# Vivekananda Complete Works Volume 9
# Source: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/volume_9_contents.htm
# Pages: 281



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/volume_9_contents.htm


 ←
Home / Complete-Works
/ →

Volume 9

 

Calcutta 1897

***

Letters
(Fifth Series) 

Lectures
and Discourses 

Notes
of Lectures and Classes 

Writings:
Prose and Poems (Original and Translated) 

Conversations
and Interviews 

Excerpts
from Sister Nivedita's Book 

Sayings and
Utterances 

Newspaper
Reports 



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/001_sir.htm


← Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters
– Fifth Series / →

«
Chronology
»

«
Addressee
 »

I

(Translated from Bengali)

To Balaram Bose

Glory to Ramakrishna

GHAZIPUR

February 6, 1890

RESPECTED SIR,

I have talked with Pavhari Baba. He is a wonderful saint — the
embodiment of humility, devotion, and Yoga. Although he is an orthodox
Vaishnava, he is not prejudiced against others of different beliefs. He
has tremendous love for Mahâprabhu Chaitanya, and he [Pavhari Baba]
speaks of Shri Ramakrishna as "an incarnation of God". He loves me very
much, and I am going to stay here for some days at his request.

Pavhari Baba can live in Samâdhi for from two to six months at
a stretch. He can read Bengali and has kept a photograph of Shri
Ramakrishna in his room. I have not yet seen him face to face, since he
speaks from behind a door, but I have never heard such a sweet voice. I
have many things to say about him but not just at present.

Please try to get a copy of Chaitanya-Bhâgavata
for him and send it immediately to the following address: Gagan Chandra
Roy, Opium Department, Ghazipur. Please don't forget.

Pavhari Baba is an ideal Vaishnava and a great scholar; but he
is reluctant to reveal his learning. His elder brother acts as his
attendant, but even he is not allowed to enter his room.

Please send him a copy of Chaitanya-Mangala
also, if it is still in print. And remember that if Pavhari Baba
accepts your presents, that will be your great fortune. Ordinarily, he
does not accept anything from anybody. Nobody knows what he eats or
even what he does.

Please don't let it be known that I am here and don't send
news of anyone to me. I am busy with an important work.

Your servant,

NARENDRA



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/letters_fifth_series_contents.htm


 ←
Home / Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ →

Letters - Fifth Series Contents

Calcutta 1897

***

I Sir 

II Sir 

III Sir 

IV Balaram Babu

V Tulsiram 

VI Sharat 

VII Mother 

VIII Mother 

IX Mother 

X Mother 

XI Mother 

XII Mother 

XIII Mother 

XIV Mother 

XV Mother 

XVI Mother 

XVII Mother 

XVIII Mother 

XIX Mother 

XX Mother 

XXI Mother 

XXII Mother 

XXIII Mother 

XXIV Mother 

XXV Mother 

XXVI Mother 

XXVII Mother 

XXVIII Mother 

XXIX Mother 

XXX Mother 

XXXI Mother 

XXXII Mother 

XXXIII Mother 

XXXIV Mother 

XXXV Mother 

XXXVI Mother 

XXXVII Mother 

XXXVIII Mother

XXXIX Mother 

XL Mrs. Bull

XLI Miss Thursby

XLII Mother 

XLIII Mother 

XLIV Mother 

XLV Mother 

XLVI Mother 

XLVII Miss Thursby

XLVIII Adhyapakji

XLIX Mother 

L Mother 

LI Mother 

LII Mother 

LIII Mother 

LIV Mother 

LV Friend 

LVI Mother 

LVII Mother 

LVIII Sir 

LIX Mother 

LX Doctor 

LXI Mother— 

LXII Mother— 

LXIII Mother 

LXIV Mother— 

LXV Mother 

LXVI Mother— 

LXVII Friend 

LXVIII Mrs. G. W. Hale

LXIX Christina

LXX Mother— 

LXXI Sister
Christine 

LXXII Isabelle
McKindley 

LXXIII Christina

LXXIV Christina

LXXV Christina

LXXVI Your
Highness 

LXXVII Sir— 

LXXVIII Christina—

LXXIX Mrs. Ole Bull

LXXX Sir 

LXXXI Mrs. Bull

LXXXII Mrs. Funkey

LXXXIII Mrs. Bull

LXXXIV Christina

LXXXV Mrs.Bull—

LXXXVI Miss Thursby

LXXXVII Friend

LXXXVIII Christina

LXXXIX Mrs. Funkey

XC Christina

XCI Christina

XCII Mrs. Bull—

XCIII Sir 

XCIV Mrs. Bull—

XCV Mother— 

XCVI Sir 

XCVII Mrs. Bull

XCVIII
Blessed and Beloved 

XCIX Christina

C Miss Noble

CI Miss Noble—

CII Christina

CIII Madras
Committee 

CIV Gentlemen

CV Christina

CVI Mrs. Bull—

CVII Ram Ram 

CVIII Miss Noble

CIX Lalajee 

CX Badri Sah

CXI Mother— 

CXII Mrs. Bull—

CXIII Friend 

CXIV Shivananda

CXV Christina

CXVI Sister
Christine 

CXVII Miss Noble

CXVIII Christina

CXIX Margaret

CXX Dhira Mata—

CXXI Jagmohan

CXXII Miss MacLeod

CXXIII Sir 

CXXIV
Miss Macleod / Mrs. Bull 

CXXV Mr.
J. J. Goodwin’s Mother 

CXXVI Your
Highness— 

CXXVII Christina

CXXVIII Your
Highness— 

CXXIX Your
Highness— 

CXXX Margot 

CXXXI Nivedita

CXXXII Christina

CXXXIII Raja 

CXXXIV S 

CXXXV Margot 

CXXXVI Sir 

CXXXVII Margot

CXXXVIII Christina

CXXXIX Miss Macleod

CXL Christina

CXLI Christina

CXLII Sister
Christine 

CXLIII Mother 

CXLIV Isabel— 

CXLV Christina

CXLVI Mother
Church 

CXLVII Mother 

CXLVIII Christina

CXLIX Christina

CL Christina

CLI Christina

CLII Christina—

CLIII Mrs. Bull—

CLIV Christina

CLV Dhira Mata—

CLVI Mother 

CLVII Margot 

CLVIII Mother 

CLIX Christina

CLX Brahmananda

CLXI Christina

CLXII Margo 

CLXIII Joe— 

CLXIV Christina

CLXV Sister
Christine 

CLXVI Margot 

CLXVII Margot 

CLXVIII Mother

CLXIX Christina

CLXX Abhedananda

CLXXI Christina

CLXXII Christina

CLXXIII Christina

CLXXIV Christina

CLXXV Mrs.
Hansbrough— 

CLXXVI Sister
Christine 

CLXXVII Mrs.
Hansbrough— 

CLXXVIII Abhedananda

CLXXIX Christina

CLXXX Mrs. Leggett

CLXXXI Christine

CLXXXII Nivedita

CLXXXIII Christine

CLXXXIV Christina

CLXXXV Mother 

CLXXXVI Alberta

CLXXXVII Christina—

CLXXXVIII Margo

CLXXXIX Sister
Christine 

CXC Your Highness—

CXCI Mother— 

CXCII Sir 

CXCIII Margot 

CXCIV Christine

CXCV Introduction

CXCVI Christine

CXCVII Mother 

CXCVIII Mrs.
Hansbrough— 

CXCIX Friend— 

CC Christina

CCI Christine

CCII Christine

CCIII Christine

CCIV Christine

CCV Christina

CCVI Christina

CCVII Margo 

CCVIII Christina

CCIX Christine

CCX Christine

CCXI Christine

CCXII Christine

CCXIII Sister
Christine 

CCXIV Christine

CCXV Joe— 

CCXVI Joe— 

CCXVII Mrs.
Hansbrough 

CCXVIII Margo 

CCXIX Christine

CCXX Mother 

CCXXI Joe— 

CCXXII Christine

CCXXIII
Mademoiselle 

CCXIV Christine

CCXXV Christine

CCXXVI Christine

CCXXVII Christine



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/lectures_and_discourses/lectures_and_discourses_contents.htm


 ←
Home / Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ →

Lectures and Discourses

Calcutta 1897

***

The Women of
India 

The
First Step towards Jnana 

Bhakti-Yoga 

The Mundaka
Upanishad 

History
of the Aryan Race 



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/notes_of_lectures_and_classes/notes_of_lectures_and_classes_contents.htm


 ←
Home / Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ →

Notes of Lectures and Classes

Calcutta 1897

***

Note 

The Religion
of India 

Christ's
Message to the World 

Mohammed's
Message to the World 

Class
Lessons in Meditation 

The Gita 

The Gita — I 

The Gita — III

Gita Class 

Remarks
from Various Lectures 



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/writings_prose_and_poems/writings_prose_and_poems_contents.htm


 ←
Home / Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ →

Writings: Prose and Poems

(Original and Translated)

Calcutta 1897

***

The Ether 

Notes 

Lecture Notes

Macrocosm
and Microcosm 

Footnotes to The
Imitation of Christ 

The Plague
Manifesto 

One Circle More

Facsimile of One Circle
More 

An Untitled Poem
on Shri Ramakrishna 

An Unfinished
Poem 

Bhartrihari's
Verses on Renunciation 



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/conversations_and_interviews.htm


←
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ →

CONVERSATIONS AND INTERVIEWS

FIRST MEETING WITH MADAME EMMA CALVE

(New Discoveries,
Vol. 1, pp. 484-86.) 

[The story of the first meeting
of Swami Vivekananda and Madame Emma Calvé, as told in Calvé's
autobiography, My Life]

. . . [Swami Vivekananda] was lecturing in Chicago one year
when I was there; and as I was at that time greatly depressed in mind
and body, I decided to go to him.

. . . Before going I had been told not to speak until he
addressed me. When I entered the room, I stood before him in silence
for a moment. He was seated in a noble attitude of meditation, his robe
of saffron yellow falling in straight lines to the floor, his head
swathed in a turban bent forward, his eyes on the ground. After a pause
he spoke without looking up.

"My child", he said, "what a troubled atmosphere you have
about you. Be calm. It is essential".

Then in a quiet voice, untroubled and aloof, this man who did
not even know my name talked to me of my secret problems and anxieties.
He spoke of things that I thought were unknown even to my nearest
friends. It seemed miraculous, supernatural.

"How do you know all this?" I asked at last. "Who has talked
of me to you?"

He looked at me with his quiet smile as though I were a child
who had asked a foolish question.

"No one has talked to me", he answered gently. "Do you think
that it is necessary? I read in you as in an open book."

Finally it was time for me to leave.

"You must forget", he said as I rose. "Become gay and happy
again. Build up your health. Do not dwell in silence upon your sorrows.
Transmute your emotions into some form of external expression. Your
spiritual health requires it. Your art demands it."

I left him deeply impressed by his words and his personality.
He seemed to have emptied my brain of all its feverish complexities and
placed there instead his clear and calming thoughts. I became once
again vivacious and cheerful, thanks to the effect of his powerful
will. He did not use any of the hypnotic or mesmeric influences. It was
the strength of his character, the purity and intensity of his purpose
that carried conviction. It seemed to me, when I came to know him
better, that he lulled one's chaotic thoughts into a state of peaceful
acquiescence, so that one could give complete and undivided attention
to his words.

FIRST MEETING WITH JOHN D. ROCKEFELLER 

(An excerpt from Madame Verdier's
journal quoted in the New Discoveries, Vol. 1, pp.
487-88.)

[As told by Madame Emma Calvé‚
to Madame Drinette Verdier]

Mr. X, in whose home Swamiji was staying in Chicago, was a
partner or an associate in some business with John D. Rockefeller. Many
times John D. heard his friends talking about this extraordinary and
wonderful Hindu monk who was staying with them, and many times he had
been invited to meet Swamiji but, for one reason or another, always
refused. At that time Rockefeller was not yet at the peak of his
fortune, but was already powerful and strong-willed, very difficult to
handle and a hard man to advise.

But one day, although he did not want to meet Swamiji, he was
pushed to it by an impulse and went directly to the house of his
friends, brushing aside the butler who opened the door and saying that
he wanted to see the Hindu monk.

The butler ushered him into the living room, and, not waiting
to be announced, Rockefeller entered into Swamiji's adjoining study and
was much surprised, I presume, to see Swamiji behind his writing table
not even lifting his eyes to see who had entered.

After a while, as with Calvé, Swamiji told Rockefeller much of
his past that was not known to any but himself, and
made him understand that the money he had already accumulated was not
his, that he was only a channel and that his duty was to do good to the
world — that God had given him all his wealth in order that he might
have an opportunity to help and do good to people.

Rockefeller was annoyed that anyone dared to talk to him that
way and tell him what to do. He left the room in irritation, not even
saying goodbye. But about a week after, again without being announced,
he entered Swamiji's study and, finding him the same as before, threw
on his desk a paper which told of his plans to donate an enormous sum
of money toward the financing of a public institution.

"Well, there you are", he said. "You must be satisfied now,
and you can thank me for it."

Swamiji didn't even lift his eyes, did not move. Then taking
the paper, he quietly read it, saying: "It is for you to thank me".
That was all. This was Rockefeller's first large donation to the public
welfare.

A DUSKY PHILOSOPHER FROM INDIA 

(New Discoveries,
Vol. 5, pp. 389-94.)

(To preserve the historical authenticity of the newspaper
reports in this section, their original spelling has been largely
retained; however, their punctuation has been made consistent with the
style of the Complete Works.

— Publisher.)

[An interview by Blanche
Partington, San Francisco Chronicle, March
18, 1900]

. . . . . .

. . . Bowing very low in Eastern fashion on his entrance to
the room, then holding out his hand in good American style, the dusky
philosopher from the banks of the Ganges gave friendly greeting to the
representative of that thoroughly Occidental institution, the daily
press.

. . . I asked for a picture to illustrate this article, and
when someone handed me a certain "cut" which has been extensively
used in lecture advertisements here, he uttered a mild protest against
its use. 

"But that does not look like you", said I.

"No, it is as if I wished to kill someone", he said smiling,
"like — like —"

"Othello", I inserted rashly. But the little audience of
friends only smiled as the Swami made laughing recognition of the
absurd resemblance of the picture to the jealous Moor. But I do not use
that picture.

"Is it true, Swami", I asked, "that when you went home after
lecturing in the Congress of Religions after the World's Fair, princes
knelt at your feet, a half dozen of the ruling sovereigns of India
dragged your carriage through the streets, as the papers told us? We do
not treat our priests so".

"That is not good to talk of", said the Swami. "But it is true
that religion rules there, not dollars."

"What about caste?"

"What of your Four Hundred?" he replied, smiling. "Caste in
India is an institution hardly explicable or intelligible to the
Occidental mind. It is acknowledged to be an imperfect institution, but
we do not recognize a superior social result from your attempts at
class distinction. India is the only country which has so far succeeded
in imposing a permanent caste upon her people, and we doubt if an
exchange for Western superstitions and evils would be for her
advantage."

"But under such regime — where a man may not eat this nor
drink that, nor marry the other — the freedom you teach would be
impossible", I ventured.

"It is impossible", assented the Swami; "but until India has
outgrown the necessity for caste laws, caste laws will remain". "Is it
true that you may not eat food cooked by a foreigner — unbeliever?" I
asked.

"In India the cook — who is not called a servant — must be of
the same or higher caste than those for whom the food is cooked, as it
is considered that whatever a man touches is impressed by his
personality, and food, with which a man builds up the body through
which he expresses himself, is regarded as being liable to such
impression. As to the foods we eat, it is assumed that certain kinds of
food nourish certain properties
worthy of cultivation, and that others retard our spiritual growth. For
instance, we do not kill to eat. Such food would be held to nourish the
animal body, at the expense of the spiritual body, in which the soul is
said to be clothed on its departure from this physical envelope,
besides laying the sin of blood-guiltiness upon the butcher."

"Ugh!" I exclaimed involuntarily, an awful vision of
reproachful little lambs, little chicken ghosts, hovering cow spirits —
I was always afraid of cows anyway — rising up before me.

"You see", explained the Brahmin [Kshatriya], "the universe is
all one, from the lowest insect to the highest Yogi. It is all one, we
are all one, you and I are one —". Here the Occidental audience smiled,
the unconscious monk chanting the oneness of things in Sanskrit and the
consequent sin of taking any life.

. . . He was pacing up and down the room most of the time
during our talk, occasionally standing over the register — it was a
chill morning for this child of the sun — and doing with grace and
freedom whatever occurred to him, even, at length, smoking a little.

"You, yourself, have not yet attained supreme control over all
desires", I ventured. The Swami's frankness is infectious.

"No, madam", and he smiled the broad and brilliant smile of a
child; "Do I look it?" But the Swami, from the land of hasheesh and
dreams, doubtless did not connect my query with its smoky origin.

"Is it usual among the Hindoo priesthood to marry?" I ventured
again.

"It is a matter of individual choice", replied this member of
the Hindoo priesthood. "One does not marry that he may not be in
slavery to a woman and children, or permit the slavery of a woman to
him."

"But what is to become of the population?" urged the
anti-Malthusian.

"Are you so glad to have been born?" retorted the Eastern
thinker, his large eyes flashing scorn. "Can you conceive of nothing
higher than this warring, hungry, ignorant world? Do not fear that the you
may be lost, though the sordid, miserable
consciousness of the now may go. What worth having [would be] gone?

"The child comes crying into the world. Well may he cry! Why
should we weep to leave it? Have you thought" — here the sunny smile
came back — "of the different modes of East and West of expressing the
passing away? We say of the dead man, 'He gave up his body'; you put
it, 'he gave up the ghost'. How can that be? Is it the dead body that
permits the ghost to depart? What curious inversion of thought!"

"But, on the whole, Swami, you think it better to be
comfortably dead than a living lion?" persisted the defender of
populations.

"Swâhâ, Swaha, so be it!" shouted the monk.

"But how is it that under such philosophy men consent to live
at all?"

"Because a man's own life is sacred as any other life, and one
may not leave chapters unlearned", returned the philosopher. "Add power
and diminish time, and the school days are shorter; as the learned
professor can make the marble in twelve years which nature took
centuries to form. It is all a question of time."

"India, which has had this teaching so long, has not yet
learned her lesson?"

"No, though she is perhaps nearer than any other country, in
that she has learned to love mercy."

"What of England in India?" I asked.

"But for English rule I could not be here now", said the monk,
"though your lowest free-born American Negro holds higher position in
India politically than is mine. Brahmin and coolie, we are all
'natives'. But it is all right, in spite of the misunderstanding and
oppression. England is the Tharma [Karma?] of India, attracted
inevitably by some inherent weakness, past mistakes, but from her blood
and fibre will come the new national hope for my countrymen. I am a
loyal subject of the Empress of India!" and here the Swami salaamed
before an imaginary potentate, bowing very low, perhaps too low for
reverence.

"But such an apostle of freedom — ", I murmured.

"She is the widow for many years, and such we hold in high
worth in India", said the philosopher seriously. "As to freedom, yes, I
believe the goal of all development is freedom, law and order. There is
more law and order in the grave than anywhere else — try it."

"I must go", I said. "I have to catch a train".

"That is like all Americans", smiled the Swami, and I had a
glimpse of all eternity in his utter restfulness. "You must catch this
car or that train always. Is there not another, later?"

But I did not attempt to explain the Occidental conception of
the value of time to this child of the Orient, realizing its utter
hopelessness and my own renegade sympathy. It must be delightful beyond
measure to live in the land of "time enough". In the Orient there seems
time to breathe, time to think, time to live; as the Swami says, what
have we in exchange? We live in time; they in eternity.

"WE ARE HYPNOTIZED INTO WEAKNESS BY OUR
SURROUNDINGS" 

(New Discoveries,
Vol. 5, pp. 396-98.)

[An interview by the San
Francisco Examiner, March 18, 1900]

Hindoo Philosopher Who Strikes at the
Root of Some

Occidental Evils and Tells How We Must
Worship God

Simply and Not with Many Vain Prayers.

. . . . . .

One American friend he may be assured of — the Swami is a
charming person to interview.

Pacing about the little room where he is staying, he kept the
small audience of interviewer and friend entertained for a couple of
hours.

"Tell you about the English in India? But I do not wish to
talk of politics. But from the higher standpoint, it is true that
but for the English rule I could not be here. We natives know that it
is through the intermixture of English blood and ideas that the
salvation of India will come. Fifty years ago, all the literature and
religion of the race were locked up in the Sanskrit language; today the
drama and the novel are written in the vernacular, and the literature
of religion is being translated. That is the work of the English, and
it is unnecessary, in America, to descant upon the value of the
education of the masses."

"What do you think of the Boers War?" was asked.

"Oh! Have you seen the morning paper? But I do not wish to
discuss politics. English and Boers are both in the wrong. It is
terrible — terrible — the bloodshed! English will conquer, but at what
fearful cost! She seems the nation of Fate."

And the Swami with a smile, began chanting the Sanskrit for an
unwillingness to discuss politics.

Then he talked long of ancient Russian history, and of the
wandering tribes of Tartary, and of the Moorish rule in Spain, and
displaying an astonishing memory and research. To this childlike
interest in all things that touch him is doubtless due much of the
curious and universal knowledge that he seems to possess.

MARRIAGE 

(New Discoveries,
Vol. 5, p. 138.)

From Miss Josephine MacLeod's February 1908 letter to
Mary Hale, in which she described Swami Vivekananda's response to
Alberta Sturges's question: 

ALBERTA STURGES: Is there no happiness in marriage?

SWAMI VIVEKANANDA: Yes, Alberta, if marriage is entered into
as a great austerity — and everything is given up — even principle!

LINE OF DEMARCATION 

(New Discoveries,
Vol. 5, p. 225.)

From Mrs. Alice Hansbrough's reminiscences of a
question-answer exchange following the class entitled “Hints on
Practical Spirituality”: 

Q: Swami, if all things are one, what is the difference
between a cabbage and a man?

A: Stick a knife into your leg, and you will see the line of
demarcation.

GOD IS! 

(New Discoveries,
Vol. 5, p. 276.)

Alice Hansbrough's record of a question-answer
session after a class lecture: 

Q: Then, Swami, what you claim is that all is good?

A: By no means. My claim is that all is not — only God is!
That makes all the difference. 

RENUNCIATION

(New Discoveries,
Vol. 6, p. 11-12.)

From Alice Hansbrough's reminiscences of a
question-answer session following one of Swami Vivekananda's San
Francisco classes pertaining to renunciation:

WOMAN STUDENT: Well, Swami, what would become of the world if
everyone renounced?

SWAMI VIVEKANANDA: Madam, why do you come to me with that lie
on your lips? You have never considered anything in this world but your
own pleasure!

SHRI RAMAKRISHNA'S DISCIPLE 

(New Discoveries,
Vol. 6, p. 12.)

Mrs. Edith Allan described a teacher-student exchange
in one of Swami Vivekananda's San Francisco classes: 

SWAMI VIVEKANANDA: I am the disciple of a man who could not
write his own name, and I am not worthy to undo his shoes. How often
have I wished I could take my intellect and throw it into the Ganges!

STUDENT: But, Swami, that is the part of you I like best.

SWAMI VIVEKANANDA: That is because you are a fool, Madam —
like I am. 

THE MASTER'S DIVINE INCARNATION

(New Discoveries,
Vol. 6, p. 17.)

From Mrs. Edith Allan's reminiscences: 

SWAMI VIVEKANANDA: I have to come back once more. The Master
said I am to come back once more with him.

MRS. ALLAN: You have to come back because Shri Ramakrishna
says so?

SWAMI VIVEKANANDA: Souls like that have great power, Madam. 

A PRIVATE ADMISSION 

(New Discoveries,
Vol. 6, p. 121.)

From Mrs. Edith Allan's reminiscences of Swami
Vivekananda's stay in northern California, 1900: 

WOMAN STUDENT: Oh, if I had only lived earlier, I could have
seen Shri Ramakrishna!

SWAMI VIVEKANANDA (turning quietly to her): You say that, and
you have seen me? 

A GREETING 

(New Discoveries,
Vol. 6, p. 136.)

From Mr. Thomas Allan's reminiscences of Swami
Vivekananda's visit to Alameda, California, 1900: 

MR. ALLAN: Well, Swami, I see you are in Alameda! 

SWAMI VIVEKANANDA: No, Mr. Allan, I am not in Alameda; Alameda
is in me. 

"THIS WORLD IS A CIRCUS RING"

(New Discoveries,
Vol. 6, p. 156.)

From Mrs. Alice Hansbrough's reminiscences of Swami
Vivekananda's conversation with Miss Bell at Camp Taylor, California,
in May 1900:

MISS BELL: This world is an old schoolhouse where we come to
learn our lessons.

SWAMI VIVEKANANDA: Who told you that? [Miss Bell could not
remember.] Well, I don't think so. I think this world is a circus ring
in which we are the clowns tumbling.

MISS BELL: Why do we tumble, Swami?

SWAMI VIVEKANANDA: Because we like to tumble. When we get
tired, we will quit. 

ON KALI

(The Complete Works of Sister
Nivedita, Vol. I, p. 118.)

Sister Nivedita's reminiscence of a conversation with
Swami Vivekananda at the time she was learning the Kâli worship:

SISTER NIVEDITA: Perhaps, Swamiji, Kali is the vision of
Shiva! Is She?

SWAMI VIVEKANANDA: Well! Well! Express it in your own way.
Express it in your own way! 

TRAINING UNDER SHRI RAMAKRISHNA

(The Complete Works of Sister
Nivedita, Vol. I, pp. 159-60.)

While on board a ship to England, Swami Vivekananda
was touched by the childlike devotion of the ship's servants:

SWAMI VIVEKANANDA: You see, I love our Mohammedans!

SISTER NIVEDITA: Yes, but what I want to understand is this
habit of seeing every people from their strongest aspect. Where did it
come from? Do you recognize it in any historical character? Or is it in
some way derived from Shri Ramakrishna?

SWAMI VIVEKANANDA: It must have been the training under
Ramakrishna Paramahamsa. We all went by his path to some extent. Of
course it was not so difficult for us as he made it for himself. He
would eat and dress like the people he wanted to understand, take their
initiation, and use their language. "One must learn", he said, "to put
oneself into another man's very soul". And this method was his own! No
one ever before in India became Christian and Mohammedan and Vaishnava,
by turn!



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/excerpts_from_sister_niveditas_book/excerpts_from_sister_niveditas_book_contents.htm


 ←
Home / Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ →

Excerpts from Sister Nivedita's Book

Calcutta 1897

***

Note 

Foreword 

    I 
The Home On The Ganges 

   II 
At Naini Tal And Almora 

  III 
Morning Talks At Almora 

  IV 
On The Way To Kathgodam 

   V 
On The Way To Baramulla 

  VI 
The Vale Of Kashmir 

 VII 
Life At Srinagar 

VIII  The
Temple Of Pandrenthan 

   IX 
Walks And Talks Beside The Jhelum 

    X 
The Shrine Of Amarnath 

   XI 
At Srinagar On The Return Journey 

  XII 
The Camp Under The Chennaars 

Concluding Words
Of The Editor



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/sayings_and_utterances.htm


←
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ →

SAYINGS AND UTTERANCES

LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS

In this section, only Swami Vivekananda's direct words have
been placed within quotation marks. References have been identified by
the following abbreviations:

ND                  
Burke, Marie Louise. Swami Vivekananda in the West: New
Discoveries. 6 vols. Calcutta: Advaita Ashrama, 1983-87.

CWSN            
Nivedita, Sister. The Complete Works of Sister Nivedita.
Vol. 1. Calcutta: Advaita Ashrama, 1982.

LSN                
Nivedita, Sister. Letters of Sister Nivedita. 2
vols. Compiled and edited by Sankari Prasad Basu. Calcutta: Nababharat
Publishers, 1982.

VIN                 
Basu, Sankari Prasad and Ghosh, Sunil Bihari, eds. Vivekananda
in Indian Newspapers: 1893-1902. Calcutta: Dineshchandra
Basu, Basu Bhattacharya and Co., 1969.

1.        
From Mrs. Prince Woods's description of Swami Vivekananda's departure
from the Woods's residence in Salem, Massachusetts, in August 1893.
Swami Vivekananda gave his staff, his most precious possession, to Dr.
Woods, who was at that time a young medical student, and his trunk and
his blanket to Mrs. Kate T. Woods, saying:

"Only my most precious possessions should I give to my friends
who have made me at home in this great country." (ND
1: 42) 

2.        
On the back of Swami Vivekananda's transcription from Louis Rousselet's
book India and Its Native Princes — Travels in Central India
and in the Presidencies of Bombay and Bengal, dated February
11, 1894:

"I say there is but one remedy for one too anxious for the
future — to go down on his knees." (ND 1: 225)

3.        
An extract from a prayer Swami Vivekananda delivered at the Chicago
World's Parliament of Religions:

"Thou art He that beareth the burdens of the universe; help me
to bear the little burden of this life." (ND 2: 32)

4.        
An extract from another prayer offered by Swami Vivekananda at the
Chicago World's Parliament of Religions: 

"At the head of all these laws, in and through every particle
of matter and force, stands One through whose command the wind blows,
the fire burns, the clouds rain, and death stalks upon the earth. And
what is His nature? He is everywhere the pure and formless One, the
Almighty and the All Merciful. Thou art our Father. Thou art our
beloved Friend." (ND 2: 33)

5.        
From Mary T. Wright's journal entry dated Saturday, May 12, 1894:

The widows of high caste in India do not marry, he said; only
the widows of low caste may marry, may eat, drink, dance, have as many
husbands as they choose, divorce them all, in short enjoy all the
benefits of the highest society in this country. . . .

"When we are fanatical", he said, "we
torture ourselves, we throw ourselves under huge cars, we cut our
throats, we lie on spiked beds; but when you are
fanatical you cut other people's throats, you torture them by fire and
put them on spiked beds! You take very good care of
your own skins!" (ND 2: 58-59)

6.        
An 1894 extract from the Greenacre Voice, quoting one of the Swami's
teachings delivered at Greenacre, Maine:

"You and I and everything in the universe are that Absolute,
not parts, but the whole. You are the whole of that Absolute." (ND
2: 150)

7.        
In a March 5, 1899 letter from Sister Nivedita to Miss Josephine
MacLeod:

"I am at heart a mystic, Margot, all this reasoning is only
apparent — I am really always on the lookout for signs and things — and
so I never bother about the fate of my initiations. If they want to be
Sannyâsins badly enough I feel that the rest is not my business. Of
course it has its bad side. I have to pay dearly for my blunder
sometimes — but it has one advantage. It has kept me still a Sannyasin
through all this — and that is my ambition, to die a real Sannyasin as
Ramakrishna Paramahamsa actually was — free from lust — and desire of
wealth, and thirst for fame. That thirst for fame is the worst of all
filth." (ND 3: 128-29)

8.        
From John Henry Wright's March 27, 1896 letter to Mary Tappan Wright,
in which Swami Vivekananda stated that England is just like India with
its castes:

"I had to have separate classes for the two castes. For the
high caste people — Lady This and Lady That, Honourable This and
Honourable That — I had classes in the morning; for the low caste
people, who came pell-mell, I had classes in the evening." (ND
4: 73)

9.        
While Swami Vivekananda was offering flowers at the feet of the Virgin
Mary in a small chapel in Switzerland in the summer of 1896, he said:

"For she also is the Mother." (ND 4: 276)

10.      
From Mr. J. J. Goodwin's October 23, 1896 letter to Mrs. Ole Bull,
quoting Swami Vivekananda's conversation at Greycoat Gardens in London

"It is very good to have a high ideal, but don't make it too
high. A high ideal raises mankind, but an impossible ideal lowers them
from the very impossibility of the case." (ND 4: 385)

11.      
A November 20, 1896 entry from Swami Abhedananda's diary, quoting Swami
Vivekananda's observation of the English people:

"You can't make friends here without knowing their customs,
behaviour, politics. You have to know the manners of the rich, the
cultured and the poor." (ND 4: 478)

12.      
In Mr. J. J. Goodwin's November 11, 1896 letter to Mrs. Ole Bull,
quoting Swami Vivekananda's unpublished statement toward the end of
"Practical Vedanta — IV":

"A Jiva can never attain absolutely to Brahman until the whole
of Mâyâ disappears. While there is still a Jiva left in Maya, there can
be no soul absolutely free. . . . Vedantists are divided on this
point." (ND 4: 481)

13.      
From Swami Saradananda's letter to a brother-disciple, concerning Swami
Vivekananda's last days:

Sometimes he would say, "Death has come to my bedside; I have
been through enough of work and play; let the world realize what
contribution I have made; it will take quite a long time to understand
that". (ND 4: 521)

14.      
In an October 13, 1898 letter to Mrs. Ashton Jonson, written from
Kashmir, Sister Nivedita described Swami Vivekananda's spiritual mood:

To him at this moment "doing good" seems horrible. "Only the
Mother does anything. Patriotism is a mistake. Everything is a mistake.
It is all Mother. . . . All men are good. Only we
cannot reach all. . . . I am never going to teach
any more. Who am I that I should teach anyone? . . . Swamiji is dead
and gone." (ND 5: 3-4)

15.      
From Mr. Sachindranath Basu's letter recounting Swami Vivekananda's
closing remarks in his talk to swamis and novices assembled at Belur
Math, June 19, 1899:

"My sons, all of you be men. This is what I want! If you are
even a little successful, I shall feel my life has been meaningful." (ND
5: 17) 

16.      
During an evening talk with Swami Saradananda in the spring of 1899:

"Men should be taught to be practical, physically strong. A
dozen such lions will conquer the world, not millions of
sheep. Men should not be taught to imitate a personal ideal, however
great." (ND 5: 17)

17.      
From Mrs. Mary C. Funke's reminiscences of her August 1899 voyage to
America with Swamis Vivekananda and Turiyananda:

"And if all this Maya is so beautiful, think of the wondrous
beauty of the Reality behind it!" (ND 5: 76)

"Why recite poetry when there [pointing to sea and sky] is the
very essence of poetry?" (Ibid.)

18.      
In Miss Josephine MacLeod's September 3, 1899 letter to Mrs. Ole Bull:

"In one's greatest hour of need one stands alone." (ND
5: 122)

19.      
From Sister Nivedita's October 27, 1899 diary entry at Ridgely Manor,
in which Swami Vivekananda expressed his concern for Olea Bull Vaughn:

"Nightmares always begin pleasantly — only at the worst point
[the] dream is broken — so death breaks [the] dream of life. Love
death." (ND 5: 138)

20.      
In a December 1899 letter from Miss Josephine MacLeod to Sister
Nivedita:

"All the ideas the Californians have of me emanated from
Chicago." (ND 5: 179)

21.      
From Mrs. Alice Hansbrough's reminiscences which quoted Swami
Vivekananda as telling Mr. Baumgardt:

"I can talk on the same subject, but it will not be the same
lecture." (ND 5: 230)

22.      
Mrs. Alice Hansbrough's reminiscences relating Swami Vivekananda's
response to her sight-seeing attempts:

"Do not show me sights. I have seen the Himalayas! I would not
go ten steps to see sights; but I would go a thousand miles to see a
[great] human being!" (ND 5: 244)

23.      
From Mrs. Alice Hansbrough's reminiscences relating Swami Vivekananda's
interest in the problem of child training:

He did not believe in punishment. It had never helped him, he
said, and added, "I would never do anything to make a child afraid". (ND
5: 253) 

24.      
Mrs. Alice Hansbrough's record of Swami Vivekananda's explanation of
God to seventeen-year-old Ralph Wyckoff:

"Can you see your own eyes? God is like that. He is as close
as your own eyes. He is your own, even though you can't see Him." (ND
5: 254)

25.      
Mrs. Alice Hansbrough's reminiscences regarding Swami Vivekananda's
opinion of the low-caste English soldiers who occupied India:

"If anyone should despoil the Englishman's home, the
Englishman would kill him, and rightly so. But the Hindu just sits and
whines!

"Do you think that a handful of Englishmen could rule India if
we had a militant spirit? I teach meat-eating throughout the length and
breadth of India in the hope that we can build a militant spirit!" (ND
5: 256)

26.      
Mrs. Alice Hansbrough's reminiscences of a picnic in Pasadena,
California when a Christian Science woman suggested to Swami
Vivekananda that one should teach people to be good:

"Why should I desire to be 'good'? All this is His handiwork
[waving his hand to indicate the trees and the countryside]. Shall I
apologize for His handiwork? If you want to reform John Doe, go and
live with him; don't try to reform him. If you have any of the Divine
Fire, he will catch it." (ND 5: 257) 

27.      
From Mrs. Alice Hansbrough's reminiscences:

"When once you consider an action, do not let anything
dissuade you. Consult your heart, not others, and then follow its
dictates." (ND 5: 311) 

28.      
From Mr. Frank Rhodehamel's notes taken during a March 1900 lecture in
Oakland, California:

"Never loved a husband the wife for the wife's sake, or the
wife the husband for the husband's sake. It is God in the wife the
husband loves, and God in the husband the wife loves. (Cf. Brihadâranyaka
Upanishad II.4.5.) It is God in everyone that draws us to
that one in love. [It is] God in everything, in everybody that makes us
love. God is the only love. . . . In everyone is God, the Atman; all
else is but dream, an illusion." (ND 5: 362)

29.      
From Mr. Frank Rhodehamel's notes taken during a March 1900 lecture in
Oakland, California:

Oh, if you only knew yourselves! You are souls; you are gods.
If ever I feel [that I am] blaspheming, it is when I call you man." (ND
5: 362)

30.      
An excerpt from Mr. Thomas J. Allan's reminiscences of Swami
Vivekananda's March 1900 San Francisco lecture series on India:

"Send us mechanics to teach us how to use our hands, and we
will send you missionaries to teach you spirituality." (ND
5: 365)

31.      
Mrs. Edith Allan's reminiscences of Swami Vivekananda's philosophical
observations while cooking at the Turk Street flat:

"'The Lord dwells in the hearts of all beings, O Arjuna, by
His illusive power causing all beings to revolve as though mounted on a
potter's wheel.' [Bhagavad-Gitâ XVIII.61] This has all happened before,
like the throw of a dice, so it is in life; the wheel goes on and the
same combination comes up; that pitcher and glass have stood there
before, so, too, that onion and potato. What can we do, Madam, He has
us on the wheel of life." (ND 6: 17) 

32.      
From Mrs. Edith Allan's reminiscences of an after-lunch conversation:

"The Master said he would come again in about two hundred
years — and I will come with him. When a Master comes, he brings his
own people." (ND 6: 17)

33.      
Mrs. Edith Allan's reminiscences of Swami Vivekananda's "kitchen"
counsel while he was staying in San Francisco, California, in 1900:

"If I consider myself greater than the ant that crawls on the
ground I am ignorant." (ND 6: 19)

"Madam, be broad—minded; always see two ways. When I am on the
heights I say, 'Shivoham, Shivoham: I am He, I am He!' and when I have
the stomachache I say, 'Mother have mercy on me!'" (Ibid.)

"Learn to be the witness. If two dogs are fighting on the
street and I go out there, I get mixed up in the fight; but if I stay
quietly in my room, I witness the fight from the window. So learn to be
the witness." (Ibid.)

34.      
From Mr. Thomas J. Allan's reminiscences of a private talk with Swami
Vivekananda in San Francisco, California, 1900:

"We do not progress from error to truth, but from truth to
truth. Thus we must see that none can be blamed for what they are
doing, because they are, at this time, doing the best they can. If a
child has an open razor, don't try to take it from him, but give him a
red apple or a brilliant toy, and he will drop the razor. But he who
puts his hand in the fire will be burned; we learn only from
experience." (ND 6: 42)

35.      
From Mrs. Alice Hansbrough's reminiscences of a walk home with Swami
Vivekananda after one of his lectures in San Francisco in 1900:

"You have heard that Christ said, 'My words are spirit and
they are life'. So are my words spirit and life; they will burn their
way into your brain and you will never get away from them!" (ND
6: 57-58)

36.      
From Mrs. Alice Hansbrough's reminiscences in San Francisco, 1900 —
referring to Swami Vivekananda's great heart:

"I may have to be born again because I have fallen in love
with man." (ND 6: 79)

37.      
From Mrs. George Roorbach's reminiscences of Swami Vivekananda at Camp
Taylor, California, in May 1900:

"In my first speech in this country, in Chicago, I addressed
that audience as 'Sisters and Brothers of America', and you know that
they all rose to their feet. You may wonder what made them do this, you
may wonder if I had some strange power. Let me tell you that I did have
a power and this is it — never once in my life did I allow myself to
have even one sexual thought. I trained my mind, my thinking, and the
powers that man usually uses along that line I put into a higher
channel, and it developed a force so strong that nothing could resist
it." (ND 6: 155)

38.      
In a conversation with Swami Turiyananda, which probably took place in
New York:

"The call has come from Above: 'Come away, just come away — no
need of troubling your head to teach others'. It is now the will of the
Grand Old Lady (The “Grand Old Lady” was a figure in a children’s game,
whose touch put one outside the game.) that the play should be over." (ND
6: 373)

39.      
In a July 1902 Prabuddha Bharata eulogy, "a Western disciple" wrote:

The Swami had but scant sympathy with iconoclasts, for as he
wisely remarked, "The true philosopher strives to destroy nothing, but
to help all". (VIN: 638)

40.      
Sister Nivedita's reminiscences of Swami Vivekananda in an October 9,
1899 letter to Miss Josephine MacLeod:

He has turned back on so much — "Let your life in the world be
nothing but a thinking to yourself". (LSN I: 213)

41.      
Swami Vivekananda's luncheon remarks to Mrs. Ole Bull, recorded by
Sister Nivedita in an October 18, 1899 letter to Miss Josephine MacLeod:

"You see, there is one thing called love, and there is another
thing called union. And union is greater than love.

"I do not love religion. I have become
identified with it. It is my life. So no man loves that thing in which
his life has been spent, in which he really has accomplished something.
That which we love is not yet ourself. Your husband did not love music
for which he had always stood. He loved engineering in which as yet he
knew comparatively little. This is the difference between Bhakti and
Jnana; and this is why Jnana is greater than Bhakti." (LSN
I: 216) 

42.      
Swami Vivekananda's remarks on his spiritual ministry, recorded in
Sister Nivedita's October 15, 1904 letter to Miss Josephine MacLeod:

"Only when they go away will they know how much they have
received." (LSN II: 686)

43.      
Sister Nivedita's reminiscences in a November 5, 1904 letter to Alberta
Sturges (Lady Sandwich) of Swami Vivekananda's talk on renunciation
while he was staying at Ridgely Manor:

"In India we never say that you should renounce a higher thing
for a lower. It is better to be absorbed in music or in literature than
in comfort or pleasure, and we never say
otherwise." (LSN II: 690)

44.      
In Sister Nivedita's November 19, 1909 letter to Miss Josephine MacLeod:

"The fire burns if we plunge our hand in — whether we feel it
or not — so it is with him who speaks the name of God." (LSN
II: 1030)

45.      
Swami Vivekananda's reminiscences of Shri Ramakrishna, recorded in
Sister Nivedita's July 6, 1910 letter to Dr. T. K. Cheyne:

"He could not imagine himself the teacher
of anyone. He was like a man playing with balls of many colours, and
leaving it to others to select which they would for themselves." (LSN
II: 1110)

46.      
Sister Nivedita's reminiscences of a conversation with Swami
Vivekananda at Ridgely Manor, recorded in an 1899 letter written from
Ridgely Manor to Miss Josephine MacLeod:

I have never heard the Prophet talk so much of Shri
Ramakrishna. He told us what I had heard before of [his master's]
infallible judgement of men. . . .

"And so", Swami said, "you see my devotion is the dog's
devotion. I have been wrong so often and he has always been right, and
now I trust his judgement blindly". And then he told us how he would
hypnotize anyone who came to him and in two minutes know all about him,
and Swami said that from this he had learnt to count our consciousness
as a very small thing. (LSN II: 1263) 

47.      
From Sister Nivedita's January 27, 1900 letter to Sister Christine:

Swami said today that he is beginning to see the needs of
humanity in quite a different light — that he is already sure of the
principle that is to help, but is spending hours every day in trying to
solve the methods. That what he had known hitherto is for men living in
a cave — alone, undisturbed — but now he will give "humanity something
that will make for strength in the stress of daily life". (LSN
II: 1264)

48.      
In a July 7, 1902 letter to Sister Christine, Sister Nivedita recorded
one of Swami Vivekananda's remarks made while giving a class to the
monks at Belur Math on July 4, 1902:

"Do not copy me. Kick out the man who imitates." (LSN
II: 1270)

49.      
The Swami's comment after he made a statement concerning the ideal of
the freedom of the soul, which brought it into apparent conflict with
the Western conception of the service of humanity as the goal of the
individual:

"You will say that this does not benefit society. But before
this objection can be admitted you will first have to prove that the
maintenance of society is an object in itself." (CWSN
1: 19)

50.      
Sister Nivedita wrote:

He touched on the question of his own position as a wandering
teacher and expressed the Indian diffidence with regard to religious
organization or, as someone expresses it, "with regard to a faith that
ends in a church". "We believe", he said, "that organization always
breeds new evils".

He prophesied that certain religious developments then much in
vogue in the West would speedily die, owing to love of money. And he
declared that "Man proceeds from truth to truth, and not from error to
truth". (CWSN 1: 19-20)

51.      
"The universe is like a cobweb and
minds are the spiders; for mind is one as well as many." (CWSN
1: 21)

52.      
"Let none regret that they were difficult to convince! I fought my
Master for six years with the result that I know every inch of the way!
Every inch of the way!" (CWSN 1: 22)

53.      
Swami Vivekananda was elucidating to what heights of selflessness the
path of love leads and how it draws out the very best faculties of the
soul:

"Suppose there were a baby in the path of the tiger! Where
would your place be then? At his mouth — any one of you — I am sure of
it." (CWSN 1: 24)

54.      
"That by which all this is pervaded, know That
to be the Lord Himself!" (CWSN 1: 27)

55.      
Concerning Swami Vivekananda's attitude toward religion:

Religion was a matter of the growth of the individual, "a
question always of being and becoming". (CWSN 1: 28)

56.      
"Forgive when you also can bring legions of angels to an easy victory."
While victory was still doubtful, however, only a coward to his
thinking would turn the other cheek. (CWSN 1: 28-29)

57.      
"Of course I would commit a crime and go to hell forever if by that I
could really help a human being!" (CWSN 1: 34)

58.      
To a small group, including Sister Nivedita, after a lecture:

"I have a superstition — it is nothing, you know, but a
personal superstition! — that the same soul who came once as Buddha
came afterwards as Christ." (CWSN 1: 35)

59.      
After Swami Vivekananda was told of Sister Nivedita's willingness to
serve India:

"For my own part I will be incarnated two hundred times, if
that is necessary, to do this work amongst my people that I have
undertaken." (CWSN 1: 36)

60.      
Sister Nivedita's memory of an incident:

He was riding on one occasion with the Raja of Khetri, when he
saw that his arm was bleeding profusely and found that the wound had
been caused by a thorny branch which he had held aside for himself to
pass. When the Swami expostulated, the Rajput laughed the matter aside.
"Are we not always the defenders of the faith, Swamiji?" he said.

"And then", said the Swami, telling the story, "I was just
going to tell him that they ought not to show such honour to the
Sannyasin, when suddenly I thought that perhaps they were right after
all. Who knows? Maybe I too am caught in the glare of this flashlight
of your modern civilization, which is only for a moment".

" — I have become entangled", he said simply to one who
protested that to his mind the wandering Sâdhu of earlier years, who
had scattered his knowledge and changed his name as he went, had been
greater than the abbot of Belur, burdened with much work and many
cares. "I have become entangled." (CWSN 1: 43)

61.      
Sister Nivedita wrote:

One day he was talking in the West of Mirâ Bâi — that saint
who once upon a time was Queen of Chitore — and of the freedom her
husband had offered her if only she would remain within the royal
seclusion. But she could not be bound. "But why should she not?"
someone asked in astonishment. "Why should she?" he retorted. "Was she
living down here in this mire?" (CWSN
1: 44)

62.      
As years went by, the Swami dared less and less to make determinate
plans or dogmatize about the unknown:

"After all, what do we know? Mother uses it all. But we are
only fumbling about." (CWSN 1: 44)

63.      
Quoting Swami Vivekananda, Sister Nivedita remembered:

Love was not love, it was insisted, unless it was "without a
reason" or without a "motive" . . . . (CWSN 1: 52)

64.      
About Swami Vivekananda, Sister Nivedita wrote:

When asked by some of his own people what he considered, after
seeing them in their own country, to be the greatest achievement of the
English, he answered "that they had known how to combine obedience with
self-respect". (CWSN 1: 54)

65.      
Swami Sadananda reported that early in the morning, while it was still
dark, Swami Vivekananda would rise and call the others, singing:

"Awake! Awake! all ye who would drink of the divine nectar!" (CWSN
1: 56) 

66.      
Sister Nivedita remembered:

At this time [during the Swami's itinerant days, near Almora]
he passed some months in a cave overhanging a mountain village. Only
twice have I known him to allude to this experience. Once he said,
"Nothing in my whole life ever so filled me with the sense of work to
be done. It was as if I were thrown out from that
life in caves to wander to and fro in the plains below". And again he
said to someone, "It is not the form of his life that makes a Sadhu.
For it is possible to sit in a cave and have one's whole mind filled
with the question of how many pieces of bread will be brought to one
for supper!" (CWSN 1: 61)

67.      
About his own poem "Kali the Mother":

"Scattering plagues and sorrows", he quoted from his own
verses,

Dancing mad with joy,

Come, Mother, come!

For terror is Thy name!

Death — is in Thy breath.

And every shaking step

Destroys a world for e'er.

"It all came true, every word of it", he interrupted himself
to say.

Who dares misery love.

Dance in Destruction's dance,

And hug the form of death, . . .

"To him the Mother does indeed come. I have proved it. For I
have hugged the form of Death!" (CWSN 1: 98-99)

68.      
Sister Nivedita, referring to her plans for a girls' school:

Only in one respect was he [Swami Vivekananda] inflexible. The
work for the education of Indian women, to which he would give his
name, might be as sectarian as I chose to make it. "You wish through a
sect to rise beyond all sects." (CWSN 1: 102)

69.      
Commenting on Sister Nivedita's visit to Gopaler-Ma's dwelling — a
small cell:

"Ah! this is the old India that you have seen, the India of
prayers and tears, of vigils and fasts, that is passing away, never to
return!" (CWSN 1: 109)

70.      
About the aims of the Ramakrishna Order:

The same purpose spoke again in his definition of the aims of
the Order of Ramakrishna — "to effect an exchange of the highest ideals
of the East and the West and to realize these in practice" . . . . (CWSN
1: 113)

71.      
After teaching Sister Nivedita the worship of Shiva, Swami Vivekananda
then culminated it in an offering of flowers at the feet of the Buddha.
He said, as if addressing each soul that would ever come to him for
guidance:

"Go thou and follow Him, who was born and gave His life for
others five hundred times before He attained the
vision of the Buddha!" (CWSN 1: 114)

72.      
Upon returning from a pilgrimage in Kashmir:

"These gods are not merely symbols! They are the forms that
the Bhaktas have seen!" (CWSN 1: 120)

73.      
Sister Nivedita's reminiscences of Swami Vivekananda's words heard long
before:

"The Impersonal God seen through the mists of sense is
personal." (CWSN 1: 120) 

74.      
Swami Vivekananda's comment when he was reminded of the rareness of
criminality in India:

"Would God it were otherwise in my land, for this is verily
the virtuousness of death!" (CWSN 1: 123)

75.      
Swami Vivekananda said:

"The whole of life is only a swan song! Never forget those
lines: 

The lion, when stricken to the heart,

gives out his mightiest roar.

When smitten on the head, the cobra lifts its hood.

And the majesty of the soul comes forth,

only when a man is wounded to his depths."
(CWSN 1: 124)

76.     
After hearing of the death of Shri Durga Charan Nag (Nag Mahashay):

"[He] was one of the greatest of the works of Ramakrishna
Paramahamsa." (CWSN 1: 129)

77.      
About Shri Ramakrishna's transformative power, Swami Vivekananda said:

"Was it a joke that Ramakrishna Paramahamsa should touch a
life? Of course he made new men and new women of those who came to him,
even in these fleeting contacts!" (CWSN 1: 130)

78.      
While speaking on the true spirit of a Sannyasin, Swami Vivekananda
said:

"I saw many great men in Hrishikesh. One case that I remember
was that of a man who seemed to be mad. He was coming nude down the
street, with boys pursuing and throwing stones at him. The whole man
was bubbling over with laughter while blood was streaming down his face
and neck. I took him and bathed the wound, putting ashes on it to stop
the bleeding. And all the time with peals of laughter he told me of the
fun the boys and he had been having, throwing the stones. 'So the
Father plays', he said.

"Many of these men hide, in order to guard themselves against
intrusion. People are a trouble to them. One had human bones strewn
about his cave and gave it out that he lived on corpses. Another threw
stones. And so on. . . .

"Sometimes the thing comes upon them in a flash. There was a
boy, for instance, who used to come to read the Upanishads with
Abhedananda. One day he turned and said, 'Sir, is all this really true?'

"'Oh yes!' said Abhedananda, 'It may be difficult to realize,
but it is certainly true'. 

"And next day, that boy was a silent Sannyasin, nude, on his
way to Kedarnath! 

"What happened to him? you ask. He became silent!

"But the Sannyasin needs no longer to worship or to go on
pilgrimage or perform austerities. What then is the motive of all this
going from pilgrimage to pilgrimage, shrine to shrine, and austerity to
austerity? He is acquiring merit and giving it to the world!" (CWSN
1: 133)

79.      
Referring to the story of Shibi Rana:

"Ah yes! These are the stories that are deep in our nation's
heart! Never forget that the Sannyasin takes two vows: one to realize
the truth and one to help the world — and that the most stringent of
stringent requirements is that he should renounce any thought of
heaven!" (CWSN 1: 134)

80.      
To Sister Nivedita:

"The Gitâ says that there are three kinds of charity: the
Tâmasic, the Râjasic and the Sâttvic. Tamasic charity is performed on
an impulse. It is always making mistakes. The doer thinks of nothing
but his own impulse to be kind. Rajasic charity is what a man does for
his own glory. And Sattvic charity is that which is given to the right
person, in the right way, and at the proper time. . . .

"When it comes to the Sattvic, I think more and more of a
certain great Western woman in whom I have seen that quiet giving,
always to the right person in the right way, at the right time, and
never making a mistake.

"For my own part, I have been learning that even charity can
go too far. . . .

"As I grow older I find that I look more and more for
greatness in little things. I want to know what a
great man eats and wears, and how he speaks to his servants. I want to
find a Sir Philip Sidney (Sir Philip Sidney (1554-1586): English poet,
soldier and politician.) greatness! Few men would remember the thirst
of others, even in the moment of death.

"But anyone will be great in a great position! Even the coward
will grow brave in the glare of the footlights. The world looks on.
Whose heart will not throb? Whose pulse will not quicken till he can do
his best?

"More and more the true greatness seems to me that of the worm
doing its duty silently, steadily, from moment to moment and from hour
to hour." (CWSN 1: 137)

81.      
Referring to the great individual — the divine incarnation, the Guru,
and the Rishi:

"You do not yet understand India! We Indians are man —
worshippers, after all! Our God is man!" (CWSN 1:
144)

82.      
On another occasion, Swami Vivekananda used the word "man-worshippers"
in an entirely different sense:

"This idea of man-worship exists in nucleus in India, but it
has never been expanded. You must develop it. Make poetry, make art, of
it. Establish the worship of the feet of beggars as you had it in
Mediaeval Europe. Make man-worshippers." (CWSN 1:
144-45)

83.      
To Sister Nivedita:

"There is a peculiar sect of Mohammedans who are reported to
be so fanatical that they take each newborn babe and expose it, saying,
'If God made thee, perish! If Ali made thee, live!' Now this, which
they say to the child, I say, but in the opposite sense, to you
tonight: 'Go forth into the world and there, if I made you, be
destroyed! If Mother made you, live'!" (CWSN 1: 151)

84.      
Long after Southern magnates in America had apologized to Vivekananda
when they learned that he had been mistaken for a Negro and was thus
refused admission into hotels, the Swami remarked to himself:

"What! rise at the expense of another! I didn't come to earth
for that! . . . If I am grateful to my white-skinned Aryan ancestor, I
am far more so to my yellow-skinned Mongolian ancestor and, most so of
all, to the black-skinned Negritoid!" (CWSN 1: 153)

85.      
Commenting on the dungeon-cages of mediaeval prisoners on
Mont-Saint-Michel:

"What a wonderful place for meditation!" (CWSN
1: 154)

"Oh, I know I have wandered over the whole earth, but in India
I have looked for nothing save the cave in which to meditate!" (Ibid.)

86.      
Though he considered offspring of the Roman Empire to be brutal and the
Japanese notion of marriage a horror, Swami Vivekananda nevertheless
summed up the constructive ideals, never the defects, of a community:

"For patriotism, the Japanese! For purity, the Hindu! And for
manliness, the European! There is no other in the world who
understands, as does the Englishman, what should be the glory of a
man!" (CWSN 1: 160) 

87.      
Swami Vivekananda said of himself before he left for America in 1893:

"I go forth to preach a religion of which Buddhism is nothing
but a rebel child and Christianity, with all her pretensions, only a
distant echo!" (CWSN 1: 161)

88.      
Describing the night Buddha left his wife to renounce the world, Swami
Vivekananda said:

"What was the problem that vexed him? Why! It was she whom he
was about to sacrifice for the world! That was the struggle! He cared
nothing for himself!" (CWSN 1: 172)

89.      
After describing Buddha's touching farewell to his wife, the Swami said:

"Have you never thought of the hearts of the heroes? How they
were great, great, great — and soft as butter?" (CWSN
1: 172)

90.      
Swami Vivekananda's description of Buddha's death and its similarity
with that of Shri Ramakrishna's:

He told how the blanket had been spread for him beneath the
tree and how the Blessed One had lain down, "resting on his right side
like a lion" to die, when suddenly there came to him one who ran for
instruction. The disciples would have treated the man as an intruder,
maintaining peace at any cost about their Master's death-bed, but the
Blessed One overheard, and saying, "No, no! He who was sent (Lit., “the
Tathâgata”. “A word”, explained Swami Vivekananda, “which is very like
your ‘Messiah’”.) is ever ready", he raised himself on his elbow and
taught. This happened four times and then, and then only, Buddha held
himself free to die. "But first he spoke to reprove Ananda for weeping.
The Buddha was not a person but a realization, and to that any one of
them might attain. And with his last breath he forbade them to worship
any."

The immortal story went on to its end. But to one who
listened, the most significant moment had been that in which the teller
paused — at his own words "raised himself on his elbow and taught" —
and said, in brief parenthesis, "I saw this, you
know, in the case of Ramakrishna Paramahamsa". And there rose before
the mind the story of one,
destined to learn from that teacher, who had travelled a hundred miles,
and arrived at Cossipore only when he lay dying. Here also the
disciples would have refused admission, but Shri Ramakrishna
intervened, insisting on receiving the new-comer, and teaching him. (CWSN
1: 175-176)

91.      
Commenting on the historic and philosophic significance of Buddhistic
doctrine:

"Form, feeling, sensation, motion and knowledge are the five
categories in perpetual flux and fusion. And in these lies Maya. Of any
one wave nothing can be predicated, for it is not. It but was and is
gone. Know, O Man, thou art the sea! Ah, this was
Kapila's philosophy, but his great disciple [Buddha] brought the heart
to make it live!" (CWSN 1: 176)

92.      
Concerning the Buddhist First Council and the dispute as to its
President:

"Can you imagine what their strength was?
One said it should be Ananda, because he had loved Him most. But
someone else stepped forward and said no! for Ananda had been guilty of
weeping at the death-bed. And so he was passed over!" (CWSN
1: 177)

93.      
Considering reincarnation a "scientific speculation" rather than an
article of faith:

"Why, one life in the body is like a million years of
confinement, and they want to wake up the memory of many lives!
Sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof! . . . Yes! Buddhism must
be right! Reincarnation is only a mirage! But this vision is to be
reached by the path of Advaita alone!" (CWSN 1:
180-81)

94.      
"Had I lived in Palestine, in the days of Jesus of Nazareth, I would
have washed his feet, not with my tears, but with my heart's blood!" (CWSN
1: 189)

95.      
"For the Advaitin, therefore, the only motive is
love. . . . It is the Saviour who should go on his way rejoicing, not
the saved!" (CWSN 1: 197-98)

96.      
On the necessity of restraint in a disciple's life:

"Struggle to realize yourself without a trace of emotion! . .
. Watch the fall of the leaves, but gather the sentiment of the sight
from within at some later time!" (CWSN 1: 207)

"Mind! No loaves and fishes! No glamour of the world! All this
must be cut short. It must be rooted out. It is sentimentality — the
overflow of the senses. It comes to you in colour, sight, sound, and
associations. Cut it off. Learn to hate it. It is utter poison!"
(Ibid., 207-208)

97.      
On the value of types:

"Two diffferent races mix and fuse, and out of them rises one
strong distinct type. A strong and distinct type is always the physical
basis of the horizon. It is all very well to talk of universalism, but
the world will not be ready for that for millions of years!

"Remember! if you want to know what a ship is like, the ship
has to be specified as it is — its length, breadth, shape, and
material. And to understand a nation, we must do the same. India is
idolatrous. You must help her as she is. Those who
have left her can do nothing for her!" (CWSN 1: 209)

98.      
Describing the Indian ideal of Brahmacharya in the student's life,
Swami Vivekananda said:

"Brahmacharya should be like a burning fire within the veins!"
(CWSN 1: 216) 

99.      
Concerning marriage by arrangement instead of choice, Swami Vivekananda
said:

"There is such pain in this country! Such pain! Some, of
course, there must always have been. But now the sight of Europeans
with their different customs has increased it. Society knows that there
is another way!

[To a European] "We have exalted motherhood and you, wifehood;
and I think both might gain by some interchange.

"In India the wife must not dream of loving even a son as she
loves her husband. She must be Sati. But the husband ought not to love
his wife as he does his mother. Hence a reciprocated affection is not
thought so high as one unreturned. It is 'shopkeeping'. The joy of the
contact of husband and wife is not admitted in India. This we have to
borrow from the West. Our ideal needs to be refreshed by yours. And
you, in turn, need something of our devotion to motherhood." (CWSN
1: 221-22)

100.     Speaking
to a disciple with great compassion:

"You need not mind if these shadows of home and marriage cross
your mind sometimes. Even to me, they come now and again!" (CWSN
1: 222)

101.     On
hearing of the intense loneliness of a friend:

"Every worker feels like that at times!" (CWSN
1: 222)

102.    
Concerning the Hindu and Buddhist monastic and non-monastic ideals:

"The glory of Hinduism lies in the fact that while it has
defined ideals, it has never dared to say that any one of these alone
was the one true way. In this it differs from Buddhism, which exalts
monasticism above all others as the path that must be taken by all
souls to reach perfection. The story given in the Mahâbhârata of the
young saint who was made to seek enlightenment, first from a married
woman and then from a butcher, is sufficient to show this. 'By doing my
duty', said each one of these when asked, 'by doing my duty in my own
station, have I attained this knowledge'. There is no career then which
might not be the path to God. The question of attainment depends only,
in the last resort, on the thirst of the soul." (CWSN
1: 223)

103.     With
reference to the idea that the lover always sees the ideal in the
beloved, Swami Vivekananda responded to a girl's newly avowed love:

"Cling to this vision! As long as you can both see the ideal
in one another, your worship and happiness will grow more instead of
less." (CWSN 1: 224)

104.    
"The highest truth is always the simplest." (CWSN 1:
226)

105.     Swami
Vivekananda's remarks on American séances:

"Always the greatest fraud by the simplest means." (CWSN
1: 233)

106.     On
Western and Eastern views of a person as a body or a soul:

"Western languages declare that man is a body and has a soul;
Eastern languages declare that he is a soul and has a body." (CWSN
1: 236-37)

107.    
Concerning Swami Vivekananda's reverence for his Guru:

"I can criticize even an Avatâra [divine incarnation] without
the slightest diminution of my love for him! But I know quite well that
most people are not so; and for them it is safest to protect their own
Bhakti!" (CWSN 1: 252) 

"Mine is the devotion of the dog! I don't want to know why! I
am contented simply to follow!" (Ibid., 252-53)

108.    
"Ramakrishna Paramahamsa used to begin every day by walking about in
his room for a couple of hours, saying 'Satchidânanda!' or 'Shivoham!'
or some other holy word." (CWSN 1: 255)

109.     A few
months before his passing away, Swami Vivekananda said:

"How often does a man ruin his disciples by remaining always
with them! When men are once trained, it is essential that their leader
leaves them; for without his absence they cannot develop themselves!" (CWSN
1: 260)

110.     A few
days before his passing away, the Swami said:

"I am making ready for death. A great Tapasyâ and meditation
has come upon me, and I am making ready for death." (CWSN 1: 261-62)

111.     In
Kashmir after an illness, Swami Vivekananda said as he lifted a couple
of pebbles:

"Whenever death approaches me, all weakness vanishes. I have
neither fear, nor doubt, nor thought of the external. I simply busy
myself making ready to die. I am as hard as that
[the pebbles struck one another in his hand] — for I have
touched the feet of God!" (CWSN 1: 262)



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/newspaper_reports/newspaper_reports_contents.htm


 ←
Home / Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ →

Newspaper Reports

Calcutta 1897

***

Part
I: American Newspaper Reports 

Part
II: European Newspaper Reports 

Part
III: Indian Newspaper Reports



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/002_sir.htm


← Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters
– Fifth Series /
 →

« Chronology

»

« Addressee
»

II

(Translated from Bengali)

To Balaram Bose

Glory to Ramakrishna

GHAZIPUR

February 11, 1890

RESPECTED SIR

I have received your book. In Hrishikesh, Kali [Swami
Abhedananda] has had a relapse and is again suffering from what seems
to be malaria. Once it comes, the fever does not easily leave those who
have never had it before. I too suffered the same way when I first had
the attack of fever. Kali has never had the fever before. I have not
received any letter from Hrishikesh. Where is . . . ?

I am suffering terribly from a backache which began in
Allahabad. I had recovered from it some time back, but it has recurred.
So I will have to stay here awhile longer because of my back and also
because Babaji [Pavhari Baba] has requested it.

What you have written about uncooked bread is true. But a monk
dies that way, not like the breaking of a cup and saucer. This time I
am not going to be overcome by weakness in any way. And if I die, that
will be good for me. It is better to depart from this world very soon.

Your servant,

NARENDRA



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/b6027ae9001.htm


Back
to
English

২৭ক

(বলরামবাবুকে লিখিত)

রামকৃষ্ণজয়তি

গাজীপুর

৬।২।৯০

পূজ্যপাদেষু —

পওহারী বাবার সহিত আলাপ — অতি আশ্চর্য
মহাত্মা! বিনয় ভক্তি এবং যোগমুর্তি। আচারী বৈষ্ণব কিন্তু দ্বেষবুদ্ধি
রহিত।
মহাপ্রভুতে বড় ভক্তি। পরমহংস মহাশয়কে বলেন, “এক অবতার যে”। আমাকে বড়
ভালোবাসিয়াছেন। তাঁহার অনুরোধে কিছুদিন এ স্থানে আছি। ইনি ২।৬ মাস
একাক্রমে সমাধিস্থ থাকেন। বাঙ্গলা পড়িতে পারেন। পরমহংস মশায়ের
photograph রাখিয়াছেন। সাক্ষাৎ এখন হয়না। দ্বারের আড়াল থেকে কথা কহেন।
এমন মিষ্ট কথা কখনও শুনি নাই। আরও অনেক কথা ইহার সম্বন্ধে, এখন বলিব না।
ইহার জন্য একখানি চৈতন্যভাগবত পত্রপাঠ যেথায় পাও পাঠাইবে। গগনচন্দ্র
রায়, আফিং ডিপার্টমেন্ট গাজীপুর — এই ঠিকানায় পাঠাইবেন। ইহাতে অন্যথা
না হয়। ইনি তোমাদের একজন ideal বৈষ্ণব। খুব পন্ডিত কিন্তু ধরিবার যো নেই।
এরও একজন হৃদে (অর্থাত বড় ভাই) কাছে আছে — সেও বাটীতে ঢুকিতে পায় না।
তবে হৃদের মত ... নহে। চৈতন্যমঙ্গল যদি ছাপা হইয়া থাকে তাহাও পাঠাইও। ইনি
গ্রহণ করিলে তোমার পরম ভাগ্য জানিবে। ইনি কাহারও কিছু লয়েন না। কি খান,
কি করেন, কেহই জানে না। আমি এস্থানে আছি কাহাকেও বলিও না, ও আমাকেও কাহারও
খবর দিবে না। আমি বড় কাজে বড় ব্যস্ত —

দাস

নরেন্দ্র



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/003_sir.htm


← Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters
– Fifth Series / →

«
Chronology
»

«
Addressee
 »

III

(Translated from Bengali)

To Balaram Bose

Salutation to Bhagavan Shri Ramakrishna

GHAZIPUR

February 1890

RESPECTED SIR,

I have received an anonymous letter which I have been unable
to trace back to the gigantic soul who wrote it. Indeed, one should pay
homage to such a man. He who considers a great soul like Pavhari Baba
to be no more than water in a hoof print, he who has nothing to learn
in this world and who feels it a disgrace
to be taught by any other man — truly, such a new incarnation
must be visited. I hope that if the government should discover the
identity of this person, he will be handled with special care and be
placed in the Alipore garden [zoo]. If you happen to know this man,
please ask him to bless me, so that even a dog or a jackal may be my
Guru — not to speak of a great soul like Pavhari Baba.

I have many things to learn. My master used to say: "As long
as I live, so long do I learn". Also please tell this fellow that
unfortunately I do not have the time to "cross the seven seas and
thirteen rivers" or to go to Sri Lanka in order to sleep after having
put oil in the nostrils.1

Your servant,

NARENDRA

P.S. Please have the rose-water brought from Ishan Babu's
[Ishan Chandra Mukherjee's] residence if there is delay [in their
sending it to the Baranagore Math]. The roses are still not in bloom.
The rose-water has just been sent to the residence of Ishan Babu.

^Here
the Swami is referring to Kumbhakarna, the brother of the villain
Râvana of the Râmâyana. He was of such a lethargic and evil nature that
Brahmâ granted the boon that he should sleep for six months at a
stretch. Putting mustard oil in the nostrils is considered an aid to
sleeping soundly.

"Crossing seven seas and thirteen rivers" is a Bengali phrase meaning
to travel a great distance. Sri Lanka is the ancient name for the
island of Sri Lanka and was the capital of Ravana's kingdom.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/004_balaram_babu.htm


← Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9 /
Letters –
Fifth Series / →

«
Chronology
»

« Addressee
»

IV

(Translated from Bengali)

To Balaram Bose

GHAZIPUR

March 12, 1890

BALARAM BABU,

As soon as you get the railway receipt, please send someone to
the railway warehouse at Fairlie Place (Calcutta) to pick up the roses
and send them on to Shashi. See that there is no delay in bringing or
sending them.

Baburam is going to Allahabad soon. I am going elsewhere.

NARENDRA

PS. Know it for certain that everything will be spoiled if
delayed.

NARENDRA



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/005_tulsiram.htm


← Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9 /
Letters –
Fifth Series / →

«
Chronology
»

V

(Translated from Bengali)

To Tulsiram Ghosh

GHAZIPUR

10 May 1890

DEAR TULSIRAM:1

A basket of roses will be sent to you in a few days at
Chitpur. Do you please send them up immediately to Shashi [Swami
Ramakrishnananda, at the Baranagore Math]. They would not be sent to
the care of Balaram Basu, for there would be such nice delays and that
would be death to the flowers. I think if sent to Chitpur, to your
depot, it would reach you there at the very place; if not, write sharp.
Baburam [Swami Premananda] is here, going up in a day or two to
Allahabad. I too am going off from this place very soon. I go perhaps
to Bareilly and up. What is Balaram Babu [Balaram Bose] doing?

My Pranâms etc. to you all.

Yours affectionately,

NARENDRA

^The
eldest of three brothers (Tulsiram, Baburam and Shantiram) and a sister
(Krishnabhavini), married to Balaram Bose.  



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/006_sharat.htm


← Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9 /
Letters –
Fifth Series / →

«
Chronology
»

«
Addressee
»

VI

To Swami Saradananda

Salutation to Bhagavan
Ramakrishna

CALCUTTA

32 ASHADHA [JULY 15, 1890]

MY DEAR SHARAT

I am sorry to learn that [Vaikunthanath] Sanyal's habits are
as yet not Pucca [firm]; and what about Brahmacharya? I don't
understand you. If so, the best thing for you both is to come
down and live here. The widow of Mohindra Mukherjee is trying head and
heart to erect a Math for you, and Surendranath Mitra has left another
thousand so that you are very likely soon to get a beautiful place on
the river. As for all the hardships up there, I reserve my own opinions.

It was not at all my intention to come down, only the death of
Balaram Bose had made me have a peep here and go back. If the mountains
be so bad, there is more than enough place for me; only I leave Bengal.
If one does not suit, another will. So that is my determination.
Everyone here will be so glad at your return here, and from your letter
I see it would be downright injurious to you if you didn't come down.
So come down at your earliest opportunity. I will leave this place
before this letter reaches you; only I won't go to Almora. I have my
own plans for the future and they shall be a secret.

As for Sanyal, I do not see how I can benefit him. Of course,
you are at liberty to hold your own opinion about the Sanga [holy
company] here. That I can find places Sudrishya [having scenic beauty]
and Subhiksha [where alms are available] is enough. Sanga is not much,
or, I think, not at all necessary for me.

Yours, etc.,

NARENDRA.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/007_mother.htm


← Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9 /
Letters –
Fifth Series / →

«
Chronology
 »

Addressee
 »

VII

To Mrs. G. W. Hale

MINNEAPOLIS

21 November 1893

DEAR MOTHER,

I reached Madison safely, went to a hotel, and sent a message
to Mr. Updike. He came to see me. He is a Congregational and so, of
course, was not very friendly at first; but in the course of an hour or
so became very kind to me, and took me over the whole place and the
University. I had a fine audience and $100. Immediately after the
lecture I took the night train to Minneapolis.

I tried to get the clergymen's ticket, but they could not give
me any, not being the headquarters. The thing to be done is to
get a permit from every head office of every line in Chicago. Perhaps
it is possible for Mr. Hale to get the permits for me. If it is so, I
hope he will take the trouble to send them over to me to Minneapolis if
they can reach me by the 25th, or to Des Moines if by the 29th. Else I
would do it the next time in Chicago. I have taken the money in a draft
on the bank, which cost me 40¢.

May you be blessed for ever, my kind friend; you and your
whole family have made such a heavenly impression on me as I would
carry all my life.

Yours sincerely,

VIVEKANANDA



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/008_mother.htm


← Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9 /
Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
»

« Addressee
 »

VIII

To Mrs. G. W. Hale

MINNEAPOLIS

24 November 1893.

DEAR MOTHER

I am still in Minneapolis. I am to lecture this afternoon, and
the day after tomorrow go to Des Moines.

The day I came here they had their first snow, and it snowed
all through the day and night, and I had great use for the arctics. (A
waterproof overshoe.) I went to see the frozen Minnehaha Falls. They
are very beautiful. The temperature today is 21o
below zero, but I had been out sleighing and enjoyed it immensely. I am
not the least afraid of losing the tips of my ears or nose.

The snow scenery here has pleased me more than any other sight
in this country.

I saw people skating on a frozen lake yesterday.

I am doing well. Hoping this will find you all the same, I
remain,

Yours obediently,

VIVEKANANDA



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/009_mother.htm


← Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9 /
Letters –
Fifth Series / →

«
Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

IX

To Mrs. G. W. Hale

DETROIT,

14 February 1894.

DEAR MOTHER,

Arrived safely night before last at 1 o'clock a.m. The train
was seven hours late, being blocked by snowdrifts on the way. However,
I enjoyed the novelty of the sight: several men cutting and clearing
the snow and two engines tugging and pulling was a new sight to me.

Here I met Mr. Bagley, the youngest [Paul F. Bagley], waiting
for me at the station; and, it being very late in the night, Mrs. Bagley1
had retired, but the daughters sat
up for me.

They are very rich, kind and hospitable. Mrs. Bagley is
especially interested in India. The daughters are very good, educated
and good-looking. The eldest gave me a luncheon at a club where I met
some of the finest ladies and gentlemen of the city. Last evening there
was a reception given here in the house. Today I am going to speak for
the first time. Mrs. Bagley is a very nice and kind lady. I hope the
lectures will please her. With my love and regards for you all, I
remain,

Yours sincerely,

VIVEKANANDA.

PS — I have received a letter from Slayton2
in reply to that in which I wrote to him that I cannot stay. He gives
me hope. What is your advice? I
enclose the letter [from Narasimhacharya] in another
envelope.3

Yours,

V.

^Mrs.
John Judson Bagley (1833 – 1898) was one of Detroit's most influential
women, who had met Swami Vivekananda at the Parliament of Religions in
Chicago. She was a great admirer and supporter of the Swami and was his
hostess during this period. She honoured him with an enormous and gala
reception to which the élite of Detroit were invited.

^The
Slayton Lyceum Lecture Bureau of Chicago, with whom the Swami had
signed a contract for three years. Later he broke the contract after
noticing that the Bureau had been cheating him.

^Narasimhacharya
of Madras was a delegate to the Parliament of Religions, held at
Chicago in 1893, where he became acquainted with Swami Vivekananda.
After the Parliament was over, he stayed for some months in the United
States. He had written a letter to Swami Vivekananda from the Nicholson
Hotel, Nashville, Tennessee, where he was stranded. The letter reads:
"Dear Swami, I have come here, and without being able to get out am
stopping; and I would be very much obliged if you would kindly send me
$50 so that I can fix the whole thing and come over to Chicago, from
which place I shall go back home. Please do so at once as I am in
trouble. Hoping to hear from you soon, I remain, Yours sincerely,
Narasimhacharya". Swami Vivekananda mailed this letter to
Mrs. G. W. Hale on February 14, 1894, from Detroit with a line: "What
do you advise, Mother? Vivekananda".  



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/010_mother.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

X

To Mrs. G. W. Hale

DETROIT,

20 February 1894.

DEAR MOTHER

My lectures here are over. I have made some very good friends
here, amongst them Mr. Palmer,1
President of the late World's Fair. I am thoroughly disgusted with this
Slayton2
business and am trying hard to break loose. I have lost at least $5,000
by joining this man. Hope you are all well. Mrs. Bagley and her
daughters are very kind to me. I hope to do some private lecturing here
and then go to Ada and then back to Chicago. It is snowing here this
morning. They are very nice people here, and the different clubs took a
good deal of interest in me.

It is rather wearisome, these constant receptions and dinners;
and
their horrible dinners — a hundred dinners concentrated into one — and
when in a man's club, why, smoking on between the courses and then
beginning afresh. I thought the Chinese alone make a dinner run through
half a day with intervals of smoking!!

However, they are very gentlemanly men and, strange to say, an
Episcopal clergyman3
and a Jewish rabbi4
take great interest in me and eulogize me. Now the man who got up the
lectures here got at least a thousand dollars. So in every place. And
this is Slayton's duty to do for me. Instead, he, the liar, had told me
often that he has agents everywhere and would advertise and do all that
for me. And this is what he is doing. His will be done. I am going
home. Seeing the liking the American people have for me, I could have,
by this time, got a pretty large sum. But Jimmy Mills5
and Slayton were sent by the Lord to stand in the way. His ways are
inscrutable.

However,
this is a secret. President Palmer has gone to Chicago to try to get me
loose from this liar of a Slayton. Pray that he may succeed. Several
judges here have seen my contract, and they say it is a shameful fraud
and can be broken any moment; but I am a monk — no self-defence.
Therefore, I had better throw up the whole thing and go to India.

My love to Harriets, Mary, Isabelle, Mother Temple, Mr.
Matthews, Father Pope and you all.6

Yours obediently,

VIVEKANANDA.

^Mr.
Thomas W. Palmer of Detroit was a rich businessman and statesman. In
1883 he was elected to the United States Senate and later became
Minister to Spain (Minister Plenipotentiary or Ambassador). He was
chosen President of the World's Fair Commission when the World's
Columbian Exposition was organized at Chicago, in the 1890s. In all
probability, it was the Parliament of Religions that he first came to
know and admire Swami Vivekananda.

^The
Slayton Lyceum Lecture Bureau of Chicago. On the cover of this letter
someone, perhaps Mrs. Hale, had written: "Feb. 22 President Palmer
breaks the Slayton contract".

^Reverend
Reed Stuart of the Unitarian Church, who was an admirer of the Swami.

^Rabbi
Grossman of the Temple Beth El. On Sunday, February 18, 1894, Rabbi
Grossman spoke in his temple on "What Swami Vivekananda Has Taught Us".
The Rabbi became Swami Vivekananda's devoted friend, and the Swami,
during his visit to Detroit in 1896, lectured at the Rabbi's temple.

^Jimmy,
or Irving, Mills might have been either an individual lecture agent or
an agent of the Slayton Lyceum Lecture Bureau.

^Here,
"Harriets" refers to Harriet McKindley and Harriet Hale; Harriet
and Isabelle McKindley were the daughters of Mrs. Hale's sister.
Harriet and Mary Hale were her own daughters. Swami Vivekananda used to
address Mr. Hale's sister (Mrs. James Matthews) as "Mother Temple", Mr.
G. W. Hale as "Father Pope" and Mrs. G. W. Hale as "Mother Church".



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/011_mother.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
»

« Addressee
 »

XI

To Mrs. G. W. Hale

DETROIT

February 22, 1894

DEAR MOTHER

I have got the $200 for the engagements, $175 and $117 by
private lectures1
and $100 as a present from a lady.

This sum will be sent to you tomorrow in cheques by Mrs.
Bagley. Today, the banks being closed, we could not do it.

I am going tomorrow to lecture at Ada, Ohio. I do not know
whether I will go to Chicago from Ada or not. However, kindly let not
Slayton know anything about the rest of the money, as I am going to
separate myself from him.

Yours obediently,

VIVEKANANDA.

^When
Swami Vivekananda realized that the Slayton Lyceum Lecture Bureau was
cheating him, he began to arrange lectures privately, not knowing that
Mr. T. W. Palmer who had gone to Chicago on his behalf, had broken the
contract on the day this letter was written.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/012_mother.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

«
Chronology
»

« Addressee
 »

XII

To Mrs. G. W. Hale

DETROIT,

10 March 1894.

DEAR MOTHER,

Reached Detroit safely yesterday evening.1
The two younger daughters were waiting for me with a carriage. So
everything was all right. I hope the lecture will be a success, as one
of the girls said the tickets are selling like hot cakes. Here I found
a letter from Mr. Palmer awaiting me with a request that I should come
over to his house and be his guest.

Could not go last night. He will come in the course of the day
to take me over. As I am going over to Mr. Palmer's, I have not opened
the awfully-packed bag. The very idea of repacking seems to me to be
hopeless. So I could not shave this morning. However, I hope to shave
during the course of the day. I am thinking of going over to Boston and
New York just now, as the Michigan cities I can come and take over in
summer; but the fashionables of New York and Boston will fly off. Lord
will show the way.

Mrs. Bagley and all the family are heartily glad at my return
and people are again coming in to see me.

The photographer here has sent me some of the pictures he
made. They are positively villainous — Mrs. Bagley
does not like them at all. The real fact is that between the two photos
my face has become so fat and heavy — what can the poor photographers
do?

Kindly send over four copies of photographs. Not yet made any
arrangement with Holden. (A lecture agent at Detroit.) Everything
promises to be very nice. "Ssenator Ppalmer"2
is a very nice gentleman and very kind to me. He has got a French chef
— Lord bless his stomach! I am trying to starve and the whole world is
against me!! He used to give the best dinners in all Washington!
Hopeless! I am resigned!

I will write more from Mr. Palmer's house.

If the Himalayas become the inkpot, the ocean ink, if the
heavenly eternal Devadaroo3
becomes the pen, and if the sky itself becomes paper, still I would not
be able to write a drop of the debt of gratitude I owe to you and
yours. Kindly convey my love to the four full notes and the four half
notes of the Hale gamut.4

May the blessings of the Lord be upon you and yours ever and
ever.

Ever yours in grateful affection,

VIVEKANANDA.

^On
Friday, February 23, 1894, Swami Vivekananda had left Detroit for Ada,
Ohio, and from there he may have returned to Chicago. It appears that
his Detroit admirers called him back to fight the Christian onslaught
which had been launched against him.

^Because
Mr. T. W. Palmer was a stammerer, Swami Vivekananda spelled his name
this way.

^Lit.,
"a tree of angels"; in Sanskrit Deva means "god" or "angel" and Dâru
means "tree" or "timber"

^The
four full notes of the Hale family were Mr. and Mrs. G. W. Hale and Mr.
and Mrs. James Matthews; the half notes were Harriet and Mary Hale and
Harriet and Isabelle McKindley — respectively, the daughters and nieces
of Mrs. G. W. Hale.  



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/013_mother.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

«
Chronology
»

« Addressee
 »

XIII

To Mrs. G. W. Hale

DETROIT

16 March 1894

DEAR MOTHER,

Since my last, there has been nothing of interest here. Except
that Mr. Palmer is a very hearty, jolly, good old man and very rich. He
has been uniformly kind to me. Tomorrow I go back to Mrs. Bagley's
because I am afraid she is rather uneasy at my long stay here. I am
shrewd enough to know that in every country in general, and America in
particular, "she" is the real operator at the nose string.

I am going to lecture here on Monday1
and in two places near the town on Tuesday and Wednesday.2
I do not remember the lady you
refer me to,3
and she is in Lynn; what is Lynn, where on the globe its position is —
I do not know.4
I want to go to Boston. What good would it do me by stopping at Lynn?
Kindly give me a more particular idea. Nor could I read the name of the
lady at whose house you say I met the lady. However, I am in no way
very anxious. I am taking life very easy in my natural way. I have no
particular wish to go anywhere, Boston or no Boston. I am just in a
nice come-what-may mood. Something should turn up, bad or good. I have
enough now to pay my passage back
and a little sight-seeing to boot. As to my plans of work,
I am fully convinced that at the rate it is progressing I will have to
come back four or five times to put it in any shape.

As to informing others and doing good that way, I have failed
to persuade myself that I have really anything to convey to the world.
So I am very happy just now and quite at my ease. With almost nobody in
this vast house and a cigar between my lips, I am dreaming just now and
philosophising upon that work fever which was upon
me. It is all nonsense. I am nothing, the world is nothing, the Lord
alone is the only worker. We are simply tools in
His hands etc., etc., etc. Have you got the Alaska information? If so,
kindly send it to me c/o Mrs. Bagley.

Are you coming to the East this summer? With eternal gratitude
and love,

Your son,

VIVEKANANDA.

^On
Monday, March 19, Swami Vivekananda spoke at the Detroit Auditorium on
"Buddhism, the Religion of the Light of Asia."

^On
Tuesday, March 20, Swami Vivekananda delivered a lecture on Hinduism at
Bay City, Michigan; and on Wednesday, March 21, he spoke on the
"Harmony of Religions at Saginaw, Michigan.

^Mrs.
Francis W. Breed, a social leader of Lynn and the wife of an extremely
wealthy boot and shoe manufacturer.

^Lynn,
Massachusetts, a small industrial town on Massachusetts bay, ten miles
north of Boston.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/014_mother.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

«
Chronology
»

« Addressee
 »

XIV

To Mrs. G. W. Hale

DETROIT

Tuesday, 27 March 1894

DEAR MOTHER,

Herewith I send two cheques of $114 and $75 to be put in the
banks for me. I have endorsed them to your care.

I am going to Boston in a day or two. I have got $57 with me.
They will go a long way. Something will turn up, as it always does. I
do not know where I go from Boston. I have written to Mrs. [Francis W.]
Breed but as yet heard nothing from her.1
His will be done. Not I but Thou — that is always the motto of my life.

With my eternal gratitude, love, and admiration for Mother
Church and all the dignitaries,

I remain your son,

VIVEKANANDA.

^Soon
afterwards the Swami received a telegram from Mrs. Breed inviting him
to Lynn to be her guest for a week; he accepted and spent a week at her
home in Mid-April.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/015_mother.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

«
Chronology

»

« Addressee
 »

XV

To Mrs. G. W. Hale

C/O DR. GUERNSEY 

528 FIFTH AVENUE

NEW YORK

2 April 1894

DEAR MOTHER,

I am in New York. The gentleman [Dr. Guernsey] whose guest I
am is a very nice and learned and well-to-do man. He had an only son
whom he lost last July. Has only a daughter now. The old couple have
received a great shock, but they are pure and God-loving people and
bear it manfully. The lady of the house is very, very kind and good.
They are trying to help me as much as they can and they will do a good
deal, I have no doubt.

Awaiting further developments. This Thursday [April 5] they
will invite a number of the brainy people of the Union League Club and
other places of which the Doctor is a member, and see what comes out of
it. Parlour lectures are a great feature in this city, and more can be
made by each such lecture than even platform talks in other cities.

It is a very clean city. None of that black smoke tarring
everyone in five minutes; and the street in which the Doctor lives is a
nice, quiet one.

Hope the sisters are doing well and enjoying their music, both
in the opera and the parlour. I am sure I would have appreciated the
music at the opera about which Miss Mary wrote to me. I am sure the
opera musicians do not show the interior anatomy of their throats and
lungs.

Kindly give brother Sam1
my deep love. I am sure he is bewaring of the vidders.2
Some of the Baby Bagleys are going to Chicago. They will go to see you,
and I am sure you would like them very much.

Nothing more to write. With all respect, love and obedience,

Your son,

VIVEKANANDA.

PS — I have not to ask now for addresses. Mrs. Sherman (Mrs.
Bagley’s married daughter.) has given me a little book with A., B., C.,
etc., marks and has written under them all the addresses I need; and I
hope to write all the future addresses in the same manner. What an
example of self-help I am!!3 

V.

^Sam
Hale, younger brother of Mary and Harriet. He was then in Alaska.

^A
reference in Charles Dickens' novel Pickwick Papers to a Mr. Weller,
whose second marriage to a domineering widow prompted him to warn his
son Sam: "Be careful o'widders all your life . . . , Sammy".

^At
the end of the letter, Mary Hale added the following note: "Dear Sam
[Hale], be sure not to lose any of these letters, and return them as
soon as possible. We miss you, awfully. Hope you are well and happy and
bewaring of the vidders, as Swami says. Love to all. Affectionately
your sister, Mary".



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/016_mother.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

«
Chronology
»

« Addressee
 »

XVI

To Mrs. G. W. Hale

[C/O DR. EGBERT GUERNSEY 

528 FIFTH AVENUE]

NEW YORK 

10 April 1894

DEAR MOTHER,

I just now received your letter. I have the greatest regard
for the Salvationists; in fact, they and the Oxford Mission gentlemen
are the only Christian missionaries for whom I have any regard at all.
They live with the people, as the people, and for the people of India.
Lord bless them. But I would be very, very sorry of any trick being
played by them. I never have heard of any Lord in
India, much less in Ceylon. (Now Sri Lanka.) The
people of Ceylon and northern India differ more than Americans and
Hindus. Nor is there any connection between the Buddhist priest and the
Hindu. Our dress, manners, religion, food, language differ entirely
from southern India, much less to speak of Ceylon. You know already
that I could not speak a word of Narasimha's language!!
Although that was only Madras. Well, you
have Hindu princesses; why not a Lord, which is not a higher title.

There was a certain Mrs. Smith in Chicago.1
I met her at Mrs. Stockham's. She has introduced me to the Guernseys.
Dr. Guernsey is one of the chief physicians of this city and is a very
good old gentleman. They are very fond of me and are very nice people.
Next Friday I am going to Boston. I have not been lecturing in New York
at all. I will come back and do some lecturing here.

For the last few days I was the guest of Miss Helen Gould —
daughter of the rich Gould2
— at her palatial country residence, an hour's ride from the city. She
has one of the most beautiful and large green-houses in the world, full
of all sorts of curious plants and flowers. They are Presbyterians, and
she is a very religious lady. I had a very nice time there.

I met my friend Mr. Flagg (William Joseph Flagg.) several
times. He is flying merrily. There is another Mrs. Smith here who is
very rich and pious. She has invited me to dine today.

As for lecturing, I have given up raising money. I cannot
degenerate myself any more. When a certain purpose was in view, I could
work; with that gone I cannot earn for myself. I have sufficient for
going back. I have not tried to earn a penny here, and have refused
some presents which friends here wanted to make to me. Especially Flagg
— I have refused his money. I had in Detroit tried to refund the money
back to the donors, and told them that, there being almost no chance of
my succeeding in my enterprise, I had no right to keep their money; but
they refused and told me to throw that into the waters if I liked. But
I cannot take any more conscientiously. I am very well off, Mother.
Everywhere the Lord sends me kind persons and homes; so there is no use
of my going into beastly worldliness at all.

The New York people, though not so intellectual as the
Bostonians, are, I think, more sincere. The Bostonians know well how to
take advantage of everybody. And I
am afraid even water cannot slip
through their closed fingers!!! Lord bless
them!!! I have promised to
go and I must go; but, Lord, make me live with the sincere,
ignorant
and the poor, and not cross the shadow of the hypocrites and tall
talkers who, as my Master used to say, are like vultures who soar high
and high in their talks, but the heart is really on a piece of carrion
on the ground.

I would be the guest of Mrs. Breed for a few days and, after
seeing a little of Boston, I would come back to New York.

Hope the sisters are all right and enjoying their concerts
immensely. There is not much of music in this city. That is a blessing
(?) Went to see Barnum's circus the other day. It is no doubt a grand
thing. I have not been as yet downtown. This street is very nice and
quiet.

I heard a beautiful piece of music the other day at Barnum's —
they call it a Spanish Serenada. Whatever it be, I liked it so much.
Unfortunately, Miss Guernsey is not given to much thumping, although
she has a good assortment of all the noisy stuffs in the world — and so
she could not play it, which I regret ever so much.

Yours obediently,

VIVEKANANDA.

PS — Most probably I will go to Annisquam as Mrs. Bagley's
guest. She has got a nice house there this summer. Before that, I will
go back to Chicago once more if I can.

V.

^Mrs.
Arthur Smith. On April 24 Swami Vivekananda spoke before Mrs. Smith's
"Conversation Circle" at the Waldorf Hotel in New York; his first known
talk in that city.

^Mr.
Jay Gould, one of the richest men in America. After his death in 1892,
a part of his immense fortune was inherited by his daughter Helen.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/017_mother.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

«
Chronology

»

« Addressee
 »

XVII

To Mrs. G. W. Hale

C/O MISS FLORENCE GUERNSEY

528 FIFTH AVENUE

NEW YORK

4 May 1894

DEAR MOTHER

Herewith I send over $125 in a cheque upon the 5th Avenue Bank
to be deposited at your leisure.

I am going to Boston on Sunday, day after tomorrow, and write
to you from Boston. With my love to all the family.

I remain yours truly,

VIVEKANANDA



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/018_mother.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

«
Chronology
 »

XVIII

To Mrs. John J. Bagley

HOTEL BELLEVUE

EUROPEAN PLAN

BOSTON

May 8, 1894

DEAR MOTHER,

I have arrived in Boston again. Last afternoon [I] spoke at
Mrs. Julia Ward Howe's club — of course for nothing, but it gives me a
prestige. I saw there Mrs. [Ednah Dean] Cheney. Would you not write a
letter to her for me? Although I told her I had a card from you, I
think a letter is better.

Yours truly,

VIVEKANANDA



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/019_mother.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

XIX

To Mrs. G. W. Hale

HOTEL BELLEVUE, EUROPEAN PLAN

BEACON STREET, BOSTON 

11 May, 1894

DEAR MOTHER,

I have been since the 7th, lecturing here every afternoon or
evening. At Mrs. Fairchild's I met the niece of Mrs. Howe. She was here
today to invite me to dinner with her today. I have not seen Mr.
Volkinen as yet. Of course, the pay for lecture is here the poorest,
and everybody has an axe to grind. I got a long letter full of the
prattles of the babies.1
Your city, i.e. New York, pays
far better than Boston, so I am trying to go back there. But here one
can get work almost every day.

I think I want some rest. I feel as if I am very much tired,
and these constant journeyings to and fro have shaken my nerves a
little, but hope to recoup soon. Last few days I have been suffering
from cold and slight fever and lecturing for all that; hope to get rid
of it in a day or two.

I have got a very nice gown at $30. The colour is not exactly
that of the old one, but cardinal, with more of yellow — could not get
the exact old colour even in New York.

I have not much to write, for it is the repetition of the old
story: talking, talking, talking. I long to fly to Chicago and shut up
my mouth and give a long rest to mouth and lungs and mind. If I am not
called for in New York, I am coming soon to Chicago.

Yours obediently,

VIVEKANANDA.

^Mary
and Harriet Hale and Isabelle and Harriet McKindley.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/020_mother.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology

»

« Addressee
 »

XX

To Mrs. G. W. Hale

HOTEL BELLEVUE EUROPEAN PLAN

BEACON STREET, BOSTON

14 May, 1894

DEAR MOTHER,

Your letter was so, so pleasing instead of being long; I
enjoyed every bit of it.

I have received a letter from Mrs. Potter Palmer (Social queen
of Chicago who made Swami Vivekananda’s acquaintance at the Parliament
of Religions, in which she had been active. Vide Complete
Works , VI.) asking me
to write to some of my countrywomen about their society etc. I will see
her personally when I come to Chicago; in the meanwhile I will write
her all I know. Perhaps you have received $125 sent over from New York.
Tomorrow I will send another $100 from here. The Bostonians want to
grind their own axes!!

Oh, they are so, so dry — even girls talk dry metaphysics.
Here is like our Benares where all is dry, dry
metaphysics!! Nobody here understands "my Beloved". Religion to these
people is reason, and horribly stony at that. I do not care for anybody
who cannot love my "Beloved". Do not tell it to Miss Howe — she may be
offended.

The pamphlet I did not send over because I do not like the
quotations from the Indian newspapers — especially, they give a haul
over coal to somebody. Our people so much dislike the Brâhmo Samâj that
they only want an opportunity to show it to them. I dislike it. Any
amount of enmity to certain persons cannot efface the good works of a
life. And then they were only children in Religion. They never were
much of religious men — i.e. they only wanted to talk and reason, and
did not struggle to see the Beloved; and until one does that I do not
say that he has any religion. He may have books, forms, doctrines,
words, reasons, etc., etc., but not religion; for that begins when the
soul feels the necessity, the want, the yearning after the "Beloved",
and never before. And therefore our society has no right to expect from
them anything more than from an ordinary "house-holder".

I hope to come to Chicago before the end of this month. Oh, I
am so tired.

Yours affectionately,

VIVEKANANDA.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/021_mother.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

«
Chronology

»

« Addressee
 »

XXI

To Mrs. G. W. Hale

541 DEARBORN AVENUE

CHICAGO 

9 June 1894

DEAR MOTHER,

We are all doing very well here. Last night the sisters (The
daughters of Mrs. Hale: Mary and Harriet.) invited me and Mrs. Norton
and Miss Howe and Mr. Frank Howe. We had a grand dinner and softshell
crab and many other things, and a very nice time. Miss Howe left this
morning.

The sisters and Mother Temple (Mrs. James Matthews, Mr. Hale’s
sister.) are taking very good care of me. Just now I am going to see my
"oh-my-dear" Gandhi.1
Narasimha was here yesterday; he wanted to go to Cincinnati where he
says he has more chances of success than anywhere else in the world. I
gave him the passage, and so I hope I have got the white elephant out
of my hands for the time being. How is Father Pope doing now? Hope he
has been much benefited by the mudfish business.2 

I had a very beautiful letter from Miss Guernsey of New York,
giving you her regards. I am going downtown to buy a new pair of shoes
as well as to get some money, my purse having been made empty by
Narasimha.

Nothing more to write. Yes, we went to see the "Charley's
Aunt".3
I nearly killed myself with laughing. Father Pope will enjoy it
extremely. I had never seen anything so funny.

Yours affectionately,

VIVEKANANDA.

^Probably
Mr. Virchand Gandhi, who represented Jainism at the Chicago World's
Parliament of Religions, in 1893.

^Mr.
and Mrs. Hale were staying at the mineral-springs resort in Indiana.
"Mud baths" were supposed cures for all ailments.

^Charley's
Aunt was a highly popular comedy of the era.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/022_mother.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

«
Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

XXII

To Mrs. G. W. Hale

NEW YORK 

28 June 1894

DEAR MOTHER,

Arrived safely two hours ago. Landsberg1
was waiting at the station. Came to Dr. Guernsey's house. Nobody was
there except a servant. I took a bath and strolled with Landsberg to
some restaurant where I had a good meal. Then, I have just now returned
to Landsberg's rooms in the Theosophical Society and am writing you
this letter.

I haven't been to see my other friends yet. After a good and
long rest through the night I hope to see most of them tomorrow. My
Love to you all. By the by, somebody stepped on my umbrella on board
the train and broke its nose off.

Your affectionate son,

VIVEKANANDA.

PS — I have not settled myself. So as to direct letters to me,
they can be directed c/o Leon Landsberg, 144 Madison Ave., New York.

^Mr.
Leon Landsberg, who was later initiated by Swami Vivekananda into
Sannyâsa at Thousand Island Park and became known as Swami Kripananda.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/023_mother.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology

»

« Addressee

»

XXIII

To Mrs. G. W. Hale

C/O LEON LANDSBERG

144 MADISON AVENUE

NEW YORK

1 July 1894

DEAR MOTHER,

Hope you are settled down in peace by this time. The babies
are doing well in Mudville (Kenosha, Wisconsin) — in their nunnery, I
am sure. It is very hot here, but now and then a breeze comes up which
cools it down. I am now with Miss [Mary A.] Phillips. Will move off
from here on Tuesday to another place.

Here I find a quotation from a speech by Sir Monier Williams,
professor of Sanskrit in the Oxford University. It is very strange as
coming from one who every day expects to see the whole of India
converted to Christianity. "And yet it is a remarkable characteristic
of Hinduism that it neither requires nor attempts to make converts. Nor
is it at present by any means decreasing in numbers, nor is it being
driven out of the field by two such proselytizing religions as
Mahomedanism [sic] and Christianity. On the contrary, it is at present
rapidly increasing. And far more remarkable than this is that, it is
all-receptive, all-embracing and all-comprehensive. It claims to be the
one religion of humanity, of
human nature, of the entire world. It cares not to oppose the progress
of Christianity nor of any other religion. For it has no difficulty in
including all other religions within its all-embracing arms and
ever-widening fold. And in real fact Hinduism has something to offer
which is suited to all minds. Its very strength lies in its infinite
adaptability to the infinite diversity of human characters and human
tendencies. It has its highly spiritual and abstract side suited to the
philosophical higher classes. Its practical and concrete side suited to
the man of affairs and the man of the world. Its aesthetic and
ceremonial side suited to the man of poetic feeling and imagination.
Its quiescent and contemplative side suited to the man of peace and
lover of seclusion.

"Indeed, the Hindus were Spinozists 2,000 years before the
birth of Spinoza, Darwinians centuries before the birth of Darwin, and
evolutionists centuries before the doctrine of evolution had been
accepted by the Huxleys of our time, and before any word like evolution
existed in any language of the world."

This, as coming from one of the staunchest defenders of
Christianity, is wonderful indeed. But he seems to have got the idea
quite correct.

Now I am going to send up the orange coat today; as for the
books that came to me from Philadelphia, I do not think they are worthy
of being sent at all. I do not know what I am going to do next.
Patiently wait and resign myself unto His guidance — that is my motto.
My love to you all.

Your affectionate son,

VIVEKANANDA



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/024_mother.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

XXIV

To Mrs. G. W. Hale

C/O DR. E. GUERNSEY

CEDAR LAWN, FISHKILL ON THE HUDSON

19 July 1894

DEAR MOTHER,

Your kind note reached me here yesterday evening. I am so glad
to hear the babies are enjoying. I got the Interior
and am very glad to see my friend
Mazoomdar’s (Pratap Chandra Mazumdar.) book spoken of so highly.
Mazoomdar is a great and a good man and has done much for his fellow
beings.

It is a lovely summer place, this Cedar Lawn of the Guernseys.
Miss Guernsey has gone on a visit to Swampscott. I had also an
invitation there, but I thought [it] better to stay here in the calm
and silent place full of trees and with the beautiful Hudson flowing by
and mountain in the background.

I am very thankful for Miss Howe’s suggestion, and I am also
thinking of it. Most probably I will go to England very soon. But
between you and me, I am a sort of mystic and cannot move without orders,
and that has not come yet. Mr. [Charles M.] Higgins, a rich young
lawyer and inventor of Brooklyn, is arranging some lectures for me. I
have not settled whether I will stop for them or not.

My eternal thanks to you for your kindness. My whole life
cannot repay my debt to you. (Original letter: your debt.) You may see
from the letter from Madras that there is not a word about Narasimha.
What can I do more? I did not get the cheque cashed yet, for there was
no necessity. Miss Phillips was very kind to me. She is an old lady,
about 50 or more. You need not feel any worry about my being taken care
of. The Lord always takes care of His servants; and so long as I am
really His servant and not the world’s, I am very confident of getting
everything that would be good for me. The Guernseys love me very much,
and there are many families in New York and Brooklyn who would take the
best care of me.

I had a beautiful letter from Mr. Snell,1
saying that a sudden change for the better has taken place in his
fortunes and offering me thrice the money I lent him as a contribution
to my work. And he also has beautiful letters from Dharmapala and
others from India. But, of course, I politely refused his repayment.

So far so good. I have seen Mr. [Walter Hines] Page, the
editor of the Forum here. He was so sorry not to
get the article on missionaries.
But I have promised to write on other interesting subjects. Hope I will
have patience to do so. 

I had a letter yesterday from Miss Harriet, (Mrs. Hale’s
daughter.) from which I learn that they are enjoying Kenosha (A port in
Southeast Wisconsin, on Lake Michigan.) very much. Lord bless you and
yours, Mother Church, for ever and ever. I cannot even express my
gratitude to you.

As for me, you need not be troubled in the least. My whole
life is that of a vagabond — homeless, roving
tramp; any fare, good or bad, in any country, is good enough for me.

Yours ever in love and obedience,

SWAMI VIVEKANANDA

^Mr.
Merwin-Marie Snell, who had been the President of the Scientific
Section of the Chicago World's Parliament of Religions.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/025_mother.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
»

« Addressee
 »

XXV

To Mrs. G. W. Hale

SWAMPSCOTT, MASSACHUSETTS

23 July 1894

DEAR MOTHER

I think I have all your questions answered and you are in good
humour again.

I am enjoying this place very much; going to Greenacre today
or tomorrow and on our way back I intend to go to Annisquam, to Mrs.
Bagley's — I have written to her. Mrs. Breed (Mrs. Francis W. Breed of
Lynn, Massachusetts.) says, "You are very sensitive".

Now, I fortunately did not cash your check1
in New York. I wanted to cash it here, when lo! you have not signed
your name to it. The Hindu is a dreamer no doubt, but when the
Christian dreams he dreams with a vengeance.

Do not be distressed. Somebody gave me plenty of money to move
about. I would be taken care of right along. I send herewith the cheque
back to you. I had a very beautiful letter from Miss Mary. My love to
them.

What is Father Pope doing? Is it very hot in Chicago? I do not
care for the heat of this country. It is nothing compared to our India
heat. I am doing splendidly. The other day I had the summer cholera;
and cramp, etc. came to pay their calls to me. We had several hours
nice talk and groans and then they departed.

I am on the whole doing very well. Has the meerschaum pipe
reached Chicago?2
I had nice yachting, nice sea bathing, and am enjoying myself like a
duck. Miss Guernsey went home just now. I do not know what more to
write.

Lord bless you all.

Affectionately,

VIVEKANANDA

^
British spelling
of "cheque" is also used in this letter.

^The
Swami had purchased this pipe in New York as a gift for Mr. Hale.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/026_mother.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

«
Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

XXVI

To Mrs. G. W. Hale

GREENACRE INN 

ELIOT, MAINE

5 August 1894

DEAR MOTHER

I have received your letter and am very much ashamed at my bad
memory. I unfortunately forgot all about the cheque. Perhaps you have
come to know by this time of my being in Greenacre. I had a very nice
time here and am enjoying it immensely. In the fall I am going to
lecture in Brooklyn, New York. Yesterday I got news that they have
completed all the advertising there. I have an invitation today from a
friend in New York to go with him to some mountains north of this state
of Maine. I do not know whether I will go or not. I am doing pretty
well. Between lecturing, teaching, picnicking and other excitements the
time is flying rapidly. I hope you are doing very well and that Father
Pope is in good trim. It is a very beautiful spot — this Greenacre —
and [I] have very nice company from Boston: Dr. Everett Hale,1
you know, of Boston, and Mrs. Ole
Bull, of Cambridge. I do not know whether I will accept the invitation
of my friend of New York or not.

So far only this is sure, that I will go to lecture in New
York this coming fall. And Boston, of course, is a good field. The
people here are mostly from Boston and they all like me very much. Are
you having a good time, and Father Pope? Has your house-painting been
finished? The Babies, I am sure, are enjoying their Mudville.

I am in no difficulty for money. I have plenty to eat and
drink.

With my best love and gratitude to you and Father Pope and the
Babies.

Yours affectionately,

VIVEKANANDA

Excuse this hasty scrawl. The pen is very bad.

V.

The Harrison people sent me two "nasty standing" photos — that
is all I have out of them, when they ought to give me 40 minus the 10
or 15 I have got already!!!

V.

^Edward
Everett Hale (1822 – 1909), a famous clergyman and author.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/027_mother.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology

»

« Addressee
 »

XXVII

To Mrs. G. W. Hale

GREENACRE INN

ELIOT, MAINE

8 August 1894

DEAR MOTHER

I have received the letter you sent over to me coming from
India.

I am going to leave this place on Monday next for Plymouth
[Massachusetts], where the Free Religious Association1
is holding its session. They will defray my expenses, of course.

I am all right, enjoying nice health, and the people here are
very kind and nice to me. Up to date I had no occasion to cash any
cheque as everything is going on smoothly. I have not heard anything
from the Babies. Hope they are doing well. You also had nothing to
write; however, I feel that you are doing well.

I would have gone over to another place, but Mr. Higginson's2
invitation ought to be attended
to. And Plymouth is the place where the
fathers of your country first landed. I want, therefore, to see it.

I am all right. It is useless reiterating my love and
gratitude to you and yours — you know it all. May the Lord shower His
choicest blessings on you and yours.

This meeting is composed of the best professors of your
country and other people, so I must attend it; and then they would pay
me. I have not yet determined all my plans, only I am going to lecture
in New York this coming fall; every arrangement is complete for that.
They have printed advertisements at their own expense for that and made
everything ready.

Give my best love to the Babies, to Father Pope, and believe
me ever in gratitude and love,

Your Son,

VIVEKANANDA.

P.S. I am very much obliged to the sisters for asking me to
tell them if I want anything. I have no want anyway — I have everything
I require and more to spare.

"He never gives up His servants."

My thanks and gratitude eternal to the sisters for their
kindness in asking about my wants.

V.

^The
Free Religious Association, founded in 1867, was a liberal offshoot of
the then conservative Unitarian Church. Among its members were some of
the best thinkers of America.

^Colonel
Thomas Wentworth Storrow Higginson (1823 – 1911), President of the Free
Religious Association, was a well-known writer and liberal reformer. He
had made Swami Vivekananda's acquaintance at the Chicago World's
Parliament of Religions.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/028_mother.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

«
Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

XXVIII

To Mrs. G. W. Hale

C/O MRS. J. J. BAGLEY, ANNISQUAM

20 August 1894

DEAR MOTHER

Your letters just now reached me. I had some beautiful letters
from India. The letter from Ajit Singh (The Raja of Khetri, a very
devoted disciple of the Swami.) shows that the phonograph has not
reached yet, and it was dated 8th June. So I do not think it is time
yet to get an answer. I am not astonished at my friends' asking Cook
& Sons to hunt for me; I have not written for a long time.

I have a letter from Madras which says they will soon send
money to Narasimha (Narasimhacharya. Vide the
letter dated February 14, 1894.)
— in fact, as soon as they get a reply to their letter written to
Narasimha. So kindly let Narasimha know it. The photographs have not
reached me — except two of Fishkill when I was there last. Landsberg
(Leon Landsberg. Vide the letter dated June 28, 1894.) has kindly
sent over the letters. From here I will probably go over to Fishkill.
The meerschaum1
was not sent over by me direct, but I left it to the Guernseys. And
they are a lazy family in that respect.

I have beautiful letters from the sisters.

By the by, your missionaries try to make me a malcontent
before the English government in India, and the Lieutenant Governor of
Bengal in a recent speech hinted that the recent revival of Hinduism
was against the government. Lord bless the missionary. Everything is
fair in love and (religion?).

The word Shri means "of good fortune",
"blessed", etc. Paramahamsa is a title for a Sannyâsi who has reached
the goal, i.e. realized God. Neither am I blessed nor have I reached
the goal; but they are courteous, that is all. I will soon write to my
brothers in India. I am so lazy, and I cannot send over the newspaper
nonsense day after day.

I want a little quiet, but it is not the will of the Lord, it
seems. At Greenacre I had to talk on an average 7 to 8 hours a day —
that was rest, if it ever was. But it was of the Lord, and that brings
vigour along with it.

I have not much to write, and I do not remember anything of
what I said or did all these places over. So I hope to be excused.

I will be here a few days more at least, and therefore I think
it would be better to send over my mail here.

I have now almost become dizzy through the perusal of a heavy
and big mail, so excuse my hasty scrawl.

Ever affectionately yours,

SWAMI VIVEKANANDA.

^Swami
Vivekananda had bought a meerschaum pipe in New York as a present for
Mr. Hale.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/029_mother.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

XXIX

To Mrs. G. W. Hale

ANNISQUAM

23 August 1894

DEAR MOTHER

The photographs reached safely yesterday. I cannot tell
exactly whether Harrison ought to give me more or not. They had sent
only two to me at Fishkill1
— not the pose I ordered, though.

Narasimha has perhaps got his passage by this time. He will
get it soon, whether his family gives him the money or not. I have
written to my friends in Madras to look to it, and they write me they
will.

I would be very glad if he becomes a Christian or Mohammedan
or any religion that suits him; but I am afraid for some time to come
none will suit our friend. Only if he becomes a Christian he will have
a chance to marry again, even in India — the Christians there
permitting it. I am so sorry to learn that it is the "bondage of
heathen India" that, after all, was the cause of all this mischief. We
learn as we live. So we were all this time ignorantly and blindly
blaming our much suffering, persecuted,
saintly friend Narasimha, while all the fault was really owing to the
"bondage of heathen India"!!!!

But to give the devil his due, this heathen India has been
supplying him with money to go on a spree again and again. And this
time too "heathen India" will [take] or already has taken our
"enlightened" and persecuted friend from out of his present scrape, and
not "Christian America"!! Mrs. Smith's plan is not bad after all — to
turn Narasimha into a missionary of Christ. But unfortunately for the
world, many and many a time the flag of Christ has been entrusted to
such hands. But I would beg to add that he will then be only a
missionary of Smithian American Christianity, not Christ's. Arrant
humbug! That thing to preach Lord Jesus!!! Is He in want of men to
uphold His banner? Pooh! the very idea is revolting. Do good to India
indeed! Thank your charity and call back your dog — as the tramp said.
Keep such good workers for America. The Hindus will have a quarantine
against all such [outcasting] to protect their society. I heartily
advise Narasimha to become a Christian — I beg your
pardon, a convert to Americanism — because I am
sure such a jewel is unsaleable in poor India. He is welcome to
anything that will fetch a price. I know the gentleman whom you name
perfectly well, and you may give him any information about me you like.
I do not care for sending scraps2
and getting a boom for me. And these friends from India bother me
enough for newspaper nonsense. They are very devoted, faithful and holy
friends. I have not much of these scraps now. After a long search I
found a bit in a Boston Transcript. I send it over
to you.3
This public life is such a botheration. I am nearly daft.

Where to fly? In India I have become horribly public — crowds
will follow me and take my life out. I got an Indian letter from
Landsberg. Every ounce of fame can only be bought at the cost of a
pound of peace and holiness. I never thought of that before. I have
become entirely disgusted with this blazoning. I am disgusted with
myself. Lord will show me the way to peace and purity. Why, Mother, I
confess to you: no man can live in an atmosphere of public life, even
in religion, without the devil of competition now and then thrusting
his head into the serenity of his heart. Those who are trained to
preach a doctrine never feel it, for they never
knew religion. But those that are after God,
and not after the world, feel at once that every bit of name and fame
is at the cost of their purity. It is so much gone from that ideal of
perfect unselfishness, perfect disregard of gain or
name or fame. Lord help me. Pray for me, Mother. I am very much
disgusted with myself. Oh, why the world be so that one cannot do
anything without putting himself to the front; why cannot one act
hidden and unseen and unnoticed? The world has not gone one step beyond
idolatry yet. They cannot act from ideas, they cannot be led by ideas.
But they want the person, the man. And
any man that wants to do something must pay the penalty — no hope. This
nonsense of the world. Shiva, Shiva, Shiva.

By the by, I have got such a beautiful edition of Thomas à
Kempis. How I love that old monk. He caught a wonderful glimpse of the
"behind the veil" — few ever got such. My, that is religion. No humbug
of the world. No shilly-shallying, tall talk, conjecture — I presume, I
believe, I think. How I would like to go out of this piece of painted
humbug they call the beautiful world with Thomas à Kempis — beyond,
beyond, which can only be felt, never expressed.

That is religion. Mother, there is God. There all the saints,
prophets and incarnations meet. Beyond the Babel of Bibles and Vedas,
creeds and crafts, dupes and doctrines — where is all light, all love,
where the miasma of this earth can never reach. Ah! who will take me
thither? Do you sympathize with me, Mother? My soul is groaning now
under the hundred sorts of bondage I am placing on it. Whose India? Who
cares? Everything is His. What are we? Is He dead? Is He sleeping? He,
without whose command a leaf does not fall, a heart does not beat, who
is nearer to me than my own self. It is bosh and nonsense — to do good
or do bad or do fuzz. We do nothing. We are not. The world is not. He
is, He is. Only He is. None else is. He is.

Om, the one without a second. He in me, I in Him. I am like a
bit of glass in an ocean of light. I am not, I am not. He is, He is, He
is.

Om, the one without a second.

Yours ever affectionately,

VIVEKANANDA.

^Fishkill
Landing, a resort in New York State where the Swami had spent some days
with his friends Dr. and Mrs. Guernsey of New York City.

^Apparently
Swami Vivekananda meant newspaper clippings providing proof of Hindu
India's approval and support of his work in America.

^Two
newspaper clippings — neither one from the Boston Transcript —were
enclosed with this letter and are given below.

(From the Indian Mirror, July 14, 1894): "There has been some lively
correspondence between Swami Vivekananda and a retired Christian
Missionary on the work and prospects of Christianity in India. Among
other things, the Swami is reported to have said that 'the way of
converting is absolutely absurd'; 'Missionary doctors do no good,
because they are not in touch with the people.' 'They accomplish
nothing in the way of converting, although they may have nice sociable
times among themselves, etc.' The revered gentleman took exception to
the words, maintaining that, speaking the vernaculars well, nobody of
foreigners understands and sympathises with Indians better than
Missionaries. The Missionaries are undoubtedly good and well-meaning
people; but we think the statement of the Swami that they are seldom in
touch with the people is not without foundation. With the revival of
Hinduism, manifested in every part of the country, it is doubtful
whether Christianity will have any sway over the Hindus. The present is
a critical time for Christian Missions in India. The Swami thanked the
Missionary for calling him his fellow-countryman. 'This is the first
time,' he wrote, 'any European foreigner, born in India though he may
be, has dared to call a detested Native by that name — Missionary or no
Missionary. Would you dare to call me the same in India?' Would he,
indeed?".   (From the Amrita Bazar Patrika, August 24, 1894):
"The insinuation that Swami Vivekananda is not an 'orthodox' Hindu owes
its origin to missionary influence. It is simply impossible for the
missionaries to love Vivekananda, and it is therefore natural that they
should try to bring him down. And why is Vivekananda not an orthodox
Hindu? It is because, say they, he has crossed the ocean and eaten
un-Hindu food. But the restriction which Hinduism imposes on its
members has no forces upon the liberated — the Sannyasis, to which
class the Swami belongs. The Hindu who has cut off his connection with
the world has liberty to take anything and to go anywhere he pleases.
Vivekananda deserves well of the world. The world is now governed by
the West. In the West, especially in America, every man is a monarch.
To make any impression in such a country is beyond the means of the
ablest of our species. Vivekananda's work in America is a miracle, and
he is no doubt an instrument in the hands of God."



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/030_mother.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
»

« Addressee
 »

XXX

To Mrs. G. W. Hale

ANNISQUAM 

DATE DO NOT KNOW

[Postmarked: August 28, 1894]

DEAR MOTHER

I have been for three days at Magnolia. Magnolia is one of the
most fashionable and beautiful seaside resorts of this part. I
think the scenery is better than that of Annisquam. The rocks there are
very beautiful, and the forests run down to the very edge of the water.
There is a very beautiful pine forest. A lady of Chicago and her
daughter, Mrs. Smith and Mrs. Sawyer, were the friends that invited me
up there. They had also arranged a lecture for me, out of which I got
$43. I met a good many Boston people — Mrs. Smith Junior, who said she
knows Harriet, and Mrs. Smith the elder, [who] knows you well.

In Boston the other day I met a Unitarian clergyman who said
he lives next to you in Chicago. I have unfortunately forgotten his
name. Mrs. Smith is a very nice lady and treated me with all courtesy.
Mrs. Bagley is kind as ever, and I will have to remain here a few days
more, I am afraid. Prof. Wright and I are having a good time. Prof.
Bradley of Evanston1
has gone home. If you ever meet him at Evanston, give him my best love
and regards. He is really a spiritual man.

I do not find anything more to write.

Some unknown friend has sent me from New York a fountain pen.
So I am writing with it to test it. It is working very smoothly and
nicely as you can judge from the writing. Perhaps Narasimha's
difficulties have been settled by this time, and "heathen India" has
helped him out yet, I hope.

What is Father Pope doing? What the Babies are doing and where
are they? What news of our Sam?2
Hope he is prospering. Kindly give him my best love. Where is Mother
Temple now?

Well, after all, I could fill up two pages. Yes, there was a
Miss Barn (?) who said she met me at your house. She is a young lady of
Chicago.

Magnolia is a good bathing place and I had two baths in the
sea. A large concourse of men and women go to bathe there every day —
the most part men. And strange, women do not give up their coat of mail
even while bathing. That is how these mailclad she-warriors of America
have got the superiority over men.

Our Sanskrit poets lavish all the power of expression they
have upon the soft body of women — the Sanskrit word for
women is "Komala", the soft body; but the mailclad ones of this country
are "armadillas", I think. You cannot imagine how ludicrous it appears
to a foreigner who never saw it before. Shiva, Shiva.

Now Narasimha's Mrs. Smith does not torture you anymore with
letters, I hope. Did I tell you I met your friend Mrs. H. O. Quarry at
Swampscott? — she can swamp a house for all that, not to speak of a
cott — and that I met there the woman that pulls by the nose Mr.
Pullman?3
And I also heard there the best American singer, (Miss Emma Thursby.)
they said — she sang beautifully; she sang "Bye Baby Bye". I am having
a very, very good time all the time, Lord be praised.

I have written to India not to bother me with constant
letters. Why, when I am travelling in India nobody writes to me. Why
should they spend all their superfluous energy in scrawling letters to
me in America? My whole life is to be that of a wanderer — here or
there or anywhere. I am in no hurry. I had a foolish plan in my head
unworthy of a Sannyasin. I have given it up now and mean to take life
easy. No indecent hurry. Don't you see, Mother Church? You must always
remember, Mother Church, that I cannot settle down even at the North
Pole, that wander about I must — that is my vow, my religion. So India
or North Pole or South Pole — don't care where. Last two years I have
been travelling among races whose language even I cannot speak. "I have
neither father nor mother nor brothers nor sisters nor friends nor
foes, nor home nor country — a traveller in the way of eternity,
asking no other help, seeking no other help but God."

Yours ever affectionately,

VIVEKANANDA.

^A
city in northeastern Illinois on Lake Michigan, near Chicago.

^Sam
Hale, the only son of Mrs. Hale.

^Possibly
Mrs. George Mortimer Pullman, wife of the wealthy and powerful Pullman
of the Pullman Palace Car Company.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/031_mother.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

«
Chronology

»

« Addressee
 »

XXXI

To Mrs. G. W. Hale

 

[GLOUCESTER, MASSACHUSETTS]

4 September 1894

DEAR MOTHER

The bundle was the report of the meeting. Hope you will
succeed in publishing some in the Chicago papers.

Here is a letter from Dewanji1
to you which will explain his sending a pamphlet to Mr. Hale.2
The rugs are coming. When they come, take them in, even paying the duty
if any. I will pay it to you afterwards. I have plenty of money, more
than $150 in pocket. Will get more tonight. Here are some newspaper
clippings, and an Indian Mirror I will send later
on. Some have been sent to Mr. Barrows;3
don't hope he will give them publicity. Now for your Mrs. Bartlett.

I am in haste. [Will] write more with the clippings. Write to
me always, kind Mother — I become very anxious when I do not hear from
you. Write, whether I reply sharp or not.

Your son,

VIVEKANANDA

^Shri
Haridas Viharidas Desai, or Haridasbhai, the Dewan of Junagadh.

^Enclosed
in the above letter was a letter from the Dewan of Junagadh, Haridas
Viharidas Desai, addressed to Mr. Hale and dated August 2, 1894. In
view of the slander being heaped upon Swami Vivekananda at that time,
the Dewan vouched for his sincerity and probity. The pamphlet referred
to gave the Dewan's references.

^Dr.
John Henry Barrows, who had served as Chairman of the General Committee
for the World's Parliament of Religions in Chicago, 1893.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/032_mother.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

«
Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

XXXII

To Mrs. G. W. Hale

ANNISQUAM

5 September 1894

DEAR MOTHER

The news of the arrival of the phonograph from Khetri has not
come yet. But I am not anxious, because I just now got
another letter from India wherein there is no mention of the
photographs I sent, showing that parcels reach later than letters.

Herewith I send you an autograph letter of H.H. the Maharaja
of Mysore, the chief Hindu king in India. You may see on the map [that]
his territory occupies a very large portion of southern India.

I am very glad that he is slowly being gained over to my side.
If he wills, he can set all my plans to work in five days. He has an
income of $150 million dollars; think of that.

May Jagadamba [the Mother of the Universe] turn his mind
towards the good work. He says he quite appreciates my good words —
they were about my plans for educating the poor. Hope he will soon show
it in material shape.

My love to all. Why the babies do not prattle?

Your son,

VIVEKANANDA



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/033_mother.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology

»

« Addressee
 »

XXXIII

To Mrs. G. W. Hale

HOTEL BELLEVUE, EUROPEAN PLAN

BEACON STREET, BOSTON

12 September 1894

DEAR MOTHER

I hope you will immediately send me over the little scrap from
the Indian Mirror about my Detroit lectures which I
sent you.

Yours,

VIVEKANANDA



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/034_mother.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

«
Chronology
»

« Addressee
 »

XXXIV

To Mrs. G. W. Hale

HOTEL BELLEVUE

BEACON STREET, BOSTON

13 September 1894

DEAR MOTHER

Your very kind note came just now. I was suffering for the
last few days from cold and fever. I am all right now. I am glad
all the papers reached you safe. The newspaper clippings are with Mrs.
Bagley; only a copy has been sent over to you. By the by, Mrs. Bagley
becomes jealous if I send away everything to you. That is between you
and me. The Indian Mirror is with Prof. Wright,1
and he will send it over to you. There is yet no news of the
phonograph. Wait one week more and then we will enquire. If you see a
letter with the Khetri stamp, then surely the news is coming. I do not
smoke one third as much as I used to when Father Pope's eternal box was
ready and open day and night. Haridasbhai is to be addressed as Shri
only. On the envelope, Dewan Bahadoor ought to be written, as that is a
title. Perhaps the note from the Maharaja of Mysore has reached you by
this time.

I will remain a few days yet in Boston and the vicinity. The
bank book is in the bank. We did not take it out, but the cheque book
is with me. I am going to write out my thoughts on religion; in that,
no missionaries have any place. I am going to lecture in New York in
autumn, but I like teaching small circles better, and there will be
enough of that in Boston.

The rugs I wanted to be sent from India; and they will come
from Punjab, where the best rugs are made.

I had a beautiful letter from Sister Mary. (Mary Hale.)

Narasimha must have got money or passage by this time, and his
people have taken care to send him Thomas Cook's passage from place to
place. I think he is gone now.

I do not think the Lord will allow his servant to be inflated
with vanity at the appreciation of his countrymen. I am glad that they
appreciate me — not for my sake, but that I am firmly persuaded that a
man is never improved by abuse but by praise, and so with nations.
Think how much of abuse has been quite unnecessarily hurled at the head
of my devoted, poor country, and for what? They never injured the
Christians or their religion or their preachers. They have always been
friendly to all. So you see, Mother, every good word
a foreign nation says to them has
such an amount of power for good in India. The American appreciation of
my humble work here has really done a good deal of benefit to them.
Send a good word, a good thought — at least to the down-trodden,
vilified, poor millions of India instead of abusing them day and night.
That is what I beg of every nation. Help them if you can; if you
cannot, at least cease from abusing them.

I did not see any impropriety in the bathing places at the
seashore, but only vanity in some: in those that
went into water with their corsets on, that was all.

I have not got any copy of the Inter-Ocean
yet. (A leading Chicago newspaper.)

With my love to Father Pope, babies, and to you, I remain

Your obedient son,

VIVEKANANDA

^Dr.
John Henry Wright, a professor of Greek classics at Harvard University.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/035_mother.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

«
Chronology

»

« Addressee
 »

XXXV

To Mrs. G. W. Hale

HOTEL BELLEVUE

BEACON STREET , BOSTON

19 September 1894

DEAR MOTHER

The huge packet received. It was a few pamphlets sent over to
me from my monastery in Calcutta. No news at all about the phonograph.
I think it is high time we make them inquire into it.

The two volumes of Todd's [Tod's] history of Rajasthan have
been presented to me by Mrs. Potter Palmer. I have asked her to send it
over to your care. The babies will like reading it very much, and after
they finish I will send it over with my Sanskrit books to Calcutta.

I did not ask you to send me the typewritten news clippings at
all, but a little slip I sent over some time ago from the Indian
Mirror. Perhaps it did not reach you at all. You need not
send the typewritten thing at all.

I do not require any clothes here; there are plenty of them. I
am taking good care of my cuffs and collars, etc.

I have more clothes than are necessary. Very soon I will have
to disburse myself of half of them at least.

I will write to you before I go to India. I am not flying off
without giving you due intimation.

Yours,

VIVEKANANDA

P.S. — My love to Babies and Father Pope.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/036_mother.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

«
Chronology

»

« Addressee
 »

XXXVI

To Mrs. G. W. Hale

HOTEL BELLEVUE

BEACON STREET, BOSTON

24 September 1894

DEAR MOTHER,

I have not heard from you a long while. I am still in Boston
and will be a few days more.

I am afraid the phonograph has not reached India at all, or
something is the matter with it. Kindly ask Mr. —— to inquire. The
receipt is with you on which they will enquire.

Ever affectionately yours,

VIVEKANANDA



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/037_mother.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

«
Chronology

»

« Addressee

»

XXXVII

To Mrs. G. W. Hale

HOTEL BELLEVUE

BEACON STREET, BOSTON

27 September 1894

DEAR MOTHER

The bundles all came safely. One was newspapers from India.
The other was the short sketch of my Master published by Mr. Mazumdar
long ago. In the latter bundle there are two sextos or pamphlets. One,
my Master's sketch; the other, a short extract to show how what Mr.
[Keshab] Chandra Sen and [Pratap
Chandra] Mazumdar preached as their "New Dispensation" was stolen from
my Master's life. The latter therefore you need not distribute, but I
hope you will distribute my Master's life to many good people.

I beg you to send some to Mrs. Guernsey, Fishkill on the
Hudson, N.Y.; Mrs. Arthur Smith and Mrs. [Miss Mary A.] Phillips, 19
West 38th Street, New York (both); to Mrs. Bagley, Annisquam, Mass.;
and Prof. J. Wright, Professor of Greek, Harvard, Mass.

The newspapers — you may do whatever you like, and I hope you
will send any newspaper scrap you get about me to India.

Yours etc.,

VIVEKANANDA



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/038_mother.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

«
Chronology
 »

«
Addressee
 »

XXXVIII

To Mrs. G. W. Hale

C/O MRS. OLE BULL

168 BRATTLE STREET

CAMBRIDGE, MASS.

5 October 1894

DEAR MOTHER,

I have not heard from you for long. Have you received the huge
packages I sent over to you? Have you heard anything about the
phonograph from the express office?

I will be with Mrs. Ole Bull a few days, and then I go to New
York to Mrs. Guernsey's.

Yours ever affectionately,

VIVEKANANDA



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/039_mother.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

«
Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

XXXIX

To Mrs. G. W. Hale

C/O MRS. OLE BULL

RIVERVIEW, 168 BRATTLE STREET

CAMBRIDGE, MASS.

[Postmarked: Oct. 10, 1894, 4:30 a.m.]

DEAR MOTHER,

Received two letters from you and a large number from India
but none from Khetri.

I am sorry the sisters have got bad colds and more sorry for
your getting worried over it. Nothing can make a Christian worry. I
hope Narasimha will be a good boy this time forth. Sister Mary is
coming to Boston — good. I am going off from here tomorrow to
Baltimore. I had enough to pay all my expenses here; and since I am
living with Mrs. Bull, there is no expense. She is a rich and highly
cultured lady. She has given me $500 for my work or anything I like. As
I am not going west very soon, I will have a bank account here in
Boston. From Philadelphia I go to Washington, and then I will run
between New York and Boston. So I do not think I will be able to see
you, except perhaps Sister Mary. I want so very much that Mary will see
Mrs. Bull and others of my friends here. I have the fat of the land as
usual, and my dinner is cooking very well both here and in India. Do
not make it public, Mother — that is between you and me and the babies
— and do not worry yourself about anything. All things come to him that
waits. I am going to send the greater part of the money I have got to
India and then money will come faster. I have always found that the
faster I spend, the faster it comes. Nature abhors a vacuum. I am in
very good spirits, only you must not stop keeping me informed about
yourself, Babies and Father Pope from time to time.

Perhaps you remember the two letters that came from Mysore — I
want one of those envelopes with the Mysore King's seal on the outside
to be sent to Miss Phillips, 19 West 38th Street, New York.

I cannot go to New York now nor to Chicago, although I had a
number of invitations and offers from both the places. I
must see now the capital and the other cities. I am in His Hands. If
Miss Mary be in Boston, sometime I may hope to see her.

I am glad that Narasimha was never fast — hope he will never
be.

From India they always write me to come, come, come. They do
not know the secret. I am acting more from here than I will ever do
from there.

Kindly send my letters to this address and they will reach me
safe wherever I be. This will be one of my homes when I am in Boston.

Lord bless you all, dear Mother.

Yours ever affectionately,

VIVEKANANDA



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/040_mrs_bull.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

«
Chronology

»

«
Addressee
»

XL

To Mrs. Ole Bull

1123 SAINT PAUL STREET, BALTIMORE,

17 October 1894.

DEAR MRS. BULL,

I could not find time earlier to write you — I was so
incessantly knocking about. We had a nice meeting last Sunday at
Baltimore and [are] going to have one more next Sunday. Of course, they
do not financially help me a bit; but as I promised to help them and
like the idea, I speak for them.1

In the letters you sent over from India was an address sent
over to me from Calcutta by my fellow citizens for my work here and a
number of newspaper cuttings. I will send them on to you later.

Yesterday I went to see Washington and met Mrs. Colville and
Miss Young, who were very kind to me.

I am going to speak at Washington again and then will go over
to Philadelphia and from there to New York.

Your affectionate Son,

VIVEKANANDA.

^During
his first visit to America, Swami Vivekananda occasionally spoke for
other organizations, both American and Indian. This time he had come to
Baltimore at the invitation of the Vrooman brothers, who had a project
to establish an International University of Religions, which the Swami
endorsed by speaking on the brothers' behalf. Readers should, however,
note that the International University project of the Vrooman brothers
of Baltimore and Swami Vivekananda's "Temple Universal" proposed in New
York were two entirely different projects.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/041_miss_thursby.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

«
Chronology
»

Addressee
 »

XLI

To Miss Emma Thursby

[WASHINGTON, D.C. 

26 October 1894]

DEAR MISS THURSBY,1

I received your kind note and the introductory letters. I will
make it a point to see the ladies and hope to be benefitted much by it.

I had a beautiful letter from Mr. Flagg.2
I am soon coming to N.Y. where I hope to see you.

With my deepest love and gratitude,

I remain yours faithfully,

VIVEKANANDA

^Emma
Thursby, the celebrated singer, a close friend of Mrs. Ole Bull and an
ardent admirer of Swami Vivekananda.

^William
Joseph Flagg, a well-known lawyer, congressman, author and a friend of
the Swami.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/042_mother.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

«
Chronology

»

« Addressee
 »

XLII

To Mrs. G. W. Hale

[WASHINGTON, D.C.

October 27, 1894]

DEAR MOTHER,

I received your very kind note and all the India letters just
now. I will make it a point to see Mrs. Whitland [?]. I have been very
kindly treated by Mrs. [Enoch] Totten.

Will you kindly order 100 photographs from Harrison, and send
them over to India to Ramdayal Chakravarty, c/o Swami
Ramakrishnananda, Varahanagar Math, Alambazar, Calcutta? I will pay for
it when I come to Chicago.

I have nothing especial to write — except I had good treatment
everywhere. How I long to give up this life of weariness and blazoning
day and night.

I will go from here to New York and will come back to see you
in Chicago before I start for England.

Yours etc.,

VIVEKANANDA



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/043_mother.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

«
Chronology

»

« Addressee
 »

XLIII

To Mrs. G. W. Hale

BALTIMORE, [MARYLAND]

3 November 1894

DEAR MOTHER,

I do not know what to say about this phonograph business. It
takes six months to go to India!! and the company cannot get an inquiry
in another six months!!! American express, indeed!! Well — however,
they are bound to make good my money. Mother, do not lose the receipt
of the express company.

I am going to New York as soon as possible.

Yours affectionately,

VIVEKANANDA



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/044_mother.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

«
Chronology
»

« Addressee
 »

XLIV

To Mrs. G. W. Hale

NEW YORK

18 November 1894

DEAR MOTHER

I have been very late this time in writing you as Sister Mary1
has already written to you, no doubt, about me.

The clothes have all reached safe, only I will send over some
of the summer and other clothes as it will be impossible to carry the
burden all along with me.

The certainty about going to Europe this December has gone; so
I am uncertain when I go.

Sister Mary has improved a great deal from what I saw her
last. She lives with a number of fox-hunting squires and is quite
happy. I hope she will marry one of those fellows with long pockets. I
am going again to see her tomorrow at Mrs. Spalding's — I was there
last afternoon. I will be in N.Y. this month; then I go to Boston and
perhaps will be there all through December. When I was sick in Boston
last spring, I went over to Chicago, and not to Detroit as Mrs. Bagley
expected. So this time I am going to Detroit first and then to Chicago,
if possible. Else I altogether give up the plan of going to the West
soon.

There is more chance of working my plans out in the East than
in the West, as it now appears.

I have got news of the phonograph — it has reached safe, and
the Râjâ2
wrote to me a very nice letter on that. I have a lot of addresses and
other nonsense from India. I have written home to them not to send any
more newspapers. My love to the babies at home and I am going to visit
the baby3
abroad.

Mrs. Guernsey has been at death's door. She is now recovering
slowly. I have not seen her yet. She is not strong enough to see
anybody. Hope she will soon be strong.

My love to Father Pope and everyone.

Your ever affectionate son,

VIVEKANANDA

^Mary
Hale, the daughter of Mrs. G. W. Hale.

^Ajit
Singh, the Maharaja of Khetri, a devoted disciple of Swami Vivekananda.

^The
"babies at home" refers to Mrs. Hale's daughter and two nieces:
Harriet Hale, and Isabelle and Harriet McKindley. The "baby abroad"
refers to Mary Hale.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/045_mother.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

«
Chronology
»

« Addressee
 »

XLV

To Mrs. G. W. Hale

C/O MRS. OLE BULL

168 BRATTLE STREET

CAMBRIDGE, MASS.

6 December 1894

DEAR MOTHER

I have not heard long from you. What is the matter with you? I
am here in Cambridge and will be here for three weeks to come and will
have to lecture and hold classes. Here is a Chicago lady, Mrs.
[Milward] Adams, who lectures on tone building etc.

Today we had a lecture from Lady Henry Somerset1
on Woman Suffrage. Miss Willard2
of Chicago was here and Julia Ward Howe.

Col. Higginson, Dr. [J. Estlin] Carpenter of Eng. and many
other friends were present. Altogether it was a grand affair. I have
received a letter from India informing me that the phonograph was duly
received.

I have sent part of my money to India and intend sending
nearly the whole of it very soon. Only, I will keep enough for the
passage back. Saw Mother Temple several times in New York. She was kind
as usual. So was Mrs. Spalding.

Sister Mary wrote me a letter from Brookline [Massachusetts].
I am sure she would have enjoyed Lady Somerset's lecture so much. I
wrote her about it, but I have not heard from her yet.

I will go to see her the first day I get some time. I am very
busy. Hope the sisters at home are enjoying themselves. I will try to
run into Chicago for a few days if I can.

Please write me all about the holy family as soon as you get
time.

Mrs. Guernsey was very ill and still so weak that she cannot
get out of her room.

Miss Helen Bagley3
was seized with diphtheria in New York and suffered a good deal. She
has recovered, however, and the Bagleys have gone home to Detroit.

With my Love to you all, I remain,

Ever yours affectionately,

VIVEKANANDA

P.S. — Kindly send my India mail c/o Mrs. Sara Ole Bull, 168
Brattle Street, Cambridge, Mass.

V.

^President
of the British Women's Temperence Union.

^Miss
Frances Willard, founder and President of the World's Women's Christian
Temperence Union.

^The
daughter of Mrs. John Bagley.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/046_mother.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

«
Chronology

»

« Addressee
 »

XLVI

To Mrs. G. W. Hale

[CAMBRIDGE, MASS.

21 December 1894]

DEAR MOTHER,

I am glad that Haridas Viharidas (The Dewan of Junagadh.) has
sent the rugs. I am afraid they will take a long time to reach here.
The Raja (Maharaja Ajit Singh, the Raja of Khetri.) was very much
pleased with the phonograph, as he writes, and has heard my voice
several times. Hope he will bring it into life.

I have not seen Sister Mary yet, but hope to see her this week
as I am going away to New York next Tuesday. Cannot come by any means
to Chicago now, for I expect to go to Washington from New York and hope
to be pretty busy in New York.

If I can snatch up a few days between the lecture in Brooklyn
on the 30th and the next series in New York, I will fly to Chicago for
a few days. If I had time just now, it would have been better for me,
for the half — fare ticket will expire after this month.

I have been kept very busy here this month so could not go to
Boston even for a day. Now I have time and hope to see Sister Mary.

How are the babies at home? Mrs. M. Adams of Chicago, who
lectures on voice building and walking etc., has been lecturing here
all this time. She is a very great lady in every respect and so
intelligent. She knows all of you and likes the "Hale girls" very much.
Sister Isabel[le] knows her especially, I think.

Do not you see, Mother — I am determined to work my project
out. I must see the light. India can cheer alone —
but no money. In the East and South I am getting slowly friends who
will help me in my work, I am sure, as they have done already. They all
like me more and more.

I have made friends of Lady Somerset and Miss Willard, you
will be glad to know. So you see, Mother, you are the only attraction
in Chicago; and so long I am in this country, wherever you live is my
home. As soon as I have time I will run in to see you and the sisters.
But I have no other hopes in the West; nor will you advise me to
destroy the only hope I have of success in these
parts of the country by giving it up and going to Chicago to be idle as
the day is long.

Mrs. Bull and a few other ladies here who are helping me on
are not only sincere and love me but they have the power to do as
leaders of society. Would that you had millions.

With my love to you all,

Your ever affectionate Son,

VIVEKANANDA



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/047_miss_thursby.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

«
Chronology

»

« Addressee
 »

XLVII

To Miss Emma Thursby

CHICAGO 

541 DEARBORN AVENUE 

17 January 1895

DEAR MISS THURSBY,

I am very sorry to learn about the passing on of Mr. Thorp.1
Mrs. Bull must have felt it deeply. Still he has passed on after a good
and useful life. All is for the best.

I have been lecturing every day to a class in Mrs. Adams's2
rooms at the Auditorium. Today I also lecture there and in the Evening
to a class of Miss Josephine Locke's3
at the Plaza Hotel.

Have you seen Mrs. Peake4
in New York? She is lecturing to a class at Mrs. Guernsey's.

Miss Locke is as kind as usual. She is enamoured of Mrs. Peake
as are many of Miss Locke's friends, you will be glad to learn.

Mrs. Peake has made a very favourable impression on Chicago.
So she does wherever she goes.

Mrs. Adams invited me to an organ concert in the Auditorium.
She is so good and kind to me. Lord bless her.

I have not seen Mr. Young, nor, I am afraid, [will] I have
time to see [him,] as I start for New York on Friday next.

I will hear him once in New York.

I was so busy here these two weeks.

I have got a new scarlet coat but can get no orange here.

Ever with blessings,

Your brother,

VIVEKANANDA

^Joseph
G. Thorp, Mrs. Ole Bull's father.

^Florence
Adams, wife of Milward Adams, house manager of the Opera House in
Chicago.

^Miss
Josephine Locke was Director of Art in the Chicago public schools.

^An
itinerant teacher of metaphysics.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/048_adhyapakji.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

«
Chronology
»

«
Addressee
»

XLVIII

To Professor John H. Wright

54 W. 33 STREET

NEW YORK

1 February 1895

DEAR ADHYAPAKJI,

You must be immersed in your work now; however, taking
advantage of your kindness to me, I want to bother you a little.

What was the original Greek idea of the soul, both
philosophical and popular? What books can I consult (Translations, of
course) to get it?

So with the Egyptians and Babylonians and Jews?

Will you kindly name me the books? I am sure you are perfectly
well and so are Mrs. Wright and the children.

Ever gratefully and fraternally,

Yours,

VIVEKANANDA



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/049_mother.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

«
Chronology
»

« Addressee
 »

XLIX

To Mrs. G. W. Hale

54 W. 33., NEW YORK

18 March [February]
1895

DEAR MOTHER,

I am sure you are all right by this time. The babies write
from time to time and so I get your news regularly. Miss Mary is in a
lecturing mood now — good for her. Hope she will not let her energies
fritter away now — a penny saved is a penny gained. Sister Isabel[le]
has sent me the French Books and the Calcutta pamphlets have arrived,
but the big Sanskrit books ought to come. I want them badly. Make them
payable here, if possible, or I will send you the postage.

I am doing very well. Only some of these big dinners kept me
late, and I returned home at 2 o'clock in the morning several days.
Tonight I am going to one of these. This will be the last of its kind.
So much keeping up the night is not good for me. Every day from 11 to 1
o'clock I have classes in my rooms and I talk [to] them till they
[grow] tired. The Brooklyn course ended yesterday. Another lecture I
have there next Monday.

Bean soup and rice or barley is now my general diet. I am
faring well. Financially I am making the ends meet and nothing more
because I do not charge anything for the classes I have in my rooms.
And the public lectures have to go through so many hands.

I have a good many lectures planned ahead in New York, which I
hope to deliver by and by. Sister Isabel wrote to me a
beautiful letter and she does so much for me. My eternal gratitude to
her.

Baby1
has stopped writing; I do not know why.

Kindly tell Baby to send me a little Sanskrit book which came
from India. I forgot to bring it over. I want to translate some
passages from it.

Mr. [Charles M.] Higgins is full of joy. It was he who planned
all this for me, and he is so glad that everything succeeded so well.

Mrs. Guernsey is going to give up this house and going to some
other house. Miss [Florence] Guernsey wants to marry but her father and
mother do not like it at all. I am very sorry for her, poor "Sister
Jenny"2
  — and so many men are after her. Here is a very rich railway
gentleman called Mr. [Austin] Corbin; his only daughter, Miss [Anna]
Corbin, is very much interested in me. And though she is one of the
leaders of the 400,3
she is very intellectual and spiritual too, in a way. Their house is
always chock full of swells and foreign aristocracy. Princes and Barons
and whatnot from all over the world. Some of these foreigners are very
bright. I am sorry your home-manufactured aristocracy is not very
interesting. Behind her parlor she has a long arbour with all sorts of
palms and seats and electric light. There I will have a little class
next week of a score of long-pockets. The Fun is not bad. "This world
is a great humbug after all", Mother. "God alone is real; everything
else is a dream only." Mother Temple4
says she does not like to be bossed by you and that is why she does not
come to Chicago. She is very happy nearby. Between swells and Delmonico
and Waldorf dinners, my health was going to be injured. So I quickly
turned a thorough vegetarian to avoid all invitations. The rich are
really the salt of this world —
they are neither food nor drink. Goodbye for the present.

Your ever affectionate Son,

VIVEKANANDA

^Harriet
McKindley, youngest of the "sisters".

^Perhaps
in likening Miss Florence Guernsey to "Sister Jenny", the Swami was
referring to the old nursery rhyme, which the Hale sisters may have
taught him. Robin Redbreast promised Jenny Wren that if she would be
his wife he would dress her "like a goldfish or any peacock gay". She
replied that that is all very nice, but "I must wear my plain brown
gown and never go so fine".

^"The
Four Hundred" — a then current term for New York's most exclusive
social set.

^Mrs.
James Matthews, a married sister of Mr. Hale.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/050_mother.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

«
Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

L

To Mrs. G. W. Hale

54 W. 33RD ST., NEW YORK

11 March 1895

DEAR MOTHER,

Many thanks for your kind letter. I will be only too glad to
have an orange coat, provided it be light as summer is approaching.

I do not remember whether the Cook's letters of credit I have
are limited as to their time or not. It is high time we look into them.
If they are limited, don't you think it is better to put them in some
bank? I have about a thousand dollars in the Boston bank and a few
hundred in the New York — they all go to India by this week or next. So
it is better that I look into the Cook's letters, and it will be
foolish to get into trouble by having them past the date.

There are a few more Sanskrit books which have not been sent —
one pretty thick and broad, the other two very thin. Kindly send them
as soon as you can.

Mrs. [Milward] Adams, Mrs. [Ole] Bull, and Miss Emma Thursby
are gone to Chicago today.

With eternal love to the babies and to you and Father Pope.

I remain ever your affectionate Son,

VIVEKANANDA



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/051_mother.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology

»

« Addressee
 »

LI

To Mrs. G. W. Hale

[54 W. 33RD ST., NEW YORK]

14 March 1895

DEAR MOTHER,

The last letter you sent over is a notice from the Chicago
post office of a parcel received by them. I think it is some books
sent to me from India. The rugs cannot come through the post office (?)
I do not know what to do. I send you therefore back this notice, and if
they deliver it to you, all right — else I hope you will ask them to
send it over to New York and kindly give them my address.

Yours obediently,

VIVEKANANDA



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/052_mother.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

LII

To Mrs. G. W. Hale

[NEW YORK

April 25, 1895]

DEAR MOTHER,

I was away a long time in the country. Came back day before
yesterday.

I think the summer coat is in Chicago. If so, will you kindly
send it over c/o Miss Phillips, 19 W. 38 Str., New York? It is getting
hot here every day.

I will remain in New York till the end of May, at least.

Hoping you are all in perfect health. I remain yours truly,

VIVEKANANDA



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/053_mother.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
»

« Addressee
 »

LIII

To Mrs. G. W. Hale

54 W. 33.

NEW YORK

[April 26, 1895]

DEAR MOTHER,

Perhaps you did not receive my letter asking you to send the
Calcutta pamphlets about the
Paramahamsa Ramakrishna. Kindly send them to me at 54 W. 33, and also
the pamphlets about the Calcutta meeting if you have any. Also the
summer coat to the care of Miss Phillips, 19 W. 38.

As I do not see any probability of my going soon to Chicago, I
am thinking of drawing all my money from the Chicago bank to New York.
Will you kindly ascertain the exact total amount I have in Chicago so
that I may draw it out at once and deposit it in some New York bank?

Kindly do these and I will bother you no more. I have written
to India long ago about the rugs. I do not know whether Dewanji1
is alive or dead. I have no
information.

I am all right and will be more than a month yet in New York.
After that I am going to the Thousand Islands — wherever that place may
be — for a little summer quiet and rest. Mrs. Bagley has been down here
to see me and attended several of my classes.

The classes are going on with a boom; almost every day I have
one, and they are packed full. But no "money" —
except they maintain themselves. I charge no fees, except as the
members contribute to the rent etc. voluntarily.

It is mostly probable that I will go away this summer.

With my love to all,

Ever gratefully yours,

VIVEKANANDA

^Shri
Haridas Viharidas Desai, Dewan of Junagadh.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/054_mother.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

«
Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

LIV

To Mrs. G. W. Hale

54 W. 33 NEW YORK

The 1st of May 1895

DEAR MOTHER,

Many, many thanks for sending the coat. Now I am well equipped
for summer. I am so sorry the rugs could not come before I leave this
country. They will come if Dewanji is alive.

I have been out of town a few days and have now come back all
right — healthy as ever.

Lord bless you ever and ever for your untiring kindness to me.

Ever your grateful Son,

VIVEKANANDA

P.S. The History of Rajasthan1
I present you, and the satchel to the babies. Yours,

VIVEKANANDA

^This
book by James Tod was given to Swami Vivekananda by Mrs. Potter Palmer.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/055_friend.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

«
Chronology

»

«
Addressee

»

LV

To Mr. Francis H. Leggett

54 W. 33RD ST.

NEW YORK

THE 4TH MAY '95

DEAR FRIEND,

Many thanks for your kind present. The cigars are indeed
delicious — and a hundred times so, as coming from you.

With everlasting love and regards,

I remain yours truly,

VIVEKANANDA



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/056_mother.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

LVI

To Mrs. G. W. Hale

54 W. 33

NEW YORK

16th May '95

DEAR MOTHER,

Your kind note duly reached. The books have arrived safe and
more are coming. The Sanskrit books pay no duty, being classics. I
expect a big package from Khetri. The big packet was from the Raja of
Khetri, sending me an address from a meeting held of Rajput nobility at
Mount Abu, for my work in this country.

I do not know whether I will be able to come over to Chicago
or not. I am trying to get a free pass; in case I succeed I will come,
else not. Financially this winter's work was no success at all — I
could barely keep myself up — but spiritually very great. I am going to
the Thousand Islands for the summer to visit a friend and some of my
pupils will be there.

I have got plenty of books now to read from India, and I will
be quite engaged this summer.

The Khetri package will not arrive soon, so kindly make
arrangements that it will be received during your absence if you go
away. [There] will have to be paid a heavy duty for [it,] I am afraid.

Mrs. [Florence] Adams brought me the love from the [Hale]
Sisters on her way to Europe. She started this morning. A large package
of books also I expect soon. The original Upanishads — there is no duty
on them.

I have had some trouble with my stomach; hope it will be over
in a few days.

With love to all, I am ever your affectionate Son,

VIVEKANANDA



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/057_mother.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

«
Chronology
 »

«
Addressee
»

LVII

To Mrs. Ole Bull

NEW YORK

The 28th May '95

DEAR MOTHER,

Your last kind letter to hand. This week will be the last of
my classes. I am going next Tuesday with Mr. Leggett to Maine. He has a
fine lake and a forest there. I will be two or three weeks there.1
Thence I go to the Thousand Islands. Also I have an invitation to speak
at a parliament of religions at
Toronto, Canada, on July 18th. I will go there from Thousand Islands
and return back.

So far everything is going on well with me.

Ever your grateful son,

VIVEKANANDA

P.S. My regards and love to your daughter and pray for her
speedy recovery.

V.

^On
June 4, 1895, Mr. Leggett and his party of five — including Swami
Vivekananda — took a train from Portland, Maine to Mr. Leggett's cabin
in Percy, New Hampshire.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/058_sir.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

Addressee

»

LVIII

To Dr. Paul Carus

19 W. 38TH ST.,

NEW YORK

June [May]
28, '95

DR. PAUL CARUS, LA SALLE, ILL.

DEAR SIR,

I am just now in receipt of your letter and will be very happy
to join the religions Congress at Toronto. Only, as you are well aware
of, the financial means of a "Bhikshu" (A Hindu or Buddhist monk.) are
very limited. I will be only too glad to do anything in my power to
help you and wait further particulars and directions.

Hoping to hear from you soon and thanking you very much for
your great sympathy with Buddhistic India.

I remain ever fraternally your,

VIVEKANANDA



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/059_mother.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

LIX

Mrs. Ole Bull

4th June '95

DEAR MOTHER

Today I leave New York at 5 p.m. by steamer with Mr. Leggett.

The classes were closed on Saturday last [June 1] and so far
the work has been very successful, no small part of which is due to you.

Ever praying for you and yours,

I am ever your faithful Son,

VIVEKANANDA

P.S. I will acquaint you with my whereabouts as soon as I know
it myself.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/060_doctor.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
»

« Addressee

LX

To Dr. Paul Carus

C/O MISS DUTCHER

THOUSAND ISLAND PARK

N. Y.

[June 1895]

DEAR DOCTOR,

I am in this place now and had to change some of my plans on
account of the Toronto Congress.

I am therefore not quite sure whether I will be able to come
to Oak Island Conference. It is very possible, however, that I will be
able to do so.

I also hope Mr. [Charles Carroll] Bonney will come. He is a
noble, noble soul — one who sincerely wishes the fellowship of all
humanity.

Is it not true, Dr., that Mr. Bonney, as I have every reason
to think, originated the plan of the parliament of religions?

I will certainly try my best to come.

Thanking you very much for your kindness, I remain

Ever yours in the Lord of Compassion,

VIVEKANANDA

P.S. Will you kindly inform me what lines of thought you want
me to take.

V.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/061_mother.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

«
Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

LXI

To Mrs. G. W. Hale

C/O MISS DUTCHER'S

THOUSAND ISLAND PARK

N. Y.

2nd July 1895

DEAR MOTHER —

You did not write to me a single line for a long time. Neither
did Sister Mary write about the duty paid on the rugs [from the Dewan
of Junagadh]. I am afraid the rugs are small.

Here is another consignment from Raja Ajit Singh [the Maharaja
of Khetri] consisting of carpets, shawls, etc., etc., for which the
bill of lading you sent me the other day. This consignment has no duty
to pay because it was all prepaid in India, and the bill of lading says
so expressly. I will send you the bill of lading and the receipt for
the duty. Kindly take one more trouble for me and
get it out of the express company. And keep it with you till I come.
The goods have arrived in New York and I had a notice of that. They are
on their way to Chicago.

In two or three days I will send the bill of lading and the
receipt for duty paid, to you. I foolishly asked Miss Phillips, as soon
as I got the Company's (Original letter: Companies'.) notice, to get
them out before I got the bill of lading. Now the bill of lading shows
that it is bound for Chicago. So I am bound to give you this trouble. I
am so sorry. Again with my usual business instincts — I forgot to note
down the name of the express company. So I have written to New York for
the letters of the Company. As soon as that comes I will send over to
you.

I am going to Europe by the end of August or a little later.

I will come to see you by the end of August.

Lord bless you and yours for ever and ever.

Your ever affectionate Son,

VIVEKANANDA



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/062_mother.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology

»

« Addressee
 »

LXII

To Mrs. G. W. Hale

THOUSAND ISLAND PARK, N.Y. 

C/O MISS DUTCHER

July 3, 1895

DEAR MOTHER —

Herewith I send you the bill of landing and the inventory of
the goods sent from India. The duty, as you will find, has been
prepaid, so there is no botheration on that score. The goods have
reached Hull.1
They will be here by the middle of this month. And if you see a letter
with the Morris American Express Co. name on the envelope, tear it
open. You need not forward it to me, for that will be the notice of
arrival to Chicago. I am sure Dewanji's carpets were too small, but why
do you not write to me about the duty if you had to pay it? I insist
upon paying it myself. The Raja's things seem to come very quick. I am
so glad too I will have something to present to Mrs. Bagley, Mrs. Bull,
etc.

[Enclosed in the above letter was the following note.]

541 DEARBORN AVE.

CHICAGO.

TO THE MORRIS EXPRESS CO.—

DEAR SIR,

Please permit Mrs. G. W. Hale of 541 Dearborn Ave., Chicago,
to act for me about the goods sent to me from India and receive the
same.

I have the honor to be, sir, your most obedient servant,

SWAMI VIVEKANANDA

^England,
not New York as the Swami had thought.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/063_mother.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

LXIII

To Mrs. Ole Bull

C/O MISS DUTCHER

THOUSAND ISLAND PARK

N. Y.

13th [postmarked
11th] July '95.

DEAR MOTHER,

The shirts arrived yesterday; they are nice and fit me well.

Everybody liked them.

Landsberg arrived this morning with a picture of Shri
Ramakrishna.

The Toronto affair has fallen through because the clergyman
objected to a heathen. There is one invitation from the Christian Union
of Oak Beach. I do not know whether I will go there.

As I intend to go to Chicago, in August, I ought to give to
the people here all the time I can.

I do not know yet the exact date when I start [for Europe] —
but somewhere at the end of August, I am sure.

Landsberg sends his love to all the rest.

Ever yours in love and gratitude,

VIVEKANANDA



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/064_mother.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology

»

« Addressee
 »

LXIV

To Mrs. G. W. Hale

THOUSAND ISLAND PARK

C/O MISS DUTCHER

N. Y.

27th July '95

DEAR MOTHER —

I will be ever so much obliged if you kindly look into the
"bead" affair. (Rudrâksha beads sent from India. Vide
letter dated January 17, 1895 in Complete
Works , VI.)
I think there will be a little duty to pay. I will pay it to you when I
come.

I start from here next week. I will be in Detroit a day or two
on my way. I will be in by the third or fourth of August.

With Everlasting love, your Son,

VIVEKANANDA

[Enclosed in the above letter was the following note.]

27th July '95

TO THE UNITED STATES EXPRESS COMPANY

FOREIGN DEPARTMENT.

DEAR SIR,

Herewith I authorize Mrs. George W. Hale to take delivery of
the "beads" that have been expressed to me from India. Hoping they will
be regularly delivered to her, I remain yours obediently,

SWAMI VIVEKANANDA



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/065_mother.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

«
Chronology

»

« Addressee
 »

LXV

To Mrs. G. W. Hale

C/O MISS DUTCHER

THOUSAND ISLAND PARK

30th August [July]
'95

DEAR MOTHER,

I was starting for Chicago, Thursday next [August 1], but your
letter stopped me. The letter and the package have safely arrived.

Write to me or wire if you want me to come to Chicago. I will
then start for Chicago next week, i.e. on Tuesday next [August 6]. I
thought Sister Mary was at home. When are the other babies coming? My
going to Europe is not yet settled finally. The babies have not written
me a line — not one of them.

Oh, Mother, my heart is so, so sad. The letters bring the news
of the death of Dewanji. Haridas Viharidas has left the body. He was as
a father to me. Poor man, he was the last 5
years seeking the retirement from business life, and at last he got it
but could not enjoy it long. I pray that he may never come back again
to this dirty hole they call the Earth. Neither may he be born in
heaven or any other horrid place. May he never again wear a body — good
or bad, thick or thin. What a humbug and illusion this world is,
Mother, what a mockery this life. I pray constantly that all mankind
will come to know the reality, i.e. God, and this "Shop" here be closed
for ever.

My heart is too full to write more. Write to me or wire if you
like.

Your ever obedient Son,

VIVEKANANDA

P.S. We will think of the coming package [from the Maharaja of
Khetri] in Chicago. How long will you be in Chicago? If it is only a
week or so, I need not come. I will meet you in New York. If more than
that, I come to see you.

Yours,

V.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/066_mother.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

«
Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

LXVI

To Mrs. G. W. Hale

C/O MISS DUTCHER

THOUSAND ISLAND PARK

N. Y.

[July 31, 1895]

DEAR MOTHER —

I am afraid I can not come to see you and neither will you
advise me. I am going with a friend (Mr. Francis Leggett.) to Europe,
at his expense. We go first to Paris and from there to London. My
friend will go to Italy and I to London. I will, however, come back to
New York in September. So I am not going away for
good.

I start on the 17th. So you see, it is impossible to come and
go that way for 3 or 4 days.

The package from India ought to have reached by this time. If
they come, (The goods mentioned in Swami Vivekananda's letter dated July 2, 1895.) kindly take
the delivery and send it back to New York to Miss Mary Phillips, 19 W.
38. If the package does not come to Chicago before you go away, then
kindly send the bill of lading etc. to Miss Mary Phillips, 19. W. 38.
The babies [the Hale daughters] did not write me a line, nor did they
intimate where they are. I absolutely do not know anything about them.
As they do not want it, it seems I ought not to disturb them with my
letters. But you kindly convey them my love and eternal, undying
blessings. So to you, Mother and Father Pope. I will pen a longer
epistle in a few days. We will see each other next spring in Chicago,
Mother, if we all live.

Ever gratefully your Son,

VIVEKANANDA



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/067_friend.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
»

«
Addressee
»

LXVII

To Mr. Francis Leggett

[THOUSAND ISLAND PARK, U.S.A.

August 1895]

DEAR FRIEND,

I received your note duly.

Very kind of you and noble to ask me to have my own time to
London. Many thanks for that. But I am in no hurry for London and,
moreover, I want to see you married in Paris and
then I go over to London.

I will be ready, Father Leggett, at hand and in time — never
fear.

Yours affectionately ever,

VIVEKANANDA



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/068_mrs_hale.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

LXVIII

To Mrs. G. W. Hale

THE WESTERN UNION TELEGRAPH COMPANY.

RECEIVED AT: PLAZA HOTEL DRUG STORE,

NORTH AVE. & CLARK STREET.

THOUSAND ISLAND, N.Y., 2, '95

[August 2, 1895]

8 jw ws 11 paid 1.33 p.m.

MRS. G. W. HALE

541 DEARBORN AVE.

WHY ANY CHARGES DUTY PREPAID (This evidently again refers to
the goods sent by the Maharaja of Khetri. Vide the
letter addressed to Mrs. G. W. Hale dated July
2, 1895.) YOU HAVE DOCUMENTS WRITE FULL PARTICULARS.

VIVEKANANDA



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/069_christina.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

«
Chronology
 »

Addressee
 »

LXIX

To Sister Christine

19 WEST 38TH STREET

9th August '95

DEAR CHRISTINA,

You must be enjoying the beautiful weather very much. Here, it
is extremely hot but it does not worry me much. I had a pleasant
journey from Thousand Islands to New York; and though the Engine was
derailed, I did not know anything of it, being asleep all the time.
Miss Waldo went out of the train at Albany. I did not see her off as I
was asleep. I have not heard anything from her yet. Hope to hear soon.
Dr. [L. L. Wight] and Miss [Ruth] Ellis must have gone home by this
time.

We gave them a telepathic message but Miss Ellis has not got
it sure, else she would write.

I am making preparations for my departure.

I came in time for one of the meetings here and had another
one last evening — going to have one more this evening and almost every
evening till I go over.

What is Mrs. Funkey [Mary Caroline Funke] doing, and Miss
[Mary Elizabeth] Dutcher? Do you go to meditate on the mountain as
usual? Did you hear from Kripananda?

Write to me as soon as you can — I am so anxious to hear from
you.

Ever yours with blessings and love,

VIVEKANANDA

P.S. My love and blessings to Mrs. Funkey and Miss Dutcher.

V.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/070_mother.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

«
Addressee

»

LXX

To Mrs. Ole Bull

19 WEST 38TH STREET

NEW YORK

9th August '95

DEAR MOTHER —

Your note duly received. I saw also Miss Thursby yesterday.
After the hard work at the Thousand Islands, I am
taking a few days quiet and preparation for my departure. So I cannot
come to Greenacre. I am with Miss Phillips and will be till the 17th,
on which day I depart for Europe. I have seen Mr. Leggett. You remember
Mrs. Sturges, the widow in black in my classes. She is going to marry
Mr. Leggett in Paris. They will be married the 1st week we arrive, and
then they go on a tour through Europe, and I, to England. I hope to
return in a few weeks — back to New York.

Kindly give to Miss Hamlin [Elizabeth L. Hamlen], to Miss
[Sarah] Farmer, Dr. [L. L. Wight] and Miss Howe, and all our friends my
greetings, love and good-bye.

Ever sincerely your Son,

VIVEKANANDA



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/071_sister_christine.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
»

« Addressee
 »

LXXI

To Sister Christine

[The following telegram was sent on Swami
Vivekananda's behalf.]

POSTAL TELEGRAPH-CABLE COMPANY

RECEIVED AT MAIN OFFICE, COR. GRISWOLD

AND LAFAYETTE AVE., DETROIT, MICH.

43. NY. FC. W. . . 10 PAID. 12:45 PM

NEW YORK, N.Y.

[August 17, 1895]

MISS CHRISTINA GREENSTIDEL,

418 ALFRED ST., DETROIT, MICH.

SWAMM [SWAMI] LEAVING SENDS YOU AND MRS. FUNKE LOVE AND
BLESSING.

KRIPANANDA.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/072_mckindley.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

LXXII

To Miss Isabelle McKindley

80 OAKLEY STREET

CHELSEA, S.W.

LONDON.

24th October '95

 We meet and part. This is the law

      and ever ever be.

I sadly ask O gentle ones

      Do you remember me?

I haven't had any news from Chicago, nor did I write as I did
not want to bother you — also I did not know where to.

Accompanying is a newspaper notice of a lecture I delivered in
London. It is not bad. The London audiences are very learned and
critical, and the English nature is far from being effusive. I have
some friends here — made some more — so I am going on.

My bed is in the foaming deep

What care I, friend, the dew!

It is a queer life, mine — always travelling, no rest. Rest
will be my death — such is the force of habit. Little success here,
little there — and a good deal of bumping. Saw Paris a good [deal].
Miss Josephine M'cLeod [MacLeod], a New York friend, showed it all over
to me for a month. Even there, the kind American girl! Here in England
they know us more. Those that do not like the Hindus, they hate them;
those that like, they worship them.

It is slow work here, but sure. Not frothy, not superficial.
English women as a rule are not as highly educated as the American
women, nor are so beautiful. They are quite submissive wives or
hidden-away daughters or church-going mothers — the embodiments of
crystallized conventionality. I am going to have some classes at the
above address.

Sometimes — and generally when I score a success — I feel a
despondence; I feel as if everything is vain — as if this life has no
meaning, as if it is a waking dream. Love, friendship, religion,
virtue, kindness — everything, a momentary state of mind. I seem to
long to go; in spite of myself I say, how far — O how far! Yet the
body-and-mind will have to work its Karma out. I
hope it will not be bad.

How are you all going on? Where is Mother Church? Is she
interviewing the ghosts of the Thotmeses and Rameses1
in the Pyramids — or calmly going her round of duties at home?

Yet the life seems to grow deep and at the same time lose its
hold on itself.

Not disgust, nor joy for life, but a sort of indifference —
things will take their course; who can resist — only stand by and look
on. Well, I will not talk about myself so much. Egregious egotist! I
always was that, you know. How about you all? Great fun this life,
isn't it? Don't go to the extremes. A calm, restful, settled married
life is good for the majority of mankind. Mr. [Edward T.] Sturdy, the
friend with whom I am living now, was in India several times. He mixed
with our monks and is very ascetic in his habits, but he is married at
last and has settled down. And
[he] has got a beautiful little baby. Their life is very nice. The
wife, of course, doesn't much care about metaphysics or Sanskrit, but
her whole life is in her husband — and husband's soul is in Sanskrit
metaphysics! Yet it is a good combination of theory and practice, I
think. Write me all about yourselves if you have time and inclination,
and give Mother Church my eternal gratitude.

My movements are so, so uncertain. Yet I will be a month more
in London.

With never-ending gratitude and love,

VIVEKANANDA

^"Thotmeses"
refers to the four Egyptian pharaohs of the 18th dynasty (Thutmose I,
II, III and IV), who reigned from 1504 B.C. till 1391 B.C. The Rameses
were pharaohs of the 19th dynasty. Neither of these families built
pyramids but were all buried in the Valley of the Kings.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/073_christina.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

«
Chronology

»

« Addressee
 »

LXXIII

To Sister Christine

228 W. 39TH STREET

[NEW YORK]

8th Dec. '95

DEAR CHRISTINA,

I am once more on American Soil and have taken lodgings at 228
W. 39, where I begin work from Monday next. Sometime after Christmas I
intend to make a tour through Detroit and Chicago.

I do not care for public lecturings at all — and do not think
I shall have any more public lectures charging admission. If you will
see Mrs. Phelps and others of our friends and arrange some classes
(strictly on nonpayment basis), it will facilitate things a good deal.

Write at your earliest opportunity and give Mrs. Phunkey
[Funke] and all our friends my deepest love and gratitude.

Yours ever in the Lord,

VIVEKANANDA

P.S. Kripananda is over full of praise of you and Mrs. Funkey
[Funke] and sends his loving regards for you.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/074_christina.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

LXXIV

To Sister Christine

228 W. 39TH STREET

[NEW YORK]

Dec. 10, 1895

DEAR CHRISTINA,

Perhaps by this time you have received my first letter. I
received yours just now.

I had a splendid success in England and have left a nucleus
there to work till my arrival next summer. You will be astonished to
learn that some of my strongest friends are big "guns" of the Church of
England.

This Christmas I am going away a week, from 24th Decem., to
the country with Mr. and Mrs. Leggett — after that I resume my work. In
the meanwhile the classes have begun.

I have written to you my intention of taking a quick turn
through Detroit and Chicago in the meanwhile and [then] return back.

Give Mrs. Phelps my love and kindly arrange the classes [in
Detroit] with her. The best thing is to arrange for a public lecture
where I give out my general plan of work. The Unitarian church is
available; and if the lecture is free, there will be a big crowd. The
collection most possibly will cover the expenses. Then out of this we
will get the materials of a big class and then hurry them through,
leaving Mrs. Phelps and you and Mrs. Funkey [Funke] to work on with
them.

This plan is entirely feasible and if Mrs. Phelps and Mrs.
Bagley desire it, they can work it out very quickly.

Ever yours with love and blessings,

VIVEKANANDA



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/075_christina.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

LXXV

To Sister Christine

228 W. 39TH STREET

NEW YORK

12 December 1895

DEAR CHRISTINA,

I am going away out of town from the 24th of this month and
will come back on the 2nd of January. From the 24th — the 2nd I will
not be here. I will settle the dates for Detroit and Chicago after
hearing from you and from Chicago.

[Paragraph excised from the original letter.]

My love to Mrs. Phunkey [Funke] [excised] and all other
friends.

Ever yours in the Lord,

VIVEKANANDA



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/076_your_highness.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

LXXVI

To the Maharaja of Limdi,

Cathiawad, Bombay

CHICAGO

14th Dec. '95

YOUR HIGHNESS,

The gentleman whom I have the pleasure of introducing to you
was the chairman of the Parliament of Religions held in Chicago.

He is a holy and noble gentleman. We owe him a deep debt of
gratitude; and as he is going to make a tour through India, I hope your
Highness will extend him the same hospitality as he has to us.

Yours with blessings,

VIVEKANANDA



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/077_sir.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology

»

LXXVII

To the Dewan of Mysore, Madras (His
Excellency Seshahari Iyer, K. C. S. I.)

CHICAGO,

the 14th Dec. '95

DEAR SIR —

The gentleman I have the pleasure of introducing to you was
the chairman of the Chicago Parliament of religions.

All India owes him a deep debt of gratitude. He is now on a
tour through our country, and I am sure you will help him in seeing
your part of the country and oblige.

Yours with blessings,

VIVEKANANDA



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/078_christina.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

«
Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

LXXVIII

To Sister Christine

228 W. 39TH STREET

NEW YORK

December 24, 1895

DEAR CHRISTINA —

Merry Christmas and happy New Year to you. I am going today to
the country. I return in 10 days.

About the tour through Detroit — I will fix it later on. I am
afraid if I go just now, everything here will fall to pieces.

I will come anyway, but I am afraid it will be later than I
expected.

My love to Mrs. Phelps, Mrs. Phunkey [Funke] and all our
friends and Christmas greetings.

Ever yours in the Lord,

VIVEKANANDA

P.S. Kripananda sends his greetings too.

V.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/079_mrs_bull.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

LXXIX

To Mrs. Ole Bull

228 W. 39

NEW YORK

24 December 1895

Merry Christmas and happy New Year to you, dear Mrs. Bull. And
may peace and health rest on you and yours for ever. I am going out of
town today and will be back in ten days.

My love to all.

Yours affectionately,

VIVEKANANDA



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/080_sir.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

«
Chronology
 »

LXXX

To the Editor of
Light of the East

1896.

DEAR SIR,1

Many thanks for your kindly sending me several copies of the Light
of the East. I wish the paper all success.

As you have asked for my suggestion [that] I can make towards
improving the paper — I must frankly state that in my life-long
experience in the work, I have always found "Occultism" injurious and
weakening to humanity. What we want is strength. We Indians, more than
any other race, want strong and vigorous thought. We have enough of the
superfine in all concerns. For centuries we have been stuffed with the
mysterious; the result is that our intellectual and spiritual digestion
is almost hopelessly impaired, and the race has been dragged down to
the depths of hopeless imbecility — never before or since experienced
by any other civilised community. There must be freshness and vigour of
thought behind to make a virile race. More
than enough to strengthen the whole world exists in the Upanishads. The
Advaita is the eternal mine of strength. But it requires to be applied.
It must first be cleared of the incrustation of scholasticism, and then
in all its simplicity, beauty and sublimity be taught over the length
and breadth of the land, as applied even to the minutest detail of
daily life. "This is a very large order"; but we must work towards it,
nevertheless, as if it would be accomplished to-morrow. Of one thing I
am sure — that whoever wants to help his fellow beings through genuine
love and unselfishness will work wonders.

Yours truly,

VIVEKANANDA

^This
letter was published in the December 1896 issue of Light of the East, a
well-known monthly journal of those days, published in Calcutta. The
editor, Satishchandra Mukherjee, Swami Vivekananda's boyhood friend,
was the third son of Ishanchandra, a very dear disciple of Shri
Ramakrishna.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/081_mrs_bull.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology

»

« Addressee
 »

LXXXI

To Mrs. Ole Bull

228 W. 39TH STREET

NEW YORK

the 3rd Jan. ’96

DEAR MRS. BULL—

I have had a letter from Mr. Trine1
asking me to have some classes at the Procopeia2
in February. I do not see my way to go to Boston in February, however I
may like it. I have given up for the present my plan of going to
Detroit and Chicago in February. Later on I will try. Miss [Josephine]
Locke will see to my having classes in Chicago and I have some friends
in Detroit I may go to Baltimore for a few days in the meanwhile. I
enjoyed my visit with the Leggetts exceedingly. It has braced me for
further work. I am very well both physically and mentally.

Wishing you a happy New Year,

I remain yours affectionately,

VIVEKANANDA

^Ralph
Waldo Trine, a journalist who later became a well-known writer on
metaphysics.

^A
club in Boston that attracted a variety of metaphysicians and served as
a platform for their beliefs.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/082_mrs_funkey.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

«
Chronology
 »

Addressee
 »

LXXXII

To Mrs. Charles (Mary) Funke

228 W. 39

NEW YORK,

the 6th Jan. 1896.

DEAR MRS. FUNKEY [FUNKE] —

Many, many thanks for the sweet flowers. It recalls to me the
beautiful times we had at the Thousand Islands and presages many such
summer gatherings.

The work here had begun in right earnest, and we will advance
it farther this year than in the last.

I am therefore uncertain as to the exact date of my coming to
Detroit. I will come, however, very soon.

Yours ever in the Lord,

VIVEKANANDA



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/083_mrs_bull.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

LXXXIII

To Mrs. Ole Bull

228 W. 39TH STREET

NEW YORK

10 January 1896

DEAR MRS. BULL,

I have received your letter and also another from the
Secretary of the Harvard Metaphysical Club.1

I will be only too glad to come to Boston for the Harvard
lecture especially — but these are the difficulties in the way: First,
the work here will fall to pieces; secondly, I have begun to write in
right earnest. I want to finish some text books to be the basis of work
when I am gone. I want to hurry through four little text books before I
go.

Of course it is impossible to come this month as the notices
of the four Sunday lectures are out. In the first week of February I
have again a lecture at Brooklyn at Dr. Janes's. My idea now is to make
a tour to Boston, Detroit, and Chicago in March and then come back to
New York a week or so and then start for England. In March I will be
able to stay a few weeks at each of these places. Of course it is true
that [as] yet I have no competent persons here to carry on the work
like Sturdy in England, nor any sincere friend to stand by me except
you.

I will do anything you want me to, and if you think it is good
for me to come to Boston in February, I am ready.

Ever yours with gratitude, love, and blessings

VIVEKANANDA

P.S. I have not much faith in that Procopeia business, (The
Procopeia Club.) except as a nucleus to work from.

My love to Miss Hamlin and all the other friends there.

YOURS, V.

^Most
probably the graduate Philosophical Club of Harvard, before which Swami
Vivekananda spoke in March 1896.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/084_christina.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

«
Chronology

»

« Addressee
 »

LXXXIV

To Sister Christine

24th Jan. '95 ['96]

DEAR CHRISTINA,

I have not heard from you [for] long. Hope everything is going
on well with you and Mrs. Phunkey [Funke].

Did you receive my poem
? I had a letter from Mrs. Phelps
today. I am coming to Detroit next March early, as I will have to
finish my February course in New York. The public lectures will be
printed as they are delivered right along. The class lectures will very
soon be collected and edited in little volumes.

May the Lord bless you ever and ever.

Yours ever with love and blessings,

VIVEKANANDA



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/085_mrs_bull.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

«
Chronology
»

«
Addressee
»

LXXXV

To Mrs. Ole Bull

228 W. 39

NEW YORK

the 6th of Feb. '96

DEAR MRS. BULL —

I received your last duly, but owing to many things I have
given up the idea of taking rest next month. I go to Detroit the first
week of March and then, towards the middle or last week, come to
Boston. I have not much faith in working such things as the Procopeia
[Club] etc.— because these mixed-up conglomerations of all isms and
ities — mostly fads — disturb the steadiness of the mind, and life
becomes a mass of frivolities. I am very glad, however, to get an
opportunity to talk to the graduates of Harvard. This does not mean
that I am not coming to Procopeia. I will come but it will be only for
your sake. There is one if, however — and that is if I am physically
able. My health has nearly broken down. I have not slept even one night
soundly in New York since I came; and this year there is incessant
work, both with the pen and the mouth. The accumulated work and worry
of years is on me now, I am afraid. Then a big struggle awaits me in
England. I wish to go to the bottom of the sea and have a good, long
sleep.

To Detroit I must go, dead or alive, as I have disappointed
them several times last year. There were big money offers from near
Chicago. I have rejected them as I do not any longer believe in paid
lectures and their utility in any country. If after Detroit I feel the
body able to drag itself on to Boston, I will come, else I will remain
in Detroit or some other quiet place and rest to recuperate for the
coming work in England. So far I have tried to work conscientiously —
let the fruits belong to the Lord. If they were good they will sprout
up sooner or later; if bad, the sooner they die the better. I am quite
satisfied with my task in life. I have been much more active than a
Sannyasin ought to be. Now I will disappear from society altogether.
The touch of the world is degenerating me, I am sure, so it is time to
be off. Work has no more value beyond purifying the heart. My heart is
pure enough; why shall I bother my head about doing good to
others? "If you have known the Atman as the one, only existence and
nothing else exists, desiring what? — for whose desire you trouble
yourself?"1
This universe is a dream, pure and simple. Why bother myself about a
dream? The very atmosphere of the world is poison to the Yogi, but I am
waking up. My old iron heart is coming back — all attachments of
relatives, friends, disciples are vanishing fast. "Neither through
wealth nor through progeny, but by giving up everything as chaff is
that immortality attained"2
— the Vedas. I am so tired of talking too; I want to close my lips and
sit in silence for years. All talk is nonsense.

Yours faithfully,

VIVEKANANDA

^Brihadâranyaka
Upanishad 4.4.12 (adapted).

^Mahânârâyana
Upanishad 12.14 (adapted) and Taittiriya Aranyaka 10.10.21. (adapted).



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/086_miss_thursby.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

«
Chronology

»

« Addressee

LXXXVI

To Miss Emma Thursby

228 W. 39TH STREET

NEW YORK,

February 26th, 1896

DEAR MISS THURSBY,

Will you oblige me by giving Mr. Goodwin any particulars you
can with reference to the business arrangements made for my 6 lectures
with Miss Corbin. He will see her, with the idea of obtaining payment.

Thanking you in anticipation, and with best regards,

Very truly yours,

VIVEKANANDA



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/087_friend.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

LXXXVII

To Shri Giridharidas Mangaldas
Viharidas Desai

228 W. 39TH STREET

NEW YORK 

2 March 1896

DEAR FRIEND,

Excuse my delay in replying to your beautiful note.

Your uncle1
was a great soul, and his whole life was given to doing good to his
country. Hope you will all follow in his footsteps.

I am coming to India this winter, and cannot express my sorrow
that I will not see Haribhai once more.

He was a strong, noble friend, and India has lost a good deal
in losing him.

I am going to England very soon where I intend to pass the
summer, and in winter next I come to India.

Recommend me to your uncles and friends.

Ever always the well-wisher of your family,

VIVEKANANDA

PS: My England address is: C/o E. T. Sturdy, Esq., High View,
Caversham, Reading, England.

^Shri
Haridas Viharidas Desai, the deceased Dewan of Junagadh, who had been a
loyal friend and supporter of Swami Vivekananda.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/088_christina.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

«
Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

LXXXVIII

To Sister Christine

C/O THE PROCOPEIA

45 ST., BOTOLPH STREET

BOSTON, MASS.

22nd March '96

DEAR CHRISTINA,

Herewith [words excised] to countersign it and put it [words
excised]. I am afraid I have made a mistake in writing Miss to your
name. In that case you will have to sign also as Miss etc.

I am enjoying Boston very much, especially the old friends
here.

They are all kind. Reply promptly. Write fully later on.

With everlasting love and blessings,

Yours etc.,

VIVEKANANDA



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/089_mrs_funkey.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
»

« Addressee

LXXXIX

To Mrs. Charles (Mary) Funke

C/O THE PROCOPEIA

45 ST., BOTOLPH STREET

BOSTON, MASS.

22nd March '96

DEAR MRS. FUNKEY [FUNKE] —

I had no time to write a line even, I was so busy. I am
enjoying Boston immensely, only hard work. The meeting with old friends
is very pleasing, no doubt. The so-called class swelled up to 500
people last night and, am afraid, will go on increasing. Everything
going on splendidly. Mr. Goodwin as nice as ever. We are all friends
here. I go next week to Chicago.

Hope everything is going on well with you there. Kindly give
my love to Mrs. Phelps, Mr. Phelps and all the rest of my friends.

With all love and blessings,

Yours,

VIVEKANANDA



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/090_christina.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

«
Chronology

»

« Addressee
 »

XC

To Sister Christine

1628 INDIANA AVE.

CHICAGO, ILL.

[April 6, 1896]

DEAR CHRISTINA,

[Line excised.] reply as soon as possible.

I am going forward to New York on Thursday [April 9] and
[will] start for England on the 15th of April.

Goodby and love to you all — to Mrs. Funkey [Funke], to Mrs.
Phelps and all the rest of our friends.

In this life we meet and part again and again; but the mind is
omnipresent and can be, hear, and feel anywhere.

Yours with love and blessings,

VIVEKANANDA

P.S. Give Kripananda and Miss [Martha] Hamilton my love and
blessings when you meet them next.

V.

[Written in the margin:] I will go to New York next Friday
[April 10].



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/091_christina.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

«
Chronology

»

« Addressee
 »

XCI

To Sister Christine

HIGH VIEW, CAVERSHAM

READING, LONDON.

26th April '96

DEAR CHRISTINA,

How are things going on with you? I am all safe and sound here
in England. Going to begin work from May fourth. How is Mrs. Funkey
[Funke]?

Give them all my Love. Write me all about yourself and Mrs.
Funkey when you have time. Address me at 63 St., George's Road, S.W.
London.

Where is Krip. [Swami Kripananda]? What is he doing now? Has
he been able to get up any classes yet? Has his temper gone down?

Give them all my love — and [to] Miss Hamilton and to all my
friends and to the Rabbi [Grossman of Detroit].

Yours ever with love and blessings,

VIVEKANANDA



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/092_mrs_bull.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

«
Chronology

»

«
Addressee

»

XCII

To Mrs. Ole Bull

63 ST GEORGE'S ROAD

LONDON. S.W.

May 8, 1896

DEAR MRS. BULL —

Your last letter to Sturdy at hand. They, I am sorry to say,
leave us nowhere. I could not make anything out of them.

What are we to do? Is the book going to be published or not?
Prof. [William] James's introduction (Preface to Swami Vivekananda's Râja-Yoga.)
is of no use in England. So why wait so long for that; and what use are
those long explanations about him?

Our hands are tied down. Why do you not write something plain
and decisive? Life is short and time is flying. I am so sorry you are
losing sight of that. Your letters are full of explanations [and]
directions, but not one word about what is to be done!!!
So much red tape about printing a little book!! Empires are managed
with less manipulation than that, I am sure!! So kindly write at your
earliest something precise about the book and whether it is going to be
printed or not, and pray make the writing a little legible.

Poor Sturdy is out of his wits as to what to do; he has gone
through the Mss. long ago.

Joking apart, I am very sorry you are not coming over this
year. We are in Lady Isabel's house. (The house was rented from Lady
Isabel Margesson.) Miss [Henrietta] Müller has taken some rooms in it
too. Goodwin is here with us. We have not yet made any big stir here.
The classes have begun; they are not yet what we expected. We [have]
had only two yet.

We will work on steadily the next 4 or 5 months. Sturdy is as
patient and persevering and hopeful as ever.

It is cool enough here yet to have a fire in the grate.

Give my love to Mrs. Adams, Miss Thursby and all other
friends. My love to Mr. Fox and blessings.

Yours with love and blessings,

VIVEKANANDA



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/093_sir.htm


 ← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

«
Chronology
 »

«
Addressee
»

XCIII

To Mr. Francis Leggett

(Swami Vivekananda enclosed the
following document in a July
6, 1896 letter written
to Francis Leggett.)

63 ST. GEORGE'S ROAD, LONDON, S.W.

6th July 1896

TO FRANCIS LEGGETT, ESQ.

DEAR SIR,

Herewith I constitute you as my attorney and representative in
regards to all publication pamphlets etc., written or dictated by me,
their copyright, sale, etc., in the U.S. of America.

Yours affectionately,

VIVEKANANDA



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/094_mrs_bull.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology

»

«
Addressee

»

XCIV

To Mrs. Ole Bull

63 ST. GEORGE'S ROAD, LONDON, S.W.

6th July 1896

DEAR MRS. BULL —

I have sent to Mr. Leggett by last mail the power of attorney,
and, as you desired, this is to notify you of the fact and absolve you
from the responsibilities of the power of attorney which I gave you in
America last year.

Yours affectionately,

VIVEKANANDA

Saradananda and Goodwin have arrived, I am sure, by this time.
I have a nice letter from Dr. Jain [Dr. Lewis G. Janes]. I am going to
Switzerland for a vacation in a few days. I mean to stay there a month
or more. I will return to London in the next fall. I do not know when I
go back to India.

Things are growing nicely here.

With love to all,

 

Yours affectionately,

VIVEKANANDA



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/095_mother.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

«
Chronology

»

« Addressee
 »

XCV

To Mrs. G. W. Hale

July 7, 1896

DEAR MOTHER —

[On the] 18th of this month I start for Switzerland for a
holiday. I will come back to London again to work in the Autumn. The
work in England bids fair to be much better and deeper than in the U.S.
And here in London is the heart of India also. Where are you now? I am
passing through Geneva on my way to the Hills. I will be there a day or
two.

If you be somewhere near, I will make it a point to come to
see you. Did you hear Annie Besant? How did you like her? What about
your plans of going to India next winter? What about the innocents
(Mary and Harriet Hale and Isabelle and Harriet McKindley.) at home? I
haven't had any news of them. My love to Father Pope, Mother Temple
(Mrs. James Matthews, Mr. Hale's sister.) and yourself. Kindly answer
as I will be only a few days here.

Ever yours with love and gratitude,

VIVEKANANDA



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/096_sir.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

XCVI

A letter to the editor, which
appeared in the July 11, 1896 issue of the Light

63, ST. GEORGE'S-ROAD, S.W.

SIR,

Allow me to put a few words in your estimable journal as
comments on an article in your paper dated July 4th. I must thank you
without reserve for the kind and friendly spirit manifested throughout
the article towards me and the philosophy I preach; but, as there is a
fear of misconstruction in one part of it — especially by my
Spiritualistic friends — I want to clear my position. The truth of
correspondence between the living and the dead is, I believe, in every
religion, and nowhere more than in
the Vedantic sects of India, where the fact of mutual help between the
departed and the living has been made the basis of the law of
inheritance. I would be very sorry if I be mistaken as antagonistic to
any sect or form of religion, so far as they are sincere. Nor do I hold
that any system can ever be judged by the frauds and failures that
would naturally gather round every method under the present
circumstances. But, all the same, I cannot but believe that every
thoughtful person would agree with me when I affirm that people should
be warned of their dangers, with love and sympathy. The lecture alluded
to could but accidentally touch the subject of Spiritualism; but I take
this opportunity of conveying my deep admiration for the Spiritualist
community for the positive good they have done already, and are doing
still: (1) the preaching of a universal sympathy; (2) the still greater
work of helping the human race out of doctrines which inculcate fear
and not love. Ever ready to co-operate with, and at the service of, all
who are striving to bring the light of the spirit,

I remain yours sincerely,

VIVE KANANDA



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/097_mrs_bull.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

«
Chronology

»

«
Addressee

»

XCVII

To Mrs. Ole Bull

63 ST. GEORGE'S ROAD

18th July '96

DEAR MRS. BULL,

I received your last note duly — and you already know my
gratitude and love for you and that I perfectly agree with most of your
ideas and work.

I did not understand, however, one point. You speak of Sturdy
and myself being members. Members of what? I, as you well know, can not
become a member of any society.

I am very glad to learn that you have been favourably
impressed by Saradananda. There is one big mistake you are labouring
under. What do you mean of [my] writing to my workers more
confidentially and not to you? I seldom write to
anyone — I have no time to write. I have no workers. Everyone is
independent to work as one likes. I do not bother my head about these
little things at all. I can give ideas — that is all; let people work
them out any way they like, and Godspeed to all.

"He who works unattached to persons and giving up the fruits
of work is a genuine worker" — Gitâ.

Yours Ever with love and gratitude,

VIVEKANANDA



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/098_blessed_and_beloved.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

«
Chronology

»

« Addressee
 »

XCVIII

To Sister Christine

[POSTMARKED: SAAS-FEE]

SWITZERLAND

5th August 1896

BLESSED AND BELOVED,

Surrounded on all sides by eternal snow peaks, sitting on the
grass in a beautiful wood, my thoughts go to those I love — so I write.

I am in Switzerland — constantly on the move — getting a much
needed rest. It is a miniature Himalayas, and has the same effect of
raising the mind up to the Self and driving away all earthly feelings
and ties. I am intensely enjoying it. I feel so, so uplifted. I cannot
write, but I wish you will have the same for ever — when your feet do
not want, as it were, to touch the material earth — when the soul finds
itself floating, as it were, in an ocean of spirituality.

Prof. Max Müller has written in the Nineteenth
Century an article on my Master. Read it if you can — August
number.

I hope you are enjoying this beautiful summer and are
perfectly rested after hard work.

My love to all. Blessings to all.

Yours ever with love and blessings,

VIVEKANANDA

P.S. A few Alpine flowers growing almost in the midst of
eternal snow I send you, praying that you may attain spiritual
hardihood amidst all snows and ice of this life.

V.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/099_christina.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

«
Chronology
»

« Addressee
 »

XCIX

To Sister Christine

AIRLIE LODGE, RIDGEWAY GARDENS

WIMBLEDON, ENGLAND

October 6, 1896

DEAR CHRISTINA,

I am sure you got my letter from Switzerland.

I am now in London, back after having travelled through
Germany and Holland.

How are things going with you? Had you a nice summer? How are
you physically and spiritually? How is Mrs. Fhunkey [Funke] and all the
other friends? Have you any news of Baby?1
Where is Kr [Kripananda] and what is he doing now?

I have another Sannyasin over here with me now, who will work
here whilst I am away to India, where I go this winter.

I will write to you in extenso later;
tonight it is so late and I am so weary.

With all love and blessings,

Yours,

VIVEKANANDA

^Stella
Campbell, one of Swami Vivekananda's students at Thousand Island Park.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/100_miss_noble.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

C

To Sister Nivedita

14, GREYCOAT GARDENS

WESTMINSTER

October 29, 1896

DEAR MISS [MARGARET] NOBLE —

I will be at yours on Friday next, at 4 p.m.

I did not know of any arrangements made to meet anybody Friday
last, hence my absence.

Yours,

VIVEKANANDA



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/101_miss_noble.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

CI

To Sister Nivedita

14, GREYCOAT GARDENS

WESTMINSTER, S.W.

5 December 1896

DEAR MISS NOBLE —

Many thanks for sending the kind present from Mr. Beatty. I
have written to him acknowledging his beautiful gift.

As for you, my dear, noble, kind friend, I only would say this
— we Indians lack in many things, but there is none on earth to beat us
in gratefulness. I remain,

Ever yours gratefully,

VIVEKANANDA



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/102_christina.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

CII

To Sister Christine

ON BOARD PRINZ REGENT LUITPOLD

3rd January 1897.

DEAR CHRISTINA,

By two p.m. today I reach Port Said. Asia once more. I have
not heard from you [for] long. Hope everything is going on well with
you. How are Mrs. Funke, Mrs. Phelps, and all other friends?

My love to all. Write when you feel like it.

VIVEKANANDA.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/103_madras_committee.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

CIII

To the Madras Committee

[After Swami Vivekananda arrived at Colombo on
Friday, January
15, 1897, the Madras Committee, which was planning a reception for the
Swami, sent the following message: "Motherland rejoices to welcome you
back". In reply, Swami Vivekananda sent a wire.]

[Postmarked: January 15, 1897]

MY LOVE AND GRATITUDE TO MY COUNTRYMEN.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/104_gentlemen.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

«
Chronology

»

CIV

To the Hindu Students of
Trichinapally1

[February 16, 1897]

GENTLEMEN,

I have received your address with great pleasure and sincerely
thank you for the kind expressions contained therein.

I much regret, however, that time effectually prevents my
paying even a short visit to Trichinopoly at present. In the autumn,
however, I propose making a lecture tour throughout India, and you may
rely upon it that I shall then not fail to include Trichinopoly in the
programme.

Again thanking you, and with my blessings to all.

Sincerely yours,

VIVEKANANDA.

^A
deputation consisting of Messrs. K. S. Krishnamachari and S. M. Raja
Ram waited upon Swami Vivekananda in the "Nilgiri Hall", Kumbhakonam,
with a memorial signed by about 750 students (representing the
students' population of Trichinopoly) requesting the Swami to stay at
least one or two days. This was the reply given by Swami Vivekananda.
It was published in the Madras Standard of February 16, 1897.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/105_christina.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

CV

To Sister Christine

DARJEELING,

[RETURN ADDRESS: ALAMBAZAR MATH, CALCUTTA]

16th March 1897.

DEAR CHRISTINA,

Many, many thanks for the photograph and the poem. I never saw
anything half as beautiful. The work I had to do to reach Calcutta from
Ceylon was so immense that I could not earlier acknowledge your
precious gift. The work has broken me down completely, and I have got
"diabetes", an incurable disease, which must carry me off — at least in
a few years.

I am now writing to you from Darjeeling, the nearest hill
station to Calcutta, with a climate as cool as London. It hasrevived me a bit. If I live, I
will come to America next year or so.

How are things going on with you all? How are Mrs. Funkey
[Funke] and Mrs. Phelps?

Are you laying by a few dollars whenever you can? That is very
important.

I am in a hurry for the mail. You will be glad to know that
the Indian people have, as it were, risen in a mass to honour me. I am
the idol of the day. Mr. Goodwin is going to publish in book form all
the addresses given to me and the speeches in reply. The demonstrations
all over have been simply unique.

Yours with all love,

VIVEKANANDA.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/106_mrs_bull.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

CVI

To Mrs. Ole Bull

ALAMBAZAR MATH

CALCUTTA

[DARJEELING]

26th March 1897

DEAR MRS. BULL —

The demonstrations and national jubilations over me are over —
at least I had to cut them short, as my health broke completely down.
The result of this steady work in the West and the tremendous work of a
month in India upon the Bengalee constitution is "diabetes". It is a
hereditary foe and is destined to carry me off, at best, in a few
years' time. Eating only meat and drinking no water seems to be the
only way to prolong life — and, above all, perfect rest for the brain.
I am giving my brain the needed rest in Darjeeling, from where I am
writing you now.

I am so glad to hear about Saradananda's success. Give him my
best love and do not allow him [to] do too much work.
The Bengalee body is not the same as the American.

Mr. Chatterjy (Mohini) came to see me in Calcutta, and he was
very friendly. I gave him your message. He is quite willing
to work with me. Nothing more to write, only I am bent upon seeing my
monastery started; and as soon as that is done, I come to America once
more.

By the by, I will send to you a young lady from England — one
Gertrude Orchard. She has been a governess, but she has talent in art
etc., and I wished her to try her chance in America. I will give her a
letter to you and Mrs. [Florence] Adams.

With my love to Mrs. Adams, Miss Thursby, Miss Farmer (the
noble sister) and all the rest of our friends.

With eternal love and gratitude,

Yours affectionately,

VIVEKANANDA



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/107_ram_ram.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

CVII

(Translated from Bengali)

To Pandit Ram Ram Samjami

DARJEELING

[April] 1897

DEAR RAM RAM,

I received your first letter in Calcutta. I was busy there,
and so it seems that I forgot to reply. You have deplored this in your
letter, but that is not right. I do not forget anyone — especially
those who have received grace from "Him".

While I was in England, I received your Avadhuta-Gitâ. It is
beautifully printed. You mentioned Karma-Yoga — I
do not have that book with me. It was printed in Madras. If there are
any copies at the Math, I shall ask them to send one to you.

I have been very sick, so right now I am staying at
Darjeeling. As soon as I feel better, I shall return to Calcutta. . . .

Please accept my special love. I pray for your welfare always.

Yours etc.,

VIVEKANANDA



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/108_miss_noble.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology

»

« Addressee

»

CVIII

To Sister Nivedita

DARJEELING,

3rd April 1897.

DEAR MISS NOBLE,

I have just found a bit of important work for you to do on
behalf of the downtrodden masses of India.

The gentleman I take the liberty of introducing to you is in
England on behalf of the Tiyas, a plebeian caste in the native State of
Malabar.

You will realize from this gentleman what an amount of tyranny
there is over these poor people, simply because of their caste.

The Indian Government has refused to interfere on grounds of
non-interference in the internal administration of a native State. The
only hope of these people is the English Parliament. Do kindly
everything in your power to help this matter [in] being brought before
the British Public.

Ever yours in the truth,

VIVEKANANDA.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/109_lalajee.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

CIX

To Lala Badri Sah of Almora

DARJEELING

7th April '97.

DEAR LALAJEE,

Just received your kind invitation through telegram. Perhaps
you have already heard that I have been attacked by "Diabetes", a fell
disease.

That unsettled all our plans, and I had to run up to
Darjeeling, it being very cool and very good for the disease.

I have felt much better since, and the doctors therefore do
not want me to move about, as that brings about a relapse. If my
present state of health continues for a month or two, I think I will be
in a condition to come down to the plains and come to Almora to see you
all. I am very sorry that I have caused you a
good deal of trouble, but you see it could not be helped — the body was
not under my control.

With all love to yourself and other friends in Almora.

Yours affectionately,

VIVEKANANDA



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/110_badri_sah.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

« Addressee

CX

To Lala Badri Sah

DEVALDHAR BAGICHA,1

Thursday, [June
1897]

DEAR BADRI SAH,

I have been very sorry to learn that you are not well. It
would please me very much if you would come down here for a few days,
at any rate, with us; and I am sure it would do you good.

Yours with blessings,

VIVEKANANDA

^When
Swami Vivekananda visited Almora in the summer of 1897, he was the
guest of Lala Badri Sah for about two and a half months. During this
period the Swami primarily stayed at Badri Sah's house in the bazaar
and occasionally retreated to the garden-house of the Sahs at
Devaldhar, about twenty miles north of Almora. In Hindi, the word
Bagicha means "garden".



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/111_mother.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

CXI

To Mrs. Francis Leggett

ALMORA

20 June '97

DEAR MOTHER —

Herewith I take the liberty to introduce to you Miss Tremayne
of London, a particular friend of mine going over to the States.

Any help given to her would greatly oblige.

Yours in the Lord,

VIVEKANANDA



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/112_mrs_bull.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

CXII

To Mrs. Ole Bull

ALMORA

20 June '97

DEAR MRS. BULL —

Herewith I take the liberty of introducing Miss Tremayne of
London.

I like nothing so much as being serviceable to young and
energetic persons — and any help given to her in America will greatly
oblige.

Yours in the Lord,

VIVEKANANDA



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/113_friend.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

CXIII

To Mr. Sokanathan, Colombo

ALMORA

30th June 1897.

MY DEAR FRIEND,

The bearer of this note, Swami Shivananda, is [being] sent to
Ceylon, as promised by me during my sojourn. He is quite fit for the
work entrusted to his care, of course, with your kind help.

I hope you will introduce him to other Ceylon friends.

Yours ever in the Lord,

VIVEKANANDA



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/114_shivananda.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

CXIV

(Translated from Bengali)

To Swami Shivananda

ALMORA,

The 9th July 1897

DEAR SHIVANANDA, (This address was written in English.)

I haven't received any word of your arrival yet. I heard that
Alasinga has gone there with his relations by way of Jaipur. We stayed
at the Binsar Dak Bungalow [rest-house] for two or three
days, and then I left for Shyamdhura. At this, Miss [Henrietta] Müller
got infuriated and left for Almora. Terribly upset, Miss Müller accused
Shivananda of telling her first that I shall live with a friend as his
guest and of renting later such a big house for the season at 80 rupees
without consulting her. Very cross with everybody, she has been
reproving one and all but has cooled down a little when I said I would
pay half of the rent. . . .

Shashi himself [Swami Ramakrishnananda] should handle the
entire amount of 100 rupees which the Raja of Ramnad is donating (every
month); he should send a detailed account of the monthly income and
expenditure to the Math — otherwise there won't be any check. Advise
him to spend as little as necessary on Thakur's1
worship, for the money is [primarily] "for propagation of Truth". (The
phrase “for propagation of Truth” was written in English.)

In case Gupta [Swami Sadananda] has lost his mental balance,
ask him to come to Almora — but only when the boy selected for Shashi
reaches there. I received a letter from R. A. [Rajam Aiyer?]. The money
he sent has reached the Math. I have received two volumes of Ramanuja's
commentary. Advise him to send me the third. Ask G. G. [Narasimhachari]
to send me similar commentaries by Madhva and others, if he can.

A public meeting will have to be organized at Madras to
present an address of welcome to the Raja [Ajit Singh] of Khetri and to
Pratap Singh of Jodhpur for their boldness in visiting England as well
as for representing their principalities in India in the Jubilee
celebration. This has to be done on their return to India, but for that
you have to endeavour from now on. Please go to Colombo and arrange a
similar public meeting there.

Give my love to Kidi [Singaravelu Mudaliar] and Doctor
[Nanjunda Rao]; ask Kidi why he hasn't written to me. What is wrong
with him? Has he lost his devotion? Bear this in mind that you should
not assume a teacher's place in the beginning. Do all your work with
humility; otherwise everything will crumble to pieces. Please see that
there is no opposition, criticism
or obstacles to Shashi's work in Madras, for everybody should obey
him — whoever may be in charge of a particular centre. If Shashi goes
to Ceylon, he will have to obey your authority, etc. Make sure that
every centre sends a weekly report to the Math. I have not seen a
single one from Shashi yet. "O Rama! How hard it is to turn a donkey
into a horse, even by beating!"

Above all "obedience" and "esprit de corps".2
The work cannot succeed unless there is perfect obedience to the
authority of the Order and sacrifice of individual views for the sake
of the Order. Trinair gunatvam âpannair badhyante
mattadantinah — "Blades of grass woven into a rope can
restrain even mad elephants".

With love to Sashi and Gupta,3

VIVEKANANDA

^Thakur
is a Bengali word, which means "lord" or "master" and, in this case,
refers to Shri Ramakrishna.

^Swami
Vivekananda wrote this sentence in English. The French Phrase esprit de
corps means "the spirit of loyalty".

^This
closing was also written in English.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/115_christina.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

«
Chronology

»

« Addressee
 »

CXV

To Sister Christine

KHETRI,

13th December 1897.

MY DEAR CHRISTINA,

How funny all these dreams and evil prognostications of yours!
You don't want to send me evil influences by thinking that way of me! I
will be only too glad to lose 50 lbs. of my weight. A little rest puffs
me up, and I am the same bloated monk as ever.

I am all right except [for] a bad cold the last few days,
owing to exposure and travel in the desert. I thank you for the letter
though. I am pleased with it enormously, as it shows the mind.

Give Mrs. Funkey [Funke], Baby [Stella Campbell], and all the
rest my love, and, as you know, yourself —

Yours ever in the Lord,

VIVEKANANDA.

PS — I will write a better note when this cold has left.

V.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/116_sister_christine.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

CXVI

To Sister Christine

JODHPUR, RAJPUTANA,

4th January 1898.

Love and greetings etc. to thee, dear Christina, and a happy
New Year. May it find you younger in heart, stronger in body, and purer
in spirit.

I am still travelling in season and out of season. Lecturing
some, working a good deal.

Have you seen Mr. [Edward T.] Sturdy of England, who, I learn,
has been to Detroit? Did you like him?

I am quite well and strong. Hope to meet you this blessed year
again in America.

I am going to Calcutta in a few days, where I intend to be the
rest of this cold weather. Next summer, I start for England or America
most probably.

Yours ever in the Lord,

VIVEKANANDA.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/117_miss_noble.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
»

«
Addressee
 »

CXVII

To Sister Nivedita

CALCUTTA

30th January 1898

MY DEAR MISS NOBLE,

This is to introduce Prof. M. Gupta,1 who has been
already introduced to you on board the boat that brought you over to
shore.

He has very kindly consented to devote an hour or more every
day to teach you Bengali. I need not state that he is a genuine, good
and great soul.

Ever yours in the Lord,

VIVEKANANDA

P.S. I am afraid you felt badly today.

V.

^Mahendra
Nath Gupta, the writer of The Gospel of Sri Ramakrishna.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/118_christina.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

CXVIII

To Sister Christine

THE MATH, BELOOR, HOWRAH DIST.,

BENGAL, INDIA,

11th March 1898.

MY DEAR CHRISTINA,

I simply wonder what has become of you. It is an age [that] I
did not hear from you, and I expected so much after Sturdy's visit to
Detroit. How did you like the man? What about Baby and the Devendorfs?
How is Mrs. Funkey [Funke]? What are you going to do this summer? Take
rest, dear Christina; I am sure you require it badly.

Mrs. Bull of Boston and Miss MacLeod of New York are now in
India. We have changed our Math from the old, nasty house to a house on
the banks of the Ganges. This is much more healthy and beautiful. We
have also got a good piece of land very near on the same side where
Mrs. Bull and Miss MacLeod are putting up now. It is wonderful how they
accommodate themselves to our Indian life of privation and hardship!
My, these Yanks can do anything! After the luxuries of Boston and New
York, to be quite content and happy in this wretched little house!! We
intend to travel a bit together in Kashmir, and then
I come to America with them and am sure to get a hearty welcome from my
friends. What do you think? Is it welcome news to you? Of course, I
cannot undergo the same amount of work as before; that, dear Christina,
I am sorry, I will no more be able to do. I will do a little work and
[take] a good deal of rest. No more getting crowds and making noise,
but quiet, silent, personal work will be all I intend to do.

This time I will quietly come and quietly go away, seeing only
my old friends, and no noise.

Write soon, as I am so anxious.

Ever yours in the Lord,

VIVEKANANDA.

"There are two sorts of persons — one sort has the heart of
water, the other of stone. The one easily takes an impression, and as
easily throws it off; the other seldom takes an impression, but once it
takes, it is there for ever. Nay, the more they struggle to cast it
off, the more it cuts deep into the stone soul." — R. K. [Ramakrishna]
Paramahamsa



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/119_margaret.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

CXIX

To Sister Nivedita

MATH, BELUR.

HOWRAH, BENGAL.

16th March 1898.

MY DEAR MARGARET,

It is needless to let you know, you have fulfilled all my
expectations in your last lecture.

It appears to me that the platform is the great field where
you will be of great help to me, apart from your educational plans. I
am glad to learn that Miss [Henrietta] Müller is going to have a place
on the river. Are you also going to Darjeeling? So you will all the
better work after a trip up there! Next season I am planning a series
of lectures for you all over India.

Ever yours with all love and blessings,

[Stamp with Swamiji's portrait]

THE CALCUTTA BOY.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/120_dhira_mata.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

CXX

To Mrs. Ole Bull

DARJEELING

the 4th April '98

MY DEAR DHIRA MATA —

I am afraid you are getting roasted down there in the heat of
Calcutta. Here it is nice and cool and rather chill when it rains,
which it does almost every day. Yesterday the view of the snows was
simply superb, and it is the most picturesque city in the world; there
is such a mass of colour everywhere, especially in the dress of the
Lepchas and Bhutias and the Paharees. Had it not been for the awful,
corrugated iron roofs everywhere, it would have been twenty times more
picturesque.

My health was not bad in Calcutta; here it is the same — only,
the sugar has entirely disappeared, the specific gravity being only 13.
I slept very well last night too; but the morning ride up, or climb, of
a few miles is proving too much for my adipose tissues. The flannel
clothes only made me worse, so I have given them up and have gone to my
summer dress and am all right.

I have sent you Sturdy's letter already — poor fellow — I do
not know what to do for him. He is really "living in a desert of his
own making" — you see, one thing is not good for every one. Marriage
has indeed proved a hell for Sturdy. And he can not come, although "he
is skirting the coast of India". Lord help the poor boy. May He cut all
his bonds and make him free soon. Aye, it is good that he is feeling
the bondage — and not "hugging and kissing its spokes of agony".

I gave a little lecture to the Hindus here yesterday, and I
told them all their defects purposely and with their permission. I hope
it will make them howl.

Miss Müller has taken a bungalow here and she is coming on
Wednesday. I do not know whether Miss Noble is coming with her. She
[Miss Noble] had better be your guest in Kashmir as according to our
plan.

Have you got that place yet or changed [places]? I am going to
Kashmir anyway, as I have promised.

I will be here only a few days and then I come to Calcutta, to
be there only a week — and [then] I start for the N.W. Of course this
is not the time to see anything in the N.W.P.; (North-West Provinces,
now Uttar Pradesh.) everything is burning there. Yet that heat is much
healthier than that of Bengal.

Ever yours in the Lord,

VIVEKANANDA



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/121_jagmohan.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology

»

«
Addressee

CXXI

To Munshi Jagmohanlal

BALLEN VILLE

DARJEELING

15 April 1898

MY DEAR JAGMOHAN,1

If you can find out all the letters that I addressed to H.H.
on my way to — and stay in — Japan, Europe and America, please do send
them carefully packed, under registered cover, to my address in the
Math, as early as possible.

With blessing to you,

I remain,

Yours truly,

VIVEKANANDA 

^The
Dewan and private secretary of Maharaja Ajit Singh of Khetri.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/122_miss_macleod.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

«
Chronology
 »

«
Addressee

»

CXXII

To Miss Josephine MacLeod

DARJEELING

19th April '98

MY DEAR MISS MACLEOD,

Miss Müller is very glad to learn that you intend inviting
Miss Noble to join our party to Kashmir.

It has her hearty approval. On her way back, Miss Müller will
start something for her in Calcutta. She need not come to Darjeeling at
all.

Hope you are enjoying the baking quite a bit. I start this
week most probably.

Ever yours in the Lord,

VIVEKANANDA



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/123_sir.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

CXXIII

To the Officer in Charge of
Telegrams, Srinagar

April 19, 1898.

SIR,

Please allow Miss M'cLeod [MacLeod] or her agent to receive
any telegrams that you have received for me and receipt the same.

Yours truly,

VIVEKANANDA



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/124_miss_macleod_mrs_bull.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

«
Chronology
»

«
Miss Josephine MacLeod
»

« Mrs. Ole Bull
»

CXXIV

To Miss Josephine MacLeod or
Mrs. Ole Bull

SESHNAG

CHANDANBARI, KASHMIR

[EN ROUTE FROM SRINAGAR TO AMARNATH]

[End of July 1898]

I send back the old Dandi (A simple palanquin.) as it is
difficult to carry it through. I have got another like Margaret's.
Please send it back to the Tahsildar of Vernag, Khand Chand, Esq., whom
you already know. We are all right. Margot has discovered some new
flowers and is happy. There is not much ice so the road is good.

Yours affectionately,

VIVEKANANDA

P.S. Keep this Dandi till I come and pay the coolies (2) 4
Rs., 2 annas each.

Coolie — Tara

[Accounts List]

[Illegible word] 
 20 

Dandi 
26 

Coolies 16 
2 hrs. 
 =8 Rs.
—as. 

Coolies 4 
 2½ hrs. at 4 as. per hr.
=2
— 8

Dandi 26 
3½ hrs. at 6 as. per hr. 
34 
— 2 

4 extra
 1 hr. at 4 as. per hr.
=1 
— 0

2 ponies 
 2½ hrs. at 12 as. per hr.
=3 
— 12

1 pony 
1 hr. at 12 as. per hr.
=0
— 12

50
— 2  

2 Dandis
3½ hrs.
[Illegible words]
 

52
— 0

[Illegible words]
8
— [0]

60
— [0]

Bed chairs
4

Luggage
25

Dandi
26

55

55 all inclusive

Two horses——
1st stage——12miles

Batacooti——

Phahalgaon [Pahalgam]—
next stage



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/125_mr_j_j_goodwins_mother.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

CXXV

To Mr. J. J. Goodwin's mother

[On receiving news of the untimely death of Josiah J.
Goodwin, Swami Vivekananda sent the following paragraph along with the
poem "Requiescat in Pace" (This poem has been previously published in Complete
Works , IV.)
to the newspapers as well as to Goodwin's mother.]

ALMORA

June 1898

With infinite sorrow I learn the sad news of Mr. Goodwin's
departure from this life, the more so as it was terribly sudden and
therefore prevented all possibilities of my being at his side at the
time of death. The debt of gratitude I owe him can never be repaid, and
those who think they have been helped by any thought of mine ought to
know that almost every word of it was published through the untiring
and most unselfish exertions of
Mr. Goodwin. In him I have lost a friend true as steel, a disciple of
never — failing devotion, a worker who knew not what tiring was, and
the world is less rich by one of those few who are born, as it were, to
live only for others.

[UNSIGNED]



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/126_your_highness.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

«
Chronology

»

«
Addressee

»

CXXVI

To Maharaja Ajit Singh, the
Raja of Khetri

SRINAGAR

10 August 1898

YOUR HIGHNESS—

I have long not heard any news of you. How are things going on
with you both bodily and mentally?

I have been to see Shri Amarnathji.1
It was a very enjoyable trip and the Darshana2
was glorious.

I will be here about a month more, then I return to the
plains. Kindly ask Jagmohan to write to the Dewan Saheb of Kishangarh
to get for me the copies of Nimbârka Bhâshya which he promised.

With all love,

Yours,

VIVEKANANDA

^A
cave in the Kashmir Himalayas, where an ice Lingam of Shiva is
worshipped.

^Paying
respects to a holy place or person by a ceremonial visit; also the
blessings or purification felt in the presence of holiness.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/127_christina.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

CXXVII

To Sister Christine

THE MATH, BELOOR, HOWRAH DIST.,

25th October, 1898.

MY DEAR CHRISTINA,

How are you? I am very anxious about your health. I have long
not had any letter from you.

My health again failed badly. I had, therefore, to leave
Kashmir in haste and come to Calcutta. The doctors say I ought not go
tramping again this winter. That is such a disappointment, you know.
However, I am coming to the U. S. this summer. Mrs. Bull and Miss
MacLeod enjoyed this year's trip to Kashmir immensely, and now they are
having a glimpse of the old monuments and buildings of Delhi, Agra,
Jeypore [Jaipur], etc.

Do write a nice, long letter if you have time, and do not work
yourself to death. Duty is duty, no doubt; but we have our duties, not
only to our mother etc., but to others also. Sometimes one duty asks
for physical sacrifice, whilst the other insists on great care for our
health. Of course, we follow the stronger motive, and [I] do not know
which will prove stronger in your case. Anyhow, take great care of your
body, now that your sisters have come to your help.

How do you manage the family? — the expenses etc? Write me all
you like to write. Give me a long chat, will you? Do!

I am getting better every day — and then the long months
before I can start for the U.S. Never mind, "Mother" knows what is best
for us. She will show the way. I am now in Bhakti. As I am growing old,
Bhakti is taking the place of Jnâna. Did you get the new Awakened
India? How do you like it?

Ever yours in the Lord,

VIVEKANANDA



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/128_your_highness.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

CXXVIII

Maharaja Ajit Singh, the Raja
of Khetri

MATH BELUR

22 November 1898

YOUR HIGHNESS —

Many thanks for your kind note and the Nimbarka Bhashya —
reached through Jaga Mohan Lalji.

I approach your Highness today on a most important business of
mine, knowing well that I have not the least shame in opening my mind
to you, and that I consider you as my only friend
in this life. If the following appeals to you, good; if not, pardon my
foolishness as a friend should.

As you know already, I have been ailing since my return. In
Calcutta your Highness assured me of your friendship and help for me
personally and [advised me] not to be worried about this incurable
malady. This disease has been caused by nervous excitement; and no
amount of change can do me good, unless the worry and anxiety and
excitement are taken off me.

After trying these two years a different climate, I am getting
worse every day and now almost at death's door. I appeal to your
Highness's work, generosity and friendship. I have one great sin
rankling always in my breast, and that is [in order] to do a service to
the world, I have sadly neglected my mother. Again, since my second
brother has gone away, she has become awfully worn-out with grief. Now
my last desire is to make Sevâ [give service] and serve my mother, for
some years at least. I want to live with my mother and get my younger
brother married to prevent extinction of the family. This will
certainly smoothen my last days as well as those of my mother. She
lives now in a hovel. I want to build a little, decent home for her and
make some provision for the youngest, as there is very little hope of
his being a good earning man. Is it too much for a royal descendent of
Ramchandra to do for one he loves and calls his friend? I do not know
whom else to appeal to. The money I got from Europe was for the "work",
and every penny almost has been given over to that work. Nor can I beg
of others for help for my own self. About my own family affairs — I
have exposed myself to your Highness, and none else shall know of it. I
am tired, heartsick and dying. Do, I pray, this last great work of
kindness to me, befitting your great and generous nature and [as] a
crest to the numerous kindnesses you have shown me. And as your
Highness will make my last days smooth and easy, may He whom I have
tried to serve all my life ever shower His choicest blessings on you
and yours.

Ever yours in the Lord,

VIVEKANANDA

P.S. This is strictly private. Will you please drop a wire to
me whether you will do it or not?

Ever yours,

VIVEKANANDA



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/129_your_highness.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

CXXIX

To Maharaja Ajit Singh, the
Raja of Khetri

MATH BELOOR

HOWRAH DISTRICT

1 December 1898

YOUR HIGHNESS —

Your telegram has pleased me beyond description, and it is
worthy of your noble self. I herewith give you the details of what I
want.

The lowest possible estimate of building a little home in
Calcutta is at least ten thousand rupees. With that it is barely
possible to buy or build a house in some out-of-the-way quarter of the
town — a little house fit for four or five persons to live in.

As for the expenses of living, the 100 Rs. a month your
generosity is supplying my mother is enough for her. If another 100 Rs.
a month be added to it for my lifetime for my expenses — which
unfortunately this illness has increased, and which, I hope, will not
be for long a source of trouble to you, as I expect only to live a few
years at best — I will be perfectly happy. One thing more will I beg of
you — if possible, the 100 Rs. a month for my mother be made permanent,
so that even after my death it may regularly reach her. Or even if your
Highness ever gets reasons to stop your love and kindness for me, my
poor old mother may be provided [for], remembering the love you once
had for a poor Sâdhu.

This is all. Do this little work amongst the many other noble
deeds you have done, knowing well whatever else can be proved or not,
the power of Karma is self-evident to all. The blessings of this good
Karma shall always follow you and yours. As for me, what shall I say —
whatever I am in the world has been almost all through your help. You
made it possible for me to get rid of a terrible anxiety and face the
world and do some work. It may be that you are destined by the Lord to
be the instrument again of helping yet grander work, by taking this
load off my mind once more.

But whether you do this or not, "once loved is always loved".
Let all my love and blessings and prayers follow you and yours, day and
night, for what I owe you already; and may
the Mother, whose play is this universe and in whose hands we are mere
instruments, always protect you from all evil.

Ever yours in the Lord,

VIVEKANANDA



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/130_margot.htm


 Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9 /
Letters –
Fifth Series /

← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

CXXX

To Sister Nivedita

3 p.m. Sunday.

[Early 1899]

MY DEAR MARGOT,

I am sorry I cannot come to see Dr. Mahoney1
— I am ill. I have not yet broken my fast.

Have you stopped teaching my little cousin?

Yours with love,

VIVEKANANDA

^Dr.
Mahoney was the District Medical Officer who used to inspect the
sanitary works conducted in Calcutta during the plague relief of early
1899, by the Ramakrishna Mission under the leadership of Sister
Nivedita.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/131_nivedita.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

CXXXI

To Sister Nivedita

[Early 1899?]

MY DEAR NIVEDITA,

The address of my cousin is 127 Manicktala Street. The
husband's name is Durga Prasanna Bose. The wife's name is most probably
not known to the people you will meet in the male department. Therefore
it is the custom to ask for the wife of so-and-so.

Manicktala Street is that which runs east and west, south of
the tank garden.

Yours with love,

VIVEKANANDA



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/132_christina.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

CXXXII

To Sister Christine

THE MATH, BELUR,

DIST. HOWRAH, BENGAL, INDIA,

26th January 1899.

MY DEAR CHRISTINA,

Excuse this long delay in replying to your very beautiful
note. The fact is, I was once more in the vale of death. The old
diabetes has now disappeared. In its place has come what some doctors
call asthma, others dyspepsia, owing to nervous prostration. However,
it is a most worrying disease, giving one the sensation of suffocation
— sometimes for days. I am best only in Calcutta; so I am here for rest
and quiet and low diet. If I get well by March, I am going to start for
Europe. Mrs. Bull and others are gone; sorry I could not accompany them
owing to this disease.

I have carefully weighed your plans for coming over. I will be
ever so glad to see you, you know it well; but, my dear, the Indian
summer will not suit you, and if you start now it will be midsummer
when you reach India. Then, you must not hope of making any living
here. It is impossible for me to make a living most times in my own
country. Then all the surroundings are so, so wretched and different
from what you see around you, e.g. you will find me going about in
loin-cloth — will that shock you? Three-fourths of the population only
wearing a strip of white cloth about their loins — can you bear that?

I must stop here; I am so weak. If I do not get well by March,
I will write you to come, for I wish it ever so much to see you once
before I pass away.

Do not be the least anxious, dear. Things must be as "Mother"
wishes. Ours is only to obey and work.

Ever yours in the Lord,

VIVEKANANDA.

PS. Mrs. Bull will reach Cambridge, Mass., soon. You may write
to her there on the particulars.

Yours,

V.

PPS. I have again lost your address. Please give the correct
one in your next.

V.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/133_raja.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

CXXXIII

To Swami Brahmananda

THE MATH, BELUR

Friday [March
(?) 1899]

MY DEAR RAJA,

Please pay 100 Rs. to Sister Nivedita immediately for plague
work and credit it to a separate plague account.

Yours affectionately,

VIVEKANANDA



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/134_s.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

Addressee
 »

CXXXIV

To Swami Swarupananda, editor of
Prabuddha Bharata, Mayavati

[March 1899]

MY DEAR S[WARUPANANDA],

I have no objection whether Mrs. Sevier's name goes on top or
mine or anybody else's; the prospectus ought to go in the name of the
Seviers, mustering my name also if necessary. I send you a few
lines for your
consideration in the prospectus. The rest are all right.

I will soon send the draft deed.

V.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/135_margot.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

CXXXV

To Sister Nivedita

THE MATH, BELUR,

March 2nd, 1899

MY DEAR MARGOT,

Will you look into your trunks for a Sanskrit book of mine,
which was, you know, in your keeping in Kashmir. I do not find it in
our library here.

I have been thinking of your friend Miss [Sarala] Ghosal's
coming to see the Math on Sunday. The difficulty is here. The ebb tide
will be on till 5 p.m. In that case our big boat can go down easily to
bring the party up; and going back, if the party starts long before 5
p.m., say 4 p.m., will be all right. To come up will take at least two
hours from Baghbazar. If the party starts from Baghbazar — say at 12
a.m. — and reaches the Math at 2 p.m. for lunch and then starts back by
4 p.m., it will be nice.

If you cannot start as early as that, I will advise you to
send the carriage to wait at Baranagore on the other side so that our
boat can ferry the party over any time they like. The boat journey in
that case will only be on coming.

With all love and blessings,

VIVEKANANDA



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/136_sir.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology

»

CXXXVI

To Ishwar Chandra Ghosh

MATH, BELUR

HOWRAH DIST.

6th March '99

MY DEAR SIR,

Many thanks for your kind invitation. I am so sorry that so
many days' delay should occur in reply to your note.

I was very ill at the time, and the gentleman on whom the duty
fell of replying could not do it, it seems. I got notice of it just now.

I am not yet sufficiently recovered to take advantage of your
kindness. This winter I had made it a point of visiting your part of
the country. But my Karma will have otherwise. I will have to wait to
give myself the pleasure of visiting the seat of civilisation of
ancient Bengal.

With my thanks again for all your kindness, I remain,

Yours in the Lord,

VIVEKANANDA



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/137_margot.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

CXXXVII

To Sister Nivedita

THE MATH, BELUR,

April 25th, 1899

MY DEAR MARGOT,

I could not come today. I am so, so sorry. The body would not
allow — neither can I come to the Boses'.1
I have written to them.

I have an engagement tomorrow.

Possibly I may see you in the evening.

With all love and blessings,

VIVEKANANDA

^The
famous botanist Dr. J. C. Bose and his wife, Abala.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/138_christina.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

CXXXVIII

To Sister Christine

THE MATH, BELUR,

DIST. HOWRAH, BENGAL, INDIA,

10th May 1899.

MY DEAR CHRISTINA,

I am getting better again. In my mind the whole of my
complaint is bad assimilation of food and nervous exhaustion. The
first, I am taking care of; the second will completely pass off when I
meet you again. The great joy of meeting old, old friends, you know!
Cheer up! There is no cause for anxiety. Do
not believe a single desponding line I write now, because I am at times
not myself. I get so nervous.

I start this summer for Europe anyway, as you say in America.
With all love and blessings,

Yours ever in the Lord,

VIVEKANANDA.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/139_miss_macleod.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

CXXXIX

To Miss Josephine MacLeod

[When Swami Vivekananda sailed
from Calcutta, he
dispatched the following cablegram.]

[CALCUTTA,

June 21, 1899]

STARTED. WIRE STURDY.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/140_christina.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

CXL

To Sister Christine

SUEZ,

14th July 1899.

MY DEAR CHRISTINA,

You see this time I am really out, and hope to reach London in
two weeks. I am sure to come to America this year and earnestly hope
will have the opportunity of seeing you. I am so materialistic yet, you
know! Want to see my friends in the gross body.

I had a beautiful letter from Baby [Stella Campbell] before I
left. I am soon going to pen a reply to your care, as directed. I could
not write her earlier.

I was so, so bad in health in India. My heart went wrong all
the way — what with mountain climbing, bathing in glacier water and
nervous prostration! I used to get terrible fits [of asthma] — the last
lasting about seven days and nights. All the time I was suffocating and
had to stand up.

This trip has almost made a new man of me. I feel much better
and, if this continues, hope to be quite strong before I reach America.
How are you? What are you doing? Write everything about yourself, c/o
E. T. Sturdy Esq., 25 Holland Villas Road, London, W.

With everlasting love and blessings,

Ever yours in the Lord,

VIVEKANANDA.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/141_christina.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

CXLI

To Sister Christine

MARSEILLES,

23rd July 1899.

MY DEAR CHRISTINA,

Your very, very welcome wire just came. By next Sunday1
we arrive in London, Albert Dock.2
We are a party of four: myself, another Sannyasin,3
a Calcutta boy4
going to study in America, and Miss [Margaret] Noble. Miss Noble is a
young lady from Wimbledon, near London, who has been working in India
on the education of girls.

Our stay in England will not be long, I am afraid, as this is
neither the season nor am I in fit condition to work much. Anyhow, we
will be in London a few weeks — at least myself — then go to the U.S.
We will talk over all this and infinite things besides when we meet. I
do not think even English summer days are long enough for all the
chatter I will assail you with.

We go to Wimbledon for a day or two, and then I come back to
London and find lodgings for myself and make plans.

Come to the Dock if that is possible and discreet. Yes, it is
discreet, as there is a lady in the party and others will come to meet
her. Only, Christina, don't if you feel the least tired or unwell. I
hope you are enjoying London immensely.

The Orientals do not like any effusion of feeling. They are
trained to hide all expression.

Is Mrs. Funkey [Mary Caroline Funke] with you? If so, give her
my best love.

I am much, much better just now. I am really quite another man
this time. I was nearly dead in Calcutta when I started, but this
voyage has improved me immensely.

Hoping soon to see you,

Ever yours in the Lord,

VIVEKANANDA.

^Perhaps
at Marseilles Swami Vivekananda received information that their ship,
the S.S. Golconda, would reach London on Sunday (July 30, 1899);
however, he later learned that it would reach there on Monday (July 31,
1899). In order to inform Christina of the change, the Swami sent her a
telegram from Camberwell, B.O. on July 30: "Golconda due docks 6 a.m.
Monday".

^The
S.S. Golconda actually arrived at the Tilbury Dock in London, instead
of the Albert Dock, on Monday morning.

^Swami
Vivekananda's brother-disciple Swami Turiyananda.

^Satish
Chandra Chakravarty, Swami Saradananda's brother.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/142_sister_christine.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

CXLII

To Sister Christine

TELEGRAM

TO:

CHRISTINA GRINNSTIDEL [GREENSTIDEL]

23 CROWHURST RD., ANGELL RD.

BRIATON, LDN.

30 July 1899

GOLCONDA DUE DOCKS 6 AM MONDAY. (Vide Swami
Vivekananda's letter dated July
23, 1899.)



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/143_mother.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

CXLIII

To Mrs. Ole Bull

THE LYMES, WOODSIDE

WIMBLEDON, ENGLAND

6 August 1899

MY DEAR MOTHER,

Your letter directed to Sturdy at hand. I am very thankful for
your kind words. As for me, I don't know what I am to do next or
anything to do at all. On board the steamer I was all right, but since
landing [I am] feeling quite bad again. As to mental worry, there has
been enough of late. The aunt whom
you saw had a deep-laid plan to cheat me, and she and her people
contrived to sell me a house for 6,000 Rs., or £400, and I bought [it]
for my mother in good faith. Then they would not give me possession,
hoping that I would not go to court for the shame of taking forcible
possession as a Sannyasin.

I do not think I have spent even one rupee from what
you and others gave me for the work. Cap. Sevier gave me
8,000 Rs. with the express desire of helping my mother. This money, it
seems, has [also] gone to the dogs. Beyond this, nothing has been spent
on my family or even on my own personal expenses —
my food etc. being paid for by the Khetri Raja, and more than half of
that went to the Math every month. Only, if Brahmananda spends some in
the lawsuit [against the aunt], as I must not be robbed that way — if
he does, I will make it good anyway, if I live to do it.

The money which I got in Europe and America by lecturing
alone, I spent just as I like; but every cent I got for the work has
been accounted for and is in the Math, and the whole thing ought to be
clear as daylight if Brahmananda never cheated me. I don't believe he
will ever cheat me. I got a letter at Aden from Saradananda that they
were preparing an account. I have not received any yet.

I have no plans yet, nor care to make any. Neither do I wish
to work. Let the Mother find other workers. I have my burden enough
already.

Ever your devoted son,

VIVEKANANDA



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/144_isabel.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

«
Chronology
 »

« Addressee

CXLIV

To Miss Isabelle McKindley

RIDGELY MANOR

STONE RIDGE, N.Y.

31st August '99

MY DEAR ISABEL —

Many thanks for your kind note. I will be so, so glad to see
you. Miss M'cLeod [MacLeod] is going to write you to stop a day and a
night here on your way to the West.

My love to the holy family in Chicago, and hope surely to be
able to come West and have great fun.

So you are in Greenacre at last. Is this the first year you
have been there? How do you like the place? [You have] seen Miss
Farmer, of course. Kindly convey her my kindest regards and to all the
rest of my friends there.

Ever yours affectionately,

VIVEKANANDA



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/145_christina.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

CXLV

To Sister Christine

RIDGELY MANOR,

20th September 1899.

DEAR CHRISTINA,

I am much better, thank you. Hitherto, excepting three days,
there has not been any wet weather to speak of here. Miss [Margaret]
Noble came yesterday, and we are having a jolly good time. I am very,
very sorry to say I am growing fat again. That is bad. I will eat less
and grow thin once more.

You are again at work — so do I find — only with a little
variation of the old occupation. Better rest than mere idling. Do you
like my new poem? (Vide Complete Works,
IV for the text of the poem
"Peace" enclosed in this letter.) Miss Noble thinks it is nice. But
that is her way with everything I do. So you also say. I will now send
my writings to missionary papers to get a fierce criticism.

With all love to you and Mrs. Funkey [Funke],

Ever yours affectionately,

VIVEKANANDA.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/146_mother_church.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

CXLVI

To Mrs. G. W. Hale

RIDGELY MANOR

5 October 1899

MY DEAR MOTHER CHURCH,

Many, many thanks for your kind words.

I am so glad you are working on as ever. I am glad because the
wave of optimism has not caught you yet. It is all very well to say
everything is right, but that is apt to degenerate into a sort of laissez-faire.
I believe with you that the world is evil — made more hideous with a
few dashes of good.

All our works have only this value, that they awaken some to
the reality of this horror — and [those] flee for refuge to some place
beyond, which is called God, or Christ, or Brahma, or Buddha, etc.
Names do not make much difference.

Again, we must always remember ours is only to work — we never
attain results. How can we? Good can never be done without doing evil.
We cannot breathe a breath without killing thousands of poor little
animals. National prosperity is another name for death and degradation
to millions of other races. So is individual prosperity the beggaring
of many. The world is evil — and will ever remain so. It is its nature,
and cannot be changed — "Which one of you by taking thought . . ." etc.
(Matthew 6.27.)

Such is truth. The wisdom is therefore in renunciation, that
is, to make the Lord our all in all. Be a true Christian, Mother — like
Christ, renounce everything and let the heart and soul and body belong
to Him and Him alone. All this nonsense which people have built round
Christ's name is not His teaching. He taught to renounce. He never says
the earth is an enjoyable place. And your time has come to get rid of
all vanities — even the love of children and husband — and think of the
Lord and Him alone.

Ever your Son,

VIVEKANANDA



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/147_mother.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

CXLVII

To Mrs. G. W. Hale

[RIDGELY MANOR], NEW YORK, N.Y.

23 October 1899

MY DEAR MOTHER,

I was taking a few days' complete rest and so am late in
replying to your very kind note. Accept my congratulations on the
anniversary of your marriage. I pray many, many such returns may come
to you.

I am sure my previous letter was coloured by the state of my
body, as indeed is the whole of existence to us. Yet, Mother, there is
more pain than pleasure in life. If not, why do I remember you and your
children almost every day of my life, and not many others? Happiness is
liked so much because it is so rare, is it not? Fifty percent of our
life is mere lethargy, ennui; of the rest, forty percent is pain, only
ten happiness — and this for the exceptionally fortunate. We are
oft-times mixing up this state of ennui with pleasure. It is rather a
negative state, whilst both pleasure and pain are nearer positive,
though not positive.

Pleasure and pain are both feeling, not willing.
They are only processes which convey to the mind excitements or motives
of action. The real positive action is the willing, or impulse to work,
of the mind — begun when the sensation has been taken in (pleasure and
pain); thus the real is neither pleasure nor pain. It has no connection
with either. Quite different from either. The barking of the dog
awakens his master to guard against a thief or receive his dearest
friend. It does not follow, therefore, that the dog and his master are
of the same nature or have any degree of kinship. The feelings of
pleasure or pain similarly awaken the soul to activity, without any
kinship at all.

The soul is beyond pain, beyond pleasure, sufficient in its
own nature. And no hell can punish it, nor any heaven can bless it. So
far philosophy.

I am coming soon to Chicago, and hope to say "Lord bless you"
to you and your children. All love as usual to my Christian relatives,
scientific or quacks.

VIVEKANANDA



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/148_christina.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
»

« Addressee
 »

CXLVIII

To Sister Christine

C/O F. H. LEGGETT, ESQ.,

RIDGELY MANOR,

STONE RIDGE, ULSTER CO., N.Y.

25th October 1899.

DEAR CHRISTINA,

What is the matter with you? Write me a line to tell me how
you are and what you are doing now.

I am tired of this place, and will come down to New York for a
few days soon. I start thence for Chicago and, if you like, will stop
at Detroit on my way to How-do-you-do. I am much better, indeed quite a
different man, though not completely cured — for that, time is
necessary.

Yours,

VIVEKANANDA.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/149_christina.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

CXLIX

To Sister Christine

RIDGELY MANOR,

30th October 1899.

MY DEAR CHRISTINA,

Did you not get my last letter? I am very anxious to know how
you are. Write a line to tell me you are in very good health.

I am afraid the previous one was misdirected, so I send this
c/o Mrs. Funkey [Funke].

Do write soon. I am thinking of Battle Creek food.1
Baby insists on that. Do you think it will do me any good? Write soon.

Ever yours in the Lord,

VIVEKANANDA.

PS — Where is this Battle Creek? Is it near Detroit? I am
seriously thinking of giving it a trial. I am not bad, but unfit for
any exertion, even for a walk. This sort of life is no good to live. I
[will] try Battle Creek, and if that fails, get out quick.

V.

Write me about Battle Creek.

V.

^Battle
Creek is a city in Central Michigan, United States, famous for its
Health Centre, which was known since 1876 as Battle Creek Sanitarium.
Under the direction of John Harvey Kellogg (1876 – 1943), the
Sanitarium experimented with health foods, which became the main
industry of the city.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/150_christina.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

CL

To Sister Christine

RIDGELY MANOR,

4th November 1899.

MY DEAR CHRISTINA,

The letter was all right in reaching. It was only my
nervousness. I am sure you will understand and excuse this. I eagerly
expect to see you in Cambridge. I am going to New York next week.
Thence I go for a few days to Washington and then to Cambridge. Do
come. And mind you, I must learn German. I am determined to be a French
and German scholar. French, I think, I can manage with the help of a
dictionary. If I can do that much German in a month, I will be so glad.

It naturally takes time for a letter to reach from here. We
have one delivery and one posting a day.

With all love,

Ever yours in the Lord,

VIVEKANANDA.

My eternal love and blessings to Mrs. Funkey [Funke].



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/151_christina.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

CLI

To Sister Christine

21 WEST 34TH STREET,

NEW YORK,

10th November 1899.

MY DEAR CHRISTINA,

I received your letter just now. I am now in New York. Dr.
[Egbert] Guernsey analysed my urine yesterday, and there was no sugar
or albumen in it. So my kidneys are all right, at least at
present. The heart is only nervous, requires calming! — some cheerful
company and good, loving friends and quiet. The only difficulty is the dyspepsia,
and that is the evil. For instance, I am all right in the morning and
can walk miles, but in the evening it is impossible to walk after a
meal — the gas — that depends entirely up on food, does it not? I ought
to try the Battle Creek food. If I come to Detroit, there will be quiet
and Battle Creek food for me.

But if you come to Cambridge with all the instructions of the
Battle Creek food, I will have it prepared there; or, between you and
me, we will cook it. I am a good hand at that. You don't know a thing
about cooking. Well, you may help in cleaning the plates etc. I always
get money when I need it badly. "Mother" always sees to that. So, no
danger on that head. I am not in the least danger of life, the Doctors
agree — only if this dyspepsia goes away. And that is "food", "food",
"food", and no worry. Oh, what a worry I have had! Say we go somewhere
else and make a little party and keep house ourselves. In Cambridge,
Mrs. Bull has a quiet separate place — her studio house. You can have
rooms there. I wish you to know Mrs. Bull. She is a saint, a real
saint, if ever there was one. Wait for my next letter. I will write
today again, or tomorrow after seeing Mrs. Bull.

Ever yours in the Lord,

VIVEKANANDA.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/152_christina.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

CLII

To Sister Christine

C/O DR. E. GUERNSEY,

180 WEST 59TH STREET,

NEW YORK,

12th November 1899.

CHRISTINA —

Mrs. Bull has gone to Boston without seeing me. I am with the
Guernseys. All today laid up with colds.

Oh, these nasty colds. The doctor here declares my case as
entirely one of nervous exhaustion. Even the dyspepsia is entirely
nervous.

I will be a few days yet here, and then I don't know where I
go. I have a great mind to try health food. As for you, write
unreservedly where you [would] like me to be. If you think it best for
me to come to Detroit, write or wire on receipt of this. I will come
immediately. Only difficulty is now the dyspepsia.

With love to Mrs. Funkey [Funke],

Ever yours with blessings,

VIVEKANANDA.

P.S. If Cambridge is best, say that immediately.

V.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/153_mrs_bull.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

CLIII

To Mrs. Ole Bull

180 W. 59,

C/O E. GUERNSEY, M.D.,

12 November 1899

DEAR MRS. BULL —

I am laid up with a bad cold. The clothes are not ready — they
will be next week. I don't know what my next step will be. Dr. Guernsey
is very kind. Several Doctors have examined me and none could detect
any organic disease.

Even the kidney complications for the present have disappeared.

Well, the whole thing is then dyspepsia. I want ever so much
to try Battle Creek food. There is a restaurant which cooks only Battle
Creek food. Do you think it should be best for me to try it just now?
If so, I go to Detroit. In that case, send me my terracotta, thick
cashmere coat.

Ever yours in the Lord,

VIVEKANANDA

Had three treatments already from Helmer.1
Going to take some next week. None can do anything for this "wind".
That is why dieting should be tried at any cost.

V.

^An
osteopath recommended by Miss Josephine MacLeod.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/154_christina.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

CLIV

To Sister Christine

21 WEST 34TH STREET,

NEW YORK,

21st November 1899.

MY DEAR CHRISTINA,

Circumstances have so fallen that I have to start for
California tomorrow. It is for my physical benefit too; as the doctor
says, I had better be off where the severe winter of the North cannot
reach.

Well, thus my plans are made and marred. Anyway — come over to
Cambridge when you feel like it. Mrs. Bull will only be too happy to do
anything for you she can.

I hope to stop in Detroit on my way back. The Lord's will — as
we say.

Ever yours in the Lord,

VIVEKANANDA.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/155_dhira_mata.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

CLV

To Mrs. Ole Bull

CHICAGO

30 November 1899

MY DEAR DHIRA MATA —

I am going to leave this place tonight. They have given me a
new trunk — a big one. The Maspero book1 is with me,
only the second volume. The first volume must be in Boston. Kindly send
it c/o Joe [Miss Josephine MacLeod].

They have been very kind. Madame [Emma] Calvé‚ came to see me
day before yesterday. She is a great woman.

I have nothing to write here except that Margo [Sister
Nivedita] is doing very well, except some people were complaining last
night that she frightened them with her assertion that Swami can not
make mistakes!!!

Hope things are going on with you very well. This is in haste.
I write in length from California.

Ever your son,

VIVEKANANDA

My love to Mrs. [Olea] Vaughn. (Mrs. Ole Bull’s daughter.)

^Histoire
Ancienne Orientale by Sir Gaston Maspero, a French Egyptologist and
archaeologist.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/156_mother.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

CLVI

To Mrs. G. W. Hale

THE CALIFORNIA LIMITED

SANTA FE ROUTE

1 December 1899

MY DEAR MOTHER,

Excuse this scrawl as the train is dancing.

I passed a good night and hope to have a good time all
through. With all love for the sisters and Mr. [Clarence] Woolley
(Husband of Mrs. Hale's daughter Harriet.) and Bud and Father Pope.

With love,

VIVEKANANDA



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/157_margot.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

CLVII

To Sister Nivedita

THE CALIFORNIA LIMITED

SANTA FE ROUTE

December 2nd, 1899

MY DEAR MARGOT,

Two nights are passed — today the third will come. If it
proves as pleasant and somnolent as the last two, I [shall] rejoice.

The scenery today I am passing through is much like the
neighborhood of Delhi, the beginning of a big desert, bleak hills,
scanty, thorny shrubs, very little water. The little streams are
frozen, but during the middle of the day it is hot. Must be [illegible]
I presume, in summer.

I send this to the care of Mrs. Adams, (Probably Mrs. Milward
Adams.) as I don't know your address. The Chicago work will not give
you much, I am sure, except in education in the methods here, which I
am sure will work out soon.

With all love and blessings,

VIVEKANANDA



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/158_mother.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

«
Chronology
 »

« Addresee

CLVIII

To Mrs. G. W. Hale

LOS ANGELES

6 December 1899

MY DEAR MOTHER,

A few lines to say my safe arrival and am going to resume my
usual work of lecturing here.

I am much better than I was in Chicago and hope soon to become
well again.

I cannot tell you how I enjoyed once more the little visit
with my American Mother and Sisters.

Harriet has scored a triumph really. I am charmed with Mr.
Woolley — only hope Mary will be equally fortunate. It gives me a new
lease of life to see people happy. May they all be happy.

Ever with love, your son,

VIVEKANANDA



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/159_christina.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology

»

« Addressee
 »

CLIX

To Sister Christine

921 WEST 21ST STREET,

LOS ANGELES,

9th December 1899.

MY DEAR CHRISTINA,

After all, it is good for me, and good for those I love, that
I should come here. Here at last in California! One of our poets says:
"Where is Benares, where is Kashmir, where Khorasan, where Gujarat! O
Tulsi! thus, man's past Karma drags him on". And I am here. After all
it is best, isn't it? Are you going to Boston? I am afraid you are not.
I have not unsettled any of your plans, have I? — unnecessary expenses?
Well, if any, I will make it up. Only the trouble is yours. I am
ashamed of my eccentricities. Well, how are you? What are you doing?
How are things going with you? Sleep if you can; it is better to sleep
than get awakened. I pray that all good may come to thee — all peace,
all strength to do and suffer. I have a great deal of strength to do,
but very little to suffer.

I am so selfish again, always thinking of my own sufferings
and paying no heed to others. Pray for me; send strong thoughts that I
may have strength to suffer. I know you will. Now, I mean to remain a
few weeks in this city. After that, "Mother" knows. I am physically
much better now than I have been for months. The weakness of the heart
is nearly gone. The dyspepsia is also much better, and [there is] very
little. I can walk miles now without feeling it in the heart. If this
continues, I expect to have a new lease on life. I am so, so sorry of
asking you to come to Boston and flying away. If you are there, I hope
you will enjoy the place and the meetings. If you have given it up —
well, did you take leave and not go to Boston? My! what a bungle! Well,
I ask a thousand pardons, if such is the case. Things must look
brighter anyway, sooner or later. What of these little, few days of
life!

How is Mrs. Funke? Loads of love for her. How long a leave
[do] you get at Christmas? When does it begin? If you feel inclined and
willing, write me a long note, will you? But don't tell my friends my
whereabouts. I want to be off from the world
for a time, if I can. Will you kindly send Mr. Freer's address to Mrs.
Bull? She needs it. I had a lecture here last night. The hall was not
crowded, as there was very little ad[vertisement], but a fairly good —
sized audience though. I hope they were pleased. If I feel better, I am
going to have classes in this city soon. I am on the business path this
time, you know. Want a few dollars quick, if I can.

Ever yours in the Lord,

VIVEKANANDA.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/160_brahmananda.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

CLX

To Swami Brahmananda

[Swami Vivekananda sent the
following cablegram to
his brother-monk.]

[Postmarked: December 13, 1899]

PERFECTLY CURED. BLESS ALL. VIVEKANANDA.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/161_christina.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

CLXI

To Sister Christine

921 WEST 21ST STREET,

LOS ANGELES,

27th December 1899.

DEAR CHRISTINA,

So you are awake and can't go to sleep any more. Good! Keep
awake, wide awake. It was good I came here. For, in the first place, I
am cured. What do you think of this — able to walk, and every day walk
three miles after a heavy dinner! Good! Isn't it?

I am making money fast — twenty-five dollars a day now. Soon I
will work more and get fifty dollars a day. In San Francisco I hope to
do still better — where I go in two or three weeks. Good again —
better, say I — as I am going to keep the money all to myself and not
squander it any more. And then I will buy a little place in the
Himalayas — a whole hill — about say, six thousand feet high with a
grand view of the eternal snows.
There must be springs and a tiny lake. Cedars — the Himalayan cedar
forests — and flowers, flowers everywhere. I will have a little
cottage; in the middle, my vegetable gardens, which I will work myself
— and — and — and — my books — and see the face of man only once in a
great while. And the world may go to ruin round about my ears, I would
not care. I will have done with all my work — secular or spiritual —
and retire. My! how restless I have been all my life! Born nomad. I
don't know; this is the present vision. The future is to come yet.
Curious —all my dreams about my own happiness are, as it were, bound to
come to nothing; but about others' well-being — they as a rule prove
true.

I am so glad you are happy and peaceful under Mrs. Bull's
hospitable roof. She is a great, great woman — one whom to see is a
pilgrimage.

No snow here — exactly like northern India in winter. Some
days, even warmer — cool in the morning and evening, in the middle of
the day, warm, in the sun, hot. The roses are about us, gardens
everywhere, and the beautiful palms. But I like the snow: crisp,
crackling under the feet, white, white, white — all round white!

I don't think I have anything with the kidneys or the heart.
The whole thing was about indigestion and it is now nearly cured. A
month more, and I will be strong like a lion and hardy like a mule. The
poor English are getting it hot from the Boers. Mourning in every home
in England and still the war goes on. Such is human folly. How long
will it take for man to become civilized! Will wars ever cease? Mother
knows! The New Year is sure to bring about a great change. Pray some
good may come to India. I send you all joy, all love, all success for
the New Year and many, many more to come.

So you did well, you think, by coming to Mrs. Bull. I am glad.
I wanted you to know Mrs. Bull thoroughly. Remain there as long as you
can. It will do you good, I am sure. Take heart and be of cheer, for
next year is sure to bring many joys and a hundred blessings.

Yours truly,

VIVEKANANDA.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/162_margo.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

«
Chronology

»

«
Addressee

»

CLXII

To Sister Nivedita

LOS ANGELES

[Early February 1900]

DEAR MARGO [MARGOT],

You have the Gopâla.1
Add the Sâvitri story2
to that. I send you four more herewith. They ought to make a nice
volume. Work on them a bit, will you. If you get a publisher in
Chicago, all right; if not, Mr. Leggett promised to publish them
sometime ago.

Yours,

VIVEKANANDA

P.S. The preliminary parts should be struck off.

^Gopala
is the name of Baby Krishna.

^The
Indian queen Savitri, whose life is recorded in the Mahâbhârata,
typifies the ideal of conjugal love.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/163_joe.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

CLXIII

To Miss Josephine MacLeod

1231 PINE STREET

SAN FRANCISCO.

March 2nd 1900

DEAR JOE —

Your note enclosing two from France and three from India just
received. I have had general good news and am happy.

Financially, I have got $300 in Los Angeles. About Mrs. Bowler,1
she has about a hundred odd dollars in cash. Mrs. Hendrick and she have
not paid up as yet. That money — $300 in all — is with her. She will
send it to me whenever I write.

Rev. Benjamin Fay Mills,2
a very popular Unitarian preacher in Oakland, invited me from here and
paid the fare to San Francisco.
I have spoken twice in Oakland to 1500 people each time. Last time I
got from collection $30. I am going to have classes at 50 cents
admission each.

San Francisco had one lecture the other night [February 23] at
50¢ each. It paid its expenses. This Monday [Sunday?] I am going to
speak free — after that a class.

I went to see Mrs. Hurst [Hearst].3
She was not at home. I left a card — so with Prof. Le Conte.4

Mary [Hale] writes that you wrote her of my coming any day to
the East. I don't know. Here I have a large following — ready — made by
my books. Will get some money, not much. St. Francis [Francis Leggett]
may put the money in the bank for me — but can that be done without my
signature? And I am here? It is good if it can be done. Did you see any
possibility of my books being sold for good to any publisher?

The French invitation5
is all right. But it seems impossible to write any decent paper on the
subject we chose. Because if I have to lecture and make money, very
little time will be left for anything else. Again, I can not find any
books (Sanskrit) here. So let me try to make a little money if I can
and go to France all the same, but send them no paper. No scholarly
work can be done in this haphazard and hurried fashion. It means time
and study.

Shall I write to Mr. [Gerald] Nobel an acknowledgement and
thanks? Write to me fully on these subjects if you can before you leave
[for Europe]. My health is going on the same way. The gas is there more
or less and this city is all climbing up[hill] — that tires me much.

With all love,

Yours affectionately,

VIVEKANANDA

P.S. Did anybody else respond to Mrs. Leggett's call?

^Mrs.
Emeline F. Bowler, president of the Pasadena Shakespeare Club and a
friend of Swami Vivekananda in southern California.

^Minister
of the First Unitarian Church in Oakland, where Swami Vivekananda spoke
several times.

^Mrs.
Phoebe Apperson Hearst, mother of the newspaper tycoon William Randolph
Hearst.

^Probably
Joseph Le Conte, a well-known geologist, then in the seventies, and a
professor at the University of California at Berkeley.

^An
invitation to speak in September at the Congress of the History of
Religions at the Paris Exposition.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/164_christina.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

CLXIV

To Sister Christine

1719 TURK STREET,

SAN FRANCISCO, CALIFORNIA,

12th March 1900.

DEAR CHRISTINA,

Just now received a letter from you through New York. I, the
other day, wrote you one c/o Mrs. Funke, as I was not sure which of
your addresses in my notebook was the correct one! Mental telepathy or
foolishness — what is it?

By this time you must have got mine. There is nothing
particular about me, except things are going on at the same rate — very
little money — making, a good deal of work, and moving about. I leave
here in April and come to Chicago for a few days, then to Detroit and
then, through New York, go to England. I hope you are all right. I am
very calm and peaceful mentally, and hope to remain so for the rest of
my life.

How are Mrs. Funkey [Funke] and the rest of our friends?

With all love,

VIVEKANANDA.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/165_sister_christine.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

CLXV

To Sister Christine

1719 TURK STREET,

SAN FRANCISCO,

[April 9, 1900]

Hello! What's the matter with you — gone to sleep? Have not
had any news of you for a long time.

I am getting better every day, and one of these days — say in
a few weeks — I am coming straight to say how-d'you-do. Well, I will be
here two weeks more, then to a place called Stockton — thence to the
East. I may stop a few days in Chicago. I may not.

Beginning of May, I come [for] sure to Detroit. I will, of
course, write to you. How is life going on with you — grinding,
as usual? Any improvements? Write a chatty letter if you feel like. I
am dying to get news.

Ever yours in the Truth,

VIVEKANANDA.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/166_margot.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

CLXVI

To Sister Nivedita

C/O DR. LOGAN,

770 OAK STREET,

SAN FRANCISCO, CALIFORNIA,

17th May [1900].

DEAR MARGOT,

I am sorry, I cannot come to Chicago yet for a few days. The
doctor (Dr. Logan) says I must not undertake a journey till completely
strong. He is bent on making me strong. My stomach is very, very good
and nerves fine. I am getting on. A few days more and I will be all
right. I received your letter with the enclosed.

If you leave for New York soon, take my mail with you. I am
coming to New York direct. If you leave New York before I leave, put my
mail in a cover and deposit with Turiyananda, and tell him to keep it
for me and not to open it on any account, nor any one of my Indian
letters. Turiyananda will take charge. Also see that my clothes and
books are at the Vedanta Society's rooms in New York.

I will write you more soon — an introduction to Mrs.
Huntington.1
This affair should be private.

With love and blessings,

VIVEKANANDA.

P.S. As I have got to stop at Chicago for my ticket, will you
ask anybody to take me in for a day or two, if Mrs. Hale is gone East
by that time?

V.

^Mrs.
Collis Potter Huntington, wife of one of the wealthy "Big Four" of the
Central Pacific Railroad in the United States.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/167_margot.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

CLXVII

To Sister Nivedita

770 OAK STREET,

SAN FRANCISCO, CALIFORNIA,

18th May 1900.

DEAR MARGOT,

Enclosed find the letter of introduction to Mrs. Huntington.
She can, if she likes, make your school a fact with one stroke of her
pen. May Mother make her do it!

I am afraid I will have to go direct to New York, as by that
time the Hales will be off. I cannot start for two weeks at least yet.
Give the Hales my love.

With love and blessings,

Yours,

 VIVEKANANDA.

P.S. I received your letter, including Yum's [Miss Josephine
MacLeod's].

V.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/168_mother.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

«
Addressee
 »

CLXVIII

To Mrs. Ole Bull (in London)

SAN FRANCISCO

18 May 1900

MY DEAR MOTHER,

Many thanks for Joe's [Miss Josephine MacLeod's] and your
letters. I have again a bad relapse — and [am] struggling out of it.
This time I am perfectly certain that with me all diseases are nervous.
I want rest for two, three years — and not the least bit of work
between. I will take rest with the Seviers in the Himalayas.

Mrs. [James Henry] Sevier gave me 6,000 Rs. for family — this
was distributed between my cousin, aunt, etc. The 5,000 Rs. for buying
the house was borrowed from the Math funds. Do not stop the remittance
you send to my cousin, whatever Saradananda may say to the contrary. Of
course I do not know what he says.

I have long given up the idea of a little house on the Ganges,
as I have not the money.

But I have got some in Calcutta and some with the Leggetts,
and if you give a thousand more, that will be a fund for my own
personal expenses (as you know I never took Math money) as well as for
my mother. Kindly write to Saradananda to give up the little house
plan. I am not going to write any more for weeks yet — till I
completely recover. I hope to get over [it] in a few weeks from now —
it was a terrible relapse. I am with a Doctor friend [Dr. Milburn H.
Logan], and he is taking every care of me.

Tell Joe that going amongst different people with a message
also does not belong to the Sannyasin; for a Sannyasin, [there] is
quiet and retirement, scarcely seeing the face of man.

I am now ripe for that, physically at least. If I don't go
into retirement, nature will force me to it. Many thanks that temporal
things have been so well arranged by you.

With all love to Joe and yourself —

Your Son,

VIVEKANANDA



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/169_christina.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

CLXIX

To Sister Christine

C/O DR. LOGAN,

770 OAK STREET,

SAN FRANCISCO, CALIFORNIA,

19th May 1900.

DEAR CHRISTINA,

How are you? When is your vacation to commence? I am still in
California. Hope to start for the East in two or three weeks more.

Write me all about yourself and how things are going on. How
is Mrs. Funkey [Funke]? And the other friends?

Yours as ever,

VIVEKANANDA.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/170_abhedananda.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

CLXX

To Swami Abhedananda

770 OAK STREET

SAN FRANCISCO, CAL.

C/O DR. LOGAN, M.D.

[May 19, 1900?]

MY DEAR ABHEDANANDA

I am very, very glad to hear about the new home of the Vedanta
Society. As things stand, I will have to come to New York direct from
here — without stoppage — but it will be two or three weeks yet, I am
afraid. Things are coming up so fast that I can not but change my plans
and stop a few more days.

I am trying my best to get one of you for a flying visit to
this Coast — it is a great country for Vedanta.

Get all my books and clothes etc., in your home. I am coming
soon. My love to Mrs. Crane. Is she still living on beef-steak and hot
water? Miss [Sarah Ellen] Waldo and Mrs. Coulston1
write about the publication of a new edition of Karma-Yoga.
I have written to Miss Waldo all about it. The money in hand from the
sale of books ought to be spent, of course.

Do you see my books and clothes all safe there? They were with
Mrs. Bull in Boston.

With all love,

VIVEKANANDA

^Mrs.
Mary B. Coulston was secretary, in 1898, and later treasurer, in 1899,
while serving on the executive committee of the New York Vedanta
Society, founded by Swami Vivekananda in 1894. She was given the name
of Brahmacharini Sevaputa by Swami Abhedananda, who, on April 2, 1899,
gave her the Brahmacharya vows with five others, including Gurudasa
(Swami Atulananda).



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/171_christina.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

CLXXI

To Sister Christine

VEDANTA SOCIETY,

102 EAST 58TH STREET,

NEW YORK,

9th June 1900.

DEAR CHRISTINA,

I could not write more, as the last few weeks of my stay in
California was one more relapse and great suffering. However, I got one
great benefit out of it inasmuch as I came to know I have really no
disease, except worry and fear. My kidneys are as sound as any other
healthy man's. All the symptoms of Bright's disease etc., are only
brought on by nerves.

I wrote you one, however, from 770 Oak Street, San Francisco,
to which I did not get any reply. Of course, I was bedridden then and
my address book was not in the place I was in. There was a mistake in
number. I cannot believe you did not reply willingly.

As you see, now I am in New York, and will be here a few days.
I have an invitation from Mrs. Walton of Cleveland, Ohio. I have
accepted it. She writes me you are also invited and have accepted her
invitation. Well, we will meet in Cleveland then. I am sure to see you
before I go to Europe — either there or anywhere you wish. If you don't
think it would be possible for you to come to Ohio, I will come to any
other place you want me to come to say goodbye.

When is your school going to close? Write me all about your
plans — do!

Miss Noble wants me very much to go to Cleveland. I would be
very, very glad to get a few weeks' seclusion and rest before I start
with friends who do not disturb me at all. I know I will find rest and
peace that way, and you can help me any amount in that. In Cleveland,
of course, there will be a few friends always and much talkee-talkee as
a matter of course. So if you think I will have real peace and rest
elsewhere, just write all about it.

My reply to the Cleveland lady depends on your letter.

How I wish I were in Detroit or elsewhere just now, among
friends who I know are good and true always. This is weakness; but when
the physical vitality is lowered and the nerves all unstrung, I feel
so, so much to depend upon somebody. You will be glad to learn I made a
little money in the West. So I will be quite able to pay my expenses.

Write soon.

Yours affectionately,

VIVEKANANDA.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/172_christina.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

CLXXII

To Sister Christine

VEDANTA SOCIETY,

102 EAST 58TH STREET,

NEW YORK,

13th June 1900.

DEAR CHRISTINA,

There is no cause for any anxiety. As I wrote, I am healthier
than ever; moreover, all the past fear of kidney troubles has passed
away. "Worry" is the only disease I have, and I am conquering it fast.

I will be here a week or two, and then I come to Detroit. If
things so happen that I cannot come, I will sure send for you. Anyway,
I am not going to leave this country before seeing you. Sure, sure — I
must see you first, and then go to Europe.

Things are looking cheerful once more, and good luck, like
ill, also comes in bunches. So I am sure it will be smooth sailing
every way now, for some time at least.

With love to Mrs. Funkey [Funke],

Ever yours in the Truth,

VIVEKANANDA.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/173_christina.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

CLXXIII

To Sister Christine

VEDANTA SOCIETY,

102 EAST 58TH STREET,

NEW YORK,

15th June 1900.

MY DEAR CHRISTINA,

I am getting better every day, only this New York is a bad
place for sleep. Again, I am working some, though not hard, to get the
old friends together and put the thing in shape.

Now, you know, I will in a week or so finish this work and
then be ready for a real quiet of a week or two or more.

Detroit, alas! will be no better than New York. With so many
old friends! How can you avoid friends whom you really love?

I will have perfect freedom at yours — sure — but how can I
avoid seeing friends and the eternal visiting and paying visits and
much talkee-talkee? Do you know any other place within eight or ten
hours (I want to avoid night rides) of riding from New York where I can
be quiet and free from the people? (Lord bless them.) I am dead tired
seeing people just now. Just think of that and everything else; if,
after all, you think Detroit is the best place for me, I am ready to
come.

Yours truly,

VIVEKANANDA.

PS — I am also thinking of a quiet place.

V.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/174_christina.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

«
Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

CLXXIV

To Sister Christine

VEDANTA SOCIETY,

102 EAST 58TH STREET,

NEW YORK,

27th June 1900.

DEAR CHRISTINA,

This is my plan just now. I will have to remain in New York a
few days yet to see my books through. I am going to
publish another edition of Karma-Yoga and the
London lectures in a book form. Miss Waldo is editing them, and Mr.
Leggett will publish.

Then, I think, if I am to remain in this country a few weeks
more, it is better that you get a rest and change. Newport1
is a celebrated seaside place —
four hours from New York. I am invited
there. I will go there this week and, as promised, I [will] find quiet
and retirement and freedom. I will try to find a place for you and wire
you as soon as found.

I am sure in Detroit you cannot have rest. A little change of
place and quiet from time to time is a great factor in renewing one's
vigour.

Well, if you think that you would have better rest and quiet
in Detroit, drop a line and I come. It is only seventeen hours from New
York to Detroit, and I am quite strong to undertake it. I am free to go
already; only I really want you to take a good, long rest for some
weeks at least.

Don't be afraid of expenses. Mother has amply provided that
and will provide, so long I am unselfish.

Think [over] all the pros and cons, and write at your earliest
convenience.

I am going to Newport anyway, just to see what it looks like.
I will write you all about [it] as soon as I am there.

Ever yours in the Lord,

VIVEKANANDA.

^Newport
is a fashionable seaside resort on the Narrangansett River, in Rhode
Island. Dr. Kate Stanton (Brahmacharini Shantikama), a disciple of
Swami Abhedananda, lived there and probably invited the Swami to visit
the town in order to take rest.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/175_mrs_hansbrough.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

Addressee
 »

CLXXV

To Mrs. Alice (Shanti)
Hansbrough

THE VEDANTA SOCIETY,

102 EAST 58TH STREET, NEW YORK, N.Y.

[End of June 1900]

DEAR MRS. HANSBROUGH —

I have not written you a line since you left San Francisco. I
am well and things are going on well with me.

I am in New York once more, where they have got now a home for
the Society and their headquarters. I and the other Swamis also live
there.

A San Francisco lady [Miss Minnie C. Boock] now here owns a
plot of land near Mt. Hamilton, 12 miles east of Lick observatory — 160
acres in area. She is going to make us a present of it. It would be
nice for a summer gathering for us in California. If friends like to go
there now, I will send them the written authority.
Will you write to Mrs. Aspinall and Miss Bell etc., about it? I am
rather desirous it should be occupied this summer as soon as possible.
There is only a log cabin on the land; for the rest they must have
tents.

I am sorry I can not spare a Swami yet.

With all love to you and Mrs. [Carrie Mead] Wyckoff and the
baby of the family.

Ever yours in the Truth,

VIVEKANANDA

P.S. Tell Helen [the youngest Mead sister] — I thank her for
her kind invitation, but [am] so sorry [I] can not accept it now. After
all, you three sisters have become a part of my mind forever. What
about the club?

V.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/176_sister_christine.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

CLXXVI

To Sister Christine

[On July 3, 1900,
before departing for Detroit with Swami Turiyananda and Miss Minnie
Boock, Swami Vivekananda dispatched a telegram.]

[POSTMARKED: NEW YORK

July 3, 1900]

STARTED REACH TOMORROW WEDNESDAY 2 P.M. COME STATION WABASH.

SWAMI VIVEKANANDA



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/177_mrs_hansbrough.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology

»

« Addressee
 »

CLXXVII

To Mrs. Alice (Shanti)
Hansbrough

102 E. 58TH STREET,

NEW YORK,

3rd July 1900.

MY DEAR MRS. HANSBROUGH —

This is to introduce Swami Turiyananda. The lady who gave the
piece of land for Vedanta work belongs to Los Angeles. She has taken
Turiyananda with her. He is a great spiritual teacher — but has no
experience in platform work.

The best thing would be to help him to start a centre for
quiet and rest and meditation in the land near San Jose.

With all love to the holy Trinity.1 

Ever yours in the Lord,

VIVEKANANDA

^The
three Mead sisters: Mrs. Alice Mead Hansbrough, Mrs. Carrie Mead
Wyckoff and Miss Helen Mead.  



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/178_abhedananda.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

« Addressee

CLXXVIII

To Swami Abhedananda

102 E. 58TH STREET, 

NEW YORK,

24 July 1900.

DEAR ABHEDANANDA,

I would have gladly remained here, but sastây kisti
mât.1
Got a fine berth — one room all to myself — on a fine vessel.2
As soon as August comes it will be a terrible Bhida [crowd] as the
companies are reducing prices.

Things are going quite all right. Mr. Johnson has returned to
their house, and all the rooms are full except two. You write to Mrs.
Crane whether you want to get them or not.

You need not feel the least anxiety about the N.Y. work; it
will go as a marriage bull next season. Give my love to Mrs. [Mary B.]
Coulston and explain to her the circumstances.

With all love,

VIVEKANANDA

^A
Bengali phrase meaning literally "Checkmate when cheap"; that is, "Get
while the getting is good".

^On
July 26, 1900, Swami Vivekananda was to board the S.S. Champagne, bound
for Le Havre, France, and thence travel by train to Paris.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/179_christina.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

CLXXIX

To Sister Christine

A BORD DE PAQUEBOT LA CHAMPAGNE,

Friday morning, 9 a.m.,

3rd August 1900.

DEAR CHRISTINA,

It is foggy this morning. We are in the channel — expect to
reach [Le Havre] at 12 a.m. [noon]. It has been a very bad voyage —
rolling and raining and dark nearly all the time. Terrible rolling all
through. Only last night I had good sleep. On other occasions the
rolling makes me sleep well, but this time I don't know what was the
matter; the mind was so whirling. Anyway, I am well and soon to reach
land.

Hope to reach Paris this evening.

I send this to Detroit, expecting you there.

With all love and blessings,

VIVEKANANDA.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/180_mrs_leggett.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

CLXXX

To Mrs. Francis Leggett

[Swami Vivekananda
sent the following telegram on Friday, August 3, 1900, when the S.S.
Champagne (which he had boarded in New York on July 26) docked at Le
Havre, France.]

[Postmarked: Friday, August 3,
1900]

ARRIVE A HUIT HRES STLAZARE — VIVEKANANDA

[Translation: "I arrive at eight o'clock (p.m.) St. Lazare —
VIVEKANANDA".]



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/181_christine.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

CLXXXI

To Sister Christine

6, PLACE DES ETATS-UNIS

14th August 1900

DEAR CHRISTINE,

Your letter from New York reached just now. You must have got
mine from France, directed to 528 Congress.

Well — it was a dreary, funeral-like time. Just think what it
is to a morbid man like me!

I am going to the Exposition, etc., trying to pass time. Had a
lecture here. Père Haycinth [Hyacinthe], the celebrated clergy — man
here, seems to like me much. Well, well what? Nothing. Only, you are so
good, and I am a morbid fool — that is all about it. But "Mother" — She
knows best. I have served Her through weal or woe. Thy will be done.
Well, I have news of my lost brother [Mahendranath Datta]. He is a
great traveller, that is good. So you see, the cloud is lifting slowly.
My love to your mother and sister and to Mrs. Funkey [Funke].

With love,

VIVEKANANDA



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/182_nivedita.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

CLXXXII

To Sister Nivedita

6, PLACE DES ETATS UNIS,

PARIS,

23rd August 1900.

DEAR NIVEDITA,

The manuscript accounts of the Math just reached. It is
delightful reading. I am so pleased with it.

I am going to print a thousand or more to be distributed in
England, America and India. I will only add a begging paragraph in the
end.

What do you think the cost will be?

With love to you and Mrs. Bull,

VIVEKANANDA.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/183_christine.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

CLXXXIII

To Sister Christine

6, PLACE DES ETATS-UNIS, PARIS

23rd August 1900

DEAR CHRISTINE,

What is the matter with you? Are you ill? Unhappy? What makes
you silent? I had only one little note from you in all this time.

I am getting a bit nervous about you — not much. Otherwise I
am enjoying this city. Did Mrs. A. P. Huntington write you?

I am well — keeping well as far as it is possible with me.

With love,

VIVEKANANDA



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/184_christina.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

CLXXXIV

To Sister Christine

6, PLACE DES ETATS UNIS,

PARIS,

15th September 1900.

DEAR CHRISTINA,

Your letter was very reassuring. I am so glad this summer did
you good. So you did not get enamoured of New York City.

Well, I am getting enamoured of Paris. I now am living with a
M. Jules Bois, a French savant, who has been a student and admirer of
my works.

He talks very little English; in consequence, I have to trot
out my jargon French and am succeeding well, he says. I can now
understand if he will talk slowly.

Day after tomorrow I go to Bretagne [Brittany] where our
American friends are enjoying the sea breeze — and the massage.1

I go with M. Bois for a short visit; après cet
[after that] I don't know where I go. I am getting quite Frenchy, connaissezvous
[do you know]? I am also studying grammaire and
hard at
work. [Sentence torn off] In a
few months I hope to be Frenchy, but by that time I will forget it by
staying in England.

I am strong, well and content — no morbidity.

Au revoir,

VIVEKANANDA.

^The
magnetic healer Mrs. Melton (also known as Mrs. Walden) was in Brittany
at that time.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/185_mother.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

CLXXXV

To Mrs. Ole Bull

66, RUE AMPERE

22nd October 1900

DEAR MOTHER,

I am sorry to learn you are not well. Hope you will soon be
better. Things seem to turn out better for me.

Mr. Maxim of the gun fame is very much interested in me, and
he wants to put in his book on China and the Chinese something about my
work in America.1
I have not any documents with me; if you have, kindly give them to him.
He will come to see you and talk it over with you. Canon Hawes
[Reverend Hugh Reginald Haweis] also keeps track of my work in England.
So much about that. It may be that Mother will now work up my original
plan of international work. In that case, you will find your work of
the Conference2
has not been in vain.

It seems that after this fall in my health, physical and
mental, it is going to open out that way — larger and more
international work. Mother knows best.

My whole life has been divided into successive depressions and
rises — and so, I believe, is the life of everyone. I am glad, rather
than not, these falls come. I understand it all; still, I suffer and
grumble and rage!! Perhaps that is a part of the cause of the next
upheaval.

I think you will be in America by the time we return; if not,
I will see you in London again. Anyhow, adieu for the present. We start
day after tomorrow for Egypt etc. And all blessings ever be on you and
yours is, as always, my prayer.

Your son,

VIVEKANANDA

PS: To Margot [Sister Nivedita] my love, and I am sure she
will succeed.

V.

^Sir
Hiram Maxim. In the foreword to his book L. Hung Chang's Scrapbook
(1913), Maxim wrote at some length of Swami Vivekananda's appearance at
the Parliament of Religions. Vide Marie Louise Burke's Swami
Vivekananda in the West, Vol. 6, pp. 319-21.

^The
Cambridge Conferences, an annual series of lectures by eminent people,
which Mrs. Bull had organized at her home in Cambridge.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/186_alberta.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

«
Addressee

CLXXXVI

To Miss Alberta Sturges

[Swami Vivekananda
sent the following postcard.]

[CONSTANTINOPLE,

November 1, 1900]

DEAR ALBERTA,

How are you? I am having a grand Turkish time.

Yours,

VIVEKANANDA



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/187_christina.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

CLXXXVII

To Sister Christine

[On a postcard,
picturing the old decayed fortress walls of Istanbul, Swami Vivekananda
wrote the following note.]

[Postmarked: November 1, 1900]

DEAR CHRISTINA —

I am having a good time here. So I hope you also are having in
Detroit —

Yours truly,

VIVEKANANDA.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/188_sister_nivedita.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

CLXXXVIII

To Sister Nivedita

[On a picture
postcard showing dervishes and local fish merchants, Swami Vivekananda
wrote the following note.]

[POSTMARKED: CONSTANTINOPLE

November 1, 1900]

Dear Margo [Margot], the blessings of the howling dervishes go
with you — Yours in the Lord,

VIVEKANANDA.

P.S. All love to Mrs. Bull.

V.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/189_sister_christine.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

CLXXXIX

To Sister Christine

[On a postcard,
showing the temple of Hepaistos, popularly called Thesion, Swami
Vivekananda wrote.]

[POSTMARKED: ATHENS,

November 11, 1900]

Great fun. I write without the possibility of being written
to, as I am changing place all the time. How do you do?

VIVEKANANDA



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/190_your_highness.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

« Addressee

CXC

To Maharaja Ajit Singh, the
Raja of Khetri

THE MATH

BELOOR

HOWRAH DIST.

[December 1900]

YOUR HIGHNESS —

Very glad to learn that you and the Coomar [the Royal Prince]
are enjoying good health. As for me, my heart has become very weak.
Change, I do not think, will do me any
good, as for the last 14 years I do not remember to have stopped at one
place for three months at a stretch. On the other hand, if by some
chance I can live for months in one place, I hope it will do me good. I
do not mind this, however; I feel that my work in this life is done.
Through good and evil, pain and pleasure, my life-boat has been dragged
on. The one great lesson I was taught is that life is misery, nothing
but misery. Mother knows what is best. Each one of us is in the hands
of Karma — it works out itself, and no nay. There is only one element
in life which is worth having at any cost — and it is love. Love
immense and infinite, broad as the sky and deep as the ocean. This is
the one great gain in life. Blessed is he who gets it.

Ever yours in the Lord,

VIVEKANANDA



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/191_mother.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

CXCI

To Mrs. Ole Bull (in London)

DACCA,

20 March 1901.

MY DEAR MOTHER,

At last I am in Eastern Bengal. This is the first time I am
here, and never before knew Bengal was so beautiful. You ought to have
seen the rivers here — regular rolling oceans of fresh water, and
everything so green — continual production. The villages are the
cleanest and prettiest in all India.

Joe [Miss Josephine MacLeod] is perhaps by this time in Japan.
I received a long and beautiful letter from Margot. Tell Margot that
there has been of late a regular fall of fortune on the Kashmir Raja;
things are all changing to his benefit. Mr. Mookherjey is now Governor
of Kashmir. Saradananda had a bad fever. He is well now, but weak. He
possibly goes to Darjeeling for a change. Mrs. [M. N.] Banerjey, who is
at Calcutta, is very anxious to take him to the hills. Mohin
[Mahendranath Datta], my brother, is in India, in Karachi near Bombay,
and he corresponds with Saradananda. He writes to say he is going to
Burma, China, etc. The traders who lure him have shops in all
those places. I am not at all anxious about him. He is a very selfish
man.

I have no news from Detroit. I received one letter from
Christina nine months ago, but I did not reply. Perhaps that may have
vexed her.

I am peaceful and calm — and am finding every day the old
begging and trudging life is the best for me after all.

Mrs. Sevier I left at Belur. She is the guest of Mrs.
Banerjey, who has rented Nilambar Mookherjey's house on the river (the
old Math). She goes very soon to Europe.

Things are going on, as is in the nature of things. To me has
come resignation.

With all love,

Ever your Son,

VIVEKANANDA.

PS — All blessings on Margot's work. Mother is leading, I am
sure.

V.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/192_sir.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

CXCII

To Ramesh Chandra Dutta1

THE MATH, P.O. BELUR,

DIST. HOWRAH, BENGAL,

4 April 1901.2

DEAR SIR,

I am so very glad to learn from a person of your authority of
the good work Sister Nivedita is doing in England. I join in earnest
prayer with the hopes you entertain of her future services to India by
her pen.

I have not the least desire that she should leave her present
field of utility and come over to India.

I am under a deep debt of gratitude to you, Sir, for your
befriending my child, and hope you will never cease to advise her as to
the length of her stay in England and the line of work she ought to
undertake.

Her book on Kâli has been very popular in India. The debt our
Motherland already owes you is immense, and we are anxiously awaiting
the new book of yours.

May all blessings ever attend you and yours is the constant
prayer of —

Yours humbly,

VIVEKANANDA.

^Ramesh
Chandra Dutta had become acquainted with Sister Nivedita in England,
where he was staying after his retirement from the Indian Civil Service.

^This
letter was written from Dacca, which is now the capital of Bangladesh.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/193_margot.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

«
Addressee

»

CXCIII

To Sister Nivedita

THE MATH, BELUR,

HOWRAH DISTRICT, BENGAL,

4 April 1901.

DEAR MARGOT,

A letter came just now from Mr. R. Dutt [Ramesh Dutta]
praising you and your work in England very much and asking me to wish
you to stop longer in England.

It requires no imagination to learn that I am overjoyed at all
the news about you Mr. Dutt so kindly sends.

Of course, you stay as long as you think you are working well.
Yum [Miss Josephine MacLeod] had some talk about you with Mother [Holy
Mother, Sarada Devi], and she desired you to come over. Of course, it
was only her love and anxiety to see you — that was all; but poor Yum
has been much too serious for once, and hence all these letters.
However, I am glad it should happen, as I learnt so much about your
work from Mr. Dutt, who can't be accused of a relative's blind love.

I have written to Mrs. Bull already about this matter. I am
now at last in Dacca and had some lectures here. I depart for
Chandranath tomorrow, near Chittagong, the farthest eastern extremity
of Bengal. My Mother, aunt, cousin, another cousin's widow, and nine
boys are with me. They all send you love.

I had just now a few lines from Mrs. Bull, also a letter from
Mr. Sturdy. As it would be almost impossible for me to write for some
days now, I ask you to thank Mrs. Bull for me for her letter, and tell
her kindly that I have just now a long letter from Miss [Christina]
Greenstidel of Detroit. She mentions a beautiful letter from Mrs. Bull.
Sturdy writes about the publication of any further edition of Raja-Yoga
by Longmans. I leave that consideration with Mrs. Bull. She may talk
over the matter with Sturdy and do what she thinks proper.

Please give Sturdy my best love, and tell him I am on the
march and will take time to reply to his letter; in the meanwhile the
business will be looked after by Mrs. Bull.

With everlasting love and blessings,

VIVEKANANDA.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/194_christine.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

CXCIV

To Sister Christine

THE MATH, BELUR,

HOWRAH DIST., BENGAL,

[April 4, 1901]

DEAR CHRISTINE,

The subsequent proceedings have been so much interesting; and
the interest has been growing so rapidly of late, that one could
scarcely utter a word.1

I am glad to learn of Mrs. [Ole] Bull's sweet letter to you;
she is an angel. You are peaceful and happy — good. I am growing
towards it too.

I am en route to Chandranath on pilgrimage.

I have been anxiously awaiting a letter from you, and it
seemed it would never come.

 

I am sure to be happy — can't help thinking so. After so much
struggle, the result must come. Things take their own course; it is I
who am to brighten up, I find. And I am trying
my best. And you can help me by writing nice letters now and then; will
you?

Margot [Sister Nivedita] is doing splendid work in England
with Mrs. Bull's backing. Things are going on nicely.

I am sleeping better and the general health is not bad.

With everlasting love and blessings,

VIVEKANANDA.

P.S. Please enquire of Miss [Sarah Ellen] Waldo about the
publication of Karma and Jnâna Yogas
and write.

^As
there was no known communication between Swami Vivekananda and
Christine during the first quarter of 1901, perhaps the Swami was
referring to the fact that he was then on pilgrimage to East Bengal,
with a large party, and was too busy to write to anyone during this
period.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/195_introduction.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

CXCV

Letter of Introduction

GAUHATI

April 17, 1901

I have great pleasure in certifying the great amiability and
helpfulness of the brothers Shivakanta and Lakshmikanta, Pandas of Shri
Kamakhya Peetham.

They are men who help most and are satisfied with the least.

I can unhesitatingly recommend them to the Hindu public
visiting this most holy shrine.

SWAMI VIVEKANANDA



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/196_christina.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

CXCVI

To Sister Christine

THE MATH, BELUR,

HOWRAH DIST., BENGAL,

13th May 1901.

DEAR CHRISTINE,

I arrived in the Math yesterday. This morning came your short
note. You must have got my letters by this time, and [I] hope this will
give you a taste of how sometimes silence is gold.

I have beautiful letters from everywhere this morning and am
quite happy. I paid a long visit of two months to Assam and
different parts of eastern Bengal. For combined mountain and water
scenery, this part of the country is unrivalled.

Either I am to go to Europe this summer, and thence to the
U.S., or you come over to India — things are all getting ready to that
end. Mother knows Her ways. For one thing, I am calm, very calm, and
hope to keep a hold on this state for a long time; and you are my best
help to keep this poise, are you not? I will write more in my next;
just now these few lines — and a hundred pardons I beg for their
scantiness. Yet silence tells more sometimes than all the speech in the
world.

With all love and blessings,

Ever yours in the Lord,

VIVEKANANDA.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/197_mother.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

CXCVII

To Mrs. Ole Bull

THE MATH, BELUR

13 May 1901

DEAR MOTHER,

I reached Calcutta yesterday. This morning arrived your letter
containing three cheques for my cousin. They shall reach her regularly.

I have not had any letter from Joe [Miss Josephine MacLeod]
from Japan, but several I find awaiting me from on board steamer. She
also sends me a newspaper cutting to be sent to Professor Geddes. I
enclose it in this letter and expect you to direct it to Prof. Geddes.

Saradananda has been three weeks in Darjeeling, where he has
improved greatly. I wish he will remain some time longer there. Mr.
Bannerjy is the kindest of hosts.

Mrs. Sevier is in London at 2, Maisemore Mansions, Canfield
Gardens, London, N.W.

You are right: my experiences are bringing about calmness —
great calmness.

Mrs. Patterson and children are off to Europe. General [C. B.
Patterson] is alone and very desirous that I would call. I will the
next time I go to town.

My cousin and mother and the rest send love, and my eternal
love you know always.

Ever your son,

VIVEKANANDA

P.S. All love and blessings for Margot [Sister Nivedita].



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/198_mrs_hansbrough.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

CXCVIII

To Mrs. Alice (Shanti)
Hansbrough

THE MATH

HOWRAH DIST.,

BENGAL, INDIA

3rd June 1901

DEAR MRS. HANSBROUGH —

The contribution of six pounds and three shillings to the Math
by the Los Angeles club has duly reached. Swami Brahmananda will write
to you a separate acknowledgement. But as I happen to be here just now
and have not had long any direct communication with you, I feel like
having a chat with you as of yore, even though it be through the post.
Now how are you and the Baby and the holy Trinity and the oldest who
brings up the rear?

How are all our Los Angeles friends? Poor Mrs. [Emeline F.]
Bowler, I hear, has passed away. She was an angel. Where is Miss
Strickney? Please tender her my sincerest love, gratitude and prayers
when you meet her next.

How are all the San Francisco friends? How is our Madam (Mrs.
Benjamin Aspinall.) — the noble, the unselfish? What is she doing now?
Quietly gone back to her Home of Truth work?

Are you pleased with Turiyananda and his work? Is the [Shanti]
Ashrama progressing?

With everlasting love and blessings,

Ever yours in the Lord,

VIVEKANANDA



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/199_friend.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

CXCIX

To Mr. Okakura Kakuzo

THE MATH, BELUR

HOWRAH DIS.

BENGAL, INDIA

18th June 1901

DEAR FRIEND —

Allow me to call you a friend. We must have been such in some
past birth. Your cheque for 300 rupees duly reached and many thanks for
the same.

I am just thinking of going to Japan, but with one thing or
another and my precarious health, I cannot expedite matters as I wish.

Japan to me is a dream — so beautiful that it haunts one all
his life.

With all love and blessings,

VIVEKANANDA

Kakudzo [Kakuzo] Okakura Esq.

Tokyo, Japan



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/200_christina.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

CC

To Sister Christine

THE MATH, BELUR

DIST. HOWRAH, BENGAL, INDIA,

[End of June 1901]

DEAR CHRISTINA,

Your very welcome letter just reached. A few days ago a
precious little bit of poem also reached. I wish it ever so much you
were the writer thereof. Anyhow, most of us feel, though unable to
express; and then, "There are thoughts that lie too deep for tears".
Regularity in anything is not in my line of life, but that need not
make you irregular. I pray you to drop a few lines every now and then.
Of course, when I am not in this body, I am sure the news will reach
you, and then you will have to stop writing.

Miss MacLeod wishes me to join her in Japan, but I am not
sure. Most probably I am not going, especially as I expect both her and
Mrs. Ole Bull in India, in November. Two whole months consumed in
coming and going; only one month's stay in Japan — that does not pay, I
am afraid.

Say, I am getting enormously fat about the middle — alas!

Mrs. [Charlotte] Sevier, who is now in England, returns in a
few months to India. She has invited Mrs. Bull etc. to be her guests in
the Himalayas. I wish they could be there during summer.

I have manfully borne the terrific heat of my country in the
plains, and now I am facing the deluging rains of my country. Do you
know how I am taking rest? I have got a few goats and sheep and cows
and dogs and cranes! And I am taking care of them the whole day! It is
not trying to be happy; what for? Why should one not be unhappy as well
— both being nonsense? — but just to kill time.

Do you correspond with Mrs. Bull or Nivedita?

Don't worry, don't be anxious; for me the "Mother" is my
protection and refuge; and everything must come round soon, better than
my fondest dreams can paint.

With all love,

VIVEKANANDA.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/201_sister_christine.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

CCI

To Sister Christine

THE MATH, BELUR,

DIST. HOWRAH, BENGAL,

6th August 1901.

Letters are sometimes, dear Christina, like mercy — good to
the one that sends and the other that receives.

I am so happy that you are calm and resigned as ever. You are
ever that. "Mother knows", indeed; only I know that "Mother" not only
knows, but does — and is going to do something very fine for me in the
near future. What do you think will be very good for me on earth?
Silver? Gold? Pooh! I have got
something infinitely better; but a little gold will not be amiss to
keep my jewel in proper surroundings, and it is coming, don't you think
so?

I am a man who frets much, but waits all the same; and the
apple comes to my mouth by itself. So, it is coming, coming, coming.

Now, how are you? Growing ever thinner, thinner, thinner, eh?
Do have a very good appetite and good sleep in anticipation of the
coming good time — to be in trim for welcoming its advent.

How did the heat feel this year? We read all sorts of horrible
stories about American heat waves. You have beaten the world's records,
even in heat — that's Yankee push, surely.

Well, you are right as about taste: I renounce the yellow of
gold and the white of silver, but stick to amber always — that is to my
taste.

Amber and corals I always hated; but of late I am awakening to
their beauty. One learns as he lives, is it not?

I am going to Darjeeling tomorrow for a few days and will
write to you from there. Now gute Nacht [good
night] and au revoir [good-bye] for the present.

Ever yours truly,

VIVEKANANDA.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/202_christine.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology

»

« Addressee
 »

CCII

To Sister Christine

THE MATH, BELUR,

DIST. HOWRAH, BENGAL,

27th August 1901.

DEAR CHRISTINE,

I am expecting a long, long letter from you; and, like all
expectations of mine, [it] will not be realized, I fear.

Well, I need not bother you with the usual string of
questions: How are you? What are you doing all this summer? etc. I am
sure the Mother will [do] so much as to keep you in good health at
least.

Now, Christina, for many reasons this letter happens to be
short, very. It is written with the special purpose that as soon as you
get this, send me your latest photograph.

Did you write to Miss [Sarah Ellen] Waldo about the
publication of the books? I get no news and, what is more important, no
money (that is between you and me) from the sale.

Did you have any news of Margot [Sister Nivedita], of Mrs.
[Ole] Bull etc.? And are you happy? I sometimes feel I am, other times
it is clouded. Well, it is all the body, after all — material. Goodbye.

Yours with love and blessings,

VIVEKANANDA.

PS — Do send the photo as soon as possible.

V.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/203_christine.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

CCIII

To Sister Christine

THE MATH, BELUR,

DIST. HOWRAH, BENGAL,

2nd September 1901.

MY DEAR CHRISTINE,

I have been looking at one of your old photos — the only one
you sent four or five years ago; and then I remember how changed and
reduced you looked last summer; and it came to me that you must be
awfully thin now, as it seems very hard for you to get rid of
anxieties. This is simply foolish. Things will, of course, take their
shape. We only make ourselves miserable by moping. It is very hard to
manipulate one's philosophy to contribute to one's daily need. So it is
with you, as with me. But it is easiest to take the teacher's chair and
read a lecture. And that has been my life's business!! Indeed, that is
the reason why there are more disciples up to the mark than teachers.
The upshot of all this is that you must create a huge appetite, then
gorge, then sleep and grow fat, fat, fat. Plump is the English word, is
it not?

As for me, I am very happy. Of course, Bengal brings the
asthma now and then, but it is getting tame, and the terrible things —
Bright's disease and diabetes — have disappeared altogether. Life in
any dry climate will stop the asthma completely, I am sure. I get
reduced, of course, during a fit, but then it takes me no time to lay
on a few layers of fat. I have a lot of cows, goats, a few sheep, dogs,
geese, ducks, one tame gazelle, and very soon I am going to have some
milk buffaloes. These are not your American bison, but huge things —
hairless, half-aquatic in habits, and [that] give an enormous quantity
of very rich milk.

Within the last few months, I got two fits [of asthma] by
going to two of the dampest hill stations in Bengal — Shillong and
Darjeeling. I am not going to try the Bengalee mountains any more.

Mrs. Bull and Nivedita are in Norway. I don't know when they
[will] come over to India. Miss MacLeod is in Japan. I have not heard
from her [for] a long while. They all are expected here in November,
and will have a "hot time in this old town"1
etc. I pray you can come, and the Mother will open the door for it. I
cannot but say my prayers mostly have been heard, up to date.

Well now, Christina, send me one of your latest photos next
mail, will you? I want to see how much of fat you have accumulated in
one year.

Anyhow, I will have to go to America with Mrs. Bull, I am
sure. [Excision]2
 By the by, excusez-moi,3
our Calcutta is never so hot as your Detroit or New York, with its
added advantage — we are not required by our society to wear many
things. The old Greeks used to think that wearing too many clothes and
[feeling] shame to show any part of the body a peculiarity of
barbarians! So the Hindus think, down to the present day. We
are the most scantily clothed people in the whole world. Bless the
Lord! How one would live otherwise in our climate!

3rd September —

I left the letter unfinished last night. The foreign English
mail starts day after tomorrow. So begin again. The moon is not up yet,
but there is a sunless glow upon the river. Our mighty Ganges (She is
indeed mighty now, during the rains) is splashing against the walls of
the house. Numerous tiny boats are flitting up and down in the dark;
they have come to fish for our shads, which come up the river this
season.

How I wish you were here to taste our shads — one of the most
delicate fish in the world. It is raining outside — pouring. But the
moment this downpour ceases, I rain through every pore — it is so hot
yet. My whole body is covered by big patches of prickly heat. Thank
goodness there are no ladies about! If I had to cover myself in this
state of things, I surely would go crazy.

I have also my theme, but I am not despondent. I am sure very
soon to pan it out into a beautiful ecstasy [excision]. I am half crazy
by nature; then my overtaxed nerves make me outrageous now and then. As
a result I don't find anybody who would patiently bear with me! I am
trying my best to make myself gentle as a lamb. I hope I shall succeed
in some birth. You are so gentle. Sometimes I did frighten you very
much, did I not, Christina? I wish I were as gentle as you are. Mother
knows which is best.

I would not take any supper tonight, as I ate rather heartily
of the aforesaid shad! Then I have to think, think, think on my theme;
and some subjects I think best in bed because the whole is made clear
to me in dream. Therefore, I am going to bed, and gute Nacht,
bon soir,4
etc., etc. No, no, it is now about 10 a.m. in Detroit. Therefore, a
very happy day to you. May all good realities reach you today while I
am expecting dreams.

Ever yours with love and blessings,

VIVEKANANDA.

^The
quotation is from a song entitled "Camptown Races" by the American
composer Stephen Foster.

^The
paper of the original letter is so old and brittle that some portions
have disintegrated.

^A
French expression which means "excuse me".

^German
and French expressions which mean "good night" and "good evening"
respectively.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/204_christine.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

CCIV

To Sister Christine

THE MATH, BELUR,

DIST. HOWRAH, BENGAL,

25th September 1901.

DEAR CHRISTINE,

I could not write you last mail, excusez [excuse]. But I have
been expecting one from you for a long time. Hope one will come this
mail.

I am just thinking of going over to Japan, as Miss [Josephine]
MacLeod is so insistent. Perhaps something will be done; who knows?

From Japan, of course, a peep into America seems inevitable.

Not much news of Mrs. [Ole] Bull or Margot [Sister Nivedita].
Margot is rested, well, and strong. She will come to India some day,
perhaps. I am soon expecting Mrs. [Charlotte] Sevier though. Her work
is needing her. Her beautiful home in the Himalayan forests is a
temptation, especially now when a huge tiger is roaming in her compound
and killed a horse, a buffalo, and her pair of mastiffs in broad
daylight; a number of bears [are] playing havoc with her vegetable
garden; and lots of porcupines [are] doing mischief everywhere!!! She
went out of the way to buy land in a forest — she and her husband liked
it so much.

There is not much to write this week. Words only tire one,
except one which is inexhaustible, infinite.

So, goodbye till next week.

Ever with love and blessings,

VIVEKANANDA.

PS — Just now comes a telegram from Miss MacLeod and a letter
also. She is so insistent that I am thinking of going over to Japan. In
that case, we cross over to America this winter, and thence to England.

Yours,

V.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/205_christina.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

CCV

To Sister Christine

THE MATH, BELUR,

DIST. HOWRAH, BENGAL,

8th October 1901.

DEAR CHRISTINA,

Yours of September 9 came to hand yesterday. I congratulate
you on your successful visit to the Huron Lake; a few more of them
(according to your letter) will force you to sympathize with our
condition — oh, the gasping and the melting and the puffing and all the
rest of them!

However, nothing in the world like a plump, ripe fruit.

I had to give up my trip to Japan: firstly, because I am not
in a working trim yet; secondly, [I] don't much care to make such a
long voyage (one month) alone; thirdly, what am I to talk to them, I
wonder.

Our heat too has been fierce and is continuing unusually long
this year. I am blacker than a Negro by this time.

The California work is progressing famously. They want one or
two men more. I would send, if I could, but I have not any more spare
men. Poor Turiyananda is suffering from malaria yet, and is awfully
overworked.

Do you know whether they published my Jnana-Yoga
or not? I got a copy of a second edition of Karma-Yoga
only.

I am bobbing up and down in the current of life. Today it is
rather down, so I finish the letter here.

Yours with all love and blessings,

VIVEKANANDA.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/206_christina.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

CCVI

To Sister Christine

THE MATH, BELUR,

DIST. HOWRAH, BENGAL,

14th October 1901.

MY DEAR CHRISTINA,

Just now came a letter from Mrs. Bull, but none from you, as I
expected one this mail.

Mrs. Bull writes, "I wrote Christina recently to ask her if
she were to be free in case the opportunity opened for her to go to the
East. I send you her reply".

I went through several times your letter to Mrs. Bull. It
surely was horrible; and you have been all this time hiding the real
state of affairs from me and posing great cheerfulness!!

You will be a precious fool to lose the opportunity if such
comes and is offered by Mrs. Bull. You will only have to take a year's
leave. The rest will all be arranged by Mrs. Bull, including, I am
sure, all your anxiety for those you will have to leave behind in
Detroit.

You have been good, too good to be human, and you are so,
still. But it is no use making oneself unnecessarily miserable.
"Mother's will", surely, if the chance comes; and it has got to come, I
know.

I would not write you about my health; for after all this hide
and seek, even though it was for my good, I think you have not much of
a right to know the truth about my health.

But to some things you have eternal rights, and amongst
others, to my eternal love and blessings,

VIVEKANANDA.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/207_margo.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

CCVII

To Sister Nivedita

THE MATH,

P.O. BELUR, HOWRAH,

12th November 1901.

MY DEAR MARGO [MARGOT],

Since the Durgâ Pujâ I have been very ill, and so could not
reply to your letter earlier.

We had a grand Puja here of Durga, lasting nearly four days;
but, alas, I was down with fever all the time.

We had a grand image, and a huge Puja it was. Then we had the
Lakshmi Puja following close, and then night before yesterday, we had
the Kali Puja. It is always after midnight — this
Puja. I am better now, and we will find a house for you as soon as you
come.

I am so glad you are accompanying Mrs. [Ole] Bull. She
requires all care; and she always thinks of herself the last. Joe [Miss
Josephine MacLeod] is coming to India shortly — at Christmas time with
some Japanese friends. I am expected to meet her in Madras.

I am going off to the N.W.P. [North-Western Provinces] etc.
soon, as Bengal is malarious — now that the rains are over.

Mrs. Bull has been a mother to us all, and any time and
service spent for her is as nothing to what she has been doing for us
all. Remain with her as long as she wants you — the work can wait well;
"Mother" sees to her work. We needn't be anxious.

By the by, Miss [Henrietta] Müller is here in Calcutta. She
wrote a letter to Akhandananda, with whom she has been in regular
correspondence — care of the Math. So I sent some flowers and fruits
and a letter of welcome to her hotel. I have not had a reply yet.

Mrs. [Charlotte] Sevier, I expect, has already started.
Swarupananda had his heart weakened by the constant uphill and
downhill. He is here and improving.

Things are going on well with us, slowly but surely. The boys
of late have been very active, and it is work only that tells and
nothing else.

Yours with all love and blessings,

VIVEKANANDA.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/208_christina.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

CCVIII

To Sister Christine

THE MATH, P.O. BELUR, HOWRAH,

12th November 1901.

DEAR CHRISTINA,

The morning's mail brought me a photograph from Detroit. I
thank the sender very much for promptness. Well, I liked it much. But
the old one is the profile view; this, the front. Then again, the
phenomenal fat seems to be only imaginary on somebody's part. In a way,
I am more used to the old one, and, as such, I cannot slight an old
friend. So let me say both are good. The one is an evolution of the
other — for the better. I expected
a line but it has not arrived yet; [it] may tomorrow. We have a proverb
here: "One river is equal to forty miles". There is only a river
between Calcutta and our Math, and yet such a round — about way for the
mail. Sometimes it comes dribbling for days.

Mrs. [Ole] Bull and Nivedita must have started for the U.S. by
this time. Nivedita is sure to see you in Detroit. Mrs. Bull is anxious
to induce you to join her Indian party via Japan. If you can take leave
for some months, do come. Mother will arrange anyhow; I need not
trouble myself.

Mrs. Sevier has started already, it seems — alone.

We had grand Pujas (worships) here in our Math this year. The
biggest of our Pujas is the Mother worship, lasting nearly four days
and nights. We brought a clay image of Mother with ten hands, standing
with one foot on a lion, the other on a demon. Her two daughters — the
Goddess of Wealth and the Goddess of Learning and Music — on either
side on lotuses; beneath, her two sons — the God of War and that of
Wisdom.

Thousands of people were entertained, but I could not see the
Puja, alas! I was down with high fever all the time. Day before
yesterday, however, came the Puja of Kali. We had an image, too, and
sacrificed a goat and burned a lot of fireworks. This night every Hindu
home is illuminated, and the boys go crazy over fireworks. There are,
of course, several cases of severe burns in the hospitals. We had less
fireworks but more Puja, recitation of Mantras, offering of flowers,
food and songs. It lasted only one night.

I am expected to leave Calcutta and Bengal in a few days, as
this country becomes very malarious this month, after the rains. It is
pleasant and cool now, and the north Himalayan wind is blowing.

We have fenced in a lot of our grounds to protect our
vegetables from our cows and goats and sheep. The other day one of my
[a portion excised] . . . but the mother was either so wicked or [a
portion excised] . . . that she would not look at her young. I tried to
keep them alive on cow's milk, but the poor things died in the night!
Two of my ducks are sitting on their eggs. As this is their first time,
and the male does not help them a bit, I am trying my best to keep up
their strength by good feeding.
We cannot keep chickens here — they are forbidden
to us.

With all love,

VIVEKANANDA.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/209_christine.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

CCIX

To Sister Christine

THE MATH, P.O. BELUR, HOWRAH,

25th November 1901.

DEAR CHRISTINE,

It seems your bottle of nerve tonic did not do you much good,
your assurances to the contrary. It must have been a curious error. I
must have been down with fever or asthma or something else at that
time. Still a thousand, thousand pardons. This was my first, and it
will be my last, offence. Your letter that went to Miss [Josephine]
MacLeod has not come back yet. Perhaps Miss MacLeod is bringing the
letter with her, as she is coming over to India from Japan herself,
accompanied by her Japanese converts (male, of course, as she is a lady
missionary).

Well, well, I so wish things would so arrange themselves that
I could see you once more. Mother knows. By the by, my right eye is
failing me badly. I see very little with that one. It will be hard for
me for some time either to read or write; and as it is getting worse
every day, my people are urging me to go to Calcutta and consult a
doctor. I will go soon, as soon as I recover from a bad cold I have on.

I am so glad you were so taken by Abhedananda; only I thought
one Hindu was good for a lifetime.

Poor Miss Joe [Miss Josephine MacLeod] — so she remains
ignorant as to the real cause of my not going over to Japan! You need
not be the least anxious — there is no harm done; and if there were,
Joe and especially Mrs. [Ole] Bull make it their life's duty to
befriend those I love.

I will try your tonic when it arrives; and the gift, I pray,
will even be followed by the giver, for surely a [words excised] . . .
is more stimulating and healing than dead drugs.

With all love,

VIVEKANANDA.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/210_christine.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

CCX

To Sister Christine

THE MATH, P.O. BELUR, HOWRAH

27th November 1901.

DEAR CHRISTINE,

It is almost sure, I did not write any letter to you that week
in which [I] made that infamous blunder. As I wrote you two letters a
few days previously, it is not at all probable that I wrote you
another. Then Miss [Josephine] MacLeod [would have] sent the letter
back. I must have written only one letter that week to Miss MacLeod,
giving her my reasons for not going to Japan; and somehow it so
happened that the hand wrote the most familiar name on the envelope. So
you need not expect any letter of yours back from Japan, as there was
none; and if there were, you shall have it.

I am just under another spell of catarrh and asthma. Yesterday
a cyclone blew over the place, and several trees and a bit of the roof
are damaged. It is gloomy yet and cold. You know it is almost
impossible to write with the asthma on. So au revoir
[good-bye].

VIVEKANANDA.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/211_christine.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

CCXI

To Sister Christine

THE MATH, P.O. BELUR, HOWRAH

12th December 1901

DEAR CHRISTINE,

Well, then, you wanted to know all about my state of health,
and you insist. You shall have it.

You know, the last three years I have been getting albuminuria
now and then. It is not constant, nor is it yet of any organic
character. The kidneys are structurally all right. Only they throw out
albumen now and then.

This is worse than throwing out sugar in diabetes. Albumen
poisons the blood, attacks the heart and does all sorts of mischief.
Catching cold always increases it. This time it has caused
a small blood vessel in the right eye to burst, so that I scarcely see
with that eye.

Then the circulation has become very rapid. The doctors have
put me to bed; and I am forbidden to eat meat, to walk or even stand
up, to read and write.

Already there is some benefit in this lying-down process, as I
sleep a lot and have a good appetite and am digesting my meals.
Curious, is it not, that inactivity should bring on sleep and appetite?
There is no cause to be anxious at all.

Mrs. [Charlotte] Sevier arrived in Calcutta three days ago;
and by the last advice from Nivedita, Mrs. Bull and she will start on
the 13th December, if they can secure berths, or on the 30th December
at least. I pray Mrs. Bull has already invited you and that you have
got your year's leave and are coming over, and that you will get this
letter in India redirected. If Mother does not fulfil this prayer, sure
She will take me across the water soon, and [line excised] . . . . The
doctor says if I keep to my bed for three months, I will get completely
cured.

Now, don't worry. If good days are not coming, we will make
them, that is all. Hang it! I must have good days now and, that too,
very soon. You know, I always keep my word. Mother must do it, or I
throw Her overboard. I am not so submissive as you are.

Our old-school physicians pour in tons of iron and other
metals — including gold, silver, pearls, etc. — down our throats. I
should be a man of iron by this time; perhaps yours will be the last
touch to make my body one of steel.

This is our best season for eating turtles, but they are all
black. The green [ones] can only be found in America. Alas! I am
prevented from the taste of meat.

Now, noble heart, take courage. Don't mope: you have buffeted
[too] many a storm in life, old war horse, to be like a silly
boarding-school girl. Things must go all right. I am not going to die
or to be ill just now; I am determined to be healthy. You know my grit.

Miss [Josephine] MacLeod sent you your letter. What was it
about? Was there anything queer? I am glad she had it. She writes
beautifully about you. She has already started, and we will have a
jolly good company this winter here in Calcutta.
Mrs. [Ole] Bull, Miss MacLeod, Mrs. Sevier and Nivedita and I will be
overjoyed if somebody else will be thrown into the bargain. I can't get
any more value, eh? I must stop. Am going to look after my geese and
ducks just for five minutes, breaking the doctor's command to lie down
all the time. One of the geese is a silly, fearful bird, always
despondent and anxious. She likes to be all alone by herself and is
miserable — very much like another goose I know in another place.

Here my story ends

And spinach top bends.

Why is spinach withering?

Because the goat is browsing.

Why is the goat browsing?

Because no grass is growing.

Why no grass is growing?

The gardener is not watering.

Why there is no watering?

The Master is not commanding.

Why is he not commanding?

An ant has bitten the Master!

This is a nursery rhyme told after a story, and it is true of
us all. It is only an ant bite, after all — the trouble here; is it not?

Ever yours,

VIVEKANANDA.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/212_christine.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

CCXII

To Sister Christine

THE MATH, BELUR,

DIST. HOWRAH, BENGAL, INDIA,

18th December 1901.

DEAR CHRISTINE,

I am much better, and the rest is doing me good. I have found
out that lying in bed all the time gives me as much sleep
as wanted and good digestion too. Albumen and sugar vanish immediately
[when] I begin taking rest.

Mrs. Bull and Nivedita start for India from Marseilles today,
and unless they change their plan, [they] must be in India before this
reaches you — two weeks before.

Herewith I send you four hundred and eighty dollars by cheque
drawn on Thomas Cook & Son, Broadway, New York. They have no
branch office in Detroit. On receipt of this, you write to Thomas Cook
& Son, Broadway, New York, that you have got a cheque from
India — mentioning the amount and number — drawn by Thomas Cook
& Son on the firm of Thomas Cook & Son, and want to be
advised as to how to cash it. Don't send the cheque ahead. (Excuse all
these details. I feel you are a baby in business, though I am worse.)
This is to pay your "passage to India"1
if you think fit to accept Mrs. Sevier's invitation. If you get leave
and come, I am sure you will find somebody who is coming to England, at
least. Then from there, again, somebody who is coming to Egypt. You
come with them as far as Italy, thence direct on a boat to India.

Second-class passage across the Atlantic is all right, but the
second class from Italy to Bombay is rather bad. There are always a few
rough men and fast women. There is money enough for travelling first
class all through, if you so like.

The Mother will see to it, even as [She did when] this money
came. Drop me a line as soon as you engage your passage —better a week
ahead; otherwise I don't see how the letter can reach me. The vessel to
India you get from London; and possibly a letter may reach me with the
name of the vessel, etc. In any case, however, you wire me as soon as
you land and get into a good hotel. You will find
many persons to receive you — and me too, most probably.

In case, however, things take another turn and you cannot
come, no matter. Do with the money just as it pleases you.

It is very probable that after Miss [Josephine] MacLeod and
Mrs. [Ole] Bull have been through India, they are going home via Japan;
and, of course, I am going with them. In that case I will be in
California next fall.

It will be a nice trip, and would it not be a fine tour round
the world if you get leave and come?

Do just as the Mother opens the way for you, and do not worry.

Yours with all love and blessings,

VIVEKANANDA

^Probably
the Swami placed this phrase in quotation marks because it is the title
of a poem in Walt Whitman's Leaves of Grass.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/213_christine.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

CCXIII

To Sister Christine

THE MATH, BELUR,

DIST. HOWRAH, BENGAL, INDIA,

25th December 1901.

A Merry Christmas and Happy New Year is the usual
congratulation. Alas! The stars brought you a tremendous blow. (Sister
Christine's mother had passed away.) Blessed be the name of the Lord.
After all, it is only "Thy will be done" — our only refuge. I will not
insult you by offering you consolation — you know it all already. Only
this line to remind you of one who is in entire sympathy with you and
who knows that all your plans must be good in joy or sorrow, as you are
dedicated to the eternal Mother. Well, the Mother phenomenal has merged
in the Mother absolute, eternal. Thy will be done.

By this time you must have made a decision, or, rather, the
"Mother" has shown you the way, surely. I rest content.

The soldier of the Queen has gone abroad to fight for Her
cause, leaving all he loves to Her care. The soldier is to look to his
duty. The Queen of the Universe knows the rest.

With all love as usual,

VIVEKANANDA.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/214_christine.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

CCXIV

To Sister Christine

THE MATH, BELUR, DIST. HOWRAH,

23rd January 1902.

MY DEAR CHRISTINE,

By this time you must have settled your plans. Don't worry,
however, on my account. I only want to see you rested and well rested,
wherever you be.

Excuse this rather long delay in writing. Owing to various
reasons I could not, but [was] mentally sending you good wishes all
along.

Miss [Josephine] MacLeod has arrived with her Japanese
friends: Mr. Okakura [Kakuzo], a professor of art, and Mr. Hori, a
Brahmachârin. The latter has come to India to study Sanskrit and
English. The former came to see India, the Motherland of Japanese
culture and art. Well, Mrs. [Ole] Bull and Nivedita are also expected
in a few days. As it seems now, this whole party is going to Japan —
minus Nivedita. She remains here to work.

Now, I am going to try my hand in Japan and, if possible, in
China. Oh, how I wish you were coming with Nivedita to make one of the
party to Japan! Yet, do not put yourself to unnecessary trouble for
that. There is Japan, and there is the U.S., after all, where we meet.
You will only break yourself in trying to "hustle up". No Hurry, No
Worry. I am rather anxious in not hearing from you for weeks. I pray
you are not ill, anyway.

To Mother have I given you over. She protects Her own, ever
and ever, I have no fear.

With all love and blessings,

VIVEKANANDA.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/215_joe.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology

»

«
Addressee
 »

CCXV

To Miss Josephine MacLeod

GOPAL LAL VILLA, BENARAS CANTONMENT

7th Feb. 1902.

MY DEAR JOE —

We have safely reached Benaras, and Mr. Okakura [Kakuzo] has
already done Benaras. He goes to see Sarnath (the
old Buddhistic place) today and starts on his tour tomorrow.

He has asked Niranjan [Swami Niranjanananda] to accompany him
and he has consented.

Kanay [Nirbhayananda] has supplied him with everything he
asked for — and he asks me also to send you the accounts. This, on the
other page.

I hope Nivedita and Mrs. [Ole] Bull have safely arrived. I am
rather better than at Buddha Gaya. This house is nice — well furnished
and has a good many rooms and parlours. There is a big garden all round
and beautiful roses — and gigantic trees. It is rather cooler here than
at Gaya. There was no hitch to our friends being admitted into the
chief temple and [allowed to] touch the Sign of Shiva and to worship.
The Buddhists, it seems, are always admitted.

With all love and welcome to Mrs. Bull and Nivedita — if they
have arrived — and all to you,

VIVEKANANDA

[Enclosed in the above letter was the following
accounts list.]

4TH FEBRUARY 1902. Rs 100

Rs.         
As.         
P.1 

Train hire from Gaya to
Benares                       
20           
4             
0

Cab
hire                                                                
5             
0             
0

Tel
message                                                         
2             
0             
0

Refreshment Room
(Morning)                          
1             
8             
0

Cooly hire
Gaya                                                   
0             
10           
0

Tobacco
etc.                                                        
0             
5             
0

Refreshment Room
(Evening)                           
2             
0             
3

Cooly hire (at
Benares)                                      
1             
1             
0

Cab hire at
Benares                                             
1             
10           
0 

——————————————————

Total                                      
34           
6             
3

 

5TH FEBRUARY

Paid to Medicine for Mr. K.
Okakura               
1             
8             
0

" [Ditto] Oatmeal & corn —
flour                     
1             
4             
0

"             
Tobacco
etc.                        
               
0             
6             
3

"             
Bread
etc.                                             
0             
2             
0

Paid to
Barber                                                      
0             
3             
0

"             
Fish                                                       
0             
7             
6 

—————————————————

Total                                      
3             
14           
9

—————————————————

6TH FEBRUARY 1902

Pickles                                                                   
1             
0             
0

Sweetmeats                                                          
0             
9             
0

Carriage
hire                                                         
1             
8             
0

Priests of Vishvanath
etc.                                  
10           
4             
0

————————————————

Total                                      
13           
5             
0

————————————————

Things purchased for store at

Gopal Lal Villa before Swamiji's
arrival            
17           
11           
9

————————————————

Total                                      
69           
5             
9 

Paid to Expenses from Calcutta to Buddh—

Gaya                                                                      
30           
10           
3

————————————————

Rs.                                         
100         
0             
0

(“P.” stands for pie-s, twelve of them making one Anna (As.)
and sixteen annas making one rupee (Rs.).)

^"P."
stands for pie-s, twelve of them making one Anna (As.) and sixteen
annas making one rupee (Rs.).



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/216_joe.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

CCXVI

To Miss Josephine MacLeod

GOPAL LAL VILLA

BENARAS CANTONMENT

14 February 1902.

DEAR JOE —

I received a note yesterday from Mr. Okakura [Kakuzo]. They
have seen Agra on their way to Gwalior. They must be there now.

The wire he sent to Japan was to Mr. [Tokuno] Oda to come
immediately. There was a work. "Six" in it also.

It is quite cool here even now — and will remain so for this
month at least. Is it getting warm in Calcutta?

I hope Mrs. [Ole] Bull and Nivedita are getting well rested
after that tremendous journey.

I am so so.

The boys all send love.

Ever Yours with love and blessings,

VIVEKANANDA.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/217_mrs_hansbrough.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology

»

« Addressee

CCXVII

To Mrs. Alice (Shanti)
Hansbrough

BENARAS

14 Feb. 1902

MY DEAR MRS. HANSBROUGH,

I am eternally indebted to you for what you did for me in the
past, and infinitely more now for what you are doing for Turiyananda.

A gloom came over the Math when news reached Calcutta of his
severe illness. Now, I hope, he has recovered completely, and I will be
so glad to get the news from you.

It seems the American climate does not suit him. In that case
it will be better for him to come over to India whenever he thinks fit.

In all probability I am going to Japan in a month or two.
Ramakrishnananda accompanies me. Turiyananda may come over to Japan and
I go to America. "Mother" knows best, however, and we obey.

I am just now in Benaras for a few days. All letters should,
however, be addressed to the Belur Math.

Kindly convey my best love to Turiyananda and to yourself, the
holy family and the other friends.

Ever yours in the Lord,

VIVEKANANDA

PS. Let Turiyananda take rest all the time now. He must not
work at all till I reach Japan or America.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/218_margo.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

«
Chronology
 »

«
Addressee

CCXVIII

To Sister Nivedita

GOPAL LAL VILLA,

BENARAS CANTONMENT,

4th March 1902.

MY DEAR MARGO [MARGOT],

It is night now, and I can hardly sit up or write, yet still
feel duty bound to write to you this letter, fearing lest it becomes my
last, it may put others to trouble.

My condition is not at all serious, but it may become [so] any
time; and I don't know what is meant by a low fever that almost never
leaves me and the difficulty of breathing.

Well, I sent Christina [Greenstidel] £100 from Mrs.
[Charlotte] Sevier for a travel to India, as she lost her mother at
that time. Her last letter informs me that she sails on February 15th.
In that case, her reaching India is very near. I expect, of course,
some information as to the port and steamer next week. In case I pass
away, which I would like very much to do in this city of Shiva, do you
open her letters directed to me, receive the girl, and send her back
home. If she has no money to go back, give her a passage — even if you
have to beg.

I have spent the little money I brought from Europe in feeding
my mother and paying her debts. What little remains I cannot touch, as
that is the expense for the pending lawsuit.

In case I rally, I will inform you of the time of her arrival,
and, in that case, you will have to see that she comes in safe to some
station in Bareilly,  where I [will] meet her. And she is to
be the guest of Mrs. [Charlotte] Sevier. I am also going to take
another chance in Almora.

Ramakrishnananda came a few weeks before I came away, and the
first thing he did was to lay down at my feet 400 Rs. he had collected
in so many years of hard work!!! It was the first time such a thing has
happened in my life. I can scarcely suppress my tears. Oh, Mother!!
Mother! There is not all gratitude,
all love, all manliness dead!!! And, dear child, one is enough — one
seed is enough to reforest the world.

Well, that money is in deposit in the Math. I never mean to
touch a penny of that. When I asked Ramakrishnananda to give that money
to his people, he replied he did not care a hang to give to anybody
except me and was only sorry he could scrape that little in four years!
Well, if I pass away, see that 400 Rs. is paid back — every rupee to
him. Lord bless you and Ramakrishnananda.

I am quite satisfied with my work. To have left two true souls
is beyond the ambition of the greatest.

Ever your loving father,

VIVEKANANDA.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/219_christine.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

CCXIX

To Sister Christine

THE MATH, BELUR,

DIST. HOWRAH, BENGAL,

30th March 1902.

MY DEAR CHRISTINE,

You know how welcome you are — I need not express it. This is
a land where expressions are studiously subdued. Margot [Sister
Nivedita] and Joe [Miss Josephine MacLeod] have already written and
made arrangements at Bombay. I expect and wait for you here in
Calcutta. I wish I could be in Bombay to receive you, but all our
wishes are not to be fulfilled.

Come over straight; only take great, great care of the heat by
protecting the back of the head.

The trains here are not so safe as in your country, so have a
little care of your things during night travel.

If you feel tired, take rest in Bombay. Mrs. [Ole] Bull, Joe
and Margot are anxiously awaiting you, and so is

VIVEKANANDA.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/220_mother.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

«
Addressee

»

CCXX

To Mrs. Ole Bull

[THE MATH, P.O. BELUR, DIST. HOWRAH,

March (?) 1902]

DEAR MOTHER,1

I am glad Chinnu has arrived. Any hour you like will suit [me]
for your coming tomorrow. But it is ferocious heat here from 11 a.m. to
5 p.m.

I would, therefore, suggest that you start after breakfast and
remain the day here and have some Bengalee fish lunch, and go back in
the evening.

I insist on your taking a cab here and back. A cab to come and
go costs quite as much or less than a boat, and there is no change [of
transportation]. If the cabby does not understand Belur, tell him to go
to a place two miles south of Bally. He must know Bally, and then let
him ask his way to the Math.

One such drenching and capsizing experience as Mr. Okakura
[Kakuzo] had the other day will unsettle your nerves for days; and we
expect such rough weather every evening this month. The land route is
nearer, easier, and cheaper from where you are. I have also instructed
your servant, the bearer of the letter.

Ever your Son,

VIVEKANANDA.

^At
the time of this letter, Mrs. Ole Bull was staying with Sister
Nivedita, Mr. Okakura Kakuzo and Miss Josephine MacLeod at the American
Consulate in Calcutta. Mrs. Bull had come to India with Sister Nivedita
in the second week of February, and she left Calcutta on April 17, 1902.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/221_joe.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

CCXXI

To Miss Josephine MacLeod

THE MATH

2nd April 1902

MY DEAR JOE —

The telegram is already gone, and I expect you will fill all
arrangements there.

The Dak bungalows en route to Mayavati provide no food, nor
have they cooks.

Provisions have to be taken at Kathgodam and arrangements made.

If you find any difficulty, go straight to Almora and make
your arrangements at leisure. The Dak bungalows on the way to Almora
provide food and in Almora there is a nice Dak bungalow.

Hoping everything will come your way, as it always does —
(except Grandpa's1
health).

Yours affectionately,

VIVEKANANDA

I like Mr. [Tokuno] Oda much — he means business.

V.

^Here
Grandpa refers to Swami Vivekananda himself.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/222_christine.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

CCXXII

To Sister Christine

THE MATH, BELUR,

DIST. HOWRAH,

15th May 1902.

MY DEAR CHRISTINE,

So glad to learn you like Mayavati. The heat here has come in
earnest, and no rain. I drink very little water though.

I have given up all idea of going to Mayavati or Almora. I
bear the heat well, but the rains here are to be avoided. I will remove
[myself] to somewhere else then.

No news from Calcutta. I am in a hurry. Write me the details
of whatever you see or feel there — about men and things.

Yours with all love,

VIVEKANANDA.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/223_mademoiselle.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

« Addressee

CCXXIII

To Mme. Emma Calvé

[This letter of condolence was written upon the death
of Mme. Calvé's father and enclosed in a letter to Miss Josephine
MacLeod.]

THE MATH, BELUR

HOWRAH DISTRICT

BENGAL, INDIA

the 15th May 1902

MY DEAR MADEMOISELLE,

With great sorrow I learn the sad bereavement that has come
upon you.

These blows must come upon us all. They are in the nature of
things, yet they are so hard to bear.

The force of association makes out of this unreal world a
reality; and the longer the company, the more real seems the shadow.
But the day comes when the unreal goes to the unreal, and, ah, how sad
to bear.

Yet that which is real, the Soul, is ever with us,
omnipresent. Blessed is the person who has seen the real in this world
of vanishing shadows.

I hope, dear Mademoiselle, you have greatly improved in health
since our last meeting in Egypt.

May the Lord always shower His choicest blessings on you is
the everlasting prayer of

VIVEKANANDA



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/224_christine.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology

»

« Addressee
 »

CCXXIV

To Sister Christine

THE MATH, BELUR, DIST. HOWRAH,

27th May 1902.

MY DEAR CHRISTINE,

I am sorry I could not visit the mountains this time. My
health, though not improved as much as I [had] wished, is not
bad. The liver has been benefited — [that] is a great gain. The rains
will commence very soon in the hills. So it is useless for me to take
all the trouble of that terrible route.

I am so happy to learn the mountains are doing you good. Eat a
lot, sleep as much as you can, and get plump. Stuff yourself till you
get plump or you burst.

So the place did not suit Mr. Okakura [Kakuzo] — why? There
must have been something to annoy him very much that he left the place
so abruptly. Did he not like the scenery? Was it not sublime enough for
him? Or the Japanese do not like sublimity at all? They only like
beauty.

One of the boys writes that the little boy is getting
disobedient etc. Mrs. Sevier wants me to take him down. So I do. I have
asked Sadananda and another monk (whom I want for work here) to go to
Almora and wait for the monsoon, and when it breaks, to come down.

If you feel you are becoming the least burdensome to Mrs.
Sevier, write me immediately. It would be a sin to put further pressure
on her — she does so much for me. However, she likes you very much and
writes that you look be-au-ti-ful in saris.

I have just now two kids and three lambs added to the family.
There was one more kid, but he got himself drowned in the yellow fish
tank. How is Margot? Is she still there, or gone away with Mr. Okakura?
How is she pulling on with the boys?

What do you do the whole day? How do you pass the day? Write
me all details, and frequently; but do not expect long letters from me
often.

Give my love to Mrs. Sevier, to Margot and the rest, and you
may take a few spoonfuls, if you like,

with only this,

VIVEKANANDA.

PS — Have an eye on the little chap. The boys are already
jealous of him. They did spoil another boy that way before.

V.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/225_christine.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

CCXXV

To Sister Christine

THE MATH, BELUR, DIST. HOWRAH,

14th June 1902.

MY DEAR CHRISTINE,

Your letters had to wait a few days, as I was out of town in a
village.1
Well, many thanks for all the information I got. Mr. Okakura [Kakuzo]
has been to the Math, but I was away. He will be in Calcutta a few
weeks more and then goes to Bombay. He intends taking a house near the
city to learn intimately the customs of Bengalees. I am so glad to
learn Margo's [Sister Nivedita's] intention to stop at Mayavati longer.
She really requires good rest, and she had none in Europe, I am sure of
that. If she were amenable to my advice as of old, I would take away
every book and every scrap of paper from her, make her walk some, eat a
lot and sleep a lot more. As to talking, I would have the merriest
conversation all the while.

I have a beautiful letter from Mrs. Sevier, and [am] so happy
to learn that she loves you more and more. But plumpness is the
criterion, mon amie [my friend], for a' [all] that.

So there was a great flutter in our dovecote owing to my
letters, but things must have assumed their old form by this time. The
boy, my nephew, is going to be sometime yet in the Ashrama; make him
talk English with a good accent — do. No foreign language can be learnt
properly unless you talk in it from childhood.

Mr. Bose2
is still there, I hope; and you must have liked him immensely. He is a man,
a brick. Tender him my best regards, will you?

Have you any water in the lakes now? Do you get the snows
clearer? It has been raining all through this summer here. We
had very few burning days, only a number of stuffy ones. Our rains also
have nearly set in. In a week the deluge will commence in earnest.

As for me, I am much stronger than before; and when seven
miles of jolting in a bullock-cart and railway travel of thirty-four
miles did not bring back the dropsy to the feet, I am sure it is not
going to return.

But anyway, it is the Math that suits me best just now.

With all love,

VIVEKANANDA.

^According
to Swami Brahmananda's diary, Swami Vivekananda left for Boro Jagulia
on June 6. First he travelled by train from Sealdah to Kanchrapara, a
distance of about thirty-four miles. From there the Swami went about
seven miles by bullock-cart to Boro Jagulia village at the request of
his disciple Shrimati Mrinalini Basu, at whose home he stayed.

^Mr.
A. M. Bose, President of the Sadharan Brahmo Samaj, had come to
Mayavati on May 23.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/226_christine.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology
 »

« Addressee
 »

CCXXVI

To Sister Christine

THE MATH, BELUR, DIST. HOWRAH,

15th June 1902.

DEAR CHRISTINE,

Just now received your note. I am quite easy in my mind so
long [as] you live with Mrs. [Charlotte] Sevier at Mayavati. You know,
anxiety is one thing I must avoid to recover. I will be very anxious if
you are in Calcutta, at Baghbazar. I am slowly recovering. Stay with
Mrs. Sevier as long as you can. Don't come down with Margot [Sister
Nivedita].

With love,

VIVEKANANDA.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/letters_fifth_series/227_christine.htm


← 
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Letters –
Fifth Series / →

« Chronology

« Addressee

CCXXVII

To Sister Christine

THE MATH, BELUR, DIST. HOWRAH,

21st June 1902.

MY DEAR CHRISTINE,

You have not the least cause to be anxious. I am getting on
anyhow and am quite strong. As to diet, I find I have to restrict
myself and not follow the prescription of my doctor to eat anything I
like. The pills continue, however. Will you ask the boys if they can
get "Amalaki" [Emblic myrobalan] fruits in the
place now? We cannot get them in the plains now. They are rather sour
and puckery eaten raw; but make marmalade of whole [ones] — delicious.
Then they are the best things for fermentation I ever get.

No anxiety on the score of Marie Louise's1
arrival in Calcutta. She has not yet made any noise.

Things go on the same. I am trying to go to Monghyr — a place
near Calcutta and said to be very salubrious.

We will think of your coming to Baghbazar after Nivedita has
fairly started; till then keep quiet and lay on food.

With all love to yourself, the boys and Mother [Mrs. Charlotte
Sevier],

VIVEKANANDA.

PS — I am laying on adipose tissues fast — especially about
the abdominal regions: "It is fearful to see!"

^Swami
Abhayananda, one of Swami Vivekananda's Sannyasin disciples.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/lectures_and_discourses/the_women_of_india.htm


←
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Lectures
and Discourses / →

THE WOMEN OF INDIA

(New Discoveries,
Vol. 2, pp. 411-26.)

The following lecture was
delivered at Cambridge, December 17, 1894, and recorded by Miss Frances
Willard’s stenographer.

Swami Vivekananda faced bigotry
in America on several issues of Indian culture — one was the Indian
woman. Naturally he sought to correct Western misconceptions. When he
lectured in his own country, however, there was no greater advocate for
improving the life of Indian women than the Swami.

In speaking about the women of India, ladies and gentlemen, I
feel that I am going to talk about my mothers and sisters in India to
the women of another race, many of whom have been like mothers and
sisters to me. But though, unfortunately, within very recent times
there have been mouths only to curse the women of our country, I have
found that there are some who bless them too. I have found such noble
souls in this nation as Mrs. [Ole] Bull and Miss [Sarah] Farmer and
Miss [Frances] Willard, and that wonderful representative of the
highest aristocracy of the world, whose life reminds me of that man of
India, six hundred years before the birth of Christ, who gave up his
throne to mix with the people. Lady Henry Somerset has been a
revelation to me. I become bold when I find such noble souls who will
not curse, whose mouths are full of blessing for me, my country, our
men and women, and whose hands and hearts are ever ready to do service
to humanity.

I first intend to take a glimpse into times past of Indian
history, and we will find something unique. All of you are aware,
perhaps, that you Americans and we Hindus and this lady from Iceland
[Mrs. Sigrid Magnusson] are the descendants of one common ancestry
known as Aryans. Above all, we find
three ideas wherever the Aryans go: the village community, the rights
of women and a joyful religion.1

The first [idea] is the system of village communities — as we
have just heard from Mrs. Bull concerning the North. Each man was his
own [lord?] and owned the land. All these political institutions of the
world we now see, are the developments of those village systems. As the
Aryans went over to different countries and settled, certain
circumstances developed this institution, others that.

The next idea of the Aryans is the freedom of women. It is in
the Aryan literature that we find women in ancient times taking the
same share as men, and in no other literature of the world.

Going back to our Vedas — they are the oldest literature the
world possesses and are composed by your and my common ancestors (they
were not written in India — perhaps on the coast of the Baltic, perhaps
in Central Asia — we do not know).

Their oldest portion is composed of hymns, and these hymns are
to the gods whom the Aryans worshipped. I may be pardoned for using the
word gods; the literal translation is "the bright
ones". These hymns are dedicated to Fire, to the Sun, to Varuna and
other deities. The titles run: "such-and-such a sage composed this
verse, dedicated to such-and-such a deity".

In the tenth chapter comes a peculiar hymn — for the sage is a
woman — and it is dedicated to the one God who is at the background of
all these gods. All the previous hymns are spoken in the third person,
as if someone were addressing the deities. But this hymn takes a
departure: God [as the Devi] is speaking for herself. The pronoun used
is "I". "I am the Empress of the Universe, the Fulfiller of all
prayers." (Vide “Devi Sukta”, Rig-Veda 10.125)

This is the first glimpse of women's work in the Vedas. As we
go on, we find them taking a greater share — even officiating as
priests. There is not one passage throughout the whole mass of
literature of the Vedas which can be construed even indirectly
as signifying that woman could never be a priest. In fact, there are
many examples of women officiating as priests.

Then we come to the last portion of these Vedas — which is
really the religion of India — the concentrated wisdom of which has not
been surpassed even in this century. There, too, we find women
preeminent. A large portion of these books are words which have
proceeded from the mouths of women. It is there — recorded with their
names and teachings.

There is that beautiful story of the great sage Yâjnavalkya,
the one who visited the kingdom of the great king Janaka. And there in
that assembly of the learned, people came to ask him questions. One man
asked him, "How am I to perform this sacrifice?" Another asked him,
"How am I to perform the other sacrifice?" And after he had answered
them, there arose a woman who said, "These are childish questions. Now,
have a care: I take these two arrows, my two questions. Answer them if
you can, and we will then call you a sage. The first is: What is the
soul? The second is: What is God?" ( Brihadâranyaka Upanishad
3.8.1.-12.)

Thus arose in India the great questions about the soul and
God, and these came from the mouth of a woman. The sage had to pass an
examination before her, and he passed well.

Coming to the next stratum of literature, our epics, we find
that education has not degenerated. Especially in the caste of princes
this ideal was most wonderfully held.

In the Vedas we find this idea of marrying — the girls chose
for themselves; so the boys. In the next stratum they are married by
their parents, except in one caste.

Even here I would ask you to look at another side. Whatever
may be said of the Hindus, they are one of the most learned races the
world has ever produced. The Hindu is the metaphysician; he applies
everything to his intellect. Everything has to be settled by
astrological calculation.

The idea was that the stars govern the fate of every man and
woman. Even today when a child is born, a horoscope is cast. That
determines the character of the child. One child is born of a divine
nature, another of a human, others of lower character.

The difficulty was: If a child who was of a monster-character
was united with a child of a god-character, would they not have a
tendency to degenerate each other?

The next difficulty was: Our laws did not allow marriage
within the same clans. Not only may one not marry within his own family
— or even one of his cousins — but one must not marry into the clan of
his father or even of his mother.

A third difficulty was: If there had been leprosy or phthisis
or any such incurable disease within six generations of either bride or
bridegroom, then there must not be a marriage.

Now taking [into account] these three difficulties, the
Brahmin says: "If I leave it to the choice of the boy or girl to marry,
the boy or girl will be fascinated with a beautiful face. And then very
likely all these circumstances will bring ruin to the family". This is
the primary idea that governs our marriage laws, as you will find.
Whether right or wrong, there is this philosophy at the background.
Prevention is better than cure.

That misery exists in this world is because we give birth to
misery. So the whole question is how to prevent the birth of miserable
children. How far the rights of a society should extend over the
individual is an open question. But the Hindus say that the choice of
marriage should not be left in the hands of the boy or girl.

I do not mean to say that this is the best thing to do. Nor do
I see that leaving it in their hands is at all a perfect solution. I
have not found a solution yet in my own mind; nor do I see that any
country has one.

We come next to another picture. I told you that there was
another peculiar form of marriage (generally among the royalty) where
the father of the girl invited different princes and noblemen and they
had an assembly. The young lady, the daughter of the king, was borne on
a sort of chair before each one of the princes in turn. And the herald
would repeat: "This is Prince So-and-so, and these are his
qualifications". The young girl would either wait or say, "Move on".
And before the next prince, the crier would also give a description,
and the girl would say, "Move on". (All this would be arranged
beforehand; she already had the liking for somebody before this.) Then
at last she would ask one of the servants to throw the garland over
the head of the man, and it would be thrown to show he was accepted.
(The last of these marriages was the cause of the Mohammedan invasion
of India.) (Vide later
this chapter for the
story of Samjuktâ, daughter of a Rajput prince, who became the Queen of
Delhi.) These marriages were specially reserved for the prince caste.

The oldest Sanskrit poem in existence, the Râmâyana, has
embodied the loftiest Hindu ideal of a woman in the character of Sitâ.
We have not time to go through her life of infinite patience and
goodness. We worship her as God incarnate, and she is named before her
husband, Râma. We say not "Mr. and Mrs.", but "Mrs. and Mr." and so on,
with all the gods and goddesses, naming the woman first.

There is another peculiar conception of the Hindu. Those who
have been studying with me are aware that the central conception of
Hindu philosophy is of the Absolute; that is the background of the
universe. This Absolute Being, of whom we can predicate nothing, has
Its powers spoken of as She —
that is, the real personal God in India is She. This Shakti of the
Brahman is always in the feminine gender.

Rama is considered the type of the Absolute, and Sita that of
Power. We have no time to go over all the life of Sita, but I will
quote a passage from her life that is very much suited to the ladies of
this country.

The picture opens when she was in the forest with her husband,
whither they were banished. There was a female sage whom they both went
to see. Her fasts and devotions had emaciated her body.

Sita approached this sage and bowed down before her. The sage
placed her hand on the head of Sita and said: "It is a great blessing
to possess a beautiful body; you have that. It is a greater blessing to
have a noble husband; you have that. It is the greatest blessing to be
perfectly obedient to such a husband; you are that. You must be happy".

Sita replied, "Mother, I am glad that God has given me a
beautiful body and that I have so devoted a husband. But as to the
third blessing, I do not know whether I obey him or he obeys me. One
thing alone I remember, that when he took me by the hand before the
sacrificial fire — whether it was a
reflection of the fire or whether God himself made it appear to me — I
found
that I was his and he was mine. And since then, I have found that I am
the complement of his life, and he of mine".

Portions of this poem have been translated into the English
language. Sita is the ideal of a woman in India and worshipped as God
incarnate.

We come now to Manu the great lawgiver. Now, in this book
there is an elaborate description of how a child should be educated. We
must remember that it was compulsory with the Aryans that a child be
educated, whatever his caste. After describing how a child should be
educated, Manu adds: "Along the same lines, the daughters are to be
educated — exactly as the boys".2

I have often heard that there are other passages where women
are condemned. I admit that in our sacred books there are many passages
which condemn women as offering temptation; you can see that for
yourselves. But there are also passages that glorify women as the power
of God. And there are other passages which state that in that house
where one drop of a woman's tear falls, the gods are never pleased and
the house goes to ruin. Drinking wine, killing a woman and killing a
Brahmin are the highest crimes in the Hindu religion. I admit there are
condemnatory sentences [in some of our books]; but here I claim the
superiority of these Hindu books, for in the books of other races there
is only condemnation and no good word for a woman.

Next, I will come to our old dramas. Whatever the books say,
the dramas are the perfect representation of society as it then
existed. In these, which were written from four hundred years before
Christ onward, we find even universities full of both boys and girls.
We would not [now] find Hindu women, as they have since become cut off
from higher education.3
But [at that time], they were everywhere pretty much the same as they
are in this country — going out to the gardens and parks to take
promenades.

There is another point which I bring before you and where the
Hindu woman is still superior to all other women in the world — her
rights. The right to possess property is as absolute for women in India
as for men — and has been for thousands and thousands of years.

If you have any lawyer friend and can take up commentaries on
the Hindu law, you will find it all for yourselves. A girl may bring a
million dollars to her husband, but every dollar of that is hers.
Nobody has any right to touch one dollar of that. If the husband dies
without issue, the whole property of the husband goes to her, even if
his father or mother is living. And that has been the law from the past
to the present time. That is something which the Hindu woman has had
beyond that of the women of other countries.

The older books — or even newer books — do not prohibit the
Hindu widows from being married; it is a mistake to think so. They give
them their choice, and that is given to both men and women. The idea in
our religion is that marriage is for the weak, and I don't see any
reason to give up that idea today. They who find themselves complete —
what is the use of their marrying? And those that marry — they are
given one chance. When that chance is over, both men and women are
looked down upon if they marry again; but it is not that they are
prohibited. It is nowhere said that a widow is not to marry. The widow
and widower who do not marry are considered more spiritual.

Men, of course, break through this law and go and marry;
whereas women — they being of a higher spiritual nature — keep to the
law. For instance, our books say that eating meat is bad and sinful,
but you may still eat such-and-such a meat — mutton, for instance. I
have seen thousands of men who eat mutton, and never in my life have I
seen a woman of higher caste who eats meat of any kind. This shows that
their nature is to keep the law — keeping more towards religion. But do
not judge too harshly of Hindu men. You must try to look at the Hindu
law from my position too, for I am a Hindu man.

This non-marriage of widows gradually grew into a custom. And
whenever in India a custom becomes rigid, it is almost impossible to
break through it — just as in your country, you
will find how hard it is to break through a five-day custom of fashion.
In the lower castes, except two, the widows remarry.

There is a passage in our later law books [which states] that
a woman shall not read the Vedas. But they are prohibited to even a
weak Brahmin. If a Brahmin boy is not strong-minded, the law is applied
to him also. But that does not show that education is prohibited to
them, for the Vedas are not all that the Hindus have. Every other book
women can read. All the mass of Sanskrit literature, that whole ocean
of literature — science, drama, poetry — is all for them. They can go
there and read everything, except the [Vedic] scriptures.4

In later days the idea was that woman was not intended to be a
priest; so what is the use of her studying the Vedas? In that, the
Hindus are not so far behind other nations. When women give up the
world and join our Order, they are no longer considered either men or
women. They have no sex. The whole question of high or low caste, man
or woman, dies out entirely.

Whatever I know of religion I learned from my master, and he
learned it of a woman.

Coming
back
to the Rajput woman, I will try to bring to you a story
from some of our old books — how during the Mohammedan conquest, one of
these women was the cause of what led to the conquest of India.

A Rajput prince of Kanauj — a very ancient city — had a
daughter [Samjukta]. She had heard of the military fame of Prithvi Raj
[King of Ajmere and Delhi] and all his glory, and she was in love with
him.

Now her father wanted to hold a Râjasuya sacrifice, so he
invited all the kings in the country. And in that sacrifice, they all
had to render menial service to him because he was superior over all;
and with that sacrifice he declared there would be a choice by his
daughter.

But the daughter was already in love with Prithvi Raj. He was
very mighty and was not going to acknowledge loyalty to the king, her
father, so he refused the invitation. Then the king made a golden
statue of Prithvi Raj and put it near the door. He
said that that was the duty he had given him to perform — that of a
porter.

The upshot of the whole affair was that Prithvi Raj, like a
true knight, came and took the lady behind him on his horse, and they
both fled.

When the news came to her father, he gave chase with his army,
and there was a great battle in which the majority of both armies was
killed. And [thus the Rajputs were so weakened that] the Mohammedan
empire in India began.

When the Mohammedan empire was being established in northern
India, the Queen of Chitore [Râni Padmini] was famed for her beauty.
And the report of her beauty reached the sultan, and he wrote a letter
for the queen to be sent to his harem. The result was a terrible war
between the King of Chitore and the sultan. The Mohammedans invaded
Chitore. And when the Rajputs found they could not defend themselves
any more, the men all took sword in hand and killed and were killed,
and the women perished in the flames.

After the men had all perished, the conqueror entered the
city. There in the street was rising a horrible flame. He saw circles
of women going around it, led by the queen herself. When he approached
near and asked the queen to refrain from jumping into the flames, she
said, "This is how the Rajput woman treats you", and threw herself into
the fire.

It is said that 74,500 women perished in the flames that day
to save their honour from the hands of the Mohammedans. Even today when
we write a letter, after sealing it we write "74½" upon it, meaning
that if one dares to open this letter, that sin of killing 74,500 women
will be upon his head.

I will tell you the story of another beautiful Rajput girl.5
There is a peculiar custom in
our country called "protection". Women
can send small bracelets of silken thread to men. And if a girl sends
one of these to a man, that man becomes her brother.

During the reign of the last of the Mogul emperors — the cruel
man who destroyed that most brilliant empire of India — he
similarly heard of the beauty of a Rajput chieftain's daughter. Orders
were sent that she should be brought to the Mogul harem.

Then a messenger came from the emperor to her with his
picture, and he showed it to her. In derision she stamped upon it with
her feet and said, "Thus the Rajput girl treats your Mogul emperor". As
a result, the imperial army was marched into Rajputana.

In despair the chieftain's daughter thought of a device. She
took a number of these bracelets and sent them to the Rajput princes
with a message: "Come and help us". All the Rajputs assembled, and so
the imperial forces had to go back again.

I will tell you a peculiar proverb in Rajputana. There is a
caste in India called the shop class, the traders. They are very
intelligent — some of them — but the Hindus think they are rather
sharp. But it is a peculiar fact that the women of that caste are not
as intelligent as the men. On the other hand, the Rajput man is not
half as intelligent as the Rajput woman.

The common proverb in Rajputana is: "The intelligent woman
begets the dull son, and the dull woman begets the sharp son". The fact
is, whenever any state or kingdom in Rajputana has been managed by a
woman, it has been managed wonderfully well.

We come to another class of women. This mild Hindu race
produces fighting women from time to time. Some of you may have heard
of the woman [Lakshmi Bai, Queen of Jhansi] who, during the Mutiny of
1857, fought against the English soldiers and held her own ground for
two years — leading modern armies, managing batteries and always
charging at the head of her army. This queen was a Brahmin girl.

A man whom I know lost three of his sons in that war. When he
talks of them he is calm, but when he talks of this woman his voice
becomes animated. He used to say that she was a goddess — she was not a
human being. This old veteran thinks he never saw better generalship.

The story of Chand Bibi, or Chand Sultana [1546 - 1599], is
well known in India. She was the Queen of Golconda, where the diamond
mines were. For months she defended herself. At last, a breach was made
in the walls. When the imperial army tried to
rush in there, she was in full armour, and she forced the troops to go
back.6

In still later times, perhaps you will be astonished to know
that a great English general had once to face a Hindu girl of sixteen.

Women in statesmanship, managing territories, governing
countries, even making war, have proved themselves equal to men — if
not superior. In India I have no doubt of that. Whenever they have had
the opportunity, they have proved that they have as much ability as
men, with this advantage — that they seldom degenerate. They keep to
the moral standard, which is innate in their nature. And thus as
governors and rulers of their state, they prove — at least in India —
far superior to men. John Stuart Mill mentions this fact.

Even at the present day, we see women in India managing vast
estates with great ability. There were two ladies where I was born who
were the proprietors of large estates and patronesses of learning and
art and who managed these estates with their own brains and looked to
every detail of the business.

Each nation, beyond a general humanity, develops a certain
peculiarity of character — so in religion, so in politics, so in the
physical body, so in mental habitude, so in men and women, so in
character. One nation develops one peculiarity of character, another
takes another peculiarity. Within the last few years the world has
begun to recognize this.

The very peculiarity of Hindu women, which they have developed
and which is the idea of their life, is that of the mother.
If you enter a Hindu's home, you will not find the wife to be the same
equal companion of the husband as you find her here. But when you find
the mother, she is the very pillar of the Hindu home. The wife must
wait to become the mother, and then she will be everything.

If one becomes a monk,
his father will have to salute him
first because he has become a monk and is therefore superior to him.
But to his mother he — monk or no monk — will have to go
down on his knees and prostrate himself before her. He will then put a
little cup of water before her feet, she will dip her toe in it, and he
will have to drink of it. A Hindu son gladly does this a thousand times
over again!7

Where the Vedas teach morality, the first words are, “Let the
mother be your God" (Taittiriya Upanishad 1.11.) — and that she is.
When we talk of woman in India, our idea of woman is mother. The value
of women consists in their being mothers of the human race. That is the
idea of the Hindu.

I have seen my old master taking little girls by the hands,
placing them in a chair and actually worshipping them — placing flowers
at their feet and prostrating himself before these little children —
because they represented the mother God.

The mother is the God in our family. The idea is that the only
real love that we see in the world, the most unselfish love, is in the
mother — always suffering, always loving. And what love can represent
the love of God more than the love which we see in the mother? Thus the
mother is the incarnation of God on earth to the Hindu.

"That boy alone can understand God who has been first taught
by his mother." I have heard wild stories about the illiteracy of our
women. Till I was a boy of ten, I was taught by my mother. I saw my
grandmother living and my great-grandmother living, and I assure you
that there never was in my line a female ancestor who could not read or
write, or who had to put "her mark" on a paper. If there was a woman
who could not read or write, my birth would have been impossible. Caste
laws make it imperative.

So these are wild stories which I sometimes hear — such as the
statement that in the Middle Ages reading and writing were taken away
from Hindu women. I refer you to Sir William Hunter's History
of the English People, where he cited Indian women who could
calculate a solar eclipse.

I have been told that either too much worship of the mother
makes the mother selfish or too much love of the children for
the mother makes them selfish. But I do not believe that. The love
which my mother gave to me has made me what I am, and I owe a debt to
her that I can never repay.

Why should the Hindu mother be worshipped? Our philosophers
try to find a reason and they come to this definition: We call
ourselves the Aryan race. What is an Aryan? He is a man whose birth is
through religion. This is a peculiar subject, perhaps, in this country;
but the idea is that a man must be born through religion, through
prayers. If you take up our law books you will find chapters devoted to
this — the prenatal influence of a mother on the child.

I know that before I was born, my mother would fast and pray
and do hundreds of things which I could not even do for five minutes.
She did that for two years. I believe that whatever religious culture I
have, I owe to that. It was consciously that my mother brought me into
the world to be what I am. Whatever good impulse I have was given to me
by my mother — and consciously, not unconsciously.

"A child materially born is not an Aryan; the child born in
spirituality is an Aryan." For all this trouble — because she has to
make herself so pure and holy in order to have pure children — she has
a peculiar claim on the Hindu child. And the rest [of her traits] is
the same with all other nations: she is so unselfish. But the mother
has to suffer most in our families.

The mother has to eat last. I have been asked many times in
your country why the [Hindu] husband does not sit with his wife to eat
— if the idea is, perhaps, that the husband thinks she is too low a
being. This explanation is not at all right. You know, a hog's hair is
thought to be very unclean. A Hindu cannot brush his teeth with the
brushes made of it, so he uses the fibre of plants. Some traveller saw
one Hindu brushing his teeth with that and then wrote that "a Hindu
gets up early in the morning and gets a plant and chews it and swallows
it!" Similarly, some have seen the husband and wife not eating together
and have made their own explanation. There are so many explainers in
this world, and so few observers — as if the world is dying for their
explanations! That is why I sometimes think the invention of printing
was not an unmixed blessing. The real fact is: just as in your country
many things must not be done by ladies before
men, so in our country the fact is that it is very indecorous to munch
and munch before men. If a lady is eating, she may eat before her
brothers. But if the husband comes in, she stops immediately and the
husband walks out quickly. We have no tables to sit at, and whenever a
man is hungry he comes in and takes his meal and goes out. Do not
believe that a Hindu husband does not allow his wife to sit at the
table with him. He has no table at all.

The first part of the food — when it is ready — belongs to the
guests and the poor, the second to the lower animals, the third to the
children, the fourth to the husband, and last comes the mother. How
many times I have seen my mother going to take her first meal when it
was two o'clock. We took ours at ten and she at two because she had so
many things to attend to. [For example], someone knocks at the door and
says, "Guest", and there is no food except what was for my mother. She
would give that to him willingly and then wait for her own. That was
her life and she liked it. And that is why we worship mothers as gods.

I wish you would like less to be merely petted and patronized
and more to be worshipped! [You], a member of the human race! — the
poor Hindu does not understand that [inclination of yours]. But when
you say, "We are mothers and we command", he bows down. This is the
side then that the Hindus have developed.

Going back to our theories — people in the West came about one
hundred years ago to the point that they must tolerate other religions.
But we know now that toleration is not sufficient toward another
religion; we must accept it. Thus it is not a question of subtraction,
it is a question of addition. The truth is the result of all these
different sides added together. Each of all these religions represents
one side, the fullness being the addition of all these. And so in every
science, it is addition that is the law.

Now the Hindu has developed this side. But will this side be
enough? Let the Hindu woman who is the mother become the worthy wife
also, but do not try to destroy the mother. That is the best thing you
can do. Thus you get a better view of the universe instead of going
about all over the world, rushing into
different nations and criticizing them and saying, "The horrid wretches
— all fit to be barbecued for eternity!"

If we take our stand on this position — that each nation under
the Lord's will is developing one part of human nature — no nation is a
failure. So far they have done well, now they must do better! [Applause]

Instead of calling the Hindus "heathens", "wretches",
"slaves", go to India and say, "So far your work is wonderful, but that
is not all. You have much more to do. God bless you that you have
developed this side of woman as a mother. Now help the other side — the
wife of men".

And similarly, I think (I tell it with the best spirit) that
you had better add to your national character a little more of the
mother side of the Hindu nature! This was the first verse that I was
taught in my life, the first day I went to school: "He indeed is a
learned man who looks upon all women as his mother, who looks upon
every man's property as so much dust, and looks upon every being as his
own soul".

There is the other idea of the woman working with the man. It
is not that the Hindus had not those ideals, but they could not develop
them.

It is alone in the Sanskrit language that we find four words
meaning husband and wife together. It is only in our marriage that they
[both] promise, "What has been my heart now may be thine". It is there
that we see that the husband is made to look at the Pole-star, touching
the hand of his wife and saying, "As the Pole-star is fixed in the
heavens, so may I be fixed in my affection to thee". And the wife does
the same.

Even a woman who is vile enough to go into the streets can sue
her husband and have a maintenance. We find the germs of these ideas in
all our books throughout our nation, but we were not able to develop
that side of the character.

We must go far beyond sentiment when we want to judge. We know
it is not emotion alone that governs the world, but there is something
behind emotion. Economic causes, surrounding circumstances and other
considerations enter into the development of nations. (It is not in my
present plan to go into the causes that develop woman as wife.)

So in this world, as each nation is placed under peculiar
circumstances and is developing its own type, the day is coming when
all these different types will be mixed up — when that vile sort of
patriotism which means "rob everybody and give to me" will vanish. Then
there will be no more one-sided development in the whole world, and
each one of these [nations] will see that they had done right.

Let us now go to work and mix the nations up together and let
the new nation come.

Will you let me tell you my conviction? Much of the
civilization that comprises the world today has come from that one
peculiar race of mankind — the Aryans.8

[Aryan] civilization has been of three types: the Roman, the
Greek, the Hindu. The Roman type is the type of organization, conquest,
steadiness — but lacking in emotional nature, appreciation of beauty
and the higher emotions. Its defect is cruelty. The Greek is
essentially enthusiastic for the beautiful, but frivolous and has a
tendency to become immoral. The Hindu type is essentially metaphysical
and religious, but lacking in all the elements of organization and work.

The Roman type is now represented by the Anglo-Saxon; the
Greek type more by the French than by any other nation; and the old
Hindus do not die! Each type has its advantage in this new land of
promise. They have the Roman's organization, the power of the Greek's
wonderful love for the beautiful, and the Hindu's backbone of religion
and love of God. Mix these up together and bring in the new
civilization.

And let me tell you, this should be done by women. There are
some of our books which say that the next incarnation, and the last (we
believe in ten), is to come in the form of a woman.

We see resources in the world yet remaining because all the
forces that are in the world have not come into use. The hand was
acting all this time while other parts of the body were remaining
silent. Let the other parts of the body be awakened and perhaps in
harmonious action all the misery will be cured. Perhaps, in this new
land, with this new blood in your veins,
you may bring in that new civilization — and, perhaps, through American
women.

As to that ever blessed land which gave me this body, I look
back with great veneration and bless the merciful being who permitted
me to take birth in that holiest spot on earth. When the whole world is
trying to trace its ancestry from men distinguished in arms or wealth,
the Hindus alone are proud to trace their descent from saints.

That wonderful vessel which has been carrying for ages men and
women across this ocean of life may have sprung small leaks here and
there. And of that, too, the Lord alone knows how much is owing to
themselves and how much to those who look down with contempt upon the
Hindus.

But if such leaks there are, I, the meanest of her children,
think it my duty to stop her from sinking even if I have to do it with
my life. And if I find that all my struggles are in vain, still, as the
Lord is my witness, I will tell them with my heartfelt benediction: "My
brethren, you have done well — nay, better than any other race could
have done under the same circumstances. You have given me all that I
have. Grant me the privilege of being at your side to the last and let
us all sink together".

→

^Since
Swami Vivekananda's time there has been more research on the spread of
the Aryan culture.

^Note:
The text of this sentence is not found in the extant Manu Samhitâ. Vide
Mahânirvâna Tantra 8.47.

^Since
Swami Vivekananda's time, higher education among women in India has
spread rapidly.

^Today
Indian women are no longer barred from reading any scriptures — Vedic
or non-Vedic.  

^Chârumati,
or Rupamati, daughter of Vikram Singh, King of Kishangarh, in
Rajasthan. Charumati is the heroine of Râjasimha, a Bengali historical
novel written by Bankim Chandra Chatterjee.

^The
soldiers were so impressed with Chand Bibi's military prowess and
courage that they referred to her as Chand Sultana, which means "Chand
— the Empress".

^This
custom is a gesture meant to acknowledge the mother not only as the
first teacher and preceptor in one's life, but also as an embodiment of
the all-loving God.

^It
may be noted here that today many historians and anthropologists would
describe the Aryans as a linguistic group rather than a race. —
Publisher.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/lectures_and_discourses/the_first_step_towards_jnana.htm


←
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Lectures
and Discourses
/ →

THE FIRST STEP TOWARDS JNANA1

[A Jnâna-Yoga class delivered
in New York, Wednesday, December 11, 1895, and recorded by Swami
Kripananda]

The word Jnâna means knowledge. It is
derived from the root Jnâ — to know — the same word
from which your English word to know is derived.
Jnana-Yoga is Yoga by means of knowledge. What is the object of the
Jnana-Yoga? Freedom. Freedom from what? Freedom from our imperfections,
freedom from the misery of life. Why are we miserable? We are miserable
because we are bound. What is the bondage? The bondage is of nature.
Who is it that binds us? We, ourselves.

The whole universe is bound by the law of causation. There
cannot be anything, any fact — either in the internal or in the
external world — that is uncaused; and every cause must produce an
effect.

Now this bondage in which we are is a fact. It need not be
proved that we are in bondage. For instance: I would be very glad to
get out of this room through this wall, but I cannot; I would be very
glad if I never became sick, but I cannot prevent it; I would be very
glad not to die, but I have to; I would be very glad to do millions of
things that I cannot do. The will is there, but we do not succeed in
accomplishing the desire. When we have any desire and not the means of
fulfilling it, we get that peculiar reaction called misery. Who is the
cause of desire? I, myself. Therefore, I myself am the cause of all the
miseries I am in.

Misery begins with the birth of the child. Weak and helpless,
he enters the world. The first sign of life is weeping. Now, how could
we be the cause of misery when we find it at the very beginning? We
have caused it in the past. [Here Swami Vivekananda
entered into a fairly long discussion of "the very interesting
theory called Reincarnation". He continued:]

To understand reincarnation, we have first to know that in
this universe something can never be produced out of nothing. If there
is such a thing as a human soul, it cannot be produced out of nothing.
If something can be produced out of nothing, then something would
disappear into nothing also. If we are produced out of nothing, then we
will also go back into nothing. That which has a beginning must have an
end. Therefore, as souls we could not have had any beginning. We have
been existing all the time.

Then again, if we did not exist previously, there is no
explanation of our present existence. The child is born with a bundle
of causes. How many things we see in a child which can never be
explained until we grant that the child has had past experience — for
instance, fear of death and a great number of innate tendencies. Who
taught the baby to drink milk and to do so in a peculiar fashion? Where
did it acquire this knowledge? We know that there cannot be any
knowledge without experience, for to say that knowledge is intuitive in
the child, or instinctive, is what the logicians would call a "petitio
principii".2

It would be the same [logic] as when a man asks me why light
comes through a glass, and I answer him, "Because it is transparent".
That would be really no answer at all because I am simply translating
his word into a bigger one. The word "transparent" means "that through
which light comes" — and that was the question. The question was why
light comes through the glass, and I answered him, "Because it comes
through the glass".

In the same way, the question was why these tendencies are in
the child. Why should it have fear of death if it never saw death? If
this is the first time it was ever born, how did it know to suck the
mother's milk? If the answer is "Oh, it was instinct", that is simply
returning the question. If a man stands up and says, "I do not know",
he is in a better position than the man who says, "It is instinct" and
all such nonsense.

There is no such thing as instinct; there is no such thing as
nature separate from habit. Habit is one's second nature, and habit is
one's first nature too. All that is in your nature is the result of
habit, and habit is the result of experience. There cannot be any
knowledge but from experience.

So this baby must have had some experience too. This fact is
granted even by modern materialistic science. It proves beyond doubt
that the baby brings with it a fund of experience. It does not enter
into this world with a "tabula rasa" — a blank mind upon which nothing
is written — as some of the old philosophers believed, but ready
equipped with a bundle of knowledge. So far so good.

But while modern science grants that this bundle of knowledge
which the child brings with it was acquired through experience, it
asserts, at the same time, that it is not its own — but its father's
and its grandfather's and its great-grandfather's. Knowledge comes,
they say, through hereditary transmission.

Now this is one step in advance of that old theory of
"instinct", that is fit only for babies and idiots. This "instinct"
theory is a mere pun upon words and has no meaning whatsoever. A man
with the least thinking power and the least insight into the logical
precision of words would never dare to explain innate tendencies by
"instinct", a term which is equivalent to saying that something came
out of nothing. But the modern theory of transmission through
experience — though, no doubt, a step in advance of the old one — is
not sufficient at all. Why not? We can understand a physical
transmission, but a mental transmission is impossible to understand.

What causes me — who am a soul — to be born with a father who
has transmitted certain qualities? What makes me come back? The father,
having certain qualities, may be one binding cause. Taking for granted
that I am a distinct soul that was existing before and wants to
reincarnate — what makes my soul go into the body of a particular man?
For the explanation to be sufficient, we have to assume a hereditary
transmission of energies and such a thing as my own previous
experience. This is what is called Karma, or, in English, the Law of
Causation, the law of fitness.

For instance, if my previous actions have all been towards
drunkenness, I will naturally gravitate towards persons who are
transmitting a drunkard's character. I can only take advantage of the
organism produced by those parents who have been transmitting a certain
peculiar influence for which I am fit by my previous actions. Thus we
see that it is true that a certain hereditary experience is transmitted
from father to son, and so on. At the same time, it is my past
experience that joins me to the particular cause of hereditary
transmission.

A simply hereditary transmission theory will only touch the
physical man and would be perfectly insufficient for the internal soul
of man. Even when looking upon the matter from the purest materialistic
standpoint — viz. that there is no such thing as a soul in man, and man
is nothing but a bundle of atoms acted upon by certain physical forces
and works like an automaton — even taking that for granted, the mere
transmission theory would be quite insufficient.

The greatest difficulties regarding the simple hypothesis of
mere physical transmission will be here: If there be no such thing as a
soul in man, if he be nothing more than a bundle of atoms acted upon by
certain forces, then, in the case of transmission, the soul of the
father would decrease in ratio to the number of his children; and the
man who has five, six or eight children must, in the end, become an
idiot. India and China — where men breed like rats — would then be full
of idiots. But, on the contrary, we find that the least amount of
lunacy is in India and China.

The question is, What do we mean by the word transmission?
It is a big word, but, like so many other impossible and nonsensical
terms of the same kind, it has come into use without people
understanding it. If I were to ask you what transmission
is, you would find that you have no real conception of its meaning
because there is no idea attached to it.

Let us look a little closer into the matter. Say, for
instance, here is a father. A child is born to him. We see that the
same qualities [which the father possesses] have entered into his
child. Very good. Now how did the qualities of the father come to be in
the child? Nobody knows. So this gap the modern physicists
want to fill with the big word transmission. And
what does this transmission mean? Nobody knows.

How can mental qualities of experience be condensed and made
to live in one single cell of protoplasm? There is no difference
between the protoplasm of a bird and that of a human brain. All we can
say with regard to physical transmission is that it consists of the two
or three protoplasmic cells cut from the father's body. That is all.
But what nonsense to assume that ages and ages of past human experience
got compressed into a few protoplasmic cells! It is too tremendous a
pill they ask you to swallow with this little word transmission.

In olden times the churches had prestige, but today science
has got it. And just as in olden times people never inquired for
themselves — never studied the Bible, and so the priests had a very
good opportunity to teach whatever they liked — so even now the
majority of people do not study for themselves and, at the same time,
have a tremendous awe and fear before anything called scientific. You
ought to remember that there is a worse popery coming than ever existed
in the church — the so-called scientific popery, which has become so
successful that it dictates to us with more authority than religious
popery.

These popes of modern science are great popes indeed, but
sometimes they ask us to believe more wonderful things than any priest
or any religion ever did. And one of those wonderful things is that
transmission theory, which I could never understand. If I ask, "What do
you mean by transmission?" they only make it a
little easier by saying, "It is hereditary transmission". And if I tell
them, "That is rather Greek to me", they make it still easier by
saying, "It is the adherence of paternal qualities in the protoplasmic
cells". In that way it becomes easier and easier, until my mind becomes
muddled and disgusted with the whole thing.

Now one thing we see: we produce thought. I am talking to you
this evening and it is producing thought in your brain. By this act of
transmission we understand that my thoughts are being transmitted into
your brain and your mind, and producing other thoughts. This is an
everyday fact.

It is always rational to take the side of things which you can
understand — to take the side of fact. Transmission of thought is
perfectly understandable. Therefore we are able to take up the [concept
of] transmission of thought, and not of hereditary impressions of
protoplasmic cells alone. We need not brush aside the theory, but the
main stress must be laid upon the transmission of thought.

Now a father does not transmit thought. It is thought alone
that transmits thought. The child that is born existed previously as
thought. We all existed eternally as thought and will go on existing as
thought.

What we think, that our body becomes. Everything is
manufactured by thought, and thus we are the manufacturers of our own
lives. We alone are responsible for whatever we do. It is foolish to
cry out: "Why am I unhappy?" I made my own unhappiness. It is not the
fault of the Lord at all.

Someone takes advantage of the light of the sun to break into
your house and rob you. And then when he is caught by the policeman, he
may cry: "Oh sun, why did you make me steal?" It was not the sun's
fault at all, because there are thousands of other people who did much
good to their fellow beings under the light of the same sun. The sun
did not tell this man to go about stealing and robbing.

Each one of us reaps what we ourselves have sown. These
miseries under which we suffer, these bondages under which we struggle,
have been caused by ourselves, and none else in the universe is to
blame. God is the least to blame for it.

"Why did God create this evil world?" He did not create this
evil world at all. We have made it evil, and we have to make it good.
"Why did God create me so miserable?" He did not. He gave me the same
powers as [He did] to every being. I brought myself to this pass.

Is God to blame for what I myself have done? His mercy is
always the same. His sun shines on the wicked and the good alike. His
air, His water, His earth give the same chances to the wicked and the
good. God is always the same eternal, merciful Father. The only thing
for us to do is to bear the results of our own acts.

We learn that, in the first place, we have been existing
eternally; in the second place that we are the makers of our own lives.
There is no such thing as fate. Our lives are the result of
our previous actions, our Karma. And it naturally follows that having
been ourselves the makers of our Karma, we must also be able to unmake
it.

The whole gist of Jnana-Yoga is to show humanity the method of
undoing this Karma. A caterpillar spins a little cocoon around itself
out of the substance of its own body and at last finds itself
imprisoned. It may cry and weep and howl there; nobody will come to its
rescue until it becomes wise and then comes out, a beautiful butterfly.
So with these our bondages. We are going around and around ourselves
through countless ages. And now we feel miserable and cry and lament
over our bondage. But crying and weeping will be of no avail. We must
set ourselves to cutting these bondages.

The main cause of all bondage is ignorance. Man is not wicked
by his own nature — not at all. His nature is pure, perfectly holy.
Each man is divine. Each man that you see is a God by his very nature.
This nature is covered by ignorance, and it is ignorance that binds us
down. Ignorance is the cause of all misery. Ignorance is the cause of
all wickedness; and knowledge will make the world good. Knowledge will
remove all misery. Knowledge will make us free. This is the idea of
Jnana-Yoga: knowledge will make us free! What knowledge? Chemistry?
Physics? Astronomy? Geology? They help us a little, just a little. But
the chief knowledge is that of your own nature. "Know thyself." You
must know what you are, what your real nature is. You must become
conscious of that infinite nature within. Then your bondages will burst.

Studying the external alone, man begins to feel himself to be
nothing. These vast powers of nature, these tremendous changes
occurring — whole communities wiped off the face of the earth in a
twinkling of time, one volcanic eruption shattering to pieces whole
continents — perceiving and studying these things, man begins to feel
himself weak. Therefore, it is not the study of external nature that
makes [one] strong. But there is the internal nature of man—a million
times more powerful than any volcanic eruption or any law of nature —
which conquers nature, triumphs over all its laws. And that alone
teaches man what he is.

"Knowledge is power", says the proverb, does it not? It is
through knowledge that power comes. Man has got to know. Here is a man
of infinite power and strength. He himself is by his own nature potent
and omniscient. And this he must know. And the more he becomes
conscious of his own Self, the more he manifests this power, and his
bonds break and at last he becomes free.

How to know ourselves? the question remains now. There are
various ways to know this Self, but in Jnana-Yoga it takes the help of
nothing but sheer intellectual reasoning. Reason alone, intellect
alone, rising to spiritual perception, shows what we are.

There is no question of believing. Disbelieve everything —
that is the idea of the Jnani. Believe nothing and disbelieve
everything — that is the first step. Dare to be a rationalist. Dare to
follow reason wherever it leads you.

We hear everyday people saying all around us: "I dare to
reason". It is, however, a very difficult thing to do. I would go two
hundred miles to look at the face of the man who dares to reason and to
follow reason. Nothing is easier to say, and nothing is more difficult
to do. We are bound to follow superstitions all the time — old, hoary
superstitions, either national or belonging to humanity in general —
superstitions belonging to family, to friends, to country, to fashion,
to books, to sex and to what-not.

Talk of reason! Very few people reason, indeed. You hear a man
say, "Oh, I don't like to believe in anything; I don't like to grope
through darkness. I must reason". And so he reasons. But when reason
smashes to pieces things that he hugs unto his breast, he says, "No
more! This reasoning is all right until it breaks my ideals. Stop
there!" That man would never be a Jnani. That man will carry his
bondage all his life and his lives to come. Again and again he will
come under the power of death. Such men are not made for Jnana. There
are other methods for them — such as bhakti-yoga, Karma-Yoga, or
Râja-Yoga — but not Jnana-Yoga.

I want to prepare you by saying that this method can be
followed only by the boldest. Do not think that the man who believes in
no church or belongs to no sect, or the man who
boasts of his unbelief, is a rationalist. Not at all. In modern times
it is rather bravado to do anything like that.

To be a rationalist requires more than unbelief. You must be
able not only to reason, but also to follow the dictates of your
reason. If reason tells you that this body is an illusion, are you
ready to give it up? Reason tells you that heat and cold are mere
illusions of your senses; are you ready to brave these things? If
reason tells you that nothing that the senses convey to your mind is
true, are you ready to deny your sense perception? If you dare, you are
a rationalist.

It is very hard to believe in reason and follow truth. This
whole world is full either of the superstitious or of half-hearted
hypocrites. I would rather side with superstition and ignorance than
stand with these half-hearted hypocrites. They are no good. They stand
on both sides of the river.

Take anything up, fix your ideal and follow it out boldly unto
death. That is the way to salvation. Half-heartedness never led to
anything. Be superstitious, be a fanatic if you please, but be
something. Be something, show that you have something; but be not like
these shilly-shallyers with truth — these jacks-of-all-trades who just
want to get a sort of nervous titillation, a dose of opium, until this
desire after the sensational becomes a habit.

The world is getting too full of such people. Contrary to the
apostles who, according to Christ, were the salt of the earth, these
fellows are the ashes, the dirt of the earth. So let us first clear the
ground and understand what is meant by following reason, and then we
will try to understand what the obstructions are to our following
reason.

The first obstruction to our following reason is our
unwillingness to go to truth. We want truth to come to us. In all my
travels, most people told me: "Oh, that is not a comfortable religion
you talk about. Give us a comfortable religion!"

I do not understand what they mean by this "comfortable
religion". I was never taught any comfortable religion in my life. I
want truth for my religion. Whether it be comfortable or not, I do not
care. Why should truth be comfortable always? Truth many times hits
hard — as we all know by our experience. Gradually, after a long
intercourse with such persons, I came to find out what they meant by
their stereotypical phrase. These people
have got into a rut, and they do not dare to get out of it. Truth must
apologize to them.

I once met a lady who was very fond of her children and her
money and her everything. When I began to preach to her that the only
way to God is by giving up everything, she stopped coming the next day.
One day she came and told me that the reason for her staying away was
because the religion I preached was very uncomfortable. "What sort of
religion would be comfortable to you?" I asked in order to test her.
She said: "I want to see God in my children, in my money, in my
diamonds".

"Very good, madam", I replied. "You have now got all these
things. And you will have to see these things millions of years yet.
Then you will be bumped somewhere and come to reason. Until that time
comes, you will never come to God. In the meantime, go on seeing God in
your children and in your money and your diamonds and your dances."

It is difficult, almost impossible, for such people to give up
sense enjoyment. It has grown upon them from birth to birth. If you ask
a pig to give up his sty and to go into your most beautiful parlour,
why it will be death to the pig. "Let go, I must live there", says the
pig.

[Here Swami Vivekananda explained the story of the fishwife:
"Once a fishwife was a guest in the house of a gardener who raised
flowers. She came there with her empty basket, after selling fish in
the market, and was asked to sleep in a room where flowers were kept.
But, because of the fragrance of the flowers, she couldn't get to sleep
for a long time. Her hostess saw her condition and said, 'Hello! Why
are you tossing from side to side so restlessly?' The fishwife said: 'I
don't know, friend. Perhaps the smell of the flowers has been
disturbing my sleep. Can you give me my fish-basket? Perhaps that will
put me to sleep'."]3

So with us. The majority of mankind delights in this fish
smell — this world, this enjoyment of the senses, this money and wealth
and chattel and wife and children. All this nonsense of the world —
this fishy smell — has grown upon us. We can hear
nothing beyond it, can see nothing beyond it; nothing goes beyond it.
This is the whole universe.

All this talk about heaven and God and soul means nothing to
an ordinary man. He has heaven already here. He has no other idea
beyond this world. When you tell him of something higher, he says,
"That is not a comfortable religion. Give us something comfortable".
That is to say that religion is nothing but what he is doing.

If he is a thief and you tell him that stealing is the highest
thing we can do, he will say, "That is a comfortable religion". If he
is cheating, you have to tell him that what he is doing is all right;
then he will accept your teaching as a "comfortable religion". The
whole trouble is that people never want to get out of their ruts —
never want to get rid of the old fish-basket and smell, in order to
live. If they say, "I want the truth", that simply means that they want
the fish-basket.

When have you reached knowledge? When you are equipped with
those four disciplines [i.e. the four qualifications for attainment
discussed in Vedantic literature: discrimination between the real and
the unreal, renunciation, the six treasures of virtue beginning with
tranquillity, and longing for liberation]. You must give up all desire
of enjoyment, either in this life or the next. All enjoyments of this
life are vain. Let them come and go as they will.

What you have earned by your past actions none can take away
from you. If you have deserved wealth, you can bury yourself in the
forest and it will come to you. If you have deserved good food and
clothing, you may go to the north pole and they will be brought to you.
The polar bear will bring them. If you have not deserved them, you may
conquer the world and will die of starvation. So, why do you bother
about these things? And, after all, what is the use of them?

As children we all think that the world is made so very nice,
and that masses of pleasures are simply waiting for our going out to
them. That is every schoolboy's dream. And when he goes out into the
world, the everyday world, very soon his dreams vanish. So with
nations. When they see how every city is built upon ruins — every
forest stands upon a city — then they become convinced of the vanity of
this world.

All the power of knowledge and wealth once made has passed
away — all the sciences of the ancients, lost, lost forever. Nobody
knows how. That teaches us a grand lesson. Vanity of vanities; all is
vanity and vexation of the spirit. If we have seen all this, then we
become disgusted with this world and all it offers us. This is called
Vairâgya, non-attachment, and is the first step towards knowledge.

The natural desire of man is to go towards the senses. Turning
away from the senses takes him back to God. So the first lesson we have
to learn is to turn away from the vanities of the world.

How long will you go on sinking and diving down and going up
for five minutes, to again sink down, again come up and sink, and so on
— tossed up and down? How long will you be whirled on this wheel of
Karma — up and down, up and down? How many thousands of times have you
been kings and rulers? How many times have you been surrounded by
wealth and plunged into poverty? How many thousands of times have you
been possessed of the greatest powers? But again you had to become men,
rolling down on this mad rush of Karma's waters. This tremendous wheel
of Karma stops neither for the widow's tears nor the orphan's cry.

How long will you go on? How long? Will you be like that old
man who had spent all his life in prison and, when let out, begged to
be brought back into his dark and filthy dungeon cell? This is the case
with us all! We cling with all our might to this low, dark, filthy cell
called this world — to this hideous, chimerical existence where we are
kicked about like a football by every wind that blows.

We are slaves in the hands of nature — slaves to a bit of
bread, slaves to praise, slaves to blame, slaves to wife, to husband,
to child, slaves to everything. Why, I go about all over the world —
beg, steal, rob, do anything — to make happy a boy who is, perhaps,
hump-backed or ugly-looking. I will do every wicked thing to make him
happy. Why? Because I am his father. And, at the same time, there are
millions and millions of boys in this world dying of starvation — boys
beautiful in body and in mind. But they are nothing to me. Let them all
die. I am apt to kill them all
to save this one rascal to whom I have given birth. This is what you
call love. Not I. Not I. This is brutality.

There are millions of women — beautiful in body and mind,
good, gentle, virtuous — dying of starvation this minute. I do not care
for them at all. But that Jennie who is mine — who beats me three times
a day, and scolds me the whole day — for that Jennie I am going to beg,
borrow, cheat and steal so that she will have a nice gown.

Do you call that love? Not I. This is mere desire, animal
desire — nothing more. Turn away from these things. Is there no end to
these hideous dreams? Put a stop to them.

When the mind comes to that state of disgust with all the
vanities of life, it is called turning away from nature. This is the
first step. All desires must be given up — even the desire of getting
heaven.

What are these heavens anyhow? Places where to sing psalms all
the time. What for? To live there and have a nice healthy body with
phosphorescent light or something of this kind coming out of every
part, with a halo around the head, and with wings and the power to
penetrate the wall?

If there be powers, they must pass away sooner or later. If
there is a heaven — as there may be many heavens with various grades of
enjoyment — there cannot be a body that lives forever. Death will
overtake us, even there.

Every conjunction must have a disjunction. No body, finer or
coarser, can be manufactured without particles of matter coming
together. Whenever two particles come together, they are held by a
certain attraction; and there will come a time when those particles
will separate. This is the eternal law. So, wherever there is a body —
either grosser or finer, either in heaven or on earth — death will
overcome it.

Therefore, all desires of enjoyment in this life, or in a life
to come, should be given up. People have a natural desire to enjoy; and
when they do not find their selfish enjoyments in this life, they think
that after death they will have a lot of enjoyment somewhere else. If
these enjoyments do not take us towards knowledge in this life, in this
world, how can they bring us knowledge in another life?

Which is the goal of man? Enjoyment or knowledge? Certainly
not enjoyment. Man is not born to have pleasure or to suffer pain.
Knowledge is the goal. Knowledge is the only pleasure we can have.

All the sense pleasures belong to the brute. And the more the
pleasure in knowledge comes, these sense pleasures fall down. The more
animal a man is, the more he enjoys the pleasures of the senses. No man
can eat with the same gusto as a famished dog. No man was ever born who
could feel the same pleasure in eating as an ordinary bull. See how
their whole soul is in that eating. Why, your millionaires would give
millions for that enjoyment in eating — but they cannot have it.

This universe is like a perfectly balanced ocean. You cannot
raise a wave in one place without making a hollow in another one. The
sum total of energy in the universe is the same throughout. You spend
it in some place, you lose it in another. The brute has got it, but he
spent it on his senses; and each of his senses is a hundred times
stronger than that of man.

How the dog smells at a distance! How he traces a footstep! We
cannot do that. So, in the savage man. His senses are less keen than
the animal's, but keener than the civilized man's.

The lower classes in every country intensely enjoy everything
physical. Their senses are stronger than those of the cultured. But as
you go higher and higher in the scale, you see the power of thought
increasing and the powers of the senses decreasing, in the same ratio.

Take a [brute], cut him [as it were] to pieces, and in five
days he is all right. But if I scratch you, it is ten to one you will
suffer for weeks or months. That energy of life which he displays — you
have it too. But with you, it is used in making up your brain, in the
manufacture of thought. So with all enjoyments and all pleasures.
Either enjoy the pleasure of the senses — live like the brute and
become a brute — or renounce these things and become free.

The great civilizations — what have they died of? They went
for pleasure. And they went further down and down until, under the
mercy of God, savages came to exterminate them, lest we would see human
brutes growling about. Savages killed off
those nations that became brutalized through sense enjoyment, lest
Darwin's missing link would be found.

True civilization does not mean congregating in cities and
living a foolish life, but going Godward, controlling the senses, and
thus becoming the ruler in this house of the Self.

Think of the slavery in which we are [bound]. Every beautiful
form I see, every sound of praise I hear, immediately attracts me;
every word of blame I hear immediately repels me. Every fool has an
influence over my mind. Every little movement in the world makes an
impression upon me. Is this a life worth living?

So when you have realized the misery of this physical
existence — when you have become convinced that such a life is not
worth living — you have made the first step towards Jnana.

^The
Vedanta Society of Northern California archives. Vide New Discoveries,
Vol. 3, pp. 358-63. The title of this class has been provided by the
Publisher.

^"Petitio
principii" refers to a logical fallacy in which a conclusion is taken
for granted in the premise.  

^M.,
The Gospel of Sri Ramakrishna, trans. Swami Nikhilananda (New York:
Ramakrishna-Vivekananda Center, 1952), p. 433.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/lectures_and_discourses/bhakti-yoga.htm


←
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Lectures
and Discourses
/ →

BHAKTI-YOGA

(New Discoveries,
Vol. 3, pp. 543-54.)

[A bhakti-yoga class delivered
in New York, Monday morning, January 20, 1896, and recorded by Mr.
Josiah J. Goodwin]

We finished in our last [class the subject] about Pratikas.
One idea more of the preparatory Bhakti, and then we will go on to the
Parâ, the Supreme. This idea is what is called Nishthâ, devotion to one
idea.

We know that all these ideas of worship are right and all
good, and we have seen that the worship of God, and God alone, is
Bhakti. The worship of any other being will not be Bhakti, but God can
be worshipped in various forms and through various ideas. And we have
seen that all these ideas are right and good, but the difficulty is
here: If we just stop with this last conclusion, we find that in the
end we have frittered away our energies and done nothing.

It is a great tendency among liberal people to become a
jack-of-all-trades and master of none — to nibble a little here and
there and, in the long run, find they have nothing. In this country it
many times grows into a sort of disease — to hear various things and do
nothing.

Here is the advice of one of our old Bhaktas: "Take the honey
from all flowers, mix with all with respect, say yea, yea to all, but
give not up your seat". This giving not up your own seat is what is
called Nishtha. It is not that one should hate, or even criticize, the
ideals of other people; he knows they are all right. But, at the same
time, he must stick to his own ideal very strictly. 

There is a story of Hanumân, who was a great worshipper of
Râma. Just as the Christians worship Christ as the incarnation of God,
so the Hindus worship many incarnations of God. According to them, God
came nine times in India and will come once more. When he came as Rama,
this Hanuman was his great worshipper. Hanuman lived very long and was
a great Yogi.

During his lifetime, Rama came again as Krishna; and Hanuman,
being a great Yogi, knew that the same God had come back again as
Krishna. He came and served Krishna, but he said to him, "I want to see
that Rama form of yours". Krishna said, "Is not this form enough? I am
this Krishna; I am this Rama. All these forms are mine". Hanuman said,
"I know that, but the Rama form is for me. The Lord of Jânaki (Janaki
is a name of Sitâ.) and the Lord of Shri (Shri is a name of Laksmi.)
are the same. They are both the incarnations of the Supreme Self. Yet
the lotus-eyed Rama is my all in all". This is Nishtha — knowing that
all these different forms of worship are right, yet sticking to one and
rejecting the others. We must not worship the others at all; we must
not hate or criticize them, but respect them.

The elephant has two teeth coming out from his mouth. These
are only for show; he cannot eat with them. But the teeth that are
inside are those with which he chews his food. So mix with all, say
yea, yea to all, but join none. Stick to your own ideal of worship.
When you worship, worship that ideal of God which is your own Ishta,
your own Chosen Ideal. If you do not, you will have nothing. Nothing
will grow.

When a plant is growing, it is necessary that it should be
hedged round lest any animal should eat it up. But when it has become
strong and a huge gigantic tree, do not care for any hedges — it is
perfect in itself. So when just the seed of spirituality is growing, to
fritter away the energies on all sorts of religious ideas — a little of
this and a little of that: a little of Christianity, a little of
Buddhism, and, in reality, of nothing — destroys the soul.

This [acceptance] has its good side; and in the end we will
come to it. Only do not put the cart before the horse.

In the first place, we are bound to become sectarians. But
this should be the ideal of sectarianism — not to avoid anyone. Each of
us must have a sect, and that sect is our own Ishta — our own chosen
way. However, that should not make us want to kill other people — only
to hold onto our own way. It is sacred and it should not be told to our
own brothers, because my choice is
sacred, and his [also] is sacred. So keep that choice as your own. That
should be the [attitude of] worship of everyone. When you pray to your
own Ideal, your own Ishta, that is the only God you shall have. God
exists in various phases, no doubt, but for the time being, your own
Ishta is the only phase for you.

Then, after a long course of training in this Ishta — when
this plant of spirituality has grown and the soul has become strong and
you begin to realize that your Ishta is everywhere — [then] naturally
all these bondages will fall down. When the fruit becomes ripe, it
falls of its own weight. If you pluck an unripe fruit it is bitter,
sour. So we will have to grow in this thought.

Simply hearing lectures and all this nonsense — making the
Battle of Waterloo in the brain, simply unadjusted [undigested?] ideas
— is no good. Devotion to one idea — those that have this will become
spiritual, will see the light. You see everyone complaining: "I try
this" and "I try that", and if you cross-question them as to what they
try, they will say that they have heard a few lectures in one place and
another, a handful of talks in one corner and another. And for three
hours, or a few days, they worshipped and thought they had done enough.
That is the way of fools, not the way to perfection — not the way to
attain spirituality.

Take up one idea, your Ishta, and let the whole soul be
devoted to it. Practise this from day to day until you see the result,
until the soul grows. And if it is sincere and good, that very idea
will spread till it covers the whole universe. Let it spread by itself;
it will all come from the inside out. Then you will say that your Ishta
is everywhere and that He is in everything.

Of course, at the same time, we must always remember that we
must recognize the Ishtas of others and respect them — the other ideas
of God — or else worship will degenerate into fanaticism. There is an
old story of a man who was a worshipper of Shiva. There are sects in
our country who worship God as Shiva, and others who worship Him as
Vishnu. This man was a great worshipper of Shiva, and to that he added
a tremendous hatred for all worshippers of Vishnu and would not hear
the name of Vishnu pronounced. There are a great number of
worshippers of Vishnu in India, and he could not avoid hearing the
name.
So he bored two holes in his ears and tied two little bells onto them.
Whenever a man mentioned the name of Vishnu, he moved his head and rang
the bells, and that prevented his hearing the name.

But Shiva told him in a dream, "What a fool you are! I am
Vishnu, and I am Shiva; they are not different—only in name. There are
not two Gods". But this man said, "I don't care. I will have nothing to
do with this Vishnu business".

He had a little statue of Shiva and made it very nice, built
an altar for it. One day he bought some beautiful incense and went home
to light some of the incense for his God. While the fumes [smoke] of
his incense were rising in the air, he found that the image was divided
into two: one half remained Shiva, and the other half was Vishnu. Then
the man jumped up and put his finger under the nostril of Vishnu so
that not a particle of the smell could get there.

Then Shiva became disgusted, and the man became [was turned
into] a demon. He is [known as] the father of all fanatics, the
"bell-eared" demon. He is respected by the boys of India, and they
worship him. It is a very peculiar kind of worship. They make a clay
image and worship him with all sorts of horrible smelling flowers.
There are some flowers in the forests of India which have a most
pestilential smell. They worship him with these and then take big
sticks and beat the image. He [the "bell-eared" demon] is the father of
all fanatics who hate all other gods except their own.

This is the only danger in this Nishthâ Bhakti — becoming this
fanatical demon. The world gets full of them. It is very easy to hate.
The generality of mankind gets so weak that in order to love one, they
must hate another; they must take the energy out of one point in order
to put it into another. A man loves one woman and then loves another;
and to love the other, he has to hate the first. So with women. This
characteristic is in every part of our nature, and so in our religion.
The ordinary, undeveloped weak brain of mankind cannot love one without
hating another. This very [characteristic] becomes fanaticism in
religion. Loving their own ideal is synonymous with hating every other
idea.

This should be avoided and, at the same time, the other danger
should be avoided. We must not fritter away all our energies,
[otherwise] religion becomes a nothing with us — just hearing lectures.
These are the two dangers. The danger with the liberals is that they
are too expansive and have no intensity. You see that in these days
religion has become very expansive, very broad. But the ideas are so
broad that there is no depth in them. Religion has become to many
merely a means of doing a little charity work, just to amuse them after
a hard day's labour — they get five minutes religion to amuse them.
This is the danger with the liberal thought. On the other hand, the
sectarians have the depth, the intensity, but that intensity is so
narrow. They are very deep, but with no breadth to it. Not only that,
but it draws out hatred to everyone else.

Now, if we can avoid both these dangers and become as broad as
the uttermost liberals and as deep as the bluest fanatic, then we will
solve the problem. Our idea is how that can be done. It is by this
theory of Nishtha — knowing that all these ideals that we see are
[good] and true, that all these are so many parts of the same God and,
at the same time, thinking that we are not strong enough to worship Him
in all these forms, and therefore must stick to one
ideal and make that ideal our life. When you have succeeded in doing
that, all the rest will come. Here ends the first part of Bhakti: the
formal, the ceremonial and the preparatory.

You must remember that the first lesson in this Bhakti was on
the disciple. Who is the disciple? What are the necessary
qualifications for a disciple? You read in the scriptures: "Where the
speaker is wonderful, so is the listener. When the teacher is
wonderful, so is the taught. Then alone will this spirituality come".

Mankind generally thinks that everything is to be expected
from the teacher. Very few people understand that they are not fit to
be taught. In the disciple first this is necessary: that he must want —
he must really want spirituality.

We want everything but spirituality. What is meant by want?
Just as we want food. Luxuries are not wants, but necessaries are
wants. Religion is a necessary thing to very few; and to the vast mass
of mankind it is a luxury. There are a hundred
things in life without which they can live, until they come to the shop
and see a new and artistic something and they want to buy it.
Ninety-nine and nine-tenths per cent of mankind comes to religion in
this way. It is one of the many luxuries they have in life. There is no
harm in this. Let them have all they want; but they are entirely
mistaken if they think they can fool God. He cannot be fooled. They
will only fool themselves and sink down lower and lower until they
become like brutes. Those therefore will become spiritual who want
[spirituality] — who feel the necessity of religion, just as they feel
the necessity of clothes, the necessity of work, the necessity of air
to breathe.

A necessary thing is that without which we cannot live; and a
luxury is that which is simply the gratification of a momentary desire.

The second qualification in the disciple is that he must be
pure; and the other is that he must be persevering — he must work.
Hearing is only one part; and the other part is doing.

The second necessity in Bhakti was the teacher. The teacher
must be properly qualified. The main idea in that lecture was that the
teacher must have the seed of spirituality. The teacher is not a
talker, but the transmitter of spiritual force which he has received
from his teacher, and he from others, and so on, in an unbroken
current. He must be able to transmit that spiritual current.

When the teacher and the taught are both ready, then the first
step in bhakti-yoga comes. The first part of bhakti-yoga is what is
called the preparatory [stage], wherein you work through forms.

The next lecture was on the Name — how in all scriptures and
in all religions Name has been exalted and how that Name does us good.
The Bhakti-Yogi must always think that the Name itself is God — nothing
different from God. The Name and God are one.

Next, it was taught how, for the Bhakti-Yogi, humility and
reverence are necessary. The Bhakti-Yogi must hold himself as a dead
man. A dead man never takes an insult, never retaliates; he is dead to
everyone. The Bhakti-Yogi must reverence all good people, all saintly
people, for the glory of the Lord shines always through His children.

The next lesson was on the Pratikas. In that it was taught
that Bhakti is only when you worship God. Worshipping anyone else is
not Bhakti. But we can worship anything we like if we think it is God.
If we do not think it is God, that worship is not Bhakti. If you think
it is God, it is all right.

There was a certain Yogi who used to practise meditation in a
lonely part of the forest, on the banks of a river. There was a poor
cowherd, a very ignorant man, who used to tend his herd in that forest.
Every day he used to see this same Yogi meditating by the hour,
practising austerities, living alone and studying. Somehow the cowherd
got curious as to what he did. So he came to the Yogi and said, "Sir,
can you teach me the way to God?" This Yogi was a very learned, great
man, and he replied, "How will you understand God — you common cowherd?
Blockhead, go home and tend your cows and don't bother your head with
such things".

The poor fellow went away, but somehow a real want had come to
him. So he could not rest, and he came again to the Yogi and said,
"Sir, won't you teach me something about God?"

Again he was repulsed: "Oh, you blockhead, what can you
understand of God? Go home". But the cowherd could not sleep; he could
not eat. He must know something about God.

So he came again; and the Yogi, in order to quiet the man, as
he was so insisting, said, "I'll teach you about God".

The man asked, "Sir, what sort of being is God? What is His
form? How does He look?"

The Yogi said, "God is just like the big bull in your herd.
That is just God. God has become that big bull".

The man believed him and went back to his herd. Day and night
he took that bull for God and began to worship it. He brought the
greenest grass for that bull, rested close to it and gave it light, sat
near it and followed it. Thus days and months and years passed. His
whole soul was there [in the bull].

One day he heard a voice, as it were, coming out of the bull.
"The bull speaks!" [the cowherd thought.]"

"My son, my son."

"Why, the bull is speaking! No, the bull cannot speak."

Again he went away, and sat near meditating in great misery of
his heart. He did not know anything. Again he heard the voice coming
out of the bull: "My child, my child".

He went near. "No, the bull cannot speak." Then he went back
again and sat despondent.

Again the voice came, and that time he found it out. It was
from his own heart. He found that God was in him. Then he learned the
wonderful truth of the Teacher of all teachers: "I am with thee
always". And the poor cowherd learned the whole mystery.

Then he goes back to the Yogi, and when he is at some distance
the Yogi sees him. The Yogi has been the most learned man in the
country, practising austerity for years — meditating, studying. And
this cowherd, an ignorant blockhead, never studied a book nor learned
his letters. But he comes — his whole body, as it were, transfigured,
his face changed, the light of heaven shining round his face. The Yogi
got up. "What is this change? Where did you get this?""

Sir, you gave me that."

"How? I told you that in joke."

"But I took it seriously. And I got everything I wanted out of
that bull, for is He not everywhere?"

So that bull was the Pratika. And that man worshipped the bull
as his Pratika — as God — and he got everything out of it. So that
intense love — that desire — brings out everything. Everything is in
ourselves, and the external world and the external worship are the
forms, the suggestions that call it out. When they become strong, the
Lord within awakens.

The external teacher is but the suggestion. When faith in the
external teacher is strong, then the Teacher of all teachers within
speaks; eternal wisdom speaks in the heart of that man. He need not go
any more to any books or any men or any higher beings; he need not run
after supernatural or preternatural beings for instruction. The Lord
Himself becomes his instructor. He gets all he wants from himself.
[There is] no more need to go to any temple or church. His own body has
become the greatest temple in the world, and in that temple lives the
Lord of Creation. In every country great saints have been born,
wonderful lives have been [lived] — coming out of the sheer power of
love.

So all these external forms of Bhakti — this repetition of the
Name, worship of Pratika, this Nishtha, this Ishta — are but the
preparations until that eternal power wakes up. Then alone comes
spirituality — when one goes beyond these laws and bounds. Then all
laws fall down, all forms vanish, temples and churches crumble into
dust and die away. It is good to be born in a church, but it is the
worst possible fate to die in a church. It is good to be born in a
sect, and the worst possible thing to die in a sect with sectarian
ideas.

What sect can hold a child of the Lord? What laws bind him?
What forms shall he follow? What man shall he worship? He worships the
Lord Himself. He Himself teaches him. He lives in the temple of all
temples, the Soul of man.

So this is the goal towards which we are going — the supreme
Bhakti — and all that leads up to this is but preparation. But it is
necessary. It prepares the infinite Soul to come out of this bondage of
books and sects and forms; these [ultimately] fly away and leave but
the Soul of man. These are superstitions of an infinite amount of time.
This "my father's religion", "my country's religion", or "my book", or
my this and that, are but the superstition of ages; they vanish. Just
as when one is pricked with a thorn he takes another thorn to get the
first out and then throws both of them away, so this superstition is in
us.

In many countries — even into the soft brains of little babies
— are put the most horrible and diabolical nonsense, as sect ideas.
Parents think they are doing good to the child, but they are merely
murdering it to satisfy Mrs. Grundy. What selfishness! There is nothing
that men out of fear of themselves or out of fear of society will not
do. Men will kill their own children, mothers will starve their own
families, brothers will hate brothers to satisfy forms — because Mrs.
So-and-so will be pleased and satisfied.

We see that the vast mass of mankind is born in some church or
temple of [some religious] form and never comes out of it. Why? Have
these forms helped the growth of spirituality? If through these forms
we step onto the highest platform of love, where forms vanish and all
these sectarian ideas go away, how is it that the vast majority of men
are always grovelling in some
form or another? They are all atheists; they do not want any religion.

If a man comes to this country without any friend or without
knowing anyone — supposing he is a blackguard in his own country — the
first thing he will do in this country will be to join a church. Will
that fellow ever have religion?

Do you mean to say that those women who go to churches to show
their dresses will ever have religion or will come out of forms? They
will go back and back. And when they die, they will become like animals.

Do you mean to say that those men who go to church to look at
the beautiful faces of women will ever have religion? Those who have
certain social religions — because society requires that they shall
belong to Mr. So-and-so's church or because that was their father's
church — will they ever have religion? They understand certain broad
views, but they must keep a certain social position — and will keep it
through eternity.

What you want, you get. The Lord fulfils all desires. If you
want to keep a certain position in society you will do so; if you want
the church, you will get that and not Him. If you want to play the fool
all your life with all these churches and foolish organizations, you
will have them and have to live in them all your lives. "Those that
want the departed, go to the departed and get ghosts; but those that
love Him, all come to Him." So those that love Him alone will come to
Him, and those that love others will go to wherever they love.

That drill business in the temples and churches — kneeling
down at a certain time, standing at ease, and all that drill nonsense,
all mechanical, with the mind thinking of something else — all this has
nothing to do with real religion.

There was a great prophet in India, Guru Nânak, born [some]
four hundred years ago. Some of you have heard of the Sikhs — the
fighting people. Guru Nanak was [the founder and also] a follower of
the Sikh religion.

One day he went to the Mohammedans' mosque. These Mohammedans
are feared in their own country, just as in a Christian country no one
dare say anything against their religion. . . . So Guru Nanak went in
and there was a big mosque, and the Mohammedans were standing in
prayer. They stand in lines:
they kneel down, stand up, and repeat certain words at the same times,
and one fellow leads. So Guru Nanak went there. And when the mullah was
saying "In the name of the most merciful and kind God, Teacher of all
teachers", Guru Nanak began to smile. He says, "Look at that
hypocrite". The mullah got into a passion. "Why do you smile?"

"Because you are not praying, my friend. That is why I am
smiling."

"Not praying?"

"Certainly not. There is no prayer in you."

The mullah was very angry, and he went and laid a complaint
before a magistrate and said, "This heathen rascal dares to come to our
mosque and smiles at us when we are praying. The only punishment is
instant death. Kill him".

Guru Nanak was brought before the magistrate and asked why he
smiled.

"Because he was not praying."

"What was he doing?" the magistrate asked.

"I will tell you what he was doing if you will bring him
before me."

The magistrate ordered the mullah to be brought. And when he
came, the magistrate said, "Here is the mullah. [Now] explain why you
laughed when he was praying".

Guru Nanak said, "Give the mullah a piece of the Koran [to
swear on]. [In the mosque] when he was saying 'Allah, Allah', he was
thinking of some chicken he had left at home".

The poor mullah was confounded. He was a little more sincere
than the others, and he confessed he was thinking of the chicken, and
so they let the Sikh go. "And", said the magistrate [to the mullah],
"don't go to the mosque again. It is better not to go at all than to
commit blasphemy there and hypocrisy. Do not go when you do not feel
like praying. Do not be like a hypocrite, and do not think of the
chicken and say the name of the Most Merciful and Blissful God".

A certain Mohammedan was praying in a garden. They are very
regular in their prayers. When the time comes, wherever they are, they
just begin, fall down on the ground and get up and fall down, and so
on. One of them was in a garden when the call for prayer came, so he
knelt there prostrate on the ground to
pray. A girl was waiting in the garden for her lover, and she saw him
on the other side. And in her hurry to reach him, she did not see the
man prostrate and walked over him. He was a fanatical Mohammedan — just
what you call here a Presbyterian, the same breed. Both believe in
barbecuing eternally. So you can just imagine the anger of this
Mohammedan when his body was walked over — he wanted to kill the girl.
The girl was a smart one, and she said, "Stop that nonsense. You are a
fool and a hypocrite".

"What! I am a hypocrite?"

"Yes, I am going to meet my earthly lover, and I did not see
you there. But you are going to meet your heavenly lover and should not
know that a girl was passing over your body."



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/lectures_and_discourses/the_mundaka_upanishad.htm


←
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Lectures
and Discourses
/ →

THE MUNDAKA UPANISHAD

(New Discoveries,
Vol. 3, pp. 557-68)

[A Jnâna-Yoga class delivered
in New York, January 29, 1896, and recorded by Mr. Josiah J. Goodwin]

In the last Jnana-Yoga (Vide Complete
Works, II.) lecture, we read one of the Upanishads;
we will read another [the Mundaka Upanishad]. Brahmâ was the first of
the Devas, the Lord of this cycle and its protector. He gave this
knowledge of Brahman, which is the essence of all knowledge, to his son
Atharvan. The latter handed it over to his son Angiras, he to his son,
Bharadvâja, and so on.

There was a man called Shaunaka, a very rich man, who went to
this Angiras as a learner. He approached the teacher and asked him a
question. "Tell me, sir, what is that which, being known, everything
else is known?"

One [knowledge] is supreme and the other is inferior. The
Rig-Veda is the name of one of the different parts of the Vedas.
Shikshâ is the name of another part. All different sciences are
inferior. What is the supreme science? That is the only science, the
supreme science, by which we reach the Unchangeable One. But that
cannot be seen, cannot be sensed, cannot be specified. Without colour,
without eyes, without ears, without nose, without feet — the Eternal,
the Omnipresent, the "Omnipenetrating", the Absolute — He from whom
everything comes. The sages see Him, and that is the supreme knowledge.

Just as the Urnanâbhi, a species of
spider, creates a thread out of his own body and takes it back, just as
the plants grow by their own nature, and all these things are yet
separate and apparently different (the hair is, as it were, different
from the other parts of a man's body; the plants are different from the
earth; the thread is different from the spider — yet they [the earth,
the spider and so on] were the causes, and in them these things act),
so from this Unchangeable One has come this universe.

First, out of Brahman comes the knowledge of desire and from
that comes the manifestation of Creator, or the Golden Womb. From that
comes intelligence, from that, matter and all these different
worlds. 

This is the truth — that for those who want to come to
salvation or attain to other enjoyments, various ways are told in the
Vedas.

Then it [the Mundaka Upanishad] goes on to say how they will
reach these blessings. When they die they will go through the sun's
rays to places which are very beautiful, where after death they will go
to heaven and live for some time, but from there they will again
fall. 

Here are two words — Ishtam and Purtam.
Sacrificial and other rituals are called Ishtam, and Purtam is making
roads, building hospitals and so on. "Fools are they who think that
rituals and doing good work are high and that there is nothing higher."
They get what they desire and go to heaven, but every enjoyment and
every sorrow must have an end. And so that ends, and they fall back and
back and become men again, or still lower. Those that give up the world
and learn to control the senses live in a forest. Through the rays of
the sun they reach that immortality where lives He who is the Absolute.

Thus the sage, examining all desires of good or evil works,
throws away all duties and wants to know that, getting which there is
no more return, no more change. And to know that, he goes to the Guru,
the teacher, with fuel in his hand. 

There is a myth in our country about going to the Guru with
fuel in one's hands as a sign of helping him in making sacrifices, as
he will not take presents.

Who is a teacher? He who knows the secrets of the scriptures,
he whose soul has gone unto Brahman, who does not care for works or
going to heaven or all these things.

Unto such a disciple, who has controlled his mind, has become
peaceful and calm, has given up all this tremendous wave that rises in
the mind by desire ("I will do this and that" and all those desires
which are at best only disturbing, such as name and fame, which impel
mankind to do all sorts of things) — to that disciple in whom all these
vexatious desires have been calmed down, the teacher teaches the way
which is the science of Brahman,
by which he can know that One who never changes and who is the Truth.

Then comes what he [Angiras] taught:

This is the truth, O gentle one, as from a
mass of burning flame myriads of sparks come out of the same nature as
the fire, even so from this Unchangeable One all these forms, all these
ideas, all this creation, come out; and unto Him it [the creation] goes
back.

But the Eternal One is everlasting,
formless, without beginning, inside
and outside of every being — beyond all life, beyond all mind, the Pure
One, beyond even the unchangeable, beyond everything.

From Him is born the vital principle. From
Him comes the mind. From Him
come all organs of the senses. From Him are air, light, water and this
earth which holds all beings. These heavens are, as it were, His head;
His eyes, the sun and moon. The cardinal points are, as it were, His
ears. The eternal knowledge of the Vedas is, as it were, His manifested
speech. His life is the air. His heart is this universe; His feet, this
world. He is the Eternal Self of every being.

From Him have come the different Vedas.
From Him have come the gods of
the Sâdhyas. The latter are superior men, much higher than ordinary men
and very much like the gods.

From Him are all men. From Him are all
animals. From Him is all life;
from Him, all the forces in the mind; from Him all truth, all chastity.

The seven organs are all from Him. The
seven objects of perception are
from him; the seven actions of perception are from Him.

From Him are the seven worlds in which the
life currents flow. From Him
are all these seas and oceans. From Him are all rivers that roll into
the sea; from Him are all plants and all liquids.

He is the inside. He is the inner Soul of
every being. This great
Purusha, this great One — He is this universe, He is the work, He is
the sacrifice. He is Brahman, and He is the
trinity. He who knows Him frees his own soul from the bond of ignorance
and becomes free.

He is the bright one. He is inside every
human soul. From Him are all
name and form; all the animals and men are from Him. He is the one
Supreme. He who knows Him becomes free.

How to know Him? Take this bow, which is
the Upanishad, the knowledge
of the Vedanta; place upon that bow the sharpened rod [arrow] of
worship; stretch that bow by what? — by making the mind of the same
form as He, by knowing that you are He. Thus strike at it; strike at
that Brahman with this rod.

This One is the bow. This human mind is
the rod [arrow]. Brahman is the
object which we want to hit. This object is to be hit by concentrating
the mind. And just when the rod has hit [its mark], the rod penetrates
into the object and becomes one with it — a unity. Even so, this soul,
the rod, is to be thrown upon the object so that it will become one
with It — in Whom are the heavens, this earth and the skies, in Whom
are the mind and all that lives.

In the Upanishads there are certain passages which are called
the great words,1
which are always quoted and referred to.

In Him, that One — in Him alone, the Atman
— exist all other worlds. What is the use of all other talk? Know Him
alone. This is the bridge over this life to reach universality.

He [Angiras] goes on to show a practical way. So far it is
very figurative.

Just as all the spokes of a wheel meet at
the axle, even so in this body is that place from which all the
arteries flow and at which they
all meet. There, meditate upon the Om that is in the heart. May thou
succeed.

May the gentle one with success attain the
goal. May you go beyond all
darkness to Him who is omniscient, the All-Knowing. His glory is in
heaven, on earth and everywhere.

He who has become the mind, the Prânâ, He
who is the leader in the
body, He who is established in the food, the energy of life. By supreme
knowledge the sages see Him whose nature is bliss, who shines as
immortality. (Mundaka Upanishad 2.2.8.) (This is another of the
sentences very much quoted.)

There are two words: one is Jnâna, the
other Vijnâna. Jnana may be translated as science —
this means intellectual [knowledge] only — and Vijnana as realization.
God cannot be perceived by intellectual knowledge. He who has realized
[the Self] by that supreme knowledge — what will become of that man?

All the knots of the heart will be cut
asunder. All darkness will vanish forever when you have seen the Truth.

How can you doubt? How foolish and childish you will think
these fights and quarrels of different sciences and different
philosophies and all this. You will smile at them. All doubts will
vanish, and all work will go away. All work will vanish.

Beyond, the golden sheath is there —
without any impurity, without parts [indivisible] — He, the Brahman.
His is the brightness, the Light of all light — the knowers of the
Atman realize Him as such.

And when you have done that, the sun
cannot illumine, nor the moon, nor
the stars. A flash of lightning cannot illumine the place; it is mental
— away, deep in the mind. He shining, everything else shines; when He
shines within, the whole man shines. This universe shines through His
light.

Take such passages [for memorizing] later on, when studying
the Upanishads.

The difference between the Hindu mind and the European mind is
that whereas in the West truths are arrived at by examining the
particular, the Hindu takes the opposite course. There is no [such]
metaphysical sublimity as in the Upanishads.

It [the Mundaka Upanishad] leads you on, beyond the senses —
infinitely more sublime than the suns and stars. First Angiras tried to
describe God by sense sublimities — that His feet are the earth, His
head the heavens. But that did not express what he wanted to say. It
was in a sense sublime. He first gave that idea to the student and then
slowly took him beyond, until he gave him the highest idea — the
negative — too high to describe.

He is immortal, He is before us, He is
behind us, He is on the right side, He is on the left, He is above, He
is beneath.

Upon the same tree there are two birds
with most beautiful wings, and
the two birds always go together — always live together. Of these, one
is eating the fruits of the tree; the other, without eating, is looking
on.

So in this body are the two birds always
going together. Both have the
same form and beautiful wings. One is the human soul, eating the
fruits; the other is God Himself, of the same nature. He is also in
this body, the Soul of our soul. He eats neither good nor evil fruits,
but stands and looks on.

But the lower bird knows that he is weak and small and humble,
and tells all sorts of lies. He says he is a woman, or he is a man or a
boy. He says he will do good or do bad; he will go to heaven and will
do a hundred sorts of things. In delirium he talks and works, and the
central idea of his delirium is that he is weak.

Thus he gets all the misery because he thinks he is nobody. He
is a created little being. He is a slave to somebody; he is governed by
some god or gods, and so is unhappy.

But when he becomes joined with God, when he becomes a Yogi,
he sees that the other bird, the Lord, is his own glory. "Why, it was
my own glory whom I called God, and this little "I", this misery, was
all hallucination; it never existed. I was never a woman, never a man,
never any one of these things." Then he gives up all his sorrow.

When this Golden One, who is to be seen,
is seen — the Creator, the Lord, the Purusha, the God of this universe
— then the sage has washed off all stains of good and bad deeds. (Good
deeds are as much stains as bad deeds.) Then he attains to total
sameness with the Pure One.

The sage knows that He who is the Soul of
all souls — this Atman —
shines through all.

He is the man, the woman, the cow, the dog — in all animals,
in the sin and in the sinner. He is the Sannyâsin, He is in the ruler,
He is everywhere.

Knowing this the sage speaks not. (He
gives up criticizing anyone, scolding anyone, thinking evil of anyone.)
His desires have gone into the Atman. This is the sign of the greatest
knowers of Brahman — that they see nothing else but Him.

He is playing through all these things. Various forms — from
the highest gods to the lowest worms — are all He. The ideas want to be
illustrated.

First of all the writer showed us the idea that if we want to
get to heaven and all these places, we will get there. That is to say,
in the language of the Vedas, whatever one desires that he sees.

As I have told you in previous lectures, the Atman neither
comes nor goes. It has neither birth nor death. You are all
omnipresent, you are the Atman. You are at this moment in heaven and in
the darkest places too. You are everywhere. Where are you not?
Therefore how can you go anywhere? These comings and goings are all
fictions — the Atman can never come nor go.

These visions change. When the mind is in a particular
condition it sees a certain vision, dreams a certain dream. So in this
condition, we are all seeing this world and man and animals and all
these things. But in this very place, this condition will change. And
the very thing we are seeing as earth, we shall see as heaven, or we
may see it as the opposite place or as any place we like.

All this depends on our desires. But this dream cannot be
permanent, just as we know that any dream in the night must break. Not
one of these dreams will be permanent. We dream that which we think we
will do. So these people who are always thinking in this life of going
to heaven and meeting their friends, will have that as soon as their
dream of this life is ended. And they will be compelled by their
desires of this life to see these other dreams. And those who are
superstitious and are frightened into all such ideas as hell will dream
that they are in the hot place. Those whose ideas in this life are
brutal — when they die, will become pigs and hogs and all these things.
With each one, what he desires he finds.

This book starts by telling us that those who know nothing
better than a little road-making or hospital-building and such good
works will have a good dream when they die. They will dream that they
are in a place where they will have god-bodies and can eat anything
they like, jump about, go through walls and so on, and sometimes come
down and startle someone.

In our mythology there are the Devas, who live in heaven, and
the Devakas, who are very much the same but a little more wicked. The
Devas are like your angels, only some of them from time to time become
wicked and find that the daughters of men are good. Our deities are
celebrated for this sort of thing. What can you expect of them? They
are here — simply hospital-makers — and have no more knowledge than
other men. They do some good work with the result that they become
Devas. They do their good work for fame or name or some reward and get
this reward, dreaming that they are in heaven and doing all these
things.

Then there are demons who have done evil in this life. But our
books say that these dreams will not last very long, and then they will
either come back and take the old dream again as human
beings, or still worse. Therefore, according to these books, it
behooves every sensible, right-thinking man, once and for all, to brush
aside all such foolish ideas as heavens and hells.

Two things exist in the world — dream and reality. What we
call life is a succession of dreams — dream within dream. One dream is
called heaven, another earth, another hell, and so on. One dream is
called the human body, another the animal body, and so on — all are
dreams. The reality is what is called Brahman, that Being who is
Existence, Knowledge, Bliss.

He is the Guru — the sage who wants to get rid of all these
dreams, to stand aside and know his own nature — who wants to go beyond
this self-hypnotism.

When we desire, we are hypnotizing ourselves. Just as I desire
"I will go to heaven", that hypnotizes me, and I begin to find I am in
heaven directly I die, and will see angels and all sorts of things. I
have seen about fifty people who have come from death's door, and they
all have told me stories about being in heaven. These are the
mythologies of our country, and it shows that it is all hypnotism.

Where Western people make a great mistake is here. So far as
you have these ideas of heaven and hell, we agree with you. But you say
this earth is real. That cannot be. If this is real, heavens and hells
are real, because the proof of each of these is the same. If one is a
hypnotic condition, the whole of it must be so.

Vedantists say that not only are heavens hypnotic, but so is
this life and everything here. Some people want to go from one hypnotic
condition to another, and these are what we call the fools of the world
— the Samsârins, the travellers who go from dream to dream, from one
hypnotic trance to another. For fifty years they are under the idea
that they are men and women.

What nonsense is [this — ] a man or a woman in the soul? It is
terrible hypnotism. How can the soul have any sex? It is
self-hypnotism. You have hypnotized yourself and think you are men and
women. If we are fools, we will again hypnotize ourselves and want to
go to heaven, and hear all this trash of gods and goddesses and all
sorts of humbug, and will kneel down and pray, and have god-bodies by
the millions to worship on thrones. At the end, we have to hypnotize
ourselves again.

We are all in the same boat here, and all who are in the same
boat see each other. Stand aside — free, beyond dream and hypnotism.
Some fools have hypnotized themselves that they have bodies and wives
and all these things. I also am a fool and have hypnotized myself that
I have senses and all these things. So we are all in the same boat and
see each other. Millions of people may be here whom we do not see,
touch or feel. Just as in hypnotism there may be three books before
you, but you are hypnotized and are told that one of them does not
exist. And you may live for a year in that condition and never see it.
Suppose thirty men are under the same hypnotic influence and are told
that this book does not exist. Those who are in this condition will all
fail to see the book. Men, women, animals are all hypnotized, and all
see this dream because they are all in the same boat.

The Vedanta philosophy says that this whole universe — mental,
physical, moral — is hypnotic. Who is the cause of this hypnotism? You
yourself are to blame. This weeping and wailing and knocking your heads
into corners [against brick walls, as it were] will not do you the
least good.

However, knocking everything [that is hypnotic] on the head
[leads to] what is called non-attachment; and clinging to more and more
hypnotism is attachment. That is why in all religions you will find
they wanted to give up the world, although many of them do not
understand it. These fellows used to starve themselves in a forest and
see the devil coming to them.

You have heard those wonderful stories of India — of how those
magicians can make a man see a rope rise from the ground to the skies.
I have not seen any of them. One of the Mogul emperors, Jahangir,
mentions it. He says, "Allah, what do these devils do? They take a rope
or a chain, and the chain is thrown up and up until it becomes firm —
as if it were stuck to something. Then they let a cat go up the chain —
then a dog, then a wolf, then a tiger, then a lion. All walk up the
chain and vanish. Sometimes they will send men up the chain. Two men
will go up and begin to fight, and then both of them vanish. And after
a while you hear a noise of fighting — and [then] a head, a hand, and a
foot fall. And, mind you, there are two or three thousand people
present. The fellow showing it
has only a loincloth on". They say this is hypnotism — throwing a net
over the audience.

That is what they call their science. It exists within a
certain limit. But if you go beyond this limit or come within it, you
do not see it. The man who is playing does not see anything. So if you
stand near him, you do not see anything. Such is the hypnotism here.

So we have first to get beyond the circle (Jnana) or stand
within the circle of the hypnotism (Bhakti) with God, the great Player
who is playing all these things — the whole universe He projects.

Chapter after chapter comes and goes. This is called Mâyâ, the
power which creates all these tremendous things. He who is the ruler of
this Maya, is God; and he who is ruled by Maya [is the soul]. Just as
in the case of that chain — so the man who was standing in the centre
had the power and was not deluded, but all that audience was governed
by Maya. So that portion of Atman which rules Maya is called God, and
the little bits of the Atman deluded by it are called souls — you and I.

The Bhakta says, Crawl nearer and nearer to the hypnotist, and
when you get to the centre you do not see anything. You get clear of it.

The Jnâni does not care to undergo all this trouble — it is a
dangerous way. Unless a man becomes a lunatic, when he finds himself
covered with mud, will he take more mud to wash himself? So why
increase the hypnotism? Get out of the circle; cut it off and be free.
When you are free you will be able to play, even without being caught
yourself. Now you are caught, then you will catch — that will be all
the difference.

Therefore in the first part of this book, we are told that we
must give up all this idea of heaven and of birth and death and so on.
It is all nonsense; no man was ever born or ever died. They are all in
hypnotism. So is eternal life and all this nonsense. Heaven is
hypnotism and so is earth.

It is not as materialists say: that heaven is a superstition
and God is a superstition, but he himself is not a superstition. If one
is superstition — if one link is
nonexistent — the whole chain is
nonexistent. The existence of the whole chain depends on the existence
of one link — and that of one link, on the whole.

If there is no heaven, there is no earth; and if there is no
God, there is no man. You are under this hypnotism; and as long as you
are under it, you will have to see God and nature and the soul. And
when you are beyond this hypnotism, God will vanish2
— so will nature, and so will the soul.

Therefore, first of all, we will have to give up all these
ideas of God and heaven and enjoying the fruits of these; and all that
going to heaven will be one more dream.

Next, after showing these things, the book goes on to tell us
how to get out of this hypnotism. And the one idea that is brought out
through all these ideas is to be one with that Universal Being. The
thing manifested — the Universal Being — is not anything of these;
these are all nonsense — Maya. (The Swami has been discussing the two
aspects of Maya. On the previous page, (a
few paragraphs earlier)
he described Maya as the power of Brahman; here he is referring to
Maya as the world-appearance.) But that upon which all these things are
being played — the background upon which all this picture is written —
[is we ourselves]; we are one with Him [that Universal Being]. You know
you are one with Him, only you must realize it.

He gave us two words: one is intellectual knowledge,
and the other is realization. That is to say,
intellectual assent is within this realization, and realization is
beyond it. Therefore intellectual assent is not sufficient. 

Every man can say this theory is right, but that is not
realization; he must realize it. We can all say we understand that this
is hypnotism, but that is not realization. That will be when the
hypnotism will break — even for a moment. It will come in a flash; it
must come. If you struggle it will come.

When it does vanish, all idea of body will go along with it —
that you have sex or body — just as a lamp blows out. Then what will
become of you? If some part of your Karma remains, this world will come
back again — but not with the same force. You have known that it is
what it is; you will know no more
bondage. So long as you have eyes you will have to see; or ears [you
will have to] hear — but not with the same force.

I had read all sorts of things about the mirage, but had never
seen it before until about four years ago when I was travelling in
western India. Of course, as a Sannyasin I was travelling on foot,
making my slow marches. So it took me about a month to travel through
that country. Every day I saw such beautiful lakes and the shadows of
trees on the shores of those lakes, and the whole thing was quivering
in the breeze — and birds flying, and animals. Every day I saw this and
thought what a beautiful country it was. But when I reached some
village, I found it was all sand. I said, How is it?

One day I was very thirsty and thought I would drink a little
water at the lake. But when I approached, it disappeared, and with a
flash [the thought] came into my mind: "This is the mirage about which
I read all my life". But the strange thing is that I was travelling for
a month and could never recognize that it was a mirage — and in one
moment it vanished. I was very glad to know this was the mirage about
which I had read all my life.

Next morning I saw the lake again, and along with it came the
idea: "That is the mirage". All that month I had been seeing the mirage
and could not distinguish between reality and mirage. But in that one
moment I caught the idea.

From that time, when I see a mirage, I will say, "That is a
mirage", and never feel it. Such will it be with this world when the
whole thing will vanish once; and after that, if you have to live out
your past work, you will not be deceived.

Take a carriage with two wheels. Suppose I cut one of the
wheels from the axle. The other wheel will run for some time by its
past momentum and will then fall. The body is one wheel, and the soul
another; and they are joined by the axle of delusion. Knowledge is the
axe which will cut the axle, and the soul will stop immediately — will
give up all these vain dreams.

But upon the body is that past momentum, and it will run a
little, doing this and that, and then it will fall down. But only good
momentum will be left, and that body can only do good. This is to warn
you not to mistake a rascal for a free man. It
will be impossible for that [free] man to do evil. So you must not be
cheated.

When you become free the whole hypnotism has vanished and you
know the distinction between the reality and the mirage. [The mirage]
will no more be a bondage. The most terrible things will not be able to
daunt you. A mountain [could] fall upon you, but you will not care. You
will know it for a mirage.

^In
each of the four Vedas there is one such "great word", or great
utterance, called Mahâvâkya: "Prajnânam Brahma" ("Consciousness is
Brahman"); "Aham Brahmâsmi" ("I am Brahman"); "Tat Twam Asi" ("That
thou art"); and "Ayam Atmâ Brahma" ("This Self is Brahman").

^Here
Swami Vivekananda is referring to Ishvara, or the Personal God.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/lectures_and_discourses/history_of_the_aryan_race.htm


←
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Lectures
and Discourses
/ →

HISTORY OF THE ARYAN RACE1

[A Jnâna-Yoga class delivered
in London, England, on Thursday morning, May 7, 1896, and recorded by
Mr. Josiah J. Goodwin]

I have told you how I would divide the subject into four
Yogas, but, as the bearing of all these various Yogas is the same — the
goal they want to arrive at is the same — I had better begin with the
philosophical portion: the Jnana-Yoga. Jnâna means knowledge, and,
before going into the principles of the Vedanta philosophy, I think it
is necessary to sketch in a few words the origin and the beginning and
the development — the historical portion of that system. Most of you
are now familiar with the words Arya and Aryan,
and many things have been written on these words.

About a century ago there was an English judge in Bengal, Sir
William Jones. In India, you know, there are Mohammedans and Hindus.
The Hindus were the original people, and the Mohammedans came and
conquered them and ruled over them for seven hundred years. There have
been many other conquests in India; and whenever there is a new
conquest, the criminal laws of the country are changed. The criminal
law is always the law of the conquering nation, but the civil law
remains the same. So when the English conquered India, they changed the
criminal law; but the civil law remained. The judges, however, were
Englishmen and did not know the language of the country in which the
civil laws were written, and so they had to take the help of
interpreters, lawyers of India, and so on. And when any question about
Indian law arose, these scholars would be referred to.

One of these judges, Sir William Jones, was a very ripe
scholar, and he wanted to go to the fountain-head himself, to take up
the language himself and study it, instead of relying
upon these interpreters who, for instance, might be bribed to give any
verdict. So he began to study the law of the Gentoos, as the Hindus
were called. Gentoo is probably a form of the word gentile,
used by the Portuguese and Spaniards — or "heathen", as you call it
now. When the judge began to translate some of the books into English,
he found that it was very hard to translate them correctly into English
at first hand. What was his surprise when he found that if he
translated them first into Latin, and next into English, it was much
easier. Then he found in translating that a large number of Sanskrit
words were almost the same as in Latin. It was he who introduced the
study of Sanskrit to the Europeans. Then as the Germans were rising in
scholarship — as well as the French — they took up the language and
began to study it.

With their tremendous power of analysis, the Germans found
that there was a similarity between Sanskrit and all the European
languages. Among the ancient languages, Greek was the nearest to it in
resemblance. Later, it was found that there was a language called
Lithuanian, spoken somewhere on the shores of the Baltic — an
independent kingdom at that time and unconnected with Russia. The
language of the Lithuanians is strikingly similar to Sanskrit. Some of
the Lithuanian sentences are less changed from Sanskrit forms than the
northern Indian languages. Thus it was found that there is an intimate
connection between all the various languages spoken in Europe and the
two Asiatic languages — Persian and Sanskrit. Many theories are built
upon it as to how this connection came. Theories were built up every
day, and every day smashed. There is no knowing where it is going to
stop.

Then came the theory that there was one race in ancient times
who called themselves Aryans. They found in Sanskrit literature that
there was a people who spoke Sanskrit and called themselves Aryans, and
this is mentioned also in Persian literature. Thus they founded the
theory that there was in ancient times a nation [of people] who called
themselves Aryans and who spoke Sanskrit and lived in Central Asia.
This nation, they said, broke into several branches and migrated to
Europe and Persia; and wherever they went, they took their own
languages. German, Greek and
French are but remnants of an old tongue, and Sanskrit is the most
highly developed of these languages.

These are theories and have not been proved yet; they are mere
conjectures and guesses. Many difficulties come in the way — for
instance, how the Indians are dark and the Europeans are fair. Even
within the same nations speaking these languages — in England itself —
there are many with yellow hair and many with black. Thus there are
many questions which have not yet been settled.

But this is certain, that all the nations of Europe except the
Basques, the Hungarians, the Tartars and the [Finns?]  (Vide
Complete
Works ,
VIII.) — excepting these, all the Europeans, all the northern Indians
and the Persians speak branches of the same language. Vast masses of
literature are existing in all these Aryan tongues: in Greek, in Latin,
in modern European languages — German, English, French — in ancient
Persian, in modern Persian and in Sanskrit.

But in the first place, Sanskrit literature alone is a very
big mass. Although, perhaps, three-fourths of it has been destroyed and
lost through successive invasions, yet, I think, the sum total of the
amount of literature in Sanskrit would outbalance any three or four
European languages taken together, in number of books. No one knows how
many books are there yet and where they are, because it is the most
ancient of all these Aryan languages. And that branch of the Aryan race
which spoke the Sanskrit language was the first to become civilized and
the first to begin to write books and literature. So they went on for
thousands of years. How many thousands of years they wrote no one
knows. There are various guesses — from 3000 B.C. to 8000 B.C. — but
all of these dates are more or less uncertain.

Each man in writing about these ancient books and
dates is first of all prejudiced by his earlier education, then by his
religion, then by his nationality. If a Mohammedan writes about the
Hindus, anything that does not glorify his own religion he very
scrupulously pushes to one side. So with the Christians — you can see
that with your own writers. In the last ten years your literature has
become more respectable. So long as they [the Christians] had full
play, they wrote in English and were
safe from Hindu criticism. But, within the last twenty years, the
Hindus have begun writing in English, so they are more careful. And you
will find that the tone has quite changed within the last ten or twenty
years.

Another curiosity about the Sanskrit literature is that it,
like any other language, has undergone many changes. Taking all the
literature in these various Aryan languages — the Greek or the Latin or
all these others — we find that all the European branches were of very
recent date. The Greek came much later — a mere child in comparison
with the Egyptian or the Babylonian.

The Egyptians and the Babylonians, of course, are not Aryans.
They are separate races, and their civilizations antedate all the
European civilization. But with the exception of the ancient Egyptians,
they were almost coeval [with the Aryans]; in some accounts, they were
even earlier. Yet in Egyptian literature, there are certain things to
be accounted for — the introduction of the Indian lotus on old temples,
the lotus Gangetic. It is well known that this only grows in India.
Then there are the references to the land of Punt. Although very great
attempts have been made to fix that land of Punt on the Arabs, it is
very uncertain. And then there are the references to the monkeys and
sandalwood of southern India — only to be found there.

The Jews were of a much later date than the Greek Aryans. Only
one branch of the Semitic race of Babylon and this nondescript,
unknowable race — the Egyptians — were much older than the Aryans,
except the Hindus.

So this Sanskrit has undergone very much change as a matter of
course, having been spoken and written through thousands of years. It
necessarily follows that in other Aryan languages, as in Greek and
Roman, the literature must be of much later date than Sanskrit. Not
only so, but there is this peculiarity, that of all regular books that
we have in the world, the oldest are in Sanskrit — and that is the mass
of literature called the Vedas. There are very ancient pieces in the
Babylonian or Egyptian literature, but they cannot be called literature
or books, but just a few notes, a short letter, a few words, and so on.
But as finished, cultured literature, the Vedas are the oldest.

These Vedas were written in the peculiar archaic Sanskrit, and
for a long time — even today — it is thought by many European
antiquarians that these Vedas were not written, but were handed down by
father to son, learned by rote, and thus preserved. Within the last few
years, opinion is veering round, and they are beginning to think that
they must have been written in most ancient times.

Of course they have to make theories in this way. Theory after
theory will have to be built up and destroyed until we reach truth.
This is quite natural. But when the subject is Indian or Egyptian, the
Christian philosophers rush in to make theories; while if the subject
is nearer home, they think twice first. That is why they fail so much
and have to keep on making fresh theories every five years. But this
much is true, that this mass of literature, whether written or not, was
conveyed and, not only that, but is at the present day conveyed by word
of mouth. This is thought to be holy.

You find in every nation when a new idea, a new form, a new
discovery or invention comes in, the old things are not brushed aside
all at once, but are relegated to the religion of holiness. The ancient
Hindus used to write on palm leaves and birch bark; and when paper was
invented they did not throw aside all the palm leaves, but used to
consider writing on palm leaves and birch bark holy. So with the Jews —
they used to write only on parchment, and parchment is now used for
writing in their temples. So you find when new customs come in, the old
ones become holy. So this form of transmitting the literature of the
Vedas from teacher to disciple by word of mouth, although antiquated
and almost useless now, has become holy. The student may refresh his
memory by books, but has to learn by word of mouth of a teacher. A
great many modifications will always gather round such a fact to make
its holiness more rational, but this is the law.

These Vedas are a vast mass of literature by themselves. That
is to say, in those ancient times, in every country, religion was the
first ideal to spring out of the heart of man, and all the secular
knowledge that men got was made over to religion.

Secondly, people who deal with religion and in later times
came to be called priests — being the first thinkers of every
nation — not only thought about religious subjects, but secular matters
also; and, as such, all knowledge was confined to them. These masses of
knowledge — both secular and religious — will always be gathered
together and made into a vast mass of literature.

In much later times, this is the case. For instance, in
studying the Bible of the Jews, we find the same thing. The Talmud
contained a vast mass of information on all subjects and so did the
Pentateuch. In the same way, the Vedas give information on various
subjects. They have come together and form one book. And in later
times, when other subjects were separated from religion — when
astronomy and astrology were taken out of religion — these subjects,
being connected with the Vedas and being ancient, were considered very
holy.

Almost the largest portion of the Vedas has been lost. The
priests who carried it down to posterity were divided into so many
families; and, accordingly, the Vedas were divided into so many parts.
Each part was allotted to a family. The rituals, the ceremonies, the
customs, the worship of that family were to be obtained from that
[respective] portion of the Vedas. They preserved it and performed all
the ceremonies according to that. In course of time, [some of] these
families became extinct; and with them, their portion of the Vedas was
lost, if these old accounts be true.

Some of you know that the Vedas are divided into four parts.
One is called the Rig-Veda, another Yajur-Veda, another Sâma-Veda, and
the fourth Atharva-Veda. Each one of these, again, was divided into
many branches. For instance, the Sama-Veda had one thousand branches,
of which only about five or six remain; the rest are all lost. So with
the others. The Rig-Veda had 108, of which only one remains; and the
rest are all lost. 

Then [there were] these various invasions. India has been the
one country to which every nation that has become strong wants to go
and conquer — it being reputed to be very rich. The wealth of the
people had become a fable, even in the most ancient history. [Many
foreign invaders] rushed to become wealthy in India and conquered the
country. Every one of these invasions destroyed one or more of these
families, burned many libraries
and houses. And when that was so, much literature was lost. It is only
within the last few years that ideas have begun to spring up about the
retention of these various religions and books. Before that, mankind
had to suffer all this pillaging and breaking down. Most stupendous
creations of art were lost forever. Wonderful buildings — where, from a
few bits of remnants now in India, it can be imagined how wonderful
they were — are completely gone. . . . 

[The fanatical belief of many of these invaders into India is]
that those who do not belong to their sect have no right to live. They
will go to a place where the fire will never be quenched when they die;
in this life they are only fit to be made into slaves or murdered; and
that they have only the right to live as slaves to "the true
believers", but never as free men. So in this way, when these waves
burst upon India, everything was submerged. Books and literature and
civilization went down.

But there is a vitality in that race which is unique in the
history of humanity, and perhaps that vitality comes from
non-resistance. Non-resistance is the greatest strength. In meekness
and mildness lies the greatest strength. In suffering is greater
strength than in doing. In resisting one's own passions is far higher
strength than in hurting others. And that has been the watchword of the
race through all its difficulties, its misfortunes and its prosperity.
It is the only nation that never went beyond its frontiers to cut the
throats of its neighbours. It is a glorious thing. It makes me rather
patriotic to think I am born a Hindu, a descendant of the only race
that never went out to hurt anyone, and whose only action upon humanity
has been giving and enlightening and purifying and teaching, but never
robbing.

Three-quarters of the wealth of the world has come out of
India, and does even now. The commerce of India has been the turning
point, the pivot, of the history of the world. Whatever nation got it
became powerful and civilized. The Greeks got it and became the mighty
Greeks; the Romans got it and became the mighty Romans. Even in the
days of the Phoenicians it was so. After the fall of Rome, the Genoese
and the Venetians got it. And then the Arabs rose and created a wall
between Venice and India; and in the struggle to find a new way there,
America was discovered. That is how America was discovered; and the
original people of America were
called Indians, or "Injuns", for that reason. Even the Dutch got it —
and the barbarians — and the English and they became the most powerful
nation on earth. And the next nation that gets it will immediately be
the most powerful.

Think of all this mass of energy that our nation displays —
where does it get it? In India, they are the producers and you are the
enjoyers, no doubt. They produced this — the patient, toiling millions
of Hindus under the whip and slavery of everyone. Even the
missionaries, who stand up to curse the millions of India, have been
fattened upon the work of these millions, and they do not know how it
has been done. Upon their blood the history of the world has been
turning since we know history, and will have to turn for thousands of
years more. What is the benefit? It gives that nation strength. They
are, as it were, an example. They must suffer and stand up through all,
fighting for the truths of religion — as a signpost, a beacon — to tell
unto mankind that it is much higher not to resist, much higher to
suffer, that if life be the goal, as even their conquerors will admit,
we are the only race that can be called immortal, that can never be
killed. (Vide Complete
Works , IV)

Where are the Greeks today — they whose armies marched over
the whole world? Gone, thousands of years — nobody knows where.
Vanished, as soon as the barbarians of the north came and attacked
them. Where are the mighty Romans, whose cohorts came and trampled the
face of the earth? Where are they today? Gone — vanished like the
morning dew, and left behind in the march.

But here are the Hindus — three hundred million strong. And
think of the fertility of the race! They can increase more than the
whole world can kill them. This is the vitality of the race. Although
not belonging very much to our subject, I wanted to bring these things
before you.

Generally the uneducated minds, the vulgar minds of every
nation, like the vulgar mobs in every big city, cannot grasp, cannot
see, cannot understand, any fine movement. The causes, the real
movements in this world of ours, are very fine; it is
only the effects that are gross and muscular. The mind is the real
cause of this body, the fine movements behind. The body is the gross,
the external. But everyone sees the body; very few see the mind. So
with everything; the masses, the brutal, ignorant masses of every race,
see a triumphant procession, stampeding horses, arms and cannonades,
and these they understand. But those fine, gentle workings that are
going on behind — it is only the philosopher, the highly cultivated man
or woman, that can understand.

To return to our Vedanta, I have said that the Sanskrit in
which the Vedas were written is not the same Sanskrit in which books
were written about a thousand years later than the Vedas — the books
that you read in your translations of poets and other classical writers
of India. The Sanskrit of the Vedas was very simple, archaic in its
composition, and possibly it was a spoken language. But the Sanskrit
that we have now was never a spoken language, at least for the last
three thousand years. Curiously enough, the vast mass of literature was
written in a language which was dead, covering a period of three
thousand years. Dramas and novels were written in this dead language.
And all the time it was not spoken in the homes; it was only the
language of the learned.

Even in the time of Buddha, which was about 560 years before
the Christian era, we find that Sanskrit had ceased to be a spoken
language. Some of his disciples wanted to teach in Sanskrit, but the
master studiously refused. He wanted to teach in the language [of the
people], because he said he was the prophet of the people. And that is
how it has come about that the Buddhistic literature is in Pali, which
was the vernacular of that time.

This vast mass of literature — the Vedas — we find in three
groups. The first group is the Samhitâs, a collection of hymns. The
second group is called the Brâhmanas, or the [group dealing with
different kinds of] sacrifice. The word Brahmana
[by usage] means [what is achieved by means of] the sacrifice. And the
other group is called the Upanishads (sittings, lectures, philosophic
books). Again, the first two parts together — the hymns and the rituals
— are called the Karmakânda, the work portion; and the second, or
philosophic portion (the Upanishads), is
called the Jnânakânda, the knowledge portion. This
is the same word as your English word knowledge and
the Greek word gnos — just as you have the word in
agnostic, and so on.

The first portion is a collection of hymns in praise of
certain gods, as Agni, fire; Mitra, the sun; and so forth. They are
praised and oblations are offered to them. I have said these hymns are
to the gods. I have used the word gods until I make
you familiar with the Sanskrit word Deva, because
the word gods is very misleading. These Devas mean
the "bright ones", and gods in India are less persons than positions.
For instance, Indra and Agni are not names of particular persons, but
particular posts in this universe. There is the post of President, the
presiding post over certain elements, the presiding post over certain
worlds, and so forth. According to these theologians, you and I — most
of us — probably have been some of these gods several times. It is only
temporarily that a soul can fill one of these positions. And after his
time is over, he gives way; another soul is raised from this world by
good works and takes that position — he becomes [for example] Agni. In
reading Sanskrit philosophy or theology, people always get bothered by
the changing of these gods. But this is the theory — that they are
names of positions, that all souls will have to fill them again and
again; and these gods, when the soul has attained to that position, can
help mankind. So gifts and praise are offered to them. How this idea
came to the Aryans we do not know, but in the earliest portion of the
Rig-Veda we find this idea perfected and completed.

Behind and beyond all these Devas and men and animals and
worlds is the Ruler of this universe, Ishvara — somewhat similar to
what in the New Testament is called God the Creator, Preserver, the
Ruler of this universe. These Devas are not to be confused with Ishvara
at all, but in the English language you have the same word for both.
You use the word God in the singular and the plural. But the gods are
the bright ones — the Devas — and God is Ishvara. This we find even in
the oldest portions of the Vedas.

Another peculiarity is that this Ishvara, this God, is
manifesting Himself in all these various forms of bright ones. This
idea — that the same God manifests Himself in various forms — is a very
rudimentary idea of the Vedas, even in the oldest portions.
There was a time when a sort of monotheistic idea entered the
Vedas, but it was very quickly rejected. As we go on, perhaps you will
agree with me that it was very good that it was rejected.

So we find in these oldest portions of the Samhitas that there
were these various Devas — [being praised as] the manifestations of
someone very much higher than they [had left] behind, so that sometimes
each one of them was taken up and adjectives piled on it and at last it
was said, "You are the God of the universe". Then such passages as this
occurred: "I am God, worshipped as the fire", and so forth. "It is the
One; sages call Him variously." "He is that one existence; the sages
call Him by various names." This I ask you to remember, because this is
the turning point, the key-note of all thought that India has produced
— "He is that One Being; sages call Him variously." All Hindu
philosophy — either theistic or atheistic or monotheistic, dualistic or
nondualistic — has that as the core, the centre. And by thousands of
years of culture in the race, it is impossible for the Hindu race to go
[away from] that idea.

That germ became a big tree; and that is why there was never a
religious persecution in India, at least by the Hindus. That explains
their liberality and welcome to any religion from any part of the world
which came to settle there. That is how, even at the present day,
Indian Rajas go and perform Mohammedan ceremonies and enter Mohammedan
mosques, although [some] Mohammedans took the first opportunity to kill
a number of "the heathens".

"He is the One Being; sages call Him variously."

There have been two theories advanced in modern times with
regard to the growth of religions. The one is the tribal theory; the
other is the spirit theory. The tribal theory is that humanity in its
savage state remains divided into many small tribes. Each tribe has a
god of its own — or sometimes the same god divided into many forms, as
the god of this city came to that city, and so on; Jehovah of this city
and of such-and-such mountain [came to such-and-such city or mountain].
When the tribes came together, one of them became strong.

Take the case of the Jews. They were divided into so many
tribes, and each tribe had a god called either Baal or Moloch,
which in your Old Testament is translated as "the Lord". There was the
Moloch of this state and that state, of this mountain and that
mountain, and there was the Moloch of the chest, who used to live in a
chest. This latter tribe became strong and conquered the surrounding
tribes and became triumphant. So that Moloch was proclaimed the
greatest of all Molochs. "Thou art the Java [?] of the Molochs. Thou
art the ruler of all the Baals and Molochs." Yet the chest remained. So
this idea was obtained from tribal gods.

There is the other theory of Spiritualism — that religion
begins with the worship of ancestors. Ancestor worship was among the
Egyptians, among the Babylonians, among many other races — the Hindus,
the Christians. There is not one form of religion among which there has
not been this ancestor worship in some form or other.

Before that they thought that this body had a double inside it
and that when this body dies the double gets out and lives so long as
this body exists. The double becomes very hungry or thirsty, wants food
or drink, and wants to enjoy the good things of this world. So he [the
double] comes to get food; and if he does not get it, he will injure
even his own children. So long as the body is preserved the double will
live. Naturally the first attempt, as we see, was to preserve the body,
mummify the body, so that the body will live forever.

So with the Babylonians was this sort of spirit worship. Later
on as the nations advanced, the cruel forms died out and better forms
remained. Some place was given to that which is called heaven, and they
placed food here so that it might reach the double there. Even now the
pious Hindus must, one day a year at least, place food for their
ancestors. And the day they leave off [this habit] will be a sorry day
for the ancestors. So you also find this ancestor worship to be one
cause of religion. There are in modern times philosophers who advance
the theory that this has been the root of all religions. There are
others who advance the theory that the root of all religions was the
tribal assimilation of gods into one.

Among the Jews of the Old Testament you do not find any
mention of soul. It is only in the Talmud that it is found. They got it
from the Alexandrians, and the Alexandrians from the
Hindus — just as the Talmud had [developed] later on the idea of
transmigration of the soul. But the old Jews had grand ideas of God.
The God of the Jews developed into the Great God — the Omnipotent,
Omniscient, All-Merciful — and all this came to them from the Hindus,
but not through the idea of the soul. So Spiritualism could not have
played any part in that, because how could the man who did not believe
in any soul after death have anything to do with Spiritualism?

On the other hand, in the oldest portion of the Vedas, there
is very little of Spiritualism, if anything at all. These Devas [of the
Vedas] were not [related to Spiritualism] — although later on they
became so; and this idea of Someone behind them, of whom they were
manifestations, is in the oldest parts.

Another idea is that when the body dies, the soul [which] is
immortal remains beatified. The very oldest Aryan literature — whether
German or Greek — has this idea of soul. The idea of soul has come from
the Hindus.

Two people have given all the religion to the world — the
Hindus and the Jews. But it is only with the Hindus that the idea of
soul comes at first, and that was shared by the Aryan races.

The peculiarity you find is that the Semitic races and the
Egyptians try to preserve the dead bodies, while the Aryans try to
destroy them. The Greeks, the Germans, the Romans — your ancestors
before they became Christians — used to burn the dead. It was only when
Charlemagne made you Christians with the sword — and when you refused,
[he] cut off a few hundred heads, and the rest jumped into the water —
that burying came here. You see at once the metaphysical significance
of burning the dead. The burying of the dead (Preserving the dead by
the burying of the body.) can only remain when there is no idea of the
soul, and the body is all. At best there came the idea later on that
this very body will have another lease of life, after so many years —
mummies will come out and begin to walk the streets again.

But with the Aryans the idea was from the first that the soul
is not the body, but would live on. There are some old hymns in the
Rig-Veda: when the bodies are burnt they say, "Take him gently, purify
him, give him a bright body, take him to the land
where the fathers live — where there is no more sorrow and where there
is
joy forever". (Rig-Veda 10.16.4.)

It is curious that though in modern times many hideous and
cruel forms of religion crept into India, there is one peculiar idea
that divides the Aryan from all other races of the world: that their
religion, in the Hindu form, accepted this Indra as one [with the
Ultimate Reality]. Three-quarters of the mythology of the Vedas is the
same as that of the Greeks; only the old gods became saints in the new
religion. But they were originally the gods of the Samhitas.

One other peculiarity we remark — that it is a cheerful,
joyful, at times almost hilarious religion; there is not a bit of
pessimism in it. The earth is beautiful, the heavens are beautiful,
life is immortal. Even after death they get a still more beautiful
body, which has none of the imperfections of this body, and they go to
live with the gods and enjoy heaven forever.

On the other hand, with the Semitic races, the very first
inception of religion was one of horror. A man crouched in his little
house for fear. All round his house were those doubles. The family
ancestors of the Jews were there, ready to pounce upon anybody and tear
him to pieces if bloody sacrifices were not given to them. Even when
you find that this [double] idea coagulated into one — "Thou art the
Elohim of the Jews, Thou art the Elo[him] of the [Babylonians?]"2
— even then the idea of
sacrifice remained.

The idea of sacrifice in India was not with this first
portion. But in the next portion we find the same idea in India too, in
the Brahmanas. The idea of sacrifice was originally simply giving food
[to the gods], but gradually it was raised and raised until it became a
sacrifice to God. Philosophy came in to mystify it still more and to
spin webs of logic round it. Bloody sacrifices came into vogue.
Somewhere we read that three hundred bullocks have been roasted, or the
gods are smelling the sacrifices and becoming very glad. Then all sorts
of mystical notions got about — how the sacrifice was to be made in the
form of a triangle or a square, a triangle
within a square, a pentagon, and all sorts of figures. But the
great benefit was the evolution of geometry. When they had to make all
these figures — and it was laid down strictly how many bricks should be
used, and how they should be laid, and how big they should be —
naturally geometry came [into being]. The Egyptians evolved geometry
[by] their [irrigation] — [they] made canals to take the Nile water
inside their fields — and the Hindus, by their altars.

Now there is another particular difference between the idea of
sacrifice in India and [that] of the Jews. The real meaning of
sacrifice is worship, a form of worship by oblations. At first it was
simply giving food to the bright ones, or the higher beings. They had
gross food just as we have. Later on philosophy stepped in and the idea
came that they, being higher beings, could not eat the same food as we
do. Their bodies are made of finer particles. Our bodies cannot pass
through a wall; theirs find no resistance in gross material. As such,
they cannot be expected to eat in the same gross way as we do.

[Some parts of the transcription of the remaining
portion of this lecture, recorded by Mr. J. J. Goodwin, were found in a
severely damaged condition. Hence we have reproduced below only the
legible fragments as they appeared in the original.]

. . . "O Indra, I offer you this oblation. O Agni, I offer you
this oblation." The answer is that these words have a mystical power in
Sanskrit. And when a man, in a certain state of mind, pronounces these
words, he sets in motion a set of psychological causes, and these
causes produce a certain effect. That is the evolution of thought.

To make it clearer, suppose a man was childless and wanted a
son. He worshipped Indra, and if he got a son he said Indra gave him
the son. Later on they said Indra did not exist. Who, then, gave him
the son? The whole thing is a matter of cause and effect. . . .. . . 

They said it was not giving the gods food, but simply laying
my sins upon the head of another victim. "My sins go upon the goat's
head, and, if the goat be killed, my sins are for
given." That idea of sacrifice of the Jews never entered India, and
perhaps that has saved us many a pang, many a trouble.

Human nature is selfish, and the vast majority of men and
women weak; and to teach vicarious sacrifice makes us more and more
weak. Every child is taught that he is nothing until the poor fellow
becomes hypnotized into nothing. He goes in search of somebody to cling
onto, and never thinks of clinging to himself. . . . (Vide Complete
Works , VIII
for similar ideas.)

^Vedanta
Society of Northern California archives. Vide New Discoveries, Vol. 4,
pp. 154-56 for extracts of this class.

^The
square brackets in this paragraph mark illegible portions of Mr.
Goodwin's original typescript.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/notes_of_lectures_and_classes/note.htm


← Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Notes
of Lectures and Classes
/ →

NOTE

Swami Vivekananda delivered scores of lectures and classes
during his relatively short ministry. Unfortunately the Swami was not
always accompanied by a professional stenographer who could keep pace
with the exceptional speed of his extempore deliveries. However, a few
students managed to take notes of some lectures and classes, which are
today the only available records of works that would otherwise have
been lost to the world.

The original quotation marks of the note-takers have been
reproduced.

— Publisher



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/notes_of_lectures_and_classes/the_religion_of_india.htm


← Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Notes
of Lectures and Classes
/ →

THE RELIGION OF INDIA

(New Discoveries,
Vol. 2, pp. 145-49, 155-56.)

These notes of daily morning classes delivered at
Greenacre, Maine, in the summer of 1894 and recorded by Miss Emma
Thursby were discovered among Miss Emma Thursby's papers at the
New-York Historical Society. They have been lightly edited in order to
conform to the style of the Complete Works.

Notes taken miscellaneously from discourses given by Swami
Vivekananda under the "Pine" at Greenacre in July and August 1894.

The name of Swami's master was Ramakrishna Paramahamsa. The
signification of Vivekananda is conscious bliss.

Meditation is a sort of prayer and prayer is meditation. The
highest meditation is to think of nothing. If you can remain one moment
without thought, great power will come. The whole secret of knowledge
is concentration. Soul best develops itself by loving God with all the
heart. Soul is the thinking principle in man, of which mind is a
function. Soul is only the conduit from Spirit to mind.

All souls are playing, some consciously, some unconsciously.
Religion is learning to play consciously.

The Guru is your own higher Self.

Seek the highest, always the highest, for in the highest is
eternal bliss. If I am to hunt, I will hunt the rhinoceros. If I am to
rob, I will rob the treasury of the king. Seek the highest.

[Some of the following passages are the Swami's free
translations from Indian scriptures, including the Avadhuta-Gitâ of
Dattâtreya.]

If you know you are bound [you are bound];
if you know you are free, you are free. My mind was never bound by
yearnings of this world; for like the eternal blue sky, I am
the essence of Knowledge, of Existence and of Bliss. Why weepest thou,
Brother? Neither death nor disease for thee. Why weepest thou, Brother?
Neither misery nor misfortune for thee. Why weepest thou, Brother?
Neither change nor death was predicated of thee. Thou Art Existence
Absolute.

I know what God is; I cannot speak [of]
Him to you. I know not [what]
God is; how can I speak [of] Him to you? But seest not thou, my
brother, that thou wert He, thou wert He? Why go seeking God here and
there? Seek not, and that is God. Be your own Self — One that cannot be
confessed or described, One that can be perceived in our heart of
hearts. One beyond all compare, beyond limit, unchangeable like the
blue sky. Oh! learn the All Holy One. Seek for nothing else.

Where changes of nature cannot reach,
thought beyond all thought,
unchangeable, immovable, whom all books declare, all sages worship, O
Holy One! Seek for nothing else.

Beyond compare, Infinite Oneness — no
comparison is possible. Water
above, water beneath, water on the right, water on the left. No wave on
that water, no ripple. All silence, all eternal bliss. Such will come
to thy heart. Seek for nothing else. Thou art our father, our mother,
our dear friend. Thou bearest the burden of this world. Help us to bear
the burden of our lives. Thou art our friend, our lover, our husband.
Thou art ourselves.

Four sorts of people worship Me. Some want
the delights of the physical
world. Some want money, some want religion. Some worship Me because
they love Me.

Real love is love for love's sake. I do not ask health or
money or life or salvation. Send me to a thousand hells, but let me
love Thee for love's sake. Mirâ Bâi, the great queen, taught the
doctrine of love for love's sake.

Our present consciousness is only a little bit of an infinite
sea of mind. Do not be limited to this consciousness.

Three great things [are] to be desired to develop the soul:
First, human birth; second, thirst for the highest; third, to find one
who has reached the highest — a Mahâtmâ, one whose mind, word and deed
are full of the nectar of virtue, whose only
pleasure is in doing good to the universe, who looks upon others'
virtues,
be they only as a mustard seed, even as though they were a mountain,
thus expanding his own self and helping others to expand. Thus is the
Mahatma.

The word Yoga is the root of which our
word yoke is a derivation — meaning "to join" — and
Yoga means "joining ourselves with God" — joining me with my real Self.

All actions now involuntary or automatic were once voluntary,
and our first step is to gain a knowledge of the automatic actions —
the real idea being to revivify and make voluntary all automatic
actions, to bring them into consciousness. Many Yogis can control the
actions of their hearts.

To go back into consciousness and bring out things we have
forgotten is ordinary power, but this can be heightened. All knowledge
— all that — can be brought out of the inner consciousness, and to do
this is Yoga. The majority of actions and thoughts is automatic, or
acting behind consciousness. The seat of automatic action is in the
medulla oblongata and down the spinal cord.

The question is, how to find our way back to our inner
consciousness. We have come out through spirit, soul, mind, and body,
and now we must go back from body to spirit. First, get hold of the air
[breath], then the nervous system, then the mind, then the Atman, or
spirit. But in this effort we must be perfectly sincere in desiring the
highest.

The law of laws is concentration. First, concentrate all the
nerve energies and all power lodged in the cells of the body into one
force and direct it at will. Then bring the mind, which is thinner
matter, into one center. The mind has layer after layer. When the nerve
force concentrated is made to pass through the spinal column, one layer
of the mind is open. When it is concentrated in one bone [plexus, or
"lotus"], another part of the world is open. So from world to world it
goes until it touches the pineal gland in the center of the brain. This
is the seat of conservation of potential energy, the source of both
activity and passivity.

Start with the idea that we can finish all experience in this
world, in this incarnation. We must aim to become perfect in this life,
this very moment. Success only comes to that life
amongst men who wants to do this, this very moment. It is acquired by
him who says, "Faith, I wait upon faith come what may". Therefore, go
on knowing you are to finish this very moment. Struggle hard and then
if you do not succeed, you are not to blame. Let the world praise or
blame you. Let all the wealth of the earth come to your feet, or let
you be made the poorest on earth. Let death come this moment or
hundreds of years hence. Swerve not from the path you have taken. All
good thoughts are immortal and go to make Buddhas and Christs.

Law is simply a means of [your] expression [of] various
phenomena brought into your mind. Law is your method of grasping
material phenomena and bringing them into unity. All law is finding
unity in variety. The only method of knowledge is concentration on the
physical, mental, and spiritual planes; and concentrating the powers of
the mind to discover one in many, is what is called knowledge.

Everything that makes for unity is moral, everything that
makes for diversity is immoral. Know the One without a second, that is
perfection. The One who manifests in all is the basis of the universe;
and all religion, all knowledge, must come to this point.

[The following are some of the disconnected notes
taken by Miss Emma Thursby during the last of the Swami's Greenacre
classes, delivered Sunday morning, August 12, 1894.]

I am Existence
Absolute           
Kundalini

Bliss
Absolute                          
Circle mother

I am He, Shivoham

I am He, Shivoham

He is the learned man who sees that every man's property is nothing.
Every woman his Mother.

Shanti — peace
—                                          

We meditate on the Glory of    
Hrim  (A Bija Mantra, or seed word, for the Divine Mother.)

Mother

Buddhistic Prayer

I bow to all the saint[s] on Earth

I bow down to the founders of Religion

to all holy men and women

Prophets of Religion

who have been on Earth

Hindu prayer

I meditate on the Glory of the producer of this Universe

may He enlighten our minds.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/notes_of_lectures_and_classes/christs_message_to_the_world.htm


←
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Notes
of Lectures and Classes
/ →

CHRIST'S MESSAGE TO THE WORLD

(New Discoveries,
Vol. 5, p. 379.)

[From Mr. Frank Rhodehamel's
notes of a lecture delivered in San Francisco, California, on March 11,
1900]

Everything progresses in waves. The march of civilization, the
progression of worlds, is in waves. All human activities likewise
progress in waves — art, literature, science, religion.

Great waves succeed each other, and between these great waves
is a quiet, a calm, a period of rest, a period of recuperation.

All manifest life seems to require a period of sleep, of calm,
in which to gain added strength, renewed vigour, for the next
manifestation, or awakening to activity. Thus is the march of all
progress, of all manifest life — in waves, successive waves, [of]
activity and repose. Waves succeed each other in an endless chain of
progression.

Religion, like everything else, progresses in waves; and at
the summit of each great wave stands an illumined soul, a mighty
spiritual leader and teacher of men. Such a one was Jesus of Nazareth.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/notes_of_lectures_and_classes/mohammeds_message_to_the_world.htm


←
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Notes
of Lectures and Classes
/ →

MOHAMMED'S MESSAGE TO THE WORLD

(New Discoveries,
Vol. 5, pp. 401-3. Cf. "Mohammed", Complete
Works , I.)

[Excerpts of Ida Ansell's first
transcript of Swami Vivekananda's San Francisco lecture delivered
Sunday, March 25, 1900]

Mohammed

[After stating that he would "take Mohammed and bring
out the particular work of the great Arabian prophet", Swami
Vivekananda continued his lecture.]

Each great messenger not only creates a new order of things,
but is himself the creation of a certain order of things. There is no
such thing as an independent, active cause. All causes are cause and
effect in turn. Father is father and son in turn. Mother is mother and
daughter in turn. It is necessary to understand the surroundings and
circumstances into which they [the great messengers] come. . . .

This is the peculiarity of civilization. One wave of a race
will go from its birthplace to a distant land and make a wonderful
civilization. The rest will be left in barbarism. The Hindus came into
India and the tribes of Central Asia were left in barbarism. Others
came to Asia Minor and Europe. Then, you remember the coming out of
Egypt of the Israelites. Their home was the Arabian desert. Out of that
springs a new work. . . . All civilizations grow that way. A certain
race becomes civilized. Then comes a nomad race. Nomads are always
ready to fight. They come and conquer a race. They bring better blood,
stronger physiques. They take up the mind of the conquered race and add
that to their body and push civilization still further. One race
becomes cultured and civilized until the body is worn out. Then like a
whirlwind comes a race strong in the physical, and they take up the
arts and the sciences and the mind, and push civilization further. This
must be. Otherwise the world would not be.

* * * *

The moment a great man rises, they build a beautiful
[mythology] around him. Science and truth is all the religion
that exists. Truth is more beautiful than any mythology in the world. .
. .

The old Greeks had disappeared already, the whole nation [lay]
under the feet of the Romans who were learning their science and art.
The Roman was a barbarian, a conquering man. He had no eye for poetry
or art. He knew how to rule and how to get everything centralized into
that system of Rome and to enjoy that. That was sweet. And that Roman
Empire is gone, destroyed by all sorts of difficulties, luxury, a new
foreign religion, and all that. Christianity had been already six
hundred years in the Roman Empire. . . .

Whenever a new religion tries to force itself upon another
race, it succeeds if the race is uncultured. If it [the race] is
cultured, it will destroy the [religion]. . . . The Roman Empire was a
case in point, and the Persian people saw that. Christianity was
another thing with the barbarians in the north. [But] the Christianity
of the Roman Empire was a mixture of everything, something from Persia,
from the Jews, from India, from Greece, everything.

* * * *

The race is always killed by [war]. War takes away the best
men, gets them killed, and the cowards are left at home. Thus comes the
degeneration of the race. . . . Men became small. Why? All the great
men became [warriors]. That is how war kills races, takes their best
into the battlefields.

Then the monasteries. They all went to the desert, to the
caves for meditation. The monasteries gradually became the centres of
wealth and luxury. . . .

The Anglo-Saxon race would not be Anglo-Saxon but for these
monasteries. Every weak man was worse than a slave.. . . In that state
of chaos these monasteries were centres of light and protection.

Where [cultures] differ very much they do not quarrel. All
these warring, jarring elements [were originally] all one.

In the midst of all this chaos was born the prophet. . . .

[This concluded the first part of the Swami's
lecture. Vide "Mohammed", Complete
Works , Vol.
I, for the remainder of the lecture.]



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/notes_of_lectures_and_classes/class_lessons_in_meditation.htm


←
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Notes
of Lectures and Classes
/ →

CLASS LESSONS IN MEDITATION BY SWAMI VIVEKANANDA

(New Discoveries,
Vol. 6, p. 10.)

[Mr. Frank Rhodehamel's notes
of a class delivered in San Francisco, California, on Monday, March 26,
1900]

The first point is the position. Sit with the spine perfectly
free, with the weight resting on the hips. The next step is breathing.
Breathe in the left nostril and out the right. Fill the lungs full and
eject all the breath. Clear the lungs of all impure
air. Breathe full and deep. The next thing is to think of the body as
luminous, filled with light. The next thing is to concentrate on the
base of the spine, not from the outside, but look down the spinal
column inside to the base of the spine.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/notes_of_lectures_and_classes/the_gita.htm


←
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Notes
of Lectures and Classes
/ →

THE GITA

(New Discoveries,
Vol. 6, pp. 175-76.)

[Mr. Frank Rhodehamel's notes
of a Bhagavad-Gitâ class delivered Thursday, May 24, 1900, in San
Francisco, California]

The Gitâ is the gist of the Vedas. It is not our Bible; the
Upanishads are our Bible. It [the Gita] is the gist of the Upanishads
and harmonizes the many contradictory parts of the Upanishads.

The Vedas are divided into two portions — the work portion and
the knowledge portion. The work portion contains ceremonials, rules as
to eating, living, doing charitable work, etc. The knowledge came
afterwards and was enunciated by kings.

The work portion was exclusively in the hands of the priests
and pertained entirely to the sense life. It taught to do good works
that one might go to heaven and enjoy eternal happiness. Anything, in
fact, that one might want could be provided for him by the work or
ceremonials. It provided for all classes of
people good and bad. Nothing could be obtained through the ceremonials
except by the intercession of the priests. So if one wanted anything,
even if it was to have an enemy killed, all he had to do was to pay the
priest; and the priest through these ceremonials would procure the
desired results. It was therefore in the interests of the priests that
the ceremonial portion of the Vedas should be preserved. By it they had
their living. They consequently did all in their power to preserve that
portion intact. Many of these ceremonials were very complicated, and it
took years to perform some of them.

The knowledge portion came afterwards and was promulgated
exclusively by kings. It was called the Knowledge of Kings. The great
kings had no use for the work portion with all its frauds and
superstitions and did all in their power to destroy it. This knowledge
consisted of a knowledge of God, the soul, the universe, etc. These
kings had no use for the ceremonials of the priests, their magical
works, etc. They pronounced it all humbug; and when the priests came to
them for gifts, they questioned the priests about God, the soul, etc.,
and as the priests could not answer such questions they were sent away.
The priests went back to their fathers to enquire about the things the
kings asked them, but could learn nothing from them, so they came back
again to the kings and became their disciples. Very little of the
ceremonials are followed today. They have been mostly done away with,
and only a few of the more simple ones are followed today.

Then in the Upanishads there is the doctrine of Karma. Karma
is the law of causation applied to conduct. According to this doctrine
we must work forever, and the only way to get rid of pain is to do good
works and thus to enjoy the good effects; and after living a life of
good works, die and go to heaven and live forever in happiness. Even in
heaven we could not be free from Karma, only it would be good Karma,
not bad.

The philosophical portion denounces all work however good, and
all pleasure, as loving and kissing wife, husband or children, as
useless. According to this doctrine all good works and pleasures are
nothing but foolishness and in their very nature impermanent. "All this
must come to an end sometime, so end it now; it is vain." So says the
philosophical portion of the
Upanishads. It claims all the pain in the world is caused by ignorance,
therefore the cure is knowledge.

This idea of one being held down fast by past Karma, or work,
is all nonsense. No matter how dense one may be, or how bad, one ray of
light will dissipate it all. A bale of cotton, however large, will be
utterly destroyed by a spark. If a room has been dark for untold ages,
a lamp will end it all. So with each soul, however benighted he may be,
he is not absolutely bound down by his past Karma to work for ages to
come. "One ray of Divine Light will free him, reveal to him his true
nature."

Well, the Gita harmonizes all these conflicting doctrines. As
to Krishna, whether or not he ever lived, I do not know. "A great many
stories are told of him, but I do not believe them."

"I doubt very much that he ever lived and think it would be a
good thing if he never did. There would have been one less god in the
world."



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/notes_of_lectures_and_classes/the_gita_i.htm


←
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Notes
of Lectures and Classes
/ →

THE GITA — I

(New Discoveries,
Vol. 6, pp. 205-7. Cf. Ida Ansell's notes of "The Gita I", Complete
Works, I.)

[Mr. Frank Rhodehamel's notes
of a Bhagavad-Gitâ lecture delivered Saturday, May 26, 1900, in San
Francisco, California]

The Gitâ is to the Hindus what the New Testament is to the
Christians. It is about five thousand years old, and the day of
religious celebrations with the Hindus is the anniversary of the Battle
of Kurukshetra about five thousand years ago. As I said, the Vedas are
divided into two great divisions, the philosophical and the Karmakânda,
or work portion.

Between the kings, who promulgated the philosophic portion,
and the priests a great conflict arose. The priests had the people on
their side because they had all the utility which appealed to the
popular mind. The kings had all the spirituality and none of the
economic element; but as they were powerful and the rulers of the
nation, the struggle was a hard and bitter
one. The kings gradually gained a little ground, but their ideas were
too elevated for the masses, so the ceremonial, or work portion, always
had the mass of the people.

Always remember this, that whenever a religious system gains
ground with the people at large, it has a strong economic side to it.
It is the economic side of a religion that finds lodgement with the
people at large, and never its spiritual, or philosophic, side. If you
should preach the grandest philosophy in the streets for a year, you
would not have a handful of followers. But you could preach the most
arrant nonsense, and if it had an economic element, you would have the
whole people with you.

None knows by whom the Vedas were written; they are so
ancient. According to the orthodox Hindus, the Vedas are not the
written words at all, but they consist of the words themselves orally
spoken with the exact enunciation and intonation. This vast mass of
religion has been written and consists of thousands upon thousands of
volumes. Anyone who knows the precise pronunciation and intonation
knows the Vedas, and no one else. In ancient times certain royal
families were the custodians of certain parts of the Vedas. The head of
the family could repeat every word of every volume he had, without
missing a word or an intonation. These men had giant intellects,
wonderful memories.

The strictly orthodox believers in the Vedas, the Karmakanda,
did not believe in God, the soul or anything of the sort, but that we
as we are were the only beings in the universe, material or spiritual.
When they were asked what the many allusions to God in the Vedas mean,
they say that they mean nothing at all; that the words properly
articulated have a magical power, a power to create certain results.
Aside from that they have no meaning.

Whenever you suppress a thought, you simply press it down out
of sight in a coil, like a spring, only to spring out again at a
moment's notice with all the pent up force as the result of the
suppression, and do in a few moments what it would have done in a much
longer period.

Every ounce of pleasure brings its pound of pain. It is the
same energy that at one time manifests itself as pleasure and at
another time as pain. As soon as one set of sensations stops,
another begins. But in some cases, in more advanced persons, one may
have two, yes, or even a hundred different thoughts enter into active
operation at the same time. When one thought is suppressed, it is
merely coiled up ready to spring forth with pent up fury at any time.

"Mind is of its own nature. Mind activity means creation. The
thought is followed by the word, and the word by the form. All of this
creating will have to stop, both mental and physical, before the mind
can reflect the soul."

"My old master (Shri Ramakrishna.) could not write his own
name without making a mistake. He made three mistakes in spelling, in
writing his own name."

"Yet that is the kind of man at whose feet I sat."

"You will break the law of nature but once, and it will be the
last time. Nature will then be nothing to you."



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/notes_of_lectures_and_classes/the_gita_iii.htm


←
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Notes
of Lectures and Classes
/ →

THE GITA — III

(New Discoveries,
Vol. 6, pp. 213-16. Cf. Ida Ansell's notes of "The Gita III", Complete
Works, I.)

[Mr. Frank Rhodehamel's notes
of the Bhagavad-Gitâ lecture delivered Tuesday, May 29, 1900, in San
Francisco, California]

1.  "If you know
everything, disturb not the childlike faith of the innocent."

2.   "Religion is the realization of Spirit as
Spirit. Not spirit as matter."

3.   "You are spirit. Realize yourselves as spirit.
Do it any way you can."

4.  "Religion is a growth": each one must experience
it himself.

5.   "Everyone thinks 'my method is the best'. That
is so, but it is the best for you."

6.   "Spirit must stand revealed as spirit."

7.   "There never was a time when spirit could be
identified with matter."

8.   "What is real in nature is the spirit."

9.   "Action is in nature."

10. "'In the beginning there was That Existence. He looked and
everything was created.'"

11. "Everyone works according to his own nature."

12. "You are not bound by law. That is in your nature. The mind is in
nature and is bound by law."

13. "If you want to be religious, keep out of religious arguments."

14. "Governments, societies, etc., are evils."

"All societies are based on bad generalizations."

"A law is that which cannot be broken."

15. "Better never love, if that love makes us hate others."

16. "The sign of death is weakness; the sign of life is strength."

[The following numbered paragraphs are correlated
with the preceding numbered sentences.]

4.
       
The Christian believes that Jesus Christ died to save him. With you it
is belief in a doctrine, and this belief constitutes your salvation.
With us, doctrine has nothing whatever to do with salvation. Each one
may believe in whatever doctrine he likes or in no doctrine. With us
realization is religion, not doctrine. What difference does it make to
you whether Jesus Christ lived at a certain time? What has it to do
with you that Moses saw God in a burning bush? The fact that Moses saw
God in the burning bush does not constitute your seeing Him, does it?
If it does, then the fact that Moses ate is enough for you; you ought
to stop eating. One is just as sensible as the other. Records of great
spiritual men of the past do us no good whatever except that they urge
us onward to do the same, to experience religion ourselves. Whatever
Christ or Moses or anybody else did does not help us in the least
except to urge us on.

5.
       
Each one has a special nature peculiar to himself which he must follow
and through which he will find his way to free
dom. Your teacher should be able to tell you what your particular path
in nature is and to put you in it. He should know by your face where
you belong and should be able to indicate it to you. We should never
try to follow another's path for that is his way, not yours. When that
path is found, you have nothing to do but fold your arms and the tide
will carry you to freedom. Therefore when you find it, never swerve
from it. Your way is the best for you, but that is no sign it is the
best for another.

6.        
The truly spiritual see spirit as spirit, not as matter. Spirit as such
can never become matter, though matter is spirit at a low rate of
vibration. It is spirit that makes nature move; it is the Reality in
nature, so action is in nature but not in the spirit. Spirit is always
the same, changeless, eternal. Spirit and matter are in reality the
same, but spirit, as such, never becomes matter, and matter, as such,
never becomes spirit. Matter, as such, never becomes spirit as such,
for it is simply a mode of spirit, or spirit at a low rate of
vibration. You take food and it becomes mind, and mind in turn becomes
the body. Thus mind and body, spirit and matter are distinct though
either may give place to the other; but they are not to be identified.

8.        
"What is real in nature is the Spirit." The spirit is the life in all
action in nature. It is the spirit that gives nature its reality and
power of action.

9.        
"Action is in nature." "The spirit never acts. Why should it?" It
merely is, and that is sufficient. It is pure existence absolute and
has no need of action.

12.      
All nature is bound by law, the law of its own action; and this law can
never be broken. If you could break a law of nature, all nature would
come to an end in an instant. There would be no more nature. He who
attains freedom breaks the law of nature and for him nature fades away
and has no more power over him. Each one will break the law but once
and forever and that will end his trouble with nature. "You are not
bound by law. That is in your nature. The mind is in nature and is
bound by law."

14.      
The moment you form yourselves into an organization, you begin to hate
everybody outside of that organization. When you join an organization
you are putting bonds upon yourself, you are limiting your own freedom.
Why should you form your selves
into an order having rules and regulations, thus limiting every one as
to his independent action? If one breaks a law of an order or society
he is hated by the rest. What right has anyone to lay down rules and
laws governing others? Such laws are not laws at all. If it were a law
it could not be broken. The fact that these so-called laws are broken
shows clearly they are not laws.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/notes_of_lectures_and_classes/gita_class.htm


←
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Notes
of Lectures and Classes
/ →

GITA CLASS

(New Discoveries,
Vol. 6, pp. 275-76.)

[Sister Nivedita's notes of a
New York Bhagavad-Gitâ class, recorded in a June 16, 1900 letter to
Miss Josephine MacLeod]

This morning the lesson on the Gitâ was grand. It began with a
long talk on the fact that the highest ideals are not for all.
Non-resistance is not for the man who thinks the
replacing of the maggot in the wound by the leprous saint with "Eat,
Brother!" disgusting and horrible. Non-resistance is practised by a
mother's love towards an angry child. It is a travesty in the mouth of
a coward, or in the face of a lion.

Let us be true. Nine-tenths of our life's energy is spent in
trying to make people think us that which we are
not. That energy would be more rightly spent in becoming
that which we would like to be. And so it went — beginning with the
salutation to an incarnation:

Salutation to thee — the Guru of the
universe,

Whose footstool is worshipped by the gods.

Thou one unbroken Soul,

Physician of the world's diseases.

Guru of even the gods,

To thee our salutation.

Thee we salute. Thee we salute. Thee we salute.

In the Indian tones — by Swami himself.

There was an implication throughout the talk that Christ and
Buddha were inferior to Krishna — in the grasp of problems — inasmuch
as they preached the highest ethics as a world path,
whereas Krishna saw the right of the whole, in all
its parts — to its own differing ideals.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/notes_of_lectures_and_classes/remarks_from_various_lectures.htm


←
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Notes
of Lectures and Classes
/ →

REMARKS FROM VARIOUS LECTURES

(New Discoveries,
Vol. 6, pp. 209-10.)

[Mr. Frank Rhodehamel's random
lecture notes, most of which seem to pertain to chapter two of the
Bhagavad-Gitâ]

"Spirituality can never be attained until materiality is gone."

The first discourse in the Gita can be taken allegorically.

"The Vedas only teach of things in nature, only teach of
nature."

We are always letting sentiment usurp the place of duty, and
flattering
ourselves that we are acting in response to true love.

We must get beyond emotionalism if we would be able to
renounce.
Emotion belongs to the animals. They are creatures of emotion entirely.

It is not sacrifice of a high order to die for one's young.
The animals
do that, and just as readily as any human mother ever did. It is no
sign of real love to do that; merely blind emotion.

We are forever trying to make our weakness look like strength,
our
sentiment like love, our cowardice like courage, etc.

Say to your soul in regard to vanities, weaknesses, etc.,
"This does
not befit thee. This does not befit thee".



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/writings_prose_and_poems/the_ether.htm


 ←
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Writings:
Prose and Poems
/ →

THE ETHER1

This article first appeared
anonymously in the February 1895 issue of the New York
Medical Times, a prestigious monthly medical journal founded
and edited by Dr. Egbert Guernsey.

Classification or grouping of phenomena by their similarities
is the first step in scientific knowledge — perhaps it is all. An
organized grouping, revealing to us a similarity running through the
whole group, and a conviction that under similar circumstances the
group will arrange itself in the same form — stretched over all time,
past, present and future — is what we call law.

This finding of unity in variety is really what we call
knowledge. These different groups of similars are stowed away in the
pigeon-holes of the mind, and when a new fact comes before us we begin
to search for a similar group already existing in one of the
pigeon-holes of the mind. If we succeed in finding one ready-made, we
take the newcomer in immediately. If not, we either reject the new
fact, or wait till we find more of his kind, and form a new place for
the group.

Facts which are extraordinary thus disturb us; but and when we
find many like them, they cease to disturb, even when our knowledge
about their cause remains the same as before.

The ordinary experiences of our lives are no less wonderful
than any miracles recorded in any sacred book of the world; nor are we
any more enlightened as to the cause of these ordinary experiences than
of the so-called miracles. But the miraculous is "extraordinary", and
the everyday experience is "ordinary". The "extraordinary" startles the
mind, the "ordinary" satisfies.

The field of knowledge is so varied, and the more the
difference is from the centre, the more widely the radii diverge.

At the start the different sciences were thought to have no
connection whatever with each other; but as more and more knowledge
comes in — that is, the more and more we come nearer the centre — the
radii are converging more and more, and it seems that they are on the
eve of finding a common centre. Will they ever find it?

The study of the mind was, above all, the science to which the
sages of India and Greece had directed their attention. All religions
are the outcome of the study of the inner man. Here we find the attempt
at finding the unity, and in the science of religion, as taking its
stand upon general and massive propositions, we find the boldest and
the most vigorous manifestation of this tendency at finding the unity.

Some religions could not solve the problem beyond the finding
of a duality of causes, one good, the other evil. Others went as far as
finding an intelligent personal cause, a few went still further beyond
intellect, beyond personality, and found an infinite being.

In those, and only those systems which dared to transcend
beyond the personality of a limited human consciousness, we find also
an attempt to resolve all physical phenomena into unity.

The result was the "Akâsha" of the Hindus and the "Ether" of
the Greeks.

This "Akasha" was, after the mind, the first material
manifestation, said the Hindu sages, and out of this "Akasha" all this
has been evolved.

History repeats itself; and again during the latter part of
the nineteenth century, the same theory is coming with more vigour and
fuller light.

It is being proved more clearly than ever that as there is a
co-relation of physical forces there is also a co-relation of different
[branches of] knowledge, and that behind all these general groups there
is a unity of knowledge.

It was shown by Newton (Isaac Newton, 1642 – 1727.) that if
light consisted of material particles projected from luminous bodies,
they must move faster in solids
and liquids than in air, in order that the laws of refraction might be
satisfied.

Huyghens, (Christian Huyghens, 1629 – 1695.) on the other
hand, showed that to account for the same laws on the supposition that
light consisted in the undulating motion of an elastic medium, it must
move more slowly in solids and fluids than in gases. Fizeau (Armand
Hippolyte Louis Fizeau, 1819 – 1896.) and Foucault (Jean Bernard Léon
Foucault, 1819 – 1868.) found Huyghens's predictions correct.

Light, then, consists in the vibrating motion of a medium,
which must, of course, fill all space. This is called the ether.

In the fact that the theory of a cosmic ether explains fully
all the phenomena of radiation, refraction, diffraction and
polarization of light is the strongest argument in favour of the theory.

Of late, gravitation, molecular action, magnetic, electric,
and electro-dynamic attractions and repulsions have thus been explained.

Sensible and latent heat, electricity and magnetism themselves
have been of late almost satisfactorily explained
by the theory of the all-pervading ether.

Zöllner, (Johann K. F. Zöllner, 1834 – 1882.) however, basing
his calculations upon the data supplied by the researches of Wilhelm
Weber (Wilhelm Eduard Weber, 1804 – 1891.), thinks that the
transmission of life force between the heavenly bodies is effected both
ways, by the undulation of a medium and by the actual evidence of
particles.

Weber found that the molecules, the smallest particles of
bodies, were composed of yet smaller particles, which he called the
electric particles, and which in the molecules are in a constant
circular motion. These electric particles are partly positive, partly
negative.

Those of the same electricity repulse those of different
electricity; attracting each other, each molecule contains
the same amount of electric particles, with a small surplus of either
positive or negative quickly changing the balance.

Upon this Zöllner builds these propositions:

(1) The molecules are composed of a very great number of
particles — the so-called electric particles, which are in constant
circular motion around each other within the molecule.

(2) If the inner motion of a molecule increases over a certain
limit, then electric particles are emitted. They then travel from one
heavenly body through space until they reach another heavenly body,
where they are either reflected or absorbed by other molecules.

(3) The electric particles thus traversing space are the ether
of the physicist.

(4) These ether particles have a twofold motion: first, their
proper motion; second, an undulatory motion, for which they receive the
impulse from the ether particles rotating in the molecules.

(5) The motion of the smallest particles corresponds to that
of the heavenly bodies.

The corollary is:

The law of attraction which holds good for the heavenly bodies
also holds good for the smallest particles.

Under these suppositions, that which we call space is really
filled with electric particles, or ether.

Zöllner also found the following interesting calculation for
the electric atoms:

Velocity: 50,143 geographical miles per second.

Amount of ether particles in a water molecule: 42,000 million.

Distance from each other: 0.0032 millimeter.

So far as it goes, then, the theory of a universal cosmic
ether is the best at hand to explain the various phenomena of nature.

As far as it goes, the theory that this ether consists of
particles, electric or otherwise, is also very valuable. But on all
suppositions, there must be space between two particles of ether,
however small; and what fills this inter-ethereal space? If
particles still finer, we require still more fine ethereal particles to
fill up the vacuum between every two of them, and so on.

Thus the theory of ether, or material particles in space,
though accounting for the phenomena in space, cannot account for space
itself.

And thus we are forced to find that the ether which
comprehends the molecules explains the molecular phenomena, but itself
cannot explain space because we cannot but think of ether as in space.
And, therefore, if there is anything which will explain this space, it
must be something that comprehends in its infinite being the infinite
space itself. And what is there that can comprehend even the infinite
space but the Infinite Mind?

^Reprinted
in New Discoveries, Vol. 3, pp. 55-59. Because the Swami's
original handwritten article is unavailable, we have made the spelling,
punctuation and grammar of his published version conform to the style
of the Complete Works. — Publisher.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/writings_prose_and_poems/notes.htm


 ←
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Writings:
Prose and Poems
/ →

NOTES

(New Discoveries,
Vol. 3, pp. 440-41.)

[An undated and untitled,
one-page manuscript in Swami Vivekananda's own handwriting]

My nerves act on my brain — the brain sends back a reaction
which, on the mental side, is this world.

Something — x — acts on the brain through the nerves, the
reaction is this world.

Why not the x be also in the body — why outside?

Because we find the already created outside
world (as the result of a previous reaction of the
brain) acts on us calling on a further reaction.

Thus inside becomes outside and creates another action, which
interior action created another reaction, which again becomes outside
and again acts inside.

The only way of reconciling idealism and realism is to hold
that one brain can be affected by the world created
as reaction by another brain from inside, i.e., the mixture x + mind
which one brain throws out can affect another, to which it's similarly
external.

Therefore as soon as we come within the influence of this
hypnotic circle, or influence, created by hundreds of preceding brains
we begin to feel this world as they see it.

Mind is only a phase of matter, i.e., of the ever-changing
phenomena of which matter and mind are different states or views. There
must be something in whose presence this eternal, phenomenal net is
spread — that is the Substance, the Brahman.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/writings_prose_and_poems/lecture_notes.htm


 ←
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Writings:
Prose and Poems
/ →

LECTURE NOTES

(New Discoveries,
Vol. 4, pp. 213-14.)

Probably at the turn of the century, Miss Ellen Waldo
gave these undated notes in Swami Vivekananda's handwriting to her
friend Sister Devamata, a member of the Boston Vedanta Centre, where
they were later made available for publication.

Man will need a religion so long as he is
constituted as at present.

The forms will change from time to time

The dissatisfaction with the senses.

The yearning beyond.

There were encroachments of religion on the domains of physical science
— these [encroachments] religion is giving up every day.

Yet there is a vast field covered by religion where physical science[s]
are mute.

The [vain?] attempt to keep man strictly within the limits of the
senses —

Because — there are men who catch a glimpse now and then of the
infinite beyond.

The types of men.

The worker — the mystic the emotional  the intellectual.

Each type is necessary for the well — being of society. The dangers of
each —

A mixture minimizes the danger

The East is too full of mystics and meditative the West of workers —

An exchange will be for the good of both.

The necessity of religion —

The four types of men

that come to religion —

the basis of Unity — the Divinity

in man. Why use this term?

the western Society has work

and intellectual philosophy —

But work must not be destructive

of others.

Philosophy — must not be only dry intellectuality



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/writings_prose_and_poems/macrocosm_and_microcosm.htm


 ←
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Writings:
Prose and Poems
/ →

MACROCOSM AND MICROCOSM

(The Life of Swami Vivekananda,
Vol. I. p. 250.)

After his experience of the macrocosm within the
microcosm while absorbed in meditation under the peepul tree at
Kakrighat, in 1890, Swami Vivekananda jotted down in Bengali fragments
of his realization in his notebook.

In the beginning was the Word etc.

The microcosm and the macrocosm are built on the same plan.
Just as the individual soul is encased in the living body, so is the
universal Soul in the Living Prakriti [Nature] — the objective
universe. Shivâ [i.e. Kâli] is embracing Shiva: this is not a fancy.
This covering of the one [Soul] by the other [Nature] is analogous to
the relation between an idea and the word expressing it: they are one
and the same; and it is only by a mental abstraction that one can
distinguish them. Thought is impossible without words. Therefore, in
the beginning was the Word etc.

This dual aspect of the Universal Soul is eternal. So what we
perceive or feel is this combination of the Eternally Formed and the
Eternally Formless.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/writings_prose_and_poems/footnotes.htm


 ←
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Writings:
Prose and Poems
/ →

SWAMI VIVEKANANDA'S FOOTNOTES

TO THE IMITATION OF CHRIST

(Prabuddha Bharata,
September 1982, pp. 390-93.)

In 1889, Swami Vivekananda translated into Bengali selections
from Book I, chapters 1-6 of Thomas à Kempis's The Imitation
of Christ. They were published along with a preface in a
now-defunct Bengali monthly magazine, Sâhitya Kalpadruma.
The Swami's preface and Bengali translation, entitled "Ishânusharana",1
were later published in the
Bengali Complete Works
(first edition), VI, pp. 16-28. However, only the preface to The
Imitation of Christ was published
in the English edition of the Complete
Works, VIII.

Swami Vivekananda's partial Bengali
translation of The Imitation of Christ includes as
footnotes quotations from Hindu scriptures that parallel à Kempis's
ideas, comments or commentary. For the sake of clarity, these footnotes
(numbered 1 through 17) have been appended to their respective verses
in The Imitation of Christ (indicated in
parentheses), arranged under their appropriate chapter headings in the
book, and reproduced here in bold.

Many of the Sanskrit footnotes to the Bengali translation were
later rendered into English during the course of Swami Vivekananda's
lecturing or writing. For the sake of interest, these English
translations have also been added to the Swami's restored footnote
text. Otherwise, Sanskrit verses have been translated by the Publisher
for the convenience of the reader.

— Publisher

BOOK
I2

CHAPTER 1

Of the Imitation of Christ and
Contempt of all the Vanities of the World

1. "He that followeth Me, walketh not in darkness", saith the
Lord [John 8.12]. (The Imitation of Christ V.1.)

SWAMI VIVEKANANDA'S FOOTNOTE:
BHAGAVAD-GITA 7.14

दैवी ह्येषा गुणमयी मम
माया दुरत्यया।

मामेव ये प्रपद्यन्ते मायामेतां तरन्ति ते॥

SWAMI VIVEKANANDA'S TRANSLATION: This My Mâyâ is divine, made
up of qualities and very difficult to cross. Yet those who come unto
Me, cross the river of life. (Vide "Maya
and Freedom" , Complete
Works, II.)

2. Let therefore our chief endeavour be to meditate upon the
life of Jesus Christ. (The Imitation of Christ V.1.)

SWAMI VIVEKANANDA'S FOOTNOTE: Adhyâtma
Râmâyana,

UTTARA-KANDA 5.54 (RAMAGITA)

ध्यात्वैवमात्मानमहर्निशं
मुनि:।

तिष्ठेत्सदा मुक्तसमस्तबन्धनः॥

PUBLISHER'S TRANSLATION: Thus meditating upon the Self day and
night, let the sage abide free from all bondage.

3. The doctrine of Christ exceedeth all the doctrines of holy
men; and he that hath the Spirit will find therein the hidden manna. (The
Imitation of Christ V.2.)

SWAMI VIVEKANANDA'S FOOTNOTE:

When the Israelites were afflicted by want of food in a
desert, God showered on them a kind of "manna".

4. But it falleth out, that many who often hear the Gospel of
Christ, are yet but little affected, because they are void of the
Spirit of Christ. But whosoever would fully and feelingly understand
the words of Christ, must endeavour to conform his life wholly to the
life of Christ. (The Imitation of Christ V.2.)

SWAMI VIVEKANANDA'S FOOTNOTE (A):
BHAGAVAD-GITA 2.29

श्रुत्वाप्येनं वेद न चैव कश्चिन्

SWAMI VIVEKANANDA'S TRANSLATION: Others, hearing of It, do not
understand. (Vide "The
Gita II" , Complete
Works, I.)

SWAMI VIVEKANANDA'S FOOTNOTE (B): Vivekachudâmani
62

न गच्छति विना पानं
व्याधिरौषधशब्दतः।

विनाऽपरोक्षानुभवं ब्रह्मशब्दैर्न मुच्यते॥

PUBLISHER'S TRANSLATION: A disease does not leave the body by
simply repeating the name of the medicine; one must take the medicine.
Similarly, liberation does not come by merely saying the word Brahman.
Brahman must be experienced.

SWAMI VIVEKANANDA'S FOOTNOTE (C):
MAHABHARATA

(critical edition) 12.309.91

श्रुतेन किं येन न
धर्ममाचरेत्।

PUBLISHER'S TRANSLATION: Of what avail is reading the Vedas
without practising religion?

5. What will it avail thee to dispute profoundly of the
Trinity if thou be void of humility and art thereby displeasing to the
Trinity? (The Imitation of Christ V.3.)

SWAMI VIVEKANANDA'S FOOTNOTE:

According to the Christians, God the Father, Holy Ghost, and
God the Son are One in three and Three in One.

6. Surely great words do not make a man holy and just; but a
virtuous life maketh him dear to God. (The Imitation of Christ
V.3.)

SWAMI VIVEKANANDA'S FOOTNOTE: Vivekachudamani
58

वाग्वैखरी शब्दझरी
शास्त्रव्याख्यानकौशलम्।

वैदुष्यं विदुषां तद्वद् भुक्तये न तु मुक्तये॥

SWAMI VIVEKANANDA'S TRANSLATION: Wonderful methods of joining
words, rhetorical powers, and explaining texts of the books in various
ways — these are only for the enjoyment of the learned, and not
religion. (Vide "Realization"
, Complete Works,
II.)

7. If thou didst know the whole Bible by heart and the sayings
of all the philosophers, what would it profit thee without the love of
God and without grace? (The Imitation of Christ V.3.)

SWAMI VIVEKANANDA'S FOOTNOTE: [reference
only]

—I Corinthians 13.2.

8. "Vanity of vanities, all is vanity" (Eccles.) except to
love God and to serve Him only. (The Imitation of Christ
V.3.)

SWAMI VIVEKANANDA'S FOOTNOTE: Maniratnamâlâ

के सन्ति
सन्तोऽखिलवीतरागाः।

अपास्तमोहाः शिवतत्त्वनिष्ठा:॥

PUBLISHER'S TRANSLATION: They alone are holy men (Sâdhus) who
are devoid of any longing for worldly objects, free from delusion and
are devoted to the truth of Shiva.

9. Call often to mind that proverb "The eye is not satisfied
with seeing, nor the ear filled with hearing". (The Imitation
of Christ V.5.)

SWAMI VIVEKANANDA'S FOOTNOTE: [reference
only]

—Eccles. 1.8.

10. Endeavour, therefore, to withdraw thy heart from the love
of visible things and to turn thyself to the invisible. For they that
follow their lusts stain their own consciences and lose the grace of
God. (The Imitation of Christ V.5.)

SWAMI VIVEKANANDA'S FOOTNOTE:
MAHABHARATA, 2.63

(YAYATIGATHA)

न जातु कामः
कामानामुपभोगेन शाम्यति।

हविषा कृष्णवर्त्मेव भूय एवाभिवर्धते॥

SWAMI VIVEKANANDA'S TRANSLATION: Desire is never satisfied by
the enjoyment of desires; it only increases the more, as fire when
butter is poured upon it. (Vide "Maya
and Illusion" , Complete
Works, II.)

CHAPTER 3

Of the Doctrine of Truth

11. What availeth it to cavil and dispute much about dark and
hidden things; for ignorance of which we shall not be reproved at the
day of judgement? (The Imitation of Christ V.1.)

SWAMI VIVEKANANDA'S FOOTNOTE:

According to the Christian view, God will judge all beings on
the last day (the day of the dissolution of the world), and will award
heaven or hell according to the virtues or vices of different
individuals.

12. He to whom the Eternal Word speaketh is delivered from
many an opinion. (The Imitation of Christ V.2.)

SWAMI VIVEKANANDA'S FOOTNOTE:

This Word is somewhat similar to the Maya
of the Vedantists. This Itself was manifested in the form of Christ.

CHAPTER 5

Of the Reading of Holy
Scriptures

13. Truth, not eloquence, is to be sought for in Holy
Scripture. Each part of the Scripture is to be read with the same
Spirit wherewith it was written. (The Imitation of Christ
V.1.)

SWAMI VIVEKANANDA'S FOOTNOTE: KATHA
UPANISHAD 1.2.9

नैषा तर्केण मतिरापनेया।

SWAMI VIVEKANANDA'S TRANSLATION: Neither is the mind to be
disturbed by vain arguments, for it is no more a question of argument;
it is a question of fact. (Vide "Realization"
, Complete Works,
II.)

14. Let not the authority of the writer offend thee, whether
he be of great or small learning; but let the love of pure truth draw
thee to read. (The Imitation of Christ V.1.)

SWAMI VIVEKANANDA'S FOOTNOTE: Laws of
Manu 2.238

आददीत शुभां विद्यां
प्रयत्नादवरादपि।

SWAMI VIVEKANANDA'S TRANSLATION: Learn supreme knowledge with
service even from the man of low birth. (Vide "The
Common Bases of Hinduism"
, Complete Works, III.)

CHAPTER 6

Of Inordinate Affections

15. Whensoever a man desireth anything inordinately, he
becometh presently disquieted in himself. (The Imitation of
Christ V.1.)

SWAMI VIVEKANANDA'S FOOTNOTE:
BHAGAVAD-GITA 2.67

इन्द्रियाणां हि चरतां
यन्मनोऽनुविधीयते।

तदस्य हरति प्रज्ञां वायुर्नावमिवाम्भसि॥

SWAMI VIVEKANANDA'S TRANSLATION: For the mind which follows in
the wake of the wandering senses carries away his discrimination as a
wind (carries away from its course) a boat on the waters.

16. The proud and covetous can never rest. The poor and humble
in spirit live together in all peace.

The man that is not yet perfectly dead to himself, is quickly
tempted and overcome in small and trifling things. (The
Imitation of Christ V.1.)

SWAMI VIVEKANANDA'S FOOTNOTE:
BHAGAVAD-GITA 2.62-63

ध्यायतो विषयान्पुंसः
सङ्गस्तेषुपजायते।

सङ्गात्सञ्जायते कामः कामात्क्रोधोऽभिजायते॥

क्रोधाद्भवति सम्मोहः सम्मोहात्स्मृतिविभ्रमः।

स्मृतिभ्रंशाद् बुद्धिनाशो बुद्धिनाशात्प्रणश्यति॥

PUBLISHER'S TRANSLATION: By thinking about sense objects,
attachment to them is formed. From attachment comes longing, and
longing breeds anger. From anger comes delusion, and from delusion,
confused memory. From confused memory comes the ruin of discrimination;
and from the ruin of discrimination, a man perishes.

17. There is then no peace in the heart of a carnal man, nor
in him that is addicted to outward things, but in the spiritual and
devout man. (The Imitation of Christ V.2.)

SWAMI VIVEKANANDA'S FOOTNOTE:
BHAGAVAD-GITA 2.60

यततो ह्यपि कौन्तेय
पुरुषस्य विपश्चितः।

इन्द्रियाणि प्रमाथीनि हरन्ति प्रसभं मनः॥

PUBLISHER'S TRANSLATION: The turbulent senses, O son of Kunti,
violently carry away the mind of even a wise man striving after
perfection.

^In
Bengali, the word Ishâ means Christ and Anusharana, "to follow"; hence
Ishânusharana means "to follow Christ".

^Verses
are cited from Thomas à Kempis's Of the Imitation of Christ (London:
Oxford University Press, 1961.) This translation — based on that of F.
B. (the Jesuit Anthony Hoskins), which first appeared c. 1613 — has
been lightly edited in order to conform to the grammar, punctuation and
style of the Complete Works — Publisher.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/writings_prose_and_poems/the_plague_manifesto.htm


 ←
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Writings:
Prose and Poems
/ →

THE PLAGUE MANIFESTO1

Om Salutations to Bhagavan Shri
Ramakrishna

Brothers of Calcutta!

1. We feel happy when you are happy, and we suffer when you
suffer. Therefore, during these days of extreme adversity, we are
striving and ceaselessly praying for your welfare and an easy way to
save you from disease and the fear of an epidemic.

2. If that grave disease — fearing which both the high and the
low, the rich and the poor are all fleeing the city — ever really comes
in our midst, then even if we perish while serving and nursing you, we
will consider ourselves fortunate because you are all embodiments of
God. He who thinks otherwise — out of vanity, superstition or ignorance
— offends God and incurs great sin. There is not the slightest doubt
about it.

3. We humbly pray to you — please do not panic due to
unfounded fear. Depend upon God and calmly try to find the best means
to solve the problem. Otherwise, join hands with those who are doing
that very thing.

4. What is there to fear? The terror that has entered people's
hearts due to the occurrence of the plague has no real ground. Through
God's will, nothing of the terrible form that plague takes, as seen in
other places, has occurred in Calcutta. The government authorities have
also been particularly helpful to us. So what is there to fear?

5. Come, let us give up this false fear and, having faith in
the infinite compassion of God, gird our loins and enter the field
of action. Let us live pure and clean lives. Disease, fear of an
epidemic, etc., will vanish into thin air by His grace.

6.
   (a) Always keep the house and its premises, the
rooms, clothes, bed,
drain, etc., clean.

       (b) Do not eat
stale, spoiled food; take
fresh and nutritious food instead. A weak body is more susceptible to
disease.

       (c) Always keep the
mind cheerful.
Everyone will die once. Cowards suffer the pangs of death again and
again, solely due to the fear in their own minds.

       (d) Fear never
leaves those who earn their
livelihoods by unethical means or who cause harm to others. Therefore,
at this time when we face the great fear of death, desist from all such
behaviour.

       (e) During the
period of epidemic, abstain
from anger and from lust — even if you are householders.

       (f) Do not pay any
heed to rumours.

       (g) The British
government will not
vaccinate anyone by force. Only those who are willing will be
vaccinated.

       (h) There will be
no lack of effort in
treating the afflicted patients in our hospital under our special care
and supervision, paying full respect to religion, caste and the modesty
(Purdah) of women. Let the wealthy run away! But we are poor; we
understand the heartache of the poor. The Mother of the Universe is
Herself the support of the helpless. The Mother is assuring us: "Fear
not! Fear not!"

7. Brother, if there is no one to help you, then send
information immediately to the servants of Shri Bhagavan Ramakrishna at
Belur Math. There will be no dearth of help that is physically
possible. By the grace of the Mother, monetary help will also be
possible.

— N. B. In order to remove the fear of the epidemic, you
should sing Nâma Sankirtanam [the name of the Lord] every evening and
in every locality.

^Udbodhan,
Chaitra 1329, Vol. 25, Number 3, p. 169 (March 1926). In May
1898, when a plague epidemic broke out in Calcutta and numbers of
terror-stricken residents fled the city in panic, Swami Vivekananda
wrote this manifesto in Bengali, which was printed and freely
distributed amongst the people.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/writings_prose_and_poems/one_circle_more.htm


 ←
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Writings:
Prose and Poems
/ →

ONE CIRCLE MORE1

[A fragmentary poem composed at
Ridgely Manor, in 1899]

One circle more the spiral path of life
ascends

And time's restless shuttle — running back and fro

Through maze of warp and woof

of shining

threads of life — spins out a stronger piece. (Cf. a slightly different
version of the first three lines of this poem which appeared in Swami
Vivekananda's own handwriting on the left-hand side of the folded
letter paper containing the original draft (Vide the facsimile):

   
   One circle more the spiral path
of life ascends

       And Time's restless shuttle
running

       back and fro

       through maze of warp and
woof spins out a

       stronger piece.

Hand in hand they stand — and try to

fathom depths whence

springs eternal love, each in other's eyes;

And find

No hold o'er that age but brings the youth anew —

And time — the good, the pure, the true.

^Vedanta
Society of Southern California archives. Mrs. Frances
Leggett found this document on Ridgely Manor stationary and sent it to
the Vedanta Society of Southern California in the summer of 1962. The
title of the poem has been supplied by the editors of Vedanta
Kesari
(May 1973).



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/writings_prose_and_poems/facsimile.htm


 ←
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Writings:
Prose and Poems
/ →

FACSIMILE

One circle more the spiral path of life
ascends

And Time's restless shuttle running

back and fro

through maze of warp and woof spins out a

stronger piece.

RAILROAD STATION,

W. U. TELEGRAPH
AND                                     
P. O. STONERIDGE.

NATIONAL EXPRESS
OFFICES,                                          
ULSTER CO., N. Y.

BINNEWATER, ULSTER CO., N. Y.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/writings_prose_and_poems/an_untitled_poem.htm


 ←
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Writings:
Prose and Poems
/ →

AN UNTITLED POEM ON SHRI RAMAKRISHNA

(Complete Works
(Bengali edition), VI, p. 256.)

सामाख्याद्यैर्गीतिसुमधुरैर्मेघगम्भीरघोषैः

यज्ञध्वानध्वनितगगननैर्ब्राह्मणैर्ज्ञातवेदैः।

वेदान्ताख्यैः सुविहितमखोद्भिन्नमोहान्धकारैः

स्तुतो गीतो य इह सततं नं भजे रामकृष्णम्॥

He who was praised by the Brâhmanas, those knowers of the
Vedas who made the sky reverberate with the sacred sounds of the
sacrifice and caused the darkness of delusion to vanish through
well-performed rituals and the knowledge known as Vedanta — he whose
greatness was sung in the sweet chants of the Sâma-Veda etc., with
voices thundering like clouds (In Indian mythology clouds can cause
both thunder and lightning.) — to that Shri Ramakrishna, I offer my
eternal worship.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/writings_prose_and_poems/an_unfinished_poem.htm


 ←
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Writings:
Prose and Poems
/ →

AN UNFINISHED POEM

(New Discoveries,
Vol. 3. p. 490. This undated poem is preserved in the archives of the
Vedanta Centre, Cohasset, Massachusetts. Cf. "My Play is Done", Complete
Works , VI.)

From life to life I am waiting here at the gates — they

        open not.

My tongue is parched with ceaseless prayers and dim

        my eyes
have grown

With constant straining through the gloom to catch

        one ray
long sought;

My heart is seized with dark despair, all hope well-

        nigh has
flown.

———

And standing on life's narrow ridge, beneath the

        chasm I
see —

Strife and sorrow, darkness deep of whirling life and

        death,

Of mad commotion, struggles vain, of folly roaming

        free.

On one side this dark abyss — I shudder to see it even —

        On the
other this wall . . .



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/writings_prose_and_poems/bhartriharis_verses.htm


 ←
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Writings:
Prose and Poems
/ →

BHARTRIHARI'S VERSES ON RENUNCIATION1

This is Swami Vivekananda's free translation of
verses from Bhartrihari's Sanskrit poem Vairâgya Shatakam.

The Swami's translation is from Sister Nivedita's Unpublished
Notes of Some Wanderings with the Swami Vivekananda — selected
verses recorded almost verbatim, but not necessarily in Bhartrihari's
order, by Sister Nivedita as Swami Vivekananda translated them orally
for some of his Western disciples during a Himalayan pilgrimage in 1898.

For the researcher's benefit, verses 14-15, 18,
24-26, 31, and 33 have been footnoted as corresponding verses taken
from Swami Vivekananda's original handwritten translation, which was
given to the Vedanta Society of Southern California by Miss Josephine
MacLeod, shortly before her passing away in 1948. This footnoted
handwritten version was first published in the collection of poetry
entitled In Search of God and Other Poems
(Mayavati: Advaita Ashrama, 1968).

Stylistic differences in Swami Vivekananda's overall
translation of Bhartrihari's poem are due to those variations inherent
in the two aforementioned sources. Obvious typographical and
punctuation errors have been corrected.

The verse numbers, as available, correspond to
Bhartrihari's numbering.

— Publisher

BHARTRIHARI'S VERSES ON RENUNCIATION

[A translation of verses from
Bhartrihari's Sanskrit poem Vairagya Shatakam]

I have travelled in many countries, hard
to travel in,

And got no result;

Giving up pride of birth and position,

I have served all.

Like a crow stealing into a kitchen,

With fear I have eaten the bread of others in their homes,

Yet thou, Desire, who leadest to evil deeds,

Leavest me not!

(Verse 2)

I have crossed oceans to find wealth.

I have blasted mountains to get jewels.

I have spent whole nights in graveyards

repeating Mantras

And have obtained — not the broken cowrie

of blessedness

Ah, Desire, give me up now.

(Verse 3)

I have borne the wicked words of the
wicked;

To please fools, when my heart is weeping,

my lips ever laughed.

Stopping my judgment, I have with folded hands

Stood before unworthy persons.

Even now, my Desire, why do you make me dance 

like a fool?

(Verse 4)

For this life, which is like a drop of
water 

on a lotus leaf,

We have not enjoyed, but enjoyments have enjoyed us.

We did not penance, but penances burnt us up.

Time did not fly, yet we are gone.

We become decrepit with age, but not so Desire.

Infirmity assails us, the skin wrinkles,

The hair whitens, the body becomes crooked,

Old age comes on.

Desire alone grows younger every day.

(Verses 5-8)

Hope is the name of this river, whose
water is Desire,

And Thirst the waves thereof.

Passion is the crocodile living in that water,

Vain resolves are the birds that reside

In the tree of virtue on the shores and kill it.

But there are the whirlpools of Delusion

And Despondence, the high banks.

The great Yogis are blissful because they,

With their pure minds, never crossed this river.

(Verse 10)

Blessed are they that, living even in the

caves of mountains,

Meditate on the supreme Light.

Even the birds will fearlessly drink of the

tears of pleasure

That flow from their eyes.

Alas, (Here Swami Vivekananda's handwritten translation begins.) our
minds grow familiar, even in imagination,

With palaces and pleasure — gardens,

And thus our lives fleet by.

(Verse 14)

Even when the only food is gained by
begging,

and that is tasteless;

One's bed, the dry earth;

One's whole family, his own body;

His only clothing, a ragged bit of cloth —

Alas, alas, the desire for enjoyment does not leave a man.

(Verse 15)

Not knowing the power of flame, the insect
falls into it.

The fish swallows the bait, not knowing the hook inside.

That, well aware of the vanity and dangers of the world,

We cannot give it up —

Such is the power of Delusion.

(Verse 18)

Have such places in the Himalayas become
extinct

That a man should go begging at others' doors?

Have the roots in the mountain forests all disappeared?

Are the springs all dry?

Are the trees all withered that bear sweet fruits 

And bark for garments

That a man should look with fear on the face of a fool,

Whose head is turned by a little wealth?

(Lit., "Whose eyebrows are dancing with the wind of the

pride of a little wealth".)

Verses 24-25)

Arise! Let us go into the forest

Where pure roots and fruits will be our food,

Pure water our only drink,

Pure leaves our bed,

And where the little-minded, the thoughtless,

And those whose hearts are cramped with wealth

Do not exist.

(Verse 26)

In enjoyment is the fear of disease;

In high birth, the fear of losing caste;

In wealth, the fear of tyrants;

In honour, the fear of losing her;

In strength, the fear of enemies;

In beauty, the fear of the other sex;2

In knowledge, the fear of defeat;

In virtue, the fear of scandal;

In the body, the fear of death.

In this life, all is fraught with fear.

Renunciation alone is fearless.

(Verse 31)

The root of health has always round about
it

A thousand worms in the form of dangers and disease.

Where fortune falls, open a hundred gates of danger.

Whosoever is born, him death will surely swallow.

Say, where is that Providence who ever created 

Anything that died not?

(Verse 33)3

Life is like a wave upon the waters,

Youth only remains a few days.

Wealth is like a fancy of the mind,

It immediately vanishes.

Enjoyment is like a flash of lightning

amongst dark clouds.

Our most beloved one is only for a moment.

Knowing this, O man, give your heart unto Brahman

To cross this ocean of life.

(Verse 36)

. . . Living in whom gods like Indra,
Brahmâ 

      and others appear
like a blade of grass,

Whose anger can destroy the worlds in a moment.

O sage, know Him, that One Supreme

Who dies not,

And give not your mind to false enjoyment.

(Verse 40)

Ah, where is happiness in this life?

(At best it lasts but a hundred years, of which half is spent
in sleep; of the other half, half in decrepitude; of what remains — one
half goes in childhood and, of the rest, still half in serving others!)

O man, in this futile, wave-like life

Where is happiness?

(Verse 49)

Now you appear as child

And now as a youth, whose whole occupation is love.

This moment poor, another wealthy,

Now a babe, and again a decrepit old man.

O actor man, at last you vanish from the stage

When death beckons you behind the scenes!

(Verse 50)

You are a king, but we have served Gurus,

Who are great in knowledge.

You are known by your wealth as a king,

We for our knowledge.

There is infinite difference between us and you,

Therefore we are not the persons to wait upon you,

O Kings!

(Verse 51)

Oh, when will that day come,

When in a forest, saying "Shiva", "Shiva",

My days shall pass?

A serpent and a garland the same,

The strong foe and the friend the same,

The flower-bed and the stone-bed the same,

A beautiful woman and a blade of grass the same!

(Verses 85, 90)

O Shiva, when shall I be able to cut

To the very roots of my Karma,

By becoming solitary, desireless, quiet —

My hands my only plate, and the cardinal points 

my clothing?

(Verse 99)

The fruits are sufficient food,

The waters of the mountain sufficient dinner,

The earth a sufficient bed,

And bark a sufficient garment —

These are all welcome.

Only I cannot bear the proud words of fools,

Whose organs are all disordered by the drink

Of the wine of new wealth!

(Verse 54)

What if you have got the wealth that
fulfils every desire?

If your foot is on the heads of your foes,

What of that?

If you have made all your love wealthy,

If your body remains a Kalpa (A periodic cycle of creation and
dissolution.) — what of that?

The only thing to be desired is Renunciation

Which gives all love to Shiva.

(Verse 67)

Fear only life, that brings Birth and
Death,

Have no love of friends, no lust, no attachment.

Alone, living alone in a forest,

What is more to be longed for than this Renunciation.

(Verse 68)

Going searching in the lower regions,

Going into the skies,

Travelling through all the worlds,

This is but the fickleness of the mind.

Ah, friend, you never remember the Lord

Who resides within you!

How can you get happiness?

(Verse 70)

What is there in the reading of Vedas,

The Shrutis, the Purânas and doing sacrifices?

Freedom alone takes off the weight

of this dreadful world,

And manifests Self-blessedness.

Here is the truth: the rest is all shop-keeping.

(Verse 71)

When the body is still healthy and
diseaseless,

When old age has not yet attacked it,

When the organs have not yet lost their power,

And life is still full and undiminished,

Now, now, struggle on, rendering great help to yourself!

My friend, it is useless to try to dig a well

In a house that is already on fire!

(Verse 75)

In Shiva, who is the Lord of this Universe,

Or Vishnu, its soul, I see no difference,

But still, my love is for Him

Who has the young moon on His forehead.

(Verse 84)

Oh when will that time come,

When in a beautiful full-moon night,

Sitting on the banks of some river,

And in a calm, yet high notes repeating

"Shiva! Shiva! Shiva!"

All my feelings will come out through the eyes

In the form of tears?

(Verse 85)

When, wearing only the Kaupina,
(Loincloth.)

Lying on the sands of the holy Ganges in Benares,

When shall I weep aloud, "O Lord of ghouls",

Saying this, and whole days shall pass like moments?

(Verse 87)

When, bathing in the pure Ganges water,

Worshipping Thee, Omnipresent, with holy fruits

and flowers,

Stretching myself on stones in a stony cave,

My whole soul shall go into meditation,

And according to the voice of my Guru,

I shall avoid all misery, and purify

The mind defiled with serving the rich.

(Verse 88)

This whole wide earth my bed,

My beautiful pillows my own two arms,

My wonderful canopy the blue sky,

And the cool evening air to fan me,

The moon and the stars my lamps,

And my beautiful wife, Renunciation, by my side,

What king is there who can sleep like me in pleasure?

(Verse 94)

This Universe is only a little circle.

What is there to desire in it?

Will the ocean go into waves

By the jumping of a little [fish?]?

(Verse 92)

There was a time when I could see nothing
but Women

in this world:

And now that my eyes are opened,

I can see nothing but Brahman.

Beautiful are the rays of the moon,

Beautiful are the lawns in the forest,

Beautiful is the meeting of the good,

Beautiful is poetry, and

Beautiful is the face of the beloved.

But to me none of these are beautiful,

Knowing that they are evanescent.

(Verse 79)

Oh mother earth, father wind,

Friend light, sweetheart water,

Brother sky,

Here take my last salutation

With folded hands!

For today I am melting away into Brahman,

Because my heart became pure,

And all delusion vanished

Thro' the power of your good company.

(Verse 100)

Old age watches us, roaring like a tigress.

Disease, like enemies, is striking us often.

Life is flowing out like water from a broken jar.

Curious still how men do evil deeds in this world!

(Verse 38)

Those beautiful cities.

Those mighty monarchs.

Those powerful nobles.

Those learned assemblies.

Those moon-faced women.

Those proud princes.

And those that sang their praises —

They have all been swept away from the memory

of man.

My salutation, therefore, is to Time who works

all these!

(Verse 41)

The sun by his coming and going every hour

is lessening the life of man.

Time flies without our knowledge,

Crushed as we are by the load of many works.

Seeing the evils of Birth, Old Age, Danger, and Death

We are not afraid.

Ah me, drinking the wine of delusion,

The world has become mad.

(Verse 43)

I have not learnt that knowledge which
defeats all

opponents!

Nor have been able, at the point of the sword,

Which can cut thro' an elephant's back,

To send our glory even unto the skies;

Nor, under the light of the full moon,

Drunk the nectar of the budding lips of the Beloved.

My youth is gone fruitless

Like a lamp in an empty house.

(Verse 46)

^Sister
Nivedita's Unpublished Notes of Some Wanderings with the Swami
Vivekananda (Calcutta: Bangiya Sahitya Parishad, 1983) pp. 13-20, 41-42.

^The
literal Sanskrit translation is: "In beauty there is the fear of age".

^Here
ends Swami Vivekananda's handwritten translation. The edited version
published in In Search of God and Other Poems follows in this note: 

Alas our minds [dally but] in imagination with palaces and pleasure
gardens, and thus our lives are spent. [One's] only food is by begging
— and that too is tasteless; one's bed, the dry earth; all of one's
family, one's own body; and the only clothing a tattered piece of cloth
around the waist — alas, still the desire for enjoyment does not leave
a man. 

(Verses 14-15) 

Not knowing the power of flame,

The insect falls into it.

The fish swallows the bait,

Not knowing the hook inside.

And knowing full well the vanities and dangers of the world. We cannot
give it up —

Such is the power of delusion.

[With rocks cooled by] the spray of the Ganga's waters,

Where the Vidyâdharas love to sport —

Have such places in the Himalayas become extinct

That a man should beg (in disgrace) at other's doors? 

(Verse 18, 24) 

Have the roots in the mountain forests all disappeared?

Are the springs all dry? Are the trees all withered

That bear sweet fruits and bark for garments

That a man should look with fear on the face

Of the fool, whose eyebrows are dancing

[In] the wind of the pride of a little wealth? 

(Verse 25) 

Arise, let us go into the forest, where pure roots and fruits will be
our food, pure water our only drink, and pure leaves our bed — And
where the little-minded, the thoughtless, and those whose hearts are
cankered with wealth do not exist. 

(Verse 26) 

In enjoyment is the fear of disease,

In high birth, the fear of losing caste,

In wealth, the fear of tyrants,

In honour the fear of losing [it],

In strength, the fear of enemies,

In beauty, the fear of [old age],

In knowledge, the fear of defeat,

In virtue, the fear of scandal,

In the body, the fear of death,

In this life all is fraught with fear:

Renunciation alone is fearless. 

(Verse 31) 

[A person's] health [is uprooted by] thousands of [worries] and
disease. Where fortune falls upon a hundred gates of danger. 
Whosoever is born, him death will surely swallow. Say, [has] Providence
ever created anything that died not? 

(Verse 33)



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/excerpts_from_sister_niveditas_book/note.htm


 ←
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9 /
Excerpts
from Sister Nivedita’s Book
/ →

NOTES OF SOME WANDERINGS WITH THE

SWAMI VIVEKANANDA

[Excerpts from the book by
Sister Nivedita]

Note: In the following work only those extracts which present
Swami Vivekananda’s ideas or direct quotations have been printed.
Descriptions marking the background context of these talks have also
been retained for the sake of clarity and continuity. Ellipses mark the
deleted portions. Spelling and punctuation have been made to conform to
the style of the Complete Works.

— Publisher



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/excerpts_from_sister_niveditas_book/foreword.htm


 ←
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9 /
Excerpts
from Sister Nivedita’s Book
/ →

FOREWORD

PERSONS: The Swami Vivekananda, Gurubhais, (Spiritual
brethren; disciples of one and the same master are so called.) and a
party of European guests and disciples, amongst whom were Dhira Mata,
the "Steady Mother" [Mrs. Ole Bull]; one whose name was Jaya [Miss
Josephine MacLeod]; and Sister Nivedita. (Dhira Mata and Jaya were
Americans; Nivedita was British. — Publisher.)

PLACE: Different parts of India.

TIME: The year 1898. 

Beautiful have been the days of this year. In them the Ideal
has become the Real. First in our riverside cottage at Belur; then in
the Himalayas, at Naini Tal and Almora; afterwards wandering here and
there through Kashmir — everywhere have come hours never to be
forgotten, words that will echo through our lives forever, and once, at
least, a glimpse of the Beatific Vision.

It has been all play.

We have seen a love that would be one with the humblest and
most ignorant, seeing the world for the moment through his eyes, as if
criticism were not; we have laughed over the colossal caprice of
genius; we have warmed ourselves at heroic fires; and we have been
present, as it were, at the awakening of the Holy Child. 

But there has been nothing grim or serious about any of these
things. Pain has come close to all of us. Solemn anniversaries have
been and gone. But sorrow was lifted into a golden light, where it was
made radiant and did not destroy.

Fain, if I could, would I describe our journeys. Even as I
write I see the irises in bloom at Baramulla; the young rice beneath
the poplars at Islamabad; starlight scenes in Himalayan forests; and
the royal beauties of Delhi and the Taj. One longs to attempt some
memorial of these. It would be worse than useless. Not, then, in words,
but in the light of memory they are enshrined forever, together with
the kindly and gentle folk who
dwell among them and whom we trust always to have left the gladder for
our coming.

We have learnt something of the mood in which new faiths are
born and of the persons who inspire such faiths. For we have been with
one who drew all men to him — listening to all, feeling with all and
refusing none. We have known a humility that wiped out all littleness,
a renunciation that would die for scorn of oppression and pity of the
oppressed, a love that would bless even the oncoming feet of torture
and of death. We have joined hands with that woman who washed the feet
of the Lord with her tears and wiped them with the hairs of her head.
We have lacked not the occasion, but her passionate consciousness of
self. 

Seated under a tree in the garden of dead emperors there came
to us a vision of all the rich and splendid things of Earth, offering
themselves as a shrine for the great of soul. The storied windows of
cathedrals and the jewelled thrones of kings, the banners of great
captains and the vestments of the priests, the pageants of cities and
the retreats of the proud — all came and all were rejected.

In the garments of the beggar, despised by the alien,
worshipped by the people, we have seen him; and only the bread of toil,
the shelter of cottage roofs, and the common road across the cornfields
seem real enough for the background to this life.. . . Amongst his own
the ignorant loved him as much as scholars and statesmen. The boatmen
watched the river, in his absence, for his return, and servants
disputed with guests to do him service. And through it all the veil of
playfulness was never dropped. "They played with the Lord" and
instinctively they knew it.

To those who have known such hours, life is richer and
sweeter, and in the long nights even the wind in the palm trees seems
to cry: "Mahadeva! Mahadeva! Mahadeva!"



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/excerpts_from_sister_niveditas_book/chapter_i.htm


 ←
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9 /
Excerpts
from Sister Nivedita’s Book
/ →

CHAPTER I

THE HOUSE ON THE GANGES

PLACE: A cottage at Belur, beside the Ganges.

TIME: March to May, 1898.

Of the home by the Ganges the Master had said to one, "You
will find that little house of Dhira Mata like heaven, for it is all
love, from beginning to end.

It was so indeed. Within, an unbroken harmony, and without,
everything alike beautiful — the green stretch of grass, the tall
cocoanut palms, the little brown villages in the jungle, and the
Nilkantha that built her nest in a tree — top beside us, on purpose to
bring us the blessings of Shiva. In the morning the shadows lay behind
the house, but in the afternoons we could sit in front worshipping the
Ganges herself — great leonine mother! — and in sight of Dakshineswar.

There came one and another with traditions of the past, and we
learnt of the Master's eight years' wanderings; of the name changed
from village to village; of the Nirvikalpa Samâdhi; and of that sacred
sorrow, too deep for words or for common sight, that one who loved had
alone seen. And there too came the Master himself, with his stories of
Umâ and Shiva, of Râdhâ and Krishna, and his fragments of song and
poetry.

It seemed as if he knew that the first material of a new
consciousness must be a succession of vivid but isolated experiences,
poured out without proper sequence so as to provoke the mind of the
learner to work for its own conception of order and relation. . . . For
the most part it was the Indian religions that he portrayed for
us—today dealing with one and tomorrow with another — his choice
guided, seemingly, by the whim of the moment. But it was not religion
only that he poured out upon us. Sometimes it would be history. Again,
it would be folk-lore. On still another occasion it would be the
manifold anomalies and inconsistencies of race, caste and custom. In
fact India herself became, as heard in him, as the last and noblest of
the Purânas, uttering itself through his lips.

Another point in which he had caught a great psychological
secret was that of never trying to soften for us that which would at
first sight be difficult or repellent. In matters Indian he would
rather put forward, in its extreme form at the beginning of our
experience, all that might seem impossible for European minds to enjoy.
Thus he would quote, for instance, some verses about Gauri and Shankar
in a single form:

On one side grows the hair in long black
curls,

And on the other, corded like rope.

On one side are seen the beautiful garlands,

On the other, bone earrings and snake-like coils.

One side is white with ashes, like the snow mountains,

The other, golden as the light of dawn.

For He, the Lord, took a form,

And that was a divided form,

Half-woman and half-man

. . . . . . .

Whatever might be the subject of the conversation, it ended
always on the note of the infinite. . . . He might appear to take up
any subject — literary, ethnological or scientific — but he always made
us feel it as an illustration of the Ultimate Vision. There was for him
nothing secular. He had a loathing for bondage and a horror of those
who "cover chains with flowers", but he never failed to make the true
critic's distinction between this and the highest forms of art.

One day we were receiving European guests and he entered into
a long talk about Persian poetry. Then suddenly, finding himself
quoting the poem that says, "For one mole on the face of my Beloved, I
would give all the wealth of Samarkand!" he turned and said
energetically, "I would not give a straw, you know, for the man who was
incapable of appreciating a love song!" His talk too teemed with
epigrams.

It was that same afternoon, in the course of a long political
argument, that he said, "In order to become a nation, it appears that we
need a common hate as well as a common love".

Several months later he remarked that before one who had a
mission he never talked of any of the gods save Uma and Shiva.
For Shiva and the Mother made the great workers. Yet I have sometimes
wondered if he knew at this time how the end of every theme was Bhakti.
Much as he dreaded the luxury of spiritual emotion for those who might
be enervated by it, he could not help giving glimpses of what it meant
to be consumed with the intoxication of God. And so he would chant for
us such poems as:

They have made Radha queen, in the
beautiful

groves of Vrindaban.

At her gate stands Krishna, on guard.

His flute is singing all the time:

Radha is about to distribute infinite wealth of love.

Though I am guard, all the world may enter.

Come all ye who thirst! Say only 'Glory unto Radha!'

Enter the region of love!

Or he would give us the great antiphonal Chorus of the
Cowherds, written by his friend: (The Bengali dramatist Girish Chandra
Ghosh.)

Men:               
Thou art the Soul of souls,

Thou yellow-garbed,

With thy blue eyes.

Women:          
Thou dark One! Thou 

Shepherd of Vrindaban!

Kneeling at the feet of the Shepherdesses.

Men:               
My soul sings the praise of the glory

of the Lord,

Who took the human form.

Women:          
Thy beauty for us, the Gopis.

Men:               
Thou Lord of Sacrifice.

Saviour of the weak.

Women:          
Who lovest Radha and thy body floats on its

own tears.

. . . . . .

MARCH 25.

. . . At this time the Swami kept the custom of coming to the
cottage early and spending the morning hours there, and again returning
in the late afternoon. On the second morning of this visit, however —
Friday, the Christian feast of the Annunciation — he took us all three
back to the Math, and there in the worship-room was held a little
service of initiation where one was made a Brahmachârini. That was the
happiest of mornings.

After the service we were taken upstairs. The Swami put on the
ashes and bone-earrings and matted locks of a Shiva-Yogi and sang and
played to us — Indian music on Indian instruments — for an hour.

And in the evening in our boat on the Ganges, he opened his
heart to us and told us much of his questions and anxieties regarding
the trust that he held from his own Master.

Another week and he was gone to Darjeeling; and till the day
that the plague declaration brought him back, we saw him again no more.

MAY 3.

Then two of us met him in the house of our Holy Mother. The
political sky was black. It seemed as if a storm were about to burst. .
. . Plague, panic and riot were doing their fell work. And the Master
turned to the two and said, "There are some who scoff at the existence
of Kâli. Yet today She is out there amongst the people. They are
frantic with fear, and the soldiery have been called to deal out death.
Who can say that God does not manifest Himself as evil as well as good?
But only the Hindu dares to worship Him in the evil".

He had come back and the old life was resumed once more, as
far as could be, seeing that an epidemic was in prospect and that
measures were on hand to give the people confidence. As long as this
possibility darkened the horizon, he would not leave Calcutta. But it
passed away, and those happy days with it, and the time came that we
should go.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/excerpts_from_sister_niveditas_book/chapter_ii.htm


 ←
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9 /
Excerpts
from Sister Nivedita’s Book
/ →

CHAPTER II

AT NAINI TAL AND ALMORA

PERSONS: The Swami Vivekananda, Gurubhâis, and a party of
Europeans and disciples, amongst whom were Dhira Mata, the "Steady
Mother"; one whose name was Jaya; and Nivedita.

PLACE: The Himalayas.

TIME: May 11 to May 25, 1898.

We were a large party, or, indeed, two parties, that left
Howrah station on Wednesday evening and on Friday morning came in sight
of the Himalayas. . . .

Naini Tal was made beautiful by three things — the Master's
pleasure in introducing to us his disciple the Raja of Khetri; the
dancing girls who met us and asked us where to find him, and were
received by him in spite of the remonstrances of others; and by the
Mohammedan gentleman who said, "Swamiji, if in after-times any claim
you as an Avatâra, an especial incarnation of the Deity — remember that
I, a Mohammedan, am the first!"

It was here too that we heard a long talk on Ram Mohan Roy in
which he pointed out three things as the dominant notes of this
teacher's message — his acceptance of the Vedanta, his preaching of
patriotism, and the love that embraced the Mussulman equally with the
Hindu. In all these things he claimed himself to have taken up the task
that the breadth and foresight of Ram Mohan Roy had mapped out.

The incident of the dancing girls occurred in consequence of
our visit to the two temples at the head of the tarn. . . . Here,
offering worship, we found two nautch-women. When they had finished,
they came up to us, and we, in broken language, entered into
conversation with them. We took them for respectable ladies of the town
and were much astonished later at the storm which had evidently passed
over the Swami's audience at his refusal to have them turned away. Am I
mistaken in thinking that it was in connection with these dancing-women
of Naini Tal that he first told us the story, many times repeated, of
the nautch-girl of Khetri? He
had been angry at the invitation to see her, but being prevailed upon
to come, she sang:

O Lord, look not upon my evil qualities!

Thy name, O Lord, is Same-Sightedness.

Make us both the same Brahman!

One piece of iron is the knife in the hand of the butcher,

And another piece of iron is the image in the temple.

But when they touch the philosopher's stone,

Both alike turn to gold!

One drop of water is in the sacred Jamuna,

And one is foul in a ditch by the roadside.

But when they fall into the Ganges,

Both alike become holy!

So, Lord, look not upon my evil qualities!

Thy name, O Lord, is Same-Sightedness.

Make us both the same Brahman!

And then, said the Master of himself, the scales fell from his
eyes, and seeing that all are indeed one, he condemned no more. . . .

It was late in the afternoon when we left Naini Tal for
Almora, and night overtook us while still travelling through the
forest. . . . till we reached a quaintly placed Dak bungalow, on the
mountain side in the midst of trees. There after some time Swamiji
arrived with his party, full of fun and keen in his appreciation of
everything that concerned the comfort of his guests. . . .

From the day that we arrived at Almora the Swami renewed his
habit of coming over to us at our early breakfast and spending some
hours in talk. Then and always he was an exceedingly light sleeper, and
I imagine that his visit to us, early as the hour might be, was often
paid during the course of his return with his monks from a still
earlier walk. Sometimes, but rarely, we saw him again in the evening,
either meeting him when out for a walk or going ourselves to Captain
Sevier's, where he and his party
were staying, and seeing him there. And once he came at that time to
call on us.

Into these morning talks at Almora a strange new element,
painful but salutary to remember, had crept. There appeared to be on
the one side a curious bitterness and distrust, and on the other,
irritation and defiance. The youngest of the Swami's disciples at this
time, it must be remembered, was an English woman, and of how much this
fact meant intellectually — what a strong bias it implied, and always
does imply, in the reading of India, what an idealism of the English
race and all their deeds and history — the Swami himself had had no
conception till the day after her initiation at the monastery. Then he
had asked her some exultant question, as to which nation she now
belonged, and had been startled to find with what a passion of loyalty
and worship she regarded the English flag, giving to it much of the
feeling that an Indian woman would give to her Thakur. His surprise and
disappointment at the moment were scarcely perceptible. A startled
look, no more. Nor did his discovery of the superficial way in which
this disciple had joined herself with his people in any degree affect
his confidence and courtesy during the remaining weeks spent in the
plains.

But with Almora it seemed as if a going-to-school had
commenced. . . . It was never more than this; never the dictating of
opinion or creed; never more than emancipation from partiality. Even at
the end of the terrible experience when this method, as regarded race
and country, was renounced, never to be taken up systematically again,
the Swami did not call for any confession of faith, any declaration of
new opinion. He dropped the whole question. His listener went free. But
he had revealed a different standpoint in thought and feeling, so
completely and so strongly as to make it impossible for her to rest,
until later, by her own labours, she had arrived at a view in which
both these partial presentments stood rationalized and accounted for. 

"Really, patriotism like yours is sin!" he exclaimed once,
many weeks later, when the process of obtaining an uncoloured judgement
on some incident had been more than commonly exasperating. "All that I
want you to see is that most people's actions are the expression of
self-interest, and you constantly
oppose to this the idea that a certain race are all angels. Ignorance
so determined is wickedness!" . . .

These morning talks at Almora, then, took the form of assaults
upon deep-rooted preconceptions — social, literary and artistic — or of
long comparisons of Indian and European history and sentiments, often
containing extended observations of very great value. One
characteristic of the Swami was the habit of attacking the abuses of a
country or society openly and vigorously when he was in its midst,
whereas after he had left it, it would often seem as if nothing but its
virtues were remembered by him. He was always testing his disciples,
and the manner of these particular discourses was probably adopted in
order to put to the proof the courage and sincerity of one who was both
woman and European.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/excerpts_from_sister_niveditas_book/chapter_iii.htm


 ←
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9 /
Excerpts
from Sister Nivedita’s Book
/ →

CHAPTER III

MORNING TALKS AT ALMORA

PLACE: Almora.

TIME: May and June, 1898.

The first morning the talk was that of the central ideals of
civilization — in the West, truth; in the East, chastity. He justified
Hindu marriage customs as springing from the pursuit of this ideal and
from the woman's need of protection, in combination. And he traced out
the relation of the whole subject to the philosophy of the Absolute.

Another morning he began by observing that as there were four
main castes — Brahmin, Kshatriya, Bâniyâ [Vaishya], Shudra — so there
were four great national functions: the religious or priestly,
fulfilled by the Hindus; the military, by the Roman Empire; the
mercantile, by England today; and the democratic, by America in the
future. And here he launched off into a glowing prophetic forecast of
how America would yet solve the problems of the Shudra — the problems
of freedom and co-operation — and turned to relate to a non-American
listener the generosity of the arrangements which that people had
attempted to make for their aborigines.

Again it would be an eager résumé of the
history of India or of the Moguls, whose greatness never wearied him.
Every now and then throughout the summer he would break out into
descriptions of Delhi and Agra. Once he described the Taj as "a
dimness, and again a dimness, and there — a grave!"

Another time he spoke of Shah Jehan, and then, with a burst of
enthusiasm: "Ah! He was the glory of his line! A
feeling for and discrimination of beauty that are unparalleled in
history. And an artist himself! I have seen a manuscript illuminated by
him which is one of the art treasures of India. What a genius!"

Oftener still, it was Akbar of whom he would tell, almost with
tears in his voice and a passion easier to understand, beside
that undomed tomb, open to sun and wind — the grave of Secundra at Agra.

But all the more universal forms of human feeling were open to
the Master. In one mood he talked of China as if she were the
treasure-house of the world, and told us of the thrill with which he
saw inscriptions in old Bengali (Kutil?) characters over the doors of
Chinese temples.

Few things could be more eloquent of the vagueness of Western
ideas regarding Oriental peoples than the fact that one of his
listeners alleged untruthfulness as a notorious quality of that race. .
. . The Swami would have none of it. Untruthfulness! Social rigidity!
What were these, except very, very relative terms? And as to
untruthfulness in particular, could commercial life or social life or
any other form of co-operation go on for a day if men did not trust
men? Untruthfulness as a necessity of etiquette? And how was that
different from the Western idea? Is the Englishman always glad and
always sorry at the proper place? But there is still a difference of
degree? Perhaps — but only of degree!

Or he might wander as far afield as Italy, that "greatest of
the countries of Europe — land of religion and of art; alike of
imperial organization and of Mazzini; mother of ideas, of culture and
of freedom!

One day it was Shivaji and the Mahrattas and the year's
wandering as a Sannyâsin that won him home to Raigarh. "And to this
day", said the Swami, "authority in India dreads the Sannyasin, lest he
conceals beneath his yellow garb another Shivaji".

Often the enquiry "Who and what are the Aryans?" absorbed his
attention; and holding that their origin was complex, he would tell us
how in Switzerland he had felt himself to be in China, so like were the
types. He believed too that the same was true of some parts of Norway.
Then there were scraps of information about countries and
physiognomies, an impassioned tale of the Hungarian scholar who traced
the Huns to Tibet, and lies buried in Darjeeling and so on. . . .

Sometimes the Swami would deal with the rift between Brahmins
and Kshatriyas, painting the whole history of India as a struggle
between the two and showing that the latter had
always embodied the rising, fetter-destroying impulses of the nation.
He could give excellent reason too for the faith that was in him that
the Kâyasthas of modern Bengal represented the pre-Mauryan Kshatriyas.
He would portray the two opposing types of culture: the one, classical,
intensive and saturated with an ever-deepening sense of tradition and
custom; the other, defiant, impulsive and liberal in its outlook. It
was part of a deep-lying law of the historic development that Râma,
Krishna and Buddha had all arisen in the kingly, and not in the
priestly caste. And in this paradoxical moment Buddhism was reduced to
a caste-smashing formula — "a religion invented by the Kshatriyas" as a
crushing rejoinder to Brahminism!

That was a great hour indeed when he spoke of Buddha; for,
catching a word that seemed to identify him with its anti—Brahminical
spirit, an uncomprehending listener said, "Why, Swami, I did not know
that you were a Buddhist!

"Madam", he said, rounding on her, his whole face aglow with
the inspiration of that name, "I am the servant of the servants of the
servants of Buddha. Who was there ever like him? — the Lord — who never
performed one action for himself — with a heart that embraced the whole
world! So full of pity that he — prince and monk — would give his life
to save a little goat! So loving that he sacrificed himself to the
hunger of a tigress! — to the hospitality of a pariah and blessed him!
And he came into my room when I was a boy and I fell at his feet! For I
knew it was the Lord Himself!

Many times he spoke of Buddha in this fashion, sometimes at
Belur and sometimes afterwards. And once he told us the story of
Ambâpâli, the beautiful courtesan who feasted him. . . .

National feeling did not have it all its own way. For one
morning when the chasm seemed to be widest, there was a long talk on
Bhakti — that perfect identity with the Beloved that the devotion of
Ray Ramananda, the Bengali nobleman, before Chaitanya so beautifully
illustrates:

Four eyes met. There were changes in two
souls.

And now I cannot remember whether he is a man

And I a woman, or he a woman and I a man!

All I know is, there were two,
Love came, and
        there is one!

It was that same morning that he talked of the Babists of
Persia, in their era of martyrdom — of the woman who inspired and the
man who worshipped and worked. And doubtless then he expatiated on that
theory of his — somewhat quaint and surprising to unaccustomed minds,
not so much for the matter of the statement as for the explicitness of
the expression — of the greatness and goodness of the young, who can
love without seeking personal expression for their love, and their high
potentiality.

Another day coming at sunrise when the snows could be seen,
dawn-lighted, from the garden, it was Shiva and Umâ on whom he dwelt —
and that was Shiva up there, the white snow-peaks, and the light that
fell upon Him was the Mother of the World! For a thought on which at
this time he was dwelling much was that God is the Universe — not
within it or outside it and not the universe God or the image of God,
but He it, and the All.

Sometimes all through the summer he would sit for hours
telling us stories, those cradle-tales of Hinduism whose function is
not at all that of our nursery fictions, but much more like the
man-making myths of the old Hellenic world. Best of all these I thought
was the story of Shuka, and we looked on the Shiva-mountains and the
bleak scenery of Almora the evening we heard it for the first time. . .
.

Shuka was indeed the Swami's saint. He was the type, to him,
of that highest realization to which life and the world are merely
play. Long after, we learned how Shri Ramakrishna had spoken of him in
his boyhood as "my Shuka". And never can I forget the look, as of one
gazing far into depths of joy, with which he once stood and quoted the
words of Shiva in praise of the deep spiritual significance of the
Bhagavad-Gitâ and of the greatness of Shuka: "I know the real meaning
of the teachings of the Bhagavad-Gita, and Shuka knows, and perhaps
Vyâsa knows — a little!"

Another day in Almora the Swami talked of the great humanizing
lives that had arisen in Bengal, at the long inrolling
wash of the first wave of modern consciousness on the ancient shores of
Hindu culture. Of Ram Mohan Roy we had already heard from him at Naini
Tal. And now of the Pundit Vidyâsâgar he exclaimed, "There is not a man
of my age in northern India on whom his shadow has not fallen!" It was
a great joy to him to remember that these men and Shri Ramakrishna had
all been born within a few miles of each other.

The Swami introduced Vidyasagar to us now as "the hero of
widow remarriage and of the abolition of polygamy". But his favourite
story about him was of that day when he went home from the Legislative
Council, pondering over the question of whether or not to adopt English
dress on such occasions. Suddenly someone came up to a fat Mogul who
was proceeding homewards in leisurely and pompous fashion in front of
him, with the news "Sir, your house is on fire!" The Mogul went neither
faster nor slower for this information, and presently the messenger
contrived to express a discreet astonishment, whereupon his master
turned on him angrily. "Wretch!" he said. "Am I to abandon the gait of
my ancestors because a few sticks happen to be burning?" And
Vidyasagar, walking behind, determined to stick to the Châdar, Dhoti
and sandals, not even adopting coat and slippers.

The picture of Vidyasagar going into retreat for a month for
the study of the Shâstras, when his mother had suggested to him the
remarriage of child-widows, was very forcible. "He came out of his
retirement of opinion that they were not against
such remarriage, and he obtained the signatures of the pundits that
they agreed in this opinion. Then the action of certain native princes
led the pundits to abandon their own signatures so that, had the
government not determined to assist the movement, it could not have
been carried — and now", added the Swami, "the difficulty has an
economic rather than a social basis".

We could believe that a man who was able to discredit polygamy
by moral force alone, was "intensely spiritual". And it was wonderful
indeed to realize the Indian indifference to a formal creed when we
heard how this giant was driven by the famine of 1864 — when 140,000
people died of hunger and disease — to have nothing more to do with God
and become entirely agnostic in thought.

With this man, as one of the educators of Bengal, the Swami
coupled the name of David Hare, the old Scotsman and atheist to whom
the clergy of Calcutta refused Christian burial. He had died of nursing
an old pupil through cholera. So his own boys carried his dead body and
buried it in a swamp and made the grave a place of pilgrimage. That
place has now become College Square, the educational centre, and his
school is now within the university. And to this day Calcutta students
make pilgrimage to the tomb. 

On this day we took advantage of the natural turn of the
conversation to cross-question the Swami as to the possible influence
that Christianity might have exerted over himself. He was much amused
to hear that such a statement had been hazarded, and told us with much
pride of his only contact with missionary influences, in the person of
his old Scotch master, Mr. Hastie. This hot-headed old man lived on
nothing and regarded his room as his boys' home as much as his own. It
was he who had first sent the Swami to Shri Ramakrishna, and towards
the end of his stay in India he used to say, "Yes, my boy, you were
right, you were right! — It is true that all is God!" "I am proud
of him!" cried the Swami. "But I don't think you could say that he had
Christianized me much!" . . .

We heard charming stories too on less serious subjects. There
was the lodging-house in an American city, for instance, where he had
had to cook his own food, and where he would meet in the course of
operations "an actress who ate roast turkey every day, and a husband
and wife who lived by making ghosts". And when the Swami remonstrated
with the husband and tried to persuade him to give up deceiving people,
saying, "You ought not to do this!" the wife would
come up behind and say eagerly, "Yes, sir! That's just what I tell him;
for he makes all the ghosts, and Mrs. Williams takes all the money!"

He told us also of a young engineer, an educated man, who, at
a spiritualistic gathering, "when the fat Mrs. Williams appeared from
behind the screen as his thin mother, exclaimed, 'Mother dear, how you have
grown in the spirit-world!' "

"At this", said the Swami, "my heart broke, for I thought
there could be no hope for the man". But never at a loss, he told the
story of a Russian painter who was ordered to paint the pic
ture of a peasant's dead father, the only description given being,
"Man! Don't I tell you he had a wart on his nose?" When at last,
therefore, the painter had made a portrait of some stray peasant and
affixed a large wart to the nose, the picture was declared to be ready,
and the son was told to come and see it. He stood in front of it,
greatly overcome, and said, "Father! Father! How changed you are since
I saw you last!" After this, the young engineer would never speak to
the Swami again, which showed at least that he could see the point of a
story. But at this the Hindu monk was genuinely astonished.

In spite of such general interests, however, the inner strife
grew high, and the thought pressed on the mind of one of the older
members of our party that the Master himself needed service and peace.
Many times he spoke with wonder of the torture of life, and who can say
how many signs there were of bitter need? A word or two was spoken —
little, but enough — and he, after many hours, came back and told us
that he longed for quiet and would go alone to the forests and find
soothing.

And then, looking up, he saw the young moon shining above us,
and he said, "The Mohammedans think much of the new moon. Let us also,
with the new moon, begin a new life!" And he blessed his daughter with
a great blessing so that she, thinking that her old relationship was
broken, nor dreaming that a new and deeper life was being given to it,
knew only that the hour was strange and passing sweet. . . .

MAY 25 

He went. It was Wednesday. And on Saturday he came back. He
had been in the silence of the forests ten hours each day, but on
returning to his tent in the evenings he had been surrounded with so
much eager attendance as to break the mood, and he had fled. Yet he was
radiant. He had discovered in himself the old-time Sannyasin, able to
go barefoot and endure heat, cold and scanty fare, unspoilt by the
West. . . .

JUNE 2. 

. . . . . .

And then, as we sat working on Friday morning the telegram
came, a day late, that said: "Goodwin died last night at Ootacamund".
Our poor friend had, it appeared, been one of the first victims of what
was to prove an epidemic of typhoid fever. And it seemed that with his
last breath he had spoken of the Swami and longed for his presence by
his side.

JUNE 5.

On Sunday evening the Swami came home. Through our gate and
over the terrace his way brought him, and there we sat and talked with
him a moment. He did not know our news, but a great darkness hung over
him already, and presently he broke the silence to remind us of that
saint who had called the cobra's bite "messenger from the Beloved", one
whom he had loved second only to Shri Ramakrishna himself. "I have
just", he said, "received a letter that says: 'Pavhari Baba has
completed all his sacrifices with the sacrifice of his own body. He has
burnt himself in his sacrificial fire'". "Swami!" exclaimed someone
from amongst his listeners. "Wasn't that very wrong?"

"How can I tell?" said the Swami, speaking in great agitation.
"He was too great a man for me to judge. He knew himself what he was
doing." 

Very little was said after this, and the party of monks passed
on. Not yet had the other news been broken.

JUNE 6.

Next morning he came early in a great mood. He had been up, he
said afterwards, since four. And one went out to meet him and told him
of Mr. Goodwin's death. The blow fell quietly. Some days later he
refused to stay in the place where he had received it, and complained
of the weakness that brought the image of his most faithful disciple
constantly into his mind. It was no more manly, he protested, to be
thus ridden by one's memory than
to retain the characteristics of the fish or the dog. Man must conquer
this illusion and know that the dead are here beside us and with us as
much as ever. It is their absence and separation that are a myth. And
then he would break out again with some bitter utterance against the
folly of imagining Personal Will to guide the universe. "As if", he
exclaimed, "it would not be one's right and duty to fight such a God
and slay Him for killing Goodwin! And Goodwin, if he had lived, could
have done so much!" And in India one was free to recognize this as the
most religious, because the most unflinchingly truthful, mood of all!

And while I speak of this utterance, I may perhaps put beside
it another that I heard a year later, spoken out of the same fierce
wonder at the dreams with which we comfort ourselves. "Why!" he said
then. "Every petty magistrate and officer is allowed his period of
retirement and rest. Only God, the Eternal Magistrate, must sit judging
forever and never go free!"

But in these first hours the Swami was calm about his loss,
and sat down and chatted quietly with us. He was full that morning of
Bhakti passing into asceticism, the divine passion that carries the
soul on its high tides far out of reach of persons, yet leaves it again
struggling to avoid those sweet snares of personality.

What he said that morning of renunciation proved a hard gospel
to one of those who listened, and when he came again she put it to him
as her conviction that to love without attachment involved no pain, and
was in itself ideal.

He turned on her with a sudden solemnity. "What is this idea
of Bhakti without renunciation?" he said. "It is most pernicious!" And
standing there for an hour or more, he talked of the awful
self-discipline that one must impose on oneself if one would indeed be
unattached, of the requisite nakedness of selfish motives, and of the
danger that at any moment the most flower-like soul might have its
petals soiled with the grosser stains of life. He told the story of an
Indian nun who was asked when a man could be certain of safety on this
road, and who sent back for answer a little plate of ashes. For the
fight against passion was long and fierce, and at any moment the
conqueror might become the conquered. . . .

. . . Weeks afterwards in Kashmir, when he was again talking
in some kindred fashion, one of us ventured to ask him if the feeling
he thus roused were not that worship of pain that Europe abhors as
morbid.

"Is the worship of pleasure, then, so noble?" was his
immediate answer. "But indeed", he added after a pause, "we worship
neither pain nor pleasure. We seek through either to come at that which
transcends them both".

JUNE 9.

This Thursday morning there was a talk on Krishna. It was
characteristic of the Swami's mind, and characteristic also of the
Hindu culture from which he had sprung, that he could lend himself to
the enjoyment and portrayal of an idea one day that the next would see
submitted to a pitiless analysis and left slain upon the field. He was
a sharer to the full in the belief of his people that, provided an idea
was spiritually true and consistent, it mattered very little about its
objective actuality. And this mode of thought had first been suggested
to him in his boyhood by his own master. He had mentioned some doubt as
to the authenticity of a certain religious history. "What!" said Shri
Ramakrishna. "Do you not then think that those who could conceive such
ideas must have been the thing itself?"

The existence of Krishna, then, like that of Christ, he often
told us "in the general way" he doubted. Buddha and Mohammed alone
amongst religious teachers had been fortunate enough to have "enemies
as well as friends", so that their historical careers were beyond
dispute. As for Krishna, he was the most shadowy of all. A poet, a
cowherd, a great ruler, a warrior and a sage had all perhaps been
merged in one beautiful figure holding the Gitâ in his hand.

But today Krishna was "the most perfect of the Avatâras". And
a wonderful picture followed of the charioteer who reined in his horses
while he surveyed the field of battle and in one brief glance noted the
disposition of the forces, at the same moment that he commenced to
utter to his royal pupil the deep spiritual truths of the Gita.

And indeed as we went through the countrysides of northern
India this summer, we had many chances of noting how deep this Krishna
myth had set its mark upon the people. The songs that dancers chanted
as they danced in the roadside hamlets were all of Râdhâ and Krishna.
And the Swami was fond of a statement, as to which we, of course, could
have no opinion, that the Krishna-worshippers of India had exhausted
the possibilities of the romantic motive in lyric poetry. . . .

But throughout these days the Swami was fretting to be away
and alone. The place where he had heard of Mr. Goodwin's loss was
intolerable to him, and letters to be written and received constantly
renewed the wound. He said one day that Shri Ramakrishna, while seeming
to be all Bhakti, was really within all Jnana; but he himself,
apparently all Jnana, was full of Bhakti, and that thereby he was apt
to be as weak as any woman.

One day he carried off a few faulty lines of someone's writing
and brought back a little poem, which was sent to the widowed mother as
his memorial of her son. . . . [Vide "Requiescat
in Pace" , Complete
Works, IV]

And then, because there was nothing left of the original and
he feared that she who was corrected (because her
lines had been "in three metres") might be hurt, he expatiated, long
and earnestly upon the theme, that it was so much greater to feel
poetically than merely to string syllables together in rhyme and metre.1
He might be very severe on a
sympathy or an opinion
that seemed in his eyes sentimental or false. But an effort that failed
found always in the Master its warmest advocate and tenderest defence.

And how happy was that acknowledgment of the bereaved mother
to him when in the midst of her sorrow she wrote and thanked him for
the character of his influence over the son who had died so far away!

JUNE 10.

It was our last afternoon at Almora that we heard the story of
the fatal illness of Shri Ramakrishna. Dr. Mahendra Lal Sarkar had been
called in and had pronounced the disease to be cancer of the throat,
leaving the young disciples with many warnings as to its infectious
nature. Half an hour later "Naren", as he then was, came in and found
them huddled together discussing the dangers of the case. He listened
to what they had been told and then, looking down, saw at his feet the
cup of gruel that had been partly taken by Shri Ramakrishna and which
must have contained in it the germs of the fatal discharges of mucus
and pus, as it came out in his baffled attempts to swallow the thing on
account of the stricture of the food-passage in the throat. He picked
it up and drank from it before them all. Never was the infection of
cancer mentioned amongst the disciples again.

^In
the original manuscript of the book Sister Nivedita added the following
note:   "In obedience to the beloved wish of S. Sara, I give
here the original lines:   Speed forth, lonely Soul, upon thy
star-strewn path, Spread, lonely soul, upon thy meditative way, Freed
from the mists of time and sense — Ascend;   Service complete
and service accepted, from Thy home in the deep heart of Love
Transcendent find Incense and flowers and music fill thy place behind
thee, Rest, weary soul!   Severed all bonds that held thee,
ended thy quest — Then lost in the ocean — one with the Life Immortal.
Peace, happy soul!   "'It has three metres' — said the Master.
Again, he said, 'The line that really strikes the poetic note is that —
"Thy home in the deep heart of Love Transcendent find"'."  



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/excerpts_from_sister_niveditas_book/chapter_iv.htm


 ←
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9 /
Excerpts
from Sister Nivedita’s Book
/ →

CHAPTER IV

ON THE WAY TO KATHGODAM

JUNE 11.

On Saturday morning we left Almora. It took us two days and a
half to reach Kathgodam. . . .

Somewhere en route near a curious old water-mill and deserted
forge, the Swami told Dhira Mata of a legend that spoke of this
hill-side as haunted by a race of centaur-like phantoms, and of an
experience known to him by which one had first seen forms there and
only afterwards heard the folk tale.

The roses were gone by this time, but a flower was in bloom
that crumbled at a touch, and he pointed this out because of its wealth
of associations in Indian poetry.

JUNE 12.

On Sunday afternoon we rested near the plains in what we took
to be an out-of-the-way hotel above a lake and fall, and there he
translated for us the Rudra prayer: 

From the unreal lead us to the Real.

From darkness lead us unto light.

From death lead us to immortality.

Reach us through and through our self.

And evermore protect us — O Thou Terrible! —

From ignorance, by Thy sweet, compassionate face.

He hesitated a long time over the fourth line, thinking of
rendering it, "Embrace us in the heart of our heart". But at last he
put his perplexity to us, saying shyly, "The real meaning is, Reach us
through and through our self". He had evidently feared that this
sentence, with its extraordinary intensity, might not make good sense
in English. . . . I have understood that a more literal rendering would
be, "O Thou who art manifest only unto
Thyself, manifest Thyself also unto us!" I now regard his translation
as a rapid and direct transcript of the experience of Samâdhi itself.
It tears the living heart out of the Sanskrit, as it were, and renders
it again in an English form.

It was indeed an afternoon of translations, and he gave us
fragments of the great benediction after mourning, which is one of the
most beautiful of the Hindu sacraments:

The blissful winds are sweet to us.

The seas are showering bliss on us.

May the corn in our fields bring bliss to us.

May the plants and herbs bring bliss to us.

May the cattle give us bliss.

O Father in Heaven, be Thou blissful unto us!

Thy very dust of the earth is full of bliss.

And then, the voice dying down into meditation:

It is all bliss — all bliss — all bliss. 

And again we had Suradâsa's song, which the Swami heard from
the nautch-girl at Khetri:

O Lord, look not upon my evil qualities!

Thy name, O Lord, is Same-Sightedness.

Make of us both the same Brahman! . . .

Was it that same day or some other that he told us of the old
Sannyâsin in Benares who saw him annoyed by troops of monkeys and,
afraid that he might turn and run, shouted, "Always face the brute!"?

Those journeys were delightful. We were always sorry to reach
a destination. At this time it took us a whole afternoon to cross the
Terai by rail — that strip of malarial country on which, as he reminded
us, Buddha had been born. 

As we had come down the mountain roads, we had met parties of
country-folk fleeing to the upper hills with their families and all
their goods, to escape the fever which would be upon them with the
rains. And now in the train there was the
gradual change of vegetation to watch and the Master's pleasure,
greater than that of any proprietor, in showing us the wild peacocks,
or here and there an elephant or a train of camels. . . .



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/excerpts_from_sister_niveditas_book/chapter_v.htm


 ←
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9 /
Excerpts
from Sister Nivedita’s Book
/ →

CHAPTER V

ON THE WAY TO BARAMULLA

PERSONS: The Swami Vivekananda, Gurubhais, and a party of
Europeans and disciples, amongst whom were Dhira Mata, the "Steady
Mother"; one whose name was Jaya; and Nivedita.

PLACE: From Bareilly to Baramulla, Kashmir.

TIME: June 14 to 20, 1898.

JUNE 14.

We entered the Punjab next day, and great was the Swami's
excitement at the fact. It almost seemed as if he had been born there,
so close and special was his love for this province. He talked of the
girls at their spinning wheels listening to the "So'ham! So'ham!" — I
am He! I am He! Then, by a swift transition he turned to the far past
and unrolled for us the great historic panorama of the advance of the
Greeks on the Indus, the rise of Chandragupta and the development of
the Buddhistic empire. He was determined this summer to find his way to
Attock and see with his own eyes the spot at which Alexander was turned
back. He described to us the Gandhara sculptures, which he must have
seen in the Lahore Museum the year before, and lost himself in
indignant repudiation of the absurd European claim that India had ever
sat at the feet of Greece in things artistic.

Then there were flying glimpses of long-expected cities —
Ludhiana, where certain trusty English disciples had lived as children;
Lahore, where his Indian lectures had ended; and so on. We came too
upon the dry gravel beds of many rivers and learnt that the space
between one pair was called the Doab and the area containing them all,
the Punjab. 

It was at twilight, crossing one of these stony tracts, that
he told us of that great vision which came to him years ago, while he
was still new to the ways of the life of a monk, giving back
to him, as he always afterwards believed, the ancient mode of Sanskrit
chanting.

"It was evening", he said, "in that age when the Aryans had
only reached the Indus. I saw an old man seated on the bank of the
great river. Wave upon wave of darkness was rolling in upon him, and he
was chanting from the Rig-Veda. Then I awoke and went on chanting. They
were the tones that we used long ago".

. . . Those who were constantly preoccupied with imagination
regarding their own past always aroused his contempt. But on this
occasion of telling the story, he gave a glimpse of it from a very
different point of view.

"Shankarâchârya", he was saying, "had caught the rhythm of the
Vedas, the national cadence. Indeed I always imagine", he went on
suddenly with dreamy voice and far-away look, "I always imagine that he
had some vision such as mine when he was young, and recovered the
ancient music that way. Anyway, his whole life's work is nothing but
that, the throbbing of the beauty of the Vedas and Upanishads". . . .

From Rawalpindi to Murree we went by tonga, and there we spent
some days before setting out for Kashmir. Here the Swami came to the
conclusion that any effort which he might make to induce the orthodox
to accept a European as a fellow-disciple, or in the direction of
woman's education, had better be made in Bengal. The distrust of the
foreigner was too strong in Punjab to admit of work succeeding there.
He was much occupied by this question from time to time, and would
sometimes remark on the paradox presented by the Bengali combination of
political antagonism to the English, and readiness to love and trust. .
. .

JUNE 18.

. . . . . .

Most of the afternoon we were compelled by a storm to spend
indoors; and a new chapter was opened at Dulai in our knowledge of
Hinduism, for the Swami told us gravely and frankly of its modern
abuses and spoke of his own uncompro
mising hostility to those evil practices which pass under the name of
Vâmâchâra.

When we asked how Shri Ramakrishna — who never could bear to
condemn the hope of any man — had looked at these things, he told us
that "the old man" had said, "Well, well! But every house may have a
scavengers' entrance!" And he pointed out that all sects of diabolism
in any country belonged to this class. . . .

JUNE 19.

We took it in turns to drive with the Swami in his tonga, and
this next day seemed full of reminiscence.

He talked of Brahmavidyâ, the vision of the One, the Alone —
Real, and told how love was the only cure for evil. He had had a
schoolfellow who grew up and became rich, but lost his health. It was
an obscure disease, sapping his energy and vitality daily, yet
altogether baffling the skill of the doctors. At last, because he knew
that the Swami had always been religious, and men turn to religion when
all else fails, he sent to beg him to come to him. When the Master
reached him a curious thing happened. There came to his mind a text:
"Him the Brahmin conquers who thinks that he is separate from the
Brahmin. Him the Kshatriya conquers who thinks that he is separate from
the Kshatriya. And him the universe conquers who thinks that he is
separate from the universe". And the sick man grasped this and
recovered. "And so", said the Swami, "though I often say strange things
and angry things, yet remember that in my heart I never seriously mean
to preach anything but love! All these things will come right only when
we realize that we love each other". 

Was it then, or the day before, that talking of the great God,
he told us how when he was a child his mother would sigh over his
naughtiness and say, "So many prayers and austerities, and instead of a
good soul, Shiva has sent me you!" till he was hypnotized into a belief
that he was really one of Shiva's demons. He thought that for a
punishment he had been banished
for a while from Shiva's heaven, and that his one effort in life must
be to go back there.

His first act of sacrilege, he told us once, had been
committed at the age of five when he embarked on a stormy argument with
his mother, to the effect that when his right hand was soiled with
eating, it would be cleaner to lift his tumbler of water with the left.
For this or similar perversities her most drastic remedy was to put him
under the water tap and, while cold water was pouring over his head, to
say "Shiva! Shiva!" This, he said, never failed of its effect. The
prayer would remind him of his exile, and he would say to himself, "No,
no, not this time again!" and so return to quiet and obedience.

He had a surpassing love for Mahâdeva, and once he said of the
Indian women of the future that if, amidst their new tasks, they would
only remember now and then to say "Shiva! Shiva!" it would be worship
enough. The very air of the Himalayas was charged for him with the
image of that "eternal meditation" that no thought of pleasure could
break. And he understood, he said, for the first time this summer, the
meaning of the nature-story that made the Ganges fall on the head of
the great God, and wander in and out amongst His matted locks before
She found an outlet on the plains below. He had searched long, he said,
for the words that the rivers and waterfalls uttered, amongst the
mountains, before he had realized that it was the eternal cry "Bom!
Bom! Hara! Hara!" 

"Yes!" he said of Shiva one day, "He is the great God — calm,
beautiful, and silent! And I am His great worshipper".

Again his subject was marriage, as the type of the soul's
relation to God. "This is why", he exclaimed, "though the love of a
mother is in some ways greater, yet the whole world takes the love of
man and woman as the type. No other has such tremendous
idealizing power. The beloved actually becomes what he is
imagined to be. This love transforms its object".

Then the talk strayed to national types, and he spoke of the
joy with which the returning traveller greets once more the sight of
the men and women of his own country. The whole of life has been a
subconscious education to enable one to understand in these every
faintest ripple of expression in face and form.

And again we passed a group of Sannyâsins going on foot, and
he broke out into fierce invective against asceticism as "savagery" . .
. . But the sight of wayfarers doing slow miles on foot in the name of
their ideals seemed to rouse in his mind a train of painful
associations, and he grew impatient on behalf of humanity at "the
torture of religion". Then again the mood passed as suddenly as it had
arisen and gave place to the equally strong statement of the conviction
that were it not for this "savagery", luxury would have robbed man of
all his manliness.

We stopped that evening at Uri Dak bungalow, and in the
twilight we all walked in the meadows and the bazaar. How beautiful the
place was! A little mud fortress — exactly of the European feudal
pattern — overhung the footway as it swept into a great open theatre of
field and hill. Along the road above the river lay the bazaar, and we
returned to the bungalow by a path across the fields, past cottages in
whose gardens the roses were in bloom. As we came, too, it would happen
that here and there some child more venturesome than others would play
with us.

JUNE 20.

The next day, driving through the most beautiful part of the
pass and seeing cathedral rocks and an old ruined temple of the sun, we
reached Baramulla. The legend is that the Vale of Kashmir was once a
lake and that at this point the Divine Boar pierced the mountains with
his tusks and let the Jhelum go free. Another piece of geography in the
form of myth. Or is it also prehistoric history?



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/excerpts_from_sister_niveditas_book/chapter_vi.htm


 ←
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9 /
Excerpts
from Sister Nivedita’s Book
/ →

CHAPTER VI

THE VALE OF KASHMIR

PERSONS: The Swami Vivekananda and a party of Europeans and
disciples, amongst whom were Dhira Mata, the "Steady Mother"; one whose
name was Jaya; and Nivedita.

PLACE: The River Jhelum — Baramulla to Srinagar.

TIME: June 20 to June 22.

"It is said that the Lord Himself is the weight on the side of
the fortunate!" cried the Swami in high glee, returning to our room at
the Dak bungalow and sitting down with his umbrella on his knees. As he
had brought no companion, he had himself to perform all the ordinary
little masculine offices, and he had gone out to hire Dungas
[houseboats] and do what was necessary. But he had immediately fallen
in with a man who, on hearing his name, had undertaken the whole
business and sent him back free of responsibility.

So we enjoyed the day. We drank Kashmiri tea out of a Samovar
and ate the jam of the country, and at about four o'clock we entered
into possession of a flotilla of Dungas, three in number, on which
presently we set forth for Srinagar. The first evening, however, we
were moored by the garden of the Swami's friend. . . .

We found ourselves next day in the midst of a beautiful valley
ringed round with snow mountains. This is known as the Vale of Kashmir,
but it might be more accurately described, perhaps, as the Vale of
Srinagar. . . .

That first morning, taking a long walk across the fields, we
came upon an immense chennaar tree standing in the midst of a wide
pasture. It really looked as if the passage through it might shelter
the proverbial twenty cows! The Swami fell to architectural visions of
how it might be fitted up as a dwelling-place for a hermit. A small
cottage might in fact have been built in the hollow of this living
tree. And then he talked of meditation, in a way to consecrate every
chennaar we should ever see.

We turned with him into the neighbouring farmyard. There we
found, seated under a tree, a singularly handsome elderly woman. She
wore the crimson coronet and white veil of the Kashmiri wife and sat
spinning wool, while round her, helping her, were her two
daughters-in-law and their children. The Swami had called at this farm
once before in the previous autumn and had often spoken since of the
faith and pride of this very woman. He had begged for water, which she
had at once given him. Then, before going, he had asked her quietly,
"And what, Mother, is your religion?" "I thank God, sir!" had rung out
the old voice in pride and triumph. "By the mercy of the Lord, I am a
Mussulman!" The whole family received him now as an old friend and were
ready to show every courtesy to the friends he had brought. 

The journey to Srinagar took two to three days, and one
evening, as we walked in the fields before supper, one who had seen the
Kalighat complained to the Master of the abandonment of feeling there,
which had jarred on her. "Why do they kiss the
ground before the image?" she exclaimed. The Swami had been pointing to
the crop of Til — which he thought to have been the original of the
English dill — and calling it "the oldest oil-bearing seed of the
Aryans". But at this question he dropped the little blue flower from
his hands, and a great hush came over his voice as he stood still and
said, "Is it not the same thing to kiss the ground before that image as
to kiss the ground before these mountains?"

Our master had promised that before the end of the summer he
would take us into retreat and teach us to meditate. . . . It was
decided that we should first see the country and afterwards make the
retreat.

The first evening in Srinagar we dined out with some Bengali
officials, and in the course of conversation one of the Western guests
maintained that the history of every nation illustrated and evolved
certain ideals to which the people of that nation should hold
themselves true. It was very curious to see how the Hindus present
objected to this. To them it was clearly a bondage to which the mind of
man could not permanently submit itself. Indeed, in their revolt
against the fetters of the doctrine, they appeared to be unable to do
justice to the idea itself. At
last the Swami intervened. "I think you must admit", he said, "that the
ultimate unit is psychological. This is much more permanent than the
geographical". And then he spoke of cases known to us all, of one of
whom he always thought as the most typical "Christian" he had ever
seen, yet she was a Bengali woman, and of another, born in the West,
who was "a better Hindu than himself". And was not this, after all, the
ideal state of things, that each should be born in the other's country
to spread the given ideal as far as it could be carried?



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/excerpts_from_sister_niveditas_book/chapter_vii.htm


 ←
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9 /
Excerpts
from Sister Nivedita’s Book
/ →

CHAPTER VII

LIFE AT SRINAGAR

PLACE: Srinagar.

TIME: June 22 to July 15, 1898.

In the mornings we still had long talks as before — some-times
it would be the different religious periods through which Kashmir had
passed, or the morality of Buddhism, or the history of Shiva-worship,
or perhaps the position of Srinagar under Kanishka.

Once he was talking with one of us about Buddhism, and he
suddenly said, "The fact is, Buddhism tried to do, in the time of
Ashoka, what the world never was ready for till now!" He referred to
the federalization of religions. It was a wonderful picture, this, of
the religious imperialism of Ashoka, broken down time and again by
successive waves of Christianity and Mohammedanism, each claiming
exclusive rights over the conscience of mankind and finally to seem to
have a possibility, within measurable distance of time, today!

Another time the talk was of Genghis, or Chenghis, Khan, the
conqueror from Central Asia. "You hear people talk of him as a vulgar
aggressor", he cried passionately, "but that is not true! They are
never greedy or vulgar, these great souls! He was inspired with the
thought of unity, and he wanted to unify his world. Yes, Napoleon was
cast in the same mould. And another, Alexander. Only those three, or
perhaps one soul manifesting itself in three different conquests!" And
then he passed on to speak of that one soul whom he believed to have
come again and again in religion, charged with the divine impulse to
bring about the unity of man in God.

At this time the transfer of the Prabuddha Bharata
from Madras to the newly established Ashrama at Mayavati was much in
all our thoughts. The Swami had always had a special love for this
paper, as the beautiful name he had given it indicated. He had always
been eager too for the establishment of organs of his own. The value of
the journal in the education of modern India was perfectly evident to
him, and he felt that his master's message and mode of thought required
to be spread by this means as well as by preaching and by work. Day
after day, therefore, he would dream about the future of his papers, as
about the work in its various centres. Day after day he would talk of
the forthcoming first number under the new editorship of Swami
Swarupananda. And one afternoon he brought to us, as
we sat together, a paper on which he said he had "tried to write a
letter, but it would come this way!" . . . [Vide "To
the Awakened India", Complete Works, IV: 387-89
]

JUNE 26.

The Master was longing to leave us all and go away into some
place of quiet, alone. But we, not knowing this, insisted on
accompanying him to the Coloured Springs, called "Kshir Bhavâni", or
"Milk of the Mother". It was said to be the first time that Christian
or Mohammedan had ever landed there, and we can never be thankful
enough for the glimpse we had of it since afterwards it was to become
the most sacred of all names to us. . . .

JUNE 29.

Another day we went off quietly by ourselves and visited the
Takt-i-Suleiman, a little temple very massively built on the summit of
a small mountain two or three thousand feet high. It was peaceful and
beautiful, and the famous Floating Gardens could be seen below us for
miles around. The Takt-i-Suleiman was one of the great illustrations of
the Swami's argument when he would take up the subject of the Hindu
love of nature as shown in the choice of sites for temples and
architectural monuments. As he had declared, in London, that the saints
lived on the hill-tops in order to enjoy the scenery, so now he pointed
out — citing one example after another — that our Indian people always
consecrated places of peculiar beauty and importance by making there
their altars of worship. And there was no denying that the little Takt,
crowning the hill that dominated the whole valley, was a case in point.

Many lovely fragments of those days come into mind, as:

Therefore, Tulasi, take thou care to live
with

all, for who can tell where, or in what garb,

the Lord Himself may next come to thee?

One God is hidden in all these, the Torturer

of all, the Awakener of all, the Reservoir

of all being, the One who is bereft of all

qualities.

There the sun does not shine, nor the moon,

nor the stars.

There was the story of how Râvana was advised to take the form
of Râma in order to cheat Sitâ. He answered, "Have I not thought of it?
But in order to take a man's form you must meditate on him; and Rama is
the Lord Himself; so when I meditate on him, even the position of
Brahmâ becomes a mere straw. How, then, could I think of a woman?"

"And so", commented the Swami, "even in the commonest or most
criminal life, there are these glimpses". It was ever thus. He was
constantly interpreting human life as the expression of God, never
insisting on the heinousness or wickedness of the act or a character.

"In that which is dark night to the rest of the world, there
the man of self-control is awake. That which is life to the rest of the
world is sleep to him."

Speaking of Thomas à Kempis one day, and of how he himself
used to wander as a Sannyâsin with the Gitâ and the Imitation
as his whole library, one word, he said, came back to him, inseparably
associated with the name of the Western monk:

Silence! ye teachers of the world, and
silence!

ye prophets! Speak Thou alone, O Lord, unto my soul!

Again:

The soft Shirisha flower can bear the
weight of

humming bees, but not of birds —

So Umâ, don't you go and make Tapasyâ!

Come, Uma, come! delight and idol of my soul!

Be seated, Mother, on the lotus of my heart,

And let me take a long, long look at you.

From my birth up, I am gazing,

Mother, at your face —

Know you suffering what trouble,

and pain?

Be seated, therefore, Blessed One,

on the lotus of my heart,

And dwell there for evermore.

Every now and then there would be long talks about the Gita —
"that wonderful poem, without one note in it of weakness or
unmanliness." He said one day that it was absurd to complain that
knowledge was not given to women or to Shudras. For the whole gist of
the Upanishads was contained in the Gita. Without it, indeed, they
could hardly be understood; and women and all castes could read the
Mahâbhârata.

JULY 4.

With great fun and secrecy the Swami and his one non-American
disciple prepared to celebrate the Fourth of July. A regret had been
expressed in his hearing that we had no American flag with which to
welcome the other members of the party to breakfast on their national
festival; and late on the afternoon of the third, he brought a Pundit
Durzey [Brahmin tailor] in great excitement, explaining that this man
would be glad to imitate it if he were told how. The stars and stripes
were very crudely represented, I fear, on the piece of cotton that was
nailed with branches of evergreens to the head of the dining—room—boat
when the Americans stepped on board for early tea on Independence Day!
But the Swami had postponed a journey in order to be present at the
little festival, and he himself contributed a poem to the addresses
that were now read aloud by way of greeting. . . . [Vide
"To
the Fourth of July", Complete Works, V]

JULY 5.

That evening someone pained him by counting the cherry-stones
left on her plate, to see when she would be married. He somehow took
the play in earnest and came the following morning surcharged with
passion for the ideal renunciation.

JULY 6.

"These shadows of home and marriage cross even my
mind now and then!" he cried, with that tender desire to make himself
one with the sinner that he so often showed. But it was across oceans
of scorn for those who would glorify the householder that he sought on
this occasion to preach the religious life. "Is it so easy", he
exclaimed, "to be Janaka? To sit on a throne absolutely unattached?
Caring nothing for wealth or fame, for wife or child? One after another
in the West has told me that he had reached this. But I could only say,
'Such great men are not born in India'!"

And then he turned to the other side.

"Never forget", he said to one of his hearers, "to say to
yourself, and to teach to your children: as is the difference between a
firefly and the blazing sun, between the infinite ocean and a little
pond, between a mustard-seed and the mountain of
Meru, such is the difference between the householder and the Sannyasin!"

"Everything is fraught with fear: Renunciation alone is
fearless."

"Blessed be even the fraudulent Sâdhus, and those who have
failed to carry out their vows, inasmuch as they also have witnessed to
the ideal and so are in some degree the cause of the success of others!"

"Let us never, never, forget our ideal!"

At such moments he would identify himself entirely with the
thought he sought to demonstrate, and in the same sense in which a law
of nature might be deemed cruel or arrogant, his exposition might have
those qualities. Sitting and listening, we felt ourselves brought face
to face with the invisible and absolute.

All this was on our return to Srinagar from the real Fourth of
July celebration, which had been a visit to Dahl Lake. . . .

At nine o'clock on the evening of the following Sunday, July
the 10th, the first two [Dhira Mata and Jaya] came back unexpectedly,
and presently, from many different sources, we gathered the news that
the Master had gone to Amarnath by the Sonamarg route and would return
another way. He had started out penniless, but that could give no
concern to his friends, in a Hindu native state. . . .

JULY 15.

What were we setting out for? We were just moving to go down
the river on Friday, and it was close on five in the afternoon when the
servants recognized some of their friends in the distance, and word was
brought that the Swami's boat was coming towards us.

An hour later he was with us, saying how pleasant it was to be
back. The summer had been unusually hot and certain glaciers had given
way, rendering the Sonamarg route to Amarnath impracticable. This fact
had caused his return.

But from this moment dated the first of three great increments
of joy and realization that we saw in him during our months in Kashmir.
It was almost as if we could verify for ourselves the truth of that
saying of his Guru: "There is indeed a certain ignorance. It has been
placed there by my Holy Mother that her work may be done. But it is
only like a film of tissue paper. It might be rent at any moment".



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/excerpts_from_sister_niveditas_book/chapter_viii.htm


 ←
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9 /
Excerpts
from Sister Nivedita’s Book
/ →

CHAPTER VIII

THE TEMPLE OF PANDRENTHAN

PERSONS: The Swami Vivekananda and a party of Europeans and
disciples, amongst whom were Dhira Mata, the "Steady Mother"; one whose
name was Jaya; and Nivedita.

PLACE: Kashmir.

TIME: July 16 to 19, 1898.

JULY 16.

It fell to the lot of one of the Swami's disciples next day to
go down the river with him in a small boat. As it went, he chanted one
song after another of Râmprasâd, and now and again he would translate a
verse:

I call upon thee, Mother.

For though his mother strikes him,

The child cries, "Mother! Oh, Mother!"

Though I cannot see Thee,

I am not a lost child!

I still cry, "Mother! Mother!"

And then with the haughty dignity of an offended child,
some-thing that ended, "I am not the son to call any other woman
'Mother'!"

JULY 17.

It must have been next day that he came into Dhira Mata's
Dunga and talked of Bhakti. First it was that curious Hindu thought of
Shiva and Umâ in one. It is easy to give the words, but without the
voice how comparatively dead they seem! And
then there were the wonderful surroundings — picturesque Srinagar, tall
Lombardy poplars and distant snows. There in that river-valley, some
space from the foot of the great mountains, he chanted to us how "the
Lord took a form and that was a divided form, half woman and half man.
On one side, beautiful garlands; on the other, bone earrings and coils
of snakes. On one side, the hair black, beautiful and in curls; on the
other, twisted like rope". And then passing immediately into the other
form of the same thought, he quoted:

God became Krishna and Râdhâ —

Love flows in thousands of coils.

Whoso wants, takes it.

Love flows in thousands of coils —

The tide of love and loving past,

And fills the soul with bliss and joy!

So absorbed was he that his breakfast stood unheeded long
after it was ready, and when at last he went reluctantly — saying,
"When one has all this Bhakti what does one want with food?" — it was
only to come back again quickly and resume the subject.

But either now or at some other time he said that he did not
talk of Radha and Krishna where he looked for deeds. It was Shiva who
made stern and earnest workers, and to Him the labourer must be
dedicated.

The next day he gave us a quaint saying of Shri Ramakrishna,
comparing the critics of others to bees or flies, according as they
chose honey or wounds.

And then we were off to Islamabad, and really, as it proved,
to Amarnath.

JULY 19.

The first afternoon, in a wood by the side of the Jhelum, we
discovered the long — sought temple of Pandrenthan (Pandresthan, place
of the Pândavas?).

It was sunk in a pond, and this was thickly covered with scum
out of which it rose, a tiny cathedral of the long ago, built of heavy
grey limestone. The temple consisted of a small cell with four doorways
opening to the cardinal points. Externally it was a tapering pyramid —
with its top truncated, to give foot-hold to a bush — supported on a
four-pierced pedestal. In its architecture, trefoil and triangular
arches were combined in an unusual fashion with each other and with the
straight-lined lintel. It was built with marvellous solidity, and the
necessary lines were somewhat obscured by heavy ornament. . . . 

For all but the Swami himself, this was our first peep at
Indian archaeology. So when he had been through it, he taught us how to
observe the interior.

In the centre of the ceiling was a large sun-medallion, set in
a square whose points were the points of the compass. This left four
equal triangles at the corners of the ceiling, which were filled with
sculpture in low relief, male and female figures intertwined with
serpents, beautifully done. On the wall were empty spaces, where seemed
to have been a band of topes.

Outside, carvings were similarly distributed. In one of the
trefoil arches — over, I think, the eastern door — was a fine image of
the Teaching Buddha, standing, with his hand uplifted. Running round
the buttresses was a much-defaced frieze of a seated woman with a tree
— evidently Mâyâ Devi, the mother of Buddha. The three other
door-niches were empty, but a slab by the pond-side seemed to have
fallen from one, and this contained a bad figure of a king, said by the
country-people to represent the sun.

The masonry of this little temple was superb and probably
accounted for its long preservation. A single block of stone would be
so cut as to correspond not to one brick in a wall, but to a section of
the architect's plan. It would turn a corner and form part of two
distinct walls, or sometimes even of three. This fact made one take the
building as very, very old, possibly even earlier than Marttanda. The
theory of the workmen seemed so much more that of carpentering than of
building! The water about it was probably an overflow into the
temple-court from the sacred spring that the chapel itself may have
been placed, as the Swami thought, to enshrine.

To him, the place was delightfully suggestive. It was a direct
memorial of Buddhism, representing one of the four religious periods
into which he had already divided the history of Kashmir: (1) tree and
snake worship, from which dated all the names of the springs ending in
Nag, as Verinag, and so on; (2) Buddhism; (3) Hinduism, in the form of
sun worship; and (4) Mohammedanism. 

Sculpture, he told us, was the characteristic art of Buddhism,
and the sun-medallion, or lotus, one of its commonest ornaments. The
figures with the serpents referred to pre-Buddhism. But sculpture had
greatly deteriorated under sun worship, hence the crudity of the Surya
figure. . . .

It was the time of sunset — such a sunset! The mountains in
the west were all a shimmering purple. Further north they were blue
with snow and cloud. The sky was green and yellow and touched with red
— bright flame and daffodil colours, against a blue and opal
background. We stood and looked, and then the Master, catching sight of
the throne of Solomon — that little Takt which we already loved —
exclaimed, "What genius the Hindu shows in placing his temples! He
always chooses a grand scenic effect! See! The Takt commands the whole
of Kashmir. The rock of Hari Parbat rises red out of blue water, like a
lion couchant, crowned. And the temple of Marttanda has the valley at
its feet!"

Our boats were moored near the edge of the wood, and we could
see that the presence of the silent chapel, of the Buddha, which we had
just explored, moved the Swami deeply. That evening we all foregathered
in Dhira Mata's houseboat, and a little of the conversation has been
noted down.

Our master had been talking of Christian ritual as derived
from Buddhist, but one of the party would have none of the theory.

"Where did Buddhist ritual itself come from?" she asked.

"From Vedic", answered the Swami briefly."

Or as it was present also in southern Europe, is it not better
to suppose a common origin for it and the Christian and the Vedic
rituals?"

"No! No!" he replied. "You forget that Buddhism was entirely
within Hinduism! Even caste was not attacked — it was not
yet crystallized, of course! — and Buddha merely tried to restore the
ideal. He who attains to God in this life, says
Manu, is the Brahmin. Buddha would have had it so,
if he could."

"But how are Vedic and Christian rituals connected?" persisted
his opponent. "How could they be the same? You have nothing even
corresponding to the central rite of our worship!"

"Why, yes!" said the Swami. "Vedic ritual has its Mass, the
offering of food to God; your Blessed Sacrament, our Prasâdam. Only it
is offered sitting, not kneeling, as is common in hot countries. They
kneel in Tibet. Then too Vedic ritual has its lights, incense, music."

"But", was the somewhat ungracious argument, "has it any
common prayer?" Objections urged in this way always elicited some bold
paradox which contained a new and unthought-of generalization.

He flashed down on the question. "No! And neither has
Christianity! That is pure Protestantism and Protestantism took it from
the Mohammedans, perhaps through Moorish influence! 

"Mohammedanism is the only religion that has completely broken
down the idea of the priest. The leader of prayer stands with his back
to the people, and only the reading of the Koran may take place from
the pulpit. Protestantism is an approach to this.

"Even the tonsure existed in India, in the shaven head. I have
seen a picture of Justinian receiving the Law from two monks, in which
the monks' heads are entirely shaven. The monk and nun both existed in
pre-Buddhistic Hinduism. Europe gets her orders from the Thebaid."

"At that rate, then, you accept Catholic ritual as Aryan!"

"Yes, almost all Christianity is Aryan, I believe. I am
inclined to think Christ never existed. I have doubted that ever since
I had my dream — that dream off Crete!1
Indian and Egyptian
ideas met
at Alexandria and went forth to the world, tinctured with Judaism and
Hellenism, as Christianity.

"The Acts and Epistles, you know, are older than the Gospels,
and S. John is spurious. The only figure we can be sure of is S. Paul,
and he was not an eye-witness, and according to his own showing was
capable of Jesuitry — 'by all means save souls' — isn't it?

"No! Buddha and Mohammed, alone amongst religious teachers,
stand out with historic distinctness — having been fortunate enough to
have, while they were living, enemies as well as friends. Krishna — I
doubt; a Yogi, a shepherd, and a great king have all been amalgamated
in one beautiful figure, holding the Gitâ in his hand.

"Renan's life of Jesus is mere froth. It does not touch
Strauss, the real antiquarian. Two things stand out as personal living
touches in the life of Christ — the woman taken in adultery, the most
beautiful story in literature, and the woman at the well. How strangely
true is this last to Indian life! A woman coming to draw water finds,
seated at the well-side, a yellow-clad monk. He asks her for water.
Then he teaches her and does a little mind-reading and so on. Only in
an Indian story, when she went to call the villagers to look and
listen, the monk would have taken his chance and fled to the forest!

"On the whole, I think old Rabbi Hillel is responsible for the
teachings of Jesus, and an obscure Jewish sect of Nazarenes
— a sect of great antiquity — suddenly galvanized by S. Paul, furnished
the mythic personality as a centre of worship.

"The resurrection, of course, is simply spring-cremation. Only
the rich Greeks and Romans had had cremation anyway, and the new
sun-myth would only stop it amongst the few.

"But Buddha! Buddha! Surely he was the greatest man who ever
lived. He never drew a breath for himself. Above all, he never claimed
worship. He said, 'Buddha is not a man, but a state. I have found the
door. Enter, all of you!'

"He went to the feast of Ambâpâli, 'the sinner'. He dined with
the pariah, though he knew it would kill him, and sent a message to his
host on his death-bed, thanking him for the great deliverance. Full of
love and pity for a little goat, even before he had attained the truth!
You remember how he offered his own head, that of prince and monk, if
only the king would spare the kid that he was about to sacrifice, and
how the king was so struck by his compassion that he saved its life?
Such a mixture of rationalism and feeling was never seen! Surely,
surely, there was none like him!"

^In
travelling from Naples to Port Said, on his way back to India, in
January 1897, the Swami had a dream of an old and bearded man who
appeared before him, saying, "This is the island of Crete", and showing
him a place in the island that he might afterwards identify. The vision
went on to say that the religion of Christianity had originated in the
island of Crete and in connection with this gave him two European words
— one of which was Therapeutae — which it declared were derived from
Sanskrit. Therapeutae meant "sons" (from the Sanskrit Putra) of the
Theras, or Buddhist monks. From this the Swami was to understand that
Christianity had originated in a Buddhist mission. The old man added,
"The proofs are all here", pointing to the ground. "Dig and you will
see!"   As he awoke, feeling that this was no common dream,
the Swami rose and tumbled out on deck. Here he met an officer turning
in from his watch. "What o'clock is it?" said the Swami. "Midnight!"
was the answer. "Where are we?" he then asked, when to his astonishment
the answer came back: "Fifty miles off Crete!"   Our master
used to laugh at himself for the strength of the impression that this
dream made on him. But he could never shake it off. The fact that the
second of the two etymologies has been lost is deeply to be regretted.
The Swami had to say that before he had his dream, it had never
occurred to him to doubt that the personality of Christ was strictly
historic. We must remember, that according to Hindu philosophy, it is
the completeness of an idea that is important, and not the question of
its historical authenticity. The Swami once asked Shri Ramakrishna,
when he was a boy, about this very matter. "Don't you think", answered
his Guru, "that those who could invent such things were themselves
that?"



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/excerpts_from_sister_niveditas_book/chapter_ix.htm


 ←
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9 /
Excerpts
from Sister Nivedita’s Book
/ →

CHAPTER IX

WALKS AND TALKS BESIDE THE JHELUM

PERSONS: The Swami Vivekananda and a party of Europeans and
disciples, amongst whom were Dhira Mata, the "Steady Mother"; one whose
name was Jaya; and Nivedita.

PLACE: Kashmir.

TIME: July 20 to July 29, 1898.

JULY 20.

. . . . . .

That morning the river was broad and shallow and clear, and
two of us walked with the Swami across the fields and along the banks
about three miles. He began by talking of the sense of sin, how it was
Egyptian, Semitic and Aryan. It appears in the Vedas, but quickly
passes out. The devil is recognized there as the Lord of Anger. Then,
with the Buddhists he became Mara, the Lord of Lust, and one of the
most loved of the Lord Buddha's titles was "Conqueror of Mara". (Vide
the Sanskrit lexicon Amarkosha that Swami learnt to patter as a child
of four!) But while Satan is the Hamlet of the Bible, in the Hindu
scriptures the Lord of Anger never divides creation. He always
represents defilement, never duality. 

Zoroaster was a reformer of some old religion. Even Ormuzd and
Ahriman with him were not supreme; they were only manifestations of the
Supreme. That older religion must have been Vedantic. So the Egyptians
and Semites cling to the theory of sin while the Aryans, as Indians and
Greeks, quickly lose it. In India righteousness and sin become Vidyâ
and Avidyâ — both to be transcended. Amongst the Aryans, Persians and
Europeans become Semitized by religious ideas; hence the sense of sin.1

And then the talk drifted, as it was always so apt to do, to
questions of the country and the future. What idea must be urged on a
people to give them strength? The line of their own development runs in
one way, A. Must the new accession of force be a compensating one, B?
This would produce a development midway between the two, C — a
geometrical alteration merely. But it was not so.

National life was a question of organic forces. We must
reinforce the current of that life itself, and leave it to do the rest.
Buddha preached renunciation, and India heard. Yet within a thousand
years she had reached her highest point of national prosperity. The
national life in India has renunciation as its source. Its highest
ideals are service and Mukti. The Hindu mother eats last. Marriage is
not for individual happiness, but for the welfare of the nation and the
caste. Certain individuals of the modern reform, having embarked on an
experiment which could not solve the problem, "are the sacrifices over
which the race has to walk".

And then the trend of conversation changed again and became
all fun and merriment, jokes and stories. And as we laughed and
listened, the boats came up and talk was over for the day.

The whole of that afternoon and night the Swami lay in his
boat, ill. But next day, when we landed at the temple of Bijbehara —
already thronged with Amarnath pilgrims — he was able to join us for a
little while. "Quickly up and quickly down", as he said of himself, was
always his characteristic. After that he was with us most of the day,
and in the afternoon we reached Islamabad. . . .

In the dusk that evening one came into the little group
amongst the apple trees and found the Master engaged in the rarest of
rare happenings, a personal talk with Dhira Mata and her whose name was
Jaya. He had taken two pebbles into his hand and was saying how, when
he was well, his mind might direct itself to this and that, or his will
might seem less firm; but let the least touch of pain or illness come,
let him look death in the face
for a while, and "I am as hard as that (knocking the stones together),
for I have touched the feet of God".

And one remembered, apropos of this coolness, the story of a
walk across the fields in England, where he and an Englishman and woman
had been pursued by an angry bull. The Englishman frankly ran and
reached the other side of the hill in safety. The woman ran as far as
she could and then sank to the ground, incapable of further effort.
Seeing this, and unable to aid her, the Swami — thinking "So this
is the end, after all" — took up his stand in front of her, with folded
arms. He told afterwards how his mind was occupied with a mathematical
calculation as to how far the bull would be able to throw. But the
animal suddenly stopped a few paces off and then, raising his head,
retreated sullenly.

A like courage — though he himself was far from thinking of
these incidents — had shown itself in his early youth when he quietly
stepped up to a runaway horse and caught it in the streets of Calcutta,
thus saving the life of the woman who occupied the carriage behind.

The talk drifted on, as we sat on the grass beneath the trees,
and became, for an hour or two, half grave, half gay. We heard much of
the tricks the monkeys could play in Vrindaban. And we elicited stories
of two separate occasions in his wandering life when he had had clear
previsions of help which had been fulfilled. One of these I remember.
It may possibly have occurred at the time when he was under the vow to
ask for nothing, and he had been several days (perhaps five) without
food. Suddenly, as he lay almost dying of exhaustion in a
railway-station, it flashed into his mind that he must rise up and go
out along a certain road and that there he would meet a man bringing
him help. He obeyed and met one carrying a tray of food. "Are you he to
whom I was sent?" said this man, coming up to him and looking at him
closely.

Then a child was brought to us, with its hand badly cut, and
the Swami applied an old wives' cure. He bathed the wound with water
and then laid on it, to stop the bleeding, the ashes of a piece of
calico. The villagers were soothed and consoled, and our gossip was
over for the evening.

JULY 23.

The next morning a motley gathering of coolies assembled
beneath the apple-trees and waited some hours to take us to the ruins
of Marttanda. It had been a wonderful old building — evidently more
abbey than temple — in a wonderful position; and its great interest lay
in the obvious agglomeration of styles and periods in which it had
grown up. . . . Its presence is a perpetual reminder that the East was
the original home of monasticism. The Swami was hard at work in an
instant on observations and theories, pointing out the cornice that ran
along the nave from the entrance to the sanctuary, to the west,
surmounted by the high trefoils of the two arches and also by a frieze;
or showing us the panels containing cherubs; and before we had done,
had picked up a couple of coins. The ride back through the sunset light
was charming. From all these hours, the day before and the day after,
fragments of talk come back to me.

"No nation, not Greek or another, has ever carried patriotism
so far as the Japanese. They don't talk, they act — give up all for
country. There are noblemen now living in Japan as peasants, having
given up their princedoms without a word to create the unity of the
empire.2
And not one traitor could be found in the Japanese war. Think of that!"

Again, talking of the inability of some to express feeling,
"Shy and reserved people, I have noticed, are always the most brutal
when roused".

Again, evidently talking of the ascetic life and giving the
rules of Brahmacharya — "The Sannyâsin who thinks of gold, to desire
it, commits suicide", and so on.

JULY 24.

The darkness of night and the forest, a great pine-fire under
the trees, two or three tents standing out white in the blackness, the
forms and voices of many servants at their fires in the distance, and
the Master with three disciples, such is the next pic
ture. . . . Suddenly the Master turned to one member of the party and
said, "You never mention your school now. Do you sometimes forget it?
You see", he went on, "I have much to think of. One day I turn to
Madras and think of the work there. Another day I give all my attention
to America or England or Ceylon or Calcutta. Now I am thinking about
yours".

At that moment the Master was called away to dine, and not
till he came back could the confidence he had invited be given.

He listened to it all, the deliberate wish for a tentative
plan, for smallness of beginnings, and the final inclination to turn
away from the idea of inclusiveness and breadth and to base the whole
of an educational effort on the religious life and on the worship of
Shri Ramakrishna.

"Because you must be sectarian to get that enthusiasm, must
you not?" he said. "You will make a sect in order to rise above all
sects. Yes I understand".

There would be obvious difficulties. The thing sounded on this
scale almost impossible for many reasons. But for the moment the only
care need be to will rightly; and if the plan was sound, ways and means
would be found to hand, that was sure.

He waited a little when he had heard it all, and then he said,
"You ask me to criticize, but that I cannot do. For I regard you as
inspired, quite as much inspired as I am. You know that's the
difference between other religions and us. Other people believe their
founder was inspired, and so do we. But so am I also, just as much so
as he, and you as I; and after you, your girls and their disciples will
be. So I shall help you to do what you think best".

Then he turned to Dhira Mata and to Jaya and spoke of the
greatness of the trust that he would leave in the hands of that
disciple who should represent the interests of women when he should go
West, of how it would exceed the responsibility of work for men. And he
added, turning to the worker of the party, "Yes, you have faith, but
you have not that burning enthusiasm that you need. You want to be
consumed [with] energy. Shiva! Shiva!" And so, invoking the blessing of
Mahâdeva, he said goodnight and left us, and we presently went to bed.

JULY 25.

The next morning we breakfasted early in one of the tents and
went on to Achhabal. One of us had had a dream of old jewels lost and
restored, all bright and new. But the Swami, smiling, stopped the tale,
saying, "Never talk of a dream as good as that!"

At Achhabal we found more gardens of Jehangir. Was it here or
at Verinag that had been his favourite resting-place?

We roamed about the gardens and bathed in a still pool
opposite the Pathan Khan's Zenana, and then we lunched in the first
garden and rode down in the afternoon to Islamabad.

As we sat at lunch, the Swami invited his daughter to go to
the cave of Amarnath with him and be dedicated to Shiva. Dhira Mata
smiled permission, and the next half-hour was given to pleasure and
congratulations. It had already been arranged that we were all to go to
Pahalgam and wait there for the Swami's return from the pilgrimage. So
we reached the boats that evening, packed and wrote letters, and next
day in the afternoon started for Bawan.

^One
of those who listened to this talk had a wonderful opportunity later of
appreciating the accuracy as well as the breadth of the Swami's
knowledge when she saw two Parsis glad to sit at his feet and learn
from him the history of their own religious ideas. — N.

^This
is, perhaps, a mistake. It was their political privileges, not their
estates, that the Japanese samurais renounced.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/excerpts_from_sister_niveditas_book/chapter_x.htm


 ←
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9 /
Excerpts
from Sister Nivedita’s Book
/ →

CHAPTER X

THE SHRINE OF AMARNATH

PLACE: Kashmir.

TIME: July 29 to August 8, 1898.

JULY 29.

From this time we saw very little of the Swami. He was full of
enthusiasm about the pilgrimage and lived mostly on one meal a day,
seeking no company much, save that of Sâdhus. Sometimes he would come
to a camping-ground, beads in hand. Tonight two of the party went
roaming about Bawan, which was like a village fair, all modified by a
religious tendency centering in the sacred springs. Afterwards with
Dhira Mata it was possible to go and listen at the tent door to the
crowd of Hindi-speaking Sadhus who were plying the Swami with questions.

On Thursday we reached Pahalgam and camped down at the lower
end of the valley. We found that the Swami had to encounter high
opposition over the question of our admission at all. He was supported
by the Naked Swamis, one of whom said, "It is true you have this
strength, Swamiji, but you ought not to manifest it!" He yielded at the
word. That afternoon, however, he took his daughter round the camp to
be blessed, which really meant to distribute alms — and whether because
he was looked upon as rich or because he was recognized as strong, the
next day our tents were moved up to a lovely knoll at the head of the
camp. . . .

JULY 30.

. . . . . .

How beautiful was the route to the next halt, Chandanwari!
There we camped on the edge of a ravine. It rained all afternoon, and I
was visited by the Swami only for a five-minutes'
chat. But I received endless touching little kindnesses from the
servants and other pilgrims. . . .

. . . Close to Chandanwari the Swami insisted on my doing my
first glacier on foot and took care to point out every detail of
interest. A tremendous climb of some thousands of feet was the next
experience. Then a long walk along a narrow path that twisted round
mountain after mountain, and finally another steep climb. At the top of
the first mountain, the ground was simply carpeted with edelweiss. Then
the road passed five hundred feet above Sheshnag with its sulky water,
and at last we camped in a cold damp place amongst the snow-peaks,
18,000 feet high. The firs were far below, and all afternoon and
evening the coolies had to forage for juniper in all directions. The
Tahsildar's, Swami's and my own tents were all close together, and in
the evening a large fire was lighted in front. But it did not burn
well, and many feet below lay the glacier. I did not see the Swami
after we camped.

Panchatarani — the place of the five streams — was not nearly
such a long march. Moreover, it was lower than Sheshnag, and the cold
was dry and exhilarating. In front of the camp was a dry riverbed, all
gravel, and through this ran five streams, in all of which it was the
duty of the pilgrim to bathe, walking from one to the other in wet
garments. Contriving to elude observation completely, Swamiji
nevertheless fulfilled the law to the last letter in this respect. . . .

At these heights we often found ourselves in great circles of
snow-peaks, those mute giants that have suggested to the Hindu mind the
idea of the ash-encovered God.

AUGUST 2.

On Tuesday, August the 2nd, the great day of Amarnath, the
first batch of pilgrims must have left the camp at two! We left by the
light of the full moon. The sun rose as we went down the narrow valley.
It was not too safe at this part of the journey. But when we left our
Dandies and began to climb, the real danger began. . . . Then, having
at last reached the bottom of the
farther slope, we had to toil along the glacier mile after mile to the
cave. . . .

The Swami, exhausted, had by this time fallen behind. . . . He
came at last and with a word sent me on; he was going to bathe. Half an
hour later he entered the cave. With a smile he knelt first at one end
of the semi-circle, then at the other. The place was vast, large enough
to hold a cathedral; and the great ice-Shiva, in a niche of deepest
shadow, seemed as if throned on its own base. A few minutes passed, and
then he turned to leave the cave.

To him, the heavens had opened. He had touched the feet of
Shiva. He had had to hold himself tight, he said afterwards, lest he
"should swoon away". But so great was his physical exhaustion that a
doctor said afterwards that his heart ought to have stopped beating,
but had undergone a permanent enlargement instead. How strangely near
fulfilment had been those words of his Master, "When he realizes who
and what he is, he will give up this body!"

"I have enjoyed it so much!" he said half an hour afterwards,
as he sat on a rock above the stream-side, eating lunch with the kind
Naked Swami and me. "I thought the ice Linga was Shiva Himself. And
there were no thievish Brahmins, no trade, nothing wrong. It was all
worship. I never enjoyed any religious place so much!"

Afterwards he would often tell of the overwhelming vision that
had seemed to draw him almost into its vertex. He would talk of the
poetry of the white ice-pillar; and it was he who suggested that the
first discovery of the place had been by a party of shepherds, who had
wandered far in search of their flocks one summer day and had entered
the cave to find themselves before the unmelting ice, in the presence
of the Lord Himself. He always said too that the grace of Amarnath had
been granted to him there, not to die till he himself should give
consent. And to me he said, "You do not now understand. But you have
made the pilgrimage, and it will go on working. Causes must bring their
effects. You will understand better afterwards. The effects will come".

How beautiful was the road by which we returned next morning
to Pahalgam! We struck tents that night immediately on
our return to them and camped later for the night in a snowy pass a
whole stage further on. We paid a coolie a few annas here to push on
with a letter; but when we actually arrived next afternoon we found
that this had been quite unnecessary, for all morning long relays of
pilgrims had been passing the tents and dropping in, in the most
friendly manner, to give the others news of us and our impending
arrival. In the morning we were up and on the way long before dawn. As
the sun rose before us, while the moon went down behind, we passed
above the Lake of Death, into which about forty pilgrims had been
buried one year by an avalanche which their hymns had started. After
this we came to the tiny goat-path down the face of a steep cliff by
which we were able to shorten the return journey so much. This was
little better than a scramble, and everyone had perforce to do it on
foot. At the bottom the villagers had something like breakfast ready.
Fires were burning, Chapatties baking, and tea was ready to be served
out. From this time on parties of pilgrims would leave the main body at
each parting of the ways, and the feeling of solidarity that had grown
up amongst us all throughout the journey became gradually less and less.

That evening on the knoll above Pahalgam, where a great fire
of pine-logs was lighted and Dhurries spread, we all sat and talked.
Our friend the Naked Swami joined us and we had plenty of fun and
nonsense, but presently, when all had gone save our own little party,
we sat on with the great moon overhead and the towering snows and
rushing rivers and the mountain-pines. And the Swami talked of Shiva
and the cave and the great verge of vision.

AUGUST 8.

We started for Islamabad next day, and on Monday morning as we
sat at breakfast, we were towed safely into Srinagar.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/excerpts_from_sister_niveditas_book/chapter_xi.htm


 ←
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9 /
Excerpts
from Sister Nivedita’s Book
/ →

CHAPTER XI

AT SRINAGAR ON THE RETURN JOURNEY

PERSONS: The Swami Vivekananda and a party of Europeans and
disciples, amongst whom were Dhira Mata, the "Steady Mother"; one whose
name was Jaya; and Nivedita.

PLACE: Kashmir — Srinagar.

TIME: August 9 to August 13, 1898.

AUGUST 9.

At this time the Master was always talking of leaving us. And
when I find the entry "The river is pure that flows, the monk is pure
that goes", I know exactly what it means — the passionate outcry "I am
always so much better when I have to undergo hardships and beg my
bread", the longing for freedom and the touch of the common people, the
picture of himself making a long circuit of the country on foot and
meeting us again at Baramulla for the journey home.

His family of boat-people, whom he had staunchly befriended
through two seasons, left us today. Afterwards he would refer to the
whole incident of their connection with him as proof that even charity
and patience could go too far.

AUGUST 10.

It was evening, and we all went out to pay some visit. On the
return he called his disciple Nivedita to walk with him across the
fields. His talk was all about the work and his intentions in it. He
spoke of the inclusiveness of his conception of the country and its
religions; of his own distinction as being solely in his desire to make
Hinduism active, aggressive, a missionary faith; of "don't-touch-ism"
as the only thing he repudiated. Then he talked with depth of feeling
of the gigantic spirituality of
many of those who were most orthodox. India wanted practicality, but
she must never let go her hold on the old meditative life for that. "To
be as deep as the ocean and as broad as the sky", Shri Ramakrishna has
said, was the ideal. But this profound inner life in the soul encased
within orthodoxy is the result of an accidental, not an essential,
association. "And if we set ourselves right here, the world will be
right, for are we not all one? Ramakrishna Paramahamsa was alive to the
depths of his being, yet on the outer plane he was perfectly active and
capable."

And then of that critical question of the worship of his own
master, "My own life is guided by the enthusiasm of that great
personality, but others will decide for themselves how far this is true
for them. Inspiration is not filtered out to the world through one man".

AUGUST 11.

There was occasion this day for the Swami to rebuke a member
of this party for practising palmistry. It was a thing he said that
everyone desired, yet all India despised and hated. Yes, he said, in
reply to a little special pleading, even of character-reading he
disapproved. "To tell you the truth, I should have thought even your
incarnation more honest if he and his disciples had not performed
miracles. Buddha unfrocked a monk for doing it." Later, talking on the
subject to which he had now transferred his attention, he spoke with
horror of the display of the least of it as sure to bring a terrible
reflex.

AUGUST 12 AND 13.

The Swami had now taken a Brahmin cook. Very touching had been
the arguments of the Amarnath Sâdhus against his willingness to let
even a Mussulman cook for him. "Not in the land of Sikhs at least,
Swamiji", they had said, and he had at last consented. But for the
present he was worshipping his little Mohammedan boat-child as Umâ. Her
whole idea of love was service, and the day he left Kashmir she, tiny
one, was fain to carry a tray of
apples for him all the way to the tonga herself. He never forgot her,
though he seemed quite indifferent at the time. In Kashmir itself he
was fond of recalling the time when she saw a blue flower on the towing
path and sitting down before it, and striking it this way and that,
"was alone with that flower for twenty minutes".

There was a piece of land by the riverside on which grew three
chennaars, towards which our thoughts turned with peculiar love at this
time. For the Mahârâjâ was anxious to give it to Swamiji, and we all
pictured it as a centre of work in the future — work which should
realize the great idea of "by the people, for the people, as a joy to
worker and to served".

In view of Indian feeling about a homestead blessed by women,
it had been suggested that we should go and annex the site by camping
there for a while. One of our party, moreover, had a personal wish for
special quiet at this time. So it was decided that we should establish
"a women's Math", as it were, before the Maharaja should require the
land to confer it on the Swami. And this was possible because the spot
was one of the minor camping grounds used by Europeans.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/excerpts_from_sister_niveditas_book/chapter_xii.htm


 ←
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9 /
Excerpts
from Sister Nivedita’s Book
/ →

CHAPTER XII

THE CAMP UNDER THE CHENNAARS

PERSONS: The Swami Vivekananda and a party of Europeans and
disciples, amongst whom were Dhira Mata, the "Steady Mother"; one whose
name was Jaya; and Nivedita.

PLACE: Kashmir — Srinagar.

TIME: August 14 to August 20, 1898.

AUGUST 14.

It was Sunday morning and next afternoon the Swami was
prevailed on to come up to tea with us in order to meet a European
guest who seemed to be interested in the subject of Vedanta. He had
been little inclined to concern himself with the matter, and I think
his real motive in accepting was probably to afford his too-eager
disciples an opportunity of convincing themselves of the utter futility
of all such attempts as this. Certainly he took infinite pains with the
enquirer and, as certainly, his trouble was wasted.

I remember his saying, amongst other things, "How I wish a law
could be broken. If we were really able to break a law we should be
free. What you call breaking the law is really only another way of
keeping it". Then he tried to explain a little of the superconscious
life. But his words fell on ears that could not hear.

AUGUST 16.

On Tuesday he came once more to our little camp to the midday
meal. Towards the end it began to rain heavily enough to prevent his
return, and he took up Tod's History of Rajasthan,
which was lying near, and drifted into talk of Mirâ Bâi. "Two-thirds of
the national ideas now in Bengal", he said, "have been gathered from
this book".

But the episode of Mira Bai, the queen who would not be queen,
but would wander the world with the lovers of Krishna, was always his
favourite, even in Tod. He talked of how she preached submission,
prayerfulness, and service to all in contrast to Chaitanya, who
preached love to the name of God, and mercy to all.

Mira Bai was always one of his great patronesses. He would put
into her story many threads with which one is now familiar in other
connections, such as the conversation of two great robbers, and the end
by an image of Krishna opening and swallowing her up. I heard him on
one occasion recite and translate one of her songs to a woman. I wish I
could remember the whole, but it began in his rendering with the words
"Cling to it, cling to it, cling to it, Brother", and ended with "If
Ankâ and Bankâ, the robber brothers; Sujan, the fell butcher; and the
courtesan who playfully taught her parrot to repeat the name of the
Lord Krishna were saved, there is hope for all".

Again, I have heard him tell that marvellous tale of Mira Bai
in which on reaching Vrindaban, she sent for a certain famous Sâdhu.1
He refused to go on the ground
that women might not see men in
Vrindaban. When this had happened three times, Mira Bai went to him
herself saying that she had not known that there were such beings as
men there; she had supposed that Krishna alone existed. And when she
saw the astonished Sadhu, she unveiled herself completely, with the
words "Fool, do you call yourself a man?" And as he fell prostrate
before her with a cry of awe, she blessed him as a mother blesses her
child.

Today the Swami passed on to the talk of Akbar and sang us a
song of Tânsen, the poet-laureate of the emperor:

Seated on the throne, a god amongst men,

Thou, the Emperor of Delhi.

Blessed was the hour, the minute, the second,

When thou ascendest the throne,

O God amongst men,

Thou, the Lord of Delhi.

Long live thy crown, thy
sceptre, thy throne,

O God amongst men,

Thou, Emperor of Delhi.

Live long, and remain awakened always,

O son of Humayoon,

Joy of the sun, God amongst men,

Thou, the Emperor of Delhi!

Then the talk passed to "our national hero" Pratâp Singh, who
never could be brought to submission. Once indeed he was tempted to
give in, at that moment when having fled from Chitore and the queen
herself having cooked the scanty evening meal, a hungry cat swooped
down on that cake of bread which was the children's portion, and the
King of Mewar heard his babies cry for food. Then, indeed, the strong
heart of the man failed him. The prospect of ease and relief tempted
him. And for a moment he thought of ceasing from the unequal conflict
and sending his alliance to Akbar, only for an instant. The Eternal
Will protects its own. Even as the picture passed before his mind,
there appeared a messenger with those despatches from a famous Rajput
chief that said, "There is but one left amongst us who has kept his
blood free from admixture with the alien. Let it never be said that his
head has touched the dust". And the soul of Pratap drew in the long
breath of courage and renewed faith; and he arose and swept the country
of its foes and made his own way back to Udaipur.

Then there was the wonderful tale of the virgin princess
Krishna Kumâri, whose hand was sought by various royal suitors at once.
And when three armies were at the gate, her father could think of
nothing better than to give her poison. The task was entrusted to her
uncle, and he entered her room, as she lay asleep, to do it. But at the
sight of her beauty and youth, remembering her too as a baby, the
soldier's heart failed him, and he could not perform his task. But she
was awakened by some sound, and being told what was proposed, stretched
out her hand for the cup and drank the poison with a smile. And so on,
and so on. For the stories of Rajput heroes in this kind are endless.

AUGUST 20.

On Saturday the Swami and he whose name was Soong went to the
Dahl Lake to be the guests of the American consul and his wife for a
couple of days. They returned on Monday, and on Tuesday the Swami came
up to the new Math, as we called it, and had his boat moved close by
ours so that he could be with us for a few days before leaving for
Ganderbal.

^Sanâtana,
the famous Sannyâsin disciple of Shri Chaitanya of Bengal who gave up
his office of minister to the nawab of Bengal to become a religious
devotee.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/excerpts_from_sister_niveditas_book/concluding_words.htm


 ←
Home
/ Complete-Works
/ Volume 9 /
Excerpts
from Sister Nivedita’s Book
/ →

CONCLUDING WORDS OF THE EDITOR

From Ganderbal the Swami returned by the first week of October
and announced his intention of leaving for the plains in a few days for
urgent reasons. The European party had already made plans to visit the
principal cities of northern India, e.g., Lahore, Delhi, Agra, etc., as
soon as the winter set in. So both parties decided to return together
and came to Lahore. From here the Swami and his party returned to
Calcutta, leaving the rest to carry out their plans for sight-seeing in
northern India.



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/newspaper_reports/part_i_american_newspaper_reports/american_newspaper_contents.htm


 ←
Home / Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Newspaper
Reports
/ →

American Newspaper Reports

Calcutta 1897

***

Note 

Chicago
Newspapers, September 11, 1893 

Chicago
Record, September 11, 1893 

Chicago
Inter Ocean, September 21, 1893 

New
York Critic, November 11, 1893 

Daily
Cardinal, November 21, 1893 

Daily
Iowa Capitol, November 28, 1893 

Iowa
State Register, November 28, 1893 

Daily
Iowa Capitol, November 29, 1893 

Iowa
State Register, November 30, 1893 

Des
Moines Daily News, November 30, 1893 

Daily
Iowa Capitol, November 30, 1893 

Iowa
State Register, December 1, 1893 

Minneapolis
Journal, December 15, 1893 

Minneapolis
Tribune, December 15, 1893 

Detroit
Tribune, February 18, 1894 

Detroit
Tribune, February 19, 1894 

Detroit
Journal, February 23, 1894 

Detroit
Evening News, February 25, 1894 

Detroit
Tribune, March 11, 1894 

Detroit
Tribune, March 20, 1894 

Detroit
Evening News, March 21, 1894 

Bay
City Times Press, March 21, 1894 

Saginaw
Evening News, March 21, 1894 

The Lynn
Daily Evening Item, (Date?) 

New
York Daily Tribune, April 25, 1894 

Smith
College Monthly, May 1894 

New
York Daily Tribune, May 3, 1894 

Evening
Tribune, May 16, 1894 

Lawrence
American and Andover Advertiser, May 18, 1894 

Boston
Evening Transcript, August 11, 1894 

Greenacre
Voice, 1894 

Boston
Evening Transcript, August 15, 1894 

Baltimore
American, October 13, 1894 

Baltimore
News, October 13, 1894 

Baltimore
Sunday Herald, October 14, 1894 

Washington
Times, October 29, 1894 

Washington
Times, November 2, 1894 

Baltimore
News, November 3, 1894 

Daily
Eagle, April 8, 1895 

New
York World, December 8, 1895 

New
York Herald, January 19, 1896 

Hartford
Daily Times, February 1, 1896 

Tribune,
March 5, 1896 

News
Tribune, March 16, 1896 

Boston
Evening Transcript, March 21, 1896 

Boston
Daily Globe, March 24, 1896 

Boston
Evening Transcript, March 27, 1896 

Boston
Evening Transcript, March 30, 1896 

Los
Angeles Times, December 9, 1899 

Los
Angeles Times, December 13, 1899 

Los
Angeles Herald, December 13, 1899 

Los
Angeles Herald, January 3, 1900 

Los
Angeles Times, January 17, 1900 

Los
Angeles Herald, January 26, 1900 

Unity,
February (?) 1900 

San
Francisco Chronicle, February 24, 1900 

Oakland
Tribune, February 26, 1900 

The
Alameda Encinal, April 5, 1900



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/newspaper_reports/part_ii_european_newspaper_reports/european_newspaper_contents.htm


 ←
Home / Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Newspaper
Reports
/ →

European Newspaper Reports

Calcutta 1897

***

Maidenhead
Adviser, October 23, 1895 

Standard,
October 23, 1895 

London
Morning Post, October 23, 1895 

Christian
Commonwealth, November 14, 1895 

The
Queen, November 23, 1895 

Daily
Chronicle, May 14, 1896 

Light, July 4, 1896 

Light,
October  28, 1896 



# Page: https://www.ramakrishnavivekananda.info/vivekananda/volume_9/newspaper_reports/part_iii_indian_newspaper_reports/indian_newspaper_contents.htm


 ←
Home / Complete-Works
/ Volume 9
/ Newspaper
Reports
/ →

Indian Newspaper Reports

Calcutta 1897

***

Madura
Mail, January 28, 1893 

The
Indian Mirror, November 28, 1893 

The
Indian Mirror, December 7, 1893 

The
Indian Mirror, June 14, 1894 

The
Indian Mirror, July 20, 1894 

The
Bengalee, May 18, 1895 

The
Indian Mirror, June 29, 1895 

The
Indian Mirror, December 1, 1895 

The
Indian Mirror, March 25, 1896 

The
Indian Mirror, June 19, 1896 

The
Brahmavadin, July 18, 1896 

The
Indian Mirror, September 22, 1896 

The
Journal of the Maha-Bodhi Society, November, 1896 

The
Indian Mirror, December 16, 1896 

The
Amrita Bazar Patrika, January 8, 1897 

The
Amrita Bazar Patrika, January 20, 1897 

The
Indian Mirror, February 24, 1898 

The
Indian Mirror, April 24, 1898 

The
Indian Mirror, February 15, 1901 

The
Indian Social Reformer, June 16, 1901 

