THE PANCAPADIKA 


OF 

padmapAda 

(Translated INTO English) 


BY 

Rajasevasakta 

D/ VENKA TARAMIAH, B.A., L.T. 
Formerly Mysore Educational Service 


ORIENTAL INSTITUTE 
BARODA 

■ im 



IJ Bu..\ •' '/y 

Data# . . * ■ ; ' ■ ■■ . 


Oftll No. 




i,. 



PRINTED AT THE BANGALORE PRESS, BANGALORE CITY, 

BY G. SRINIVASA RAO, SUPERINTENDENT, AND PUBLISHED 
ON BEHALF OP THE GOVERNMENT OP HIS HIGHNESS THE MAHARAJA 
GAEKWAD OF BARODA 

BY BENOYTOSH BHATTACHARYYA, DIRECTOR, ORIENTAL INSTITUTE. 
AT THE ORIENTAL INSTITUTE, BARODA 


Price: Rs- 17 



FOREWORD 


The famous Vedanta polemical work, Pancapadika of 
Padmapadacarya in English translation is now presented to all 
lovers of Indian Philosophy as No. CVII of the Gaekwad's Oriental 
Series. The publication of this work is a melancholy story 
since the esteemed translator, the late Rajasevasakta Sri. D. 
Venkataramiah, died as soon as arrangements were made to print 
his book at the Bangalore Press, Bangalore. Before his death he 
was very anxious to have the book printed, and always reminded 
us that delay might kill him. The work was first entrusted under 
Government orders to the Sadhana Press, Baroda, but this press, 
hardpressed with work, could not make any headway even after 
a lapse of full one year. Thereafter, Mr. Venkataramiah him- 
self fixed the Bangalore Press for printing his work, and this 
printer within a short time set up nearly a hundred galleys in type. 
These galleys were sent to the editor without delay, but by that 
time Mr. Venkataramiah was too ill to revise the proofs. That 
illness proved to be his last illness and he expired on Friday, 13th 
June 1947, at the ripe old age of 81, and thus India lost a great 
scholar, a profound philosopher and above all, a gentleman of 
very high qualities and character. We were associated with 
Mr. Venkataramiah for the last ten years or more, and we shall 
ever remember with appreciation and admiration his great 
desire to help us in difficulties, his remarkable promptitude in 
disposing of business and the uniform courtesy that was inherent 
in him. 

The late Mr. Venkataramiah was conscious that he was old 
and that he may collapse at any time. In order that the printing of 
the work may not suffer in any way, he requested his friend and 
associate, Mr. D. V. Gundappa, a well-known political, literary 
and social worker of Mysore, to examine the proofs of the 
Pancapadika in case anything happened to him. But alas ! the 
worst happened, and the author passed away leaving the heavy 
responsibility of printing this complicated work to others. Those 
were the days of intense political excitement and activity in the 
State of Mysore, as throughout the rest of India ; and 
Mr. Gundappa, being an old public worker, could not but go 
forward to take his share in the struggle. This necessarily meant 
the diversion of his attention from the unexciting pages of the 



Pancapadika which asked rather for concentration of attention. 
After he had gone through the first 30 or 40 pages, Mr. Gundappa 
saw that he was in a situation likely to make for delay if he 
continued to retain the responsibility for proof-reading; arid it 
. was thereupon agreed that the General Editor should take overi 
the responsibility. _ 

The General Editor would assure the readers that he has. 
performed his part to the best of his ability. His only regret is 
that the proofs of this great and standard philosophical work 
could not be examined either by the late author, Mr. Venkata'^ 
ramiah, or his nominee, Mr. D. V. Gundappa. 

The late Mr. Venkataramiah spared ho pains in making the 
translation perfect. He not only translated the most difficult 
Vedantic text of Pancapadifca but followed the subtle differentia- 
tion in elaboratehotes from the Yivarana at every step. Besides 
this in a detailed conspectus he gave exhaustive notes with original 
quotations from Vedantic works and copious comparisons of topics 
and views of the greatest authorities on Vedanta. The material 
presented in this volume with the critical acumen exhibited by 
the translator at every step is bound to make the volume a standard 
work on the subject and an outstanding contribution to Vedanta. 
Philosophy. 

At our request Mr. D. V. Gundappa has contributed a bio- 
graphical note on the late Rajasevasakta §ri. D. Venkataramiah, 
and this is printed as part of the preliminary pages, and for this 
act of courtesy, grateful thanks- of the General Editor to 
Mr. Gundappa are recorded here. 

It is not possible to close this Foreword without a reference 
to the author, Padmapada, who.is the founder of what is known as 
the Vivarana school of Vedanta, as running parallel to the Bhamati 
School started somewhat later by the famous scholar, Vacaspati 
Misra. It is hardly necessary to state that Padmapada was a 
direct disciple of Sarikaracarya, the founder of what is called the 
• Advaita school of Vedanta. Sarikaracarya’s teachings are in- 
corporated in the Sariraka Bha§ya on the Vedanta Sutras of 
Badarayapa, and subsequently Sankara’s original teachings were 
interpreted differently by two different schools of thought, one 
headed by our author, Padmapada, and the other by Vacaspati 
MiSra as already alluded to. A large literature grew round 
the works of these two authors, and they were known by the 
names of the Vivarapa and Bhamati schools of Vedanta. 



course of time, the Vivarana school seems to have 
fallen into desuetude as compared with its rival; and for this, two 
reasons at least are clearly discernible; (l).The basic text of the 
Vivarana school, namely, the Pancapadika, is available only in the 
form of a fragment while that of the other (Bhamati) is in its 
complete form. The general student of Sankara’s philosophy 
would naturally prefer that Vyakhyana which covers the Bhasya 
on all the 555 sutras to that which is unfortunately found limited 
to just four of them. It is not unreasonable to assume that the 
Bhasyakara’s mind is more fully brought out in the Bhamati which 
deals with the sutra topics from A to Z than in the extant fraction 
of the Pancapadika, whatever be the relative merits of the two 
Vyakhyanas which it should be only for specialists to take into 
account. To the average student, both alike represent Sankara’s 
Advaita; and their interpretative distinctions are to him merely 
a technical matter. Unlike Padmapada whose known achieve- 
ment is only in the field of one Darsana, Vacaspati the author of 
Bhamati has to his credit works of recognised authority in all the 
six Darsanas. His works in Nyaya, Samkhya and Purvamimamsa 
have earned for him a prestige which naturally magnifies his 
stature in the realm of the Vedanta. This is an advantage not 
matched in the case of Padmapada. In addition to these two 
facts, we may also note that some scholars hold the view that 
while Vacaspati (Bhamati) scrupulously keeps close to the letter 
of the Sankara Bhasya, Padmapada (Pancapadika) tries to supple- 
ment the original with something of his own thought in the process 
of clarification and argument. This impression of Bhamati’s 
greater literal approximation to the original may be another 
reason for Vivarapa’s comparative lack of popularity. 

On the other hand, thinkers and writers of no inferior stand- 
ing mindful of the doctrinal possibilities of the Sankara Bhasya 
have looked upon the Vivarapa (Pancapadika) literature as an 
invaluable source of light and guidance. This should be evident 
when it is recalled that among the contributors to this literature is 
the great Madhava Vidyaranya, author of the Vivarana-prameya- 
sangraha as of the more popular Vedanta Pancadasi. The 
question of the place of the Vivarana school in the history of 
Advatitc thought is one that awaits the attention of the researcher. 

Padmapada’s work and all commentaries thereon are thus 
of academic and antiquarian interest, as they are undoubtedly of 
unique interest to the student of pure philosophy; and if proper 



care is not taken to preserve this literature it is quite possible that 
the school will be relegated to the limbo of oblivion in the course 
of another century. Whether the Indian Papdits and the Sanskrit 
Pathasalas will make a renewed attempt to revive this forgotten 
school, time alone can say. But there is no doubt that Padma- 
pada’s arguments are sound and have a strong appeal, and his 
painstaking interpretations with hair splitting differentiations wilt 
certainly excite the admiration of succeeding generations with 
unabated vigour. The hairline subtleties of his writings perhaps 
can only be compared with the critical analysis resorted to in the 
Navya Nyaya school of later times. 

Being a direct disciple of the great saint Sahkaracarya there is 
hardly any difficulty in fixing Padmapada’s age. Sahkaracarya 
according to tradition lived for 32 years, and painstaking research 
has shown that this period was covered by the years 788-820 A.D. 
Thus Padmapada’s time can be precisely fixed at 820 A.D. and 
scholars have generally agreed on this point. Our author 
Padmapada is reputed to have written two works both of which 
have fortunately survived. One of them is the Pancapadika which 
is a commentary on the Sankara BhSsya on the first four sutras 
of the Brahma Sutras. The name Pancapadika however sug- 
gests that the original commentary was obviously on five sutras, 
out of which one was lost subsequently. 

In his introduction to the Siddhanta Bindu {G.O.S. No. LXIV) 
on p. xci the editor Mr. P. C. Divanji has recorded an interesting 
story explaining the circumstances under which part of Padma- 
pada’s book was lost. 

The legend goes on to say that when Padmapada had finished 
his task of composing the full text of the Pancapadika he was 
seized with a desire to go out on a pilgrimage. Before he could 
put that idea into practice he went to his guru like an obedient 
disciple for permission to leave. Sankara at first was not willing to 
let him go, W as he was insistent, he ultimately gave permission 
much against his wishes. Padmapada started on his journey 
all the time carrying the Pancapadika along with him. On the 
way to Ramesvaram he halted at the house of his maternal uncle 
who was a follower of the Prabhakara School of Mimamsa. 
To this uncle Padmapada showed his Pancapadika wherein he 
had refuted Prabhakara and supported the Sankara view-points. 
Thereafter he left for Rame§varam leaving all his belongings with 
his uncle including his new book Pancapadika. 



ix 


In his absence, the uncle thought that if Pancapadika gains 
publicity and popularity it will injure his master’s doctrines which 
may ultimately go out of currency. Thinking thus he hit upon 
the trick of destroying the manuscript by setting fire to his own 
house. Padmapada informed his master about this disaster on 
his return, and bitterly regretted having gone out on pilgrimage 
against his advice. The latter thereupon dictated to him the 
Catussutri portion of the work which he remembered. That 
accounts for the incompleteness of the present work if this legend 
can be trusted. 

The second work attributed to Padmapada is the Atmabodha- 
vyakhyana, also called the Vedaritasara. Although he had left 
us two works his reputation is based on the sure foundation of 
the Pancapadika. 

According to Dr. Das Gupta this Pancapadika is one of the 
most important of the Vedanta works known to us. It was 
commented upon by Prakasatman (A.D. 1200) in his Pancapadika- 
vivarana, which was later further commented upon by Akhai^da- 
nanda (A.D. 1350) in his Tattvadipana. Anandapurna 
(A.D. 1600), another famous author, wrote a commentary on the 
Pancapadika. Dr. Das Gupta informs us that l^risimhasrama 
wrote a commentary on the Pancapadika-Vivarana entitled 
Pancapadika-vivara9a-praka§ika while another old author 
Srlkrsria composed a further commentary on the Pancapadika. 
Among other writers on Vivarapa may be mentioned the names 
of Ramananda Sarasvati, the author of Vivaranopanyasa, and 
of Vidyaranya author of Vivarariaprameyasamgraha. In this long 
line of Vivarana authors Ramananda is perhaps the last great 
scholar. Dr. Das Gupta places him in the early part of the 17th 
century on arguments which appear to be sound.^ 

General Editor. 


^ For further details and elaborate discussion on the subtle differentiations 
existing between the two schools Vivarana and Bhamati, see remarks of Dr. S. N. 
Das Gupta: A History of Indian Philosophy, Volume II, p. 102 ff. (Padmapada) 
and 106 ff. (Vacaspati Mi^ra). It is unnecessary to dilate on them here. 

A study of the contribution of the Vivarapa School to Advaitic theory is 
contained in The Philosophy of Advaita: with Special Reference to Bharatitirtha - 
Vidyarapya, by Dr. T. M. P. Mahadevan of Madras. 




A BIOGRAPHICAL NOTE ON 
THE LATE RAJASEVASAKTA SRi. D. VENKATARAMIAH 

Mr. D. VenkatarAMIah, author of the English version of the 
Pancapadika herein offered to the public, was born in October 26, 
1867. He came of an orthodox Brahmin family of Mysore and 
grew amidst living traditions of devotion to the disciplines of 
religion and learning. The struggle he had to put up so as to 
keep himself at school and college was another factor that contri- 
buted to his strength of character. Soon after taking the B.A. 
degree he joined service under the Government of Mysore in 
. 1893, and the next year saw him in the position of Assistant Master 
in the Normal School at Mysore. It is illustrative of the serious- 
ness with which he always regarded the duties of his office that 
he sought to qualify himself the better for the teaching profession 
by taking the L.T. course at the Training College at Saidapet 
(Madras), It was there that he met the late Rt.-Hon. V. S. Srinivasa 
Sastri as a fellow-student. The friendship they formed there 
grew with years and proved a source of comfort and strength 
to both alike in days of old age. In 1896 Mr. Venkataramiah 
was transferred to the Maharani’s College where classes had to 
be taken in English literature; and with characteristic zeal he 
prepared himself by equipping himself with a library of standard 
works on Shakespeare and Wordsworth and other great poets 
and studying them with conscientious diligence. He was pro- 
. moted to the headmastership of the Normal School in 1913; and 
then to the principalship of the Training College- in 1916. - He 
was made Circle Inspector of Education in 1919 and Deputy 
Inspector-General (Director) of Education in 1922. He retired 
from service in June 1923. In appreciation of his manifold ser- 
vices to the public in the fields of education and learning, the title 
of Rajasevasakta was conferred on Mr. Venkataramiah by His 
Highness the Maharaja of Mysore at a Durbar in June 1944. He 
died on Friday, the 13th of June 1947, in his 81st year, in his house 
in Basavangudi, Bangalore City. The first sheaf of the press- 
proofs of this work (Pancapadika) reached Mr. Venkataramiah’s 
hands 4 or 5 days prior to his passing. He was then too ill to' go 
through them. But he eagerly ran his eyes over them and expressed 
appreciation of the typography and format of the pages, and said 



xii 


(in Kannada) : “ May this be for Sri Rama’s acceptance ! (Sn 
Rama-arpita)." These were practically his very last words. 

Even when pressed for time in the midst of his onerous and 
multifarious duties as an administrative officer, he always made 
it a point to find time for his studies in Sanskrit and English 
literature and in philosophy. He sought the company of Pandits 
and took delight in their discourses on topics of religion and 
philosophy. 

As teacher and professor, as Inspector and Principal, he won 
the respect and gratitude of all by his conscientious devotion to 
duty and his unfailing gifts of sympathy and understanding. A 
keen student of literature and philosophy, he had no difficulty 
in finding work for his hands in days of retirement. He continued 
to serve the cause of education as a member of the Text-Book 
Committee, as the Chairman of the Local Education Board and 
as an influentiaT member of many such public bodies, besides 
giving his services as honorary professor to a local College. He 
continued to find delight in the pages of the Bible and Shakespeare 
as well as of Valmiki and Vy§sa. For some 12 years he was the 
President of the Association of Pandits which was founded and 
built up largely through his effort. He was also one of the founders 
of the Sanskrit Academy of Bangalore, to which institution he 
has made a gift of his collection of Sanskrit books. The most 
enduring monument to his learning and love of service to fellow- 
men is in his insightful and well-phrased English, renderings of 
some of the principal Upanisads and other celebrated Sanskrit 
philosophical treatises. His translation of Parthasarathi Mi§ra’s 
“ Sastra-DTpika ” into English was published in the Caefcwfld 
Oriental Series eight years ago. These works testify to his 
conscientious care as well as to the deftness of his workmanship 
in clarifying the intricacies of Vedantic polemics and suiting the 
vehicle of a foreign tongue to convey the subtleties of Sanskrit 
philosophical thought. Clean from every point of view through- 
out his career, gentle and forbearing, free from vanity and ostenta- 
tion, with a temperament trained to equanimity and calm, 
Mr. D. Venkataramiah lived the twofold Dharma of self-culture 
(SvadhySya) and teaching (Pravacana) prescribed to a Brahmaria. 

March 8, 7948. 


D. V. Gundappa. 


INTRODUCTION 


*r f?rr%|;3gf II 

—R.V., I. 164. 39. 

What gain to him is all this Vedic lore 
That comprehendeth not the That-The Lord ? 

But they that Him do comprehend for sure 
Shall tranquil rest in Him for evermore. 

I 

The Pancapadika is a gloss on Samkara’s Sutra-Bhasya 
(I. i. 1-4). Padmapada, its author, was one of the favourite 
disciples of iSamkara, the others being Suresvara, Hastamalaka 
and Trojaka. The names well known to posterity are only those 
of Padmapada and Suresvara. The main source of information 
from which we could get to know the circumstances under which 
the PancapMika was written is the ^amkara-digvijaya attributed 
to Vidyaranya and though we may not place implicit faith on 
its authenticity, we need not altogether discredit the account. 

It is stated that at the request of Suresvara, Samkara gave 
him permission to write a commentary on his Bha§ya. The 
friends of PadmapSda pleaded before Samkara that Mandana^ 
(the pre-ascetic appellation of Suresvara) should not be entrusted 
with the task of writing an authoritative commentary on the 
Bhasya. They argued that having been an ardent upholder of 
the teaching of the Karma Kanda which attaches ultimate value 
to ritualistic practice, he would minimise if not altogether suppress 
the importance of jnana as the only means of liberation. They 
feared that he would pervert the pure Vedantic doctrine and 
accordingly recommended Padmapada as best fitted to be en- 
trusted with the work of expounding the Bha§ya since his absolute 
faith in the Guru had been evidenced when, as the tradition goes, 

^ The identity of Mandanamilra with Suresvara has been of late 
questioned. — See Prof. Kuppaswami Sastri’s Introduction to Brahma- 
siddhi of Mandana. 



xiv 


in obedience to the master’s call he stepped across the Ganges on 
whose bosom miraculously sprang up lotuses to serve as his foot- 
hold; (hence the name Padmapada). 

Samkara though he was convinced of the competency of 
Suresvara to interpret the Advaitic doctrine in its purity, yielded 
to the importunities of those who discredited Suresvara. He 
consequently commissioned Sanandana (the ascetic name of 
Padmapada) to write the sub-commentary (Nibandhana) but 
assigned to Suresvara the composition of Vartikas on the 
Brhadaranyaka and Taittiriya Upanisads bringing out in full the 
essentials of the Advaita system. From these Vartikas and also 
from his Naiskarmyasiddhi, an independent work with its powerfull 
advocacy of knowledge dissociated from ritual as the only means 
of freedom, we see how groundless was the charge of those fellow- 
disciples who suspected Sure^vara’s bias to the Karma doctrine. 

Padmapada’s commentary on the Bhasya is known as the 
Jika,^ the first part being styled the Pancapadika, the rest Vrtti. 
From internal evidence it is perceived that Padmapada in all 
probability wrote his gloss on the entire Bhasya but what is left 
to us is only the Tika relating to the Bhasya on Badaraya^a- 
Sutras, I. i. 1-4.® 

After completing his work Padmapada sought permission 
from the master, it is said, to travel south on a pilgrimage to 
Ramesvaram and though warned against the dangers incidental 
to, such a long journey, he wrested Samkara’s consent and pro- 
ceeded on his travels taking his work with him. On his way he 
reached his uncle’s house. This uncle of his who was a staunch 
follower of Prabhakara — the famous exponent of the ritualistic 
doctrine of one school of PQrvamImamsa — naturally felt aggrieved 
at the attack made in the Pancapadika on the Prabhakara teaching 
but without revealing his mind complimented his nephew on his 

^ Ramananda in his commentary on l§amkara-bha§ya — Sri Venka- 
teswara Press, Bonibay — p. 13,. quotes the passage from p. 4 of PP.— ■ 

— ^which he calls the Jika. 

® References to the Vrtti found in Pancapadika are : — 

P. 29— T%5vrci< sicrerraMw: 

„ 30— infTT45T55rW flUT , 

. , „,75— g a[5r erw 

» 88— eruiN F. 5'. I. iii, 26 ff. . 



erudition. Padmapada left his work with him exhorting him to 
keep it safe till his return from Ramesvaram. The uncle knew, 
he could not controvert the Pancapadika view by arguments and 
resolved therefore to destroy the work as otherwise he felt sure that 
his school of thought would stand discredited. To escape csnsure 
he set fire to his own house and with it perished the Pancapadika.^ 

Returning to his master who had by then travelled south to 
Kerala, Padmapada in great distress related how his work had 
been destroyed by fire in his uncle’s house. Samkara consoled 
him by dictating the Tika on the first five padas {i.e., four sections 
of the first chapter and the fifth section of the second chapter) — 
verbatim as he had heard that portion read to him while they were 
in Srngeri (S.D., p. 505). Since the Tika on the first five padas 
was restored and the work still bears the name Pancapadika it is 
difficult to account for the loss of all but the gloss on I. 1-4. 
Vidyaranya is silent on the point and even so early as the time 
of Prakasatman (950 A.D.) the author of the Vivarana, the work 
appears to have suffered this further mutilation. 

Being the earliest commentary on Samkara-bhasya the 
Pancapadika even in its abridged form deserves a careful study by 
every student of Advaita philosophy. It sets forth the funda- 
mental doctrines of the system, in particular that bearing on 
superimposition or adhyasa which is pivotal to the Vedantic non- 
dualism as taught by Samkara. We have in it an epistemological 
discussion of high value to students of modern philosophy. 
Samkara’s exposition of adhyasa is brief, though lucid, as all his 
writings are but the elaboration and the rebuttal of other schools 
were left to Padmapada. The rival doctrines of the Naiyayikas, 
the Bhattas, the Prabhakaras, the Vijnanavadins and the 
Madhyamikas of the Budhistic school are all subjected to a search- 
ing examination and refuted with great argumentative skill. This 
exposition of adhyasa-bhasya occupies nearly half the present 
work. We shall give below a brief outline of this and other allied 
problems discussed in the Pancapadika'.^ 


^ Vidyaranya says that he is not quite sure of the authenticity of 
this incident but that he is relying only on report- -5.D., p. 495, SI. 116, 
2 The first four Sutras, on the Bhajya of which, Padmapada has 
commented may be regarded as embracing the essentials of the 
philosophy of Advaita. I have accordingly thought fit to include 
a brief discussion of the more fundamental doctrines of the system* 



xVi . 

II . 

Samkara, it is well known, prefaces the Bhasya on the first 
aphorism of Badarayana with an exposition of illusory knowledge. 
Though the subject of illusion seems at first sight to stand out- 
side the purview of the Vedanta Sutras, in the Bhasya it is shown 
that the idea is not an adventitious element but is implicit in the 
Sutra itself. According to the Sutra— ‘ athato Brahmajijnasa ’, 
jnana as implied in the word jijnasa, is the means to the attainment 
of Brahman or moksa which is no other than freedom from bond- 
age. If however, the bondage were real jnana would not be 
efficacious. Its only function in this respect is to remove ajnana 
or ignorance. Hence bondage must be illusory — mithya ; in 
other words it is on the supposition that bondage is not real but 
mithya that Badarayana should have composed the first sutra. 

The Pahcapadika as already stated is expositofy of Samkara- 
bhasya and as such it gives at the outset a detailed account of 
superimposition— adhyasa, which is the very crux of the Vedanta 
philosophy. 

It is within common experience that knowledge as given by 
the senses is at times erroneous and does not correspond to the 
object from which it has arisen. To mention only a far palpable 
instances of false knowledge or misapprehension, a piece of shell 
is taken for silver, a pollard at a distance for a man, a sinuous 
bit of rope for a serpent. Now the problem is how to distinguish 
between truth and error. There is a sharp distinction among 
thinkers— whether Realists or Idealists, in their exposition of 
error. Each of these views is riddled with difficulties. Let us 
take the shell-silver illustration. How could silver appear as being 
out there if it were unreal ? The unreal like a barren woman’s son 
or sky-flower never comes within cur experience. If to avoid this 
difficulty we assume that the silver as seen in the nacre is real how 
could it be altogether sublated later ? No real thing in our expe- 
rience vanishes without leaving something of it behind. Hence 
in the error-situation we have been considering we can neither 
deny the silver completely nor affirm it completely. The truth 
must lie, it is clear, between these two extreme positions, in a 
teftium quid. There are only two ways then of explaining the 
object of error. It should be real as Well as unreal, or neither. 
The former explanation must be ruled out as involving self- 
contradiction since we cannot predicate both reality and unreality , 



—sat and asat, of one and the same thing. We are therefore 
forced to adopt the second view, viz., that it is neither sat nor asat 
and this is the Advaitic position— the object of error is an appear- 
ance only. 

Now an appearance must be an appearance of something, 
J.C., objects of error must point to a ground of which they are the 
appearance as does the silver to the shell or the serpent to the 
rope. It is on this analogy and on the authority of the scriptural 
texts like ‘ neha nanasti kincana ’—variety here is novK—Katha 
Up., II. i. 11, that the advaitin arrives at the conclusion that 
Brahman is the sole reality and that the object-world is its appear- 
ance. It is clear from the above that the world is not held to 
be absolutely lacking in reality— asat, as the critics often assert. 
Even the dream-state, however, short its duration is real in its 
own sphere, and the empirical life— samsara, does not forego its 
claim to reality till the final release from bondage. 

Samkara however establishes the theory of superimposition 
by analysing the concept of the ego— ‘ aham ’. The ego is a 
complex entity involving the sentient as well as the non-sentient 
element — the self and the not-self, i.e., of the Witness (Saksin) 
and the internal organ (antalikarapa). According to one school 
of thought, viz., that of Kumarila, self-consciousness is literally 
true — mam aham janami — The ego can be both subject and 
object in the same knowledge. He holds that the self can actually 
know itself. The criticism against this theory is that atman in 
that case is both sentient and non-sentient and as such would 
consist of parts — savayava — and therefore would be non-eternal. 
According to Prabhakara the ego itself is the integral self and 
that in every cognition there are three elements, ‘triputi’ — the 
knower, the knowing and the known, where the act of knowing 
reveals not only the known {i.e., the object) but also the knower.^ 

^ 3TRHI nwifrfilN ^ 34 ff., Nirnayasagara 

Press. — Though atman is inert, says Prabhakara it is karta and not 
karma as held by the Bhattas. 

Vacaspati refutes the Prabhakara view that the object and the self 
are both inert and that the light of consciousness (Samvit) having the 
self (atman) as its locus illumines the object. He points out that it is 
not inevitable that the self and the objait should be illuminated 
merely on the ground that consciousness is self-luminous. The argument 
that consciousness being occasioned by the presence of the self and 
the object (ntrrat and nn^r) tnust illumine them is met by the 



xviii 

Others like the Samkyas hold that it cannot and that what- 
ever is known or knowable is /pso /acto different from the self. 
The advaitin’s analysis is the same except for the fact that he 
explains the not-self element as an appearance of or superimposed 
on the self. The reason for declaring the not-self as illusory — 

‘ mithya ’ is that it is in every respect opposed to the self and that 
two such CO trary things cannot be in actual association with each 
other, and in consequence their coming together which is a fact 
of experience must be illusory. But error as exemplified by the 
rope-serpent has as a necessary precondition of it, ignorance of the 
true nature of its ground. A person who knows for certain that 
what, lies before him is a rope will never mistake it for a serpent. 
Hence it is concluded that the objective world (drsya) which on the 
above reasoning is mithya, must have as its source ignorance, of 
its ground, viz., Brahman—this is the congenital source of error. 

Now the doctrine of adhyasa is opposed by the Naiyayikas 
including the Bhatta Mlmamsakas and the Samkhyas (with whom 
the Mimamsist Prabhakaras agree) on the ground that the silver 
appearing in the shell is real and is not sublated when the know- 
ledge of the locus, vfz., shell, arises. The Vijnanavadins of the 
Buddhist persuasion hold that adhyasa is nothing more than 
consciousness taking shape outside of one’s self even when such 
shape does not correspond to an object, while the Madhyamika 
Buddhist regards the so-called external world which includes cases 
coming under adhyasa as blank or sunya. • These explanations 
of error the object of which is somehow to show the untenability 
of adhyasa are known respectively as anyathakhyati or viparita- 
khyati of (Kumarila), akhyati, atraakhyati, and asatkhyati. They 

facetious remark that this reasoning is as cogent as the inference that 
because the son is learned the father should also be learned. He 
finally comes to the conclusion that consciousness is not something 
distinct from the self, but that the self itself (atman) is of the nature 
of consciousness. No difference exists between the self, the substrate 
of consciousness and consciousness itself. 

To the objection that the impartite atman cannot be the substrate 
of the superimposed object since in all cases of superimposition the 
substrate is partly known and partly unknown, the answer is that the 
manifestation of unit-consciousness, say ‘this is silver’ is possible when 
there is non-difference between the insentient object and samvit and 
this non-difference can, be explained only on the basis of superimpo- 
sition of the object on the pure consciousness (^^), 



XIX 


are discussed in detail and their defects exposed in the Pancapadika. 
There is no need therefore to restate the arguments by which the 
opposing theories have been met. The reader may be referred 
to the conspectus prefixed to the translation. Residually it is 
pointed out that adhyasa is inexplicable^ — either as real or unreal 
— sadasadanirvacaniya. What it means is that the silver in the 
shell is neither real nor unreal, nor both real and unreal. It belongs 
to a different order of being. Its existence is conterminous with 
illusion and it takes its exit with the rise of right knowledge. None 
of the solutions offered by other schools accounts satisfactorily for 
the presentation of silver in the nacre. Perhaps it may be desirable 
to refer to the theories formulated since the time of Padmapada 
with a view to point out whether they are more tenable. 

The later exponents of the Vedantasutras like Ramanuja and 
Madhva who are also opposed to the doctrine of adhyasa explain 
the erroneous cognition under consideration each in his own way. 
Ramanuja maintains that all perceptions are true and that conse- 
quently there is no reason to question the reality of their contents. 
On the basis of quintuplication (Pancikarana) be argues that 
every thing in the world possesses the characteristics of every 
other thing. His doctrine of error is known as sat-vada the 
essence of which is that every cognition in any situation has its 
objective counterpart and that it is meaningless to hold that any 
cognition could arise in the absence of a corresponding object. 
What we should notice here is that the explanation of illusion is 
applicable to normal presentation of objects as well as of the 
supposed illusory cognitions. If it be asked how in that case the 
well-known distinction between truth and error (prama and 
bhrama) is to be accounted for Ramanuja’s answer is that that 
knowledge is bhrama, the object of which is for one reason or 
another not serviceable for purposes of life, e.g., the knowledge 
of shell-silver passes for a bhrama, not because it does not point 
to actual silver but because the silver element apprehended in it 
is too small to be of practical use, say in the making of a bangle. 
Even though the object of cognition here is real as in the sphere of 
normal perception, it fails to satisfy a pragmatic test. The point 
however is whether silver at all exists in the shell even as its 
infinitesimal fraction. This account of error also contradicts 
experience since it is assumed that when the sight is blurred by 
some defect one perceives the minute constituents of an object 
^ut when it is sound one perceives the grosser constituents. 



XX 


As regards dream-cognitions where objects are private 
Ramanuja true to his realistic bias offers an explanation which 
while it may satisfy the faithful appears to be far from cogent. 
He says that God actually creates dream-objects for enabling 
one to reap the fruit one’s karma just as he creates sensible objects 
for enjoyment in the waking state. The dream-experience as it 
were, supplements the waking experience. Explanations of other 
cases of illusory cognitions like ‘yellow conch etc., partake of 
the same unscientific character. 

The Dvaita which is equally realistic as the Visistadvaita 
explains error more or less like the Nyaya. The Naiyayika holds 
that though the serpent is not where it is seen, is somewhere else. 
Madhva however is of opinion that it is neither here nor anywhere 
else so that the non-existent appears as the existent. This is the 
misconception (anyathakhyati) involved in error according to him. 
The explanation stops there and does not proceed as in the 
anyatha-khyati of the Naiyayikas to account for sense-contact 
by what is known as ‘ alaukika-sannikarsa ’ or super-normal 
relation. It is a new kind of anyatha-khyati and is termed 
‘ abhinava anyatha-khyati ’. The central point in Madhva’s 
explanation is that the non-existent is apprehensible. This is a 
position hardly intelligible unless we suppose that the meaning 
of the word (concept) is mistaken for the corresponding thing. 
We cannot say that we know the non-existent simply because we 
understand the’meaning of the word ‘ asat ’. 

Ramanuja has tried to maintain that the silver experienced 
in illusory knowledge is real (sat) but we have shown that he has 
not succeeded in doing so. Madhva has similarly failed to 
establish that the silver in the shell-silver cognition is asat. These 
theories result in the advaitic view that the silver is neither sat 
not asat. Why silver is presented to sense where there is only a 
bit of shell is left unexplained. It is evident that none of the 
theories can cogently account for the unitary cognition that arises 
in an error-situation and its subsequent conative activity. We 
must therefore admit that the serpent in the rope or the silver in 
the nacre comes under a unique category. It is neither absolutely 
real nor absolutely unreal. It is anirvacaniya, i.e., non-determi- 
nable. 

In conformity with his doctrine of error the advaitin recog- 
nises three orders of existence — paramarthika, absolutely real, 
vyavaharika — real for practicaT life, and pratibhasika — real only 



XXI 


till the illusion lasts. Brahman the sole reality, pure conscious- 
ness, pure bliss, relationless, timeless, or the presupposition of all 
our thoughts and the ground of the objective world comes under 
the first order, the every-day world of our experience under the 
second and illusions like the rope-serpent under the third. 

From its self-discrepant character the empirical world, it 
must be noted, is analogous to the dream-world wherein the 
residual impressions of the waking-life generate cognitions of 
such amazing variety. How, it may be asked, is the world self- 
discrepant. It comes about this way — no object in our experience 
admits of a finally satisfactory explanation. If for e.g., we take 
a rose and tty to explain how it is related to the redness which is 
predicated of it we at once meet with embarrassment, for we can 
neither say that the two are identical (a substance not being a 
quality) nor can the two be said to be different since it is incon- 
ceivable that the redness should exist apart from the rose. Grant- 
ing that a relation like inherence (saraavaya) can be postulated 
between them which is different from identity as well as differ- 
ence, we shall be at a loss to determine the relation between such 
relation and either term. This kind of inexplicability may be 
illustrated by other instances like milk (ksira) transformed into 
sour milk (dadhi) or cotton threads constituted into a piece of 
cloth. Such inexplicable and therefore self-discrepant character 
of empirical objects has led to the postulation of mithyatva. 
This conclusion the advaitin supports on the one hand by pointing 
to the nature of illusions which present almost the same ifficulty 
and on the other to the explicit authority of the Veda in state- 
ments like “ neha nanasti kincana — the manifold is non-est. Then 
the question is how do we come to possess the knowledge of the 
empirical world? Here again there exist conflicting views. The 
Naiyayikas of one school and other realists hold that the senses 
come into contact with objects which are existent in their own 
right and generate the knowledge of those objects. But the need 
for sense-contact in all cases is questioned not only by the 
Advaitins but by other thinkers also. Though this view may be 
accepted by the Advaitins so far as external perception goes, it 
does not hold good in the case of internal perception when we 
look at it from the Vivarana point of view. In the experience 
of pleasure and pain the Vivarana which by the way does not 
admit antahkarana to be the internal sense-organ rejects the view 
that there is sense-contact. Pain and pleasure are but the states 



or psychoses of the internal organ and as such are inevitably 
manifested by the Saksin, the Witnessing Self as defined by the 
particular antahkararia ; pain and pleasure are therefore said to 
be saksat-safcsibhasya as distinguished from the knowledge of 
the external world which we get from sense-contact through a 
vrtti. The discussion of other Indian theories of perception does 
not appear to be pertinent here. We may however just estimate 
the value of the advaitic theory of perception to which exception 
is taken characterising it as crude and unscientific. The Advaita 
account of say, visual perception, to state briefly, is as follows : 
When the sense of sight for example comes into contact with a 
chair that is out there in space a certain modification takes place 
in the internal organ and this modally transformed antahkarana, 
termed vrtti, flows towards the object (chair) and assumes its 
shape, just as when irrigating a garden from a canal the water 
takes the shape whatever it be of the trench around each tree. 
Caitanya or consciousness, it must be remembered, is all-pervad- 
ing and as such the chair-defined consciousness when the veiling 
ajnana is removed by the vrtti, becomes one with the vrtti-defined 
consciousness and we have the manifestation of the chair.^ We 
may notice here the contrast between this theory and its Western 
counterpart. Here in a sense it is the subject that goes to the 
object in order to apprehend it but the reverse is the process as 
maintained by Western psychologists. The activity is from the 
object side. When an object is perceived say a pot, the light- 
waves proceeding from it impinge on the eye and an image is 
formed on the retina followed by the stimulation of certain brain 
centres and we perceive the prototype, viz., the pot. But the 
incompleteness of the theory becomes evident when we try to 
understand how the inverted image of the object that is formed 
on the retina enables us to perceive the tangible upright object 
out in the open. The inadequacy of this explanation has been 
realised in the west and several theories have been advanced to 
solve the riddle. We have the representative or copy theory 

^ qrWIW-JTT: ^ 

qttrtrr: % 3Ti5JiRfTJrt?r iqwijcn: g-fqgnRr s?riHr 

Bh. Tait. Up. II. 1 . 

The mental psychoses passing through the eye and other sense- 
organs assume the form of sense-objects and these manifestations are 
objects of atman’s consciousness, 



xxiii 


(photo theory) of the School of Locke according to which mate- 
rial things are not perceived as such but only their representations 
which are mental pictures. Berkeley going beyond this empiricist 
doctrine torpedoed the existence of material things altogether and 
maintained that there exist only ideas since one has direct appre- 
hension only of them. Existence is perceiving — esse is percipi. 
Only as mental experience a thing can be viewed as possessing 
existence. This subjective-idealism as contrasted with the Repre- 
sentationism of Locke and others borders on solipsism and is 
allied to the Vijhanavada of the Buddhist according to which 
consciousness alone assumes external shapes of objects there 
being no material objects as such. The objection to this theory 
is that we cannot account for the public character of percepts 
since they are individual mental creations and as such private.^ 
Leibniz with his theory of windowless monads advanced the view 
that the relation between the mental and physical series of events 
becomes possible on the basis of harmony pre-established by 
God.^ Another recent theory is based on the analogy of the 
radio-set. W. A. Sinclair (see his brochure, ‘An Introduction 
to Philosophy’, Oxford Pamphlet) says that different electro- 
magnetic wave-lengths impinge on the retina, and we get a picture 
of the world that is real; similarly with other sense perceptions. 
But he is careful to add that this theory of knowledge that he 
has advanced must be taken only as a suggestion and that the 
argument by which the theory is supported is not a proof. 
Another significant observation of his is that we should not forget 
that the sense-organs are inert like the objects of perception. The 

^ The difficulty is met by the observation that in Berkeley’s view 
it is not the individual minds that create the world. It is God’s mind 
that creates, man’s mind passively receiving an objective order as 
given to it by God. — See p. 116, The Idea of Nature, by R. G. Colling- 
wood, The Clarendon Press, 1945. 

^ Wildon Carr who upholds the monadology of Leibniz in a some- 
what modified form explains perception thus— “The immediate reality 
in the form of sense-image is not self-existent but an appearance 
whose ground is the reality. It is the idea of a reality outside the 
mind and independent of it which manifests itself to the mind by 
a stimulus which compels the mind to infer it .” — A Theory of 
Monads, p. 61. 

Why the mind is compelled to infer the object which is outside 
when only its image is formed on th9 retina is left unexplained, 


xxiv 

last remark disposes of the claim that perception could be ex- 
plained on purely physiological and psychological grounds.^ In 
every one of the above theories there is a big gap, a hiatus. The 
gulf which exists between the disturbance in the visual mechanism 
and the mental sensation of the object is not easily bridged over. 
No mental activity whether of the perceptive variety or other 
can ignore the subjective side or in other words the atman-basis. 
Hence the advaitic analysis of the process of perception, it must 
be admitted, has merits of its own. Its strong point further lies 
in its conformity to the doctrine of the sole reality of Brahman. 
Its metaphysical importance cannot be exaggerated. 

When in the light of what has been said before three orders 
of reality — Paramarthika, Vyavaharika, and Pratibhasika — are 
admitted the test of truth or right cognition must be wheher it 
relates to objects which belong to a particular sphere. This 
criterion of truth however does not apply to the Paramarthika 
satta, for the ultimate reality is the relationless Brahman and no 
question of relation is admissible. As regards the Vyavaharika 
or empirical truth two conditions are laid down in the Advaita 
to ensure validity — it must be uncontradicted (abadhita) and must 
also possess an element of novelty (anadhigata). In the view of 
some the first condition alone is sufficient. The Naiyayikas on 
the other hand maintain that truth is correspondence. When a 
thing possesses any specific feature that feature must be presented 
in knowledge. For instance, in ‘ blue pot ’ blueness is the quality 
(visesapa) possessed by the pot and if in our knowledge of the 
pot blueness appears as qualifying it then that is valid knowledge 
(tadvati tatprakarakam prama.)® No doubt may arise in the case 
of any particular knowledge, say ‘ this is water ’—‘idam jalam 
We cannot -here a&ctxXsan directly whether ‘water’ is given 
actually. Hence unlike the Advaitin the Naiyayika resorts to a 
pragmatic test (samvadipravrtti — leading to fruitful activity), viz., 

1 For a fuller account of the theory of perception the chapter on 
‘Perceptual Thinking’ in Macdougall’s work, An Outline of Psychology 
may with advantage be consulted. He approves of what he calls the 
‘psychic stimulus’ theory according to which the crude sensations are 
considered as goods to the mind put forth as stimulating powers. It is 
admitted he says, that the mind supplies from its own resources 
something very essential over and above the sensory qualities with which 
it responds to sense-stimulations. 

* Advaita Paribhasa, p. 291, Venka^esvara Press, Bombay. 



whether the presented object quenches thirst. If it does it is 
prama, otherwise bhrama. This is the instrumental value of truth. 
We may add by the way that this conception of truth much re- 
sembles the one held by some western thinkers. The Advaitin 
as we have noted above adopts a different course. Whether a 
particular knowledge is contradicted or not is the test for determin- 
ing the logical character of that knowledge. If it is not contra- 
dicted by the rest of relevant experience it has truth-value, other- 
wise it is false. Thus coherence or non-contradiction which 
expresses the nature of truth, also serves as the test of truth. 

According to the Naiyayikas every cognition should stand 
the test of another after-cognition, vyavasaya should be followed 
by anuvyavasaya. But what guarantee that the after-cognition 
is valid ? It must be testified to by another, and that again by 
another and so on ad infinitum. The more acceptable theory 
is that of coherence according to which truth consists in harmony 
of experience (Saravada). In any particular climate of experience 
an object has its truth-value so long as it is not contradicted. Even 
a dream-object does not lose its claim to reality till it is sublated 
by the waking state and as regards objects of normal experience 
they continue to be valid and stimulate man to action till the 
fetters of metempsychosis are snapped.^ Even the theory of 
coherence or conscilience is relative in character. On the basis 
of this theory we can explain only parts of the Universe (prati- 
bhasika, or vyavaharika) and not the Universe in its entirety. 
In one sense however, the theory may be justified as subserving 
one grand pattern — the Absolute as the sole reality, the indivi- 
dual as the absolute obscured and the universe as but the shadow 
of the absolute. This is the transcendental coherence. 

Ill 

We are now confronted with the question — ^What is the 
nature of Brahman, the absolute reality ? The answer is furnished 
in the second aphorism of Badarayana — ‘ That from which the 


^ Samkara, it is to be noted, is positive about the objective 
character of our experience. His epistemological realism is unmistak- 
able. He argues that it is irrational to deny the reality (of whatever 
degree) of what any knowledge actually presents. It is as he aptly 
puts it, like denying the feeling of satisfaction after one has had 
a square meal. — V.S., II. ii. 28, 



xxvi 


world originates, by which it is sustained and in which it dissolves, 
is Brahman This aphorism is formulated on the creation- 
sruti, “ From which all these beings are born, by which being 
born, they live, and in which they merge when departing.” — - 
Tait. Up. III. 8. But this definition is incompatible with a being 
that is beyond any determination (Yato vaco nivartante aprapya 
ffianasa saha — Tait. Up. II. 4). Brahman being an attributeless 
being defies all description. Hence it is necessary to understand 
in which sense the aphorist has used the definition. Now a 
definition may be of two kinds— definition per accidens (or indi- 
cative definition) and definition by essence, respectively known 
as ‘ tatasthalaksana ’ and ‘ svarupalaksana ’. The first defines 
a thing without the implication of the differentiation entering into 
its constitution, e.g., in the statement ‘the person wearing a hat 
is our guest,’ the hat while it distinguishes the guest from those 
wearing turbans does not form an integral part of him; in a 
‘peacock is a bird having a tail of variegated colours ’ the qualifica- 
tion is integral to the peacock. The definition of Brahman as 
stated in the second aphorism must be the definition per accidem 
since Brahman as the ultimate and undifferentiated reality is void 
of all attributes and is non-relational. The definition or de- 
scription therefore, viz., that it is the source of the origin, etc., of 
the world merely points to Brahman without suggesting 
any attributive characterisation, i.e., that the attribute is 
factual. We may say that Brahman’s causality is analogous 
to that of shell when it gives rise to the illusory appearance of 
silver. The shell no doubt is the ground of silver, for without 
the shell the apprehension of silver is impossible but the effect, 
viz., ‘ silver ’ is illusory and vanishes with the knowledge of the 
shell. Similarly the universe has Brahman as its ground or cause 
but it disappears with the rise of the knowledge of Brahman, the 
Ultimate Reality. The attribution of causality to Brahman is 
for the purpose of distinguishing It from those like Prakfti which 
other doctrines take to be the source of the world and is not meant 
to describe It. This, in fact, is the real purpose of the definition 
per accidens. It enables one to identify the thing defined without 
in any way suggesting that the qualities are in intimate associa- 
tion with it.^ 


Advaita Parihhasa,VU, 



Xxvii 

Now the point to be considered is whether the definition 
per accidens alone is adequate for knowing Brahman. It is not. 
The definition by essence (svarupalaksana) is also necessary as 
otherwise one’s desire to understand the full nature of Brahman 
cannot be satisfied. In its own nature Brahman is bliss absolute 
(Anando Brahmeti Vyajanat— ThzT Up. III). But bliss is not the 
attribute of Brahman but it is Its very essence. It is to be observed, 
however, that Brahman as notefi above baffles all description, 
neither speech nor mind being competent to compass its essence, 
(Yato vaco nivartante aprapya manasa saha — Tail. Up. II. 4). 
Laksana or definition is a unique quality pertaining exclusively 
to the object defined — ^asadharanadharma. Brahman is void of 
attributes and as such the term ananda foxinA in the present Sruti 
cannot directly express the nature of Brahman. It can do so only 
indirectly (laksaijaya), but by assuming® for the moment bliss 
(ananda) to be an attribute of Brahman we may define Brahman 
as an entity qualified by ananda (anandavisista) which definition 
is adequate enough to differentiate Brahman from entities which 
are generally conceived as the source of the world such as pradhana 
and atoms which are inert. This is definition by essence. What 
is to be understood from this definition therefore is not what it 
explicitly states but what it indirectly means, viz., the infinite bliss 
which is the necessary ground according to the Advaita, of what 
we commonly term pleasure, happiness and so forth. The 
indirectness of the definition is necessitated by the circumstance 
that no direct reference to It is possible, Brahman being unitary 
and indistinguishable from its essence. The other svarupa- 
laksanas found in the sruti as ‘ Satyam Brahma ‘ Prajnanam 
Brahma ’ are to be understood analogously. The sruti text — ^ 
‘ Satyam, Jnanam, Anandam Brahma ’, is meant to define Brahman 
negatively — that Brahman is the opposite of what is false, insenti- 
ent, or afflicted (asad, jada, duhkha, vilaksapa). But this negative 
definition ought not to be so regarded as leading to the conception 
of Brahman as a mere blank, a nullity — sunya. The terms 


It is tatasthalaksana where the attributes differentiate the thing 
though their existence is not conterminous with it. 

That the mark is something exterior to thing defined is made 
clear, in the definition of tatasthalak§ana as given in Siddhantaleh 
Samgraha, p. 53, Kumbhakonam Ed.— 

® Wl: P- 44. 



xxviii 

satyam, etc., being defining adjuncts, must define something 
positive and not a mere void—sunya. They do not stop with 
mere aegation but point to the ground, i.e., the entity which is 
other than the unreal, the insentient and the aflflicted {cf. Tait. 
Up. S. Bhd. on II. i).^ The main object of the second aphorism 
is to point to the Reality as such through the indicative definition. 

Before passing on to the next factor, viz., the ascertainment 
of the valid means by which the sole reality of Brahman is deter- 
mined we have to note what constitutes the operative cause 
(nimittakarana) and what the substantive cause (upadanakarana) 
in the world-creation. In the Advaita doctrine Brahman consti- 
tutes both the causes.® The world with its extraordinary variety 
can have only an intelligent being as its cause and not something 
that is insentient like the Pradhana of the Samkhyas or the 
Paramapu of the Naiyayikas. Brahman’s agency in the world- 
creation can be accepted, since Brahman is of the very nature of 
knowledge and the only reality. The Sruti text confirms this 
view, ‘ He desired, may I become many ’ — Tait. II. vi. Desire 
and volition can be attributed only to a conscious being. Isvara, 
(Brahman in its active phase) creates the world in order that the 
individual souls may reap the fruit of their past Karma and also 
find opportunity for spiritual advancement. His impartiality 
cannot be impugned on the ground of the existence of conflict 
and affliction in the world. The material causality of Brahman 
in respect of the universe is intelligible since Brahman is the sub- 
strate of the illusory manifold or the substrate of Maya which 
has evolved in the form of the universe. Having the material 
causality in view, we may equate Brahman with the world. To 
say that Brahman is the material cause of the universe suggests 
their identity. They are indeed identical in a sense. But this 
identification of cause and effect does not mean, as some have 


‘ In the second aphorism what is intended to impress is the 
essential nature of Brahman by its definition per accidens. The basic 
text for the tatasthalaksapa is etc., and 

Brahman’s essential nature, is substantiated by 

^JTT^ 

Tait. Up., III. vi. 1. 

This as the Bhasya says is the determinative statement. — V.S., I. ii. 2. 

® See F.5., I. iv. 2.3, where the double causality of Brahman is 
elaborated. 



supposed, that the effect (v/z., the world) is real like the cause 
(v/z., Brahman). Such an interpretation is opposed to the very 
fundamental doctrine of Advaita. A superimposed object (snake) 
may be viewed as one with its substrate (rope) inasmuch as the 
latter is the sustaining factor of the former. The cause is no 
more than its substratum (V.S. II. i. 16). If as Bradley maintains 
the phenomena without committing suicide, as he would put it, 
should find asylum in the absolute, the charge would be that they 
would inquinate the absolute with all their defects. Hence to 
meet this charge Bradley adds that in the final stage of absorption 
the phenomena undergo a thorough transmutation and become 
sublimated. How is this effected ? To this question his only 
answer is ‘ somehow ’. The advaitic view is that the appearances 
do not affect Brahman at all. They only exist for ajiva and when 
any jiva attains freedom they cease to exist for him.^ 

Thus far it has been shown in what sense Brahman is the 
efficient as well as the material cause of the universe. Of the 
several ancient Indian theories of causation we may mention the 
‘satkarya vada ’ of the Samkhya realists who maintain that 
Prakrti or Pradhana evolves into the world-spectacle. No 
intelligent cause in its commonly accepted sense is admitted of 
world-creation in the system. What is only implicit in the primal 
cause — Prakrti, becomes explicit through the elaborate process of 
evolution. It may be mentioned that the satkaryavada is also 
adhered to by the Advaitin but then it should be remembered that 
maya and not Brahman is the source of the universe. The world 
which emerges from maya is as real as that maya. Hence it can 
be represented as the parinama of maya or as it is sometimes 
described as prakrti. The point to be carefully noted is that it is 
a provisional and not an ultimate explanation of the universe. 
Ultimately the world is neither the evolute of Prakrti nor is it 
absolutely real as held by the Samkhyas. The opposite view is 
held by the Naiyayikas and the Vaifesikas according to whom 
the effect comes into existence de novo (asatkarya). While the 
Samkhya (with whom the Advaitin is in agreement upto a point) 


1 After examining the several objections raised against the doctrine 
of creation Samkara points out that the main object of the Vedanta 
is not the elaboration of the theory of creation but the teaching of the 
identity of the Supreme Self and the individual self— Brahmatmaikya.— 
V.S., I. iv. 14; GaudapadakariM, HI. 15; Chand. Up., VI. viii. 4. 



XXX 


maintains that the effect is pre-existent in the cause, the Naiyayika 
says it is non-existent before it is produced. Now the problem 
for the Naiyayika is to establish causal relation between, say, 
clay and pot when the latter is totally different from clay. On 
the asatkaryavada the previous existence of the agent (clay) in 
which action implied in the effect takes place would be rendered 
unnecessary and the effect would lose its claim to its very being. 
Further if the effect is wholly new having had no existence before, 
its emergence would be similar to the birth of a son to a barren 
woman. If it be argued that no causal agency need function in 
the production of effect if the effect is identical with the cause 
we say that agency is needed to bring about a mere rearrange- 
ment in the cause and the effect is no more than such a causal 
rearrangement.^ Another well-known theory is that, of the 
ancient writer, Bhartrprapanca who upholds what is known as 
the ‘ bhedabhedavada ’—according to which reality may be 
regarded as identity-in-difference. Not only is this principle 
applicabe to the relation between Brahman and jiva but also to 
the physical world. Bhartrprapanca favours the evolution theory 
of creation, the heterogeneous mass of the objects of sense being 
regarded as the transformation of the homogeneous Brahman. 
This view very much resembles the Samkhya satkaryavada except 
for the fact that Brahman and not Prakrti is the primal cause. 
This question of causal order involved in our understanding of 
the objective world has given rise to different schools of thought 
in the west, a discussion of which seems uncalled for here. So 
acute a thinker as Bradley in the third chapter of his celebrated 
work — Appearance and Reality' — has shown the untenability 
of relations such as are ordinarily understood to exist between 
cause and effect, thing and attribute, and so on. In his collected 
Essays, Vol. II, this is what he observes, “ Relational thinking is 
and remains a method which is legitimate and is necessary for 
our understanding of the world. But it pays for every advance 
by an inconsistency which is irremovable so long as we insist 
on its ultimate truth and reality ”. How near Samkara Bradley 
approaches may be seen in his statement that “ relational expe- 
rience has to fall back on a non-relational form of unity, and is 
therefore not ultimate.” The problem turns mainly upon the 


^ For a detailed refutation of the asatkarya theory see S. Bha., 
II. 1. 18. 


XXXI 


postulation of a theory that will satisfactorily explain the relation 
between cause and effect, a problem the inherent difficulties of 
which can be surmounted only on the Advaita postuk’e of the 
world-phenomenality. The world is only an appearance (vivarta) 
having as its substrate Brahman, the sole ontological reality. 

IV 

It has been stated that both definition and proof are indispen- 
sable in the determination of an object. Brahman being the 
object of inquiry, its nature can be ascertained by the adduction of 
laksapa and pramana. We have shown that the second Vedanta 
aphorism points to the definition per accidens (tatasthalaksana) 
as well as to the definition propriutn (svartipalaksana) of Brahman. 
We have now to make sure of the pramana on which the existence 
of Brahman as defined above is based. It is on the authority of 
Scripture (Sruti) that the existence of Isvara (Brahman) who 
creates the world, sustains it and finally ends it, is adduced. The 
third Vedanta Sutra (Sastrayonitvat) is explained as bearing two 
senses (VI and VII sections of the Pancapadika). The first brings 
home the omniscience of livara since He is the author of the all- 
comprehensive Veda. This interpretation merely amplifies the 
idea already contained in the statement that Brahman is the source 
of the universe. Without therefore dwelling on it further we 
pass on to the seventh Varnaka which refers to the point we pro- 
pose to discuss in this section. What is emphasised here is the 
view that the Upanisads are the only valid means (pramapa) by 
which the Supreme Reality could be established and by no other 
pramana.^ Brahman is to be known only from the Vedanta, A' 
question pertinent to the topic under consideration may well arise 
here — ^is there no room then for reasoning and is the teaching 
entirely dogmatic? No doubt it is from the discussion of the 
Scriptural texts that Brahman as the Creator, etc., of the world 
is established. In the Karmakanda, however, the authoritarian 
character of the Veda is absolute. Obligatory and prohibitive 
injunctions laid down therein demand implicit acceptance and 


Brh. Up., III. IX. 26. 

I ask you about the Person who is to be known only from the 
Upanisads, who having set the universe of beings in motion, withdraws 
and transcends it. 



xxxii 

unquestioned obedience. But reasoning, though by itself is not 
absolutely dependable, is indispensable if the scriptural teaching 
is to be properly assimilated by the pupil. Full weight is given 
to logic also. That reasoning is necessary is corroborated by 
the sruti, “ Atman is to be seen, heard about, reasoned about, 
and meditated upon.”^ A Vedie statement gains immensely from 
the standpoint of the disciple if it is buttressed by reasoning. In 
the Vedanta, logic no doubt should be conformable to the truths 
as revealed in the Scriptures, yet the method of approach to reality 
bears out the fact that the teaching is not dogmatic. We are 
told in the TaittirTya Upanisad that Bhrgu sought the know- 
ledge of Brahman from his father Varuna who instead of straight- 
away explaining the nature of Brahman just indicated the general 
features of Brahman, and set him thinking as to its real essence. 
The hint given by Varuna, viz., that the entity from which the 
world derives its being and in which it lives and ends, is Brahman, 
was the starting point in the boy’s quest of Brahman-knowledge. 
He flounders on the way, lands first in materialism when he con- 
cludes that matter (food — anna) satisfies the definition, then success- 
ively in vitalism (Prana), mentalism (manas), subjectivism or 
rather self-consciousness (Vijnana) till at last he arrives at the 
final truth, that bliss supreme is Brahman— the highest reality. 
At every intermediate stage, dissatisfied with himself he seeks his 
father for enlightenment but the father advises him to think further 
and find out the solution for himself. What is to be noted here 
is that the seeker is not asked to take things on trust. He is 
enjoined to exercise his own independent judgment in arriving at 
the truth. There is no ipse dixit. Bhrgu by hard thinking rejects 
the intermediate solutions and arrives at the correct knowledge 
of Brahman, viz., that bliss unalloyed is Its very essence.^ 

As pertinent to this topic we have to consider whether ^abda 
takes rank with other pramapas and serves as a valid means of 
Knowledge and whether the Knowledge so given is direct. The 
Vedanta is an assemblage of words and when it is said that 
Brahman is to be known, from that source only we have to make 


^ ^f^«3rn%5[«?r: 

Brh. Up., II. iv. 5. 

Here manana or reasoning is insisted upon as indispensable for 
the realisation of Brahman. 

2 “Anando Brahmeti Vyajanat.”-^7’air, Up., III. 6.; Bhj-guvalli. 


xxxiii 



Sufe whether sabda (word) is a pramapa at all. Even among the 
orthodox philosophers, the Vaifeiikas reject verbal testimony as 
an independent pramana and bring it undex inference. As regards 
the second point, perception, it is contended, gives us direct 
knowledge (aparokia) but sabda can convey only indirect know- 
ledge (paroksa). But we know that the knowledge of the Ultimate 
Reality must be direct as otherwise it cannot annul our empirical 
conviction of the truth of duality (dvaita). To avoid this impasse 
some among them postulate the need for ‘ dhyana ’ or meditation 
on the ultimate truth as mediately known through the Scriptures. 
It is thus they maintain, that the indirect knowledge is trans- 
formed into the direct knowledge which alone can dispel ignorance. 
Two criticisms, however, may be advanced against this view. 
The first is that the direct knowledge that may result from 
‘Dhyana’ need not necessarily be valid, for ‘ Dhyana ’ is not 
counted as a pramana and cannot of certainty lead to prama or 
truth. The second criticism is that it is not right to lay down as a 
general rule that verbal testimony can convey only mediate 
knowledge. That is its usual character no doubt, but there are 
clear exceptions to it; e.g., the statement ‘Thou art the tenth’ 
(Dasamastvamasi).^ Further to lay down such a rule would be 
to assume that even entities which by their very nature are inward 
(pratyagvastu) are known mediately— that is obviously impossible. 
Hence the position of the Advaitin (except Vacaspati and his 
followers), that the immediacy of the knowledge of an object 
depends not upon the kind of pramana by which it is attained 
but on the nature of the object that is known. Now the Ultimate 
Reality itself, being the inmost self and supersensuous, Vedic 
testimony alone as in ‘ That Thou art ’ is competent to bring 
about immediate experience provided one is qualified otherwise. 
The characteristics of the validity of knowledge are that it should 
relate to something not previously known and that it should not 
be contradicted later (anadhigata and abadhita). Brahman which is 
the vi§aya of the knowledge (jnana) arising from the text ‘ That 
Thou art ’ stands both these tests. The validity of such knowledge 

1 In the illustration the boy is counting the number of those 
that crossed the river omits himself and thereby is under the delusion 
that out of ten one is missing. The verbal assurance of a by-stander 
that he himself is the tenth— at oiice reveals the fact , to 
him. His ignorance is dispelled and inunediate knowledge is generated, 


XXXIV 


is intrinsic to it (svatastva) but this is not accepted by other 
thinkers. According to the Naiyayikas the validity of jnana 
arises and also is known from ingredients distinct from those 
which generate such knowledge. This is (paratastva). Accord- 
ing to the Advaita and Mimamsa, validity is intrinsic and non- 
validity is extrinsic.^ 

V 

All systems of Indian philosophy admit that the highest 
human endeavour finds its culmination in the attainment of 
immortality-mokfa. But what is moksa ? It is freedom from 
bondage. If ignorance — avidya (or maya) is responsible for man’s 
separation from God, if it veils from him his identity with the 
sole reality and presents the spectacle of a universe in which he 


^ The normal characteristic of jnana as such is validity (Pramatva). 
It is intrinsic to it, not extrinsic. In ‘this is pot’ (srq ^r^:) the know- 
ledge is perceptive. The elements required for its generation (Utpatti) 
are, sense-contact, presence of light and so forth. These very elements 
give rise to its validity also. This is svatastva of pramanya in regard 
to utpatti (3?Trfr Now to consider the question of validity 

in respect of apprehension (jnapti), say, from the Advaita point of 
view: that which reveals knowledge is the witnessing self (Sak?in) 
and that itself also reveals the validity of the knowledge. This is 
svatastva in the apprehension of validity The Naiyayikas 

also lay down the same causes and conoitions for the origination of 
knowledge and they maintain that these are not by themselves adequate 
for the origination of validity in knowledge and that extra circum- 
stances are demanded. Such extra circumstances are the excellence 
(guna) of the causes and conditions of the generation of knowledge, 
e.g.f the light that is required for perceiving a pot should be of 
a certain degree of intensity for the knowledge (jnana) being right. 
It is this intensity that is taken to constitute its excellence. Again 
as to the apprehension (jnapti) also of the validity of knowledge the 
Naiyayikas hold that an extra factor is necessary. In the case of 
‘this is pot’ the knowledge that such a jnana has arisen is here 
ascribed to what is termed ‘ anuvyavasaya ’. Though anuvyasaya may 
thus reveal knowledge it does not reveal its validity; for its revelation 
a fresh means (hetu) such as samvadipravrtti is needed. In fine the 
means to comprehend the validity of a jnSna is other than (parata^:) 
the means to know that jnana. It must stand a pragmatic test. It 
may be noted that samvadipravrtti implies an action such as will 
(■orrespond to the knowledge in question. 


XXXV 


plays his part taking it to be absolutely real when it is but a shadow 
of reality, it is the removal of that ignorance which constitutes 
liberation. The individual soul (jiva) is in its essence ever free, 
but under the sway of primordial nescience it wanders in worlds 
of sorrow and transcience having forgotten its home of bliss. 
Man has slipped from his high estate and must work his way up 
to regain it. The destiny of man is the goal of perfection and 
the attainment of Brahmahood. Freedom (moksa) is eternal and 
is therefore not a thing to be accomplished; i.e., it is not sadhya 
but siddha. Hence all action is for removing that which obscures 
it, viz., nescience. 

The theories of moksa as held by any school of Vedantic 
thinkers are coloured by their metaphysical prepossessions. The 
doctrine of a personal God and of the reality of individual souls 
must naturally alter the conception of moksa. The theistic view is 
that the liberated soul does not lose its individuality even in release^ 


1 Bheda or difference is fundamental to Dvaita. Each thing is 
unique having its difference from the rest as its very characteristic 
(Svarupa). The conception of ‘pot’ involves its difference from every 
thing other than pot. It comes to this that the difference of pot from, 
say cloth is identical with pot. Then the question may be raised, why 
should we know cloth as we must, to know pot’s difference from it ? 
The Dvaitin answers that in knowing the essence of the thing, say, 
pot, the pratiyogijnana is present. Two points however are to be 
noted, viz., that the pratiyogijnana is general, i.e., of all things besides 
pot, not specific and that the means (indriya) to it (viz., the general 
pratiyogijnana) is the Saksin — the Witness. If the essence of pot and 
its difference from cloth — to select one thing among the rest are 
identical how comes it that we talk of the difference of the pot ? It is 
sanctioned by usage. It is a special kind of identity says the Dvaitin 
known as ‘savise?abheda’. The viSe§a assumed here is also pressed 
into service in explaining passages really importing complete identity 
as between Brahman and its attributes when the latter are spoken of 
as being distinct from one another and from Brahman. Let us take 
the two texts — ‘Brahmana anandah’ and ‘anandam Brahma’. The 
second text denotes identity between Brahman and ananda which is 
admitted to be a fact ; but the first denotes difference. The two scrip- 
tural te.Kts cannot conflict with each other. Hence the identity here 
is of the unique variety — saviSesabheda which reconciles such usage. 

It is evident that the postulation of the visesa category is merely 
to escape from a dilemma. There is no need to posit the visesa cate- 
gory since the appositional use of the genetive case is common. 


xxxvi 


but freed from metempsychosis it attains the presence of God 
where it dwells in bliss everlasting. But however eminent that 
state of happiness, it can never approach that of the Supreme. 
The followers of Madhva believe that some souls are doomed to 
eternal perdition, some bound down to the wheel of samsara for 
ever, and others bound but fit for freedom and that among the 
freed the bliss of Heaven is unequally shared.^ The Ramanujiyas 
on the other hand though refusing to admit the elimination of 
singularity in release recognise no difference in the enjoyment of 
bliss not only among the emancipated souls but even between their 
bliss and that of Isvara. The affinity of the freed soul with 
Tsvara both in point of knowledge and bliss is complete except 
in respect of Isvara’s creatorship. 

The Vedantic view of immortality according to Samkara 
and his school is not merely cessation of rebirth but becoming 
identical with the immortal Being. If release should mean the 
attainment of some state in a different region it ceases to be eternal 
for, according to the general rule connection (samyoga) must 
end in disconnection (viprayoga).^ It has been pointed out that 


^ In the Dualistic metaphysics liberation or mukti is of four 
kinds: (i) Sayujya (union), (ii) Sarupya (similarity in appearance), 
(iii) Salokya (residence in the same region), (iv) SamTpya (nearness of 
the Lord). By (i) is meant the being clothed as it were, by Isvara, 
so that the liberated soul moves with Isvara’s feet, gives with Isvara’s 
hands and so on; by (ii) the liberated soul becomes four-armed 
(caturbhuja), wears the conch and disc (Samkha and Cakra); by (iii) 
the liberated soul dwells with the Lord in the same region which 
embraces both heaven and earth — it is said that there are such souls, 
only they are not visible; by (iv) remianing always near God, like 
Brahma. LaksmI alone, besides Vi§nu, is ever liberated — ^Nityamukta. 
Among human beings there are muktiyogyas — ^those who are fit for 
liberation, nityasamsarins — those fated to dwell always in the world 
of mixed joy and sorrow, tamoyogyas — those fated to dwell in joyless 
regions. The world consists of all the three. The Gods are duplicate- 
dwelling, here and in heaven. While those who come under the first 
category have hopes of redemption, the other two have none. Their 
lot indeed is cheerless. It is difficult to understand how the all-mercifiul 
Lord could relegate a section of humanity (tamoyogyas) to eternal 
perdition. 

See Cora, on UpadesasahasrI, XVI, 62, 


xxxvii 

the only existential Being is Brahman and that all human ills are 
caused by the primal nescience positing the world of variety. As 
such the eradication of nescience alone constitutes moksa which 
is ever present though obscured by the encircling gloom. The 
realisation of the atman’s identity with the Absolute is the highest 
human end — ^paramapurusartha. This is the we plus ultra oi 
the Vedantic teaching. No doubt the different states achieved 
through means other than jnana though quite desirable in them- 
selves possess an instrumental value only subserving the highest 
value, viz., the Supreme Reality. Karma, for example, i.e., the 
performance of obligatory duties and avoidance of interdicted 
duties ensures the purification of the heart; bhakti, i.e., devotion 
and self-surrender to God, serves as the means of securing divine 
grace, and dhyana or meditation brings on mental equipoise by 
shutting out all distractions — all these are but stepping stones 
to the attainment of the identity — knowledge which alone is the 
solvent of ignorance. 

Jnana being of such prime importance in the scheme of 
Advaita the question is raised as to the means by which it is 
secured. All valid knowledge or prama as is evident, is the 
outcome of a right means of knowledge — pramana. Now of the 
six means of knowledge, scriptural testimony is alone recognised 
by most of the Indian thinkers as the source from which the nature 
of the Ultimate Reality is known, which Reality according to the 
Advaita is no other than the unity of the individual and the uni- 
versal self or to express it more accurately, the non-duality of 
the self. The scriptural text which is the bed-rock of the unity- 
doctrine is the one reiterated nine times in the Chandogya Upa- 
nUad—Nl. 3. 6, to press home the great metaphysical truth of 
the sole reality of Brahman. “ That Thou art— Tat Tvam asi ” 
points to the non-difference between the individual self (Thou) 
and the universal self (That). From the context we know that 
here the identity of jiva and Isvara is meant to be inculcated but 
then such identity seems impossible since the finite jIva can never 
be the same as the infinite ISvara. But in understanding the text 
under consideration we must bear in mind that the meanings of 
words “That” and “Thou” when divested of their adventitious 
attributes like finitude and limited cognition in regard to jiva 
and absolute detachment, possessibn of unlimited cognition and 
causality in respect of the whole Universe, in regard to I§vara 
point to an identical object. The vyords “That” and “Tbou” 


xxxviii 


thus finally point to one and the • same entity. Hence it is that 
SuTesvaTa. in his Naiskarmya Siddhi 111. 2, construes the Vedic 
text “ Tat tvam asi ” as word-sense, padartha— and strictly not 
as propositional import — vakyartha.^ The illustrations given in 
the ^ruti in ttie elucidation of the Mahavakya all go to show that 
the basic cause alone is the reality, the so-called effects are but 
names and forms {Chand. Up. Yl). Now this text is variously 
interpreted, by the rival schools of Vedanta in conformity with 
their conceptions of reality, a discussion of which however appears 
out of place in this short introduction. The tenor of this and 
other scriptural texts bears unmistakable testimony to the 
Advaitic truth as propounded by Samkara and elaborated by 
Padmapada. Any other explanation necessitates the setting 
aside the text as it stands and forcing it to yield a sense not 
intrinsic to it. 

A question of vital importance crops up here. If the sole 
reality is Brahman, what is the status of the world we live in ? 
More than once has Samkara called attention to the fact that 
there are different degrees of reality— the reality of Brahman 
which is absolute (paramarthikasatta), of the world, which is 
empirical (Vyavaharikasatta), and of the dream-state, which is 
illusory (Pratibhasikasatta). The world is real in the empirical 
sense, Le., its reality is not absolute like that of Brahman. It 
vanishes with the knowledge of Brahman. But its value is not 
to be underrated for it is the vale, so to speak, through which 
the self has to work its way up to the shining heights of beatitude. 
The destiny of man is the goal of perfection and it could be 
attained only by the attainment of moral and spiritual perfection 
on earth. It is only to a diseased mind that the world appears 
as no more than ‘ a tale told by an idiot full of sound and fury, 
signifying nothing This life is replete with significance to man. 
It is here and not anywhere else that regeneration is possible. ^ 
The charge is baseless therefore that the Advaitic conception of 


The propositional import is a judgment which is either an 
affirmation or negation of relation. But the knowledge of Brahman 
is supra-relational and is of the nature of intuition. 

^ In commenting on Katha Up., IT. iii. 5, Samkara points out that 
at best one can get only a blurred view of Reality in worlds other 
than our own and that for a clear insight one has to endeavour while 
yet on earth— 


XXXIX 


freedom takes away all stimulus to moral endeavour and empties 
ethics of its content. No doubt this life is compared to a dream 
but that is only to emphasise its relative and phenomenal charac- 
ter. In fact all the three states — ^waking, dream and deep slumber, 
are designated as dream in the Aitareya Upanisad} Samkara 
in commenting on this justifies the appellation of ‘ dream ’ even 
to the waking state (jlgrat) on the ground that the world-spectacle 
is as illusory as the dream world the consciousness of the Ultimate 
Reality not having arisen. It is only in this sense that the dream 
analogy has to be understood. There is no thought of reducing 
man’s life on earth to a vacuum.® 

VI 

We will conclude this resume of Advaitic monism propounded 
by Padmapada, with a brief description of Jivanmukti or freedom 
in the embodied state, a doctrine which is cardinal to the Advaita, 
The Sruti is explicit that the knowledge of Brahman enables one 
to attain freedom from the bonds of samsara here and now—* atra 
Brahma sama^nute ’ — (Katha Up. 11. iii. 14). The Pancapadika 
also is clear on the point (see IX. Varnaka) as it maintains that 
the liberated person has to wait only till the fall of his physical 
body to be merged in the Supreme.® We find a large number of 


— Ait. Up., Chap. III. 

For him three states there are, and three are the dreams; this 
is the seat (see the present writer’s translation of Ait. t/p.—The 
Bangalore Press). 

^ While controversing the Buddhistic view of an objectless world, 
Samkara emphatically asserts that the work-a-day world stands un- 
assailed, for all practical ends. — V.S., II. ii. 31; cf. PP., end of the 
IXth Varnaka. 

® c!^ 311^ uw 1 

Chand. Up., VI. XIV. 2. 

The redeemed individual has only to wait the dissolution of his 
body to be lost in the Eternal. Commenting on this passage Samkara 
leaves no room for doubt that the jivanmukta has to stay on earth 
only till the dissolution of the present body to realise his oneness with 
the Supreme. The word ‘atha’ says §amkara excludes the notion of 
intermission, between the fall of the body and the attainment of 
jnoksa— See also BA. GM, IX. .28, 



passages in Samkara which indicate that the released soul attains 
at the very moment of release its oneness with the Universal 
Spirit. There exist however conflicting views regarding the true 
import of ‘ Jivanmukti Some of the commentators like 
Ramanuja refuse to take the word in its literal sense and regard 
it as but a figurative expression. Among the modern scholars 
again the conception of ‘ jivanmukti ’ is not countenanced by 
some on other grounds. In an interesting symposium (c/. 
Proceedings of the Eighth Philosophical Congress, Mysore Session, 
1932) Sir Radhakrishnan strongly animadverts against this doctrine 
and advocates what is known as ‘ sarvamukti ’—salvation for all, 
i.e., that no one is saved till all are saved.^ The released soul in 
this view takes on recurring births and continues to labour for 
the spiritual good of man till the time of final world-redemption. 
It is pointed out that it is not easy to reconcile Videhamukti, i.e., 
jivanmukta’s attaining freedom from metempsychosis after the 
death of the present body, with what is stated in the Bhasya on 
V.S. III. iii. 32. In the Bhasya referred to it is related that muktas 
like Apantaratamas and Vasistha entered on mundane existence 
at the bidding of the Lord to help suffering humanity. 

We may in support of the jivanmukti doctrine call in the 
witness of Vidyaranya who in his ‘ Jivanmuktiviveka ’ has 
exhaustively dealt with the subject. As he rightly points out 
what is assured to a jivanmukta is the stoppage of renascence. * 


In explaining this stanza Samkara refers to jTvanmukta as attaining 
moksa after the demise of the present body— 

I 

1 Appayadiksita in his Siddhantalem Samgraha (p. 453, Kumbha- 
konam Edn.) argues in favour of Sarvamukti and basing his view on 
Pratibimbavada (i.e., Isvara as prototype and jiva as reflection) con- 
cludes that a liberated jIva attains the state of Isvara and waits for 
final absorption into the Absolute till the moment of universal eman- 
cipation. But even in this docrtine there is no warrant for the 
contention that jivanmuktas are subject to recurrent births. 

® See Jivanmuktiviveka, Anandasrama Edn., pp. 30-32 ; according 
to Vidyaranya videhamukti is the immediate result of the rise 
of jnana. He takes ‘deha’ in ‘videhamukti’ to mean the body that the 
jiva assumes at the onset of a fresh prarabdha karma and that, 
he says, is interdicted so soon as one attains iflurnination. The jivanmukta 


The case of Apantaratamas and others is not against the doctrine 
of jivanmukti. They were, as the Bhasya explains, commissioned 
for a specific purpose and even while sojourning on earth never 
lost sight of the fact that they were emancipated souls. Samkara 
concludes his Bhasya on the Sutra in question by referring to 
the experience of Vamadeva who is said to have attained realisa- 
tion while yet in his mother’s womb {cf. Brh. Up. I. iv. 10). 
He clinches the matter by emphasising that the fruit of universal 
atma-hood eventuates at the very moment of Brahma Jnana.^ As 
regards the objection that absolute contentment and joy are 
unthinkable so long as there remains a single unredeemed soul, 
it may be remarked that the contention would hold if in the state 
of release the soul is the enjoyer — bhokta— but the true doctrine 
is that the soul in that state is bliss itself being merged in the 
Supreme. It seems only right to accept the view that a jivanmukta 
is one who is absolutely rid of all notions of duality by the know- 
ledge of the Supreme and that the actual Brahma-hood ensues 
on the fall of the body. If he continues to work till life lasts^ 
he does so out of the plenitude of his love for his love is now 


is virtually ‘videhamukta’ and his embodied state for a while is only 
to liquidate his prarabdha karma. 

^ Cf. V.S., III. ii. 21 — where Samkara explicitly states that Sarva- 
mukti which involves the final dissolution of the world is not what 
the scriptures teach. The jivanmukta foretastes the Supreme bliss 
while yet in the flesh and becomes one with the Absolute on his 
discarnation. That jivanmukti has been attained by some choice 
spirits is confirmed by the remark that the dissolution of the entire 
world would, on the contention of the opponent, have been brought 
about by the first emancipated person. 

No doubt this passage occurs in a different context. Samkara 
is there answering the critic who holds the view that the world which 
is real comes to an end with the rise of the knowledge of Brahman 
which is enjoined. Still the point to be noticed is that the phenomenal 
world continues to exist for the unredeemed souls and not for a jivan- 
mukta. 

^ The Bhasya on Chand. Up,, VI. xiv. 2, makes it clear that 
corporeality does not cease at the veiy moment of the rise of know- 
ledge and that a jivanmukta alone i? competent to instruct 

one in Brahmajnana. 


xlii 


universalised and not from self-interest or at the call of duty even. 
A jivanmukta stands beyond the pale of ordinary judgment.^ 
It is no argument that corporeality which still clings to him acts 
as an impediment to his self-realisation. It is a question of atti- 
tude. Ripeness is all. 




3^5? =?r 3m<Ji 

F.S., IV. i. 15. 

The question is irrelevant whether the knower of Brahman 
remains embodied or not for a time. How can one person dispute 
the fact of another person’s deep conviction of his attainment of 
the Knowledge of Brahman and at the same time existing in the 
embodied state? 

“It is interesting in this connection to refer to Samkara’s state- 
ment at the end of his commentary on V.S., IV. i. 15 which tradition 
views as an allusion to his own direct experience of the ultimate 
truth.’’— C>./. A — Foot-note 2 on p. 381, 




CONTENTS 


Sutra 

Varnaka- Topic 

Section 


PAGfi 



Foreword by the General Editor . . 

. . 

V 



A Biographical Note on the Late Rajaseva- 
sakta Sri. D, Venkataramiah 


xi 



Introduction . . . . . . 


xiii 



Abbreviations . . 

. . 

xlv 



Invocatory Verses . . . . 


xlviii 

First 

1 

Superimpositiott . . . . * . 


1 


2 

Vedanta — Not Anticipated by Jaimini 


142 


3 

The Qualifications of the Agent 


179 


4 

Is Brahman a Known Entity ? 


229 

Second 

5 

Definition of Brahman 


258 

Third 

6 

The Omniscience of Brahman 


277 


7 

Brahman — Established on the Authority 
Vedanta 

of 

279 

Fourth 

8 

Vedanta— Intimates an Existent Entity 


281 


9 

Is Brahman the Object of the Injunction 
Meditation? .. .. .. 

of 

295 



Conspectus . i 


333 



Index 


409 




Abbreviations 


1. 

Ar.S. .. 

Arthasamgraha. 

2. 

A.S. .. 

Advaita Siddhi of Madhusudana Saraswati. 

3. 

Brh.Up. . . 

Brhadaranyakopanisad. 

4. 

G.O.S. . . 

Gaekwad’s Oriental Series. 

5. 

I.S. 

Istasiddhi — Gaekwad’s Oriental Series, 

6. 

N.S. 

Naiskarmya Siddhi — ^Bombay Sanskrit Series VIII. 

7. 

O.I.P. . . 

Outlines of Indian Philosophy by Prof, Hiriyanna. 

8. 

PP. 

Pahcapadika — ^Viziagnagaram Sanskrit Series. 

9. 

S'. 

English Translation of Vivaranaprameya Samgraha, 
by Suryanarayana Sastri and Kileswaran — Andhra 
University Series. 

10. 

S.P, .. 

Sahara Bhasya—Anandasrama Edition. 

11. 

S.D. . . 

Sastra Dipika — English Translation — Gaekwad’s Ori- 
ental Series. 

12. 

S.L.S. .. 

SiddhantaleSasamgraha, by Appayya Dikshita— 
Kumbhakonam Edition. 

13. 

SV. 

Svetasvataropanisad. 

14. 

TD. 

TatvadTpana — Anantakrishna Sastri’s Edition, Cal- 
cutta. 

15. 

T.S.A. . . 

Tarka Samgraha by Athale. 

16. 

V. 

Vivarana — Vizianagaram Sanskrit Series. 

17. 

V.P.S. .. 

Vivaranaprameya Samgraha— Vizianagaram Sanskrit 
Series. 

18. 

v.s. . . 

Vedanta Sastra of Badariyai^a — Nirnayasagara Press, 
Bombay. 

19. 

F£/. 

Vivaratiopanyasa by Sri Anandasaraswati— Benares 
Sanskrit Series. 



PANCAPADIKA 

INVOCATORY VERSES 

I. Prostration to Brahman, the beginningless, blissfil, 
the changeless, of the nature of knowledge, eternity 
and existence; (the ground of) the non-existent 
multiplex of duality, the Witness. 

IL Prostration to the sage of the name Badarayajnia, the 
abode ofpeace,whois (as it were) the embodiment 
of the Sun to the cluster of Lotuses (v/z., the 
Upanisads) standing at the head of (/.e., the inflor- 
escence of) the Srutis. 

III. I bow to the unique Samkara rich in the possession 

of an entourage of ascetics (‘bhogi ’ in the sense 
of serpents as applied to Lord iSamkara), bereft of 
wealth (‘ bhuti’ — sacred ashes covering the body 
of §iva), who attaches equal value to reasoning 
(anuraa = reasoning which, equally with sruti, 
supports the body of Samkara’s doctrine; Uma, 
Siva’s consort forms half his body), of mild aspect 
(unlike Ugra, Siva who as the name implies, 
is of fierce aspect), who has eradicated all traces 
of Kala (Kala-Maya, also poison; Siva is Visa- 
ka^^:ha, having the mark of poison on his throat), 
rid of Vinayaka (a Buddhist teacher whom 
Samkara silenced; Siva has Vinayaka, his son 
by his side). 

IV. I bow my head before the teachers, renowned for 

their knowledge (Lit. Wealth) of the Bhasya, — 
those who drink the nectar flowing from the 
Bha§ya-lotus, which owes its birth to the Manasa- 
lake of his (Bhasyakara’s — Samkara’s) mouth, — 
the loving disciples who, like the bees, are eagerly 
lifting up their faces from all quarters. 

V. I now begin in all earnestness the exposition of the 
Bhasya which bears the weight rendered heavy 
with the cluster of words, etc., and which is limpid 
yet profound. 


VARitJAKA 1 
SUPERIMPOSmON 

1.1. [Page 1] (Samkara’s) Comment — beginning with “ the 
notions comprised in the object (yusmat) and the ego (asmat )” 
and ending with “ I am this, this is mine : such is how men behave” 
having the very purport conveyed in the comment “ with the object 
of getting rid of this (erroneous idea) which is the cause of misery, 
and thereby arriving at the knowledge of the oneness of the self 
with the Absolute, the study of the whole of the Vedanta is 
begun ”, — explains that both the vi.aya (subject-matter) and the 
prayojana (purpose), of the sastra {viz., the Vedanta sutras) are 
suggested by implication in the first sutra {viz., athato Brahma- 
jijnasa).^ And this {i.e., how the subject-matter visaya, hnd the fruit 
resulting from its study are indicated in the first sutra), we will 
state more clearly when commenting upon the bhasya — “Therefore 
is Brahman to be inquired into {vide Varnaka III, p. 66). 


^ The Bha?ya on the Vedanta sutras beginning with — 

‘the notions of the object and the subject’ and ending with 

— ‘it is on the part of man a natural procedure’, explicitly 
states the objection against the view of the illusory character of the 
entire world of sense and the answer thereto. There is no reference hero 
to the subject-matter and the purpose of Vedantic study as stated in 
the first siitra. But yet as the Bha§yakara concludes this section on 
illusion, with the statement that the study of the Vedanta texts is begun 
with a view to getting rid of all the ills of life, and to acquiring the 
knowledge of the identity of the individual self with Brahman 
5t?I’3Tiq it becomes 

evident that the exposition of illusion, has its affinity with 

the first aphorism and is not discordant with it. Padmapada makes 
this point clear. The first aphorism serving as the introduction to the 
Vedanta sastra sets forth the subject-matter (l^ispr) and the purpose 
(tt-qrast) and this topic receives adequate treatment in the third Varpaka. 
It must be noted that the subject-matter and the purpose are only 
implied (arthat) and not explicit in the first sutra. The word in 
^T% may be construed in two ways; (i) because the first 
sutra suggests both the subject-matter and the fruit, the prefatory com- 
ment being its elucidation also . mentions them; (ii) the prefatory 
comment itself explains that the first sQtra is intended to denote both 
vi?aya and prayojana. 


2 PASgAPADlKiA OF PADMAPADA p. 

2. Here this objection is taken: If it be so, let the bhasya 
be thus much only — “ With the object of getting rid of this (erro- 
neous idea) which is the cause of misery, and thereby arriving at 
the knowledge of the oneness of the self with the Absolute, the 
study of the whole of the Vedanta is begun”. There, by the 
phrase, “ with the object of getting rid of this which is the cause 
of misery ” the fruit (prayojana) is indicated, and by the phrase, 
“ for arriving at the knowledge of the oneness of the self with the 
Absolute” the subject-matter (visaya) is rendered explicit. As 
that is so, what is the purpose of the Bhasya beginning with 
‘ yusmadasmat ’ (and ending with ‘ sarvalokapratyaksah ’) by 
which it is intended to show the error-begotten nature of men’s 
doings (i.e., their modes of thought and conduct) characterized 
by egoity as evidenced in the expression ‘aham manusyah ’ — ‘ I am 
man’, where the self is identified with the body or the senses, 
‘ahamidam’— 1 am this (i.e., the body, etc.), ‘ mamedam 
mine is this (children, wealth, etc., belonging to me and 
so on).* 

3. This will be said in answer: The knowledge of Brahman as 
the solvent of the root-cause of the ills of life (anartha) is sug- 
gested in the sutra, and anartha is constituted by (the notion that 
one is) an agent and an enjoyer which again presupposes (the belief 
that one is) a cogniser. If that (anartha) be genuinely real, it 
cannot be annihilated by jnana (knowledge), for jnana can 
remove only ajnana (nescience). [Page 2.] If on the other hand 
agency and enjoyment are grounded in nescience, then what is 
going to be stated (by the Sutrakara, r/^., that the knowledge of 
Brahman is the solvent of the cause of anartha) would be appro- 
priate. Hence {i.e,, since knowledge is powerless to destroy the 
notions of kartrtva, etc., unless the latter are rooted in nescience), 
it comes to this — that agency and enjoyment as the outcome 
of nescience have been clearly indicated by the aphorist 


* The objection is as to the need for the commentary elucidating 
illusion— adhyasa bha§ya. It has been shown that the first sutra itself 
points out, though by implication, the subject-matter of the sastra 
and the purpose of its study; and these are the identity of the individual 
with the universal self and the riddance of the miseries of life. When 
vi§aya and prayojana are indicated in the sutra and rendered explicit 
in the bha§ya, there is little justification for elaborating the nature of 
illusion and its effects, 



SUPERIMPOSmON 3 

himself, when he suggests that BrahmajnSna is the solvent of 
anartha.® 

Hence, in order that it may serve to establish the meaning 
conveyed by the sutra, (the explanation of the nature of illusion 
has to be undertaken) by pointing out the error-begotten charac- 
ter of bondage (tatpradarsanadvarepa), and as such this prefatory 
commentary has the purpose of serving as the introduction to 
the entire sastra {viz., Vedanta).* 

4. And therefore, what this Sastra in substance expounds 
is that all the Vedanta texts culminate in showing that the ultimate 
nature of the individual soul (atman) alleged to be samsarin 
(transmigratory being) is one uniform bliss, the very essence of 
existence, no n-mutable and consciousness entire. And that 
teaching {viz., what is commonly regarded as the migratory soul 
is in reality the Absolute) conflicts with the notion ‘ I am the 
doer ’, ‘ I am happy ’ and ‘ I am miserable ’ — notions which, to 
all appearances, are uncontradicted. Hence, for the removal of 
this conflict, as long as it is not elucidated that the nature of the 
individual soul, in so far as it appears different from Brahman, is 

® When it is known that liberation is the prayojana of the vi^ara- 
sastra (i.e., Vedanta sutras), it is also known by implication that the 
knowledge of Brahman (Brahmajnana resulting from vi<;ara) is the 
dispeller of the ills of life (anartha). Then the doubt arises how 
Brahmajnana could dispel anartha, for the nature of jnana is only to 
remove ajnana and not anartha. To remove such a doubt and to 
substantiate that anartha, which expresses itself as egoity, agency, 
enjoyment, etc., is destroyed by the saving knowledge, it has to be 
proved that such notions as egoity, etc., are the outcome of avidyS 
or ajnana and this is what the Bha§yakara does in the prefatory 
bha§ya beginning with ‘the notions comprised in yu^mat, asmat, etc.’ 
It has been shown that the illusory nature of egoity, etc., is Indicated 
in the sQtra itself and as such it must be understood that the bha^ya 
merely elucidates it. 

* 3Rf: This is to meet the objection that the conclud- 
ing comment af RR sal 

sufficiently brings out the purpose of the Vedanta iastra and that it 
does not require further elucidation. The idea of the opponent here 
is that the oneness of the individual soul with Brahman might be 
admitted and not the unreality of the world. Such a view was held 
by many Vedantins like Bhartfprapanqa, (and though later than 
^amkara) Bhaskara and Yadava who were all Brahma-paripama- 
vadins, but not Brahma-vivarta-vadids, 


4 PANgAPADIKA OF PADMAPADA [1. 5 

the creatioH of avidya, so long, the mahavakya — tat tvam asi— - 
[that thou art] will appear as meaningless as the vakya (statement)] 
beginning with ‘ jaradgava As it is so, in order to eradicate it 
{viz., the notion that the world is real) the non-Brahman nature of 
the individual self has to be shown as being due to the play of 
avidya. And this the aphorist does when elucidating the nature 
of the individual self, in the chapter styled ‘ non-contradiction ’ 
with the Words ‘ tadgunasaratvat ’, etc.® 

5. If that be so, why not this (V.S. II.iii.29) be the first (sutra)? 
Not that why. Because of (the need for indicating) the particular 
import. It is only when this particular import, v/z., that all the 
Vedanta texts are congruent in the elucidation of the secondless 
Brahman (samanvaya), is brought to light (will its correctness be 
challenged); and then its refutation will be appropriate. (Hence 
V.S. II. iii.29, which points the identity of the individual soul 
with Brahman, comes after, and not before ‘ athato Brahmajijnasa). 
If however this special significance is not brought to light, objec- 
tion to its validity as well as its refutation will be irrelevant. As 
for the Bha§yakara, he elucidates what in fact is established there 
(f.e., 11. iii-29) and what the first Autra suggests by implication,’ 


® If the finite nature or the individuation of the soul is not proved 
to be the product of nescience, the Upanisadic statements 

‘That thou art’, and ‘I am Brahman’, which unmistakably point 
to unity, would be as meaningless as the following nonsense verse: — ■ 

i srf^ ii 

mil'll i ii 

This is the English version: — 

An old bull wearing blankets and sandals 
Standing at the passage sings madraka songs; 

Him, asks a Brdhman lady desirous of a son 
“O King, what is the price of garlic in the land of Ruma”. 

The incoherence of the sentences is obvious. 

« V.S. II. iii. 29.— The siitra in full is 
where it is shown that finitude, etc.,, belong to the intellect and not to 
the individual soul. According to a well-known canon of mimamsa 
interpretation, where Scripture contradicts common experience, the 
Sruti has to be interpreted in a secondary way, as in ‘adityo yiipah’ — 
the sun is the sacrificial post. Here the Sruti can be literally under- 
stood if the conflict can be shown to be only apparent. 

, ’ — On the strength of arthSpatti pramana — ^implication 

or postulation. Because of the fact that bondage can be eradicated 


II. 6] SUPERIMPOSITION 5 

in order that it (the teaching) may be easily understood. As such 
there can be no blemish. 

II. 6. Objection . — When beginning to write a treatise, those 
who adhere to hoary tradition first propitiate the deity of their 
choice by worship and prostration, as befitting the work they have 
undertaken, and start with such benedictory words as they may 
remember, e.g., ‘atha’, ‘vrddhi’, etc.,® or after meeting with (an 
auspicious) sight like a pot of curds, etc. The practice of wise men 
is also our authority. And it is well known that the removal of 
obstacles is the result of such prayer. Great many are the 
impediments to one undertaking a work relating to a subject 
of such a high purpose (as liberation). And the saying goes — 
many are the impediments in the way of one’s attaining the good. 
(The Sruti) also reminds us — ■' Therefore to them (Gods) it is 
distasteful, viz., men becoming enlightened’ ;® and it is common 
knowledge that those, to whom a thing is distasteful, create 
obstacles in its way. Then how did the commentator (§amkara) 
confidently proceed with his work, having discarded the ancient 
tradition by not prefacing it with a benediction ? 

7. [Page 3] The objection is thus met: — The comment 
beginning with “ the notions of the ‘ Thou ’ and the ‘ I ’ etc.”, 
and ending with “ the mutual identity of their attributes also 
is absolutely untenable ” (amounts to mangalacarana — ^benedic- 
tion). Its meaning is that the entity which is free from all evil 
and is one homogeneous sentience is what constitutes the inner 
Self; and the comment is intended to show that the manifesta- 
tion of something different in an entity which in reality is as 
described, is anyway illusory (mithya). As such, to one who 
in that comment, though it is explicative of a different topic 
(i.e., intended for a different purpose, viz., elucidation of 
adhyasa), is contemplating atman as that in which all perturbations 
have been eradicated and as the sole essence of consciousness, 


by knowledge on the only alternative that it is the product of nescience, 
adhyasa— nescience, has to be expounded. 

s The words ‘atha, vrddhi’, etc., are regarded as indicating 
auspiciousness. 

* The word ‘vijnayate’ is used in ancient literature when the 
authority cited is the Veda, particularly the BrShmana portion. In the 
present case, the quotation is from the Brhadaranyaka Upanisad (I. iv. 10) 
which is a portion of the Satapatha Brdhma^a of the ^ukla Yajurveda, 



6 PANQAPADIKA of PADMAPADA [III. 9 

whence could arise accidents causing obstruction Hence the 
revered Bhasyakara (is to be regarded as) the foremost in the 
maintenance of the orthodox tradition. 

III. 8. (Now follows the bhasya text) — [“It is evident 
that the mutual identity of the object (visaya) and the subject 
(visayi), which are as opposite in character as darkness and light, 
is what is impossible to support] ”. (Here these questions appear 
pertinent :) Which is this opposition ? Of what nature is the 
mutual identity (indistinguishability) held to be? On account of the 
untenability of which is the comparison — ‘ like darkness and light ’ 
adduced ? If opposition (virodha) is defined as mutual exclusion 
(lit. non-residence in the same locus), then the presence of light 
would not warrant the presence of darkness. But this is not 
true. It is common knowledge that in a dimly-lit room objects 
(lit. colour or shape) are perceived not clearly but elsewhere 
(i.e., where well-lit) clearly.^^ From this it is obvious that in a 
room having a dim light, darkness also exists in some degree. 
Similarly, even in shade, warmth experienced in varying degrees 
indicates the presence of sunshine therein. From this it must 
be understood that corn-presence of heat and cold may be taken 
to have been established. 

9. We say (in answer) that opposition is characterized by 
the absence of mutual identity (tadatmya).^* This means that 
no actual relation is possible as in the case of the universal and 
the particular (jati and vyakti). Hence the identity of the one 
with the other, that is, their mutual identification is indefensible. 


Though there is no explicit offer of prayer and the bhasya 
starts with the topic of superimposition, Samkara, it is clear, has in 
mind the pure Consciousness, the sole Reality. As such, it cannot be 
said that he has not sought divine benediction. 

The point is that in one and the same place, contrary to the 
definition given above, there is light as well as darkness. In a dimly-lit 
room, unlike in a well-lit place, things are dimly seen. In so far as they 
are seen, they indicate the presence of light, but in so far as they 
are dimly seen, they indicate the presence of darkness. 

11 The analogy of light and darkness, says the Siddhantin, is 
adduced to mark mutual opposition not on the ground of residence 
i n a common locus but on that of identity ?Tr^Ri9. ' There 

is no tadatmya relation between light and darkness as we find, say, 
in jati and vyakti, i.e., between the universal and the particular, 



IV. 10] 


SUPERIMPOSITION 


7 


How (is it that there can be no identity) In so far as its 
nature is concerned (;.e., in itself— svatastavat), the visayi or 
the self can have (in reality) no identity of being with the visaya 
or the non-self, because it (the self) is wholly of the essence of 
consciousness (cidekarasa) ; nor through the other (visaya) because 
it is incapable of transformation (pari nama) and is unattached. 
The object also cannot by its own nature attain identity of being 
with the self by transforming itself into consciousness (cit), for 
then it will lose its characteristic as object by attaining equal 
status with consciousness'. Nor through the other (the self by 
drawing the non-self into itself) can the non-self partake of the 
nature of the self, for the self is actionless (niskriya).i^ 

IV. 10. [As regards their qualities even, there is absolutely 
(no question of identity).] When it is so (/.c., when it is proved 
that there can be no identity of being), their attributes cannot, 
having dissociated themselves from their substrates, exist else- 
where (/.e., the attributes of the self in the non-self and vice-versa) •, 
and this is (pointed out to be) a well-known fact. The word 
‘ iti ’ (in “ sutaram itaretarabhavtnupapattiriti ”) denotes reason. 
Because of the reason adduced, there arises no notion of identity. 
Therefore (atah) (we have the bhasya text), — [the subject which 
is denoted by the notion ‘ 1 ’ and is of the nature of intelligence] . 
That which in that notion is the ‘ not-this ’ is pure consciousness. 
With that (pure consciousness) there is identity (relation) as it were, 
of that which is denoted by the ‘ thou ’, as is evident in the notion 
‘ I am a man’ — ‘ thou ’ in the sense (laksanatah) of being mani- 
fested by virtue of the ‘ that ’ {viz., the aforesaid sentient). 
That alone is superimposition.^® 

[And of its properties also — taddharmananca] ; — When how- 
ever there occurs the superimposition of objects (visaya), the 


The question is raised why illusory identity relation should 
not exist between the self and the not-self as in the case of mother- 
of-pearl and silver though real identity may fce barred. The p.p. 
answer begins with 

For this expression cf. Patanjala Yoga- 

sutra, IV. 22. 

IS What the purvapaksin wishes to show is that there is no 
transference — adhyasa, even in the notion ‘I am a man’. The identity 
between the ‘I’ and the ‘Thou’ notions is only apparent due to the 
fact that the latter manifests itself throu|h the cit or consciousness, 



8 PAtgAPADIKA OF PADMAPADA [V. 13 

superimposition of their properties results by implication ; still 
even without the superimposition of objects, the superimposition 
of their properties is perceived, as in the case of the property of 
hearing, etc., of deaf persons.^® Hence the separate mention 
(of the superimposition of properties). 

11. [Page 4] (The bhasya further makes the statement)— 
In contrast to it {i.e., conversely), of the subject and its pro- 
perties— visayinah taddharmapanca ”]. This means — of cons- 
ciousness (cetana) and of its properties (there can be no super- 
imposition on the object). 

Well, since the subject is of the essence of consciousness, 
whence could it possess properties which might be conceived as 
being superimposed on the object ? 

This is our reply: Joy, experience of sense-objects and eternity, 
these are the properties. Though non-distinct they appear as 
distinct from the cit (pure consciousness).^’ Hence (there is) 
no blemish (in the above argument). 

12. Superimposition (adhyasa) means the manifestation of 
the nature of something in another which is not of that nature. 
That (manifestation), it is reasonable to hold, is false (mithya). 
The word ‘ mithya ’ is of double signification — it is denotative of 
negation as well as of inexpressibility (anirvacanlyata). Here it 
is an expression of negation. (The above statement) “ mithyeti 
bhavitum yuktam ” means that it is reasonable to ascribe non- 
existence alone to superimposition (adhyasa). 

V.13. Though it is so {i.e., though superimposition is not 
warranted), yet it is seen to be congenital, or a constant accom- 
paniment of the mere being (matra) of the inner self.^® This means 


When a deaf man says ‘I cannot hear’ there is no tadatmya 
between the self and the sense of bearing, but there is tadatmya 
between the self and hearing which is the property of the auditory 
sense. 

Atman in its pristine state is attributeless, but in the empirical 
sphere, attributes like existence, consciousness and bliss are spoken of 
as belonging to atman. It is in the different psychoses that atman 
appears as endowed with different attributes; cf. Bhamati, p. 156; also 
V.P.S., p. 12. 

Lokavyavahara is explained as superimposition in the form of 
‘I’ and ‘mine’. Superimposition is heginningless (naisargikah) judged 
from its character as a continuous stream; but in its individual character 



V. 14] 


SUPERIMPOSITION 


9 


the mutual superimposition of the ‘ thou ’ and the ‘ I ’ as exempli- 
fied in the worlds (loka) usage (vyavahara) — [‘ I am this’ and 
‘ mine is this ’].^® 

Hence (because it is established by expeirence), just as the 
existence of the ‘ I ’ notion cannot be negated (being indubitable), 
even so that of superimposition ; (the ego-concept necessarily 
involves the notion of superimposition). By the word ‘loka’ 
is meant the whole class of beings permeated by the conceit, 
‘I am a man ’ (i.e., ego-conscious). Vyavahara is usage. 
(How) ? Superiraposition as is evident in ‘ I ’ and ‘ mine ’ means 
egoity in the form of ‘ I am a man ’. (Hence the sentence means 
that the conceit ‘ I am a man,’ is a matter of common experience 
and is beginningless.) 

14. [Satyanrte mithunikrtya — coupling together truth and 
error.] ‘ Satyam ’ means, ‘not this’ (i.e., other than the world 
of perception ; intelligence — caitanya). ‘ Anrtam,’ that which is 
connoted by the ‘ thou ’ (i.e., the insentient world), because even 
in itself (svarupatopi) it is illusory knowledge.®® In the phrase 
“having made an erroneous transfer”, as also in “having 
coupled ” (adhyasya, mithumkrtya) the suffix ‘ ktva ’ is not used 
on the admission that it denotes a time prior to and an action 
different from ‘ lokavyavahara ’ (egoism taking the form ‘ I am 
a man ’, etc.), as in the statement, ‘ having eaten he goes ’ ; 


(vyaktirupena) it has a beginning as each act of superimposition 
presupposes a previous one as its cause. Such usage as ‘I am this’, 
‘this is mine’ involving mutual superimposition is found naturally 
(i.e., universally) wherever the internal self as such is felt. ‘Matra’ 
excludes the phenomenal phase of caitanya. 

is used in different senses: knowing — fW, expression 
— getting — procedure — Here it is used in the 
first two senses — SftR first arises the illu- 

sory knowledge and then is expression given to it. Both are beginning- 
less. 

Caitanya or Brahman on the contrary has its adhyasa through 
its association with the limiting conditions — upadhi. ' Hence the 
adhyasa in the case of Brahman is spoken of as samsr§tadhyasa or 
sopadhika. In itself Brahman is uncontaminated. It is only as 
conditioned that Brahman is superimposed, while the ‘thou’ category 
is directly superimposed being mithyS by nature. The question arises 
when and how Brahman became associated with limitations. The 
answer is — anadi — beginningless and inexplicable. 



10 PANgAPAOIKA OF PADMAPADA [V. 15 

because there is no reference to a different act. The phrases 
‘ adhyasya and ‘ naisargikoyam lokavyavaharah,’ both, in 
substance point to the act of erroneous transference (adhyasa 
kriya, and not to priority in time or to a distinct act).^^ Further 
in the concluding part (of this section on superimposition, the 
Bhasyakara) has only this as the final statement: “ In the matter 
aforesaid this superimposition is beginningless and endless (till 
the rise of knowledge) ”, because, it is naisargika (continuous like 
a stream).®^ Hence like the phrase — “ the Self’s nature is intelli- 
gence” (the termination ‘ ktva ’) should be understood as used 
in a figurative sense only (vyapadesamatram). 

15. [“ Mithyajnana nimitta iti”®® — that which is mithya 
(erroneous) and at the same time, ajn ana (nescience) is mithya- 
jnana.] The word ‘ mithya ’ means ‘ inexpressible ’ (anirvacaniya), 
and by the word ‘ ajnana ’ is meant the potency of avidya which 
is of the nature of insentience and is the negation of jiiana. And 
‘ tannimitta ’ means ‘ having that {viz., mithyajnana) as the 
material cause.’ 


21 Because it ends in 
referring to one and the same act, viz., the act of superimposition. 

22 What the author says is that the contextual meaning is to be 
ascertained from the paragraph as a whole — the thesis with which it 
starts and the conclusion arrived at (upakrama and upasamhara). Here 
the conclusion makes no mention of teifiporal succession or of dis- 
tinction of one act from another. Hence the termination ‘ktva’ should 
be regarded as an expletive ; and merely in order to give it signifi- 
cance, the sentence-unity (vakyartha) ought not to be sacrificed. 

22 (a) firKJfiiRfJrfrtfi: m «rT(?cTiiFiTfrt;rei«r;, ‘ msRr tig 

=g’ ^1% r.D. 

The resolution of the compound mithyajnana into ‘mithya ’ and ‘ajuSna ’ 
is to oppose the view that superimposition is the outcome of illusory 
knowledge (bhrantijnana). 

{t>) m 3TfRmf3% tgiFtruRiiircr 

II V.P., 11. 

The mention of ‘mithya’ would mean illusory knowledge, and the 
mention of ‘ajnana’ would mean absence of knowledge. It is to reject 
both absence of knowledge and illusory knowledge that the compound 
is split up into ‘mithya’ and ‘ajnana’. Something other than these, 
viz., primal ignorance — mulavidya, constitutes the material cause of 
the world-spectacle. 


- SUPERIMPOSITION | 11: 

V1.16:^^ W is proved to be the product 

of (mithyajnana), how could it be said to be beginningless 
(naisargika) ? Here is the answer : — It cannot but be admitted 
that there exists this potency of nescience in things external, as 
well as internal, its existence being a constant accompaniment 
of their inner nature. Otherwise {i.e., if nescience is not 
admitted) the appearance of illusory objects becomes inexplica- 
ble.^^ And that nescience does not cause any impediment to 
the manifestation of the real nature of insentient objects since 
their non-cognition is caused merely by the absence of the 
(necessary) means of valid knowledge. [Page 5] Prior to the 
manifestation of ' silver ’ and after (its manifestation also), even 
though it (avidya) exists, its real nature (f.e., of silver) is appre- 
hended.^’^ Hence it (avidya) is but the cause of the manifestation 


What the author means is that avidya in its nature as primal cause 
is beginningless, but as a specific adhyasa it is a product of precedent 
illusory knowledge. Hence there is no contradiction in the statements 
naimittika and naisargika. Hence, says V, that positive nescience 
has atman as its locus. That nescience exists is proved 
both by inference as indicated by the word ‘avaiyamV and by percep- 
tion as indicated by the word ‘this’ esa. And this avidya is present 
wherever there is caitanya. 

But as a matter of fact ‘shell-silver’ and ‘rope-serpent’ are 
apprehended. Hence presumption, (^^U%) also establishes nescience. 
The superimposition of ego on pure consciousness or of silver on nacre 
comprising false object — arthadhyasa, and false knowledge— jnana- 
dhyasa, necessitates the postulation of some material cause therefor, 
which must also be erroneous— mithy a. 

Having postulated a single primary nescience which has atman 
as its ground — a^raya, it is pointed out that its objects (vi§aya) are 
not insentient objects like pot, etc. Otherwise with the knowledge 
of pot, etc., the primal nescience must disappear, but it does not till the 
final release — moksa. Then how is the non-cognition of pot to be 
accounted for? It is because of the absence of vrtti or psychosis 
(pramanavaikalyat) that there arises no perceptive knowledge of the 
same. 

What is sought to be proved is that nescience does not veil things 
other than atman. In case avidya which has its ground in atman veils 
non-sentient objects, then, since objects cannot manifest themselves 
without the desrtuction of the obscuring veil, the primal ignorance 
relating to atman would disappear with the rise of the knowledge of 
objects. Even though avidya exists in atman at all times — past, present 



12 


[VI. 16 


PAtgAI^ADIKA OF PADMAPADA 

of something different (from the original, the real; e.g., appear- 4 

ance of silver in shell— rupantara. This is due to the vik?epa- 
iakti of avidya). In the inner self however which is of the nature 
of (pure) intelligence and as such self-lucent, since the non-mani- 
festation of Brahman cannot be accounted for by anything else, 
its non-manifestation (it must be admitted) is due to the obstruc- 
tion caused by the potency of nescience which is existent therein 
(in Brahman) and is beginningless.®® Hence it (primal nescience) 
obstructs the manifestation of the real nature of Brahman in the 
inner self (jiva) and it becomes the cause of the appearance of 
something other than its nature, like the ego notion, etc. ; and in 
deep slumber, etc., having remained in the residual state of mere 
impressions of ego-notion, etc., which are the outcome of its 
projective power, it revives again (on waking). Hence though the 
superimposition as evidenced in the notions of men such as ‘ I ’ 
and ‘ mine ’ is beginningless (because the hetu, viz., avidya is 
bcginningless) it is spoken of as having mithyajhana as its cause, 
but not as adventitious.®® Therefore its beginninglessness is 
not in conflict with its coming into existence as the result of a 
cause.®® 

and future, because objects in their nature are perceived, ajnana or 
avidya, it must be admitted, does not draw the veil on things other 
than the self. 

®® In its pristine condition, one’s inner self is characterised by 
existence and luminosity and as such it must manifest itself and yet 
one characterises it as Tt is not’, ‘It does not manifest itself’. So the 
presumption is that there must be some positive entity obscuring the 
self and that entity is avidya or primal ignorance. Again, without first 
obscuring the ground (adhisthana, viz., the Brahman — this is the 
avarana-sakti), avidya cannot bring about the world-spectacle (the 
phenomenal world) which is due to its viksepa-^akti, Le., making reality 
appear as something different. And because this obscuration as well 
as projection is the outcome of ignorance, nescience must be positive. 

This is a case of inferring the cause from the effect. — V.P., 15-16. 

®® ;?r — ^When it is said that superimposition is caused by 

mithyajnana, it should not be supposed that it comes into being de novo. 

It only means that it requires avidya as its logical precedent if it 
should be properly explained. 

®® Paradoxical as it may seem, superimposition may be described 
both as beginningless and produced from an antecedent cause, viz., 
ipithyajnana. It is not self-contradictory, . 


VII. 17] SUPERIMPOSITION 13 

VII. 17. [“ And (erroneously transferring the attributes) of 
the one with those of the other — anyonyadharmamsca; ”.] The 
reason why the attributes are taken separately is to show that in 
some cases superimposition of mere attributes (without reference 
to the substance) is perceived (as in ‘I am deaf’. Deafness is 
the property of the organ of hearing and not of the self). 
[“Because of not discriminating the one from the other’’— — 
itaretaravivekena], which means confounding the one with the 
other (lit. regarding both as one; ekatapatti). Of which dharmin, 
how and where is the adhyasa? Again, where is the superimpo- 
sition of attributes perceived ? These (questions) the Bhasyakara 
himself answers. He points to the form that superimposition 
takes in “ This am I ” and “ This is mine ”. The ego notion 
so far is the first adhyasa.®^ 

Is it not that the integral (partless) cit alone manifests itself 
in the ‘ aham— ego ’ and that there is no additional part (seen in 
the ego-notion) either superimposed or not superimposed 

We will show; (when explicating the ‘ego’) how the 
superimposed part {viz., the insentient) is involved therein. 

18. Well, in the notion — ‘ this ’ (referring to one’s body), 
the body — the aggregate of cause and effect which is the means of 
the enjoyment (of the agent denoted by the ego — ‘ aham karta ’) 
is manifest to view {i.e., is seen as the object of perception) ; and in 
‘ this is mine’, (the body) is related to the agent as his property 
{i.e., as a thing distinct from him). There (in consequence) 
nothing appears to be superimposed. 

Here is the answer: When the notion of ego as agent is 
(admitted to be) a case of superimposition, then alone is it evident 

The aham-ego is a complex of cit and acit — sentience and 
insentience. Why the author regards the ego-superimposition 
as the initiative adhyasa, is because it is the starting point of all the 
karyadhyasas, the effect-series (V, p. 17). Though the superimposition 
of nescience on consciousness which is pure, integral, bliss entire, and 
witness of ajnana {i.e., it reveals ignorance) is beginningless, the aham- 
karadhyasa is spoken of as the beginning in the effect-series — karya.; 
dhyasa. 

In all cases of superimposition, two apprehensions are involved; 
but in the ego-concept, the opponent says, there is only one and 
hence superimposition is absent. ■ The answer is that even in this con- 
cept two notions are present, the one real, the other transferred, similar 
to ‘this’ and the ‘silver’ in ‘This is silver’, ■ ' 



14 PASgAPADIKA OF PADMAPADA [VIII. 19 

that its auxiliary also is an erroneous notion; (when the notion 
of self— jiva as manifested in the ‘I’ is error-ridden, the body 
which is intended for its service is likewise an erroneous notion, 
i.e., of like nature, when spoken of as ‘ this is mine ’). Of one 
who has been crowned king in a dream, or of a king who is a 
creation of mighty magic,®® the paraphernalia of royalty cannot 
have any real existence. It is thus that all worldly activities 
beginning with the ego-agency (I am doer, etc.), and embracing 
action, means and results (phala) are superimposed on atman 
which is by nature eternal, pure, enlightened and free. Hence 
it is by such knowledge as culminates in the experience of the 
identity of atman with Brahman, thus characterised, that freedom 
from the evil-causing adhyasa (superimposition) results, so that 
the beginning of a study of the Vedanta philosophy having such 
(knowledge) as its content becomes appropriate.®^ 

VIII. 19. The Bhasya beginning with [“well, what is it that 
superimposition means ? ” (up to ‘ sarvalokapratyaksah) is in- 
tended to substantiate (the doctrine of) ‘superimposition’ 
(adhyasa). In that again, what precedes the passage—* How again 
(can perception, etc., which are the means of right knowledge) 
have reference to that which is error-contaminated ?’ — is intended 
to delineate the nature of superimposition and to prove its proba- 
bility (sambhavana). Beginning with that {viz., how again, etc., 
and ending in ‘ sarvalokapratyaksali ’) the Bhasya is meant for 
demonstrating its existence (by pramana) — thus (is the Bha§ya) 
to be split up (while construing). 

20. [Page 6] If that be so, there is no need for a separate 
exposition of its definition and its probability. What cannot be 
defined and is improbable cannot be established, by any instru- 
ment of knowledge. And when its existence is specifically 
assured by perceptive knowledge, there arises no need for a specific 
mention (of definition and probability)®® (lit. indefinability and 


Omitted in A.K.S. Edition, p. 135. 

®* Why the study of the Vedanta Sastra should be undertaken 
is stated. The knowledge one gets from such study destroys the ills of 
life as a result of the intuitive perception of identity.— V, p. 18. 

®® What the objector means is that when superimposition is 
proved to be a matter of experience (c/. questions 

regarding its knowabiiity and probability do not arise at all. Hence 
he argues that the bhasya relating to the definition of superimposition 


VIII. 22] superimposition 

improbability cannot be predicated of what is actually given in 
perception). 

(The objection) is thus met: It is not merely by showing 
(the agency in knowing), in the case of that man only who is under 
the conceit of ‘ I ’ and ‘ mine’ in respect of the body and the senses, 
etc. {i.e., of the man who confounds his self with his body and 
who thinks that the self possesses the senses) that its erroneous 
nature can be established. What is the cause of it? (i.e., what 
is the reason of its not being possible to determine that such a 
conceit is due to nescience ?) Ordinarily, experience of nescience 
is non ejrunlike that of shell-silver or double-moon. It is only when 
the apprehension is sublated that it becomes evident (I.e., that the 
apprehension was erroneous); but here (in the conceit of ‘ I ’ 
and ‘ Thou ’) it (sublation) is not perceived. Hence the definition 
of adhyasa (superimposition), having (first) been stated the nature 
of the notions (of ‘ I ’ and ‘ mine ’) has to be described as falling 
under that definition.®® 

21. Well, even then what is pertinent to the present context 
is the proof of the existence of an object illustrative of that defini- 
tion and nothing more. Where the reality of a thing is not 
vouched for by a valid means of knowledge, there alone can doubt 
as to its existence arise. If it did, there would then be the necessity 
of a distinct statement of probability for its (doubt’s) removal.®’ 

22. True, it is even so. Though a particular object becomes 
manifest to knowledge (in the origination of which knowledge) no 
blemish of any kind is perceived even if attempted to be sought, 
it is within one’s experience that the knowledge of that object is 
discredited as being improbable on the basis of a precedent 

and its probability is purposeless. The word anubhava or experience 
is used to denote knowledge, other than recollection (smrti), such as 
perception, inference, verbal testimony, etc. 

®5 The ‘I’ and the ‘mine’ conceits no doubt point to a ‘knower’ 
but they need not on that account be erroneous notions. Hence to 
prove that they are erroneous we must first define what superimposition 
is and show that these conceits are subsumed under that definition. 

®’ That superimposition is to be defined is admitted, but doubt 
is cast on the necessity of showing the probability of superimposition. 
What is said in answer is that it is only where there is probability 
that determination by definition is possible. When prima facie a thing 
is improbable, no attempt need be made to determine its nature. That 
adhyasa is probable should therefore be brought home. 


16 PANC^APADIKA of PADMAPADA [IX. 23 

pramtna (means of right knowledge) which is of universal accept- 
ance and of unquestioned validity ; for instance, the sun-spots 
portending calamity, or the (phantom of) swallowing of a mansion 
by one expert in magic. In like manner, the superimposition on 
the self which is not comprehended as the object, which is void 
of all relation, which exhibits none of the properties which 
constitute the reason for superimposition and which, because 
of its intrinsic nature as pure intelligence, is potent to dispel even 
the error with which an external object is encompassed, (in such 
atman, the notion of super imposition), when no defect in the sense- 
organs is perceived to exist, might be supposed to be unreal.®® 

Thus would one entertain a doubt regarding the possibility 
of superimposition. In order that there may be no room for 
such a doubt, it is essential that as distinct from the proof of the 
existence of superimposition, its probability also must be set forth. 
Now, that (viz., the triad consisting of definition, probability 
and valid reason) will be stated (in order). 

IX. 23. [What is it that is meant by the term adhyasa (super- 
imposition) ? asks (the opponent).] The word ‘what — kim ’ 
is, as is well known, used to denote a question as well as an 
objection and both are possible here; hence a statement compre- 
hending both is (tantrena— by design) made.®* And there again 

What the opponent wishes to emphasise is that the so-called 
superimposition as illustrated in the ‘I’ and ‘mine’ notions is no 
superimposition at all. Just as we perceive the spots in sun owing to 
some defect in our eye though they are .unreal, even so the ‘I’ and 
‘mine’ are regarded as erroneous notions due to some defect in the 
means of apprehension. The vedantin however regards such notions not 
as bhrama or unreal, but as pram§— real in the empirical sphere. To 
the opponent the adhyasa of anatman, the inert, on atman does not 
exist. It is a case of bhranti. His main point is that the ingredients 
necessary for adhyasa are lacking. Atman is not perceived as identical 
with what is superimposed, like the shell-silver. It cannot 
be an object, being self-luminous. Atman is relationless. The notion 
of superimposition is due to some defect in the perceiver, but atman 
is freefrom any defect; and as such superimposition, says the opponent, 
is impossible. — Superimposition presupposes that the sub- 

strate should resemble the object superimposed in its attributes and in 
the parts composing it; but atman resembles the superimposed in 
neither. Hence no room for superimpositibn. 

** Tantra is a single statement with a double import. It 

is a technical term.-^Fiisfe S.D., Ehg. Trans. G.O.S., p. 227, 



DC. 24] SUPERIMPOSITION 17 

having first stated the definition (of superimposition) in answer to 
the question (presuming it to be such), and again anticipating the 
objection to the probability of that very thing (superimposition), 
(the siddhantin) meets it. In regard to atopic of this nature (i.e., 
where the subject under discussion is difficult of comprehension) 
the writers, for the easy understanding of the learners, proceed as 
if a questioner were in their very presence and meet his criticism 
supposing that he has raised that criticism with a particular 
object ; and again postulating an objection on the ground that 
he is making his own meaning explicit (/.«., that he meant some- 
thing else) endeavour to satisfy him. This is the method of 
exposition in all such contexts in the work. 

24. [It (superimposition) is “the manifestation, in some other 
object, of that which is of the nature of recollection of what 
had been observed before]— thus is enunciated the definition of 
the term ‘ superimposition ’ (adhyasa) found in the question 
{viz., ‘ what is it that is meant by adhyasa ? ’). Here, when it is 
said ‘ paratra ’ (‘ in some other object’) it becomes evident by 
implication that the manifestation is of something other (than 
the presented object). (The phrase) ‘ being of the nature of 
recollection ’ is its (manifested object— parasya) attribute. 
What is recollected — that is ‘ recollection ’. This construction is 
justified on the ground of usage, for the termination ‘ ghan ’, 
etc., is sometimes used in karaka which is not denotative of 
subject though its sense is derivative.*® [Page 7]. The mani- 
fested object only resembles the object remembered {i.e., the ap- 
pearance, i.e., rupa of the superimposed object, is only similar 
to the appearance of the recollected object), but is not the thing 
(actually) recollected; and this is clear from the fact that what 
is presented to the sense (and not what is remembered) is (what is) 
manifested. That it (adhyasa) resembles recollection is corroborated 


Here the word ‘smfti’ is taken in the sense of what 
is recollected, being its derivative meaning, spiRr:. Now 

grammar requires that ‘ktin’ termination (in ^’ife:) which is included 
in the ‘ghan’ group should be affixed to roots to form derivatives in 
all cases except the nominative and only when their sense is conven- 
tional— rudhi, ^ Panini, III. 3-19). But the 

word ‘smrti’ is construed here against common convention and yet 
the termination ‘ktin’ is affixed. The justification is that it follows 
usage, 


2 



!8 PANgAPADIKA OF PADMAPADA [fX. 24 

by the explanation that it is the manifestation of what was per- 
ceived in the past. There can be no manifestation of silver to 
one in direct sense-contact with the shell, who has not seen silver 
before." 

And since, on the strength (of this sentence — vakya- 
samarthyat), it is clear that this definition is also the definition 
of the knowledge (avabhasa) of the illusory object. (There is no 
need for a separate definition of illusory knowledge as apart from 
illusory object).*^ 

How? (Yes), it will be answered. Of this (/.e., of the 
illusory knowledge) the manifestation is similar to the mani- 
festation of recollection {i.e., recollective knowledge) ; but not 
recollection itself, since the knowledge of the particular object 
(say, silver in the mart) given in past pramana (Perception, etc.), 
does not manifest itself as such (i.e., as the object of past expe- 
rience. If it did, the silver in illusion should have assumed the 
form ‘ that silver — tadrajatam but it appears as ‘ this silver — 
idam rajatam ’). Then how do you account for its similarity 
(rupa) with recollection ? Because it arises through having the 
past pramana as its origin. The origination of the knowledge 
which illumines an object {viz., the presented silver) with which 
there is no sense-contact is impossible unless that origination 
be through that {i.e., samskara) arising from the pramana which 
in the past occasioned the knowledge relating to that object, viz., 
silver.*® 


** The persistence of past impressions — samskaras, is essential 
both for memory-recall and for illusory perception. Hence the use 
of the phrase — ^purvadr§ta, which implies that unless past impressions 
are revived, neither memory nor illusion is possible. But in the case 
of illusion it is not the very object of past experience that manifests 
itself but one belonging to that jati. 

The point is that in shell-silver not only is the object silver 
illusory, but also its knowledge; we have both arthadhyasa or vi§aya- 
dhyasa and jnanadhyasa. The former is defined as, ‘superimposition 
is that thing similar to the remembered thing which appears as the 
self of a distinct object’. The latter is defined as, ‘superimposition 
is that cognition similar to memory’.— -Vide V.P.S., p. 26. 

in reality there is no contact- between the eye and the silver. 
The eye perceives only the sh^lT-dfd^, -biii' owing to past impressions 
“rsamskiras ' aided by imperfect., vision, silver manifests itself afresh. 
This is the Vedantic doctrine of adhySsa,. 


X. ^ ^ ^ ^ SUPERIMPOSITION 

X.25. Some one (who is opposed to this view) says: When 
the eye is in contact with a particular object and the knowledge 
is of some other object, is that not recollection only ?“ But the 
knowledge that it is recollection— (smrtirityanubhavah) is lacking. 
Owing to some special affection of the sense-organs, etc., which 
are the means of knowledge, some particular object (say silver) 
is revived in memory (and not some other nacre though there is 
very close affinity with the ‘ this ’)• Further, owing to that 
affection the instrumentality (capacity) of the sense-organ to 
manifest the special feature of the object {viz., nacreness or dis- 
tinctness from silver) with which it has come into contact is 
destroyed. Hence, because of the failure to mark the distinction, 
due only to this sense-defect, between the perceived and the re- 
membered which arise without intermission, a unitary cognition 
is spoken of as if arisen when actually there is none, very like the 
use of the expression “ (I perceive) a single tree ” when two trees 
which are at a distance (are seen).*® 

26. How could (one may urge) it be recollection (when there 
is absence of memory-reviving impressions — samskara) in the case 
of a boy who has never tasted (anything) bitter, but who owing to 
bilious disorder feels the bitter taste in that which is sweet ? 

Here is the answer: — because of its {i.e., of bitter) experience 
in some other birth. If it were not so, the fact of not having 
previously experienced being on a par (with what is experienced) 
would (naturally) lead to the question— why should not an abso- 
lutely non-existent seventh taste be felt?*® Hence the bile itself 


** Prabhakara, in advocating the akhyativada, is relying upon the 
law of the excluded middle; for he says that knowledge must be either 
recollective or anubhava which latter includes perception, inference, 
etc., and that there is no other kind in between these two. The 
idealists (particularly of the school of ^amkara), relying on experience, 
maintain that there is another variety of knowledge, viz., illusory. 
The superimposed silver is not the recollected silver* nor is the super- 
imposed knowledge the same as recollective knowledge. 

*® The akhyativSdin’s point is that the non-discrimination between 
the perceived and the revived is the cause of pravftti, i.e., activity as 
evidenced in one’s going to take the silver. In a ‘bhrama’ situation, 
there are four elements— jnSna, icchfi, kfd, sabda. PrabhSkara main- 
tains that the first is always valid while the other three are false. 

** Only six kinds of taste are admitted— §adrasa: pungent—^, 
sour— saline — bitter-'4^‘SB, sweet — astringent— 


20 PANgAPADIK A OF PADMAPADA [X. 26 

(which is the dosa) is the cause of the inability to feel the sweet 
taste, of the recollection of the bitter taste, and of the obscura- 
tion of that recollection. (How is it known that the dosa has 
such potency ?) The nature of the cause is ascertained from the 
effect. (We must infer that a dosa causes only this and not that 
on the evidence of the result — karya). Hence it must be under- 
stood that, in all cases where the cognition of something differ- 
ent from the one with which the sense is in contact arises, the 
explanation is that there has been a revival of memory and its 
obscuration.*^ 


*’ The akhyativada or the doctrine of non-apprehension is criti- 
cised in the Vivarana in some detail (vide p. 23 ff.). It has been 
argued that akhyati is illusion ('^w) and that anyathakhyati, anir- 
vacanlya khySti, etc., are untenable in an illusory context. Now the 
negative particle in the akhyati must mean either negation (3T¥rR) or 
something other (a?'?!) or something opposite (iW^^), videT.D. Jnana- 
bhdva or absence of knowledge is negation, but illusion is admitted 
to be knowledge and not absence of knowledge; further in deep sleep 
there is total absence of knowledge and we would be obliged to extend 
the scope of the term ‘akhyati’ to that state (3Tl%a?Ilp). Next, if it' 
should mean some peculiar knowledge it will then amount to 

cognition leading to action in relation to a false object, or 

cognition of several undifferentiated objects (3Tr%l%‘gjT%W^T4^rq') ; the 
first alternative is faulty because in the case of those who have no 
desire to possess ‘the silver’ there is illusion, but since it is not the 
hetu to prompt action it would not be akhyati. The second alternative 
also fails. The word ‘undifferentiated’ (3?t%H‘®) cannot mean 
identity, for when we use an expression ‘this is silver’ two 

distinct words are uttered and the objects ‘idam’ and ‘rajatam’ appear 
as distincts; and as such the cognition— ‘ this is silver’ will not be then 
cognition of things undifferentiated. Hence the definition of akhyati 
fails. Again difference (^) may mean the object itself or its quality 
(■q^) ; e.g., ’13:^^ may be either 13 itself or a quality of 13. It 
cannot be the first, for then the cognition ‘this is silver’ will cease 
to be a case of akhyati; for the ‘bheda’ say, of silver, is perceived along 
with the object, viz., ‘idam’. 

Now the third alternative, v/ 2 ., that akhyati means ‘what is 
opposed to khyati (f%W), is combated (vide T.D.). The cognition of 
cloth is opposed to the cognition of pot and one may arise after the 
other, but that is not regarded as akhyati though one cognition is 
opposed to the other. Again the antecedent negation of cognition 
(^PTSTiWI') being the opposite of cognition would fall under akhyati, 


XL 27] V; SUPERiMPOSmON /r 2i 

XI. 2^. Sidd^ But it may be asked— what is it tha 

is meant by ‘ smaranabhimana ’ It is not, however, presenta- 
tion (lU^, perception say, of silver) as associated with (the past) 
knowledge (jnananuviddhataya),^^ It cannot be that past expe- 
rience (because it is past), will, as the attribute of what is pre- 
sented (silver), become the object (visaya) of recollection (smrti). 


but it is not. How could it be asserted that there is akhyati when 
there is total absence of jhana? 

The Vivararia further points out that on the view that the 
cognition of several objects as undifferentiated constitutes akhyati, 
even right cognition would acquire the character of illusion, ‘Spotted 
cow’ nf:) would be illusory cognition while it is not; here 

jati and vyakti appear as non-distinct. 

T,D,: Does ‘Smaranabhimana’ mean (a) recollective cognition, 
(b) cognition different from it, or (c) both ? It cannot be (a) for when 
that is obscured, recollection itself would disappear; it cannot be {b) 
for if a different cognition is obscured, why should the distinctive 
character of the recollected and the presented object be obscured ? 
Recollection will then point to the distinction between ?^^‘this’ and 
^silver’; (c) it is not for it admits of no possibility. The term 
" * does not precisely connote what is meant. If it is literally 

understood it should mean lack of memory. What is however meant 
is not the denial of memory, but the lack of the knowledge that it is 
memory. Hence is used here for the usual 

^ etc. Smaranabhimana may mean (a) some property 

belonging to the recollected object, c/. TT ^2: where indicates the 
relation of past experience, locality, or time; or (b) the cognition in 
the form Le., and this property is found in the 

recollective cognition. Now (a) fails in the illusory cognition of ‘this 
is that Devadatta’, i,e., when by mistake one might think that he is 
perceiving Devadatta whom in fact he had met before. For here is 
and not its obscuration. Hence it would not be 
This is an additional example given in the V. The PP, urges that the 
relation of past experience with the remembered object is absent 
altogether. For even in the past experience what forms the object is 
only the pot (in ‘this is pot’) and not itself (experience) as conjoined 
with the ‘pot’. No doubt in the view of Prabhakara, the advocate of 
at the very time of anubhava, cognition along with the 
object (say, pot) manifests itself (for he maintains i%32fr), but the objec- 
tion against it is that the saine co|nition cannot both be subject m4 
object^ . / 


22 PAtgAPADIKA OF PADMAPADA [XL 27 

Hence memory manifests the object pure and simple and not 
as associated with the (past) knowledge.®® 

In like manner, in the recall of meanings from words, the 
association of (past) cognition is not perceived, for then cogni- 
tion also would be regarded as word-meaning (i.e., a word instead 
of denoting an object would also denote knowledge which on 
the face of it is absurd).®^ 

Likewise the recollection having a desired spot as its content 
takes the form ‘ that is to be resorted to ; ’ and that recollection 
compasses only what was presented (viz., the pleasant object of 


®® The akhyativadin again urges that the remembered object— ^3: 
is evidently associated with the recollection-* the pot that was cognised’ 
(^lat 'ER:) and as such it could not be said that the recollected object 
is devoid of association with past experience. Tbe answer is that the 
recollection taking the form does arise, but that does not 

mean that the recollected object is associated with past experience. 
For the recollection ‘ irr^r ^3: ’ is inferential cognition derived from 
prakatya arising in the object when first perceived. The recollection 
associated with past cognition is therefore distinct, having arisen from 
impressions caused by anumiti which again is derived from prakatya- 
linga. (This argument is taken from the Bhafta armoury.) 

'F[r4?^T,~A question may be raised here — ^why should 
the recollection of meanings only and not meanings in conjunction 
with past cognition arise from words ? Is it not that words are used 
in order that they may denote the sense of the sentence as a whole ? 
And even when meanings are cognised why should they be admitted 
as recollective? The Vivarapa answers thus: — ^No doubt words are 
used in order that they may subserve the construing of the sentence. 
Still as they are uttered successively and not all at once, their individual 
meanings are inevitably recalled, which in combination signify the 
import of the sentence of which they form part. 

Those who maintain that the meanings of words cohere to bring 
out the import of a proposition (vSkya) are known as ‘Abhihitanvaya- 
vadins’. The Bhatta school of Mimamsa and the Advaitins of the 
Bhamati persuasion belong to this section. Those who maintain that 
words only in association with other congruent words bring out the 
import of a proposition are called ‘Anvitabhidhanavadins’. This is 
the Vivarapa view; while the PrabhSkaras though advocating Anvi- 
tibhidhanavada insist on kriySnvita, action-associated — cf. Varpaka 
IX. For a detailed account of theie views vide SastradipikS, Tarkapada, 

ap-s, ' 


Xl.28] SUPERlMPOSmON 23 

previous knowledge) and it makes no reference to the past cog- 
nition (anubhavajnana). 

28. [Page 8| And as a matter of fact, nearly all recollec- 

tions do occur without any cognitive reference. Nor is (recollec- 
tive) cognition seen to possess in itself a special form that may 
be regarded as smaranabhimana. Indeed cognition which is 
ever an object of inference (as e.g., according to the Bhattas) is 
not in itself seen to be associated with any special form like any 
other object-'^ (whose existence is always to be inferred; e.g., virtue, 
Dharma or akasa). Therefore it is said — “ We infer ‘ jhana ’ 
which is indeed devoid of form The word ‘ anakara ’ 

means that- which is of indefinable form or has no particularity 

of its own (svalaksana). Hence the quality of smaranabhimana 
(smaranabhimanadharma) is not perceived in itself {i.e., in 
recollective cognition) distinct (from the) object (of anubhava). 

29. Nor can smaranabhimana be inferred from some 

object of cognition serving as its probans (lihga), because recollec- 
tion gives us neither more nor less than what the (past) pram§.na 
(say, perception) actually did convey. Nor does any distinct 

(specific) phala (not given in cognition, say, fetching a pot, or 

avoiding a road — hanopadana) serve as the mark (linga, of 
smaranabhimana) since the phala is (always) limited to the object 
of (the past) pramana (see T.D.). 

30. No doubt in some cases and on certain occasions the 
cognitive relation as expressed in ‘ I remember ’ with the recollec- 
tion of a past experienced object, does arise, and that relation is 
the result of the apprehension of the phrase denotative of recollec- 
tion; it is like relating the perceptive cognition of the form ‘ cow ’ 
with ‘ an animal having a dew-lap ’ (caused by the apprehension 
of the word ‘ cow ’)• Hence, (i.e., there being no smarapabhi- 
mana), revival consists only in the manifestation of the object as 
brought to mind through impressions left by the past pramana 
ii.e., by previous experience). And neither cognitively nor 
existentially is there any additional element, whose obscuration, 
through some defect, could have been supposed. Moreover, 
here (in the case of shell-silver) is no manifestation of an object 
of a past pramana (perception, etc.), because it is the manifesta- 
tion of an object that is actually present before one’s eye— this 
point has already been noticed. Hence, the cognition of some- 


24 OF padmapAda: : 

thing (silver) when the contact (of the. eye) is w.ith, something other 
(shell) is not to be classed under memory ; bnt it is illusion, 
XrL31. If that is so, it would be abnormal : the know- 
ledge is of silver, but its substrate is shell. This view appeals to 
none who set any value by experience.^^ 


The akhyativadin observes that if his view, v/z., the silver of 
recollection and the presented object are distinct, is not accepted, it 
means that the silver manifests itself as being identical with the 
presented object. Then these questions have to be answered — (1) Is it 
that the silver elsewhere remaining, manifests itself here? or (2) Is 
the manifested silver but a transformation of the internal conscious- 
ness ? or (3) Is the silver in question inexplicable ? Again, as regards 
(1) it has to be asked: 

(i) is the distant silver perceived by the eye, or 

(ii) by something else ? 

It cannot be (i) for there is no contact between the sense of sight 
and the object in a diiferent locality; it cannot be (ii) for unaided by 
the senses the mind does not travel outside. 

Anyathakhyativadin: We maintain that the eye through super- 
normal relation has the capacity to perceive even an object that is out 
of its purview. 

Akhydtivddin: In that case the cognition should be only of ‘the 
silver in a different region and not the silver here— 

m 

Anyathdkhyativddin: TSlo; the eye, due to the defect (dosa), is 
competent to perceive the distant silver as identical with the shell. 

Akhydtivddin: Then the defect helps the eye to perceive some- 
thing that has not been within one’s experience. 

Anyathdkhydtivadin: No, the mental impression of the previously 
cognised object, v/z., silver, is also necessary. 

Akhyativadin: Then why not everything of past experience be 
perceived and why ‘silver’ in special? 

Anyathdkhydtivadin: For memory-revival, similarity, di similarity, 
etc., are also the necessary elements. 

Akhydtivddin: What do you mean by anyathakhyati ? (i) Is it 
that the manifestation is of one object and the substrate (ground) is 
of another? or (ii) Does one thing manifest itself as another? or 

(iii) Does the cognition relate to an object that has transformed itself 
into another (the shell changing its nature to silver) ? It cannot be 
the first for it is opposed to experience. (Note the PP. text 5?=%# 
on page 8.) Moreover, the silver-cognition must have only silver as it$ 
ground (alambana) and not shelly 


XII. 32] 


SUPERIMPOSITION 


25 


(Anyathakhyativadin) : Well, even where the shell appears 
in its real nature {i.e., shell as shell), the alambanatva (ground) 
means only fitness for (initiating) activity promoted by the appre- 
hension (samvit). The same (shell) here {i.e., in ‘ shell-silver ’ 
apprehension) manifests itself as being fit for activity in relation 
to silver! Hence why should it not serve as the ground? (The 
substratum is the same in both cases.) 

32. {Akhyativadin) : Is the manifestation of the shell as of 
the form of that (viz., silver) absolutely true or not ? If abso- 
lutely true, there should be no sublation of the form — ‘ This is not 
silver ’ just as (the notion) ‘ this is not shell ’ (does not arise when 
we perceive a real shell). But there is the sublation. Hence this 
view is unsupported by any valid reason.®* 

33. If it be argued that the appearance of silver caused by 
some ocular defect is but the shell so transformed, even that 
(argument) is jejune. When milk changes into curds, sublation 
in the form ‘ this is not curds ’ does not occur ; nor is there the 
notion, ‘this is milk ’. But here both these are perceived (viz., 
‘this is not silver’, ‘this is shell’). Again if the shell has 


Since manifestation and ground are different 
this doubt need not be entertained. j 

Akhyativadin', Then what does alambanatva mean? (i) Is it a 
transference of form ? or (ii) Is it something relating to activity 
consequent on apprehension ? or (:ii) Is it dependence on atiSaya 
produced by apprehension ? Not the (i), the shell cannot transfer its 
own form to the silver; not the (ii); when we come across a serpent, 
activity in the form of taking up a cudgel ensues, but that activity I 

is not the ground of the serpent-cognition. (This answer is supplied ! 

in the Vivarapa; the PP. merely raises the question with the words i 

5T3 3Tq¥rT?fh, etc., p. 8); not the (iii), for we should cease i 

to have the cognition of absent objects. This criticism applies to the | 

prakatya theory of the Bhatta Mimamsakas. According to them it is i 

the prakatya or the jnatata that serves as the hetu for the cognition. | 

This jnatata arises only in the case of the presented object. j 

®* The second alternative — that it is not absolutely true though 
stated, is not discussed in PP. The Vivaraija makes the point clear. j 

If the manifestation is not real, then the relation between the ‘this’ ! 

and the ‘silver’ must be false; but then there could be no manifestation i 

of what does not exist. Even the cognition — ‘spotted cow’ would be ! 

a case of illusion since the Naiyayifcas admit no relation of any kind i 

between the class and the particular— jati and vyakti, | 


26 PAtgAPADIKA OF PADMAPADA [XIT. 34 

transformed itself into silver just as milk into curds, then even 
after the disappearance of (ocular or other) defect, it should 
remain as such only (/.g., unchanged). 

34. (Anyathakhydtivadin) : Well, is it not seen that the 
lotus-bud changes into the blossom and remains as such so long 
as its cause— the light of the sun, remains and with its dis- 
appearance returns to the state of the bud? The same may 
happen here. 

{Akhydtivadin): [Page 9] No (this cannot be accepted). 
If it were so, just as in the case of the other {viz., the resumption 
of the bud form), let the after-cognition arise in the form ‘ (the 
shell which hitherto was silver) has resumed its former state’ 
and let there be no notion of the sublation (of silver). 

35. {Atmakhydtivddin): It may again be thought that the 
(illusory) silver is the product of the apprehension (pratlti) 
begotten of some vitiated cause.®® Even that does not stand to 
reasori. How? (It may be asked.) Whatever cognition (pratiti) 
it be from which that (the silver manifestation) arises, that cogni- 
tion anyhow will not have that (silver) as its object, because of 
the difference in time, owing to the cognition being prior and 


®® The vijnanavadin who upholds the doctrine of Atmakhyati avers 
that the silver manifesting in the shell has no external existence, but is 
a form of vijnana or inner consciousness. He may, however, be asked 
whether consciousness appearing as silver is due to its very nature 
(svabhavika) or caused by something else. It cannot be the former 
for in his view there is no other entity but vijnana, and this excludes 
the possibility of the latter. But the atmakhyativadin defends his 
position by asserting that the silver-cognition is an infinite series and 
that itself or the precedent cognition is the samskara which gives rise 
at some time or other to a particular silver-cognition so that the 




u 


silver being only a form of consciousness appears as though existing 
outside. The Akhyativadin rejoins — is that silver, which is no more 
than consciousness manifesting itself as silver, a product ? If so, is it 
produced from itself or from another? Not the first alternative for 
the same thing would be both the producer and the product; not the 
second alternative, for it must either be from an object or from 
another jfiana. That it is a product of an object is vetoed on the 
ground that objective existence is altogehter derived in vijnanavada. 
It must then have been generated from another jnana. The PP. takes 
up this question with the words 31«r gq-; etc. For further 

^Jucjdatipn of atmakhyati— vfrfe VPS., p. 34 and SD., p. XV, 







XIII. 37] SUPERIMPOSiTION 27 

the other (silver-manifestation) subsequent. It cannot be main- 
tained that the silver-manifestation is due to some other cognition 
(Le., not the one generated by defective cause) for then the (right 
cognition of some other person also would manifest this (error- 
contaminated) silver. 

36. How could it be argued that the cognition of another 
person also would have that (i.e., the silver as its object) ? It is 
in fact the cognition resulting from vitiated causes only that has 
that (the silver) as its object (and not the right cognition— 
samicingjhana). 

Akhyativadin : Not so. Even a separate cognition, if it is 
of the same character (i.e., generated by du§takarapa), has its 
function fulfilled in creating a distinct ‘silver (manifestation)’ 
just like the first cognition (i.e., it cannot have the silver in ques- 
tion as its object). Hence (it all comes to this that) the silver is 
as good as not having come into existence. As such what is left 
(i.e., the right conclusion) is (that the illusory knowledge is caused 
by) the obscuration of memory. 

XIII. 37. Objection : . Has it not been said that obscuration 
of memory cannot occur ? (The Akhyativadin is reminded by 
Anyathakhyativadin). This is also what the followers of other 
schools of thought aver. ‘ Memory is that which recalls the 
object of past experience and is free from the obscuration (of the 
cognition that it was an object of past experience) 

Akhyativadin: Then what is the solution of the manifesta- 
tion of silver when the sense-contact is (only) with the shell?®’ 

38. Anirvacanlyakhyativadin: This is the solution — ^It is 
not that the memory, caused by the mental impressions 
(samskara) and divested of the knowledge that it is memory 
(smaranabhimanasunya), arises distinct from the cognition arising 
from sense-contact (viz., of the ‘ this ’). On the contrary it is a 
unit cognition only, (arising) from the sense allied with the mental 
impressions. 


Cf. Patanjala Yoga Sutra, I. i-ii. It cannot be said that it is 
memory and at the same time obscured. 

®’ Which are the ingredients (^fWsft) in the production of shell- 
silver? The answer is that the impression left on the mind by the 
past experience of silver, together vtwith the vitiated sense, constitutes 
the instrument. The sense-aberration not only revives the past impre§T 
slop but it i? thf cause of thf Illusory silver alsp, 


28 


[XIII. 39 


PAXgAI^ADIKA OF PADMAPADA 
Akhyativadm-. How could it be so ? 

AnirvaganTydkhydtivadin: Well, thus it is : the vitiated 
cause having inhibited its (sense) potency to porduce the proper 
result (/.c., to give rise to correct knowledge) revives at the same 
time the particular mental impression (causing illusory appre- 
hension). It is from the effect that the potency of the vitiated 
cause is inferred. Hence the impression as associated with the 
vitiated cause is the single instrument. And that produces a 
single cognition and a single phala (practical end).®® 

39. And of that cognition which has arisen through the 
instrumentality of the particular impression revived by some 
perverted cause, the erroneous silver-in-the-shell manifests itself 


AkhydtivSdin: The sense-contact is with the ‘this’ so that a 
single cognition relating to the ‘this’ alone should arise and not that 
relating to the ‘silver’. We know the sense cannot establish its contact 
either with unreal silver or silver out of its ken. In your doctrine 
(referring to the anirvacaniyakhyati) the silver-cognition is not due to 
the force of impression, for you admit only similarity to memory 
(?^f^?l?isr) and not memory itself; nor is do§a competent to bring 
about any result of its own accord. Again the explanation offered by 
the anyathakhy5tivadin also is void, for if it be held that the ‘silver- 
in-the-mart ’ is seen here, it may be questioned, why not the intervening 
objects also manifest themselves in the presented object ? 

Anirvacanlyakhyativadin: The correct explanation is what follows: 
first, from the contact of the vitiated sight with the object in one’s 
vicinity arises the cognition of the ‘this’ only; then does avidya per- 
taining to the consciousness delimited by the ‘this’ stirs itself into 
being; lastly this avidya ministered to by the mental impression revived 
by similarity, desire, etc., transforms itself into the ‘silver’ (arthadhyasa). 
Likewise avidya pertaining to consciousness mirrored in the vrtti 
(mental mode) appearing as the ‘this’ transforms itself into the 
‘ silver-cognition ’ (jnanadhyasa). 

Akhyativadin: Well, since the mental modes, viz., that relating 
to the ‘this’ and that relating to the ‘silver’ are distinct, the consci- 
ousness as limited by the one must be different from the one limited 
by the other. There can therefore be no single consciousness. 

Anirvaacnlyakhyativadin: No, it is a unit consciousness — fR. 
It means this: — though there is difference between the mental modes, 
as the real (this) and the unreal (silver) are undifferentiated 

the consciousness delimited by these modes is one only, 
, and as the two cognitions are identical, the mental modes also of 
whtpb the one is real and the oth?r js not, are imagined to be single. 


Kill. 40] SUPERlMPOSmON 29 

as the appropriate object (alambana). Hence that cognition 
which has something unreal as its object is unreal cognition, 
for unreality cannot be attributed to cognition as such, since its 
sublation does not take place. 

40. (Akhydtivadin) : How is it pertinent (it may be ques- 
tioned) that a single cognition is produced by ingredients which 
serve as the cause of disparate cognitions ? There is nothing 
wrong. It is well known that the apprehension of the probans 
and the mental impression (of the concomitance between the 
probans and the probandum— vyapti) conjointly produce the 
inference. Recognition also arises from sense (contact) and 
mental impression (samskara). In both cases (inference and 
recognition) there is only a single valid cognition having intimate 
relation with memory.®® For without the revival of the impres- 
sions it is impossible that it {i.e., either inference or recognition) 
could arise. Hence it must be said that it is only the perception 
of the probans that, having recalled the impression of vyapti- 
jnana (z.e., the samskara left by the former experience of the 
concomitance between the probans and prabandum) generates 
in association with it, the inferential cognition. 

41. [Page 10] The same reasoning holds good even as 
regards recognition. And there is no valid means by which to 
prove (here) the (origination of) two cognitions, {viz., recollec- 
tion and perception). , Even so is to be exemplified the unit 
cognition of a portrait drawn from (a variety of colours) like 
blue, (red, green, etc.) which serve as causes of separate cognitions. 
There is this difference however: cognitions of the nature of 
inference, recognition and cognition of complex colours (i.e., a 
portrait) manifest themselves as being true to reality (vyavaharika) 
because they have originated from non-vitiated causes. 

42. Here (in the case of * shell-silver ’, Tope-serpent’, etc.), 
owing to vitiated causes, the cognitions are not true to reality. 


— Coming under the category of memory partly. This 
phrase is used to point out that mental impressions which are the 
special ingredients in memory-revival are also found to operate both 
in inference and recognition. In ‘the . hilHs fiery — we have 
memory-revival in regard to fire— ^ and perception in regard to hill 
— 41?!. Again in ‘this is that Devadatta’, we have memory- 

revival in regard to cfT^tsEr, and perception in regard to Devadatta. 
But they are not distinct cognitions. 



% PAtgAPADIKA OF PADMAPADA [XIII. 42 

Hence (in the light of what has been said) since the manifested 
silver is the object of cognition (illusory), there is no going counter 
to experience.®” Hence the ‘ silver ’ is the product (z.e., trans- 
formation) of maya.®^ Were it real it would have been appre- 
hended by all, since the real silver (relatively paramarthika) does 


*" — ^The doctrine of illusory cognition as expounded 

here does not offend experience. According to the Akhyativadins, two 
cognitions are posited— perceptive and recollective (silver). If the 
cognition of ‘silver’ is recollective, its experience as presented becomes 
inexplicable. According to the Anyathakhyativadins, the relation 
between the ‘this’ and the ‘silver-in-the-shop’ is false, but this is 
against experience since in the perception of silver on the spot the 
relation is actual. According to the atmakhyativadins of the Yogacara 
school, it is not possible to account for the external manifestation of 
silver when it is but a transformation of internal consciousness. 

Objection: Well; how, on your (referring to the siddhantin) own 
theory either, can you avoid inconsistency when it is argued that the 
false silver appears as real ? 

Answer: Though the ‘silver’ is distinct from the real silver, it is 
related to the reality of the shell; as such we perceive the ‘shell-silver’. 
Hence the experience ‘ ’ is not contradicted. 

Objection: Well ; is that relation of ‘satta’, real or unreal or 
both? It cannot be the first for then it cannot be negated, nor the 
second, for it is against experience, nor the third, for no experience 
of a thing that is both real and unreal is possible. 

Answer: Your objection is not valid. We admit three grades of 
reality: the ultimate (irOTi^^) reality of Brahman, the empirical 
(B3fl^i;i^^) reality of the world of space, time and cause, and the 
illusory (ifri%¥ni%qi) reality of the shell-silver variety. Now in the 
case of the ‘shell-silver’, what is conceded is not that the reality 
inherent in the shell manifests itself as related to silver; but we admit 
that the illusory reality existing in it only does appear. It is on the 
basis of this kind of reality that the notion ‘sadrajatam’ — ‘here is the 
silver’ arises. 

Objection', But then when you admit illusory reality, why do 
you characterise it as anirvacaniya — inexplicable ? 

Answer: As contrasted with the pre-eminent reality of Brahman, 
the reality assigned to the sensible world and illusion is inexplicable 
since neither existence nor non-existence can be attributed to either. 

31RT: — ^Because of the unsatisfactory character of the explana- 
tions offered by other systems. In the akhyati doctrine, we have to 
premise two cognitions, memory as regards the silver-cognition and 


,XHL, 43] 


SUPERlMPOSlTfON 


31 


not presuppose a vitiated cause in the origination of its cognition. 
If it (real silver) did require (the aberration) in the origination 
of its cognition, then where it is absent there its cognition will 
not arise, as when the light is absent, the form (of a thing) is not 
perceived. 

43. If on the contrary (the shell-silver is admitted to be) 
the product of maya^ it would be right to conclude that only those 
whose knowledge-giving senses have been rendered morbid, per- 
ceive (the illusory silver), very like the person whose sight has 
been assailed by incantations, etc. Moreover sublation also 


non-presentation; obscuration of the fact that it is memory and its 
cause, v/z., non-discrimination and as a result, activity in relation to 
the object perceived, and the experience of past births in special cases. 

In the anyathakhyati doctrine, we have to presume the existence 
elsewhere of an object apprehended on the spot, the competency of 
the senses to grasp things existing elsewhere beyond their ken, extra- 
ordinary potency to aberrations, and perceptibility of a relation that 
is false, viz,, that between the ‘this’ and the ‘silver’. 

In the atmakhyati doctrine, we have to presume the internality of 
that which manifests itself as out there, the sublation of the ‘this’ which 
experience points to as really existing, and the non-sublation of 
‘silver’ which really suffers sublation. 

The silver in the shell-silver is verily the product 
of maya; it is anirvacaniya or inexplicable. Anirvacaniya and maya- 
maya convey the same sense; otherwise it would be illogical to 
conclude that the ‘shell-silver’ is the product of maya, having set out 
with the object of proving that it is anirvacaniya. 

A question of some importance is raised here. Can we equate 
maya with avidya? Some hold the view that the two are diflFerent. 
Maya is dependent on the agent and as such cannot delude him 
whereas avidya deludes the person willymlly. They, therefore, urge 
that the shell-silver cognition is the product of avidya and not of 
maya as stated in the PP. This view is contradicted on the ground 
that the definition of the one identical with that of the other. The 
note of inexplicability is common to both, as well as the potency to 
obscure reality and project the unreal. Further, these words are used 
as of identical import in the Scriptures and in later authoritative 
works, vide K, p, 31, beginning ^ 

Where however vik^epa (or manifestation of a thing as other than 
itself) is emphasised, the term m§ya is used; but where the potency 
to conceal reality is emphasised, the term avidya is used {vide SLS^ 



35 PAtgAPADIKA OF PADMAPADA 1X111. 43 

which takes the form ‘ this is not silver ’ points to its being only 
the product of maya. How ? (it may be asked). It is indeed 
from that (/.e., the cognition of sublatioii) that its (shell-silver) 
maya-origin is brought to mind preceded by the negation of its 
(silver) very essence.®^ Witness the nature of the cognition that 
arises after sublation, v/z., ‘ this is not silver; what manifested 
itself was false only’.®® And such cognition would be inappro- 
priate if (the shell-silver) is admitted to exist in its real nature in 
some form (as the mart-silver) such as it would be (inappro- 
priate) to negate the shell with which the sense is in contact and 
(as it would be inappropriate to negate) cognition where its 
object is regarded as a nullity, (the Buddhist idealists admit jnana 
alone as real, but regard its content as non est).^ 

In addition to the evidence of arthapatti pramana by which 
it was shown that the illusoriness of the ‘shell-silver’ could be 
accounted for in no other way than by ascribing the maya-origin to 
it, perceptive evidence is here adduced in its support. In the negative 
cognition ‘this is not silver’, maya-mayatva is perceptive for the silver 
manifests itself in the substratum (the ‘this’) as the counter-correlate 
of abhSva (negation). Where the silver manifests itself but does not 
actually exist it must be the off-spring of maya. 

— The sublating knowledge removes, to begin 
with, the notion of the silver in the substratum, vh., the shell, and 
such removal must lead to the conclusion that the apprehended silver 
was the product of nescience. ‘How?’ it may be asked. The defini- 
tion of maya or mithyatva is nothing other than the counter-correlated- 
ness of negation in a known substratum. Here the shell is the known 
substratum; the negation of silver is revealed in it by the sublating 
cognition, and the silver is the counter-correlate of the 

negation, 

*® — should be taken as a separate sentence. 

The sublation is expressed in the words The use of the 

word immediately following is to emphasise that erroneousness. 

®* After sublation, the awakened consciousness takes the form 
‘what I saw was not silver, but was only a product of maya’; but it 
should not be so to the NaiySyika who, maintaining anyathakhyati, has 
to say ‘this is not silver’, but, it is ‘that silver* referring to what exists 
in the shop; as also to the Buddhist Vijfianavadin who has to say 
“the external ‘this’ in which the silver appears is a false substratum; 
the silver is only a form of internal consciousness’’; and so on. But 
common experience is otherwise and expresses itself thus— “this is 
not silver, it is magic, it is neither here, nor there’’. The sublation 


XIV. 44] 


SUPERIMPOSITION 


33 


XIV. 44. Well, is EOt this definition (fallacious inasmuch 
as it is) of partial applicability (navyapakam) since (illusions of) 
dream, sorrow, etc., cannot come within its scope In one’s 


would be quite otherwise on the theory of error held either by the 
Naiyayikas or by the Vijnanavadins. 

A question pertinent to the present topic is, ‘what is sublation 
(badha) ?’ It may mean (i) the turning away of one from an object 
when in reality one is seeking another (say, silver) or (ii) the destruc- 
tion of its (false object) capacity to provoke action; or (iii) the 
discrimination of what was not previously discriminated; or (iv) cogni- 
tion of mutual negation, 1^., cognition that this is not the ‘silver’ 
and vice versa; or (v) the cognition in the known-substratum (say 
the shell) that the silver is the counter-correlate of the negation; or 
(vi) eradication of ignorance (ajnana). The first five are objections; 
the sixth is the siddhanta. (i) is untenable; in the case of an ascetic 
there is no action and hence no dissuation from it though he too 
gets the knowledge of the non-existence of the silver, (ii) is untenable, 
for the badha, when once it arises, does not guarantee the disappear- 
ance of illusion for all time; the shell-silver cognition may arise more 
than once, (iii) is also untenable, for what was first observed as one 
undifferentiated object, like a heap of clothes, may be subsequently 
differentiated as white, red, etc., but there is no badha here though 
discriminative knowledge arises, (iv) is unsound. Whiteness which 
appears as pot in ‘the pot is white’ is again spoken of as “quality and 
not as substance”, e.g., ^ But there is no badha 

here, (v) again does not stand. If it be argued that sublation 
(bhava) means the cognition of the counter-correlatedness of the 
abhava (f.e., cognition of the absence of the silver in the ‘this’) in 
the presented substratum, the question will be whether the sublation 
is of the knowledge (jnana) of silver or of the silver (jneya). The 
first alternative does not stand, because one cognition does not require 
another for its elimination, since cognitions are momentary; the 
second also is untenable because the vi§aya (silver) is not effaced by 
either its own cognition or by that of the ‘shell’. 

The rejoinder for the criticisms thus advanced is that sublation 
stands. on a different basis altogether. Sublation is the eradication for 
all time of ignorance (ajnana) together with its effects (c/. V,, p. 33, 
and KR.S., pp. 38-39). 

The aUirvacaniyakhyati’s opponent argues 
thus: One characteristic of illusion — adhyasa, is that it is the outcome 
of three factors: sense-contact, defective vision and revived impres- 
sions. This is the indirect or indicative definition (tatasthalaksana) of 
3 


34 


PANgAPADIKA OF PADMAPADA [XIV. 45 

experience of dream, sorrow, etc., there is no sense-contact with 
anything (f.e., some substratum) by which one object could be 
regarded as manifesting itself in another. Hence there being no 
cause other than the mental traces we must conclude (that the 
dream-experiences, etc.), are outright memory-pictures and not 
memory-like (smrtirupa). 

This will be said (in answer) here — It is not in reality of the 
nature of recollection, for the manifestation is of a presented 
object. 

Nor is it memory-like either (says the opponent), since the 
cognition has arisen only through the mental-impressions left 
by a past valid means of knowledge (say, perception). 

45. Here we reply thus:*® It has been stated that what 
constitutes recollection is the mere manifestation of the object 


adhyasa or illusion. Another characteristic is that it is the manifesta- 
tion of one thing as another (r/. ^TcTI^^cI^TS: — B ha§ya). This is the 
direct definition (svarupalaksana, i.e., of the very essence) of adhyasa. 
In dream-illusion, as the senses are quiescent, there can be no sense- 
contact so that the first definition fails. The absence of the substratum 
(adhi§thana) rules out the second definition; if atman is construed 
as adhifthana, the dream-experience of say ‘elephant’ should take the 
form ‘I am elephant’, and everything other than atman comes under 
the category of superimposition and so it cannot serve as the sub- 
stratum. Hence he concludes that dream-objects as arising from past 
impressions must be classed as recollective. 

*® The Siddhantin proceeds thus: It is evident that the dream- 
cognition is neither memory nor perception. All disputants have to 
admit that it is a unique experience. Hence we call it adhyasa or 
superimposition. Here the causes essential for its origination do exist 
and they are the cognition of the substratum (adhisthana), the blurring 
effect of sleep (dosa), and the mental traces (vasana). The sense-con- 
tact is not indispensable. It is the cognition of adhi§thana with do§a 
and samskara, whose offspring the dream is. Here the adhisthana 
is the caitanya (consciousness) delimited by egoity (ahamkara) or the 
non-delimited caitanya. The PP. supports the latter view. And 
because it is self-luminous, it does not need the senses for its illu- 
mination. 

Hence the requirements of both the definitions (viz., tatastha and 
svarupalak§ana) are satisfied. It is avidya that constitutes the evolu- 
tionary cause of dream-objecte and. their cognition; and because 
caitanya is the substratum of that avidyd, it (i.e., caitanya) is the vivar- 
topadSnakSrana (for it manifests itself as the dream-spectacle). Even 


XIV.46] SUPERIMPOSITION ^5 

of a past valid means of knowledge (pramana) . And here the 
mind disturbed by sleep (which in itself is a dosa) and in associa- 
tion with such impressions as are revived by one’s adrsta (unseen 
principle) etc., gives rise to a cognition Which has something 
unreal for its object. 

And of this cognition, the potency of avidya resident in the 
immediate consciousness delimited by the inner sense (tadavacch- 
inna) evolves into (vivartate) its content (yiz., the illusory object, 
say— elephant). ■ 

46. Well, in that case the appearance of the dream-object 
would be internal only (anta(;i). 

Whoever says that it is not internal? 

But is it not one’s experience that the locus Oi'' dream-objects 
is distinct (from and outside the subject) as in the waking state? 
And that (experience) if its locus is internal, cannot account for 
the dream-object.®’ 

Well, the space also (where the dream-object appears— 
prthaktvavabhasa) is like it (i.e., internal only); how then could 
relation with such space make (the object) appear outside? Then 
this also is an additional blemish. (If internal, the cognition 
would take the form— aham de§ab). 

47. No, there is no blemish. [Page 11] Even in the 
waking state by no valid means of knowledge could it (in reality) 
be proved that the internal consciousness (caitanya) is different 
from the external consciousness (in other words there is no 
difference between internal consciousness and object-conscious- 
ness); for the manifestation (in both) is identical. Hence an 
object even in the waking state is perceived as intimately asso- 
ciated with the internal consciousness {i.e., the inner witness) ; 
otherwise the manifestation of the insentient (object-world) 
would be unintelligible.®® For instance a pot shrouded in 


in the waking state, mere ‘shell’ is not the adhisfhana in shell-silver- 
cognition, but it is the caitanya delimited by the ‘shell’. Adr§ta or 
unseen potency accounts for the dream being private. 

*’ The dream-object is out there and therefore to say that it is 
internal is indefensible. 

68 aisifsir, etc. — If the intimate relation with the pure unconditioned 
consciousness is not admitted, the world would remain a blank. 
Consciousness delimited by the ego is internal and so cannot discover 
the outside world, nor the object-limited consciousness, for if it were 


36 ; ' 'PAtgAPADIKA OF' PADMAPADA ; ■ ' [XV. 49 

darkness does not , become visible except in contact with the light 
of a lamp— so, here.. 

48. As for the appearance of objectivity (of objects in 
dreams) as distinct (from the ego) even in the waking state, it 
must be (regarded as but) the display of maya.^^ Because the 
whole of the universe stands on the single basis of consciousness 
and because that consciousness is void of parts and as such there 
could be no distinction of space (as internal and external loci), 
it is the world-diversity (and that is anadi) which superimposes 
limitations on that {viz., the cit, the one reality), which then mani- 
fests itself as if conditioned, as if external, as if internal. 
Or ‘ dis’ (quarter) and akasa (space) which the mind alone can 
apprehend, do serve as the substratum of superimposition every- 
where (in dream and waking) and as such (the insertion of) 
‘ paratra— elsewhere ’ (in the definition of adhyasa, viz., paratra 
paravabhasah) is unexceptionable.^® 

XV. 49. Then how is the superimposition of Brahman on 
names, etc., to be accounted for?^^ 


distinct from the internal consciousness, the experience ‘that the pot 
is perceived by me’ would be untenable. All knowledge is for the 
self: the cognition arises as ‘the pot is seen by me’. Hence both in 
dream and waking it is the saksicaitanya — the inner witness, that is 
the substratum of all cognitions. 

— How, it may be asked, if all objects have the 
same consciousness — substratum, could the dream cognitions which 
take both the forms as ‘I am king’ and ‘this is a mansion’ be explained. 
The explanation is to be sought in the manner in which the dormant 
mental impressions are revived. That we should have the experience — 
erf as also ^ is to be attributed to the samskaras which 
repeat themselves so that when once the form of a cognition is 
determined it appears again and again unchanged. 

As a matter of fact, though the mind is capable of grasping 
‘dis’ and ‘akasa’ in dreams, it cannot without the agency of the 
senses grasp either of these in the external world so that these cannot 
serve as the substratum of superimposition. Hence this alternative 
suggested in the text is only by way of concession — F, p.35. 
All space is internally perceived, for mind cannot comprehend any- 
thing outside without the aid of the external senses — 

7x — Meditate on names as Brahman — cf. Chand. Up., 

VII. i. 5. So far the objection that the definition of superimposition 
is non-pervasive — has been met. Now the opponent urges 



XV. 50] 


SUPERIMPOSITIOW 


37 


What is it that is meant here by ‘ how ’ (katham, i.e., by what 
reason has superimposition been denied here) ? 

There (in the superimposition of Brahman on names) 
neither a defective cause nor even the manifestation of an 
illusory object is perceived. (Hence this is no case of superim- 
position.) 

It is true.’* Therefore only, since it is undertaken volun- 
tarily on the authority of an injunction, this (the superimposition 
of Brahman on names) is (to be regarded as) a mental act and it 
is not cognition (jhana). Knowledge generated by a defective 
cause has indeed for its object one that is erroneous. By one’s 
will it is not possible either to create knowledge or negate it; 
because it (cognition) is dependent solely on definite causes, there 
is no just scope for will. 

50. Is it not an observed fact that recollective knowledge 
is generated by one’s will (abhoga= iccha — ^T.D.) and suppressed 
also by inhibiting the mind ? 

Yes, it is so; but they {i.e., will and inhibition) are inope- 
rative in originating or suppressing (recollective knowledge); 
they however either stimulate or obstruct the causes (which gene- 
rate recollective knowledge) as witness the cognative function 
which is limited to the opening or shutting the eye and has no 
part in the origination of knowledge. 

51. Hence the ascription of Brahman-nature to names is 
merely an act of superimposition and it is done with a view to 
secure some guerdon and is effected by voluntary effort as the 
result of (Scriptural) injunction (v/rfe, Chand. Up., VII. 5), very 
like regarding another man’s wife as one’s mother, in order to 
inhibit (carnal) desire. Therefore the conclusion is that the 
definition of adhyasa, viz., the manifestation in some other place 
(or thing) of what was seen before (elsewhere) which is s imil ar 
to memory, is faultless. 


that the definition is liable to the charge of being over-pervasive — 
The superimposition of Brahman on names is neither 
mithya, nor bhranti, nor avidya and. yet it satisfies the definition, viz., 
one thing appearing as another. In other words, there is no super- 
imposition though the definition holds good. 

” The siddhantin 

admits that the laksya, viz., superimposition is absent and not that 
the superimposition of Brahman on names conforms to the definition. 


3 8 PAtgAPADIRA OF PADMAPADA [XVI. 5 

XVI. 52. By the phrase — [‘tarn ke cit ’], “some (define it),” 
etc.,''® he (the Bhasyakara) discusses the doctrines of other schools 
with a view to clarifying his own doctrine. How ? They main- 
tain that superimposition means the ascription to nacre, etc., of 
the qualities of something which is quite distinct from it, viz., 
either silver which is but a form of jnana (as held by the Vijnana- 
vadins) or silver which exists elsewhere (say, in the shop as held 
by the Naiyayikas).’* 

53. Others (referring to the Prabhakaras) hold [that where 
one thing is imposed on another, the Bhrama (confusion) is due 
to the non-discrimination (of the two factors involved, viz., the 
perceptive cognition of the shell and the recollective cognition of 
silver)]. The sentence has to be construed thus— the illusion 
that it is a single cognition (which it is not) is caused, they say, 
by the failure to comprehend the distinction between the two 
things of which one is superimposed on the other. 

54. [Others again (referring to the nihilist Madhyamika 
and a particular school of Naiyayikas) maintain that where one 
thing is superimposed on another, the (false) ascription of a 
totally opposed quality to that (another) alone constitutes 
illusion], (The sentence is explained thus) : — yatra= in the shell. 


’® The controversy ranges round the locus (stT^lI^r) and the 
illusory object but none regarding the definition — ‘the 

apparent presentation of the attributes of one thing in another’ — cf. 
Bhasya— For example, regard- 
ing the locus, the Naiyayika, the Prabhakara and the Bhatta maintain 
the reality of the locus as well as of the superimposed object. The 
Madhyamika denies reality to both. The Naiyayika regards the locus 
as insentinent — but the Vedantin regards it as sentient since 
according to him it is the nacre-defined intelligence that is the locus. 
As regards the superimposed object, it is void— to the Madhya- 
mika, maya to the Advaitin, mere consciousness— jnana to the other 
Buddhists and a real thing having another abode to the Naiyayika 
and Prabhakara. From this it is clear that dilferences of opinion 
exist only regarding the substratum and the object of delusion. 

Anyatra = in the shell, etc., anyadharmasya = of silver which 
is a different object, z.e., different from the shell, Jnanakarasya = of 
the appearance of knowledge; or bahisthasya == of that which is outside; 
adhyasah = superimposition; iti . yadanti = so they say. Here the 
atmakhyati of the Buddhistic Vijnanavada and the anyathakhyati of 
he Naiyayikas are respectively referred to. 


XVI. 55] 


SUPERIMPOSITION 


39 



etc., yasya= of silver, etc., adhyasah== superimposition, tasyaiva 
= of the bit of shell, etc., viparitadharmatvasya= of the form of 
silver, etc., kalpanam=the manifestation of what does not exist, 
acaksate= they say. 

55. [Page 12] By the phrase [sarvathapi tu] — ‘ taken in 
whatever sense — he (the Bhasyakara) points out that all the 
different (conflicting) explanations (of adhyasa) are in conformity 
with his own doctrine. Because the mention of the word ‘paratra ’ 
(in something or place) necessarily implies ‘ paravabhasa ’ (mani- 
festation of some other thing), we stated that the manifestation 
of a quality belonging to one object in another object is what 
constitutes the definition (of adhyasa) and that does not go astray 
(z.e., the definition holds good for all schools). How? Accord- 
ing to the first view the definition does not stray since the silver 
of the form of consciousness or the silver existing outside appears 
as of the essence of nacre. Even according to the second view, 
(it does not fail) since, to be consistent (it must be conceded 
that) the two real distincts— shell and silver— appear as non- 
distinct through illusion. Again (it holds good) as regards the 
third view, since the shell manifests itself in the form of silver.^® 

As regards the prior perception and the similarity of recollec- 
tion (the other components of the definition), what (the Bhasya- 
kara) means is that since these are found in all (definitions), there 
is no room for controversy. 

5 . . - Here means That the 

negation of nacre is ‘the silver’ is admitted by the upholder of the 
void-doctrine as well as by a particular school of logicians. But the 
latter does not regard non-existence as void as does the 

Madhyamika. The generality of the logicians aver that the silver is the 
one existing elsewhere— but not non-existence — ar^TN. 

76 3TicWsJTf% — According to the 

position maintained by the Buddhist idealists and the Logicians 
generally. The former hold that the ‘silver’ a form of jnana — appears 
as nacre; the latter that the silver-in-the-shop appears as the quality 
of nacre. f5:wqsfq-afiqTl%q|r, the doctrine of non-discrimination as 
maintained by Prabhakara. When activity connected with the getting 
of the presented silver is admitted as fruitless, 3TJrrfr45tfr%, the cognition 
leading to it must be single and illusory, — the 

doctrine of void. The Madhyamika, with a section of Naiyayikas, admits 
the manifestation of unreal silver in a piece of shell. Hence it is 
as good as admitting the definition. 


40 PAtgAPADIKA OF PADMABADA [XVII. 56 

XVII. 56. If it (adhyasa) were defined only by tlie terms 
‘ what resembles recollection ’ and ‘ the manifestation of what 
was experienced before the scope of the definition would even 
extend to the irrational view of the Nihilist that superimposition 
has no locus (adhisthana). To obviate it therefore the word 
‘ paratra ’ is used. 

57. How is this view irrational ? 

Because indeed there has been no experience of adhyasa 
devoid of a locus, nor is it likely to occur hereafter. 

Well, is it not within one’s experience that one perceives a 
dark mass of hair having no locus? 

No, even that has the locus constituted by the light-particles 
(for such dark mass appears only in the light — vide VPS., p. 41). 

Well, (we maintain that) like the seed and sprout (series), 
knowledge— samvit, (having its substratum) in the ‘ silver ’, and 
‘ the silver ’ in knowledge manifest themselves each serving as 
the locus of the other 

This is jejune. There (in the seed-sprout series) the sprout 
is produced from a particular seed, but that seed is not produced 
from that very sprout; (on the contrary) from a different sprout. 
Here, however, we have a particular knowledge in which a particular 
‘ silver’ manifests itself; between these two only, there is mutual 
superimposition. Hence this (mutual superimposition) is hard to 
reconcile. Even as regards the seed and sprout what is aimed at 
(viz., that the seed is the material cause) is not established merely 
because the seed and sprout form an infinite series, for neither on 
grounds of apprehension nor of reason will the akahksa (the longing 
to find what the material cause is) be dispelled. On this again, if 
it be questioned how (it could be proved that of the two — seed and 
sprout — the one is instrumental in producing the other), the 
answer is that it is proved by actual experience (Le., by perception) 
and there enquiry should stop however far it may have gone. 
Otherwise, (Le., if he does not accept empirical truth) the enquiry, 
relying on the infinite cause-series, will find no resting-place (ana- 
vastha) and cannot extricate itself from the fallacy of infinite 
regress (i.e., regress of the unverified type — ‘andhaparampara’). 

58. Again, nowhere does the knowledge of negation arise 
in the form of mere ‘ No ’ without reference to some terminus.’’ 


77 a^rf? ^ • Another reason that illusion cannot be void of a 

locus. No negative statement can be made without reference to a locus. 



XVII. 59] 


SUPERIMPOSITION 


41 


Where the knowledge of the mere absence of the serpent (in the 
form ‘ not serpent ’) arises either from inference or from the word 
of a trustworthy person, there again the desire to know what it is, 
is seen to arise (which desire is expressed thus — ‘what then is this’?) : 
and because it is so, only the object that is before one’s eye re- 
mains as (i.e., to be regarded as) the terminus. Even in the case 
of ‘pradhana’ (which is regarded by the Samkhyas as the cause 
of the Universe), etc., the negation of (the existence of) the triad 
of the gunas, etc., in the cause of the universe has indeed a known 
terminus.''® 

59. Or (it may be stated that) this (illusory knowledge) 
has as its locus the universal witness (i.e., the Eternal Seer). And 
in the case of the illusory knowledge of the dark hairy masS, when 
that (hairy mass) is negated it is only the (intimate) relation that 
it has with knowledge (bodha) that is negated and not knowledge 
(as such). Hence the negation of all things has that (the Witness) 
as its terminus. Therefore since negation so far as it (the Witness) 
is concerned is non est, and since in itself no attributes are per- 
ceived (the Saksin in its nature, is pure, but it is the upadhis or 
limiting adjuncts that confer qualities on it), all negation must 


If the illusory knowledge had no locus, then only could negation be 
expressed by mere ‘no’. As it is, we can only say ‘in this locus 
it (the illusory object) does not exist’. 

What is meant by the negation of Pradhana is only that the 
possession of the triad of qualities is absent in that which is held by the 
Samkhyas to be the cause of the universe; so also when atoms are 
denied, what it means is that atomicity is absent in that which is held 
by the Naiyayikas to be the cause of the universe; so also when 
Brahman is denied it means that infinitude — — js absent in 
the cause of the universe. The reality, cannot be negated; it 

is only the determinations— For the Samkhyas the ‘pradhana’ 
is the ultimate reality, the atom for the Naiyayikas and Brahman is 
the ultimate reality to the Vedantin and when these are negated it 
does not mean that no substratum is left behind. The substratum, 
viz., the cause of the universe is there, but only its determinations are 
negated. VPS., p. 42 remarks thus; 
m ^ rlWIIT 

— What is sought to be established is that in no case, 
not even in magic creations, is a substratum lacking for negation. 
Superimposition demands a locus and negation or badha must stop 
short of the witnessing consciousness. 



42 


PAtQAPADIKA OF PADMABADA [XVIII. 60 

stop with the immutable, immediate and integral conseiousness. 
Nor is the superimposed (object) a mere nullity. If it were so 
(i.e., if the object of illusion were absolutely non-existent) it would 
not be directly perceptive.’® 

XVIII. 60. [Page 13.] Bauddha: Well, is it not your 
doctrine that all this (the whole universe) is non-existent ? 

Siddhantin: Who said so? We have proclaimed that all 
this is error-ridden, which error is inexplicable and beginning- 
less.®® If, however, admitting that the total effacement of ignor- 
ance (avidya or error) on the rise of knowledge (vidya) you postu- 
late the non-existence (of the world), you are at liberty to do so.®^ 
As such {i.e., when it is established that avidya ceases after the 
rise of Vidya) the knowledge of negation as in ‘ This is not silver’ 
arises only by negating the silver associated with some specific 
region or time and it does not bring about (i.e., point to) its (silver) 
relation with some different region, for it is not so experienced.®® 
Again one who mi stakes a rope that is at a distance to be a serpent, 
when told by a trustworthy person who is near him that it is not 
a serpent, gets knowledge of only the absence of the serpent and 
not of its existence in a different place, for the sentence {viz., 

‘ nSyam sarpah ’ — this is not serpent) is incapable of generating 
that knowledge (viz., that the serpent exists elsewhere). 

’* Here by awirm is meant immediate perception. 

What is absolutely non-existent does not manifest itself. A non- 
existent object like sky-lotus may be for some vrtti or 

mental modification is generated on hearing the word sky-lotus — 

®® The world of appearance is not a mere blank — §unya; but is 
an inexplicable entity capable of being postulated neither as existent 
nor as non-existent. 

The question is irrelevant since all schools of thought have 
to admh that things cease to exist after they are destroyed. There is 
therefore nothing incongruous in the view that a thing existing in the 
realm of ignorance disappears altogether with the dawn of knowledge. 

®® This is in answer to a possible objection that an object of 
illusory knowledge, when negated, does not become extinct altogether 
but is found elsewhere, as held by the Naiyayikas. The objector admits 
that all things, when destroyed, cease to exist altogether (§unya), but 
the object of illusion, he thinks, is a real one and that through some 
perversity of the sense, etc., it appears in a wrong place and as such 
its claim to reality is not lost when negated. 


XIX. 62] 


SUPERIMPOSITION 


43 


61. Nor is it to be proved by arthapatti (presumptive evi- 
dence) like the negation of ‘ pot-that-is-destroyed-here ’ (iha 
bhagnaghatah).®® From that alone it (negation) is established.® 
Where again a positive cognition of existence (vidhi)— ‘ this is 
rope arises, preceded by a negative cognition — this is not a 
serpent either by direct perception or by a corresponding verbal 
statement, even there the same reasoning (per force) holds good . 
For it is not so experienced (i.e., the negation of a superimposed 
object does not bring to mind its existence elsewere). From all 
this we conclude that illusory knowledge can nowhere arise with- 
out a substratum. Hence the appositeness of the word ‘ paratra ’ 
(in the definition of adhyasa). 

XIX. 62. If it be so let merely the words — the manifestation 
somewhere else of what was seen before’®* (paratra purvadr§tava- 
bhasah) — suffice for the definition (of adhyasa); for when thus 
defined its recollective character does not stray.®® 

Yes, it is true; but then what is implied (by the word 
purvadrsta) would be pure remembrance and not that which is 
similar to remembrance (smrtirupa). And it has already been 


®® The objection may be raised on the ground that the negation 
of an apprehensible object, in a particular spot, becomes cogent only 
when its existence elsewhere is postulated. But as a matter of fact 
when a pot is destroyed in any place, there arises no need to presume 
its existence in some other place. The Vivarana (page 39) points out 
that the Naiyayikas also do not admit the existence elsewhere of the 
negated false relation which false relation according to them produces 
the illusory knowledge. The negative knowledge causes the total 
extinction of the relation. Similarly with the other schools. 

— ^This should be taken as a separate state- 
ment and in answer to the objection that the negation of silver in 
the nacre — the ‘this’, as also elsewhere, say, the shop, etc., must result 
in the total negation of silver and that its apprehension is impossible 
in the ‘nacre — silver’ context. The answer is that the apprehension 
is intelligible on the ground that the silver even as a false object 
inexplicably exists in the nacre. 

*® The epithet (smrtirupah) might be justified on the 

ground that, in all cases of illusion, there exists a recollective element; 
but that the illusion is partly the offspring of memory-revival, becomes 
evident from the use of the word — ^purvadrsta — so that, says the 
purvapaksin, the word ‘smrtirupah’ may be dropped. 


44 


PAtgAPADIKA OF PADMAPADA [XX. 64 

stated that what constitutes the object of recollection cannot be 
characterised as illusory.®® 

63. If it be so, let these words alone — ‘the manifestation 
elsewhere of what is similar to the object of memory paratra 
smrtirupavabhasah ’ — suffice for the definition (of ‘ adhyasa ’). 
There in that (definition) the mention of the word ‘paratra’ 
suggests, by implication, the manifestation of a different object 
(paravabhasa) and ‘ smrtirupatva ’ is its qualifying adjunct. It is 
clear that ‘ similarity with the recollected ’ (smrtirupatva) is not 
possible of a distinct entity (parasya, Le., of the silver) which is 
not in conjunction (with the eye), in the absence of past perception 
(purvadrstatva). 

It is true. The use of the phrase— purvadrsta is however for 
the better clarification (of the nature of adhyasa).®’ Hence let 
the definition stand in the manner set forth (viz., smrtiruaph 
paratra purvadrstavabhasah). 

XX. 64. [Even so is one’s experience in the world.] (Tatha ca 
loke anubhavah ’) So that, by the adduction of two instances, the 
nature of illusion (i.e., the manifestation of the relation of the 
false and the true) as attested by ordinary experience alone, is indi- 
cated by the definition. What is the use of reasoning here? As 
to this he (Samkara) says, “ it is the shell indeed that manifests 
itself as the silver ”.®® 


®® It is to exclude cases of genuine recollection that ‘smrtirupa’ — 
merely resembling memory, and not actual memory — is used. The 
object that is brought to mind by the revival of past impressions is not 
illusory as already shown. derived from ST^nq^ranmor or pre- 

sumptive evidence. 

In recollection we perceive the object as associated with past 
experience, but in illusion we are aware only of the object — say, the 
silver of past experience. The word ‘smrtirupa’ suggests both, and 
it is to exclude the former that ‘purvadrsta’ is used. It may in 
passing be noted that the illusory silver is not even the very silver 
of previous experience; it only belongs to the jati or the universal of 
the silver seen before, for in an illusory situation the Advaita maintain 
that some indefinable silver — anirvacanlya rajata — newly comes into 
being — vide V, p. 39. 

®® What is meant is that reasoning is of little consequence in estab- 
lishing illusion when every-day experience amply testifies to it. The 
other instance given in the Bhasya is that of the single moon appear- 
ing double. 



XX. 65] 


SUPERIMPOSITION 


45 


65. Well, (in the illusion of ‘shell-silver’) the shell does 
not manifest itself, the silver alone manifests itself; hence 
the use of both the terms— ‘ the shell ’ — ‘ suktika ’, and ‘ like 
the silver’ — ‘ rajatavat ’ (suktika hi rajatavat avabhasate) is in- 
appropriate. 

This is our answer — The use of the word ‘ suktika ’ is justified 
on the ground that what is ascertained by the subsequent valid 
knowledge is (none other than) the final reality of the shell; and 
the use of (the termination) ‘ vat ’ (in rajatavat) is justified on 
the ground that the non-silver {viz., shell or mother of pearl) with 
which there is sense-contact, manifests itself as if inseparably related 
to the illusory silver.®* We speak of even the illusoriness of the 
silver, because it is produced by adventitious defects and because 
it is immediately negatived (in the empirical sphere itself), and 
not on the ground of its distinctness from silver which is accepted 
as ultimately real.*® [Page 14.] There, (in shell-silver appre- 
hension) since no contact exists (between the eye and) the silver, 
the manifestation of the ‘ thisness ’ (idanta) cannot belong to it — 
(the silver; in other words, the silver cannot be the asraya of 
idanta), but it belongs only to that with which the eye is in 
contact {viz., the shell). As for the direct manifestation of silver), 
even though its apprehension is produced by the revival of memory- 
impressions, it must be understood as being due to the potency 
of defects and to its intimate association with what the sensory 
knowledge gives {viz., the ‘ this ’). 


** After the negative knowledge arises, there is no other way of 
explaining the object of this knowledge {viz., the silver) except by 
regarding it as illusory. It is in illustration of this that Samkara 
gives these two examples —‘it is the shell only that manifests itself 
as silver’, ‘it is the single moon that appears as if having a second’. 
The shell-silver points to the definition — ‘paratra paravabhasah’, and 
‘vati’ termination points to what is defined — the false superim- 
position. » 

** 3Tr'i?5^iq’ — Accidental defect as distinguished from 
—beginningless defect, whichproduces the — the silver found 

in the mart; but this is due to occasional sensory and other defects. 
In other words, this is not regarded as illusory, because it is different 
from the silver that is absolutely real, for there is none such. 

*^ If the silver is illusory, its property, viz., the ‘thisness’— 
will also be illusory so that illusion would have ho real substratum. 
To this objection PP. answers , etc. 



46 PASQAPADIKA OF PADMAPADA [XXL 67 

66. There (in the Bhasya) by adducing the instance of the 
‘ shell’, it is pointed out that the ‘ silver ’ is not of the nature of 
(i.e., is somethirig other than) that which is in sense-contact; and 
the purpose (of this illustration) is to show that the egoity 
(ahamkara), because it is lit up (manifested) by it(cit), comes under 
the category of the ‘ thou-notion ’ (yusmadartha),®* and that as 
such, it is superimposed on the pure sentience (cit) which is 
unattached (niranjana) and is the ‘ not— this ’ element in the 
‘ I-notion ’ (asmadartha). By adducing the instance of the 
double-moon, what is pointed out is that the manifestation of 
difference between jiva (individual soul) and Isvara and between 
soul and soul is not of the nature (of cit).®® (Like the single moon, 
there is only one caitanya; and yet ignorance creates difference 
as does the dosa in the former). 

XXL 67. Purvapaksin : Well, in the case of an object out- 
side oneself, the defect of the cause, such as similarity, etc. exist- 
ing in the object (substratum, the shell) and morbid affection 
(timira) etc., existing in the sense of sight (and desire, etc., existing 
in the deluded seer) is perceived (to exist) and as due to that 
(defect), the substratum being constituted of parts, it is perhaps 
intelligible that though one part (the ‘ this ’) is apprehended, 
the other part (the ‘ shell ’) remains obscured. But here (in 
ahamkaradhyasa) it is not from any extraneous cause that it 


The ego-notion (ahampratyaya) contains two elements — ^the 
sentient and the insentient — a complex of the self and the not-self — 
citacidgranthi. The illustration of the shell-silver is to bring home 
the superimposition of acit on the cit. On the shell is superimposed 
what is not-shell; so also what is not-atman is superimposed on 
atman. The term ‘yusmatpratyaya’ has as its object what is not 
‘asmatpratyayavisaya’. The egoity comes under the category of the 
‘thou-notion’ since, for its manifestation, it is dependent on cit — 
intelligence, and as such it is not identical with cit which is the ‘not- 
this’ entity in the ego-notion. Hence it (egoity) is to be regarded 
as superimposed on the cit. 

®® The shell-silver illusion is known as ‘nirupadhikadhyasa’ and 
the double-moon illusion as ‘sopadhikadhyasa*. The first disappears 
the moment the right knowledge comes; but the second, in spite of 
knowledge to the contrary persists as long as the adventitious cause 
(upadhi) lasts. The superimposition of the ego on cit is an instance 
of nirupadhikadhyasa and the superimposition of duality on cit is 
sopadhikadhyasa. 


XXL 68] 


SUPERIMPOSITION 


47 


(substratum, viz., the saksin) is avouched; for if it had been so, its 
obscuration would have been possible as due to any defect in it 
(t.e., the cause). But that (i.e., specific feature, viz., having 
corners, etc., as in the case of the shell), can by no means exist in 
the self-luminous and partless caitanya.®* 

68. Siddharitin: Well, the fact is there that the real nature 
of Brahman remains unknown. 

Purvapaksin: From the non-manifestation of that (Brahman), 
neither non-manifestation nor illusion would occur in regard to 
the individual soul. Because the ‘ shell ’ is unapprehended, it 
does not follow that non-manifestedness and superimposition 
would result in the case of a pollard.®® 

Siddhdntin: Well, the individual soul is not different from 
Brahman, as witness the Scriptural text — “ With this soul which is 
my very self, etc.” (Chand. Up., VI. iii-2). Hence its (Brahman’s) 
non-apprehension is verily the non-apprehension of the soul. 

Purvapaksin: If that be so, there exists no possibility what- 
ever for avidya to arise there since Brahman is of the nature of 
knowledge, as witness the Scripture — ‘ From its refulgence all 
this (the world) stands revealed’ (Mund. Up., II. ii-2; Katha Up., 
II. ii-15), and since it is from the pure sentience itself that the 
revelation of all this is made possible. 

69. Siddhdntin : This is to be said (in reply) that even here 
{i.e., in Brahman) there exists the dosa (perversion) constituted by 
avidya (beginningless ignorance), which is hostile to knowledge, 
and which veils the luminosity (of Brahman).®® 

Purvapaksin : How is this known? {i.e., from which pramana ?) 

Siddhdntin: From the Scriptures (sabda) and from the 
. Srutarthapatti (verbal presumption). As for Sruti we have. 


®® The saksin is self-proven — ‘svatahsiddha’ and its knowledge 
is therefore dependent upon no external cause; but in the case of the 
shell its ‘thisness’ is vouched for by the sense of sight. 

®® There is no point, says the opponent, in asserting that Brahman 
remains unknown. Adhyasa is on the Jiva which is the substratuni 
and not on Brahman; and jiva is ever manifest. 

®® The epithet ‘agrahana* means ‘grahariavirodhi.’ Avidya, though 
obscuring the Absolute is dissolvable by the non-discursive cognition — 
That avidya exists has been established on the 
evidence of perception, inference and perceptive-presumption-^ 
drstarthapatti. Now the evidence of Sruti and of Srutarthapatti is 
adduced in support. 



48 


PASQAPADIKA of PADMAPADA [XXL 70 

“ Wholly immersed in ignorance (anrta) (Chand. Up., VIII. iii-2); 

‘ without cognising his identity with Tsvara he sorrows, lost in 
delusion ’ (Mund. Up., III. i-2), and the rest. Likewise Srutartha- 
patti also exists (as evidence of avidya). In all the Srutis it is the 
vidya (knowledge) of Brahman that is set forth as the means of 
release. Hence by presumptive evidence this becomes clear— 
that the bondage of ignorance, which is of the nature of non- 
comprehension of the individual’s identity with Brahman, exists 
congenitally.®’ 

70. Well, was it not said that Jiva is non-distinct from 
Brahman? 

True, it is for that very reason that avidya, which conceals 
in Jiva the luminous nature of Brahman, is posited by implication 
(arthat). Otherwise (if the individual soul is admitted to be, 
distinct from the Absolute, insentient, or of finite intelligence, 
avidya, a positive entity having the capacity of concealment cannot 
be maintained),®® when the Jiva is in reality (of the nature of) 
Brahman, if the knowledge of identity also were eternally estab- 
lished, then the teaching of identity (tadatmyopadesa) would be 
purposeless. [Page 15] As such it must be admitted by those 


The ‘bandha’ or bondage, if it should be removed by knowledge 
as enjoined in the Veda, must be of the nature of avidya. Hence 
Srutarthapatti. The ‘sravanavidhi ’ — also confirms 
avidya, for the study of the Scriptures is an aid to the removal of 
avidya and not for the elucidation of the nature of Brahman which 
is self-luminous. Now ajnana is vouched for by the inner witness— 
saksin, and not either by the sruti or arthapatti. The function of the 
latter is to show that avidya which is manifested by the Sak§in is an 
entity distinct from non-existence — cf. ?IT%- 

— VPS., p. 45. The pramaria is mentioned 
only to refute the position of those who contend that there is nothing 
called nescience, which is indeterminable and of the nature of an 
existent. As for the existence of nescience, it is established only 
by the witnessing intelligence. 

98 < gjyjj-ssfi ’ (Otherwise), is not syntactically related to what follows. 
The sense has to be completed by supplying the enclosed words. 
Incomprehensibility (ilf'>Tt*ng) of the Reality would be obvious if 
Jiva differed radically from Brahman. But since Jiva is identical with 
Brahman and yet Brahman is not apprehended, avidya must be 
presumed to exist. 



XXL 71] SUPERIMPOSITION 49 

learned in the Sruti, Smrti and Nyaya that Brahman which is 
homogeneous consciousness is the substratum of the illusion of 
the endless souls which are conditioned by the beginningless 
nescience. 

71. We have the Smrti (in support of this view)— ‘ You had 
better know that Prakrti (avidya) and Purusa (Tsvara) are both begin- 
ningless ’ (Gita, XIII-19); i.e., Avidya which serves as the cause of 
the distinction between ksetra (body) and ksetrajna (the individual 
soul) and which is there from eternity, is expressed by the word 
‘ prakrti The Sruti has ‘ As for maya, know that it is prakrti ’ 
(§V; Up., IV-10). Hence, conditioned as it is by maya, (the soul) 
though non-distinct, fails to perceive its own (identity with Brahman) 
nature. So it is said: “When the Jiva is awakened from the 
sleep of the beginningless maya, then it understands (itself to be) 
the unborn, the ever-awake, the dreamless, the secondless ” — 
Gaudapada’s karika 16 on VII. Mand. Up.). 

72. Purvapaksin: Well, when invalidated by some other 
pramapa, neither Sruti nor implication from words (irutarthapatti) 
is competent to prove (that) avidya (has Brahman as its vi§aya).®® 

Siddhantin : Which is that pramana by which this (Brahman’s 
being the object of nescience) is invalidated? 

Purvapaksin: (What you say is appropriate to things having 
parts). It does not stand to reason that an entity which is devoid 
of parts and self-luminous remains unrevealed (lit. its nature 
unlit up). 

Siddhantin: Well, the separateness (distinguishability) of the 
enjoyer (bhokta, the inner self) from the bodily aggregate (karya- 
karapasamghata) does not become manifest even though the 

*® That Brahman is the substratum (a^raya) of avidya has been 
stated; now objection is taken to the view that the self-luminous 
Brahman is the object (vijaya) of avidya. How can an entity which 
by its nature is all radiance be the object of ignorance (darkness) ? 
This is met by an appeal to experience. In shell-silver cognition, reason 
ought to exclude the possibility of cognising ‘silver’, but experience 
is otherwise. Again when we say ‘I do not know what you mean’ 
’T 5 riTni%) we have a case where what is appVehended is spoken 
of as being unapprehended — It is not that what does 
not stand the test of reason does not come within the purview of 
experience. It comes to this— that even though a thing is self-luminous, 
it can be the object of ignorance. As such, atman may be the vi§aya 
of ajnana. 



50 


PAtGAPADIiKA OF PADMAPADA [XXII. 73 

bhokta is self-luminous. (The otherness from the body is not 
distinct from the self-luminous atman, and hence it is immediate, 
and is also not manifest as distinct from the body. As such even 
what is self-luminous may be the content of ajnana.) 

Purvapaksin: Well, the bhokta is not self-luminous ; on the 
contrary, he is revealed by the notion of ego (ahampratyayavisaya). 

Siddhdntin: How atman is self-luminous and how ahamkara 
is not jnana (pratyaya— which illumines atman) will be explained 
in the sequel (vide PP. p. 18). 

XXII. 73. Purvapaksin: How then is it that the self- 
luminous enjoyer (the inner self) is not revealed as distinct from 
the aggregate (of the body and the senses)?^®" 

Siddhantin: It is due to the erroneous apprehension of unity 
as in ‘ I am man 

Purvapaksin : This is only a metaphorical usage and not 
illusory.^®* 

Siddhantin: How this is not a case of metaphortheBhasya- 
kara (Samkara) himself will explain (in the sequel). 

74. Purvapaksin : If the ego-cognition (ahampratyaya) has 
the same substrate as the body, then the existence of atman as 
independent of the body becomes untenable, since there is no 
other notion having as its objet (atman as apart from the body) 
and since even Scriptures and inference if opposed to it (z.e., the 


100 This is a fresh objection raised by the Mimamsakas, and it is 
stated thus; In your doctrine, atman is self-luminous; and the distinc- 
tion of the aggregate in atman is atman itself (as patabheda which is 
in ghata is ghata only) so that the manifestation of atman (in aham) 
is as good as the manifestation of the distinction. And yet you say 
atman is revealed, but not the distinction. 

101 The rule is where one object is mistaken for another, the 

distinction of this other from the first is not perceived. In T am man’ 
— art — ^because there is the superimposition of the aggregate on 

atman, the distinction of the aggregate is not perceived. The distinc- 
tion is not manifest because of the illusion of unity between the body 
and atman. 

10* In the instance — ^‘theboy isalion’— rati — the distinction 

between the boy and the lion is known (w?f), so that it is only 
figuratively we say — — the boy is a lion, and there is no 
error. Similarly, the opponent contends that the usage, T am man’ 
is figurative, for both the aggregate and the soul (aham) are distinctly 
apprehended. 


XXII. 74] 


SUPERIMPOSITION 


51 


perceptive ego-cognition) lose their claim to validity as means of 
right knowledge (pramanatva).“® If it be argued that the ego- 
cognition (where the bodily aggregate and atman are perceived 
in intimate relation) is illusory and as such there is no opposition 
(between the perceptive ego-notion on the one hand and inference 
and Scriptures on the other), on what basis do you presume this 
illusoriness ? (we ask). Because (it may be answered) what is 
understood from the testimony of the Scriptures or of inference 
is otherwise.^®* (But) it is not so, for then it will result in the 
fallacy of mutual dependence — if Scripture and inference are valid 
means of cognition (with reference to atman being independent) 
perception will be invalid ; and if perception is invalid Scriptures 
and inference will be valid, Hence the fact that the ego-cognition 
(ahampratyaya) denotes atman as its content, as distinct from the 
body, etc., has to be admitted by those who uphold the doctrine 
of atman (viz., that it is a distinct entity).^®® Otherwise there 
would be no valid means to prove the existence of atman. There- 
fore the ascription of ‘ manusyatva ’ (z.e., identifying ‘ ego ’ with 
‘man’, etc., as in ‘ I am man’) is to be understood in a figurative 
sense. 


^®® The opponent rejects the view that agama and inference might 
establish an independent atman even though perceptive evidence is 
absent, since perception is the fundamental pramana and any other 
pramaria going counter to it is valueless. 

^®^ Atman is pure consciousness as denoted by 3Tf , and 
is an erroneous ascription. Hence the cognition ‘I am man’ is not 
prama, but bhrama. And the illusory perception is not hostile to 
inference and Scriptures which enjoin distinction between the body and 
the soul. Where perception is non-illusory, there alone neither inference 
nor Scripture can brush it aside. Now inference to the effect that 
atman is an entity distinct from the body is based on the invariable 
concomitance that objects in general have a cognisor distinct from 
themselves. As regards the Sruti, we have texts like 
etc., Ka^ha Up., I. iii. 15 also I. iii. 10. 

^®® All those who differ from the materialist Carvaka and main- 
tain the independent existence of atman will find, says the purvapaksin, 
that the ego-cognition reveals atman dissociated from the aggregate 
and that such revelation needs the support neither of inference nor of 
Scriptures. The usage therefore of ‘manusyoham’ — I am man, etc., 
is one of gauria — ^metaphor, and not of adhyasa — ^illusion (as held by 
the Siddhantin), 


52 


PAtGAPADIKA OF PADMAPADA [XXII. 75 

75. Siddhdntin : Here is the answer. It is no doubt true that 
(in reality) this ego-notion has the bhokta (enjoyer) distinct from 
the body, etc., as its object; but still there being no certain know- 
ledge as such (tatha), there occurs the erroneous superimposition 
of its qualities (z.e., the bodily attributes) on atman. And it is a 
well-known fact that a thing, though revealing its true nature, is 
seen as manifesting itself in intimate relation with another thing 
for lack of the definite knowledge that this other is distinct, as 
when short (and long) sounds are found intimately related to the 
‘akara’ (the ‘a’), single though it is.“® 

76. [Page 16] If again atman (ahamkarta) reveals itself 
invariably as distinct from the body, etc., as does say, scent from 
taste, then no controversy will arise regarding its existence (as a 
distinct entity) so that no inquiry for establishing it would be 
undertaken. 

77. Purvapaksin : If after the inquiry (jijnasa) it is ascer- 
tained that atman is distinct from the body, then it is only right 
to admit that (the apprehension of identity as in ‘ I am man ’ which 
recurs) is figurative (and not illusory). How ? (it may be asked). 
Inquiry means the thinking out of a reason, and reason is incompe- 
tent to produce a distinct piece of knowledge but it only explicates 
what was implicit already there, viz., the object of the ego-notion 
(yiz., atman). Hence it is but right to hold that ahamkara after 
careful inquiry denoting a distinct object (z.c., distinct from the 
body) ends only in bringing prominently to one’s knowledge the 
distinguishability of atman. 

78. Siddhdntin : It is not right (to conclude that reasoning 
establishes its figurative nature). It is like the illusion of 
‘ hrasvatva ’ (short vowel-length) in ‘ a ’ varna. 

Purvapaksin: Will, even there (i.e., in ‘a’ sound) how (is 
the illusion tenable) ? 

Siddhdntin: It is experience only (that points to superimpp- 
sition in the notion of shortness in ‘ a ’). Similar is the reasoning 
in regard to the ego-notion. 

Purvapaksin: Well, aided by reasoning one gets the expe- 
rience (of identity — adhyasa) in ‘akara’ which is of that nature 


lo* According to the Mimamsakas, the varnas are constant, 

unique and all-pervading— They have no real association with 
vowel-lengths — short or long, but appear in intimate relation (rT^loRd?’?) 
with them through adhyasa. Even so is the view of the Siddhantins. 



XXII. 79] SUPERIMPOSITION 53 

{i.e., distinct from ‘ hrasva ’), since, though in reality ‘hrasva’ 
is distinct from ‘ akara it is not understood as such.’-®’ 

Siddhantin: It is not so; because the distinctness of the one, 
by implication, establishes the distinctness of the other. (The 
exclusion is mutual.) 

79. Purvapaksin: Well, it is extraordinary juglery to main- 
tain that the knowledge of identity between two things which 
manifest themselves, each in its distinctive nature on the basis of 
pramana (perceptive) strengthened by reasoning, is not meta- 
phorical (but illusory).’®® 

80. Siddhantin: Yes, surely; it is really legerdemain as it is 
the work of avidya. To explain; the ego-notion assuredly related 
to its object {viz., atman distinct from the body) is also observed 
to point to the body, etc., owing to the operation of the beginning- 
less avidya which obstructs it (ego-notion) from revealing atman 
only as its object. Hence, that the ego-notion has its own object, 
{viz., atman) is non-hostile to the object constituted by the body, 
etc.’®® Hence by reasoning though the distinction of the objects 
(viz., soul and body) is clarified, it only shows its object (i.e., atman 
undifferentiated from the body); and as such, reason has merely 
emphasised what the object of the ego-notion is — viz., atman along 
with the body, and has not brought to light anything in addition. 
And it has been stated that its (ego-notion) terminating in (reveal- 
ing) its object, (viz., atman as undifferentiated from the body- 
aggregate) does not conflict with the ascription of the notions 

The opponent concedes illusion in the case of short and long 
sounds of ‘a’ since in his view, perceptive cognition — anubhava (i.e., 
what is directly apprehended by the inner Witness — saksin), when 
assisted by reasoning, brings home merely that akSra is distinct from 
‘hrasva’ and not that ‘hrasva’ is distinct from ‘akara’. But in the 
ego-notion both elements (body and atman) are distinctly perceived. 
Hence there is no room for superimposition. 

’0* The apparent non-difference between things which are actually 
known to be different must be taken only in a figurative sense, and to 
say that it is to be understood otherwise is nothing but sophistry, says 
the antagonist. 

’®* The ego not only embraces the soul, but owing to the begin- 
ningless nescience takes the body also within its compass. When it is 
perceived that the ego-notion has corporeality as its object through 
nescience, there can be no conflict with its having atman also as its 
content, What is produced by nescience is not opposed to reality. 


54 PANCAPADIKA OF PADMAPADA [XXII. 81 

of ‘ I ’ and ‘ Mine ’ to the body, etc. Hence even after the differ- 
entiation of objects is effected by reasoning, the ego-notion does 
not in any way differ from its previous state. Therefore the 
notion ‘ I am man’ is at no time to be regarded as ‘ gauna ’ 
(figurative) but is illusion only).^^° 

81. Such being the case, the individual soul (Jiva) which is 
self-luminous and distinct from the bodily aggregate is not seen 
to manifest itself as such, so that there arises the illusory cognition 
as evidenced in the expression ‘ I am man ’. And the cause (of 
this illusion) which obscures the nature of the Jiva which in reality is 
one with Brahman, is the avidya (lit. darkness) which has no 
starting point in the past (z.e., beginningless) and which envelopes 
the luminosity (of Mman). That this is so is vouched for by the 
Scriptures and verbal presumption (srutarthapatti— -implication 
from words). And it is on that basis that the illusory concep- 
tion of the ego (ahamkaradhyasa) becomes explicable. And since 
this superimposition is beginningless, its being a past cognition — 
purvadr§tatva, and its being similar to recollection — smrtirupatva, 
are also expHcable. Because the enjoyer (which is the substrate) 
is not the content (visaya) of a cognition as distinct from the non- 
atman-cognition, and because there is the unit-cognition arising 
from the association of the enjoyer-consciousness (with the non- 
atman) there results the apparent manifestation of something 
previously observed in some other thing,— that is, their intimate 
mutual relation and as such it stands to reason that the definition 
of superimposition applies here also (z.e., in the ego — superimpo- 
sition).“^ 


If the ego-notion is scmtinised, the distinction between atman 
and the bodily aggregate which together constitute its content — vigaya, 
becomes clear. The ptirvapakSin therefore urges that the knowledge 
of their identity must be regarded as figurative. But the Siddhantin 
points out that illusion is immediate to perceptive cognition and it 
cannot be sublated by the mediate cognition (paroksa) which alone is 
given in inference (yukti). 

This presupposes an objection. In all cases of superimposition 
the substrate — anwilH as well as the thing superimposed forms the 
content — of the illusory cognition. There should be three causes 
to produce the cognition of the superimposed and the substrate — 
and the cognition in such a situation should be single. But 
these conditions do not obtain in the ego-superimposition — 

'EJIW. Atman (substrate) 'is by nature non-objective — aimtr and 


XXIII. 82] SUPERIMPOSITION 55 

XXIII. 82. [Page 17] [“What is it that is meant by 
‘adhyasa’?”] 

Since the word (‘ vrttasya the term vrtti is applied to a 
word having either primary or figurative significance) ‘ kim ’ is 
equally significative of both question and objection, (the Siddhan- 
tin), not knowing which in particular was meant, (by the opponent 
when he put the question ‘ koyamadhyaso nama ’) expounded the 
nature of adhyasa under the impression that the question (relating 
to the definition of adhyasa) only was put. Then the opponent 


because the ego — is revealed by the Witness, unlike the percep- 
tive cognition, say of pot, the cognition of the ego is of the nature 
of the Witness itself. The Witness is eternal and not a product 
therefore of the triad of causes. Hence the objector avers that the 
‘F notion — is not a case of superimposition. 

It is answered thus — what the unit-cognition embracing two 
contents means is that the substrate should not be the content of 
a cognition distinct from that which has the superimposed as its 
content. Here in the ahamkaradhyasa the cognition of the super- 
imposed is the content of the witnessing consciousness. Superimposi- 
tion having been established we must see how far the definition of 
superimposition is satisfied. Of atman we know the general feature — 
viz., and f%?I. but the specific feature. — remains 
unknown, i.e., its supreme bliss— Hence atman serves as the 
substrate— As such the svarupalak§apa, the essential nature, 
viz., hTif is established. Even as regards —qualifi- 

cation per accident, of the three necessary elements— do§a and adhi- 
Ithanajnana have been disposed of. Now by the phrase, 
it will be shown that samskara, the residual impression, is the third 
cause of the ego-superimposition — 

; both these are established since 
superimposition is beginningless. Hence the definition, < 5 ^- 

‘the apparent presentation, in the form of remembrance to 
consciousness of something previously observed, in some other thing 
applies to the ego-superimposition, and it is not the content of any 
other cognition. Again, though in its nature it is not a product it 
becorhes a product because of its association with the insen tent object 
. (i,e., of the Witness). 

— association with the enjoyer — ^intelligence; this is put in to obviate 
tuccha (what is empty of content) like hare’s horn, being regarded 
as the substrate. But because tuccha is not related in any way 
with bhoktrcaitanya as the unit cognition is, it cannot become 
adhisfhana. 



56 PANCAPADIKA of PADMAPADA • [XXII. 83 

says,^^* “ objection (to atmadhyasa) was also raised by me”. This 
latter view is expressed in the following words — [How then could 
there be the superimposition of the (inert) object and its qualities 
on the inner self (pratyagatma) which is non-objective?] 

83. It may be admitted that the (adhyasa) is as thus defined, 
but that will not fit in here. ‘ How ’ (it may be asked) ? Because 
[it is indeed on the object that is present before one’s eyes that 
every one superimposes a distinct object. And you (referring to 
the Siddhantin) predicate non-objectivity to the inner self which 
is unfit to be brought under the ‘thou-notion’ (yusmatpratyaya)] ; 
and in what is not an object, superimposition was not observed 
in the past nor will it be observed in the future. 

84. Siddhantin-. [This is the answer.) It is not that it 
(atman) is absolutely a non-object (avi^aya), because it is the object 
of the ‘ ego-notion ’)].^^® 

Purvapaksin ; Well, how can the subject (visayi— self) which 
is of the nature of pure intelligence become an object (visaya— 
non-self)? That indeed becomes visaya which being external 
becomes obvious in the ‘ this-notion Opposed to this is the 
subject which constitutes the inner-self, which is not the ‘this’ 
and which is self-luminous. Then how could these two proper- 
ties (visayatva and visayitva) which are mutually hostile co-exist 
in atman which is one and devoid of parts ? 

Siddhantin-. Here, this will be said in answer: The word 
‘ ego-notion ’ (asmatpratyaya in the Bhasya) means the inner 
sense (antahkarana). And that (ahamitipratyaya — the notion, 
VIZ., ‘ I ’) embraces both the ‘ this ’ and the ‘ not this ’ elements 
is a matter of universal experience. Let those worthy critics say 
whether the ego-notion (asmatpratyaya) is as defined here or not, 

A new topic begins from here. So far the definition of 
superimposition has been discussed and its cogency pointed out. 
Now is taken up the Bhasya dealing with the probability of super- 
imposition — 

Atman though not the object in a primary sense is so in 
a secondary sense — or There must be two requisites 

in a thing that is an object — viz., its being something other 
than luminosity and the dispelling of doubt regarding its existence 
brought about by luminosity. Now atman possesses the second, for 
no one doubts his own self, and not the first, for atman is self, 
luminous. Hence it is vi§aya in a secondary sense. It may therefore 
become the substrate for superimposition. 



XXIV. 85] 


SUPERIMPOSITION 


57 


after intelligently analysing it (?.e., the ahampratyaya) with con- 
centred mind like a connoisseur of coins and without concealing 
their own experience.^^* 

XXIV. 85. Prabhdkara\ Well, what is there to be said here 
except that the ego-notion (ahamityanubhavah) is one that is 
evidently disparate from the ‘this’ notion? It may be asked 
‘ How ’ ? The knower (pramata), the known (prameya — object), 
and knowing (pramiti-jnana) are all immediately perceptive {i.e., 
of direct experience). The prameya is perceptive (in its natmre) 
as objectivity. As for pramatr and pramiti, they are altogether, 
perceptive only (i.e., directly experienced) but not as object. 
Pramiti is experience (anubhava), self-luminous and is the result 
of pramana (valid means of knowledge). Through its (pramiti) 
instrumentality the other (pramatr as well as prameya) manifests 
itself. Pramana however represents the function (or activity) of 
the pramata and is always something inferred on the basis of the 
result (i.e., with the phala serving as the middle term). Hence 
in the statement— ‘ I know this (ahamidam janami)’, the cognitive 
function of the pramata relates to the object and not to atman. 
Atman however reveals itself as ‘ aham ’ (ego) both in the phala 
(jnana) and visaya (pot, cot, etc.), by the sole reason of the cog- 
nition of the object (visaya). 

86. Bhatta : It should not be supposed that the ego-notion 
arises because of the object perceived, on the other hand the ego- 
notion is indeed different, having atman only as its visaya. And 
in that (ego-notion), objectivity (prameyatva) of atman is secured 
in its feature as substance (dravya) and subjectivity (pramatrtva) 
in its feature as knower (jnarttva). Thus, because the ego-notion 
reveals the subject and the object, atman is both the cogniser and 
the cognised. Hence it (atman) combines both the features — 
‘ the this ’ and the ‘ not this ’ — the object-part since it comes under 


The Bhasyakara uses the word ‘asmatpratyaya’ in the sense 
of antahkarapa. Atman niirroring in it becomes vyavaharayogya, i.e., 
it manifests itself indubitably. This is all what is meant when we 
attribute objectivity (visayatva) to atman and not that it is the object 
of jnana. In order that a thing may become a vijaya it is enough 
if it manifests itself, thereby dispelling the doubt regarding its existence, 
there being no absolute necessity for sehse-contact. Now atman being 
of the nature of jnana is self luminous and needs no other jnana for 
its revelation. 



58 


PAhCAPADIKA of PADMAPADA [XXV. 88 


‘ the this ’ notion and the subject-part, since it comes under the 
‘ not-this ’ notion. 

Sl. Prabhakara: This does not stand to reason because 
atman is devoid of parts and is not subject to evolution. [Page 18] 
And the object being indicated by the ‘ this ’ is of the nature of 
parak (outward as opposed to pratyak— inward) and non-atman 
(and as such atman loses its claim to be either the knower or the 
known).^^ Hence, anubhava is the result of the perception of 
blue, etc., and this anubhava being self-luminous reveals the 
object (the cognised) as the ‘ this ’ and the subject (the 
cogniser) as the ‘ not-this ’ and leads to the inference of pramana 
(grahana). This is the right view to take. Therefore atman 
(ahamkara) cannot assume ‘the this’ aspect.^^® 

XXV. 88. Siddhantin : This is to be urged — concerning the 
view you have expressed (tatra), your worthiness has to be ques- 
tioned whether (i) of the two, atman and anubhava, the former 
manifests itself being of the nature of consciousness and the latter 
manifests itself being of the nature of insentience, or (ii) whether 


If atman as grahaka — ^knower, is regarded as prameya — object, 
then falling under the category of the ‘this notion’ it becomes non- 
atman but if it is not regarded as prameya it loses its self-revelatory 
character and it cannot be proved to be the substratum — asraya of 
jnana. 

The factors involved in any empirical cognitive situation are 
the cogniser — ^pramata or atman, the cognised — ^prameya, the cognition 
— ^pramiti, and the valid means of cognition — ^pramapa. Now the 
Prabhakaras maintain that the first three are always perceptively 
cognised (R^fll^F^T:). The Samkhyas, Naiyayikas and Vaisesikas 
maintain that the cogniser is always inferred (K, p. 49). The Sautran- 
tika Buddhists on the other hand hold the cognised to be always 
inferred. The subjectivist Buddhists, viz., Vijnanavadins deny the 
externality of objects so that for them objects are perceptively cognised 
not as objects as such, but as being indistinguishable from cognitions 
The Bhatta MlmSmsakas have their own theory. 
They agree with the Nyaya-Vai§esikas that atman (pramata) is inferred 
but the process is different. They say that when an object is cognised 
there arises in that object what is styled ‘prakatya’ or knownness, 
from which serving as the hetu, atman is inferred, whereas for the 
Naiyayikas the cognition (vyavasaya) leads to after cognition (anuvya- 
vasaya) in which atman is presented. It must also be noted that atman 
of the Bhattas is part-sentient and part-insentient. 



SUPERIMPOSITION 


59 


XXV. 89] 


that also (i.e., anubhava together with atman) manifests itself being 
of the nature of consciousness, or (iii) whether that only (i.e., 
anubhava) manifests itself being of the nature of consciousness 
while atman is of the nature of insentience. The first alternative 
is untenable for it (experience, i.e., jnana) resulting from pramana 
were insentient it would result in the world remaining totally 
unrevealed. 

Purvapaksin: It is not so. The pramata (the cogniser, 
atman) being of the nature of consciousness manifests, with its 
aid (i.e., of anubhava), the object as the ‘this’ and itself (atmanam) 
as the ‘ not-this ’ like light (which illumines objects as well 
as its own self) so that there occurs no non-revelation of the 
world. 

Siddhdntin: That cannot be. It does not appear to be 
reasonable to hold that (atman) being itself of the nature of 
consciousness illumines (others and its own self) through the 
benevolent instrumentality of anubhava (visayanubhava — the 
experience of the object) which is inert (jada). Moreover, if atman 
is said to manifest like light, both the object and its own self with 
the help of pramanaphala (i.e., anubhava) then the act of mani- 
festation (cetanakriya) will be interminable.^^’ 

89. As regards the second alternative atman also (like anu- 
bhava) would of its own accord manifest itself ; and why should 
it need the aid of the object-experience ? If it be urged that in 
spite of its partaking of the nature of consciousness atman is not 
self-revealing, a reason must be adduced for this discrimination 
(i.e., for conceding the right of self-revelation to anubhava only. 
The implication is, there is no' hetu). It is not intelligible that 
(atman) being of the nature of intelligence is in itself mediately 
perceptible and immediately perceptible with the aid of another. 
Again since there is parity between them (both the atman and 
anubhava are cetanarupa) like two lights, the one need not require 
the help of the other. 

90. Even as regards the third alternative (viz., atman is jada 
and anubhava is citipraka§a) in spite of one’s will it will lead to 


The point is that if anubhava through whose co-operation 
the manifestation takes place should produce the prakasanakriya (i.e., 
anubhava before manifesting), this also being the inert product of the 
inert, anubhava would produce another prakasanakriya as the first one 
did, and so on without end, leading to infinite regress. 



60 


PAnCAPADIKA of PADMAPADA [XXV. 90 

the inevitable conclusion that atman alone is the luminous consci- 
ousness.^^® No vahd reason could be adduced to substantiate the 
existence of such an anubhava (j.e., self-luminous like atman) 
distinct from it (atman). 

How ? If it be argued that anubhava (which is self-luminous) 
is established by pramana then by the differentia (bhedasadhaka- 
dharma) inhering in it (anubhava), it would reveal each object as 
distinct from the other (and not by the fact of there being distinct 
objects), and it would reveal in addition the anubhavatva (the 
universal concept) the common characteristic of all anubhavas 
like gotva (i.e., the cowhood common to all cows). But the 
particularity (visesa) inherent in itself (anubhava) is not seen 
to manifest itself as blue-experience, and yellow-experience to 
the exclusion of any reference to the particularity existing in 
the object.^“ 


The third view, viz., that atman is jada and anubhava is 
consciousness is the one held by the Prabhakaras. Its acceptance, it is 
pointed out, will force one to take refuge in the Vedantic doctrine that 
atman is consciousness and self-luminous. Anubhava (jnana) must 
be eihter dravya — substance (Samkhya) or karma (Bhatta) or guna — 
quality (Prabhakara and Nyayavaise§ika). If it is substance its dimen- 
sion must be either minute =anu or middling madhyama or infinite = 
ananta. If jnana is minute it can like a glow-worm light up just 
a spot on an object, say, a pot. But in ‘ghatajnana’ the whole pot is 
revealed. If middling, jnana composed of parts would have to depend 
on the parts for its generation as a pot depends upon the kapalas. 
But jnana is partless. If infinite — ^mahatparimana, then it would 
reveal everywhere its substratum, viz., the atman but it does not. 
Jfiana cannot be karma since it ill-assorts with what is of the nature 
of luminosity (viz., apprehension). Jfiana then must be admitted to 
be guna = quality. Since it is self-luminous its asraya or substratum, 
viz., atman must also be self-luminous like light, i.e., not depending 
on any extraneous aid for its luminosity. Being its very quality jfiana 
cannot be said to originate in its substratum. Hence if atman 
possesses the property of luminosity, it amounts to atman itself being 
self-luminous. 

In the cognitions — ^this is blue, this is yellow, the distinctions 
are due to the distinctness of objects blue and yellow. Jfiana is 
integral and one jfiSna differs from the other only because the object 
which is cognised is different. In jfifina as such there is no internal 
plurality of distinctions. 



XXV.9G] SUPERIMPOSITION 61 

Well, the differentiation (i.e., visesa— distinction in knowledge) 
can be maintained on the ground of the destruction and non- 
destruction (of jnana).^^® 

Yes, this could be maintained if the destruction and non- 
destruction could be established. If (jnana is something) that is 
born, then (destruction as well as non-destruction) will result; 
if that (destruction as well as non-destruction) is established then 
the origination (of jnana will result).^®^ Hence owing to such 
mutual dependence neither (janyata nor nasa) will become tenable. 
For this very reason the argixment (of the VijnanavMins) that 
owing to extreme similarity the cognitive distinctions (f.e., differ- 
ences in anubhava itself), are not perceived, stands refuted, for 
the view (that distinction is due to jnana) is lacking in proof. 
[Page 19] Nor is it grounded in reason to aver that the distinct- 
ness pertaining to the Ixuninosity of consciousness is not revealed; 
for only if that (bheda) remained obscured could we regard that 
the bhrama iyiz., the apprehension of a single jnana) as due to 
similarity. The analogy of the individual soul (not revealing its 
Brahman-nature), though it is . self-luminous and of the same 
essence (as Brahman), does not hold good. As for its (Brahman’s) 
non-manifestation, the reason {viz., the operation of avidya) has 
already been stated; here no such reason exists {i.e., there is no 
obstructive cause for the apprehension of the differentia inhering 
in jnana). Nor indeed can the ‘ samanyato-drsta ’ inference step 
in (to prove the cognitive distinctions), being opposed to both 
experience and reason,^*® and attention has already been drawn 

ISO What is meant is that the destruction and non-destruction of 
knowledge {e.g., when there is pot-cognition, the cloth-cognition is 
absent) are determinants of cognition-distinctions and not the visayas; 
this is to refute the siddhanta-position that barring distinctions in 
objects there are no distinctions in jnana. ' 

It is only the destruction of the adjunct— that is 
erroneously attributed to jnana— jnana being eternal is subject neither 
to origination nor destruction — cf. % ftl — destruction is 

inevitable only of a thing that is born — GM, II. 27. 

One way of classifying inference is to bring it under three 
heads: — (i) reasoning from cause to effect— e.g., from the appear- 
ance of clouds we infer that rain will fall; (ii) reasoning from effect 
to the cause— e.g., from the inundation of a river we infer that 
rain must have fallen in the higher reaches; (iii) all inferences that 
do not fall under the above two are samanyatodrsla— 



62 PAtCAPADIKA OF. PADMAPADA [XXV. 91 

to both experience and reason (in this behalf). Hence atman 
being of the nature of consciousness only, gets the appellation 
of anubhava when conditioned by the differing objects of know- 
ledge, but when the hmiting adjuncts are out of purview it is de- 
scribed by the terms atman, etc., just as the trees lose the appella- 
tion of forest when the fact of their standing together in one spot 
(which was the justification for the appellation), is ignored and 
are described as trees, etc. ; that analogy should be admitted (here 
also). . 

91. Prabhakara: Well, let it be as you say (i.e., let atman 
be self-luminous and anubhavarupa); therefore only ahamkara, 
which the object-cognition (visayanubhava) gives rise to, is de- 
scribed (by us) as being of the nature of the ‘ not this 

Siddhdntin: So far right {i.e., that the ego-consciousness is 
dependent on object-cognition). But (we do not admit that the 
ego itself is atman). If ahamkara is admitted to be atman even 
in deep sleep ahamkara, ‘ the I-cognition ’ would manifest itself 
(lit. would reach the consciousness level). 

Prabhakara: How? (It is wrong to urge that the ‘ I-notion ’ 
should be manifest in sleep. The object-consciousness being 
absent there, the ‘ I-notion ’ is absent.) 

Siddhantin : The contact of the self-luminous consciousness 
(caitanya) with ‘ blue ’ (i.e., objects like blue)— ito is blue-mani- 
festation (i.e., such contact only, reveals the object) and that 
(visayanubhava however) is not competent to reveal the ego. (Now) 
atman manifests itself as ‘aham ’ (for Prabhakara, aham and 
atman are one and atman, it has been shown, is self-luminous). 
If, when one is asleep owing to the absence of contact with objects. 

The samanyatodfstanumana that the purvapaksin may rely upon is 
stated in the V. thus:— obstructed by 
similarity, cognitions do not reveal differences; 1^1, ^ 

because of the (false) apprehension of luminosity as lasting — not 
momentary, like a flame. The samanyatodpstanumana is 

defined as a variety of inference the distinguishing feature of which is 
that we are arguing from one sort of activity which we have experi- 
enced to another sort of activity of which we have no experience — 
vide Sastradlpika, Tarkapada, English Translation, G.O.S., p. 231. 

The ‘not-this’ is the inner self. For Prabhakara ahamkara is 
atman — draspa, as revealed in object-consciousness. He argues that 
the ego is atman because in ‘I know this’ the ego is the seer and the 
seer is atman. 


XXV. 92] SUPERIMPOSITION 63 

there is no reference to the object and its experience as is evi- 
denced in ‘ I cognise this let them not be (revealed) ; but why 
should not there be the revelation of the bare ‘ aham’ (which is 
no other than atman and which is admitted to be self-luminous)? 

92. Prdbhakara: Well, the ‘I’ signifying enjoyment 
(bhoktrtva) is (as a matter of fact) experienced (in sleep). (But) 
when that (object-cognition) is absent how could the manifesta- 
tion be like that (i.e., as aham) 

Siddhantin: There is no substance in it. The word ‘aham’ 
means consciousness (caitanya) divested of all limiting adjuncts, 
and as such it should always (even in sleep) reveal itself as ‘ aham ’. 
And it is not possible to hold that caitanya has to depend upon 
the (mental) recall of the limiting adjunct (upadhi) to reveal itself 
as ‘aham’; (in other words the object-consciousness cannot 
serve as the cause of ‘ ahamullekha ’—becoming explicit as 
‘aham’). Its (of upadhi) recall indeed substantiates that {viz., 
visaya only) and is not the means by which the real nature (of 
atman disassociated from all objects) is substantiated. The 
substantiation of its true nature, however, is effected by its own 
potency (self-luminosity). And hence in its own true nature 
devoid of all experience resulting from contact with objects it 
.(atman) would reveal itself as ‘aham’ even in sleep because of 
the fact that it is not different from the intelligence principle {i.e., 
the luminous caitanya or inner witness). If you should concede 
that it is so (z'.e., that aham is manifest in sleep) we say it cannot 
be. For then one would remember (on waking, his consciousness 
of the ego) just as one remembers to-day one’s yesterday’s ego- 
consciousness. If it be argued that it is not remembered because 
of the absence of mental impressions (samskara) due to the ‘aham ’ 
being indestructible, then yesterday’s ego-consciousness also 
would not be remembered.^®® 


124 Prabhakara’s contention is that in deep sleep there does exist 
the ‘ahamkara’ which is the bhokta, but its non-manifestation as ego 
is owing to the lack of external objects. The latter part of the sentence 
— ^tadabhava, etc., is in answer to the query that if the existence 
of ‘aham’ in sleep is conceded why it does not appear as such. 

12® 3Tl%arT%?f: STirrqicl.— Remembrance (smrti) is dependent 

on the revival of impressions left on the mind by an experienced 
event which has disappeared, but says the opponent, that since the 
ego-consciousness is eternal there can be no mental impressions and in 


64 PAtCAPADIKA OF PADMAPADA [XXV. 93 

93. Purvapaksin: There does exist the consciousness of 
‘ aham ’ in deep sleep, since it is perceived that a person waking 
from sleep has the recollection of the happiness he enjoyed when 
he slept as when he says— ‘ I slept happily’; and there {i.e., in 
sleep) no experience other than that of atman occurs.^“ 

Siddhantin: True, it does exist (v/z., the recollection in the 
form ‘I slept happily’); but that recollection is not produced 
from the mental impressions of the pleasure experienced in sleep. 
What else then ? Because of the absence of pain in (sleep) we 
get the recollection of pleasure. How? (you may ask). In the 
dream state indeed there certainly is the experience of pain. But 
in sleep because it is absent we express it {i.e., the absence of pain) 
by the term ‘ pleasure And its absence (z.e., of the pain) is due 
to the quiescence of sense-activity. [Page 20] If on the other 
hand there should be the recollection of having experienced happi- 
ness, then it would be recollected as associated with some object 
(i.e., specifically), but there is no such (specific recollection). 
Indeed even the expression is seen to take these forms — ‘slept 
happily ‘ nothing was cognised by me 

94. If again it be said that the experience of pleasure can 
be inferred from the lightness of hmbs and the composure of the 
senses in one, after waking from sleep, (we say) that is not right. 
If happiness had been experienced it would be remembered and no 
purpose is served therein by a probans {i.e., when a thing could 
be an object of recollection where is the need to call in the aid 
of a hetu to prove it inferentially) ? 

Purvapaksin'. If it be so, how is it that when awake from 
sleep one person feels the lightness of limbs, while another not ? 

Siddhantin : Here is the answer : The actively engaged 
senses get tired in the waking state and quiescience of activity 

consequence no recollection. The Siddhantin rejoins that the same 
reasoning ought to apply to ego-consciousness of yesterday resulting 
in its non-recollection, but as a matter of fact we do have the revival 
of past cognitions of the waking state as associated with the ego. 

The happiness that one experiences in sleep must have an 
asraya — substratum and it is no other than the atman — ‘aham’. The 
‘aham’, according to Prabhakara manifests itself as the asraya of 
jnana or anubhava and not as its visaya^ ; ■ : ^ 

It means, I slept without pda, W; q%TJl,'^There was 

the experience of the absence of jSSaa.. But note the Siddhdnta view 
that in sleep there exists happiness toother with the positive nescience. 


* XXV. 94] SUPERIMPOSITION 65 

and there (i.€.s in sleep) if the 
: cessation of activity is complete lightness of limbs ensues, other- 

j: ^ the light of the above, this' ego- 

It is to be noted here that Padmapada in refuting the doctrine 
of Prabhakara, vzz., that ahamkara itself is atman, has advanced the 
view that in sleep there is neither sukhanubhava — experience of 
pleasure, nor ajnananubhava— experience of nescience, but that one 
has only the experience of duhkhabhava — absence of pain and of 
jnanabhava— absence of knowledge; this, however, should not be 
mistaken for the siddhanta-view. Padmapada’s object is merely to 
point out that this conclusion is inevitable from the opponent’s view- 
point, for Prabhakara in reality is wholly opposed to the view that 
in sleep happiness exists; but here he posits a view which is directly 
hostile to his doctrine {VPS,^ p. 59). In susupti there cannot be the 
experience of the absence of pain or of knowledge, for every negation 
i — abhava presupposes the knowledge of a counter-correlate — prati- 

yogin, but what one really experiences is the happiness of one’s 
nature— svarupasukha and the positive nescience. The unshrouded 
witnessing consciousness itself constitutes that experience, /.c., imme- 
diate perception. Even in the waking state such experience (of pleasure) 

I does exist but like a light exposed to wind it is neither steady nor 

j constant owing to illusory distractions. No doubt on waking one may 

' say — ‘without pain I slept, nothing was cognised by me’. But then 

it is not from memory that absence of pain and absence of knowledge 
are recalled; it is only by presumptive reasoning— arthapatti, because 
we cannot account for the recollection of the sleep-experience of 
happiness and ajhana, except by presuming the absence of pain and to 
jnana in sleep. 

The recollection of ajnana, happiness, and witnessing-conscious- 
ness, the three elements rendered explicit when one says — ‘sukhamaham 
asvapsam nakincidavedisam — I slept happily, I knew nothing’, is 
rendered possible by the fact that in sleep the experience of nescience, 
^ etc., is not through pure consciousness but through the saksin delimited 

j by avidyavrtti and this vftti after its disappearance leaves impressions 

I ' behind it. Even when risen from sleep it is the consciousness delimited 

hy avidya and not by antahkarana that has the recollection. Other- 
i wise, if recollection is attributed to consciousness delimited by the 

internal organ, the substratum of experience— would be different 
1 . from the substratum of recollection, for in sleep the internal organ 

: is absent. In other words, the man who recalls the happiness of sleep 

would not be the same man as actually experienced it. Hence to 
, avoid such a contingency it is stated that even after waking the 

recollecting entity is. the con^do^shess delimited by nescience only, 

: ' ' ■' ''' ^ - ;r;/ 



66 


PAHCAPADIKA of PADMAPADA [XXVI. 95 

consciousness (ahampratyaya) is not that which being quite dis- 
tinct from the cognition of blue, etc., has atman as its object, or 
is aham (ahampratyaya) rendered manifest only through the 
object-cognition ; (nor is atman to be identified with ahamkara.^®® 
Therefore the doctrine enunciated by the revered commentator 
(Bhasyakara, viz., Samkara) who is alone, the supreme among 
the kndwers of Brahman,^®® who put on the bodily vesture, moved 
by the one desire to help mankind and with the object of dissemi- 
nating true knowledge, is to be accepted.^®^ 

XXVI. 95. Here, (i.e., when the query regarding the material 
cause, etc., of ahamkara is 'raised) the answer is given.^®® That 


But the ‘aham’ appearing in is to be regarded as having 

been superimposed on nescience — delimited consciousness. It is a 
harmless intrusion. Hence it is that the sleep-experience and its 
remembrance relate to the same individual — the anubhavita is the 
smarts. 

— According to the 

Naiyayikas and the Bhattas the object of the ‘I’ notion is the soul or 
atman which is inert— jada and is cognised by the inner or mental 
perception — ^manasapratyaksa, while the cognition of objects is external 
— bahya, and is the outcome of sense-contact. 

The Prabhakaras reject the view that atman is the content of mental 
perception but maintain that it manifests itself in every cognition as 
its substratum — asraya. Both these views are refuted by the Vedantin. 
Residually atman is for him, self-luminous. 

ISO means a tiger, here it denotes superiority. It also 

means a white-lotus. 

isi is also explained as ‘having the scriptural author- 

ity’— cf. Chand. Up., VII. 25. i. 2. 

^®® etc., — ^What follows is in answer to the following 

questions: — 

(i) Which is the material cause of ahamkara ? 

(ii) Which is its efficient cause ? 

(iii) "What is its nature ? 

(iv) What is its function ? 

(v) From which valid means of knowledge is it proved to 

exist? and 

(vi) Why is it not manifest in sleep ? 

The text • . . . is in answer to (i) ; rWT: .... 

to (ii);‘f%fH]^qi -arrsPr: to(iii);!^%f 

arrap;: • • • • • •5rf%f^:3qFiT?r: to (iv); fzpsr: 

to (v); and ^ . . • • to (vi). 


' XXVI. 96] ■ SUPERIMPOSITION , '/L : 67 

wMcli is: variously' described in Sruti, Smrti, Itihasa (history), and 
Purana in dijfferent contexts as namarupa,^^^ avyakrta, avidya, 
maya, prakrti, agrahana, avyakta, tamas, karana, laya, sakti^ 
mahasupti, nidra, aksara, akasa; that which having prevented 
caitanya from manifesting itself as of the nature of Brahman which 
is its essential characteristic, brings about its individuation 
(jivatva); that which serves as the wall on which are pieture- 
illusion, action, and residual impressions of past cognitions; that 
which exists in deep slumber enveloping (avarana) the light (of 
atman) and remaining only as mental traces of the world-projec- 
tion (viksepa) — that is the beginningless avidya. 

96. And of this avidya, the ahamkara is a particular trans- 
formation (evolute) resulting from its having Paramesvara as 


— Names and forms; both are anirvacanlya— indefin- 
able, hence avidya is so designated. 

— Undifferentiated — avidya remains in pralaya but not 
name and form which are its differentiations. 

— Removable by vidya— knowledge; not found in 
mukti. 

Tfmf — Because it causes like a magician the manifestations of 
names and forms in that which is secondless — the Abso- 
lute. 

5 j|Rf%_This is to ward off the atomic theory of creation held 
by the Naiyayikas. 

— Because it veils the supreme Bliss. 

Because it is not perceived by the senses. 

It hides its substratum, viz.. Brahman. 

— Because other than itself it needs no material cause for 
world-creation. 

osq — In su§upti and pralaya the world of duality finds its 
dissolution in it, 

— It is Isvara’s might and so controlled by him, unlike 
the Pradhana of the Samkhyas which is independent of 
Purusa. 

— Because like sleep it is the cause of the emergence of 
the world even after the world-dissolution. 

R^r — Dream; because it is the cause of plurality as in dream. 
— Indestructible, because it cannot be effaced except by 
jfiana. 

— ^Because it is the cause of akasa. From this the 
non-eternality of the elemental ether — bhutakasa is indi- 
cated. 


68 


PANCAPADIKA OF PADMAPADA [XXVI. 97 

substratum; it (vzz., ahamkara) is the substratum of jnanasakti 
(thought-energy) and kriyasakti (kinetic energy); it is the sole 
basis of agency and enjo 3 nnent {i.e., it gives rise to notions of 
doer and enjoyer); it is a light generated by its association with 
the unchanging intelligence (caitanya); it is self-luminous (for 
it manifests itself as long as it exists, unlike pot, etc., — -T-D.) and 
it is immediate cognition, (not inferred as held by the Naiyayikas. 
And due to its intimate relation with it (ahamkara) the unchanging 
Intelligence (kutastha caitanya) has acquired erroneously indeed 
the vogue of enjoyer, though it is of the nature of the ‘ not-this ’ 
and is the atman-entity. And whence could it (the ‘I’ notion) 
arise in susupti where all the transformations (evolutes) of 
avidya have been rooted out ?— (z.e., ahamkara has no existence 
in deep sleep). 

97. It should not be thought thus (as the Samkhyas do) 
i.e., since it is only one of the evolutes of its ground {viz., Pradhana) 
and not implicit in the saksin which manifests the ahamkara; 
it (ahamkara) has that only (vzz., pradhana) as its originator (z'.e., 
material cause).’-®* For if it were so, then enjoyment (bhoktrtva) 
which is its (ahanikara) essential property, deprived of all relation 
to the saksin would manifest itself only as ‘ the this ’ only.’®® But 
it is not so. And that particular evolute (vzz., of avidya) having 
been thoughtfully abstracted from atman which is of the nature 


’®* The Samkhyas take exception to the Siddhanta-view that 
ahamkara is a transformation of avidya which has consciousness as 
its substratum. In the Samkhya-system the prakjti or pradhana 
independently of purusa, the conscious subject, evolves itself into mahat 
or buddhi which in turn posits ahamkara as its evolute. 

13S — Here ‘ahamkrti’ is used in the sense of 

saksin; STfwra f Jrr%R: — it is in relation to the 

inner witness that the word ‘aham’ is used. Hence the phrase means, 
divested of all association with the inner witness. Avidya may be 
regarded either as the §akti (prowess) of the sakjin, i.e., its property 
or as that which is superimposed on it (^'^). The Samkhya counte- 
nances neither of these views. 

— If the inert pradhana independently of caitanya is 
admitted as evolving ahamkara then the appropriate expression would 
be ‘this is bhokta — enjoyer’ and not ‘I am bhokta’. The latter is 
possible only on the basis of the relatedness of ahamkara with the 
witness. 


xxvn.98] 


SUPERIMPOSITION 


69 


of the ‘ not-this ’ and consciousness, is termed by the Vedanta- 
philosophers, antahkarapa, manas, buddhi and ahampratyayatvam 
{i.e., the ground of the ‘ I-notion ’) in so far as its cognitive power 
is concerned, and prana in so far as its movement (is concerned). 
Hence the ego-agency (ahamkartrtva) that is attributed to atman 
because of its intimate relation with the inner sense (antahkarana) 
is illusory only like the red colour of the crystal stone, due to the 
superimposition (of the red in the japakusuma). 

XXVII. 98. [Page 21] How could it be maintained 
(says the akhyativadin) that the redness of the crystal is 
illusory? 

This is the explanation : If the ocular rays impinging on the 
crystal were deflected and reached the japakusuma (China-rose) 
then they would encompass (reveal) that red only which inheres 
in the japakusuma (visista). But visual apprehension pertaining 
to colour exclusively, has not hitherto been within one’s experi- 
ence.^®® Nor again has the cognition of the reflected colour alone 
with no reference to its substratum (japakusuma) been ever experi- 
enced before.^®’ 

99. But (it may be argued) just like a pure ruby gem the 
japakusuma also has its lustre and because it is similarly perva- 
sive^®® the crystal also shines as if it were red. Even then it would 
come to this that what is not red in itself {viz., crystal) appears 


The cognition of the bare quality dissociated from the object 
of which it is the quality is impossible. The quality red is related to the 
japakusuma by samavaya (inherence) and there is the relation of 
conjunction (samyoga) between the eye and japakusuma, so that when 
the red is perceived by the samyukta-samavaya-sambandha, the japa- 
kusuma, the substance which is in conjunctive relation must necessarily 
be perceived. 

^®’ This is the view held by the Naiyayika and the Bhatta — ^the 
red only of japakusuma is reflected in the crystal ; because we fail to note 
the distinction between the crystal and the red, the red is cognised as 
identical with the crystal. The identity cognition is illusory. 

^®® Id. ^The Naiyayika- view is that the illu- 

sion is caused by the samsarga being erroneous; the redness — ^lohita, 
is real but its relation with the crystal is erroneous. The Siddhantin 
argues that since the relation is admitted to be false the cognition of red 
must be illusory, the definition of adhyasa being — 

would mean — according to the Akhyati- 

vSdin, 


70 PANCAPADIKA OF PADMAPADA [XXVIII. 101 

erroneously as red. (Hence the relation of red with the crystal 
is illusory.) 

It may be argued that it is the lustre only (of japakusuma) 
that shines red and not that the crystal (appears red). 

Siddhantin: Then whiteness also would shine in the crystal 
(because the crystal is not seen as red). But if it be said that it is 
obstructed (apasaritam— lit. driven out) by the lustre then how 
could it being colourless, become an object of sight? And the 
ocular perception of the crystal (as red) cannot be attributed to 
its relation with a coloured substance (vzz., prabha). For then 
the same thing would have to be said of air (when it is in conjunc- 
tion with a coloured substance); nor again could it be averred 
that due to the lustre, redness is (actually) produced in it (crystal) 
for then the crystal would continue to shine red even subsequent 
(to the removal of japakusuma). 

100. It has been argued so far assuming the lustre (of 
japakusuma). The lustre of the ruby, etc., shines before us even 
without its substratum— (i.c., the lustre is perceived though the 
ruby is not within sight); the same is not the case with the 
japakusuma. This being so, just as in the crystal there exists the 
illusory relation of the upadhi {viz., japakusuma), in atman there 
exists the illusory relation of ahamkara; hence on account of the 
(erroneous) relation of these dual forms (cit and acit— the intelli- 
gence and the inert) it becomes as it were a knot (granthi) so that 
ahamkara is spoken of as granthi (f.e., a tangle of the conscious 
and unconscious elements). 

XXVIII. 101, There {i.e., in the crystal-red cognition) because 
the crystal (which is covered by upadhi) is an inert substance the 
perception of the superimposed {viz., the redness) is not dependent 
on it (crystal).^®* On the contrary the relation of cit {i.e., between 
cit and antahkarana) though in the absence of any mental 


We must presume an objection here; the crystal cannot 
reveal what is erroneously imposed upon it, so also atman cannot 
reveal the ‘ahamkara’ which is imposed on it. The answer is that in 
the case of the crystal there is inertness (jadatva) and so it has no 
power to manifest the redness, whereas the relation of cit (with 
ahamkara) manifests itself even in the absence of the cognitive activity 
required for revealing ahamkara and its properties. The reason is that 
ahamkara is in relation with cit which not only reveals itself but 
also the object in association with it. , 


XXVHI.102] SUPERIMPOSITION 71 

activity, {i.e., of the psychosis of the internal organ) relating to 
it, manifests itself by its potency. Hence (because its manifestation 
depends on cit), it (ahamkara) is stated to be of ‘ the this ’ aspect 
considered in its real nature and not according to usage.^*^ In 
the sphere of ordinary experience however, that by whose asso- 
ciation the agency of that which is of the essence of the ‘ not 
this ’ is illusory (is the ahamkara); the self, only as identifying 
itself with ahamkara and intimately associated with its activity 
has its experience through the vrtti of that {viz., of the external 
world such as the body, senses, etc.), and that alone {viz., the 
ahamkara) is the object of the nature of the ‘ this ’. 

102. It is on account of this that some people are under the 
delusion that the notion of ego (aham) manifests itself as dis- 
connected altogether with what is characterised as the ‘ this ’.^*® 
It is indeed seen that though on the strength of its real nature 
(laksanatah) it is fit to be so expressed {i.e., as the ‘ this ’) it does 
not fall under the ‘ that ’ category. For instance, from the 
sprout up to the fruit all the changes of the tree are product of 
the gradual transformation of the earth substance, as it is the case 
with ‘ pot ’ and ‘ ant-hill ’ but yet usage is different, (the tree is 


The Naiyayikas regard atman as unconscious and maintain 
that consciousness is induced in it by the action of the external 
world on it — this is jnanavyapara constituted by the objects coming 
into contact with the senses, the latter with the mind and the mind 
in turn with atman. Then only does atman reveal the objects. The 
Siddhanta-view is that atman being self-luminous does not always 
require cognitive activity for revealing objects; where there is imme- 
diate relation between the luminous self and the object there the object 
is revealed at once as in the case of ahamkara. In the perception of 
external objects like pot, however, there is a gap and to bridge it the 
vrttirupavyapara is required. 

In ordinary usage (vyavaharatah) no doubt {e.g., in aham 
bhokta) the ahamkara points to the ‘not-this’ but in its essential feature 
(laksanatah) it points to the ‘this’. Because ahamkara is the vi§aya 
of cit, it is jada — inert, 

U2 The contrast 

between the cognition of ahamkara and of the objective world is 
this that while ajnana intervenes • as regards the former the vrtti 
intervenes as regards , the latter. Because the mediacy of the Vfittiis 
absent and only ajnana intervenes some people conclude that ahamkara 
denotes atman and as such is not to be characterised as the ‘this’. 



72 


PANCAPADIKA of PADMAPADA fXXlX. 104 

not spoken of as composed of earth though the other two are); 
as for thoughtful men, they do not consider that usage even {viz., 
the non-inclusion of ahathkara under the ‘this’ element) as a 
matter of much seriousness. Hence, it has already been stated 
that for those who, like the scrutiniser of coins, examine and 
decide the nature of the ego-notion with more than ordinary skill, 
the ahamkara is (apparently) mixed up with the ‘this’ aspect. 

103. Now as regards the illustration of the reflection of 
the face in the mirror as well as of the moon in water, what is 
intended to bring home is the fact that the ‘ not-this ’ (atman) 
as evidenced in the expression ‘I am doer’ is an entity not dis- 
tinct from Brahman but on the contrary that only, just as the 
reflected image is not distinct from the object. [Page 22] It 
is to point out that (in the mirror-instance) the only elements to be 
regarded as illusory are their {viz., object and reflection) appear- 
ance as distincts (the one as different from the other), and appear- 
ance as contrawise {i.e., the object and the reflection appearing 
opposite to each other).“® 

XXIX. 104. How is (one to know) that it is the same as 
that ? Because of the cognition of the essentially identical object. 
For instance, with whatsoever individual trait Devadatta is found 
when he is outside (the house) with the same trait he will be found 
even when he has entered the house; in the same-manner (Deva- 
datta) even when (reflected) in the mirror (is identical with Deva- 
datta that is outside). And that (cognition of identity, i.e., 
recognition) would not be intelligible if it (the object reflected) 
were different. Again if it were a different object it should be 
stated on the basis of presumptive evidence that the mirror itself 
when in the vicinity of the object transforms itself into the features 
of the object-as-contained-within-it.^** It cannot be argued that 

It might be objected that the example from the mirror, etc., 
is unnecessary since the superimposition of the self and the not-self 
could be adduced from the example of the crystal-China-rose. The 
answer is that in the latter redness similar to the redness of the 
China-rose is imposed on the crystal and not that the two are identical. 
What is made clear in the former is the identity of the individual soul 
and the Absolute. 

144 If the reflected image is distinct it must then be a product 
and the mirror its material cause. What the Siddhantin wants to show 
is that if identity is not admitted it would amount to regarding the 
image as a transformation — ^parinama of the mirror. 


XXIX. 105] SUPERIMPOSITION 73 

it (reflection) is of the nature of a mark left by the object (bimba) 
similar to the impress of a seal, because of the incompatibility of 
size and of the absence of contact.^® If it be so the mirror whose 
transformation was brought about by the vicinity of the object 
would remain in the same state (i.e., the reflection would persist) 
even when the object is removed. 

105-6. And it ought not to be thought that the analogy of 
the rolled-up mat getting spread out by some (nimitta) karana 
(say, stretching with the hands) and rolling itself up (assuming 
its previous state) the moment the cause disappears, applies here. 
For there, the cause of the mat again turning over upon itself 
is the samskara, produced by its having been kept rolled up for 
a considerable time (and not the removal of the nimitttakarana). 
As such, until the destruction of this capacity (samskara) there 
occurs the self-folding as soon as the cause of spreading out (I.e., 
keeping it stretched with one’s hands) is removed. Hence the 
mirror which has changed into the shape of the object owing 
to the fact that the object has been in its neighbourhood for long, 
would remain till one’s life-time in the same state even when that 
(object) has disappeared; but it is not perceived as such. If,— 
another analogy may be brought to the fore— however it is pointed 
out that the lotus bud whose transformation into a blossom is 
effected by the sun’s light, closes again into the form of the bud 
at the same time as .the light vanishes even though that light has 
remained with it long, (it should be borne in mind) that what 
constituted the cause of the earliest bud {i.e., the very first bud 
as it shoots forth), viz., the activity (active process) of the earth- 
and-water-components of the lotus operates also when again 
reverting to the bud-state. When that ceases, the faded-flower 
is not seen to again close into the bud. In the case of the mirror 
on the other hand there exists no such cause as brought about 
its former state (purvarupa).“® 


The seal-analogy is inappropriate because the size of the seal 
and that of impress are the same, but the sizes of the object and the 
image may vary. Again there is no contact here as in the case of 
the seal and the material on which it is imprinted. 

As it existed before changing into the reflected image; there 
is not present the activity of the mechanic who made the mirror 
for it to assume its former even state as in the case of the 
lotus-bud. 


74 P A:&CAPADI,K,A of PADMAPADA [XXIX. 107 

107. Here (the opponent of the doctrine that the object and 
the image are identical) says— let it be conceded that there is 
no distinct object, but the assertion, ‘ that alone is that ’ {i.e., that 
pratibimba is nothing but bimba) cannot be tolerated, for it is 
perceived that the silver (appearing) in the nacre though unreal, 
manifests itself as identical in nature with the real silver 

It is not so. There (in the shell-silver cognition) because of 
the sublatibn it is regarded as illusory. Here no sublation of the 
image as such is in evidence. The disappearance of that {i.e., the 
image on the removal of the mirror is not a case of sublation; 
for then it (sublation) would overtake the mirror also.^^® 

108. Purvapaksin. — ^Well, is not sublation evident from the 
sentence ‘That thou art’? 

Siddhdntin . — ^Not so ; there (in the sentence) ‘ that thou 
(art) ’ what is intimated is that the individual soul (jlva) which is 
in the position of the image (pratibimba) is of the nature of 
Brahman occupying the position of the object (bimba). Other- 
wise the sentence would not be (of the form) — ‘that thou art ’ 
but would be ‘ thou art not ’ like ‘ silver is not 


What the purvapaksin means is that though the image may 
not be a separate object it is an erroneous cognition like that of the 
silver in the shell. The Pancapadika on the contrary maintains that the 
image is real since it does not differ in essence from its proto-type. 

The contention is that the shell-silver analogy does not hold 
good in the case of the object-reflection-cognition. In the case of shell- 
silver, silver as such is negated and ‘this is not silver’ is the form 
in which the negation is expressed. The particular spot in which the 
‘silver’ appears is not alone negatived. If it had been, we could have 
had recognition, expressed thus — ‘here silver is not’. Here however 
the sublation is not of the object (fact) as such. The judgment does 
not take the form — this is not my face, but here (in the mirror) the 
face is not, thus negating only the particular spot — desa. After the 
negation of the locus we get the recognition — ‘the face is mine only’, 
and that recognition is not negatived. The being in the mirror is 
alone illusory. The object and the image are one and the same. 
If the mere fact of the disappearance of the image is construed as 
a case of sublation then since the mirror has been removed we would 
be forced to say that it also has been sublated — a view which is 
palpably wrong. 

The opponent contends that when the right knowledge arises 
the reflection should be sublated altogether as is evident from the 


XXIX. 109] SUPERIMPOSITION 75 

109. Page 23] Moreover the sastraic usage also confirms 
the view that the reflection is in reality identical with the object. 
“ At no time, should one see the sun when he is just rising, when 
he is setting, when he is eclipsed, when he is reflected in water, 
and when he has reached the mid-sky 

110. He who thinks that it is not the original (bimba) alone, 
that as existing outside itself is revealed by the visual rays which 
have turned back from the reflector but that the original remain- 
ing in its own place {viz., the neck) is revealed by the rays which 
having impinged upon the mirror turn back and proceed in the 
opposite direction — him, experience itself condemns; as such 
his view is not controverted.^^ 

111. Prdbhakara.— Mow could, that which is circumscribed, 
singles, of the nature of being one (ekasvabhava) and which mani- 
fests itself in its wholeness in two separate regions, be absolutely 
in both?"®** 


mahavakya — ‘That thou art’. Unless the ‘thou’, viz., the individual 
soul is sublated there is ho liberation. Hence, he maintains that the 
mahavakya is a case of The Siddhanta-view 

is that it is a case of as exemplified in 

It is a case of recognition; as such the reflection is not 
sublated. With the rise of right knowledge, the individual self is not 
sublated but is recognised as one with the universal self. The absolute 
is the original — and the world is the reflection — Brh., 
Up., II. iv. 12; Bhasya, S.L.S., pp. 75 ff.; N.S., II. 29. 

In the illustration quoted from Dharmasastra, among the 
adjectives which all relate to the real sun we have varistham — ^reflected 
in water. Hence the reflection is also real. 

This view is advocated by Prabhakara who does not admit 
illusion of any kind. The appearance of the face in the mirror — 
is for him a case of non-discrimination. There is no 
reflection at all; the proto-type alone is apprehended. The Siddhanta- 
view is that the appearance in the mirror is illusion. 

1 S 2 Siddhanta-view that the reflection is as real as the 

original is objected to on the ground that the face — a single object 
cannot have two loci at the same time. The epithets used are 
significant: — that is to exclude ether which though single 
is all-pervading; — integral, unlike distinct objects like pot and 

mat which may occupy different places; by its very nature 

it is one, unlike the relation of conjunction (fitiu) which presupposes 
a double loci; -if it had parts we could understand certain 



76 


PAtCAPADIKA OF PADMAPADA 


[XXX. 112 


Siddhantin.—We do not say that the manifestation (of a 
single object) in separate spots (at the same time) is absolutely 
real, but (we maintain) ekatva (oneness). The appearance (of 
the objet) as distinct is the display of maya and as is Well-known 
there is nothing incongruous to maya. That (Maya) indeed is 
adept in creating improbabilities. 

XXX. 112. Purvapaksin . — Even when the identity of the 
reflection with the original is cognised there (still) exists the erro- 
neous manifestation of separateness, etc., pertaining to it (i.e., 
the reflection) ; similarly even when the identity of the individual 
soul with Brahman is cognised (through study and reflection), 
there does exist the erroneous manifestation of separation, etc. 
(between the jiva and Brahman) which cannot be got rid of (i.e., 
even though one is cognizant of the oneness with the Absolute 
one cannot get rid of the notion of one’s separation from the 
Absolute). 

Siddhantin . — This is how it is met. The reason is that what 
is reflected is only Devadatta’s insentient part. Even admitting 
that what is reflected is insentient (we say) that just as the duski- 
ness of the mirror — the cause of reflection — (affects the reflected 
image) even so being pervaded (lit. assailed) by the inertness of 
the mirror that reflection (of Devadatta’s face) does not cognise 
its identity with the proto-type (bimba). Because it is inert (it is 
not sentient as held by the Carvaka). And such is experience 
(i.e., experience corroborates that reflection is insentient); with- 
out the movement of the bimba the pratibimba does not move.’^®® 

113. Indeed when illusion arises in a person whether in 
relation to himself (e.g., as in ‘ I am enjoyer ’, etc.) or in some- 
thing extrinsic (as in ‘ shell-silver ’) that illusion is sublated by 


parts being in one place and certain others elsewhere, but the face 
though not such is supposed to occupy a double loci. 

The objection may be stated thus: Just as in our experience 
the reflection of Devadatta’s face in water cannot cognise its identity 
with the proto-type, even so the ji;va cannot cognise its identity with 
Brahman. The answer is that the analogy does not hold good, for 
Devadatta’s face is inert while jiva is not. Even supposing that 
Devadatta’s reflection is sentient — the view held by the Carvakas, the 
reflection, it must be pointed out, is sullied by the inertness of the 
mirror and as such it cannot cognise its identity, with the face. But 
as a matter of fact Devadatta’s body that is reflected is inert only. 


XXX. 113] 


SUPERIMPOSITION 


77 


the right knowledge appertaining only to him.^®^ Dewdatta 
who understands his identity (lit. non-separateness) with the 
reflection is untouched by the defects belonging to it.^^® And 
neither is the reflection sublated merely by the right knowledge, 
because the cause of reflection, viz,, mirror is real {Le,, in a relative 
sense— laukikaparamarthika) 

The jiva on the other hand which may be likened to reflec- 
tion is of the nature of cit (sentience) as is within the cognizance 
of us all and is not pervaded by the inertness pertaining to the 
inner sense. And that (jIva) entertains the notion of self-agency 
of itself as of the nature of active agent) but not of its oneness 
with Brahman which resembles the original (bimba).^^^ Hence 


iM — This is in answer to the objection that the know- 

ledge dispelling ignorance has to arise in Brahman as it does in the 
case of, say, Devadatta, since both stand in the position of bimba. The 
illusion, the Siddhtotin urges, belongs to jiva and not to Brahman. 
Error pertains to jiva and as such it can be eradicated only by the 
right knowledge of jiva. But Brahman is free from ignorance. 

155 etc. — The question is raised whether Brahman 

cognises its identity with the reflection, viz., jiva or not. In the 
former alternative Brahman would be subject to transmigration like 
jiva, in the latter it ceases to be omniscient. The reply is that though 
Devadatta is convinced of his identity with the reflection he knows 
that the characteristics of the reflection do not belong to him, even so 
Brahman though aware of its identity with jiva is untouched by its 
transmigratory character; for Brahman is eternally free and being 
omniscient knows that samsara is illusory. 

As regards the reflection in the mirror though the knowledge 
of its identity with the original arises the reflection is not sublated; 
hence doubt arises whether illusion will be destroyed even after the 
rise of the knowledge of unity. But there is a fundamental difference 
between the ordinary relational knowledge which has no power to 
destroy the upadhi — the mirror; and the knowledge of the oneness 
of Brahman with atman, which when it destroys the mist covering 
Brahman destroys all upadhis, internal sense included, root and branch. 
This is in answer to the objection raised to start with — vide 
etc., above* 

If jiva is of the essence of consciousness — where is 
the need, it may be asked, for study and reflection. But though 
jiva is in reality consciousness itself like Brahman, since.it is under 
the blinding darkness of ignorance, study and contemplation are 


78 PANCAPADIKA of PADMAPADA [XXXI. 115 

it is reasonable that the illusion should disappear with the know- 
ledge of its nature (as Brahman, because of the disappearance 
of upadhi, viz., the inner sense, etc.). 

114. Purvapaksin . — ^Is it not a fact that there {i.e., in the 
cognition of reflection and crystal-red) a real thing which consti- 
tutes the cause of illusion, such as the mirror or the China-rose, 
is in close proximity of the person who is deluded ? Here (in 
atman) in every case of the superimposition of non-sentience 
(including egoity, etc.), when a person is attracted by illusory 
diversions no such real object exists in the vicinity ? 

Siddhantin . — ^That such a doubt may not arise they (Scrip- 
tures) give the rope-serpent example.^®® 

XXXI. 115. Purvapaksin. — Well, even there {i.e., in the 
rope-serpent) if indeed the serpent is not in the vicinity now (at 
the present moment) still the samskara (impression) of the ex- 
perience which must have arisen in the past certainly does exist; 
(this samskara is itself the upadhi). 

Siddhantin . — It is true (that there exists the cause afforded 
by the persistent impressions). Even here the notion of the 
agency of the Self and its residual impression are beginningless 
like the seed-sprout (series) and since their relation as cause and 
effect will be later demonstrated {vide, S. Bh. I. 4 and II. 1) there 
exists the samskara as the ground of illusion.^®® 

116. [Page 24] There (in the red-crystal) the non-relation 
of the red colour with the crystal becomes evident on the basis of 
anirvacaniyata (the principle of inexplicability, or on that of 
sublation by jnana) though the crystal, etc., possessing parts are 

necessary as means to generate the final psychosis which dispels that 
ignorance. The agency of jiva is only mayic — illusory. 

1®® In the two examples intended to illustrate superimposition 
there are tangible upadhis, viz., the mirror and the China-rose but in 
the case of the superimposition of ahamkara on atman there exists 
no such upadhi. The analogy in the latter is the rope-serpent and 
there is no upadhi. The first two come under ‘sopadhika-bhrama’ — 
conditioned-illusion; while the third comes under ‘ nirupadhika-bhrama ’ 
— ■unconditioned-illusion. 

1®* Samskara or residual impression is essential in all cases of 
superimposition, but in the superimposition of red — on the 
crystal or of agency on atman we have in addition the japakusuma 
and the internal sense as nimitta respectively. But in the rope-serpent 
and the ego samskara alone serves as upadhi. 


XXXI. 117] SUPERIMPOSITION 79 

fit to be so related; still (the person under delusion) imagines 
as if (the redness which is) reflected in the crystal is related to it 
(crystal). In the rope on the other hand there arises only the 
serpent-notion and neither the idea of relation nor of non-rela- 
tion.^*® From (examples such as) these, the non-relational 
character of atman as vouched for in the Scriptural tests, viz., 
“ Atman is unattached, for it does not attach itself”, Brh. Up., 
4-4, 22; “ This person is unattached ”, etc., is not clearly brought 
out. With this in view the example of ether-in-the-pot (is 
adduced). There (in the pot-ether) indeed, apart from remind- 
ing it (viz., the limitation constituted by the ‘ pot’), difference, 
form, serviceability and name are not perceived as belonging to 
itself.^®^ 

117. And all this aggregate of examples is for the purpose of 
removing the doubt that may arise regarding what has been 
established by the Scriptures, conformatory logic and experience, 
and also for mental concord it is not for directly stabilising 
the thing itself (v/z., atman). 


“® In the rope-serpent no question of either relation or non-relation 
arises for the object of cognition is single, whereas in the case of 
crystal-red, etc., there are two cognitions and yet through nescience 
their non-identity is not perceived. None of the three examples 
given above brings out indubitably the non-relatedness (asangata) of 
atman. Hence the jar-space (ghatakasa) illustration, where it is obvious 
that the aka§a confined within the jar has no connection with the 
jar. Only the non-relatedness of the individual soul is exemplified 
and not its nature. 

The space in the jar can acquire none of the following 
properties when disassociated from the limiting condition, viz., the 
jar: — bheda — distinction between jar-ether and cauldron-ether, say; 
rupa — as of small contour; karya— serving as a receptacle; samakhya 
—having a name as jar-ether. 

One may well doubt the need for Scriptural evidence when the 
illustrations adduced here are adequate to bring home the real nature 
of atman. The mirror-reflection illustration points to the singleness — 
ekatva; the crystal-red and the rope-serpent illustrations point to the 
unchangeability — avikaritva; and the jar-ether illustration is to show 
the detached character — asangatva of atman. The answer is that 
illustrations are meant only to corroborate what is established by 
a pramapa. Here of course the Sabda-pramana — verbal testimony is 
supreme in proof of the existence and nature of atman. 


80 PAtCAP^DIKA OF PADMAPADA PCXXII. 119 

118. That being so, no doubt (atman) which is ‘conscious- 
ness entire’ cannot be an object since it is of the nature of the 
‘ not this ’ ; but still when (associated) with the ego-notion 
(asmatpratyaya) it becomes fit for vyavahara, so that in a 
figurative sense it is spoken of as the ego-notion (asmatpratyaya) ; 
because the fitness of an object of cognition for vyavahara never 
strays (the figurative use is tenable since atman has vyavahara- 
yogyatva). 

Pwryapaksiw.— -Well, if it be said that superimposition is 
(prerequisite) for vyavahara and that fitness for practical pur- 
pose is dependent on the ego-notion which is the outcome of 
superimposition, does it not result in reciprocal dependence ? 

No, (this argument has been refuted on the ground of (the 
adhyasa) being beginningless. • 

XXXII. 119. There the particular activity described by the term 
jnana belonging to the ‘ this ’ aspect of what has thus become 
ahamkara (i.e., the notion ‘ I am doer ’), because it is transitive 
in sense, conveys a reference to the object and produces some 
result in that which is its a§raya (i.e., its abode),^®® for it is the 
nature of (all) action to effect a change in that in which it inheres. 
And that (avasthavisesa) is described as the relation of the cog- 
niser with the cognised and it is like the particular change (atisaya, 
say, reaching the village) produced in the karta (i.e., the man 
who is proceeding to it) by the action (of going).^®^ The inner 


183 g'=f — When atman is proved to be the object in the ego-notion, 
tj# — Of the cit which through superimposition of ajnana 

has become identical with the antahkarapa. 

— Of the ‘this aspect’, viz., the antahkarana involved in 
the ego-notion. 

f H — ^The mental mode or psychosis. 

5qiq'RT%'5r'?: — 3Tf?r:«tyiiRvirni%trW: — The modal change of the 
internal organ, i.e., vftti. 

Pointing to the object. 

— In the internal organ which is the seat of the 

vrtti. 

^ certain result, viz., the rela- 
tion as between the cogniser and the object cognised. 
The vrtti which is a mode of the internal organ brings 
about the relation between the internal organ and the 
object. 

The reading should be 


XXXIL 120] 


SUPERIMPOSITION 


81 


sense (antahkarana) only as related to a particular object through 
that (/.e., the vrtti) particularises the caitanya (ghatavacchinna- 
caitanya for instance).^®® 

120. When the modal change— antahkarana-vrtth begins to 
function, that which is in the objective relation also (say, the jar) 
when impinged upon by the vrtti, because it is the vivarta (trans- 
formation) of caitanya, manifests the consciousness (jar-caitanya) 
which is identical with the consciousness conditioned by the 
particular aspect (vzz,, the relation of the cogniser and the cog- 
nised) constituted by agency, which aspect (again) is generated by 
the vrtti (pradhanakriya).^®® And then the particular aspect of 

165 caitanya being everywhere shrouded by avidya is incapable 
of revealing objects but whatever form the internal organ assumes by 
its contact with objects that very form the caitanya also takes. In 
other words the caitanya particularised by the internal organ which is 
in contact with an object, manifests that object — 

It is like the fire assuming the form of a square when a four- 
cornered object is burning (F., p. 70). 

Just as the internal organ which is the vivarta or appearance 
of caitanya manifests caitanya, so also does the object which is again 
the vivarta of caitanya; the conditioning vrtti is vivarta, the condi- 
tioned also, viz,, the jar in our example, is vivarta; it too therefore 
becomes the manifestor of caitanya. The same caitanya is manifested 
by two indicators — ^vrtti and visaya. Hence the appositeness of the 
usage — The jar is cognised by me’ (^^T fT^:). In the result consci- 

ousness manifests itself both as the cogniser and the cognised. In other 
words, there now arises the tMatmya-sambandha or identity-relation 
between the object-limited-consciousness and the internal-sense-limited- 
consciousness. This is how the perception of the external world becomes 
possible. 

which means that the vftti has reached the object, viz., pot 

etc., ar^H^- 

= 1^, 3TTf|?r:= SctllRd- ; f^ff 

The relation of the knower with the object of cognition is its 
specific aspect. 

trsr 3Tfii5jr;^ra;-%5q%3r2n- 


6 


82 . : ■ PAnCAPADIKA of PADMAPADA ' [XXXIL 120 

.atman brought about by the particular modal change of the interiial 
, organ ' constitutes (its, cognisership).^®’- That is the phala ^ 
the result of the cognitive process) which is none other than the ; 
immediate perception revealing the object and spoken of as the 
experience of the object — (visayanubhava).^®® so that the phala 
has the same object as the kriya {Le,, vrtti).^®® When this is so, 
(ne., when the vrtti, z.e., kriya and anubhava phala point to the 
same object and have the same locus, viz., the jar and atman is 
erroneously identified with the ego), the ego (‘ ahamkarta ’) 
assumes the role of cogniser both on the strength of its conscious- 
ness aspect and of its association with the vftti; and as such it is 
said that the purusa (the self) cognises the object presented in the 
intellect 


When the same consciousness is conditioned by the internal 
organ as well as by the object, how is it, it may be asked, that the 
term pramata— cogniser, is restricted to the consciousness conditioned 
by the internal organ? The answer is that in the absence of v^^tti— 
psychosis, cognisability cannot be ascribed to atman and vrtti is the 
modal change of the internal organ. Hence the consciousness condi- 
tioned by the internal organ and functioning as vj*tti alone can 
become the pramata, and not consciousness particularised by ‘pot’ 
for the latter is void of vrtti. 

The objection may be raised that since the consciousness 
conditioned by the object and the consciousness conditioned by the 
internal organ are identical, the cognition of the object — ^visayanubhava 
need not be the phala. The answer is that there is no room for 
confusion since the upadhis are distinct. The phalatva results when 
the consciousness is conditioned by the object and pramatjtva when the 
consciousness is conditioned by the internal organ. 

— The phala is the cit as 
reflected in the jar through the agency of the vrtti or karya. The 
point is that in the cognition of an object the cit of the vrtti and the 
cit of the jar become identical and hence both the vrtti and anubhava 
have the same asraya. 

In the system of Samkhya it is the intellect (buddhi) only that 
comes in contact with the object and undergoes modification. How 
the self cognises is accounted for by the postulation of akhyati, z.c., 
though purusa is in reality detached, through lack of discrimination, 
he imagines that he is cognising. This technique so far as the 
modification of the intellect on coming into contact with the object 
is concerned, is accepted by the Vedtota; but it goes further, and 
discarding the view that the insentient intellect can apprehend the object 



XXXIII. 122] SUPERIMPOSITION 83 

121. And there, the anubhava of the self-luminous cogniser, 
an entity revealed from its contact with the object, though 
embracing all objects, because of its all-pervadingness (aparoksa- 
taya) is restricted only to that {viz., the object) since along with 
the combination of other accessories (such as the senses, etc.), 
it brings about the activity of the pradhanakriya (vrtti); with 
whatever karmakaraka (a thing that is in the objective relation), 
the main activity in the form of vrtti is in contact, that thing only 
{i.e., the cit reflected in it) is the anubhava and none other. And 
with whatsoever person the karmakaraka jointly serves as the 
means (of the activity of the vrtti), that person alone has the imme- 
diate cognition just as contact with the village is of the person 
(who has journeyed to reach the village).^’^ 

XXXIII. 122. Objection: pPage 25] If objects like blue 
(pot), etc., are of the nature of aparoksa (i.e., immediate cogni- 
tion) it amounts to the same thing as saying that jnana (samvit) 
is of the nature of blue. Hence it is as good as maintaining the 
Mahayanika contention.^’* 

Answer: It is not so; blue and yellow manifest themselves 
each excluding the other, but aparoksata (jnana) on the other hand 
is not so; for it is comprehended as a single entity though the 
cognitions (of objects) manifest themselves as disparate. Hence 
(blue, etc.), are not of that nature {i.e., of jnana). If it had been 
so then jnana would also manifest itself like that only {i.e., Uke 


affirms, that it must be informed by the cit before any such appre- 
hension is possible — V., p 71. 

The awareness of the object is restricted to the person whose 
mental modification in the form of vftti has impinged upon that very 
object. The sphere of experience therefore is limited to the particular 
self. This is ‘purusaniyama’. The sphere of objectivity — ^visayaniyama 
is likewise limited. In neither case can the charge of overpervasiveness 
be maintained. 

It has been maintained that the identity of the cit as reflected 
in the internal organ and the cit as circumscribed by the object, say 
pot, brought about by the vrtti is the cause of the object-cognition. 
If so, urges the critic, it is not diflferent from the Buddhist doctrine, 
viz., that the internal vijnEna externalises itself in the so-called object- 
cognition and that the object as such has no independent status. The 
idealist vijnanavadin and the nihilist madhyamika are both comprised 
in the term ‘mahayanist’. But here the vijnanavEdin is meant as he 
alone holds the view that objects are but thought-forms (jnanakara). 


84 PANCAPADIKA of PADMAPADA [XXXIII. 123 

the external object) one excluding the other. But it does not so 
(reveal itself). 

Moreover, even by them (the Vijnanavadins) is it admitted 
that as distinct from the consciousness of the blue there is a sepa- 
rate cognitive entity (vikalpa) of the nature of internal conscious- 
ness (lit. that which is internally manifest as ‘ aham ’) which is 
turned away from (i.e., unrelated to) the external (like pot, etc.), 
which is characterised by immediacy and which ends in its own 
self.”® And the blue (object) it is evident is experienced as dis- 
tinct from that which is pratyak (i.e., the ego-consciousness), and 
as the ‘ this ’, which is of the nature of an object of cognition. 
Hence it is obvious that there are two entities which are of the 
nature of the apprehender and the apprehended and which are 
mutually exclusive. 

123. No, it is not so; since both (i.e., the 

ego-consciousness and the blue) are self-cognising how could 
there arise the distinction between the object and the subject 
O’.e., the cogniser and the cognised) ? 

Siddhantin: liovf then (do you account for) the distinct 
manifestation of the cogniser and cognised as evidenced in (the 
statement) ‘ I know this ’ — ‘ ahamidam janami ’ ? 

VijMnavddin: This is not such manifestation (i.e., of the 
cogniser and the cognised — grahya-grahaka), but as ‘ aham ’ 


etc. — ^The Yogacara also admits determinate knowledge; 
in the proposition T perceive blue’ — — the blue manifests 
itself as object and the T-consciousness ’ (alayavijnana) manifests itself 
as subject and because the difference between the T-consciousness 
and object is unmistakable it is evident that the alayavijnana is 
distinct from the object ‘blue’. No doubt the yogacara avers that it 
is only the pravrtti-vijnana (like the cognition of jar, etc., as contrasted 
with alayavijnana which is ‘aham’) that is non-distinct from the blue, 
etc., and not alayavijnana, but in the commentary the distinction between 
aham and blue is sought to be proved. This statement therefore appears 
to be superfluous. Still it must be remembered that alayavijnana and 
pravfttivijnana are not distinct. They are different names of the 
ego according to its different modes of operation. When the distinction 
between alayavijnana and blue is proved, it is as good as proving 
the distinction between pravjttivijnana and blue.— c/. T.J)., p. 

The phrase means Jfrs only— F;, p. 73. • The 

‘vikalpa’ is the determinate cognition, viz., ‘aham’. 
points only to itself— self-regarding. 



XXXIII. 1231 SUPERIMPOSITION 85 

(the ego-consciousness), ‘ idam’ (‘ this ’ consciousness), and 
‘janami ’ (cognition of cognition,— jnanavisayaka-jnana) they 
are mutually exclusive determinate cognitions. 

Siddhantin: How then (do you account for) this know- 
ledge of the (prior-posterior) relation between them when there 
is not even so much as a mutual exchange of glances (i.e., when 
not even a remote connection exists among these cognitions)? 

VijMnavddin: That is a distinct cognition, complex in 
character, generated by the immediate preceding cognition 
(samanantara-pratyaya) conjoined by the impressions (left behind 
by the isolated determinate cognitions of ‘ aham’ and ‘ idam’); 
and here is no knowledge of relation.”* 

Siddhantin'. How is it that your worthiness (sarcastic) elabo- 
rates a technique such as would not conform to experience? 

Vijndnavadin: Because entities which suffer instant destruc- 
tion cannot subserve any practical purpose. It is only when 
what is denoted by ‘ aham ’ {i.e., atman or vijnana) is of an endur- 
ing nature, there would arise the relation with the ‘ blue ’ which 
is also enduring, as the result of the activity (of vijnana), and then 
there would be the immediate cognition also of ‘ blue ’, etc., 
dependent upon that activity; but they are not enduring.”® 


”* The two past cognitions — ‘aham’ and ‘idam’ are there as 
impressions — ^vasanas and the cognition — ‘janami’ in conjunction with 
the vasanas produces a distinct unit-cognition which assumes the form 
‘I know this — ahamidam janami’. Hence without the necessity of any 
relation a single cognition does arise. This is the yogacara-answer to 
the abjection that in the obsence of relation the cognition — ‘ahamidam 
janami’, is inexplicable. The yogacara ‘does not admit any relation 
outside the terms’. 

”® The identity of vijnana and object is not, says the Yogacara, 
attempted to be proved on the testimony of experience but on the fact 
that cognisability (grahyatva) itself is dependent on the identity. No 
relation could be brought about between entities which last no more 
than a moment. Vijnana and blue are both momentary and unless 
they endure for a time, the activity of vijnana and of object essential 
for subject-object contact is impossible and as such grahyatva would 
be impossible too. Hence objects must be regarded as but thought- 
forms. The relation between thought and object is adventitious and 
this cannot arise between entities which are momentary. Hence the 
relation between vijnana and the external object can only be one of 
non-difference. 


86 


PAnCAPADIKA of PADMAPADA [XXXIII. 124 

124. Siddhantin: If that be so (i.e., if momentariness is 
accepted) the ego-cognition should be regarded as an unrelated 
unique particular svalaksana) changing moment by moment. 
Now, let those people tell us who do not conceal their own 
experience (svapratyaksam) whether that (unceasing change) is 
a fact or not. 

Vijnamvadin: There is distinctness, but it is not perceived 
owing to extreme similarity (between momentary cognitions which 
are in reality distincts). 

Siddhantin: If the distinctness (bheda) is regarded as of the 
very nature of jnana (samvit) and if there is not its manifestation 
then the whole universe would be an absolute blank.^^® 

Again the postulation of similarity to account for the mani- 
festation of unit-cognition (tadrupa=aikyarupa) is opposed to 
pramapa and is unsupported by any pramana. 

Purvapaksin: Since the unit-cognition is illusory, it is not 
opposed to pramana; nor is it unsuiiported by pramapa for 
illusion is impossible without a cause.^”" 

etc. — Now begins the discussion regarding the 
continuous existence of Stman which the Vedantin establishes on the 
strength of recognition — ^pratyabhijna, while the Buddhist avers it is 
momentary. If distinctness between one cognition and another is 
admitted we must know whether it is revealed by another jnana or 
whether it is of the very nature of samvit. If the former, then again 
whether the other jnana has for its object the distinctness only or 
both dharmi or anuyogi and pratiyogl, i.e., the two relate (for bheda 
desiderates both). The distinctness alone without the relata cannot 
be comprehended. But if all the three — the two relata and distinctness 
are comprehended in bhedajnana all become a single jnana and there 
could be no bheda. If on the other hand it is maintained that the 
bheda (distinctness) is of the nature of samvit (e.g., the patabheda is 
ghatasvartipa) then since bheda is said to be unperceived owing to 
similarity, samvit (consciousness or vijnana) also ceases and darkness 
veils the universe. This alternative only is dealt with in the PP— c/. 
VPS., p. 76. 3TP: 

PPlf:. 

The Yogacara’s reply is that the postulation of similarity cannot 
be said to conflict with what is a piece of erroneous knowledge, viz., 
the unit-cognition. It could be so, only if the unit-cognition were 
prama, for identity and similarity are inconsistent. On the other hand 
the notion of identity in what are really distincts cannot be explained 
except on the basis of similarity. 



XXXIII. 125] 


SUPERIMPOSITION 


87 


Siddhdntin: No, it is not so; for it is open to (the fallacy 
of) mutual dependence. It is only when illusoriness (of unit- 
cognition, i.e., recognition or pratyabhijna) is proved that simi- 
larity can be maintained as it then would be unopposed to pramana 
and would also be supported by pramana. [Page 26] And if 
similarity is proved then could illusoriness as adduced from it, 
be maintained. 

125. Purvapaksin: Yes, it would be so, but then this 
(charge of mutual dependence) applies equally (to the unit- 
cognition-aikyajnana) if held to be non-illusory. When the 
postulation of similarity is proved to be unsupported by pramarta 
and also hostile to pramapa then would be established the non- 
illusoriness of the cognition in that form (i.e., as a single entity — 
aikyapratiti) ; again if this (aikyajnana) is (proved to be) non- 
illusory the postulation of similarity would both be unsupported 
by pramana and hostile to it. 

Siddhdntin: No, it is not so. The validity of cognition 
(in the present context it is pratyabhijna which reveals identity) 
is self-proven (i.e., it does not require proof ab extra) and (as 
such) is not dependent upon anything else. Hence, because of 
its validity the postulation of similarity has not only no pramapa 
in its support but is opposed to it.^’® The cognition of similarity 
(kalpana, i.e., cognition by postulation) does not exist in its own 
right; if it did it would have become pramapa. It (the postula- 
tion of similarity) is possible only on the presupposition of the 
invalidity (of recognition).^’* 


Only when recognition is invalid and is bhrama could we 
postulate similarity by arthapatti-pramana to account for the unit- 
cognition but in the case of recognition it is self-established as all jnana 
is. It is only invalidity that is to be established ab extra, — 

cognition is self-certifying. The Buddhistic view is just the opposite — 
validity is established ab extra while invalidity is self-proven — svatah 
siddha. 

It is the iliusoriness of the unit-cognition of what are distinct 
momentary cognitions that necessitates the presumption of similarity 
and as such, similarity cannot be said to be self-established. What 
is insisted on by the Bauddha is that the ever-recurring vijnanas 
themselves constitute atman and the identity-notion we have of them 
as given in pratyabhijna or recognition is illusory and explicable on 
the assumption of intimate resemblance between one vijnana and 
another. The Vedantin on the contrary maintains that pratyabhijna 



:88 " PADMAPADA. [XXXIIL126': 

126. But since destruction is patent at the 

end, the inference of destruction at the beginning (is mevitable). 
Hence seeing that the cognitions are distincts similarity is postu- 
lated.^'®®, ■ 

Siddhantin : Well, since the existence of pot (beyond a 
moment) is perceived at the moment of its existence why is it not 
(existence— satta) inferred at the end (the moment of destruction) 
also 9^81 If jt be argued that such inference is opposed to the 
(actual) perception of destruction, (we say) that here also your 
own inference is opposed to the evidence of recognition which gives 


is perceptive knowledge and is therefore self-certifyirg in character 
and the identity or the notion of permanency vouched for by it 
cannot be challenged. The atmasthayitva, Ue., the permanency of 
atman is, he says, established on the strength of pratyabhijna. 

180 existence, say of the pot as associated with the moment 
immediately preceding the moment of destruction. 

3 Tr^r — All the existential moments of the pot preceding the last 
in the series. The reasoning of the ksanikavadin may be expressed 
in the following syllogistic form:— 

Subject: — the preceding existents except the last; 

Probandum: are each associated 

with destruction the moment next after the moment of their existence; 

Probans: because their existence is of the nature 

of pot-existence; 

Example: Like the pot-existence associated with the last moment 
(in the series). 

The pot as existing at the last moment perishes the next moment 
and so the pot-existence at every moment is liable to destruction in the 
immediately following moment. Ergo^ objects in general are of 
momentary existence. 

In his rejoinder the Vedantin just reverses the position. 
the word ‘adi’. means moments associated with the pot-existence. 

— the word ‘anta’ means all moments regarded as associated 
with destruction. His reasoning may be stated as follows: — 

Subject: — moments regarded as 

associated with destruction; 

Probandum: are pervaded by pot-existence ; 

Probans: because they are time-associated ; 

Example: Like time — associated with existence — satta. 

Pot-existence is continuous from moment to moment since each 
moment is an existent. 



XXXIII. 127] 


SUPERIMPOSITION 


89 


the very object (that was seen before). And certainly there is 
nothing to distinguish between the two experiences.^®*^ 

127. Purvapaksin: But if you hold that the ego-conscious- 
ness is a permanent entity, (we ask) whether it possesses any 
practical efficiency or not. In case it does not (produce any- 
thing) it acquires the character of non-being and as such loses 
its claim to reality. If, however, it does (produce) then it is not 
permanent. For casual efficiency is incompatible with an object 
that is permanent. How incompatible (it may be asked) ? 
Incompatibility comes about this wise^ — ^while producing it 
(arthakriya) does it (one may question) produce it successively 
or simultaneously ? Not however successively; seeing that it 
(the permanent object) undergoes no change, i.e., remains the 
same in the future as it was in the past (the question will naturally 
arise) why should it not bring into effect at the preceding time 
that also which it is going to effect in the succeeding time 
Nor even simultaneously ; for having effected in a single moment 
only, what has to be done during a whole life-time, it (the so-called 
permanent object) acquires the character of non-being owing to 
its absence (f.e., of the causal power) the next moment. Hence 
permanency is ruled out from the very fact of causal efficiency. It is 
evident therefore that the apprehension of permanency (permanence 
implying the identity of ego-notions) is due to similarity. 

128. Siddhantin: Well, this has to be urged: — ^which is 
t his causal efficiency (arthakriya) in the absence of which (you 
say) a thing acquires the character of non-being? 


182 q- — The ksanikavadin avers that 

because the cognition of destruction is perceptive— abhijna, it has greater 
probative value than recognition — ^pratyabhijna by which the exist- 
ential pervadingness, — ^is attempted to be established. But 

the Vedantin points out that both abhijna — perception, and pratya- 
bhijiia — recognition are of equal probative value. 

183 3T^r%JiT5Brfe^ — Capacity to produce an action or event. This 
is the definition, according to the Buddhists, of existence or being — 
satta. And since each moment is associated with a new effect, the 
real, they maintain, is momentary. The contention is that if perma- 
nency is the mark of an object, say a pot, why it should not bring 
about to-day what it is going to bring about to-morrow since it retains 
its identity; for example it must all at once exhaust its capacity to 
fetch water— viie English Translation of §astradipik& — Tarkapada, 
G.O.S., p. 207. 



90 


PAtCAPADIKA OF PADMAPADA |XXXIIf. 128 

Purvapaksin: (Causal efficiency means ' the ' capacity ' of), , 
originating the cognition: of its object' (in the same series, in ' the 
cognition series of another person, or in that of Isvara, c./. VPS., 
.P....79).' 

■ .ySiddhantin:: M follows then that all cognitions (without 
exception) will acquire the character of non-being since they are 
all by nature self-revealed and as such they need no other cogni- 
tion to reveal them. Nor even in a different series have they 
the capacity of such revelation, because of its (/.c., another’s cogni- 
tion series) not being apprehended by the senses. And in the 
case of inference also (it should not be forgotten that) it is not 
generated by what is real. (In perception reality can be the cause 
but not in inference where only universal which are mental 
constructs form the content. See Nyayabindu Jika by Dhar- 
mottara, p. 16).^^ Even as regards the knowledge possessed by 

184 Buddhist explains causal efficiency as the giving rise by 
one cognition, i.e., moment, to another moment. In this view the 
Siddhantin says the definition fails; for in a cognition-series one 
cognition does not reveal another since cognitions in their very nature 
are self-luminous. In other words there is no subject-object or cogniser- 
cognition relation or The Buddhist 

rejoins that though in the same series such revelation is not possible 
it is possible in a different series so that the validity of the definition 
is not vitiated; when Maitra cognises Caitra’s cognition by some 
indicative marks, it is evident that Caitra’s cognition is the visaya 
(sr^r^^r) of Maitra’s cognition which is the cogniser Hence 

of Caitra’s cognition. The Siddhantin points out that 
this is a case of inference and not of perception where alone the entity, 
say pot, is the cause of pot-cognition for the pot is an object of 
perception, whereas in inference say of fire, it is not percep- 

tive and therefore is not the cause of its cognition on the hill (^gRTU). 
Similarly Maitra cognises Caitra’s cognition only by inference so that 
the latter cannot be said to produce the other. Hence in no cognition 
is the satta — existence, of the nature of origination of the cognition 
of itself, is present. In the same series there is but not 

whereas in a different series the reverse is the case, 
he explains also as a particular cognition in the same 
series which is both the cogniser of itself and the cognised; but here 
there is no and as such the definition fails. It is necessary 

that to satisfy the definition there should be both janyajanakabhava 
and visayavisayibhava — the relation of originator and the originated 
as well as of the cogniser and the cognised — c/. F., pp. 78-79. 



XXXIII. 128] SUPERIMPOSITION 91 

the All-knowing (Isvara) it cannot be held (that the cognition of 
the jiva— individual soul) produces Isvara’s own knowledge 
directly {i.e., as non-different from it with all its affections). For 
then it (the knowledge of the All-knowing) would become identical 
in nature with that of the jivas (struggling) in the world.^®® In case 
its nature is not that, it ceases to be its object {i.e., if the cognition 
of Isvara is not non-different from the contaminated individual 
cognitions, the latter cannot serve as the object of the former).^®* 

Purvapaksin: Well, we maintain that causal efficiency 
means the giving rise to the (next) momentary state (the reference 
here is to the realm of being). 

Siddhantin: The last moment (then) will acquire the charac- 
ter of non-being.^®’ And it cannot be argued that the cogency 

185 q- etc. — ^Isvara in his omniscience has the cognition of 

all jivas as the object of his perception so that individual cognitions 
must be regarded as producing Isvara’s cognition, thus justifying the 
definition of practical efficiency, viz., The Siddhantin 

points out that individual cognitions being contaminated by affections 
of pleasure and pain cannot generate l^vara-jnana. It must be noted 
that the Buddhist admits non-difference between cognition and the 
object of cognition (this refers to Vijfianavada School— c/. VPS.,p. 70). 

186 — It may be urged by the Buddhist that though indi- 
vidual cognition is contaminated it becomes pure by the knowledge 
of reality-r-^t^?lf^ and then it will be identical with ISvara’s knowledge. 
The Siddhantin answers that since cognition as such is self-revealing 
the same cognition (rI=^^?I!T) would reveal the blemishes and negate 
them — an impossible position. If again it be argued that the blemishes 
are removed by a separate cognition then since visaya and vi§ayi are 
not different all the blemishes found in the cognition that is negated 
will vitiate the negating cognition. No cognition can negate another 
without this other being its object. A third position may be taken up. 
Let not the blemishes be negated; let not the blemished cognition be 
the object of I^vara’s cognition. Even then cognition that is free 
from affections cannot get lost in Isvara’s cognition. To rebut this 
view the text proceeds with 3TcT^^. In case it is not admitted that 
there is identity between Isvara’s and the contaminated individual’s 
cognitions there will be no visayavisayibhava (subject-object relation 
or cogniser-cognised relation). Then the Buddha will cease to be the 
teacher. He can impart the saving knowledge only when he is aware 
of the ills of mankind. 

187 The second definition of causal effici- 
ency — is that one momentary existent gives rise to the 



92 PA^-CAPADIKA of PADMAPADA PCXXIII. 128 

(of the definition of causal efficiency) is secured by the fact that 
the last moment gives rise to the cognition of the All-knowing. 
For then it cannot be held to be the last moment and as such it 
will come to this that there will be no release (mukti.)^®® [Page 27] 
Again one cognition cannot serve as the object of another cogni- 
tion’^®® for the reason that both are in essence cognition (nirakara- 
jnana— -formless cognition) and as such are not different from one 
another, just as one light cannot be said to "be the object (visaya) 
of another light. 

Moreover its acquiring the status of being is not due to the 
fact of causal efficiency, because it gives rise to its effect having 
already come into being through the operation of its (specific) 
causes (such as in the case of pot, the potter, the wheel, the clay, 
etc.). Hence it can (only) be said (that casual efficiency) produces 
the cognition of the existence (of the cause ; it does not make it 
real). Then the cognition of its existence {i.e., of the practical, 
efficiency — arthakriya) would depend upon something else (i.e., 
cognition of its own arthakriya), that again upon another ad 
infinitum, resulting in the cognition of nothing that is existent 
so that the world would become a mere blank.^®° 


next momentary existent. But this definition breaks down in the case 
of the last moment — for this consciousness moment is succeed- 
ed by moksa or annihilation of the series. 

188 — ^In the doctrine of the Bauddhas the moments 
are similar and as cause and effect they belong to the same series — 
^=^^1 ; since both the last moment and Isvara’s cognition are pure, 
being of the same nature, and in the relation of cause and effect, 
Isvara’s cognition also must belong to the same series. Hence the 
so-called final moment will not be the liberation moment. Mukti in 
the Buddhistic doctrine is the diremption of the moment-series. 

189 ^ — It was hitherto assumed that the Buddhist 

meant by mukti the termination of the ego-series in question, but that 
is not the only view of ‘mukti’ in Buddhism. There was another 
conception of it according to which ‘mukti’ is merging in cosmic 
vijnana or sarvajnajnana as the PP, puts it. It is to point out that 
even on this view of ‘mukti’ the Buddhistic position is not tenable 
that the text adds ‘ ^ ’—see V., and TD. also OIP., p. 219, 

and Bhiksu’s Yogavartik&, p. 116. 

190 If on the basis of its karya like fetching water, 
the retoy of karapa is to be understood, the reality of karya also 
would require another karya to justify its existence, the latter again 


XXXIII. 129] SUPERIMPOSITION 93 

Purvapak§in: But there is no regress since the causal effi- 
ciency of the nature of jnana resulting from itself (i.e., the first 
moment) is self-revealed (being of the nature of cognition).i®^ 

Siddhantin: If so it is not from the causal efficiency that 
the cognition of its existence (i.e., of the precedent moment which 
is the hetu of the next moment) arises. And it cannot be that its 
own self is its causal efficiency. 

129. You have argued that causal efficiency (resulting in 
some action) does not take place in succession (as opposed to 
instantaneous origination), on the ground that in the preceding 
and succeeding moments (i.e., time past and time future) it (the 
karana) remains the same without any special feature (visesa). It 
is no defect. Even a permanent karana can effectuate (causal 
efficiency in succession) since it desiderates the auxiliaries and as 
such it is wrong to say that the causal entity has no additions 
(visesa) but remains the same. If it be argued that to speak of 
the need for an auxiliary is improper in the case of karapa (i.e., 
an entity which has the capacity to produce an effect), more so 
is it in the case of akarana (z.e., of an entity which through lack 
of capacity is impotent to be a cause). And it follows therefore 
that the world will exhibit no instance of any co-operation what- 
soever. If again it be argued that what is not in itself the cause 
(akarana) is in need of auxiliaries in the production of what really 
constitutes the cause (yiz., the aggregate — samagri of, say, the 
sprout) then the question will be whether that {viz., the inefficient 
seed) is the cause or not the cause (of the karana — ^the samagri 
which produces the sprout). In case it is the cause {i.e., potent 
in producing the aggregate) it is in no need (of auxiliaries). If 


would require the reality of another karya and so on indefinitely. 
Hence the existence of no object could be established. 

191 — ^Arthakriya means karya and karya in the yogacara-view 
is the consciousness moment succeeding the preceding consciousness 
moment, and since cognition is self-established there is no regression. 
The second moment which is the karya of the first moment is 
self-revealing and therefore does not require another karya to 
reveal it. 

192 ArthakriyS is of the nature of karya and in its 
own nature it is karana so that both cannot be identical. The test 
of reality being arthakriya, itself must be its own arthakriyS — an 
absurd view . 



94 PA:&CAPADIKA of PADMAPADA [XXXIII. 130 

it is not the cause (akaraxia) by no means (is there a need for 
auxiliaries). If it be averred that in regard to the auxiliaries 
(sahakari) the causes (in general) are in no need of them, that 
statement would stand condemned by the testimony of experience 
(darSana). It is indeed perceived that causes do require auxi- 
liaries. Hence when the effect is present the causal capacity of 
the cause is— -no matter how— apprehended, because it is a matter 
of experience that only when cause is given, the effect is seen; 
even so is the effect perceived as resulting from the cause in asso- 
ciation with the auxiliaries; as such the hetutva (tat) in the hetu 
along with the auxiliaries has to be admitted.^®® 

130. One who thinks that the cause constituted by visesa 
(additament or supplementation) produced by the auxiliaries 
brings the effect (karya) into being since otherwise it would be 
relating what can render no help {viz., the auxiliary) to (the effect) 
which does not need it, he should be questioned whether that 
(i.e., the main or basal entity) is the cause or not (of the visesa 
or additament). If it (the basal entity) is not the cause in the 
production of the visesa then it would not be needed. What 
follows then is that the auxiliaries alone would originate the 
vi§e§a (since the seed remains inert) and from the latter the karya 
would result (but this is absurd). If on the other hand it {viz., 
the bare seed) does serve as a hetu, (the question is) how could it 
produce that (very) visesa when (another) viSesa is not generated 
in it (seed) by the auxiliaries ? If (the basal entity together with 


The Bauddha throws the Siddhantin on the horns of a dilemma; 
the Siddhantin seeks refuge in experience. The Bauddha urges that 
reason is of superior cognitive value and points out a case where 
experience is palpably in the wrong. In experience vouches 

for the bodily identity of atman, reasoning negates it. The Siddhantin 
however argues that we cannot ignore the truth as ascertained from 
repeated facts of experience — ^the highest tribunal in one’s search after 
truth. When the effect is patent we must admit that the hetutva, the 
potency of being the cause, resides in the cause. 

In the satkhyati doctrine the pot exists in clay and is rendered 
manifest later. But why, it may be asked, is it subsequent in its 
appearance? The answer is that such is our experience and no logic 
can explain it. It is unexplainable. Hence the generalisation that the 
cause-effect is something that cannot be accounted for; it is anirva- 
canlya. 


XXXni. 131] SUPERIMPOSITION 95 

the visesa is) regarded as producing the visesa there would be 
infinite regress.^®* 

131. Purvapak^in: We maintain this view: not that every 
effect is the product of an entity in which the additament is wrought 
by the auxiliaries; when there is the full complement of causes 
and yet there is no effect as in the case of the sprout, etc., it is so 
(i.e., it requires the production of a visesa— puffing up— of the 
seed). In some (other instances) the effect is produced by the 
cause constituted by the auxiliaries when the cause and the auxi- 
liary are together present as witness the sensory cognition which 
brooks no delay.^®® Such being the case, (tatra), the first visesa 
(viz., ucchumnata or turgescence) results from the mere proximity 
of the auxiliaries like the sensory cognition which brooks no delay 
—as such there is no infinite regress. 

Siddhantin : Then it comes to this that the auxiliary though 
it renders no aid to the basal cause is desired by it (but this is self- 
stultifying). In the production of protuberance (tatra) there is 
indeed no self-transformation (i.e., no atisaya) in the basal cause 
(viz., the seed). 


— ^The Purvapaksin is here supposed to be a follower 
of the Vaifesika-school (vide TD.). It is doubtful if the Vaisesika 
doctrine is in conformity with the view expressed here. 

If the basal cause, the seed, has no part in producing 
the viiesa (protuberance, etc.), then it is not right to speak of its 
requiring subsidiaries. It is only when its own competency is inade- 
quate that it desiderates help and not when it is wholly incompetent. 

15 : — ^If it be said that the seed also is the hetu the question 
will be whether the seed without the visesa or with it, is the hetu 
in the production of vi§e§a. Not the first, since the vise$a from 
a seed without the visesa is impossible as in the case of the sprout; 
not the second for since visesa in the seed is a karya like the sprout, 
it requires another visesa to produce it and so on, resulting in infinite 
regress. 

19S — In the case of sensory cognition what is required 

is merely the vicinity of the auxiliaries such as, say, in regard to 
visual perception, light, object, etc. No change is effected in the eye, 
the organ of sight. There is no interval of time between the opening 
of the eye and the perception Of the object.. On this analogy it is argued 
that the visesa which produces the sprout requires only the vicinity of 
the auxiliaries; it does not need the 'seed-cum-vi^e§a. There is thus, 
observes the purvapaksin, no infinite regress. 



96 PANCAPADIKA of PADMAPADA [XXXIII. 132 

Puryapaksin : \?SigQ 28] The (auxiliary) which renders 
no aid is not desired (by any-one) as otherwise it would lead to 
unwelcome results {i.e., anything might become auxiliary to any- 
thing). The auxiliary does no service to the seed as such, but is 
of service in the origination of the karya, yiz., the sprout, because 
it is indispensable for its effectuation, since it results inamediately 
after. 

Siddhantin : Then why is it not admitted that the entity 
(i.e., the basal seed) though permanent desiderates even when 
no visesa is generated in it, the auxiliary for the effectuation of 
the karya (the sprout) like the momentary seed ? Just as the 
momentary entity produces the karya at the very instant the 
subsidiaries are present because it (karya) is contingent on the 
combination of the causes (such as earth, water, seed, air, etc.), 
even so the permanent entity also needs the compresence of the 
auxiliaries though they are of no service to itself (i.e. , not producing 
any visesa in it) since they are indispensable in (the origination 
of) the karya. 

132. Purvapaksin: But this is our view; the momentary 
seed also does not require (the presence of the auxiliaries) for 
when it is itself competent to produce the other (viz., the sprout) 
there is no reason that it should require any external aid. The 
karya (i.e., the sprout) however which comes into being only in 
the com-presence of something (does need the auxiliary) because 
its coming into being is effected only, in the com-presence of some- 
thing other, and otherwise not effected. But regarding the cause 
that is permanent, it is inevitable that it should always be effec- 
tuating (i.e., an enduring begetter must ever begetting). And 
which is the cause that brings about the desired (com-presence) 

^ — The Siddhantin’s argument runs as follows: 

fhmigh the seed is permanent it needs the subsidiaries for the origination 
of the karya and as they come to exist in succession and are not 
always there, it is not permanently that the karya is produced but 
only casually (aim^ll^). The query then would be, what is it that has 
occasioned the coming together of the karapa, viz., the seed and the 
subsidiaries — ? if you posit a karapa for sannihitatva 
(coming together) this karana cannot be either the basal cause, viz., 
the seed or the subsidiaries, for if so being both permanent, karya 
would always be effectuated. It must therefore be adventitious 
(agantuka) but then the question will be how was this agantuka caused 
and so on indefinitely. 


XXXIII. 132] 


SUPERlMPOSITION 


97 


As for the entity which is momentary and originates (the next 
moment) it (exists) neither before nor after, so that the effect 
(ktrya) does not come into being either in the preceding or the 
succeeding instant.^®’ 

Siddhantin : TMs 6 lOq^ not stand the test of reason. 

Pwrvajjafow : W it here that does not stand to reason ? 
(We admit, say the Bauddhas, that karya requires the proximity 
of the auxiliary, but not their cause-effect relation). 

Siddhantin: Ths lies in this that while admitting the 
relation of positive and negative concomitance (niyama) you 
reject the cause-effect relation (nirapeksatvam). To explain — 
if the relation of something with something else is one of positive- 
negative concomitance, that relation (it is evident) has arisen 
because of the cause-effect relation. If it were not so the niyama 
(viz., the positive-negative, anvaya-vyatireka-sambandha) would 
be unintelligible. It is indeed thus that the nature of cause-effect 
relation is determined and (it is further observed that) those who 
wish to bring about a desired result utilise the entire aggregate 
of causes. As such, if it is averred that since the momentary 
cause does not need the auxiliary and its effect also (is not in need 
of the auxiliary), how is the niyama (positive-negative concomit- 
ance) possible ? To explain — since the causes follow in unremit- 
ting succession, one casual moment giving rise to another the 


197 etc. — The Siddhantin tries to hoist him with his own 

petard. The seed cannot produce, say the sprout-instant at the very 
moment of its own existence for it is admitted that the cause, has its 
existence in the immediate preeedent proximity of the effect and 
further the cause-effect relation between two entities originating at the 
same moment is as impossible as the right horn of a cow producing 
its left horn since both come into being at the identical moment. 
Nor again could it be said that the effect is produced in the second 
instant for then it would mean that eyen in the absence of the cause — 
the preceding moment has disappeared — the effect is produced. If 
the effect could come into existence in the second moment without 
the cause, it may do so in perpetuity. 

This objection is met by the Bauddha in the following words; — 
g 5T The cause, says he, must imme- 

diately precede the origination of the effect and not exist anywhere 
and at any time. Hence the effect cannot come into being at any 
time except at the instant immediately preceded by the cause-instant. 
Hence is obviated the occurrence of the effect k all times. 



98 PANCApAdIKA of PADMAPADA [XXXIII. 13 j 

subsidiary is not needed either for the origination of itself (in 
the succeeding moment) or for (producing) the karya (say, sprout), 
since it has in itself the potency to originate (the karya). Not 
even does the karya (require the auxiliary) for the unaided (moment 
—the seed immediately preceding the sprout) only has the power 
of forcibly producing the effect and as such the principle that the 
auxiliary should be in close proximity (at the moment of the sprout 
coming into being) would be purposeless. It would be a matter 
of fortuitous coincidence (kakataliyam). If that be so (i.e., if 
the auxiliary is something unlooked for) there would be an end to 
all dealings based on cause-effect relation. Hence {i.e., seeing 
that your doctrine is liable to such grave objections) it has to be 
said that though the momentary causal entity which, of its own 
accord, produces (the karya) is in no need of the auxiliaries for 
producing itself (svasvarupa) it requires them for effectuating 
the karya (say, sprout). Or (it has to be admitted that) the karya 
(directly) requires them since it is brought about by the aggregate. 
That the aggregate constitutes the cause is evident from the inva- 
riable concomitance of the aggregate of the causes and the effect. 
Similar is the case with even a permanent causal entity so that 
we perceive no difference.^®* 

133. When this is so, siiice the ego-consciousness is per- 
ceived to ever retain a uniform nature and since it possesses causal 
efficiency, though it is permanent the Mahayanika-doctrine ought 
not to be supposed to be held (by the Vedantin) merely on the 
ground (that he admits the relation) of identity between the blue 
and vijnana or cognition. i®® It would, however, (amount to 

1®® Even if permanency of objects is admitted it makes no differ- 
ence. The objection that the seed in the barn also may produce the 
sprout does not hold good since the aid of subsidiaries is required 
whether the seed be permanent or momentary. 

199 — The invariable concomitance of the auxiliaries with the 

effect being inevitable, the Bauddha statement — whatever is real is 
momentary — — stands condemned. From PP. pages 25 to 
28, the discussion has centred round the Mahayanika-doctrine of 
momentariness or flux. Now on the ground that the Vedantin like 
the subjectivist vijnanavadin admits the relation of identity — 
between jnana and vi^aya, the charge is laid at his door that he also 
upholds the Buddhistic doctrine. The charge, however, is baseless. 
The fundamental difference between the two schools is this, that while 
f<?r the Bauddha the ego-entity has a momentary existence, for the 



XXXIII. 134] 


SUPERIMPOSITION 


99 


his siding with the Mahayanika vijnanavadin) if a permanent self 
which is the cogniser and which is manifest in ego-consciousness 
is not taken to exist. And the existence of such atman (aham- 
karta) which is the (unchanging) one has been proved on the 
strength of both experience {viz., of recognition) and reason. 

134. Purvapaksin: The object of inferential cognition, etc., 
is not apprehended as directly perceptive (which it ought to be in 
your view).®®® 

Siddhantin : 29] This is the answer: As regards 

the object of inference, etc., there is no immediate presentation 
O'.e., the object of inference is not perceptive) because in the origi- 
nation of its own cognition there is no activity (on the part of 
that which is the object of inference),®®^ and because with what- 
soever object the probans is in (concomitant) relation that parti- 
cular object only manifests itself in inferential cognition.®®® That 

Vedantin atman as manifested in the ego is uniform in character and 
permanent. Though there is only one entity and the perceptive 
cognition is no other than the apprehension of identity between the 
witness (?rT^) and the object {i.e., visayacaitanya) in experience, 
‘otherness’ also is recognised as existing, and not in Buddhism — 
vide V., p. 83 (see page 25). 

®®® In perception the object is immediately presented because it 
manifests the caitanya (intelligence), and on this analogy, the PQrva- 
pak§in says that in inference also the object should be immediately 
presented, but as a matter of fact it is not. Fire, for example, is the 
object of inferential cognition but yet it is not of immediate presenta- 
tion. What is an object — vi§aya, is the manifestor — vyanjaka of 
caitanya and what is the manifestor is immediately presented. On this 
reasoning the objection is raised. 

2®i The object acquires competency to receive the image of atman 
by its contact with the vjtti. But this does not happen in the case of 
inference since the object is not instrumental in the generation of the 
vftti and as such is not the vyanjaka of its cognition — the object of 
inference; the object may be at a distance and sometimes even absent 
as when we infer rain that is over. 

Then the question is why should one object alone be inferred 
and not another ? In perception, no doubt, the cognition takes the 
form of (pot), because ‘pot’ has vyanjakatva and karakatva but in 
inference owing to the absence of either why should cognition take the 
form of fire, pot, etc., in a certain, order? The answer is furnished 
in the statement that the object can be no other than what is invariably 
concomitant with the probans. 



\00 PA^fGAPADlKA OF PADMAPADA ixXXIV' 135 

the object of valid cognition (in general) is the hetu in the origi- 
nation of its cognition is unsupported by any pramana. 

Let there be no further elaboration of this incidental topic; 
in its proper context when examining the Buddhistic doctrine, 
we shall enlarge it with greater precision.^"® 

XXXIV. 135. (In what follows the Bhasya text— asmat- 
pratyayavisayatvat— is commented upon).®®* The contexture of 
ego-ahamkaragranthi) is termed ‘aham’ as well as ‘ pratyaya ’ 
since like a mirror which reflecting the image becomes the cause 
(hetu) of the cognition of the image, the ‘ahamkara because it 
contains the consciousness element, manifests (i.e., becomes -the 
hetu of the cognition of) the cit (consciousness). Hence, because 
it assumes as it were the nature of object (visayatvat), the entity 
which is not the ‘this’, which is consciousness, and which is 
(no other than) ‘ atman-entity ’ is by courtesy described as the 
object of ‘ asmatpratyaya ’ (ahamkaragranthi).®®® And that (atman) 
— of the nature of the ‘ not this ’ conditioned as ego in the waking 


'^®® etc. — What is pertinent to the present context is the 

examination ofthe nature of the ego — but incidentally 
the Buddhistic doctrine of flux came in for review. The Prabhakara, 
Naiyayika, and Vaisesika regard the ego itself as atman, while the 
Vedantin holds that it is distinct from atman — pure consciousness. 

— The ego-complex indistinguishable from conscious- 
ness. sitfl5T%-3TfRoif:?jrrrsi%ti%ra — The ego-complex is known 

both as asmat and pratyaya (aPTf.^w) ; 5i<3- 

What we mean by 

atman’s vi?ayatva, i.e., its becoming an object, is tis ‘pratibimbitatva’ — 
getting reflected in ‘ antahkararia Hence atman is spoken of as 
— the insentient part of the ego-complex, — the 

‘not-this’, not the world of perception; hence consciousness — 

Just as the image is manifested in a mirror, consciousness — cit, is 
cognised in ‘ahamkara’ for it is conjoined with 'it (i.e., reflected in it). 

205 — Because of similarity, the quality of manifestation is 

common to both. The ‘jar’ for example is revealed in cognition and 
so is said to be the object of that cognition; atman also reflected 
in the inner sense becomes manifest; hence is said to be the object 
of the ego-complex. In the case of ‘jar’ it is manifested by cit 
delimited by vftti and becomes fit for vyavahara. But atman being 
self-luminous is not manifested but it becomes fif for vyavahara that 
is the common feature. Hence atman is by courtesy spoken of as 
object. 



XXXIV.,1'35] . SUPERIMPOSITION ' ^01 

and dream states, and conditioned in deep slumber by avidya 
which has within it traces of the impre sions (that the inner sense 
has left behind), which is the opposite of jhana and which obstructs 
the light (of atman) — keeps going forwards and backwards and 
as such is termed in Sruti, Smrti and in common parlance as 
samsari, jiva, vijiianaghana, vijnanatma, prajna, sarirl, sarirah, 
atma, samprasadah, purusa, pratyagatma, karta, bhokta and 
ksetrajna.^®^^ 


206 The soul passes from 

waking to dream — from dream to sleep; 3Tin^^-.~from deep slumber 
the passage is in the reverse order. 

The different names given to the conditioned atman are accounted 
for thus: — 

— Because of the superimposition of pleasure-pain vrtti of 
the inner-sense, /.<?., the soul is under the delusion that it 
experiences pleasure and pain which in reality are affections 
of the inner-sense. 

tonq*: — Because of identity with the inner-sense in its active phase, 
Jiva is pranabhimani. 

— Because of identity with the pure inner-sense. 

— ^Termed so in a general sense in relation to its identity 
with the inner sense. 

— Because of the superimposition of nescience. This name 
is given to atman in the state of deep sleep for then ajhana 
alone is the upadhi or the limiting condition. Atman there 
is Suddha since there is absolute cessation of both mental 
and physical activity. 

— Because of atman’s identity with the gross body. 

— Because of manifestation in the body, 

Brum — To show that atman though styled is not limited 

but all-pervading which the term imports, 

— Because atman identifies itself with the deep slumber 
state. The inexplicable relation between atman and deep 
slumber is itself abhimana. 

— Because the bodily form consisting of head, trunk and 
limbs is superimposed on consciousness, cit. 

— The pure atman — but when conditioned, the same 
atman engaged in all the manifold activities — ^mental and 
bodily. 

Wt, — Atman becomes agent when identifying itself with 

the conative aspect of the mind and is the enjoyer when 
, : |4entifying itself with the pleasure-modality of the mind, 



102 PAnCAPADIKA OF PADMAPADA |XXXV. 136 

XXXV. 136. Moreover, it is not that atman becomes fit 
for superimposition only because it is the visaya of ‘ asmat- 
pratyaya It is so because of the nature of immediate direct 
presentation. To substantiate that (atman is of immediate cogni- 
tion) the Bhasyakara says, ‘ because pratyagatma is self-proven ’ 
(for no one denies the self). If atman remains an unknown 
entity there would be no distinction between what is cognised by 
oneself and what is cognised by another.*®® 

Prdbhdkara view criticised : Atman’s existence is not sub- 
stantiated by the cognition of an object only (lit. what is cognised, 
like jar, cow, etc.,) because it (atman) is not in the objective rela- 
tion (to that cognition) and because it leads to unwarrantable 
conclusions.*®® ' 

Bhatta view criticised: Nor (can atman be established) by 
(its being regarded as the object of) a cognition which is distinct 


— The word ‘ Ksetrajfia ’ brings home the existence of atman 
so described. Ksetra is karyakaranasamghata^ — i.e., the body, 
and k§etrajna is the individual soul. 

<T , etc. — Because atman is immediately presented. By the 
statement ‘ superimposition on the qualified atman, 

i.e,, atman in association with antahkarana was pointed out; now by 
the statement ‘ ’ superimposition on the unqualified atman 

is pointed out. Atman is of immediate presentation, in the sense 
that the chief element in perception, viz., annulment of doubt regard- 
ing the existence of the object — is here. Because atman is 
intimately known it can become the substratum of superimposition. 

*®^ 'T — The distinction between my cognition and 

that of another is possible only when atman is presupposed, for of every 
one the cognition takes the form — ‘by me is this known’, ‘ 

Otherwise the subject-object relation itself would not arise 
and one who perceives an object and one who does not will be 
on a par. 

209 7! ^ — Prabhakara maintains that atman becomes 

known by being the substratum — of jfiana without being its 
object. This view is criticised. — what is cognised, say, a jar. 
The existence of atman cannot be proved by the cognition we have of 
a jar, etc., for atman has no objective relation — and then 
if it is argued that even without the accusative relation atman can be 
established, there is no reason why atman alone should be the object — 
Atman is not admitted as the object of jfiana by Prabhakara 
but yet atnian beconies inanjfest ^s (he substrate of jfiana— 




XXXV. 136] SUPERIMPOSITION ^ 103 

from it (say, eognition of pot).®^” If that (cognition should arise) 
at a time distinct from that of the cognition of atman then there 
could be nothing to distinguish one’s object of cognition from that 
of another owing to the non-cognition of the relation of the object 
of cognition (and atman). Nor can it be maintained that (the 
cognition of the object is simultaneous with the cognition of 
(atman) since the two cognitions relating to (two) opposed objects 
(v/z., atman and visaya) arise simultaneously. It is not per- 
ceived that Devadatta has established simultaneously a double 
contact, one with an object that is in front of him by moving 
forwards and another that is behind him, by moving backwards. 

Bhatta Defence: Let not two acts of the nature of move- 
ment take place simultaneously, but what is of the nature of trans- 
formation certainly takes place (i.e., a thing — here atman — can 
undergo a double transformation at the same time). 

Siddhdntin : No, it is not so ; even what is of the nature of 
movement can take place without self-contradiction {i.e., there 
may be two simultaneous movements), as in the case of a person 
who walks while singing. {Per contra) what is of the nature of 
transformation cannot take place {i.e., a double transformation 
of a single object simultaneously) without self-contradiction, as 
the transformation due to youth and that due to old age cannot 
occur simultaneously (in the body). Hence the pure conscious- 
ness — atman, is self-established, is the final limit (avadhi) of all 
our aversions and coverings (hanopSdana), itself is not an object, 
fit neither for abandonment nor for possession and because it is 


ST — It is argued that atman’s existence may be 

established by its being regarded as the object of jhana which is 
other than that of object-cognition. This is the view of Bhatta, 
Gautama and Kanada. It is refuted; the opponent has to answer 
whether that jfiana arises simultaneously with the perception of the 
object (say, jar) or at a different time. It cannot be the second 
alternative for then any distinction between one’s cognition and 
another’s will cease because of the absence of the experience of the 
relation between the object and atman. Nor the first alternative, 
VIZ., that the visayanubhava and atmanubhava are synchronous, 
because as the PP. says JT atman 

which is the substrate of jMna and is void of parts, cannot suffer 
two transformations either in one part or in ? distinct part — vid? 
VPS,, p. 85, 


104 PAtGAPADIKA OF PADMAPADA [XXXVI. 137 

self-luminous (and so always immediately present) is fit to be the 
substratum of illusory knowledge. 

XXXVI. 137. Purvapaksin: Well, superimposition on the 
mere basis of immediate presentation has been nowhere observed 
hitherto ; everywhere it is seen that illusory knowledge arises only 
when the eye comes into contact with a presented object. 

Siddhantin: Having premised this objection (the Bhasya- 
kara) says— [“ There is no such rule ”]. [“In akasa (ether) 
though it is not an object of perception, etc.,”] which (latter 
statement) means that it (akasa) is paroksa — not perceived (by 
the eye) ; [Page 30] or balah — men who cannot discern the truth, 
superimpose ‘ talam ’ — colour resembling that of sapphire and 
‘ tamala ’-leaf and also ‘ malinata,’ z.e., (smoke, etc.), or some- 
thing else similar to the colour of blue lotus, etc., on akasa which 
is perceptive though not through the activity of the visual sense ; 
(akasa is perceived by the saksin).^^^ [“ So there is no discrepancy 
(in the superimposition of the insentient on the pure conscious- 
ness {cf., Bhasya, p. 39)”],— in these words the Bhasyakara 
concludes (the section on) probability (i.e., of atman’s being the 
substratum of illusory knowledge which the opponent had denied). 
How akasa though not in contact with the sense of sight is per- 
ceptive, we will show (in the sequel), 

XXXVII. 138. Purvapaksin: Well, is not avidya suggested 
(by Vyasa) as the cause of the endless afflictions of mankind since 
he has set out with the proposition that the knowledge of Brahman 
is the destroyer of the cause of the miseries ? Hence the nature of 
that alone {i.e., avidya) which is the root cause of the ills of life 
in the shape of agency (activity, enjoyment, etc.), has to be 
expounded. Then why is the nature of superimposition described 
at length (by the Bhasyakara) ? 

Siddhantin : Presuming this objection the commentator gives 
the answer in the following words — this very superimposition 
(adhyasa) which is defined in the manner above, the pandits — those 


211 The opponent contends that the self which is self- luminous and 
therefore immediately presented cannot be the substrate of super- 
imposition, for he argues that unless the substrate and the super- 
imposed object are apprehended by the same sense-organ no super- 
imposition is possible. The Siddhantin adduces the instance of 
superimposition on the ether which is not the object of sense perception 
but of the inner witness or of the niind, 



XXXVII. 139] SUPERIMPOSITION 105 

who are skilled in appraising the means of knowledge---under- 
stand to mean avidya. 

139. They also give the name vidya to the ascertainment of 
the essence of reality by its being differentiated from avidya. 
The knowers of Brahman amongst mankind (loke) term as vidya, 
the discriminating knowledge which effects the dispelling of the 
superimposed and false serpent (lit. serpent which is of the nature 
of the not-that, v/z., the rope), and which thereby brings home 
the fact that the object in its real nature is no other than the rope 
only, a fact borne out by common experience. 

140. Purvapaksin: If it is so, after having begun with super- 
imposition, to have again commented on its appellation of avidya 
is unnecessary effort and as such it would have been better if 
(the Bhasya) had started with avidya.^^^ 

Siddhantin: This is not a sound objection. If the (Acarya) 
had begun with (the exposition of) (avidya) only, its feature as an 
enveloping entity (avarana) alohe would have been denoted and 
not its causal potency to produce the ills of life by projecting 
something other than the real object. Hence the necessity of 
first characterising its potency to distort reality (lit. to make things 
appear different from what they are) as adhyasa, since that aspect 
of it v/z., viksepa is pertinent to the context. Again by terming 
it avidya, its fitness for sublation by vidya alone, has to be rendered 
explicit.®^® That being so, {i.e., since superimposition is dis- 
pelled by knowledge) the Bhasyakara says (‘ where something is 


The objection is grounded in the fact that the com- 
mentator starts with the delineation of superimposition' — and 
then because the sublation of the superimposed by knowledge has to 
be established, he interposes avidya (nescience) as its other name, 
(it must be remembered that knowledge — 14^1 removes its opposite 
and not Why not, the objector says, should he have 

begun with nescience, since by its removal on the rise of knowledge, 
its effect, v/z., superimposition also would naturally disappear? 

213 etc. — The answer to the objection raised 

above, is that avidya by itself is not productive of the ills of life— 
No doubt in its veiling, aspect it hides reality as in sleep but 
in its projecting aspect it is responsible for the opposites like pain and 
pleasure, heat and cold, etc., with which one is assailed. The nature 
of viksepa as evident in the superimposition of atman on non-atman 
and vice versa has first to be rendered explicit. The primary object 
of inquiry into the nature of Brqhman is to find a remedy for one’s 



106 


PAtCAPADIK A OF PADMAPADA [XXXVIII. 141 

superimposed on something else, not even to a tittle is the entity 
(on which something is superimposed) affected by either the bad 
or the good effects accruing from it (adhyasa).^^^ Thus the Bhasya- 
kara shows the unreality of anartha (enjoyership, etc.). If they 
were real (the Sfltrakara’s) asseveration (pratijna) that its sublation 
results only from jnana would become void 

XXXVIII. 141. Thus up to this point the bhasya com- 
mencing from ‘ the notions' of non-ego and ego, etc.,’ and ending 
with ‘due to erroneous knowledge, not differentiating truth from 
error men carry on their empirical activities from eternity ’ has 
discoursed on superimposition, called avidya which consists in 
the mutual confounding of atman and non-atman, as if it were 
validated (by pramana).®^® And desirous of (establishing its 
existence) the commentator having given its definition and having 
shown the possibility {prima facie) of its occurrence in atman and 
again desirous of determining its existence (/.e., of superimposi- 
tion) on the basis of sound logic, says : [“ And this erroneous 
mutual transference of atman and non-atman, otherwise termed 
avidya is presupposed in all activities — secular and sacerdotal 
based on the distinction between the means of knowledge and the 
objects of knowledge as also in all the Scriptural statements 
whether injunctive or prohibitive or relative to liberation.]®^® 


sufferings brought on by viksepa. It is through superimposition that 
avidya afflicts man. As such the nature of superimposition has to be 
explicated before that of avidya. 

214 ^ the ascription of silver to the shell, for 

example, brilliance which belongs to the silver is by no means related 




to the shell; in the rope serpent appearance, the poisonous quality of 
the serpent has absolutely no connection with the rope. Hence super- 
imposition is nothing but error — 

215 — ‘Without stating the pramarias the commenta- 

tor’ says Padmapada, ‘has expounded the nature of superimposition, 
its cause, its definition artd its probability — Now cogent reasons 
— smior’s are adduced in proof of the actual existence of adhyasa, 
- 5mm«rr — desirous of adducing valid means of 

knowledge in support of superimposition. 

— Scriptures, Le., the Upanisads bearing upon libera- 
tion; from the insertion of this phrase it is evident that the Upanisads 
do not subserve the karmakapda or the ritualistic portion of the 
Vedas; on the contrary their independent instrumental value as sub'- 
serving the highest huiiian end is indicated, 


XXXVIII. 142] 


SUPERIMPOSITION 


107 


[Page 31] The liberation texts of the sastra demarcate it {i.e., 
the topic of moksa) from the ritualistic section having admitted 
that their function is only to expound the real nature of atman, 
since there is no occasion here for either injunction or prohibition 
and since consequently it is irrelevant to speak of possessing or 
eschewing (hanopadana). 

142. Purvapaksin : [“ But how could it be maintained 
that perception and other means of valid cognition as also the 
Scriptures have in view one who is under the spell of nescience ” ?] 
Well, we admit that avidya as defined (above, viz., that it is the 
manifestation elsewhere of what was seen before) may have the 
pure atman as its locus. By this alone its (avidya) actual exist- 
ence is not really established. Hence its existence has to be 
substantiated (by cogent reasons).®^’ The pramanas are depend- 
ent on the knowing subject (pramata) ; hence the knowing subject 
is the locus (asraya) of the pramanas {i.e., he is the ground of 
the means of right knowledge), and not the one who is under 
illusion — which means that avidya has no place here. Or, the 
sentence (kathara punah, etc.) may be construed thus: — How 
can perception, etc., and also the Scriptures be the valid means 
of knowledge when they relate to one who is deluded (bhranta) ? 
If they have their seat in one who is a bhranta {i.e., if they have a 
deluded person as their asraya^, they cease to be pramanas being 
vitiated by their contact with the defects inherent in such a person 
— this is the adverse criticism. 

143. Siddhantin : [“ This will be answered. For one who 

is free from the erroneous notions of ‘ I ’ and ‘ mine ’ in the body 
and the senses, the idea of * a knower ’ is inappropriate and as 
such the operation of pramarias is unintelligible”] — so far it is 
the Bhasyakara’s succinct statement. The same is elaborated 
in, [“ without employing the senses] (there can be no talk of 


The commentary beginning with ‘How could it be maintained 
that perception and other pramapas presume one who is under 
nescience, etc.?’ has to be understood thus — apart from its being 
apprehended by the inner witness, is there any proof to show that 
superimposition is the basis of all activities connected with pramapa, 
prameya, etc.? 

The questioner admits the probability of the superimposition of 
non-atman on atman, but then re<]|uires definite proof of its 
^xistenpp, 


!08 PAnCAPADIKA OF PADMAPADA PCXXVIII. 144 

perception, etc.). The capacity to know is not perceived in one 
who is in deep slumber since in that state one is free from the 
erroneous notions of ‘ I ’ and ‘ mine ’ in the body and the senses, 
(so that in the absence of superimposition the triad of vyavaharas 
— pramana, prameya, pramata, is impossible), Because the 
illusory ascription of the ego is to the body, the notion of ‘ mine ’ 
is to the senses ; from the word adi (and so on), the bodily organs, 
such as the arm, etc., have to be taken. The term ‘ body ’ (deha) 
has to be understood as pointing to the whole (avayavi) possessing, 
the head, etc., and distinguished by the generic concept of ‘ man ’ 
etc., and not merely to the physical body; for it is evident that 
the usage does not take the form ‘ I am the body ’ (but rather 
‘ I am man ’). Activity of every kind presumes that the conscious 
principle (caitanya) has a locus (identical with that of) a parti- 
cular genus, as exemplified in the usage, “I who am a man, 
know”, “ I, who am a deity, know ”, and that this is a matter 
of immediate, intuitive experience is self-evident. It cannot be 
(maintained) that any empirical activity (as evidenced by the 
employment of expressions) like the knower, (knowing and what 
is known), is possible on the basis of the relation of overlordship 
either by the bodily configuration or by the eye, etc., organically 
connected therewith, based on the relation of possession; for 
then such activity would be possible even through the servant, 
etc., possessing a human body.®^®" 

144. Some one else says: — ^The relation of the body (lit. 
the aggregate of the bodily organs and the senses) with the self 
is one of (subordination) being directed by one’s will, and the 
relation of the self again with the body is one of (controller), 
directing the body at its own will. From that (takes place) every 
activity of the self as the knowing subject, etc., involving action, 
means of action and the result (phala). For example, with the 
desire to stand one stands up ; and also with the desire to sit one 
sits down. But there is no such thing {i.e., this kind of relation — 
that of controller and controlled) in the case of servants, etc. 
Hence the absence of vyavahara there — involving the knowing 


218 jf the relation between the self and the body be not one of 
(false) identity but only one of master and servant we might as well 
admit that the empirical activities of the self of the master are 
dependent upon the body of the servant. There is relation of owner- 
ship in either case — an unwelcome contingency. 


XXXVIII. 145] SUPERIMPOSITION 109^ 

subject, etc., —is not wrong, because there is no direct dependence 
of action upon the will. 

145. Siddhantin: What you say is not convincing to one 
who sets any value by experience; to explain— it is self-evident 
that GUT experience takes the form ‘ I am man’ and not ‘my 
man If you argue that this is only a figurative use, all that 
can be said is your honour alone (/.e., your bare assertion only) 
is the pramana here. Moreover even desire is a specific modal 
change (of the inner sense) and how can that (desire) be of atman 
which is changeless (ht. not subject to any transformation) unless 
it be through the ego which is atman as (erroneously) related to 
the transformed inner sense? [Page 32] Hence the experience 
‘Twill stand’ which implies that it is by one’s desire that one 
stands up as well as sits down. As such no value attaches to that 
{viz., the attempt to explain vyavahara by relations other than 
the identity-in-difference — tadatmya). 

146. Therefore the knowership (pramatrtva) cannot be 
predicated of the entity {viz,, atman) which is in itself relationless 
and changeless except (on the basis of) erroneous superimposition. 
Hence {i.e., since the knowership is not intelligible without super- 
imposition) though pramana (means of valid cognition) in its 
application desiderates one who has the capacity of functioning 
as the knower, yet that (knowership) itself is an offshoot of avidya; 
as such it is stated that all pramanas presume one who is under 


‘If the master-servant relation does not fit in’ says the ptirva- 
pak§in, ‘let the relation be one of controller and controlled, — 

I — Atman, as agent, is the controller and the 
aggregate as the object is the controlled. Why the master-servant 
relation which is also fails is because the 

master’s will is not the sole factor; the servant when commanded 
has also to will. But in ‘I stand’ and ‘I sit’ there is the direct 
dependence of action upon the will. Hence there is difference between 
the two. 

220 etc. — The purvapak§in attempts' to explain all 

vyavaharas like pramana, prameya, etc., by relations other than , 
tadatmya. The siddhantin points out that where these other relations 
exist between two words their* case-endings are not identical as in 
tadatmya. Because of tadatmya relation between the body and the 
self we use the expression ‘I am man— if it were any other 
relation the expression would be "my man’ — 


1 io PAfCAPADIKA OF PADMAPADA [XXXVIII. 146 

the spell of avidya; (Cp. ‘Tasmadavidyavadvisayapyeva pratyaksa- 
dini pramapani sastrani, ca (Just as the pramapas pre- 
suppose a person who is under the sway of nescience) even so 
pramapas requiring as they do no other aid and revealing objects 
from their own self-potency possess validity since their negation 
is not perceived, and as such it is not possible to say ‘ no ’ and 
deny what has been demonstrated by primarily adducing per- 
ception (vidhi), Le., that pramapas are (relatively, in the empirical 
realm) valid, and that they have as their visaya one who is under 
illusion. It is only the adventitious defect that is the cause of 
invalidity in knowledge (jnana) and not the defect that is beginning- 
less (naisargika) ; even so is our experience.®^® And there arises 


The criticism here is that superimposition is an unnecessary 
hypothesis. The knower (pramata) himself is the agent in all activities, 
mental and physical and there need be no superimposition (adhyasa). 
To which the answer is that competency to act as knower is possible 
only in the case of one who is under the sway of avidya. ‘Hence’ 
says ^amkara, ‘all pramarias including the Scriptures presuppose primal 
illusion’. 

Merely on the ground that pramanas presuppose one who is 
deluded they do not lose their claim to validity. The critic advances 
the argument that pramanas like perception, inference, etc., are vitiated 
at their very source as their aSraya (ground) is one who is under 
illusion.. In answering the critic, the Vedantin queries thus: — (i) do 
you urge that they forfeit their claim to validity because they proceed 
from one who is deluded ? or (ii) because they are valid, a deluded 
man cannot be their asraya ? As regards the first alternative again, 
(a) do you think that such pramapas are incompetent to reveal the 
absolute truth ? or (6) to reveal the knowledge of empirical objects? 
In regard to (a) we admit the incompetency of pramanas other than 
the Upani§ads; but as regards (ft) the pramanas are certainly valid 
in the workaday world, since they are not negated. We cannot will 
away experience, (ii) is answered in the words — 

trq_This is in answer to an implied objection. 
The Purvapak§in argues that even Brahman which is the vi§aya of 
Brahmajiiana must be illusory like the cognition of shell-silver, for 
all cognitions have their sources in mind which is affected by avidya. 
This argument is fallacious being associated with an adventitious 
condition (upadhi). If a particular cognition is to be illusory it must 
have arisen from a source affected by a defect that is occasional — 
Avidya is not adventitious but primal. It can only frustrate 
the perception of atman in its uniqueness and not in the revealing of 


XXIX. 148] SUPERIMPOSITION lit 

no idea of the existence of defect in what is universal and 
natural. 

147. To illustrate (the above)— neither as regards the dis- 
tress produced by hunger and thirst, nor as regards the digestion 
(lit. destruction) of food and drink brought about by the frequently 
recurring change effected by the gastric juice (jatharagni— the 
digestive fire of the stomach) does any one conceive the idea of 
disease. (On the contrary) as regards even a mild fever returning 
for a brief period or cold caused by slight phlegm, there arises the 
idea of disease because of its adventitious occurrence (lit. non- 
natural). And it is with the notion that the defect pertains to 
the non-natural (has Sahara) said “ Jnana which is produced from 
defective sense-organs and where jnana turns out to be false (the 
moment after it arises) — that alone is wrong knowledge and none 
other (T.D.) 

XXXIX. 148. On account of this also that is so— [Those 
learned in the Sastras) are on a par with the brute creation 
For example, it is indubitable knowledge that cattle, etc., at the 
time of exercising their judgment as knowing beings (prama- 
trtva) assume an attitude either of purposeful activity or with- 
drawal or indifference, thereby indicating that they too illusorily 
conceive the aggregate of the body and the senses as identical with 
the self. In the matter of empirical activities (lit. yoga means 
acquisition, and ksema, safeguarding what has been acquired) 
there is indeed similarity between their behaviour and that of men 
who are from their birth superior to them in intelligence and even 
of those who have acquired competency in the knowledge of the 
future world (derived) from a study of the Sastras. Hence, that 


duality. In the case of visual sense, etc., it is only when they are 
afflicted by some disease that what they reveal is invalid but when 
whole, their claim to denote empirical facts is not abrogated, though 
being under the influence of innate nescience they project diversity. 

It may be questioned why even those who have the conviction 
derived from the Sastras that the self is not the body, should be 
spoken of as no better than animals in their cognitional activities. It 
is to be noted that Mstraik knowledge is indirect— paroksa, and as 
such it cannot negate superimposition — adhyasa, which is mediate — 
aparoksa. What is immediately cognised can be annulled only by 
another cognition which is also immediate. What is intended to be 
impressed is that activity in general, be it of animals or even of the 
educated men, presupposes superimposition. 



il2 PANCAPADIKA of PADMAPADA [XXXIX. 149 

is, since it is seen that the empirical behaviour (karya) of even 
learned men is of the same character as theirs it is only right to 
conclude that the superimposition of the self on the aggregate of 
the body and the senses is similar. 

149. Furvapaksin: Will, on what grounds is it determined 
that in the case of cattle even, there is the superimposition of the 
self on the aggregate of the body and the senses, so that you 
speak of it as if it were already established ? 

Siddhantin: It is thus answered; — It is only to persons of 
superior intelligence that atman is taught by those expert in the 
knowledge of the real nature of pramanas like perception, etc. 
Otherwise it would result in its {i.e., instruction) becoming 

purposeless ; and likewise the whole world would understand 

what atman is without inquiry into the means of valid know- 
ledge.^^® 

150. Purvapaksin: Well, cowherds, women and others 
ignorant of the knowledge of pramanas (like the Veda, etc.) 
understand that a permanent enjoyer survives the fall of the 
present body and perform (religious rites) for his sake. 

Siddhantin'. No, the practical behaviour, (the vyavahara of 
the common people), has for its pramana only the vyavahara 

of those who are cognizant of that {yiz., that the soul is perma- 

nent and survives the body). Therefore it is that when asked 
who it is that (survives and) is related to the other world, they 
answer, “ we do not know what it is in particular; it is, however, 
a well-understood belief in the world ”. [Page 33] As such 
it is rightly said, [‘ action based on perception, etc., of animals 
evidently presupposes non-distinction (between the self and the 
not-self, viz., the body). And because such resemblance (with the 
vyavahara of animals) is observed, the vyavahara in the nature 
of perception, etc., of even men of understanding so long as super- 
imposition lasts, is of the same character only {i.e., originates in 
nescience) ’.] 


It is perceived that the knowledge of atman can be brought 
home only to those who possess higher intelligence, and if we should 
suppose that there is no superimposition in the cognitional activity 
of animals then (like them) the whole of mankind would cognise atman 
without. the necessity of study and inquiry. In the empirical sphere 
the behaviour of even the discriminating is on a par with that of 
animals. Their thoughts and actions are based on ‘adhyasa’. 


XL. ^ ^ ^ ^ SUPERIMPOSITION 113 

XL. 151. What has been said so far is this : — ^perception 
and other means of valid knowledge are established through 
the instrumentality of (the sense-organs like) the eye, etc., and 
they {i.e., the instruments) cannot operate without a basis 
(adhisthana) and the body is the adhisthana (z.e., the body on 
which atman has been superimposed serves as the ground). And 
the cognitive function is ill-suited to the atman-entity which is 
relationless, immutable and of the essence of pure intelligence, 
without its identification with the body, etc., through superimpo- 
sition. In this way having pointed out that as a matter of expe- 
rience, perception, etc., have as their asraya (locus) one who is 
under the spell of nescience, and having explained the same on 
the basis of their karya (procedure) also because of its similarity 
with the procedure of animals, (in other words karya or vyava- 
hara of learned- men being similar to that of animals is made the 
probans to infer that they also act under illusion), the Bha§yakara 
premising (now) a specific doubt, v/z., that the Sastra on the 
contrary {i.e., action enjoined in the Scriptures) is intended only 
for one who is cognizant of atman (as distinct from the body) 
and as such activity therein does not proceed from superimposi- 
tion, shows that even in his case action presupposes avidya, and 
says [‘ As regards activities enjoined by the Scriptures it is true 
no doubt that an intelligent man who undertakes them does so 
not without knowing (beforehand) that atman (is distinct from the 
body and) is related to the other world ’]. 

152. Purvapaksin: Well, the injunctions (Vedic mandates) 
relating to interested action, obligatory action, occasional action 
and expiatory action do certainly possess validity without the pre- 
supposition of an enjoying agent who survives the collapse of the 
presenfbody.®^® We will point out how (it is argued that the Vedic 


The materialist Carvaka questions the Bhasyakara’s statement 
that when one pursues an action for the sake of an unseen phala 
one must have a knowledge of atman apart from the body, for the 
Scriptixral injunctions (he says) may acquire the status of pramana 
even in the absence of heaven and a dweller therein. 

(i) — Injunction relating to interested action' — kamya- 
karma, performed for a reward — phala. 

(ii) — Injunction relating to obligatory duties — nitya- 
karma, as sun-rise and sun-set prayers, sacrifices on new and full-moon 
days, autumnal rites, etc. 



114 


PAnCAPADIKA of PADMAPADA [XL. 153 

texts acquire validity without necessitating a disembodied atman) 
when commenting on the section beginning with the Sutra— 
“ Some (maintain that) the self (is non-different from the body, 
because knowledge, etc., are manifest) when the body exists 
(and not when the body does not exist)”. 

Siddhantin: This is true as you say (z.e., atman as an entity 
distinct from the body is not established). But yet the Bhasya- 
kara has made this statement (viz., that atman as related to 
Heaven exists apart from the body) admitting the reality of 


(iii) — Injunction relating to occasional obligatory 
duties, as bathing at the eclipse, etc. 

(iv) — Injunction relating to expiatory ceremonies such 
•as are done when one commits a sin. 

The Carvaka must be supposed to reason thus:— Interested action 
may yield its phala in this birth only as the bestowal of cattle, etc. 
If it is performed for svarga even that could be had here, for svarga 
means a state of supreme ' happiness and joy and that also may 
eventuate in one’s life-time as a reward for the performance of 
Jyotistoma, etc. As for (ii) and (iii) the Mimamsakas hold the view 
that Nitya and Naimittika duties yield no reward, but that one will 
be committing sin if one neglects them. As for (iv) evil deeds may be 
expiated in this life only since the affliction they bring also relates to 
the present life. If fruits of one’s deeds here should eventuate, as 
held by some, in some other region called svarga a man can proceed 
there in this earthly body with the aid of mantra and medicine. 
The Carvaka conclusion, therefore, is that the validity of Vedic 
mantras (if one believes in them) can be maintained without presuming 
a disembodied soul. 

V. S., III. iii. 53 — A Purvapak?a sutra which declares the 
materialistic position that no spiritual entity apart from the bodily 
aggregate exists. The siddhanta sGtra, i.e., the sutra declaring the 
true doctrine runs thus:— V. Sut., 
III. iii. 54; — ^Your contention that a distinct atman does 

not exist, is untenable; 53jf^\ci;:_Atman distinct from the body does 
exist; ' why ? even though the body exists, say, when 

a man is dead, there is the absence of consciousness, desire, etc., 
which are admitted to be attributes of the Self; the know- 

ledge of the external world is something distinct from the external 
world and is not identical with it; even so it must be admitted that 
upalabdhi or knowledge is distinct from the body and atman is no 
other than such knowledge. 


XL. 153] SUPERIMPOSITION 115 

such an entity_as vouched for by a consideration of all the 
Sastras.^^® 

153. Even so the commentator (Sahara) in commenting on 
the sutras (of Jaimini) purporting to exphcate the Vedic mandates 
has advanced ab extra a powerful defence for the existence of an 
independent atman (though atman is not established in the 
sutras).®^® 

Purvapak^in: On what ground (does he undertake to 
estabhsh atman)? 

Siddhantin: Having in the sutra — ‘Inquiry into Dharma’ 
Jai. Sut; I. i, resolved to expound the nature of karya and basing 
the 'validity of its (i.e., Dharma) knowledge on the non-require- 
ment of any other pramana, the Sutrakara (Jaimini), it is to be 
supposed, admits the validity of even those Vedic statements 
which relate to self-existent objects because of the absence of 
any distinction. Similarly having stated that codana (the vidhi 
or mandatory statement) is indeed competent to convey the 
knowledge of the past, the present, the future, the supersensuous, 
the separated (in space), the distant (in time) and all other objects 
of this nature, (Sahara), it is seen (understands) that in the know- 
ledge of existent entities even though as auxiliary to mandatory 
statements, the non-requirement (of pramanas other than sabda) 


228 , etc. — This is partial agreement. Though sastraic 

duties can be undertaken without reference to the other world, 
Samkara bearing in mind the true doctrine as expounded in the 
Devatadhikararia (V. S., I. iii. 26-33) where the validity of mantra 
and arthavada is admitted, has made the statement that an entity 
distinct from the body and related to the other world exists. What 
is however pertinent to the context is the adduction of proof for the 
existence of illusion. 

, etc. — If the postulation of atman as distinct from the 
body was necessary for the carrying out of the Vedic mandates Jaimini 
would have framed a siitra for that purpose but such postulation is 
unnecessary to enforce the fulfilment of a mandate. Hence Jaimini’s 
omission. But Sahara has expounded the nature of atman when 
commenting on the Vth sutra known as the ‘autpattika stitra’ on the 
strength of the ‘anapeksatva hetu’- — that the Veda as a whole requires 
no other pramapa for its validity. The Upanisads forming part of the 
Veda must necessarily be valid and they reveal the nature of atman 
an existent entity — ijclisf. — ^beyond the sutra, apart from the 
sutra. 



116 PAhCApADIKA OF PADMAPADA [XL. 154 

is of equal application. And as to where or how the Vedie texts 
relating to the cognition of the existent entity (serve as a pramapa 
is not explained by the revered Jaimini since in accordance with 
his resolve he set about investigating into the nature of dharma 
only and since such knowledge {Le., of atman as distinguished 
from the body) is not to the purpose.®*® 

154. But the revered Badarayana on the other hand having 
resolved to inquire into a different topic altogether, has expounded 
(the subject of the separate existence of atman) in the ‘ saman- 
vayadhikarana ’ — ^V.S., I. 1-4. And there svarga the bliss of 
which is to be enjoyed in a world other than ours is (as good as) 
proved to exist. And all that is pertinent to svarga can never 
become significant without an enjoyer different from the aggre- 
gate of the body and the senses (being premised). And its proof 
{i.e., atmasiddhi) does not depend solely on the Scriptures. [Page 
34] A statement relating to a thing which when fit for cognition 
by a different pramana is unsupported by such pramaria or is 
contradicted by it would become as invalid as the statement that 
stones float. Hence (Badarayana) has devoted his sole attention 
to the demonstrability of that {i.e., atman as described in the 
Upanisad. 

155. It is true that validity would belong (to the injunctions 
relating to the performance of ritualistic duties) even without 
that {i.e., without the necessity of atman as distinguished from 
the body being established). But that (validity) does exist (in 
regard to existent objects like svarga). And when Vedic passages 
relating to existent objects are valid, the Vedic utterances relating 
to phala {i.e., the reward accruing from the performance of sacri- 
fices) will have no validity without it {i.e., unless the self as dis- 
tinct from the body is substantiated). Knowing this the Bhasya- 
kara (Samkara) says, [“ as regards the duties enjoined by the 
Scriptures on the person qualified, it is true no doubt that an 
intelUgent man who undertakes them does so not without knowing 
beforehand that atman is distinct from the body and is related 
to the other world ”]. 


®»® The mandatory statements demand implicit obedience and no 
question as to whether atman as distinguished from the body exists 
or not is pertinent. Even without reference to the surviving self the 
karmakapda imposes obligation to carry out its behests. 



XLI. 156] 


SUPERIMPOSITION 


117 


XLI. 156. [“ And yet (a knowledge of the real nature of 
atman) to be had from the Vedanta (is not required in the per- 
formanee of karma).”] Which is that atman (z.e., of what essence 
is that atman which is to be known from a study of the Vedanta) ? 
To this query he (Samkara) says, [“the knowledge of the real 
nature of atmaii as an entity free from transmigratory existence 
is not required in the performance of karma (adhikara)== 
karmanusthana — ^performance of- sacrifices) because, it serves no 
purpose and (not merely that), it is opposed to karma.”] By 
(the phrase), “ that which is free from longing for food, etc.”, 
he points out the negation of transmigratory existence. Indeed 
every creature that is afflicted by the gnaw'ngs of hunger finding 
no rest (i.e., not being free from love and hate) will be engaged 
in some kind of activity ; when that (hunger) disappears, remain- 
ing in peace perceives nothing that is either to be acquired or 
rejected. By (the phrase) “ unassociated with all distinctions of 
Brahmana, Ksatriya, etc.,” he points out the total negation of 
the world and (the existence of) the one entire consciousness- 
entity of the nature of Bliss (rasa). 

157. He further says, [“ And prior to the rise of such know- 
ledge (as described above), the Veda .(^'-S-, the Scriptural injunc- 
tion) in its application cannot step beyond, but must refer to one 
who is under the spell of avidya ”.] (This means) that prior to the 
rise of the knowledge, derived from the (Mahavakya — the great 
pronouncement) — “That thou art”, the sastra which proceeds 
(to instruct) on the presupposition of samsara, (empirical life) 
the creation of avidya, rendered manifest in the ego notion, does 
not step beyond the man who is deluded (i.e., it addresses itself 
only to one who is still in the realm of nescience). Hence it was 
rightly said that the pramanas like perception, etc., as well as the 
sastras are operative in relation to those under the spell of 
nescience. 

281 (a) f 

When one is no longer subject to hunger and thirst the idea 
that one is under the obligation to do any specific duty ceases. 

When distinctions of caste disappear specific karmas enjoined as 
the means to some end, on Brahmapas, Ksatriyas, etc., cease. 

(c) ‘ 11% ff%Ttri%5l%. 

When the idea of bondage ceases there is absolute freedom and 
Scriptural commands have no authority on the liberated person. 



118 


pancapadika of padmapada 


[XLII. 159 


158. He establishes that same point. To explain The 
Vedic mandates, ‘ Let the Brahmapa perform the Sacrifice etc. 
proceed on the basis of the superimposition on atman of what 
is not that (vjz., atman). The statements ‘Initiate a Brahmana 
(z.e., perform Upanayana) in his eighth year etc., (presuppose) 
caste and age-superimposition. The asrama-superimposition is 
indicated in “ Do not beg after ‘having bathed The super- 

imposition of. a particular state (avastha) is indicated in ‘if one 
is suffering from a chronic disease one should perform such and 
such a sacrifice’. The word ‘ adi ’ points to the text ‘Till life 
lasts perform (agnihotra)’ whereby the superimposition of ‘ living ’ 
(is premised).®* * ® 

XLII. 159. Thus having established the existence of super- 
imposition (prasadhya— by defining it and adducing pramanas in 
its support), the Bhasyakara, with the statement “we have 
explained that all that superimposition means is the apprehension 
of something in what is not that something ” reminds us that, 
what has already been defined in the commentary beginning with 
‘ of the nature of recollection etc., and ending with ‘ adhyasa. 
however understood, does not depart from the definition that it 
is the apparent manifestation of the attributes of one thing in 
another ”, is literally the superimposition of ‘ what is not that ’.*** 


* ST f ^ Having finished studies under a preceptor, 

in the celebate state— one should perform the ceremony known 
as ‘snatakakarma’ and enter upon a married life, the stage of a 
house-holder — He should now cease to beg food as he used 
to do while pursuing studies as a Brahmacarin. 

Obligatory duties such as daily prayers to the Sun, and new 
moon and full-moon sacrifices are to be performed during the whole 
of one’s life-time. But this obligation does not bind a liberated man 
but only that man who is under the illusion that he exists as an 
individual Self — JIvadhyasa. And when one realises one’s own true 
self the obligatory duties lose their binding force. 

234 — In these words, Samkara restates 

briefly the definition of superimposition already stated: 

— with the object of illustrating it. The examples already 
given, viz., ‘shell-silver’ and ‘double-moon’ no doubt substantiate the 
definition, but they are not elucidative of the topic under discussion. 
It is the superimpositiori of the ‘I’ and ‘mine’ that should be rendered 
intelligible. Hence another illustration— cl^IsiT 
^ 


XLII. 160] SUPERIMPOSITION 119 

(And this statement is made) in order to specifically point out, 
which thing, as denoted by the ‘ thou (object) ’, is superimposed 
on which thing, as denoted by the ‘ego’ (subject) and again in 
the reverse order. What it means is the apparent presentation 
of the notion of what is denoted by the ‘ thou ’ {i.e., ‘ the this ’) in 
what is denoted by the ‘ not this ’-ego ; (again) in what is the 
‘ not-this ’, (i.e., in what is denoted by the ‘ not-thou ’). Hence 
says (the commentator— ‘ As when sons and wife, etc.’ 

160. Purvapaksin: Well, it is not literally (i.e., in the 
primary sense) that the soundness or the unsoundness (of health) 
of one’s children, etc., that one attributes through ignorance to 
one’s own self and indeed it was undertaken by you to show the 
superimposition of what is not the ‘ that ’ in a primary sense 
(and not in a figurative sense). 

Siddhantin: [Page 35] Yes, it is true (that superimposition is 
literal and not figurative). That only is illustrated. How ? It 
is thus — ^when a baby-son is decorated with clothes and orna- 
ments by someone who is in no way related (to the child) except 
as a neighbour, the father thinks in no figurative sense that he 
has honourad the father only, because of the fact that he 
himself is honoured; and the person honouring also thinks that 
he honoured the father only, because of the fact that the 
sense of pride at being honoured has not developed in the child. 
Similarly, with the object of vanquishing a king a neighbouring 
king who is desirous of victory, having destroyed only a single 
town in his kingdom thinks that he has vanquished him only ; 
and he also {i.e., the pillaged king) grieves (saying) ‘ I am van- 
quished ’. Hence in this wise, superimposition in a real sense is 
perceived in the self which is patently distinct (from children, 
wife, etc.). Where then is the need to state that superimposition 
is real (not figurative) in the case of one who imagines thus — ‘ I 
am lean, I am stout ’, etc. ? To point this out (the Bha§ya) says, 
[“myself alone am unsound or sound; thus he superimposes 
on the self qualities which do not pertain to him ’]. The super- 


It is through adhyasa that the non-related self erroneously relates 
itself first with the internal organ. This is the direct, primary identi- 
fication — the non-personal self becoming the personal self. The self 
becomes ‘I’ and on this further superimpositions take place, e.g., 
identifying oneself with one’s wife, child, etc. These are cases of 
mediated adhyasa. 


120 PAtCAPADIKA OF PADMAPADA [XLII. 160 

imposition of what is denoted by the ‘ Thou ’ (Yusmat) is only 
that of the attributes (dharma) belonging to external objects as 
(when one appropriates to oneself) the honour, etc., done to the 
sons and so on. The meaning of the word ‘ asmat is in fact 
that which is interrelated to the ground of the ego-notion (/.e., 
the inner sense or antahkarapa), which is the sentient part as 
distinguished from the ‘ this ’ (i.e., the nonsentient world), and 
which is the object (visaya and not visayi); but it is not pure 
consciousness only, as in the case of the superimposition of the 
inner sense (on atman) where there is no interposition of an addi- 
tional superimposition (except ajfiana) ; even so ‘ the attributes 
of the body such as leanness, etc.,’ (are superimposed on the 
self); alike the superimposition of the thing possessing attributes 
(dharminopi, vfe., the body, etc., which are the locus of leanness, 
etc.). The use of the word ‘ dharma ’ is to indicate that the super- 
imposition is of the body, only as associated with attributes like 
‘ manhood ’ (being a man), etc., and not to denote (association 
with others as illustrated in) ‘ I am body’. And based on that 
(viz., the superimposition of attributes — ^dharmadhyasa) distinct 
(lit. such and such) rules relating to distinct actions are enjoined 
by the Scripture. Even so, ‘ the attributes of the senses such as 
dumbness, etc.,’ so that only the attributes (are superimposed on 
the Self). Likewise in the bha?ya [‘ the attributes of the inner 
sense such as desire, etc.’] the attributes alone are to be under- 
stood as superimposed (on the self). The word ‘ antahkarana ’ 

23 S etc. — ^Here the word ‘atman’ in the bha§ya statement, 

is explained. The bha§ya starts with the 
superimposition of external objects on the body, the latter on the 
senses and so on up to the superimposition on the pure atman. But 
this order has to be reversed. In reality the superimposition takes 
place thus; — 

(i) the superimposition of nescience on the pure consciousness 

— atman; 

(ii) the superimposition of antahkarapa on the nescience- 

conditioned, VIZ., atman; 

(iii) the superimposition of the senses on that which is condi- 

tioned by antahkarapa; 

(iv) the superimposition of the body on that which is condi- 

tioned by the senses; 

; (v) the superimposition of what is external on that which is 

conditioned by the body. 



XLIII. 162] 


SUPERIMPOSITION 


121 


(inner sense) denotes (here) the cognitive potency aspect of what 
is denoted by the ego-notion and desire, etc., are its (antahkarana 
in its cognitive aspect) characteristic properties. 

XLIII. 162. i From the bhasya), ‘evamahampratyayinam’ the 
dharmin (having attributes) is to be understood. (Padmapada 
proceeds to explain the bhasya text— “ evamahampratyayinam- 
asesasvapracarasaksini pratyagatmanyadhyasya, tam ca pratya- 
gatmanam sarvasaksinam tadviparyayena anta^karapadis- 
vadhyasyati ”) — pratyayah, desire, etc., (kamadayah); asya — of 
this (antahkarana) ; hence pratyayi (the inner sense is called 
‘ pratyayi ’ because it undergoes modal changes— vikarah to 
express desire, aversion, etc.; it is the asraya). It is aham- 
pratyayi because it is both ego and the modally transformed ; 
and having superimposed that (ahampratyayi) on the inner atman 
(pratyagatman) which is the witness of all its transformations; 
by the word ‘ svam ’ is denoted the ego-complex (the intelligence 
and non-intelligence tangle — cidacidgranthi) which is (as it were) 
the main pillar of the dancing-hall of the life-cycle (samsara). Its 
(antahkarana) operations are the innumerable modal changes 
(psychoses) in the shape of desire, resolve, agency, etc., on account 
of which (transformations) the creature from Brahman down to 
an immobile object (like plants) wander again and again, for- 
lorn, as if with a blazing head. And the whole of that (modal 
change of the inner sense, as desire, aversion, etc.) the conscious- 
ness entity (cidvastu) manifests directly, without the intervention 
(of another vrtti), itself remaining unattached, undergoing no 
change, and (therefore) being void of (the desire) to own or disown 
(anything). And that (z.e., the consciousness entity) only, is spoken 
of as the inner self (pratyak) since it appears as if shining inwards 
in the direction, opposite to that of the body, etc., which have 
acquired the character of externality being designated by the 
‘ this The term ‘ atman ’ itself (is justified on the ground 
that it is so) in its own nature (i.e., not in a figurative sense). 

163. Having superimposed (the nonsentient) on that (the- 
self), again, the superimposition of that, nz., the inner self on 
the nonsentient is effected. If the superimposition were only 


236 3151% atman is i.e., 

is of the nature of existencfe, consciousness and bliss and manifests 
itself as the very opposite of non-existence, insentience and pain. 
Hence it is known as ‘pratyak*. : , 



122 PAhCAPADIKA of PADMAPADA [XLIII. 164 

of that which is denoted by the ‘ thou ’ on the inner self then the 
inner self would not reveal itself.^®’ (For instance) in the 
superimposition of ‘ silver ’ on the nacre, is not revealed. 
But here consciousness (caitahya) manifests itself in the 
ego, etc. [Page 36] Similarly if there were only the super- 
imposition of consciousness on the ego (the insentient part) then 
the world beginning with the ego would cease to manifest itself. 
In order to obviate both (the Bhasyakara) in confirmity with 
experience says— [“ And vice versa, the inner self which is the 
universal witness is superimposed on the internal organ (antah- 
karana), etc., (including the senses)”]. It ought not to be con- 
tended here that because in the sphere of mutual superimposi-, 
tion the manifestation is (of two) separate (entities) it is (a case 
of) figurative (usage) and not (of) mithya (illusion). Since expe- 
rience contradicts it {i.e., that it is a figurative expression) it is 
illusion proper. The validity of what is given in experience can- 
not be questioned. 

164. Purvapaksin: Well, it is only on the antahkarana 
that the inner self— the pure consciousness, is superimposed. 
Elsewhere on the other hand, (say the body, the senses and so 
on) it is only the anthahkarana when it has become endowed 
with the property of immediate cognition as the result of the 
superimposition of consciousness on it, that is superimposed 
(and not the pure atman). For that reason (because the condi- 
tioned self only is superimposed on the senses, etc.,) it was said : 
[“ Tadviparyayepa visayinah, taddharmanam ca visaye adhyaso 
mithyeti bhavitum yuktam — vice versa it is wrong to superimpose 
the subject (visayi) and its attributes also on the object (vi§aya ”)]. 
Otherwise (if the superimposition of the conditioned atman is 
not accepted) whence could atman which in its entirety is cons- 


d ^ nwrioErWJJ:, etc.— Since it is maintained that the self and 
not-self are mutually superimposed it may be urged that both are 
illusory and if both be substrates we should not have the cognition 
of special property — of the substrate, but as a matter of fact 
when atman is the substrate its special property, its knowledge aspect, 
is cognised, e.g., we say, 

The answer is that atman may become illusory when in conjunc 
tion with the insentient — 51^ and not in its pristine state. 

Again is perceived as conjoined with the ego and not as 

conjoined with atman. Hence atman’s becoming the substrate is valid. 



XLIII. 164] SUPERIMPOSITION 123 

ciousness get its attributes which may be superimposed (on the 
senses, etc.) ? 

Siddhantin: Your honour has spoken the truth only; but 
still elsewhere {i.e., apart from antahkarana) the inner sense as 
associated with cit only (consciousness) is superimposed and at 
such where it is superimposed (say on the senses, etc.), there it 
remains discarded, as if itself were non-existent, having assigned 
to that only {viz., the sense) the function of generating action in 
atman.^®® In every case of superimposition (on the body as well 
as on the inner sense) it is atman (cidrupa— consciousness) alone 
that remains unaltered either in itself (svarupena — as when super- 
imposed on the inner sense) or when distinct (upadhiruperia — as 
when along with the inner sense, it is superimposed on the senses, 
etc.).®®® Hence it is said — “ tarn ca pratyagatmanam sarvasaksi- 
nam tadviparyayena antahkaranadisvadhyasyati” {vide above). 
Because it is so {i.e., since atman only is superimposed on the 
body, etc., the disbelievers— Carvakas) and others fancying that 
consciousness which accompanies (all mental modes) is no other 
than buddhi (intellect), etc., and associating atmatva (self-hood), 
with intellect (buddhi), mind (manas), vital breath (prana), sense- 


®®® We admit that atman as conditioned by the internal organ only 
is superimposed on the senses, etc.; but then in the bhasya text 
the mention of the word 3IFi% beginning with (the internal 
sense), would imply that the pure atman alone is superimposed on the 
senses, etc. Hence there is contradiction. As a matter of fact there 
is no contradiction, for in such a situation it is only the senses that 
prompt the self to action and not the internal sense. Hence though 
the internal sense remains as the conditioning agent — the 
bhasya states that the pure self is superimposed on the senses, etc., 
because the internal sense is ineffective in producing action in atman. — 
vide VPS., p. 65. 

®®® — In whatever manner atman is super- 

imposed on the internal sense, in the same manner it is superimposed 
on the senses, etc. It means that the nature of atman in both is 
unaltered. Nor is there any change even when the superimposition of 
the conditioned atman is effected. No doubt atman in its pure state, 
i.e., conditioned only by nescience, is superimposed in the internal 
sense and conditioned both by nescience and internal sense it is 
superimposed in the senses, etc. Still as the internal sense does not 
function in the latter case, the pure atman, should be supposed as 
being superimposed in every case of superimposition. 



124 PAhCAPADIKA of PADMAPADA [XLIV. 165 

organ (indriya), and body, ascribing consciousness to each, delude 
themselves. 

XLIV. 165. (The Bhasyakara) thus concludes : [“ evam- 
ayamanadirananto naisargikodhyasah ”) — In this manner pro- 
ceeds this natural beginningless and endless superimposition. 

Purvapaksin: Well, when prefacing this topic it was said 
that all empirical activity (lokavyavahara) was natural (naisargikah 
— ^beginningless) as witness — ‘ ahamidam mamedamiti naisargiko- 
yam lokavyavaharah ’. How then is it that here it is concluded 
with ‘ adhyasa ’ (superimposition^ — i.e., that adhyasa is beginning- 
less) ? And further how is it that the word ‘ anadi ’ — ‘ without 
beginning’, is added? (c/. ‘ evamayamanadirananto naisargiko- 
dhyasah ’). 

Siddhantin: Here is the answer. There also (i.e., in the 
introductory bhasya beginning with “ tathapyanyonyasmin, etc.,” 
and ending with “lokavyavaharah”) it is only the superimposi- 
tion of the ego (the ‘ not-self ’) on the inner self that is meant by 
‘ the natural empirical activities ’. And that inner self (which is 
the substratum of superimposition) is a beginningless entity and 
as such the. beginningless superimposition on it should be presumed 
as established. Hence the conclusion is in conformity with the 
beginning and there is no inclusion of any adventitious matter.^® 

166. Purvapaksin: Well, let us grant (that superimposition is) 
beginningless ; but how endless (ananta) ? If it be (endless) how 
can for its eradication the study of the Vedantas be commenced ? 

Siddhantin : Suppose it ends, even then (we rejoin why should 
one begin the study of the Vedanta for its effacement) ? Its end 
is brought about either by itself or some other (cause). Hence 
what is intended to convey from the statement that all the 
Vedantas are begun for the destruction of what is endless, is that 
this alone (z.e., Vedantic study) is presumably the cause of its 
removal.®*^ If that (Vedantic study) be absent it is evident that 
it (adhyasa) will be endless. 

The objection is met by pointing out that lokavyavaharah 
means ‘ahamkaradhyasa’ — cf. The anaditva — ^beginning- 

lessness of superimposition, is established by arthapatti. 

rtRra; aPFcTR STf ioi[?T .... The Bhasyakara has stated that super- 
imposition is endless and that the study of Vedanta brings on its end. 
This is apparent contradiction. It is resolved by the statement that 
the eradication of superimposition is effected by the knowledge resulting 
from Vedantic inquiry. 



XLV. 168] 


SUPERIMPOSITION 


125 


167. (In the phrase) ‘ mithyapratyayartipa ’ the inclusion 
of the word ‘ rupa’ is to show that it appears so {i.e., false), only 
if judged by its definition (laksanatah) and not in the empirical 
sphere {e.g., in the ordinary usage ‘I am a man, I am lean, etc.,’ 
no one regards it as false knowledge^ — ^mithya; it is only when 
scrutinised that falsity is detected). [Page 37] From the phrase 
‘ kartrtva-bhoktrtva-pravartana— (pravartakah) ’—being the cause 
of agency and enjoyment, it is pointed out that superimposition 
is the cause of the afflictions of mankind (because agency and 
enjoyment are the source of all evil as evidenced in (‘ I ’ and ‘ mine’) 
in order that they (ahanta— egoity and mamata— acquisitiveness) 
may be avoided. 

By this statement the doctrine of those who maintain that 
while atman’s agency and enjoyment are actual wrong knowledge 
leads to erroneous deeds, stands refuted. 

Now as to the phrase ‘ sarvalokapratyaksah ’ perceived by 
all, (the Bhasyakara) having explained to start with, that 
pramatrtva— cognisership, is impossible without the erroneous 
notion that the body, the senses and the rest are identical with the 
self, and stating that ‘ without the employment of the senses, etc., 
perceptive and other activities cannot take place, points to 
anubhava (pratyaksa) as the determining factor in the establish- 
ment of mithyatva (adhyasa) and concludes with it {i.e., anubhava) 

XLV. 168. Thus up to this point, having shown that Jiva’s 
appearing as something other than Brahman is due to nescience, 
in order to substantiate (that the Vedanta has a definite) result, 
which (content and fruit — ^visaya and prayojana) can be presumed 
from the Sutra {viz., athato Brahmajijnasa), the commentator 
(Samkara) poiptedly draws attention to the fruit (result) by the 
phrase — ‘ asyanarthahetoh prahanaya ’ — for the eradication of 
the cause of this evil.“* It is indeed from the destruction of 


242 — From the first sutra it is learnt that subsequent 

to the desire for liberation inquiry into the means of Brahma- 
knowledge has to be undertaken. By the well-understood rule that 
what is undertaken subsequent to the desire is itself the means of 
achieving it, it is clear that inquiry is the means of attaining 

liberation. Because inquiry is the means through the channel of Brahma- 
knowledge, knowledge — jnana also becomes the means of liberation — 
#1^. And liberation is the sublatibn. of evil— Hence 
or fruit is secured as jnana is the itte^s of eradicating evil. 


126 


pahcapAdikA OF padmapAda 

the cause that there results the total destruction of that which is 
the effect of that cause (v/z., the karya in the shape of agency, 
enjoyment, etc.). 

169. Purvapaksin: Well, adhyasa (erroneous transference, 
the cause of the ills (of life) is beginningless ; how can it be termi- 
nated? To explain— in the ego-notion the superimposition relates 
specifically to the entire class of men (manusyatva) ; hence though 
(ascertained) by reasoning that the ego is distinct (from atman) 
the superimposition remains unaltered (shrouding the self) as 
before, because it is beginningless. 

170. Siddhantin: This is no defect. For what we seek 
is the unique knowledge (jnanantara) which pointing to the nature 
of Brahman arises from (the comprehension of/ the proposition 
That thou art— (tatvamasi) ’.^® And that (knowledge) arises 
revealing simultaneously the real naturp of Brahman, and dis- 
pelling nescience which by concealing the Brahman-nature of 
consciousness, brings on jivahood {i.e., finitises it as individual 
self), and exists from eternity and which (again) is the cause of 
the manifestation of the ego-notion, etc.^^ From that (f.^., 
from the Brahma-knowledge) arises the effacement of the cause 
{viz., nescience) and then its effect, which as the notion of ego 
assumes enjoyership in the individual self, is destroyed together 
with all its paraphernalia; and this stands to reason. The ego- 
notion again, is existent from eternity and is in intimate associa- 
tion with the entire bodily aggregate which is also existent from 


Again, because the illusion is of the jiva and it is eradicated by 
Brahma-knowledge, there must be identity between jiva and Brahman . 
Jiva is the locus, of nescience which is sublated by Brahma- 

knowledge. Hence jiva must be one with Brahman. As such this 
identity is itself the subject of inquiry — fqqq. 

^rq^r-which is 

We do not say that the cognition of difference between the body and 
the self sublates illusory knowledge. But we maintain that such 
illusory knowledge is sublated by verbal testimony, i.e., by the 
knowledge of the mahavakya. Hence there is no conflict with 
pratyak§a. 

Brahman being delimited by the final psychosis ii.e.. Brahman 
reflected in the vftti) resulting from the mahavakya sublates nescience. 
The PP. mentions a four-fold qualification of nescience — (i) obscura- 
tion of Brahman’s nature, (ii) finitising Brahman by individuating it, 
(iii) existing from eternity, and (iv) causing egoity. 


XLVI. 171] 


SUPERIMPOSITION 


127 


eternity and as such there is no antagonism between them. Hence 
superimposition cannot be eradicated, by one’s merely discrimi- 
nating atman from the bodily aggregate; nor has the other 
knowledge (vzz., ‘ aupanisadatmajnana ’ — ‘ the knowledge of 
atman as revealed in the Upanisads’) yet arisen — this is the 
distinction.^*® * 

XLVI. 171. Purvapaksin: Well, the Scriptures declare that 
Brahman is of the nature of transcendental bliss (c/., ‘ vijnanam 
Brahma ’ ; ‘ anando Brahma ’) and that the means of attaining 
Brahman is the knowledge of Brahman (Brahmavidya) as wit- 
ness such Srutis, ‘ He who knows the supreme Brahman does 
indeed become Brahman only ’ — (Mund. Up., III. ii-9). Hence 
it must be stated that (the study of the Vedanta) is fo: the attain- 
ment of the highest happiness; how then is this said that it is 
for the eradication of the cause that brings on the evil (of metem- 
psychosis) ? It may however be urged that the Scriptures also 
declare that the eradication of the evil together with its cause is 
the end (phala) of Brahmavidya, as witness, ‘ the knower of atman 
steps across sorrow (which is evil) ‘ when he sees the other, 
the adored, the Lord and His greatness, he becomes freed from 
sorrow ’ (Mund. Up., III. i-2; Svet. Up., IV. 7 respectively). If 
so both should be mentioned (as phala), because of the declaration 
of the Scriptures and of their serving as the highest human end. 

.172. Siddhantin: It is needless to state (both). How? 
From the Bhasya ‘ for the attainment of the knowledge of the 
unity of the self’ (we gather) that the subject-matter of the 
Vedanta sastra is atman’s, i.e., jiva’s identity with Brahman. 
From this {i.e., because this unity is the visaya of the sastra) the 
jiva’s attainment of the nature of Brahman which is identical with 
Bliss, itself becomes the visaya (for whatever is the subject-matter 
must be the subject of investigation). [Page 38] And it (the 


T%trwii%^Tsn!:^iS'Ttr ; trti: 

— 

The distinction between verbal knowledge derived from the 
Upanisads and the discriminating knowledge is that verbal knowledge 
does not suffer association with the body, etc., which the other 
tolerates; as such there is opposition in the one case and not in the 
other; again while verbal knowledge eradicates the bodily aggregate, 
the other does not. 



128 


PANCAPADIKA OF PADMAPADA [XLVI. 173 

attainment of bliss) is not something outside the visaya (i.e., it is 
vi'saya itself), and it would have been appropriate to have predi- 
cated separately (the end— prayojanatva of anandavapti) in case 
(it had not partaken of the nature of the visaya). On the other 
hand, the eradication of evil with its root-cause falls outside the 
content of the sastra which is (no other than) the unity of the 
self with Brahman.^® 

173. Purvapaksin: If so, even the eradication of the cause 
of evil need find no separate mention, the reason being that in 
all the Vedantic texts the identity of the individual soul (jiva) 
with Brahman is enunciated only after expounding the nature of 
Brahman since the (latter) is beyond the range of the empirical 
means of knowledge. To explain: — All the texts beginning with 
‘ my dear, this (world) was verily being ” (sat — i.e., the object of 
sadbuddhi— mere existence) in the beginning (i.e., before the 
world came into existence — Ghand. Up., VI. 2-1) and ending with 
‘ All this (the entire universe) is of the essence of that (viz., the 
Being, sat) ; that (being) is Reality, that is atman ” — (Chand. 
Up., VI. 16-3), should be construed as a single sentence intended 
to show that what is denoted by the word ‘ that ’ (‘ tat ’ in 
‘ tatvamasi ’) points to an entity which is of the nature of the 
sublation of the entire universe. Because of this (viz., that all 
these sentences cohere and point to the world-sublated Brahman), 
the.import of the ‘ thou ’ (in tatvamasi ’) coalescing with the import 
of the ‘ that ’ of the above description is determined (from the 
knowledge of the mahavakya) to be also such (i.e., as rid of all 
the ills of life) preceded by the total destruction of both nescience 
and illusion, i.e., avidya, which serve as the cause of misery, which 
obscure reality, and which generate erroneous knowledge. 

174. Siddhantin: If that be so, i.e., if the eradication of 
avidya which is the cause of evil must necessarily precede, the 
knowledge of Brahman-identity then §abda is not operative there 


It is true that both the eradication of the cause of world- 
misery and the attainment of bliss constitute the phala. Still, because 
it is necessary that the identity should be stated as the visaya and 
because that itself is of the essence of bliss, the phala, viz., the attain- 
ment of bliss is secured by arthapatti, by the mention of visaya; the 
Bha?yakara, to , avoid prolixity, has refrained from stating it. The 
other phala, viz., the eradication of the cause of evil is not of the 
nature of visaya and therefore finds a separate mention. 


XLVI. 175] 


SUPERIMPOSITION 


129 


(i.e., in the eradication of nescience). Therefore it is separately 
mentioned (by Samkara). And this (separate mention) stands to 
reason also:— it is indeed impossible to determine the real nature 
of a thing cognised in a false light illusorily apprehended 
like shell taken for silver) without its (illusion) eradication. 
Hence the sentence (mahavSkya) establishes the reality, only by 
first eradicating the unreal (ataddharma— what is not, the ‘ that ’ 
—the real) which was (the object of illusory cognition before). 

175. Purvapaksin: Well, how could you make the state- 
ment (that the mahavakya teaches the pure Brahman) only by 
first eliminating the world, in the absence of (lit. when not heard) 
the negating particle ‘ na etc., and of the word denotative of 
the thing that is negatived 

Siddhantin ; Here is the answer : Where the illusory know- 
ledge alone is got rid of as in ‘ this is not silver’ and the real 
nature of the object is not brought to light, (viz., this is nacre), 
there let it be so (i.e., begin with the negative particle). Here on 
the other hand (in the sentence, ‘ tatvamasi ’) the cognition itself 
arises in that very manner (i.e., negating the world and its illusory 
knowledge at the very moment of its origin) since without first 
negating its opposite it would be incompetent to bring home what 
its object is (viz.. Brahman)^® — just as the act of raising one scale- 
pan of a balance necessarily, without a separate effort, lowers the 
other scale-pan. To explain — the act of raising cannot bring 
about the contact o' its object (viz., the scale-pan, which is raised 


When not prefaced by a negative how could the mahavakyas 
and eif etc., negate erroneous knowledge ? Now, when 

negating the illusory cognition of silver in nacre the statement takes 
the negative form Again negation means the negation of 

something that is the counterTCorrelate and this must be mentioned. 
In the Vedantic statements noted above there is no mention of the 
world which is the counter-correlate of negation. On these grounds, 
says the opponent, the mahavakyas cannot be said to involve the 
notion of the prior negation of the world. 

The elimination of error is effected by the cognition of the 
positive entity, viz., nacre in the stock example, or by the apprehension 
of the absence of the superimposed object, viz., silver. When the 
illusory knowledge alone is to be got rid of and there is no idea of 
getting at the knowledge of the , ©tgCct . on which superimposition has 
taken place there is the need oTthe negative but not when the know- 
ledge of the locus is sought. 


130 


PAtCAPADIiKA OF PADMAPADA [XLVI. 176 

by the act) with the space above without at that very time effecting 
its (the other pan) contact with the space below. And it is not 
(to be supposed) that the effort of the hand, etc., which serves as 
the cause in the raising is also the cause of the lowering, for such 
a view does not obtain currency and it is against all experience. 

176. Similarly in regard to the object that is apprehended 
under the spell of illusion, the cognitive activity arising from 
§abda (viz., mahavakya) which illuminates the Reality underlying 
that object comprehends the notions— ‘ I am Brahman’, ‘I am 
not agent’; it is like our having the notions — ‘this is nacre’, 
‘ this is not silver Hence ‘ this is nacre ’ is a non-desiderative 
sentence and ‘ this is not silver ’ is an explanatory (or repetitive) 
sentence.®®® 

177. For this reason only, when the word denoting a verbal 
idea constitutes a sentence, from the mere knowledge of the 
action (as indicated by the verb) the knowledge of all its acces- 
sories (of necessity) results. Therefore, the exegetists (the 
Mimamsakas) aver that the other words in a sentence (apart from 
the verb) are meant either for exclusion or explanation.®®^ And 


The question is how could the cognition of the elimination of 
evil — apf'l arise without its specific mention in the ^astra. The 
answer is that when Brahma-knowledge arises the deremption of evil 
is inevitable on the analogy of the scale-pan; there is no separate 
effort needed for the eradication of the conflicts of life; the effort to 
realise the Supreme cannot but bring about the disappearence of evil. 
The notions of ‘I am Brahman’, ‘I am not agent’, etc. — at? wp, 

rise together, just as when the presented object is perceived to be 
nacre, the falsity of silver becomes apparent. 

Note that the order of ^rit and should be reversed, 

because the notion of Rlt wr results only from arthapatti subsequent 
to the identity-knowledge. 

250 — ^The sentence ‘this is nacre’ conveys in 

itself the full sense whereas ‘this is not silver’ is implicated in ‘this is 
nacre’. Hence it is only or re-statement of what results from 

arthapatti. The first cognition necessarily leads to the second. 

261 3T?r etc. — ^What follows is to illustrate that the cognition of 

one object may produce that of another. In the Vedic command 
‘sacrifice with rice’ the use of the word ‘rice’ is for excluding 
‘barley’, etc., which also may serve as an element of sacrifice. In 
‘eat using sugar’ the word ‘sugar’ is a mere restatement for excluding 
other accessories. Hence it is evident that the leading word in a 


XLVI. 177] 


SUPERIMPOSITION 


131 


so they say— “The mandate, perform the sacrifice” (instructing 
action reveals the substance and deity also) because its full import 
is possible only when the knowledge of the group including the 
substance, the deity and action arises. 

page 39] Others, however, say — “We expound the nature 
of Yajna as consisting of the substance, the deity and the gift 
(to the God).252 

Question: How (is it that the substance and the deity are 
known by implication and not directly denoted (by the verb — 
yaj)? 

Answer: The manifestation of the substance and of the 
deity by the root ‘ yaj ’ which by its denotative power expresses 
only the sacrificial act without being the cause of their cognition 
is effectuated by implication. Even in the sublation of perceptive 
cognition the process is the same, for the sublation cannot be the 
object of sense-contact.^®® • 

sentence is the verb and the others either indicate ‘exclusion’ or are 
merely repetitive. Now in the sentence ‘I am Brahman’ — 3Tf suiwr 
the statement ‘I am not agent’ — is implied and therefore it is 
a restatement. Similarly the mandate ‘sacrifice’ — ?i3Rl denotes the 
action directly, and by implication, the accessories and the deity. 

arfi: 3, etc. — The composers of Kalpasutras like Apastamba. 
The Jaimini Sutra — etc., IV. 2. 27 and the Kalpasutra — 

— strq-. iff:. l both illustrate the 
fact that denotes action in the shape of bestowing the gift 

directly and the substance and the deity by presumption or impli- 
cation. 

*** The opponent concedes that where the negation is of an 
illusion and expressed in a sentence as in ‘this is nacre’ — 51 %:’ 
the cognition of the object opposed to illusory cognition 

implies that it is not silver; but why not, he asks in perception the 
two together arise, viz., the nacre and absence of silver ? As such why 
should arthapatti be postulated to establish the negation of silver? 
Even so in the context sTf — I am Brahman; since this cognition 

is perceptive why not it take the form ?Fii 3|ir— I am not agent, 

but Brahman, and why should the cognition of non-agency be 
supposed to result from arthapatti? The objection is met in the 
words — etc. The same procedure that is followed in 
the expressed statement ’ applies here also, i.e., in the percep- 

tive context. Just as the negatibil of illusion and its cognition follow 
by implication when we use the sentence ‘It is nacre’ so also in the 
perceptive context the sublation of silver and its cognition follow by 



132 PA^CAPAdIKA OF PADMAPADA [XLVII. 179 

178. Therefore it is that the revered commentator who is 
master in the knowledge of the Scriptures and Logic, knowing 
that the destruction of the ills of life (avidyavilayam) is not some- 
thing that can be ascertained from sabda (z.e., mahavakya) points 
it out as apart (from the visaya) in the words ‘ for the destruction 
of the cause of this evil — ‘ asyanarthahetoh prahanaya’. The 
use of the dative case also is with the object of showing that the 
destruction of evil results from the potency of the knowledge 
(of unity): and it is not (that the study of Vedanta) is undertaken 
for that purpose — the destruction of evil. (But it need not 
be doubted that because the Brahman-knowledge and not the 
eradication of evil is the phala of the Vedanta sastra the eradica- 
tion of evil is by no means the fruition of the sastra). (And the 
eradication of evil) — the phala— may be regarded as resulting 
(though indirectly) from man’s desire only (for everyone ardently 
wishes to be free from the ills of life). 

XLVII. 179. Purvapaksin: It is not that vidya (the know- 
ledge of unity) is acquired like getting a cow from without as if it 
stood apart (from the knowing subject), which (standing apart) 
would render the acquisition from outside possible. But that 
knowledge having the knower as its locus arises even while mani- 
festing the object (of knowledge) to him.^®® 


implication. Similarly when we get the immediate knowledge (a^^) 
of Brahman as in STf the cognition, T am not agent’ — Jrif 

arises by implication, since there is no contact between the eye and the 
negation — It is for this reason that the commentator makes a 
specific statement regarding the destruction of evil as it has to be 
ascertained by presumption — and cannot be directly under- 
stood from the Scriptural text — ‘that thou art’. 

etc. — ^The objection anticipated here may be 
stated thus: — Instead of saying that the eradication of evil is the 
result of knowledge since knowledge alone is hostile to ignorance 
(3 r 4 or evil) the Bhaiyakara says that it is the result of inquiry 
into the Vedantic texts— c/. sttPirw 

The answer is that the study of the Vedanta Sastra is for arriving 
at the indubitable knowledge of the unity of atman and thereby and 
not directly, getting rid of evils of recurrent births. And this riddance 
is welcomed by all. 

, *8® JT etc.— Objection is taken to the use of the 

word in for attaining the knowledge of 


XLVII. 180] 


SUPERIMPOSITION 


133 


Siddhantin: True, it is so elsewhere. But in what we are 
now considering though knowledge arises in regard to the visaya 
(v/r., Brahmatma-identity) it does not attain indubitable certainty 
because it (visaya) is beset with improbability (and contrariety). 
Such is the experience of men: — when there is a rooted conviction 
that a particular object by its very nature cannot exist (say) in 
this region and at the present time, if it should somehow by sheer 
accident come to view, the person though perceiving it himself 
will not be convinced of its existence as long as he does not take 
the trouble to ascertain its probability. Hence the right know- 
ledge also (though it has arisen) not being indubitable as regards 
its visaya (content, viz., Brahmatma-identity) will be as if it did 
not compass the visaya. As such the knowledge that arises from 
the vakya calls in the aid of tarka for self-certainty Q.e., for 
securing indubitableness to its context). 

180. Therefore {i.e., since logic clarifies and stabilises the 
knowledge derived from pramanas) it is, that those proficient in 
tarka (aver) that tarka is an (indispensable) aid to pramanas 
(here verbal means of knowledge). 

What is it that is meant by the term ‘ tarka ’ ? 

It is reasoning. 

Well, this is only a synonym. Its nature had better be 
explained. 

This is its explanation : — ^It is of the nature of discriminating 
cognition by which the probability (or improbability) of parmana. 


the absolute unity of the self. is alone sufficient; for 

no knowledge can arise without at the same time embracing the 
knower. Knowledge implies the knower and the object. It is not like 
getting a cow which stands apart from the person having had its origin 
elsewhere. Hence is redundant. 

Answer-. In other spheres of perception no doubt there are not 
two distinct events — the rise of knowledge and the comprehension of 
its content. Both happen together. But in the case of the attainment 
of the knowledge of unity though the meaning of the text may be 
grasped by a cultivated mind no conviction as to its content arises 
since the mind is assailed by doubts and difficulties. Hence constant 
reflection — tarka — ^is indispensable for removing impediments and 
rendering the knowledge acquired indubitable. As such the justification 
of the use of the word attainment of certitude ab extra, i.e., 

by the employment of reasoning. 



134 PAHCAPADIKA of PADMAPADA [XLVII. 181 

sakti and visaya (v/z., the identity of Brahman and the individual 
soul) is ascertained.*®® 

\Zl. Purvapaksin: -Well, if so (the Vedanta) since it requires 
tarka to establish the certitude of what it imports becomes invalid 
having lost its character of non-dependence (on extraneous aid). 

SMdhantin: It does not (become non-valid merely because 
it requires tarka); for by its own potency it is productive of the 
indubitable knowledge of what it denotes (svavisaya, which here 
is the identity of atman and the absolute). 

Purmpaksin: Then what is the purpose served by tarka ? 
(If the mahavakya itself is competent to bring home the know- 
ledge of identity, what is the function of tarka) ? 

Siddhantin: When there is improbability regarding the 
visaya (viz., the unity of the individual soul with Brahman) and 
the fruition of that kind of experience (which brings about the 
destruction of anartha or the evils of life) has not arisen (tarka is 
useful) in removing the obstacles to the phala (fruition) through 
pointing to its probability (sambhava). As such in the maha- 
vakya (tatvamasi) the meaning of ‘ tvam ’ is the jiva (or individual 
soul) and this jiva presuming the improbability of his being 
identical with Brahman which the word ‘ tat ’ denotes, (nay), 
further, thinking that he is of an opposite nature, fails to arrive 
at the truth, though the knowledge (identity) has arisen,*®’ so long 


2 M apsr #s=4 ri^T 1 The place of tarka has to be ascertained 
here. Tarka or reasoning helps in the ascertainment of the proba- 
bility as to (i) pramapa, i.e., that the scriptural testimony supports 
unity; (ii) the probability that the Sakti, the significance of the 
mahavakya is the unity of the individual soul with the Universal; 
and (iii) Visaya: the probability that the individual self is Brahman, 
should be resolved as — iRToi 

*®’ etc. — ^The text avers that ‘tatvamasi’ fulfils its 

function, even before tarka operates in showing that the Veda is an 
independent testimony. It is therefore necessary to understand the 
exact place of tarka in arriving at Brahma-knowledge. Now the 
function of verbal testimony may be taken to be the conveying of 
immediate or mediate knowledge according to the difference of opinion 
among those who adopt verbal testimony, (i) Let us suppose that 
the mahavakya gives rise to the immediate knowledge of unity. But 
then such , a view, conflicts tyith our experience since even after 
comprehending the meaning of the sentence we feel that the knowledge 
of unity has not risen in us. How is this discrepancy to be explained ? 



XLVIII.183] SUPERIMPOSITION 135 

as he does not recognise the probability of his own self being 
identical with Brahman, having (first) through the aid of tarka 
removed the impediments. 

182. Hence, before (rational inquiry), though the 
knowledge of identity has arisen from the sentence (tatvamasi) 
it is as good as not having been acquired. The way of acquiring 
it is pointed out in the Vedanta itself with a view to (help 
one to attain) the phala of immediate experience. Therefore 
it is said (by the Bhasyakara) ; [“ The study of the entire 
Vedanta is intended] for attaining the knowledge (of atman- 
identity)]. 

XLVIII. 183. Purvapaksin: The knowledge that the indi- 
vidual self is identical with the supreme self is not potent enough 
to eradicate the cause of the evil (anartha that plunges one in 
samsara). To explain: [Page 40] The cognition by the indi- 
vidual self of its identity with Brahman is not any way distinct 
from the cognition of its difference from the bodily aggregate. 
It is so because (in both the cognition of atman as distinct, from 
the body and the innnediate cognition of identity with Brahman) 
there is the unabated persistence of the ego-tangle extending up 


It is by presuming that our feeling of non-realisation of unity is the 
result of bhrama. Every case of bhrama presupposes some mental 
blemish — cittadosa, as one of its causes. There must be cittadcsa 
here also which when removed by manana, etc., brings heme to us 
the knowledge conveyed by the mahavakya. It should be noticed that 
it is the purified mind — suddhacitta that removes the bhrama which 
is different from tarka which as stated in the text leads to the 
removal of obstacles — ^pratibandhakanivrtti. To avoid the diver- 
gence between the statement of the Pancapadika and its explana- 
tion by himself Praka§atman, the author of the Vivarana, under- 
stands by tarka, suddhacitta. There is nothing out of the way 
here because tarka has been interpreted secondarily as citta (cf. 
Tatvadipana) because citta serves virtually the same purpose that 
the purified mind does. 

(ii) Let us suppose that ‘tatvamasi’ yields only mediate knowledge, 
then there is no difficulty in admitting that verbal testimony fulfils its 
function here. But what is the place of tarka ? Now, mediate certainty 
— paroksaniscaya is only one of the factors contributing to immediate 
cognition— -aparoksajnana with the aid of the purified mirror of the 
mind — or tarka. In neither case does tarka interfere with the 
independent validity — nirapekfaprimapya of labda. 



136 


PAnCAPADIKA of PADMAPADA [XLVIII. 184 

to the illusory ascription of the notion of man (to the pure being 
as in ‘ I am man— manusyoham ’)-“® 

Siddhantin: This is our answer: There (when atman is 
known as not identical with the aggregate) let that (the persistence 
of the tangle) exist, as avidya (in the shape of samsara) is not seen 
to have disappeared; but here however (in the cognition of 
identity with Brahman) when the Brahma-cognition has dawned 
having dispelled the taint of illusion, how could it remain without 
arresting the current (i.e., the continuous succession of complexes) 
of the notions of enjoyer, etc., generated by nescience ? It is indeed 
evident that the cognition of the Supreme by the individual cannot 
come about before destroying the ignorance that shrouds it {viz., 
the Reality) — ^which is its object. 

184. Purvapaksin: If from the knowledge of Brahman, 
avidya (lit. non-comprehension) should disappear then there 
ought to occur at that very moment the disappearance of the 

3TfiR5ti%-nf5«r^qTffrt: ; 

By the word ‘aham’ is meant the complex of saksin — the Inner 
Witness, and antahkarana — the mind. It is this complex that is here 
described as ‘ahamkaragranthi’. But ‘aham’ is not always restricted 
to this complex. When we think that we are deaf or blind the 
identification is not between the saksin and antahkarana but between 
the saksin anid the senses through the antahkarapa. This varying 
connotation ends in ‘aham manu§yah’ — ‘I am man’. It is to indicate 
this wide range of the connotation of ‘aham’ that the adjective — 
‘ manusyabhimanaparyantasya ’ is used. 

q- ofr^^T, etc. — The purvapaksa is that the cognition of the 
fact that the individual is other than the body, is not in effect (’SScT:) 
distinct from the knowledge of the nature of Brahman; and because 
we see that avidya in the shape of samsara persists in the first case, 
it must persist even after the rise of Brahma-knowledge. The Vedanta 
reply is that the two cases are entirely different. In the first, though 
one is aware of atman’s being distinct from the body ajnana that is the 
cause of samsara has not been removed. There is an uninterrupted 
succession of the ego-complexes. In the second case however, it must 
be understood that the rise of Brahma-knowledge presupposes the 
complete annihilation of the primal ajnana along with its effect. 
When the rope is cognised the serpent superimposed upon it dis- 
appears together with the ajnana that had brought about the illusory 
knowledge. So it is with Brahmajnina. ^ The Scriptural texts also 
support this view: 

and so on. 



XLIX. 185] SUPERIMPOSITION 137 

ego-complex (v/z., the body, etc.) which has that (v/z., avidya) 
as its cause. 

Siddhantin: No. Even from mental impressions there results 
the continuance of avidya like the continuance of fear (after its 
cause has disappeared; e.g., the fear of serpent even with the 
knowledge of the rope in the rope-serpent illusion). To explain : 
even though removed by the knowledge of the real, fear persists 
on account of the mental impression and becomes the cause of 
trembling, etc. Similarly avidya (agrahana) also through its 
samskara (mental traces left behind) continues and becomes the 
progenitor of ahamkaragranthi or ego-complex. As such there 
IS nothing that offends reason. 

XLIX. 185. Purvapaksin: Well, not all the Vedantic 
texts proceed to expound vidya (Le., the knowledge of Reality); 
a part of the Vedanta is understood as expounding a variety of 
upasanas (or modes of contemplation) for the attainment of the 
reward of ‘ salvation by gradation ’ (karmamukti) ’, for achieving 
super-human powers and for the speedy fruition of karma per- 
formed with the object of attaining svarga (abhyudaya).^®^ 


etc.-— The contention is that when the 
knowledge of unity rises the primal nescience must vanish and the 
human frame too which is its product must perish. This raises the 
question of the status of jivanmukta, i.e., of the person who has 
attained freedom while yet in this life, here and now. The text 
explains it on the basis of residual mental impressions. The Vivarana 
explains the word samskara to mean a small residue of avidya. And 
of the several explanations given in this connection, the one which 
appears more satisfactory than the rest is that the jivanmukta has 
overcome all karma except the prarabdha which has begun to yield 
fruit in this life and to that extent he may be said to be bound from 
our point of view though his mental purity is such that he lives and 
moves in this world unperturbed by the joys and sorrows and all the 
passing shows of life — cf. Bhagavadgita, Chap. 2, where a full descrip- 
tion of Sthitahprajna or jivanmukta is given. 

%g[Rcrr 3nTv:ii%. All Vedantic texts 
proceed with the single aim of inculcating the knowledge of the unity 
of the self. This statement of the commentator is criticised on the 
ground that a section of the Vedanta deals with ‘meditation’. For 
instance we have, ^iriflT^^TqT^Frr, e.g., 3TfW^m?RT, etc., 

F.5., III. The criticism is thus met— the different paths of meditation 
prescribed are in relation to sagupa Brahman and not the nirgupa and 



138 PAtCAPADIKA OF PADMAP^DA [XLIX. 186 

Siddhantin: It is true. The object of contemplation, how- 
ever is Brahman {i.e., the qualified Brahman) and that (Brahman) 
when divested of all determinations is the real nature of the indi- 
vidual soul (jiva); and in order to clarify this point {viz., that 
jiva is identical with Brahman), Brahman who is the inner self of 
all, the omniscient, and omnipotent was first {i.e., prior to the 
negation of attributes) defined as the cause of the origin, etc., 
of the entire universe. 

186. And in that (state of avidya) without negating the 
world in Brahman, the contemplation of Brahman as qualified 
by specific attributes is enjoined for specific rewards. It is like 
the mandate specifying the ‘milk-jar’ (godohana) for fetching 
water if one desires cattle- — which mandate occurs in the Darsa- 
purpamasa (new-moon and full-moon sacrifices) context.®®^ 
Hence since the other (section of the Vedanta) is but subsidiary 
to that (section relating to the nirgupa-Brahman) there is no 
contradiction in the (commentator’s) statement, viz., ‘ It is for 
the elucidation of the knowledge of atman-identity that all 
Vedantas (Vedantic texts) proceed’. 


these vidhis or mandates regarding meditation occur incidentally in 
the nirguna context and, as such are of subordinate importance; the 
primary subject-matter of all Vedantic texts is nirguna only. Moreover 
the saguna-meditation is helpful in bringing mental clarification and 
purification, essential for self-realisation. Again it is by the method of 
adhyaropa — superimposition, and apavada — elimination that the real 
nature of the Absolute can be cognised — cf. 

First Brahman finitised by determinations should be brought 
home and then by the negation of these determinations by negative 
statements — neti, neti, would it be possible to understand the real. So 
all meditations refer only to the qualified Brahman — vide VPS., p. 105. 

262 The ‘godohana’ analogy is to show that the meditation vakyas 
are not something distinct but are closely related to the negative 
statements — ^neti, neti; since a negative desiderates a positive we 
posit the attributes when describing Brahman as the cause of the 
world’s origin, etc. — ‘Janmadi’ and negate them so that we may 
realise the Absolute Reality defined as Existence, Knowledge and 
Bliss. The first is known as ‘tatasthalak§ana’ of Brahman which is 
thus expressed: not being of the nature 

of the defined yet reminds one of the defined; and the second known 
as ‘svartipalaksapa’ is expressed thus: ’at);. being 

of the nature of the defined reminds one of it. ' 



L. 187] 


SUPERIMPOSITION 


139 


L. 187. : Are not meditations on what is non- 

Brahman, such as those embracing prana (life-breath), etc., per- 
ceived (to be stated) in the Vedantas ? 

Siddhdntin: It is true. They also have mukti as their end 
though by gradation (the purified jiva first reaching the Hiranya- 
garbhaloka). And this is mentioned by the composer of the 
aphorisms — “With the disappearance of the world of Hiranya- 
garbha, they, the purified souls, reach in the company of the Lord 
of that region, Brahman that transcends Hiranyagarbha, as 
declared in the Sruti 

188. [“That this is the substance of all the Vedanta texts, 
we shall show in (expounding) this Sarirakamimamsa ”] — in these 
words the commentator points out that the logical proofs (nyaya) 
which are (as it were) strung together on the aphoristic sentences 
commencing from the Samanvaya sutra {i.e., the fourth sutra of 
the first pada in the I Chapter) are meant to show that the pur- 
port of all the Vedanta-texts is the one set forth here.*®* (The 
word ‘ sarirakah ’ is thus explained) ; ‘ sarira ’ is ‘ sarirakam ’ 
(the body), ‘ sarirakah jivah (the embodied soul or the indivi- 
dual self); and the work composed having that (individual self) 
as its subject-matter (/.e., the UttaramTmamsa) is sarirakah. 
Because the Vedanta texts start with the main object of elucidating 
the nature of the individual self and end in showing that the self 
is of the nature of Brahman, it comes to this that the aphorisms 
composed (by Badarayana) for pointing out this fact {viz., that 


*®® V., Sut. rv. iii. 10. — ^It is explained thus — 3TT%tqT!Tra:. — on the 
authority of the scriptural statement — cf. ?! Chand. Up., 

VIII. XV— 1, on the destruction of 

Hirnyagarbhaloka, along with the Lord of that region 

OTra^r: — those who have gained the knowledge of reality therein, 
3T?f. — transcending that region, ^ — ^the Absolute, — attain. 

The individual soul after its probation in the region of Hiranyagarbha 
attains the state of the pure Brahman. 

*®* It must be understood that the first is pratijna or upodghata- 
sutra, indicating visaya and prayojana — ^the content and the value of 
the Vedanta-sastra; the second is Brahma-laksana-siitra, where the 
definition of Brahman is given, the third is pramapa-sfitra where 
sastraic proof is adduced to establish Brahman, and from the begin- 
ning of the fourth, reasons are advanced to substantiate that the entire 
Vedanta-texts are congruent in the elucidation of the unity of the 
individual soul and the supreme Brahman — ^Brahmatmaikya. 



140 PAtCApADIKA OF PADMAPADA [LI. 189 

the Vedanta teaches the absolute identity of the individual sou 
with Brahman) purport to have been composed, having the 
embodied soul (sarirakam-jivatatvam) as their topic. Hence 
here (in this commentary) the name ‘ sariraka’ (is given to the' 
sutras). 

LI. 189. [Page 41] Though the sutra (viz., ‘ athato Brahma- 
jijhasa) from its express statement means only that one should 
endeavour to attain Brahma-knowledge after the longing for 
release has arisen, still by presumption (arthapatti) it is as good as 
declared that the release is the fruit (phala) of Brahma-knowledge. 
To explain : where following a desire to obtain an object which is 
a human end, a certain course of action is enjoined, there its instru- 
mentality in bringing it about is also seen by presumption to be 
indicated. As such (i.e., where through Brahma-knowledge 
inquiry is established as the means of release) when questioned 
how Brahma-knowledge becomes the means of attaining that 
moksa (we say), that it is intimated from this §a§tra (sutras), by 
implication, so that Brahma-knowledge (the Brahma to be known 
— ^jneya-Brahman) is pointed out as the visaya (subject or topic) 
of the §astra.*®® 

190. Therefore it is that, having shown that the (first) sutra 
reveals by implication both visaya and prayojana (phala) of the 
Vedanta-Mimamsa sastra, by first inculcating the duty of acquir- 
ing Brahma-knowledge following closely upon the longing for 
freedom, then having described the nescience-constituted bondage 
which is desiderated by them (viz., visaya and prayojana) and 
which is implicit therein (in the sutra), and, on the need arising 
for reasoning to substantiate the proposition set forth (viz., that 
the whole of the Vedanta is concerned in the exposition of the 
identity of the individual self with the supreme self), having 
declared (in these words) — “ we will in this very sastra (i.e., the 

The critic points out that in the first sutra what is stated is that 
the inquiry into the meaning of the Vedanta has to be undertaken for 
the knowledge of Brahman and that there is no mention of either the 
subject of the discourse— visaya, or the benefit accruing — prayojana. 
He therefore queries to know how the commentator is right in 
maintaining that adhyasabha§ya — ^the comment on world-illusion, is 
for the purpose of substantiating the visaya and prayojana. The 
answer is that both are implied in the first sutra though not expressly 
stated. The first sutra is an introduction to the whole work and 
as such it must set forth both vi§aya and prayojana like all introductions. 


LI. 191] 


SUPERIMPOSITIGN 


141 


sutras) show it {viz., pratijnatartha) thereby suggesting the pro- 
priety of commenting (on the sastra),— he, the Bhasyakaraj 
wishing to undertake the commentary states the reason why at 
the very commencement, prayojana and visaya have been taken 
for consideration — [“ of the Vedanta-mimamsa or discussion on 
the meaning of the Vedantic texts to be commented upon, this 
viz., ‘then therefore the inquiry into Brahman’, is the first 
sutra ”]. 

191. This is what it (the above bhasya) means: Of the 
Vedanta-mimamsa sastra {i.e., the Vedanta-aphorisms) this is 
the first. And in the beginning, prayojana— the desired end, 
(and) visaya— the content, have to be made known to subserve 
the purpose of inducing one to undertake (the study). And this 
is a sutra ; therefore whatever import comes to light either from 
the denotativeness of the words or from implication, the whole 
of it, is its import only,^®® so that the sutra by its very potency 
is connotative of a number of meanings. Because of the reason 
that this sutra is the first (in the series) and because it is an 
aphorism, having stated that vi§aya, prayojana and bondage of 
the nature of avidya, necessitated for securing those (two, viz., 
visaya and prayojana), are all ascertained by postulation 
(srutarthapatti) (the commentator) begins the explanation of 
every word to show the competency of the sutra therein {i.e., in 
yielding the meanings referred to). 

Here ends the First Varnaka of the Pancapadikd 


It cannot be doubted that a single aphorism can yield a multi- 
plicity of meanings, viz., (i) the duty of investigating the meanings of 
Vedanta, (ii) the statement oif the topic and the subject of study, and 
(iii) the illusoriness of bondage. All these do result from the very fact 
that it is a sQtra.' ' ' ■ ■■■ '>■' ; 


VARI^^AKA II 

VEDANTA^ NOT ANTICIPATED BY JAIMINI 

L I. Amrambhavadin.—\?di%Q 42] Well, the inquiry into 
Brahman is as good as accomplished since the investigation into 
the meaning of the whole body of the Veda is rendered explicit 
in (the Sutras of Jaimini’s Purvamimamsa beginning with)— ‘ Then 
therefore inquiry into the nature of Dharma.’ Further, since 
the knowledge of Brahman comes within the purview of vidhi 
(Vedic mandate) it acquires the character of Dharma. Hence 
Brahmajijiiasa also has indeed received full treatment (in the 
scholium of Jaimini). 

2. Because (also) there exists no additional doubt to demand 
a fresh inquiry.^ 

IL 3. Arambhavddin , — Here some (critics)^ pointing to the 
existence of an additional doubt (asamka) (find the need to) 


^ The criticism starts with the assumption that Jaimini in his' 
aphoristic treatise on the Karmakanda has dealt with the whole body 
of the Veda in which is comprised the Vedanta or the Upanisad section 
as well, and that therefore there is no justification for a separate work 
by Badarayania. The first Varnaka (section), it will be remembered, 
started with the contention that the Brahman-inquiry was unnecessary 
since it lacked both visaya (subject-matter) and prayojana (benefit) 
and concluded by pointing out the need for such inquiry as both 
visaya and prayojana did exist. The second Varnaka starts with the 
purvapaksa that the previous Sastra,' viz., the ritualistic treatise by 
Jaimini has anticipated what Badarayana has said and that as such 
there is no point in composing the Vedanta Sutras. The Siddhantin 
maintains that there has been no such anticipation and that in 
consequence a fresh inquiry is justifiable. 

^ — One class of critics justify Brahma-jijnasa apart from 

Dharma-jijflasa, on the ground that some of the Vedantic texts like 
‘Sadeva saumya idam agra asit’ are not mandatory in character 
though Jaimini has shown that the entire Veda enjoins action — 
karyapara. And this might lead the unwary to conclude that no 
further inquiry is desirable as without a Vidhi Vedanta is purposeless. 
It is to obviate such a conclusion being drawn, that Brahma-jijnasa 
is undertaken. The additional doubt— is raised that the 
Vedi.nta being non-mandatory, has no independent status and is unfit 
for exposition. 


IT. 4] 


VEDANTA— NOT ANTICIPATED BY JAIMTNI 


143 


commence a separate investigation into the nature of Brahman. 
Now the question is — ^which is here the additional asamka ? That 
Vidhi or Vedic injunction is authoritative as a valid means of 
knowledge was shown (by Jaimini) when formulating (the Sutra), 

‘ codanalaksano artho Dharmah (vfie : Vol. LXXXIX, p. 17, 
G.O.S.). Here (z.e., in the Vedanta) the Vidhi is not declared 
at all in some statements as in — “Sadeva saumya idam agra asit” — 
“ Existence alone this (world) was in the beginning, my dear ” 
{Chand. Up., VI, 2-1, etc.). 

4. And where Vidhi is declared as in “atma va are drastavyah” 
— “Lo, verily is the atman to be seen” (Brh. Up., II. 4-5); and in 
“ Tasmin yadantah tadanvestavyam, tadvavavijijnasitavyam ” — 
“ That which is within it, that is to be sought, and that alone is 
to be inquired into ” — there, no doubt grammar (smrti) warrants 
the use of the terminations ‘ tavya \ etc. (as in drastavyah) in the 
sense of Vidhi, on the ground that there is no distinction (between 
the ‘ tavya termination and lin when expressing a mandate). 

5. Even then it is only that ‘tavya’ termination which 
denotes the root-meaning (as in gantavyah) that is competent to 
direct the person to undertake an act since primacy (there) is in 
relation to action, but if it is used with the emphasis on the object 
(i.e., on that which is in the objective relation), there it cannot 
enjoin the act that is adjectival (gunabhuta, i.e., subordinate) to 
the object as related to some other karya (phala, viz., moksa). 
And if (it be supposed that) the injunction (as expressed in ‘atma va 
are drastavyah) refers to the ‘atisaya’ produced in the object 
(dravya), since (atman) is not something that is to be originated, 
something to be modified, something to be obtained, nor, some- 
thing that is to be purified, (there can be no injunction relating 
to atman).® And because even when purified it (atman) serves 

® In the mandate ‘athato Brahma-jijfiasa’ the jnana-kriya (act of 
meditation, jnana taken to mean dhyana or meditation) cannot be 
enjoined either for an independent phala, say, mok§a for it stops with 
pointing to atman as the object of meditation, or for the purpose 
of generating some new feature in atman which is in the objective 
relation to the vidhi, for atman is incapable of any such modification. 
The functions of a kriya, when operating on a substance— dravya, it 
may be noted, are: (i) producing, (ii) — ^getting, (iii) 

modifying, and* , (iy) f^^r^puitfjafig. Now, none of these 
effects can take place in atmSh hs thf ; result of kriya, for atman is not 
the phala of kriya for it is eten^y existent and as such cannot be 


144 PAnCAPADIKA of PADMAPADA [II. 6 

no purpose in any other act, it does not admit of any purifica- 
tion.^ 

6. Hence, in statements like ‘ atmanamupasita ’ — ‘ meditate 
on atman atman ceases to be (sought as) the most desired object. 

Anarambhavadin.—y^oll, why not suppose, on the analogy of 
‘ saktu-homa ’, the reversal of the order of principal and subsi- 
diary ?® 

Arambhavadin. —Even then it is not known which that medi- 
tation is, and how that is done by atman {i.e., what the instru- 
mentality of atman is). 

Anarambhavadin. — Well, it is (certainly) known:— jnana itself 
is upasana, and atman in its character as visaya is the cause of it 
(i.e., meditation). Atman as the object of meditation is Karma- 
karaka and in its capacity as affecting the visaya is in the instru- 
mental relation). 

7. Arambhavadain . — If so, (i.e., if atman stands in the 
objective relation to j f.anakriya) there would be the same predica- 
ment that atman is something to be had (apyate — to be origi- 
nated) by jnana (the cognitive act enjoined by the root terminating 


a product; atman is not liable to change, and being eternally pure 
it is wrong to think of it as fit for purification. 

When atman ceases to come under the purview of a vidhi it can 
no longer be regarded as the most coveted object; it is only what one 
gets by following a Vedic mandate that constitutes one’s highest good. 
It is to obviate such a contingency that a fresh treatise has to be begun. 

* Let, by the potency of the injunction — the removal 
of the impurities of ignorance, demerit, etc., be effected, though the 
vidhi may not operate in the usual way of originating, etc. This is 
answered by the observation that atman rid of impurities, even if 
admitted, can serve no purpose in any other act — 
the purified rice, for it is used as oblation. 

6 — In the mandate ‘he offers saktu — barley meal, 

as an oblation to ‘fire’, the word ‘saktu’ is not taken in the objective 
case but in the instrumental case and the passage, ira is under- 
stood as The homa then becomes a pradhana 

karma. On this analogy, srRtnqgqigjcT is to be interpreted as 
Thus the objections that would arise if atman 
is construed in the objective relation are avoided since it now occupies 
a subordinate position while upasana becomes primary. — Cf. “cTf?!, 
' aiictTRg«ri?flcf ’ ariciitr 

AwSFf arwir^Tr vPS., p. 112. 


III. 8] VEDANTA— NOT ANTICIPATED BY JAIMINI 145 

in ‘ tavya ’)• And that is purposeless, amounting as it does to 
doing a thing that has been done (krtakaranam), for atman is 
eternally existent (z.e., self-revealing and is not something to be 
originated). And it has been said that no purpose is served by 
the purification of atman (unlike the purified rice). Hence as 
there is no room for vidhi (in the Uttara-Mimamsa) one would 
suppose that the Vedanta texts carry no (direct) import with them 
and that as such the study-completion-bath should follow imme- 
diately after the inquiry into what constitutes Dharma. (To 
point out that such a view is wrong) this, viz., ‘Then therefore is 
the inquiry into the nature of Brahman ’ is begun {i.e., Badarayana 
begins the Uttara-Mimamsa with this aphorism). What is meant 
is that without a break (anantaram, i.e., immediately after com- 
pleting Dharma-jijnasa), Brahman has to be inquired into 
(Brahma-jijnasitavyam), and the ‘ bath’ should not be performed 
(na snatavyam.)® 

ITT, 8. No doubt the objective relation is denoted (in the 
vakya) but yet from the ‘ tavya ’ termination the vidhi (a niyoga) 
is apprehended and as such it is impossible to discard niyoktjtva 
(i.e., we must posit an agency from which the mandate emanates; 
here it is the sruti or Veda; ordinarily it is a person); that this 
is so is evident in commands like ‘the mat has to be made by 
you’, ‘ the village has to be reached by you ’. 

9. The statement that niyoga if it points to something 
(dravya) that is in the objective relation serves no purpose as being 
incapable of producing any result, is void of truth, because of 


® snH - • • The ceremonial bath known as ‘sama- 

vartana karma’ has to follow immediately after the pupil finishes his 
study of the Veda and is about to quit his preceptor’s house. The 
question is whether mastery in the Purva-Mimamsa marks the close of 
the study necessitating the ‘bath’ or whether it has to be followed by 
the study of Uttara-Mimamsa and the ‘bath’ postponed. ^ The 
arambhavadin holds the latter view. In the ^astra Dipika of Partha- 
sarathi Misra, the discussion on the ‘bath’ centres round the question 
whether residence in the preceptor’s house has to be terminated 
immediately after the pupil has acquired the ability to merely chant his 
branch of the Veda ox m be prolonged for inquiry into it® ®en^ 
•arthajnana. The- Siddhahta fSS of ^Ihe latter, w/e LXitX., 

p. 1 ff.^ G.O.S,)* ^ " ' 


10 


146 PAI^CAPADIkA of PADMAPADA [IV. 10 

the destruction of avidya, which ensues (from this samskara), 
and avidya is the (veritable) cause of Samsara.^ 

IV. 10. Others again argue thus: Perception and other 
pramapas (distinct from Sabda) though acknowledged to be capable 
of revealing existent objects since they generate their cognition, 
are incompetent in (so far as the revelation of) Brahman (is con- 
cerned) ; and as regards the Veda (amnaya) it (such revelation) 
is wholly improbable seeing that it relates to something that is 
(yet) to be accomplished (karya). [Page 43] To one who thinks 
thus the idea arises that Vedic inquiry closes with the close of 
Sahkarsakatida.® Hence this fresh resolve (as evidenced in the 
1st Vedanta sutra) to dispel (such an idea). 

11. Here also (in the Vedanta or Uttara-Mimamsa) all the 
texts enjoining atmajhana {e.g., atmanamupasita-atma vare dra§t- 
avyah) set out that karya is their import in the same manner (as 
in the Purvamimamsa). And the knowledge of Brahman 
(tatvavabodha) is karya {i.e., something to be attained by effort — 
krtisadhya) because it is perceived as being related to the agent 
(adhikarin) and is the visaya of the mandate (niyoga).® Therefore 


’ The anarambhavadin’s contention is that as a result of the 
mandate relating to mat-making something is actually produced but 
no such result is possible from the mandate, say, ‘atman is to be 
seen — strut ’ and as such the niyoga is purposeless. The 

answer is that the phala here is the disappearance of the nescience 
that contaminates one’s self, so that the niyoga has a supreme 
purpose to serve (vide TD.). 

® Safikar§akapda — This consists of the last four chapters in 
Jaimini’s Dharma-sutras, from the 13th to the 16th. Some hold that 
these are by a different author and that Jaimini’s authorship is 
limited to twelve chapters only. Notice that the critic here is different 
from the one referred to as in Section II, who premising 

that an additional doubt — 3Tf'^r exists justifies Badarayana in 

undertaking his work. The objection here is that the question of 
inquiry into Brahman does not arise at all and that all inquiry should 
end with the sixteen chapters of the Jaiminlya aphorisms. 

* Why a separate treatise is necessary, it is argued, is because 
in the Purvatantra Jaimini has not dealt with the tatvavabodha or the 
knowledge of Brahman. To the objection that if the Veda is non- 
mandatory it fails of its, purpose it is answered that the Vedanta also 
is mandatory in character. The Upanisads establish the relation 
between Brahmajnana, i.e., tatvavabodha, and mok§a, which is its 



147 


V. 12] VEDANTA— NOT ANTICIPATED BY lAIMINI 

the ^astra (Vedanta) should be begun with the object of investi- 
gating it. 

V. 12. Anarambhavadin . — Here this will be said: The 
(Vedanta Sastra) need not be commenced for the subject has 
already been dealt with. How? The reason first stated for 
commencing (the Vedanta Sutras) was that from the ‘ tavya’ 
termination related to the object there arises no knowledge of 
niyoga (mandate). (But) it was shown that the injunctive charac- 
ter is expressed by itself {i.e., by the termination itself) and it is 
universally admitted that statements like ‘ svadhyayodhyetavyah 
—one should study one’s branch of the Veda ’ are injunctive in 
character. (Hence) there is no reason to justify the postulation 
of any additional doubt (§amka).^® 

13. Arambhavddin . — Has it not been said that in neither of 
the four ways is the result of kriya possible in atman ? 

Anarambhavadin . — If that be so the analogy of saktu will 
step in.“ 

phala. One who desires the phala should undertake the meditation, 
and the anusthana, i.e., engaging in the act of meditation must be 
prompted by niyoga. Hence jfiana (meditation) becomes niyoga- 
visaya or the object of a mandate. It may be noticed that the 
arambhavadin like his opponent admits the entire Veda including 
Vedanta as enjoining karya. The justification he finds for the new 
Sastra is that the karya of the nature of Brahmajnana has not received 
any treatment in the Purvamimamsa. 

The arambhavadin’s argument is that only under a particular 
condition (i.e., in bhavartha or root-meaning) the ‘tavya’ termination 
denotes niyoga and not always, but the advocate 'of anarambha — 
non-commencement, points out that the ‘tavya’ ending always denotes 
karya and because Jaimini has intimated the adhyayana vidhi in the 
first sutra he has, it should be inferred, admitted the jnanavidhi also. 
The reading Mw, etc., should be v/ie V. 

In the Vedic statement he offers the rice-meal as 

an oblation — the objective case is changed into the instrumental 
to shift the emphasis from to tw (^n%) since the homa- 
samskara in relation to serves no purpose. So also, says the 
anarambhavadin, apOTlJigTldta' should be construed as ‘atRtiJfl 
’ so that the emphasis will be on Upasana and not on atman. 
This mode of construing would obviate the objection that atman 
cannot be the vi§aya of a vidhi, being eternal and changeless. Hence 
no need for Sastrarambha as the objection that there is no mandate, 
is absent. 



148 PAtCAPADIKA OF PADMAPADA [V. 12 

Arambhavadin.— -Even that is not (pertinent). We have said 
that the knowledge pertaining to the self (i.e., atman-cognition) 
is eternally established.^® 

Anarambhavadin . — Even of that (atmajnana) which is eter- 
nally existent concentration (lit. repetition) styled upasana (medi- 
tation) will be the result of vidhi for effectuating abhyudaya 
(moksa) like the wearing of a golden ornament.^^® 

Arambhavadin . — It is not incumbent that the stream of atman- 
consciousness should arise from the vidhi either, for that succession 
of cognitions relating to atman is always present in one’s waking 
state 

Anarambhavadin . — If so let during such times as one is dis- 
engaged from attending to the needs of the body (arthavrruddhesu) 
the mind remain concentrated in atman (prompted by vidhi).^® 


q- — ^The arambhavadin again argues that atman cannot 
but be construed in the objective relation; otherwise the doubt 
persists whether jnana which has not an object or visaya can be 
enjoined. For the removal of that doubt Sastrarambha is necessary. 

13 — ^What the anarambhavadin means is that though 

atman cannot be in the objective relation since it is impossible to 
effect any change in the changeless it is by meditation as enjoined by 
vidhi only that abhyudaya or salvation results. It is the restrictive 
injunction or niyamavidhi that is to be understood here. Everyone 
knows that gold is meant for ornamental purposes, but still one is 
enjoined to wear gold to the exclusion of other metals if one courts 
prosperity. 

The consciousness of the ego-aham is continuous in all the 
three states — waking, dream and sleep (the word ' snsttr: ’ stands for 
all the three states — F). Hence there is no rule that meditation which 
here means the stream of atman-cognitions should be secured by 
niyamavidhi. There is no room for an alternative. 

When the restrictive injunction is shown to be inapplicable the 
anarambhavadin advances the parisamkhyavidhi or ‘exclusive specifi- 
cation’ as being appropriate in the present context. Where more than 
one alternative has simulatrieous scope the mandate restricts the choice 
to one of them by excluding the rest; c.g., we have the injunction 
*I^t’ — ‘ five five-nailed animals may be eaten’, excluding the 
eating of five-nailed animals other than the specified ones. Similarly 
when one is not engaged in his usual avocations one has leisure which 
may be spent equally in idle thoughts or atmajnana. The anarambha- 
vadin says that the parisamkhyavidhi excludes the first alternative. — 


149 


V. 12] VEDANTA— NOT ANTICIPATED BY JAIMINI 

Again, you have argued that atmajiiana results in the elimi- 
nation of nescience and that from its elimination results the cessa- 
tion of the life-cycle (samsara). This is untrue. The entire body 
of men always experience atman as the ego (aham) and yet samsara 
has not ceased. 

Irambhavadin.—Om contention, however, is that atman- 
entity which is quite distinct from what is given in the ego-notion, 
and which has cut asunder the knot (of the notions) of experiencer- 
experienced-experiencing, is brought to mind by the Jnanavidhi 
(viz., the mandate —Atma vare drstayyah) as something to be 
known (i.e., the injunction has as its content the knowledge of the 
attributeless Brahman). 

Anarambhavadin— That is wrong; for it is evident that a 
vidhi is competent to reveal a particular when in its general aspect 
as action it is understood and not in regard to the revelation of 
a thing that is absolutely non-existent. It may be said that 
patently such knowledge (f.c., mere atmajnana) is possessed by 
all; but still the knowledge pertaining to pure consciousness from 
which the world has been eliminated (Le., the qualityless pure 
Being devoid of aU upadhis) is asiddha (i.e., unsupported by evi- 
dence), and any injunction for its effectuation (karya) is as im- 
possible as commanding one to strike the void with one’s fist.^® 

Arambhavddin.— But the knowledge of such atman (i.e., 
atman divested of all upadhis) is comprehended (by all). 

Andrambhavadin.— What then is the use of the mandate?^’ 

— ^The operation of parisamkhya is at those times which are 
different from the ones in which a man is occupied in the struggle for 
existence. — TD. 

^® If one had some general conception of the transcendental 
Brahman injunction to acquire the knowledge of such Brahman would 
be feasible as in the case of actually experienced cognitive entities. 
But no such injunction of knowledge would be appropriate in regard 
to Brahman of which there is not even a vague notion. 

f% %%5Tr— The anarambhavadin questions whether that atma- 
jnana is private to the person seeking liberation or is the property of 
another. If private it is already there and so there is no need for 
vidhi; if not private, i.e., when it is not the property of the agent 
in the cognitive act, it is foreigpi to . him and as such he cannot be 
enjoined to acquire it, with the result, that no purpose will be served 
by vidhi. The dilemma cannot be avoided. . ^ 



150 PANCAPADIKA of PADMAPADA [VI. 16 

Arambhavadin. -Even as regards the other view (referring to 
the second cxiiic), viz., that since the revelation of the supreme 
hes outside the cognitive range of perception, etc., and since the 
Sastra (Veda) relates to something that is to be accomplished 
(karyarthatvat), the Vedic inquiry closes with the Sankarsakanda 
(so far purvapaksa), it should be noted that the mandatory charac- 
ter (karyaparata) of the Vedantic texts is equally (evident). The 
cognition of the nature of Brahman is karya (/.e., that which can 
be acquired by effort, krtisadhya), for this is known from the fact 
that it is in intimate relation to the adhikarin (one who desires 
liberation) and is the content of niyoga. As such (there is justi- 
fication for) the commencement of the Sariraka MImamsa for 
its inquiry (i.e., inquiry for the knowledge of Brahman). 

Anarambhavddm .- — We have refuted that also having pointed 
out, on the strength of the reasoning already adduced, that karya 
(or Niyoga) is out of place whether the cognition of Brahman does 
actually exist or does not exist. 

VI. 16. Another Arambhavadin.— [Fa,ge 44] Here is a 
different view. It is true that the Veda has karya as its content 
but its office is not confined to that alone. When it is there {Le., 
the vidhivakya or mandatory statement (denoting karya) whatever 
things are cognised, are each one of them to be regarded as having 
been denoted by it (viz., the vidhi); for example, when colour is 
presented to the eye, it starts functioning, but it is not the colour 
only that is the object of sight; on the other hand the substance 
also along with the colour. Similarly here (i.e., in the mandatory 
statement having Kriya as its content) the essence of Reality 
(Vastutatva -the pure Brahman) also is the visaya.^® 

17. Anarambhavadin. — How is that? 

Arambhavadin. —This is how — (from the Upanisad text) 
‘ what all this (meaning thereby, the universe) is, that is atman ’ 
(Bfh. Up., IV. 5), it is not intended to teach that atman is of the 

The contradiction lies in this that the Veda is said to denote 
action and yet to reveal the eternally established entity, viz.. Brahman. 
It is resolved by maintaining that when a Vidhi prompts action it must 
reveal all that is pertinent to the karya such as the vi§aya, etc. It 
follows therefore that though the Upanisadic texts are related to 
action (upasana) they also reveal the Pure Brahman, the Reality. 
Vidhi therefore is pertinent. The distinguishing feature of this third 
view is that in addition to the pratipatti-vidhi it conjoins atma-svarupa- 
jfiana to atmopasana. 


VII. 18] VEDANTA— NOT ANTICIPATED BY JAIMINI 151 

very nature of this all. If atman were taught as being identical 
with the all (i.e., the world) then since insentience is the mark of 
this all, atman would also assume that form (i.e., become insen- 
tient) ; this would lead to the elimination of knower (lit. the 
knowerhood— bodhrtva) thus depriving the sabda (Veda) of its 
knowledge-imparting character (for when there is none to receive 
knowledge, the Veda would lose its knowledge-imparting func- 
tion). Hence what is enjoined is that the all is of the essence of 
atman (i.e., the universe derives its existence from the Supreme 
atman and has no independent existence); it is indeed from the 
elimination of what is non-atman (viz., the world) that the know- 
ledge of reality comes. 

Anarambhavadin. — Well, here no vidhi is mentioned.^® 

Arambhavddin . — If so let a Vidhi be understood.®® 

VII. 18. Anarambhavadin . — Is (the word denoting) a man- 
date (Niyoga) to be postulated when the meaning of the Vidhi 
has been comprehended or when it is not comprehended ? If 
postulated after comprehension, the postulation is of no use.®^ 


What the anarambhavadin urges is that in the Vedic sentence 
‘idam sarvam yadayamatma’ there is no word to indicate a mandate. 
The sentence imports only the secondlessness of atman. 

2® When in a Vedic statement the mandatory part is absent it is 
considered a hiatus and the substitution of the part in question is 
allowed. For instance, is inserted in the passage 

If and the sentence is construed thus: 
sfiu: On this analogy the arambhavadin says that the 

sentence fT has to be completed by the addition of the 

phrase 

f%5rat% — ^The objection raised against the postulation of 

Vidhi is based on the following reasoning: — ^Karma which is unrelated 
to either part, present or future, when understood from sabdasakti, 
being otherwise inexplicable demands Niyoga, which is of the nature 
of karya and then is postulated the word (with the termination, lin 
or tavya) denoting vidhi. For example, we have the vakya ’ijfr 
STRSATIU: % H: — ‘the sun has for his share the kneaded flour, 

he is indeed toothless’. Here are mentioned the deity, % the 
sacrificial material; and in order that the material may reach the 
deity, yaga has to be postulated (by arthapatti). Hence vidhikalpana, 
i.e., postulation of the word indicating karya by the lin or tavya 
termination is appropriate. But Stman in is not some- 

thing fit for 3T5BR or performance and there can be no mandatory 


152 


PASCAPADIKA of PADMAPADA [VII. 19 

A word is sought, as is well known, only for the understanding 
of the content (of a Vidhi), but what is it that is achieved by one 
who postulates a word when that content is (already) known ? 
If you should argue that having premised a (word denoting, vidhi 
only in relation to what is wholly uncomprehended {viz., vidhyartha- 
niyoga or apurva), the thing-Niyoga is to be understood from that 
(from the mandatory termination — lih. etc.), (it can only be said) 
that the reasoning {i.e., your way of imagining the vidhi) is highly 
ingenious. 

19. Arambhavadin.—yNeVL, even when the vidhis are not 
declared as in “ Therefore the kneaded flour indeed belongs to 
the sun who is toothless, etc.” the vidhi is premised. 

Anarambhavadin. — ^It is true. There it is appropriate, for 
the sun’s connection with the flour-substance is (merely) denoted 
by the compound (prapistabhaga^, i.e., the relation between 
substance and deity is known from the ‘ Bahuvrihi ’ compound - 
prapistah, bhagah yasya sah); it (the relation) does not exist as 
accomplished and will not come into being from something (apart 
from yaga) because of the absence of any corroborative evidence. 
Nor is this statement (pusa, etc., laudatory) to necessitate its con- 
nection with some mandatory statement (yidhivakya) to secure 
syntactical unity, as, had it been so, (laudatory vakya) we might, 
somehow posit the syntactical relation (alambana) on the analogy 
of the vakya relating to the unsheathing of the omentum (vapot- 
khanana). Hence to avoid discontinuity (niralambana) we pre- 
sume that this vakya (pusa, etc.) has reference to Karya.^^ 

20. Arambhavadin. --Well, even here (i.e., ia the sentence — 
‘idam sarvam yadayamatma’— -what all this is, that is atman) 
the word atman denotes the sentient agent who is the enjoyer, 
and because he is the one to be mandated there is need for the 
mandate (niyoga). 


word. It is Siddhavastu or an accomplished entity. Hence vidhi- 
kalpana is untenable. And there would be no hiatus if vidhi is not 
premised. 

— ^All laudatory statements are intended only to extol 
the yagas and thus act as incentive to their performance. They have 
no independent status but must subserve a vidhivakya. If there is 
no such vakya one has to be postulated. . We have the laudatory state- 
ment srsrptfcRRit#! srrt the vidhivakya with which it is 

connected is — Tait. Sam., II, 1. Pra^na. 


VIII. 21] YEDANTA— NOT ANTICIPATED BY JAIMINl 153 

Anarambhavadin . — ^This is vapid. It is true that niyoga is 
not perceived to exist in the world independently of its association 
with a specifically denoted person and as such it desiderates a 
specific person as in yagas like visvajit, etc.®® But is it that a purusa 
independently of any niyoga unthinkable by us so that it would 
be incumbent to supply a vidhi (niyoga) ? 

VIII. 21. Still let us grant the existence of vidhi (in the 
statement — ^idam sarvam, etc., but) that (vidhi) is not perceived 
to exist by itself unconnected with the root.®* It is therefore to 
be postulated along with a root. Which is the root?®® If (you 
should answer that) the root is (krn in ‘ kartavyam ’ understood), 
(even then) the non-atman (that is — ^the insentient) nature of the 
world will not be eradicated.®® It is like the injunction ‘ Let these 
flour-balls be modelled into lions ’ where even after the injunction 
is carried out, the nature of the flour is not effaced. And (it has 
also to be noted that) the auxiliaries (itikartavyata) have not been 
indicated, so that the injunction-statement desiderating the auxi- 
liaries would go in vain.®’ 


®® Visvajit — For an account of viivajit yaga vide the English 
translation of Sdstra Dlpika, TarfcapEda, p. 2, note 4, G.O.S., 89 

®* The rule is that when in a Vedic statement there exists a 
relation between two things, say substance and deity, such relation 
demands association with Niyoga. This being so, the relation of 
atman with the world demands a niyoga as otherwise it would be 
violating the rule. The objection being thus postulated the answer is 
given in PP. beginning with the phrase 3P4IN. 

®® When niyoga or vidhi is premised, the vidhi termination, either 
lin or tavya, is to be understood as connected with a root. In asking 
the question — ^S^IT ‘which is that root?’ the anarambhavadin 
means that no root will fit in. 

®® The root ‘kr’ — ‘kj-tih’, to make, may be understood since it 
is common to the root-meanings of all the verbs; hence says the 
andrarabhavadin that the sentence has to be completed thus — ^ 

But such substitution will not give the sense of the 
vakya — ‘idam sarvam yadayamatma’, viz., by eradicating the world 
the realisation of atman has to be secured. The non-atman nature of 
the world persists. 

The anarambhavadih raises another objection — when the word 
kartavya is understood wh^t enjoined is ‘the making the world 
assume the atman-nature ’,, but the manner of performance — itikarta- 
vyata — ^which is an essential constitijmnt of a mandate is lacking and 


154 PAtGAPADIKA OF PADMAPADA [IX. 23 

22. Now the word ‘ jnatavyah ’ (to be known), it may be 
urged, is to be understood ; but even then, there remains the iden- 
tical fault— the non-atman nature (of the world) will not dis- 
appear. Further it would amount to enjoining a thing that is unfit 
to be so enjoined (it is evident that knowledge jnana, is not 
krtisadhya). [Page 45] Indeed one thing cannot be understood 
as of the nature of another.^® 

Arambhavadin . — If that be so the word ‘jnatavyah’ may be 
understood and there (i.e., when the ellipsis is supplied) the mean- 
ing of that root (dhatvartha) is a mere restatement (anuvada) and 
the termination {i.e., the ‘ tavya ’ ending) is indicative of vidhi 
or mandate.®® Would you ask ‘ From what is that jnana derived 
of which this is the restatement ’ ? We say it is from the words 
expressly stated (in the Vedanta texts like ‘tatvamasi ’ which are 
distinct from the mandatory words). 

Anarambhavadin.—lf that be so the enjoining (vidhanam) 
would become meaningless since even at the time of learning to 
chant the Vedas (of course this presupposes one who is compe- 
tent to understand the significance of the words chanted) the 
jnana (it must be admitted) has arisen. 

IX. 23. Arambhavadin . — ^As in the case of the mantras, 
jnana once acquired is enjoined again to be acquired (i.e.. 


as such the sentence ; etc., would be purposeless. As for the 
itikartavyata sentence, viz., santodanta, etc., it is stated in connection 
with jnanavidhi but not with krti vidhi. 

“ ^ Tf g-sRcf— It is possible to meditate upon 

one thing as if it were another; e.g., any symbol say salagrama-pebble 
may be mentally dwelt upon as Visnu; but then the nature of the 
pebble remains what it is. So also the world may be meditated upon 
as atman but its insentient nature will not disappear. We may consci- 
ously or even by illusion regard one thing as another, but it can 
never be valid cognition. 

tr# a'ft — What the arambhavadin means is that the knowledge 
of the Eternal by negating the world results from some other means 
such as the Scriptural testimony— ^-tatvamasi — but this knowledge 
(jnana) should become the object of a vidhi. Hence the termination, 
‘tavya’ alone has to be added to the root ‘jiia’ in jnatavyah. The 
object is to bring in the Vedantic teaching also under the purview of 
Vidhi. The meaning of the root ‘jna’ therefore is only a restatement — 
anuvSda, for jnana has been obtained from another valid instrument 
of cognition, viz., Sabda. 


IX. 23]' YEDANTA^-^NOT ANTICIPATED BY JAIMINI 155 

krtisMhya— the object of attainment by following the man- 
date).^,®,':; 

The prayogavacana there (in that context) 
is mandatory (vidhivakya; here there is none such).^^ 

Arambhavadin . — We say that here also (in the atmajnana 
context) the. prayogavacana is mandatory.®^ 

30 gjsfT The arambhavadin advances the analogy of mantras 

or hymns which when recited at the time of sacrifice recall to mind 
the substance — dravya, and the deity — devata, connected with the 
sacrifice. The utility consists in their serving as aids to seer ring 
apurva from the yaga. It may be said that dravya and devata are 
recalled to mind even by the Brahmana vakyas; but the niyamavidhi 
enjoins that they should be brought to mind only through the 
mantras and not through the Brahmana if apurva should result; even 
so atmajnana though it has arisen even in the absence of the injunctive 
word, is again enjoined by a vidhi for it is only this mandated jnana 
that yields salvation — moksa, and not the one understood otherwise. 

31 is pointed out when and under 
what circumstances the mantra-analogy is appropriate. The vidhi 
known as prayogavidhi which enjoins the order in which the subsi- 
diaries — angas, of a sacrifice have to be performed operates in regard 
to the mantras. The rule is that if no prayogavidhi is expressly 
stated, one has to be understood. The injunction of performance 
therefore impels one to acquire that meaning of the mantra which is 
helpful in securing apurva, to the exclusion of its sense acquired when 
learning to recite the Veda. 

What the arambhavadin means is that even in the atmajnana 
context the prayoga injunction is operative. The originative injunction^ 
is to be understood and that desiderates Tti- 
kartavyata’ or the mode of performance and this is afforded by the 
Vidhi in the same context relating to atmajnana associated with 
a beneficent result, viz., “seek atman in atman having cultivated such 
virtues as peace of mind, self-control, etc."’ 

This is the viniyogavidhi. 
Hence the originative injunction has become viniyogavidhi and it 
denotes the relation between atmajnana which is angi and sama, 
dama, etc., which are angas. The viniyogavidhi in turn becomes the 
adhikaravidhi which is thus expressed in full — 

Then it becomes prayogavidhi. The man desirous of freedom shall 
effect the attainment of the knowledge of atman (in himself) with the 
aid of the Upanisadic statements and possessed of such qualities as 
composure of mind, etc. 


156 


panoapAdika of padmapAda 


[IX. 24 


24. Anarambhavadin. — Well, as regards the mantras, since 
what they signify {nz., material, deity, etc.) is established from 
something other than themselves {yiz., Brahmana) it is right that 
they should denote the (mere) jnana (pratyaya), but here (in the 
sentence ‘ idam sarvam yadayamatma ’) there would be contra- 
diction if the words composing the vakya refer to the injunction 
of that which they signify (namely, the Brahman-nature of the 
world) as also to the injunction of jnana.®® 

25. Arambhavadin . — There is no blemish. What is meant 
to serve one object does (often) serve another;®^ the instance in 
point is this : canals are cut for (irrigating) the fields, and from 
them thirst is quenched and ablutions made. Even so here. 
Just as §abda (a Vedic statement) enjoining (that one should 
acquire) the meanings of the words (composing it) enjoins also 


®® ng Here is pointed out the difference between the mantra 

and the Vedanta- vakya. The mantra merely gives rise to the apurva- 
producing jnana, whether that jnana has a valid visaya (object) or not. 
There is no need that there must be the objective counterpart of what 
it denotes; e.g., when the mandate relates to meditation, say, on 
‘vak (word) as cow (vacam dhenumupasita) ’ we know it is a mere 
figure of speech. But as regards the Vedantic text it is purposeful 
not only in producing jnana but also in its artha; i.e., the object that 
it denotes must be real. In the Vedantic statement ‘ayamatma jnata- 
vyah’ so far as meditation is concerned it may consist in contemplating 
that the world is atraan but it is not necessary that the negation of 
the world should become actual, as in 

where meditation alone is meant — ^The Vedanta unlike mantra 
gives rise to jnana and also points to a fact — and also 
The anarambhavadin therefore points out the 
contradiction, for the same sentence imports two ideas, a sentence- 
split, vakya-bheda. The word 

vidhi is appropriate only in the sense that the Vedanta points out 
something not known before and is also productive of some benefit. 

34 etc. — ^The arambhavadin answers that the same 

proposition may denote its own sense and also enjoin jnana. The 
statement ‘ayamatma jnatavyah’ is denotative of a mandate— vidhi- 
paratva, since what is enjoined is jnana — this is the main idea 
(mukhyartha); and it is also denotative of its intrinsic sense, v/z., the 
world-negation prapanca-vilaya — : — ^this is the subordinate idea (avto- 
taratatparya). The sentence enjoining 

atmajMna. apqi4 


IX. 56] VEDANTA— NOT ANTICIPATED BY JATMINI 157 

the order (of performance of a yaga), similarly sabda enjoining 
the acquisition of its own specific sense becomes the vidhi (mandate 
of jfiana).®® 

26. Anarambhavadin . — ^This looks as if no thought has 
been bestowed (upon the subject). How (it may be asked)? The 
mantras, the prompting to chant which comes from the mandate 
requiring one to study one’s branch of the Veda, because their 
significance is determined by some other means {viz., Brahmanas), 
cannot confer validity on it (i.e., on what they signify); having 
thus missed their claim, to serve as valid means of knowledge 
(pramana) they are ranked as prameya (object of knowledge) 
like rice (and barley, etc.) and as such it is but right that they 
should become auxiliaries to (yagas) as ascertained from sruti, 
(linga, prakarana, etc.). (The Mantras) construed (thus) as 
auxiliaries should be regarded as reminders since at the time of 
sacrifice the recollection of what ought to be done {e.g., taking 
out a certain quantity of grain for preparing the cake for obla- 
tion) is desiderated. But here the cognition which arises from the 
syntactical arrangement of words in the (Upanisadic) sentence, 
‘what all this manifold is, that is atman ’ points to the atman- 
nature of this all and that cognition (vijnana) is not the object 
of a vidhi; and it is so because its object (visaya) is not ascer- 
tained by anything ai exira. But if it should be the object of a 
mandate (vidhi) then it loses its capacity to make known a pra- 
meya. And neither could both (i.e., vidhivi?ayatva and prameya- 
bodhakatva) manifest themselves at the same time for it would 
result in one and the same vakya denoting opposite senses 
(vairupyaprasangat).®® 


This is in answer to 

anarambhavadin who points out the inappropriateness of the example 
taken from irrigation. The channel is stationary and so might serve 
a double purpose either simultaneously or in succession, but ^abda 
can yield only one sense because of its momentary existence. But 
says the arambhavadin, there are cases of !§abda yielding a double 
sense. In ^1^%, the words not only indicate the padarthas — 

Samit (name of Yaga), etc., but also the order of performance after 
Samidyaga, Taniinapat and then Iigta and so on since a single agent— 
karta, cannot perform these ySgas — simultaneously. 

®® In case the same ^litence, vi2., ‘idam sarvam 

yadayamatma (jnatavyah)’ should constitute a vidhi and also mean 


158 PANCAPADIKA of PADMAPADA [X. 27 

'K. 27. Arambhavadin . — If it be so (i.e., if it be thought 
that it is a blemish for the same sentence to convey senses which 
contradict one another) then the mandate, wherever it occurs, 
relating to auxiliary duties would be to no purpose.®'^ 

Anarambhavddin . — It will not be purposeless. (There can be 
gu^iavidhana.) Where {e.g., in the sentence, ‘he sprinkles rice’) 
that which stands in the objective relation {viz., rice) to the auxi- 
liary karma {viz., sprinkling) is ascertained from a distinct 
pramana, there karma {viz., sprinkling) which brings about as 
its result any one of the following — originations, etc., enjoined; 
where however the visaya that is in the objective relation to jnana 
(as in ‘ idam sarvam, etc.’) is not ascertained from a distinct 
pramana, there it (the Karmakaraka) is vouched for by the 
same (statement— tenaiva) and as such cannot be pointed to as 
uddesya (on the supposition that it is) previously established (like 


Brahman (atman-nature) there would be a triad of mutual contra- 
dictions: (i) it is Brahmajnana that is enjoined; hence in relation to 
jnana the primacy— pradhanya, is of Brahman; again the subsidiary 
nature— gimatva, of Brahman is indicated because Brahman is adjec- 
tival (vi^esana) to jnana which is enjoined (for apurva); (ii) because 
Brahman is the object sought (prameya) it is to be achieved— Upadeya; 
and in relation to vidhi (jnatavyah) Brahman is something existing to 
which the vidhi points — uddesya; (iii) because it is prameya — some- 
thing vouched for by a pramana— Brahman which is unknown is made 
known — ajSatajnapya, i.e., vidheyatva; again since jnana of Brahman 
is enjoined. Brahman which is already known is merely recalled — 
anuvadyatvam — V.P., 117. 

The mandates ' ’—he sprinkles the 

rice-grains with water, he pounds the rice, which are 

subsidiary acts— serving a main yaga, would lose their significance 
since such mandatory sentences bear conflicting ideas. Now in 
wfcT because some other pramana, viz., perception vouches 
for the existence of rice it acquires the quality of being 

restated, but because some adrsta (unseen good) is generated in it by 
the sprinkling of water it acquires the opposite quality, viz., ; 

again in relation to the rice is the main, ; but in relation 
to yaga, it is subsidiary ; so also it acquires 

or something that is to be accomplished by an act, viz., 
sprinkling which produces or but because the sprinkling 

is enjoined in relation to rice it acquires The opposite 

qualities are and and and 


X. 2H] VEDANTA— NOT ANTICIPAIED BY JAIMINI 159 

vrihi) ; for had it been so, there would be justification for the 
injunction of knowledge relating to it (Brahman) for the purpose 
of generating some new feature (atisaya). 

28. Hence here (in ‘idam sarvam, etc.’) since the two cannot 
arise simultaneously the statement cannot but denote ideas 
repellent to each other. And the same concourse of words 
when sundered from the mandatory word which is its (integral 
part) will be incapacitated from yielding any sense (i.e., no 
(sabdabodha relating to Brahman is possible) for a truncated 
sentence cannot convey any valid piece of knowledge (prama).®® 

29. Arambhavddin.—\PsLge 46] Well, we opine that like 
laudatory passages, the statement ‘ Satyam, jnanam, anantam, 
Brahma’, etc.), having revealed some sense on the strength of 
the mutual relation (of the words composing it) gets into contact 
with a vidhi (or mandate— jnatavyah).®® 

Andrambhavadin. — ^That is not right. There is reason in 
the laudatory passages assuming a subsidiary position in relation 
to a main action which alone yields a fruit, because they cannot 
independently produce any fruit and as such are not complete 
in themselves. Here however {i.e., in “ satyam jnanamanantam 
Brahma ”) the collocation of words unrelated to any vidhi (man- 
datory statement) reveals while revealing its own sense, the real 
nature of atman, (which is no other than) the cessation of all the 
mundane ills, the experience ne plus ultra of bliss, beatitude, and 


»r ^ etc. — ^The arambhavadin argues that there are 

two cognitions in the present context as well: 

(i) one arising from that part of the statement, viz., ‘idam 

sarvam yadayamatma’ which is divested of the mandatory 
word— jnatavyah ; 

(ii) the other arising from the full sentence, viz., ‘idam sarvam 

yadayamatma jnatavyah’ and that atmajnana is estab- 
lished from (i) and is made the object of the mandate 
in (ii). 

The answer is that (i) being truncated cannot be denotative and 
there results no apprehension of the same. — Assem- 
blage of words. cannot produce any prama or valid 

knowledge. 

The arambhavadin, to ayoid the triad of opposites, regards the 
statement — ‘satyam, jnanam, anantam, Brahma’ as a laudatory sentence 
being auxiliary to the mandatory vakya — ‘idam sarvam yadayamatma 
jnatavyah.’. 


160 PANCAPADIRA OF PADMAPADA [XL 30 

secondlessness.*® Then for what purpose (when thus the nature 
of atman is revealed by ‘ satyam jnanam, etc.) should one obtain 
the phala generated by making it (the ‘ satyam, etc.’ vakya) subsi- 
diary to a vidhi? This (viz., that nothing worthy is to be gained 
further) is borne out by the Smrti text— “ Nothing else is en- 
joined (i.e., to be gained) beyond the acquisition of atman (atma- 
jnana).” 

XI. 3Q. Arambhavadin. — -Well, that variety of experience 
is not to be had from verbal knowledge (sabdajiiana). ' Hence 
the need of vidhi for its immediate apprehension.*^ 

Anarambhavadin.~(y^& as]s) by what instrument of know- 
ledge is that jnana which is enjoined for the acquisition of that 
experience produced? As for perception, etc., they are powerless 
to generate such experience (lit. the Brahmajnana lies beyond the 
range of the senses), as witness the mantra (Katha, II. 3-9), “With 
the eye it is not perceived,” and so on. And verbal knowledge 
(sabdajfiana having the potency to destroy nescience) is not 
accepted by you, (because sabda gives only indirect knowledge 
and it is the immediate knowledge that is potent to dispel nescience). 

Arambhavadin. — ^Yes, it is true. Sabdajfiana if unassociated 
with vidhi is incompetent to produce the experience (which implies 
the negation of avidya) but if associated it does serve as the hetu 
(instrument of that experience.) 

Anarambhavadin . — ^That does not stand to reason. As for 
that jfiana which naturally arises from the contexture of words 
memorised as the result of the vidhi that one should study one’s 

*® The anarambhavadin regards that statements such as 
WIT are unlike what are distinctly arthavadas like 

since its own sense constitutes the highest phala it needs 
no association with a mandatory sentence which imports a phala. 

** The arambhavadin contends that by verbal cognition, i.e., by 
the denotative power of words— satyam, etc., we only comprehend 
what was uncomprehended; e.g., the nature of Brahman unknown 
hitherto becomes known on hearing the words satyam, jnanam, etc. 
But we cannot stop here. We have to get rid of all illusory cognitions 
and the mental traces they have left behind. And this is not possible 
by Sabdajfiana. It is the immediate intuitive knowledge of Brahman 
that can bring about such a result. Hence the need for vidhi for 
effecting saksatkara or immediate perception — ^a result which the 
knowledge of the import of the vSkya— satyam, jnanam, anantam, 
Brahma’, is incompetent to produce. 



XI. 31] YEDANTA— NOT ANTICIPATED BY JAIMINI 161 

branch of the Veda, it is not something that is enjoined; for it 
has already been said that since its sole purpose is to point to 
prameya (Brahman) there is no ground to regard it as the valid 
object (prameya) of a vidhi. 

31. Arambhavadtn.—'^ we maintain that the vidhi (man- 
date) is to the effect that the same jnana should be meditated upon 
continuously.*^ 

Anarambhavadin . — How could it {i.e. the Vidhi relating to 
jnanasamtana) result in the absence of either of the verbal roots 
signifying upasana (upasti) or dhyana (dhyayati) which express 
the cognition series ? Nor can it be urged that its own series is 
implied in a secondary sense in the word jnana itself, since there 
exists no inseparable connection such as invariable concomitance 
(sahacarya)*®, etc. And further the intuitive and immediate 
cognition of the Supreme cannot result from continual medita- 
tion.** And there is no Vedic text enjoining dhyana (meditation 
on Brahman), by which had there been one, meditation on the 
cognition-series would have been enjoined for its sake {i.e., for 
immediate knowledge — saksatkara). 

32. Arambhavadin.—^Q\\, what is the purpose served here 
by a vidhi (sravaria, i.e., a mandate relating to it) ? (None); for 
a man of his own accord (i.e., without the prompting of a vidhi) 
incUnes towards the attainment of immediate knowledge since it 
(such sak§atkara) is the most cherished object. When the text 


*® One who is competent otherwise gets a fairly correct compre- 
hension of the Vedic passages the commits to memory and vidhi is 
out of place here. The arambhavadin admits this but says, that the 
vidhi is for nididhyasana, i.e., it lays down that one who longs to 
achieve freedom has . to meditate constantly upon the jnana which 
results from adhyayana. 

*® The contention is that when jnana is. enjoined its series may 
in a secondary sense be understood. But no secondary sense is 
possible since there exists none of the grounds to justify it. The 
grounds are invariable association — simularity — oppo- 
sition — etc. Here jfiana or cognition is the primary sense — 
. and cognition-current — is the secondary sense — 
55^311^ and there is nothing to suggest their invariable relation. 

rTift- 8T«n?rmir?n5;Tf: ‘Let meditation be enjoined as in 

‘ ’ says the objector, ‘yet meditation does not bring 

about the realisation of the Supreme’ for meditation is excluded from 
the category of pramana or vrdid instrument of cognition. 


162 PAnCAPADIKA of PADMAPADA [XII. 33 

(Srotavyo, mantavyo, nididhyasitavyah) is heard (the nature of 
atman is cognised) and constant meditation on that is doubtless 
the hetu of immediate knowledge. 

Anarambhavadin . — If that be so what is the good of vidhi? 
When it is understood that it leads to purusartha (a human end) 
and when jnanabhyasa which is the hetu is also known the person 
himself begins to act (i.e., practices contemplation).^ 

XII. 33. The example however, which you have adduced, 
viz., that channels dug for the purpose of irrigating crops (inci- 
dentally serve other purposes is beside the point). There no 
doubt it holds good since it is perceived to actually serve a double 
purpose; here, on the other hand (z.e., in idam sarvam yadayam- 
atma) it has to be established by reason and it has been said {vide 
ante) that there exists no reason to suppose that both occur 
simultaneously.*® 

34. And what was said again, viz., that a vakya (sabda) 
decreeing padarthas (i.e., specifying particular yagas) decrees also 
the order (of performance) and that similarly the vakya (saman- 
vaya — ^fit combination of words, idam sarvam, etc.) which signi- 
fies the single atman entity also puts in mind that to which the 
injunction relates is something that does not appeal either.*’ Now 


*® The anarambhavadin pertinently asks if the opposite view 
which accepting vidhi advocated that the Vedanta Sastra needed a 
separate treatment, is not abandoned. The answer is that by vidhi 
is not meant the impelling of an inactive person to act. It is merely 
a reminder, bodhaka, i.e., what the vidhi ordains is that atman- 
reahsation is to be secured through mind-concentration, and this 
aspect of vidhi is not abandoned. But, says the anarambhavadin, it 
has already been said that a person desirous of self-realisation enters 
of his own accord upon meditation without being prompted by vidhi. 

*« The anarambhavadin points out the inapplicability of the 
analogy adduced from the irrigating channel. There the thing is 
stationary and can therefore serve a double purpose. But the words 
composing a sentence cannot assume a double function being fleeting 
in their nature. It is impossible for the sentence under consideration 
to refer to the nature of atman as this-all, and also to the vidhi, viz., 
that such atman has to be cognised. 

« — In support of the contention that a double purpose 

could be achieved by a single statement another analogy had been 
adduced by the arambhavadin ; 

lailt ^1^ ; now the mandates relate not only to the particular yaga 


XII. 34] VEDANTA— NOT ANTICIPATED BY JAIMINI 163 

in regard to the mandatory texts like prayaja referring to separate 
(yagas) it must be noted that the mandates as expressed by them 
(texts) are applicable only to those (yagas) and not to krama or 
order of performance. Now are they {viz., the yagas such as 
Samit, Tanunapat, etc., fit to be) designated by the word ‘krama’ 
And the prayoga vakyas also directing the undertaking of the 
yagas (padarthas) refer only to these (viz., prayajadi) and it has been 
said that they are not identical with krama or order of perforrn- 
ance.*® [Page 47] And (it should be pointed out) that the 
existence of such an entity as krama cannot be wholly denied for 
if so there would be no basis for such a notion (viz., sequence) 
as well as for such a name (viz., anteriority — ^posteriority). (Since 
krama is the ground of both the notion of sequence and the term 
sabda, viz., the word ‘anantara ’) there certainly is such an entity 
as krama. They only (Le., the padarthas like prayaja) become 
in association with some limiting adjuncts (as space and time) 
the ground for both the idea and the term on the analogy of 


such as but also to the order in which they are to be performed. 
The anarambhavadin however points out that the padarthas onl)^, i.e., 
the'specific yagas to be performed, are denoted by the mandatory 
sentences and that the order of sequence of the yagas is known by 
presumptive evidence or arthapatti pramana since a single agent 
cannot perform several yagas all together and not by verbal testimony. 
Construe the sentence thus: a: 

T ‘Samit’, etc., are the names of the five prayajas 

or the ‘fore-offerings of ghee’— vide Ar.S., Sections 12 and 61. 

Two questions arise in this context— Do 
these texts bearing on the fore-sacrifices denote ‘krama’ or sequence 
presuming that such sequence is quite distinct from the fore-sacrifices 
or identifying the two, viz., parySja, etc., and krama {cf. that which is 
distinct from ‘pot’ is the same as ‘cloth’ — The 
first alternative is met by the statement etc. The second 

alternative is met by the statement etc. What is meant is that 

if krama is only another name for the fore-sacrifices then the word 
krama would have stood for prayaja, etc. But it is not so. 

‘*9 etc.— The point is whether the five injunctive 

passages are indicative of both the things — ^padarthas like samit, etc., 
and the order of performance of these yagas. It is seen that they 
cannot do both. Krama is secured neither as the result of originative 
injunction — nor as the result of injunction of performance — 
But it is known by arthapatti or presumption. 


164 PA]&CAPADIKA of PADMAPAdA pClI. 35 

‘ forest ’.®® Or the recollective knowledge would, on the occa- 
sion of performance, {anu§thanakala) suggest the padarthas 
(prayajadi) in the order of remembrance (z.e., in the way each 
yaga is recollected). However it be, there does exist a jnana 
(of krama) distinct from the jnanas arising severally from each 
of the padarthas (samit, ida, etc.). And that (distinct cognition 
of order) which is desiderated and which immediately presents 
itself is obtained by prayogavacana (injunction of performance), 
since the karta or agent is one and since padarthas (fore-sacrifices) 
are many and as such it is out of the question that there could 
be simultaneous performance — this is right way of understand- 
ing. But here no such double cognition exists (as in the other, 
where we have the knowledge of samit, etc., from sabda and of 
krama by arthapatti), which had it existed would have denoted 
the universal pervasion of atman as well as the mandate (that 
such atman is to be known). Therefore, owing to the absence 
here of anything fit to be enjoined, owing to the absence of any 
mention of a vidhi (expressed either by lih or tavya termination) 
and also because no adhyahara (postulation of a vidhi to complete 
the sense) is warranted by any pramatia (say, arthapatti), the 
prayogavacana, which would have decreed again the acquisition 
of jnana also as in the case of mantras (where the prayogavidhi 
enjoins both mantra and mantrajnana) is not found (in this 
context). Hence the view is wrong that the Veda though having 
karya (apurva) as its subject, also expounds the nature of reality 
{viz., idam sarvam yadayamatma). 

35. Again the example that you adduced, viz., just as the 
eye when it reveals the colour, reveals also the substance, the Veda 
revealing karya, reveals also the nature of reality (is also inappli- 
cable). There, no doubt it is appropriate ; sense of sight is inde- 
pendently probative in every item of knowledge that it reveals, 
but here on the other hand the tatparya only, i.e., the sense (of 
the passage) as a whole invests it with validity {i.e., pramavisayata) 


“ ct trf %qrr%f'7n%rT — Sequence-krama, implies space and time as 
being inevitable for its existence. It is the same whether we use the 
word krama or say that things take place in a certain sequence of time. 
A group of trees growing together in a particular region come under 
the designation of ‘forest’. The very term ‘forest’ implies an assem- 
blage of trees as limited by a particular region {i.e., limitation of 



XIII. 36] VEDANTA— NOT ANTICIPATED BY JAIMINI 165 

and not each item of knowledge (that is given in isolated words) 
—this is what distinguishes (verbal from the perceptive know- 
ledge).®^ 

Xni. 36. Arambhavadin.— Let there be no two cognitions; 
let the knowledge which the denotative potency of the words yields 
subserve the object of the vidhi, and when the injunction is with 
reference to that (v/z., what is denoted by sabda) then inevitably 
by arthapatti pramana the atman-nature of the whole (world) 
results, for cognition means cognition of an object (i.e., cognition 
implies something cognized.®^ 

Anarambhavadin . — -Even so {i.e., when you premise that the 
vakya — idam sarvam, etc.,— is injunctive in character and that 
atmatatva results from Srutarthapatti) your construing the sentence 
{i.e., the manner in which you understand the sense of the 
Upanisadic text — ^idam sarvam) is most amazing seeing (that in 
your interpretation) the sense which is not pertinent to the context 
{viz., injunction of knowledge results from the sabda, while what 
is pertinent {yiz., the all-atman nature of the world) results from 
arthapatti.®® 


In perception the eye gets into contact with form and sub- 
stance separately, hence it can point to both; but the denotativeness 
of sabda is in conformity with the sense of the phrase or passage con- 
sidered as a unity and not with reference to each component part. It 
depends entirely upon the speaker’s idea as a whole. This is the 
difference between perceptual and verbal knowledge. 

Conceding that sabda can yield only a single cognition unlike 
the sense of sight, the ‘arambhavadin’ points out that the universal 
nature of atman — is ascertained from the same 
vakya by the valid means of knowledge known as ‘srutarthapatti’ or 
postulation from words. The mandate has 

jnana as its object — and naturally jnana desiderates a |t*l or 
and that is the atmahood of this all. The conclusion is that the 
Uttara-Mimamsa Sastra has to be begun, since the injunction of 
knowledge is established and as such the doubt that such injunction 
does not exist, has been removed. 

®® Arthapatti is of two kinds: Srutarthapatti, i.e., presumption 
from what one hears, and Dfftirthapatti, Le., presumption from what 
is actually experienced; Caitra, wp are informed, is alive, but we do not 
find him in his house, ergo, f he. is out — ^this is in illustration of 
drstarthapatti. Devadatta, we are told, is fat but does not eat by 
day, the implication is that he eats by night — this is in illustration of 



166 PANCAPADIKA OF PADMAPADA [XIV. 38 

37. Moreover^ {i.e., apart from the fact of your illogical 
interpretation) it is not that the mandate regarding jnana (prati- 
patti) invariably (niyogatah) denotes the relation of what it enjoins 
(v/z.,. jnana) with an object that is really existent (/.e., the injunction 
may not reveal that the relation between the world and atman is 
real). The cognitions (pratipattayah) which are enjoined by the 
Veda (codana), it is well known, have (often) as their objects even 
those things which are only imagined (and not those which corres- 
pond to reality), and which (nevertheless) yield (some) fruit, as 
witness the statenient ‘ meditate on speech as the cow ’, etc. And 
this alone (vzz., that jnana has the imagined identity) is appro- 
priate here {i.e., in this vakya, ‘idam sarvam, etc.’) the jnana which 
is enjoined is incapable of producing the valid cognition of what 
stands as its object, very like the case of meditation on the ‘speech- 
cow,’ vak-dhenu), because the text when it does not (according 
to you) really mean that (vfz., the atman-identity of this-all) 
and when such identity-knowledge is also opposed to percep- 
tion, etc., it becomes incapable of determining the sense as denoted 
(by the phrase— -idam, etc.). Hence it is mere fancy to suppose 
that the Veda whose object is to denote action establishes the 
nature of reality (vastutatva). 

XIV. 38. Therefore atman is only that which is rendered 
explicit by the ego-notion (ahampratyaya) and of that (atman) 
there exists no other form (rupantaram, i.e., the entity character- 
ised by world-negation — nisprapancasvarupam) which is super- 
sensuous and determined (only) by verbal testimony, for sabda 
is not competent to reveal such an entity. When this is so the 
words ‘Brahman’, ‘ antaryamin ’, etc., found in, the texts: — 
“ This self (atman) is Brahman (ayamatma Brahma) ”, “ This 
person is your atman, indweller, immortal (esa te atma antaryam- 
yamrtah) ” somehow {i.e., figuratively) find this significance in 
atman as rendered explicit in the ego-notion. Hence it is but 

Srutarthapatti. In both cases what on the face of it is a contradiction 
is resolved by a suitable postulation. The text under notice, viz., 
^ ttl means that all, is of the nature of atman and this 

meaning is to be had by arthapatti, whereas injunction knowledge 
(jnanavidhi) which is not there, is said to be its meaning by the addi- 
tion of the phrase— jnatavyah. When jnana. is enjoined it would 
require a visaya and that vi§aya is no other than the identity of the 
world with atman. This is postulation or arthapatti. This way of 
construing the vakya, says the anarambhavadin, is most novel. 


XV. 40] VEDANTA— NOT ANTICIPAl ED BY JAIMTNT 1 67 

right to conclude that the text: ‘that is atman, that thou art’ 
(enjoins meditation on atman in association with the qualities 
which either actually exist or are imagined, which (meditation) 
yields the fruit of moksa (freedom from bondage). 

39. Hence since the import of the (whole) Veda is to incul- 
cate action (karya or karma) and since it (karma) has been in all 
its aspects investigated (in the Purva-Mimamsa) what else is there 
remaining which would necessitate the commencing of the inquiry 
into the nature of Brahman?®* 

XV. 40. Pammasiddhanta: [Page 48] It is thus an- 
swered: This would be so {viz., the anticipation of Uttara- 
Mimamsa by Jaimini) if the whole of the Vedartha had been taken 
up by him for investigation in formulating the Sutra— athato 
dharmajijnasa— ‘ then therefore is the inquiry into the nature of 
Dharma ’ and investigated too. (On what ground, it may be 
asked, is it presumed that the entire Veda is not commented on 
by Jaimini) ? Because (yavata) only that portion of the Veda 
which deals with duty— kriya — has been inquired into and not 
that which relates to the essential nature of reality. 

41. To explain: The introduction to the (MImamsa) iSastra 
is thus set forth by the commentators. How ? Dharma verily 
is some instrument by which the performer (of karma) obtains 
happiness (such as Svarga) in the future, (kalantara, i.e., after 
death) and this Dharma in its general aspect is the visaya of the 
cognition arising from that semblance of pramapa (pramapa- 
bhasa — men’s untutored perception) known by the name of loka.®® 
But as regards its specific nature thinkers hold diverse views. 
Some maintain that Dharma consists in agnihotra, etc.; others, 

®* tr# etc. — ^Brahman, antaryamin, etc., denote only atman as 
revealed in the ego-notion — and not any Higher Being; for 
one who maintains that Uttara-Mlmamsa need not be commenced 
jiva or individual soul alone exists and apart from it there is no 
Buddha or the pure self. 

^«rT%ci:. — Somehow, either etymologically or figuratively, niw and 
not by conventional usage — ^ existing qualities like 

mahatva, magnitude, etc. 

— ^What appears to be a valid means of 
knowledge, i.e., the common sepse view, and this is termed loka. 
Dharma is not altogether a novel conception; in its general nature it 
is manifest to all; but difference of opinion exists as regards its 
special feature — whether it is yi^a or worship at Caitya, etc. 


168 pancapAdikA OF padmapAda 

in the adoration at Buddhistic places of worship. (There being 
diversity of opinion the purvapaksin like the Bauddha) argues 
thus: “ It is not that Dharma means only what is of the nature 
of agnihotra, etc. ; therefore there is no occasion for inquiring 
into the meaning of Vedic sentences expounding agnihotra, etc. 
Nor is there any meaning intended to be conveyed (by these Vedic 
statements).®® Hence, of the adoration of Caitya, etc., what consti- 
tutes Dharma is only one of them and it is some one statement of 
Buddha expounding that (Dharma) that has to be inquired into, or 
not even that. For it is clear that in. human utterances the meaning 
is not in conformity with the denotative potency of the word 
(sabda) but on the contrary with his (speaker’s) intended sense.®’ 

42. When such a question is raised by the opponent 
(Bauddha or some other non-follower of the Veda, the Siddhantin 
proceeds to answer). Intending to inquire (from the second Sutra 
onwards) into the meaning of the Vedic texts for (ascertaining 
what constitutes Dharma) Jaimini framed the (first) Sutra — Athato 
Dharmajijnasa — “ then therefore is the inquiry into the nature of 
Dharma ” — i.e., to point out that the Veda conveys a specific 
sense that therefore there is occasion for investigation and that 
after gaining mastery over the Vedic text, it is incumbent that one 
should undertak-e the inquiry into Dharma and not take the 
ceremonial bath which amounts to quitting the preceptor’s house. 
When this is so, (i.e., when the introductory Sutra, restricts the 
inquiry to Dharma) the idea is not, that the Sastra (i.e., the Purva- 
Mimamsa) embraces the entire . Vedartha but it is understood 
that there exists (a part of) the Veda significant of an accomplished 
entity (siddharupa — already there, not coming into existence by 
one’s effort as is the case wth Dharma), distinct even from Dharma, 
which is unnoticed by Jaimini since it forms the subject-matter 
of a separate philosophical system (Nyaya). 


®« The negative particle ‘no’ is to be taken along with the 
preceding as well as the succeeding sentence — ^ 

^ etc. 

m Wf On reflection, inquiry is inappropriate even in the 
case of Buddha’s utterances; for according to the Bauddhas as also 
according to the Prabhakaras words have no significative potency in 
the empirical sphere: they merely serve as a mark— linga for inferring 
the speaker’s intention — — q- 5 



XVI. 44] VEDANTA— NOT ANTICIPATED BY JAIMINT 169 

43. Anarambhavddin.-^Yio'f! is it to be determined that this 
alone is (Jaimini’s) view ? {i.e., on what grounds are we to suppose 
that the Purvakapda deals with Dharma only and not the entire 
Veda ?)®8 

Arambhavddin . — ^This is how it is determined. Now Dharma 
is understood in its general sense by what passes muster with the 
people but when conflicting views exist regarding its nature and 
its (validating) pramana, even agnihotra, etc., as the meaning of 
the Veda become fit for inquiry. Because inquiry into that also 
(i.e., whether Dharma means agnihotra, etc., or something else) 
has been occasioned, it is but right to understand that the Veda 
has a specific sense to convey. And the mere recital (of one’s 
branch of the Veda) does not conclude one’s duty. Hence after 
finishing the Vedic recital, one ought not to quit the preceptor’s 
abode; on the contrary the question whether Vedartha (i.e., the 
import of the Scriptures) is Dharma or anything else merits 
investigation. It is to point this out that the word Dharma has 
been rightly introduced into the aphorism ‘ athato Dharma- 
jijnasa ’ — ‘ then therefore is the inquiry into the nature of Dharma ” 
and not Vedartha-jijnasa ; for no one will undertake (agnihotra, 
etc.) if they are taken as the meaning of the Veda. (It is when 
agnihotra means Dharma that one undertakes it.) 

XVI. 44. Again the second Sutra (of Jaimini, viz., ‘ codana- 
laksano artho Dharmah ’) is intended to elucidate the nature 
and pramana of Dharma, and (as such) it amounts to this that 
Dharma has the Veda as its pramana. Why then is the phrase 
codanalaksana (used in the aphorism) It is therefore evident 


rtcl, the use of the word ‘Dharma’ how do you 

infer that Vedantic inquiry is excluded? Because the words ‘atha’ 
and ‘atah’ are used, the Sutra means the inquiry into Vedartha only 
and not Dharma. There is sequence between adhyayana and Vedartha- 
vicara and not between adhyayana and Dharmavicara. This is 
Purvapaksa ; 3Tcr:-^I«4R^ 

59 qcgJT: — ^The first SQtra of Jaimini makes it clear that the 
nature of Dharma has to be investigated, for Dharma in its general 
sense is conducive to man’s highest good but its special sense admits 
of controversy. Jaimini sets about investigating Dharma and not the 
meaning of the Veda as a whole, ; The second Sutra also is in relation 
to Dharma only, though Prabhakara and Kumarila interpret it differ- 
ently. The former thinks that the Sutra is concerned with the definition 



170 


PAtCAPADTKA OF PADMAPADA 


[XVI. 45 


that (Jaimini) is of the view that not the whole of the Veda finds 
its fulfilment in (or ends in expounding) Dharma of the nature 
of karya, but that some portion of it bears on the essence of the 
thing (existent reality) where the idea of k^ya is absent. 

45. Anarambhavadin . — [Page 49] Well, the use of the 
word codana is with a different purpose altogether, the meaning 
of the root ‘cuda ’ is prompting-prerana, so that the root cuda 
which denotes prompting assumes the form codana. Hence the 
injunction of the nature of prompting being unable (i.e., it being 
inappropriate) to prompt (one) to an action that does not result 
in one’s highest good, causes svarga, etc., though denoted by a 
different word, (viz., svarga, in svargakamah) to get into objective 
relation with the bhavana (or puriisapravrtti — action) and this 
it does having discarded the root meaning which is denoted by 
the same word (as contains the mandatory suffix— yajeta ’) and 
which is much nearer (spatially than svarga, etc.); it is to express 
this idea that the word codana is used.®^ 


— of Dharma, and only by implication — 3TSTtq'i%, with the 
pramapa (i.e., the valid means of knowledge by which Dharma is 
cognized); the latter thinks that the postulation of pramapa is primary, 
and definition is by implication. However it be, both schools admit 
that the second Sutra states not only the definition of Dharma but 
also the validating pramana which is the Veda. The question then 
will be, why was the Sutra been worded as 54^1: and not 

as '<4F:. 

The advocate of the view that a separate treatise dealing with 
an existent entity unassociated with karya need not be begun assigns 
a different reason for the use of the word codana in the second sutra 
and rejects the view that it is meant to exclude that portion of the 
Veda which is uncommented upon by Jaimini. In ‘ ’ the 

termination ‘ta’ denotes impulsion or prompting and prompting to 
action is consistent only when some good is held forth as the reward 
of action. This reward on the face of it would be ‘yaga’ indicated by 
the root ‘yaj’ in the same word ‘yajeta’, but no one will undertake 
yaga if it ends there. Hence svarga which is indicated in 3l%cr’ 

is to be understood as the reward for the attainment of which one is 
prompted to action. It is to make this point clear that the word 
codana is used. The Purvapak§in’s idea is that in all vidhivakyas, 
the prompting (codana) denoted either by the ‘optative’ suffix or 
‘tavya’ suffix results in action leading to svarga as the object of 
attainment. 


XVT. 46] VEDANTA— NOT ANTICIPATED BY JAIMINI 171 

46. Arambhavadin . — That is jejune. The vidhi relating to 
adhyayaha the mandate enjoining the getting by rote one’s 
branch of the Veda) setting about to induce the pupil (manavaka) 
to master the Vedic text finds itself incapable of inducing him 
without first showing that adhyayana is the means of attaining 
the highest good, for the vidhi fails to fulfi l its purpose (viz., that 
of prompting one to action) when the highest human end is not 
evident even if remotely. Hence it is not for that (i.e., for de- 
noting purusartha) that the word codana is used for that may be 
secured even by the use of the word Veda.®^ Moreover the use 
of the word Veda alone is appropriate since it leaves no room for 
doubt, but the use of the word ‘ codana’ surely generates doubt 
because we have also empirical mandates.®^ 

47. Anarambhavadin . — In the Vedadhikarana, we have the 
sutra' — “ some make the assertion that the Vedas are of recent 
origin,” (z.e., ascribe nearness of time to the Vedas; because of 
the presence of names therein). From this it is established, 
because of specific indication, that the Veda (alone) is intended 
(and not empirical mandates).®® 


®^ Even if the sutra had been worded as 

’TO: ' the purpose, viz., that a mandate before it prompts one to 
action must hold out the highest bliss as the reward — could have been 
served. For the vidhi in general, as in the example ‘ i 

demands for its fulfilment, svarga, etc., as its guerdon. The question, 
therefore, has to be answered, why has Jaimini specifically used the 
term codana ? 

62 Codana or mandate may be either 

scriptural or empirical {i.e., mandate emanating from men). Empirical 
statements also may point to Dharma which of course is against the 
doctrine and as such doubt arises as to which to take. Moreover 
Upanisadic statements which relate to an existing entity dissociated 
from action may have to be regarded as not falling within the scope 
of Vedic mandates. Hence the use of the word ‘codana’ is detri- 
mental to the opponent’s position. 

6® ‘aPT — ^The Purvapaksin’s rejoinder is that codana 

cannot possibly refer to empirical mandates since in VIII-27, Jaimini 
has used the word Veda specifically. The sutra runs thus: 

It is obvious from the use of the word Veda that 
scriptural injunctions alone andiUbt etnpirical, are to be taken. The 
Vedadhikarana is the last in &e Tarkapada of Purva-Mimamsa of 
Jaimini. The meaning of the sfitra i^ as follows: t 7% some, viz., the 


172 PANCAPADIKA of PADMAPADA [XVII. 48 

Jrambhavadin.— This is as the proverb goes ; “ Licking the 
hand having thrown away the morsel of food”. It would be 
attributing lack of ingenuity to the aphorist (Jaimini).®* Hence 
by the employment of the word codana (meaning a command) it 
is perceived that the existence of a section of the Veda which is 
not of a mandatory character was admitted (by Jaimini). And 
this (viz., the word codana) he has used in order that the Veda in 
its entirety might not mean duty (karma). Therefore in this way 
the aphorist himself has hinted that no inquiry has been made into 
that part of the Veda which deals with a topic different from that 
of his own treatise (^astra — sacred work). 

XVn. 48. Andrambhavadin. — Well, (we have the following 
texts)—" Its (i.e., of the Veda) sense is evidently the inculcation 
of duty” (i.e., karma or niyoga is the obvious sense of the Veda, 
S.B., p. 6). “ The utterance of the words which are implied in 
the meanings, is with the object of enjoining some action” — 
Jaimini Sutra, I. vii-25. 

“ The Veda is meant to inculcate duty (hence whatever por- 
tion means something other than that is devoid of purpose.” — 
Jai. Sut. I. ii-1). ^ 

The whole of the Veda is thus shown to prescribe duty. 

49. Arambhavadin. — ^Yes, it is true. But on the strength of 
what has been set out (as the object of inquiry, viz., Dharma or 
duty, the terms used subsequently like ‘ tasya ’, amnayasya, 
‘ tadbhutanam ’, etc., though general in character should be 
understood as referring only) to a portion of the Veda, i.e., to 
codana (or mandatory section) and not to the whole of it. (Fur- 
ther Sahara’s statement) — “ The knowledge of karma (Niyoga, 
etc.) is the obvious fruit (prayojana) of the Veda ” is not for point- 
ing out that the entire Veda inculcates karma. How? (it may 
be asked) ; on completing the Vedadhyayana (i.e., memorising the 


Naiyayikas, etc., (say that) the Vedas (are of man’s creation), 

the reason for this view is that there is mention of names 
like Kathaka and Kalapaka pointing to authors. 

— ^To assert that because Jaimini has used the 
word Veda in I. viii. 27, codana in I. 2 must mean Veda is to belittle 
Jaimini’s intelligence. If he meant that the whole of the Veda was 
action-related, the right place to use the word Veda would be 

I. 2 which is the Laksapa siitra and he would not postpone its 
employment to the VIII adhikarapa. 


xvn. 49] VEDANTA— NOT ANTICIPATED BY JATMTN 1 173 

text of one’s branch of the Veda) one comes across the authori- 
tative statement enjoining the ceremonial bath (which should 
therefore follow immediately) so that one entertains the impression 
that the Veda (apart from its committal to memory) carries no 
sense; then (to eradicate such an impression the Bhasyakara, 
viz., Sahara says)— “ We will transgress this mandate. If we 
do not transgress it we would be rendering the Veda meaningless 
when (actually) it is froughfwith meaning.®® The knowledge of 
karma is indeed its obvious fruit,®* so that it is clear that what is 
pointed out is that the Veda does really possess a meaning and 
not that there exists no other meaning (i.e., other than karma). 
That statement (i.e., drstohi, etc.) is made to dispel the notion 
that the Veda is unrelated to artha (sense) and not to disprove 
that anything apart from karma (viz., Brahman) is to be found in 
the Veda. 

The word karma denotes Dhatma only (like agnihotra) 
because it is something to be achieved by effort and because the 
person who undertakes to acquire the knowledge of Dharma seeks 
to know if the Veda is significative, i.e., whether there is any mean- 
ing yielded by the Veda or not and whether it is possible to under- 
stand that significance as being (identical with) Dharma.®’ Hence 
(to conclude) the Bhasyakara (Sahara) should not be deemed as 
holding the opinion that the knowledge of karma alone is the 
fruit of the Veda. 


®® Vide the present writer’s English translation of Sastradipika, 
G.O.S., Vol. LXXXIX, pp. 1-15 for a discussion of this topic; also 
S.B., pp. 5 and 6. 

®® — ^The Veda in general, with no portion 

excepted possesses meaning. It is to indicate this fact that the above 
statement is made by Sahara and not that any portion of the 
Veda is void of meaning, when it denotes something other than 
karma. 

®’ Since the word karma means 

object of knowledge in general — it denotes both Brahman 
and Dharma. There is therefore no need for a separate treatise 
dealing with the nature of Brahman. This is parvapak§a and the 
answer is given in the text beginning with etc. The siddhantin 

says that from the context etc., karma should naturally mean 

Dharma only but that meaning is discarded because of the need to 
remove the doubt whether the Veda is significant or not. Hence 
the word karma is taken in the sense of artha. 



174 PASCAPADIKA of PADMAPADA [XVII. 50 

50. [Page 50] Again (let us take the Sutra) — “ Since the 
object of the Veda is to enjoin karya, what does not enjoin karya 
is purposeless ”—Jai. I-ii. 1. There, if the word ‘ anarthakya ’ 
is taken to mean non-denotative {i.e., conveying no meaning), 
that interpretation is wrong, because the meaning is made clear ; 
we have the Bhasya text— “ Thus in this manner only they— 
arthavadas (the laudatory or condemnatory texts) restate existing 
things ” (S.B. P. 105). If on the other hand the word means 
‘serving no purpose’ (it is unwelcome) since the mandate en- 
joining the recital of one’s own branch of the Veda {yiz., 

‘ svadhyayodhyetavyah ’) does not so much as admit the getting 
up of even a single letter that is purposeless®® We will grant 
that arthavada statements like ‘ He cried, etc.’ (are purposeless) 
since in themselves they do not serve a desired human end 
(purusartha).®® And it is inappropriate to postulate a separate 
karya (vidhi) because it (the arthavada— so rodit, etc.) is in syntac- 
tical unity (with the negative vidhi— ‘ barhisi rajatam na deyam ’). 
It is not possible either, to supply (a mandate, since it is absurd 
to enjoin rodana — howling). 

51. The (Upanisadic) statements on the contrary (unlike 
the arthavada), are productive of that knowledge which enables 
one to realise the atman that is rid of every trace of affliction, 
and fraught as they are with such irreproachable beneficence their 
value is beyond compare. Hence {i.e., since the Vedanta passages 
possess an independent value) it was shown (in the ritualistic 
section) that arthavadas being in themselves incompetent to serve 
a human end become purposeful as aids to it (purusartha-yaga 
which is the means to Svarga) by extolling it {i.e., the injunction) 

«® The arambhavadin says that the word in Jai., I. ii. 1. 

cannot be taken to mean ‘void of sense’ for all the Mimamsakas are 
agreed that the Veda in its entirety is significant. Now that the 
anarambhavadin might urge that if it should mean ‘purposeless’ — 
it would be unacceptable to the arambhavadin also — so 
far, the resume of the View held by one who advocates the non- 
commencement of the Uttara-Mimamsa Sastra. 

The word could be interpreted in two ways : (i) having 

no meaning whatever. This is unacceptable both to the opponent 
and the Siddhantin; (ii) serving no purpose. The Siddhdntin admits 
purposelessness only with referei^e to such statements, i.e., arthavadas^ 
as are non-significant without their association with mandatory state- 
ments— vidhivakyas — cf. Jai. Sut., I. ii. 1. 


XVIII. 52] VEDANTA— NOT ANTICIPATED BY JAIMINI 175 

in one way or other (in a secondary sense), and (their utihty as 
auxiharies to some kriya was stated) not on the supposition that 
none of these (texts including both arthavadas and Vedantic texts) 
served any useful purpose unless related to some kriya. And 
therefore, only sentences of that description (like so rodit, etc.) 
were there (under Jai. Sut. I. ii. 1) adduced in illustration (and no 
Vedantic passage was instanced as auxiliary to karya like 
Jyotistoma). 

XVIII. 52. Some (Prabhakaras) however account differ- 
ently for commencing the Sastra {viz., codanalaksario artho 
Dharmah). It is indeed not thus {l.e., as stated by the Bhatta 
School) that the Sastra (Purva MTmamsa) sets about, viz., whether 
Dharma is what the Veda imports or what the Buddha declares 
to be such. How else then? One who has learnt to recite the 
Veda will gather (in a general way) some sense (from what he has 
mastered) and it is there only that views, one discrepant with 
the other, exist, (leading to the doubt) whether this one is its sense 
or that. And it is to resolve those doubts that the Sastra is 
commenced.’® '* 

53. Even there, i.e., even in the view of the Prabhakaras, 
it is not to be understood that inquiry into the Veda in its entirety 
has been rmdertaken. How is that (to be known) ? If it were so, 
{i.e., when the inquiry related to the meaning of the entire Veda) 
the sutra should have been framed thus : athato Vedartha- 
jijnasa, since the inquiry is not about Dharma but about Vedartha 
(and Vedartha is the object of inquiry). 

Prabhakara . — It is true; but then (it must be admitted that 
authors of sacred writings compose their works to inculcate 


The Bhafta School justifies the commencement of the Mimamsa 
Sastra on the ground that doubt arises as to whether agnistoma, etc., 
are Dharma or caityavandana; to resolve such a doubt and to prove 
that agnistoma, etc., are alone Dharma that the Mimamsa Sdstra has 
to be begun. The Prabhakaras on the other hand aver that doubts 
as to the special significance of the Vedic passages arise and to 
resolve these doubts the Sastra has to be begun and not for refuting 
the opinions held by the heretical schools regarding the nature of 
Dharma. The first Sutra in consequence would mean — It is incumbent 
on one to inquire into the meaning of the Veda and not — ^It is incumbent 
on one to inquire into the meaning of Dharma as the Bhaftas 
maintain. 


176 PAtCAPADIKA OF PADMAPADA [XVIII. 54 

that which is of value (Purasartha). Hence the inclusion of the 
word ‘ Dharma ’ for impressing purusartha.’^ 

Siddhmtin . — ^If that be so, let the inquiry be confined to 
Dharma only, because it is fraught with a human value and admits 
of doubt (as to its nature).’^ 

54. And further the next Sutra also is in consonance (with 
the first). It is to dispel contrary notions held regarding the 
nature of Dharma (that the second Sutra)— “That which is sup- 
ported by Vedic testimony and beneficent in its results, is Dharma ” 
is intended. Otherwise, z.e., if Vedartha itself is understood as 
giving rise to contrary notions, then to dispel them the Sutra 
should have been (framed as) ‘ codana laksano Vedarthah ’ 
(Vedartha and not Dharma is what the Veda defines), for if 
‘ Dharma ’ is taken (as the right word) then it will not be possible 
to dispel contrary notions regarding Vedartha. How? (Why not 
regard Dharma as used in the sense of Vedartha and the second 
sutra as intended for the purpose of refuting any wrong inter- 
pretation of Vedartha ?) In so far as the thing that is revealed by 
the mandatory statement is Dharma (this is what the Sutra means); 
if thus its (i.e., of the thing denoted— artha) nature as Dharma 
(Dharmatva) is brought to mind, then it cannot be concluded 
that that alone (vz^., Dharma like Jyotistoma, etc.) is Vedartha 
{i.e., what the entire Veda enjoins) and none other.^® If however 


The justification, says Prabhakara, for the use of the word 
‘Dharma’ instead of ‘Vedartha’ is that Vedartha as a whole is puru- 
sartha; Dharma means purusartha or ‘iftasadhana’. 

The word ‘Dharma’ cannot mean Vedartha in general on the 
basis of rQdhi, i.e., common usage, since it may also mean caityavadana. 
Ordinarily by Dharma we understand ^reyassadhana, i.e., means to the 
attainment of bliss. Since Vedartha also is the means of attaining 
bliss the word ‘Dharma’ may import Vedartha. But this is not right. 
Dharma however relates only to agnihotra, etc., and they alone are 
the means to bliss. Brahman is not sadhana to bliss but bliss itself. 
Hence it is evident that Jaimini has not proposed the inquiry into the 
whole of Vedartha, but has left Brahmajijnasa unexpounded, which 
therefore demands a fresh treatise. 

■ It has been pointed out tliat the word ‘Dharma’ does not mean 
Vedartha by common usage— rfldhir It cannot also be supposed that 
figuratively it can be so taken. If the word ‘Dharma’ should mean 
Vedartha by (i) Jahallak§aija— where the primary sense of the word 
is altogether discarded, then VedSrtha instead of being Dharma would 



XVIII. 55] VEDANTAr-NOT ANIICIPATED BY JAIMIMI 177 

(the second stitra is interpreted) as laying down that Dharma is 
the name for what the codana denotes pointing thus to the rela- 
tion of the name and the named, such a course would clash with 
the beginning of the sastra (Dharmavicara), would lead nowhere, 
and would be quite arbitrary. 

55. pPage 51] But still if it be maintained that the word 
‘ Dharma ’ somehow means Vedartha only, then it would amount 
to saying that Vedartha is what the codana defines and not what 
arthavada denotes; and this would lead to the conclusion that 
like the second adhyaya and the sequel of Jaimini sutras this 
inquiry {i.e., of the first adhyaya) is in relation to the meaning 
(artha) of the Veda whose validity has been previously established.’* 

‘ Tatra,’ i.e., if the validity has been established in the first sutra 
itself ; ‘ anantaram i.e., again, the attempt to prove the validity 
(as Jaimini does in sutra V — ‘ anupalabdhe arthe tat pramanam 
Badarayanasya, etc.) would be out of place; as also useless would 
be (the statement of Sabarasvamin) — ‘ Vrttam pramanalaksaiiam ’ 
— (Bfhati — Anandasrama Edn., p. 370). (In the first adhyaya 
Jaimini has established only that the Veda is a valid means of 
knowledge and if what the Veda imports — arthavatva — has also 
been established by him, Sahara should have said. “Vrttam 
pramapalaksanam, Vrttanca Vedasya arthavatvaniscayah ”). 
(Again if the Vedartha has been determined in the second sutra 
as the one denoted by codana) doubt as to whether mantras and 
arthavadas signify karya (or not) would not arise; (but then) 
that doubt is dispelled only in the sequel {i.e., in the arthavadadhi- 
karapa — ^Jai. I. ii. 1, ‘ amnayasya etc.). 

Hence on the ground already stated it must be concluded 
that that part of the Veda only which is associated with karya 


be Adharma; (ii) Ajahallaksaija— where the primary sense does not 
wholly disappear, then as the Paiicapadika says etc.) 

we would not be justified in concluding that what is not enjoined by 
codana or mandate, is not Vedartha. 

’’t wr, fr, 

Pll^. — ^The doubt arises only after the pramapya of the 
Veda is understood. Hence the inquiry into the pramanya of the 
Veda beginning with the third s&tra and ending with the first adhyaya 
would be supererogatory. 

7 12 ..... ^ - 


178 PAtCAPiA.DIKA OF PADMAPADA [XVlII. 55 

was undertaken for inquiry, and inquired into, but not that part 
of the Veda whose object it is to inquire into the existing entity. 
That being so, this (first sutra of Uttara Mimamsa, viz., athato 
Brahmajijnasa — ‘then therefore the inquiry into Brahman ’, is 
(it is evident) begun with the object of investigating that part of 
the Veda which deals with the nature of Reality. 

Here ends the Second Vanraka of the Pancapadika 


VARljfAKA III 

THE QUALIFICATIONS OF THE AGENT 

I. 1. Inquiry into the meanings of words constituting the 
Jijnasa Sutra— Athato Brahmajijnasa. 

[Page 52] “ There {i.e., in the first sutra) the word ‘atha’— 
then, is to be understood in the sense of immediate succession^ 
and not in the sense of adhikara (which means commencing a 
fresh topic for exposition), the reason being that the desire to 
understand Brahman is not (a fit subject for commencement)”— 
and so on is the Bhasya. The objection is raised that such com- 
ment (Samkara Bhasya) will be appropriate if the word ‘ jijnasa ’ 
is construed according to its component parts (avayavartha). 
For there is no prominence assigned in the Sutra either to Brahman 
or to Brahmajiiana whose exposition may fitly be commenced 


^ Samkara comments on the word ‘atha’ found in the first sutra — 

in the following words: 

^ 5 ll?fr?tt — Now the first Varnaka dealt with the topic 

under inquiry, viz., identity of the individual with Brahman and also 
the benefit resulting from the knowledge of the identity, viz., the 
removal of the ills of life; the second, with the topic whether the 
contents of the Uttara Mimamsa are, or are not subsumed under the 
Purva Mimamsa. The present section discusses the question whether 
there is any indication in the first Sutra as to the person competent 
to pursue the inquiry — adhikarin. The word ‘atha’ means ‘immediate 
conclusion’ — anantarya, implying that Brahman-inquiry is preceded by 
something. The question is what is that something? It is the 
preliminary discipline — moral and spiritual. The antecedent require- 
ments for Brahmajijnasa are known as Sadhana-catus|:aya or the four 
essential means, viz., discrimination between what is eternal and what 
is ephemeral— aversion from the enjoyment of 
objects here and hereafter — acquisition of 
mental peace, self-restraint, etc. — and longing for 
liberation — Th® word ‘atha’ cannot mean ‘commencement’ 
as some suppose since ‘desire— jijnasS—jnatumiccha — desire to know’ 
is not a thing to be commenced. The point to be noticed is that 
we must be able to ascertain from the SQtra who the person is that 
is fit for the study of the SSstra and this is evident from the word 
‘atha’. 



ISO PAnCAPADIK'A OF PADMAPAPA [T. 2 

and of desire which is prominent, such commencement is not 
possible.^ 

2. But this word ‘ jijnasa ’ is used by many learned men as 
a term denoting inquiry — ^vicara— otherwise known as mimamsa 
(investigation or examination); e.g., “This therefore they inquire 
into (jijnasamte), viz., whether the meditation pertaining to Vedic 
chanting which is subsidiary to the ritual has to be done by the 
sacrificer or by the officiating priest.” — (V.S., III. iv-44). “ But 
this has to be inquired into (jijnasyam), vzz., whether these two 
(tapya— what is fit to be burnt, viz., body and tapaka — that which 
bums, V2Z., samsara) are but features of the single atman or belong 
to a distinct species {i.e., something distinct from atman — vide 
V.S., II. ii-10). . 

3. The commentator of Dharma Mimamsa also (Sahara) 
has taken the word (jijnasa) in the aggregate (and not in its com- 
ponent elements)— “ Let one desire to investigate (jijnasitum) 
Dharma ” ; for the aggregate denotes inquiry, otherwise he would 
have said, “ Let one desire to understand (jnatum) Dharma.” 
Hence it is that the caturthi samasa (the compound of the fourth 
case-ending) has been selected (by Sahara having) admitted that 
the meaning is of the aggregate and so dissolving the compound 
(Dharmajijnasa) as Dharmaya-jijnasa (the inquiry is for Dharma). 
And the extracts that follow are in conformity thereof:— “So 
the Vedic statements are inquired into (vicaryante) by these (Sutras 
of Jaimini) ” ; “ The Vedic statements are to be inquired into 
(vicarayitavyani) ”, and “ how are the Vedic statements to be 
inquired into (vicarayet)? ” And again, “ the inquiry regarding 
kratvartha and purusartha”, “ kratvartha and puru§artha are 
both inquired into jijnasyete”. 

.4. Here also the Bhasyakara (Samkara) says : — “ therefore 
has Brahman to be inquired into ” ; and again “ the inquiry 


“ In Brahmajijnasa — ^Brahmajnmeccha — ^it is iccha or desire that 
is the leading element and not Brahman or Brahmajnana; for ‘iccha 
kartavya ’ is meaningless. Hence ‘ atha ’ cannot mean ‘ Commencement ’. 
It is to be noted that the inappropriateness of taking ‘atha’ in the sense 
of commencement of a new topic will be apparent only when jijfiasa 
is interpreted derivatively— jnatum iccha and not as a whole which 
then would mean merely vicara or inquiry. The objection raised is, 
“Why should not the word jijnSsa be construed collectively — 
instead of construing it by dismembering it into its component parts?” 


181 


I. 5] THE qualifications OF THE AGENT 

(mimamsa, i.e., jijnasa) into the meanings of the Vedantic state- 
ments, which is based upon ratiocination— logical aids not con- 
flicting with them, and which leads to the ultimate good of the 
nature of Liberation, is begun.” Hence since the undivided 
aggregate (v/z., jijnas§. taken as a whole) has (investigation) as its 
sense, adhikarartha fits in (with the word atha); indeed the word 
jijnasa means Sastra signifying vicara or inquiry. As such, it 
should be understood that the commencement of inquiry into 
Brahman (is what the first Sutra means). 

5. This is said in answer : — ^This word jijnasa is not used 
purely as a synonym of mimamsa having altogether abandoned 
the meaning of the component parts, nor is such usage (jijnasa 
in the sense of vicara) supported by grammar (smarana). Further 
when a sense is yielded by the component parts it is not right to 
ascribe a different meaning to the aggregate.® 

6. Well, it is not merely our fabrication; the usage of the 
learned has been adduced (in evidence). 

No, that (usage) can be explained otherwise. You may 
query— How is it explained otherwise? ’ It is on second thoughts 
(antarnita— implied sense) that the word jijnasa means vicara 
or inquiry; to explain— the meaning of the word jijnasa is the 
desire in relation to that knowledge which presupposes careful 
inquiry and not to that which results from mere instruction 
(upadesa).* It is thus (only) that we find the word jijnasa used 
and the idea (sabdabodha) also conveyed by it. Hence, i.e., since 
a cogent sense can be had from the constituent parts of the word 


® — ^When the word jijnasa means by accepted 

usage, jnaneccha — desire for knowledge, it is not right to take it in the 
sense of vicara. Neither etymologically nor on the basis of convention 
is it possible to regard jijnasa as meaning vicara or inquiry. 
In the citations made in support of jijnasa meaning vicira the secondary 
sense alone is feasible. Based on the yoga^akti, i.e., the significative 
force of the components, vicarartha is understood by laksana {i.e., 
secondary sense). What is intended to be refuted is that vicarartha 
is yielded by ^akti, i.e., the significative force of the word. 

4 The word jijnasa relates to the desire 

for that knowledge which is the outcome of inquiry — ^vicara and not 
to that which one gets on trust from others. Hence ‘inquiry’ is the 
probans and jfLana the probandum. Therefore owing to this relation 
of sadhya-sadhanabhava that the word jijnasa means vicara by laksapa. 



182 


PASCAPADI-JC:,A OF PADMAP^ADA p. 7 

jijnasa what the Bhasyakara (^arnkara) has said, vzz., that Brahma- 
jijnasa is not what can be commenced is perfectly justifiable. 

7. Objection. — p*age 53] Well, even then {i.e., even if the 
word jijnasa is taken in its derivative sense) how is it appropriate 
to maintain that jijnasa does not mean the undertaking of a fresh 
topic ?’ Vicara may no doubt be admitted as secondary form 
from the word — standpoint; if on the other hand we emphasise 
the sense-aspect of jijnasa which brings vicara into prominence 
and (remember) that Brahman and Brahma-knowledge are fit 
topics for being commenced and accept the possibility of com- 
mencing them, why not take adhikara as the meaning of ‘ atha ’?® 

® etc. — ^The opponent thus argues: the word jijnasa 

means desire for jhana; jnana is that which we long for, and such 
jflana cannot result without inquiry. Hence vicara being the means 
is implicit in the word jijnasa. It comes to this therefore that the 
word ‘atha’ is appropriately used to mean ‘commencement’ since 
it may relate either to Brahman or Brahmajnana or inquiry, all of 
which are dealt with in the Sastra. How then is the statement 
‘anadhikaryatvat’ reasonable? 

® The phrase Brahmajijnasa points to Brahman, cognition of 
Brahman, and the desire to know Brahman. Emphasis (ai’7I-3r) is 
of two kinds: word-emphasis and meaning-emphasis 

(ar4Ur-tI'5T). Now Brahman and its cognition come under artha- 
pradhanya and ‘desire to know’, under labdapradhanya. On the 
basis of Sabdapradhanya, desire (f^ST) is therefore the principal 
element and Brahman and Brahman-cognition are attributive (vi§esanas) 
and therefore subordinate. The pQrvapaksin admits that on the basis 
of sabdapradhanya the Sutra denotes ‘desire’ and as such becomes 
purposeless since ‘desire’ cannot be ‘commenced’; but then he urges 
that on the basis of arthapradhanya Brahman and its cognition would 
be primary and so fit for ‘commencement’ (arrat^Ul'Zic^). Hence 
he maintains that the word ‘atha’ means ‘commencement’ and not 
‘consecution’— 

This sentence has to be split up into two: (i) 

IT Why not the word ‘atha’ be taken to mean 

‘commencement’ by focussing attention on the meaning — emphasis 
and construing the Sutra as denoting inquiry — ^vicara which sense 
is to be had by laksaijia (3T:=d«ff?T) 1 (ii) 

sirsrr^jr ‘arq-’ 

9ffq5BR[^ R Wd? Why not the word ‘atha’ be taken to 


1 . 8 ] 


THE QUALIFICATIONS OF THE AGENT 


183 


and for what reason is it maintained — attaching importance to 
the formal aspect of jijnasa, and on the basis that desire cannot 
be willed, that ‘ atha ’ means consecution only ? 

This will be said (to meet your objection)— Since 
it would result in the non-undertaking (the study) of the (Brahma- 
mimamsa) Sastra, the adhikarartha (i.e., construing ‘ atha’ as 
commencement) is inappropriate.’ Indeed the Sastra serving 
no purpose if adhikarartha is accepted would be as valueless as 
the inquiry into the number of a crow’s teeth and as such would 
not be undertaken. Hence {i.e., when the Sastra becomes pur- 
poseless) who can be spoken of as qualified for the study ? 

%. Objection .-— the knowledge of Brahman is the 
prayojana (fruit) and it is for securing it that the (study of the) 
Sastra is to be commenced.^ 

Answer. — No, there is no possibility of the desire to acquire 
the knowledge of Brahman arising.® The Scripture declares that 
with the acquisition of Brahmajnana one is isolated even from 

mean ‘commencement’ seeing that Brahman and its cognition though 
attributive on the basis of ^abdapradhanya are primary on the basis 
of arthalaksana ? 

’ If we undersatnd by the word ‘atha’, commencement — 
and not, consecution — there will be none competent — 
to undertake the study of the Uttaramlmamsa, with the 
result that the Sastra will fall into neglect. ‘Atha’ therefore means 
‘after the acquisition of the preliminary discipline’ which consists in 
the acquisition of Sadhanacatustaya. When a fit recipient of the teach- 
ing is not available the question naturally arises — ‘for the fulfilment of 
whose wish is the study to be commenced?’ 

® The Siddhantin pointed out that if ‘atha’ is construed as 
anantarya, it would mean ‘after the mumuksu’ is secured. Hence 
‘moksa’ becomes the prayojana. But if it means ‘commencement’, 
no prayojana would result. The purvapaksin answers that prayojana 
could be had on the analogy of ‘Ratri Satra Nyaya’ where the adhi- 
karin though not directly stated can be ascertained from arthavada. 
In the present context the arthavada vakyas are — ‘ cRT% 

‘ tRiL’, etc., where it is seen that crossing the sorrow 

and attainment of the ultimate, constitute the prayojana and the 
adhikarin is one who longs for freedom from sorrow or one who 
longs to attain Brahman. 

® The Siddhantin queries if all are competent for Vedic study 
since the desire for Brahmajftlna is common to all, even without 
the mandate, or is competency conferred on all by the mandate ? 



184 PAnCAPAD IK^S. OF PADMAPADA [111 . 1 1 

the mind, with the result that there will be no contact with any 
of the sense-objects. And that (cessation of contact) puts an 
end to every grade of happiness, declared in the Sruti. (Tait. Up. 
Ananda Valli) beginning with that of the world-sovereign and 
culminating in that of Brahmaloka, each succeeding happiness 
excelling the previous one (nay, putting an end also to) the means 
by which such happiness is attained. Hence the world turns 
away from Brahmajnana in aversion. Why will one covet it ? 

9. Objection. — Well, the state of bliss also is attained by 
Brahmajnana and as such one strives after it. 

Answer. — That is not so. Brahmananda (i.e., the joy that 
one experiences by Brahmajnana) never having been experienced 
before, is powerless to mitigate the longing for that happiness 
which has been experienced; had Brahmananda been potent, 
it could have prompted one to acquire Brahmajnana abandoning 
the other. 

10. Objection. — ^Well, we know that Brahmajnana yields 
also what is of the nature of supreme- satisfaction; hence what 
does the man, who is satisfied, desire, for all desire springs (by 
reason of) dissatisfaction ? To this effect is the (corroboration of) 
Sruti — ‘ whose desire is satisfied, whose desire is atman ’ (Brh. 
Up., IV. 4-6) ; also of Sm|ti — ‘ nothing higher than the attain- 
ment of atman is known’; ‘ O, Bharata, knowing this {i.e., 
atman) he becomes wise, well-contented too ’ — (Bh, G., XV. 20). 

■y4«.vwer.— ISIo ; from satisfaction itself arises repulsion be- 
cause it destroys (all appetite for) objects of enjoyment (through 
satiation). Even so do people say — ‘ alas ! how sad that the 
creation was not thus; (i.e., did not provide for) ‘capacity for 
constant enjoyment, non-satiation, and indestructibility of the 
objects of enjoyment’. And they adduce in illustration a verse 
sung by the sensualist, viz., “ O, Gautama, one would rather long 
for the life of a jackal in a desolate forest but never would one 
desire liberation which is the negation of all objects of enjoyment.” 

HI. 11. Objection. — Let not desire for Brahma-knowledge 
arise (independently of vidhi). Because of its (Brahman) being 
(a part of) the very import of the Veda, it is incumbent on one to 
acquire Brahma-knowledge.^® (If it should be urged that vidhi 


^® It was pointed out that there would be no competent agent 
in case the word ‘atha’ is not interpreted as meaning anantarya. The 
pQrvapaksin tries to show that the adhikarin can be had from the 



185 


m. 1 1] THE QUALIFICATIONS OF THE AGENT 

is incompetent to initiate vicara, the answer is no), because the 
chanting of one’s section of the Veda has the understanding of its 
import as its phala (end to be achieved). 

Answer— 'Yes, it would be so if the Vedic chanting had the 
understanding of its meaning as its result (phala). The adhyayana- 
kriya, obviously has as its phala (only) the acquisition of that 
which is studied and ends in one’s learning the words of the Veda.^’- 
Objection . — [Page 54] Well, it is profitless, the (mere) 
acquisition of words; as such the mandate does not find its fulfil- 
ment there. 

Answer.— Then let the analogy of ‘ the saktu ’ hold good 
(f e as in the sentence — saktun juhoti,’ the root meaning ‘ homa ’ 
is the principal and the adjacent word— ‘ saktu ’ is subsidiary.^^ 
Objection . — Even that wilTnot suit ; because it is seen that 
from the words, a knowledge of the meaning which serves a useful 
end is obtained.^® 

Scriptural mandate; the mandatory statement— confers 
adhikaritva on the first three castes. This means that the meaning of 
the texts chanted, should be known by all the three castes and they 
should consequently investigate into the meaning, i.e., be engaged in 
inquiry. Hence they become adhikarins for inquiry. 

The Siddhantin argues that mastery over words only is the 
phala of adhyayana and not the knowledge of the meaning since the 
vidhi — svadhyayodhyetavyah is meant only for the acquisition by rote 
of one’s branch of the Veda and not for the acquisition of its meaning. 
There is no word suggesting the latter. The ‘tavya’ termination points 
to svadhyaya in the objection relation. Hence we ought not to go 
beyond it for phala; that itself is the phala. 

On the analogy of the Saktu-homa the sentence 
has to be construed thus— ^ wqqtL, 
so that adhyayana would be undertaken for Svarga only since it is 
coveted by all and not for arthajfiana; cf. w?r ^ a form 

got by changing the accusative into the instrumentaL 

The analogy of saktu-yaga is inappropriate* There does result 
a phala from adhyayana; for when one studies the Veda with its 
auxiliaries — grammar, phonetics, etc., one is sure to acquire the 
meaning of the Veda. And because the determination of the meaning 
is the meed — of Vedic study, inquiry or vxara becomes 
essential and in its wake the adhikarin. Thus according to the 
opponent, the adhikarin, • the person fit to study the Sastra is 
secured without the necessity of taking "atha^ in the sense of anantarya 
— ^immediate succession. 



186 PAnCAI^ADIKA of PADMAPADA [III. 12 

, the mere words (i.e., acquiring command over 

the bare text) are not without serving some end. Hence adhyayana 
which ends in that (v/z., aksaragrahana) is not without meed. 
As such the purpose of the niyoga or vidhi (mandate) is fulfilled 
from the mere acquisition of the letters (composing the Veda) 
and the outcome of the memorised text which is the phala of 
adhyayana is the knowledge of the meaning (artha).“ 

12. Again, maintaining the view that the purpose of the man- 
date is not fulfilled with the acquisition of the bare text, you cannot 
possibly suppose that everywhere (/.e., in all contexts the vidhi) 
finds its fufllment in inculcating the knowledge of the meaning 
which has some purpose to serve. In such contexts (tatra, i.e., 
in regard to statements where the knowledge of the meaning is 
to no purpose) it becomes incumbent to suppose that the vidhi 
has its object fulfilled in merely enjoining the acquisition of the 
mastery over the words — for instance, in the case of a member of 
the warrior caste (rajanya) Vedic statements relating to sastra 
(Brahmans only are competent for this ritual), Vaisyastoma 
(Vaisyas only are competent for this ritual), and Brhaspatisava. 
Brahmans only are competent for this ritual ; and in the case 
of a Vai^ya, the texts relating to Asvamedha, Rajasuya (intended 
only for the warrior caste) and Satra. And it cannot be said 
that these sections {i.e., those relating to rituals from which they 
are excluded) have to be left unchanted (by these respective castes); 
for from the word svadhyaya (in ‘ svadhyayodhyetavyah) it is 
evident that the study of the whole content of the Veda is enjoined 
(on all the three castes). 

13. Purvapak^in . — ^The Adhyayana mandate has not stated 
the adhikarin {i.e., the person competent to study the Veda; 
hence an adhikarin has to be understood, and the knowledge of 
the meaning, it is evident, supervenes the acquisition of the mastery 
over the words. (This is urged to meet the argument that one 


W tr^ — The Siddhan- 

tin’s point is that if svadhyaya is not regarded as the bhavya (phala) 
of adhyayana, it would mean the abandonment of bhavyatva of 
svadhyaya {cf. where bhavyatva is specifically 

mentioned) and the acceptance of the unmentioned viz., 

arthavabodha. For the Siddhantin the knowledge of the meaning is 
through svadhyaya or the memorised text while for the Purvapak§in 
it is through adhyayanavidhi or the injunction enjoining Vedic study. 



IV. 14] THE QUALIFICATIONS OF THE AGENT 187 

desirous of Svarga may be considered as the adbikarin on the 
analogy of Visvajidyaga. The knowledge of the meaning is 
drstaphala and as such the man who desires the knowledge of 
the meaning is the adhikarin). And that (i.e., arthavabodha) 
having obviated the need for supplying the adhikarin (on the ' 
analogy of Visvajidyaga,) itself becomes the hetu of the adhikarin 
(vzz., the man desirous of acquiring the meaning— arthavabodha- 
kama). In all cases where the adhikara is of the drsta type, that 
adhikara which is obvious, itself constitutes the circumstance 
relating the vidhi with the person carrying it out. Hence the 
scope of the vidhi contained in ‘ svadhyayodhyetavyah ’ extends 
up to the attainment of the knowledge of the meaning (of the 
memorised texts).^® It is evident therefore that the inquiry into 
the meaning of the entire Veda (here of course the Upanisads) is 
only for the fulfilment of the niyoga (or vidhi). 

IV. 14. Siddhantin. This will be said in answer: Granted 
that the apprehension of meaning is the outcome of the adhyayana 
mandate, it (arthavabodha) fails to be the means of inducing one 
to undertake the inquiry for the reason that before adhyayana 
{i.e., Vedic study) the meaning is not understood. It is (before 
the vidhi is heard) that the . knowledge as to who the adhikarin 
is becomes purposeful {i.e., we should know beforehand who is 
competent and then the vidhi will be fruitful). Hence (since the 
adhyayanavidhi is out of the question) no apprehension of the 
meaning will result as drstaphala (direct experience) from the 
vidhi (because such a result is not patent). 

V. 15. Purvapaksin . — If that be so {i.e., if as the result of 
acquiring mastery of the Vedic text the meaning is not under- 
stood) since the phala is not mentioned in the mandatory sentence 
and since you do not admit that arthavabodha (understanding of 


— ^This is the Purvapaksin’s answer to the objec- 
tion that even if we admit that the adhyayanavidhi itself points to 
the adhikarin, viz., one desirous Of acquiring the sense of the memor- 
ised text, the question as to who it is that is competent for under- 
taking the inquiry into the Vedic sense would be left unsolved. The 
Purvapaksin argues that since arthajnana is not possible by mere 
adhyayana, inquiry is posited by arthipatti — ‘presumption’. Hence 
effort to undertake the inquiry becomes possible without the necessity 
of taking the word ‘atha’ as the Siddhantin does, in the sense of 
‘immediate succession’. 



188 , ; PAtCAPADIKA OF PADMAPADA ■ [¥.16 

the sense) is in. the. attributive relation. to the adhikarin (in; other 
words, that the , desire to know the sense is the hetu of adhikara) 
the result would be that no effort will be made for Vedic study. 

16; The Prdbhakara View , — Here some (meaning the 
Prabhakaras) say:^^ The pursuit of the Vedic study (adhyayana) 
is impelled by the mandate relating to preceptorship on the ana- 
logy of adhana which (ritual) is undertaken when impelled by 
a Sruti connected with an interested act.^^ 

17. Siddhdntifi—Oi\itx^^^ (the Siddhantins) say that it is 
untenable. How? if it be thought that the mandate-—^ initiate 
a Brahmana in his eighth year ’ is the one relating to the preceptor, 
then the neophyte (mariavaka or the boy just initiated) will not 
be under obligation to carry out the mandate. And in one whom 
the mandate does not bind, there results no effort to study one’s 

16 The Prabhakaras maintain that impulsion to Vedic 

study comes not from the mandate relating to Vedic study— 

viz., but from that relating to the 

preceptor — m T%^4 i 

xT II It comes to this that Vedic study is undertaken 

on the strength of the adhyapanavidhi and not adhyayanavidhi. Since 
the motive for action arises from adhyapanavidhi, the other loses its 
motivating force. 

17 — Since the sacred fires are essential for the performance 
of rites the injunction relating to those rites will apply only to him that 
has maintained these fires. In the case of injunctions relating to 
interested acts— the man desirous of the fruit — creates 

— the sacred fire if he has not already maintained it, by 
consecrating it; but he may not so create it when the injunction relates 
to obligatory duties— for there is no phala— fruit (according 
to Prabhakara). Now adhyapana is an interested act, for the precep- 
torship is a coveted honour and hence the preceptor seeks a boy^ — 
and instructs him in the Veda. Thus the pravrtti or effort to 
study is secured through adhyapanavidhi. 

18 — The Prabhakara view is criticised by others, mean- 
ing the Siddhantins as well as the Bhattas. In the statement— g 

etc., there is no vidhi relating to instruction since the vakya 
is only anuvada as indicated by the word Upanayana and 
Adhyapana are both referred to (anuvada) and only the name acarya 
is declared to be given to one who undertakes the initiation and 
instruction of the pupil. Hence since the Vedic study (adhyayana) is 
not prompted by adhyapanavidhi it is evident that the mandate 
relating to adhyayana alone impels the study. 



V. 17] THE QUALIFICATIONS OF THE AGENT 189 

branch of the Veda. Yet another (flaw has to be pointed out).’-® 
The mandate governing preceptorship, is optional (anitya). 
Teaching (the Veda), officiating at a sacrifice (yajana) and accept- 
ance of gifts (pratigraha) are (privileges to which a Brahmana is 
entitled) in addition (to those common to all the three castes, viz., 
learning the Veda, performing a sacrifice and offering gifts) and 
these special privileges ' are utilised only for the sake of a living. 
Hence the exe’^cise (of these privileges) is at one’s option The 
purificatory ceremony named Upanayana (z.e., of investing the 
boy with the sacred thread and making him fit to approach a guru 
for Vedic study) on the other hand is obligatory. If not per- 
formed {i.e., if the boy is not initiated)’ there is this imprecation : — 
‘Those of the three (castes) who after the prescribed time remain 
without going through the purificatory ritual, who are deprived 
of holy association with the Savitri, (and who are therefore) out- 
castes become fit objects of reproach by the faithful (aryas— the 
respectable). With such unregenerate men no Brahmapa, even 
when in distress, should at any time or place enter into authorised 
(by sastra) ritualistic or marital relationship. The purification 
{viz., Upanayana) is for (fitting the pupil) for his Vedic study so 
that the Vedic study also is obligatory (as Upanayana is). To this 
effect is the condemnatory passage — ‘ Those who have forsaken 
the obligatory duties, abandoned Vedic study and have not main- 
tained the ritualistic fire are (as good as) pursuing the dharma 
of a sudra ’ (for none of these is enjoined on the fourth caste). 
When it is so you (referring to Prabhakara) have to explain how 

atgqf If the mandate ‘initiate a Brahmana in his 

eighth year, etc.’ is intended for one desirous of attaining preceptorship 
then there will be little inducement for the pupil to undertake the 
Vedic study. When there is no direct vidhi, adhyayanavidhi will not 
be binding on the mapavaka. The conferment of preceptorship will 
hardly stimulate it. If the Prabhakara should admit the mandatory 
character of adhyayana but refuse to concede ‘prerakatva’ {i.e., the 
compelling force) then the question will be whether the vidhi deside- 
rates both visaya and adhikarin in order that its nature (svarupa) may 
be ascertained. If vi§aya only, then the blemish will be that even those 
who are forbidden to study the Veda will become competent 
(adhikarins) for such study. If both are admitted to be necessary the 
mandate relative to Vedic study wil certainly have an adhikarin; and 
hence the adhyayanavidhi itself will impel the neophyte and not the 
adhyspanavidhi. : 


190 


PAjtCAPADiKA OF PADMAPADA 


[VI. 18 


what is nitya (obligatory duty like Upanayana) is brought about 
by what is anitya (optional duty like the one enjoined on a pre- 
ceptor). 

VI. 18. Purvapaksin. : Prdbhdkara . — [Page 55] How can 
it be shown that the mandate relating to the preceptorship (i.e., 
one relating to instruction) is optional, seeing that it (mandate) 
is intended to enable one to earn one’s living ? It is evident that 
no one will get on in life without money; and so it is said ‘ It 
does not stand to reason to suppose that one can live without 
money ’. Hence being the means, as it always is, to all, of securing 
the most desired fruit (viz., money) how could it (the acarya- 
karanakavidhi) become an optional mandate? 

19. Siddhdntin . — (The vidhi relating to the preceptorship) 
may be admitted to be nitya in so far as the fruit (phala, viz., 
money) is considered but not on the authority of sabda (Vedic 
mandate, for there is none such). To explain ; — Since the fruit 
is the one always desired, the obligatoriness (of adhyapana or 
undertaking the instruction) is dependent upon the vastu (object, 
because the vastu, viz., the living is always sought after, it con- 
fers nityatva on the mandate). There, §abda being inoperative 
(i.e., in regard to the obligatory performance of adhyapana) the 
knowledge of obligatory performance arises from the desire (for 
wealth) and not the desire (for performance) from a sense of duty. 
If from a specific mandate (sabda) we come to know that instruc- 
tion (adhyapana) is obligatory (nitya) then indeed the desire (for 
imdertaking the instruction of the pupil) also being dependent on 
it (adhyapanavidhi) would become nitya, since sabda is uniform 
in its operation and binding always on all (i.e., the first three 
castes).®*® No doubt the desire to perform karma is greatly 
mitigated when appropriate means such as some one (fit to under- 
take the karma), some aid (needed for karma), some place, some 

®® The PQrvapaksin might urge that it was immaterial whether 
nityatva — obligatoriness to initiate and instruct the pupil results from 
vastu or §abda. The difference is pointed out — ^in the one-case it is 
dependent on the vastu, — the object of desire, in the other on Vedic 
authority. The order of precedence is reversed. The scope of Vedic 
authority cannot be restricted; not so of desire. If obligatoriness should 
follow desire it is possible that adhySpana may become anitya — 
optional, since all those competent to undertake the teaching many 
not be willing to do so. But iabda is peremptory and as such the 
desire (iccha) derived from a sense of obligation cannot but be nitya. 



Vn. 211 THE QUALIFICATIONS OF THE agent 191 

time (/.e., a fit place and fit time) are not available.^’^ Hence the 
imdertaking of karma (r.e., adhyapana) prompted by a vidhi that 
is nitya, becomes nitya similarly, so that the irreconcilability of 
the obligatory and the non-obligatory getting into relation is 
obviated. But if, the need for undertaking it (adhyapana) is 
understood as depending on the phala that it yields then the need 
to perform the karma, viz., adhyapana ceases to be obligatory.^® 

20. It is true that the phala is always coveted, but since it is 
possible of achievement by other means also (apart from 
adhyapana instruction does not become obligatory). Even when 
it (adhyapana) is the only means (as in the case of one who is 
unqualified otherwise), either from indolence or from inability 
to bear the strain, one’s desire (for gain) is impeded and as such 
one fails to regard it (adhyapana) as obligatory, so that when it 
becomes non-obligatory (anitya) it (adhyapanavidhi) ceases to be 
the incentive to what is obligatory (v/z., adhyayana). 

YU. 2\. Purvapak^in. — Well, the mandate enjoining on 
the father the obligation to beget a son (does not stop there) but 
its scope extends to requiring the father to give proper instruction 
to the son, as witness : ‘ Hence they say that the son who is instruct- 
ed is the way to the higher worlds (i.e., the father goes to Heaven 
through the instrumentality of a worthy son); therefore he 
instructs him.’ Hence since the duty of rearing a progeny is 
obligatory, since its scope extends to ‘ instruction ’, and since 
initiation (upanayana) and pupilage (adhyayana) are per force 
implied,®® how could the mandate relating to preceptorship (lit. 

®1 -This is in answer to the objection that 

when appropriate means are not available the desire to undertake 
instruction ceases to be obligatory even though the imparting of 
instruction is an enjoined act. The Siddhantin admits that the desire 
springs when the required means such as the right time, the right 
place, etc., are available but he urges that even in the absence of all 
these auxiliaries adhyapana will be undertaken as far as it lies in his 
power, if there is Vedic injunction for fear of disobeying an enjoined 
act and thereby committing sin. 

The text here appears to be corrupt. Following V. we have to 
omit the incomplete sentence 

®® ‘ er 911^’ to be understood after qi?rracq^5Ucn5fltu#r. 

®® When the vidhi relating to getting a son fulfils itself only when 
the father imparts learning to the son, both initiation and ‘instruction’ 
are postulated by arthapatti pramana — ^no Vedic instruction can be 


192 PAtCAPADTKA OF PADMAPADA [VII. 22 

preceptor-making), become non-obHgatory {i.e., optional)? How 
again could Vedic study stop short of conveying the meaning (of 
the memorised text) ?2* 

22. Siddhdntin . — This is to be said: From this {i.e., from the 
quoted text) it is not to be understood that ‘instruction’ (anu- 
sasana) is enjoined either as auxiliary to the vidhi relating to the 
‘rearing of a progeny’, or independently.. But this (viz., anu- 
iasana— ‘ tasmat putram anu^istam lokyamahuh, tasmadenam 
ahu^asati ’) is arthavada being subsidiary (sesa) to the injunction 
relating to the sampattikarma*® because it is syntactically con n ected 
with it. Hence this (statement, viz., tasmat putram, etc., merely) 
reiterates the anusasana that has been established (by implication). 

Purvapaksin . — What does that ‘ instruction ’—anusasana, con- 
sist in ? How again is that to be taken as if it were a reiteration 
of what has already been established (by some other pramana)? 

23. Siddhantin . — ^This is the answer — The benefit (phala) 
of the injunction in relation to ‘ the begetting of a son ’ which is 
obligatory is ‘ the rescue of the manes of one’s ancestors from 
falling into hell, by performing the karma consisting of the offer- 
ing to them of bolus of rice and water, because of the Sruti 
(Vedic statement) ‘ that one’s forefathers go to hell if deprived 
of the offering of bolus (pinda) and water (udaka) ’. And its 


given to a boy before he is initiated and acaryatva — ^preceptorship 
cannot be secured unless the boy is instructed. 

24 ?r The Mlmamsakas of both 

the schools maintain that the Vedic study — has its purpose 
fulfilled only when the meaning is comprehended, while the PP. 
declares that mastery over the words — alone is the fruition 
of such study. 

^<1%^ — ^This ought to be For a description of 

samprattikarma vide Aitareyopani§ad, Ch, II and Samkara’s com- 
mentary thereon: ‘sampratti’ means the giving away or transference; 
that topic is termed samprattividya wherein is described the karma 
which the son has to do after it has been transferred to him by the 
father. — Bph. Up., I. v. 17; vide the present writer’s translation of 
Aitareya Upanisad, the Bangalore Printing and Publishing Co., Banga- 
lore, Page 104 — note 1. 

Arthavada is of three kinds: (i) gunavada, (ii) anuvada and 
(iii) bhutlrthavada. The anusasana implied in putrotpadana vidhi is a 
case of anuvada or assertion (vie/e Arthasamgraha, Section 93). 
Samprattikarma presumes anusasana. 



VII. 24] THE QUALIFICATIONS OF THE AGENT 193 

performance (z.e., pitrkarma) will not be possible without a know- 
ledge of the Sastra. Hence in order that the obligatory injunction 
of ‘ begetting the son ’ prescribed in his behalf may be fulfilled 
the father lays down the command (anusasana or advice) relating 
to the duty that should be necessarily carried out by the son, viz., 

‘ By you who are a Brahmana the samskara (the purificatory 
ceremony, v/r., upanayana or investiture with the sacred thread) 
has to be got done in the eighth year of your birth which samskara 
has been enjoined for the purpose of befitting one for the study 
of the Veda (adhyayana) This is the anusasana (upadesa) and 
it is here restated (z.e., in the context of putrotpadanavidhi) with 
the words, ‘ tasmadenam anusasati 

24. Even so the lihga (z.e., it is corroborated by lihga)^^.— 
“Now there was iSvetaketu. the grandson of Aruna. Him the 
father (Arupa) addressed: ‘Svetaketu, lead the life of a Brahma- 
carin (z.e., a student of the Veda) ; in our family indeed, my dear, 
there is none who fails to study the Veda and remains a degraded 
Brahmana (lit. one who can only point to a Brahmapa relative — 
himself having fallen low).” Chand. Up., VI. i-1. [Page 56] 
When it is so you have to explain how what is obligatory (nitya) 
could be brought about by the non-obligatory vidhi relating to 
preceptorship. 

25. And it should also be noted that when the preceptor 
(acarya) is dead the pupil does not seek another preceptor 
(acaryantarakarapa — the pupil will not help another to attain 
preceptorship).*^ Nor is the adhikarin to be secured by a substi- 

\%WiL— indirect suggestion. It is thus defined: — 

?ir% d’T^^r'4^ We have this indirect implication when a word 

used in a different context is explicative of the point under considera- 
tion. The Chandogya passage — etc., is intended to 
extol Divine Knowledge — but it indirectly points to Brahma- 
carya, in that the boy should go to a preceptor for Vedic study. 
Brahmacarya means Vedic chanting preceded by the initiation ceremony. 

etc. — It may be argued that when theprec eptor is 
dead after having commenced instruction— the pupil com- 
pletes his tuition under another, thereby securing preceptorship to the 
other. But this is impossible; the impelling agency is absent. The 
mandate relating to Vedic study— according to the 
Prabhakaras is no incentive to Vedic study for its place is taken by 
a adhyapanavidhi and adhyapanavidhi is inoperative because the 
acarya is dead. 

13 



194 PAtCAPADTKA OF PADMAPADA [VII. 25 

tute, nor is adhikara feasible either.^® The adhikarm (i.e., the 
functionary, the sacrificer entitled to enjoy the fruit resulting from 
the sacrifice), it is right to state, will, in order that he may make 
good his qualification substitute one auxiliary (ingredient) when 
another fails and thus secures his title (adhikara). It is then 
evident that this view {viz., that Vedic study is prompted by 
adhyapanavidhi and not by adhyayanavidhi) is vitiated by many 
defects. Hence the niyoga (i.c., the adhyayanavidhi) pertains to 
the pupil only.®® 

Purvapak?in.—Yi.avf cm the vidhi (injunction) related to the 
activity of the subordinate agency apply to the principal 
agent 

Siddhaantin . — ^In the mandatory sentence— “ By this (yaga— 
isti) conduct the sacrifice of one who is desirous of acquiring a 
village the yaga is enjoined on the person wishing to obtain a 


“ ?lf|, This is in answer to the 

contention that the mapavaka (pupil) by seeking another preceptor 
may bring about the fulfilment of preceptorship to his first acarya 
on the strength of what is known as 'pratinidhinyaya’. If in the per- 
formance of obligatory karma an accessory, say rice is absent, it is 
enjoined that some other ingredient say wild rice — nivara — ^may be 
substituted. But, says the Siddhantin, that the ‘representative theory’ — 
pratinidhinyaya, does not apply here. It is only when the adhikarin 
is alive that he can substitute another. Even if the pupil should 
select a substitute, the substitute will not succeed in establishing his 
own preceptorship — with the result that neither acaryatva 
of the first teacher nor of the representative will eventuate. 

®® In ‘initiate a Brahmapa in his eighth year and teach him to 
chant the Veda— STwl there is no vidhi 

regarding initiation and tuition which are the duties pertaining to the 
acarya but it relates to the mapavaka who should go to the preceptor — 
and get tuition under him— 

The Purvapak$in argues thus: the word consists of 

the root and the causative sense. Hence the word should mean 
causing the pupil to come to him (acarya), Now the acarya is gupakarta 
or auxiliary functionary while the pupilis pradhanakarta or the principal 
functionary. If the word " ’ is interpreted as the Siddhantin does 

what the vidhi (lifi) enjoins has to be transferred from its 
legitimate functionary — the auxiliary, to the pradhanakarta — ^the prin- 
cipal— a procedure opposed to the rules of verbal interpretation — 


VIII. 26] THE QUAIIFICATIOHS OF THE AGENT 195 

village and the action (vyapara) of the subsidiary agent (gupa- 
karta— the priest) is restated because of its having been already 
established because the officiating at the sacrifice by the priest 
is done in pursuit of his profession. Similarly here also the func- 
tion of the subsidiary agent which results from the pursuit of his 
profession is (merely) repeated.^^ 

VIII. 26. At this point some critics interpose with this 
observation— in ‘ yajayet ’ (cause the performance of the yaga) the 
causative ‘ pic ’ which denotes the action of the subordinate agent 
and which is a distinct word (as contrasted with the root ‘ yaj ’) 
comes after the root which denotes the action of the principal 
agent and because it {viz., yajana denoted by ‘pic’ is not what 
is enjoined, it is but right that the injunction should relate to the 
action of the principal agent {viz., yaga).®® 

27. Here on the other hand the single root ‘ ni ’-^(f.c., 
having no pic termination) may denote either the action of the 
mapavaka or of the preceptor. It cannot be that the pupil as 
the active agent is indicated in the root — meaning of ‘ni ’ 
(nayati) because the word ‘ pupil ’ is in the objective relation 
(Brahmapam upanaylta). Hence how could the mandate apply 


The mandatory sentence, ‘ would ordinarily 

mean ‘officiate at the sacrifice of the person desirous of owning a 
village’. The vidhi, it must be noted, always relates to something that 
is unknown and not to what is already known. Here the sacrificer is 
not unaware of ‘village’ but is ignorant only of the means and 
consequently the vidhi prescribes a certain yaga for the attainment of 
the object in view. The new element is the yaga, and ‘village’ which is 
already known is merely referred to. Hence ‘ qraqp;’ is to be taken as 
‘ the causative force being ignored. On this analogy ‘upanaylta’ 
has to be taken, says the siddhSntin, in the sense of ‘upagacchet’ — 
the pupil should go to the teacher for instruction. 

‘ — ^Here is another criticism; in ‘ qpjtqtt’ we have the 

causative termination — ^pic— from which the activity of the subordinate 
functionary, viz., the officiating priest is indicated, and the root — yaj 
from which the activity of the principal functionary, the agent — 
yajamana, is indicated. And it is right therefore that the one (yajana) 
is treated as a restatement and the other (yaga) as a mandate. But 
in ‘ ’, which is a single word only the activity of the subordinate 

functionary acarya, becomes evidraat and as such there is no possibi- 
lity of taking one activity as a restatement — anuvSda, and the other 
as mandated— vidheya. 



196 PAnCAPA,DTK A OF PADMApADA [IX. 28 

to one to whose activity there is no reference. It is not possible 
that in the (legitimate) activity of one (acarya) another (manavaka) 
could be enjoined. Surely it is in one’s own activity that one is 
enjoined (lit. the niyoga is applicable to the sphere of a person’s 
own activity). Hence (because upanayana does not constitute 
the function of the manavaka) this mandate (initiate a Brahmana 
in his eighth year, etc.) does not relate to the pupil.®® When it 
is so, adhyapana is prompted by the mandate enjoined on the pre- 
ceptor and there need be no mental perturbation as to who is the 
adhikarin. 

IX. 28. Siddhantin . — ^This has to be said; the Niyoga 
(viz., initiate a Brahmatia in his eighth year, etc.) is enjoined on 
the pupil only and there is nothing that is enjoined to be accom- 
plished by the preceptor. 

Purvapak^in.—'WhaX is the proof of the aforesaid statement 
(viz., that the vyapara of the prayojya-manavaka, is known by 
implication, and that the vyapara of the prayojaka-acarya, is 
only a restatement of what is otherwise established) ? 

Siddhantin.— Ths meaning of the word ‘ upanayita ’ both from 
the sabdasakti — ^primary significance and ‘ from rational usage ’ 
amounts only to this — that to make oneself an acarya one should 
get some (pupil) to one’s vicinity and impart Vedic instruction 
to him. And all this (i.e., initiation and instruction) having been 
established from a different pramana {i.e., distinct from scriptural 
testimony — viz., perception or inference) as meant for a Brah- 
mapa’s vocation, need not here be enjoined. 

Purvapaksin . — There {i.e., in adhyapayet) the question natu- 
rally will be ‘ whom shall he teach ? ’ When there is such specific 

‘ ’ — The opponent argues that the pupil 

cannot come under the injunction because the vyapara which is what 
is enjoined — vidheya, is absent in him. He is not the one that is 
enjoined. The action connected with the initiation — upanayana, be- 
longs to the preceptor. Hence the text ‘initiate a Brahmapa in his 
eighth year’ is intended to impose the duty on the preceptor and not 
on the pupil. The siddhantin might concede the absence of niyoga 
in so far as upanayana is concerned bpt not as regards adhyayana 
which is the duty enjoined on the pupil only. But says the Prabhakara 
that both sentences ‘ ’ and cTJT'^qTq'Ji'icr are in 

juxtaposition and are similar' in form; as such they must be inter- 
preted ‘alike. Hence adhyayana— -Vedic study, also is the outcome of 
the niyoga relating to the teacher— 



197 


IX. 29] the qualifications of the agent 

expectancy (akanksa) the vidhi (in adhyapayet) will relate to the 
auxiliary (anga) a Brahmana who is eight years old.’®* 

Siddhdntin.—Th&TQ, if the activity (as indicated in the root- 
meaning) is already established (prapte — if some other pramana 
has previously established and it is only anuvada), it is not possible 
to ascribe mandatoriness (vidhi) to two things (artha) in a single 
sentence,®® as it would result in sentence-split. Hence no duty 
(vidheya) of any sort is enjoined on the preceptor. 

29. Well, not even the manavaka has any 

vidheya (activity) enjoined on him, ( 2 .e., visaya as ascertained from 
the root). 

Siddhantin.—We say that it (injunction) does exist. 

Purvapak^in.—Ho'f/ T 

Siddhantin.— At the very time the vakya ‘ upanaylta ’ (per- 
form the ceremony of the sacred thread) brings to mind, both on 
the strength of the word— import and reason (nyayatah) the duty 
of undertaking, for attaining the status of preceptor, the puri- 
fication by initiation (upanayana) of some one and instructing 
him in the Veda, there is also this idea in general that there must 
be some one (manavaka) who has to undergo initiation for learn- 
ing the Veda (/.e., the upaganta — one who should approach the 
guru); and this idea arises on the analogy of a Vedic mandate 
relating to a yaga where the dravya (the substance to be offered 


The opponent argues that even conceding the absence of injunc- 
tion regarding initiation and instruction there can be no injunction 
regarding the pupil’s going to the preceptor — ^upagamana, and Vedic 
study — adhyayana. The injunction in ‘upanayTta, etc.’, though not 
with reference to the preceptor is with reference to the Brahmana 
pupil who is eight years old. This is gupavidhi or injunction of the 
accessory. It speci es that he should be a Brahmana and of eight 
years of age. 

Since adhyapana is established by the necessity of earning a 
livelihood, it will be evident that the vidhi in upanaylta and adhyapa- 
ylta should relate to astavarsatva and Brahmanatva, but then there 
will be sentence-split if these two— astavarsatva and Brahmanatva — 
which are the vidheyas, are to be related to the bhavana, viz., 
upanayana or adhyapana each df which is anyathSsiddha. 

86 is a rule that in any complete sentence the activity 

of the subject ^rfr is perceived arid not of that which is in th® 
objective relation. The manavaka is in the objective relation; your 
contention that the activity of the mSuavaka is enjoined, is untenable, 



198 PAnCAPADIKA OF PADMAPADA [X. 31 

as oblation), and the deity (to whom the offering is to be made) 
are both understood in general.®’ 

30. [Page 57] An intelligent lad will not embark upon a 
thing that is profitless and though the Vedic text, when learnt, 
yields the sense he will not be aware of it before (he gets it up) 
and therefore since the knowledge of the Vedic import cannot be 
regarded as prompting him to undertake the study (it must be 
concluded that) he actively engages in the study because he is 
aware of the existence of a mandate enjoining such study as bis 
obligatory duty, and this he does of his own will (z.e., neither with 
any desire to know the sense for he is ignorant that the Veda is 
pregnant with sense nor prompted by a preceptor). Hence the 
import of the sentence— ‘ Initiate a Brahmana in his eighth year ’ 
(astavarsam Brahmanam upnayita) is that a Brahmaiia lad in his 
eighth year should go to a preceptor, just as the mandate ‘ cause a 
yaga to be performed by one who longs to own a village ’ (grama- 
kamam yajayet ’) has to be interpreted as ‘ let one who desires 
to own a village perform a yaga’ (gramakamo yajeta). 

X. 31. PwrvflpflArjzH.— Even then the agency is not deter- 
mined.®® 


®’ ‘Nayati’ has a double object of which the principal object is 
acarya-samipadeSa (preceptor’s vicinity), the subordinate object is 
mapavaka. The manavaka is prayojyakarta and the acarya is prayo- 
jaka-karta. The gamana — agoing, which results from the action of the 
prayojaka-kartS has as its agent— karta, one who is in subordinate or 
objective relation, viz., manavaka, and as such the activity of .the 
manavaka is vidheya. Hence the sentence implies ‘manavakah acaryam 
upagacchet’ — ^let the pupil go to the preceptor. 

ss ft The opponent contends that in spite 

of the existence of the obligatory mandate relating to Vedic study there 
is no connection established between the import of the mandate — 
and the pupil. Adhikara is used to mean either the hetu bring- 
ing about the connection between the injunction and the person 
enjoined, or the connection as between the prompter and the 
prompted, or active effort. None of these three is applicable here. 
It may be urged that the specification of one’s being a Brahmana and 
of eight years old — and serves as the hetu of the 

required connection. But these two attributes can relate separately 
only, to the principal element in the sentence, viz,, the verbal idea — 
or what the verbal part of the suffix in upanayita, etc., 
denotes, and cannot by being mutually related become the hetu of 


199 


X. 31] THE QUALIFICATIONS OF THE AGENT 

SiddMntin.—-lL\iQT& certainly is the hetu which is nitya (Le., 
obligatory or compelling in nature establishing the connection 
between the performance — karya and the performer— karta, 
prompter and the prompted,— preraka and prerya), viz., caste 
qualified by one’s eighth year or eighth year qualified by caste.®* 
Purvopait^/n.— Well, caste and age are attributes to what is 
upadeya and it is an accepted fact that what serves as pointing 
to agency should be other than the attributes to upadeya, (an 
attribute to what is not upadeya is alone the hetu of adhikara).'** 
Siddhantm.—Tm& sack the situation (according to some; 
it is true that astavarsatva and Brahmanatva are attributive to 
what is upadeya and that what constitutes the attribute of anupa- 
deya only is the hetu of adhikara). But there are (other) men well 

The 3T!?FTIrn^, say, in yajeta, is action or effort 
conducive to the performance of yaga. It is known as arthibhavana 
or end-efBcient force. 

39 The Siddhantin’s answer is that and 

WIH'JF? are constant hetu and not accidental. It is not incumbent 
that what is denoted by the words as they stand in grammatical 
relation (here and are in objective relation) alone 

should bring about the connection between the arthabhavana and the 
person enjoined. It may be implied on the analogy of the performance 
of a yaga where the implication is that only he who is competent 
is enjoined, though such competency as possessing wealth, bodily 
strength, and learning, is not actually expressed in the mandate — 
Or we may first construe Brahmanatva and astavarsatva 
separately with the kriya or akhyatartha (according to the Bhatta 
view) and then arrive at the propositional import that the boy who is 
a Brahmana and of eight years is enjoined — 

M — In the vidhi for mandate is furnished by the 

‘ta’ termination and its object or visaya, by the meaning of the root 
which is yaga and under upadeya (what is signified) should be 
included also its attributive, the kartrkaraka or that which stands in 
any case-relation or words qualifying it. The subject of the sentence — 
the pupil — ^is the kartrkaraka both in ‘upagamana’ and ‘adhyayana’ 
and ‘astavarsatva’ and ‘ Brahmapatva ’ are the qualifying adjuncts of 
the kartfkaraka. Hence falling under the category of upadeya— the 
opponent says — these adjuncts cannot be the hetu of the adhikarin 
of either the Vedic study: or approaching the preceptor— 

The attributes of -kart§ cannot be the attributes of 
bhokta. ■ •, 



200' ' ./PAtCAl^DlKA OF PADMAPADA' ; ; : : [X. 32 

versed in: the sastra, (Purva-mimamsa) who admit that whoever is 
the agent (karta) is also the adhikarin (one entitled to obtain the 
fruit '.of .action).^^ . 

32: Again here in the act of initiation the boy who comes 
under the particular caste and age is not the upadeya, not 
kartrkaraka but it is upanayana only that is enjoined having him 
in view; for (it is a rule that) purification— samskara is enjoined 
for the sake of that which is to be purified.^^ Hence age and 
caste are both limiting adjuncts of the pupil that is to be purified 
(samskarya) and as such these distinguishing (avacchedaka) 


T%m According to the expla- 
nation of the Bhattas age and caste constitute the hetu, stand in 
attributive relation to the agent or adhikarin— 

It is thus:— In the statements and the ^^v^^ 

element denotes bhavana or action which desiderates 

the agent— the object to be achieved— and the means — 
The phala is the acquisition of the meaning— and the 
karana is adhyayana. By elimination the eight-year old Brahmana 
pupil becomes the karta. But according to the general rule that the 
fruit accrues only to the karta — Jai. Sut., 4th Chapter 
— the attributes of the karta, vz>., being a Brahmana and eight years 
old, become the hetu of phalasvamita — ^being entitled to the fruit. 
Hence the said pupil becomes anupadeya in his capacity as the 
phalasvamin. 

According to the Prabhakaras the lin denotes niyoga or karya 
so that what is primarily suggested is the niyojya. The question is 
who is the enjoyer— for whom this niyoga is meant? Hence 
astavarsatva and Brahmanatva are associated with the enjoyer, not 
the doer — karta. 

According to the Vedanta School the lih denotes the possibility 
of effecting of one*s good — and even here the question 
is ‘of which enjoyer — bhokta is this the means of effecting good?’ 
The import of the mandate— is 
qin:. 

From the above it is clear that the words Brahmanatva and 
astavarsatva particularise the bhokta and not karta. 

42 OTqqqqq [%qflq% — On the face of it this appears to contradict 
the previous statement that upagamana only is enjoined. But it must 
be noted that the preceptor is the prompter in the .action — qqi^qjqs^r 
and the pupil acts on being prompted — ^srql^qqjm. It is only to 
emphasise the latter point that the word Rqiq% is used. Hence the 
mandate in reality is with reference to upagamana only. 



XL 34] the QUALIFICATIONS OF THE AGENT 201 ’ 

epithets become obligatory requisites (nityanimitta) in the puri- 
fication (Le., the investiture ceremony) of the pupil. 

33. It comes to this therefore that because upanayana (which 
has to be taken as upagamana) is for the purpose of adhyayana— 
Vedic study, and because that (upagamana) is associated with the 
adhikarin (viz., a Brahmana boy of eight years) it follows that the 
mandate enjoining adhyayana becomes associated with the adhi- 
karin from that very adhikara (viz., age and caste). The adhi- 
kara (i.e., the title to the phala) is secured by the acquisition of 
the mastery over the bare text; as for the understanding of the 
sense of the text it is got from the other sources (such as a know- 
ledge of grammar, etc.).*® 

XI. 34. Purvapaksin.—'SVdl, “the memorised Vedic text 
is perceived to be the hetu of the inquiry into Dharma; there- 
after is Dharma to be inquired into” — thus they say that the 
memorised text serves as the hetu (incentive) to the inquiry of 
Dharma requiring no other aid— (C/. Sahara Bhasya, p. 8, 
Anandasrama Edn.). 

Siddhantin. — ^Yes, it is true. It is even as you say. Whoever 
takes a contrary view (lit. whoever says otherwise) ? Indeed a 
person who has completed, acquiring mastery over the Vedic 
text being aware that the daily and occasional duties which are 
obligatory and which if neglected are productive of sin, perceives 
that their import (i.e., of texts relating to obligatory duties) has 
perforce to be inquired into immediately after the Vedic study in 
order that he may know how these (duties) are to be performed.** 


*® The Siddhantin’s point is that the acquisition of the mere 
verbal mastery is the fruit of adhyayana and such mastery can be 
had even without inquiry. Therefore he contends that a distinct 
adhikarin has to be sought for inquiry into the meaning if the 
Upanisads and as such the necessity to take the word ‘atha’ to mean 
subsequence. The adhyayana injunction by itself cannot prompt one 
to inquire — 

** What the PP. means is that the mandate relating to adhyayana 
is not directly the hetu of vicara but only medially. To start with 
is the adhyayana vidhi and then follow those relating to nitya and 
naimittika karma, i.e., obligatory and occasional duties. One has to 
necessarily inquire into their sense if one has to perform them 
rightly. It is evident therefore that inquiry is occasioned by the 
subsequent mandates and not directly by the mandate relating to 
Vedic study. Such is the way, saj^ Padmapdda, to interpret the 


202 PAtCAPADIKA OF PADMAPADA [XII. 36 

Hence, j.e., since the existence of the subsequent mandates (uttara- 
vidhis) is not cognised prior to the Vedic study and as such since 
the uttaravidhis cannot necessitate the Vedic study (the 
Mimamsaka) declares that the naemorised text only without the 
intervention of anything else becomes the hetu in the under- 
standing of the sense. 

35. There is no such obligation in the case of Brahman- 
knowledge for no pramaiia that its neglect is productive of sin 
exists. Hence inquiry into Dharma is essential and not inquiry 
into Brahman for one who has mastered the Vedic text. From 
what has been said so far, since the desire for the knowledge of 
Brahman (Brahmajijnasa) is not a fit subject for commencement 
and since Brahman and Brahman-knowledge though fit for 
commencement are not sought after (by such a person) the 
jijnasa becomes inadmissible.*® 

XII. 36. [Page 58] Since the word ‘atha’ even in the 
sense of auspiciousness (mahgala) fails to become an integral part 
of the import of the statement, and since when merely heard the 
word ‘atha’ constitutes auspiciousness, (like the sweet sounds of 
vlpa), the Bhasyakara (Samkara) has rightly said, the word ‘ then ’ 
is here to be taken as denoting immediate consecution; not as 
indicating the introduction of a new subject to be entered 
upon.’ 

37. Purvapaksin. — ^Well, from the word ‘ atha ’ we gather 
for a certainty that there is something antecedent to the topic 


statement of Sahara quoted in the text. Moreover vicara is not 
a necessary sequel of adhyayana but the case is different with uttara- 
vidhis which enjoin the performance of rituals. 

*® may also mean either i.e., topic 

of discourse or i.e., action. Now Brahmajijnasa means Brahma- 
jnaneccha — desire for the knowledge of Brahman. ‘Atha’ in ‘athato 
Brhamajijnasa’ cannot be construed as adhikara for ‘desire’ which is 
the principle element in the sentence is not fit subject of inquiry nor 
is it to be had by action No doubt Brahman and Brahman- 

knowledge are discoursed upon by Vyasa but then these words occupy 
a subordinate position in the sentence and as such ‘atha’ cannot get 
related to them. Hence the conclusion is that the word ‘atha’ should 
be taken to mean ‘ thereafter \ It implies an antecendent condition. 
Brahmavicara should be undertaken by one subsequent to one’s 
acquiring certain qualifications, lliis is Padmapada’s comment on the 
Bha§ya— ^ ‘ -unfwtr^r. 


xril. 39] THE QUALTFICATTONS OF THE AGENT 203 

now under consideration. Hence why not ‘ atha ’ be understood 
as denoting such sequence?*® 

38. Siddhantin . — ^We say that this (interpretation — arthan- 
tara) is in no way different from its interpretation as immediate 
consecution — anantarya. 

Purvapak§in . — How ? 

Siddhantin . — ^This is how. That becomes the indispensable 
precedent of the topic undertaken, if it (Brahmajijnasa) shoud 
be begun necessarily after that, and if it requires that (the preceding) 
only. Then (evam sati) that something which has preceded neces- 
sarily becomes the immediate cause of what has been undertaken. 
Otherwise, i.e., if it (the topic on hand) desiderates something or 
other (not necessarily that which serves as its inevitable cause) 
then it would result in its becoming either a restatement (anuvMa) 
or something pointing to adrsta (unseen good). Hence what is 
required is some antecedent constituting a necessary condition 
(hetu). And this is what the Bhasyakara means. — The sense of 
‘ atha ’ as immediate consecution (anantarya) does not in essence 
differ from its sense as some precedent topic — (Purvaprakrta). 

XIII. 39. “When (the word ‘atha’ is understood as) 
‘ immediate consecution ’ it must be rendered explicit on what 
antecedent, Brahmajijnasa, i.e., the inquiry into Brahman, is 
necessarily dependent, on the analogy of Dharmajijnasa, {Le., 
inquiry into Vedic duties) which necessarily depends upon the 
antecedent Vedic study — adhyayana. Vedic study however is 
common (to both Dharmajijnasa and Brahmajijnasa”). The 
cause (hetu) without which what follows is not necessarily under- 
taken, and following which the inquiry into Brahman is (as a 
matter of fact) undertaken must be pointed out as having been 
the (inevitable) antecedent.*’ 


“ The sequence that the opponent means by ‘tat’ 

here is mere sequence, such for e.g., as ‘b’ following ‘a’ in the 
alphabet, while for the Siddhantin it means causal sequence. Note 
that the opponent has accepted ‘anantarya’ as the meaning of ‘atha’ 
and is now differentiating one kind of it from another. 

*’ Three alternative meaning of ‘atha’ were advanced by way of 
Purvapaksa:— (i) commencement of a new topic, (ii) auspiciousness, 
and (iii) something dMinet; febm a prior topic. All these have been 
shown to be wrong either construed properly 

with the sentence— r‘ atha; to Btaiana|gfiasa’,. or they are not logical. 


204 PA^CAPADIKA OF PADMAPADA [X III. 40 

40. Learning the Veda by rote (Svadhyayadhyayana) how- 
ever is common, that is, it is the same antecedent of the inquiry 
into both religious duty and Brahman. And therefore, the word 
‘ atha ’ in ‘ athato Brahmajijnasa ’ will serve no purpose if it is 
intended to denote only that (viz., Sadharana karana). Or what 
is meant by the word ‘ samana ’ is a cause which is not unnecessary 
but which at the same time is, ‘not potent by itself to capacitate 
a person for inquiry and impel him to commence the jijnasa in 
question.’*® Hence such a hetu (in this special sense) which is 
common does not necessarily bring about (the result, viz., inquiry 
into Brahman). 

41. PMZvqpafczin.— -Well, is there not here the additional 
feature, viz., the subsequence of Brahmajijnasa to the knowledge 
of religious duty (karma) ?*® Even so, it is stated in another 
commentary (vrttyantara ) — “ the word ‘ atha ’ standing for imme- 
diate consecution means ‘ after acquiring the knowledge of 
Dharma ’ (karma) ” ; because either by engaging in the perform- 
ance of graduated karma or by attaining step by step mental 
purity as enjoined by the Veda or by the enjoyment of the rewards 
of karma (in succession) choosing at option the one or the other 
alternative, one obtains through karma that knowledge (that is 
of Brahman), and also finds it is helpful in the attainment of 


No doubt in the absence of Vedic study the inquiry into 
Brahman is out of the question but then not all those who have 
mastered their branch of the Veda will undertake the inquiry into 
Brahman for they are lacking in the urge for freedom. Hence mere 
adhyayana does not capacitate one for higher knowledge. 

etc. — ^The contention is that inquiry into the 
meaning of the Veda comprising, both the Purva and Uttara Mimamsa 
is necessary since moksa involves knowledge— j nan a, and jfiana results 
only by inquiry— vicara. Of these the inquiry into the Purvamimamsa 
is upakaraka and as such should precede the inquiry into Brahman, 
which is upakarya, i.e., their relation is one of helper and helped, 
or principal and subordinate. The fresh point urged here is that 
a knowledge of karma, if not Vedic study, is an adequate cause — 
pu?kalakararia of Brahmajijnasa. One of three courses is recommended 
in order that the inquiry into Dharma may be of help to the knowledge 
of Brahman— (i) the performance of rituals in a graduated series; or 
(ii) enjoyment of the desired objects acquiring mental purity (in succes- 
sion); and (iii) mental purity, by following the injunctions laid down 
in the Scriptures. 



2G5 


XIIT. 42] THE QUALIFICATIONS OF THE AGENT 

moksa.®® By another commentator also it is thus stated, ‘ the 
words ‘ atha ’ and ‘ atah ’ were explained in the first sutra of the 
first adhyaya only (i.e., the MImamsa sutra) ; the word ‘ atha ’ 
is intended to mean that after the inquiry into Dharma which is 
the antecedent condition, the inquiry into Brahman (follows) ; 
the word ‘ ata^ ’ states that what has already been indicated is 
the hetu in regard to Brahmajijnasa. 

42. Siddhdntin.—No, (it is not as you explain)— “ Even prior 
to dharma-vicara, inquiry into Brahman is possible to one who has 
studied the Vedanta section No doubt the getting up of the 
words of (Upanisads) is not by itself an adequate hetu (i.e., pre- 
requisite for inquiry into Brahman); still without it desire to 
understand Brahman does not arise, but it does arise even without 
the knowledge of Dharma— this is the substance. 

43. Purvapaksin. — How? 

Siddhdntin. — [Page 59] There, anyhow, in the Dharma 
Mimamsa three factors become apparent :—(i) the thousand inter- 
pretational principles enunciated in the twelve chapters (of the 
Purvamimamsa), (ii) the determination of the meaning of the 
ritualistic statements, as revealed by the application of those 
maxims, and (iii)- karmas like Agnihotra which form the import 
of those statements. Now of these three (tatra) the nyaya (or 
reason which is implied from the use of the word ‘ atha ’ in the 
first aphorism ‘ athato Dharmajijnasa ’) serves as the instrument 
(hetu) for producing in us the knowledge that the Vedic study 
(adhyayana) is meant for understanding the sense (of the memo- 
rised text).®^ Again in the Autpattika sutra (V adhikarana of 

®® The word ‘samskara’ used in the text has been explained in the 
Vivaraiia in this two-fold way. We shall need this distinction in 
following the coming discussion of this part. 

81 From the insertion of ‘atha’ in the 

first sutra a certain maxim — nyaya, is indicated and on the basis of that 
nyaya we understand that one who studies the Veda must know its 
sense. The nyaya in question is that when two alternatives are 
possible the seen should be preferred to the unseen — # *5% fi^TWTcf 

Vedic study may be regarded as meant 
for attaining svarga or for understanding the import; the latter sense 
is to be preferred being the seen result, to the former which is unseen. 
This is the mimamsaka view. The Vedantin however maintains that 
the understanding of the sense of the Vedic texts is not direct but is 
mediated through the bare verbal mastery — 



206 PAkCAPADIKA OF PADMAPADA [XIII. 44 

Jaimim’s Purvamimamsa) the self-validity of the Upanisadic 
texts has been made out by establishing their non-dependence (on 
any other pramana) on the ground of the eternity of the relation 
between the word and its import and the self-existent nature 
(apauruseya) of those texts. And let both these be utilised here 
(in Brahmavicara) also since they are required.®^ But the rest of 
the assemblage of the (Purvamimamsa) nyayas serve no purpose in 
the investigation into the nature of Brahman. For the topic 
proposed for consideration is not the identity of the individual 
soul with Brahman which is rid of all misery. There is no men- 
tion of any nyaya by which §abdas (Vedantic passages) could 
be construed as expounding the nature of Brahman, nor any 
nyaya that they (sabdas) are potent to expound Brahman. 

44. Again even in this (tantra, viz., Vedanta, as regards the 
mandates relating to meditation— v/cife V.S., III. 3) dependence 
upon the nyayas enunciated in the Purvatantra (z.e., the Purva- 
mimamsa sastra), is only so far as it concerns the knowledge 
of the qualified Brahman. And there {i.e., m passages relating 
to meditation) what is enjoined in meditation which is a mental 
act, whose reward is temporal and as such it is but a variety of 
Dharma (karma); it being so, the total body of. such nyayas can 
serve no purpose in Brahma-vicara. Hence tiie word ‘ atha ’ 
does not need that, as its prerequisite.®® 

45. (It may be urged that ‘ atha ’ need not mean ‘ subse- 
quent to Dharmavicara,’ but might mean ‘ subsequent to the 
inquiry into the validity of the Veda as ‘ a pramana,’ the answer 
is) that the two nyayas enunciated, of which the one serves to show 
that the learning of the Vedic text is for understanding the mean- 
ing, and the other to show the non-requirement of other pramanas 
to establish the self-evidential character of the Veda, though 


is another reading. The two 
nyayas establishing the eternity of the relation between the word and 
its sense and the non-human origin of the Veda are authoritative for 
Vedanta as for Purvamimamsi. Because they are common to both 
they cannot be regarded as the adequate cause of Brahmavicara. The 
Purvamimamsa nyayas are useful for the knowledge of karya — some- 
thing to be done but not for the comprehension of Brahman, a 
siddhavastu, an accomplished entity. 


207 


xni. 46] THE QUALIFICATIONS OF THE AGENT 

required (in the Uttara-mimamsa) are not like the Vedic study 
(which is a precondition of the inquiry of both Dharma and 
Brahman)— the hetu exclusively of inquiry into Brahman. Hence 
the word ‘ atha ’ does not mean ‘ subsequence ’ to mimamsa in 
so far as those two nyayas are concerned. 

46. If it be argued that the determination of the meaning 
of the Vedic statements (is a prehminary requisite) it is evident 
that it (vakyarthanirriaya) does in no way help in the inquiry into 
Brahman.®^ The knowledge of one thing can by no means initiate 
effort in the direction of something that is quite different. Some- 
times it is possible as in inference, etc., that the knowledge of the 
one (say, smoke) leads to the knowledge of the other (fire); but 
even that is absent here, since no relation between Dharma and 
Brahman could be ascertained. 

47. Hence the possibility of utilising karma (alone remains). 
Accordingly this is what was said by them also {viz., by those 
commentators)— “ the word ‘ atha ’ standing for ‘ immediate 
consecution ’ means ‘ after acquiring into the knowledge of 
Dharma (leading to its performance) since the karmas (prescribed 
duties) performed in their ascending order of importance or mental 
purity cultivated on the authority of Vedic testimony or by the 
enjoyment of the rewards of karma — choosing the one or the other 
path — will enable a person to obtai n that knowledge {i.e., of 
Brahman) This point is discussed by us here. Which is this 
gradation of acts to be performed ? And how are they the means 
to jijnasa ? For him who wishes to climb to the top of a mansion 
the flight of steps gradually ascended becomes the means of gain- 
ing the top floor, not so here; the prescribed duties performed 

SI g'fsp?fisq'f%c^ — It has been pointed out that the import of the 
Vedic texts is dharma or karma, i.e., ritual. And the determination of 
dharma can in no way serve as a preliminary either for inquiry into 
Brahman or for ascertaining Brahman’s real nature. It may be noted 
that three other alternative explanations of the word ‘atha’ have been 
ruled out, viz. — 

(i) subsequent to Vedic study — ; 

(ii) subsequent to knowing the Ptirvamimamsa nyayas — 

(iii) subsequent to knowing the particular nyayas — 

viz., reason, to show that Vedic study is meant for the 
comprehension of the sense, reason to establish the self- 
evidential character of the Veda, ' 



208 PAtCAPADIKA OF PADMAPADA [XIIT. 48 

up to the end of even a thousand years are not the means of 
inducing that act {viz., Brahmajijnasa) in one who is desirous of 
inquiring into the nature of Brahman, because of the absence of 
valid proof.®® 

48. It may be said that a person, whose mind is overpowered 
by cravings will be ever inclined to gratify them and will not enter- 
tain the idea of Brahmavicara; when however the cravings are 
satisfied by the performance of karmas they disappear and then 
he enters upon the inquiry into Brahman. Even so {Le., in eluci- 
dation thereof) it is stated that religious duties performed, cause 
the fulfilment of one’s cravings by yielding a succession of rewards 
beginning with universal sovereignty and ending with the attain- 
ment of Brahmaloka, each reward (in the ascending scale) being 
a hundred times more excellent than the one preceding it.®® 
Because there exists nothing beyond Brahmaloka and because no 
desire springs in the absence of objects, cravings subside as fire 
subsides when the faggots are burnt out; then it is that one 
engages in the Brahman inquiry. 

49. Siddhantin . — [Page 60] If so the wording of the 
Bhasya should have been ‘ after the performance of karma’ and 
not ‘ after understanding the nature of dharma’. Again how can 
the attainment of longings be the means of quelling the longings ? 

Purvapaksin . — On the strength of familiar instances of it in 
life — fire which though it gains in volume by the (pouring in of the) 
oblation, subsides of its own accord having burnt up the whole 
oblation when all of it has been offered to it. Even so it is but 
right to regard that desire having the objects (of sense — visaya) 
for its faggots, though it goes on increasing so long as the objects 
(last) subsides of itself on its (visaya) destruction (brought about 
by satiation), like the fire when the faggots are destroyed. 

®® Here begins the discussion of the second of the three items 
referred to above, viz., samskara in the sense of phala. We shall pre- 
sently meet with the discussion relating to the second meaning, viz., 
mental purity. 

®® — cf. Tait. Up., II, 8th anuvaka. — ^There, grades 

of bliss are enumerated, beginning Svith the universal sovereignty and 
culminating in the bliss of Hirapyagarbhaloka. It must be noted 
that the ascending scale of happiness described here belongs to the 
sphere of samsara only. It is the realisation of unity that constitutes 
the supreme bliss of which the other varieties are as drops compared 
to the ocean. 



2C9 


XV. 52] THE QUALIFICATIONS OF THE AGENT 

Siddhantin.—Yes, this would be right if the bliss of Hiranya- 
garbhaloka did not wane. It does wane however, because it is 
the result of action (viz., meditation — upasana) and because it is 
derived from finite objects (unlike Brahmananda). When that 
(the bliss of Hiranyagarbhaloka) wanes desire is sure to spring 
afresh as before for the attainment of that which has not been 
attained. Hence even for Hirapyagarbha the cessation of cra- 
vings (is brought about) by his realising the evanescence and other 
defects (inherent) in the objects of sense (and not from their grati- 
fication). And to this effect it is said— “ To him who is the 
Lord (z.e., Hiranyagarbha) of the world, unimpeded knowledge, 
dispassion, sovereignty, and dharma, these four are congenital.®’ 

50. Hence what causes the eradication of all desire is the 
knowledge of the defects of the objects of sense as well as the 
realisation of the Eternal Being, as witness the Smrti — “objects 
turn away from the man who practises abstinence, but not the 
subtle attachment for them, but even that attachment vanishes 
when he sees the Supreme Reality ” (Gita, II. 59). And there 
exists no such scriptural authority to show that from the attain- 
ment of all the objects of enjoyment in the region of Hirapya- 
garbha the desire perishes. 

51. Purvapaksin. — ^Well, is not this self-evident to all that 
a man on the attainment of (a particular) desire gets peace of 
mind and becomes fit to engage in some other act ? 

Siddhaniin. — ^True, (this happens) from the Satisfaction of 
one’s longing. But that satisfaction of longing comes, because 
the capacity (for enjoyment) ceases at the time; for as long as 
the capacity exists there results unrestricted self-indulgence. If 
however one is absolutely rid of all desire for an object, one does 
not cherish again that object. Hence it is not by the eradication 
of desires (after gratifying them) that the karmas (like agnihotra) 
generate capacity in a person to undertake the inquiry into 
Brahman. As such the word ‘ atha ’ does not signify the know- 
ledge of karma. 

, XV. 52. Purvapaksin. — ^Let then the antecedent existence 
of karmas by reason of their purificatory function be admitted. 
In support thereof are the following quoted : — ‘ He who has gone 

The point to be noticed jn this quotation is that the vairagya 
of Hirapyagarbha is congenital and not the result of phalabhoga as 
the purvapaksin seeks to make, ouL ; . , ' 

14 ; ’ ’ . ’ ' ■ 



210 PAtCAPADIKA OF PADMAPADA [XV. 52 

through the forty purificatory rituals and possesses the eight self- 
regarding virtues, attains union (with the Absolute);®® ‘ By the 
performance of mahayajnas, and yajnas, the person becomes fit 
for Brahma-knowledge ” ; “knowledge arises in men by reason 
of the destruction of sinful karma; just as (the aspirants) perceive 
their own selves in the inner sense resembling a (purified) mirror 
these are the smrtis. “They (the aspirants) desire to know 
(Brahman) through sacrifice, charity, meditation and temper- 
ance”; “By the performance of any one of the yagas or of 
Darvlhomas one’s mind will get rid of all impmrities ’’—these are 
the Srutis. And the Sutrakara (VySsa) also says, “ Hence it is 
that karma pertaining to (each) asrama is needed”; “There is 
need of all karmas (for Brahmajnana) because of the Sruti relating 
to Yajna, like the horse”.®* 


®® — etc.— Samskara is either the removal of impurities— 

or the generation of some quality— swistr. We have the 
text, “The yogins engage in karma without attachment, for the purifi- 
cation of the Self” — Gita, V. 11, pointing to the eradication of sin by 
the performance of karma. It is also well known that apurva is 
generated in one who follows the Vedic mandates. (This is gunadhana). 
Of the forty-eight samskaras, forty are ritualistic and eight are personal 
virtues, viz., ^1— compassion, ^rr%w5r— kindliness, SRtJJTT— freedom 
from jealousy, — cleanliness, — not given to listlessness, 

benignity,- not being niggardly, SRifclT— not being 

covetous. The ritualistic samskaras are five mahayajnas, twenty-one 
yagas, ten ceremonies beginning with garbhadhana and ending with 
Upanayana and four vratas— vide Gautama Dharma- Sutras, Ch. VIII. 
13-23. The sayujya is only relative; it is not absolute identity with 
Brahman. 

®“ “aicl This is quoted as one of the sfitras of 

Vyasa but is not traceable. It is no doubt a variant of III. iv. 32, 

V.S., III. iv. 26. 

— all the duties prescribed for each of the four 
orders of religious life, 

^ VZ2., qfqq- ?n-UTSqr- 

?r%«T — Bfh., IV. iv. 22. The Brahmai>as long to know such a Being 
by the repetition of the Vedas, by sacrifices, by offerings, by penance, 
by fasting. ^ 

, The illustration is to show that karma is needed as a means 

for the origination of Brahma-knowledge and not as a means for 
Release. The horse is used for drawing chariots and not for ploughing. 



211 


XVL 55] THE QUALIFICATIONS OF THE AGENT 

53. Siddhantin . — ^[Page 61] What you say would be true 
if the karma performed in the same birth did purify the man and 
render him fit for Brahmajijnasa. But there is no time-specifica- 
tion for the eventuation of the reward accruing from enjoined 
karmas. As such the man regenerated by acts of karma in his 
previous births enters upon the inquiry into Brahman even with- 
out undertaking the inquiry into dharma (karma) and its per- 
formance either, so that the word ‘ atha ’ is not used to indicate 
subsequence in relation to that (Dharmajijnasa or karmanusthana). 

54. On the parity of this reasoning is refuted the view that 
through the discharge of one’s debts (to the manes or one’s 
ancestors) karma constitutes the antecedent condition.®® To this 
effect (there is also the authority of) both Sruti and Smrti— - 
“ Because, otherwise also one may enter on the order of samnyasa 
while yet in the stage of a bachelor ” (Jabalopanisad— 4). “ Some 
have stated that one may assume samnyasa in any one of the 
(three) alternative stages— (Gautama Dharma Sutra— HI. 1). 
Rightly therefore it is said (by the Bhasyakaxa) that ‘ it is possible 
for one who has studied the Vedanta portions to undertake the 
inquiry into Brahman before even inquiring into the nature of 
Dharma.” 

XVI. 55. Purmpak§in.~lM it be even so. We dp not 
say that the word ‘ atha ’ (means subsequence) desiderating a 
knowledge of karma as an immediately preceding cause, but (is 
used) only for bringing home the order of succession as evidenced 
in (the mandate) “ First he cuts off from the heart, then from the 
tongue, then from the chest (of the animal to be sacrificed.” — 
Vide Tait. Sam. VI Kanda. 

56. Siddhantin . — Even that (namely ‘ atha ’ meaning suc- 
cession) is untenable (occurring as it does) in a nyayasutra.®^ 
And where a number of acts having a single agent cannot be 


— ^The discharging of one’s debts, viz., pitf-rija; 
this can be discharged by begetting sons; rsi-rpa, manusya-rria — by 
Vedic study, deva-rna — by yajna. 

^1^1^ — In the nyaya-sutras, i.e., both dharma-sutras 
and vedanta-sutras, only the nyayas or interpretational rules are inti- 
mated and not the order or krama. Its direct indication is the 
function of Sruti. The sutras.are concerned with merely laying down 
the nyayas. 


212 PAtCAPADIKA OF PADMAPADA [XVII. 57 

accomplished all at the same time and as such the order of succes- 
sion being unavoidable, the word ‘atha’ might intimate the 
rule (by which to detemoine the order). And unity of agency 
(ekakartrka) ■ is found where one act is auxiliary to another, 
or where several auxiliaries are related to a single principal 
(or main act) or where an act is dependent upon the 
qualification conferred on a person for another act, but not 
elsewhere (/.e., in no other context).®^ But indeed there exists 
no proof to show that one or other of these relations 
obtains between the inquiry into Dharma and the inquiry into 
Brahman. The same is thus expressed (by Samkara) : — “ There 
is the restriction of (a particular) succession in cutting off of the 
heart, etc. (of the sacrificial animal) since such order is intended ; 
hke that there is no order intended here, because there exists no 
proof for assioming the inquiry into Dharma and the inquiry into 
Brahman to stand in the relation of principal and auxihary or 
the relation of qualification conferred on a person for a parti- 
cular act.” 

XVII. 57. Purvapaksin . — ^It (the order of succession) may 
also be thus — just as svarga is the specific single reward (phala) 
for the six yagas consisting of Agneya, etc., similarly inquiry into 
Dharma as well as Brahman has svarga as the single reward (for 
both) and hence requiring as such inquiries do a certain order, 
(we have to take) * atha ’ as intended to determine it. Or just as 
from all the twelve chapters of (Jaimini’s PurvamTmamsa Sutras) 
Dharma alone has to be inquired into by an orderly discussion 
of one or other of its phases in every chapter ; or again in the 
present treatise (tantra, v/z., Vedanta) also composed of four 


etc. The intimation of order would be appro- 
priate if the agent in both cases were identical. What the Siddhantin 
points out is that between Dharmajijnasa and Brahmajijnasa there 
obtains neither the relation of principal and subordinate— 
e.g., between the prayaja and Dar^apurriamasa sacrifice; nor the 
relation of several auxiliaries and one principal — '9 

e.g., the relation between the fore-sacrifices related to the 
DarSapurpamasa; nor the relation as found when one action qualifies 
a person for another; — the same person 
who is the agent — yajamana in Dar^apiirpamasa is the agent in 
Godohana; i.e., fetching water in the milk jug. In these cases there is 
the need for krama or order. 


XVII. 58] THE QUALIFICATIONS OF THE AGENT 213 

chapters it is the one Brahman that is the object of inquiry by 
an orderly discussion of one or other of its phases in every chapter, 
it follows that there should be a proper arrangement of the chap- 
ters. So that it is the Brahman only that is the object of inquiry 
in both the tantras {viz., the Purva and Uttara Mimamsas); as 
such the use of the word ‘ atha’ is for the purpose of krama- 
niyama {i.e., to intimate the order of succession). 

58. Premising this demurrer (the Bhasyakara) 
says, [“ Because of the difference of phala (result of inquiry) and 
of the object of inquiry”.] After the expression phalajijnasya- 
bhedacca’v the inquiry into Dharma and that into Brahman is 
to be understood. That very difference is explained— (the know- 
ledge of Dharma has prosperity as its phala which is dependent 
upon action). That prosperity is the reward of the knowledge 
(and subsequent performance) of Dharma is universally admitted 
and is disputed by none. Even that (prosperity) is not the result 
of the knowledge (as such of Dharma) but of the object of know- 
ledge {viz., Dharma or Karma) and of that again it is the result 
not of Dharma but of its performance. [Page 62] (“ the know- 
ledge of Brahman on the other hand has moksa, the bliss-supreme 
as its phala and does not depend upon the performance of any 
distinct act ”) so that the fruit of Brahma-knowledge is final 
beatitude (apavarga). And that (apavarga) is eternally accom- 
plished, immediate {i.e., it is one’s own atman and so always 
possessed) and self-revealed. Because nescience (avidya) is the 
cause of samsara — the world-cycle (there is need for self-regenera- 
tion and Vedantic study, for its eradication). And knowledge 
does not arise without dispelling nescience. As such their natures 
being so radically diverse, and the paths to their approach also 
being different, a single agency (of both sastras) does not fit in 
even through (your postulation of an identical) phala. Hence 
there arises no requirement (dkahksa) of the order of precedence 
as between these two Sastras. 

59. As for the objects of inquiry (jijnasya), they are totally 
distinct; because what is inquired into the first tantra {viz.. 
Purvamimamsa) is Dharma which is a thing to be effected and 
which is dependent upon man’s action and whose very being {viz., 
the act of religious duty) is absent at the time of inquiry into its 
nature. Here on the other hand Brahman which is eternally 
accomplished and which is not dependent on man’s effort is the 
object of inquiry. 



214 PAHCAPADIKA of PADMAPADA [XVII. 60 

60. Again [‘ owing to the difference in the operation of the 
Vedic texts also ’], (the two inquiries differ) — ^This is another 
difference in regard to the objects of inquiry depending upon the 
difference in the pramanas {i.e., pramanavakyas or authoritative 
texts). The codana (Vedic injunction) relating to Dharma no 
doubt prompts one to action, but finding itself incapable of 
prompting in the case of an absent visaya the object to be 
achieved, instructs one in the visaya also. The pramana (text) 
relating to Brahman on the other hand, is confined only to the 
instruction (jnapanamatra) and the man is not prompted to exert 
to achieve it. Knowledge indeed arises in conformity with the 
object and in conformity with the pramana, and does not conform 
to man’s desire. How could there be any prompting ? When, 
for example, there is proximity between the sense and the object, 
cognition is produced in the man by the perceptive sense owing 
to proximity and the man is not enjoined (to acquire it). It is 
analogous to it; even if undesired it arises of its own accord. And 
as for Brahman,, however, because it is eternally existing there is 
no room for prompting. The word Vcodana, ’ in the Bhasya 
‘ Brahmacodana ’ is used with the object of denoting prama^ia®® 
(i.e., valid means of proof relating to Brahman) and not with the 
idea of denoting prerana — incitement to action or niyoga and this 
(the Bhasyakara) states : — [“ That codana which defines Dharma 
’’’timates the knowledge of its own subject (of Dharma) to the 
person while at the same time enjoining action on him; codana 
relating to Brahman on the other hand merely instructs the person 
(in the knowledge of Brahman and does not urge him to action) ; 
the person is not enjoined (to exert) for instruction, because instruc- 
tion (immediately) results from codana (i.e., the Vedic sentence 
explicative of Brahman, e.g., ‘ That thou art ’). Itis analogous 
to the perception of an object when the perceptive sense and the 
object are in juxtaposition.”] It is therefore evident that no 
order of succession between the two tantras (sastras) is intended 
as depending upon the identity of the object of knowledge ; and 
the word ‘ atha ’ would (no doubt) have been explained in that 
sense (if there had been identity of objects). 


This is added because the same word codana has been inter- 
preted as injunction— prerapa, in the previous portion dealing with 
Dharma. 


XVIIL 62] THE QUALIFICATIONS OF THE AGENT 21$ 

61. pt comes to this therefore that something (some ante- 
cedent) or other must be postulated subsequent to which the 
inquiry into Brahman is proposed to be undertaken.] 

XVIII. 62. (The antecedent conditions,) [we say, are dis- 
crimination between what is eternal and what is not eternal; 
renunciation of desire for the enjoyment 'of the fruit of one’s 
deeds here as well as hereafter; the acquirement of such aids as 
tranquilUty and self-restraint; and the desire for eternal free- 
dom.’®*] It was pointed out before, that the word ‘ atha ’ if taken 
to intimate the ushering in of a fresh subject, the undertaking 
(of the composition) of the Sastra {viz., the Uttara Mimamsa) 


etc. — ^The Purvapaksin concedes that the 
word ‘atha’ may not import subsequence to (i) Vedic study — 

(ii) inquiry into Dharma — (iii) knowledge of what consti- 
tutes karma — (iv) performance of ritualistic duties 
but urges that it may mean subsequence to something within ordinary 
experience and not necessarily subsequence to the antecedents here 
specified. The answer is that the Vedantic inquiry must follow only 
after acquiring the qualifications prescribed in the Scriptures them- 
selves. And these qualifications are known as sadhanacatuitaya and 
they are— 

(i) discrimination of what is eternal and 

what is transient— c/. afgsf 

ara;: Chand. Up., VIII. i-vi. 

(ii) avertion to the enjoyment of the 

fruit of one’s action here and hereafter — cf. SficJRJT^ 
^rarsr *1^1%,— Brh. Up., II. iv. 5. This enjoins 

renunciation of everything that is not Atman. 

(iii) — 

— ^tranquillity; 

— self-control; the other aids are; 

OTifa — abandonment of ritualistic duties; 
bearing one’s cross patiently; 

— concentration of mind; and 
?Tg:i— faith. 

These are known as sadhanasatka — cf. Brh. Up., IV. iv. 23. 

(i'v) ggiR- desire for Release— c/. 

When the riddance of all misery is promised as the reward of the 
knowledge of Brahman desire for such reward springs and the man in 
whom such desire becomes dominant is the one entitled (adhikarin) 
for Vedantic study. 


216 PA:&GAPADIKA OF padmapAda CXVin. 63 

would be valueless since none would endeavour to study it. And 
the reason for the lack of endeavour has also been stated.®® (Why 
there arises no effort is explained). The inquiry undertaken, 
would be privative^ of the enjoyment of the whole body of plea- 
sures extending upto the attainment of the Hiranyagarbha state so 
that all inclination to the inquiry into Brahman would be absent 
and as such what incentive could there be for a person to attempt 
such inquiry ? 

63. [Page 63] Hence as long as one does not realise the 
ephemerality of that enjoyment culminating in Hiranyagarbha, 
subject as it is to destruction, because it originates and is of res- 
tricted scope (one fails to take to jijnasa). And though this (world 
of sense) perishes (to him that is a virakta) it perishes only up to 
(and not including) the Being — immutable and eternal; otherwise 
there is no possibility of a thing again coming into existence when 
its ground is destroyed so that even the present world would vanish 
and there would be a mere blank (abhava) — by such exposition 
(it is evident) that so long as discrimination between the lasting 
and the evanescent does not arise (‘ so long, there arises no detach- 
ment ’).®® 

64. And as long as he does not cease to hanker after plea- 
sures,— -though in his very presence the pleasures even of him who 
is in the actual enjoyment of them perish, like the flower-garland, 
unguent, raiment and other decorations put on by one (the wife) 
with the object of entering the fire,®’ though experiencing all the 
worries resulting from attempts to secure the objects of pleasure, 
and though failing to attain happiness resulting from enjo5mient 
on account of the worries incidental to them, (so long the desire 
for Freedom does not arise in him). 

®® Of the four indispensable qualifications, desire for Freedom 
is the principal and the other three are auxiliaries. ‘Atha’ in the 
sense of ‘commencement of a new topic will not stimulate inquiry as 
the end in view (phala) is left unspecified. ‘Atha’ meaning subsequence, 
anantarya, therefore means after the desire for Freedom arises. 

«® The text stops with ‘ ’ ; the Vivarana 

completes the sentence by the addition of ' and this 

is printed in the body of the text. 

Refers to the SatT performed of yore when the wife bedecked 
with jewels and flower-garlands and wearing a saffron-coloured garment 
proceeded to the cemetery to immolate herself on the funeral pyre 
of her husband. 



217 


XVIII. 65] THE QUALIFICATIONS OF THE AGENT 

65. Therefore as long as he does not entertain the desire 
for Freedom by cultivating (such virtues as) tranquility, self- 
control, self-abnegation, endurance, mental equipoise, (earnest- 
ness), which are the means of its attainment, so long who will 
betake to the inquiry into Brahman ? If, however, some person 
under impulsion from the Unseen, or by curiosity, or from a 
desire for much learning, should undertake the inquiry he will 
not have the competency to comprehend indubitably, that Brah- 
man is one’s own self, because lacking in the possession of the 
means just enumerated his mind without turning inward will be 
engrossed in things external only.®® 

66. Hence the Acarya (Badarayana) has used the word 
‘ atha ’ to mean ‘ subsequence ’ to the (acquirement) of the group 
of disciphnes described. And the same is expressed by the 
Bhasyakara (in the following words) ; — [“ If those disciplines 
exist either prior to the inquiry into Dharma or after it, one may 
engage in the inquiry into Brahman and acquire the knowledge 
of Brahman but not otherwise (z.e., in the absence of these disci- 
plines). Hence by the word ‘ atha ’ is pointed out that the inquiry 
into Brahman is subsequent to the acquirement of the above- 
expressed means (disciplines).] 

67. [“ The word ‘ atah ’ expresses a hetu or reason.”] 

Purvapaksin . — Let it be so ; but a thing that is a product and 

a thing that is delimited or conditioned do not for that reason 
necessarily denote perishability, as for example, the red colour of 
the atoms which is the result of baking and therefore an effect, 
is admittedly eternal and the atoms themselves which are delimited 
(by space) are eternal.®* In the Veda also imperishableness is 

Katha Up., II. i. 1. Our senses are 
so fashioned that they can only grasp external objects being attracted 
by them and cannot therefore perceive the internal Atman. But some 
heroic soul by turning his eye inwards and longing for immorality 
realises Atman. 

®* The Purvapaksin objects to the taking of the word ‘atah’ in the 
sense of hetu or cause for he says the word ‘atha’ meaning ‘subsequence’ 
also denotes the same idea. The Siddhantin maintains that the aphorist 
by the use of the word ‘atah’ emphasises the causative sense of ‘atha’ 
for such emphasis is needed seeing that doubt; as regards the compat- 
ibility of sadhanacatusfaya serving as a hetu is not easily dispelled. 
When the fourfold discipline is once established as being indispensable 



218 PAS-CAPADIKA of PADMAPADA [XVIIL 68 

declared of the fruit of meritorious action (pu^iyaphala) as witness 

Of one who performs the caturmasya-yaga, the merit does 
indeed become imperishable”; “we drank some and became 
immortal”. 

68. Hence it is not that even men of discretion invariably 
renounce the pleasures of sense. Nor again does desire for 
liberation arise on the strength of a being that is immutable and 
eternal (for there is no probability of identity with the inner wit- 
ness); and because of its absence (viz., renunciation as well as 
desire for liberation)^ no one cultivates tranquillity, self-control, 
etc.; for which reason (f.e., Jiva and Brahman being opposite in 
nature) the jiva’s (bhokta’s) tadatmya with that (Brahman) is 
improbable, nor does (z.e., since Brahman is all-pervading) jiva’s 
reaching that — kutastha — (desire for liberation on the support 
of Kutastha) arise.’® Though sorrows have ceased (in the state of 
moksa), since there is no enjoyment of (positive) pleasure that 
purusartha (f.e., the human end) is not irreproachable. (There- 
fore the abandonment of the enjoyment of the fruit of karma does 
not stand to reason). For fear of indigestion there is no aban- 
donment of food, for fear of mendicants there is no cessation of 
mounting cooking vessels, on the oven. If consequences that 
are evil should arise a remedy must be sought — this is the right 
principle. Hence it (desire for freedom) does not constitute the 
cause of the inquiry into Brahman. 

Siddhdntin . — To meet this argument it is advanced that the 
‘ atah ’ (therefore) is used to point out that it (desire for freedom) 
does constitute the reason (for Brahman-inquiry). 

69. How? (It may be asked). [Because the Veda itself 
declares that the fruit (phala) of Agnihotra and other ritualistic acts 

for Vedantic study all covetings for non-eternal things cease and the 
truth that Brahman alone is eternal while the rest however exalted 
is ephemeral, becomes apparent in conformity with the nyaya — 
— ^whatever is a product is perishable. 

n aira:— (T.D.). 

Because of the improbability of the identity of the individual soul 
with Brahman there arises no efiFort for the Vedantic inquiry by those 
who long for the knowledge of identity— SPUT 

3Tcr: sf And because there is no samyoga relation 

between the jiva and Brahman there arises no effort for inquiry 
approachability. 



i‘ ■ ' .. ' ■" ■ ■ 

I ■ 

XVIII. 70] THE QUALIFICATIONS OF THE AGENT 219 

which are a means of happiness (sreyas) is non-eternal on the 
strength of such passages, ‘ as everything acquired here on earth by 
action perishes similarly whatever has been acquired by the per- 
formance of religious duties perishes in the other world— Chand. 
Up., VIII. i-6, etc.]. (Hence after the acquisition of the four-fold 
discipline the inquiry into Brahman has to be undertaken.) 

Purvapaksin.— \?2igQ 64] Well, we have already said that 
the Veda itself has declared that even the meritorious acts (like 
quarterly offerings) yield imperishable fruit. 

Siddhdntin.-— It is not so. What is a (mere) laudatory state- 
ment is incompetent to declare imperishability when it is con- 
flicted (with a ^ruti— Vedic text) which has the additional strength 
of reasoning based upon facts of experience.’’- Because of the 
perishable nature of atoms and of the quality generated therein 



by heating (we do not admit that either of them is eternal— 
ante). Hence the knowledge of the non-durability of the enjoy- 
ments of the objects of sense does constitute the reason for 
mumuksutva (longing for Freedom). 

70. As for the reason urged for the absence of mumuksutva 
the Bhasyakara says, [“ even so {i.e., as a contrast to what has been 
said of ritualistic acts) the Veda declares that the highest end of 
man is realised by one who has the knowledge of Brahman, as 
witness ‘ He who knows Brahman attains the Supreme ’ — (Tait. 
Up., II. i’ ”.] Hence the conclusion— [“ therefore the inquiry into 
Brahman has to be made after acquiring the aforesaid means.”] 
It is because the hetu when adequate must immediately bring about 
the effect that the Bhasyakara has used the word ‘ kartavya ’ to 
denote inevitability. By one who recoils from all contact with 
duality, and is conscious that his identity with Brahman is within 
grasp the inquiry into Brahman has necessarily to be undertaken 

— ^Now there are two Vedic texts which 
seem to conflict with each other. The Purvapaksin depends on 
‘ 3T^ % I ’ while the Siddhantin on ' sre: 

3<Rf%cfr Chand. Up., VIII. i. 6. The position 

of the Siddhantin is however stronger than that of the objector because 
the text he relies upon, has the support of the logical inference — that 
which is a product is non-etemal— The other text 
therefore occupies a subordinate position being regarded as laudatory 
in character— 3T5RI^. 5re5^aixl-wirfH^75Jlftl — supported by concomit- 
ance — rf^f . 


220 PAHCAPADIKA OF PADMAPADA [XX. 71 

on the analogy of one who should plunge in a lake to cool his 
burning head or of one who standing on tip-toe and touching 
with his finger-ends a luscious fruit, plucks it. When such is the 
case (i.e., when on the strength of both Scriptures and reasoning 
it is proved that the four-fold discipline alone serves as the hetu for 
Brahman-inquiry) the view that the word “ atha ” involves the 
necessary antecedence of inquiry into Dharma is on the aforesaid 
grounds refuted by implication (arthat, i.e., by arthapatti-pramatia). 

XX. 71. [The phrase ‘ Brahmajijnasa ’ has to be construed 
as ‘ Brahmano jijnasa ’) — desire for the knowledge of Brahman. 
If the word ‘Brahman’ in ‘Brahmajijnasa’ is construed with 
‘ inquiry ’ — ^vicara, which is the secondary sense (antarnita, lit. 
inner sense) of jijnasa then indeed the ‘ dependent determinative 
compound ’ (‘ Tatpuru§a samasa ’) would be preceded by a word 
in the dative case (Brahmane jijnasa) but not when ‘Brahman’ 
is construed with the primary sense of jijnasa, i.e., jnaneccha — 
desire for the knowledge (of Brahman) ; with this view, accepting 
the meaning (of the phrase Brahmajijnasa) as yielded by its 
component parts, the Bhasyakara regards it as the genitive 
(objective) compound.'^® 

72. Now that it is time to explain the meaning of the word 
‘ Brahman ’ (in Brahmajijnasa) the Bhasyakara says that the 


etc. — ^The question may well be raised why 
preference is given to the objective genitive compound when the dative 
compound is equally applicable. In the PurvamTmamsa the word 
Dharmajijnasa has been dissolved also into ‘dharmaya jijnasa’ (vide 
Sabarabha§ya, p. 9). The answer is that Samkara accepts the primary 
sense of jijnasa, viz., the desire to know, and not the secondary sense, 
viz., vicara or inquiry. Now desire — ^iccha — bepg desiderative demands 
a word in the objective relation. Hence ‘Brahman’ in ‘Brahmajijnasa’ 
is to be regarded as the object of desire. Hence also the need for 
dissolving the compound as Brahmano jijnasa and talcing it as genitive- 
objective. When the desire to know relates to Brahman, the prayojana 
or fruit has to be stated. But it must be noted that whatever is the 
object of desire — viz.. Brahman, that itself is the prayojana — viz., 
Brahmajnana. 

In the case of other transitive verbs, object and result may be 
distinct but not so in the case of verbs denoting desire. On the other 
hand if the secondary sense, viz,, vicSra is accepted Brahman becomes 
the prayojana and the Vedanta, karma. The prayojana being thus 
prominent the compound may be dissolved into Brahmaije jijnasa. 



221 


XX. 72] THE QUALIFICATIONS OF THE AGENT 

author of the Vedanta aphorisms, himself will state it— [‘ By 
Brahman is meant that from which the origin, etc.] (of the world 
proceed)— Ved. Sut, I. i-2. 

In construing this passage (tatra) the other senses of the word 
Brahman are premised (by way of Purvapaksa) and discarded by 
other commentators. For indeed by the word Brahman the 
Brahmanical caste is not meant since the thing is patent and there 
is nothing to inquire about; nor could it be said that the inquiry 
is to be undertaken by that (caste alone), for Vedic Study is 
enjoined on all the three castes; nor does the word Brahman mean 
the individual soul (jiva), since if jiva is taken as the agent (in the 
Vedantic inquiry) the attributive (viz., jiva agency) would serve 
no purpose (for there can be no inquiry apart from jiva); if it is 
taken as the object (of jijnasa), because it is ever present (i.e., 
since its existence is undoubted, there would be no room for 
inquiry); nor does (Brahman) mean the Veda (lit. the assemblage 
of Vedic passages), since it has already been elucidated in the 
Dharmajijnasa and ‘ autpattika ’ sutras that the Veda is explica- 
tive of something productive of good (arthavatva) and that is a 
valid pramana nor is it (Brahman) to be taken to mean Hiranya- 
garbha,. since the inquiry into Brahman is enjoined on one who 
has renounced all thought of reaching even that state (i.e., of 
Hiranyagarbha), nor can it be said that Hiranyagarbha is the 
karta of (i.e., the person engaged in) Vedantic inquiry since know- 
ledge and renunciation are inseparably associated with him. (He 
is a jivanmukta having attained jnana and vairagya and waiting 
for final release). All this (i.e., the objection raised and its rebuttal) 
need not be undertaken, says Samkara (in the following words) — 
[“ It is therefore not to be imagined that the word Brahman may 
denote some other sense such as the Brahmana caste, etc.”] 

73. [The genitive in the word Brahmanah is used in the 
accusative sense.] In another commentary however the genitive 


The word ‘Brahman’ has several connotations of which one is 
the Veda, but that does not suit here. In the first sutra of Purva- 
mlmamsa Jaimini has shown that karma or ritualistic act is what the 
Vedic texts mean and that karma is productive of good. In the fifth 
sutra known as autpattika sQtra he has pointed out that the validity 
of the Veda as a means of knowledge is unexceptional. Hence it would 
be mere reiteration to accept that sense (vide the present writer’s 
English Translation of Sastra DIpika in the Gaekwad Oriental Series). 



222 PASCAPADIKA OF PADMAPADA pCX. 74 

is explained as denoting relation in general, but that is discarded 
(by the statement)— [‘ not some supplementary relation in gene- 
ral.’] The reason for that (f.e., for not taking it as sesa-sasthi) is 
given in [‘ because the desire for knowledge demands the object 
of desire ’.] 

Purvapaksin. — Even then the object of inquiry may be some- 
thing different (from Brahman which may have a supplementary 
relation to the inquiry). 

Siddhantin. — To this it is answered— [Page 65] [‘No other 
object of inquiry is indicated.’] 

74. Purvapaksin.— advocate of ‘ fesasasthi again argues 
thus: — “ Even if ‘ sesasasthi’ is accepted the objective relation 
of Brahman to the inquiry is not jeopardised since that general 
relation necessarily demands a specific relation”. {Cf., nirvi- 
sesam na samanyam— there can be no general relation without the 
specific relation). No doubt the rule is that the genetive is used 
to denote relation in general (sesasasthi), but still Vyavahara 
(common transactions) do depend upon particulars. And the 
specific relations are many, and of them one has to be singled 
out as otherwise vyavahara would not be possible. There {i.e., 
among the specific relations) in the absence of the context and 
of the Upapadas (juxtaposed words) from which the specific 
relations could be determined, the relation is one of karaka {i.e., 
one of the six relations of nouns with verbs as determined by 
implication, since a specific verb has been used, viz., jijnasa). 
There again the objective relation (karmakaraka) is to be pre- 
ferred seeing that we have a transitive verb {viz., jijnasa) so that 
there is nothing (in this) to conflict with ‘ Brahman ’ being the 
object (of inquiry). 

Siddhantin. — ^With all your reasoning your labour would be 
wasted if you discard the desired sense {viz., objective relation) 
of the common word {i.e., the word which denotes either the 
objective relation or other) and accepting a different sense, again 
try to cognise through its means the desired sense. Hence says 
(the Bhasyakara) — [“ But this way (of interpreting) would amount 
to refusing to take Brahman as the direct object and then again 
to indirectly {i.e., throu^ the means of the general relation) postu- 
lating it (Brahman) in the objective relation — and this attempt 
(of the Vartikakara) serves no purpose.] 

' 75. Purvapaksin. — Well, how is it purposeless ? If we take 
it (Brahmanah) as sesasasthi {ie., as genitive of supplementary 



223 


the agent 

relation in general) it would be as good as our resolving to investi- 
gate everything that is connected in general {i.e., relations as such) 
with Brahman, in fact every particular without whose inquiry 
the nature of Brahman would remain unexpounded. Hence it is 
that the specific relation is not directly intended; since it is inclu- 
ded in the ‘general’ — ^this, that is advanced [by the Purvapaksin 
(the Bhasyakara), states (thus)— “ Not needless ; it is for promis- 
ing the discussion of all matters connected with Brahman (that 
the word ‘ Brahmanah ’ is to be understood as importing general 
relation)]. 

76. Himself premising thus, what is said by the purvapaksin, 
the Bhasyakara says— [“ This is not a cogent argument. For the 
mention of the principal topic naturally implies (by arthapatti- 
pramana) all subsidiary topics connected therewith.] T his state- 
ment is a brief summary of what is intended and it is expanded 
thus ; — [“ Brahman is indeed the most cherished of all objects 
of knowledge; and when that principal (entity) is taken as the 
object of inquiry, all that is related to it, without inquiry into which, 
the nature of Brahman remains unexpounded, is by implication 
presupposed; as such those objects need not be specified in the 
Sutra ; it is parallel to the sentence, ‘ The king is there going ’ 
which is as good as saying that the king is going with his retinue.’] 
Because the attainment of Brahman is the highest human end 
therefore it is the most desired object that is to be attained by 
knowledge. Hence (its being the most desired object) since effort 
(by way of study — sravana, etc.) is for its attainment it (Brahman) 
is the most pre-eminent, and when that which is pre-eminent is 
inquired into, even that {i.e., comprising subsidiary topics, like 
the definition of Brahman — lakiapa, proof for the existence of 
Brahman — ^pramapa, etc.) without whose exposition the inquiry 
would not be complete, by implication only (samarthyadeva) will 
be inquired into with that purpose {i.e., in order that Brahman 
may be understood in all its aspects) and there is no useful purpose 
served by its separate mention. For instance when it is stated 
‘ the king is going ’ because of the presumption that a certain 
retinue is following him as without which there can be no royal 
progress, no one makes any explicit statement of it. Analogously 
here also the inquiry regarding the nature (svarupa), proof, (valid 
means of knowledge), helpful reasoning (yukti), means (of attain- 
ing — sadhana), and the purpose (prayojana) — all of which is 
necessary for the knowledge of Brahman to be complete — results 



224 PA:SCAPADIKA of PADMAPADA [XX. 77 

by implication (arthat) and need not find a separate mention in 
the sutra.’^* 

77. Moreover even the trend of the l§astra points to the 
objective genitive. [Page 66] How (it may be asked)? It is 
indeed thus that the ^astra should be begun. To him who has 
cultivated a spirit of detachment on seeing that the merit (one 
has acquired by works) vanishes, as evidenced by the ^rutis, like 
‘ the world gained by one’s punya-karma perishes Chand. Up., 
VIII. i-6, and on the principle— nyaya (what is a product, that is 
ephemeral) and who ascertaining that the highest human end 
that is achieved from the knowledge of Brahman is the ne plus 
ultra corroborated by the Sruti ‘ The knower of Brahman 
attains the Supreme (Tait. Up. Brahmavalli— i) and who as such 
desires to know (Brahman), (the ?Lsi Varuna) first expounding 
the nature of Brahman in (the words), ‘ Whence surely these beings 
are born, etc., instructs (his son Bhrgu) thus — ‘ that seek thou to 
know; (that is Brahman);— Tait. Up. Bhrguvalli— i) ” which is 
a mandate enjoining that Brahman is to be known directly as the 
object. And this that (Varuna taught and Bhrgu learnt) is 
aphoristically expressed by the present Sutra — “ Then therefore 
is the inquiry into Brahman.” Hence if (Brahmapah) is taken 
as the objective genitive the sutra which as the name suggests 
strings together the reasonings (necessary to determine the import 
of the ^rutis, will be conformable to it (§ruti). Otherwise not 
being conformable to, the laksya {i.e., the srutis which the sutras 
— laksana, expound) the ^utra ceases to be coherent (lit. becomes 
disconnected with the Sruti). This the Bhasyakara expresses thus : 
[‘This interpretation is in agreement with the Scripture’] — a 

So far the meaning of the radical Brahman has been explicated; 
now begins the inquiry into the meaning of the genitive termination 
in ‘Brahmanah’. The text commencing with Wfl'JT and 

ending with is taken up with maintaining the objective 

sense of the genetive termination as against whose proper sphere 

is to denote ‘relations such as obtain between persons or things 
denoted by nouns’. While the upholder of the ksasastbi has to bring 
the objective relation indirectly by presumptive evidence— arthapatti 
the Siddhantin by maintaining karmaiji §asthl shows that all the rela- 
tions expressed by the genetive in its primary sense cannot be implied 
in the objective sense. Pramana is pramajanaka, yukti or tarka is 
pramapanugrahaka, i.e., supportive of a pramana by pointing to the 
probability of the conclusion to which it leads. 



XXL 78J THE QUALIFICATIONS OF THE AGENT ‘ 225 

brief statement which is expanded in, [“Whence, surely, are all 
these beings born, etc.”— srutis such as these, (again) ‘ Desire to 
know that — ‘That is Brahman’, directly represent Brahman as 
the object of the desire of knowledge; and it is only when the 
genitive case is taken to denote the object that the sutra will con- 
form to the Sruti; hence it must be understood that the word 
‘ Brahmanah ’ is in the objective genetive.”’® 

XXL 78. [“The word jijnasa means — ‘ desire to know”] 
— (by this statement) the Bhasyakara gives the meaning of the 
component parts of the word jijnasa for showing that the ‘ san ’ 
ter min ation means desire. It is thereby indicated that that jiiana 
(knowledge) should terminate in the final beatitude (moksa) since 
in the case of (all) the desires (iccha) the visaya is identical with 
the result (phala). The Bhasyakara says; [‘The object of the 
desire as denoted by the ‘san’ termination is knowledge up to 
and inclusive of the complete comprehension of Brahman since 
all desire has for its object that which is its phala.] By the word 
‘avagati’ is meant direct experience; the word jnana however 
may signify even what is mediate (paroksa) and has not yet been 
verified by one’s own experience. It arises as stated before in 
an undetermined form even in that which though immediately 
present appears impropable. Thus the Bhasyakara says :— [“ It 
is indeed knowledge which is the means (pramana) by which the 
full comprehension (avagati) of Brahman is sought to be obtained ; 
the comprehension of Brahman is the purusartha or the human 
end] which means the direct intuition of the self as identical with 
Brahman. 

79. The ^utra under consideration (v/z., the first sutra which 
has been so far explained) is an integral part of the sastra.^® And 


The PancapadikS concludes this section by showing that the 
sutras based as they are on the Srutis must indicate the objective 
relation since such relation is directly expressed in texts like ‘ ciTgT^r- 
Tait. Up., Bhyuguvalli, 1. 3. We have thus direct 
verbal authority in support of the objective relation. Hence ‘Brahma- 
jijnasa’ has to be taken as karmapi §a§thl — the inquiry has Brahman 
as its subject-matter. 

This statement serves as the 
introduction to the Bhasya — which is the finale of 
the third vanjaka. The Vivarana synopsis is here given: — In the 
preceding bha§ya the root jna (in jijnSsa) was explained as denoting 
IC 



226 


PAtCARADTKA OF' PABMArADA; : 

from this' sQtra what is understood is that of the two qualifications 
associated with' the person possessing competency (for Vedantic 
study— adhikarin), viz., desire to comprehend (the Ultimate) and the 
will to attain Freedom, the one (as well as the other three consti- 
tuting the four disciplines) which has arisen from other causes 
constitutes, by implication, the means (hetu), because it precedes 


immediate comprehension— ‘akharKjavrttijnaria—W^is^iq^^T, and as 
such the desire for the direct knowledge of Brahman constitutes the 
import of the sutra statement. It is thus— sut sequent to the attain- 
ment of the four disciplinary aids^ — ^sMhanacatustaya — there arises the 
desire for the direct and immediate comprehension of Brahman’. Now 
it is urged that the prescription of inquiry— is needless 
since the very excellence of the desire (it is to attain the immediate 
knowledge of Brahman than which there is nothing more excellent) 
prompts one to begin the inquiry and that as such the first sutra is 
a mere restatement — ^anuvada. To meet this objection what it is that 
is to be done has to be stated. Since jiiana is declared in the Sruti 
as the desired object it follows that the means to such jflana is also 
desired. But mere desire — cannot be the means for the acqui- 
sition of the direct knowledge of Brahman: it is the inquiry into the 
Vedanta which must follow the desire and precede jnana. Hence the 
word jijnasa should by secondary significance be taken to mean inquiry 
into Vedanta. To point out the import of the proposition thus arrived 
at the Bhasya proceeds with the words In 

order to explain this bhasya the PP. premises 

a possible objection which it refutes. The point of the objection is 
that the first sutra which serves as a foreword to the §astra — ^Vedanta 
sutras — does not deserve to be commented upon since it forms no 
part of the Sastra. For if it did, the question would be whether itself 
is the introduction or another ? The first alternative is liable to the 
fallacy of ‘self-dependence — atmaSraya’ and the second to infinite 
regress — anavastha. The PP. maintains that the first sutra is an 
integral part of the sastra and yet is free from any defect. How (it may 
be asked) ? The gruti Wim} ^k , etc., suggests 

inquiry in a general way and in order that it may be speci- 

fically known the Sruti itself necessitates the first sutra which expounds 
the three essential elements — ^anubandha tritaya, viz., agent competent 
to study the §astra — the subject-matter of the sastra — 
and the fruit to be had from such inquiry — Hence the first 
sutra belongs to the Sastra proper and is occasioned by the Sruti and 
as such is not open either to atmSsraya or anavastha. 


227 


XXI. 80] THE QUALIFICATIONS OF THE AGENT 

(inquiry).” The obligation to undertake the other (vfz., jijnasa 
or inquiry) which follows it (viz., the fourfold discipline) and is 
prompted by it, is intimated directly (Srutya saktya— by the pri- 
mary significance) from the word kartavyah to be understood). 
There no doubt he (the adhikarin) knows that it is his duty to 
undertake it (i.e., to acquire the knowledge of Brahman; hence 
the sutra need not state that the knowledge is to be acquired), 
but by what means (he should acquire it) he does not know. 
Hence the means to its acquisition has to be specified {i.e., he 
should be instructed that the inquiry has to be undertaken by him. 
It is the inquiry that serves as the means to achieve what is desired 
— knowledge of Brahman). The relation — sambandha, the object 
— -visaya, the utility — prayojana, of the §astra have to be stated. 
Otherwise everything would appear as if lacking in sense.’® 
Hence in order to point out that all this (anubandha-catustaya 
the four essential requisites in any sastra) has been indicated in 
this very aphorism the Bhasyakara says [Therefore is the desire 
of knowing Brahman to be cherished.] 

80. Admitting that what is vidheya (vidhivisaya) is vicara 
implicit in (the term (jijnasitavyah) that term is to be taken as 
equivalent to mimamsiiavyah. This is substance in what has 
been said in the bhasya, — “ Therefore is the desire of knowing 
Brahman to be cherished ” — by one who is desirous of knowledge 
of Brahman is this sastra (beginning with ‘ Janmadyasya yataljt ’) 


” — Because the desire for freedom tcgetherwith 

the other three requisites constituting sadhanacatvstEya must precede 
vi.ara, it is to be regarded as occasioning the latter. The causality of 
the fourfold discipline follows from arthapatti pramaria but that of 
inquiry — from the direct statement. 

’® etc. — It may be said that the explanation of individual 

words comprised in the first sutra, viz., atha, atrh, Bralman (as 
objective genitive), jna, and ‘san’ termination, is quite adequate to 
convey the import of the sentence and that in consequence the state- 
ment ‘ flWTm ’ is needless. But it must be borne in 

mind that the discrete meanings of words fail to convey the import of 
the sentence and as such it must be expressly stated. cIFBitl,— 

— ^because of the existence of the four essential elements; 

for the intuitive perception of Brahman; 
inquiry ought to be made. 

This is the vakyartha. 


228 PAnCAPADIKA OF PADMArADA^^^^^^^ [XXI. 80 

to be heard {i.e., studied and comprehended), because the know- 
ledge of Brahman arises, from the study of this treatise. Hence 
(/.e., since Brahma-knowledge results from the sastra) the sastra 
constitutes the means to what is desired {viz.. Brahma-knowledge) 
by the prayojya (the agent). Therefore it comes to this that (the 
first sutra, v/r., ‘ athato Brahmajijnasa ’) has by implication stated 
the sambandha—relation, abhidheya— -vi|aya or object, prayojana— 
fruit of the sastra. 

Here ends the Third Varnaka of the Paficapadika 


VARl^TAKA IV 

IS BRAHMAN A KNOWN ENTITY? 

I. 1. Purvapaksin . — [Page 67J [“ It may again be asked 
whether that Brahman is well known or not well known (before 
one undertakes the inquiry). If known, there is no need to inquire 
into it, but if not known, it is not possible to inquire into it.”] In 
these words the objection points to the absence of prayojana (fruit), 
visaya (content of inquiry), and sambandha (relation).^ 

Siddhantin.—How (does your criticism stand)?® 

Purvapaksin . — ^The word * prasiddha ’ (‘ tat punar Brahma 
prasiddham aprasiddham va syat’ — bhasya) means ‘what is 
known ’. If that (Brahman) is already known by some other 
pramana, then it is not the content of this Sastra.® 

Siddhantin.-^Vox what reason (do you maintain that when 
a thing is once known it cannot be the object of inquiry)? 

Purvapaksin . — Because of the rule that visayata {i.e., objec- 
tivity) is justifiable only when what is yet to be known is expounded, 
and when that is already known the sastra (undertaking to expound 
its nature) will serve no purpose.^ Hence Brahman cannot be 

* etc. — ^The pQrvapaksin urges that since doubt arises as 

to whether there is any relevant subject — vi§aya for the Uttara- 
mlmamsa Sastra to discuss, we are in perplexity and as sush he thinks 
that the study of the Sastra need not be undertaken. His point is 
that there is neither vi§aya nor prayojana whether Brahman is known 
or not. The first stitra by showing that the anubandha-catujfaya exists 
dispelled this doubt. Now the question is again raised whether the 
Sastra has a vi$aya. In the first vantaka objections were answered on 
the basis of illusion. Here the question is raised directly and answered. 
—cf. VPS., p. 176. 

2 The Siddhantin points out the untenability of the objec- 

tion since both visaya and prayojana are implied in the mandate regard- 
ing inquiry, viz., ‘atman is to be perceived, heard about, and meditated 
upon’.— Brh. Up., IV. v. 6. 

® The Sruti quoted, 3IRHI fis^, etc., is not an injunction in reality. 
It is only laudatory since there can be no injunction regarding a thing 
that is already known. 

4 ^ — It will not be the 

means to the end, viz., revealing what is unknown. Lit. 
means useless for the purpose. 



230 PAnCAPADIKA of PADMAPADA [II. 3 

its visaya. And because the knowledge (which can dispel nesci- 
ence) does not arise, from this sastra, the knowledge of Brahman 
is not the fruit of this sastra. Hence {i.e., since the knowledge 
of Brahman which is the instrument by which freedohi is attained 
does not result) even prayojana or phala is negatived. 

2. But suppose (Brahman) is altogether an unknown entity 
then its inquiry is an impossibility. 

Siddhantin . — How (can you maintain this position when you 
have admitted the absence of previous knowledge as a necessary 
element) ? 

Purvapak§m.—Y{o'N is ajiy exposition possible of a thing 
wlxich in its real nature has at no time been brought within the 
ambit of one’s mind? Hence (/.e., since Brahman is an unknown 
enthy) the Vedanta sastra incapable of expounding it cannot even 
so much as touch it.® If however you ask what about the known 
Brahman, we say that it is expounded in this Sastra, because of 
the very fact that it is a known entity, and yet (even though the 
sastra here merely reminds one of what is known), it (sastra) is 
not (to be regarded as) supportless (unrelated) merely on the ground 
that it reveals the significance of the known Brahman (prasiddha 
Brahman).® 

The unknown (aprasiddha) on the contrary is supportless 
(f.e., §abda has no significative potency to reveal such Brahman). 
Hence (i.e., in the absence of abhidha or significative potency) 
the 'Sstra establishes no relation with any meaning — thus criti- 
cised the sambandha (or the significative potency of §abda). 

11. 3. Siddhantin.— \n order to induce effort on the part 
of the learner, the comment, ‘ Brahman is certainly known ’ meets 

® ^ ^51 r% — nor even in a secondary sense is there 

any connection between the Vedanta and Brahman. 

® This is an answer to the objection that the absence of relation is 
admitted in the case of unknown Brahman and not of the known 
Brahman. If the Sastra, says the purvapaksin, expounds Brahman that 
is established from some other pramana even then there does exist the 
relation known as Vrttisambandha which includes the primary-lakti, 
secondary-lak§ana, and figurative gupa, relations. Because §abda 
conveys its sense, ^aktisambandha must be admitted. It is true that 
there is neither vi?aya nor prayojana if what is expounded is the 
known Brahman but on that account sambandha cannot be said to be 
absent. Tn the case of the unknown Brahman both sambandha and 
prayojana are absent. 


II. 4] IS BRAHMAN A KNOWN ENTITY ? 231 

the contention that the triad {viz., vi§aya, sambandha, andprayo- 
jana) is absent.^ 

Purvapak^in. — Well, the §astra (Vedanta sutras) is the work 
of one whose critical acumen and unimpeachable trustworthiness 
are a guarantee that he will not undertake a work which is devoid 
of prayojapa (fruit), visaya (object), and sambandha (relation). 
Hence the learners begin the study solely from their sense of reve- 
rence to him (viz., the sage Vyasa). As such why this trouble 
(to establish the triad — anubandhatraya) ? 

4. Siddhdntin.— Yes, it is true. Because of the respect due 
to the author there arises in a general way the belief that the 
§astra has some benefit to confer, but that in itself cannot induce 
effort. It is well known that all effort is for a benefit that is 
voluntarily sought but what that (benefit) is cannot be understood 
unless it is distinctly expressed. 

5. Purvapaksin . — Even so let the specific benefit (prayojana) 
alone be expressed (and not the other two, viz., object and relation). 
What is not identical, with the visaya (object of inquiry), and is 
unfit to be expounded fails to be prayojana. For instance, the 
tree which is the object of the act of cutting is spoken of as the 
phala (prayojana or the desired result) after it is cut; again 
the same clay which is the visaya for the operation of the 
potter’s club becomes the prayojana in its changed condition 
as pot.® 


’ Simkara is emphatic about Brahman’s being known. Then the 
question will be why inquiry should be undertaken regarding an entity 
the knowledge of which none doubts. The answer is that the inquiry 
is appropriate where the knowledge of a thing is superficial and its 
specific nature remains unknown.. Now in regard to Brahman though 
its knowledge is not altogether new what its real essence is has to be 
ascertained. Hence there is scope for inquiry and the treatise under- 
taking such inquiry has all the three prerequisi es — subject-matter or 
visaya, purpose or prayojana, and relation or sambandha. 

8 — ^Without being identical with the visaya. 

it is not a fit subject for exposition, i.e., 
there exists no proper relation between the work and the subject it 
proposes to expound. In fine the subject-matter should be special 
to it. What the pQrvapaksin means is that when the phala is stated, 
ipso facto, the visaya and sambandha become known and there is np 
need for their specific mention. 


232 PA^CAPADIKA OF PADMAPADA [II. 7 

6. Siddhantin . — It is true®; but even then when (for instance) 
there are several medical authorities like Caraka, Susruta, Atreya 
and SO on, for acquiring knowledge in therapeutics or (to vary the 
example) when there are different ways for the production of rice 
(from paddy), like pounding, unhusking with the finger-nails, and 
grinding, the adoption of the one to the exclusion of the other 
(say the study of Caraka for the knowledge of medical treatment, 
pounding for getting rice) is not incumbent. [Page 68] Even 
so here also if the knowledge of Brahman could be had somehow 
(i.e., through some other pramana) one does not necessarily under- 
take the study of this (sastra) only. Hence (i.e., to obviate such 
dubiousness) a visaya that stands out distinct from the rest has to 
be stated ; it is like this — ^when it is said that this (viz., the killing 
of the demon by name Nivatakavaca) is the visaya of Arjuna 
(i.e., what is to be accomplished by him) we understand that the 
visaya (the killing) is something not possible for another (in other 
words the competency to kill the demon is to be found only in 
Arjuna). As such (i.e., since, if the visaya is not specifically men- 
tioned the knowledge that is unique— ananyasadharana does not 
arise) the visaya as the auxiliary (i.e., the means) to effort has to 
be stated (i.e., that the nature of Brahman is to be ascertained 
from this and not from any other sastra). 

7. Sambandha (relation) also in its character as auxiliary 
to effort only, has to be stated. For instance the knowledge of 
the correct use of words before one has commenced the study of 
grammar is not possible of achievement by any other means; 


® — The siddhantin queries the pGrvapak§in — 

(i) whether alt the three pray ojana, visaya and sambandha are 

identical; 

(ii) whether when the prayojana is specified the other two 

necessarily follow by arthapatti— implication; 

(iii) whether visaya and sambandha need not be stated seeing 

that prayojana is a sufficient inducement for effort. 

He says that none of these contentions can be maintained. The 
three are distinct. Prayojana means what is sought for by one; 
visaya, that which is not established by any pramana except by vicara 
sastra and sambandha is the relation between the Sastra that expounds 
and Brahman that is expounded. Arthapatti is inapplicable here 
since there is no necessary sequence between the one and the other. 
No effort is possible unless all the four (the fourth is the adhikarin) 
constituent elements — ^anubandha-catu^Jaya are found in combination. 



233 


II. 7] IS BRAHMAN A KNOWN ENTITY ? 

hence there exists no relation with anything else. Therefore he 
who seeks it (z.e., the knowledge of correct usage) does not enter 
upon any other study (say, the study of medicine). Again, the 
preparation of food though possible of accomplishment by one 
process only {i.e., by cooking), it is not possible of accomplishment 
by the one process of the act of going. Hence there exists no 
relation between the act of going (gamanakriya) and the produc- 
tion of food. Therefore one desirous of food does not undertake 
a journey, etc.^® As such the fruit — prayojana, which consists 
in the fulfilment of some human end, object— visaya or what is 
not possible of attainment from any other than from the one 
intended, and relation— sambandha being (one of expounder 
and expounded), all these differ from one another (and therefore 
have to be stated separately). 


^® It may be argued that relation— apart from the subject 
of inquiry— i^zr, need not be mentioned since visaya cannot remain 
isolated but must imply relation. But it has to be pointed out that by 
visaya we mean what is possible of being expounded only by the 
sastra of which it is the visaya and by none other; sambandha on the 
other hand emphasises its (visaya) inseparable relation, with the Sastra 
or in other words negates its non-relation — Hence both 
vi§aya and sambandha should be explicitly stated. Two illustrations 
are given in the text to show that mere mention of vi|aya without 
sambandha would lead to an irrelevant conclusion.— (i) A person 
wishing to acquire knowledge of the correct use of language, when he 
is not engaged in the study of grammar may proceed to the study 
of a medical treatise like Caraka for here is vi§aya without sambandha. 
How ? Because the knowledge of the correct use of language is not 
possible of acquisition ‘by a pursuit other than that of medical 
science’. Here the definition of vi§aya is satisfied, viz., 
incapable of being expounded by any means other than that. To 
avoid such a contingency distinct mention of sambandha is essential. 
But there exists no relation between the study of medical science and 
linguistic knowledge. Hence no one engages in the study of medical 
science for acquiring knowledge of the right use of words. Similarly 
one who wishes to prepare food will not undertake a journey to , 
a village, for there is no sambandha, though visaya in its literal sense 
exists. Before one is engaged dn cooking which alone is the means 
to produce food, one will ncrt proceed on a journey though food is 
not the outcome of “ any meahs other than the journey ” — thus satisfying 
the definition of visaya. But since; the relation between the two acts 


is absent one whose object is to get 


food will not proceed on a journey. 



234 PAS’-CAPADIKA OF PADMAPADA^^ ^ 

8. And these three are the means to effort (pravrtti). No 
sensible person will engage in an occupation which serves no end, 
such as the counting of a crow’s teeth or the threshing of husk. 
When the knowledge of the healing art which is the end in one’s 
view is secured by the study of Susruta, etc., one is not constrained 
to study Caraka. Nor when rice is produced by grinding (the 
paddy) would one necessarily resort to pounding — (the latter 
two examples relate to the absence of visaya). Though the know- 
ledge of the correct use of words which is the object aimed at is 
not acquired by any other means— -(here we have both visaya and 
prayojana), no one would resort to the study of medical science 
since it is not the means (of acquiring such knowledge) nor resort 
to ‘ gamana ’ (setting out on a journey) since it is not the means 
of producing ‘ odana ’ (meal). There (when the opponent raised 
the query whether Brahman was known or not known and urged 
that inquiry was out of place in either case), having discarded, on 
the ground of the conflicting views (held by different schools of 
thought), the absolute knowability or absolute unknowability (of 
Brahman, the Bhasyakara) has shown the possibility of explain- 
ing the nature of Brahman, as also the impossibility of establish- 
ing it by any means other than (the vicarasastra) and thereby has 
justified the tenability of both visaya and sambandha. And when 
it is stated [that the inquiry having the highest beatitude as its 
prayojana is begun] (the existence of) prayojana also (has been 
proved).^^ 

III. 9. Purvapaksin . — Is not Brahman the subject-matter 
(visaya) of the Vedanta portions and the sastra (r.e., Vicara ^astra, 
Uttaramimamsa) on the other hand is concerned with stating 
reasons by means of which the conviction arises that the Vedanta 
texts generate the knowledge of Brahman ? Then how could it 


f^5if?r7T5T^r-cf=T:— The opponent’s contention is that though 
visaya, prayojana and sambandha are indispensable for inducing the 
study of any Sastra, they cannot be shown to exist here on the postu- 
lation of either alternative, i.e., whether Brahman is known or is not 
known. If known, visaya and prayojana are absent, if unknown, 
sambandha as well as prayojana is absent. In answer, the Bhasyakara 
says that neither alternative is right in entirety and that Brahman is an 
entity that can be expounded. He thus maintains the tenability 
of all the three essential requisites for the commencement of the 
Sastra, 



III. 10] IS BRAHMAN A KNOWN ENTITY ? 235 

be maintained that the sastra has visaya and sambandha As 
for prayojana it is even possible of occasionally resulting though 
indirectly, just as the object of one’s wish is possible of attainment 
by the study of the sastras dealing with dharma and artha.^® 

10. Siddhantin. — Well, just as the fore-offerings (prayaja, 
etc.) constitute the ‘ itikartavyata ’ of yagas like Agneya which 
yield svarga, even so the vicara (mimamsa) is the itikartavyata of 
the Vedanta which yields (the fruit in the shape of) the right know- 
ledge of Brahman ; hence being of the nature of itikartavyata 
the sastra also has the same subject-matter (visaya) as the Vedanta 
itself, seeing that it is auxiliary to it in producing the knowledge 
of its import (v/r.. Brahman).^* It cannot be that water, etc., 
which are aids to the paddy grains in putting forth the sprout 
have not also the sprout as their product (karya). Therefore it 
is indubitable that the vedanta sastra alone is means of the know- 
ledge of Brahman and that the inquiry (mimamsa) fulfils the func- 
tion of itikartavyata (z.e., steps into the place of itikartavyata) 
and yet it (the vicara) has Brahman only as its visaya. It is not 
that the wood-cutter’s action (vyapara) of the nature of raising and 
bringing down (the axe) having the axe as its visaya has not also 


stfT — ^The inconsistency pointed out here is 

that the three essentials spoken of, can justly pertain to Vedanta only 
and not to the Uttaramimamsa (VedSnta stitras). The function of the 
latter is to interpret the Upanisads by adducing pertinent texts and 
cogent reasoning. It is interpretational and has only an instnimental 
value. 

The prayojana in the case of Vedanta is Brahmasaksatkara or 
the direct realisation of Brahman. The study of Vedanta sutras by 
eradicating all doubts and wrong notions strengthens the conviction 
of identity got from the pregnant texts like ‘That thou art’. Thus the 
sutras have an indirect value. A parallel may be cited. The study of 
works dealing with dharma (ritual) and artha (wealth) helps one to 
attain happiness indirectly through obtaining ‘svarga’ or wealth as the 
study is of the one or the other. 

The Vedas enjoin the performance of yagas of which the 
principal ones are Agneya, etc., and the auxiliary ones are the five 
prayajas. Without the latter the desired end will not eventuate. 
Similarly, Vedanta is the direct means of Brahma-realisation, but the 
study of the Uttaramimamsa iS" aii.: essential auxiliary to the right 
understanding of vedanta. 

Procedure of :^rfotaance, ■ 



236 


PAS-CAPADIKA of PADMAPADA [III. 11 

the tree as its visaya because it is meant for that purpose (I.e., 
for splitting the tree), and because (the action of) the instrument 
{viz., the axe) is the intermediate step (by which the required object 
is gained). Otherwise (/.e., if the objective relation of the tree 
via the axe is not admitted) the agent’s action would be in one 
locus (viz., the axe) and the result (of such action) in another, 
(v/z., the tree) so that each would be subsisting in a different 
substratum (and this goes counter to common experience). 

11. PurvcpaAr^iw.— [Page 69] This is to be said — ^your 
illustration is inappropriate. It is only where in which object) 
the phala (end in view) itself does not eventuate without the aid 
of something else, that something also has that object as its visaya.“ 
But here on the contrary even apart from the mimamsa (the 
Uttaramimamsa 4astra) the sentence (the vedantic text) conveys 
the sense requiring only (on the part of the hearer) a knowledge 
of the primary significance of words, its recollection and the 
revival in the mind of the meaning, and it (sentence) does not need 
any other aid.^® 

12. Siddhantin.—^tW, lh& inquiry (mimamsa) by removing 
all doubts and erroneous notions becomes the means of determin- 
ing the sense (of the Vedantic texts) and because the determined 
(v/z., Brahman that is demonstrated) is the principal (visaya) of 
this determination (nirnaya) the entity that is demonstrated 
becomes the object of the hetu (v/z., vicara) of the nirnaya also.^’ 


The phala — the being split in twain, has the tree as its locus and 
it cannot be brought about except by the upward and downward 
movement of the axe. Hence the axe, is directly the visaya of the 
movement and the tree indirectly. Here however, says the opponent, 
even without inquiry the phala — ^Brahman-cognition takes place in the 
locus, v/z., Brahman; as such it is not the visaya of inquiry — ^vicara. 

In order that the Uttaramimamsa may be considered indispens- 
able like the fore-offerings in a ritual there must be Vedic sanction 
which, the purvapaksin says is absent. Nor is the inquiry indispens- 
able since one who has a fair knowledge of the language can construe 
the sense of the Upanisadic passages with the aid of accessories such as 
expectancy — sirajl^^rT, juxtapositiQn--Ul%f>? and compatibility — 
knowledge of the relation of the word with its object , etc. 

The siddhantin admits that even without inquiry, the Upanisadic 
passages can be understood with, the knowledge of grammar and 
idiom, but the vicara is intended to clarify the text by dispelling doubts 
ftud difficulties that may arise at the time of comprehending its import, 



237 


III. 13] IS BRAHMAN A KNOWN ENTITY? 

13. Purvapak'.in . — ^Your argument is unsound. Where indeed 
on the hearing of a sentence more than one cognition arises irres- 
pective of inquiry there one (of them only) must be regarded as 
having been truly produced by the sentence, because a proposition 
once stated is by rule capable of conveying only one meaning; 
the rest on the other hand are due to one’s having observed the 
same words used in different contexts. (But then what purpose 
does the inquiry serve?) There (i.e., where different cognitions 
arise) when the inquiry is carried on in conformity with the signi- 
ficative potencies of words as commonly accepted, one gets to 
know that one particular jnana is truly produced by the words 
(composing the Vedantic text) and then one comes to the conclu- 
sion that its (jnana) visaya is the meaning of the Vedic (text in 
question) and as such one discards the rest, but (it is to be noted 
that) by no means does the sastra (Uttaramimamsa) function in 
the production of the determining jnana, (here, the jnana by which 
the Ultimate is comprehended). For instance though the eye 
has come into contact (with a tree) it may create doubt owing to 
a certain cause, whether it is a tree or a man, or it may create 
(owing to some other cause) the erroneous notion that it is a man 
and subsequently on the strength of other causes it produces the 
indubitable right knowledge. But this is not analogous. It is 
not that Sabda, before the inquiry is undertaken produces either 
doubtful or erroneous cognition and then again with the help of 
the inquiry produces the indubitable right knowledge; but on 
the contrary even before securing any support from the inquiry 
it (§abda) has by its own competency (to generate valid cognition) 
actually produced such knowledge.^® To conclude the (Uttara- 
mxmamsa) §astra has not Brahman as its visaya. 

It is the Vedanta that is mainly concerned with elucidating Brahman 
but doubt as to the correct meaning of Brahman arises when the 
significative potency of the word or the import of the passage in which 
it occurs is missed and it is to dispel such doubt that vicara is 
indispensable. Hence Brahman becomes its vi§aya. 

“ The pUrvapaksin animadverts against the assertion that sabda, 
when vitiated somehow generates wrong knowledge and -that inquiry 
eradicates the defect Tn the Sabda and enables it to produce right 
knowledge. He maintains that Sabda is self-valid and by its very 
nature produces right knowl^gfe Wrong knowledge however is due 
to the defects either in the man, the sense-organs, or the object of 
cognition. 



238 PAnGAPADIK A OF PADMAPADA^^ ^^^ [III. 14 

14. Paramasiddhdntin. — Here is the answer.’^® No doubt 
the cognition of the propositional import (vakyartha) arises even 
before any support is had from the sastra (Uttaramimamsa). 
But still being confronted by a (different) cognition which mani- 
fests itself at the very time its import (f.e., of the proposition or 
Vakya) is being determined, which has arisen from the similarity 
(of the very words used in different contexts), which has as its 
visaya something distinct (from the knowledge of unity), and 
which is fancied to be of equal validity with itself {viz., the know- 
ledge of oneness), it (the vakyarthajnana) is reduced as it were 
to the plight of one who sinks and rises in water (z.e., appears 
as though it were beset with doubt and error). And in this state, 
placed in the category of dubious cognitions (it vakyarthajnana) 
gets support from the inquiry made in conformity with the signi- 
ficative potency of words, with the result that the hostile cogni- 
tion does not arise and the doubt as regards its validity disappears 
(nimajjanabhavat) so that the inquiry is spoken of in a secondary 
sense, as if producing an unwavering and indubitable cognition; 
but it is not the direct cause of indubitable knowledge. This being 
so the mimamsa (i.e., the inquiry) serves by secondary significa- 
tion as an auxiliary means in the understanding of the vedanta 
passages which expound Brahman (/.e., which have Brahman as 
their visaya); hence it is that the sastra is spoken of as having the 
knowledge of Brahman for its content. 

15. And this triad consisting of prayojana (benefit) vi§aya 
(object) and sambandha (relation) has to be rendered explicit at 
the commencement of the treatise as integral to the hearer’s 


— ^What follows is the statement of the siddhantin 
proper — 'tWtr'lgl'cfr, as distinguished from the purvavadin, the inter- 
mediary who argued against the pQrvapakiin. His view coincides with 
that of the purvavadin in respect of the self-validity of sabda and of 
the subsidiary function of vicara in removing the obstacles to Sabda 
serving as the determining factor of knowledge. But, he maintains 
that Sabda when beset by contradictory notions loses its capacity to 
dispel ignorance. It is then that vicSra conducted on approved lines 
will enable one to perceive what exactly the vedanta texts import. 
Hence the vicara performing this function of removing wrong notions 
is by way of figure spoken of as bestowing on Sabda the capacity to 
determine the sense. Vicara is, not the direct means in the deter- 
mination of the sense. In this way, vicara should be understood as 
having Brahman as its vi?aya. 


239 


rV. 16] IS BRAHMAN A KNOWN ENTITY ? 

pravrtti (/.e., one’s undertaking the study of the iastra). No 
doubt from the very fact of our regard for the author we presume 
that the sastra is purposeful; but yet what specific purpose it is, 
we cannot understand from its mere knowledge {i.e., from our 
respect for the author) if it is not explicitly stated. [Page 70] 
Hence it has to be indicated. Even when attention is drawn to 
it (v/z., the specific phala or prayojana) a person may think that 
the sastra is incapable of revealing such phala and so his ardour 
having abaied he will not undertake (the study of MTmamsa) ; 
as such it is necessary to point out the sadhya.®® (Again) even 
when one has the knowledge that this can denote the fruit, pravplti 
does not arise in case this result is seen to accrue from some other 
means. Hence it is also necessary to show the impossibility of its 
being revealed by any means (other than the sastra). And this trial 
is found together and also separately in one and the same context.®* 
Let not the topic be prolonged. 

IV. 16. The Bhasyakara, by the statement [‘ Brahman, we 
maintain, is known’, etc.] has shown that universal experience 
vouches for the existence of Brahman and that as such having 
discarded the view that Brahman is unknown he has maintained 
that because the nature of Brahman is possible of being expounded 
(by the sastra) there exists the relation (of expounder and ex- 
pounded, pratipadya-pratipadaka sambandha between the §astra 
and visaya, viz.. Brahman). (It may be asked) ‘ how ’.®® As for 

Hftsrr . . . . The first sutra has no doubt intimated the 
fruit — ^prayojana, yet the relation between the Uttaramimamsa §astra 
and the prayojana has not found a definite mention as one of expounder 
and expounded— Hence the relation has to be 
specifically stated. 

^ OTsrfirrr. Here Brahman is visaya, 
liberation is prayojana, the one (i§astra) being the expounder and the 
other (Brahman) expounded, is the relation, sambandha — thus these 
can be expressed as distinct. Similarly Brahman-knowledge is the 
prayojana, relationship appertains to that only since it is expounded by 
the work, 3'firifiJTt?tT and finally that itself is the contert — since 
it cannot be established by any pramapa other than that, viz., sabda. 
Thus these can be expressed in their aggregate character. 

— ^The purvapak^in finds fault with the assertion — 3Ti% 
Brahman is beyond perception’s range being void of colour 
and shape; nor can it be the content of inference for the latter 
presupposes perception; nor again is, the Veda capable of revealing 


240 PASCAPADIKA of PADMAPADA^^^^^^ [IV. 17 

the word Brahman (we say, that it is not used in the sutra (athato 
Brahmajijnasa) in any one of the senses — (Brahmana) caste, 
individual soul, the creator (lit. one who is seated on the lotus), 
and the Veda (lit. assemblage of words), because it has been 
pointed out that such an interpretation fits ill (with the definition 
of Brahman, as given in the second sutra. Hence it is seen that 
the word is in reality used to denote some other entity in view. 
As such on the analogy of the meanings of words like svarga, 
apurva, devata, it becomes evident that there exists some (special) 
meaning solely on the ground that it is used (in the Sruti and 
sutra).®® 

17. Purvapaksin.—^hsit is jejune. A word does not pro- 
duce immediately the knowledge of a thing not previously compre- 
hended as does the eye, etc. (if otherwise, Le., if the word could 
produce such cognition) we would be in a position to know by 
the mere use of the word the meaning of a thing which was neither 
comprehended before nor avouched by any other pramaria. And 
even (the meanings of) entities like svarga, etc., are not deter- 
mined by the mere use of the words. 

18. Siddhantin . — ^We will answer. Suppose in some sen- 
tence with the exception of a single word the meaning of other 
words is well-known, we put this question — do you abandon that 
(viz., the well-known import) because of the offence of non- 
comprehension of a single word or would you attempt to some- 
how comprehend the meaning of that word though unknown 
before on the strength of the fact that many words (there), have 
their significance previously ascertained? In such a case (tatra — 
when we have a sentence of this description) on the strength of 

it since its real significance is undetermined. But even when the 
meaning of the word Brahman is known it cannot generate the 
propositional import — for isolated words can only recall their 
primary sense. Supposing the meaning of the proposition arises when 
the word Brahman is found as a part of the sentence, it may mean 
Brahmapa caste, Hirariyagarbha, etc., and we may fail to determine 
its real sense here. 

The objection is that the word Brahman cannot, as supposed 
by the siddhantin,- convey a non-empirical sense — because the 
primary significance of Vedic words is, in conformity with that of 
secular words. Words bear the same meaning whether found in sacred 
or profane literature. The Siddhantin answers that not the whole of 
the Vedic usage is in conformity with secular usage. 



IS BRAHMAN A KNOWN ENTITY? 


241 


IV. 19] 


nigama, ninikta, and vyakara^a which serve as the means of 
ascertaining the relation of such meaning the relation of 
the distinctive sense of the unknown word with the rest of the 
words) we should establish the connection and understand the 
import of the proposition (vakyarthavagati).^* This is the right 
course. What is well comprehended is not to be set aside by 
what is not comprehended. The rule is that on the strength of 
the comprehended the non-comprehended even should be rendered 
explicit. 

19. Purvapaksin. — Well, if the relation of the meanings (of 
words) is made to depend on nigama, etc., it would somehow be 
possible to understand such relation of meanings as existing every- 
where and there would be chaos as regards the meanings of words, 
with the result that the vakyartha (propositional import) would 
be left undetermined. 

Siddhantin . — If so Nigama, etc., are meaningless. 

(Nigama, etc.,) are significant in contexts 
where with the main object of elucidating the vakyartha a word is 
used in a sense even different from its own : in such a situation 
when .we inquire how that word could denote this (altered sense) 
we come to know that it is owing to the relation of the meaning 
of a single constituent element of that word with this (altered) 
significance.®® 


— ^What ‘nigama’ denotes is that when the root-meaning 
of a word composed of the root and the termination, is in harmony with 
the context that meaning alone should be regarded as fixe one denoted 
by the entire word. In the bhajya — it is clearly 
stated that from the etymology of the word Brahman ‘byh’ — to be 
great, the all-pervading Brahman alone is meant. From that root- 
meaning, i%TriT we also understand what the chief attributes of 
Brahman are, viz., eternal purity, eternal knowledge and eternal 
freedom. 

a#PT:— The word ‘Brahman’ is found in association 
with other words constituting a sentence and the sentence-import will 
be incoherent unless ‘Brahman’ is taken in a specific sense. Here 
Nigama comes to our aid. When from its root-meaning Brahman is 
understood to mean all-embracing, there the vakya, WH will 

yield a coherent sense. Eternal existence, knowledge and limitlessness 
cannot be attributed to Brahman if it should be particular caste, 
Hirapyagarbha, etc. 


18 



242 


PAtCAPADIKA OF PADMAPADA 


tIV.20 


Siddhantin . — ^Then it comes to this that for determining one 
(definite) meaning (discarding the rest) you seek the support of 
prayoga (z.e., the use of an indeterminate word in association 
with words of ascertained sense), we say (on the other hand) that 
even where there is not that prayoga, the nigama, etc., function 
in determining the (one among the several senses of a word). 
As such there is no blemish of any kind. 

20. Therefore (since the distinctive sense can be ascertained 
on the basis of nigama discarding the conventional sense) when 
we trace to the root, the word Brahman (occurring in the sutra 
and vedanta, i.e., when the derivation of the word is taken into 
account) we find that the meaning of the root ‘ Brh’— ‘to be 
great’ is connected with (Brahman).^® Because of the absence 
of relation with (a special meaning indicated), and because if the 
word ‘Brahman’ should have some other significance (say, akasa) 
—cosmic space, it would denote relative greatness which as such 
is unacceptable, we infer that from the word Brahman an entity 
possessed of unexcelled magnitude (alone) is fit to^be associated with 
the (sense of the) other members of the sentence (Satyam, Jnanam, 
Anantam — absolute existence, consciousness, infinite). [Page 71] 
Hence, because of the absence of alpatva (smallness— restrictedness) 
due to the delimitation caused by time, some entity that is con- 
stant and therefore eternal is intimated by the term Brahman. 


The purvapaksa is that where the conventional sense of a word 
say, Brahman ill-assorts with the meanings of other words in whose 
company it appears in a propositional statement, nigama solves the 
difficulty on the basis of arthapatti; but the siddhanta ignores the 
conventional sense, for in the case of Brahman no conventional sense 
is possible being incapable of corroboration by any other pramSna. 
It is its association with words of definite significance that necessitates 
us to resort to the root-meaning, nigama. The word s#rnr is used 
twice; the first means and the second, 

etc. — What alpatva means is the limitation caused 
by place, time and object. , The absence of limitation constitutes the 
unsurpassed greatness of Brahman. Such greatness is denoted by the 
very word Brahman provided it is not used with any qualifying adjunct 
or in any specific context. 

^315^ points to the limitation caused by time; etc., 

that caused by vastu or object; that caused by space. The 

use of the word in the bha§ya is to intimate 

the absence of these three limitations. 


V. 21] IS BRAHMAN A KNOWN ENTITY ? 243 

Even so, if an entity distinct (from Brahman) did exist 
restrictedness would result due to its absence in Brahman. 
And that (contingency) is avoided by the very word Brahman. 
Hence the knowledge of a homogeneous, non-dualistic entity is 
conveyed by the word ‘ Brahman From this (very fact, viz., 
absence of limitation caused by time and object) it must be under- 
stood that the limitation caused by space also is negatived. It is 
only when another entity exists we could say that this entity as 
distinguished from the other has its existence limited only to thus 
much space and does not extend beyond, being excluded by that 
other. That being absent there arises no idea of circumscription. 

21. That Brahman is (pure) consciousness also results from 
the connection of the root-meaning only (with Brahmani. How ? 
All that is other than consciousness falls under the category of 
the experienced. Hence as compared with the experiment it is 
inferior, being subordinate to him. Consciousness on the other 
band is subordinate to none. Hence from its connection with the 
meaning of Brh only, we arrive at the notion of some entity which 
is the most excellent of all and is of the nature of consciousness.*® 
‘ Freedom ’ also (is ascertained from the same root-meaning). 
The person who is under the sway of nescience (avidya), lust 
(kama) and karma (riies) being pulled this way and that by them 
like an animal (in his case driven from earth to svarga and back 
again and so on indefinitely) becomes a despised being. The 
word ‘ Brahman ’ on the other hand by investing some entity 
with its sense (i.e., the root-meaning, viz., mahatva or greatness) 
makes us cognisant of its transcendental greatness, and freedom 
for ever from avidya, etc., which constitute the seed of the world- 
cycle. 

22. That [“that entity is endowed with omniscience and 
omnipotence ”] is known from the word ‘ Brahman ’ alone It 
may be asked ‘ how ’ ! If there should be something unknown 
to it (entity), or if its potency were to turn back frustrated from 
any act, then its excellence would be relative (and not absolute). 
But that (relative excellence) is inappropriate in relation to an 
entity not established by any other (pramapa) but whose nature is 
vouched for by the very use of the word {viz., Brahm.an). If the 


This is the idealistic standpoint. The word ‘Brahman’ points 
to perfection or absoluteness in every respect since there is no reason 
to restrict that perfection to a particular aspect. 


244 PANCAPADIKA OF PADMAPADA [V. 24 

word Brahman is applied to a thing previously given in other 
prama^as (like perception, etc.), the greatness (mahatva) of that 
thing is perceived only to the extent that is warranted by the pra- 
mapa which has avouched it. If from the word only we cognise 
the relation of its meaning (with the rest of the vakya in which it 
occurs) we have to admit that its meaning is unfettered (suffers no 
limitation). 

23. To conclude, the meaning of the root (‘ brh’ will be 
complete if the whole of the universe lies directly in the path of 
(Brahman’s) consciousness (sarvajnatva) and is under (Brahman’s) 
control (sarvaSaktitva). What has been demonstrated so far is 
thus expressed (by Samkara) — [“ There certainly exists Brahman 
characterised by eternal purity, consciousness, and freedom and 
endowed with omniscience and omnipotence ; if indeed we consi- 
der the etymological sense of the word Brahman, we come to know 
that eternal purity, etc., are the attributes of Brahman since the 
meaning of ‘ Brh ’ is in consonance thereof”.] 

V. 24. Purvapa/rnn.— -Well, even on this (procedure), that 
is, by keeping close to the derivative sense there is just the possi- 
bility of getting an idea of the existence of an entity possessing 
such qualities (as eternal purity, etc.) ; but from this alone 
Brahman is not indubitably established for the mere word (viz.. 
Brahman) is not a valid means of knowledge. 

Siddhantin . — It is just so. But it is for that very reason 
(namely) that as regards the knowledge of Brahman endowed 
with such qualities as purity, wisdom, freedom, etc., there is only 
probability and not certainty, there is room for inquiry as in the 
case of Dharma whose existence is vouched for by empirical 
judgment which has the semblance of pramana. What follows 
is the statement of another reason to prove the existence of the 
entity denoted by the term ‘Brahman’. 

25. (And that is rendered explicit in the Bhasya) — [“ Every 
one is aware of the existence of atman (/.e., his own self) and no 
one says ‘ I am not (existing) ’ ; if the existence of atman were 
unknown everyone (without exception) would think ‘ I am not ’ 
(existing). And Atman is Brahman ”]. 

Piirvapak^in . — But how (do you maintain that) atman is 
(identical with) Brahman? 

Siddhantin . — [Page 72] Because of the fact that in the 
Vedanta texts the word Brahman is used to denote atman. And 
it is that atman only (of which the Veda speaks) which is desig- 



VI. 26] IS BRAHMAN A KNOWN ENTITY ? 245 

nated the ego (aham) in the world. Hence as the idea conveyed 
by the ‘ ego ’ is known to be Brahman only there is no room for . 
the doubt whether Brahman is known.*® 

VI. 26. Purvapaksin . — [“But if Brahman is understood by 
all as the self then the same objection holds good that because it is 
known there is no occasion for inquiry. ”] Thus he argues against 
there being any object (visaya) of inquiry (at all). 'It is only an 
unknown thing whose nature has to be ascertained that consti- 
tutes an object (of inquiry). But if already ascertained it is not 
again (attempted to be) ascertained, so that there exists no visaya 
for this (Uttarambnamsa) §astra. 

27. Siddhantin . — ^[Tt is not so; (though all are aware of the 
existence of atman) differences of opinion exist as regards its 
specific nature.] As such, visaya and sambandha are established 
— (to explain)— it is true that the notion of ego points to atman and 
atman is (no other than) Brahman, but it is there only that a 
conflict of opinions arises (some averring that) it is this (i.e., of this 
description ; some again averring that) it is this {i.e., of a different 
description). Those (conflicting views) in reality are with refer- 
ence to the meaning of the word ‘ Brahman ’ only because both 
Brahman and atman denote identically the same thing. Hence 
though a matter of universal experience (that which is the content 
of the ego-notion) its specific nature is not indubitably established; 
as such, it is as good as not established so that the visaya (of the 
sastra) is secured for the reason the specific nature (of atman) 
has to be determined. Because it is known in a general way it is 
possible to investigate into its specific nature. Hence the Mstra 
becomes the means of ascertaining its specific nature ; the relation 
(between the §astra and Brahman or viz., one of exponent and ex- 
pounded, pratipadaka — ^pratipadya) is also thereby proved to 
exist. 

28. How opinions conflict is shown in [“ mere body, etc.”]. 
As when the word ‘ go — cow ’ is used amidst a variety of notions 
suggested such as the individual configuration (akrti), class (jati) 
movement (kriya), quality (guna), dewlap, etc. ; jati as the primary 


etc. — ^From the deriyative significance of the word 
‘Brahman’ as also from universal experience. Brahman becomes a 
known entity and the enquiry consequently is of the known Brahman, — 
afctTsf^. It is such BraWan that is the content of the inquiry and not 
a thing altogether unknown. 



246 PANCAPADTKA OF PADMAFADA [VII. 30 

sense (of the word cow) is admitted by some, individual (vyakti) 
by others, and so on ; similarly when the ego-notion arises in 
the presence of the aggregate of the body and the senses endowed 
with intelligence, its content (/.e., what it stands for) is taken to 
be something by some (and something else by others or in other 
words the import of the ego-notion, aham-pratyaya is variously 
understood).. And this is expressed in the Bhasya-—[“ The igno- 
rant as well as the materialists consider that the body only endowed 
with intelligence is atman]. 

29. To illustrate— In “ I am a man” the characteristic of 
man is attributed to atman ; in ‘ I go ’ movement is attributed 
(to atman). Such attribution will be appropriate (only) if the 
ego-notion has the body as its content. By the phrase ‘ the mere 
body — ‘ dehamatram ’ what is to be understood is the bodily 
aggregate including the head is meant. By the word ‘mere' 
‘matra ’ what is pointed out is that there is no independent intelli- 
gence distinct from the body nor is intelligence (caitanya) attri- 
butive to something other (than the body) but that intelligence 
is no other than what is comprised in the four elements which 
have evolved into the contexture of the body.®® By the word 
‘ atman ’ is meant that which is denoted by the ego-notion— aham- 
pratyaya;®^ by the word ‘ prakrtah ’ is meant those whose minds 
are untutored for lack of sastraic instruction, that is, those who 
without deliberation act merely on what appeals to their senses. 
The Lokayatikas (materialists) are well known, as the upholders 
of the reality of (only) four elements. 

VII. 30. [Likewise others (think) that the sense-organs only 
endowed with intelligence constitute atman.] On the ground 
that theie arises no knowledge of colour, etc., in the absence of 
the sense-organs ranging from the eye to the mind even though 
the body exists they believe that to them {i.e., the senses) only 
in their individual capacity is intelligence attributable and also 


®® The Samkhyas and the Vedantins admit that caitanya is an 
independent entity. The NaiySyikas say that it is attributive to at ma n 
which is distinct from the body. Both these views are animadverted 
against by the materialists. Intelligence according to them is not 
a separate category but is involved in the four elements. 

®^ In the context relating to the different views regarding the mean- 
ing of the ego-notion the word atman should be taken to mean the 
content of the ego-notion — 



vn. 31 ] 


IS BRAHMAN A KNOWN ENTITY? 


247 


that they are the content of the ego-notion. Further (they are 
of the view that each sense) in turn subserves the other on the 
analogy of a number of suitors.®^ As such the ego-notion is 
perceived as the substratum of the qualities pertaining to the senses, 
for instance (we say) ‘I am deaf’, ‘I am dumb’, etc. 

31. [Others are of opinion that the ‘ mind ’ alone is atman] 
and is the content of the ego-notion. [Page 73] And pointing 
to the fact that in the state of dream though the ten senses are 
quiescent the mind by itself in the place of the ego (aham) gene- 
rates all activities they assert (that what is denoted by ‘ aham ’ is 
the mind). 

32. [Others maintain that the self is a mere momentary 
idea— vijnana.] The word ‘ matra — mere ’ is intended to denote 
that apart from what the three letters, ‘ a, h, m (in aham) ’ express 
(viz., vijnana) nothing else is manifest as otherwise, i.e., if anything 
else were manifest it could have been conceived as the object 
denoted by the ego-notion. Hence these others hold the view 
that vijnana itself which is liable to destruction by its very nature, 
which arises in ceaseless succession, which is the abode of all life’s 
activities (lit. all that constitutes life’s journey), and with reference 
to which the other theory, as contradicting experience, stands 
condemned, rightly constitutes the ego (aham — self). 

33. [Others maintain that the ego-notion is the void (sunya).] 
In the state of deep slumber there is not the least trace of vijnana 
(consciousness); the ego-notion is perceived to arise (immediately 
after waking) from sheer accident, and absolute reality cannot be 
asserted of that which has arisen without a cause and is (therefore) 
accidental so that these others declare that the ego manifests only 
non-existence or the void.®® 

®® When a number of suitors are in search of a wife, when one 
succeeds, the others withdraw. Similarly when the perceptive sense 
is active the other senses are quiescent; when the tactile sense is 
active the others are not prominent and so on. This is in answer to the 
objection that there would be conflict and confusion when cognising 
the objects of sense if each sense was independent of the rest. The 
VPS., p. 181, explains the passage somewhat differently. When there 
are several men in a family at the marriage of each the others are 
mere accessories— mrf 

®® The nihilistic argument of the Madhyamika Buddhist is that 
since vijnana actualised as object-forms is totally absent in the state 


248 


PAIPJCAPADIKA of PADMAPADA [VIII. 34 

VIII. 34. [Others hold that there exists one who is distinct 
from the body, who is the migratory soul, agent and enjoyer (of 
the fruit of action).] Nowhere (they urge) is the capacity for enjoy- 
ment perceived in a thing that is not denoted by the ego; that 
which is the enjoyer (bhokta, i.e., aham) must be of a permanent 
nature because of its being the object of recognition and no cause 
is known marking the limit of what is permanent; hence fatman 
is) an enduring entity.®^ Because enjoyment is incompatible with 
what does not suffer change, because change is the result of action, 
and agency (kartrtva) can be attributed only to that with which 
action is in intimate relation, because a transmigratory life, is 
possible only in the case of one who corresponds to this descrip- 
tion, and (finally) since capacity for enjoyment cannot in reason 
be predicated of the body, etc., ranging up to the mind, (therefore) 
one different from them, who is a transmigratory being, agent, 
and enjoyer (must be admitted) to be the visaya (object) denoted 
by the ego-notion (aham-pratyaya). This is what others think. 

of deep slumber, the ego-notion stands for mere emptiness. The 
vijnanavadin might contend that there are two kinds of knowledge- — 
determinate and indeterminate; determinate in waking and dream, 
and indeterminate in sleep, that the determinate cognitions only have 
objective counterparts and not the indeterminate and as such vijiiana 
alone exists in sleep. The nihilist — SQnyavadin says there is no rule 
that some cognitions should- be determinate and others indeterminate 
and that if vijiiana existed in sleep it would be recollected after waking, 
but as a matter of fact it is not. Hence he concludes that non-existence 
only is the content of the ego-notion. 

. The Naiyayikas affirm that atman as distinct from the body, 
senses, mind, consciousness, and void, does exist for the reason that 
what is denoted by the ego, viz., body, senses, etc., is not spoken of 
as ‘aham’. We do not use such expressions as ‘I am body’, ‘I am 
touch’, etc. The distinction between the ego and what it denotes is 
indicated by the possessive termination, e.g., ‘my body’, ‘my sight’, 
etc. In such usages as ‘I am blind’, ‘I am lame’, ‘I am pleased’, etc., 
there is apparent identity between the two but it is due to ignorance. 
Moreover recognition would be inexplicable if the senses were regarded 
as atman — ^we say for example — ‘I who slept am now awake’. 

— no cause is found to show that the self 
reaches a stage when it loses its permanence; hence it is eternal. 
Destruction is neither inherent nor ah extra. This is to meet the 
view of the Buddhist who thinks that all things carry seeds of their 
own destruction — vide V.P., 190. 



VIII. 35] 


IS BRAHMAN A KNOWN ENTITY ? 


249 





How do they entertain the view that a being exists who is 
different from it body) ? 

It has been stated that it is because (capacity for) enjoyment 
is incompatible with it. 

35. How again is enjoyment incompatible? 

Well, it is thus — the aggregate of the elements constitutes the 
body. Now, enjoyment (bhokrtva) might be conceived to belong 
to the elements taken either disjointedly or conjointly, siroulta- 
neously or seriatim. Anyway, such ascription (of enjoyment) is 
impossible. If the disjointed are supposed to possess the capa- 
city for enjoyment simultaneously, then each would be function- 
ing for its sake and as such the relation of principal and subordinate 
(ahgahgibhava) could not be thought of. And without the rela- 
tion of principal and subordinate the conception of the ‘ aggre- 
gate ’ is untenable. Hence there could be no simultaneous enjoy- 
ment in the case of disparate elements. 

Let there then be enjoyment in succession on the analogy 
of a group of suitors (for a maiden’s hand) since simultaneity 
is ruled out. 

Even this is untenable, for there the object of enjoyment 
belongs exclusively to one (asadharana) ; and asadharanatva 
means the restriction of (marriage) to this or that person indivi- 
dually. Here on the other hand it is exactly the opposite (/.e., 
common, not restricted to one or the other); when in the pre- 
sence of several (enjoyers) objects of common enjoyment exist 
and there is nothing to indicate precedence, (there is no ground 
to suppose that enjoyment takes place in succession). 

36. Let then (bhoktrtva — ^gratification) belong to the aggre- 
gate (samuha); sentience-contact becomes manifest (in the aggre- 
gate) as does the flame in a quantity of sesamum (and not in single 
seeds).®® Let bhoktftva be denied to disjointed elements either 
taken simultaneously or seriatim. 

It is not as you suppose. Aggregation is not possible on the 
basis of enjoyable objects. 

®® The purvapak§a may be stated thus — aflame is 

caused when a quantity of sesamum seeds is thrown on fire though 
there exists no relation of principal and subordinate between the 
different seeds. On this analogy let the elements though on a par 
combine together in the act of enjoyment and let no separate entity — 
Stman be posited. 


250 PAfJCAPADTK,A OF PADMAPADA [IX. 38 

How impossible? 

Primary — pradhanya, should be ascribed to the enjoyer as 
against the object of enjoyment. 

Well, even in enjoyment aggregation is perceived as in the 
case of man and wife. 

The reasoning is vapid, because it is a matter of doubt if 
here the gratification is of the samghata or of something distinct 
from it {viz., the self). As regards the flame caused by the sesa- 
mum it is just the opposite; in an act produced by the aggregate 
it is right that the individuals composing the aggregate should 
take a subordinate place (gupabhavitva). 

37. [Page 74] Then let enjoyment be specifically of one 
(only among the elements). 

No, (that is not possible), for there again it remains undeter- 
mined as to which one among them enjoyment belongs. 

What need for such determination? Even without it the 
intended object (namely,' the negation of the enjoyer distinct from 
the body) is secured. 

If that be so, it being untenable that any one of them {viz., 
the elements) could be secondary to the rest since all of them are 
on a par, (aggregation) is out of the question as between these 
elements which are of the nature of karya ; (the four elements are 
regarded by the materialists as produced naturally). The same 
argument holds good against the view that the senses (karana) 
constitute the self since the elemental nature (bhutatva) is common 
to both {viz., the senses on the one hand and earth, water, light and 
air on the other).®® If again it be held (as some Carvakas do), that 
the aggregate constituted by both (karya and karapa, i.e., the gross 
body and the senses) is the self, the argument is similar, {i.e., the 
same defects as pointed out in the other cases apply here also). 
Therefore (the Naiyayikas) conclude that there exists an entity which 
is distinct from the body and which is the object of the ego-notion. 

IX. 38. Samkhya view . — [‘ He is enjoying only and not 
acting.] This Bha§ya means that the object of the ego-notion 


®® If the senses are regarded as atman the que.stion will be whether 
each sense is the product of a single element or of all the four elements. 
In the first case recognition is not possible; we cannot say ‘I who 
saw the hill yesterday am climbing it to-day’ or ‘I who saw the fruit 
then am tasting it now’. In the second case aggregation fails since all 
the elements are of equal grade. 



IX. 39] 


IS BRAHMAN A KNOWN ENTITY ? 


251 



is only the enjoyer; with this (assertion) some come to the fore- 
holding that action is incompatible with the nature of that same 
entity described above as being distinct from the body, etc. ; not 
always is the ego-notion (ahampratyaya) in association with action 
and expressed as ‘ I act ‘I know ’ and ‘ I enjoy Hence this 
is not denotative of it. If however the ego-notion did denote 
it then that notion would not arise dissociated from them (viz., 
action, etc.).®’ 

Well then, He is not the enjoyer even, since such (enjoyment) 
is not manifest (when the ego is manifest). 

It is not so, because the ego manifests itself as consciousness 
(cetana) ; and because all things are for its sake, enjoyefship 
(bhoktftva) is of the nature of cetana (intelligence). Hence 
they maintain that it is but right to regard atman as enjoyer 
only.®® 

39. [Some maintain that there exists a Being who is dis- 
tinct from that (the individual soul), who is the Lord, omnicient 
and omnipotent.] Different from that, i.e., from that which is 
distinct from the body, etc., and is the object of the ego-notion 
(viz., the Jiva). is the One who is the Ruler of all and as such is 
cognizant of the entire being of everything under His sway and 
who is endowed with powers of control (over all). Because of 
the variegated forms inconceivable even by the mind of human 

” Agency— implies association with action, and action 
means movement or change. Because atman is all-pervading and 
impartite there can neither be movement nor change in it. It may be 
urged that agency pertaining to the intellect may be appropriated by 
atman, but that is out of the question since according to the Samkhyas 
there is no super-imposi'ion. They hold the akhyati doctrine like 
the Prabhakaras. The second reason for atman’s not being the agent 
is that its association with action strays — (vide text). 

— In the system of Samkhyas the self is mere 
experiment — The prakfti which evolves into the manifold is 
intended for the benefit of cetana, the sentient principle termed purusa. 
Contrast this with the Vedanta doctrine in which the experient is not 
the pure consciousness. Bhoktrtva there means the awareness of 
pleasure and pain and this awareness is of consciousness conditioned 
by avidya. 

It may in passing be noted that investigation into the nature of 
the individual self — has been so far made. Next begins the 
inquiry into the nature of I§vara^ — 


252 pa:ScaeAdikA OF padmapAda 

beings, because it is a creative act embracing (manifold) bodily 
organisms and worlds, and because such a universe is impossible 
unless it be the handiwork of a mighty thinker, (the existence of 
Isvara) is patent, very like the existence of a potter inferred from 
a pot which is an effect. That object, of relative magnitude reach 
an ultimate limit is well known. And knowledge (we know) 
admits of degrees. Hence when it has reached its ne plus ultra 
somewhere, it comprehends everything; as such Isvara being the 
locus of jnana becomes the all-knower and eternally existing. 
That such Isvara is what is meant by the word Brahman is main- 
tained by some (Yogins).®® 

Now, everyone understands the ego (aham) to mean atman ; 
and atman is Brahman ; so that when dispute arose as to the nature 
of atman, which as the content of the ego-notion is of the nature 
of Brahman it was undertaken to show the conflicting opinions 
held in regard to it (atman which is the same as Brahman). Then 
why should any controversy be introduced as to whether Brahman 


^rfriT'nr JT^r^risf^ — ^The existence of a supreme Being is attempted 
to be proved by some schools thus; — 

(i) The Vaii’sikas: The universe with all its variety is the 

work of a Being whose knowledge should be such as 
would enable him to comprehend the means with which 
He creates and the purpose for which He creates. The 
analogy is that of an architect who designs a mansion. 
They argue that a single supreme Being, the AH-wise must 
be the creator of the universe. 

(ii) The Yogins : Our limited knowledge, and prowess must 

derive their being from a source which is the fountain of 
limitless knowledge and prowess. Human knowledge, 
etc., are relative characterised by ‘less’ and ‘more’. 
Hence by contrast there must be one whose sway is 
unlimited. They advocate a personal God. 

(iii) The Naiyayikas : The world in which we live is the outcome 

of man’s karma and what falls to one’s lot is the gift of 
One whose knowledge is all-comprehensive, including the 
nature of karma, the reward it yields, the person to whom 
it is meant and the means by which it has to be performed. 
The reward does not eventuate immediately karma is 
performed. There must be One therefore to keep an 
account of man’s doings and reward him at the right 
moment. The analogy is that of master and servant. 



IX. 40] IS BRAHMAN A KNOWN ENTITY ? 253 

means I§vara who is not the content of the ego-notion and is not 
atman?*® 

This is the reply — Since what is undertaken to show is the 
differing coimotations of Brahman (it is found necessary to deter- 
mine the nature of Brahman — ^whether it is identical with pratya- 
gatman which is what the ego-nolion denotes, and in this connec- 
tion the view; held by some that Isvara is distinct from pratya- 
gatman has to be stated, for they hold that Brahman is Isvara). 
Even though the opposing views regarding the ego-notion are 
pointed out it is as good as showing the opposing views regarding 
the nature of Brahman, indirectly. The reason is this, that no 
purpose is served by (merely) directing attention to the differing 
views held regarding the object denoted by the ego. Hence the 
appropriateness of that {viz., the Bhasya statement — ‘ asti 
tadvyatirikta Isvarah, etc.). 

40. Vedantin . — [Page 75] [Others are of opinion that, the 
Lord is the atman or the self of the enjoyer (vzz., the individual 
soul).] To explain — -that conscious being which becomes manifest 
as the ego is the enjoyer (experiencer) and he is Brahman — ^this 
is how it is understood by some (the Vedantins). Of the individual 
soul (tasya) the bhoktrtvavabhasa (i.e., the manifestation as the 
experient) is evident from the ego-notion; it is illusory only 
and is the play of the primal nescience which is indefinable and 
beginningless. In reality however, He who is omniscient, the 


The criticism proceeds thus-— are not the opposing views in 
relation to the meaning of aham (ego) ? It has been stated that the 
ego-notion denotes atman and that atman is identical with Brahman, 
Hence it must be clear that when doubt arises as to the nature of 
atman it tantamounts to doubt regarding the nature pf Brahman. The 
dispute centres round the concept of atman which is the same as 
Brahman. Physical body, senses, mind, consciousness, utter blank, 
etc., are each in turn held to be the significance of the ego-notion. 
The conflict is in reality between these views and the Vedantin’s view 
that atman (Brahman) is what is denoted by the ego-notion. When 
it is presumed by the Yogins for example, that ISvara is distinct from 
atman, the individual soul, how could any doubt arise whether 
Brahman means Isvara? Isvara is neither jiva (pratyagatman) nor 
Brahman and is not the vi§aya of aham pratyaya, so that in regard 
to the controversy, Isvara is not on a par with body, senses, etc., and 
cannot therefore be regarded as one of the alternative equivalents of 
atman. - 



254 PAnCAPADIKA OF PADMAPADA [X. 41 

Supreme Ruler (I^vara), who is not implicit in the ego-notion 
(like the body and the senses) and who is not determined by any 
other pramana (except Vedanta) is his (bhokta’s) very self 
(svarupa). On this (hypothesis only, viz., the identity of jiva and 
isvara) does Isvara acquire the etymological significance of the 
word Brahman, being related to the meaning of the root Bfh." 
Otherwise {i.e., if jiva is a distinct entity) not being one with the 
individual soul (lit. deprived of the relation of non-distinctness 
from jiva) I§vara’s greatness will not be unrestricted so that no 
longer will the primary sense of (the word) Brahman be Isvara. 

X. 41. [Thus are there many disputants relying (for main- 
taining their individual doctrinesy upon reason partly, verbal 
(i.e., scriptural) statements partly and often on what are but 
semblances of these]— thus the commentator (Samkara) con- 
cludes (this topic). 

Thus in the manner aforesaid some understand by Brahman 
some one entity (say body, senses, consciousness, blank, etc.). 
Does it all emanate from a mere pet wish of theirs ? No, (says 
Samkara). By careful reasoning which supports the pramanas 
in determining the correctness of what they denote, and which is 
synonymous with the word ‘ tarka and also (by carefully 
considering) the vakya (the Scripture) which corroborates the 
view that every Vedantic text is devoted to a just exposition of 
the nature of Brahman, (they contend that Brahman is a parti- 
cular entity). It is the discemers of truth who with the aid of 
reasoning and verbal testimony decide in favour of the last alter- 
native, viz., that I§vara is the very self of the ‘ bhokta ’ (individual 
soul). The rest (of the contestants) on the other hand depending 
upon reasons, which are but semblances of reason and not reasons 


If Isvara be an entity distinct from the individual soul he 
would suffer limitation caused by the jiva standing apart 
As such there arises one of the three kinds of limitations, 

and Isvara’s characteristic is unrestricted 

greatness subject to the limitation of neither time, nor object, nor space. 

cl4 — ^This is indirect reasoning intended to secure unassailable 
certitude to what is given in inference. If one should object to the 
invariable concomitance of fire with smoke and come out with the 
poser, let smoke be there without the fire; it amounts to this that smoke 
cannot be produced by fire, which is reductio ad absurdum. Tarka is 
-a powerful instrument in the hands of a reasoner. 



X. 42] IS BRAHMAN A KNOWN ENTITY? 255 

in reality and accepting verbal statements which are but semblances 
of verbal statements, and which are not valid pronouncements 
since they do not support (these opposing) views, hold contrary 
doctrines. That the reasoning pursued is spurious was indeed 
to some extent pointed out by those who argued the existence 
of atman as distinct from the body, etc. And that the other 
reasons are also spurious in their character, we will point 
out in their proper context. And this has been to some extent 
already shown when the reason was assigned why of the 
several views the succeeding one was to be preferred to the 
preceding one. Concerning the misinterpreted (lit. the specious 
statements — vakyabhasa) sentences however we will point 
them out when expounding the true doctrine as each section is 
taken up.'*® 

42. [In these circumstances if a person should, without due 
investigation, accept someone (among the contending doctrines) 
he will be debarred from the highest bliss (liberation), nay, he 
will court disaster.] (The Pancapadika proceeds to explain this 
bhasya passage)— tatra,— (when there exist such diverse views), 
evam sthite— (it being so), mumuksuh— (one desirous of the high- 
est beatitude through the knowledge of Brahman), avicarya — 
(neglecting the study of this sastra, the Vedanta), pravartate — 
(if he should follow anyone of the doctrines that precede the last 
one), tada— (then), moksasya samyak jnanaphalatvat — (since 
Freedom is the outcome of true knowledge), tasya ca atathabhavat, 
—(since the knowledge embraced in the opposing views is not the 
right one), nisreyasM pratihanyeta— (he will be debarred from 
obtaining the fruit of moksa— Freedom), anarthanca pratipadyeta 
— (and not only that, he will also meet with spiritual ruin). 
The Sruti corroborates this view — “ Thpse among men who have 
slain their souls enter into the boundless tracts of gloom ” (Ka. 
Up., Ill and IX). It is the belief in what is not really atman, 
thereby rendering the existence of atman almost nugatory that 
constitutes the slaying of the soul (Stmahanana). Because killing 
of the soul is effected in this manner (spiritual ruin will be the lot 
of one who misconceives the self). In no other way is ‘ self- 
murder’ possible. Physical death is not to the present purpose 


This refers to V.S., III. iii-— another indication of Padmapada’s 
having commented or projected to comment on the whole of the 
Uttaramimamsa sQtras. 



256 PA:&CAPADIkA of PADMAF^ADA [X. 43 

(z'.e., everyone that dies — he may be a yogin — does not go to the 
region of darkness). 

43. [Page 76] [Hence prefacing with a discussion on 
Brahmajijiiasa, the disquisition of the Vedanta texts having as 
its aid conformable logic (lit. reasoning not conflicting with it) 
and having as its end liberation (from recurring births) is begun ] 
(The Pancapadika explains the passage thus) — ^The discussion on 
the meaning of the Vedanta passages implied as it is in the word 
jijnasa, is begun on the plea of expounding Brahmajijnasa'** Or 
(to interpret the passage dilferently), when the (acquisition of the) 
desired knowledge of Brahman is enjoined as a duty, it is per force 
implied from the sutra that the Vedanta proposes to explain the 
nature of such knowledge for the sake of those who are engaged 
(in the pursuit of Brahmajnana) ; and for that purpose the inquiry 
into the meaning of the Vedanta-texts is begun.^® With what end 


^ . . . , — The desire for the knowledge of Brahman— 

sTUlnnxSr is discussed as a preliminary; it is the inquiry into the 
Vedanta that is intended and it begins from the second sutra. The 
aphorist is not so much concerned with Brahmajnana, for one who is 
equipped with the fourfold discipline does begin the inquiry into 
Brahman and that need not be enjoined. 

The first sutra directly enjoins the inquiry into Brahman. The 
phrase ‘Brahmajijnasa’ means desire for the knowledge of Brahman. 
But since injunction is incompatible with desire, jijnasa should be taken 
in a secondary sense to denote something that can be accomplished 
and is fit to be enjoined, and that is, inquiry — ^vicara. It is therefore 
evident that the sutra is meant’ to inculcate inquiry only and the 
Vedanta appropriately constitutes the content of vicara. The sutra 
has therefore to be construed thus — the study of the Vedanta from 
which arises the knowledge of Brahman has to be undertaken in order 
that Freedom may be attained. 

An alternative interpretation is also possible. From the sutra 
we understand that desire for knowledge has to be undertaken, which 
amounts to saying that jnSna which is the thing desired is the sadhya 
or what is to be achieved. But it is evident that jnana cannot directly 
be the sadhya but its sadhana or the means can, and that is vicara 
resulting from arthapatti or presumptive evidence. 

What is the difference between the two interpretations ? In the 
first the word jijnasa itself is taken in a secondary sense to denote 
vicara. In the second it is not taken in the secondary sense but both 
the knowledge desired and the obligation to acquire it are understood 



257 


X. 431 IS BRAHMAN A KNOWN ENTITY ? 

■ 

in view and with what means (is this inquiry associated) ? Here 
is the answer— it has as its auxihary, logic that is not hostile to it 
(Vedanta) and the highest beatitude (mok§a or freedom) is its 
end (prayojana). To explain— tadvirodhi, etc., taih— to the 
Vedantic texts, avirodhi — not hostile, tarkah — reason, upakaranam 
—aids, auxiliaries or itikartavyata (like the fore-yagas which are 
aids to the principle or pradhana yaga) or in other words— auxi- 
liary means (sahakarikarapam). Or ‘tarka’ anumana (inference) 
which is not in conflict with Vedanta and which in reality serves 
as a corroborative evidence by strengthening the conviction got 
from the (study of) the Vedanta— this is what it means. 

Here ends the Fourth Varnaka of the Paneapadikd. 


from the primary significance of the phrase so that the duty to under- 
take the vicara is derived from arthapatti pramana and not from 
Sabda. ‘Jijnasa kartavya’, amounts to ‘vicarah kartavyah’. 


VARl^AKA V 

DEFINITION OF BRAHMAN 

1. 1. [It has been stated that the knowledge of Brahman 
is to be desired.] The meaning of this Bhasya is, “ This sastra 
is to be studied by one who is desirous of acquiring the knowledge 
of Brahman so it is said. ^ When this statement was made 
then only laksana— -definition of Brahman, pramaria— valid means 
of knowledge, yuktih— conformable logic, sadhana— aids to reali- 
sation and prayojana— fruit, all these (it must be understood) the 
Bhasyakara proposed to expound. Amongst these (tatra), the 
nature of Brahman (laksana) has to be first indicated because of 
its primary importance. ^ [Of what nature then is that Brahman ? 
Such a question arising (iti), answering that (atah) the revered 
aphorist propounds (the following second sutra)—“ From whom 
the origination, etc., (z.e., the origin, subsistence and destruction) 
of this (world are effected)?”] 

2. Yukti also it may be presumed to have been indicated 
for vahdating the definition. 

(In the sutra— ‘ Janmadyasya yatah’), [janma means, origin 
and of the three {viz., origin, subsistence and destruction) it (janma) 
is the beginning— this is the meaning of the dissolved compound 
of the class of tadgunasamvijnana].® The resolution of the sen- 


^ — The desire to know Brahman. This is the sense 

that is patent on hearing the phrase. But neither jhana nor iccha (desire) 
which are its two elements is fit to be enjoined. Hence jijnasa should 
be taken to mean inquiry— vicara in its Secondary sense, and the 
sutra should be construed as— ‘inquiry should be undertaken for 
acquiring the knowledge of Brahman. ’ 

® Inquiry into Brahman includes laksapa, pramana, yukti, sadhana 
and phala. Here Brahma-laksana or the definition of Brahman has 
first to be stated as without it the elucidation of the other four is not 
possible. 

® — The attributive compound (bahuvrihi samasa) is of 

two kinds— tadgupa and atadgupa-samvijnana. In the first the attri- 
butive element also gets into the predicative relation along with the 
aggregate (samastapada); in the second it enters into no such relation. 
For example take ‘ — ^bring Devadatta with the long 

ear’; here long-eared, the attribute of the aggregate, ‘one 



1.3] 


DEFINITION OF BRAHMAN 


259 


tence into its constituent parts (padaccheda), the meaning of the 
words, and the resolution of the compound into its components— 
all these three which are indispensable in comment have been 
secured, 2 .e., rendered explicit (by the Bhasyakara). The object 
of taking the compound ‘janmadi’ as tadgunasanavijnana is 
explained as [‘ janma, sthiti, bhahgam and samasarthah ’, z'.e., 
the three should be taken in the aggregate, (otherwise janma or 
origin would be left out)]. The use of the third gender the 
neuter) is to show that the meaning of the aggregate stands pro- 
minent in the compound (janmasthitibhahgam). 

3. The word ‘ adi ’ (beginning) implies that it is associated 
with the antecedent non-existence (purvakala-kotimat) but that 
(pragabhava or antecedent non-existence) being absent in the 
case of the world (for the world is beginningless though having 
an end) how can one speak of ‘ adi ’ ? A doubt such as this 
arising, the Bhasyakara says [“ That the origination (of the world) 
as being the first in the series is based on the authority of the Vedic 
text and also on the way a thing develops ”]. The Vedic text 
which proceeds to describe that very Brahman which has been 
defined in this sutra' has therein, origination as first mentioned; 
hence its primacy (in the sutra). This is evident from the nature 
of things also — ^no object exists after having come to an end, nor 
existing is it born; nor does it suffer destruction with its very 
origination for the doctrine of the momentariness has already 
been refuted.* Hence having originated, and having existed it 

who has the long ear’ is related to the predicate (vidheya), anaya 
(bring). Butin'f^wa bring Devadatta of the brindled cow 

we have the atadguna-samvijnana; for in the compound, ‘citragum’ 
(the brindled cow) is hot in relation with the predicate — anaya. Where 
the meaning of the parts (gunavayava) is in attributive relation, we have 
‘tadguna-samvijnana’ but if it is only upadhi or upalaksapa we have 
atadguna-samvijnana. The compound- ‘janmadi ’ is tadguna variety. 
Here the aggregate, as in all cases of babuvrihi, points to something 
distinct— It has to be resolved thus— ^if-9TTi^-3r¥r— that 
which has janma — origination, as the first of the group, the other two 
being sthiti — sustention, and bhanga — destruction. Janma is vise§ana, 
i.e., an integral part of the aggregate. Hence the Bhasyakara says that 
janmadi is tagduna-samvijnana bahuvrihi. 

* etc. — Objection is taken to the order mentioned here. 

The word beginning implies a state in which the world did not exist. 
But the world has not started from any point of time. The objection 
loses its ground when confronted ■with the iSruti— sitl 



260 PAnCAPADIkA of PADMAFADA [I. 4 

comes to an end— thus has this world (of perception) origination 
to begin with (and then follow existence and destruction). 

4 . [Page 77] In the bha$ya beginning with [‘ asya, etc.,] 
what is shown is the meaning of ‘ idam’ (this) which is a part 
of the word (asya) and is a mere pratipadika {Le., its uninflected 
form). To explain: — ^Everywhere the pronoun on the strength 
of (external causes such as) the context, etc., and (of juxtaposed 
words) stands for a certain limited number of objects. But in 
their absence it stands by its very nature for everything that is 
in any way the object of a pramapa. Hence says (the Bhasya- 
kara), [“ By the word ‘ idam ’ is meant the dharmin [i.e„ the 
world which is the substrate of qualities) revealed in perception, 
etc.® The use of the genitive case (asya) is to show the relation 
that the world has to the attributes, origination, etc., and it is 
meant here to denote relation in general and is not to be regarded 
as restricted to any one relation in particular. [“ Yatah— (from 
which) points to the cause of (the Universe,”)] showing thereby that 
the ablative is significative of the causal sense and none other.® 

Tait. Bb|-guval]I. Here the 
order is origination, sustention and withdrawal, all having their sub- 
stratum in Brahman. The sutra which is based on the text noted above 
cannot but follow the Sruti if only to avoid a conflict. The natural 
order of things also is identical. 

STRICT BlRfr— This refers to the Buddhistic doctrine of 
momentatiness which has been already rebutted. If objects perished, 
the moment they were born, priority and posteriority would be out of 
the question. 

O'igination is mentioned first following common usage, cf. VPS., 
p. 195— crsrift 9 % 

3Iir^4H|5r: I 

® A pronoun — as the name implies stands for all nouns 
unless its scope is limited either by the context or by its association with 
some limiting adjuncts. Here the pronoun ‘this’ — is used in its 
unrestricted sense. of the objective world. 

5 irn’ilF%q?rrri 5 I — all that is given in any pramapa, i.e., all prameyas — 
all objects of knowledge. 

« ?rfr fifl, etc. — ^The pronoun ‘yatah’ should in the present context 
relate to Brahman only but the bha§ya says that it denotes cause 

fr% ^ipnR^^T:), the object being that from the ablative we must 
understand that Brahman is both the material and the instrumental 
pause, for the word karapa is a general term. 


261 


11. 5] DEFINITION OF BRAHMAN 

II. 5. The bhasya beginning with the words [‘ of this 
world ’] proceeds to expound the svarupalaksana of Brahman 
which is the laksya or the subject of the definition. Definition 
is of two kinds — ‘upalaksana’ or indicative definition and 
‘ vise§alaksana ’ or descriptive definition. Of these the laksa^a 
here pointing as it does to the attributive adjuncts of the world 
stands outside only, of (Brahman) and yet denotes Brahman by 
indirect characterisation and not by the description (of its nature).’ 
Hence as distinct (from its characterisation as the source of the 
origination, subsistence, and dissolution of the world) Brahman’s 
descriptive definition has to be stated. (This svarupalaksana is 
that Brahman is of the nature of Existence, Knowledge and Bliss, 
and it will be expounded later on.) 

6. [Of the world differentiated by names and forms]; — 
Some philosophers in some way conceive the objective world 
(lit. the world which is a product) under certain categories each 
according to his own technique. As against such classifications, 

This bhasya therefore points out that the origin, etc., of the world 
is to be regarded not as the definition of Brahman, but only as being the 
cause of the world-origination, etc. Even there causation so far 
as the Absolute is concerned is ‘tatisthalaksapa’ or ‘upalaksana’- 
qualification per acddens, and this is merely the descriptive definition of 
‘Sabala’ or Mava-associated Brahman. It must be understood that 
in the tastisthalaksana are comprised both varieties — material and 
instrumental causes. If Brahman is regarded as the material cause 
only, we should posit Isvara to serve as the instrumental cause; if only 
instrumental, we have to posit a material cause like clay for the potter. 
Both are incompatible with the significance of the word ‘Brahman’. 

’ ff The purvapak§a or the opponent’s view is that 

the definition of Brahman as given in the second siifra is neither 
‘tatasthalaksana’ nor ‘svarupalaksana’. It cannot be svarQpalaksapa 
because Brahman is nirapek^a — non-relational ' or akhanda while the 
definition presumes the asso’ciation of Brahman with the world — 
sapeksa. Nor is tatasthalaksana appropriate, fcr if it, i.e., the world, 
is real non-duality would cease and the word ‘Brahman’ would lose 
its significance and the defined itself would be annulled. If on the 
other hand, the definition be false it ceases to be indicative of Brahman 
like the misty emanations which resemble smoke and yet do not 
suggest the presence of fire. 

The answer is that it is tatasthalaksapa only and is illusory and 
as such it cannot bring about the annulment of the defined — ^lakfya, 
viz.. Brahman, 


262 


pascapadikA of PADMAPADA 


[11.7 

the Bhasyakara on the strength of the Sruti which restates (and 
confirms) the generally accepted view, dichotomizes the world 
and accordingly uses the expression, ‘ differentiated by names and 
forms’.® The instrumental case (namarupabhyam) is used 
adverbially (itthambhave — in this manner, i.e., as names and 
forms). It is indeed self-evident that an individuated object is 
brought into existence only after one has previously thought of 
what constitutes its form and the name involved in it.® 

7. [“Having many agents and enjoj'ers ”]— this phrase 
points out that agency and enjoyment also being of the nature of 
names and forms are comprised in the world {i.e., come within the 
world-order). [Which is the abode of the rewards of one’s action, 
which rewards will eventuate in specific places and time and on 
specific causes being fulfilled]— -that is, for the enjoyment of the 
fruit of every action, a place is defined, for instance for the reward 
of svarga (to result), the top of mount Meru and this mundane 
globe for the reward of a village. As to time also, it is after the 
fall of the body that the reward of Svarga and it is after the boy- 
hood stage is passed that the reward of a son, will come to pass 
and as to the fulfilment of a specific cause, one’s death during 
the summer-solstice. 

8. [The structure of whose constituent parts cannot even 
be mentally conceived.]— One of limited vision cannot even con- 
ceive of the manner in which the external world is designed as 


® — The Advaita-vedantins conceive the objective world as 

constituted by names and forms; the Bhattas— substance, quality, 
action, genus, species, samavaya (inherent relation); the Jainas— jiva, 
a^rava, samvara, nirjara, bandha, moksa; the Prabhakaras — sub- 
stance, quality, action, genus, species, sakti and paratantrya, niyoga; 
the Naiyayikas — the sixteen categories such as pramapa, prameya, 
etc.; the Samkhyas— five intellectual senses, five active senses, five 
subtle elements, five gross elements, mind, egoism, mahat, avyakta and 
purusa. 

9 cf. the Sruti— Brh. Up. Nama is the 
world of names; rQpa is the world of forms. The objective world is 
divided into two categories — names and forms. ®2Tl%?rFr9n3:^®iE?fn%^Fr'ifii, 
— the world which was in a subtle condition became gross in these 
two ways, names and forms. srfifq'JnjTB; is Sfl^rvTT and 

^7 is 3Tf5r%sr, both being inextricably fused. each object 

has its own name in intimate union. A potter makes a pot only after 
he has thought of its name and form. So also the world-maker. 



II. 9] DEFINITION OF BRAHMAN 263 

also of the bodily organism constituted as it is of limbs and nervous 
filaments each of which performing its defined function. How 
then is it possible for him to create such world ? [The omniscient, 
omnipotent cause from which the origin, subsistence and dis- 
solution (of the world) take place — that is Brahman — these (last 
two words) have to be understood as completing the sentence.]— 
By thus commenting (the Bhasyakara) shows that the words 
desiderated in the sutra-statement have been added and also points 
to the descriptive definition of Brahman indicated (in this defini- 
tion, viz., that from which, etc.,).^® 

III. 9. Well, there are other states of existence such as 
modification, etc. Why are they not included (in the sutra)? 
Raising this objection the Bhasyakara says, [“ anyesamapi, etc.,] 
of other “forms of existence”. [Page 78] Nowhere is the 
particular state {viz., growth and modification) of an object possible 
without its undergoing destruction nor even destruction possible, 
of a thing which has not taken its birth and is not existing. Hence, 
since they are subsumed under these three only, they are not 
separately mentioned (Buddhi and parinama come under janma, 
and apaksaya under vinasa). 

10. Well, the Nairuktas speak of six stages of existence 
(lit. the changes that things undergo — bhavavikaras) and if they 


10 ^ What is the definition of the real 

nature — of Brahman whose indicative definition, 
has been given in the aphorism The svarupalaksana must 
be given as otherwise the Samkhyapradhana might claim equal 
status in the creation of the, world. The svarupalaksapa is the 
viSesalaksapa or the specific definition which excludes without excep- 
tion all that is not Brahman. To one who has not seen the moon 
we may call his attention to the celestial entity by pointing to the 
branch of a tree above which it shines; this is the indicative definition 
but then among the celestial bodies we have innumerable stars and to 
exclude them the svariipalaksapa must be given, viz., the moon is the 
celestial body which emits abundant light. Now the svarupalaksana 
is given by Samkara in the bhasya— “■ qtl: that 

omniscient, omnipotent cause from which the world takes its birth 
etc., — that is Brahman”. Here the word ‘sarvajhatva — omniscience’ 
is the svarupalaksaria of Brahman. Pradhana, atoms and other 
supposed causes of the world cannot be said to possess sarvajnatva. The 
sarvajnatva should be understood in the sense of svaprakasatva — self- 
refulgence, Knowledge is the essence of Brahman and not its property. 



264 


PAtCAPADIKA OF PADMAFADA 


[III. 9 


are accepted there need be no effort to point out the subsumption 
(of other vikaras under origination and dissolution). Presuming 
this objection the Bha§yakara says — [“As regards the six states 
enumerated by Yaska, viz., origination, subsistence, etc.”]^^ When 
earth, water and light (i.e., the three subtle elemental forms— 
suksmabhutas) have evolved into the organised world, they (the 
six states as enumerated by Yaska) hold good only in regard to 
the objects constituted by the elements. Hence if that {viz., 
Yaska’s division) is accepted the doubt would arise that they 
woxild alone {viz., the three subtle elements from which the world 
has evolved) are defined here and not Brahman and that is 
indefensible. Hence in order that the sutra (janmadi, etc.), may 
become truly significant the origination, etc., as pointed o-ut in 
the ^ruti {cf.yaXo va imani bhutani jayante, etc., Tait. Bh'guvalli) 
alone, we admit, for the object of the sutras is to determine its 
(§ruti) meaning. Hence that entity depending on which the 
entire world manifests itself is alone the prime cause, namely. 
Brahman — this is the meaning of the Sutra.^® 

According to Nirukta, I. 2, the six bhava- 
vikaras are: — origination, existence, modification, increase, decrease 
and destruction. Even Yaska could not have perceived the changes 
which the elements undergo. All the changes which he mentions relate 
to things created from the elements according to the doctrine of 
q lintuplication — Hence if Brahman is taken as the 
cause of thi.ags evolved from the elements, the five elements themselves 
would be in the place of Brahman. But if the aphorism should follow 
the Sruti we must accept what is stated in the §ruti — qt ftpR 

etc., i.e., the cause of the entire universe including the elements 
is the unrelated Brahman. Hence Yaska’s division is unacceptable. 

1 — Some advocate what is known as paripamavada accord- 

ing to which Brahman only has evolved into the world-form. The 
word ‘vivarta’ is used to refute that view. The vivartavada maintains 
that the world is but a manifestation — ^vivarta of Brahman and not 
its evolute. We have vivarta when a thing without losing its essence 
appears as something else, e.g., the shell appearing as silver; we have 
paripama when a thing loses its identity and is changed to something 
new, e.g., clay appearing as a pot. 

The evolution-hypothesis is objected to on the following 
grounds: 

(i) Relying on the creation-Srutis if we admit the world-evolution. 
Brahman’s very nature, viz., partlessness, homogeneity, 
vastness, etc., would be destroyed. 



III. 10] 


DEFINITION OF BRAHMAN 


265 


Well, the sutra would be emptied of its meaning if what the 
Sruti points out (viz., that the origin, subsistence and dissolution 
of the world proceed from Brahman),’-® is accepted. We indeed 
do not see this earth coming into existence, nor water, nor light; 
then how can the sutra presume that they are existing things 
(effects) and define Brahman as their origin, etc. ? Here is the 
answer : — As for light its origin is seen when fire is kindled by 
rubbing one stick against another and its extinction with the 
extinction of the faggots ; the origin of water also in the moon- 
stone, etc., and its gradual desiccation ; as regards the earth even, 
we infer its origin and dissolution because we see its parts being 
joined and parted — samyoga and vibhaga which point to their 
(origin and dissolution). Even now it is perceived in particular 
instances (say lumps of clay) that their origin and destruction are 
due to samyoga and vibhaga (conjunction and disjunction). And 
the origin and destruction of air, ether, time, quarter (‘ dis ’) must 
be admitted on the principle to be enunciated in the sutra’^ — 
“ yavadvikaram tu vibhago lokavat ” (—as is seen in the world, 
things which are disparate (like pot, dish, etc., are the vikaras of, 
i.e., produced from something, say— clay. So also vayu, akasa, 
etc., being disparate, i.e., distinct from one another must neces- 
sarily have originated from a single being). 


(ii) It may be urged that the creation-texts are neutral; they do 

notafSrm either that the previous state is altered or unaltered. 
They merely indicate a change of form — Breh- 
man appears as the non-sentient world. But though those 
texts are not decisive we must admit that the previous state 
is unchanged on the authority of texts like — ariWI 

etc. 

(iii) We have also the text 1%— which points 

clearly to the fact that Brahman {%^) has attained this 
world-variety through maya so that the manifold is only the 
outcome of maya and not that it has actually evolved from 
Brahman. 

The definition of Brahman as the cause of world-creation is 
untenath, since it is not established that the five elements are effects. 
We perceive that all material things comprising the world are derived 
from the elements. Hence Brahman cannot be presumed to be the 
cause of the origination of the world. 

-4144 — vide VS., II. iii. 7. Padmapada is perhaps 
anticipating his commentary- on the bha§ya referred to here. 



266 PA??CAPADIkA OF PADMAPADA [IV. 12 

IV. 12. The Bhasyakara (Samkara) in the bhasya— [“ na 
yathoktavisesanasya— of the origin of a world possessing such 
attributes as have been stated cannot, etc.,”] points out that this 
very sutra— “ From which the origin, etc., of this” contains also 
the ground for determining the nature of Brahman— that ground 
being furnished either by ‘ tantra ’ or Vavrtti’.^® ‘Of the world 
with its fourfold qualification ’, viz., differentiated by names and 
forms, having many agents and enjoyers, the home of fruition of 
actions performed in prescribed places, times and occasions, and 
the nature of whose design {i.e., disposition of its contents) is 
beyond even mental conception— of such a world, the origin, 
etc., cannot possibly be ascribed ‘ leaving out Isvara possessing 
the enumerated qualities ’, i.e., having set aside the Lord Who is 
omniscient and omnipotent, to any other source imagined by the 
opposite schools, such as the insentient Pradhana or the sentient 
Hiranyagarbha^® whose knowledge and activity are of restricted 
scope and who is subject to transmigration. 

13. As for the origin of the world from an insentient thing, 
it is out of the question because of the very fact of insentiency. 
Even a sentient source (Hiranyagarbha) is untenable because of 
limited cognitional and conative potency. As for the view that 
non-existence — abhava, (is the cause of the origination of the 
world), not only on the ground of insentiency is it untenable but 


A single 

pronouncement to indicate two ideas is ‘tantra ", a separate pronounce- 
ment is avrtti. Badarayana has framed the sutra with this object in 
view, v/z-, that the origin, etc., of the world is due to Brahman 
(Isvara) and that this world cannot come into existence from any 
entity other than Brahman. For us repetition (avrtti) of the sutra 
twice is necessary to arrive at this dual significance, the first denoting 
the laksana and the second excluding any other entity like Pradhana. 
For a fuller description of ‘tantra’ see the present writer’s translation 
of Sastra Dipika (Tarkapada)“-Gaekwad’s Oriental Series, Vol. 89. 
p. 229. 

Hiranyagarbha though a highly evolved being belongs to the 
category of the jfvas. His powers are therefore limited. In the yoga 
system Hiranyagarbha is regarded as the cause of the world. This 
view finds support in the agamas. The Samkhyas attribute the origin 
of the world to Pradhana or Prakrti constituted by the three gunas, 
the Vaisesikas to the atoms and the Naiyayikas infer Isvara as the 
primal source of the Universe. 



V. 15] 


DEFINITION OF BRAHMAN 


267 


on the ground also of its incompetency to be the visaya (content) 
of the notion of ‘ existence — asti (Again) since (according to 

the sunyavada) not even the residual impressions of past creation 
are left, no valid means of knowledge could support the position 
that the present creation also is exactly similar to the past. If it 
be held that all the events of life (vyavahara) are accidental then 
no law or order would prevail anywhere. 

14. Nor is the creation self-posited (i.e., without an external 
cause) since it is perceived that specific places, times and causes 
are utilised (for producing the things needed).^® [Page 79] 
What the term ‘ svabhava ’ means is the non-requirement of any 
other, (/.e., the repudiation of any external principle governing 
the occurrences in the world); as such the requirement of an 
external cause (in the origination of an object is unjustified); 
then where is there any possibility of determining the order of 
things ? Hence, i.e., since we have rebutted even on the basis of 
reasoning, the possibilities of other entities (like Pradhana, atoms, 
etc.), serving as the cause (of the origination, etc., of the world) 
it is established residually that Tsvara, whose attributes have been 
already stated, is alone the cause (of the universe). 

V. 15. [This very argument] — ^The argument (yukti) just 
now advanced, v/z., that the origination, etc., of the world cannot 
possibly take place from- any entity other than Isvara possessing 
such attributes as have been stated, they say, is the . anumana 
(inference) which independently (without the aid of the Sruti, 


— ^The Bauddhas uphold the doctrine of a void or 
sunya. All effects according to them originate from non-existence. 
We do not know the previous state of pot; hence that state must be 
. §unya. lacking in the very quality 

of existence. Hence non-existence dannot even be conceived as the 
cause of the sensible world. ^-aFSflRT A. S., 

p.271. 

1® — The ‘svabhavavada’ denies the existence of an over- 

ruling Providence and even of individual souls. It is pure materialism. 
Things come into being prompted by their very nature — svabhava. It 
comes to this therefore that there is no cause behind the world. 
Creation is causeless. 

The one effective refutation of this doctrine is that there would 
be no definite order in the origination of things. Nothing but chaos 
would reign in the world. 

For a fuller statement of this doctrine— -vide O.I.P., p. 104. 



258 PANCAPADIKA OF PADMAPADA [V. 16 

serves as the valid means of establishing a Lord and also of estab- 
lishing His Omniscience and Omnipotence; where then therefore 
is the use of the Vedantic texts ?— thus think K anada (Vaisesika) 
and others who maintain that Isvara is the cause of the world, 
and who assert the sta,tements—‘ That from which these beings 
are bom, (that by which when bom they live, that into which they 
enter after death— that, be desirous of knowing; that is Brahman 
— Tait. Up., in. 1)— the meaning of which is implied in the 
aphorism “ That from which the origination, etc.,” amount to the 
formal syllogistic reasoning (pararthanumana).^® 

16. [Well, even here (z.e., the second sutra) the same 
anumana as leading independently to the correct sense of the 
Upanisadic passage referred to) is expressed], just as a particular 
kind of smoke has its origin in fire lit up with ‘ agam ’ (fragrant 
aloe-wood) so has this world of unique (variety and) design, as 
its originating cause, an entity endowed with the attributes of 
omniscience, etc. 

Siddhantin. — [NO: the object of the aphorisms (sutrasY is 
merely to string together the meanings (the flowers) of the Vedanta 
passages].®® It is true that that very argument (which is taken as 

“ W-sugnw — Inference is of two kinds — sv3rtha and parartha. 
Literally, the former rheans intended for oneself and the latter intended 
for another. In pararthanumana we employ a formal argument to 
convince another. This necessitates the employment of all the five 
members of the syllogism — vide TSA., p. 283 ff. 

Those who maintain that Isvara as the Creator of the world could 
be established by argument only, without requiring any Scriptural 
authority employ the following inferential process: — 

Every effect (^'^) is the product of one who is cognizant of its 
nature of the miterials pf its composition its auxili-' 

aries (^ST^w), for. whom it is intended (flu^R). the use it serves 
(sfflist^), and its fitness to serve a purpose (?rrn»4). Therefore being 
a composite structure the world must be the creation of one who is 
all-wise. 

The object of the entire body of the aphorisms is to enunciate 
the principles by which to determine the sense of the Vedantic texts. 
The anumana on which you depend no doubt is helpful in producing 
the notion of probability — ^'iTiqJrT, regarding the nature of Brahman, 
but not certainty. 

It is pointed out that mere argumentation— yukti— generates cnly 
a notion of probability. Anumana^ on the other hand, produces the 
notion of certitude — cf. VPS., p. 212. 



VI. 18] DEFINITION OF BRAHMAN 2€9 

inference by you but as ‘ yukti ’ by us) is stated because it serves 
as an aid and not because it leads to the knowledge of the real 
purport (of the Vedanta). The real object of the aphorisms how- 
ever is to connect together the menings of the Vedic passages 
(f.e., Vedanta). The same idea is expanded (by the Bhasyakara) 
—[(As a matter of fact) the Vedanta texts (are referred to in the 
aphorisms and discussed)]. It is with the aid of the nyayas 
(syllogisms) arrived at, from a due consideration of the aphorisms 
commencing from the samanvaya sutra (V.S., I. 4) and by closely 
adhering to the significative potency of words, that the knowledge 
of Brahman (saksatkara) as the purport of (all) the Vedanta texts, 
is effected, and it is not brought about by other pramaijas such 
as inference, etc. 

17. [“ While there are Vedantic passages (declaring the 
source of the origin, etc., of the world”)] inference also as long 
as it does not contradict the scriptural texts becomes the right 
means of knowledge and as such is not discarded, because 
scripture itself approves of argumentation as an (indispensable) 
aid. To explain: — ‘ Atman is to be heard and thought on (B,h., 
II. iv-5) just as from this Sruti, §ravana (inquiry into the texts) 
is stated to be the means in the acquisition of Brahma-knowledge, 
even so is manana or yukti restated premising it to be the indu- 
bitable means of the cognition of Brahman. Likewise another 
Sruti — “One learned and reflecting, etc.”, “ A. person having a 
teacher to instruct him obtains knowledge ” — (Ch ..nd. Up., VI. 
xiv, 2) declares that human reasoning aids Scripture. When the 
confirmation of the knowledge obtained (from Vedanta) is secured 
for his pupils by the teacher’s adducing instances from ‘ the crystal, 
etc.,’ which are in conformity with Sruti, then that is restated in 
the text— ‘ the person having a teacher obtains knowledge.’ 

VI. 18. [“ Not as in the case of inquiry into the nature of 
Dharma (religious duty)] — from this, the reason for the employ- 
ment of argumentation is stated. Sruti (in ‘ iSnityadayah ’) is 
the word(sabda) which (in the elucidation of meaning) requires 
no other word. From the word ‘ adi ’, are to be understood 
linga, vakya, etc., being the different forms of the word (sabda- 
prakaras).^^ It is not that they only (viz., the six pramanas) are 


Direct statement — ^flr, potency of words — syntactical 
relation — 'Tsf, context — position — paiJT, name — These 
are the six modes of evidence in the cognition of Brahman. 


270 


pancapAdikA of padmapada 


[VI. 19 


the right means in the cognition of Brahman, but on the con- 
trary also experience, etc., in corroboration of which the bhasya 
says— [“ Because anubhava (intuitive perception or saksatkara) is 
the culmination of the knowledge regarding Brahman, and because 
that knowledge has as its object an accomplished (existing) entity”]. 
(To explain) because experience is possible of a thing that already 
exists and because the annulment of the desire for Brahma-know- 
ledge has experience as its terminus, (i.e., it is saksatkara or 
intuitive perception that satisfies one’s longing to know Brahman). 

19. Well, in the inquiry into Dharma, even without the 
need of experience, the knowledge obtained by strictly adhering 
to the significative potency of words (composing, say a manda- 
tory statement like ‘ .Tyotistomena svargakamo yajeta ’—one who 
desires heaven should perform Jyotistoma sacrifice) desiderates 
no other aid and also brings about the final result and does not 
require even an iota of argumentation. Let it be so even here 
since there exists no difference between the Vedanta texts and 
those of Purvamimamsa in regard to their validity as means of 
knowledge. The question thus arising the distinction is pointed 
out in the bhasya beginning with [“ If it were a thing to be accom- 
plished — kartavyatve hi visaye, etc.,” and ending with “ the 
knowledge of Brahman is altogether dependent on the thing 
because its object is an accomplished entity {viz., Brahman)— 
Brahmajiianamapi vastutantrameva bhutavastuvisayatvat ”]. 

20. [Page 80] How? (It may be asked where the dis- 
tinction lies). Indeed a thing that is enjoined as a duty to be 
accomplished is of the nature of an unaccomplished (unoriginated) 
object because of the very fact that it is yet to be accomplished 
and (as such) it cannot be an object of direct experience. It 
follows therefore that no desire (for anubhava — realisation) arises. 
Here, on the other hand, the accomplished entity (viz., Brahman) 
is taken as the object of immediate illusory cognition (cf. aham 
pasyami — I see; it is pratyaksabhrama where the act of seeing 
is attributed to the self; i.e., illegitimately transferred from the 
intellect — buddhi, to the self— atman) and the rise of such illusory 
cognition cannot be prevented except by valid immediate per- 
ception; such is our experience as regards the perception of the 
‘ double Moon Merely because the two portions of the Veda 

— Owing to some defect we perceive the double 
Moon; this is immediate illusion and it can be eradicated only by the 



VI. 21] 


DEFINITION OF BRAHMAN 


271 


(the ritualistic where something is enjoined to be accomplished, 
and the Vedanta where an existing entity is the visaya) resemble 
each other in so far as their inherent validity is concerned it can- 
not be supposed that there is resemblance even as regards their 
method of exposition (avabodhana).^® If there should be (such 
resemblance) then Brahman would be an entity to be brought 
into existence also by man’s wish (i.e., it would be at one’s option . 
to bring it into being or not). As such injunction and prohibi- 
tion — vidhi, pratisedha, alternative and combination — vikalpa- 
samuccaya, general rule and exception — utsarga, apavada, annul- 
ment and augmentation— badha, abhyuccaya, settled and un- 
settled — ^vyavasthita and vikalpa ; all these would have their place 
(in the case of Brahman as in that of Dharma).®* 

21. This is inappropriate in regard to an existing entity since 
it would result in the negation of its very nature. For instance, 
the alternative notion that arises in a single object, viz., whether 
it is a pollard or a man will not be a valid cognition as is that of 
the oblation of an alternative ingredient (in a sacrifice); as re- 
gards the final truth it is the single notion — this is a pollard only 
(that can stand the test) because the knowledge of an accomplished 
thing (siddhavastu) is dependent on the nature of the thing and 
it is not that the thing is dependent on the knowledge. If it were 
so, even the notion of shell-silver would be like that (i.e., would 
be samyagjnana or valid cognition). But as regards the know- 
ledge of a thing (yet) to be accomplished it is right knowledge 

direct perceptive cognition of the single Moon; even so the immediate 
illusory knowledge as evidenced in such statements as ‘I am happy’, 
‘I am grieved’, can be eradicated only by the direct intuitive perception 
of reality— 

The opponent argues that since both Brahman and Dharma 
constitute the visaya of the Veda, manana, nididhyasana and anubhava 
need not be regarded as means to the knowledge of Brahman as they 
are not required in, the case of Dharma where verbal cognition alone 
is required, or if they are insisted upon there is no reason, he would 
say, to omit them in regard to dharma. The answer is given in 
— ^ etc. 

If the method of exposition be the same Brahman would be 
the content of an injunction — cf. q%cf and would be the content 

of prohibition — cf. q again just as rice or barley can with 

impunity be used in a sacrifice Brahman or Sthanu, an insentient 
object can be the means of moksa, etc. 



272 PANCAPADIKA OF PADMAPADA ^ ^ [VII. 22 

only even when it relates to something other than itself. This is 
pointed out in Chand. Up., V. viii-1 : ‘ Woman, O ! Gauta.ma is 
the sacrificial fire, etc.’ (‘ The sentence denotes meditation on 
woman as fire— this, is meditation on what is other than itself, 
viz., woman and yet the knowledge of that meditation is right 
knowledge). [Because it is so (/.<?., since the knowledge of all 
things depends on the nature of the things themselves) the know- 
ledge of Brahman also is dependent on the thing itself since its 
vi§aya (content) is an accomplished thing {viz.. Brahman itself]. 
To conclude, it is appropriate that in the inquiry into Brahman, 
reasoning should find a place as well as the need of experience 
and not elsewhere (namely, in the inquiry regarding karma or 
active religious duty). 

VII. 22. Some one objects thus: [since (Brahman) is of 
the nature of an existing object, etc.] — this is what it (the Bhasya 
of which a portion is quoted here) means:— If reasoning should 
find a place here, as the matter relates to an existing thing, then 
what is the purpose served by investigation into the meaning of 
the Vedantic texts ? Let the argument of those who by inference 
deduce ISvara’s agency (in the origination of the world) hold 
good so that let the first sutra {viz., ‘ athato Brahmajijnasa) set 
forth the thesis (pratijna) and this {viz., janmadyasya yatah), the 
reason (hetu). 

23. The answer is given (in the bhasya): — [“No, {i.e., what 
you say is not tenable) ; since (Brahman) is not the object of the 
senses, no relation can be perceived, etc. (/.e., between the sadhya 
— Brahman and hetu— karyatva)]. The senses have the world alone 
as their object and not its cause (Brahman). If they could bring 
that also {viz., the cause of the universe) within their purview then 
there would be no use in your setting out the inferential argument. 
Even the inference known as ‘ samanyato dtsta ’ cannot serve 
as a valid means of knowledge in regard to Brahman which trans- 
cends the scope of the senses.®® Hence concludes (the Bhasya- 
kara) — [“ Therefore the sutra — ‘ That from which the origination, 


It has been shown that Brahman cannot be established from 
Visjsaiuraaaa since it is not the object of the senses. The opponent, 
say the Niiyayika, might urge that Brahman could be deduced from 
that variety of anuraaaa known as samanyatodrsta, e.g., 

: —where with the support of what is found in the sphere 
of sensuous objects, we reason about parallel cases in the sphere of the 



VII. 24] DEFINITION OF BRAHMAN 273 

etc,,’ is not intended to set forth an inference (as the means of 
understanding the nature of Brahman) but on the other hand 
it is to make known a Vedantic text.] And it has already been 
said that the sutra indicates that reasoning is an auxiliary to the 
Vedanta as helping in the realisation of what it imports {viz.. 
Brahman). 

24. [Page 81] Well, if that be so, how can reasoning 
incompetent as it is to have Brahman as its object serve as an 
axndhary to Vedantic statements dealing with (the nature of) 
Brahman ? 

Here is the answer — ^In elucidating the nature of Brahman 
reasons are adduced on the analogy of clay, etc. (Chand. Up., VI. 
i-4). And just as the laudatory and condemnatory passages 
(arthavadas) are desiderated by the statements of injunction and 
prohibition to prompt one to action or dissuade one from it, those 
(reasons) assximing the position of arthavada importing proba- 
bility are desiderated by the Vedanta passages describing the 
essential nature (of Brahman) till fruition, i.e., liberation is 
attained. It is therefore said that they (reasons) fulfil their part 
by serving as auxiliaries to the scriptural statement. 

25. [“ Which then is the Vedantic text which the sutra indi- 
cates as having to be expounded (m order to determine the nature 
of Brahman) ”?] Now, since the word ‘ Brahman ’ occurring in 
whichever Vedanta passage is not significative (because Brahman 


supersensuous. The Siddhantin points out that this k i nd of inference 
also is incompetent to establish Brahman. The Naiyayikas admit 
Brahman as possessing eternal knowledge but the eternity of knowledge 
is rebutted by the counter-argument— and what is a 

or a product is non-etemal. 

From the pot-inference we can only infer a creator but not a 
creator possessing omniscience. 

Reason no doubt is incompetent to determine Brahman which 
is bliss, knowledge and inner light, but yet, it points to the probability 
of its existence. In the Sruti — ‘It is one only without a second’ what 
is intended is that Brahman is the material cause of the universe; the 
clay-illustration is apt here for we do not perceive the effect, viz., 
pot apart from the cause, viz., clay. The crystal-red illustration points 
to the illusory nature of agency-^kartftva; the ‘mirror-reflection’ 
example points to the identity of the individual soul with the universal 
soul, and the pot-ether example brings home the relationlessness of 
Brahman. 



274 PAnCApADIKA OF PADMAPADA [VII. 25 

is an unknown entity), it is not possible to fit in, its meaning either 
as a substantive or as an attributive in the import of a proposition 
(vakyartha)— such is the objection. 

In that section of the Veda which one has to commit to 
memory, in whatever order the Vedanta texts are found juxta- 
posed, for the elucidation of Brahman, in that very order the first 
two sutras are intended to bring out the nature of Brahman. With 
this object is given, the illustration— “Bhfgurvai Varupih”.^’^ 


^ The purvapaksin argues that the Vedantic 

texts containing the word ‘Brahman’ cannot be the laksya of the 
sutras owing to the unknowability of Brahman. The answer is given 
in the statement — It may be expanded thus: — 
Do you hold that Brahman in its special nature is unknown or in its 
general nature ? If the first, we do not contend it for we admit that 
we are ignorant of the specific nature of Brahman, and that without 
inquiry we cannot know Brahman as the Real— as Knowledge — 
as Bliss— as the Inner Soul- — and as secondless — 
If you say that Brahman is not knowable even in its general 
nature we do not agree with you. Brahman in its literal sense of vast- 
ness is known. Hence on that basis we get to know its specific nature 
from the juxtaposition of other words, viz., satya, jnana, etc., so that 
statements like — sTfJ, — ^become competent to expound the 
nature of Brahman. The Vivarana answers another objection: It is 
this: — ^If we follow the order of words as found in the text — Tait. Up.> 
II. 1 to be memorised {viz., ^^1^, etc.,) we fail to get at the 
meaning, but we have to follow the reverse order in order to under- 
stand that Brahman is the cause of the world. The rule is from the 
known to the unknown. The text can be rightly understood if it be 
construed thus: WKraW: 3|i:— That from which 

space is born is Brahman which is of the nature of reality, know- 
ledge and bliss. The text however is in this order— fRJTJTVri . 

etc. Here, first, Brahman is defined 
as being, intelligence and bliss and then it is said that from this 
Brahman space (akasa) arose, from space vayu, etc. Hence the 
objector questions the appositeness of the text adduced, viz., 
etc., as it does not bring out the nature of Brahman. 

The answer is contained in etc. The Bhasyakara 

no doubt concedes the rule that we must proceed from the known to 
the unknown — ; but he points out that the 
objection raised on that ground is irrelevant here. In the passage 
given as illustration what is to be noted is that Bhfgu goes to his 
father as one anxious to know Brahman. He is a ‘mumuksu’, one 



275 


VII . 26] DEFINITION OF BRAHMAN 

26. From the reasoning pointed out when explaining the 
word ‘ atha ’ (in the first sutra), the text {viz., ‘ Bhrgurvai Varunih 
— Bhrgu the son of Varuna ’) should be taken to illustrate the 
first sutra, and the text ‘ yato va imani bhutani ’ ‘ from which 
these beings to illustrate the sutra beginning with ‘ Janma ’ 
origination, etc. 

How (can it be argued that the Entity from which these beings 
are born is Brahman) ? 

Since the origin, etc., of the earth, etc., is, from the proofs 
adduced already, a matter of experience and since in the deter- 
mination of its cause, evidence is lacking by which to ascertain 
which of the two, viz., imitary causation or plural causation is to 
be apprehended and when all that is known is only that the prece- 
dent causal entity is some intelligent Being, the singleness of cause 
is rendered explicit by the text ‘ From whence (yatah) proceed 
these beings ’ ; because the word denoting the cause (yatah) is in the 
singular number and because the purpose (of the text — ^Yato va 
imani) is to denote only that -{viz., ekatva), the distinctive cause, 
viz., that the Being whence the world originated is all-knowing 
and all-potent, is by presumption (arthapatti) understood from 
the text itself {viz., yato va, etc.). Again (we have) the text “ That, 
have the desire to understand, (Tait. Bhrguvalli) ” — this is a 
restatement — anuvada having reference to what has gone before. 
(It is followed by the statement), “ That is Brahman ” ; because 
here the word ‘ Brahman ’ is used, what is ascertained by taking 
it in its (literal) sense of vastness, is that the Being which is the 
cause of the world is characterised by freedom from all limitations. 

27. The determinative sentence of that (world-cause) is, 
“ For indeed from bliss only (beings are here bom, when born 
they live by bliss and on death they enter into bliss”. — Tait. Up., 


wishing to learn, and unless there has first sprung in him the desire 
for knowledge, the question ‘what is that Brahman’, i.e., ‘what is its 
specific nature’ does not arise. Hence the order in the Vedantic 
passages, viz., Bhpgu — ^Varuni approached his father Varuna and asked 

‘Teach me Brahman’ ‘That, surely, from which beings are here 

born, etc.’ — Tait. Up., Ill VallL 

It may be noted that here the thing to be defined — unknown, 
is mentioned first and then follow the description of its specific nature. 
This is justified on the ground mentioned above. Hence there is no 
need to reverse the order of the Upani§adic texts. 



276 PAtCAPADIKA OF PADMAPADA [VIL 27 

III-6). Since it is associated with the particle ‘hi’ which points 
to something well known it is right to suppose that it points to 
bliss as the essence (of Brahman). If indeed a thing that is of the 
nature of non-bliss be the world-cause the word ‘ Brahman ’ will 
not be applicable to it. By the apphcation of its meaning (v/z., 
bfhatva or vastness) to what deserves (only) neglect, it will cease 
to be truly significant. Hence in the text relating to Brahman, 
{viz., “Whence these beings are born, etc.”), since the aggregate 
of the attributes beginning with ‘origination, etc.,’ defines 
Brahman only by indirect indication and (as such) does not 
establish its contact with Brahman (it is evident that), Brahman 
is Omniscient, Omnipotent and Supreme BHss. It is thus estab- 
lished that the real nature of Brahman is what is defined in the 
sutra beginning with ‘ origination, etc.’ 

Here ends the Fifth Var^aka of the Pancopadika 



VARl^AKA VI 

THE OMNISCffiNGE OF BRAHMAN 

I. [Page 82] [“ From its being the source of Scripture”,] 
This sutra lays down, another reason in support of the omnis- 
cience of Brahman which is the cause of the world.^ Since the 
sastra, termed the Veda (whose study demands) the aid of several 
branches of knowledge, deahng with inniimerable and varied 
topics, falls within the world-order, its source is from Brahman 
only (tata eva). And there is no proof for the existence of any 
thing that is not its (Veda) content. Hence because it embraces 
everything it is omniscient. The use of the termination “ Kalpa’ 
in the Bhasya (sarvajnakalpasya) is to indicate that Scripture, 
because it lacks consciousness, falls a little short of perfection 
(in the matter of omniscience). As such, its cause (viz.. Brahman) 
is understood to be able to comprehend much more than what 
forms its subject-matter. It is common knowledge that authors 
of Sastras are so even now (z.e., their knowledge is of wider range 
than that covered by their works). 

II. Purvapaksin . — ^If it be so the Veda would be dependent 
upon human authorship since its composition presupposes an 
intelligent understanding (of its purport with the aid of other 
pramanas).® 

Siddhantin. — ^No, it would not, since like Brahman it is with- 
out a beginning and unalterably constant; (lit. unchanging like 
the anvil). 

^ ts- — ^Regarding the all-knowingness of Brahman, 

jagatkarapatva — ^the fact of its being the cause of the world — ^was 
adduced as one reason in the second sutra. Here is given another, 
viz., Sastrayonitva — ^being the source of the Veda. 

2 — supported. A proper study of the Veda requires a 

knowledge of Puraria, Nyaya, Mimamsa, etc., cf. 

(Yajnavalkya) 

® — ^If it be stated that the Veda is a mere utterance of 

Bvara, then He would not be omniscient for we see that the Vedic 
teacher even to-day repeats the Veda as ever before but he is not 
all-wise. Or if it be stated that Kvara has composed the Veda having 
previously thought out its sense then the Veda would be of human 
origin and lose its character as the unfailing valid means of knowledge. 
This is the purvapaksa and the PP. meets the objection in these words 
^rra:., etc. 



278 


pancapAdikA of padmapAda 


pi. 


Purvapaksin . — How then (could it be maintained) that its 
origin is from Brahman (seeing that the Veda is unalterable and 
beginningless)? 

Siddhantin . — ^Because it (Veda) is dependent upon that {viz.. 
Brahman), like the rope-serpent.* Even thus is the sruti— ‘ This 
(Veda) is breathed by Him’. Just as among men the act of 
breathing is spontaneous, even so in regard to the Veda and as 
such that (supposed) defect, viz., that it is dependent on other 
pramanas does not exist. 

Purvapaksin. — -If it be so, {i.e., if it is not admitted that it is 
composed after due thought) how do you maintain the omniscience 
of Brahman ?® 

Siddhantin . — The world of names is constituted by the mani- 
festation of the knowledge-giving power of that (Brahman) only. 
Even of the world of forms the manifestation is dependent upon 
that (Brahman) and as such it has its origin in it (Brahman).® 
There is no origination of a non-existent entity.’' 

* Here is pointed out the difference between the unalterableness of 
the Veda and of Brahman. The Veda is not eternal since it belongs 
to the world-order, nor is it unoriginated. It is vivarta or manifestation 
of Brahman like the silver in the shell. Without Brahman there could 
be no universe as without rope there would be no serpent. Its 
eternality coexists in its similarity as regards the verbal order from 
cycle to cycle. The Sruti also vouches for its origin from Isvara — 
am Fftr 

® To avoid the human origin of the Veda it is stated that the Veda 
is the manifestation or vivarta of Brahman and as such Brahman 
is the vivartopadanakararia of the world like the rope in the rope- 
serpent illusion. Then the Pariinian example is out of place. Not being 
the author in the sense that Panini is, Brahman cannot be said to 
possess transcendental knowledge. 

® The phenomenal world is differentiated by names and forms. 
Brahman is the ground of their existence and manifestation — 

As the material cause Brahman possesses vastly superior knowledge as 
compared with the object world (^TTU'Pj) and the world of names 
(^TI+iMM^), which latter includes the Veda. Hence answering the query 
the PP. says— 

’’ Because names and forms which constitute the world derive 
their being and manifestation from Brahman it is wrong to suppose 
that the origination of the world proceeds from non-existence as 
maintained by the Naiyayikas and -the Buddhists. 

Here ends the Sixth Varifaka of the PancapSdika 



VARISfAKA VII 

BRAHMAN— ESTABLISHED ON THE AUTHORITY 
OF VEDANTA 

I. [‘ Or else JR.gveda, etc., as stated above ’]— commencing 
with this Bhasya the Bhasyakara says that the (third) sutra bears 
another meaning, v/z., the enunciation of the pramma (or the 
valid means of knowing the real nature of Bralunan), inasmuch 
as this second interpretation is a necessity.^ 

gwery.— How could a single aphorism bear a double sense ? 
Answer.— Only because it is a sutra, as witness the Pauranikas 
what the knowers of the meaning of ‘Sutra’ say is that a 
sutra should consist of a minimum number of letters, be free from 
doubt, should contain the quintessence of the thing, should admit 
of more than one sense, contain no unnecessary letter, and be 
free from erroneous terminology By the word ‘ Visvatomukha’ 
is meant that it bears more than one sense. Hence it is indeed 
an embellishment to the sutra that it yields diverse meanings. 

Query. — Well, in explaining the previous aphorism (second 
sutra) the Bhasyakara adduced as illustration the pertinent Scrip- 
tural passage—" From whence all these beings are bom, etc.,” 
and as such purposed to show that the Sastra itself points to Scrip- 
ture as the valid means of knowing the nature of Brahman. 

Answer . — It is true ; on the strength of this (third sutra) that 
(Sruti — ‘ yato va, etc.,) was adduced in illustration. Otherwise 
owing to the absence of any reference to the Vedic text (in the 
second sutra) it would lead to the supposition that inference only 
was intimated for estabhshing the nature of Brahman. 


^ The third sutra ‘ admits of a double inter- 

pretation. The compound may be resolved either as 3gri^pi?r trT%: = 

that which is the origin (of 
the Sastra, viz., Brahman) or as W ^ 

— (Brahman) which has the Sastra as its pramana. 
The phrase here has to be construed in the second way. What it means 
is that the Sastra beginning with the Rgveda is the pramana or the 
valid means, of proving Brahman’s existence. It is through Scriptures 
apart from reasoning that Brahman is known as the cause of the origin, 
etc., of the world. The sutra therefore may be taken as enunciating the 
pramana for establishing Brahman. 


280 PANCAPADIKA of PADMAPADA [1. 42 

Such contingency arising the Bhasyakara has stated that 
[‘ the omniscient, and omnipotent cause from which the origi- 
nation, etc., of the world take place, is Brahman — and that this 
is complementary (to the aphorism)’]; and this statement which 
reinforces (the Brahman’s being the world-cause, denoted by 
‘ yatah’) would be without any valid ground (if there were no 
sutra to indicate that the sastra alone is the valid means of know- 
ing Brahman). Since it is also possible that separate entities in 
the objective-world may be produced from separate causes, 
omniscience and omnipotence of the world-cause will not even- 
tuate; and since in the empirical world it is not seen that the 
word ‘ Brahman ’ is used to denote the cause of the world (the 
Bhasya, ‘omnipotence, etc.,’ would be groundless). [Page 83] 
Hence in order to remove the supposition that by inference alone 
Brahman could be understood the second sutra might take this 
from — ‘That from which there is. the origination, etc., of the 
world is known from Vedic testimony ’. (That Brahman has 
Sastra as its pramana no doubt results from the Sutra when 
expanded thus, but ‘ that Brahman is omniscient because it is the 
cause of the Veda ’ does not result from the single Sutra as framed 
above. Hence the need of a separate sutra). The framing of 
the separate sutra is for denoting by means of an alternative 
interpretation (vyakhyantara) that the omniscience of Brahman 
could be easily established since Brahman is the cause of the 
Sastra also, which Sastra comes under the same category as the 
world it is a karya, not nitya as held by the Mimamsaka). 

Here ends the Seventh Varpaka of the Pancapadikd 



VARljfAKA Vm 

VEDANTA— INTIMATES AN EXISTENT ENTITY 

1. 1. Purvapaksin . — [How can it be maintained that the 
Sastra (Vedanta) is the valid means of ascertaining the nature 
of Brahman since it has been shown that the Sastra has reference 
to kriya or action as borne out by the statement, ‘ the Veda is 
denotative of action and as such what is not so denotative serves 
no purpose’ (Jai. I. ii-1)? Hence the Vedanta texts possess no 
value because of their non-injunctive character].^ 

2. No doubt the texts quoted in the Bhasya, viz., “ From 
which all these beings originate, etc.,” declare Brahman charac- 
terised by such attributes as omniscience, etc., to be the cause of 
the universe. Still as there is scope also for perception, etc., to 
reveal an existing object, they (the Vedanta texts) cannot partake 
of the nature of a pramana in relation to Brahman uncorrobo- 
rated as they are by them (perception, etc.). 

3- Siddhmtin. — ^Well, since the Veda is not the work of 
man, the knowledge that arises from it desiderates no other 
pramana in the determination of the object denoted by it, and 
as such how could it be invalid (i.e., how could its claim to convey 
valid knowledge regarding an accomplished object be denied) 

^ From the second sutra the indicative definition (definition per 
accidens) of Brahman — viz., that it is the cause of the 
origination, etc., of the world, as also the determinative definition 
(definition per se) of Brahman that it is consciousness, and bliss, is 
stated. The third sutra sets forth that the Vedanta is the valid means 
of establishing Brahman so defined. Here the doubt arises how Brahman 
could be established on verbal testimony (Sastrapramdria), since Brahman 
is an existing entity (Siddhavastu). The evidential character of verbal 
testimony, is impugned on the authority of Jaimini Stitra — ^I. ii. 1. 

This is the Mimamsa demurrer. The point of the objection is that 
the entire Veda including the Vedanta has action as its visaya (content) 
and the Vedanta if it should reveal only an existing entity is valueless. 

5r^i%. An existent object 
has reference to time — ^past, present or future, or it may mean a thing 
that is not the product of action — 

. * — Statements made by men have often to be tested by 

other pramanas to ascertain their validity, but since the Veda is non- 
personal in origin its validity is absolute, requiring no corroborative 
evidence. 



282 


pa^capAdikA of PADMAPADA [I- 4 

Purvapaksin . — ^It is true ; but still just as the visual cognition 
of the depression and elevation in a picture that is the object of 
the sense of touch, is invalid being uncorroborated by it (yiz., the 
tactual sense), even so here also {i.e., in the case of knowledge 
arising from the Scripture) it would be (invalid).® Again, the 
Vedantic texts are invalid also for the reason they signify nothing 
that is of value to man. What indeed constitutes human value 
(purusartha) is the attainment of happiness and riddance of 
sorrow. And those (happiness and sorrow of which happiness 
is the object of attainment and sorrow of riddance) will not 
result in regard to that which is an existing entity and is not 
related to action, since it (Brahman) is an accomplished being. 
Hence (the Bhasya)—[‘ nowhere has the significance of the Vedic 
statements been seen or found to be intelligible except in so far 
as they are associated with an injunction (either directly or 
remotely)], 

4. Moreover, in regard to an object which is not given in 
perception, etc., sabda as a whole, (when not injunctive) fails 
to serve as a pramana. The nature of the Sastra is this, that it 
is explicative of things which are not cognised (by other pramanas).* 

® Even in the case of independent pramapas we find that one 
contradicts the other. A picture that presents an even Surface— — 
to the touch, appears as consisting of depressions and elevations to 
visual perception. Hence the invalidity of visual cognition. Even so 
the Vedanta text which declares the identity of Brahman with the 
individual soul is contradicted by what is given in perception (experi- 
ence), viz., that the body (parak) which is subject to birth, growth and 
destruction is identical with the inner being (pratyak — ^individual soul) 
as witness the usage — atf ‘I am man’. The Sruti intimates the 

identity of jiva with Brahman while pratyaksa, that of jiva with the 
body— TD. 

^ etc. — ^An aggregate of words not injunctive 

in character cannot denote an object which is not given by some 
pramapa other than iabda because of the absence of relation between 
such an aggregate and the object it signifies. It is a known fact that 
without the cognition of relation there arises no knowledge of the 
import of a proposition — As such the Vedanta ceases to be 
a valid means of conveying knowledge (Pramana). This is known as 
srsrrJTI'Jqi^ — invalidity due to the failure to convey 
sense. The other two cases of invalidity are — that 

which makes known the known, and — that 

which intimates what serves no useful purpose. A valid means of 



1. 5] VEDANTA— INTIMATES AN EXISTENT ENTITY 283 

On the other hand, it is only in the manifestation of such objects 
as are understood by other pramanas that the capacity of Sabda 
is perceived but not in the manifestation of objects not so under- 
stood. Hence the Vedanta portions are purposeless; their vah- 
dity in the revelation of Brahman is nought. It is, on this ground, 
therefore, that (we hear) the nauseating utterance of some that the 
Vedanta portions are the “ barren tracts of Veda”. 

5. Now what the commentator (Samkara) has stated (when 
adverting to the MImamsa view), namely, that if for fear of there 
being difference in the contexts, the Vedanta texts are not accepted 
as supplementary to the ritualistic injunctions by revealing the 
nature of the agent (in the ritualistic act) and of the deity (invoked 
in the ritual), they may denote the act of meditation explicit in 
their own vakyas (sentences) — ^that does not stand to reason.® 
Even though the Vedanta portion is (admitted to be) supple- 
mentary to injunctions of meditation, owing to lack of corro- 
borative evidence, a Being endowed with omniscience, etc., as 
the cause of the world-creation cannot be established. 

6. [Page 84] It is true (says the upholder of the latter view) ; 
when on the basis of inference is understood some world-cause 
undifferentiated by any attribute, qualifications are superimposed 
on it (i.e., the world-cause) and from such (attribution) the injunc- 
tion of meditation will be found to be justifiable.® In fine what 


knowledge is defined thus— — 
Validity is constituted by its revelation of what is not known, what is 
not sublated, and what denotes something that will serve a purpose. 

® — Samkara states the Mimamsaka’s alter- 

native argument in support of his view that the Vedantic texts import 
meditation. He would argue thus — ^If you (referring to the Vedantin) 
say that the two contexts — the Purvamimamsa, one of ritual and the 
Uttaramiraamsa, one of knowledge, are distinct and as such neither 
agent nor deity should here be the topic, I maintain that Vedanta texts 
subserve meditation mentioned in those very texts. 

etc. — Statements contained in the Vedanta portion as 
contrasted with those of the karmakanda. It should be noted that 
meditation also is action, only mental, so that the subsidiariness of the 
Vedanta to action is as the Mimamsaka thinks established. His point 
is that the Vedanta should be regarded either as being subordinate to 
karmakanda or as enjoining acts of meditation. 

® The Pflrvapak§in argues thus: ‘Both of us admit 

on the basis of (inference of cause from the effect, 



284 PAtCAPADIKA OF PADMAPADA ^IIL7 

is meant is (says the purvapak|in), “that the Vedanta portions 
whose study follows from the injunction relating to the recital 
of one’s branch of the Veda (adhyayanavidhi) will not by any 
means be purportless And the fruit therein should be under- 
stood as resulting from the laudatory statements.’ 

III. 7. [That, however {yiz.. Brahman is to be ascertained 
from the Vedanta Sastra) since the Vedanta texts are congruent 
in having it (Brahman) as their purport.] In this aphorism the 
proposition that Brahman (tat) having the attributes of omni- 
science, etc., is known from the Vedanta Sastra as set forth and 
the probans (hetu) is stated in the words ‘ because they are 
congruent — ‘samanvaya ’ which means that as regards their 
purport the Vedanta texts are in agreement.® 

e.g., the world is a product, it must have a cause), that some specifically 
undetermined cause, is the source of the world. We merely superimpose 
on that karana qualities which are not there for the purpose of 
meditation. Hence the Vedanta may be admitted as relating to the 
meditation of Brahman thus superimposed. Such an entity does not 
require corroboration from other pramanas. 

’ ^ cIW — This sentence has dropped out of the 

text. It means that the fruit of meditation should be presumed to be 
that which is stated in the laudatory passages. The Siddhantin points 
out that the Vedanta passages like ‘Existence, knowledge and bliss 
constitute Brahman’ do not contain any word denoting meditation nor 
do‘ those passages occur in a meditation context. Hence, he argues, 
that they have no connection with meditation and are not supplementary 
to injunctions of meditation. He adds that notwithstanding, they 
are purposeful, since the knowledge of atman — ^nciTfR— purporting 
from those texts is itself the phala. 

The purvapaksin’s answer is this— on the basis of injunction relat- 
ing to Vedic study— The Veddntic texts like ‘Existence, 
Knowledge, etc.,’ are studied. Therefore they should point to a 
prayojana as the ritualistic texts do. It is evident that mere knowledge 
of atman does not confer the desired reward, viz., immoratality — 
SPSTR. The statements of the Vedanta denoting existing objects would 
become purportless unless associated with injunction — As such 
the laudatory passage should be construed thus — one who desires im- 
mortality should meditate on Brahman endowed with existence, etc., 
WIT 

Understand— 4;® =q m (vide V). 

® etc. — :A11 the Vedantic texts are accordant as much 

as they have for their purport the omniscient, omnipotent Brahman 



III. 7] VEDANTA— INTIMATES AN EXISTENT ENTITY 285 

‘ Samanvaya ’ means intimate connection (samyafc anvaya). 
Here the question is ‘ What is it that constitutes the intimacy of 
the connection ’ ? It is the connection of words, which convey 
no mutually related meanings {i.e., unlike the words which denote 
the relation of kriya and karaka), which desiderate none othOT 
(say, miyoga) along with the meaning which is a single unit 
(conception, unlike ‘ blue-lotus’), which is homogeneous and which 
relates merely to the import of the pratipadika (uninflected 
substantive).® 


as the cause of the origin, sustentation, and dissolution of the 
universe. 

In the aphorism ' ’ we find the probans and - 

the subject (Brahman). The probandum has 

to be understood- in Brahman possessing omni- 
science, omnipotence, etc., ‘Samanvaya’ means relation, 

which relation here is one of the manifestor and the manifested— 
The Vedanta manifests the nature of Brahman. 
But that itself is the thesis set forth or sadhya. Hence there arises 
the defect of the identity of the probans and the probandum. To avoid 
this, ‘Samanvaya’ has to be understood in the sense of ‘tatparyavatva’ 
(having the purport). The syllogism may be stated thus:— 

Subject.— 'RxBhxaa.n — 

Probandum . — Is revealed in the Vedanta— 

Probans.— Because the Vedanta has Brahman as its purport — 

The Pancapadika completes the probans by supplying the word 
so that the sentence will read thus — 

* of the words contained in the texts— 

(1) — ^mutually unrelated unlike the relation 
existing between kriya and karaka as for example in #133 

(2) not desiderating karya or niyoga or vidhi, as 

is required in ‘ where is only the name of 

the yaga and is not karaka. 

(1) and (2) are attributes to the words contained in the 
texts. 

(3) quite distinct from the relation existing between 
kriya and karaka. 

(4) — ^not like the non-difference-c«m-diflerence as found in 



286 PAI^CAPADIKA OF PADMAPADA [III. 8 

8. It (the connection) is like the one between the words 
‘ sah ’ and ‘ ayam ’ composing the sentence— (soyam Devadattah) 
and like that between the words ‘ prakrsta ’ and ‘ prakasa (in 
the sentence— (prakrstaprakaia§ candrah) where the meaning con- 
veyed is the same as when designated by the single term candra 


(5) the meaning of the bare substantive/ not deside- 
rating karya or niyoga or vidhi as required in ‘ 

(6) — undifferentiated by gender or number. 

The attributes (3) to (6) refer to the meaning. 

The relation of the words characterised by the attributes (1) and 
(2) with the meaning characterised by the attributes (3) to (6) is what 
is known as or in other words the relation between 

the impartite vakya with the impartite sense. 

etc.— the words here denote 
the impartite sense, /.a., the undifferentiated Devadatta. This is given 
to bring home the impartite sense conveyed by the Mahavakya ‘That 
Thou art’. 

— ^This is to illustrate the avantara vakya— 

The statements srqrrrWI, denote the identity of the 

individual soul with the Absolute by the secondary sense termed 
i.e., by the partial rejection of the primary significance. 
All the Vedic texts relating to the cause of the origin, etc., of the 
world denote the Absolute only either by primary signification — 
or by the partial rejection of the primary signification 
or by the ‘conditioning adjunct’— e.g., the terms 
jnSna and ananda denote Brahman by their primary significance; by 
the total rejection of the primary sense — STfSOT, for ‘eka’ should be 
taken to mean — ^negation of the other; ‘That thou art’ — 
by partial rejection; and the terms omniscience, etc., by the 

conditioning adjunct, viz., for they will be inappli- 

cable to the Absolute unless the world-creation stands over against it. 

The Pancapadika adduces two empirical illustrations such as 
trs4 and to substantiate the doctrine that the 

Vedantic texts like denote by laksana the impartite homogene- 

ous Brahman — 

Question: How is the sentence, ‘#rsq ’ (‘this is that Deva- 
datta ’) illustrative of (‘that thou art ’) ? How does it end in 

denoting the bare, relationless object ? 

Answer: In ‘this is Devadatta’ we have an instance of recogni- 
tion. It means that Devadatta who is present here and now, is the same 
Devadatta who was present there and then. But since there can be no 



III. 8] VEDANTA— INTIMATES AN EXISTENT ENTITY 287 

To explain— by some one who wishes to know which particular 
object is known by the (uninflected) word Candra the question is 
put, ‘which in this luminous firmament is designated Candra?’ 
The answer to that question is ‘ that which shines the brightest 
is Candra Thus only will it be the (right) answer if what is 
denoted by the word Candra is denoted likewise by these two 
words (viz., prakrsta and prakasa).^® This being so even such 

identity between Devadatta qualified by that place and that time with 
Devadatta qualified by this place and this time, we have to admit the 
identity of Devadatta on the basis of upalaksapa — qualification per 
accidens. The differences of time and place are not attributive since 
they are not an integral part of Devadatta. Their function has ceased 
with pointing to Devadatta as such. Hence UTsq is a mere 

identity-judgment. On this analogy we have to construe the Vedantic 
statement, ‘That thou art’ — ?rTqqi%. The word ‘thou’— c# should be 
stripped of its associations like limited knowledge — and the 
word ‘that’— rfff of its associations like ‘non-immediacy’- ; 
then ‘thou’ in its secondary sense of cogniser, and ‘that’ in its 
secondary significance of ‘Brahman* will both denote the identical 
being. It should be noted that the sentence ‘That thou art’ restates 
the identity (anuvada) of the individual soul with the Absolute, since 
while clarifying the meanings of the words jiva and Brahman, it 
establishes that identity and yet the vakya does retain its claim to be 
a valid means of knowledge— Though the vakya is anuvada 
its validity as a pramana is not imperilled since it dispels the illusion 
that the Jiva and Brahman are distincts— c/. Comment on Advaita 
Vedanta Paribha§a— 

This is what is known as ^1155515^1^. 

Another objection raised is that since the statement, ‘That thou 
art’ has for its content nothing more than what is signified by the 
words composing it, viz., ‘that’ and ‘thou’ it is no vakyartha that 
we get, i.e., there is propositional import. This is admitted by the 
Vedantin. It is not vakyartha but avakyartha or padartha, word- 
import. But we have to note the difference. In the case of padartha 
it is the primary significance— vakyartha, and in vakyartha it is 
laksyartha — secondary sense.— qf. N.S., III. 2. 

“ — This is another instance to corroborate the 

view that the statement ‘tatvamasi’ points to a single entity. Now the 
word ‘prakasa’ through its generic sense points to a particular object — 
VIZ., the moon; and the word ‘prakpsta ’ through its secondary 
sense resides in prakasa indicating abundance. Here, neither the word 
‘prakrsta’ which denotes quality nor prakasa which denotes jati 



288 PANCAPADIKA OP PADMAPADA 

relation as exists in ‘blue-lotus’ where the two terms are in 
inseparable association, mutually delimiting, and connected as 
adjective and substantive (/.e., attributive and attributed) is not 
found (in prakrstaprakasa and alike in Satyam jnanam, etc.)- 
How could then, the relation of the nature of kriya and karaka 
which are distinct (entities) exist in ‘Satyam Jnanamanantam 
Brahma’. 

IV, 9. (Hence) he (Samkara) adduces as illustrations state- 
ments like ‘ Existence alone, dear one, this was in the beginning ’ 
(Chand., VI. ii-1) which are of that description (i.e., non-relational 
in character:— c/. above-padanam parasparanavacchinnanam, etc.). 

Piirvapaksin.— Welly validity should be pointed out from 
those texts only which have been adduced, as illustrations under 
the aphorism relating to the creation, etc. (of the world); what 
then (is the purpose of adducing different illustrations)? 

Siddhantin.— It is true; the commentator however has some 
object in view. There (in commenting on the second aphorism), 
the idea being that a definition of Brahman should be given, such 
sentences as based upon accidental features of Brahman, were 
adduced in illustration (i.e., definition per accidens); here, on the 
other hand since the Vedantic texts like ‘ That thou art ’ find their 
fulfilment in generating the knowledge of the identity of the indi- 
vidual soul with Brahman, and not merely in demonstrating that 
(Brahman), as the passive agent only, is the cause of the world- 
origin, sentences of that description only as “ existence alone, 
my dear one, this was in the beginning ” are adduced in illustra- 
tion. 

10. Again it was argued that an existing entity is cognisable 
by perception, etc., and that in its (perceptive cognition) absence, 
suspicion arising that it is unreal, it (Vedanta) loses its title to 
validity. Such an objection has been met by the statement that 
since Brahman is devoid of form, etc., it cannot be the object 
of the senses.^^ 

(generic sense) can be significative of Candra. Hence having abandoned 
both the quality (aiss) and the class idea (Jt^Rt) we relate them to their 
locus — Candra with which they are in inseparable union. It is therefore 
evident that 5tWS5R)RT and relate to the same object. 

“ etc. — The opponent’s objections may be 

stated thus: — 

(i) The Vedantic statements are incompetent to give us a know- 
ledge of Brahman — ^an existing Being, because they require 


IV. 11] VEDANTA— INTIMATES AN EXISTENT ENTITY 289 

Purvapaksin. — Well, we have said that because of the very 
fact of its non-apprehension by the senses and in consequence 
its not being an object of perception, etc., sabda as a whole loses 
its claim to be a valid means of knowledge in relation to it (Brah- 
man). 

11. Siddhantin.—Ws will answer: it is no doubt seen that 
the use of words (z.e., verbal expression) as a whole is only with 
reference to an object which is the content (visaya) of perception, 
etc. But we have to consider how a learner of language acquires 
(the significance of words). Evidently, it is the behaviour of the 
hearer (of the mandatory statement) that is the basis of children’s 
acquisition of the significance of words. And that behaviour 
unalloyed from dependence on any other jnana (prama^a) of the 
hearer serves as the cause in the learner’s understanding of the 
significative, potency of words. [Page 85] Hence at the time of 
understanding the potency of the word (to convey a particular 


no pramana for corroboration. If they do give us a know- 
ledge of an existing Being they lose their character as valid 
means of knowledge having to depend on another pramapa. 
(ii) The whole body of the Veda has a purpose to serve — 

If the Vedanta which forms part of the Veda should intimate 
Brahman, it would be barren of results. 

The answer to the first objection is found in the Bhasya state- 
ment — ^^'-tUr^Etii^—Since Brahman is not an object 
of the senses it has no relation with those other means of knowledge, 
I. i. 2; cf. also V.S., II. i. 4 and II. iii. 7. A pramapa is not invalid 
merely on the ground that what is given in it is not also corroborated 
by another pramapa. The answer to the second objection follows 
later on. 

— ^If Brahman is not the object of the senses, it is 
pointed out there would be no relation established between Brahman 
and sabda for the object, is something unknown— The objec- 
tion may be met as follows: Is it your contention that the relation 
that we cognise is only of sabda with an object that has been appre- 
hended by some other pramana or that the content of sabda is not only 
the object which it denotes but pramapantara as well. We admit the 
first alternative though there are some cases where even objects not 
denoted by other pramanas do form the content of sabda (Veda), 
i.e., yupa, the sacrificial post— c/. PP., p. 84. Even as regards 

statements like the words etc., first get related 

to the differentiated Brahman — and then by secondary impli- 
cation — they denote pure consciousness— 

19 



290 PANCAPADIKA OF PADMAPADA [V. 12 

meaning) the learner has no idea of the association of a separate 
pramana with the cognition of the sense (of the sentence he has 
heard from his elder). Without at all having the knowledge (of 
the co-existence of a distinct pramana) the boy comprehends the 
significative potency of the words. And in the manner in which 
the meaning is apprehended, in that very manner it comes to be 
associated in his mind (vijnana) with the corresponding word. 
But when once he has understood the meanings of words and 
himself wishes to make a statement for conveying its sense to 
another, then he does so with the consciousness that the content 
of that statement has been directly cognised by him with the aid 
of some other pramana; he (now wrongly) thinks that these two, 
yiz., the fact of having been cognised by some other pramana 
and the wish to convey the sense, were there when he imderstood 
the potency for the first time, but they are of no avail in producing 
that knowledge (z.e., the potency). Hence at the time the import 
of words is being grasped, the potency of sabda as manifesting 
an object presented by another pramana is not cognised; but 
like the visual sense, etc., sabda generates cognition without 
desiderating Anything else and in conformity with the acquired 
significance of the words. As such the fact of the prameya being 
the object of perception, etc., serves no purpose (z.e., is irrelevant) 
in sabda conveying its sense. 

V. 12. And further how could any suspicion of non- 
validity arise as regards iabda (scriptural testitoony) which is of 
non-personal origin and which like the eyes desiderates nothing 
else in the generation of knowledge ? 

Pwrvqpa/:iz«.— Well, the reason for doubt has been already 
stated; it is the invalidity of the visual cognition of the height 
and depressions seen in a picture (say of a landscape) which is 
apprehended by the tactile sense, because it (the visual cognition) 
is uncorroborated by it. 

Siddhantin . — ^That statement of yours is untenable because 
as an instrument of knowledge this (§abda) is free from defect, 
and as regards that (yiz., the visual organ) there is its absence 
(i.e., the absence of adustakaranatva — ^non-defective instrumenta- 
lity). To explain — as for sabda, it is free from defect since it is of 
impersonal origin. 

13. As regards the prameya (the object of cognition) again, 
there exists no pramana (anvaya vyatireka) to show that it serves 
as the cause of jnana (i.e., the cognition of the propositional 


VI. 14J VEDANTA— INTIMATES AN EXISTENT ENTITY 291 

import), because, §abda by itself is the cause of the knowledge 
since its purport is with reference to its own prameya. As for 
the picture which falls within the aggregate of causal factors 
(samagri) in perceptive cognition, the juxtaposition of darker 
(and lighter) lines is the defect {i.e., it causes an illusory vision of 
the picture). In its absence there arises a correct vision as when 
the eye is free from timira {i.e., some eye-disease). Hence (i.e., 
because of the absence of illusion-producing light and dark lines 
in the picture) the pramana (viz., the tactile sense) though it should 
proceed (to test what is given in perception), only corroborates it, 
and does not render it (the perceptive cognition) invalid. And 
(it should be noted) that the criterion of validity is not corrobo- 
ration in the opinion of those who are proficient in the technique 
of pramana but the revelation of objects (the presumption being 
that such revelation is valid). 

Hence, as in the case of mandatory statements (in karma- 
. kapda) where their validity is (unquestioned) in regard only to 
what they denote {viz., action), even so in the case of statements 
denoting the nature of existing objects, for both (karmakanda 
and Vedanta) have in common the determination of a thing that 
Is previously unknown (and as such each in its sphere is a valid 
means of knowledge). 

VI. 14. Purvapaksin. — ^Well, it is but right that validity is 
only of mandatory statements since the Veda (Amnaya) has action 
as its subject-matter. 

Siddhantin. — ^No, for it will lead to the fault of ‘ mutual 
dependence’ — ^if indeed it be established that mandatory state- 
ments alone are the valid means of knowledge, then it could be 
established that the Veda has action for its subject-matter; again 
if it be established that the Veda has action for its subject-matter, 
validity could be of them only {viz., mandatory statements) and 
as such it would be (a case of) mutual dependence. Indeed 
neither of these two can be established by something other.^* 


5T etc. — ^Neither of these two, viz., action being the content 

of the Veda, and the validity of only mandatory statements, can be 
established by anything different from either of these two. If to avoid 
the fault of mutual dependence the Purvapaksin should urge that 
on the authority of Jaimini Satras the Veda as a whole intimates 
action without presupposing the validity of mandatory statements, 
we may confront him with the equally authoritative statement of 



292 PAtCAPADIKA OF PADMAPADA [VI. 14 

As such what the Veda intimates, that is its meaning.^® Hence 
just as the mandatory section by intimating karya, has karya 
(action) as its content, the Vedanta section also, by intima.ting 
the imity of the self, becomes fit to have that {viz., the unity of 
the individual self and the absolute) as its content (artha), [Page 
86] For credibility is the outcome of cognition and as for cogni- 
tion, it is the same as regards both karya (action) and the unity 
of the self. Even in the case of perception, etc., what sets the 
stamp of authoritativeness is that something not known before 
is revealed by them.^^ 

Purvapaksm.~{Ths Purvapaksin) says (as follows); as for 
perception, etc., their authoritativeness as means of knowledge 
is intelligible because of the absence of anything else desiderated. 
But in regard to the Veda the study of which is undertaken in 
accordance with the mandate (that one should learn one’s branch 
of the Scriptures), its object will not be fulfilled unless it satisfies 
some human end (purusartha) as otherwise it will result in the 
futility of Scriptural injunctions. Hence it is unreasonable to 
suppose that the statements relating to the unity of the Self have 
only their own (literal) sense to intimate.^® 


Badarayana that the Vedanta has an existing being as its content. 
Hence the fallacy of mutual dependence cannot be obviated. 

If ‘having action alone as content’ is the criterion of validity, 
texts intimating existing objects would become purposeless; if on the 
other hand the latter alone should be deemed valid the other texts 
would go without a purpose. Hence we must conclude that what 
import is special to the text, be it action or an existing entity, 
is verily its content. 

The Mimamsaka considers that the Veda acquires its validity 
as a prama^a by the fact of its denoting action, i.e., it is dependent 
on prameya or content. The Siddhantin rightly points out that it is 
cognisability— avabodha, and not action that determines validity. The 
Veda acquires its validity because of its revelatory character, whether 
the revealing be of karya or an existing object. Even karya to be 
prameya should depend on avabodha. As such the certitude of the 
Vedanta as a pramapa depends upon its revealing the knowledge of the 
identity of the individual soul with the Universal. This is the doctrine 
of Svatah-pramanya, i.e., that the truth is self-proved and not as the 
Naiyayikas think dependent on corroboration ah extra~cf. A., p. 350. 

etc.— -The view that the authoritativeness of the Veda 
as a pramaijia is because of its revealing some new knowledge, is 




VI. 14] VEDANTA— INTIMATES AN EXISTENT ENTITY 293 

Siddhantin.—^t is thus answered : A person, as is well known, 
desires only so much — ‘may good come to me, may evil not 
approach me’; and not thus^ — {i.e., may the desired object result 
from action, and the riddance of pain from inaction) or other 
than thus— (f.e., may the desired object result from inaction, and 
the riddance of pain from non-inaction). And of this (fruit or 
phala) he is not the arbiter (e.g., he cannot make the impossible 
possible). In two ways does he desire to achieve his good; in 
regard to something that is possible of accomplishment (sadhya 
or prapya), e.g., reaching a village, etc., or through illusion in 
regard to something though already accomplished (siddha or 
prapta), e.g., the forgotten gold (ring) on one’s own finger (ht. 
gold, etc., kept in one’s hand). Evil also he wishes to get rid of 
in two ways {i.e., under the following circumstances) — ^where a 
thing can be actually avoided (sadhya), e.g., (falling into) a pit, 
etc., or where something though avoided (parihrta) is attempted 
to be avoided as when— he attempts through delusion to avoid 
rope, etc,, apprehended as serpent, etc. There (z.e., of these two 
kinds of purusartha) when a man’s object is of the nature of some- 
thing that is fit to be achieved or fit to be avoided, injunction and 
prohibition are of significance since its achievement is dependent 
on the knowledge of the means (to be adopted). As regards the 
other two {viz., that which is possessed and that from which one 
is really freed), since it is only the delusion that is the 
estranging element nothing other than its removal, is desired 
as one’s highest object. And as for its removal, it is accom-. 
plished by the knowledge of Reality and in no other way. 
Achieved even thus {i.e., by the instrumentality of knowledge) 

challenged. In those cases of perception, etc., where no action is 
meant it may be admitted that the knowledge imparted (3t^tt>^) is the 
hetu of pramaiiya. But as regards the Veda the study of which is 
enjoined by the mandate, ‘ one should learn one’s branch of the Veda ’ — 
it must denote some purposeful activity which can be achieved only by 
either engaging in action or desisting from it. Hence it mjust be 
admitted that the Vedic statements have for their content either incite- 
ment to action or dissuasion from it. Authoritativeness of the Veda 
therefore depends upon pravartaktava and not bodhakatva. The 
Vedarthas as forming an integral part of the Veda cannot therefore 
have an existing entity devoid of association with action, as its 
content. 


294 PAS^CAPADIKA OF PADMAPADA [VI. 14 

the eradication of delusion, a person regards as purusartha, nay 
he much applauds it.^® 

Indeed what is dependent upon (action as its) means might be 
obtained with toil, but in what is dependent on knowledge even 
toil (miseries that beset man) is eradicated. Hence of him who 
is deluded, thinking— as though his self is defiled by manifold 
ills, the highest human end will be attained only when the real 
nature of atman which is void of all evils, is unfolded, and as sTich 
there arises no contingency that the scriptural injunction will be 
rendered futile, even if the identity statements end in declaring 
their own import.^’ Hence is concluded that the Sastra is the 
valid means of the knowledge of Brahman as defined. 

Here ends the Eighth Varnaka of the Pancapadika 


“ Not only is the destruction of nescience a 

purusartha but it is the highest. Hence the attribution of excellence to 
what is accomplished by knowledge as contrasted with what is 
accomplished by action. The latter involves much physical labour, 
while the former removes all the miseries that beset man. Hence the 
Vedanta holds out purusartha without enjoining any action and as such 
the contention that because the Vedanta has for its content an existing 
entity it is purposeless, is vitiated by the fallacy of svarupasiddha, i.e., 
where the hetu is absent in the subject (paksa). 

It is on the ground of purposelessness that the Mimamsaka 
attempted to refute the claim of the Vedanta as a valid means of 
knowledge, but the SiddhSntin has now shown that the Vedanta serves 
a supreme purpose, viz., the removal of illusion. If the ritual-section 
of the Veda is purposeful, so also is the knowledge-section. While in 
the one the rneans to attain the short-lived happiness of svarga, etc., 
is enjoined, in the other the way is pointed out for the attainment of 
eternal bliss. Hence both karmakapda and jnanakanda have a purpose 
to serve. 



VART^AKA IX 

IS BRAHMAN THE OBJECT OF THE INJUNCTION 
OF MEDITATION ? 

I. I. [“ Here some others come forward with this objec- 
tion.”] No doubt, ^ from the scriptures (only) is Brahman under- 
stood and yet it is in association with an injunction and not with- 
out it. Why so? (It may be asked). Otherwise communica- 
tion by speech will be unintelligible. The employment of words 
is, it is evident, the outcome {i.e., external manifestation) of a 
man’s will. And that (will) has as its object the acquisition of 
what is desired and the avoidance of what is undesired. The 
desired and the undesired will not happen by excluding even their 
indirect relation with pleasure and pain. Unlike the attainment 
of pleasure and the riddance of pain (respectively) after one 
becomes aware of the forgotten gold and of the rope on which the 
serpent is superimposed, they are not perceived when similarly 
from the scriptures the nature of Brahman is understood. Even 
as before the flux of life appears (to continue). [Page 87] Also 


— Kumarila Bhatta admits that in empirical usage, words 
have the potency to intimate their sense having come into compatible 
relation with other words; e.g., in ‘bring the pot’, the word 

‘ w ’ IS potent to reveal its meaning having got into relation with the 
objective termination It is not incumbent that the sense should 

be karya only. The other requisites are its corroboration by a different 
pramapa, say, perception— pramanantarasamvada and serviceableness — 
prayojanavatva. His contention is that if the Vedanta intimates only 
an existent entity it loses its claim to be a valid means of knowledge 
as there is no pramanantarasamvada; neither perception nor any other 
pramapa can vouch for the existence of such an entity as Brahman. 
The Veda is apauruseya and as such there is no scope for ordinary 
pramapas here. 

In this section is examined the doctrine of Vrttikara (with whom 
Prabhakara agrees) who urges that ‘Sabdavada’ whether empirical or 
Vedic must intimate as its import what is inseparably related to action. 

It must be noted that in his attempt to disprove that the Scriptures 
reveal the existence of Brahman, Bhatta virtually disbelieves in the 
existence of Brahman. The Vrttikara on the other hand admits as the 
Vedantin does, that Brahman is revealed by the ^astra but maintains 
that without association, with some action no statement whether empi- 
rical or Vedic is significant. 



296 


pancat;Adika of padmapAda 


[II. 3 


because of the fact that following the acquisition of jnana by the 
study of the Vedanta sastra, contemplation (nididhyasa) is pre- 
scribed. Hence though it may perhaps be conceded that in 
empirical usage statements have as their final import some human 
end (purusartha) even if they do not convey any injunction, in 
the Veda, when not injunctive in character they cannot have that 
(vzz., purusartha) as their fruit. 

2. Hence though in reality between the inquiry into the 
nature of Dharma and of Brahman there exists difference in what 
is to be attained, because of the fact that the content of the one 
(i.e., of the latter) is an accompanied object and that of the other, 
what is yet to be accomplished, yet when injunctions, ‘ He is to 
be sought out ‘ He is to be inquired into ’, etc., exist the question 
‘who is this atman? ’ arises; and then the whole assemblage of 
words (padasamanvayah) relating to the nature of Brahman will 
be found useful in its delineation; but (that contexture of words) 
is not capable of expounding Brahman independently (i.e., except 
as subsidiary to an injunctive statement). Hence what is to be 
understood is that Brahman is revealed as being in the objective 
relation to the enjoined jnana. Again (what is to be understood) . 
from the bhasya [‘ Hence it follows that the sastra can be accepted 
as the valid means of knowing. Brahman only in so far as it 
(Brahman) is the object of an injunction relating to pratipatti ’], 
is that it is the conclusion of the opponent’s view. There, the 
word ‘ pratipatti ’ is to be understood as denoting every mental 
activity whether it is of the nature of pramana (prama) or other- 
wise (say a meditative act) which is assumed by some to be en- 
joined in some manner, with Brahman as its object — (the word 
‘ pratipatti ’ in the concluding bhasya) is to be understood as 
standing in brief for all that (i.e., both pramanatmaka and itara). 

11. 3. Siddhantin . — Here is the answer: Of what nature 
is that knowledge which having Brahman as is object, is enjoined ? 
It is not however what is conveyed by sabda (i.e., it is not verbal 
knowledge) for that is attained by the mere study of one’s own 
branch of the Veda. It may be said that the continuous recalling 
to mind of that very knowledge produced by Sabda is enjoined, 
but then we do not perceive any good resulting from it. 

Piirvapaksin.. — ^Well, it is perceived that a continuous thought 
of a desired object does serve as the cause of an uninterrupted 
succession of pleasurable sensations (sukhasantana — ^here it is 
happiness of the nature of moksa or liberation). 



II. 3] IS BRAHMAN THE OBJECT OF MEDIATTION? 297 

Siddhdntin.— If it be so, verily as in the other, injunction is 
purposeless (i.e., even without injunction recollection of a plea- 
sant experience induces happiness). 

Purvapaksin . — But now this is our view, that the injunction 
relating to the knowledge-series (i.e., mandate enjoining conti- 
nuous recalling of the identity— knowledge arising from sabda) 
is laid down for ‘ saksatkara ’ (i.e., final psychosis which removes 
the primal ignorance). 

Siddhdntin . — That does not stand to reason. A mandate 
having a perceivable end will not be such, without the probability 
at least (of that result being an object) of direct experience. An 
object of inferential knowledge (say fire whose knowledge is 
inferred from the invariable concomitance of smoke and fire) 
will not be the content of immediate perception even though the 
knowledge arising from the linga (middle term or hetu) is repeated 
a thousand times. 

Purvapaksin . — Let not saksatkara result only from verbal 
knowledge constantly recalled. It will result from a separate 
cognition arising from it (viz., from smrtisantana — stream of 
recollections).^ 

Siddhdntin . — There is no evidence that such is the case. 

Purvapaksin. — ^Well, be it admitted then that what is enjoined 
is the mental act termed ‘ dhyana ’ (meditation) on the object 
cognized from sabda (i.e., verbal testimony) in the very manner 
in which one has cognized it. 


a The Vrttikara’s contention that the 

Vedanta passages have as their purport the enjoining of either a conti- 
nuous recalling of the Brahma-cognition arising from the compre- 
hension of the pertinent texts or the enjoining of meditation as vouched 
for from the statement ‘nididhyasitavyah ’ has teen rebutted. Now 
he shifts the ground and asserts that a distinct type of jnana is produced 
by meditation and that the aspirant is enjoined to acquire that jnana. 
The question then will be which is the content of that jnana and 
which is the means by which it is to be acquired ? The means, it may 
be said, is prescribed in Bfh. UP., IV. iv. 22; then the objection is 
that the Vedic injunction related to this particular jnana and not to 
that of identity which latter is what the Vrttikara is trying to maintain. 
Manidana, a Vedantin of old, was a staunch advocate of such a view. 
For a concise but clear exposition of the different views held 
on the subject — vide ‘Introduction to N.S.’, p. 22 ff. 



298 


PAtCAPADlKA OF PADMAPADA [II. 4 

Siddhantin —Wiih. what purpose is it (meditation) enjoined ? 
Purvapaksin.—li is for the immediate perception (saksatkara) 
of the object of meditation. 

Siddhantin. — ^That will not result {i.e., there is no possibility 
of the intuitive perception of the object of meditation resulting 
from meditation). An object of contemplation which is beyond 
the range of perception is not seen to become the content of 
intuitive perception. 

Purvapaksin. — ^Well, it is a matter of experience that when 
one is assailed by lustful passion, etc., the object of constant 
thought though beyond the range of perception is seen to come 
within one’s immediate vision. 

Siddhantin.— Your reasoning is not valid. What is meditated 
upon (viz., wife and child — say) does not become (as object of 
immediate perception). But it is the outcome of nescience (and 
as such it is illusory knowledge) ; if it were otherwise it would 
not be sublated. 

4. Purvapaksin.— (In the Brh. Up., II. iv. 5, we have the 
passage — ‘ This self is to be seen — drastavyah, — ^heard about,— 
§rotavyah, cogitated upon — ^mantavyah, meditated upon — nidi- 
dhyasitavyah). Here from the word ‘ drastavyah ’ which' means 
‘ with the object of dar^ana ’ (immediate perception — saksatkara), 
meditation which has darsana as its fruit is enjoined as vouched 
for by the word ‘ nididhyasitavyah ’. 

Siddhantin . — It has already been said that an injunction 
having a perceivable end will not be such without (at least) having 
a probable phala (vide, ante). [Page 88] Nowhere indeed has 
meditation been found to be the cause of the immediate percep- 
tion of the object of meditation. Even admitting that the 
immediate perception of the object of meditation results from 
meditation, what evidence is there that the object of meditation 
is real (i.e., of that character, viz., identity of the Jiva with 
Brahman)? The dhyeya or the object of contemplation may 
be something imaginary. As for sabda (verbal testimony), it 
stops' at decreeing meditation as the means of securing saksatkara 
and does not teach that the dhyeya is an actuality (i.e., it 
caimot also have the additional function of denoting real identity 
as the content of meditation. A single sentence cannot bear 
two meanings). 

Purvapaksin. — ^It is true; but still the truth (i.e., the identity 
of the individual soul with the supreme spirit) does become evident 



III. 5] IS BRAHMAN THE OBJECT OF MEDITATION? 299 

on the analogy of the principle to be set forth later in (establishing) 
the embodiment of the deities.® 

Siddhdntin . — ^The analogy stated is inappropriate. There (in 
that context) indeed, because of the absence of a distinct pramana 
either corroborating, or annulling what it (Sruti) actually imports, 
it is so understood by those who adhere to what the words actually 
convey (lit. by those whose refuge is the knowledge as conveyed 
by the words). But it is not so here ; perception, etc., are adverse 
to the conception that all is atman. And meditation is intelligible 
even when the object of meditation is assumptive. Even as regards 
the injunctions of knowledge mentioned before, this very course 
has to be followed in rebutting (the claim) that the injunction of 
jnana is for establishing reality as it is. 

III. 5. Again it is said by others that as distinct from a 
knowledge of the import of sabda there arises a distinct non- 
empirical cognition and that is what is enjoined in the Vedantic 
texts as one’s duty to acquire (vide, ante). As regards that (view) 
we ask, ‘ well then, which is the means (i.e., pramana by which 
such cognition is proved) and which is the content (visaya of that 
cognition) ’?— these questions have to be answered. No cogni- 
tion which has not a known content in the objective relation can 
possibly be enjoined. And when that (viz., the content of imme- 
diate perception — aparoksa-jnana) is known, the injunction will 
be purposeless. 

6. Again the means of acquiring it (cognition) is not en- 
joined and without it the injunctive sentence desiderating (here, 
lacking in the answer to the question, ‘ by what means is that 
cognition to be acquired ?), would convey no meaning. 

If it be averred that, from the text — (Bj:h. Up., IV. 4-22), 
‘ such a one the Brahmanas desire to know by a recital of the 
Vedas, etc.,’ the means (for the knowledge of Brahman) constituted 
by the Vedic recital is certainly enjoined, then Upanisadic testimony 


® This reference to V.S., I. iii. 26 

points to Padmapada’s commentary (?) beyond I. i., i — 4. Mantras and 
arthavadas become finally significant only in relation to injunctive 
statements; yet they convey their own sense inasmuch ' as they, for 
example, denote the corporeality of Gods— etc. Similarly, 
says the purvapaksin, Vedic passages may bear a double sense — the 
Vidhi primarily is with reference to the unique jnana but secondarily 
to the unity of atman and Brahman— 



300 PAtCAPADI^ OF PADMAP^DA [IV. 7 

becomes the means (of the knowledge) of another pramana (the 
tertium quid) and. not' of the true self; and that does not stand 
to reason. Indeed the validity (of knowledge) is known from 
Karya {i.e., pramanaphala) and not from vidhi (injunction) ; (arid 
in support) this may be cited- — “ or by secondary implication 
(at least) the sense of a word would be understood, since the rela- 
tion (between the word and its meaning) is not brought about 
by the sastra — ^Jai. III. ii-4).” Hence this contention that Brahman 
is established by Vedic testimony only when in association with 
an injunction (niyoga) is baseless.^ 

IV. 7. -Thereafter (atha) when on the basis 

of the text — “ now, the light which shines higher than the distant 
heaven”. Brahman which transcends the universe is admitted, 
the rule pertaining to the assumption of forms by the deities 
applies (here also) and as such (we must conclude) that medita- 
tion on Brahman is enjoined on one who aspires for liberation.® 


4 ‘No doubt’ says the 

Siddbantin, ‘in ordinary intercourse we see a master ordering his 
servant to do something as tethering a cow’. Here, in the form of 
command the master expresses his wish to prompt the servant to 
action. But such a procedure is out of place in the Vedic utterances 
since the Veda is of non-personal origin. Tf ‘niyoga’ means karya, 
i.e., the knowledge that arises in one that it is one’s duty to undertake 
something, we should ascertain whether ‘karya ’ implies, (i) association 
with action, or (ii) something fit to be undertaken, or (iii) something 
non-empirical, distinct from an act (l%5Tl), causal correlate (^t:^) 
and fruit ('B^s). It is not (i) oecause association with action— 

€€5 means which is the cause of 3^1% a case of self-dependence 
— epcirrtFI ; not (ii), for even a thing that brings about an evil is fit 
to be undertaken — not (iii) for a thing which is non-empi- 
rical — is non-perceptive and therefore niyoga expressed 
from terminations such as lin, etc., will not be significant. 

It cannot be said that efforts to action would be impossible 
if niyoga or karya is not the purport of Vedantic texts, for what is fit 
to be striven after and is the means of achieving the object of one’s 
desire is certain to prompt activity. It is — ^the knowledge 

that good will result that incites otie to action— vide VPS., p. 237. 

6 stsrrRai 3r^nr:'??r3#r%:— Chand. up.. III. xiii. 7. Others 
hold the view that the individual soul and Brahman are distinct and 
that meditation on the text ‘aham Brahmasmi’— ‘I am Brahman’ 
where the non-difference of Brahman is superimposed on the jiva, is 



VI. 7] IS BRAHMAN THE OBJECT OF MEDITATION? 301 

To this effect is the Vedic text — ■' from Vidya (i.e., meditation) 
they attain that (i.e.. Brahman)’. Nor can it be contended that 
because it {i.e., liberation) is something produced it has termina- 
tion (i.e., not eternal), for from the verbal testimony, ‘he does 
not return again ’ (Chand., IV. xv-6; VIII. xv-1 ; Brh., VI. ii-15) 
cessation from recurrent births is ascertained. It is not to be 
ascertained from reasoning, for if it had been so (if the nature of 
liberation were possible of ascertainment from reasoning) its real 
nature could have been determined by reasoning (tarka or ratio- 
cination). As to him who thinks that of what is to be known 
from sabda® its real nature is to be determined from i§abda only, 
the Bhasyakara (Sankara) replies as follows No, what you 
say is not valid, because of the difference in the nature of the bene- 
fits to be had from action on the one side and the knowledge of 
Brahman on the other.”] 


enjoined, and from that contemplation mok?a is secured as svarga 
from ‘yaga’. They argue that Brahman ('3<frt%:) has no contact with 
jiva and dwells outside the world. 

But Sankara has already stated that meditation which is action, 
yields a fruit distinct from that accuring from Brahmajnana. 

i.e., when a Vedic statement does not repeat what has been 
vouched for by some other pramana, nor is contradicted by other 
pramanas that statement must be taken to mean what it actually 
denotes. This rule is applicable here. Brahman is described as of the 
form of light and as such meditation on such Brahman should be 
understood as having been enjoined — this is what is urged by the 
Purvapak§m. 

« — Now there is conflict between Sruti and anumana 

as to the nature of moksa. The Scriptural statement — ‘there is no 
return hither {w ^ S'l^tRcra) ’ points to the eternality of liberation 
reached by meditation, while the tarka— -whatever is a product is 
ephemeral points to the opposite conclusion. Hence 

it may be urged that there is room for uncertainty (#5T5r) but the 
Purvapaksin argues that doubt may arise only when two arguments 
are of equal weight, as between ‘sadhakanumana’ and ‘satpratipaksa ’, 
i.e., when one hetu leading to a particular conclusion is paralleled by 
another hetu leading to an opposite conclusion, but when the reasoning 
(cT^) contradicts the scriptural statement (^^), the former is over- 
ruled by the latter. Hence he concludes that moksa though attained 
by the act of meditation is eternal on the strength of the Sruti — 



302 PAtCAPADIKA OF PADMAPADA [IV 8. 

8. This is the abridged statement of the topic (under consi- 
deration, v/z., the difference in the nature of fruits). Of this alone 
the elaboration is contained in the comment ending with, [“ there- 
fore the teaching regarding Brahman cannot in reason be supple- 
mentary to action (ht. what is enjoined)”]. In brief this is what it 
means— since both on the strength of Vedic authority and reason- 
ing it is admitted to be eternal, libemtion is not an effect of action. 
How ? (It may be asked). If like the meditation (on the res- 
plendent deity) at sunrise and sundown, which is mental, the 
meditative act having Brahman as its content is also mental and 
enjoined for the fruit of liberation, (then it would be enjoined) 
like yaga (jyotistoma) which yields the fruit of svarga (the abode 
of gods.' [Page 89] Then the fruit would be for the enjoyment 
of an embodied being only, with the result that the enunciations 
of liberation as disembodiedness and also of the absence of con- 
tact with the pleasing and the displeasing appropriate (in an 
embodied state) as stated in the text ‘ neither the pleasing nor 
the displeasing touches one who is in a disembodied state ’ would 
both be baseless. And it cannot be argued that disembodiedness 
itself is the effect of dharma (i.e., meditative act) for it exists in 
itself (and is not produced by any other agency ; it is eternal — 
the state of liberation). Hence disembodiedness termed moksa 
(liberation), is distinct from the fruit possible of attainment by 
effort, and is self-established and as such its eternality is indubitable. 

9. And even there (even on the supposition that it is nitya), 
if moksa were somehow of the nature of paripaminitya (Le., eter- 
nality consistent with transformation like clay which is constant 
though changed into pot) then perhaps it might possibly have 
been the effect of dharma (i.e., meditative act).’ But this Brah- 
man of the nature of immutable eternality the cognition of whose 
essence is understood as constituting the jiva’s liberation, is the 
subject of the present inquiry. And now rejecting (the true) 


’ cr«ni7 T%i;,, etc. — ^The point to be decided is whether disem- 
bodiedness— sRirircW which is moksa, is natural and pristine or 
occasional, brought on by some external agency. It is to be noted 
that between the body and the self there exists no real connection. 
Hence non-embodiedness is natural and embodiedness is but illusory. 
And the cognition of such illusory relation cannot be removed by 
acts like meditation nor is modification by medication possible in the 
case of atman which is disembodied and immutable (vide V.P., 254). 



V. 10] IS BRAHMAN THE OBJECT OF MEDITATION ? 303 

moksa which, like the forgotten gold kept in one’s own hand, is 
concealed only by illusion, if moksa of the nature of some specific 
pleasure capable of being enjoyed, be 'conceived as resulting from 
a meditative act having Brahman as its content, very like yaga, 
etc., performed to propitiate a deity, then this (moksa) also would 
become identically one among those very pleasures which are 
the fruit of yaga and are subject to gradation (/.e., different degrees 
of pleasure). Then moksa would partake of the nature of non* 
eternahty as may be inferred from the maxim {viz., yat krtakam 
tadanityam — ^whatever is a product, that is mconstant), which 
has the support of the corroborative text — “as here on earth, 
objects of enjoyment earned by works are destroyed, even so, 
there, objects of enjoyment earned by merit are destroyed ” — 
(Ghand., VIII. 1-6). And it is not so admitted by those who 
advocate nloksa. Hence the teaching of Brahman cannot reason- 
ably be regarded as auxiliary to duty {t.e., the enjoined medita- 
tion) — this is the conclusion. 

V. 10. The statement again, that it is not proper to refute 
by logic the eternality (of moksa) apprehended from the text, 

‘ He does not return to mundane life (Chand., VIII. 15-1) is 
wrong. From the use of the present tense (avartate) the need for 
pramana to substantiate its being so {i.e., moksa effected by medi- 
tation being eternal) is evident; (for ‘ na ca punaravartate ’ is 
only a laudatory statement and therefore it is no pramana). There 
is no pramana to validate the eternity of what is an effect. The 
analogy that the quality of colour produced by heat in atoms 
is eternal does not hold good, for it finds support only in the 
technique (of the Vaisesikas). 

11. Again (we have) the scriptural texts — “For them there 
is no return hither ” (Chand. Up., VIII. 15). “ (They who pro- 
ceed by it) return not to this world of man caught in samsara (the 
wheel of life and death) ” — Chand., IV. .15-5; here the qualifying 
words ‘ here — ^iha ’ and ‘ this — imam ’ point to non-reversion in 
this cycle and not to limitless non-reversion. Again on the suppo- 
sition (for argument’s sake) that Brahman admits of association 
with action, it was stated that liberation would be liable to the 
defect of non-eternality, but the fact is that the congruence of 
sense yielded by the words composing the Vedanta passages does 
not tolerate (Brahman’s) association with action. Even so 
scriptural texts such as, ‘ The knower of Brahman becomes verily 
Brahman’ — Mund., HI. 9, which promise liberation immediately 



304 PAtCA?ADlKA OF PADMAPADA [VI. 14 

after the cognizance of Brahman, repel the interposition of any 
action, since simultaneity of , time as to the cognizance and the 
attainment of Brahman is specified. Hence Brahman cognised 
(from verbal testimony) is not related (as object) to (a meditative) 
act. 

12. Likewise (we have the text), “ seeing this, indeed the 
seer (rsi) Vamadeva obtained (the universal self-hood) ”—Brh. 
Up., I. iv-10; here since it is pointed out that the knowledge of 
Brahman is synchronous with the attainment of universal self- 
hood, the participle affix ‘ satr ’ (in pasyan) wards off the inter- 
vention of a separate act (vzz., that of meditation); [Page 90]. 
As witness, “ when one action is the remainder of another action, 
the root of the verb denoting ‘ remainder ’ or ‘cause’ takes the 
‘ satf ’ ’’ (present participle)— (Panini, III. u-126) and since kriya 
is the cause (hetu) of another kriya (product or phaia) nothing 
should intervene. Compare the analogous passage ‘standing 
he sings ’ where we find that between the standing and the singing 
there is no action (of the same agent) intervening; there the act 
of singing is not accomplished merely on the strength of the action 
of standing but results from a distinct effort, and the analogy is 
applicable only in so far as no word in the sentence (standing he 
sings) denotes the intervention of any action between those two 
{viz., the standing and the singing). Here, on the other hand, for 
the realization of the universal self-hood, there appears no need 
of any distinct effort apart from the knowledge of Brahman. 

13. Again, the ^rutis like “ To him (Narada) who is rid of 
all impurities, he (viz., Sanatkumara) shows the further shore of 
darkness” — Chand., VII. 26-2, point merely to the removal of 
darkness, that is, the illusory knowledge which intercepts libera- 
tion; and (they do not point to) liberation as the result of action. 

VI. 14. From this also (viz., that the removal of nescience 
from the knowledge of reality and not from meditation) is con- 
firmed — other rationalistic thinkers (Gautama-Nyayasutra, I. i-2) 
also point out that liberation which is no, other than the absence 
of misery follows immediately on the removal of wrong know- 
ledge. [“ And the removal of wrong knowledge reults from the 
knowledge of the identity of Brahman and atman ”] ; not from 
action. 

Purvapak^in . — ^How is tMs known? 

Siddhantin.— Indra by his mayik powers assumes many 
forms’ (Bfh. Up., II. v-19), from this text it is only perceived that 



305 


VII. 15] IS BRAHMAN OBJECT OF MEDITATION ? 

the apprehension of difference is illusory only, and that it is re- 
moved by the apprehension of non-difference which is its opposite.® 

VII. 15. Let it be what you say; (even then) the knowledge 
of identity has not as its content the thing as it really is (i.e., it 
does not denote absolute identity for no such identity exists); 
if it had such a content, then the apprehension of difference which 
is illusory in character would have been dispelled by it. On the 
other hand (it denotes) an imagined form, etc. (sampadadi) 
enjoined to be meditated upon by one who so desires. What 
‘ sampat ’ means is meditation on a great object even in a small 
thing as its substrate by merely perceiving some common charac- 
teristic (between the two). And from that (fancied identity, etc.) 
there results the fruit (sought for). The fruit either, may be 
imagined; to explain; from the common feature of the endless 
psychoses (mental modifications) meditation on the endless 
Visvedevas — ^the All-gods, is resorted to, which results in the 
conquest of the endless worlds — (vide, Brh. Up., III. i-9). Simi- 
larly since the individual soul possesses the common feature of 
intelligence, having imagined Brahman-feature in it (and so 
meditating, the aspirant) attains the fruit of Brahmahood — 
(Brahmaphala). 

16. Meditation on mind, sun, etc., none of which is Brahman, 
imaginmg them to be Brahman, is superimposition; similar is 
the meditation on the individual soul imagined as Brahman. 
Making prominent that which is to be meditated upon (i.e., the 
imagined object) and regarding the ground (say mind) as if non- 
existing, is what constitutes ‘sampat’ (imaginary identification); 
in superimposition (adhyfisa) on the other hand it is the constant 
dwelling of the mind on the locus making that itself prominent. 
Meditation on mind as possessed of the quality of ‘ gathering up ’ 
because it gathers up unto itself fire, etc., is (known as) kriyayoga. 
Similar is the meditation of the individual soul identifying it with 
Brahman since it Giva) is associated with the meaning of the root 
‘ brh It is ceremonial purification to conceive as Brahman the 

® from the root 

1^;%^^), qr^rnw: - = 

It is the potency of primal nescience with which the Supreme 
projects the world-spectacle with all its variety, and this nescience 
can disappear only with the rise of Brahmajnana, 



306 


pancapAdtkA of PADMAPADA 


[VIII. 17 


individual self who occupies a subordinate position in some karya 
(yaga) much like the act of looking at the clarified butter.® 

VIII. 17. Siddhantin . — ^Here is the answer. (If the know- 
ledge of the identity of Brahman and atman were admitted) as 
referring to ‘ sampat’ {i.e., fancied combination), etc., (it would be 
going counter to the texts which purport to intimate identity). 
(Page 91] Then (z.e., if meditation is what is meant), the con- 
nected sequence of words in the (Vedantic) texts, ‘ That thou art ’ 
and the hke, which denotes in no figurative sense, the knowledge 
of the identity of the self and Brahman would, without any cause 
and most arbitrarily, be imagined to refer to sampat, etc. And 
it would be suppressing one’s own actual experience of the fruit 
of the nature of the attainment of Brahman resulting from that 
cognition (vfe., of identity) preceded by the cessation of ignorance 
and which is similar to the discovery of the forgotten gold that 
is in (one’s own) hand. Also the Sruti, ‘variety here is none’ 
(Bih., IV. iv-19 ; Katha,, IV-15), which intimates the non-existence 
of difference, would be contradicted. 

18. Hence the knowledge of Brahman is, unlike sampat, 
etc., not dependent on man’s activity, but it should be admitted 
that like the cognition arising from perception, etc., it has as its 
content the object {i.e.. Brahman) in its mere essence, which is 
unrelated (as content) either to (the act of) eschewing or possessing. 

19. When that is so, how could Brahman, after its knowledge 
has arisen, be construed as being in the objective relation? How 
could its cognition {i.e,, the knowledge of Brahman from verbal 
testimony) either, be the content of injunction seeing that it brings 
on (without any injunction) the fruit of self-realization ? Hence 
it is illusory only — ^this cognition of difference {i.e., the multiplex 


® The PQrvapaksin disputes the claim that Brahman and the 
individual soul are in reality one. He says that the so-called identity 
may be explained in one of the four ways: (i) sampat, fancied identi- 
fication; (ii) adhyasa — superimposition; (iii) kriyayoga — connection of 
things viewed as identical with some special activity as in the passage — 
‘air is the absorber; breath is indeed the absorber’ (Chand. Up., IV. 
iii. i-3); jiva is Vibhu and hence it acquires the. meaning of the root 
‘bjh’ in Brahman; (iv) Samskara— -ceremonial purification, just as in 
yaga the ghee is purified by the look of the sacrificer’s wife, so the self 
of the man who meditates on Brahman is purified by the cognition of 
its being identical with Brahman. 



307 


IX. 20] IS BRAHMAN OBJECT OF MEDITATION ? 

world of sense) ; and its sublation is from the cognition of non- 
difference which is its opposite. Therefore it is evident that both 
on the authority of the Scriptures and reasoning liberation is only 
the eradication of illusory knowledge. 

IX. 20. Well, Brahman indeed becomes the object of the 
verb ‘to know’, so that when its relation with action is feasible, 
there is room for injunction ^ anticipating this objection (the 
Bhasyakara) says: [“Nor, again, as being the object of the act 
of knowing, can Brahman be related to action”?] 

Says (the purvapaksin) : And this {viz., the negation of the 
objective relation of Brahman to the act of meditation) is (on a 
par with) raising the devil in the act of exorcising it— in repudiating 
Brahman’s association with action (in general) you have repudi- 
ated its association as content of even the act of knowing {i.e., 
the act of meditation); and thereby only, is, for sure, repudiated 
its (Brahman’s) source also — the sastra, and this is expressed in 
the bhasya) ; [“ if Brahman is not the content (of speech, mind, 
etc.), the sastra cannot possibly be the source of Brahman ”]. 

21. Siddhantin.—IAQTQ is the answer: [“No, your conten- 
tion is baseless, because (the object of the sastra is to repudiate 
all distinctions which are) the creation of nescience ”.] Indeed the 
sastra is the valid means in the knowledge of Brahman as the 
empirical sentence, ‘ This is that ’ is (in the recognition, say, of 
Devadatta).^® To explain: In the sentence ‘ This is that ’, by 

“ JJTM ff etc. — ^The Scripture bears evidence to the 

identity of Brahman-atman on the analogy of the empirical statement, 
‘this is that man’. In the sentence, ‘ ’ it is admitted by all 

schools of thought that Devadatta divested of all limiting adjuncts is 
the prameya, i.e., the object of knowledge conveyed by the sentence, 
but it is by the elimination of delimiting adjuncts of space and time 
which relate to the past and the present, which are subversive of the 
non-difference between Devadatta seen before and seen now. It is 
by ignoring these limitations that we get rid of the notion of difference 
and apprehend identity as expressed in the sentence. Even so is the 
validity of the Vedantic statement, ‘That thou art’. It is to be noted 
that the Mahavakya ‘ ’, generates the final psychosis, ‘ li% ’ of 

the form of the pure impartite Brahman — which destroys 
the notion of difference between the individual self and Brahman, as 
wrongly held by the world. Brahman is self-luminous. The function 
of the Scriptures consists only in the removal of the obscuring nescience 
and not in manifesting Brahman. 



308 


PA^CAPADIKA of PADMAPADA pc. 22 

the removal of the cause of distinction, viz., space and time, non- 
distinction is cognised. Similarly (the individual) — the meaning 
of the word ‘ Thou ’ also believing himself to be of the nature of 
the individuated ego, cognises, on (hearing the text) ‘ That thou 
art ’ his oneness with what the word ‘That’ stands for (viz.. 
Brahman), just as (he understands oneness) from the sentence 
‘ This is that (Devadatta) ’ ; and .that (i.e., the import of ‘ the 
that’) is pointed to (by the Mahavakya) as no other than the lumi- 
nous ‘ not-this ’, which is conditioned by the world constituted 
by the notions of the known, the knower and the knowledge, the 
result of the ‘This’ aspect of ego-consciousness, which is sub- 
lated by the implicit capacity (of that which is the object of the 
final psychosis, viz.. Brahman or the not-this element). Even that 
(viz., the conditioned not-this element) when the limiting adjunct 
(viz., notion of knower, etc.), is destroyed as the result of the 
destruction of nescience parts at the very moment with its aspect 
(as the conditioned) and attains (its pristine state) free from all 
determinations. Hence though all at once the quartet of knower, 
etc., (object of knowledge, act of knowing and means of know- 
ledge) perishes, the fruit of self-realization (anubhavaphala) 
conditioned by that (viz., the quartet) depends upon verbal 
testimony.^^ Therefore it is that the learned in the Veda have 
concluded that the bliss of liberation (or in other words the un- 
qualified Atman) is known only from the Veda. As such, in 
the bhasyas are mentioned ‘ Mantra ’ and ‘ Brahmaria ’ state- 
ments which reveal the function of the pramana (sabda) of this 
nature. In the result, [“ since (the Mahavakya) shows that 
release is of the nature of the eternally liberated atman it (moksa) 
is not liable to the defect of non-etemality ”.] 

X. 22. [Page 92] In the bhasya beginning with [“ For 
him (Vrttikara) to whom liberation is something to be effected ”], 


The fruit of verbal testimony (viz., MahavSkya) is the final 
psychosis— in which is ‘reflected the pure consciousness 
(Brahman) and this Brahman as conditioned thus has the capacity 
(3TsTt^) to destroy the obscuring avidyS and even while avidya which 
is the hetu of the notions of the knower, etc., is eradicated Brahman 
manifests itself in its self-luminosity rid of all determinations. Hence 
it is said that Brahman is known only from the knowledge which the 
pregnant statements of Veddnta convey. Indirectly therefore they are 
the means of imparting the cognition of identity. 



309 


X. 23] IS BRAHMAN OBJECT OF MEDITATION ? 

and ending with (“ Therefore here (z.e., as regards moksa) not even 
in the shghtest degree is it (liberation) connected with action apart 
from its sole connection with knowledge”], what is pointed out 
is that for one who having abandoned the conception of liberation 
as identical with the eternally liberated atman which results from 
the removal of nescience, imagines its (liberation) connection with 
action — even to him — there can be no such possibility (of release 
being connected with action). ‘How ? ’ (it may be asked). When 
liberation is regarded as something to be produced or modified, 
there no doubt it is reasonable to hold that it admits of associa- 
tion with action but then it was pointed out from the bhasya, 
“No, the fruit of action on the one hand and the fruit of the 
knowledge of Brahman on the other hand are quite distinct, etc.,” 
that non-etemality would certainly follow. 

23. But, in order to obviate (the contingence of) non- 
eternality, if it be said that what already exists only (and not the 
ejSected or modified) is the thing to be obtained, even that is un- 
tenable. It is against reason (to suppose) that what is of the nature 
of a person’s self is something to be obtained preceded by kriya 
{i.e., the act of meditation— jnanakriya serving as its cause). 
Even on the basis of its (liberation or Brahman) being distinct 
(from one’s self), its attainment is not dependent on action since 
it is omnipresent and as such is eternally present like (the all- 
embracing) ether. 

Purmpaksin. — ^Well, though not resident in {i.e., unrelated 
to) the manifested world (vikara — illusorily transformed world) 
Brahman (is seated above) as witness the Scriptural text — “ Now, 
the light which is higher than this heaven (svarga), etc.,” and as 
such there is need for action for its attainment.^® 

Siddhantin. — ^No; even in the illusory world, since Brah- 
man’s connection with the manifested world is absent, there is 
nothing to differentiate (between the state of Brahman in two 
regions and as such Sarvagatatva or all-pervadingness is not 
annulled). 


(PP.); the other reading is ‘ Here 

the first reading is followed. What the purvapak§in urges (if we take 
the second reading) is that ubiquitousness— of Brahman 
mentioned above is only figurative, since Brahman is described as 
occupying a region higher than the Heavens— Chand. Up., III. xviii-7. 
Hence both readings make good sense. 



310 PA:n"CAPADIKA OF PADMAPA.DA \X.24 

Purvapaksin.—Well, (we say), that Brahman is by no means 
connected with the illusorily-manifested world and does not exist 
in the illusorily-manifested region (but resides in a distinct region). 
Hence the need for action for its attainment. 

Siddhdntin.—WeU. then (we ask), ‘ Does that attainment 
tantamount to the jiva’s becoming identical with it (Brahman) or 
to its existence there (i.e., in the Brahma-region) in its own state 
(i.e., without losing its identity) ? If the first alternative, then, 
it Giva’s) individual nature is destroyed. If on the other hand 
it is the second, since conjunction must end in disjunction return 
(from that bourn is inevitable).^* And the Sruti text, viz., “ He 
does not return hither again ”, denoting an action (i.e., returning) 
relating to the present time desiderates another valid means 
(pramana) to substantiate that it is so (f.e., that the liberated 
person does not return) and as such does not itself become pra- 
mana in this behalf.*® 

•24. Nor is it maintainable that release is something to be 
purified for neither the addition of any excellence nor the removal 
of any taint is possible there. It may be urged that the purifica- 
tion is for the manifestation of what exists (viz., Brahmabhava) 
as in the case of a mirror (whose natural brightness becomes 
manfest by the act of rubbing). This again does not hold good, 
for the self is void of action. Again it (the self) is not the content 
of (i.e., related to) action having its abode in something different, 
since it is the inward being (and is therefore unrelated to anything 
extraneous). 


** — If the jiva becomes one with Brahman, the Dvaitin 

must admit that its distinguishing features admitted by him, viz., its 
atomic size, its agency, etc., would perish. If on the other the jiva 
should retain its identity in heaven then in accordance with the rule 
that samyoga must end in viprayoga, the jiva’s association with 
Brahman must be followed by Association: Hence the non-eternality 
of liberation. 

*® — ^It is patent that simultaneous attainment of the 

Higher Region and return to mundane life is an impossible notion and 
need not therefore be denied. Hence the Sruti ‘ ’ is only 

anuvadarthavada. The use of the present tense— ‘ ari^a ’ points to 
the simultaneity of attainment and return which is a palpable contradic- 
tion. It is to be noted then that the vakya is not a 

pramana in regard to what it imports but is only a laudatory 
statement. 



XI. 27] IS BRAHMAN OBJECT OF MEDITATION? 311 

25. Purvapaksin. — ^Well, there does rpsult the removal of 
taint from meditation on Kvara just as darkness, the obscuring 
veil of a jar, is removed by the light of a lamp. 

Siddhantin . — ^We ask, whether this taint existing in reality 
(is removed) or having (only) an illusory existence ? If being 
existent in reality (it is removed) then it is not possible to remove 
it without its abode (v/ 2 ., the self) undergoing change. But the 
self suffers no change as evidenced from the Sruti intimating the 
unchangeability (of atman). If however the taint is illusorily 
conceived then its removal is not possible unless it be with the 
rise of perfect knowledge in one who is under (the sway of) nesci- 
ence, for such is the common experience {i.e., ignorance as re- 
removed only by knowledge), and is not perceived otherwise {i.e., 
the removal of ignorance is not perceived to result from action). 
And purification is not possible as (it is) by the act of bathing, 
etc. ; for there the purification is only of the ‘ this ’ element of 
the ego — the agent (in all cognitions and actions). 

26. The (bhasya) concludes thus; [“Therefore Release is 
not something to be purified either”.] And yet anticipating a 
possible doubt that there exists some other result of action by 
which means release might be connected with action (the (Bhasya- 
kara) says, [“ anything other than these, etc.”] [Page 93] Indeed 
it is not possible for any one to show either visible or invisible 
result of action which is other than the set of four beginning with 
origination (the others being apti, vikara and samskara). To 
conclude. Release is possible of attainment only by knowledge, 
and not by action.^® 

XI. 27. Purvapaksin. — ^Well, by you, (quoting the bhasya) 
“nor again, as being the object of the act of knowing, can 
Brahman be related to action” {Cf., Kena Up., I. 3); it was 
asserted that Brahman was not the content of knowledge even 
{vide, ante). 

Siddhantin. — ^Yes, it is true, (Brahman’s) objective relation 
to knowledge was condemned, but it was not said that knowledge 
served absolutely no purpose. And in fact in that context only 
the way it fulfils its purpose was pointed out in the bhasya : (“ No, 
your contention is baseless ”), because the object of the sastra 


w Hence no one is able to show any other way by which connec- 
tion between liberation and action could be established — 

511% %jqi3S%!5T§:R Bhasya, 



312 PASOAPADIK A OF PADMAPADA {XI, 2 8 

(i.e., of the knowledge arising from the ^astra) is to repudiate all 
distinctions which are the creation of nescience, etc.”). 

2%. Purvapaksin.— Do not, then, aver, “ It is out of the 
question that here action could have access, even to the slightest 
extent ” (/.e.. Release could have no connection whatsoever with 
action). [“Is not knowledge a mental act?”] 

[No, is our answer, since the two are of a dis- 
tinct nature.] 

Puryapaksin. — How, of a different nature ? 

Siddhantin. — Because the phala {i.e., the result of knowledge) 
is not something that originates (afresh). The non-origination- 
character of the result has been discussed in the comment of 
egoity {vide 1st Varnaka). 

29. Here is another distinction (between knowledge and 
action). Knowledge is the result not of an injunction but as is 
well known it is the object that gives rise to it ; and as for the 
object, it exists in its own right even before its knowledge arises. 
Hence knovdedge is dependent on that and it is not possible for 
the knowledge to effect any change in that {viz., the object). 

Puryapaksin.— Even granting it (the doubt) remains still ; 
it may be that perceptive cognition originates from the object; 
how in the case of inference, etc. ? 

Siddhantin.— Even there the dependence is on the probans, etc., 
and injunction has not scope there Moreover knowledge that 
arises from injunction is not always determinative of the object 
(as it really is) ; for we find the injunction laid down for the medi- 
tation on woman (Chand. Up., V. vii-1 ; viii-1), etc., as fire, etc. 
Hence knowledge having an (existent) object as its content, though 
partaking of the nature of action (kriya) is not the effect of an 
injunction and is not dependent on man’s effort, but on the other 
hand it is dependent on pramana and visaya. Thus is the intelli- 
gibility of true knowledge (possible) like the knowledge of fire 
in the fire (unlike that knowledge in woman). This being so, 
since even the knowledge of the identity of Brahman and the self 
has for its content an object such as it really is, it does not 


“ Even in the case of inference and verbal testimony knowledge 
arises from pramana— linga or probans in the case of inference, and 
sabda or scriptural testimony, in the case of kriya like jyoti§tcma or 
Brahman, an accomplished entity. No codana or injunction is needed 
for jnana. We may include arthapatti, upamana and anupalabdhi. 



313 


XL 30] IS BRAHMAN OBJECT OF MEDITATION ? 

originate from injunction. As such injunction has no place here 
O'.e., in Brahma-knowledge). 

, 30. Hence though mandatory statements exist (referring to 

the knowledge of Brahman) their function is impeded in relation 
to the knowledge that is dependent entirely on the valid means of 
proof and the existent object, since they are ineffective.^® There- 
fore the Vedic texts such as ‘ atman is to be seen, heard about, 
thought over and meditated upon’ look like injunctions, because 
as laudatory passages they extol the knowledge of (the identity 
of) atman (with the absolute), because they divert the mind towards 
it (i.e., the knowledge of Brahman), and because by inhibiting 
one’s outward-bound activities which are prompted by natural 
propensities they possess something of the nature of action that 
is enjoined. 

31. Similarly, by the term ‘ ^ravana ’ is meant the inquiry 
into the import of the Vedanta passages for the comprehension 
of atman, as also the inquiry into the nature of the self. By 
‘ manana ’ is meant concentred thought on the illustration of the 
‘ great drum, etc.,’ (the ‘dundubhi’ drowns every other sound) 
adduced in support of the scriptural statement (viz., ‘That thou art’ 
etc.), importing the reality {viz., identity of the self with Brahman), 
on the laudatory passages relating to the origination, sustention 
and destruction (of the world), and on the (Upanisadic) text that 
the manifested world is mere verbal distinction;®® (Manana) also 


19 ara: .... — ^The objection may he raised that reasoning 

cannot go counter to such Vedic texts as ‘Atman is to be seen’ which 
are clearly injunctive in character. But this objection is void. The Vedic 
texts serve as valid means of knowledge where their application is 
appropriate and not where they are not. If their validity is accepted 
as infallible in all cases and no exceptions are permitted then validity 
has to be admitted even of the statement, ‘Prajapati disembowled his 
own entrails’ — such statements are to be taken as only laudatory in 
character. Even so the texts — ‘atman is to be seen, etc.,’ are intended 
to extol the knowledge of the self. They have no validity of their own. 
Imperative statements referring to the knowledge of Brahman are to 
be regarded as ineffective as a razor when used against a stone. 

The illustration of the drum is intended to show that all 
mind-begotten (^?r) cognitions are dissolved in the cognition of the 
substrate, viz.. Brahman (Brh. Up,, IV. V. 8);“from which these beings 
are born, born from which they live by it, that into which when deceased 
they enter (Tait. Up., IIL i),” this is noted to show that nothing exists 


314 PANCAPADIKA OF PADMAPADA [XL 32 

means the consideration of the syllogistic arguments not hostile 
to the import of the propositional statement (viz., the identity 
of jiva with Brahman). By ‘ nididhyasana ’ is meant the strength- 
ening of the conviction regarding the meaning of the identity 
proposition which has been firmly grasped by manana (and not 
the nididhyasana of what is enjoined), for nididhyasana, otherwise 
termed ‘upasana’ which is enjoined (z.e., which is the content 
of a Vedic mandate) yields no fruit. ‘ Darsana ’ is the intuitive 
experience as the result of firm conviction in the vakyartha of 
the unity of the homogeneous mass of sentiency rid of the entire 
world of illusory manifestation. 

32. Purvapaksin.—\Pzigt 94J Which then is the laudatory 
passage? 

Siddhantm.—T\:as is what is expressed in the context there— 
It is for (the benefit) of Maitreyr who had renounced all love of 
worldly life (constituted as it is) of action, agent and fruit, and 
who was longing for freedom, that (Yajnavalkya) desirous of 
expounding the knowledge of the self which is the means of 
attaining freedom, declares, ‘ Lo, not for the love of the husband 
is the husband loved, etc.,’— thereby precluding the desire for 
the husband (as the end in itself) and emphasising that the self 
is the supreme object of desire (Bfh. Up., TV. 5. 6 If). 

PMrvflpafci/n.— Well, it is not the desire of atman that is 
declared as the most coveted object, but it is only the husband, 
etc., who are as objects of desire, declared for the sake of atman 
(the self) as witness, ‘ for the love of atman does the husband 
become dear 

Siddhantin.—^o, your contention is wrong. If that (atman) 
is not a thing wished for, we would not covet that which procures it, 
(viz., love of husband, etc.). Hence through this means (i.e., 
by the example of one’s love for one’s husband) is declared that 
atman only is the thing wished for. If that is the object of desire 
the text ‘ to be seen, to be heard about ’ is (indeed to be regarded 
as) a laudatory statement. All this is implied in the first sutra 
and expounded also in the bhasya.^^ 


apart from Brahman; “all changes are mere verbal distinctions, a mere 
name, the real thing is only, ‘clay’,” (ChSnd. Up., VI. 4). This 
points to the unreality of the manifested world of sense. 

=?r Atman’s being the object of desire; 

the non-mandatory character of the knowledge of atman because it is 




XII. 35] IS BRAHMAN OBJECT OF MEDITATION ? 315 

33. Moreover this termination ‘ tavya ’ (belonging to- the 
krtya group of terminations) does not denote injunction.^^ In 
what sense then is it used? In accordance with the rule ‘krtya’ 
and trc in the sense of ‘ worthiness krtya (here the ‘ tavya ’ 
termination falling under that order) denotes worthiness. From 
this it is to be understood that the texts lik e ‘ meditate on atman 
only ’ ; ‘ meditate only on atman the blissful ’ (lokam), which are 
but semblances of injunction are (as good as) explained. Hence 
it is only by the cognition (intuitive) of Brahman, having nothing 
to do with either the avoidance or the pursuit of an object that 
one’s duty is perceived as accomplished. Scripture and tradi- 
tional treatises also are corroborative in this respect. 

34. Hence (the Bhasya) concludes with the statement 
[‘ Therefore Brahman is not to be regarded as the object of 
injunction (of meditation)’]. What it signifies is that Brahman 
has no connection with any cognitive activity relating either to 
valid knowledge or other, assumed to be injunctive in character. 

XII. 35. The (Bhasya) statement [‘And that which some 
maintain, etc.,’] (has to be considered). This is its purport: — 

the subject; application of vidhi to inquiry (vicaravidhi) which is 
auxiliary to sravana, manana and nididhyasana undertaken for jfiana; — 
all this is implied in the first siitra — STqraT SfitrafreT. 

In that sutra the phrase ‘ Brahma jijnasa’ means ‘desire for the 
knowledge of Brahman ’ and by extension of the sense it amounts to this 
that inquiry has to be made for the knowledge of Brahman. Now 
since the sutra sets out with the resolve to undertake the inquiry the 
pertinent Vedic text has to be mentioned. Otherwise there would be 
no connection between the stltra and the Sruti — ^rutisangati is vital to 
the aphorisms. Hence the source should be sought in ‘atman is to be 
seen, heard about, etc.’ And because of the identity of sense between 
the source and that which depends upon that source, viz., the first sQtra, 
the injunction enjoining inquiry — ^vicara, must be regarded — as 
contained in the sutra. 

^ fqqr 1?^:— So far, the text ‘ 3TI?Fr qR ^cF^tT 

has been explained as intended for the 
laudation of atman, taking for the sake of argument the ‘tavya’ termi- 
nation of the four words in the text to denote injunction. The fact is 
it has no injunctive character. It denotes ‘worthiness’ — The 
‘tavya’ termination belonging to the ‘krtya’ order in etc., 

does not convey the sense of injunction but denotes Hence the 

passage means that atman is worthy of being seen — etc. 


316 PASCAPADIkA of PADMAPADA IXII. 36 

If there should be any section of the Veda devoted also to the 
elucidation of mere existent things then this, what has been said 
before (by the Vedantin) would gain confirmation. Otherwise 
(f.e., if no part of the Veda denotes a mere existing entity) what 
has no connection with action would only denote something 
unscriptural.^® 

36. Siddhantm.~}i.txQ is the answer : Your view is erroneous. 
[“ The purusa — ^the individual soul, which forms the subject- 
matter of the Upanisads, is not complementary to anything 
else ” :] — ^this is the brief statement of the subject, and its own 
elaboration (is contained in the bhasya), [“ That which is to be 
imderstood from the Upanisads only, etc.”]. This is what it 
means — that which is different from the self which is the object 
of the ego-notion and is related to works, (this is jivatman), is 
uniform and the one amidst all (transitory) things, being the 
witness of even the ego-notion — ^that is not established by any 
pramana (other than the Upanisad) as, had it been so established 
it might have got into relation with action. It is evident that 
what is not established by a different means of knowledge (pramana) 
cannot be pointed to as having any connecton with action. Nor is 
it right to say that (because the whole of the Veda is concerned 
with laying down injunctions) that Being is impossible of compre- 
hension, since it has been shown that the Upanisadic texts are 
all accordant in the elucidation of that Being (as the one homo- 
geneous unity). Hence only it is, that the attribute of its being 
comprehended from the Upanisads and not from any other (is 

28 etc. — ^It is admitted that liberation is the thing 

sought for (vidheya) and on reflection it is found that the text (§abda), 
“Existence, knowledge and bliss,” is the pramana for knowing Brahman 
without requiring any specific injunction. This point was rendered 
explicit in the second Varnaka. That the Vedanta has the sole 
evidential value in the elucidation of Brahman was pointed out in the 
first Varnaka. The contention that the Vedanta portion of the Veda 
inculcates vidhi like the ritualistic portion was proved to be untenable 
by discussing the nature of Brahman, of knowledge, and of liberation. 
It was pointed that considered in whatever way vidhi is out of the 
question. 

Now in the present context the discussion turns on the view held 
by both the objectors, that the Veda if it should denote anything other 
than injunction or something supplementary to it, W'ould cease to be 
the Veda. 



317 


XII. 36] IS BRAHMAN OBJECT OF MEDITATION ? 

appropriate). And that {viz., the epithet, aupanisadatva) is intelli- 
gible as denoting that the principal topic of the Vedanta passages 
is Brahman; (if the Vedanta relates to injunction then the epithet 
‘aupanisadatva’ will be inappropriate). [Page 95] It cannot 
be said that though it (Purusa or Brahman) is known (from the 
Upanisads) it {i.e., the cognition of that Being) is illusory, like 
that of the silver in nacre, because of the absence of negation. 
There is an additional reason why it cannot be argued that the 
knowledge of Brahman is illusory,^— in relation to that Purusa 
only there is corroboration from the Upanisadic text: “That self 
is not this, is not this” where the word ‘ atman ’ is used. And 
of the atman there is no possibility of negation (as witness the 
Bha§ya), [“he who denies the atman cannot avoid the contin- 
gence of himself being the atman ”.^®] 

At no time does there occur its destruction for it is not the 
object of the causes which bring on destruction. And destruc- 
tion's not without (having something as its antecedent) cause, 
because the doctrine of flux is discarded owing to the constant 
homogeneous refulgence of consciousness. Hence in that (atman) 
which is void of the three particularising adjuncts (space, time and 
object-limitations) and is self-luminous everything perishes every- 
thing up to (and exclusive of) the Purusa, finds its eflfacement 


— ^The objection against accepting the transcendent Brahman 
is that being an unknown entity no predication is possible. If the subject 
( 3 ^ 5 ^) were known then we could predicate non-duality, supreme 
knowledge and bliss, of that subject. But we have no knowledge of 
Brahman. Hence, says the purvapaksin, such knowledge as is vouched 
for in the Upanisads must be illusory. The answer is furnished in the 
Sruti, “That self is not this, is not this”— Bfh. Up., III. ix. 26. Here 
the pronouns ^•. and tl^: denote the inner self (atman) which is 
implied in the ego-notion. And this inner atman is itself Brahman 
so that the predicates (^%^) of non-duality, etc., relating to a known 
subject can be ascribed. 

25 sr cn^I?ir?^iRrwra:— We have to suppose here an 

alternative — ^Does there exist one who is the denier of atman or does 
he not exist ? In the first alternative the contingence of ‘atman’s being 
the very self of the denier cannot be escaped; the denier exists, and 
existence — satta is itself atman* One cannot will away one’s own 
existence. In the second alternative, since there exists no denier, the 
act of denying itself exists not. Then how could the non-existence of 
atman be asserted ? 



318 


pa^jcapadikA of padmapAda [xn 


(as borne out by the scriptural text — ^Katha. Up., I. iii-2), “He 
is the limit, He is the final destination”. Therefore (this is the 
conclusion of the topic under consideration) when there are 
grounds such as these, how can it be maintained that the Vedic 
section (v/z., the Vedanta) is not elucidative of the non-trans- 
migratory atman which is not to be understood from any other 
means of valid means of knowledge and which is known from 
the gist of the Vedantic texts? How again can that which is 
revealed therein be denied ? 

XIII. 38. Purvapaksin.—WQW, ‘Since the Veda has action 
as its purport, those passages which do not refer to action have no 
sense to conveys (Jai., Sut., I. ii-1) ; the learned interpreters of the 
Sastra say that statements which do not import action are void 
of sense. Hence (the Vedanta texts) which ‘ declare something 
which neither impels one to action nor dissuades one from it are 
purportless (niralambana) and as such there can be no cognition 
of an existent object from it (i.e., the Vedanta). And what know- 
ledge arises from Vedic passages merely on the ground of the 
universal (vakyatva) is illusory. Hence no verbal knowledge is 
possible of anything that, neither helps in the impulsion to action 
nor desistance from it. For this reason also, viz., that there is 
not any other means of proof even (apart from verbal testimony) 
in corroboration of the existence of such an object {i.e., having 
no connection with action or inaction) it is right to regard that 
(i.e., the cognition that has arisen somehow) as false. It may 
however be questioned how verbal knowledge is not possible of 
an object that (neither helps one to engage in action nor to desist 
from it). The answer is that sabda-sakti (i.e., the power of deno- 
tation) is not perceived therein. And the mere word when its 
significative potency remains unknown fails unlike the sense of. 
perception to generate knowledge.^® And it is from the cognitive 

^ ST etc. — It is not essential that the significative 

potency of a word should be known, prior to verbal knowledge. In 
inferring the specific fire on the hill we first comprehend the universal 
concomitance of smoke with fire and then of fire on the hill. Even 
so the verbal cognition (^t®^«r) of the word ‘go’ — cow, may first 
be comprehended as associated with the act, say, of bringing and then 
its denotation of the unassociated object, viz., the mere existent ‘cow’ 
may be understood — no, says the purvapaksin — sr 'Sfl’lfr?!, etc. This is 
a negative analogy.. 

We need not know that the eye has come into contact with pot. It is 


XIII. 39] IS BRAHMAN OBJECT OF MEDITATION ? 319 

act that the existence of sakti (the denotative power) has to be 
inferred. And knowledge (z.e., sabdabodha) has for its content 
a thing associated (with action) and it arises from activity in rela- 
tion to that something. When such activity is absent (as 'in the 
case of existent objects) whence could the denotative power of 
§abda be understood? And how could a word whose signi- 
ficance is undetermined generate any knowledge of a thing that 
is unrelated to action? 

39. Siddhantin.—We will answer : Neither what the apho- 
rist (Jaimini) and the commentator (Sahara) mean, nor the empi- 
rical (process of) reasoning (in construing a sentence) has been 
clearly understood by you. (Prabhakara.) Now you consider 
this— -whether in the sentence—” Devadatta, drive the white cow 
with the stick, ” the words ‘ Devadatta ’, etc., which are distinct 
from action-prompting word ‘ drive ’ and which are expressive 
of existent objects and do not therefore prompt action, are known 
from the very sentence enjoining action to possess the significa- 
tive potency (sakti) in relation to existing objects also or not. 
If known (i.e., if from mandatory sentences, the words denoting 
existing objects are ascertained to possess significative potency), 
then the word ‘ anarthakya ’ (in ‘ amnayasya kriyarthatvadanartha- 
kyamatadarthanam ’) may be construed as ‘ serving no purpose ’ 
but not as lacking in content (sakya). And this is expressed by 
the Bhasyakara (Samkara) [‘again, since action is the purport 
of the Scripture ’, etc.] 

40. And the fruit (prayojana) consisting either in the 
acquirement of happiness or the riddance of misery accrues either 
directly following (action) or indirectly (when adrsta holds the fruit 
in store for a distant future.) [Page 96] Hence ‘ Snarthakya (i.e., 
fruitlessness) may be admitted in the case of sentences composed of 
such words as ‘ he howled, etc.,’ which do not subserve that object 
{viz., the fruit, say, securing svarga). But (says the Siddhantin) 
how could statements (like ‘ that thou art ’) which generate the 
knowledge of the identity of the individual with the supreme self 
having as their fruit the highest human end, be purposeless 

enough if there is contact between the eye and the object. But as 
regards inference, postulation and comparison, knowledge presupposes 
the comprehension of sambandha. 

Vide Chap. VII of Ssstradlpika (G.O.S.) on the import of 
propositions. The anvitabhidhanavada of Prabhakara is criticised 
from the view-point of the Bhatta school. 


320 PAf^CAPADIKA OF PADMAPADA pCIV. 41 

XIV. 41. Frabhakara. — Well, this is what we hold as the 
right view.— It may be that even from a sentence prompting 
action the significative potency of words expressive of existing 
things also is known, but still such cognition is not possible from 
(words relating to) bare existing objects (Suddha), because the 
cognition (of the meaning) arises only as associated with an 
action (at the time of first learning its meaning). From the word 
‘ go— -cow ’ what is cognized at the time its primary sense is 
grasped is the jati (cowhood) of an animal-with-a-dewlap. If 
now the word is to be interpreted in another sentence it cannot 
be regarded as either the unqualified (i.e., unspecific) or as 
qualified otherwise, say as an animal having a mane.^® 

42. Siddhantin.—Youv discourse is irrelevant.^® A variety 
of significative potencies of the word ‘ go ’ is perceived to exist 

tT«nf^r, etc.— V.; Jtg Jjfrm irwra?Tifni% ; 

The question to be put to Prabhakara is that if the words have 
the potency (sakti) of signifying existing objects, why not they be 
understood as capable of getting into suitable associations with one 
another and denote the import of the proposition? But Prabhakara 
while admitting that words are expressive of existing objects, maintains 
that they cannot do so unless related to a word prompting action 
(Niyogasamsrsta), for saktigraha has arisen thus only. 

The Bhatta, on the other hand, maintains that even without niyoga 
words may express the propositional import in the empirical sphere 
by getting into appropriate syntactical relation. In the Veda, however, 
he thinks that no purpose is served if merely existing objects are 
denoted, and that such vidhi or niyoga is essential. 

The Vedantin disagrees with both and maintains that a Vedic 
sentence is competent to denote an existing object and is also purpose- 
ful seeing that the highest human end — ^paramapurusartha, is achieved 
by the comprehension of the import of such texts as ‘That thou art’. 

29 — Since the word ‘go’ is used in different contexts 

there is no impelling necessity that the genus cow (JT 411 Ki%) which is 
its primary significance should invariably be associated with the verbal 
idea (^r4). On the other hand, we perceive it in association with 
quality — guna, substance — dravya, action— kriya, causal correlate — 
karaka, etc. Take the sentence ‘bring the white cow’— 
here the quality ‘ white ’ is perceived as associated with the dravya in the 
genus ‘cow’ the dravya in association with 

the meaning of the case-termination, dravya in conjunction with karaka 
in association with kriya; bringing (kriya) with the niyoga (karya or 



321 


XIV. 43] IS BRAHMAN OBJECT OF MEDITATION ? 

as other words (not importing action only) get unto relation with 
its meaning {viz., an animal with the characteristic marks of cow). 
Hence (to avoid indetermination— avyavastha) it is but right 
that the cognition (that arises from ‘go’) should be the same 
throughout (as you have pointed out). When, however, words 
signifying other things are conjoined with it as a result of diverg- 
ence in the form of statements due to difference in terminations 
and difference in the things mentioned the import is seen to be 
divergent, and as such at the very time the sense of ‘ go ’ is under- 
stood, the import of the proposition (samanvaya) is cognized as 
determined by the insertion and removal (of the words that are 
in relation to the word ‘ go ’). Hence with the words expressive 
of substance, quality and action and associated with such case- 
tenninations as point to their fitness for getting into relation 
(with each other) propositions are employed each denoting its 
individual sense and as such it is clear that at the time of cognising 
the specific significance of the word, relation is not positive {i.e., 
it may be action or an existing thing that is related). 

43. Even so (of the Vedic statements), “ The first offer of 
food {viz., soma) is to him (the priest) who utters the formula 
‘ vasat ’ in offering an oblation ” ; “ Pusa (sun) has the boiled 
meal as his share”, the import is evident even though they con- 
tain no word expressive of action. As for the contention that its 
connection with action is secured with the word ‘kartavyah’ 


aptirva). It is therefore evident that the association of the word ‘go’ 
with karya is not direct (but vyavahita). Hence to secure immediate 
consecution of relation the primary significance (5ira) should he under- 
stood as resident in “anvitasvartha”, i.e., as associated with seme 
other factor and not invariably with kriya This is known 

as “Itaranvitavada” as distinguished from the “abhihitanvayavada” 
of Bhatta and “ kriyanvitavada ” of Prabhakara. 

Again if ‘§akti’ is admitted as residing only in the meaning of the 
word associated with action, then the word denoting action — ‘anaya’ 
in the sentence under consideration would be left unrelated owing to 
the absence of another word denoting action; on other grounds also 
the karyanvita has to be dispensed with. The primary significance of 
words as associated with any other words can be made out by- looking 
up the dictionary and grammer. 

The Vivarana therefore concludes that the ‘Itaranvita’ doctrire 
ulone is the one meant by Padmapada — 
page ^78. 

21 


322 


pa^JcapAdikA of PADMAPADA 


[XIV. 44 


understood, it must be noted that the connection is the sequel of 
sabdabodha (propositional import) and not that sabdabodha is 
its sequel. (It is true that) Jaimini has framed the sutra— “ The 
uninterrupted utterance of words which are implied in them (is 
for the purpose of enjoining action.”®® But even there (we must 
understand that) the consecutive expression (lit. utterance) of 
words (samanvaya) denoting existing objects like colour, etc., is 
with the object of pointing out that the relation between tbe 
words is one of ‘ samanadhikaranya ’, etc. (i.e., relation to an 
identical object). This is so because it has been shown that 
verbal knowledge (samanvaya or sabdabodha) is possible even 
where the relation is one of substantive and attributive. The 
mention of the word ‘ kriyarthena ’ (in the sutra), however, is 
accordant with the present context -^vhere the discourse on 
Dharma is begun. As such the Bhasyakara (v/z., Sahara) also 
in his comment, “ The meaning of the word (i.e. the assemblage 
of words of the Scripture including Vedanta) is the direct result, 
which is instruction in karma ”, that is, instead of merely saying 
that the Veda has a meaning to impart (arthavabodha) has 
mentioned ‘ instruction in karma as its object’ since it serves the 
purpose on hand (viz., the inquiry into Dharma).®^ 

44. And this same view is expressed by the BhasyakSra 
(Samkara) : [“ As regards the passages cited relating to the views 
of men well conversant with the purport of the sastra (it must be 
supposed that they point to that part of the sastra which consists 
of injunctions and prohibitions)”]. It is because from the 
preceding Vtantra ’ (i.e., sastra, viz., Purvamimamsa) this matter 
(viz., the nature of the self, an existent entity) has not been under- 

HTTWW:”— Jai. Sut., Chap. I, xxv. “The 
utterance of the words which are implied in the meanings is with the 
object of an action (i.e., for the purpose of enjoining an action) because 
the meanings of words in ‘ \ are the pramapa 

for the vakyartha, viz., yaga which is the Dharma serving as the means 
to svarga”. Here it is -definitely stated that thfe words have their signifi- 
cative potency only when in conjunction with a word denoting action. 
This is the contention of the opponent — vide S.D., G.O.S., 89, p. 217. 

Sahara’s use of the expression ‘ is justified on the 

ground that Dharma with which the topic is concerned is something 
to be achieved by action. The consecutive expression of words is cnly 
to denote the relation of the meanings they imply, and not for eluci- 
dating their meanings as associated with action. 


XIV. 45] IS BRAHMAN OBJECT OF MEDITATION ? 323 

stood (there is justification for) commencing the Sariraka- 
mimamsa (z.e., the inquiry into the meaning of the Vedanta texts. 

‘ Sanraka ’ literally means, that concerning the embodied soul 
whose nature is explained in the Vedanta). Indeed there (z.e., 
in the Purvamimamsa) the credibility of the intended sense of the 
Veda, its self-evidential character, and (the eternal potency of 
the word to generate the cognition of its meaning) all this is 
understood. The juxtaposition of the phrase ‘ for instruction 
in action ’, is to indicate that such juxtaposition is in harmony 
with the declared object of inquiry into Dharma. 

45. Here, on the other hand, in the sutra (T. i. 4) ; “And that 
(Brahman is to be known from the Scripture), because it is in 
harmony (with the Vedantic texts),” discarding the identity-relation 
of the attribute and the attributed, and also the figurative identity- 
relation in the text, ‘That thou art’, the single impartite entity 
is pointed out. [Page 97] Even so, the revered Panini lays down 
the rule that the first case suffix (nominative) denotes what is not 
distinct; that is, its use is confined to the mere stem (uninflicted 
substantive) and does not extend to (anything) beyond it such as 
its being the agent of the action ‘ asti ’ (is). And therefore it is 
that the view held by Katyayana that the root ‘ asa ’ with the 
‘ lat ’ termination (is always there even though not expressed) is 
not admitted. And we come across sudi sentences as ‘ These 
fruit-yielding trees ’, ‘ This is the king’s man ’, where the import 
is conveyed in the absence of the verb ‘ asti ’. It is not intended 
that even here the sentences should be completed as ‘ These fruit- 
yielding trees are ’, ‘ He, the king’s man is ’. But the sentence (as it 
stands) determines the relation only (between the terms) as may be 
expressed thus — ‘ These trees in fruit ’, ‘ This man of the king ’. 

46. Similarly it is evident that the sole purport of the Vedanta 
texts consists in pointing to the relation of the entity which in its 
universal aspect (as existence) is established as the world-cause with 
its own nature as omniscience, etc. ; and also in pointing to the iden- 
tity with Brahman of that which is denoted by the word ‘Thou’ (in 
‘That thou art’). There is no importation here of the verb ‘asti’ (is) 
even though it forms the integral part of the thing itself; much less 
scope surely for it {viz., the existential act, in the case of) what is 
beyond it; as such verb denoting external acts, are far removed.®^ 

— ^What is essential to the thing; without being 
or existence the thing is non est. But in the vakyartha (propositional 


324 PAIsTCAPADIKA OF PADMAPADA [XV. 47 

XV. 47. Again in construing a negative sentence like, 

‘ A Brahmana is not to be killed neither action nor means to 
action is cognised, but it is the abstention from action that is 
invariably manifest. In the performance of rites like ‘ Praja- 
pativrata however, where certain vows are enjoined such 
as ‘the rising Sun should not be seen ’ because of the con- 
nection of the word ‘vrata’ (with the other words in this 
sentence), the mental act of the observance of non-perceiving 
is manifest. As such the injunction, ‘observe — ^non-perceiving’ 
should be construed as ‘ take the resolution thus— I will not 
look (at the Sun, etc.)’ ; merely on the ground that the negative 
particle is juxtaposed in the sentence (there is no apprehension 
of an act of vow); for its {i.e., of the negative particle) function 
consists in negating what is denoted by the word with which it is 
connected. 

48. The meaning of the bhasya [“Nor, again can the act 
of killing, expressed by the verb ‘is to be killed’,* which action 
is prompted by natural motives, etc.], is this — ‘by the promptings 
of one’s nature only’ (svabhavata eva) under the influence of 
passion, etc., not depending on any Vedic injunction; ' when the 
act of murder thus resulting (if the verb) is conjoined with, i.e., 
is qualified by, the negative particle ‘not’, then it amounts (in 
sense) to abstention from killing. As such the import of the 
sentence, (‘ a Brahmana is not to be killed) will be, ‘ make a reso- 
lution of not-killing ’, and it is not that the phrase ‘ killing is not 
to be done’ means mere absention from the act of murder — a 
passive state. Hence the determination (that a Brahmaria) is not 
to be killed which is a mental act, not revealed (anywhere else 
except in the Veda) is intimated. 

49. Siddha.ntin.—T)m does not. stand to reason, for the 
function of ‘not’ is to altogether obliterate what is connected 
with it. As for (the injunction) of ‘not seeing’ we have said 
that such import is possible on the strength of the word ‘ vow ’ 
(vrata), and not on the strength of ‘ not ’. 


import) of ‘That thou art’ even the act of ‘being’ (3n%l%4T) is void 
of connection with* the other terms of the proposition— 

The other variety of kriya is that which is related to something external 
and not involved in the thing itself; e.g., act of eating, etc. There is 
no room here for verbs denoting external acts such as the act of medi- 
tation-^qraJff^F. . ' 



XV. 50] IS BRAHMAN OBJECT OF MEDITATION ? 


325 


50. Prdbhdkara.~W t\\, in prohibitive sentences (we main- 
tain) that what the negative denotes is connected with niyoga 
(apurva or karya). Hence niyoga is to be effected (sadhya) by 
performing what is denoted by ‘not’ as in the case of the per- 
formance of yaga, etc;, (to fulfil niyoga). How can it be said 
then that cessation from action which is a state of passivity is 
apprehended (from the negative sentence)? 

» Siddhdntin . — This is a statement empty of content. It is 
indeed evident that what the ‘not’ indicates is not action nor 
is it the means of action, but on the other hand it denotes the 
negation of that with which it is conjoined, and is not the cause 
in its (niyoga) production. As such, it is established as a fact 
that prohibitive propositions are other than vidhi (injunction). 
[Page 98] Otherwise {i.e., if even negative sentences are con- 
strued as denoting vidhi), mandatory would be all (sentences in 
the empirical sphere and there would be the contingence of the 
absence of all prohibitory statements). Hence the prohibitive 
proposition points to the negation of that with which the ‘ not ’ 
is connected; and not even a trace of injunction exists there. 

51. What is coveted as the fruit of the forbidden act {viz., 
killing) which is the meaning of lih, etc., of the prohibitive sen- 
tence is conjoined with the negative particle ‘not ’ because the 
other senses of the termination (‘ tavya ’ here) like vidhi, 
nimantrana, amantrana, adhista, samprasna and abhyanujna 
are absent (/.e., out of the place) here.®® Hence {i.e., since the 
‘ not ’ goes with istasMhana, i.e., contributoriness to a (desired 

etc. — So far, the explanation of the negative sentence 
‘a Brahmapa is not to be killed’ rested on the assumption that the 
negative particle is conjoined with the base, viz., ‘banana’ 

(killing), and it was pointed out that its purport was only the negation 
of the action as indicated by ‘hanana’. Now the ‘not’ is assumed 
by the opponent to be conjoined with the suffix ‘tavya’ but even there 
it is shown that niyoga is not its purport. The meaning of ‘tavya’ is 
‘istasadhanatva’, capacity to serve as a means of bringing about the 
desired end. When ‘not’ is joined to that termination the sentence 
means that the killing of a Brahma pa will not be the istasadhana. The 
other senses of ‘tavya’ such as vidhi, etc., do not fit in here, because 
there is none other than the person who is the niyojya, i.e., the 
niyojaka, the one from whom vidhi, etc., proceed is absent here just 
as in the case of perception, inference, etc . — vide Papini, 3-3-161 for 
the definition of vidhi, nimantrapa, etc. 



326 PARCAPADTKA OF PADMAPADA [XV. 52 

end) the meaning of the negative sentence {viz., ‘ a Brahmana 
is not to be killed ’) is its {viz., istasadhana) negation ; and that 
(negation) is antecedent-negation which is self-established, (which 
amounts to saying that it is not a thing to be brought about by 
one’s effort). Therefore, even when the cause {viz., the' delusion 
that the act of killing a Brahmana is the means to gratify one’s 
desire) incited by passion is imminent, its obstruction has to be 
brought about by main effort. And that {viz., obstruction) po 
doubt is a thing to be accomplished (sadhya); but even then it is 
known from positive and negative concomitance {i.e., common 
experience) and not from verbal testimony, because there is no 
word specifically indicating it {viz., the obstruction of the passion 
prompting one to murder a Brahmapa). And further in a single 
sentence the import of the proposition is constituted only by the 
meaning of the words in syntactical relation and not as apart 
from this. Hence whatever import is apprehended from artha- 
pattipramana {i.e., implication or it may be inference as here), 
that is not the import derived from sabda (Vedic injunction). 
As for the negative sentence it is plain that it denotes a sense 
involving no action, and nothing to be accomplished does stand 
in the objective relation to it for its function is fulfilled in remain- 
ing passive only (after denoting the negation of contributoriness 
to happiness by the act of killing). ' 

52. But still you (referring to Prabhakara) may persist in 
urging that even in a negative sentence that which is related to 
the denotation of the negative particle, viz., niyoga is what the 
sentence imports. Granted ; even then that {i.e., niyoga) is 
established as the result of the abandonment of the forbidden 
act and the motive for undertaking the act (of killing) is only 
the longing to reap its fruit {i.e., the notion that killing is contri- 
butory to the desired end), so that when its cause is baulked (as 
when the ‘ not ’ is taken with istasMhanatva), the effort (which 
is prompted by passion) ceases and niyoga results.®* And that 


?I?rrN etc.— Prabhakara’s contention is that the 

apurva, the unseen potency is what the termination ‘tavya’ (or lin) 
indicates and that as such it is not possible to deny that the negative 
sentence has apiirva as its import. Now the question is whether in 
ordinary usage niyoga or apQrva is known from the termination or that 
is so in the Veda. In the empirical world apurva is not seen, so that 
the termination has not niyoga as its primary significance. If niyoga 



XVI. 53] IS BRAHMAN OBJECT OF MEDITATION ? 327 

{viz., the niyoga-relating to the negation of killing) is determined 
by the law of positive and negative concomitance and as such it 
{viz., the meaning of the negative particle) does not deviate from 
the way it has been explained before. Such being the case even 
though it is understood that the usage of elders should alone be 
followed in construing a sentence, Brahman known from the 
(Vedantic) texts is not like Dharma, known from ‘ codana ’ 
{i.e., a mandatory statement). When in a general way (Brahman) 
is established as the world-cause, Vedantic texts such as ‘ From 
which these beings are bom, etc.’, and ‘That thou art’ which 
cohere therein {i.e., in manifesting Brahman’s special nature) are 
also adduced for enabling one to understand its (Brahman) 
specific nature. 

XVI. 53. Again it has been alleged that since even the per- 
son who has the knowledge of the identity of the self with 
Brahman is perceived to belong to the transmigratory world as 
before {i.e., before his acquiring the knowledge of identity, no 
purpose is served (by its describing the nature of Brahman) as 
(witness to the contrary) when information about the rope is 
given (when under illusion the rope is mistaken for a serpent); 
and that as such the sentence (‘That thou art’, etc.,) cannot be 
said to end by merely referring to (the pure and unrelated 
Brahman). 

Here is the answer: — [“Not of the person who has under- 
stood that Brahman is the self, etc.]”. This is its meaning — 
the connection of the self with the body is not due to karma, for 
otherwise it would lead the logical fault of mutual dependence 
and there is the additional reason that atman itself (caitanya) is 
devoid of (any connection with) action, etc. If it be held that 


is admitted in the domain of the Veda and if it is urged that it is what 
is signified by the termination it will be on a par with the adage 
known as ‘bakabandha’. To explain: If one should say that to catch 
a crane a lump of butter has to be placed on its head so that the 
melted butter may blind its eyes one forgets that all this presupposes 
catching the crane. To one desirous of svarga the performance of 
yaga is indispensable, but then yaga does not last till the fruit is 
secured. Hence on the basis of ‘implication from words’ — 
apurva is premised. When this apflrva is already established it is 
purposeless to urge that it is the primary significance of the suffix 
‘tavya’. Hence the appropriateness of the adage. 



328 PA5TCAPADIKA OF PADMAPADA [XVII. 55 

(this mutual dependence) is retrogressively beginningless, we say 
that based as it is on no valid ground it is on a par with an end- 
less succession of blind men (one trying to lead the other). And 
even if the relation of the self with the body be accepted as due 
to karma then one’s love of one’s body could only be figurative 
as it is in the case of the bodies of one’s sons, etc. Because experi- 
ence contradicts it, because of the absence of similarity with any 
well-known case of figurative usage, and because of the contin- 
gency of even one’s own body ceasing to be a factor when one 
is an agent in the act of knowing, just as one (is not the agent in 
the act of knowing) with the body of one’s sons, etc. (?.e., the 
father is not the knower in the act of the son’s knowing), resi- 
dually, we must conclude that the relation of the body with the 
self is due to avidya. And when that {viz., avidya) is sublated 
and as a consequence its connection (f.e., of the body with the 
self) is sublated how could there be causelessly, the experience 
of pleasure and pain as before? (There could be none.) 

54. [Page 99] To this effect Sruti and Smrti statements 
which denote that for a knower of Brahman there is the total 
riddance of all connection with mundane existence are given in 
illustration in the bhasya. Hence there is no transmigratory 
existence as before, to one who has the consciousness of his 
identity with Brahman since it {viz., atman-realization) is sub- 
versive of all attachments to it (migratory life). 

As for the apparent consciousness of the objects of sense 
which present themselves to one’s experience in so far as one 
continues in life, it must be regarded as due to a small fraction of 
the residual karma operating in the present life; it is just like 
the appearance of the double moon when one is affected by an 
eye-defect (timira). Reflection and meditation, as has been 
already said, are not posterior to the knowledge of Brahman but 
like Vedantic study (sravana) they pre-exist as the means of 
knowledge. 

XVII. 55. To sum up — (Brahman), an accomplished entity 
because it is unknown in its real nature becomes (necessarily) 
the object of a pramana (other than the Veda), i.e., it stands in 
need of such a pramana being known and as such it is the prameya 
(or object of knowledge other than Vedic testimony). If how- 
ever (Brahman) is admitted to be in the objective relation to an 
action that is enjoined, then since a casual correlate has to be 
established by some other evidence (say perception), its {i.e.. 



xvn. 55] IS BRAHMAN OBJECT OF MEDITATION ? 329 

Brahman’s) attainment through it (Vedanta) becomes unintelli- 
gible. The contingency of sentence-split will arise (if it be based 
on the very sentence enjoining meditation), and the analogy of 
the ‘ devatadhikarana ’ does not hold good as going counter to 
perception, etc.®® 

Even granting that the entity {viz., Brahman) having been 
previously established by a different text, becomes the object of 
an action, it should be pointed out that none of the four kinds 
of effects admitted to be produced in what serves as the object of 
an action, is possible there {i.e.„ in Brahman).®® 

If liberation resembling svarga as the fruit of meditation with 
(Brahman) as its object be premised (by you, referring to the 
Mimamsakas) on the analogy of sacrifices offered to a deity then 
there arises the contingency of its (liberation) impermanence very 
like that (viz., Svarga). 

From statements like ‘ who knows Brahman becomes Brahman 
only, etc.,’ which demonstrate the absence of interval between the 
knowledge of Brahman and the frxxit of liberation, the interposition 
of action betwixt (knowledge and liberation) is implicitly negated. 

From a consideration of texts like ‘ The knower of atman 
crosses (the bounds of) sorrow ’ it is evident that the fruit of atman- 
knowledge is only the removal of the obstacle to liberation, and 

5---If Brahman is admitted to be in the 
objective relation to karma having posited the injunction — meditate on 
Brahman — ’ the following defects cannot be avoided: — 

(i) The doctrine that Brahman is known only from the Vedanta — 

will be upset. 

(ii) When atman is established on the deliverance of the Vedanta, 

only, to suppose that atman-identity is the result of medi- 
tation would lead to ‘sentence-split’ — 

(iii) If on the analogy of Devatadhikarapa — ^it be said that the 

vidhi on meditation has the intermediate purport — 

of Atman-identity and the chief support 
(UfraFT^r) of the meditative act, the inapplicability 
nadhikarapa is apparent since the intermediate sense, viz., 
identity is contradicted by the experience (pratyaksa), ‘I am 
not Brahman’. 

®® The four modifications effected 

by action in a thing that is in the objective relation are origination — 
3^71%, getting — 3TifH, change— f^R, purification — ^f^R, none of which 
is possible in Brahman. Hence Brahman is not in the objective relation 
to any action. 



330 PAf^CAPADIKA OF PADMAPADA [XVII. 56 

as such there being nothing else to be effected, the interposing of 
action does not stand to reason. , 

The knowledge of atman as Brahman (taught) in the context 
of absolute identity does not admit of (being explained) as involv- 
ing an assumption (conceit) as in the case of sampat.®^ 

Since Brahman is not regarded as being in the objective 
relation to jnana though it has arisen from a valid source (v/z., 
the Veda), far removed is the possibility of its {i.e.. Brahman’s) 
being the object of an enjoined meditative act.®® 

Though (Brahman) is not in the objective relation to the act 
of knowing, its being the import (visaya) of the sentence (say, 
‘tatvamasi’) is intelligible on the ground that the sentence {i.e., 
its knowledge) serves to dispel the illusory ascriptions and by that 
means reveals that the etemally-existent consciousness (atman) 
is of the real nature of Brahman. 

Even granting that Brahman is the content, (visaya) of the 
act of knowing, it {viz., vedana— knowledge) is not dependent on 
injunction. 

The passages which appear as if injunctive in character since 
they are understood as laudatory are extrinsic to it. And (lastly) 
the liberation from the transmigratory existence as the result of 
Brahma-knowledge is a matter of actual experience. 

(For these reasons) we conclude that Brahman independently, 
without depending upon any injunction, is indubitably propounded 
in the sastra, for all the Vedantic texts are concordant in this respect. 

56. Such being the case, since apart from the knowledge 
that is produced from the mutual connection of words (consti- 
tuting the Vedantic texts, ‘ That thou art ’, ‘ Existence, knowledge, 
‘Eternal is Brahman ’, etc.), no prompting to action is intimated, 
very like the eye, etc., which reveal the object but do not prompt 
action, it is appropriate that a different sastra having that {viz., 
inquiry into the Vedanta) as its subject should be begun. Other- 
wise, that is, if even here it be admitted that over and above the 


®’ ^'ttk-4'TvrW 31^ g-WF^T %:TF'g?ITf^T 

Sampat is a fanciful combination, e.g., Brh. Up., III. i-9; Chand. Up., 
III. 18—1, etc. 

^ 38 srgF'TRRffTfrgTTf^ m g mg: ; T%r%Fqq:trqrrg?rgT gg (sru) 

? When Brahman transcends the realm of logic how can it 
become the subject of meditation which is essentially volitional in 
character ? 



331 


XVII. 16] IS BRAHMAN OBJECT OF MEDITATION ? 

imparting of knowledge, it (the Uttara-mimamsa) prompts action, 
then a different Sastra would not be commenced, since the sastra 
concerned with injunctions has already been commenced with (the 
Jaiminlya first sutra) — “Then, therefore, the inquiry into Dharma.” 
But still it may be urged that since it (Brahman) is to be achieved 
by non-external means, supplementation to that (v/x., the sastra 
dealing with rituals) is necessary.®® Then, in that case (the Sutra- 
kara) would have taken the resolve to begin the new sastra with 
the first aphorism worded thus : ‘ Then therefore inquiry into the 
remaining part of Dharma for the inquiry relates to a distinct 
injunction (?'.e., that which is connected with meditation). 

57. [Page 100] Therefore, since (the knowledge of the 
identity arises in the manner aforesaid), all talk of injunctions, 
objects of injunction, valid means of knowledge, and the objects 
of knowledge is (appropriate) only prior to the knowledge of 
Brahman. But after that, owing to the absence of the knowing 
subject and also of any object of injunction, their (f.e., of the 
knower, means of knowledge, etc.), existence has no significance. 
[To this effect they have made the declaration.] (To explain) — 
Because it is universally held by the knowers of Brahman, they 
have summarised the view set forth above in the stanzas beginning 
with, [“ Figurative, illusory, etc.”] The transference of the 
cgo-conception to children, wife, etc., is to be taken in a figurative 
sense because the relation is one of possession (i.e., the relation 
between the self on the one hand and wife and children, etc., on 
the other can be denoted by ‘ mine ’)• Hence that is the figura- 
tive self (gaunatma). The transference of the ego conception 
(aham karta) to (objects) commencing with the body up to (and 
inculding) the ‘ this ’ aspect (or the objective counterpart) of the 
ego-notion is to be regarded as due to error, because of the super- 
imposition of the (real) self on the non-self. Hence that is the 
illusory self (mithyatma). But when both of them are eliminated 
by the knowledge of the primary (mukhya) and eternal (para- 
martha) self and the sublation of the notions of children and body. 


3T«nN -The case for vidhi is again urged on 

the ground that in the Vedanta internal means should he enjoined as 
external means are enjoined in the Purvamimamsa. Action is either 
bodily or vocal or mental and of these Jaimini has.elahorately discussed 
the first two' and the third which is 'mental relating to meditation is 
enjoined by Badardyar^a. This is controverted by Padmapada. 



332 PA^fCAPADIKA OF PADMAPADA [XVII. 57 

etc., grounded therein (f.e., having the real self as their substratum) 
following, scriptural injunctions enjoining action and bodily 
enjoyments (both) depending as they do upon their postulation 
{viz., of the figurative and the illusory self) would at no time 
(thereafter) arise, because of the disappearance of the cause. 

58. Emphasizing this very point it is stated that [‘ the atman 
is to be sought after It is only before the rise of the knowledge 
of the oneness of the self with Brahman which is characterised 
by the total riddance of transmigratory existence and which is 
expounded in the text beginning with (the phrase) ‘ That is to be 
sought after’, that the inner consciousness is misconceived to 
be the cogniser. But when the knowledge of its real nature is 
restored like the forgotten gold (necklace), then that very self 
which had been (falsely) regarded as the agent in (the act of) 
cognition attains freedom from the evils of transmigratory life. 
Hence whence could there be agency and enjoyment for the self? 

If the ordinary usage of expressions like ‘I am the knowing 
subject, ’ etc., beginning with the ‘ I ’ is based on mere assumption, 
the question is how can any validity be ascribed to it at present 
(i.e., in the empirical sphere) ? Meeting this objection it is said 
“ As the notion of atman” being the body (is assumed by you to 
be valid in the empirical sphere).*® To explain just as in the 
body the relation of the ego-notion of the individual self, which 
is quite distinct from it (vfe., the body) is, though fancied the 
cause of the knowledge as it appears in so for as the activities 
pertaining to ordinary worldly transactions, and also of scriptural 
injunctions depending as they do on its connection (i.e., of the 
fancied identity-relation of the self with the body) so also this {i.e., 
the ordinary source of knowledge like perception, inference, etc.) 
though assumed, must be held valid until the real nature of the 
transcendental self is apprehended because it gives rise to indubit- 
able knowledge and there is not the perception of its sublation. 

Here ends the Ninth Varmka of the Paficapadika 

Thus is concluded Sri Padmapadacarya's 
Pancapadika on the Bhasya of 
Sri Szmkarac&rya, comprising 
Vedanta Sittras I-IV 


*® In concluding the bhajya on the fourth sOtra ^amkara quotes 
three stanzas (see the co«j/>ecto) attributed to. one Sundara-pa^dya. 



CONSPECTUS 
FIRST VARNAKA 

(N.B. References are to the Edition, Vizianagaram Sanskrit Series 1891.) 

I Section 

From to ^ vm i 

Topic , — Deals with the Bhasya on illusion in general. 

The objection that the Bhasya on illusion between the 
self and not-self being outside the purview of the Sutra does 
not merit commentation is met. 

Paragraphs,— ■ 


1. 

From 

to 


2. 

5 5 


55 

i 

3. 

55 


55 

l 

4. 

55 

m] 

55 


5. 

11 Section 

55 


55 

^1% JT 1 


From ^3 =^ i 

Topic . — The second objection that the lack of preliminary bene- 
diction in the Bhasya is against accepted tradition is met. 

Paragraphs . — 

6. From ^ to srq# i 

7. 5, 

111 Section 

From to i 

Topic . — Now begins PadmapMa’s comment on the section of 
Bhasya relating to the opposition between atman and anatman, 
i.e., the reciprocal superimposition of the substrates dharmins. 

Pratfka . — ■ 

Paragraphs . — 

8 . From to i 

9. ,, I 

Note . — Portions of the Bha§ya not commented upon but subsumed under the 
particular section are enclosed within brackets. 

22 



334 


pangapAdikA of padmapAda 

IV Section , 

From to g=?R I 

Topic. — Defends thQ prima facie view — purvapaksa, against the 
probability of Illusion — adhyasa, between the attributes of 
the self and the not-selt— dharmadhyasa. Here ends the 
purvapaksa on adhyasa. 

Pratika . — 

cf^FWirf^r gcTibi;. 

^rs;irl'5TT 

Paragraphs . — 

10. From ct^ffOTFUf^ to SVTWJTftrn 1 

11. „ d-fl['T4^vr 

12. „ stK3Ti^[ HTO „ 1 ^ ^ 

V Section 

From ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ 

Topic . — Comment on a few of the words in the Bhasya establishing 
Illusion. This is a reply to the purvapaksa on the basis that 
the adhyasa is beginningless— naisargika, 

Pratika . — 

3T«?rW, 

ITfE^ITfmRraTr; ?t^rart 
at^lir^ Tfir^fiTf% aiq i 

Paragraphs . — 

13. From to i 

14 . „ ?i?rra% : „ sissini; i 

15. ,, ( 

VI Section 

From W g?r: to T i 

Topic . — Here is considered the apparent contradiction in des- 
cribing the adhyasa in question as both Naisargika and mithya- 
jnananimitta. What follows is only an amplification of what 
has gone before. 

Paragraph . — 

16. From ^«r g^l: 


to sr I 



CONSPECTUS 


335 


VII ' Section \ 

From to 

Topic . — Establishes that the two-fold adhyasa (dharmi and 
dharma) is a matter of common human experience and on 
the ground that adhyasa does not taint the substratum 
adhisthana, the utility of Vedanta is shown. 

Paragraphs,— 

17. From to i 

18. ,, ^ ,, I 

VIII Section 

From ^rf ; to \ 

Tpp/c.— This points out the necessity in the present case for defining 
adhyasa and showing its probability as well, before proceeding 
to its establishment. 

Paragraphs . — 


19. 

From 


to 


20. 

If 


11 


21. 

ff 


11 


22. 

f f 


11 


IX Section 

From 


to 



Topic . — Explanation of the definition of adhyasa. 

Pratlka . — 

3Tif, €TS3Tq«?rrei i ( 5 = 5 ^ 3)— 1 
Paragraphs — 

23. From to t?? 

24. „ 

X Section 

From 3Tqq arrf to s^rrwtf 

Topic . — Statement of objection against the definition of Super- 
imposition by the akhyativadins — the Prabhakara School of 
Purvamimamsa ; and setting forth of the akhyati view. 

Paragraphs . — 

25. From 3Tq^ 3TTf to g'cq^SfF: 

26. „ ffl ,, 



336 


pancapAdika of padmapada 


XI Section 

From to 

To/>ic.— Refutation of akhyativada by the Naiyayika Anyatha- 
khyativadin. 

Paragraphs . — 


27. From 


to 


28. „ 


9 ) 


28. „ 

?riT^ 

99 


30. „ 


9 9 

3T«3TI?r: 


Xll Section 

From 515%^ to 3t^ra|icT. 

ro/Jic.— Rebuttal of anyathakhyati and of atmakhyati by the 
akhyativadin. 

Paragraphs . — 


31. 

From 


to ^ ?TPI, 

32. 

99 



33. 

99 

m 

„ atfralcT 

34. 

9 9 



35. 

99 

s?r: 

„ rifk sTEura: 

36. 

99 

?Tg F%fiTT% 


[ Section 




From 


to 

Topic.— 

-Substantiation of anirvacamyakhyMi. 

Paragraphs . — 



37. 

From 


to 4:5[?ftq5TI4PPJ 

38. 

99 


,, fIT5T 51^341% 

39. 

, f 1 ... 


„ i4P4mRi?i; 

40. 

99 

mvTsitcftq 


::: ;41. 

99 ' 

3T#f ^ 

„ 3(«n4^5r 3if4TW: 

7:^2. 

99 



43. 




Section 




From 

^ 5fr S3T[q^T%^ 

to 51 


Topic . — Objection that the definition of Illusion does not apply 
to the dream illustration is met. 



CONSPECTUS 


337 


Paragraphs — 

44. From ?r5 5T to 

46. ,, 

46. „ 3Tq^> 

47. ,, WT ?TT: „ Jf 

48. ,, ?i: g^: „ 

XV Section 

From Wit to ffw 

Topic. — Conclusion that the definition of Illusion is immaculate 
and is not open to the further objection that it is overperva- 
sive in names. Note that this objection is based on the ambi- 
guity of the word adhyasa as used in Advaita. See Samkara on 
Vedanta Sutra III. iii. 9. 

Paragraphs . — 

49. From wff to 3 

50. ,, 

51. „ wwifi; „ aiqwiw 

XVI Section 

From W to 

Topic. — Explanation of the definition of superimposition as com- 
prehending atmakhyati, anyathakhyati, and akhyati and 
asatkhyati. 

Pratika . — 

WT i 3 ww rwqtiw- 

q^5qq;?q5TFFiw5trw ?iw 1 wqsriN 3 aj^qgirk^rwwr w 

11 

Paragraphs . — 

52 . From W to 

53. „ ,, eigqw: 

54. „ 3i;% g ,, 3Ti=5f^tW 

55. ,, wlwfMT 3 „ fwrr^snw; 

XVII Section 

From ww to WSTRW nrwFTWfqiniw: I 

Topic. — From the use of the word ‘paratra’ in the definition of 
superimposition the asatkhyativada of the Madhyamika School 
of Buddhists is refuted. It is also maintained that there is 



338 


pancapAdika of padmapada 

no illusion without a real ground and that even the so-called 
illusory object cannot be wholly unreal. 

Paragraphs . — 

56 . From to 

57 . ,, ^4 

58. „ 3TT% =? „ 

59. „ arw „ 

XVIII Section 

From ^3 to 

Topic. — Attribution of asatkhyati view to siddhanta by the nihilist, 
is refuted. 

Paragraphs . — 

60. From to 3T?IW’aT!i:r¥^9t 

61. ,, q-isrk^ir ,, q-t;tr% 

XIX Section 

From to 

Topic . — The object of using the two words ‘Smrtirupa’ and ‘purva- 
drstavabhasa’ is explained. 

Paragraphs . — 

62. From ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ to 

63. ,, 5T%4 cUfti: 

XX. Section 

From rr«rr ^ 

Topic . — Elucidation of the two illustrations of shell-silver and 
double-moon given in the Bhasya and of their respective signi- 
ficance to Advaita. Here is clinching of the matter by refer- 
ence to common experience. 

Pratika . — 

fiair ai% sigiT^: — gr%5^r fl ^ f|cfi?r 

Paragraphs . — 

64. From rt*TI ^1% to 

65. „ Hgsrgrw „ 

66. „ ?rw 



to fl% ^#4 


CONSPECTUS 


339 


XXI Section ■ ■ /. - v : ; 

' From ■ to ^ 

Topic,— Objection to the superimposition of non-Mnian on atman 
is stated and answered. Objection— atman is partless and 
as such there is the absence of particularity being 

relationless Mman is void of all blemish — ; it is of the 
very essence of knowledge— and is eternal. The super- 
imposition of one object on another is intelligible ; the super- 
imposition of anatman on atman is not. 

Objection met: nescience is itself the blemish; 

the parts are its creation and they are obscured by nescience; 
the psychosis t%flR is non-eternal; hence the superimpo- 
sition of non-atman on atman is feasible. 


Paragraphs , — 

67 . From to 


68. 




69. 

n 



70. 



„ arvgqrrrfficjrq; . 

71. 

n 


„ 

72. 

n 


„ 

XXII Section 




From 

g?r»Ti=g>T 



Topic . — Establishment of the possibility of superimposition of non- 
atman on atman by rebutting the prima facie view that 

identity conveyed in the expression ‘l am man’ ^rg^sT; is only 
figurative and not illusory. 

Paragraphs.— 


73. 

From 

^4 5 ^; 

to 

74. 




75. 

11 



76. 

11 

W^. 3 ^: 


77. 

11 



78. 

11 



79. 

11 



80 . 

11 

Rit 

,, Jtm: 

81. 

11 

44^ trq 



(End of Laksana Bhasya) 


340 


PAS-CAPADIKA of padmapAda 


XXIIl Section 

From to ?r %T%. 

Topic.— Th& improbability of superimposition on what is not 
objective and has no parts; the answer thereto based upon 
the fact of self-consciousness. 

Pratika.— 

fsiR5if«r?rR?r^ir =4 

Paragraphs . — 

82. From ^PT to m^cT53TWlf%f^ 

83. „ „ ^4141 

84. „ q-% 1 % 

XXTV. Section 

From >rg to 5 ^ 

Topic. — Prabhakara’s view that ego-notion 3Tf^R: is not to be 
identified with the ‘this’ notion ![^45r:, /.e., that the ego-itself 
is atman. 

Paragraphs . — 

86 . From fig to arg^ff'^l^cr 

86. ,, Hg gii 

87. „ I'cTl'cRq: „ 

XXV Section 

From to HcWITWRcrs^ 



Topic . — Refutation of the doctrine of Prabhakara and the affirm- 
ation of the view that atman is self-luminous and distinct from 
the ego. 

Paragraphs . — 

88 . From 3^^ to ^a^IT^f^q-Rf^rsr^fn; 

89. ,, ,, 

90. „ „ 3T¥5qjT5=c(5qq; 

91. „ wTssmti^r „ 

92. ,, „ JT 

93. „ ,, 

94. „ 



CONSPECTUS 


341 


XXVI. Section 

^ ^ to ^iT^%irr 

Topic . — The ego-notion 3 t^ its constituents, its nature, 

proofs in its support, its effects, and the reason why it is not 
manifest in sleep are dealt with. 

Paragraphs.— 

95. From to 3Rr%f^?Tf 

96. „ ^l: ,, ftI9I 

97. „ JT %4 ,, ^lf|i%Tri 


XXVII Section 

From ^4 gJT; to nr# 

Topic . — On the analogy of the illusoriness of the red-crystal, the 
illusory character of the ego — a complex of atman and the 
internal organ is demonstrated. 


Paragraphs . — 

98, From 45«f gp: 

99, ,, m 

100 . ,, 


to 

„ nsri^nsnnr^ 


XXVIII Section 

From ffW to rirs:%% 

Topic . — The ‘this’ in the ego (sTf'-BFf) is illumined by the ‘not- 
this’ part of the ego. By usage (sralr%g) the ego is identified 
with atman, or the ‘not-this’ by its characteristic 

feature ( 55 ^ 01 ^:) being illumined by the ‘not-this’ 

(aiqrniR) it is of the ‘this’ nature (^#^). As such the 
double nature of the ego is evident. Again from the illustra- 
tion of the image and the proto-type it is pointed out that 
the ‘not-this’ is identical with Brahman. 


Paragraphs — 

101. From 

102. „ 3T?rtr^ 

103. „ qcS'f: 


to nin^rq^nrRSBr mnn: 


XXIX Section 

From ^ sn: to f| ni 

Topic . — Points out the identity of the image and the proto-type in 
contradistinction to what obtains in shell-silver. The ego- 
complex in this respect is not parallel to the shell-silver since 
it is not sublated entirely. 



342 


PA:tCAPADIKA OF PADMAPADA 


Paragraphs.— 


104 . From 4;^ 

105. ,, 

106. „ 

107. „ aT5rif 

108. „ ^5 

109. „ 

no. „ 

111 . ,, 


to 

„ fr =sr gsTT 
„ qr?iim|g3[i% 

„ 5E«tcR^n%4<l 
„ nfTwrcT 
„ At 


XXX Section 

From ?itrw to ^^TT%^TfT:p?r 

Topic . — It is contended that if the individual soul is regarded as 
the reflection of Brahman it should be insentient like all reflect- 
tions in the world and that like all the proto-types, 
Brahman should be error-ridden and not be the locus of the 
knowledge that dispels ignorance. It is shown that no such 
contingency arises. It is further pointed out that the rope- 
serpent illustration met with in Sastraic works is intended to 
bring home the fact that there is a second kind of illusion, viz., 
nirupadhikabhrama. The superimposition of the ego-notion on 
atman is not mediated through the mental mode i.e., 

not through the modification of the internal sense (3?'cl:q)T;<Jr), 
in other words it is direct-nirupadhika. 

Paragraphs . — 

112. From to (?T%) 

113. „ 

114. Hgtrw „ 


XXXI Section 

From fig TfJiTPT to aigTRc^rg 

Topic . — What is determined here is — 

(i) that atman though in reality is unrelated appears as 
if related through upadhi like pot-ether, 

(ii) that atman, as a matter of fact, is not established on 
the strength of the several illustrations given, viz., the red 
crystal, the mirror-image, the rope-serpent and pot-ether, 
but is established on the strength of the Scriptures, reasoning, 

- and intuition, the illustrations serving only to dispel the notion 
of improbability regarding the existence of atman, i.e., that 
which is pure, non-distinct from Brahman, etc. 




COISSPECTUS , ■■ 343 


ThQ phrase is explained as 

The vyavahara or empirical activity of atman 
is tenable only in its complex aspect, ego-sense. The 
that there exists the fallacy of mutual dependence 
between fitness for empirical activity and superimposition is 
met by the statement that the two are beginningless — anMi. 

Paragraphs . — 

115 . From af cr^lfq to 

116. „ 

117. „ ewq; „ 

118. „ 3T?rrr^^5T ^xRc^'ra: 

Prakaranas XXIV to XXXI are an exposition of the 
Bhasya pointing to the knowability of the 

self, Le., in self-consciousness. 


XXXIl Section 

From fr%#^fTW ^ 

■Topic . — Here is explained the Pratikarmavyavastha. Though atman 
is all-prevading its capacity to cognise is in conformity with 
the order and regularity immanent in the world. It is not 
hap-hazard. This is possible because atman is conditioned 
by the internal organ. This paragraph further purports to 
explain how the self can be knower, i.e., agent in knowing, 
the process of knowing, etc. 

Paragraphs . — 

119. From to 

120 . „ 

121. „ gsr =st „ 


XXXIII Section 

From fl3 Jfiarf^l^^-qif^ to RSHcft 

Topic.— (j) From the statement ^53Trqrrt:r%r%gB[ 

it is urged that the object and cognition becoming 
identical, there is affinity with the vijnanavada of Buddhistic 
Philosophy. The Siddhantin points out that the two are poles 
asunder, since the one (object) varies while the other (cognition) 
is constant. 


(ii) Rebutting the doctrine of momentariness the eternal 
nature of knowledge is demonstrated. 

(iii) Practical efficiency is proved to be possible without 
the presupposition of moraentariness. 


344 


■ : ' FAf^CAPADIKA OF PADMAPADA ^ 

(iv) Since the object is the indicator ( 021 ^^) of 

consciousness it is immediately perceived; hence it is argued 
that the inferentially cognised also should be of a immediate 
perception. This -is repudiated. 

Paragraphs . — 


122 . 

From 


to 


123. 



>> 


124. 

>> 


>9 


125. 



>> 


126. 



>> 


127. 


m 3 ( 7 -%^ 

9} 


00 


mm 

>> 


129. 

>9 


» 


130. 



>9 

srsFT 3FT^?*ir 

131. 

3 > 

m 

99 


132. 

>> 

3?«r *1# 

99 


133. 



*99 


134. 



99 


XXXIV 

From 

3Tf 

to 


Topic, — Here PP. comments on 

the Bhasya, “ 

Paragraphs . — 
136. From 


to 


XXXV Section 

From 


to 

3T«?r6SI4I!nT; 


rn/?/c‘. —Here PP. comments on the Bhasya, n^mrT?nT%%: 

Fratfka. 

Paragraph . — 

136. From 1%^ to 

XXXVI Section 

From ^ to 

Topic,— Here PP. comments on the Bhasya beginning with 
^ to the end of On the analogy of 

the common notion that the akisa is blue, etc., though it is not 
presented, the need for objective presentation is denied in the 
case of the ground of superimposition. 



CONSPECTUS 


345 



Pratlka — 

3T3R%sfi7 5imtr t tpJTRiS:: ITc^T^lRH^R- 

JrTcJTI«?rT?i: I 
Paragraph.— 

137. From sTg^fJR^TO^iTRto ft«rT^55fr%?rR: 

XXXVII Section 

From Rg to JTRfr 

Topic, — Here PP. comments on the Bhasya beginning with 
^fT# to the end of ^rsnmnqr ^ What is rendered 

explicit is that nescience, Le,, its aspect as a projecting entity 
is the cause of the manifold ills of life ; and that the qualities 
of the superimposed object do not in the least affect the sub- 
strate. 

Pratlka , — 

qrw^aT 3Tr%%fd i crfJ%%iT 

^^TRWR'JT r^R|; 1 ?fR) Jf5r tfwn goR 

^TSgFI^oilf^ g I 

Paragraph . — 

138. From ^ to 

139. „ crf5=l^^ ,, 

140. „ rM „ IRrT 

xxxvm Section 

From g^rlRg. to SlR^ISR'^r ^Rl 

Topic . — Superimposition of the non-self on the self is established 
on the basis of inference. The knowledge of things through 
praraanas is not possible to a knowing agent — pramata, without 
the presupposition of adhyasa. 

The following Bhasya is commented upon : — 

Pratlka . — 

3?R?rR2rBT5JiRrfiR'nT?r^^rRra twRaiiJr- 

5Ji?§fTT: sn%?;i Ir'^'Tr^ trfrif:, ^ ifRsrRRHf^R^q-Tnor. 

g^TR?iRfl:'5r^ir'3j sriihr s^n^ifor — 

3?tBBTWBR^Tt?Rr 5WIlRrg'Tq#l SWTO5lfr?igqq%: — 

JT iiF^mgqi^R ^iRSRirRi^i 

=^R«5fRiRTn'%5?r'^|^ ; q- %cf%- 

f^r4i%m?rR r^iirtcJFT: 5WigRgqq?i!r ; ^ wgRFScR'n' swr- 

JUraiTR ; rf^iRR^iwf^jrpoBR HR^T^rR JRRrn%, =^r) i 


346 


PANCAPADIKA OF PADMAPADA 


Paragraphs.- 


141. 

From 


to 

142. 

>9 

3^: 

„ 3Tr%q; 

143. 

>> 

/ 

„ SfflR 

144. 

■■ ' 3? 

mx 

,/ gtsfftfiiTfTffiwffn'^fff 

145. 

3> 


„ fffc^I%^ffff: 

146. 

' 99 \ 

m- 

„ trasi%: 

147. 

>> 

ft 



XXXIX Section ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ 

From to ?riTW ?ra 

Topic . — Even the behaviour of discerning men is the outcome of 
nescience. From the effect the cause is inferred. 


Pratika.— • ^ ^ - ' 

^ 1 %, stiff ffffi =ff 5 

jjsrr ^«fr?rff€i qr f'fiiqfiixgcruff qffri%gnR¥r?ff, 

fRfftjoig^qifaifqtsvff ff stc^fltg^i^rff^ff ; g^t stfir 5gcq?ti%Tti: 
^??:g1ffT^r^ff: ?srfffi?rff^i[iff: ffstff fiffi fffgq^ifftq^ 

afff affffsff, 3iff: ffififf: g^qmi stTtwaTiffsfffffit: i) 

q^r^Iffr ^ afffsTsfffffqigiq): (gi?ff?:) acffsjttRESffffftt:: 1 ffcffwi'ff- 
^^qfffTrffiffPr gOT<Jir ?rff 

(Rr^ffff) I 

Paragraphs . — 

148. From to fffft^r g’®: 

149. „ ffg q^igwRi^ „ ffff: ffniffqtfff 

150. „ ffg „ fffftff fiff 


XL Section 






From T^ff ffiffff: to qt:^raff5fff 3TR!%ffff ?fff 

7o/)/c.— Because atman is distinct from the body, doubt is raised 
that activity enjoined by the scriptures is not based on super- 
imposition though empirical activity presupposes it. 

Pratika . — ^ 

5 3Rrfi?r ff^ggqjtO ff[fff%ffrssRff: 

uBi^ff I 




CONSPECTUS 


347 


Paragraphs.— 
151. From 


to 3Tr5ii^^ fifr 

„ 4tT4n'Cl4I^ 


152. 

153. ,, ^r4t ^ 

164. „ ^ffir^Rg 

155. „ r%RlT^ 

XLI Section 

Topic . — The doubt raised in the previous section is cleared. 
Prattka . — 

cT^flf^ ^ 3T5r^3Tr?jgft^ aTqcrsTll^r^'fl^ arg^TR'ictT- 

3n'%5Bft; arq^-^f'd, arg'Ffmi^t ; 5JT^ ?f«rFg?fRtT- 

SI^^JTR iFTTW 3Tf4?nff|^3Tc4 dmfl — “ STIfRfr 

5rrir(03TRJTt% 


Paragraphs . — 

156. From rfSTTr^ ?T 

157. „ 5n^=^ 


158. 

XLIl Section 




to 

„ 3Ti%rRii:'??rc4i3. 


From tl# 3?«3TrogW2n5. to 

Topic . — The definition of superimposition as between self and 
not-self stated above is supported by reference to mediated 
adhyasa. 

Pratika . — 

3I^I#F ?twr^%^ds:(5:i^^(ll- I riW^TT— (pr^T5f!% 

^r), '3T^q' f%^; %’)% 1 

g«n ‘^Tf, ‘fesiw’ 

®W^’W %l% I d«rT — II^sFTRjfiq: — IJ??:, 4;m:, 3?f%- 

T?T1% 1 

Paragraphs , — 

159. From 3T«JlT?rer5[igj^ to S^T^lRTkl^^lfT 

160. „ Jfs ^ g^^isnt5f , „ 

161. „ 3PFfr^4«r „ 


34B 


PAtCAPADIKA'OF PADMAPADA ; ; / ' 

XLIII Section ' 

To^/c.-— The exposition of the mutual superimposition of the 
internal sense etc*, and the self Illustrations 

of the superimposition of attributes, were given in the 

Bhasya beginning with and ending in 

mmiK y: 

Here are given examples of the mutual superimposition 

of substrates--~’4TR^p3|i^. 

■■ PratJka.— 

Paragraphs.— 

162. From to 

163. „ cr „ >i ft 

164. ,, TTf ,, ^Rf?cT 


XLIV, Section ,, 

From to ^ 

Topic . — Conclusion of the Bhasya on superimposition to which, 
to start with, objection was taken and which was met by defining 
it and proving its existence by adducing pertinent pramanas. 

Pratfka . — 
it4 


Paragraphs . — 


165. From : 

166. „ ?rg 

167. ,, R[5:?rTR^R^qr ?T% 


to ^T=RTr4^^RF«T: 


XLV Section 

From to mm: 

Topic . — It is argued that since nescience is not as a matter of fact 
destroyed by the knowledge of the distinction between the 
self and the body such knowledge is valueless. This is not 
by pointing out that though the differentiating knowledge is 
incapable of eradicating nescience the final knowledge of 
Brahman (which is enveloped by ajnana) arising from the 


CONSPECTUS 


349 


mahavakya is competent to bring about its destruction. The 
fruit of Brahman-knowledge is also indicated here. 

Pratika — 

3TR¥JP%) I 
Paragraphs . — 

168. From to 3Tr^^4fr 

169. „ ,, arf^^r 

170. „ JfT3T 1%^^: 

XLVI Section 

From m to tr^i^ i 

Topic.— It was shown that the fruition of Vedantic inquiry was 
the eradication of the source of evil, viz., nescience but then 
the Scripture declares that the attainment of bliss is the fruition. 
How is it, asks the purvapaksin, that the Bhasyakara omits 
to mention the attainment of bliss as the fruit of inquiry ? If it be 
urged that the eradication of evil also finds a place in the 
scripture as witness , etc., then he should have 

mentioned both as constituting the end of Vedantic inquiry. 

The objection is met thus; From the statement of the 
subject-matter of Vedantic inquiry, viz., knowledge of the 
unity of the individual self with the supreme, the fruit of bliss 
is as good as stated, for the unity of the self and bliss are identi- 
cal. Hence it need not find a separate mention. But since 
the eradication of evil is outside the content— cognition of 
identity— though its knowledge supervenes that of identity 
the Bhasyakara makes an express statement of it and has 
omitted to specify the attainment of bliss as the phala. 


Paragraphs , — 

171 • From 


to 


172. 



>? 


173. 




risn 

174. 



>y 

drqilSRfHqft 

175. 



9> 


176. 

>> 


» 


177. 



p> 


178. 

>> 


' pp 



350 . 


PAtCAPADIKA OF PADMAPADA 


XL¥II .Section , , ' . , 

From ?fff # 

It is eDongh, says the purvapaksin, if is used 

and there is no need for the insertion of the phrase 
for as soon as jnana arises (f%^r) the knower gets into relation 
with jnana both in its aspect as an object and as something 
known or in other words we have the container-eontained 
relation and the relation of awareness flfddf. 

Hence i.e.y ‘for obtaining’ is redundant. 

The answer is that this rule applies to cases of perception 
in general but not in the case of Brahman. The mere rise of 
Brahma-knowledge does not eflfect the eradication of evil — 
but it is effected by pratistha —stabilisation, which means 
that both the final psychosis and Brahman should 

simultaneously become manifest And the pratistha 

is secured by reflection. As such what is intended to be 
expounded here is the Vidya-Pratistha and not merely 
the rise of Jnana. Hence the appropriateness of the word 
‘pratipatti’. 

Paragraphs.— 

179. From ^ % !W?If 

180. „ 3T?r 

181. „ 

182. „ cTcT: 

XLVIII Section 

From to ff 

Topic.— It is pointed out that the knowledge of identity between 
atman and Brahman is on a par with the knowledge of the 
distinction between the body and atman and because the latter 
knowledge is not seen to sublate the motions of egoity, etc., the 
former also is in the same predicament. This objection does 
not hold; for it is only the knowledge of the identity which 
is positive and not difference which is negative that destroys 
the notions of agency, etc. Mere intellectual conviction does 
not bring about the desired end. 

Paragraphs . — 

183. From JrsqRqqRft^rqf^q^: to 

184. „ ^ „ 9Tgqq5fm% 


to 


fqgrrqfaqtiq 



CONSPECTUS 


351 


XLIX Section- 

From to 

Topic. — ¥mlt is found with the statement that air Ved antic texts 
expound the knowledge of Brahman since there are texts en- 
joining meditation on Brahman. The Siddhantin says that all 
texts point to the undifferentiated Brahman only. The medita- 
tion texts are contextual The knowledge of the quali- 

fied Brahman is indispensable for the knowledge of the un- 
qualified Brahman and it is as such that meditation on the 
qualified Brahman is enjoined. The process of attaining the 
pure Brahman is by first ascribing qualities to it and then 
sublating them; cf., (/.c., Brahman) 

srqwd. The sublation can only be of something that is known. 
Here there exists no fault. 

Pratika . — 

Paragraphs . — 

185. From ^ to 551%^ 

186. „ afW 

L Section 

From to 

Topic . — Though it may be admitted that there is nothing incon- 
sistent in prescribing meditation on the qualified Brahman for 
the attainment of the knowledge of identity between atman 
and Brahman, how is it consistent to enjoin meditation on 
‘Breath — praija’, etc., which are insentient? asks the purva- 
paksin. The answer is that even the texts on pranopasana 
do not conflict with those on the undifferentiated Brahman 
since meditation on praija (Samvargavidya) leads to the region 
Hiranyagarbha and therefrom to Brahman-realisation. 

Pratika . — 

qqi =qFqTr^: ^?rrtR^tfrnroRft 

5t?[^T^«qi5Fr: I 

Paragraphs . — 

187. From 3m^iqfRrqR;qfq to 

188. „ W „ ^FrRR^TlilHRlF 



352 


PAtCAPADI.K,A OF PADMAPADA 


LI, Section/ 

From 331^ ^ to 

Topic ,: — The objection is that the Bhasyakara has stated the subject- 
matter and the purpose of Vedantic study — items not found in 
the sutra. The reply is that though not expressly stated in 
the aphorism they are derived from presumptive reasoning— 
arthapatti— hence the comment 

Fmtfka,— 

Paragraphs,— , 

189 . From 33 ^?% to 

190. ,, 33lc^r?r?^i ,, 

191. 




VARljIAKA 11 

I Segtion 

From T%t^ to 3?¥?TrferqBis?rfmrwf%f3 

Topic . — As the purvamimamsa of Jaimini has traversed the whole 
range of the Veda, the objection says, that Badarayana need 
not have composed the Vedanta Sutras separately, with the 
object of inquiring into the nature of Brahman. 

Paragraphs.— 

1. From to 

IT Section 

From ®r5r to 

Topic . — A school of Vedantins admitting the mandatory character 
of the Veda as a whole justify the separate composition of the 
Vedanta Sutras. They point out that the Saktu-nyaya also 
does not apply, for the purified atman does not serve as an 
instrumental agent in effecting something that is coveted. 

Paragraphs.— 


3. 

From 


to 

4, 




5. 

>> 

cfqifcr 


6. 


airf: — STRJIiq 


7. 

>> 

rrff 

„ 5T ^nrTsqfil^IWttiq: 


III Section 

From to WTfl’iai 

Topic . — What this section means is that even when the emphasis 
is on the object (accusative) in an injunction the imperative 
import is not absent. In the present case the carrying out of 
the mandate also serves a definite purpose, viz., the removal 
of nescience. 

Paragraphs . — 

8 . From to n'cfsq’ 

•9. 

IV Section 

From srqt to 

Topic . — A class of critics justify the commencement of the Sastra 
on a different ground. Brahman can become the content of 
perception being an existing entity and not of Veda which 



354 


pascapAdikA of PADMAPADA 


enjoins action ; but because Brahman is a transcendental Being 
perception, etc., have no scope. Therefore the conclusion arises 
that the inquiry into the meaning of the Veda closes with the 
Samkarsa kapda of Jaimini and in consequence Brahman 
remains unestablished by any pramana. Hence to refute such 
a view and to show that the Vedanta also is related to action 
this inquiry into its meaning is undertaken by Badarayana. 

■ , Paragraphs,— ■. 

10. From to fdii; 

11 . ,, 

V Section 

From ■ to 

Topic. — The mimamsaka who maintains that the sastra need not 
be begun, in contradistinction to the two Vedantins who on 
different grounds advocate its commencement, avers that no 
additional problem arises which would justify the undertaking 
of the Uttaramimamsa. 

Paragraphs,— ■ ■ ■ . ■ 

: 12. 'From:'^#^^ •• . ■ to, 

" 18./,' 

15. 

VI Section 

.From ' m . '^to nM " : 

rop/r.— In answer to the critic who contends that the Vedan 
aphorisms are a superfluity, a third critic says that the Vedantic 
. . texts not only reveal an existent object but also ^ enjoin ■ the 
knowledge of that object as 'a thing to be undertaken, and that 
though the mandate (jnana-vidhi) is not found in them it has 
to be understood. 

Paragraphs . — 

16. From to mm 

17. ,, cf^ ,, T%!%: 

,VII Section 

From 1% 5fnT% to 

Topic.— The anarambbavadin rejoins that no injunction is possible 
of postulation and that the analogy of understanding a vidhi 
(Vidhikalpana) in the case of offering of the kneaded flour 
to the sun is inappliable. 


CONSPECTUS 


355 


Paragraphs . — 

18 . From 1% mm to 

19. ,, 

20 , ,, 

Vin Section . ■ ' . ’ ' 

From ^«TTTT T[^g to 

Topic . — Mere terminations like 'tavya’ cannot be postulated; we 
must premise the roots along with them and construe the text 
under consideration thus—- 5S5cF®2F or gut 

such construing is inappropriate in as much as the inert nature 
of the universe cannot be eradicated thereby. As for jhana- 
vidhi or injunction of knowledge in its logical sense it is pur- 
poseless since the knowledge of the Vedic texts arises at the 
time of learning to recite them. This is the view-point of the 
anarambhavadin. 

Paragraphs . — 

21. From ^rsrifcf to 

22. „ 9T«r f tcfs^r: „ 


IX Section 

From g^: ^§s?rcFTr to 

Topic . — The upholder of the UttaramTmamsa sastra argues that 
the knowledge arising when chanting the Veda is distinct from 
that which leads to liberation and is therefore enjoined in the 
Vidhi — ‘idam sarvam yadayamatma jnatavyah’. He advances 
‘mantra’ in point which yields one sense at the time of chant- 
ing and another when uttered at a sacrifice, useful in the gene- 
ration of apurva or transcendental result, for the rule is that 
for securing apurva the meaning of the mantra should be 
remembered by actually uttering the mantra 


The anarambhavadin rebuts this view. 


Paragraphs . — 

23. From g^T: 

24. „ JigJT^g 

26. „ 3t?3?Ts|FfHf 


26 . 


to 





356 


pascapAdikA of PADMAPADA 


X Section , 

From to %% wm- 

Topic— The anarambhavadin points out that if vidhi is accepted 
in the texts like Hdam sarvam, etc.’, the same sentence will 
have to convey two meanings, one opposed to the other. The 
arambhavadin disagreeing with him advances the analogy of 
mantras which in his view bear a double sense. Likewise he 
instances gunakarmas or subsidiary acts where also it is no 
blemish for a single sentence to denote two senses. The 
anarambhavadin rejects both as being untenable. 

ArambhavMin— the contingency of double sense can be 
avoided by splitting up the sentence into two, 
which merely denotes the object and which is the in- 

junction of knowledge. 

AnarambhavMin— Tf the sentence is thus cut up it loses 
all validity. 

Arambhavadin, brings in the analogy and laudatory sen- 
■■ tences. , 

Anarambhavadin.— They are only auxiliaries to vidhi 
and have no meaning of their own ; this is the mimamsa view. 

Paragraphs , — 

From to fR 

28. „ 

29. ,, 3Tsrrlfqf?[q^iirfr%^ „ 

XI Section 

From m to |#r mm 

Topic, — The arambhavadin varies his argument and says that 
liberation does not result from mere verbal knowledge but 
from intuition — aparoksya, and that knowledge— jnana should 
be enjoined in order that aparoksya may result. The opponent 
answers that such jhana is indeterminate and as such cannot 
be the content of a vidhi and he also refutes the view that 
vidhi is in relation to knowledge-series, jhanasamtana. 

Paragraphs , — 

30. From m to 

81. „ „ f iqwTO 

32. „ 

XII Section 

From to 

Topic.— The arambhavadin to substantiate his contention has 
pointed out the analogy of (i) a water-course which serve 




CONSPECTUS 


357 


the doiiMe purpose of irrigation and quenching one’s thirst ; 
(ii) statements relating to the fore-sacrifies such as prayajas 
which denote the order of sacrifices as well as the res- 
pective padarthas; (iii) the organ of sight which revealing 
colour also reveals substance. The anarambhavadin rejects 
all these as besides the point. 

Paragraphs ^ — 

33. From to 

34. 

35. ^cg^r; ,, 

XIII Section 

From to 

Topic,— ^ Let not the sentence Mdam sarvani, etc.’, says the 
arambhavMin, “ denote its sense — prameya, let it denote only 
the injunction, the former being ascertained from presumptive 
evidence ‘srutyarthapatti’.” The rejoinder is that this violates 
all rules of interpretation. To abandon what the sentence 
actually gives, v/^., the world pervasion of atman— prameya, 
and to construe it as denoting injunction is objectionable,; 
nor is there any necessity that an injunction regarding jnana 
should imply a real fact as its object, for artificial or fictitious 
meditations are quite conceivable. 

Paragraphs.— 

36. From ^ to 

37. „ R =sr mm: 

XIV Section 

From to Hgm 

Topic . — The anarambhavadin or the MTmamsaka concludes his 
argument here. He maintains that what is denoted by the 
ego-notion or ahampratyaya is itself the atman and none 
exists apart from it. He asserts that texts like ‘He is Atman, 
and That Thou Art’ — ^ 3TIRT, cTTq'm% enjoin meditation on 
atman as possessing actual fancied qualities (according to cir- 
cumstances) for the sake of liberation Hence he sums up 

by pointing out that all the Vedantic texts denote action of 
the nature of meditation and since Jaimini has made an ex- 
haustive inquiry into all the Vedic statements denotative of 
action, there exists no justification for any additional treatise. 
Uttaramimamsa therefore is purposeless. 

Paragraphs . — . 

38. From 3TtTt5l^?IT^%?r: 

39. „ 3T?l: 


to 

„ stpTlcf 



358 


paRcapAdikA of padmapAda 


X¥, Segtign. ' .. . , ■ ' 

:Fxom to fi^ hi%: 

Topic.— against the four contestants, viz,, the three who advo- 
cate the commencement of the UttaramTmamsa Sastra pro- 
mising Vidhi and the one who sees no object in it, the accepted 
conclusion is that there is justification for the new 

on the ground that in the first aphorism of Jaimini, 
the word Dharma and not the word Veda is used, so that it 
is evident that that part of the Veda, viz., the Upanisad which 
relates to the self-existent entity has been left uncommented 
by Jaimini. As such it calls for a distinct inquiry. 

Paragraphs,— 

40 . From to 

41. „ T% „ 

42. „ 

43 . „ mmvi ,, HR 511#!: 

XYI Section 

From to 

Topic . — ^In the first aphorism— the emphasis is laid 
on the word Dharma, similarly in the second aphorism 
the emphasis is laid on the word Codana 
which means Vidhi or injunction to action. It therefore excludes 
the inquiry into the entity devoid of any connection with action. 
Otherwise to obviate all doubts Jaimini would have framed the 
second sutra as Because he has not done so it 

must be concluded that he admits the inclusion in the Veda of 
something that is not the content of Purvamimamsa. 

Paragraphs . — 

44 . From to 

45. ,, Jfg 

46. „ „ iraw RRT^TWfgra: 

47. „ srq- ^^ifKrat:Sr „ 

xvn Section 

From 5rgi:lrf| to 

Topic. — The anarambhav5din relies on the following texts. 
?ST f| (Sahara), 

— (Jaimini); all these seem to indicate that the Veda 
has action as its theme and where it speaks of an existent entity 
it means that the text in question should be construed with 


i 


i 




CONSPECTUS 


359 


passages prescribing action. He takes amnaya to mean Veda in 
general and comes to the conclusion that every section of Veda 
has come under the purview of Jaimini’s investigation of 
Parvamimtosa. The Siddhantims contention is that it is 
untenable to hold that all parts of the Veda are related to 
action. The sentence % is intended to show that the Veda 
has a specific sense and not to exclude reference to an existing 
entity. As regards the sutra etc., it is true that state- 
ments like are purposeless unless they are conjoined 

with texts denoting action but that does not warrant the sup- 
position that a purpose is served only when there is associa- 
tion with action. The Upanisadic texts are all purposeful 
but they are not ancillary to mandatory texts. 


Paragraphs . — 


48. From f| 

to 

49. „ 


50. „ qcgJt: 


61. „ Jnftf 


XVIII Section 


From 




rojo/c.— Prabhakara, a leader of 

an important school of Purva- 


mimtosa explains the word Dharma as Vedartha. He makes 
no division of the Veda into two parts, one relating to action 
and the other to an existing object. His contention is that 
inquiry — vicara, is for the purpose of determining what exactly 
is the teaching of /Veda’ (for its statements engender doubt), 
while according to Kumarila Bhatta, the leader of the rival 
school, inquiry is to determine what is dharma, whether it is 
agnihotra, etc., or caityavandana. 

^ The Siddhantin says that even acording to Prabhakara 
not the whole of the Vedartha is indicated but only that sec- 
tion which is concerned with enjoining action, for the word 
used in the aphorism is Dharma and not Vedartha. 

Paragraphs , — 


52. From 

53. „ 

54. 

55. 


to 



VAR^JAKA.in 

I Section 

FT<ym'^m to 

Topic . — The objection is raised that the Bhasyakara by constming 
the word - Jijhasa, in the sense of ^Desire for knowledge’ has 
stated that the word ‘atha’ does not mean commencement; 
and that this is untenable since the accepted meaning of ‘atha’ 
is commencement. This is met by pointing out that where 
the etymological sense authorised by grammar is admissible, 
the conventional sense has to be ignored. 


Faragraphs . — 


1. From 


to 

2. „ 



8. „ 


,, m 

4. „ 



5. „ 

^3Tcl 


6- „ 



Pratika . — 




rr5ri«I?15i^ sqiUTSffqH: 3T^I%- 

II Section 

From to 

Topic . — Because desire — is something that cannot be com- 
menced at one’s will you say that the word ‘atha’ cannot 
appropriately be understood to mean ‘commencement’ — 
BT[Wr4. This is wrong, for it is not merely ‘desire’ that is 
meant by but it points, in a secondary sense — 

to inquiry as the means to the acquisition of the desired know- 
ledge. The phrase denotes ‘inquiry’ which is a 

proper subject for undertaking and as such it is* appropriate 
to take ‘atha’ to mean ‘commencement’. 

It may be noted that the opponent admits that the 
aphorism conveys the sense of ‘desire’ but since it is not a 
fit subject of ‘commencement' he urges that it should be taken 
to mean ‘inquiry ’ in its secondary significance. 

The rejoinder is that if ‘atha’ is not taken to mean imme- 
diate succession signifying subsequence to the acquisition of 
the four-fold qualification, but if taken to mean ‘commence- 
ment’, then the enjoined inquiry would not be undertaken for 
want of an agent, If it be argued that one desirous 



CONSPECTUS 


361 


of the fruit as constituted by Brahma-knowledge or 

liberation characterised by supreme bliss is the agent, it must 
be pointed out that few desire either Brahma-knowledge or 
liberation which as taught in the Upanisads is of a super- 
empirical character and therefore altogether unfamiliar to man. 

Paragraphs,— 

7 . From 

8 . ,, ?rg R srtM# 

9. „ 

10. „ ?ig 

III Section 

From W ^ to 

Topic . — The purvapaksin contends that the agent can be secured 
without ‘atha’ being construed as ‘subsequence’. The inquiry 
into the meaning of the Veda is prompted by the injunction of 
Vedic study, viz,, and since Vedanta also is 

a part of the Veda the inquiry into its meaning is also prompt- 
ed by the same yidhi or injunction ; so that whoever is the fit 
agent in the Vedic study is also the agent in the 

Vedantic inquiry. The knowledge of the Vedic import is 
the fruit of and such knowledge cannot be had with- 

out inquiry. It cannot be said that the memorising of the 
bare text is the fruit, for that serves no purpose. Hence the 
word ‘atha’ must mean commencement of a new topic and 
not immediate consecution. 


to 


Paragraphs . — 

11. From W 

12 . „ 

13. „ JI5 

IV Section, 

From 


to 

to 


Topic . — The rejoinder to the above is that the injunction to Vedic 
study has not as its fruit the comprehension of the meaning of 
the Veda, the reason is that before the injunction is known 
one is not aware that the Veda purports to have a specific 
sense and it is only what is so known that helps to determine 
agency. Hence since inquiry is not instigated by the injunc- 
tion to Vedic study there will be no agent to undertake the 
inquiry and the agent can be secured only by taking ‘atha’ 
to mean ‘subsequence’. 



362 


pascapAdikA of padmapAda. 


■ : , ; Paragraphs . — . , 

14 « From to 

V Section . ' 

From 

Topic,— Tht injunction to Vedic study does not explicitly mention 
the adhikarin. The adhyapana, no doubt, results in 'arthava- 
bodha’. But that for reasons just assigned, cannot point to 
the adhikarin. Hence the injunction becomes futile for lack 
of adhikarin. When such an objection is raised by the advo- 
cate of Vcommencement’, — he is confronted by the 
Prabhakaras who deny agency as resulting from the injunc- 
tion to Vedic study, and transfer it to the injunc- 
tion relating to the teaching, The siddhantin in 

rebutting this view points out that the injunction to Vedic study 
is obligatory, whereas that relating to the teaching, 
is optional. How can what is optional entail the 
performance of the obligatory? Therefore the irijunction to 
Vedic study of itself prompts one to undertake the study and 
does not depend upon the injunction to instruct. 

Paragraphs.— 

15, From AtM to 

16, „ 

17 * ,, 

VI Section 

From m to 

Topic . — The Siddhantin admits that in one sense, viz., in so far 
as the income that it brings is necessary for livelihood the 
injunction of preceptorship, is obligatory, — 

but there is no sastraic pronouncement — 
that it is obligatory. The mark of obligatoriness is the incurring 
of sin by neglecting the enjoined duty, say, the initiation of a 
Brahman lad in his eighth year. In the case of preceptorship, 
its phala, viz,, income, can be got by other means as well 
and it does not amount to sin if one does not follow the 
profession of teaching. Hence the injunction relating to it is 
not obligatory and as such it would be wrong to suppose that 
it is productive of what is obligatory, viz., adhyayana. 

Paragraphs.— 

18 • From to str^ 

19. „ 

20 . „ 



CONSPECTUS 


363 


VII Section \ ■ ■ v 

- to ^ 

Topic.— Tho ptirvapaksa is that though instruction, sr^^pq^r is not 
obligatory it derives obligatoriness from its being ancillary to 
the injunction relating to the rearing of a male progeny which 
is obligatory. Hence it is urged that it prompts adhyayana. 
The Siddhanta is that the injunction to rear a family in the 
words, 3^ only arthavada being 

ancillary to ‘sampattikarma’; moreover on this view if the 
preceptor who has commenced tuition should die there would 
arise the contingency of the cessation of adhyayana for, as the 
purvapaksin admits, another preceptor cannot take his place— 
the substitution of one teacher by another being disallowed. 
The agent (adhikmn) is never replaced. It is the means that 
may be replaced provided the agent continues to be there; 
what is intended to be impressed is that if adhyayana is made 
to depend upon the adhyapana vidhi, the death of the preceptor 
puts a stop to the study for he is the agent intended in the 
vidhi. If on the other hand, adhyapana is the outcome of the 
adhyayana vidhi, the loss is only of an aid, and it may well be 
replaced. How can an injunction connected with a subordinate 
agent, it may be asked, be preferred to the principal agent ? 
The answer is as in 


Paragraphs.— 

21. From Hg 

22 . „ 

23. „ F% 

24. „ ^«rr ^ 

25. „ 1%=^ 

vm Section 

From 


to 

„ 3Tg^3[T% 

„ srg^rw^frra 

to iTH: 


Topic . — In statements like “cause the yaga to be performed by 
one who desires to own a village, ” since we 

have a causative verb we perceive two functionaries— the 
active agent, and the subordinate agent. But in such cases 
the injunction relates to the active or the .principal agent since 
the subordinate functionary, the officiating priest acts only 
with the object of eking out a livelihood and not under iastraic 
obligation. 

True, but in the statement ‘initiate a Brahman’, ^ruot- 
g'TJT^flcl, there is no causative termination so that there is no 


364 PAnCAPADIKA QF PADMAPAPA 

double function. It is only of the preceptor— the prayojaka- 
karta. Hence, says the advocate of adhyapanavidhi implying 
adhyayana, that the injunction cannot relate to the pupil 
Armsp. 

Paragraphs . — 

26. From 

27, „ 

IX Section 

From ^^1% to W 

Topic.— The PuiT.'apaksin’s contention is met thus— True, in 
‘initiate’ the pupil’s duty is not directly indicated 

while the preceptor’s function is indicated. Yet it is obvious 
that the act of initiation is undertaken by the preceptor because 
of his calling, H%, but not so in the case of the pupil. An 
injunction must embrace that which is not yet known, araiH 
and not that which is sfTH, from some other source. Hence 
it comes to be the pupil’s duty that is enjoined 

though indirectly through reference to the activity of the 
preceptor. 


Paragraphs.— 


28. 

From 


to 


29. 

>> 


99 


SO. 

■ ■ 79 ■ 

TO ^ 

99 

w 

X Section 


From 


to 



Topic . — It is urged that the mandate ‘one should study one’s 
branch of the Veda does not bring to light 

who the agent is that is competent for study. This mandate 
is nityakamya. It is nitya since its non-performance results 
in sin and it is kamya for the fruit is the acquisition of the know- 
ledge of the meaning Though nitya, the agent is 

not indicated by any qualificatory adjuncts. To this the 
Siddhfinta reply is that the age and caste specifications as 
seen in the injunction ‘initiate a Brahman in his eighth year 
’ bring to light the agent in the initiation 
ceremony and this ceremony necessarily implies 

Vedic study, so that whoever is the agent in the one is the agent 
in the other. The fruit according to the siddhantin is the 
mastery over the text and not the knowledge of the Vedic 
import. 


to 



CONSPECTUS 


Paragraphs . — 

31. From 
• 32. „ % ^ 

33. „ 


to 

■„ fT% 


365 


XI Section 

From sig to i%?Rrrsgqqw 

Topic . — The vrittikara quotes Sahara in support of the view that 
the injunction of Vedic study itself serves to prompt inquiry 
and opines that the understanding of the sense is the fruit of 
Vedic study. The Siddhantin admits that Sahara intends that 
the knowledge of the sense is the fruit of Vedic study hut says 
that it is only in reference to a particular context (/.e., obli- 
gatory duties and also optional duties according to the 
Vivarapa). The person who has studied the Veda with its 
accessories ?rnTt’iqrq''r, gets a vague notion of the injunctions 
relating to the several religious duties to he performed hy him 
and its clarification demands decisive knowledge; as such 
he has to undertake the inquiry. The steps are, first Vedic 
study— then an indistinct understanding of the injunc- 
tions pertaining to the obligatory duties and the desire to 
perform them which in turn requires careful investigation. 

But Brahmajijnasa, says the Siddhantin, does not deside- 
rate inquiry— for no such obligation exists in its case. 
One may remain without such knowledge and yet incur no sin. 


Paragraphs . — 

34. From Hg to 

35. „ ft ci«iF wuf Rii. „ i%rars5qqvrr 
So far the refutation o/siITFqi^. 


XII Section 

From to 

Topic . — Here is refuted the view that the word ‘then’ — has 
‘auspiciousness’ — Ffs as its sense. The word no doubt 
bears the meaning of ‘mangala’, but that meaning cannot be 
syntactically connected with the rest of the sutra. Nor does 
the word refer to any other antecedent circumstance, unless 
it stands for what we shall mention soon. 


Paragraphs . — 

36. From 
.37. „ ^rg 

38. „ 


to 

„ rafJifd ^ 



366 


PA5JCAPADIKA OF PADMAPADA 

Pratika.— 

(i) (=g) I (3r«r??cr5!;iiggi 

3TSRrSc[: 1 

(ii) 

XIII Section 

From 3TR?5Rr?5TrW to 

Topic. — Here is criticised the view that, on the analogy of inquiry 
into Dharma — qf[raft[?il, where Vedic study is the correlate 
(precedent condition — ar%%»Tl) of inquiry, Vedadhyayana— 
Vedic study, is the correlate of subsequence — 3Tl!F?r^, for 
Vedic study is the common precedent condition to those who 
investigate into the meaning of Dharma as well as those who 
long for Brahmajhana. When we conclude that ‘atha’ means 
‘immediate sequence’, we should point to some antecedent which 
is both necessary and sufficient for the Brahman-inquiry. To 
represent adhyayana as that antecedent would be repetition 
for it has already been mentioned in Jai. Sat. I. i. Further 
Vedic study or adhyayana may be a necessary condition, but 
it is by no means sufficient. 

Paragraphs . — 

39. From ^1% R 

40 . „ 

Pratika . — 

1 

XIV Section 

From qfN'f to srtr ^ 

ropzc— When the word ‘atha’ is understood to mean ‘subse- 
quence — the question naturally arises which are the 
other possible precedent conditions following which — 
Brahman-inquiry should begin ? These antecedents may be — 

1. Jaimini’s 1,000 nyayas with which to determine the 

meaning of the Vedic texts. 

2. The settled import of the various adhikaraijas— 

arrived at from applying these 1,000 nyayas. 


to 

„ ^ 4 : 



CONSPECTUS 


367 


Two in particular of these 1,000 nyayas, viz,, 

{d) Knowledge of the nyaya which points to the 
fact that the object of the Vedic study is 
to comprehend the sense. 

{b) Knowledge of the nyaya pointing to the fact 
the Veda is self-valid— 

(n) and (6) are no doubt essential for Brahman-inquiry but 
they are not sufficient like svadhyayadhyayana (see Sec. XIII). 

3. Gradual acquisition of competency for Brahman- 
inquiry by performing acts of religious duty beginning with the 
simplest like offering prayers to the sun and proceeding to 
the more complicated; 

{b) acquiring detachment through satiation after enjoy- 
ing pleasures even up to, and including Hirai:iyagarbhaloka. 
This is 

None of these, it is pointed out, can serve as the antecedent 
of Brahmajijnasa. There is no direct causal relationship. 


Paragraphs,— 


41. 

From 


to 

5fT% ^1% 

42. 


3T^rf 

9> 

srfyrmq: 

43. 

>> 




44. 

)> 


» 


45. 

79 

3c3q: 

7> 


46. 

>? 

3 : 33 ; 

y> 


47. 

48. 



7> 


>> 


7) 


49. 

50. 



77 

,v 's »s r-s. 

>7 


77 


61. 

Pratfka,- 



77 

3121 


XV Section 

From *1^3 3fl to 

Topfc.— Mental purity, says the Purvapak§in, is attained by the 
performance of karma and then only is one fit for Brahman- 
inquiry. The answer is that it may have been accomplished 
in a previous birth so that KarmSvabodha (/.?., Karmanusthana) 
in the present life is not a necessary precondition of Brahman- 
inquiry. This also furnishes the answer to the argument based 
upon the necessity for the prior discharging of the triple debt. 


368 


PASCAPADIKA of PADMAPADA 


Paragraphs.— 

to ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ 

53. „ 

64. „ TT%Jt „ ^r5ffmm%fi% 

XVI Section 

From 3T«rirq WT^ to |t% 

Topic . — The Purvapaksin shifts the ground. Let not karma — 
performance of the enjoined acts, as the immediate precedent 
cause of a Brahman-inquiry be admitted, but says he, let it 
be a mere antecedent, i.e., let it merely denote that Brahman- 
inquiry follows Dharma-inquiry without implying any causal 
relation as in the cutting of the heart, then the tongue and 
then the breast of the sacrificial animal. The Siddhantin shows 
the inapplicability of the analogy adduced. 

Paragraphs . — ' 

55. From srstir^ to 

56. „ „ f%liraqin;r% 

Pratika . — 

iRqr %q%f^fqsfwfciirqqiR qi 

XVII Section 

From 3T«nfq: ^ig^ to 

2’op/c.— The six yagas constituting Dar^apurnamasa yield in the 
aggregate a single result — necessitating as such a single 
performer — , who has per force to observe definite order 
in the performance of these yagas. Again, krama or order 
is to be observed in studying the twelve chapters of the Purva- 
mlmamsa for the phala is one; similarly in studying the four 
chapters of the Uttaramimamsa. On these two analogies it 
is urged that the order of precedence is to be admitted since 
the content of inquiry — is identical in both Dharma- 
mlmamsa and Brahma-mimamsa and the agent — qicfr is one 
and the same. 

The Siddhantin points out the inherent opposition between 
Dharmajijnasa and Brahmajijnasa. In the case of the former, 
it is mere prosperity here or elsewhere that is the fruit, in the 
case of the latter it is spiritual freedom. The former is con- 
cerned with that which is yet to come into being, the latter with 
what already exists. There is therefore nO singleness of agency 
and so no room for precedence. 


CONSPECTUS 


369 


Faragraphs,— 


67. 

From sisiirf^ 

58. 


59. 

„ r%fi^ gn: 

60. 

„ f%R 

61. 

„ 3151 Rqgfiira 

Pratika.- 

—— 


to 

„ |1% 


•■^JT?t?i ci^ srgfRi^^g;, — R^r^r^r- 

^ 5 (^r)?t^ If R 3T5SRR5=?[?;iq5ai^— i%fi# it 
fR^I^SI%, g^qsRTTRcf'iTRIR; ^ 3 SIUlRfm R^RIti: ^T 

g^i?oRmi^i?5r^) — ^i^srrairRR^iR — t| ^R^rr r 4^ ss^it ri 
5 RR^R Rg^R^ 5^^Tf^€rR2ri%, PTff^TcRr (3) 55T: g^crTtgti’aJrli^ 
%cr^, ^ g^tis^tpq Rp#; RRT^T^- 

Ri%5|5WRT«fRfrR — ci^r; q^isq sffifRfitr'?- 

%R^t ?I%. 


XVm Section 

From R=55 t>t to RiRSTRq^Tfir^it R>?i^^f2Tcr 

Topic . — Here is established the antecedence of the four-fold disci- 
pline — RIRJfRgSR, both on the authority of the Scriptures 
and of strict logic. Further it is emphasised that of these 
prerequisites, viz., perception of distinction between the eternal 
and the transcient, aversion for the enjoyment of the goods 
of this and other world, the practice of sadhanasatka (vide 
note 70), and longing for freedom, the preceding one is indis- 
pensable for what follows immediately. These four disciplines 
constitute the hetu of Brahman-inquiry and as such it is evident 
that they, as cause or necessary conditions must precede the 
inquiry. 

■ ■■ 

Paragraphs , — 


62. 

From 


to 5ifraRi% 

63. 



„ R RR% cIRflR^F ?r 





64. 



„ tmifliiTR: (5nRfgg^ iii- 





65. 

» 


„ aimi^R^JTR; 

66. 

>> 




370 pa5JcapAdikA of padmapAda 

'Wratika,—: : 

?fr5WT4('qjc!)#iTrf^rJT:, 

=^1— %s t| ainiq aiii%rai3ir ^ 

5rf[i%ii%g ^ q:^i=^gTsri:r- 

Here ends the discussion of the meaning of ‘atha’—arq'. 

XIX Section 

From 3ra:2?r% fc^^- to fsTTI^^cT 

Topic . — It is argued that the so-called four disciplines are out of 
the question, for one will not desist from performing rites such 
as the quarterly — "^IffrlFr since they yield everlasting happiness- 
Moreover it is unintelligible that with the object of attaining 
the one changeless Being — one would like to renounce 
this world and the next, for in the state of that eternal Being 
though there is absence of pain and suffering, there is no 
positive happiness. That state cannot be taken as the highest 
end of man— -TWgWf'-l. Hence though karmaphala is not 

unmixed good it will be sought for. 

This arrangement is met by the observation that the fruit 
of quarterly rites is impermanent as declared in the Scriptures 
rightly understood, and supported by reasoning. The text 
‘the knower of Brahman attains the Supreme’ — 
reveals that the attainment of the Eternal Brahman is the 
highest human end and other texts bring home the blissful 
nature — of Brahman. Hence one who cultivates 
the qualities embraced in the four-fold discipline necessarily 
enters upon Brahman-inquiry. 


Paragraphs . — 


67 . From 


to 

68. „ 


„ 31ff:5a5^: 

69. „ 


„ 

70. „ 

^cS^T: 


Pratika . — 




JT’filTSte irq 3Tf%91'Iv55^r — 

‘ wi%cfr sra: ’ 

gsn qt gw4 3[5§-q-f^— ‘ qt i 

Here ends the discussion of the meaning of ‘atah’ — «Rr:. 



CONSPECTUS 


371 


XX Section 

From ^'Jil to >^^1 

Topic . — ^Three points are made clear in this section : — (1) the 
compound Brahmajijnasd is to be dissolved as Brahmano + 
jijnasa and not as Brahmarie+jijnasa; (2) the meaning of the 
word Brahman; (3) the word Brahmajijnasa involves an 
objective genetive and not a genetive of possession. It is also 
shown that from the description of the word Brahman as given 
in the second sutra it is evident that Brahman means the Lord 
who is the creator, sustainer and destroyer of the universe. 


Paragraphs.— 


71. From 


to 

72. „ 



73. „ 



74. „ 

ga: ^aagiaigif 

„ aare: ^Tiai% 

75. „ 

ag 


76. „ 

^aaa 

„ ^aiadsaifa 

77. „ 

f%=a 

„ d war apa |i% aiiTia qg'i 

Pratlka . — 




Tgt i%frawr: — — ^5 

trTg^TTftJTlsf^ 1%%^- 

T%gcgiT5ir— a?tvr: ^riifFa^R'n q%5g aiac# 

aare: r sa^:, auif^ai^aia^RafaifRi^aiRra 

aaiaaf^at daaitdr awialfejRaiai— au f| ?R5iF5i%g 
aaian, ai%T?a'ar% f%ai?rr qiaw aroifra af^ari%afer 
afn%ii%d a a aar 

Traiti a=Eg!alc5% ^laRaraa Rifi aaag^ Trai% crsti; — g^gaaw 
ati ar faifa 5ria% ’ ^a-- ‘ 

a^i^iia affa'r i%awta:5aca a^'af%, frsg a;4fa agiarial 
aai%, cRaiiLaifia ^RT aafha a^i. 

XXI Section 

From to ^l^ 

Topic . — Having explained the words ‘atha’, ‘atah’ and ‘Brahman’ 
found in the sutra — ‘atha’, to ‘Brahmajijnasa’ the Bhasyakara 
takes up the word ‘jijnasa’ for comment. The root jna in 
jijnasa, it is pointed out, denotes the ultimate cognition which 


372 


PAtOApADIKA OF PADMAPADA 


is the immediate means of the fruit of freedom — ^moksa. Also 
by pointing out that the desired jiiana is not attained except 
through vicara the commentator states that the word jijnasa 
implied by means of inquiry also — vicara. 

Paragraphs . — 

78. From to 

79. „ 

80. „ ?rOT?I. „ r% 

Pratfka . — 

rafraT~(3Tqrnfcrp^?f) fR H5qT=E3ri ?IT 

qjsfqqqrqrti^ — fRff if anTORifm^TOS fir, 

sumrafl s^iq:— (ff:|[qg?nt:5fT3iisfir?iiqiq^ffq|'Jitf,) — 

sTP (fq)t>ltn%?r5qn. 




VARljTAKA IV 

I Section 

From ^TcS^I^ to aTn%Fl: 

Topic. — The Purvapaksin argues that if Brahman is an already 
known entity there would be neither Visaya for inquiry nor 
prayojana for it, if unknown, Visaya may be there but neither 
prayojana nor sambandha. The dilemma, he says, cannot be 
avoided. 

Paragraphs.— 

1. From ?Tcg^: to 

2. „ 3T#Tr: 

PratJka.— 

(3=£q%) ” 

II Section 

From 3?!% ctRfU to IRT 

Topic. — In the portion of the Bhasya beginning with ‘Brahman is 
known in a general way, etc.’, Visaya, sambandha, and prayo- 
jana are established. It is true that visaya, sambandha, and 
prayojana must be presumed to be there, since it is the work 
of an author of such eminence ; yet a specific mention is neces- 
sary to induce effort for inquiry. It may be urged that in that 
case prayojana alone needs to be separately mentioned since 
its mention is enough to imply the other two. But a prayojana 
may be achievable by more means than one; and in that case, 
no effort in a definite direction can be expected to result. In 
order to secure such effort, it is necessary to specify the Vi§aya 
of the sastra. Similarly in regard to sambandha also. 


Paragraphs,— 



3, From 


to 

4 . „ 



5- » 



6 - „ 



7 . „ 



8. „ 



III Section . 



From 


to 


Topic. — Brahman is the subject-matter, Visaya, of Vedanta and 
not of Uttara-mlmamsa Sastra, i.e., Badarayapa’s aphoristic 



374 


paScapadika of PADMAPADA 


treatise. The latter is concerned only with interpretational 
principles— Nyaya, which are helpful in the exposition of 
Brahman, and as such Brahman is not the Vi§aya of this 
Sastra nor is sambaudha so, though the Sastra may perhaps 
be taken as connected with prayojana mediately-paramparaya. 
The determination of Brahman is effected by ttie Vedanta 
itself. No doubt it may be thought that the mimamsa by 
removing the doubts that may be entertained regarding the 
correct sense of the Vedanta also has Brahman as its visaya. 
But yet since the Vedanta does not owe its existence to any 
human source it is absolutely free from any defects and as 
such it conveys a knowledge of Brahman in its true nature 
without depending upon the aid of the mimamsa— such is the 
pQrvapaksa. The Siddhantin admits that the Vedanta is self- 
valid, but as its sense cannot be apprehended unless the 
obstacles in the shape of doubts due to the suggestion of colla- 
teral meanings are removed, the Uttara-mimamsa Sastra doing 
this office, is indirectly helpful and it must therefore be con- 
ceded that it also has Brahman as its visaya. As such Vieira 
or inquiry is not pointless. 


Paragraphs . — 


9. 

From 

mi 

to 

10. 

)> 



11. 


g:=5!rcr 


12. 

>> 



13. 



„ crw3. ^ 

14. 




15. 


...... # 





rv Section 





From 




Topic. — Brahman’s existence, the Bhasyakara shows, is not en- 
tirely unknown, and that there thus being scope for inquiry, 
the relation between the §astra and the vi§aya is established. 
The purvapaksin contends that the Veda does not vouch for 
the existence of Brahman— the Supreme reality, since the word 
Brahman occurring there admits of various connotations and 
further that it is only a complete sentence that can be a valid 
means of knowledge and not individual words like ‘Brahman’. 

To this contention the answer is that it is possible to deter- 
mine the exact meaning of the unknown word ‘Brahman’ 
with the aid of nirukta, vyakarapa, nigama, etc., when that 



CONSPECTUS 375 

word is in juxtaposition with words the significance of which 
is patent 

There are two other points in the text of this section:— 
{a) The etymology of the word ‘Brahman’ helps us to surmise 
the nature of the entity it denotes— that it is eternal, pure, etc. ; 
(b) to a possible objection that on the basis of mere etymology 
we cannot deduce such transcendental features of Brahman, 
the answer is that the objection may hold in the case of words 
denoting objects knowable by other pramanas whose meaning 
is ascertained from usage, but not in cases where, as here, the 
meaning is determined by etymology exclusively. One must 
grant in such cases whatever the etymology may betoken. 


Paragraphs.- 


16. 

From 



17. 



„ 1%^: 

18. 

>> 



19. 



„ 5T 

20. 


5r 


21. 

>> 



22. 


mwi 

„ ar+gTOSJf: 

23. 




PratJka.- 





If, 5Icfl2I% I f.fa’lT^P[«I13- 

V Section 

From ' to 

Topic . — It may be said that the tracing the etymological meaning 
of the word ‘Brahman’ may give us an idea of its nature; but 
it cannot vouch for its reality or existence, for a single word by 
itself cannot constitute a pramana. True; and that is the 
reason for the present inquiry into what has been empirically 
envisaged but not fully established. The existence of Brahman, 
it is further pointed out is vouched for by the fact that Brahman 
is the very self of all beings. If it be urged that the Sastra 
would be emptied of content if Brahman is a patent fact it is 
argued that though the general sense of Brahman is compre- 
hended its specific nature remains unknown and as such it is 
the fit content of the Sastra. 



376 


PAfJCAPADIKA OF PADMAPADA 


Paragraphs.-— 

24. From to 

25. ,, „ snai%5;w 

26. ■ „ cn'| tr% „ 

Fratika^ 

(i) 5a^Fr 3?iOTcwi=E^ 

(ii) ^ f| sncin%c4 a^i%, h i (f|) frrciir- 

fecfEirar^: scflw, arwr 

(iii) 3rit cTii mkm nfH^irrecr ^rti f i?fir%i% 3Tr%^i^qc# 

gTO'T^ 

(iv) Jf 

VI Section 

From-H5iFfr?rwcJTi f% sr^q- to ^ijr^sq-qn^ff: nr%5: 

Topic.— The materialist’s view that the body alone is atman is 
stated here. 

Paragraphs.— 

27. From to 

28. „ i%5n%qf^ ^i&q% „ iti^^rr ‘ 

29 . „ cr«rr f| „ 5r{%^[: 

Prdtika . — 

%rRI%%S^PFW SIf ?I! 5RI ^qiiqictqil^ Jlf^qsrr: 1 

VII Section 

From gq to ?^q>: 


Topic.— The doctrines of those who severally contend that atman 
is no other than the senses, mind, or momentary consciousness, 
or void, are stated. 


Paragraphs . — 

30 '. From irfT%f^qt 5 p%q 

31 . „ tRgq 

32 . „ I%mi 5 ri 5 [ 

33 . „ „ 

Pratika . — 

(i) 

(iii) rafiqJirw 


to Jprsf 


(ii) qR 

(iv) iSfqR^fqi 



CONSPECTUS 


377 


VIII Section 

Topic. — The Naiyayikas and others of their way of thinking main- 
tain that atmau is other than the body, the senses, etc., since 
the latter are incapable of being agents and enjoyers. 

Paragraphs.— 

34. From 3TI%r?§Ff^ to 

35. „ qjg cT^^T „ |;cTO5Pr?Il4 

36. „ sTfg wft „ goNTTtTT'ra: 

37. „ 3T^5B^q[ „ 3i|a5iqm4 

Pratika.— 

STI^cT ^frf^!52Tr%[%?R: g5Eir<l 

IX Section 

From %# 5T to 

TbpiG.— Other doctrines are set forth. The Samkhyas maintain 
that the ego-notion has the individual soul— jiva as its content 
and the jivas are only enjoyers and not agents. When the 
question arises whether the jiva is different from Brahman, 
the Naiyayikas and others like the yogins in order to estabhsh 
that the jiva is distinct, posit I§vara with the attributes of 
omniscience, etc. For them Brahman and Bvara are one. 
As against this the Siddhantin hold that Brahman is the very 
essence of, i.e., fundamentally identical with the jl^ 

Paragraphs . — 

38. From to 

39. „ 3TI% 

40. „ 3TR?n 'FT ^ra[. 

Pratika , — 

(i) ^T%sr ^ 

(ii) 30% ^%%fi 

(iii) 3rRBI =51 

X Section 

From II# f#5ri%qvtT to 

Topic. — ^This is the concluding portion of the meaning of the 
Bhasya. Of the various views, the last is the right one, being 
based upon a proper interpretation of the Vedanta and sup- 
ported by reason. The rest are the result of a misunder- 
standing of the texts and of fallacious reasoning. To adopt 




378 PA5ICAPADIKA OF PADMAPADA 

without scrutiny any of the latter would be not only to miss 
salvation but also to court positive evil. Hence the need for 
this inquiry. 

Paragraphs.— 

41. From l%5I#15rT: to 

42. „ 

43. „ ?rRI5i: 

' Pratika.— 

(i) tr# iwafaiw: ?F?r: 

(ii) 5T5rrf%=^r^ afcri^mitr 

(iii) ?[RTfiiT%?Wiq'qrag#r ?i^'T- 






I Section 


VARljTAKA V 

From m to 

Topic.— Tht first sutra states that inquiry into Vedanta is to be 
undertaken by one desirous of knowing Brah m an. It follows 
therefore that the definition of the nature of Brahman, valid 
means to its knowledge, conformable logic, way to its attain- 
ment and the fruit to be derived, are all necessitated. Here 
since Brahman (i.e., its nature) is the most important its defi- • 
nition is set forth in the second sutra. Brahman is described 
as the cause of the origination, etc., of the world. The rest 
of this section explicates the import of the words composing 
the Sutra. 

Paragraphs . — 

1. From 5ru 

2. „ 5i%^rq 

3. „ 

4. „ 

Pratika . — 

xf 

“5r#r qr ^itir 5rR?% ” 

SIfJRT 

n Section 

From 3 t^ to =tr 

Topic.— The Bha§ya beginning with ‘of this world differentiated by 
names and forms’ up to ‘ that is Brahman, has to be understood’ 
is explained. It also states that it is the definition per accidens 
of Brahman which is given here, i.e., a definition where the 
differentia or the special mark mentioned does not actually 
characterise Brah m an. 


to 

„ 



380 


paScapadikA of padmapada 


Paragraphs.— 

5 . From 

6. ,, siTTr^^«rm 

7; „ 3#q^»Tt|5- 

„ JfTOTfir 

Pratika . — 

(i) ar^ispTcr:; (ii) ?Tmw«rf ; 

(iii) ; 

(iv) ar%%q?f^5a^T5Ji%i%?ira?ii’Wissrqw; 

(v) 

(vi) ?rcr: 

III Section 

From to ?cnT^ 3r?JTf%fn#r 

Topic . — There are no doubt other states of objects like change 
but they may be included under the three mentioned above. 
The six stages of existence enumerated by Yaska cannot be 
accepted as meant here, for the ^ruti ‘From which all these 
beings are born, etc.’, declares only origination, subsistence 
and destruction. If Yaska’s division is accepted, instead of 
Brahman’s being the world-cause, the elements would become 
the cause because that division is meant to apply to elemental 
objects (and not to elements). This explanation points to 
Brahman as prime cause. 

Paragraphs . — 

9. From 

10 . „ ^3 ^ 

11 * » 

Pratika . — 

(i) (*rRi%FF:mT ?r% 

I? ®rT%r ” 

(ii) (jii^) 

(iii) cpsff 5Picf: #¥ir5zrin?R^T^ ii?^R’in|?Tm%r%Jn2;rr 

^ rl5=Jn 51^1% 5ntqT%: WU’iI: 1^1%; 

S55?r«^, ?n![5r 


to ?:«rgqF2rr^qrq; 


„ 5r;jTf^T%»TW. . . 




CONSPECTUS 


381 


IV Section 

From !T to ^W[%% 

Topic.— The Bhasya JT Rf^Tfr^rimf is explained. 

The Sutra suggests a rational basis for the view that Brahman 
is the source of the world for, being of the character described, 
the world cannot be the work of Pradhana because it is insenti- 
ent, or of Hiranyagarbha because he is of limited capacity or 
of Sunya, etc., the inconceivability of any of these being its 
source is the indirect proof. Pariksanumana is suggested 
here. 

Paragraphs . — 

12. FromRW^ 

13. „ 

14. „ H 

Pratlka . — 

(i) ^ (sTUrT:) 

(ii> 

(in) 3T??Trt: wi) 

(iv) 

(v) f^rfiifiRr If g'TRiJnT. 

V Section 

From trti%rgitRfJu% to SW 

Tbp/c.— The reasoning referred to above is put forward by 
rationalists like the Logicians as the independent proof for 
believing in the existence of Brahman and in its omnipotence, 
etc., and they represent the Scriptural passages cited in this 
connection as but clothing that reasoning in words for the 
sake of communicating it to others. The Vedanta sutra how- 
ever is really meant not to indicate the rational basis for the 
belief in question, but to show that a knowledge of Brahman 
as described is the result of properly interpreting all the rele- 
vant Scriptural passages— that such Brahman is their concordant 
teaching. But it is not that argumentation has no place in 
it. Scripture itself recognises the need of logic for re-inforcing 
the sense ascertained from the Vedic study. 

Paragraphs . — 

15. From T3:^ffr3JTRf*T% to : 

16. „ qf^fflR „ WSTr^^lR^vlf 

17. „ I „ 


to 

„ RqqisrTRHaL 
„ 5Brt:DTi%T% 


25 


5W 



382 


PAKCAPADIKA of padmapAda 


Pratika . — . 

(ii) 

(iv) ?r %^i5=fr^i¥3Tf i?j; ^j^rmiq^ 

(v) %^Fcimf3nf% (f| i%=5rr3|fcf, 

^aiRfsilrl! f|) 

(vi) 3pf’Tf^''f5iTwrf^5HTrwiRH[M^T 

(vii) ^?g ^'Wf^^ROigrRS 

sngFPfFii^) 

(viiii) %^iRr^Tf^rTTOf% iptiot Rwwt, gliw =? ?i?rq?^ir 

(ix) cr«fi!| “ ^ras% jfcTs^t: ” # 

(x) 'tI^f ^riCf (nF'WRF^ 5rq^q%lw>f) 

(xi) sTiRi^qi^ =q ife^FTiF^JFRTrjSt ^i^sTra. 

VI Section 

From 5T WT%?IIW to aig^iqi'^^F R %cl^5r 

Topic . — If it be urged that the need for reasoning should be allowed 
both in regard to Dharma and Brahman or rejected altogether 
it is pointed out that a vital difference exists between the two. 
The latter is an existent entity so that (1) it can be reasoned 
about, and (2) its direct realisation can be sought after. The 
former on the other hand is yet to be, so that neither (1) nor (2) 
is possible in its case. Hence while in the case of Dharma 
explicit statements in Scripture (^ruti) are the only means open 
for ascertaining its character, in the case of Brahman other 
aids like direct experience are also legitimate. 

Paragraphs . — 


18. From Jf 

to 

19. „ 5Tg 


20 . „ 


21, „ ?r^q^ffr 

„ %cit;5r 

Pratika . — 


(i) 5T 



(ii) (gq SHIR 

WJnr) 

(iii) STliTqrEtBIJTFnPqrt^ 


i 

i 

1 




CONSPECTUS 383 

(iv) simMpii:, 

ijTf 4 ^rT%4 ^ sb4, 3t 4!% ^=E^r%, q?[5p*E=3T^T 

^ wr w " ti^r%4 ipto, ?rri%^iW 

4i^%4 wira ’; # 

f%f43ra4wr^T5r 5^:, jf g 

q^iTi% 5Tr^u% g^Tf s^i- 

qiffi:, Jf w?5?fi«fifpi^r4 ; f% crfi >^g- 

gg; ?r (% gi4i?4i li% g-R^tR 

; 35r gw4i 4i% wsR^R gf^ftR w^g- 

^sTRig, 3i^?gRW5if 3ram w^dwE;). 

(v) ^tl4 wg 3frfRiTf4 ^ig^^gm^iRig . 

VII Section 

From ar^T: to gi5R^'T ®%ciT4m 

Topic.—lf there is room for inference because Brahman is an 
accomplished object, let there be, says the opponent, no injury 
into the meaning of the Vedanta Texts, but let the inquiry be 
confined to reasoning only. The first sutra states the propo- 
sition and this the second Sutra sets out the probans or hetu. 
The Siddhantin points out that since perception is incompetent to 
compass Brahman, inference based upon it also fails to compre- 
hend Brah m an. Moreover though mere agency may be 
inferred it is not possible to infer definitely whether that agent 
is one and not many. Hence it is only the Vedanta that is the 
valid means of knowing Brahman. This may seem to exclude 
reasoning altogether; but it does not, for reasoning is intended 
to support Scriptural teaching much as arthavadas are admitted 
to do in the case of ritual. Vedanta texts bearing on ‘Tatastha 
laksana, e.g., ‘From which all these beings are born’, and 
‘svarupalaksapa’, e.g., ‘From Bliss alone all these beings are 
born, etc.’, are quoted. 

Paragraphs . — 


22. 

From 

aTT?:: qMrafwfg 

to arfir^HRR 

23. 




24. 

» 



25. 

?> 

T% g^-- 


26. 

» 



27. 

>> 





384 


pancapAdijca of padmapAda 


Prattka.— 

(i) I?i5=?t4i4=2r- 

ami) 

(ii) H mamaiofii^- 

jrri^, nm i%an% ; ?»ra aipi; 

apnr 4;4i%r% ^r4Tri5ra^ g Wtam t% 

aiTwi ^ait %!Trai:ra a^wm jt ^4=^ m%SJ5[ ) 

(iii) ciW3t;jTTf^^ qrgjTima^t^fi^, t% ?ii|, 4^i'?i4ma^- 

(iv) f% g^wg;^ (^^Fcr) 414=4 (44: ) 

(v) 4141%: (‘ 444 f444gTO?rre, 3T4lf|: 44 % 4|jT^ 
5cf4453:4I? — 44T 4T f 4114 •■g4lf4 544%, %4 544!%- 
5li4P4, 4ca45=^m%%^I%, 4li:i%lira^; 44:4|l%) 

(vi) 44r =4 %444I44 ‘ 5Tl4?4T«lr4 411 (?4lf4 ^141% 504%,’ 
5TR%4 5frar% 5f[4f%; 3ri4?4 a4?^W4f4^%ra‘ 

(1. 4. \-i)i 3Ts:4r5=4%4 5tI4''l445rf4 414=41% — m'lr- 
5:5f3[g^4r4I44lf 4f4^4)I=(;4f444I034m4o4I%) 



I Section 


VARljIAKA VI 


From to ^ffl^iorf : 

rcyic.— The omniscience of the Lord has been pointed out in the 
.second Sutra on the ground that He is the cause of the entire 
Universe, This universal causation, it may be objected, is 
■ untenable since the Veda though within the world-order, is 
eternal and is therefore not an effect. But, says the Vedantin, 
that Brahman is the source of the entire universe including 
the Veda and that as the Veda is all-revealing (sarvajnakalpa), 
its source or author is necessarily all-knowing. 

Paragraphs . — 

1. From to 

II Section 

From to ?r aTHcI; 

Topic . — If it is argued that since the Veda owns Isvara’s author- 
ship its validity ceases to be absolute and becomes dependent, 
it is answered that the Veda does not originate in time but it is 
beginningless like Brahman himself. If it be said that Brahman, 
being absolutely changeless, cannot be the source of the Veda, 
the answer is that He is its cause in the sense in which Brahman 
is the cause of the manifold of sense, or as the rope is of the 
illusory serpent. If the Veda is not his composition in the 
ordinary sense (as Grammar is Pani^ii’s) but merely a sponta- 
neous emanation from him, its authorship, it may be thought, 
cannot signify his omniscience. But His omniscience is secured 
by the fact that the all-revealing character of the Veda is only 
the appearance (Vivarta) of bis knowledge-phase. 

Paragraphs . — 

2. From to 

Pratika . — 

qik: qsRor m. ^ 

3TWR5OTqlr^ra[. m »?ri^tiiTk qiiV^k: irfq ?r 

ifs 5if%5 f%3 

sTEwiF- 

” (it. II, iv-10) w iritT 

%Rr i 



I Section 


VARl^TAKA VII 


From 3Tsr^ to 

Topic.— 'Mow is given an alternative interpretation 6f tlie same 
Sutra. The Sastra is the valid means of knowing Brahman. 
That a Sutra bears a double sense is one of its merits as shown 
by the definition of Sutra. The objection is raised that since 
the Sastra as the pramana of Brahman, has been substantiated 
in the explanation of the second Sutra itself, the present Sutra 
as signifying the same is superfluous. It is admitted that the 
pertinent Sastra has been adduced by the Bhasyakara while 
expounding the second Sutra, but owing to the absence of 
the word Sastra there, it might lead one to the conclusion that 
the Sutra is intended to point to an inference as the pramafia 
to establish Brahman. To obviate such a contingency a sepa- 
rate Sutra explicitly stating that the Scripture is the pramana 
becomes a necessity. 

Paragraphs . — 

1 . From to 

Pratika . — 

3T«r wi wkwit w 

sr:; ^Ti^rgrTf^ ft ’’ ^tf^. 

?Tlt ^ ftf^ 5rt?frq% I fn^- 



VARl^TAKA VIII 

I Section 

From ^'4 5?!: to 

Topic . — The criticism here relates to the authoritativeness of 
Vedanta; since all Veda should be denotative of action, 
Vedanta which merely points to an existing entity loses its 
character as an independent means of valid knowledge. Further 
it is a matter of common knowledge that an existing entity is 
the object of perception, etc., and as such Vedanta though it may 
convey a knowledge of an all-knowing entity ceases to be 
authoritative since its teaching is at variance with those pra- 
manas or common experience. If it be argued that Vedanta 
needs no external corroboration in its own sphere, it may be 
pointed out that where one pramana contradicts another even 
though they may have each its own specific object to reveal, 
one of the two loses its validity; compare how in a painting 
touch contradicts sight. Now the Sruti asserts that atman 
and Brahman are one while perception contradicts it. More- 
over the non-authoritativeness of Vedanta is evident from the 
fact that from knowing Brahman which it teaches, there is 
neither the acquisition of anything desirable nor the avoidance 
of anything evil. Hence, concludes the Purvapaksin, that 
both on grounds of its irreconcilibility with pratyaksa and 
fruitlessness of the knowledge it imparts. Brahman as under- 
stood by the Siddhantin, cannot be established on the strength 
of Verbal testimony. 

Paragraphs . — 

1. From 

2 . „ 

3. „ 

4. „ f% 

Pratlka . — 

(i) ^4 gp: "3Trai?n?i 

(%. % Vk-'i) I 

3raT %?[i?cn5TWR4^4, i gi 


to 



388 


PAK;CAPADIKA of PADMAPADA 


^ 1 fF^H'nr flgq-rac^nw^- 

>?n'%c>?r sB^T^UT^Fi^^i 5=giH i) 

(ii) ^ %^^r^^isrT ?ttqq^t 

qr I ^ qftf%fgcr ’Rf^; Fjirqra; feqiT^Rn'Ii^: i 

^ i%q'riq?^lrqR '^I'cn^q; i 

3TST jR;wi-?iw5Tr%3^’’gq»rRr%, ?r4iR RqRjrntiqraqrf^qjqqKfqq^ i 

gw5fsrff'ir:^Rrttf^qfi?RqiH^^^ — “ erg ^w^qqTci.” « ' g ' ^53[: 

i q?«rJi^? ^fPR^Tg. 1 ?{^g ft q^F'^S qF^RFft cfFcq^g- 

FgFtqiEq qF%qF3[5Ectq ^rPgqcFTft l “ ^tq' tFJ%JTq afF^EfFg I l^qF^qr- 

Tg:cFlqq.” (sF, '3TFcPr qr f^qq; t^ff sn^lg’ (tw. V3- 

3-3). 'j^FqqFcqq^cf^TiqF?!^’, ‘ srqiricfrF qf[ gqFg^j:’ 

(l. ■<-V3S), 'qlR^q’jq (3®3‘.W3^) ^Riqiiq I R R 

R^iRT qqRi RUR^fqqt RPat ?nFq3FisqjTrqqTts«fi?crF!;q5?qqF' 
gW; gqfF^q-^cF^^qqFqRiFR 1 q R %qf q^tRJ^qsRrqFqqqiRiq- 
^RW; ‘ qc%q R qFjtg’ (f. w-3^) fRFft F'^qFq;[wq)55F%^FqiF[R- 
^: i q R qRfqsqq^gR^qRsft aRsfFTF'trqqqcq wfiR; ; ‘ qTqin% ' 

(3F, ^-c-'s) fi% qUFRqtqR qFRrqsqWFqqqRfqFqRR I 

t^FqFqq^ftqRFfqRRFq^qq ^1%, qq qFq: ; tRFqFtqsSf^qHFRqR- 

qqFqq qqs^qfFRicgqqFRFRt: I tqRiFqqfqqrqqR g RqFqRqqF- 

qrqqFRfqsft q RfRFg^FR:, q g q«n RfFR qqFRqTFqiqtqxq Rqqfq ; 
^qsR iRFqiqqs^^q^iqi F%qFq;FWFtl?rfq?iFqRqqfqq%: i q If^r- 
F%fR#i'qfqqR IqFqfFqR gq: RRtFsf^, %q'FqFqqF^FR%q5q qfpq: 

qi%qtq I qRR'qR RWf qRi RftqfT^?qtR IfqFRR q 
qRFRFRFtlFRR R^JqqJcFcqRT RftqRR ^TIW SFRFR i?TRq KRT- 
5^igjg I q RFgqiqqrq qrFRqFRFoq, %qF?qR fqqs^qqt^R I 
cFRFFI^^' q?iq: ^F^qqiq^qjg l) ■ 

II Section 

From qcgqq'F'RqFrTR to RFqqrTq# 

Topic , — The MTmamsaka concedes that Vedanta is not supple- 
mentary to karma as the two kandas are distinct. But he 
maintains that Brahman of the Upanisads is supplementary 
to meditation as prescribed therein. The Siddhantin points 
out that even if Brahman’s ancillary status be accepted it is 
not possible to establish Brahman who is omnipotent, omnis- 
cient, etc., for meditation is quite possible on Brahman on 
whom omniscience, etc., are superimposed. The opponent 
(MTmamsaka) says he has no disagreement with the Siddhantin 



CONSPECTUS 


389 


in so far as Brahman possessing omniscience, etc., is not 
established for his main object is to prove that Vadanta in its 
entirety is denotative of action and is therefore not purposeless. 

Paragraphs . — 

V 5. From 

III Section 

From to 

Topic,— 'First the general sense of the aphorism is given and then 
the phrase ‘samanvayat’ is explained. The purport of the 
aphorism is that Brahman is to be understood from the Vedanta 
for all the texts are in agreement in elucidating the non-rela- 
tional entity or Brahman as such — akhandartha. That the 
major text ‘That thou art’ imports the unrelated 

Brahman is rendered explicit on the analogy of ‘This is that 
Devadatta’ and that the subsidiary text ‘existence^ 

knowledge, bliss, is Brahman’ also imports the relationless 
Brahman is rendered explicit on the analogy of ‘the brightest 
shining body is the moon’ Hence such 

Vakyas do not signify things connected as substance and 
attribute or as action and its aids. 

Paragraphs . — 

7. From 

IV Section 

From to 

Topic . — Since the existence of Brahman is vouched for from 
passages such as ^ ’ from which indeed 

are these things born, etc., — the Bhasyakara should have shown 
that those illustrative passages themselves import the non- 
relational Brahman instead, why for this purpose, 

should he have adduced passages like etc. ‘Exist- 

ence alone, my dear, there was in the beginning ? This objec- 
tion is met by the observation that there the idea was to give 
merely the definition per accidens of Brahman. « Here how- 
ever it is intended to show the non-separateness of Brah- 
man from jiva. Hence the necessity to deduce statements appro- 
priate to such a purpose. 

Now as regards the objection that an existent entity 
because it is the object of perception, etc., cannot form the 


to 


to 



PAj&CAPADIKA OF padmapAda 


390 

primary content of Sabda whose nature is to signify things 
already known otherwise. It may be that sabda, when 
addressed to others, refers to things as already known by some 
other pramana, like perception, in virtue of the new associa- 
tions which words have acquired by then in the mind of the 
speaker. But when the meanings of words are irst caught 
by a child, while watching the elders conversing with one 
another, those meanings are apprehended independently of 
other pramanas : the eye, for example, does not depend upon 
other pramanas for apprehending its specific object. Hence 
for Verbal testimony to convey its sense, it is not necessary 
that the objects of which it speaks should have been otherwise 
known already. 

Paragraphs.— 

9. From to 

10. „ 3Tc5?r: ,, dW 

11 . „ ,, 

V Section 

From ^ to 

Topic . — The Siddliantin concedes the necessity of a distinct corro- 
borative pramana in so far as the origination of right cognition 
from secular words is concerned, but he argues that as regards 
Scriptural statements no corroboration from other pramanas 
is necessary in the same way as no distinct Pramana is necessary 
to vouch for what is given by the sense of sight. It was pointed 
out in Section I, that the evidenGe of the sense of sight is super- 
ceded by that of touch in the example of the picture, but it 
must be noted that non-corroboration by the sense of touch 
is due to the defect in the instrument of perception. The 
Veda however being apauruseya is free from blemish and as 
such no thought of invalidity can arise in regard to the know- 
ledge it imports. Further the validity of a pramana depends 
oil its knowledge-giving capacity, /.e., whether or not it reveals 
its object and not on its corroboration by another pramana. 

Paragraphs . — 

12. From to 

13* ,, 

VI Secition 

From to 

Topic.— It was urged that the Upanisads could claim no validity 
because of the dictum that the Veda intimates action and as 




CONSPECTUS 


391 


such injunctive statements denotative of action only are authori- 
tative and not others. This proposition is subject to the defect 
of mutual dependence. If the Veda in its entirety intimates 
action; then injunctive statements importing action alone will 
be valid and vice versa. Hence whatever sense the scriptural 
texts intimate whether connected with action or with an exist- 
ing entity that is the right sense. What confers validity upon 
a verbal statement is its capacity to convey meaning and not 
its capacity to prompt action as in the case of perception, etc. 
But it may be urged that as distinguished from perception 
words fail of their purpose unless they are intended to serve 
some and (purusartha) to the person to whom they are addressed 
and this purpose cannot be achieved by him without either 
engaging in some act or withdrawing from it, particularly 
as purusartha the aim for Vedic study is the result of the injunc- 
tion to study one’s branch of the Veda. And since the 
Upanisads intimate merely an existing entity no purusartha 
as possible of achievement. In answer, it is pointed out that 
purusartha may consist in attaining what has not been attained 
or by realising in thought what has been lost sight of and there 
is no rule that it is achieved only by following one of the alter- 
natives mentioned. The summum bonum which is the aim of 
the Vedanta is reached by the removal of ignorance and that 
it is to be realised in thought and not in fact, constitutes its 
excellence rather than its drawback. 

Paragraphs . — 

14. From to 

15. ,, 

16. ,, 



VARIJIAKA IX 

I Section 

From 3T5rm to 

roj^/c.— There is a class of critics who hold that Vedic statements 
though having an existing entity as their content are valid only 
to karya. Brahman therefore established 
though it be on the strength of Verbal testimony, is the object 
of meditation which is enjoined. That words acquire validity 
only when their import is action-related, is based on the follow- 
ing grounds: — (i) In our common experience it is perceived 
that the significance of words is cognised by the learner only 
when it either urges one to action or dissuades one from it ; 
(ii) if Brahman, the existing entity is intimated no purpose 
is served since even with that knowledge there results no 
cessation of the metempsychosis; (iii) if Brahma-knowledge 
were the sole means of liberation there would be no need for 
injunctions on meditation Hence though there is 

distinction between the subject-matter of inquiry in the two 
§astras, atman is denoted as the content of meditation enjoined 
in texts like ‘He is to be sought out — Xhis is the 
view of the Vrttikara, 

Paragraphs . — 

1. From 3T5riqt; to fTcqsfjfitTT 

2 . 1 ^ 

Fratika . — 

(i) sTwiq^ wff, cr«niit ii^q%- 

wn 1 ?r«ri 

^ I rr«n f|; sarwcrrcq^fq^ arif : “ fl i 

“ %3rRr: ^Rgq w: — (I. g. 

“ci^rfRf i%jrT^fr ” (^. % i “sTRri^r^ i%^rR- 

” (%. ^. q-!?-q) R I sr^; pq iif%T§:qq-- 
5tq§qcf rrr^Ti:qq%fiqiraq#jf^m=E3i5fi3; i ?i=#q?Rr 
fgiiT 1 Ftjna: i ?it% r RfRqq?q 

qqr ^iqq5(J?^TIFfT5rrr%RIRR ffWRcT tr^flfgFTRqilTr?! RflfR fq'cfi- 
|i% pig; I frNf Rsqr r%fT9f 

^ 5 gjr fq^iRifT m f^i?trirr% i rr R^fRqjsrTRgqRTq^- 

•ficS^OT R^fRqjcS Rf^5*ttr% t RlfRR RRgiX I qjRiqfRS^Ri^R 
Rfpq: SRqiWRRIR I "aTRRI RT 3H fR l 

‘ R 3rRRisqi?rqr'Ri — rtrssr: r %%w%cFR:’ v5-\s-q) i 



CONSPECTUS 393 

' 3Tr?ir^#T9ratcr ’ (i. i-v-va) i ‘ sTiciriiiT^^ ^ragqrercr ’ (f . i 

‘ ^r3i% ’ (gw?, g-fi ?^s?ti3Tc3T t% 

?f51I ?I3 

^tWt R?i^ r%?rs:5f^5^^5fritr i%f rjtr? 3 wn ’ ^§i3Tn3^: 1 
3fqRRM rs ^trs^cTir i 3cfs3i3«!T3f stir ^^^^- 

JTt5r9;33 fRtqi^r^iH^T^ra:, gH^'^qr qiira't, 3=£?5 rri%i33- 

3%3!'?r^TT3RmR333TI3 I R3 3^3313^331^ 3R 

3?r f?irfr Wr'33R3*flRf^r3333r3353 fS3;/ 3T33T3W 

3^35E3%3 33TRR13Tf?3R3333l43R T3T3; I 31133^, 3f3 T^l- 
^3333 33 0q¥rrF3:, ^gTro313lf?3rf|M^q3333I3'3 f33^ I 

3f f33^3, g33fl'nTfq 33T’i^ SW5:53lf^^?r[R333^3R, “ »^Tcr4T 
3'3S3t f5rf3’^3TT%353: ” (ff. '^-V-^) 3% =3 ^R^fflT^R^RWqRR- 
’Rra33ITif^3^3R) ■ , 

(ii) 3WR.qRqf3l'3r'3f333333 ^1313313% 3ftr-i-'gq3?3®3m% I 
(3T3Tf33T3% — •) 

II Section - 

From ®r3R3!l to RUqiRT 

Topic.— AW possible ways in which Brahma-knowledge can be 
, made, the subject-matter of meditative prescription are consi- 
dered and dismissed as unsatisfactory in one way or another. 
The Siddhantin points out that the Vrttikara who advocates 
Brahmajnana as subsidiary to Niyoga cannot advance any 
pramana to substantiate niyoga. The reason is that there is 
no Vidheya to determine the niyoga, i.e., the thing of which 
it is predicated. The knowledge relating to Brahman may 
result either from Sabda or bhavana (dhyana) or saksatkara, 
in none of which niyoga is permissible. As regards verbal 
knowledge one who studies the Scriptures acquires it without 
the necessity of any Niyoga provided one has a fair compe- 
tence in the idiom and syntax of the language. There is no 
good enjoining bhavana for it does not yield the desired result. 
If like svarga the phala of bhavana or recollective series 
(iflfd^dR) is eschatological then it desiderates karma and 
not jnana; if on the other hand it is perceptive (tRT^) 
it must result immediately, but it does not ; similarly niyoga 
is inapplicable to jnana resulting in saksatkara. 

Nor does it stand to reason to suppose that from smrti- 
santana or uninterrupted meditation on Brahman intimated 
in the Upanisads, a distinct variety of jnana arises which helps 
one to Brahma-realisation. Again injunction on meditation 



PAtCAI>ADIKA OF PADMAPADA 


394 

in general and not on the recollection series is also untenable, 
for here the very subject-matter of meditation may be illusory. 

Paragraphs . — 

3. From to 

III Section 

From q?g?r: to 

Topic.—Soms other critics advance the view that an extra- 
empirical jnana differing from verbal-knowledge is enjoined 
as the object to be striven after. But this is unsustainable. 
If such jnana is to be enjoined we have to seek for extra 
empirical karana, and vi|aya. In case they are secured from 
such passages as ‘ »?rci°tT ‘cTB# it comes 

to this that this extra-empirical vijnana is the valid means of 
establishing Brahman — and the Veda is the 
praraana for vijnana. But that the Vedanta Vakyas are a 
direct means of self-realisation is a matter of immediate per- 
ception. Hence no vidhi is possible of an extra-empirical 
knowledge which is the competent to yield the fruit of 
saksatkara. 

Paragraphs,— ' 

5. From to 

6. „ BUB: 

IV Section 

From sTBTRB to 

Topic . — Some others hold the view that Brahman and the indivi- 
dual soul are distinct, ascribe to Brahman all-pervadingness 
as well as residence in a specific region (heaven) and believe 
that from the enjoined meditation on the assumed identity 
of the self and Brahman as expressed in BUTI%, the fruit 
of release is secured like the fruit of Svarga from Yaga. If 
that be so, Release being the Karya of Upasana would be 
evanescent like enjoyment in Svarga. Also texts declaring the 
disembodiedness of Release as vouched for in 
would be set at nought. 

Paragraphs . — 

7. From to 

9, „ 5I5nf^ „ 



CONSPECTUS 395 

Pratika.— 

^TT!^, qfl;'s[JiT rafrai ‘ ' (it. ^t- T- 

'^-'i) 3Twiq ft?rrr%: jrfcww^i^s^ar'JR^rt^in??: 

I ?tti^tT^i55^'fi^R:2ik^3fr4i?isr^^i: ’lis s?i% 1’^!:%, 

Tq[^F5[2r^#m;^ siffiNi 5n%5 i 

Jig5W3Er?;¥Jr srpf^i i 

^TRgT# ^ar% I w^riRcRsn^r^^rftciTOi^i]^ i ak^ 
^aP^wR^twqq; I ci«rr ^ amrgssifjrjnria k?iwaiTak?rEir|^?;oi 
q«rT jraH, ^T%^?r a^r cTWIN 

cTc^fia^rfiRcR^ ^ ^riirrg; “ aRceTragikfi ” (skr. 

“-'^) I ^«iT ag^aiNi Jri^5fi^iTO-a5 i^a:ws?f^fiR5^'ir- 

’R# ?iRcr5%5f i 

ara%akR?ri5?^’ii^ cf^srk^ =?? 
aRaiq 5Ra?r I T^^ak?Tiktiwar w^fiRciFakfri^ ^il^iqi^i^- 
i^:=iaftRaKfakk ^^iRfa i ^t^n =a 

gf^:— “ ^ 1 1 g^rCR^ ^la': PtaikaaRaifastfe ” ik 
aaR^aga^k i “ai^tiiaia aa a rsPTiiaaRS^a:” (sf.^r. -i-iv^) 
ffa miPra^T^aara^awr^aw^oiaafTak sr^- 

m’^aa fia a^aa i if mairaa^qssfiiara'^ti aiqq^ja i 

sTiafRcf^ra aa^i^kfa %r ; a^ ^wiff^cfi^ i “ ar^fR 
aa^^aafkajf I afiRf kgaicaiaacar ^r^ra ii (^re. 

“ sraiai ftaai: ” (g'la'. wx) “ srair ua gaa ; ” (if . v-v 

1^) f^mfgfa^a: i sRiifigiafiaWi^^a 
fa^kfa fa^ t ai f%f%?qfwwi^ akiikikaamPi a^ffwk 
f T%a faf?aa i aar ifasaiff siaia^icaari'^ii^ i aar a akaHt 
sai: I fi 1 aRarf^, is^akk, s^aacakaik, a^i%aRf|a, 
ia?ri?T, f%^a, iaa^ifcr:^aTaq; i . ai aafaa? af 
^tcsaa araia^a i aiaia^t^k ar^niajf i' " ^Rai aaifRiraifi- 
fRwiattcfaif ail 1 3i?aa ipw asaia” (ajs. vn) laaif- 
gkaa: 11 

3Taarpi, aka ^rgi a^ar \ aak ^s^takaiwkka, 
aa a ak^aa aiR^^aiksv^aaka, srfaar ira i ala ak 
aaiai^ai^a aRafaia%^?kki ^P^aiaak ft% aa ^aa i 
faar^ aak^Taikiki^^aaa i ) 

(ii) ski a aiksatraka a^raiar gai: i (arfa a) ii 



396 ■ ' 

'■V. 'Section';' ■ 

v: From : . to 

Topic * — The opponenfs contention that Liberation though effected 
by action is eternal as attested by the §ruti — "There is no 
returning to the mundane life’ — Chand* xv. U does not stand 
to reason. The use of the present tense " avartate’ is to indicate 
mere laudation. Chdnd. VIII. i. 6 "just as here on earth what- 
ever accrues from action perishes, so does the merit in the 
other world accrued from' works’ supported by the well- 
understood rule "that which is an effect is short-lived — 
^ is subversive of the opponent’s contention. 
It is true that Chand* IV. xv. 5 declares that those who proceed 
by the path of light are rid of transmigratory life, but from 
the qualifying words "iha’ and ‘imam’ it should be understood 
that non-reversion is limited to the present cycle and is not 
limitless. Moreover, the text "The knower of Brahman becomes 
Brahman’, Mimd* IIL 9. makes it evident that no action inter- 
venes between the knowledge of Brahman and Freedom, for 
the two are simultaneous. What is required is the eradica- 
tion of the obscuring nescience. 


Paragraphs * — 


10. From 

qcSJf: 

to JUfRiw^Pi aRiiiTUi; 

11. „ 

3 lfq R 


12. „ 

?i«ri 


IS. „ 

f%R 


Pratika . — 




(i) ’ [(5^. 

?n%R cs ’ (gwg-. I ' T%[i^ I 5T 

(I. 1 sriHire ’ (ff. v-^v) i 

^rifofrT. w-'io) | 

‘ m ^ ffTf : ’ (^ifrr. vs)] 

(ii) cwr ' ?rl:ac>T^2Tf 

(15- i-v-io) ^ i 

(iii) (crcq>?5B qJfqWi 

JRRR 1 ' R f| ff: Rlt ' 

(a. 5areirRTn%%% tit ’fFR: 

stiRifir i ai R*RF#rai?i qit cnr^’ (sFti- 1 



■ CONSPECTUS 397 

(iy) ' m 

(^F%. vs-^ %wmr; §cf#f 

^iq-fj{?:q[i^RmgTi?Tfi^iqT^ % i-v^) # i 

VI Section ■ . . ■■ 

From to 

Topic,— That the dispelling of ignorance results in salvation finds 
corroboration in rationalistic systems like the Nyaya. That 
system conceives moksa as resulting from the eradication of 
pain, birth, effort, blemish (as likes and dislikes), and false 
knowledge, the destruction of the subsequent effecting the 
destruction of the one immediately preceding (Gautama’s 
second aphorism); according to the Bauddhas also freedom 
consists in the emergence of the final moment of pure conscious- 
ness (in the consciousness series) resulting from the eradication 
of illusory notions as the outcome of constant reflection on 
truth (tatvajnana). But it should be noted that the Vedantic 
conception of moksa is by no means the same as that of these 
two schools. The analogy holds good only in so far as they 
hold that false knowledge is dispelled by the knowledge of 
tatvajnana whatever be its nature. Such dispelling of igno- 
rance is through right knowledge which in the present case 
is that Brahman and atman are not distinct 

Paragraphs . — 

14. From to # 

PratJka , — 

i I I ^ 

’ (ll- I ^ I 3r«n srfiRgqrgk” 

(31^1. Vl-S-'i) “ 3Tffa[# 11% qJT 

3TT%^T%f 1 %I%2I%?iraW%FTrxi ' qipk 

‘in'qiqTq (sf^. v-V’), 



VII Section 

From aT«n% to 

Topic . — The opponent maintains that the Vedantic texts adduced 
to establish the identity of jiva and Brahman are in reality 
meant to enjoin meditation on Brahman which is an entity 
distinct from jiva, which meditation may be any one of |h^ 


2 § 



398 PAtCAPADTKA OF PADMAPADA 

following varieties: Sampat, adhyasa, kriyayoga, mmitta, 
samskaratmaka Brahmadrsti in jiva: (for an explanation of 
these terms, P.P.). 

, Paragraphs . — , 

15. From to , 

16. „ 

VIII Section 

From artrat to 

7bp/e.— If Upanisadic statements like ‘That Thou art’ are ad- 
mitted to teach meditation on Sampat, etc., the unequivocal 
pronouncement therein of the identity of the individual self 
and Brahman would go in vain. The Srutis denying variety 
as such would be purposeless. Liberation is no other than the 
eradication of ignorance and it is only the khow'ledge of identity 
that is the solvent of the obscuring nescience. 

Paragraphs — 

17. From to / 

18. „ rfWrar „ 

19. „ 

Fratika . — 

' 3lt (if. l-v-'lo) ‘ aWJTlwr s?fl’ (if. 

iiiuii ifrrcB^fi^sn^qT^qr?:: i 

‘fvRra ” (go^. 

i "m ^rfira” (go^. \-\-%) 

fT% ^ i 

^i5RF5r #q^TR^qq:sffip|q;Rf%^riTBL i ^ 3ffifq?n i 

1% ifi i iqgppi urn- 

FSRftfq-R ^ jf W(%1W ^R'lgqqqr: q5^R§g I ] 

IX Section 

From irg to jfl^W 3n%R;qtTi: 

Topic.— It cannot be maintained, the upholder of Vidhi urges, 
that Brahman is not in the objective relation to action since 
it is the visaya of the action denoted by the verb ‘to know’; 
cf., ‘The knower of Brahman becomes Brahman only — 
Further it is urged that if Brahman 
is not a knowable entity, the declaration that Brahman is to 
be known from the Scriptures loses its significance. 



■ CONSPECTUS 399 

The Siddliantin points out that though Brahman being 
self-luminous does not require anything else for its mani- 
festation, it becomes the subject-matter of the Sastra in so far 
as it constitutes the reflection, informing the final psychosis 
or antahkaranavrtti which dispels avidya. When this vrtti 
also disappears because it is a product of that avidya, the 
Self remains by itself as it has ever been. Since thus moksa 
signifies but a restoration of the ever free self, to its original 
state, it cannot be said to have been produced. 

Paragraphs,— 

20. From to stgcrq-raRra 

2,1. „ 3TtrfF.Jl „ 

Pratlka,— 

(i) JT ?r- 

” (%Jr. 

5rl1%5rrrrn% =;r i ^^r- 

stftoT c# ^Ti1[^qT?ra ’ (%?r. v») 

# i] : 

(ii) qrTfr%%?qigqq%Ri% %g. I 

(iii) ?r, I q ^rriimT^- 

ctqr fqqq'ijcr sr^i 5fraiTqr^rW% ire ^rfi 

5i%qr^5rgfq?ii^r<?qd i cr«rf =q qn^nj— 

‘ qwisFg cf^iFd ?r % ?f: I srreiM re^iR^r refimFwstisT- 

giJl’ (%q. vn "g ?:s s[SR ‘ 1% 5tiifl2?T: ‘ 

(ff . V %qqTf^ I 3T^sf^iqir5q^^?riRcqf5rq^#5T] i 



X Section 

From g to f^gtqTi 

Topic.— kny karma to be purposeful must originate something 
3cqr%, secure something — 31#^ bring about some changes — 
T^R, or effect purification. Now since karma is incapabN 
of effecting moksa in any one of these ways there is no scope 
for it, i.e., there is not even, the remotest connection of mok?a 
with action. 


26a 



PAtGAPADIKA OF PADMApAdA 
Paragraphs.— 

22 . From to 

23. ,, 3T2rtR?iOTr?:fRra „ 

24. „ #^4c^irpif „ 

25. ,, 

26. „ clWFti: „ ill=q^t ff r%?rraT: 

Pratlka . — 

(i) FW:, [A¥T WI 

ffw l rf'^I =ErcT%. f# 3Tf%^cga3^ t iJT ft 

rr2ri% r%9i %i ®i% i m 

I q'lrilc#, ?r^>ra#!T 

FI^IITOlFTc^R^fW'T^lFr:, 3TIi?T?r^ 1 ?rrft qiTBqiTK- 

I ft iiTF g^^P4Pt giriqftJT m i sr 

1 trg FlSfr: ft5?frq-F*IH 

gf^^5Tfn5rsfif5?r5tcr, q^nsssf^f Rw4«n%?j5Tr ^^^rmior 

I q r%qrwqrqi 3 qq%?[Rqq: i qqi^qi tipqi qqlqfltf qqRirw 

3¥|t I q^JtoPfl r^qqr f%f^^|Sfq<^f^qJTTc3Efq: 51^15%^ I ‘ arfqqjiqfsq- 

g^iqt’ %qFr^(i% qiqqrft qr^t^q: I ?rqtiftsq;i awisr 
f^qpnq; WTqr% l sr^qmqiqi^g f%qiqt: STiqqqtqrsT ctqrsScHT 4 - 
1 ^3 tf i?Tqqt ^mi=qFqqtTqq'fcrrft^qr i%qqi tCf ^f^Bqnniri 

?g: I q I ^ftqjqqnrRqrq: I Jr?T^ 

^ !§rRi=qqqit%^Fqii%cqn i m\ ?rc4f?i qtf^qrq^rqrfjq- 

f?RHl q«lT tfraqT%t%c^I%ft%q qif- 
ri«f5?r9T crqitmf^q qw 1 

trq ?IFqi=qJFtq#qqtm%rr 3Ti q^T f f'%^? 1 % ?f 

^F'^q^ I g =q trq I tlq ?rt^^If9F^^F%qq'JI 

?fqt: F%qF r%q^?% I q??J3 q ^ trqi^qrfq, ' q#Ftrq: F%q55 ^Flfqq- 
¥t?rftF STF^qr^^Fn^ ’ (go;r. 5 ft Jf-qqoftq: t '•3TF?%'%- 

Jt^FffR 36r%i?IFf4fF'iTW ’ (^F5. fft =q i qqr =q ''trsEfti: 

3 S: ?r^F<fr 1 ^Ffija-TfqqF?!: ?rr^t 

F%^'q^” vii) ff% 1 qqorr^^FqFFqjrqot 

JfSnM giFFqtqFq^lJC” (|?r. c) 5 % q 1 I^I ?F 5 rFqqFqqFF% 5 rqcrt 
ft<?lS-«qt =q qi&q?r: qiJ»TFq^ 5R!^: I 
rTWF^ 3 Fa^qjrqlsft 1 

3|#S?qs%^ ^Ff a%?rg[Ft 3 SJTf q 1 ] 

(ii) cWrq; HFq^^ gfcqt f^(qt) q^quiiTFiFrqgiFqqr ff 
%q'l^ II 



CONSPECTUS 


401 


XI Section 

From ?If ^ to fr% 

Topic.— lx is argued that since Brahma-jfiana is a mental act it is 
fit to become the content of an injunction and such jnana, 
only as Vidheya, is related to Brahman and not independently. 

^ ^ ^ ^ ^ is rebutted by a detailed exposition of the 

fundamental difference between jnana and kriya (i.e., Jnana 
as a logical fact and jnana as a psychological process) in their 
nature, logical implication and the result they yield. Even 
texts like ‘atman is to be seen, heard about, etc.,’ are only 
injunctive in appearance but are really meant to extol atma- 
jnana. Hence the siddhanta is that jnana can never be the 
subject-matter of a mandate. 

Paragraphs.— 


27. 

From 


to 

OO 

>> 



29. 

?? 



30. 

>) 

mmm 


31. 

>> 

BBI B BBB BIB 

» 

32. 


B5: gB: ■ 


33. 

?» ■ 

3T(^ =B 


34. 

■ >? ■■ 

BBBB 


Pratika.- 

- — „ 




(i) Jig f R JfR t%^lr i b i : (i%Br if bibbi 

at BBBr i bbbi 
(^. m. V'i-'i) I «Bi!r bur bbiIt gw 

5RPTB, I gwFWRR \ f ib g sBrarB^BB. i 

HBIB BT BsngcTBfgf^BBBm fIB «|B^^B?B«Tr BI 

I B %BBIBJ^B: I Bift gW^^TB; I BBTFBIBB^r^ 
?IBBT Bftsiigtozpg^ I 3 isii^-“gBBr BIBBlBBlf^T: ” BIB! BIB ’TrBBTI%: 
(SFtt. 4 - 1 ) f?I 5 r Bli^gBBBBIBffSBrBBI BBf^ I %B 55 %rBBr- 
5 FBcBtl%BB BI B I BI g ar%tsBIBfllf BI I 

BIR gBBBJBI I Bfi SBr?ilBBBB 5 flBj|Bm flBBBBB I%qT I tR 
BlaBRIBBBB^g BIBci^B: I bIb B% BBigBBflTcBlBBBBfqr ?TB B 
I BfSBB BBBIBT SFBfBBIBBIBBBcBR f-^- 

BBBgqt?nBl BllBigBlBBB^gfBBBtBrBil f%BBff^ 

Bf| *' 3 IFBT BI 3 fT sESSB: ” ^BUBflB .BBBUB | 



402 


paNcapkdtkA of PADMAPADA 


fs ^ FI ^ =^1 5 w45!^%, 

gw4^iFs4 ?3wrR^^Tq^i’TO'erra5rn%5Tt^r%g€if ^ s^rnRAr- 

“3TRJIT gft S'SSJf: '’ I ^9iIcin%nJIW 

Slf?Wf =^Rfr<lT^37!^Kf% l '• ?fl JI^JIURTd” (if. vv- 
^) “11 cl^ ?Il?Tn^T5jyTc^l ^ q^ll, %5T ^ fllRriTri: I^fiRIRtll* 
1 %1 (if. V-V-'i'^) “lllRK Ifj'’ (if. Wl^) 

fRTfffi; I if'iqjisisriRiRiiii fiiFiRtfRii ii i Ri^r%, 
craiiRvgqiTii i ar^rtr fufrefrra ifftRitnii gut ii^si- 
cTTfri^: RIT %1% I IIT 1 gfi:— *' IRlli 

111:1 raTi=ES?irR mri qriRni^iqfi^i’ II (if. v-x-'i^) ff% ’ 
“ W'^lT fl%TrRllRflfRl IRl” (R. ’fT. °i'^.-^o) 1 

(ii) mm lIlirailflf^llllT Ifpi: llioil t 

XII Section 

From lffq%f^fT|: to 

Topic . — The purvapaksa (Prabhakara) is that no part of the 
Scriptures is denotative of mere existent things. The Veda 
serves as a valid means of knowledge only because it is through- 
out injunctive in character; otherwise it would cease to be a 
pramana. Vedic statements become significant in relation to 
action, not otherwise. The Siddhanta makes it clear that 
distinct from the ego which is associated with action there 
exists the Saksin, the inner witness which, because it is revealed 
by no pramana, Other than scriptural testimony cannot be 
related to action. That witness is not illusory like the nacre- 
silver; it is never sublated. Nor can one will it away for it is 
one’s own atman and to will away oneself is impossible, for 
one who does so is himself the atman. Nor finally is its des- 
truction conceivable for the instruments of destruction cannot 
affect it. Rather it marks the limit at which all destruction 
ceases. It is the goal of everything — the Ultima Thule — cf., 
w ?rf q^r *if%: i 

Paragraphs . — 

35. From to 

36. „ „ STRFffail'Irf 

'37. „ llcRl „ 

Frattka , — 

(i) ‘ %i55iEiqi^ if iiifr 

11% ’’fill 



CONSPECTUS 


403 


(ii) 1 

• (iii) tr?r!|'7R'qc%^if^’T?T-. (plis^^fiCi m ^?4Rii%igi%^?r- 

T%?5{3ir: iJTi^r ?rn% ^ii'^’Ttstrr fi 4'r^, 

“?f lT5f %!% (ff. VV=^0 

R^PTc^il'JH^c^^ %i?i^ I ?r I cr^rf^cl^r aci^^ig; 1 

^ , iit5r^Jrm2i^5irraX%'it ^icgrel ?tir t^; ia:^i%^; 

5W ^ %!n%Tra*Ta: ?i^i?TicTrF, sra; ?r jt %^- 

c5r^r??5Ti5 5514^1 %gn i =Er ^ t% 

;Ti'^qi^5T: I ^ Tf t%Jr^^rTi:^tT5tT3 5W'cT ra5r^3ii% I g^r ra^tr^- 
|?^^7r^i^i%^i5fr, i%r%3Tf|c4¥rTqw iH^r%?T;, arfr T%5rs«f5gTft- 
I ctwci; ‘ gw5i q< f%f%c?FT qRisi ?ii qqi nra: ’ (4;ra. win) 

' ^ g^'i ' (??. Vv^.^) ira ^IraRq^cq-RtRiuij; 1 

g^#qr%qcg aqvm*Tifr?q ^qq?j% 1 ai^r gyTq^iqqr %^viritr 

5TH% 51% ^=45T ] 

XIII Section 

From 5T^gi?rW¥I to I'^^a^'R^Tc^ia: 

Topic . — On the strength of the text, “Since the Veda has action 
as its purpose, those passages which do not refer to action 
have no independent logical status” — Jai. Sut. 1.2.1, the 
purvapaksin, urges that passages which neither prompt one 
to action nor dissuade one from it are void of import and in 
consequence the knowledge of mere existent things must be 
only illusory, especially when, as in the present case, no appeal 
is possible to other praradnas in support of it. Sabdasakti 
or the power of denotation is apprehended in no word that 
points to an object as such, unrelated to action. The 
Siddhantin rejoins that experience is otherwise. In the sen- 
tence ‘ Bring the cow, Devadatta’ the word Devadatta signifies 
an existent object though through an imperative statement. 
Hence it cannot be maintained that it is contentless — nira- 
lambana. It can only be said that such sentences as refer 
to existent objects are purposeless. But the Vedantic texts 
do serve a purpose which consists in their contribution to thg 
realisation of the Supreme bliss. Hence passages relating to 
existing objects may lack independent validity when they are 
arthavadas (like but not when they refer to the one- 

ness of Brahman with the jiva, 



404 PAhGAPADIKA OF PADMAPADA 

Paragraphs — 

38. From 

40. „ 5f3Tf5fq ^ 

XIV Section 

From W%ct<^ to ^ 

Topic— li is urged that Sabda whether empirical or Vedic must 
intimate as its import what is related to action. Unlike the 
Bhattas the Vrittikara admits that Vedic words may denote 
existing objects but then he maintains that they are meaning- 
less unless in some way they are connected with action. He 
criticises the view that words become significant only in 
association with action in the early stages but later on they 
may express existing objects when conjoined with other words 
(itaranvita) and not necessarily with words denoting action. 
If this is conceded, he points out there will be the contingence 
of the word ‘cow’ meaning an animal with a dewlap to the 
boy who has just begun to learn the language, and an animal 
with a mane, say a horse, to him at a later stage. 

As against the view that words can denote objects, only 
as related to action the Siddhantin adduces instances where 
without any verbal idea meaning is conveyed from expressions- 
What all is required for a word to become significant is its 
association with other compatible words and not that it should 
always desiderate a word expressive of action. 

No doubt one of Jaimini’s Sutras (I. i. 25) seems to justify 
the purvapak§a view. But a careful consideration of Sahara’s 
Commentary on it shows that it really does not. The allusion 
in the Sutra to ‘relatedness to action’ is with reference speci- 
fically to the portions of the Veda dealing with the ritual. The 
Vedanta view is that verbal statements may point not only to 
related entities, unconnected with action, but also to ‘ reality 
itself’ unrelated to anything— a view which has the support 


of Pamni* 



Paragraphs , — 




From 


to qf itcfr# 

42. 




43, 

>> 



44. 




45. 




46. 





to fqftR 
„ vri^or 



CONSPECtUS 4oi 

Prattka.— 

— (?:tt f| 

ink, cf^RfrarmsTc^nltmsrraw’^^tMTwsn^ i 3 !pt =a 

“arratw T%3ft4caTa[R^^3Ti?^«iRrq,” 

^iq%5rR^3T5raw; i 5FiRikii%Ri%g=^s2iR\%^ 
vrsiTT^k^, ^lak^ralra tr f^-. i ^icrgak^^^qk 

ik^n ¥rf% I 3n%3nksk im 

%i: i la ^11?; I %qfraksN waiRa^a^TTkiirg^tSTi^^ i i^i^- 
k I 5iti3R ctR I a %cna3f a^asafas ^rak i araanT i% 
aa aa Rif^fa i a^al — aRaaarwa^a^^ ala ^rfa^Jrlk t aa- 
aa^rr fa^ars^R ^aRlarkfik: aaraa ftaa a^iaT%sa«fafa i%ar- 
aiaraa^a?a%a i 3aa =a — “ a f^a^a: ” a^aargr ki%- 

a:ai%aa i a =a ai war i ana fl;aiataaa[ i ankarsnaTsaatis- 
aaa;%a: “arn'ifi a ^^asa--” ^anfa laa^ga'^anaraTaaaa araai i 
a^Tia5qi.i) 


XV Section 

From ^=a arirai a a^a^a: to afaa?fRri^ a 

Topic . — It has been (VIII) shown that the significative potency 
(Sakti) of words can be ascertained when they are in juxta- 
position with other meaningful words which may not convey 
a verbal idea. Here is pointed out that even the advocate of 
kriyanvitasakti, etc., has to admit that a connected meaning 
is possible in a negative sentence without the interposition of 
a verbal idea. The prohibitory passage — ‘a Brahman is not 
to be killed’ intimates no injunction to action; it only enjoins* 
abstinence from action. The negative particle denotes the 
negation (prior to negation- in- the present case) of what the 
word to which it is syntactically joined imports. This is a 
further consideration which shows that Vedantic . texts may 
point to mere existing objects unrelated to action. 

Paragraphs,—^ 


47. 

From 


to 

48, 

>> 

¥r n 


49. 




60. 

>5 


„ *r kf¥r'4Tk 

51. 

»> 



62. 


m 3^: 




406 


pAngapadikA of padmap^da 


Pmlika — 

^r43T^ti% i i m ^ 

qtR|qT^‘€ri?rif^^r^^i^m3Ti7m 

^^g?iTW5=^^r^rT?r?T=Tsf^ mtm ''mk 

I 5T3 g?f5rf[^fsfq ^m^ 

\ m^nm — 

XVI Section 

From to 

Topic , — The observation has been made that the Vedanta import- 
ing the nature of the accomplished something serves no purpose 
seeing that one who gets to know the reality through Vedantic 
study continues to exist in the transmigratory world. It is 
pointed out in answer that samsara— transmigratory existence- 
ceases altogether the moment the immediate unobstructed 
knowledge of Brahman arises. The continuance of common 
experience as distinguished from Brahman realisation so far 
as it continues — is because of prarabdha karma continuing 
to operate. As regards the point mentioned before^ v/z., that 
prescription of reflection— manana, and meditation — nidi- 

dhyasana besides sravana implies the inadequacy of the latter 
for Brahma-realisation, the reply is that they are also contri- 
butory aids and as such are anterior and not posterior to 
saksatkara or realisation. 

Paragraphs , — 

53. From to 

54 . „ rt«fr ^ 


Pratika.— 

:Tm?T^rwmiTO (JTsn# 

i sr f| |-.^¥r5Trf5[?r54 

?si%f% %^a*iiin5fRrrw^iciiR[n% 
i%T%i 45?qn%g?j; I w ^ 

t^jrTf^jrrfJTtr 5iRiq?i?Ri%^ f :# sRWffw gjrrt^jrR- 

' ’■5RRfRf^R^ %-.4 I If R f f o^RR TfiT- 

JTPTfRRfT cT^ f0555f2^=?RF!r ,^r^r%TR^f|WFT 



CONSPECTUS 407 

§53 5T3r% I gRT— “ 3RP(tif F3 # 

sr ^5sr?r:” i-'iv'i) i qrt%s^CRc3 

R fief %»r, I^sRTf RfJTWflc^ia; V ^ flRW: 

^rfl^acJTTT^Wm^'Jt W«3fllR 5fRF3?T: §5r€^R 5rf # 35?T^55T I 
f3^qi5i;65:?3§3i4[%RtiRn'^RtRR 1 ?icf3'w*fr3^r3w^ 5ERr<i?;R%ra 
%5t I 5WT- 

s^Irtr^cffTR^ ^^FcRi^^RsgiT^s^T^qTqisifrif^^wseqjri i t^i- 

?rfRRWi3i^t?pR: qslRrgqq^: i 5aR3R>Til['ir ?:rajf§?f!?rT 

•45i^Rr^qii%l^g3FWRra^ 3it'^lqq%: i ^ RiR^^r 

•43TT3TR3-eg<f<;il%[‘^: I 

RWfif*TR55 JTR^: 1 traq- qgiiifjfcc[qic5T#'r safR^R I 

3T5fl^; — ■'^fTf^55T%F^5?lIR?r aiRjf!% '^ir^RWHltl ’T^ofl JT R5:^% 
tvT, ’tl’iR3g5??!RqR%: 1 f| ara;?'! 3^5^^:, 

RSfT %?i5[Ti^fr|in^fgi%|itlSigq5i|ra\q;r'RT f%l^^aRq51Rg5itlS?5l: 
a'fes:, 5^: 3ir3%; ^I^^ISTTRR: l%13§l^gw: W5:, 

^T§T g^ f^f53®^3R^r R"?! I 35?T 

5T3tr ^ jf^r 1 ?r«!H?5^FW^R: ?srTSJ?;5T^- 
33PTiirR|rq g^?r5^a^4]r ?«ii3i^q5fr, q«n 3 t si^RR^^RmsRtiirfe 
^rf^#r qr=^3R5ft, R^,q=3R<ii 

5rRJiii^3%5ficq?WT#i 3R 5Ti'q‘r 3TR*iRi?iTRti%HRT% 

qfS^i3wqti?^qRRr!iigiRi%4i ?F®^aR2fi 5433 : 1 35Ri^iT^sin'%- 
RtRTRT I%R3lf^3r ^tl^RfaRtl fil43 5T ^I'»l: I cfWTl'*l«RiaRq- 
i^f^rRqRgqrCFR^i ^iqtrfq f^gqrsqriRRg^ 1 crai r 3ii(%f|5RT 
g%:__< ggsiisfl 355^1% a^5gi I 

3T3RJrfl3t<i^is§g; ai'm 3 I 3 %5r . v-v-vs) ^rt 1 ‘ e 

RgRq ^ ?i3mn% ?r3i arwr 53 ^taiofisaR ^3 ’ # 

=3 1 3 ‘ ^ 3131 ’ ( 3 ^ 37. 5 ^.' ^I 3 r R3351?- 

55^F3I3^mi (^: 3^S[W33?3 3^31% I 33113133331115331331 
33igl 33lfe31T I 33T § 33ig^ 331R53 313133333^53313 |3R33nTI 
. 35g33^ sr3315333733T^3Rf3'^3T3337333lflt^^353 3f4l 3 

g^3333lf^53r3R I 3 1 3T3331353F333Rr3«3T33tl: I 3T3 §13351 
3flF33 f3I%I%35Tt5r 33^31 ^333533^ t 35 331%, 3331313*3133- 
33333333135315^ I 513113 5tf^3t%!‘313{^3331 31IW513133R3 
3113: 33351%51: ^3'333 311 31^3313% 3315331333353311313 
1%33. 1 33 31% “ 313l3t 3111^131 ’ 3% 5rf§;33: S3^3111R3 

3333% I 51%3ftlI31%'RR % ‘ 8T3%1 33%f T3 %R535313 g333rRr- 
3R¥q3 I 31T5:¥33m %3 r 451— 3T3ra: 3Rl%33li<3fTt ’%j 


408 


PAtCAPADIKA OF PADMAPADA 


“STsira: (I. W'l) I 

^5ifafi%T% pi: ^rrwfw: — ‘3T«rT^r wiif^frTflr ’ fra 
sTfriwI^p^trai tr? ?fW raw3T: ^a^ffor aarorira . ^ fifqiira- 

f3nl?fR5TiWi raff^^TTopjiT^^Biw ^ stuionra ^rrasRlrafra v 

XII Section 

From cf^# %i:9I ^gjl: to srrq'Il^ss'jf^IcT 

Topic. — This is a recapitulation of the arguments of the last two 
Varpakas (V. p. 285). Here is criticised the view that the 
Vedanta enjoins meditation on Brahman — an existent entity. 
It is further pointed out that Brahman is established from the 
Sastra irrespective of any need for Vidhi, i.e., Brahman does 
not stand in complementary relation to any injunction. 
Finally on the ground that the previous Sastra has not dealt 
with the pure non-relationar Brahman it is pointed out 
that there is justification for commencing the new Treatise. 

The Varnaka concludes with the explanation of the three 
stanzas quoted in the Bhasya which are attributed to one 
Sundara Pandya. 

Paragraphs.— 

55. From cif4 

56. „ P ^ 

57. ,, T 

58. „ 

Pratika . — 

(i) srf^ =srrf : I 

(ii) »fRr%«qrcJT#r(s?r^ i 

t 

(iii) ap^soqi(cRfqiitq'ic5nqF5riT(g:fq»nOTfr: i ^Ttsuraq 

(iv) (qfctwioirafr i 31!%% ?fg:\p srat'rf 

cT[SScJn%^ 5 II?f tl A II 


to ^TTF^qrrara 


II l| 


INDEX 


■A': 

Abode, 310 

Absolute, 1, 2, 3, 76, 1 34, 210 
Absolute identity, 330 
Act, 212 

Actiou, 113, 131, 172 
Activity, 108 

Adhikara, 179, 182 • 

Adhikarin, 186, 187, 188, 194, 196, 226 
Adhyapana, 190, 191, 196 
Adhyayana, 171, 186, 187, 188, 191, 
193, 201, 203, 205 
Adhyasa, 44 
Adi-sta, 35 
Affliction, 125, 174 
Age, 199,200,201 
Agency, 198, 199 
Agent, 146, 195, 200, 211, 283 
Aggregate, 98, 249, 259 
Agneya, 212,235 

Agnihotra, 118, 167/ 168, 169, 173, 
205, 218 
Ahanta, 125 
Air, 265 

Aka^a, 36, 104, 265 
All-knowing, 275 
All-potent, 275 
Aloe-wood, 268 
Anartha, 106, 135 
Ancestors, 192 
Animal, 211 
Anitya, 190 
Ant-hill, 71 
Anubhava, 125 
Apprehended, 84 
Apprehender, 84 
Apavarga, 213 
Apurva, 240 
Arjuna, 232 
Artha, 235 

Aruria, 193 ^ ^ ' 

Aryas, 189 
Asvamedha, 186 
Atmahanana, 255 
Atmajhana, 146 

Atman, 51, 52, 57, 60, 80, 102, 116, 
121, 123, 143, 149, 150, 151, 159, 
160, 244, 245, 246, 248, 251, 255, 
269,294,296, 313, 314, 332 
Atman -cognition, 148 
Atman-entity, 149 
Atman-identity, 135, 138 
Atoms, 217, 219> 267 
Atreya, 232 
Attainment, 310 
Attributes, 244, 260 
Auspiciousness, 202 
Author, 231 


A — Contd^ 

Authorship, 277 
Auxiliaries, 94, 95, 96 
Avararia, 105 

Avidya, 10, 11, 12, 35, 42, 47, 49, 53, 
54, 67, 68, 104, 105, 107, 128, 136, 
137, 141, 146, 328 
Axe, 235 

-B ■■■ 

Baby-son, 119 
Bachelor, 211 
Badarayana, 116, 139, 217 
Bath, 145, 168, 173 
Bauddhas, 97, 168 
Beatitude, 234, 257 
Beginningless, 124, 126 
Being, 216, 251, 275 
Benediction, 5 
Benefit, 231 
Bhatta, 57, 102, 175 
Bhrama, 38 
Bhrgu, 224, 275 
Bile, 19 
Bitter, 19 

Bliss, 117, 159, 184, 255, 275 
Blue-lotus, 285, 288 
Body, 108, 112, 113, 114, 148, 255, 
328, 332 

Bodily aggregate, 126, 127 

Bolus, 192 

Bondage, 3 

Boy, 200, 201, 290 

Brahman, 1, 48, 127, 145, 221, 223, 
225, 238, 243, 258, 265, 276, 288, 
294, 296 

Brahma-cognition, 136 
Brahma-knowledge, 126, 140 
Brahmaloka, 184, 208 
Bmhmavidya, 127 
Brahmapa, 188, 308, 324, 326 
Breathing, 278 
Btbaspatisava, 186 
Buddha, 168, 175 
Buddhistic, 100, 168 

C . , , 

Caitya, 168 

Calamity, 16 

Canals, 156 

Candra, 287 

Caraka, 232, 234 

Carvaka, 76, 123, 250 

Caste, 199, 200, 201 

Cattle, 111 - ^ 

Caturmasyayaga, 218 

Cause, 94, 95, 96, 272, 281 

Cause-effect, 97 


410 


PAtCARADIKA OF PADMAPADA 


C-^Contd. 

Cause-effect relation, ,98 ^ 

Causal efficiency, 92, 93 
Chapter, 213 ■ ‘ 

Child, 119 
China-rose, '28. / 

Class, 245 
Clay, 23r ■ 

Cognised, 57, 80, 81, *84 
Cogniser, 2, 57, 80, 81, 82, 83, 84 
Cognition, 29, 31, 32, 35, 37, 38, 83, 
85, 90, 92, 98, 148, 157, 165, 214 
Colour, 29, 150, 164, 246 
Configuration, 245 

Consciousness, 35, 36, 58, 59, 62, 63, 
242 

Consecution, 183, 202, 203 

Contemplation, 138, 162, 296 

Content, 152 

Cooking, 23 

Cow, 23, 132 

Cravings, 208, 209 

Creation, 267 

Creator/ 240 

Crow’s teeth, 183, 234 

Crystal, 69, 70, 78, 79, 269 

Curds, 25, 26 

D 

Darvihomas, 210 

Deafness, 13 

Deaf persons, 8 

Death, 262 

Debts, 211 

Deep-sleep, 64, 68 

DejBnition, 258, 261, 263 

Deity, 5, 131,* 156, 198, 283, 300, 329 

Delusion, 293 

Desire, 209, 215, 225 

Desired, 295 

Detachment, 224 

Destination, 318 

Destruction, 61, 88, 258, 259, 260, 

313. 

Devadatta, 72, 286, 307, 319 
Devata, 240 
Devil, 307 

Dharma, 115, 116, 142, 145, 167, 168, 
169, 170, 172, 173, 175, 176, 177, 180, 
201, 202, 204, 205, 206, 207, 211, 
212, 213, 214, 220, 235, 244, 269, 
270, 271, 296, 302, 322, 323, 327, 
331 

Dhyana, 161 

Discipline, 217, 219, 220, 226 
Disease, 111 
Dish, 265 
Dissolution, 264 
Do§a, 20 

Double-moon, 15, 270 
Doubt, 142, 147, 176 
Dream, 14, 33 
Dream-objects, 35 


B^Contd, : 

Dumbness, 120 

Duty, 172, 190, 197,204, 213, 270 
E 

Earth, 275 
Effect. 94 
Effort, 146 
Ego, 62 
Ego-agency, 69 
Ego-cognition, 50, 86 
Ego-consciousness, 62, 63 
Ego-notion, 52, 53, 54, 56, 57, 80, 120 
126, 149, 166, 247, 248, 251 
Elements, 246, 264 
Elephant, 35 
Endless, 124 

Enjoyment, 184, 216, 249, 250, 251 

Entity, 128 

Eradication, 132 

Eternal Seer, 41 

Ether, 265 

Evil, 128, 132, 134, 135, 293 

Evolution, 58 

Existence, 260, 263, 267 

Experience, 29, 52, 57, 63, 64, 94, 109 

Exposition, 230 

Eye, 164 

F 

Father, 191, 193 
Faggots, 208, 265 
Falsity, 125 
Fear, 137 
Fields, 156 

Fire, 189, 207, 208, 265, 268, 312 

Flame, 250 

Flour, 152, 153 

Food, 218, 233 

Fore-offerings, 235 

Forest, 62 

Forms, 262, 266 

Freedom, 140, 216, 226, 243, 244 
Fruit, 71 
Future, 93 

G 

Gamana, 234 
Gautama, 272 
Gifts, 189 
Good, 293 
Gotva, 60 
Grain, 157 
Grammar, 201, 232 
Granthi, 70 
Grinding, 234 
Gupas, 41 

H 

Happiness, 64, 184, 219, 282, 296 
Health, 119 
Heaven, 114 
Hell, 192 

Hiranyagarbha, 266 
Husk, 234 


INDEX 


4U 


Identity, 135, 305, 312, 327, 331 
Identity of Brabman; 306 
Identity of Self, 306 
Ignorance, 136 
Illusion, 38, 78, 122, 128 
Iliusoriness, 51, 87 
Illusory, 5, 317, 318 
Illusory Cognition, 270 
Illusory knowledge, 43 
Immediate perception, 298 
Imperishability, 219 
Impression, 29, 85 
Impurities, 210 
Incompatibility, 89 
Indigestion, 218 
Individual self, 4, 139, 140 
Individual soul, 47, 61, 76, 254, 288, 
298, 305 
Indra, 304 
Inference, 51 
Infinite, 242 
Infinite-regress, 40 
Inhibition, 37 
Initiation, 196, 200 
Injunction, 165, 166, 271, 297, 298, 331 
Inquiry, 52, 150, 181, 187, 203, 204, 
205, 206, 213, 216, 219, 221, 227, 
229, 238, 256 
Insentience, 58, 59 
Instruction, 190,192,196 
Isvara, 46, 48, 90, 91, 252, 253, 254, 
267, 268, 272, 311 
Intellect, 123 

Internal consciousness, 84 
Invalidity, 110 
Itihasa, 67 

■ J .. 

lackal 1 84 

Jaimini, 115, 116, 167, 168, 169, 170, 
172’, 177, 180, 319, 322 
Japakusuma, 69, 70 
Jati, 320 

Jiva, 12,48, 49, 54, 74, 76, 77, 91, 
128, 134, 138, 139, 221, 254, 305, 
310, 314 
Jivanmukta, 221 
Jivatman, 316 
Jnana, 111 
Joy, 184 

Jyoti§toma, 175, 176, 270, 302 
K 

Kapada, 268 

Karma, 117, 173, 190, 191 
Karya, 152, 174 
Katyayana, 323 
Kinetic energy, 68 
King, 119, 223 
Knowership, 109 

Knowledge, 18, 37, 165, 227, 228,' 230, 
269, 312, 331 
Kriya, 175 
K§ema, 111 


Lad, 198 
Lake, 220 
Landscape, 290 
Learner, 289 

Liberation, 5, 106, 107, 181, 184, 218, 
273, 296, 300, 301, 302, 303, 304, 
307,308,309,329,330 
Life-cycle, 121, 149 
Light, 265 
Limit, 318 
Lions, 153 
Logic, 133 
Logical proofs, 139 
Loka, 9 

Lokayatikas, 246 
Lord, 251, 253,266, 268 
Lotus, 73 
Lotus-bud, 26 

M ' 

Madhyamika, 38 
Magic, 14, 16 
Mahayanika, 83, 98, 99 
Maitreyi, 314 
Mamata, 125 

Mandate, 146, 149, 152, 157, 158, 159, 
161, 173, 174, 186, 189, 198, 292 
Manhood, 120 
Mansion, 207 
Mantras, 156, 157, 308 
Mart-silver, 32 
Mat, 73, 145 
Materialist, 246, 250 
Maya, 30, 31, 36, 49, 76 
Meaning, 187, 236, 240, 241, 244, 300 
Medical science, 234 
Medicine, 233 

Meditation, 139, 144, 148, 167,206 
209, 297, 298, 299, 300, 301, 302, 
305, 309, 311, 315 
Memory, 20, 22, 27, 29 
Memory-impressions, 45 
Memory -like, 34 
Memory-pictures, 34 
Mental-impressions, 27, 34 
Merit, 224, 303 
Meru, 262 
Milk, 25, 26 
Milk-jar, 138 
Mimamsa, 167, 180, 181 
Mimamsaka, 202 
Mind, 148 

Mirror, 72, 73, 75, 77, 78, 100 

Mok§a, 140, 148, 167, 205, 218, 225 

Momentary, 97 

Momentariness, 86, 259 

Moon, 72 

Moon-stone, 265 

Movement, 245 

Mukti, 92, 139 

Murder, 324, 326 

Mutual dependence, 87 



412 PAtCAPADIKA OF PADMAPADA 


'':N- 

Nacre, 38, 39, 74, 122, 129, 130, 317 
Nairuktas, 263 . 

Naiyayikas, 38, 68, 250 
Names, 262, 266' 

■Narada, 304 
Negation, 8 
Neophyte, 188 

Nescience, 2, 15, 49, 117, 126, 128, 
149,298,304,311 
Nigama, 241, 242 
Nihilist, 40 
Nirukta, 241 
Nitya, 190 

Niyoga, 145, 151, 153, 325, 326 
Non-bliss, 276 
Non-destruction, 61 
Non-revelation, 59 
Non-self, 7 
Not-self, 112 
Nyaya, 49, 168 

O 

Object, 57, 58, 62, 63, 72, 82, 83, 84, 
119, 122 

Object-cognition, 66 
Oblation, 198 
Odana, 234 
Omnipotence, 243, 268 
Omnipotent, 263, 276, 280 
Omniscience, 243, 268, 277, 278, 281, 
283, 284, 323 

Omniscient, 263, 276, 280 
Oneness, 308 
Origin, 171, 258 
Origination, 259, 264, 267, 313 
Out-castes, 189 

P 

Paddy, 235 
Pain, 295 
Papini, 323 
Paramesvara, 67 
Particular, 6 
Past 93 

Perception, 29, 40, 51, 113, 146, 160 
Performance, 164, 213 
Pennanency, 89 
Permanent enjoyer, 112 
Phala, 116 
phantom, 16 
Picture, 282 
Picture-illusion, 67 
Plants, 121 
Pleasures, 216, 295 
Pollard, 271 
Pot, 71, 265 
Pounding, 234 
Prabhakara, 57, 319 
Prabhakara, 38, 58, 62, 102, 175, 188, 
189, 326 

Pradh^a, 68, 266, 267 
Prajipativrata, 324 ; \ ■■ i • 


"^^Contd, 

Prakfti, 49 

Pramapa, 107, 108, 110, 146, 169 

Pramata, 108 

Prameya, 108 

Prapa, 239 

Pratigraha, 189 

Pratyabhijha, 87 

Prayaja, 163 

Prayoga, 242 

Prayojana, 141 

Preceding-time, 89 

Preceptor, 196, 197, 198 

Preceptorship, 191, 193 

Priest, 180 

Primal nescience, 12 

Prime cause, 264 

Privileges, 189 

Progeny, 191, 192 

Prohibition, 271 

Prosperity, 213 

Proverb, 172 

Pupil, 171, 194, 195, 196, 200, 201 
Purapa, 67 

Purification, 144, 145, 311 
Purity, 204, 244 
Purva Mimamsa, 175, 205 
Puru§a, 49, 82, 317 
Pu^a, 321 

'"q 

Quality, 245 
Quarter, 265 

■■ ■ ■ ' 

Rajanya, 186 
Rajasuya, 186 
Realisation, 273 

Reality, 150, 151, 166, 17$, 209, 293, 
299 

Reasoning, 133 
Recognition, 29, 72 

Recollection, 17, 22, 23, 29, 39, 40, 
297 

Reflection, 72, 73, 75, 76, 77 
Regress, 93 
Relation, 97 
Release, 140, 310, 311 
Remembrance, 43, 164 
Removal, 124 
Renunciation, 215 
Resemblance, 271 
Revelation, 150, 291 
Reward, 208, 262 
Rice, 157,232 
Ring, 293 
Ritual, 180 
Room, 6 

Rope, 43, 79, 137, 327 
Rope-serpent, 29, 78 
69 

Rfipa,- 125 



INDEX 


413 


S 

l§abda, 47, 128, 130, 132, 146, 151, 
157, 160, 165, 168, 190, 237, 290, 
^ 296,297,298,301 
iSabdabodha, 319, 322 
Sabda-sakti, 318 

Sabara, 115, 172, 173, 177, 180, 319, 
,322 

Sabarasvamin, 177 

Sacrifice, 117, 118, 189, 194, 329 ■ 

Sacrificer, 180, 194 

Sakti, 319 

Saktu, 147, 185 

Saktu-homa, 144 

Samit, 163 

Samkhya, 41, 68, 250 

Samnyasa, 211 

Samsara, 135, 180, 213, 303 

Samskara, 137 

Sanatkumara, 304 

Sapphire, 104 

feriraka, 323 

Satiation, 208 

Satra, 186 

Satisfaction, 184 

Savitri, 189 

Scale-pan, 129 

Scripture, 47, 269, 307 

Seed, 40, 96 

Seed-sprout, 78 

Self, 1, 2, 7, 78, 112, 114, 148, 292, 

■■ : 309, "328, 332 
Self-certainty, 133 
Self-contradiction, 103 
Seif-hood, 123 
Self-indulgence, 209 
Self-iuminous, 50, 104' 

Self-realisation, 306, 308 
Self-restraint, 215 
Self-revealing,' 145' 

Seif-validity, 206 
Sense-activity, 64 
Sense-contact, 27, 34 
Sense-objects, 184 
Sensory-knowledge, 45 
Sequence, 163, 203 
Serpent, 41, 42, 43, 137, 327 
Sesamum, 249 

Shell, 24, 25, 26, 27, 29, 39, 44, 129 
Shell-silver, 15, 23, 25, 31, 32, 45, 74, 
76, 271 

Sight, 150, 164 

Silver, 18, 19, 21, 24, 25, 26, 27, 30, 
32, 38, 39, 40, 42, 44, 74, 122, 129, 
130, 317 
Similarity, 87 
Sin, 201, 202 
Sleep, 65 
Smoke, 207, 268 
Smiti, 49, 67 
Solvent, 2, 3 
Son, 191, 192, 193 
Sorrow^ 33, 282 
Soul, 3, 46, 240, 255 


B--^€ontd. 

Sovereignty, 208 
%ace, 163 

Sprout, /O, 71, 96, 98, 235 
Sruti, 47, 49, 67, 127, 240, 262, 267, 
269, 311 
Step, 207 
Study, 228 

Subject, 57, 58, 84, 119, 122 
Sublation, 74 
Subsequence, 207, 211, 217 
Subsistence, 258 
Substance, 131 
Succeeding time, 89 
Succession, 179, 213, 214 
Sudra, 189 
SuitorSi 247 
Sun, 75 
Sun-spots, 16 
Sunyavada, 267 
Super-human power, 137 
Superimposition, 1 
Supreme, 136, 161, 219, 224 
Supreme Bliss, 276 
Supreme Ruler, 254 
Supreme self, 140 
Supreme spirit^ 298 
Susruta, 232, 234 
Sustention, 313 
Sutra, 279 

Svarga, 116, 137, 167, 170, 187, 212, 
^ 235, 240, 262, 302, 309, 329 
Svetaketu, 193 
Syllo^sms, 269 

T 

Tadatmya, 109 
Tantra, 322 
Tanunapat, 163 
Tarka, 133, 134, 135 
Teacher, 269 
Teaching, 189 
Therapeutics, 232 
Thinker, 252 
Thought-energy, 68 
Time, 163, 265 
Timira, 46 
Transformation, 103 
Tree, 19, 62, 231, 236 

U 

Ultimate, 226, 237 
Undesired, 295 

Universe, 36, 41, 128, 150, 260, 281, 
300 

Universal, 6 
Unknown, 230 
Unreality, 29 
Unseen, 217 
Upade^a, 181 

Upanayana, 118, 189, 190, 191, 193, 
196, 197, 200, 201 



414 


PAtCAPADIKA OF PADMAPADA 


U^Contd, ■ 

UpaDi§ad, 116, 127, 150, 187, 205 
Upasana, 1 37, 144, 148, 1 61, 314 
Uttara MfmamsS, 178 

V, . 

Vakya, 133 
Validity, 116 
Vimadcva, 304 
Varuna, 224, 275 
Vayy, 265 

Veda, 117, 151, 154, 161, 164, 166, 

167, 170, 171, 172, 173, 174, 175, 

176, 177, 178, 184, 185, 187, 189, 

193, 197, 204, 206, 217, 218, 221, 

278, 281, 291, 292, 296, 308, 316, 

318, 323, 330 
Vedartha, 176, 177 
Vaile§ilca, 268 
Vai^yastoma, 186 
Vidhi, 149, 151, 160 
Vidya, 42, 105, 132, 137 
Vijnana, 98 

Vijfianavadin, 38, 61, 84, 99 
Vik^epa, 105 

Village, 84, 145, 194, 195, 198, 262 
Vipa, 202 
Virtues, 217 
Vi§aya, 141 
Vi^vajit, 153 
Vidvajidyaga, 187 
Visvatomukha, 279 
Vi§vadevas, 305 


V — 'Contd, , 

Vyakarai^ia, 241 
Vyavahara, 109 
Vyasa, 210 

W 

Waking state, 35, 148 
Wealth, 190 
White cow, 319 
Will, 37, 295 
Wisdom, 244 
Woman, 272 

Word, 152, 186, 236, 237, 238, 240, 
244, 289, 290, 295, 300, 320, 323, 
330 

Work, 303 

World, 59, 93, 129, 139, 153, 165, 216, 
258 , 259, 260, 261, 262, 263, 265, 
266, 267, 269, 272, 277, 288 
World-cause, 276, 280, 323, 327 
World-creation, 283 
World-cycle, 243 
World-negation, 166 
World-order, 277 
World-sovereign, 184 

Y 

Yajfia, 131 
Yajana, 189 
YajhavaJkya, 314 
Yaska, 264 
Yoga, 111 
Yogins, 252 


473*47 Printed «it The Bangaloire Presn, Bangalore City, by G. Srinivasa Rao. SuDcrintendent, 
and Published by Or. B. Bhattacharyira. M.A„ Ph-D., Director, Oriental Institute, Baroda 



