PANCHAPADIKA VIVARANAM 
OF 
PRAKASA TMA Y A TI 


Rendered into English 
by 
Prof. P.S. SASTRI 


M.A., M.Litt., Ph.D., D.Litt 


Publishers by : 


SADHANA GRANTHA MANDIR - TENALI 



First Publication: 1997 


Copies Printed 


1000 


Copy
right 


a) Translator 
b) Sadhana Grantha Mandali, 
Tenali. 


Isvara Ashadham 


Price 


Rs. 800/- 


Printed at : 
Karnala Art Printers, 
TEN A L I. 



):(
):():():OO:():()$(Jo:.')J(*):();()():O:();():(
):():():():(

)(
)c():():(
 

 
 
I a 

 
 

 
 

 
 
s 
 

 
 

 
 
s 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 s 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 * 
s s 

 ! 
S This hook 

 
S Panchapadika Vivaranam 
 
S was printed and published i 

 with the financial assistance given by 
 

 Sri Tirumala Tirupati Devasthal1am, 
 

 Tiru p ati- 
 

 
 
* 
 
S S 

 
 
! s 

 
 

 
 

 
 

);():(









):(


):():(
):(













 



:x 


Re.ply to Prabhakara 
Ahankaranubhava 
Bimba Pratibimba vada 
Illustrations 
Theory of Perception 
Vijnana vada 
Advaitin's Reply 
Vedantin speaks 
Immediacy and Mediacy 
Immediacy of the self 
Adhyasa 
Prayojana Bhashya 
Pramanya Vicara 
Mahavakya aparokshya Prayo jakatvam 
J ivanmukti 
Sagunu Brabmopasana 
Mumukshoh Pravritti 
Vidhi Vicara 
Statement of another objection 
Reply 


181 
190 
214 
230 
237 
249 
259 
2&2 
290 
293 
328 
341 
35
 
3_4 
371 
374 
377 
378 
3&4 
3&6 



A Word from SadhanQ Grantha Mandali 
Sadhana Grantha Mandali was founded at Tenali 
in 1945. Many eminent scholars have enriched the Mandali 
with their valuble contributions on Religion and Philosophy. 
Many more have financed the publications. One of the 
aims of the Iustitution was to bring about the major works 
of Sri Sankara Bhagava tpada. We started with the minor 
worka attributed to Sri Sankara. So far sixteen volumes 
of these worke were published in TelugU with translation 
and commentary. We have also published ten volumes of 
the teachings of the late SJi Chandrasekharendra. Saraswati 
of Kamchi Kamakoti Pitha. 
Works like Saundarya Lahari, Siva Sutra Vartika t 
Chaitanya Charitamrita, Indian systems of philosophy, 
Matrika Cakra viveka, Biography of Sri Sankara, Muka 
Panchasati, some workS ofSadasiva Brahmendra and others 
were published in Tclugu. In MdIltra S.lstra we brought out 
Amnaya Mandara, Sudarsana Kalpa, Sri Kalpa, Maha- 
ganapathi Kalpa, Dattatreyakalpa, Hayagreeva Kalpa, 
Dakshina Murthy Kalpa, Chandi Sapta Sati, Vanadurga 
Mahavidya Pan
hasati, Pratyangira, Manyusukta, Sarva.. 
devata Pratishtha, Homasata chandi, Pratishtha Mandara 
an,d others in Telugu script during the last 52 years. 
The latest is the present work Pancha Padika 
Vivaranam of Prakasatma Yati re.ndered into Enghsh by 
Sri Potukuchi Subrahmanya Sastri, retired Professor of 
English, University of Nagpur. This monumetal work is 
a major landmark in the evolution of Advaita Vedanta. 
We invoke the blessings of the divine on all authors. 


T enali, 
20-7 -1997 


(8ufusu Suryaprakasa Sanri) 
Founder: Sadhana Gr.antha Mandali. 



PRE F ACE. 


Sri Sankara's commentary on the Vedanta Sutras 
of Badarayana is a monumental work. I(nown as Sari- 
ral<a Mimansa Bhashya, the comlnentary introduced 
tbe concept of Adbyasa which is of the greatest significance 
jn metaphysi'cs. This paved the way for the classification 
of the Upanishadic passages. 
R eJatj onal G\od and Supra-relational Absolute were 
introduced. Empirical and ultimate degrees or' Reality 
came next.. The Upanishads 
 are not dogmatic utterances.. 
They present the recorded statements of the spiritual ex- 
periences of the ancient wise men. Nagarjuna"s neyartha 
and nitartha, samvriti satya (empirical truth) and parmar- 
thl satya (absolute truth) have different terms in Advaita 
Vedanta. Vasubandha's Tri Svabhava Nirdesa intro- 
duced a th i rd degree of truth. It is the pratibhasikasatya 
(transient truth) during the erroneous cognition of Advaita 
Vedanta. 


After Sri Sankara there came Bhaskara who expoun- 
ded the theory of Bheda-abheda (Identity in difference). 
The theory was there carIier. 


Padmapada was said to be the direct disciple of Sri 
Sankara. This is debatable. His Panchapadil<a is a 
cornn1entary on Sri Sankara's commentary on the first four 
sutras of Badarayana.. 


Soon after these arose divergent developments in 1 
n1etaphysis of Advaita Vedanta (non-dualistic Absolutisll1). 
Vachaspati Iv1isra \vho wrote his Nyaya Suci Nibandha 



;,dii 


in 841 A. D., wrote a commentary cal1ed Bhamati on 
Sri Sankara's commentary. With this starts the Bhamati 
school. It starts with an empirical base and develops intQ 
Absolutism. This grants m.any concessions. It aUo
s 
karmas or Jighteous activities, multiplicity of selves, em.. 
phasizes on nididhyasana (contemplation), and many 
others. It is more electie. 


On Padmapada's Panchapadika Prakasatman wrote 
an elaborate commentary named Vivaranam. This is the 
starting point of the Vivarana school in Advaita Vedanta. 
This provides the metaphysi;al basis and exposition of 
Advaita. It offers an ontological and epistemological 
basis, admitting that in the 
fina:l analysis epistemology 
offers only a bloodless ballet of categories, Perception, 
inference and implication are accepted as empirically va1id 
means of knowledge. The emrhasis is on sound, he
ring 
(sravana). It leads to the apprehension of Reality as 
Experience,. 


The dialectic followed by Prakasatman is not spiral as 
in Hegel. It is like Bradley's dialectic, like Nagarjuna's 
ca
ushkoti, like the Socratic dialectic. 


Prakagatman criticises Bhamati, Bheda abheda and 
Vijnanavada. His exposition of erroneous cognition 
(Khyati) is superb. The major opponents are the philo- 
sophers of Vijnana veda like Dinnaga and Dharmakirti. 
While Sri Sankara fought a successful battle against the 
thinkers of the Sankya system of Philosophy (dualism), 
Pragksatman destroyed the Vijnanavada system of Buddhist 
philosophy. At the same time he assimilated some of the 
important elelnen ts from that school. 



"iii 


The Vivarana ofrprakasaiman is a hard nut. Nfany of 
our Professors of Indian Philosophy have not touched it so 
far. It is time their eyes are opened to the golden mine of 
Vivarana, Indian phi losophy cannot be brushed aside. 
We rendered the first Varnaka of this text into English 
in 1957. Since then it underwent many revisions. We 
are grateful to Sri Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanam for the 
financial assistance given. We are grateful to Sri Bulusu 
Surya Prakasa Sastri under the patronage of whose 
SADHANA GRANDHA MANDALI this is being publi- 
shed. We wish more and more students and teachers of 
Indian Philosophy delve deeper and deeper into the golden 
mines preserved by our ancient thinkers. 


Tenali, 
20-7-1997- 


P.S.SASTRI 
(Potukuchi Subrahmanya Sastri) 



P ANCHAP ADIKA VIV ARANAM 


The first verse of the Pancapaadika offers the anthor's 
obeisance to his deity in accordance with the traditional, 
convention, so that the intended work might be completed 
safely and spread far and wide. It also suggests briefly the 
final import of the whote commentary to be one of (abso- 
lute) identity between the/self and the Absolute. The know- 
ledge of this identity is arrived at from a close enquiry into 
the meanings of the terms subject (=tvam) and object 
(=tau). All the truths or conclusions that are arrived at 
later on, are within the frame work of this identity. 
The first verse is fully substantiated (or supported) by 
the author's offering addresed to god ;;:.nd his preceptor. 
This in itself is capable of bringing into fruition the result 
desired by h!m. Yet with his speech, mind and body, the 
author offers his obesiance to his preceptors in the next 
three verses so that the listeners too might realize the same 
result. 
The fifth verse sets forth the author's objective in com 
posing the Panchapadika. 
Objection: Sankara's Commentary should not be 
commented upon sinte it cannot be considered to be a com- 
mentary in the strict sense of the term. Where the meaning 
of an aphorism is explained (or described) in words or 
sentences that are dependent on the aphorism and where 
the explanations are claborately discussed, there aloone we 
have a real commentary. Let us apply this definition to the 
very first sItra- "athato brahma jijnasa". lnorder that 
there canbe purusha pravritti we haveto preSUlne here the. 
word 'Kartavyaa' .(This is against the Bhaamati school which 



2 


Panchapadika 


rejects a 'Vldhi there and accepts only an 'anuvaada' by com- 
pleting the expresion with 'bhavati'. Jijnaasaa cones in 
between an incomplete and a complete knowledge; ie, it 
implies the investigation or enquiry that comes after a 
preliminary cognition. So the sutra would read- One who 
has the 'saadhana catushtaya' must undertake (=Kartavyaa) 
the enquiry (::. V.ihaara) into Bramajnana. I hus we arrive 
at the conclusion that Brhn1ajna:Qa is the means for libera_ 
tion of a specific adhikari. FroiD the context it would appear 
that this enquiry is into the vedaanta vakyas. Hence, one 
who has the 'sadhana catushtaya' must undertake:the enq- 
uiry into the vedanta vakyas so that he might have the 
Brahn1t:Jnana which is the means:of liberation. This is the 
meaning we apprehend fro 11 the first aphorism. Now 
the 'adhyasa bhaasya' of Sankara does not explain even 
remotely the meaning of this aphorism; and hence it should 
not be commented upon. 
Reply: To answer this objection, Padmapada states 
that this part of the comment£ ry explains the 'Vishaya' and 
'prayojana' which are implied by the meaning of ihe ahpori 
SIn. That part of the comn1entary ending with "Loka vya- 
vaharah" has its full Ineaning only when read with the next 
few sentences ending with "Vedaantaa a rabhyante". These 
two parts together explain that the "Vis
=1aya' and 'Prayoj' 
an of this system are implied in the first aphorism. 
Objection: I-Iow is it then that we have then two 
Bhashyas propounding the 'Vishaya' and the 'prayoja.na' ? 
The last sentence alone is giving out the 'Vishaya' and 'pra- 
yofana'; and what then is the purpose of the earlier part? 
If both these parto are giving only the subjectmatter and 
purpose, where is 'adhyaasa' propounded? If these parts 



Vivar an am 


3 


are to give only the subjectmater and purpose, why is 
'adhyasa' explained ? 
Reply: If the 'Vishaya' and 'Prayojana' that detennine 
whether a particular system should be studied or not; and 
it is the principle. of adhyaasa that determines the 'vishaya' 
and the 'Pray oj ana' . In other words, you can not know 
the subject matter ,nor the purpose of the system if 'adhyasa' 
is not enunciated. The middle term ( == hetu) always esta- 
blishes the relation of the major to the minor. 'Adhyasa' 
is the 'hetu' for the 'Visahya & prayojana' which in their 
turn explain why the system should be studied carefullyr 
Just as the tilling of the field should be undertaken since 
it has an object and an turpospe, so should the enquiry into 
any system of knowledge be undertaken if it has an object 
and a purpose. 
When we are awake, we come to understand or com- 
prehend the world around us. In like manner Sankara's 
commen-taryreveals to us the nature of 'avaidyatmaka band- 
ha and how to over come it. As such here we have a specifi. 
subject-matter and. a definite purpose attached there to. 
That the bondage (bandha) is 'avidyaatmaka' is the import 
of both the parts in this 'adhyasa bhasya' And this part of 
the commentary cOlnsequentIy explains the 'vishaya' and 
'prayojana' of this system which enable 'us to study it. 
Objection: We are told that the bondage of the 
self is due to 'avidya'. This reason ('hetu') is 'asiddha' 
(unproved). How can an 'asiddha hetu' establish an 
'asiddha sadhya' ? 
Reply: In the sentence '''asyaanartha prahaanaaya..." 
it is well established that the 'saadhya'is 'avidya nivritti'. In 



4 


Panchapadika 


arriving at this 
 'Vishaya' we fare told about the definition 
(laksana), conceivabilily (sambhaavanaa), possibility (sadb- 
haava) a.nd the ways of establishing (pramaana)'adhyasa'. In 
this manner did the commentator establish and prove 
adhyasa, and then dfd he establish the subject matter and 
purpose of his work. Thus the earlier part of the 'adhyasa 
bhasya' is related to the main text through the latter part. 
This explains why Padmapada divided the 'adhyapsa bha- 
shya' into two parts. 
Objection: But the passage ending with 'asyaanartha 
hetoh prahaanaaya...' does not prove 'adhyasa'. Ihat 'adh- 
yaasa' exists is proved only by the sentence ending wi th 
'sarva loka pratyakshah'. As such it should be said that the 
earlir part should be read only with reference to or along 
with this part ending with 'sarva loka pralyakshah? 
Reply. : It is true. However, that part of the comment- 
ary ending with the sentence 'sarve vedaantaa aarabhyante' 
explains the 'Vishaya' and 'prayojana' and states that they 
are found in the vedaanta vaakyas. As such that sentence 
alone explains the relation of the 'Vichaara' 'saasfra' to the 
earlier part of the text. In arriving at the 'Vishaya' and 
'prayojana' of this
investigation which are given in the latter 
part, we come to estarblish 'adhyaasa' through which alone 
we can establish the other. This explains the relation of 
the two parts. 
Objection : Yet, the Vishaya and pray ojana expo- 
unded here do not seem to be implied by the first aphorism. 
They appear to be totally unrelated to the aphorism. 
Reply: This is answered by Padmapada when he 
observed that since these are implied by that aphorism, 



Vivaranam 


5 



he commentatcr begins with an exposition of those impl- 
cations. 
The next objection takes a serious turn. It argues that 
the first aphorism itself is 'asamgata' and hence the comm- 
entary need not be gone through. There is an injunction 
'Svaac.hyaayo a dhyetavyah' and this is a 'nitya vidhi'. 
According to this injunction, one has to study his own veda 
which includes the Sanhita, Braahmana, Aaranyaka and 
Upanisad. One who studies his own veda is surely bound 
to come across vedaanta vaakyas which give him a knowledge 
of Brahman' This' apprehension is a logic:
1 corollary of 
the 'Svaadhyaya Vidhi', and it can not be an additional 
Vidhi. Some of the passages which give an understanding 
of Brahman and which he will go through while studying 
his own vedas are referred to. This is a passage beginning 
with 'Everything becomes dear or loveable only for the love 
of the self. Having begun with this sentence, it is said 
at the end with referenc to him that has renounced every- 
thing and that loves the self, 'when the self is apprehended, 
all this is known; this much indeed is immortaliy'. The 
apprehension of the self is here said to be the way of real- 
ising immortality. In the statement "The.self is to be seen, 
heard, meditated and conten1plated", the word drashtavyab 
does not indicate an injunction. Any con1mand refers to 
some conation and the realization of an end which does 
not 'exist' as such prior to the conation. 'Dyshtavyah' 
does not imply a command since sight as such does . not 
lead to any further conation in the present context. On the 
other hand 'manana' and "nididhyasana' are the essential 
elements in the conation arising from 'sravana'. As such 
the comll1and refers to sravana and it makes 'manana' and 
;nididhyasana subordinate to it. (The Bhamati school makes 



6 


Panchapadika 


'manana' the central pivotal word in the sentence.) And 
he who stud.ies his veda has to enquire into the following: 
what are the specific features of an 'adhikari'? What are 
the 'pramanas' he has to follow? What is the 'vedanta 
vakva vihara'? Can it be had by any other means or not? 
How is 'atmajnana' the way to liberation? What is this 
'atmajnana' and how can he have it? This 'jijnasu' desires 
the chief 'purushartha'. It is with""reference to such an one 
who possesses the 'saadhana catushtaya' that Badarayana 
has decreed enquiry into the 'vedanta vakyas' so that there 
can be the knowledge of Brahman which is the way to liber- 
ation. This injunction implies the 'adhikari', 'vishaya' and 
'pha]a' which are the three 'anubandhas'. To determine these 
three, he gave the aphorisln 'athaato brahma
jijnaasaa'; for 
it is generally admitted' that the 'sruti' and the 'vedanta 
sutra' are in essence identical. And it will be explained 
later on how 'manana' and 'nididhyasana' become the 
'angas' of 'sravana'. 


Objection: The first aphorism is said to be based 
011 'sravana vidhi'. But the 'sravana vidhi' itself is impo... 
sible. This 'vidhi' cannot command 'vedaanta vakya vihaara' 
which leads to 'moksha saadhana brahmajnana' for one 
possessing the 'sadhana catuhtaya'. This injunction can- 
not be an 'apurva vidhi' which refers only to an 'atyanta 
prapta vishaya'. The 'sravana vidhi' is said to give rise to 
'jnana'. This 'jnaana' can be had not only through 'sra.. 
valla'. There are other ways too, and there is no necessary 
relation between 'sravana' and 'jnaana'. Nor can we take 
'srotavy,
h' to be a 'niyama vidhi' as in the case of 'vrihiiin 
avahanyaad' wher e the removal of the husk is the 'drishta 
phala' and where there is also an 'adrishta prayojana'
 . 
Since the husk can be removed by other ways also, we . 



Vivaranam 


7 


assume here an 'adrishta phala' also. No such thing can be 
found in the 'sravana vidhi'; fer if we were to take it as a 
'niyama vidhi' we have to find out whethr the 'saadhya' is 
'paramaa purva' or 'atma bodha'. It can not be the fermer 
fer the Sfuvana vidhi does not have any 'adrishta sadbya'. 
Nor can it be the latter since 'atmaavagama' is 'drishtepaaya 
maatra sadhya'. Hence there is no 'adrishta phala'. 
Reply: It is neither an 'apurva vidhi' nor a. 'parisan- 
khya vidhi'. But it is a 'niyama Ividhi'. In the context of 
"sarvaa peksa ca yajnadi sruter asvavat", it is decided later 
en that the immediate apprehension .of the self (aatma tatt. 
vaapareksya) is 'sarvaadrishta sadhyatva'. It can be const- 
rued like 'vrihin avahanyad' as having beth the 'drishta' 
and 'adishta phala'. 
Objection: Sankara himself has rejected the veiw 
that the 'vedaanta vakyas' are injunctions. If they are t.o be 
treated as 'vidhis', their .object which is Brahman must 
have te be a so-far non-existent entity. The rejection of 
'vidhitva' to these passges removes such 'a
iddhi' and ather 
defects. Hence we cannot accept a 'sravana vidhi' here. 
Reply: Sankara has rejected .only a 'jnana vidhi' 
and net a 'sravanavidhi' there, for in the latter case those 
'doshas' do net arise. Thus, in a 'darsana vidhi' we have 
an .object called Brahman and this object is to be apprehen. 
ded through an action. The .object becel'nes specific and 
distinguishable, and we will then have a Brahman which is 
'guna bhuta' (qualified). In a 'vichara vidhi' however, the 
object aimed at is 'Brahma darsana'. Brahman then be- 
comes the abject which is an end in itself and not a means 
to an end. Thus the 'vedaanta vaakyas' enunciate Brahman 
as an end in itself, and tewards the apprehension of Brah- 



8 


Panchapadika 


man they provide the injunction for 'sravana'. This does 
not in any way vitiate the nature of Brahman. 
Objection: In accordance with the 'upakramopa_ 
samhara nyaaya, (harmony of the beginning and the end), 
we learn that the vedaanta vaakyas are directed towards the 
enunciation of the nature of the self. And if we were to 
rely on some passages alone and come to the conclusion tha.:J 
they refer to 'sravana vidhi', we will be going against the 
final or total import. How can the later conclusion arise in 
view of this final import? 
Replv: To tbis objection two lines of reply are offe- 
red. i) There is the passage - "Tam vividishanti yajn- 
eta, danena, napasanasatkena". This is one of the passa- 
ges occuring in the texts and this cannot be interpreted as 
identical with the final import. Yet 'yajna' and other 
ways referred to in the passage are esentially 'Jnaanarthaka' 
(means to knowledge). Likewise in a context of 'adho 
dharana' , 
we come across the injunction "upari hi deve- 
bhyah H . Here is no 'vakyabheda' for the latter injunction 
has an 'apurva'. In the same manner the sravana vidhi. 
does not come into conflict with the 'atma vakya'. Fur- 
ther, in the context of 'darsapurna masa' we read "Tisro 
ratrir vratam caret anjalinava a pah pibet" and also 
"malavad vasasana samvadet". From the context (pra- 
karana) it appears that the prohibition in the latter sentence 
is 'kratvartha' and not 'purushartha'. But it has been deter- 
mined that it is a 'purusartha para'. A similar interpretation 
is_to be given to 'avantaravakyas' like 'sravana vidhi'. 
Or ii) take a sentence like 'Tasmad braahmanah paa- 
ndityam nirvidya...'. Since this refers to 'sravana', we can 
take it to be 'sravana vidhaayaka'. Even the sutrakara ob- 



Vivaranam 


9 


serves the same thing in the aphonism "sahakary antara 
vidhih pakshena tritiyam tadvato vidhyadiva" (3.4.47). 
Thus considered in any manner there is a 'sravana vidhi' to 
which 'manana' and 'nididhyasana' are 'angas'. And to 
determine the three 'anubandhas' implied by. this vidhi, the 
first aphorisn is given. 
This aphorism declares that a proper 'adhikari' must 
undertakes the enquiry into the 'vedanta vakyas' so that he 
may have 'mokshasadhana brahma jnana'. This enquiry 
comnences with the second apr.orism. The injunction of 
'sravana' implies, as we have said, an 'adhikari', a
'vishaya 
 
and 'prayojana'. In determining the last two, Sankara ex- 
plains that bondage (bandha.), is 'mithya'. Thus the 'adh- 
yaasa bhaashyais inecesarily implied by the first aphorism. 
Objection: If however, 'vishz.y.l' and 'prayojana' are 
implied by the aphorism, then the coemmentator aught to 
have first explained tbe purpose of the aphorism; and then 
he should have clearly and plainly explained the 'vishaya' 
and 'prayojana' in the fornl of question and-answer. 
Otherwise it would appear 
that the sutrakara's views are 
not given by the commentator. 
Reply: Padmapaada replies .that a full and convinc- 
ing answer wil1 be given when we come to the passage 
,therefore Brahman should be enquired into'. 
Padmapada then proceeds to explain elearly the open- 
ing sentences of Sankara. Padmapada raises an objection- 
"If the purpose of the 'adhyasa
bhashya' is only to provide 
the 'visaya' and the prayojana', it is better to have only 
the sentence 'asyananantha hetoh....'. Why should Sankara 
compose the earlis sentences? If the entire 'adhyaasa 



10 


Panchapadika 


bhashya' is only to provide the 'vishaya' and the 'prayojana' 
like Lhd sentence 'asyanartha hetoh...', where is the neces- 
sity for the earlier sentences? 


Reply: We bave in this aphorism the enquiry L 
(vichaarakartavyataa),
'vishaya prayojana' and 'adhyasa' in 
this part of the commentary. Here every succeeding thing 
maKes the preceeding thing necessary. As such we can arrive 
at vishaya and prayojana only when we have established 
shed 'adhyasa' ; and we can have 'vichara kartavyatya' only 
later on. 


Objection: The aphorism indicates the 'vihaara 
kartavyataa' .whose 'prayojana' is the knowledge of Brahman 
Then how can the dispelling of the bondage be the prayo- 
jana for the enquiry and for the knowledge? 


Reply: The subject matter of the 'aphorisms is the 
knowledge of Brahman, which knowldge destroys the cause 
of all evil. The enquiry gives us knowledge. The 
'prayojana' of this knowledge is implied by or involved in, 
the 'vicharavidhi' ; and this injunction makes us understand 
that liberation for a specific 'adhikari' is the 'pFayojana'. 
Objection: 'Anartha' is generally seen to be of the 
nature of falling into hell. But here the 'anartha' is said' 
to be the appearance of body etc for which Iyou are go- 
ing to establish 'mithyatva'. Is this proper? How? 
Repiy: 'Anartha' involves the meaning that the self 
18 taken...t0 be the subject of all actions and to be the 
enjoyer. 



Vivar an am 


:ilL 


Pramatritva, kartritva and bhoktritva (knowing, do- 
ing and enjoying) constitute the object or the nature of the 
object. Can knowledge dispel these? These is an orject 
having specific avayavas (parts) and we have the knowledge 
that it is a blue substance. This knowledge does not dispel 
the substance; nor can it dispel the properties that are 
necessar1y connected with it; nor can it dispel the absence 
of its contradictory. What is dispelled by this knowledge 
is only the absence of understanding of the object. i.e.. The 
knowledge
of an 'object puts an end to the ignorance of the 
object jhat we have. 
You cannot say that by knowledge there is dispeiIed 
that which has its 'asraya' (locus) in the self. For the know- 
ledge of the pot does not dispel the properties like dharma 
and adharma that are in the self. 
Nor can knowledge dispel that object :which is related 
both to the 'asraya' and to the' vishaya' for even when the 
self has the knowledge of the body, we do not see that the 
relation of the self and the body is dispelled. 
Objection: From onr experience we can not say 
that knowledge dispels bondage; for the dispelling of the 
bondage is not seen and knowledge then would have to 
be 'avidyatmaka'. But it is only the scripture that tells Ua 
that knowledge liberates us from bondage. 
Reply: It is only to make the sruti like "Tathaa vid- 
vaan nama mupad vimuktah" intelligible that we accept 
avidyatmatva to be the nature of bondage. Eg sucheint- 
preation has been accepted with reference to the ,apurva of 
the 'aagneyaadi yaagas'. and also with reference to the 'sruts 
svargapurva' . 



12 


Panchapadika 


Objection: :But there we have the karmas which are 
momentary and whose results are to be experienced after 
a long time. To facilitate that many apurvas are presumed 
in the meanwhile; and thus they have 'surtopapatti'. 
Reply: Here too we have such a .concomitant relation. 
"Knowledge can dispel only ignorance". Hence the apho- 
rism itself indicates that the bondage is of the nature of 
avidya.As such to arrive at the 'vichara kartavyata' given by 
the lneaning of the aphorism, we should establish the pur- 
pose of the sastra. And 1he 'prayojana' can arise only 
when we have given an account of adhyasa. 
"Ifkartritva and bhoktritva are brought by ajnana, 
then Brahmajnana alone can dispel this evil. Badarayana 
indicates that Brahmajnana dispels this anartha; and in so 
doing he implies that this anartha is brought byavidya. 
And by explaining this ajnana, Sankara makes the meaning 
of the aphorism jconsistent and intelligible". Sankara does 
not give the plain meaning of the aphorism first, but its 
implication because this part of the commentary is the gen- 
eral introduction to the whole system. 
The identity of the Brahman and the self is the final 
conclusion or meaning of the whol
 system. 
Objection: Let adhyasa be the ground from which 
we can establish the 'prayojana'. But how can this be also 
the ground fOI maintaining that final conclusion? 
Reply: "All the vedantas go to establish the reality 
of Brahman who is pure bliss, pure existence, 'kutastha 
chaitanya' (Integral consciousness) and 'asamsarin' (nonrela- 
tional whole). This is the ultimate nature of the self" 
This meaning has been propounded by the aphorisms and 



Vivaranam 


13 


by the commentary. Since this conclusion is arrived at 
from an examination of adhyasa, Padmapada proceeds to 
state why adhyasa is to be discribed first. "We have the 
cogntions - I am the doer, I am happy, I am unhappy- 
and these are immediately apprehended by us. These are 
opposed to the nature of Brahman. To 
put an end to this 
contradiction, we should know that we are identical with 
Brahman and that the apparent apprehension of differen. 
nce is due to avidya - which has Brahma svarupa viparita 
rupa' . (Other than the beign of Brahman). If the true 
nature of the self is not apprehended, the anartha would 
remain as it is like a meaningless sentence". 
Objection: When the Sastra itself treats bondage 
to be unreal and propouds the identity of the self with 
Brahman, then why should you describe adhyasa again ? 
Reply: If it is not described, the Sastra would be 
unintelligible like a series of nonsense syllables. "To get 
rid of b )ndage we" should know that it is 'avidya vilasita', 
that it lies in falsely taking ourselves to be different from 
Brahman. 
Objection: If the Sastrartha call be es'tabished only 
by establishing adhyaasa, then adhyasa being the more 
important one it ought to have been rendered into an aphf 
orism at the very outset. Otherwise adhyasa would be out 
of place and inconsistent with the views of Badarayana. 
Reply:' "Samkara himself would explain later on 
under the aphorism 'Tadguna saratvat' that it is not out 04 
place and ,that it is not inconsistent." 
J 
Objection: If so, adhyasa being the general intro- 
duction, it oupht to have been the first aphorism. 



Il4 


Panchapadika 


Reply: The aphorism is engaged in setting and 
determining the final truths, and not in writing introduc- 
tions. "The first aphorism cannot be written on adhyasa 
because of the purpose on hand for the aphorist. When 
the truths are arrived at aDd the canflicting texts are pro- 
perly intrpreted, then there might arise doubts, and it is 
only these doubts that are to be 
rejected l
.,ter on. If the 
truths are not stated, how can a doubt and its rejection' 
arise ?'" I.E the aphorism 
on adhysa would come under 
doubt and its rejection. 
Objection: Then the commentator too ought to 
follow the order of the aphorisms. 
Reply: The commentator begins with adhyasa which 
is implied by the first aphorism, only to make us under- 
stand the text easily. 


Mangalacarana (Salutation at the beginning) 
Objection -: Yet this commentary should not bel 
commented upon since there is no 'mangalacarana'. If it is 
not there the sastrartha may not be comprehened, may be 
construed otherwise, or may be inconsistently understood. 
So many obstacles go with the sastrartha. Further a Man- 
galasloka at the beginning is s
shtacara (convention of th- 
wise). which has been violated; and this makes the comm- . 
entator an 'anapta', one on whose words we cannot keep 
lIeliance. The prayojana intended can be safely realised be, 
having the 'mangalacarana'. "It is generally seen that, 
mangalacarana' has its purpose in putting an end to or in 
gnietening the obstacles. This work is aimed at 'nissreyasa j 



Vivaranam 


15 


prayojana' which is very great. And when there is such a 
great purpose, obstacles are found to be many. Then why 
did Sankara act thus" ? 
Replv: Those who have God always in their heart 
and those who have.always the experience with God, the; 
have nothing to fear about; they have no obstacles. Thu s 
the Smriti proclaims. To quieten the obstacles, it is enough 
to have the 'mangalacarana')n one's own mind, and San- 
kara has performed it. "Our proof for this statement is 
found in the opening lines ending with the words 'sutaram 
itaretara bhavanupapattih'." This may also be taken to be 
the 'mangalacarana'. 
Objection: How does this passagergive us the kno- 
wledge that it is 'visista devatanusmarana'. (cotinuous re- 
membering of a specific...deity)..? 
Replv : "This passage declares that the self is devoid 
of any obstacles and destruction and that it is pure thought 
(= prajnana ghanah). When this reality I'\appears like ano-. 
ther entity, this appearance is false.' Sankara proceeds to 
declare the mithyatva of this appearance by expounding the 
self to be pure consciousness and to be devoid of all 'upa- 
playas' (fluctuations). When Sankar
t is exponding the nat_ 
ure of such consciousness, wherefrom can the obstacl
 
arise? This in itself is the 'mangalacarana'.. 
. 
While he is explaining the nature of adhyasa, by impli- 
cation he is actually referring to the pure consciouness 
which is the ground of adhyasa. 


Adhyasa-Virodha 
"The object and the subject are opposed to one ano- 
ther as darkness and light. What is this 'virodha'? 



16 


Panchapadika 


(contrariety) and what is the nature of the 'itaretara bhava' 
which is said to be inconsistent with the nature of these 
two? 


There are two forms of 'virodha' and two forms of 
'itaretara bhavanupapattih' (impossibility of the two nat- 
ures being one). When tW{) objects cannot be at the same 
place, at the same time, or in the same stage, we have the 
'virodha' which refers to the nature or dharma of the obj'" 

 
ects. The absence of the 'avastha laksana karya' bronght' 
by such virodha is the incon1.patibility of their 'itaretara 
bhava' . 


When two objects cannot have the nature of one ano- 
ther, we have the second type of 'virodha\ which also is 
based on the nature of the objects. The absence of the 
'itaretartvata lakslma' brought by such virodha is another 
form of the incompatibility of their itaretara bhava. 
If it is said that virodha means that two entities can not 
coexist, then when there is light there cannot be darkness. 
This is fat Ee. Eg when there is a faint light in the room, 
we cannot cognise the objects clearly. I.E. in such a room 
both light and dar:kness are found coexisting. Like wise 
in the shade, we have both heat and shade in varying deg- 
rees. Similar is the case with cold and: heat. 


Then one might argue that virodha means that of two 
objects, one cannot have the nature of another. Then con- 
sider the universal and the particular. Though they are dis- 
tinct from one another, one penetrates into the other. Suce 
an integration ought to be impossible if the nature of the 
one is not to be found in the other. 



VIxaranam 



7 


Vivarana proceeds to examine the nature of 'tamas 
darkness) and rejects the view that it is only' 'prakasaa' 
bhava'. (absence of light). 
9. Objections concerncng adhyaasa 
Objection: There may be the natural incompati- 
bility of any relation between the dark (seeing) and the 
drsya(seen). Yet it can not obstruct the appearance of 
'tadatmya' which is the cause of error. Eg sukti (mother 
of pearl) CI..nd silver have no relation of tadatmaya at all. 
Yet there appears an identical' ground for both and this 
gives rise to error. And the same may hold good here 
also. 


The ground is only the 'this', and that which is adh- 
yasta (superimposed) is the silver. There is some tadatmya 
between the t\\ 0. This relation be-t\\een the 'this' and the 
'what' may bc..one of 'samanya viseshaabhava" (general and 
particular) or of gunaguni bhava' (quality and qualified). 
And we find the 'amsa' (aspec(or part) of one appearing ag 
the 'amsa' of the other. Such an 'anyataramsa adhyasa 
(an aspect of one cognising as that of another) whieh is a case 
of error is seen. Like wise we have consciousness as the 
ground, and the not-salf as the adhyasta. But here we do 
not have such a relation as before. "Since the subject is 
in itself pure consciousness it can not admit
of any 'yusmad 
amsa' (aspect of the object) in it." 
If there were to be an adhysa /III of the not-self 011 the 
self the
self as the ground mti
t admit of the 'idam altlsa. 
(thatness). That will have to be the 'acid aUllsa' (aspect of 
non-consiousness) which may be natural or 'agantuk<.1 



18 


Panchapadika 


(adventitions) to consionsness. It cannot be natural since 
it is pure consicousness and consciousness alone in itself. The 
object is unconscious and is appearing as the object for con 
scioensness. How can the subject of an act become also 
the object of the act? Is this not strange and fantastic 'l 
If it is then 'agantuka', has it a cause or no? If it has no 
cause, it cannot come into existence. If conciousness which 
is 'niravayava' (having no parts) cannot evolve itself into 
a 'savayava' (having parts) entity. It can not have also a 
cause, since consciousness is 'niranjana' (non-relational) 
Eg the amsa has no avayavas; and we do not see any 
evolution of it brought about by a cause. 
"Nor ca.n the not self be the ground, since the object 
in itself is not a conscious 'entity. Further, if the object is 
a conscious entity, it would be the same as the subject; and 
thus it would cease to be an object." Eg one percipient 
cann ot have any im.n1ediate experience of another percipient; 
but can only befer the other. Like wise the object, that is 
a conseious entity, could not be directly congnised, but 
only inferred. 
Moreever the object cannot evolve itself into the form 
of consciousness, since an unconcious entity can be the 
eause of only that effect which is also unconscious. 
Then can't we say the not-self accepts the 'atma caita- 
nya' as its own amsa ? 
This is imposible since conseiousness cannot move like 
that. It is 'aprati samkrama' (motionless). Thus no where 
do we find 'tadatmya' even. to a very slight extent. And 



Vivaranam 


19 


we cannot have the amsa of one in another, whence the 
a
yaasa which is of the form of 'anytaraamsa' is imposible. 
"The same argument will tell us that the properties 
of an object cannot appear in another object since any 
property cannot give up its ground or locus. 
"Thus there arises the in1pos
ibi1ity of 'itaretara bhaava'. 
The subject is apprehended as asmat pratyaya gocara and 
is of the nature of consciousness. This is the 'anidamalnsa' 
or the eltll1cnt 0 f the not-this in the 'asmat pratyaya' 
On this is supposed to take place the adhyaasa of the 'yus- 
m
dartha, (the this) which involves the attachnlent to the 
body etc. When the'!' and the 'this' have the mutual in- 
terpenetration, there is supposed to arise a single datum 
which is called adhyaasa"', That this is not possible, is the 
contention of the objector. 
We refer to all the entities beginning with the aham- 
kaara (Ego) and ending with the body not as the 'this' but 
as the'!'. How are these taken to be 'yusmat pratyaya 
gocara'? (aprehended as this). 
The reply: Consciousness is 'asmat pratyaya gocara' 
Now 
 ahamkaara etc are apprehended as almost identical 
with this consciousness, Due to this strength, and due to 
the fact that they are all illumined directly by consciousness 
they can not strictly be taken to be on a par with the other 
objects. Yet in so far as they are direcily illumined by con- 
sciousness, They are in a sense 0 bjecto - 0 bjects for consci- 
ousness. 


"Now in the 'vishayaadhyas' (super imposiation of the 
object) the properties of one object may be cognised as th
 
properties of another. Yet even without any such 'vishayaa- 



20 


Panchapadika 


dhyasa', there can be only the adhyaasa of the properties. 
Eg deafn ess is a property of the ear, but is cognised as an 
attrib1. te of the person. In the same way we can also have 
the adhyasa that involves the properties of the subject. 
"Now, if the subject is pure conssiousness, how can it 
have properties and can there be the adhyaasa of these pro- 
perties ? 
'Ananda' (Bliss), 'Vishayaanubhava' (experience) and 
'nityatva' (eternality are the properties of conciousness. 
Eventhough. they can not be separated there is nothing 
wrong in s<:tying tbat the properties of consciousnes also 
can be adllyasta.. These properties constitute the very nature 
of consciousness. Yet they appear as if they are many plO 
perties only in the 'antah Karana Vrtty Upaadhi' (condi- 
tioned psychosis). 
Adhyaasa requires a similarity between the two obje- 
cts ; and this similarity must be found in the case of the 
parts of the object. But when. the self in concerned such 
an 'avayava saadrisya' (similarity of parts) cannot be found. 
So, when we speak of Kartritva for the self, we admit that 
it is due to the upaadhi called the ahankara. Though this 
'bhrama' (illusion) has such a cause in the upaadhi, it is a 
fact that the 'sadrisya adhyaasa' does not haye an upadhi. 
For the adhyaasa of the body etc., there is no 'sopadhika 
bhramatva'. As such it is impossible to say that the enti- 
ties from ahankaara to the body are adhyasta on the perci- 
pient. This impossihility has been accepted and recognised 
by Padmapaada. 
Suppose, we know the smell of the 'Ketaki gandha' 
and we also know that the' sarpa Gandha' is similar to it. 



Vivaranam 


21 


When we smell the Jatter and when the other is absent, the 
argument from analogy would tell us that we are smelling 
only the 'sarpa gandha'. When we cognise yellow in the 
conch we try to find out a cause for this yellow, and we 
assume the reality -of such a cause. In the same manner 
when there is the congnition of the effect of the 'nirupaa- 
dhilca bhrama' (unconditioned illusion) we have to assume 
that this is due to something similar to it, or that there is a 
cause for it. That this is the proceedure is given by Padma- 
paada. 
"Adhaa'Sa is the appearance of a form where that form 
is not. This is rnithyaa. Mithyaa means that which con- 
ceals something, or that which is inexplicable. Here it is 
the former mc
ing intended. In reality there is no such 
adhyaasa. Yet it is naisargik2.. (Naturals') 


"Naisargika means that which is internally related to 
the 'Pratyak Caitanya Sattaa" alone. When the defects of 
Kartritva and bhoktritva are related to the self, then we 
have adhyaasa. To be an enjoyer, the self must be a doer, 
for one who is not a doer cannot enhoy the consequences 
of his actions. To be a doer, the self must hove the 'sarnyo- 
gaadhyaasa' (relational) with love and hatred. One cannot 
be a doer if he does not have love and hatred. Once there 
is the contact of the self with such defects, it must necess- 
arily become an enjoyer; for in the absence of such an 
enjoying, love and hatred would be inconsistant. In this 
manner the adhyaasa goes on endlessly and without a 
beginning; It is as beginningless and endless as the relation 
between the seed and the plant. As such adhyaasa is spo- 
ken of as being 'naisargika' or natural. 



22 


Panchapadika 


"This natural adhyaasa is manifest in 'lokavyavaha- 
rika' as-I am this, this is nine etc. Just as we can not reject 
the existence of tbe I, so too we cannot reject the existence 
of adhyaasa." 'Lokavyavahaara' takes the form of - 'I am 
a man', 'I am a human being'. Here in we are treating the 
I not as the self, but as something alse. 
Adhyaasa is said to be the appearance of an entity as 
having the nature of another. If so, the expression 'white 
cloth' ought to be a case of adhyaasa, since the white is 
predicated of the cloth. The remove such instances from 
the spbere of adhyaasa, it has been said that adhyaasa ari- 
ses when there is the interpenetration or integration of the 
real and the unreal. into a single entity. There should be 
the 'samyoga' of the real and the unreal. It is only such 
an integrated or synthetic single entity that can be taken to 
constitute avidyaa. With this in mind, Sankara has spoken 
of 'satyanrita mithunikritya'. "By styam is meant the con- 
sciousness which is the not-this; and by anrita is meant the 
this, since it is to 'swaruupa' itself that is adhyasta." 
Objection: 'mithunikritya' means having conjoined 
or united the two. This suffix- 'kritvaa' inflies that the aCt 
conveyed by this verb is different from the act conveyed by 
another verb which alone can complete the sentence and the 
action. Furtber, prior io this 'mithunikarana', there must 
have been something etc. 'As such how can you maintain 
that 'adyaasa', 'mithunikarana' and 'Iokavyavahara
 are all 
synonymous with one another ? 
Reply: "This suffix- 'kritvaa' does not reveal that 
something takes place after it ; it does not show that it is 
distinct from "likavyavahaara.' In 'bhuktvaa vrajati' also 



Vivaranam 


23 


other hand in 'mithunikritya' we have only the suffix and not 
two different verbs. It does not simply or involve another 
vel'b. 'adhyasya' and 'lokavyavaharah' and this - 'ktriaa!' 
here only explains tbe same. We COIl not admit, of 'Kripa- 
bheda' (difference in verbs) because at the end sankara sumS 
up by saying 'Evam ananto naisargik adhyaash" Thus 
the 'upakrama' (beginning) and the 'upasamhara' (conclu_ 
sion). So to establish that this 'kritvaa' is not different from 
'adhyaasa,' and from 'lokavyavahara.' Just as we say, 'Cai. 
tayam purushasya gunam' even though conciousness is 
not distinct from the purusa, so too is employed this 

-kirtvaa' suffix. It is only an ' Aupacaarika (conventional) 
usage, and it does not bring out any"distiction of the succe- 
ssive stages. 


Eg. In itself there is only one adhyaasa where one 
object is apprehanded as. having the nature of another. 
Yet it appears as many and all these are called adhyaasa 
only through 'Upacaara'. They are not really different adh- 
yasas having specific differences. They only appear as 
'aham', 'idam', 'mamedam'. This differance is between the 
upaadhis of these entities. The 'paurvaaparya' (succession) 
of these adhyaasa is determined only from our 'pratipatti 
or apprehension. Consequently, we can say that the suffix 
'-Kritvaa' has been 
mployed by accepting t4e Kriyaa 
bheda'because of the. 'Visessha bheda'. 


"This adhyaasa is 'mithya'; mithyaa and anrita are 
referred to here. Mithyaa conveys the meaning of inexpli- 
cability (anirvachanniyata), while ajh.nana convyes the Avi- 
dya sakti which is of the nature of unconscious." Instead 
of 'mithyajnana., if Sankara had employed only 'ajnanam/ 



24 


Panchapa:diIca 


it would mean only the absence of negation of knowledge.. 
If he comployed only the word 'mithyaa', it would mean. 
erroneous knowledge (bhranti ajnanam).. To exclude there 
are two meanings, Padmapada explains the two to mean that 
'ajnana' which is also 'mithya', It means 'ajnana", which is 
not the absence of juana, but is a positive existent entity. 
It is not a merely unreal or totally fa.lse entity; for it has 
some form of reality. Such: an "ajnana' is the material cause 
(upaadana) of entire adhya,asa. 
11. Objection: How is 'mithya.jnana" the nlete- 
rial cause (upadhana) of adhyasa ? 
Reply: It is through the l11ethod of agreement and 
difference that this is established. Adhyasa arises when 
there is a 'mithyajnana2., and it ceases to be in the absence 
of the latter. 
Objection: 'Adhyaasa' is dispelled by (is the con- 
tradictory of) 'tattvajnanam. The a bsence of the latter is. 
'ajnana'. Thus the 'pr2..tibandhaka abhava vishayata' 
is adyasa. And the method of agreement and difference 
does not prove anything. 


Reply: 'Pratibandhaka' (obstaeles) actually meanS. 
'Utpatti virodhi', that which prevents a thing from coming 
into existence. When there is a sifficient cause, anything 
that prevents the emergance of the effect, is called 'pratiba_ 
ndhaka.' When there is the sufficent cause called 'adhyasa', 
we do not become a ware of 'tattvajnana' as that which pre- 
vents the emergence of the effect and even if the sufficent 
cause caJled 'adhyasa,' were absent, we have the emergence 
or awakening of 'tattvajnana ? As such it is evici.ence thaI; 



Vivaranam 


25 


the concomitant relation of 'ajnana' to 'adhyasa' does not 
apply in the case of 'pratibandhaka - bhava.' 


Objection: 'Adhyasa" is not a 'Pratibandhaka' for 
the knowledge of truth ('tattva bodha'). Yet the former 
can be dispelled only by the latter; and as such the latter 
is the 'virodhi 
 (contradictory) of the former. One is the 
'abhaava' 'negative) of the other. One totally excludes 
the other. 


Reply: But given an 'effect' it denlads the knowledge 
of its cause, and never its contradictory ('virodhi samsarga 
bhaava'). The method of agreement and difference, then' 
attelnpts at determining its cause alone at the outset, for 
the 'apekshjta vidhana' and the anapekshiLa' 'vidhana", the 
former is the stronger and has precedence. 
Objection: Why can't we say that the 'vishaya- 
dosha', l1ke sin1ilarity, the 'Kaacdi indriya dosa' atta- 
chment, to be the cause (Up:1d3.na) of 'Adhyasa' ? 
Reply: These 'dosas' (defects) constitute only the 
conditions and not the cause. If these 'dosas' were to be 
taken as the cause, we have to enquire the cause of this' 
cause. Tn this process we will have to admit at some stage 
or other that 'ajnana' is the final cause. Everything that 
is an effect has a material cause since the effect is a 'Bhava- 
karya', as the pot which is an existence has its Inate
ial 
cause in the clay. In the absenoe 0 f a maerial cause, there 
can be no effect. The cause a.nd the effect are in essence 
non-different. The effect comes into existenc
 along with 
its 'g11nas
 (qualities) and 'Kriya
, (actjvity). The substance 
with its 'grnas' and 'kriya' finds 'asraya' in its 'Upadana' 



2. 


Pancbapadika 


or Material cause; and.the 'upadana' and the 'Upadeya' 
(effect) are not related to one another. This 'adhyasa must 
take as its 'upadana' something which is its 'asraya' and 
which has in essence the nature of the 'upadcya.' Such an 
entity can be found only in 'ajnana'. 
Objection: The 'bhranti jnanopadana' can be the 
self or the 'antah karana.' Instead of consider an un- 
known entity like 
ajnana' as the material cause, it is better 
to consider something known in this light. 


Reply: The self which is beyond any change will 
have to undergo some change or other.if it were taken to be 
the material cause. The self is 'niravayava' and hence 
unchanging. 


Next we have to consider whether the 'antahkarana' 
can be the material cau.se. Since this is 'savayava' it can 
undergo some change or other. Does the 'antah karana' 
as the material cause imply its connection with the sense 
organs, or does it not? It cannot be the latter since the 
'antah kaTana' being internal cannot come to cognise the 
objects that are outside. It cannot be the former too, since 
in the case of erroneous cognition the sense organ does not 
come into contact with an object like 'mithya rajata' which: 
in reality does not exist. We have to admit that the 'antah- 
karana' alone cogness it; and this is impossible. 'Mithya.. 
nana' is 'anindriya janya' (not the out come of the senses) 
in general. 


In the erroneous cognition there is the knowledge of 
the 'this' which is the 'adhisthana' (ground) and a specific 
knowledge of the 'what which does nat fit into the 'this" 
Without the general knowledge 
f the 'adhisthana' there is 



Vivaranam 


27 


no erroneous cognition. If the 'antahkarana' (inner organ) 
cognises the 'this', it should be able to cognies the 'what' 
also. It cannot be taken to be the 'upadana.' 


If knowledge is the 'parinan1a' (transformation) of 
'antahkarana', we have to admit that the 'antahkarana' is 
not 'jada' (insentient). This is absurd for it is not by itself 
'conscious' of anything; and as such it cannot knowany- 
thing. Pure 'antahkarana' by itself cannot' be the 'adhara' 
(substratun1). We cannot refer error to , ant ahkar an a' and 
'tattvajnana' to the self. Both error and truth must have 
the same 'asraya' (ground) and if error is 'antahkarana- 
sraya', the self has nothing to do with it. This would 
imply that the 
lf has nothing to do even with bondage, 
removal of this bondage and the true knowledge. The self 
will have to be pure ; and thi-t; is against the facts. 


Neither the seJf nor the 'antahkarana' can be' the 'Upa- 
dana' of adhyasa'. Hence 'l11ithyajnana' alone can be the 
'up adana' . ' Adhyasa' is Mithyabhuta' ; and it has 'mithya- 
rtha' and is 'mithyajnanaatamaka'; and the consideration 
of 'upadana kaarana. Such an 'upadana karana' cannot 
be found in 'Kaacadi nimitta kaarananl' (Physical defects of 
the age) which differ from individual to individual and 
from occasion to occasion. 'Adhyasa' cannot have its 
'asraya
 in any of the' dosas' . Further, the 'dosas' are in a 
sense 'real', while 'adhyaasa' is not so real; and a real 
entity cannot be the cause of one that does not partake of 
its nature. 


When the object is 'mithya' its appreciation too is 
'mithya' . 



28 


Panchapadika 


This principle of 'ajnana' is in agreement with the nat... 
ure of all effects ; and it is present in all cases of erroneouS 
cognition. This 'ajnana' has the 'asraya' (superinmposed 
on the self). And anything that is apprenended by it part- 
akes of its nature. As such the 'up adana' of 'adhyasa' can 
be only 'mithyajnana' ; it can be neither the self, nor the 
'antahkarana', nor the 'Kaacadi dosas'. 


So far we have argued for the 'atmasrayatva' (self be- 
ing the ground) of 'jnanadhyasa'. How can we have the 
san1e 'asraya' for 'arthasraya'. For, in the cognition 'this 
is siver', we approhend it as external, as lying outside the 
self. The silver that is cognised has the mother-of-peal as 
its "asraya' ; and the latter, in so far as it is cognised is 
a.ctually 'idam amsaavacchinna caitanya' (consciousness as 
conditioned by the 'this'). That it is not really extenal will 
be explained later all. 


Now with reference to 'adhyasa' we find Sankara obse- 
rving 'mithyajnana nimittah' and "naisargiko 'Yam loka 
Vyavaharah" . It is both 'naimtttika' or conditioned and 
'naisargika' or natural or inherent. Padmapada asks how 
is the unconditioned taken to be)he conditioned? 


To this we have the reply that 'adhyasa' is 'naisargika.. 
in so for as it is a cyclical process and is in essence identi- 
with its material cause. It is 'naisargika' in the sense that 
it is like a 'pravaha' (process) where we can make out nei- 
ther a beginning nor an end. It is said to be 'naimittika' 
since it appears in the manifestation of the effects or produ- 
cts. As such there is no difficulty here. To arrive at this 
conclu
ion Padmapaada proceeds to establish 'bhaavaru- 
pam ajnaanam' (positive charactor of nes'cience) in the self. 



Vivaranam 


29 


With this in view, Padmapaada states that this (adhyaasa) 
necessarily 'be accepted.' Here he employs two words- (the 
adhyasa) and 'avasyam' (necessarily). The first word refers 
to 'Pratyaksha Pramaana 7 (perceptual apprehension) and 
the second to 'anumaanapramana' (inference). These two 
pramaanas conclusively prove the positive nature of 'ajnana'. 


To begin with, perception. Take the expressions, '1 
am ignorant, '1 do not know myself and other'. The first 
sen tence makes the 'self the 'asraya' of 'ajnana'. In both 
I have the immediate "and direct apprehension of 'ajnana'. 
They establish the positive existence of 'ajnana' and take 
the (the not-self) to be the object of 'ajna.na' .This is a fact 
of experience. 


Objection: When I say 'I am ignorant' is it not an 
apprehension of the absence of 'jnana' ? Is not 'ajnana' the 
negative of 'jnana' ? 


Reply: No. Jest as in the statement 'I am happy' I 
have an imn1ediate awarences of a positive content, so do I 
have in 'I an1 ignorant This is a pure perceptual know- 
ledge. This is not possible; 'ajnana' is the negation ('abh- 
ava
) of 'jnana' for 'abhava' is cognised not by perception 
but by 'anupalabdhi'. 


Is 'abhaava' cognised by perception? It is impossible 
to apprehend perceptually the absence of 'v ijnana in the 
self. So we experience 'jnanabhava' after experiencing 
the contradictory of the ground or without experiencing? 
Now in the statement 'There is no nowledge in me', we 
have an experience in which we have the apprehension of 
'dharmipratiyogi' and 'artha' or a positive something. Here 



30 


Panchapadika 


is 'jnanasadhava' (being of knowledge) and as such it is im.. 
possib Ie to have the direct a.pprehension of jnallabha
va. 
And if the 'dba-rIni' etc. is not aprehended, 'abhava' can 
never be cognised. 'Jnan:lbhava is experienced only when 
there is the 'dharmaadi pratipatti.' This apprehension is 
through 'anupalabdhi' a new means of congnition. 'Abhava' 
may also be said to be cognised through inf
rence. In any 
manner whether 'fnanabhava' is apprehended in the self or 
not we cannot have 'jnanabhava pratipatti' in the self we 
cannot have 'jnanabhava pratipr..tti in the self (apprahen 
sion of the absence of knowledge). 


It is generally seen that there is a conation in the world 
after apprehending ajnana in the form of ' I dp not know 
what you say'. Even whEm the objects are known, it is 
quite possible that the number may not be known and the 
'sastrartha' too may not be kno\vn. Here we apprehend 
'ajnana' which is 'visaya vyavritta' and then w
 proceed in 
our activities of listening etc. with reference to it. 


Then 'arthajnana' and 'abhava' (its absence) do not 
have a simultanei
y or co.existence. In the same manner 
we cannot have both the knowledge and the absence of the 
knowledge of the same object at the same tiJne. 


As against this view we hold that' ajnana' is a positive 
entity and that it is per,ceptnally apprehended. Jts 'asraya' 
is the self and the 'pratlyogi' (contradi
tary) of the self is 
'ajnana'. We have said that 'jnanabhava' c-annot co-exist. . 
with' jnana' without violating the law of non-contradiction 
Such a violation does not arise when we have th
 'd,sraya 
pratiyogijnana, for it can coexist with a (diffe-ront pOiitive 
quality). 



Vivaranam 


311 


Now the 'saksbi caitnanya' (witnessing consciousness) 
Casraya' pratiyogi jnana bhutam (having the knowledge of 
its contradictory). Yet it does not dispel 'ajnana' which is 
.a; different positive entity, or it makes the object of know- 
ledge manifest. And it is a fact that the knowledge of some- 
thing does not dispel that something. 


Objection: The object 'gives' knowledge; and 
knowledge is the contradictory of 'ajnana'. The object 
then is 'ajnana' vyavartaka (dispeller of ignorance). The 
object is detennined by a 'pran1aana' ; ie., . its validity or 
existence is determined or condiditioned by a valid means 
of knowledge (Pramana). If so how is the object Inade 
manifest by 'sakshi caitanya'. Does 'sa.kshi caitanya' ll1ake 
manifest 'ajnana' as qualified by the object? Or pure 'ajn- 
ana' ? It cannot be the former, fur any object is appreh
n- 
ded thourgh one of the pramanas only. I t cannot be the 
latter since mere 'ajnana' is beyond apprehension. 
Reply: We do not speak here of lnore and unquali- 
fied 'sakshivedya1va'. It is always 'visista saksi vedyatva' 
(kno'wn as qualified witness-courciousness)that we recognise 
here. Ady object is an object of 'saksi caitanya" either as 
known or as unknown. The object as known is apprehen- 
ded by one of the 'pramanas.' The object as unknown is 
apprehended in a general or specific form as 'ajnana' vyava- 
rtka'. One demands the 'pramana vyavadhana (media- 

ion by a means) while the other does not. In either way 
!here is 'ajnana pratyaksa' (direct appehension of nescience) 
and this 'ajnana' It positive entity which has the self as its 
-asraya'. . 


Now with the aid of inference the author proceeds to 
establish 'bhava rupaajnana' (positive character of ajnana).. 



32 


Panchapadika 


An object that is in a dark room is not apprehended be- 
cause it is not visible. The first rays of light con1ing from 
the candle illuml!le the obj
rt: ?.11ti t'hp Abject is distinct 
from the darkness th:1t is dispelled by the rays of light, 
Likewise take an object whish is at a fixed place and which 
exists for a certain period of time. Inference is to establish 
'ajne-na' as a positive entity. It is 'vasthvantara purvakam 
distnict from the object cognised, distinct fr.)m the self. It 
is at the same place as the object. but is not cognised by 
the sense-organs. Jt dispels itself as the object is appre- 
hended; ie.. it is not 'adrsta'. The object that is not cog- 
nised stands as 'avrita' (cor.cealcad covered) just as the 
cognition sublates the prior conition, we cannot say that the 
cognition of the object dispels the ignorance that has enve- 
loped it so far. It is 'svaprabhava vyatirikta' (other than 
its o\vn prior-non-existence) or brought about by nothing 
outside of itself. Since there is nothing external to it, it 
itself is the 'r.:warana' (ocupying, cov
ring). And when the 
object is ccgnised that which is sublaled is this 'avarana 
The mOlnent it is sublated, the object gets h.nown ; and this 
is 'Possible only when the object and 'ajnana' are at the 
same place. And since it is not an erfonneous cognition 
that results, it is said th(\.t it is 'vastav antara' or an object 
distinct from that which is known. 


The 'hetu' (cause) for all this is the illun1ination of an 
object in a dark room by the first rays of light. It is said 
the raysh illumine the object which is so far u nillumined. 
Cognition is 'dha.ra vahika:> (continous process). Here cog.. 
nition is ta.1:en to be a continuous stream or span spread 
over successive moments. The cognition of the second 
moment does not destory the knowledge of the firs.t Hlom- 
ent ; and by the time we come to the second lTIOn1l..:nt> the 



VivaTanam 


33 


object is already illumined and known. Hence it is said 
that the object is so far unillumined and that it is the 'pra- 
thamotpanna prabha (emerging first ray of light) which 
is said to illumine the object. 


Is 'anatma jnana' the dharmi'? or the 'atmajnana'? 
It cannot be the former since 'ajnana' is not 'anatmavarka' 
(concealing not we self). Nor can be accept the latter since 
it does not exclude anatmajnana as such - 'Pratipannasy 
aatma jnanasy anatma jnanasya cadharmitvam'. It is the 
ground of the emerging knowledge of the self and that of 
the not- self. This would make 'ghat adhyavacchinna cait:1- 
nyam' the object of perception. That is, consciousness con- 
ditioned or delimited by the object, like the pot, is the obj- 
ect of perception. This is 'ajnanavarakam ' (enveloped n1Y 
necessence) . 


Thus is established the positive nature of 'ajnana' and 
with jnana it has 'samanasrayavisaya' (similar ground and 
consjgmcnt). 


Padn1apada speaks of 'avidya sakti'. 'A vidya itself is 
'saktimattva' (having potency). It is external to the self. 
And since it is capable of fulfilling the functions of the self 
which is 'sarva kaaryaopadana' (material cause of all acti- 
vities) it is said that there is a 'sakti' of 'avidya.' The 'sakti' 
(potiency) is not outisde of 'avidya'. It is inherent in 
'avidya'. And when we speak of a 'sakti' belonging to it, we 
should consider the expression to be purely metaphisical. 


Padmapaada says, "avidya saktir bahya dhyaatmikesu 
vastushu tat swarupa sattaa ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... This .avidya 



34 


Panchapadika 


sakti' is always attached only to the 'atma tattva satta' (the 
being of the self). When we, cognise the objects which are 
outside the self or speak of the 'ahankara' whose 'asraya' 
is the self . We have avidya attached to the 'atmasatta' for 
the objects constituting the not-self, we have the self as the 
'adhisthana' . 
Then Padmapaada proceeds to argue bringing in ano- 
ther pramana called 'artha patti ! In the absence of this 
'avidyasakti' we cannot consistently and satisfactionly expl- 
ain 'mittyartha' (illusory object) and 'tad avabhaasa' (its 
appearance). And in extablishing the 'bhaavarupajnana' we 
have 'arthapatti' as another 'pramaana'. 


Now ' ahankaara' is 'adhyasta' on pure Brahman as sil- 
ver on the- mother-of-pearl. Both the object and the know- 
1 edge of the object are cases of 'adhyaasa' : for knowledge 
presupposes the ekistence of an object. We have to find out 
the 'upadana' which also should be mithyaabhuta' . The 
material cause is real, the effe;ct also ought to be real since 
the effect partakes of the nature of the cause; and in such 
a case the 'adhyaasa' would have to be real. Has the 'upaa. 
dana' a beginning? or no ? The former would lead to a 
r
grees. No 'Pramana' can prove the latter. If the 'mithyo- 
padana' has a beginning, its cause will be another 'mittya- 
padana' and this will land us to a regress. As such we have 
to assume that the 'mithyopadana' has no beginning. That 
which is beginningless, is itself 'mithya' and 'mithopadana' 
is no other than 'ajnana' which is 'atmasambandhi'. Hence 
'mithyadhyasa' alone is 'jnanopadana'. Apart from this 
we can have nothing else. 



Vivaranam 


35 


Objection: 'Avidya vishayatva' (nescience as object) 
has been maintained for 'anatman' (not-self). Anything 
that manifests or reveals or brings its nature bec
use of 
something else, is the object of the latter. Then how can 
there be an object for 'avidya' ? 


Reply: Due to 'ajnana' there arises an 'avarana' for 
the object (the anatman). Ajnana cannot be taken to be 
envaloping (the avarna of) the self, for it cannot hide it or 
illumine it. There is no 'pramana' to show that it enve- 
lopes ; and that it envelopes is inconsistent with its nature- 
and function. Admiting that 'ajnana' is only 'vishayava, 
raka' (enveloping the object) how do we know that it exists? 
When we know that this is a blue pot, the 'avarna' has cea- 
sed to evist for the pot; and it is then impossible to know 
the 'avarana'. When we do not know that this is a blue pot, 
we cannot know the 'avarana'. 


Objection: Since we apprehend the object now, we 
can assume that if was 'avrita' prior to this moment. 


Reply: But in the case of 'dhaaravaahika jnana' 
we find that the object cognised in the second or third mo- 
ment is also cognised in the first or the preceeding moment. 


Objection: But jn so far as it is known at this. n10- 
ment, is there not the 110n-aporehension prior to this mo- 
ment ? 


Reply: No. first we have the cognition and we know 
that it is a blue plot. Here we do 110t become aware of our 
prior non-apprehension of the object. This awareness comes 
only later on. 



36 


Panchapadika 


Objection: But take the case of 'pratyabhijna'. 
(recognition). .A
n 0 eject has been cognised son1e time back 
and it is recognised now to be the same. In the intervening 
time we have to admit the non-apprehension of the object. 
Otherwise there ought to be this recognition even in the 
intervening time. 
Reply: This does not establish non - apprehension 
(anavagati). In the case of the self which is 'dhaaravahika 
jnana gamya'(apprehended by knowledge which is a process) 
we have a situation similar to that of pratyabhijna'. This 
'purvapara sambandha vishaya' is found even in the case of 
self which is always 'avagata (apprehended). 
Objection: Through 'arthapathi' (implication)one can 
establish this 'non-apprehension'. In the interval between 
the past cognition and the present recognition there is the 
absence of 'jnanasmriti'. As such is not non-prrehension 
apprehended ? 
Reply: No. Even in apprehension there is no nece- 
ssity of smriti. 
Objection: However, 'avarana" is a fact of experi- 
ence. How can it be rejected by reason ? 


Reply: The apprehension or otherwise of an object 
is determined by a 'pramaana'. But the apprehension of 
non-apprehension is not determined by any 'pramaana ?' 
And this 'anavagati' along with the objects is 'adhyasta' on 
the 'saaksin'. There is the 'ajnaanadhyaass' along with the 
objects on 'saksicaitanya' and this explains the experience. 
That which is 'adhyasta' has no 'savarana'. But the 
object cannot be apprehended if the 'savarana' is not des_ 



Vivaranam 


37 


troyed and as such the 'avarana bhal1ga
 (destruction of the 
enveloping) must be stated. Is the 'avarana bhanga' acco- 
Inplished by a 'prama:na' or by 'sakhin ?' It cannot be the 
forn1er for in the perception of two Inoons there is no 
'pramaanagamyatva'. Nor can it be the latter since the;! 
'avarana
 arises as dependent on the 'saakhsin'. 


Hence there is no pramaana which can make us say 
that there is <ajnaanavarana' for the not-self. The not-self 
is essentially dependent and is 'prakaasahina. (non-illumi- 
nant) ; ,and no purpose is served by an 'avarana' for the 
llt)n--conscious not self. And since the not-self as object 
does not get any 'atisaya', from 'ajnana\ it cannot be 
'agnanavishaya'. Padmapada, therefore, observes, that the 
A vidya 
akti does not prevent the 'svarupavabhaasa' of the 
non-conscious objects'. The'svarupa' (nature) of the not- 
self is 'ajnanatmaka'. Since the not self is 'acidrupa' there 
is no posibility of any 'prakaasa'; and hence it does not 
prevent the 'svarupavabhasa' (appearance of its form). 


But, then, how do you maintain 'anatmavishayatwam.'? 
The reply is that though 'ajnana
 is not 'visayavaraka' 
(enveloping the object), get is has a 'vikshepa sakti' (power 
of revealing plurality). Because of 'vikshepa' we can main- 
tain 'anatma vishayatman'. It is 'rupantaravebhasa hetuh' 
(cause for the appearence of another form). This will be 
explained later on. 


If tbe not-self has Cavirta svarupa' (form of being enve- 
oped), we have to say that it is now 'ajnata.' 'unknown'; 
since this is absurd we should say the (ajnatatva' is due to 
some other reason. But this is faulty. "Anatma visaya,.. 



38 


Panchapadi.ka 


ntah karana parinaamaa' nudayalaksana vaikalyaat" (it is 
is due to the non-emergence of the modification of the psy... 
chosis having the not-self as the object. 


We can interpret Padmapada's statement 'pramaana 
vaikalyadeva' differentlysthus. Even though the not-self it 
not by itself luminous, it might become luminous since is 
has the contact with 'caitanya prakaasa' (self luminous 
consciousness). Then the not-self will be like the real and 
it will have 'nityatva prakasa' (eternally luminous). Then 
'arnana' is required to function as the 'avarana' of this not- 
self. To avoid this conclusion, Padmapada has to give that 
statement by way of reply. 'caitanya' is 'nitya'; and it is 
the 'saadhana' (means of establishing)for the not-self. Since 
it is the 'anavirta caitanya' (unenveloped consciousness) 
which is the 'vishaya saadhaka', the object cannot be appre- 
hended only when the 'caitanya' is enveloped by 'ajnaana' 


Hence there is no necessity to assume another 'avarana 
for the not-self. Tbis is given by Padmapada in the nex' 
sentence 'rajatapratibhasad' (
rom the appearance of silver). 
If the 'ajnana' which is 'atmaasraya' (grounded in the 
se]f) were to be 'anatmavarana\ then a curious result would 
follow. Unless the 'avarana' is destroyed, the object, can- 
not be apprehended; and when there is the knowledge of 
tIle object, then the 'ajn::.na' which is in the self ought to dis_ 
appear con1pletely. This is contrary to experience. A') 
such there is 'avidya' in the self. Then in all the three per- 
iods (before 'rajata bhasa', during 'rajata bhasa' and after 
'rajata bhasa') we have the ',vishaya svarupa pratibhasa' 
(appearence of the' form of the object). And this means 
that ajnana, cannot have 'anatmavarana'. 



Vivaranam 


39 


Objection: 'Ajnana' need not be one only. There 
is 'ajnana' with reference to 'shukti' (nl0ther of pearI)and It 
is dispelled by 'sukti jnaana', There is another 'ajnaan a
 
which we ::.pprehend with reference to the self. This 1s dis-' 
tinct from the previous one. 


Reply: No. To establish 'bhavarupa.ajnaana' as ex- 
isting
distjnc1y in every object apart from lhe 'ajnana' which 
is 'atmaasraya' and 'atmavishaya', we have no 'pramaana." 
The object is not apprehended precisely because there doe
 
not arise any 'vritti' (psychosis I and because there is 'caita- 
nyavarana' (enveloping consciousness). 


Further 'ajnana' is 'atisayaantarajaaaka' (causing a diff_ 
erent mark) with reference to the object; and hence it IS 
proper to speak of 'ajnana vishayatva' for the object. In 
maintaining 'anatmavisha.yanl ajnanam', Padmapada states 
'rupantarava.bhasa hetur kevaellatn' (merely). 'Avdiya 
causes the object to appear in a form other than its own. 


Objection: This too is inconsistent and impossible 
when we have the knowledge of 'shukti' we find that silver 
which is its 'rupantara') is dispelled along with the 'ajnana' 
which is the 'upadana' of the form of silver. Now when the 
.'agnanadhyasa' isdispelled by the knowledge of 'shukii', how 
is it that we still have the ajnana in the self? Hence we 
have to admit that there is a different 'ainana' for every 
different object. And if many 'ajnansam' cannot be accep- 
ted, we cannot have 'agnana' as the 'upadana' of 'adhayasa'. 
But we cannot have a 'satyaopadana' (real cause) fOT a 
'mithyabhuta vishaya', (an erron.eous datum). Then we may 
have to admit that 'adhyasa nirtti' is possibleve jf there 
is no 'upaadana nivritti'. 



40 


Panchapadika 


Reply: When the pot is destroyed we speak of the 
pot as having its 'pravilaya' (involution) in its own 'karana' 
(cause). In the same way, when we have the knowledge of 
'shukti', the 'rajatadhyasa' too has 'svakarana pravilaya" 
(dissolved into its own cause). 


We can argue that there is a 'mitijnana' (primal neschy.. 
ence)which has a different 'avastha' .(status). These'avasthas' 
are the 'upadanas' for the cognitions of silver etc., These 
'avasthas' or 'upadanas' are dispelled along with 'adhyasa' 
and the knowledge of 'shukti' etc. 
Obejction: But in ordinary experience; we do not 
apprehend the 'nivritti' (sublation) of 'adhyasa' along with 
'ajnana' though' tattvajnana' going against this experience 
how can we say that 'adhyasa' along with 'ajnana' can be 
dispelled by the knowledge of Brahman1 
Reply: But 'jnana' dispels that which is not 'jnana" 
and this is a fact of experience. 'Ajnana' being the contra_ 
dictory of 'jnana'it is capableof being dispelled by the latter. 
'Agrahana' (non-cognition), mitthyajnana' and the like are 
tattvavabl1asa virodhinah.' (contradictaries of the appear- 
ence of the real). That they are dispelled by 'tattvajnana" 
is a fact of experience. In the same way when we say that 
'bhavarupainana' is the contradictory (virodhi) of 'tattva- 
vaabhasa', it is but proper to say that Brahmajnana can 
dispel that 'ajnana'. 
With reference to 'avarana' we have said earlier that if 
it were for the object, it cannot be known. Such a defect 
does not arise here in the case of this 'vikshepa.', for it is 
through 'bhranti jnana' that we apprehend'vishaya vyavdtta 
rupantara' (a different form which is other than that of the 



Vivaranam 


41 


Objection: Then even for the self there need not 
.. be .ajnana nimittam avarana krityam'. (caused by nesci- 
ence). An 'avarana' hides or conceals 'prakasa'. But the 
'svarupa' of the self cannot be so hidden. Nor can there 
by any 'karya pratibandha' nor this 'pratikri'. There is nei- 
theF a pratibandha nor a 'pratikriya'for jnana which is 'visa- 
yavabhasatmana udita' (arising just in the appearance of 
the object). And since no useful purpose is served by this 
'bhavaru-pajnana', it does not exists even in the self. 


Reply: To this Padmapada replies: 'Pratyagatman' 
is of the nature of consciousness and it is 'svayam prakasa' 
(self-luminol1s). Brahmasvarupa cannot be for any 
reason or factor outside of Brahman;' we have to admit that 
this 'anavabhasa' is due only to the 'pratibandha' (obstcles) 
of the 'avidhya sakti' which is 'tadgata nisarga siddha' ari- 
sing naturally from is ground). 


Now, on the one hand there is the sufficient cause fOJ 
the 'ava.bhasa' of Brahman, for it exists and is luminous. 
And yet, on the other hand, there is the 'atma tattvalam- 
bana vyavaharah" (activity depending on the self)in the form 
that it doesnot exist and that it is not luminous. Its nature 
is one thing and the way it is apprehended is a different 
thing. This difference can not be explained unless we ass- 
ume an 'avarana" in the form of 'ajnana', as a positive 
entity. When there is the presencs of the sufficient cause and 
the absence of 'avarana', the pot which is near by is app. 
rehended as existing. Hence empirical statements like 'Bra- 
hman is not' and 'Brahman is not luminous' go to imply 
through rthapapatti' (implication) only that 'ajnana' which 



42' 


Panchapadika 


is 'bhavarupa'. In this way 'arthapatti' or 'anumana' go to 
establish this 'ajnana.' 


And with referencc to the empirical statement like the 
self is luminous 'Padmapada' proceeds to show that the self 
is the sufficient cause; 'Pratyagatman' is of this nature of 
consciousness; and yet there is the 'brahmasvarupa anava- 
bhasa' (non-appearance of the being of Brahman) for we 
have such expressions as 'nasti' (is not) and 'naprakasate' 
(does not appear). 


This consciousness is the 'adhisthana' and the form in 
which it is apprehended is its 'karya' (product or effect). It 
is only what there is a 'Pratibandha for this 'adhisthana' 
that we apprehend its 'Karya', as other than itself. And 
since the 'avarana' has 'avidyasambahdha', it is quite 
probable that the fOrTIler has :aniruphakarata' (indetermis- 
nate fornl). 


Objection: Even though it is 'svayam prakasam', 
there is non-apprehension in the case of 'purusanatara sam- 
vedana' (apprehension of another person). Why can't we 
accept the same 'agrahana' here too? 


Reply: No, In the case of apprehending anothe1 
person that person is an other. Because of this otherness, 
we c&.n speak of 'agrahana' there. But Brahaman is not 
other, but pratyak (immediate experience). Consequently 
a cause other than 'ajnana' can not be found here. For the 
'anavabhasa' of' Brahman there is sufficient cause in the 
form of 'ajnana' which functions as the 'pratibandha' of the 
self and which is 'tadgata naisargika siddha avidya sakti'. 
Since Brahman is 'pratyaksvarupa' (the form of one's self) 



Vlvaranam 


43 


substance (murtadravya) can be its 'vyavadhayaka'. Hence 
'ajnana' arises from the preception of 'Karya'. It make s 
the object appear as something else. That it, the avarana 
krtya is to alter (viparyaya) the object and its apprehension 
by the self. And we have to assume because of anyathanu- 
'papatti', the existence of 'bhavarupajnana' which is the 
cause of the 'mithyavastu' and the 'mitthyjna' alike. 


Objection: We do not find 'ajnana' as an entity 
di$tinct from 'agrahana', 'mithyajnana' or its 'samskal'a'. 
Eventhough the 'svarupa' of BrahmaLi is self - luminous, 
these three alone are capable of preventing its 'avabhasa' 
for the self. 
Reply: No, says, Padmapada.' This 'ajnana' remains 
as 'ahankaradi viksepa samskara matrae' in deep sleep. 
And when we get up, dpe to this 'samskara', it again spri- 
ngs up.'. 


Even in deep sleep the 'avidyasakti' remains 11'erelyas 
a 'samskara'. We cannot say that the 'samskaI1as' alone are 
'ajnana'. In the apprehension of another, the precipient 
is different from being perceived there ; and in deep sleep, 
then, the other is not apprehended. In the same way we 
cannot say that in deep sleep there is the 'anavabhasa' of 
Brahmaswarupa which is 'svayamprakasa', because we are 
told of the identity of the percipient with psceived Braha- 
man (in the srutis). 


It is not 'mithyajnana' wh.ich prevents us, for in deep 
t;leep there is no 'mithyajnana..' 
Nor can we say that the 'bhranti' (illusion) arises from 
the fact that 'samskaras' of this 'mithyajnana.' prevent 



44 


Panchapadika 


the favabhasa'. For it is not a rule that the 'samskaras' 
prevent the 'tattvavabhasa'. Even when there are the 'sam- 
skaras' in the form of 'rajata bhrama':I we have the appre_ 
hension of 'sukti'. 


Nor can 'agrahana' prevent the 'avabhasa'. 'Svarupa 
grahana' is always there. W
en the 'samvedana' is self- 
luminous' the 'visaya kadacitka agrahana'(non -apprehension 
of the object) cannot prevent it. 


Even the 'Karanas' or actions are not opposed to 'sva- 
rupaavabhasa'. If the 'kaarnas' are its 'virodhis", then 'cait- 
anya' should cease to be luminous (prakasa) always. 


Objection: Don't we get the same conclusion even 
if we admit 'ajnana.' as preventing the avabhasa' ? 


Reply: No. 'Ajnana' has its 'asraya' in conscious- 
ness. It is not offered to consiousness. It is not a 'prati- 
bandhaka', for'svavishaya caitanyavahasa.' (the apprearence 
of its object). 


'Ai ana' is 'sa:ksi caitanyavabhasaya
 (illumined or 
manifested by the witness consciousness). Karanas are not 
so, since their 'avabhasyatva is due to the 'pramanas ' If, 
on the other band the karanas too are'cidbhasya'(mainfested 
by consciousnttss), t
en the 'saksi caitanya' will have to be 
always luminous and fire. That the karauas are the 'viro- 
dhis' for the 'vabhasa' of their own 'asraya' cannot 'be 
established by a.ny 'pramana'. The 'bhranti samskara' does 
not prevent the 'sukti bodha' ; likewise the karanas which 
are 'samskara rupas' cannot prevent the 'avabhasa 1 of 
'Brahmasvarupa' . Hence we have to admit that the 'svaru.. 



Vivaranam 


45 


panavahasa' (non... manifestatioR of the form) in deep sleep 
is not due to 'agra.hana', 
mithyajnana', 'samskara>, or 
"karana' . But it is due to 'ajnana', which is different from 
these and which alone can prevent the 'avabhasa' of Brah- 
man. . 


Objection: Then why should you assume 'ajnana'l 
:as 'pratibandhaka' ? Why should you not assume a different 
substance altogether? 


-Reply: No. only when the 1: pra tibandha' is dispelJed 
by the knowledge of Brahman, can we have the 'svavisaya- 
vabhasa'. And jnana can dispel only that which is not jna- 
na. Such an entity is only "ajnana'. 


Objection: Here arises an objection from the stand- 
point of Bhedabhedavada.. There is no 'ajrtana' which is 
distinct from 'I agr ahan a' , 'mithyajnana', and 'tatsamskara 'I 
 
and which is the primal cause of the whole 'samsara', whicb 
continues to remain undestroyed in 'jagrat', 'svapna' and 
'sushupti', and which remains till the 'sanlsara ceases, It is 
()nly 'bhranti jnana' which can be called 'ajnana". 


But what is 'Bhranti'? It is only the 'atmanubhuti', 
(awareness of the self) in the not--self which is from 'ahan- 
kara to the body. 


But this is against the tenegts of the Bhedabheda school. 
In'Khanhndlgant' they maintain its'abheda'(non-difference) 
'with the other cows because of \:gotva
 (cowness) and its 
<Bheda' (difference) with them because of 'Khandatva-. In 
the same way, why should we not take 'ahammanushyah", 
(I am a man) also as a case of bhedabheda? In 'aham 



46 


Panchapadika 


arrJsa', there is 'bheda' with Brahman 1 and in the ..manusy.... 
amsa' there is 'abheda'.. We cannot say that there is the 
apprehension '1 am not a manusya, but Brahman_ 
 For, 
even in a statement like 
nayam khando gauh, kintu mun- 
dogauh. (this cow-is not khan d) both the Khanada' and 
.munda' agree in 'gotva" and as such are identical. Like- 
wise when I think of myself as being a man" the self is, 
ide
ticaI with the body and when I take myself to be Brab.. 
man, the self is identical with Brahman. 
It cannot be said tha.t 'aham manus hyah" is a case of 
'bhranti" as in 'this is silver'. F or even in 'Khando gauh 
too we will have to admit the same 'bhranti' ? 
But in 'naya.m khandogauh" kintu mundah" we find 
that 'khandatva' is negated in 'mundogauh', The 'gotvopa- 
dhi" (cownesss as deJimitedy it) is there. And there is no 
putting an end to 'vyavahara' to the latter As such it 
might be argued that this is not a case of 'bhranti'. To this 
we can reply that the san1e holds good even ill 'aham manu- 
syah'. In the state of liberation there is "sarvatmatva' and 
in this state the whole 'vyvatara' (activity) based on the 
love of and attachment to the body and sense organs cea... 
ses to exist. 


And when there is 'vyavahara uccheda" (distracted acti.... 
vity) we have an erroneous cognition. 
To this the bhedabheda vadin might say that we may 
not be able to define exactly what bhadabheda is.' But the 
relationships that subsist between the universal and the 
particular, quality and substance, effect and ca.use, 'visista' 
and 'svarupa', 'amsa' and 'amsi' (part and whole)-these 
are all cases of behda bheda. Such a relationship does not 
exist between the body and the selt 



Vivaranam 


47 


But we have to ask how 'sarirasadrisambandha' (body- 
.soul relationship) differs from (guDagunyadisambandha' 
(quality and substance relation). All these are identical 
relationships. It is meaningless not to extend that relation- 
ship here. Since 'brahmatva' is admitted to the 'cetana sva- 
rupamsa', we bave to say that there is a causal relation bet- 
ween the 'cetana svarupa' and the body. Hence there is no 
'bhranti' in this school of Bhedabheda. 


Further, if 'BhTanti jnana' is 'antahkarana parinan1a\ 
then 'vidya', cannot be 'atmasraya' (self as ground); if it be 
said that the "antahkarana parimana' (evolution of the in- 
ner organ) itself is 'atmani adhyasta' (grounded in the salf). 
Then there cannot be any 'atmavidyasambhandha', for in 
the 'anyathakhyati' theory there is no relation between the 
real object and the 'mithya object. 


Bhranti cannot be even 'atmaparinama' since the self is 
'aparinami' (changeless). 


Accordings to this school jnana is only a property of 
the self. We cannot say whose property is jnang, which will 
undergo a change (parinarna) in the form of another 'jnana 
guna'. Now the clay which is the 'aadhara' (basis) for the 
pot, cannot be the 'adhara' for some other object. Like 
wise the self 
hich is the 'asraya' for knowledge, cannot be 
the 'asraya' of another knowledge. Two distinct properties 
that differ in their nature cannot have the same identical 
'asrya' . ' 


This 'sarva sankara vadin' (theory that mixes up all 
kinds of views) does not accept the 'mithyajnana' which 
is 'anadisiddha' (beginningless) and as such there can not be 
any 'samskara' of this 'mithyajnana'. He cannot have 



48 


Panchapadika 


'aYidya'. Even though there is the relationship of the self 
to the 'mithyajnana' which is 'anadi:, yet it is only a tem- 
porary relationship like 'ajnana'. Just like 'ajnana' this. 
can be dispelled by true knowledge. 'Ajnana' is related 
to the selt like the co]our blue to the sky. As such it does. 
not put an end to the 'kutastha' (integcality)of the self. 


Thus far we have shown that perception
 inference and 
'arthapatti' are the valid means of knowledge that establish 
'ajnana' as a positive and beginningless entity. Such an 
'ajnana' is both 'naimittika' and 'naisargika'. It is mani- 
fest both as the cause and as the effect. 


Padmapada says that the aham (I) is the first adhyasa. 
How is this possible? The self is essentially pure conciou- 
sness itself. It is devoid of parts and is 'anandaikara' (of 
the form of Bliss alor..e). Ajnana etc. are made possible 
by this consciousness which is the 'saksin'. They are 'sak- 
sibhasya'. This 'ajnana' is the 'upadana' for adhy?sa it- 
self. As such this 'ajna:aadhyasa" is anadisiddhi'; yet Pad- 
mapada takes up a temporary case of adhyasa and sa.ys that 
"the I is the first adyasa". 


Objection: Just as in the adhyasa of this is silver 
'we ha.ve two entities (Viz. This and silver)
 similarly if 
'aham is a case of adhyasa, we require two entities; and 
. hence it is apprehended as pure consciousness which is 'nir- 
amsi' (partless); we do not find any other 'amsa' which is 
'adhyasta' or 'anadhyasta' 


Reply: The reply will be given later on. 



Vivaranam 


49 


Objection: . Padmapada speaks next of'saiiradhysa". 
This is impossible since the body is like the 'ahamkara' ego 
in being unconscious (jada). We do not apprehend the 
'antahkarana' and the sense-organs as having an existence 
apart 'from the self. We even take them to be practi- 
cally identical with the self-i.e., we cognise them as 'adhy- 
asta' on the self. And when there is the 'atmatattvavabo- 
dha' their very 'svarupa' is lost in the nature of the self. So 
let it be accepted that they are adhyasta on the self in their 
0wn form and also as 'samsrsta' (fused) with the self. As 
regards the body, however, it is apprehended by the sense- 
organs as the 'this", and, therefore, not 'kevalasask- 
vedya.' Even when ',the soul leaves the body we fiind the 
body to be distinct from the soul and the body has its 
'laya' (dissolution) in the elements. Hence it is not adhya- 
sta." By the 'this' we apprehend the 'karya karana sangh- 
ata' (causal complex) which is the 'bhogasadhana' (means 
of experience) of the 'ahankarta' (agent). That which is 
said to be mine is distinct from the body and it can not a.t 
all be adhyasta on the self. Hence we cannot take the 
,this' and the "mine' to be cases of adhyasa. 
Reply : The 'sariradi padrthasvarupa' (body and sense 
organs) is the object of the self; and the self is taken as 
'samyukta' (combined) with the doer or .karta(doner) bhokta 
(enjoyer) and pramata (knawer) and these distinctions are 
'n1ithya kalpita'. For such a self there is the body consi- 
dered as the karya(effect) bhogya (enjoyed),prameya(object), 
and dvesya (hated) and the body is created only for these 
purposes. That such a body is in itself and by itself mithya 
can be irnferred from 'sv.apna drstallta
 (exampJe from 
dream). So Padmapada rites- 'When the -ahankarta is 
adhyasatmaka, the upakarana' (means) too get the same 



50 


. Panchapadika 


nature. When I dream myself to be the crowned king or 
when the magician creates a crowned king, the "rajyaopa- 
karana'(kingship) does not become real. Thus the 'yaikvova- 
hara' (normal activity) which is 'ahamkartrtva pramukha' 
(based on I as doer) and which is 'kriya karaka phaIatmaka 
(result- oriented) is adhyasta on the self whose nature is 
eternal and pure and partakes of the ought and freedom. 
Hence in order to have the atmanubhava (self-realization) 
of such a Brahman we should have knowledge which dis- 
pels the adhyasa ; for adhyasa is the cause of all this 'avar- 
tha' (evil error). As such tbe vedanta Mimansa is begun 
with this ends in view'. 


The appear ante of the drisya (external) is the avidya 
dhyasa' on the perceiving self. Only when this is accepted- 
we can have the subject matter and purpose of this sastra' 
This sastra would .explain how the 'brahmatmanubhava., 
and the 'bandha nivrtti ' (cessation of bondage) are possible. 
When the 'visaya' and the 'prayojana' are estabHshed we 
arrive at the 'sastra-rambha kartavyata' (activity of beginn... 
ing the study of this system of philosophy). 


'From 'ko' yam adhyasaral11a (what is this adhyasa?' 
we .have the commentary that establishes 'adhyasa'. In 
till the beginning of 'Katham punar avidyavad visayani' 
(How are these the objects like nescience?) We have adh- 
yasa svarupa' and 'adhyasa sambhavana' (possibility of adh.. 
yasa). From that sentence we have determining the positive 
character of adhyasa. If this is the division there is no need 
to give adhyasa svarupa and its sambhavana separately; 
for if the svarupa of an entity is not known and if it is 
.asambhavyamana' (cannot be imagined as possible) you' 



Viva ran am 



 


cannot have its 'nirnaya'. 'Niraya' alrady presuppeses its 
eifinition or nature and its possibility. In the absence of 
these two, the 'nirnaya' will become all the more difficult 
of obtaining specially as regards the adhyaksanubhava nir- 
naya' 
It is the pramana itself which' is the object. The odject 
here is 'adhyasa' which is defined as 'anyasyanyamana ava... 
bhasah' (one appearing on having the nature of another). 
Only after 'atma s
kshatkara every thing becomes 'asambha- 
vita'; till then everything must be 'sambhavita) (possible)- 
The pramana in establishing adhyasa also establishes that 
adhyasa has a conceivable form having its own place, time 
and upadhi and that it has also its specific and unique form. 
Then why should there be a separate discussion on the defi- 
nition and possiblity of adhyasa ? 


But inference and other pramanas give us the valid 
cognition of an obj
ct, Later on we enquire about the nat- 
ure and possibili1y of that object. This i
 generally the case. 
Why can't we say that the sa':11e is the case with adhyasa 
also ? 


To this the objector replies that it is very difficult to 
have such a later enquiry which can specify it and distin- 
guish it as unique. 


Reply: That the arceiving self is apprehended as 
having the nature of the perceived, is found. This much of 
pramana is given later OD. 


Further, A vidya is that which is dispelled by know- 
ledge ; bhranti has only 'Pratibhasa matra sarira' (having 
only the form of appearance). Adhyasa involves the unity of 



52 


Panchapadika 


the rea] with the false . and mithya is (sad asad vilaksha:na 
(other than the true and the untrue). In view of these dis_ 
tinctions, "it is not possible to establish" the 'adhyasatma- 
kata' for those having the 'aham mamabhimana' regarding 
the body and senseorgans, by merely plesenting the prama- 
trtva" . 


Objectio....: The difinition given is the appearance 
of an object as having the nature of another. Since two 
objects are ta:t<:en as one object here, why can't we say that 
'mithyatva' is established '] 


Reply: It is not through experience alone tbat we 
can establish it. 'In the world there ie no experience of 
adhyasa like that of the 'suktirajata' or like that of the two 
moons.' 


Objection: When there is the pramana, how can 
yar say that there is no sucb experience ? 


Reply: Suktirajata etc. are taken to be experiences 
of adhyasa only when they are negated. If there is some.. 
thing that cannot be 
ublated, then it is not a ease of adh- 
yasa. The self is such an entity. But to show that there is 
the appearance of the not-self superimposed on tbe self, we 
have pramanas like perception, inference, arthapatti (impli- 
cation) and agam3: (yerbal testimoney). 
Objection: The erroneous cognition is sublated 
when freed from the adhyasta. Thjs discriminatiQn is the 
cause of the sublation. In the absence of such a discimi- 
-nation we cannot know that the cognition was a case of one 
object appearing as having the nature of another. If there 



Vivaranam 


53 


is no discrimination. the cognition will be that of an object" 
al'pearing as having its own nature. So where is adhyasa ? 
It preupposes discrimination and discrilnination is applied 
to adhya
a
 


Reply: uThe sublation is not found here" Logical 
reasoning gives us a mediated knowledge of discrimination. 
To establisb the 'parasparatmatavabhasa' (appearance of 
one in another) we should depend on discrimination. The 
in1mediate sublation is that which puts an end to the 'bhra- 
nti pratibhasa'. But since there is nothing that puts an end 
to the erroneous cognition, the experience of mithyatva is 
not clear. 


The err-oneoU's cognition which is immediate can be 
sublated by that cognition which also should be immediate. 
And in the absence of the sublation, you cannot establish 
the mithyatva of the cognition. But to have the 'badhaka 
pratyaya' it is not enough to know only the pramana. You 
should know the nature and definition of mithyatva; and 
this knowledge will tell us how and when it can be sublated 
"Hence the definition of adhyasa should be given first; and 
then the possibility of adhyasa in all cases to which this 
definition applies
 should be established". 


Obj ec1:ion: In such a case you can establisb adhy- 
asa clearly by presenting only the definition and the pra.. 
mana. And the pramana will conclusively establish its 
possibility and dispel all doubts reparding the possibility. 
As such one need not speak of 'adhyasa sambhavana' '1 


"When the possibility of adhyasa is established or app" 
rehended from the pramanas ll no doubt can arise regarding 



54 


Panchapadika 


this very possibility. And as such nothing need be told 
again on the question of possibiIity.H 


Reply: Even though the pramanas have the capacity 
to establish it still we do have experiences where we rejeCt 
as impossible that which is directly and immediately appre... 
hended. We have the direct experience of the sukti 
and this has no concejvable "cause. We have also the 
direct experience of the things produced by the magician.. 
Yet we reject these as impossible because of the pramanas 
which aid us in drawing our conclusion. 


Objection: Sometimes the pramanas make us accs 
ept the impossible as real as in the movements of the bird... 
in the sky; at times they make us reject even an immedia.... 
telyapprehended object as impossible to be there. Now 
when you say that there is the appearance of the not-self 
in the self, which of the above two alternatives does it fail ? 
Since it is something impos.sible, you can't say that adhyasa 
is quite possible. 


Now the self is not an object" but the subject. The 
ground and the cohsqeuent must be there io give rise to a 
simple knowledge. In the absence of a ground, you cannot 
1).ave adhyasa. As such we should note that the self is nOt 
an object.. The entire 'Karya karana sanghata' (causal 
series) which is distinct from the' percipent 'is to be exp-lained 
as having the nature of adhyasa ; and this requires 'kacadi'" 
dosas' in the percipent. But the self is free from such defe.. 
'cts and is non-relati9nal (asanga). Further there must be a 
similarity between the avayava (parts) of the ground and 
those of the consequent. But the self is free from all attriJ.. 



Vivaranam 


55 


butes and avayavas. Moreover, when the ground appears as 
in itself it really is
 adhyasa ceases; and if the ground is alw.. 
ays lun1inous there is no possibility of adhyasa. The self 
being "niskalanka caitanya" (spotless consciousness), it is 
capable of dispelling all adhyasa. In such a case we are 
not able to imagine any possible defect or cause that can 
give rise to. this vibhralna (Illusion)". 


Further, if we do no apprehend or understand the self 
as the subject, we can't have any 
'asambhavana buddhi H , 
(awareness of an impossibility). and if we do understand it 
to be the subject, there does not renlain any adhyasa. 


Reply: The self is the subject; and the 'asambha- 
vana buddhi 
 arises from the 'paroksha avabhasa' (appear- 
ances as external). Only when there is the immediate appre- 
hension, adhyasa is dispelled. As such "not only should 
adllyasa be defined, but its possibility too should be establi- 
, shed." So Samkara proceeds to give the definition, sambha_ 
vana, and pramana of adhyasa in a regular sequence. 
Adhyasa Laksana (Definition of Adhyasa). ' 
The question is - 'Ko' Yam)adhyaso nama'f (What is 
adhyasa '?)The word"koyam'(What, refers both to a question 
and to a doubt; and both are found here, The word is 
employed with two meanings at the same time. These 
meanings respectively refer to definition and 'sambhavana' 
(possibility). But it is only the former that it first taken up 
because to dispel the doubt regarding its possibility we 
should first have a working definition on which the question 
of doubt can be raised. 
The definition is to define 'adhyasa'; and the word 
to be defined is not found in the difinition given. So We 
, 



56 


Panchapadika 


have to interpret this definition as that of adhyasa, because 
the question begs its definition. ' 
Objection: Adl1yasa is later on stated to be the 
apparance of one (parasya) having the nature of another 
(Paratra). Then how is it that in the definition we :ha-:e 
only one word 'paratra'. How can it complete the d1finl- 
tion ? 


Reply: "The word' paratra (elsewhere) implies nece- 
ssarily 'parasy a avabhasan1anata'. This word 'partra'is qua. 
lified by the adjective 'smrti rupah' (having a form similar 
to that of memory). Smrti or memory is that which is re- 
membered. 


Objection: The suffix 'ghar is exployed only in 
'bhavartha'. But you are explaining the 'ghai' in the word 
'smurti' to refer to an object(Karma) and not to 'bhava'(be- 
ing). 


Reply: "Panini's" afhorism 'asamjnayam apy' states 
plainly that for aU the Karakas (declensions) save those of 
the nominative case, we can have the 'ghai' both in 'sanjna' 
and in "asanjna' ? 


Objection: If 'srnrti' is that which is remenlbered? 
why is there also the word 'rupa
 attached to 'smrti' ? 
Reply: ]t is intended for comparing that which is 
remembered with that which is not remembered. "So 'slnrti 
rupah' means the formar similar to the form of that which 
is remembered". 


, A khyativadin (Prabhakal'a Mimamsa): What is this 
comparison? Thi:; silver is only the remembered silver. 



Vivaranaln 


57 


Reply: No, it is not merely the remembered one. 
Objection: But since the tye etc. cannot have a 
contact with such an unreal silver, by a process of elimi- 
. nation we may say that it is the remembereQ silver. 


Reply: No. It cannot be the remembered silver sinc
 
"it appears or it is cognised, as being immcdia.tely" before 
us". 


In non-erroneous cognition we have the experience like 
'this is silver' and 'this is a pot'. In such cased the 'this' 
is cognised as 'silver' or as 'pot'. The 'this' is taken.to be 
necessarily the 'silver' or 'pot'. The 'this' and the 'wha. t 
are apprehended as 'samsrshta'(fused) There are notwo enti- 
ties cognised as two, but as one. The cognition is imme- 
diate and direct. Likewise in the erroneous cJgnition we 
have the imn1ediate apprehension of the 'this' and the'what' 
as 'san1srishta'. The 'what' is not the remembered content 
but the serceived comtent. 


It might be argued that the 'this' is immediately cog- 
nised; and that due to non-discrimination the 'what' too is 
taken to be immediately cogllised. As such there is no 
'samsarga samvid
 (unified awareness). 
But is it the 'samsarga samvid.' rejected' because this 
cognition is sublated later on ? or because there is no silver 
in the erroneous cognition? The forn1er (Pratibhasa vailak- 
sanya) is impossible since the apprehension of the real silver 
involves as much 'samsarga' of the 'this' and the 'what' as 
that of the erroneous silver. In the actual n10ment of 
apprehension there is no difference and we can not deny the 
'samsarga samvid'. It cannot be the latter. 



58 


Panchapadika 


How can there be an imm.ediate apprehension in the 
absence ('.f the c bject 1 The 'artha satta niscaya 
 (determi- 
ning the being of the object) is dependent upon samvid ava.. 
bhasa' (appearance of aW..I.reness). It is not the object which 
makes apprehension possible; but' it is the apprehension 
which n1ak.es the knowledge of the object possible. If the 
'samvit sattaniscaya' (the being of conscriousness) 
were to be dependent on the 'artha satta niscaya', we have to 
find out another 'niscaya' on which does defend the 'artha 
satta niscaya'., To avoid this regress we have to assume 
ontological and logical priority of'samvit satta' (being or 
reality cf con
ciousnet;s). 


Objection: But there is a later apprehension (sam- 
vedana) that 'this is no silver 1 Does not this determine the 
absence of the object even during the erroneous cognition? 


Reply: But prior to this sublation there was an app- 
rehension (samvedana) which proves the existence of that 
object which is sublated later. In the later cognition w:;, 
have 'this is no silver. The silver which is the this is nega- 
ted. It is not mere silver that it negated but the silver which 
is 'samsrishta' (fused) with the 'this'. 


Objection: In the prior cognition we have the app.. 
rehensions of 'this', 'silver', and the 'abhava' of this silver. 
These are not distinguished likewise ; can' t we say that ill 
the later cognition too these are 110t distinguished and, as 
. such there i3 only 'samsarga samvid abhava' ? (negation of 
the fused awareness). Since there is 'vyavahara sambhava 
jnana' (knowledge which is in agreement with activity) in 
thc later congtion, we can say that then alone there is the 
samsarga' between the 'this' and the 'silver'. 



Vivananarr.. 


59 


Reply : This would mean that 'artha samvit sadbhava. 
isca.ya
 is du
 to the knowledge of its utility. Though the 

rabhakara M
mamsaka admits' samvic Pratyaksatva'(imme- 
.iacy of conscIousness) here he argues that 'samirt' is known 
hrough something else. It is no longer immediate. ThiS 
s contrary to their fundamental pdncipales. Even if we 
.dmit that the knowledge of its utility, determines the 'artha 
amvitsadbhava', the reality of the forn1er is known again 
hrough another apprehension. In this way the argument 
I'ill involve both the regress and the vicious circle. 


There is an objection from one of the followers of the 
advaita) siddhanta' to the effect that we too maintain the 

bsence of the object. For we are negating it l::1.ter on. But 
ts there the absence of the object during the 'pratibhasa 
amya'? (molnent of appearance) or later on? It can not 
>e the former) for the silver is apprehended as existing then. 
n the later cognition we are rejecting the 'mithyarajata': 
.lnless it existed eadier, we can not negate it later. (This is 
;loser to the view of Bhamati). 


There is real silver in tbe world outside: and since i 
LS not this silver which is apprehended, how can you negate 
It and say that there was, is, or will he, no silver? But there 
LS the 'rajatabhasa prasak"t.i' and this il11plies that the real 
silver too is in the mind. As such the negation becomes 
possible. There are the 'two 'samvits' (of the real and' 
mithya silver) and that which is said to be non. existing; 
hence in all the three tenses is the real silver as such. Of 
these two 'samvits' why cannot we leave one and thus give 
up the'al
;ukika1kalpana'?(assuminga mysterious one)We can. 
not do so because during the erroneous cognition we do not 
aye the knowledge of two silvers. If there were this know. 
h 



60 


Panchapadika 


ledge, we could easily give up one. When we later on s
y 
'nasty atrarajatalll "'we are repeating the existence of real Sl.l- 
ver in all the three times. But when we say 'mithyaivaraja- 
tam abhae, we are predicating its existence. The 
nisedha' refers to the empirical silver, and the acceptance 
of the reality of silver during the erroneous cognition refers 
to 'mayavivartita rupya' (silver distortedly appearing thre- 
ugh maya). 


Objection: Because of the non-discirimiation between 
the knowledge of 'aprakasa sukti' and the l11emory of sil- 
ver, we nlight say that silver, is apprehended immediately 
(This is Prabbakara's view). 


Reply: Padmapada replies, it is clear as it is imme- 
diately apprehended). The alleged non... discrimination is 
contrary to experience. Even when there is the discrimina- 
ting knowledge, there is the 'pratyabhijna' (recognition) ill 
the form, 'Till this moment this was silver', 'this appeeared 
(abhat). Here the recognition takes the form in which the 
..this' is apprehended as 'samsrista" with the silver. In the 
erroneous cognition the silv
r is apprehended as 'samsrgata" 
with the 'this' which is immediate. And that which is neg- 
ated later on is not the meare silver but the 'tbis silver' 
It is this that accounts for the later' pratyabhigna. Other- 
wise the 'Pratiti (Apprehensionf ought to have been' that 
(remembered) silver is "avivikta"-(not discriminated) till 
this time? The 'this silver' is the object of experience. 


We can also interpret it differently. It is the knowledge 
of the object (that) that gives rise to the 'pravrifi' with 



Vivaranam 


61 


refrence to the object. Thus there is a necessary relatio 
between .the "Padarthajnana' (apprehension of the 
iaspec
 

f the object) and ttatpravrtii' (activity there after). Like- 
wise here too for the 'samsagajnana'the condition is 'samsa- 
rga pravl"tti ? "'v'le have the "pravrtti' with reference to some- 
thing because of the knowledge of that something. And 
one who needs silver (rajatarthi) has his 'pravrtti' with refe- 
rence to the Cthis". Hence knowing that the immediately 
present object is silver, he proceeds. This is the meaning 
of Padmapada's statement. 


Since the si lver is apprehended as immediate and dir- 
ect, how can we say that the silver has the form similar to 
that which is remembered? To this Padmapada says;" 
. purvadrstava bhasah" (appearence of what was seen before) 
is the 'upapatti" given for 'smriti rupatva'. But it is the 
"sukty avidya" (avidya concering the mother of pearl) that 
at once brings into immediate and direct existense the sil- 
ver. If so how can we speak of it as cpurvadrsta'? The 
reply is that it is similar to that which was seen before. 
he silver was not seen earlier. There cannot be 'rajata- 
vabhasa' (appearance of silver) when we cognise the 'sukti". 
So far we have considered 'adhyasa' as 'smaryamana 
sadrsah anyatra anyatmana avabhasamanah' (that whic1a is 
similar to the remembered appearing else where as the form 
of the object.). This accounts only for the superimposition 
of the object. Padmapada now begins to explain the defi- 
nition with reference to 'jnanadhyasa' also. But when we 
admit one of these 'adhyasas', the other too is automatically 
implied. As such why should the

 be a separate . e
plana- . 
tion lor jnalladhyasa' (super inposltlan of the cognItlOn) 



62 


Panchapadika 


Even though when one of the two adhyasas is establi- 
shed, the other too is implicitly established, yet the definition 
of .arthadhyasa' cannot cover the cases of 'jnanadhyasa'. 
Hence- a separate explanation is given. 


But when the 'jnana' or knowledge which is 'arthavisL 
sta' (qualified by the object) is taken to be a case of 'adhy?-- 
sa', then an object appearing as having the nature of ano- 
ther object becomes a case of 'adhyasa'. Here it become8 
'smriti samana' (equivalent to memory). Thus Padmapada 
says ; "The expression 'smrti rupah 
 in the definition means 
that which has a form similar to the 'form of memory. It 
is not really a case of memory. Any case of memory requi- 
res a prior perception. This perception creates a 'samskara' 
(impression) in the mind. Since the erroneous silver is not 
apprehended as that which was seen earlier, we cannot take 
it to be a case of memory, but one having 'smrti rupatrva'. 
This is possible because it has come into existence due to 
he'samskara' of a prior perception (Pramana) or existence. 
How can it be 'samskara gayyam arising from an impression 
When we deny 'smrititva' (having the nature of memory) 
to it ? We deny 'smrtitva' because we do not apprehend it 
as having 'smrtirupa' and yet we cannot apprehend it so if 
there were no such 'san1skara." 


Objection: If we deny 'smrititva' to the cognition, 
we can not take it to be due 10 the 'samskara'. It cannot 
be 'samskarajanya because it does not have 'smrtirupa'. If 
it is not a case of memory, it is a case of 'bhranti' and like 
the preceptual knowledge it is not 'purvanubhavajanya". 
Reply: By the method of agreen:ent and difference 
we conclude that this cognition too is the result (janya) of 



Vivaranam 


tt'3 


our prior experiences. In all those apprehensions where 
there is no 'ca"ksusamprayaoga' (contact of the eye) with 
the object in an cases of erroneous cognition- we ean- 
elude that this is made possible only by the impressions of 
our previous evpriences. 


AKHY A TI (Nature of erroneous cognition according 
to Prabhakara). 


Objection: Let us admit tha.t an erroneous cogni- 
tion is due to this 'samskara'. Then the sense organ is in 
contact with one object 
nd there is the knowledge of some 
other object immediately. This can be only 'smrti'. and 
any knowledge which is mediated by 'smrti', is ca.Ued infe- 
rence etc. Thus knowledge arises only in two ways-experi- 
ence or 'Anubhava' (which is always true or Yathartha) and 
'smrti' (memory). There can be no third type cal1ed'mithya' 
Jnana. 


Padmapada states this view thus: "When ,the eye is in 
contact with one object and there is the knowledge of ano- 
ther object, we have only 'smriti'. In erroneous cognition 
the 'smaxanabhimana' is suppressed (pramrishta). Due to 
some specific 'dosha"or other the sense organs which are the 
causes of knowledge come to have the "smriti sam udbodha' 
(awakening of the memory)of some one 'specific object. The 
'dosha' does not allow the sense organ which is in contact 
w'ith the object to be the cause of 'Visesha pratibhasa 
hetu' (cause of a specific appearance). Mainly due to the 
'dosha' of the sense organ we are unable to distinguish'bet- 
ween the perceived content and the remembered content 
which are 'nirantarotpanna
 (arising without an interval). 
Just as two trees which are far away areapprehended as one t 



64 


Panchapadika 


so here both the apprehensions are taken to constitute a 
single apprehension. This is the 'uptanna bhrama" (emer- 
ging illusion). 


When we see the 'gavaya' and remember the cow, the 
cowness is given up and only its similarity with the 'gavaya' 
is taken note of. From the perceived 'gavaya' the 'cow' is 
distinguished and we have the experience that 'I remember' . 
So if there is 'smriti,' in the erroneous cognition, it should 
be like this. To this the reply of the Prahq.akara is that 
nlemory is suppressed ('Pramrishta'). 


Why do we remember silver when we perceive 'sukti'? 
Because of similarity between the two. Tben since there is 
the greatest similarity with another 'sukti', why don't we 
remember another 'sukti' ? To this the reply a
sumes some 
defect or other in the sense-organ. 


Let there not be the discrimination of the object be- 
cause of the suppression of memory. But the perceived 
object distinguishes itself from the remembered. This too 
cannot be accepted for the 'dosha' does not allow the sense 
organ (which is in contact with the object) to be the .vise- 
sha pratibhasa hetu'. 


But it is said that there is memory and then perception. 
These two do not come at the same time, but one after the 
.other. Then the prior knowledge is 'vyavahita' (has an 
interval) and as such cannot bring about the 'pravritti'. 
There is no 'pravritti' because of 'samanya jnana' (general 
knowledge) alone (idam) or because of 
Visesha jnana> (par- 
ticular kowledge) alone (rajatam). It ought to require both.. 



Vivaranam 


65 


To this the reply is : "Mainly due to the 'dosha.' of the 
sense organ we are unable to distinguish between the per- 
ceived content and the remembered content which are 'nira- 
ntar otpanna (successive)". It is the 'Nirantorotpatti' alone 
which is the cause of 'pravritti'. 


But we do have the experience that this is silver? Here 
we do recognise (pratyabhijna) the 'samsarga pratyaya' (pri- 
nciple of rel,ation) between the this and the silver. The reply 
given is that the 'ekatva' (oneness) itself is the 'bhrama'. 


Another objection to 'akhyati' is stated by Padmapada. 
The experience of the past life is not remembered. Now 
the child who cannot and does not remelnber the experience 
of its past life takes for the first time some thing that is 
sour. And yet it has the experience of sourness and appre- 
hends it as sour. How is this possible? The reply is that 
it was experienced in the past life. Otherwise, the child 
ought to have apprehended not anyone of the six 'rasas', 
but a seventh one. How is it that only ..a part of the past 
experience is remembered, not the whole? Because of the 
'doshabala' (strength of the defect). Then how is it that 
the 'dosha' does not make the whole of the past experience 
remembered ? The reply is 'Kaarya gamyatvaad hetu bhaa.. 
vasya' (the cause is apprehended from the effect). That 
which is to be remembered in the act of taking in the sour, 
is only sournes
. 


But if we don't accept that there is 'ayathaartha jnaana' 
(untrue knowledge) also, there will be 'siddhaanta kishati' 
(destruction of the theory) for the Praabhaakara. The'saa- 
strakaara' (Saankhya systelll whose cosmology etc. is acce- 



66 


Panchapadika 


pted by Prabhaakara) defines ,ayathaartha jnaana' as 'ata- 
ttve tattva jnanam' (knowledge of the real in the unreal). 
TheIl how can Praabhaakara reject it ? 


The reply given is that that statement has a reference 
only to
'vyavahaara', and that 'samsarga bhrama' is real1y a 
case of the supplession of the knowledge of memory. And 
instead of assuming 'sarnsarga jnaana' as the cause of the 
erroneous cognition, it is easier to assume 'akhyaati'. 


Criticism of Akhy.,aati theory. 
What is 'akhyaati' ? It cannot be the mere negation or 
absence (abhava) of knowledge (khyati), for it is accepted 
to be a form of knowledge. And all cases of the absence 
of knowledge are not cases of 'bhralna' (illusion). 


When a person has 'pravritti' (activity) with reference 
to one object, there arises a knowledge which is the cause 
of 'pravritti' for another object. Can't this be the defini- 
tion of 'akhyaati'? Then there are cognitions where we 
have objects with reference to which there is no 'pravritti' 
and no quick sublation too. How can we treat them as 
cases of 'bhraanti' ? 


Objection: The absence of discrimination between 
the knowledges of many 'padaarthas' (objects) may be taken 
to be 'bhraanti'. 


Reply: Take the cognition 'this is silver'. The'this' 
is not a synonym of 'silver' . There are two words and the 
two are clearly distinguished because they are not synonYlns. 
Further there is admitted to be also memory. Hence we 
cannot say that here we have 'bhrama' arising out of the 



Vivaranam 


67 


non - discrimination between the 'saamanya' (idam) and 
'visesha' (rajatam). The Praabhaakara admits the know- 
ledge of difference between the 'this' and the silver; and 
when he cannot recognise that this is only one knowledge, 
he cannot plead for the non a discrimination between the 
'saamaanya' and the 'visesha". Further is this difference 
the nature of the 'padaartha'? Or its property? It cannot 
be the former ; for when the Padaartha is apprehended, its 
'bheda' (difference) too is apprehended and then there is no 
'aviveka' (non-discrimination). Regarding the second alter- 
native it might be argued that 'bheda" can manifest itself as 
mutual exclusion, or as the apprehension that there are two 
or more knowledges ; and only when we have the specific 
knowledge that the terms are mutually exclusive or that they 
are two, we have 'viveka' (discrimination). 
Even this is not possible. Take the sentence 'bring the 
cow with the stick'. Here the cow is in the accusativa case 
and the stick is in the instrumental. Their Karakas (decl- 
ensional suffixes)are different. And the cow is also distinct 
from the stick. And if we were to apply their definition of 
'viveka' to this statement, this w0'l1:ld become a case of 
'aviveka bhrama'. 
Objection: But even there we have the know- 
ledge of difference in an implicit form. ' 
Reply: Then in 'this is silver', since the words are 
not synonymous' we have to accept the implicit difference; 
and then it cannot be a case of en"or arising from non- 
discrimination. Otherwise, the.re must be the non-apprehe.. 
nsion of the distinction (viveka) between the 'viseshakaara' 
(particular) and the 'saamaanya karat (general) and then the 
cognition ought to be only 'this is' or 'silver is\ and never 
'this is silver', 



68 


Panchapadika 


Is there non.-discrimination between the objects wl:ich 
are 'bhaasan1aanas' (appearing entjti
s) ? or objects which 
are not 'bhasamanas'? It cannot be the former. It cannot 
be the 'aviveka' between the 'pratjiyamaanaakaras' (appre- 
handed forms) since there is the apprehension of distinct- 
ion arising from the rejection of, synonymity. Nor can it be 
the latter since in deep sleep too 'there is the non-discrimi- 
nation between the 'apratiiyamaana akaras' (unapprehended 
forms). Hence non-discrimination cannot be a case of 
'bhrama' . 
It has been said earlier that 'bhrama' is 'aviviktaaneka 
padaartha jnaana maatram' (mere knowledge of the undis- 
criminated plurality). Is this an explanation of erroneous 
cognition? Or is error ('bhrama'), 'grahanna smarannaa- 
tmaka' (apprehension and memory)? Or is it 'samsarga 
jnaana asamsakritatva vishesham' (not cooperated by a rela- 
tional cognition)? There is the knowledge of 'sukti' which 
is the 'adhishthaana' of 'rajata', and the 'sukti' totally 
excludes the silver. Is error then 'anadhikara natva visesh- 
itam' (that which has no ground or basis)? Of these alter- 
natives, let us take the first which involves"r 'ativyaapti' 
(applying to those to which it cannot apply). Take the 
sentence 'Khando gauh'. Here are two 'pratyayas' (terms) 
which are not only not discriminated, but related. This 
does not make this apprehension erroneous. 
We cannot take up the second alternative and say that 
error is the non-discrimination between perceptual and me- 
mory apprehensions. For in J'aham manushyah', we have 
this non-discrimination between two perceived co l1tents; 
and yet it is a case of error. 
We cannot admit the third alternative and say there is 
only 'samsarga jnaana. (relational cognition in 'samanya 



Vivaranam 


69 


vi
eshe' (general and particular ede., for, where we do not 
distinguish the knowledge of the v
.rious 'padaarthas
, we 
may have to recognise error. And in 'samsarga jnaana' 
there is no such discrimination. Further, there cannot be 
even a 'samsarga pratyaya', for the 'aalambana' (supp
rt or 
basis) which is required in 'samsarga' is taken to be absent 
in the erroneus cognition, We cannot say that for 'samsa- 
rga pratyaya' there is, lhe 'aalambana' in 'guna guny adi 
sambandha' (relation between quayity and ubtance and 
so on); for in the ense of recognition, there is 'aikyaalam- 
bana' (identical ground). Like the :t:gunagunyaadi samba- 
ndha' we can say that even the relationship of similarity can 
be the 'aalambana' in the cognition "this is silver'. 


Let 'Us take the fourth alternative. In the theory of 
'akhyaati' that which sublates the error,is the knowledge of 
discrimination. The object of this 'baadhaka jnaana' (suI?- 
lating cogri1.ion) is the silver which totally excludes or neg- 
ates the 'ssukti' that is its 'adhikarana (locus). But in 'this 
is silver', the 'this' is the 'saamal'lya' and it is distin- 
gui shed from the 'silver' which is the 'visesha' (particular). 
Now in 'ghatasya shuklatvam (whiteness of the pot) the pos- 
sessiva case clearly sho vs the difference of the pot from its 
whiteness. The same 'viveka' is obtainable even in 'this is 
silver'; and both will have to stand on the same leveL 


When we say that error is the failure to distinguish 
between pe.rception and memory, there is another defect. 
Why can't we say that the perceived content is capable of 
making the remembered silver give up its specific content of 
silverness?; and thus, why can't it distinguish itself from 
the perceived? One might reply that this is because there 
is no 'visesha darshana' (rerceptual apl'rhention of the par- 



70 


Panchapadika 
ticular or difference). But if the merely perceived'shukti' 
is different from silver
 then the 'visesha' implied by the 
difference will be the 'adharmy aakaara', or the form of 
suktiy, or the 'pratiyogy aakaara.' or its opposite the rajata, 
and none other. And thus the 'bhedaakaara" (different 
form) which is perceived ought to be apprehended distinc- 
tly (viviktah). 


Is the 'bhedajnaana' merely the knowledge of the 'dhaa 
rmi pratiyogi' the contra.dictory of the locus whice is rajat- 
Then the 'dharmi pratiyogi jnaana, (knowledge ,of the contr- 
adictory of the locus) is the knowledge of difference; there 
is on the one hand this knowledge, and on the other, both 
the 'dharmi' and its 'pratiyogin are knoW11. Then even the 
difference ought to' be apprehended distinctly. 


Let us admit that both th
 'dharmi' and its 'pratiyogi' 
are apprehended (perceived). They are mutually exclusive 
and as such these two make us apprehend a third called 
difference. Then prior to our apprehension of the differe- 
nce there is the apprehension of the two terms, the this and 
the silver. Then before we perceive the difference, these 
two are undistinguished and as such it will be a case of 
'bhrama'. All knowledge then wiIl be 'bhrama jnaana'. 


. You cannot say that in mere apprehension as such 
there is no difference of the sukti from silver; for, then we 
have the knowledge of the identity of the this with the sil- 
ver. And 'samsarga. jnaana' will have to be the 'aalam- 
bana' . 


Now let us examine 'smrjti' after 'grahana'.' We per- 
ceive the 'gavaya' and observ
 its sin1ilarity with the cow 



Vivaranam 


71 


whi'Ch is remembered. Here the difference of the' gavaya/' 
is suppressed and its identity alone is takea inte accounL 
Likewise, the perceived 'sukti' can give up its specific diffe- 
rence and yield only its iddentity with silver. It might be 
replied that the 'smaranaabhimaana' is suppressed. 


What is this <smaranaabhimaana'? This cannot be 
"sIDIiti', for when m
mory is suppressed, there is the possi- 
bility of the very abst.Jlce of knowledge. 


You cannot say that 'smaranaabhimaana"> is different 
from memory; for when that which is dfferent from mem- 
ory is suppressed' how cen the full knowledge that has ari- 
sen., to bring about the discrimination in its objects? 
There cannot be a 'smaranaahimaana' which is not 'smriti'. 


Objection: That which involves the space and time 
'Of the rrevious experience, or that which is ref erred to as 
"that' (sab ity aakarena) may be called 'smarnabhimana'.. 


Reply.: Padmapaada says: "Nn tavaj jnan'Bnuvidd- 
hataya grahanam" It connot be apprehended as united with 
cognition.. Now in the 'case of error arising out of recogni- 
tion we apprehend the <this' as the 'that
 and we are aiso 
aware of remembering the tim-e and place of the earlier 
-cognition.. With all these apprehensions, we are unable to 
distinguish the 'that' from the perceived 'this\ 


Further, the 'sambheda' (unity) of tbe past experience 
does not take place when we .are remebering. And Padma- 
paada says that "the knowled
e acquired in the past cannot 
become an object now by being 
the adjective of the percei- 
ved." The past kn-owledge is capable of giviag rise to the 



72 


Panchapadika 


'snrriti samskaara' for the object. This. knowledge cannot 
be an object to itselC for the previous knowledge has only 
an object as its object. Knowledge has an object other 
than itself, and it cannot be its own object. With reference 
to that object which was not an object in the previous kno- 
wledge, there cannot arise any memory which is 'tat sams- 
kaara janya' (arising from that ilnpression) Experience and 
its memory do have only the saTI1e identical object. The 
'samskaara' that came in to existence by the mere experie.. 
nee alone does not have the power to give rise to 'Vlsista 
&mrlti (specifi memary) Hence the melnory whiah is a pro- 
duct of that experience has the same object. It is 'artha 
matra visaya' (merel having an object). Hence 111omory 
which arises from the knowledge of 'artha matra vishaya' 
can have only the 'artha maatra' as its object. It cannot 
have as its object that knowledge which was not the object 
of the previous knowledge. Otherwise froin the apprehen- 
sion of the blue thing we 111ay have to obtain the memoryt 
of the yellow thing. 


Objection: Take the cognitions, 'this pot is known' 
and 
I remember this known pot'. In the first, 
the object 
is the pot; and in the second the object is the known pot 
or the knowledge of the pot. Here we do find that the 
knowledge which is not an object in the second Thus, 
has not knowledge beco111e its own object? Is this 110t a fact 
of our experience ? 


Reply: Yes. In the previous experience ths object 
is cognised and thus arises a property (according to the 
Mimaansakaas) called 'jnaatataa' (known-ness) in the obiect 
and it is known. Due to this 'hetu' (reason) called 'jnaa- 
tataa' \ve are able to infe! its cause, viz. knowledge which 



Vivaranam 


73 


is 'aatmaasraya' (dependent on the self). The 'samskaara ' 
of this inferential knowledge gives rise to menlory which 
makes us apprehend the object experienced. The memory 
of the object is determined only by the apprehension of the 
object. The knowledge of the object has its object in the 
memory that arises from the earlier cognition. Thus the 
knowledge 'this is a pot' has its own specific memory where 
the object is memory. On the other hand the knowledge 
':jnaato ghatah' (the pot is known) has its memory 'jnaatam 
ghat am aham smaraami' (1 remember the known pot). This 
memory cannot come in the first cognition. Each cognition 
has its own specific memory attached t6 it. 


First we have the memory of the object. After this 
there may arise another Inemory which takes the form .1 
remember the pot that is known'. The latter arises after 
the former, and it has its own specific object. But that 
which is present in the erroneous cognition is the memory 
of the object as indistinguishable from perception. It is 
not the latter one. As such Padmapaada states, "memory . 
apprehends the object in itself, and 
not the object along 
with the knowledge of the object". Only that much of the 
object as such, or that much of the object along with its 
knowledge as was the object of the previous knowledge, is 
made manifest (avabhaasayati) by memory. It does not 
make manifest the knowledge which is its basis and source. 


Froin the l11ere knowledge of the object there arises a 
'samskaa.ra' because of which we have nlelnory. This obj- 
ect is purely or Inerely an object. Any other object is a 
qualified or specific object. The n1emory of the object is 
'artha maatra vishaya'. This is explained in another way. 



74 


Panchapadika 


By the melnory of the object we mean that 'pratyaya' 
which arises from the 'samskaara' that comes from the 
knowledge of the object as such. And that 'pratyaya'which 
arises from the 'samskaara' that comes inferentially or 
mediately is called 'smrityantara' (followed by memory). Is 
'jnaatam ghatam smaraami' (I remember the known pot) a 
case of 'artha smriti'? or a case of 'smrity antara'? How 
to di5tinguish here? To this Padlnapaada says: "While we 
go through the words in a sentence, each word gives us its 
meaning. But this meaning remains as a remembered con- 
tent till we come to the end of the sentence. When we have 
the 'Padaartha smriti' from the word we do not find 'Jnana 
Sambheda' (Jnananu viddhatva = being together with know- 
ledge) ; for even knowledge is dependent on 'Sabdarthatva'. 


The Statement of Purvapaksha : 


We want to know the meaning of a sentence and we 
come to the end of the sentence word by word in a regular 
order. Then in this process there arises the knowledge of 
that which refers to the meaning of the words. Thus there 
are as many jnanas as there are words. Each word has iti 
meaning and a specific jnana. As the related or appropri- 
ate word is apprehended, these jnanas come to have "Sam- 
bandhy antaratha Vishayah'. Their objects are other rela- 
ted ones. And these are retained and are called 'smriti'. 
So much)s commOl1 ground for both the schools of Purva 
Mimamsa (of Kumarila and Prabhakara). 


Objection: The apprahension of the word is said to 
giv'e rise to the memory of the meaning. Now, what is the 
relation of the word to its meaning? 



Vlvaranam 


75 


Reply: This relationship may be said to be of the 
nature of having the ability to give rise to 'artha buddhi' 
(apprehension of meaning). 
Objection: Is it of the natuFe of having the ability 
to give rise to memory? Or is it something different? 


Reply: It is not something different since the words 
can .ot and do 110t give rise to anything different from 
,smriti' in their 'padarthamsas'. 


The r 
lationship between the word and its meaning, 
we have said, is capable of giving rise to smriti. Is this 
ability given to a known relationship? Or to an unknown 
one? When a thing is said to be capable of producing 
something, this ability is apprehended only through the 
product or the effect. Thus when there is memory, from 
this we can apprehend the capability or power (samarthya) 
of the word. Then to say that memory arises when this 
ability is known, is arguing in a circle. We cannot argu
 
that memory arises from the ability of another memory, 
since this leads to a regfess. This ability cannot be attri- 
buted even to an unknown relationship, for even the igno- 
rant ones must then be able to understand the meanings of 
the words as soon as they hear the wcrds. Thus in any way 
it is difficult to explain "Smriti Janana Samarthya laksh. 
ana" (nature of being able to give rise to memory). Memor y 
cannot arise purely from the 'smriti janana samarthya 
sambandha' . 


Further, there is another defect. When A and B are 
similar to one another (sadrisyadi sambandha), the percep. 
tion of the one will bring the other to memory. Here in 



76 


Panchapadika 


the case of the word and ;its meaning there is 110 1"elation- 
ship of sizrilarity etc; and as such we cannot say that the 
word gives rise to the memory of the meaning. 


Answer to this Purvapaksa : 
The ability to give rise to memory is said to be the rela- 
tionship between the word and its meaning. Only when this 
relationship is known, it becomes 'arthabodhaka' (cause of 
the apprehension of meaning). The samskara arises from 
the knowledge of the relationship. Even if the 'samskara' 
is not apprehended, the 'artha bodhakata' is adn1itted. Even 
though the 'samskara' is always there, we cannot say that 
there is always memory, for it is admitted that the 'smriti 
hetu' is the 'samskara' that is aroused fronl the percption of 
the word. Thus both the 'sambandha jnana samskara' 
and sabda darsana constitute the 'smriti hetu' 


The knowledge of the word as qualified by its relation- 
ship with the meaning cannot be the cause of the memory 
(in giving rise to the apprehension of the meaning) If this 
were not so, the ability to give rise to memory wl'l have to 
be determined by this 'vaisishtya'. (speciality). Then the 
vaisishtya is one :relationship and this would require another 
relation with memory. Further, when we apprehend the 
word as qualified by its relation with its meaning, we can- 
not say that the word is the cause of men1ory, for in the 
apprehension of such a word, the meaning is already known 
since the .Mord is apprehended as qualified by its relation to 
its meaning. Thus even before the 'smriti' (which is said 
to give us the l11eaning), the meaning is known. 


It has been said that since the pelception of a related 
entity (sambandhi) is capable of giving us the memory of 



Vi v ar an am 


77 


another related entity, we have 'sadrisyadi saillbandhy an- 
tara'. A 'samarthya sambandha' which, does not involve 
any 'sambandhantara (another relationship), has the pro- 
perty of 'smarakatva (being remembered). Does it mean 
that elsewhere too the same thing holds good? Or since 
elsewhere the 'samarthya' involves the relationships 1ike 
similarity, do we try to establish' sadrisyapekshatva'? Or 
do we say that since there is no original relationship, there 
is only the 'anutpatti' (non-emerance) of 'buddhi'? The 
first two alternatives are at first rejected. 


SiInilarity and other relationships do not have the po- 
wer to give rise to memory (and thus make us apprehend 
the meaning of the word). That the 'samarthya sambandha' 
can make us apprehend the meaning of the word, is not 
opposed to its nature. This cannot be rejected. That the 
original relationships like similarity etc., have the property 
of 'smarakatva' can be proved by agreement and difference. 
We cannot speak of ' samar thy a rupatva' with reference to 
these. And this makes the first alternative untenable. 


Regarding the second alternative we say: The original 
rela.tionships like s;nlilari1.Y etc
, 'Can give the awareness of 
'arthantara' (another meaning) because of 'samarthya sam- 
bandha' since there is no "buddhi samarthyaeakshanantara' 
"Buddhi SalDflrthya Lakshana' means that which can giv
 
the awareness of 
artha:ntaTatvam', asamkirnatvam\ 'sabda 
samarthyena sahaanavasthitatvanl, (another meaning, non- 
confusion, non-<:o-existence because of the power of the 
word). 


Even though this mem.ory is of a different object when 
we have the relationship like similarity, yet in the present 



18 


Panch apadik a 


context we cannot assume a n
w relationship since it is 
mpossible and unnecessary. 
If we refuse to admit that the ability to give rise to 
melnory (that enables us to apprehend "the meaning) does 
give us the meaning of the word, then it is a self contradic- 
tory statement. This is how the Buddhists argue. 
Regarding the third alternative we say : Does this alter.. 
native seek to maintain 'buddhy anutpatti' (non emergence: 
of cognition) through the 'samarthya' by accepting the fObu- 
ddhi samarthya' of word? or does it deny the very 'samar- 
thya' ? But when there is 'buddhi samarthya' for words, it 
is self contradictory to argue 'buddhy anutpatti'. The second 
alternative cannot be maintained for the word has the abil- 
ity to give rise to an apprehension (buddhijanana samar- 
thya
). As such it is maintained that a word has the abi- 
lity to give rise to memory which gives us the meaning of 
the word. From the words we get the memories and these 
in their turn give meanings. The 'sambandhi da.rsana' and 
'sambandhyantara smarana' are 'sambandha siddha' for the 
word and its meaning. And when one is perceived, the 
other is re...membered. It has been sa.id that like the lnemory 
of 'padartha', even the other melnory does not involve any 
relationship with jnana. Here the author begins to doubt 
"drishtanta asampratipatti' (fallacious analogy). He asks" 
where then is the absence or negation of the integration of 
knowledge (jnana sambhanda) ? Padmapada says, 'jnana- 
syapi sabdarthtva prasangat'. .As explained jn Tattvadar- 
pana, 'Sabdasya Sakti bheda Kalpana prasangad artha. 
matra vishayatvanl yuktam'. The word refers to its meani.. 
ing. The power of the word brings. about a relation bet- 
ween the meaning and memory ; and even knowledge nece- 
ssarily involves 'sabdarthatva prasanga'.. 



Vivaranam 


79 


, Objection: Smaranabhimana may be interpreted 
a'S csmaranagato dharmah't (quality present in memory) and 
not as 
smaryagato dharmah' (quality in the remembered). 
Just as in triangularity we find a specific 'Avagata visesha 
(inherent feature) so in (smrHijnana) too we have a specific 
property and this is 'smaranabhimana'.. 


This is an internal property and hence is necessarily 
involved whenever the object having it is taken into' consi- 
deration. 


Reply: Padmapada denies this by saying that we do 
not apprehend a new and distinct form called 'smaral1abh- 
imana' as the 'avagata' or internal property of knowledge; 
this property is not perceptually cognised. Nor is it infer- 
entially cognised. Sabara, therefore says, that we have to 
infer the 'buddhi' as 'anakara' by which is meant 'anirupita 
akara visesha' or 'anirdi shta svalakshana' (indeterminate 
form ). 
Objection: That 'smaranabhimana' is some speci- 
fic internal feature of 'smriti juana' can be maintained 
inferentially. 'Vyapara visesha' can make us infer 'vyapaka 
visesha' (pervasive featurc:). Fronl 'linga vlsesha' (specific 
cause) we can have' hetu viseshanumaana (inference of 
a specific reason. 


According to the Mimansaka) knowledge is always 
inferred. And in inference from a perceived object we can 
infer that which is necessarily related to it. Further, from 
the effect of a perceived entity, we can infer the cau
e of 
the inferred entity. Thus for example from the sweet fra- 
grance coming from a smoke (Iinga visesha) we infer that 
there is a tree having fragrant wood (hetu visesha). 



80 


Panchapadika 


Reply: What is 'linga visesha'? Is it a 'grahya vise- 
sha"? Or a 'phala visesha' (specific result)? It cannot be 
the fonner for there is no invariable rule that only the 
, . 
pramana grahya (apprehended through pramana) is appre- 
hended by memory. The internal property must be direc- 
tlyapprehended when the object is being cognised. We 
cannot bring in the 'ayam' (this) in recognition and the 
'sah' (that) in menlory as maintaining this rule; for space 
and time are apprehended mediately and also immediately, 
and this does not constitute a difference in the object. 


It cannot be a 'pbala visesha' also, for this is unproven. 
Phala visesha means that which referes to the object. Acc- 
ording to the Mimansakas it is jnatata which is the 'pha.la' 
of perception; and according to the Nyaya system, it is 
'anuvyavasaya' in the form '1 know that this is a pot'. The 
phala visesha is conditioned by the difference in the object; 
and there is no difference in the object between the 'Pra- 
mana phala' and 'Smriti phala'. 


Objection: There is the knowledge that I remenlber 
('smarami'). This may be taken to be 'smaranarbhimana'. 
Reply: Padmapada observes; any knowledge that 
takes the form 'I remember that...', arises at times with 
reference to the object and also with reference to the time 
and not every where; and the experience 'I remen1ber' is' 
apprehended by the explicit mention of the ,v'ord 'smaramp. 
, 
as such this cannot be a cau::-e for its non-discrimination 
from perception. The 'I remember' is a specific immediat0 
experience which involves 'smarya' 'smarta' and sn1riti' 
(remen1bered, one who remembers and memory). It m
.y be 
taken to be inferential knowledge involving these three 



Vivar an am 


8Ii 


factors, In either theory, it is not the 'I remember', that 
distinguishes memory from perception. To have the expe- 
rience 'I remember', 1 should know all ready that it is a 
case of memory; otherwise 1 cannot say '1 remember'. To 
know that it is a case of memory I should know that the 
other experience is a perceptual one involving 'grahya'. 
'grihita' and 'grahana'. 
(apprehended object, one who 
apprechends, and apprehension), Even prior to the memory 
1 should know that there is a perceptual experience which 
differs from this memory experience. Therefore I cannot 
have either the immediate experience of memory which is 
distinct fronl the perceptual one, or the inferential cogni- 
tion of memory which is distinct fronl the inferred knowl- 
edge of perception. 1 cannot have this or that unless 1 cog- 
nise that this experience or that cognition differs from its 
perceptual correlate. 
For, the '1 remember' and the 'I infer' are determined 
by the apprehention of the specific meaning of the given. 
Hence even before 1 have the experience of '1 remember' 
I should be knowing the difference between perception and 
memory. I cannot bring in the '1 remember' as pointing 
out the difference to me for the first time. 


Objection: Both experience and the memory there- 
of have the same object land yet that they differ is well 
known. What is this difference? 


Reply: Padmapada says that memory arises from the 
'samskara' of the earlier experience; and the function of 
memory is only to make manifest the object. 



82 


Panchapadika 


This'samskara samutthatva' (emergence of the impre- 
ssion) is common to both experjence and memory. But in 
memory it is the n1ere 'samskara' that brings fourth the 
awareness of the object; whereas in perception there is also 
the contact of the object with the sense organ. Even though 
they have an identical object, they have different causes. 


Do 'smriti jnana' and 'jnananumana' (remembered 
knowledge and inferred one) differ because of a difference 
in their objects? Or because of a difference in their resp- 
ective causes? Or because one takes the form of a refere- 
nce to 'that' (which was experienced) and the other does not 
to do so ? 
Since both have the same object which gives knowle. 
dge, the first alternative is to be rejected. Since both are 
based upon the same 'samskara' we cannot admit of any 
difference in their respective causes. 


Then there remains the third alternative. Me1nory is 
said to have the form of reference to that ('sa ity akarah'). 
What is this 'sa ity akarah'? Does this mean the object as 
qualified by the place and time which are not the here and 
the now? Or does it mean the integration of th
 previous 
experience? Does it mean that which has arisen from the 
'samskara' of the previous experience? The first alterna- 
tive is common also to inference which too involves the 
place and time which are 'paroksha' (not innediate Or 
direct. ) 


I Regarding the second alternative, we have to ask whe. 
ther it is the integration of the me
e previous experience? 
Or is it the integration of that knowledge which is its cause? 
The former is common also to 'jnananumana' (inferentjal 



Vivu.ranam 


83 


knowledge) while the latter is common also to the knowle- 
dge that arises from a 'paurusheya vakya'-(human uttera- 
nce). Take the sentence, 'there are flowers on the bahks of 
the river'. From this we get the apprehension of the 
knowledge about the flowers which are on the banks of the 
river. As such here too we have the integration of the 
knowledge which is its cause. This second alternative can- 
not crnstitute a difference between 'smriti jnana' and 
'jnananumana' . 


Hence we have to admit that 'sa ity akarah' means' 
that which arises "from the 'samskara'. Then we have to 
recognise that memory is different from jnananumana in 
so far as the former arises only from the 'samskara'. 
Padmapada rejects this argument and observes' "in order 
to assume the suppression of any entity due to 'dosha' 
there ought to be an additional something in the cognition. 
This additional something is not to be found either in the 
apprehension (pratiti) or in the object (artha)". 
Now, take dream cognition. Is it a case of error where 
there is non-discrimination between two perceived entities? 
Or between a perceived enttiity and a remembered one? Or 
between two remembered entities? The cognition of blue 
cannot be different from the cognising self. And since we 
do not cognise the blue that is different from the self, the 
first alternative stands rejected. In the cognition of blue, 
since the blue is not different from the sel!, we may have to 
say 'I am blue' and this is absurd. The 
 '1' is immediately 
apprehended and the 'blue' is the remembered entity. The 
non-discrimination between the two is there. Since the per- 
ceived is not discriminated from the remembered, the latter 
becomes ,immediate ('aparoksha'). Likewise, since the reme- 



84 


Panchapadika 


Inbered is not-discriminated from the perceived, tbe l
.tter 
might be 'paroksha'. Because of this difficulty the second 
alternative too is faulty. 


"In the erroneo'l1S cognition", says Padmapaada, "there 
is no apprehension of the object 'of the previous experience; 
for the object is apprehended as being before us, as being 
immediate. " 


It we accept the third alternative, we have to say that 
there is the non-discrimination between two remembered 
entities. If there is this mutual non- discrimin"tion. between 
these two entities, then we have to apprehend the whole of 
'paroksha' (that which is not immediately or directly cog- 
nised). 
Hence kno'wledge does not come only from experience 
and memory. There is also a third source calles 'bhranti 
jnana'. Padmapada says, "when we have a contact with 
one object and there is the knowledge ,of another, it is not 
a case of memory but one of 
adhyasa' . 


If it is nat a case of memory, what is the explanation 
for the cognition 'this is silver'? The reply leads us to 
ANVATHA KHVATI :. (Theory of Bhatta Mimansa and 
Nyaya systems). 
Statement: \VeH it is 'anyatha khyati. When the 
eye has the contact with 'Shukti', the eye, which suffers 
from some defect, receives the impression of silver which is 
at some other place. The silver is in its own place and it 
is apprehended in the nature of'shukti' ('Shuktikatl11ana') 
by the sense organ which suffers from some defect or other. 
Then it might be asked-why should such an organ appreh- 



Vivaranam 


85 


end only silver? It can as well ayprehend something which 
it has not exper
enced before. To thi", the reply is tha l 
the sense organ received the impression of that which bears 
a similarity with the given object. Similarity etc, are some 
'Of the "doshas'. Hence this 'Anyatha Khyati' is a form cf 
knowledge and it is cognised ('Grahanatmaka'). 


CRITICISM 
 What is 'anyatha khya.ti' ? The word 
is so vague that it can mean anyone of the .foilowing four 
things : 


i) The know ledge of one object appears as the form 
of another, 'anyakara.m Jnanam': 


ii) The Q b ject apprehended does not have its basis in 
itself but in something else, 'anyalambanam'. 
iii) An object appears as having the nature of ano- 
ther obj
t. Vasturah vastvantaratmana avabhasah'. 
iv) The knowledge that arises does not agree with the 

given' but with its 'parinama" or evolute - 'anyatha pari- 
nate va'Stuni fnanam'. They respectively refer to 'jnana', 
esphurana
.. 'vishaya' and 'parinati'. 


The first two meanings are not correct. It might be 
.argued that there is 'vaiparitya' (inappropriate straneness) 
whence the perceived 'shukti' appears in the form of silver'.. 
The "alambana' or basis of the given is 'shukti' ana. that 
which is apprehended is silver. Now it is the apprehension 
that detennines the nature of the object or the given. That 
whicb is the forn1 of the apprehension is always the 'alam- 
bana' or the object given. We cannot have one object and 
.an apprehension that refers to another object which is not 



86 


Panchapadika 


given. If the 'shukti' were to be the 'alambana" the appre-- 
hension cannot have the form of silve,r. 


Objection: We need not have the form of appre":" 
hension and the 'alambana' always. The 'alambana' is 
that object with reference to which the apprehension is eng- 
aged ('prayukta'). Since 'shukti' is not the object with refe- 
rence to which there is the 'pravritti' (activity) of the appre- 
hension. We are not able to apprehend it even thongh it 
has its own 'svarupavabhasa' (appeaxence of its own form).. 
The apprehension is 'rajata vyavahara yogya" (appropriate 
to silver) and hence the silver is apprehended. Why cannot 
silver be the 'alambana' ? 


Reply: Take the cognitions of a tiger and a snake 
which mak e us catch hold of a stick. But the stick is not 
the 'alambana' for our cognitions. Qne who is in need of a 
S11 bstance takes it up ; and since its qualities do not exist 
apart form it, thes
 qualities too are involved in the act. 
Similarly one who takes up a quality is involved also with 
the substance. In such cases we have to say that of the sub- 
stance and its qualities, one is the 'alambana' for the know- 
ledge of the other. And this is absurd. Hence 'shukti' can 
not be 'alamballa' for this cognition. The' knowledge of 
one object can not appear as the form of another. The ob- 
ject apprehended must have its basis in itself a.nd not in 
something else. 


The third view states that an object appears as having 
the nature of another object. "If the shukti appears as 
having the nature of silver", asks Padmapada, "is this app... 
earance real or no for the shukti? If it is a real appearance, 



Vivaranan:
 


81 


it cannot be sub]ated lateT on. And since there is the sub- 
lation, this view cannot be accepted". 
The propounder of c'anythakhyati" argues for the com.. 
Jete difference between the given 'shukti' and the cognised 
silver. They cannot accept a real 'samsalga' between the 
two; and since they do not accept an 'anirvacaniya sam-. 
sarga' (inexplicable relation), the 'samsarga' must be a non. 
entity. And a non-entity (sunya) cannot be apprehended. 
Likewise even in 'Khando gauh' there can be no 'samsarga' 
.and then it ought to be a case of error, 


The Bhedabhedavadin might accept that the 'samsarga 
is real. Then is the appearance of silver real or no? It is 
not real because it is sublated later on. In 'Khando gauh, 
there is 'samsarga' and also identity-in-difference. And 
since there is identity-in-difference every where there can- 
not be any where an error and its sublation; or everywhere 
there will be error and its sublation.. 


Then there is the fourth interpretation on which Pad- 
mapada argues thus : "It mi ght be argued that due to some 
'dosha', there is the evolution of the form of silver for the 
'shukti". Thjs is faulty. Curd is evolved from milk; and 
if the curd stands on the sa'1l
 footing as the silver there 
ought to be the sublation of the curd. No such later cog- 
nition arises, And no one can cognise the curd as milk and 
call it a true cognition. Both these are found in the silver. 
, 
for, we sublated it and cognise the this as 'shukti'. If the 
'shukti' has evolved itself in the form of silver due to some 

dosha' then even when the 'dosha' disappeares, it should 
remain as silver'. We cannot compare this to the blosomw 
ming of 'kamala' by the rays of the sun and its closing in 
of its petals when the sun sets. Here we bave its stages: 



88 Panchapadika 
and with the setting of the sun, it goes back to its earlier 
state. Likewise in the case silver, we cannot say that we 
separate the silver. We can only say that the silver has 
gone back to its earlier state'1. 


The snbsequent part of the Panchapadika may be in- 
terpreted as the refutation of the fourth interpretation, or 
as the refutation of Atmakhyati. The author of the Viva- 
rana, however, interprets it by foHowing the second alter- 
native. 


ATMAKHYATI :- (Theory of Vijnanavada Budd. 
hism ). 


Statement :- It is the 'buddhi' (intellect) that has 
the 'rajatakara' (form of silver). There is no silver outside, 
since it is sublated later on. How can we attribute 'buddhy 
akarata' to silver? This silvel' is not the object of know- 
ledge that arises from tbe contact of the seuse organ; and 
yet it is immediately apprehended like consciousuese. 


Is the form of silver for knowledge natural or brought 
about by anthing else? It cannot be the former since know- 
Jedge is merely and purely kuowledge. And for the same 
reason, the second alternative does not arise. And yet due 
'samskara samarthya (power of impressions) there arises 
the form of silver for kn:>wledge. Some time back in the 
past when there arose the knowledge of silver, that know- 
ledge remained as a 'samskara'. 


This 'samskara' arises from knowledge and how can 
we attribute 'jnanatva' (know] edge) to it? Is the 
'samskara' which is distnict from 'jnana', SOD1ething to be 



Vivaranam 


89 


no possible relation on this view between 'juana' and the 
'vedya' (known object). It cannot be the latter due to 
'Vyavahara gocaratvanupapatti' (impossibility of any acti- 
vity). Hence we have to attribute 'jnanamatratva' to the 
'samskara' . 
This 'samskara' arose long ago and there were many 
'vijnanas' in the intervening times. How can that 'sams- 
karat be the cause now? The reply is that the 'salibija' 
(corn seed) is able to give rise to another seed though prior 
to the emergence of the new seed there are many interven- 
ing stages. Likewise even though the 'samskara' is 'vyava- 
hita's (having intervals) by many different Vijnanah it is 
capable of giving rise to the knowledge of silver 
now. 
One seed is not the cause of another seed. But the 
first seed is the cause of those things that bring about the 
next seed. In such a case these intervenning things are the 
immediate causes. The first 
eed is thus 'Vyavahita' and 
cannot be the cause. And to show that even if it is 'Vyava- 
hita' it can be a cause, another argument is given. From 
the knowledge of silver there arose a 'jnana santana' (series 
of cognitions) which constitute the 'samskara'. The form 
of silver which was in the earlier knowledge takes the form 
of 'buddhi' and is apprehended as it is were outside. 
CRITICISM:- We have to ask whether the silver 
comes into existence or no? If it does not COIne into exi- 
stence it cannot be there like the 'akasa'. If it comes into 
, 
existence, it cannot be from an object since there is no 
object other than jnana. It may be said that due to some 
'dushta karana' (defective cause) there arises the existence 
of silver from jnana. 



90 


Panchapadika 


Padmapada gives the {ollowing reply: Let us Suppose 
that knowledge can bring an object in
o existence. Is it this 
apprehension that brings about the . silver? Or some other 
apprehension? 


The 'janaka pratiti' (or the apprehension ofjnana which 
;s to give rise to the silver) is prior to the silver. It does 
not have the silver as its object at that time. The 'pratiti' 
and the silver belong to two different times. When there 
was tl:e knowledge (which is the caus,e of silver), there was 
no silver and also no knowledge of silver. Knowledge is 
said to be momentary. Then while there is the apprehen- 
sion there is no silver. and when there is the silver, 
the apprehension has ceased to be there. As such this app- 
rehension cannot be the cause of the silver coming into 
view. 


It is some 'dushta karana' in the jnana that has brought 
.about the silver. Prior to this moment there was no 'dushta 
karana' in the jnana; nor is there any such defect after the 
silver carne out. And if the :.pratiti which lis free from all 
defects were to have the silver as its object, then everything 
will have to be apprehended in every apprehension. . 


Does the 'pratiti' create the silver? Or no? That 
which gives U
 something positive is real. Since we accept 
this maxim, and since the silver too is a cause of its mean- 
ing or apprehension, the silver will have to be real. The 
'dushta karana pratiti' is taken to bring out the silver, 
whence the silver is the 'a.lambana" for the former. And 
since the silver gives us its apprehension or meaning it sho- 
uld be accepted as real. 



Vivaranam 


91 


If the 'pratiti' d&es not create the silver, the sih'er is' 
not its object and as SUGh it cannot be apprehended. 
The akhyativadin says that since these tow theories are 
found to be illogical ':ve l)ave to admit the suppression of- 
memory as explaining the nature of erroneous cognition. 
'But we have said earlier that this suppression itself is' 
impossible. 
Panchapadika reads: "The',Y oga system observes 
that the non-suppression of the experienced object (or con- 
tent) is memory". 


Advattic position : 


If this is neither a remembered silver nor a perceived 
:a;eal silver
 how can you main.tain that this knowledge will 
be 'alaukika' ? How is this possible? As Padmapada puts 
the question: "What is the way out to explain the appea- 
rance of silver when we have the contact with "shukti"? 


Doos this question refer to the 'saamagri' (totality of 
factors) or knowledie, or the object? If it refers to 'saam- 
agri' the reply is stated thus by Padmapaa.da- "Memory 
which arises from 'samskaara' and which does not involve 
the awareness of the 'I relnember', is n,ot distinct from the 
knowledge that comes from sense-perception. It is identi- 
cal wi th th e knowledge:of sense-preception which involves 
the 'samskaara'." 


If the sense-organ and the 'samskaara' constitute 
the '
aamagri' then this will be the true knowledge itself 
like memory and perception. But 
the erroneous cognition 



92 


Panchapadika 


involves the cooperation of the defect (dosha) also; and the 
'dosha' is the third entity in the 'saamagri'. 


Though the 'sukti
 is immediately before us, we do not 
apprehend it. For the 'kaarana dosha' or the defect in' app. 
rehension prevents its own power in the 'kaarya' (object); 
a1'ld at tbe same time it also awakens the samskaara; 
tor the 'kaarana dosha sakti' is 'kaaryagamya'. (defect in 
the causal potency is inferred from the effect). 


Objection: Defect '(dosha) appears to be involved 
in the 'sarnagri' of knowledge. A defect is that which pre- 
vents the proper result from coming into existence. It does 
not create a new effect; for the seed immersed in oil does 
not only not give rise to its own plant, but it also does no 
bring out a new plant. 
Reply: That there is a defect in the cause is known t 
only from the effect, Hence there is only one 'samagri
 
which is constituted by the integration of 'samskara' with 
'dushtakarana' (defective cause). 


The dosha cannot be the cause of the prior non-exist- 
ence (pragabhava) of the effect, for there is nothing for 
which this can be taken to be the cause. But the dosha can 
give rise to a 'viparita karya' (a different or strange effect) 
just as the 'bhasmaka' disease brings about excessive hun- 
ger and just as the 'vetra' seed burnt by the fire of the forest 
brings out the plantain tree. In the same way the 'Kacadi 
doshas' can function as a 'viparya hetu' (contrary cause) for 
the result. 


Objection: If a 'do
ha' can awaken a'samskara', 
it cannot form part of the 'samagri'. If a 'dosha' can awa- 



Vivaranam 


93 


ken the samskara, why can't it also give the knowledge of 
the object? 


Reply: There is no pran1ana to show that it is both.. 
As such there is onJy one samagri which involves both (sam- 
skata' and 'dushtakaranata'. 


Regarding the second viz., knowledge: In the errone- 
ous cognition we have only one knowledge. There are no 
two apprehensions. 


Objection': To say that there is only one knowledge 
is against the tenets of Advaita. The sense organ has the 
C onta-ct with the this; and there arises a knowledge of the 
this. This knowledge is 'antahkarana p
rinama' (modifica... 
tion of the psychosis). There is the contact of the sen&e 
organ with the "this' and then arises a knowledge. This 
has the "samsarga' of silver with the "this' as its object. Has 
the know ledge arisen from the contact with the mere 'this l' 
Or from the contact with the silver? Neither the silver nor 
its 'samsarga' is the object of this cognition. The silver be- 
ing 'mithya' cannot have the contact with the eye. It if were 
the silver which is elsewhere, even then the eye fails to have 
any contact with it. 


But it might be said that when I close my eyes I cannot 
have the cognition of silver, and that this cognition arises 
only when I open my eyes and have the 'COntact with the 
object. 


This argument is faulty since what I cognise is 'Only the 
'this' which is the 'adhisthana'. I cannot say that I a.ppre- 
her.d the silver because of t.he 'samskara' that has arisen 



94 


Panchapadika 


from my previous experience of silver; for, memory is not 
recognised or accepted to be present in the erroneous cog- 
Dition. We cannot also say that a defect by itself ca can use 
knowledge. The dosha or the defect can only prevent an 
effect from coming into existence. It cannot be a cause. 
And since a 'jnana karana' (eause of knowledge) alone can 
bring about the effect(the knowledge of the effect), the defect 
as 'Jnanakarana' cannot give rise to the knowledge of the 
object. 


Hence you cannot say that there is only one knowledge 
of silver which is integrated with the very existence of 'shu- 
kti'. On the other hand, it is "!naintained that there is 'avi- 
dya'. Due.to the 'bahya doshas' (external defects) func- 
tioning as an instrumental canse, this 'avidya' assumes the 
form of silver in the 'shukti' as there is some similarity bet- 
ween the two. A vidya which is conditioned by that cons- 
ciousness that is reflected in the 'ldamakara vritti' (psycho" 
sis having the form of the this) cooperates with the 'sams- 
kara' that gives the knowledge of silver. This avidya' evol- 
ves itself in the form of tjnanabhasa'. The silver that con- 
dItions the consciousness is the cause of the 'jnanabhasa' 
which therefore takes the form of silver. This form
is 'sva... 
vishaya vyavahara ajanaka' (ineffective to give rise to the 
awareness of its own object) since it is 'aGetana.'. As such 
this form of avidya becomes the object fOl
 the "sakshi cai- 
tanya) . 


In this statement of the advaitin's position, how do we 
have only one knowledge ? And since the difference in the 
fnanas brings about a difference between the objects, how 
can we say that there is only one object? 



Vivaranam 


,s 


The reply is as follows: 
We cognise an object and there is the apprehension. It 
is the mere apprehension (sphurana) and it is not 'jnana 
visishta' (qualified by its knowledge). There is the 'ava- 
bhasa' for the apprehension or 'sphurana' as 'vishayavacc- 
hinna' and not as 'jnanavacchinna'. The 'sphurana' Or 
.apprehension is not conditioned by any psychosis, but by 
the object alone; and the object is cognised as having the 
"pratiphalita caitanya' (reflected consciousness). 


Now the true and the false (mithya) objects appear as 
one in so far as they assume each other's nature (anyonya- 
t
ata). This is the object cognised and it gives rise to'Visha- 
yavacchinna phalaikya'. In this 'Upadhi' botb the true 
knowledge and the false one, even though they are two, are 
taken thr-ough 'upacara' to be one only. 


Tben we come to the third meaning which refers to the 
"vishaya'. The ,knowledge (that is said to be one) arises 
from the 'samagri' which includes the 'samskara' that has 
awakened from the dosha. For such a knowledge it is bUt 
proper to have the 'avabhasa (appearance)of the 'alambana) 
viz., the erroneous silver in the shukti (shuktigata mithya- 
rajatam).. Then the 'mithya jnana' is 'mitnyalambanam 
jnanam'. Since knowledge as such has no sublation, know- 
ledge in itself is not mithya. 


Neither knowledge nor its negation can be treated as 
mithya. But in the erroneous cognition we have a know- 
ledge which is integrated to 'mithyatva'. Such a jnana 
samavayi mithyatva is understood to be no other than 
4anirvacaniya' (inexplicable). 



96 


Panchapadika 
. . This 'mithyajnana' is neither true nor false; and hence 
It IS called 'anivacaniya'. 


Objection from akhyativadin : 
When there is the contact of the sense organ with the 
()
ject, this contact (samprayoga) is a cause of knowledge 
wIthout the aid of anything else (nirapekshah). The con- 
t
.ct "lith smoke by itself gives us the knowlege of fire. 
l.ikewise samskara by itself is the cause of the memory of 
a pa
t experience. Thus we have two 'nirapeksha karanas' 
ci1.lIcd perception and memory. Now the erreneous cogni- 
tion is brought about by these two causes which are con- 
tinuous and simultaneous (nirantara). At:; such there we do 
not have one knowledge alone but two. There is know- 
ledge aric;ing from the contact, and there is also the sam- 

kura. These a.re two distinct entities. Then how can we 

ay that there is only one knowledge arising from the cog- 
nitit'1'1 of silver in the shukti? From these knowledges 
there is the 
pecific (pravritti (activity). 
Reply: This 'visishta pravritti' itself is iplpossibJe. 
'1 he apprehension of the 'samsarga jnana' (relational know.. 
ledgc) i, f('tund in the cognition 'this is silver'. If there is 
nut 
)nc: knnwlcge then one knowledge ought to come after 
the tither. And because of the interval (Vyavadhana) there 
\. .Ulnnt arbc any 'pravritti't. The pravritti is brought about 
the "a,vya v ahita,1va' which makes us apprehend the 'this' 
,,
 

ilvcr.. 
f 'ur cXi.ltnplc, ta'<e a word which consists of many 
Uahh:'-.. J
jJ.(.:h !-.ylla.blc being In01TICntary, it is destroyed 
",,\:cn I.Lt'tcr we utter it; and each syllable by itself cannot con- 
\cy the nlc:auing. Each syllable is said to give rise to, a 

.u'hkl.U\
. The la
t syllable, aided by these samskaras 



Vivaranam 


97 


functions as the cause in giving us the' meaning of the word. 
This is assumed so that all the preceeding syllables (which 
are the causes) might give us the apprehension. If all these 
preceeding causes are absent in the form of samskaras there 
can be no apprehension of meaning. Even E thogh there 
are many cau!es here, this is not a defect since the preceed_ 
ing causes function as accessories in the form of samskaras 
to the last cause. 


If there is a difference in the cause" we can infer the 
diff erence in the effect. Then there cannot be one know- 
ledge, but many. Memory and perception are different 
causes and they give 'rise to different effects. But due to 
the presence of the defect, there arises a distinctly new 
effect. Thus even though the 'vetra bija' ..can give rise to a 
vetra plant, still it gives rise to a plantain when it is scor- 
ched in the fire of the forest. It cannot be said that since 
the defect is 'sapeksha' (reflexive) and since perception and 
nlemory are 'nirapeksha' (non-reflexive), the defect cannot 
cooperate with the other two to bring about one effect. The 
smoke that is apprehended in infrential cognition is 'sape.. 
ksha'; and the memory of the concommittance of smoke 
with fire is 'nirapeksha'. Both these cooperate with one 
another in giving us one fknowledge. Thus both the know.. 
ledge of the cause (linga jnana) and the samskara function 
together in giving rise to the knowledge of 'lingi' in infer- 
ence. And in recognition we find that perception and 
memory function together. In both there is only one know- 
ledge which ha.s in it memory inherently (smriti garbham)
 
And if the samskara is not awakened, we cannot have 
such a knowledge. Hence the perception of the 'linga' it- 
self a\V,aknes the 'sambandha jnana samskarara' , and these 



98 


Panchapadika 


two toget
er give us the knowledge of the 'lingi'. The same 
holds good in the case of recognition also" (Padmapada). 


We can not then admit any difference in the different 
causes in this cognition. We cannot treat the perception 
of , ling a' and the memory of 'vyapti' as the causes, for the 
latter is only a samskara. If the samskara is3not awakened, 
then we cannot have the knowledge. Only when the sam- 
skara is 
wakened we have the 'jnanadvaya yaugapadya 

(simi1taneity of knowledges). 


Objection: In recognjtion we have perception and 
also the memory of the past experience as the causes. 
There is 'jna
advaya yaugapadya' here since we have the 
cognitions of 'ayam' and 'sah'. Then we have two 
knowledges. 


Reply: No. The knowledge of the 'linga' gives us 
the knowledge of the 5lingi' with which it is necessarily 
connected. Andfrom the 'artha jnana janana sakti sam- 
b'.Lndha' (relation of the power to give rise to the knowledge 
of the object) we apprehend the meaning of the word. But 
there is no such relatIonship between memory and recog- 
nition. As such memory is not the cause of recognition, 
but only a samskara for perception in recongnition. 


When the 'samskaara' is awakened, there arises recog- 
.nision; and here we do not find a second entity called 
memory. 


Objection: The copresence of the causes which 
are 'nira.peksa' is to be found only in the cas
s of the 
pramaanas other than 'abhijnaa pratyaksa'. 'Abhijnaa' is 



Vivaranam 


99 


the knowledge of the object which is conditioned by one 
place and by one time. 


Reply: From the cognitions of blue etc. which are 
the causes of different knowledges, we get o,nly one speci- 
fic know ledge of the picture. Even in prception these 
is the 'nirapeksa kaarana samaahaara' (totalily of non- 
reflexive causual factors). 


Objection: If the samskaara is necessarily involved 
in the 'pramaana kaarana' , then we have the 'pramaana 
jnaana' in which memory is an essential elen1ent (smrti 
garbha). Then we cannot have the cognition 'this is 
silver' in which we do not find this memory. 


Reply: Inference and other vaJid means of know- 
led
e give rise to knowledge without ha
g the co-opera- 
tion or aid of the 'dosha'. But 'bhranti jnana' is different 
frOl'D. these. "Inference, recognition and 'citra jnana' do 
not require 'dushtakarana'; and hence we are able to app... 
rehend the object as it 1s. But in 'bhranti juana' there is a 
'karana dosha' and the object is not cognised as it is" 
(Padmapada). And this cognition has only one knowledge 
where we have the 'samsarga.' between the 'this' and the 
silver. They are necessarily connected. The this is nece- 
ssarily cognised as .sil ver. 


The 'akhyati vada' accepts two jnanas here. The silver 
which is cognised iml11ediately and directly is taken to be 
the remembered one. This is contrary to facts. 
In 'anyatha khyativada', the existence of the object in 
the cognised" adhisthar).a is rejected. Though the 'this" is 
cognised to be the silver, the 'sarhsarga' is rejected. And 



98 


Panchapadika 


two toget
er give us the knowledge of the 'lingi'. The san1e 
holds good in the case of recognition also" (Padmapada). 


We can not then admit any difference in the different 
causes in this cognition. We cannot treat the percepti on 
of , ling a' and tbe memory of 'vyapti' as the causes, for the 
latter is only a samskara. If the salnskara is3not awakened, 
then we cannot have the knowledge. Only when the sam- 
sk
ra is 
wakened we have the 'jnanadvaya yaugapadya 

(simi1taneity of knowledges). 
Objection: In recognjtion we have perception and 
also the memory of the past experience as. the causes. 
There is 'jnanadvaya yaugapadya' here since we have the 
cognitions of 'ayam' and 'sah 7 . Then we have two 
knowledges. 


Reply: No. The knowledge of the 'linga' gives us 
the knowledge of the 'lingi' with which it is necessarily 
connected. Andfrom the 'artha jnana janana sakti sam.. 
b
ndha' (relation of the power to give rise to the knowledge 
of the object) we apprehend the meaning of the word. But 
there is no such relatIonship between memory and recog- 
nition. As such memory is not the cause of recognition, 
but only a samskara for perception in recongnition. 


When the 'samskaara' is awakened, there arise s recog- 
.nision; and here we do not :find a second entity called 
memory. 


Objection: The copresence of the causes which 
are 'nirapeksa' is to be found only in the cas
s of the 
pramaanas other than 'abhijnaa pratyaksa'. 'Abhijnaa' is 



Vivaranam 


99 


the knowledge of the object which is conditioned by one 
place and by one time. 
Reply: From the cognitions of blue etc. which are 
the causes of different knowledges, we get only one speci- 
fic knowledge of the picture. Even in prception these 
is the 'nirapeksa ka3.rana samaahaara" (totalily of non- 
reflexive causual factors). 


Objection: If the samskaara is necessarily involved 
jn the 'pramaana kaarana', then we have the 'pramaana, 
jnaana' in which memory is an essential element (smrti 
garbha). Then we cannot have the cognition 'this is 
silver' in which we do not find this memory. 


Reply: Inference and other va1id means of know- 
ledge give rise to knowledge without hav!ng the co-opera- 
tion or aid of the 'dosha'. Bat 'bhranti jnana' is different 
from these. "Inference, recognition and 'citra jnana' do 
not require 'dushtakarana'; a.nd hence we are able to app'" 
rehend the object as it is. B
t in 'bhranti jnana' there is a 
'karana dosha' and the object is not cognised as it is" 
(Padmapada). And this cognition has only one knowledge 
where we have the 'samsarga' between the 'this' and the 
silver. They are necessarily connected. The this is nece- 
ssarily cognised as .silver. 


The 'akhyati vada' accepts two jnanas here. The silver 
which is cognised imlnediately and directly is taken to be 
the remembered one. This is contrary to facts. 


In 'anyatha khyativada', the ex
stence of the object in 
the cognised" adhisthana is rejected. Though the 'this" is 
cognised to be the silver, the 'sal'nsarga' is rejected. And 



100 


Panchapadika 


the silver that is apprehended immediately and directly is 
said to be the silver existing elsewhere. 


In 'atma khyati', the silver that is in actually apprehe- 
nded as existing outside of us is taken to be in reality 
purely internal. 


These defects are not found in our anirvacaniya khyati. 
And our theory is not contrary to experience since we acc- 
ept the silver that appears (pratibhasamanasya). 


Objection: But the silver is apprehended as real 
and not as 'anirvacaniya'. Is this not contrary to experi- 
ence ? 


Reply: Just as the thisness (idanta) has the 'sam- 
sarga' with the silver, what appears (avabhasate) is the 
'shuktika satta salnsarga' (relation of the being of shukti). 
This is not a new, 'sattva' of silver. The reality of the shu- 
kti is apprehended as th e reality of silver. 


Or, we accept three degrees of reality (sattvam). VIti- 
nlate reality {Paramartha sattvaI1!)is that of Brahman. Then 
there is the empirical reality which has the ability to bring 
about the objects and actions. This is conditioned. by maya 
and it is manifested in the form of akasa etc. Then there 
is a third degree of reality which is conditioned by 'avidya'; 
and it is apprehended in the form of silver etc., in errone. 
ous cognition. Considered with reference to ultimate 1 ea- 
lity, the third degree of reality is called 'anirvacaniya'. As 
such it is not' contrary to experience. Following experience 
we accept the reality of the object here also. 



Vivaranam 


lUll 


i) Neither the real, nor the unreal can be taken to be 

bhrallti jnana ' (erroneous knowledge). Ii) The 
()th
r theories of error are shown to be violating the facts 
of experience" Hi) In 'akhyati' we have to assume many 
things like 'parokshya" memory, suppression of the know- 
ledge of memory, non-discrimination brought about by this 
.suppression, 'pravritti' brought out by this non-discrimina- 
tion ; and the memory of the 
experiences of the past life; 
all these are not warranted by the cognition as such. 'Anya... 
thakhyati' assumes many things like: an object apprehended 
at one place has its reality or existence at another place; 
the sense organ can apprehend an object experienced in the 
past; the sense organ can cognise an object which is at 
another place -and at another time; the 'dosha': is said to 
bring about this ability to the sense organ; even though 
there is no 'samsarga' in reality it is said to be immediately 
apprehended. All these are opposed to the pramaanas. 


Hence to put an end to all these defects we bave to 
accept the nature of the apprehended silver to be "mithya.. 
tva'" In the later cognition we say 'there is no silver, it 
a.ppeared as mithyaa silver only' . We have to accept the 
Cmithyaatva' or 'anirvacaniyatva' for the silver on the basis 
of this experience. The 'upaadaana' for this silver is 'avi... 
dyaa' and it can be proved by agreement and difference. 
Hence Padmapaada speaks of the silver as 'mithyaamayatn'. 


A true object gets itself integrated to the existence of a 
mithyaa object; and as such it appears. Such an appea- 
rance is called 'maa.yaa', 'mithyaa' 'anirvacaniya khayaati' 
and also 'adhyaasa. 



102 


Panchapadika 


MAYA AND AVIDVA 


Objection: The silver in erroneous cognition can 
be only 'avidya mayam' and 110t 'maya mayam'. Since all 
ca
C's of error or illusion are dispel1ed by true knowledge, 
error has the nature of avidya. Further Maya is different 
from avidya. Maya cannot bring out any vyamoha' (desire 
or passion) to its own 'asraya', and it fo]]ows or abides by 
the will of the agent (karta). A vidya functions in a totally 
. different way. Even in empirical experiences maya is taken 
to be different froIn avidya. Thus the elephant, horse, and 
chariot constructed by maya cannot be spoken of as arising 
from avidya. 


Reply: Is this difference made out on the basis of a 
difference in their nature (lakshana)? Or is it based on 
'loka vyavahara' ? Both are faulty. To begin with, it can- 
not be the former. 


The 'svarupa lakshana' (real definition) of maya and 
avidya is the same. They have also the same 'visesha lak- 
sana'. They both prevent the object from manifesting itself 
in its own form
; and they also make the object appear in 
a different form. 


Objection: When an object is said to be the pro- 
duct of maya, the material cause for this product consists 
of 'mantra (spell)', 'oshadhi (medicine) erc. These are real 
entities.- But 'anirvacaniyatva' does not admit such a 
reality. 


Reply: No. The word n1aya is not applied to the 
material cause, but to the product that IS immediately co. 



Vlvaranam 


J.V.;.J 


gnised or apprehended. The onlooker does not have any 
knowledge of the mantra or oshadhi, and the word maya 
is not applied to these. Mantra, oshadhi etc., are only the 
instrumental causes like kacadi dosas. 


Elephant, horse etc., produced by maya have the 
nature of may a; and since they are 'anirvacaniva'their 
material cause too must be that 'ajnana' which is 'anirvac- 
aniya'. It is the same avidya which is the material cause 
of adhyasa. 
Mantra etc., are brought about by a cause which is the 

anady avidya' or 'anadyajnana'. Masa and avidya are 
one and the same and they have no beginning. 
But it is the object like the elephant etc. that is said to 
be 'mayamaya'. How can its cause also be maya. ? 


The reply is based on the text 'mayantu prakritim 
vidyan mayinam tu mahesvaram". Here the word maya is 
employed to convey the idea of a material cau'Se.. Maya 
and avidya are'the material causes. Their 'vikaras" or 
modificatiQns are adhyasa and maya. These have the 
same nature. Hence the cause and the effect as wen are 
spoken .of as being maya which term is identical with avidya. 
Objection: Avidya is seen to bring about the 
"vyamoha' for its 'asraya' who is the agent. Maya does 
not bring Qut such a thing. There is at least this much of 
difference in their natures. 


Reply: No. If the "asr
ya' is the percipient, he 
ought to have the <vyanl-oha' when he 'Sees the maayamaya 
<>bject near by. If he is the doer or agent he does no
 have 
the "vyamoha.' not because he knows maya, not because he 



104 


Panchapadika 


knows that it is all maya; but because he knows that it is 
surely sublated later on, and because he' knows also how to 
counteract it. If this were not the explanation,. he ought to 
have the 'vyamoha' like the percipient. 


Objection: Maya functions in obedience to the 
will of its owner, while avidya controls the will. 


Reply: This difference too is faulty. The agent or 
deer has complete freedom in selecting the instrumental 
causes like mantra and oshadhi. Having secured these, he 
cannot prevent maya from bringing out the result. A vidya 
too functions in the same manner. If we place the finger 
on the eye. ball we will perceive two moons. WhetheF we 
should pla,;c the finger thus or 110, is dependent on our 
will. But having placed it there we cannot prevent the two 
moons from appearing. After we rub the eyes we have the 
'Kesondraka bhrama' (illusion of a woolly mass). Offering 
prayeI s and taking some medicines give rise to 'svapna 
bhramas'. All these are cases of avidya and they are on a 
par with maya. These appearances (pratibhasah) continue 
to remain even when we have true knowledge; and they 
arise from the will of the doer. 


Sastra vyavahara (the teaching of the system of philo- 
sophy) too does not maintain that maya is different from 
avidya. In the sruti passage. "Tasyaabhidhayanad yajanat 
tattva bhavad bhuyascante visva maya nivrittih"'. We find 
the word maya employed to denote avidya. that is dispelled 
by '1:attva jnana t . In the surti passage, "taraty avidyam 
vifatam hrdi yasmin nivesite Yogi mayam ameyaya tasmal 
vidyatmane namah". We find that maya and avidya are 



Vivaranam 


105 


synonyms and they can be overcome by true knowledge. In 
the Vedanta Sutras we read the aphorIsm- "maya matram tu 
kartsyena anabhivyakta svarupatvat", where the word 
maya is employed with reference to dream experience which 
is one of avidya. Sankara often writes 'avidya maya', 'avi- 
dyatmika maya sakti' etc. Padmapada too observes "avi- 
dya maya ksharam"" The author of Brahma siddhi too 
writes in the same manner, 'Iyam avidya, maya, mithya 
pratyayah' " 


Thus the identity in their nature and the 'Vriddha vya- 
vahara' (usage by elders) go to show that maya and avidya 
are identical. 


Yet when we emphasize the 'v
kshepa' sakti' (power of 
diffusion, of plurality), we speak of it as maya ; and when 
we emphasize the 'acchadana sakti' (power of concealing) 
W
 calI it avidya. This is only a difference in our use of 
the terms. 


ERROR 


Now the silver in the erroneous cognition is spoken of 
as maya maya because, unlike avidya which controls the 
\vill or 'iccha 
, maya is controlled by the will. If it controls 
the will, i't can be called 'avidya maya'", Bit,her way it is 
only a difference arising fron1 our use of the terms. 


au j ecti on: Then, as we ap'P.ehend why should we 
not accept an .ultiInately real silver in, ,the apprehended 
'adh
shthan'a' ? And this will put an end to the defect (, f 
unnecessary assumption. 



106 


Panchapadika 


Reply: If it is the ultimately real silver, everyone 
should be appreheding it thus. 


ObjectiGn : Only those that have the 'karana dosha' 
apprehend it thus. Otherwise it is an ultimately real one. 


Reply: If the silver is ultimately real, it does not 
require a 'karana desha' to give rise to the knowledge of 
this real entity. If it requires a IIkarana dosha' then in its' 
absence there cannot be any apprehension. Just as in the 
absence of light, form cannot be apprehended, so in the 
absence of the defect silver too can't be cognised. In the 
absence of the defect silver has to be cognised not only in 
the shukti, but every w
ere. 


Objection: Avidya is said to have its asraya in the 
self. Even if the silver is of the nature of this avidya, it 
()ught to be cognised by all. Due to the avidya which is 
in the 'idam anisavacchinna caitanya' (consciousness condi- 
tioned by the this), there has arisen a silver in front of us ; 
and since this avidya is common to all, all should cognise 
the silver. 


Rep Iy: Due to the 'mantra' the eye of the spectator 
gets a defect and fails to cognise the object as it is. Like- 
wise only those who have the dosha are able to cognise the 
silver because this silver is 'mayamatra'. 


This silver is 'sakshi bhasya' and as such its asraya is 
said to be 'sakshi caitanya'. This witnessing consciousness 

"appears as silver when it is 'idam akaravacchinna'. This 
'sakshi caitanya' differs from individual to individual. 
Now, the silver is apprehen9.ed as the san1e as the shukti. 



Vivaranam 


107 


Such an integration of the two is also of the nature of avi- 
dya ; and it is apprehended as silver only by that person 
whose 'sakshi caitanya' is responsible for this appearance. 
And just as my happiness cannot "be apprehended by any 
one other than myself, so .is this silver. 


That knowledge is not 'bhranti" needs no proof. When 
we take the 'bhranti' to be 'mithyatva" we are assuming the 
barest minimum and we are not going contrary to experi- 
ence. 'Bhranti' enables us to apprehend its nature as 
(mithyartha jnana'. 


BADHAKA PRARTVAKSHA. (Sublation) 
There is the sublation of the erroneous cognition and 
it takes the form of 'this is not silver".. The apprehension 
of this sublation (badhaka pratyaksha) by itself establishes 
the 'mithyatva' of silver. 
Objection: The subsequent negation ('badha') 
makes us understand the absence of silver in the apprehen- 
ded 'adhishthana'. 
Reply: No. It only implies the mithyatva of silver. 
Mithyatva means the 'abhava pratiyogi' (contradictory of 
the negation) in the apprehended 'adhishthana'. When we 
predicate the presence of an entity at a particular place 
and tater negate it, this negation cannot refer to the mere 
absence; for it implies something positive. When there is 
the knowledge of the negati<?n, the silver appears (avabha- 
sate) as its own 'abhava pratiyogi' in the apprehended upa- 
dhi (adhishthana); and this is a perceptual apprehension. 



108 


Panchapadika 


The silver then comes to be the 'abhava pratiyogi' of 
the apprehended adhishthana through the knowle,dge of its 
negation. Such a silver 'can be only mithya rajata. We 
therefore say not only that "this is not silver', but that 'it 
appeared as mithya (Mithyaiva abhasis
ta). We refer to it 
as explicitly mithya; and this is the object of the negation. 
Objection: Even if we take the silver to be that 
existing 'at another place and time, we can negate it and say 
'this' is not silver'. . 


Reply: No. The silver is the object of negation and 
we have the knowledge of this object. This object was earl. 
ier apprehended as being the 'this' with which we have 
the sensewcontact. If silver exists elsewhere, how can we 
apprehend it here and later nagate it here? The negation, 
then, cann'ot have the form 'this is mithya silver. It ought 
to have been 'that is silver' or 'the silver is only buddhy 
akara' (in the intellect as an image). If the error has arisen 
because of the non-discrimination between the perceived 
and the remembered, then too negation cannot take the 
form 'this is mithya silver'. We see the 'gavaya' and rem.. 
-ember that it is similar to the cow we have seen earlier. 
Here the true knowledge bas taken the form of the aware.. 
ness of similarity. Likewise we should say that 'this 
shukti is similar to that silver which I have seen earlier.' 


What is a negation (badha)? 1. Is it the obstruction 
of the acitivity at one place of a person who is desirouSO't 
something e1se? Now a mendicant cognises silver in the 
shukti aild yet he does not have 'any pravritti. If the deff- 
nition were correct, he cannot negate the silver, and yet he 
negates it. 



Vivaranam 


109 


2) If it is not the obstruction to the pruvrjtti, can it 
be the putting an end to the possibility of pravritti? No. 
I cogpise - silver now and the possibility of my pravirtti 
is destroyed as I find that it is only shukti. Later on I 
again cognise silver. If tIle very possibility of pravritti is 
destroyed, I should not have the cognistion of silvcr at alL 
Further, a thirsty person is in search of water; he sees 
snakes or thiev:er and controls his thirst. His pravfitd for 
water is obstructed. Does the knowledge or cognition of 
sna
es 
tc., f.unction as the negati<?n of the cognition of 
water? 


(3) When two things are apprehended as 'avivikta', 
the later discrimination may, be taken to constitute the 
negation. No. In the begtnning all objects are apprehen.. 
ded as avivikta. La
er on we are able to 
istinguish theln 
with reference to one another. This latter 'viveka' does 
not constitute negation. 


Does 'aviviktatva' mean not apprehend
ng through dis- 
crimination ? Or does it mean the apprehension of their 
identity? In the of 
rmer 
ase
 is the apprehension through 
discrimination 'pada1;t h a jna:n.a
irikta' (ot
er than the know- 
ledge of the object)? Or is it the 'pada1;tha jnana' itself? 
When we have the 'p.adar,tha jnana', we do not apprehend 
this difference; and when we'later on,4isti
guish Ol1
 o
ject 
'from another, we should be able to say that this cognition 
negates the earlier one. 


So we o:ught t
 say that th<? apprehension of difference 
is the apP.Iehension o( the object it

lf. In such a case, as 
we apprehend an object we are apprehending also its 
difference; and hence there is no question of ':a.viveka'. 



110 


Panchapadika 


4) Then one :might say that 'avivicktatva' is cognising 
the objects as identical. An object is apprehended as hav- 
ing the nature of another object; and later on we come to' 
cognise that one excludes .the others. Can this be the neg- 
ation? But take the first apprehension that 'the pot is white" 
Later on we come to apprehend that the whiteness of the 
pot is not a substance but a quality. This ought to be con... 
stitutjng the negation of the first apprehension. 


In the theory upheld by the objection every object i
 
defined in terms of identity-in-difference. In such a case 
when we apprehend the identity .first and later cognise the 
difference, the result will be that every object negates itself.. 
" 


5) Negation may than be defined as the apprehension 
of the 'abhava pratiyogi' in the apprehended 'adhishthana." 
Then, is it the 'abhva protiyogitva t (being contradictory of 
negation) of more knowledge? Or of the difference of the 
object known (jneya) 1 Negation cannot be the destruction 
(pradhvansa) of knowledge, since knowledge being momen- 
tary, is destroyed every moment. So the second alternative 
remains. Here we have to ask. Is there the negation of 
the apprehended object? Or of the unapprehended object? 
If it is the negation of the apprehended object,. does this 
negation arise from the knowledge of that very object, or 
from that of another 0 bject ? It cannot arise from the 
knowledge of that very object, for the apprehesion goes to 
establish the validity of the prior knowledge. It cannot 
arise from the knowledge of another object; for the objects 
or knowlepge being dit:ferent,. one cannot be the negation 
of the other.. 



Vivaranam 


ItL 


There cannot be the negation of the unapprehended 
object. 
6) Can negation be the dispeIling (nivriti) of ajnana ? 
No, for, in such a case, all the knowledges that dispel ajn- 
ana will have to constitute negation only. 


Then what is negation? Ajnana has brought about the 
<;ognition of an object and this cognition does not give us 
the knowledge of its 'adhishthana'. Now negation not only 
dispels the cognised object 
ut also ajnana which is its 
cause. It gives us the knowledge of the 'adhishthana' also. 
Then, is negation the dispelling of ajnana along with 
its product which is cognised here and now? Or is it the 
dispelling of ajnana whose products has obtained its 'laya' 
(involution) in itself? 
There is the cognition of silver in the shukti. Let us 
assume that later on the mind wanders a.fter S01ne other 
object
 Then again the eye comes back and ha£ the cantact 
wi
h shukti, There arises the knowledke of the 
adhishth- 
ana' and the ajnana is dispelled. Here we do 110t have the 
'dhvansa' (destruction) of the immediate product (karya) of 
ajnana. Thus the first alternative is too narrow. The 
second alternative is not applicable in the case of ajnana 
which is dispelled along with its present or immediate pro- 
duct. 
But in both the cases thele is negation in so far as we 
have the dispelling of ajnana \vhish has evolved itself in the 
form of the product. This is the definition of 'negation'; 
and negation has its meaLing only in the dispelling of such 
as 'anavabodhd.' (non-konwledge). Hence 'badhyatva' is 
taken to be 'mithyatvam'. 



112 


Panchapadhika 
DEFINITION OF IADHYASA' 
THAT IT IS TOO NARROW. 


In the definition we find the word 'smriti rupa' which 
means 'the forn1 similar to that of memory' . From this we 
de d uce san1skara as one element. Since similarity inov lves 
difference, we get the sense-contact as the second element. 
Since the cognition is that of error and these two do 
not give rise to such a cognition. We arrive at the defect 
or dosba as the thhd element. These three elements are 
implied by smriti rupa. They give rise to the erroneous co- 
gnition which ie the apprehension of one object as having 
the nature of another. 


Objection: ThIS definition does not apply in an 
cases, It is too narrow and does not cover all the 'laksh- 
yas' (Object). For example how can we explaIn the sorrow 
evperienced in the drea111? It is a case of adhyasa; and 
yet the definition does not seem to apply here. In every 
adhyasa there is an object external to the individual and 
some thing else is appehended there in. This apprenensiol1 
requires the contact of the sense organ with the external 
object. New, in dream we caunot have subh a contact of 
the sense organ with the external object. Both the sense 
01 gan and the external object are absent here. In the ab.. 
sence of any cause other than the samskara or 'vasana', 
we should gay that iti the dream cognition we have only the 
smriti and not smriti rupata
 


Reply: We see the 'gavaya' and remember the cow 
for it is said to be siJ:?1i1ar to the cow. Here our apprehen- 



Vlvaranam 


L
3 


and it is not erroneous. There is no dosha in a cognition 
that results from memory. 


Further the dream cognition is not a case of memory. 
The object is cognised immediately and directly. 
Objection: In the dream there is no contact with 
the eye, for the eye has ceased to function, and also be.. 
cause the object is not external. There cannot be any 
dosha since the eye itself is not functioning then. There 
cannot be any 'vishaya dosha' (defect. in the object) also for 
this dream cogLition. If the 'vishaya dosha' were the 
cause, is it 'jnaya manataya hetuh' ? or 'ajnayamanataya' 
(causal in the process of being known or . not being known) 
Since the eye does not . function then and since the mind 
cannot have a contact with the external directly, the former 
alternative is to be rejected. It cannot be the latter (or the 
vishaya dosba that we apprenend in our waking mornents 
has a specific cause. Further, there cannot be any 'prama- 
tri dosha' during sleep. Thus we do not have all the three 
factors necessary for adhyasa. As su'ch it cannot be an 
erroneous cognition. 


Reply: This cognition arises from all the three fac- 
tors working together; and it is a cognition which appreh- 
ands an object as having the nature of another. There is 
no contact of the object with the eye; and the object is app- 
rehended immediately. It is neither a case :of perception 
nor a case of memory. And as such it must be a third type 
of knowledge which is capable of giving us the nature 0 f 
adhyasa. Padmapada observes; "it has been said that the 
form of memory is only to make us apprehend the object of 
our prior or earlier experience". 



11.4 


Panchapadika 


The cognising individual of the dream world is differ- 
ent from the cognising individual of the waking stage.- 
There is vijnana for this 'pramata' also, and there is his 

antah karana t which is the means of obtaining knowledge. 
This 'pramata' suffers from the doshas like sleep and 'vata'; 
and he has also the samskara of the past experiences. Thus 
all the three factors are present here: and hence it is said 
that b'hranti jnana' is 'smriti rupa'. 


"There is the mind which is overcome by the defects 
like sleep, and which has all the samskaras. These .samska- 
ras are awakended by the 'adrishta' karma. The mind 
takes up that form which is necessitated by the 'samskara 
. visesha'. Such a form is 'rnithyartha vishaya' and there 
arises knowledge" (Padmapada). 


Objection: You may establish the 'tatastha laks- 
hana' (definition per accidents). How can you establish 
the 'svarupa lak
hana' (definition per se): ? In adhyasa we 
have an object appearing at a place other than its own. 
What is its adhishthana ? 


Reply: "There is the avidy.a sakti in the imtrediate 
(aparoksa) consciousness of the indIvidual (who is sleeping). 
This consciousness is determined or conditioned by 'antah 
, karana'. Such an avidya sakti appears (vivartate) as the 
'alambana' for the object" (padrnapada). 


The antah karana is overcome by the doshas like sleep 
and 1;>y the samskara. This is the instrumental cause of 
the mithyadhyasa. And there is the avidya sakti in the 
consciousness as conditioned by the antah-karana. 



Vivaranam 


11\5 


The 'upadana' is not the antah karana but the'mithya- 
dhyasa. And the 'adhishthana' or the 'this' in the cogni"" 
tion is 'manasa samyuktan' (un}ted with the mind); and it 
is the consciousnessas conditioned by the avidya sakti. 
Thus there is the samsa.rga with the sufficient instrumental 
cause. As such this avidya sakti brings about the sufficient 
cause for adhyasa; and it becomes as if (vivartate) it is the 
alambana for the'mithyartha'. It is not the avidya sakti 
that appears as the mithyartha, for every adhy.asa requires 
the samsarga of the leal with the unreal.. But it is consci-. 
ousness itself that appears like that through the avidya 
whose 'asraya' it is. Then we have the integration of the 
real object with the unreal and it is this integrated entity 
that appears. Consequently we have 'paratra paravabhasah'. 


The same explaanation holds good of the erroneouS 
cognitions that arise in the waking moments. .The shukti 
as such is not the 'adhishthana' of silver. It is that consci- 
ousness as conditioned by the shukti; f
r an unconscious 
entity canl10t Inal1ifest any other entity. Such a shukti is 
the 'alambana' for siver. 


When the sense organ has the contact with the external 
object, then thr )ugh the"sense organ the 'antah karana' 
becomes or appears as (viparinamate) the externa: 1 form.. 
Unless the antahkarana comes into contact "with the object, . 
there can be nb apprehension. In this pure antahkarana 
there appears or arises the reflection of consciousness and 
throu.gh the antahkarana there is ta '(en the 'visha.ya samsa- 
rga' also. 


Consciousness is 'samsrishta' (fused) with the external. 
adhishthana. . Sin?e this 'adhishthana' is only the 'caitanya 



116 


Panchapadika 


vivarta' through avidya. It is to be treated as the 'adhish- 
thana' of consciousness. 
;' 


This avidya sakti appears (vivartate) in the form of 
silver which is 'samsrishta' with the external 'adhishthana'. 


Hence that consciousness whi.ch is conditioned by the 
shukti is the 'alambana' for the silver; and as such we 
speak of 'bahyalambana' (external locus). 


Eveywhere the 'alambana' for the erroneous cognition 
is either pure consciousness itself or consciousness 
as conditioned by something. Hence it is but proper 
to say 'paratva paravabhasah', (the other appearing in the 
external). 


There comes an objection fron1 one who does not take 
this 'adbishthana' to be consciousness which appears every_ 
where and which assumes a variety of shapes like the sky 
He takes the adhishthana to be the ahankara and asks: 
Then the 'svapnartha pratibhasa' (appearance of drea
 
object) must be purely internal or inward. If this ahamkara 
which lStbe ' par icchinna atman' (conditioned self) is the 
adhishthana, we should have the cognition 'I am blue' 
where the'!, is the 'this' of normal cognition. In such a 
manner we should be having our dream cognitions. 


The reply is that the adhishthana is the self which is 
pure consciousness and which is distinct from ahankara. 
And everywhere we have the 'samanadhi karanya' of the 
object (Cetya) with the cit or consciousness'. As such 
we admit that the apprehension is internal. 



Vivaranam 


It7 


Objection: If there is the 'cit samanadhikarana" 
for all apprehendsions or appearances, we c:1.nnot have the 
experience of 'vicchinna desa'. If the object is apprehended 
here or there, we can say that the object has' 'antar anubha- 
vasraya (having a locus of experience internally). 


Reply: The object is apprehended not as here or 
there, but as 'this'. The 'this' means that it is distinct from 
the self. Then the 'avabhasa' ceases to be internal. ' 


Objection: Even this 'avabhasa' as distinct from 
the self is really internai or inward. Reply: Even space is 
not 
xternal, for its adhishthana. is the self. Difference too 
is apprehended through the 'samsrishti'l with the uncondi- 
tioned consciousness. 


If the objector brings in the self as conditioned by aha... 
nkara and makes it the adhishthana, the cognition of diffe- 
rence will have to take the form of '1 am difference. 


All the objections are based on the view that the'ahan- 
karavacchinna atman' (self as conditioned by the ego) is 
the adhishthana'. The reply takes the pure consciousness 
to be the adhishthana. Now Padmapada proceeds to make / 
this point clearer and plainer. He begins to state clearly 
that pure consciousness which is the self-huminous self, is 
the locus. 


When the self is the basis of all cognitions, the appre- 
hensions can be only internal. This is true of the cogni- 
tions of the waking- state also. The 'pramanajnana' gives 
us the immediate experience with the self. This immediate 
experience does not differ from the immediacy of the obj- 



118 


Panchapadika 


ect. Both the subject and the object have the 'eka rupa 
prakasana' (one form of appearence). Hence even in the 
waking stage the object is experienced as enveloped by the 
'antar aparoksanubhava'. 


The dream cognition does not differ essentially and 
fundamentally from the other cognition. The difference is 
only one of degree, not of kind. It is 'pratibhasika bheda" 
(momentarily apparent cliff erence). 


Objection: Why should we think that there is only 
one consciousness? Why cannot the 'vishaya gata caitan- 
yani, be different and distinct from 'aham avaccbinna cai- 
tanya'? 


Reply: If they are different, The object being 'jada' 
(unconscious), cannot manifest itself. Just as the pot enve.. 
loped by darkness cannot be manifested in the absence of 
light falling 011 it, so is the object incapable of being mani- 
fested if it is not illumined by consciousness" (Padmapada). 
If the objects which ar'e by themselves devoid of conscious- 
ness, do not have t11e samsarga with the 'atmavagati pra- 
kasa (illumination of self realisation), we cannot have the 
sambhandhavabhasa in the form they are 'known by me.' 


If consciousness is eveywhere, how is it we have the 
apprehension of the distinction or difference between the 
self and the not-self as'!' and 'this' ? The reply is that even 
in the waking state this 'vicchedavabhasa (appearance of 
difference) is due to maya. The whole universe has its 'as- 
raya' only in consciousness. This consciousness is devoid. 
of parts and a s such there can be no 'Pradesa bheda' in it 



Vivaranam 


119 


Consciousness appears everywhere with the distinctions 
of internal and externa1, it is no longer akhanda and advi- 
tiya (non-dual). We cannot apprehend the 'svarupabheda' 
(difference from others in essence) unless we have the diffe- 
rence brought about by the differences in the objects. These 
differep.ces are due to the conditioning upadhis (limiting 
factors). Hence consciousness is said to be ""devoid of parts. 
Such an entity which is 'niramsa' (without parts) is 
ei ther an anu (atomic) O! is 'ananta' (Infinite). But it is 
qpprehended everywhere as having 'madhyama parimana'. 
To this we reply that the 'parimana' (magnitude) of con
ci- 
ousness is the same as that of the 'upadpi' which condi- 
tions it. 
When consciousness thus becomes the a:dhishtana{locus, 
ground) eve;n during the cognitions of the waking stage, it 
need not be said again that the same holds good of dream 
ognitions. The upadhi which conditions it brings about 
the empirical distinctions of internal, external etc. 
PadJ.napada gives another explanation as an alternative 
way of explaining the same phenomenon. This does not 
represent his conclusions, for the mind, not being a sense- 
organ, cannot by itself come into cQ,ntact w
th an external 
object. This is only Wl '
bhyupag
c:;Lva4a'(theory assuming 
tb.e opponent's view) presented by P
dmapada. 
So far we have disproved the contention that the defi- 
nition of adhyasa is too narrow. 


Thot it js 
.90 wide 
It is argued that even though mithya, adhyasa, bhranti 
and avidya are not prescI?.t, we do find that there is 'anya- 



120 


Panchapadika 


sya anyavabhasa' (other appearing as another). As such 
there is 'ativyapti' (too wide). "There is 'brahmadhyasa
 
cn names. How is this possible? There is no 'karana dosha.
 
here; nor do we find 'mithyarthavabhasa'. 


The reply is tllat adhyasa is defined as apprehending an 
object as having the nature of another. In the case of the 
'brahmadhyasa' we find that an in
vidual has his 'manasi 
kriya' (mental action of mediation etc.) with reference to 
some object. "This meditation is regulated by a 'codana' 
(injunction) and it demands "icchato anushthana'. It is a 
mental act and not a knowledge (or cognition). When there 
is an object giving us a knowledge arising fr.om 'dushtaka- 
rana', we consider the object to be 'mithya vastu'. In adh- 
yasa proper we have some knowledge or other, while in 
upasana w
 have only a lnental act" (Padmapada). 


We cannot say that knowledge itself is the ordained 
here; for desire (iccha) can neither create nor prevent 
knowledge. The desire of the individual gives rise to 'pra_ 
yatna'. This desire comes into existence because of an in- 
junction. Where such an 'iccha prayatna' is not involved 
(nirapeksa) there we have t:he sufficient cause for knowledge. 
For even if we do not desire it, we do have the 'apishta 
darsana' (unwelcome apprehension). As such the 'brahma- 
dhyasa' refers to a mental act. It is not a case of 'adhyasa. 


ADHVASA LAKSANA 
Since there is no unanimity amongst the critics in defin. 
ing adhyasa it is ilnpossible to give an acceptable definition. 
The defferences amongst the critics, refer to the 'avarupa', 
t atva' (nature), desa visesha' (space) and 'kala visesha t .of 



Vivaranam 


12L 


the 'adhishthana' and adhyasyamana'. They all a
ee in 
adm!tting that adhyasa is no other than apprehending one 
object as having the nature of another. 


But such a definition is lopsided, since the cases in- 
volving the relationship of substance, quality etc., will have 
to become erroneous cognitions. 'Khando gauh' will have 
to be an erFoneous cognition since 'K.handatva' is ?pprehen.. 
ded in the cow, the cow is cognised as naving 'Khandatva'). 
This implies that when both the elements are real and when 
both exist together:l we cannot have adhyasa. Hence we 
have to say that adhyasa is tlie apprehension (avabhasa) 
<:if a content which unites a real object with an unreal one. 
With this in mind, tHe commentator states the view of 
error held by others. 


Of the three views stated, the first is Atmakhyati and 
Anyathakliyatii the second is Akhyati; The third is Sunya 
khyati if we interpret it to mean that shukti is congnised as 
having the nature of silver which is 'asat' or 'abhava' (non- 
existent). This third is Anyatha Khyati' if we interpret it 
to mean die e6gnitiori of the nature of silvet which is the 
negation of s-hukti. 


Padmapada: "To present his own view in a clearer 
and purer form, Sankara is stating the views of others 011 
the nature of adhyasa. According to the first view, the 
silver is distinct from shukti; there is the cognition of the 
property of silver in the' shukti. This silver has the fonn 
of knowledge, or it exists else\vI1:ere. The second view 
states that adhyasa is an erroneous cognition arising from 
the non-apprehension of discrimination between the adhis- 
16) 



122 


Panchapadika 


hthana and the adhyasta. There is the 'ekatva Bhrama. Ac.. 
cording to the third view silver is adhyasta on the shukti. 
'Rajatadi rupatva'; is the 'viparita dharmatva' of the 
shukti. This 'kalpana' is assumed here. 'kalpana'means 
the appearance (avabhasamanata) of the non-existing. All 
these views agree with ours in holding that adhyasa is the 
cognition of an object as having the naturu of another. This 
definition does not deny the 'paravabhasa' which is conveyed 
by the word 'paratra' (externally) in the original definition. 
How? In the first view the silver which is of the form of 
knowledge or which is elsewhere, is Lcognised as the nature 
of the shukti. In the second view, shukti and silve r have a 
distinct and independent existence and they are 1 taken to be 
appearing as indistinct (aprithak). This meaning we have 
to derive from their statement. For in this theory they 
have to accept a 'samsarga jnana' (relational cognition) 
which is mental (as in sankhya); or they have to accept 
'samsargabhimana' (as in the Prabhakara system). In the 
third view, there is the 'pratibhasa' (momentary appe- 
arance) of the form of silver for the shukti. 


Since 'smriti rupa' has been found in all the views to 
be so significant, and since this implies only perceptual 
contact and dosha
 does it mean that we need not empha.. 
size the three factors? No. "For, smriti rupatva' and 
'purva drishtatva' are factors common to aU the theories of 
adhyasa. 


Nir adhishthana bhrarna 


Objection: An erroneous cognition is the knowle- 
ge of the padartha (object) itself arising from the dosha 
like avidya. and from the samskaras of the previous errone.. 



Vivaranam 


1,23 


ous cognitions. The erroneous cognition does not stand 
in need of a real object and in need of the 'pramana karana 
like the sense-contact. As such this cognition, says the 
nihilist Buddhist, has no 'adhishthana'. 


Reply: In the absence of the 'adhishthana' conveyed 
by the word 'paratva' of the definition, we have to accept' 
niradbishthanadhyasa which is illogical. To avoid such 
an illogical conclusion this word 'paratra' (in the 
external) 
is employed. We can neither perceive nor -conceive such 
an adhyasa which is devoid of an adhishthana. Even the 
appearance of the 'kesondraka' has its basis (locus) in the 
'tejo avayava'. 


Is error the mere knowledge of the 'padartha'? Or is 
it the product of causes like avidya? If the first alternative 
is true, then 
even the knowledge of 'sunya' would have 
to be a case of error. It is the knowledge of an object at 
a place other than its own. The Buddhist argument is 
'nir upapattika
. (unfounded). If the second alternative 
is taken, then by the method of agreement and difference 
we can say that the locus too' is cognised. 


Objection: There is the 'samvit' (consciousness) 
which apprehends the silver, and there is the silver which 
is apprehended only by the 'samvit'. From this it can be 
argued that it is a case of 'sadl1ishthana bbrama' where 
one is the locus for the other. As such we need not bring 
in as the locus a third real entity. The seed is the locus of 
the plant, and the plant is the locus of the seed.. 


Now, the locus is Ma1ways different fFom that which is 
adhyasta. If. one is the locus of the other they ought to 



1?4 


]?.a.p.chapadika 


iropJy mutua..Ily one another and this is impossible. But 
such is seen in the relationship between the seed and the 
plant. 
Reply: In the 'bijankura' (seed and plant) rela.- 
tion we do not find that one is the cause of the other in a 
mutual relation. For this seed gives a plant and' the plant 
gives rise to a new seed. The new s
ed gives rise to a 
different plant. In this way we :do not [have 'anyonyasra- 
ya.ta' (vicious circle) but only a 'katana parampara' (an 
infinite causal series). On the other hand the sa.mvit which 
apprehends the silver is taken to be the. locus of the silver; 
and. the silver is the locus of the same samvit. This is 
impossible. 


.ObjQc;tion:. The silver has ita locus in the samvit 
The silver has its locus in the previous samvit; and the 
sa
vit has its locus in its own object. In this way we can 

ssu
e ap. infinite series here also. 


Reply: Then the prese8.t samvit is the locus of the 
silver which comes in the next moment; and the silver Of 
that mQment is the locus for the sa
vit of the next 
wom
nt. In this wa:Y we 1?-ave to ar
e; and this will put 


 
n4 to the momentary nature o
 cognition or know)edge. 
For, 
he 
amvit of the: previous moment must continue to 
be there so. that tJ.le 
iIver of this mement ma
 be adhyasta 
on it. 


Objection: Even in the 'bijankura', we do not find 
both,. the seed and its 'ankura' coexisting even though one 
is the 'upadana' (material cause) of the other. 
, 



Vivaranam 


125 


Rf.}p'V: Here too it is 110t the I\1ere Cbijankura para- 
Dlpara' (causal series or chain) that C.1n bring about the 
'anvayi karanatva siddhih'. In bringing about the plant, 
th
 seed as a cause functions not by it
e>lf hut by u.ndergoing 
a s
ries of -ch",nges. And by the time the plant comes up, 
the seed is 
},Q longer there as 
he seed. Tb,e seed is 'anvita' 
(involved) with the plant. It exis.ts in the plant and as the 
plant. If this were not there, there. c
n be nQ, pl
nt. T.hat 
it is not the mere 'bij@l<:ura. para,mpar
' is establi$heq by the 

p;rat.iti' (appreb.ensiQn) and by. the factual data alsQ, Those 
ent
ti
s (
vay,avah) which function to..gether (anugatah) as 
giv,
ng rise to ttle 'bijady arambb.a'1 they constitute the 
'up
dana'. This doe$ not mean t

t tbe seed etc., is 
u
eless. The 
eed aAq the- 'ankU1;a' b
ve the mutual 'nimi- 
tta nain1ittikata sambandha' (casual relationship). 


Objection: Just like this, 'we may say that the 
samvit is prior 'anvita' (fused) with the latter, viz., the 
silver; and that the former is the 'adhyasa nimitta' for the 
latter. 


Reply: There is no pramana for. this. We accept 
that the seed is tbe cause and that the 'ankura' (plant) is 
the effect because this. is. seen (drishtatvat). No such rela.. 
tionship is seen between the samvit and the silver. The rela- 
tionship between the seed and the 'ankura J is. seen in cer- 
tain cases and we extend. it to all seeds in so far as they aTe 
seeds. Since this is seen to\ be a fact the.re, is no faJlacy of 
infinite regress. As. regards the relationship between the 
samvit and the silver, we have to assume their casual rela- 
tion in the very beginning. It is not an assumption based on 
experience, but on a faulty. analogy. As such this relation- 
"'hip is not a 'dr,ishta par atnp ar a' (prov.en serves) but an 



1:26 


Panchapa;dika 


andha parampara (unproven series). The andha parampara 
alone involves the infiinite regress. 


All erroneous cognitions are of the form 
this is silver', 
«this is a snake'. Here we have two entities conveyed by the 
'this' and the 'silver'. The 'this'9 is the locus ; and as such 
it is said that error is 'paratra paravabhasah' (an other app- 
earing as another elsewhere). Even if we examine the latter 
negative judgment, we will have to admit the. 'adhishthana'.. 
We find that the object which is apprehended as giving the 
erroneous cognition, does not admit the 'bhranty amsa' be- 
cause of the knowledge of another 'visishtamsa'. This ne- 
gation too implies that the previous cognition is a "sadhi- 
shthara bhrama' (of error grounded in a fact).. 


First there is the cognition 'this is silver' and later we 
negate the silver. If there is no 'avadhi' in the form of the 
'this' 
 there cannot arise such a negative judgment'. 


Objection: Instead of the negation taking the form 
of'this is not a snake', it is also seen to have the form of'not 
a snak e ll. Inference and the word of elders do thus give us 
merely the 'sarpabhava' (non-snakes) and not the 'amsan- 
tara' as qualified by the 'abhava' of the snake.. 


Reply : But even in sucb cases, there arises the ques- 
tion 'what is this' 1 We then find the locus (avadhi) to be 
the object in itself which exists before us. There too we 
apprehend the mere object as qualified by the negation of 
the snake; for the negation implies the object mistaken. 


Objection: Take the statement, 'Pradhanam nasti
 
(there is no prakriti), where the pradhana' is taken to be the 



Vivar an am 


127 


cause of the word; and where it means the three constitu- 
ent 'gunas'. In this negative judgement we are not appre- 
hending any other object as qualified by the negation of the 
pradhana or of the three gunas ; for the pradhana cannot 
be said to be adhyasta on any other entity. 


Reply': When we negate the pradhana a') being the 
cause of the world, something which is the cause is there 
as the basis of this negation. 


Another explanation of the negative judgement is 
possible. In all erroneous cognitons the 'alambana' is the 
witnessing consciousness; and this has been found by us 
earlier. And even in the negation of the alleged 'niradhi- 
shthana niravadhika bhrama', we have this consciousness 
as the 'adhishtana' for error and as the 'avadhi' for nega- 
tion. When we negate the 'kes-ondraka' that which is nega- 
ted is the reality of the kesondraka and not the reality. of 
our apprehension ('bodha'); and tbis 'badha' implies the 

sakshin' as the "avadhi'. 


Objection: When there is the negation of the 
object, there is al$o the negation of that knowledge. So 
with the negation of the error, there must be also the nega- 
tion of the 1 'sakshi caitanya' which makes the objec
 appear 
thus. As sucn 'sakshin' cannot be the locus. 


Reply: This conclusion is impossible since that 
which is negated is only the 'kesondraka' appearance of the 
<sakshin' and not the sakhini itself. The 'sakshin' is not 
negated since it is also the sakshin of the negation and 
since it is ulso the cause of fur
her erroneous cognitions. 
It remains as the 'adhishthana' :01' 'avadhi'. 



1
8 


Panchapadika 


Negation, then, involves or implies the reality of the 
'avadhi'. Without the 'avadhi' there can be no knowledge 
of negation. And this 'avadhi' itself is not therefore ne- 
gated. This 'sakshin' or 'avadhi' is not negated since it 
is not internally differentiated. Such an 'avadhi' is that 
consciousness whi
h is 'kutastha' and 'approkshaika rasa'. - 


There is then a locus for all erroneous cognitions. In 
such a cas
 even the 'adhyasta' cannot be 'sunya'. It is 
not an unreal (asat) entity, for an unreal entiity is not capa- 
ble of appearing (pratibhasa) immediately and;directIy. Ifwe 
deny the mere appearance as such, there is no error. Such: 
a denial wouJ d be as meaningless as the statement, the 
sunya does not appear'. If it d-
es not appear, how can we 
say it is sunya? If it appears, it is no longer sunya. 


Objection: All that is adhyasta is sunya or unreal 
even according to your view. 


Reply: Who said that ? We have often repeated 
that it is of the nature of avidya which is beginninglesss and 
which is 'anirvacaniya'. It is distinct from the. sunya of 
the Buddhists. And if we say that the silver is 'asat' we 
only mean that it is different fronl 'sat', and not that it is 
unreal. 


Objection: During the erroneous cognition tIle 
error n1ay have the nature of 'anirvacaniyatva'. But wh('n 
there arise(the negative judgement:l we 8'3.y 'this is not sil- 
ver'. This l1:egatron implies the sunyatva of silver. If 
when true knowledge arises, avidya is seen to be unreal 
(nirupakhya' asat); and hence why cannot we speak or'it as 
'asat' . 



Viv a:r an am 


129 


Reply: All the theories agree t4at even though the 
object (viz., silver) exists during the cognition, it is npn- 
extstent after the negative judgem
nt arises. We accept 
this much and you can say that it is 'asat'. 


Objection: The object may be (sunya' after its 
'vinasa' (destruction) has taken place. But an object co- 
gnised as exi&tent 9.
ring errOl, cannot become sunya. It 
exists in some other place
 
Rep'y: We have then to ask - Does the 'badhaka 
jnana" (cognition of negation) itself make 
s apprehend the 
re?L1ity of silver at son1e other place ? Or does it 1D;ean that 
it is impossible to negate it here? It cannot be th
 former, 
for the 'badhakajnana' neg
tes only that silver which is 
taken to exist in a specific place and at a specific time. It 
does not imply its existenc
 els?where, for we do not have 
the apprehension that 'thftt is spver' after this neg
tion. We 
do not have the apprehensiol1 that the silver is at some other 
pl
ce and at some other time; or th;:tt it is in 'buddhi'. A 
sentence enables us to apprehend only that meaning which it 
is capable of conveying. The negative judgment 'this is not 
silver' does not have the power to convey the meaning t hat 
the silver exists elsewhere. And this latter :£11.
aning is not 
th
 me
ning of the negative jU9-g1nent. Thus, one ta
es the 
rope th
t is far away to be a snC!o
e. And al
 elder w
o is 
near by tells him th
t 'this is not a sna1<e'. This sentence 
only conveys the absence of the snake her
, not its existepce 
elsewhere ; bec
use this sep.tence does npt have th
 power 
to give such an apprehension. 
Objection: 'An pbject like silver is apprehended. 
We cannot deny its existence here if we do not assume its 



130 


Panchapadhika 


existence elsewhere. Thus through arthapatti (implication) 
we can say that the negative judgn1ent is capable of imply- 
ing the existence of silv
r elsewhere. 


Reply: No. Even arthapatti will not help us in deri- 
ving such an implication. If the person who is putting forth 
is a Mirnamsaka, he accepts anyatha khyati or akhyati ; and 
in both such an interpretation is an impossibility. 


Aryathakhyati rejects samsarga (relation) and yet it is 
cognised as external. In either case negation is possible 
only if the object negated exists immediately. And yet it is 
negated. As regards Akhyati ; there is the exist of the Rit- 
viks from .the yajnasala in Jyotishtoma, holding one other's 
'kaccha
 (cloth). If the 'pratiharta' loses hold of it, there is 
ordained 'sarvadakshina' to complete the sacrifice. If the ud.. 
gatri loses hold of it, it is ordained that the sacrifice is to be 
completed without "dakshina'. If both lose hold of it, we 
should normally take up the '&arvasva daksina'; but it is de- 
cided that the sacrifice should be completed without 'da- 
kshina.'. The second 'viccheda' functions as the 'badha' of 
t'he former. Here only the second case is ordajned. 


We cannot say that pravritti itself is prevented in the 
case of the former; for the prevention of pravritti is not a 
case of 'badha'. Further take the case of a person having 
his 'pravritti' with reference to a sacrifice. He cognises the 
'pratibandha' from the king or from the thieves; and the 
'pravritti' is prevented. Yet there is no badha, so far as the 
'yagadibuddhi' is concerned. Such an individual may per. 
form the sacrifice at any time. In spite of the 'pravritty anu_ 
papatti' with reference to the Yaga, we find the possibility 
of pravritti. 



Vivaranam - 


131 


The same conclusion arises even if we take a normal 
experience. We apprehend an object in a particular place; 
and in this adhishthana (ground) we negate it later on. We 
do not assume the existenoe of the object in another similar 
upadhi. Take the sentence 'the broken or destroyed pot is 
not here'. The broken or destroyed pot is negated in this 
apprehended place ; and we cannot assume the existence of 
this pot in some other place. Thus an object wbich is neg- 
ated in the apprehended here and now cannot be said to 
l1ave its existence in the unapprehended there and then. 


Objection: Then how do you apprehend the totally 
or absolutely non-existent? 


Reply: What we apprehend is having apprehended 
only'anirvaccaniya mithya vastu sadbhava' -(existence of 
the nonreal which is inexplicable). And this is arrived 
at from our pratiti. 


Objection: There was silver before, and it is not 
there now. These ;facts tell us tha.t the negation 
has be- 
come possible because of the difference in the time of the 
apprehensions. 


Reply: No. What is said to be not existing in all 
the three tenses is on ly the empirically real silver. With 
reference to such a silver we say that such a silver, which 
does not have its adhishtha_ana there (which is nirupa- 
dhika) is not there. The negation refers to the empi- 
rical silver and not to the praatibhaasika (apparent) 
silver. From the negation of the Bempirical silver we get 
at the apprehended silver through implication
as being 



132 


Panchapadika 


the 'mithyaa rajata'. Hence after the negation we are 
a.ble to refer to the apprehended content as 'mithyava 
rajatam abhaat'. 


Instead of this, if we were to admit the difference in 
time, it ought to be the real silver. The immediate app_ 
rehension of 'this is no snake' refers only to the 'abhaava' 
of the snake and not to its existence else where. For, the 
apprehension settles down to the 'this' and we say 'this is 
a rope'. Hence we speak only of the apprehended 'adhis- 
thaana' . 


The cognition of the this as a rope negates the snake. 
This ar
ses from the sense-contact. The same knowledge 
nHght arise al so from the sentence 'this is no shake'. In 
both cases we are left with: the 'adhlshtnana' and not with 
the snake that exists elsewhere. Hence there can be no 
'adhyasa' which has no 'adhishtana'. 


If so, let the defnition be only 'paratra purva drish- 
tavabhasah (seeing outside what was seen earlier), for 
smtiti rupatva (form or nature of memor:y) seems to be in- 
consistent with the definition. 


Yes, the knowledge of 
n object seen ,before has 
'smrititva' (quality of memory) only, and not smritiru- 
paiva' (form of memory). But we cannot speak of adhyasa 
for the 'smriti vishaya' (object of memory). So let the 
definition be only 'paratra smriti rupavabhasah'. Then we 
mean by it that an object having 'smriti rupa' is apprehen- 
ded elsewhere. 'Smriti rupatva' qua Iifies 'paravabhasa'. 
If there is no 'purva drishtatva' we cannot a.ttribute 
'smriti rupatva'. 



Vivaranam 


133 


Yes, the expression 'purva1rishta (seen earlier) is 
employed for the sake of clarity (Pad.mapad.1). 


Erroneous cognition needs a locus with which we have 
the contact of, the eye. Then we can dror 'smriH rupa' 
from the definition. Does the word 'srnriti rupa' nlean 
that the erroneous cognition arises from the samskara? 
Or tbat it involves the m'sambheda' (fusion) of the past 
experience with the present one? Or that which has 
similarity with memory? 


When there is a doubt like this, tbe author of the Tika 
proceeds to make clear that it means only 'samskara janya.. 
tvaIh'. As such he says that it is the appearance (avabhasa) 
()f something that was seen (drishta) earlier. It is not the 
app
arance of the earlier perception (darsana). The olher 
apprehended is the 'sajatiya' (similar to) the object seen 
earlier; and this makes us accept it to be 'anirvacaniya 
rajata'. If it is said to be a case of 
bhranti' (illusion)only, 
we reply that we have the appearance of a real object hav- 
ing the 'mithya vastu sambheda' (fusion with the unreal). 
Otherwise many cognitions which are not erroneous would 
become erroneous. This is the logical argulnent given so 
far. However adhyasa is also ']okanubhava siddha (fact 
of experience). It does riot mean that the logicaJ argument 
is useless. 


Sankara refers to our experience in the world and this 
experience goes to prove the va1idityof adhyasa. And he 
has given the definition of the svarupa (nature) of adhyasa 
which is 'loka siddha'. Logical argument can only support 
this fact of experience ; as such it is not necessary to multi- 
ply the arguments. 



134 


Panchapadika 


Samkara gives two illustrations. The first is = shuktika 
appears like silver', and the second is ; 'one moon appears 
as two'. 


Objection: The first sentence does not represent the 
erroneous cognition, for we apprehend 'this silver' only.. 
We are not then aware of it as shukti appearing like the 
silver. This sentence does not represent even a negation 

 
for in the negative judgment 'We do not s.ay that 'this is not 
like silver'. It is not the shukti but the s.ilver that appears; 
as such the words 'shuktika' and 'rajatavat' (like silver) in 
the sentence are faulty.. 


Reply: With reference to the 'badbaka jnana' (cog- 
nition of negation), it is said that shukti appears like silver; 
and 
his presents the definition of adhyasa. Either reference 
to the object of the 'badhaka jnana' or the implication of 
the 'bad.haka jnana' establishes adhyasa and makes out the 
apprehended content to be 'mithya rajata'.. This object be.. 
ing mithya it is employed with the suffix 'vat' as 'rajatavat'. 
Thus this sentence is expressed keeping in mind both the 
lakshana' and the 'lakshya' of adhyasa (difinition 'and the 
object). 


The true knowledge which arises later on reveals that 
the this is the shukti which is real. With reference to this 
real shukti Samkara bas employed shuktika in the example. 
The shukti has the svarupa (fonn) of the non...silver with 
which we have the contact; and since it appeared as having 
the 'mithyarajata sambheda", he has employed 'rajatavat
. 
Due to the temporary doshas and from the later neg'ation 
we aTe able to comprehand the silver as mithya. When we 
speak of the 'mithyarajata sambheda' with the shukti, we 



Vivaranam 


135 


employ the word mithya to describe or define the apprehen- 
ded silver, not to exclude the other silver. We refer to this 
-silver as mithya not by recognising its difference from the 
real silver. 


Objection : If the silver is mithya, since it is pre- 
dicated of the this, the this too ou
ht to be ,mithya. And 
when the this is mithya, we have 'nir adhishth
na bhrama\ 


Reply: The sit ver is not the object of the (asampra- 
yukta) sense contact; and the appearance (avabhasa) of the 
thisness does not belong to the silver.. 


Objection: If the silver does not have the contact 
with the eye, how can we say that it is immediately cogni- 
sed? 


Reply: But the silver is cognised as being in the this 
with which we have the contact. Those who have the 
samskara are able to cognise the silver immediately be- 
cause of some defect or the' other. And . it is the sense 
organ having the d
fect that gives rise to this knowledge. 
It is an immediate experience arising in the perceptual one. 


Thus in the example of the shutika we find the silver 
to ,be the anatma (not-self) of the this with which we have 
the 'sense-contact. 


Consciousness which is 'niranjana' has the cpratibha- 
sa' as the I; and it is that element (amsa) which is the not-- 
this' The this is the not-self which is 'cidavabhasya:t 
, 
'(illumined or manifested by consciousness). Even though 
there is no "Yusmad arthatva' (being an object) ; still in 



136 


P
nchapadika 


so far 
s there is 'cidav
bhasyatva' we get "the" Yusn1ad. 
artha' which is the 'ahamkara' &nd which is adhyasta on 
conscio
sn
ss. This is tq.e implication of the first example. 
The second exa.mple implies the 'bhedavabbasa' (appea... 
rance of difference) between the self and the Absolute; and 
tl1
s is the 'al
atn1a rupo bhedavabh
sah,.. 


Objection: 'Ahamkaradi samghata
 is adhyasta on 
the self which is 'advitiya caitanya prakasatman', (non-;- 
dual, self-luminous consciousness). T4is self is the percipi- 
ent and to explain the adhyasa here we require three 
factors. First, in every adhyasa we have a locus which is 
distinct from the adhyasta; and so we require an adhish- 
than
. Secondly, there should be a 'pramana jnana' 
which can give us valid knowledge of the adhishthana. 
Thirdly we need a percipient. Here we have to say that 
the self is all these three factors. 


This implies a good deal. There is one dosha belong- 
ing to the locus, another attached to the percipient, al1d a 
third possessed by the 'prama karana" (instrument of know_ 
ledge). Then all these doshas must be said to be in the 
self. 


This is not true, for the self is pure. Consciousness 
Is the knowledge tb
t makes us apprehend the adhyasa and 
the 'vishaya'; and this consciousness is not something 
which comes into existence now or hereafter. If the D t... 
self is adhyasta on the self, we cannot get that knowll:dge 
whi<;;h requires tl1e three 
atJ,ses .. viz., samskara, sense- 
contact with the object ",nd the doshas; and these causes 
are essel1t
al i.n all erroneous cognitions. The adhishthana 
in every adhyas
 pas a g
n
ral (samanya) nature and a spe. 
cific eJement out of which only the former is cognised. 



Vivaranam 


137 


The self then ought to be the adhishthana whose general 
nature alone is cognised and not the specific nature. But 
such a thing is impossible in the case of the self. And 
finally the adhishthana must exist external to the percipient. 
All difficulties make the anatmadhyasa on the self impos- 
sible, Hence the objector asks; 


The object exists external to the percipient in every 
adhyasa. Here we have the 'karana dosha', the doshas ltk
 
timira (darkness) attached to the sense-organs. Due to 
these doshas we apprehend only one 'amsa' of the object 
and we are prevented from cognising the other 'amsa'. 
Such a thing is not possibl
 here. The self is not brought 
about by any cause other than itself; and this rules out the 
,arnsavabhasa' (non-appearance) due to the dosha of the 
cause; This is impossible with regard to consciousness, 
which is 'niramsa' (partless) and 'svayam jyothi' (seif.. 
luminous). But is it not a fact that there is the anava.. 
basha of Brahma svarupa? No, for if this were true,. 
this 'anavabhasa' would not give rise to the 'anavabhasa' 
and 'viparyasa' of the self. When the shukti is not appre- 
hended, do we have the non-apprehension or 'viparyasa t 
of the pillar ? 
But the self is not different from Brahman, for it is 
said 'anena jivena atmana anupravisya'. And hence this 
non-apprehension may be said to belong only to the self. 
If this position were accepted then it is absolutely 
impos sible to have avi dya in the self. The self is of the 
nature of vidya. And the text 'tasya bhasa sarvam idam, 
goes to show that everything is made manifest only by the 
cons


usness which is the self (Padmapada). 



138 


Panchapadika 


In the case of a normal erroneous cognition, we appre_ 
hend the general nature of the object and we have the non- 
apprehension of its specific nature. Likewise we cannot 
infer the sa,me process as regards the self by cognising its 
general nature of existence and by the non-apprehension 0 f 
its specific nature as constituted by 'cit' and 'ananda'. We 
cannot do so because the self is not 'karanantara ayatta' 
(brought about by other causes), and because it is devoid of 
parts. Whether the self is 'madhyama parimana' or 'anu' 
.or 'ananta' it is 'nir amsa' (without parts). 


Objection : It may be 'niramsa'. But so is 
'akasa' which does fully manifest its nature. 


Reply: Such a thing is impossible for the self beca- 
use it is 'svayam jyotih'. Such an entity has 'avabhasa' 
complete1y as long as it exists. It is fully luminous. Such 
are the passages 'atrayam purusah svayam jyotih', 'atmai- 
vasya jyotih' etc. 


Objection: By 'jyotih' we cannot mean the mere 
'prakasaguna' (quality called light) since that would make 
the self something that has a property ('guna'). Hence we 
should say that 'jyotih' is - a substance like 'prakasaguna'. 
Tbere is a pot and the knowledge of a pot, and the know- 
ledge of a pot. The relation between these two is 'guna 
nishtha' (having quality as its locus) because it is 'jnana 
nishtha'. In the absence of the guna these two cannot be 
related and so we speak of jnana as being the guna. Like_ 
wise jyotih may be taken to be a 'prakasavad dravyam'. 
(substance like light). This 'prakasa' is the 'janya' (pro- 
duct) of the self; and from the knowledge of this 'janya') 



Vivaranam 


139 


(viz. prakasa), we speak of the self as having the 'prakasa 
guna'; and hence it is called jyotih (luminous). 
Reply: This is impossible. There is 'anyanimitta 
prakasa samsarga' (relation with light caused by another) 
for all entitles. And to show that such a thing is impossi- 
ble in the case of the self, it is explicity said that it is 'sva- 
yamjyotih'. And the word 'eva' in the second passage 
clearly states that the self itself is its own jyotih. 


Objection: Why can't we say that there is no 'kara- 
kantara apeksha' (related to another agent) here; and that 
as such the self creates knowledge in itself by itself, whence 
the word 'svayam 
 is an adjective? 
Reply: No; for the substantive is jyotih itself 
whence it does not stand in need of a 'karakantara 
. 


Further, knowledge is not something that newly comes 
into existence; and when we reject jnana 'janma' (coming 
, 
of know ledge into existence), there can be no 'karakapeksa 
(rdlexive relation). 
Objection: The knowledge of the object is seen to 
come into existence, to arise from the object. As such we 
do find that there is 'jnana janma'. 


Replv: No. We speak of the 'prakasa guna' of the 
self because of the 'prakasa' itself. This 'p;rakasa' only 
reveals that the substance has come into existerlce
 Take 
ego the 'pradipa' (1anlp) which is said to have 'prakasa'. 
The'pradipa' is its 'asraya' and t
e upadhi ; and in this up- 
adhi we find the substance comi:p.g into existence. We d
 
not find the prakasa coming into existence ..in the pradipa; 



140 


Panchapadika 


but we only see the pradipa coming into existence since it 
b Inanifcstcd by the prakasa. From this we have to con- 
dude that the word jyotih does not mean that a 'prakasa 
gun
}. 
 h born in the self. 


The argurI1ent is : Anything that has an asrayopadhi, 
«(,()t1<.Htinncd by the locus) is not born' in its asrayopadhi 
ht,t:au,c it is prakasa. itse1f ; and the 'pradipa prakasa' is the 
tl lu"tratiun. 


There i
 the 'jnana parinama (evolutionary process of 
kno\\'lcdgc) in the antahkarana, and this is generally known 
.
'. f\ Titti jnana" (psvchosis). Even when there is this vritti- 
}1I.',n.L there b 110 'prakas
1. gunodaya' ; for the vritti jnana 
I. 71\ It n.',J,lly jni.uut., though we speak of it as jnana. The 
.uH.thkanuw, h. a 
ubstancc like 'prakasa'; the vritti jnana 
1 . JIJ 1,;'\ Illuh: of this a.ntahkarana. Just as clay is evolved 
JI
h\ th
 fonn
 l.r pot etc., so does antahkarana have the 
"nluti\iU intl' the f,'rn1 of knowledge. Both th
 antahka- 
I,Uh\ and the P(1t are (jad

 ; but one is seen to have the 
.pt ,\1'1\\ 
una.' and the other not. This is bccause the anta- 
.u .w.' i.. hy ntt.turc «.
 'pntkasa guna vad dravya'. 


\\ 


we 'J,cak of vi
haya joana (knowledge of the 
the w..,nl jrw.na tnean 'svarupa jnana' or vritti'? 
(In we find t\\\ a.rupa. jnana' to be that which 
nHu cxhtcnce. So it muy be said that we do find 
'-nni cutnc, into existence in the antahkarana. But 
thnt hrin
s ,
bout the ,a.rthaprakasa' (manifesta- 
nt tlu: ,
bjt:lt) fur the kn()wcr; and this jnana has its 
Ut 
dL if we ca:.n Inakc 
t1ch a distinction only 
nf cnn'Vcnicncc, And when the word jnana. is 
t
 - the \"fini. it is purely a conventional (aupaca- 
nllt ,\ fcat U\tLgC. 


'."q
'\ t L 
,
, \\ 


I 1 


f t ,
f 
II J 



Vivaranam 


141' 


Nor can jnana, be a substance having the self as its 

asraya'. If jnana has 'prakasa guna', it means that the 
self has this property ; and in such a case the self cannot be 

svayam jyotih' (self-luminous). 


Objection: The "Prakasa' has its (asrayopadhi' in 
the antakarana, and it is not born in this upadhi. Then as 
the 'jada prakasa guna' it may not come into being; but it 
can come into being as 'cit prakasa guna'. 


Reply: No. Take the mirror in which is reflected 
the face. The prakasa is already there whence the reflection 
becomes possible. It reflects the face when the face is pre- 
sent and does not reflect it when the face is not there. And 
when the mirror is covered with dust etc., there is no destru. 
ction of the 'prakasaguna' but only the prevention of the 
"prakasa guna' from appearing. Now, the self has its 'asra_ 
vopadhi' which it illulnines, and in which it does not come 
into being. And wbat we say is the 'tirodhana nirakarana' 
(negation of the disappearance) of the vidyamana prakasa 
(illumination that is present) only. When the dust is rubbed 
off, the mirror is again able to reflect. 


Objection: But the prakasa guna seems to come 
into existence only when there is the pradipa. 


Reply: In the case of the pradipa that which comes 
into existence is the pradipa itself and not the prakasa guna. 
The self is spoken of as 'prajnana ghana' (integral 
knowledge) and it can be 'prajnana ghana' only when it is 
completely 'prajnana' alone. This expression tells us that 
the self is caitanya jyotih (effulgence that is consciousness) 



142 


Panchapadika 


and not 'jada jyotih
. Likewise we have passages 'vijna- 
nam anandam', 'prajnanam anandam brahma' etc. 


Objection: 'In vijnanam br
hma' we have only 
'jnatr abedha' (non-difference from knower) and not 
'bodha abheda' (non-difference from knowledge). By 
jna.na we should mean 'bhavartha' and not 'jnatritva. 
(knower-ness). Jnana means knowledge and not the 
knower. 


Reply 'Bhavartha' is 'kriyatmaka' (having the 
nature of an activity) and knowledge is not an act but all 
existent state. 


Further, it is easier and better to accept 'ananya nimi- 
tta prakasatva (uncaused luminosity) for the self. The pra- 
kasa is not something which comes into being from out.. 
side (agan.tuka), because it has no prior non-existence. 
There is no pramana to prove that prakasa guna comes to 
the self from some vhere. 


Objection: There is an element in the nature of 
Brahman which is not cognised or apprehended; and this 
is a fact of experience - ie., there is the 'anavabhasa' (non... 
app(}arance) of Brahma svarupa. 


Reply: Thenjust as in the case of the shukti there 
will be the 'anavabhas;t,' and 'viparyaya' (opposite) fvr 
Brahman only. There is no valid means to show that the 
self is identical with Bralllnan, yet the 'anavabhasa' and 
'viparyaya' cannot be for the s.el f. 


Ob j ecti on: When two substances have no causa 
relation, they may both have the 'samanadhikaraya' (ap.. 



Vivaranam 


143 


position) in the same substance as in 'so yam devadattah' 
(this is that Devadatta). Likewise, sinc.; there is only one 
substance, the 'anavabhasa' and 
viparyaya' will belong 
on ly to the self.. 


Rep1y: Then due to 
jnana prakasa virodha' (nega- 
tion of luminosity of knowledge) and due to the absence 
of the 
asraya vishaya blieda' (difference of the locus and 
its object). Brabn1am cannot be the :asraya of ajnana. 


So far the Purvapaksa is stated and explained. 
Reply: At first Padmapada proceeds to show the 
"avidya karana dosha samsarga" (relation of the causal de- 
fect of avidya for consciousness. This consciousness refers 
to 'advitiyadhishtbana brahmatman' (the ground or locus 
which is the non-dualistic Brahman-self). It is avidya 
that prevents us from having a knowledge of the adhish- 
thana. "There is a dosha even here and it is of the nature 
of 'agrahana avidya' (avidya that does not apprehened) 
wlich conceals (acchadaka) the ptakasa. We come to 
know this from the sruti and flcm .arthapatti (impli- 
-cation). ,) 


We have earlier eslablished ajnana through:'perception, 
inference and art1:a'patti; and now we proceed to explain 
the same from sruti and arthapatti. 


TheTe are surti passages like uanritena hi pratyudhah' 
and ".anisaya socati muhyamanah". Now in deep sleep 
there can be no mithyajnana ; and even though the bhrama 
salnskaras (hnpressions of illusion) exist, they are not ab1e 
to prevent a right cognition. A temporary non....apprehen-:- 



144 


Panchapadika 



h\n is not opposed to an apprehension that is 'svatah sid- 
dha 
 (",elf cxi1:;tent).. And the 'svarupa caitanya' itself gives 
tIH.: 
hrahJna. svarupavabhasa'. Yet Brahman is not cogni- 


c.l a,\ Bra.han. That which prevents the avabhasa of such 

L UHthln
Ln is here called 'anrita".This 'anrita' is the 'mithya 
vw",tu. which is the condition preventing the "avabhasa'.. 
Such a. condition is distnict from the mithyajnana., from the 
'\.uu\kant. of the erroneous cognitions and from non-appre- 
ht'1hir\>n. 


(n the 
ccond passage quoted above we find that 'Isva- 
f"\t.,,. t(j
H
)d
hood) is 'svabhavasiddh.a'. And yet the indivi- 
cJt..t.l cn
l\i,c
 hilnsclf as 'anisvara.'. Such a fact is. due to 
nUh..a.ppn:hcnsion of Isvaratva. This Isvaratva is some. 
Uun
'j that 
Hsnc
 and goes. And the non-apprehension ex" 
(,"V\('''' ,t.,c1f a'\ 
nrrow which is to be traced to 'rooha'.. 
\ 1.1. 'nh,h
\' i, the sa.me as ajnana.. 


\\' 
 
;'U1 at"o refer to 'Na tam vidatha ya ima jajana. 
) u\hJn
tka.n\ a.ntaram badhuvajniharena pravrita jal- 
_, *".,utnr"',t. uktha. sasas caranti". This 'nihara' is synon- 
"lth t;.\.um\ (darkness) and ajnana. From this it is 
c !rut th.H niha.ra (frost) which has enveloped the self is 

 .HI'iI,: \ If nl 
t apprehending Brahmam and is also the 
".u.\
 'jtdpya.tvady adhyasa' (<o;uper imposit
on of 
uu ng' (.;\uc tt) prattling). 


t\

,UH th
 tc
t .. "Avidyayam antare vartamana nany.. 

 \t'thY\lntc"'- explains that avidya is the cause of 
4',1 rUfM hr;Lhma aparijnana' (Non-apprehension of 
th .ihtn,uufihH"sr and of the 'kriya'karakadhyasa' (suuper 
;Lgcnt a.nd act). 



Vivaranam 


145 


Similar texts are "ajnanenavritam jnanam ten
 muhya- 
nti" and so on. 


Arthapatti also gives the same conclusion. We know 
that there is 'bandha nivritti' (cessation of bondage) only 
when there is the knowlepge of Brahman, and yet Brahman 
is not known earlier. This. must be due to a cause which 
is related to adhyasa. Thus we assttme avidya because of 
the 'phala sruty anupapatti'. Or we can arrive at the same 
conclusion from the 'vidhananupapatti' since there is a 
command that Brahman should be apprehend
d. This is 
possible only if the 
elf does not know Brahman earlier. 
There must be a cause forthe'anavabhasa' of Brahma svarupa; 
and such an 'adhyasa hetu' must have the self as its asraya. 


Aj'nana is apprehep.ded by the Sakshin. That which is 
apprehended must be valid.; but these pramanas are only 
intended to show that jnana is not an abhava (negative ent- 
ity) and hence they are not useless. 


Objection: But the self is said to be not different 
from Brahman. Then ajnana may be posited in Bra- 
hman. 


Rep Iy: Does it mean that this contention is based 
on the identity of the self with Brahn1an ? We have three 
alternatives- 


i) Is there 'asraya vishaya bhedanupatti' (incompati- 
bility of the difference between the locus and its object) be- 
cause of the identity? Or 


19) 



146 


Panchapadika 


ii) Does it mean that 'avidyasrayatva' (being the locus 
of avidya) is inconsistant with the nature of Brahman, viz. 
consciousness ? Or 
iii) Does it mean that if there IS avidya, Brahman 
cannot be sarvajna ? 


i) To begin with the first alternative. Ajnana does 
not require an asraya which is distinct from its 'vishaya'. It 
has its asraya in a place which it also envelopes. It fulfills 
two functions at a single stroke. It is like darkness which 
conceals or hides its own asraya and which thus has a two- 
fold function. It realises these functions in so far as it is 
'akriyatmaka' (non. action) and is an 'avarana'. 


Th
 pot is 'mrinnishtha. (having its locus in clay) be- 
cause its upadana is clay. The clay is its asraya; and yet 
it exists at a place which is its asraya. Likewise darkness 
has its asraya in its upadana ; and it can stiIl have another 
asraya which it envelopes. It does not manifest these two. 
So is ajnana. Knowledge involves two distinct factors-an 
asraya (locus) and a vishaya (object). But like knowledge 
ajnana does not require these two as distinct fro111 one ano
 
ther. But there seem to be these two factors. Thus the 
word 'agaman.t.' (not-going) conveys the meaning of'sthiti' 
(state). It involves the reference to an object and also to 
an action. But the action being absent there is in reality 
only one reference and not two. 


Like darkness, ajnana envelopes its own avarana and 
it is not inconsistant with its identity with its own asraya. 
ii) Nor is ajnana inconsistent with the 'cit prakasa' 
wbich is its asraya. It is the knowledge (samvedana) as' 



Vivaranam 


147 


the 'cit prakasa' that illumines or apprehends this ajnana. 
Even ajnana is rendered possible by being 'sakshi bhasya'. 
Hence there is no 'cid asrayatva virodha
 for ajnana. 


In all the three stages (jagrat, svapna and sushupti) 
objects are cognised by the self, and.there is the knowledge 
arising from the objects. There is the avabhasakatva of 
the self and this is not inconsistant with its ajnana samban- 
dha. Such a self can be ajnanasraya (locus of ajnana). 


Further, prakasa itself is not opposed to ajnana; for 
it is not there in 'ajnana vishaya jnana'. Since the self is 
'svayam prakasa' we do not find any 'jnana samsarga viro- 
dha' also. Svaprakasa can have a samsarga (relation) witb 
ajnana. There cannot be any samsarga only with the obje- 
cts which are illumined n 6t by the self but by somethin g 
else (vishayanam para prakasyanam). 


To show that there is no 'jnanasamsarga virodha', ano-. 
ther argument is given from the standpoint of samvedana. 
Samvedana or knowledge is of the nature of atma svarupa, 
and we find tha t ajnana has its asraya in this jnana. 


iii) Brahman is sarvajna and is identical with the self.. 
Yet it is the self which is the asraya of ajnana. For the- 
syamatva (blackness) etc., which are adhyasta on the reflec- 
tion are not seen in the' original bimba. Further there is 
no virodha between the purity and the ajnana of the self. 
Hence even though the self is identical with Brahman, it is 
not inconsistent to say that the former is the asraya of avi- 
dya and that the latter is sarvajna. Moreover, the identity 
itself implies that avidya is there. 



148 


Panchapadika 


Hence we assume in the self that avidya which conceals 
the 'brahma svarupa prakasa'. Ultimately the self has bra- 
bma svarupa. Still the self does not have the real avabo- 
dha (awareness). In the absence of avidya, there ought to 
be not only svarupa abheda but also, the avabodha. And 
if this a\ abodha (apprehension or knowledge) is already 
there texts like 'tattvam asi' which teach this identity would 
, 
be meaningless. 


The self is identical with Brahman ; and it is svayam 
prakasa and sarvajlla. Yet there is the anavabhasa (non- 
manifestation) of Brahman. To explain this we assume 
the avidya which is its 'acchadika'. If there is no such avi- 
dya, we have to admit the difference between the self and 
Brahman, and 'jadyatva' (unconsciousness) and 'kincijjna.. 
t va ' (non-omniscience) to the self. In such a case all the 
texts teaching avidya and identity would become useless 
and faulty. Such texts eomply the words 'tamas, anrita, 
nihara, ajnana, avritatva' etc. These words propound a 
positive entity called ajnana which causes the 'anavabhasa- 
dhyasa', and the denial of avidya would amount to inter- 
preting ajnana as only jnanabhava (negation of knowledge). 


If the self and Brahman are identical, whence arises 
the distinction between the two, 'which distinction attributes 
'avidyasrayatva' to the one and 'sarvajnatva' to the other' ? 
Three views are propounded to answer the question. i) That 
the sel f is delimited by antahkarana whence arises the diiTe.. 
rence (view of Bhamati); ii) That it is due to 'atireka' 
which is a property that achieves identity - in - difference 
(theory of Bhaskara) ; and Hi) That it is due to the 'amsa- 
msibhava (Part and whole :relation) which is natural and 
not artificial (opinion of Yadava Prakasa). To reject all 



Vivaranam 


149 


these views, Padmapada states that "Brahman is the one 
reality which nlakes the many selves possible, each self be- 
ing that which is conditioned (avacchinna) by avidya; and 
this avidya is 'anadi siddha.' . 
That which envelopes the self is ajnana that is in the 
self; and this ajnana is the upadana for the 'jiva brahm'l 
vibhaga adhyasa' (distinction of Brahmam and self). As 
such ajnana is the cause that delimits or conditions the 
self. It is the upadana even for the 'avaccheda' which is 
the 'pratibhasika adhyasa'. In the absence of this ajnana, 
we cannot explain the appearance of duality (dvaidhibhava) 
for that which is in reality 'niravayava'. Further there are 
the doshas like those of the doer and enjoyer which are 
attributed to the self: and we have shown earlier that these 
doshas are beginningless like the relationship of the seed 
to its ankura (plant); and .the up adana for this too is 
ajnana which is therefore said to be 'anadi siddha'. For 
the beginningless process of the adhyasa, viz., that of the 
distinction between the self and Brahman, the cause is only 
the beginningless avidya. 
i) It cannot be the antahkarana. If the self is con- 
ditioned by the antahkarana, the 'avacheda' cannot be 
torn off in reality. The 'avacchaeda' (antahkarant=>..) is only 
'vibhramamatr.a' (iIIusory). Even its upadana is no other 
than ajnana. When the 
rue knowledge COIJ"es, the antah- 
karana stands rejected, and as such it is only a case of 
'avidyadhyasa'. The antahkarana becomes the avacchedaka 
only when it is conditioned by its own cause, VIZ., 
ajnana. 


The antahkarana is real, and it has a beginning. But 
such an entity cannot be the upadhi for the 'anady avacc- 



J..50 


Panchapadika 


heda' (the self). In deep sleep the antahkarana is absent 
and we ought to s
ay that the self is unconditioned at that 
time. These are some of the objections against the first 
view. 


Objection: Yet in deep sleep the antahkaral1a is. 
in the 'sukshmavastha' (subtle s.tate) and.as such can con- 
dition. the self.. 


Reply: Does 'sukshmata' mean the absence of its. 
parts? In such a case, it ceases to exist since that which 
has parts has ceased to have parts, or,. does it mean the de- 
crease in its parts?' If so, this would differ from that 
which has all its parts, and this would not bring about 
those things which it could otherwise bring. 


Objection: It exists potentially in a causal form. 
Reply: Does this mean that only the cause' (ajnana) 
remains? Or does the cause remain along with its effect 
(a
tahkarana) ? In the former case there is no antah- 
karana. In the latter it does not differ from the usual 
antahkarana. 


Objection: The antahkarana remains in the form 
of a cause having a 'sakt!' and being aided by the 'karya. 
sa111skara
 -Impressions of products). 
Rep Iy: The samskara cannot be the 'avacchedo.. 
padana' whence in deep sleep every one ought to be libe- 
rated. Hence the self is not conditioned by the antah- 
karana. 
ii) We cannot assume even 'atireka' also as bringing 
about the distinction between the self and Brahman. 



Vivaranam 


15Jl 


Objection -: Ajnana cannot explain how this dis- 
tinction arises. Now, there is avidya for the self as regasds 
Brahman. Even before avidya is there, there ought to be 
the distinction between the self and Brabmam.. Such a 
-difficulty does not adse if we accept atireka.. 


Rep IV: Let us admit that there is atireka. This 
would involve the questions "whose' and 'why'; and this 
means that the atireka arises only after the distinction has 
set in. The 1:dharmipratiyogibhava' is dependent on dif- 
ference. One can be the 'dharmi' and the other can be 
its [!'pratiyogin' (opposite) only if they differ" They pre- 
suppose difference and yet it is difference which makes 
them cc'ine into existence. This difficulty is common both 
to atireka and to ajnana. The 'jiva brahmabhava' puruppo- 
ses ajnana and also brings about ajnana. 


Hi) There cannot be a difference based on 'amsamsi- 
bhava' since Brahmam is devoid of parts (niramsa). 


Hence we conclude that avidya alone is the cause of 
the bhedadhyasa (S'llperill1position of difference). What is 
that to which avidya is related so that it can be a cause of 
difference ? We ask by way of reply: what is that to which 
the mirroT is related so that it can be a cause of the 'bimba 
bheda' ? The mirror is related to the face only; and like- 
wise ajnana is related only to the 'cit svarupa' whence it 
brings out the 'jiva brahma vyavahara bhedha'" 


But then ajnana is related only to the 'cit svarupa'. 
Yet it gives up its attachment to the Brahma svarupa and 
develops a partiality only to the self. The mirror brings 
about a distinction between the face and its relation, as the 



152 


Panchapadika 


pot brings about a difference between the ak
sa outside it 
and that inside it. Yet they give up their attachment to the 
face and the akasa (that is o:utside), and show their partia... 
lity only to the reflection and the 'ghatakasa' respectively. 


What is the asraya of avidya? It can not have as its 
asraya that svarupa which is qualified by the antahkarana 
because there is no pramana to prove it. 


Objection: There is the apprehension (pratibhasa) 
like 'I am jgnorant'. Since ignorance cannot be attributed 
to another ignorance, we have the experience to say that 
there is here a 'visishta asraya' (specific 10clJ.s). 


Reply: Take the experience 'I experience'. If we 
accept tbe contention of the objector, then even the caitanya 
prakasa would have to :find a 'visishtasraya'. The 'prati- 
bhasa' alone cannot be the criterion. Experience is cit pIa- 
kasa and a 'visishtasraya' cannot be cit pr
kasa. 


Objection: But consider 'ayo dahati' (cron is bur- 
ning), Burning is a property of fire ; but it is treated as the 
property of the iron here. Because of the fire there is the 
nlutual 'sambandhavabhasa' (apperance of the relation) bet"" 
ween the iron and the burning. Likewise experience and 
antahkarana are related to the saIne self; as such that which 
belongs to the self is to be attributed 10 the antahkarana. 
But the antahkarana is apprehended by experience. Hence 
there is no'avabhasa for the antahkarana. 


Reply: In this way ajnana and antahkarana too have 
their relation to the same self. Then the apprehension' 
'aham _ ajl.J.ah' (1 am ignorant) cannot belong to the 



Vivaranam 


153 


antahkarana for the antahkarana is conditioned by ajnana. 
Hence the asraya of ajnana is the self and this is corrobo- 
rated by the apprehension. Further since the antahkarana is 
the karya (product) of ajnana, it cannot be ajnanasraya 
(locus of ajnana)for that would involve the fallacy of 'anyo- 
nyasrayatva (mutual dependence). Further, if avidya is re- 
lated only to the antahkarana it should cease in deep sleep ; 
whereas avidya which is related to the self is there in deep 
asleep also. 


Objection: It is inconsistent to speak of mere sva- 
rupa caitanya (consciousness per se) as the asraya. Hence 
we should assume a 'visishtasraya' (specific locus). 


Reply: But even this is related to the svarupa cai- 
tanya. And if an unconscious entity like the antah!carana 
were to be the asraya of ajnana, it would have to be the 
asraya of the erroneous cognition and of the true knowledge 
as well. 


Objection: If the svarupa caitanya is taken to be 
its 
s:raya, is it not inconsistent with the nature of Brahman? 


Reply: Yes, But instead of assuming two asrayas 
(viz., antahkarana and the self), it is better to assume only 
one asraya which is already .established. If the asraya is 
the antahkarana, he who is bound is not the person libera- 
ted (mukta). 


Bhaskara argues that if there is ajnana, is it there only 
for the antahkarana. We have to ask him whether the self is 
20) 



154 


Panchapadika 


sarvajna (omniscient) or 'kincijjna'? The self is 'kincijjna'; 
and as such it does not know something at some time or 
other. There is the 'vishayanavabodha' (non-awareness of 
the object) for the self. Ajnana is here assumed to have its 
asraya in the self. 
Objection : 'Agrahana' (non-apprehension) and 
mithyajnana (erroneous cognition) may have the self as their 
asraya ; but the positive entity Icalled ajnana has only the 
antahkarana as its asraya. 


Reply: What is this? If it is different from jnana, 
it is only ajnana ; and we too accept that the 'kacakama- 
ladi' defects are forms of ajnana. Ajnana cannot be that 
which is opposed to jnana ; for according to you, jnana and 
ajnana have different asrayas and the same vishayi (subject); 
and yet we do not see that they are opposed to one another. 


Reply: There is no pralD.ana to prove these differ- 
ent asrayas. Further t? ke a person who is in ,deep sleep. 
His antahkarana which is the instrument of cognition has 
its 'laya' (involution) then. From the absence of any 
action on the part of this person, another infers so mucb 
about his antahkarana etc. This inference ought to dispel 
the ajnana which is in his antahkarana; and this is not 
seen. 


Objection: The kacadi doshas are the cau
e of the 
erroneous cognition. These .doshas have their asraya in 
the instrument of cognition. Likewise, can't we say that 
ajnana too is 'karanasraya' (its cause as its locus) ? 
Reply: Then even the eye would become the 
asraya. 



Vivaranam 


1,55 


Objection: But the eye and other sense organs 
have a beginning. As such they cannot be the 
asraya for 
the beginningless ajnana. 


Reply: You should not forget that the antahkarana 
too has a beginning. 
Objection: Accepting 'satkarya vada' (evolutionary 
theory) we can say that the antahkarana has no beginning. 


Reply: The same is the case with the sense organs 
like the eye. 


Hence the antahkarana cannot be the asraya of the 
beginningless ajnana. Both for those who have realized 
knowledge and who haven't; for both these conscious per- 
sons only there is stated 'avritatva' by the words anrita, 
nihara etc., As such ajnana is not 'antahkaranasraya'. It 
is 'c3.itanya5raya'. 


"Such a Brahman is expressed by the sruti, smriti and 
the scholars of Nyaya". The sruti texts are like "anyad 
yushmakam antaram babhuva, niharena pravrita jalpya 
ca.." etc. Here we find ajnana to be the cause for the 
vyavahitatva (distinction) between the self and Brahman. 


There is the surti passage - 'vibheda janaka jnane 
D2.Sam atyantikam gateJatu mano brahmano bhedam asan- 
tam kah karishyati". 


That there is a beginningless entity called ajnana 
which is distinct from Brahman is conveyed by the surt i 
passage - "prakrtim purusam caiva viddhy anadi ubhav 
api" . That ayidya is. anadi siddha is conveyed by the 



156 


Panchapadika 


word prakriti. Such is also the case in the sruti-mayam 
tu prakritim vidyat. 
Even though the svarupa of Brahman is different from. 
that of the 'mayavacchinna rupa', the self does not know 
that its real nature is that of Brahman, because of the 
ajnana. Thus we also read - "anadi mayaya supto yada 
jivah prabuddhyatejajam anidram asvapnam. advaitam 
budhyate sada." 


Thus we have established that the locus of avidya is 
self which is svayam prakasa. Now, we begin with the 
objection that the svayam prakasa Brahman cannot be the 
avidya vishaya (object!
of avidya). 
Objection: When other pramanas cannot establish 
the svarupanavabhasa' of Brahman through avidya, you 
cannot establish avidya only through the sruti and through 
arthapatti. 
Reply: Take the cognition: 'I do not know that 
which you said'. Here we find that there is avabhasa!for 
that which excludes ajnana. The that which excludes -the 
ajnana has also the pratibhasa (appearance). 
Obj ecti on: There we apprehend the general nature 
(samanyakara) only. That which is excluded is the un- 
known (anavagata) 'viseshakara' (specific form). 
Reply: If the viseshakara is not known it cannot 
have aLY avabhasa ; and that which has no avabhasa cannot 
be apprehended as the excluded one. 
Objection:. Now even that which is apprehended 
(has 'avabhasa') cannot be apprehended as the cxcluded 
one. 



Vivaranam 


157 


Reply: This anupapatti (incompatibility) does not 
affect ajnana. Ajnana is nothing but a pratibhasa. Its 
anupapatti is itself an ornament. It is well known that there 
is the pratibhasa. It is nothing but an appearance. 


So Padmapada as1< s : When the object is apprehended. 
how does the anupapatti arise for the 'avidya vishaya'? 
What is that pramana which conflicts 
with sruti and artha- 
patti that have established ajnana? The objector replies 
that arthapatti itself can disprove it. "When Brahman is 
svayam jyotih and niramsa", there cannot be any 
svarupa- 
navabhasa' of Brahman. 


An object is that which is immediately and directly 
apprehended. Such an 'aparoksha prakasamanata' means 
the non-difference of the object from samvit or knowledge. 


The self is 'bhasamana' (always manifest) and yet it is 
not apprehended as being distinct from the body. The self 
as separate from the body is not cognised. But tbat which 
has bhasamana is always 'adhigata'. Such a thing is not 
se en here. 


Now does the difference from the body mean the non.. 
difference (svarupa abheda) with the atma prakasa which is 
svayam jyotih ? Or does it mean the non-difference in so 
far as its property (dharma) is concerned? 


If difference is a property, how can we have 'aparok- 
shatva' only by having the knowledge of the 'dharmi'? In 
the immediate experience of the 'dharma
 etc., we do not 
iind the non-apprehension of the difference. We do expe- 
rience it or apprehend it in1mediately. 



158 


Panchapadika: 


Hence Padmapada says that ,.'the enjoyer has the 'kat... 
ya:karana. sanghatadhyasa
 (super imposition of the causal 
aggregate) whence he is not able to cognise the self as dis- 
tinct from the self which is svayam jyotih"'. To this the: 
objection is : The enjoyer is not svayam jyotih; but is one 
apprehended as the "aham pratyaya" (object of I). Padma- 
pada states that he will explain later on how the enjoyer is. 
svayam jyotih" 


The self, then is apprebended not as united to the body 
but as distinct from the body. 
This position is objected to. The self is not apprehen- 
ded as distinct from the body because we do not have the 
'bheda jnana samagri' (the knowledge of difference). We; 
have the self and the body. To cognise the difference, we 
require not the knowledge 0 f the self and of the body, but a.. 
third knowledge which alone comprehends difference. In 
having the knowledge of the padartha. we a.re also having 
the knowledge of difference. As such when I say 'aham' 
I have the knowledge of the 'atma padaxtha't; and thiS 
knowledge itself gives us the knowledge of difference. This 
,. 
itself is the requhed pramana. Prior to this third know- 
ledge there can be no apprehension of difference, and then 
the two terms being intermixed there can be no knowledge: 
of the dharmi and its pratiyogin. And in the absence of 
this knowledge there can be no knowledge of difference. As 
Padmapada puts the objection: How is it that the enjoyer 
who is the svayam jyotih does not have the prakasa as be- 
ing distinct from or as excluding the 'karya karana san- 
ghata' ? 
The reply : Everywhere the cause for the non- appre... 
hension of difference is only tbe 'samsargadhyasa' (rela- 



Vivaranam 


159 


"lIonal super-imposition). The self is distinct from the body. 
Then to explain the 'dehatma buddhi' (apprehension of the 
body as the I or self), we may have to adopt either 'adhya- 
tma' or 'gaunatva' 
 To take the first alternative. In every 
.adhyasa, that whi-ch is not cognised or apprehended or app- 
:rehended is the difference ; and the absence of the appre- 
hension of difference must be accepted. Such a 'samsarga- 
dhyasa' is the 'Condition for the non-apprehension of diffe- 
I'ence" In' aham manusyah' (I am a man) the apprehension 
.of identity between the two pers-ons is then really mithya. 
To this one might say that it is not rnithya, but only 'gauna' 
{metaphorkal). .:Padartha pratyaksa' itself gives 'Cognition 
.of difference; .and the 's.amanadhikaranya' (being in appo- 
sitiny) of the two terms constitutes only a 'gaunavabhasa, 
{indirect appearance). Sankara himself would later on 
explain how this is not true. 


Now the 'g.aunavadi' raises an objection" 


Objection,o: If the'!' in 'aham manusyah" has no 
csamanadhikarana' (similar lecps) with the body, then it 
would mean that there is a self apart from the body; for 
there is no such 'pratyaya' as the 'P for another who does 
not apprehend like that. Even agama (revealed testimony) 
and inference are not capable 'Of disproving it since it is a 
perceptual experience. Any pramanah has validity only if 
'it does not contradict the perceptu al experience. 


But it might be argued that as in the case of the per- 
ception of two moons, that which is perceptually cogn 1 sed 
is mithya. As such agama (revealed testimony) and infere- 
nce alone have validity and that which is negated is the per- 
ceptual condition. Where the perceptual cognition is based 



160 


Panchapadika 


on the absence of any discrimination
 there let inference 
etc., establish its invalidity at once and let the perceptual 
experience come to naught. But where the cognitions are 
fully supported by discrimination and the like, there infe.. 
rence etc., cannot make out the perceptual cognition to be 
mithya. That a perceptual cognition to be 'mithya' can 
be made out on 1y by examining the stre.ngth or otherwise 
of the fully developed and substantiated cognitions. As 
such it is not inference etc., that can establish the mithyatva 
of perception. 


Hence the objector asks : "Wherefrom does mithyatva 
arise ?" We might reply that since there is the 'anyathava.. 
gama
 (apprehension in another manner) we -grgue that mit.. 
hyatva is established through agama or inference. Then 
the objector proceeds to argue thus: "Your argument would 
invoive the fal1acy of 'anyonyasrayata 9 . Only when agama 
and inference function we have the mithyatva of the perce... 
ptual cognition; only 
hen there is this 'mithyatva', agama 
and inference function. Hence the atmavadins should acc- 
ept that the ahamkara is only that which is distinct from 
the body. If there is the 'tadatmya' between the body and 
the aham, the 'atma siddhi' would not have any validity. 
As such the 'manushyabhimana' in 'aham manushyah' is 
<>nly 'gauna' or n1etaphonical or conventionat 


Now the reply follows 
 


Does ahankara have as its Vishaya the self whbh is 
clistxinct flom the body etc? or the self which is distinct 
from the prathibasa? Take the first alternative. Padma.. 
pada answers ;. "Even though 
he 'vishaya' of this 
ahankara 
is that enjoyer who is distinct from the.body etc. sHll we 



Vivaranam 


161\ 


are not experiencing such an enjoyer. As such the pro.. 
perties of the body etc. are adhyasta on this enjoyer". The 
prathibhasa of the distinction between the self and the 
body is inconsistent with or opposed to adhyasa; and as 
such there arises the gaunatva for the 'samanadhikaran- 
ya' . It is said that when the viseshas (particular entities) 
are opposed to one another, their viseshas (qualities) too 
beconle matually contradictory. But even when the garland 
and the snake are excluded, still we have. the adhy- 
asa of the form 'this js a snake'. Hence mere difference 
cannot make the two terms mutual1y opposed. 'Aham' and 
manushyah' may differ from one another and yet we may 
not be consciously aware of this difference. 


Objection: We cognise only the 'samanyamsa' 
(general aspect) and since we do not apprehend the vises- 
l1amsa (specific aspect) there arises the 'avabhasa' of 
'anya samsarga' relation with anothee. Now the self is 
cognised in its 'visesha rap a' as conseiouness. How can 
there be an adhyasa? 


Reply: Consciousness illumines the other not as the 
mere 'atma dharma' (property of the self) which excludes 
the ahankara It necessarily requires the ahankara to 
illumine the other. Hence even though it is 'pratiyamana' 
(apprehensible), there arises adhyasa. "Even though there 
is the 'svarupa avabasa' we do not experience its differ- 
ence from other objects; and hence it has its avabhasa as 
having its integration with other objects. This is similar 
to the case of the letter 'a' which is one letter and yet short 
and other differences are integrated with it u .. 



162 


Panchapadika 


Now Jet us take the second alternative. Here the 
objector argues that the object of the 'aham pratyaya' is 
the self which is distinguished or separated from the pra.. 
tibbasa. Just as 'rasa' (taste) is totally different from 
'gandha' (smell), the ahankara appears (avabhasa) a.s fun- 
damentally or essentially different from the body etc. 
Reply: If there is such an 'avabhasa', there should 
not be different opinions regarding its sadbhava (existence) 
and then there is no necessity for any enquiry to establisb 
it. 


Then it might be argued that there is 'gaunatva only 
after the enquiry. 
Now with the aid of logical reasoning we find that the 
self is distinct from the objects; and even after the enquiry 
we have the 'samanadhikaranya' whence we say 'aham 
manushyah'. If there is only 'gaunatva' (metaphonical 
expression) here, it would mean that prior to this enquiry 
too it was a 'gauna' expression. 


But the objector says that there is this gaunatva only 
after the enquir;y and not before the enquiry. Jijnasa 
(enquiry) means bringing out the logical arguments to bear 
on a proplem.\ Now 'yukti' (logical reaaoning) cannot sepa- 
rately bring out a different knowledge. Its function is to 
enquire into the already existent vishaya of the aham 
pratyaya. The 'aham pratyaya vishaya' (object of the term 
'I') is already existent an distnict from the body etc. This 
is known after the enquiry. After the enquiry the 'r is 
taken to be distinct. As such the gaunatva is there in ex- 
pressions like the 'aham manushyah.' only after the 
enquiry. 



Vivaranam. 


163 


Reply: Even after the enquiry we do not get the 
'aham pratyaya vishaya - as distinct from the body etc. But 
always we get at the 'aham pratyaya' as the 'sva:rupa 
matra vishaya' (object of the mere form). We get at the 
self as such, the self in itself. And it is the logical reason- 
ing alone which gives us the knowledge that is distinct 
from the body etc. The knowledge derived from logical 
reasoning is mediate and it cannot be contradictory of the 
aparoksha bhrama (immediate or direct illusion). Hence 
adhyasa renlains as before till we have the imediate ex... 
perience of this distinction. 
Padmapada says that "it is impossible to argue that 
there is gaunatvabhimana only after the enquiry. Just as in 
'hrasvo akarah' (the letter 'a' is short) we donot have any 
gaunatva, so in 'aham manushyah'. Even though 'akara' is 
one it stands for hrasvatva, dirghatva (being long) and 'plu- 
tatva' of 'akara'. Now we say that there is no 'gaunatva' 
in 'hrasvo akarah' because we experience it as 'hrasva' just 
as we experience the silver in 'this is silver'. This experi- 
ence makes it a case of adhyasa. 
From logical reasoning if we accept that 'akara' is ex- 
:luded from 'hlasvatva' etc., how can we explain the expe- 
rience of the 'akara' as being short? We have no apprehen- 
tion or knowledge that the 'hrasva' (shortness) is excluded 
from the 'akara' ; from this we cannot say that there is no 
:;xperience of the adhyasa. When there is the apprehension 
that 'akara' is excluded fronl 'hrasva', then there is the 
possibility of apprehending that same other thing also is 
excluded from 'hrasva'. 


Is akaro hrasvah the sanle as Cthis is silver' in so far 
as both appear to involve adhyasa 7 In one single 'akara' 



164 


Panchapadika 


we have the integration of 'hrasva' etc. 'Akara" being a 
word is real or external; and 'hrasvatva' etc., is only a pro.. 
perty of sound. Thus from grammar we know that akara 
i
 necessarily the shorts syllable. But 'hrasvata' cannot ex- 
clude the 'akara' as such. So the objection is: "we can 
have the experience of 'akara' as such when we have the 
necessary logical understanding of its nature. But we do 
not have the experience of 'hrasvatva' etc., as mere 'hras- 
vatva' etc., though these are distinct properties.
' 'Akara' 
excludes 'hrasvatva', but 'hrasvatva' does not exc1ude the 
'akara'. There is adhyasa in akaro hrasvah. On the other 
hand, in 'this is silver the th i s excludes the silver and the 
silver excludes the this. Then there cannot be adhyasa 
there. 
The reply: Two things differ from one another. Now 
they differ exaclly in the same way. A's difference from 
B is identical with B's difference from A,. Now, if A is 
said to differ from B, it implies necessarily that B differs 
from A. Just as 'akara' excludes 'hrasvatva', so can 'hras- 
vatva' exclude the 'akara'. 
Logical reasoning reveals clearly and conclusively that 
the entities or terms have their own specific and unique 
natures; and when they are apprehended as identical, this 
apprehension is not accepted to be gauna. This seems to 
be the great stroke of a magician. To this objection, Pad.. 
mapada says that this is really magic since all this is the 
product of aVldya. 
When we have the knowledge of difference, adbyasa is 
dispelled; and yet \ve elnploy expressions like 'aham manu_ 
shyah'. Since we have the knowledge of difference here, it 
is argued that such expressions are not cases of erroneous 
cognitions, but 'gauna' expressions. 



Vivaranam 


165 


When we have the discriminating knowledge, is adhy- 
asa contradicted by the mere 'aham pratyaya' ? Or by logi- 
cal reasoning? It cannot be the former. So Padmapada 
says: "The 'aham pratyaya' has its existence in the body 
because of the beginningle
s avidya. And yet it has in rea- 
lity its locus in the self and this is different from the body; 
and this is not prevented by the body. The body does not 
bring about any 'pratibandha' (obstacle) for the self in hav- 
ing its own separate and distinct existence in itself". The 
self exists in the body; it acts through the antahkarana. 
and the vishaya or the object of the aham pratyaya (aham
 
kara) is the self. Hence the dependence of the aham prat- 
yaya on the self is not opposed to its 'dehadi vishayatva' 
(body etc., being the objects). 


Objection: Logical reasoning makes out the self to 
be distinct fro"'JJ. the body; and prior to this logical reason- 
!ng that which we apprehend must be the self as distinct 
from the body. 


Reply: We have said eG\.rlier that the aham pratyaya 
can be dependent on the self and also on the body, for these 
are not incons.istent with one another. Prom this it follows 
that we may enquire into the object with the aid of logical 
reasoning; and we will come to know what these entities 
are. Even with the aid of logical reasoning we cannot get 
anything more than that already apprehended. Logical rea.. 
soning will only teU us that the self is distinct from the 
body. But it cannot make. us 
xperience the self as distinct 
from the body. Even if there is a different knowledge near 
by, perceptual cognition does not involve the awareness of 
this different kl.owledge which is not contained in it. The 



166 


Panchapadhika 


the perceptual cognition. Even 
if it is integrated it is not 
an immediate knowledge, but only one that is mediated by 
logical reasoning ; hence tbe aparokshadhyasa cannot be 
different from the earlier stage. 


Therefore there is no difference betweet1 the aham 
pratyaya .of the earlier stage and that of the present. The 
apprenhension 'aham manu shyah , can never be a. gauna. 
cognition. The self which is svayam jyotih does not 
appear (anavabhasa) as distinct from the "karya karana 
sanghata; and we have the appr
hension of the adhyasa in 
the form 'aham manushyah'. Even though the self is 
identical with Brahman, there is the anavabhasa of Bra- 
hmasvarupa. The prakasa is el1veloped or concealed be- 
cause of a darkness; and that there is this darkness or 
avidya is given to us by the sruti and by arthapatti.. 
From this cause or condition we do determine the 'aham... 
karadhyasa'.. And since it is beginnjngJess, we have 
.puIva drishtatva' and 'smruti rupatva'. (prior experience 
and similarity with the form of memory). 


Objection: In 'aham n1anushya.h' there is the 
adhyasa of the body on the self. This is a perceptual 
cognition. Can the knowledge of the difference between 
the two be a valid one without negating the identity of the 
two? 


Reply: Mere inferel1ce and agama cannot establish 
the difference between the two
 That there is only 
one moon has arisen after we have negated the two 
moons. A similar negation of adhyasa can arise only 
when agama and inference are strengthened by the 'aham 
pratyaya' which cooperates with logical reasoning. Only 



Vivaranam 


167 


such pramanas as are based on the evidence given by the 
"'aham pratyaya' can establish the distinction. 


The self is 'svayam prakasa' and yet due to avidya it 
is not cognised or experienced as such; and the self thus 
becomes the adhishthana for avidya. This would enable 
.paratra paravabhasah' (the other appearing in the ex- 
ternal). 
Thus we have consciousness which illumines the 
:self, and the self is without a second. There is the avidya 
dosha here; and the antahkarana would constitute the kara- 
na dosha. And since avidya is beginningless there arises 
a samskara. Thus we have all the three factors required ror 
adhyasa. 
Objection : Inspite of the presence of the three 
factors there cannot be adhyasa here. There can be no 
samsarga for thi
 consciousness which is the adhishtana, 
and we therefore have the knowledge of this adhishtana 
and also the knowledge of something else. For, the self is 
not an object and conseiousness is external. We do have 
the apprehension of the adhi
htana because it is the sub- 
ject, and we have the knowledge of the object. Adhyasa 
requires only one knowledge arising from the entities in so 
far as they are apprebended as 'samsrishta'. But here the 
samsarga itself is impossible. Hence there is no adhyasa. 
Reply: The self may not be an object. Yet there is the 
apprehension of the ar9Pya and then; is no other;knowledge. 
Consequently it constitutes the adhishthana. We do not; 
have the experience of the enjoyer distinetIy or separately 
and we have a single experience in which is integrated the 
consciousness as enjoyer. Thus there is the 'anyonya sam. 
bhedha' which renders it a case of adhyasa. Atmaicatanya 



168 


Panchapadika 


itself manifests the integration of the self and the not-self. 
And even though it does not come into existence in its pure 
form, it appears as if it comes into existence because of 
the specific 'vishayoparaga'(attachment to the object). Thus 
'aham manushyah' is a case of error. Since it is an errone- 
ous cognition, the 'vishaya' (object) and the 'vishayi' (sub- 
ject) are able to appear in the same pratyaya as an integra- 
ted whole. Thus we have adhyasa here; and this is the 
knowledge which manifests the non-self in the self; and 
this erroneous cognition arises from three factors, viz. 
sense-contact, samskara and dosha (defect). 
AHANKARA : 
Padmapada next proceeds to give the import of that 
part of the commentry beginning wi th 'katham punah pra- 
tyagatmani...' This part d.eals with the 'sambhavana (possi- 
bility) of adhyasa. There was a question earlier, 'ko ayam 
adhyaso nama'. The 'kim' implies both a question regarding 
the definition, and a doubt regarding the possibility of adt.... 
yasa. Thinking that the question was really raised by the 
doubter, the definition has been given. Then since it is 
also doubted Sankara proceeds, to answer the doubt regar... 
ding it:
 possibility. Sankara states the doubt thus- "Kat- 
ham punah pratyagatmany avisaye adhyaso vishaya tad 
dharmanam? The definition of adhyasa given earlier is not 
possible in the case of the self. For, everyone cognises an 
object in the place of another object which is immediately 
before him. Since the pratyagatman (self) is distinct from 
the 'yushmat pratyaya' (object) you maintain that it is not 
an object. When the adhishtana is not an object, can there 
be ana adhyasa ? Is it cognised? Can it be possible? 
The adhishthana is always on the same level with that 
which is adhyasta on it so far as both are the objects cog- 



Vivaranam 


169 


nised by the same sense organs and intellect. Since this is 
absent here, there can be no adhyasa. This is the import 
of the 'akshepa' (objection). 


The reply: What is required is that in one vijnana(cog. 
nition) there should be the avabhasa of two vijnanas, and 
these two should be integrated into one. This much alone 
is necessary for adhyasa. It is not necessary that two enti- 
ties should appear as one object. With this jn mind, San- 
kara replies: 'Na tavad ayam ekantena avishayah asmat 
pratyaya vishayatvat', it is the 0 bject of 'as mat pratyaya'. 


The objector takes 'asmat pratyaya' to mean the know- 
ledge which is atma vishaya. So the objector argues: "The 
cidatman is the subject. How can it become an object? 
An object is something other than the subject and it is 
always referred to or cognised as the 'this'. Can such an 
entity overcome its nature by a strange process and become 
the subject which never is the 'this' ? In a percepitual cog- 
nition the subject cannot be the same as the object; there 
cannot be onc entity which is both the subject and the 
object. 
Then we might say that there are two elements in the 
subject and that one can be the subject while the other can 
be the object. 
To this the objector replies : "The self is devoid of 
parts ; how can you attribute two mutually exclusive parts 
to such a self 1" 
Reply: Take for example the SUD. Its rediance is 
spread in all directions. In order to have a specific(unique) 
22) 



170 


Panchapadika 


n1anifestation of this radiance, we hold a mirror against it ; 
and the radiance is concentrated and radiated. 


Now tbe sun is like the atma caitanya and like the mir- 
ror there is the antahkarana. In order that the atma cait- 
anya may become clear and distinct with a specific form, 
there is adhyasta on the self the antahkarana which is a 
'bhasvara dravya', (a shining substance). This antahka- 
ran
 is meant by the 'asmat pratyaya". 


But in an adhyasa like this is silver, we have the this 
and the silver: two distinct entities. Likewise, are we to 
say that 'aham' means two different forms or entities? In 
answering this question, Padmapada says that "ahankaTa 
(antahkarana) has implicitly in it the this and the not-this". 


Take the cognition, 'Iron is burning'. The burning is 
a property of the fire and is cognised in the iron, i.e., it 
has 'dvai rupya avabhasa' (appearance of two). Likewise 
in 'aham upalabhe' we have this 'dvai rupya avabhasa' for 
'aham'. The 'upalabhritva' is attributed to the self through 
the 'antahkarana'. That which has actually the 'upalabdhi" 
is the antahkarana, but it really refers to the self. When 
there is the integration or attachment (uparaga) with the 
'asadharana kriya' such a self appears as qualified by ano- 
ther 0 b j ect. 


As antahkarana it appears as having sorrow and as 
undergoing changes; but as the self it has the form of 'pre- 
maspada' (love) and is thy percipuent. In all the objects 
like ahankara etc., it is manifest as consciousness which is 
immanent ; and as excluding the other objects, it is manifest 
as ahankara. This is a fact of common experience, al1.d 



Vivaranam 


1711 


tbe san1e entity appears as having two forms. It is said 
that it is 'sarvaloka sakshi'; and let those. who argue exa- 
mine,their own experience carefu
ly and say whether this 
is a fact or no. 


Objection from Pra'bhakara Mimansa 
The self is the asraya for the knowledge of the object. 
In 'aham janami' ([ know) we find that the ahankara ap- 
pears as having its asraya in knowledge. Then how can 
the 'aham' be the this? The experience or cognition of 
'aharn' shows plainly that it is untouched by, that it has 
nothing to do with, the this. 


Objection to this objection from Advaita: In 'ayo 
dahati' it is well known that iron is 'not the agent having 
the action viz., burning. Likewiae even though it is not 
the agerJ.t (karta) there is the ahankara .vhich has the co- 
gnition (or which cognises). 
The Prabhakara replies Quite apart from the iron 
we find the fire whose natural property is to burn. The 
fire is the asraya for the act of burning. Likewise we do 
110t find an ellti ty called the self as distinct from the ahan- 
kara, because apart from the ahamkara we cannot have the 
jnana kriya. Hence the ahankara itself is the self. 
According to the Sankhy..t.system, there is the appear- 
ance (avabhasa) of the reflection of cOllsciouness on the 
antahkarana which)s unconscious (acidatman). Just ill- 
front of it there is its original 'bimba', for the reflection 
of the face is possible only where there is the face in front 
of the n1irror. Prom this they infer the self to be of the 
nature of the 'bimba' or the original for the reflection in. 



172 


Panchapapika 


According to the Nyaya and Vaiseshika systems, de- 
sire and other 'gunas' are. the 'visesha gunas' of a sub- 
stance which is distinct from the Mahabhutas. In these 
elements desire etc., are not found; and since these gunas 
are apprehended or cognised only by the mind, they are 
called 'visesha gunas\ There are no 'visesha gunas' in the 
elements, or in the 'dik' or in 'kala' (space and time) or in 
the mind. And by a procees of elimination it is inferred 
that there is a distinct substance having the gunas like de- 
sire etc. Such a substance is the self. 


According to the Sautrantika school of Buddhism, 
there is the appearance of the reflection of the objects in 
the 'samvedana', and this requires its 'bimba' near by. 
The bimba is reflected in soumething other than itself. And 
from the reflected face in the mirror, we infer the face is 
outside the mirror. From the redness in the crystal we in- 
fer a red object is near by. Hence objects are always in- 
ferred. 


It is with reference to these three views that the Pra- 
bhakara maintains that 'the subject (pramata), the object 
(prameya) and the means of cognition (pramana) are all 
immediate (aparoksha)'. 
If these systems say that though the self is immediately 
apprehended, we require inference to present it clearly, we 
have no quarrel with them. But if they say that the exis_ 
tence of the self can only be inferred, then this conflicts 
with the immediacy of the self, just as it conflicts also with 
the immediacy of the objects. 
The Sautrantika argues that the objects are only infer- 
red. If the objects are apprehended directly in the infer- 



Vivaranam 


173 


ential cognition, they can likewise be cognised even in per- 
ception. That which is an immediate and direct object for 
inferential cognition can be an immediate object in percep- 
tion with greater plausibility and truth. But if there is no 
apprehension of the object (which is bimba bhuta) in infe- 
rence, then you cannot say that the objects are inferred; 
and there is no need for them to take recourse to inference. 
Inference here is opposed to the avabhasa of the objects 
which are 'aparoksha vyavahara yogya' (capable of being 
cognised directly). 
The vijnan avadinargues that the object is essentiaHy of 
the form of vijnana, and that there is the immediacy of the 
vijnana. Since there is no di fference between the vijnana 
which is the object and the vijnana which cognises it, there 
is the 'aparokshavabhasa' (immediacy) of the object. 


It is to reject such an orgument that the Prabhakare 
says: "there is the immediacy of the object in so far as the 
object is the object for a subject in a cognition". There is 
the experience, "1 am seeing this". It is not due to its nOD- 
difference from vijnana; there is the immediacy of the 
object. The self has an immediate silver which is cognised 
as distinct from me and from my cognition. If it is said 
that the external silver is, vijnana itself, then like the exter.. 
n al silver, it cannot have negation. Hence without any 
mediation we have the immedi
cy of the object; and this 
immediacy is the same as the cognition that requires the 
sense contact with the object. 


A ccording to the Vartikakara and the Nyaya- Vaisesh- 
ika systems, there is a perceptual cognition arising from the 
'samyoga' (contact) between the self and the mind; and this 



174 


Panchapadik a 


perceptual cognition apprehends the self as immediate. The 
Nyaya- Vaiseshika systems observe that the self is united to 
the mind. There is 'samyukta samavaya' (conjnct inhere. 
nce) relationship here. This relationship is the condition 
or cause giving rise to a distinct or new knowledge. Such a 
knowledge makes 'pratniti' immediate. But accor- 
ding to the Vartikakara, the pramiti or n1eans of cog- 
nition is 'prameyagata'. The eye comes into contact with 
an object and with such an object that there is the relation.. 
ship of identity-in-difference for knowledge. Due to this 
relation of 'tadatmya' there arises a distinct 01' new know- 
ledge as the object of the "pramiti'. And from this is esta- 
blished the imlnediacy of the pramiti. 


It is with reference to these views that the Prabhakara 
states that 'the subject and the pramiti are purely imll1ediate 
only ; they are in1mediat
 in yet another way from the 
immediacy of the object. 


There is no 'pramana' by which we can say that be- 
cause of a new knowledge arising from the mind the self is 
immediate. 


The 0 bje: ctor n1ay argue that in the presence of the 
mind there is not the apprehen
ion of the self and in its 
absence in deep sleep there is no such apprehension. As 
such it 111ight be said that agreement and difference estab- 
lish the Nyaya contention. 


, 
But the actual experience of the objects goes against 
this contention. Our 'anubhava sambandha' (experience) 
with the objects itself proves the immediacy of the objects. 
In the same manner there is the in1n1ediacy of the self expc- 



Vivaranam 


175 


rienced by 'Us. In such a case it is unnecessary to assume 
a new knowledge and a new function of the mind to esta- 
blish it. The self is the asraya for the knowledge of the 
object; and we need not assume a 'jnanantara' (another 
cognition). As such we conc1ude that there is the immedi- 
acy of the self without the mediation of the objects. 


The Nyaya contends that the samyukta samavaya is 
the cause of the 'jnanantara'. We cannot say that the' experi- 
ence of the self or of the object is immediate through jnana.. 
ntara because of this relationship. Now, perception refers 
to or involves the reference to an object here and now. In 
such a ca.<>e the Nyaya theory would require that there should 
be two experiences at the same time. 


Let us assume that 'samyukta samavaya sambandha' or 
the relationship of 'samyukta tadatmya' gives us the appre- 
hension or exper ience. In such a case along with the imme- 
diacy of the know ledge there ought to be the hnmediacy of 
the 'parimana' of the self and of the 'rasa' of the object as 
well. Experience cannot be apprehended (gamyah) by ano" 
ther knowledge, for that would involve the violation of its 
'sva prakasatva'. 


There are some (Bhatta Mimanlsakas) who hold that 
the 'prakatya' (manifestation) which is in the object is also 
'svaprakasa'. In this theory it is . impossible to nlaintain 
the very emergence of this 'prakatya'. The experience of 
the object cannot be said to arise from the 'atIra vyapara'. 
And many reasons can be adduced. An activity can be 
due to 'parispands' or to /parinama'. The self is 'vibhu' 
(all-pervasive) and as such cannot have any 'parispand;t, 



176 


Panchapadika 


like the pot. It cannot undergo any change for the pro- 
duct of the change is dependent on the act which brings it 
about; and the act is seen to merge into the effect. But 
the act ivity of the self is not seen to merge into the object. 
And if knowledge is tbe 'asraya' of the object, the objects 
would have to become conscious entities. 


It cannot also be argued that the objects have the 
power to give rise to their knowledge; and since knowledge 
has its asraya in the self, the self is conscious. In such a 
case the mind too would be conscious for it too gives rise 
to knowledge. If the objects are 'svaprakasa' and have the 
property of 'prakatya', take the cognition, this is known by 
me. Here is the avabhasa of a relation between me and 
this. The object is apprehended by me, or is made known 
by me. If the object is 'svaprakasa' such a cognition is 
impossible; and the Bhatta Mimansa cannot even infer the 
'jnana kriya" in the self. When experience does not have 
any relationship with the self but only with the \..) bjects, the 
'parinama kriya' will be in the self and its 'phala' will be 
in the experience. In the absence of this 'ekadhikarana 
(identical locus) we cannot have Jnananumi6 (inferential 
cognition). 
Hence 'pral11ata' and 'pramiti' have no immediacy in 
the sense of 'kannatva'. They are immediate in a diffe_ 
rent way. 
Objection: It is not proper to assume 'svayam pra- 
kasatva' for both the subject and the 'pramiti'. It is better 
to accept only the immediacy of the self, and not of know- 
ledge also ; and it is better to accept the 'sva prakasatva' 
of the self only. If the self has 'svaprakasatva', it would 
make every activity possible including knowledge. 



Vivaranam 


177 


Reply: The Prabhakara replies that our experience 
proves the 'svaprakasatva' of the pramiti; and because of 
this everything else is illuminated. If experience is devoid 
of'svaprakasatva' there can be no experie...ce. Even if the 
self is devoid of 'sva prakasatva', it does not cease to be a 
self, since it is the 'asraya' of knowledge. But if the 'pra- 
miti' is devoid of 'svaprakasa' it cannot cbgnise or appre- 
hend the objects. 


Another way to establish this contention is to focus 
our attention on the 'pramana phala'. Only after the per- 
ceptual -contact we have the 'hanady upa lampha' etc. 
Because of this we are able to say that perceptual contact 
has a 'phala' or results in a valid experience. The 'pramana 
phala' is the 'pramiti' or knowledge. Suppose there is 
the 'catushtaya saunikarsha' and there can yet be the ab- 
sence of the experience of the objects. III such a case we 
can have neither the 'han
' (loss) nor the 'upadana.' (gain). 
As such experience itself is the 'phala'. When there is 
the experience proper, it is not iogical to think of some- 
thing else as being the 'pramana phala'. 


It has been said that knowledge is tke 'pramana 
pha1a'
 and this is doubted by Jhe Buddhists. Since 
knowledge (samvedana) has the specific form of the obiect, 
we are able to speak of th
 pratnanatva of the Csamvit'. 
The 'phala' of th is pnimana is of the form of the 'vishaya 
sphurana'. Samvedana has the 'pranlanatva' in so far as 
it has a form similar to that of the object. This 'pramana 
phala' is the apprehension (upalabdhi) of the objects. 



1.78 


Panchap a dik a 


To prevent such a conclusion, the Prabhakara obser- 
ves: The pramana is the act of the subject:" having its 
'phala 1inga'; and it is always inferred. Pramana, accord- 
ing to this school, involves the 'sannikarsha' (contact) of 
four entities; these four are the object, the sense organ, 
the mind and the self. We do not have a perceptual co.. 
gnidon of this 'catushtaya sannikasha'. But from our 
valid perceptual cognitions, we infer that these four were 
present in that cognition. The phala linga spoken of is 
the apprehention of form' etc. From thIs 'upalabdhi' we 
infer the presence of the four entities. 


Take the cognition 'aham idam janami' (T know this.) 
The '1' represents the experiencing self and the this stands 
for the experienced not-self. 'Janami" is the experience of 
knowledge. The objector argues that to reject the 'karma- 
taya aparoksbatva' of the pramata and the pramiti is to 
contradict or go against expeFience. But we have to re- 
member the distinction we have made out between the 
three. Now, if the experience "having the not-self as its 
object were to be tbe asraya to make the 'atma vyavahara' 
possible, we need not assume a separate jnan-g. There is 
no scope lor assuming a jnana in the subject. As such the 
Prabhakara states: "The jnana vyapara (act of knowing) 
of the subject refers to the object and not to the self. The 
self is the condition of the experience of the objects; and 
as such it is seen as the I both in the phala or experience 
and in the object. The I is the condition or cause of the 
experience of the objects." 


Objection to the Prabhakara theory from the Bhatta 
stand point - - 



Vivaranam 


1\79 


That which appears (avabhasate) always appears as the 
objects of knowledge; But in the cognitions of the objects 
the self too necessartlyappears. If this is accepted the self 
would 2ppear to be the object, not to be a more 'asraya'. 
So the Bhafta argues that "the I is not the cause or con- 
dition for the experience of the objects. It is diffelent flom 
this position. The 'aham' is only 'atma matra vishayah'. 
The ' aham' is nothing but the self. 


Now perceptual knowledge arises from the object; and 
we have to accept 'karma karakatva' for the object. The 
Prabhakara argues that there is the immediate apprehension 
of the self. In such a case the self that apprehends mUSt 
be the subject of the aparehended self which is the object. 
In the same act how can one and the same thing be both 
the subject and the object? The subject and the object are 
mutually exclusi ve entities. Further, of the subject and the 
object in the knowledge situation, the latter is more impor- 
tant and the former is subordinate. Thus when the same 
entity appears as two, these two forms are opposed to one 
another in their nature also. 


So the Bhatta Mimansaka argues: "The self has two 
forms. As having the form of a substance, the self becomes 
an object; and as the knowing form, it is the subject. Thus 
the aham pratyaya is constituted by the two forms of the 
subject and the object; and the self, then, is both the cog- 
niser and the cognised. Hence the self has the form of the 
this and also the form of the not-this. The 'prameyamsa' 
is of the form of the this, while the 'pramatramsa
 is of 
the form of the .non-this". 
Reply of the Prabhakara to this objection : 



180 


Panch apadika 


The self is said to have 'ftrnsas' (parts). The 'samanya- 
msa' is of the from of the object. It is a substance and not 
a subject; and yet it is common both to the object a:Q.d to 
the subject. But since it is an amsa making the self an obj- 
ect, it cannot be treated as the self. The 'viseshal11&a' is 
said to be of the form of the subject; but the self is devoid 
of any parts. Hence 'there cannot be any distinction of the 
subject and the object in the self itself. 


If the self were to undergo any change, it ought to be 
'savayava' (having parts). But the self being 'niravayava' 
(h

ing no 'parts) it cannot change itself into the subjpct an.d 
the object at the same time. 


Further, does the apprehending (gr

k
 rupa) self ever 
have the nature of the object? Or np ? If it 4o
s not hav
 
the nature of the object, it cannot be the apprehendjng self 
since the Bhatta does not accept the self to be 'svayatp. pra:" 
kasa' and does not recognise the self to be the asraya. of 
knowledge. If it can ha.ve the nature of the object, t
le re- 
ply is : 
'The object is of the form of the 'this' and is always 
the other, not the I ; and then it woulq. be the not-self". 


Thus from a consider
tion of knowledge alon
 we can 
establish the imm
diacy of the subject, object and 'pramiti'. 
And the '
ham' is the a,.sraya of knowledge and thus it too 
beaomes immediat.e. Consequently ahankara Cij:Q.not be the 

idam amsa' (this). 


E
periel1ce is the phala (product) of 'catushtaYf1 s().}1ni- 
karsha' with the objects and it is 'syaya:lT.!- pr
k

q.'., The 
object is apprehended as the this; 
n
 t4e 
ppr
h
n4ing 
entity is revealed as the not-this by experience. And this 



Vivaranam 


181 


experience enables us to infer the pramana (catushtaya san- 
nikarsha). Henge we cannot take out ahankara to be the 
'idarn aznsa'. 


Rep Iy of Advaita to the Prabhakara 
The purport of the reply is to disti
guish the self from 
ahankara. Towards this end Padmapada first proceeds to 
establi
h that the self is 'svayam prakasa'. And he esta- 
blishes this through a criticism of the Prabhakara view. 
The Pr
bhakar
 view may :rp.ean thr
e pos
ibl
 thing
 and 

11 
r
 impossible. These three alternatives are: i) The 
self is '9a
tanya pr,!-kas
' and experience is 'jada pra
a
a' ; 
ji) Bptp'- 
re c9
itanya pr'J-kasa' ? a1].d iii) the self is 'jada 
SV'J-r
p
' while expyri
J:?
e is 'cai
anya prakasa' . 


(i) The first alternative is impos
ible. If experience 
is 'jada svarupa' (nor.-
etltient), we will have to admit that 
there is the nQ
-appearance (anavabhasa) of everything. 
'Jada prak!1
a. means that though it is not 'sva prakasa' it 
can reveal or iIlJlmine the objects because of some other 
factor. 


Obje

io.,: Does kn9wledge reve
l that which is 
not ¥,nown? or th'}t which is known? The eye reveals 
t4
t whi
h is n9t reveflled: and you cannot then make out 
th
 
o:p-?-ppe
rance of everything. 


Reply: No. The eye reveals or illumines the objects; 
but it is not svayam prakasa. The eye has the prakasa 
only to reveal the ob.jects and not. to r
veal 
tself. - Herein 
it 9.iffers from knowledge which reveals the objects im- 
m
diately ap.9. 
p. so doing also reveals itself. . Know- 

edge cannot hav
 ..
nother knowledge (samvedana) to illu.. 
mine it, for this would le1=1d to a regrees. As such it)s 



J.82 


Panchapadika 


sva prakasa. It therefore differs from the sense organs 
like the eye. We can say that experience reveals the 
objects like a 'pradipa' (lamp) which also reveals itself. 


Objection: No such distinction can be made out 
between the eye and the 'pradipa': for both reveal the 
objects only by giving rise to the experience of the 
objects. 
Reply: This is a faulty argument for there is a dist- 
inction between the eye and the 'padipa'. Both these 
again differ from knowledge. Knowledge gives us the 
apprenhension of the objects while it dispels ignorance. 
The 'pradipa aloka' is different from this jnana, in so far 
as the former has the prakasa only to dispel darkness' The 
aloka is different from experience and its prakasa can 
dispel darkness without giving rise to knowledge. But 
knowledge has prakasa which not only dispels ignorance 
but also gives the knowledge of the objects. The eye does 
110t and cannot fulfil any of these functions, since it has 
neither the nature of jnana nor that of the aloka. 
Hence experience does not require any similar experi- 
ence to illumine it or reveal it'. While it has prakasa it is 
also the condition or cause that brings about the 'prakasadi 
vyavahara' in' the object. Just like the 'pradipaloka', it 
brings about the 'prakasadi vyavahara" in the object 
immediately. 
Objection: The 'pradipa' is illumined by the 'aloka. 
which is of the sante nature as the former. In the same 
way can't we say t1.1 at there is a 's
jatiya prakasa' (illu- 
mination of a like nature) for the eye because of which 
the eye is able to reveal the pot? 



Vivaranam 


183 


Reply: This is impossible because the eye itself is 
not a prakasa, but only a property of prakasa. 


Does the "aloka' require the illumination of the. eye 
('cakshusha prakasa) so that there might arise that prakasa 
which is opposed to darkness? or does it require the 'caks.. 
husha prakasa' so that there:might arise that'jnana prakasa' 
which.is opposed to ignorance? 


The first alternative is impossible since the eye is only 
a prakasa guna. As regards the second alternative we 
should note that the 'pradipa' is illumined by the knowle- 
dge which is distinct from it. It does not require a similar 
"aloka'. 


Hence just as the cpradipa' which is screened cannot 
illumine the objects, so also experience, which is devoid of' 
'prakasa', cannot illumine or reveal objects. And every- 
thing would remain unrevealed or unillurninated. Consequ.- 
ently we cannot admit that experience is 'jada prakasa'. 


Objection: Even though experience is 'jada sva.. 
rupa', yet objects are made intelligible by the svaprakasa of 
the subject. From this we can argue that 'pramatri caita- 
nya' reveals itself and the object. Pramana is a conscious 
entity; and because of this strength the subject is able to 
make us aware of the object as the this and of the subject 
as the not-this. He does this like a lalnp that reveals itself 
and also others. Hence the 'anavabhasa 
 of the world does 
not arise.' 


Reply: Experience is said to bring about the atta.. 
chment (uparaga) of the objects to caitanya. Such a rela.. 



184 


Panchapadika 


tionship between the self and the object is brought ab
ut 
by experience. Then experience itself would be a 'buddhi 
parinama (evoIute of the intellect). This is opposed to the 
Prabhakara view, but is acceptable to us. It is possible that 
experience too has svaprakasa. But the 'cidatma prakasa' 
cannot be dependent on the 'jadanubhava.' 'The self is 
consciousness and svayain prakasa ; arid. to say that such a 
self ilIurnines itself as being dependent on the objects is in.- 
conceivable. Now how does the dipa (lamp) illumine 
itself? If it requires another dipa to niumine it, it leads us 
to a regress. If the pramata is like the dipa we would have 
to face this regress. 
ii) The second alternative make
 out that the self and 
experience are both 'caitanya prakasa'. Now if both are 
sva prakasa one does not involve any reference to the other. 
They will have no relationship at all like two distinct per- 
sons. Nor can we apprehend the relation of the self to the 
samvit. If the self manifests itself by itself why should it 
refer to the objects or relate itself to the objects? 
Objection: My knowledge of another person is not. 
svayam prakasa for that other person. This knowledge is 
the form or property of consciousness. Likewise the self 
has the 'caitanyaguna' (Samvedana) and yet is not svayaln 
r rakasa. Though the self is of the nature of consciousness, 
it is not svayam prakasa. 


Rep Iy: What is the calise of this distinction? If the 
self is of the nature of consciousness, how carl it be svayam 
parakasa ? And how can the experience of the objects make 
it immediate? If the self is dependant on the experience of 
the objects, the experience too will have the 'prakasa' by 
being dep
ndent on something other than itself. 



Vivaranam 


185 


It might be argued that my knowledge of another per.. 
Son is not inlmediate for that person. It is only a mediated 
knowledge for him. . And such a mediacy is not there in 
experience. In such a cas\: the prakasa of the self cannot 
be mediated by experience, since experience is directly rela- 
ted to the self. Just as one dipa does not require another 
dipa to illumine it, sinlilarly self and experience do not re- 
quire one another if both are sva prakasa. 


iii) The third alternative makes out experience to be 
I . 
sva prakasa and the self to be 'Jada svarupa' This too can- 
not be accepted. 


According to the Bhattas, 'samvedana' is only a'karma' 
for knowledge is in the objects as 'prakatya' or as ']natata" 
whence we know the objects. If knowledge is a 'karma' or 
an object, it is impossible to cognise it, for cognition can- 
not function without knowledge. Nor can we have the ex. 
perience ';l.l1d the awareness of the objects. 


The Sankhya treats samvedana as a substance. Then 
it ought to be an atom, or an infinite eI\tity, or one that 
has only 'madhyama parhnana'. If it has only' anu pari- 
mana", then we will be aware of only an 'anu parimana' 
(
tomic n1agnitude) in the object; for if the light of the 
glow-worm alone is shed on the pot, the whole pot is not 
revealed. If it is an infinite entity, since its asraya is the 
self, there should be the avabhasa of the self everywhere. If 
it has 'madhyama parimana' (the magnitutude of t
e con- 
tainer), then knowledge would be an entity having parts ; 
and this would make knowledge dependent on these parts 
and not on the self. 



186 


Panchapadika 


The Nyaya and the Prabbakara systems take samvedana 
to be the property of the self. Due to the necessary rela- 
tionship between the guna (quality) and the gunin (sub- 
stance) the self itself will have the prakasa guna ; and then 
it might be said that just like the pr..dipa, the self reveals 
itself while revealing the objects. But we have said earlier 
that the prakasa guna is never born, but only the medium 
that reveals it. This guna is not born in its 'asrayopadhi' 
like the prakasa of the sun. Thus we would be forced to 
admit that the self itself is svayam prakasa. Therefore Pad- 
mapada says- "Even if the Prabhakara does not like it, the 
conclusion is unavoidable that the self alone is svayam pra- 
kasa (self -luminous)". 
Objection: Jnana is svaprakasa and knowledge has 
its asraya in the self which is of 'madhyama pari mana.. 
Then as the asraya of knowledge, the self too 1nay be taken 
to be svaprakasa. The pot has its asraya in its own avaya- 
vas, and yet the pot is on the ground. The pot is only 
dependent on the clay and not on the ground. Likewise 
svaprakasatva is in knowledge and knowledge is in the self 
Thus svaprakasatva is not dependent on the self. Hence r 
cannot be made out that 'caitanya prakasa' is 'svaprakasa'
 


Reply: There 1S no way to establish such a conten. 
tion. It is impossible to argue that caitanya prakasa is not 
svaprakasa. Just as we bave the cognition 'it is illumined 
by the pradipa', we have also the cognition like 'this is 
known by me'. This experience proves that the self itself is 
'cit prakasa'. Otherwise this statement would have to be 
on a par with the sentence'this is illumined by the firewood- 
The self is not distinct from experience. Now, know- 
ledge (samvedana) does not reveal the difference between 



Vivaranam 


187 


these two. That which is dependant on experience becomes 
the not-self since it is similar to an object. We have to 
accept that the single, unchanging, immanent self alone is 
exper tence. So Padmapada states: "If experience arises 
from a pramana, then such an experience is one which is 
internally differentiated; and each specific internal differen- 
tiation will have to reveal or illumine every object distinctly 
and separately". 


Instead of assuming many experiences and their uni... 
versal, it is better to accept that there is a single experience 
called the self, for this alone is real. 'Just as there is a. 
single 'gotva' (co-wness) running through all the cows, we 
have an 'anubhavatva' (experience-hood) common to all 
experiences or running through all experiences'. Experi- 
ence, then, is not one which is interLally differentiated. We 
distinguish the experience of blue from that of yellow: and 
this distinction is dependent upon the objects that enter 
into experience. These objects do not create internal 
differentiation, in the experi ence, but only make us have 
the experience in a specific form. 


Objection: When I have the apprehension of blue; 
the apprehension of [yellow has ceased to be there. There 
is the 'sthiti' (state) of one experience and the distinction 
of another experience. As such we should accept a differ- 
ence in the dharmi and say that there are many experien- 
ces. The destruction and otherwise of experiences go to 
establish the spectfic differentiations in experience. 
Reply: If so, because of these differentiations on1y 
we have the presence and absence of experiences. In this 
manner it will involve he vicious circle. 



188 


Panchapadika 


Objection: The required means is near and by a 
new apprehension has arisen. But since two apprehensions 
cannot coexist, the previous one is destroyed. 


Reply: No, this would involve the fallacy of 'an- 
yonyasrayata' (mutual dependence). The samvit is said to 
be born; and it is born only when there is the samvit. 
ConsequentJy you cannot have even one samvit. Instead 
of this it is easier and better to assume that the samve- 
dana
 is already:] there; and it requires only 'sadhana' 
(means) which brings about the uparaga of the objects for 
the experience. It is unnecersary to assume 
that every 
experience arises afresh from the u
araga of the objects. 
The Buddhists argue that though experiences differ 
from one another, this difference is not cognised because 
of the defects like extreme similarity. There is a flame 
which appears as one even though it is brought about by 
the individual flames of the sticks put in it. Likewise we 
are not cognising the differences between the various 
'samvits' . 


This theory also involves the same fal1acyas above. 
We assume similarity only when we cognise the difference; 
and we can establish difference only when we cognise simi- 
larity.> When the 'samvit' is prakasamana, its differences 
too must be illumined or revealed. Likewise, it is not 
proper to say that the internal differences in 'citprakasa. 
are not revealed. Only when there are rhese differences 
you can say that in the absence of the 'bheda pra! asa: 
(appearance of difference) there is an erroneous cognition 
brought about by similarity. 



Vivaranam 


189 


You cannot also bring in tbe case of the self whose 
form is that of Brahman and who is svayam jyotih; and 
you cannot say that just as the Brahman-hood (brahma- 
rupatva) of the self is not revealed or illumined, so is the 
difference in the experiences. In the case of the self there 
is the sufficient cause for such a revelation. But it is the 
'avidya pratibandha' that is responsible for the absence of 
the prakasa. In the case of experience there is no such 
pratibandha and the differences amongst experiences. if 
they are real, ought to be manifested. 
Objection: We can prove the reality of these dif- 
ferences on the basis of the inference called'samanyato 
drishta' . The major premise is: Due to similarity the 
avabhasa of the differences amongst the samvits they are 
prevented from emerging. The main reason is - because 
they are eognised or known by the iutellect of the sthayi 
prakasa (abiding effulgence); and the illustration is that 
of the flame. 
Objection: Then bow can there be the experience of 
the objects for the atma caitanya which is eternal? 
Reply : That there are differences is opposed to ex. 
perience and also to logical reasoning. No inference can 
establish the reality of a non-existent. Experienee is one 
and is of the same form in all experiences; and if differe.. 
nce is real it ought to be revealed. 
Reply: The self is of the nature of conscious. 
ness. The various different objects which enter into this 
consciousness delimit it: and thus these seem to appear 
as different experiences. The seU:and other words convey the 
meaning of the 'avivakshitopadhi (undetermined condition- 
ing). The trees are in a forest. The trees are in a parti- 
cular place and they are given a common name, forest. 



190 


PanchapadiI(8 


And each tree differs from the other and also from the 
forest. And yet it is only a tree and is also constitutive of 
the forest.. 


Ahamkaranubhava (Experience of the Eg.a.)... 
Objection; There is the experience of the objects 
for the atma caitanya which(is .svayam prakasamana. Yet 
the experience of the objects alone gives rise to the 'drash- 
std paraml'sa as the 'aham'. From this we are forced to 
conclude that the self itself is the ahannkara.. The self is 
the cause or condition for the experience of the objects.. 
Such a self is the ahankara which is of the nature of the 
not-this. The self can be considered to be the perceiver 
only because of the experience of the objects. Here the 
objector does not consider the svarupavabhasa. If we do 
not so consider the self as the perceiver, then there will 
have to be the t;cinrnatra avabhasa' (manifestation of con.. 
sciousness alone) which is devoid of 'drashtradi vibhaga' 
(differentiations .of the seer, seen etc. Since the latter is 
not apprehended, we have to take tbe self to be the perci- 
pient; andlthe percipient involves the objects and makes 
us 1101d to the identity of the self with the ahankara... 
Reply: In deep sleep there is the avabhasa of th_e 
self and not of the ahankara. If they are ideutical, the 
ahankara must be apprehended)n deep sleep. 
Objection : The cause of the experience of the ob- 
jects is the ahankara as the percipient, Since the objects 
are absent in deep sleep, you con't have the apprehension 
of the self as the 'ahankara'. 


Reply: The cause of the experience of the objects 
is not the self or the ahankara, but the 'avabhasa' of the 



Vivaranam 


19L 


objects; for it is not svaprakasaka but only 'jada'
 Hence 
we cannot have the 'parnmarsa' of the conscious self aris- 
ing from the experience of the obje
ts. Thus it is said; 
"'When the blu.e is felt in consciousness, there is 
he exist- 
ence of the blue; and this cannot be taken to give rise to 
the apprehension of the per
ipient as the ahankara. The 
knowledge of the blue arises from the this and not from 
the pereipient. The perceiving individual is not mere 
ahankara. In 'aham' that whcch is revealed is the self. 


Objection: Now in deep sleep there is the absence 
of the percipient. Yet haw do you refer ro that percipient 
as 'aham'? 


Reply : "In deep sleep there are no objects and 
there cannot be the cognition- 'idam janami' (I know this). 
There is no reference to the objects and to the experience as 
well. As such there may not be any reference to ahankara. 
But what is there to prevent the reference being made to the 
self, and not to ahankara ? To be a percipient I must have 
objects; and if the percipient is conveyed by 'aham', then 
ahankara will be only the not-self, since it is absent in deep 
sleep. Ahankara involves the objects and is destructible; 
.and it cannot be identical with the self. By 'aham' we n1ean 
that which does not involve the objects. If the ahankara is 
the self, there ought to be the 'aham ullekha' in deep sleep. 
But since such a thing is not there, ahankara is the not-self. 


Objection: The form of the percipient is that 'bho- 
ktritva' (being an enjoyer) which excludes an relationship 
with the objects. Ahankara is that consciousness which is 
'nirvikalpaka' (non-determinate). Such a consciousness is 
(bhasate) there in deep sleep. 



192 


Panchape.dika 


If we include the word 'katham' (how) in this objec- 
tion, the passage would mean : That the presence of the 
objects would make the ahankara the not.. self. This is 
opposed to experience The that which is being experien- 
ced as excluding the not-self cannot be treated as being the 
Dot..se1f. But in deep sleep there is no experience of the 
objects; and hence there does not arise the question o( the 
experience of the ahankara. 


Padmapada states the objection thus: By aham that 
which is revealed is the nature of the enjoyer. And in the 
absence of the objects in deep sleep, how can there be the 

 pratibhasa' of the ahankara ? 


Reply: This identification of the self with ahankara. 
is impossible ; for in view of the absence of the objects in 
deep sleep, it is not ahankara that is in deep sleep. When 
the 'upadhi visesha' relation with objects is removed, we 
have only the L consciousness which is the me-aning of 'a ham' 
 
Then we should always have the 'aham pratiti'. 


Objection: Even the objectless 'svarupa' may be 
conveyed by 'aham', since the laham' is present also in the 
experience of the objects. 


Reply: In the former the objects ale not involved# 
while in the latter the objects are necessary. The two are 
dissimilar . You can argue that the same consciouness is 
spoken of as the ahankara when objects are present. The 
consideration of the ()bjects would establish the ahankara 
and not the objectless consciousness. Consciousness by it
 
self exists without the objects. Then to treat the ahankara 
which is a.ttached to the objects and which requires the obj
 



Vivaranam 


193 


ectcs, as the self that exists in deep sleep, is contrarito ex- 
perience. The self that appears in deep sleep is that whicb 
is unrelated to objects and which has no experience of obje- 
cts ; and since there is nothing to be perceived, there is the 
'svarupa siddhi'. The self is 'sarvatmakatva' (universal 
consciousness) whence it has nothing to exclude from itself. 
And only when there is the attachment of the objects to the 
6 a ham', there is the awareness of the objects that are distinct 
from the 'aham'. 


If it is said that the ahankara is in deep sleep without 
requiring objects and that there is this awareness, then we 
ought to remember it, just as we do remember the ahan- 
kara of yesterday. There is the abhimana of the ahankara 
yesterday; and even though there is no rule that we should 
remember all tbat was experienced, yet since the nature of 
ahankara is to remember, there should be the memory of 
the ahankara in deep sleep. 


Objection: The eternal consciousness is beyond 
destruction; and abankara being this consciousness, we 
cannot have the samskara necessary for me!11ory. Samskara 
arises after an experience is over ; and such a thing is impo. 
ssible here. Hence there is no memory of ahankara. 


Reply: In such a case even the ahankara of yester- 
day cannot be remembered. 


Objection: How can you establish the 'ahankara 
smriti' on your own view? For ahankara, accordiug to 
you, is said to be iIlumined by the sakshi caitanya. 



194 


Panchapadika 


Reply: It is only the antahkarana as conditioned by - 
the 'aham vritti' that becomes the object for consciousness. 
This psychosis has a beginning and an end. Then it can 
have the samskaras of pre.vious experiences from which 
there arises memory. And the antahkarana is conditioned 
by such a memory. But the antahkarana in turn conditions 
the (smrity anubhava' (rai shi caitanya). In this way we ex- 
plain the memory of ahankara. 


Objection: Now, in deep sleep there is the experi- 
ence of happiness (sukha), and this happiness always has its 
leaning towards its asraya which is the ahankara. Why 
can't we then say that even in .deep sleep there is the expe- 
rience of antahkarana ? After we get up from sleep I say 
that I slept happily. Herein we refer to an experience of 
happiness in deep sleep. Since such an experience necess- 
arily implies the abam, there is the 'aham ullekha' in deep 
sleep". 


Reply: If happiness was experienced, we should note 
that happiness arises from objects. And there will be the 
'aham ullekha' arising only from the experience of the obj- 
ects. In deep sleep there cannot be the experience of some 
thing other than itself by the self. Then ther can be the 
memory arising from the samskara of the experience of 
happiness. We refer to that state as one of 'sukba' and 
by this we only mean the absence of 'duhkha'. 


Objection : 
When you enquire into the nature and 
meaning of 'sukha', you give up the primary and essential 
positive meaning of 'sukha' ; and instead of this you are 
taking its opposite to interpret 'sukba' to mean 'duhkha 
abhava' . You can take recourse to such secondary meani- 



Vivaranam 


195 


ngs (lakshana) only if it is verbal knowledge that "is to be 
determined. When'sukhavamarsa' is a fact of experience 
you cannot resort to ?lakshana'. 


Reply: Since there is no way to find out that there 
is an experience of sukha and since that state can be descri. 
bed only in a negative way, we treat 'sukha' to mean only 
the absence of 'duhkha'. P. s in the waking state. so in 
dream too we have t];e experience of 'duhkha'. Since such 
an experience is not found in deep sleep we refer to it as 
'sukha'. We are able to say that there is no'duhkha' be- 
cause in deep sleep the sense organs cease to function. 


Objection: Why cannot we assume the primaty 
meaning of 'sukha' blcause of the power implicit in the 
'paramars a ' ? 


Reply: "If there is the memory of deep sleep and 
also of its object viz., sukha, we should remember it as hay- 
ing the 'uparaga' (attachment) of the specific objects. BUt 
such a memory is not there. And even when we describe it 
we only say- 'I slept well ; and nothing was done (cetitam) 
by me? This statenlent too proves that the object of refe- 
rence is the absence of unhappiness. 


Objection: But we can also prove the eX\perience of 
happ iness in deep sleep from the fact that one gets up from 
sleep and feels himself light and refreshed; and ..this mak
s 
us infer the experience of happiness. 


Rap Iy: This is false. If the sukha is directly expe- 
lienced, it does not re quire an inference to establish it. 



196 


Panchapadika 


Objection: Then how is it that one feels himself 
light and refreshed as he wakes up, while another does not 
feel so ? 


Rep Iy: During the waking state our sense - organs 
get tired; and this is overcome by stopping their activity. 
Such a stopping of the activity of the sense organs is deep 
sleep. There too if there is complete cessation of the acti- 
vity, we feel light and refreshed as we get up. If there is 
no iuch complete cessation we feel otherwise when we 
. get up. 


From this we conclude that even as the enjoyer the 
aham is not remembered in deep sleep. 


Objection: If the self is experienced as the enjoyer, 
it ought to be remembered. 


Rep Iy: It is not a rule that all that was experienced 
should be remembered. When the self is being remembe- 
red, that aspect of it being the ahankara, what needs to be 
remembered is the ahankara only and not the self. 


Prakasatman's objection against Padmapada's conten- 
tion that in deep sleep we have the absence of unhappiness. 
Even if we admit that there is 'duhkhabhava', it is not 
possible to experience such an entity. And there can be no 
memory of such an entity because it is a negative entity. 
There can be the experience of the 'svarupananda' which is 
fundamental, and not any other sukha. 
Objection: But since that 'svarnpananda sukha' is 
enveloped by avidya, it cannot have any prakasa. 



Vivaranam 


197 


Reply: The 'sukhamsa' of the wit.l1ess
g c


cious: 
ness is never enveloped by avidya, for aVldya Itself IS sakshl 
bhasya'. It is 'prakasamana
. 
Objection: How is it this sukha is not revealed 
during the waking state? 
Rep Iy: It is reveale
 as having the nature of 'parama 
premaspadatva'. But it is not illumined or revealed clearly 
just like the light of the pradipa which is being blown by a 
, :fierce wind ; it is 'm.ithya jnana vikshi pta' . Since there is 
no such preventing force in deep sleep, it is manifested 
better. 


Objection : When one gets up he refers to the abs- 
ence of unhappiness in deep sleep. Since there i
 no know.. 
ledge of the 'pratiyogi', there cannot be any experience. If 
so, how does he refer to it ? 


Reply: That which was experienced is only sukha; 
and when he gets up he remembers it. We arrive at the 
absence of duhkha through arthapatti; for, if sukha was 
experienced, there was no duhkha. The absence of duhkha 
is not remembered, but only inferred or assumed. Likewise 
one who gets up refers to the absence of knowledge since 
that which was experienced is its opposite, viz., ajnana. 
Since we cannot argue that it is remembered, we infer or 
assume the experience of jnanabhava. 


Obj ecti on: During the waking state too we experi- 
ence ajnana. How can this ajnana be the opposite of 
knowI edge ? 



.1"anCnapaC11.ka 


Reply: In deep sleep there is the experience of that 
ajnana which is qualified (determined) by the specific stat
 
of sleep. This ajnana is seen to be opposed to the know- 
ledge of pot etc., that we have in the waking state. The 
knowledge of the pot is opposed to the knowledge of the 
cloth, when we are having the latter. 


Objection: Since we do not have the memory of 
the various knowledges in deep sleep, we may infer that 
there is the absence of knowledge. Thereby you need not 
assume the experience of 'ajnana 
 which is opposed to 
'jnana' " 


An object which is beyond this world cannot be seen 
and therefore cannot be remeln bered ; likewise there is no 
experience of jnana in deep sleep because it is not remem- 
bered. 


Reply: Even when there is the knowledge of such a 
transcendental object, there lieed :rot be a memory of it. 
There was the absence of tt- e elephant in the morning. But 
I can infer the'gajabhava\through arthapatti by taking into 
consideration. the objects that make the presence of the ele- 
phant there inconsistent. I now remember the objects which 
make its presence incompatible with them. I do not arrive 
at the conclusion merely from the 'anudaya' (non-emerging) 
of the memory of the elephant: Therefore I arrive through 
'arthapatti' at the 'jnanabhava' and the 'duhkhabhava' from 
the incompitibility of the presence of the specific ajnana 
and of the experience of sukha respectively. 


Objection: We have the experience of ajnana, the 
experience of sukha, and the witnessing consciousness. We 



Vivaranam 


199 


are said to remember all these three when we get up. But 
to rem em ber there must be a samskara which presupposes 
the destruction of the previous experience. In every expe- 
rience there is the 'sakshi caitanya' which has no destru- 
ction. Then how is there the memory of these three fOf 
one when he gets up from sleep? 


Reply: Consciousness in itself is eternal, but as con- 
ditioned it is not eternal. Thus memory becomes possible. 
Ajnana evolves itself into the form of that which witnesses 
its own happiness. In this evolved ajnana, th
re arises the 
'caitanyabhasa' . From this we have the 'ajnanadi visesha- 
nubhava' . 


Ajnana conditions consciousness and aSSU1l1es a variety 
of forms. Of these forms we have the ajnananubhava, suk- 
hanubhava and sakshi.. These differ from one another since 
they are the various stages or forms of the evolving ajnana. 
Thus arises the difference between one 'caitanyabhasa' (cai.. 
tanya vritti) and another. Such vrittis have a begioing 
and end and they are destroyed. They give rise to samskara; 
and tllis in its turn gives rise to memory. And the memory 
appears in the forms of ajnana sukha and sakshi caitanya. 


Now it is a rule that samskara has as its asraya in that 
which has given rise to it. Such an entity is the sel f as con- 
ditioned by ajnana. It has its asraya in this ajnana, and 
not in the antahkarana.. 


Thus there is always the possibility of experiencinO' 
the '
jnana sukh,,:' in deep sleep. Consequently Padma: 
pada s. argument In favour of'duhkhabhava' is faulty and 
inconsIstent. 




uu 


.rancnapadika 


Formal reply to this objection by Prakasatman him- 
self is now given: 
This should not be construed as a mistake on the part 
of PadJP,apada for he is giving the reply not from the stand- 
point of his own system, but from that of the Nyaya system. 


So far we have establis.hed that consciousness which is 
svayam prakasa is distinct from ahankara. The ahampra- 
tyaya, whose object is the self, is not at all different from 
the blue that is the object of' cognition. Nor can the 'aham.. 
ullekha' arise only from the experience of tbe objects. This 
distinction between the self and the ahankara as maintained 
by Sankara has its basis also in the Upanishads. This dis- 
tinction has its basis in the agamas also. 


In the passage- "Sa evadhastat sa evoparishtat... ", we 
fHnd 'Sarvatmakatva' attributed to the 'Bhuma Brahman'. 
Then in 'athato ahankaradesah'. We find ahankara treated 
as'sarvatmaka'. And later on in 'atha.ta atmadesah' we 
find that the self is explicitly distinguished from ahankara. 


Objection : There are' passages where the 'sarvat- 
makatva' is attributed to the self, while in others it is attri- 
buted. to Brahman. This has been done only to establish 
the identity of the self and Brahman. Likewise we can say 
that the 'sarvatmakatva' referred to earlier is intended only 
to identify the ah8-nkara with the self. 
Reply: No. When one is distinct and different from 
the other, both cannot be treated as 'sarvatmaka'. Such is 
the case with the self and the ahankara. But the self and 
Brahman are apprehcnded as different from one another; 
and the texts go to remove this error and establish their 



Vivaranam 


201 


identity. As regards the ahankara, it is already apprehen- 
ded as being identical with the self; and the texts are inten.. 
ded to establish their' difference. Since Brahman is nOt 
taken to be immediate, the texts aim at establishing the 
immediacy of Brahman. To achive this' easi1y, they first 
identify the ahankara with the self; and later on ignore it 
or reject it. Thereby they are able to establish the iden- 
tity of the self with Brahman. 


It is not only the sruthi that establishes the difference 
between the self and the ahankara, but also the smriti as 
in passages like- "mah.abhutany ahankarah...". 
i) What is the upadana of 
ahankara? ii) What is its 
instrumental cause? Hi) Wh3.t is its svarupa? iv) What is 
its patimana? v) What is its karya? vi) Why does it not 
appear in deep sleep ? 


i) The up adana is referred to in the texts as the favya.. 
kritha namarupa, avidya, m'aya, prakriti, agrahana, avyakta, 
tamas, karana, laya, sakti, mahasupti, nidra, akshara, 
akasa. Consciousness is in itself and by itself the form of 
Brahman. A vidya prevents the appearence of this Brahman 
and brings about the jiva. It is the strange wall which 
hears or nB.nifests itself in 'bhranti\ 'karma" 'and the saui... 
skaral) of previous experjences. In deep sleep it reIPalns as 
mere 'vikshepa samskara' by concealing or enveloping the 
prakasa. Such a beginningless avi'dya is the material cause 
of ahankara. 


ii) Paramesvara is the ground; and this ground func- 
tions as the instrumental cause whence avidya evolves itseJf 
into a specific fonn ealled ahankara.. 



202 


Panchapadika 


Hi) The vijnana sakti 
 and the kriya sakti of Isvara 
constitute the asraya of this ahankara;and this is its svarupa. 
iv) Its karya or product is seen in making us treat it 
as both the doer the enjoyer. 


v) It gets its illumination (jyothih) by its integration 
with the kutastha caitanya which constitutes its pramana. 
This ahankara has svayam prakasa and is immediate. Be- 
cause of this integration of the ahankara with the primal 
foundational consciousness, 'consciousness is 'Wrongly trea- 
ted as the enjoyer even though it is the not-this and even 
though it is the only self. 


vi) In deep sleep all the evolutes of avidya have their 
laya (devolution) into avidya, whence ahankara ceases to be 
ahankara. It remains in its 'karanarupa' (causeal state( 
viz, that of avidya. Where there is the devolution of the 
'linga sarira' (astral body) which is the product of ajnana, 
there we have deep sleep. 


Objection : But even in deep sleep there is 'prana' 
which is the 'kriya' of ahankara. Then how can there be 
the devolution of ahankara ? 


Reply: We cannot attribute the nature of ahankara 
alone to 'prana'. 'Prana' has an existence distinct from 
that of ahankara and in order there might be the five-fold 
activity we only say that there is the 'kriyas sakti' for ahan- 
kara ; for the prana vritti is dependent on the lnind. 
Objection : But if the 'prana vyapara'is dependent 
on ahankara, in the absence of the later, the former too 
should cease. 



Vi var an am 


203 


Reply: An alternative explanation is therefore given. 
We have said that there is a 'kriya sakti' and a 'vijnana 
sakti' in ahankara. And we can say that there is the devo- 
lution of only the latter in deep sleep ; and since the former 
remains there is prana. This can be argued out since there 
are amsas in antahkarana. 


Or we can argue from the standpoint of drishti srishti 
(creative experience). In the dreams the objects seen are 
created. Extending this principle we may say that there is 
the devolution in so far as the person having deep sleep is 
concerned. That the person in deep sleep has 'prana' is the 
cognition of another who is not in deep sleep. 


Now arises an orjection from the Sankhya: It has 
been admitted tbat the material cause for antahkarana etc., 
is the unconscious maya. When there is the 'ahankara nir- 
bhasa', does it mean the 'aham pratyaya' or the 'sakshin? 
A vidya which is not ilnplicitly involved in aham pratyaya is 
only a nimitta, and hence it cannot be the former. And 
since 'the sakshin in 
prajnana ghana' it cannot involve avi- 
dya in itself. A vidya can bt said to be in the sakshin in 
one of the three ways- a) AVldya can be its sakti ; b) Avi- 
dya can have its asraya in it; c) Avidya can be that which: 
is adhyasta on it. All these are impossible. And hence 
this 'pradhana' is 'svatantra' (independent) and it evolves 
by itself in three ways- Viz. dharma, lakshana, and avastha. 
The 'dharma' (avayavi) parinama takes the form of the 
whole wor1d that is 'karya' beginning with 'mahat'. The 
ilakshana.' parinama brings about the temporal distinctions 
for the evolutes of the previous order. The unborn evolute 
is born and later it is no more. Here we have the 'anagata 



. 
204 


Panchapadika 


lakshana' (unborn), 'vartamana' (present) lakshana, an
 
'atita (future) lakshana. The avastha parinama, compre- 
hends the positive, comparative and superlative degrees and 
the old and the new forms. The unconscious 'pradhana' 
can explain every thing and then we need not accept a 
conscious entit¥ as the material cause. 


Reply: This vie\v is to be rejected; for ahaJ;lkara. 
being an evolute of prakrti it ought to be apprehended as 
the 'this'.. The self as the enjoyer is freed from the 'ahan 
kriti san:sarga
. Ahankr;ti means the sakshin. There is 
the appearance of consciousness 
s integrated with the not.. 
self. This is as .we. have seen, neither a. case of akhyati, 
nor of anyathakhyati, nor of atma khyati. We have seen 
tha'(( there is an ayidya having its asraya in consciousness. 
This avidya distorts the real and brings about the appea- 
rance of the integration with the mithy
 vastu. Such an 
appearance is a case of anjrva
aniya khyati. If this inte- 
gration is not accepted consciousness and the unconscious 
should appear distinctly and separately, and not as a single 
entity. 
There is another objection from the Nyaya : When the 
self, the sense-organs and the objects are together there 
arises now and then some knowledge of the objects. There 
is the power here to give ris
 to knowledg
. Further the 
'jnanadr vritti' which have their ground in the self have 
to come in an order successively.' That instrument which 
gives that abHity and facilitates this succession is the mind 
which should be 'assumed. There is nothing called antah- 
karana as distinct from the mind. Knowledge, happiness 
and unhappiness, desire, effect, and the like are said to be 
'vijnana kriya vrittis' of antahkarana. The ground of these 



Vivaranam 



05 


vrittis is 'he antahkarana, just as the ground or locus for 
the fire is the piece of iron, just as the mirror is the "'asraya' 
for the face, jUctt as the water in; a glass is the me
iium of 
reflection for the moon. Sech an antahkarana is ta:ken to 
be conditioning or delimiting the self. It is considered 1.0 
be that whj.ch brings z..bou.t the adhyasa on the self. Such 
an entity which is distinct from the mind is nowhere to be 
found. you cannot take the antahkarana to be non.differ- 
ent flom the buddhi also. For Akshapad
's aphorism 
clearly 
tates that bL:ddhi is a synonym of 'upalab.dhi' and 
jnana. You cannot also say that the buddhi knows (janati) 
while the self <;omprehends (upalabhate); for the admission 
of a differen between 'knows' and comprehends', would 
c0mpeles
 to a.ccept two distinct entities haying these two 
functions. Hence there is no antahkarana. 


Repfy: The intellect separates the evolved ahankara 
from consciousness which is the not-self
 and the Vedantins 
speak of ahankara under the names of antahkarana, Inanas, 
buddhi, and aham pratyaya, (or they aCgept the 'vijnana 
sakt
 visesha' in this consideration. When they accept 
the parispanda sakti the same evolved form is treated as 
sprana' . 


There is the sruti passage - c'Budher gunenatma gu- 
nena caiva aragramatro hy avaropi drishteh 'I'., Here 
Buddhi is taken to be a substance since it has the nature of 
evolving. Again in the S
uti text ., "yada pancaiva liyante 
janani manasa saha, buddhis ca nengate tatra para11\ atma- 
nam afnute". Here again Buddhi is the asraya of 'ceshta' 
and is thus conprehenned to be a substance.. 
In "Vijnanam yajnam tanute" we find a separate and 
distinct mention of the self which is 'anaudamaya' . This 



Pancbapadika 


means vijnana is synomynous with buddhi. And buddhl 
as the fasraya' of 'kriya' is again taken to be a substance. 
Again we read "vijnanena va rigvedam vijanati ma... 
nasa hy eva pasyati". The word 'manas' is expressed here 
only to emphasise the means of apprehension. And manas 
then is identical with vijnana. Manas has the vrittis like 
karma, sankalpa and vidkitsa. 


Hence sruti and reason establish that the antahkara- 
na has. the vijnana sakti and kriya, and that it is also des.. 
cribed as manas, buddhi etc.. 
Take again the sruti passages - "Buddher,gunenatma 
gunena caiva", "sa dhih svapno bhautva imam Iokam sam- 
carati", "vijnana mayah" and "manomayah". Here 
we find man as or buddhi as that which delimits or condi- 
tions the self and as that which makes us take its attributes 
to be those of the self. 


In the sruti paSS!:1.ge - "Kasminv aham utkrante utk.. 
anto bhavishyami". We find that 'prana' which is the 
'upadhi' of 'utrkanti' etc., is only an larosa' of the - antah.. 
karana. But we cannot treat both 'prana' and the 'antah.. 
karana' as the two upadhis; for that is inconsistent.. The 
antah
 arana then is the only upadhi- (the conditioning 
principle) 


It cannot be argued that all the passages given above 
are only 'arthavadas' (laudatory) and that therefore they do 
not lay down any principles. For we have the self which 
is devoid of parts, which is aU-pervasive or every where, 
which is asanga (non-relational) and which is uncondi- 
tioned like the sky. Such a self cannot be treated as baving 



Vivaranam 


207 


the Cutkra.ntyadi gamena'. This movement being incon- 
sistent with the nature of the self, we argue through artha- 
patti to establish that the antahkarana or ahankara is the 
upaphi, that it conditions the self due to avidya. 


Objection: Why can't we say that the 'Vijnana 
sakti' and 'kriya parinama sakti' belong only to the self. 


Reply: Any parinama is inconsistent with the nature 
of the self, for the self is devoid of parts, is all..pervasive, 
and is asanga. Further the appearances are made possi- 
ble only when the evolved antahkarana is near by. And. 
Padmapada says that "due to its paraga with the antah- 
karana the self is falsely treated as the ahankarta, just as 
the crystal is taken to be red because of the 'uparaga, 
with the 'japakusuma' which is near by." 


Padmapada states the question. "How do you accouut 
for the mithyatva of the redness in the crystal 1" The 
crystal is apprehended as red. Redness is not cognised as 
separate from the crystal. There is the samsarga between 
the redness and the crystaL This is explained differently 
jn different theories. 


Akhyati: There is the appearance of the false read- 
ness in the crystal. But the redness that is cognised be- 
longs to or comes from the japakusuma. And it does not 
appear as distinct from the crystal. The absence of this 
distinction between the two brings about this erroneous 
cognition. 


Reply The rays of light emanating from the eye 
catch the cFystal; and if these rays approach the japa- 
kusutna flower, they will cognise the redness as belonginQ: 



208 


Panchapadika 


to that flower only. The nature of the eye is to cognise 
the form along with its properties. We never see that the 
eye apprehends only the form or only the property. 


...Y ou can not say th at since there is a defect in the sense 
organ there is no contact with the flower and that therefore 
the erroneous cognition has arisen. The property of an 
object is necessari1y connected with the object. When the 
property is apprehended, the object a]so is apprehended.. 
You cannot cognise the mere redness and not the flower 
having this redness, if the redness belongs only to the flower. 


Anyathakhyati: Only the mere form of the flower is 
reflected and it appears as the nature of the cryst
l. 


Reply: We nowhere see that only the form can be 
reflected and not its asraya also. It is not the bare abstract 
form of the .flower that can be reflected, but the flower as 
such in all ics concreteness. Otherwise we should apprehend 
and say that we cognise redness in the crystal, or that the 
redness of the flower being undistinguished from the crystal 
appears as having the nature of the crystal. If there is a 
concomittant relation between the 'prabha' of the flower 
.. and of the crystal, the crystal should appear as red. In such 
a case there wou1d be the 'samsarga' between the crystal 
and the redness; for the crystal which is not in itself red, 
appears as red. This redness is mithya because of the sam- 
sarga between the two whence we cognise only one entity 
as the red crystal. . 


Akhyati; We can argue that it is only the prabha. of 
the flower 'that appears as red, and not the crystal.. 



Vivaranam 


209 


Reply: We cognise the crystal and the crystal has 
wbiteness. This whiteness is integrally and internally rela- 
ted to the crystal; and its manifestation is not prevented by 
any thing. Thus even the whiteness must appear in the cry- 
stal. 


Objection: But there is the red 'prabha' coming 
from the :flower and this is opposed to the whiteness. The 
whiteness is removed, rejected, suppressed or prevented. 


Reply: If the whiteness is suppressed or prevented 
it means that the internal quality is no more there; and in 
the absence of the quality the object is also not there. Ho\v 
can you cognise a formless object? 


Objection: The substance may be devoid of a form; 
yet there is the prabha which is the 'rupi" (that which has 
the form)and since there is the samyoga with such a prabha 
the object is cognised, and cognition has become possible. 


Reply: This is impcssible; for the wind which is 
formless comes into contact with objects having a form. 
Then the wind too would have to be cognised by the eye. 


Objection: Redness has arisen when the whitene
s 
has been removed or suppressed. The crystal has again a 
form and thus the eye was able to cognise it. 


Rep Iy : Redness has not arisen because of the prabha. 
The prabha is there even after we overCODle the error and if 
the redness is due to the prabha, the crystal should appear 
red even then. 



210 


Panchapadika 


So far we have assumed the existence of the prabha. 
The prabha of tbe 'padmaraga' and other genes is without 
a ground. But it is apprehended when we cognise them. 
On tbe other hand redness is in the crystal and is cognised 
as such. It has a ground. 


The redness cognised in the crystal is conditioned by 
the flower which is near by. Likewise there is the uparaga 
of the ahankara in the self. Since the self is conditioned 
by the ahankara we treat the self as the agent etc. Thus 
the self and the antahkarana so interpenetrate into one 
another that they are welded into a single unity. This is 
caIled a knot; and ahankara is spoken of as the 'granthi' 
(knot)" . 
Objection: 'Kartritva' (agent-hood) is a property 
of ahankara. _ Is there only a superimposition of this pro- 
perty on the self? Or does there arise anew:, but false, pro.. 
perty in the self? If it is the former, the illustration of the 
red crystal will be of no use, and there will be the admiss- 
ion of anyatha khyati. If it is the latter there will be a true 
katritva besides a false kartritva, and both these will have 
to appear. 
. Reply: It is not a property of the ahankara alone 
that IS superimposed on the self. That which is superims- 
posed is the ahankara along with its properties. Hence 
there is mithyatva and we do not have anyathakhyati. Fur- 
ther the example is taken only to imply that in the presence 
of one object, there appears a mithya dharma in another. 
Only this much is to be taken from the example. Or, we can 
accept that there are two Kartritvas. But since there is only 
one dharmi, there is no apprehension of the difference bet- 
ween these two kartritvas. 



Vivaranam 


21\11 


Objection: In "Bhidyate hridaya granthih' we find 
that the 'hridayagranthi' in the self is the cause of all 'ana- 
rtha'. Then how do you attribute this 'anflrtha' only to the 
ahankara which is to be broken? 


Reply: Ahankara and the self are integrated (or wel- 
ded) into a unity or knot. 


Objection: The self has the uparaga of the ahan- 
kara. Just as the crystal which is uparakta reveals the pro- 
perty of the flower in it. So must the self reveal the pro- 
perties of the ahankara in itself. 


Reply: Ahankara which has the uparaga with the self 
is an unconscious entity. There cannot be the sakshad- 
bhava (immediacy) of the uparaga. The unconscious and 
consciousness are the conditions or a causes for the appea- 
rance (avabhasakatva) and the non-appearance. It is not 
the 'uparaktatva' and 'anuparakta' that can be treated as 
the conditions or causes of appearance. 
Objection: Even consciousness does not have the 
manovyapara of the 'uparakta ahankara vishaya'. Con- 
sciousness does not have any activity with reference to the 
objects. T
en it becomes the same as ahankara. 
Rep Iy : There is the uparaga for consciousness and 
eonsciousness illumines the ahankara. The vishaya vyapara 
belongs directly to ahankara and indh7ectIy to conscious- 
ness. Ahankara functions because it is illumined by cons- 
ciousness. Ahankara is immediately connected with or 
related to consciousness. And due to this salnsarga cons- 
ciousness is the 'pratibhasa hetu' (cause of appearance) and 
not the 'jnana vyapara'. 



212 


Panchapadika 


Objection: Then ahankara does not seem to require 
the mediation of the vijnana sakti and kriya sakti that con... 
stitute the sakshi svarupa. In such a case, ho\v can there 
be the 'idam amsata' for ahankara? 


Reply : Ahankara is cidbhasya or illumined by cons- 
cipusness and it acquires be nature of an object (idam 
amsata). The not.thisness is the form of consciousness and 
the object of consciousness constitutes the tbisness. TLis 
does not require the mediation of jnana and kriya. 


Because of the uparaga of ahankara, the self which is 
not- this is falseJy taken to be ahankarta. The self is 
taken to acquire the nature of ahankara; and such a self 
has the 'vyapara' of the ahankara only. In terms of this 
vyapara there .arises the illumination 
(prakasa, pariccheda) 
of the ahankarta; and this ahankarta alone is the object 
having the nature of the this. 
The body, sense organs and the objects are cognised 
as the this because they are apprehended through the 
mediation of the antahkarana vritti (psychosis) and since 
there is no such mediation in the case of the ahankara it 
appears as the not-this. 
Objection: But is not ahankara mediated by ajna- 
na? for ajnana brings about the ahankara. In view of 
this mediation how can you maintain the absence of the 
'idamtavabhasa' for the ahankara ? 
Reply : It is only because of ajnana there is the in- 
tegration of consciousness and ahankara into one. Since 
consciousness and ahankara are distinct, some are unable 
to accept the view that the ahankara has the nature of the 



Vivaranam 


213 


this. Sin-ce th-ere is only the mediation of ajnana, the 
.ahankara appears as the not-this; and people are not will- 
ing to see any distinction here. 


Objection 
 If the a.nankara ha-s really the nature 
and meaning of the object, then it is not proper for the 
ahankara not to reveal itself as an object.. 


Reply: The aha.llkara reveals itself as an object and 
it is proper to treat it 'So. But we have fa-cts "Of experience 
which show that we behave otherwise even when we know 
the facts. The whole process' of the tree beginning with 
the ankura {plant) aad end;ng in the fruit is the result ob- 
tained from the series {)f the evolution from the changes 
that took place in the clay . Yet you do no t speak of the 
tree as "mrinmaya' as we do speak of the pot or the 'val. 
mika' (anthitl.) 


Objection: Yes, in the 'Case of the tree we must 
have the 'mrinmaya vyavahara' .. But when we 'come to 
examine ahankara. we do speak of it as the this. Then 
this example does not fit in here. 
Rep1y.: Even the wise are not iDtolearnt of su-ch a 
usage. 


Hence let those who doubt this nature of ahankara 
examine it carefully from their own experiences and find 
()ut whether what we stated is true. 
The form of ahankara is the this which is integrated 
to the not-this or consciousness. So far it is established 
and the illustration of the red crystal \vas also given to show 
that the not-self is superimposed on the s
lf" 



214 


Panchapadika 


Bimba - Pratibimba Vada (Theory of Reflection) : 


Yet Padmapada gives the il1ustration of the reflections 
falling in the mirrer and in water. These illustrations go 
to show that the 'anidamamsa' (the aspect of the not-this) 
of the ahankarta is tbe reflection of Brahman, and that the 
reflection is not something different from the Bimba (origi- 
nal) of Brahman, but is the same as Brahman. The reflec- 
tion appears to be different (distinct) from Brahman and it 
also appears as distorting the original. Only this much is 
false. 


Objection: But distortion and difference are facts 
of direct experience in this case. How can you say that 
they are identical? 


Reply: There is the recognition that both have the 
identical featutes. The features of Devadatta when he is 
outside the house are found to be the same as those when 
he is inside. Thus there arises the recognition. Likewise 
there is the recognition of this identity bet veen the original 
and the reflection. 


Objection: In direct perception there is the aware- 
ness of difference. How can this be negated by mere re- 
cognition ? 


Reply: If the reflection is different from the original_ 
there cannot arise any recognition. 


Since we have the awareness of both identity and diffe- 
rents, there arises the doubt as to what negates which ; and 
the difference is negated because it lacks logical support. 



Vivaranam 


215 


Obje:>tion: Since there is a difference you can argue 
that there is a mirror near the original face and that the 
';avayavas' (parts) of the mirror have evolved themselves 
into the form of another person. In any other way there 
:cannot arise a different person. It cannot be the impression 
of a stamp even, since the reflection is a strange evolute 
having features opposite frorn those of the original. There 
is no csamslesha' (fusion) too which is necessary for such an 
. impression. As such we say that the reflection is evolved 
from the avayavas of the mirror. 


Reply: In st!ch a case we should have to say that 
reflection is evolved in the mirror in the presence of the 
origjnal near by ; and when the original is removed, the 
reflection should remain as it is. "You can't say that the 
reflection is always there since it appears only when we look 
into the mirror. For, hold the 
irror crosswise and you 
won't see the reflection as you found it earlier. 


Objection: When the instrumental cause is remo- 
ved, its effect also is gone.. The Vaishikas argue that'dvitva', 
(two-ness) arises because of the 1:apaksha buddhi', and when 
the latter is lost, the former too disappeares. Likewise 
when there is the contact with the hand you can stretch a 
closed mat (which is curling) ; and when the contact is not 
there, the mat is closed. Likewise the face is only the inst- 
rumental cause of the reflection. 


Reply : The facts are otherwise. The mat has been 
closed many a time previously and there has arisen in it a 
certain samskara which is the instrun1ental cause of its 
closing. When the iron is nlelted by the fire, it pa%es into 
the state of a solid only when an object opposed to the 



216 


Panchapad ika 


melted iron has arisen. It is such an object that functions 
as the instrumental cause. The example from the Vaises- 
hikas is fa.ulty, since number coexists with the object and is 
not created.. 


Objection: When there arises a now product that 
comes from the salnskara, you argue that there is the desti... 
nction of the previous product and not the destruction of 
the instrumental cause. How is this possible? 


Reply : If you go on strectching it frequently to put 
an end to its closing, it will not close even when thpre is or 
there is no contact with the hand. It there is the absence 
of the stretching because of the absence of the 'nimitta'., 
then in the. absence of the samskara also it must close it- 
self. 


Objection : Consider here the case of the mirror 
which is pure and clear. There is a samskara arising froln 
the 'samstbana'. Because of the strength of the samskara, 
there arises a 'viruddha kaarya' (contrary effect). Then 
there is the absence of the reflection. 


Reply: If so take a mirror which bas just then come 
into existence. The continued long presence of the object 
before it gives rise to samskara of the tbimba parinama'. 
Even then the removal of the original would result in the 
removal of the reflection. 


Objection: The rays of the sun have fallen on the 
kamala and they have given rise to a samskara called its 
',vikasa parinama n (change into flowering). Yet when 
the rays of the sun are removed, we find the blosomming 
too disappearing. Likewise the reflection, which has been 



Vivaranarn 217 


there for a long time. clisappears when the origina.l is 
removed. 


Reply : No. In the case of the blosomming, of th
 
kamala we should note there was a time when it was only 
in the form of a bud inspite of the rays of the sun fall- 
ing on it. Its first blosomming was brought about by the 
earthly and watery elements that are in it. 


Objection: It is not these elements that have made 
it blossom. It is only the instrumental cause, viz., the rays 
of the sun. 


· Reply : No. When these elements are no more in 
the flower, it becomes old and it does not close even in 
the absence of the sun. 


Objection: But even here the instrumental casse is 
the removal of the instrumental cause itself, and not the 
earthly and watery parts. 


Reply: But when these parts are in a state of decay; 
the" flower does not close even when the sun has set. 


Obj£ction: Then why can't we assume a 'parinal11a 
hetu' in the case of the nlirror for the effect of a contrary 
face ? 


Reply: We do not find such a parinamahetu in the 
case of the mirror. When thcre is the proximity of the 
Bimba the mirror reveals the fornlof tbe face; and this 
requires carving which is not found. Further the refIec- 



218 


Panchapadika 


ction is not amenable to touch. If it is said that the parts 
of the mirror mediate the reflection and hence we cannot 
toucbit, then we cannot have a preceptual cognition of the 
reflection. Further we commonly say that "there is no differ- 
ent person in the mirror since there is no cause that can 
bring about such a person. This different person is as non- 
existent as the horns of a hare. 


Objection: Then as in the cognition of the false 
silver we have mithyatva hare, and as such there is no iden.. 
tity of face. Let it not be a different face; but it cannot 
be the identical face. Recognition too; does not make out 
the identity here; for the 'suktirajata' which ,has only a 
'mithyarupa' appears as baving the form of the real silver. 
Tl1ere is the recognition of real silver even in the erroneous 
cognition; and this does not make the two identical. 


Reply : No. In the case of the silver, we take it 
to be 'mithyarajata' since there is the sublation. Such a 
sublation is not found in the case of th
 reflection. The 
sublation does not involve any) recogntion of identity 
between the true and the false. Here we do not have the 
mblation ) f the form 'this is not a face'. It cannot take 
.ome such form as 'this face here is not mine' for there is 
'eco gnition. If it is the face of a person other than mine, 

ven then I cannot sablate it. Further, when the mirror 
s removed, the reflection is lost. But this is not a case 
.f sublation; for jf it were a case of sublation it would in- 
'olve the sublation of the mirror itself. 


Objection: Now, we never cognise our own facial 
vayava.s, and hence there is no perceptual experience of 
ur Own faces by ourselves. 



Vivaranam 


219 


Reply: No. We do cognise some of these avayavas; 
and just an ,ve cognise a part or aspect of an object and feel 
that we cognised the object completely, so do we feel about 
our own faces. 


Ob jection: Take "Tat tvam asP'. This is intended 
to sublate the 'tvam padartha' (thou) fOl no liberation is 
possible if the samsarin is not destroyed. As such this is 
not a correct illnstration: From the sentence 'tat tvam asi' 
we do find sublation in such cases. 
Reply : Here we should note that "so yam devadattah' 
(This is that Devadatta) refers only to 'taadaatmya' (iden- 
tity) and not to the parartha badha because there is no 
'samaanaadhikaranya' 
behveen the self and Brahman. The 
words 'tat' and 'tvam' convey the 'Brahmasvarupa' which 
is the Bimba for the self which is the reflection. If this 
were not the meaning, the sentence would have been 'Na 
tv,un asi' (you are not) and not 'tat tvam asi', as in the case 
of 'na rajata111 asti'. Further even the sastraic text 'nekshet 
adltyam aadityam .nastam yantam kadacana, noparaktam 
110 vaaristham no madhyam. nabhaso gatam' goes to show 
that the identity of the Bimbarupaa is ultimately real. By 
stating 'no vaaristham' this passage maintains the identity 
of the sun with the sun's reflection in water. 


The Akhyati vadin (Prabhakara) says: The reflection 
which is in the lr'irror does not appear as different from the 
original. But the Bimba itself appears (prakasa) as undis- 
tinguished from the mirror. It is not that the rays of the 
eye falling on the mirror apprehend (or cognise) the Bimba 
alone as existing in a different place. But the rays of the 
eye faIl on the mirror and are sent back and they cognise 
the Bimba only as existing in the aakasa. 



220 


Panchapadika 


Reply: It is a fact that there appears the reflection 
in an object that is in front of us and it appears as 'pr,ty. 
ang mukha'. As if it has entered into the mirror, it is cog. 
nised by us. We find as if we are seeing another person. 
The face does not appear as it is but as if it were another. 
When this is the fact of experience there is IDO use in con- 
tradicting it or rejecting it. 


Objection: An object having a specific form is refl. 
ected completely in the mirror. We no-where see that a 
specific object can exist completely and as it is in two diffe- 
rent places at the same time. How then can a specific 
finite entity appear at two different places with an identical 
nature, and yet how can both be real ? . 


Rep Iy : We only say that there is only one face exis.. 
ting at only one place. Such a face appears as two at two 
different places because of iIlusion (bhrama)' We do nOt 
say that the 'vicchedaavabhaasa' (appearance of difference) 
is real, but we only say that the identity is real. 
Objection": Then what is this that we have? One 
object alone existing at only one place is appearing diffe- 
rently as two and as existing at two places? What is this 
difference ? 
Reply: This difference (vicchada) is brought about 
by niaya H . 
Ob jection: But how can even Maya bring things 
tha.t are inconsistent with the pramanas ? 
Reply: There' is nothing impossible in Maya; for 
Maya is skilled in manifesting the impossible or the incon- 
ceivable. 



Vivaranam 


22l 


Objection: How is the appearance of 'viccheda' 
brought by avidya.? The tree, which is seen to have its bra-- 
nches upwards, is cognised in the water as having its bran- 
ches downwards. And we do not find any ajnana in such 
an appearance.. 


Reply: We have said carHer that the cause of adhya- 
asa is not the ajnana which is said to envelop the obje.::ts, 
for ajnana is not vishayaavaraka. In all these cases where 
we have 'aupaadhika bhrama' (conditioned illusion) it is 
only the upaadhi that functions as the sufficient cause for 
the evolution of <atmavidya'.. In '
opaadhika bhrama' you 
nlay cognise the ground, and yet this cognition is Dot oppo- 
sed to adhyasa. The -cognition of the ground wiH dispel or 
sublate only the 'nirupadhika bbrama
 (unconditioned ill a- 
sion). 


Objecton: In 'sopaadhika bhrama' we have the 
"bheda kartritvadhyasa (superimposition of a different 
agent). Here we can and do have the knowledge of the 
ground and this is the true knowledge. Yet this true know- 
ledge does not dispel adhyasa. But adhyasa is dispelled 
only when the upaadhi is dispelled. And the appearance 
of difference etc.. ought to remain as it is even when there is 
the true knowledge. There is the knowledge or apprehen- 
sion of the identity of the bimba.. There is the reflection 
and also the difference of this reflection from the original; 
and there are mithyavabhaasas (false appearences). Now 
even when there is the apprehension of the identity with 
Brahn1an, the distin-ctness and difference cannot vanish" 


Before a final reply can be given to this objection
 there 



222 


Pancbapadika 


Objection: If the self is only a reflection; we can- 
not understand tbe nature of the original since it is a refle- 
ction ouly ; The reflection of Devadatta does not compre- 
hend the nature of Devadatta. 


Reply: But in the case of Devadatta that which is 
reflected is only the 'acetamamsa" (non-sentient aspect).. 
Since the reflection is an unconscious entity it is unable to 
comprehend it ; for example, the pot does Dot comprehend 
its own reflection. . 


Ob jection: But there are tbe atheistic nleteriaIists 
according to whom the body itself is the conscious entity. 


Reply
: If it is the 'sacetanaamsa' that is reflected 
we find that the properties like 'syamatva' which are not in 
the original but in tbe unccnscio"Cs mirror are seen in the 
reflection since tbe reflection has a necessary relation with 
the D1irror. tThese properties come to the reflection be... 
cause of the mirror wbjch is unconscious and with which 
thel e is the relation to the reflection. This is the answer if 
we accept the lJ'ateriaHsts conten1ion. In any other view, 
we have to attribute these new properties of the reflection to 
the naturally unconscious entity called the body with which 
there is a relation for the conscious eTement of Devadatta.. 
As such the reflection being 'acetana' (unconscious), can.. 
not know that it is jdentical with the Bimba. There is 
another argument to show that the reflection of Devadatta. 
is 'acetana'. It is our experience tbat the movement is 
possible in the reflection if there is no corresponding move- 
ment in the original. If the reflection has at some n10- 
ment some consciousness, it should show movement without 
requiring such a movement in the original. 



Vivaranam 


223 


Objection: It is not possible to suppress the <:ajna- 
tva' (ignorance) of the self by [merely accepting that Brah- 
man is 'sarVi jna' (omnicient) while the self is 'ajna'l or 'kin- 
cijjna' ; for Brahman too cannot be said to be 'sarvajna'. 
The argument is thus stated for the objection. It is the face 
of Devadatta that is reflected, and Devadatta can !Ind out 
whether it is his reflection 
or not by his movements. So, 
the 'asraya' of'tattvajnana' as well as the 'aasraya' of the 
previous doubt is Devadatta himself. Likewise Brahman 
alone ought to be the 'asraya' for both .ajnaua' and 'tattva- 
jnana ' . 


Reply: Trlle knowledge can arise only in that per- 
son who has no bhranti (illusion) either with reference to 
hllnself or with reference to otbers; and the true knowledge 
can dispel his own ignorance only_ If I am in error, true 
knowledge dispels only my ignorance. Tattvajnana does 
not arise ,.from the bimbatva, but from dispelling the 
error. This error is the result of a.jnana and ajnana is the 
condition that brings the self into existence. 


Objection: Does Brahman know that the nature of 
the reflection as being that of the self? or no? if it 
does not know, he ceases to be 'sarvajna'.. If it knows 
it will see itself to be the 'samsaarin' (self). 


Reply: <'When Devadatta knows his reflection to 
be identical with himself, he does not take the reflection 
along with the objects that have crept into it. He finds 
his reflection as being smal1er. Ye he is not worried about 
these defects for he knows that it is his and that it is essen- 
tially non-different from him. Likewise Brahman sees in 
himself the self as his reflection and sees the samsara in 
the self; yet this is only a defeet that has crept with the 



224 


Panchapadika 


reflection, and it does not belong to him. This is what 
the true knowledge of identity gives. True knowledge and 
'samsara" are as differeut froln one another as white and 
black; and one cannot be the other. 
Objection: Even when there is the awareness of 
identity, the 'vicchedda vibhrama' does not disappear, 
Tattvajnana cannot dispel ths 'bheda bhralna', for it is to 
khowledge of identity similar to that between the bimba 
and its reflection. 


Reply: Yes, it is true in our empirical experience
 
The 'viccheda vibhrallla' is not Lbrought by the ref1cetion. 
but by the 'upaadhi' which is brought by ajnana; and this 
ajnana is dispelled by knowledge. By more knowledge 
alone there cannot be the dispelling' 'or disappeasance of 
the reflections for the cause of reflection is the mirror 
which is real. 


Ob jection : Then there is the 'Upadhijaadya' atta- 
ched to the self; as such the self cannot be the 'asraya' for 
'bhranti" and for true knowledge. If the self is the asraya 
for these, he ceases to be a reflection. 


Reply : But the self
 i::; similar to a reflection and 
is immediately apprehended by aU of us as 'cidruupa'. He 
!s not completely everCOll1e by the .antahkarana jaadya. 
There is the 'smtiti text - "Ruupam rupam prati ruupo 
babhuva H " and Badarayana's apoerism - "Ekahsa bahu- 
dha caiva drisyate jala candravat"; and Badarayana
s apho- 
risln -"Asha eva copama jala suryakadivat". These passages 
also establish the self to be the ref1ect
on of Brah111a just 
as there is the reflection of aakaasa which is without a form 



Vivaranam 


225 


-as its reflection in water along with the clouds and stars, 
so can there be the reflection of Brahman. Even in a 
little pot of water we do :find the reflection of a great ex- 
panse of the sky. And it is impossible to say that onJy 
that aakaasa which is in the water is seen as 'abhraadi 
bimba yuktah'. Hence Brahman is the Bimba and the self 
is its reflection and also 'cidrupa'. This is arrived at 
from the sastras and from direct experience. As such it 
is not possible to reject it. 


Ob jection: Why can't we say that like the 'ghata- 
akasa' , the self in conditioned (avacchinna) by the upaa.. 
dhi ? 


Reply: No. The self is that consciousness which is 
said to be conditioned by the upadhi; and Brahman 
is the consciousness while there are only various conscious- 
nesses here. Brahman should ha.ve to be outside the sphere 
of the conditioned. In the sphere of the conditioned 
Brahman is conditioned as the self completely (sarvat- 
mana). And if Brahman is outside of the conditioned, he 
is no longer the unconditioned. He cannot be every where, 
nor can he be the 'sarvaniyanta' , (controlling object) for 
the unconditioned cannot be there where the conditioned 
is, since that would bring about an unnecessary redupli.. 
cation. 


The avacchedvaadin might argue that the cupadhy 
avacchinnatva' is intended only to explain how the many 
forms or appearances come to exist, and that this has not- 
hing to do with Brahman that is outside. 



226 


Panchapadika 


To this the reply is - Brahman is said to be the caUSe 
etc. of the world, and to be the' sarvaniyantaa' (all contro. 
Bing). In passages like "y
 vijnanat..." we hear that 
Brahman who is distinct fro n the self appears as the vari- 
0us modifications in the proximity of the self. On the other.. 
band, if we accept the 'pratibimba vada', we find that there 
is the natural akaasa in the water and in such a water we 
find the 'pratibimbaakaasa'. Consequently the same origi- 
nal is there both in the water and outside it ; but we treat 
it as due to error. And even though the self is a reflection, 
Brahman can be the 'niyanta' etc. Thus this is a better 
theory. 


The self is 'cidruupa' (form of consciousness) and the 
cause for this reflection is ajnana which is dispelled by true 
knowledge arising from 'sravana'. Thus the self is the 
asraya for the false and the true knowledge as well. This 
self tbinks itself to be having the form of the ahankara. 
It does think that it has that for In which Brahman, who is 
similar to a Bimba, has. Even the .upaadhi svaruupa' 
appears as only a case of error. True knowledge dIspels 
this 'upaadhi' and then there is an ell:! to the 'vicchedaava- 
bhaasa' ." Hence when there is the experience of Bra- 
hman, there is the removal or distruction of mithya- 
atva. 


Objection: Ajnana has been said to be the upaadhi 
that conditions the self. Then how is it that you say the 
upaadhi of the self is ahankaara ? 


Rep Iy: There is no inconsistency here. Those that 
condition consciousness are many and they condition it i 1 
various WJ,ys and in varying degrees. It is only our conve- 



Vivaranam 


227 


nience and purpose that determine which of these we should 
take up. Thus the one pure consciousness which is 'nirvi. 
kalpaka' gets into a relation with avidya ; and in deep sleep 
it becomes 'ishadvikalpa vyavahara alambana.
 This avidya 
brings the antahkarana; and when the self is conditioned 
not directly by avidya but by the antahkarana in the drealn 
state, then it becomes 'sthuulatama vyavaharalambanam" 
(ground or locus for the activity of the gross body). When 
this antahkarana gets into an intimate relation with the 
gross body in the waking state, it becomes 'sthulatma vyva- 
haralambanam. For these three stages the immediate Up3t- 
adhis are respectively ajnana, antahkarana and the body. 
These do not create any differences or distinctions in the 
ultimate principle. From the difference in the upaadhis, 
you cannot conclude that there is a different self for each 
upaadhi. Each succeeding 
conditioning entity conditions 
that which is already conditioned by the previous entity. If 
there is no such relation between the upaadhis, you will 
a.rFlve at the difference in the selves. 


Objection: Ajnaana is the material cause of the 
gross body and it is also "uparakta' by the samskara of the 
subtle body. This subtle body is absent in deep sleep. Then 
how can such an ajnana condition the self in deep sleep? 
The distinction between the self and Brahman is due to 
bhranti, and there is no such bhrantl in deep sleep. And 
if you argue that the distinction is assumed as 'arthagata' 
(as being in the two objects)because of the'bhranty ajnana', . 
then the 'vibhaga' is a product of ajnana. Now there is a 
devolution of all the products of ajnana in deep sleep. As 
such the distinction must be absent in deep sleep. In the 
absence of the distinction, the 'avidya ahankarya' will have 



228 


Panchapadika 


to be in Brahman. But if this distinction is not due to 
ajnana, then the distinction will have to be beginningless. 
And there cannot be any 'avidya nimittatva' . 


Reply: To avoid the 'avidya samskarya' (modified 
by nesceience) for Brahman, we assume that the distinction 
between the self and Brahman exists even in deep sleep. 


Objection: Then it must be a distinction arising 
from (or based upon) the nature of the two objects, and not 
fronl ajnana. 


Reply: Yes. In all cases of distinction excepting 
that involved in deep sleep, the distinction is only a case of 
error and has its 'upadana' in avidya. 
Objection: Then that distinction which is based on 
the nature of the two objects cannot have avidya as its upa- 
dana, for it is beginningless and is not erroneous. 


Reply: Yes. Even though it is beginninglesss, we 
say that all distinction is dependent on avidya. The rela- 
tion of the self to avidya does not have avidya as its upa- 
dana ; but it is dependent on, is determined by avidya. Be- 
fore this relation has arisen, there cannot be an indepcndent 
existence of the self. Because of this inconsistency we speak 
of the self and of the relation of tbe self to avidya as being 
determined by avidya. There is no 'avidyo padanata' for 
the 'atmavidya sambandha' (relation with avidya) for the 
beginningless ajnana can only bring the relation of the self 
to avidya. 
Objection: How is the distinction of the self from 
Brahman dependant on avidya, or deternlined by avidya ? 



Vivaranam 


229 


Reply: Consciousness is qualified by the beginning. 
less avidya and appears as tbe be.ginningless selves by re- 
maining as the asraya (locus) for the temporary yet beginh.. 
ningless difference. It is Ql1ly a temporary or unreal diffe- 
rence and not an actual 'One because of the identity of that 
consciousness with the self Hence this distinction has its 
"asraya' in the 
al1aady avidya visishtam caitanyam'G(conscio.. 
usness modified by the beginningless avidya). This distjnc- 
tion acquires an 'uparaga' (relationship) with the svarupa 
also, and as such it becomes specifically 'avidya tantra'. 
Thus we speak of the distinction as 'avidya krita't (brought 
by avidya). Those that are dependent on avidya are like 
the 'avidya sambandha' itself both canirvachaniya' and be.. 
ginnin.gless ; and this is not inconsistent with them.. 


It is tbe specific -or qualified mirror and the specific or 
qualified pot that gives rise to the appearance of an unreal 
difference between the face and tbe akaasa on the one hand 
and their reflections on the other. There is [no 'svarupato 
bheda
. Hen'Ce we 'Conclude that difference is dependant on 
the upadhi. 


The self, then, as the reflection appears to be distinct 
from Brahman because of the functioning of the beginning- 
less avidya. From this avidya there arise other upa.dhis 
like ahankara. And in so far as these belong to the same 
reflection, they are all treated as upadhis. ' 
Now the Bhedabhadavaadin (Bhaskara) argues that 
'Since the reflection is an unreal elltity
 the self cannot be 
the reflection of Brahman. 
We have to reply that the reflection of the face and 
that of the 'cit svarupa' are not unreal entities or fictions, 



230 


Panchapadika: 


Even though we admit that the difference and the 'vipar- 
yasa' here are unrea1, there is no harm in so far as the face 
and consciousness are concerned. By implicity rejecting 
the 'mithyaamsa' we apprehend the 'bimbatmata 7 for the 
face and for the 'cit svarupa'. Bondage and liberation ,how- 
ever, are not for the mithyamas. but for the 'svarupa' of the 
self. So that there may not be any avidya samkarya for 
Brahman, we have shown that the self differs from Brah- 
man, because of the upadhi which only the self has. As 
such Bhaskara errs profoundly in not under&tanding the 
standpoint of others and in maintaining the unreality of 
the reflection. 
IllUSTRATIONS: 
Ahankara functions as the upadhi and brings the 
distinction between the self and Brahman. This is the 
purport of the illustrations given for Bimba Pratibimba 
vaada - the reflection of the sun in the water, or of the 
face in the mirror. 


That ahamkara functioning as the upadhi brings the 
'anatmadh;yasa', is the purport of the illustration of the 
crystal appearing red. These adhyasas require the 'upa- 
dhi' . 


Then why is the il1ustratiot1 of the snake appearing in 
the rope given? In the adhyasa iUustrated by the previous 
examples We have real upadhi really in the form of the 
mirror Qr of the ahankara. But in the case of the anat- 
madhyasa too do we require such as upadhi near by? The 
self is consciousness and what is adhayasta on it is different 
from consciousness. To show that the adhyasa here does 



Vivaranam 


231 


ing in the rope is 
often given" Kartritvaadhyasa has 
ahankara as its upadhi. And this is the cousequence of a 
"nirupaadhika adhyasa'. It is to explain this that such an 
illustration is given. 


Objecticn : But every where adhya'Sa requires an 
upadhi which is different from both the ground and the 
consequent. It cannot be without an upadh.i. 
 In the case 
-of the rognition of the snake the snake may not be near 
by. But formerly we had such experiences and now there 
.are the samakaras of those experiences and, these samskaa- 
I'as constitute the upadhi u .. 


Reply: So much of an upadhi that is brought about 
only by the samskaras of the previous experience is found 
in the case of the self also. What is denied is only ;that 
upadhi which exists independently. The samskara of the 
previous experience alone cannot be said to be the cause of 
error. There is no rule stating that the 'purva bhranti 
samskara' is not the cause. Here too we have the aham- 
karta and the samskaras to which this ahankara gives rise. 
The relation between these two is as beginning less as that 
between the seed and the plant. This causal relati 1D be- 
gets a S&llskara which is the cause .of the errcneous cog- 
nition. 


So far there illustrations have been able to establish 
tbe 'sopadhika' and 'nirupadhika' forms of adhyasa. 
What then is the purpose of the 'gbatakasa", illustration? 
It aims at explaining ..to us that the ground which is con- 
sciousness is 'asanga" (non-relational) Reality. The 
redness which is a property of the flower has a synthetic 
unity with the crystal which is a substance. The crysta.l is 



232 


Panchapadika 


a 'savayava' (having parts) substance and it can have the 
property of redness. Yet there is the 'asambhed avabhaasa 
of the red. This appearance is aided by, 'anirvachani- 
yatva' (inexplecablity). Yet this appearance is taken as 
if the crystal is related to the red colour. In the ca-se of 
the rope we have the cognition of the snake; and this snake 
is neither sambhinna' (fused) nor 'asan1bhina' (not ft sed) 
in the rope. Thus these illustrations are not able to ex- 
plain the 'asangatva' (non-relational) nature of the self as 
conveyed by the srutis 'asango nahi sajjate" and 'asngo 
hy ayam purusah." As such the -ghatakasa' illustration is 
given. In the case of the 'ghatakasa' we find that it is only 
the consideration of the upadhi that gives us distinctions 
like difference, form an
 effect; and these are seen as the 
internal different;ations of the upadhi (or brought about 
by the upaadhi). 
Objection: If the illustrations alone are ca1)able 
I 
of establishing the 'avikaritva' (changelessness), 'e
(atva' 
(oneness) and 'as angatva !' of the self, then the 'agama, 
is of no further use. It is better not to touch it. 


Reply: Sruti, nyaya and experience establish the 
self and determine its nature, and these illustrations are 
only intended to ward off the doubts that arise in the en.. 
quiry.' They make us eomprehend the truths. They do 
not give us the immedia to experience of Reality. Examp.. 
les alone are not capable of establishing the truth; and 
there is also the possibility of counter examples. Argum
nt 
from analoga is the weakest one. 
Pure Consciousness is the Ground; 
Sankara's statement 'asma(pratyaya vishayatvat' js 
directed towards establishing the adhyasa on the self. So 



Vivaranam 


233 


far we have established the 'asmat pratyaya
 (I, self) and 
the adhyasa to which it gives rise to. Now the meaning of 
'vishaya' (object) is given. 


Pure consciousness is of the nature of the not-this 
and as such is not an object, yet it makes the 'vyavahara
 
(activity) possible in the ahankara : for ahankara conditions 
consciousness. As such accepting the 'gaunivritti" 
(secondary idea) we say that consciousness is the object for 
the 'asmat pr at yay a' , and this object i
 also seen to be 
'vyvaharayogya' in so far as it appears as ahankara. 


Objection: The 'anatmadhyasa' (superimpositton 
of the not-self) is only 'savikalpaka' (determinate,delimited 
(finite) adhyasa ; and as such the ground should also be 
finite or determined. Hence the unlimited or unconditioned 
consciousness alone cannot be the ground. How can there 
be abankara adhyasa which is that of a finite entity? Now 
there is adhyasa only when there is 'vyavahara yogyatva'; 
and there is vyavahara yogyatva only when there is adbyasa. 
This involves the fallacy of mutual dependence. 


Reply: The 'savikalpadhyasa' is seen to have a nir- 
.vikalpa (non-determined) entity as its ground. We can 
say that the ajnanadhyasa has n1ade the ground a savikalpa 
<>ne for the ahankara or the 'purvahankaradhyasa (super- 
imposition of the prior ego) has made the ground a svikalpa 
one. As such for the later ahankaradhyasa, the ground can 
be the cidavabhasa. Beginninglessness explains the adhyasa 
,satisfactorily. 



234 


Panchapadika 


Conciousness as the subject, Doer Enjoyer. 
Objection: The self is beyond change, is pure con- 
sciousness, is undefiled blise and asanga. Such a self can'" 
not be the pramata (knower) for a pramana involves pra.. 
miti (knowledge) ; and prarniti requires 'pramana kriya 
parinama' (activity of the meaning of knowledge). This 
is impossible in the case of that consciousness. If one is 
Lot a pramata, he can be neither the doer nor the enjoyer. 
The vyvahara which is of the nature of samsarga implies the 
groups... pramata - pramana - prameya, Karta... Karma ... 
Kriya, and bhokta - B.hoga - bhoktavya, The vyavahara is 
impossible in the case of the self. The ahankara being un- 
conscious cannot be the a.sraya of these. As such there can 
be no vyavahara at all. 


Further, the prakasa (effulgence) of consd ousness is 
natural and inherent in it ; as such it itself can illumine the 
objects. Since it is sarvagata (all-pervamive), it should 
illumine everything. This would lead to avyavastha (impo- 
ssibility of any distinctions). Hence we should accept the 
view that the self is 
:capable of undergoing transforma- 
tions or changes, 


Other objections and an examination of these objec.. 
tions follows: 


Objection: These difficulties do not arise if we hold 
to the all-pervasive character of the self. Knowledge may 
be an act or a property; and if knowledge aris2s fron1 the 
:catushtaya sannikarsha' (coming together of the four) this 
knowledge would have to arise as having a 'samavaya' (in- 
herent) relation with the self since it can not have any 'pra- 
:lesasrayatva' (locus) in view of the self being 'niravayava'. 



Vi varan am 


235 


Then knowledgc is related to the self which is .its ground; 
and the self is all-pervasive. Such a self win then have a 
contact with all finite objects or substances. Consequently 
all should have the knowledgei=ithat:: illumines all objects. 
The pradipa has an act and also a 'prakasa guna', and these 
are related to the lan1p which is their ground. As such a 
corresponding illumination is cognised in the object. Why 
can't we say that there is only an 'adri::;hta sambandha' 
(mysteriouls relation) because of which knowledge does not 
illumine all objects but only the one concerned? 


No, for the lamp is so seen to manifest all the objects 
that have a relation with the light. This is the nature of 
the objects, and we find no rule that can go against this. 
'Sukha' and 'duhkha' are taken to be 'adrishtavishayas' 
whence we do not recognise objects like thorn etc. as capa- 
ble of giving rise to that 'duhkha' (sorrow). 


Then, the object gives rise to knowledge and knowledge 
may be said to illumine or nlanifest only this object and 
not all. 


No. Even the sense organ like the eye has a part in 
giving rise to the cognition, and knowledge should also, illu- 
mine the eye. Since even that which bas not given rise to 
knowle4ge appears as the object, we cannot say that know- 
ledge illumines only that object which has given rise to it. 
The 'prakaasa guna' of the;lamp, for instance, is seen to illu- 
mine or manifest even the 'ajanaka vishaya' (non-existent) 
which is related to it. 


If knowledge is a property, it cannot illumine to obj- 
ect which has brought it. The same difficulty is there even 



236 


Panchapadika 


if knowledge is an act. The arrow may not have any known 
target; bu
 when once it is discharged it is sure to hit that 
person who acquires a relation with its 'asraya'. 


,V ell, the self is 'niravayava' (partless) and as such it 
can have a contact with all. 


If so, it can ill umine or manifest nothing. Kriya and 
guna cannot have any samsarga with any object other than 
their own 'asraya'. They cannotlalso have any 'samsarga' 
even with their own 'asraya'; and in the absence of the 
'samsarga', they can bring nothing to light. As such the 
self cannot be niravayava. 


Then the objector proceeds to make ouf his position by 
arguing that knowledge has the 'samavaya' relation only 
with the 'pradesa' (place) of the self which is conditioned 
by the body. It does not have this relation with the whole 
self. Then the self would be 'saavayava' and it cannot ill- 
umine or manifest an object that is not immediate and 
direct. Since the 'prakasa' which has its ground in the self 
has no 'samsarga' with the object, it can be said that 
kriya, guna etc., do not have the? 'asrayati1anghana' (over. 
coming or passing beyond their own asraya). There can 
not be the illumination or manifestation due to the relation 
with the 'anasrayatva. pradesa', for that would involve the 
manifestation of everything. 
But is it not a fact that an 'abhicaarakarma
 (witch- 
craft) has its asraya in a person from whom it proceed') 
and it then proceeds to create the evil in another person 
who h
s no r.elation with the form
r? It appears to have 
a relatIon wIth one who is not related to its 'asrayatma 
pradesa'. Why can't we accept the same process here? 



Vivaranam 


237 


No. We do see that the harm is created in ano}her 
:and as such we have to admit an 'adrishta sambandha' 
between these tvlo places.. But this only makes us infer 
that the relation here is effected by the presiding spirit, or 
by god, or by some 'sakti' {power).. The 'Object :8 sa
d to 
be manifested by the relation of the sensc organ with the 
-object, of the mind with the sense organ, and of the self 
with the min
 But this manifestation of the object does 
not arise from the knowlcdge which has its gound in the 
person; for even if another object is related to this object, 
that another object is seen to be manifested. Further 
, 
prior to the emergence of the knowledge arising froln the 

catushtaya sannika.tsa', we cannot say that is exists and 
the knowledge tha.t has arisen has no relation with the 
objects,. Consequently this knowledge can not determine 
the existance of the objec
 


All these defects arise whether the self is anuparina 
.ama 
(atomic) or 'deha parimal.a' (medium magnitude)- 
Hence no one is able to establish the possibility of 'prama.: 
nadi vyav'Bhara'.. 


Advai'tic Theory of Perception: 


To a certain extent only Advaita can establid1. the dis- 
tinction .of subject, object, means of cognition etc. 


There is the 'antah.karana' which is the ida111 anlsa (th.
 
this-aspect) of the ahankara. This 
 antahkarana undergoes 
an evolutionary process (parinana vyapara) which is spoken 
of as jnana because it is the 'antahkarana vritti" (spistemic 
act). The antahkarana is a substance having parts or 
-.avayavas', and it has the nature of prakasa. It is that 



238 


Panchapadika 


unseen thing which cooperates with the sence organs etc., 
and which evolves itseif far and wide like a long ray of 
light; for it is commonly seen that 'tejas' (light) nl0ves 
quic1dy to a very great dis1ance in space. It has a quick 
spatial and temporal movement. 
This 'parinama vyapara' of the antahhakara has a 
transitive reference. It has an object and proceeds towards 
it. In so doing it brings out something sepcific to the self 
which is its ground; for every act functions as a cat se 
and brings a change or modification in its own asraya or 
ground. This 'parinama' brings a specific state called the 
"kartrikarma sambandha', (subject-act relation). The act 
conveyed by 'prapnoti' (obtains) referes to a specific state 
of the doer with reference to the object obtained. This is 
known in the case of the 'antahkarana parinama' as the 
rel
tion between the knower and the known. 


Due to its own 'par i nall1a . let the antahkarana. have a 
relation with the object. But how docs the 'vishaya visesha- 
vabhasa' (apppearance of a specific object) arise for the 
self'? The reply is as follows : 


Tbe . . manifesting medium of consciousness in only 
tbat antahkarana which is'vishaya visesha sanlbandha'. The 
antahkarana has a relationship with the specific object. The 
antahkarana brings about this relation to consciousness. 


Since it is every where enveloped by avidya, the nature 
of consciousness is unn1anifested (anabhivyakta svabhavaln). 
Yet since the antahkarana is the n1edium that conditions 
consciousness, consciouness is manifested or revealed thro... 
ugb it. Whatever oe the specific n10difications that the 



Viv a.ran am 


;:39 


a.ntahkarana undergoes, consciousness alone is revealed 
through all of them. The ball .of iron when it is aflame 
assumes a variety of forn1s and all these forms are also the 
forms of the. :fire. As such, consciousness, as conditioned 
by the antabkarana which is already 'samsri
hta' (fused) 
with the objects, assumes that form into which this antah- 
karana has evolved itself. 


Let the consciousness whi'Ch is conditioned by the 'pra- 
matri rupa' appeal' as the pramata (knower). But how does 
this consciousness become that which is conditioned by 
the object? The answer is- There is the 'parinama vya... 
para' which is the es'Sential or most important act of the 
ant ahkar ana. This action has a transitive reference. It 
refers to an object whi-ch is not apprently a conscious ent- 
tity. Due to the 'parinama samsarga' the unconscious 
nature (jadyatva) of the object stands rejected or transfor- 
med. The object becomes -capable of giving up its exclu- 
sive nature for it is enveloped by the activity of the antah- 
karana. This is possible because the func:tioning of the 
antahkarana is a transformation (vivarta) of consciousness. 
Just as the alltahkarana makes itself capable of mJ.nifesting 
consciousness, so does it make its related object too capable 
of manifesting the same consciousness. 


Objection : Because there is the difference in the 
"avacchedaka' (the manifesting medium), there arises the 
difference in the 'cit prak.asa'. Then 11 ow does the ':sall1- 
sarga' with the "pramatriruravabhasa' (appearance of the 
knower) arise for the experience which is 'Conditioned by 
the objects? If there is no 'san1sarga' at all, how can we 
say that 'this is known by me'? How can we have the 
knowledge that manifests the samsarga bet\veen the subject 



240 


Panchapadika 


and the object? In other words, what is the 'pramana vya- 
vastha"? And how does it arise in view of the differences 
between one experience and another? The apprehension of 
only one relation between the subject and the object- 
cannot bring the manifestation of the objects or of the 
knowledge of the objects. 


Reply: 'The 'antahkarana vritti' involves or bringS 
the subject.. object relation. Her,ein the immediate cons- 
ciousness as .conditioned by the 'pramatravastha visesha' 
(specif ic state of the knower) is identical with that immedi- 
acy of the object. Such an identity is of the nature of 
immediacy and this is manifested by the antahkarana . vrt-i. 
The vrtti parinama (evolution of the epistemic 
act) has the 
samsarga (relation) with both the subject and the object. 


\\-Then there .is a 'vyanjaka bheda ' (difference in the 
medium or conditioning) there will be a'vyangya bheda' 
(difference in the conditioned). But here such a thing is 
not possible since the same 'parinama vritti' as having the 
samsrishti (fusion) with both the subject and the object, 
has become 'the vyanjaka (manifesting form). The mani- 
festing medium is the same for both; but that which is 
manifested appears differently in different parts. 


Objection : If the 'caitanyaabhivyakti' (manifesta- 
tion of consciousness) is the same in both, then is the expe- 
rience as conditioned by the pot the subject? Or is the sub- 
ject that experiences or consciousness which is conditioned 
by the antahkarana ? Whatever it is, both are identical. 


Reply: The antahkaran
 is the upaadhi that eon. 
ditions the self. The vritt is its specific state in which We 



Vivaranam 


241 


have the conditioned consciousness. This specific state 
characterizes the 'pramata' (the subject). 'Pramaatrita 9 
being a subject, is of the nature of the doer alone, and not 
of the object, Since the antahkarana is here the doer, we 
speak of the subject as the consciousness which is condi- 
tioned by the antahkarana. 
Objection: If there is an identical consciousness, 
the subject alone will have to constitute the evperience or 
the complete cognition. Is this not inconsistant ? 


Reply: No. Cognition involves that consciousness 
which is conditioned or manifested by the object; and thus 
we have the cognition with the experience of such an object.. 
Thus the subject is the consciousness as conditioned by the 
antahkarana, and the 'phala' is the consciousness as con- 
ditioned by she object. 


Objecti on: The vritti has its asraya in the antah- 
karana, while the cognition has the samavaya (in...herence) 
relation with the self. Thus there are two differ-ent grounds 
for both. Further, they have different objects also. The 
vritti refers to the object pot, while the cognition refers 
to the antahkarana. Thus kriya (vritti) andphala (cogn 
ition) have different grounds' and different objects. Is 
this not inconsistent ? 


Reply: No. Antahkarana and self are not two dif- 
ferententies; for the adhyasa between these. two gives 
rise only to a common idenitcal ground. And since the pot 
too is only a medium manifesting consciousness, there is 
only a common identical object for both the vritti and the 
cognition. . 



242 


Panchapadika 


Objection The samkhya system says that the 
n1eaning is in the intellect and that the purusha knows this 
meaning. Now according to your position, the meaning 
js consciousness, is in consciousness, and consciousnsss 
comprehends it. 


Reply: The samkhya contention is only this .. The 
meaning is first in the intellect, and later on the self com.. 
prehends it having become identical witb the intellect. 
Thus we have seen that even though the self is all-per.. 
vasive its prakasa is enveloped by avidya. This self is con- 
ditioned by the upadhi called the antahkarana. The vritti 
of this antahkarana constitut es the medium through which 
consciousness is revealed. In so far as this medium in- 
volves the objects that manifest consciousness, it is with 
reference to the objects that we speak of the self as being 
the subject. 


O
jection: What is 'abhivyakti' (manifestation) ? 
Reply: It is only the removal of the 'avarana' (en- 
velope), not anything that brightens or adds to the 'sva- 
rupa). It is only the removal of that which prevents the 
illumination of the real, or it is only the dispeIling of the 
ajnana that has enveloped the conditioned self. 


Objection: Now there is the sTuti text - "hrir dhir- 
bhir ityetat sarvam manahva". Here we hear of the upadhi 
having the nature of parinama. What is its pramaana ? 
Is manas (mind) too an evolute ? 


Reply: '11anas' is that which has the 'jnana pari- 
nama'; and this 'vyavahara' is the buddhi'. Since buddhi 



Vivaranam 


243 


and manas are identical, we are able to speak of the 'parl- 
namavati buddhih' (intellect transforms or changes). 


Thus it is the upadhi which brings about the 'vyava- 
stha bheda'. Now if it 
is argued - that all objects as 
objects are on the same level in so far as they are all 
equaHy well illumined by consciousness; and that therefore 
everything must be ma lifested or illumined at the same 
time then this argument comes from one who does not 
know the nature of the up3.dhi and who does not know 
what it involves. 


The subject is 'svayam jyotih' (self luminous); when 
there is a relation with. the objects for this subject there 
arises an experience; and this experience is an in1Il1ediat e 
one and is )denticaI for al1. The kartradi karakas give 
rise to the 'jnanakriyaa' {only when they function together. 
The kartrikaraka (doer-ship) requires a specific object 
(karma k
raka) for La cognition. As such the :cognition 
and the vritti have their ground only in the subject, and 
not elsewhere. That karmakaraka which gives us the 
vrittijnana is the one related to the kartr;karaka. The 
experience, then, has its ground in the object. 


Obj&ction: If consciousness is manifested also in 
the 'karmakaraka', then we
have to note that the object is 
an object for all subjects. As such it should appear for 
all subjects. 


Reply : "Karmakaraka give us the :.cognition only 
when it functions together with the kartrikaraka. As such 
this gives rise to the immediacy of the subject only, just as 
the previous agrument gives rise to the immediacy of the 



244 


Panchapadika 


object. "Sah graamam gacchati". Here 'grarna' (village) 
is the object and it is rea1ised by the person who moves. It 
referes to the person as being the one imn1ediately involved 
here. 


The 'vishaya caitanya' (object as consciouness) is mani- 
fested only as being identical with that 'pramatri caitanya 
which is related to the object concerned. It is not identi- 
cal with any other 'pramaatri caitanya' which is not involved 
in the cognition. As such all cannot have the same cogni- 
tion when only one has it. 


Objection : The lamp has prakasa and it bas sam- 
sarga with all objects; and it manifests them all. Likewise 
since consciouness is 'svayam prakaasa' and all pervasive, 
it has samsarga with all objects; and it should manifest or 
illumine all. In such a case how can you assume ahan- 
kaara to be the upadhi for that consciousness? 


Reply: In so far as the individual is concerned, it is 
the tantahkarana parinama vritti that brings about a rela- 
tion of samasrishti]between the subject and the object. The 
object is necessarily implied by the vritti; and antahkarana 
conditions consciousness. Even though consciousness has 
contact with all objects, it can illmine only those with 
which the vritti is connected; and because of the vritti there 
arises the cognition. When the vritti is absent the cogni.. 
tion is impossible even if there is the 'vishay oparaga' 
(attachment to the object) for conciousness. 


Obje(.tion: Prakasamarata is attibuted only to the 
'samsarga' of the 'prakasa'. It is tbe prakaas a that 
illumines the objects on ",hich it falls. It does not illu.. 



Vivaranam 


245 


mine other objects because consciousness being <asanga, 
(non-relational) does not have any relation with them. If 
this is given as the explanation, then we have to say, that 
consciousness being 'asanga' cannot have any relation with 
the an tahkaran a; and that such an upadhi cannot illu.. 
mine anything. 


Rep!y: Let it be so
 The self that is -conditioned by 
the anI ahkarana is like the reflection; and it illumines 
those -objocts which are 'samsrishta' with it. Brahman, on 
the otherhand, is like the Bimba; and since it is aU- 
pervasive.. It can illumine every thing. The sarvadarsitva 
< all-seeingness) of Brahmam does not come to the self also, 
just as the purity of the face does not come to the reflection. 
And the kincijjnatva' of the self does not belong to Bra- 
hman, just like the darkness of the reflection. Thus we can 
explain everything.. 
Objec"tion: This is not convIncIng. Now, cons- 
ciousness as conditioned by the object is the Brahma caita- 
nya; and this cannot be attributed to (or cannot be in) the 
self that is conditioned by ahankaara; just as the 'sarva- 
jnatva' (all-knowingness) of Brahman is not found in the 
self. Then there cannot be any Jvi shay aavabhasa' for the 
self.. 
Reply: But between the antahkarana which is the 
upadhi of tbe self and the object there is a mutual syntac- 
tical relation. And even though consciousness is conditi.. 
oned by both these, the t vo are mutually samsrishta. As 
such the self can have th
 'vishayavabhasa'.. 
Objection: In such a case, we bave to note that the 
antahkarana is always samsarishta with Brahman who is 
all-pervasive. The antahkarana is the upadhi. The iden- 



246 


Panchapadika 


tity of the jiva and Brahma caitanya is manifested in tl1e 
upadhi. As such the sarvjnatva of Brahman which has 
the illulnination for the self is eternal. The self then will 
cease to be the conditioned mode of consciousness. 


Reply : Then we shan argue from another standpoint. 
The self is conditioned by avidya. 


Objection: Consciousness is all - pervasive; and 
then it cannot even illumine or reveal itself. When 'cai- 
tanya prakasa' is in itself 'aprakasamana', it cannot reveal 
any object; for the lamp that is devoid of light does not 
manifest any object. Further, we can place one finger before 
our eye and prevent the rays of the sun falling on it. Like- 
wise that which conditions consciousness obstructs or pre- 
vents the prakasa of the all-pervading consciousness. 


Reply: Due to the uparaga (attachment) of the an- 
tahkarana, the avarana is overcome; and consciousness 
which is manifested or revealed therein is able to manifest a 
.little. 


Objection: Even this is faulty. The antahkarana 
is the product of avidya. How can an effect overC01ne or 
dispel its cause, since cause and effect have only the mutual 
relation of co. operation. Thus you cannot establish the 
'kincijjnatva' of the self from the 'ahankaropadhi'. 


Final Reply: That avidya is the upadhi of the self 
is quite proper. The all-pervasive self being 'asanga' can- 
not have 'samyoga' with all. Only -a conditioned consci- 
ousness can have the relation with son1e. Further, prakasa 
can illumine or manifest only that object with which there 



Vivaranam 


247 


is the Csamyoga' . Moreover, BJahlnan being the 'sarvopa_ 
dana' (cause of all) makes manifest the whole world as non. 
different fro'Jl itself, just as it manife&ts to the self as iden- 
tical with itself. The self cannot do this because it is not 
the upadana of the world. 


Objection: But Brahman is all-pervasive and un- 
related to any object being asanga. How does this casam.. 
srishta' (non-relational) consciousness acquire a samsarga 
relation with antahkarana ? 


Reply: Three possible explanations are given. They 
are respectively (1) ciduparaganta vritti (attached to cons. 
ciousness), (2) abhedartha (non-different) vrttih, and 
(3) avaranabhibhavartha (enveloping) vrttih'. 


1) cGotva' is a (cowness) generic universal. Even 
though lions and other animals which are different from tb
 
cow are near by, the <gotva' is not manifested by the horse 
etc because the horse has no relation with 'gotva'. It is the 
nature of 
gotva' to be manifested only by those amimals 
that have the dewlap etc., for 'gotva' has a necessary and 
natural relation only with such animals. 


2) There is the pradipa prabha (light the lamp). The 
ray of light spreads to the air, ether, rasa, gandha etc. 
Yet because of its nature, it does ,not manifest these. It 
manifests only those forms with which it has a samsarga. 
Likewise it is the specific nature of consciousness to have 
its sams!l.rga with the antahkarana only and not with any- 
thing else. 
c) Thorns etc. by them'Selves do not burn. But when 
the ball of fire has its samsarga with them, they begin to 



248 


Panchapadika 


burn. The iron ball is like the ahankara, while the fire of 
the baIl is like the self. It is such a self that illumines 
those objects that are not capqble of revealing themselves. 
Hence it is proper to treat ahankara as the upadhi. 


2) We may argue that the self has an upadhi. Being 
conditioned by the upadhi, the self is 'paricchinna'; and 
hence it cann<>t illumine every thing. That which brings 
\11 is conditioning is the antahkarana which has vritti. This 
y r itti effects a samsarga with the objects whence arises the 
n1anifcstation of the 'vishaya ca.itanya'. 'Jivacaitanyata' 
is not opposed to this. There will be an eternal illumina- 
tion of all the obj.:::cts as in the case of Brahman only when 
the antahkarana vritd undergoes a Inadification in the form 
of Bralunan. Till such a vritti can have the samsarga, 
only a fl.:w objects are revealed. It is not the samsargl of 
the real antahkarana that bringes this manifestation, Msince 
tha.t would have to reveal also th
 dharmas of this antah- 
karana. That antahkarana whose vritti has evolved itself 
into the forn1 of the self, only such an antakarana can 
ovcrcon1C the self. If this were not true, the experience 
of deep sleep would have to be false. Hence we conclude 
that the cr'paricchinnatva\ of the self does not bring the 
nlanifestation of all objects. 


3) The self is enveloped by ajnana; and even though 
it is svay
 nl prakasa, it is unable to manifest all the obje- 
cts. And when there is the upasarga with the antahkarana, 
there disappears the 'avarana'. Manif
station arises there 
{)nly
 a.nd that object is illumineted with which there is the 

a 111
arga for the antahkarana. Ajnana envolopes the self 
a.nd produces the antahxarana, and this antahkarana can 
dl$pel the avarana because of the vritti. That an effect 



Vivaranam 


249 


can put an end to the normal act of its cause is seen in the 
cases of the serpent and the tree coming!to appear respecti- 
vely from cowdng and clay. Thus we can establish the 
'pramatritvaadi vyavastha' for the self. 


Vijnana Vada : 
We have said that the object is a transformation 
(vivarta) of consciousness. Eventhough consciousness is 
not different from the object, it is of the only form of 
the object; it is of the only form of 'aham avabhasa' (appe- 
arance of the I). How does it differ from vijnanavada? 


Vishayaa paroksha (immediacy of the object) and 
vishaya paroksha are admitted;. and an identity has been 
arrived at between pramata, pramiti and prameya in terms 
of conscriouness. If the 'niladi vishaya' (object like blue) 
too were of the nature of immediacy, it nleans that we have 
the 'nilatmika samvit' (consciousness as blue). The cogni- 
tion or consciousness of the blue will be the consciousness 
itself. This amounts to the Buddhist position. 


The Vijnanavadin
 argue that since vijnana is momen- 
tary there a1 ises difference. And this difference gives us 
the cogn:tion of the object which is said to have the 'artha- 
kriya samar 1 hya' .(pragmatic ability) and because of this 
'samathya', the object is only sunya (vo.id). 
The Vedantins argue that due to the 'samvedana' 
(consciousness as experience) which is advitiya (non-dual) 
there arises the non-differen
e between the subject and the 
object. Yet difference too is there; and this gives us the 
cognition of the object which has the 'arthakriya sanla- 



250 


Panchapadika 


rthya'; and because of the 'samarthya' the 'sthayitva' (stea.. 
diness) of the object is not subject to negation or sublation. 
Where as there is 'badhita sthayitva' (negative steadiness;) 
in the other view, here we have 'abadhita sthayitva'. Fur.. 
ther, from the standpoint of the 'samvedana' difference is 
absent. Yet an 'aropita bheda' (imputed difference) is 
accepted, whence this doctrine cannot be confused with 
the Mimaamsaka position. 


To distinguish the Vedantic position from that of the 
Buddhists, Padmapaada argues: There is the avabhasa of 
the blue and that of the yel10w as excluding one another. 
In so far as both are immediate cognitions, the immediacy 
proper is identical in both. One immedicy is not exc1usive 
of another immediacy; bu(:the object felt in one immediacy 
is exclusive of the object felt in the other. We have the 
'samvid eka rupavagama'. The samvit for both is one and 
the same.' 
 


The samvid (consciousness) is the continuant in all 
apprehensions and as such may be said to be identical in 
aU of them. But there is the 'bheda pratiti' (awareness of 
difference) also in so far as there are two or more than two 
apprehensions. Then how can there be the samvid aikyam 
(oneness of consciousness) ? Let there be 'ekarupata' 
because of the recognition of identity. But there is also 
the awareness or apprehension of difference, since one is a 
'ghata (pot) samivt' while the other is a 'pata (cloth) 
samvit' . 


The 'avabhasa- of difference is not natural to the 
immediacy of the samvit. The difference brought by the 
'paropadhi' does not negate or su.blate the 'svarupa pra- 
tyabhijna' . 



Vivaranam 


25JJ 


Objection: Even if there is the identity of samvits 
why can't there be the non-difference of objects? Why 
can't there be the non-difference of the 'samvedya' (known) 
with the 'samvit' ? 


Reply: There cannot be a real identity because of 
the upadhi bheda. If there is a total difference, there 
ought to be the 'avabhasa' of the 'vyavritta svabhavata' 
(excluded nature) also. But that is not found. 
It has been said that the 'anuvritta' (continuant) samvit 
is not non-different from the 'vyavritta :(excIuded object), 
since it is the nature of the continuant to imply differents, 
just as in the case of the akasa which continues to be in the 
pot etc. Now, the author :proceeds to show
)hat the diffe- 
rence between the object and the samvit is also perceptually 
arrived at. 


According to the Buddhists, vijnana is momentary. As 
such the object and its 'samvit' cannot coexist. When they 
speak of 'nilatn1aka samvit' (consciousness of the nature of 
blue) we should take theln to mean only 'nilam' (blue). 
Even the Buddhists admit that the 'pratyag avabhasa 
(awareness of the self) which is immediate and which exclu- 
des the object, is different from the 'nilatmaka samvit'. 


It is well known that Caham nilam pasyami' (I see the 
blue) is an immediate apprehension. The 'vishaya samvit, 
and the 'vishayi samvit" cannot be at the same rnoment. So, 
they admit that the 'aham ullekha' is different from the 
'nila.) The blue is the apprehended while the I is thaI which 
apprehends. This difference, then, is immediate. The 
'pratya.g avabhasa' is only the 'aham samvedana'. and it 



252 


Panchapadika 


differs from the 'parag avabhasa' which is the object. The 
pratyag avabhasa 'is to be found only in the 'svarupa'-i.e. t 
in the Caham samvedana'. We apprehend it as being diff.. 
erent from the blue. Not only should we accept it :as diff- 
erent, but we also experience it. We apprehend the blue 
as th,e this, as that which excludes the subject, as the appr.. 
ehended. Thus we have two entities that exclude one 
another and stand in the relation of the apprenheded and 
the apprehending. 


The Vijnanavadin observes: Both are 'svarupa 
matra nishtha'; and as such bow can there be subject.. 
object relation here? If the blue appears as unrelated to 
the samvit, it cannot appear in its 'samvedana'. Since the 
samvit is said to have the form of the blue, it may be 
said that the blue appears in its samvedana. In the absence 
of any relation it is impossible to have the form of the 
blue. But if it can have the form of the blue, why cannot 
the samvedana reveal all objects? You cannot also argue 
that the blue appears as' related to the samvit, for there is 
no specific relationship here.. 


The Buddhist might argue that there is a causal rela- 
tion (Janya janakata sambandha) here. Is)thls relation 
one of mere 'janakatva' (causing to come into being) or of 
'vishayataya janakatva' (using an object to come into 
being). It cannot be the former for that would involv, 
the coming into existence of all samvits. The sense organ. 
too is essential for the samvjt, and as such it too would 
become an object. Hence we have to say tbat there is a 
relation of identity which is natural but uncommon; and 
due to this relatio n, the blue appears in the vijnana. 



Vivaranam 


253 


Further, wben the 
bhedavabhasa' too is immediate
 
how can you suppress it or reject it :relying only on logical 
reasoning'? How is it that in 'idam aham janami' (I know 
this) we have the awareness of the 'grahya grahakata' (gra- 
sped and grasping) in ? 


The Vijnanavadin replies that these three are not app- 
rehended in 'One samvit, but th-ey are three successive sam- 
vits ; and that they are mutually exclusive. 


But if they are successive sarnvits, when there is the 
second samvit, there 
aDnot be the avabhasa for the first.. 
These three are together apprehended immediately" Tile 
idea of succession., then, is inconsis.tent with the immectiate 
apprehension.. 


The Vijnanavadin 
 ThIs apprehension has arise. 
from the vasana or samskara that has -come from the previ- 
ous samvits.. And these three are so united tthat we have a 
distinct and new apprehension.. Here we do not have the 
awareness of the relation.. 


At first there is the vijnan-a. arIsIng from 'Gaham
 (I) 
Then there comes the vijnana of the object as 'idam' (this) 
These vijnanas al()ne are the vasanas" The "'Sajatiiya jnana: 
(cognate 'Cognition) of the previous moment is the 'vasana', 
for the 'sajatiya jnana
 of this moment.. There is no other 
thing called samskara except this.. The two previous vasa... 
nas whi.ch are together get into a relation witn janami 
(know) which also gives forth a vas ana.. In accordance with 
tbese three vasanas functioning together as the causc) there 
arises one single vij-nana which has three forms in it. 



254 


Panchapadika 


Vedantin : This whole 'prakriya' (procedu.re) is COrl1" 
pletely inconsistent with experience. We never find the 
pratyayas 1ike the mere 'aham', or like the mere 'idam', or 
like the mere 'janami'. Even at the very outset the prat- 
yaya is one synthetic unit of the form 'aham idam janami' ; 
and this is 'katrikarmanubhavatmaka'. As such we should 
accept that which is a fact of experience. And we should 
admit that the object blue which is 'arthakriya samartha't 
is distinct fron1 the vijnana 'aham'. 


Vijnanavadin : Yes. We do not say, because of the 
experience, the blue is 110n-lifferent from the 'Sf,mv:- 
dana'. But because the 'pratibhasa' of the blue cannot be 
explained satisfr ctorily through vijnana, we speak of that 
non-differc nee. Now vijnana and the object are 'sthayains' 'I 
(fixed ones) and not momentary ones. And the unc..nnmon 
but mutual reh
tion which is the cause of the act would give 
rise to an unCOD mon 'vishayavabhasa'. If the object and 
tbe vijnana are not momentary, their relationship would be 
uncommon. Such a Inutual relation gives rise to the expe- 
riencing act. As such the vishayabvabhasa too would have 
to be unCOll1mon. 


Suppose the object and the vijnana afe only momen- 
tary. A momentary entity cannot have any 'agantuka 
sambandha' (relation with an outside intruder). Then it 
cannot have evef1 a natural abheda (non- different) samban.. 
dha. Then that which has no necessary relation with con- 
sciousness cannot have any 'pratibhasa'. 


H ef1ce the Vijnanavadin argues that non- difference is 
estabJished or arrived at because otl1erwise the 'vishaya. 
pratibhasa' is impossible. -"Since this theory accepts the 



Vivaranam 


255 


momentariness of cognitions, in the absence of identity bet- 
ween the subject and the object, there will be 'kriyanupa- 
patti' ('mpossibility of the act). 


If the vijnana and the object are not momentary, the 
permanent subject will have the knowing relation with the 
permanent object only; and then because of the act of 
knowing, there will be the immediacy of the blue etc ; since 
this is not acceptable, we deny this contention and say that 
vijnana and aham (i) are only mon1entary. 


Vedantin : Does perception establish the momentarL 
ness of vijnana? Or is it inference which establishes it ? If 
it is the former, the jnana that is there now in ;th18 moment 
excludes from itself that which is not in this moment; and 
it should give us the knowledge of this exclusion also. 
There is the 
nilajnana' which gives us the knowledge of 
of the exclusion of the non-blue. Hence by pratyaksha or 
immediate experience is n1eant that vijnana which exists 
only in this present moment. Such a perceptual cognition 
cannot give us the 'vijnana bhedavabhasa' (awareness of the 
cognition of difference). If we accept the momentariness 
of vijnana, then the aham would hav
 to be different at 
every different moment ; for every moment has its own par- 
ticular samvlt or aham.. Whether such a difference is found 
or not, let them exarrine their own experiences and say. 


Vijnana vadin: The apprehension of difference is 
there. But the 'ahamsamvit' of this moment is so greatly 
sinlilar to that of the other mOlllent, that the difference is 
not clearly revealed. The difference is distinct from the 
samvit aud it can be apprehended by another jnana. But 



256 


Panchapadika 


because of the defect called extreme similarity it is not cle- 
ar ly co gnised. 


Vedaptin: The "aham samvit' of the previous moment 
is different from that of this moment. That they are diffe- 
rent is to be apprehended by another samvid. But one sam- 
vit can not be an object of another samvit; and as such 
the difference cannot be apprehended. If one 'samvit' can 
be an object of another 'samvit', W
 will have in the cog- 
nition of difference (bheda samvedana) three factors- viz. 
first samvit, second samvit, and the difference between 
these two. Are these three f..lctors assumed.. to be there in 
the 'bheda samvedana'? Or a.re they non-differe1;}t frOlD 
that cognition of difference? 


If may be argued that the .samvit svarupa' itself is 
difference and that the samvedana itself is that jnana. 'Sanl- 
vid bheda' (difference of consciousness) and 'samvid bodha. 
(awareness of consciousness) are.identical. 


Vedantin : Then as along as the 'samvidbheda' is not 
cognised or apprehended. so long will the 'samvid bodha" 
remain unintelligible and ununderstood. Nothing can be 
known.. 


Further when the 'aikya pratibha.sa ' (awareness of iden.. 
tity) between the I of the past moment and the I of the pre- 
sent moment is there. it is inconsistent with pramana 10 
assume a relation 'of similarity between the two. When 
two different objects are mistaken to be identical with one 

nother, then you can assume similarity and 110 pra.lnana 
V\ould come in the way. When the two do not differ fro111 

nother, there does not arise any question of similarity.. 



Vivaranam 


257 


Assuming similarity where there is the apprehension of 
identity, is useless and is opposed to all pramanas. 


Vijnanavadin : But since the 'aikyavabhasa' is "due to 
some error (vyamoha), the assuming of similarity is not 
opposed to any pramana. When two objects are
different, 
they can be mistaken to be one and the same, only if they 
are similar. Such an arthapa.tti (implication) compells us 
to assume similarity. Thus we establish similarity. 


Vedantin : Here is the fallacy of mutual dependency. 
You can establish 'aikya bhrama' only by assuming simi- 
larity ; and you can make ol.1;t si11J.i1arity only by assuming 
'aikya bharma'. One involves the other. 


Vijnanavadin: 'Aikya partibhasa' cannot have self 
validity. If there is similarity there is no 'aikyatavabhasa't ; 
and if there is 'aikyatavabhasa' (awareness of identity), 
there is no similarity. The apprehension of identity depe- 
nds on the absence of similarity; and the latter depends 
on the former. Thus the same fallacy occurs here also. 


Vedantin: The 'aikyapratibhasa' is not dependent on 
similarity or on the absence of similarity. It has self 
validity. 


Vijnanavadin : Then even similarity has self
va1idity. 


Vedantin: If this were so, similarity too would have 
'pramanya' (validity); on the contrary, it is 'apramanya 
purvika' when we have aikya bhrama; this implies that 
two' different entities are assumed to' be similar. This 



258 


Pancbapadika 


assumption alone makes the false cognition of identity 
possible. On the other hand, the aikyavabhasa is a fact 
of experience and as such it does not stand in need of any 
proof." That this experience is there is well attested by 
recognition. 


The Buddhists proceed to criticise pratyabhijna. What 
is this pratyabhijna or recognition with the help of which 
you seek to maintain the identity of the samvit and thus 
the identity of the continuant? 
V: There is the samskara arising from the previous 
experience. This samskara cooperates with the present 
experience where we have the sense contact with the object. 
From this arises a single cognition which involves the rela- 
tioll of two moments of time and which is a perceptual 
cognition. 


B: Such a recognition might be found in so far as 
the cognitions of the objects are considered. It is not 
applicable in the case of the self. According to you the 
self is of the nature of vijnana and is s.thayin; and being 
svaprakasa, it cannot be an object for another knowledge. 
Only when it is an object in a cognition and when such a 
cognition is destroyed, can it give rise to a samskara. 
Such a samskara is absent; for the svarupa of jnana is be_ 
yond destruction. And that which is not destroyed cannot 
give rise to a samskara. Further, there is no pramitikarana 
in the case of tbis self which is svayam prakasa. As such 
recognition cannot establish the identity of the self of the 
past moment with that of the present moment. 
V: Then the 'svarupa jnana samskara' may be taken 
to be the cause of the recognition. - 



vivaranam 


259 


B; No. the self is like the pradipa which illumines 
only those that are before it at that moment. Neither the 
objects of tbe past, nor those of the future can be illumined 
by it. As such the 'svarupa jnana' cannot effect an iden- 
tity between two moments of the self. Moreover, in 'so 
ham' (I am he) we have two different f.)rms 'sah
 (he) and 
'aham' - and these are two different objects. The differ- 
ence in the objects brings about a difference in the cogni- 
tions. And this difference cannot make out any identity 
like that presupposed in recognition. Hence the 'atma- 
ikyapratiti' (apprehension of the identity of the self) is an 
erroneous cognition. 
Adviatin's reply to this contention : 
V: We apply pratyabhijnana only in the case of the 
self that is conditioned by the antahkarana; we do not 
apply it in the case of the pure consciousness. The sthayi- 
tva (permanence) of this pure cO.llsciouness is known!o us 
only from the sastra. 


During the 'samsaravastha' (state of finite life) it is 
always conditioned by the antahkarana and this form does 
not disappear. Pratyabhijna helps us in making out the stha- 
yitva of this self only. The antahkarana of this self 
evolves itself into an 'ahamkara vritti.' which alone makes 
the manifestation of the conditioned self possible. The 
'aham vritti' has given rise to the experience of the condi- 
tioned self at the previous time. This vritti has given rise 
to a samskara which is in the antahkarana. Such an an- 
tabkarana is the cause of the present 'atmabhivyakti'. As 
such it affects an identity between the conditioned selves of 
the two moments. The awareness of this identity is the 
re.("0gnition of identity. 



260 


Panchapadika 


B : Both in the previous experience and in the present 
experience, the self is Dot revealed as the object. How 
can such a self be the object in recognition? 


V: There is no such defect here. 'Samvedana' is 
'svayam prakasa' and it cannot then be an object in a:nother 

saDivedana'. Yet at a later time it can be the object of 
n1emory that has arisen from its own samskara. Likewise 
the self may not be an object in one experience; but it can 
become an object in recognition. 


B: But the self being 'svayam prakasa' cannot be 
come an object. 


V: It can become an object in so far as it is condi- 
tioned by space, time, and antahkarana. Take dharma 
which can be known only through agama (scripture). Even 
such a dharma has the specific nature of yielding its fruits 
in the present. From the consequences that have arisen in 
the present we come to know of its existence and nature. 
Dharma which is not an object of cognition becomes an 
object through its consequences. 


B: In recognition the same self is both the subject 
and the object at the same time. Is this not inconsistent? 


V: But -all those who accept the self to be distinct 
from the body, do bave this inconsistency. The self be- 
comes an object in the inferential cognitions aimed at esta- 
blishing the self. 


B: This is not so. In inference the object doe nots 
bave janakatva (karakatva). It is the mere form of the self 



Vivaranam 


261 


atone that is the object, while it is the real self that is the 
subject. In perception, however, the object has janakatva- 
it gives us the knowledge of itself. As such in a perceptual 
experience there would have to be an object and this would 
make the self both the subject and the object at the same 
time in recognition. 


V: As conditioned by the antahkarana, the self is to 
bc treated as the knower. As cO.uditioned by the past and 
the present moments, the self is the object known. Because 
of this diffe.rence in the upadhi, there is no inconsistency in 
the position we have advanced. The recognition involved 
in 'so ham' is a fact of experience ; and it should be expla... 
ined some how or other. As such we assume the difference 
in the upadhis to account for it. And this experience is 
not opposed to facts, nor is it a case of error. 


You can not argue that there is a difference of form in 
'so ham' giving rise to a difference in the objects and thus 
to a difference in the two cognitions. You argue that 
vijnana is momentary. Here vijnana is one cognition, 
while 'momentary' is another and a different cognition. 
There are two different entities here and two different cog- 
nitions. As a result, vijnana would cease to be momentary.. 


B: It is true. We only speak of I the momentarines 
of vijnana for the sake of convenience. We do not say tha
 
it is reaL 


V : We too speak of sthayitva etc. in vijnana only 
from the standpoint of the upadhis.. They are not real in 
an ultimate sense. But there is this much: of difference 
when time and other upadl:1is are there, we are able to arrive 



262 


Panchapadika 


at 'sthayitva' and other "vikalpa pratyayas
 through the ex- 
perience of identity involved in 'so ham'. They are not 
cases of error and they have the 1fartha kriya samarthya'. 
Such is not the case with momentariness etc. accpted by you!", 


Here arises a dispute with the Prabhakaras for whom 
the self is the ground of knowledge and not the object. They 
argue that recognition does not establish the self to be an 
object, but only as the asraya (ground, locus). 


Vedantin : In recognition the fself of the past mo- 
ment is related to t.he self of the present moment. Cog- 
nition being momentary, recognition would find it difficult 
to bring into it two moments; and the self cannot beCOD1e 
the ground for such a recognition. By becoming the ground 
for a momentary cognition, the self cannot be 'sthayi
. 


Prabhakara: I an1 remembering now the samvedana of 
the past moment. Since any knowledge must have a ground,: 
the ground of this remembered knowledge is that self as 
qualified by the past moment. And the ground for the pre- 
sent remembered knowledge is the self of the present mom- 
ent. Thus the two moments are there and they qualify the 
same self. 


V: The act of remen1bering would establish the pre- 
sel1t self, while the past experience would do tbe .same for 
the pa'st self, like two perceptual experiences. How can you 
establish that the same self is related to both these monle.. 
nts ? You cannot say that this it is established by the two 
samvits-of the past and of the present; for when we recog- 
nise the pot we d.o not bring in two perceptual experiences, 
but only one single act of recognition. The two samvits 



Vivaran:am 


263 


are not capable of effecting a relation between the two 
moments. 
The two samvits cannot also establish the self to be on 
tbe same ground. Each samvit by itself" can establish only 
the self of that moment ; and we cannot sa y that both have 
the same ground. N or can the two sam.vits toghether esta- 
blish it ; for since both are not together present, e2.ch can 
establish the self of that particular moment only. The self 
as qualified by its samvit does not happen to be the ground 
of the other samvit. 
P: The two samvits of the two moments having the 
self of two fIloments as their grounds, give rise to a third 
samvit ; and the object of this third samvit is that self 
which is identical in the other two samvits. 


V: That the self is the object and not the ground in 
recognition is the very thing we are establishing. 


Furhter, we have to accept that the self can be the obi 
ect of recognition, and not its ground. Take -the cognition 
canubhutam maya', (It was experienced by me). There was 
an experience in the past, and I now remember that experi- 
ence as mine. In this act there is the memory of the expe- 
rience as belonging to the self. The previous samvit as 
qualifying its ground is remembered. This is a 'visishta 
smarana' (specific remembering) in which the self also is 
apprehended. We arrive at the self as having had the pre- 
vious experience in the present memory cognition. In the 
present specific (visishta) memory we have the memory of the 
self as qualified by the past experience. We do not have 
the memory of the past experience as detached from the 
self. This is a fact of experience. 



264 


Panchapadi;k
 


Now, from the cognition of the present, I can have the 
knowledge that there will be rain in the furture; and eve.n 
though there is no rainbow, the former proceeds to act in 
the field so that the future rain may be of use to him. The 
'prakasa manatva' (apprehension) of the clouds now is the 
cause of the act. Through jnana we are able to compre- 
hend the rain that will come later. Likewise there wa.s 
only the samvedana in the past and now I remember it is 
my own past experience. Even though the past experience 
is not present now as the present experience, it is cognised 
through the 'prakasamanatva' of the self. 
The self may be the ground of the past samvedana; but 
in the present memory cognition we have the past sam- 
vedana of the self. As such that self which may be the 
ground beC0111eS the object in this present memory cogni- 
tion. The self' which is the ground of the remembered 
samvedana and that which was there at the time of that 
samvedana, such a self now becomes an object in my pre- 
sent memory cognition. 


The Prabhakara mas argu
 that only that samvedana 
is made the object by the prest?ut memory; and that as that 
samvedana is remembered, it brings its ground even now 
as its ground. 


This is false. In the present memory cognition that 
samvedana is not present as this savedana. An absent sa.. 
mvedana cannot establish its ground now; for any samve- 
dana can establish only that ground which was present only 
when that san1 edana was there. It is only that samvedana 
which is 'svayaln prakasaman
' and it is only such a sam- 
vedana that can establish its asraya (ground). But the 
samvedana comprehended in the memory is only the object 



Vivaranam 


265 


in the memory cognition; and as such it is paraprakasya 
(revealed by the other). SUCll an entity that is illumined by 
something other than itself, can not be a sadhaka (means 
to prove) for the self. Otherwise, dharma etc. which are 
illumined by agama etc. (which are distinct from dharma 
etc.), woald have to be the sadhakas for establishing their 
ground. This is absurd. 


Hence we have to conclude that tbe self which was in 
the past cognition becomes an object only in the present 
memory cognition. 


So far we have shown that perception cannot establish 
the moementariness of vijnana; and that perception cannot 
p.lt an end to the aikyavabhaasa of the self. 


The Vijnanavadin next attempts at establishing the 
momentariness of vijnana inferentially. The inferential 
argument may be stated thus ; 


Destruction is noticed in the last moment of the object. 
This last moment is preceeded by a mOlnent which must 
have the power to produce this destruction9 In this way 
all the preceeding mqments must have the same nature. 
Thus each Inoment is distinct from the other and has its 
relation with the preceeding and succeeding 111oments9 And. 
we therefore have a similarity between these moments9 


The immediately preceeding moment of the actual des- 
truction has existence; and this mOll1ent is called the last 
mOlnent. There is the distruction immediately after this 
moment has come into existence. During this last monlent
 



266 


Panchapadika 


the existence of the pot is conditioned by this last moment. 
The existence of the pot as conditioned by the moments 
earlier to this moment is distinct from the former existence. 
This latter existence is referred to as its cadi' (beginning). 
Even in these moments each moment finds its destructIOn in 
the immediately succeeding moment. The destruction in 
the succeeding moment is copervasive with the existence of 
this moment. In this the earlier moments are similar to 
the la:;t moment. Prom this inference mome:.tariness is 
established. And the identity between the moments is based 
only on their similarity with one another. 


To this, Padmapada gives a counter-inference which 
nlay be rendered thus: 


Existence is noticed in the first moment. Existence can 
give rise only to existence. As such even at the end we can 
infer the existence of the pot. 


'The first moment' means the mOlnent which conditions 
the existence of the pot; the 'end' means those lnoments 
which condition its destruction. As such even after the 
destruction of the pot, we may infer the existence of the pOt 
during those moments. We may infer that the existence 
of the pot is copervasive with those moments of the pot 
(when the pot is no more). All the moments have the nat.. 
ure of time. The first moments are the times as conditioned 
by its existence. The same may hold good of the last mom- 
ent also. 


The Buddhist argues that when the pot is no more,there 
if, the experience of its negation or absence; and as such 
the Vedantin's inference runs counter to experience. 



Vivarallam 


267 


To this the Vedantin replies that since we experience 
the existence of the object in the earlier moments, the Budd- 
hist contention too runs con
rary to experience as embodied 
in recognition. 


The Vedantin's inference flouts experience, while the 
Buddhist's flouts recognition. But experience is strongr:.r 
than the other. Abhijn 1 or perceptual experience can be a 
'badhaka' for this inferential cognition; but there can be 
no such 'badhya badhakata' between inference and recog- 
nition. 


To this, the Vedantin 's reply is that there is 110 diffe- 
rence at all between the two. In the 'jvalapratyabhij La 
 
(recognition of the flame) we find inference functioning as 
the 'badhaka' for the recognition. The 'kshayanubhava! 
(experience of destruction) does not arise i1111nediately bu t 
only Inediately since it involves the apprehension of both 
the 'dharmin' and its 'pratiyogin' (contradictory). Whethtir 
it is abhijna or pratyabhijna, both are cases of perceptual 
cognition. Anyone of these can be a badhaka for inference 
and this we find in the case of the cognition of two moons. 
Hence both the inferences are on the same level. C0nsequ- 
ently wo cannot establish 'kshantkatva' (momentariness) or 
sattva (existence) from any of these two imferences. 
Atthakriyakarita and Sattva : 
The Buddhist then proceeds to establish the momenta- 
riness from the doctrine of 'artha kriya karitva' (praglnatic 
activity). .Arthakriya kari' 111eanS that which gives rise 
(makes possible) an act. The inference given is 
 
That which is not InOlnentary is not 'artha kriyakarr; 
e.g. the horn of a hare
 To state this inference" he first 



268 


Panchapadika 


proceeds to show that 'arthakriyakaritva' is incompatible 
with then nature of a 'sthayin'. This argument is stated 
thus by Padmapada : 
You want the 'aham ullekha' to be' a 'sthayin'. The 
I for you is not a fleeting and changing entity. Does this 
I give rise to an 'artha kriya' ? Or no ? If it does not give 
rise to one, it p
takes of the nature of non-existence, and 
is therefore not at all real. But if it does give rise to one, 
it is no longer the unchanging 'sthayin'; for the 'sthayin' 
does not admit of arthakriya karitva. 


On this the Vedantin raises an objection: If an object 
were to give rise to another, then something must set the 
object in motion. This something is to be related 1:0 the 
object. Such a relation is possible only when the object 
has unchanging existence. If it is momentary, nothing can 
be related to it ; and then nothing can come out of it. As 
such only a 'sthayin' has the 'arthkriya yoga'. 
The Buddhist denies such a 'yogyatva' (properiety). He 
argues: Does the sthayin give rise to 'arthakriya' success- 
vely? Or simultaneously? Successively means producing 
many karyas (effects) one after the other in a series. 
Simultaneously means producing all the karyas at one 
and the same moment. 
Now let us take the first alternative. Since there is no 
difference between any two moments, why does not the pre.. 
vious mome:qt give rise to that which the succeeding mom- 
ent produces ? If it is capabi e of giving rise to many 'kar- 
yas', it should produce them all at the sa.me moment since 

t is the sufficient cause and since one cause can produce a 
pl1.1;rality of effects. 



Vivaranam 


L;O
 


Then consider the second alternative. If it can prod- 
uce in a single moment all that it produces through out its 
life, then immediately after that moment it would cease tQ 
exist. It w0':11d be unreal since it has nothing 
ore to do. 



n the former alternative we do not find any cause 
which would make it give rise to its karyas only at a later 
time. And if it is not an agent at a later time, it is no lon- 
ger real then. Hence any entity which is 'artha kriya kari' 
does not become a 
sthayin' only because of this. Conse- 
quently the 'ahamullekha' differs from moment to moment, 
whence the 
aikyav.abhasa. (apprehension of identity) is the 
result of the similarity between those moments. 


The Vedantin now proceeds to reply to this exami- 
nation. The sthayin, on this view, may produce all its kar- 
yas in a single moment ; and then it may keep quiet. Yet 
it does not become a non-existent entity. "Sattva" cannot 
be defined as tbat which has the ability to give rise to an 
'artha kriya'. So the Vedantin asks: What is this 'artha- 
kriya' in the absence of which an entity is said to become 
non-existent? 


The Buddhist replies that it is the ability of an object 
to give rise to the knowledge of itself. 
V: This kind of sttva may be found in the case of 
external objects. But it 1,5 not applicable in the case ofvij- 
nana. If vijnana were to be a 'sattva') it should be an obj- 
ect in another vijnana. Vijnana cannot be said to arise 
from its own vijnana. Each samvit is 'svaprakasa', and a 
such i1 is not capable of giving 'svavlshaya jnana' (object 
of its own cognition). Hence it will have to be 'asat' 
non-existent). 



l70 


Panchapadika 


B: There cannot be a subject-object relation betW'ee:t1 
.he jnanas of one 'jnana santana' (series). Yet my jnana 
;an be an object for the cognition of another person. Thus 
t will be 'putusbantara jnana janaka' (able to cause tbe 
:nowledge of another p(i;l'son). Hence there is 'artha kriya' 
or the samvits. 


V: Even this is not possible; for jnana cannot be 
ognised by the sense-organs. My jnana is not immediate 
or anothel. It can only be inferred. 


B: Then my knowledge is the object inferred. As 
uch the jnana belonging to one 'jnana santana' can give 
ise to the jnana belonging to another jnana santana. 


V: This too is not possible since the inferential cog- 
ition i's based on r a perceptual cognitisn; and perceptual 
)gnition is absent here. 


B: Yet all the samvedanas are the objects for the 
lana of an all-knower. Thus they can be objects that give 
se to the knowledge of themselves. This is possible be- 
luse the sarvajna (ominiscient) has the immedia.te appre... 

nsion of all objects. 


V: Such an immediacy which does not exclude the 
Tijnana upapIavas' (fluctuations in knowledge) is nOt 
)ssible: i.e., the jnana of the all-knower would have to 

 identical with the objects and the objects which are our 
ana are all imperfect. That would bring about an iden- 
y between his jnana and our 'samsaara samvit' (finite con... 
iousness). This would impute an our difficulties to 

abman. Since the sanlvit js non-different from the object\p 



Vivaranam 


27L 


the 'sarvajna jnana' would be polluted by the 'samsara 
samvit' . 


. B. Even though the jnana of the Allknower is 'upara- 
kta' (attached) with our jnana, it does not corrupt Or 
pollute the 'sarvajna jnana' since it is neglted (badhita) by 
true knowledge. 


v. Now such a negation for the 'samsara samvit' is 
not possible in the 'sarvajna jnana' at the same moment. 
The 'samsara samvit' will be there at one moment, and the 
negation will arise at the next moment. Till tbe negation 
has arisen, there is the corruption of the 'sarvajna jnana'. 
This 'samara samvit' cannot be negated by the next jnana, 
for the letter cannot have the former as its object. To have 
the former as its object, it should continue to exist beyond 
its moment. Even if it becomes an object, there would be 
an identity between the 'badhita (negated) samvit' and 
'badhaka (negating) samvit 
We cannot also say that witbout any of the upaplavas 
(flucuations) there will be the uparaga of the!'samsara 
vijnanas' in tbe jnana of the all-knower; for in such a case 
the samsara samvit' is no longer the object. The all-kno\ver 
would be incaple of apprehending the world by 'upaplavas'. 
and his teaching would then be out of place. ' 


B: Then I shan advance another definition. Arlha. 
kriyaa need not mean giving rise to the knowledge of itself. 
It only means giving rise to another monlent which is cog- 
nate with it (sajatiya). 
V: Then what would happen to the last moment? 
Win not the last mOlnent be non-existent (asattva)? There 
are tbe. vijnanas of the form '1' changing from moment to 



272 


Panchapad.ika 


moment. These constitute orie 'jnana santana'. Here we 
assume the relationship of the knower.. known-knowing, 
along with a 'sthayin'. Due to these; our vijnanas are ren... 
dered impure by the 'ragadidoshas' and by the objects. 
N ow there are the samskaras of the nature of the vijnana 
arising from the preceedil1g cognate objects. Prom these 
samskaras, there arise the later vijnanas. Wben we know 
(bhavana) that all this is momentary, there is dispelled the 
'sthayaitva kalpana ? When we come to know (bhavana) the 
particular, there is destroyed that assumption (kalpana) 
which involves the substance, quality, sound, act, adjunct 
(viseshana)and vishaya (object).When all this is known to be 
dubkha there disappear the 'sukha duhkha upaplavas bro- 
ught by the 'ragadi dJsha pravritti'? The contemplation 
of this as the 'sunya' (void) puts and end to the 'vishaya 
upaplava' ? 


Thus there are four different bhavanas having four act- 
ions that put an end to the corresponding different samska- 
ras. In this way the four types of upaplavas are slowed 
down. Then there arises a vljnana which is free from all 
'upaplavas'. And this arises in the moment that immedia- 
tely succeeds the last moment of the upalavas. The mo- 
ment that has the jnana which is free from al1 upapiavas:t 
is preceeded by that moment where the upalavas are only 
slow
d down. This moment COllIes at the end of the 'sam... 
sara jnana santana
 (series of finite cognitions) and thus it is 
caned the last moment. 
This last moment does not give rise to any other mom- 
ent where the upaplavas can be seen. As such this last 
moment would be 'asat'. Consequently all the preceeding 
moments too would have' to partaka of the nature of non- 
exis.tence. 



Vivaranam 


273 


B: The last mcment may not give rise to a moment 
having its cognate jnaqa. But it brings as its object the 
jnana of the al1
knower. 


V: Giving rise to the jnana of the all-knower does 
not make it 'arthavattva'. For, if it gives rise to that jnana, 
it is no longer the last 11'oment. And when there is no last 
moment, there can be no liberation. 'Ekasantanata' means 
that there is a causal relation between two entities having a 
similar nature. And if the last moment gives rise to the 
jnana of the all-knower, then both these must have an 
identical or similar nature. Such a causal relation would 
Inake the last moment impossible; and if there wet"e to be 
liberation, there should be a last moment. 
B: There is a moment giving rise to the jnana of the 
all-knower. There two jnana santanas are similar and have 
a similar nature. And since that moment is giving rise t() 
the jnana of the all-knower, we have the 'santanaikya' 
(identity of the series). This identity itself may be ta
 en to 
be the liberation.. 


V: Then this moment is not giving rise to that jnana 
as its object. .One samvit cannot be the object of another 
samvit, since as samvits they do not differ from one ano- 
ther. Just as one pradipa as light does not differ fr
)m ano- 
ther pradipa as light, so too two samvits cannot differ from 
one another. 


One samvit cann()t be the object of another samvit. 
Ol1e samvit cannot have the immediate experience of ano- 
ther. Somebody else's samvit can on]y infer my samvit. 



.t./4 


Panchapadika 


Or it might be said that the samvedana is im] 
and direct. What is inferred is not another's sam. 
the relation of the samvit to another body-ie., that 
such a samvit in him or for him because his body is 
ring thus. As such samvit is never an object f 
pramana. 


As having the nature of the samvit, the two sam' 
non-different. One samvit does not differ from (; 
samvit, in so far as both are samvits. If the 'dhaJ 
samvit, and if its 'pratiyogin' (contradictory) also is 5 
there are no two samvits but only one samvit. 
Of these two, if only one is samvit and the 0 
not, even then there will be only one samvit. An, 
there cannot be a subject-object relation between the 
vits. 


Moreover, does the 'arthakriya karitva' of an 
act as the cause to establish the existence (sattva) 
cause of the entity? Or is it only a 'pratiti nimitt. 
strument or cause of apprehension) ? 
Take the first alternative according to which an c 
is supposed to have existence if it is 'arthakriyakari' - 
gives rise to something. The emergence of the 
would establish the existence of its cause. But the 4 
has come into existence long before its effect. Does i 
exist if it has not produced an effect? Till it has 
duced an effect, is it existent? . The horn of the hare 
not exist and it does not produce any effect.. It is no 
absence of the effect that Inakes the horn of the hare 
existent. But it is its non-.;xistence that does not all( 
to give rise to any effect. 



Vivaranam 


275 


So, one may fall back on the second alternative and 
say that only the apprehension (pratiti) of the existence of 
the cause is rendered possible by the 'arthakriya karitva" 
of the effect. Then the effect has 'arthakriya karitva'; it 
gives us the apprehensjon of its cause. Any thing can be 
apprehended only by the knowledge of its effect. To have 
the knowledge of this effect, we re
uire its effect; and in 
this way we are led to a regress. As such we cannot have 
the apprehension of 'satta' at any time. The whole world 
remains unapprehended. It would remain a void. 


Buddhist: 'Arthakriya" is no other than an effect. 
An object gives us knowledge and this is the effect and 
knowledge is 'svayam siddha' (self-proved) since it does 
not require any thing else to be known. This knowledge 
makes us know that the object exists. As such there is no 
pratity anavastha (regress in apprehension). 


Vedantin: Jnana is the effect and it is said to be 
the cause that determines the existence of the object, and 
since these jnanas are 'svayam siddha' that which gives us 
the jnana is self, and not the 'artha kriya'? Further jnana 
and its object being identical on the Buddhist view, we can- 
not say that the 'karana bhuta jnana' (causel cognition) 
is dependant on:the illumination of the 'karya bhuta jnana"; 
for all jnana is self-luminous. 


B: Let this be so. Jnana is illumined by it self. It 
can by itself be its own 'arthakriya'. 
V: This is a tautology; and it admits in es
ence that 
'arthakriya karitva' cannot establish the sattva of the 
object. Sattva is not dependent on 'artha kriya'. It is 
natural and inherent for the object. The existence of the 



276 


Panchapadika 


unchanging object continues to remain unchecked even if 
it gives rise to its effect once and keeps quiet for the rest 
of the time. 


Likewise the existence of the object remains unchecked 
even if it produces its effects in succession. The objection 
raised by the Buddhist earlier on this was: if the sthayin 
r
veals its arthakriya (pragmatic effect) in succession, 
why should it reve
l thus only at some specific moments? 
. Since it is an unchanging entity, there is no difference bet- 
ween any two of its moments. Then why can't it reveal 
all its future effects also in the present moment only. 


Here we have to consider one important factor. The 
cause has the power to give ris
 to its effect. But it can.. 
not do so unless the factors that co-operate (sahakari) 'with 
it are near by in a specific "manner. It is capable of pro- 
ducing the effect only when its latent power is awakened 
by the cooperating factors or conditions. Because of this 
it is wrong to say that there is no difference between any 
two of its moments. 


B: If the cause has the p
wer, it does not stand in 
need of the co-operating factors. 


V: Then even that which does not have the power 
:cannot be benefited by those factors. The cooperating 
factors are useless for a non-cause. And this would lead 
us to consider that there is no need for any 'sahakari ill 
the world. But we do see in'the world that only a potent 
cause takes the aid of these factors! and the denial of the 
aid of these factors amounts to a denial of the facts pre- 
sented by experience. 



Vivaranam 


277 


B: Only those objects that are powerless do require 
the aid of these factors in giving rise to a potent cause. 
This is not opposed to experience. In order to become the 
cause, the non-cause requires these factors. 


V: These factors are powerless to produce the effect. 
Yet when they cooperate with the cause, there arises the 
effect. Till they cooperate, the cause is in reality a non- 
cause. Now are these factors powerful to lnake the non- 
cause a cause? or not? Are these factors the .cause of 
the non-cause? or not? If the non-cause becomes a 
cause, it does not require them. If it does not become a 
cause, they are useles
. If these factors constitute the 
cause for the non-cause, then the non-cause would be an 
effect and not a cause. If they do not constitute the cause, 
they require other factors in a regress. 
You should not say that a cause does not require the 
aid of cooperating factors, for this is a fact of experience. 
B: The effect is not now there. It is almost non- 
existent. Such a non-existent entity cannot have an exi
t1'" 
ent entity as its cause. Then why can't you say th
t any 
cause can bring it into existence? The cause too has no 
specific relation with the now non-existent effect. Then 
can't it be the cause of all effects? When there is this 
'avyavastha' (confusion) how are you .able to make out 
the mere distinction between cause and effect. If you 
say that there is this relation because of the agreelnent 
and difference that exists in between them, there is such a 
relation al..o between the cooperating factors and the 
effect. 
V: The cause is always a cause and it has the power. 
When the effect is there we are somehow or other able to 



280 


Panchapaaika 
BUDDHIST POSITION: 


Since these co-operating factors are of use only to the 
effect, they are requirc.d only for the effect. They are not 
of any use to the cause whence the cause does not require 
them or involve them. Even that momentary entity called 
the cause does not require them; for the effect arises when 
these factors are there, and it does not arise if they are not 
there. Likewise even if the cause is an unchanging entity, 
there is the 'apeksha' of lhe cooperating factors only for 
the effect. This can be arrived at through agreement and 
difference. Even then it is inconsistent to speak of 'krama- 
janana' (successive emergence). The main cause is said to 
be unchanging. If this were to give the effects in a succe- 
ssive series, the cooperating factors too are to be in a succe. 
ssive series. In such a case are these factors directly the 
cau'se of the effect? Dc es tIle effect arise only when they 
are present near by (when they are in proximity) ? 


In some form or other and to some extent the co..ope- 
rating factors are always present. As such the unchanging 
cause must always produce the effects. This is absurd, and 
thus the "first alternative falls. 


Take the second alternative which states that only the 
presence or proximity (sannidhana) of these factors is requ- 
.ired. Both the 'sahakarin' and its proximity are required. 
"In such a case, since the proximity too is always there, 
there cannot be a 'kramajanma." (emergence of successive 
series). There need not be a fur1her 'apeksha' for the pro. 
ximity, when it is already present. 


If the 'sahakari'sambandha' is natural there ought to 
be tIie' 'karyaj
l1ma' (emergence of effect) always. If it is 



Vivaranam 


281 


not natural, there is another difficulty. Is the relation bet- 
ween the cause and its sahakarin brought about by the 
mel e sahakarin ? Or by anything else? It cannot be the 
former, for that would involve 'sada karya prasanga' (eter- 
nal emergence of effect). Nor can it be the latter since that 
something else also is always there. Further, if the relation 
is brought by something else, this something else would 
require another as its cause; and thus a regress is inevitable. 


The vedantin might argue that there is the 'karya sata- 
tya prasanga' (ever-present effect) even for the Buddhist. 
The momentary entity called the cause has the power to 
bring forth the effect. Such a cause necessarily involves 
the sahakari. Then should"it also not produce its effects 
always? The 'sattakshana' is the actual cause; and such a 
moment is always there. 


Is there the birth of the effect in the 'sattakshana. 
(moment of its being)? Or in the next n10ment? But the 
cause is admitted to be that moment immediately precee- 
ding the Inon1ent of the effect. As such the Buddhist does 
not accept the first 'alternative. Even though there is no 
'katana satta" in the next moment, still there can be the 
effect; for there is no difference between the two moments. 


With reference to the effect, the cause and its sahakarin 
are necessari1y and :inevitably in the preseeding l11oment. 
This sahakarin has its purpose (function) with reference to 
the cause. And in the next moment there is the effect. As 
such there does not arise the contingency of 'sada1<arya 
janana' (always producing the effect). 



.4l.S.l 


Panchapadika 


That moment which is the necessary cause has no exis- 
tence prior to this moment or next to this moment. As 
such neither the preceeding moment nor the succeeding mo- 
ment can give rise to an effect. 


Vedantin's Reply: 
There is an impossibility or illogicality in the Budd- 
hist's argument. 'Agnikshana' (fire-moment) gives rise to 
the 
dhuma kshana' (smoke-moment). Do we apprehend a 
causal:: relation between these two moments only? Or do 
we apprehend the causal relation between the 'agni kshana 
jnana santana' (series of fire cognitions) and the dhuma 
kshana santana ? 


Now it is impossible to understand that 'agnisvalak- 
shana' is the cause of the 'dhuma svalakshana'. Svalaksh- 
ana is that which is identical with itself while excluc.ing 
others from it. To establish a causal relation we should 
apprehend the two together. But we apprehend fire in one 
moment, and smoke in another. The first moment is destro- 
yed when we are in the second moment. There cannot be 
established any necessary relationship between an absent 
moment and a present moment. The two moments cannot 
be apprehended together. 


As such one may have to say that through the method 
of agreement and difference, he can establish a relation bet- 
ween the 'agnisantana' and 'dhumasantana'. Therein one 
may say that the 'agnisvalakshanas' are the causes of the 
'dhuma svalakshanas t . One should assume such a general 
necessary relation. 



vivaranam 


283 


Now there is no difference between anyone agnisval- 
akshana' and allY Qther. Then why can't there be the eme- 
rgence of smoke even from that 'agnisvalakshana', which is 
in the coal. 


The Buddhist might reply that there is no 'kashtha' 
(stick, wood) which is the sahakarin.- 


Then is the cause only the absence of the 'kashtha sva- 
lakshana' for the absence of the 'sannihita svalakshana' 
(proximate particular)? It cannot be the former for the 
'kashtha svalakshana' is formed in its own santana (series). 
Then you have to argue that there is required a relation 
between the 'agnisvalakshana' and the 'kashtha svalaksbna'. 


Then, is this relation between the two brought about 
by themselves? Or by anything else? If the two santanas 
are not momentary- Le., if they are real and unchanging 
(nitya) then tbe relation between the two also must be alw- 
ays present. . If it is brought by something else, then tbe 
Buddhist's position is not far removed from that of ours. 


Even if the cause is real and unchanging, the proximity 
of the sahakarin is- there only at a specific time ...and 
not always. The 'samyoga' (conjunction) between the 
cause and the sahakarin is not always there. And the pro- 
ximity is not always formed. As such there is no sadaka.. 
. " 
rya Janana " 
B: Only when there is the promixmty of the sahaka- 
rin there is the birth of the effect. This is a necessary and 
invariable rule. Yet such a necessary relation between the 



yanchapadika 


'upakarya' and the 'upakaraka' does not exist in the case 
of the 'dhumasantana' and 'kashtha santana'. 


V: If there is such a necessary relation between the 
sahakarin and the effect, how can the effect not requie the 
sahakarin? To say that there is an invariable concomitant 
relation between the sahakarin and the effect, and to say 
also that there is no 'upakaryopakaraka sambandha' bet- 
ween the two, is to contradict oneself in the same breath. 


B: The concommitant relation is arrived at through 
agreement and difference. This is a I necessary 'rule' (niy.. 
ama). That between th
 'upakarya' (effect) and 'upaka.. 
raka' (sahakarin) is a relation. Where is the vyapti (con- 
co-rnmitance) between that rule and this relation? 
There may be a concommitant relation between the sabaka- 
rin and the effect. But this needs the one as a 'Up i:I karaka' 
and the other as an 'upakarya'. 
V: That these two are identical is seen in the relation 
between the cause and the effect. Whenever there is a 
'vyapti niyama\ it implies that one of the terms or objects 
necessarily involves the other; and if it does not involve 
the other, it is not a'Vyapti niyama'. If there is no 'upa- 
karyopkaara sambandha', there cannot be a necessary con- 
commitani relation between the two- ego between water 
and smoke there is no such 'niyama'. 
B: We see that there is a causal ralation between the 
'agnisvalakshana: and 'dhumasvalakshana'. But here we 
do not find any cancommitant relation '(vyaptiniyama') 
between the 'agnisantana' and'dhumasantana'. Suppose 
we do find such a 'niyama'; then the two relations are 

 dentica1. Then what will happen is this: the 'agnisvala.. 



Vivaranam 


285 


kshanas' are the causes of the 'dhumasvalakshanas'. Smoke 
requires the 'kashtha svalakshanas' also.. When there is 
the 'kashtha samyoga' with the fire, we have the smoke, 
and in the absence of that 'samyoga', there is no smoke. 
So the 'kashtha' is the co-operating (sahakarin) cause hav- 
ing an "anvaya vyatireka niyama' (principle of agreement 
and difference) with the smoke. The relation of 'upakarya' 
and 'upakaraka' is of 'apekshaa lakshana'. Both that 'niy- 
ama' and this 'sambandha' ought to b( found in the case of 
the 'karya karana svalakshanas' only. In any other general 
necessary relation (samanya upadhau .samaanya vyaptan), 
the causal relation cannot be found. 


There may be a causal relation etc., between the "agnis- 
valakshanas' and the <:dhumasvalakshanas'., and there may 
also be the 'upakary opakaaraka. relation between tLe 
'kashtha samyoga' and the smoke. But in the relation 
between the "agnisantanas' and the 'dhuma santanas'. such 
a thing is impossible.. Hence there is no 'vyaptiniyama
 
which makes the 'sahakaryapeksha' possible. The 'vyapti- 
niyama', between the two 'santanas' (series) does not p03tU- 
late the relatioll of the 'sahakrin' (cooperating factor) to 
the 'dhumasantana'.. 


V: But the cvyaptiniyama' is a logical or necessary 
deduction from the causal relation. And those who want a 
particulat: effect do take recourse to a specific cause; and 
a specific cause is that which gives rise to an effect only 
when it has a 'sahakarin'.. We fin
 the vyavahara (acti- 
vity) only with reference to the 'samanya upadhi'.. The 
'San1aanya upadhi' is that 'sahakarin' which brings the 
effect into existence. The 'sahakarin' is thus taken to be 
the cause. 



286 


Panchapadika 


If there is a causal relation between"? the 'svata... 
kshanas
, one who is in need of curd need not take recourse 
to rnilk, for there is no identity between the two. Milk by 
itself does not give curd. Nor can we say that the 'dugdha 
santana' (milk ,,:series) can give rise to 'dadhisantana' (curd... 
series). Curd requires a sahakarin for the n1ilk. 
B : Let there be the 'janyajanakata yogya niyama' (ap- 
propriate cause and effect.relation) in so far as the "sam- 
yopadhi' is concerened. What does it imply 7 


V: If the cause is only a momentary entity, it cannot 
involve any sahakarin; nor can it involve any effect. How 
do you get the 'yyapti niyama' 1 The cause is a moment, 
its sabakarin another. The two cannot coexist. When 
either is present, the other is not. When the effect is pre- 
sent, the other is not. As such you cannot have a.ny 'vya.. 
pti jnana' . 


B: The cause does not require the sahakarin for it.... 
self; for the cause is that which has the power in it to bring 
about the effect. Each preceeding moment is seen to give 
rise to each succeeding moment. This is the relation of 
cause and effect. Even the effect does not require the 
sahakarin because it is brought only by the effect. When 
the cause has the sufficient power, it will perforce bring 
about the effect; and then the rule that the sahakarin must 
be nearbyis rendeted useless. 


V:\ From the agni svalakshal1a there arises the smoke 
because there is the 'kashtha samsarga t nearby. Then why 
can't you say that the sahakar1n too has a hand in the 
emergence of the effect '1 



Vivaranam 


287 


B: No. The agnisvalakshana is capable of giving 
rise to smoke. It has this power (ability) even before there 
is the 
kashtha samyoga' for the fire. But when there is no 

kashthasamsarga, the 'agnisvalakshana' is said to be a non- 
cause for the effect. This 'vyatireka', (relation by diffe- 
rence or negation) too must be seen. But we cannot argue 
merely from the 'anvaya' and establish the 'sahakari'.. To 
say that the 'kashtha samsarga' alone c('n make the 'agnL 
svalakshana' the cause of smoke, we require both 'anvaya' 
and 'vytireka'.. Merely from 'Vyatireka' we cannot establi
'h 
it. And since we have not seen the 'kashtha samsarga- 
bhava' (absence of a conjnction with wood) giving rise to 
the 'dhumaabhava' (absence of smoke), we cannot take the 
sahakarin to be essential either for the cause or for the 
effect. Renee we can only say that the presence of the 
sahakqrin in the emergence of the effect is purely acciden. 
tal (kakataliya). 


V: Let the 'sahakarya apeksha' be not there. And 
then why should there be a cause? Let it also be unnece- 
ssary. Then there is an end to all causal relations and 
actions. 


Whether the cause is an unchanging entity or a mome- 
ntary one, there is the same 'sahakari sannidhana krama' 
in both the views. And as a result, that which is taken to 
be the cause is also the same in both views. 


The cause is 'svayamjanaka (self .creative); it produ- 
ces the effect, for it has in itself the necessary power to 
produce the effect. And such a C3use may be but mome- 
ntary. The sahakarin is of no use at all for the 'karana 
svarupa'. Yet in order that there might arise an effect 



288 


Panchapadika 


there is the 
sahakaryapeksha' for the caus:e. Or there fg 
the 'sahakarya apekshaa' only for the effect because it is 
only the 'karana samgri constituted by the cooperating 
factors that produce the effect. This sahakarin is neces- 
sarily involved in the emergence of the effect. The same 
account holds good of our view also, where the cause is 
not momentary, but an unchanging entity. 


From one 'agnisvalakshana'we have fire on the ground" 
smoke above it, ashes below, and the knowledge of the fire 
for the individual. Here the 'kashthadi sahakara' is found 
for the fire. One 'agnikshana' gives rise to another 'agni- 
kshana'. When moisture is the sabakarin, there is found 
smoke. Ashes arise from the 'indhana sahakara' (coopera'" 
tion of fire-wood), and the sense contact being the sahara. 
rin, there arises the 'svavishayajnana'. Thus the difference 
in the sahakarins involved by the 'desabheda', makes one 
entity give rise to many effects. Thus, when 'kala bheda' 
brings about a difference in the sahakarins, we have diffe- 
rent effects emerging from the cause. 


Hence, even though there is the non ..difference between 
the object and 'ahamsamvedana' from an empirical and re- 
lative standpoint we have to construe facts as they a,'e, as 
they appear. OUf apprehension shows that the object is 
different from the' advitiya samvedana'. This object is a 
'sthayin' (abiding) and it has 'artha kriya samarthya' (prga-- 
matic potency). Thus there is a great difference between 
our view and that of the Buddhists. 


The ahamkarta (subject) cognises the object as having 
the same form; and even though it is a sthayin, it is 'artha 
kriyakari' . Thus simply because we admit the immediacy 



Vivaranam 


289 


of the blue, you should not take us to be 'exponuding a 
Buddhist doctrine. The ahankarta is the percipient self 
who is distinct from the not-self. That this ahankarta is 
the unchanging 'ekarupah' (one) has been established from 
experience and from pure logical reasoning as well. 


The Advaita Siddhanta is free from all Buddhistic con- 
ceptions. On the other hand, traces of Buddhism appear 
only in the theories of those who have attacked Advaita. 
Thus the Prabhakara agrees with the Carvaka and Buddhist 
systems in rejecting the validity of mantra, arthavada, iti- 
hasa, and purana ; ill rejecting devata, svarga, isvara and 
moksha ; and in accepting the momentariness of the cogni- 
tions and of the pramanas. The Bhatta agrees with Car- 
vaka and Buddhist system:; in accepting identity indifference 
and in rejecting the validity of mantra etc. The Bheda- 
bheda of Bhaskara agrees with Buddhism in rejecting the 
knowledge of Brahman, in degrading the sanyasins, and in 
making a farce of bondage and liberation. 


The Bhedabhedavadin puts a series of questions to show 
that there is no difference between Buddhism and Advaita. 


Obj: You and the Buddhist agree in holding that the 
world is 'kalpita', (artificially constructed) in vijnana. 
Ved: Yes. But you and he agree in saying that the 
world is 'pratibhasya' (manifested) by vijnana. 
Obj: Though it is 'pratibbasya' by vijnane., we admit 
the distinction between the true and the false. 



290 


Panchapadika 
Ved: Here too we admit the mithyatva of the world 
And yet in this world we too maintain the distinction bet- 
ween 'sattva' (being) and 'asattva' (non-being) brought by 
'artha kriya samrthya'. . 


Obj: But you can maintain the distinctions not as 
ultimately real, but as 'kalpita'. 


Ved: Even if you admit the distinction between the 
true and the false, it is only as 'pratibhasya'., 


Obj: But such a distinction is seen. 
Ved: Why can't there be seen such a distinction even 
in my view also ? 


Obj: No one would say that the pot etc., are false. 


Ved: Even a <pratibhasya satyatva' would make the 
pot etc. unreal. But on my view the distinction is sounder. 
'Arthakriya karitva' makes the pot etc. real; and the abse- 
nce of this 'samarthya' makes the erroneous sHver false. 
And we do see that the act of maya (magic) gives us delight 
or hatred. You c
nnot take these to be mere cognitions 
devoid of an objective existence. For we hear of the battle 
between gods and Denons where weapons are employed. 
These weapons are real and are not mere cognitious. They 
give rise to actions etc., 


Immediacy and Mediacy : 
Obj: Since the object is the medium for the revela- 
tion (manifestation) of consciousness, you admit the imme- 
diacy of the object. Then there should be such an imme- 



Vivaranam 


2911 


diacy of the object even in inference and other pramanas. 
But we do not find this immediacy there. 


Reply: The antahkarana vri1 ti (epistemic act) comes 
into contact wieht the object and assumes the form of the 
object. Then the object becomes the medium that manifests 
consciousness. The yogyatva (propriety) is not found in 
the objects of inftrence etc; for the objects here are not 
present before us. As such the object there is neither a kar- 
aka (causative) nor a vyaniaka (manifesting one);it does not 
give the cognition of itself because of the absence of the 
contact with the vritti ; and it does not therefore manifest 
consciousness. These two properties are found only in the 
present objects and not in those objects which are not pre- 
sent here and now. As such they are not immediate obje- 
cts. These objects do not have their vyapara in giving us a 
knowledge of themselves. This vyapara consists of the pro. 
perties of 'karakatva' and 'vyanjakatva' referred to above. 


When the pot comes into a contact with fire we see red.. 
ness. But if the pot is not present, fire will not reveal that 
redness. Similar is the case with the object in inference. 


Objection: There was rain in the past. And I say 
that the rain is present now as the.past rain or as the future 
rain (atitavrishti t or anagata vrishti). 


Reply: But rain cannot be both 'atita' (past) and 
'vartan1ana' (present) at the same moment. As atita it does 
not. have any 'anvaya' with a present object. It appears 
only as the 'abhava pratiyogi' (contradictory of its absence). 
It is never vartamana if it was only in the past. 



.l.':J.l. 


f'anchapadika 


Further the 'atitavrishti' (past rain) cannot have any 
relation with the present 'kriya' and 'guna': It is only the 
'vartamana ghata' (present pot) that has the 'vartamana 
lauhitya' (present redness). Thus in infrence the object is 
neither a karaka nor a vyanjaka. 


In perception, however, the sense contacts the property; 
and we have the cognition of this property only when the 
substance begins functioning. 


Objection: If the object is not immediate in infer- 
ence, and if such an object cannot be a karaka or a vyanj- 
aka, how can our vijnana have the vishayakara (form of the 
object) in inference? 


Reply: We have the sense contact with the 'linga' 
(hetu or reason). And the specific relation brought by this 
functions as the cause in giving us the 'visisht aikartha jna- 
na'- (a specific uni l ary cognition). 


Objection: If it is 'atita', then it is an object. And 
when it can have 'vishayatva', why can't it have tp.e 'kara- 
katva' also ? 


Reply: No. An object is not an object jf it does 
not give rise to a knowledge of itself. The object in infer- 
ence is an object only in so far as it removes the ignorance 
we have of it This absence of ignorance which this object 
gives, is not its property. Nor can we say that the 'vishaya 
vyapara' is to give us the 'vijnanakara'. Vijnanakara' be- 
longs only to juana and to none else. When we say 'vrish- 
timjanati' (He knows about the rain) as an inferntial cogni- 
tion, the verb to know has an object. But this object here 



Viv'aranam 


293 


is not tbe object having the nature of the object of immedi- 
ate apprehension. It is an object only in sofar as our igno- 
rance of it is dispelled by it. But if is a direct object of 
cognition, it would require sense contact etc. and thut 
would be an immediate object. 


I mmediacy of the self : 
Having explained the nature and roeaning of 'asmas 
pratyaya vishaya', Padmapada now proceeds to explain the 
text and to state the relation between the ego and Brahman. 


This 'ahankara granthi' is conveyed by the expression 
'asmat pratyaya'. This is a 'pratyaya' (apprehension). The 
antahkarana or ahankara is like a n1irror in which we have 
the reflection called the self. Herein we find the interpene.. 
tration of the ahankara and consciousness which is the not 
this. This antahkarana is the manifesting medium of that 
consciousness. For such an ego Brahman appears as if it 
is an object. It is only an 'aupacarika' (metaphorical) 
usage to speak of Brahman as its object. Such a self is 
s
en as the I in jagrat (working) and svapana (dream), while 
in sushupti (deep sleep) the I or the ahankara remains in its 
'samskata rupa'. Consequently the illumination of the self 
is obstructed by the 'agrahana avidya' (non-apprehending 
nescience)which is uparakta by the'samskara'. He does know 
tbe 'gatagata' (past and future) and is spoken of in the texts 
as 'samsari, jivah, vijnanaghanah, vijnanatma, prajnah, 
sariri I sarirah) atma, samprasadah, purushah, pratyagatma, 
bhakta, kshetrajna. 



294 


Panchapadika 


Objection: The sruti describes the self as havin 
reTation with many upadhis Iike)he body and the 'kshetr

 
How is it you speak of ahankara alone as the Upadhi? · 
Reply: The self is the 'ajnanopadhi'. This is 'upa.. 
rakta' (affects) by the ahankara
 
nd its 'samskara'. During 
the tbree stages, such a sel
 acquIre: many an external Up a- 
dhi; and the many upadhls descrIbed refer to this aspect 
only. When he is said to have the 'gatagatacarana" it 
only means that having this one upadhi he comes to acquire 
many other upadhis. 
To show that for this 'savikalpaka adhyasa' (deterrni- 
nate superimposition) there is a ground which is 'savikal- 
paka'; the explanation is given in 'asmat pratyaya vishaya- 
tvat' . Now Padmapada is going to show that there can be 
a 'savikalpaka adhyasa' even \vhen the gound is 'nirvika- 
Ipaka' (non..relational or non-determinate). 


The self is 'adhyasarha" not merely because it is the 
object for the 'asmat pratyaya; but because it is also imm- 
ediate. For, the pratyagatman (our self) is experienced by 
us immediately and directly. 


Objection: But the self is always something that is 
to be inferred. How can you speak of its immediacy? 


Reply: If I do not have an in1mediate experience of 
my self, wh(:f.t is the difference between my experience and 
the knowledge of my experience possessed by another ?When 
I say 'mayedam viditam' (this is known by me), I recognise 
a subject in me and an object for me. This subject-object 
relation cannot be apprehended by me if the self is only 
inferentially cognised. 



Vivaranam 


295 


Objection: Your self is the ground for the jnana 
arising from your experience. This is all the difference 
between your cognition .and somebody else's cognition of 
yours. 


Rep Iy: In the absence of the experiencing self, the 
other person cannot have any knowledge of the relation bet... 
ween D1Y experience and myself (or between my knowledge 
and myself). If the absence of the 'anubhavasambandha' 
(relation of experience) is comn10n both 
to me and to the 
oiher, he cannot bave an inferential co
niticn of the ground 
of the knowledge. If there is no relation between the self 
and the 'ghatanubhava' (cognition of the pot), then the 
'hetujnananumana' (inference of the cause) cannot arise. 


Objection: Let there be the self as the ground of 
the 'vishayanubhava'. 


Reply: The 'samvedya jnan
' or the knowledge of 
the object cannot establish the self; for the self would cease 
to be the subject of the experience by becoming an object. 
Further it would make experience itself impossible. If the 
object and the self were to be the objects of experience, 
there would be two objects arising at the same time; and 
this is an impossibility. The self cannot be an object of 
any samvit other than its :own; it is not a 'samvit 
karma'. 


Objection: Samvit may not establish that the self is 
its object. But it can establish the self as . its own upadhi. 
Since the samvit establishes the exis,tence of the self, the 
1:Ielf is its upadhi or viseshana' (unimportant). 



296 


Panchapadika 


Reply: Does upadhi mean the ground (asraya) or 
the object (vishaya), 
or one of these two? Upadhi cannot 
:p1ean the ground. If the self is the ground for the samvi t 
and if the samvit gives us a knowledge of the ground, then 
it cannot give us a knowledge of the object since the object 
is not a ground at all. The samvit win have to illumine 
or reveal only the self and not the object. 
Samvit (consciousness) cannot give us a knowledge of 
the self if the self were to be an object; for, the self as on 
object would cease to be the self, and the objects would 
cease to be objects. 


Nor can we say that upadhi is asraya vishayatvam. 
What is meant by a 'vishaya' ? 


Objection: It is that which is capable of giving 
rise to the 'vyavahara' (activity) set in motion by the sam- 
vito 


Reply: Then the self too would become an object. 
Objection: The object then may be that which is 
distinct from the ground and at the same time that which 
excludes the samvit. 


Reply: Then the eye too would become the object 
along with that which it is said to cognise. 


Objection: It is different from the ground; and yet 
it is that which is capable of giving rise to the 'vyavahara' 
set in motion by that very ground. 


Reply: Then what wiII happen is this; the relation 
between the samvit and its ground would have to be an 



Vivaranam 


297 


object. You cannot say that there is no such relationship; 
fer you admit that there is a 'samavaya' (relation of inher- 
ence) between the samvit and the self, because of which 
there is no immediacy of the self. 


Objection: The object is that which is 'karma 
karaka' (causing an act). 


Reply: Then an object whicb is not present (atita) 
ceases to be an object, whence you can not admit)nference.. 
The object cannot be merely that which is cognised because 
of the sense contact witb it. 


Objection: Let the self be arrived at as being the 
object (karma) of the samvit. 


Reply: This is impossible. The object is in one 
moment and the cognition in another. The relation bet- 
ween the two is not comprehended in any moment. As 
such my knowledge of Inyself (as object) would not be dif- 
ferent from another's knowledge of the same. That the 
self is the object of the samvit is estabJished by the cog- 
nition other than that in which we cognise the object. Does 
this 'jnanantara' (different cognition) coexist with the 
experience of the object? or does it come at a later time? 
If it comes at a later time, we have said already that it is 
impossible to know the relation between the samvit and 
the self. 


These two cognitious being different in having diffe.. 
rent objects, how can they together arise at the same mo- 
ment? Can any person have a forward step and also a 
backward step at the same time ? 



298 


Panchapaclika 


That which is 'niravayava" (part-less) cannot have 
two 'parinamas' (changes) at the same time in one 
place or in two different places. 


Objection: Two 'parispandas' (movements) are 
impossible at the same time for one object, when the object 
is said to change in its entirety. But there can be a 'pari- 
nama' (change). 
Reply: This is not possib!e. On the other hand, 
there can be two 'parispandas' at the same time, if they 
have different origins: ego He goes singing. Going is 
accomplished by the l legs and the other by the vocal chords. 
Even two 'parinamas' can be there for one object,_ if only 
we recognise that they come at different times : ego youth 
and old age come at different times. 


There cannot be the parinama. of .one part only since 
the self is devoid of parts. Hence the self is imlnediate in 
so far as it is 'svaprakarsa'. This pratyagatma is 'svayam 
siddha' (self-existent foundational consciousness); and 
through its own inherent power, it becomes 'adhyasa yo- 
gya' since it is immediate. 


Objection: But t\e ground and the adhyasta are 
c.o gnised by the same sense organ. Mere immediacy is of 
no avail here, if the ground and the adhyasta are not said 
to be cognised by the same sense organ. We do not see 
any adhyasa or a pure immediacy. In any adbyasa there 
is the contact of the eye with the ground which is immedi- 
ate. 



Vivarafiam 


29J 


Repty: There is no such ru1e that an object can be 
adhyasta only on another immediate and direct object. The 
akasa is not a case of 'pratyaksha prama' and yet surface, 
colur et. are imputed to it. Thus says Sankara: the 
akasa is 
paroksha) or it mav be said to be a perceptual 
cognition which does not require the sense-contact. 


The Vaiseshika and the Nyaya argue that sabda is a 
'visesha g..!na', (particular quality). It is apprehended only 
by one external sense organ; and yet as un1 ike the case of 
smell, it is apprehended as excluding its substance. It is 
not a general or common property like others. It does It.Jt 
coexist with any of the other gunas like touch and form. 
Since it is cognised by an external sence organ, it is diffe- 
rent from dik (space), kala (time) and manas (n1ind) whose 
specific property it cannot be., Hence sabda is the visesha- 
guna of a substance which is other than the four elements, 
space, time, mind and self. That which has the property 
of sound is the akasa. This a1:asa is inferentially cognised. 
Buddhists and carvakas infer akasa through 'anupalabdhi 
(non- apprehsion) and maintan that it is the mere negation 
(abhava) of a murta dravya (distinct substence). 


Since a bhavantara is 110 other than an 'abhava" (nega- 
tion, non
 existence), there is an akasa which is merely the 
abhava, of a murtadravya; and this is established through 
iOanupalabdhi'. Thus the Prabhakaras argue. 


B
t the Vartikakara argues that akasa is cogn
sed dir- 
ectly by the eye. 


If the eye can cognise it, it ll1Ust have a form; and as 
su
h it must be something that can be touched. The eye 



300 


Panchapadika 


can cognise only a substance which has the qualities of form 
(or shape) and touch. Further in arriving at the inferential 
cognition of akasa we have a 'hetu' (or Iinga) in anupala- 
bdhi; and this does not alIa", us to accept a sense contact 
with the akasa as possible. Hence akasa is only apratyaksha 
siddha' (proved by non-perception) 


Or we may argue that there is an immediate cognition 
of akasa, and that this cognitio1 is called 'apratyakasha, 
because it does not involve the contact of any of the exter- 
nal sence organs. Then it is immediate as known or app- 
rehended by the sakshin or as apprehended by the mere 
mind. 


Those who do not see the truth attribute 'm 
1inya"' 
(colour etc.) to the sky and speak of its surface as being 
similar to the 'indra ,nila tamala patra' (dark blue leaf). 
It is blue like the indral1ila (blue sapphire). The blue of 
other objects is apprehended as the nature of akasa. 


Thus Sankara winds up the 'sambhavana' (possibility) 
of adhyasa wifl the words 'even aviruddhah... t. In the 
apprehended upadhi we are rejecting the object cognised. 
And this object along with the knowledge of such an object 
is spoken of as avidya ? 


Objection -: It bas been declared that the cause of 
'anartha', (misfortune called bondage) is dispel1ed by Bra- 
hma vidya; and so far we are told that avidya is the cause 
of anartha. Then it ought to be stated that this avidya 
alone is the cause of the anarthas like 'kartritva t . Then 
why is the commentator expounding adhyasa ? 



Vivaranam 


3011 


Reply: To answer such doubts. Sankara says that 
this adhyasa whose n3ture has been given so far is taken to 
be avidya by the pandits (wise men) who are wen versed in 
the pramanas. 


We do not merely say that the anartba hetu (cause of 
bondage) is avidya because all this has avidya as its mate.. 
rial cause and consequently the 
 anartha t00 js avidya. i.We 
do not rely only on agreement and difference between 
avidya and anartha (adhyasa). It is called avidya because 
it is opposed to vidya, which :;alonc can dispel it. When 
we are able to have a discrinminatory knowledge, we come 
to understand the real nature of the objects; and this is 
called vidya. When the snake that is adhyasta is dispelled, 
the snake dis8ppears and we bave the 1"no,vIedge that it is a 
rope. This vijnana is called vidya by the wise in philo- 
sophy. 


Objection: First describe avidya and then show 
that it can be and 1S dispelJed by real knowledge (jnana). 
Thereby you can show the dispelling of adhyasa. When 
this is a srnipler method, why should you diescribe adhyasa? 


Rep Iy : We desire the dispelling of anartha. And 
since the anartba is dispelled by vidya, whai is to be done 
is to describe hovv anartha has the nature of avidya. 
Suppose instead 
of describing adl1yasa, Sankara spoke of 
avidya. This avidya would Inean that which envelopes or 
conceals, for this is its nature. It does not lnean the appe- 
arence of an object as having -a Dature other than its own; 
and such an appearence js the cr.use of anarlha. Hence 
Sankara first speaks of stkh an adhyasa or appearance, and 



302 


Panchapadika 


later on speaks of it as avidya because it is dispelled by 
vidya. This is the proper method
 


Suppose the anartha is descti bed as having the nature 
. of avidya. Its ground is the self and its object is Brahman. 
Either in the self or in its object we do not find the 'gunas' 
and the 'doshas' (defects) that can be said to arise from avi- 
dya. As such knowledge can bring about the nivritti 
(cessation) of all anarthas. So anartha is more iJnportant 
from our standpoint. 


Thus the consequence of this enquiry is: there is 
something adhyasta on the self. Such a self is not stained 
or touched even to the slightest extent by the doshas and 
gunas brought out by the adhyasa. This sentence of San- 
kant shows that anartha is not ultimately real. If the ana- 
rtha is real, then the declared assertion would be futile and 
meaningless. The assertion was that knowledge alone can 
dispel the anartha. 


Avidyadhyasa does not in relaity bring any gunas and 
doshas 10 the self. Due to adhyasa there is the evolu,tion 
of the self and the self as the ground of the adhyasa is free 
from doshas and gunas. Now the 'avabhasa' (manifesta- 
tion) of the eternal consciousness is obstructed by the 
beginningless 'avidyadhyasa'. Because of _this anaditva 
(beginning1essness) there-can be no adhyasa parinalna for 
the self, The self is not evolved out of the 'avidyadhyasa
. 


But can we say that the self is evolved out of the 
ahankaradhyasa'? Now if avidyaa is the ground of such 
an 'agantuka adhyasa' (accidental superimposition) then 
there is no need on the part of'the self to have any know- 



Vivaranam 


303 


ledge; for the self is free and undefiled by the adhyasa. 
On the other hand, the self is the ground for avidya and 
also for the product of avidya. Then a lone knowledge 
would have a value for the bound self. And the aphorist 
has made by implication the asesrtion that bondage is des.. 
troyed by jnana. 


Summarsing the salient features explained so far, 
Padmapada introduces the .ipurport of the next part. 
The commentary ending with 'naisargiko yam loka vyava. 
harah' has established that there is an adhyasa called avi- 
dya; and it is shown that the self and the not-self appearing 
as one is avidya or adhyasa. To prove this, Sankara has 
given its definition and has shown "how it is possible and 
conceivable. Again he proceeds to show with the aid of fur.. 
ther arguments acceptable to an, how the pral'nanas can 
establish it finally. With this desire he states
'tam etam 
avidya khyam ... moksha parani'. Our vyvahara is 
three - fold- pralnata (knower), pramana (means of know- 
ing) and pranlaya (object); this is the activity of the sub- 
ject); b) Karta (doer), karma (act) and karya (object of 
activity). This is the activity of the doer or agent. And c) 
bhokta (enjoyer), bhoga (enjoying) and bhogya (object). 
This is the activity of the enjoyer. This three-fold activity 
is based on the aham adhyasa and the mamadhyasa. {
Our 
activity is immediately related (puraskritya, putah saratvam) 
to this adhyasa. Adhyasa is an immediate or perceptual 
experience since it is csakshi pramana siddha (established 
by the witnessing consciousness). 


Objection: Now all the sastras deal with commands 
and prohibitions only. Why should Sankara say that mok- 
sha too is dealt with in thenl ? 



304 


Panchapadika 


Rep Iy That there is an entity which does not invo- 
lve comn1ands and prohibitions is accepted by us. We say 
that there are texts dealing only with the svarupa (nature) 
of reality. Such are the texts on moksha. Hence moksha 
is separately mentioned. 


Objection : How them are the pramanas and sas- 
tras to be accepted as 'avidya vad vishayani' (obj
cts char- 
ecterised by avidya) ? What pramana will help us in decla- 
ring th
t the three-fold activity has avidya as its material 
cause? The avidya you have described so far may appear 
even in the case of the self. But this alone does not esta- 
blish that it is possible or real. You have to show it with 
the aid of the pramanas. Moreover, the pramanas depend 
on the pralnata (subject) ; and the subject is their ground. 
The subject cannot he one having avidya, for the pramanas 
are useJes for such a subject. vVhen the subject does not 
have avidya, you cannot attribute avidyatva to him or to 
the pramanas. 


Or another line of argument may be advanced. The 
imtegration of the ahankara with the self is the work of 
avidyadhYL.sa. If this avidya i& the nlaterial cause for the 
subject, you cannot establish the validity of the pramanas. 
Howare the 'pratya.ksha adipramanas' (perception and 
other valid means of knowledge) and sastras to be accepted 
as 'avidya vadvishayani' ? If there is 'avidyavad vishayatva' 
for these, the defects of the ground would creep into these 
and stain them. As such they will not have any validity. 


Reply: If I do not treat the body as the I and the 
sense organs as mine
 I C3.nnot becollle a pramata (subject); 
a.nd this would make the 'pramana. pravritti' inconsistent 



Vivaranam 


305 


for me. This sentence of Sankara summarises the main 
doctine ; 'and this is elaborated in the following sentences. 


That the three fold activity has adhyasa as its 'upa- 
dana' can be shown through 'arthapatti' (ilnplication) and 
'vyatireka' (negative) inference. There is a negative con- 
committance of the form: wherever there is found the abs.. 
ence of adhyasa, in all of them there is also found the abs- 
ence of activity. This meaning is in Sankara's commentary 
and Padmapada now proceeds to explain it. 


The 'aham abimana' (egocentric attitude) and the 
'mamabhimana" (the mine-attitude) are absent in deep 
sleep; and we do not find pramatritva in the person having 
deep sleep. The word bo9.Y does not convey the meaning 
of only the hody, but of a living person having a head and 
limbs; for the mere body is not apprehended as the I. 
When we say 'manushy.:>ham' (I am a man) or 'devo ham' (I 
am a god) we refer to ourselves as being individuals of a 
certain character having life and conSCIousness. And this 
is everyone's experience. The three fold activity then can- 
not be established, for the body which is COf.ne )ted with 
our existence, or for the sense organs which are necessarily 
found in the body. It is attributed to the living body or to 
the conscious body of a person. Here alone we can find 
the'dehabhimana' (aham) and the 
indriyadya bhimana' 
(mama). If the 'mamabhimana' were not to be confined to 
the sense organs and limbs only, even the servant would 
have to become necessary for my pramatritva. 


Devadatta has the waking state and the dream state. 
He is the agent having as his 'karanas' (instruments, means) 



306 


Panchapadika 


the body, sense-organs and limbs; and these constitute the 
cahan) mamadhyasa' on whose basis there is the activity of 
the subject in those two states. And this has arisen for 
Devadatta because he has those states which are different 
from sushupti. If there is a time or state that does not 
make him appear as a subject, then that state h not diffe- 
rent from sushupti. This is the inference establjshing pra- 
matritva etc. Earlier we have noticed perception establi.. 
shing the same. 


Ar
hapatti too establishes it. The tl1ree..fold activity is 
not possible in the absence of adhyasopadana, for when 
adhyasa is absent we do not find activity, as ego in sushupti. 
This is arthapatti. 
The 'kartrikarana bhava' (idea of agent) between the 
body etc. and the subject is based on the relation between 
. the two. There is here no such relation as that between the 
master and his servant. The former relation is 'samanya 
vyapati' (ordinary conco111n1ittance), while the latter is 'vya.. 
paka visesha'. While the former is present we are also 
aware of the absence of the latter. Thus the knowledge 
arising from these two is one of arthapatti wbich is the pra- 
mana (means of knowledge) for establishing pralnatritva. 


o b j e.ctr (l n: But in both 1he relatic11s it is the living 
or ccnscious body (svattadhna vyavasthita D1anushya avay.. 
avi) that brings about the activity.. Then how can you rej- 
ect the second relation here? What is wanted in activity is 
the 'kartrikarana sambandha' only and not their'tadatmya' · 
As SliCh arthapatti here is not valid as stated. 


Reply: Since the other relations are not valid here, 
we have to accept onJy the tadatmya sambandha. Which 



Vivaranam 


307 


are we take of th
 following: 1) 'svasvamita sambandab 
(ownership), 2) 'viniyojya viniyojakata sambandhah 
(doing), :J) san1yogah .(conjuction), 4) samavayah (inh- 
erence), 5) 'bhoktri bhogyata (enjoyer), 6) 'svakaramara.. 
bhyatvam', 'I) 'svendriyadhishtheyatvam', or any other. 


1) The first is impossible because it does not make 
one a pramata (knower), as ego the master in deep sleep is 
not a pram&ta for the servant; and there is no 'svattvena 
sambandha" between them. The 'pram

tritva' is 'prama 
kartritva' and this involves the sense organs which are not 
active in deep sleep. When the other karakas are not fun- 
ctioning, the 'pramakartritva' cannot function. 


2) Objection: Then one might say that the body 
etc., function when there is the desire. Body etc. obey the 
desire, act in accordance with desire. And since this desire 
is ab'\ent in deep sleep, there is no pramatritva then. There 
is the relation betwen the self and the 'karya karana sangh- 
ata' (body, sense organs etc.) brought by desire or consci- 
ous willing. This mutual relation makes the body etc. act 
in accordance with the wishes of the self. When the mere 
desire brings this 'viniyojya viniyojaka san1bandha\ then 
the entire activity of 'kriya karaka phala', which is of the 
nature of pramatritva (knower
hood) etc. would belong to 
the self. It is not adhyasa that brings this activity. That 
this activity has its origins in such a relation is seen in 
cases like 'I have the desire to get up, and so I get up and 
also sit'. Experience alone is the pralnana here. ' 


But the servants also are seen to act in accordance with 
the desire of the master. Then there should be the activity 
on the part of the servant when the master has the desire. 



Panchapadika 
And in the absence of the servant there may have to be the 
absence of pramatrtIva. 


-vv 


This is a faulty objection since the desire of one is me- 
diated by the activity of another bcdy. The activity of the 
body etc. should have an immediate or direct relation with 
the body. We do not have such a relation between the 
master and his servant, for there is no 'mukhyabhimana' 
(feeling of priority) for the body of the servant. 


Reply: If the relation 
is merely that of'icchanuvi- 
dhana yogyataj<, we have it in deep sleep whence there 
ought to be an activity even then. If js is 'icchant:.vidh- 
iyamanatva sambandhah', this is absent in deep sleep ::;nd 
as sl:ch tbere c
n be pramatritva. Nor cen you say that 
th is relation is seen to be the source of all activity; for 
VYl1en you accept the 'svaprakasa' of the samvit, you cannot 
speak like .bis. T1:e sc;mvit (ccnsciol1sness) 'IDanusrJyc11am' 
(13m a n an) is our own in:mediate experience, and we do 
not reject it or contradict it. Here we do find that we have 
o-ur 'mukhyabhimana' for the body. You cannot say that 
this js a ga'Una (anciHary) f)"J;CIfssicn, fer it con1rr.dicts 
your experience. 


Because of the contact with the upadhi, there arisse 
the desire and this can't be rejected. Even desire has its ori- 
gin in adhyasa. Even desire is a 'parinama visesha' of adh- 
yasa. How can such a change be predicated of the self 
which is beyond change or evolution? Antahkarana which 
is an evolute of adhyasa has the rnutual interpenetration 
,
"ith tbe ahankarta whence desire is attributed to the self. 
This is a fact of experience also. I have the desire to get up 
al1.d so I get up and sit. This getting up etc. is an activity 



Vivaranam 


309 


of the body which has an interpenetration through the 
ahankara with the self. 


3, 4) One cannot also argue that the relation of 'sam- 
yoga' or 'samvaya' between the self and the not-self is the 
calise of all activity, for this relation is found even in deep 
sleep where there is no activity. 


5, 6, 7) 'Bhoktribhogyata', 'svakarmarabhyatva', and 
'svendriyadhishtheyatva' - these relations presuppose their 
origin in 'bhogadhyasa (superin1position of enjoying); and 
they are also seen in the bodily activities of the servants 
etc. 


Objection: But in the case of the servants, it "is 
their body which mediates bhogyatva. Hence we have to 
say that the original relation is one of 'bhgoyatva' which 
does not require any such Inediation. 


Reply:" If this relationship has the propriety (yogyata) 
to enyoy, it is present even in deep sleep. 


Objection: It is not 'bhoga yogyatva' (propriety to 
enjoy), but 'bhojyamanatva', (enjoying) which too does not 
require any mediation. 


Reply : This is impossible without a prior and diffe... 
rent relation. If there is no prior relation of the body to 
the sel( I cannot conceive of a bhoga sambandha for this 
body. Now the self is immediately present in aU spaces and 
in all bodies. As such there ought to be 1he 'bho ga 
every where. Hence this relation is other than and pas 
terior to the adhyasa relation. 



310 


Panchapadika 


Thus by the method of residues,. we find. arthapatti 
and anumana establishing that adhyasa IS the onginal rela... 
tion that is the cause of all activity. If you do not accept 
'avidyadhyasa', you cannot speak of the 'pramatritva
 for 
tbe self which is by native 'asanga' (non-relational) and 
'avikari' (unchanging). 


Objection: The self is present in all bodies and 
fhere is no difference on this count between the various 
badies. Then, how can you say that there is the adhyasa 
niyama for the self only in this body? How can you speak 
of the living body of tbis person only as being the subjec t 
etc. ? 


Reply: The 'avidyadhyasa' is beginningless; and as 
such the distinctions between the selves too is beginningless.. 
The subtle body which is the cvolute of adhyasa is attached 
to such a self whence arises 'pramatritvadi niyama' for the 
self. The gross body too is the product of the same avidya. 
Now that which is begun by the subtle body is ta.ken up 
by the gross body; or because of the close connection bet- 
ween the subtle and the gross bodies, the gross body acqu- 
iries this 'adhyasa niyama '. 


Objection: But it is only the prau1ata that is the 
ground of activity. It is not adhyasa. 


Reply: No. The 'pramatritva' itself is the result of 
'adhyasa'. Then the mere presence of the 'pran1atritva 
sal-ti' is the cause jn all 'pramana pravritti (activity of the 
knowner); yet -this 'sakti' is the product of the play of 
aidya. As such we argue the avidya vad vishayatva for 
rato.anas. 



Vivaranam 


311 


Objection: Ahankaara is said to be the product of 
adhyasa; and there is the ahankara with the self. This is 
the meterial cause giving rise to activity. But this is vitia... 
ted by the defect called avidya. Consequently the prama.. 
nas cannot have any validity. They cannot give rise to 
valid cognitions. 


Reply: The knowledge of truth that is not subIated 
, by any pramana - ie. the knowledge that is given only by 
agama cannot be given 
 by anyone of thepramanas. 
The knowledge given by the pramanas may be contra- 
dicted by the knowledge of truth given .by the agama; 
but in so far as it n1akes the activity and experience in the 
en1pirical world possible, such a 'pramana jnana' is not 
subject to sublation. They give the knowledge of the 
objects correctly within the empirical famework. The 
'apekshavishaya' of these pramanas does not' fall outside of 
the empiric[Ji world. By their own inherent power they 
give us the right cognition of the objects; and these 'nir2.- 
eksha pramanas' do not ge.t contradicted in the empirical 
framework. As such their vaidity and their 'avidyavad 
vishayatva' are not inconsistent. 


Perception establishes the vyavaharangata (subsidiary 
, to activity) of the pramana
; and that the prarnatritvadi 
vya v ahara has its or jgins in adhya£a, is established by per- 
ception, infErence and arthapatti. Thus we get at their 
validity (pramanyam) and at their 'avidyavad vishayatv[un'. 
This is vidhimukhopadarsita' - ;vidbi' isthat which gives 
the knowledge that this is like this; it is a perceptual 
knowledge. And 'vidhi mukha' means that which takes 



312 


Panchapadika 


the 'aid of perception, inference etc. Hence the validity 
and the 'avidya vad vishayatva', proved by these pran1anas 
cannot be rejected as being impossible. 


S
bda (verbal testimoney) may be unreal (mithya). 
But it is seen to give rise to an act in the form of p:ltting 
all end to av.idya. Sabda and other pramanas have the 
'arthakriya samarthya' which is of the nature of dispelling 
avidya and of giving the apprehension or experience of 
Brahman. Because of this ability they have their validity 
and this is not inconsistent w
th their mithyatva. A pra.. 
mana might have its basis in avidya, but it can become a 
m.eans of dispel1ing that very avidya. 


Objection: Then, the validity of sabda etc. is de- 
termined by their 'arthakriya samarthya'. This would 
mean that they have a vJ.lidity brought by something other 
than thenlselves. 


Reply: Jnana has 'svatah pramanya'. And we 
show that the pram'1nas have the 'arthakriya sa.mrthya' 
only to dispel the dO'.lbts reglrding their invalidity. This 
is not inconsistent with: their 'svatah pramaanya' (self vali- 
dity). 


In Mimaansa there is the svatah pr
maanya for jnana; 
and the 1'vishaya. svarupa"(artha tathatva) is attributed to 
knowledge, since, only knowledg
 g:ves the vishaya sva- 
rupa. Likewise only by apprehending the object can 
we determine the (artha' kriya samarthya'. If this is not 
accepted by the Mimansaka, then his jnana too would have 
paratah pramanya because i.t is dependent on 'prakatya' 
\jnatata) which is in the object. 



Vivaranam 


313 


Objection: Even the knowledge of Brahman is a 
faJse knowledge, for this knowledge arises from 'ajnana' 
which is its 'upadana'. As such it cannot dispel avidya. 


Reply: If by false knowledge is meant 'svarupa;- 
nlithyatva' (or the falsify of the epistemic act), it is aGce- 
ptable to us. In so far as jnana is vritti jnana even the 
akhandakara vritti 
 (internal1y unified cognition) cannot 
claim to be ultimately real. We accept the 'svarupa mi- 
thyatva of knowledge; and we reject 'mithyatva for the 
object of knowledge. The vritti jnana may be false; but 
you cannot say that it cannot put an end to avidya. The 
dream cognitions are false; but the falsity of the objects 
of these cognitions is made known to us by the absence of 
the 'arthakriyakaritva samarthya' ;n them. 


The vritti jnana may be false; but its object is not 
false since it has no sublation, since it remains uncontra- 
dicted. Brahma jnana does not have any 'vishaya mith- 
yatva' since there is the 'anupalabhya mana badha'. 


Objection: But a. counter inference too can be 
given, Brahman is mithya or false since it is comprehen- 
ded by that knowledge which has 'ajnana' as its up a- 
dana. The world is false for the same reason. Likewise 
the silver is false because the cognition is false. Jnana- 
dhyasa presupposes 'vishayadhyasa' . Of these two one 
cannot be false while the other is true. 


Reply: The world is false because it is sublated Or 
neg
ted, not because it is comprehended by the knowledge 
whose 'upadana' is ajnana. 



314 


l-'anchapadika 


Ob jection: But wben the cognition arises from the 
defect in the sense organ, then both the cognition and the 
object are false. And here the defect is adhyasa which 
alone is said to make one a pramata. 


Reply: No. It is only an 'agantuka dosha' (adven- 
titious defect) that can be a cause in declaring the falsity of 
the object; but if the defect is natural (naisargika) it can- 
not make the object false, since this 'naisargika dosha'is 
the very basis of all apprehension. 


A defect is called a defect only if it comes after the 
'pramana karanas\' are there. Such a defcct is 'agantuka', 
that which arises in the middle. It is not there prior to the 
pramata and his sense organs. 


But a defect which is there as the very basis or source 
(karana) of the pramana, is not a defect like the ordinary 
defects. It is the cause of the 'pramatritva' and as such is 
.naisargika' or natural. 


Eg. 'kaca', 'kama.la' etc. are 'doshas' and give rise to 
erroneous cognitions. But these very defects can become a 
basis for inferring the sins etc. committed by the percipient. 
In such a case we find that a defect can be a cause for esta- 
blishing.a valid knowledge. To the subject proper it is a, 
defect; but to another it is a valid cause for a valid infe- 
rence. 


Now, avidya is a defect in so far as it prevents or obs- 
tructs. the 'avabhasa' (manifestations) of Brahman. It is 
illumined by the' 'prakasa' (light) of Brahman and it prese- 
nts adistored appearance of that very Brahman. But the app- 



Vivaranam 


31.5 


earences it brings are 'vyavahara yogya'. Since avidya 
presents a distorted appearance of Brahman and since it is 
the cause of such an appearance, avidya is said to be a 'nai- 
sargika dosha'. 


To show how only an 'agantuka dosha' is taken to be 
a defect, and how the 'naisargika dosha' is not considered 
to be a defect, Padmapada giv
s an illustration. The sor- 
row or unhappiness arising from hunger and thirst is 81wa- 
rys with us ; or when there is the nausea brought by the 
digestive system, we have the 'annapana nishpanda'. These 
cases are not considered by us to be cases of disease. But 
when there is a slight rise in the temperature, eventhough 
it is there only for a very shorr time; or when there is a 
slight cold and cough brought by phlhegm-in these cases we 
have the thought that they are diseases. The first is a natu. 
ral ailment and is therefore not caIled a disease. The sec- 
ond is a temporary ai]nlent and is therefore caned a dise- 
ase. The same is the case with avidya which is a natural 
defect; while the 'kacadi doshas' being temporary aliments, 
are called defects. 


Objection: But Sabara has declared that the m
re 
presence of a defect would make both the cognition and the 
object false. For he declared- "Yasya ca dushtam kara-- 
nam, yasra ca mitbyeti pratyayah, sa eva asamicinah praty- 
ayo nanyah". 


RepEy: This sentence was given by Sabara only with, 
,reference to the non-natural defects. For, the word defect S 
(dosba) is normally and generally taken to mean only an 
agantuka dosha. It is only with this meaning that we 
have to interprect Sabara's sentence. 



316 


Panch a padika 


Objection The activity of the unwise might have 
its basis or origin in adhyasa; But such an origin cannot 
be ascribed to the activity of the wise. 


Reply: It is to ward off such a contention that San- 
kara declared the non-difference in the activity of men and 
that of anin1als. This illustration shows that our activity 
originates in adhyasa. "During the activity of pramatritva 
etc the animals etc. show activity, inaction and indifference; 
and it is well known that they have the 'aham abhimana' 
(ego-centric attitude) in their 'karya karan
 sanghata (cau- 
sal complex) only. Now from the activity we infer adhy-- 
asa. In this inference, activity is shown as being that of 
the wise also. "Human beings have the same behaviour as 
that of the animals. By birth they are more rational than 
animals, and have the ability to understand the truths given 
by the sastras". It is in such persons that we fiind the 
middle term (hetu) of the inference, viz, activity. The adh.. 
yasa has having the 'hetu' is inferred. "Even though they 
are more rational, they act like animals in so far as they 
have the 'atInabhimana' for their bodies". Then the infer- 
ence would be- 


The activity of the wise is conditioned by adhyasa ; 


Because it has the nature of activity; 


as, for example, the activity of animals. 


The example is 'sadhya vikala' (unproven major). As 
1] ch what is required is that even this illustration can esta, 
Ush the validity of adhyasa. 



Vivaranam 


317 


Objection: '"'You argue that there is the 'ahamka- 
ranubandha' in the body etc., even for the animals. You 
'Speak of it as if it is thus known. How do you establish 
this for the animals !" 


Reply: When there are two o
ects and when the 
difference between them is not cognised through perception 
or inference or agama, tIaen by a process of elimination we 

et at adhyasa. It is only the wise minds that are skilled 
in inference a.nd agama (revealed wisdom) that can arrive 
at the self as being distinct from the' body. They alone are 
capable of arriving at it because they are also skilled in 
perceptual activity etc. If they can understand the self as 
being distinct fron1 the body without the aid of perception, 
inference and agama, these pramanas would be rendered 
useless. In the absence of the pramana vica.ra (enquiry 
into the means of knowledge) no such distinction can be 
apprehended.. 


Objection: Even those who do not have the "anu- 
managama vicara (enquil y into j nferential and verba] kno- 
wledge) do have certain actions which presuppose an 'adri- 
shtartha' (invisible purpose) for their souls. These persons 
have the activities based upon a distinction between the 
boby and the self, "Cowherds, women and others do not 
have any knowledge of the pramanas; and f'yet they do 
accept that they have an unchanging self which exists even 
after their death, and that this self is the enjoyer of the 
fruits of their actions", The distinction here is apprehen- 
ded perceptually. 


Rep Iy: There is no such apprehension here, bUt 



318 


Panchapadika 


wise). Their activity is based on what the elders said.. If 
they have the knowledge of distinction arrived at perce. 
ptually, they would have apprehended the pratyagatman. 
Thus when they are asked 'who bas the relation with the 
other world ?', they reply that they do not know it defini . 
tedly and that they heard of it in the world. Hence it has 
been wisely said 'pasvadinan ca prasiddho aviveka purvakah 
pratyakshadi vya vaharah. That samanya darsanad vyutpa- 
ttimatam api purushanam pratyakshadi vyavaharas tat 
kalah samana hi". Even the activity of the wise is similar 
to that of the animals during the time of that activity; and 
that time is the time where adhyasa is found. This much 
at best is common to the activity of the wise and of the 
animals. 


Perception and other pramanas have the eye etc. as 
their means. The means are 
not devoid of a ground; and 
such a ground is the body. Thus for perception etc.., the 
body is necessary. 


Objection: Let adhyasa be. the cause of activity. 
Yet just as in 1he case of 'rajatadhyasa' tbe silver is only 
an instru'nental cause t likewise even for activity we may 
take adjhyasa to be only an instrumental cause. The 
mere self is the material cause. By the mere self we 
mean the 'anadhyast
 atma bhava' (idea of the non- 
superimposed self). 


Reply: Sankara states- 'Na tenanadhyasta atma bha... 
vana asangasya avikarinas caitanyaika rasasy atmanah pra- 
matrtivam upapadyate'. Here we are told that experience, 
alone makes out the 'avidya vad vishayatva' of the pramanas 



Vivaranam 


319 


After teaching tbis Sankara has explained the similarity 
b
tween the activity of the animals and that of men. In 
'rajatadhyasa' the ground is only the object, and not the 
pramata who is the ground of natural activity. Even tho- 
ugh it is a pramata that has this 'rajatadyasa', stiU it is the 
sole factor that determines the pramatritva. Even in the 
absence of this adhyasa we have activity. As such, the silver 
is the instrumental cause of the activity in rajatadhyasa. 
This does not hold good of the normal activity which has 
its ground in the pramata; and it is only the normal activity 
that determines the pramatritva (krower-ness) of a person. 
Further, in deep sleep we find that there is no activity of 
the mere self. And in deep sleep tLere is present the upa.. 
dana (meterial cause) viz., aVldya. Even if mithyajaana is 
not directly and completely the upadana, the upadana is 
that product of -avidya which has interpeDetration with the 
self. 


Having established avidya as the basis of all our 
activity, Sankara proceeds to declare that the sastra in 
its turn, teaches something with reference to the self as 
apprehended generally. Here one 
may say that the acti- 
vityordained by the sastra is not based on adbyasa. To 
put an end to such a false belief, he declares that sastra 
too is 'avidyavad vishaya' when he said - 'sastriye tu vya- 
vahare yadyapi buddhipurvakari na vidl tva atmanah para 
Ioka sambandham adhikriyate'. 
The sastra proclaims an adrishta (unseen) object as the 
goal to be realised through an act. There cannot be any 
activity regarding a sacrifice etc. One does not know 
bow he wHl enjoy the consequences jn the world to come. 
There should be the knowledge of the self's relation to the 
other world. Otherwise no activity is possible. Taking 



320 


Panchapadika 


this contention. as a convenient one, the Carvaka now 
raises an objection., 


Objection: The injunction is a codana (instigation) 
aDd it commands th
t an act should be done for a specific 
end. The self that will have a relation with another body, 
cannot be had from the 'phala codana' - instigation caused 
by an idea of the resuI t. Why does the 'phala codana 
 
not involve or in1ply such a self? If this question is asked,. 
you have to reply whether it i5 the 'pasvadi phala codana' 
(result of obtaining cattle as the instigator of the svarga- 
di phaIa codana' that implies this self. It cannot be the 
former - One perfonns the 'karinyadi' rites and as a con- 
sequence may 0 bt ain animal s even in this life. It cannot 
also be the latter. When we speaki of svarga (heaven) as. 
the end, you cannot prove that svarga is a different world. 
You can only say that it stands for happiness; and this 
does not make out the re lation of the self to another body 
necessary or essential. Either way you cannot get at such 
a. self. 


The same result would follow even in 'uaiyyamika. 
codalla, (instigation of an absolute law) and 'nahnittika 
codana' (instigation under specific conditions). When the 
phala codana itself is unable to imply a distinct 'bhokta
, 
these codanas are c0111pletely weak in implying it. Such 
'phala' is directly experienced as 'sukha-prapti, and 'dukha 
nivritti'. The Bhatta cannot speak of the 'phala' 
 for 
'naiyyamika codana'. Even the 'prayascitta codana' does 
not involve such a self since this act has a direct resul 
t 
here and now in so far as the defect is said to be removed. 
And it is possible to cxp::rience here itself the 'd.osha 
phala" viz., sorrow. 



Vivaranam 


321 


'Yh en certain crimes are committed, one is said to be 
born In certain ways and forms. The resu]t is the conse- 
quence of !he present crime; and the consequence is only' 
sorrow WhICh can be undergone in this life itself. 
Further, 'certain rites do not appear to give any visibie' 
results. Thus in 'karinyadi' rites,. one ought to obtain 
them, and this is traced to some defect in'the performance 
of the ancillary rites. The same explanation can be extended 
to all performances. And with the' help of the 'mantraS' 
and 'oshadhis' (medicines) we may develop this body so 
well that all the pleasures of 'svarga' can be experienced 
in this life. 


Hence there is no use in having a knowledge which is 
said to give us the self as being different from the body. 
Reply: The" 'devatadhikarana' establishes the vali- 
dity of mantra etc; and as such the Mimamsaka admits the 
'svargadiphala' which is experienced or enjoyed by the body 
in a specific place and at a specific tin1e. The specific place 
is 'meruprishthadih'. The specific time is after the bodily 
death. The specific body is the 'ta:ijasa' one. It is on this 
basis that we have said that the 'sastra vyavahara' involves 
pramatritva etc- viz., the self which appears in adhyasa. 
Through an exhaustive enquiry into "the' 'codana
. Sabara 
has come to accept a self which is ,distinct from the body. 
And only such a self would make possible the upabhogya 
svargopalabdhi' (enjovable heaven). 
Objection: This is inconsistant with Sabara's own 
other statements where he rejects the val,idity of mantra 
etc. Even without requiring the validity of mantra etc, 



322 


Panchapadika 


purely from codana he wants a self which should be differ- 
ent from the body. For, Sabar
 establishes the self only 
from codana because his purpose was only 'karma nir- 
naya'. If the codana does not involve a self distinct from 
the body, it is futile to establish such a self. And Sabara's 
purpose was the 'nirnaya' (determination) of only the 
'vidhivakyartha' (meaning of the injunction). As such he 
cannot establish a distinct self on the basis of the vali- 
dity of the mantra etc. 


Reply: Sabara's work was the enquiry into tbe nat- 
\Ire of the vidhis (injunctions). Even he has established such 
a self purely becaus e the self is implied in the vidhivakyas 


Objection: -If the self is implied by the vidhis, then 
there ought to be an aphorisn on the self. This is anape- 
kshita (not intended) and asutrita (not given in an apho- 
rism). 


Reply: There is aT! aphorism 'Badarayanasya anape. 
kshatvat' . This aphorism gives the need for establishing 
the self. And through the validity of mantra etc. it is also 
'parmparya sutrita'. The first aphorism is athato dharm 
jijnasa where we have the pratijna (declaration of the aim.. 
that this system would enquire into the nature and mean- 
ing of the vidhis. Later in the 'autpattika sutra' is establi- 
shed the 'apaursheyatva' (revealed nature) of the vedas 
Wl1ich necessarily implied the validity 'svatah pramanya' of 
the Vedas. Since the Vedas include also the 'mantra' por- 
tion, their validity also is implicitly giv
n in aphorisms. 
Thus even the 'svarupa vakyas' become self-valid. 



Vivaranam 


323 


And the atma vicara given by 'Sabara is based on the 
validity of the existent object (bhuta artha); and it is not 
based on the codana samarthya. 


Objection: How do you come to know this? 


Reply: It is from Sabara's own words- "Codana 
hi bhutam, bhavantam, bhavisyantam, suksrnam, vyava-' 
hitam, vipralrishtam ity evam jatiyaka"I artham saknoty 
avagamayitum H . Codana gives us a knowledge of aU 
these. But codana being an act, it cannot directly give 
the knowledge of these. Hence we ought to say that this' 
'bodhakatva' is through the 'seshabhuta mantras' etc. As 
such Sabara undertook the atmavicara on the basis of the 
validity .of mantra etc, 


Objection: According to you, the validity of the 
'svarupa nishtha vakyas't (statements of facts) would be 
implied by the 'autpattika sutra\ Their 'pramanya' _ too 
ought to have been discussed there by J aimini. 


Reply: Through Sabda we get the 'svarupa avagama' 
(apprehension of the nature). Is this svarupavagama valid 
in the case of the self which is 'Codana sesha bhuta'? or 
in the case of an independent self? Is it 'akhandartha' or 
'samsrishtartha'? These questions cannot be touched by 
Jaimini and Sabara, even though J aimini has implied the 
validity of the vedantic texts in that aphorism. Yet the 
purpose on hand was only the 'vidhivakyartha nirupana' 
(determining the import of injunctions) for Jaimini. These 
questions about the 'svarupavagama' are of no use here and 
hence they are left out in 'dharmajijnasa'. 




7t1 


Panchapadika 


You cannot argue that even though Jaimini'is busy 
wi
h \he enquiry into Dharma he ought to discuss the nat- 
ure of the self because it is implied by the Vidhivakyas 
For, such an enquiry would be futile here. 
Objection: How do you say that it is futile here, 
since Dharma .too requires a self which ought to be distinct 
from the body. 


Reply: It is Bot mere dharma that requires such & 
self. It is only the 'phala' (result) which wants that self 
aJ?d Jaimini is not concerned with the 'phala vicara'.. 
Objection: But there is 'phalapeksba.' even for 
dharma. 'Dharmopadesa' cannot be 'nishphala' (useless), 
and the phala is inevitable at some time in the future. Such 
a phala is impossible in the absence of a distinct self. As 
such an enquiry into the nature of the self.is necessary. 


Reply: Since this has been done in Uttara Mirna- 
rosa by Badaraya,na, it was not undertaken by Jaimini. 
Objection: But Badarayana"s enquiry refers only 
10 
rahman and not to the 'codanaphala'. 


ReplY,': laimini.s enquiry establishes svarga which 
is enjoyed by another body. This 'svarga bhoga' necessita- 
te,s an enjoy
r who should be different from the 'Karya _ 
karana sanghata t (gross body). 


Objection: Since we are able to establish the sel 
th;rough, the 'vak;ya paryalocana', it is not necessary for 
Badharayana to und
rtake this enquiry into the self. 



Vivaranam 


325 


Rep IV: Brahman or self is an existent and existing 
entity. That can be established only by a different pram-' 
ana. Mere vakya cannot establish it or its nature. 


'Obj'ec'tio'n: If such a distinct self is 'pramanantara 
yogya' (to be established by another means of knowledge), 
it means that no pramana can 'establish it. Then why can't 
you take the body alone to be the self? 


Reply: 'Pramanantara yogyatva' only means that a 
pramana like sabda can give an erroneous cognition. The 
self is the object of experience and experience alone can 
finally establish it. On the other hand an unreal or an 
inconsistent object may be given by sabda as ill 'SHah pla- 
vanti' (the rocks are flowing) which lacks validity. Bec
use 
of this possibility of 'apramanya', Badarayana had to 
undertake a separate enquiry to have the 'virodha parihara 
phala' ,result by resolving contradictions). 
Objection: Then even without the 'virodha parih- 
ara't there can be established the validity (pramanya). 


Reply: Even if the self as distinct from the body is 
absent, then too we hear of the validity of the phalacod- 
anas. Then will ari'se the 'paramarsa sanka
 (doubt) about 
the validity. There is the 'pramanya' of the existant obje- 
cts like svarga. And when this validIty is found, you can 
not establish the validity for the 'phaladi codanas J hi the 
absence of a distinct self which excludes the body. As 
such Sankara says-"Sastriye tu vyavahare...... adhikriyate H . 


Objection: In the Devatadhikarana both Jaimini 
and Sabara have explicitly stated that there is no 'mantradi 



.t'anchapadi ka 


pramanya' as far as the devatas are concerned. Then how 
can you accept that validity which is only implied else- 
where? 
Reply: In that 'adhikarana (topic) the aim is a 
d liferent one. If the devata has a form like ourselves it 
ought to be bodily present at the sacrifice when it is invok- 
ed. If it is not apprehended as being pres(nt, there will 
arise 'karmanusthana lopa' (lapse in the performance of the 
rite). To ward off such undesirable consequences there we' 
are given to understand that the devata has no shap'
 etc. 
The adhikarana does not make out any 'apramanya' for the 
devatas. Moreover, the non-vidhis,like the 'arthavada 
lingas' (laudatory statements) too are quoted in the 112 
chapters of Jaimini as being texts having a" 'pramanya J . 


It is only such a self whicb is distinct from the body 
that is required in the 'sastriya vyavahara 9 outlined by 
Purva mimamsa. So Sal1kara saY3 - "Tathapi na vedanta 
vedyam... h Here we have (i) 'kartranvaya '(syntactical reI a- . 
tion with the doer) - of the form - 'mayedam anustheyam' 
(this is to be performed by me); ii) 'adhikaranvaya' . 
(relation with the proper agent) of the form-'madabhilash- ' 
ita sadhanam idam (this is the means of realising my 
desire); and (iH) 'bhoktranvaya.' (relation with the enjoyer) 
of the form-'mamayam niyogah' (this is my duty). These 
three are rejected or negated in the real nature of the self. 
The self is an 'asamsarin', has nothing to do with 
adhik- 
ara', and is not a 'bhokta'. 


"The 'Sastriya vayavahara' does not require the 'asam- 

aryatmatvam' as its 'adhikarin' (proper subject), because 
such a self is useless here and is also not an 'adhikari'. By 
'asanayadyatitam' is meant that 'atma tattva t which is free 



Vivar an am 


327 


from the wheel of life. Hunger and thirst overtake the 
living and cause them unhappiness and restlessness; and 
when they are quenched they feel happy. But the self is" 
eternally free from these. It is free from all differences of 
caste etc Prior to the having of such vijnana or self-know.. 
ledge, whatsoever activity is ordained for us by the sastra 
, 
that activity would render that sastra to be 'avidyavad 
vishayatva' only. The activity ordained by the sastra is 
based on the conception of the I which is the product of 
avidya. Prior to the realization of the meaning of senten- 
ces like 'Tattvamasi' (that thou art), all the activity that is 
ordained by sastra, is only of the nature of avidya. It 
does not cease to have such a nature. 
Objection: How can the knowledge of the self as 
that which is distinct from the body, coexist with adhyasa? 
Reply: The knowledge is a mediate one while adhy_ 
asa is immediate. An immediacy can be sublated only by 
another immediacy. Some others explain the doubt by 
pointing to the coexistence of the knowledge of one moon 
with the cognition of two moons. 
Others would argue this: The subtle body is the 
product of atma avidya. Now the product is different from 
and is also identical with the cause. Such a subtle body is 
always seen to have a samsarga with the gross body, like 
the fire in the ball of iron. Thus here we find that the gross 
body is different from and yet is identical with its cause. 
This explanation ma;y be taken up. 
In any way it is only imnlediacy that can put an end to 
adhyasa. Hence Sankara has declared that the pramanas 
and the sastra are of the nature of avidya. 
Here ends the Pramana Bhasya. 



328 


Panchapadi.ka 


It is 110t only perception, inference and 
mpIication 
that establish adhyasa; hut there is also' agama (scriptural 
testimony). The agama provides injuctions for the adhi.. 
karin; whom it explicitly called Brahmana. etc. and whom 
it describes in term
 of his age, asrama etc. In so doing 
it accepts the 'cetanacetan adhysa' as the basis of the acti- 
vity it ordains. In 'Brahmano yajeta' (that Brahmana. is to 
perform the sacrifice) we have the 'anatmadhyasa.', on the 
self. 'Ashta varsham brahmanam upanayita.' involves 'var- 
nadhyasa' (superimposition of caste) and 'vayo' dhyasa'.. 
Likewise there are injuctions invoiving the adhyasas of 
asrama, avastha (state), jivana (profession) and the Jike. 


Thus having shown the 'sadbbava" (posibiIity), defi- 
nition, and 'pramana' of adbyasa, Sankara recalls the 
definition in the words - 'at" asmins tad buddbih" .
What j
 
the 'Yushmad artha'? and in what 'ayushmad ar
ha' is there 
adhyasa ? In presenting this wisely and rationally Sankara 
states that the 'Yushmadartha" is the atadartha
 the not-that 
which is adhyasta on consciousness which is the not..this. ,The 
apprehension of the not-this as this is called adbyasa. Here 
we have the Yushmad arth avabh as a , which we take to be 
the 'asmad arthava bhasa'. This is the 'itaretar adhyasa' 
(super-imosition of one on another.) . 


This is illustrated next. 


The order in which these adhyasas are state
 and ex- 
plained in Panchapadika have a peculiar order. There 
we have to note tha
 the proceeding adhyasa presupposes 
the succeeding one as its base. Finally the ultimate ground 
is said to be the self. This self is said to be the integration 



Vivaranam 


329 


. 
self is said to be the integration of the self and the not
self 
into one single unity, and it is not the pure 'aham 
pratyaya' . 


Objection: Is the body also 'adhyasta', and is it 
not the adhyasa of the dharmas ? 


, . 
Rep IV: Even the dharmin too is adhyasta. Since 
th
 dhar as have no inherent relation to the body, it is 
nvt the mere body that is adhyasta. As such the word 
'dharnla' too is employed by Sankara. 


The sastriya vyavahara does not take the mere body 
into consideration, but the dharmas that belong to it. 
Hence the dharmadhyasa (superimposition of quality) js 
more important here than the 'dharmyadhyasa'. (super- 
imfosition of the qualified. 


Objecton: In 'aham dandP (1 have a stick) we find 
a c'onjuctive relation. Likewise in 'aham kami' (I am in 
love) too we have the same relation. Thus kama and 
other dhannas of the antahkarana, wp.ich are apprehended 
as having this relation> cannot be adhyasta. 


Reply: No. The antahkarana is that aspect of the 
'aham pratyayin' called the 'vijnana sakti' . Its properties 
are kama and the like
 When the antahkarana is adhya- 
sta, these properties cann ot escape. These properties are 
present when the antahkaran3. is present; and they are 
absent when it is absent, as in deep sleep. This agreement 
and difference shows that as the properties of antahkarana 
they are adhyasta. 



330 


Panchapadika 


Objt.,; ction But these are the properties of the seJf. 
Theyare active through the aDtahkarana which is its 
karana. As such they are present or absent when their 
karana is present or absent. 


Reply: No. That which is 'karya' (caused) is depen. 
dent on its cause (karana); and there is no rule that the 
effect is dependent on the cause. Inste
d of assuming a 
'karana", it is easier and better to assume an 'upadana'., 
Moreover there are 'karanas' like the eye etc., and these 'do 
not allow us to accept the antahkarana as their karana 
(instruments) but as their upadana (material cause). 
Objection: But in 'aham kami' which is a direct 
experience, we do find th
 self to be the upadlna. 


Reply : If the relation between the 'aha!l1' (I) and 
the danda (stick) exists also between the 'ahan1' and 'kama' 
(love), and if the 'aham' is said to be the upadana, then 
there ought to be the relation of 'tadatmya'. As such we 
ought to say 'aham kamah' (I am love). lIenee reasoning 
and imference through agreement and difference compel us 
to treat the 'antahkarana' as the 'upadana' for 'kama' and 
other 'dharmas'. 'Antahkarana' means 'ahamkara', the 
faham pratyayin'. Because it has the 'pratyayas' called 

kanla' etc" it is called 'pratyayin'. This antahkarana 
is 'adhyasta' on tl.1e 'pratyagatman' who is 'asesha &v.:t- 
-pracara sakshin' (an prevasive witnessing consciousness). 


The self is the sakshin for the 'ahamkara granthi 
which is the source of the wheel 'of life, and which evolves 
itself into 'kama, san1kaIpa, kartritva' etc. The sakshin 
is non-relational (asangi) and 'avikari'; and it is 'hanopa- 



Vivaranam 


331' 


'dana sunyah' (devoid of receiving or giving). It illunlines 
the antahkarana without being mediated by any. 
Objection: How then does the all-pervasive self 
become as if it were internal? 


Reply: Consciousness is spread in. the body. And 
at the time of citta samadhana (reflection etc) 
we feel as 
if it is' inward
. 


Objection: Antahkarana cannot be 'sakshivedya) 
(known by the witness-consciousness). Now the self, sense 
organs and the object are present together; there does not 
arise the knowledge of the object. The presence of a 
fourth term is required for knowledge. Thus that which 
n1akes knowledge possible, when these three are present, is 
the antahkarana or jnana (mind). Thus the mind is known 
through arthapatti. 


Reply: No, we can arrive at the mind in a different 
way. Instead of assumjng an entity called 1he mind having 
the ability to give knowledge, it is better to ascribe this 
ability to the self. 
Objection: Then we can establish the mind infer- 
rentially thus; when all the objects are in the proximity <. f 
the self there arises the 'kramakarya' or knowledge through 
the objects
 sense organs etc; and this requires the con1IDon 
or 'sadhararia' cause fl)r the agent. When In any objects are 
in the proximity of th
 agent there arises only the knowle- 
dge of the object. "I 


When many obj
cts are present before Devadatta he) 
s able to cut a piece of wood only when he has an axe. 



332 


panchapadika 


Reply: This involves the fallacy of anaikantikata. 
The mind functions by having a 'samyoga' with the sense 
organ concerned. · This samyoga is present in I he activity 
of the se!lse organ; and the krama bere does not stand in 
need of any other cause. When the mind has 'kramena 
samyoga 
 (gradual conjunction) with the sense organ, we do 
!Jot notice any other necessary cause. You cannot say that 
there is a necessary cause in the form of 'adrishta-; for 
when the fruit is falling from the tree, the fruit has a saID- 
yoga witb theS'akasadesa', and there is no adrishta karana 
in the 'krama' . You cannot say that in the case of the 
fruit its beaviness is the necessary cause; for, when the eye 
has tbe contact with the object, there is krama (gradual 
order) present. Adrishta karana is not to be had there; 
and a necessary cause is never an 'adrishta karana' in such 
cases. 


Objection: A better inference can be given thus- 
knowledge is 
the visesha guna tbat arises in the object, 
when there is the 'dravyantara samyoga'. This '. amyoga' 
of another substance, without having any inherent relation, 
is the cause req uired. 
For, the knowledge that has ari.;en comes from a real 
(nitya) substance. . 


The redness in the atom arises when the atom has the 
samyoga with fire. This fire is the mind, the atom is the 
object, and the redness is the cognition or knowledge. 
Hence the 'dravyantara' which has the samyoga with the 
object is the mind. 


Reply: When the self has the samyoga with the 
body and sense organs, we have that non-inhering cause 



Vivaranam 


333 


which gives knowledge. Thus arises the fallacy of establi- 
shing that which is already known or established (siddha 
sadhanata). You cannot establish the mind from an exami- 
nation of dream cognitions; for even in dreams there is the 
samyoga with the body which can fulfil the same function. 


Nor can you establish the mind perceptually. If it is 
a perceptual entity, it ought to have 'anu parimana' (atomic 
magnltude
; and then like the atom it cannot be cognised 
by anyone of the sense organs. If it has 'ananta pariwana' 
(infinite magnitude), the whole world should have to be 
cognised at the san10 time in a moment. Even if it has 
'madhyama parimana' (medium magnitude) it cannot be 
cognised by tbe sense organs; for when all the sense organs 
are absent in the dream state, we do find that the mind is 
present. 


We cannot say that there is no 'pratiti' or awareneitS 
of the mind; for we have the experiences like 'mam mano 
nyatra gatam' (my mind is elsewhere). . Thus by the method 
of residues we have to accept the 'sakshivedyatva' for the 
mind. And that there is such a mind is established only by 
agama, and not by inference and arthapatti. 


Objection: That there is the superimposition for 
the self in the antahkaran 1. etc. has been shown. This is 
impo3sible. The itaretaradhyasa' means tbat the self is 
superimposed on the antahkarana, and that the antabka... 
rana on the self. If b
th are sup
rimposed, both will have 
to 
e m;thya (illu')ory). If b:)th are tbe grounds, one 
cannot appear as the other. If the 'this' i
 superimposed 
on the self, the self like the mother of pearl should no t 
have any illumination (pra\:asa). But here you admit that 



334 


PanchapadiIca 


there is the illumination cf con<;ciousness in ahankara. If 
there is the superimposition for consciousness in a:lankara. 
etc., then the world ought not to be revealed as ha.ving its 
basis in ahankara.. 


Reply: In every case of superimposition (adhyasa) 
Que object has the 'sam3.nyavabhasa" (g
neral appearance) 
while the other has the 'viseshavabhasa' (specific appeara.- 
nce). Here we have the conscious and the unconscious. 
entities. The 'vis esh avabh as a' of these two makes us. 
understand that there is the 'itaretaradhya)a' of these two; 
for in sup
rimpc)sltiOl1 it is only the specific appearance 
that is superimposed. But both cannot be false. The 
conscious. entity cannot have any svarupadhyasa in the 
uncol1scions, for then the latter would no longer be the 
unconscious. So consciousness is. a case of adhyasa in so 
-far as it is fused (samsrishta) with the other. T.ae sam:;arga. 
(conjunction) proper alone is a case of adhyasa here. 


Even though there is the viseshavabhasa, it can be the: 
ground since the visesha is not apprehended as the 'adhish... 
thana dharlna', (property of the locus), but as the property 
of another ground. Hence to reject the conclusions raised 
by the objector, Sankara based his argument on experienc- 
"Tam ca pratyagatmanam... antahkaranadish vadhyasyati" 


Objection: When both the 'cit' and the 'jada' are 
appearing as the general and particular (samanya viseshat- 
rnana), there c?nnot b,e any adhyasa. On the other hand 
there is only Sama.nadhikaranya (apposition) whence the 
expressions like 'aham kami (r am in love):are gauna (meta.- 
phonical) expressions.. 



Vivaranam 


335 


Reply: No. Our experience tells us that it is not a 
gauna expression. Our experience does not show that 
there is a "prithag avabhasa' (separate appearance) of these 
two entities. 


Objection: In 
antahkaral1adishu' we find the word 
'adi' extending the scope of adhyasa.. This is!;impossible an 
The antahkar
na is superimposed on pure pratyagatln, 
and this antahkarana is the product of caitanyadhyasa. In 
all other cases, they are adhyasta on the antahkaranal 
Thus did Sankara say in the beginning- 'tad viparyayena 
vishayinas tad dharmanam ea... yuktam' .iThere are no dhar- 
mas of consciousness that .can be superimposed on something 
else. 


Rep Iy: r or the caitanyadhyasa we have antahka" 
rana as the upadhi. Yet consciousness alone is revealed as 
'vishayavacchinna' (conditioned by objects); and the anta.. 
.hkarana is the conditioning Tnedium of consciousness. 
Thus when Sankara speaks of antahkarana in the passage 
referred to has be the 'pratibhasa' (momentary appearance) 
in his mind. Where the antahkarana with the body etc is 
adhyasta, it is not as the mere mind but as. the conscious 
mind. In so obtaining an adhyasa, the mind makes the 
body become a subject, agent etc., and it remains concealed 
and unfo:lnd. II is only the (cidrupa
 (form of conscious- 
ness) that is foumd everywhere in all adhyasa. When the 
body appears as the subject, there is no samanadhikaranya, 
for the body makes the self become the subject etc. In all 
the adhyasas of the body etc., it is only the nlind that is 
unique in conditioning consciousness. Sometimes for the 
consciousness the 'upadbi is required, :and at other times 
the upadhi is not required: 



336 


Pancll apaclika 


Objection: Even though ahankara is the other) is 
external to consciousness, there is the appearance of cons- 
ciousness in ahankara (caitanya vat sambandha), it is cont- 
rary to experience to say that there is no pratibhasa for 
the mind in the body etc. 


Reply: It is imos
ible for the atheist to maintain the 
'atmatva bhrama' in the ,body; and be cannot hold the 
'pratibhasa' of tbe mind in the body. Those who imagine 
that the 'cidrupa' is the immanent continuant (anusyuta) in 
the intellect etc, are only trying to establish the ahankart- 
ritva.' in the intellect, etc.:- are only tlying to establish the 
ahankartritva
' in the 11 tellect, mind
 sense organs, or 
body. That which they accept .they consider to be eonsi... 
ous. In 'aham manushyah' etc. consciousness is attribu. 
ted to the body etc. This is possible because of a false 
identification of the body etc with the ahankara graL. thr. 
It is only the apprehension of mere conscio.lsness tha. 
makes p03sible the 'atmatva vibhrama' in all entitles, lik 
 
the body ect., 
For the. atheist, however, the aham (I) as the body 
stands for consciousness. In such a case, consciousness is 
adhyasta on the mind; and. this specific consciousness is 
adhyasta on the body. Then thil) specific consciousness 
being now conscio:Isness, th
re cannot arise any atmatva- 
bhrama. Ahankara being non-different froLn consciousnes 
the mind would have to be the self; and we ought to have 
such an apprehension. 
All except the Samkhya argue that the self. has the 
the power (sakti) whereby it become5 the doer and the 
enjoyer, and adayasa is said to b
 the cause of only t
e 
activity for such a self. Mithyajnana gives rise to love, 



Vivaranam 


3'Y1 


hatred etc., and thus is the cause of activity. But the acti- 
vity of the self conceived as being the agent and the en- 
joyer, is the cause of all evil (anartb a). As such we can- 
not say that the mithyajnana is the cause for the activity 
of suc
 a self. This adhyasa is a fact of common exped.... 
ence. 


Thus by implication we arrive at the subject matter 
and purpose from the first aphorism. To establish these 
two, Sankara has shown that the 'abrahma svarupatva' of 
the self is of the nature of adhyasa. Destroying the caus6 
of such an 'anartha' is the purpose. 


Objection: What is. wanted is the destruction of 
'anartha', and not its cause. 


, ' Reply: It is only when the cause that brings it is 
destroyed, there is total 0 r complete eHmination or destru. 
ction of "anartha". 


Objection: This adhyasa is said to be beginning- 
less. If so, how can it be destroyed? 


Reply: That it is destroyed we have the 'Sastra- 
pramanya' (scriptural testin10ny). 


Objection: But it is contrary to experience. EVe'n 
though the 'aham pratyaya' (I-principle) is distinct fro111 
'manushyatva' \ being human) etc., still the 'manushyatvady 
adhyasa' is beginn ingless. As such it cannot be dispelled. 


Rep'ly: It is not 'anaditva' or beginninglessness that 
is the cause of the destruction or non-destruction of the 




8 


Panchapadika 


ihyasa. On the other hand, the cause is the proximity 
[' otherwise of that which contradicts it. That knowledge 
hich arises from the apprehension of 'brahma svarupa' 
[yen by sentences like 'tattvam asi'.. such a know ledge 
one can dispel adhyasa. 
We see in the world that the beginningless 'praga- 
lava' (prior non-existence) is destroyed when an object 
)mes into existence. The Buddhists admit that the beginn- 
19less vasana santanas (series of impressions) are destro- 

d by the four-fold 'tattva bhavana'. The Naiyayikas ad.. 
lit that there is dispelled the beginningless flow of mithya- 
ana, and that even the blackness of the atom is dispelled. 
tte Samkhyas recognise that the beginningless non-h discri.. 
.ination is destroyed by discrimination. The Mimamsa- 
1S say that the beginningless 'pragabhava' of the 'dhanna 
Lttva jnana' too is destroye d. 


Objection: In all these cases, the beginningless 
.bhava' (non- existence) is only a negative entity. But 
)ur adhyasa is a positive entity like the self. As such it 
In not be destroyed. 
Reply: But this ajnana (nescience) is of the nature 
. ineplic ability. Hence even though it is beginningless 
can be dispelled by jnana. There is a. specific necessary 
lation of contradiction between ajnana and joana, where.. 
. jnana is the stronger. 
. 


Objection: The destruction of the pot means tha 
remains not in the form of clay, but that it remains in 
; 'kapalady avastha', (in the state of potsherds). It rem. 
n8 in its causal form. The kapala avastha' is its 'karana 
.mavayiny' (inheres in its causal state). ButJajnana is un.. 



Vivaranam 


339 


ca.u
ed and it cannot have such a 'karana samavayiny 
uttr..ravastha' (posterior to the causal inheran
e). Hence it 
cannot be destreyed. 
Reply: If destruction means that the object goes to 
the state immediately succeeding its up adana karana; then 
tbe qualification-viz. 'samavayikarana' (inhering cause) is 
useless. As such one has to admit that .
'Brahma svarupa- 
bhivyakti
 (manifestation of Brahman) is the same as 'avi- 
dya nivritti'. Further if the qualification 'samavayikarana' 
is retained then there cannot be the dispelling or destruc- 
tion of the blackness of the atom and of the 'pragabhava' 
(prior non-existence) as well. 
Obj action: Ajnana is different from abhava, like 
the self. Hence it can be dispelled. 


Reply: A counter inference can be given: Ajnana 
is different from 'sat'. like the 'pragabhava'. Hence it 
can be dispelled. 
Objection: Which is the better inference of the 
two? 
Reply: The second inference is the better since it 
brings out plainly how jnana sublates or contradicts ajnana. 
Objection: Then, even when we know that the self 
is different from the body, the adhyasa does not seem to 
disappear. 
Rep Iy: Adhyasa disappears not because there is the 
knowledge of distinction, but because there is the appre- 
hension of Brakman arising from the knowledge of Brah- 
m
n conveyed by the Mahavakyas (conclusive scriptural 
statements). 



340 


Panchapadika 


Objection: There is the knowledge of the self as 
being distinct from the body. Th
re is the apprehension 
of Brahman or the knowledge of Brahman. How do you 

ay that only the later brings about the - Sll blation of 

p.hyasa ? 
Replv: Ajnana that has concealed Brahma rupa of 
cQnsciousness and thus brought about the apparently finite 
ie1f, is the beginningless avidya; and it is the cause of the 

ahankaradi vikshepa (diffusion of the ego etc.) Now 
lJrahma Jnana reveals Brahman while destroying this avi- 
dya. It is not the absence of the knowledge of the distin- 
ction betV'{een the self and the body, that is the cause 0 f 

fJ.p1sara. :t3ut the real cause is the non..apprehension ;of 
Brahman. That this is the cause we have shown through 
'sruthi and through arthapatti. As such ajnana (or avidya) 
i$ disp
l1ed by 'tattva jnana' (!<nowledge of the real). 


Objection : Jnana can dispel only ajnana. How 
can it dispel adhyasa ? 
Replv: Ajnana is the cause and its product is the 


ya
a which makes the self appear as the agent, sub.:ect 
etc. Now, when the cause is destroyed, the cause disapp- 
ears along with its products or effects. 


Obje(:tiQn: NoW the 'aham pratyaya' also is essen- 
tially of the nature of Brahman. H9W is it tbat does not 
4ispel ajnana? 
Reply: Becaus
 it does not appear, or it does not 
manifest itself, as having the nature of Brahman. The 
'aha.IQpratyaya' is beginningless and coexists only with the 
beginningless 'karyakarana'. Here we do not find any 



Vivaranam 


341 


relation of contradiction between the 'aham pratyaya' and 
the body etc., As such mere svarupa viveka 
knowledge 
of discrimination) cannot put an end to adhyasa. 


Objection: Adbyasa n1ay not be dispeHed by tbe 
knowledge that the self is different from the body etc.... 
Yet there arises a knowledge from the enquiry and th.1: 
knowledge, which is adventitious (agantuka), may be taken 
to put an end to adhyasa. 


Reply: If the jananantara arising from the enquiry 
is inferential
 it is a mediate knowledge and hence is of no 
use here. If enquiry means only log ical reasoning (tarka), 
it is no longer a 'pramana jnana
. 


Prayojana Bha 
hya : 
Objection: The purpose of the sastra is not the 
dispelling of the evil (anartha); but it is the realization of 
the incomparable Brahmananda. Brahman is spoken of in 
the srutis as bejng 'niratisayanand
m. (absolute beatitude). 
And Brahma vidya is the means of realising Brahman. This 
meaning is gathered from passages like - "sa yo ha vai tat 
paraman brahma veda brahmaiva bhavati'. Hence the pur- 
pose ought to be declared as the realization of 'niratisaya 
sukha" . 


Reply: It is true that it is Baid that the realization of 
this is the fruit of Br
hma vidya which arises from the 
sastra. In the same way, it is also said that the qispelling 
of evil too is the fruit of the same. \Ve have passages like 
iO'tarati sokam atma vit', and 'Jushtam yada pasyailty 

nisam asya mahimanam eti, vita sokam it'. Here we hear 
of the destruction of the very origin or source of evil. 
Can't this be a 'prayojana (purpose) ? 



342 


Panchapadika 


Objection Then t11e complete or entire "phala" 
should be mentioned, not only a part of it. Since both 
these: results are tenned in the sruti and since both are de- 
sired by us, let both be the prayojanas. 

 Reply: The realization of bliss is implied in the 
subject matter; and when we say that 'brahmatmaikatva' is 
the subjec('lnatter, we imply the realization of bliss. Now 
the 'prayojana' can be only that which is desired; and wha t 
is desired here is "anartha hetu nivritti" (cessation., of the 

ause of evil) which results when we realize the bliss called 
Brahman. Anandavapti is only 'artha siddha' and as such 
it does not n1erit a separate mentioning. 


The Brahma svarupata prapti is of the nature of bliss. 
lnd it is accepted as constituting the subject matter. 


Objection: Let the subject matter be the identity 
)f Brahlnam and the self. But let the realization of bliss 
>e stated as the (prayojana\ 


Rap Iy: No. The realization of bliss does not fall 
)utside of realisation of identity of Brahmam and the self. 
fit f.ills outsid
, the realization of bliss 
an be stated 
,eparately. The 'Brahmatmata' itself is the 'anand
 
)rapti' . 


Objection: Even the 'avastha nivritti' can be taken, 
lS 
ubject matter of the sastra. 
Reply: No. The avastha is dispelled along with its 
:ause. This dispelling or destruction falls outside of the 
ubject matter, viz 'Brahmatma rupa'. "The subject matter 
s the identify of Brahman and the self, while the 'phala' 
Lrises from the realization of this identity. 



Vivaranam 


343 


Objection: Then the subject matter of the sastra 
itself-viz., Brahmatnlaikatva-, this itself is 'anartha nivri.. 
tti'. As such the destruction of evil need not be taken as 
the 'prayojana'. 


Reply: But in "tattvatn asP we do not find the 'ana... 
xtha nivritti' as being the subject
matter. 
Objection : Thic; sentence might not give that mea... 
ning. But read along with others in that context, that me- 
aning would come out. In all the vedantic passages, the 
nature of Brahman is spoken of as that of the self. In so 
doing the "anartha 
 is prespupposed to be overpowering 
the self. The plain meaning of the sentence refers to the 
realizing of something positive. Yet Brahman that is 
propounded is the Brahman who is free from 'anartha'. 
As such 'anartha' nivritti' too is the subject-matter. 


Reply: The esntence is not there to expound the 
nature or meaning of Brahman, but it is there only to ex- 
pound the identity of the self with Brahman. 
Objection: This is not so. '
The text begins witb 
"sad eva somya. 
 and ends with 'tat sat yam sa C atma'. Here 
we find that the passage rejects 'sa prapancatva' and pro- 
claims the 'nishpraparcatva' of Brahman. This Brahmam 
is the meaning of the word 'tat' in the sentence 'tattvam 
asi' . Since Brahman is transcendental, the passage first 
explains the meaning of Brahman; and then at the end it 
declares that such a Brahman is identical with the self. 
Reply: The 
nishprapancatva (non-transmigration) 
of Brahman is the subject matter. How can this subject 
matter be thelsame as the dispelling of the 'anartha' which 
is there for the self. 



344 


Panchapadika 


Objection: t The 'tvam padartha' (thou) has the 
samsarga with such a 'tat padartha' (that) referred to. 
While rejecting such a samsarga, the passage declares that 
this is the 'anartha hetu', called agrahana (non-apprehen- 
sion) and anyatha grahana (apprehending otherwise). To 
establish the identity, this sentence rejects the cause of 
'anartha' . 


Reply: Ultimately, the subject matter is the nish- 
prapancatva of Brahman. H is not the rej
ction of the prati- 
bhasa of avidya, or of the products of avidya. From the 
apprehension or realization of 'nishprapanca brahmatmlta' 
we derive by implication both the 'avidya nirasa' and the 
'avidya karya nirasa'. Such an implied nleaning or dedu- 
ction cannot constitute the very s: bject-matter. For, if 
the 'avidya pratibhasa' and the 'avidya karya pratibhasa' 
were to be absent, then what is required is that which 
can put an end to this 'prati bhasa'. And this cannot be 
.presented by the sastra. "If 'Brahmatmavagati and avi- 
dya nivl'itti are simultaneous, this simultancity does 110t 
arise from the activity of the word. As such you cannot 
treat the 'avidya nivritti' separately as the subject 
matter" . 


Objection: In the erroneous cognition we have the 
'pratibhasa. of avidya and of its product, and this is nega- 
ted later on. Yet the sentence 'this is silver' cannot be 
taken to refer to the non-exist
nt silver. Likewise, the sen.. 
tence like 'Tat tvam ac;i' might imply the 'nivritti' (cessa- 
tion) of adhyasa which is the 'nishprapancatva>. Yet there 
are other sentences like 'asthulam ananu'; and in these we 
find 'saprapancatva' directly and they are actually predi- 
cated of Brahman. 



Vivaranam 


345 


R ep Iy: That the world is adhyasta on Brahman and 
that Brahman is related to the world - do we apprehend 
through perception? or through agama? it cannot be a 
perceptual knowledge since Brahman is not an object of 
perception. 


Yet, one may say, there is the apprehension of the 
. 
world which makes us hold that it is relating to Brahmam. 
But any relation is a relation between
lwo factors or terms. 
. When one of the terms is not apprehended, the relation it- 
self cannot be apprehended. 


Objection: In the contexts that proclaim 'nish..... 
prapancatva', we read passages"like 'Idam sarvam yad ayam 
atma'; and these sentences go to show that the world app- 
ars as being adhyasta on Brahman. 


Reply: Yes;there is the mere appearance (pratibhasa). 
Bu t such passages are 110t offered to' those that speak of 
'nishprancatva'. That Brahman is the all-pervasive self 
we recognise when we find that therein is the power (sama- 
rthya) of being the upadana dharama for" everything. The 
prapanca sambandha is obtained from the causal law; and 
texts like 'Idam sarvam' should not be construed as giving 
us the knowL
dge of this causg.l relation. Hence tl.ese 
texts are not opposed to the nishprapanca vakyas. Further 
there are certain texts negating certain things in Brahman; 
and what these things are, we get from the texto bearing on 
saprapancatva. Because of this 'ekavakyata' they cannot 
become badhaka (contradiction) for the nishprapancava- 
kyas. 



.346 


Panchapadika 


'Further the saprapancavakyas' make Brah!l1an the 
upadana for ever)'thing; and. this does not establish the 
"sarvatmabhava' (omni&cience) of Brahman. As such these 
tezts are not able to declare the 'sarvatmata' of Brahan. 
'They are only supplementary. 


. Texts like 'Idam sarvam', have 
ekavakyata' with the 
"nishedha vakyas (prohibitions). They cannot give an inde- 
,pendent meaning. If they can independently convey a 
meaning, we would have the 'saprapancatva' (worldliness) 
for Brahman. This' would be devoid of any tpurpose or 
value because only the 'nishprapanca vakyas' have a. 
purpose. When 'ekavakyta' (unified import) is possible, it 
is a fal1acy to/split the passages; and when one is said to 
have a purpose or value, its contradictory cannot have any 
purpose or value. 


-The nishprapanca vakyas have- a purpose or value. 
We do find that the purushartha of the conscious self in 
deep sleep is nishprapancata. Even the sruti corroborates 
this by saying 'asabdam asparsam arupam avyayam nicayya 
tam mrutyamukhat pramucyate'. Moreover, we do find 
that 'saprapancata' for the conscious self is the cause of 
evil; we do not also hear. of any purpose for it. Hence we 
should read these texts along with the negative ones as con- 
stituting 'ekava
yata', so that they are not 'nirarthaka' 
. (meaniI.1gIess). 


Objection: The prapancavakyas may not be capa.. 
. ble of giving us the cognition or. knowledge. But they do 
have the 'tat pratiti janaka
va'. The former is their anu- 
vadakatva, while the latter is the pramiti. Th
 later being 
. the stronger, it can be a badhaka for the former. 



Vivaranam 


347 


Reply: But in so far as it is a 'badhaka" it is its 
OW11 badhaka, It negates itself. 


Objection: Though there is no prapancatva, it is 
first propounded, and now you say that it is negated or rej- 
ected. This is a useless procedure. For, instead of getting 
into the mind and then washing the fact, it is better to be 
away froln the mind. 


Reply: Only by arguing out that there must be an 
upadana for the whole universe, we are 
able to arrive at 
Brahman. This Brahman constitutes'"the 'advitiya purush- 
artha' (supreme end of life). To establish it we have made 
the anuvada of the prap:3.ncatva; and then we negate it. 


Objection: But the 'sarvopadanatva' itself implies 
the 'saprapancata pramit
'. 


Reply: No. Saprapancatva is arrived at througt1 
the ability of srutarthapatti (verbal implication) and this 
stands negated by the immediate utterances. of the sruti. 
Sruti is stronger than arthapatti. 
Objection: Then we do not arrive at the saprapan- 
cata through the concept of sarvopadanata. 


Reply: It is .not so. Till the nega.tion comes, the 
erroneons silver has its 'pr
tibhasa'. Likesise Ii there would 
continue the appearance of 
saprapancata" (externalitY) der- 
ived from the 'sarvopadanatva samarthya', till its negat- 
ion is realized. For, an immediate apprehension can be neg- 
ated only by another immediate :apprehension; it is not the 
unapprehended, nor is it the 'pramiti' that can be negated. 



348 


Panchapadika 


In the upasana portions Brahman is referred to t'in 
'saprapanca vakyas'. But Brahman should not be under- 
stood or apprehended as being of the nature of 'saprapan- 
catva' . Between those passages that speak of 'nishprapan.. 
catv a' and those that refer to 'saprapancatva', the latter are 
the weaker. And the vakyas referred to are in the context 
of upasana, whence they cannot contradict the negative 
sentences. For the upasana vakyas refer only to the aro- 
pita rupa. And the Brahman spoken of by the upasana 
need not be real. Moreover this Brahman may be taken 
to be the 'aropita rupa' of the real Brahman. The 'sruti 
vakyas' (statement5 of creation) are intended only to esta. 
blish the realization of the advitiya Brahman, because they 
are 'nishedhya para vakyas'. They are to be construed in 
haramony with the purport of the negative passages. 


Hence the 'nishprapanca brahmatva pralniti' cannot 
have any contradk:tion frollJ the verbal or empirical cogn- 
ition. 


Objection: The identity of the Brahman and the 
self is the meaning of the n1ahavakyas. In the cogn ition of 
the meaning of the sentences the object cognised is this 
identity. As such the self becomes the object. Otherwise 
the identity cannot be apprehended as an object. But we 
cannot have the self as the object since the identity of the 
self who is a samsarin (relational) with Brahman who is 
asamsrain (non-relattional) is an impossiblity. Then. how 
can there be the cognition of the 'nishprapanca vakyartha
 ? 


Reply: Does it mean that it is impossible for the 
obJect refered to by the 'tvan1 pada' (Thou) to be identical 
with Brahman? or Does it mean that there is the impo- 



Vivaranam 


349 


ssibility for the 'tvam pada vacya' t? be thus identical? It 
cannot be the former since 'samsaritva' (being in bondage( 
etc., cannot be predicated. of the 'tvam pada laksbya (indi- 
cated by thou). We do accept the latter. 
Now, tbe self is spoken of as being the agent etc. 
(1) .Is kartritva etc., inferentiaHy apprehended? (2) or per... 
ceptually cognised? (3) or apprehended through any other 
pramana? (1) Kartritva (being a do
r) etc. is not inferen- 
tionally cogn ised sjnce it is directJy 
 perceptually appre. 
hended. (2) The pratyagatman is not an object that can 
be directly cognised by the external sense organ
; as such 
there can be no 'bahyendriya pratyakshatva'. If it is 
aid 
that the kartritva etc. is cognised through 'manasa pratya.. 
ksha' (n1ental cognition), what is the pramana ? 
Objection: We have the agreement and <.lifference- 
when tbe mind is present, the self is taken to be in bondage. 
When it is absent in deep sleep, this bondage is not cogni- 
sed (anupaIabdhi). 


Reply: No This bondage can be estabJished otherwise 
better. That the self is the cause of the existence of the 
'kartritvadi prapanca' can be established by agreement and 
difference. It is only the 'sattakarna' because there is no 
kartritva in its absence. Moreover. in deep sleep there is 
the 'anavabrasa." (non-appearc.nce) for the kartritva etc. 
Is this due to the absence of the mind then,or is it because 
kartritva etc., itself is absent. 


Objection: If something i
 to be apprehended, the 
karana (means) is necessary; and the karana is absent In 
deep sleep. 



50 


panchapadika 


Reply: No. For, any 'pratibhaa' is due to the imme- 
Hate illumination of atmacaitanya, and not due to any 
:arana. 


Objection The Buddhists and the Prabhakara 
lIgue that the 'Kartritva', 'bhoktritva', love, hatred, happi- 
less, sorrow etc., are there in the self as self-luminous or 
elf-revea ing (svayam.prakasah). 
Reply: Are they separate substances along with the 
,elf? If so, you should admit that there are many subst- 
LDces having 'svaprakasa'. It is better to admit only the 
sva prakasa.tva' (self-luminosity) of the self whence others 
lre revealved. Nor can they be treated as the q.ualities of 
.he self, for, if they are 'sva prakasa', you would have to 
,ay that one prakasa guna (property of inumination) gives 
ise to other 'praka'5:1 gunas'. And this is absurd. You 
;annot also say that they alone ate the 'prakasa guna
'; for 
:he 'prakasa gun a' as in the case of the sun, does not come 
into existence in its own 'asrayopadhi' (ground). 


You cannot also assume '.svaprakasatva' (self-lumino- 
sity) for 'kartritva' etc. because their 'satta' involv
s it. For; 
they can ha.ve the 'prakasa' since they have the 'samsarga> 
with the eternal or real self. 


(3) 'J(artritva (agent-hood) etc., cannot be cognised by 
any other prama.na There is no immediacy of the/bondage 
for us; and even if there is, you need not asC\ume any other 
pramana save the self. Otherwise it would conle into 
conflict with the agama that teaches 'nishprapancata' (non- 
worldliness). Moreover, the passage 'Indro mayabhih...' 
clearly shows that there is a'rnithya karalla', viz.. ajnana 
for the bondage etc. 



Vivaranam 


;;J.JJ.. 


Hence there is no pramana to show that there is the 
<prapanca sambandha' for Brahman. It is apprehended 
only by the sakshin, because it is sakshi siddha. We 
cannot sa
 that the world is ultimately real; for, even a 
fa.lse or unreal object is apprehended by the sakshin. 
Hence the nishprapanca brhmatma pramitih. 
annot be 
contradicted or negatived by the 'saprapanca pramiti'. 


The world then appears because it is of the nature of 
avidya. The 'pratibhasa' (momentary appearance) of avidya. 
and its products has its ultimate 
eaning only in getting 
itself negaged by the immediate texts. Th
 'tattva bodha' 
(apprehension of the real) arises while it negates tho avidy- 
ashyasa' and 'avidya karyadhyasa'. They do not come 
one after another, but slmultaneous by. 


Objection: If 'anartha nivrtitti'is not the subject 
matter, how can it be derived from the 'vishaya vagati 
samarthya' (ability from apprehending the object) ? 


Reply: (i) Do you mean 'anartha mirasa'? Or 
(ii) the 'anartha nirasa pratibhasa' ? 
(i) If you mean only .anartha nirasa' (negation of 
evil), the explanntation is as follows : 


When an object is erroneously apprehended, you 
cannot detennine its real nature without rejecting or subIa. 
ting (nirasa) it. The sentence that 'this is sukti' conveys the 
real nature of the object only while it rejects the 'atad 
dharma' apprehended before. The prior a,pprehension is 
contradicted by the'tattvabhasa (apprehension of truth) and 
it is also of th
 nature of avidya being a product of avidya. 



352 


Panchapadika 


Consequently the negation of the prior apprehension is 
neces
arily implied in the 'tattvabhasa'. 


Objection: Silver which is the object cognised 
previously, stands :rejected by the cognition 'this is not 
silver'. But here we have 'aham brahmasmi (I am Brah- 
man) which is only vastu svarupa nishtha vijnana' (know- 
ledge determined by the object). It does not negate the 
world. It only tells something about Brahman or me, and 
nothing about the world. "How can there be the 'vipar- 
yasa nirasa' here, when we do not bave any negation and 
any word that stands for the negated? 


Reply: There are two jnanas that can contradict or 
n.egate a 'viparyasa' - (a) the positive knowledge of another 
entity which is real like the sukti and the self; and by the 
negative knowledge of any entity which is not really there, 
but is only adhyasta. It is the latter knowledge where we 
have the 'adhyasa nirasa' that negation should be expli- 
citly expressed. No such thing is required in the former 
knowledge; for the knowledge of ihe object implicitly and 
necessarily implies the rejection of the other. And ihere 
is no need for an open rejection of the other. 


The 'saprapancata jnana' is the bhava jnana (positive); 
and its 'virodhi bhavantara jnana. (contradictary knowledge) 
is the knowledge of identity. The latter puts an end .to 
the adhyasa: for, it is itseif capable of negating the former 
implicity. 


Objection: Any activity can go to fuJfil only that 
for which it is intended, that to which i
 refers. It cannot 
go to establish something else even by implication. No.word 
can giva two co
miti()n
 
t thp. C"::n....A +;.......A A 
 --- -,- 



Vivaranam 


355 


verb can imply a .manifold substances, peities etc., This is 
aU the function of anuvada. 


Through the srLltarthapatti alone we can have the 
apprehension of ',rthantara' (different meaning). 
Objection: But just like the verb we do apprehend 
the 'v;1cyatva' of the substance and the deity. How are 
these to be taken as the meaning of 'yajati' through anupa... . 
patti 'l Why can't we say that there is only '
'ajaty abhid- 
h
yalva' (primary meaning) ? 


Reply: A mere verb can convey only the meaning of 
that which it directly signifies. It can't give up its meaning 
and directly convey the others. We have to admit the 
'nantariyakata siddhi' for the substance and deity. 


Objection: The meaning of the sentence is the 
padartha reffered to; while the sublation of the viparyasa 
(contradictory) is not arrived at from the meaning of the 
sentence since it is not the padartha. Then the apprehen- 
sion of the sublation can be 'nantariyaka'. But where the 
negation is immediately conveyed, the affirmative knowle. 
dge h not directly conveyed by the sentence. In such a case 
you cannot admit the 'nantariyakata' for the knowledge 
of the sublation. In the present context of the self, we find 
that b.:>nda.ge is dispeHed by immediacy (aparoksha jUJ.na). 
I(nowledge refers to both directly, and not to one alone. 
lienee you cannot speak of the 'nantariyakata siddhi' for 
the other. 


Reply: In <paroksha badha' (Indirect negat ion) we 
find that the knowledge of the ground is the cause of both 



352 


Panchapadika 


Consequently the negation of the prior apprehension is 
neces
arily implied in the 'tattvabhasa'. 


Objection: Silver which is the object cognised 
previously, stands :rejected by the cognition 'this is not 
silver'. But here we have 'aham brahmasmi (1 am Brah- 
man) which is only vastu svarupa nishtha vijnana' (know.. 
ledge determined by the object). It does not negate the 
world. It only tells something about Brahman or me, and 
nothing about the world. "How can there be the .vipar- 
yasa nirasa' here, when we do not have any negation and 
any word that stands for the negated? 
Rep Iy: There are two jnanas that can contradict or 
n.egate a 'viparyasa' - (a) the positive knowledge of another 
entity which is real like the sukti and the self; and by the 
negative knowledge of any entity which is not really there, 
but is only adhyasta. It is the latter knowledge where we 
have the 'adhyasa nirasa' that negation should be expli- 
citly expressed. No such thing is required in the former 
knowledge; for the knowledge of ihe object implicitly and 
necessarily implies the rejection of the other. And ihere 
is no need for an open rejection of the other. 


The 'saprapancata jnana' is the bhava jnana (positive); 
and its 'virodhi bhavantara jnana" (contradictary knowledge) 
is the knowledge of identity. The latter puts an end .to 
the adhyasa: for, it is itseif capable of negating the former 
impHcity. 


Objection: Any activity can go to fu1:fi1 only that 
for which it is intended, that to which i
 refers. It cannot 
go to establish something else even by implication. No.word 
can giva two cognitions at the same time. As such we 



Vivaranam 


353 


should say that tbe 'viparyasa nirasa' (negation of the 
contradictory) alone can put an end to the saprapancata. 
You cannot bring in a 'bhavantara visbaya' (a different 
positive entity) as implying the rejection of adhyasa. 


Reply: No. Take the balance. One of the pans i
 
raised by the hand; and this automatically takes the other 
pan down. The activity of the hand is not directed to the 
lowering of the pan. And yet that act which raises on
 
pan also brings down the other. The same is the relatio1;1 
between the knowledge of identity and the sublation of 
prapancatva. Here we have the 'nantariyakata siddhi'. 


. Objection: Let the rejection or sublation 
Jnirasa) 
of the silver and of the bondage arise simultaneously witb 
(nantariyaka) the knowledge of the sukti and of the iden- 
tity of the self with Brahman. But how do we know that 
there is this sublation? How can rhere be the apprehen... 
sion of this sublation? 


Reply: Even that too is 'nantariyaka'. The self 
has the jnana vyapara with regard to that which it has 
otherwise apprehended. This jnana is brought -about by 
the word that signifies the truth about it. As the sublation 
arises, so is the apprehension of truth. The cognitions are 
apprehended in the. order Brahmaham, ,aham Brahma, 
(r aln Brahma) and 'naham karta, (1 am not a doer) when 
the n1eaning is understood as 'Brahman'; then the 'nantra- 
riyaka sbod!ha'
'of the form - If I am Brahman, I am not 
a doer. The same procedure or explanation holds good 
of 'nedam rajatam' also. 



354 


Panchapadika 


Objection : Why can't the same sentence give two 
meanings? 
Reply: No. For, 'Iyam suktih, (this is the mother of 
pearl) is a complete sentence which does not have any fur.. 
ther syntatical relatfon. This is thereforf' a more important 
sentence, while the negative sentence like .nedam rajatam' 
(this is not silver) is only an 'anuvada'. It is the anuvada 
'(explanatory statement) in so far as it is 'nanta.riyaka sid- 
dha' from the knowledge of the affirmative sentence. That 
there is the 'nantariya pratibhasa' of an 'arthantara jnana' 
fronl an 'arthantara jnana' is generally accepted. The 
Mimamsaka admits that the verb is enough to "constitute a 
sentence; and from the kr,iyajnana (cognition of the verb) 
we are able to apprehend the sadhanas (meanc:) required. 
Yet there are other words constituting the 'itikartavyata' 
(ancil1ary activities). They are employed so that other 
()bjects are not to be taken up. These other words are only 
anuvadakas. Thus they say that t he injunction of 'yajati' 
\ sacrifices) can and does give the substance, deity and act 
all in one. Others interpret yajna to mean the s
lbstance 
, 
deity and tyaga. 


Since the verb expresses the act which is the meaning 
of the sentence, the verb is taken to constitute a sentence 
by itself. 
rom the 'kriya janana samarthya" (cognition of 
the act) itself all the means imp lied by the act are appre- 
hended; and we do apdrehended that they have the relation 
vrith the verb. Then the words are intended only to exclude 
those that are not Inentioned by them. Thus in spite of 
the apprehension of a unified meaning, these 'anuvadaka" 



Vivaranam 


355 


verb can imply a .manifold substances, peities etc.. This is 
aU the function of anuvada. 


Through the sru.tarthapatti alone we can have the 
apprehension of', rthantara' (different meaning). 
Db jection: But just like the verb we do apprehend 
the 'vClcyatva' of the substance and the deity. How are 
these to be taken as the meaning of 'yajati' through anupa... 
patti '? Why can't we say that there is only '
'ajaty abhid- 
h
yatva' (primary meaning) ? 


Reply: A mere verb can conv
y only the meaning of 
that which it directly signifies. It can't give up its meaning 
and directly convey the others. We have to admit the 
'nantariyakata siddhi' for the substance and deity. 


Objection: The meaning of the sentence is the 
padartha reffered to; while the sublation of the viparyasa 
(contradictory) is not arrived at from the meaning of the 
sentence since it is not the padartha. Then the apprehen- 
sion of the sublation can be 'nantariyaka'. But where the 
negation is immediately conveyed, the affirmative knowle.. 
dge i3 not directly conveyed by the sentence. In such a cac;e 
you cannot admit the 'nantariyakata' for the knowledge 
of the sublation. In the present context of the self, we find 
that b,)ndage is dispelJed by immediacy (aparoksha jn:tna). 
I<.nowledg0 refers to both directly, and not to one alone. 
Iience you cannot speak of the 'nantariyakata siddhi' for 
the other. 


Reply: In <paroksha badba' (Indirect nega1ion) we 
find that the knowledge of the ground is the cause of both 



356 


Panchapadika 


the sublation of error and the 'nirasa pratibhasa'. The 
same holds good of 'pratyaksha badha' also (perceptual 
negation). 


Take for example the 'rajatabbava' (absence of silver) 
It is not apprehended through 'anupalabdhi', for the silver 
is apprehended directly as the this. Nor does the cogni- 
tion of 'rajata bhava' arise from th
 sense contact, for there 
can be no contact of the eye with an ab
ent object. Both 
the silver and its absence are not capable of being cogoised 
by the eye. 


Thus the saprapancatva is ;asabdm (non.verbal) and it 
is 'avidya vilayam'. Hence Sankara separately and distin- 
ctly refers to it in 'asyaanartha hetoh prahanaya...'. 


Objection: If the purpose of Bhrama vidya is the 
sublation or rejection of the 'anartha " it is not the 'vedan- 
tarambha phala'. The Vedanta refers only to Vidya and 
'Dot to avidya. Then why should Sankara say- 'asyanartha 
hetoh prahanaya sarve vedanta arabhyante' ? 


Reply: The dative in 'prahanaya' takes the 'vidya 
samarthya siddhi' into considei ation. Only through vidya 
that the avidya is destroyed. It does not mean that the 
Vedantas are to be begun for the destruction of the cause of 
evil. It means that the Vedants brings about this result at 
the same time. 


Objection: , Then the purpose of Brahma vidyJ. be.. 
ing only the vidya, the purpose of the sastra cannot be the 
sublation of evil. 



Vivaranam 


357 


Reply: Between 'sukha prapti' (reaIisation of bliss) 
and duhkha l1ivritti'(ccssation of sorrow), it is the latter that 
is desired by us. As such the meaning of the sastra would 
culminate in the 'anartha ni vritti'. 
Objection : Sankara says - 'vidya pratipattaye'. 
What is this 'pratipattaye
 ? When we bave the knowledge 
of an object, the object is other than the knower; and so 
we may have to state sep:uately that the object is to be 
obtained or possessed. But there is no such thing here. 
Vidya has its ground in the knower, and it arises by revea- 
aling the object to him. 
Rap Iy: The knowledge and the apprehension thereof 
are possessed by the knower at one and the same time. 
The way in which objects are possessd is not found in the 
case of vidya. When we sayapti (possession) we mean 
the immediacy of the object and of the cognition or know.. 
ledge. B:lt in the cac;e of vidya it is otherwise. 
Even if vidya has arisen it may not have any pratis- 
htha' - (it may not be firmly rooted in its imrJ!ediacy). For 
this vidya has the object that gives room for asambhavana 
(doubt) and 'viparita (contrary) bhavana'. By vidya is 
mean! that valid cognition (pramanajnana) which arises 
from the word wherein there is the co-op
ration of sakti, 
tatparya and vicara. The pratishtha it is to have only 
means that it should have the 'aparokshya' with its own 
object. Such an immediacy h prevented by 'asambhavana' 
(impossibility) and 'viparita bhavana'. The former is the 
inlpossibility of having I hat con
entration which can bring 
about the 'brahn1atata bhava'. The latter is the domination 
of the 'sariradhyasa' etc. When we overcome these two 
, 
we have the vidya pratipatti (apprehension of knowledge). 



358 


Panchapadika 


Objection The Vedanta is said to be the cauge of 
the 'aparoksha prama' (immediate experience). How can 
there be the 'apratitatva' for Brahma vidya? We have 
two types of 'Cittadosha' viz. 'asambhavana' and 'Viparita. 
bhavana'. Then we cannot have any 'aparoksha niscaya'. 


Reply: But consider the example. Take the 'ardra 
maricipbala'. We may have seen it in its dried up state. 
This wet one is at a distance; and we have no samskara. 
(impression) of any previous cognition of this object. On 
the other hand there may be a 'viparita samskara' present. 
Then even though the object is immediately present we are 
unable to determine it. There does 110t arise the rea.l 
'aparoksha niscaya', which is free from error and doubtt' 
Likewise true knowledge arisess as.if it is not ;pratishthita
. 
For its 'svarup;t pratis.htha' it ta:<es the aid of tart
a. 


Objectson: How can that which is not deternlined 
by pramana, be determined by tarka (logic) 1 


Reply: Tarka is only the 'anugrahaka' (subsidiary) 
to the pramanas. It is only an auxiliary to all the prama- 
nas. It is present in all of th
m as an aid. Ani it is well 
known that when the sahakarins (anxillaries) are present,. 
we obt.:iin th
 req'.lirel result. 
Objection: If tarks too is a valid mean.s, how can 
you have two praman3.S to have the 'artha niscaya'? If it is 
not a vaild means of cognition, its aid is unnecessary and 
even faulty. So, what is tarka ? 
Reply: Tarka means expedient reasoning. 
Objection: But yukti (expedient rea)oning) is only 
a synonym of tarka. 



Vivaranam 


359 


Reply: Even though tarka is not a praD"ana, it is 
a s(I,hakarin because it is a necessary feature or elen1cnt in 
all. Tarka is the principle whose nature is to distingu ish 
the pos::,ibility and the impossibility of the truth conveyed 
by the pramaua
 sakti, and vishaya. It is the principle that 
finds out the p0ssibility or otherwise of their truth;' and 'it 
is not of a (niscaya rupa' (form of determining). 
Pramanya vicara as established in Purva Mimamsa; 


(1) The samkhyas argue that both the validity and 
nonvaIidity of cognitions is internal or self-dependent, 


(2) The Nyaya argues that both validty and non- 
validity are external or dependent on something else. 


(3) To the Buddhists, validity is external or depend- 
ent on something.else, while non-validity is internal. 


(4) To th
 Vedavadins only the validity is internal, 
while Don-validity is ex' ernal. 


(I) Tile first view is untenable because it involves 
a self-contradiction. The same cognition would have to be 
both true and false. 


Objection: Due to the difference in the 'jnana 
sal11agri vyaktis', we -can distinguish validity from invali- 
dity. If the jnanasamagri is not aided by any defect, it 
gives a valid cognition; otherwise we have an invalid 
cognition. 


Reply: Yes, this explains how the valid and the 
invalid cognitions arise. But as apprehensions they do not 
differ from one another, the same cognition would have to 



36
 


Panchapadika 


be both resulting in the absence of any activity. Further, 
if the distinction between the valid and the invalid is imm- 
ediately or-directly apprehended, this probbm itself cannot 
arise. Whether there is difference or absence of confused 
mixing between the pramana vyakti and the apramana 
vyakti, there cannot be any distinction between the acti
i- 
ties. The pramana jnana and the apramana jnana are 
directly the causes of activity. As such they should be 
known if we accept that both are 'svatah 1 (self-valid). 


(2) The second view also is faulty. Only when there 
is knowledge' you can discuss their validity or non-validity, 
This knowledge is devoid of any such distinction; and such 
a knowledge cannot be apprehended. Th
re is no knowle- 
dge which is neither valid nor non-valid. 


i) Is validity known externally? ii) or is it not 
known? In the former alternative ia) is it known 
through 'karanaguna jnana"? or ib) through 'artha 
kriyasamvada jnana' ? 


It cannot be (ia). If it is apprehended to be valid 
because it arises from the 'karana guna', then to establish 
the validi lY of the 'guna janyatva jnana' we require another 
such 'glln1.janyatva jn3.na'. In this way we are led to a 
regress. If the validity 0f the 'guna jnana' is not establis- 
hed, there cannot be any activity; otherwise even without 
this 'guna jnana, the first jnana must lead to activity. 


Does validity arise as per the emergance of know- 
ledge? or along with knowledge? It cannot be the for. 
mer.. since jnana being momentary, it does not exist when 



Vivaranam 


361 


Tbe pratibhasa is the same whether it is true or untrue 
I.:now1edge. And prior to the understanding or apprehen- 
sion arising from the 'caksur adiguna', there is no deter- 
u1ination of validity and as such there can be no activity. 
Now, vaJidhy is said to arise from the contact of the" 
sense organs and the like (caksur adiguna jnana). The 
validity of the latter requires another such and thus we 
face regress. 


In so far as the 'pratibhasa' is concerned, the true 
knowledge is not different from the false one. As such you 
ca.nnot say that the 'guna janyatva" is 'svatah' (internally 
valid). 


Objection: In the absence of the guna. there is no 
knowledge, and there is knowledge when the gUDa is pre- 
sent. Thus by agreement and difference we can make out 
the validity of cogniti0n on something external to it. 
Reply: No. this concomittal1ce refers only to the 
absence of the defects which obstruct validity. There can 
be found in the sense organs no other property save tbat 
which removes the defect. 


Nor can you say that knowledge and its validity arise 
together at the same mcn1ent; one is the cause of the other, 
and the cause must always preceed the effect in time. They 
cannot coexist. 


It cannot be (ib). 'Artha kriya samavada jnana' cannot 
determine or establish the validity, for that would lead to 
regress etc. To establish the validity of.. this 
artha kriya 



362 


Panchapadika 


jnana' we should know whether the validity of this 'artha 
lriya jnana' is external? or internal? If it is external, 
it leads to a regress. It cannot be internal also. 


Obje
tion: By 'sadhana' we mean the 'arthakriya 
kari vastu'; and by 'ph ala' we mean the 'artha kriya'. Now 

artha Kriya samvada' gives rise to the validity of the co- 
gnItion of the object (vastu jnanas), and not to the cogni- 
tion of purpose (phala jnana', because there is further 

thakriya' or 'phala'. Hence there can be no regress. 


Reply: If the purpose (phala) has self-validHy, why 
not admit the same for the 'vastu' also? If th 1 s is not 
accepted, the validity of the 'sadhana jnana' must be 
dependent on the 'artha kriya'. And the validity of the 

artha kriya' will have to be determined by the 'sadh3.na 
jnana' . To recognise the validity of one, we have to as- 
sume the validity of another. And when validity is esta- 
blished, there arises activity; and when activity is there, 
validity is established. This is the fallacy of mutual de- 
pendence. 


We cannot say tha t activity arises to determine vaIi- 
aily; for all cognitions are free from ambiguity or doubt. 


Objection: Activity need not arise in aU cases only 
to determine validity. It may so arise only in certain cases. 
In exarnining silver we proceed through 'niriksh<ina' 
'dahana', 'chedana' and '.aigharshana' and thus establbh it 
to be silver. 


Reply: 'In such cases, W
 hav.; to say that only on
 
of these gives rise 10 the cognition, and that the others are 
intended to reject the obstruction to the cognition. When 



Vivaranam 


363 


the first cognition arises, if there are.'doubts etc., preventing 
a correct knowledge, then the latter cognit:ons are required.. 


(3) The Buddhist view also is faulty . We have only 
the 'jnanotpatthmatra prayukta artha vyavahara'. C::>gni- 
tion as such results in the knowledge of the object. 'Artmt 
nis
aya' (detc1mining the" object to be such and such) and 
validity are 110t dependent on anything other than cognItion. 
Because of the cause which is aided by the defect, there 
arises non-validity. And since this is subject to negation
 
non-validity is not self-dependent. 


NonNvalidity, the objector may argue, cannot be said 
to arise from something external to the cogn jtion proper; 
For, non-validity is only of the nature of the prior negation 
of validity. 


This is a fa 1 11ty argum
nt, non-validity is not the mere 
absence of negation of validity. "Ajnana\ 'samsaya' (doubt) 
and 'mithyatva" are the three forms of non-validity; and all 
these are positive. 


Objection: How can non-validity be external for 
the self-valid (svatath pramanasya)? 


Reply: Heat is the nature of fire; and coldness is 
imopssible, or inconsistent with fire. Yet when the obstl u" 
ction from a defect is strong as in the case of the geli1, 
there can be coldness. It is not at all inconsistent. All 
cognition or knowledge is seen to give rise to activity be- 
cause of the self ..validity of cognition. This activity would 
continue till the defect is apprehended. Hence validity and 



'364 


Panchapij dika 


its apprehension do not have any reflective nature or other- 
;wise; and without this apeksha, jnana has self validity and 
is the cause of 'niscaya vyavahara'. 


Mahavakyasya aparokshya Prayojakatvam : 
Objection: Now if this self-valid knowledge requ- 
ires the aid of logic, how can there be -the determination 
of meaning 1 The very fact that 'tarka' i<; necessary as an 
aid to the prJ.manas, is opposed to the self validity of the 
pramanas. 


Reply: No, the self validity of the pramanas is not 
lost, since each pramana by its own inherent pow
r can 
determine the nature of the object. 


Objection: Then what is the use of reasoning? 


Reply: When there is a doubt regarding tbe impo- 
ssibility of tbe object, the 'anubhava phala
 does not arise. 
Then tarka comes in to show that it is possible and thereby 
removes the obstacle. Pramana alone brings froth the 
'arthaparokhsya niscaya', and tarka dispels the obstacles 
that obstruct this 'niscaya'. Tarka is not the cause of 

 artha nirnaya' . 


Objection: Let this hold good so far as external 
objects are concerned. It cannot hold good jn the case of 
the self, for there can be no obstacles for the self-humino- 
. sity of the self. 


Reply: Consider the example, That thou art. Here 



Vivaranam 


365 


self does not consider himself immediately t.o be of the 
nature of Brahman; en the other hand, he takes himself to 
be other than Brahman. As such, even when jnana has 
arisen, he does not have the determinate experience of the 
Brahmatmama bhava. Then comes 'tarka' and removes 
the obstacles. If the obstacles are net removed by tarka" 
he cannot have the immediacy-he cannot realize .the iden. 
tity with Brahman. 


In normal empirical experience we have the immediacy 
of the object in three ways - 
i) The object as. non-different from consciousness. 


ii) Without being mediated by anything else, if the 
object can give rise to its samvit; it is another ferm 
of immediacy. 


Hi) When there is the contact for the .object with the 
sense organ which is 'pramana karana' there is a 
th ird form. If these three are absent we have the 
inferential and other cognitions where the object is 
mediated. 


The samvits are reflected in the evolutions of the 
mind, the form of the not-self. For these samvite the upa- 
dana is the Brahman who is like the 'Bimba'. As such 
Brahman is the upadana for all samvits. And this would 
make out that Brahman is non-different from samvit. 


It is the nature of the word to give rise to the media- 
ted apprehension. Yet it can and does give the knowledge 
.of immediacy to the self \vbich is immediate and self rev- 
ealing. Now there is;a consciousness arising from the ver- 



366 


Panchapadika 


baI testimony and having the form of Brahman. This sam. 
vit is different from Brahman, or it arises from Brahman. 
As such at first Brahman too is apprehended immediately. 
Objection: If this is the case, is not the mananadi 
vidhana (reflection etc.) useless? 


Replv: No. This. Brahman appears as if it is the 
other through some 'bhranti' (error) which is brought by 
the mind. Two defects aid the mind is having this error 
and they are the inability to concentrate and the 'viparyasa 
samskara' . Thus the self is (pratibadha) bound (or 
1imi
ed)' 
To enable the realization of higher immediacy there 
are ordained yajna, sarna, nididhyasana etc. Thereby the 
mind becomes 'aparokshya niscaya nimittam'. 


Yajna and others put an end to the obstacles of defe- 
cts. Sarna and others eliminate the defect of a contradic- 
tory activity: tbe activity directed towards the not-self. 


'Manana' (reflection) shows an object. There arises a 
'guna' of the nature of concentration in this object; and 
that guna itself is a pradipa. As this lamp b
comes lumi- 
nous it becomes capable of removing (or dispelling) the 
obstacles; and thus it reveals the subtlest Brahman. This 
Brahman is the 'atma vishaya nididhyasana' - the object of 
contemplation by the self. As this contemplation is inten- 
sifi
d th
r
 .;ar ise.> a property wiich is of the nature of d
ep 
concentration. . 


As the obstacles that have brought about the illusion 
of mediate apprehension (Parokshya vibl.1rama) are removed, 



Vivaranam. 


367 


the mind becomes the cause of 'aparoksh pratyaya' (imm- 
ediacy) through sabda alone. The mind is able to give the 
'aparokshniseaya'. It is also generally found that when 
the m"iod is iutent"ely concentrating, it is able to find even 
the subtlest and slightest entity. 


Here we find that the mind is the sahakarin; and in the 
Tika this position is ascribed to 'tarka'. 1 he ability to dis- 
pel or put an end to the obstacles is the nature of tarka 
too; and as such this 'tarka' is the san1e as the mind 
described above. In other words, 'tarka'. conveys the mea- 
ning to the mirror of the mind. 


Tarka puts an end to the impossibility (asambhavang. 
and to contrary possibility (viparita bhavana); and such a 
"tarka' is the 'prathal11a jnana sadhana' (primary means of 
knowledge).. 


The 111ind then gives the immediacy of Brahman 
through sa.bda; further in "Tam tvaupanishadam, we 
:find the derivative form (taddhita) which states that reali- 
zation of Brahman. And only an immediacy (aparokshava- 
gati) can be spoken of as b
ing the true realisation. 


The Vedantas then give rise to the irnmediate experi.. 
ence (aparoksh pramiti) with regard to Brahman; and 
tarka comes in only to remove the obstacles. 


Obj '. ction: But it is the nature of the word to give 
only a n1ediate apprehension; and the Vedantas take the 
aid of tarka, they become the cause of the 'aparoksh 
pramiti. Sabda first of aH gives th
 knowledge of Brahman 
as the other. And when there is the aid from the mirror 



368 


Panchapad ika 


of the mind-which was described earlier -, there arises 
a second knowlcjgc which is immediate. The taddhita in 
the passage noted above shows that sabda and other things. 
have their power of application (Vl11iyoga samarLhya) in 
immediate apprehension. As such nl
re tarka would not 
do. The contact of the eye with the object first gives 
a perceptual knowledge; and when the samskara of this 
experience aids us we are latter able to bave recognition.. 
You cannot say that the nlediate knowledge about the 
'svaprakasa' Brahman is an erroneous one; for, even though 
the samved 1na of another is 'svayanl prakasa' still it is 
Inediately apprehended through inference. 


Reply: Whether we accept the contention of the 
objector or hold to our own, the result is the same. The 
word 'pratip

tti' (apprehension) does not conflict with 
'vidya'. In both the views, immediacy is obtained through 
a 'prayatna' (effort) on the rart of the mind. .Hence it is 
but proper to use the word 'pratipatti.' Before tarl
a has 
fread the mind from all obstacls, vidya might have 
arisen from the Mahavakyas. Stin it appears as if it is 
not obtained (anavapteva). 


What then are the sahakarins with the help of which 
the 'sabda pramana.' gives us immediacy? To this Padma- 
pada replies - The avapti prakara (mode of apprehension) 
has been shown in the Vedantas and it refers directly to 
the 'anubhava phala'. Here we conle across 'Sravana', 
'manana' and 'nididhyasana' . And this schoo
 of Vivarana 
takes 'sravana', to be the 'angin' (princepal one) and the 
others to be its 'angas' (subsidiaries). 



Vivaranam 


369 


Sravana vidhi : 
Objection: How can you make 'manana' and 
'lnjddhyasana' to be tbe 'al1gas' of 'sravana'? Sabda 
(word) has sakti and tatparya. Such a Vedanta sabda gives 
the know ledge of Brahman and sravana gives the apprehe- 
nsion of Brahman. This apprehension is awakened in the 
self. Then anses 'manana' 
which brings the consideration 
(paryalocana) of those 'upapattis (arguments) that are 
necessary for the contemplation (sambhavana) of the object. 
Sabda prall1ana and yukti sambhavana - thus establish or 
determine the object. Yet, to have the absolute concentra- 
tion of the mind on this one object there arises 'nididhya- 
sana .. Thus 'sravana' and 'mana.na' go to help 'nididhy.. 
asana. which alone can be the 'angin' since it alone directly 
brings about that jm111ediate experience. 


Reply : Even here you admit that the knowledge of 
Brahman arises from the word which has 'saktf and 'tatpa- 
rya 1 . The word then first gives the knowledge of Brahman 
as the other; and when the mind is purified by the other 
two sarnskaras, there is said to arise the immediate experi- 
ence. This may be immediately proceeded by nididhyasana; 
Yet the 'aparoksha jnana. has arisen directly from the 
apprehension of the word. As such we have to say that 
'sravana' is the most important, is tbe 'angin'; and that the 
other two arc required as bringing abflut the 'phala' or 
experience proper. They aid in the realisation of the 
'ph ala'. They are 'phalopakari angas.' 


Objection: Even in the emergence of the 'aparo- 
ksha phala', why cannot the other two be the-.angas of nidi- 



E70 


Panchapadika 


dhyasana; for aU the three are (practically) identical iu 
being 'sannipaty opakarakas'. In 'Darsa pUTna masa' we 
have the angas all of which are equally important (samai 
pradhana). The same will hold in the present case also. 
.. 


Reply: The word is 'Sakti tatparya visisbta' (quali- 
fied
by the power of giving an import). When such a word 
is heard, the word is immediately the cause of apprehend--- 
ing the object. In this apprehension the word does not 
require the mediation by' anything else. For any pramana 
gives only the immediate apprehension of its object. Now, 
'manana' and enididhyasana' purify the mind; and in so far 
as they give rise to the jntense power of concentration 
, 
they function as "the cause of the experience of Brahman. 
Sabda, then, is unmediated (avyavahita) as far as the'phaIa' 
is concerned. If this unmediated apprehension. is preven'" 
ted or delayed, the other two come in as its 'angas'. 


When the sabda alone at first gives that knowledge 
which is the 'phala' of the immediate experience, there are 
still the 'bhranti :vikshepa samskaras' (impressions causing 
a plurality of illusions) in the mind. Because of these 

doshas' we erroneous]y apprehend the aparokshanubhava 
phala' (immediate experience) as the 'parokshanubhava 
phala' (m,;diate one). Then 'manana' and 'nididhyasana
 
are required to put an end to these 
doshas
 that prevent 
that immediate experience. Thereby they go to confirm the 
'aparokshlphala'. Consequently they are the 'phalopakar... 
yangas' of sabdapramana'. 


You cannot say that ni<
idhyasana alone without the 
sabda karana', can give that immediate experience; for it 
has no validity (pramanva). 



Vivaranam 


371 


Ob jection: Immediacy is of the nature 
of Brah- 
. 
mata arrived at from the apprehension 
 of the word. 
Through this we can establish the 'pramanya' of nididhya... 
sana. 


Rep Iy: No. Already knowledge has arisen from 
one praD1ana and we have arrived at the 'vishaya sadbhava'; 
and then we are asked to admit another pramana which is 
dependent on this. It is better to accept only one having 
the power to give immediate experience. If two pramanas 
are to be accepted, jnana would not have self-validity. If 
sabda alone is accepted it would have self-validity. Hence 
it is proper to treat. 'manana' and 'nididhyasana' as the 
'phalopakarya angas' for 'sravana
. 


,JIVANMUKTI : 


Objection: Even Brahmaparoksha jnaria cannot 
bring about the dispeUing or destruction of 'anartha'; for 
even when it is there we find the continuance (anuvritti) of 
'samsara'. This is incompatible as soon as there is that 
immediacy, the body must be left behind. 


. , . 
Reply: But we have shown that 'tattva Jnana IS 
different from the know ledge that the self is different froIn 
the body. 


Objection: It is true. Yet there is no difference 
from the standpoint of 'phala'. Whether there is 'tattva 
jnana' (appreltension of truth) or vyatireka jnana (contrary 
knowledge), i11 both we find the continuous presence of the 
'
hankara granthi' and its consequences. 



372 


Panchapadika 


Reply: No. From the method of agreement and 
difference and from the 'sastra' we do find that adhyasa 
.alo
g with its origins is removed by 'tattvaparoksha'. In- 
spite of the 'vyatireka jnana" the samsara (bondage or fini- 
tude) would continue because 'avidya' has not ceased to 
be. But when the 'tattvaparoksba' (immediacy of truth or 
rea]) arises the entire avidya dosha is removed. Can "t 
such an 'aparoksha jnana' remove the products of aividya 
also ? 


Objection: The apprehension of the self as being 
different from the body etc. is opposed to adhyasa; an d yet 
it does not put an end to adhyasa. On this analogy we 
can infer that even though 'tattvavabhodha" is opposed to 
adhyasa, it cannot dispel adhyasa. 


. . 
Reply: But will the 'brahmatmavagaml' (experience 
of Bhrahman as th
 self) arise for the self without at the 
same time sublating or negating the 'brahmatmanavagama' 
(apprehension of Brahman as other than tbe self) 


Objection :. The 'aparokshavagama' arises for one 
existing with his body and sense-organs. And since the 
body etc., constitute the adhyasa, that apprehension must 
involve the liberation of the self from the bJdy completely. 
Brahmajnana removes the 'agrabana 
 or adhyasa. And 
since the 'ahankara granthi' is only the product of adhyasa I 
it should C
.tS
 to be at that very moment. 


Reply: No. Even though 'tattvajnana' can put an 
end to tbe activity of avidya, still there can be the conti- 
nuance (anuvritti) of avidya for some time. Even after 
the 'agrahana' is removed there is present its samskara 



Vivaranam 


;'/J 


(impression) for some time as in the case oftbe fear which 
continues. The fear is dispelled when the true know! edge 
of the rope comes; and yet the samskara of the fear con- 
tinuous and shows shivering etc., Likewise through sam- 
skara avidya too continues to be for some time; and thus 
.is the cause for the 'ahankara granthi. 


Objection: There can be a samskara only for an 
act (kriya) or for knowledge (jnana) and none for ajnana or 
for its product. ' 


Reply: No. We do find the samskara of the gandha 
(latent impression) also; and this is not an act, nor a cog- 
nition. Further, during 'pralaya' we accept that all 

ntities remain in the form of their samskaras. Every 
where samskara is inferred to remain when that which 
gives rise to it comes to an end. Moreover, avidya and 
its products arc not taken to be the absence of knowledge, 
but to be 'brant i jnana'. Even ajnana is 'sakshibhasya'; 
and it has thus the jnanabhasa
 whence it can give rise to a. 
samskara. 


Objection: But a sam'Skara is only the cause .of 
memory. How can this give rise to the immediate appre- 
hension of the app
arance of quality ? 


Reply : We reply that avidya and its products bring 
the dosha for consciousness. The defect that is in the cause 
'Of 'aparokshavabhasa' is the cause of 'aproksha bhrama" 
and when the self is the ground of avidya, it can be the 
ground of this samskara also. 


Nowavidya is the upadana for all its products save 
its samskara. And just as. the self is not the upadana of 



574 


Panchapadika 


avidya, it is also not the upad
na of avidya samskara. Yet 
it is the 'asrayopadhi' for both avidya and its samskara. 


Gradually will the samskaras disappear as there takeS 
place the anusandhana of true knowledge. Till this arises 
the samskara remains for some time and there takes place 
the 'videha mukti' (liberation after the body is dissolved). 
This is not at an oppo
ed to our doctrine. 


One might" interpret 'samskara' to mean 'avidya lesat 
on the analogy of 'tamo lesa'. 


Sag una Brahmopasana (Personal God) 


Obj ecti 9n: All the Vedantas are not begun only 
for the sake of rsuch a vidya. Some of the texts aim at 
'krama mukti', 'aisvarya', 'abhyudaya', 'karma samriddhi', 
There are the upasana (worship) portions in the texts. How' 
are they to be explained ? 
Reply: . The main puport of the Vedantic texts is 
with reference to the apprehension of the 'nirvisesha 
Brahman'. The passages bearing on 'sagunopasana' come 
only by the way and are 'prasangika' (incidental). 'Bra- 
hman is the object of the upasana. In order to show tha. 
this Brahman is 'nishprap tncaka' and that this Brahman is 
the real nature or form of the self, there should be given 
at the outset that Brahman is the creator etc. of
jthe entire 
universe. Thus at the outset Brahman is declared to be 
'sarvatmaka', 'sarvajna' and 'sarva sakti'. 


Objection: If Brahman is established and propou- 
nded as 'nirvisesha', how does he become the object of per- 



. Vivaranam 


375 


sanal worship (&agunopasana)? And how does the world 
get it self related to be dependent on him? F or it is only 
such a saguna Brahman that makes worship possible. 


Reply: According to the maxim-'adhyaropa apavada 
bbyam nishprapancam prapancyate\, the world etc is 
'adhyasopita' and this also makes possible the latter subla- 
tion. As such we speak of Brahman as 'apakrtasesha pra- 
paneam' (negation of all finitude). 


In the 'saprapancatva' state itself, without sublating Or 
rejecting it in Brahman, upasana has 
been ordained. In 
this, Brahman is conceived under various conditioning 
media so that he. can be worshipped, whereby one may 
reaHze the object he aims at. 


Objection: Now, if the sam'e Brahman is the obj- 
ect here, it might also require the same competant pursuer- 
In 'Darsa purnamasa' we have the cap pranayana' with the 
'camasa'. But the adhikarin of the Y:Jga may have also 
th
 desire for cattle in which case the 'camasa' is to be 
rejected and the 'godohana vidhana' (procedure of milking) 
is to be accepted. Here we find that the adhikarin for the 
'appramayana' is already qualified (adhikrita) in 'Darsa 
purnamasa\'. And he cannot take the i:camasa", but only. 
the 'godohana vidhana'. Likewise the adhikarin for the 
realization of 'Dirvisesha Brahman' (non-determitate Bra.. 
bman) will have necessarily to be the adhikarin for the 
'upasana vidhis' also. Only a person seeking liberation 
(mumukshu) would have to be an adhikarin for the upa_ 
sanas_ 



376 


Pancba padika 


Reply: Now the 'appranayana' is already ordained 
in 'Darsapurnamasa' and the adhikarin would have to do it 
necessarily. It is not ordained ..by- the 'godohana vidhana' 
but by the 'prakriti'-viz.. the sacrifise. The 'appranayana' 
is 'praptoddesya'. Likewise those desirous of cattle also are 
there. But here what is ordained is that if tp.e adhikarin 
for the sacrifice is a
so desirous of cattle, he should follow 
the 'godohana vidhana' ? 


On the other hand whether one is a mumukshu or not 
, 
he can arrive at the upasana of 'saprapanca' Brahman 
through the sabda. The upasana vidhan3. has no specific 
adhikarin in mind; and it is the sam
 for both the 'mumu- 
kshu' and the non-mumkshu. It may be of use to the 
'mumukshu' also. BJt the 'mumukshu' is not given as the 
'adhikarin' here. 


The upac;ana vidhana, then, is ba.sed on the 'saprapa- 
nca' Brahman. It is only an 'asritya vidhanam'. 


The ultimate import of the Vedantas then is with 
reference to Nirv isesha Brahman. 


Objection: But there are also abrahmopasanas 
.
n the Vedantas lik
 the upasana of prana etc. What about 
these ? 


Reply: Even they aim at the realisation of karya 
. Brahman; and thus would lead gradually to mukti. The 
sutrakara (aphorist) hilnself would say this much in the 
aphorism: 'Kary at yay e tadadhyakshena sahitah paran1 
abhidh'1nat' . 



Vivaranam 


377 


All the Vedantas are directed to tbe apprehension ot" 
experience of brahmatmyaikyavagatva either directly, or 
gradually, on the parification of the 'antahkarana'. 


MUMUKSHOH PRA VRITTI (The activity of the 
seeker of Lioration) 
The 'vishaya' and the 'prayojana. of the V
danta give 
us the 'vishaya' and the 'prayojana' of the enquiry or vicar a 
sastra. So Sankara-"Yatha cayam arthah...sarvesham...... 
pradarsayisyamah". The purporl of the Bbasya is stated. 
That is the meaning of the Vedantas, Sankara proc- 
eeds to show in the 'Sariraka Mimansa'; Sankara explains 
the import of the vedantas after the fourth sutra onwards. 
'Saririka' is that which is of the nature of the body. That 
which is in the 'sa:1riraka' is the self. And the work dealing 
with the nature of that self is the 'Sariraka Mimansa. 


The Vedantas and the vicara sastra deal with th
 
nature of the self, the 'sariraka'. The Vedantas have come 
with reference to the 'tatva' of the self; and they culminate 
in 'Brahma rupata'. To show this Mirnansa is undertaken. 
This Mimansa is begun with reference to that' jiva tattva'. 
, 
and such is designated as 'Sariraka Mimansa'. 


Ob jection: But the plain meaning of the first 
aphorisn is only 'vicar a kartavyata' (something to be 
enquired i1;lto). 
Reply: Padlnapada has answered the doubt raised 
by this question previously. Even though 'vishaya' and 
Iprayojana' are not given by Badarayana here, still they 
4&) 



378 


Panchapadika 


are taken by implication because Veda.nta and its enquiry 
presuppose them. So Padmapada - The plain and direct 
meaning of the aphorism is that one having the desire to 
get liberated must undertake (karivaya) the enquiry into 
Brahma]nana. Yet, by imp1 ication we find that 'moksba' 
is the 'prayojana' of Brahma jnana. 
Objection: How is this implication derived from 
the plain meaning of the aphorism? 


Reply: First there is the desire for the purush- 
artha. After this desite
kamana) has arisen we proceed in a 
particular direction with reference to something desired. 
The something des ired and the means of realizing it are 
implicitly implied in tbe 'pravritt. 


Since there can be no 'pravritti' or activity here ,in the 
case of Brahmln, we have to take 'pravritti' to mea.n 
'pravritti vL;haya ishta sadhanata'. And this itself, we say- 
is the 'vidhi' (injuction). 
VIDHI VICARA (enquiry in the injunction). 
The meaning of the optative suffix is the 'ishtasadha, 
nata', 'pravritti' or activity is the same as 'bhavana" 
(means of realising the desired). Ishtasadhanata' atone is 
the meaning of the '!in' (optative mood). Then how ca.n 
grahma jnana be the m
ans of realising 'moksha'? The 
optative suffix and other words indicate the 'pravritti' 
which is the means of realising the desired object. This 
'ishtasadhanata" is the meaning of the root and it has the 
power where by it involves a relation to the specific 'adhi- 
karin' and to the specific phla. The act conveyed by the 
root is only general or universal; and it becomes intelli- 



Vivaranam 


379 


gible only when it gives a specific cognition where in it is 
related to a particular doer or agent, and to a particular 
object to be realized. 


Now, the 'vicara.' or enquiry is apprehended through 
the 'ishta sadhanata' in a gen
ral or universal ma.nner. And 
its abillty or power establishes juana. Throng!! thjs jnana, 
we arrive at moksha as being the specific 'ph ala' , and for 
aspecific adhikarin. Assuch the 'mol(shasadhana' can be 
Brahma jnana. 
This is objected to by the Prabhakra who says that 
'lin:trtha' cannot be' ishta sadhanatva'. One who desires 
a purushartha is ordained to act in a particular way. This 
'lliyoga' (command) makes the 'dhatvartha' (Jneaning of 
the verb) mean the 'purushartha sadhanatva'. Lin etc., 
give us the 'niyoga' or the command to act; and this in:":" 
volves the person and th
 object. Thus sacrifice (yaga), 
the object (vishaya), and the 'svarga
(aIlli. (one desirous of 
heaven) al) the p
rson (niyogl) are implied. Now, if rhe 
yaga cannot be a 'sadhana' (means) for the desired 'svarga', 
then the 'svargakalnin niyoga vishay.lt\ a would be impos- 
sible or inconsistent. Hence through the 'niyoga samar- 
thya' that has been understood from the 'liil' etc. We find 
that the 'yaga' and 'svarga' are related to one another as 
the object to be realised (sadhya) and the means of realiz- 
ation (sadhanata). As such from the 'niyoga san1anhya' 
it is better to aSSUlne that the ordained 'vicara' or enquiry 
to be the means of realizing Moksha. It is unnecessary to 
assume the 'ishta sadbanatva vidhi salnarthya'. 
The reply to this argument: There is no 'anupapatti' 
(inconststancy) or ilnpossibilisy in our contention. If there 



380 


Panchapadika 


is no relation between the 'phala' and the 'dbatvartha', 
what is the impossibility? 
(i) Is it.. the 'niyoga svarupa' (the act as such) that is 
impossible? or 


(ii) Is there the impossibiHty of the initiating an acti- 
vity (pravartakatva)? (or) 


(iii) Is it the 'phala kami yaga' (sacrifice to realise a 
desire) that is impossible? 


(i) It cannot be the first. Even without the relation 
between the 'phala" and the 'dhatv artha.', we have the 
'niyoga' in 'svarga kamah. 'Sikatha bhakshsayet' (one 
desirous of heaven should eat sand). Here and in 'naiyya.. 
mika niyoga' we have actions arising even when the rela- 
tion is absent. 


(ii) It cannot be the second; for, even when the rel

 
tion is absent we do have the 'pravartakatva'. Do
s the 
'niyoga' give ri
e to the act when the 'phalakamans' is 
involved (apekshita)? or when it is not involved '? In the 
former case, the 'kamana' itself would have the 'pravarta. 
katva'. Desire (kamana) alone would be the cause of the 
activity; and the cause would not be the 'niyoga'. For, the 
'kamana" inva. iably, necessarily, and immediately preceeds 
the act. If the 'kam3.na' is not required (na apeksyate) by 
the 'niyoga', then the 'dh:atvartha' has no relation with the 
cpbala
 . 


(iii) It cannot be the third; for 
 even when the rela- 
tion is absent, we do have .the 'phala kami yaga'. When 



Vivaranam 


3811 


the Prabhakara establishes the relation between the 'phala' 
and the 'dhatv artha', does he mean (a) that it is impossi- 
ble to take the kamana as only the 'adhikari viseshana'? 
(qualification of a competent agent), or (b) that it js impos- 
sible to have a 'viseshana' (qualification) to be realized 
(sadhya) ? 
Now, (a) is untenable. We have 'yavajjivam agni- 
hotram juhuyat' (Throughout life one is to wordhip fire 
with oblations). Here jivana is not a sadhya', but an 
'adhikariviseshana'. The 'phalakamana' here qualifies 
only the adhikarin. 
Then (b) also is untenable. You cannot say that 
"sadhyasya viseshanatvam': is impossible. What is the me- 
aning of the word 'sadhya' 7 When you take 'svarga' to be 
'yaga' sadhya, (can be realised by a sacrifice), you would 
commit the fallacy .of m Itual dependence, if the 'phala 
kamitva' does not qualify the sadhya; for, once you have 
the 'sadhya sadhana sambandha'. you can make _'f\
arga' to 
be 'yaga sadhya'. Yaga would require svarga, and svarga 
would require yaga. As such, the Prabhakara cannot nlake 
out the 'sadhyavta'to be 'siddhavat' (as if proven). 
Arguing from another angle - Do we apprehend the 
'sadhyata' from the word 'svaxga kama' (desirous of hea.;; 
ven), or from the meaning? It cannot be the former, for 
it is not specifically mentioned. For 'svarga kama' means 
that all those who do not desire 'svarga' are excluded. 
The viseshana here is intended to' exclude other 
possible agents (adhikarins), and not to mention the 
'sadhyata'. It refers only to the required specific doer 
and not to the object of the desire. It cannot be the latter 
also, for there is no pramana to show tbat the' sadhyata' 



382 


Panchapadika 


is apprehcnded from the rreaning. Even through jivana is 
not a 'sadhya' (in 'yavajjivam agnihotram jubuyat'), yet it 
is a viseshana for the adhikarin. Likewi:::e, there can be the 
viseshatva for svarga etc.. which are not 'sadhya'. 
So far we have argued after accepting that 'svarga' is 
only an (,adhikarl visesbana':. and n)t ct 'sadhya'. Now, 
.we bave to point out that (,kamana' also is a 'siddha sva.. 

pa' (an existent) for it is already there; and this is the 
'viseshana' of the 'adhikarin'. And 'svarga') is only the 
'viseshana' of 'kamana'. 
'Svarga' can ha.ve only a relation with the 'adhikarin' 
through 'kamana' - it has a paramp3.ra sambhan dha. Even 
if it is the 'viseshana' of the 'adllikarin', you cannot have 
the relation between the .phala' and the 'dhatavartha'. 
Take the following :- 
Adhyetu kamo bhakshyam caret; 
parastri kamah prayascittaln kuryat; 
granla kamo bhunkshva. 
o .Ie who is having his studies (adhyayana) is to b
g his 
food. The begging is not the 'sadhya' for 'adhyayana'.. 
Yet, for t l
 act of begging, the proper 'adhikarin' is one 
who is studying. Likewise 'svarga' is not th
 'sadhya' 
for the sacrifice. Yet it can and does involve the 'adbi. 
kari vise\)hanatva' for the act of sacrificing (Y.1ga niyoga). 
It n';:ed not be the 'sadhya'but to have the ac
 p, W
 re_ 
quire S. Thus there is no 'phala dhatv artha sambandha' 
here. 


Satrictly speaking, even kamana cannot be the qualifL 
cation of the agent (adhikari visheshana), Take the case 
of 'darsapurna nasa' for the 'svarga kama'. When there 



vivaranam 


383 


is no relation between the niyoga (act) and. th
 
person (doer), we have 'ayaga'; and when there is a 
relation bctweea an svarg3. karni and the act (niyoga), 
w.:; have 'anyayoga'. Now is the 'svarga kamana' given tG 
exclude the 'ayoga' 1 or to exclude the 'anya yoga'? Both: 
are impossible. 
The word 'svarga kama' cannot be the 'vyavachedak
 
(factor of distinction) for the 'asamyoga' (noG-conjunction) 
between the 'darsapaurna masa niyoga' and the person for 
the relation with the doer is already established by 1he 
'nitya vidhi' (categorical imperative). 
Nor can it be a 'vyavachedaka' for the relation betwee
 
this 'niyoga' and some other person who does uot desire 
'svarga'; for, that would conflict she 'nitya vidbi' viz., the 
'daIsapurunamsa vidhi'. ; 
One may argue tha.t the word 'svarga kama" may no
 
be a 'vyavachedaka for the ayoga or for the anyayoga s
 
far as Ihe 'nitya. vidhis' are concerned. But it may be a 
vyavachedaka' in the 'kamya vidhis'. " 


Even this is not possible. You cannot bring in the 
difference between the 'nitya' and 'sukamya' vidhis, as far a
 
the 'niyoga' is concerned. The 'niyoga' of the 'dal.sapurn
 
masa' enbraces all its 'angas"; and the 'niyoga' here is 
'avisishta' (unspecified). There is the same 'niyoga'. 
If there is no difference between the two 'niyogaa', how 
IS the difference between the 'nitya' and 'kamya' vidhis to 
be explained? When a 'kami' (one having a desire) per- 
forms the rite, it is a ka1nya vidhi; and when- a jivanadi- 
visishta adhikarin' performs it, we _ have a 'nitya vidhi'. 



J84 



anchapa dika 


fh,is is aU the difference. It is a difference due to the 
lifference between the 'adhikarins'. 
Thus the word 'svarga kama' does not offer the 'adbi- 
carin', but only the 'phala'. Prom 'maitravarunah praish- 
tar we set the 'praisyanu vada'; and this brings the 'danda 
.6mbandba', whence we have 'dandi praishan anvp ha'. 
rhe <dandi' comes as a 'viseshana only. LikewIse the word 
svarga' is not 'visishta purusha para' (related to a particular 
Lgent), but only 'viseshana para'. As such tbe word 'svarga 
cama' refers only to the 'phala'.' And by implication the 
svarga kama' becomes an 'adhikarin'. 
Objection: Let this be so. But how is the 'niyoga' 
lot the meaning of the sentence '1 
'" 
. Reply: The 'phala vacara' has its synt
cticaI relation 
vith the 'sadhana vacane', and not with the 'niyoga'. \Vhen 
ve say 'ishta sadhanata', one asks whose 'ishta' (desire\ it 
s. Then we get that it is the 'ishta' of the 'svarga ka.ma'. 
from 
thi
 we apprehend svarga and ask: Wha
 is the 
sadhana'? fhe answer is given in 'lin' etc. Thus we are 

ble to explain it without assuming the 'niyoga'. Hence the 
ishta sadhana' zlone is the 'lin adi Sabdartha' and this is 
he injunction; for 'lin arthatva' is no other than the 'ishta 
adhanatva' which is 
kriti yogya' (appropriate for the 
Lct. ) 
ITATEMENT OF ANOTHER OBJECTION 
But there is another school of Mimansa which accepts 
:he 'dhatv artha phala sambandh::t' through arthapatti. In 
:he absence of this 'sambandh:1.', they argue, it is impossible 
:0 have a specific 'adhikarin' and the 'anvaya' (syntactical 
["elation). To facilitate these, we have to assume that 
)am\1andha. they argue thus; 



Vivaranam 


385 


If the vishaya and the doc r are absent there can be nG 
'niyoga a bbidhana t (mention of the injuction). As such we 
should say that the 'niyoga' which is ordahied is one that 
involves both the object and the doer. Thus, one is the 
realised and the other is the realizer- 'paraspara nirvartya 
nirvartakata lakshana sambandha siddhi'. Otherwise there 
will be the 'anupapatti' of not havini a specific 'adhikarin' 
and the 'anvaya'. 


If there is no 'kartri karmanvaya' - ie., if there is no 

nirvartya nirvartakata lakshana sambandha', the result is 
as follows: We recognise the 'niyoga' through 'kriti sad- 
hyata'. It does not directly have the 'kriti sadhyatva'. As 
such we have to say that when there is the 'yaga. nivritti. 
, 
there is the 'niyoga nivritti' . You cannot argue that in the 
absence of the 'anusl1thata' there is the 'yaga l1ivritti'; and 
that thus there is the 'Nirvarlya nirvartskata lakshana anv.. 
aya' between the sacrifice and the doer.. 


Can there be the 'phala viseshanavaya' when there is 
the syntactical reIation between the object (visbaya) and the 
doer? Yes. The 'tatv artha' has its 'anvaya' with 'svalga 
kama'; and as such we should say that there is the anvaya. 
with svarga. Otherwise there can be no visishtanyaya. 


Even when we have the relation between the phala and 
the 'dhatv artba', how can we have 'sadhya sadhanata' '? 
The answer: The two are not 'sarna pradhana' as in 'dar- 



386 


Panchapadika 


Sapaurna masa t ; for, here one is desired and the other is 
:not so .desired. Therefore, the 'anvaya' would have to be 
'guna pradhana bhavana'. Therein 'avarga' being the 
desired is 'sadhya' and since 'yaga' is of the nature of an 
act, it is a'sadhana,. Thus we get the 'sadhya sadhana. 
bhava' . 


Reply to this Objection: 


That the impossibility of'visishtanvaya', (specific rela- 
tion) necessitates the acceptance of 'viseshanvaya' is a 
faulty and needless argument. The injunctions relating' 
to 'jivana', 'dohataha' parastic kaawa etc. have the 'vise- 
shanas' with which we find the 'anvaya for the 'yaga'. Is 
this 'angatayaa anvaya'? Or another? If it is the former, 
the maxim 'prakrtivadvikriti kastavya would tell us that 
there must the 'atidesa (induction) for it in the 'vikriti'. 
The vikriti, there wouldhave to be performed throughout 
the life. And the 'yavaj jiva anusthana' is opposed to 
'kartvyatva' ; for iwe would get in the vikritis, in comm- 
ands like 'yavajjivan' caryam' nirvapet. 


If, on the other h
nd we are to take it as 'uddes!at- 
vena anv.aya', even jivana' too would have to be 'karma 
sadhya'. Jivana' is 'karmantara adhina' and it cannot be 
the 'sadhya' for the-present act. 


I
 this view also, it is impossible to have the 'dhatv 
artha phala sambandha". And we cannot accept the 'linady 



Vivaranam 


387 


arthatva' of fered by this view. The word 'svarga kama) 
has its anvaya. with the 'phala'. The 'linnadi padas' expresh 
the injuuction which is the means of realizing the 'preyas'. 
With such a general 
1ia or pada" does the word 'svarga- 
kama' have its anvitabhidhana'? 4 s vargakama" is a visesha. 
pada' (specific expression) while the 'lin' etc., is a 'samanya 
, pada' (general expression). 


Objection: The relation between the 'yaga' and 

svarga' is arrived at fro"7" 'sabda'. In this sabda bodha 
we do not find the culminatson (paryavasana) of the 'linad 
bodhits samanya'; and to say that because of this aparya- 
vasana samarthya we should recognise 'viseshanvay' is not 
proper. 


Reply: 'Lin' etc., give the knowledge of tht:: means 
necessary for the refl,lizatiou of sreyas. It is the 'samanya 
tadhana' that is apprehended by 'lin' etc.., It .involvas an 
<akanksha' and the '
I.kanl:shitartha' (l1ecess
rily related' 
meaning) is given by ihe word 'svarga kama', When 
such a thing tJ.
.es place, the 'line becomes 'pradhaaa't. And 
th
 'aparyavasana san1J.rthya
 of the 'lin' eta would Inake 
us recognise or accept the 'phala visesha' , We thus assume: 
tbat the word 'svarga kam,a' is 'phala visesha para' ; for 
the 'padantara tatpayya' is dependent upon, or determined 
by, the 'vidhy akanksha'. I-Ienee from the "vidhi samarthya' 
we speak of the 'phala sawbal1dha'. 



388 


Panchapadika 


Objection: If the meaning of the 'lin' is 'isl1ta 
sadhanata', how can you explain the instrumentai case in 
'jyotistomena' etc., For the 'lin' 
is said to express the 
'karana1a' for the sacrifice. When the 'karama karaka" is 
not expressed (anabhihita) by 'lin', 'krit', 'taddhita' ane 
'samasa', then only l. the instrumental case is valid. Here 
'lin' expresses the 'karana' in which case the instrumental is 
'jyotishtomena' is not valid grammatically. 


Reply: There is no such invalidity. Yaga gives 
only the 'samanyabhidhana', while the word 'jyotishto 
mena' gives the 'viseshabhidhana'. For the 'viseshabhidh- 
ana' we do require the instrumental case there. 'Lin' exp- 
ress only the 'dravya tyaga rupa paga salnanya gatam kara- 
natvam'. And the 'karanatva' which is 'yaga visesha gatnm' 
is expressed by 'jyotishtomena!>. 


Objection: Now, 'vishyaa' is that which is not 
expounded by anything other than_this. And in the apho- 
rism we do not find anything that expounds the 'vishthsaya'. 
So, how do we have the 'vishaya pratipatti' (vishaya 
siddhi) ? 


Reply: Brahman cannot be known by any other 
pramana save by this sastra. As such by implication we 
get the 'vishaya nirdesa' (indicatian of the aim or 
object. ) 



Vivaranam 


389 


When the question - from what or whence do we have 
the Brahma jnana which is 'mokshasadhana) -, when 
this question airses, we reply that by implication only this 
sastra can give it. Thus Sankara has shown Brahmajn::Lna 
to be the vishaya' of this sastra. After the desire fOr 
liberation has arisen, this enquiry into Brahma joana 
should be undertaken. In rhis form of upadesa we are 
given both the 'vishaya' and 'prayojana' of the Vedantas. 
Yet Sankara has shown the implication of the first apho- 
ri$.ID and explained that which is presupposed is the very 
basis of this implication. Thus he explained the avidya- 
tmaka bandha. And to fulfil his pratijna. he proceeds to 
explain all this in the sutras that follow. And in order to 
imterpre t the sutra!
, he next gives the reason for first 
taking up the 'prayo jana' and 'vishaya' in the words- 
'Vedanta mimamsa sastrasya vyacikhyasitasya idam adim- 
mam sutram - adhato brahma jijnasa' . 


Objection: From tbe :samanya lakshana' itself 
we come to know the 'vishaya'; and we lealn of the 
'prayojana"l from the fourth chapter. Then how do you 
say that these two are indicated or suggested by the first 
aphorism ? 


Reply: 'When Sankara s})eaks' of it as 'adimam 
sutram', he means that it is the beginning of the sastra. 
As 'such, at t.he very beginning both the 'vishaya - and 
'prayojana' must be indicated by way of 'pravrtty angata'. 


Objection: But is it improper to derive many a 
meaning from one sentence of the aphorism '1 



3
O 


Panchapadika 


Reply: No, for it is a 'sutra'. Any meaning thr.t 
is utprekshita' by 1he 'sabda samarthya' or by the strength 
of its n1eaning, all that is the meaning of the aphorism. 
And all this 'artha kalapa' is understood and desired from 
the inherent power or strength of the aphorism. Thus, 
because it is the beginning of the sastra, because it is the 
first aphorisn1
we are"'able to derive from it the 'vishaya'and 
'prayojana' and he is able to explain that which makes the 
'vishaya' and the 'T rayoj ana' possible. The bondage of 
the self is called avidya; and it is i1nplied by the vishaya' 
and 'prayojana'. Having exhibited alllhis, Sankara pro- 
ceeds to show the 'sutra Samarthya' for all this. Accord- 
ingly, he now begins tos comment on the aphorisln word 
by word.', 


Here ends a the first Varnaka in Panchapadika and 
in Panchapadika VivaranalTI. 



