THE 


SAMKSEPASARIRAKA 

OF 

SARVAJNATMAN 


CRITICALLY  EDITED 
WITH 

INTRODUCTION,  ENGLISH  TRANSLATION 
NOTES  AND  INDEXES 


BY 

N.  VEEZHINATHAN,  M.A.,  Ph.D. 

Lecturer  in  Sanskrit,  Centre  for  Advanced  Study  in  Philosophy 
University  of  Madras 


CENTRE  FOR  ADVANCED  STUDY  IN  PHILOSOPHY 
UNIVERSITY  OF  MADRAS 
1972 


U'BF'-An,-.3HNA  ASHRAMA 

B  A  N  Ci  A  L  O  R  &  ‘ 


Thesis  approved  for  the  Degree  of  Doctor  of  Philosophy 
in  the  University  of  Poona  in  1964 


First  Published,  1972 
(jC)  University  of  Madras,  Madras,  1972 


•i 1 :  .  'ft  e_  e.  •  ^  fo 

i*«  m,;  i  ,f/ ij 


j*cv.  Ac  u\  i 


|  III  Otic  i'i 


i 

i 


PRINTED  IN  INDIA  AT 

THE  RAMAYANA  PRINTING  WORKS 
MADRAS-4. 


FOREWORD 


Dr  N-  Veezhinathan,  Leolw»cr*«in  Sanskrit  at  this 
Centre,  workefl  as  Research  Scholar  from  1960  to  1963  in 
the  Deccan  College  Post-graduate  and  Research  Institute, 
Poona,  and  wrote  his  doctoral  thesis  on  the  Sarhk§epa- 
iariraka  of  SarvajSktman.  The  thesis  earned  for  him  the 
Ph.  D.  Degree  of  the  University  of  Poona  in  1964.  He 
joined  this  Centre  as  Lecturer  in  1964.  My  own  observa¬ 
tion  of  his  thesis  and  the  encomiums  it  has  received  from 
scholars  who  had  occasion  to  see  it  made  me  feel  that  the 


thesis  was  a  distinctively  valuable  contribution  to  scholarship 
in  the  field  of  Advaita  and  that  its  "publication  would  do 
credit  to  any  institution  that  sponsored  it,  more  so  to  an 
institution  like  this  Centre  which  has  devoted  itself  to  study 
and  research  in  Advaita-VedSnta  for  the  past  forty  years. 
Accordingly,  it  was  recommended  for  publication  by  this 
Centre,  and,  thanks  to  the  publication  grant  made  availa¬ 
ble  by  the  University  Grants  Commission  to  the  Centre 
and  the  facilities  provided  by  the  University  of  Madras,  it 
is,  now  being,  published  as  No.  18  in  the  University, 
Philosophical  Series. 


The  Samk$epa£ariraka  is  aft  important  classic  in  the 
Advaita  tradition,  being  a  full  metrical  summary  of  the 
central  teachings  of  Sri  Sankara’s  Brahma-sutra-bhB§ya,  The 
importance  of  the  work  for  a  student  of  Advaita  is  evident 
from  the  fact  that  it  has  eight  commentaries,  as  Dr 
Veezhinathan  has  identified  in  his  Introduction.  The 
author  of  the  work,  SarvajSStman,  himself  occupies  a 


position  of  eminence  in  the  line  of  preceptors  following  3ri 
Sankara,  having  been,  according  to  tradition,  ordained  by 
the  BbagavatpSda  himself  and  nominated  to  succeed  him 
and  Sure.4vara  in  the  central  $ri  KSmakoti-Pitha  at  K&fici. 

The  present  work  is  a  critical  Edition  and  English 
Translation  of  the  classic,  with  a  detailed  Introduction, 
Notes,  and  Indexes.  In  the  Introduction,  Dr  Veezhi- 
nathan  discusses  systematically  the  basic  issues  of  Advaita- 
Vedanta,  such  as  Brahman ,  mSya,  adhjasa,  jiva,  Idvara,  jagat, 
and  mok§a,  and  brings  out  the  special  contribution  made  by 
Sarvajnatman  to  the  development  of  Advaita  thought. 
The  text  has  been  definitively  edited  after  collating  several 
manuscripts.  The  translation  is  faithful  and  readable. 
The  notes  add  to  information  and  clarify  subtle  points. 
The  four  detailed  Indexes  render  the  edition  highly  useful 
to  scholars 

1  have  great  pleasure  in  commending  this  work  to 
serious  students  of  Advaita. 


Madras 
February  25,  1972. 


T.  M.  P.  MAHADEVAN 


P  R  E  P  A  C-E 


The  present  Critical  Edition  of  the  Saikk$epai5rlraka , 
a  work  on  Advaita  Vedanta,  with  Introduction,  English 
Translation,  Notes  and  Indexes,  represents  the  research 
work  completed  under  the  guidance  of  the  late  Dr  A. 
Sankaran,  m  a  ,  ph.D.,  Assistant  Editor,  Sanskrit  Dictionary 
Department,  and  Honorary  Professor  of  Sanskrit,  Deccan 
College  Post-graduate  and  Research  Institute,  Poona,  for 
the  Degree  of  Doctor  of  Philosophy  of  the  University  of 
Poona.  The  Sarhk§epa£5rlraka  is  a  work  of  Sarvajfiatman 
the  disciple  of  Sure£var5carya  ;  it  sets  forth,  in  verses,  the 
views  of  J>rl  Sankara  as  expounded  in  his  bhasya  on  the 
Brahma.su tra-  It  contains  1240  verses  and  is  divided  into 
four  Adhyayas. 

The  edition  of  the  text  of  the  Samk$epa£Sriraka  is  based 
on  the  following  manuscripts : 

Ti  A  paper  manuscript  in  Devanigari  script  (No- 
7121)  of  the  Tanjore  Sarasvati  Mahal  Library. 
The  following  five  manuscripts  also  belong  to  this 
library. 

T2  A  palm-leaf  manuscript  in  Telugu  script  (No.  7122) 

Ts  A  palm-leaf  manuscript  in  Grantha  script  (No-7 123) 

T4  A  paper  manuscript  in  DevanSgari  script  (No.  7124) 

T5  A  paper  manuscript  in  DevanSgari  script  (No. 
7125).  This  contains  only  the  third  and  fourth 
Adhyayas. 


iv 


T6  A  paper  manuscript  in  Devanagari  script  (No. 7 126; 

Six  commentaries  on  the  work  are  available  and  they 
have  also  been  used  in  editing  the  work-  Of  the  six  com¬ 
mentaries,  two  are  yet  unpublished. 

Ma  Sambandhokti  by  Vcdananda :  a  transcript  of  a 
palm-leaf  manuscript  (R.  2919)  belonging  to  the  Govern¬ 
ment  Oriental  Manuscript  Library,  Madras  This  contains 
the  text  also. 

Ma  Siddhantadipa  by  ^iSvaveda  ♦  a  transcript  of  a 
manuscript  [R.  1558  (b)]  belonging  to  the  Government 
Oriental  Manuscript  Library.  Madras.  This  contains  only 
the  commentary.  The  author  of  this  commentary  gives 
only  a  summary  of  each  verse,  and  so  the  correct  reading 
of  the  text  cannot  be  fixed  with  the  help  of  this  commen¬ 
tary.  The  present  edition  owes  to  it  not  more  than  one 
variant  reading. 

Bj  The  Ks$l  Sanskrit  Series  edition  of  the  commen¬ 
tary  —  Sdrasahgraha  of  Madhusudanasarasvatl- 

B2  The  Princess  of  Wales  Sarasvati  Bhavana  Texts 
edition  of  the  commentary  -  Tattvabodhini  of  Nfsimha^rama. 

Pj  The  AnandaSrama  Sanskrit  Series  edition  of  the 
commentary  —Subodhini  of  Purufottama- 

Pa  The  AnandaSrama  Sanskrit  Series  edition  of  the 
commentary  AnvayarthaprakSiikS  of  Rsmatlrtha. 

The  present  thesis  consists  of  three  parts.  The  first  part, 
the  Introduction,  again  is  divided  into  two  sections-  In 
the  first  section,  I  discuss  the  life,  date,  and  work*  of 


Sarvajnatman.  In  the  second  section,  I  discuss  the  .basic- 
doctrines  of  the  Advaita  Vedanta  according  to  Sarvajfiat- 
man  :  (i)  the  Nature  of  the  Ultimate  Reality,  (ii)  Nescience 
( maya-avidya ),  (iii)  Superimposition  ( adhyasa ),  (iv)  the 
Individual  soul  and  God  {.ilva  aftd  tivara  ),  (v)  the  Pheno¬ 
menal  World  ( jagat ),  and  (vi)  Liberation  (mok$a).  And, 
in  the  end,  I  have  given  an  evaluation  of  SarvajfiatmanV 
contribution  to  Advaita  Vedanta.  The  second  part  presents 
the  text  with  an  English  translation.  Explanatory  notes 
are  added  wherever  necessary.  In  the  notes  are  provided  the 
identification  of  the  authors  presupposed  and  references  to 
the  texts  cited  and  implied.  The  third  part  consists  of 
an  alphabetical  index  of  quotations,  an  index  of  the  views 
of  other  authors  referred  to  andv  implied  in  the  text,  an 
index  of  terms  used  in  the  text,  and  an  index  of  the  verses 
of  the  SathksepaSariraka. 

This  edition  of  the  Samksepa&ariraka  of  Sarvajfistman, 
who  was  an  younger  contemporary  of  Adi  J>ahkarac5rya 
and  who,  under  the  fostering  care  of  his  preceptor  SurcS- 
varacSrya,  adorned  the  great  Kfimakoti-pifha  at  Kafici  as  its 
head,  I  humbly  dedicate  to  His  Holiness  Sri  Candradekha- 
rendra  Sarasvati  Sripujyapadah,  the  present  head  of  that 
hoary  SahkarHe  Institution  at  Ksncl.  All  my  activities  ia 
the  pursuit  of  my  study  of  Advaita  and  publications  relat¬ 
ing  thereto  have  been  possible  only  through  the  benign 
grace  of  His  Holiness  who  remains  ever  for  me  as  my  ins¬ 
piring  Light  and  Guide.  I  offer  my  most  respectful  homage 
at  the  lotus-feet  of  His  Holiness. 

I  offer  my  most  respectful  salutations  to  His  Holiness 
5»rl  AnantSnandendr*  Sarasvatt  Svlmi  of  the  Upani$ad* 


brahmendra  Majha  at  KiScl  for  the  inspiration  and 
guidance  I  have  always  received  at  His  feet. 

To  Dr  S.M.  Katre,  the  former  Director  of  the  Deccan 
College  Post-graduate  and  Research  Institute,  Poona.  I 
express  my  sincere  gratitude  for  providing  me  with  all 
facilities  to  carry  on  my  research  work  there. 

To  the  authorities  of  the  University  of  Poona,  I  am 
thankful  for  permitting  me  to  work  for  the  Doctorate  degree 
of  the  University  of  Poona  \and  also  for  granting  me 
permission  to  publish  the  present  thesis. 

I  express  my  sincere  thanks  to  BrahmaSri  TS-  Srinivasa 
Sastri  of  the  Dictionary  Department,  Deccan  College  Post¬ 
graduate  and  Research  Institute,  Poona,  for  suggesting  to 
me  this  Advaita  Classic  for  my  thesis  and  for  teaching  me 
the  text. 

I  expi-css  my  deep  sense  of  gratitude  to  my  esteemed 
Professor  the  late  Dr  A.  Sankaran  for  his  kind  guidance 
at  every  step. 

To  Dr  T.  M-  P-  Mahadevan,  Director,  Centre 
for  Advanced  Study  in  Philosophy,  University  of 
Madras,  lam  now,  as  in  the  past,  greatly  indebted  not 
only  for  recommending  this  work  for  publication  under  the 
auspices  of  the  Centre  for  Advanced  Study  in  Philosophy, 
but  also  for  kindly  scrutinizing  the  entire  typescript  before 
it  was  sent  to  the  press  and  for  his  kindness  in  having  writ¬ 
ten  a  Foreword  to  this  work.  My  obligations  to  him  are 
Indeed  great. 


To  my  friend  and  colleagyf  Dr  T.P.  Ramachandtea* 
I  offer  my  grateful  thanks  for  the  encouragement  he  gave 
me  at  every  stage  in  the  printing  of  this  work  and  for 
rendering  valuable  help  in  seeing  the  work  through  the 
press. 

I  am  thankful  to  the  authorities  of  the  University  of 
Madras  for  sanctioning  the  publication  of  this  work  under 
the  auspices  of  the  Centre  for  Advanced  Study  in  Philosophy 
and  to  the  University  Grants  Commission  for  the 
permission  to  utilize  their  grant. 

I  thank  the  Ramayana  Printing  Works  for  the  care 
they  have  bestowed  on  the  printing  of  this  work. 


Madras 

February  29, 1972. 


N.  VEEZHINATHAN 


'  LIST  OF  ABBREVIATIONS 


Ait , 

Aitareyo' panisad 

A? 

A  nvayd  rthapraka  i  ika 

ARR 

A  dva  it  a- ra  tna-raks  ana 

AS 

Advaitasiddhi 

Bh  G. 

Bhagavadgita 

Bh.G.B. 

Sankara’s  bhasya  on  the  Bhagavadgita 

Brh  , 

Brhadd  ranyako’’ panisad 

BS 

Brahma-su  tra 

BSB 

Sankara’s  bhasya  on  the  Brahma-su  tra 

Chand, 

Chandogyo'  panisad 

Kath.i 

Katho' panisad 

Muriel., 

Mundako' panisad 

PP 

Pahcaprakriya 

S 

Subodhini 

SB 

Siddhdntabindu 

SLS 

Siddha  ntale*  asangraha 

SS 

Sdrasangraha 

SS' 

Samksepas  a  ri  raka 

S'vet , 

Sveta  d  vataro' panisad 

Tailt., 

Taittiriyo' panisad 

TB 

Tatlvabodhini 

V 

Siddha ntadipa  of  ViSvaveda 

Ved 

Sambandhokti  of  Vedananda 

VK 

Vedantakalpalatika 

CONTENTS 


Page 

Foreword  J 

Preface  iii 

Abbreviations  viii 

Part  One  :  Introduction 

Sarvajfiatman  —  his  life  and  date  1 

His  works  6 

The  nature  of  the  Ultimate  Reality  9 

Nescience  (maya  —  avidya)  64 

Superimposition  (adhyasa)  84 

The  individual  soul  and  God  (jiva  and  Isvara)  101 

The  phenomenal  world  (jagat)  111 

Liberation  (moksa)  126 

Conclusion  145 

Part  Two  J  Text,  Translation,  and  Notes 

FIRST  ADHYAYA 

Invocation  i 

Result  of  inquiry  7 

Avidya  9 

The  nature  of  the  self  10 

Superimposition  13 

Brahman  —  the  object  of  inquiry  25 

Qualifications  of  the  aspirant  29 

Instruction  by  the  preceptor  41 

(Doubts  of  the  aspirant) 

The  self  cannot  be  known  through  the  Upanigads  43 

Major  texts  do  not  give  rise  to  immediate  knowledge  57 


Knowledge  arising  from  Upani§ads  does  not 
remove  avidyS  58 

Anirvacanlyats— a  pseudo  concept  80 

Import  of  the  Vedic  texts  is  niyoga  81 

(Objections  answered) 

Impartite  sense  —  the  import  of  the  major  texts  89 

The  self  is  secondarily  signified  7  2 

The  primary  senses  of  the  terms  satya,  etc.  86 

Identity  of  the  secondary  senses  of  the  terms  satya,  etc.  90 
Lordship  —  not  the  essential  nature  of  the  self  93 

Sequence  through  which  the  knowledge  of  the  self  arises  95 
Words  cannot  primarily  signify  the  self  115 

Validity  of  the  Upanisads  in  respect  of  the  self  118 

Niyoga  is  not  the  import  of  the  Upanijads  166 

BhSvanS  —  the  import  of  the  Vedic  texts  186 

BhSvana  —  not  the  import  of  the  Vedic  texts  190 

Knowledge  cannot  be  enjoined  211 

The  import  of  the  texts  that  convey  the  qualified  self  217 
Upani§ads  point  to  the  existent  entity  218 

World  —  the  effect  of  a  sentient  being  232 

The  three  kinds  of  definition  240 

The  definition  of  Brahman  242 

SECOND  ADHYAYA 

Objection:  Upani§adic  teaching  is  stultified  by 
perception,  etc.  261 

(Reply)  Upani§adic  teaching  is  not  contradicted 
by  perception,  etc.  263 

Definition  of  a  proof  267 

Distinction  between  real  and  indeterminable  objects  270 
Objection:  Advaita  view  is  identical  with  Vijfiana-vftda  271 


(Reply)  Distinction  between  Advaita  and  VijfiSna-vada  272 

Objection:  waking  and  dream  states  are  identical  27  4 

(Reply)  Distinction  between  the  waking  and  dream 

1  '  274 

states 

Distinction  between  the  real  and  indeterminable 
objects  is  possible  only  in  Advaita  276 

Perception  does  not  reveal  the  reality  278 

Basis  for  the  acceptance  of  the  pari^ama-vada  284 

Upani§ads  admit  only  the  vivarta-vada  28  8 

Refutation  of  the  samghata-vada  289 

Refutation  of  the  arambha-v&da  289 

Method  of  refutation  of  the  rival  theories  292 

Three  points  of  view  29  * 

Objection  :  three  points  of  view  relate  to  three 
types  of  aspirants  297 

(Reply)  The  three  points  of  view  relate  to  only 

one  aspirant  297 

The  maxim  that  the  antecedent  one  is  ineffective  306 

The  distinction  of  release  and  bondage  according 
to  the  eka-jlva-vada  814 

The  self — the  locus  of  avidya  333 

Difference  between  jlva  and  ISvara  335 

Distinction  between  release  artffrfcondage  352 

Indeterminable  entity  could  oonvey  the  reality  355 

Scope  of  the  texts  enjoining  sacrifice,  etc.  362 

THIRD  ADHYAYA 

Means  of  the  knowledge  of  the  self  365 

Transmigration  367 

Means  to  liberation  386 

Clarification  of  the  senses  of  the  terms  tat  and  tvam  388 


The  secondary  sense  of  the  term  tvam  389 

The  secondary  sense  of  the  term  tat  429 

Arambha-vada,  pariij3ma-vada,  and  vivarta-vada  451 

Status  of  scripture  470 

The  primary  and  secondary  senses  of  the  terms  tat 
and  tvam  483 

Extent  of  the  subsidiary  Upanisadic  texts  496 

The  proximate  and  the  remote  means  of  knowledge  502 
Renunciation  from  activities  — a  proximate  means 
to  moksa  517 

FOURTH  ADHYAYA 

Question  regarding  the  fruit  of  the  knowledge  of 
the  self  519 

The  fruit  of  the  knowledge  of  the  self  520 

Refutation  of  jnana-karma-samuccaya-vada  521 

Nature  of  the  removal  of  avidya  523 

Liberation  is  identical  with  the  self  530 

The  concept  of  jivanmukti  534 

The  path  of  manes  and  of  gods  not  intended  for 
the  liberated  soul  537 

Karma — only  a  proximate  means  to  knowledge  538 

In  praise  of  the  knowledge  of  the  self  589 

Purpose  of  the  composition  of  this  treatise  543 

Dedication  to  God  543 

Part  Three :  Indexes 

Index  of  quotations  in  the  text 

Index  of  the  views  of  other  authors  referred  to  and 

implied  in  the  text 

Index  of  terms  used  in  the  text 

Index  of  the  verses  of  the  SamksepaSarlraka 

Bibliography 


Part  I  INTROblJCTION 


IWTRWttCTlON 

I 


SARVAJfJATMAN  —  IilS  LIFE  AND  DATE 

In  order  to  preserve  the  Advaitic  tradition  for  the 
benefit  of  posterity,  Sri  Sankara  established  monastic  insti¬ 
tutions  in  various  parts  of  India.  Badari,  Dvaraka,  Puri, 
Sringagiri,  and  Kanci  were  the  important  ones  among  them. 
Of  these,  the  institution  at  Kanci  is  the  foremost  and  is 
termed  the  Kamakoti-pitha.1  Sri  Sankara  himself  assumed 
the  headship  of  this  pitha.  Ordained  as  sannyasin  by 
Sri  Sankara  himself,  Sarvajnatman  was  nominated  successor 
to  the  Kamakoti-pitha  with  SureSvara — his  preceptor,  as  his 
protector. 

In  the  Jagadgururalnamalastava,  a  work  giving  the 
list  of  succession  of  the  acaryas  of  the  Kamakoti-pitha 
composed  by  SadaSivabrahmendra  who  flourished  in  the 
16th  century,  there  occurs  the  statement  that  Sarvajnatman 
vanquished  the  Jainas.2  Atmabodhendra  Sarasvati  in  his 
commentary  Susaina  on  th*.  work  deals  with  the  life 

of  Sarvajnatman.  Sarv^ftatmafTwas  a  native  of  a  village 
called  BrahmadeSa  on  the  banks  of  the  river  Tamraparni. 

jivame  was  Vardhana.  During  Sri  Sankara’s 
tours  of  victory  (dig  yij  ay  a) ,  N  ar  thiatra  c&cvqtfej  were 

defeated ;  but  Vardhana’s  son  Mahadeva  who  was  only 


1  Pwhtnrs  of  Advaita,  Edited  by  Dr  T.  M.  P.  Mahadevan, 
At-ViWcA  IU%  oon^icaa  iroi.u.v-0-,  11.1  vf  Road. 

Madras,  \967],  pp.  429-67. 

2.  Jagadgururalnamalastava,  (5>ri  Kamako^Ko^asthanam,  Francis 
Joseph  Street,  Madras- 1,  1962),  p.  46. 


seven  years  old  at  that  time  carried  on  the  philosophical 
discussion  for  three  days  longer;  but  on  the  fourth  day  he 
had  to  yield  to  the  great  Advaita  teacher.  He,  then, 
expressed  his  intense  desire  to  become  a  sannyasin.  £>ri 
3ahkara  initiated  him  into  the  sannyasa  drama ,  bestowed  on 
him  the  name  Sarvajhdtman  and  chose  him  as  his  future 
successor  to  the  Kamakoti-pitha.  Sarvajnatman  functioned 
as  the  head  of  the  pitha  under  the  fostering  care  of 
Suregvara3. 

SureSvara’s  association  with  the  Kamakoti-pitha  is 
well-known.  The  ivarahasya  dealing  with  the  life  of 
3ri  Sankara  states  that  £>ri  SSankara  brought  from  Kailasa 
five  sphatika  lingas  which  are  known  as  Toga-linga,  Bhoga- 
liAga ,  Vara-linga,  Mukti-lviga  and  Moksa-lingai 5.  Anandagiri’s 
Sfankaravijaya,  the  manuscript  of  which  is  available  in  the 
Rama  Taraka  Mutt  Library,  Varanasi,  and  which  is  re¬ 
cognised  by  the  orientalists  as  the  most  authentic  biography 
of  3rl  Sankara  states  that  3rl  Sankara  visited  Kafici,  con¬ 
secrated  the  S'ricakra  in  the  temple  of  Kamaksl,  established 
the  Kamakoti-pitha  and  asked  SureSvara  to  be  in  charge  of 
it  by  worshipping  the  Toga-linga  there6.  It  further  states 
that  J>ri  Sankara  consecrated  the  Mukti-linga  at  Kedara, 
Vara-linga  at  Nilakantha-ksetra,6  and  the  bhoga-linga  at  an 


3.  ibid.,  pp  46-47. 

4.  S’  ivarahasya,  (Maharaja  Jayacamarajendra  Granthamala 
Series,  No  32.,  Mysore,  1950),  IX,  xvi,  44. 

5.  ...nijdvdsayogyarii  mathamapi  parikalpya  tatra  nijasiddhantam 
advaitam  prakadayitum  anteva sinatii  suredvaramahuya  yoganamakam 
lingath  pujaya  Hi  tasmai  datvd  tvamatra  kamakoti  pit  ham  adhivasa  iti 
vyavasthapya  di$yajanaih  paripujyamdnah  dri  paramaguruh  sukliamasa, 

Chapter,  65. 

6.  kedaraksctre  ekam  mukplingdkhyam  pratisthdpya...,  Chapter,  55. 

. nilakanthtdvaram  natvd  tatra  varanamakam Jin  gam  pratisthdpya . , 

ibid. 


3 


institution  near  Sringagiri  on  the  banks  of  (lie  river  Tuhga- 
bhadra7.  And,  during  his  last  days  at  Kancl,  Sri  Sankara 
directed  Sure^vara  to  send  the  Moksa-linga  to  Cidambaram®. 
It  was  with  SureSvara  that  Sarvajnatman  adorned  the 
Kamakoti-pitha  for  seventy  years  and  then  himself  for  forty- 
two  years.9 

Sarvajnatman  wrote  three  works  entitled  Samksepa- 
Jariraka,  Pahcaprakriya ,  and  Pramanalaksana.  In  all  these 
three  works,  he  refers  to  the  name  of  his  preceptor  as 
Deve^vara10.  Madhusudana  Sarasvatl  and  Ramatirtha  in 
their  commentaries  on  the  Samksepaidriraka  identify  Deve- 
Svara  with  SureSvara  on  the  basis  of  the  identity  of  the 
meaning  between  the  words  dera  and  sura.  11  Moreover,  in 


7  . if ringagirisamipe  tungabhadratire  cakrath  nirmaya . . 

nijamatham  krtva  . Chapter,  62. 

. tadananlaram  padmapa  dakhyam  kariicit  d  is  yarn  pilhd  dhyaksam 

krtva  hhoganamakam  li Again  tasmin  pi  the  hiksipya . Chapter,  63. 

8  . ladanantaram  sami  past  hath  indrasampraddyanuv'artinam 

suredvaratnalviya  blio  disya  idatii  rnoksnli ' gam  cidambarasthalarh  presaya 
iiyuktva . ,  Chapter,  74.  - 

9.  Jagadgururalnania  la  stava,  p.  47. 

10.  (i)  yadiya  samparkamava pya  kevalath  vayarh  krtarthah  niravadya- 
kirtayah. 

jagatsu  le  taritadisyapanktayah,  jayantidevedvarapadarenavah,  S&,  I,  8. 

d  ri  devcd  varapa  dapanka  'arajassatiiparkapu  la  d  ayah . 

sarvajild  tnuigird  nkito  munivetrap  sathksepad a  rirakam. 

ibid.,  IV,  62. 

(ii)  d ri deved vara  nghrisphutakamalarajah  pa  tasamparkapu  lah. 

sarvajild  tma  samastad rutipathakud alah . PP,  p.  15. 

(Hi)  d  ri  deved  varapa  dapadmarajasa  sadyah  pavitrikrtah. 

sarvajild  Imamahdmunih  prakaranam  cakre  trikdndigalam, 

Pramanalaksana,  p.  56. 

11.  surapadastha tie  devapadaprayogah ,  SS,  p.  15 

iddnirh  sdksdtsvagurum  suredvaraca  ryarii  abhipiijayati,  AP,  p.  17 


the  Samksepadariraka,  Sarvajnatman  upholds  the  view  that 
Brahman-  Atman  is  intrinsically  inward  and  of  the  nature 
of  consciousness.  And,  mind,  owing  to  its  association  with 
Brahman-Atman,  is  viewed  as  inward  and  of  the  nature  of 
consciousness.  It  is  thus  clear  that  inwardness  and  cons¬ 
ciousness  are  occasioned  in  mind  because  of  the  mutual 
superimposition  between  Brahman-Atman  and  mind.  In 
this  connection  Sarvajnatman  states  that  this  view  is  based 
upon  the  sayings  of  those  who  know  the  true  tenets  of 
Vedanta13.  Madhusudana  Sarasvati  in  his  commentary 
points  out  that  Sarvajnatman  refers  to  his  preceptor 
Sure^vara  who  advocates  the  above  view  in  his  JVaiskarmya- 
siddhi. 18 

It  would  have  become  clear  from  the  foregoing  account 
that  Sarvajnatman  is  the  disciple  of  Sure$vara  and  the 
grand-disciple  of  Sri  Sankara.  This,  however,  is  questioned 
by  Mr.  T.  A.  Gopinatha  Rao  on  the  basis  of  the  geneoiogy 
said  to  be  given  by  Sarvajnatman  himself  in  his  other  work 
Pramanalaksana  where  one  Devananda  is  referred  to  as  his 
grand-preceptor  and  not  Sri  Sahkara.11  Moreover,  in  all 
his  three  works,  Sarvajnatman  offers  s/dutations  not  to 
Sure^vara  but  to  Devefvara.  This  fact  supported  by  the 
name  of  the  preceptor  of  DcvrSvara,  that  is,  Devananda  that 

12.  bodhalmatve  nirnimitle  pratico  bodhdtmalve  lannimille  tu  buddeh, 
bodhdtmalve  buddliidharmau  ca  buddheh  ukte  salsa  l  vedasiddhd  nlavidbhili , 

■SS,  I,  190. 

13.  naiskannyasiddhau  deary aih  tadubhayamapyuktam  ityd ha  — bodha¬ 
lmatve  iti,  SS,  p.  150. 

vide  —  ku  tasthabodhah  pratyaktvam  animitlam  saddtmanah 
boddhrtclhaihtayoh  hetuh  tabhydm  teno'palaksyale, 

Naiskarmyasiddhi,  III,  11. 

14.  £ri  £  res  t  ha  nan  dap  d  dad  isya  It  £ri  dxvanandapadah,  £ri  devananda- 
padadisyah  dri  devedvarapddah,  dri  deved varapa dad isyd h  dri  sarvajfldtma- 
paddh,  tadiya  krtih  pramanalaksanam  samaptam. 

Pramanalaksana ,  p.  56. 


5 


has  led  Mr.  T.  A.  Gopinatha  Rao  to  believe  that  Devesvara 
is  different  from  Sure^vara,  and  so  Sarvajnatman  is  not 
the  disciple  of  SureSvara. 

It  must,  however,  be  noted  that  the  ancestral  line 
referred  to  above  is  g'ven  more  or  less  in  a  tabular  form. 
Though  the  work  Pramanalaksana  is  in  ~  rose  form,  yet  it 
seems  strange  how  Sarvajnatman  who,  in  that  work  itself, 
refers  to  the  name  of  his  preceptor  in  verse,  and  who,  as 
we  shall  presently  see,  expounds  in  the  Samksepa&ariraka 
even  the  subtle  points  of  Advaita  in  verses,  and  that  too,  in 
a  variety  of  metres,  chose  to  give  his  pedigree  alone  in 
such  a  way.  It  is  clear,  therefore,  that  the  geneological 
table  given  at  the  end  of  the  Pramanalaksana  is  a  later 
interpolation.  And,  we  may  take  Sarvajnatman  as  the 
direct  disciple  of  SureSvara  and  the  grand-disCiple  of 
3ri  Bar  bara  who,  according  to  the  Guruparampard  lists  pre¬ 
served  in  the  Dvaraka  and  Puri  mutts  flourished  in  about 
500  B.G.15  The  ancient  tradition  of  the  3rihgagiri  mutt, 
however,  takes  the  date  of  3ri  Sankara  to  44  B.  G. 16 
Sarvajnatman  attained  . iddhi  in  Kali  2737  (365  B.  C.)  on 
the  caturdaSi  of  the  dark  half  of  the  VaiSakha  month  of  the 
year  ."la  a. 17  He  was  the  contemporary  of  Vimuktatman, 
the  author  of  the  Is;a-s‘ddhi ,  and  this  i?  evident  from  his 
reference  to  the  View  of  .he  latter  in  the  Samksepaiariraka13. 
He  was  also  the  contemporary  of  a  king,  who  shone  like 
the  sun  of  the  race  of  Manu  and  who  was  the  prosperous 
king  of  the  Ksatriya  race.19  Moreover  he  was  a  great 
devotee  of  Lord  Padmanabha.20 


15.  f  receptors  of  Adaiiu,  p.  50. 

16.  Notable  Horoscopes,  by  B.  V.  Raman,  (Raman  Publications, 
Sri.  Rajeswari,  Banglore-3,  1956),  pp.  28-30. 

17.  Jagadgururatnamalastava,  p.  47. 

18.  SS,  IV,  14. 

19.  ibid.,  IV,  62. 

20.  ibid.,  IV,  61  and  63. 


6 


HIS  WORKS 


Sai  vajnatrnan  if  well-known  in  toe  history  of  AcKaita 
as  the  author  of  the  present  work  Samksepad ariraka  which 
is  a  succinct  exposition  in  verses  of  the  views  of  3rl  Sankara 
as  stated  in  his  Brahma- Sutra-bhdsy a  or  S'driraka-bhdsya.n 
This  work  has  one  thousand  two  hundred  and  forty 
verses  in  several  metres  and  is  divided  into  four  chapters. 
The  first  chapter  has  five  hundred  and  sixty  three  verses 
and  corresponds  to  the  first  adhyaya  of  the  Brahma-Sutra 
termed  samanvayadhyaya.  It  is  devoted  to  the  correct 
interpretation  of  the  different  texts  of  the  Upani^ads 
pointing  to  Brahman  which  is  attributeless  ( nirguna )  and 
formless  { nirakara ).  The  second  chapter  comprises  two 
hundred  and  forty  eight  verses  and  it  corresponds  to  the 
second  adhyaya  of  the  Brahma-sutra  known  as  avirodhadhyaya. 
It  shows  that  the  Upamsadic  teaching  is  not  stultified  by 
other  proofs  like  perception,  etc.,  or  by  the  views  of  the 
other  philosophical  systems.  The  third  one  contains  three 
hundred  and  sixty  six  verses  and  it  corresponds  to  the  third 
adhyaya  of  the  Brahma-sutra  known  as  sadhanadhyaya  and  it 
is  devoted  to  an  exposition  <if  the  means  to  the  realization 
of  Brahman.  The  fourth  ohe  has  sixty  three  verses  and  it 
conforms  to  the  fourth  chapteKof  the  Brahma-sutra  termed 
phalddhydya  and  it  deals  with  theHrature  of  jivanmukti  and 
mdehamukti. 

Vhocgh  i.ne  titter  of  the  feu’  chapters  of  this  work 
correspond  to  those  of  the  Brahmv-si  tra,  and  the  sabject- 
matter  treated  of  in  each  is  *he  same  as  in  the  bhas  >a  of 
3ri  Sankara  on  the  corresponding  chapters  of  the  Brahma- 
sutra  or  the  tfdriraka-sutra,  yet  all  reference  to  the  nature 


21.  Sd,  I,  10  and  57. 

vide  also,  darire  sihula-suksma-kd  rairarupe  bhavah  pralibimbitatx 
ciddhaiuh  da  rirah,  tatpralipddako  granthopi  dariraka  ityu:j  n  *,  dri- 
madbhasyam  ityarthah,  TB,  p.  19. 


7 


of  the  qualified  Brahman  ( saguna  Brahman),  the  methods  of 
meditative  worship  thereof,  and  the  result  arising  there¬ 
from  is  avoided.  On  this  ground,  the  title  Samksepadariraka 
— an  abridgement  of  the  Sariraka-bhasya  of  3rl  Sankara 
is  significant.  22 

This  work  has  eight  commentaries.  The  earliest  of 
them  seems  to  be  the  Siddhantadlpa  by  Vi^vaveda;  and,  it 
is  available  in  mi  rescript  [R.  1558  (£)]  in  the  Government 
Oriental  Manuscripts  Library,  Madras.  Madhusudana 
Sarasvatl  and  Ramatirtha  the  two  commentators  on  the 
Samksepadarlraka  have  based  their  commentaries  on  the 
Siddhantadlpa.  23  Another  commentary  called  Sambandhokii 
is  by  Vedanrnda  and  it  is  also  available  in  manuscript 
(R.  2? ’9)  in  me  Government  Oriental  Manuscripts  Library, 
Midnv;.  lathi  sommentarv  th  author  attempts  to  show 
W  rr.viuai  relation  of  the  vevs’s  of  the  Samks'paiariraka 
as  giving  a  consistent  meaning.  Full  details  abouc  the  life 
and  date  of  these  two  commentators  are  not  available. 
Rartjatirtha,  the  disciple  of  Krsnatirtha,  who  is  assigned  24 
to  the  middle  of  the  /16th  century  wrote  a  commentary 
called  Anvayartlmprakadika.  His  disciple  Purusottama 
wrote  another  commentary  called  Subodhini.  These  two 
are  published  the  Auapda^rarna  Sanskrit  Scxlcs,  Poona. 
Nrsimha^rama,  the  disciple  of  JagannathaSram  *  who  is  a. 
contemporary  of  Krsnatirtha,  the  preceptor  of  Ramatirtha 


22 .  mumuksvajijnasya-saviSesabrahmapra  sangikavica  ra-paritya  - 
garu  pasarhksepavi  d  is  tam  nirvi  S  esabrahmavica  ra  tmakam  &  a  ri  rakai  a  stra- 
meva  etaa  iti  samksepai a  ri  rakam  iti  samakhya  asya yuktaiva,  SS ,  p.  2. 

23.  videsadvidvavedasya  pratyagvisnoica  buddhayoh 
vyakhydnam  s raddhaya  lekhi  gurunam  tau  hi  no  guru,  SS,  p.  2. 
siddhuntadiparii  pwato  nidhayn  veda-itamantargrhasannivistam 
iamksepusci ri rukaratnapuhjarh  praka damadaya  tnaya  viviktam, 

AP,  p.  853. 

24.  The  Dai:  >f  Ramatirtha  Tail,  liy  Mr.  P.  K.  Gode,  Adayar 
Libra  r  Bulletin,  Vol.  VI,  part  II,  pp.  107-10. 


8 


referred  to  above  wrote  a  commentary  called  Tattva- 
bodhini  and  it  is  published  in  the  Princ^  s  of  Wales  Sarasvatl 
Bhavana  Texts  Series,  Banaras.  Madhusudana  Sarasvatl 
who  flourished  in  the  middle  of  the  16th  century  wrote  his 
commentary  Sarasarhgmha  and  it  is  published  in  the  Kali 
Sanskrit  Series,  Banaras.  Apart  from  these  six  commentaries, 
Aufrecht  mentions  one  more  commentary  known  as 
Vidyamrtavar.yni  by  one  R^ghavananda  Sarasvatl.  25 
Another  commentary  by  one  Pratyagvi$iiu  is  referred  to  by 
Madhusudana  Sarasvatl.  26 

Apart  from  the  Samksepad ariraka,  Sarvajnatman  wrote 
another  work  on  Advaita  entitled  Pancaprakriya  which  is 
published  in  the  Madras  University  Sanskrit  Series.  It  is 
divided  into  five  Sections.  The  first  of  them  deals  with  the 
different  kinds  of  meanings  which  a  word  may  have.  The 
next  three  sections  treat  of  whai  are  described  as  the  major 
texts  of  which  tat  ivaw  asi  (Tint  thou  art)  is  a  familiar 
example  and  point  out  how  they  should  be  interpreted. 
The  last  section  is  dieted  to  the  elucidation  of  the  nature 
of  bondage  and  release.  T^his  won.  summarizes  the 
teachings  >f  he  Srr  Ky.oai  ariraka. 

Apart  from  these  two  works  on-Advaita,  he  wrote  a 
short  treatise  Pramanalaksanu  on  the  Purva-Mimamsa 
system.  This  work  deals  with  the  various  pra  manias  of  the 
Mimamsakas  and  closes  with  an  estimate  of  their  episte¬ 
mological  doctrines.  It  is  available  in  manuscript 
(D-15716)  in  the  Government  Oriental  Manuscripts 
Library,  Madras. 

We  shall  in  the  sequel  set  forth  in  detail  the  teachings 
of  the  Samksepai ariraka. 


25.  Catalogus  Catalagorum,  Vol.  Ill,  p.  163. 

26.  See  Foot-note,  23. 


The  subject-matter  of  all  religion  and  philosophy  mav 
be  stated  to  comprehend  primarily  the  three  elements, 
namely,  God  (Igvara),  the  individual  soul  (jiva)  and  the 
phenomenal  world.  According  to  Advaita,  all  these  three 
are  but  the  appearances  from  a  fourth  transcendental 
entity  called  Brahman  or  Atman  which  is  non-dual  and 
pure  consciousness.  2  7  The  truth  of  non-duality  is  the 
import  of  the  Upanisadic  texts. 26  \\  e  shall  now  deal  with 

the  /  d/aitic  con  tcp-ion  of  the  ultimate  reality  as  expound¬ 
ed  b/  Sarvajnatmai, 

THE  NATURE  OF  THE  ULTIMATE  REALITY 

The  Advaitin  assigns  an  important!  place  to  the 
Upanisads  and  holds  29  that  the  major  text?  (mahavakyas) 
such  as  tat  tvam  asi,  80  aham  bra\masmi,  31  /h tc.,  signify  the 
transcendental  non-dual  reality.  The  hprter  is  sonn  times 
represented  3  2  as  the  all -pervading"^ principle,  and  is 
termed  Brahman.  And,  at  other  times,  it  is  subjectively 
represented  33  as  the  inner  consciousness  ( pratyakcaitanya )  of 
jiva  and  is  termed  Atman.  The  term  tat  in  the  Upanisadic 
sentence  tat  tvam  asi  gives  us  a  knowledge  of  Brahman, 
while  the  term  tvam  gives  us  a  knowledge  of  Atman.  This 
distinction  should  not  be  taken  as  final.  What  the  major 
text  tat  tvam  asi  signifies  is  the  identity  of  Brahman  and 
Atman. 

We  shall  now  consider  how  the  major  text  tat  tvam  asi 
conveys  ihe  identity  of  Brahman  and  Atman.  A  sentence 


27.  S3,  III,  29? 
29.  SB ,  p.  19. 

31.  Brh.,  I.  iv,  ’9. 


28.  BS,  I,  i,  4. 

30  Chand.,  VI,  viii,  7. 
32.  Chand ,  VI,  ii,  1. 


10 


could  give  rise  to  the  knowledge  of  its  sense  only  through 
the  knowledge  of  the  senses  of  the  words  constituting  it. 
Words  convey  their  senses  through  three  kinds  of  signification, 
namely,  primary  signification  ( mukhya-vrtti ),  secondary 
signification  ( laksana-vrtti ),  and  signification  based  upon  the 
knowledge  of  similarity  of  the  qualities  ( gatipi-vrUi ).  These 
three  are  defined  as  follows : 

1.  Primary  signification:  A  word  used  to  convey  a 
sense  conveys  that  sense  through  either  a  genus  (jati),  or 
quality  ( guna ),  or  activity  ( kriya ),  or  relation  ( sambandha ) 
which  exists  in  the  sense  that  is  conveyed  ;  and  this  process 
is  known  as  primary  signification. 

2.  Seeondar)  signification  :  When  the  literal  meaning 

of  a  sentence  is  incongruous,  then  one  of  the  words 
constiudr.j  i:  oveys  some  other  sense  that  is  invari ably 

connected  with  iis  primary  seii.c ,  and  this  process  is 
known  as  secondary  signification.  Th^i  is  of  three 
kinds:  (i)  jahallaksana  (exclusive  secondary  signification), 
(ii)  ajahallaksarid  (non-exclusive-  secondary  signification), 
and  jahad-ajahallaksaixa  (exclusive — non-exclusive  secondary 
signification).  These  three  may  be  defined  and  illustrated 
successively  as  follows : 

Jahallaksana  is  that  where  a  word  totally  abandons  its 
primary  sense  and  signifies  the  other  sense  invariably 
connected  with  its  primary  sense.  This  kind  of  signification 
is  adopted  in  the  case  of  ‘  The  hamlet  is  on  the  Ganges’. 
Here  since  the  literal  meaning,  namely,  the  hamlet  being  on 
the  current  of  the  Ganges  is  discrepant,  the  word  ‘  Ganges  ’ 
abandons  its  primary  sense  and  secondarily  signifies  its  bank 
which  is  invariably  connected  with  its  primary  sense — the 
current  of  the  Ganges.34 


34.  S$,  I,  155. 


II 


Ajahallaksarta  is  that  where  a  word  without  abandoning 
any  part  of  i; j  primary  sense  signifies  the  other  sense  con¬ 
nected  wi  d  its  priman,  ;ense.  This  kinc  is  adopted  in  t  ie 
case  of  *  The  red  (horse)  stands  outside  Here  the  primary 
sense  of  the  statement,  namely,  the  quality  of  redness 
standing  is  incompatible ;  and  the  incompatibility  is 
removed  by  understanding  from  the  word  ‘  red  ’,  without 
excluding  its  primary  sense,  a  horse  to  which'  .redness 
belongs. 3  3 

Jahad-ajahallakgana  is  that  where  a  word  by  excluding 
a  part  of  its  primary  sense  conveys  another  part.  This  is 
adopted  in  the  case  of  the  sentences  such  as — ‘  This  is  that 
Dc.adatta’.  This  sentence  involves  a  partial  contradiction 
in  this  that  ‘  Devadatta  ’  as  related  to  past  time  and  a 
different  place  (referred  to  by  the  word  *  that  ’)  is  identified' 
with  Devadatta  as  related  to  present  time  and  a  particular 
place  (referred  to  by  the  word  ‘  this  ’).  Hence  the  words 
‘  this  ’  and  ‘  that  ’  discard  a  part  of  their  primary  sense, 
namely,  the  relation  of  present  and  past  time  and  place,  and 
convey  the  other  part,  namely,  the  person-in-himself.8# 
The  secondary  signification  is  thus  three-fold. 

3.  Signification  based  upon  the  knowledge  of  similarity 
of  qualities :  When  the  literal  sense  of  a  sentence  is 
incongruous,  then  one  of  the  words  constituting  that 
sentence  conveys  some  other  sense  width  has  the  same 
qualities  d at  are  preseit  in  its  primary  sense;  and,  this 
process  to  known  as  signification  based  on  the  knowledge 
of  similarity  of  qualities.  This  kind  of  signification  is 
adopted  in  the  case  of —  ‘  Devadatta  is  a  lion’.  Here  since 
the  literal  meaning,  namely,  ‘  Devadatta  being  a  lion  ’  is 
discrepant,  the  word  ‘  lion  ’  signifies  the  person  *  Devadatta 
who  has  the  qualities  of  valour,  cruelty,  etc.,  —  the  qualities 


35.  ibid. 


36.  SS,  I,  156. 


12 


which  are  present  in  the  primary  sense  of  the  word 
‘lion5.  These  qualities  air  secondarily  signified  by  the 
word  ‘  lion  ’. 

Now,  the*  question  arises  regarding  the  resemblance  of 
secondary  rign-f  oatior  an  1  the  signification  based  on  the 
knowledge  of  similarity  of  qualities,  as  ir  both  cases  alike 
one  word  signifies  another  sense,  that  is,  ch.e  sense  of  another 
word.  Sarvajnatman,  following  Kumarila  Bha^a,  explains 
the  difference  between  the  two  by  pointing  out  the  charac¬ 
teristic  feature  which  clearly  distinguishes  the  two.  He 
explains-  that  a  word  has  secondary  signification  if  it  signifies 
another  sense  connected  with  its  primary  sense.  But  as 
regards-the  signification  based  on  the  knov/ledge  of  similarity 
of  qualities  he  states  that  a  word  has  this  kind  of  significa¬ 
tion  if  it  conveys  another  sense  having  the  same  qualities, 
present  in  its  primary  sense.37  As  has  been  stated  above, 
the  word  conveys  the  qualities  present  in  its  primary  sense 
only  secondarily. 

So  far  the  explanation  of  the  three  kinds  of  significa¬ 
tion.  It  remains  to  see  what  kind  of  signification  is  adopted 
in  interpreting  the  words  tat  and  tvam  as  meaning  Brahman 
and  Atman  respectively.  Sarvajnatman  points  out  that  the 
words  cannot  indicate  Brahman-Atman  through  primary 
signification.  There  is  in  the  first  place,  th~  absence  of 
media  through  which  the  words  could  convey  their  primary 
senses.  A  word  conveys  its  primary  sense  through  a  genus 
( jati ),  or  act  (, krijc ),  or  quality  ( guna ),  or  mode  of  relation 
(sambanJha).  It  follows  from  this  that  the  primary  sense 
that  i  word  conveys  must  have  eichei  of  these  four  factors. 
For  example,  the  woid  ‘cow’  s.gnuris  the  object  —  cow 

37. 

vide  —  abhidheyavind bhu  te  prati ier  lakjai.* iyate 

laksyamdnagunairyogat  vrtterifta  tu  gaunata, 

Tcntravdrtika  (Ananda^rama  Sanskrit  Series,  Poona),  p.  354. 


12 


which  are  present  in  the  primary  sense  of  the  word 
‘lion’.  These  qualities  an  secondarily  signified  by  the 
word  ‘  lion  ’. 

Now,  the  question  arises  regarding  the  resemblance  of 
secondary  %n*feafcior  an  i  the  signification  based  on  the 
knowledge  of  similarity  of  qualities,  an  :r  both  cases  alike 
one  word  signifies  another  sense,  that  is,  the  sense  of  another 
word.  Sarvajnatman,  following  Kumarila  Bha^a,  explains 
the  difference  between  the  two  by  pointing  out  the  charac¬ 
teristic  feature  which  clearly  distinguishes  the  two.  He 
explains-  that  a  word  has  secondary  signification  if  it  signifies 
another  sense  connected  with  its  primary  sense.  But  as 
regards  the  signification  based  on  the  knowledge  of  similarity 
of  qualities  he  slates  that  a  word  has  this  kind  of  significa¬ 
tion  if  it  conve/s  another  sense  having  the  same  qualities, 
present  in  its  primary  sense.37  As  has  been  stated  above, 
the  word  conveys  the  qualities  present  in  its  primary  sense 
only  secondarily. 

So  far  the  explanation  of  the  three  kinds  of  significa¬ 
tion.  It  remains  to  see  what  kind  of  signification  is  adopted 
in  interpreting  the  words  tat  and  tvam  as  meaning  Brahman 
and  Atman  respectively.  Sarvajnatman  points  out  that  the 
words  cannot  indicate  Brahman-Atman  through  primary 
signification.  There  is  in  the  first  place,  the  absence  of 
media  through  which  the  words  could  convey  their  primary 
senses.  A  word  conve/s  its  primary  sense  through  a  genus 
( jati ),  or  act  (krijc),  or  quality  (gupa),  or  mode  of  relation 
(sambarJhaj.  It  follows  from  this  that  the  primary  sense 
that  i  convjys  must  have  either  of  these  four  factors. 

For  example,  the  word  ‘cow9  s..gni;ies  the  object  —  cow 

37.  S$,  I,  172. 

vide  —  abhidheyavinabhute  pratiter  lahsar.'jyate 

laksyamd nagunairyoga  t  vrtteri§ta  tu  gaunata  , 

Tcntravartika  (Ananda^rama  Sanskrit  Series,  Poona),  p.  354. 


13 


s 

through  the  medium  ‘cowness’  ( gotva )  which  is  present  in  the 
object  —  cow.  The  woM'*  ‘cook’  signifies  a  person  who 
cooks  through  the  medium  —  the  act  of  cooking  which  is 
present  in  the  primary  sense,  that  is,  a  person  who  cooks. 
The  word  ‘blue’  in  the  expression  —  ‘blue  lotus’  signifies  the 
substance  —  lotus,  through  the  medium  —  the  quality  of 
blueness  which  is  present  in  the  primary  sense,  that  is, 
lotus.  The  expression  ‘  a  king’s  servant  ’  signifies  a 
servant  of  a  king  through  the  medium  —  the  relation  of 
being  a  servant  to  a  king  which  exists  in  the  primary 
sense— the  servant.  It  is  clear,  therefore,  that  a  word  could 
primarily  signify  a  sense  only  through  a  genus,  or  act,  or 
quality,  or  mode  of  relation.  Brahman-Atman,  which 
transcends  both  speech  and  mind,  and  which  is  free  from 
all  qualities  has  no  genus,  docs  not  act,  possesses  no  qualities 
and  is  related  to  nothing  else.  Genus,  according  to  the 
Nyaya  school,  is  eternal  and  is  present  in  the  objects  of  the 
same  kind.  For  example,  cowness  is  the  genus  that  is 
present  in  all  the  cows.  Thus  genus  for  its  existence 
requires  many  objects  of  the  same  kind.  Erahman-Atman, 
according  to  the  Upanisads,  is  one  without  t  second  38  and 
hence  it  car.not  nave  a  jenvs.  The  Up?ni<adic  texts  such 
as  ‘Brahman  is  free  frcn  parts  and  activity’,39  etc.,  and 
‘Brahman  is  the  witness,  and  is  of  the  nature  of  conscious¬ 
ness  ;  it  is  absolute  and  is  free  from  any  quality,40  deny  the 
existence  of  any  quality  or  activity  in  Brahman.  Similarly 
the  Upanisadic  text  ‘Brahman  is  supra- relational’ 41  denies 
any  relation  in  respect  of  Brahman.  Brahman-Atman, 
therefore,  does  not  have  genus,  or  act,  or  quality,  or  mode 
of  relation  which  are  the  media  through  which  words 
convey  their  primary  senses.  It  follows  from  this  that 
Brahman-Atman  cannot  be  primarily  signified  by  the  words 


38.  Chan.,  VI,  ii,  1. 
40.  ibid.,  VI,  11. 


39.  S' vet.,  VI,  19. 
41.  Brh.,  IV,  iii,  15. 


14 


on  account  ^f  the  absence,  of  media  through  which  words 
could  convey  *  primary  senses.42 

Another  reason  for  holding  that  vhe  words  do  no', 
convey  Bja'iman-Atman  is  that  there  is  no  knowledge  of  the 
significative  relation  between  the  wo’d.s  and  Brahman- 
Atman.  *  It  is  clear  that  a  word  (say)  ‘pot’  could  primarily 
signify  the  sense— pot,  only  when  there  is  the  knowledge  of 
the  significative  relation  between  the  word  and  the  sense  in 
the  form  ‘This  word  is  significative  of  this  sense’.  The 
significative  relation  of  a  word  to  its  sense  can  be  known 
only  when  the  sense  is  known  through  perception  or  other 
proofs.  But  the  latter  function  in  respect  of  that  object 
alone  which  is  comprehended  by  mind.  Mind  which 
comprehends  only  external  objects  cannot  function  in 
respect  of  Brahman-Atman  which  is  internal.  It  follows 
that,  as  Brahman-Atman  is  not  comprehended  by  mind,  it 
cannot  be  known  through  an/  proof  and  as  such  the  signifi¬ 
cative  relation  of  the  words  to  it  cannot  be  known.  And 
in  view  of  this,  it  is  clear  that  words  cannot  primarily 
signify  Brahman-Atman.49 

From  what  has  been  said  so  far,  it  would  be  evident 
that  Brahman-Atman  cannot  be  primarily  conveyed  by  the 
words  tat  and  tvam.  Now  is  to  be  examined  whether  it 
can  be  secondarily  signified  and,  if  so,  what  kind  of 
secondary  signification  could  be  adopted.  Sarvajnatman 
holds  that  the  words  to'  and  tvam  convev  B -ahman- Atman 


42.  SS,  239. 

vide  —  pravfUinimittasya  durnirupatvat  avdeyatvam,  taduktam — 
drsta  gunakriydjdtisambandhah  dabdahitavah 
natmanyanyatamo  hyesam  tendtma  nabhidhiyate,  AS,  p.  786. 
vide  also  :  Bh.  G.  Bh..  NIH,  12. 

43.  SS,  I,  240- 


through  secondary  signification,  and  that  too  through 
exclusive-non-exclusive  secondary  signification  (jahad-ajahal- 
laksana _).44  The  argument  of  Sarvajnatman  in  favour  of 
this  view  may  be  briefly  stated  as  follows :  a  word  can 
secondarily  signify  that  sense  alone  which  is  invariably 
connected  with  its  primary  sense.  In  the  sentence  ‘  The 
hamlet  is  bn  the  Ganges  the  sense  ‘  bank  ’  is  secondarily 
signified  by  the  word  ‘  Ganges  ’  and  that  sense  is  invariably 
connected  with  the  primary  sense  of  the  word  ‘■Ganges’, 
that  is,  the  current  of  the  Ganges.  Similarly  the  primary 
sense  of  the  word  ‘red’  in  the  sentence  ‘The  red  (horse) 
stands’  is  ‘redness’;  and  the  word  ‘red’  secondarily  conveys 
the  sense  of  horse  to  which  redness  belongs.  And,  in  the 
same  way  the  wor/ls  ‘this’  and  ‘that’  in  the  sentence  ‘This 
is  that  Devadatta’  espectively  convey  through  primary 
signification  Devadatta  as  associated  v/ith  present  time  and 
a  particular  place,  ana  Devadatta  as  associated  with  past 
time  and  a  particular  place.  Tfe>  secondarily  convjv  the 
person — Devadatta  in  whom  there  exists  the  relation  to  past 
and  present  time  and  to  particular  places.  Il  is  cicni  from 
this  that  a  word  secondarily  signifies  only  that  sense  which 
is  invariably  connected  with  its  primary  sense.  Hence  in 
order  to  make  any  further  analysis  of  what  is  secondarily 
signified  by  the  words  tat  and  tvam,  it  is  necessary  to  find 
out  their  primary  meanings. 

The  primary  as  well  as  the  secondary  senses  of  the 
words  tat  and  tvam  could  be  known  only  from  the  Upanisadic 
texts.  The  Upanisadic  texts  which  convey  the  primary  and 
the  secondary  senses  are  termed  subsidiary  sentences 
(avantara-vakyas).45  We  shall  first  consider  the  subsidiary 
sentences  that  convey  the  primary  and  secondary  senses  of 
the  term  tat.  The  Upanisadic  text  — ‘That  from  which  these 
beings  arise,  That  by  which  the  beings  that  have  arisen  are 


45.  See  SB,  pp.  26-32. 

/I'C 


44.  S3,  I,  151. 


sustained.  That  into  which  they  lapse  back  at  the  time  of 
dissolution — seek  to  know  That;  That  is  Brahman’46  conveys 
the  primary  sense  of  the  word  tat.  This  passage  states  that 
Brahman  is  the  source  of  the  universe.  The  primary  sense 
of  the  word  tat,  therefore,  is  Brahman  which  is  viewed  as 
the  source  of  the  universe. 

The  Upanisadic  texts  such  as  ‘Brahman  is  existence, 
consciousness  and  endless,’47  and  ‘Brahman  is  consciousness 
and  bliss’,48  convey  the  secondary  sense  of  the  word  tat.  The 
words  constituting  these  two  sentences  do  not  give  us  a 
complete  knowledge  of  the  secondary  sense  of  the  word  tat. 
The  author  of  the  Brahma-sutras  prescribes49  a  method  of 
gathering  the  unrepeated  words  that  are  found  in  the  Upan¬ 
isadic  passages  that  speak  of  Brahman.  The  words  thus 
gathered  amount  t6  ten;  and,  they  are:  nitya,  Suddha,  buddha, 
mukta,  satya,  stiksma,  sit,  -tibhu,  advitiya  and  ananda  j60  and 
these  words  constitute  a  sentence.  Sarvajnatman  points  out 
that  no  additional  essential  feature  is  accepted  in  the  case 
of  Brahman  apart  from  these  signified  by  the  words  gathe¬ 
red  from  the  other  Upanisadic  texts.51  From  this  it  is  clear 
that  the  ten  words  referred  to  above  convey  the  nature  of 
Brahman. 

Now,  1  h"  q;etO'i  arises  as. to  tow  these  words  convey 
the  nature  of  Brahman.  We  have  pointed  out  earlier  that 
words  could  signify  Brahman-Atman  not  primarily  but 
only  secondarily.  W e  have  also  pointed  out  that  in  order 


46.  Tait.,  HI,  i,  1.  47.  ibid.,  II,  i. 

48.  Brh.,  III,  is,  28.  49.  BS,  III,  iii,  11. 

50.  SS',  I,  173. 

51.  Stf,  III,  323. 
vide 

laksyasya  tadarthasya  brahmanah  pratipadakdvantaravartino’  punar- 
iktarupah  tie  ‘nitya'  ityadi  daiapada rlha h  brahmalattva-paryavasita 
anusandhiyante,  AP,  p.  1 72. 


17 


to  find  out,the  secondary  sense  of  a  word  we  have  to  find 
out  its  primary  "meaning.  The  discussion  about  the  primary 
meanings  of  the  words  satya,  etc.,  has  a  vital  bearing  on  the 
distinction  between  the  phenomenal  entities  and  Brahman. 
In  Advaita  it  is  accepted  that  the  phenomenal  entities  are 
only  empirically  real.  Bui  Brahman  is  unconditioned  by 
the  three  divisions  of  time — past,  present,  and  future,  and 
hence  it  is  absolutely  real.  Sarvajnatman  accordingly  holds 
that  there  are  two  levels  of  reality  — one,  empirical,  and  the 
other,  absolute,  and  he  posits  the  former  to  the  phenomenal 
entities  and  the  latter  to  Brahman.  And  he  proceeds  further 
to  point  out  that  the  phenomenal  entities  and  Brahman,  owing 
to  mutu'ii  superimposit  on,  form  a  blend.  This  blend  con¬ 
sists  of  vet  another  level  of  reality,  which  is  distinguishable 
from  tl.p  former  two  and  which  is  also  a  blend  of  the  empi¬ 
rical  and  the  absolute  reality.  The  interesting  point  about 
this  result  is  that  the  primary  sense  of  the  word  satya  is 
neither  the  phenomenal  entities,  nor  Brahman,  but  the  blend 
of  the  two.53  Now  it  is  not  difficult  to  see  that  this  expla¬ 
nation  is  applicable  as  regards  the  primary  senses  of  the 
remaining  words  such  as  jhana,  etc.53  It  is  thus  clear  from 
Sarvajnatman’s  argument  that  the  primary  senses  of  ihe 
words  satya ,  etc.,  are  the  blend  of  the  phenomenal  entities 
and  Brahman. 

The  primary  senses  of  the  words  having  been  consider¬ 
ed,  it  remains  now  to  examine  their  secondary  sense.  Out 
of  the  three  kinds  of  secondary  signification  already 
explained,  Sarvajnatman  adopts  the  third  one,  namely,  the 
exclusive  —  non-exclusive  secondary  signification.  This 
method  which  is  adopted  in  the  case  of  the  statement — 
‘This  is  that  Devadatia-,  excludes  a  part  of  the  primary 
sense  of  a  word  and  conveys  another  part.  Now,  in  the 
primary  senses  of  the  words  satya,  etc.,  there  are  two 
elements  — the  phenomenal  entities  which  are  insentient 

52.  Stf,  1,  178.  ?3.  ibid.,  I,  179-8*' 


3 


18 


and  Brahman  which,  is  sentient.  The  word  satya,  through 
exclusive  —  non-exclusive  secondary  signification  drops  ;he 
insentient  element  and  conveys  only  the  sentient  part 
which  is  Brahman.  And  exactly  similar  consideration 
applies  to  all.  the  other  words.  It  should  be  noted  here 
that  the  words  satya ,  jnana,  etc.,  which  secondarily  signify 
Brahman  convey  it  as  of  the  nature  of  existence,  conscious¬ 
ness,  etc.,  and  also  eliminate  their  opposites,  namely, 
non-existence,  insentience,  etc.54 

Now,  we  shall  consider  and  meet  the  possible  objections 
to  the  view  that  the  words  convey  Brahman  through  exclu¬ 
sive-  non-exclusive  secondary  signification.  It  has  been  ex¬ 
plained  that  the  words  satya,  etc.,  exclude  the  insentient 
part  of  their  primary  ,sense  and  convey  the  sentient  part.' 
It  might  be  objected  thus :  Why  should  we  leave  the  insen¬ 
tient  part  and  take  the  sentient  part  alone?  Why  should 
riot  the  reverse  be  accepted?  It  is,  therefore,  necessary  to 
point  oi\  seme  ratitj’/ion  for  ma:"nta.r  ing  the  position 
affirmed  Accordingly  .SarvajnStna  a  holds  that  a  woid 
could  signify  through  exclusive-non-cxclusive  sicondary 
signification  only  that  sense  which  serves  as  the  ground  for 
the  use  of  the  word  in  its  primary  sense.55  We  have  seen 
that  the  word  satya  conveys  the  blend  of  the  phenomenal 
entities  and  Brahman — the  blend  which  consists  of  a  parti¬ 
cular  mode  of  existence.  The  ground  for  the  use  of  the  word 
satya  in  the  sense  of  the  blend  is  the  existence  present  in  the 
blend.  But  as  this  existence  is  derived  from  Brahman  which 
is  of  the  nature  of  existence,  Sarvajnatman  concludes  that 
Brahman  which  is  existence  serves  as  the  ground  for  the 
use  of  the  word  satya  in  its  primary  sense,  namely,  the  blend.6® 

54.  Sg,  III,  319.  55.  SS,  I,  185. 

56.  yena  krtam  yatkrtarh  tasminnarthe  satya  did  abate  niru^hah 
vacakatvenc.  prasiddhah  tatraiva  nimittabhute  paramarthasatyadisvabhave 
asya  satya  dipadasya  lakpapa,  SS,  p.  147. 

vide  also:  d  abate  hi  satyata  esaiva  yat  paramo rthasamsar geixa 
pratiyamane  tasmin  satyadabdasangaligrahah ,  AS,  p.  692. 


19 


To  state  the  same  in  other  words,  it  is  because  of  Brahman, 
the  blend  acquires  a  particular  mode  of  existence  and  as  such 
it  becomes  the  sense  of  the  word  satya.  Similar  consideration 
applies  to  the  other  words  also.  Hence  Sarvajnatman  points 
out  that  the  words  satya ,  etc.,  could  signify  through  exclu¬ 
sive-non-exclusive  secondary  signification  only  Brahman, 
as  the  latter  serves  as  the  ground  for  the  use  of  the  words 
in  their  primary  sense,  namely,  the  blend  of  the  phenomenal 
entities  and  Brahman. 

Another  objection  which  is  raised  regarding  the  view 
that  Brahman  is  secondarily  signified  may  be  stated  as 
follows.  It  is  said  that  a  word  could  secondarily  signify 
a  sense  which  is  known  through  other  proofs  as  related  to 
its  primary  sense.  This  is  made  out  from  the  fact  that 
in  the  sentence  —  ‘This  is^  that  Devadatta’,  the  word 
‘  this  ’  secondarily  signifies  the  person  ‘  Devadatta’  and  this 
sense  is  known  through  perception  as  related  to  its  primary 
sense-the  person  as  associated  with  the  present  time  and  a 
particular  place.  Similarly,  the  word  ‘  that  ’  secondarily 
signifies  the  person  ‘  Devadatta  ’  and  this  sense  is  known 
through  recognition  ( pratyabhijha )  as  related  to  its  primary 
sense — the  person  as  associated  with  the  past  time  and  a  diffe¬ 
rent  place.  On  this  ground  it  is  objected  that  if  Brahman  is 
to  be  secondarily  signified  by  the  words  satya,  etc.,  then  it 
should  be  known  through  other  proofs  as  related  to  the 
primary  sense  of  the  words.  But,  as  Brahman  is  not 
cognized  by  other  proofs,  it  cannot  be  known  as  related  to 
the  primary  sense  of  the  words.  It  follows  then  that  it 
cannot  be  secondarily  signified.57 

Sarvajnatman  proceeds  to  answer58  this  objection  by 
contending  that,  while  it  is  true  that  the  relation  of  the 
primary  sense  to  the  sense  which  is  to  be  secondarily 


57.  Si,  I,  99. 


58.  ibid,  I,  152. 


20 


signified  should  be}  known,  it  "is  not  necessary  that  that 
relation  should  be  l:':. own  through  proofs.  He,  however, 
does  not  elaborate  this  point.  But,  Madhusudana 
Sarasvad,  in  ids  commentary  explains  Sarvajnatman’s 
contention.  He  points  out  that  Atman  is  secondarily 
signified  by  the  word  tvam  in  the  sentence  tat  tvam  asi  or  aham 
in  the  sentence  aham  brahma smi.  Here  the  primary  sense 
of  the  word  tvam  or  aham  is  the  blend  of  Atman  and  the 
mind.  And  its  relation  to  Atman  which  is  to  be  secondarily 
signified  is  known  by  the  self-luminosity  of  the  latter.89 
Similarly,  Brahman  is  secondarily  signified  by  the  term  tat' 
in  the  sentence  tat  tvam  asi  or  Brahman  in  the  sentence 
aham  brahmasmi  and  by  the  words  satya,  etc.  The  primary 
sense  of  the  word  tat  or  Brahman  is  Hvara — the  blend 
of  Brahman  —  the  non-dual  consciousness  and  avidya. 
The  primary  sense  of  the  words  satya,  etc.,  is  the  blend 
of  Brahman — the  non-dual  consciousness— and  the  phen¬ 
omenal  elements.  The  relation  of  the  primary  sense  of 
these  words  to  Brahman — the  non-dual  consciousness — 
which  is  to  be  secondarily  signified  is  known  through  tarka 
in  this  form  :  the  blend  cannot  have  any  manifestation  unless 
it  is  superimposed  on  a  self-luminous  entity  to  which  it  is 
not  really  related.  This  self-luminous  entity  is  known  from 
the  Upanisads  to  be  the  non-dual  consciousness,  that  is, 
Brahman.  Thus  it  is  known  through  tarka  that  the  biend 
which  is  the  primary  sense  is  related  to  Brahman — the 
non-dual  consciousness.90  It  should  be  noted  here  that 
tarka  is  r.ot  an  independent  proof,  but  is  only  a  help  to  a 


5t .  rndndntaram  vmdpi  tadarlhasariibanckitaya  avagamamd ti  tr.a  sa 
(lakfarjd)  sidhyati,  sa  ca  avagamah  tvam ihamd dipada laksye  ahamkaradi- 
saksipi  svaprakdie  tadbala t  sidhya'i,  SS,  p.  126. 

60.  brahmadipadalaksyam  ca  advayam,  brahma dipadava cyam  iabalam 
vastutat}  svasamsargaiunye  caitanye  kalpitam,  dabalatvat,  adhyastatvat  va , 
S ab ala  ntar aval  rajatadivat  iti  tarkena  tatsambandhitaya  sidhyati  iti  na 
mdndntaraptksa ,  ibid. 


■21 


pram  ana.  Hence  ^ladliusudana  Saras  vati  concludes  that 
the  words  satya,  etc,,  Could  secondarily  signify  Brahman 
as  the  relation  betweeja  the  latter  and  the  primary  seir.e 
of  the  words  is  known,  though  not  through  a  proof.  The 
significative  relation  of  the  words  satya,  etc.,  to  the  blend 
i?,  however,  known  through  perception.61 

Now,  as  regards  tiie  relation  between  the  primary  sense 
of  the  words  and  Brahman,  an  objection  may  be  raised. 
And  the  objection  is  that  as  Brahman  is  supra-relational,  it 
cannot  have  any  relation  with  the  primary  sense  of  the 
words,  and  hence  it  cannot  be  secondarily  signified  by  the 
words. 

Sarvajnatman  admits  that  there  cannot  be  any  real 
relation  of  Brahman  to  the  primary  sense  of  the  words. 
But,  he  points  out  that  this  does  not  preclude  the  possibility 
of  Brahman  being  secondarily  /  signified,  as  there  exists, 
owing  to  avidya ,  the  superimposed  relation  of  whole  and 
part  between  Brahman  and  the  primary  sense  of  the  words, 
namely,  the  blend  of  the  phenomenal  entities  and  Brahman.62 
It  is  evident  from  this  that  Sarvajnatman  maintains  that,  in 
order  that  Brahman  may  be  secondarily  signified  by  the 
words,  there  should  be  a  relation  between  Brahman  and 
the  primary  senses  of  the  words.  But  he  holds  that 
that  relation  may  be  a  superimposed  one  and  need 
not  necessarily  be  real.  It  may  be  added  here  that 
Madhusudana  Sarasvati  adopts  this  line  of  argument  in  his 
Advala-siddhiP 

From  what  has  been  said  so  far,  it  would  have  become 
clear  that  the  words  satya,  etc.,  secondarily  signify  Brahman. 
As  regards  this  conclusion  one  may  put  the  following 


61.  SS,  I,  289.  62.  ibid.,  I,  204. 

63.  na  ca  iuddhe  sambandhabhavanna  laksanapili  vacyam,  atattvika- 

sambandhenaiva  laksanopapatteh . iuddhasyaiva  sarvakalpand  spadatvena 

iuddhe  na  kalpitasambandha nupapattih,  AS,  p.  674. 


22 


question  :  i  s  there  any  difference  ii  tho  sense  secondarily 
signified  by  the  word;  or  not?  If  difference  is  admitted, 
tjien  we-  have  to  accept  that  Brahman  consists  of  diverse 
forms,  and  this  conclusion  is  contrary  to  the  teaching  of 
Advaita  that  Brahman  is  unitary.  If  the  difference  is 
rejected,  then  the  main  criticism  one  would  have  to  make  on 
this  is  that  the  words  satya,  etc.,  are  synonymous. 

As  against  the  dilemma  put  forth  in  the  foregoing 
paragraph,  Sarvaj fiatman  holds  that  there  is  no  differ  nice 
in  the  sense  conveyed  by  the  words  satya,  etc.  In  fact,  the 
secondary  sense  of  the  word  satya  would  hold  good,  only  if 
it  is  identical  with  the  secondary  sense  of  the  word  jnana. 
If  the  two  are  different,  then  the  former  being  different  from 
consciousness  would  become  insentient  like  pot,  etc.,  and 
hence  cannot  be  viewed  as  absolutely  real.  Similarly,  if  the 
secondary  sense  of  the  word  jnana  is  different  from  the 
secondary  sense  of  the  word  satya,  then  it  should  be  held  as 
unreal  like  the  horn  of  a  h^re  and  hence  it  cannot  be 
consciousness.  It  is,  therefore,  clear  that  it  would  be 
reasonable  to  take  Brahman  as  existence  and  consciousness 
only  when  the  secondary  sense  of  the  words  satya  and  jnana 
is  unitary.  Since  exactly  similar  argument  applies  to  the 
other  words  like  cinaacla,  nitya,  etc.,  v/e  have  to  take  the 
secondary  sense  conveyed  by  the  remaining  words  also  to  be 
identic.".!.  Thus  dure  is  no  difference  in  the  sense  conveyed 
by  the  words  satya ,  etc. 15  • 

There  remains,  however,  the  difficulty  that  the  absence 
of  difference  in  the  senses  conveyed  by  the  words  renders  the 
words  synonymous.  Similar  objection  is  raised  as  regards 
the  words  tat  and  tvam  in  the  sentence  tat  tvam  an  as  the 
two  point  to  the  same  object — Brahman-Atman.  And 
Sarvajnatman  answers  that  objection  by  contending  that, 
though  the  words  point  to  the  same  object,  yet  they  a:  t  not 


64.  Si,  I,  186-9. 


synonymous,  as  their  primary  senses  are  different.05  And 
this  argument  should  bp  extended  in  the  case  of  the  words 
satya,  etc.  It  follows  then  that  the  words  satya,  etc.,  convey 
the  same  object — Brahman ;  but  they  are  not  synonymous. 

This  part  of  the  discussion  may  be  summed  un  by  saying 
that  Brahman  is  secondarily  signified  by  the  words  satya, 
etc.,  as  eternal,  pure,  consciousness,  ever-released,  existent, 
subtle,  real,  all-pervasive,  non-dual  and  of  the  nature  of 
bliss.60 

An  objection  may  be  raised  to  the  conception  of 
Brahman  stated  above.  The  objection  is  that  the  many 
qualities  which  are  ascribed  to  Brahman  as  its  essential 
nature  are  not  so.  Of  course,  the  qualities  of  existence, 
consciousness,  and  bliss  constitute  the  essential  nature  of 
Brahman.  But  the  remaining  qualities  such  as  eternity, 
purity,  etc.,  are  not  natural  to  Brahman.  Whenever  it  is 
said  that  Brahman  is  eternal  (nitya),  pure  (Suddha),  etc.,  it 
does  not  mean  that  eternity,  purity,  etc.,  are  its  nature  ; 
but  the  words  only  convey  the  absence  of  their  opposites. 
And  no  quality  involving  the  aspect  of  non-existence  ran 
be  the  nature  of  Brahman,  as  the  latter  is  existent.  On 
this  ground,  some  hold  that  eternity,  etc.,  are  not  natural 
to  Brahman,  unlike  existence  (satya),  consciousness  (jnana), 
and  bliss  ( ananda ).67 


65.  Si,  I,  161. 

vide  also:  i abdaparyayatvam  samana dhikarpyam  ca  laksyaikye'pi 
vacyabhedadupapannataram,  SS,  p.  149. 

66.  Si,  I,  173. 

67.  Si,  I,  174. 

vide:  brahmano  bhavarupalvat  bhavarupameva  sadanandadikam 
svarupam  bhavitum  arhati,  iu  ni'yatvadikam  abhavarupam,  virodhat, 
SS,  P.  141. 


24 


SarvajnStman  merely  refers08  to  this'  objection  and  he 
suggests69  a  doubt'  as  to  its  validity ;  but  he  does  not 
endeavour  '  to  refute  the  objection.  Nfsimha^rama  irr  his 
commentary  has  shown  that  there  are  no  reasons  in  favour 
of  the  objection  and  strong  reasons  against  it.  He  points 
out  that  just  as  the  wc ids  satya,  jhana,  and  ananda  second¬ 
arily  signify  Brahman  as  of  the  nature  of  existence,  con¬ 
sciousness,  and,  bliss,  so  also  the  words  nitya,  etc.,  present 
in  the  Upanisadic  passages70  secondarily  signify  Brahman 
as  of  the  nature  of  eternity,  etc.  Moreover,  if  eternity, 
purity,  etc.,  are.  r  ot  natural  to  Brahman,  then  the  inevitable 
consequence  would  be  that  Brahman  should  be  taken  as 
tramien:,  imome,  '-etc.71  Hence  it  should  be  held  that 
eternity,  etc.,  also,  are  the  essenti  a  nature  of  Brahman. 

In'  order  to  complete  the  account  of  the  nature  of 
Brahman  as  set  forth  by  Sarvajf.atman  it  is  necessary  to 
consider  one  more  objection  which  is  as  follows :  why  is 
lordship  (aid  vary  a)  not  considered  to  be  the  essential  nature 
of  Brahman  like  existence,  consciousness,  bliss,  etc.?  There 
are  certain  Upanisadic  texts  which  speak  of  Brahman  as 
having  lordship  as  its  essential  nature.  The  text —  ‘  He 
becomes  a  lord  ,7a  declares  that  the  released  soul,  that  is,  one 
who  has  realized  his  identity  with  Brahman  remains,  after 
the  final  fall  of  his  body,  in  his  true  nature  which  is  partless, 

68.  SB,  I,  174. 

69.  atra  kecil-klla-i abdabhya  m  asvd  rasyarh  dyotitam,  SS,  p.  141. 

70.  nityam  vibhurh  sarvagatam  susuksman  (Murid.,  I,  i,  6),  asna- 
virarh  iuddhath  apapaviddham  (Idavasyo’  panisad,  8),  vimuktaica  vimu - 
cyate,  (Katha,  V,  i),  rka-nevadvitiyam,  (Chand.,  VI,  ii,  1 ),  itya did rutibhih 
nityatvadinamapi  auiiesepa  svarupatvenavadha rand t,  TB,  p.  192. 

71.  nityatvadindrh  svarupabahirbhdve  svarupasya  anityatvddi-do$a- 
prasangaica,  ibid. 

72.  Chand.,  VII,  xxv,  2. 

See  also  Si,  IK,  154  and  156. 


attributeless,  arid  absolute  lordshij^-pTtlrther  the  text — 
‘  After  the  dissolution  of  the  subtle  and  the  gross  bodies  on 
the  realization  of  Brahman,  the  released  soul  attains 
unconditioned  lordship  and  thereby  he  is  satisfied  with  his 
own  self ,7'  states  that  the  released  soul  remains  in  his  true 
nature  which  is  unconditioned  lordship.  Hence  it  must  be 
admitted  that  lordship  is  the  essential  nature  of  Brahman. 


This  view  has  also  the  sanction  of  Sri  Badarayaiia  and 
Sri  Sankara.  The  former  in  the  Brahma-sutra — parabhid- 
hyanattu  tirohitam  tato  hyaya  bandhaviparyayau 74  affirms  that 
lordship  which  is  veiled  by  avidya  becomes  manifest  in  the 
individual  soul  at  the  time  of  liberation  by  meditation  on 
Brahman.  It  is  evident  from  this  that  lordship  is  the 
essential  nature  of  the  released  soul,  that  is,  Brahman.  Sri 
Sankara  in  his  commentary  on  the  Brahma-siitra — karanatvena 
cakaSadisu  yatha-vyapadis toktehn  designates76  the  source  of 
the  universe,  that  is,  Brahman  as  lord.  On  taese  grounds 
some  hold  that  lordship  also  is  the  essential  nature  of 
Brahman, 

Sarvajnatman  rejects  the  view  put  forth  in  the  foregoing 
paragraph,  and  he  brings  out  the  true  import  of  the 
Upanisadic  texts,  the  sutra  of  Sr!  Badarayana,  and  the  state-' 
ment  of  Sri  Sankara  which  are  cited  in  favour  of  that  view. 
He  points  out,  to  begin  with,  that  the  Upanisadic  texts  that 
are  referred  to  above  are  merely  recommendatory  passages 
and  they  do  not  have  as  their  import  the  primary  sense 
convened  by  them.  Lordship  thus  known  from  the  recom¬ 
mendatory  passages  cannot  be  ti  e  essential  nature  of 


73.  Svet.,  I,  11  See  also  SSt,  III,  15.'). 

74.  BS,  III,  ii,  7.  75.  ibid.,  I,  iv,  14. 

76.  atra  tavat  jtlanaSabdena  parena  ca  tadvisayena  kamayitrtva  — 
vacanena  cetanarh  brahma  nyarupayat  aparaprayojyatvena  idvaram  karanam 
abravit,  BSB,  I,  iv,  14. 


4 


26  \ 

Brahman.  If  it  is  urged  that  lordshipTthough  known  from 
the  recommendatory  passages,  is  natural  to  Brahman,  then 
Sarvajnatman  observes  that  the  inevitable  outcome  would 
be  that  singing  sSman,  eating,  and  the  creation  of  the 
universe  which  are  known  from  the  recommendatory 
passages77  with  reference  to  the  released  soul,  should  have  to 
be  accepted  as  natural  to  Brahman.  If  it  is  said  that  all 
these,  cannot  be  accepted  as  natural  to  Brahman  on  the 
grounu  tna;  they  ..  re  contrary  to  the  Upanisadic  text78  which 
declares  the  unemtodied  nature  of  Brahman,  then  '3ar- 
vajfiatman  contends79  that  exactly  a  similar  consideration 
applies  to  lordship  also.  No  doubt  the  text  of  the  Brhadara- 
jjyaka — ‘He  is  the  supreme  lord’  etc.,80  conveys  lordship  with 
reference  to  Brahman.  But  later  the  text  denies  it  by  saying 
‘Not  this,  not  this.’81 


It  might  be  objected  :  Lordship  is  two-fold  as  primary 
and  secondary.  And  the  Upani?adic  text  ‘The  self  is  not 
this,  not  this’,  denies  only  the  secondary  lordship.  The 
primary  one,  on  the  other  hand,  is  natural  to  Brahman  and 
it  is  not  negated  by  this  text82. 

In  reply  to  this  as  to  the  previous  objection,  Sar¬ 
vajnatman  observes83  that  in  that  case,  it  should  be  held  that 
singing  saman,  eating  and  creation  of  the  universe  are  two¬ 
fold  as  primary  and  secondary,  and  the  Upanisadic  text  — 
‘The  self  is  not  this,  not  this’  is  concerned  with  denying 
only  the  secondary  ones,  while  the  primary  ones  are  the 
essential  nature  of  Brahman.  If  it  is  said  that  there  is  no 
valid  reason  to  consider  singing  saman,  etc.,  as  primary  and 


77. 

See  Notes  on  Sg,  III,  160. 

81 

ibid. 

7  j. 

iv'vnd.,  J.f  •?. 

82. 

Sg,  III,  163. 

"9. 

80. 

•SS",  III,  16.. 

Vrh.,  IV,  iv,  22. 

Si. 

ibid..  Ill,  164. 

27 


secondary,  Sarvajnatman  contends84  that  this  line  of  argu¬ 
ment  can  be  extended  to  lordship  also.  He  proceeds  to 
point  out85  that  lordship  does  not  admit  of  any  distinction 
as  primary  and  secondary.  It  is  present  in  Brahman  before 
the  rise  of  the  realization  of  one’s  self.  But  at  the  time  of 

ft 

liberation  it  ceases  to  exist.  And  lordship  spoken  of  with 
reference  to  Brahman  at  the  time  of  liberation  is  mainly 
intended  to  praise  the  state  of  liberation.86 

Another  difficulty  which  Sarvajnatman  feels  in  regard 
to  lordship  being  of  the  nature  of  Brahman  may  be  stated 
as  follows :  If  lordship  is  accepted  as  natural  to  Brahman 
on  the  ground  that  the  Upanisadic  text  mentions  it  with 
reference  to  Brahman,  then  as  the  characteristics  of  being 
the  source  of  the  universe  and  the  witness  of  all  actions  are 
also  mentioned  by  the  Upanisadic  texts87  with  reference  to 
Brahman,  they  are  also  to  be  taken  as  the  essential  nature 
of  Brahman.88  If  it  is  held  that  the  Upanisadic  texts  which 
convey  the  characteristics  of  being  the  source  of  the 
universe  and  the  witness  of  all  actions  with  reference  to 
Brahman  do  not  have  them  as  their  import  and  hence  they 
are  not  natural  to  Brahman,  then  Sarvajnatman  contends89 
that  the  Upanisadic  text  that  conveys  lordship  also  does  not 
have  it  as  i.s  import  and  hence  it  should  not  be  admitted  as 
natural  to  Brahman.  He  points  out  that  the  qualities  of 
being  the  witness,  cause^and  the  lord  are  similar  in  this  that 
they  are  not  the  import  of  the  Upanisadic  texts.  Hence 
these  three  should  not  be  taken  as  natural  to  Brahman  Tf 
one  is  admitted,  then  all  these  three  should  be  admitted  as 
natural  to  Brahman.90 


84. 

ibid.,  Ill,  165. 

88. 

ibid.,  Ill,  182. 

85. 

ibid.,  Ill,  169. 

89. 

ibid.,  Ill,  186. 

86. 

ibid.,  Ill,  170. 

90. 

ibid.,  Ill,  187. 

87. 

ibid.,  Ill,  184-5. 

28 


Sarvajnatman  further  emphasizes  that  the  characteris¬ 
tics  of  being  the  cause  and  witness  cannot  be  taken  as  the 
essencial  juature  of  Brahman  on  the  ground  that  they  are 
inde'erminable  by  being  dependent  on  something  else. 
The  nature  of  being  a  cause  cannot  be  thought  ofxexcept  in 
relation  to  an  effect,  while  the  latter  is  never  intelligible 
without  relation  to  a  cause.  Hence  these  two  are  inter¬ 
dependent.  Similarly  the  nature  of  being  a  witpCss  and 
the  nature  of  what  is  witnessed  are  neither  admitted  nor 
intelligible  without  a  reference  to  the  witnessed^ objects  and 
the  witness  respectively.  Hence  these  two  also  are  inter¬ 
dependent.  And  whichever  js  interdependent  is  indeter¬ 
minable  as  either  real  or  unreal.  It  follows  then  that  as 
the  nature  of  being  a  cause  and  effect,  and  similarly  the 
nature  of  being  a  witness  and  the  witnessed  are  inter¬ 
dependent,  they  are  indeterminable.91  In  view  of  this,  the 
nature  of  being  a  cause  and  witness  cannot  be  natural  to 
Brahman  which  is  always  real.  By  extension  of  this  line  of 
argument,  Sarvajnatman  holds99  that  lordship  and  the 
controlled  beings  are  interdependent  and  as  such  both  are 
indeterminable.  Hence  lordship  cannot  be  the  essential 
nature  of  Brahman." 

It  might  be  objected  that  consciousness  and  bliss  also 
cannot  be  considered  as  natural  to  Brahman,  as  the  two 
involve  a  reference  to  the  objects  to  be  known  and  the 
objects  to  be  enjoyed  respectively,  and  as  such  indeter¬ 
minable. 

Sarvajnatman  meets  this  objection  by  explaining  the 
nature  o t'jhana.  In  the  system  of  ^dvaita,  jnana  is  neither 
the  mental  state  nor  Brahman  by  itself,  but  a  blend  of 
both — the  mental  state  or  the  vrtti  inspired  by  Brahman 


9).  ibid.,  Ill,  189-190.  92.  ibid.,  Ill,  188. 

93.  ibid.,  Ill,  193. 


29 


— Atman.  In  jhana  thus  understood,  the  vrtti  element  is 
contingent,  the  other,  namely,  the  spiritual  element  is 
eternal.  Accordingly  Sarvajnatman  holds94  that  knowledge 
or  consciousness  is  two-fold  as  eternal  and  transient.  The 
transient  knowledge  which  is  mental  state  depends  on  exter¬ 
nal  objects,  while  the  eternal  one  is  the,  essential  nature  of 
Brahman  and  is  experienced  at  the  time  of  deep  sleep  and 
liberation.  The  Brhadaranyako' panisad  passage  ‘In  the  deep 
sleep  state,  the  self  sees  (by  being  the  witness),  but  ii  $ocs 
not  see  (through  sense-organs)  ’ 95  clearly  distinguishes 
the  knowledge  as  eternal  and  transient  by_sjatiftg  the 
presence  of  the  immutable  Brahman — Atman  and  the 
absence  of  mental  state  in  deep  sleep.90  And  similarly, 
bliss  is  two-fold  as  eternal  and  transitory.  The  passage — 
‘Verily  not  for  the  love  of  the  husband  is  a>  husband 
dear,  but  for  the  love  of  the  self  is  a  husband  dear’97  etc.,, 
brings  out  the  transitory  bliss  which  depends  on  the 
conditions  like  Husband,  son,  and  others.  The  eternal  bliss, 
on  the  other  hand,  is  of  the  nature  of  Brahman  and  it  is 
stated  yi  the  text — ‘  Brahman  is  consciousness  and  bliss’.98 

Thus  we  arrive  at  the  conclusion  that  while  existence, 
consciousness,  bliss,  etc.,  are  the  essential  nature  of 
Brahman,  we  cannot  maintain  the  same  view  as  regards 
lordship. 

It  now  remains  to  inquire  into  the  import  of  the 
Brahma-sutra — parabhidhydndttu  tirohitam  tato  hyasya  bandhavi- 


94.  ibid.,  Ill,  166.  95.  Brh.,  IV,  iii,  23. 

96.  Sg,  III,  167. 

vide :  ‘  paiyanvai  tanna  paiyatV  iti  irutya  sak$adeva  satyamapi 
kutasthadrstau  buddhivrttyabhdvakathanat  nitya nityajfla navibhagah  tatpar - 
yepo’klah,  S,  p.  704. 

97.  Brh.,  II,  iv,  5. 

98.  ibid.,  Ill,  ix,  28;  See  also  S$ ,  III,  168. 


30 


paryayau’  which  is  stated  to  affirm  lordship  in  the  case  of 
Brahman.  The  meaning  of  this  sutra  as  interpreted  by  £>rl 
Sankara  may  be  stated  as  follows:  This  sutra  is  intended  to 
refute  the  contention  of  the  purvapaksin  that  the  individual 
soul  is  a  part  of  Brahman  and  so  shares  its  power  of  know¬ 
ledge  and  lordship  even  as  a  spark  and  fire  have  alike  the 
power  of  burning  and  should  therefore  be  able  to  create 
the  objects  of  the  drfeam  state  with  his  lordship.  This,  the 
author  of  the  sutras  refutes  by  pointing  out  that  lordship  is 
covered  by  avidya  and  becomes  manifest  when  avidya  is 
destroyed  through  meditation  on  Brahman.  On  this 
ground,  it  is  held  that  the  author  of  the  sUtras  admits 
lordship  to  be  the  essential  nature  of  Brahman. 

Sarvajnatman  points  out"  thht~-4t— fs^true  that  the 
author  of  the  sutras  admits  lordship  in  the  case  of  Brahman, 
but  he  does  so  by  adhering  for  the  .  moment  to  the  stand¬ 
point  of  the  purvapaksin.  and  it  is  not  his  final  view.  Sarva¬ 
jnatman  adduces  two  reasons  to  arrive  at  such  a  conclusion. 
There  is  in  the  first  place,  the  IJpanisadic  text  — ‘Not  this, 
not  this’,  which  denies  lordship  in  the  case  of  Brahman.100 
In  the  second  place,101  the  Brahma-sutra — kamaditaratra  tatra 
cayatana  libhyah  102  states  that  the  Chandogya  Upanisadic 
passage- -‘Brahman  is  the  self.  It  is  free  from  sin,  old  age, 
death  grief,  hunger,  and  thirst.  Its  desires  come  true,  its 
thoughts  <  ome  true,’  1M  etc.,  and  the  Brhadaranyaka  Upa¬ 
nisadic  passage — ‘That  great  unborn  self  which  is  identified 
with  the  intellect,  which  is  immanent  in  the  sense-organs, 
lies  in  the  space  within  the  heart.  It  is  the  controller  of 
all,’  104  etc.,  form  one  sentence  and  the  qualities  mentioned 
in  each  passage  are  to  be  gathered  in  the  other.  The 
Chandogya  text  treats  of  the  qualified  Brahman,  whil  e  the 


9° 

Ssf,  III,  175. 

102. 

BS,  III,  iii,  39. 

100. 

ibid. 

103. 

Chand.,  VIII,  i,  5. 

101. 

ibid.,  Ill,  177. 

104. 

Brh.,  VI,  iv,  22. 

31 


Brhadaranvaka  text,  of  the  attributeless  Brahman.  This  sutra 
prescribes  a  combination  of  qualities  for  glorifying  Bra¬ 
hman.105  From  this  it  is  clear  that  the  quality  of  being  a 
lord  conveyed  by  the  Brhadaranyaka  text  is  similar  to  the 
qualities  like  having  desire,  etc.,  conveyed  by  the  Chandogya 
passage.  The  qualities  of  having  desire,  etc.,  are  stated 
with  a  view  to  glorify  Brahman.  Hence  the  quality  of 
lordship  also  is  intended  to  glorify  Brahman.  105  On  these 
grounds,  Sarvajnatman  contends  that  the  assertion  of  the 
author  of  the  sutras  that  lordship  is  natural  to  Brahman  is 
only  made  from  the  stand-point  of  the  purvapaksin  and  not 
a  well-grounded  theory. 

Another  argument  advanced  to  prove  that  lordship 
is  natu  ral  to  Brahman  must  be  examined  in  this  connection. 
And  that  argument  is :  Sri  Sankara  in  his  bhasya  on  the 
Brahma-su  tra — ka  ranatvena  c  aka  da  disu-yatha  vyapadis  toktehm 
designates  the  source  of  the  universe,  namely,  Brahman 
as  lord.107  And  this  would  hold  good  only  when  lordship  is 
natural  to  Brahman. 

As  regards  this  contention,  Sarvajnatman  points  out 
that  the  word  Hvara  is  used  by  Sri  Sankara  to  signify 
Brahman — the  source  of  the  universe,  through  signification 
based  on  the  knowledge  of  similarity  of  qualities.108  The 
latter  is  adopted  in  the  case  of  ‘  Devadatta  is  a  lion’. 
Here  the  word  ‘lion’  signifies  the  individual  ‘Devadatta’ 
who  has  the  qualities  of  valour,  cruelty,  etc.,  that  are 
invariably  present  in  its  primary  sense  — ‘a  lion’.  Similarly 
the  word  ‘  Hvara  ’  signifies  Brahman  which  has  the  quality 
of  independence  that  is  invariably  present  in  its  primary 
sense — ‘the  supreme  lord’.  The  important  point  about  this 


105.  Sg,  III,  178-80.  106.  BS,  I,  iv,  14. 

107.  aparaprayojyatven.i  iivaram  Kdranam  abravit,  BSB,  I,  iv,  14. 

108.  SS',  HI,  171. 


32 


result  is  that  the  word  ‘lion’  is  used  with  reference  to 
the  individual — ‘Dcvadatta’  to  convey  the  qualities  of 
valour,  cruelty,  etc.,  present  in  him.  Similarly,  the  word 
‘  Uvara  ’  is  used  with  reference  to  Brahman  to  convey  the 
quality  of  independence  present  in  it.109  Hence  Sri  Sankara 
uses  the  word  ‘Hvara’  to  signify  Brahman  with  a  view  to 
point  out  that  the  latter  without  depending  on  any  cause, 
is  the  source  of  the  universe.  It  might  be  objected  that 
if  the  quality  of  independence  is  attributed  to  Brahman, 
then  the  latter  becomes  qualified  ( savi&esa ).  Hence  Madhu- 
sudana  Sarasvatl  points  out110  that  ‘independence’  means 
‘absence  of  dependence’  and  this  refers  to  the  substratum  — 

Brahman.  Hence  Brahman  does  not  become  qualified.111 

/ 

This  part  of  the  discussion  may  bp'  summed  up  by 
saying  that  the  Upanisadic  ^text  first/affirms  lordship  to 
Brahman  and  then  denies  it  byThe^words  ‘Not  this,  not 
this’.  But  the  Upamsadic  texts  which  convey  Brahman  as 
of  the  noture  of  e  r\l  u: ice,  consciousness,  etc.,  are  not  con¬ 
tradicted  by  any  other  text.112  Hence,  lordship  is  not  natural 
to  Brahman,  while  existence,  consciousness,  etc.,  are  consi¬ 
dered  to  be  its  essential  nature.  Thus  it  is  known  that  the 
subsidiary  Upanisadic  sentences  that  are  affirmative  in 
character  convey  Brahman  as  of  the  nature  of  existence, 
consciousness,  etc. 

So  far  the  consideration  of  the  nature  of  Brahman  as 
conveyed  by  the  subsidiary  Upanisadic  texts  that  a>  e  affir¬ 
mative  in  nature.  There  are  certain  other  subsidiary  Upa- 


109.  yalha  siriiha  ityukte  iauryarh  laksyate,  talha  iivara  ityukte 
svatantryam  laksyate,  AP,  p.  810. 

110.  svatantryam  —  aparavaiyam,  SS,  Part  II,  p.  253. 

111.  atra  i  ivarat  ruhlaksitasra  tantryasya  i  uddha  ImajiiAlrataya  viva - 
kfitatvat  na  tena  tasya  sagupatvapattih,  ibid.,  p.  255. 

112.  Sg,  I,  193. 


33 


ni§adic  texts  which  are  negative  in  nature.  The  Upanisadic 
texts  such  as— ‘Brahman  is  neither  gross  nor  subtle,  neither 

short  nor  long . It  is  neither  air  nor  etheric  space;  it  is 

unattached;  it  is  without  taste  or  smell,  without  eyes  or  ears, 
without  tongue  or  mind’,  etc.,113  and  ‘Then  there  is  the.* 
description  of  Brahman  as  ‘Not  thus,  not  thus’  etc.,114  negate 
the  phenomenal  elements  in  Brahman.  As  the  phenomenal 
elements  are  many,  the  urirepeated  words  from  the  other 
negative  Upanisadic  sentences  should  be'  gathered  in  the 
negative  text  found  in  a  particular  section  of  the  Upani- 
sads.115  Moreover,  the  things  which  *are  not  negated  by  the 
words  that  are  gathered  together  should  also  be  negated; 
and  for  that  purpose,  the  words  which  would  convey  the 
negation  of  the  things  that  are  not  yet  negated  should  be 
added  to  the  negative  Upanisadic  sentences.  The  words 
found  in  the  latter  merely 'indicate  the  tilings  to  be  negated 
and  hence  they  are  not  exhaustive."0  Unless  the  words 
which  would  negate  all  the  phenomenal  elements  are 
gathered,  there  would  arise  the  contingency  of  the  negation 
of  only  limited  objects  in  Brahman;  and  hence  the  latter 
cannot  be  known  as  iree  from  all  duality. "°  So  the 
negative  Upanisadic  texts  like  —  ‘it  is  neither  gross  nor 

subtle,  neither  short  nor  long . it  is  neither  air  nor* 

etheric  space;  it  is  unattached;  it  is  without  taste  or  smell, 
without  eyes  or  ears’,  etc.,"9  to  which  unrepeated  words 
gathered  from  the  other  negative  Upanisadic  texts  are 
added  negate  all  duality  in  Brahman  and  thereby  indicate 
that  the  latter  is  devoid  of  any  relation,  quality,  part, ’'etc. 

It  should  be  noted  here  that  the  negative  Upanisadic  texts 

113.  j Brh  ,  III,  viii,  8.  114.  ibid.,  II,  iii,  6. 

115.  SSf,  III,  317.  116.  ibid.,  Ill,  321. 

117.  ibid..  Ill,  318. 

118.  tatha  ca  naikani-Un  -lisbrapnhcam  brahma  bhavet  ili  bhavah, 

TB,  p.  1004.  ,U 

119.  Brh.,  Ill,  viii,  8. 


5 


34 


merely  negate  the  forms  in  Brahman.  They  do  npt,.  like 
the  affirmative  ones,  refer 'to  some  form  and  convey  it  as 
the  essential  nature  of  Brahman.120 

Now;,  'one  may  put  the  following  question:  what  is  the 
relation  of  the  negative  Upanisadic  texts  to  the  affirmative 
ones?  As  regards  this,  Sarvajnatman  refers  to  the  views  of 
Magana  and  PadmapaJa,  and  later  sets  forth  his  own 
view. 

Maijdana  holds  that  the  negative  Upanisadic  texts  are 
primary,  while  the  affirmative  ones  are  secondary.  It  is 
obvious  that  the  negative  Upanisadic  texts  only  negate  the 
world  of  duality.  But,  as  negation  is  unintelligible  without 
a  substratum,  the  former  refers  to  a  substratum.  The 
phenomenal  elemeras  h^nnot  be  /  conceived  of  as  the 
substratum;  for,  the)  are  altogether  denied  by  the  negative 
Upanisadic  texts.  Hence  Brahman  alone  could  serve  as 
the  substratum.  Thus  the  negative  Upanisadic  texts, 
independent  of  the  affirmative  ones,  refer  to  Brahman  as 
the  substratum  of  the  negation  of  the  universe.  The 
important  result  about  this  point  is  that  though  the  negative 
Upanisadic  texts  presumptively  refer  to  Brahman,  yet  there 
is  no  need  for  having  recourse  to  secondary  signification  in 
the  explanation  of  Brahman  as  the  import  of  the  Upanisadic 
texts.  But  the  affirmative  texts  which  primarily  convey 
only  the  blend  of  the  phenomenal  entities  and  Brahman 
should  be  taken  as  conveying  Brahman  only  secondarily. 
On  this  ground,  Mandana  holds  that  the  negative  texts  are 
primary  and  the  affirmative  ones  are  secondary.121 

It  should  be  noted  here  that  Mandana  does  not  stale, 
this  view  quite  explicitly;  but  he  should  be  taken  to 
maintain  such  a  view,  as  tne  latter  is  clearly  deducible  from 
his  observation  that  —  ‘the  total  negation  of  the  world 


120.  Sg,  III,  320. 


121.  Sg,  I,  250. 


35 


( prapancabhava )  is  the  absolutely  irreducible  minimum  of 
truth  that  could  be  exclusively  attributed  to  the  Upanisadic 
teachings,  having  due  regard  to  the  fact  that  Brahman  in 
some  manner  or  other  is  present  in  all  kinds  of  cogni¬ 
tions’.122. 


Padmapada,  on  the  other  hand,  maintains  that  the 
negative  sentences  restate  the  sense  which  is  presumptively 
known  from  the  affirmative  ones.  It  is  obvious  that  the 
negative  sentence  — ‘This  is  not  silver’  restates  the  non-exis¬ 
tence  of  the  silver  which  is  presumptively  known  from  the 
knowledge  of  the  shell  arising  from  the  affirmative  sentence  — 
‘This  is  shell’.128  Similarly,  the  negative  Upanisadic 
sentences  restate  the  absence  of  duality  that  is  presumptively 
known  from  the  knowledge  of  Brahman  as  the  sole  reality 
arising  from  the  affirmative  Upanisadic  texts.  Sarvajnatman 
accepts  this  view  by  pointing  out  that  it  is  commendable, 
faultless,  and  desirable.12' 

Sarvajnatman’s  view  regarding  the  relation  of  thd' 
negative  Upanisadic  texts  to  the  affirmative  ones  consists  in 
his  criticism  of  Maijdana’s  view  put  forth  above.  The  view 
of  Mandana  is  not  favoured  by  Sarvajnatman  on  two 
grounds.  In  the  first  place,  the  negative  Upanisadic 
sentences  convey  only  the  absence  of  the  superimposed 
universe  and  as  such  they  are  not  capable  of  giving  rise  to 
the  knowledge  of  Brahman  as  of  the  nature  of  existence, 
consciousness, ^  bliss,  etc., — the  knowledge  which  leads  to 
liberation.  The  affirmative  texts  like  ‘  Brahman  is  existence, 
consciousness,  and  infinite  ’,125  on  the  other  hand,  give  rise  to 


122.  Sec  Mm.  Kuppuswami  Sastri’s  Introduction  to  Brahma- 
siddhi,  p.  xlii. 

vide:  Brahma- siddhi,  p.  23  and  p.  157. 

123.  iuktikeyarh  ityeva  nirakdhksam  vakyaih,  ntdam  ramtamili  anu- 
vadah,  PaHcapadika ,  p.  167. 

124.  S&,  I,  257.  125.  Tail,  II,  i,  1.  * 


125.  rail,  II,  i,  1. 


36 


the  knowledge  of  the  true  nature  of  Brahman  —  the  knowledge 
which  directly  leads  to  liberation.  Hence  the  affirmative 
Upanisadic  sentences  alone  are  primary  to  the  negative 
ones.126  Another  ground  for  rejecting  Mapdana’s  view  is 
based  on  the  import  of  the  Brahma-sutra—tattu  samanvayat.1 2  7 
This  sutra  states  that  Brahman  which  is  of  the  nature  of 
existence,  consciousness,  bliss,  etc.,  could  be  known  only 
through  the  Upanisadic  texts,  because  the  latter  have  it  as 
their  import.128  Brahman  having  such  nature  is  conveyed 
by  the  affirmative  Upanisadic  texts  alone  and  not  by 
the  negative  ones,  as  the  ;mport  of  the  latter  is  onlythe 
absence  of  the  superimposed  universe.  Hence  from  this 
sutra  also,  it  is  evident  that  Brahman  could  be  known 
through  the  affirmative  Upanisadic  passages  and  hence  they 
arc  primary  md  the  negative  ones  are  secondary. 

Now,  i  may  be  asked  What  is  the  function  of  the 
negative  Upanisadic  texts?  SarvnjnStmar., 'following  the 
author  of  the  sutras,  answers  that  the  negative*\Upanisadic 
texts  clarify  the  sense  of  the  term  tat  in  the  text  idt  tmm:  asi^ 
The  author  of  the  sutras,  in  the  aphorism — prakrtaitavattvam  hi 
pratisedhali  tato  braviti  ca  bhuyahm  indicates  by  the  word 
pratisedhati  that  the  negative  Upanisadic  texts  such  as — ‘Then 
there  is  the  instruction,  ‘  Not-  thus,  not  thus,130  etc.,  clarify 
the  concept  of  Brahman  — the  sense  of  the  term  tat ,  by 
denying  the  material  and  the  immaterial  form  superimposed 
on  it.  Hence  the  negative  sentences  are  intended  to  clarify 
the  concept  of  Brahman. 1  3  1 

It  may  be  said  that  as  the  subsidiary  texts  like — ‘Brah¬ 
man  is  existence,  consciousness,  and  absolute’132  clarify  the 
concept  of  Brahman  by  giving  rise  to  its  knowledge,  there  is 


126. 

W,  I, 

253. 

127. 

BS, 

I,  i,  4. 

128. 

W,  I, 

261. 

120. 

BS, 

Ill,  ii,  22. 

130. 

Brh., 

II,  :ii,  6. 

131. 

ss, 

I,  262. 

132. 

Tail., 

II,  i,  1- 

37 


no  need  for  the  negative  Upanisadic  passages.  Sarvajnatman 
points  out  that  the  negative  Upanisadic  passages  are  needed 
to  confirm  the  knowledge  of  Brahman  arising  from  the 
subsidiary  Upanisadic  passages  that  are  affirmative  in 
character.  When  it  is  stated  that  Brahman  is  existence, 
consciousness,  and'  absolute,  the  possibility  of  its  absolute 
nature  is  not  attained  unless  there  is  the  knowledge  of  the 
annihilation  of  all  duality.  And  the  negative  Upanisadic 
texts  annihilate  all  duality  and  thereby  confirm  that 
Brahman  is  absolute,  that  is,  not  conditioned  by  time,  space, 
and  objects.1 33  On  these  grounds,  the  negative  Upanisadic 
texts  are  assigned  a  secondary  place,  while  the  primary  place 
is  given  to  the  affirmative  ones.  Thus  Brahman  is  known 
to  be  of  the  nature  of  existence,  consciousness,  etc.,  and  at 
the  same  time  to  be  free  from  any  quality  and  duality. 
When  such  is  the  case,  the  Upanisadic  texts  like  —  4  Brahman 
is  the  creator  of  the  world  ( sarva-karma ),  He  cherishes  all 
(righteous)  desires,  contain?  all  (pleasant)  odqurs,  and  & 
endowed  with  all  (pleasant)  tastes’,  etc.,134  which-corrvey 
Brahman  as  possessed  of  qualities  are  to  be  considered  as 
primarily  conveying  the  superimposed  qualities.1 35  The 
author  of  the  Brahma-sutra  points  out136  that  Brahman 
cannot  be  attributeless  and  at  the  same  time  endowed  with 
qualities  as  it  is  opposed  to  experience.  It  rnay  be  said  that 
Brahman  by  itself  is  free  from  all  attributes,  but  by  its 
association  v/ith  a  limiting  adjunct,  it  acquires  qualities  which 
are  real.  This  contention  is  not  correct ;  for,  the  true  nature 
of  a  thing  cannot  change  because  of  its  association  with 
some  limiting  adjuncts.  Redness  in  a  crystal  which  is 
colourless  is  caused  by  the  redness  of  a  flower  placed  by  its 
side  and  it  is  not  real.  Similarly  the  qualities  in  Brahman 
which  is  pure  consciousness  are  caused  by  avidya  and  hence 


133.  Ssf,  I,  263.  134.  Chand,  III,  xiv,  2. 

135.  Sg,  III,  2 ?, 8-289.  136.  AS,  III,  ii,  11. 


38 


they  are  not  real.  Of  the  two  aspects  of  Brahman  set  forth 
in  the  Upanisadic  texts  we  have  to  accept  that  which  is 
attributeless  ( nirviie§a )  as  its  essential  nature.  The  other 
aspect  of  Brahman  is  only  superimposed  on  it  by  avidya  and 
hence  it  is  not  real.  This  aspect,  however,  is  mentioned  for 
the  sake  of  meditative  worship.137  It  is  thus  clear  that 
there  can  be  no  relation  of  he  qualities  of  real  nature  to 
Brahman  even  through  a  limiting  adjunct.  Sarvajnatman, 
therefore,  concludes  that  the  possibility  of  intrinsic  relation 
of  qualities  of  real  nature  to  Brahman  is  far  removed.138 

From  what  has  been  stated  so  far,  it  is  clear  that  the 
import  of  the  term  tat  in  the  text  tat  tvam  asi  is  existence, 
consciousness,  bliss,  etc.,’  dnd  it  is  free  from  implying  any 
quality. 

So  far,  we  have  considered  the  Upani§adic  texts  which 
give  us  the  knowledg&of  the  primary  and  secondary  senses 
of  the  word  tat.  Now  we  shall  consider  thVUpanisadic 
texts  which  give  us  the  knowledge  of  the  primary  and 
secondary  senses  of  the  word  tvam. 

The  subsidiary  Upanisadic  texts — *  As  a  large  fish 
swims  alternately  to  both  banks  (of  a  river),  so  does  this  self 
move  to  both  the  states  of  dream  and  waking  ’,139  and  ‘  Asa 
hawk  or  falcon  roaming  in  the  sky  becomes  tired,  folds  its 
wings,  and  hastens  to  its  nest,  so  does  this  self  hastens  for 
this  state  (of  deep  sleep),  where  falling  asleep,  he  cherishes 
no  more  desires  and  has  no  more  dreams’,140  affirm  that  the 
self  experiences  the  three  states  of  waking,  dream,  and  deep 
sleep.  It  moves  by  turns  from  the  waking  state  to  the 
dream  state,  from  the  dream  state  to  that  of  deep  sleep,  from 
that  agai.i  back  to  the  dream  sta'e  and  so  on.  The 
experient  of  the  three  states  is  jiva.  The  pure  consciousness 

137.  £55,111,11,11.  138.  55,  III,  232. 

139.  Brh.,  IV,  Hi,  18.  140.  ibid.,  IV,  iii,  19. 


39 


which  is  constant  in,  and  also  the  witness  of,  the  three  states 
is  termed  Atman.  And,  Atman  associated  with  avidya  and 
body-mind  complex  is  jiva  who  experiences  the  three  states 
of  waking,  dream,  and  deep  sleep.  The  primary  sense  of 
the  word  tvam  is  jlva  who  is  ignorant,  finite  and 
immediate  and  is  endowed  with  the  characteristics  of  being 
an  agent,  enjoyer,  etc. 

The  Upanisadic  text — ‘  This  self  is  identified  with 
intellect,  is  present  as  the  inner  ruler  of  the  senses  of 
knowledge  and  action,  and  vital  airs,  and  is  immanent  in 
the  mind  as  self-luminous  consciousness 5141  gives-  us  the 
knowledge  of  the  secondary  sense  of  the  term  tvam.  This 
text  conveys  the  self  to  bo  self-luminous  consciousness  and  it 
distinguishes  it  from  the  intellect,  sense-organs,  and  vital 
airs  by  stating  that  it  is  identified  with  intellect,  that  it  is 
present  as  the  inner  ruler  of  the  sense  organs  and  vital  airs, 
and  it  is  immanent  in  the  mind. 

The  self  which  is  self-luminous  consciousness  being 
identified  with  the  intellect  undergoes  transmigration^  and 
also  experiences  the  thr  ee  states  of  waking,  dream,  and  deep 
sleep.  It  moves  by  turns  from  the  waking  state  to  the  dream, 
state,  from  the  dream  state  to  that  of  deep  sleep,  from  that 
again  back  to  the  dream  state  and  so  on.  The  spiritual  element 
which  is  uniformly  present  in  the  states  of  waking,  dream, 
and  deep  sleep  which  are  variable  is  real.  Whichever  is 
variable  is  indeed  unreal  like  garland,  snake,  and  stick  that 
appear  on  the  rope.142  Moreover,  the  intellect  superimposed 
on  the  self  sustains  the  three  states  And  the  intellect 
associated  with  them  is  manifested  by  thg_|ight  of  the  self. 
Hence  these  four  factors,  namely,  the  intellect  and  the  three 
states  are  not  natural  to  the  self.143  From  this  it  would  be 
clear  that  as  the  intellect  is  superimposed  on  the  self,  the 

141.  Brlu,  IV,  iii,  7.  142.  Sg,  HI,  139. 

143.  SSi,  III,  137. 


40 


transmigration  and  the  ihree  states  of  wak.rg,  dream,  and 
deep  sleep  which  depend  on  the  intellect  dre  superimposed 
on  the  self  and  they  are  not  real.  It  follows  from  this  that 
the  characteristics  of  being  an  agent,  enjoyer,  and  knower 
pertaining  to  the  self  in  the  states  of  waking  and  dream  are 
also  unreal.  Hence  the  self  is  pure  consciousness  free  from 
agency,  etc.  And  it  is  termed  Atman.  The  secondary 
sense  of  the  word  tvam  is,  therefore,  Atman  which  is  pure 
consciousness,  and  which  is  constant  in  and  the  witness  of 
the  three  states  of  waking,  dream,  and  deep  sleep. 

This  part  of  the  discussion  may  be  summed  up  by  saying 
that  the  primary  sense  of  the  word  tat  is  Brahman  which  is 
viewed  as  the  source  of  the  universe.  Brahman  becomes 
the  source  of  the  universe  only  through  avidya ,  and  Brahman 
as  associated  with  avidya  is  Hvara  who,  op  the  basis  of  the 
Upani§adic  texts,  is  admitted  to  be  omniscient,  absolute,  and 
mediate.144  The  primary  sense  of  the  word  tvam  is  jiva 
who  is  a  blend  of  Brahman  (Atmlan)  and  body-mind 
complex  and  who  is  ignorant,  finite,  and  immediate.145  The 
secondary  sense  of  the  word  tat  is  pure  consciousness  which 
is  existence,  consciousness,  bliss,  etc.,  and  which  is  free  from 
any  quality.110  The  secondary  sense  of  the  word  tvam  is 
pure  consciousness  which  is  the  witness  of  the  three  states 
of  waking,  dream,  and  deep  sleep.147 

Now,  "a e  shall  examine  how  the  two  words  tat  and  tvam 
refer  to  Brahman  and  At. nan  respectively.  These  two 
words  give  us  through  exclusive — non-exclusive  secondary 
signification  a  recollection  of  the  senses  of  Brahman  and 
Atman  which  are  already  known  from  the  subsidiary 
Upanisadic  sentences.148  The  relation  of  the  primary 

144.  ibid.,  I,  158.  145.  ibid.,  I,  159. 

146.  ibid.,  I,  237.  147.  ibid. 

148 . prathamam  avantaravakyebhyo’  nubhutayoh  duddhayoh 

jivabrahmanoh  tattvamasya  divakye  mukhydrlhanvayanupapaUyd  laksanaya 
smaranopapattih,  SB,  p.  34. 


41 


senses  of  the  words  is  incompatible  in  view  of  the  contradic¬ 
tory  attributes  present  in  them.  Hence  recourse  is  had  to 
exclusive — non-exclusive  secondary  signification.  The  words 
tat  and  tvam  discard  a  part  of  their  primary  senses,  namely, 
avidya  and  body-mind  complex  respectively  and  convey  the 
spiritual  element  of  Brahman  and  Atman. 

It  might  be  objected  that  secondary  signification 
need  not  be  resorted  to  in  the  case  of  the  words  tat 
and  tvam,  as  the  relation  of  their  primary  senses  itself  is 
compatible.  Sarvajnatman  rejects  this  objection  by  point¬ 
ing  out  that  even  the  entities  characterized  by  unopposed 
attributes  cannot  be  identical.  For  example,  stick  and 
ear-rings  are  unopposed  attributes  present  in  a  person — 
Devadatta.  These  two  attributes  give  rise  to  the  knowledge 
of  two  qualified  entities,  namely,  Devadatta  as  ^associated 
with  the  stick,  and  Devadatta  as  associated  vtfith  the  ear¬ 
rings.  Sarvajnatman  proceeds  to  say  that  the^e  two  entities 
characterized  by  unopposed  attributes  are  not  identical;  for 
their  identity  would  necessarily  involve  the  identity  of  the 
attributes — stick  and  ear-rings,  which  is  discrepant.  When 
such  is  the  case,  Sarvajnatman  argues,  how  could  the 
primary  senses  of  the  two  words  characterized  by  contradic¬ 
tory  attributes  such  as  immediacy  and  mediacy  be 
identical  ?  U9  On  this  ground  Sarvajnatman  concludes 
that  the  two  terms  tat  and  tvam  refer,  through  secondary 
signification,  to  Brahman  and  Atman  conveyed  by  the 
subsidiary  Upanisadic  sentences.150 

The  process  through  which  the  sentence  tat  tvam  asi 
gives  rise  to  the  knowledge  of  the  identity  of  Brahman  and 
Atman  is  explained  by  Sarvajnatman  thus:151  first  there  arises 
the  knowledge  that  the  words  tat  and  tvam  stand  in  gram- 


149.  5s",  I,  167.  150.  ibid.,  I,  237. 

151.  ibid.,  I,  197. 


6 


42 


matical  co-ordinate  relation  (samana dhikaranya— sambandha) 
to  each  other.  This  means  that  the  two  words  which  have 
similar  case-endings  and  which  are  juxtaposed  are  intended 
to  convey  the  identity  of  their  senses.  Then  there  arises  the 
knowledge  of  the  relation  of  the  primary  meanings  of  the 
two  words  as  attribute  and  substantive.  In  expressions  such 
as — ‘blue  lotus’  the  relating  of  the  primary  meanings  of  the 
words  do  not  present  any  difficulty,  as  they  are  not  opposed 
to  each  other.  Hence  there  arises  the  knowledge  in  the 
form  ‘The  lotus  is  blue’  But  in  the  case  of  the  words  tat 
and  tvam  the  relating  of  the  primary  meanings  presents  a 
difficulty..  For  the  primary,  sense  of  the  word  tat  is  Hvara 
characterized  by  mediacy;  while  the  primary  sense  of  the 
word  tvam  is  jiva  characterized  by  immediacy.  These  two 
cannot  be  related  as  attribute  and'  substantive  on  account 
of  their  inherent  opposition.  And  to  avoid  Jhis  difficulty, 
the  words  tat  and  tvam  are  taken  to  mean  tfufough  exclusive — 
non-exclusive  secondary  signification  Brahman  and  Atman 
respectively  by  discarding  the  contradictory  features.  This 
stage  is  described  as  the  relation  of  the  \secondarily  signified 
and  the  ore  that  signifies.  And  the  two  words  together 
convey  the  identity  >_f  Brahman  and  A  tman.  It  should  be 
noted  that  the  identity  here  is  not  the  relation  of  identity 
that  involves  duality  but  what  is  known  as  svarupabheda  or 
identity-in-itself.152 

There  remains  one  important  question,  namely,  how 
is  the  meaning  of  a  sentence  known?  Two  theories  are  put 
forward  to  answer  this  question,  one  known  as  abhihitanvaya- 
vada,  and  the  other,  anvitabhidhana-vada.  Of  these,  the 
former  is  advocated  by  Kumarila,  and  the  latter  is  the 
refined  form  of  the  PrSbhakara’s  anvitabhidhana-vada.  These 
two  theories  may  be  explained  successively  as  follows. 


152.  yatra  taddtmyarh  na  sambhavati ,  tatra  akhanddrihatvdi,  jivai- 
vei  atvo’  pahitayoh  tdddtmydsambhava  t  akhapdarthatvam,  nilo  ghat  ah 
ityadau  tu  tddatmyam  sambhavati,  Laghucandrika ,  p.  675. 


43 


The  abhihitanvaya-va da  holds  that  the  words  through 
their  inherent  capacity  give  rise  to  the  knowledge  of  their 
senses.  The  senses  later  give  rise  to  the  knowledge  of  their 
relation,  namely,  the  sense  of  the  sentence.  Since  words 
cease  to  function  with  giving  rise  to  the  knowledge  of  their 
senses,  and  since  the  sense  of  the  sentence,  that  is,  the 
relation  of  the  senses  of  the  words  must  be  based  on  words, 
this  theory  holds  that  words  in  their  capacity  as  words  give 
rise  to  the  knowledge  of  their  senses.  The  knowledge  of 
the  sense  of  a  word  is  not  recollection  ( smrti) ;  for,  in  that 
case  we  have  to  consider  the  word  as  one  which  gives  ris,e 
to  recollection  ( smaraka ).  The  relation  of  the  one  that 
gives  rise  to  recollection  ( smaiuka )  and  the  one  recollected 
(. smarya )  known  as  smarya-smaraka-bhava  holds  good  between 
two  objects,  (say)  elephant  and  its  master.  Here  the 
relata  are  elephant  and  its  master.  The  knowledge  of  one 
of  the  relata,  namely,  elephant  gives  rise  to  the  recollection 
of  the  other  relatum,  its  master.  This  becomes  possible 
because  there  already  exists  the  knowledge  of  the  relation 
of  the  one  protected  ( palya )  and  the  onb  who  protects 
( palaka )  between  the  elephant  and  its  master.  This  is  the 
primal  relation  ( mula-sarhbandha )  on  the  basis  of  which  the 
relation  known  as  smarya-smaraka-bhava  exists.  In  the  case 
of  the  words  and  their  senses,  the  abhihitanvaya-va  da  holds 
that  the  function  of  the  words  rests  in  only  giving  rise  to 
the  knowledge  of  their  senses.  So,  between  words  and  their 
senses  there  exists  no  primal  relation  on  the  basis  of  which 
the  smarya-smaraka-bhava  between  them  could  exist.  In 
the  absence  of  any  primal  relation  between  words  and 
their  senses,  there  is  no  relation  of  the  one  that  gives  rise  to 
recollection  and  the  one  recollected  between  them.  Hence 
the  knowledge  of  the  senses  arising  from  the  words  cannot 
be  of  the  nature  of  recollection.  It  cannot  be  experience 
( ambhava )  also;  for,  the  sense  conveyed  by  a  word  is  known 
already.  A  word  could  convey  its  sense  only  when  the 
significative  relation  is  known  between  that  word  and  its 


44 


sense.  In  order  that  the  significative  relation  between  the 
word  and  its  sense  may  be  known,  what  is  necessary  is  that 
that  sense  must  be  known  through  perception  or  other 
proofs.  So  it  is  clear  that  while  a  word  gives  rise  to  the 
knowledge  of  its  sense,  the  sense  is  already  known  and  on 
this  ground  its  knowledge  is  not  experience  ( anubhava ). 
Thus,  according  to  abhihitanvaya-vada,  the  knowledge  of  the 
sense  ark.  ng  from  the  words  is  neither  smrti  nor  anubhava , 
but  different  from 'the  two.  It  is  said  that  it  is  similar  to 
smrti  ( smrtisama ).153 

According  to  the  anvitabhidhana-vada,  words  themselves 
have  the  inherent  capacity  to  give  rise  to  the  knowledge  of 
the  relation  of  the  senses  of  words,  that  is,  the  sense  of  a 
sentence.  This  serves  as  the  primal  relation  between  words 
and  the  relation  of  their  senses.  The  senses  of  the  words 
also  thus  come  within  the  range  of  this  prhhal  relation;  and 
so  the  word 5  on  the  one  hand  and  thejr  senses  on  the  other 
become  reluta  of  the  primal  relation.  The  knowledge  of  the 
words — tne  relaturn,  gives  rise  to  the  re:ollection  of  their 
senses — the  ether  relaturn.  154  \ 

In  order  to  account  for  the  nature  of  the  primary 
meanings  of  the  words  tat  and  tvam,  these  two  theories  are 
considerec  The  difference  between  the  two  theories  invol- 


153.  abhihitanvayavdde  padaih  svad  aktivad  a  t  padarthah  abhlihi 
yante,  na  tu  smaryante  sma rya-sma raka-sambandha tiriktamulakalpanapatteh, 
ckasambandhijUanam  hyaparasambandhismarakam,  na  tu  sma  rakatvameva 

sambandhah,  hastipaka  di$u  tatha  darianat , . ajUatajhapakatvabhavat 

nu  ambhdvakam ,  sambandhantarabhavacca  na  smarakam,  kirn  tu  iaktya 
jflatajnapakamiti  smaraka  sadrdarh  ityarthat},  smjty anubhava tiriktam  ca 
jfldnarh  pramanabalSdayatarh  afigikdryameva,  AS,  p.  701. 

154.  padanam  am  ay  a  nubhavaj  ananas  a  marthyamtva  iaktirityucyate, 
ekaikapadartho’pasthitistu  smrtirUpa,  na  daktisadhya ,  ekasambandhijfldnd- 
daparasambandhismaranasya  hastipaka  disadha  ranatva  t,  anvaya  nubhava- 
jananasamarthyarupasya  ca  mulusu;hbandhasya  vidyamdnatvat,  ibid.,  p.  702. 


45 


ves  the  difference  in  the  nature  of  the  meaning  of  the  words. 
Sarvajnatman  points  out  that  if  abhihitanvaya-vada  is 
.  adopted  in  the  case  of  the  sentence  tat  tvam  asi,  then  the 
words  tat  and  tvam  give  rise  to  the  cognitions  of  their  primary 
meanings — the  cognitions  which  are  similar  to  recollection. 
But  if  anvitabhidhana-vada  is  adopted,  then  the  words  give 
rise  to  the  cognitions  of  their  primary  meanings — the  cogni¬ 
tions  which  are  of  the  nature  of  recollection.  Sarvajnatman 
extends  this  line  of  explanation  to  the  secondary  meanings. 
The  primary  meanings  of  the  words  cannot  be  mutually 
related,  in  view  of  their  inherent  opposition.  So  the 
two  words  through  exclusive-non-exclusive  secondary 
signification  refer  to  Bj#fiman  and  Atman  respectively.  It 
follows  from  this  that,  if  abhihitanvaya-vada  is  adopted,  then 
the  words  tat  anq  tvam  through  exclusive-non-exclusive 
secondary  signification  give  rise  to  the  cognition  of  Brahman 
and  Atman  — the  cogtptions  which  are  similar  to  recollection.- 
If  anvitabhidhana-vada  is  adopted,  then  the  cognitions 
arising  from  the  words  are  of  the  nature  of  recollection.165 

Having  stated  the  difference  in  the  nature  of  the 
meanings  of  the  words  in  the  two  theories,  Sarvajnatman 
proceeds  to  deal  with  the  sense  of  the  sentence.  It  will  be 
remembered  that  in  abhihitanvaya-vada  the  meanings  of  the 
words  convey  their  relation,  that  is,  the  sense  of  the 
sentence,  while  in  the  anvitabhidhana>vdda,  the  words 
themselves  convey  the  sense  of  the  sentence.  Accordingly, 
Sarvajnatman  states  that  if  abhihitanvaya-vada  is  followed, 
then  the  knowledge  of  the  identity  of  Brahman  and  Atman, 
that  is,  the  sense  of  the  sentence,  arises  from  the  knowledge 
of  the  secondary  senses  of  the  words  tat  and  tvam  and  not 
from  the  words.  But  in  the  anvitabhidhana-vada,  the 
words  tat  and  tvam  themselves  convey  the  relation  of  their 
secondary  senses.  Madhusudana  Sarasvati  points  out 


155.  Sg,  I,  384. 


that  Sarvajnatman  advocates  the  anvitabhidhana-vada  as  he 
refers  to  it  as  ‘our  view’.155  This  view  is  preferred  because 
here  the  words  constituting  the  sentence  gives  rise  to  the 
knowledge  of  Brahman-Atman  and  it  is  in  consonance  with 
the  teaching  of  the  Upanisadic  sentence157  that  Brahman- 
Atman  could  be  known  only  from  the  Upanisadic  texts. 

From  what  has  been  said  so  far,  it  would  be  clear 
that  the  Upanisadic  texts  are  valid  in  respect  of 
Brahman-^  tman. 

There  are  certain  objections  to  this  conclusion  and  they 
are  to  be  examined  now.  The  first  of  the  series  of  objections 
to  the  validity  of  the  Upanisadic  texts  is  based  on  the  nature 
of  Brahman.  The  purvapaksin  contends  that  in  ordinary 
experience,  it  is  found  that  wonJfr'STgTTffy  only  the  existent 
objects  which  are  cognized  by'  other  proofs.  So  a  word 
depends  on  some  other  proof/in  giving  rise  to  a  knowledge 
of  an  existent  object.  He  points  out  that  Brahman-Atman 
is  an  existent  object  and  so  it  is  cognized  by  other  proofs. 
Hence  it  should  be  held  that  the  Upanisadic  texts  depend 
on  some  other  proof  in  giving  rise  to  the  knowledge  of 
Brahman.168  It  follows  then  that  the  Upanisadic  texts  are 
exposed  to  the  fault  of  losing  their  self- validity. 

Sarvajnatman  argues  that  it  is  deducible  from  the 
purvapaksin’s  argument  that  the  criterion  for  an  object  to 
be  cognized  by  other  proofs  is  its  existence.  He  refutes  this 
point  by  holding  that  the  criterion  for  an  object  to  be 


1 56.  smrtisamapadajanyabuddhiyugma  t 

paraded  i  mohaiivartanam  paresam 
paradrii  padajasmr  tidvaye  syat 

ptidayugald  t  /  .  arniteh  samudbhavo  nah,  ibid.,  I,  385. 

vide :  ev  ih  ca  na  iti  "ad a  'a  saksatkarasya  upanisajjanyatvena  brah- 
manah  svamate  aupviupidaU  i : iddue'i  idameva  jydyu  :.ti  dariitam,  SS ,  p.  285. 

157.  B  h.,  Ill,  ix,  26.  158.  Stf,  I,  1 C 1 . 


47 


cognized  by  other  proofs  is  its  possession  of  the  qualities  of 
colour,  etc.  As  Brahman-Atman  is  without  qualities,  it 
cannot  be  cognized  by  any  proof  other  than  the  scripture. 
Hence  the  latter  without  depending  on  any  other  proof 
is  valid  in  respect  of  it.  Sarvajnatman  suggests  that  another 
criterion  for  an  object  to  be  cognized  by  other  proofs 
is  that  it  should  be  conveyed  by  the  words  in  empi¬ 
rical  usage.  It  follows  from_  this  that  as  Brahman-Atman 
is  extra-empirical  ( alaukika )  it  is  not  cognized  by  other 
proofs.  On  this  ground  also,  Sarvajnatman  holds  that  the 
scripture,  without  depending  on  any  other  proof,  is  valid 
in  respect  of  Brahman-Atman.159 

The  secondyobjection  to  the  validity  of  the  scripture  is 
that  it  does  not  signifwdnything  of  value  to  man  and  hence 
it  is  not  valid.  It  is/well-known  that  attainment  of  happi¬ 
ness  and  avoidance  ^of  misery  constitute  the  human  goal.  • 
These  two  arc  to  \be  accomplished  by  performing  some 
activity  like  jyotis  toniy  sacrifice  or  by  refraining  from  prohi¬ 
bited  activities  like  killing  a  brahmin,  etc.  And,  again 
activity  and  abstinence  arise  from  the  knowledge  that  the 
jyotistoma  sacrifice  is  the  means  to  a  desired  end  and  as  such 
it  is  to  be  achieved;  andkilling  a  brahmin  is  the  means  to 
an  undesirable  result  andias  such  it  is  to  be  avoided.  The 
Vedic  texts — [jyo/is  tomend  svargakamo yqjeta’  and  ‘ bralunano  na 
hantavyah’  give  rise  to  such  knowledge  which  leads  to  activity 
regarding  jyotistoma  and  abstinence  from  killing  a  brahmin, 
and  they  in  turn  lead  to  happiness  and  to  absence  of  misery. 
Hence  the  two  texts  are  valid.  The  purvapaksin  points  out 
that  Brahman  being  existent,  is  neither  to  be  attained  nor 
to  be  avoided.  Hence  its  knowledge  is  not  helpful  towards 
activity  or  abstinence  which  would  lead  to  human  goal. 
On  this  ground,  he  holds  that  the  Upanisadic  texts  which 
give  rise  to  the  knowledge  of  Brahman-Atman  are  not 
valid.1 00 


159.  ibid.,  I,  276-8. 


160.  ibid.,  I,  112. 


48 


Sarvajnatman  points  out  that  this  objection  would 
hold  good  only  if  from  the  direct  experience  of  Brahman 
arising  from  the  Upanisadic  passages,  there  does  not  result 
the  highest  human  goal,  namely,  liberation.  But  it  is  known 
from  the  numerous  Upanisadic  texts  that  the  sage  experiences 
the  supreme  bliss  that  transcends  all  happiness.  Sarvajnatman 
proceeds  to  say  that  it  is  not  a  blemish  to  our  system  that 
the  knowledge  of  Brahman-Atman  does  not  prompt  one  to 
activity  or  desist  from  it.  On  the  other  hand,  it  constitutes 
our  glory  that  the  knowledge  of  Brahman-Atman,  bv  anni¬ 
hilating  avidya  which  is  the  root-cause  of  passion  and 
hatred  that  respectively  prompt  one  to  activity  and  to 
desist  from  it,  leads  to  tlie  highest  human  goal — liberation.1®0 

The  third  objection  to  the  view  that  the  Upanisadic 
texts  are  valid  in  respect  of  Brahman-Atman  may  be  stated 
as  follows :  A  proof  is  valid  in  this  that  it  manifests  the 
unknown  object,  thakjs,  the  object  characterized  by  avidya 
by  removing  avidya.  If  the  Upanisadic  text  should  be  valid 
in  respect  of  Brahman-Atman,  then  it  should  be  held  that  it 
manifests  Brahman-Atman  by  removing  avidya  charact¬ 
erizing  it.  But  as  Brahman-Atman  is  self-luminous,  it  is 
not  characterized  by  avidyd  and  hence  there  is  no  question 
of  the  Upanisadic  texts  removing  avidya  and  thereby  mani¬ 
festing  Brahman-Atman.  On  this  ground  it  is  held  that 
the  Upanisadic  texts  are  not  valid  in  respect  of  Brahman- 
Atman. 

A  connected  difficulty  is  the  following :  Perception, 
etc.,  are  valid  by  giving  rise  to  the  self-luminous  knowledge 
in  respect  of  the  insentient  objects  to  reveal  them.  But  as 
Brahman-Atman  is  self-revealing,  there  is  no  need  for 
another  self-luminous  knowledge  from  the  Upanisads  to 
reveal  it.  Hence  the  Upanisadic  passage  are  not  valid  in 
respect  of  it. 


160.  ibid.,  I,  301  and  315. 


49 


Sarvajnatman  answers  the  objections  set  forth  in  the 
previous  two  paragraphs.  He  accepts  that  the  Upanisadic 
passages  do  not  give  rise  to  the  self-luminous  knowledge  to 
reveal  Brahman-Atman.  But  he  points  out  that  this  does 
not  in  any  way  suggest  that  the  Upanisadic  texts  are  not 
valid.  He  maintains  that  Brahman-Atman  is  the  locus 
(, aSraya )  and  content  (vis  ay  a)  of  avidya,  and  the  mental  state 
arising  from  the  Upanisadic  4exts  inspired  by  the  reflection 
of  Brahman-Atman  annihilates  avidya  and  thereby 
Brahman-Atman  which  is  self-luminous  manifests  itself. 
Sarvajnatman,  therefore,  concludes162  that  the  Upa¬ 
nisadic  texts  acquire  validity  in  respect  of  Brahman-Atman 
by  removing  avidya  present  in  it 

Sarvajnatman  next  considers  the  fourth  objection  which 
is  as  follows:  The  mnate  nature  of  a  sentence  is  to  give  rise 
to  only  a  mediate  knowledge.  Hence  the  Upanisadic 
sentences  also,  in  view  of  their  being  sentences,  could  give 
rise  only  to  mediate  knowledge  of  Brahman-Atman.  But 
as  the  latter  is  irhmediate,  the  mediate  knowledge  regarding 
it,  arising  from  the  Upanisads  could  only  be  erroneous. 
And  on  this  ground,  the  Upanisadic  texts  are  not  valid  in 
respect  of  Brahman-Atman. 

Sarvajnatman  contends  that  it  is  not  correct  to  say  that 
the  innate  nature  of  a  sentence  is  to  give  rise  to  only  a 
mediate  knowledge.  He  points  out  that  whether  a  sentence 
gives  rise  to  mediate  knowledge  or  immediate  knowledge 
depends  upon  the  nature  of  the  object  concerned.  If  the 
object  is  mediate,  then  the  sentence  would  give  rise  to  only 
a  mediate  knowledge  of  the  object.  If  the  object 
is  immediate,  then  the  knowledge  could  be  immediate. 
Here  Brahman-Atman  is  always  immediate  and  hence  the 
Upanisadic  texts  give  rise  to  the  immediate  knowledge 
of  it. 163 


162.  ibid.,  I,  107,  113,  319,  342.  163.  ibid.,  I,  123,  341. 


7 


50 


Now  we  have  to  consider  the  fifth  objection  which  is 
advanced  by  the  followers  of  the  Prabhakara  school.  They 
do  not  admit  that  verbal  statements  whether  Vedic  or 
secular  can  ever  point  merely  to  existent  things.  They 
limit  their  scope  to  the  mandate  or  niyoga  or  sadhya  or  karya 
and  hold  that  the  latter  is  the  final  import  of  the  Veda.  And 
assertive  or  descriptive  sentences  found  in  it  are  fully 
significant  only  when  construed  with  an  appropriate 
injunction  or  prohibition  found  in  the  particular  context. 
The  important  result  of  this  view  is  that  the  Upanisadic 
texts  like  tat  tvam  asi  which  are  not  injunctive  in  character 
should  be  construed  with  reference  to  some  action  taught 
in  the  Veda,  and  they  do  not  acquire  independent  logical 
value.  Hence  the  followers  of  the  Prabhakara  school 
conclude  that  the  Upanisadic  texts  like  tat  tvam  asi  are  not 

valid  in  respect  of/me  existent  entity  Brahman-Atman. 

/ 

Before  proceeding  further,  it  is  necessary  to  be  clear 
regarding  what  the  Prabhakaras  mean  by  niyoga.  Niyoga  is 
the  sense  of  the  endings  of  the  imperative  mood,  potential 
mood,  and  gerundives  present  in  the  secular  statements 
such  as  ‘Fetch  the  cow’,  of  in  the  scriptural  statements 
such  as  -  jyolistomena  svargakamo  yajeta.  In  order  that  a 
niyoga  may  become  significant,  two  elements  are  necessary 
and  they  are:  (1)  the  person  to  whom  it  is  addressed 
( niyojya ),  and  (2)  its  content  ( visaya ).  That  is,  a  niyoga 
should  indicate  who  is  to  obey  it  and  what  particular  act 
one  should  do  to  obey  it.  The  application  of  this  principle 
to  the  secular  injunction,  namely,  ‘Fetch  the  cow’  is  clear. 
It  is  the  servant  that  is  to  obey,  and  he  fulfils  the  niyoga 
when  he  brings  the  cow.  In  the  case  of  Vedic  injunction 
also,  the  form  yajeta  consists  of  a  root  and  a  potential  suffix. 
The  potential  suffix  denotes  the  niyoga  and  the  root  points  to 
the  sacrifice  as  the  content  of  the  niyoga.  It  is  this  niyoga 
that  is  to  be  primarily  achieved.  And  the  word  svargakdma 
refers  to  the  person  who  is  directed  [niyojya).  The  niyoga,  in 


51 


order  that  it  may  be  achieved,  prompts  the  niyojya  towards 
its  content.164  When  the  content  is  performed,  the  niyoga  is 
achieved  and  then  the  fruit  ensues  necessarily.  The  niyoga 
is  not  the  means  to 4he  fruit;  but  it  is  only  a  necessary 
antecedent  to  it.  The  means  to  the  fruit  is  the  sacrifice 
which  is  the  content  of  the  niyoga.  Unless  the  niyoga  is  first 
accomplished  through  the  sacrifice,  the  fruit — svarga  will 
not  ensue.  There  is  one  point  to  be  considered,  namely, 
the  exact  nature  of  the  niyoga  in  the  secular  and  the 
scriptural  injunction.  In  the  case  of  the  secular  injunction 
mentioned  above,  the  master’s  direction  is  carried  out  by 
bringing  the  cow.  It  is  this  act,  that  is,  bringing  the  cow 
that  is  the  niyoga  here  and  the  result  follows  directly  from  it. 
But  in  the  case  o/  the  sacrifice  in  the  scriptural  injunction, 
the  result,  namely,  svarga,  is  to  be  attained  only  in  a  future 
life  which  necessarily  involves  a  long  interval  between  the 
performance  of/fhe  sacrifice  and  its  fruit.  It  follows  then, 
that  there  should  be  something  to  link  them  together  and  it 
is  the  accomplishment  of  the  latter  that  is  signified  by  the 
suffix.  Hend^  we  must  give  up  the  idea  that  it  is  the  mere 
act  that  is  the  niyoga  as  in  the  case  of  secular  injunction  ; 
and  we  must  assume  an  enduring  thing  which  results  from 
the  sacrificial  act  and  serves~as  the  antecedent  of  the  result. 
It  is  this  additional  element  and  not  the  mere  act  that 
is  known  to  be  niyoga.  While  in  secular  injunction,  the 
endings  of  potential  -mood,  imperative  mood,  and  the 
gerundives  signify  the  act  which  is  the  sense  of  the  root  and 
which  is  termed  niyoga  ,  in  the  Vedic  injunction  the  niyoga  is 
that  which  results  from  the  act  and  which  serves  as  the 
antecedent  of  the  fruit— svarga.  Both  forms  of  niyoga  are  the 
same,  for  both  alike  prompt  one  to  activity.  The  endings 


164.  ibid.,  I,  424. 

vide  also :  sva  tmasiddhyanuku  lasya  niyojyasya  prasiddhaye 

kurvat  svarga dikamapi  pradhanam  karyameva  nah, 

PrakaranapaVicika ,  Salikanatha,  p.  190. 


52 


of  the  potential  mood,  etc.,  primarily  refer  to  niyoga  which 
results  from  the  act,  that  is,  the  sense  of  the  root  and  which 
serves  as  the  antecedent  of  the  fruit  (say)  svarga.  And  the 
sense  of  the  root  which  is  termed  niyoga  in  secular  injunctions, 
is  secondarily  signified  by  the  endings  of  potential  mood, 
etc.,  as  there  is  the  knowledge  that  it  is  related  with 
the  primary  sense,  that  is,  niyoga  in  the  Vedic  injunctions  as 
its  content.  But  it  cannot  be  held  that  the  niyoga  in  Vedic 
injunctions  is  secondarily  signified  and  the  niyoga  in  the 
secular  injunctions  is  primarily  signified;  for  the  niyoga  in  the 
Vedic  injunctions  is  not  comprehended  by  any  proof  other 
than  the  scripture  and  so  there  is  no  knowledge  of  the 
relation  of  the  primary  sense  (which  is  stated  to  be  the  sense 
of  the  root)  with  i(.  And  as  a  word  could  secondarily 
signify  only  that  thing  which  is  known  as  related  to  the 
primary  sense  (of  dKfword),  niyoga  in  the  Vedic  injunctions 
cannot  be  secondarily  signified.  Hence  the  endings  of 
potential  mood, /etc.,  primarily  signify  the  niyoga  in  the  Vedic 
injunctions  andysecondarily  signify  the  niyoga ,  that  is,  the  act 
which  is  the  sense  of  the  root  in  the  sqcular  injunctions. 1C!5 

We  must  now  turn  to  the  contention  of  the  Prabhakara 
that  niyoga  is  the  final  import  of  the  sentences.  The  secular 
sentences  may  be  considered  first.  The  Prabhakara  points 
out  that  a  word  conveys  its  sense  only  as  related  to  niyoga. 
In  the  well-known  example — ‘  Fetch  the  cow  ’,  the  word 
‘  cow  ’  conveys  its  sense  only  as  related  to  the  niyoga,  namely, 
the  act  of  bringing.  Hence  he  points  out  that  the  import 
of  the  sentence  is  niyoga  which  is  the  act  in  the  secular 
sentences.  He  proceeds  to  say  that  in  a  similar  way  the 
words  constituting  the  Vedic  injunction  also  convey  their 
senses  as  related  to  niyoga  which  results  from  the  act,  that  is, 
the  sacrifice,  which  is  an  antecedent  of  the  fruit  (say)  heaven, 
and  which  is  designated  as  apurva,  kdrya,  sadhya  or  mandate. 


165.  ibid.,  I,  139-140. 


53 


Certain  objections  to  this  view,  however,  suggest 
themselves.  In  the  first  place,  if  it  is  said  that  a  word 
invariably  conveys  its  sense  as  related  to  niyoga,  then  this 
view  holds  good  as  far  as  the  word  ‘cow’  in  the  sentence 
‘Fetch  the  cow’  is  concerned.  But  the  word  ‘Fetch’ 
cannot  convey  its  sense  as  related  to  niyoga,  that  is,  the 
act  in  secular  injunctions,  because  there  is  no  other  niyoga, 
that  is,  the  act  with  which  the  sense  of  the  word  may 
be  connected.  It  might  be  said  that  the  word  ‘  fetch  ’ 
conveys  its  sense  and  its  relation  to  another  niyoga,  that  is, 
act,  then  the  latter  niyoga,  should  have  been  conveyed  by  a 
word.  And  that  word  in  conveying  this  niyoga  should  convey 
it  as  related  to  another  niyoga.  And  so  on  ad  infinitum.166 
To  this  it  may  be  replied  that  the  word  ‘  fetch  ’  conveys  its 
sense  as  related  with  the  sense  of  the  word  ‘  cpw  ’  But  the 
difficulty  about  this  view  is  that  it  is  contradictory  to  the 
final  conclusion  of  the  Prabhakara  that  all  the  Words  convey 
their  senses  only  as  related  to  niyoga,  and  not  as  related  to  an 
existent  entity.167  Thus  the  Prabhakar^.  is  forced  to 
abandon  the  view  that  a  word  conveys  its  sef^se  as  related  to 
niyoga. 

The  Prabhakara,  however,  seeks  to  overcome  this 
difficulty  by  pointing  out  that  a  word  conveys  the  relatum 
of  the  relation  existing  between  the  sense  of  a  word  convey¬ 
ing  existent  entity  — (say)  ‘  cow ’,  and  a  word  conveying 
niyoga  (say)  ‘  fetch  ’  It  is  obvious  that  there  exists  a 
relation  between  the  object —  ‘  cow  ’,  and  the  niyoga,  that  is, 
the  act  of  bringing.  And  the  object — ‘  cow  ’  and  the  niyoga 
are  the  relata  of  the  relation.  Now  the  Prabhakara  points 
out  that  the  word  ‘  cow  ’  signifies  the  relatum,  (that  is,  the 
object  ‘  cow  ’)  of  the  relation  existing  between  the  ‘  cow  ’  and 
the  niyoga.  Similarly  the  word  ‘  fetch  ’  signifies  the  relatum 
(that  is,  the  niyoga  which  is  the  act  of  bringing)  of  the  relation 
existing  between  the  cow  and  the  niyoga.  Thus  the  Prabhakara 


166.  ibid.,  I,  345. 


167.  ibid.,  I,  346. 


54 


obviates  the  difficulty  of  accounting  two  different  criteria  for 
the  signification  of  the  word  conveying  existent  entity  and 
the  one  conveying  niyoga.  Hence  he  concludes  that  niyoga 
is  the  import  of  all  sentences.168 

Sarvajnatman  holds  that  a  word  conveys  its  sense  only 
as  related  to  a  different  but  congruous  sense.  This  view 
does  not  involve  any  defect  and  as  such  there  is  no  need  to 
maintain  that  a  word  conveys  its  sense  as  related  to  niyoga. 
He  contends  that  if  any  contradiction  is  noticed  when  it  is 
accepted  that  a  word  conveys  its  sense  as  related  to  a 
different  but  congruous  sense  not  qualified  by  any  attribute 
such  as  niyoga  or  the  relatum  of  the  relation  existing  between 
the  sense  of  a  word  conveying  existent  entity  and  the  one 
conveying  niyoga  ( karyanvayanvayi )  then  to  obviate  such  a 
difficulty  it  is  necessary  to  hold  the  attributes  mentioned 
above.  But  no  contradiction  arises  if  it  is  held  that  a  word 
conveys  its  sense  as  related  to  another  sense  and  hence  there 
is  no  need  for  any  attribute.109  / 

Sarvajnatman  further  points  out  that  the  Prabhakara 
holds  that  a  word  conveys  its  scnse^as  related  to  niyoga  on 
the  only  ground  that  on  hearing  a  sentence  (say)  ‘  Fetch  the 
cow  there  arises  the  knowledge  of  the  sense  of  the  word 
‘  cow  ’  as  related  to  the  act  of  bringing  which  is  niyoga. 
Sarvajnatman  argues170  that  in  that  case  the  Prabhakara 
should  accept  that  a  word  conveys  its  sense  as  related  to 
niyoga  which,  in  turn,  is  related  to  the  knowledge  and  the 
intention  of  the  speaker ;  for  on  hearing  a  sentence,  there 
arises  invariably  the  inferential  knowledge  of  the  intention 


168.  ibid.,  I,  130. 

vide  also:  karyasya  yo’nvayah  sambandhah  tadanvayini  tadadraye, 
karyasya  hi  siddhenanvay ah  siddhe  kdrye  ca  vartale,  anvayasya  dvinisthatvai, 

SS,  p.  109. 

169.  SS',  I,  347-9. 


170.  ibid.,  I,  350. 


55 


and  the  knowledge  of  the  speaker.  Sarvajnatman  proceeds 
to  say  that  this  position  cannot  be  accepted  by  the 
Prabhakara,  because  tip$e  would  arise  contradiction  with 
the  maxim  arrived  at  iir  the  loka-vedadhikaranam  in  the 
Purva-mimamsa.  The  ma*im  is  that  a  word  in  the  scripture 
does  not  convey  a  sense  different  from  the  one  conveyed  in 
ordinary  usage.  If  it  is  admitted  that  in  ordinary  experience 
a  word  conveys  its  sense  as  related  to  niyoga,  which  in  turn 
is  related  to  the  knowledge  and  the  intention  of  the  speaker, 
then  this  position  should  be  maintained  in  the  scripture  also 
for  the  reason  stated  above.  But  it  cannot  be  maintained 
that  a  word  in  the  scripture  conveys  its  sense  as  related  to 
niyoga  which  is  related  to  the  knowledge  and  the  intention 
of  the  speaker  ;  for  the  latter  are  not  present  in  the  scripture 
which  is  devoid  of  any  author  — human  or  divine  ;17a  hence 
Sarvajnatman  holds  that  the  Prabhakara  should  abandon 
the  view  that  a  word  conveys  its  sense  as  related  to  niyoga. 

Another  difficulty  which  Sarvajnatman  points  out  in  the 
view  that  a  word  conveys  its  sensa  as  (related  to  niyoga  is  that 
the  Vedic  text — somena  yajeta  which  conveys  a  qualified 
injunction  would  become  unintelligible.  This  sentence 
enjoins  the  sacrifice  as  associated  with  soma  creeper.  The 
association  of  the  sacrifice  with  soma  creeper  would  hold 
good  only  when  it  is  accepted  that  the  words  soma  and  the 
root  yaj  are  mutually'  related.  But  as  the  Prabhakara 
admits  that  alt  the  i.tfrds  convey  their  senses  only  as  associ¬ 
ated  with  niyoga ,  the  word  soma  and  the  root  yaj  cannot  be 
mutually  related,  as  neither  of  them  is  significative  of  niyoga. 
And  in  the  absence  of  the  mutual  relation  between  soma  and 
the  root  yaj,  there  can  be  no  knowledge  of  the  sacrifice  as 
associated  with  soma  creeper.  It  follows  then  that  the 
sacrifice  as  associated  with  soma  creeper  cannot  be  enjoined. 


171.  Jaimini-sutras,  1.  3.  10/30-5. 

172.  Sg ,  I,  351. 


56 


Hence  Sarvajnatman  suggests™  that  if  it  is  held  that  a  word 
conveys  its  sense  as  related  to  another  sense,  then  the  word 
soma  conveys  its  sense  as  related  to  sacrifice  and  vice  versa. 
Thus  there  arises  the  knowledge  of  the  sacrifice  as  associated 
with  soma  creeper  and  hence  the  latter,  namely,  the  sacrifice 
as  associated  with  soma  creeper,  can  be  enjoined  Sarvajnat¬ 
man  further  points  out  that  the  view  suggested  by  him  is  in 
consonance  with  the  -bhasya  text  of  Sahara,  which  would 
become  unintelligible  otherwise.  The  bhasya  text  is :  yada 
ekasma dapurvam  tada  itarat  tadarlham .m  This  text  means  that 
in  a  Vedic  sentence,  the  endings  of  potential  mood,  etc., 
signify  niyoga,  and  all  other  words  are  subordinated  to  the 
sense  of  the  root  ( dhatvartha )  which  is  the  content  of  niyoga. 
This  would  hold  good  only  when  it  is  accepted  that 
the  words  convey  their  senses  as  related  to  another 
congruous  sense.  If  it  is  held  that  the  words  convey  their 
senses  only  as  related-ter-m^a  thgn  all  the  words  would 
become  subordinate  only  to-niyoga  and  not  to  dhatvartha — the 
content  of  niyogal  In  that' cafe,  the  bhasya  text  referred  to 
above  would  be  contradicted.175 

Sarvajnatman  next  points  out  that  niyoga  is  a  pseudo¬ 
concept.  The  sense  of  the  root  itself  which  is  known  to  be 
the  means  to  a  desired  end,  when  viewed  as  to  be  done, 
becomes  the  sense  of  the  endings  of  the  potential  mood,  and 
the  gerundives.176  Hence  Sarvajnatman  holds  that  niyoga 
cannot  be  the  import  of  the  sentences.  He  affirms  this  view 
by  pointing  out  that  those  who  hold  that  niyoga  is  the 
import  of  the  sentences  cannot  maintain  the  same  with 
reference  to  prohibitory  Vedic  statements,  as  the  latter  are 
devoid  of  niyoga.  The  scope  of  the  prohibitory  Vedic 
sentences  such  as -brahmano  na  hantavyah  is  cessation  from 

173.  ibid.,  I,  352-3. 

174.  Sahara  bhasya  on  Jaimini-sutra,  II,  i.  1. 

175.  SS,  I,  354.  176.  ibid.,  I,  364. 


57 


longing  for  the  fruit  of  the  prohibited  deed  ;  and  cessation  is 
neither  niyoga  nor  its  content.177  Hence  Sarvajnatman 
concludes178  that  the  prohibitory  Vedic  statements  are 
accepted  to  be  valid,  though  they  do  not  point  to  niyoga. 
And,  in  a  similar  way  the  Upanisadic  texts  like  tat  tram  asi, 
etc.,  though  devoid  of  niyoga,  are  valid  in  respect  of 
Brahman-Atman  by  removing  avidya  present  in  it. 

It  now  remains  to  examine  Kumarila  Bhatta’s  objection 
to  the  validity  of  the  Upanisadic  texts  in  respect  of  the 
existent  entity —Brahman-Atman.  According  to  Kumarila, 
a  verbal  statement  may  point  to  an  existent  entity  or 
sometlting  that  is  fit  to  be  done.  But  he  holds  that  in  the 
scripture  the  statement  points  only  to  something  fit  to  be 
done.  Hence  the  followers  of  the  Kumarila  school  holds 
that  the  Vedic  texts  are  not  valid  in  respect  of  the  existent 
entity — Brahman-Atman.  — . 

Now  we  have  to  consider  the  exact  nature  of  the  import 
of  the  Vedic  texts  according  to^Kumarila.  In  the  secular 
injunctions  such  as  ‘  Fetch  the  cow  *  ( gamanaya ),  the  impe¬ 
rative  suffix  conveys  the  command  of  the  speaker, — the 
command  which  prompts  one  to  activity.  But  in  the 
scripture  which  has  no  author — either  human  or  divine,  the 
function  of  the  endings  of  imperative  mood,  potential  mood, 
and  the  gerundives  is  to  prompt  one  to  activity.  And  the 
function  is  known  as  6dbdibhavana.m  It  should  be  noted 
here  that  the  sense  of  the  endings  of  imperative  mood, 
etc.,  is  iabdibhavand .  In  order  that  iabdibhavand  may 
become  significant,  three  elements  are  necessary,  and  they 
are :  (i)  object,  (ii)  instrument,  and  (iii)  the  subsidiary 

factor.  Of  these,  the  object  is  the  volitional  activity  of  a 
person  regarding  the  object  to  be  achieved,  that  is,  sacri¬ 
fice.180  The  instrument  is  the  knowledge  of  the  endings 

177.  ibid.,  I,  401. 

179.  ibid.,  I,  387. 


8 


178.  ibid.,  1,404. 
180.  ibid.,  I,  388. 


58 


of  imperative  mood,  etc.,  and  the  subsidiary  factor  is  the 
knowledge  of  the  commendation  which  gives  rise  to  the 
desire  for  the  performance  of  sacrifice.  And  this  bhavana 
is  conveyed  by  the  endings  of  imperative  mood,  potential 
mood,  and  the  gerundives. 

The  volitional  activity  which  is  the  object  of 
dabdibhavana  is  termed  arthibhavana .  This  also  requires 
three  elements  referred  to  above  to  become  significant.  Its 
fruit  is  (say)  svarga ;  its  instrument  is  the  principal  sacrifice  ; 
and  its  subsidiary  factor  is  the  subordinate  rites  like  prayaja, 
etc.  And  the  arthibhavana  is  conveyed  by  all  the  ten  verbal 
endings.  It  is  primary  and  the  dabdibhavana  is  secondary.131 
The  followers  of  Kumarila  conclude  that  Jaimini  and  3abara 
hold  that  the  existent  entity  is  subordinate  to  the  one  to  be 
achieved,  that  is,  arthibhavana  or  volitional  activity.13'3  On 
this  ground  the-fellowers  of  Kumarila  hold  that  the  Upani- 
sadic  texOra.re.not  valid  in  respect  of  the  existent  entity — 
Brahmap-Atman. 

Sar  \Ljnatman  refutes  this  objection  and  his  arguments 
may  be  stated  as  follows.  In  the  scriptural  statements,  the 
endings  of  potential  mood,  etc.,  convey  the  dabdibhavana 
which  is  their  function.  They  should  also  be  regarded  as 
the  productive  factor  of  the  dabdibhavana,  as  the  latter  is 
their  function.  But  in  the  secular  statements  the  endings 
of  potential  mood',  etc.,  convey  only  the  command  pro¬ 
ceeding  from  the  person  who  utters  the  statements.  So  in 
the  secular  statements,  the  endings  of  potential  mood, 
etc.,  are  regarded  neither  as  conveying  the  dabdibhavana , 
nor  as  its  productive  factor.183  Thus  there  arises  con¬ 
tradiction  to  the  maxim  arrived  at  in  the  loka-vedadhi- 
karana.m  Sarvajnatman,  therefore,  suggests185  that  both  in 


181.  ibid.,  I,  389-90. 
183.  ibid.,  I,  396. 
185.  SS,  I,  398. 


182.  ibid.,  I,  395. 

184.  Jaimini- sutra,  1.  3.  10/30-5. 


59 


the  secular  and  in  the  scriptural  statements,  the  endings  of 
potential  mood,  etc.,  convey  the  uniform  sense,  namely,  that 
a  particular  act  is  the  means  to  a  desired  end,  and  the 
knowledge  that  a  particular  act  is  the  means  to  a  desired 
end  prompts  one  tu  sc4*'lty.  Thus  Sarvajnatman  holds 
that  the  assumption  «£*he  concept  of  iabdibhdvam  nas  no 
basis.  He  further  points  out160  that  in  ordinary  experience 
there  is  no  such  thing  as  arlhibhavana  different  from  the 
sense  of  the  root.  Although  in  cases  like — pacati,  pacet, 
etc.,  the  drthibhdvana ,  that  is  volitional  activity  is  known 
apart  from  the  sense  of  the  root,  yet  it  is  not  invariably  so. 
For  example,  in  the  cases  of  yateta,  kurvita,  etc.,  the  sense 
of  the  root  itself  is  of  the  form  of  activity  and  there  is  no 
such  thing  as  arlhibhavana  or  volitional  activity  as  different 
from  the  sense  of  the  root  and  as  conveyed  by  all  the  ten 
verbal  endings. 

Sarvajnatman  concludes187  that,  on  the  grounds  adduced 
so  far,  neither  niyoga ,  nor  bhavana  can  be  maintained  as 
the  import  even  in  the  ritualistic  portion  of  the  Veda.  When 
such  is  the  case,  these  two  cannot  certainly  be  the  import  of 
the  Upanisads.  Hence  the  import  of  the  Upanisads  is  not 
bhavana.  It  follows  from  this  that  the  Upanisads  are  valid 
in  respect  of  the  existent  entity — Brahman-Atman. 

So  far  the  arguments  of  Sarvajnatman  regarding  the 
validity  of  the  Upanisadic  texts  have  been  set  forth.  Now, 
to  complete  this  question^  we  have  to  consider  one  more 
objection,  namely,  th»at  1  he  Upanisadic  teaching  is  stultified 
by  the  knowledge  of  duality  arising  from  perception,  etc. 
The  Upanisadic  texts  convey  Brahman-Atman  as  absolute. 
The  purvapaksin  argues  that  perception  and  other  proofs 
comprehend  the  universe  characterised  by  duality.  Hence  the 
knowledge  of  Brahman-Atman  as  absolute  arising  from  the 
Upanisads  is  contradicted  by  the  knowledge  of  the  universe 


186.  ibid.,  I,  399. 


187.  ibid.,  I,  400. 


60 


arising  from  perception,  etc.  This  objection  is  met  by 
Sarvajnatman  and  he  points  out  certain  intrinsic  difficulties 
in  holding  that  perception,  etc.,  stultify  the  Upanisadic 
teaching.  And  his  arguments  may  be  set  forth  as  follows : 

In  the  first  place,  Sarvajnatman  holds188  that  perception, 
etc.,  comprehend  only  the  external  objects  which  are 
empirically  real,  that  is,  real  until  the  rise  of  the  direct 
experience  of  Brahman-Atman.  But  the  Upanisadic  texts 
give  rise  to  the  knowledge  of  Brahman-Atman  as  absolutely 
real,  that  is,  not  conditioned  by  the  three  divisions  of  time — 
past,  present  and  future.  Thus  there  is  difference  in  the 
scope  of  perception,  etc.,  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  scripture 
on  the  other  ;  and  hence  one  cannot  stultify  the  other. 

It  might  be  said :  In  the  system  of  Advaita,  all  the 
proofs  including  the  scripture  are  the  transfigurations  of 
avidya  abiding  in  Brahman-Atman.  When  such  is  the  case, 
it  is  necessary  to  point  out  some  criterion  for  maintaining 
that  the  Upanisadic  texts  alone  comprehend  Brahman- 
Atman  and  not  the  other  proofs.  Sarvajnatman,  therefore, 
brings  out  the  difference  between  the  two,  namely,  scripture 
and  perception,  etc.,  by  pointing  out  the  characteristic 
feature  which  clearly— distinguishes  the  two.  The  Upa¬ 
nisadic  texts  like/fne  other  proofs,  are  the  transfigurations 
of  avidya  present  in  Brahman-Atman.  But  the  spiritual 
element  predominates  in  the  .scripture,  while  the  element  of 
avidya  predominates  in  the  other  proofs.189  Hence  avidya 
serves  as  a  defect  in  the  case  of  perception,  etc.,  and  not  in 
the  case  of  scripture.190  On  this  ground  the  scripture  alone 
comprehends  Brahman-Atman,  while  perception,  etc., 


188.  ibid.,  II,  103. 

189.  pratyaksamvidavacchinnarii  ajfianam  pramanakarena  vivartate, 
tatra  ajh anapradha nyena  caksuradivivartah,  samvidpradhdnyena  vedavivarta 
iti  bhavah,  SS,  part  II,  p.  64. 

190.  SS,  II,  102. 


Cl 


comprehend  only  external  objects.  Thus  there  is  difference 
in  the  scope  of  perception,  etc.,  on  the  one  hand  and  the 
scripture  on  the  other.  Hence  one  cannot  stultify  the  other. 

Sarvajfiaimaii  further  points  cut  that  perception,  etc., 
cannot  be  considered  as  valid  in  the  strict  sense  of  the  term. 
For,  it  is  held  that  a  proof  is  that  which  makes  known  the 
unknown  object,  that  is,  an  object  which  is  veiled  by 
avidya.  This  definition  is  not  applicable  to  any  proof 
except  the  Upanisads  which  have  Brahman-Atman  as  its 
object.  For,  it  is  always  Brahman-Atman  that  can  be 
veiled;  for  that  alone  is  luminous.  Everything  else  is  itself 
insentient  and  needs  no  external  cause  for  being  obscured. 
It  follows  from  this  that  the  Upanisadic  texts  alone  make 
known  the  object — Brahman-Atman  which  is  characterized 
by  avidya ,  and  on  this  ground  it  alone  can  be  considered  as 
a  proof.  All  other  objects  except  Brahman-Atman  are  not 
characterized  by  avidya  and  hence  perception,  etc.,  which 
comprehend  them  cannot  be  considered  as  revealing  the 
hitherto  unknown  object  and  on  this  ground  they  are  not 
to  be  treated  as  proofs  in  the  strict  sense  of  the  ^erm.191 
Hence  Sarvajnatman  concludes  that  perception,  etc. /cannot 
stultify  the  Upanisadic  teaching. 

Sarvajnatman  then  proceeds  to  say  that  as  the  cognition 
of  difference  is  erroneous,  there  is  no  stultification  of  the 
Upanisadic  teaching  by  perception,  etc.,  that  cognize 
the  universe  characterized  by  duality.  To  begin  with,  it  is 
clear  that  perception  gives  us  a  knowledge  of  a  mere  object 
(say)  cloth,  and  not  even  a  trace  of  difference  in  it.  It  might 
be  objected:  Perception  gives  us  a  knowledge  of  the  object 
(say)  cloth  as  well  as  its  difference  in  the  form  ‘  The  cloth 
is  different  from  (say)  pot’.  Sarvajnatman  asks  whether  the 
difference  which  is  cognized  at  the  time  of  perception  of  the 
object — cloth  is  identical  with  the  object  or  different  from 


191.  ibid,.  IT,  8. 


62 


it.  In  either  view  there  are  difficulties:  The  first  alternative, 
namely,  that  difference  is  of  the  nature  of  the  object 
comprehended  is  untenable  on  the  ground  that,  while  the 
notion  of  difference  is  relative,  that  of  the  nature  of  a  thing 
is  not  so.  We  can  cognize  ‘cloth’  separately  by  itself,  but 
not  its  difference  from  ‘pot’  without  distinctly  calling  to 
mind  that  from  which  it  differs,  namely,  pot.  Owing  to 
this  disparity  between  the  cloth  and  ‘difference’,  they 
cannot  be  the  same.  Moreover,  as  difference  is  relative,  it 
should  be  held  as  indeterminable  also.192  It  might  be  said 
that  cloth  is  different  from  itself.  Sarvajnatman  argues193 
that  in  that  case  the  cloth  would  be  torn  into  shreds  and 
hence  there  cannot  be  the  existence  of  cloth  itself.  He, 
therefore,  suggests  that  difference  itself  is  a  pseudo-concept. 

The  cognition  of  difference  is  not  valid  on  another 
ground  that  it  involves  the  defect  of  mutual  dependence. 
In  the  statement  of  difference  of  cloth  from  pot,  cloth  is 
known  as  dharmi,  that  is,  as  one  in  which  difference  exists. 
Pot,  on  the  other  hand,  is  known  as  pratiyogi  or  that  from 
which  cloth  is  said  to  differ.  The  concepts  of  dharmi  and 
pratiyogi  can  be  employed  with  reference  to  cloth  and  pot 
only  when  the  difference  between  the  two  objects  has 
already  been  perceived.  But  unless  there  is  the  prior 
knowledge  that  cloth  is  the  dharmi ,  and  the  pot  is  the 
pratiyogi ,  there  cannot  be  "the  knowledge  of  difference 
in  the  form :  cloth  is  different  from  pot.  Thus  it  would 
be  clear  that  the  knowledge  of  difference,  and  the 
knowledge  of  the  dharmi  and  the  pratiyogi  are  interdependent 
and  as  such  the  cognition  of  difference  is  to  be  held  as 
erroneous.194  On  this  ground  also  the  Upanisadic  teaching 
is  not  stultified  by  the  knowledge  of  difference  arising  from 
perception,  etc. 


192.  ibid.,  II,  105. 
194.  ibid.,  II,  106. 


193.  ibid.,  II,  104. 


63 


Another  ground  against  the  contention  that  the 
Upanisadic  teaching  is  stultified  by  perception,  etc.,  is 
derived  from  the  absence  of  validity  of  perception,  etc. 
What  an  object  requires  of  a  proof  is  that  it  should  either 
dispel  the  doubt  or  contrary  notion  about  it  or  it  should 
give  rise  to  its  knowledge.  Then  only  a  proof  can  be  taken 
as  valid.  But  perception,  etc.,  do  neither  the  former  nor 
the  latter.  If  it  is  said  that  perception,  etc.,  remove  the 
doubt  regarding  the  object  concerned,  then  it  is  asked 
whether  the  doubt  that  is  said  to  be  removed  is  real  or 
unreal  or  both.  If  it  is  real,  then  it  cannot  be  removed. 
If  it  is  unreal,  then  it  is  like  the  horn  of  a  hare  which  is 
absolute  nothing,  and  hence  it  need  not  be  removed.  And 
it  cannot  be  real  and  unreal  at  once,  for  such/  a  position 
violates  the  law  of  contradiction.  Other  systems  of  philoso¬ 
phy  do  not  accept  the  concept  of  anirvacaniya ,  in  which  case 
it  can  be  said  that  the  proofs  remove  jthe  doub^  regarding 
the  object— the  doubt  which  is  indeterminable  either  as  real 
or  as  unreal.  Similar  argument  applies  to  the  view  that 
perception,  etc.,  give  rise  to  the  knowledge  of  the  objects 
concerned.  Hence  Sarvajnatman  points  out  that  as  the 
result  of  perception,  etc.,  cannot  be  determined  they  are 
not  valid.  It  follows  from  this  that  the  nature  of  the  objects 
of  perception,  etc.,  is  anirvacaniya.  Therefore,  perception, 
etc.,  do  not  contradict,  evpn  through  their  objects,  the 
import  of  the  Upani$ads.  •/ 

Adhering  for  the  moment  to  the  stand-point  of  the  pur- 
vapaksin,  Sarvajnatman  concedes  that  perceptual  experiences 
such  as  T  am  the  agent’,  ‘I  am  happy’,  etc.,  comprehend 
Atman  as  characterized  by  duality  such  as  agency  and  the 
like.  In  the  same  way,  perceptual  experiences  such  as  ‘The 
pot  is  existent,  etc.,  comprehend  Brahman  which  is  of  the 
nature  of  existence  as  characterized  by  the  objective  world. 
Perceptual  experiences  thus  are  clearly  in  conflict  with  the 
Upanisads.  Sarvajnatman  points  out  that,  just  as  the 


64 


subsequent  knowledge  revealing  the  true  nature  of  a  barren- 
land  cannot  arise  without  sublating  the  erroneous  knowledge 
of  mirage  which  arose  earlier,  so  also  the  knowledge  of 
Brahman-Atman  as  absolute  arises  from  the  Upanisads  only 
by  sublating  the  knowledge  of  duality.195  This  principle  of  the 
subsequent  sublating  the  earlier  is  known  as  apaccheda-nyava ,196 
And  this  holds  where  the  latter  cannot  arise  except  as 
contradicting  the  earlier  cognition  as  in  ‘This  is  silver’  and 
‘This  is  not  silver’.  On  this  ground  also,  perception,  etc., 
do  not  stultify  the  Upanisadic  teaching. 

From  what  has  been  said  so  far,  it  would  be  clear  that 
the  Upanisads  convey  the  partless  and  the  absolute 
Brahman-Atman  which  cannot  be  contradicted  by  any 
other  proof.  / 

To  sum  up:  the  Upanisadic  texts  alone  convey  the  true 
nature  of  Brahman-Atihan  which,  according  to  Advaita,  is 
the  sole  reality  and  which^owing  to  avidya,  appears  as  God,  \ 

the  individual  souls,  and  the  phenomenal  world. 

u 

NESCIENCE  ( MAYA-AVIDTA ) 

The  Upanisadic  text  ‘  That  from  which  these  beings 
arise,  by  which  the  created  beings  are  sustained,  That  into 
which  they  lapse  back  at  the  time  of  dissolution — seek  to 
know  That ;  That  is  Brahman  ’197  states  that  Brahman  is  the 
cause  of  the  universe.  Now  the  question  arises  as  to  how 
Brahman  which  is  pure  consciousness  and  is  attributeless 
could  be  the,  cause  of  the  universe.  It  is  in  order  to  account 
for  the  rise  of  the  universe  from  Brahman  of  this  nature  that 


195.  ibid.,  II,  113—5. 

196.  Jaimini-su  tra,  6-5-20/54. 

For  details  See  Notes  oa  SS1',  II,  116 — 119. 

197.  Tait.,  Ill,  i,  1. 


65 


the  Upanisadic  text  ‘  The  sages  absorbed  in  meditation  dis¬ 
covered  the  creative  power  which  is  present  in  Brahman  and 
which  consists  of  the  three  strands  of  saliva,  rajas,  and 
tamas  V98  introduces  the  principle  of  maya.  The  expression 
creative  power  in  the  above  passage  stands  for  maya  whicfc, 
as  we  shall  presently  see,  is  identical  with  avidya-ajhana. 
The  Upanisadic  text  ‘  Know  maya  to  be  the  primal  cause  of 
the  universe  and  mahedvara  as  possessing  maya  ’,199  speaks  of 
maya  as  the  primal  cause  of  the  world.  The  word  mahedvara 
in  this  text  means  pure  consciousness,  that  is,  Brahman- 
Atman.  We  shall  deal  with  this  point  at  a  later  stage.  It 
follows  that  Brahm’an-Atman  associated  with  maya  is  viewed 
as  the  source  of  the  pniverse.200  This  point  which  thus  finds 
full  expression  in  the  Upanisads  has  been  foreshadowed  in 
the  Rg-Veda.  A  /remarkably  profound  hymn  of  the  Rg- 
Veda  speaks  of  ultimate  reality  as  one  and  as  asssociated  with 
maya.  The  hymmis  as  follows  : 

na  mrtyurasit  amrtarh  na  tarhi 
na  r  a  try  a  anlia  a  sit  praketah 
a  nit  avdtam  svadhaya  tadekam 
tasmad  ha  anyarii  na  param  kihcana  Ssa20X 

This  hymn  means : 

“  Before  the  creation  of  this  world,  there  existed  neither 
the  lord  of  death  nor  the  nectar  of  the  divine  beings ;  there 
did  not  exist  the  sun  and  the  moon  — the  marks  of  day  and 
night.  There  existed  only*  That  One  ( tadekam )  which  is  free 
from  activity  and  which  is  associated  with  maya.  Nothing 
existed  apart  from  it.” 

When  it  is  said  that  Brahman- Atman  associated  with 
maya  is  viewed  as  the  source  of  the  universe,  we  must 

198.  S  vet. ,  1,  3. 

199.  ibid,  IV,  10. 

200.  na  hi  taya  vina  parameivarasya  srastrtvam  arhati ,  BSB,  I,  iv,  3. 

201.  Rg-Veda,  VIII,  vii,  17. 


9 


66 


understand  that  maya  is  the  transformative  material  cause 
(parinamyupadana)  and  Brahman- Atman  is  the  trans- 
figurative  material  cause  ( vivarto’padana )  of  the  universe. 
The  difference  between  parinama  and  vivarta  is  that  in  the 
former  the  cause  and  effect  belong  to  the  same  level  of 
reality,  while  in  the  latter  they  belong  to  two  different 
levels  of  reality.  Maya  and  the  world  consist  of  empirical 
reality,  that  is,  they  are  real  till  the  rise  of  the  direct 
experience  of  Brahman.  These  two,  therefore,  belong  to 
the  same  level  of  reality.  On  the  other  hand,  Brahman- 
Atman  and  the  world  differ  from  each  other  in  this  that 
while  the  former  is^  absolutely  real,  that  is,  not  condi¬ 
tioned  by  the  thj>ee  divisions  of  time — past,  present,  and 
future,  the  latteyfis  real  only  provisionally.  These  two  thus 
consist  of  two  dijnerent  levels  of  reality.  And  it  is  with  this 
in  view  it  is  said\that  maya  is  the  transformative  material 
cause  and  Brahman.- Atman  is  the  transfigurative  material 
cause  of  the  universe.  This  we  shall  explain  in  detail  in 
the  section  entitled  The  Phenomenal  World. 

Maya  thus  is  the  first  cause  of  the  phenomenal  world 
and  consequently  corresponds  to  the  prakrti  or  the  pradhana 
of  the  Sankhya  system ;  but  there  is  one  vital  difference 
which  distinguishes  the  one  from  the  other.  The  pradhana 
of  the  Sankhya  system  is  conceived  of  as  the  source  of  the 
universe  by  being  independent  of  the  Purusa  or  the  spirit. 
But  maya  in  Advaita  is  considered  as  the  primordial  cause 
of  the  universe  by  being  dependent  upon  Brahman.  Sri 
Sankara  notices  this  distinction  in  his  commentary  on  the 
Brahma-sutra  and  points  out  that  the  Advaitins  do  not  follow 
the  line  of  argument  of  the  Sankhya  in  accounting  for  the 
rise  of  the  universe.202 


202.  yadi  vayam  svatantram  ka  tacit  pra gavastha m  jagatah  karanatvena 
abhyupagacchema  prasafljayema  tada  pradhanakaranavadam,  paramedvara- 
dhina  tviyamasma  bhih  pra  gavastha  jagato'bhy  up  agamy  ale  na  svatantra, 

BSB  I,  iv,  3. 


65 


the  Upanisadic  text  ‘  The  sages  absorbed  in  meditation  dis¬ 
covered  the  creative  power  which  is  present  in  Brahman  and 
which  consists  of  the  three  strands  of  saliva,  rajas ,  and 
lamas  J,198  introduces  the  principle  of  maya.  The  expression 
creative  power  in  the  above  passage  stands  for  maya  whicfe, 
as  we  shall  presently  see,  is  identical  with  avidya-ajnana. 
The  Upanisadic  text  ‘  Know  maya  to  be  the  primal  cause  of 
the  universe  and  mahedvara  as  possessing  maya  ’,199  speaks  of 
maya  as  the  primal  cause  of  the  world.  The  word  make  d  vara 
in  this  text  means  pure  consciousness,  that  is,  Brahman- 
Atman.  We  shall  deal  with  this  point  at  a  later  stage.  It 
follows  that  Brahman- Atman  associated  with  maya  is  viewed 
as  the  source  of  tlje  universe.200  This  point  which  thus  finds 
full  expression/in  the  Upanisads  has  been  foreshadowed  in 
the  Rg-Vedaf  A  remarkably  profound  hymn  of  the  Rg- 
Veda  speaks  jof  ultimate  reality  as  one  and  as  asssociated  with 
maya.  The\hymn  is  as  follows^: 

na  mrtyurasit  amrtarh  na  tarhi 

na  ratrya  anha  a  sit  praketali 

a  nit  avdtam  svadhaya  tadekam 

tasmad  ha  anyam  na  param  kihcana  Ssa 201 

This  hymn  means : 

“  Before  the  creation  of  this  world,  there  existed  neither 
the  lord  of  death  nor  the  nectar  of  the  divine  beings ;  there 
did  not  exist  the  sun  and  the  moon  — the  marks  of  day  and 
night.  There  existed  only  7 hat  One  ( tadekam )  which  is  free 
from  activity  and  which  is  associated  with  maya.  Nothing 
existed  apart  from  it.” 

When  it  is  said  that  Brahman-Atman  associated  with 
(maya  is  viewed  as  the  source  of  the  universe,  we  must 

198.  S  vet. }  1,  3. 

199.  ibid  ,  IV,  10. 

200.  na  hi  taya  vina  paramedvarasya  srastrtvam  arhati,  BSD,  I,  iv,  3. 

201.  Rg-Veda,  VIII,  vii,  17. 


9 


67 


MSya  is  superimposed  on  Brahman-Atman  and  conse¬ 
quently  it  has  the  latter  as  its  locus  ( a&raya )  and  content 
( visaya ).  On  this  strength  it  af quires  a  two-fold  power, 
namely,  avarana-dakti  or  the  power  of  concealment  and 
viksepa-iakli  or  the  power  of  illusory  manifestation.  By  the 
former  it  conceals  the  true  nature  of  Brahman-Atman,  and 
by  the  latter  it  illusorily  presents  it  in  the  form  of  Hvara, 
iiva,  and  the  world.203 

This  may  a  is  identical  with  avidya  or  ajnana.  In  his 
commentary  on  the  Katho’panisad,  J>rl  Sankara  refers  to  the 
root-cause  of  the  world,  that  is,  maya  as  avidya.  He  says : 

‘  avidya  is  the  seed,  asjt  were,  of  the  whole  world.  Before 
the  creation  of  the  world,  avidya  has  within  itself  in  a 
latent  form  t\xe/  entire  world,  as  the  tiny  banyan  seed 
has  in  it  hidden  the  capacity  to  generate  a  banyan  tree.  It 
is  like  the  warp  hnd  woof  in  Brahman’.204  Further,  in  his 
commentary  on  the  Brahma-sutra  he  says  :  the  root-cause  of 
the  world  is  of  the  form  of  avidya  ;  it  is  designated  by  the 
word  avyakta ;  it  is  dependent  on  parame&vara ;  it  is  of  the 
nature  of  may  a ;  it  is  the  great  sleep.  And,  in  it  the  jivas  not 
aware  of  their  identity  with  Brahman-Atman  rest.206  These 
two  passages  clearly  show  that  £>rl  £>aftkara  treats  maya  and 
avidya  to  be  identical. 

To  reinforce  the  conclusion,  namely,  that  maya  and 
avidyp  are  identical,  Sarvajnatman  advances  one  argument 
which  is  as  follows  :  maya  and  avidya  or  ajnana,  according  to 


203.  Ss',  I,  20. 

204.  sarvasya  jagatah  bijabhutam  avyakr tana maru path  satattvam 
sarvakaryakaranai  aktisamaha  rarupam  avyaktam  avyakrtakaiadinama- 
vacyarh  paramatmani  otaprolabhavcna  sama £ ritarh  vatakanikayamwa  vata- 
vrksaiaktih,  Bhdsya  on  Katha.,  Ill,  11. 

205.  avidya  tmikd  hi  bijaiaktih  avyaktai abdanirdeiya  maya  may  i 
mahasusuptih,  yasyam  derate  svarupapratibodharahitah  samsarino  jivah, 

BSB,  I,  iv,  3. 


68 


the  Bhagavad-gita ,  are  defined  as  having  the  common 
characteristics  of  concealing  the  true  nature  of  Brahman- 
Atman  and  being  removable  by  its  direct  experience.  The 
Gita  text  ‘  Brahman-Atman  is  Veiled  by  avidya  ;  and  so  jivas 
undergo  transmigration  ’20G  states  that  avidya  veils  the  true 
nature  of  Brahman-Atman.  Another  text  ‘  Being  veiled  by 
may  a,  I  am  not  manifest  to  all  ’ 2  0  7  shows  that  the  true 
nature  of  Lord  Krsna,  that  is,  Brahman — the  pure  conscious¬ 
ness  is  veiled  by  maya.  Maya  and  avidya  have  thus  the 
common  characteristic  of  veiling  the  true  nature  of  Brahman. 
In  the  same  way,  the  Gita  texts  ‘  Avidya  is  removed  by  the 
direct  experience  of  Brahman-Atman  5208  and  ‘  Those  who 
realize  My  trde  nature  (Brahman)  transcend  maya  ’20°  show 
that  avidya  afid  maya  have  the  same  characteristic  of  being 
removable  Uy  the  direct  experience  of  Brahman-Atman. 
Sarvajnatmanytherefore,  concludes  that  maya  and  avidya 
are  identical.21®''  7 

We  shall  now  pass  on  to  the  discussion  regarding  the 
proof  for  the  existence  of  avidya.  Avidya  is  directly  mani¬ 
fested  by  the  witness-self  ( saksi-caitanya ).2U  In  the  state  of 
deep  sleep,  avidya  is  experienced  and  its  experience  then  is 
indeterminate  ( nirvikalpa )  in  character.  Witness-self  is  only 
pure  consciousness  that  transcends  avidya  or  the  pure  con¬ 
sciousness  reflected  in  the  modes  of  avidya™  An  entity 
which  is  directly  manifested  by  the  witness-self,  like  happiness 

206.  Bh.  G.,  V,  15.  207.  ibid.,  VII,  25. 

208.  ibid.,  V,  16.  209.  ibid.,  VII,  14. 

210.  Sg,  III,  108-9. 

Some  Advaitins  make  a  distinction  between  maya  and  avidya  on  the  ground 
that  maya  is  rooted  in  I  $  vara  and  avidya  in  jiva.  We  shall  in  the  sequel  prove 
that  jiva  cannot  be  the  locus  of  avidya.  Hence  the  distinction  between  maya 
and  avidya  cannot  stand. 

211.  sa  ca  avidya  saksi-vedya ,  AS,  p.  575. 

212.  sdksini-avidyo' pahitaciti,  Laghucandrikd ,  p.  545. 

saksi  ca  avidya -vrtli-pratibimbita-caitanyam,  AS,  p.  575. 


69 


or  misery,  docs  not  require  any  proof  for  its  existence. 
Moreover,  avidya  cannot  become  the  object  of  any  proof ; 
for,  proof  is  that  which  makes  known  a  thing  that  is 
unknown  or  characterized  by  avidya.  If  we  admit  any 
proof  for  the  existence  of  avidya,  then  we  must  admit  that 
avidya  is  characterized  by  another  avidya.  This  would 
definitely  lead  to  the  fallacy  of  infinite  regress. 

Although  avidya  as  such  cannot  become  the  object  of 
any  proof,  yet  as  regards  its  specific  nature,  namely, 
whether  it  is  positive  or  not,  there  may  arise  doubt.  And 
it  is  this  element  that  is  characterized  by  avidya.  And  per¬ 
ception,  inference,  verbal  testimony,  and  presumption  aided 
by  reasoning  ( tarka )  go  to  prove  that  it  is  positive  in  nature 
by  removing  the  avidya  pertaining  to  that  element.913 

We  said  that  the  experience  of  avidya  in;  the  state  of 
deep  sleep  by  the  witness-self  ixs  indeterminate  \in  character. 
It  cannot  be  referred  to  by  any  word  then.  Bufm  the  state 
of  waking,  intellect  is  superimposed  on  the  witneSs-selT-and 
we  have  the  experience  of  avidya  in  a  determinate  form  as 
‘I  am  ignorant’.  This  perceptual  experience  ‘I  am  ignorant’ 
is  technically  known  as  saksi-pratyaksa.  It  is  suggestive  of 
the  existence  of  avidya.  Aided  by  reasoning,  it  proves  that 
avidya  is  positive  in  nature.  It  might  be  said  that  this 
perceptual  experience  refers  to  mere  absence  of  knowledge 
(jndnabhava)  and  not  to  avidya  or  ajhana  as  a  positive  entity. 
This  contention  is  wrong.  In  the  first  place,  it  cannot  refer 
to  absence  of  all  knowledge;  because  there  manifests  in  the 
experience  ‘I  do  not  know’  the  experient  in  the  form  ‘I’. 
It  might  be  said  that  it  refers  to  the  absence  of  the  know¬ 
ledge  of  a  particular  thing.  This  is  also  not  correct;  because 
negation  presupposes  the  knowledge  of  the  thing  negated. 
If  it  is  said  that  the  knowledge  of  a  particular  thing  is 

213.  ajhanasya  svarupena  ajhana  visayatve’pi  tadbhavatva  dikath 
ajilanavisayo  bhavalyeva,  tasya  ajhanagra  hakasa  ksyagra  hyatva  t, 

ibid.,  p.  565. 


70 


negated,  then  we  must  have  the  knowledge  of  the  knowledge 
of  a  particular  thing  that  is  negated.  If  we  have  that 
knowledge,  how  could  we  have  its  negation?  Hence  the 
perceptual  experience  ‘I  do  not  know’  involves  a  reference 
not  to  absence  of  knowledge,  but  to  a  positive  entity.914 

In  the  same  way,  inference  also  goes  to  prove  the 
positive  nature  of  avidya.  It  is  thus :  when  valid  knowledge 
arises  with  reference  to  an  object  (say)  pot,  it  gives  rise  to 
usages  such  as  ‘The  pot  exists  ‘  The  pot  is  manifest  ’,  etc., 
like  the  light  of  a  lamp  which  appeared  first  in  the  darkness 
gives  rise  to  such  usages  about  things  already  existing  there. 
From  this  we  could  infer  that  prior  to  the  rise  of  the  valid 
knowledge  of  the  object  there  existed  some  factor  in  that 
object  which  gave  rise  to  usages  such  as  ‘  The  object  does 
not  exist,  is  not  manifest’,  etc., I  and  which  is  removed  by  the 
valid  knowledge.  And  that  factor  must  be  different  from 
the  antecedent  negation  of  valid 'knawledge  ;  for,  removal 
of  the  antecedent  negation  of  knowledge  by  knowledge  is 
not  appropriate ;  for,  knowledge  in  order  to  annihilate  its 
antecedent  negation  should  exist  prior  to  its  antecedent 
negation.  But  knowledge  could  arise  only  subsequent  to 
the  annihilation  of  its  antecedent  negation.  Or,  to  state 
the  same  in  other  words,  knowledge,  being  of  the  nature  of 
the  annihilation  of  its  antecedent  negation,  cannot  be  the 
cause  of  the  annihilation  of  its  antecedent  negation.  In 
■  the  light  of  this  argument  it  should  be  held  that  the  factor 
which  is  removed  by  valid  knowledge  is  positive  in  nature. 
And  that  factor  is  avidya?15 

214.  aham  ajilah  iti  jflanasya . abhavavilaksana-visayatvam 

siddham,  ibid.,  p.  555. 

See  Pailcapd dika -  Vivarana,  pp.  74-5. 

215.  vivadapadam  pramanajfianam  svapragabhava-vyatirikta-sva- 
visaydvarana-svanivarlya-svadeSogata-vastvantarapu  rvakam,  aprakaiitartha * 
prakaSakatvat,  andhakare  prathamotpanna-pradipaprabhavat,  AS,  p.  562. 

See  Pahcapadika-Vivarana,  p.  85.  vide  also:  SS,  III,  111. 


71 


The  Upanisadic  passages  —  “  The  true  nature  of  Brah¬ 
man  is  concealed  from  the  individual  souls  by  avidya 
(anrtay  21(5  and  ‘  The  true  nature  of  Brahman  is  veiled  from 
the  individual  souls  by  an  entity  similar  to  mist,’ 217  state 
that  the  true  nature  of  Brahman  is  veiled  by  avidya.  Since 
abhava  cannot  veil  an  object,  and  since  avidya  veils 
Brahman,  avidya  is  not  mere  negation  of  knowledge  but  a 
positive  entity.218 

Apart  from  these,  the  positive  nature  of  avidya  is 
indicated  by  the  fact  that  the  jiva  is  not  manifest  in  its  true 
nature  of  being  infinite  bliss.  If  there  be  no  avidya  to  obstruct 
it  would  surely  be  maru£est  in  its  fullness.  The  non¬ 
manifestation  of  infinite /bliss  which  is  natural  to  jiva 
presumptively  implies  th/t  infinite  bliss  is  veiled  by  a  factor 
which,  for  the  reason  stated  above,  must  be  positive  in 
nature.219  V 

It  follows  from  the  above  that  perception,  inference, 
verbal  testimony,  and  presumption  aided  by  reasoning 
prove  the  positive  nature  of  avidya. 

Avidya  is  indeterminable.  It  is  not  real  ;  for,  if  it  were 
so,  there  would  arise  contradiction  with  the  Upanisadic 
import  that  everything  apart  from  Brahman  is  not  real. 
It  is  not  unreal,  like  a  flower  sprung  from  the  sky ; 
for,  then  it  cannot  serve  as  the  transformative  material 
£3 use  of  the  world.  It  cannot  be  real  and  unreal  at 
once ;  for  that  w^ukl  violate  the"Ta\v  of  contradiction. 
Avidya  does  not  have  parts ;  for,  if  it  has  parts  then 

216.  Chand.,  VIII,  iii,  2. 

217.  Taitliriya  Sarhhita,  IV,  vi,  ii,  2. 

218.  evarii  dntayaica . anrtena  pratyudhah  iti  irutih  brahmajMna- 

pratibandhakatvenanrtam  bruvana  tadrgajhane  pramanam,  AS,  p.  570. 

219.  jivasya  anavacchinnabrahma  nanda praka  ianyathanupapaUiica  tatra 
matiam,  ibid.,  p.  576. 


72 


it  must  be  admitted  that  it  has  a  beginning  and  so  the 
reflection  of  the  pure  consciousness  in  it  which  is  Hvara 
must  also  be  admitted  to  have  a  beginning;  and,  this 
is  againt  the  Upanisadic  teaching.  Hence  it  must  be 
admitted  that  avidya  does  not  have  parts.  This  conclusion 
presents  another  difficulty.  If  avidya  does  not  have  parts, 
then  it  cannot  be  viewed  as  the  transformative  material 
cause  of  the  universe.  It  is  a  matter  of  ordinary  experience 
that  only  those  objects  having  parts  do  serve  as  the  cause  of 
the  effects.  Hence  avidya  cannot  be  said  to  be  partless.  It 
cannot  be  partless  and  possess  parts  at  once  ;  for,  that  would 
violate  the  law  of  contradiction.  These  difficulties  do 
suggest  that  avidya  is  indeterminable  (anirvacaniya)  .m  The 
Rg-Vedic  passage  c  The  caus/ of  the  world  is  neither  an 
absolute  nothing  nor  a  real  entity’ 221  affirms  that  the  cause 
of  the  world  is  something  that  is  neither  real  nor  unreal. 
This  is  exactly  what  is  meant  \yhen  it  is  said  that  the  cause 
of  the  world  is  indeterminable  either  as  real  or  as  unreal. 

It  now  remains  to  enquire  whether  this  avidya  is  one  or 
many.  It  is  one  according  to  Padmapada,  Sarvajnatman, 
PrakaSatman,  and  others  in  their  line  of  thinking.  This 
admission  raises  one  important  question,  namely,  what  is 
the  material  cause  of  the  illusory  appearances  of  shell  as 
silver,  rope  as  snake,  etc.  If  it  is  admitted  that  avidya  is 
the  material  cause,  then  as  it  will  be  removed  only  by  the 
direct  experience  of  Brahman-Atman — its  substratum,  there 
would  be  an  unending  appearance  of  shell  assilver.  And  it  is 
contrary  to  the  experience  of  the  removal  of  the  appearance 
of  silver  by  the  knowledge  of  the  true  nature  of  its  substra¬ 
tum,  namely,  the  shell.  We  must,  therefore,  admit  some 
cause  other  than  avidya  to  account  for  the  appearance  of 


220.  Sec  Kr?nananda  Tirtha’s  commentary  on  SLS p.  79. 

221.  ‘ nasadasit  nosadasit’  (Rg-Veda,  10.  129.  1.)  ityadi  d  rut  ay  o’ pi 
anirvacyatve  pramanam,  AS,  p.  643. 


73 


shell  as  silver.  Praka^atman  admits  avasthajhdna  or  the 
seeming  derivatives  of  avidya  as  the  cause  of  illusory 
appearances  and  they  are  present  in  the  conciousness 
delimited  by  shell,  rope,  etc. 222  And,  they  are  removed  by 
the  knowledge  of  their  substratum,  namely,  shell,  rope,  etc. 
This  theory  is  not  to  be  confounded  with  the  theory  of 
Vacaspatimgra  that  tkere  is  plurality  of  avidya.  According 
to  Vacaspatimigra,  avidya — the  primal  cause  of  the  world  is 
manifold.  But  according  to  PrakaSatman,  on  the  other  hand, 
avidya — the  primal  cause  of  the  world  is  one.223  But  both 
admit  seeming  derivatives  of  avidya  known  as  avasthdjnana 
to  account  for  the  illusory  appearances  of  shell  as  silver 
rope  as  snake,  etc. 

We  shall  now  consider  the  locus  ( aSraya )  and  content 
( visaya )  of  avidya.  The  content  of  avidya  is  Brahman-Atman. 
The  nature  of  avidya  is  to  conceal  something.  (Concealment 
is  possible  only  with  reference  to  a  self-lumjinous  entity. 
Everything  is  itself  insentient  and  needs  no  ei^ternal  cause 
for  being  obscured.  Hence  Brahman  alone  ckn  be  veiled 
and  thus  it  is  the  content  ( visaya )  of  avidya.™ 


222.  mulajdanasyaiva  avasthdbhedah,  rajatadyupa danani  Suktikadi- 
jnanaih  saha.dhya.sena  nivartante,  Padcapadika-Vivarana,  p.  99. 

vide  also:  mulajdanasyaiva  dharmavidesSh  tatkaryavacchinna- 
caitanyanistha  va,  Bhavapraka  Sika ,  p.  99.  / 

223.  ekajHdnapakse'pi  mu Idjhdna-avaslha bhedariipani  pratibhasiko’- 
pddandjMnani  ava&yam  adgitaryani,  anyatha  duktijfldnakale’pi  mula- 

jftanasatva  t  idam  rajatamiii  pralityapatleh . na  ca  ekajdanapaksasya 

ndndjndnapaksadaviiesa  iti  iahkaniyam,  pratijivam  mulajdanasyaiva 
bhedah  iti  vacaspatimiSrapaksayaiva  nanajdanapaksatvat, 

Brahma  nandiyabhavaprakaS a,  p.  12. 

224.  cinmatrameva  avidydvisayah . svapraka  ialvena  prasaktapra- 

kaie  tasmin  avaranakrlyasambhaiacca,  ndnyat,  tasyajddnakalpitatvat, 
aprasaktaprakd $ atoena  avaranakrtyabhavacca,  AS,  p.  586. 


10 


74 


As  regards  the  locus  of  avidya,  Mandana,  the  author 
of  the  Brahma-siddhi  maintains  that  jiva  is  the  locus  of  avidya 
which  veils  the  true  nature  of  Brahman  and  thus  has  Brah¬ 
man  as  its  content.  Mandana  thus  differentiates  between 
the  locus  and  content  of  avidya .225  VacaspatimiSra  also 
holds228  that  jiva  is  the  locus  of  avidya.  Brahmananda  in 
his  commentary  on  the  Siddhantabindu  points  out  that 
according  to  VScaspatimiSra  the  locus  of  avidya  must  be 
one  from  whom  the  true  nature  of  Brahman  is  veiled.  The 
true  nature  of  Brahman  is  veiled  from  jiva  who  feels  that 
Brahman  is  not  manifest  to  him.  Hence  jiva  alone  is  the 
locus  of  avidya.™  It  is  generally  believed  that  this  view 
is  derived  from  Mandana. 

Slrl  Sankara  in  his  commentary  on  tlje  Brahma-sutra — 
tadadhinatvadarthavat  states :  f  avidya  iy'  paramedvaradraya, 
that  is,  it  depends  on  Brahman.  Aiid,  in  it  the  jivas, 
having  lost  their  identity  with  Brahman,  rest.’228  Vaca- 
spatimi^ra  while  interpreting  the  wovd^paraniedvarddraya 
in  the  above  passage  states:  Brahman  is  the  a  dray  a  of 
avidya  not  in  the  sense  of  its  locus,  but  in  the  sense  of  its 
content.  And,  jiva  alone  is  the  locus  of  avidya.™  Ananda- 
giri,  however,  interprets  the  word  paramedvarddraya  to  mean 


225.  yattu  kasya  avidyeti,  jivdna  m  iti  brumatx,  Brahma-siddhi, 
p.  10. 

226.  na  avidya  brahma  §  ray  a ,  kiiii  tu  jive,  sa  tu  anirvacaniya 
ityuktam,  tena  nityaduddhameva  brahma,  Bhamati,  p.  80. 

227.  brahma  nastityadi  vyavahdrah  yadadritah,  ajha namapi  tada- 

iritam . sa  ca  jivairitah  iti  ajMnamapi  tada dritam,  Nyayaratnavali, 

p.  227. 

228.  See  Foot-Note,  No.  205. 

229.  jivadhikaranapyavidya  nimittataya  visayataya  va  idvaramd- 
drayate  iti  idvarasraya  iti  ucyate,  na  tu  ddharataya,  vidyasvabhdve  brah- 
mani  tadanupapatteh,  Bhamati,  p.  297. 


75 


that  avidya  has  Brahman  as  its  locus.230  SureSvara  considers 
the  differentiation  between  the  locus  and  content  to  be 
unnecessary  and  holds  that  Brahman  is  the  locus  and  content 
of  avidya. 231  Sarvajna-tman  PrakaSatman  m^ntain  the 
same  view.233  Thus  as  regards  the  locus  of  avidya,  Mandana 
and  VacaspatimiSra  hfljri  ft  view  contrary  to  that  of 
SureSvara,  Sarvajnatman,  and  PrakaSatman. 

The  view  that  jiva  is  the  locus  of  avidya  does  not  wholly 
agree  with  the  view  of  SureSvara  and  others  in  his  line 
of  thinking,  although  it  comes  nearer  to  their  theory. 
Sarvajnatman  points  out  that  the  way  in  which  jiva  is  the 
locus  of  avidya  is  inadequate  is  chiefly  based  upon  the  fact 
that  avidya  presupposes  the  appearance  of  jiva  and  hence 
the  latter  cannot  be  conceived  as  its  lodus.  No  doubt  the 
distinction  of  jiva  and  Hvara  is  beginningless.  Yet  such  a 
distinction  can  be  made  only  when  Brahman  as  such  is  not 
realized.  One  cannot  have  the  notion  of  jiva,  if  one  has 
realized  Brahman.  Hence  the  notion,  of  jiiia  derives  its 
existence  from  avidya,  although  avidya  does  not  require  the 
notion  of  jiva  for  its  own  existence.233  The  relation  between 

230.  na  va  tasyah  jiva  drayatvam  jivadabda-vacyasya  kalpitatvat, 
tacchabdalaksyasya  brahmdvyalirekdt,  Nyayan.iriT.aya ,  p.  297. 

231.  atmana  eva  astu  ajrl a  narii  y  tasya  ajUo'smi  iti  anubhavadard  and  t ; 

Naiskarmya-siddhi,  pp.  105-6. 

232.  i.  Ssk,  I,  319. 

ii.  na  tavadajhanam  d i rayavisayabheda peksam,  kirn  tu  ekasmin- 
neva  vastuni  aSraycitvaiii  aijprcnyiii  ceti  krtyadvayam  sampadayati : 

Pancapa  dika-Vivarana,  p.  210. 

233.  yadyapi  jived varaviblia ga  dih  and dih  tathapi  sa  na  vdslavah, 
mayikastu  sah  ;  advayabrahma  navabhd sadad dyd mcva  bhavatiti  tadajhdnd- 
dinasattaka  eva  ;  ajilanam  tu  svasattayarii  vibha gadisattvam  na  apeksate  iti 
na  tatprayojyam,  SS,  p.  239. 

vide  also:  yadyapi  ajiianavat  ji vedvaravibhago'pi  anddik  tathapi 
tasya  ajhanatantratvd  t  ajnanavibhagayoh  paurvaparyamapi  andditi 
kalpyate,  S,  p.  274. 


76 


avidya  on  the  one  hand,  and  jiva  and  I^vara  on  the  other, 
is  not  the  relation  of  cause  ( karana )  and  effect  (i karya),  but 
is  technically  known  as  vyapya-vyapaka-bhava.  Thus  as  jiva 
is  not  logically,  if  not  temporally,  antecedent  to  avidya,  it 
cannot  serve  as  the  locus  of  avidya. 

Another  difficulty  which  Sarvajnatman  points  out  in 
the  view  that  jiva  is  the  locus  of  avidya  is  as  follows :  jiva  is 
only  a  blend  of  Brahman-Atman  and  mind.  If  it  is  said 
that  avidya  is  rooted  in  jiva,  it  means  that  it  is  present  in 
Brahman-Atman  and  mind.  It  is  well-known  that  mind  is 
the  effect  of  avidya  and  as  such  it  is  of  the  nature  of 
avidya.  Avidya  cannot  abide  in  itself,  that  is,  in  mind. 
It  follows  from  this  that  avidya  cannot  abide  in  Brahman- 
Atman  associated  with  mind,  that  is,  jiva.™ 

One  more  argument  advanced  to  prove  that  jiva  can¬ 
not  be  the  locus  of  avidya  is  this :  in  the  state  of  deep  sleep, 
there  is  the  experience  of  avidya.  The  reminiscent  experience 
of  a  person  wno  on  waking  up  from  deep  sleep  says  ‘  I  did 
not  know  anything-^hen  I  was  asleep  ’,  and  ‘  Being 
enveloped  by  avidya,  I  was  incapable  of  understanding 
anything  ’  involves  a  reference  to  avidya.  If  not,  how 
could  there  be  the  reminiscence  in  the  form  ‘  I  did  not  know 
anything’  ?  On  the  authority  of  this  reminiscent  experience, 
it  should  be  held  that  avidya  exists  and  is  experienced  in 
deep  sleep.  But  the  notidn  of  jiva  is  absent  in  that  state. 
There  is  thus  the  direct  experience  of  avidya  even  in  the 
absence  of  the  notion  of  jiva.  And  this  would  not  be 
possible  if  jiva  were  the  locus  of  avidya.  On  this  ground 
also  it  should  be  held  that  jiva  cannot  be  the  locus  of 
avidya.™ 

These  difficulties  have  led  SureSvara,  Sarvajnatman,  and 
others  in  their  line  of  thinking  to  formulate  the  theory  that 

234.  St>,  II,  209;  III,  15. 

235.  PP,  pp.  54-5. 


77 


pure  consciousness  (Brahman-Atman)  is  the  locus  of  avidya. 
In  the  experience  ‘  I  ana.  ignorant  the  word  ‘I’  primarily 
signifies  the  blend  of  pure  consciousness  and  mind,  that  is, 
jiva.  It  secondarily  signifies  the  pure  consciousness.  This 
view  is  held  by  the  author  of  the  Advuita-siddhi .a36  In  the 
^tate  of  4eep  sleep  only  pure  consciousness  and  avidya  exist ; 
all  other  factors  are  provisionally  merged  in  avidya  then. 
Direct  experience  of  avidya  would  not  be  possible  without  a 
locus  ;  and  pure  consciousness  alone  serves  as  a  locus  then. 
It  follows  from  this  that  pure  consciouness  (Brahman-Atman) 
is  the  locus  of  avidya. 

The  view  that  pure  consciousness  is  the  locus  of  avidya 
appears  to  be  contrary  to  the  view  of  3ri  Sankara.  The  latter 
in  his  commentaries  on  the  Brahma-sutra,  the  Upanisads,  and 
the  Bhagavad-gita  holds  that  jiva  is  the  locus  of  avidya.13' 
SureSvara  also  holds  that  jiva  is  the  locus  of  avidya. 238 
It  may  be  aldded  here  that  Vacaspatimidra  might  have 
derived  the  viiiw  that  jiva  is  the  locus  of  avidya  from  these 
sources. 

It  has  already  been  shown  that  jiva  cannot  be  the  locus 
of  avidya  and  that  pure  consciousness  alone  is  the  locus 
of  avidya.  Avidya ,  though  present  in  pure  consciousness,  is 
revealed  in  the  form  ‘  I  am  ignorant 5  by  the  intellect  which 
is  the  limiting  adjunct  of  jiva.  It  is  well-known  that  the 
nature  of  a  revealing  mediuha-  is  such  that  what  is  revealed 
through  it  appears  as  though  present  in  the  medium  itself. 


236.  viiistava cakasyaiva  ahampadasya  laksanaya  niskrstahanka - 
racaitanye  prayogat,  AS,  p.  G04. 

237.  i.  kasya  punarayam  aprabodha  iti  cet,  yastvam  prcchasi  tasya 
te  iti  vadamah,  BSB,  IV,  1,  3. 

ii.  avidya  vii is  tam  ka  ryaka  rano’pa  dhira  trnci  jiva  ucyate, 

Bhasya  on  Brh.,  Ill,  viii,  12. 

iii.  avidya  kasya,  yasya  drdyate  tasyaiva,  Bh.  G.  B,  XIII,  2. 

238.  Brhadaranyako' panisad-bhasya-vartika,  I,  vi,  298. 


78 


The  individual  ‘  cow  ’  reveals  the  universal  -  cowness  ( gotva ) 
as  present  in  itself.  The  mirror  which  reflects  the  face 
appears  to  contain  the  face.  The  point  that  is  of  profound 
importance  here  is  that  the  revealing  media  reveal  the 
things  to  be  revealed  as  present  in  themselves.  In  the  same 
way,  the  intellect  which  reveals  avidya  reveals  it  as  present 
in  itself  and  consequently  in  the  consciousness  delimited  by 
it,  namely,  nva.  Hence  there  is  the  experience  ‘  I  am 
ignorant  ’. 

The  intellect  does  reveal  avidya  because  in  its  absence 
in  the  state  of  deep  sleep,  avidya,  though  present  in  the 
pure  consciousness  is  not  determinately  perceived  in  the 
form  ‘I  am  ignorant’.  And  in  its  presence  in  the  state  of 
waking,  we  have  a  clear  manifestation  of  avidya  in  the  form 
‘I  am  ignorant’.  Sarvajnatman  points  out  that  in  view  of 
the  absence  ^)f  determinate  perception  of  avidya  in  the  state 
of  deep  sleef),  Sri  Sankara  states839  in  his  bhasya  on  the 
Brhadaranyaktfpanisad  that  even  avidya  does  not  exist  in 
the  state  of  deepsteep.  Butin  his  bhasya  on  the  Chandogyo,~ 
panisad  he  holds210  that  avidya  exists  in  the  state  of  deep 
sleep.  Hence  it  should  be  understood  that,  when  Sri 
Sankara  says  that  avidya  does  not  exist  in  the  state  of  deep 
sleep,  what  he  means  is  that  it  is  not  determinately  per¬ 
ceived  in  the  form  ‘I  am  ignorant’.  It  follows  from  this 
that  avidya  is  experienced  in  the  state  of  deep  sleep,  and 
pure  consckrtisness  alone  could  serve  as  its  locus.  The 
intellect  reveals  avidya  as  present  in  itself  and  consequently 
in  the  consciousness  delimited  by  it.  The  statements  of 
Sri  Sankara  and  Sure£vara  regarding  jiva  being  the  locus  of 
avidya  should  be  interpreted  in  the  aforesaid  manner.  As 


239 . anyatvapratyupasthapakahetoh  avidydyd  abhdvat  dptakd- 

mam,  Bhasya  on  Brh.,  IV,  iii,  21. 

240.  anrtena  hi  yathoktena  hi  yasmat  pratyudhd  hrtah  svarupat 
avidya  didosaih  bahirapakrstdh,  Bhasya  on  Chdnd.,  VII,  iii,  2. 


77 


pure  consciousness  (Brahman-Atman)  is  the  locus  of  avidya . 
In  the  experience  ‘  I  ignorant  the  word  ‘I’  primarily 
signifies  the  blend  of  pure  consciousness  and  mind,  that  is, 
jlva.  It  secondarily  signifies  the  pure  consciousness.  This 
view  is  held  by  the  author  of  the  Advuita-siddhi .a36  In  the 
^tate  of  4eep  sleep  only  pure  consciousness  and  avidya  exist ; 
all  other  factors  are  provisionally  merged  in  avidya  then. 
Direct  experience  of  avidya  would  not  be  possible  without  a 
locus  ;  and  pure  consciousness  alone  serves  as  a  locus  then. 
It  follows  from  this  that  pure  consciouness  (Brahman-Atman) 
is  the  locus  of  avidya. 

The  view  that  pure  consciousness  is  the  locus  of  avidya 
appears  to  be  contrary  to  the  view  of  3ri  Sankara.  The  latter 
in  his  commentaries  on  the  Brahma-sutra,  the  Upanisads,  and 
\the  Bhagavad-gita  holds  that  jlva  is  the  locus  of  avidya .®3’ 
Sure^vara7 also  holds  that  jiva  is  the  locus  of  avidya. 238 
It  may  be  added  here  that  Vacaspatimi^ra  might  have 
derived  the  view  that  jiva  is  the  locus  of  avidya  from  these 
sources. 

It  has  already  been  shown  that  jiva  cannot  be  the  locus 
of  avidya  and  that  pure  consciousness  alone  is  the  locus 
of  avidya.  Avidya ,  though  present  in  pure  consciousness,  is 
revealed  in  the  forip  ‘  I  am  ignorant  ’  by  the  intellect  which 
is  the  limiting  adjunct  of  jiva.  It  is  well-known  that  the 
nature  of  a  revealing  medium  is  such  that  what  is  revealed 
through  it  appears  as  though  present  in  the  medium  itself. 


236.  vid istava cakasyaiva  ahathpadasya  laksanaya  niskrstahanka- 
racailanye  prayogat,  AS,  p.  G04. 

237.  i.  kasya  punarayam  aprabodha  iti  cet,  yastvam  prcchasi  tasya 
te  iti  vadamah ,  BSB,  IV,  1,  3. 

ii.  avidy  avid  is  tail  karyakarano’padhiratma  jiva  ucyate, 

Bhasya  on  Brh.,  Ill,  viii,  12. 

iii.  avidya  kasya,  yasya  drdyate  tasyaiva,  Bh.  G.  B,  XIII,  2. 

238.  Brhadaranyako' panisad-bha sya-va rtika,  I,  vi,  298. 


79 


Sarvajnatman  concludes,  the  view  of  Sri  Sankara  is  that 
pure  consciousness  is  the  locus  of  avidya .a41 

Vacaspatimi^ra  does  follow  the  tradition  of  Advaita  as 
represented  by  fafthkarn.  and  so  we*  can  confidently  say 
that  Vacaspat:.:  -’<ra  speaks  of  jiva  as  the  locus  of  avidyU 
only  by  courtesy  even  as  Sri  Sankara  and  SureSvara  do.  On 
the  contrary,  Sarvajnatman  is  not  in  favour  of  extending  the 
above  line  of  explanation  to  the  view  of  Mandana,  namely, 
jiva  is  the  locus  of  avidya.  The  argument  that  is  advanced 
to  this  effect  is  that  Mandana  represents  a  stand-point  in 
Advaita  different  from  that  of  Sri  Sankara.242 

It  follows  from  the  above  discussion  that  Brahman- 
Atman  which  is  pure  consciousness  is  the  locus  and  content 
of  apidya. 

Ib  .remaius'  to  be  examined  how  this  avidya  is  removed. 
Avidya  has  Brahman-Atman  as  its  locus.  It  could, 
therefore,  be  removed  only  by  the  knowledge  of  the  true 
nature  of  its  locus — Brahman-Atman.  This  knowledge  is 
direct  experience  and  the  means  thereof  we  shall  set  forth 
in  the  sequel.  The  knowledge  of  Brahman  which  is  the 
contrary  of  avidya  is  not  pure  consciousness  as  such,  but  it  is 
the  pure  consciousness  reflected  in  the  mental  mode  arising 
from  the  Upanisadic  texts.  The  mental  mode  inspired  by 
the  reflection  of  pure  consciousness  which  is  contrary  of 
avidya  is  not  the  lecus  ef  avidya ;  and,  pure  conciousness 
which  is  "he  Ini  ©f  avidya  is  not  the  c^ptoary  of  avidya p 
on  the  other  hand,  it  is  *ts  witness. 243 


241.  bhagavatpadiye  dariane  pratyagatmana  eva  jhanitvam  ajnani- 
tvam  ca,  PP,  p.  69. 

242.  Sd,  II,  174. 

243.  ajnanavirodhi  jnanam  hi  na  caitanyama tram,  kim  tu  vrttiprati • 
bimbitam,  tacca  na  avidya  ray  ah,  yacca  avidya  drayah  tacca  na  ajnanavirodhi , 

AS,  p.  577. 


80 


Now  we  shall  consider  the  nature  of  the  removal  of 
avidya  ( avidya-nivrtti ).  There  are  three  views  regarding 
this;  and  they  are:  (1)  it  is  identical  with  Brahman- 
Atman,  (2)  it  is  different  from  Brahman-Atman,  and  yet 
it  is  not  anirvacaniya,  but  of-a  fifth  kind  ( pancama-prakara ), 
and  (3)  it  is  identical  with  the  direct  experience  of  Brahman. 
Sarvajnatman  deals  with  the  first  two  views  only.  We 
shall,  however,  examine  these  three  views  more  closely. 

We  shall  begin  with  the  second  view,  namely,  that 
avidya-nivrtti  is  different  from  Brahman-Atman,  and  yet  it 
is  not  anirvacaniya ,  but  of  a  fifth  kind  {pancama-prakara),  as 
its  rejection  leads  us  to  the  adoption  of  the  first  view. 

|  According  to  the  second  view,  avidya-nivrtti  is  not  real;  for, 
l  if  it  were  so,  then  it  would  be  a  real  entity  other  than 
'  Brahman  and  this  would  go  against  the  spirit  of  Advaita 
that-Brahman  alone  is  real.  It  cannot  be  unreal ;  for,  if  it 
were  so,  then  it  would  be  an  absolute  nothing  like  a  flower 
sprung  from  the  sky  and  hence  it  cannot  be  attained  at  all. 
It  cannot  be  real  and  unreal  at  once,  for  that  would  violate 
the  law  of  contradiction.  It  cannot  be  indeterminable  ;  for, 
the  existence  of  an  indeterminable  object  is  based  upon 
avidya.  If  avidya-nivrtti  were  said  to  be  indeterminable, 
then  it  must  be  admitted  that  its  existence  depends  upon 
avidya.  But  avidya  and  its  removal  ( avidya-nivrtti )  cannot 
co-exist.  On  this  ground  it  is  held  that  avidya-nivrtti 
is  of  a  fifth  kind.  And  this  view  is  generally  associated  with 
Vimuktatman.244 

Madhusudana  Sarasvati  criticises  the  above  view  on 
the  following  ground.  It  is  said  that  avidya-nivrtti  is  not  of 
the  nature  of  Brahman-Atman,  and  it  is  different  from  it. 
Hence  in  order  that  avidya-nivrtti  may  manifest,  what  is 


244.  sat-asat-sadasat-anirvacaniya-prakarebhyah  hi  anyapraka  raiva 
ajhanasya  nivrttiryukta ,  Ista-siddhi,  p.  85. 

See  also:  Sg ,  IV,  13-14. 


81 


necessary  is  that  it  must  be  associated  with  the  only  self- 
luminous  entity,  namely,  Brahman-Atman.  The  latter  is 
supra-relational,  and  so  it  cannot  have  any  real  relation 
with  avidya-nivrtti.  We  have,  therefore,  to  admit  that  there 
exists  only  a  suf*rimposed  relation  between  Brahman- 
Atman  and  avidyc^uivftti.  Superimposed  relation  is  possible 
only  through  avidly  a.  Avidya-nivrtti  thus  is  to  be  admitted 
as  superimposed  orHBrahman-Atman  through  avidya  ;  and, 
being  thus  superimposed,  it  cannot  be  anything  but 
indeterminable  ( anirvacaniya ).  To  say  that  avidya-nivrtti  is 
different  from  Brahman-Atman,  and  yet  it  is  not  anirvacaniya 
is  a  contradiction  in  terms.  It  follows  from  this  that 
avidya-nivrtti  is  anirvacaniya  and  hence  it  is  not  of  a  fifth 
kind.  The  view  that  avidya-nivrtti  is  of  a  fifth  kind, 
therefore,  stands  discredited. 245 

This  difficulty  regarding  the  second  view  has  led  the 
Advaitins  to  maintain  the  first  view  that  avidya-nivrtti  is 
identical  with  Brahman-Atman.  One  objection  can  be 
raised  against  this  view;  and  it  is  this  :  as  Brahman-Atman 
is  ever-existent,  avidya-nivrtti  too  which  is  identical  with  it 
must  be  ever-existent.  So  no  attempt  need  be  made  to 
achieve  this  by  the  direct  experience  of  Brahman-Atman. 

NrsimhaSrama  answers  this  objection  by  pointing  out 
that  when  the  direct  expferience  of  Brahman-Atman  arises 
there  is  not  the  experience  of  avidya.  But  so  long  as  the 
directexperience  of  Brahman-Atman  does  not  arise,  there  is 

245.  vastutastu  atkavdsya  caitanyanaimakutvat  svapraka d acaitanya- 
sambandhenaiva  bhanam  abhyupeyam;  ku  tastha sangusvabhavasya  vastava- 
sambandhayogat  kalpanikatve  avadyam  vacye  sarvayapi  kalpanayah  avidya- 
mulatvat  abhavakalpanapyavidyarnula  iti  na  anirvacaniyavailaksanyam, 
VK,  p.  26. 

vide  also:  almaryatve  drdyatva.ya  avadyakatvena  drk-dr dya-anupa- 
pattyadiyuklibhih  mithyatvavadyakatvena  na  pailcarnapraka  ratvam,  Laghu- 
candrika,  p.  885. 


11 


82 


the  manifestation  of  avidya.  Keeping  this  in  view,  it  is  said 
by  courtesy  that  avidya-nivrlti  is  achieved  by  the  direct 
experience  of  Brahman-Atman. 246 

It  might  be  objected :  Brahman-Atman  is  always 
existent.  Hence  the  expression -avidya-nivrtti  could  apply 
to  it  even  at  the  time  of  empirical  existence,  that  is,  when 
avidya  exists.  Sarvajnatman,  refutes  this  objection  by 
contending  that  the  ground  for  the  use  of  the  expression 
—avidya-nivrtti  in  Brahman-Atman  is  the  mental  state 
which  arises  from  the  major  texts  of  the  Upanisads  with 
reference  to  Brahman-Atman.  As  this  mental  state  is  not 
present  at  the  time  of  empirical  existence,  that  is,  when 
avidya  exists,  the  expression — avidya-nivrtti  does  not  signify 
Brahman-Atman  thend^L- —  The  word  nivrtti  no  doubt 
conveys  the  seijse  of/hbsence.  But  when  compounded  with 
the  other  word,  najmely,  avidya,  it  signifies  Brahman-Atman 
through  the  medium — the  mental  state  in  the  form  of 
Brahman-Atman.2^ 

The  view  that  avidya-nivrtti  is  identical  with  Brahman- 
Atman  is  maintained  by  f>ri  S>ai\kara  in  his  Haristuti  wherein 
he  says  that  Brahman  (Hari)  is  of  the  nature  of  the 

annihilation  of  avidya  —the  cause  of  the  world.249 

I 

The  third  view  is  that  avidya-nivrtti  is  identical  with  the 
direct  experience  of  Brahman-Atman.  The  latter  is  the 
annihilating  factor  of  avidya.  Apart  from  the  rise  of  the 
annihilating  factor,  it  is  not  intelligible  to  hold  anything 
like  the  annihilation  of  a  thing.  Removal  of  darkness  does 
not  mean  anything  more  than  the  rise  of  light  that 

246.  jMnabhave  ajiidnanuvrttih.  jhanadadaydm  tuna  tadanuvftlih, 
ityetavataiva  avidya  nivrtteh  jit  anas  a  dhyatopaca  ra  t,  taduktam  acaryaih:  tat 
kaivalyam  atah  sadhyam  upaedrat  pracaksate,  TB,  p.  1061. 

247.  SB,  IV,  19.  248.  ibid.,  IV,  22. 

249.  tam  sathsd radhva  ntavina  i am  harimide 


83 


removes  darkness.  Pratyagsvarupa  in  his  commentary 
Nayanaprasadini  on  the  Tattvapradipika  of  Gitsukha  960  and 
Mandana  in  his  Brahma- siddhi 951  favour  this  view  of  avidya - 
nivrtti.  It  may  be  added  here  that  the  Naiyayikas  also 
must  subs<s*4fee  to  toJIfr  a  view.  We  shall  deal  with  this 
p»int  in  detail. 

Of  the  many  causes-  that  contribute  to  the  origination 
of  a  pot  the  most  important  cause  is  the  antecedent  non¬ 
existence  of  the  pot  ( ghata-pragabhava ).  So  according  to 
the  Nyaya  school,  pot  the  effect  of  its  non-existence. 
That  school  further  holds  that  pot  which  is  created  is  of  the 
nature  of  the  annihilation  of  its  non-existence.  Ghata  is 
ghatapragabhdva-karya\  and  it  is  admitted  to  be  of  the  natute 
of  ghatapragabhdva-dhvamsa.  Similarly  jhana  is  only  a  mental 
state.  Mind  is  an  effect  of  avidya.  Hence  the  mental  state 
which  is  jhana  is  also  the  effect  of  avidya.  Jhana  is  thus 
avidya-karya ;  and  it  is  intelligible  to  hold  that  it  is  of  the 
nature  of  avidyd-nivrtti.  This  view  is  advocated  by  Dr.  Rama 
Varma  Pariksit  -  the  most  noteworthy  and  authentic 
exponent  of  Nyaya.  SM 

Madhusudana  Sarasvati  who  examines  all  the  three 
views  on  avidyd-nivrtti  in  his  A dvaita- siddhi  dismisses  the 
second  view,  namely,  that  avidyd-nivrtti  is  of  a  fifth  kind, 
by  saying  that  this  view  is  formulated  to  satisfy  the  aspir¬ 
ants  of  average  intellect.  And,  he  establishes  the  other  two 
views.  *3  m 

- «  .  - * - — - • - * - - - ■ 

•  250.  Tattvapradi piJca p,  259. 

251.  Brahma-siddhi,  p.  119. 

252.  ghatapragabhavakuryasya  ghatasya  taddhvamsa.ru paky a  naiyayi- 
kairahgikrtatvat  ajilanakaryasyapi  jflanasya  taddhvamsarupatvam  supa- 
pantiam  iti  &ri  pariksinmaha rajah,  Brahma nandiyabha vapraka i a,  p.  12. 

253.  tasmdt  ajnanaha  nih  atmasvarupam ,  tadakara  vrttirveti  siddham, 

ye  tu  pahcama-prakdrddipaksdh,  te  tit  mandamati  vyutpadanartha  iti . 

p.  885. 


84 


The  foregoing  discussion  may  be  summarized  as 
follows : 

Avidya,  which  is  identical  with  maya,  is  the  primal 
cause  of  the  world;  it  is  beginningless  and  indeterminable. 
It  consists  of  the  three  strands  of  sattva,  rajas,  and  tamas.  It 
has  two  powers  known  as  dvarana-iakti  and  viksepa-iakti. 
It  is  positive  in  nature  and  it  is  not  mere  absence  of  know¬ 
ledge.  It  has  Brahman-Atman  —  the  pure  consciousness  as 
its  locus  and  content ;  and,  it  is  removable  by  the  direct 
experience  of  the  true  nature  of  its  substratum  —  Brahman- 
Atman.  / 

SUPERIMPOSITION  ( ADHYASA ) 

Avidya  which  is  superimposed  on  Brahman  makes  the 
latter  appear  as  iSvara,  jiva,  and  the  world.  The  conce¬ 
ption  of  superimposition  is  thus  an  essential  part  of  the 
Advaitic  theory. 

8ri  Sankara  prefaces  his  commentary  on  the  Brahma- 
sutra  with  an  exposition  of  superimposition  of  the  phenome¬ 
nal  elements  beginning  from  mind,  and  their  characteristic 
attributes  on  Brahman,  and  Brahman  and  its  nature  254  on  the 
phenomenal  elements.  Although  the  author  of  the  Bralima- 
sutra  does  not  state  the  concept  of  superimposition  so  expli¬ 
citly,  yet  he  should  be  taken  to  presume  it.  According  to 
the  Brahma-sutra — atha'to  brahmajijhdsa,  jhana  or  the  direct 
experience  of  Brahman  is  the  means  to  the  attainment  of 
liberation  which  is  only  the  removal  of  bondage  pertaining 
to  jiva.  This  bondage  consists  of  the  characteristics  such  as 
agency,  finitude,  etc.  If,  however,  the  bondage  were  real, 


254.  anando  visayanubhavah  nityatoam  cell  santi  dharmah  aprthaklve’pi 
caitanyat  prlhagiva  avabhasante,  Pahcapadika,  p.  23. 

aprthaktve'pi  caitanyat  prthagiva  avabhasante  —  antahkararia- 
vrttyupadau  naneva  avabhasante,  Pahcapadika-Vivarana,  p.  60. 


85 


jhdna  would  not  annihilate  it,  as  it  could  remove  only  that 
which  is  not  real.  This  suggests  that  bondage  is  not  real, 
but  only  appears  in  jiva  whose  true  nature  is  Brahman.  It 
is  the  appearance  of  something  in  a  locus  where  it  does  not 
exist  that  is  kno^m  as  superimposition.  It  is  on  the  suppo¬ 
sition  that  hondage  is  superimposed  and  as  such  not  real, 
the  author  of  the  Brahmfl-sutra  should  have  composed  the 
first  aphorism. 

Now  the  question  arises:  What  is  superimposition  as 
conceived  by  the  Advaitins?  3rl  Sankara  in  the  adhyasa- 
bhcisya  frames  the  definition  of  adhyasa  as  follows: 

smrtirupah  paratra  purvadrstavabhasah 

Adhyasa  is  the  knowledge  ( avabhdsah )  of  a  particular 
thing  (say)  silver  in  a  locus  (say)  shell  where  it  does  not  exist 
{paratra).  The  content  of  knowledge,  that  is,  silver  has 
originally  been  seen  elsewhere  ( purvadrsta ).  The  cogna¬ 
tion  of  silver  here  is  similar  to  recollection  ( smrtirupa ),  as 
the  object  —  silver,  unlike  an  object  that  is  remembered,  is 
presented  in  the  cognition  ‘This  is  silver’,  and  it  is  there¬ 
fore  not  exactly  what  is  remembered,  but  only  similar  to 
what  is  remembered.  The  thing  that  is  remembered  does 
not  exist  at  the  time  of  remembering  it.  Similarly,  at  the 
time  of  the  erroneous  cognition  of  silver,  silver  does  not 
really  exist  in  the  locus  in  which  it  appears. 

The  object,  namely,  silver  cannot  be  real;  for,  if  it 
were  so  it  would  not  be  sublated  afterwards.  Nor  can  it  be 
unreal;  for,  ,  in  that  Case  it  would  never  have  been  presented 
in  the  cognition  ‘This  is  silver’.  It  cannot  be  real  and 
unreal  at  once;  for,  it  is  a  self-discrepant  notion.  Thus  as 
the  object  of  the  erroneous  cognition  is  not  characterisable 
either  as  real,  or  unreal,  or  real  and  unreal  at  once,  it  is 
termed  anirvacaniya.  It  is  also  said  to  be  pratibhasika  in  the 
sense  that  it  is  coterminous  with  its  presentation  in  cognition. 
The  locus  of  superimposition,  on  the  other  hand,  is  real, 


86 


that  is,  it  has  empirical  reality  ( vyavaharika-satyatva ). 
Adhyasa,  therefore,  is  the  cognition  of  an  object  which  is 
less  real  than  the  substratum  in  which  it  appears.  It  is 
otherwise  termed  bhrama  or  erroneous  cognition. 

The  erroneous  cognition  of  shell  as  silver  is  occasional 
( kadacitka ),  and  hence  its  material  cause  must  be  referred 
to.  The  latter  must  have  the  same  level  of  reality  as  silver. 
And  that  cause  is  avidya  present  in  Brahman-Atman  delimi¬ 
ted  by  the  true  nature  of  the  object  (shell)  that  is 
misapprehended. 

Apart  from  the  material  cause,  the  efficient  cause  'also-, 
is  necessary  for  the  erroneous  cognition  of  shell  as  silver. 
There  are  four  factors  which  serve  as  the  efficient  cause ; 
and  they  are:  (i)  defect  in  the  instrument  of  valid  know¬ 
ledge,  like  defective  eye-sight,  (ii)  defect  in  the  object  of 
erroneous  cognition,  (iii)  the  previous  experience  of  silver, 
and  (iv)  a  knowledge  of  the  general  nature  alone  of  the 
substrate  without  a  knowledge  of  its  particular  character. 
Shell  appears  as  silver  or  silver  is  superimposed  on  shell  not 
by  one  who  has  not  seen  silver  before,  but  only  by  one  who 
has  seen  silver  before.  Then,  a  serpent  is  not  superimposed 
on  shell,  nor  is  silver  superimposed  on  rope.  There  must 
be  similarity  between  the  ground  of  superimposition  and  the 
object  superimposed;  and  this  similarity  is  characterized  as 
a  defect  present  in  the  object  of  erroneous  perception. 
Further,  there  must  be  also  the  defect  in  the  instrument  of 
knowledge  such  as  defective  eye-sight,  etc.  And  finally, 
the  substrate  must  be  cognized  in  its  general  nature  and  not 
in  its  specific  aspect.  What  is  presented  before  the  eyes 
should  be  cognized  as  ‘this’  and  not  as  possessing  the  attri¬ 
bute  of  shcll-ness. 

There  is  yet  another  point  of  profound  importance. 
In  the  case  of  the  erroneous  cognition  of  shell  as  silver,  it  is 
not  silver  alone  that  is  superimposed  on  the  ‘this’  element, 


87 


the  ‘this’  element  also  on  the  silver.  Sarvajnatman  points 
out255  that  the  objects  that  are  not  superimposed  are  not 
presented  in  the  erroneous  cognition.  The  shell  as  such  is 
not  presented  in  the  erroneous  cognition  and  hence  it  is 
not  superimposed.  The  ‘this’  element  of  shell,  on  the 
other  hand,  is  involved  in  the  erroneous  cognition  and 
hence  it  is  superimposed.  Similarly  the  knowledge  of  silver 
is  superimposed  on  the  ‘this’  element,  and  the  knowledge 
of  ‘this’  on  the  silver.256  Thus,  in  the  erroneous  cognition 
of  shell  as  silver,  there  is  the  mutual  superimposition  between 
the  ‘this’  element  and  the  silver,  and  the  knowledge  of  the 
‘this’  element  and  the  knowledge  of  silver.  i 

Now  it  is  contended  that  on  similar  lines  indicated 
above,  there  is  the  mutual  superimposition  between 
Brahman-Atman  and  the  phenomenal  elements.  But 
Sarvajnatman  suggests  that  the  three  factors,  namely, 
defect  in  the  object  of  erroneous  knowledge  which  is  char¬ 
acterized  as  similarity,  defect  in  the  instrument  of  valid 
knowledge,  the  previous  experience  of  £he  object  superim¬ 
posed,  are  not  common  to  all  forms  of  erroneous  perception 
and  hence  they  should  not  be  taker!  as  the  cause  of 
superimposition.  It  is  necessary  to  set  forth  Sarvajnatman’s 
arguments  in  support  of  this  view.  Sarvajnatman  points 
out  257  that  the  Vedic  text  -  brahmano  yajeta  presupposes  the 
superimposition  of  brahmin  caste  on  Brahman-Atman. 
But  these  two,  namely,  the  brahmin  caste  and  Brahman- 
Atman  are  not  similar  either  through  generic  attribute  or 
through  any  quality  or  action;  for,  both  are  devoid  of 
generic  attribute,  quality  or  action.  On  this  ground,  it 
should  be  held  that  similarity  is  not  an  essential  condition 
of  superimposition.  In  the  same  way,  in  the  case  of 

255.  Sg,  I,  34. 

256.  ibid.,  I,  35. 

257.  ibid.,  I,  28. 


88 


knowledge  which  is  self-luminous,  there  arises  the  erroneous 
notion”that  it  is  manifested  by  some  external  factors.  This 
superimposed  notion  regarding  ‘knowledge’,  cannot  be  due 
to  any  defect  in  the  substratum  -  ‘knowledge’,  for,  the 
latter,  being  self-luminous,  does  not  become  an  object. 
Nor  is  the  superimposed  notion  due  to  any  defect  in  the 
sense-organs;  for  ‘knowledge’  being  self-luminous,  does  nos 
come  within  the  range  of  sense-organs.  When  such  is  the 
case,  there  is  no  question  of  superimposed  notion  regarding 
knowledge  being  due  to  defect  in  sense-organs.258  It  follows 
from  this  that  defect  in  the  object,  namely,  similarity  and 
defect  in  the  sense-organs  are  not  the  essential  conditions 
of  superimposition,  owing  to  lack  of  correspondence 
[vyabhicard) .  The  third  one  also,  namely,  the  previous 
experience  of  the  object  superimposed  does\not  pervade  all 
cases  of  error.  Sarvajnatman  does  not  illustrate  this  point; 
but  Madhusudana  Sarasvatl  remarks  that  Sarvajnatman 
has  not  done  so,  because  this  point  is  too  clear  to  require 
illustration.  And  he  points  out  that  as  the  identity  between 
shell  and  silver,  though  not  experienced  before,  becomes 
the  object  of  erroneous  perception  and  as  such  superimposed, 
the  contention  that  the  previous  experience  of  the  object 
superimposed  is  a  necessary  condition  of  superimposition  is 
untenable.259  From  what  has  been  said  so  far,  it  would  be 
clear  that,  apart  from  the  material  cause,  namely,  avidya, 
the  only  efficient  cause  of  superimposition  is  that  the  sub¬ 
strate  of  superimposition  should  be  apprehended  in  its 
generality  but  not  in  its  particular  nature.  These,  two 


258.  ibid.,  I,  30. 

taka  samvidi  pramanaphale  ghatadijnane  yah  paresam  vedyatvddi 
bhramah  sa  tdvat  visayadosa  t  karanadosadvd  na  sambhavati,  samvidah 
svaprakdialvenavisayalvdt,  karanagocaratvacca,  SS,  p.  39. 

259.  samskaro'pi  vyabhiedri,  d uklirajatd divaii istyasya  pragananu- 
bhutasyapi  bhramavisayatvdt  iti  spastatvannoktam,  ibid.,  p.  40. 


89 


essential  conditions  are  present  in  the  case  of  Brahman- 
Atman,  and  as  such  there  can  be  the  mutual  superimposi¬ 
tion  between  the  phenomenal  elements  and  Brahman- 
Atman. 

So  far  the  presentation  of -shell  as  silver  which  involves 
the  mutual  superimposition  between  the  ‘this’  element  of 
shell  on  the  one  hanft,  and  silver,  on  the  other.  On  similar 
lines,  the  mutual  superimposition  between  Brahman-Atman 
and  the  universe  is  explained.  Before  proceeding  further, 
it  is  necessary  to  consider  the  necessity  for  accepting  the 
mutual  superimposition  between  Brahman-Atman  and  the 
phenomenal  elements. 

The  theory  of  mutuaT~lftmerimposition  between 
Brahman-Atman  and  the  phenomena  elements  is  based  on 
the  difficulty  in  accoemting  for  the]  manifestation  of  the 
universe.  There  are  only  three  ways  possible  for  the 
manifestation  of  the  universe.  It  can  be  said  that  the 
universe  is  manifested  by  itself,  or  by  Brahman-Atman  or 
by  other  proofs  like  perception,  etc.  But  all  .these  three 
courses  are  excluded.  The  first  alternative  cannot  hold 
good  on  the  ground  that  the  universe  by  itself  is  insentient 
and  as  such  it  cannot  manifest  the  universe.  The  second 
alternative  also  is  untenable;  for,  Brahman-Atman,  being 
devoid  of  any  relation  ( asanga ),  is  not  related  to  the  universe 
and  hence  it  cannot  manifest  the  universe.  The  third 
alternative  also  is  ruled  out;  for  as  proofs  are  not  productive 
factors  they  cannot  manifest  the  universe. Z0S 

Now  it  might  be  said  There  exists  the  relation  of  the 
nature  of  subject  and  object  ( visaya-visayi-bhava )  between 
Brahman-Atman  and  the  phenomenal  elements  and  so  the 
universe  can  be  manifested  by  Brahman-Atman.  Sarvajna- 
tman  refutes  this  contention  by  pointing  out  that  the 


260.  ibid,  III,  232. 


12 


90 


relation  of  the  nature  of  subject  and  object  between  Brah- 
man-Atman  and  the  phenomenal  elements  should  have  been 
caused  by  a  specific  relation  like  identity  ( tadatmya ),  or 
conjunction  ( samyoga ),  or  inherence  ( samavaya ).  But  these 
three  are  not  possible  for  the  following  reasons:  Brahman- 
Atman  is  internal  (pratyak),  while  the  universe  is  external 
( parak ).  Thus  Brahman-Atman  and  the  universe  differ  so 
markedly  that  there  can  be  no  identity  between  them.201 
The  relation  of  conjunction  can  hold  good  only  between 
substances  ( dravya );  and  substance  is  defined  as  that  in 
which  qualities  inhere.  But  no  qualities  inhere  in  Brahman- 
Atman,  as  the  latter  is  attributeless  ( nirguna ).  Hence 
Brahman-Atman  cannot  be  conceived  of  as  a  substance, 
and  as  such  it  can  have  no  relation  of  conjunction  with  the 
universe.202  The  relation  of  inherence  also  cannot  hold  good 
between  Brahman-Atman  and  thb  universe.  This  kind  of 
relation  is  recognized  as/  existing  between  the 
two  things  that  are  inseparable  ( ayutasiddha )  such 
as  component  parts  and  composite  wholes  ( avayava )  and 
avayavin),  qualities  and  substances  ( guna  and  dravya),  move¬ 
ments  and  moving  substances  (kriya  and  dravya ),  universals 
and  the  individuals  (jdti  and  vyakli),  and  particularties  and 
the  eternal  substances  ( visesa  and  nityadravya).  But 
Brahman-Atman  and  the  universe  cannot  be  viewed  as 
inseparable.  Though  the  universe  cannot  exist  independ¬ 
ently  of  Brahman-Atman,  yet,  the  latter,  at  the  time  of 
liberation  and  deep  sleep  remains  without  the  universe. 
Hence  these  two  are  not  inseparable  and  as  such  there  does 
ijot  exist  the  relation  of  inherence  between  them. 203 


261.  vastavam  tadatmyam  pratyagparagbhavena  virodhanna  sam- 
bhavati,  SS,  Part  II,  p.  285. 

262.  evarh  adravyatvat  driah  samyogo'pi  na  ghat  ate,  ibid. 

263.  napi  tayoh  samavayasambhavah,  ayutasiddhyabhavadityarthah, 
TB,  p.  928. 


91 


From  what  has  been  said,  it  would  be  clear  that  the 
relation  of  the  nature  of  subject  and  object  between 
Brahman-Atman  and  the  universe  is  not  possible,  in  view 
of  the  absence  of  any  specific  relation  between  the  two.284 

It  might  be  contended  that  the  relation  of  the  nature 
of  subject  and  object  between  Brahman-Atman  and  the 
universe  is  caused  by  the  fitness  (yogyata)  existing  in 
Brahman-Atman  itself  to  have  such  a  relation.  Sarvajnat- 
man  refutes  this  contention  by  pointing  out  that  the  fitness 
existing  in  Brahman-Atman  will  last  as  long  as  the  latter 
lasts.  And  as  Brahman-Atman  is  eternal,  the  fitness  also 
existing  in  it  should  be  viewed  ,as  eternal.  The  inevitable 
result  would  be  that  Brahman-Atman,  owing  to  its  fitness 
to  have  the  relation  wi*k  the  universe,  will  always  be 
related  with  the  universe  and  as/ such  there  will  be  never 
ending  transmigration  in  tluyease  of  Brahman-Atman.265 
Hence  Sarvajnatman  concludes  that  there  can  be  no 
relation  of  the  nature  of  subject  and  object  between 
Brahman-Atman  and  the  universe,  in  which  case  the 
universe  can  be  manifested  by  Brahman-Atman.  It  is  not 
manifested  by  itself,  as  it  is  insentient;  nor  by  other  proofs, 
as  they  are  not  productive  factors.  Hence  the  universe  is 
illusory.200  Sarvajnatman  further  explains  this  point.  He  holds 
that  Brahman-Atman  being  veiled  by  avidya  appears  as  the 
universe  and  as  such  the  latter  is  superimposed  on  Brahman- 
Atman.  Thus  it  has  no  independent  reality  apart  from 
Brahman-Atman  and  it  is  manifested  by  the  light  of  its 
substratum-Brahman-A  tm?»n.267 

From  the  foregoing  discussion,  it  would  be  clear  that 
to  account  for  the  manifestation  of  the  phenomenal  elements, 
it  is  necessary  to  admit  the  theory  of  superimposition  of  the 
latter  on  Brahman-Atman.  And  avidya  alone  is  the  primary 

264.  SS',  HI,  233.  265.  ibid.,  Ill,  234. 

266.  ibid,  III,  232.  267.  ibid.,  Ill,  236. 


92 


cause  of  bringing  about  the  superimposition  of  the 
phenomenal  elements  on  Brahman-Atman.  Or,  to  state 
the  same  in  other  words,  all  objects  are  related  to  Brahman- 
Atman  through  their  being  superimposed  on  it  by  avidya. 
The  important  result  of  this  view  is  that  avidya  also  being 
a  phenomenal  element  should  be  related  to  Brahman- 
Atman,  and  its  relation  also  should  have  been  caused  by 
avidya.  If,  in  order  to  account  for  the  relation  of 
avidya  to  Brahman-Atman  another  avidya  is  accceptcd,  then 
for  the  relation  of  the  latter  to  Brahman,  a  third  avidya 
should  be  admitted.  And  so  on  ad  infinitum.  Hence 
Sarvajnatman  concludes  208  that  the  superimposition  of 
avidya  on  Brahman-Atman  is  caused  by  avidya  itself.  It 
might  be  thought  that  this  contention  involves  the  fallacy 
of  self-dependence  ( atmairaya );  but  Sarvajnatman  holds209 
that  the  objection  regarding  the  /  defect  of  self-dependence 
should  not  be  raised  in  the  system  of  Advaita  where  every¬ 
thing  except  Brahman-Alfrfan  is  not  determinable  and 
hence  illusory. 

Sarvajnatman  substantiates  the  view  that  avidya  is  the 
cause  of  its  superimpositipn  as  well  as  the  universe  by  citing 
three  illustrations;  and  these  three  may  be  explained 
successively  as  follows  :  (i)  According  to  the  Prabhakara 

theory  of  triune  perception  ( triputi  pratyaksa)  every  know¬ 
ledge  manifests  itself  at  the  same  time  it  manifests  the  object 
and  the  knower.  It  does  not  require  any  other  condition 
than  itself  to  reveal  its  object  and  its  own  self.  Similarly, 
avidya  does  not  require  any  other  thing  than  itself 
for  its  superimposition  as  well  as  the  superimposition  of  the 
universe  on  Brahman-Atman.270  (ii)  According  to  the 
Naiyayikas,  the  self  is  an  immaterial  substance  and  it 
comprehends  the  objects  as  well  as  itself  through  knowledge 

268.  ibid.,  I,  52.  269.  ibid.,  I,  51. 

270.  ibid.,  I,  53. 


93 


( jnana )  which  is  its  quality.  Similarly,  it  is  not  unreason¬ 
able  that  avidya  itself  is  the  cause  of  superimposition  of  the 
universe  and  itself  on  Brahman-Atman.  271  (iii)  The  pot 
[ghata )  and  cloth  ( pata )  are  different  from  each  other. 
Patabheda,  which  subsists  in  ghata  differentiates  the  pata 
and  the  ghata  from  each  other.  Patabheda,  on  the  other 
hand,  is  different  from  ghata  in  which  it  subsists.  But  it 
differentiates  itself  from  ghata  without  requiring  any  other 
‘difference’  ( bheda ),  as,  otherwise,  there  would  result 
infinite  regress.  Similarly,  avidya  superimposes  on  Brahman- 
Atman  the  universe  which  is  its  modification  and  itself. 272 

So  for  the  consideration  of  the  superimposition  of 
avidya  which  is  the  material  cause  of  the  superimposition  of 
its  effect,  namely,  mind  and  other  phenomenal  elements  on 
Brahman-Atman.  It  has  already  been  pointed  out  thatj 
apart  from  the  material  cause,  the  efficient  cause  also  is 
necessary  for  superimposition.  And  that  efficient  cause  is  : 
The  substratum  must  be  cognized  in  its  generakpature  and 
not  in  its  specific  one.  It  is  clear  from  the  fact  that  shell 
which  is  the  substratum  of  silver  £hat  is  superimposed  on  it 
is  cognized  in  its  general  nature  as  this  and  not  as  shell. 
The  purvapaksin  points  out  that  Brahman-Atman  is  unitary 
and  as  such  it  has  neither  general  nature  nor  specific  one 
and  hence  it  cannot  be  the  substrate  of  the  superimposition 
of  the  phenomenal  elements. 

Sarv^jnatman  points  out  that  it  is  deduciblc  from  the 
purvapaksin’s  argument  that  an  object,  if  it  should  serve  as 
thfc  substratum  of  a  superimposed  object,  should  have  parts. 
But  it  is  not  so.  What  is  required  is  that  that  particular 
object  should  be  revealed  and  at  the  same  time  not  revealed. 
Sarvajnatman  illustrates273  this  point.  Two  trees  which 


271.  ibid.,  I,  54. 
273.  ibid.,  I,  44. 


272.  ibid.,  I,  55. 


94 


are  at  a  distance  and  which  are  really  different  are  perceiv¬ 
ed  to  be  one.  To  state  the  same  in  other  words,  ‘oneness’ 
is  superimposed  on  the  two  trees.  The  difference  that  exists 
in  one  of  the  trees  from  the  other  tree  is  identical  with  the 
tree  that  is  perceived.  It  should  be  held  that  the  tree  is 
perceived,  but  ‘difference’  which  is  identical  with  the  tree 
is  not  perceived;  for,  otherwise,  the  superimposition  of 
‘oneness’  on  the  two  trees  would  not  hold  good.  The 
matter  that  is  of  profound  importance  is  that  ‘difference’ 
which  is  identical  with  the  tree  is  not  cognized  even  though 
the  tree  is  cognized.  It  follows  from  this  that  an  object  is 
revealed  and  at  the  same  time  it  is  not  revealed.  Similarly 
Brahman-Atman,  being  self-luminous,  manifests  itself ;  and 
at  the  same  time  owing  to  avidya,  it  is  not  revealed  in  its 
true  nature.  Hence  Brahman-Atman  can  be  the  substrate 
of  the  superimposition  of  the  phenomenal  elements. 

It  might  be  objected  that  shell  which  is  the  substratum 
of  silver  that  is  superimposed  on  it  is  cognized  in  its  general 
aspect  as  ‘this’,  and  not  in  its  specific  aspeetr-  And,  the 
general  aspect  which  is  known  and  the  specific  aspect  which 
is  unknown  are  different,  as  the  two  are  designated  by  two 
distinct  terms  ‘this’  and  ‘shell’  So  what  is  unknown  is 
different  from  what  is  known.  It  follows  from  this  that 
one  and  the  same  object  cannot  be  known  and  at  the  same 
time  unknown. 

Sarvajnalman  refutes274  this  objection  by  contending 
that  the  difference  that  accidentally  exists  between  the 
general  aspect  and  specific  aspect  of  shell  does  not  account 
for  the  unknown  nature  of  the  specific  aspect.  He  holds 
that  one  and  the  same  object  can  be  known  and  at  the  same 
time  unknown.  We  have  explained  above  that  though  the 
tree  is  perceived,  yet  difference  from  the  other  tree  which 


274.  ibid. ,  I,  45-6. 


95 


exists  in,  and  which  is  identical  with  the  tree  that  is  perceiv¬ 
ed  is  not  apprehended.376  Sarvajnatman  sets  forth  another 
illustration.  The  permanence  of  pot  (say)  is  not  the  attri¬ 
bute  of  pot.  But  the  form  of  pot  itself,  on  the  basis  of  its 
rotation  to  the  past  and  the  present  time  is  spoken  of  as 
‘permanence’  Hence  ‘permanence’  is  identical  with  the 
form  of  pot.  Sarvaj#atman  points  out  that  ‘permanence’  is 
not  perceived  at  the  time  of  the  perception  of  pot.  However, 
it  later  becomes  the  object  of  visual  perception  accompanied 
by  the  awakened  latent  impressions.376  It  would  be  clear 
from  this  that  if  a  person  cannot  perceive  the  permanence 
of  an  object  which  is  identical  with  the  object,  though  the 
latter  is  perceived,  and  if  a  person  cannot  perceive  the 
difference  that  exists  in  one  of  the  two  trees  from  the  other 
tree,  though  he  perceives  the  tree  with  which  difference  is 
identical,  what  objection  is  there  in  holding  that  the  same 
object  is  known  and  at  the  same  time  unknown.  Sarvajnat¬ 
man  proceeds  to  say  that  Brahmaij-Atman  as  inner  cons¬ 
ciousness  is  always  manifest,  yet  it  is  not  revealed  in  its  true 
nature  as  absolute  bliss.  It  should  Benoted  here  that  there 
is  absolutely  no  difference  between  thedenertfm  aspect  and 
unknown  aspect  of  Brahman-Atman.  The  latter  is  self- 
luminous  and  hence  it  manifests  itself.  But,  owing  to  avidya , 
it  is  not  revealed  in  its  absolute  nature  and  blissful  form. 
Sarvajnatman  holds  that  the  criterion  for  an  object  to 
become  the  substratum  of  a  superimposed  thing  is  that  it 
should  be  revealed  and  at  tjre  same  time  certain  aspects 

which  are  identical  with  it  should  not  be  revealed.377 

/ 


275.  ibid.:  I,  44  and  47. 

276.  na  hi  sthairyarii  nama  kaicit  gunah  kriya  dharmantaram  va, 
api  tu  vastusvarupameva  pu  rva paraka  lasambhandham  nimittikrtya  sthema 
ucyate,  Stf,  Part  I,  p.  52. 

277.  adhis thane  am&avaUvath  aprayojakarh,  kim  tu  bha  samanasvaru  - 
panatiriktasyaiva  anavabhd satnd natvam,  AP,  p.  66. 


96 


Brahman-Atman  is  revealed  as  inner  consciousness  and  at 
the  same  time  its  absolute  form  which  is  identical  with  it  is 
not  revealed.  Hence  it  can  serve  as  the  substratum  of  the 
superimposition  of  the  universe.  Or,  to  state  the  same  in 
other  words  it  is  misapprehended  for  something  else. 

One  objection  to  the  conclusion  that  Brahman-Atman  is 
misapprehended  for  something  else,  however,  suggests 
itself.  And  that  objection  is :  In  worldly  experience, 
erroneous  cognition  arises  in  respect  of  objects  which  are 
similar  to  the  objects  superimposed,  and  which  are  compo¬ 
site  and  external.  As  Brahman-Atman  is  neither,  it 
cannot  be  misapprehended  for  something  else,  that  is,  the 
phenomenal  universe. 

Adhering  for  the  moment  to  the  stand-point  of  the 
purvapaksin,  Sarvajnatman  attributes378  similarity,  composite 
nature  and  externality  to  Brahman-Atman.  He  holds  that 
the  latter  and  the  pheprdmenal  element-intellect,  are  similar. 
Brahman-Atman  is  mire'  and  internal.  The  intellect,  too, 
when  contrasted  with  senses  and  body,  is  pure  and  internal. 
And  owing  to  avidyS  Brahman-Atman,  though  unitary,  is 
viewed  as  having  parts.  And  being  reflected  in  the  intellect 
it  seems  as  if  it  has  attained  the  state  of  an  object. 
Sarvajnatman  in  this  connection  cites  S>ri  Sankara’s  bkasya 
text  -  na  tavadayam  ekdntenavisayah,  asmatpratyayavisavatvat™ 
3ri  Sankara  uses  the  word  asmatpralyaya  in  the  sense  of 
antahkarana.  Brahman-Atman  reflected  in  it  becomes 
vyavaharayogya,  that  is,  it  manifests  itself  indubitably.  This 
is  all  what  is  meant  when  wt  attribute  objectivity  ( visayatva ) 
to  Brahman-Atman  and  not  that  it  is  the  object  of  know¬ 
ledge.  In  order  that  a  thing  may  become  an  object 
(yisaya),  it  is  enough  if  it  manifests  itself,  thereby  dispelling 


278.  ibid,  l,  40. 

279.  Adhyasa-bhasya. 
See  Ssf ,  I,  40. 


97 


the  doubt  regarding  its  existence,  there  being  no  absolute 
necessity  for  sense-contact.  Now  Brahman-Atman  being  of 
the  nature  of  consciousness  is  self-luminous  and  needs  no 
other  knowledge  for  its  revelation.  Thus  Sarvajnatman, 
from  the  standpoint  of  the  purvapaksin,  aclmifc  that 
Brahman-Atnaan  ia  similar  to  the  object — intel^ct  that  is 
superimposed  on  it;  #nd  it  is  composite  and  an  object.  But 
really  these  three  are  not  the  criteria  for  superimposition, 
that  is,  the.  misapprehension  of  one  thing  as  other. 
Sarvajnatman  points  out  that  for  the  misapprehension 
of  one  thing  as  other,  what  is  required  is  that  the  object 
which  is  misapprehended  should  be  immediately  presented. 
And  the  objects  are  immediately  presented  either  by  them¬ 
selves  or  bv  mind  or  by  the  sense  of  sight.  In  the  dream 
state,  Brahman-Atman  is  immediately  presented  by  its  self¬ 
luminosity  and  in  it  erroneous  cognition  of  objects  arises 
repeatedly. 380  SimilarrlyThe  etheric  space  is  cognized  by 
the  mind;  and  in/uTnere  arises  erroneous  cognition  ascrib¬ 
ing  various  colours  to  it  such  as  whiteness,  etc.  In  the 
same  way,  shell  is  cognized  by  sense  of  sight  and  in  it  there 
arises  the  delusion  of  silver.281  It  would  have  become  clear 
from  this  that  for  the  misapprehension  of  one  thing  as 
other,  what  is  required  is  that  the  object  misapprehended 
should  be  immediately  presented.  Here  Brahman-Atman 
is  immediately  presented  by  its  self-luminosity  and  so  it  can 
be  mistaken  for  the  objective  universe.  Or,  to  state  the 
same  in  other  words,  the  universe  can  be  superimposed 
(jp  B  rahman-Atman. 

/ . 

It  has  been  said  that  in  superimposition  only  the 
superimposed  objects  are  presented.  In  the  case  of  the 
superimposition  of  the  objective  elements  (say)  — pot,  etc., 
the  latter  are  presented  as  existent  in  the  form,  ‘  The  pot 


280.  ibid.,  I,  41—42. 

281.  ibid,  I,  43. 


13 


9<i 


is  existent,  The  cloth  is  existent ’,  etc  And  existence  is  of 
the  nature  of  Brahman-Atman.  Since  the  latter  also  is 
presented  in  the  superimposition  of  the  phenomenal  elements, 
it  should  be  held  that  it  is  also  superimposed  on  the 
phenomenal  elements.  Hence  there  results  the  mutual  super- 
imposition  of  Brahman-Atman  and  the  phenomenal  ele¬ 
ments.  282  Thus  in  the  superimposition  of  Brahman-Atman 
as  the  phenomenal  world,  there  is  the  mutual  identification 
of  Brahman-Atman — the  absolutely  real  entity  with  the 
phenomenal  world  which  is  only  empirically  real. 

There  is  one  important  instance  of  superimposition 
which  Sarvajnatman  specially  considers;  283  and  that  is 
the  mutual  identification  of  mind  and  its  qualities  with 
Brahman-Atman7  associated  with  avidya.  This  gives  rise 
to  the  notion  of  which  contains  the  elements — Brahman- 
Atman  which  js  consciousness  and  mind.  The  mutual  super- 
imposition  of  the  two  gives  rise  to  the  aham-padartha  or 
jiva.  The  qualiti^sof  mind  like  agency,  etc.,  are  super¬ 
imposed  ;  and,  likewise  the  relation  of  Brahman-Atman 
to  mind  and  its  qualities  are  superimposed. 

There  is  one  objection  which  mav  be  raised  against 
the  conception  of  the  mutual  superimposition  of  the  pheno¬ 
menal  elements  and  Brahman-Atman.  And  that  objection 
is  :  whichever  is  superimposed  is  later  sublated,  like  the  form 
of  silver  superimposed  on  the  ‘this’  element  of  shell. 
When  such  is  the  case,  if  Brahman-Atman  and  the  pheno¬ 
menal  elements  are  mutually  superimposed,  it  follows  that 
they  should  also  be  sublated  and  as  such  there  would 
result  only  void. 

Sarvajnatman  obviates  this  difficulty  by  distinguishing 
between  adhist liana  and  adhara,  According  to  this  view, 
the  element  which  is  presented  as  related  to  the  super¬ 
imposed  object  is  termed  adhara  and  that  element  the 


282.  ibid..  Ill,  238. 


283.  ibid.,  I,  27. 


99 


misapprehension  of  which  leads  to  the  presentation  of 
something  else  in  its  place  is  termed  adhisthana. 284  It  is 
clear  that  in  the  case  of  the  erroneous  cognition  of  shell 
as  silver,  the  c  this  ’  element  of  shell  is  presented  as 
related  to  the  superimposed  object  — ‘silver’  in  the  form 
‘This  is  silver*.  Hence  the  ‘this’  element  is  the  adhara. 
And  the  misapprehension  of  the  true  nature  of  shell  leads 
to  the  presentation  of  silver  and  hence  shell  in  its  specific 
aspect  is  termed  adhisthana.  The  correct  apprehension  of 
adhisthana,  that  is,  shell  in  its  specific  nature  totally  removes 
the  presentation  of  the  superimposed  object  (say)  silver. 
Now  Sarvajnatman  argues  that  there  is  the  mutual  super¬ 
imposition  of  the ‘this’  element  of  shell  and  silver.  And 
these  two  alone  are  $ublated  as  both  are.  mutually  super¬ 
imposed.  But  the-element — adhisthana,  that  is,  shell  in  its 
specific  aspectvis  not  sublated.  Sarvajnatman  extends  this 
line  of  argument  in  the  case  of  the  mutual  superimposition 
of  Brahman-iAtman  and  the  phenomenal  elements.  He 
points  out  that  Brahman-Atman  in  its  aspect  of  bliss, 
eternity,  etc.,  is  veiled  by  avidya  and  is  the  adhisthana  and 
it  is  not  superimposed  on  the  phenomenal  elements.  And 
the  part  of  Brahman-Atman  which  is  illusorily  manifested  by 
avidya  and  which  is  presented  as  related  to  the  superimposed 
object,  that  is,  the  phenomenal  element  is  adhara . 285 
Hence  what  is  superimposed  is  only  the  adhara  mi  a  or  the 
part  of  Brahman-Atman  termed  adhara.  Consequently 
the  latter  alone  is  sublated  and  the  adhisthana  mi  a, 
remains.  It  follows'  from  N  this  that,  in  the  case  of  the 
mutual  superimposition  of  Brahman-Atman  and  the 
phenomenal  elements,  the  part  of  Brahman-Atman  termed 

— - - - m - 1 - 

284.  yannisthataya  yat  sphurali  tat  tasya  adharah,  yadvisyajMnacca 
yadbhavati  tat  tasya  adhisthdnam ,  TD,  p.  52. 

285.  ahankdraica  avidya  kalpitacaitanyamdanistha  eva,  tasya  Ian¬ 
nis  (hataya  sphuranat  ajnanakd ryatvacca  purnacetanamadhisthanam,  tasya 
t  zdvis  aya-ajn  ci nakd  ryatva  t,  ibid. 


100 


adhara  and  the  phenomenal  elements  are  sublated.  Yet, 
as  the  adhisthanamda  remains,  there  is  no  question  of 
the  universe  becoming  void.  286  Thus  the  objection,  namely, 
that  there  would  result  only  void  in  the  case  of  the  mutual 
superimposition  of  Brahman- Atman  and  the  phenomenal 
elements,  is  refuted  by  Sarvajnatman  on  the  basis  of  the 
distinction  between  adhist harm  and  adhara.  Now  Sarva¬ 


jnatman  proceeds  to  answer  the  objection  without  making 
any  distinction  as  adhara  and  adhisthana.  He  points  out  that 
as  regards  the  mutual  superimposition  of  Brahman-Atman 
and  the  phenomenal  elements,  the  objection  that  there 
would  result  only  void  would  hold  good  if  both  are  unreal 
objects.  But  Brahman-Atman  is  real  while  the  phenomenal 
elements  are  not  real  and  these  two  are  mutually  superim¬ 
posed.  /_/ 

The  phenomei/al  elements  as  such  are  superimposed  on 
Brahman-Atman.  ^3ut  in  the  case  of  the  superimposition  of 
Brahman-Atman  on  the  phenomenal  elements,  what  is  super¬ 
imposed  is,  not  Brahman-Atman  as  such,  but  only  the  rela¬ 
tion  between  Brahman-Atman  and  the  objective  elements — 
the  relation  which  does  not  really  exist  between  the  two. 
Hence  in  the  Advaitic  terminology,  the  superimposition  of 
the  phenomenal  elements  on  Brahman-Atman  is  known  as 
svarupadhyasa  arid  the  superimposition  of  Brahman-Atman 
on  the  phenomenal  elements  is  known  as  samsargadhyasa. 
Or,  to  state  the  same  in  other  words,  in  the  case  of  the 
mutual  superimposition  of  Brahman-Atman  and  the  pheno¬ 
menal  elements,  the  relation  of  Brahman-Atman  is  super¬ 
imposed  on  the  phenomenal  elements  and  the  phenomenal 
elements  as  such  are  superimposed  on  Brahman-Atman. 
Hence,  what  are  sublated  by  the  direct  experience  of  the 
substratum,  namely,  Brahman-Atman,  are  the  relation  of 
Brahman-Atman  to  the  phenomenal  elements  and  the  phe¬ 
nomenal  elements  as  such.  Thus  Brahman-Atman  remains 


286.  SS,  I,  32. 


]  01 

and  hence  there  arises  no  possibility  for  the  objection  of 
voidness.287  Thus  the  mutual  superimposition  of  Brahman- 
Atman  and  the  phenomenal  elements  has  to  be  admitted. 

To  sum  up  Atidya  abiding  in  Brahmac-Atman 
illusorily  presents  the  latter  in  the  form  of  God,  the  indivi¬ 
dual  soul  and  the  phenomenal  world.  The  jprms  of  God 
(1 6 varatva)  and  the  individual  soul  ( jiva/va )  and  the  pheno¬ 
menal  world  as  such  are  superimposed  on  Brahman-Atman 
and  the  relation  of  Brahman-Atman  on  them.  This  super¬ 
imposition  is  characterized  as  bondage  to  Brahman-Atman 
and  this  bondage  is  caused  by  its  own  avidya.  And  the 
direct  experience  of  Brahman-Atman  which  annihilates 
avidya  results  in  this  annihilation  of  bondage.288 


TH 


INDIVIDUAL  SOUL  AND  GOD 
(JIVA  AND  I  S' VARA) 


Brahman  owing  to  avidya  appears  as  jiva  and  Nvara. 
The  Advaitins  seek  to  explain  the  nature  of  Uvara  and  jiva 
in  three  different  ways;  and  they  are:  pratibimba-vada,  abhasa- 
vada,  and  avaccheda-vada.  These  three  may  be  explained 
successively  as  follows: 

Pratibimba-vada  This  view  is  advocated  by  Padmapada  in 
his  Pahcapadika  and  by  his  commentator  PrakaSotman  in 
his  Vivarana.  According  to  this  view,  avidya  which  is 
superimposed  on  Brahman,  the  pure  consciousness  receives 
its  reflection,  like  a  mirror,  the  reflection  of  a  face.  The 
pure  consciousness  which  serves  as  prototype  ( bimba )  is 
Dvara,  and  He  is  not  affected  by  the  defects  pertaining  to 
the  limiting  adjunct— avidya.  The  pure  consciousness  that 
is  reflected  in  avidya  and  its  product — mind  in  its  gross  or 


287.  ibid.,  I,  32. 


288.  ibid.,  I,  50. 


102 


subtle  states  is  jiva.  The  latter  is  affected  by  the  defects 
pertaining  to  the  limiting  adjuncts.  This  is,  as  it  should  be; 
for,  the  nature  of  a  limiting  adjunct  (say)  mirror  presents 
the  defects  in  it  like  impurity,  etc.,  in  the  face  that  is 
reflected  and  not  in  the  face  that  serves  as  prototype.  This 
view  allows  for  the  fact  that  Hvara  according  to  Advaita  is 
not  overpowered  by  avidya,  His  limiting  adjunct.  Hvara  is 
pure  consciousness  that  serves  as  prototype.  And  the 
defects  of  the  limiting  adjunct  are  presented  only  in  the 
reflected  image  and  not  in  the  prototype.  Hvara,  thus,  is 
not  overpowered  by  avidya',  on  the  other  hand,  He  controls 
it.  Of  the  two  powers  characterizing  avidya,  namely, 
avarana-iakti  and  viksepa-iakti,  avarana-iakti  is  inactive  in 
His  case.  The  truth  of  non-duality  is  not  concealed  from 
Him.  He  never  loses  sight  of  His  identity  with  the  non-dual 
Brahman.  Avidya,  however,  is  operative  on  its  viksepa  side. 
Consequently  the  variety-of  the  world  appears  to  Him,  but 
He  at  the  same  time/fealizes  that  it  is  nothing  more  than  an 
apparent  diversification  within  Himself. 

Jiva,  on  the  other  hand,  is  pure  consciousness  that  is 
reflected  in  avidya  and  its  product — mind  in  its  gross  and 
subtle  states.  Being  a  reflected  image,  it  is  overpowered  by 
its  limiting  adjuncts.  The  true  nature  of  Brahman  is  veiled 
from  it;  it  identifies  itself  with  the  physical  and  psychical 
accompaniments  brought  about  by  the  viksepa-iakti  of 
avidya  and  therefore  it  experiences  misery  in  the  form  of 
transmigration.289 


289.  Paricapadika ,  pp.  108,  111. 

Vivarana,  pp.  287,  294. 

vide'.  ajTiano’pahitam  caitanyam  iivarah,  anlahkarnatatsamskdra- 
vacchinnajitanapralibimbitam  caitanyam  jiva  ill  vivaranakarah,  SB,  p.  225. 

antahkarariatatsamska  ra  vaccinna  -  ajftanapralibimbitam  -  antahkaranam 
sthulavaslham  manah,  tatsamskarah  suk&mdvastharh  manah,  tayoranya- 
taravidistam  yadajna nani  tatpratibi/nbitamili,  Nyayaratnavali,  p.  225. 


103 


This  theory  known  as  pratibimba-vada  is  explained  in  a 
slightly  different  way  by  Sarvajnatman.  He  holds  290  both 
Hvara  and  jiva  to  be  the  pure  consciousness  that  is  reflected 
in  avidya  and  mind  respectively.  This  way  of  viewing 
Hvara  as  reflected  consciousness  in  avidya  forces  us  into  the 
conclusion  that  Hvara,  being  a  reflected  image,  is  affected 
by  t?ie  defects  present  in  the  limiting  adjunct — avidya. ,  and 
as  such  He  cannot  be  viewed  as  one  who  always  realizes  His 
identity  with  the  non-dual  Brahman.  Sarva]natman  seems 
to  feel  this  difficulty  and  sets  forth  291  the  view  that  Hvara 
is  pure  consciousness  that  serves  as  the  prototype. 
Brahmananda,  however,  gets  over  this  difficulty  b* pointing 
out  293  that  the  Upanisadic  text  “He  who  knows  everything 
in  its  general  and  particular  aspects”  293  states  that  Hvara 
is  an  omniscient  being.  This  omniscience  would  not  hold 
good  if  Hvara  does  not  always  realize  his  identity  with  the 
non-dual  Brahman.  Hvara  may  beffegarded  as  consciousness 
that  serves  as  the  prototype  or  as  consciousness  that  is 
reflected.  Tn  either  case,  He  is  an  omniscient  being. 
According  to  both  these  views  jivas  are  many  owing  to  the 
plurality  of  minds. 

The  unique  feature  of  the  pratibimba-vada  is  that  the 
reflected  image  is  identical  with  the  prototype  and  hence  it 
is  real.  But  the  reflection  which  is  only  immanence  of  pure 
consciousness  in  the  limiting  adjunct  and  the  limiting 
adjunct— these  two  are  not  real.  It  is  only  the  immanence 
of  pure  consciousness  in  the  limiting  adjunct  that  allows 
for  the  fact  of  viewing  the  consciousness  as  associated  with 
the  characteristic  of  being  the  source  of  the  universe 
(/ dvaratva)  or  the  characteristics  of  being  an  agent  and 
enjoyer  (jivatva).  These  two — I ivaratva  and  jivatva  are 
caused  in  pure  consciousness  when  the  latter  is  reflected 


290.  Slf,  III,  277-8. 

292.  Nyayaratnavali,  p.  227. 


291.  ibid.,  II,  176-7. 
293.  Murid,  I,  9. 


in  the  limiting  adjunct  and  hence  they  are  not  real.  It 
comes  to  this :  the  reflection  of  pure  consciousness  in  the 
limiting  adjunct  is  not  real ;  but  the  reflected  consciousness 
is  real. 394 

Abhasa-vada:  This  view  is  advocated  by  Sure£vara.i;W 
It  is  almost  the  same  as  the  previous  one.  It  is  different 
only  in  the  conception  and  interpretation  of  the  nature  of 
reflection.  According  to  the  previous  view,  in  a  reflection, 
the  reflected  image  is  identical  with  the  prototype  and  hence 
it  is  real.  But  it  is  only  wrong  localisation,  transposition, 
etc.,  of  the  original  in  the  limiting  adjunct  that  are  not  real. 
According  to  the  abhasa-vada,  the  reflected  image  is  not 
identical  with  the  prototype;  it  is  different  from  it  and  it  is 
indeterminable  either  as  real  or  as  unreal.296  The  pure 
consciousness  that  is  reflected  in  avidya  is  I^vara;  and  the 
consciousness  that  is  reflected  in  mind  is  jlva.  l£vara  and 
jlva  being  reflected  consciousness  are  different  from  the 
prototype  consciousness  and  are  indeterminable  either  as 
real  or  as  unreal.  Itfmglr^be  said  that  the  indeterminable 
character  of  the  reflected  images,  namely,  I^vara  and  jlva 
precludes  the  possibility  of  viewing  the  former  as  having  the 
characteristics  of  being  the  cause  of  the  universe,  the  internal 
ruler,  etc.,  and  the  latter  as  having  the  characteristics  of 
being  the  knower,  agent,  and  enjoyer.  SureSvara  gets  over 
this  difficulty  of  pointing  out  that  the  reflected  consciousness 
in  avidya.  and  in  mind  are  falsely  identified  with  the 
consciousness  that  serves  as  the  prototype,  and  this  accounts 
for  I^vara — the  reflected  consciousness  in  avidya  being  viewed 
as  the  creator  of  the  universe,  and  jiva—  the  reflected 


294.  SS‘,  HI,  277-8.  295.  SB,  pp.  219.  ff. 

296.  svarupato  mithyabhutam  pratibimbamiti  vadah  abhasa-vada h. 
svarupatah  satyam,  pralibiihbatvaruptna  inithyd bhutorii  binibaineva  pratibi/h 
bamiti  vddasya  pralibinihavd datiamiti  bhdvah ,  Xydyuratndvali ,  p.  22j. 


105 


consciousness  in  mind  being  viewed  as  the  knower,  agent, 
and  enjoyer. 297 

The  consciousness  that  is  reflected  in  mind  identified 
with  the  prototype  consciousness  is  jiva.  Since  mind  is 
manifold,  the  consciousness  that  is  reflected  in  it  is  also 
manifold.  And  the  prototype  consciousness  falsely  identified 
with  consciousness  reflected  in  minds  appears  to  be  many. 
Hvara,  on  the  other  hand,  is  the  prototype  consciousness 
identified  with  the  consciousness  reflected  in  avidya.  Since 
avidya  is  one,  the  consciousness  that  is  reflected  in  it  also  is 
one.  Consequently  the  prototype  consciousness  identified 
with  the  consciousness  that  is  reflected  also  is  one.  Hence 
Hvara  is  one. 

Avaccheda-vada:  This  view  is  advocated  by  Vacaspati- 
mi£ra  in  his  Bhamati.  VacaspatimiSra  does  not  favour  the 
theory  of  reflection  of  Bwdiman.  While  commenting  on 
the  adhyasa-bhasya,  VacaspatimiSra  observes  that  there  could 
not  be  any  reflection  of  Brahman  which  is  free  from  any 
form.  An  object  hqvmg^a  form  could  receive  the  reflection 
of  that  thing  whibh  has_foKn.  Brahman  being  free  from 
any  form  cannot  have  any  reflection  in  mind,  which  is  also 
formless.  How  could  there  be  any  reflection  of  sound,  smell, 
taste,  etc.?  On  this  ground  he  advocates  the  theory  known 
as  avaccheda-vada.  According  to  this  view,  Brahman  delimit¬ 
ed  by  avidya  is  jiva  which  is  its  locus  (adraya)  and  Brahman 
which  is  not  conditioned  by  it,  but  which  is  the  content 
(; visaya )  of  avidya  is  Is'vara.298  n, 

VacaspatimiSra  in  his  Bhamati  compares  jiva  to  the 
etheric  space  delimited  by  jar,  pot,  etc.299  Since  there 


297.  mithyalvapakse'pi  tasyadhisthanabhutacittadatmyddhyasat  cet- 
analvamiti  bhavah,  ibid.,  p.  160. 

298.  avidya  vacchinndnavacchinndveva  jivedaviti  paksah  avaccheda- 
vddah,  Narayani,  p.  232. 

299.  Sec  Bhamati  on  BSB,  II,  i,  4.;  II,  iii,  13. ;  and  III,  ii.  3. 


14 


106 


could  be  only  delimitation  and  not  reflection  of  etheric 
space  in  jar,  pot,  etc.,  and  since  VacaspatimiSra  compares 
the  jivas  to  the  etheric  space  delimited  by  jar,  pot,  etc.,  we 
must  take  that  VacaspatimiSra  favours  only  the  avaccheda- 
vada.  According  to  this  view,  since  jiva  is  the  locus  of 
avidya  and  since  there  is  plurality  of  avidya,  the  jivas  are 
many. 

The  avaccheda-va da  is  based  upon  the  criticism  that  there 
cannot  be  any  reflection  of  a  formless  principle.  This 
criticism  does  not  hold  good.  Redness  of  a  flower  is  reflected 
in  a  crystal;  and,  redness  does  not  have  any  form.  Sound 
which  does  not  have  any  form  has  reflection  in  the  form  of 
an  echo.  Hence  it  is  not  correct  to  say  that  only  objects 
which  have  form  could  have  reflection. 

It  might  be  objected  :  only  those  objects  which  can  be 
perceived  by  the  sense-organs  could  have  reflection.  Red¬ 
ness  and  sound,  although  they  do  not  have  any  form,  are 
reflected,  as  they/are_Tespectively  perceived  by  the  sense  of 
sight  and  the  sense  of  fieabing.  Brahman-Atman,  on  the 
other  hand,  does  not  come  within  the  range  of  any  sense- 
organ.  On  this  ground  it  cannot  have  any  reflection. 

The  rule,  namely,  that  it  is  only  those  objects  which 
can  be  comprehended  by  the  sense-organs  could  have 
reflection  lacks  correspondence.  Etheric  space  which  does 
not  come  within  the  range  of  any  sense-organ  and  which 
is  manifested  by  the  witness-self  does  have  reflection  in 
water.  In  the  same  way  Brahman-Atman  which  is  form¬ 
less  and  which  transcends  the  range  of  all  sense-organs 
could  have  reflection  in  avidya  and  in  mind.300 

From  what  has  been  said  so  far  it  would  have  become 
clear  that  Sarvajnatman  advocates  the  pratibimba-vada 


300.  SB,  pp.  148-158. 


107 


according  to  which  the  individual  souls  are  many.  Sarvaj¬ 
natman,  therefore,  admits  aneka-jiva-vada. 

Apart  from  the  three  views  set  forth  above,  there  is  one 
more  view  which  holds  the  jiva  to  be  one.  This  is  known 
as  eka-jiva-vada.  Sarvajnatman  accepts  this  view  also  and 
we  shall  now  deal  with  it. 

According  to  this  view13rahman-Atman  that  transcends 
avidya  is  ISvara  and  Brahman-Atman  reflected  in  avidya  is 
nva.  As  avidya  is  one,  jiva  also  is  one.  The  jiva  alone,  owing 
to  avidya  which  conceals  the  true  nature  of  Brahman-Atman 
from  it,  is  the  material  and  the  efficient  cause  of  the 
universe.  All  the  objective  elements  and  other  jlvas  are  the 
fictitious  creations  of  avidya  which  conceals  the  true  nature 
of  Brahman-Atman  from  the  only  one  jiva  that  exists.  301 

It  might  be  objected  that  the  view  of  the  only  one  jiva 
contradicts  experience.  The  time  that  had  passed  is 
beginningless  and  the  future  is  endless.  The  released  and 
ignorant  souls  existed  before  and  will  exist  hereafter.  And 
this  experience  would  not  hokhgood.  if  it  is  held  that  there 
is  only  one  jiva.  SarvajnaxrtrSn  refutes  this  objection  by 
contending  that  such  an  experience  holds  good  when  viewed 
in  the  light  of  dream  experience.  302  A  person  who  goes 
asleep  perceives  within  a  short  time,  innumerable  years  that 
has  passed  and  innumerable  years  that  are  yet  to  come. 
Sarvajnatman  suggests  that  this  experience  of  dream  state 
should  be  applied  to  the  waking  state.  303  In  the  latter  also, 
as  in  tjie  dream  state,  there  is  the  experience  that  the  time 
that  had  passed  is  bcginningless  and  the  sage  £>uka  and 
others  attained  release.  The  time  that  is  yet  to  come  is 
endless  and  some  others  will  attain  release.  Thus,  on  the 
lines  of  dream  experience,  the  distinction  of  release  and 


301.  Sg,  II,  128. 
303.  ibid.,  II,  130. 


302.  ibid.,  II,  129. 


108 


bondage  would  exist  till  the  realization  of  Brahman- 
Atman.304  Hence  Sarvajnatman  concludes  305  that  Brahman- 
Atman  attains  the  state  of  jiva  and  it  perceives  the  group  of 
jivas  and  the  universe  from  ether  to  earth  which  are 
superimposed  by  avidya.  It  follows  from  this  that  there  is 
only  one  jiva  and  other  jivas  and  the  objective  elements  are 
illusory  and  are  to  be  treated  on  a  par  with  the  objects  of 
dream  experience. 

Now  an  objection  may  be  raised:  if  it  is  held  that  there 
exists  only  one  jiva  and  all  other  jivas  are  illusory  and  are 
similar  to  the  ones  seen  in  dream,  then  it  follows  that 
preceptor  also  is  illusory  and  hence  there  can  be  none  to 
instruct  the  only  jiva  about  the  nature  of  Brahman-Atman. 
The  inevitable  result  would  be  that  the  jiva  cannot  attain 
the  knowledge  of  Brahman-Atman  and  consequently  it 
cannot  attain  liberation. 

Sarvajnatman  refutes30®  this  contention  by  pointing  out 
that  the  knowledge  of  Brahman-Atman  arises  to  the  aspirant 
who  is  the  only  jiva,,  from ^tkeTpreqeptor,  the  Upani$ads, 
and  the  principles  of  interpretation  though  these  are  illusory. 
And  the  aspirant  whose  avidya  is  annihilated  by  the  rise  of 
the  knowledge  of  Brahman-Atman  remains  in  his  own 
self-luminous  nature,  that  is,  he  attains  liberation. 

This  discussion  may  be  summed  up  by  saying  that 
Brahman-Atman  owing  to  avidya  attains  the  state  of  jiva. 
There  is  only  one  jiva;  and  the  objective  elements,  Idvara, 
and  other  jivas  are  illusory.  Though  these  are  illusory,  yet 
they  appear  as  if  real  until  the  rise  of  the  true  knowledge  of 
Brahman-Atman.307  And  the  preceptor  also  is  a  fictitious 
creation  and  yet  he  instructs  the  only  jiva  about  its  absolute 


304.  ibid.,  II,  131. 
306.  ibid.,  II,  163. 


305.  ibid.,  II,  132. 
307.  ibid.,  II,  222. 


109 


nature 30!!  and  consequently  that  jiva  attains  liberation. 
Another  point  of  profound  importance  in  this  view  is  that 
as  there  exists  only  one  jiva,  it  alone  is  entitled  to  liberation. 
Hence  the  scriptural  texts  referring  to  the  liberation  of  3uka 
and  others  are  merely  recommendatory  and  diey  are  intend¬ 
ed  only  to  glorify  the  state  of  liberation.  This  view  known 
as  cka-jiva-vdtla  is  the  tkremost  of  all  the  doctrines  expound¬ 
ing  the  nature  of  jiva.  And  this  view,  in  the  Advaitic 
terminology,  is  known  as  dr s  t is  r sti-va da . 300 

The  difference  between  the  aneka-jiva-vada  and  eka-jiva- 
vdda  lies  in  this  that  according  to  the  former  the  objective 
elements,  the  jivas,  and  Isvara  have  empirical  reality  ( vyava - 
harika-satya )  and  according  to  the  latter,  they  have  only 
apparent  reality  (pratihbasika-satya).  Further,  avidya  which 
is  admitted  to  be  one  does  not  admit  avasthajnana  to  which 
reference  has  already  been  made  in  the  section  entitled 
Maya -Avidya.  The  material  cause  ojThelllttsqry  appearances 
of  shell  as  silver,  rope  as  snake,  et<l,  is  avidjif.  It  may  be 
objected :  since  avidya  could  be  removed  only  by  the  direct 
experience  of  Brahman-Atman,  there  will  be  the  unending 
appearances  of  shell  as  silver,  rope  as  snake,  etc.  And  it  is 
contrary  to  the  experience  of  the  removal  of  these  illusory 
SSppearanccs  by  the  direct  experience  of  their  substratum. 
This  objection  is  answered  by  pointing  out  that  the  direct 
experience  of  the  substratum  of  the  illusory  appearances  is 
only  the  mental  state  ( vrtti );  and  vrtti,  according  to  this 
view,  does  not  remove  avidya  but  only  suppresses  it.  Thus 
according  to  this  view,  the  material  cause  of  illusory  appear¬ 
ances,  namely,  avidya,  is  only  suppressed  and  consequently 
the  illusory  appearances  remain  in  subtle  form.  They 
are  finally  removed  by  the  direct  experience  of  Brahman- 
Atman. 

308.  ibid.,  II,  225. 

309.  mukhyo  vedantasiddhantah  ekaj i vava da khyah ,  imameva  drsti- 
sr  sti-va  dam  acaksate,  SB,  p.  234. 


no 


We  said  that  Sarvajnatman  admits  aneka-jiva-vada  also. 
He  holds  that  Hvara  is  Brahman-Atman  reflected  in  avidya 
and  jiva  is  Brahman-Atman  reflected  in  avidya  and  mind. 
He  also  holds  the  view  that  Brahman-Atman  which  serves 
as  the  prototype  ( bimba )  is  Hvara.  We  shall  set  forth  the 
difference  between  Hvara  and  jiva,  although,  in  essence, 
they  are  identical  with  Brahman-Atman. 

Avidya  abiding  in  Brahman-Atman  conceals  the  true 
nature  of  the  latter  and  shows  up  something  else  in  its  place. 
These  two  functions  are  respectively  ascribed  to  two  powers 
of  avidya  known  as  avarana  and  viksepa.  But  it  is  essential 
to  note  that  in  the  case  of  Hvara,  avidya  operates  partially — 
only  on  its  aspect  of  viksepa  ;  for  by  hypothesis  nothing  is 
ever  concealed  from  him.  The  function  of  avarana-Sakti  is  to 
conceal  the  unity  of  Brahman-Atman;  but  since  that  unity 
is  never  concealed  from  Hvara,  avidya  in  its  aspect  of  avarana 
is  stated  to  be  powerless  over  Him.  It  is  for  this  reason  that 
Hvara  is  accepted  to  be  omniscient.  In  the  case  of  jiva,  on 
the  other  hand,  the  unity  of  Brahman-Atman  is  concealed 
from  it  and  thus,  avidja  in  its  aspect  of  avarana  is  fully  active 
in  its  case310.  And  it  is  for  this  reason  that  jiva  possesses  only 
finite  knowledge^/ 

Another  difference  between  Hvara  and  jiva  is  based  on 
the  absence  of  mind  in  the  case  of  Hvara.  Hvara  is 
devoid  of  mind,  while  jiva  is  in  possession  of  it.  And 
without  the  association  of  the  mind.  The  experience  of 
avidya  in  the  form  CI  am  ignorant*  is  not  possible  in  the 
case  of  Hvara.  And  the  absence  of  experience  of  avidya  in 
the  case  of  Hvara  suggests  that  His  essential  nature  is  never 
concealed  from  Him.  In  the  case  of  jiva,  on  the  other  hand, 
there  is  the  experience  of  avidya  in  the  form  T  am  ignorant’, 
owing  to  the  possession  of  mind.311  And  the  experience 
of  avidya  in  the  case  of  jiva  suggests  that  its  essential  nature 

310.  Ss',  II,  165. 


311.  ibid.,  II,  178,  180, 


Ill 


is  concealed  from  it.  And  for  this  reason  also,  Hvara  is 
held  to  be  omniscient,  while  jiva  is  not  so. 313 

It  would  have  become  clear  that  the  true  nature  of 
Hvara  is  never  concealed  from  Him  by  avidya.  But  in  the 
case  of  jiva,  its  true  nature  is  concealed  from  it  by  avidya. 
For  this  reason,  the  misery  born  out  of  avidya  pertains  to 
jiva.  but  the  misery  is  not  even  seemingly  present  in  Hvara. 
And  on  this  ground  the  group  of  qualities  such  as  omni¬ 
science,  etc.,  belongs  to  Kvara  and  not  to  jiva.313 

To  sum  up :  the  reflection  of  Brahman-Atman  in 
avidya  is  Hvara  and  in  avidya  and  mind  is  jiva.  The  former 
always  realizes  His  identity  with  Brahman-Atman  and 
lienee  He  is  ever-released.  The  latter  loses  sight  of  its  identity 
with  Brahman-Atman,  owing  to  the  power  which  avidya  in 
its  aspect  of  avarana  wields  over  it,  and  hence  i-t  undergoes 
transmigration.  Then  by  realizing  its  identity  with 
Brahman-Atman,  it  attains  liberation.^/ 

THE  PHENOMENAL  WORLD  [JAG AT) 

In  order  to  aepbunt  for  the  rise  of  the  phenomenal 
world,  the  Advaitins  advocate  the  theory  of  transfiguration 
[vivarta-vada).  According  to  it,  the  cause  produces  the 
effect  without  itself  undergoing  any  change  whatsoever. 
Viewed  in  the  light  of  this  theory,  Brahmarv-Atmaji  only 
appears  as  the  world,  and  being  the  substratum  of  the 
appearance  of  the  world  it  is  its  transfigurative  material 
cause  (vivaria" padana ).  The  universe  has  no  independent 
existafece  apart  from  Brahman-Atman.  311 

The  author  of  the  Brahma-sutra  establishes  316  the 
vivarta-vada,  and  as  a  preliminary  he  critically  examines  the 


312.  ibid.,  II,  183.  313.  ibid.,  II,  173. 

314.  brahmavyatirekena  karyajatasyabhava  iti  gamy  ale,  BSB,  II,  i,  14. 

315.  BS,  II,  i,  14. 


112 


theories  put  forward  by  the  Buddhists,  the  Vaisesika.  arid 
the  Saiikhya  regarding  the  origin  of  the  universe.  Sarvajnat- 
man  briefly  sets  forth  the  arguments  of  the  author  of  the 
Brahma-sutra  against  their  theories. 

The  Sautrantika  and  Vaibhasika  schools  of  Buddhism 
advocate  the  theory  of  aggregation  ( samghatavada ). 
According  to  this  theory,  the  external  world  is  an  aggrega¬ 
tion  of  four  kinds  of  atoms — earth,  fire,  water,  and  air.  The 
internal  world  is  an  aggregation  of  five  groups  or  skandhas  : 
rupa,  vijhana,  vedana,  samjtia,  and  samskdra.  The  sense- 
organs  along  with  their  objects  constitute  the  rupa-skandha. 
Knowklge  in  the  form  ‘I’  stands  for  the  vijhana -skandha. 
The  states  of  mind  such  as  happiness,  misery,  or  the 
absence  of  the  two  which  arise  respectively  from  experience 
of  objects  that  are  pleasant,  or  unpleasant,  or  neither 
pleasant  nor  unpleasant  represent  the  vedana -skandha. 
Determinate  knowledge  ( savikalpa-pratyaya )  is  samiha- skandha. 
Desire,  aversion,  pride,  dharma,  adharma,  etc.,  constitute 
samskara-skandha .310 

The  author  of  the  Brahma-sutra  considers  this  theory  in 
the  sutra — saihudaya  ubhaya-lietuke’pi  tadapraptih ,317  He  points 
otrt—that^neither  the  atoms,  nor  the  groups  (skandhas)  can 
achieve  the  groupings  as  assumed  by  them;  for  they  are 
insentient.  The  schools  of  Buddhism  do  not  admit  any 
permanent  and  intelligent  being  who  could  bring  about  the 
groupings.  Hence  the  theory  of  aggregation  does  not  hold 
good.  313 

/ 

The  Vai^esikas  put  forward  the  theory  of  creation. 
According  to  this  theory,  something  originates  from  some¬ 
thing  else,  as  cloth  from  threads.  When  a  piece  of  cloth  is 
woven,  we  have  in  it  the  threads  in  conjunction;  and  over 

316.  55,  Part,  II,  pp.  41-2.  317.  BS,  II,  ii,  18. 

318.  vide:  55"  II,  169. 


113 


and  above  the  conjoined  threads,  the  cloth  which  has  come 
into  being  afresh.  This  new  product  was  not  in  existence 
before  its  production.  14-  has  come  into  being  as  a  new 
creation  from  its  prior  non-existence.  This  doctrine  is 
called  aramhha-vada.  and  is  also  designated  as  nwt-karya- 
vada.  And  in  this  theory,  when  an  object  (say)  cloth  is  said 
to  come  into  existence,  wha*  is  meant  is  that  the  object 
not  existing  before  its  production  come  to  have  the  relation 
of  inherence  ( samavaya )  with  its  inherent  cause  or  with  its 
existence.  319  On  this  basis  the  Vaigesika  school  attributes 
the  creation  of  the  world  to  the  conjunction  of  the  primal 
atoms.  Every  object  in  the  world  is  only  the  combination 
of  the  atoms.  When  the  world  is  to  be  created  there  is 
movement  caused  in  the  atoms  Owing  to  the  will  of  God 
and  two  atoms  join  together  to  form  a  binary  compound 
( dvyanuka )  which  has  invisible  size  and  minuteness.  Three 
such  binary  compounds  produce  a  triad  ( trynnuka )  which 
has  visible  size  and  visible  length.  To  the  question  how 
visible  size  and  visible  length  in  a  triad  arise  from  the 
invisible  size  of  the  binary  compounds,  the  answer 
given  is  that  it  is  due  to  the  number  of  constituent 
atoms.  320  When  material  things  from  binary  compounds 
are  produced  their  qualities  also  are  produced,  their  nature 
being  determined  by  the  qualities  of  the  respective  causal 
substances.  Thus  the  w*hite  colour  of  the  threads  woven 
into  a  cloth  gives  rise  to  the  white  colour  in  the  cloth.  It 
should  be  noted  here  that  the  white  colour  of  the  cloth  is 
not  only  different  from  the  cloth  but  also  different  from  the 
white  colour  of  the  threads.  On  this  ground,  the  VaiSesika 
school  criticizes  the  Advaitic  doctrine  that  Brahman- Atman 
which  is  sentient  is  the  cause  of  the  world.  It  argues  that 
if  Brahman-Atman  which  is  sentient  is  the  cause  of  the 
world,  then  sentience  must  be  present  in  the  world  also. 


319.  ibid.,  Ill,  204.  320.  ibid.,  II,  72. 


15 


114 


But  this  is  not  the  case.  Hence  Brahman- Atman  which  is 
sentient  is  not  the  cause  of  the  world. 

The  author  of  the  Brahma-sutra  refutes  this  objection 
from  the  VaiSesika’s  own  standpoint.  Sarvajnatman 
summarizes  the  arguments  of  the  author  of  the  sutras  and 
he  independently  criticizes  the  conception  of  the  production 
of  an  effect  not  existing  before  its  origination.  And  his 
arguments  may  be  stated  as  follows :  the  origin  of  an 
object  not  existing  before  its  rise  is  described  as  the  relation 
of  inherence  of  the  object,  (say)  cloth  to  its  existence  and 
inherent  cause  (threads).  Sarvajnatman  argues  321  that  this 
view  is  incompatible  on  the  ground  that  the  existence  as 
well  as  the  inherent  cause  are  real,  while  the  object  with 
which  they  are  said  to  be  related  is  non-existent.  All  the 
objects,  only  by  being  real,  are  related  to  the  real  entities. 
And  a  non-existent  entity  is  not  related  to  real  entities. 
Sarvajnatman,  therefore,  concludes  822  that  the  production 
of  an  object  not  existing  before  its  origin  is  incompatible. 
And,  on  this  ground  the  theory  of  creation  or  the  asnt- 
karya-vada  stands  discredited- 

It  now  remains  to  answer  the  objection  of  the  Vai^esika, 
namely,  that  Brahman-Atman  which  is  sentient  cannot  be 
the  cause  of  the  world.  For  if  it  were  so,  sentience  must  be 
present  in  the  effect  also.  But  this  is  not  the  case.  Hence 
Brahman-Atman  cannot  be  the  cause  of  the  world.  The 
answer  to  this  objection  is  given  in  the  Brahma-sutra — mahad- 
dirghavadva  hr asvapar inland  ala bhya m.  323  Sarvajnatman  sets 
forth  the  answer  given  by  the  author  of  the  sutras  thus: 
the  author  of  the  sutras  declares  that  just  as  the  ternary  com¬ 
pound  produced  from  the  binary  compounds  that  have 
invisible  size  and  minuteness  is  not  accepted  as  having 
invisible  size  and  minuteness,  similarly  it  is  reasonable  that 

321.  ibid.,  IIT,  202-3.  322.  ibid.,  Ill,  210. 

323.  BS,  II,  ii,  11. 


115 


the  universe  which  is  insentient  could  originate  from  the 
sentient  principle.334  The  criticism  of  the  Vai^esika  school 
is  thus  unsound. 

Now  the  theory  of  transformation  which  is  advocated 
by  the  Sankhya  school  is  to  be  examined.  'Thij  school 
accepts  two  ultimate  entities— purusa  and  prakrti  and  further 
holds  that  the  prakrti  which  is  insentient,  spontaneously  trans¬ 
forms  itself  into  the  universe.  This,  the  author  of  the 
Brahma-sutra  refutes325  by  contending  that  the  insentient 
prakrti  cannot  evolve  itself  into  the  universe.  In  ordinary 
experience  it  is  found  that  an  insentient  object  (say)  clay 
does  not  change  into  pot  without  the  causal  operation  of  a 
potter.  Hence,  the  prakrti  cannot  transform  itself  into  the 
world  unless  there  is  SbOf  ultimate  intelligent  principle  to 
bring  about  the  transformation.  No  object  ever  changes 
itself  and  on  this  ground  the  theory  that  prakrti  transforms 
itself  into  the  universe  is  unreasonable.326 

Sarvajnatman  points  out  that  the  concept  of  transfor¬ 
mation  itself  does  not  stand  to  reason.  In  the  Sankhva 
system,  production  is  transformation  which  consists  only  in 
the  manifestation  of  what  is  already  in  a  latent  form  and 
is  not  a  new  creation.  The  object  is  existent  in  an  unmani¬ 
fest  form  and  causal  operation  manifests  it.  Hence  this 
theory  is  also  termed  sat-karya-vada.  Sarvajnatman  holds 
that  in  this  view  causal  operation  is  futile.  He  argues  that 
it  cannot  be  said  that  causal  operation  brings  forth  the 
existent  object;  for,  the  object  is  already  existent  and  as  such 
need  not  be  produced.327  It  might  be  said  that  causal 
operation  manifests  the  object  by  giving  rise  to  some  qualities 
in  the  object;  for,  in  the  sat-karya-vada  the  qualities  are  also 
existent  and  hence  they  need  not  be  produced.328  It  might 


324. 

ss. 

II,  71. 

325. 

BS,  II,  ii,  1.  ff. 

326. 

ss', 

II,  76. 

327. 

ibid.,  Ill,  211. 

328. 

ibid. 

,  III,  212. 

110 

be  thought  that  the  causal  operation  manifests  the  object 
by  removing  some  defect  in  the  object;  for,  in  the  sat-karya- 
vada,  defect  also  is  existent  in  the  object  and  an  existent 
object  cannot  be  removed.32’  Hence,  Sarvajnatman  con¬ 
cludes  that  causal  operation  is  futile  in  the  sat-karya-vada. 
Sarvajnatman  proceeds  to  point  out  330  that  even  if  it  is 
admitted  that  causal  operation  manifests  the  objects,  then 
there  arises  another  difficulty  and  that  is  in  the  sat-karya- 
vada,  the  causal  operation  also  is  always  existent  and  hence 
it  should  be  held  that  it  always  manifests  the  objects. 
Hence  there  can  be  no  dissolution  and  no  states  of  deep 
sleep  and  swoon.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  causal 
operation  is  held  to  be  non-existent,  then  there  can  be  no 
creation.  Hence  the  concept  of  transformation  does  not 
hold  good. 

The  defects  in  the  theories  of  aggregation,  creation,  and 
transformation  have  led  the  Advaitins  to  formulate  the 
theory  of  transfiguration  ( vivarta-vada ).  In  this  theory, 
Brahman-Atman  gives  rise  to  appearances  which,  though 
entirely  depending  on  it,  affect  it  no  more  than  the  silver 
does  the  shell  in  which  it  appears.  The  cause  produces  the 
effect  without  itself  undergoing  any  change.  Brahman- 
Atman  without  itself  undergoing  any  modification  gives 
rise  to  the  appearance  of  the  universe,  and  being  the 
substratum  of  the  universe,  it  is  viewed  as  the  source  of  the 
universe.  The  principle  that  accounts  for  the  illusory 
presentation  of  Brahman-Atman  as  the  universe  is  avidya. 
Hence  it  is  mainly  owing  to  avidya,  Brahman-Atman 
becomes  the  source  of  the  universe.  Sarvajnatman,  there¬ 
fore,  holds331  that  Brahman-Atman  depending  on  avidya 
inspired  by  its  reflection  is  the  source  of  the  universe.  And, 
avidya  superimposed  on  Brahman-Atman  is  a  mere 
accessory  to  the  latter  in  bringing  the  universe  into  existence. 


329.  ibid.,  Ill,  213. 
331.  ibid.,  I,  323,  332. 


330.  ibid,  II,  215. 


117 


It  should  be  noted  here  that  when  it  is  said  that  Brahman- 
Atman  is  the  source  of  the  universe,  what  is  meant  is  that  it 
is  the  substratum  of  aviclyd  and  its  modification— the 
universe*332 

Now  there  arises  the  doubt  whether  avidfu  is  the  cause 
of  the  universe  -or  not.  Sarvajnatman  holds  that  avidya  is 
the  cause  of  the  universe  ;  but  it  is  to  be  understood  in  the 
sense  of  transformative  material  cause.  Hence  Brahman- 
Atman  is  the  transfigurative  material  cause  ( vivarto’padana ) 
and  avidya  is  the  transformative  material  cause  ( parinam - 
yupadana).  And  being  the  transformative  material  cause, 
avidya  serves  as  an  accessory  to  Brahman-Atman  in  bringing 
the  universe  into  existence.334  Sarvajnatman  in  this  connec¬ 
tion  considers  a  particular  theory  regarding  the  source  of 
the  universe  which  is  as  follows the  Upani§adic  passage 
‘The  etheric  space  arose  from  Atman’  3  3  5  states  that  every¬ 
thing  beginning  with  etheric  space  originates  from  Atman. 
The  word  Atman  signifies  the  blend  of  pure  consciousness 
and  the  insentient  element  of  avidya.  Therefore  the  pure 
consciousness  associated  with  avidya  is  the  material  cause  of 
the  universe.  But  the  spiritual  element  alone  present  in  the 
blend  is  the  efficient  cause  of  the  universe.330 

Sarvajnatman  refutes3  37  this  theory  by  contending  that 
the  word  Atman  no  doubt  primarily  conveys  the  blend  of 
the  pure  consciousness  and  -avidya .  But  here  it  should  be 

332.  mam  iuddham  advoyaiii  brahmaiva  avidya  ladvivarla  dhislhd 
nataya  drutisammatam  jagannidaTiam,  SS,  Part  I,  p.  243. 

333.  Sg,  II,  127,  170,  and  171. 

334.  kutasthasya  -brahman ah  i  mtipradarSitaka  ranalvd disatiiraksana  r- 
thaih  jadaprapaheopa  da  nataya  anumitarii  ajilanam  tadgha  takalaya  airitam, 
SS,  Part  I,  p.  247. 

333.  Tail.,  II,  i,  1.  336.  Ss,  I,  326-7. 

337.  ibid.,  I.  320--30. 

For  details  -see  Ss ,  I,*<P63-4. 


118 


taken  in  its  secondary  sense.  The  word  Atman,  through 
exclusive  -  non-exclusive  secondary  signification  ( jahad - 
ajahallaksana)  conveys  the  pure  conciousness  and  it  should 
be  regarded  as  the  cause  of  the  universe. 

It  would  be  clear  from  this  that  Sarvajnatman  holds 
that  pure  consciousness  is  the  source  of  the  universe.  But 
it  should  not  be  concluded  that  Hvara  is  not  the  source  of 
the  universe.  No  doubt  Sarvajnatman  holds338  that 
Hvara  as  the  blend  of  pure  consciousness  and  avidya  is  not 
the  source  of  the  universe.  But  when  pure  consciousness 
unconditioned  by  avidya  (birhbacaitanya)  is  viewed  as 
Hvara,339  then  Sarvajnatman  has  no  objection  in  hold¬ 
ing340  that  Hvara  is  the  source  of  the  universe.  Hence 
in  Sarvajnatman’s  view,  the  pure  consciousness  alone-is  the 
cause  of  the  universe.  If  Sarvajnatman  says  that  Hvara  is 
the  source  of  the  universe,  it  should  be  taken  that  the  pure 
consciousness  unconditioned  by  avidya  (birhbacaitanya)  is 
viewed  as  Hvara  and  is  considered  to  be  the  cause  of  the 
universe.  Hence  the  pure  consciousness  alone,  through 
avidya  and  not  as  associated  with  avidya,  is  the  cause  of  the 
universe. 

Now  what  kind  of  causality  is  recognized  in  respect  of 
Brahman-Atman,  the  pure  consciousness.  Is  it  efficient 
causality  alone  or  material  causality  or  both  ?  Sarvajnatman 
merely  states  341  that  Brahman-Atman  is  the  efficient  and 
the  material  cause  of  the  created  objects  ;  and  he  does  not 
elaborate  this  point.  3ri  3ahkara  in  his  commentary  on 
the  Brahma-dutra  —prakrtidca  pratijhadrstdntanuparodhat  342 


338.  Sg  I,  329-330.  339.  ibid.,  II.,  176. 

340.  ibid.,  II,  191;  III,  265,  269. 

vide:  tamasvyeva  brahma  biihbatmana  jagajjanakah  paramedvarah, 
SS,  Part  I,  p.  115. 

341.  SS',  I,  532. 


342.  BS,  I,  iv,  23. 


119 


elucidates  this  point  and  it  is  essential  to  deal  with  this 
here. 

£>ri  Sankara  observes  that  Brahman-Atman  is  to  be 
admitted  as  the  material  and  the  efficient  cause,  as  this 
view  does  not  conflict  with  the  statement  putting  forth  the 
thesis  and  the  illustrative  instances.  The  statement  putting 
forth  the  thesis  is  the  following ;  ‘Have  you  ever  asked  for 
that  instruction  by  which  that  which  is  not  heard  becomes 
heard  ;  that  which  is  not  reflected  on  becomes  reflected  on ; 
that  which  is  not  known,  known.’  343  This  passage 
conveys  that  through  the  cognition  of  one  thing  everything 
else,  even  if  unknown,,  becomes  known.  Now  the  knowledge 
of  everything  is  possible  through  the  cognition  of  the 
material  cause  sinee  the  effect  is  non-different  from  the 
material  cause.  The  illustrative  example  is  —  “Oh!  my 
dear,  as  by  one  clod  of  clay  all  that  is  made  of  clay  is 
known,  the  modification  (the  effect)  being  a  name  only 
which  has  its  origin  in  speech,  while  the  truth  is  that  it  is 
clay  merely.344  This  passage  refers  to  the  material  cause. 
Similar  statements  putting  forth  the  thesis  and  illustrative 
instances  which  are  to  be  found  in  all  Vedanta  texts  are  to 
be  viewed  as  proving  that  Brahman-Atman  is  the  material 
cause  of  the  world. 

That  Brahman-Atman  is  at  the  same  time  the  efficient 
cause  of  the  world,  we  have  to  conclude  from  the  circums¬ 
tance  that  there  is  no  other  guiding  principle.  Ordinarily 
material  causes  such  as  lumps  of  clay  and  pieces  of  gold  are 
dependent,  in  order  to  shape  themselves  into  vessels- a«d 
ornaments,  on  extraneous  efficient  causes  such  as  potter 
and  goldsmith ;  but  inside  Brahman-Atman  as  material 
cause,  there  is  no  other  efficient  cause  on  which  the  material 
cause  could  depend;  for,  the  scripture  says  345  that 


343.  Chand.,  VI,  i,  3.  344.  ibid.,  VI,  i.  4. 

343.  ibid.  VI,  ii,  1. 


120 


prior  to  creation  Brahman-Atman  was  one  without  a 
second.  Moreover,  if  there  were  admitted  a  guiding 
principle  different  from  the  material  cause  it  would  follow 
that  everything  cannot  be  known  through  one  thing  and 
thereby  the  statements  putting  forth  the  thesis  as  well  as  the 
illustrative  instances  would  be  contradicted.  Brahman- 
Atman  thus  is  the  efficient  cause  because  there  is  no  other 
guiding  principle,  and  the  material  cause  because  there  is 
no  other  substance  from  which  the  world  could  originate. 
Being  the  substratum  of  avidya,  Brahman-Atman  is  viewed 
as  the  material  cause.  And  being  the  substratum  of  desire, 
will,  and  action  which  are  the  transformations  of  avidya  and 
which  are  required  for  the  creation  of  the  world,  Brahman- 
Atman  is  viewed  as  the  efficient  cause  of  the  world.340  Both 
material  and  efficient  causality  are  brought  about  by  avidya. 

The  Advaitic  theory  of  causation,  namely,  the  brahma- 
vivarta-vada  which  is  different  from  both  the  prakrli- 
parinama-vada  of  the  Sankhya  school  and  the  anu-arambha- 
vada  of  the  Vaiiiesika  school  has  been  set  forth  by  the  author 
of  the  Brahma-sutra  as  his  final  conclusion  in  the  aphorism- 
tadananyatvam  arariibhana-d  abdadibhyah ,317 

Now  a  question  arises  as  to  the  view  that  the  Advaitx 
theory  of  causation  is  only  vivar'a-vada.  And  that  is  :  the 
author  of  the  sutras,  no  doubt,  holds  the  vivarta-vada  in  the 
aphorism — tadanayatvam  arambhanadabdadibhyah.  Butin  the 
previous  aphorism  —  bhoktrapatter  avibhagadcet  syallokavatm 
he  holds  the  theory  of  the  transformation  of  Brahman- 
Atman  into  the  universe  ( brahma-parinama-vada ),  on  the 
analogy  of  the  modifications  of  sea-water  into  foam,  waves, 
and  bubbles.  Thus  when  two  conflicting  theories  have  been 
put  forward  the  question  arises  :  how  are  we  to  decide  that 

346.  ekasyjiva  avidyo’paliitalvena  upadanatvasya,  avidya — parinama  — 
iccakrtyadya  iraydlvena  nimittatvasyapi  samhhavat  AS,  p.  759. 

See  Sg,  III,  251-2. 

347.  DS,  II,  i,  14. 


348.  DS,  II,  i,  13. 


121 


the  theory  of  transfiguration  alone  is  the  final  conclusion 
and  not  the  theory  of  transformation  ? 

3rl  Sankara  in  his  commentary  brings  out  the  true 
import  of  the  aphorisms,  and  Sarvajnatman  summarizes  his 
arguments  which  may  be  stated  as  follows  :  an  objection 
is  raised  as  regards  the  view  that  Brahman-Atman  is  the 
source  of  the  universe.  The  Upanisadic  text  ‘All  this  is 
Brahman’  349  which  states  that  Brahman  is  the  source  of  the 
universe  affirms  that  Brahman  and  the  universe  which 
consists  of  experients  and  the  objects  of  experience  are 
identical.  The  result  of  this  argument  is  that  the  distinc¬ 
tion  between  experients  and  objects  of  experience  which  we 
find  in  ordinary  experience  and  which  is  the  basis  of  all 
activities— sacred  or  secular  would  cease  to  exist,  as  the 
two  by  being  identical  with  Brahman,  would  be  identical. 
Moreover,  Brahman-Atman  cannot  be  taken  to  be  absolute, 
am  its  absolute  nature  is  contradicted  by  the  existence  of 
the  universe  which  we  perceive. 

The  author  of  the  Brahma-sutra  first  answers  the 
objections  raised  in  the  foregoing  paragraph  by  admitting 
the  theory  of  the  transformation  of  Brahman  ( brahma - 
parinama-vada)  on  the  analogy  of  the  modifications  of 
sea-water  into  waves,  foams,  and  bubbles.  This  he  states 
in  the  aphorism  bhoktrapatter  avibhagah,  cet  syallokavat.  He 
says  that  just  as  foams,  waves,  and  bubbles  in  the  sea, 
which,  by  being  the  modifications  of  the  sea-water  are 
identical  with  the  sea  and  yet  different  from  each  other,  »o 
also  the  experients  and  the  objects  of  experience  constituting 
the  world,  by  being  the  transformations  of  Brahman,  are 
identical  with  it  and  yet  different  from  each  other.  The 
theory  of  transformation  of  Brahman  into  the  universe  thus 
preserves  activity — sacred  or  secular,  which,  according  to 
men  of  average  intellect  requires  real  difference  in  the  form 


349.  Chand Ill,  xiv,  1. 


Hi 


122 


of  experients  and  the  objects  of  experience.350  Moreover, 
as  the  universe  is  identical  with  Brahman,  the  absolute 
nature  of  Brahman  also  is  maintained. 

Then,  in  the  aphorism  tadananyatvam  aramblianaiabda- 
dibhyah,  the  author  of  the  Brahma-sutra  refutes  the  objection 
referred  to  above  by  adopting  the  vivarta-vada.  The  Upa- 
nisadic  texts  themselves  suggest  the  theory  of  transfiguration. 
The  text  ‘Have  you  ever  asked  for  that  instruction,  whereby 
by  knowing  one,  everything  else,  though  unknown  becomes 
known”  301  declares  the  knowledge  of  everything,  that  is, 
the  effects,  by  knowing  one,  that  is,  the  cause.  And  another 
text  ‘clay  alone  is  true,  and  its  modifications  are  names  only; 
they  exist  through  speech  only’,352  states  that  the  entire  body 
of  products  has  no  existence  apart  from  its  cause.  By  extend¬ 
ing  this  line  of  interpretation,  we  conclude  that  the  entire 
body  of  products  has  no  existence  apart  from  Brahman.353 
It  is  only  illusory.  The  absolute  nature  of  Brahman  would 
be  contradicted  when  there  exists  the  universe  apart  from 
Brahman.  Since  the  world  has  no  independent  existence 
apart  from  Brahman,  the  absolute  nature  of  Brahman  is 
maintained.  The  world,  although  illusory,  is  real  till  the 
rise  of  the  direct  experience  of  Brahman-Atman.  Hence 
empirical  acitivity  also  could  be  preserved. 

Of  these  two  theories,  the  theory  of  transfiguration  alone 
is  the  final  view  of  the  author  of  the  Brahma-sutra ;  for,  the 
absolute  nature  of  Brahman  can  be  maintained  in  this  view 
alone,  as  it  holds  the  universe  to  be  illusory.  The  theory 
of  transformation,  on  the  other  hand,  holds  the  universe  to 


350.  apratyakhyayaiva  kdryaprapaheam  parindmapraknyam  ca  a  tr¬ 
ay  ati  saguno'pa sanesupayoksyata  iti,  BSB,  II,  i,  14. 

vide :  SS ,  II,  58. 

351.  Chand.,  VI,  i,  3.  352.  ibid.,  VI,  i,  4. 

353.  brahma-vyatirekena-kd'ya-jdtasya  abhava  iti  .gamyate, 

BSB,  II,  i,  14. 


123 


be  identical  with  Brahman,  yet  it  admits  of  difference  also. 
Hence  in  this  view  the  absolute,  nature  of  Brahman  could  be 
maintained  only  in  a  provisional  way.  From  this  it  should 
not  be  concluded  that  the  acceptance  of  the  theory  of  trans¬ 
formation  serves  no  purpose  and  as  such  it  Is  futile.  As  has 
been  indicated  above,  the  theory  of  transformation  is 
admitted  to  satisfy  men  of  average  intellect  who  hold  that 
the  universe  must  be  red  in  order  that  empirical  activities 
may  be  carried  out;  and,  the  theory  of  transformation  holds 
the  universe  to  be  a  real  transformation  of  Brahman.  Apart 
from  this,  the  theory  of  transformation  serves  as  a  prelude  to 
the  theory  of  transfiguration  which  treats  Brahman  as 
acosmic.  This  presupposes  the  view  that  Brahman  is 
cosmic;  and  the  theory  of  transformation  alone  presents 
Brahman  as  cosmic.354  On  this  ground,  the  Upanisadic  texts, 
and  the  author  of  the  Brahma-sulra  maintain  the  theory  of 
transformation.  And  the  theory  of  transfiguration  alone  is 
the  final  conclusion  of  the  author  of  the  Brahma-sutra .355 

So  far  it  has  been  said  that  Brahman  itself,  without 
undergoing  any  change  appears  as  the  universe.  The  latter 
is  known  [drdya)  and  to  that  extent  it  cannot  be  unreal;  for, 
the  absolutely  unreal  like  ‘the  hare’s  horn’  is  only  words. 
Nor  can  the  universe  be  regarded  as  real  on  its  own  right; 
for,  it  is  insentient  and  hence  depends  entirely  upon  Brahman 
for  its  being.  Thus  the  universe  is  not  finally  classi¬ 
fiable  as  either  real  or  unreal.  The  Advaitins,  by  postulating 
a  reality  behind  the  universe,  differentiate  their  doctrine 
from  the  Sunya-vada  of  the  Madhyamika.  The  latter  holds 
that  the  world  is  non-aitiitent.  The  Advaitins,  on  the  other 
hand,  hold  that  the*  world  is  neither  existent  *or  non-existent 
but  different  from  being  existent  and  non-existent. 

Now  it  is  objected  that  although  the  doctrine  of  Advaita 
is  not  similar  to  the  sunya-vada  of  the  Madhyamika, 


354.  SS',  II,  58-64. 


355.  ibid.,  II,  56. 


124 


yet  it  is  not  alien  to  the  vijnana-vada  school  of  Buddhism. 
The  latter  admits  the  reality  of  consciousness  alone.  What 
is  of  the  nature  of  consciousness  is  indeed  indivisible;  but  by 
those  whose  vision  is  confused  it  is  seen  to  be,  as  it  were, 
— ^^differentiated  into  the  perceived  object,  the  perceiving  sub¬ 
ject,  the  proofs,  and  then  the  perception  itself.  And  the 
latter  are  false.  The  Advaitins  also  maintain  that  Brahman 
alone  which  is  pure  consciousness  is  real  and  it  appears 
as  the  universe  consisting  of  the  knower,  objects,  proofs,  and 
the  empirical  knowledge,  that  is,  the  mental  state.  And  the 
universe  is  not  real.  It  is,  therefore,  argued  that  the 
vijnana-vada  and  the  doctrine  of  Advaita  are  similar. 

Sarvajnatman  refutes  this  objection  by  contending  that 
though  the  two  doctrines  seem  to  be  sirrfilar,  yet  there  are 
some  characteristics  which  clearly  mark  the  difference  bet¬ 
ween  the  two  systems.  In  the  first  place,  the  Advaitin  holds 
that  the  four  factors,  namely,  the  knower,  the  object,  the 
proof,  and  the  empirical  knowledge  are  different  among 
themselves,  while  the  Vijnanavadin  denies  any  difference 
among  them.3™  In  the  second  place,  the  four  factors  refer¬ 
red  to  above  arc  created  by  the  beginningless  avidya  abiding 
in  the  eternal  Brahman  and  they  are  real  until  the  realisation 
of  Brahman.  But  the  Vijhanavudin  neither  admits  an  eternal 
Brahman  nor  the  beginningless  avidya.  Never  does  he 
posit  reality  to  the  universe.  The  third  ground  that  suggests 
the  difference  between  the  two  systems  is  this :  Brahman 
which  is  pure  consciousness  is  eternal  and  is  different  from 
empirical  knowledge  or  the  mental  state  which  arises  from 
the  contact  of  sense-organs  with  objects  and  which  is  insen¬ 
tient-  And  Brahman  itself  is  the  witness;  and,  without 
depending  on  any  sense-organ,  it  perceives  the  universe. 
The  Vijnanavadin,  on  the  other  hand,  holds  the  insentient 
mental  state  itself  to  be  consciousness  and  as  it  depends  on 


356.  ibid.,  II,  27. 


125 


the  sense-organs  for  its  origin,  it  is  mutable.  Moreover, 
unlike  the  Advaitins  who  hold  it  to  be  eternal  and  unitary, 
he  admits  it  to  be  momentary  and  manifold.357  From  this  it 
would  be  clear  that  the  doctrine  of  Advaita  and  the  Vijnana- 
vada  differ  so  markedly  that  there  can  be  no  identity 
between  the*. 

In  order  to  complete  the  account  of  the  nature  of  the 
phenomenal  world,  is  necessary  to  consider  one  more 
objection  which  is  as  follows :  The  world  of  objects  is 
declared  to  be  not  real.  It  follow^ from  this  that  the  scrip¬ 
ture  also  is  not  real,  as  it  belongs  to  the  world  of  objects. 
Then  how  can  it  convey  the  true  nature  of  Brahman? 

£>rl  Sankara  in  his  commentary  on  the  Brahma- sutra 
points  out358  with  suitable  illustrations  that  the  scripture 
though  not  real  can  convey  the  true  nature  of  Brahman. 
And  Sarvajnatman  briefly  sets  forth  £>rl  Sankara’s  arguments 
as  follows :  the  Aitareya-aranyaka  text  (HI,  ii,  iv,  7.)  declares 
that  the  perception  of  aperture  in  the  centre  of  the  sun’s 
disc  is  not  real;  but  it  indicates  that  one  who  perceives  so 
will  shortly  face  one’s  death.  And  death  is  real.  Again, 
death  which  is  real,  occurs;  sometimes  as  the  result  of  the 
mere  suspicion  that  a  venomous  snake  has  bitten359.  Moreover, 


357.  ibid,  II,  28-9. 

vide :  pramatra  divihhagah  nityasiddhaparama  twa  £ ntanmyayaiva  vijrm- 

bhiiah,  sa  ca  sthirah  iti  asmSbhih  ahgikriyate,  na  tatha  vijii a  nova  dibhih . 

visayavijhana-vyatinkta-svapraka  6 asthasvaru pah  saja  tiya dibheda&unyah  par- 
amatma  svadhyastam  saftalam  prapahcam  sadhayati  iti  asmdbhirucyate,  na 
tatha  bauddhaih,  tanmalc  buddhivrttereva  jadaydh  vijnanatvena  angikarat, 
etadvijnanasya  ksanikasya  ksanikaprapaflcasadhakatva  t  vijhanandrh  anekat- 
vacca,  ato'pi  na  satnyam,  TB,  pp.  546-7. 


358.  BS II,  II,  i,  14. 


359.  Sff,  I,  337  II,  227. 


126 


the  Brahma- sulra™  which  discusses  the  Chandogya  Upani§adic 
passage  ‘If  a  man  who  is  engaged  in  some  sacrifice  under¬ 
taken  for  some  special  purpose,  sees  in  hfs  dream  a  woman, 
he  is  to  infer  therefrom  success  in  the  sacrifice,”1 
states  that  dream  is  an  illusion  and  yet  it  is  indicative  of 
fpture  good  or  evil  that  is  real.  From  this  it  is  clear  that  an 
ev^tit  in  drcapi  though  not  real  indicates  an  actual  future 
eventAHhrlhe  same  way,  the  scripture  though  not  real  can 
convey  the  true  nature  of  Brahman.362 

To  sum  up  :  the  phenomenal  world  is  an  appearance  of 
Brahman- Atman  through  avidya.  Though  illusory,  it  is  real 
till  there  arises  the  direct  experience  of  Brahman-Atman.  / 


LIBERATION  [  MOKSA  ] 

So  far  we  have  said  that,  according  to  Advaita,  one 
and  the  same  Brahman  comes  to  appear.,  owing  to  maya- 
avidya  as  Hvara,  jiva,  and  the  world.  Hvara  always  realizes 
His  identity  with  Brahman  and  so  He  is  ever-released. 
The  world  is  an  illusory  appearance  of  Brahman-Atman 
and  it  is  sublated  by  the  direct  experience  of  the  latter.  It 
is  only  jiva  who  falsely  identifying  itself  with  body-mind 
complex,  undergoes  transmigration,  and  strives  after 
liberation.  Jiva  is  Brahman-Atman  itself  appearing 
through  the  limiting  adjunct — mind  which  is  a  product  of 
avidya.  Or,  Brahman-Atman  reflected  in  or  delimited  by 
avidya  and  mind  appears  as  jiva  and  thus  there  results  the 
mutual  identification  of  jiva  with  the  qualities  of  mind  like 
finitude,  agency,  etc.  Further  there  is  the  mutual  identifi¬ 
cation  of  jiva  associated  with  mind  and  its  qualities  with 
sense-organs,  body,  etc. 


360.  BS,  III,  ii,  4. 
362.  Ssf.  I,  338. 


361.  Chand.,  V,  ii,  9. 


£>ri  Sankara  in  his  commentary  on  the  Drahtna-sulra  says  : 
‘as  long  as  the  jiva  is  associated  with  the  adjunct — mind,  so 
long  only  is  the  jiva  a  jiva.  In  reality,  however,  there  is 
nothing  like  jiva-hood  apart  from  what  is  fancied  to  be 
such  by  reason  of  this  adjunct.’  363  He  proceeds  to  point 
out:  ‘this  relation  of  Brahman  with  mind  has  but  avidya  as 
its  source,  and  this  avidya  cannot  be  removed  by  anything 
apart  from  the  direct  experience  of  Biahman-Atman. 
Hence  the  relation  with  such  a  limiting  adjunct  as  the 
mind  does  not  cease  so  long  as  jiva  is  not  realized  as 
identical  with  Brahman-Atman.364  Avidya,  therefore,  is  the 
source  of  all  evil  and  its  removal  would  necessarily  bripg 
about  the  removal  of  the  relation  of  mind,  and  its  qualities 
like  finitude,  agency,  etc.  Jiva,  then,  ceases  to  be  a  jiva,  as 
it  would  manifest  as  Brahman-Atman  in  its  true  nature  of 
absolute  bliss  and  consciousness.  And  this  is  liberation. 
In  other  words,  liberation  is  only  Brahman-Atman  freed 
from  avidya.30*  Liberation  being  identical  with  Brahman- 
Atman  is  ever-attained  ;  yet,  through  a'  mistaken  notion  of 
its  not  being  attained,  the  aspirant  longs  for  it  and  attains 
it  as  if  it  were  unattained  through  the  removal  of  avidya  by 
the  direct  experience  of  Brahman-Atman.30 

Avidya  could  be  removed  by  the  direct  experience  of  its 
substratum.  And  stubstratum  is  defined  as  the  content  of 


363.  vavadeva  ca  ayarh  buddhyupa  dhisambandhah  tavadevasya  jiva- 
tvaih  samsaritvam  ca ,  f>arntia rthatasiu  na  jiuo  nama  buddhyvpadhi-sarh- 
bandhaparikalpilasvarupavyatirckena  asti,  BSB,  II,  Mi,  30. 

364.  api  ca  mithya jhanapurassaro'yam  atmano  buddhyupa  dhisam¬ 
bandhah,  na  ca  mi thy  a. in a nasya  samyayjtlana danyatra  nivrtlirasti  ityatah 
yavat  brahmalmatanavabodhah  tavadayath  buddhyupa  dhisambarfdho  na 
iamyati,  ibid., 

365.  atmaiva  anadyavidjanivrttyupalaksitah  moksah,  VK,  p.  6. 

366.  .9,9',  I,  304-5. 


128 


avidya  which  is  the  source  of  all  superimpositions.307 
Brahman-Atman  is  the  content  of  avidya  and  hence  it  is  its 
substratum.  Its  direct  experience,  therefore,  necessarily 
removes  avidya.  4 

The  mental  state  which  arises  from  the  major  texts  of 
the  Upanisads  in  the  form  of  Brahman-Atman  and  which 
is  thereby  inspired  by  the  reflection  of  Brahman-Atman  in 
it  is  termed  the  direct  experience  of  Brahman-Atman. 
Brahman-Atman  as  such  cannot  dispel  avidya  ;  it  is  its 
witness.  But  when  reflected  in  the  mental  state  arising 
from  the  major  texts  of  the  Upanisads,  it  removes  avidya, 
just  as  the  rays  of  the  sun  iiormally  illuminating  the  grass 
burn  the  very  grass  when  reflected  through  a  lens.308 

Now  we  shall  deal  with  the  means  of  the  direct 
experience  of  Brahman-Atman.  There  are  two-fold  means, 
namely,  instrumental  cause  and  auxiliary  cause.  The 
latter  is  again  two-fold  as  remote  means  ( bahirahga-sadhana ) 
and  proximate  means  ( antaranga-sadhana ). 

Of  the  two  auxiliary  causes,  the  remote  means  to  the 
direct  experience  of  Brahman-Atman  consists  of  those 
factors  that  have  been  prescribed  in  the  scriptural  text  as 
indirectly  helpful  for  the  rise  of  the  direct  experience  of 
Brahman-Atman  by  giving  rise  to  the  desire  for  the  latter 
( vividisa).3<i0  The  Upanisadic  text  Hametam  vedanuvacanena 
brahmandh  vividisanti,  yajnena  danena  tapasa  and d akenad  370 
which  means  that  ‘the  Brahmins  seek  to  realize  Brahman 
through  the  study  of  the  vedas,  through  sacrifices,  through 
gifts,  and  through  austerity  and  fasting’  prescribes  the 
performance  of  duties  relating  to  one’s  stage  and  class  of 


367.  adhisthanalvam  ca  bhramajanakajilana-visayatvam,  ajilana- 
visayatvamd  tram  va,  VK,  p.  53. 

368.  SLS,  p.  492. 

370.  Brh.,  IV,  iv,  22. 


369.  Stf,  III,  330. 


129 


life  with  reference  to  the  direct  experience  of  Brahman- 
Atman.  One’s  duties  including  the  optional  one’s  when 
performed  as  an  offering  to  Hvara  remove  the  unseen 
demerit  present  in  the  mind  of  the  aspirant  which  prevents 
the  rise  of  the  direct  experience  of  Brahman-Atman.371 
Sarvajnatman  holds  that  in  the  scriptural  text  cited  above 
it  is  not  the  direct  experience  of  Brahman  but  merely  the 
desire  for  the  same  that  is  said  to  result  from  the  performance 
of  one’s  duties.  The  word  vioiclisanti  in  the  text  consists  of 
the  root  vid  and  the  desiderative  suffix  san  and  it  conveys  that 
one’s  duties  have  for  their  object  the  desire  to  have  the 
direct  experience  of  Brahman-Atman  which  is  the  sense 
of  the  desiderative  suffix.  The  desiderative  suffix  is  used  in 
the  sense  of  desire  on  the  basis  of  the  Pa nini-su Irn-^dhaUh 
karmanah  samanakartrkddicchaydm  ya.373  One’s  duties  are 
not  employed  with  reference  to  the  direct  experience  of 
Brahman-Atman  which  is  the  sense  of  the  root  vid.  Panini 
in  another  aphorism  states  as  a  general  rule  that  the  sense  of 
the  suffix  is  primary  to  that  of  the  root.373  Hence,  here, 
direct  experience  of  Brahman-Atman  being  the  sense  of  the 
root  vid  is  not  primary.  One’s  duties,  therefore,  are  not 
related  to  it. 

It  might  be  objected :  Panini  supersedes  the  above 
general  rule  by  stating  the  primary  nature  of  the  sense  of 
the  root  in  the  aphorism — dhatoh  karmanah  samanakartrkd- 
dicclidyam  vd.31i  This  aphorism  means  that  the  sense  of  the 
root  being  the  object  of  desire,  that  is,  the  sense  of  the 
desiderative  suffix  is  primary.  Hence  one’s  duties  arc  related 


371.  S!f,  l,  64;  III,  351,  353  and  355. 

372.  Pa  nini-su  tra,  III,  i,  7. 

373.  pradhanapratyayarthavacanam  arthasya  anyaprama naira t,  Pail - 
ini- sutra,  I,  ii,  56. 

See  Sg,  III,  334-5. 

374.  Pa  nini-su  tra ,  III,  i,  7. 


17 


130 


to  the  sense  of  the  root,  that  is,  the  direct  experience  of 
Brahman  which  is  primary  and  not  to  the  sense  of  the 
suffix,  that  is,  the  desire  to  have  the  direct  experience  of 
Brahman-Atman. 

Sarvajnatman  refutes  this  objection  by  pointing  out  that 
the  sense  of  the  root  is  primary  only  by  being  the  object  of 
the  sense  of  the  suffix  and  hence  its  primary  nature  is  only 
presumptively  known.  One’s  duties  could  have  relation 
with  the  sense  of  the  root,  namely,  direct  experience  of 
Brahman-Atman  only  when  the  primary  nature  of  the  latter 
is  verbally  expressed.  But  here  as  its  primary  nature  is 
only  presumptively  known,  one’s  duties  cannot  have  any 
relation  to  it.  In  the  sutra — dhatoh  karmanah ,  etc.  there  is  no 
word  that  indicates  whether  the  primary  nature  of  the  sense 
of  the  root  is  verbally  expressed  or  presumptively  known. 
Thus  this  aphorism-doesmbt  supersede  the  general  rule  that 
the  sense  of  the  suffix  is  primary.  Moreover,  in  this 
aphorism,  Panini  says  that  the  desiderative  suffix  should  be 
used  in  the  sense  of  desire  and  hence  he  means  that  the  sense 
of  desire  alone  is  primary. 

It  follows  from  the  above  that  the  expression  vividisanti 
means  that  the  sense  of  the  desiderative  suffix,  namely, 
the  desire  to  have  the  direct  experience  of  Brahman-Atman 
which  is  the  sense  of  the  root  is  primary.  And,  hence  one’s 
duties  prescribed  in  the  text — tametam  vtddnuvacanena 
brahmanah  vividisanti,  yajhena  danena  tapasa  and d akena™  are 
related  to  the  desire  to  have  the  direct  experience  of 
Brahman-Atman.37  0  It  may  be  added  here  that  Suregvara 
in  his  Brhaddranyako’panisad-bhdsya-vartika  and  Vacaspati- 
miSra  in  his  Bhamati  maintain  this  view.377 


3/5.  Drh.,  IV,  iv,  22. 

376.  Sg,  III,  333-40. 

377.  Sambandhu-  Yd  rtika,  14. 
Bhamati  on  BSB,  I,  i,  1. 


131 


Praka^atman,  on  the  other  hand,  holds  that  the  emphasis 
should  always  be  placed  on  the  object  of  desire  and  not  on 
the  desire  itself.  He  holds  that  the  rule  set  forth  by  Pariini 
to  the  effect  that  the  sense  of  the  suffix  is  primary  to  that  of 
the  root  is  a  general  one.  But  in  such  worldly  usage  as  ‘He 
desires  to  go  on  a  horse,’  the  means,  namely,  horse  is  under¬ 
stood  to  relate  only  to  the  object  of  desire,  that  is  going 
and  not  to  desire  itself.  In  the  same  way,  performance  of 
one’s  duties  relates  only  to  Icnowledge,  that  is,  the  object  of 
desire,  and  not  to  desire  itself. 378 

It  might  be  said  that  this  view  of  PrakaSatman  is  in 
direct  conflict  with  the  view  that  the  abandonment  of  one’s 
duties  is  the  means  of  attaining  the  direct  experience  of 
Brahman.  But  it  is  not  so;  for,  according  to  PrakaSatman 
also  one  must  perform  one’s  duties  till  /there  arises  in  one’s 
mind  the  desire  to  have  the  direct  exppfience  of  Brahman- 
Atman;  and  they  are  to  loe__given  up  after  that  state  is 
attained. 

The  difference  between  Praka^atman’s  view  and  the 
view  of  Sure^vara,  Sarvajnatman,  and  Vacaspatimi3ra 
regarding  the  role  of  one’s  duties  on  the  practical  side  of 
Advaita  is  this :  according  to  PrakaSatman,  performance  of 
one’s  duties  gives  rise  to  the  direct  experience  of  Brahman- 
Atman  through  the  desire  for  it;  and  hence  in  this  theory 
the  merit  generated  by  the  performance  of  one’s  duties 
persists  till  the  direct  experience  of  Brahman-Atman  arises, 
whereas  according  to  Sure^vara,  Sarvajnatman,  and  Vaca- 
spatimi^ra  the  merit  generated  through  the  performance 
of  one’s  duties  disappears  with  the  emergence  of  the  desire 
to  have  the  direct  experience  of  Brahman-Atman.  Accord¬ 
ing  to  both  the  views,  however,  one’s  duties  should  not  be 
pursued  after  the  rise  of  the  desire  for  the  direct  experience 
of  Brahman- A  tm  an. 3  7  0 

378.  Pahcapadika  —  Vivarana,  pp.  37,  543,  546.  554. 

579.  SLS,  p.  408. 


132 


We  shall  now  enqire  into  the  process  through  which  the 
desire  for  the  direct  experience  of  Brahman-Atman  arises  by 
the  performance  of  one’s  duties.  The  latter  when  performed 
as  an  offering  to  God  remove  the  unseen  demerit  present 
in  the  mind  of  the  aspirant  preventing  the  rise  of  the  desire 
to  have  the  direct  experience  of  Brahman-Atman.  Then 
there  comes  the  intellectual  conviction  that  Brahman-Atman 
alone  is  real,  and  the  world  is  not  real.  This  intellectual 
conviction  is  termed  nitya’ nitya-vastu-viveka.  This  leads  to 
absolute  detachment  towards  enjoyment  of  objects  here  and 
hereafter.  This  is  termed  ihamutrartha-bhoga-viraga.  This 
in  turn,  gives  rise  to  what  is  known  as  iamadi-sadhana- 
sampat.  These  are  iatna,  dama,  uparaii,  titiksa,  samadhana, 
and  iraddha.  Of  these,  th^  first  two,  namely,  dama  and  dama 
respectively  represent^fhe  control  of  the  mind  arid  of 
the  senses.  Uparati  is  renunciation  in  spirit.  Titiska  is 
fortitude— a  form  of  courage  shown  in  enduring  opposites 
like  heat  and  cold  or  pain  and  -  pleasure.  Samadhana  is 
power  of  concentration  and  iraddha  is  faith  in  the  teaching 
of  the  Upanisads.  These  qualities  when  pursued  give  rise  to 
the  intense  desire  for  release  from  samsara  which  is  termed 
mumuksutva.  The  aspirant  knows  from  a  study  of  the  Upa¬ 
nisads  that  the  means  to  release  is  the  direct  experience  of 
Brahman-Atman.  His  intense  desire  for  release  thus  leads 
to  the  intense  desire  for  its  means,  namely,  the  direct  experi¬ 
ence  of  Brahman-Atman.  ( vividisa ).380 

So  far  the  discussion  regarding  the  remote  means.  The 
proximate  means,  on  the  other  hand,  consists  of  those 
factors  which  are  prescribed  in  the  scriptural  texts  as  directly 
helpful  to  the  rise  of  the  direct  experience  of  Brahman- 
Atman.3  S1 

The  Upanisadic  text  383  speaks  of  asceticism  as  the  most 
important  factor  contributing  to  the  rise  of  the  direct 

380.  SS,  Part,  I,  p.  67.  381.  W,  III,  330. 

382.  Brh.  IV,  iv,  22. 


133 


experience  of  Brahman-Atman.  The  Bhagavad-gita  states  :  m 
‘duties  are  useful  to  one  who  wants  to  get  the  desire  to  have 
the  direct  experience  of  Brahman-Atman;  and,  in  the  case 
of  one  who  has  attained  the  the  said  desire,  renunciation 
of  all  activities  is  the  means  for  attaining  the  direct 
experience  of  Brahman-Atman.’  Thus  renunciation  of 
all  activities  which  is  known  as  sarva-karma-sannydsa  or 
vividisa-sannyasa  is  one  of  the  means  that  are  proximate  to 
the  direct  experience  of  Brahman-Atman. 

The  other  group  of  proximate  means  are  dama,  dama, 
uparati,  titiksa,  samadhana,  and  draddha.  The  Upanisadic 
text3*4  prescribes  these  as  the  means  tolthe  direct  experience 
of  Brahman-Atman.  These  have  bpCn  explained  before. 
The  author  of  the  BraJnna^suixaSJ^'  states  that  one  must 
possess  the  proximate  means  as  they  are  enjoined  as  the 
means  to  the  direct  experience  of  Brahman-Atman  and  till 
the  rise  of  the  latter  they  have  necessarily  to  be  pursued. 

The  Upanisadic  text  ‘atmd'va  are  drastavyah  srotavyo 
mantavyo  nididhyasitavyaJf  336  sets  forth  one  more  group  of 
proximate  means,  namely,  dravana,  matiana,  and  nididhyasana 
as  the  means  for  attaining  the  direct  experience  of  Brahman- 
Atman.  This  text,  according  to  some  preceptors  teach 
abstinence  from  external  activities.  Since  this  is  not  possi¬ 
ble  in  the  absence  of  activity  in  the  form  of  vedantic  study 
( dravana ),  reflection  ( manana ),  and  meditation  ( nididhyasana ), 
the  latter  are  presumptively  implied  in  the  text  cited 
above  and  are  not  prescribed.  Some  other  preceptors  hold 
that  by  the  numerous  Upanisadic  texts  which  enjoin  renun¬ 
ciation,  it  is  conveyed  as  a  general  rule  that  the  aspirant 
must  abstain  from  all  activities.  However,  the  Upanisadic 
text  cited  above  supersedes  the  general  rule  and  enjoins 
activity  of  the  nature  of  dravana,  manana,  and  nididhyasana .387 


383.  Bh.  a.,  VI,  3. 
385.  BS,  III,  iv,  27. 
387.  SS,  I,  74-84. 


384.  Brh.,  IV,  iv,  22. 
386.  Brh.,  IV,  v,  6. 


134 


Of  these,  Sravana  is  mental  activity  in  the  form  of 
inquiry  into  the  import  of  the  Upanisadic  texts.  Manana 
is  mental  activity  in  the  form  of  arguing  within  oneself 
after  knowing  definitely  what  the  Upanisads  teach  with 
a  view  to  convince  oneself  that  that  teaching  alone  is 
true.  3  8  8  Nididhyasana  is  the  mental  operation  which 
consists  in  turning  away  one’s  mind  from  external  objects 
and  thereby  maintaining  the  continuity  of  knowledge  in 
the  form  ‘I  am  Brahman’  that  has  arisen  from  Sravana 
and  manana ,38  9  S'rvana,  manana,  and  nididhyasana  are  thus 
mental  activities  and  they  must  be  pursued  till  one  gets 
the  direct  experience  of  Brahman- Atman.  As  regards  the 
nature  of  nididliyasana,  Sarvajnatman  records  the  view  of 
Sure^vara  whicnis-asJediows :  ‘the  knowledge  in  the  form 
‘I  am  Brahman’  which  arises  after  Sravana  and  manana  and 
which  is  devoid  of  immediacy  is  nididhyasana.  It 
immediately  leads  to  the  rise  of  the  direct  experience  of 
Brahman-Atman.390  According  to  this  view,  nididhyasana 
cannot  be  pursued  like  Sravana  and  manana,  as  it  is  only 
knowledge  which  gives  rise  to  the  direct  experience  of 
Brahman-Atman  immediately.391 

So  far  the  discussion  regarding  the  proximate  means. 
We  shall  now  enquire  into  their  function;  and  for  this 
purpose  we  must  deal  with  the  instrumental  cause  of  the 
direct  experience  of  Brahman-Atman.  Sarvajnatman  holds 

388.  ibid.,  Ill,  344.  389.  ibid.,  Ill,  345. 

vide  : . tattvamadivakyajanyavrttimadantahkaranasya  brahma  tmaikya- 

visayata , ...  vijatiyapratyayam  akrlva  aham  brahmdsmiti  brahma  tmavifaya- 
pratyayapravahah  nididhya  sanamityarthah,  TB,  p.  1020. 

390.  SS',  III,  346. 

vide  :  aparayattabedho' tra  nididhya sanam  ucyate, 

Brhadaranyako’p-anisad-bhasya-vartika,  II,  iv,  217. 

391.  as  min  pakse  iravanamananayoreva  anus  they  atv  am,  nididhya  sanarh 
tu  dirghakalam  -  anusthita  -  d ravana  -  manana  - phalaru pa  -  nirnayd  -  buddhih 
yada  bhavati  tadaiva  saksatkaro  bhavati  iti  nanus theyam,  purvasmin  pakse 
tu  nididhya sanamapi  pr thaganustheyamiti  bhedah,  TB,  p.  1021. 


135 


that  the  major  texts  of  the  Upanisads  are  the  instrumental 
cause  of  the  direct  experience  of  Brahman-Atman.  His 
view  is  based  upon  the  theory  that  a  sentence  gives  rise  to 
the  mediate  knowledge  of  an  object  if  the  object  is  mediate, 
and  it  gives  rise  to  the  immediate  knowledge  of  an  object  if 
the  object  is  immediate.  Here  since  Brahman-Atman  is 
always  immediate,  the  Upanisadic  texts  give  rise  to  the 
immediate  knowledge  or  the  direct  experience  of  Brahman- 
Atman.  According  to  this  view,  there  arises  first  the  direct 
experience  of  Brahman-Atman  in  the  form  ‘I  am  Brahman’ 
from  the  major  texts  of  the  Upanisads.  But  it  is  not  effec¬ 
tive  in  dispelling  avidya,  because  the  mind  of  the  aspirant 
who  has  such  acknowledge  is  confounded  by  latent  impres¬ 
sions  arisen  from\qjoympnt  of  worldly  objects  ( visaya-bhoga - 
vasana),  doubt  regarding  the  validity  of  the  Upanisadic 
passages  (pramanasambhavana),  contrary  notion  as  regards 
the  import  of  the  Upanisadic  texts  ( prameyasambhavana )  and 
an  unconscious  reassertion  of  old  habits  of  thought  ( viparita - 
Magana  incompatible  with  the  truth  since  learnt.  Madhu- 
sudana  Sarasvatl  in  his  preface  to  the  third  adhyaya  of  the 
present  work  points  out  that  one  group  of  proximate 
means  consisting  of  &ama,  dama,  etc.  removes  visaya-bhoga- 
vasana ,m  tfravana,  manana,  and  nididhyasana  respectively 
remove prama nasambha  vanci , prameyasambha vana,  and  viparita- 
bhavana.m  It  may  be  added  here  that  nididhyasana,  which 
according  to  Sure^vara’s  view  set  forth  above  cannot  be 
pursued,  which  is  mediate  knowledge  in  the  form  ‘I  am 
Brahman5  and  which  immediately  gives  rise  to  the  direct 
experience  of  Brahman-Atman,  must  be  taken  to  remove 
viparita-bhaiana  by-its  mere  rise.  Sannyasa  or  renunciation 
from  all  activities  which  is  another  proximate  means  helps 
the  aspirant  to  pursue  iravana,  manana,  and  nididhyasana  and 
thereby  it  is  helpful  to  the  rise  of  the  direct  experience  of 


392.  SS,  Part,  II,  p.  146. 

393.  ih id.]  Sre  ■S'S',  HI,  340,  342- 


136 


Brahman-Atman.3'1 4  These  proximate  means  in  their 
entirety  should  be  pursued  by  the  aspirant  until  all  the 
impediments  referred  to  above  are  removed.  And  the  major 
texts  of  the  Upani§ads,  when  contemplated  at  this  stage  give 
rise  to  the  direct  experience  of  Brahman-Atman  which  is 
effective  in  annihilating  avidya.  Thus,  according  to  Sarva- 
jnatman,  the  instrumental  cause  of  the  direct  experience  of 
Brahman-Atman  is  only  the  Upanisadic  texts.  The  latter  are 
intrinsically  valid  in  giving  rise  to  knowledge  and  so,  if  it 
were  held  that  the  proximate  means  help  them  in  giving  rise 
to  knowledge,  then  they  are  exposed  to  the  fault  of  losing 
their  self-validity.  The  proximate  means  only  remove  the 
impediments  that  hinder  the  direct  experience  of  Brahman- 
Atman  which  has  arisen  already  from  the  major  texts  of  the 
Upanisads  through  dispelling  avidya.30  5  The  view  that  the 
major  texts  of  the  Upanisads  alone  are  the  instrumental 
cause  of  the  direct  experience  of  Brahman-Atman  is  known 
from  the  Chart-do  gya  text  which  states  that  the  son  has  attained 
the  direct  experience  of  Brahman-Atman390  following  the 
instruction  of  his  father  in  the  form  ‘That  thou  art’.397 

VacaspatimiSra,  on  the  other  hand,  states  that  the 
innate  nature  of  a  sentence  is  to  give  rise  only  to  mediate 
knowledge.  The  Upanisadic  texts  also,  in  view  of  their 
being  sentences,  could  give  rise  only  to  mediate  knowledge 
of  Brahman-Atman.  The  proximate  means  when  pursued 
remove  the  impediments  present  in  the  mind  of  the  aspirant. 
And  the  mind  which  becomes  freed  from  impediments  gives 
rise  to  the  direct  experience  of  Brahman-Atman.  Accord¬ 
ing  to  this  view,  the  Upanisadic  text  ‘Brahman  does  not 

394.  sannyasah  $ ravana dyauasaradanena  jfia na rthah,  Gudhartha- 
dipika,  p.  242. 

395.  Sg,  I,  14-19. 

396.  taddhasya  vijajflau,  Chand.,  IV,  x\i,  3. 

397.  ialtvamasi ,  ibid.,  VI,  ix,  4. 

For  details  See  Ss ,  III,  299-303. 


137 


come  within  the  range  of  mind’3  9  8  means  that  the  mind 
which  is  not  free  from  impediments  cannot  give  rise  to  the 
direct  experience  of  Brahman-Atman.  And  the  Upanisadic 
text  ‘It  should  be  realized  through  mind  alone’399  states 
that  the  mind  which  is  free  from  impediments  gives  rise  to 
the  direct  experience  of  Brahman-Atman. 

It  may  be  said  that  the  Chandogya  texts  which  state  that 
the  son  attained  the  direct  experience  of  Brahman-Atman400 
following  the  instruction  by  his  father  of  the  major  text  'That 
thou  art’401  shows  that  the  major  texts  of  the  Upanisads  alone 
are  the  causebfthe  rise  of  the  direct  experience  of  Brahman- 
Atman.  In  the  same  way,  the  Upanisadic  text  ‘I  ask 
about  the  purusa  who  could  be  known  from  the  Upanisads’402 
speaks  of  Turusa,  that  is,  Brahman-Atman  as  one  to  be 
known  onlyTpom  the  Upanisads.  But  according  to  Vacas- 
patimiSra’s  view  all  these  texts  would  mean  this  much, 
namely,  that  the  true  nature  of  Brahman-Atman  could  be 
known  only  from  the  Upanisads.  That  knowledge  could 
o»ly  be  mediate,  as  sentences  could  give  rise  only  to  mediate 
knowledge;  and,  it  becomes  immediate  through  mind.403 
Thus  according  to  VacaspatimiSra,  mind  alone  is  the  instru¬ 
mental  cause  for  the  rise  of  the  direct  experience  of 
Brahman-Atman.  It.may  be  added  here  that  the  view 
which  holds  the  major  texts  of  the  Upanisads  to  be  the 
instrumental  cause  of  Brahman-Atman  is  the  prevalent 
one  in  Advaita. 

Sarvajnatman  points  out  that  iravana ,  manana ,  and 
nididkyasana  along  with  dama,  dama,  etc.  when  pursued  by 
ascetics  remove  the  impediments  present  in  their  minds,  and 
the  direct  experience  of  Brahman-Atman,  effective  in  dis¬ 
pelling  avidya ,  arises  in  this  life  itself,  provided  there  is  no 


398. 

Tail II,  4. 

399 

Kath.,  IV,  11. 

400. 

Chand ,  VI,  xvi,  3. 

401. 

ibid,  VI.,  ix,  4. 

402. 

Drh.,  Ill,  xii,  6. 

403. 

See  ARR,  p.  45. 

18 

13R 


obstruction  to  its  rise  by  a  variety  of  prdrabdhakarma.  If 
there  is  such  obstruction,  knowledge  does  arise  to  them  in 
the  next  life401  irrespective  of  the  stage  of  life  which  they 
lead  then.405  Sarvajnatman  then  points  out  that  those  who 
have  not  taken  up  asceticism  can  practise  iravana,  manana,  and 
nididhyasana  daily  at  the  time  they  are  free  from  the  perfor¬ 
mance  of  obligatory  rites.  They,  however,  do  not  attain 
the  direct  experience  of  Brahman-Atman  in  this  life;  but 
they  attain  it  in  the  next  life,  and  that  too,  only  after  adopt¬ 
ing  the  ascetic  stage  of  life.  Thus  Sarvajnatman  speaks  of 
asceticism  as  the  necessary  condition  for  attaining  the  direct 
experience  of  Brahman-Atman. 

Th  J  direct  experience  of  Brahman-Atman  is  directly 
opposed  Vto  avidya  and  hence  it  dispels  avidya  by  its 
mere  rise,  jfiva  is  then  freed  from  the  bonds  of  samsara. 
The  Upanisadic  text  is  explicit  in  this  that  the  direct 
experience  of  Brahman-Atman  enables  one  to  attain  the 
freedom  from  the  bonds  of  samsara  here  and  now.407 

Now  there  arises  the  question  whether  the  aspirant 
who  has  attained  the  direct  experience  of  Brahman-Atman 
is  dissociated  from  his  physical  and  psychical  accompani¬ 
ments  at  once,  or  h.e  continues  to  live  in  the  body  till  his  past 
deeds  which  have  started  yielding  their  fruits  and  which 
have  given  rise  to  the  present  body  are  exhausted.  If  the 
latter  position  is  held,  then  such  a  one  is  known  as  a  jivan- 
mukta  or  the  one  who  is  liberated  and  yet  alive.  And  this 
state  is  known  as  jivanmukti. 

Before  we  discuss  this  question,  we  may  state  in 
passing  that  the  prerogative  of  jlvanmukta  is  to  keep  alive 
the  Advaitic  tradition  for  the  benefit  of  posterity.  The 
Upanisadic  text  ‘one  who  has  a  teacher  directly  experiences 


404.  Sg,  III,  349-50. 
406.  ibid.,  Ill,  359. 


405.  ibid.,  Ill,  361. 
407.  Kath  ,  II,  iii,  14. 


139 


Brahman-Atman’408  and  the  Bhagavad-gita  text  ‘The  precep¬ 
tors  who  have  the  direct  experience  of  Brahman-Atman 
impart  the  knowledge  of  Brahman-Atman’409  are  clear  in 
stating  that  a  preceptor  is  necessary  in  order  to  preserve  and 
propagate  the  Advaitic  tradition.  The  Bhagavad-gitS  text 
cited  above  is  more  specific  in  stating  that  that  preceptor 
must  be  a  realized  soul.  The  truth  of  Brahman  cannot  be 
conveyed  by  one  who  has  not  realized  that  truth  or  by  one 
who  has  realized  that  truth  but  is  disembodied.  It  follows 
from  this  that  he  alone  who  has  the  direct  experience  of 
Brahman-Atman  and  is  embodied  at  the  same  time  could 
impart  the  knowledge  of  Brahman-Atman  to  others — the 
bound  souls.  Such  a  one  is  a  jivanmukta. 

From  what  has  been  said  above  it  would  be  clear  that  a 
jivanmukta  has  the  specific  function  of  imparting  the  know¬ 
ledge  of  Brahman  to  the  b^und  souls.  This  would  hold 
good  only  when  the  theory  £>f  the  existence  of  many  indivi¬ 
dual  souls  ( aneka-jivarvada )  is  admitted.  But  according  to 
the  theory  of  only  one  individual  soul  ( eka-jiva-vada ),  the 
knowledge  of  Brahman  arises  to  the  only  jiva  from  the 
preceptor,  the  Upanisads,  and  from  the  worship  of  Hvara 
although  these  are  only  apparently  real  ( pratibhasika-satya ). 
The  preceptor  is  a  fictitious  creation  and  he  is  fancied  to  be 
a  realized  soul.410  As  there  exists  only  one  jiva,  it  alone  is 
entitled  to  liberation.  Hence  the  scriptural  passages  dealing 
with  the  liberation  of  3uka  and  others  are  intended  to 
glorify  the  state  of  liberation.  The  point  that  is  of  pro¬ 
found  importance  in  this  view  is  that  the  only  jiva  after 
attaining  the  direct  experience  of  Brahman-Atman  is 
immediately  dissociated  from  his  physical  and  psychical 
accompaniments  and  remains  as  Brahman-Atman.  He  does 
not  remain  as  a  jivanmukta ,  for  apart  from  him  there  is  no 
other  soul  to  whom  he  could  impart  the  knowledge  of 

408.  Chand.,  VI,  xiv,  2.  409.  Bh  G.,  IV,  34. 

410.  na  ca  upadcsturabhavah.,  kalpitasya  tasya  sadbharat,  ARR,  p.  45. 


HO 


Brahman- Atman.  Sarvajnatman  admits  the  eka-jlva-vada 
also ;  and  from  that  stand-point  he  says  that  the  concept 
of  jivanmukli  does  not  hold  good  and  the  one  who  has 
attained  the  direct  experience  of  Brahman-Atman  is  freed 
from  physical  and  psychical  accompaniments  and  remains 
as  Brahman.  This  is  known  as  sadyomukti  or  videhamukti.in 

According  to  the  aneka-jiva-vada  which  is  also  admitted 
by  Sarvajnatman  the  concept  of  jivanmukti  does  hold  good. 
The  Upanisadic  text  ‘One  who  has  got  the  direct  experience 
of  Brahman-Atman  has  to  wait  to  be  Brahman-Atman  till 
the  final  fall  of  one’s  body;  and  after  the  fall  of  the  body  one 
remains  as  Brahman-Atman”413  expressly  states  the  concept 
of  jivanmukti.  We  shall  now  deal  with  this  in  some  detail. 

In  the  case  of  x5ne  who  has  attained  the  direct 
experience  of  Brahman,  the  merits  ( punya )  and  demerits 
[papa)  accumulated /in  the  innumerable  previous  births  and 
also  in  this  life  before  the  rise  of  the  direct  experience  of 
Brahman  are  annihilated.  The  Upanisadic  text  ‘Just  as 
the  upper  part  of  a  reed  thrown  into  fire  is  completely 
burnt,  so  also  all  his  sins  are  burnt  away’ 413  and  the 
Upanisadic  text  ‘  He  transcends  both  merits  and  de¬ 
merits’  414  states  that  merits  and  demerits  accumulated 
in  the  past  life  and  also  prior  to  the  rise  of  knowledge  of 
Brahman  are  annihilated  by  the  knowledge  of  Brahman. 
Further  there  is  no  possibility  of  the  rise  of  any  merit  or  de¬ 
merit  in  future  to  the  knower  of  Brahman;  for,  merit  and 
demerit  would  arise  by  performing  prescribed  and  inter¬ 
dicted  actions  respectively  with  attachment  in  the  form  ‘I 
am  the  agent  of  this  action’.  But  the  one  who  has  the  direct  w 

411.  Sg,  II,  225,  227,  288;  IV,  37-8. 

vide  also:  tatha  ca  ekajhanavddi pakse  ayamarlhah  sampannah  yat 
sadyomuktiriti,  ARR,  p.  45. 

412.  Chdnd.,  VI,  xiv  2. 

414.  Brh.,  IV,  iv,  2. 


413.  j ‘hid.,  V,  xxiv,  3. 


141 


experience  of  Brahman  has  no  idea  of  any  agency  whatso¬ 
ever  with  regard  to  any  action  that  may  occur  in  future. 
Hence  there  is  no  possibility  of  the  rise  of  any  merit  or  de¬ 
merit  in  future  in  his  case.  It  is  with  this  in  view  that  the 
Chandogyo' 'panisad  passage  fAs  water  does  not  stick  to  a  lotus 
leaf,  even  so  sin  does  not  cling  to  one  who  has  realized 
Brahman410  states  that  a  future  sin  that  might  be  expected 
to  arise  by  performance  of  activities  does  not  arise  in  the 
case  of  one  who  has  realized  Brahman.  The  word  'sin’  in 
the  Upanisadic  text  must  be  taken  to  convey  the  sense  of 
merit  also;  for  the  result  of  merit  like  that  of  sin,  is  inferior 
to  the  fruit  of  the  direct  experience  of  Brahman.415 

It  follows  from  the  above  that  the  knowledge  of  Brahman 
destroys  past  merits  and  demerits,  and  since  it  removes  the 
sense  of  agency  no  future  merit  or  demerit  clings  to  the  one 
who  has  realized  Brahmarh41’ 

There  is  one  important  point  to  be  noted  in  this  connec¬ 
tion.  When  it  is  said\that  the  past  merits  and  demerits  of 
a  person  are  destroyed,  we  have  to  make  a  distinction  bet¬ 
ween  two  kinds  of  past  merits  and  demerits,  namely,  sancita 
— the  merits  and  demerits  which  have  not  fructified,  and 
prarabdha — the  merits  and  demerits  which  have  begun  to 
yield  their  results  and  have  produced  the  body  through 
which  a  person  has  attained  knowledge.  The  Brahma- sutram 
states  that  the  merits  and  demerits  which  have  not  fructified 
are  annihilated  by  the  direct  experience  of  Brahman.  But 
the  merits  and  demerits  w'hich  have  started  giving  their  re¬ 
sults  and  which  have  produced  the  body  through  which  a 
person  has  attained  the  direct  experience  of  Brahman  are 


415.  IV,  xiv,  3. 

416.  yahapi  kevala  eva  papma  dabdo  driyale ,  talrdpi  tenaiva 
punyamapi  akalilamiti  drastavyam,  jilanaphalapeksaya  nikrstaphalatvat, 

DSB,  IV,  i,  14. 


-117.  ns,  IV*  i,  13-14. 


418.  IV  i,  15. 


142 


not  annihilated  by  the  latter.  Knowledge  could  arise  to 
an  individual  soul  only  when  it  is  embodied.  And  body  is 
produced  by  merits  and  demerits  which  have  evidently  start¬ 
ed  yielding  their  results.  When  it  is  thus  clear  that  the  rise 
of  knowledge  is  based  upon  the  body  produced  by  merits 
and  demerits  that  have  started  yielding  their  results,  it  is  but 
natural  that  knowledge  cannot  annihilate  the  latter.  Such  an 
individual  who  is  free  from  the  accumulated  merits  and  de¬ 
merits  that  have  not  fructified  and  who  is  living  out  only  his 
fructified  merits  and  demerits  is  called  ajivanmukta — one  who 
is  liberated  while  embodied.  His  body  continues  to  exist 
by  the  merits  and  demerits  that  are  fructified. 

Now  it  is  necessary  to  deal  with  the  factor  that  sustains 
the  fructified  deeds.  Madhusudana  Sarasvatl  in  his  Advaita- 
siddhi  sets  forth  two  views.  The  first  view  is  that  it  is  sarh- 
skara  or  a  residuum  of  avidya  afteiLjdie  latter  has  been 
removed  by  the  direct  experience  of  Brahman  that  sustains 
the  fructified  deeds.  This  he  explains  by  means  of  a  simile. 
Just  as  the  fragrance  of  flowers  persists  in  the  vessel  even 
after  the  flowers  have  been  taken  away,  so  also  a  residuum 
of  avidya  (. samskdra )  persists  even  after  it  has  been  removed. 
This  samskdra  is  present  in  the  pure  consciousness,  that  is, 
the  released  soul.419  The  other  view  is :  of  the  two  powers 
of  avidya,  namely,  avarana-dakti  and  viksepa-dakti,  it  is  only 
the  dvarana-sakti  that  is  removed  by  the  direct  experience  of 
Brahman.  The  viksepa-Sakti,  however,  persists  even  after  the 
rise  of  the  direct  experience  of  Brahman  and  this  residual 
portion  of  avidya  is  termed  avidya  led  a.  This  sustains  the 
fructified  deeds  that  account  for  the  continuance  of  the  body 
in  the  case  of  a  jivanmukta.  This  explanation  Madhusudana 
Sarasvatl  gives  in  his  commentary  on  the  Samksepa&dri- 
raka.A'i0  This  viksepa-dakti  has  three  aspects.  Of  these,  one 
gives  rise  to  the  notion  that  the  universe  is  absolutely  real. 


419.  AS,  p.  890. 


420.  Sg  IV,  40. 


143 


The  second  one  gives  rise  to  the  notion  that  the  universe, 
though  not  absolutely  real,  is  empirically  real.  That  is,  the 
objects  of  the  universe,  can  be  adapted  to  practical  needs 
of  life.  These  two  powers  are  removed  respectively  by 
rvdidhyasnna  in  the  iorm  ‘I  am  Brahman’  and  by  the  direct 
experience  of  Brahman  which  results  from  the  major  texts 
of  the  Upanisads  at  the  end  of  nididhyasana.  The  third  one 
gives  rise  to  the  apparent  presentation  of  the  universe  ;  and 
it  is  not  annihilated  by  the  direct  experience  of  Brahman. 
It  is  avidya  associated  with  this  power  and  divested  of  the 
other  two  powers  that  is  termed  avidyaleda .421  It  is  this 
avidya  led  a  that  sustains  the  fructified  deeds  which,  in  turn, 
accounts  for  the  embodied  existence  of  the  one  who  has 
got  the  direct  experience  of  Brahman- Atman.  The  latter 
removes  the  avidyaleda  when  the  fructified  deeds  are  ex¬ 
hausted  by  experiencing  their  results. 

The  view  as  regardSuiethree  aspects  of  avidya  and 
their  removal  is  ba?ec/ upon  the  following  Upanisadic  text : 

ksaram  pradhanam  amrtaksaram  Iiarah 

ksaralmanau  id  ate  deva  ekah 
tasya  abhidhyanat  yojanat  tatlvabhavat 

bhuyadcante  vidvamdydnivrttih ,422 

This  text  means :  avidya  is  mutable.  The  one  self- 
luminous  Brahman  (when  reflected  in  avidya)  is  iSvara  ;  the 
latter  is  immutable  and  immortal  and  it  controls  avidya  and 
the  individual  souls.  The  meditation  upon  Brahman 
(, abhidhyana )  as  T  am  Brahman’  removes  that  aspect  of 
avidya  which  gives  rise  to  the  erroneous  notion  that  duality 
is  absolutely  real.  By  the  direct  experience  of  Brahman 
{yojanat)  that  aspect  of  avidya  which  gives  rise  to  the  notion 
that  the  objects  of  the  world  are"  empirically  real  is 
removed.  Again,  in  the  end,  that  is,  when  the  fructified 
deeds  are  exhausted  {ante)  there  results  from  the  direct 

421.  AS,  p,  891.  422.  S' vet.,  I,  10. 


144 


experience  of  Brahman  the  removal  of  avidya  in  its 
entirety,  that  is,  without  any  remnant  ( viivamdyanivrttih .) 
Madhusudana  Sarasvatl  adds  that  the  expression  ante 
viivamdyanivrttih  which  means  that  avidya  in  its  entirety 
is  removed  when  the  fructified  deeds  are  exhausted  suggests 
that  before  the  exhaustion  of  the  fructified  deeds  there 
has  been  the  removal  of  avidya  only  in  certain  of  its 
aspects.423 

The  jivanmukta’s  life  has  two  phases  it  is  either 
samadhi  when  he  turns  inwards  and  loses  himself  in  Brahman; 
or  the  condition  known  as  vyutthana  or  reversion  to  empirical 
life  when  he  wakes  back  to  variety.  The  world  does  appear 
to  him  then;  but  it  docs  not  delude  him,  since  he  has  once 
for  all  realized  its  falsity.  3rl  Sankara  in  his  commentary 
on  the  Brahma-sutra  says:  ‘one  who  has  realized  his  identity 
with  Brahman  does  not  have  the  worldly  experience  just  as 
before ,  whereas  one  who  considers  the  world  to  be  real  and 
deluded  by  it  has  not  reajizexlhis  identity  with  Brahman.424 
Such  a  one  known  asfivanmukta, Mn  order  to  be  Brahman 
waits  for  nothing  else  but  the  extinction  of  the.  merits  and 
demerits  that  have  already  begun  to  fructify  and  have 
produced  the  body  through  which  he  has  attained  the 
knowledge  of  Brahman.  The  Brahma-sutra  425  states  that 
the  merits  and  demerits  which  have  begun  to  bear  fruit  are 
exhausted  only  by  experiencing  their  fruits.  And  then 
avidyaleta  or  avidya-samskara—  the  sustaining  factor  of  the 

423.  tasya...brahmanah  abhimukhyena  ahaih  brahmasmiti  evaihrupat 

dhyanat . dvaitasatyatvabhramahetubhutali  may  a  let  ah  nivartate  ;  tatah 

dhydnaparipdkasdksatkai at  yojandt,  dvaite  vyavaharikasatlvabhramahetu- 
bhutamdyaleio  nivartate,  bhuya&ca  taltvabhavat  andvjtapu  rnabralima  tmat- 
varupasvabhavat  ante  prdrabdhakarmandm  bhogena  ksaye  dvaite  prdtibhd- 

sikasattvabhramahetubhutamaydletayasya  avaiistasya  nivrttih . atra  ante 

viivamayanivrllih  iti  uktalvat  pragapi  sa vat esamdya nivrttih  pratiyate... 

SS,  Part  II,  p.  385. 

425.  nS,  IV,  i,  14  and  19. 


424.  BSB,  I,  i,  4. 


145 


fructified  merits  and  demerits  is  annihilated  by  the  con¬ 
tinuing  knowledge  of  Brahman.  The  body  of  the  jivanmukta 
then  falls  off  and  he  becomes  Brahman  itself.  This  is 
videhamnkti.  And  Brahman  which  is  pure  consciousness 
and  absolute  bliss  is  free  from  avidya  and  bodily  organisms 
then.  This  is  liberation. 

To  sum  up  Avidya  veils  the  true  nature  of  Brahman- 
Atman.  The  direct  experience  of  Brahman-Atman  which 
arises  from  the  major  texts  of  the  Upanisacls  and  which 
becomes  free  from  the  four-fold  impediments  present  in  the 
mind  of  the  aspirant  by  the  observance  of  the  proximate 
means  brings  about  the  removal  of  avidya.  Thereby 
Brahman-Atman  manifests  in  its  true  nature  of  absolute 
bliss  and  consciousness  which  is  liberation. 


CONCLUSION 

Sarvajnatman  has  distinct  views  on  the  important 
Advaitic  concepts,  and  they  have  cor  -table  importance 
in  the  historical  development  of  Advaita.  His  merits 
appear  most  clearly  when  he  is  contrasted /With  other 
Advaitic  writers  like  Padmapada,  Mandana-Si/re£vara,  and 
Vacaspatimrira.  ! 

Sarvajnatman’s  most  important  contributions  his  view 
regarding  the  locus  and  content  of  avidya.  He  holds'1 2 
that  the  pure  consciousness  is  the  locus  and  content  of 
avidya  as  against  Vacaspatimrira  who  maintains  that  the 
individual  soul  is  the  locus  of  avidya ,  while  Brahman  is  its 
content.  The  latter  view  is  refuted  by  Sarvajnatman  on  the 
ground  that  the  notion  of  individual  soul  derives  its  existence 
from  avidya  and  as  such  it  is  posterior  to  avidya.  The  latter 
cannot  abide  in  a  substratum  which  is  decidedly  subsequent 
to  it.  Sarvajnatman  further  contends427  that  the  pure  con- 

42(5.  SS',  I,  319.  427.  ibid.,  II,  211-212. 


19 


MG 


sciousness  is  the  locus  and  content  of  avidya  neither  in  its 
absolute  form,  nor  in  its  blissful  form,  but  in  the  form  of 
inner  self  ( pratyakcaitanya ).  This  he  proves  on  the  basis  of 
the  experience  ‘I  do  not  know  myself’.  It  is  Sarvajnatman 
who  explains  the  apparently  contradictory  statements  of 
Sri  Sankara  regarding  the  presence  of  avidya  in  Brahman  in 
deep  sleep.  To  any  serious  student  of  Advaita,  the  con¬ 
tradiction  in  the  statements  of  Sri  Sankara,  namely,  avidya 
does  not  exist  in  the  state  of  deep  sleep  and  avidya  exists  in 
Brahman  in  that  state  428  remained  unsolved.  And, 
Sarvajnatman  explains429  this  view  of  Sri  Sankara  by  stating 
that  avidya  is/not  determinately  perceived  in  the  form  ‘I 
do  not  know  myself’  in  the  state  of  deep  sleep  and  it  is  with 
this  view  that  Sri  Sankara  has  said  that  avidya.  does  not 
exist  in  that  state.  Really  it  exists  in  that  state  in  Bahman- 
Atman,  as  it  is  evident  from  the  reminiscent  experience  in 
the  form  ‘I  did  net  know  anything  when  I  was  asleep’.430 
Similarly  Sarvajnatman  explains  Sri  Sankara’s  statement431 
that  the  individual  soul  is  the  locus  of  avidya ,  by  contend¬ 
ing432  that  avidya  though  present  only  in  the  pure  conscious¬ 
ness  is  revealed  in  the  form  T  am  ignorant’  by  the  intellect 
which  is  the  limiting  adjunct  of  the  individual  soul.  It  is 
well-known  that  the  nature  of  a  revealing  medium  is  such 
that  what  is  revealed  through  it  appears  as  ^bough  present 
in  the  medium  itself.  The  mirror  which /reflects  the  face 
appears  to  contain  the  face.  In  the  same  W^.y,  the  intellect 
which  is  the  revealing  medium  of  avidya  revehjs  it  as  present 
in  itself  and  consequently  in  the  consciousness  delimited  by 
it,  that  is,  the  individual  soul.  Avidya,  however,  is  present 
in  the  pure  consciousness. 

Sarvajnatman’s  contribution  to  the  theory  of  the  nature 
of  Brahman  also  is  noteworthy.  Relying  on  the  method  of 


428.  ibid.,  Ill,  125-126. 
430.  ibid.,  Ill,  120-122. 
432.  ibid., 


429.  ibid.,  Ill,  123. 
431.  ibid.,  II,  175. 


147 


gathering  the  unrepeated  words  found  in  the  affirmative 
Upanisadic  texts  to  arrive  at  the  exact  nature  of  Brahman— 
the  method  prescribed  by  the  author  of  the  Brahma-sutra  in 
the  aphorism  anandadayah  pradhanasya,  433  Sarvajnatman 
affirms  that  on  the  whole  onl/  ten  words  convey  the  essen¬ 
tial  nature  of  Brahman  in  an  affirmative  manhir.  And 
those  words  are :  nitya,  iuddha,  buddha,  mukta,  satya,  suksma, 
sat,  vibhu,  advitiya,  and  ananda.434  This  same  method  is 
adopted  in  the  case  of  the  negative  texts  also.  But,  Sarva- 
jnatman  suggests  that  as  the  elements  that  are  to  be  negated 
in  Brahman  are  numerous,  the  words  found  even  in  all  the 
negative  Upanisadic  passages  are  not  exhaustive  and  hence 
many  words  should  be  gathered. 

Herein  arises  the  question  of  the  relation  between 
the  affirmative  and  negative  Upanisadic  passages. 
Sarvajnatman  considers  two  views — one  advocated  by 
Mariana,  the  other  by  Padmapada.  The  former  holds436 
that  the  negative  Upanisadic  passages  are  primary, 
while  the  affirmative  ones  are  secondary.  Padma¬ 
pada,  on  th*  other  hand,  holds436  that  the  absence  of 
duality  in  Brahman  presumptive!)  known  from  the  know¬ 
ledge  of  th  •  'bjo.uto  nature  > >f  B.-.hman  arising  from  the 
.affirmative  Upanisadic  passag*  „  is  restated  by  th  ;  negative 
Upanisadic  passages.  Thus  the  latter  are  secondary,  while 
the  affirmative  Upanisadic  pa  sages  are  primary.  While 
Sarvajnatman  accepts  this  view  as  highly  commendable, 
faultless,  and  desirable,  he  refutes437  the  former  view  on  the^ 
ground  that  the  negative  Upanisadic  passages  cannot 
directly  convey  Brahman  as  of  the  nature  of  bliss,  etc. 
Sarvajnatman,  however,  advances438  his  own  view  that 
the  negative  Upanisadic  passages,  by  denying  dll  duality, 
confirm  the  knowledge  of  the  absolute  nature  of  Brahman 
arisen  from  the  affirmative  Upanisadic  passages.  This 
view  seems  to  be  an  improvement  on  that  of  Padmapada. 


433. 

BS,  III, 

iii,  11. 

434. 

Sg,  1 ,  173. 

435. 

ibid.,  I, 

250-1. 

436. 

ibid.,  I,  257. 

437. 

ibid. ,  I, 

253-4. 

438. 

ibid.,  I,  263. 

148 


The  question  whether  lordship  is  natural  to  Brahman 
or  av  cis  <■  ?.v  <  '439  in  the  aegauve  by  Sarvajnatman,  on 

u.e  ground  fhai  lordship  Vuives  a  reference  to  the 
controlled  beings;  and  which;  v -'.r  is  dependent  o  >  something 
else  is  illusory,  and  he:*:e  lordship,  being  illusocy,  cannot 
be  natural  to  Brahman.  Tina  conclusion  seems  contrary 
to  the  view  of  the  author  of  the  Brahma-sutra,  who  in  the 
aphorism  parabhidhyanattu  tirohitam  tato  hyasya  bandhavi - 
paryayau  440  holds  that  lordship  •  is  natural  to  Brahman. 
Sarvajnatman.  with  a  refreshing  independence  of  judgment, 
points  out  441  that  the  author  of  the  Brahai-sutra  has 
said  so  from  the  opponent’s  stand-point  and  it  is  not  his 
final  view.  And  to  substantiate  this  point,  he  refers442  to 
the  other  aphorism  kamaditaratra  tatra  cayatanadibhyah 443 
which  treats  lordship  on  a  par  with  attributes  like  possession 
of  desire,  etc.,  which  cannot  be  said  to  be  natural  to  the 
attributeless  Brahman.  Hence,  Sarvajnatman  holds444  that 
Brahman  is  eternal,  pure,  consciousness,  ever-released,  real, 
subtle,  existent,  all-pervasive,  absolute,  and  bliss.  And 
herein  lies  Sarv  ijnatman’s  contribution  to  the  theory  of  the 
nature  of  Brahman. 

As  regards  the  elucidation  of  the  nature  of  ISvara  and 
jiva,  Sarvajfrtman  adopts  the  well-known  theory^  the 
pratibimba-vada,  and  in  this  he  seems  to  have  be0i  influe- 
ncid  by  die  view  of  Padmap^da. 

C  ,o  the  practical  s.ue  of  Advaita,  Sarvajnatman 

speaks140  of  asceticism  3a '  necessary  condition  for  attaining 
the  knowledge  of  Brahman.  He  holds448  -rat  the  remote 
means,  namely,  the  performance  of  rituals  including  the 


439. 

ibid.. 

,  III,  151-170. 

440. 

BS,  III,  ii,  15. 

441. 

Sf, 

Ill,  175. 

442. 

ibid.,  Ill,  177. 

443. 

BS, 

Ill,  iii,  39. 

444. 

SS,  I,  173. 

445. 

ibid. 

,  III,  358-36! 

446. 

ibid.. 

,  I,  64;  III,  330-340. 

ii  « 


INVOCATION 

[1] 

5^:  smTSfeftfa  u 

I  devoutly  praise  the  supreme  status  of  Visnu  —  the 
enemy  of  the  demon  named  Mura  —  whose  nature  is 
opposed  to  what  is  unreal  and  insentient,  which  is  free 
from  the  three  limitations  (of  time,  space,  and  objects),  and 
is  like-wise  free  from  impurity,  bondage,  and  misery,  and 
which  is  immediate,  and  immutable. 

The  ultimate  reality  is  sometiaiesrephesented  in  the  Upani$adic 
texts  as  Brahman  —  the  all-pervading  principle,  and,  at  other 
times,  as  Atman  —  the  inner  consciousness  of  the  individual  soul.  In 
this  verse,  an  invocation  is  addressed  to  Brahman  which  appears  as 
God  (I^vara),  the  individual  soul  (jlva),  and  the  phenomenal  world, 
through  the  veil  of  avidya  which  is  superimposed  on  it,  and  which 
consists  of  three  strands  of  mftva,  rajas,  and  tamas.  Brahman  reflected 
jn  avidya  is  God.  The  fcrHsx,  although  one,  is  designated  By  such  terms 
as  Brahma,  Vi$tju,ar.d  Siva  representing  His  creating, maintaining,  and 
destroying  aspects  respectively,  according  to  the  preponderance  of 
rajas,  sattva,  or  tamas.  Brahman  reflected  in  mind  —  the  product  of 
avidya  —  is  the  individual  soul,  while  Brahman  which  serves  as  the 
original  (bimba)  is  pure;  and  it  is  the  supreme  form  of  both  God  and  the 
individual  soul.  (See  Introduction,  p.  103.).  The  latter  when  divested 
of  their  respective  qualities  superimposed  on  them  by  avidya  and  its 
product  are  identical  with  the  supreme  reality  which  is  Brahman. 

A-l 


2 


SAMKSEPAg  ARIRAKA 


[2] 

*qrcifa^f^faim5T*Tt5T 

Pre-eminent  shines  the  inner  consciousness  which  is  the 
sole  cause  of  the  universe ;  whose  infiniteness  is  marred  by 
the  diversity  of  the  universe,  supreme  lordship,  and  the 
nature  of  the  embodied  soul  that  are  superimposed  on  it  by 
its  avidya  ;  which  stands  aloft  on  its  permanent  and  natural 
eminence;  and  which  is  unaffected  by  avidya. 

This  verse  is  an  invocation  addressed  to  Atman.  The  latter  is 
undifferentiated  consciousness;  and,  it  is  the  locus  and  object  of  avidya 
(Ssf,  I,  319).  Avidya  veils  the  Atman  and  illusorily  presents  it  in  the 
forms  of  God,  the  individual  soul,  and  _ihe  phenomenal  world. 
(Stf,  I,  20).  Atman  is  identical  with  Brahman;  and,  depending  on 
avidya  abiding  in  it,  it  is  the  source  of  the  universe.  (W,  I,  323). 

) 

[3] 

sroffitsfa  n 

I  ever  bow  humbly  to  the  immutable  Brahman  which  is 
identical  with  Atman  —  the  inner  consciousness ;  which  is 
self-evident;  in  which  the  difference  from  the  external  world 
is  sublated;  and  in  which  the  cause,  (that  is,  avidya),  and  its 
modifications  are  annihilated  ;  which  is  one  and  whose  true 
nature  is  pure  consciousness. 


FIRST  ADHTA  YA 


3 


Ml 

sfcqfa#  $&rtra  I 

<rf  n 

I  salute  the  Speech  (of  the  form  of  Veda)  which 
possesses  inconceivable  power ;  which  arises 1  from  the 
transfigurative  material  cause  of  the  universe  (that  is, 
Brahman),  and  whose  innate  power  of  imparting  the 
knowledge  of  the  supreme  Brahman2  is  known  from 
the  effect  (namely,  the  rise  of  the  direct  experience  of 
Brahman-Atman). 


1.  vide  Brh.,  II,  iv,  10- 

2.  adesavastuprakadane — Sesah  pararthah  apara rthasarvapradhana- 
bhutacidatma  -  vastupraka  danit  [S'] 


[5] 


Btsq  ^  || 


Prft-eminenfc  shines  Lord  Gaije^a.  When  He  is  kindly 
disposed  the  endeavours  of  even  the  lower  animals  give 
forth  infallible  results  and  when  not  gracious  the  efforts  of 
even  the  Lord  of  creation  to  attain  the  desired  objects 
become  thoroughly  futile.  His  sovereignty  over  the 
universe  is  unimpeded ;  He  is  the  Lord  as  well  as  the 


i.  — Bi 


4  SAMKsEPAg  ARIRAKA 

creator  of  this  universe1  and  He  is  keen  on  the  prosperity 
of  this  universe. 

1.  uiivakrl  —  vi $ vasya  karta  tatkarlrnam  praja patina  m  vighna- 
paharanat...viivakarta  ityarthah.  [AP], 

[6] 

^fr^r£r:  ii 

May  the  sage  Vyasa  who  is  like  the  ocean  purify  us. 
He,  whose  extensive  speeches  are  the  high  waves ;  the  true 
knowledge  of  Reality  is  the  shore  ;  and  whose  modes  of  the 
application  of  reasoning  are  the  gems. 

[7] 

^  rrt  I 

/ 

I  salute  5rl  Sankara  whose  feet  Were  worshipped  by 
all;  and  on  obtaining  that  exponent  the  eternal  speech  — 
the  Veda  —  became  possessed  of  its  true  import,  as  from  it 
the  fallacious  reasoning,  metaphorically,  the  dirt  and  loose 
clay,  has  been  removed. 


[8] 


FIRST  ADHY A  YA 


5 


Pre-eminent  shine  the  particles  of  dust  which  stuck  to 
the  feet  of  Sri  Suregvara  and  which  helped  the  series  of 
disciples  to  cross  the  ocean  of  transmigration ;  and  on 
merely  getting  their  contact  we,  the  pupils,  have  achieved 
our  purpose  and  spotless  fame  in  this  world. 


m 

srfa  f?WRi:  ftd  ft  II 

Though  we  are  in  the  proximity  of  the  lotus-like  feet  of 
the  preceptor  we  share  only  a  bit  of  his  virtues,  like  the  fish 
which,  though  immersed  in  the  ocean,  take  in  only  a  small 
measure  of  water. 


[10] 

to*  i 

r^ot  OTfa  ii 

On  account  of  my  residing  iji  the  vicinity  of  my 
preceptor’s  feet,  I  have  become  cbmpetent  (to  write  this 
treatise).  The  obstacles  (that  are  likely  to  occur  in 
attempts  like  this)  have  been  removed  by  my  preceptor’s 
contemplation  on  Lord  Narayana.  Gladdened  (by  this)  as 
lam,  I  shall  compose  briefly  this  treatise  that  has  for  its 
main  purpose  the  knowledge  of  the  oneness  of  Brahman 
which  is  the  fruit  as  well  as  the  subject-matter  of  the 
bhasya  on  the  Brahma-sutra. 


[11] 

ROT  I 

RT«ffiT  f|  RftSTRdT  ST»lfd  || 


6 


5/1  til  ICS  EPA  S' AR  IRAK  A 


Let  the  learned  in  grammar,  Mlmamsa,  and  logic 
intelligently  review  this  treatise  with  attention.  For,  in 
this  world  learned  men  are  well-known  as  being  the  means 
of  deciding  the  excellence  and  defect  (of  any  work). 


[12] 

3*4  ^  ^4  WM  ^  ^1  II 


If  learned  men  point  out  the  defects  or  praise  the 
excellences  in  my  work,  my  mind  highly  considers  them 
both  as  equal.  Alas !  it  considers  as  pitiable  what  a  dull 
person  points  out. 


Learned  men  by  pointing  out  defects  in  a  work  help  the  author  to 
rectify  those  defects ;  and  their  words  of  praise  about  the  work  are  a 
source  of  encouragement.  It  is  in  this  sense  our  author  says  that  he 
highly  values  the^sriticisms  as  well  as  the  words  of  praise  of  the  learned 
men  as  being  equal\ 


[13] 


tismflRmfa  d&#?fd  fait  I 

H  Rdd4  Tdd¥Tdt  fSldtd  II 


He,  who  wishes  to  put  aside  the  reputation— very  pure 
in  nature,  of  the  persons  having  exalted  intellectual  power, 
certainly  attempts  to  conceal  the  orb  of  the  sun  with  the 
palm  of  the  hand. 


\  •  — Bj 


FIRST  ADHYAYA 


7 


RESULT  OF  INQUIRY 

[14] 

*wt  i 

Just  as  the  cognition  though  arising  from  a  faultless 
eye  and  relating  to  Bharchu  1  but  being  obscured  by  the 
fault  of  a  person,  does  not  lead  to  determination  in  regard 
to  Bharchu  so  also  the  cognition  of  Brahman  arising  from 
the  infallible  Veda,  being  coloured  by  the  predilections  of 
man  does  not  become  fruitful  (by  dispelling  avidya). 

I.  Bharchu,  a  favourite  minister  of  a  king  was  led  to  a  forest  by 
those  who  were  jealous  of  him,  and  he  was  reported  dead  to  the  king. 
Later,  the  king  happened  to  see  him  in  the  forest,  and  he  mistook  him 
for  a  devil.  Here  the  point  of  illustration  is  :  the  knowledge  relating  to 
Bharchu  arises  through  a  faultless  eye.  But  it  does  not  lead  to  the 
determination  in  the  form  ‘This  is  Bharchu’,  because  of  the  contrary 
notion  that  Bharchu  was  dead.  Similarly,  the  knowledge  of  Brahman 
arising  from  th^  infallible  Upanijadic  sentences  is  not  effective  in 
dispelling  avidya,  because  the  intellect  of  the  person  who  has  such  a 
knowledge  is  confoimded  by  the  latent  impression  arisen  from  en  joy¬ 
ment  of  worldly/ objects,  doubt  regarding  the  validity  of  »he  Upani- 
§adic  passag«^tontrary  notion  as  regards  the  import  of  the  Upani?adic 
teaching,  and  an  unconscious  reassertion  of  old  habits  of  thoughts 
incompatible  with  the  truth  since  learnt. 

The  story  of  Bharchu  is  based  upon  the  Chandogya  Upani$adic  text 
VI,  xiv,  1. 

[15] 

eft  vgmt  n 


%.  — Pi 


8 


SAMKSEPAgARIRAKA 


Just  as  there  arises  the  column  of  smoke  from  fire,  only 
after  the  removal  of  the  counteracting  jewel  and  the  charm, 
so  also  the  cognition  of  Brahman  becomes  fruitful  after  the 
removal  of  the  defects  (of  the  aspirant). 

[16] 

\  fforc  l 

fe  mw&ww  to:  w 

Without  denying  the  self-validity  of  the  Vedic  texts, 
experts  in  the  Veda  maintain  that  the  entire  science  of 
inquiry,  (namely,  the  Purva-mimaima  and  the  Uttara- 
mimamsa )  has  for  its  purpose  the  removal  of  personal 
predilection.  Hence  this  treatise  would  become  fruitful. 

It  is  concluded  in  the  Jaimini-sutra  —  autpattikastu  iabdasya 

arthena  sambandhah . arthe'nupalabdhe  tatpramanam  badardyana- 

syanapeksitatvat  (I,  i,  5)  that  the  Vedic  texts  are  intrinsically  valid  in 
giving  rise  to  the  knowledge  of  their  sense.  If  it  is  said  that  inquiry  is 
helpful  to  the  Vedic  texts  in  giving  rise  to  the  cognition  of  their  sense, 
then  the  Vedic  texts  are  exposed  to  the  fault  of  losing  their  intrinsic 
validity  and  thus  there  would  arise  conflict  with  the  import  of  the 
aphorism  cited  above.  Hence  it  is  stated  that  inquiry  only  removes 
the  defects  present  in  the  intellect  of  the  aspirant. 

[17] 

fm:  I 

ifxh^T  It 

The  import  of  the  Vedic  texts  is  confused  by  hundreds 
of  personal  faults,  and  this  confusion  disappears  as  a  result 
of  this  treatise.  Then  the  cognition,  having  liberation  as  its 
fruit,  arises  from  the  Upanisadic  texts  without  any 
extraneous  aid. 


FIRST  ADHYAYA 


9 


[18] 

^qwq^q  q^qTrqm:  mii  l 

q^ITrqq:  m  3^  II 

In  giving  rise  to  the  cognition  of  Brahman-Atman, 
inquiry  serves  neither  as  the  efficient  cause  like  one’s  own 
Veda,  nor  as  an  ancillary  to  the  Vedic  text.  For,  in  that 
case,  absence  of  self-validity  is  liable  to  occur  to  Vedic  text 
in  giving  rise  to  the  knowledge  of  Brahman  which  is  identical 
with  Atman.  And,  that  is  not  proper. 

[19] 

qrnrc  *  cratsfa  3(3-^  1 

graftal  3  ^q=q*n  11 

Inquiry  does  not  function  in  giving  rise  to  the  cogni¬ 
tion  of  the  sense  of  a  sentence  ;  for,  it  is  seen  that  cognition 
arises  to  one  well-trained  in  language,  immediately  on  hear¬ 
ing  a  sentence.  So  if,  by  presumption  inquiry  is  regarded 
as  the  efficient  cause  or  accessory  to  it,  then  in  giving  rise 
to  the  valid  cognition  of  its  sense,  the  Vedic  text  is  exposed 
to  the  fault  of  losing  its  self-validity. 

AVIDYA 

[20] 


10 


SA  Ki KSEPA  $  ART  R  AKA 


Avidya,  owing  to  the  strength  of  having  the  pure  con¬ 
sciousness  as  its  locus  and  content,  comes  to  have  a  veiling 
and  a  transfiguring  faculty.  It  veils  the  ever-luminous 
Brahman-Atman,  and  (then)  projects  it  illusorily  in  the 
form  of  embodied  souls,  God,  and  the  phenomenal  world. 

[21] 

ftfsr-q  i mfo  w  ii 

Avidya  partially  conceals  the  nature  of  Atman,  owing 
to  the  strength  of  having  it  as  its  locus  and  content.  It 
illusorily  presents  Atman  which  is  absolute  and  free  from 
all  differences,  as  the  external  world,  etc.  And  avidya  is 
indeterminable  (either  as  real  or  as  unreal). 

Avidya  conceals  only  the  blissful  form  of  Brahman-Atman  and 
not  the  consciousness  aspect  of  it.  It  is  only  the  latter  that  manifests 
avidya.  Hence  it  is  said  that  avidya  partially  conceals  the  nature  of 
Atman. 


THE  NATURE  OF  THE  SELF 

[22] 

Perception,  inference,  and  verbal  testimony  ascertain 
that  Atman  is  free  from  misery,  is  eternal,  and  is  of  the 
nature  of  bliss.  In  this  great  one  which  is  pure  conscious¬ 
ness,  free  from  misery,  and  which  is  eternal  and  of  the 


5  •  12,  »3 


FIRST  ADHTaYA 


1 1 

nature  of  bliss,  the  existence  of  the  limited  forms  (namely, 
the  form  of  God,  the  embodied  soul,  and  the  phenomenal 
world)  previously  mentioned1  is  unimaginable. 

1 .  See  SR ,  I,  2. 

[23] 

5TT§r  m  sitera:  a* 

rrsffsfqr  it 

Having  fully  experienced  the  bliss  in  the  state  of  deep 
sleep  which  is  devoid  of  all  types  of  cognition  of  objects,  and 
having  come  to  the  waking  condition,  every  one  recollects 
‘I  slept  happily  here\  Thus  every  being  experiences  the 
blissful  form  of  Atman. 

Sarvajnatman  sets  forth  the  experience  of  every  being  which 
proves  the  blissful  form  of  Atman. 

[24] 

ft 

^4  prai^f  II 

Experts  describe  happiness  as  one,  with  reference  to 
which  all  objects  in  the  world  are  ancillary  and  which  by  its 
very  existence  gives  up  the  state  of  being  an  ancillary  to 
anything  else  That  description  is  equally  applicable  to 
Atman.  Hence  Atman  is  of  the  nature  of  bliss. 

Sarvajnatman  in  this  and  the  following  verse  proves  through  in¬ 
ference  that  Atman  is  of  the  nature  of  bliss. 


12 


SA  U  KSEPAgARIRAKA 


The  inferential  argument  put  forth  in  this  verse  is  as  follows  : 

alma,  sukhabhinnah,  sukhalaksanavattvat,  vaisayikasukhavat,  SS. 

[25] 

a  wrr  I 

?ra: 

*  SlITRft  || 

Absolute  bliss  is  not  found  in  the  objects  that  are  differ¬ 
ent  from  Atman.  It  is  ever  experienced  in  the  self  of  even 
an  insect.  This  is  established  by  the  preyah  ArutiA  So  even 
the  follower  of  the  Nyaya  system  will  not  deny  the  inference 
of  Atman  as  being  of  the  nature  of  happiness, 

1.  Vide  ‘This  self  is  dearer  than  a  son,  dearer  than  wealth, 
dearer  than  everything  else,  and  is  innermost’  Brh.t  T,  iv,  8. 

The  inferential  argument  put  forth  in  this  verse  is  as  follows 

atma  sukham,  ananpd dhikagocaratva  t,  yannaivam  tartnaivam,  yathci 
duhkhadi,  SS. 

[26] 

Those  who  follow  the  injunction  of  the  study  of  one’s 
own  branch  of  the  Veda  directly  ascertain  Brahman  from 
the  Upanisads1  as  of  the  form  of  bliss,  and  as  one  free  from 
all  miseries,  and  all  differences  by  virtue  of  its  very  nature. 

Sarvajnatman  in  this  verse  refers  to  the  druti  texts  that  convey 
that  Atman  which  is  identical  with  Brahman  is  of  the  nature  of  bliss. 

1.  Vide  Brh.,  Ill,  ix,  18,  and  Cliand.,  Vlf,  xxiii,  1. 


FIRST  ADUYA  YA 


13 


SUPERIMPOSITION 

[27] 

a- 

rereq^nsrefa^  f|  q^qifere; ! 

5if%  Bwfowq- 

II 

The  limited  form  (that  is,  ego  or  ahampadartha )  is  a 
superimposed  entity  and  it  is  hot  real  (as  such).  It  consists 
of  two  elements1  —conscious  (element)  and  the  objective 
(element);  and  these  two  are  capable  of  undergoing  mutual 
superimposition.  And  avidya  alone  is  the  cause  of  their 
mutual  superimposition. 

(1)-  Ego  is  a  complex  of  Brahman- Atman  and  mind. 

For  details  See  Introduction,  p.  98. 

[28] 

aresqiffepjft  *  fore  fafor- 

srrrer  ^  mTqgq^forfo  fofoj  1 1 

The  group  of  the  three  elements,  namely,  the  cogni¬ 
tion  of  similarity  (defect  in  the  instrument  of  knowledge, 
and  the  latent  impression)  is  not  the  cause  of  superimposi¬ 
tion,  as  it  does  not  pervade  all  cases  of  superimposition 
occurring  in  this  world.  The  superimposition  of  Brahmin- 
caste  in  Brahman-Atman  is  desired  by  the  scripture1,  but  in 
it  the  similarity  of  being  a  particular  caste  is  not  cognized. 

1.  Vide  the  druti  text  brahmano  yajeta. 

For  details  See  Introduction,  p.  87. 


14 


SA  MFCS  EPA  $  A  RIR  AKA 


[29] 

H  fqif^ 

^r^ittw  m.  i! 

It  has  been  said  by  experts  that  the  category  —  simi¬ 
larity  is  of  the  nature  of  the  aggregate  of  the  generalities 
that  pertain  to  the  abundance  of  the  qualities,  limbs,  and 
activties-1  Such  character  of  similarity  is  not  perceived  in 
the  self  along  with  (brahmin)  caste,  etc. 

1.  When  it  is  said  that  ‘gayal’  is  similar  to  ‘cow’,  what  we  mean 
is  that  in  gayal  there  is  the  presence  of  the  generic  attributes  of  qualities 
like  whiteness,  of  limbs  like  the  characteristic  of  having  a  dew  lap,  of 
activities  like  eating  and  chewing  that  are  present  in  cow.  The  presence 
of  the  aggregate  of  these  generic  attributes  constitutes  similarity. 

[30] 

mi  tffdK  ^T- 

m? fa 

The  erroneous  cognition  arises  regarding  the  empirical 
knowledge,  not  owing  to  the  defects  present  in  the  object 
and  the  sense-organ,  but  only  owing  to  avidya  unassisted  by 
any  extraneous  means.  Similarly,  the  indescribable  cogni¬ 
tion  of  duality  in  the  adorable  absolute  self  is  erroneous  and 
is  caused  by  avidya , 

For  details  See  Introduction,  p.  88.  This  verse  is  restated  in  the 
second  adhyaya  of  this  work.  See  II,  172. 


t.  Bi, 


FIRST  ADHYAYA 


15 


[31] 

’faWnsnw- 

1-4  II 

The  designation  of  ‘substrate’  ( adhisthana )  is  well- 
established  not  in  the  substance  that  serves  as  the  locus 
(. adhara )  of  the  superimposed  object,  but  in  the  substance 
that  is  the  object  of  avidya  with  its  product.  Hence  the 
great  anxiety  owing  to  prejudice  of  some  perverted  men  of 
utter  ignorance  is  improper,  the  anxiety,  namely,  acceptance 
of  mutual  superimposition  is  open  to  the  defect  that  this 
world  being  devoid  of  a  substratum  would  become  a  void. 

For  details  See  Introduction,  pp.  99-100. 

This  verse  is  restated  in  the  third  adhyaya  of  this  work.  See  III,  239. 


[32] 

*  II 

If  the  iftei’e  locus  were  the  substrate,  then  certainly  this 
objection  would  hold  good.  But  this  is  not  so.  The  name 
‘substrate’  is  applied  in  the  world  to  the  substance  that  is 
the  object  of  avidya  with  its  products. 

For  details  See  Introduction,  p.  99. 


qifaetumEdsw — B2 


16 


SAMKSEPASARIRAKA 


[33] 

flj'^  fqqaj- 

f%f£ifd  ii 

Moreover,  if  it  were  intended  here  that  a  pair  of  unreal 
objects  is  to  be  (mutually)  superimposed,  then  your  objec¬ 
tion  would  stand.  When  the  pair  consisting  of  the  real  and 
the  unreal  forms  is  mutually  superimposed,  wherefore  arises 
(the  possibility  of)  the  objection  of  voidness? 

For  details  See  Introduction,  pp.  99-100. 

[34] 

r=rawfsW  sfewra  vf?  ^  gf^.T  „ 

The  silver  is  superimposed  on  the  object  in  front  of  the 
perceiver,  namely,  the  element— ‘this*.  The  element -‘this’ 
also,  as  it  is  manifested  in  the  erroneous  cognition  of  silver 
is  superimposed  on  the  silver.1  If  it  were  not  so,  it  would 
not  be  manifested  (in  the  erroneous  cognition)  like  the 
(specific  nature  of  the  shell.) 2 

1.  The  mutual  superimposition  of  the ‘this’ element  and  silver  is 

infcrentjally  proved. 

2.  Reasoning  which  is  an  aid  to  a  pramana  is  set  forth. 

[35] 

^  4h  I 

^  qqr  qr4  ^  II 


FIRST  ADHYAYA 


17 


Just  as  the  cognition  of  silver  presents  itself  in  the 
element — ‘this’,  so  also  the  cognition  of  the  element — ‘this’, 
certainly  arises  in  the  object  ‘silver’.  When  such  is  the 
case,  how  is  it  not  ascertained  that  there  is  mutual  super¬ 
imposition  P1 

1.  The  mutual  superimposition  of  the  ‘this’  element  and  silver 
is  an  object  of  ordinary  experience. 

[36] 

ft  51^3 

it 

In  erroneous  cognitions  (of  serpent,  silver,  mirage,  and 
two  moons),  there  is  not  the  apprehension  of  the  rope,  the 
piece  of  shell,  the  desert,  and  the  unity  of  moon,  etc.  Only 
the  superimposed  object  appears  therein.  In  no  case  does 
an  object  different  from  the  one  superimposed  appear  in 
erroneous  cognitions. 

[37] 

wnrnisi  ft  t  ^  n 

As  it  is  observed  thus  in  erroneous  cognition  of  silver, 
etc.,  it  is  but  proper  to  admit  the  mutual  superimposition 
of  self  and  not-self.  Certainly  any  other  assumption, 
being  superfluous,  will  not  be  reasonable. 

[38] 


3 


18 


SAM  KSEPAg  ARI RAKA 


Hence  the  mutual  superimposition  of  self  and  not-self 
is  ascertained  by  the  triple  evidence  of  experience,  reasoning, 
and  inference.  Otherwise  the  three  grounds  mentioned1 
will  be  open  to  contradiction. 

1.  See  Stf,  I,  34-5. 

vide  ‘rajatapratitiridami  prathate'  [Stf,  1,35,]  ityasmin  padye  vpapa- 
dita  anubhutih,  tatali  purvapadye  ‘idamarthavastvapi  bhaveP  ityasmin  ukle 
yuktyanumiti ,  AP. 

[39] 

mi  i 

*173  7^3  77  7%  71737:  || 

If  it  be  said  that  in  worldly  experience,  erroneous  cog¬ 
nition  arises  in  objects  that  are  similar,  composite,  and 
external,  then  let  it  be.  We  are  able  to  attribute  all  these 
to  the  self  by  virtue  of  worldly  usage. 

For  details  See  Introduction,  pp.  96-7. 

upacarah — vyavaharah,  SS. 


[40] 

717  =q  7iE7$^7  | 

7  mfefa  773  mmmfa  11 

Moreover,  by  openly  proclaiming  in  the  texts  ‘na  tavadn, 
the  author  of  the  bhdsya  has  declared,  resorting  to  worldly 
usage,  objectness,  etc.,  in  the  case  of  the  self  in  order  to 
establish  erroneous  cognition  regarding  it. 

1.  The  following  bhasya  text  is  referred  to  here. 

na  tavadayam  ekdntendvisayah,  asmatpratyayavisayalvat,  Adhyasa- 
bhasya. 

For  details  See  Introduction,  pp.  96-7. 


FIRST  ADHYAYA 


19 


[41] 

*R*n  with  qfs  m  ^q;ram^s  m  n 

The  erroneous  cognition  of  objects  in  the  form  of 
immediacy  comes  about  depending  on  the  locus  cognized 
as  immediately  by  the  mind,  by  itself,  or  by  the  sense  of 
sight;1  for,  it  is  so  presented  in  dream,  delusion,  etc. 

1.  See  the  following  two  ver.'es. 

For  details  See  Introduction,  p.  97. 


[42] 

fcfa  I 
ililfforfa  ii 

Here,  in  the  dream  state,  erroneous  cognition  of  objects 
arises  repeatedly  in  the  substrate— the  self  which  manifests 
itself  immediately  and  which  is  beyond  the  scope  of  the 
sense  of  sight  and  the  intellect. 

For  details  See  Introduction,  p,  97. 

[43] 

In  the  ether  cognized  by  the  mind,  there  arises  by  force 
of  immediacy  the  illusion  ascribing  various  colours  to  it 
such  as  whiteness,  etc.  Similarly,  there  is  the  illusion  of 
silver,  etc.,  in  the  substrate  cognized  by  the  visual  sense. 


20 


6V1  Af  KSEPAgAR  1 RA  KA 


[  44  ] 

trmsfa  mm  crats^f^u^s- 

=q  ^  i 

^  ^  r:  u 

Regarding  the  same  object  which  is  perceived,  there  is 
manifestation  and  also  no  manifestation  owing  to  some 
defect.  It  is  well-known  that  when  two  trees  which  arc 
(apart  and)  at  a  distance  are  perceived,  their  difference 
(w'hich  is  of  the  nature  of  the  tree)  is  not  noticed. 

For  details  Sec  Introduction,  p.  01. 
ajnanatah  —  dosavndat,  AP. 


[45] 

^r*Krtw?jr  qfd  nif qjq- 

Though  there  exists  difference  accidentally  between  the 
(general)  feature  (of  the  shell,  that  is,  the  ‘element — this’) 
which  is  cognized  and  the  (specific)  feature  (of  the  shell, 
that  is,  triangular  form,  etc  )  which  is  not  cognized,  yet  the 
difference  does  not  account  for  the  unknown  nature  of  the 
specific  feature  of  shell  which  is  different  from  the  (general) 
feature  that  is  denoted  by  the  word  (‘this’)  which  is  not 
synonymous  (with  the  word  ‘shell’  conveying  the  specific 
feature  of  the  shell). 

For  details  See  Introduction,  p.  94. 


i-  12,  1 3 


FIRST  ADHTATA 


21 


[46] 

^gg^n  i 

mi  3  II 

Indeed  the  triangular  form  (that  is,  the  specific  fea- 
"turef  i>f  shell  which  is  not  perceived  is  naturally  (different 
from  the  element — ‘this’  (that  is,  the  general  nature)  of  the 
shell.  Nevertheless,  the  difference  that  exists  in  its  specific 
feature  does  not  account  for  its  unknown  aspect. 

For  details  See  Introduction,  p.  94. 

[47] 

jppwqfa  *Tfcr:  sr  imi  SNtrfoiitffunj  i 

The  reason  is  this  though  the  tree  which  has  dif¬ 
ference  from  the  one  nearby  is  well-examined,  yet  that 
difference  which  is  of  the  form  of  that  tree  docs  not  come 
within  the  range  of  perception. 

[48] 

fifftsft  qSfl^sq  |j 

The  permanence  of  the  pot,  etc.,  which  is  naturally 
identical  with  the  form  of  the  pot,  etc.,  is  not  perceived  at 
the  time  of  the  perception  of  the  latter.  But  it  is  admitted 


i.  stiffs— 1 T2  r.  *r  3 — B2  — T2 


22 


SAM  KSEPAg  ARI RAKA 


that  it  later  becomes  the  object  of  the  visual  perception 
accompanied  by  the  awakened  latent  impression. 

For  details  See  Introduction,  p.  95. 

[49] 

Kk  *$^qfq  mwfk 

fqvpiTq^S5q^q  || 

Similarly  the  self  manifests  itself  in  its  aspect  of  con¬ 
sciousness,  but  not  in  its  absolute  nature.  Hence  it  is  reason¬ 
able  that,  owing  to  avidya ,  there  is  the  superimposition  on 
it  of  the  limited  forms  such  as  ‘This  is  the  universe’,  ‘He 
is  God’,  and  ‘I  am  the  individual  soul’. 

[50] 

3Rq  ^  SRR  5KWRT  I 

^TTRTfH  11 

The  inner  self  which  is  of  the  nature  of  consciousness  is 
fettered  by  the  limited  forms1  which  serve  as  bondage.  The 
cause  of  its  bondage  is  avidya  present  in  it.  The  annihilation 
of  avidya  through  the  realization  of  the  true  nature  of  the 
self  is  liberation- 

1.  See  Ss',  I,  2  and  22. 


[51] 

3TfI^iTRfq^qts^  ;*  3 

^Rqwqtqirfq  n 


FIRST  ADUYAYA 


23 


As  there  would  be  contradiction  to  the  conscious, 
immutable,  and  non-dual  nature  of  the  self,  the  presence 
of  ignorance  in  the  person  characterized  by  it,  is  not 
(accepted  to  be)  real,  but  is  caused  by  nescience  alone. 
Here  the  objection  regarding  the  defect  of  self-dependence 
should  not  be  raised1. 

1.  The  fallacy  of  self-dependence  is  not  injurious  to  the  school  of 
Advaita  where  everything  except  the  self  is  not  deteiminable. 


[52] 

srt  esrr  ft 

There  is  no  dispute  regarding  the  view  that  all  objects 
are  related  to  the  self  though  avidya }  All  agree  that  avidya 
also  is  an  object.  Hence  the  cause  of  its  association  (with 
the  self)  also  is  avidya. 

1.  a  Imanyavabhasamanah  mohasambandhah  mohayattah,  driyatvat, 
mohakaryaprapailcavat,  Sathb.,  p.  63  (b). 


[53] 

Am  qfsqq>qTTr  i 

Just  as  empirical  knowledge  has  the  required  capacity 
to  reveal  itself  as  well  as  its  object,  so  it  is  inteKigiWe  that 


Mi,  n,  t2.  ts,  f-t.  is.  le, 
Wcri — B2 


24  SAMKSEPAg  ARIRAKA 

avidya  existing  in  the  self  superimposes  itself  as  well  as  the 
resultant  world  (on  the  self). 

For  details  See  Introduction,  p.  92. 

[54] 

Sfl^TT  I 

mm  ^  ii 

Just  as  the  soul  comprehends  the  group  of  objects  and 
itself  through  the  power  ( jnatia )  which  makes  it  the  cognizer, 
so  also  it  is  not  unreasonable  that  avidya  is  capable  of  super¬ 
imposing  the  universe  and  itself  (on  Brahman). 

For  details  See  Introduction,  p  92. 


[55] 

Just  as  difference  without  requiring  any  other  difference 
explains  its  own  difference  (from  the  objects)  as  well  as  the 
difference  between  the  two  things  that  are  to  be  mutually 
distinguished,  so  also  avidya  superimposes  itself  as  well  as  its 
effects  without  another  avidya. 

For  details  See  Introduction,  p.  93. 

[56] 

mm  i 


The  author  of  the  Brahma-sutra  has  indicated  all  these 
when  he  sets  forth  the  realization  of  Brahman  as  the  anni- 


FIRST  ADHTATA 


25 


hilating  factor  of  the  root-cause  of  the  origin  of  bondage. 
The  author  of  the  bhasya,  therefore,  elucidates  them  all. 

The  theory  of  sup-rimposition  is  implicit  in  the  aphorism  —  atha' 
to  brahmajijnasa ,  BS,  I,  i,  1. 

For  details  See  Introduction,  p.  94. 

[57] 

Hence  all  the  objects  that  are  different  from  the  self 
are  superimposed  on  it  by  nescience.  They  are  all,  there¬ 
fore,  sublated  by  the  knowledge  of  the  self.  In  order  to 
remove  the  incredibility  of  the  view  that  the  knowledge  of 
the  self  has  the  purpose  of  destroying  the  differences  in  the 
form  of  the  supreme  lord,  the  individual  soul,  and  the  pheno¬ 
menal  world,  we  compose  this  treatise  which  attempts  to 
make  clear  the  true  purport  of  the  hoary  bhasya  on  the 
Brahma-sulra. 

[BRAHMAN -THE  OBJECT  OF  INQUIRY] 

[58] 

The  non-dual  Reality  should  be  inquired  into;  it  should 
lie  inquired  into  as  the  same  as  the  self  by  this,  namely. 

t  sw:— P2 

4 


FIRST  AD  Iir AT  A 


53 


A  proof  is  accepted  indeed  by  the  Vedic  scholars  to  be 
valid  in  this  that  it  manifests  an  unknown  object.  But  as 
the  supreme  self  is  of  the  form  of  pure  consciousness,  it  is 
difficult  to  prove  that  it  is  unknown ;  and  hence  the  proof 
(namely,  the  Upanisadic  passages)  is  not  valid. 

na  mamkrtyam  —  na  ftramayyam,  TB. 

The  translation  foftows  Til.  The  objection  raised  in  this  verse 
is  answered  in  SS,  I,  335. 


[114] 

$5  tot?; 

srarrafsfaft  ii 

Who  will  have  faith  in  the  import  of  the  statements 
such  as  -  ‘A  self-luminous  object  does  not  reveal  itself’,  ‘An 
object  which  is  hot  is  cold5,  and  ‘An  object  which  is  cold  is 
hot’  ?  So  the  Vedantins  say  that  the  statement  —  ‘The 
supreme  self  is  unknown’  is  (similarly)  incompatible. 


[115] 

In  the  absence  of  the  limiting  condition,  it  is  not  possi¬ 
ble  to  have  the  object  as  presented  by  that  limiting  condi¬ 
tion.  In  the  cognition  of  the  self  through  proof,  avidya 
is  admitted  to  be  this  adventitious  limiting  condition.  But 


54 


SAM  K$EPA$  ARIRAKA 


avidya  is  impossible  in  the  self-luminous  self.  Therefore  the 
self  does  not  come  within  the  scope  of  any  proof. 

If  it  is  said  that  the  self  characterized  by  avidya  is  the  object 
of  the  Upani$ads,  then  it  is  asked  whether  avidya  is  the  qualifying 
attribute  ( viiesana )  of  the  self,  or  limiting  condition  ( upadhi ).  It 
cannot  be  the  former,  as  otherwise  avidya  also,  like  the  self,  would 
become  the  object  of  the  Upaniijads  and  as  such  it  would  become 
real.  The  inevitable  result  would  be  that  avidya  cannot  be  sublated 
by  the  knowledge  of  the  self  arising  from  the  Upani?ads.  Hence 
it  should  be  held  that  avidya  serves  as  the  limiting  condition  in  the 
case  of  the  self.  And  this  contention  is  refuted  in  this  verse. 


[116] 

Id  3  l 

3kn  n 

Having  penetrating  erudition  the  scholars  do  not  notice 
the  inconsistency  of  the  words  in  their  sentence  that  the 
proof  (Upanisads)  characterized  by  duality  is  the  source 
of  the  knowledge  of  the  self  which  is  absolute  and  self- 
luminous. 


[117] 

31f*m  3RTFR  7133-333  II 


FIRST  ADIIYAYA 


55 


If  it  is  held  that  the  knower,  knowledge,  its  means,  and 
its  object  are  the  transformation  of  the  self  (which  is  cons¬ 
ciousness)  then  we  point  out  the  defects,  namely,  the  loss  of 
the  immutability  and  absoluteness  of  the  self,  and  adoption 
of  the  view  of  the  Buddhists.1 

1.  The  Vijnanavada  school  of  Buddhism  also  holds  the  view 
that  consciousness  alone  is  real.  What  is  of  the  nature  of  cons¬ 
ciousness  is  indeed  indivisible;  but  by  those  whose  vision  is  confused, 
it  is  seen  to  be,  as  it  were  differentiated  into  the  perceived  object, 
the  perceiving  subject,  and  then  perception  itself.  Sarvajnatman, 
in  the  sequel,  refutes  the  contention  that  the  view  of  Advaita 
is  similar  to  that  of  the  Vijnanavada  school  of  Buddhism. 

See  SR,  II,  25  -  32. 


ni8j 

ii 

If  it  is  said  that  the  differences  beginning  with  knower 
and  ending  with  the  result  of  proof  (namely,  knowledge)1 
are  falsely  created  by  avidya  and  hence  indeterminable, 
then  there  arises  the  contingency  of  the  self  also  being 
superimposed  4n  view  of  its  knowability  (through  the 
Upanisadic  passages). 

1.  Knower,  means  of  knowledge,  object  of  knowledge,  and 
knowledge. 


If  it  is  said  that  the  knower,  knowledge,  its  means  and  its 
object  in  view  of  their  knowability,  are  falsely  created  by  avidyS 
and  hence  indeterminable,  then  the  self  also  should  be  held  as 


56 


SAMK§EPAgARIRAKA 


superimposed  and  as  such  indeterminable,  as  it  is  also  knowable 
by  being  the  object  of  knowledge  for  the  Upani?ads. 


[119] 

h  hr 

hpr:  li 

Just  as  fire  is  not  noted  for  consuming  an  unburnable 
object,  so  also  there  is  no  proof  that  manifests  an  un¬ 
knowable  object.  Hence  the  contention  that  the  supreme 
self  is  not  admitted  to  be  knowable,  but  has  the  Upanisadic 
passages  as  the  source  of  its  knowledge  amounts  to  the 
stultification  of  your  view. 


[120] 

f%  3R<'5$sfq 

mi  ^  1| 

Moreover,  two  classes  of  objects  ‘real’  and  ‘unreal’ 
alone  are  admitted  in  all  the  sacred  books  which  are  the 
means  of  understanding  the  philosophical  doctrines  ad¬ 
vocated  by  experts  in  the  s'astras.  Further,  even  a  single 
object  which  is  falsely  created  by  one’s  own  avidya  and  as 
such  indeterminable  is  unheard  of  in  the  three  worlds. 


The  objection  raided  in  this  verse  is  refuted  in  I,  336„ 


FIRST  ADHYAYA 


57 


[121] 

mt- 

q^qigdT  q  m  mn  ii 

As  nescience  is  well-known  to  be  the  absence  of  know¬ 
ledge,  it  is  a  void  and  so  it  should  not  be  accepted  as  the 
source  of  the  universe  characterized  by  duality.  A  void  is 
never  capable  of  giving  rise  to  a  positive  entity.  Never 
does  the  daughter  of  a  barren  woman  give  birth  to  a 
hundred  children. 

The  objection  raised  in  this  verse  is  answered  in  SS>,  I,  320. 


MAJOR  TEXTS  DO  NOT  GIVE  RISE  TO 
IMMEDIATE  KNOWLEDGE 

[122] 

ftaisg  smarftaRirrctsjifs- 

¥i?RU  n 

The  cognition  arising  from  a  sentence,  unlike  the  one 
from  the  senses,  does  not  present  its  object  as  immediate. 
Hence  the  mediate  cognition  arising  from  the  sentence  is 
erroneous  in  respect  of  the  self  which  is  always  self-luminous 
and  is  of  the  nature  of  immediate  experience. 

The  objection  raised  in  this  and  the  following  tw#  verses  is  refuted 
in  Ssf,  Ij  341. 

8 


58 


SAMKSEPAg  ARIRAKA 


[123] 

!TTTnow5r 

^  SRECfqfsfci  mm\  ii 

The  Upani§adic  sentence,  by  its  innate  nature,  makes 
known  the  eternal  and  self-luminous  object  (namely,  the 
self)  as  mediate.  Tell  me  how  it  is  reasonable  that  the 
Upanisadic  texts  are  valid  in  respect  of  the  self.  Indeed 
there  is  no  validity  for  a  proof,  if  it  makes  known  an  object 
as  of  a  different  nature. 


[124] 

g  mi 

assg  qqgtrcitsRSfTfiifa  i 

^  5TTI^sfq 

qStfd  m  qr  ii 

Though  the  object  is  always  immediate  yet  the  Upa¬ 
nisadic  passage  is  incapable  of  presenting  it  as  immediate. 
Indeed  in  the  three  worlds  the  cognition  arising  from  a 
sentence  does  not  present  its  object  as  immediate. 


KNOWLEDGE  ARISING  FROM  UPANI§ADS 
DOES  NOT  REMOVE  AVIDYA 

[125] 

m\z  qqfa  T%*rgq?m5r 

jrA  i 


FIRST  ADHTATA 


59 


n 

Now  (if)  it  is  said  (by  the  Siddhantin):  though 
there  is  nothing  to  be  revealed  by  proof  in  the  case  of  the 
self-evident  self,  yet  there  is  the  nescience  which  is  the 
dread  of  transmigration  and  which  has  to  be  annihilated 
(by  the  proof). 

Now  the  Siddhantin  holds  that  the  Upani$adic  passages  are  valid  in 
this  that  they  remove  nescience  present  in  the  self. 


[126] 

*  tons:  11 

It  is  not  correct.  A  proof  does  not  annihilate  anything 
real.  It  need  not  be  employed  to  annihilate  the  non¬ 
existent  object.  And  there  is  no  object  which  is  both  real 
and  unreal,  and  which  could  be  annulled  by  this.  Hence 
in  your  (Advaitic)  school,  proof  does  not  annihilate  any¬ 
thing. 

If  nescience  is  real,  it  cannot  be  annihilated.  Similar  is  the  case 
if  it  is  unreal,  like  the  horn  of  a  hare.  It  cannot  be  both  real  and 
unreal  at  once.  So  nescience  is  not  annihilated  by  any  proof,  in  which 
case  the  latter  would  become  valid. 

The  objection  raised  in  this  and  the  following1  verse  is  answered 
in  Ssf,  I,  342. 


i.  I  6 


50 


SAMK§EPA$ARIRAKA 


[127] 

$rk  h  iii^iW  gqi^n: 

*  m  sngm^sf^  n 

In  ordinary  experience,  it  is  well-known  that  a  proof 
is  not  a  productive  factor.  If  it  were  so,  then  it  ceases  to  be 
a  proof,  like  an  act.  The  followers  of  your  school  also  do 
not  accept  that  the  result  of  a  proof  (namely,  knowledge)  is 
produced  (even  in  the  case  of  the  insentient  objects).  Never 
do  they  accept  it  in  the  case  of  the  self. 

As  a  proof  is  not  a  productive  factor,  it  cannot  annihilate 
nescience.  It  cannot  be  urged  that,  as  a  proof  gives  rise  to  the 
knowledge  of  an  object,  it  is  a  productive  factor;  for  even  the  Advaitins 
do  not  admit  that  a  proof  gives  rise  to  the  knowledge  of  an  object. 
They  hold  that  the  pure  consciousness  delimited  by  an  insentient  object 
(say)  pot,  when  reflected  in  the  mental  state  arising  from  a  proof  in 
the  form  of  ‘  This  is  pot  ’,  is  knowledge  and  it  manifests  the  pot. 
Hence  knowledge  is  not  produced  by  a  proof  and  so  the  latter  cannot 
be  considered  as  a  productive  factor. 


ANIRVACANIYATA  —  A  PSEUDO-CONCEPT 

[128] 

snsnfir 

§1%  II 


1.  «WIT  —  h,  13 


FIRST  ADHYAYA 


61 


Even  now,  I  do  not  understand  the  concept  of 
anirvacaniya,  though  I  thoughtfully  enter  into  the  core  of  all 
the  philosophical  doctrines.  Such  an  object  as  is  termed 
anirvacaniya  is  also  unheard  of  in  worldly  experience. 

The  objection  raised  in  this  verse  is  answered  in  Stf,  I,  339-40. 


[129] 


Hence,  on  careful  examination  (it  is  found)  that  in  the 
case  of  the  self  no  result  (namely,  either  the  removal  of 
nescience,  or  the  manifestation  of  the  self  itself)  is  possible. 

In  view  of  the  absence  of  any  result,  the  Upani§adic  passage 
becomes  futile  and  hence  it  cannot  be  shown  to  be  a  proof.  ^ 


IMPORT  OF  THE  VEDIC  TEXTS  IS  NIYOGA 

[130] 

5JK5J  | 

dTORR  ^1%  II 

The  beginner  observes  activity  on  the  part  of  the  hearer 
and  infers  the  knowledge  that  prompts  the  latter  to  activity. 
He  then  understands  the  significative  power  (of  the  group 
of  words  uttered  by  the  elder  person)  in  the  sense  which  is 


62 


SAM  K§EPAg  ARI RAKA 


one  of  the  rclata  of  the  relation  existing  between  the 
existent  object  and  niyoga.  (Later  by  a  process  of  insertion 
and  elimination),  he  distinguishes  the  words  and  naturally 
understands  that  each  word  is  significative  of  its  sense  (as 
associated  with  niyoga ). 

Now  the  Purvapaksin  holds  that  the  import  of  the  Vedic  texts  is 
niyoga,  and  hence  the  Upani$ad3  are  not  valid  in  respect  of  the  existent 
entity,  the  self. 

For  details  see  Introduction,  pp.  53-4. 


[131] 

tqTfi:  qf^Sqq 

3  *qi^q 

qtotqT^3  q^qqgqnqq^qsq  11 

The  view  that  the  word  is  capable  of  denoting  the 
sense  as  related  to  niyoga  is  given  up.  The  other  view  that 
the  word  denotes  the  sense  as  related  to  another  compatible 
sense  has  not  been  .nh  .meed  c\  cm  before.  But  in  view  cf 
its  innate  nature,  a  word  conveys  a  related  sense.  Later, 
owing  to  compatibility,  etc.,  the  whole  sentence  naturally 
points  to  niyoga. 

If  it  is  said  by  the  Siddhantin  that  a  word  conveys  only  a  related 
sense,  the  Purvapaksin  admits  this  contention.  He,  however,  holds 
that  the  word  would  naturally  point  to  niyoga  later,'  owing  to  compati¬ 
bility,  congmity,  and  expectancy. 


P2 


FIRST  ADHYAYA 


63 


[132] 

srraraTTOf  i 

Some  followers  of  the  Prabhakara1  school  maintain 
that  niyoga  is  that  which  is  inimical  to  inaction  and  is  not 
conditioned  by  the  three  divisions  of  time— past,  present, 
and  future.  Some  others  affirm  that  it  prompts  one  to 
activity  by  making  known  that  its  content  is  the  means  to 
a  desired  result. 

1 .  eke — gurumatekadei inah,  [  iSS  ] 

For  details  see  S&,  I,  386,  f F. 

[133] 

’qi  JTT^lf^q  I 

Experts  in  defining  the  nature  of  niyoga  affirm  thus  — 
Niyoga  is  that  which  does  not  have  any  other  as  the  aim  of 
activity  and  is  known  to  be  achieved  by  it  (activity). 

For  details  see  Introduction,  pp.  50 — 1. 


[134] 

mi  wm  mwv  fttpr  i 

ftfH  srprn  n 


i.  «rw«rg— Mi,  Ti,  T2,  T3,  T6- 

s.  trow— T6  swqfor— T2»  T3,  Mi 

m.  B2 


G4 


SAM  KSEPAS'  ARIRAKA 


Scholars  contrast  both  ‘  passion  ’  and  niyoga  thus  : — 
‘  Passion  ’  prompts  one  to  activity  by  existing  beforehand. 
Niyoga ,  on  the  other  hand,  remains  to  be  achieved  and  in 
this  aspect  and  not  in  any  other  aspect,  it  prompts  one  to 
action. 


[135] 

3TRTqt?nTldt: 

q&qdf  zzw  i 

sfRTtqi^-q  ^qt  qqftsHqraqfirsr:  qqq*jq?r 
q^<rcq  tdteqftqqto  qqqsft  qmq^  u 

By  a  process  of  insertion  and  elimination,  the  learner 
who  passively  stands  near  and  who  is  an  adept  in  the 
application  of  the  logical  method  (of  agreement  and 
difference)  considers  that  a  word  is  naturally  capable  of 
denoting  a  particular  sense  as  related  to  niyoga.  Again 
from  other  usages,  he  ascertains  the  significative  relation  of 
each  word  to  the  sense  related  to  niyoga.  Hence  all  the 
Upanisadic  passages  are  valid  in  respect  of  the  object 
which  is  subsidiary  to  niyoga. 

For  details  see  Introduction,  p.  50. 


[136] 

m  qr*q*nq*q  fqftfaqiq  i 

f^lfqsjs^q  q  $rf%  qqdq>R?qfqqq<qqtJ^  II 

The  beginner  understands  the  signification  of  the 
potential  suffix  (lin),  etc.,  in  the  ‘state  of  being  mandatory’ 
which  is  present  in  ‘command’,  etc.,  that  are  wholly 
inimical  to  inaction  and  are  capable  of  being  denoted  by 
the  word — ‘mandatory’  ( pravartaka ). 


FIRST  ADHTAYA 


65 


[137] 

aftfa  ^5  ii 

Others  hold  Niyoga  is  unconditioned  and  as  such 
independent  in  the  sphere  of  scripture  which  is  of  imper¬ 
sonal  origin.  But  it  is  conditioned  in  the  sphere  of  secular 
statements,  as  the  latter  are  of  personal  origin. 

[138] 

In  the  sphere  of  secular  statements,  niyoga  is  determined 
by  its  relation  to  the  means  ( dhatvartha )  which  is  of  the 
form  of  activity,  which  is  associated  with  the  limiting 
conditions  like  ‘command’,  etc.,  and  which  is  already  known 
to  be  the  means  of  a  desired  end.  In  the  sphere  of  Vedic 
sentences  which  have  no  author,  niyoga  is  free  from  limiting 
conditions  suth  as  ‘the  desire  of  the  speaker’  Hence  the 
signification  of  the  potential  suffix  ( lin ),  etc.„is  the  ‘state  of 
being  a  niyoga,  and  it  is  common  to  both  Vedic  and  secular 
statements. 

s.  Mi,  P2,Ti,T2  ^  g  T2>  T3, 


9 


66 


SAM  K$EPAg  ARl  RAKA 


[139] 

m  srf%  ^r^ij 

^  ft*#?  ii 

Others  maintain  a  two-fold  niyoga  characterized  by 
different  nature  according  to  fitness  or  suitability.  In  the 
sphere  of  the  secular  statements,  it  is  the  sense  of  the  root, 
while  in  the  sphere  of  the  Vedic  statements  it  is  called  niyoga. 
The  beginner  at  first  understands  the  signification  of  the 
potential  suffix  to  be  niyoga  in  its  generic  aspect.  Later, 
acquiring  philosophical  training,  he  definitely  ascertains 
that  the  potential  suffix  refers  only  to  niyoga  that  is  present 
in  the  Vedic  statements. 

For  details  see  Introduction,  p.  p.  51-52. 

[  140] 

^  TO  II 

If  the  potential  suffix  is  capable  of  primarily  signifying 
‘the  sense  of  the  root’,  then  it  is  not  competent  to  secondarily 
signify  the  niyoga  present  in  the  Vedic  texts,  as  there  is  no 
relation  of  the  primary  sense  (namely,  the  sense  of  the  root) 
with  niyoga.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  potential  suffix 
primarily  signifies  the  niyoga,  then  it  is  capable  of  secondarily 
signifying  the  ‘sense  of  the  root’,  as  niyoga  has  relation  with 
the  secondary  sense,  namely,  the  sense  of  the  root.  Hence 


FIRST  ADHYAYA 


67 


one  should  ascertain  that  the  primary  signification  of  the 
potential  suffix  is  niyoga  present  in  the  Vedic  texts. 

[141] 

qtfar 

By  a  process  of  insertion  and  elimination  thef  beginner 
who  is  an  adept  in  the  application  of  the  logical  method 
(of  agreement  and  difference)  understands  in  a  few  days  the 
signification  of  other  words.  As  he  considers  that  all  the 
words  have  primary  signification  in  the  meanings  as  related 
to  niyoga  he  is  positively  against  the  view  that  the  Vedic 
texts  give  rise  to  the  sense  of  any  existent  entity  (that  is, 
the  self). 

[142] 

fat  faqfa  i 

There  does  not  arise  to  anyone  the  comprehension  of 
the  primary  signification  of  the  words  from  the  sentence  that 
conveys  an  existent  entity  ,  in  view  of  the  absence  of  any 
‘reason’  (namely,  activity)  from  which  the  presence  of  the 
knowledge  in  the  hearer  could  be  inferred.  The  brightness 
in  the  face  and  weltering  on  the  ground  noticed  in  the  body 


1.  minfafiij'nurei:  T2.  >nmfa  T3, 

rtsfaa'n:  Pi 


68 


SAM  K§EPA$  ARI RAKA 


of  the  bearer  are  not  always  ascertained  as  invariably 
probative  of  the  news  of  the  birth  of  a  son  (or  some 
calamity). 

[143] 


fm\w  vfafam  *  tiFTifai 
TO°*f  qmfa  ^  q^fa  Rq^R  I 
^-qqqR  ^qfq  *  ft  *qqqn  q^Tfqq; 

Therefore,  be  without  any  hope  of  the  Vedic  texts 
(conveying  an  existent  entity).  The  experts  in  the  3astras 
who  have  a  well-trained  mind  in  determining  the  significa¬ 
tion  of  words  speak  at  length  thus  :  —  the  existent  entity 
is  never  independent  by  itself,  but  is  subservient  to  niyoga, 
that  is,  the  ‘one  to  be  achieved’.1  So  the  Vedic  texts 
are  not  valid  in  respect  of  the  supreme  self  which  is 
independent,  self-existent,  and  not  related  to  niyoga. 

1.  vide  :  bhutaih  bhavyaya  upadidyate,  S  abara-bhasy  a  on  Jaimini- 
Sutra,  III,  iv,  40. 

[  144] 

qfqqnq  ^ 

s^q*rq  i%qq 
to  spit  qftsRq^R  u 

The  said  view,  namely,  that  the  Vedanta  is  valid  proof 
in  respect  of  the  oneness  of  the  self,"  appears  to  me 
incongruous.  Thus  there  has  arisen  this  contradiction  in 
my  mind.  Oh  !  Lord,  please  remove  this  for  my  edifica¬ 
tion. 


FIRST  AD HY A  YA  69 

OBJECTIONS  ANSWERED  : 

IMPARTITE  SENSE  —  THE  IMPORT  OF 
THE  MAJOR  TEXTS 

[145] 

(Now  the  preceptor  begins  to  answer  the  objections 
raised  so  far). 

What  you,  a  well-trained  student,  say  is  indeed  true. 
If  it  is  accepted  that  the  import  of  the  Upanisadic  passage 
( tat  tvam  asi )  is  identity  involving  duality  ( samsarga ),  then 
there  is  indeed  a  conflict  between  the  two  words  (tat  and 
tvam )  in  view  of  the  contradictory  attributes  present  in  their 
primary  senses,  namely,  mediateness  and  duality. 

The  objection  raised  in  the  verses  S&,  I,  95-6  is  answered  in  this 
and  the  following  verses. 

guruman — iiksilamatih  [55] 

[146] 

The  nature  of  the  import  of  a  sentence  as  stated  by  the 
authorities  on  the  Purva-mimamsa  is  not  accepted  here. 
Hence  the  great  representatives  of  the  philosophical 


»WTS  — Ti 


70 


SAM  K$EPAS  ARIRAKA 


discipline  of  £>rl  Badarayana  favour  the  partless  entity 
bereft  of  any  relation,  as  the  import  of  the  Upani§adic 
passages. 

[  147  ] 

to 

fto  fton  $3^  n 

We  are  not  at  variance  with  the  existence  of  the 
sentence — sacred  or  secular,  which  is  capable  of  conveying 
the  sense  of  identity  involving  duality,  and  which  is 
different  from  the  one  whose  import  is  the  partless  entity. 

[148] 

The  group  of  (certain)  sentences  — Upanijadic1  or 
secular  2  —  is  not  capable  of  inparting  any  sense  other 
than  the  partless  entity.  We  shall  elucidate  how  all  such 
sentences  convey  the  sense  of  the  partless  entity. 

1.  (a)  satyam  jflanarh  anantam  brahma,  Taiit II.  i,  I. 

(b)  tat  tvam  asi,  Chand.,  VI,  vii,  7. 

2.  (a)  prakrstaprakaiah  candrah, 

( b )  so'yam  devadaltali 

[149] 

to  gmRKi  ft 


FIRST  ADHYAYA  ^\ 

The  sentence  ‘This  is  that  Devadatta’  is  not  capable  of 
conveying  the  usual  sense  of  a  sentence,  namely,  an  idea 
consisting  of  the  relation  of  the  primary  sense  of  the  words. 
If  the  two  words  should  give  rise  to  the  knowledge  of 
identity  of  their  primary  senses,  then  there  cannot  be  the 
relation  between  the  two  words  as  required  in  a  sentence 
(as  they  convey  contradictory  senses). 

[150] 

ft  ^  || 

Here  there  is  no  other  alternative  than  to  accept  that 
the  import  of  the  sentence  —  ‘This  is  that  Devadatta’,  is 
partless  entity.  This  sentence  neither  conveys  the  identity 
of  the  secondary  sense  of  the  term — ‘this’  (namely,  the 
person-in-himself)  with  the  (primary)  sense— ‘Devadatta  as 
related  to  past  time’,  the  sense  referred  to  by  the  word 
‘that’;  nor  does  it  convey  the  identity  of  the  secondary  sense 
of  the  term  ‘that’  (namely,  the  person-in-himself)  with  the 
(primary)  sense  of  the  term — ‘this’  (namely,  Devadatta  as 
related  to  present  time). 

[151] 

-  wratfa  w?- 

II  II 


72 


SAMK§EPAg  ARI RAKA 


When  such  is  the  case,  the  sentence  tat  tvarh  asi  like  the 
sentence  ‘This  is  that  Devadatta’  secondarily  signifies  the 
sense  of  the  partless  entity;  for,  otherwise,  this  sentence 
(is  not  significant  and  hence  it)  will  be  analogous  to  the 
statement  —  ‘a  dry  gourd  immerses  in  water*. 

THE  SELF  IS  SECONDARILY  SIGNIFIED 

[152] 

The  assertion  that  a  word  could  secondarily  signify 
only  that  sense  which  is  known  by  other  proofs  (as  related 
to  the  primary  sense  of  the  word)  is  unsound.  For,  the 
criterion  for  taking  a  word  in  its  secondary  sense  is  that  the 
latter  should  be  known  (as  related  to  the  primary  sense  of 
the  word)  and  not  anything  else. 

The  objection  raised  in  Sg  I,  99  is  answered  here.  For  details 
see  Introduction,  p.  19. 

s iddhatvam—jnatatvam  [SS] 

[153] 

ft  * 

ft  faf *RT  *  ta- 

The  criterion  for  taking  a  word  in  its  secondary  sense 
does  not  lie  in  the  secondary  sense  being  known  by  other 
proofs  (as  related  to  the  primary  sense  of  the  word),  just 


?.  — P2,  T3. 


FIRST  ADHYATA 


73 


like  the  tawny  colour  of  fire  is  not  the  criterion  for  the  rise 
of  smoke.  Though  the  tawny  colour  subsists  in  fire,  yet  it 
is  not  instrumental  in  giving  rise  to  smoke. 

[.'15*  ] 

q  STfTfa  ^  i 

^T!*T  5T£Tftl  3  ^  *Tm*?T 

$\sq  ftWT  Vm  II 

The  secondary  signification  of  a  word  is  of  three 
kinds  :  —  One  totally  discards  the  primary  sense;  tibe  next 
does  not  discard  any  part  of  the  primary  sense;  and,  the 
third  partly  gives  up  the  primary  sense  and  partly  retains  it. 
Thus  the  mode  of  secondary  signification  is  three-fold. 

[155] 

II  3\X 

m  i 

ft#  srftftdif  3 

siiftn  n 

The  word  ‘Ganges’  discarding  its  primary  sense  (that 
is,  current)  conveys  the  bank,  and  this  (namely,  the 
secondary  signification  of  the  ‘bank’  by  the  word  ‘Ganges’) 
is  known  as  exclusive  secondary  signification.  The  non¬ 
exclusive  secondary  signification  is  adopted  in  the  case  of 
‘The  red  (horse)  stands  outside’  where  the  word  ‘red’ 
retains  its  primary  sense,  namely,  the  red  quality,  and  signi¬ 
fies  the  horse  to  which  redness  belongs. 

For  details  see  Introduction,  p.  10. 

10 


74 


SAMK$EPAg  ARIRAKA 


[156] 

etsq  smftra 

3^2?  qsjrwrT- 

OTfa#  ii 

The  exclusive— non-exclusive  secondary  signification  is 
well-known  in  the  case  of  the  sentence  ‘This  is  that 
Devadatta’,  wherein  the  words  discarding  a  part  of  their 
primary  sense,  namely,  the  place,  etc.,  convey  the  other 
part,  namely,  the  person-in-himself.1 

Thus  the  mode  of  secondary  signification  is  three¬ 
fold. 

For  details  see  Introduction,  p;  1 1. 

[157] 

Watt'd  q=q%  3  | 

5rMTi:  II 

In  the  Vedic  texts  also,  the  secondary  signification  is  of 
three  kinds : —  the  exclusive  secondary  signification  is 
adopted  in  the  case  of  the  sentence  — jajhajudhi,  etc.,  the 
non-exclusive  one  in  the  case  of  the  sentence  —  vaidvanara, 
etc.,  and  the  exclusive-non-exclusive  one  in  the  case  of  the 
sentence  —  tat  tvam  asi. 

The  exclusive  secondary  signification  is  adopted  in  the  case  of  the 
sentence — sa  esayajhayudhi  yajamanah  svargam  lokarh  yati.  Here  since 
the  literal  meaning,  namely,  the  body  of  the  sacrificer  reaching  the 


FIRST  AD  Hr  AY  A 


75 


heaven  with  the  sacrificial  vessels  is  discrepant,  as  the  body  along  with 
the  sacrificial  vessels  are  burnt  in  this  world  itself,  the  word yajftajudhi 
totally  abandons  its  primary  sense  and  secondarily  signifies  the  soul  of 
the  sacrificcr,  which  is  connected  with  the  primary  sense. 

The  non-exclusive  secondary  signification  is  adopted  in  the  case  of 
vaiivanaram  upaste.  The  literal  sense  of  this  statement,  namely, 
meditation  on  the  fire  belonging  to  the  stomach  is  discrepant,  as  the 
fire  belonging  to  the  stomach,  being  inert,  is  not  fit  to  be  meditated 
■upon.  And  this  discrepancy  is  removed  by  understanding  from  the 
•word  vaiivanara,  without  excluding  its, primary  sense, .the  self  delimited 
by  the  fire  belonging  tothestomach.  Tor  the  exclusive — non-exclusive 
secondary  signification  .in  the  case  of, the  sentence  tat  tvam.asi,  .see 
Introduction,  pp.  40-1. 


[158] 

asr  ii 

One  aspect  of  absolute  nature  is  present  in  the  nesci¬ 
ence  existing  in  the  supreme  iself,  another  aspect  is  in  the 
supreme  self;  and  the  third  is  in  the  blend -the  result  of  the 
mutual  superimposition  of  the  self  and  nescience.  Of  these, 
it  is  the  last  .that  is  the  primary  sense  of  the  word 
‘Brahman*. 

It  is  said  that  the  terms  tat  and  tvam  convey  the  unitary  self  by 
partly  giving  up  the  primary  sense  and  by  partly  retaining  it.  Now 
the  primary  sense  of  the  word  ‘Brahman’  for  which  the  term  tat  stands 
is  explained. 

The  absolute  nature  is  fancied ;  in  the  case  » of  .nescience  which,  is 
superimposed  on  the  self;  and  it  is  real  in  the  case  of,  the  self.  The 
absolute  nature  present  in  the  blend  of  nescience  and  the  self  consists 
of  the  real  and  the  superimposed  absolute  nature.  And  the  term 


76 


SAM  K$EPA&  ARI RAKA 


‘Brahman’  conveys  the  self  associated  with  nescience.  It  secondarily 
signifies  the  self  by  discarding  a  part  of  its  primary  sense,  namely, 
nescience. 


[159] 

One  aspect  of  inwardness  is  present  in  the  intellect ; 
another  aspect  is  in  the  inner  self;  and  the  third  aspect  is 
in  the  blend  —  the  result  of  mutual  superimposition  of 
intellect  and  the  inner  self.  Of  these,  it  is  the  last  that  is 
the  primary  sense  of  the  word  Atman. 

The  primary  sense  of  the  word  Atman  which  stands  for  the  term 
tvam  is  explained.  The  term  Atman  primarily  conveys  the  inner  self 
associated  with  the  intellect  which  consists  of  the  blend  of  the  real  and 
the  superimposed  inwardness.  It  secondarily  signifies  the  inner  self 
by  discarding  a  part  of  its  primary  sense,  namely,  the  intellect. 

[160] 

qiwws'w  taj  11 

The  aspirant  who  seeks  absence  of  incongruity  in  the 
sense  of  the  sentence  ( tat  tvam  asi )  should  take  (through 
secondary  signification)  the  spiritual  element  which  is 


1.  T2,  T3 


FIRST  ADHTATA 


77 


absolute  and  is  present  in  the  primary  sense  of  the  term 
tat ,  and  the  spiritual  element  which  is  inward  and  is  pre¬ 
sent  in  the  blend — the  primary  sense  of  the  term  tvam,  and 
should  understand  the  partless  self  from  the  text  tat  tvam  asi. 

[161] 

^  i|Tij  II 

Though  there  is  not  even  a  trace  of  difference  in  the 
sense  conveyed  as  their  import  (by  the  words),  yet  the  two 
words  are  not  synonymous,  because  they  secondarily  signify 
the  absolute  pure  consciousness  in  you  through  different 
media  (that  is,  the  primary  senses)  that  are  outside  the 
‘sense  °f  sentence’  (that  is,  the  oneness  of  the  self.) 

The  objection  raised  in  Stf,  I,  104-5,  is  answered  here. 

[162] 

sRqiwfsfef  qg^  mi  \ 

The  inner  self  is  present  in  the  absolute  self;  similarly 
the  absolute  self  is  present  in  the  inner  self.  Even  then  (if 
it  is  argued  that,  in  order  to  justify  the  grammatical  co¬ 
ordination  of  the  two  words,  it  is  necessary  to  accept  differ¬ 
ence),  still  there  is  not  even  a  trace  of  difference  (between 
the  senses  signified),  as  the  secondary  senses  of  these  two 
words  would  hold  good  only  when  they  are  identical. 

The  spiritual  element  signified  by  the  term  tat  is  not  conditioned 
by  time,  space,  and  object  and  hence  it  is  absolute.  The  spiritual 


1.  —  Pi 


78 


SAM  K$EPA$  ARIRAKA 


element  signified  by  the  term  tvam  is  inward  and  it  underlies  every¬ 
thing.  This  would  hold  good  only  when  the  two  senses  are  identical. 
If  they  are  different,  then  the  sense  of  the  tat  cannot  be  absolute,  and 
the  sense  of  the  term  tvam  cannot  be  inward. 

cf:  Sg,  III,  305. 


[163] 

h  ^  to 

*  ft  ftftqiRTqf 

As  there  is  no  clear  basis  for  taking  one  of  the  two 
words  in  its  figurative  sense,  it  is  proper  that  the  two  words 
should  be  taken  (together)  in  their  secondary  significative 
function.  Never  indeed  in  sentences  like  ‘This  is  that 
Devadatta’  such  a  position  (namely,  taking  one  of  the  two 
words  in  its  figurative  sense)  is  observed,  in  the  absence  of 
any  ground  to  take  it  so.1 

This  verse  answers  the  objection  that  the  import  of  the  sentence 
tat  tvam  asi  may  be  identity  between  the  primary  sense  of  one  word 
and  the  secondary  sense  of  the  other. 

L  See  Sg,  I,  150. 


[164] 

to  %- 

it 


FIRST  ADHYAYA 


79 


If  the  state  of  being  read  first  and  read  second  should 
be  the  criterion  for  taking  a  word  in  its  primary  and 
secondary  senses,  then  it  docs  not  hold  good;  for  the  position 
of  words  is  found  in  a  reverse  order.  The  word  tat  is  read 
in  the  beginning  in  the  Sama-Veda,  but  (its  correspending 
word  brahma )  is  read  at  the  end  in  the  Yajurveda. 

1.  tat  tvam  as.i,  Cliand  ,  VI,  viii,  7. 

2.  aham  brahmasmi,  Brh.,  I,  iv,  10. 

[165] 

sift  II 

It  cannot  be  said  that  the  state  of  being  read  first  and 
read  later  is  the  criterion  for  taking  the  words  in  their 
primary  and  secondary  senses,  because  in  the  secular 
sentences  ‘This  is  that  Devadatta’,  and  similarly  in  the 
sentence  ‘That  is  this  Devadatta’,  the  order  of  the  words 
‘this’  and  :that’  is  reversed. 

[166] 

*  ^  sf'iKi 

d  ft 

^  ft  nm  II 

Unless  secondary  signification  is  adopted  in  the  case 
of  the  two  words,  there  cannot  be  the  removal  of  contra¬ 
diction  that  has  arisen.  The  object  characterized  by  duality 


80 


SAMKSEPAg  ARIRAKA 


never  becomes  (identical  with)  the  object  that  is  absolute. 
Similarly  the  object  which  is  mediate  ct  nnot  be  identical 
with  the  object  that  is  immediate. 

[167] 

When  two  qualifed  entities  resulting  from  the  two 
unopposed  attributes  cannot  be  possibly  identical,  it  is 
highly  improbable  that  the  qualifed  entities  characterized 
by  contradictory  attributes  could  be  identical. 

For  details  see  Introduction,  p.  41. 

[  168] 

aw  w$Fi  gqfc  i 

aqgwrocftfcl  fl  ftmrfa  asm  n 

it  is  unsound  to  hold  that  the  text  ( tat  Ivam  asi)  conveys 
the  identity  of  the  primary  senses  of  terms  ( tat  and  Ivam) 
in  some  aspect,  because  the  three  modes  of  secondary 
signification  would  be  definitely  lost  then. 

[169] 

lift  alfc  qfft  ftddft  ddTdl- 

Just  as  in  the  sentence  ‘The  boat  makes  noise’,  ‘The 
iron  burns’,  ‘In  front  of  you  there  is  the  rope  bearing 
poison’,  the  words  convey  the  multitude  of  men,  fire  and 


FIRST  ADHYAYA 


81 


the  serpent  respectively,  so  also  (in  the  sentence  aham 
brahmasmi),  what  objection  can  there  be  if  the  words  Brahman 
and  aham,  which  primarily  signify  respectively  avidya 
and  the  intellect  inspired  by  the  reflection  of  the  self,  should 
convey  the  supreme  self  through  exclusive  secondary 
signification? 

In  this  verse,  Sarvajnatman  sets  forth  the  view-point  of  Sare^vara. 
According  to  Sure^vara,  the  primary  meanings  of  the  words  tat  or 
Brahman  and  tvarn  or  aham,  namely,  l^vara  and  jiva  are  indeterminable 
entities.  (See  Introduction,  pp.  104-5).  They  are  respectively  avidyS 
and  intellect  inspired  by  the  reflection  of  the  self.  Or,  they  are  the 
reflected  images  of  the  self  in  avidya  and  intellect  respectively.  In 
either  case,  they  are  indeterminable  either  as  real  or  as  unreal.  (See  SB, 
pp.219  fF).  Since  the  primary  meanings  of  the  words  tat  and  tvam 
are  indeterminable  entities,  the  two  words  leave  out  their  primary 
sense  completely  and  secondarily  signify  the  pure  consciousness  which 
serves  as  the  basis  for  the  two.  And  this  kind  of  secondary  signifi¬ 
cation  is  exclusive  secondary  signification  (  jahallaksana ). 

[170] 

5!r^STT%iJTT^;T  gl^g 

Or  else,  just  as  in  ordinary  experience  secondary  signi¬ 
fication  based  on  the  knowledge  of  similarity  of  qualities  is 
adopted  in  the  cases  of  “The  student  is  fire”,  “This  person 
is  a  lion”,  in  view  of  the  incompatibility  (of  any  relation) 
between  the  primary  senses  of  the  words  (student  and  fire), 
similarly,  on  account  of  the  incompatibility  (of  any  relation) 
between  the  primary  senses,  namely,  God  and  the  individual 
11 


82 


SAM  KS  EPAg  A  RIKA  K 


soul,  of  the  words  brahman  and  aham,  these  words  secondarily 
signify  the  supreme  self  and  the  inner  self  through  the 
common  feature  of  inwardness,  etc. 

The  word  ‘  fire  ’  in  the  sentence  ‘  The  student  is  fire  ’  primarily 
signifies  r  fire  ’  which  has  the  quality  of  brilliance.  It  secondarily 
signifies  a  student  who  has  the  quality  of  brilliance;  and  this  signifi¬ 
cation  is  based  upon  the  common  feature  of  brilliance  present  both  in 
fire  and  in  student. 

In  the  same  way,  the  word  aham  in  the  sentence  aham  brahma  smi 
or  tvam  in  the  sentence  tat  tv  am  asi  primarily  conveys  jiva  who  is 
inward.  It  secondarily  signifies  the  inner  self  which  is  taken  to  be 
possessing  thequality  of  inwardness;  and  this  signification  is  based  upon 
the  common  feature  of  inwardness  present  both  in  jiva  and  the  inner 
self. 

The  word  brahma  in  aham  brahma  smi  or  tat  in  tat  tvam  art  pri¬ 
marily  conveys  l£vara  who  is  all-pervasive.  It  secondarily  signifies 
the  supreme  self  which  is  taken  to  be  possessing  the  quality  of 
all-pervasiveness ;  and  this  signification  is  based  upon  the  common 
feature  of  all-pervasiveness  present  both  in  jiva  and  the  supreme  self. 
It  must  be  added  here  that  the  inner  self  which  is  identical  with  the 
supreme  self  is  free  from  any  quality.  Inwardness  constitutes  the  essen¬ 
tial  nature  of  the  inner  self  and  all-pervasiveness,  of  the  supreme  self. 
Yet  inwardness  and  all-pervasiveness  are,  by  courtesy,  spoken  of  as  the 
attributes  of  the  inner  self  and  the  supreme  self  and  it  is  on  the  basis  of 
these  attributes,  the  two  words  aham  or  tvam  and  brahma  or  tat  convey 
through  signification  based  upon  the  knowledge  of  similarity  of  quali¬ 
ties  ( gaunivrtti )  the  inner  self  and  the  supreme  self  respectively.  And 
the  text  aham  brahma  smi  or  tat  tvam  asi  conveys  the  identity  of  or  more 
strictly  the  non-distinction  between  the  inner  self  and  the  supreme 
self. 

This  view  is  advocated  by  Sure^vara. 

vide 

pratyaklvd datisuksrnatva  t  a  tmadrstyanu& 1  * 

ato  vrttirvihaydnyd  ahamvrttyaiva  laksyate, 

Naiskarmyasiddhi,  II,  55. 


FIRST  ADHTATA 


83 


The  view  set  forth  here,  according  to  Madhusiidanasarasvati, 
is  Praudhivada : — 

vide 

siddhdnte'pi  (prabhvadi)  [praiyaktvadi]  gunayogena  gaunyah  svikarah 
samksepaddrirakakarana  in  praudhivadamatramitisampraddyah,VK,  p.  49. 

[171] 

Though  in  both  (secondary  signification  and  significa¬ 
tion  based  on  the  knowledge  of  similarity  of  qualities)  alike, 
one  word  signifies  the  sense  of  another,  yet  there  is  a  chara¬ 
cteristic  feature  which  clearly  distinguishes  the  two. 

[172] 

Sprat  nqq  3  l 

lid  SWigqpqtftfd  11 

The  MimSmsakas1  bring  out  the  difference  between  the 
secondary  signification  and  signification  based  on  the 
knowledge  of  similarity  of  qualities  thus:  a  word  has  secon¬ 
dary  signification  based  on  the  knowledge  of  similarity  of 
qualities,  if  it  conveys  another  object  possessing  the  same 
qualities  present  in  its  primary  sense.  On  the  other  hand, 
a  word  has  secondary,  signification,  if  it  signifies  another 
ohject  connected  with  its  primary  sense. 

1.  vide 

abhidheyd vina bhute  pratiter  laksanesyatc 
laksyamanagunairyogat  vrtterista  iu  gaunala 

Tantra-Vartika  (AnandaSrama  Sanskrit 

Series),  p.  354. 


84 


SAMKSEPAg  ARIRAKA 


[173] 

fos:  mm  mm  m  Tiwfcite:  I 

mi  sr^T^ng^r  s#d#i  n 

Being  the  inner  self,  I  am  identical  with  the  supreme 
self  which  is  eternal,  pure,  intelligent,  and  is  of  ever-released 
nature;  which  is  existent,  subtle,  real,  all-pervasive,  non¬ 
dual,  and  which  is  supreme  bliss.  There  is  no  doubt  about 
this  experience. 


[174] 

^  ^qf 

3$  n 

Some  hold  that  the  supreme  self  is  absolute  and  is  of 
the  nature  of  existence,  consciousness,  and  bliss.  Some 
others,  however,  maintain  that  it  is  of  the  nature  of  exis¬ 
tence,  consciousness,  and  bliss  only.  It  does  not  seem  to 
them  that  the  other  qualities  (such  as  eternality,  etc.) 
constitute  the  nature  of  the  supreme  self,  as  they  are  of  the 
nature  of  absence  of  the  qualities  (such  as  ‘transience’). 

For  details  see  Introduction,  pp.  23-4. 

[175] 

sr&fa  ft  I 

as  si  11 


1.  ft  15 — T4 


FIRST  ADHTATA 


85 


The  word  ‘Brahman’  (in  the  sentence  satyam  jnanam 
anantam  brahma )  signifies  what  is  to  be  defined  and  as  such  xt 
is  primary,  while  the  other  words  serve  as  its  definition.  Just 
as  the  word  aruna  is  related  to  the  word  that  signifies  the 
sense  of ‘purchasing’,  so  also  the  words  that  signify  the 
characteristic  attributes  are  related  to  the  word  that  conveys 
what  is  to  be  defined. 

See  the  following  verse. 

[176] 

ii 

Just  as  there  is  the  mutual  relation  of  the  words  which 
convey  case-notions  and  which  are  (at  first)  related  to  the 
sense  of  ‘purchasing’,  so  also  there  is  the  mutual  relation  of 
the  words  ( satya ,  etc.)  later  and  the  ascertainment  of  the 
relation  is  capable  of  expounding  the  unitary  character  of 
the  supreme  self  which  is  all-pervasive  and  which  is  defined 
(in  the  sentence  -  satyam  jnanam  anantam  brahma). 

In  the  sentence  -  arunaya  pingaksya  ekahayanya  somam  krinati  (Buy 
soma  by  means  of  red  coloured,  tawny-eyed,  and  one  year-old  calf), 
the  two  words  pihgdgksi  and  ekahayanl  which  denote  the  substance, 
‘calf’  are  related  torthe  sense  of  ‘purchasing’.  The  word  aruna  as  it 
denotes  the  immaterial  quality  is  related  to  the  sense  of ‘purchasing’ 
through  its  being  a  determining  characteristic  ( avacchedaka 1  of  the 
substance,  ‘calf’.  Then  these  words  which  dererminc  the  nature  of 
the  substance  are  related  to  each  other  in  ofder  to  convey  one  sub¬ 
stance,  ‘calf’. 

vide  Sf  a bara-Bhcisya  on  Jairnini-Su  Ira,  12. 


86 


SAtiK$EPAgARIRAKA 


Similarly  the  words  satya,  jflatia,  and  ananta  are  related  to  one 
another  and  point  to  the  supreme  self  as  truth,  consciousness,  and 
absolute. 

[177] 

TO  TO 

m  to  fkmwm  I 

’HW'l  II 

The  method  prescribed  in  respect  of  the  primary  senses 
of  the  terms  tat  and  tvam  should  be  applied  in  the  cases  of 
the  words  satya,  etc.,  as  there  is  no  special  method  here. 
The  primary  senses  of  the  words  satya,  etc.,  being  composite 
in  nature,  a  part  of  their  senses  is  secondarily  signified  and 
in  this  respect  the  words  satya,  etc.,  and  the  words  tat  and 
tvam  are  alike. 

THE  PRIMARY  SENSES  OF  THE  TERMS 
SATYA,  ETC. 

[178] 

3Tj^ki  erTOr  mm  ^ipto^t  I 

to  mm  mw^  to  II 

One  form  of  reality  is  present  in  the  ether,  etc.;  another 
form  is  present  in  the  self;  and  the  third  is  in  a  blend  of 
these  two.  Of  these  three,  it  is  the  last  that  is  the  primary 
sense  of  the  word  satya. 

The  phenomenal  entities  are  empirically  real;  the  self  is  absolutely 
real.  And  the  blend  of  the  ether,  etc.,  and  the  self  has  a  third  mode 
of  reality  which  is  a  combination  of  absolute  and  empirical  reality. 


FIRST  ADHYAYA 


87 


The  word  satya  primarily  conveys  the  blend  of  the  ether,  etc.,  and  the 
self  which  has  absolute  and  empirical  reality. 

[179] 

55W  triRrar  1 

One  form  of  the  state  of  being  knowledge  is  present  in 
the  psychosis ;  another  form  is  in  the  inner  self ;  and  the 
third  one  is  in  what  is  a  blend  of  these  two.  Of  these  three, 
it  is  the  last  that  is  the  primary  sense  of  the  word  jndna. 

As  the  mental  modification  or  psychosis  reveals  the  consciousness 
delimited  by  the  objects  cognized,  it  is  figuratively  spoken  of  as  know¬ 
ledge. 

vide:  jhanata  —caitanyabhivyahjakatvarupa,  SS 

And,  the  inner  self  is  of  the  nature  of  self-luminous  knowledge 
which  is  absolutely  real. 

vide:  jflanata — svapraka  £  a  jilanarupS ,  SS 

[180] 

cRtfqqfe  ^  n 

One  form  of  bliss  is  present  in  the  psychosis;  another 
form  is  in  the  inner  self;  and  the  third  one  is  in  what  is  a 
blend  of  these  two.  Of  these  three,  it  is  the  last  that  is  the 
primary  sense  of  the  word  ananda. 

As  the  mental  state  meals  the  bliss  which  is  the  essential  nature 
of  the  self,  it  is  figuratively  spoken  of  as  ‘bliss’.  The  inner  selfis  of 
the  nature  of  bliss  which  is  absolutely  real. 


88 


SAM  K$EPA!i  ARI RAKA 


[181] 

jRqrf i 

One  form  of  eternity  is  present  in  the  ether  etc.;1 
another  is  in  the  inner  self;2  and  the  third  one  is  in  what  is 
a  blend  of  these  two.  Of  these  three,  it  is  the  last  that  is 
the  primary  sense  of  the  word  nitya- 

1.  kalpasthayitarupa  nityata 

2.  trikcllaparicchedyasvarupci  nityata,  SS 


[182] 

swinst  Mm  i 

One  form  of  purity  is  present  in  the  ether;1  another 
form  is  in  the  inner  self;2  and  the  third  one  is  in  what  is  a 
blend  of  these  two.  Of  these  three,  it  is  the  last  that  is  the 
primary  sense  of  the  word  Buddha. 

1.  maladileparahitatvalaksana  iuddhata 

2.  asaii galva  diprayukta  tattviki  ( iuddhata ),  S 

[183] 

IrfidT  eTT^r  SR*fT®*nt  IxfidT  I 

One  form  of  release  is  present  in  cow,  calf,  etc.; 
another  form  is  in  the  pure  self2;  and,  the  third  one  is  in 
what  is  a  blend  of  these  two.  Of  these  three,  it  is  the  last 
that  is  the  primary  sense  of  the  word  mukta. 


FIRST  ADHYAYA 


89 


].  bandhanarahitatarupa 
2.  samsaranarthasya  nityanivrttirupa ,  SS. 


[184] 

I 

aWrcfefaraT  ^  ’OTT  5^q#s4  g5T  5K*  II 

One  form  of  existence  is  present  in  ether,1  etc.;  another 
form  is  in  the  inner  self;3  and  the  third  is  in  what  is  a  blend 
of  these  two.  Of  these  three,  it  is  the  last  that  is  the 
primary  sense  of  the  word  sat. 

1.  vyavaharika  sattalaksapa  astita 

2.  parama  rthikasatta  rupa ,  S. 


[185] 

qt  m  ^  wiifawr  i 

m  ii 

Scholars  should  maintain  that  the  word  satya  second¬ 
arily  signifies  the  self  which  serves  as  the  ground  for  its  use 
in  its  primary  sense  (that  is,  a  blend  of  the  self  and  the 
phenomenal  entities  from  ether  onwards).  When  such  is 
the  case,  the  absolute  self  identical  with  the  inner  self  is  the 
import  of  the  Upanisadic  texts. 

yat  in  yatkrte  means  the  pravfttinimitta  or  the  ground  on 
which  a  word  is  used  in  its  primary  sense.  In  the^  present  case,  it  is 
because  of  the  presence  of  the  self  that  the  word  satya  is  used  in  its 
primary  sense  of  the  blend  of  the  self  and  the  phenomenal  entities. 

12 


90  SAMK$EPAs’ARIRAKA 

IDENTITY  OF  THE  SECONDARY  SENSES  OF  THE 
TERMS  SATYA,  ETC. 

[186] 

fR?iT  fTRdrcr  ^  ^  i 

The  secondary  sense  of  the  word  jnana  is  the  same  as 
the  secondary  sense  of  the  word  satya.  Similarly  the 
secondary  sense  of  the  word  saiya  is  the  same  as  the 
secondary  sense  of  the  word  jnana.  Even  then  (if  it  is 
argued  that  there  should  be  some  difference  between  the 
two,  it  is  said  that)  there  is  no  scope  for  difference;  for  only 
then  it  would  be  reasonable  to  take  the  self  as  consciousness 
and  absolute  reality. 

For  details  see  Introduction,  p.  22. 


f  187] 

3TR?<^  ^RdT  ^R3RRR^  ftf%f ; H  I 

The  secondary  sense  of  the  term  ananda  is  the  same 
as  the  secondary  sense  of  the  term  jnana.  Similarly  the 
secondary  sense  of  the  term  jnana  is  the  same  as  the 
secondary  sense  of  the  term  ananda.  Even  then  (if  it  is 
argued  that  there  should  be  some  difference  between  the 
two,  it  is  said  that)  there  is  no  scope  for  difference;  for 
only  then  lit  would  be  reasonable  to  take  the  self  as 
consciousness  and  bliss. 


For  details  see  Introduction,  p.  22. 


FIRST  ADHYAYA 


91 


[188] 

vnfa^qjTqqjT^r:  ^  s?qs&teqfoq%:  h 

The  secondary  sense  of  the  term  ananda  is  the  same 
as  the  secondary  sense  of  the  term  satya.  Similarly,  the 
secondary  sense  of  the  term  satya  is  the  same  as  the 
secondary  sense  of  the  term  ananda •  Even  then  (if  it  is 
argued  that  there  should  be  some  difference  between  the 
two,  it  is  said  that)  there  is  no  scope  for  difference;  for  only 
then  it  would  be  reasonable  to  take  the  self  as  absolute 
reality  and  bliss. 

For  details  see  Introduction,  p.  22. 


[189] 

The  existence  of  one  thing  (namely,  the  secondary  sense) 
in  another  (secondary  sense)  and  as  such  the  unitary 
character  of  the  self,  and  moreover  the  absence  of  the 
redundancy  of  the  significative  power  of  the  words1  —  all 
these  should  be  understood  in  the  case  of  the  senses  of 
the  remaining  words,2  on  the  lines  indicated  above. 

1.  Though  the  words  satya  and  jftana  convey  the  same  sense,  that 
is,  the  self,  yet  they  are  not  synonymous,  as  their  primary  senses  are 
different. 


2.  I  e$e'pi  —  satyajilanananda  t’riktefu  nilyd dipada  rihe^u,  SS. 


92 


SAM  K$EPAf>  ARI RAKA 


[190] 

Those  who  know  the  true  tenets  of  the  Vedanta  declare 
thus:  — sentience  and  inward  nature  are  natural  to  the  inner 
self.  Sentience  and  inward  nature  present  in  the  intellect 
are  caused  by  it  (namely,  the  self).  The  sentience  and 
inward  nature  of  the  intellect  are  its  attributes  (and  not  its 
essential  nature). 

It  has  been  said  in  Sg,  I,  159,  179  that  one  form  of  sentience  and 
inwardness  is  present  in  the  intellect,  while  another  form  is  in  the  self. 
Sarvajnatman,  in  this  verse,  substantiates  this  point  by  citing  the  view 
of  Suredvara. 

vide  : 

kutasthabodhah  pratydktvam  animittam  sadatmanah 

boddhrtahantayorhetuh  tcibhyam  teno'palakfyate,  Naifkarmya-siddhi, 

III,  II. 


[191] 

It  is  accepted  that  the  words  ( satya ,  etc.)  signify  the  self 
through  exclusive  secondary  signification  or  through 
secondary  signification  based  on  the  knowledge  of  similarity 
of  qualities,  because  there  is  no  specific  reason  to  hold  that 
they  signify  the  self  only  through  a  particular  mode  of 
secondary  signification  (that  is,  exclusive-cum-non-exclusive 
secondary  signification). 


See  Sf,  I,  169-70. 


FIRST  ADHYAYA 


93 


LORDSHIP— NOT  THE  ESSENTIAL  NATURE 
OF  THE  SELF 

[192] 

Steift  pra 

sen  n 

We  shall  advance  arguments  to  silence  the  opponent 
who  may  ask  why  like  satya,  etc.,  that  are  previously 
explained,1  lordship  also  should  not  be  accepted  as  having 
three  aspects,  namely,  the  one  pertaining  to  the  self,  another 
to  avidyH,  and  the  third  one  to  the  blend  of  these  two. 

1.  See  SS,  I,  178-84. 

vide : 


atmarupam  ekam;  abodhagatam — mayagatam  anyat  iti  iesah ; 
asya — tadubhaya  iabalasya  ca  aparam,  SS. 

[193] 

The  Upani§idic  passages  after  attributing  lordship  to 
the  self  in  a  clear  manner,  later  repeatedly  denies  it  by  the 
words  such  as  ‘not  this’.  But  the  uniqueness  consists  in 


94 


SA  tif  K$  EPA  gARJRAKA 


this,  that  the  Upani^adic  passage  does  not  deny  existence, 
etc.,  after  mentioning  them  as  of  the  nature  of  the  self. 

The  Upani$ad passage  -  sarrasyavati  sarvasyeianah  (Brh  ,  IV,  iv, 
22)  attributes  lordship  to  the  self  and  later  denies  this  by  the 
words  sa  t?a  neti  netyStmci,  ( Brh .,  IV,  iv,  22) 

[194] 


fewfa  iPtt:  ii 

It  has  been  determined  previously  that  in  secular 
statements  words  have  two  kinds  of  signification,  namely, 
primary  signification  and  secondary  signification.  If  the 
primary  signification  does  not  fit  in  (in  the  case  of  the  words 
tat  and  tvam),  then  let  the  secondary  signification  be  adopted 
in  respect  of  them. 


[  195  j 

Wll 

The  group  of  words  constituting  the  Upani§adic 
sentence  ( tat  tvam  asi )  is  capable  of  conveying  the  partless 
entity.  Here  the  signification  of  the  sentence  is  not  of  the 
nature  of  identity  involving  difference  (samsarga),  in  view 
of  the  contradiction  (between  the  primary  meanings  of  the 
words  tat  and  tvam).  So  take  the  import  of  the  sentence  to 
be  the  partless  self. 


FIRST  ADHTAYA  95 

SEQUENCE  THROUGH  WHICH  THE  KNOWLEDGE 
OF  THE  SELF  ARISES 

[  196] 

f^qfirei^qr  i 

3?q%  =q  mmk 
tfa&mT  |q:  sw  11 

First  there  arises  the  knowledge  that  the  two  words 
(tat  and  tvam)  have  similar  case-endings.  Then  the 
meanings  of  the  two  words  are  i-elated  as  substantive  and 
attribute.  As  this  presents  incompatibility,  the  words 
secondarily  signify  the  partless  self.  And  scholars  know 
that  this  is  the  sequence  through  which  the  knowledge  of 
the  absolute  entity  arises. 

For  details  See  Introduction,  p.  42. 

[197] 

#- 
3  II 

It  is  to  be  known  that  the  two  words  ( tat  and  tvam )  have 
similar  case-endings.  Then  the  meanings  of  the  two  words 
are  related  to  each  other  as  attribute  and  substantive. 
Then  there  is  the  relation  of  the  implied  and  implying 
between  the  two  terms  tat  and  tvam  and  the  self.  It  should 
be  borne  in  mind  that  these  three  stages  are  the  means  of 


SAM  K$EPA& ARl  RAKA 

understanding  the  import  of  the  sentence,  that  is,  the 
impartite  sense. 

cf:  samanadhikaranyam  tadanu  videsapa  videsyata  ceti 

atha  laksyalaksakatvarii  bhavati  padarthatmanam  ca  sarhbandhah 

Sri  Saftkara's  Svatmanirupanam,  29. 
samanadhikaranyam  ca  videsana  videpyata 
iokfyalaksanasariibandah  padarthah  pratyagatmanam, 

,,  ,  Naiskarmyasiddhi,  III,  3. 

art hapadam—arthapratipattisadhandni ,  SS. 

For  details  see  Introduction,  p.  42. 


r  is8] 


°bjeCtive  elements  are  not  identical. 

festation  of  difference  M  1S  deV°ld  °f  thc  mani* 

the  rise  ofr^l  r  M  °f  averaSe  intellect,  before 

that  the  wnr  i  /r ?  fr°m  the  purity  of  the  mind>  hold 
biend.  S  lkC  Sa~Va’  CtC,)  are  significative  of  this 


nthsandhibandhanam  -  tddatnyarahilam,  SS. 
a atarapari sphuran ena  dunyam  —  bjxedapratipattya  dunyam,  TB. 

r  i99] 


FIRST  ADHTAYA 


97 


Owing  to  the  purity  of  the  mind,  there  arises  ‘rea¬ 
soning’  which  is  like  a  strong  iron  rod  to  those  who  know 
the  relation  of  the  words  {satya,  etc.)  to  their  senses  (the 
blend  of  the  self  and  the  objective  elements).  By  carefully 
applying  the  reasoning  to  (the  blend  of)  the  self  and  the 
objective  element,  the  self  is  distinguished  from  the  objec¬ 
tive  element. 


[200] 

Rt  It 

Men,  who  have  distinguished  the  self  from  the  objec¬ 
tive  element  by  the  reasoning  that  arises  from  the  purity  of 
the  mind,  declare  that  (before  the  rise  of  such  distinct 
knowledge)  the  group  of  words  like  satya,  etc.,  are  significa¬ 
tive  of  the  ‘blend’  and  not  of  the  self. 

[201] 

aft  RTfa  sens  p?  n 

As  the  aspirant  understands  the  signification  of  the 
words  (such  as  satya,  etc.)  to  be  the  blend  in  a  state  of 
utter  non-discrimination  (between  the  self  and  the  objective 
element),  there  is  no  scope  for  the  question,  why  the 
significance  of  the  words  is  held  to  be  the  blend,  while  it  is 
reasonable  to  hold  that  it  (namely,  the  significance  of  the 
words)  is  either  the  self  or  the  objective  element. 

13 


98 


SAMK$EPAf>  ARI RAKA 


[202] 

sms 

<T5#T  wfh  si##  if-#:  l 

f%  m  m- 

;frmfq  nfNift  ii 

It  is  asked  (by  the  Purvapaksin )  whether  the  word 
secondarily  signifies  the  object  as  related  to  its  primary 
sense  (namely,  the  blend),  or  as  unrelated-  These  two 
alternatives  seem  to  be  unsound. 

[  203] 

#  c^g  i 

3f#2fd  ^3  f#^r  ll 

How  could  there  be  the  knowledge  of  partless  entity, 
if  the  word  secondarily  signifies  the  object  as  related  with 
its  primary  sense?  But,  nowhere  in  ordinary  experience  is 
it  found  that  the  word  secondarily  signifies  the  object  which 
is  not  related  to  its  primary  sense. 

[204] 

CTnt  *1# 

(The  siddhantin  replies): 

Prior  to  the  (rise  of  the)  knowledge  of  the  import  of 
the  sentence,  owing  to  avidja,  there  exists  the  relation  of 


FIRST  ADHTATA 


99 


whole  and  part  between  the  partless  self  and  the  primary 
sense  of  the  words  (namely,  the  blend  of  the  self  and  the 
objective  elements).  Thus  it  is  not  faulty  to  say  that  the 
word  secondarily  signifies  the  partless  self. 

For  details  see  Introduction,  p.  21. 

[205  ] 

ii 

It  is  indeed  desirable  that  the  knowledge  of  the  relation 
(of  the  primary  sense  of  the  word  with  its  secondary  sense) 
is  the  criterion  for  the  secondary  signification  of  all  words. 
But  it  is  not  accepted  that  the  knowledge  arising  through 
secondary  signification  has  for  its  content  the  secondary 
sense  as  associated  with  the  primary  sense  because  of  lack 
of  correspondence.1 

1.  Sec  the  following  verse. 

[206] 

d$ITfa'  ITO- 
SRlfW  3  II 

The  secondary  signification  is  adopted  in  the  case  of 
the  statement  ‘That  is  the  house  of  Devadatta,  where  the 
crow  is  sitting.’  But  the  knowledge  arising  through  secondary 


100  SAM  K$EPAS  ARI RAKA 

signification  has  for  its  content  only  the  house,  by  leaving 
aside  its  relation  with  the  crow. 

The  knowledge  arising  from  the  sentence  ‘That  is  the  house  of 
Devadatta  where  the  crow  is  sitting,’  through  secondary  sign’hcation 
has  for  its  content  the  secondary  sense,  that  is,  the  house  as  cated 
by  the  relation  of  the  primary  sense,  namely,  the  existence  of  crow, 
and  not  as  associated  with  the  primary  sense. 

[207  ] 

srftrar  qf^  q^m^qq]^  *3  gqfqftfqqT  11 

The  primary  meanings  of  the  words  ‘this’  and  ‘that’  (in 
the  statement  ‘This  is  that  Devadatta’)  indicate  the  person- 
in-himself,  and  hence  they  are  ‘ qualification  per  ac  Mens' 

( upalaksana ).  If  the  terms  secondarily  signify  the  person-in- 
himself  as  related  with  their  primary  senses,  then  inde' d  the 
contradiction  stands. 

Just  as  the  relation  of  identity  between  the  primary  senses  >f  the 
words  (‘this’  and  ‘that’)  is  incompatible,  so  also  the  relation  of  the 
secondary  sense  (the  person*in-himself )  and  the  primary  senses  of  the 
terms  is  incompatible.  So  a  word  cannot  secondarily  signify  the  object 
as  related  with  its  primary  sense. 

[200] 

§qcqiq\w  ^<mifaTTqr  qqg  qiq^q^s^ar  n 

It  has  been  proved  that  the  words  convey  the  sense  of 
partless  entity  through  secondary  signification.  In  the 
following  verses,  we  show  that  the  words,  without  resorting 
to  secondary  signification,  could  convey  the  partless  entity. 


FIRST  ADHYAYA 


101 


[209  ] 

^  I 

^  %^^sfq  l*WZJ\  ^ij^qT^ISSiTgi 

^  W TO  it 

The  words  bhinna  and  abhinna  uttered  along  with  the 
words  such  as  pot,  etc.,  signify  neither  more  nor  less  than  the 
pot,  etc.  If  not,  even  the  creator  cannot  avoid  the  infini  :e 
regress  of  difference  (and  non-difference)  as  we  have  to 
maintain  another  difference  (and  non-difference)  to  account 
for  the  prior  difference  (and  non-difference). 

In  the  statement,— 'The  pot  is  different  (from  the  cloth)’ —  the 
difference  should  be  held  as  identical  with  the  pot.  If  it  is  held  to  be 
different  from  the  pot,  then  this  difference  also  is  different  from  the 
pot.  And,  so  on,  ad  infinitum. 

Similarly  in  the  statement — ‘The  pot  is  not  different  (from  the 
pot) — the  non-difference  cannot  be  different  from  the  pot.  For,  other¬ 
wise,  this  difference  is  different  from  the  pot,  and  so  on,  ad  infinitum. 
Hence  it  should  be  admitted  that  ‘non-difference’  is  identical  with  the 
pot. 

So  the  words  ‘different’  and  ‘non-different’,  in  the  statements 
‘The  pot  is  different’  and  ‘The  pot  is  not  different’,  point  to  a  single 
entity  — ‘pot’,  through  primary  signification. 

cf.  ata  eva  bheda  bliedajorapyabhedci  t  tacchabdau  api 

abhinna  rt/iau,  bhinno'bhinnaica  ghata'ityatra,  Istasiddhi,  p.  25. 

[210] 

ftfawTi  ft  f i 


102 


SAM  K$EPAg  ARI  RAKji 

The  word  bhinna  signifies  (the  pot)  through  the  mutual 
negation  (of  cloth)  which  serves  as  the  basis  for  the  use  of 
the  word  bhinna  in  the  object,  (pot).  The  words  ‘pot*,  etc., 
on  the  other  hand,  signify  the  objects  pot,  etc.,  through 
their  primary  senses  (namely,  the  generic  attributes  ‘potiess5, 
etc.,)  which  serve  as  the  basis  for  the  use  of  those  wor  Is  in 
the  objects. 

Though  the  two  words  ‘different’  and  ‘pot’  convey  the  same  sense, 
that  is,  the  pot,  yet  they  are  not  synonymous,  as  they  convey  the  sense 
through  different  means  ( pravrttinimitta ). 

[211] 

rit%:  ii 

The  word  abhinna  signifies  the  pot  through  the  ‘absence 
of  mutual  negation’  which  serves  as  the  ground  for  its  use 
in  the  sense—  pot.  But  the  word  ‘pot’  signifies  the  object — 
‘pot’,  through  the  generic  attribute  ‘potness’,  which  serves 
as  the  basis  for  its  use  in  the  sense  ‘pot’. 

ghatasvarupaikaiiibandhand  — ghat  asvaru  park 

ghatapralipadikarthah ,  ghatatvaih  va  tannibemdhana  ityarthah,  AP. 

[212] 

The  two  words  in  the  sentence  ‘The  destruction-of- 
nescience  is  knowledge’  convey  the  sense  of  partless  entity. 
Here  one  word  is  used  in  its  primary  sense,  while  the  other 
word,  in  order  to  have  syntactical  relation,  is  used  in  its 
secondary  sense. 


FIRST  ADHYAYA 


103 


It  is  said  in  this  verse  that  the  sentence  ‘The  destruction-of- 
nescience  is  knowledge*  can  convey  the  sense  of  unitary  object  even  if 
secondary  signification  is  adopted  in  the  case  of  only  one  word. 

See  the  following  verse. 


[213] 

f| 

mti  n 

Here  the  word  ‘destruction-of-nescience’  is  taken  in  its 
primary  sense,  since  it  signifies  the  removal  of  nescience  by 
the  realization  of  the  self.  The  other  word  ‘knowledge’,  in 
order  to  have  syntactical  relation  (with  the  word  ‘destruction- 
of-nescience’)  discards  a  part  of  its  primary  sense,  namely, 
the  psychosis. 

As  avidya  is  superimposed  on  the  self,  its  removal  represents  the 
substratum — the  self.  So  the  word  ‘destruction-of-nescience’  primarily 
conveys  the  self.  But  the  word  ‘knowledge’  'primarily  signifies  the 
blend  of  the  psychosis  and  consciousness.  It  discards  a  part  of  its 
primary  sense,  that  is,  the  psychosis,  and  secondarily  signifies  ‘consci¬ 
ousness’,  the  self.  The  two  words,  therefore,  convey  the  partless  entity. 

[214] 

fqftrq^rft  ft  i 

3ffqq*fiR*Tqf3  STJHTRT  ^  q  g  II 

The  words  which  signify  the  existent  objects,  by 
discarding  a  part  of  their  primary  sense  and  presenting 


?.  wrrWfffi,  P2. 


104 


SAMK?EPAg-ARIRAKA 

another  part,  give  rise  to  the  knowledge  of  the  self  which  is 
not  an  object.  But  the  words  which  signify  the  annihilation 
of  the  superimposed  objects  are  not  so  (that  is,  they  primarily 
signify  the  self). 

See  notes  on  the  verse,  Stf,  I,  213. 

[215] 

m<v  I 

ii 

Just  as  there  is  no  difference  in  the  sense  conveyed  by 
the  words  in  the  sentences  such  as,  ‘Difference  is  different’, 
‘The  attribute  “atireka”  is  distinct’,  ‘The  non-difference  is 
not  different’,  ‘The  knowledge  is  self-luminous’,  even  so  the 
Upanisadic  passages  also  convey  the  partless  entity. 

(i)  bhedo  bhinnah : 

Pot  is  different  from  cloth.  That  is  to  say  that  difference  from  cloth 
exists  in  pot.  If  it  is  said  that  the  difference  (from  cloth  existing  in  the 
pot)  is  different  from  pot,  then  it  amounts  to  saying  that  difference  is 
different.  Here  the  word  ‘different’  conveys  the  sense  of  the  word 
‘difference’  and  not  any  other  sense.  Otherwise,  the  sense  of  the 
sentence  would  be  —  ‘The  difference  is  the  locus  of  difference’.  Here 
the  second  difference  should  be  taken  as  different  from  the  first  one, 
and  so  the  second  difference  becomes  the  locus  of  a  third  ‘difference’ 
which  should  be  held  as  different  from  the  second  difference.  And  so 
on,  ad  infinitum.  Hence  it  should  be  held  that  the  word  ‘different’ 
conveys  the  sense  of  the  word  ‘difference’.  Thus  the  two  words  in  the 
sentence  ‘difference  is  different  point  to  a  single  entity —  ‘difference’. 

(ii)  Similarly  the  two  words  in  the  sentence  —  atireko'  tiriktah 
point  to  a  single  entity,  namely  the  attribute  —  a tireka. 


FIRST.  ADHYAYA 


105 


atirekah—jivabrahmanoh  bhedabhedasainpcidakali  kaiciddharmah,  SS. 

(Hi)  sarhvidah  svaprakdidh: 

The  followers  of  the  Prabhakara  school  who  hold  that  ‘knowledge 
is  self-luminous*  should  accept  that  this  sentence  conveys  the  unitary 
object,  namely,  ‘knowledge*.  In  the  system  of  the  Prabhakara,  the 
word  ‘self-luminous’  could  signify  only  ‘knowledge’,  as  everything 
apart  from  ‘knowledge’  is  insentient.  Hence  the  two  words  ‘knowledge’ 
and  ‘self-luminous’  signify  the  same  entity  ‘knowledge’. 

[216] 

fmf%  #1  ii 

So  far  in  the  light  of  the  ordinary  experience,  it  has 
been  shown  that  the  words  (in  the  sentences  cited  previously) 
convey  the  unitary  object.  The  words  of  Panini  also  are 
indicative  of  this,  namely,  the  words  could  convey  the 
unitary  object.  For  he  teaches  the  nominative  case  in  the 
sense  of  tree,  etc.,  that  are  conveyed  by  the  stems,  by  the 
words  —  tanma  tre  prathama. 

The  stem  ‘tree*  ( vrksa )  and  the  nominative  case  termination 
are  not  synonymous.  Yet  it  has  been  shown  by  Panini  that  they  both 
point  to  a  single  entity  - ‘tree’,  vide  Paijini-sutra —  pra  tipadikartha - 
lingaparimd navacanama tre  prathama,  II,  iii,  46, 

Hence  Panini  also  accepts  that  the  import  of  a  sentence  could  be 
a  unitary  object. 

See  also  S&  I,  274. 

14 


ICS 


SAMK§EPAgARIRAKA 


[217] 

qfafa  ^  sqii^  ^  l 
*rWi^*rc  ftof%  sqre^Ts^ 
*SOTiiqsqq$iqqi  II 

£>rl  Badarayana  sets  forth  the  probans  ( hetu )  in  the  word 
—anvaya  which  means  syntactic  equation  of  the  terms  (of 
the  Upani§adic  passages).  As  syntactic  equation  is  two¬ 
fold  as  primary  and  secondary,  he  prefixes  the  word  anvaya 
with  the  preposition  sam  with  consideration  and  takes  it  as 
a  differentia;  and  by  this  he  differentiates  the  primary 
syntactic  equation  from  the  secondary  one,  like  the  term 
‘blue’  (in  the  sentence  ‘blue  lotus’)  differentiates  the  ‘lotus’ 
(from  the  white  ones). 

In  the  aphorism  tat  iu  samanvayat  [BS,  /,  i,  4)  the  proposition  is 
that  the  self  is  to  be  known  from  the  Vedanta- £  a  stra;  and  the  probans 
is  stated  in  the  words  - ‘because  they  are  congruent’  (samanvayat), 
which  means  that  the  terms  of  the  Upanijadic  passages  like  tat  tvam 
asi  are  in  syntactic  equation,  that  is,  they  convey  the  single 
object  -  the  self.  By  the  preposition  sam,  the  secondary  syntactic 
equation  is  eliminated. 

For  primary  and  secondary  syntactic  equation  see  SS,  I,  220. 

[218] 

afg[  jfiof  =q  pq  efc  i 

After  careful  examination,  experts  say  that  the  syntactic 
equation  is  two-fold  as  primary  and  secondary. 
The  primary  one  is  that  where  the  terms  convey  the 


FIRST  ADHTATA 


107 


sense  of  partless  entity;  while  the  secondary  one  is  that 
where  the  words  convey  the  sense  of  relation. 

[219] 

JTreiftsrarcoTift  ftofe  3  *ri  mfa:  1 

f%5TTJ  II 

The  teachers  well-versed  in  the  Upanisads  hold  that 
the  syntactic  equation  is  that  where  the  terms  having 
different  grounds  for  their  application  (in  their  senses) 
convey  only  one  concept. 


[  220] 

to  tofT- 

*ftoftft  3*?Wf:  II 

The  words  are  said  to  be  in  secondary  syntactic 
equation  in  the  statement  like  ‘The  lotus  lying  in  water  is 
blue,  fragrant,  and  big’-  Similarly  in  the  statements  such  as 
‘This  is  that  man’;  ‘The  sun  reflected  in  the  vessel  containing 
water  is  the  one  existing  in  the  sky’,  the  words  are  said  to 
be  in  primary  syntactic  equation. 

[221] 

w  iMfd  wmm  to 
3^  ft  as&r  1 
ft  fW  sifa- 
sto  11 


108  SAM  K$EPAf>  ARI RAKA 

The  definition  of  primary  syntactic  equation,  namely, 
the  words  (constituting  a  sentence)  convey  an  unitary  object, 
does  not  fit  in  where  the  words  convey  the  objects  involving 
relation.  It  is  well-known  that  the  words  in  the  sentence 
like  ‘A  blue,  fragrant,  and  big  lotus’  signify  the  object  with 
different  characteristics.1 

(1)  gunagunyalmakatvcna  visayasya  nanarasaivam,  AP. 

[  222  ] 

sSr  RRfaRK°RfafR  Rfe^T 
m  ii 

Those  adepts  in  determining  the  significative  power  of 
words  hold  that  grammatical  disagreement  is  well-known 
as  that  where  the  terms  having  different  grounds  for  their 
use  in  their  senses  convey  (totally)  different  objects. 

bhinnesu  vasiusu  —  bhinntsu  atyantabhinne$u,  SS. 

[  223  ] 

RfaRtgfW  Rr  r#:  i 

RR^TST  RR^fcl  Rlfafaf  R’RW  RfJTTRJI 

When  various  terms  having  the  same  ground  for  their 
use  in  their  senses  are  employed  to  signify  the  same  object, 
they  are  called  ‘synonyms’  by  wise  men. 

[  224] 

rs- 

fatRR  RRIWRRfa  R%5^  1 
RR?RRlfR  TR^RR  II 


FIRST  ADHYAYA 


109 


In  the  light  of  the  aforesaid  reasons,  the  terms  in  the 
statements  such  as  ‘The  wall  of  the  house’,  ‘The  lotus  of  the 
pond’, ‘This  man’s  cloth’,  are  said  to  be  in  grammatical 
disagreement.  Similarly  the  terms  such  as  ‘mukka\  ‘ vadana 
and  ‘ atiana ’  are  well  known  to  be  synonyms. 

[225] 

In  the  sentence  tat  tvam  asi,  the  two  words  are  neither 
synonymous,  nor  are  their  meanings  related  as  attribute  and 
substantive.  The  two  words  secondarily  signify  the  part, 
namely,  the  absolute  consciousness  present  in  their  primary 
senses,  as  the  relation  between  their  primary  senses  is 
incompatible. 


[  226] 

^  333;  II 

When  the  concept  of  the  moon  is  intended  to  be  con¬ 
veyed,  the  two  words  prakr$ta  and  prakaia  secondarily 
signify  the  object-‘moon’.  Similarly,  the  words  sat,  cit,  and 
ananda  secondarily  signify  the  supreme  self. 

One  who  wishes  to  know  which  particular  object  is  known 
by  the  word  —  candra,  puts  the  question,  which  luminous  body  in  this 
firmament  is  known  by  the  name  —  candra.  The  answer  to  this 
question  is  'that  which  shines  the  brightest  is  the  moon’  ( prakr§ta - 
prakaiah  candrah),  Here  the  words  prakrsta  and  prakada  point  to  the 


110 


SAMK?EPAgARIRAKA 


same  object.  Similarly,  to  the  question  about  the  nature  of  the  self, 
the  answer  is  salyarii  jhanarh  ananlam  brahma  —  Taitt.,  II,  i,  1, 

Here  the  words  salyam ,  etc.,  secondarily  refer  to  the  self. 

For  details  see  the  following  versts. 

[227  ] 

f*Rt  -qfoftgr: 

far  ssjaiissrifa  || 

The  terms  in  the  statements  like  -  ‘blue  lotus',  etc.,  do 
not  point  to  a  particular  object,  as  they  convey  the  relation 
of  their  primary  senses.  Since  recourse  is  had  to  secondary 
signification  only  when  the  relation  of  the  primary  senses  is 
incongruent  and  not  otherwise,  (the  term  ‘blue’  and  ‘lotus’ 
do  not  secondarily  signify  the  particular  object).  (If  it  is 
said  that  secondary  signification  is  adopted  even  if  the 
relation  of  the  primary  senses  is  not  incongruent),  then  let 
the  statement  ‘blue  lotus’  be  similar  to  the  statement 
( prakrstaprakaiaicandrah ) . 


[228] 

^  ^T- 


The  object  which  is  the  substratum  of  ‘lotusness’  is  not 
different  from  the  object  that  is  the  locus  of  the  generic 
attribute  ‘blueness’.  Similarly,  the  object  which  is  the 


FIRST  ADHYAYA 


111 


substratum  of  the  generic  attribute  ‘blueness*  is  not  different 
from  the  object  that  is  the  locus  of‘lotusness*. 

The  word  ‘blue’  primarily  conveys  the  generic  attribute  — 
‘blueness’,  and  secondarily  signifies  the  blue  colour  which  is  the 
substratum  of  ‘blueness’.  Similarly  the  word  ‘lotus’  primarily 
conveys  the  generic  attribute  ‘lotusness’,  and  secondarily  signifies  the 
lotus  which  is  the  substratum  of  ‘lotusness’.  The  secondary  senses 
of  the  words,  namely,  the  blue  colour  and  the  lotus  are  identical,  as 
substance  and  quality  are  identical. 

vide  —  gunaguninorabhedat  ityartah,  SS. 

Sarvajnatman  admits  from  the  standpoint  of  the  Purvapakfin 
that  the  sentence  ‘blue  lotus’  conveys  the  unitary  object.  See  the 
following  verses. 


[  229  ] 

H  fed!  ^  W  II 

There  is  no  basis  for  resorting  to  secondary  signification1 
in  the  case  of  the  words  in  the  statements  like  ‘blue  lotus’, 
etc.  So,  owing  to  the  absence  of  any  evidence,  the  two 
words  do  not,  in  our  view,  point  to  a  particular  object. 

(1)  Recourse  is  had  to  secondary  signification,  when  the  relation 
of  the  primary  senses  is  inapt,  or  when  the  intended  sense 
is  incompatible  with  the  primary  sense  of  the  sentence. 
Here  in  the  statement  ‘blue  lotus’,  there  is  no  incompatibility 
to  the  intended  sense,  namely,  the  relation  of  the  meanings 
of  the  words  as  attribute  and  substantive,  nor  is  the  relation  of  the 
primary  senses  inapt.  So  there  is  no  basis  for  resorting  to  secondary 
signification. 

vide:  na  tavadanvayanuppattih  tatrasti  nimittam 

tadanvayasya  saliva t,  napi  tatparyanupapattih, 
gunagunityasamsargasyaiva  tatra  abhipretatvSt,  SS. 


112 


SAMK§EPAg  ARIRAKA 


[230] 

wn  *  3  mmkv  I 

5^3l%q^S%q^q)fofa  55^qqrfq  *J$aqfo  || 

Granting  the  opponent’s  view,  it  was  said  by  me  that 
the  two  words  convey  an  identical  object.1  But,  really  even 
when  the  two  words  (blue  and  lotus)  are  taken  in  their 
secondary  senses,  they  (namely,  the  senses)  are  not  identical, 
as  one  (blue  colour.)  is  a  quality  and  the  other  (lotus)  is  a 
substance. 

(1)  See  Sg  I.  228. 


[231] 

ft  ^  I 

3  qT^rr  TOfTfwnf^r  *  sraq^ii 

In  ordinary  usage,  the  primary  meanings  of  the  words 
prakrsta  and  prakaia  are  the  generic  attributes  ‘abundance’ 
and  ‘brightness’.  If  the  relation  of  the  two  generic  attri¬ 
butes  is  intended,  then  the  two  words  cannot  convey  the 
sense  of  the  word  ‘moon’  (which  is  desired  to  be  known). 

[  232  ] 

TOpfwRnW  ft  ik  i 

When  the  sense  of  the  word  ‘moon’  is  asked  for,  that 
alone  should  be  given  in  the  answer.  The  relation  of  the 
generic  attributes — abundance  and  brilliance— presump¬ 
tively  make  known  the  relation  of  the  individuals  which 
reveal  them  (and  not  the  moon). 


FIRST  ADHTATA 


113 


The  relation  of  the  two  generic  attributes  would  be  unreasonable, 
if  there  is  no  relation  of  the  individuals  ( vyakti )  which  reveal  them. 
So  the  relation  of  the  generic  attributes  points  to  the  relation  of  the 
individuals  and  not  the  moon. 

vide:  prakr  s  tapraka  £  apadava  cyaja  tyoh  yo'yam  paraspar§*vayah, 
sa  saksadasariibhavannanupapattya  tadvyanjaka-gunavyaktyoran- 
vaye  paryavasyati,  na  candravyaktau  ityarthali,  AP, 

[  233  ] 

As  the  moon  is  of  the  nature  of  effulgent  luminary, 
(the  relation  of  the  generic  attributes)  is  not  accepted  to  be 
pointing  to  it  (namely,  the  moon),  which  is  the  sense  of  the 
word  ‘moon’.  So  exclusive  secondary  signification  is 
appropriate  and  hence  the  words  convey  the  unitary  sense 
already  referred  to. 

The  two  words  prakr  sta  and  prakaia,  discard  their  primary  senses, 
namely,  the  generic  attributes,  and  secondarily  signify  the  bright 
luminary  (moon)  which  is  the  locus  of  the  generic  attributes. 

vide',  prakr s  tapraka  £ atvadharmaru pava  cy a  r tha  parity  a  gen  a  tadudha- 
ratejovi£esa  tmakavyaktima  tranistha  padavrtlirupapanna 
ityarthali,  AP. 


[234] 

HOTlftfa&t  1  TO  HOT*  3  TO  I 


114  SAKi  K$EPAg  ARI RAKA 

The  ‘abundance’  present  in  the  moon  is  not  different 
from  the  ‘lustre’,  and  similarly  the  ‘lustre’  present  in  the 
moon  is  not  different  from  ‘abundance’.  Though 
‘abundance’  and  ‘lustre’  present  in  the  object  other  than 
the  moon  are  different,  yet  in  the  moon  they  are  not  only 
mutually  identical  but  identical  with  moon  also. 

The  two  qualities  of ‘ abundance  ’  and  ‘  lustre  ’  are  found  to  exist 
separately,  one  in  the  abundance  of  darkness,  the  other  in  the  lustre  of 
ordinary  lights.  But  when  present  in  the  moon  they  are  identical. 

[  235] 

mm  ramnj  ^  ii 

No  body  perceives  the  ‘abundance’  of  the  lustre  of  the 
moon  as  different  from  the  lustre  of  the  moon.  Similarly 
the  abundant  lustre  is  not  perceived  to  be  different  from  the 
‘abundance’.  So  there  is  no  evidence  for  proving  the 
difference  between  the  two  (lustre  and  abundance). 

[  236] 

fwi  *  n 

(Just  as  the  words  prakrsta  and  prakaSa  secondarily 
signify  the  moon)  so  also  the  words,  sat,  cit,  and  ananda 
secondarily  signify  the  self-  the  secondary  sense  of  the  term 
tat.  Similarly,  in  view  of  the  contradiction  to  the  relation 
between  their  primary  senses,  why  cannot  the  two  terms  tat 
and  tvam  secondarily  signify  in  unison  the  identity  of  the 
inner  self  with  the  supreme  self. 

[237  ] 

*Spf  5TrR*TTrRRTfa1  ^  SWltfe  I! 


FIRST  ADHYATA 


115 


The  primary  sense  of  the  term  tvam  secondarily  signifies 
the  inner  self  and  the  primary  sense  of  the  term  tat,  the 
absolute  self.  Thus  the  two  words  tat  and  tvam  convey 
through  secondary  signification  alone  that  the  inner  self  is 
identical  with  the  supreme  self. 

As  a  word  could  secondarily  signify  only  that  sicnse  which  is 
related  to  its  primary  sense,  it  is  stated  here  that  the  primary  sense  of  a 
word  itself  secondarily  signifies  the  object. 

Vide  :  padasya  laksyabodliakatve  Sakyasambandhasya  dvaralvat  artho 
laksayet  ityuktam,  TB. 

See  also  Si,  I,  206-7. 


[  238  ] 

qRt^T  ^ 

It  is  said  that,  owing  to  avidya,  the  supreme  self 
is  characterized  by  mediacy  and  the  inner  self  by  misery. 
In  the  case  of  the  aspirant  whose  avidya  has  been  annihi¬ 
lated  by  the  direct  knowledge  (of  the  self),  the  mediacy  and 
the  misery  are  removed;  for,  the  removal  of  cause  ( avidya ) 
brings  about  the  removal  of  its  effects. 

WORDS  CANNOT  PRIMARILY  SIGNIFY  THE 

SELF 

[239] 

set!  zist  i 

h  fl  mit  gwnfaqw  n 


i  stiver — T2,  T3 
*  fagfwrcn:  Mi,  B2. 

g» 


116  samksepaxariraka 

The  words  which  arise  from  avidya  are  not  competent 
to  signify  primarily  your  true  nature — the  inner  self  which  is 
identicalwith  the  supreme  status  of  Lord  Visnu,  which  is 
immutable^  which  is  not  intervened  by  anything,  which  is 
bereft  of  the  universe  characterized  by  duality,  which  is 
immediate  and  the  witness  of  all,  and  as  such  devoid  of  any 
relation,  generic  attribute,  quality,  action,  etc. 

sasthi  —sasthii abdena  tadarthah  sambandho  laksyate,  SS. 

For  details  See  Introduction,  pp.  12-14. 

[  240] 

to  ftfw  w- 

ggf  fift  ft*:  w 

Let  it  be  that  the  words  do  not  primarily  signify  the 
self.  Even  the  intellect  which  comprehends  the  external 
objects  cannot  give  rise  to  the  knowledge  of  the  self,  as  it  is 
inward.  When  such  is  the  case,  as  you  do  not  fall  within 
the  scope  of  all  the  six  proofs,  how  can  the  words  primarily 
signify  you  (the  self)? 

For  details  See  Introduction,  pp.  12-14. 

[  241  ] 

qifFirfa  sra:  Af  I 

ft  ftS'sft  qft 

^  m  w  il 

The  words  while  secondarily  signifying  the  self  do  not 
introduce  objectivity  in  respect  of  it,  as  it  (namely,  the  self) 


FIRST  ADHYAYA 


117 


is  not  objective  like  external  objects.  If  the  self  were  an 
object  then  its  inwardness  would  be  contradicted;  for  which¬ 
ever  is  an  object  is  not  by  nature  inward. 

[242] 

wore?  I 

*n&  m  jw»t  ^  u 

The  external  objects  alone  fall  within  the  scope  of 
speech,  etc.,  and  not  the  self.  For  when  logically  viewed 
we  do  not  see  any  instrument  of  knowledge  functioning  in 
respect  of  the  self.  The  instruments  of  knowledge  present 
in  the  three  worlds,  by  being  superimposed  on  the  self, 
comprehend  the  external  objects.  And  as  regards  this,  the 
experience  (of  great  men)  is  the  evidence. 

[  243  ] 

JRWWraif  3 

fa  d  ctct  ii 

Words  signify  an  object  which  comes  within  the  scope 
of  the  intellect.  As  the  self  does  not  come  within  the  range 
of  the  intellect,  it  is  not  signified  by  the  words  also.  So  the 
words  cannot  signify  the  self  either  primarily  or  secondarily. 
(And  since  the  seif  is  comprehended  by  the  psychosis)  it  is 


1  %cT — T i ,  T2,  T-3. 


118  SAMK§EPAg  ARIRAKA 

secondarily  signified;  but  thereby  it  does  not  acquire  the 
character  of  an  object. 

There  may  appear  to  be  contradiction  between  the  two  statements, 
namely,  ‘The  words  cannot  signify  the  self  secondarily’  and  ‘The 
words  signify  the  self  secondarily’.  But  it  is  explained  thus:  the 
mental  state  arising  from  the  sentences  such  as  satyarh  jilanarh  anantarii 
brahma,  inspired  by  the  reflection  of  the  self  in  it,  refers  to  the  self* 
and  removes  only  aoidya  obscuring  it.  The  reflection  of  the  self  in 
the  mental  state,  on  the  other  hand,  known  as  phala  being  but  a  reflex, 
is  neither  required  nor  competent  to  reveal  the  self.  That  is  to  say, 
the  self  is  vrttivyapya,  that  is,  it  is  comprehended  by  the  psychosis 
arising  from  the  sentences  such  as  satyarh  jilanarh  anantam  brahma,  and 
not  phalavyapya,  that  is,  it  is  not  manifested  by  the  reflection  of  the 
self  in  the  psychosis.  Hence  when  it  is  said  that  the  self  is  secondarily 
signified  what  is  meant  is  that  the  self  is  comprehended  by  the 
psychosis  arising  from  the  sentences  such  as  satyarh  jilanarii  anantam 
brahma.  When  it  is  said  that  the  self  cannot  be  secondarily  signified, 
what  is  meant  is  that  it  is  not  manifested  by  the  reflection  of  the  self 
in  the  psychosis.  Thus  there  is  no  contradiction  between  the  two 
statements. 

vide :  laksanaya  tadgocaranisedhadca  atmanah  phalavyapya- 
tvaiayena,  SS. 

VALIDITY  OF  THE  UPANI$ADS  IN  RESPECT 
OF  THE  SELF 

[244] 

sra: 

(The  disciple  enquires:) 


FIRST  ADHYATA 


119 


If  my  true  nature — the  inner  self — is  not  an  object  of 
knowledge,  then  how  do  you  affirm  the  validity  of  the 
Upanisadic  passages  in  respect  of  it.  The  statement  — 1 ‘The 
one  which  never  becomes  the  object  of  knowledge,  is  known 
from  the  Upanijadic  passage’ — involves  a  contradiction. 
And  it  is  not  proper  on  the  part  of  wise  men  to  utter  such 
statements. 

The  objection  raised  in  Stf,  I,  116  is  restated  here. 


[245] 

3d  i 

^  ii 

(The  preceptor  replies): 

This  is  not  correct.  The  psychosis  which  arises  from 
the  Upanisadic  passages,  and  which  is  inspired  by  the 
reflection  of  the  self  in  it,  annihilates  the  root-cause  of  this 
universe  superimposed  on  the  self.  The  psychosis  arising 
from  the  Upanisadic  passages  does  not  introduce  the 
character  of  an  object  to  your  essential  nature,  but  it 
receives  the  reflection  of  the  self  and  (thereby)  removes  the 
root-cause  of  transmigration. 

The  Upanisadic  passages  are  valid  in  respect  of  the  self  in  this 
that  the  mental  state  in  the  form  of  the  self  arising  from  them 
annihilates  avidya  abiding  in  the  self.  Thereby  the  self  which  is 
self-luminous  manifests  itself. 

Vide :  avisayatvt^biahmanah  I  a  slrayonitva  nupapattiriti  cet,  na  avidyS- 

r 

kalpitabhedanivrttiparatvut  iastrasya,  BSB,  I,  i,  4. 


120 


SAM  K$EPAS  ARIRAKA 


[246] 

^*ft^RW»Rf 

si  ^[Rrare4  ^fe*rfa  5itWt*re^  n 

The  Mlmamsakas  accept  the  statement  that  elucidates 
the  essential  nature  of  ‘knowledge’.  But  it  does  not 
introduce  the  character  of  an  object  to  the  knowledge  of 
pot,  cloth,  etc-  Its  fruitfulness  lies  in  this  that  it  removes 
the  ignorance  of  the  disciple  regarding  the  nature  of 
‘knowledge’.  Similarly  the  Upanisadic  texts  are  fruitful 
in  respect  of  the  self. 

‘Knowledge’,  according  to  the  PrSbhakaras,  is  self-luminous.  It 
is  not  an  object  of  another  knowledge;  So  the  knowledge  arising 
from  the  statement  that  ‘knowledge’  is  self-luminous’  could  not  have 
‘knowledge’  as  its  object.  But  the  statement  is  valid  in  this  that 
it  removes  the  ignorance  regarding  the  nature  of  knowledge. 
Similarly  the  Upanisadic  texts  are  valid  by  annihilating  avidjS 
present  in  the  self. 


[  247] 

Just  as  an  existent  object  (like  ether)  is  said  to  be 
accomplished,  when  the  material  objects  are  removed  by  the 
productive  factors,  so  also  the  self  which  is  not  an  object  of 
any  proof  is  said  to  fall  within  the  scope  of  proof,  as  the 
latter  removes  avidya  and  its  effects. 

s  am — Ti,  T2,  T3,  T4,  T6. 

*  P2. 


FIRST  ADHTATA 


121 


A  well  is  the  ether  delimited  by  a  particular  cavity.  The  ether  is 
existent  and  as  such  it  cannot  be  accomplished.  But  in  ordinary 
experience  we  find  that  a  well  is  said  to  be  accomplished  by  the 
removal  of  material  objecis  such  as  mud,  stone,  etc 

svayamprakSdamapi  pramartnprakd lyamtva,  tasya  ca  oprakdianam 
ajilanamiveli  tannivartanameva  tatpraka iakatvarfi  pramdnasya,  yatka 
murtadravyapanayanameva  ku  pa  ka  d  a  Jikaranam,  tasya  akaryatvat,  akrtaka- 
Ipatvacca  purvam.  tatha  svayamprakddasyapi,  aprakd  dyalvat, 
aprakasakalpatvacca  purvam,  Ista-siddhi,  p.  72. 

[248]- 

qTq^rrq^fsifTR^T 

$q  qwiMd  fHt:  q i 

qiiwi5[«T  11 

The  psychosis  which  arises  from  the  Upani§adic 
sentences,  which  has  become  pure  by  the  performance  of 
sacrifices,  and  which  is  firm  and  transparent  like  crystal  by 
the  Vedantic  study  (reasoning  and  meditation),  by  its 
proximity  to  the  inner  self,  receives,  like  a  mirror,  the 
reflection  of  your  true  nature  which  is  identical  with  the 
supreme  status  of  Visnu.  This  becomes  the  cause  of  the 
annihilation  of  the  source- of  transmigration. 

[  249  ] 

Wri  ^  *  ft  qf  w  qT%rfw  I 
qtftq  *  qfaqfe  =q  wk  q=qt 
$q  n 

*  t2,  t3 

16 


122  SAMK$EPAS>ARIRAKA 

Thus  there  is  no  contradiction  to  the  thesis  (that  the 
Vedanta  is  the  source  of  the  knowledge  of  the  self),  as  it  has' 
been  shown  that  the  Upanisadic  passages,  without  introduc¬ 
ing  the  character  of  an  object  to  it,  are  .valid  in  respect  of 
it.1  The  Upanisadic  passages  clearly  make  known  your  true 
nature2  without  introducing  the  character  of  an  object  to  it: 
and  thus  they  are  valid  in  respect  of  it. 

1.  See  notes  on,  SS ,  I,  245. 

2.  The  knowledge  arising  from  the  Upanijad  annihilates 
avidya  present  in  the  self;  and  thereby  the  self  which  is  self-luminous 
manifests  itself.  It  is  with  this  view  it  is  stated  .that  the  Upanisadic 
passages  clearly  make  known  the  self 

[250] 

d^TTd; 

d*dT«?  dT  II 

The  knowledge  of  the  negation  of  the  universe  arising 
from  the  negative  Upanisadic  sentences  such  as  ‘Not  this’1, 
etc.,  subsequently  has  for  its  content  the  absolute  self.  So 
let  the  negative  Upanisadic  sentences  be  primary  along  with 
the  affirmative  ones,  or  let  them  be  primary  (and  the 
affirmative  ones  secondary). 

1.  Bjh.,  II,  iii,  6. 

The  view  put  forth  in  this  and  the  following  verses,  is  advocated 
by  Ma^danamiSra.  See  S. 


For  details  see  Introduction,  p.  34. 


FIRST  ADHYATA 


123 


[2)1] 

3*4  es  I 

3i w  n  tiffs  ffa  w  fefa- 

ihi  SRsmtaram  feBS[q«r  ii 

The  knowledge  of  the  self  arising  from  the  negative 
Upanisadic  texts  is  similar  to  the  one  arising  from  the 
affirmative  Upanisadic  texts  such  as  tat  tvam  asi  It  does 
not  matter  whether  the  self  is  conveyed  directly  by  the 
words,  or  presumptively  known  1  Or  else,  as  the  (words  in 
the)  affirmative  Upanisadic  texts  signify  the  blend  of  the 
self  and  the  objective  element,  they  cannot  convey  the  sense 
of  partless  entity. 

1.  The  self  is  conveyed  directly  by  the  affirmative  Upanisadic 
texts,  and  presumptively  by  the  negative  ones. 

For  details  see  Introduction,  p.  34. 

[252] 

UfdfUBfa  II 

The  self  cannot  be  secondarily  signified,  as  it  is  devoid 
of  all  objects  and  as  such  incapable  of  having  any  relation1 
with  anything.  So  they  hold:  let  the  affirmative  Upanisadic 
passages  be  subsidiary  to  the  negative  ones. 


1  ft  fa — T4,  Te. 


124  SAM  K$EPAg  ARI RAKA 

1 .  saihvoga-samau3 ya-ta  da  tmya-ka  ryaka  ranata disambandha -sambhava  t. 

ss. 


[  253  ] 

^rasiwwf  r  fl  fa4  qg  wh  w  ii 

The  affirmative  Upanisadic  sentences  convey  your  true 
nature,  and  thereby  give  rise  to  the  immediate  knowledge  of 
the  self  that  directly  leads  to  liberation.  The  negative  ones, 
on  the  other  hand,  are  not  so.  They  convey  the  absence  of 
duality,  namely,  the  superimposed  universe,  and  hence  they 
are  not  capable  of  giving  rise  to  the  psychosis  that  could 
present  your  true  nature  (that  is,  the  self). 

The  view  put  forth  in  SS,  I,  250-  is  refuted  in  this  and  the 
following  three  verses. 


[  254] 

fl  r  ft  fw 
§q?qT  ffilnw  ftsrcfdt  ^HRq 

The  psychosis  arising  from  the  text,  asthula  etc.,  does 
not  present  your  true  nature,  the  absolute  self,  which  is 
all-pervasive  and  which  annihilates  avidya.  And,  without 
the  comprehension  of  the  true  nature  of  the  unknown  object 
(namely,  the  oneness  of  the  self)  there  cannot  arise,  from  the 
knowledge  of  the  texts  such  as  asthula,  etc.,  the  annihilation 


FIRST  AD  HT AT  A 


125 


of  avidyU  which  abides  in  the  self  and  which  is  the  root- 
cause  of  transmigration. 

1.  Brli.,  Ill,  viii,  8. 


[  255] 

fWH  fd^d  3  JRPR  ^  I 

assipmftsm  fond  *  a- 

siT*dfd  fw  ?tdtfd$!%ddr  u 

The  serpent  (which  appears  in  a  rope,  and)  which  is 
the  product  of  avidya  that  veils  (the  true  nature  of)  the  rope 
vanishes  not  by  the  negative  statements,  but  by  the  specific 
knowledge  that  is  capable  of  revealing  the  rope.  Similarly, 
the  misery  in  the  form  of  transmigration  which  is  the  pro¬ 
duct  of  avidya  of  the  inner  self  is  annihilated,  not  by  the 
knowledge  arising  from  the  (negative)  Upani$adic  texts 
such  as  neti  neti,1  but  by  the  true  knowledge  of  the  inner  self 
(that  is,  by  the  knowledge  of  the  identity  of  the  inner  self 
and  the  supreme  self). 

1.  Brh.,  II,  iii,  6. 


[  256  ] 

mtfiw  3  ^fd  ^Td  d’dd  dtTO  TOR  3  II 


The  texts  such  as  asthula,  etc  ,*  convey  the  sense  of 
partless  entity,  by  denying  the  duality  and  by  clarifying  the 


126 


SAMK§EPAg  ARIRAKA 


primary  and  the  secondary  senses  of  the  terms  ( tat  and  tvam.)1 
Thus  the  statement  neti  neti  is  intended  only  for  the  clari¬ 
fication  of  the  import  of  the  terms  tat  and  tvam.  And  the 
knowledge  arising  from  it  does  not  directly  lead  to 
liberation. 

1.  Brh  ,  III,  viii,  8. 

2.  vacyarlhe  na  vakyataiparyam,  api  tu  laksyamatre  iti  nij  cay  a  eva 
tayoh  sarin! odhanam,  SS. 


[  257  ] 

simTli 

Some  others,  however,  instruct  their  disciples  thus:  the 
negative  Upani$adic  texts  restate  the  annihilation  of  duality 
that  is  presumptively  known  from  the  knowledge  of  the  self 
arising  from  the  affirmative  Upani$adic  texts.  This  view  is 
commendable,  faultless,  and  desirable. 

The  view  set  forth  in  this  verse,  according  to  S,  is  advocated  by 
Padmapada. 

vide:  duktikryamityeva  nirakanksam  vakyam,  nedam  rajatamityanuvadah, 

Paflcapa  dika ,  p.  167. 

See  the  following  verse. 


[  258  ] 


FIRST  ADHYA  YA  127 

In  ordinary  experience,  it  is  observed  that  the  state¬ 
ment,  ‘What  is  in  front  of  you  is  not  serpent,  (but  rope)’, 
restates  the  non-existence  of  the  serpent  which  is  presum¬ 
ptively  known  from  the  knowledge  of  the  rope  arising  from 
the  affirmative  sentence  ‘In  front  of  you,  there  is  rope’.  In 
the  present  case  also,  it  should  be  understood  in  the  same 
way.1 

For  details  see  Introduction,  p.  55. 

[  259  ] 


qffo:  qftifl^qf- 


As  the  five-fold  purposive  commendatory  passages  of 
the  Upam'sads  substantiate  the  sentence  tat  tvam  asi,  the 
latter  signifies  the  self,  and  it  alone  is  capable  of  giving  rise 
to  the  knowledge  that  annihilates  the  root-cause  of 
transmigration. 


[  260  ] 


qfoqitwq  ^  n 

The  knowledge  of  the  self  does  not  arise  from  any  other 
source  than  from  the  sentences  like  tat  tvam  asi,  which  are 
substantiated  by  the  commendatory  statements  which 
function  under  the  guise  of  conveying  the  creation,1 


lzo  SAMK$EPAgARIRAKA 

sustenance,2  and  dissolution3  (of  the  universe',  the  self’s 
control  (over  the  universe)4  and  its  immanence.5 

1.  Taitt,  III,  1.  2.  ibid  3.  ibid 

4  Brh  ,  III,  vii,  3. 

5.  Taitt.,  II,  G. 

[2G1] 

otr;  #:  I 

H^sfq  li 

The  sage  Badarayana,  who  has  assumed  sovereign 
authority,  who  has  true  insight  into  the  significance  of  the 
entire  Upani$adic  texts,  who  has  determined  the  import  of 
all  the  Upanisadic  passages  through  reasoning  and  as  such 
knows  the  true  import  of  them,  composed  the  sutra  —  tattu 
samanvayat in  order  to  propound  (the  truth)  that  (the  know¬ 
ledge  arising  from)  the  affirmative  Upanisadic  passages 
leads  to  liberation. 

1.  BS,  I,  i,  4. 

For  details  see  Introduction,  p  36. 

[  262] 

q(3[  gqgq:  II 

The  author  of  sutras  has  indicated1  that  the  Upanisadic 
sentence  neli  neti,  is  for  the  clarification  of  the  sense  of  the 


FIRST  ADHYAYA 


129 


term  tat  that  directly  partakes  in  the  sentence  tat  tvam  asi. 
So  it  is  ascertained  that  the  negative  Upanisadic  sentence 
is  intent  on  it  (namely,  the  clarification  of  the  term  tat). 
The  intention  of  the  author  of  the  sutras  is  thus  brought 
forth  as  clearly  as  a  myrobalan  fruit  placed  on  one’s  palm. 
(Even  then)  if  others  hold  a  contrary  view,  then  how  are 
we  to  tolerate  that? 

1.  vide  DS,  III,  ii,  22. 

See  also  Introduction,  p.  36, 

[  263  ] 

for  l 

When  it  is  said  that  the  (supreme  self)  is  truth,  consci¬ 
ousness,  and  absolute,  the  possibility  of  such  a  being  is  not 
attained,  unless  there  arises  the  knowledge  from  the  state¬ 
ment  asthula ,  etc.,  annihilating  all  duality.  The  sentence 
which  negates  all  duality  confirms  the  knowledge  of  the 
secondary  sense  of  the  subsidiary  sentences  and  thereby 
leads  to  the  import  of  the  sentence  ( tat  tvam  asi)  namely,  the 
partless  entity. 

For  details  see  Introduction,  p  37. 

[  264] 

»s#£<q  q^q^r  qqqttqsq  srara: 
q<q^  ^qq^q  =q  n 


17 


130  SAM  KSEPA& ARIRAKA 

The  supreme  self  is  free  from  the  entire  universe  which 
is  characterized  by  duality  and  which  is  annihilated  by  the 
knowledge  arising  from  the  sentence  asthula,  etc. 
The  inner  self  is  free  from  the  states  of  waking,  dream,  and 
deep  sleep.  By  mutually  combining  the  senses  of  the  two 
terms  tat  and  tvam,  you  ascertain  without  doubt  that  the 
inner  self  is  really  the  absolute  self  and  the  abso’ute  self 
is  really  the  inner  self. 


[265] 


qqfqs  I 

qfaflffFqqNqi  II 

The  secondary  sense  of  the  term  tat  is  the  supreme  self, 
namely,  the  supreme  status  of  Lord  Visnu.  It  is  clarified 
(by  the  statement  asthula,  etc.)  and  it  is  free  from  the 
qualities  that  should  be  discarded  and  is  self-luminous  Your 
true  nature  is  free  from  the  limiting  conditions  (namely, 
mind,  etc  )  and  as  such  it  is  immediate.  As  the  difference 
between  the  two,  namely,  the  inner  self  and  the  supreme 
self,  is  annulled,  you  immediately  perceive  the  oneness  of 
the  supreme  self  and  the  inner  self. 

[  266  ] 

^  aft  ii 

By  removing  avidja  through  (the  knowledge  arising 
from)  the  sentence  ( tat  tvam  asi ),  you  understand  your  true 
nature  to  be  the  supreme  status  of  Visnu,  which  is  opposed 


FIRST  ADHTATA 


131 


to  what  is  unreal,  insentient,  and  which  is  opposed  to 
duality,  misery,  voidness,  and  (hence)  distinct  from  the 
entire  universe. 


[  267  ] 

ft  mi  i 

«R[f  g  =3  qn*q*?$q^  n 

In  order  to  remove  any  doubt,  the  Upanisadic  passage 
instructs— Oh!  dear,  have  faith;1  and  there  is  another  text 
which  states  that  faith  is  wealth;9  and  some  others  recite  the 
text  ‘one  who  has  faith’.8 

1 .  Chand  ,  VI,  xii,  2. 

2.  Brh.,  IV,  iv,  23.  3.  Chand.,  Ill,  xiv,  4. 

[  268  ] 

3i^ 

w:  I 

mm  3 

TOwft  11 

Lord  Kr?na  says  that  the  ignorant,  owing  to  the  non¬ 
discrimination  (of  the  sense  of  the  term  tat)  fails  to  achieve 
the  goal;  the  one  who  lacks  faith  is  miserable;  and  the  one 
of  doubting  intellect  is  still  more  miserable  and  is  always 
wretched.1 

‘  I.  Bh.  G  ,  IV,  40. 

[  269  ] 

tmtaFPTTRr  1 

$$  m  m  mfk  11 


132  SAMK?EPAgARIRAKA 

Your  nature,  the  inner  self,  released  from  duality  is 
truly  of  the  nature  of  the  supreme  self.  The  absolute  self, 
free  from  mediacy  which  is  the  result  of  avidya ,  is  of  the 
nature  of  the  inner  self.  Thus  the  oneness  of  the  supreme 
and  the  inner  self  is  invariably  established  through  the 
syntactical  relation  of  the  words  of  the  Upanisads.  And 
thus  the  supreme  goal  of  life  is  completely  attained. 

[270] 

/ 

The  timid  VaiSesika  is  not  capable  of  stating  the 
import  of  his  sentence  ‘Inherence  is  related*  to  be  none  other 
than  the  partless  entity,  as  he  is  afraid  of  infinite  regress. 
Moreover,  in  view  of  the  fear  of  contradiction  to  his  own 
view  that  the  relation  of  inherence  exists  between  five  pairs 
of  things  alone,  he  does  not  accept  any  other  relation  to 
the  relation  of  inherence. 

Sarvajnatman  in  this  and  in  the  following  five  verses  points  out 
that  the  schools  other  than  Advaita  also  admit  that  the  import  of  a 
sentence  could  be  a  partless  entity. 

According  to  Vaise?ika,  a  generic  attribute  (jati)  is  related  to  an 
individual  object  (vyakli)  through  the  intimate  relation  known  as 
samavaya.  This  samavaya  being  a  relation  should  be  related  to  the  two 
objects  that  are  related,  namely,  the  generic  attribute  and  the  indi¬ 
vidual  object.  Hence  there  is  the  usage  that  the  relation  known  as 
samavaya  is  related  to  the  generic  attribute  and  the  individual  object. 
Now  what  kind  of  relation  is  admitted  between  samavaya  and  the 
generic  attribute  or  the  individual  object?  It  cannot  be  samavaya,  for 
this  samavaya  would  require  another  samavaya  to  get  itself  related  to 


FIRST  ADHYAYA 


133 


the  former  samavaya  or  to  the  relata,  namely,  the  generic  attribute  and 
the  individual  object.  And  so  on,  ad  infinitum.  Moreover,  the  Vai£e$ika 
has  accepted  the  relation  of  samavaya  only  between  five  pairs  of  things, 
namely,  (i)  avayava  and  avayavin,  (ii)  guna  and  dravya,  (iii)  kriya  and 
dravya,  (iv)  jati  and  vyakti,  and,  (v)  videsa  and  nilya-d^nvya,  but  not 
between  samavaya  and  jati  or  vyakti.  So  he  hold>  that  samavaya  is 
connected  with  jati  or  vyakti  through  the  direct  relation  of  svariipa- 
sambandha,  that  is,  the  samavaya  itself  is  looked  upon  as  the  relation. 
Hence  the  two  words  in  the  sentence  sambandhassamavayah  should 
convey  only  the  unitary  object,  namely,  the  relation  known  as 
samavayah.  The  word  sambandha  means  svaru pa-sambandha  and  this  is 
samvdya  itself;  and,  the  word  samavaya  also  conveys  the  sense  of  the 
relation  known  as  samavaya.  Hence  the  two  words  convey  nothing 
else  than  the  unitary  entity,  namely,  samavaya. 

[271] 

There  are  clearly  two  words  in  the  ordinary  sentence 
‘ Ga  is  a  letter’.  The  import  of  this  sentence,  according  to 
the  system  of  the  Prabhakaras  is  accepted  to  be  none  other 
than  the  letter  ga. 


[  272] 

*  ft 

sfqfra  ^  ft 


134  SAM K$EPA!)  ARI RAKa 

As  the  Prabhakaras  do  not  admit  a  generic  attribute 
in  sound,  the  word  dabda  does  not  denote  the  generic  attri¬ 
bute  dabdatva,  but  signifies  the  letters  (varna)  through  the 
means  ‘  perceptibility  by  the  sense  of  hearing  ’  The  word 
ga  directly  conveys  the  letter  ga. 

The  Prabhakaras  contend  that  a  generic  attribute  can  be  reco¬ 
gnized  only  in  perceptible  substance  and  not  in  qualities  like  sound. 
Hence  the  word  dabda  signifies  not  the  generic  attribute,  but  the  letters 
through  the  perceptibility  by  the  ear  which  serves  as  the  ground  for 
the  use  of  the  word  dabda  in  the  sense  of  letters  The  word  ga  signifies 
the  letter  ga.  The  import  of  the  sentence,  therefore,  is  the  letter  ga. 

[  273  ] 

^  rupfjt:  l 

So  let  the  followers  of  the  system  of  Prabhakara 
abandon  the  dispute  regarding  (the  view  that  the  import  of 
a  sentence  is)  an  unitary  object.  If  not,  it  is  impossible  to 
give  an  intelligent  interpretation  of  the  sentence  (that  ‘Ga  is 
a  letter’).  If  the  import  of  (this)  sentence  is  accepted 
(by  Prabhakara)  to  be  different  from  the  unitary  object 
(namely,  the  letter  ga),  then  there  would  arise  contradiction 
to  his  accepted  tenet  (namely,  that  the  qualities  do  not  have 
any  generic  attribute). 

The  import  of  the  sentence  dabdo  gakarah  would  be  different  from 
the  unitary  sense,  only  when  the  word  dabda  conveys  a  generic 
attribute.  But  this  is  contrary  to  the  view  of  Prabhakara  that  the 
qualities  do  not  have  any  generic  attribute. 

vide  Notes  on  the  previous  verse. 

[  274  ] 


FIRST  ADHYAYA 


135 


The  venerable  Pfinini  holds  that  the  nominative  case- 
suffix  added  to  the  nominal  stem  does  not  convey  any  sense 
other  than  the  sense  of  the  stem.1  Hence,  Panini,  a  master 
of  all  schools  of  thought,  accepts  the  import  of  the  words 
(which  are  not  even  synonymous)  to  be  the  unitary  object. 


1.  vide  the  Pa nini-sutra :  — 

pra  tipadikarthalingaparimanavacanama  tre  prathama,  II,  iii,  46. 
See  Notes  on  SS ,  I,  216. 


[  275  ] 

stews  fa  =3  wvfa  3T5T  forsTO:  n 

It  is  well-known  that  the  import  of  the  two  words  of  the 
sentences  such  as  ‘  This  is  pot  ’,  etc.,  is  the  unitary  object — 
pot.  Hence  it  is  not  reasonable  to  evoke  controversy  on 
this  point. 


[276] 

As  the  criterion  for  an  object  to  become  capable  of 
being  known  by  the  proofs  other  than  the  Upanisads  is 
possession  of  colour,  taste,  etc.,  existence  is  nof  the  criterion 
for  an  object  to  become  capable  of  falling  within  the  scope  of 
other  proofs. 

The  objection  raised  in  Ss',  I,  101  is  refuted  here. 

[  277  ] 

W  ^  faffed 


136  SAM  K$EPA& ARI RAKA 

Hence  the  Upanisadic  passages,  without  depending  on 
any  other  proof,  are  indisputably  valid  in  respect  of  the 
self  which  is  devoid  of  colour,  etc.,  and  which  is  pure  cons¬ 
ciousness  that  does  not  become  the  object  of  any  other  proof. 

[278  ] 

faiwM  ii 

It  is  well-known  that  the  object  which  is  signified  by 
a  word  current  in  ordinary  usage  falls  within  the  scope  of 
the  other  proofs.  But  as  the  self  is  not  denoted  by  the  word 
found  in  ordinary  usage,  it  should  be  denied  that  it  is  the 
object  of  the  other  proofs. 


[  279  ] 

$fq 

\m  si  ii 

Niyoga  is  denoted  by  the  potential  ending,  etc.,  found 
in  ordinary  usage.  Hence  all  the  sentences  intent  on  con¬ 
veying  the  niyoga  are  not  valid  in  respect  of  it,  because  they 
depend  on  another  proof.'  And  this  objection  does  not 
apply  to  the  Upanisadic  passages. 

1.  In  the  system  of  Prabhakara,  the  Vedic  sentences  convey 
niyoga  which  is  denoted  by  the  potential  ending  in  ordinary  usage. 
Hence  they  are  said  to  be  dependent  on  another  proof  (namely,  the 


FIRST  ADHYAYA 


137 


word  in  ordinary  usage)  As  the  Vedic  texts  convey  something  that 
is  already  known,  they  do  not  answer  the  definition  of  validity, 
namely,  anadhigata  -  abadhitartha  -  bodhakatvam. 

[  280] 

wwfe:  q?Rr  foqf  n 

As  the  words  are  found  to  have  syntactical  relation 
even  without  a  finite  verb,  a  man  of  ripe  intellect 
does  not  desire  to  state  that  the  syntactical  relation 
of  the  words  is  invariably  brought  about  by  the  finite  verb. 

This  verse  refutes  the  objection  raised  in  Stf,  I,  100. 

[281] 

frqr  ssTft  qfR  n 

In  ordinary  experience  it  is  found  that  the  words  (in 
the  sentences)  of  the  speaker  such  as  ‘This  high-minded 
servant  of  the  king’,  and  ‘that  fruit  of  the  tree’  are  syntacti¬ 
cally  related  even  without  a  finite  verb. 

[  282  ] 

mfaaiWaqfariR  3  foqiq^  11 

The  finite  verb  is  accepted  even  in  the  Upanisadic 
passages;  and  it  is  considered  essential  only  when  it  is 
agreeable  to  the  intended  sense.  But  the  finite  verb,  though 
read  in  the  Upanisadic  passage,  is  futile  if  it  should  spoil 
the  intended  sense. 

18 


138 


SAM  K§EPAg  ARI RAKA 


[  283  ] 

^  ^  Rlt  foqiqi 
^i^qTqq*TrRTT^:  qsfca  i 
q^r 

^OTlftq<Hm:  n 

The  authorities  on  the  Upanisads  read  with  considera¬ 
tion  the  abundant  finite  verbs  of  the  Upanisadic  passages 
such  as  ‘IS’,1  ‘AM’,9  ‘ART’.5  They  hold  that  by  the 
presence  of  these  verbs  alone  the  words  of  the  Upanisadic 
passages  are  syntactically  related. 

vidt  the  texts:  1.  asti  brahmeli  cedveda,  Taitt ,  II,  vi,  1. 

2  aham  brahma  smi,  Brh.,  I,  iv,  10. 

3  tattvarh  asi,  Chand  ,VI,  viii,  7. 

[  284] 

q^r  qqT<qmqR:q*m*RPi  i 

*r?nq*nwRf  qfe  waiat  n 

The  followers  of  (the  Prabhakara  school)  state  the 
general  definition  of  valid  knowledge  as  ‘All  experience  is 
valid’;  and  then  declare  that  existence  is  ‘fitness  of  an 
object  to  fall  within  the  scope  of  valid  knowledge’.  Hence 
the  Upanisadic  passages  that  (are  said  to)  convey  the  sense 
of ‘existence’  are  not  self-valid. 

The  contention  of  the  Pi abhakara  is:  the  Upanisads  are  said  to 
convey  the  self  which  is  of  the  nature  of  existence.  And,  as  existence  is 
the  fitness  of  a  thing  to  become  the  object  of  valid  knowledge,  that  is, 
another  proof,  the  Upanisadic  passages  convey  the  thing  which  is  capable 
of  becoming  the  object  of  another  proof;  and  in  this  respect  they  are 
dependent  on  another  proof  and  henoe  they  are  not  self-valid. 


FIRST  AD  HY AY  A 


139 


[285  ] 

•I  SmUR  folftgqsqft  | 

k  Sffi*T5N^  flfo:  II 

This  does  not  hold  good.  ‘Consciousness’  is  not  capable 
of  becoming  its  object.  It  is  not  reasonable  to  hold  that 
the  ‘fitness’  ta  become  the  object  of  conciousness  exists  in 
consciousness  itself;  for,  that  thing  alone  which  is  different 
from  consc:ousness  can  become  its  (namely,  consciousness’) 
object.  Indeed  fire  does  not  have  the  power  to  burn  itself- 

The  contention  of  the  PrBbhakara  does  not  hold  good.  If 
‘existence’  is  defined  as  fitness  of  a  thing  to  become  the  object  of 
consciousness,  then  it  is  asked  whether ‘consciousness’ possesses  existence 
or  not.  If  it  possesses  existence,  then  it  should  be  held  that  ‘Consci¬ 
ousness’  is  capable  of  becoming  the  object  of  ‘Consciousness’.  And 
this  is  unreasonable,  as  the  same  thing  (namely,  consciousness)  cannot 
be  both  the  knowing  subject  and  the  object. 

[  286  ] 

wd  *r.*rai  %- 

Sw  Rrofd  *  i 

^qjFTrfMtar:  n 

If  ‘consciousness’  does  not  possess  the  fitness  to  become 
the  object  of  ‘consciousness’,  then  it  cannot  be  existent. 
(Moreover)  the  existence  of  the  cognizer,  pot,  etc.,  is  the 
fitness  of  their  becoming  the  objects  of  consciousness.  (As 
consciousness  itself  is  non-existent),  you  (the  Prabhakara) 
should  accept  the  non-existence  of  cognizer,  pot,  etc. 


140 


SAM  K$EPAS  ARI RAKA 


[287  ] 

m  \s§m  fasnfasR^rg  i 
^  35^51^%  ii 

Hcncc  you  must  accept  that  'existence’  is  the  essential 
nature  of  a  thing.  And  it  is  two-fold  as  real  and  unreal. 
You  understand  that  at  the  time  of  empirical  usage,  the 
‘blend’  resulting  from  the  mutual  superimposition  of  the 
two  kinds  of  existence  is  the  primary  sense  of  the  word  sai. 

This  verse  brings  out  the  conception  of  ‘existence’  according  to 
Advaita,  and  shows  that  it  is  free  from  the  defect  pointed  out  in  the 
conception  of  the  Prabhakaras. 


[  288  ] 
c»5r 

ifS  fS  5jfa9?S«#I  Ufa 

1 1 

Discarding  the  unreal  element  and  fixing  the  mind  with 
faith  on  the  self  which  is  self-luminous,  infinite,  and  absolu¬ 
tely  real,  you  ascertain  that  you  are  always  the  supreme 
self. 


[289  ] 

tTR^Tdfdfld^R  ^1^511%:  I 
WIT  'Wftfmi  11 


FIRST  ADHYAYA 


141 


That  the  self  is  self-luminous  and  as  such  the  blend  (of 
the  self  and  the  objective  element)  is  not  known  through 
any  proof  (other  than  the  witness-self).  Ordinary  men 
understand  the  relation  of  the  words  ( satya ,  etc.,)  to  the 
sense  (namely,  the  blend  of  the  self  and  the  objective 
element)  in  the  manner  mentioned  before,2  in  accordance 
with  the  usage  of  the  elders. 

1.  The  objection  raised  in  Stf,  T,  111  is  answered  in  this  verse. 

The  primary  sense  of  the  word  sat  is  only  the  blend  of  the  self, 
the  pure  consciousness  and  the  phenomenal  element  (say)  pot.  The 
relation  of  the  word  sat  to  this  sense  is  known  through  perception  in 
accordance  with  the  usage  of  the  elders 

The  primary  sense  of  the  word  aham  is  the  individual  soul  which 
is  a  blend  of  the  self  and  the  intellect.  The  relation  of  the  word  aham 
to  this  sense  is  known  by  the  witness-self  ( saksi-caitanya ). 

2.  See  I,  198  200. 


[  290  ] 

w  ft  u 

Just  as  the  meanings  of  the  words  like  yfipa,  etc-,  are 
easily  determined,  so  also  the  meanings  of  the  words 
like  ‘Brahma5,  etc.,  can  be  easily  determined,  as  they  are 
mentioned  in  proximity  to  the  other  words  whose  meanings 
are  well-known  in  ordinary  experience. 

The  method  to  know  the  primary  sense  of  the  word  brahman  is 
set  forth  with  an  illustrative  example.  In  the  sentence  Khadiro  yupah, 
bailvo  yupah,  yuparii  taksati,  yuparh  astairikaroli,  the  sense  of  the 
word  yupa  is  known,  with  the  aid  of  the  other  words  whose 
meanings  are  already  known,  to  be  a  piece  of  wood  which  is  cut  so  as 
to  have  eight  sides.  Similarly,  the  meaning  of  the  word  brahman  which 
is  found  in  the  sentence— yalo  va  imdni  bhutani  jayante .  tedbrahma 


142 


SAM  K$  EPAg  ARI RAKA 


[Taitt.,  Ill,  i  1.]  is  known  to  be  the  absolute  entity,  with  the  aid 
of  the  other  words  whose  meanings  are  known  already. 

[291  ] 

toft  i 

intwsrarft!  q&towlftw  n 

Even  if  the  primary  senses  of  the  words  (such  as  brahma 
and  aham )  which  signify  God,  and  the  individual  soul  are 
not  known,  there  could  arise  the  knowledge  of  the  supreme 
self  from  the  Upanigadic  text  ( neti ,  neii )‘  by  the  negation 
of  the  objective  elements. ,J 

1.  athata  adtio  neti  neti,  Brh  ,  II,  iii,  6. 

2.  anyapraiisedhanena  —  anatmapohanena,  AP. 

The  view  put  forth  in  this  verse,  according  to  SS  is  not  the 
final  view  of  the  author.  See  Notes  on  the  following  verse. 

vide:  svasammatamapi  paksamaha,  SS. 

[  292  ] 

5lf%  fto  f 

stoft  q*  it 

One  can  have  the  knowledge  of  the  self  from  the 
Upanigadic  passages  through  the  negation  of  the  universe, 
if  one  knows,  from  ordinary  usage,  the  meaning  of  the 
negative  particle  nan  and  the  words  that  convey  the  universe 
(namely,  nana  and  kihcana). 

The  main  objection  to  the  view  pul  forth  in  this  verse  is  this:  — 
the  universe  is  to  be  negated  in  the  self  which  should  be  referred  to  by 
the  word  iha  in  the  sentence,  neha  nanasti  kiflcana  ( Bfh .,  VI,  iv,  19). 
The  meaning  of  the  word  iha,  which  is  said  to  be  significative 
of  the  self  is  not  known  and  so  the  word  iha  cannot 
refer  to  the  self,  and  as  such  the  universe  cannot  be  negated 


FIRST  ADHYAYA 


143 


in  it.  Moreover,  the  knowledge  of  the  essential  nature  of  the  self 
could  arise  only  from  the  affirmative  Upanisadic  statements  like 
satyam  jilanam  anantam  brahma  and  not  from  the  negative  statements 
such  as  neha  nanasti  kincana. 


[293] 

^ ft  qqft  =q 

m  ft  li 

The  sentence  aham  brahma  smi  wherein  the  terms  stand  in 
syntactic  relation  is  the  source  of  the  knowledge  (of  the  self). 
The  absolute  self  (identical  with  the  inner  self)  which  is 
immediate  is  the  content  of  the  cognition  (arising  from  the 
sentence  aham  brahmasmi )  as  this  knowledge  arises  from 
that  (sentence).  Whichever  gives  rise  to  the  knowledge  of 
an  object,  is  valid  in  respect  of  the  object,  as  the  sense  of 
sight  with  reference  to  the  colour  of  an  object.  And  this  is 
wellknown  and  indeed  reasonable  also. 

[  294] 

TlWgd 

gqrsqfci  *q&ft 

V  ftftfjRtsqirat  II 

Just  as  'religious  rites’  known  from  the  injunctive  texts 
are  not  contradicted  (by  any  other  proof),  so  also  you 
believe  that  the  self,  which  is  self-existent,  which  is  not 
known  through  any  other  proof,  and  which  is  made  known 


144  SAMKQEPAg  ARIRAKA 

by  the  Upanisadic  passages  that  have  it  as  their  true 
purport,  is  not  contradicted  (by  any  proof). 

[  295] 


FRlWg  I 

fqfafes  SRaqRqt  m 
RiRpqwfR^  r  ii 

Wise  men  hold  that  ‘existence’  or  the  ‘state  of  being 
achieved  by  human  activity’  is  not  the  criterion  for  a  thing 
to  become  the  object  of  valid  knowledge.  Similarly,  either 
the  injuctive  character  or  the  character  of  conveying  an 
existent  object  is  not  the  criterion  for  the  validity  of  a 
sentence- 

iabdasamanvayah  —  siddhavakyam,  SS. 

[  296  ] 

ftqd  r  =qgR^q*q  Pwftsfa  3^:  | 

^  ^rqeiRfa  q&qR  qgqift  n 

Ihe  power  of  the  visual  sense  is  not  invariably  limited 
to  the  comprehension  of  either  the  blue  colour  or  the  yellow 
one.  Similarly,  never  do  the  Vedic  sentences  have  any 
predilection  for  conveying  either  the  entity  that  is  to  be 
achieved  (or  the  existent  entity). 

*  [  297  ] 

^  ^rtrij  i 

Following  the  view  of  Sri  Badarayana,  it  has  been  stated 
in  the  Purva-mimamsa  that  the  injuctive  texts  are  valid  in 


FIRST  ADHYAYA 


145 


respect  of ‘religious  rites’  which  are  not  already  known  (by 
any  proof).  And  the  validity  of  the  Upanisadic  texts  in 
conveying  the  existent  entity  is  identical. 

1.  vide:  Jaimini- sutra,  I,  i,  5. 

[298] 

fa  fafcfd  If  faft<ft  SSR  I 
refasfafa 

ffemmrefa  merest  11 

Those  who  know  the  nature  of  the  object  of  knowledge 
maintain  thus-  the  object  of  valid  knowledge  is  that  which 
is  not  already  known  by  any  proof,  and  which  is  later  cog¬ 
nized  by  a  means  of  knowledge.  And  those  who  know  the 
nature  of  proof  hold  that  it  makes  known  the  object  that 
is  not  already  known  by  any  proof. 

[  299] 

fa  fate  qfs  *TR 

farete  refaffasre  h  w^rei  1 

reftffa 

II 

When  such  is  the  case,  if  the  Upanisadic  passage  is 
not  the  source  of  knowing  the  self,  then  the 
injunctive  text  also  is  not  the  source  of  the  knowledge  of 
religious  rite.  If  the  injunctive  text  is  valid  regarding  the 
religious  rite,  then  the  Upanisadic  passage  also  is  valid 
in  respect  of  the  self. 

19 


146 


SA  M  K§  EPA  St  ARIRAK A 


[  300  ] 


33  ?7!T%  iw 

3«i:  «if%:  i 

uuRimt  $m  IfrWt:  ii 

As  the  Upanisadic  texts  convey  only  an  existent  entity 
there  does  not  result  any  benefit  to  one  who  studies  them. 
But  the  injunctive  texts  prompt  one  to  activity  and  thence 
ensues  the  benefit.  For  this  reason  alone,  the  followers'  of 
Jaimini  hold1  that  the  sentence  which  conveys  an  existent 
entity  serves  only  the  purpose  of  commending  the 
injunctions. 

The  view  set  forth  in  SSt,  I,  1 12  is  restated  here  and  is  refuted  in 
the  following  verse. 

1.  vide:  Jaimini-sutra,  I,  ii,  1  and  7. 

[301] 

This  would  hold  good  only  if  from  the  realization  of  the 
self  known  from  the  Upanisadic  passages  there  does  not 
result  the  highest  human  goal  But  it  is  known  that  the 
sage  experiences  the  supreme  bliss  that  transcends  all  grades 
of  happiness.1 

1.  cf.  Brh  ,  IV,  iii,  32. 

The  objection  raised  in  Sst,  I,  112  and  300  is  answered  here. 


■3.  T'i,  T3, 


FIRST  ADHTAYA 


147 


[  302  ] 

ftq°qr: 

5t^i  &  i 

q^Rwqs*HT*tR*reei|!it 
*ris<nq  p?l^!  T$q^  II 

Having  attained  a  particle  of  the  supreme  bliss,  Indra 
and  other  gods,  like  acquatic  animals  in  the  ocean,  remain 
contented  as  if  they  have  attained  the  highest  state.  What 
more  is  there  to  be  sought  for  by  the  sage  who  has  the 
intuitive  knowledge  of  the  supreme  status  of  Visnu,  which 
is  of  the  nature  of  the  inner  self  and  is  free  from  all  misery.1 

1.  cf.  Taitt,  II,  i,  1. 


[  303  ] 

SRT  T%qq;ftq^  II 

Is  there  anything  more  to  be  longed  for,  if  the  know¬ 
ledge  of  the  self  arising  from  the  Upani§adic  passages  when 
fully  ripened  annihilates  immediately  avidya  which  has  the 
self  as  its  object,  which  is  the  root-cause  of  transmigration, 
and  which  conceals  the  bliss-nature  of  the  self? 


%  f^fqr  Bi,  Mi,  B2 
*  Mi 


148 


SAMK$EPAgARIRAKA 


[  304] 

Riwfe  Rform  ^  m\  *w  ii 

[  305] 


r*W3?r$  R<T$afi3R  rihrir  mvm;  i 
SRRf^R  %TOR  RRT^t  II 

A  golden  ornament  which  is  placed  inside  one’s  closed 
fist  but  has  been  forgotten  seems  to  be  lost.  But  the  person 
attains  it  (as  if  it  were  unattained)  by  the  knowledge  arising 
from  the  instruction  of  a  trustworthy  person. 

Similarly,  though  the  aspirant  is  of  the  nature  of  the 
supreme  self  which  is  absolute,  yet,  through  a  (mistaken) 
notion  of  its  not  being  attained,  he  longs  for  it  and  attains 
it  (as  if  it  were  unattained)  through  means  of  valid 
knowledge  (namely,  the  Upanisads). 

[  306  ] 


3  ^ 

RfSreHS^qfftRR'JT:  f£WR  fe  <T- 
pnRrcdi%rc5T;HRtfr  \\ 

As  the  self  is  immutable,  it  is  devoid  of  modification, 
origination,  and  destruction  and  as  such  its  nature,  namely, 
liberation  cannot  be  attained  like  one’s  own  branch  of  Veda 
by  means  of  study,  or  produced  like  the  three-fold  fire  by 
means  of  consecration,  or  purified  like  grains  of  rice  by 
sprinkling  with  water,  or  modified  like  the  soma  creeper  by 
the  extraction  of  its  juice. 


FIRST  ADHYAYA 


149 


The  view  set  forth  in  this  verse  is  based  on  the  following  bhasya 

text. 

yasya  tu  utpddyo  moksah ,  tasya  mdnasam  vacikam  kdyikam  va  karyam 
apeksate  ityuktam ,  tathd  vikdryatve  ca;  tayoh  paksayoh  moksasya 

dhruvam  anityaivam . .  ca  apyatvenapi  kdryapeksd,  svdtmarupalve  sati 

andpyatvdt . napi  samskdryo  moksah  ytna  vydpdramapekseta.  samskaro 

hi  nama  sarhskd  ryasya  gunadhdnena  va  sydt  dosdpanayanena  vd — na  tdvat 
gund  dhd  tiena  sambhava  ti,  and  dheya  lid  ayabrahmasvarupatva  nmoksasya; 
napi  dosdpanayanena,  nityaiuddhabrahmasvarupatvat  moksasya , 

BSB,  I,  i,  4. 


[  307  ] 

it 

As  the  expression  brahmaiva  san  occurs  at  the  beginning 
of  the  sentence,1  it  is  more  powerful  and  (hence)  it  clearly 
makes  the  word  apyeti  discard  its  primary  sense  (of  attain¬ 
ment).  Thus  it  makes  known  that  the  identity  of  the  inner 
self  and  the  supreme  self  cannot  be  achieved  (by  action). 

1.  brahmaiva  san  brahmapytli ,  Brh.,  IV,  iv,  6. 

T  his  verse  refutes  the  possible  objection  that  liberation  is  the 
result  of  action,  because  it  is  known  from  the  druti  text  cited  above 
that  the  state  of  the  self  which  is  liberation  is  attained  (apyeti). 

See  the  following  verse. 


[  308  ] 


150  SAMK§EPA$ARIRAKA 

The  words  such  as  agneya,  etc.,  formed  with  the  taddhita 
suffixes,  being  associated  with  the  words  such  as  astakapala, 
etc.,  function  as  a  verb,  as  they  give  rise  to  the  knowledge 
of  what  is  to  be  achieved. 

It  is  objected  that  in  a  sentence  the  verb  is  primary  and  the 
nominal  word  is  secondary.  As  such,  the  nominal  word  brahmaiva  san 
is  secondary  and  it  should  be  taken  in  its  secondary  sense  and  not  the 
verb  apyeti  as  stated  in  the  previous  verse. 

To  this  it  is  said  that  a  nominal  word  is  that  which  conveys  an 
existent  entity,  while  the  verb  is  that  which  conveys  the  thing  that  is 
to  be  achieved.  When  viewed  in  this  light,  the  word  apyeti  does  not 
function  as  a  verb  (see  309)  and  as  such  it  is  not  primary. 

This  point  is  explained  in  this  verse  by  citing  an  illustration.  In 
the  Vedic  sentence,  a gneyo'  stakapalo  bhavati,  the  word  agneya  which  is 
formed  with  the  taddhita  suffix  conveys  that  agni  is  the  deity  of  an 
oblation  to  be  offered  (agnih  devata  asya).  The  word  astakapala  points 
out  that  the  oblation  is  a  cake  which  is  prepared  by  being  placed 
over  eight  plates.  So  the  word  agneya  associated  with  the  word 
astakapala  signifies  the  relation  of  deity  and  a  particular  oblation 
which  could  be  effected  only  by  sacrifice  (yaga)  which  also  is  to  be 
achieved  by  action. 

Thus  the  word  agneya  conveys  the  sense  of  what  is  to  be  achieved 
and  as  such  it  functions  as  a  verb. 

See  the  following  verse. 

[  309  ] 

II 


t  ytrfq-  3T — Bi 


FIRST  ADHTATA 


151 


Though  the  word  bhavati  in  the  sentence  ( agneyo ’ 
stakapalo  bhavati)  is  a  verb,  yet  it  functions  as  a  nominal 
word,1  as  it  conveys  a  sense  other  than  what  is  to  be  achieved. 
We  consider  the  word  apyeti  also  to  be  a  nominal  word  as  it 
conveys  a  sense  other  than  what  is  to  be  achieved.2 

1 .  As  the  word  bhavati  conveys  the  sense  of  ‘existence’  which 
cannot  be  achieved,  it  is  considered  as  a  nominal  word. 

vide :  bhavatyarthasya  sattdya  avidheyalvat  tanna  masad [  $  amevcli 
na  pradhanam ,  SS. 

2.  If  the  word  apyeti  conveys  that  the  state  of  the  self  is 
attained,  then  there  arises  contradiction  with  the  sense  of  the  word 
brahmaiva  san  which  occurs  at  the  beginning  of  the  sentence  and  which 
conveys  that  the  state  of  the  self  is  self-established.  So  the  word  apyeti 
does  not  convey  the  sense  of  what  is  to  be  achieved  and  hence  it  does 
not  function  as  a  verb,  but  as  a  nominal  word.' 

vide:  apyeti  dabdn'pi  namaiva,  brahmaiva  sanniti  prathamai rutasvatah- 
si ddhabrahmabha  vadhivirodha  t,  S. 

[310] 

mi  fifai%  m  urn 

%fq 

^qTd^^qrc^-qT^  II 

In  the  light  of  the  arguments  set  forth  above,  (it 
is  clear)  that  the  word  apyeti  is  not  substantive  in  respect  of 
the  word  brahmaiva  san.  Indeed  the  verb  is  substantive  to 
the  nominal  word;  if  the  word  apyeti  signifies  the  sense  of 
attainment,  then  it  would  be  contrary  to  the  sense  of  the 
substantive  word  ( brahmaiva  san);  and  so  it  does  not  have  the 
force  of  a  verb. 

vide:  ayamatma  brahma  itya  dilatparavakyasiddham  atmano  brahmarupatvam 
atah  tadavapteh  anrtatvdt  tannivedakam  apyetipadam  bhavyetararthagata- 
buddhinibandhanam ,  ato  nakhyatameva,  Ved.  p.  118. 


152 


SAM  K$EPA$  ARI RAKA 


[311] 

mn  as:  smgs  *r- 

o 

*qq(^  I 

3rwTwm^5i?i^T  m$\ 

it 

Thus  as  the  expression  brahmaiva  san  is  not  subordinate 
to  the  word  apyeti  and  occurs  at  the  beginning  of  the  sentence, 
it  makes  the  word  apyeti  discard  its  primary  sense.  The 
learned  men,  therefore,  accept  the  identity  of  the  inner  self 
and  the  supreme  self. 


[312] 

\jqq*  ft  Hi 

II 

Moreover,  the  principle  that  the  existent  entity  is 
subordinate  to  the  one  that  is  to  be  achieved  is  applicable 
only  in  the  brahmana  section  of  the  Veda  consisting  of  the 
injunctive  texts.  But,  here,  the  wise  men  hold  contrary  to 
it,  that  is,  the  one  that  is  to  be  achieved  is  subordinate  to 
the  existent  entity.1  The  author  of  the  Brahma-sutra  affirms 
that  the  import  of  the  entire  Upanisadic  passages  is  the 
existent  entity — the  self.2 

1  The  sacrifices,  penance,  etc.  which  are  lo  be  achieved  are 
subordinate  to  the  existent  entity,  the  self,  that  is,  they  indirectly  lead 
to  the  realization  of  the  self. 

vide  BS,  III,  iv,  26. 

2.  vide:  BS,  I,  i,  4. 


FIRST  AD  HY  AY  A 


153 


[313] 

mi 

sq^q  I 

awqfpq  qfcfte*fcl^q 
mi  qfaft  li.  g<w.sqq;q  11 

For  this  reason  also,1  the  expression  brahmaiva  san  is 
more  powerful  than  the  word  afiyeti  that  occurs  at  the  end. 
So  the  expression  brahmaiva  san  makes  it  discard  its  primary 
sense  and  assume  a  secondary  signification. 

1.  bhu  taya  bhavyvh  ityuktanyciya  dapi,  SS. 


[314] 

rcisRff  i  m  aT«nra:  foqifa- 

n  F-wp-kW  i 

qwi*!  mm  ^rf5r^^5  ii 

In  the  light  of  the  grounds  mentioned  already,  attain¬ 
ment,  or'gination,  modification,  and  purification  are  not 
possible  in  respect  of  liberation;  and  hence  it  (namely, 
liberation)  is  not  effected  either  by  the  performance  of 
rituals  or  by  the  (intuitive)  knowledge  (of  the  self),1  or  by 
the  combination  of  the  two.2 

1.  Liberation  being  the  state  of  the  supreme  seif  is  eternal  and 
hence  it  cannot  be  achieved  by  the  knowledge  of  the  self.  What  the 
knowledge  of  the  self  does  is  that  it  merely  annihilates  avidya  veiling 
the  self;  and,  thereby  the  self  which  is  self-luminous  manifests  itself. 

2.  See  Slf,  IV,  9-10. 

20 


154 


SAM  K$EPAg  ARI  RAK/i 


[315] 

^qaifa  ro:  II 

It  is  not  a  blemish  that  the  realization  of  the  one-ness 
of  the  self  does  not  prompt  one  to  activity  or  to  desist  from 
it.  On  the  contrary,  it  constitutes  our  glory  that  it 
(namely,  the  realization  of  the  self)  annihilates  ( avidya  which 
is)  the  root-cause  (of  passion  and  hatred)  that  respectively 
prompts  one  to  activity  and  desists  from  it,  and  that  it 
leads  to  liberation. 

The  objection  raised  in  Stf,  I,  112,  is  refuted  in  this  verse. 

cf.  alahkaro  hi  asmakam  yat  brahma lmavagat.au  salyam 
sarvakartavyatahanih  krtakrtyata  ca,  BSB,  I,  i,  4. 

[316] 

sfalfa  ft  | 

m  13313^  ^  ^  3- 

s^ricRtara  fl  asn:  n 

The  presence  of  avidya  in  the  self  is  possible,  as  it  is 
experienced.  Even  in  the  self  there  is  indeed  the  experience 
of  avidja  in  the  form  of  £I  do  not  know  myself’.  But  the 
experience  of  avidya  is  not  real,  as  avidya  superimposes  it¬ 
self  on  the  self1 

1.  Sec  Sg  I,  51-5. 


i.  tun  ff  T6. 


FIRST  ADHTATA 


155 


[317] 

5ti^  ^  =q  5Tf  ft:  qfksr  I 

^1  ^TTdf  jftsidq^srofistor- 
tnfojpft  w  ^n%f^  ii 

It  is  well-known  that  the  primordial  cause  of  the 
universe  which  is  termed  inanimation  or  ignorance  and 
which  veils  the  pure  consciousness  is  avidya.  It  is  indeter¬ 
minable  and  it  envelops  the  absolute  self  like  the  lump  of 
ghee,  the  blazing  fire- 


[318] 

straws  3n%qi  i 
W*TT  51TTcRf 

faST  I! 

Avidya  has  the  self  as  its  object  and  as  its  locus.  It  is 
termed  darkness,  universal  darkness,  pitch  darkness, 
inanimation,  dark  night,  illusion,  primordial  cause  of  the 
universe,  the  power  of  Lord  Visnu,  blindness,  sleep,  deep- 
sleep,  unreality,  dissolution,  and  the  oneness  of  the  three 
constituents  (of  prakrti \  viz-,  serenity,  activity,  and  inertia. 

[319] 

fk  5TT«Rt  II 


?  Pi,  Ml- 


156  SAMK?EPA$ARIRAKA 

Undifferentiated  consciousness  is  the  locus  as  well  as 
the  object  of  avidya.  (The  embodied  soul  and  God)  that 
come  into  being  subsequent  to  avidya  can  neither  be  the 
locus  nor  be  the  object  of  avidya  which  exists  prior  to  them. 

The  self  reflected  in  the  intellect  which  is  the  product  of  avidya 
is  the  individual  soul.  And  the  self  reflected  in  avidya  is  God.  They 
cannot  be  the  locus  or  the  object  of  avidya  which  exists  prior  to  them. 

For  details  see  Introduction,  pp.  75-6. 

[  320] 

fa  fa  it 

Since  avidya  veils  the  self,  it  cannot  be  a  non-existent 
entity.  Even  those  who  are  adepts  in  determining  the 
nature  of  non-existence  do  not  assert  that  a  non-existent 
entity  veils  (an  object).  Lord  Krsna  also  has  stated  that 
avidya-ajnana  is  a  veil1;  and  so  we  consider  it  to  be  a 
positive  entity. 

1.  vide'.  Bh .  G.,  V,  15. 

This  verse  refutes  the  objection  raised  in  Ss',  I,  121. 

[321] 

tel?!!  te'oT  tern  gwnft  n 

Oh!  King,  man  has  a  unique  enemy  and  that  is  avidya. 
There  is  no  second  enemy  equal  to  this.  Being  enveloped 


FIRST  ADHTAYA 


157 


by  this,  he  is  infatuated  and  does  very  dreadful  and  horrible 
acts. 

This  verse  is  from  the  Mahabharata. 

[  322  ] 

11 

1  he  insentience  pervading  the  universe  is  indeed  of  a 
positive  nature;  and  similarly  the  ignorance  present  in  man 
is  of  a  positive  nature.  The  insentience  and  ignorance  that 
are  well  experienced  are  only  avidya  which  is  said  to  be 
capable  of  concealing  the  true  nature  of  the  self. 

[  323  ] 

Tin:  I 

sit  q*  \\ 

Wise  men4iold  that  the  absolute  consciousness  depend¬ 
ing  on  avidya  inspired  by  the  reflection  of  the  setf  is  the 
(transfigurative)  material  cause  of  the  universe.  Avidya 
identified  with  the  absolute  consciousness  is  the  essential 
operating  condition  which  brings  about  the  material 
causality  of  the  self  in  respect  of  the  universe-  The 
characteristic  of  being  a  material  cause,  however,  pertains 
to  the  self  alone. 


158 


SAMK$EPAgARIRAKA 


[  324] 

3- 

h  vh  si^n^  l 
^33%  qqPd  3- 

*rc*rifl(  11 

Everything  apart  from  the  self  is  insentient;  and 
anything  insentient  is  not  accepted  in  Advaita  as  the  cause 
of  the  universe.  The  author  of  the  Brahma-sutra  clearly 
states  that  the  unintelligent  principle  cannot  be  the  cause 
of  the  universe.1 

1.  BS,  I,  i,  5;  II,  ii,  1;  and  II,  ii,  12. 

[  325  ] 

Sfa  f k  qfeq^ftrciqsfit  ^Ss  11 

Adepts  in  Vedanta,  while  refuting  the  Samkhya  theory, 
affirm  that  the  unintelligible  principle  is  not,  by  itself,  the 
cause  of  the  universe;1  it  merely  occasions  causality  of  the 
self. 


1.  vide  BS,  II,  ii,  1. 


[  326  ] 

Hqi^i^fqrqfq  =q  aft:  i 

The  word  Atman  signifies  the  blend  (of  the  self  and  the 
objective  element).  The  Upanisadic  passage  states  that 
everything  originates  from  Atman.  Others,  therefore, 


FIRST  ADHTATA 


159 


maintain  that  the  self  in  the  form  of  the  ‘blend'  is  the 
material  cause  of  the  universe. 

Some  others  hold  that  the  self  associated  with  the  objective 
element,  that  is,  avidya  is  the  material  cause  of  the  universe. 
Sarvajiiatman,  however,  holds  that  the  self  alone  is  the  material 
cause  of  the  universe. 


[  327  ] 


Just  as  the  reflection  of  the  self  in  the  intellect  is  the 
agent  of  the  virtuous  and  the  vicious  deeds,1  so  also  the 
reflection  of  the  self  in  avidya  (namely,  l  ivaracaitanya)  is  the 
instrumental  cause  of  the  universe. 

Those  who  maintain  that  the  blend  of  the  self  and  avidya  is 
the  material  cause  of  the  universe,  however,  hold  that  the  spiritual 
element  in  the  ‘blend’  alone  is  the  instiumental  cause  of  the  universe. 

1.  vide  BS,  II,  iii,  33. 


[  328  ] 

Just  as  the  blent!  of  the  intellect  and  consciousness  is 
the  material  cause  of  the  religious  merft  and  demerit,  so 
also  the  blend  of  the  self  and  avidya  is  the  material  cause  of 
the  universe  consisting  of  ether,  air,  etc. 

Religious  merit  and  demerit  are  regarded  as  the  modes  of 
antah  karana  inspired  by  the  reflection  of  the  self.  Hence  it  is  said 
that  the  blend  of  antah-karana  and  the  self  is  the  material  cause 


160  SAMKSEPAg  ARIRAKA 

of  religious  merit  and  demerit.  According  to  Advaita,  religious 
merit  and  demerit  pertain  to  the  intellect  and  not  to  the  self. 

[  329  1 

TO«TTwfjr  n 

Since  the  spiritual  element  is  present  in  the  blend  (of 
the  self  and  the  objective  element),  it  is  secondarily  signified 
by  the  word  Atman.  The  (true)  import  of  the  word  Atman 
is  not  the  blend.  The  blend  serves  as  the  medium  through 
which  the  word  Atman  secondarily  signifies  the  self. 

nigadyate  —  laksanaya  jiiapyate,  SS. 

[330] 


fa  mw  3  fow  ii 

The  word  Atman  (secondarily)  signifies  the  self  through 
the  medium,  namely,  the  blend  (of  the  self  and  the  objective 
element)  in  which  it  (namely,  the  self)  is  present.  So 
ordinary  men  have  the  misconception  that  the  import  of 
the  word  Atman  is  the  ‘blend’ 

[331] 

*rf  ffas  to  i 

What  is  the  use  of  elaborating  this  point?  I  shall 
state  the  essence  of  the  tenets  of  Advaita;  listen  to  it. 
The  pure  consciousness  transcends  mind  and  speech. 
And  it  comes  within  the  range  of  mind  and  speech.1 


FIRST  ADHYAYA 


161' 


1.  Though  the  self  transcends  mini  and  speech,  yet  it  comes 
within  the  range  of  mind  and  speech,  when  it  is  -  reflected  in  the 
intellect  which  is  superimposed  on  it  by  its  avidya. 

vide:  svabhavatah  sakalavyavahdratUo'  pi  atma  svavidyadyasta- 
hamkaradyupadhau  sakalavyav.aharabhagbhavati,  Ved-.  p.  128j 


[  332] 

fasrrom:  q$T3  ^qqintsfq  {%:*[- 
5it  q^q^qifsj^  cpt  ^  i 
%;^qr  ^jq^sqrfq  qs*T- 

^rqi^r  vm  *im  mmm  q>%sf^  n 

Though  it  is  known  that  the  performance  of  the  ritual 
named  citra  leads  to  the  attainment  of  cattle  wealth,  yet  the 
apurva  resulting  from  the  performance  of  the  citra  ritual  is 
presumptively  known  as  the  means  (of  attaining  cattleT* 
wealth).  Similarly  it  is  known  (from  the,-  Upanisadic 
passages)  that  the  conscious  self  is  the  cause  of  this  universe. 
Later,  as  regards  the  origination  of  the  universe,  avidya ,  etc., 
are  presumptively  known  as  the  media. 

mayadinam  -  By  a  di  is  to  be  understood  kama  and  karma  of  the 
jivas.  See  SS,  Ilf,  16. 


[  333] 

^qq^pq^  n 

It  is  said  that  causality  is  the  qualification  per  accidens 
of  the  self  and  not  its  qualifying  attribute.1  This  view  would 
hold  good  only  when  the  self  is  the  cause  of  the  universe. 

b  vide  BS,  I,  i,  2  and  SS,  I,  549.. 

See  the  following  verse. 

21 


162 


SAM  K$EPAfi  ARI RAKA 


[  334] 

3T*T^  I 

^pm  ^s*?infaai  ^  ai^q^q^  w  \\ 

How  can  causality  be  considered  as  the  qualification 
per  accidens  of  the  self,  if  something  else  is  the  cause  of  the 
universe?  For,  the  characteristic  feature  in  one  object 
cannot  indicate  another. 

If  the  blend  of  the  self  and  the  objective  element  is  the  cause  of 
the  universe,  then  causality  would  be  the  qualification  per  accidens  of 
the  blend  and  not  of  the  self  alone.  In  that  case,  the  true  import  of 
the  Brahma-sutra—  janmadyasya yatah  (I,  i,  2)  would  be  contradicted. 

[  335  ] 

3R*fS[«ra:  sffaiKalfwaTgqqi^  I 

As  the  self  which  is  of  the  form  of  experience  appears  to 
be  concealed  by  aviiyd  it  is  unknown  and  hence  it  is  capa¬ 
ble  of  becoming  the  object  of  (the  knowledge  arising  from) 
the  Upanisads. 

The  objection  raised  in  S&,  I,  1 13  is  answered  here. 

[  336] 

gfeufa  qsjRimfo#  n 

It  is  indisputably  known  to  everybody,  young  and  old, 
(that  the  silver  appearing  in  the  nacre  in  the  waking  state) 
is  superimposed  by  avidya  and  as  such  indeterminable  (as 


FIRST  ADHYAYA 


165 


either  real  or  unreal).  Similar  is  the  case  as  regards  the 
objects  in  the  dream  state.  The  venerable  author  of  the 
Brahma-sutra  also  maintains  the  same  view  while  refuting 
the  prima  facie  view  that  there  is  creation  in  the  dream  state.1 

1.  vide  BS,  III,  ii,  1. 

Thii  verse  refutes  the  objection  raised  in  SS ,  I,  120. 

[  337  ] 

w<m$  qfasfl  n 

It  is  well-known  that  though  the  perception  of  aperture, 
in  the  centre  of  the  sun’s  disc  is  false,  yet  it  indicates  that 
he  who  perceives  that  will  shortly  face  his  death  which  is 
real  and  which  is  pf  the  nature  of  separation  between  the 
gross  and  the  subtle  bodies. 

This  verse  presupposes  the  Aitareya-  Aranyaka  text- 
na  ciramiva  jivisyatiti  vidya  t...chidra  iva  adityo  drSyate  (III,ii,  Iv,  7). 

See  also  S$,  III,  1 16. 


[  338  ] 

*nr- 

^  mss if 

In  order  to  explain  that  the  teacher,  etc.,  though 
illusory  can  give  rise  to  the  real  knowledge  of  the  absolute 
self,  the  author  of  the  Brahma-sutra 1  declares  with  close 
application  of  mind  that  the  dream  is  an  illusion,  and  yet  it 
is  indicative  of  future  good  or  ill  that  is  real. 


164 


SA1 fir  K$EPAg  ARI RAKA 


1.  vide:  sutakaSca  hi  iruitra  caksate  ea  tadvidah ,  BS,  III,  ii,  4. 
cf:  asatye  vartmani  sthitva  tatah  satyam  samihate,  Vakyapadiya,  II,  240. 

cf  also:  asatye  vartmani  sthitva  nirtipayam  update,  Naiskarmya-siddhi 

III,  104. 


[339] 

^  to  ^ur- 

WTOcRfgiwft  fl  I 

*  II 

The  object  of  erroneous  perception  is  neither  real  nor 
unlral,  for  the  sky  (which  is  real)  and  the  flower  sprung 
from  the  sky  (which  is  unreal)  are  not  the  objects  of  errone¬ 
ous  cognition.  Nor  indeed  is  the  object  of  erroneous  cogni¬ 
tion  one  which  is  real  and  at  the  same  time  unreal;  for, 
there  is  no  object  which  is  both  real  and  unreal  (at  once). 

This  verse  answers  the  objection  raised  in  Stf,  I,  128. 

[340] 

fRIrJRt  5T?*T  «F.7TR?5T  | 

fat  dd:  fafa- 

3[1^H  3^5?^  II 

There  does  not  arise  any  erroneous  cognition  which 
is  of  the  form  of  knowledge  without  referring  to  some  object. 
So  it  is  established  in  all  systemsof  philosophy  that  an  object 
which  is  neither  ‘real’  nor  ‘unreal*  but  different  from  both 
is  the  content  of  erroneous  cognition. 


FIRST  ADHYAYA 


165^ 


I  341  ] 

q^qi^sfopj; 

STSTK^q^ft  II 

The  self  is  of  the  form  of  pure  consciousness  which  is 
devoid  of  any  defect.  It  is  naturally  immediate  as  heat  is 
(natural)  to  fire.  So  from  the  statements  of  the  Upani§ads 
which  are  faultless,  there  arises  the  immediate  knowledge 
of  the  self. 

The  objection  raised  in  Stf,  I,  122  is  answered  here. 

[342] 

ftqfqoq^s- 

35r 

OTrq  egqgiiqft  ftftfaxnj  11 

The  mental  state  (arising  from  the  Upanisads),  by  its 
mere  rise,  receives  the  reflection  of  the  self  and  on  this 
strength,  annihilates  the  indeterminable  avidya  present  in 
the  unconditioned  self  in  which  there  is  nothing  to  be 
brought  about  by  the  proof  (namely,  the  Upanisadic 
passages)-  The  three  kinds  of  misery,1  in  the  absence  of 
their  cause  (namely,  avidya )  cease  to  exist. 

1.  Three  kinds  of  mis-ry  characterize  the  lives  of  men.  The  first 
kind  relates  to  all  our  ailments,  physical  and  mental.  The  second 
relates  to  sorrow  arising  from  natural  causes  like  beasts  and  fellow- 
men.  The  third  relates  to  suffering  arising  from  supernatural  causes 
such  as  d canons,  ghosts,  etc.  All  these  three  are  caused  bjr  avidya  and 
they  are  together  called  tdpatraya. 


166 


SAMK?EPA&ARIRAKA 


NIYOGA  IS  NOT  THE  IMPORT  OF  THE 
UPANI$ADS 

[  343  ] 

SPlffNft  5T%- 

g  qz  w  srw  ll 

If  it  is  contended:  by  observing  activity  on  the  part  of 
a  person  (who  acts)  on  hearing  the  sentence  that  either 
prompts  to  activity  or  desists  from  it,  and  by  inferring  the 
knowledge  (present  in  him),  the  beginner  learns  that  a 
word  conveys  its  sense  as  related  to  niyoga.  Now,  we  shall 
answer  this  contention. 

The  objection  raised  in  Sg,  1,130-143,  is  restated  here  and  is 
answered  in  the  following  verses. 

[344] 

From  the  usage  of  the  elderly  persons  it  is  known  that 
a  word  is  capable  of  signifying  its  sense  as  related  to  a 
different  but  congruous  sense  and  not  as  related  to  niyoga. 
For,  otherwise,  the  result  would  be  that  the  words  which 
convey  niyoga  should  convey  their  meanings  as  associated 
with  another  niyoga. 

For  details  see  Introduction,  p.  53. 


FIRST  ADHYAYA 


187 


[345] 

^iqffomqfqqqr  qft 
q&Tqiqqifag  T^fK3  $m?q3(  I 
^  q  gq  q^q- 

sq^q  qq<foqqqfand:  m^W 

If  a  word  should  signify  its  sense  only  as  related  to 
niyoga,  then  as  regards  the  endings  of  potential  mood,  etc., 
which  convey  the  niyoga,  there  arises  the  necessity  for 
accepting  another  niyoga ;  and  for  this  (latter)  niyoga  another 
one  should  be  admitted.  And  so  on,  ad  infinitum. 

[  346  ] 

qPq  fosiTWH  $iq 
qgtoqfd  i 

qt  qfom:  q3(  *qqq 

qqqtfad  qFqfqfd  mi#  II 

If  the  endings  of  potential  mood,  etc.,  signify  their 
meanings  as  related  to  an  existent  entity,  then  your  rule 
stands  rejected.  You  have  stated  in  your  system  that  all 
the  words  should  convey  their  meanings  only  as  related  to 
niyoga *. 

1.  sarvameva  hi  padam  karyanvitameva  svdrtham  vadati,  na  tu 
siddhdnvitam,  SS. 

[  347  ] 

aii#q^  m m  ^rqqqfottsq 


168  SAMK$EPAS>  ARI RAKA 

If  the  principle  that  a  word  signifies  its  sense  as  related 
to  a  different  but  congruous  sense  holds  good,  then  why 
is  it  held  that  a  word  signifies  its  sense  as  related  to  niyoga,, 
which  involves  a  futile  attribute. 

[348] 

d5f  1 

If  any  contradiction  is  noticed  when  it  is  accepted  that 
the  signification  of  a  word  is  the  sense  not  qualified  by  any 
attributes,  then  let  the  sense  associated  with  some  attributes 
be  the  criterion  for  the  significative  power  of  the  word. 
But  when  it  is  accepted  that  the  signification  of  the  word  is 
the  related  sense,  there  does  not  arise  any  contradiction 
(and  hence  there  is  no  need  for  any  attribute  as  niyoga,  etc.) 

[  349  ] 

5K5T%- 

II 

If  it  is  said  that  the  sense  of  a  word  is  the  relatum  of 
the  relation  existing  between  the  existent  object  and  niyoga, 
even  then  there  arises  the  same  defect  pointed  out  before. 
As  the  view  that  the  word  conveys  the  sense  as  related  holds 
good,  the  qualifying  attribute  ‘one  of  the  relata  of  the 
relation  existing  between  the  existent  object  and  niyoga *  is 
futile. 


i  P2,  B2. 


FIRST  ADHYAYA 


169 


The  view  set  forth  in  Stf ,  I,  130  is  restated  and  refuted  here. 

[350] 

^  ft  1 1 

In  your  system  the  import  of  the  word  would  be  the 
intention  and  the  knowledge  of  the  speaker  also.  For 
there  arises  the  knowledge  of  both  on  hearing  a  sentence. 
The  primary  sense  of  a  word  is  that  which  falls  within  the 
scope  of  auditory  perception.  When  such  is  the  case,  it 
cannot  be  dismissed  that  the  intention  and  the  knowledge 
of  the  speaker  are  also  the  primary  senses  of  a  word. 

The  Prabhakaras  hold:  the  secular  sentences  first  give  rise  to  the 
inferential  knowledge  of  the  intention  and  the  knowledge  of  the 
speaker.  The  sense  of  the  sentence  also  which  is  adjectival  in  the 
intention  and  the  knowledge  of  the  speaker  is  inferentially  known. 
Later  the  sentence  restates  the  sense. 

vide:  Manameyodaya  (T.P.H.  Edition),  pp.  103-4. 

For  details  see  Introduction,  pp. ‘54-55. 

[351] 

35T  Oral  I 

37  II 

?  P2  ^  <J*rofa*g;  Bi 

22 


170 


SAM  K§EPAg  ARI RAKA 


In  view  of  the  absence  of  a  speaker  for  the  Vedic 
sentences,  the  knowledge  and  the  intention  of  a  speaker  are 
not  present.  Hence  the  word  of  the  form  of  Veda  gives 
up  its  significative  power  in  conveying  its  senses  (namely, 
the  knowledge  and  the  intention  of  the  speaker)  as  the  two 
are  absent.  You  admit  that  a  word  in  the  Veda  does  not 
convey  a  sense  different  from  the  one  conveyed  in  ordinary 
experience.  So  as  the  Vedic  sentence  does  not  give  rise  to 
the  knowledge  (of  the  intention  and  the  knowledge  of  the 
speaker)  they  are  not  valid. 

For  details  see  Introduction,  pp.  54-55. 

[  352  ] 

f|  T%q  qtmfd  qiq^H)  II 

There  cannot  be  the  mutual  relation  of  the  two  words 
soma  and  yaga  (in  the  injunctive  text  sornena  yajeta),  because 
all  the  words  in  the  sentence,  (according  to  the  Prabhakara) 
convey  their  senses  as  related  to  niyoga. 

If  it  is  held  that  a  word  should  convey  its  sense  only  as  related  to 
niyoga,  then  the  sentence  sometia  yajctci  which  enjoins  a  qualified 
injunction  would  become  unintelligible. 

For  details  see  Introduction,  pp.  55-56. 

[  353  ] 

m\  ^  q:  n 

If  the  import  of  the  word  is  the  relatum  of  the  relation 
existing  between  the  sense  of  a  word  conveying  existent 


FIRST  ADHTAYA 


171 


entity  and  a  word  signifying  niyoga,  then  there  would  arise 
the  knowledge  of  the  relatum  (of  the  relation)  existing 
between  the  existent  entity  and  niyoga,  and  not  the  know¬ 
ledge  of  the  mutual  relation  (of  the  words  soma  and  yaga). 
So  the  qualified  injunction  cannot  be  established  (in  the 
system  of  Prabhakara). 


[354] 

sre- 

srf%:  ^kz^  i 

sql  flfogfiforeg  to 

If  the  view  that  a  word  signifies  its  sense  as  related  to 
a  different  but  congruous  sense  is  maintained,  then  the 
qualified  injunction  can  be  established.  Moreover,  the 
bhasya  text  tada  itant 1  also  becomes  reasonable. 

1.  The  full  text  is: 

yadd  ekasmat  apurvam  tada  itarat  tadartham 

(Sahara- bhasya  on  Jaimini-Sulra,  II,  i,  1). 

This  text  means:  In  a  sentence,  the  potential  ending  signifies  niyoga 
and  all  the  other  words  are  subordinate  to  the  ‘sense  of  the  root* 
(dhd  tvartha)  which  is  the  content  of  niyoga. 

tkaryaiva  niyogasamarpakatvam,  padantaram  tadartham  niyogavi$aya~ 
dhatvarthartham,  TB. 

This  would  hold  good  only  when  it  is  accepted  that  the  words 
convey  their  senses  as  related  to  a  different  but  congruous  sense.  If  it 
is  held  that  the  words  convey  their  senses  as  related  to  niyoga,  then  all 
the  word*  would  become  subordinate  only  to  niyoga  and  not  to 
dhStvartha,  the  content  of  niyoga.  In  that  case,  the  bhasya  text  referred 
to  would  be  contradicted. 


172 


SAtiK$EPAgARIRAKA 


[  355  ] 

srafofci  w  ii 

If  it  is  said  that  the  potential  ending  prompts  one  to 
activity  and  does  not  convey  anything,  it  is  not  so.  For  it 
gives  rise  to  the  knowledge  that  prompts  one  to  activity. 
The  potential  ending  gives  rise  to  the  knowledge  that  a 
particular  act  is  the  means  to  realise  the  desired  object ; 
and  it  does  not  (directly)  prompt  a  person  to  activity. 

It  is  said  in  Stf,  I,  351  that  the  Vedic  sentences  are  not  valid,  as 
they  do  not  give  rise  to  the  knowledge  of  the  intention  and  the  know¬ 
ledge  of  a  speaker.  Now,  if  it  is  said  that  they  are  valid  as  they  prompt 
one  to  activity,  then  this  contention  is  refuted  in  this  veise. 

See  Ved,  pp.  136-7. 

[  356] 

By  observing  the  usage  of  elders  and  (inferring)  the 
knowledge  of  the  hearer,  some  hold  that  the  import  of  a 
word  should  be  accepted  to  be  the  sense  related  to  niyoga. 
And  this  is  not  compatible  for  the  reason  mentioned  before,1 
namely,  that  the  qualified  injunction  accepted  by  them 
(the  Prabhakaras)  would  be  contradicted. 

1.  SS',  I,  352-3. 


i  Mi,  Bi,  P2. 


FIRST  ADHYAYA 


173 


[  357  ] 

5T%JT^sfq  ^  | 

sifw  ^  qftpq  ^ 

TOfas:  d*T3*raff?ta  ll 

(Moreover)  the  comprehension  of  the  relation  of  the 
potential  ending  to  niyoga  is  not  reasonable,  as  niyoga  is 
accepted  to  be  knowledge  only  through  the  scripture.  A 
trustworthy  person  cannot  say  that  the  potential  ending 
signifies  niyoga  even  though  its  relation  to  niyoga  is  not 
comprehended. 

In  secular  statements,  the  act  ( dhatvartha )  is  the  niyoga .  But  in 
Vedic  sentences,  apurva  which  results  from  the  ‘sacrificial  act’  ( dhatvartha ) 
and  serves  as  the  antecedent  of  the  result  (say)  ‘heaven’  is  the  niyoga. 

vide:  kriyadabhinnam  yatkaryam  vedyam  manantarairna  tat 

ato  mdnantarapurvam  apurvamiti  giyate,  Prakaran apaltcika,  p.  187. 

For  details  see  Introduction,  p.  p.  51-2. 


[353] 

TOT  ^^Td^TOdhd 

SnTOTTO?:  *Fdl  II 


Though  the  supreme  status  of  Visnu  which  is 
always  self-luminous  and  which  is  eternal  pure  conscious¬ 
ness  is  beyond  the  reach  of  both  speech  and  mind,  yet  the 


174 


SAM  K$EPAgARIRAKA 


relation  of  the  words  (Atman,  etc.)  to  it  (namely,  the  self) 
can  be  comprehended  (as  the  latter  is  self-luminous). 
Hence  great  men  declare  that  the  self  is  known  through  the 
scriptures. 

It  might  be  said  that  the  relation  of  the  potential  ending  to  niyoga 
can  be  comprehended,  like  the  relation  of  the  word  Atman  to  the  self. 
And  this  contention  is  refuted  here. 

[  359  ] 

p:  ife  I 

Subsequent  to  the  statement  ‘  Oh  Ilrahmin  !  a  son, 
bringing  prosperity  to  your  race  is  born  to  you,’  the  learners 
notice  brightness  in  the  face  (of  the  hearer)  and  on  this 
ground  they  definitely  infer  the  cognition  (in  the  hearer) 
that  has  for  its  content  the  birth  of  a  son. 

[  360  ] 

WT  sCipfpd  qpfa%:  l 

n 

On  the  lines  stated  above,  it  is  possible  for  the  beginner 
to  comprehend  the  relation  of  a  word  to  its  meaning  from 
a  sentence  that  conveys  an  existent  object.  (Hence)  there 
is  no  valid  reason  to  maintain  the  rule  that  the  relation  of 
the  word  to  its  meaning  can  be  comprehended  only  from 
sentences  that  either  prompt  one  to  activity  or  desist  from 
it. 


FIRST  ADHYATA 


175 


[361] 

JTqq^q 

^Tq^q  s^q  fq^q^^fq 
g^rqqirfqqqfq  sr^asw  it 

The  observer  first  roughly  understands  that  the 
relation  of  the  meanings  of  the  words  is  the  import  of  the 
sentence  and  the  group  of  words  (constituting  the  sentence) 
is  expressive  of  the  relation  of  the  meanings  of  the  words. 
Later*  he  understands,  in  a  specific  manner,  the  relation 
of  each  word  to  its  meaning. 

padarthapindah-pada  rtkasamu halt,  S. 

[  362  ] 

$t§:  ^Tsqf  q=qi%  fqfqq^d 

qre:  flqfc  qilg^q  I 
s^qr  dl^q^dW  q^qqg^q 
^qiqlqTqi^qqer  sifog  qiqqqWr:  11 

On  hearing  the  sentence  ‘Fur^iika  is  cooking  the  food  in 
the  vessel  by  using  numerous  fuel  sticks’  the  beginner,  who 
already  knows  well  the  relation  of  other  words  to  their 
meanings  and  who  observes  the  heap  of  burning  fuel  sticks 
being  used  for  cooking,  immediately  understands  the 
relation  of  the  wort!  ‘fuel  stick’  to  its  meaning. 

,[363  ] 

3  =q  fornq  q:  qqq  ?mr  qqiTOTjjtf 
w  3  gdfN^i^qra  qi^qq^  1 
*  df^dt  iqjsqq&q^ 

33T3  qfqf 


176  SAttK$EPA$ARIRAKA 

We  do  not  find  anything  like  niyoga  through  any 
proof,  in  which  case  it  may  become  the  sense  of  potential 
and  imperative  endings-  It  does  not  differ  from  the  sense 
of  the  root,  etc.  Hence  let  the  sense  of  potential  endings, 
etc.,  be  that  a  particular  act  is  the  means  to  a  desired  end. 

[364] 

s*- 

a  fl  ^  n 

In  ordinary  experience  (it  is  found)  that  a  wise  person 
never  sets  about  performing  an  act  by  the  command  of  an 
elder  person,  unless  it  (namely,  command)  gives  rise  to  the 
knowledge  that  a  particular  act  is  the  means  to  realize  a 
desired  end.  So  when  there  arises  the  knowledge  from  the 
command  of  the  elder  person  that  a  rite  is  the  means  to 
prosperity,  desire  ensues  and  following  it  he  proceeds  to 
act. 


[  365  ] 

sir  fas  l 


1  Bi,  Ml.  aftrfg^ntfgiT:  P2. 


FIRST  ADHYAYA 


177 


The  beginner  who  knows  well  the  inferential  process 
and  who  already  possesses  within  himself  the  knowledge  of 
invariable  concomitance  suitable  for  inference,  observes 
activity  on  the  part  of  the  person  who  sets  about  performing 
some  act.  He  then  infers  that  the  desire  regarding  the  act 
which  is  present  in  the  person  and  which  has  arisen  from 
the  knowledge  that  the  act  is  the  means  to  prosperity, 
prompts  him  to  activity. 

[366] 

as:  I 

FRis^qpr  sfgqfatgaf  3  3**  » 

Then  the  beginner  infers  (roughly)  that  the  sentence 
gives  rise  to  the  knowledge  of  the  act  which  is  the  means  to 
a  desired  end  and  which  gives  rise  to  desire  that  prompts 
one  to  activity  Then  he  attempts  to  understand  the 
relation  of  each  word  to  its  meaning. 

[  367] 

Noticing  the  inclusion  of  a  word  from  another  sentence 
and  the  elimination  of  a  word  from  the  sentence  at  hand, 
the  beginner  who  is  intelligent  and  who  well  examines  the 
inclusion  and  the  elimination  of  the  words,  understands  the 
relation  of  each  word  to  its  meaning. 

[  368  ] 

fa  u  mvi  ii 


i  tt  T2. 

23 


I7a  SAMK$EPAgARIRAKA 

When  potential  ending  is  employed  (in  a  sentence) 
after  eliminating  the  ending  of  present  tense  from  it,  it  is 
known  that  (a  particular  act)  is  the  means  to  a  desired  end. 
So  the  beginner  understands  that  the  potential  ending 
signifies  (that  a  particular  act  is)  the  means  to  a  desired 
end. 


[369] 

*  %  i 

ft  ?r 

It  is  accepted  that  a  word  signifies  its  sense  neither  as 
related  to  another  congruous  sense,  nor  indeed  as  related  to 
niyoga.  But  it  conveys  its  sense  as  related  ;  for,  on  careful 
examination,  it  is  found  that  the  qualifying  attributes 
( yogyetan  and  karya)  do  not  serve  any  purpose. 

The  view  put  forth  in  this  verse  is  known  as  anvitabhidlia  na-va  da 
where  words  th^mselvis  convey  their  meanings  as  well  as  the  relation 
among  the  meanings.  See  Introduction  for  dctiils,  p.  45. 

[  370  ] 

wraiwrfcr  q^ifr  fcq:  i 

Some,  however,  maintain  thus.  The  words  convey 
their  meanings  and  then  cease  to  function.  Later  the 

s  — T6 


FIRST  ADHTAYA 


179 


meanings  of  the  words  give  rise  to  the  knowledge  of  their 
relation  as  attribute  and  substantive. 

The  view  put  forth  In  this  verse  is  advocated  by  Kumarila  and  is 
known  as  ahhihitanvaya-vada.  The  difference  between  abhihilanv'aya - 
vada  and  a nvitabhidhana-vada  is  this : 

abhihiianvayavade  hi  padani  padarthanabhidhaya  upiksiyante, 
padarthebhyo  vakya  rthapratipattih,  anvitd  bhidhdnavd  de  lu  padanameva 
vakyarthapratipadakatvam  iti  viitsah. 

Vivarana-prameya-Sangraha,  Varnaka,  ix.  p.  333.  (Andhra  Univer¬ 
sity  Series). 


[371] 

*  m  fofqqfq  wm- 

mzfo  3  q^Wfi  n 

And  this  is  incompatible.  Indeed  there  is  no  proof  to 
support  the  said  view.  For,  words  that  fall  within  the 
scope  of  auditory  perception  convey  their  meanings  only  as 
related  (to  another  sense). 


[  372] 

qhfqqi^q  qqq 

qt  q:  qqsqqpiT^:  II 

No  body  is  capable  of  understanding  the  relation  of 
cause  and  effect  between  a  word  and  the  unrelated  sense  it 
conveys,  unless  he  knows  that  the  word  is  antecedent  and 


180  SAM  K$EPAg  ARIRAKA 

the  unrelated  sense  it  conveys  is  subsequent.  The  relation 
of  antecedence  and  subsequence  is  the  basis  through  which 
the  relation  of  cause  and  effect  is  determined.  If  not,  there 
would  be  the  loss  of  any  definite  rule  (regarding  the 
relation  of  cause  and  effect)  and  hence  everything  would 
become  unrelated. 

As  the  significative  relation  of  a  word  to  an  unrelated  sense  is  not 
comprehended,  the  view  of  Kumarila  is  untenable. 


[373  ] 
ft  $R0[?3r- 

wfercfafafas:  jrErofo  aft  i 

^  *  =3  rtf 

II 

In  ordinary  experience  the  relation  of  cause  and  effect 
is  determined  on  the  basis  of  the  relation  of  antecedence 
and  subsequence.  If  not  there  will  be  no  invariable  rule 
and  hence  one  would  not  seek  specific  cause  (like  threads) 
to  produce  specific  objects  (like  cloth). 

[  374] 

If  yor  are  not  at  variance  with  the  view  that  the  group 
of  words  gives  rise  to  the  knowledge  of  the  relation  (of  their 
meanings)  then  the  assumption  of  the  intermediary  cause 
(namely,  the  knowledge  of  the  unrelated  sense)  is 
unfounded. 


Now  some  among  the  followers  of  Rumania's  school  (that  is,  the 
Bha{ta  school)  hold  that  the  words  themselves,  after  c<r.ve>irg  their 


FIRST  ADHTATA 


181 


meanings  unrelated  to  anything,  signify  their  relation.  And  this  view 
is  refuted  in  this  verse  on  the  ground  that  the  intermediary  cause, 
namely,  the  knowledge  of  the  unrelated  sense,  has  to  be  unnecessarily 
assumed. 


[  375  ] 

If  you  accept  that  the  group  of  words  gives  rise  to  the 
knowledge  of  the  relation  (of  the  meanings  of  the  words), 
then  what  is  the  use  of  this  illusive  assumption  of  the 
intermediary  cause  (namely,  the  knowledge  of  the  un¬ 
related  sense)  ?  Let  the  words  directly  give  rise  to  the 
knowledge  of  the  relation  of  their  meanings. 

[376] 

stomps: 

ll 

Wise  men  resort  to  indirect  relation  as  a  last  recourse 
when  there  is  incompatibility.  The  indirect  relation  is 
resorted  to  only  when  direct  relation  is  not  possible.  The 
red  colour,  due  to  instrumental  suffix  (present  in  the  word 
conveying  it),  is  known  to  be  the  direct  means  of  purchasing 
the  soma  creeper.  Later  owing  to  incompatibility  it  gives 
up  the  direct  relation  and  resorts  to  indirect  one. 

It  might  be  said:  let  the  words  constituting  a  sentence  give  rise  to 
the  knowledge  of  the  sense  of  the  sentence  through  the  knowledge  of 
their  meanings.  This  contention  is  refuted  by  pointing  out  that  In- 


t  e?rf?TfTn  M2 


182 


SAM  K$EPAg  ARI RAKA 


direct  relation  is  to  be  resorted  to  only  when  direct  relation  is  incom¬ 
patible.  For  example,  it  is  known  from  the  Vedic  sentence  -  arunSyS 
pingaksya  ekahayanya  somam  krinati-  that,  as  the  red  colour  is  conveyed 
by  the  word  having  Instrumental  suffix,  it  is  the  means  of  purchasing 
the  soma  creeper.  But  as  the  red  colour  is  an  immaterial  quality,  it 
cannot  serve  as  a  means  and  hence  it  is  indirectly  related  to  the  sense 
of  purchasing  through  its  being  a  determining  characteristic  of  the 
substance  ‘calf’. 

vide:  abara-bhdsya  on  Jairnini- sutra,  III,  i,  12  and  also  the  notes 

on  Sg,  I,  175. 

In  the  present  case,  as  the  words  themselves  can  directly  give  rise 
to  the  knowledge  of  the  sense  of  the  sentence,  there  is  no  necessity  for 
admitting  that  they  give  rise  to  the  knowledge  of  the  sense  of  the 
sentence  through  the  knowledge  of  their  meanings. 

[377] 

[  378  ] 

fa  11 

One  who  perceives  the  white  colour  in  front  of  him 
and  following  this  hears  the  neighing  sound  and  similarly 
the  hammering  sound  of  the  hoofs  gets  the  knowledge  in  the 
form  of  ‘A  white  horse  roams  about’- 

Similarly,  on  the  strength  of  compatibility,  etc.,  there 
arises  the  knowledge  of  the  relation  of  the  meanings  of  all 
the  words  from  the  meanings  conveyed  by  the  group  of 
words. 

s  —  T1T2T6 


FIRST  ADHTAYA 


183 


Now  the  followers  of  the  Bhatta  school  who  hold  that  the  meanings 
of  words  alone  give  rise  to  the  knowledge  of  the  sense  of  the  sentence 
corroborate  their  view  by  citing  an  illustration.  The  knowledge  that  a 
Whitehorse  roams  about  arises  from  the  objects  ( padarthas )  even 
though  there  is  not  the  cognition  of  words  that  would  give  rise  to  such 
a  knowledge.  Similarly  the  knowledge  of  the  sense  of  a  sentence  can 
arise  from  the  meanings  of  the  words  (  padarthas )k 

This  verse  is  a  slightly  modified  form  of  Kumarila’s  verse  in  the 
Sflokauarttka,  Vakya  ihikarana,  verse,  358. 

[  379  ] 

It  is  not  so.  The  knowledge  of  the  relation  (of  the 
padarthas)  which  has  arisen  in  the  form  of  ‘A  white  horse 
roams  about’  can  originate  from  the  well-established 
sources  of  knowledge.  If  a  well-known  cause  can  be 
maintained  in  respect  of  an  effect,  another  cause  need  not 
be  assumed.  Hence  the  knowledge  in  the  form  of  ‘A  white 
horse  roams  about’  has  not  arisen  from  the  group  of 
objects,  but  from  inference. 

The  argument  on  the  basis  of  the  illustration  .cited  in  Stf,  I,  377 
is  refuted  in  this  verse. 

[380] 

qrqpif  ymm  *  ^  q&  n 


184 


SAM  K$  EPAg  ARI RAKA 


The  group  of  objects  is  not  a  distinct  proof ;  and 
the  knowledge  also  does  not  arise  from  a  blend  of  several 
proofs  as  distinct  from  the  result  of  accepted  proofs.  For  to 
both  the  views  we  have  to  assume  a  different  cause.  But 
here  inference  as  a  separate  proof  serves  the  purpose. 
When  such  a  knowledge  could  arise  from  inference^  it 
need  not  be  accepted  that  the  group  of  objects  is  a  distinct 
proof  and  the  knowledge  arises  from  a  blend  of  several 
proofs. 

The  white  colour  is  the  object  of  visual  perception.  And  from  the 
neighing  sound  and  the  sound  of  the  hoofs  ft  is  inferred  that  a  white 
horse  roams  about . 

vide:  (/)  vimatah  Svetah  aivah,  hesadikartrtvat, 

(«)  dvetah  advah  dhavati,  avyavadhdnena  nanadrdesu 

drdyamannlvdt, 

Id dr  d  adevadattavat,  SS. 

klrptam  lingam  —  lingtti  pratyaksasydpi  upalaksanam,  SS. 

[381] 

T>q^ir 

^  ^3^  giT.  II 

Hence  the  words  convey  their  meanings  neither  as 
unrelated  to  another  sense,  nor  as  related  to  niyoga,  but  as 
related  to  a  compatible  sense.  When  such  is  the  case,  the 
Upanisadic  passages  are  always  capable  of  conveying  the 
oneness  of  the  self  which  is  unrelated  to  niyoga  and  which  is 
undifferentiated  and  existent. 

vastusvarupam — brahmatmaikyam,  TB. 


1  fcr  ?r  ^  npqrg:  Bi  Ba  Mi 


FIRST  ADHTATA 


185 


[382] 

3n*ft3*£*m  m  *  WFP  I 

?f#i3[fa  **4sfei  q:  q.qifqq;  II 

We  have  no  predilection  to  either  of  the  views, 
namely,  the  doctrine  of  relation  of  what  are  expressed  and 
the  doctrine  of  the  expression  of  what  are  related.  For 
these  are  concerned  only  with  the  sentence  which  is  of  the 
form  of  a  relation  of  many  senses  of  words. 

ghat  ana — anvayah,  SS. 

For  details  see  the  following  verse, 

[  383  ] 

3f*4  II 

As  the  import  of  the  words  of  the  Upanisadic  passages 
is  the  self  which  is  unitary,  the  doctrine  of  the  relation  of 
the  expressed  senses  and  the  doctrine  of  the  expression  of 
the  related  sense  are  not  reasonable. 

The  words  of  the  Upani$adic  passages  cannot  primarily  signify 
the  self  by  adopting  either  the  doctrine  of  the  relation  of  the  expressed 
sense  or  the  doctrine  of  the  exortssion  of  the  related  sense. 

[  384] 

SlfaltSTOT  *3[T  33[Rf  q^  | 

q^fa  swqmfaqR  qfo  n 

In  the  doctrine  of  the  relation  of  the  expressed  sense, 
the  two  words  ( tat  and  tvam  in  the  sentence  tat  tvam  asi) 
before  (the  rise  of  the  knowledge  of  the  sense  of  the 
sentence),  give  rise  (through  secondary  signification)  to  two 
24 


186 


SAMK$EPAg  ARFRAKA 


cognitions  regarding  the  self  —  the  cognitions  which  are 
similar  to  recollection.  But  in  the  doctrine  of  the  expression 
of  the  related,  the  two  words  give  rise  to  two  cognitions 
which  are  of  the  nature  of  recollection- 

The  words  of  the  Upani?adic  passages  secondarily  signify  the  self 
by  adopting  either  of  the  two  doctrines. 

For  details  see  Introduction,  pp.  45-6. 

[  385  ] 

^  q^qi^  i 

qrefo  q^*T$Rqf%  ^  II 

In  the  other  view  [abhihilanvaya-va da)  the  knowledge 
of  the  self  (that  is,  the  sense  of  the  sentence)  which 
annihilates  avidya  present  in  the  self  arises  from  the  two 
cognitions  which  are  similar  to  recollection  and  which  arise 
from  the  two  words  ( tat  and  tvam ).  In  our  view,  the  know¬ 
ledge  of  the  self  arises  from  the  two  words  subsequent  to 
the  two  cognitions  (of  the  meanings  of  the  words)  which 
are  of  the  nature  of  recollection  and  which  arise  from  the 
two  words. 

Sec  Introduction,  pp.  45-6. 

BHAVANA  -  THE  IMPORT  OF  THE  VEDIC  TEXTS 

[386] 

^  q^qi  II 

One  understands  from  the  usage  of  elders  that  the 
endings  of  potential  mood,  imperative  mood,  etc.,  signify 
‘command’,  etc.,  which  bring  about  absence  of  inaction 
(that  is,  which  prompt  one  to  activity).  In  the  Vedic  texts 
which  are  of  impersonal  origin  the  function  present  in  the 
endings  of  potential  mood,  imperative  mood,  etc.,  is  to  be 
assumed  as  prompting  one  to  activity. 

Bj. 


FIRST  ADHTATA 


187 


Now  the  view  of  the  Bhattas'that.as'th?  Vedic  Senten'ces  point  to 
bhavana,  they  are  not  valid  ia  respecPofthe  existeai  entity,  the  self,  is 
set  foftih  for  critical  examination. 

[  387  ] 

p^rrtoi^  ft  II 

As  there  is  the  relation  of  a  person  in  secular  state¬ 
ments,  the  command,  etc.,  of  the  person  present  in  them 
(namely,  the  statements)  prompt  one  to  activity.  But  as 
there  is  no  relation  of  a  person  (in  respect  of  Vedic  state¬ 
ments)  there  is  the  absence  of  command,  etc.,  and  (hence) 
in  Vedic  statements  the  function  of  the  endings  of  potential 
mood,  imperative  mood,  etc.,  is  to  prompt  one  to  activity. 

[388] 

mzi  i 

The  productive  factor  ( bhavaka )  is  the  endings  of 
potential  mood,  imperative  mood,  etc.  The  fruit  of  this 
{bhavana)  is  well-known  to  be  the  volitional  activity  of  a  per¬ 
son  regarding  the  object  to  be  achieved.  The  function  of  the 
endings  of  potential  mood,  imperative  mood,  etc ,  which 
has  for  its  object  the  volitional  activity  of  a  person  is  the 
verbal  productive  operation. 

[  389] 

urn  i 

*  ^  f qftrc:  $m\  n 


?•  T2,  T3,  Ti.  T6- 


188 


SAM  K$EPAai  ARI RAKA 


The  knowledge  of  the  endings  of  potential  mood,  etc., 
is  the  instrument  of  verbal  productive  operation;  and  the 
subsidiary  factor  is  the  commendation  which  gives  rise  to 
desire.  In  Jaimini’s  system  the  sense  of  the  endings  of 
potential  mood,  etc.,  is  neither  niyoga,  nor  the  means  to 
prosperity,  but  the  productive  operation. 

[  390  ] 

srsgtg:  u 

The  verbal  productive  operation  though  conveyed  by 
the  endings  (of  potential  mood,  etc.,)  is  subsidiary  and  the 
objective  productive  operation  ( arthabhavana )  which  is  of 
the  nature  of  human  activity  is  primary  to  it.  The 
objective  productive  operation  is  conveyed  by  all  the  ten 
verbal  endings,1  while  verbal  productive  operation  is 
conveyed  by  the  endings  enjoined  in  the  sense  of  command, 
that  is,  by  the  endings  of  potential  mood,  etc. 

1.  abhidhabhavanamahuh  anyameva  linadayah 

arthatmabhavana  tu  anya  sarvakhydtesu gariiyate, 

Kumarila’s  Tantra-vartika. 

For  details  See  Introduction,  p.  58. 

[391] 

g  ^ ft  fwsrg^ai  ii 

The  human  goal,  namely,  heaven,  is  the  object  of 
objective  productive  operation.  The  verbal  productive 

i.  T2  T2 


FIRST  ADHYAYA 


189 


operation  which  is  of  the  nature  of  the  function  of  the 
endings  of  potential  mood  is  not  so.  The  volitional  activity 
which  is  the  fruit  of  verbal  productive  operation  is  not  a 
faultless  human  goal. 

For  detail*  See  Introduction,  pp.  57-8. 

[39?] 

ft  I 

In  the  case  of  objective  productive  operation,  the 
desired  objects  like  cattle-wealth,  son,  rain,  heaven,  etc., 
are  the  fruits.  But  in  the  case  of  the  other  productive 
operation  (that  is,  the  verbal  productive  operation)  the 
undesirable  object,  na  nely,  activity  which  is  extremely 
laborious  and  hard  to  achieve  is  the  fruit. 

[393  ] 

As  it  is  well-known  that  both  root  and  suffix  give  rise 
to  the  knowledge  of  (mutually)  related  sense,  we  admit  the 
relation  of  expressed  senses  ( abhihitanvayavada )  only  in  the 
cases  other  than  root  and  suffix. 

The  Bhattas  admit  the  doctrine  of  the  expression  of  what  are 
related  (that  is,  anvitabhidhana-vada )  in  the  case  of  root  and  suffix. 
For  example,  the  root yaj  and  the  potential  ending  (in  the  word  yajeta) 
give  rise  to  the  knowledge  of  mutually  related  sense. 

vide  the  maxim : 

prakrtlpratyayau  pratyayartham  sahabrutah,  tayostu 
pratyayah  pradhanyena,  Mahdbhasya,  III,  iv,  67. 

But  the  two  words  yajeta  and  svargakama  in  the  sentence  jyotis to¬ 
me  na  svargakamo  yajeta  convey  their  unrelated  senses  and  later  the 


190  SAMK$EPA& ARIRAKa 

senses  give  rise  to  the  knowledge  of  their  relation,  and  here  they 
accept  the  abhihitSnvaya-vada. 

[394] 

jRqqiqg'qq^fa^  wrfti  q$dq*  fe  ^raqi  n 

Hence  the  two  kinds  of  bhavana  related  to  the  sense  of 
the  root  are  conveyed  by  the  endings  of  potential  mood, 
etc.  The  stems  convey  the  thing  subsidiary  to  the  one  con¬ 
veyed  by  the  suffixes.  And  here  the  roots  are  the  stems. 

[  395] 

wmnn  I 

d?q  ^  qqqifqq:  li 

Venerable  persons  have  said  that  the  existent  entity  is 
subsidiary  to  the  thing  to  be  achieved;1  and  hence  we 
affirm  that  the  entire  Vedic  texts  point  to  niyoga.  And  in 
our  system  niyoga  is  said  to  be  volitional  activity. 
( artha-b  Havana ). 

1.  See  Notes  on  Stf.  T,  143. 

For  details  See  Introduction,  p  58. 

BHAVANA  -  NOT  THE  IMPORT  OF  THE 
VEDIC  TEXTS 

[396] 

sTRqqrfd  titl'd  =q  fami 

Frarafa  wit^i 
d  =q  wtra  *  qm;  ^  ai 
fed^qra  5:^1^  II 


FIRST  ADHYAYA 


191 


In  the  Vedic  texts  the  potential  ending  signifies  ‘verbal 
productive  operation’  which  is  its  function  and  (hence)  its 
productive  factor  also.  But  in  secular  statements  the 
potential  ending  does  not  convey  the  ‘  verbal  productive 
operation’  and  it  is  not  its  productive  factor.  And  this 
distinction  is  not  reasonable. 

In  the  scripture  the  potential  ending  conveys  a  sense  different  from 
the  one  conveyed  by  it  in  secular  statements.  Hence  there  arises  conflict 
with  the  maxim  arrived  at  in  lokavedadhikarana  (Jaimini- sutra  1-3-10/ 
30-35) 

For  details  see  Introduction,  p.  58. 

[  397  ] 

q^qq^ 

strict  q  m  n 

When  it  would  hold  good  that  the  ending  of  potential 
mood  only  conveys  the  same  sense  in  both  Vedic  and  secular 
statements,  then  the  adoption  of  the  maxim  of  half-way- 
house  is  not  commendable.  As  it  is  reasonable  to  hold  that 
the  potential  ending  possesses  a  uniform  nature  (of  convey¬ 
ing  only  one  sense),  it  need  not  be  postulated  that  it  possesses 
different  nature  (in  secular  and  in  Vedic  statements)1. 

1.  See  the  following  verse. 

[39b] 

ql^qq  q  ^q: 

^  qqr  n 


192 


SAMK?EPA$ARIRAKA 


If  the  ending  of  the  potential  mood  conveys  that  a 
particular  act  is  the  means  to  a  desired  end,  then  it 
possesses  the  nature  of  conveying  only  a  uniform  sense  (in 
both  secular  and  Vedic  statements)  and  it  does  not  prompt 
one  to  activity-  If  the  ‘means  to  a  desired  end*  is  the 
sense  of  the  endings  of  potential  mood,  etc.,  then  this 
sense  is  similar  to  both  Vedic  and  secular  statements.  This 
sense  is  well-established  and  need  not  be  postulated  like 
(verbal)  productive  operation,  the  function  of  the  endings 
of  potential  mood,  etc.,  in  the  Vedic  sentences. 

For  details  See  Introduction,  p.  58. 

[399] 

^  *Wd  ftSWlRTH  I! 

On  careful  examination  it  is  found  in  ordinary 
experience  that  objective  productive  operation  ( arthabha - 
vana )  does  not  differ  from  the  root 1  Hence  there  is  no  such 
thing  as  arthabha  vana  different  from  the  sense  of  the  root> 
in  which  case  the  verbal  forms  can  convey  it. 

It  has  been  said  that  the  fruit  of  the  verbal  productive  operation 
(dabdabhavana)  is  the  objective  productive  operation  ( avtha-bhavana ) 
and  it  is  conveyed  by  all  the  ten  verbal  endings,  isee  Stf,  I,  388;  390'. 
And  this  view  is  refuted  here 

1 .  As  the  sense  oi  the  root  itself  i)  of  the  form  of  the  activity  in 
the  case  of  kurvita,  yateta,  etc,  there  is  no  such  thing  as  arthabhavana 
(volitional  activity)  different  from  the  sense  of  the  root. 
vide:  'kurvita',  ‘yateta’  ityadau  dhatvarthavyatiriktarthabhavanabhavat, 

dhatvarthasyaiva  prayatnarupatvai,  TB. 

[  400  ] 

*  as#  ^  sroismTfa  sift  11 


FIRST  ADHYAYA 


193 


On  the  grounds  adduced  before,  neither  niyoga  nor 
productive  operation  is  present  even  in  the  ritualistic 
portion  of  the  Veda.  Hence  these  two  are  not  present  in 
the  Upanisads  and  as  such  the  import  of  the  Upanisadic 
texts  is  not  niyoga. 

[401  ] 

hi  3  ^  *Tt^t  ii 

Moreover,  the  scope  of  the  prohibitory  (Vedic)  injunc¬ 
tion  is  cessation  from  longing  for  the  fruit  of  the  prohibited 
deed  ;  and  cessation  is  neither  niyoga  nor  its  content.1 

1.  nisedhavakyaya  hi  tiisldhyama  nahanana  digataireyassadhanaivabhava 
evarthah,  na  ca  <•<?  niyogo  bhavati.  na  va  tasya  gocarah,  vidheh  bhavartha- 
gocaratvaniyamat,  SS. 

Since  only  positive  factors  could  be  the  content  of  niyoga ,  cessation 
being  of  the  form  of  absence  cannot  be  the  content. 

phalagardhih  -  isyamd  naphalasa dhanatvam,  SS. 

[  402] 

mi  ftiRrpJ:  mwi  Rfsfe:  i 

It  is  well-known  that  the  negative  particle  nah 
naturally  denotes  the  absence  of  the  sense  of  a  word  with 
which  it  is  related.  But  in  the  case  of  aniksapa,  the  nah 
conveys  mental  activity  as  the  word  is  related  to  the  word 
vrata}  (Hence  nah  conveys  the  other  sense,  namely,  acti¬ 
vity)  owing  to  some  other  cause. 

1.  Th«  primary  sense  of  nah  is  cessation.  But  in  exceptional 
cases  it  signifies  exclusion  ( paryudasa ).  For  instance,  in  the  prajapati- 
vrata  to  be  taken  by  a  brahmacarin  after  the  completion  of  the  studies 
we  read : 

25 


194 


SAMK?EPA$ARIRAKa 


nekseta  udyantam  Sii'yam  nastamyantam  kadacana 
noparaktam  na  varistham  na  madhyam  nabhasogatam 

These  commands  begin  with  the  sentence  tasya  vratam,  The 
vows  are  of  the  nature  of  determination  to  carry  out  something.  As 
the  word  aniksaria  is  connected  with  the  word  vrata,  the  negative 
particle  nan  present  in  it  denotes  something  to  be  carried  out.  So  the 
word  aniksana  secondarily  signifies  activity  in  the  form  of  mental 
resolve  of  not  seeing  the  rising  sun. 

nahadca  esah  svabhavah  yat  svasarhbandhino'bhavam 

bodhayati . tasma  t  prasaktakriyanivrttyaudasinyameva 

‘brahrmno  na  hantavyah’  ityadisu  pratisedhartham 
manyamahe,  anyatraprajabativratd dibhyah,  BSB,  I,  i,  4. 

See  also  Sg,  I,  407. 


[403  ] 

sift  3  i  3  f#  i 

3  =ten%3T  ft  ^  w 

(If  you,  the  Prabhakaras,  say  that  the  prohibitory  text 
also  enjoins  activity)  then  according  to  your  view  the 
prohibitory  texts  do  not  differ  from  the  affirmative  ones.1 
Since  all  sentences  (affirmative  and  prohibitory)  prompt 
one  to  activity,  there  would  be  no  sentence  in  Veda  prohi¬ 
biting  one  from  activity. 

1.  The  affirmative  and  the  prohibitory  texts  mutually  differ. 
vide  the  passage: 

phalabuddhi  pramtya.  dhika  ribodhaka  bhedatah 
pancadhatyantabhinnatva t  bhedo  vidhinisedhayoli,  cited  in  S. 

[404] 


FIRST  ADHTAYA 


195 


Like  the  prohibitory  sentence,1  let  the  Upanisadic 
sentence  such  as  ‘  tat  tvam  asi  ’ ,  etc.,  being  devoid  of  any 
injunction  and  being  fruitful  by  dispelling  avidya  be  valid  in 
respect  of  the  self. 

1.  The  prohibitory  sentences  in  the  Veda  do  not  enjoin  any 
activity.  See  S$ ,  I,  401. 


[  405  ] 

qfcrafrqqt  I 

Wise  men  hold  that  the  negative  particle  nan,  when 
related  to  a  noun  or  a  verbal  root  conveys  the  sense  of 
exclusion,  and  not  the  negation  of  an  applicable  sense. 
And  it  is  observed  so  in  the  case  of  ‘non-brahmin’,  etc. 

The  view  of  the  Bhattas  is  set  forth  in  this  and  the  following  three 
verses 


[406] 

fret  u 

The  negative  particle  nan,  in  view  of  its  relation  to 
noun  in  the  case  of  the  word  ‘non-brahmin’  and  ‘non¬ 
sacrifice’  and  to  the  verbal  root  in  the  case  of  the  sentence, 
nekseta  udyantamadityam,  etc.,  always  conveys  a  different  and 
contrary  sense. 

The  negative  particle  naft  related  to  the  noun  in  the  case  of  the 
word  ‘non-brahmin’  is  taken  as  a  paryudasa  and  it  signifies  one 
different  from  a  brahmin  but  similar  to  him.  And  when  related  to 
the  noun  ‘sacrifice’  and  to  the  verbal  root  ik$ana,  nafl  is  taken  as  a 
pratiseda  and  it  conveys  some  action  different  lrom  sacrifice  and 
some  action  other  than  seeing  the  sun. 


196 


SAM  K$EPAg  ARIRAKA 


namaihatvarthayogtna  naiva  nafl  pratisedhakah 

vadato’brahmanadharmau  anyama travirodhinau,  Sfl'oka-vartika, 

( Apoha-va da 33. 

[407  ] 

ft  i 

In  the  sentence  neks  eta  udyantamad.it yam ,  etc.,  the 
negative  particle  nan  denotes  some  other  activity  present  in 
the  person  who  is  related  to  the  sense  of  the  root,  namely, 
seeing  the  rising  sun.  As  mental  resolve  is  related  to  the 
action  prohibited,  namely,  seeing  the  rising  sun,  the  particle 
nan  signifies  mental  resolve  of  not  seeing  the  rising  sun. 

vide  the  notes  on  Sg,  I,  402. 

[  408  ] 

As  the  negative  particle  is  related  to  potential  ending 
in  the  sentence  £Do  not  kill  a  brahmin’.  cDo  not  eat 
garlic’,  it  is  accepted  with  careful  thought  that  it  conveys 
the  sense  of  mere  negation  of  a  possible  occurrence  (that 
is,  killing  a  brahmin  or  eating  garlic). 

Sec  Notes  on  Sg,  I,  402. 

[409  ] 

sroris  i 


i.  P2. 


FIRST  ADHYAYA 


197 


(The  followers  of  the  Prabhakaras  school  hold  :) 

The  negative  particle  nan  present  in  the  sentences1 
denotes  activity  which  comes  within  the  purview  of  injunc¬ 
tion  and  which  is  of  the  nature  of  mental  resolve  in  the 
form  of‘I  will  not  eat  (garlic),  nor  kill  a  brahmin,  nor  drink 
(wine)’,  as  in  the  sentences  -  nekseta  udyantama  dityam,  etc. 

1.  na  kalailjam  bhaksayet,  brahmano  na  hantavyah,  na  suram  pibet, 

[410] 

ft  ^  3^ 

If  it  is  accepted  that  the  import  of  the  sentences 
containing  the  negative  particle  nan  is  only  ‘negation',  then 
the  content  of  the  prohibitory  text  would  be  contradicted 
by  perception1  and  this  is  not  reasonable. 

1.  See  Sg,  I,  417. 


[411] 

i 

dds?  M  d  ft  HT 

dT  d  falfd:  II 

The  author  of  the  bhasya  {on  Jaimini-su tra)  has  stated 
that  Vedic  text  prompts  one  to  activity;1  but  he  has  not 
stated  that  it  desists  from  activity.  From  this  also  we 
understand  that  there  is  no  Vedic  text  which  does  not 
prompt  one  to  activity.  And  this  is  our  final  view. 

1.  vidt:  codaneti  kriyayah  pravartakam  vacanam 

S abara-bha$ya  on  Jaimini-su  tra,  I,  1,  2, 


198 


SAMK$EPA$ARIRAKA 


[412] 

*  ^mrqt*rt  q  f^rftqtqtsfa  *  $k<jt  m  | 

m  sratsftiH  qwts^q  u 

The  relation  of  the  negative  particle  nan  with  either  a 
noun  or  a  verbal  root  or  potential  ending  is  not  the  criterion 
for  determining  its  sense.1  The  negative  particle  nan  con¬ 
veys  the  sense  of  negation  of  the  meaning  of  a  word  with 
which  it  is  related.  It  conveys  a  different  sense  owing  to 
some  other  cause.® 

1.  The  view  of  the  Bhattas  set  forth  in  Ss',  1,405-8  is  refuted 
here. 

2  See  Ssf,  I,  401. 

[413] 

m  ft  ^  ^  mgqft  \ 

ftq  *  m 

It  is  thus  the  prohibitive  particle  nan  is  related  to  noun 
in  the  sentence  ‘There  is  no  cow-elephant  in  front  of  you’; 
to  verbal  root  in  the  sentence  ‘Elephant  is  not  here’;  and 
to  potential  ending  in  the  sentence  ‘Do  not  eat  poison’.  In 
all  these  cases  it  conveys  the  sense  of  negation. 

[414] 

*ra1  =q  I 

m  fqqi%  *  11 

Similarly  in  the  scripture  the  negative  particle  nan 
related  to  noun  in  the  sentence  neti,  neti  ,*  to  verbal  root  in 
the  sentence  neha  nanasti2  and  to  potential  ending  in  the 
sentence  “  Do  not  eat  garlic  ”,  conveys  without  any 
difference  the  sense  of  negation. 

1.  Brh.,  II,  iii,  6.  2.  ibid.,  IV,  iv,  19. 


FIRST  ADHYAYA 


199 


[415] 

sif%m  sfa  g  m  ®zi  I 
jfkrsN  ^f*is 

fat  7^3%^  1^71^4  II 

In  whichever  sentence  the  negative  particle  nan  is 
present,  there  it  invariably  conveys  the  sense  of  cessation 
present  in  the  person  regarding  the  act  which  erroneously 
comes  into  being,  namely,  the  wish  to  kill  a  brahmin.  In 
our  system,  cessation  of  an  act  does  differ  from  the  self 
which  is  pure  consciousness.  Hence  the  Upanisadic  senten¬ 
ces  are  valid  in  respect  of  the  self  which  is  existent  and 
which  is  devoid  of  the  universe. 

nisedhe — prapaflca  iunye 


[416] 

^  <33;  II 

Having  in  mind  the  Vedic  text  whose  import  is  cessa¬ 
tion  from  activity,  the  venerable  and  learned  (5>abarasvamin) 
has  stated  that  Vedic  text  prompts  one  to  activity.  And 
this  is  not  to  deny  the  two  kinds  of  Vedic  texts. 

The  view  set  forth  In  Ss1”,  I,  41 1  is  refuted  here. 

[417] 

33  ftsfaqirlfOftd  I 

3  ft  Ti^faft  S|f37Tqt  qft  331  33^3  T3^3t  II 

I  shall  now  disprove  what  has  been  said  (by  the 
Vedantins)  that  the  import  of  the  prohibitory  sentence  is 


200 


SAtoK$EPA$ARIRAKA 


‘negation’.  Here  the  absence  of  garlic  is  not  stated  ;  for  it 
would  be  contradicted  by  the  visual  perception. 

The  Prabhakara  in  this  and  the  following  nine  verses  refutes  the 
Advaitin’s  view  set  forth  in  S&  I,  412-15 

[418] 

m  wii  ^  f|  » 

The  negative  particle  nan  cannot  convey  the  absence 
of  eating  the  garlic,  as  it  would  be  contradicted  by  percep¬ 
tion.  Nor  is  it  (namely,  the  negative  particle)  related  to  the 
desire  for  the  result ;  for  it  is  contrary  to  experience 

[419] 

*  it  II 

If  it  is  said  that  the  negative  particle  nan  negates  the 
niyoga,  to  eat  the  garlic,  even  then  thereus  the  eating  of 
garlic  out  of  desire.  It  is  not  known  that  eating  garlic 
leads  to  undesirable  effect,  when  nan  signifies  the  negation 
of  niyoga  to  eat  the  garlic. 

[420] 

If  qffd  qrcq  I 

qr  hi  qsrq  n 

(In  the  sentence  na  kalahjam  adyat),  the  negative  particle 
nan  could  have  relation  either  with  the  word  garlic  or  with 
the  root  ad  or  with  the  potential  suffix  added  to  the  root  ad. 
Here  these  three  courses  alone  are  possible  to  it. 

-  Bj,  Ti,  T2,  T3.  T41  T6* 

4 


FIRST  ADHYATA 


201 


[421] 

^  ftw'rRTI'TCT^t  I 

These  who  hold  any  one  of  the  views  set  forth  above 
(that  is,  in  the  previous'verse),  cannot  prove  the  validity  of 
the  prohibitory  statements.  So  let  it  be  accepted  that  the 
import  of  the  prohibitory  statements  is  activity  (in  the  form 
of  mental  resolve  of  not  eating  the  garlic). 

[422] 

mi  ^  I 

333^  ftixTqtsfa  u 

The  sacrificial  act,  etc.,  bring  out  the  difference  among 
the  injunctive  texts  and  hence  niyoga  also  differs.  Similarly, 
the  cessation  from  different  acts  brings  out  the  difference 
among  the  prohibitory  texts.  The  cessation  too  (like 
sacrificial  act,  etc.,)  is  the  content  of  'niyoga  (that  is,  it  is  of 
the  nature  of  mental  resolve  of  not  doing  the  prohibited 
act). 

anubandhah — anu  paicat  badhyate  vyavacchidakataya  iti 

yagadi  dhatvartho'nubandhah  tadrupo'nubandhah 
niyogavisaya  h  — SS 

[423  ] 

foim  Igftqtaat  fk  n 

The  niyoga  can  be  achieved  only  by  observing  cessation 
(that  is,  activity  in  the  form  of  mental  resolve  of  not  eating 
the  garlic  or  killing  a  brahmin).  But  it  is  not  known  from 

s.  -  P2- 

26 


202 


SAM  K$EPAS  ARI RAKA 


the  niyoga  having  for  its  content  the  cessation  (that  is, 
activity  in  the  form  of  mental  resolve  of  not  doing  a  prohi¬ 
bited  deed)  that  the  observance  of  prohibitory  deeds  leads 
to  hell.  Hence  one  who  performs  prohibitory  deeds  does 
not  go  to  hell. 


[424] 

^  wr  ftsfai  ii 

The  final  view  of  those  who  uphold  the  doctrine  of 
niyoga  is  this  :  an  agent  is  addressed  to  carry  out  the  niyoga 
alone.  In  order  to  achieve  this  alone,  he  is  addressed 
either  to  carry  out  the  sacrificial  acts  or  to  refrain  from 
prohibited  deeds,  both  being  its  content. 

vide  s  sva  tmasiddhyanukulasya  niyojyasya  prasiddhaye 
kurvatsvarga dikamapi pradhanam  karyameva  nali, 

PrakaranapaHcika ,  p.  190. 

For  details  see  Introduction,  p.  51. 

[425] 

hit%3;4  qfarafawrfa  11 

The  state  of  cessation  (namely,  activity  in  the  form  of 
mental  resolve  of  hot  doing  the  prohibited  deeds)  is  not 
steady  in  the  case  of  a  very  passionate  person.  So  niyoga  is 
addressed  to  him  to  maintain  the  state  of  cessation  from  the 
acts  that  should  be  avoided.  The  person,  knowing  the  niyoga 
afterwards  maintains  the  cessation  (that  is,  activity  in  the 
form  of  mental  resolve). 


FIRST  ADHYAYA 


203 


[426  ] 

ft  mvw  n 

The  absence  of  eating  the  prohibited  things  is  accepted 
to  be  the  knowledge  of  lips  and  teeth  unassociated  with 
the  prohibited  things.  The  cognition  of  the  substratum 
unrelated  to  the  prohibited  thing  is  (what,  answers  to) 
cessation.  And  this  view  is  faultless. 

According  »o  the  PrSbhSkaras,  cessation  being  of  the  form  of 
absence  is  not  recognized  as  a  separate  category.  It  is  not  differer  t 
from  the  substratum.  When  we  perceive  the  mere  floor  and  no  jar  on 
it,  we  say  that  there  is  no  jar.  The  cognition  of  the  substratum  by 
itseli  is  what  answers  to  the  absence. 

[  427  ] 

33  *pftftcmm3clT  $§33$3W3W  I 

3'lft  3t  3offt  II 

In  our  view,  the  primary  sense  of  potential  ending  in 
the  sentence  ( na  kalanjam  bhaksajd )  is  that  the  eating  of 
white  garlic  and  red  onion  is  the  means  to  realize  the 
desired  end.  The  negative  particle  nan  related  to  it  denotes 
its  absence  (that  is,  it  is  not  a  means  to  a  desired  end). 

[428] 

3  ft  ^  ftsft  u 

This  is  not  correct.  It  cannot  be  said  that  there  does 
not  arise  even  an  iota  of  pleasure  to  the  person  from  the 

1*  fxlftBT  -  P2,  T3,  T5. 


204 


samk$epa$ariraka 


performance  of  prohibited  deeds;  for,  it  is  found  that  there 
arises  the  desired  effect  (that  is,  pleasure)  on  eating  white 
garlic,  red  onion,  and  the  food  cooked  the  previous  night. 

The  objection  raised  by  the  Prabhakaras  against  the  siddhantin’s 
view  set  forth  in  the  previous  verse  is  explained  in  this  verse. 

[429] 

The  ignorant  man,  overlooking  the  unseen  defect  and 
seeking  pleasure  by  eating  the  garlic,  takes  in  the  garlic. 
The  prohibitory  statement  makes  known  that  the  eating  of 
garlic  is  not  the  means  to  realize  the  desired  end. 

[430] 

If  a  person  really  wishes:  let  the  killing  of  a  brahmin 
without  leading  to  hell,  give  forth  pleasure  to  me,  then  the 
prohibitory  statement  states  that  it  is  incorrect. 

[431] 

J7  dm  ^  n 

Oh!  child,  the  desire  for  (such  a)  result  by  committing 
the  prohibited  act  without  any  fear  of  sin  does  not  arise 
from  any  proof.  You  commit  the  prohibited  act  out  of 
error  which  is  due  to  ignorance.  Your  desire  for  such  a 
result  is  not  based  on  any  proof. 


FIRST  ADHYAYA 


205 


[432] 

wfai  srsftoa  ^  ?T3TFraT  l 

7\  ^iqJT^'fsqp:  SWRltS  ft  II 

Thus  the  Vedic  sentence  containing  the  negative 
particle  nan  teaches  the  person  who  commits  the  prohibited 
act.  This  sense  of  Vedic  text  is  neither  made  known, 
nor  contradicted  by  other  proofs. 

[433  ] 

ssrw I 

'RTcin  m  \\ 

[434] 

R3f[to  qto%[RPqd1  II 

Just  as  the  anxious  mother,  on  seeing  her  child  who,  to 
get  relief  from  the  heat  of  the  summer,  attempts  to  take  by 
hand,  by  mistake,  the  serpent’s  hood  which  is  smooth  and 
cool,  will  prevent  him  from  doing  so, 'similarly  the  Vedic 
text  having  the  negative  particle  nan ,  on  seeing  the  person 
who  eagerly  attempts  to  eat  garlic  which  is  the  cause  of 
evil,  under  the  mistaken  notion  that  it  is  a  means  to 
pleasure,  will  prevent  him  from  doing  so. 

[435] 

to  qmrq;  srarfitopn  h  i 

Wife  II 

Like  quality  and  substance,1  the  antecedent  negation 
of  a  possible  action  cannot  become  the  content  of  niyoga, 


s.  sffsqpr;  .  Pi. 


SAM  K$EPA&  ARIRAKA 


206 

unless  it  is  related  to  some  action.  Moreover,  as  it  is 
existent  it  cannot  become  the  content  of  niyoga  unlike  the 
sense  of  the  root  (that  is,  sacrifice)  in  your  view. 

1.  gupah  arunyadi,  dravyam  dadhyadi 

These  are  known  to  be  the  mean*  of  purchasing  the  soma  creeper  and 
of  sacrifice  respectively.  Hence  they  are  enjoined.  As  the  antecedent 
negation  of  a  possible  action  is  pot  the  means  of  any  act.  It  cannot  be 
enj  lined,  and  as  such  It  cannot  be  the  content  of  niyoga. 

[436] 

*  w  mm  1 

*  ^  11 

It  cannot  be  said  that  antecedent  negation  related  to 
the  action  of  maintaining  it  is  the  content  of  niyoga ;  for, 
here  in  the  sentence  ( na  kalahjam  bhaksayet)  the  action  of 
maintaining  the  antecedent  negation  is  not  expressed. 
Indeed  when  the  primary  sense  of  a  sentence  is  intelligible, 
secondary  sense  is  not  resorted  to,  out  of  fear  of  the 
abandonment  of  the  maxim.1 

1.  nyayahanat  -  i rutamukhyd rlho'  papattau  adrutalaksanakalpam 
gauravat,  S. 

The  translation  follows  S. 

[  437  ] 

sfd  wtot  qifci  mi  I 

*  11 


i.  ^-T^Ts.Ts. 


FIRST  ADHYAYA 


?07 


Cessation  from  activity  is  known  to  be  the  sense  of  the 
negative  particle  nan.  This  must  be  immediately  given  up 
as  being  incompatible,  if  the  import  of  the  sentence  (con¬ 
taining  the  particle  nan)  should  be  accepted  to  be  a  niyoga • 
And  the  followers  of  Jaimini  also  do  not  accept  that  an 
incompatible  sense  cannot  be  related  to  the  sense  of  a 
sentence  1 

t.  The  sense  of  a  sentence,  according  to  Prabhakara'ls  niyoga. 

vide :  vakyarthah  —  niyogah  tadbhak  tadanvayityarthah  TB. 

[438  ] 

to  qr^r  | 

qT%df  q  qrqrnt  n 

On  hearing  the  repugnant  utterance  that  committing  a 
prohibited  action  does  not  lead  to  sin,  the  person  who 
stands  nearby  and  who  is  afraid  of  sin  firmly  closes  his 
ears  feeling  that  there  cannot  be  another  sinful  statement 
like  this. 

The  view  put  forth  in  Slf,  T,  423,  is  refuted  in  this  and  the 
following  verses. 

[  439  ] 

ftftsfoqr  q^qqrqrq  qt 

m  q:  n 

If  committing  a  prohibited  act  does  not  give  rise  to  sin, 
then  misery  experienced  by  all  the  persons  should  be  consi¬ 
dered  as  not  arising  from  a  definite  cause.  Just  as  religious 
merit  is  the  root-cause  of  pleasure  experienced  by  all  the 
persons,  so  also  let  sin  be  the  root-cause  of  misery. 


208 


SAttK$EPAgARIRAKA 


[440] 

factor  m 

to  qnro  toftto  I 

to  n 

There  is  no  other  cause  .which  gives  rise  to  demerit 
apart  from  Committing  the  prohibited  act  and  not 
performing  the  enjoined  ones.  Hence  these  two  give  rise  to 
sin  and  as  such  they  are  always  its  root-cause. 

[441  ] 

snrRpR  mw  toq(%f?2T  frmrc^iqre!  n 

The  act  of  committing  the  prohibited  deed  gives  rise 
to  misery,  and  the  non-performance  of  the  enjoined  deed  is 
indicative  of  sin.  The  rise  of  an  existent  thing  (namely, 
demerit)  from  "non-existence  is  not  admitted.  And  the 
absence  (of  the  performance  of  the  enjoined  deed),  being 
known,  is  indicative  of  sin. 

In  the  previous  verse  it  is  said  that  committing  the  prohibited  deed 
and  the  non-performance  of  the  enjoined  deed  give  rise  to  sin.  But 
superficially  it  is  said  so.  Really  the  non-performance  of  the  enjoined 
deed,  being  a  negation,  cannot  be  the  cause  of  an  existent  thing,  like 
sin  There  arises  sin  from  the  performance  of  some  other  act  at  the 
time  when  the  enjoined"  deed  should  be  performed.  And  the  non¬ 
performance  of  the  enjoined  deed  merely  indicates  the  sin.  Just  as  the 
smoke  being  i;ememb:red  is  the  cause  of  the  knowledge  of  the  fire,  so 
also  the  knowledge  of  the  non-performance  of  the  enjoined  deed  is 
indicative  of  sin. 


1.  B2. 


FIRST  ADHTATA 


209 


[442] 

5ratafc«rfftfa  asr  1'.$  3°u  ii 

The  import  of  the  prohibitory  sentences  is  cessation. 
Then  it  is  presumptively  known  that  committing  the  pro¬ 
hibited  deed  gives  rise  to  an  undesirable  result.  Hence  it 
is  reasonable  to  hold  that  committing  the  prohibited  deed 
is  the  root-cause  of  man’s  misery. 

[  443  ] 

It  is  not  correct  to  say  that  thevnegative  particle  nan 
related  to  the  potential  ending,  by  conveying  the  sense  of 
‘exclusion’,  gives  rise  to  the  knowledge  that  eating  garlic, 
etc.,  being  known  to  be  the  means  of  desired  end,  is  the 
means  to  undesirable  result. 

[  444  ] 

SW  ft  | 

*  qferaw  fq?iiqqi?'T  n 

The  negative  particle  nan  can  as  a  general  rule  convey 
the  absence  of  the  sense  of  the  word  with  which  it  is  related. 
It  does  not  convey  the  sense  of  exclusion  unless  there  is 
some  contradiction  (to  its  primary  sense).  Hence  the 
import  of  nan  is  accepted  to'be  cessation. 

[  445  ] 

5fid:  q^qqfdTltfqqiq  q^THP-m  I 
n  q^mpm  mr  ii 

27 


210 


SAM  K$EPAg  ARI RAKA 


Without  resorting  to  exclusion,  it  cannot  be  postulated 
that  nah  conveys  the  sense  that  (eating  garlic)  is  a  source  of 
undesirable  result.  As  nah  can  convey  the  sense  of 
prohibiting  a  possible  action,  it  is  not  commendable  to 
resort  to  exclusion. 


[446] 

spwt^ojfeqsn  i 

*  n 

Following  the  sense  of  potential  ending,  namely,  the 
means  of  desired  end,  the  postulation  of  the  sense  of  nah 
to  be  the  means  of  undesirable  result  cannot  be  made  with¬ 
out  resorting  to  ‘exclusion’.  But  as  the  sense  of  prohibition 
(of  a  possible  act)  itself  is  proper,  the  sense  of  exclusion  (is 
unwarranted). 


[447] 

i 

sTOTwr  n 

When  it  is  said  that  the  prohibitory  sentences  are 
valid,  one  cannot  maintain  that  all  the  Vedic  texts  are 
valid  by  their  signifying  niyoga.  For,  (as  set  forth  before) 
the  import  of  the  prohibitory  statements  (which  are 
accepted  to  be  valid)  is  not  niyoga. 

[  448] 


■3.  Jxfa^rjxft  -  B^. 


3X^3;  -  Ml, 


FIRST  AD  HT AT  A 


211 


Hence  in  the  Upanisadic  statements  there  is  neither 
niyoga  nor  ‘verbal  productive  operation’.  As  the  import  of 
the  prohibitory  statements  is  not  niyoga ,  even  in  the 
ritualistic  portion  of  the  Veda,  niyoga  is  not  invariably 
conveyed, 

vidhirniyogo  na  ca  Sabdabhcivana  —  vidhirityasyaiva  vivaranam 

niyogeti,  TB. 


[  449  ] 

<wrfq  fqei^  fq^S  u 

Accepting  the  Prabhakara's  contention  that  ‘let  the 
import  of  the  prohibitory  statements  be  niyoga,  it  is  said  that 
even  then  in  the  Upanisadic  statements  there  is  no  trace  of 
ntyoga  in  view  of  its  contradiction. 


KNOWLEDGE  CANNOT  BE  ENJOINED 
[450] 

i r  m\&  *  I 

As  ‘knowledge’  has  asjts  basis  proof  and  object  alone, 
it  cannot  be  either  produced  or  not  produced  or  otherwise 
produced.  Hence  it  cannot  be  enjoined. 

jndnUth  tu  pramanajanyam,  pramanam  ca yatha bhutavastuvisayam,  ato 
jHanam  karturh  akartum  anyatha  va  karlum  aiakyam;  ktvalarh  vastutantra - 
meva  tat,  na  codumi tantram .  napi  purusatantram,  BSB,  I,  I,  4. 


212 


SAMK$EPAgARIRAKA 


[451] 

51  31T^T  I 

*  5r^|fi;  ^4  $1^4  $fs?$e  n 

One  who  comprehends  the  knowledge  of  the  self  can 
know  that  it  is  to  be  achieved.  Without  the  knowledge  of 
the  self  one  cannot  know  that  it  is  to  be  achieved. 


Cf.  Sg,  I,  59-62. 


[  452  ] 

mm  mm  m  j  m  ^  i 

fWId  RI^T  5T%3?fa 

Only  when  the  self  is  known  it  is  possible  to  com¬ 
prehend  its  knowledge  and  not  otherwise.  When  the  true 
nature  of  the  self  also  is  known  like  its  knowledge,  then 
liberation  is  attained  and  hence  the  injunction  serves  no 
purpose  here. 

See  Sg,  T,  59-62. 


[453] 

Those  who  are  deeply  versed  in  the  Upanisads  hold 
that  the  mutual  superimposition  of  the  subtle  and  the  gross 
bodies  and  the  self  which  is  due  to  avidya  is  the  cause 
of  bondage  of  the  self  Hence  the  moment  the  aspirant 
realizes  the  true  nature  of  the  self,  lie  is  liberated 


FIRST  ADHYA  YA 


213 


[  454  ] 

ft  11 

The  druti  text1  states  that  the  ripened  knowledge  of  the 
self  arising  from  the  Vedanta  texts,  by  its  mere  rise  destroys 
completely  the  beginningless  avidya  which  is  of  the  form  of 
a  thick  cloth  that  obstructs  clear  perception. 

1.  Chand.,  VII,  i,  3. 


[455  ] 

I4T%  II 

If  the  self  is  known,  then  the  injunction  of  its  knowledge 
serves  no  purpose.  Similarly  it  is  not  intelligible  (to  hold) 
that  the  knowledge  of  the  unknown  self  is  the  object  of 
injunction.  Thus  when  being  thoroughly  examined  it 
seems  that  there  is  no  scope  for  the  injunction  regarding  the 
knowledge  of  the  self.  Hence  you  understand  that  all  the 
Vedanta  texts  point  to  the  oneness  of  the  supreme  and  the 
inner  self. 


[  456  ] 

mi  guT^f  ^  frown  11 

As  there  would  arise  two  sets  of  three-fold  conflicting 
attributes,  it  is  not  possible  to  enjoin  the  knowledge  of  the 
self,  like  the  substance  vajapeya  which  cannot  be  enjoined 


214 


SAMK?EPA$ARIRAKA 


as  subsidiary  to  the  sacrifice  (in  the  sentence  vajapeyena 
svarajyakamo  yajeta  in  view  of  the  said  defect.)  Hence 
the  Upanisadic  statements  do  not  enjoin  the  knowledge 
of  the  self. 

The  sentence  vajapeyena  svarajyakamo  yajeta  enjoins  sacrifice 
having  the  heaven  as  its  fruit.  Now  there  arises  the  objection  whether 
this  sentence  enjoins  va japeya  as  subsidiary  to  the  sacrifice  or  the  word 
vajapeya  designates  the  sacrifice.  It  is  answered  that  the  sentence 
does  not  enjoin  va;apeya  as  subiidiary  to  the  sacrifice,  for  there  would 
arise  two  sets  of  three- fold  conflicting  attributes  in  the  sacrifice. 
Hence  it  Is  concluded  that  the  word  vajapeya  designates  the  sacrifice. 

This  is  discussed  in  the  Jaimini-sutra,  I,  iv,  68.  For  details  see 
Stf  I,  460.  And  for  the  two  sets  of  three-fold  conflicting  attributes  see 
the  following  verse. 


[457] 

Being  mentioned  as  already  existing,  being  what  is 
restated,  and  being  principal,  these  constitute  one  set  of 
three  attributes.  Similarly,  being  mentioned  as  achievable, 
being  made  known  afresh,  and  being  secondary,  these  con¬ 
stitute  the  other  set  of  three  attributes. 

uddiiyama natvam  —  kind dvidha turn  siddhavannirdiiyamanalvam 
anu  dyamanabhavah  —  pragavagatasya  paScadvadah  visayah 
up  a  deyam  —  anustheyataya  nirdeSyam 
vidhtyam  —  ajnatam  sat  jnapyam,  SS 

The  three  attributes  udddyatva,  anuvadyatva,  and  pradhanatva  are 
respectively  contrary  to  vpadeyatva,  xidheyatva,  and  gunatva. 


FIRST  ADHYAYA 


215 


[  458  ] 

^  fWt  TO  ^  I 

fo?®4  ^  JTCIs<ft  $sqq:  ftq^  || 

If  it  is  accepted  that  in  one  sentence  the  knowledge  is 
enjoined  with  reference  to  the  self,  and  the  knowledge  of 
the  self  which  is  desired  is  enjoined  (with  reference  to 
liberation)  then  there  would  arise  in  the  self  the  two  sets  of 
three-fold  conflicting  attributes.  Is  there  any  position 
worse  than  this? 

The  author  explains  in  the  following  verse  how  the  conflicting 
attributes  arise  in  the  self. 


[  459] 

wr  ^  faft  for  ft  i 

If  the  knowledge  (with  reference  to  the  self)  is  enjoined, 
then  one  set  of  three  attributes,  namely,  being  mentioned 
as  already  existing,  being  what  is  restated,  and  being 
principal  is  present  in  the  self.  (If  the  knowledge  of  the 
self  is  enjoined  with  reference  to  liberation)  the  self  which 
is  the  content  of  the  knowledge  becomes  the  substratum  of 
the  other  set  of  three  attributes. 

One  who  holds  the  view  that  the  knowledge  ol  the  self  is  enjoined 
must  assume  a  text  thus :  moksakamah  atmanam  janijiat.  By  this  text, 
knowledge  is  enjoined  with- reference  to  the  self,  and  the  knowledge 
of  the  self  is  enjoined  with  reference  to  liberation.  When  knowledge 
is  enjoined  with  reference  to  the  self,  then  the  self  Is  being  mentioned 
as  already  existing,  and  so  it  is  principal.  As  it  is  existent,  it  is 
restated  here.  So  the  first  set  of  three  attributes  is  present  in  the 


t  fa  —  T2. 


216 


SAM  K$EPAg  ARI RAKA 


self.  When  the  knowledge  of  the  self  is  enjoined  with  reference  to 
liberation,  then  the  self  which  is  subsidiary  to  the  knowledge  is  also 
enjoined  ( upadheya ).  As  the  injunctive  text  makes  known  the  unknown 
object,  the  self  also  is  to  be  considered  as  made  known  ( vidheya )  by  the 
injunctive  text.  Thus  the  second  set  of  three  attributes  also  are 
present  in  the  self.  Hence  there  arises  the  conflict. 

[460] 

g  II 

If  it  is  admitted  that  the  substance  ( vajapeya )  is  enjoined 
with  reference  to  (the  sacrifice),  then  the  first  set  of  three 
attributes  is  present  in  the  sacrifice  which  is  the  sense  of 
the  root yaj.  If  sacrifice  is  enjoined  with  reference  to  the 
fruit,  then  the  other  set  of  three  attributes  is  present  in  the 
sacrifice  which  is  the  sense  of  the  root  yaj. 

When  the  substance  vd japeya  is  enjoined  with  reference  to  the 
sacrifice,  then  the  latter  is  uddhaSya,  anuvadya,  and  pradhana.  This  is 
guna-vidhi  When  the  sacrifice  is  enj  fined  with  reference  to  the  fruit, 
then  the  sacrifice  is  upaJrya,  vidheya,  and  .s'esn.  This  is phala-vidhi. 

Thus  the  two  sets  of  conflicting  attributes  would  be  present  in  the 
self.  For  details  see  notes  on  Ss’,  I,  459. 

[461] 

got  ?r  ^  TO*  I 

Indeed  those  who  know  the  principles  of  interpretation 
hold  that,  in  view  of  the  conflict  of  the  two  sets  of  three 
attributes  set  forth  before,  this  root  j yaj,  mentioned  only 
once,  is  not  capable  of  bringing  about  the  relation  of  both 
the  subsidiary  substance  and  the  fruit  to  the  sacrifice. 


FIRST  ADIIYATA 


217 


C  462  ] 

um#i  fa  fqfespHW  11 

According  to  the  maxim  arrived  at  from  the  inter¬ 
pretation  of  the  vajnpeya  text,  there  can  be  no  injunction  of 
the  knowledge  of  the  self.  Hence  the  import  of  the 
Upanisadic  sentences,  being  devoid  of  injunction,  is  the 
self, 

THE  IMPORT  OF  THE  TEXTS  THAT  CONVEY 
THE  QUALIFIED  SELF 

[  463  ] 

*  U3  ^5^  *htkri  11 

The  text  conveying  the  qualified  self  points  to  the 
attributeless  self  in  all  respects.  It  is  not  conflicting  if  the 
text  conveying  the  qualified  self  has  its  import  in  the  attri- 
butelcss  self. 


[464] 

f I  R3"T  sTSTR-f 

* 

It  is  thus :  the  qualified  self  is  of  the  form  (of  the 
blend)  of  the  real  (that  is,  the  spiritual)  and  the  unreal 
(that  is,  the  phenomenal)  element.  Likewise  its  knowledge 
and  the  import  of  the  Upanisadic  texts  having  it  as  their 

■3  —  P[_ 

28 


218 


SAKlK§EPAgARIRAKA 


object  are  of  this  nature.  Hence  the  import  of  the 
Upanisadic  texts  is  differentiated  (into  two)  and  it  is  said 
that  their  intermediate  import  is  of  one  nature1  and  the 
primary  import  in  the  attributeless  self  is  of  different 
nature.3 

1 .  salya  nrtaf!  aba!  a  visayam 

2.  paramci rthaikarasavu stuvisaymn,  AP. 


[  465  ] 

The  single  knowledge  of  silver  arising  in  the  form  of 
‘This  is  silver’  points  to  its  content  as  the  blend  of  real  and 
unreal  objects.  Similarly  the  knowledge  of  the  sentence, 
which  conveys  the  qualified  self  and  which  points  to  the 
real  and  unreal  objects  indisputably  shows  that  its  content 
is  the  blend  of  real  and  unreal  objects. 

UPANISADS  POINT  TO  THE  EXISTENT  ENTITY 

[  466  ] 

UrT7  %q:  || 

According  to  the  Advaita  school,  the  purport  of  a 
sentence  is  to  have  as  its  fruit  the  knowledge  of  the  sense 


•s.  -  B2. 


FIRST  ADHYAYA 


219 


arising  from  it,  and  not  the  state  of  being  subsidiary  to  the 
knowledge  arising  from  it.  The  Vedic  study  is  subsidiary 
only  to  the  learning  by  rote  the  Vedic  texts,  and  not  to  the 
knowledge  of  the  sense  of  the  Veda. 

According  to  Mimamsakas  the  knowledge  of  the  sense  of  the  Veda 
is  the  purport  of  the  Veda,  as  the  study  of  the  latter  is  subsidiary  to 
the  former  The  Advaitins  do  not  accept  this  contention  and  hold  that 
the  purport  of  a  sentence  is  the  knowledge  of  the  sense  arising  from  it. 
And  thty  maintain  that  the  knowledge  of  the  Veda  is  the  purport  of 
the  Veda. 


[467  ] 

n  QW5&  sqf- 

awffa  fi  atowfa 

Though  (the  Vedic  study)  is  not  subordinate  to  (the 
knowledge  of  the  sense  of  the  Veda),  yet  the  latter  may  be 
the  fruit  (of  the  Vedic  study)  like  the  consecration  of  fire. 
The  consecration  of  fire  is  not  subservient  to  the  sacrifices; 
and  it  is  accepted  to  be  sybsidiaiy  to  the  (sacred)  fire  alone. 
Even  then  its  fruit  is  the  competence  to  perform  all  the 
sacrifices. 


[468  ] 

It  is  not  accepted  (by  the  followers  of  Jaimini)  that  the 
fruit  of  the  study  of  the  Vedic  hymns  and  the  commen¬ 
datory  texts  is  the  cognition  of  their  meanings  alone.  The 
knowledge  of  the  Vedic  hymns  and  the  commendatory  texts 


220 


SAMK$EPAsrARWAKA 


becomes  fruitful  by  adhering  to  the  fruitful  knowledge  of 
the  sense  of  the  injunctive  texts.  Hence  their  purport  is  not 
in  their  primary  senses. 

The  commendatory  texts  ( arthavclda )  are  valid  only  by  praising 
the  sense  of  the  injunctive  texts.  Similarly  the  Vedic  hymns  are 
valid  by  reminding  the  sacrificer  of  the  several  details  of  the 
sacrifice  to  be  performed 

[  469  ] 

STiSRSTTfftf  mi  I 

Wise  men  hold  that  a  sentence  which  gives  rise  to  the 
fruitful  knowledge  (of  a  sense)  has  that  sense  as  its  import. 
They  maintain  that  a  sentence  which  gives  rise  to  the 
knowledge  (of  a  sense)  which  is  subordinate  to  the  fruitful 
knowledge  (of  a  sense)  has  something  else  as  its  import. 

[470] 

The  great  sages  who  are  adepts  in  the  inquiry  into  the 
(import  of  the)  Upanisadic  texts  accept  that  the  Vedic 
hymns  and  thp  commendatory  texts  have  for  their  inter¬ 
mediate  import  their  own  senses-  For  the  knowledge  of 
their  senses  is  introduced  as  subsidiary  to  the  sense  of  the 
injunctive  texts. 

£>ri  Badarayana  and  Sri  §  mkara  are  here  referred  to  as  the 
great  sages. 

vide:  BS,  I,  iii,  33  and  BSB  thereon. 

i.  nyhp-it  —  B|. 


FIRST  ADHYAYA 


221 


[471] 

sromqi  ^  sfigTR^m^r- 

^qsmTOi^Rfqqi^ftg  m  i 
qRq^t  HqtW?TT  ^Tfa 

’q^q  ftiareT  qr  ^fq  ^qtsfa  n 

It  has  been  set  forth  very  carefully  that  the  sense  of  the 
potential  ending  is  the  means  to  a  desired  end.  Hence  the 
import  of  all  the  ritualistic  Vedic  texts  is  not  niyoga,  but 
sacrifice,  making  gifts,  and  offering  in  fire  which  are  the 
means  to  desired  end.  On  careful  examination,  the 
ritualistic  Vedic  texts  cannot  be  said  to  have  niyoga  as  their 
import.  (When  such  is  the  case)  what  need  is  there 
to  say  that  niyoga  is  not  the  import  of  the  Upanisadic  texts? 

[*72] 

^qiqrqqqi^Rqqqifjqq  qqqfarg 

eq  qfqq-q:  swqfiria  g  ara  q^t  I 
mvti  q^qq  snqt  qt  qr*rft<qifc6 
'^qpqiqqqTJRiqqqq  WmH  q^  II 

The  Sutra  of  Jaimini1  should  be  understood  in  the  sense 
that  all  the  ritualistic  Vedic  sentences  are  valid  in  respect 
of  sacrifice,  making  gifts,  and  offering  in  fire,  which  are  to 
be  achieved  and  which  are  the  means  to  prosperity.  Look 
into  the  text  of  Sahara’s  bhasya  ‘one  who  performs  sacrifice’ 
etc.2  which  clearly  states  that  the  word  dharma  is  significative 
of  sacrifice  alone  which  is  the  means  to  prosperity. 

1.  vide:  codand laksano'rtho  dharmah ,  I,  i,  2. 


1.  —  Mi. 


222 


SAM  KSEPAg  ARIRAKA 


2.  yoyagamanutisthati  tarn  dharmikamityacaksate, 

Sahara’s  bhasya  on  Jaimini-Sutra,  I,  i,  2. 

Jalminl  holds  that  the  import  of  the  ritualistic  vedic  texts  is 
dharma,  and  dharma  is  not  niyoga,  but  only  sacrifice,  etc.,  as  Sahara 
points  out  that  one  who  performs  srcrifice  is  known  to  be  a  dharmika. 

[  473  ] 

^  ^fTiufjRisKr 

ft  I 

fa 

srffrft  Tt  II 

The  word  dharma  which  is  significative  of  sacrifice  can 
well  be  used  in  masculine  gender.  The  sacrifice  in  its 
subtle  form  becomes  apurva.  And  figuratively  identifying 
the  sacrifice  with  apurva,  the  word  dharma  is  masculine  in 
gender.  If  it  signifies  the  sacrifice  alone  (which  is  not  iden¬ 
tified  with  apurva ),  then  it  is  neuter  in  gender. 

Tiiis  verse  answers  the  objection  that  may  be  raised  on  the 
basis  of  the  /coda  text.1 

adrste  purhsi  dharmah  syat  kliboyagddiko  matah  [cited  in  S  ]. 

[  474] 

foM  tWi 

nfcf  viM1*  wr w  ii 

In  the  view1  that  the  sense  of  the  potential  ending  "is 
the  means  to  a  desired  end,  and  in  the  view'2  that  it  means 
productive  operation,  the  agent  becomes  the  enjoyer 


h.  riiifir  —  Ti. 


FIRST  AD HT A  YA 


223 


of  the  fruit.  But  in  the  doctrine  of  niyoga,  the  aspirant  is 
related  to  niyoga  as  its  owner  and  then  to  sacrifice  as  the 
agent. 

1.  SS,  I,  398, 

2.  SS,  I,  386  -  92. 

In  the  first  two  views,  the  aspirant  is  related  to  the  sacrifice 
as  the  agent  and  then  he  becomes  the  enjoyer  of  its  fruits. 
But  In  the  doctrine  of  niyoga,  the  aspirant  is  related  to  niyoga 
as  its  owner  and  then  he  is  related  as  an  agent  to  the  sacrifice 
which  is  the  content  of  niyoga. 

[4?5] 


imgqrcs^  it 

The  sacrifice  which  is  known  to  be  the  means  to  a 
desired  end  gives  rise  to  the  desire  for  itself,  and  (through 
it)  it  prompts  one  to  activity.  After  the  rise  of  the  desire 
for  the  result,  the  means  of  the  desired  result  is  known  from 
the  potential  ending.  Then  immediately  there  arises  the 
desire  for  the  sacrifice  (which  is  the  means  to  a  desired 
end). 

vidhih  —  vidhiyale  iti  vidhih  ( yagali ) 
phald  t  —  phalecchdnantaram.  SS. 

[476  ] 

ftq>i€temq  i 

qsftd  ft  n 

Though  prompted  by  numerous  mandates,  a  person 
does  not  perform  the  laborious  sacrifice,  unless  he  desires 


224 


SAMKSEPAg  ARIRAKA 


(the  result  of  the  sacrifice).  So  the  desire  for  the  result 
alone  prompts  one  to  activity  and  this  view  is  the  right 
course. 

[477] 

It  is  reasonable  that  sacrifice  which  is  the  means  to  a 
desired  end  is  one  to  be  achieved  by  human  effort.  And 
this  sense  should  be  known  from  the  potential  ending,  etc. 
(The  desire  for  the  sacrifice)  arising  from  the  desire  for  the 
result  is  known  through  perception  (and  it  is  not  the  sense 
of  the  potential  ending,  etc.). 

The  potential  ending,  etc.,  convey  that  the  sacrifice  is  the 
means  to  a  desired  end  and  it  is  to  be  achieved  by  human 
effort.  The  potential  ending  does  not  signify  desire  for  the 
sacrifice,  as  the  latter  (that  is,  the  desire  for  the  sacrifice)  is 
known  through  perception. 


[478] 

f%f%  i 

One  aspect  of  being  an  act1  caused  by  the  desire  for  the 
result  is  present  in  the  means  to  a  desired  end.  Another 
aspect  of  being  an  act  which  is  natural  to  the  means  to  a 
desired  end2  is  present  in  the  latter-  The  aspect  of  being 
an  act  which  is  natural  is  known  from  the  potential  ending, 
etc.,  and  the  other  is  known  through  perception. 

1.  The  desire  for  the  sacrifice  arising  from  the  desire  for  its 
result  is  known  through  perception  and  it  prompts  one  to  activity. 
The  sacrifice  thus  becomes  an  object  of  human  effort  and  in  this  sense 
it  is  a  karya  or  an  act  ( krlyuddefyalvaiupatii  karyatvam  )  This  aspect  of 


FIRST  AD  Iir AY  A 


225 


being  an  act  presentin  the  sacrifice  is  known  through  perception  and 
not  from  the  endings  of  potential  mood,  etc  ,  as  it  is  based  on  the 
desire  for  the  sacrifice  which  is  known  through  perception  alone. 

2  Another  aspect  of  being  an  act  present  in  the  sacrifice  is  :  the 
sacrifice  ii»df  is  of  the  nature  of  an  act;  and  so  it  is  to  be  achieved 
by  the  volitional  activity.  And  in  this  sense  it  is  a  ka rya  or  an  act. 
krtuadhyatvarupom  karjatvam).  This  aspect  of  being  an  act  is  known 
only  from  the  endings  of  potential  mood,  c’.c. 

[  479] 

qmiem  fl  n 

Wise  men  hold:-  as  knowledge  is  not  accepted  to  depend 
on  human  agency,  the  potential  ending  used  in  respect  of 
it  fin  the  Upanisadic  texts  like  atmanam  paSyet)1  is  to  be 
taken  in  its  secondary  sense.  As  sacrifice,  etc.,  which  are 
the  means  of  desired  end  depend  on  human  activity,  the 
endings  of  potential  mood,  imperative  mood,  etc,,  used 
with  reference  to  them  (that  is,  sacrifices,  etc.),  are  to  be 
taken  in  their  primary  senses. 

1.  vide:  Brh  IV,  iv,  23. 

2  Cf:  yn.lhabhulabrahmalmavirnya-nap\  jilanam  codana  tantram, 
tadvisayc  liiiddayah  £ ruyamdnd  api  anyojyovisayatva  t  kunthibhavanti 
upaladlsu  prayukta  ksura'aiksnya iivat,  BSB,  I,  i,  4. 

[  480  ] 

^  rfk:  ll 

The  potential  ending  used  in  respect  of  knowledge 
conveys  a  part  of  its  sense  which  is  unknown,  namely,  that 
the  knowledge  is  the  means  to  liberation.  As  sacrifice,  etc., 
depend  on  human  effort,  the  potential  ending  which  signi- 

29 


226 


SAM  E$EPA$  ARIRAK A 


fies  the  means  to  a  desired  end  and  which'  is  used  with 
reference  to  sacrifice,  etc.,  is  to  be  taken  in  its  primary 
sense  and  not  in  its  secondary  sense. 

The  potential  ending  conveys  that  a  particular  thing  is  the 
means  to  a  desired  end  and  it  is  to  bo  achieved  by  human  effort- 
The  potential  ending  used  in  respect  of  the  knowledge  of  the  self 
(in  the  sentence  atmanam  padyet)  conveys  that  the  knowledge  is  the 
means  to  liberation,  but  dees  not  convev  the  sense  that  it  is  to  be 
achieved.  Hence  the  potential  ending  in  this  case  is  taken  in  its 
secondary  sense.  In  the  case  of  sacrifice,  etc.,  the  potential  ending 
conveys  that  they  are  the  means  of  desired  end  and  they  are  to  be 
achievrd  Hence  the  potential  ending  in  this  case  is  taken  in  its 
piimary  sense. 


[481] 


^  I 

The  potential  ending  is  used  in  respect  of  sacrifice,  etc., 
in  its  primary  sense.  Similarly,  reasoning,  etc.,  which  are 
the  proximate  means  to  the  realization  of  the  self,  depend 
on  human  agency  and  as  such  in  respect  of  them  the 
potential  ending  is  used  in  its  primary  sense,  there  being 
no  (valid)  reason  for  taking  the  potential  ending  (used 
in  respect  of  reasoning,  etc.,)  in  its  secondary  sense  before 
the  realization  of  the  self 

dlmasdksa  ikurodayatprak  karluh  karomityabhima nasya napayci t 

d ravand dwldhau  linadergatmatvakalpanayam  praniaiiabhdvdt.  AP. 

[  482  ] 


FIRST  ADHYAYA 


227 


In  the  ritualistic  section  of  the  Veda,  the  existent 
entity  is  taught  as  subservient  to  the  things  that  are  to  be 
achieved.1  But  this  view  is  not  accepted  in  the  Vedanta 
section  where  the  reverse  is  held,  that  is,  the  thing  to  be 
achieved  is  always  subservient  to  the  existent  entity. 

1.  bhutarii  bhavyaya  upadiiyate ,  S’abara-bhasya  on  J dimini- sutra, 

III,  iv,  40 

[483] 

mi  f%3  m  ii 

In  the  ritualistic  portion  of  the  Veda,  the  sentences 
conveying  the  existent  entity  are  wholly  useful  to  the 
knowledge  of  the  objects  that  are  to  be  achieved.  But  in 
the  Vedanta  section,  the  things  that  are  to  be  achieved 
(namely,  Vedantic  study,  reasoning,  and  meditation)  are 
useful  to  the  knowledge  of  the  existent  entity. 

Vedantic  study,  reasoning,  and  meditation  are  enjoined 
In  respect  of  the  knowledge  of  the  self. 

vide :  Brh-,  II,  iv,  v;  IV,  v,  6. 

[484] 

*!5*iRdTd1  h  ft  31%:  i 

m  nwq;  ii 

The  knowledge  of  the  things  that  are  to  be  achieved 
does  not  lead  to  any  ultimate  purpose.  But  the  knowledge 
of  the  self  leads  to  liberation.1  Hence  all  the  injunctive 
texts  such  as  Srotavyah ,  etc.,2  are  subsidiary  to  the  sentences 
that  convey  the  existent  self. 

1.  Mund,  III,  ii,  9. 

2.  Brh.,  II,  iv,  f;  IV,  v,  6. 

bhutopadeianugunam  -  bhutopadedadcsah,  AP. 


220 


SA  M  KS  EPA  g  A  It  I  HA  Kj  i 


[  485  ] 

fafcRt  ftm^§  m  vTscnqaiT:  qRf£siftqic$3*  n 

In  the  ritualistic  portion  of  the  Veda,  the  sentences 
conveying  existent  entity  become  related  to  the  sentences 
that  enjoin  the  things  that  are  to  be  achieved,  by  resorting 
to  either  primary  signification  or  secondary  one  or  the  one 
based  on  the  knowledge  of  similarity.  Similarly  in  the 
Vedanta  section,  all  the  sentences  conveying  the  things  that 
are  to  be  achieved  become  related  to  the  sentences  that 
convey  the  self. 


[4  6] 

^  *n"raTf^forcr  wq^nmls  ^  i 

*  qWft^qsrotqfaq^ft  *pth^  ii 

It  is  not  a  defect  to  take  in  their  secondary  senses  the 
words  which  convey  the  existent  entities  and  which  are 
related  to  the  injunctive  texts.  Similarly  in  the  Vedanta 
section,  it  is  not  a  defect  to  take  the  words  which  convey 
the  things  to  be  achieved  in  their  secondary  senses.1 

The  word  apyeti  in  the  sentence  brahmaiva  san  brahma  pyeti 
( Drh ,  IV,  iv,  G)  is  tak*n  in  its  secondary  sense. 

Sec  Sg ,  I,  307,  310-3. 


.  [487] 

ft  ^  n 

Religious  rite  is  insentient  and  hence  it  is  reasonable 
to  hold  that  in  the  ritualistic  portion  of  the  Veda,  the 
object  is  known  through  proof.  But  as  the  self  which  is  the 
object  of  the  Upanisadic  sentences  is  sentient,  it  is  reason- 


FIRST  ADHYAYA 


229 


able  to  hold  that  in  the  Vedanta  section  the  proofs  are 
known  through  the  object  (namely,  the  self). 

[488] 

In  the  ritualistic  portion  of  the  Veda  which  is  prima¬ 
rily  concerned  with  rituals,  the  sentence  is  determined  by 
the  presence  of  a  verb.  In  the  Vedanta  section  which  is 
primarily  concerned  with  the  self,  the  noun  is  primary  in 
all  the  sentences. 


[  489  ] 

HRRTdfcf  TOT  I 

mm  mk  wfoisd^FS^  ii 

In  the  ritualistic  portion  of  the  Veda  if  a  word,  though 
a  noun,  conveys  the  sense  of  what  is  to  be  achieved,  then 
it  is  in  effect  a  finite  verb.  Similarly,  as  all  the  verbs  in 
the  Upanisadic  sentences  point  to  the  existent  entity,  they 
are  in  effect  nouns. 

The  idea  contained  in  SSf,  l,  282-3  is  restated  here. 


[490] 

ft  m  i 


Though  the  words  such  as  agneya,  aivina,  aindra,  etc., 
are  nouns,  yet  it  is  well-known  that  they  convey  the  things 


230 


SAM  K$EPAg  ARI RAKA 


that  are  to  be  achieved.  The  word  bhavati  which  is  placed 
by  the  side  of  the  words  having  the  taddhita  suffix  enjoined 
by  (the  sutra )  sa  asya  dtvata,  functions  merely  as  a  noun. 

The  idea  contained  in  this  verse  has  already  been  explained  in 
Stf,  I,  308-9. 

The  Vedic  texts  where  the  words  referred  to  in  this  verse 
occur  are : 

1.  agneyo’stakapalo  bhavati 

2.  aindram  dadhyamava  syayam 

3.  advinam  dhumramalabhtta,  Cited  in  S. 

[491  j 

HR! 

ii 

The  finite  verbs  such  as  asti,  asmi,  and  asi  are  present  in 
the  Upanisadic  sencenccs.1  Even  then  they  do  not  function  as 
finite  verbs-  For  their  import  is  mere  existence. 

1.  Sec  Ssh  I,  283. 

nisakl'h  —  paryavasanam,  AP. 

[492] 

Those  who  know  the  nature  of  the  finite  verbs  hold 
that  the  import  of  a  finite  verb  is  the  thing  to  be  achieved. 
It  has  been  well-said  that  the  finite  verb  which  gives  rise 


?.  ^3  —  T4. 


FIRST  AD II TATA 


231 


to  the  knowledge  of  the  existence  alone  which  is  immutable 
is  figuratively  spoken  of  as  a  verb. 

[493  ] 

*qhn  n 

If  it  is  admitted  that  the  import  of  the  Upanisadic 
sentences  is  ‘existence’,  then  in  your  system  there  is  the 
possibility  of  the  (object  of  the)  Upanisads  being  known  by 
other  means  of  valid  knowledge.  For  the  wise  ones  (that 
is,  the  Prabhakarasi  admit  that  the  existence  of  the  self  is 
cognized  by  other  means  of  knowledge. 

The  objection  raised  by  the  Prabhakaras  is  put  forth  in  this  verse. 
See  Sg,  I,  284. 

The  Prabhakaras  hold  that  existence  is  cognized  by  other  means 
of  knowledge.  They  argue  that  if  it  is  held  by  the  Advaitins  that  the 
Upanijads  convey  the  self  and  the  self  is  existence,  then 
it  comes  to  this  that  the  Upanisads  convey  an  entity  which  is  the 
object  of  other  means  of  knowledge.  In  that  case,  the  Upanisads  are 
exposed  to  the  fault  of  losing  their  self-validity.  That  is,  they  convey 
a  thing  that  is  known  by  other  means  oi  knowledge. 

It  must  be  noted  here  that  the  Prabhakaras  only  say  that  existence 
is  cognized  by  other  mean3  of  knowledge.  They  do  not  say  that 
existence  is  self  and  that  is  cognized  by  other  means  of  knowledge. 
But,  since  existence  according  to  Advaita  is  of  the  nature  of  the  self, 
it  is  said  here  that  the  Prabhakara’s  criticism  would  be  that  existence 
which  is  the  self  accoidipg  to  Advaita  would  become  the  object  of 
other  means  of  knowledge. 

vide :  dimogatamiti  tu  praslutabhiprayam,  SS. 

[491] 

m  qi  fafqqqqqifeT  nmi^  • 

qiqpqfq  vi'cricM  qqftRJ  qq&iT^  II 


232 


SAMK§EPAg  ARIRAKA 


Or  else,  let  the  existence  of  all  the  objects  be  their 
fitness  to  become  the  content  of  valid  knowledge;  and  this 
view  is  faultless.  And,  let  the  Upanisadic  statements 
function  in  order  to  give  rise  to  the  knowledge  of  existence, 
that  is,  the  self. 

As  ‘existence’  is  the  fitness  of  ih?  object  to  become  the  object  of  a 
proof  other  than  verbal  testimony,  the  Upanisadic  statements  which 
signify  the  self  which  i3  of  the  nature  of  ‘existence*  are  exposed  to 
the  fault  of  losing  their  intrinsic  validity. 

[495  ] 


It  is  unsound.  It  is  also  admitted  by  you  that  ‘soul’ 
and  ‘knowledge’  possess  existence.  But  they  are  neither 
capable  of  becoming  the  objects  of  knowledge  nor  are  they 
the  objects  of  cognition,1  for  they  are  never  objects. 

The  objection  raised  by  the  Prabhakaras  is  refuted  in  this  verse. 

1.  The  Prabhakaras  hold  that  knowledge  is  self-luminous  and 
the  soul  is  manifested  as  its  substratum.  II;nce  both  are  no)  objects. 

WORLD  -  THE  EFFECT  OF  A  SENTIEN  T  BEING 

[  496  ] 

ft  II 

It  is  seen  in  the  world  that  the  things  which  are  dis¬ 
parate  like  pot,  jar,  etc.,  are  produced  from  something. 
Hence  they  infer  that  earth,  water,  fire,  air,  and  ether 
being  disparate  are  produced  from  something  (and  then 
they  think  out  the  cause  from  which  they  have  originated). 


FIRST  ADILYA  YA 


233 


[«7] 

%fa^^Ri%Rsif5iq  sirc^rgqR  n 

Noticing  origination  in  the  parts  of  earth,  water,  and 
fire,  and  citing  them  (namely,  the  parts  of  earth,  etc.)  as  the 
example,  they  infer  that  earth,  water,  and  fire,  which  ar 
respectively  of  the  nature  of  being  earth,  water,  and 
fire,  are  produced  from  something. 

We  notice  the  origin  of  earth  in  its  parts  such  as  poi,  etc.  The 
origin  of  water  is  seen  in  the  moon  — stone;  and  the  origin  of  fire  is 
observed  when  fire  is  kindled  by  rubbing  one  stick  against  another. 

Now  it  is  inferred  thus : 

imhaprlhivi  janmavati,  prthiviivat,  ghatavat. 

[498] 

srgftiR  3#  mfa  ft  qftsg  n 

Then  they  infer  that  like  pot,  etc.,  earth  and  other 
elements  which  are  produced  must  have  originated  from  a 
sentient  being.  Thus  they  think  out  that  earth,  etc.,  in 
view  of  their  being  effects,  must  have  a  cause  and  that 
should  be  sentient;  for  it  is  perceived  in  ordinary  experience 
that  the  effects  (like  pot,  etc  )  are  produced  by  a  sentient 
being- 


[  499-] 

s  ^Ri 

I 


30 


234 


SAMK$EPAgARIRAKA 


Later,  owing  to  ignorance  there  arises  an  unavoidable 
doubt  whether  the  sentient  being  which  is  the  cause  of  the 
universe  is  manifold  or  only  one  endowed  with  omniscience 
and  omnipotence. 

[  500] 

O03T0  d&OTOlftto  II 

From  the  faultless  Upanisadic  sentence  yato  va  etc.1 
there  arises  the  knowledge  that  the  sentient  being  is  one. 
And,  later  the  word  in  the  ablative  case  ( yatah )  gives  rise 
to  the  firm  belief  that  the  sentient  being  is  the  material 
cause  of  the  universe;  for  the  ablative  case  is  enjoined  in  the 
sense  of  the  source.3 

1.  Tailt,  III,  i,  1 

2.  vide :  Panini-Sutra  -  janikartuh  prakrtih,  I,  iv,  30. 

[501] 

30  I 

313^  OO^fKmiteoOT  M  1%: 

OW  000  fl  OT5  II 

In  the  sentence  yatah,  etc.,1  the  singular  number 
conveyed  by  the  singular  case-ending  is  related  to  the  sense 
of  the  stem  yat.  (VVe  do  not  find  it)  as  related  to  the  other 
sense  of  the  case-ending  (that  is,  kdraka)  —  the  source  of 
the  universe. 


?.  *mn  —  P2- 


PtPtei  —  P2. 


FIRST  ADHYA  TA 


233 


[497] 

^RTf^n  oi#fi  11 

Noticing  origination  in  the  parts  of  earth,  water,  and 
flic,  and  citing  them  (namely,  the  parts  of  earth,  etc.)  as  the 
example,  they  infer  that  earth,  water,  and  fire,  which  ar 
respectively  of  the  nature  of  being  earth,  water,  and 
fire,  are  produced  from  something. 

We  notice  the  origin  of  earth  in  its  parts  such  as  pot,  etc.  The 
origin  of  water  is  seen  in  the  moon— stone;  and  the  origin  of  fire  is 
observed  when  fire  is  kindled  by  rubbing  one  stick  against  another. 

Now  it  h  inferred  thus : 

imha prthivi  janmavati,  prlhivitvat,  ghatavat. 

[498] 

s#  $  $ci  mm  (I  n 

Then  they  infer  that  like  pot,  etc.,  earth  and  other 
elements  which  are  produced  must  have  originated  from  a 
sentient  being.  Thus  they  think  out  that  earth,  etc.,  in 
view  of  their  being  effects,  must  have  a  cause  and  that 
should  be  sentient;  for  it  is  perceived  in  ordinary  experience 
that  the  effects  (like  pot,  etc  )  are  produced  by  a  sentient 
being- 


[  499-  ] 

ft;  3 

I 

SRqiTfdfdfaTT:  iftqRt  II 


30 


234 


SAM  K?  EPASARIRA  KA 


Latei1,  owing  to  ignorance  there  arises  an  unavoidable 
doubt  whether  the  sentient  being  which  is  the  cause  of  the 
universe  is  manifold  or  only  one  endowed  with  omniscience 
and  omnipotence. 

[  500] 

tmm  SSlft  afsflHlftt*  II 

From  the  faultless  Upanisadic  sentence  yato  va  etc.1 
there  arises  the  knowledge  that  the  sentient  being  is  one. 
And,  later  the  word  in  the  ablative  case  ( yatah )  gives  rise 
to  the  firm  belief  that  the  sentient  being  is  the  material 
cause  of  the  universe;  for  the  ablative  case  is  enjoined  in  the 
sense  of  the  source.3 

1.  Tailt,  III,  i.  1 

2.  vide:  Panini-Sutra  -  janikartuh  prakrtih ,  I,  iv,  30. 

[501] 

ft  II 

In  the  sentence  yatah,  etc.,1  the  singular  number 
conveyed  by  the  singular  case-ending  is  related  to  the  sense 
of  the  stem yat.  (We  do  not  find  it)  as  related  to  the  other 
sense  of  the  case-ending  (that  is,  karaka )  —  the  source  of 
the  universe. 


S.  *U?7T  —  P  2- 


FIRST  ADHTATA 


235 


1,  The  full  tex»  is :yatovd  imani  bhulani  jayanle  yena  jatani  jivanti, 
yat  prayanJyabhisammi  anti. ..tad  brahmtti  ( Taitt .  Ill,  i>  l) 

The  case-ending  conveys  two  concepts,  namely,  number  and 
karaka.  Here  the  ablative  case-ending  in yatah  conveys  the  singular 
number  and  the  apd  dana-kdraka. 

vide:  apadane  padcami,  Panini-sutra,  II,  iii,  23.  And  the 
apa  dana-kdraka  signifies  prakrti  or  source. 

vide :  janikartuh  prakrtih,  Panini-sutra,  I,  iv,  30. 

The  purvapaksin  in  this  and  the  following  six  verses  argues 
that  number  is  not  directly  rela'ed  to  the  sense  of  the  apa  Adna-kdraka, 
that  is,  prakrti,  in  which  case  only  it  can  be  admitted  that  the  source 
of  the  universe  is  one  only. 


[  502  ] 

*  \k  OrT  ftqq  I 

q  qqfo  =q  1 1 

Nowhere  the  case-ending  denoting  number  conveys  its 
sense  as  related  to  the  (other)  sense  ( karaka )  conveyed  by 
the  same  case-ending.  And  no  case-ending  conveys  its  sense 
(karaka)  as  related  to  the  (other)  sense  of  the  same 
case-ending  denoting  number. 

[  503  ] 

The  case-endings  denoting  number  are  capable  of 
conveying  their  own  senses  as  related  to  the  sense  of  the 
stem.  The  case-ending  also  conveys  its  sense  ( karaka )  as 
related  to  the  sense  of  the  stem  and  not  as  related 
to  the  other  sense  of  the  case-ending,  namely,  number. 


236 


SAMKSEPAg  ARIRAKA 


[504] 

^  fk  i 

qTO  wik|^  h  *  #\i  m  n 

By  the  instrumental  ending  present  in  the  word  paSuna 
(in  the  Vedic  text- pad and  yajeta),  it  is  made  known  that  the 
animal  is  the  means  (to  the  sacrifice);  and,  by  the  same 
case-ending  denoting  number,  it  is  made  known  that  that 
animal  is  one  in  number  and  not  that  the  means  is  one 
in  number. 

Il  might  bi  said:  the  instrumental  casc-cnding  in  paiuna  in  the 
Vedic  ttxi-  paiuna  yajeta  conveys  two  concepts  -  singular  number 
and  ‘means';  and  these  two  are  mutually  related.  So  there  arises 
the  knowledge  that  one  animal  is  the  means.  Similarly,  here  the 
singular  number  and  the  sense  of  apadana-karaka,  that  is ,  prakrli  are 
mutually  related  and  30  there  could  arise  the  knowledge  that  one 
individual  is  the  source  of  the  universe.  Tais  contention  is  refuted 
in  this  verse. 

It  may  be  questioned:  how  does  there  arise  the  knowledge  from 
the  Vedic  text  -  paiuna  yajeta  that  one  animal  is  the  means  to 
sacrifice,  the  knowledge  which  presupposes  the  knowledge  of  the 
mutual  relation  of  the  singular  number  and  means? 

This  question  is  answered  In  the  following  two  verses. 

[  505  ] 

to  f?  fqfqpRTO  11 

The  injunction  would  not  become  intelligible  without 
the  relation  of  the  ‘means’  and  the  ‘singular  number  . 
Hence,  in  view  of  the  incompatibility  of  injunction,  the 
relation  of  the  ‘means’  and  the  ‘singular  number’  is  known 
in  the  form  ‘one  animal  is  the  means’. 

See  the  following  verse. 


FIRST  ADHYAYA 


237 


[506  ] 

3'TiJRFi:  ifcw  | 

The  relation  of  the  ‘means’  to  the  singular  number  is 
presumptively  known  from  injunction.  The  singular 
number,  being  the  delimiting  characteristic  of  the  animal, 
is  related  (to  the  means).  It  is  reasonable  to  hold  that  by 
presumption  the  means  and  the  singular  number,  through 
their  relation  nimal  are  related  to  the  niyoga. 

In  the  word  -  paiuna  in  the  sentence  paiuna  yajeta  the  stem 
conveys  the  animal  and  the  case-ending  conveys  the  ‘means’  and  the 
singular  number.  All  these  three  are  related  to  niyoga.  But  they 
cannot  be  directly  related.  The  niyoga  cannot  be  achieved,  unless 
its  content,  the  sacrifice,  is  achieved.  And  the  sacrifice  can  be 
achieved  only  when  the  animal  is  related  to  it  as  its  means.  And  the 
singular  number  is  related  to  the  ‘means’  as  the  delimiting 
characteristic  of  the  animal.  Thus  there  results,  by  presumption,  the 
relation  of  the  singular  number  and  the  ‘means’.  See  SS. 

[  507  ] 

h  %  to:  ^  i 

According  to  our  view,  there  is  no  injunction  in  the 
Upanisadic  text yato  va  imani,  etc.  Hence,  by  presumption, 
there  cannot  be  the  mutual  relation  of  number  and  the 
sense  of  karaka  (that  is,  prakrti)  as  related  to  the  sense  of 
the  stem  yat 

[5Q8] 

^  fid  yzt I  flsjifq  TfTt  li 


S.  —  T2,  Mi. 


238 


SAMKSEPAgARIRAKA 


It  is  true  (that  the  relation  of  the  singular  number  and 
the  'means’  is  known  presumptively).  It  is  a'so  true  that 
there  is  no  injunction  in  the  Upanisadic  passage  ( yato  va 
imani  bhutani  jayante,  etc..)  Yet  there  could  be  the  (mutual) 
relation  of  the  sense  of  the  case-ending  denoting  number 
and  the  other  sense  of  the  same  case-ending  ( karaka ). 

[  509  ] 

^7^7777  esfR  7q=^7R7f737  77  I 

WpiRJTR  7<7£%r77fl7J  77^  7177  II 

Just  as  there  is  the  mutual  relation  of  the  means  and 
singular  number  in  respect  of  the  animal,  so  also  in  respect 
of  the  sense  of  the  wordjyafa/j  present  in  the  sentence  yato  va, 
etc.,  there  is  the  mutual  relation  of  the  singular  number 
conveyed  by  the  case-ending  and  the  sense  of  the  source 
conveyed  by  the  same  case-ending. 

[510] 

777  7T  Rfft:  WcfSRjft  7PI  fa^77T- 

RTUnfa  ft  ^777  7R7I75  I 

l7(Wa^T  =7  77177777^1  7  1% 

I77T  II 

The  import  of  the  sentence  ‘The  primordial  cause 
which  is  one  is  the  source  of  the  universe  and  that  is  the 
self  and  let  that  be  realized’1  is  the  existent  entity  (the  self). 
Even  in  this  sentence  the  mutual  relation  [of  the  singular 
number  and  the  sense  of  source  (prakrti)]  can  be  known 
without  any  injunction.  Or  else,  the  mutual  relation  (of 
the  singular  number  and  the  sense  of  source)  can  be  presu¬ 
mptively  known  from  the  apparent  futility  of  the  injunctive 
text.  The  Upanisadic  text  ( yato  va,  etc.)  could  not  come 


FIRST  ADHYATA 


239 


within  the  range  of  the  injunctive  text  ‘One’s  own  recension 
of  the  Veda  should  be  studied’,  unless  it  conveys  a  sense 
that  leads  to  ultimate  purpose. 

The  knowledge  of  the  sense  of  the  Veda  that  leads  to 
ultimate  purpose  is  indirectly  the  fruit  of  the  injunction  regarding 
the  study  of  one’s  own  branch  of  the  Veda  (svadhyayo’ dhyetavyah). 
The  Upani?adic  texts  also  come  within  the  scope  of  this  injunction 
and  they  should  also  convey  the  sense  that  would  lead  to  ultimate 
value.  When  such  is  the  case,  in  the  sentence  yato  va,  etc.,  if  there 
is  no  mutual  relation  of  the  singular  number  and  the  source  of  the 
universe,  then  the  sentence  does  not  convey  the  sense  that  would  lead 
to  ultimate  purpose,  namely,  liberation;  for  only  the  knowledge  of 
the  oneness  of  the  source  of  the  universe  leads  to  liberation. 

vide:  upd dana-eka'va-jhanasya'wa  purusarthatvat,  TB. 

In  the  absence  of  any  fruit,  the  injunctive  text  would  not 
prompt  one  to  the  study  of  the  Veda.  Hence  in  view  of  the  fear  of  the 
futility  of  injunctive  text,  we  should  admit  that  there  is  the  mutual 
relation  of  the  sense  of  singular  number  and  the  sense  of  the  source 
of  the  universe. 

1.  Taitt ,  III,  i,  1. 


[511] 

q^fa  w  m  m  ^Tf^sfa  sqBr  ii 

Just  as  in  the  word  pasuna  (in  the  sentence paSuna  yajela) 
the  knowledge  of  the  relation  of  number  denoted  by  the 
case-ending  and  karaka  denoted  by  the  same  case-ending  is 
reasonable  by  presumption,  so  also  in  the  word  yatah  in  the 
sentence  (yato  va  imani  bhutani  jayante)  which  defines  the 
self,  (the  knowledge  of  the  relation  of  the  number  denoted 
by  the  case-ending  and  the  sense  of  the  source  denoted  by 
the  same  case-ending  got  by  presumption  is  reasonable). 


240 


SAM  K$EPAg  ARIRAKA 


[512] 

HNftgqiTOn  TWTOTq;  I 

wmiRSW  gsqfa?  *rwlitffero  g  sro*  n 

The  injunctive  text  also  presumptively  makes  known 
its  intended  sense.  Similar  is  the  case  with  the  sentence 
conveying  the  self.  So  the  nature  of  conveying  the  import 
by  presumption  is  similar  in  the  two  kinds  of  texts. 

[513] 

apira  0  wsisro:  t 

fat  to  ^cUrpro- 

wi  wrPraq  cF05^q  Tq:  n 

The  sentient  being  which  is  accepted  as  the  source  of 
this  universe  is  one.  The  sentence  ( yato  va  imani  bhulani 
jayante)  restates  this  definition  of  the  self  established  by 
inference  and  then  clearly  states  that  that  is  the  self  and 
(you)  know  it  by  enquiry.  This  definition  differentiates 
the  self  which  is  secondarily  signified  by  the  word  tat 
present  in  the  sentence  tat  tv  am  asi  (from  all  other  things 
accepted  as  the  source  of  the  universe  by  the  various  other 
schools  like  Sahkhya,  N>aya,  etc  ) 

THE  THREE  KINDS  OF  DEFINITION 

[514] 

ww®  mm  vfm, 

3i^  mm  i 

swqWfa  g  qrq&ft  n 


FIRST  ADHTAYA 


241 


In  ordinary  experience  definitions  of  an  object  defined 
are  known  to  be  three-fold.  They  are  essential  characteri¬ 
stic,  attributive  definition,  and  indicative  definition-  I  shall 
define  these  severally  and  you  understand  them. 

[515] 

I 

3?q  5mifa3[Tf i 

n 

The  characteristic  feature  which  is  present  in  the  object 
defined  and  which  completely  differentiates  it  (namely,  the 
object)  from  the  other  objects  is  held  to  be  the  definition 
(of  that  object).  This  is  the  general  definition  of  all  the 
three  definitions. 


[516] 

to  ^*mqqq  3  fes;  stf  ii 

The  characteristic  feature  which  is  the  essential  nature 
of  the  object  defined  and  which  naturally  differentiates  the 
latter  from  the  other  objects  is  said  to  be  the  essential 
characteristic,  like  ‘The  sky  is  hollow’;  ‘Water  is  liquid’, 
etc.,  in  ordinary  experience. 

[517] 

afsSHTOrci  Wfr  II 

*•  -  ?2»  T4.  3.  .  P2,  T4. 

31 


242 


SAMK?EPA&ARIRAICA 


The  characteristic  feature  which  gives  rise  to  the 
knowledge  of  its  relation  to  the  object  defined  is  said  to  be 
the  attributive  definition  of  the  object  like  the  mane  to  the 
horse. 


[518] 

The  characteristic  feature  which  indicates  the  object 
to  be  defined,  but  which  is  not  its  essential  nature,  and 
which  abandons  the  nature  of  giving  rise  to  the  knowledge 
of  its  relation  to  it  (namely,  the  object  defined)  is  held  to  be 
the  indicative  definition,  like  crow  (to  a  house). 

THE  DEFINITION  OF  BRAHMAN 

[519] 

The  pure  consciousness,  being  devoid  of  any  extra¬ 
neous  means,  is  the  cause  of  the  origination,  sustenance, 
and  destruction  of  the  universe.  (The  causality)  is  to  be 
explained  as  the  indicative  definition  of  the  self.  Why  so? 
For  then  only  there  will  be  no  contradiction  to  the  signifi¬ 
cative  power  of  the  word  ‘Brahman’  which  conveys  the 
thing  that  is  to  be  defined. 

See  the  following  verse. 


[520] 


FIRST  AD  HT AT  A 


243 


If  the  causality  of  the  origination,  sustenance,  and 
destruction  of  the  universe  being  stated  as  the  definition  of 
the  self  is  its  attributive  definition,  then  there  would  be 
contradiction  to  the  significative  power  of  the  word 
‘Brahmaa’  which  conveys  the  thing  to  be  defined. 

yadidarh  laksanamucyamanam  drdyate,  taceet  videpaparii  sya  t, 
tasya  brahmadharmatvtna  satyatvat  brhatyarthasya  aparicchtdasya  bhangat 
laksyavacibrahmapadadaktisankocah  { ydt ,  S. 

Sarvajnatman  in  the  third  adhyaya  explains  why  causality  being 
stated  as  the  definition  of  the  self  cannot  be  considered  as  the  essential 
characteristic  ( svarupa-laksana )  oi  the  self.  See  SS,  III,  184*93. 

[521] 
fl  SOTR 

iiira  ^  mk 

In  the  sentence  which  serves  as  the  definition  of  the 
self  the  word  which  conveys  the  thing  to  be  defined  is 
primary  and  the  other  words  are  secondary.  The  word 
‘Brahman’  significative  of  the  thing  to  be  defined  is  capable 
of  conveying  only  the  absolute  self  and  not  a  limited  thing 
which  is  subject  to  destruction. 

Sbs/Ae  axp/soaf/oo  o/’  //j<?  word's 
vide  Cfiand,  VTf,  xxi'v,  f. 


[522] 

Hence  in  view  of  the  fear  of  contradiction  to  the  signi¬ 
ficative  power  of  the  principal  word  it  is  reasonable  to  take 


244 


SAMK§EPA$ARIRAKA 


the  subsidiary  words  as  indicative  attributes.  And  the  word 
‘Brahman’  conveys  the  sense  of  what  is  to  be  indicated 
( upalaksya ).  Thus  in  this  sentence  (namely,  yato  va  imcini 
bhutani  jayante)  all  the  words  are  syntactically  related. 

[523] 

fafcfor  ^  ^^rorrf^r  n 

The  definitions  do  not  convey  the  nature  of  the  object 
to  be  defined;  nor  do  they  state  that  a  particular  word  is 
significative  of  a  particular  sense.  Indeed  they  are  only  to 
differentiate  the  object  defined  from  all  other  objects. 

[524] 

°qjqrq 

Perceiving  the  nature  of  the  object  defined,  and 
noticing  the  definition  present  in  it  alone,  one  wishes  to 
convey  the  object  defined,  by  differentiating  it  from  other 
objects  with  the  help  of  the  definition.  And  this  is  well 
known  to  be  so. 

[525  ] 

SWrqffT  ft  mfa 


FIRST  ADHYAYA 


245 


Nowhere  is  it  accepted  that  a  definition  gives  rise  to 
the  knowledge  of  the  relation  of  a  word  to  its  sense.  But, 
in  respect  of  the  object  defined,  it  gives  rise  to  the 
knowledge  of  its  difference  from  other  objects.  In  ordinary 
experience,  the  representatives  of  all  the  systems  earnestly 
resort  to  the  definitions  only  to  differentiate  the  object 
defined  from  all  other  objects. 

[  526  ] 

tRRipifoT  gforftw- 

The  Upanisadic  sentence  (yato  va  imani  bhutani 
jayante ,  etc.)  states  the  definition  of  the  self  as  the  source 
of  this  perceived  universe,  neither  to  convey  the  relation  of 
the  word  ‘Brahman’  to  its  sense,  nor  to  teach  the  essential 
nature  of  the  self.  But  it  is  intended  to  differentiate  the 
self  from  all  other  objects. 


[527] 

qRfesw  qnqdT  n 

The  Upani§adic  sentence  f yato.  va  imani  bhutani 
jayante,  etc.)  states  the  definition  of  the  self  to  differentiate 
it  from  limited  objects  (such  as  pradhana,  atom,  etc.).  In 
the  prima  facie  view,  it  is  held  that  the  source  of  the 
universe  is  a  limited  object;  and  this  definition  is  intended 
to  refute  that  view. 


246 


SAM  KgEPAg  ARIRAKA 


[528] 

sRTtf^TO^faq  vm  dwf^qifo?  fern  *n^  h 

When  there  is  the  discussion  that  time,  nature,  atom, 
individual  soul,  primordial  matter,  five  skandhas, 
momentary  cognition,  and  void  are  the  sources  of  the 
universe,  the  Upanisadic  sentence  ( yato  va  imani  bhUtdni 
jayante,  etc.)  and  the  Brahma-sutra  — janmadyasya  yatah  are 
introduced.  Hence  the  import  of  these  two  ( iruti  and 
sutra )  is  to  differentiate  the  source  of  the  universe  from  the 
limited  things  (stated  above)- 

[  529  ] 

The  self  is  the  material  and  the  efficient  cause  of  all 
products.  But  when  it  is  said  by  others  (namely,  the 
Naiyayikas)  that  there  is  difference  between  the  source  of 
the  universe  and  the  individual  soul  as  they  are  related  as 
controller  and  controlled,  then  there  is  every  possibility 
of  the  source  of  the  universe  being  limited. 

adhistha  tr-adhisthty  i  bhavtna  —  niyamya-niydmakabhai'tna ,  AP. 

[  530] 

qMsfa  ft  mm  Rrqfosj  n 

In  order  «to  negate  this,  the  Upanisadic  sentence 
defines  the  self  (as  the  source  of  the  universe).  How  could 


i.  —  T^,  T4,  Te- 


FIRST  ADHTATA 


247 


the  self  be  different  from  the  individual  soul?  That  the 
individual  soul  is  identical  with  the  (supreme)  self  is  ever 
established;  and  the  cognition  of  difference  in  the  (supreme) 
self  is  baseless. 


[531  1 

qdt  ^  mi  dt  n 

As  the  essential  nature  of  an  object  defined  is  known 
at  the  time  of  perceiving  the  definition  present  in  it,  the 
definition  of  the  self  does  not  convey  its  essential  nature. 

[  532  ] 

ftfim  ^  ^  qt  m  3r?mffai*r:  I 

m  qtf  I%g;q^nT  II 

(The  Purvapaksin  objects:) 

The  Upanisadic  sentence  ( yato  va  imani  bhutani 
jayantc,  etc.)  conveys  to  us  that  the  material  and  the 
efficient  cause  of  all  the  things  that  have  origination,  etc., 
is  the  self.  How  could  the  Upani§adic  sentence  clearly 
state  the  definition  unknown  in  ordinary  experience,1  as 
if  it  is  already  known  by  some  proof? 

1.  Sec  the  following  verse. 

[533] 

q  q^q  3tq#£  qdTS^q  fa  3?^  I 

oqq^rqqsft  q|%q^qr  fqq%  g  II 

The  characteristic  of  being  the  material  and  efficient 
cause  is  unknown  in  ordinary  experience.  But  the 


i.  —  Ti. 


248 


SAM  K$EPA&  ARI RAKA 


Upani$adic  sentence  ( yato  va  imani  bhutani jayante)  restates 
this  definition  and  determines  it  in  respect  of  the  object 
defined  (namely,  the  self  ).  It  is  contradictory  to  hold 
that  the  Upani§adic  sentence  conveys  the  unknown  and 
also  restates  what  is  known. 

[  534] 

(The  Siddhantin  answers)  :  the  sentence  ( yato  va  imani 
bhutani  jayante )  restates  this  causality  known  (by  its 
significative  power),  and  conveys  it  by  presumption. 
Restatement  (of  causality)  is  impossible  if  (causality)  is 
not  previously  known;  for,  it  is  accepted  that  only  those 
objects  which  are  previously  known  can  be  restated. 

[  535] 

Just  as  the  injunction  of  the  substance  (soma)  is 
reasonable  by  presumption  when  the  qualified  entity 
(namely,  the  sacrifice  qualified  by  soma)  is  enjoined,  so  also 
here  (in  the  sentence  yato  va  imani  bhutani  jayante,  etc.) 
which  restates  the  causality  existing  in  the  self,  it  should  be 
held  that  the  causality  which  is  restated,  is  presumptively 
known  already. 

The  Vedic  text  -  som/.na  yajeta  enjoins  the  sacrifice  qualified  by 
soma.  And  the  injunction  of  the  substance  soma  is  presumptively 
known. 

[  536] 

s rot  n 


FIRST  ADHTATA 


249 


Or  else,  noticing  the  restatement  of  the  sense  which  is 
incompatible  without  its  previous  knowledge,  some 
venerable  authorities  hold  that  another  sentence  which 
would  give  rise  to  the  knowledge  of  the  (restated)  sense 
should  be  assumed. 


[  537  ] 

sift  i 

^  u 

In  the  case  of  the  injunction  of  the  qualified 
entity  (namely,  sacrifice  qualified  by  soma),  another 
sentence  which  is  assumed,  in  view  of  the  fear  of  incompa¬ 
tibility  of  the  qualified  injunction,  enjoins  the  substance. 
The  same  sentence  ( somena  yajeta )  docs  not  enjoin  the 
attribute  (soma). 

The  sentence  somena  yajeta  conveys  somavatS  yagetia  is  tarn 
bhSvayet.  Then  we  assume  another  Injunction  somena  yagarh 
bhSvayet,  enjoining  the  substance  soma  with  reference  to  sacrifice. 

[538] 

swat  ^  assrosftf  i 

The  characteristic  of  being  the  cause  of  the  origination, 
etc.,  of  the  universe  which  is  given  as  the  definition  of  the 
self  is  taught  as  the  indicative  definition;  and  this 
Upanisadic  sentence  ( yato  va  imani  bhutani  jayante,  etc.) 
is  not  the  source  of  the  knowledge  of  the  self.  Others,1 
however,  hold  that  this  sentence  itself  is  (of  the  form  of) 
inference  which  is  the  source  of  the  knowledge  of  the  self.9 

1.  apart  -  vaUesikadayah,  SS 

2.  cf:  ttadeva  anumanam  sarhsarivyatlrikia  -  iivaraastiivasadhanam 
manyante  iivaraka  ranavadinah,  BSB,  I,  i,  2. 

32 


250 


SAM  K$EPA&  ARFRAKA 


[  539] 

ft 

^Ttq^of  aftafwim  i 

spbrcrEJrita:  ii 

They  hold  that  the  Upanisadic  -text  ( yato  va  imani 
bhutani  jayante)  is  subservient  to  inference;  and  the  latter 
is  not  an  accessory  to  the  Upani§adic  text.  But  this  is 
incompatible;  for,  we  do  not  know  from  the  probans  ‘the 
nature  of  being  an  effect’  that  the  cause  of  the  universe  is 
absolute  consciousness.1 

The  view  of  the  Vaidesikas  Is  refuted  la  this  verse. 

1.  From  the  inference  -  k$ityankuradikam  sakartfkam  karyatvat 
ghatavat,  we  do  not  know  that  the  [cause  of  the  universe  Is  the 
self  which  is  absolute  consciousness. 


[540] 

<WT  JTftf 

The  Upanisadic  text,  resorting  to  the  significative 
power  well  known  in  ordinary  experience  conveys  that  the 
supreme  self  which  is  of  the  nature  of  truth,  consciousness, 
and  bliss  is  the  material  and  the  efficient  cause  of  the  origi¬ 
nation,  sustenance,  and  destruction  of  this  universe.  And 
this  self  is  not  conveyed  by  any  other  proof. 


FIRST  ADHYAYA 


251 


[541] 

^Kqqiqqqfa  ^qtT^sgffi^ 

STTOiqftqqi  qfc  mss  ^  n 

Discarding  its  true  import.,  the  Upanijadic  text  should 
somehow  be  related  to  God— the  lord  of  all  beings  who  is 
said  to  be  established  by  inference  by  the  Vaisesikas.  It  is 
inconsiderate  to  hold  that  the  Upanijadic  text  depends  on 
inference  to  convey  its  sense. 

If  it  is  said  that  the  import  of  the  Upani$adic  text  is  the 
sense  conveyed  by  inference,  then  the  Upani$adic  text  is  exposed 
to  the  fault  of  losing  its  self-validity. 


[542] 

^  q*iqfo  i 

^Br  fqqfo  q>«i^qffia[  q||:  n 

It  should  be  stated  by  the  wise  men  why  those  who 
boldly  discard  the  true  import  of  the  Upani$adic  sentence 
at  their  will  without  any  reason,  do  not  drink  the  flame  of 
fire. 

The  Vaisesikas  assign  an  important  place  to  inference,  and 
♦hey  hold  that  God  is  inferred  as  the  source  of  the  universe. 
It  is  asked  why  they  do  not  drink  the  flame  of  fire  on  the 
basis  of  the  inference  that  it  is  cool,  because  it  is  a  substance 
like  water. 


252 


SAM  K$EPAg  ARI RAKA 


[  543  ] 

^3  SRti:  Rf I 

wnarat  *  ft  q^wgsrr  ifsfc  w n 

(The  Purvapakfin  argues)  : 

It  is  indeed  unfounded  to  state  that  the  self  which  is 
of  the  form  of  truth  and  consciousness  is  the  source  of  the 
universe.  Indeed  there  cannot  be  any  relation  between  the 
incongruous  senses  (namely,  the  self  and  the  sense  of  the 
universe). 

See  the  following  verse. 


[544] 

^  ft  i 

?ssRfMt$f^5RRtsfei  n 

It  is  contrary  (to  experience)  that  the  self  which  is 
truth,  consciousness,  and  bliss  is  the  source  of  the  universe. 
For,  only  insentient  objects  are  found  to  be  the  material 
cause.  There  cannot  arise  (any  valid  knowledge 
of)  the  sense  of  the  sentence  from  (the  relation  of)  the 
incongruous  senses  (namely,  the  self  and  the  sense  of  the 
source  of  the  universe).  Indeed  there  is  no  relation  between 
the  senses  of  the  words  in  the  sentence  ‘sprinkle  with  fire’. 


[  545] 

w  #3  w  ^  ser  \\ 


FIRST  ADHTATA 


253 


(The  Siddhantin  answers): 

The  sentient  being  also  is  seen  to  be  the  material  cause 
(of  effects).  The  sentient  self  is  known  to  be  the  material 
cause  of  the  manifold  creations  in  the  dream  state;  the 
spider  to  be  the  material  cause  of  its  thread,  and  the 
individual  soul  to  be  the  material  cause  of  the  hair  on  the 
head  and  body. 

The  idea  contained  in  this  verse  it  based  on  the  Murid,  I,  i,  7. 

[546] 

3?w  gaft  ft  gain  gift  giTRr  R$fft*  n 

It  is  accepted  by  the  VaiSesikas  that  the  soul  is  the 
material  cause  of  the  effects  like  knowledge,  etc.  The  soul 
is  the  substance  and  the  effects  such  as  knowledge,  etc., 
are  known  to  be  qualities.  It  is  well  known  that  the 
substance  is  the  material  cause1  of  the  qualities. 

1.  ‘Material  cause*  here  means  ‘inherent  cause’  ( sama - 
vSyikarana )  of  the  Nyaya-Vai$e§ika  system. 

[547  ] 

wf^rf^ft  ^nwft  l 

HWft  qr  qfclisi  m  dRiprr  qtfftqi  %^q  it 

Expectancy,  etc.,  ending  with  congruity  which  are 
accepted  by  the  Mimarhsakas  as  the  means  of  a  sentence  in 
giving  rise  to  knowledge  are  present  in  the  sentence  ( yato  va 
imani  bhutdnt  jayante,  etc.)  and  hence  it  could  give  rise  to 
the  kno  wledge  of  the  self  (as  the  material  cause  of  the 
universe).  Hence  it  is  reasonable  that  the  self  is  the 
material  cause. 


1.  —  Bj. 


254 


SAMKSEPAg  ARfRAKA 


[  548  ] 

5Rrfa  I 

Hence  this  definition  is  the  indicative  attribute  of  the 
self  and  this  sentence  is  not  the  proof  of  the  self  as  provi¬ 
ding  an  inference.  For  the  Upanisadic  texts  are  intrinsi¬ 
cally  valid,  and  the  probans  (of  the  inference),  namely,  ‘the 
nature  of  being  an  effect’  is  always  subservient  to  them 
(namely,  the  Upanisadic  texts). 

[  549  ] 

SRT^RURTff^Rfq  wfah  smfa  W  I 

To  establish  the  infinite  nature  of  the  self,  the  sentence 
states  its  definition  which  is  its  indicative  attribute.  Thus 
the  sentence  that  states  the  source  of  the  universe  points  to 
the  self  which  is  the  (secondary)  sense  of  the  term  tat. 

[550] 

ffTT  si$Ei  m  fMqfa  asr  i 

At  the  time  of  creation,  the  absolute  self  signified  by 
the  word  tat  comprehends  the  meritorious,  sinful,  and  the 
blend  of  these  two  deeds  of  men  which  are  the  operative 
causes  of  creation  (Then)  through  these  causes,  the  self, 
though  one,  transfigures  itself  as  the  universe. 

[551] 

mm I  5W^  ft  l 


FIRST  ADHTAYA 


255 


The  import  of  the  terms  ( tat  and  tvam  constituting  the 
sentence  tat  tvam  asi )  and  the  sentence  ( tat  tvam  asi)  are  to 
be  dealt  with  in  the  first  chapter  (of  the  Brahma-sutra )• 
Hence  the  import  of  the  terms  are  first  put  forth  by  means 
of  enquiry  into  the  subsidiary  Upanisadic  texts. 

For  the  definition  of  the  subsidiary  Upaniyadic  text,  see 
Stf,  III,  312. 


[  552  ] 

As  the  sense  of  the  term  tvam  has  been  stated  in  the 
first  aphorism,1  it  should  be  known  that  the  sense  of  the 
term  tat  is  stated  in  this  (that  is,  the  second)®  aphorism. 
The  import  of  the  term  tat  is  the  absolute  self,  while  the 
import  of  the  term  tvam  is  the  inner  self. 

1.  BS,  I,  i,  1. 

jijflasa suite  hi  Ivampadavftliratha tad I abdd bhya rii  adhikilrinirupanac- 
chalenokta,  S. 

2.  BS,  I,  i,  2. 


[553] 


fa  ii 

Though  the  pure  consciousness  has  no  competence  (to 
the  Vedantic  study)  yet,  owing  to  the  mutual'  superimposi¬ 
tion  of  the  intellect  and  the  self,  it  is  admitted  that  the  self 
acquires  the  qualities  such  as  control  of  the  mind  and  the 
external  senses.  Hence  the  self  attains  the  competence  (to 
the  study  of  Vedanta). 


256 


SAM  K$EPAg  ARI RAKA 


[554] 

^q:^^rT?RnTT^^T^qnar  wnefeifcin?;  II 

Naturally  the  inner  self  is  of  the  form  of  the  supreme 
self  and  hence  it  has  no  competence  (to  the  study  of 
Vedanta).  Yet,  owing  to  its  relation  with  avidya  which  is 
a  veil  like  darkness  (and  with  intellect),  it  acquires  the 
competence  to  the  Vedantic  study,  etc. 

[  555  ] 

sit  Rt  srrf^wmrj  i 
^Rrf%^5TWf  ft  n 

The  relation  of  avidya  and  its  effects  is  the  essential 
operating  condition  in  respect  of  the  competence  of  the 
self  (to  the  study  of  Vedanta).  But  avidya  (and  its  effects) 
have  no  competence.  For  the  insentient  objects,  being 
devoid  of  agency,  never  have  competence;  and  this  (the 
author  of  the  sutra)  explains  later  (in  the  second  adhyaya)} 

1.  vide:  BS,  II,  iii,  33. 


[  556  ] 

^  ifoi  Apf^i  ii 


It  has  been  previously1  said  that  the  (Upanisadic) 
sentence3  which  sets  forth  the  method  of  approaching  (the 


FIRST  ADHYAYA 


257 


preceptor)  points  to  the  spiritual  aspirant-  Having  this  in 
his  mind,  the  venerable  author  of  the  sutras  indicates  the 
spiritual  aspirant  (in  the  first  aphorism). 

1.  See  SS ,  I,  G5. 

2.  A  hind.,  II,  12. 

The  author  of  the  Brahma-sulra  in  the  aphorism  athalo  brahma- 
jijhcsd  refers  to  the  spiritual  aspirant  by  the  words  alha  and  atah. 

See  Notes  on  SS ,  I,  552. 


[  557  ] 

T%r^  qtfeJTR  Htqg#  I 

iftdT  rW 

qf  qaifa  n 

In  order  to  state  that  the  import  of  the  term  ivain  is  the 
pure  self,  it  has  been  said  by  the  sage  that  the  sentences1 
setting  forth  the  aspirant’s  approach  to  the  preceptor,  point 
to  the  aspirant  who  is  the  conscious,  unconditioned,  and 
evcr.free  self. 

1.  Muncl.,  II,  12. 


[  558  ] 

iqfviTd  q^r  qiK*T%  | 

^qi%  q^r  qu^m  n 

Thus,  by  enquiring  into  the  sentence  setting  forth  the 
method  of  approaching  the  preceptor,  the  venerable  author 
of  the  Brahma-sulra  states  (in  the  first  aphorism)  that  the 
import  of  the  term  tvam  is  the  witness-self  and  states  in  the 
second  aphorism  that  the  import  of  the  term  tat  is  the 
absolute  self.  And  this  is  the  difference. 

33 


258 


SAM  K$EPAg  ARIRAKA 


Ihc  word  para  Imam  in  the  first  quarter  of  this  verse  means  dehen- 
driyahamkaradivilaksane  saksini  and  the  one  in  the  last  quarter  means 
jagalkaranc  adhis  thane.  advitive,  SS. 

[  559] 

3^1  my  *  3^  ii 

This  sutra  ( janmadyasya  yatoh )  furnishes  the  ground 
required  for  determining  the  sense  of  the  Upani§adic  text 
either  by  repetition  or  by  single  pronouncement.  The 
Upanisadic  text  is  not  capable  of  conveying  its  sense  well 
without  the  reasoning  that  would  substantiate  that  sense. 

The  sutra  janmadyasya  yalah  expresses  the  definition  of  the  self  and 
the  ground  for  determining  the  sense  of  the  text,  namely,  the  self.  So  it 
is  admitted  that  the  sutra  indicates  two  ideas  or  the  sutra  is  repeated 
twice  to  arrive  at  this  dual  significance.  A  single  pronouncement  to 
indicate  two  ideas  is  tanlra  and  repetition  of  a  statement  twice  is  avrtti. 


[  560  ] 

^  ^qqqt  ^  II 

(The  author  of  the  sutras)  explains  (in  the  first  aphorism) 
that  the  import  (of  the  sentences)  setting  forth  the  nature 
of  the  individual  soul)  is  the  (secondary )  sense  of  the  term 
tvam,  and  subsequently  (in  the  second  aphorism)  he  explains 
that  the  import  (of  the  sentences  such  as  satyam  jnanarh 
anantam  brahma)  is  the  (secondary)  sense  of  the  term  tat. 
(In  the  third  aphorism)  he  states  another  reasoning  to 
substantiate  the  sense  of  the  term  tat.  Then  he  puts  forth 
the  import  of  the  major  texts. 


FIRST  ADHYAYA 


259 


[561] 

xv-vi  %rit  SnW^^rct:  li 

Stating  the  import  of  the  term  Ivam  to  be  the  inner  self 
and  of  the  term  tat  to  be  the  absolute  self,  the  sage,  then 
declares  the  import  of  the  sentence  ( tat  Ivam  asi)  to  be  the 
oneness  of  the  self  which  is  principal  to  the  senses  of  the 
two  terms. 

[  562  ] 

The  (Upanisadic  sentence)  is  capable  of  conveying  the 
existent  entity.  It  ran  convey  (the  self)  not  subordinate  to 
nijoga,  and  it  can  also  signify  partless  entity  (Finally)  it 
is  capable  of  giving  rise  to  the  knowledge  of  the  self  that 
has  liberation  as  its  fruit. 

[  563  ] 

ifWfPSW*  I 

So  far  the  determination  of  the  import  (of  the 
Upanisadic  texts).  When  the  import  is  known,  the  know¬ 
ledge  of  the  absolute  self  alone  arises  from  the  Upanisadic 
texts  and  none  else.  And  there  will  arise  the  knowledge 
that  it  is  due  to  the  fault  of  a  person  that  there  is  the 
cognition  of  difference. 


h.  n?ftf%  —  Ti,  I3|. 


260 


SA  Kl  KS  EPA  S'  ARIRA  KA 


The  aphorism  tat  tu  samanvayat  (55,1,1,4)  means  that  the 
Upanisadic  texts  have  the  non-dual  Brahman  as  their 
import.  The  phenomenal  world  is  indeterminable  and  the 
individual  soul  is  identical  with  Brahman.  So  there  is  no 

l 

contradiction  to  the  absolute  or  non-dual  nature  of 
Brahman. 


ii  Mqtsiarw  ii 


OBJECTION:  UPANI?ADIC  TEACHING 

IS  STULTIFIED  BY  PERCEPTION,  ETC. 

[1] 

RHR^T  qfnffed  qfl  3Tdt 

ii 

The  knowledge  of  the  partless  Brahman-Atman  arisen 
from  the  Upanisads  and  confirmed  by  the  determination  of 
the  import  (of  them)  is  contradicted  by  other  proofs  based 
on  perception  which  cognize  difference. 

sarvesa rii  vcdanlanu  in  ailvilive  brnhmani  samanvayah  upapudilah,  sa  ca 
anupapannah ,  bhedagrBhipralyaksavirodha /,  77?. 

[2] 

siraifi  ifemrfaanfatq- 

Just  as  the  knowledge  arising  from  the  utterance  of 
series  of  sentences  such  as  ‘A  dry  gourd  immerses  in  water’, 
‘Stones  float  on  water’,  is  contradicted  (by  perception), 
similarly  the  knowledge  of  the  oneness  of  Brahman-Atman 
is  contradicted  by  the  cognition  of  difference. 


262 


SA  Kl  K$  EPASfA  li  I RAKA 


[3] 

^qSRfcRqqWTq  qm  f^qiS  qq  5qqq$|qt:  I 
qq  =q  ^qqiqqqdteft  ’|ftqR^  II 

I  understand  my  nature  from  perception  to  be  miser¬ 
able  (But)  the  Upanisadic  sentence1  states  my  nature  to 
be  free  from  the  cause  of  misery.  Thus  the  stultification  of 
the  Upanisidic  teaching  by  perception  is  indeed  difficult  to 
be  prevented. 

1.  vide:  (i)  yn'aS anava pipase,  Brl:.,  Ill,  v,  1. 

(ii)  na  lipyale  lokaduhLhena  bdhyah,  Hath.,  V,  11. 

[4] 

qTqis  qqq  m  =q  *Rq*q  3  WTffqqiqqiq  qqic-rq  1 1 

The  injunction  of  rituals,  by  stating  the  relation  of 
niyoga  (to  myself)  conveys  my  nature  as  associated  with 
agency  (But)  the  Upanisadic  sentences  declare  my  nature 
as  one  from  which  all  kinds  of  differences  have  been 
removed.  When  such  is  the  case,  the  validity  of  the  know¬ 
ledge  (arising  from  the  Upanisadic  sentence)  appears  to  be 
unfounded. 

dukslhilamiva  dpalali  —  anupapannameva  bhavaii,  TB. 

[5] 

sRq^qiqqTsqqt:  qq^  qiq^^qftqllqqrq^  i 
s  q  qRqfcq^i  ^rWraqmiiqqti  qq^  11 

The  combination  of  perception  and  the  ritualistic  texts 
is  capable  of  contradicting  the  Upanisadic  teaching.  As 
the  two  (namely,  perception  and  the  injunctive  texts  on  the 

s.  —  ?2,  —  T4. 

fafqqtn:  ^  —  Pi,  P2. 


SECOND  AD  [IT  A)  A 


2i'.:S 

one  hand,  and  the  Upanisadic  texts  on  the  other)  are 
similar  in  manifesting  their  content,  (perception  and  inju¬ 
nctive  texts)  cannot  severally  contradict  the  Upanisadic 
teaching. 


[<3] 

q<q^q  fqfqqiqqq^q^q  qsmqq^qqsfcqfo  ^  fqftq:  n 

Or,  perceptual  knowledge  alone,  in  view  of  its  prece¬ 
dence,  is  capable  (ofcontradicting  the  Upanisadic  teaching). 
And,  let  the  injunctive  texts  be  the  aid  to  it.  Hence,  what 
objection  can  there  be,  if  perception  alone  aided  by  the 
injunctive  texts  should  stultify  (the  knowledge  of)  the 
oneness  of  the  self 

The  proofs  such  as  inference,  comparison,  verbal  testimony,  etc., 
depend  on  perception.  Hence  the  latter  is  called  jyestha-pramana. 


UPANISADIC  TEACHING  NOT  CONTRADICTED 
J)Y  PERCEPTION,  ETC- 

[7] 

qquqq  ^  m  qqRKiiq  ^?qi 

fTfew’qfh!  d^qR^qiq  1 
gqqlft  qqqif  iqdqsnp 

qqsHduqq^  nqrfq  11 

It  is  replied;  there  is  no  proof,  except  the  Upanisadic 
sentences,  that  could  convey  the  self;  and  in  which  case 
alone  there  would  be  the  objection  of  conflict  regarding  the 
inner  self  known  from  the  Upanisadic  sentences. 


264  SAMKSEPAS'ARIRAKA 

The  view  set  forth  in  this  verse  is  based  on  the  following  bhasva 

text: 

na  hi  aharhpratyayavisayavyatirekena  tatsaksi  sarvabhutasthah  sama 
el; ah . vidhikande  tarkasamaye  va  kenacidadhigatah  sarvasya tma ,BS  B,  I,  i,  4. 

[8] 

*  mfc i^r  n 

Wise  men  hold  that  a  proof  is  that  which  makes  known 
the  unknown  object;  and,  it  is  capable  of  revealing  its 
object.  This  (definition)  is  not  reasonably  applicable  to  any 
proof  except  the  one  which  has  the  inner  self  as  its  content. 

It  is  always  the  self  that  can  be  veiled  by  avidya,  for  that  alone  is 
luminous.  Everything  else,  is  itself  insentient,  and  needs  no  external 
cause  for  being  obscured.  Hence  the  self  alone  being  veiled  by  avidya 
is  unknown  in  its  specific  nature. 


[9] 

All  proofs  except  the  Upanisadic  sentence?  compiehend 
the  external  objects.  It  is  well  known  from  the  example  of 
the  lamp  manifesting  colour  that  anything  made  up  of 
fundamental  elements  comprehends  only  a  similar  material 
thing.1 

1.  ride:  pralyaksddikniii  bhaulikamalragoearam,  bluudikalvc  sail 
pi  aka  4  ahatva /,  rupa  dipt  aka  sakopradi  parol.  .S', 9. 


i.  sHmT'T.rar  —  Mi,  15^. 


SECOND  ADHYAYA 


2(35 


[10] 


fwrn 

sqr^T  gSWStfoflRsr  STTe^T  | 

$q:  q$f5FJi?rer  ftftdl  fl  £tq; 
sfa  fNaaqr  sfe  n 

In  ordinary  experience  it  is  found  that  anything  which 
manifests  (an  object)  is  similar  to  the  object  manifested, 
through  the  generic  attribute.  It  is  well  known  in  the  world 
that  a  lamp  manifests  colour.  And  it  is  found  to  be  similar 
to  colour,  as  both  are  made  out  of  fire. 

[11] 

*nNcrfmren^  RT?TT 

hth  flUHsnfat  i 

d^ri^  ’Tin  m  n 

The  intellect  gives  rise  to  the  knowledge  of  all  objects, 
and  it  is  also  similar  in  character  to  the  objects  it  manifests. 
It  is  well  known  in  the  Vedic  texts  that  the  intellect  is  an 
element.1  Hence  it  too  has  the  elements  as  its  objects. 

1.  annaimy  nil  hi  sitewa  mmah,  Chand.,  VI,  v,  4. 

[12] 

^  wRTfas  srfsrfrcg  ^raiqqimq  I 

In  view  of  the  arguments  put  forth  above,  all  proofs 
except  the  Upanisadic  sentences,  comprehend  the  external 

i.  —  B2,  Pi,  P2,  Tc. 


266 


SAM  K$EPA$  ARI RA  KA 


objects  and  not  the  inner  self.  The  sruti  too,  in  the  passage 
— paranci,  etc.,1 — clearly  states  this  view. 

1.  The  full  Sruti  text  is  cited  in  the  following  verse. 

[13] 

The  supreme  self  inflicted  an  injury  upon  the  senses  in 
creating  them  as  comprehending  the  external  objects;  hence 
a  man  comprehends  only  external  objects  with  them  and 
not  the  inner  self.  But  a  man  of  self  control,  longing  for 
immortality,  beholds  the  inner  self  with  his  senses  withdrawn 
from  external  objects. 

This  verse  is  from  the  Kathnpani$ad,  IV,  1 . 

r  14] 

;t  nrWrirfqqB  n 

The  proof  which  is  well  known  as  giving  rise  to  the 
knowledge  (of  its  object)  by  introducing  the  character  of  an 
object  to  it1  should  be  admitted  as  one  comprehending  the 
external  objects;  and  it  does  not  comprehend  the  self  in 
view  of  the  argument  stated  above.1 

1.  See  S&,  I,  241  and  249. 

2.  Sec  Stf,  II,  10. 


1.  -  B^. 


SECOND  ADUYATA 


207 


DEFINITION  OF  A  PROOF 

[15] 

q<3  q&qq«faqqtofq3  ^ithj  • 

^  ^r^cT  dxHqqrf^q  qf#s;q^fa  II 

The  proof  which  reveals  its  object  without  introducing 
the  character  of  an  object  to  it  is  capable  of  comprehending 
the  inner  self;  and  that  proof  is  the  Upani^adic  texts  like 
tat  tvam  asi,  etc.,  and  none  else. 

For  details  See  SS,  I,  241  and  249. 

[  16] 

qi^TddRqfdTRd  3|%3  #  I 

qidtaeqiq  ffc  JIT  fqsqqll  qHqifq  3TSdT  ff  m  II 

The  knowledge  that  the  insentient  objects  are  unknown 
(that  is,  veiled  by  avidya )  cannot  be  had  before  the  rise  of 
any  proof,  as  at  that  time  there  is  no  proof  to  manifest  the 
objects  (themselves).1  There  is  also  no  proof  to  give  rise  to 
it  (namely,  the  knowledge  that  the  insentient  objects  are 
veiled  by  avidya)  before  the  rise  of  any  proof;  nor  is  it  known 
from  the  object  itself,  as  the  latter  is  insentient. 

1.  It  is  impossible  to  have  the  knowledge  that  an  insentient 
object  is  veiled  by  avidya,  if  the  insentient  object  itself  is  unknown. 

[17] 

m 

-qidtqqRji  ifh  n 


268 


SAM  K$EPAg  ARIRAK A 


The  external  object  itself,  being  insentient,  is  not 
capable  of  giving  rise  to  the  knowledge  ’that  it  is  unknown 
(that  is,  veiled  by  avidyS );  and  it  should  be  accepted  that 
there  is  no  proof  which  could  clearly  reveal  that  the  object 
is  unknown,  before  the  rise  of  any  proof. 

ovabodhavilakfanatvS  t  — jaQatvat,  TB. 

[18] 

s»?f  itraum*!*?  sftsrr- 

ftfotfq  i 

SPHtfa  fS" 

ft  qi  srcrq  ftqrctsrwriat  n 

Unless  one  knows  that  the  object  is  unknown  before 
the  rise  of  any  proof,  one  cannot  say  that  that  object  is 
known  through  a  proof.  For  there  is  no  valid  reason  to 
prove  whether  the  object  is  known  through  a  proof  or 
known  intrinsically. 

matwbalena  boiUUuim —  /»amdnnba!nmivn  jhatiuh  lathd  va 

vyavahartum,  TB. 

See  the  following  verses. 


[19] 

ft  «rr  w  i 

One  who  (perceives  a  garment  only  when  it  is  white 
and)  has  not  seen  it  when  it  was  dirty,  can  never  know 
clearly  whether  the  garment  was  naturally  white  before  or 
it  has  become  white  after  washing. 


SECOND  ADHYAYA 


2G9 


[20] 

*  ^snprsrfaft  snrcftR  fk'kzt  *h  n 

Similarly,  if  one  has  not  the  knowledge  that  an  object 
is  unknown  (that  is,  veiled  bv  avidya )  before  the  rise  of  any 
proof,  then  one  cannot  clearly  know  that  the  object  is  known 
through  proof  and  not  known  intrinsically,  for,  one  has  seen 
the  object  only  in  its  revealed  state. 

Sarvajnatman  concludes  that  it  cannot  be  said  that  the  insen¬ 
tient  objects  are  unknown  (that  is,  veiled  by  avidya).  Hence  avidya 
is  not  present  in  the  insentient  objects. 

[21] 

wawwtefift  ^  JW<imflsR5  i 

f%  ^53^  ii 

Hence  all  proofs  (except  the  Upanisadic  sentences) 
which  comprehend  only  external  objects  are  not  capable  of 
revealing  the  unknown  object.  But  in  empirical  activity,  a 
proof  depending  on  a  person  characterized  by  avidya  gives 
rise  to  verbal  usage  (like  ‘this  is  pot’  etc.). 

A  proof  is  defined  as  one  which  reveals  an  unknown  object.  And, 
an  object  which  is  veiled  by  avidya  is  said  to  be  unknown.  As  has 
been  shown,  the  inner  self  alone  is  veiled  by  avidya  and  not  the 
insentient  objects.  So  the  Upanisadic  text  alone  can  rightly  be 
called  a  proof,  as  it  reveals  the  unknown  object  -  the  self.  And 
perception,  etc.,  cannot  be  called  as  ‘proofs’,  as  they  do  not  reveal  the 
unknown  object  -  the  self.  But  perception,  etc.,  remove  avidya 
present  in  the  consciousness  delimited  by  pot,  etc.,  and  by  the  removal 
of  avidyd,  the  consciousness  delimited  by  pot,  etc.,  manifests  itself  and  it 
(namely,  the  consciousness)  reveals  the  pot,  etc.  Thereby  perception, 
etc.,  give  rise  to  empirical  usages  such  as  ‘This  is  pot’,  etc.,  and  this 
function  alone  answers  to  their  validity. 


270  SAtiK?EPA$ARlRAKA 

vide’,  ghat  a  dyavacchinnacinnis  thajftananivrttya  tadvyavaha  rahetutvamevat 
at  prdmanyarh,  S. 

DISTINCTION  BETWEEN  REAL  AND 
INDETERMINABLE  OBJECTS 

[22] 

fir  Brqfwr- 
smr- 

The  distinction  of  real  and  unreal  objects,  erroneous 
and  valid  knowledge,  and  the  object  annihilated  and  the 
one  which  annihilates,  is  present  in  the  dream  state  also, 
until  one  comes  back  to  the  waking  state.  Similarly,  in  the 
waking  state  also  let  such  a  distinction  exist  until  the 
realization  of  the  self. 


[23] 

fesRBtqTBclT 

BtBi 

fqw  mir  m  n 

In  the  dream  state,  ascending  the  heated  stone  as  the 
means  to  liberation  is  false,  and  feeding  the  brahmins  as 
the  means  to  prosperity  is  true.  Similarly,  (in  that  state) 
the  thing  related  to  ordinary  life  such  as  garland  is  true 
and  the  snake  appearing  on  it  is  false.  But,  everything 
seen  in  dream  becomes  false  at  the  cessation  of  sleep. 
Similarly,  the  objects  seen  in  the  waking  state  also  become 
false  (when  the  oneness  of  the  self  is  realized). 
taptaiilfidhircha^arh  bauddhfi  gamaprasiddham  S. 


SECOND  ADHTATA 


■£W 


r  24  ] 

(tot  dfli%3Tfai^TOT  M:  qfcq^  | 

flcTOT  ffTO  r^flffcqq  dlT^ 

^tto  w 

In  the  waking  state  also,  as  long  as  the  knowledge  of 
the  self  which  is  effective  in  dispelling  the  primordial  avidya 
has  not  arisen,  the  orthodox  men  accept  it  to  be  true  that 
the  rite  named  agmhotra  is  the  means  to  prosperity;  and 
they  discard  it  to  be  false,  that  ascending  the  heated  stone 
is  the  means  to  liberation  Similarly,  the  rope  is  known  to 
be  true,  and  its  appearing  as  serpent  is  false. 

OBJECTION:  ADVAITA  VIEW  IS  IDENTICAL 
WITH  VIJRANA-VaDA 

[25] 

*3  w  qfaqF’qq  =q  i 

qft  qi^3  fW  3  ^  flqqifqql  ^  TO:  ii 

Indeed  the  doctrine  of  the  venerable  Sankara  appears 
to  be  identical  with  that  of  Buddha.  How  are  the  two 
doctrines  not  similar,  if  the  external  objects  are  (admitted 
to  be)  false? 


[26] 

qfc  qm  ^  q-'m^:  *  qAqfafqfro  i 
*3  *nfci  n 

If  it  is  accepted  that  consciousness  alone  is  absolutely 
real  and  not  the  objects,  then  indeed  the  doctrine  of  Buddha 


v  —  M2,  P2,  B2,  Ti. 


272 


SAM  K$EPAtf  ARI RAKA 


alone  is  completely  followed  by  the  religious  mendicants 
(that  is,  the  followers  of  J>rl  Badarayana). 

In  the  following  verses,  Sarvajnatman  refutes  the  contention  set 
forth  in  this  verse,  namely,  that  the  doctrine  of  Advaita  is  similar  to 
that  of  Buddha. 

See  Introduction  pp.,  123 — 125. 

DISTINCTION  BETWEEN  ADVAITA  AND 
VJJNANA  -  VADA 

[27] 

^3  msqRfqqqrairatawqt  aft  i 

How  does  this  sage  of  Vedic  order  become  similar  to 
Buddha,  as  he  (the  sage  of  Vedic  order)  admits  that  the 
knower,  proof,  objects,  and  knowledge  are  mutually 
disparate? 

It  should  be  noted  here  that  the  Vijnana-vada  school  of  Buddhism 
admits  that  knowledge  alone  is  true  and  the  knower,  object,  and  proof 
arc  its  forms  and  they  are  not  mutually  different. 

[28] 

^3  mwrfqqqq^ft  n 

Indeed  it  has  been  admitted  in  our  system  that  the 
knower,  means,  and  objects  of  knowledge,  etc.,  are  permanent 
(till  the  realisation  of  the  self)  and  they  are  produced  by 
avidya  abiding  in  the  self  and  are  mutually  different- 

[29] 

awl  =331:  a  q^qfd  q*:  s^q:  i 

qfqqqftqt^qs^qqi!  qwffaT  11 


SECOND  ADHYAYA 


273 


The  supreme  self  is  of  the  form  of  immutable  conscious, 
ness  and  is  absolute.  As  the  witness  of  all,  it  perceives  all 
these  four  factors,  (namely,  knower,  knowledge,  its  means, 
and  object)  without  any  instruments  (such  as  sense  of  sight* 
etc.). 


[30] 

fasrqrqqT  qfw  3^:  q*q;w  5  ftsrsT  wi  I 

ft  qqft  II 

The  self  being  associated  with  the  subservient  avidya 
perceives  with  its  own  light  the  entire  universe  superimposed 
on  it  and  thus  becomes  the  witness  of  all. 

akalayan  —  padyan,  TD. 


[31] 

Hfsmrs^q]:  m 

fqsiFaqt^qdT  i 

at  ftl^qfq  fasqdhd  *qq  ^qr^s 

^  ^  q^q  ^  n 

If  recognition  that  substantiates  the  permanence  of  the 
matter  and  self  were  not  reasonable,  then  (matter  and  self  ! 
should  be  held  as  momentary  and  as  such)  the  similarity 
between  our  doctrines  would  be  established.  But  recognition 
(as  a  proof)  holds  good,  and  just  as  in  your  (Buddhistic) 
view  momentariness  is  the  characteristic  of  everything, 
similarly  in  our  view  permanence  which  is  the  nature  of  the 
universe  and  the  self  is  established- 

For  details  regarding  the  concept  of  pratyabhijM ,  see  Vivarana- 
pratneya-sangraha,  pp.  91-96. 

i.  —  Ti,  T4. 

35 


274 


SAMK$EPAg  ARIRAKA 


OBJECTION— WAKING  AND  DREAM  STATES 
ARE  IDENTICAL 

[32] 

R3  fs  zwm  qs[  m  ftswi  i 

q#sfoiRT  W*l\\ 

If  you  accept  that  the  objects  of  the  waking  state  (also) 
are  superimposed,  then  tell  me  the  manner  in  which  they 
differ  from  (the  objects  of)  the  dream  state.  For  both  alike 
are  superimposed  on  the  self. 

DISTINCTION  BETWEEN  THE  WAKING  AND 
DREAM  STATES 

[33] 

mswRmmwTW  ht wfa  ii 

The  objects  of  the  waking  state,  unlike  the  objects  of 
the  dream  state,  are  not  annihilated  when  the  knower  exists. 
For  avidya  is  annihilated  only  along  with  knower,  proof, 
objects,  and  knowledge. 


[34] 

a*?:  i ' 

Avidya  which  is  the  cause  of  the  waking  state  is 
annihilated  along  with  place,  time,  knower,  and  the  three 
states  (of  waking,  dream,  and  deep  sleep)  by  the  realization 
of  the  self  arising  from  the  Upanisadic  sentences. 


SECOND  ADHTAYA 


275 


[35] 

WMll  S^q  ^Tfqq  qrq4;  q  ^sqqtsjun^  II 

The  objects  seen  in  the  dream  state,  like  the  serpent 
appearing  on  the  rope  are  annihilated  when  the  place,  time> 
and  the  knower  exist.  But  the  objects  in  the  waking  state 
do  not  experience  this  kind  of  stultification,  as  it  is  not 
observed  to  be  so  (either  by  perception  or  by  any  other 
proof). 

[36] 

fa  qrqfaf  srmt  I 

fa  qiffaqgS  qcqqffa  ii 

Hence  as  the  waking  state  is  of  a  different  nature  from 
the  erroneous  dream  state,  it  is  held  to  be  real  until  the 
realization  of  the  supreme  self.  Being  annihilated  by  it 
(namely,  the  realization  of  the  self),  the  waking  state  is  no 
more  real. 


[37] 

dq  =q  faff!  JRqqRqaqaT  I 

nWfii  qwRqq^pT  ifefamqnfat  wk  \\ 

The  mental  state  of  the  form  of  the  supreme  self,  free 
from  any  impediment,  completely  annihilates  the  waking 
and  dream  states  which  are  (respectively)  superimposed  as 
real  and  unreal1  by  avidya  abiding  in  the  self. 

1 .  See  SS ,  II,  33-5. 

[38] 

qTSfaftsq  qqi  SR:  II 


276 


SAM  K§EPAg  ARI RAKA 


Just  as  Arjuna  destroys  the  race  of  the  Kauravas  that 
has  already  been  destroyed  by  Lord  Krsna,  similarly  the 
knowledge  of  the  self  arising  from  the  Upanisadic  texts 
dispels  the  illusory  universe  which  has  already  been  deprived 
of  its  reality  by  the  ever  conscious  self. 

The  universe  which  is  superimposed  on  the  self  Inis  no  separate 
reality  apart  from  the  self.  Hence  it  is  figuratively  stated  here  that  the 
reality  of  the  universe  has  already  been  taken  away  by  the  self.  And, 
the  knowledge  of  the  self  dispels  the  appearance  of  the  universe.  And 
this  idea  is  corroborated  by  the  illustration  of  Arjuna  killing  the 
Kauravas  who  are  already  killed  by  Kr?na. 

vide:  BhG,  xii,  3. 

DISTINCTION  BETWEEN  THE  REAL  AND 
INDETERMINABLE  OBJECTS  IS  POSSIBLE 
ONLY  IN  ADVAITA 

[39] 

q  JR!  I 

qfq  3^  W  IffNqFf  || 

The  distinction  of  the  real  and  the  unreal  in  this  way 
is  not  possible  in  any  school  other  than  the  one  of  the 
Advaitins.  If  the  unreal  were  different  from  the  real  then 
it  follows  that  that  also  is  real. 

If  silver  that  illusorily  appears  in  the  nacre  is  said  to  lie  different 
from  a  real  object,  then  ‘difference’  exists  in  the  silver  and  in  the  real 
object.  The  silver  is  known  as  dhanni  or  the  substratum  while  the 
real  object  is  known  as  praliyogin  or  counter-correlative.  As  the 
substratum  of  difference  whose  counter-correlative  is  real,  cannot  be 
unreal,  the  illusory  silver  which  is  the  substratum  of  difference  should 
be  held  as  real. 


SECOND  ADHYAYA 


277 


[40] 

*  fto  to  dtodm;  i 

*  §;*mTO*to  m  tot:  #toirjtW  u 

If  the  unreal  object  were  not  different  from  the  real 
one,  then  let  it  be  well  accepted  that  that  (unreal  object) 
also  is  real.  Nor  is  it  (namely,  the  unreal  object)  accepted 
as  different  from  and  identical  with  the  real  object;  for 
there  would  arise  (the  contingency  of)  the  two  defects  pointed 
out  in  the  two  views  (namely,  the  unreal  object  is  identical 
with  the  real  object  and  different  from  the  real  object). 

If  the  unreal  object  is  different  from  the  real  object,  then  the  unreal 
object  also  should  be  held  as  real  (See  Notes  on  Stf,  II,  39).  If  it  is 
identical,  then  also  the  unreal  object  is  real. 

[41] 

torqqftosi  ^qt  to  i 

srsratftowfepr:  n 

One  whose  mind  is  directed  towards  a  school  other 
than  that  of  the  Advaitins  cannot  maintain  that  the  sense 
of  the  Vedic  scripture  is  true  and  the  sense  of  the  Buddhistic 
scripture  is  false. 

[42] 

^  to:  qftosWTtj  i 

m  ft  srto  tor  $Rtoqf%fa:  n 

In  the  light  of  the  arguments  mentioned  before,1  let  the 
real  and  the  unreal  objects  be  superimposed  (on  the  self) 
as  mutually  different.  In  the  view  of  the  Advaitins  the 
difference  between  the  real  and  the  unreal  objects  can  be 
explained;  but  not  in  any  other  system,  in  view  of  the 
arguments  put  forth  before.8 


278 


1.  Ssf,  II,  33. 

2.  Ss',  II,  39-40. 


SAMK§EPA$ARIRAKA 


[43] 

As  there  would  be  contradiction  (with  the  3ruti  text, 
parahei ,  etc.),  any  proof  which  comprehends  the  external 
objects  cannot  reveal  the  unknown  object,  (namely,  the  self) 
and  hence  let  it  be  understood  that  all  the  proofs  reveal  the 
objects  that  are  empirically  real  and  not  the  object  that  is 
absolutely  real. 

1.  See  Ss',  II,  13. 


[44] 

dRT^ST  dd*I  qfifaa  *  w:  II 

Thus  none  of  the  proofs  (with  the  exception  of  the 
Upanisadic  sentence)  arc  capable  of  revealing  the  reality 
(that  is,  the  self),  as  they  cannot  manifest  the  unknown 
object.  Hence  it  is  not  possible  to  speak  of  the  stultification 
of  the  Upanisadic  teaching  by  any  other  proof- 

PERCEPTION  DOES  NOT  REVEAL  THE  REALITY 

[45] 


^  Rfeq- 

mrqd 


SECOND  ADHYAYA 


279 


The  sage  (3ri  Badarayana)  has  stated  in  the  aphorism? 
(i tadananyatvam )  arambhana  ( dabdadibhyah )  that  the  perception 
of  causal  substance  is  valid  and  the  perception  of  modifica¬ 
tions  is  false.  From  this  it  is  clearly  known  that  the  sage  has 
in  view  the  maxim  of  tongue  coated  with  sugar. 

Just  as  a  mother  coals  her  child’s  tongue  with  sugar  before  giving 
an  unpalatable  dose  of  medicine,  so  the  author  of  the  sulra,  on 
the  strength  of  the  iruli  text  —  vacarambhanam  vikaro  ndmadheyam r 
mrllikelyeva  satyam  (Chand.,  VI,  i,  4)  gives  in  the  sulra  —  tadananyatvam 
a rambha.yad abda dibhyah  (II,  i,  14)  the  first  impression  that  the  products 
like  jar,  etc.,  are  names  only,  while  there  exists  no  such  thing  as  a 
modification;  and  the  cause,  that  is,  the  clay  alone  is  true.  But  his 
intention  is  that  the  entire  body  of  products  including  clay,  etc.,  has 
no  existence  apart  from  the  self;  and  the  self  alone  is  absolutely  real. 

vide:  brahmavyatirekena  karyajatasyabhava  iti  gamy  ate  BSB,  II,  i,  14. 

i.  nirnik  ilpapralyaksabuddhih  —  ka  ranama  tray  a  pralyaksabuddbih . 

ii.  vikalpabuddhih  —  ghatadivikarabuddhih,  SS. 

[46] 

I 

Jaimini  too  has  stated  the  definition  of  perception 
satsarnprayoge,  etc  ,l  that  equally  applies  to  the  two  kinds  of 
perception,2  only  superficially.  But  on  examination  it  is 
found  that  the  definition  indisputably  fits  in  with  (giving 
rise  to)  the  knowledge  of  mere  self  (the  cause). 

1.  vide:  satsamprayoge  purusasyetidriyanam 

buddhijanma  tatpratyaksamanimittam  vidyamanopalambhanalva t, 

(Jaimini-sutra,  I,  1,  4.j 


280  SAM  K$EPA?>  ARIRAKA 

2.  The  perception  of  the  causal  substance  and  the  perception  of 
modifications. 


[47] 

When  he  considers  that  this  definition  is  incompatible 
with  reference  to  the  (objects  of  the)  two  kinds  of  perception, 
he  leaves  out  the  perception  of  matter  and  intends  the 
knowledge  of  the  self.  How  is  this  known?  For  he  says 
that  that  knowledge  alone  which  has  for  its  content  the 
unknown  object  comprehends  the  reality. 

[«] 

ft  sprrofqqq  i 

Venerable  Jaimini  has  stated  in  the  siUra  aulpallika,1 
etc.,  that  the  unknown  object  is  the  content  of  a  proof. 
Now  it  is  objected  that  there  it  is  said  that  the  proof  of 
religious  rite  (namely,  the  injunctive  texts)  alone  reveals 
the  unknown  object  (religious  rite)  and  not  the  proof  of  the 
self  (namely,  the  Upanisadic  passages). 

1.  aulpattikastu  iabdasyarlhena  sambandhah  tasya  jdanamupadeiah 
avyatirekaica  arthe  anupalabdhc  talpramanaih  ba darayanasya napeksalva l, 

Jaimini-sulra,  I,  i,  5. 


tattl’d  rlhat’d  mi-  anadbi»atd  rlhabodhaUam .  A  P. 


SECOND  AD H TATA 


231 


[49] 

m  qqis  cRd*ra*iwr$a.q4taT^  i 

What  you,  a  person  of  well-trained  intellect,  have 
said  is  true.  From  the  empirical  stand-point,  Jaimini  has 
said  (that  the  injunctive  texts  are  valid  in  respect  of religious 
rite)  as  it  is  applicable  to  the  context  (namely,  enquiry  into 
the  religious  rite).  But  we  learn  from  his  reference  to  the 
view  of  £>rj  Badarayana1  that  he  has  a  natural  but  well- 
concealed  import  in  the  sense  that  is  elucidated  in  the 
Uttara-mima  ritsa. 

Religious  rite,  being  insentient,  cannot  be  characterized  by  avidya. 
Hence  the  injunctive  texts  which  are  said  to  be  its  proof  do  not  reveal 
the  unknown  object  and  as  such  they  are  not  valid  in  the  strict  sense 
of  the  term.  Hence  it  is  said  that  Jaimini  has  said  from  the  empirical 
stand-point  that  they  are  valid. 

1.  vide:  Jai  mini-Sutra,  l-l-o. 

2.  In  the  Uttara-mima ihsci ,  Sri  Badarayana  holds  that  the 
Upam'sads  arc  valid  in  respect  of  the  self  which  is  unknown  (that  is, 
veiled  by  avidya). 


[50] 

^*rfq  fefaq  fqfasfo- 

The  term  drastavyah 1  is  not  injunctive  in  (character). 
It  presents  the  self  alone  as  the  object  of  the  proof  (namely, 
the  Upanisads).  Why  is  it  so?  It  is  because  that  the  self 

3G 


282 


SAM  K$EPAg  ARIRAKA 


alone  is  unknown  (that  is,  veiled  by  avidya )  and  its 
knowledge  is  not  dependent  on  human  agency- 

1.  The  term  drastavyah  is  present  in  the  sentence  — 

iilma  va  are  drastavyah,  Brh.,  IV,  v,  6. 

[5  ] 

3ft  qrfoifw:  wv  faqq  *ra- 

s^qrft^rqt  to  q^:  11 

As  the  aphorism  of  Paijini  arhe  krtyatrcaica 1  clearly 
conveys  (the  sense  of  fitness),  the  gerundive  suffix  tavya 
conveys  the  sense  that  the  self  is  fit  to  be  known,  and  not 
any  other  sense.  The  sentence  drastavyah a,  etc.,  conveys 
as  its  import,  the  knowability  exclusively  present  in  the 
self,  as  the  self  alone  is  experienced  to  be  unknown  (that  is, 
veiled  by  ayidya). 

1.  Pdnim-Sutra,  III,  iii,  109. 

2.  Brh.,  IV  v,  6. 

ekdnlalah  —  tatparyatah.  TB. 

[52] 

ft  gfow 

qm^q  qfe  riprap 

qtqqqtiRfttlT  II 

The  mental  state  of  the  form  of  shell,  etc  ,  may  be 
regarded  as  arising  from  the  contact  of  sense  of  sight  with 
a  real  object  (shell)  only  when  contrasted  with  the  mental 
state  of  illusory  silver.  But  when  contrasted  with  the 


SECOND  ADIITA  TA 


283 


mental  state  of  shell,  the  mental  state  of  the  self  which  is 
free  from  any  difference  should  be  accepted  as  arising  from 
the  association  of  the  sense  (that  is,  intellect)  with  a  real 
object  (the  self). 

Shell  is  more  real  than  the  illusory  silver.  Hence  its  perception 
arises  from  the  contact  of  sense  of  sight  with  a  real  object  —  shell. 
But  the  self  is  more  real  than  the  shell.  Hence  its  knowledge  alone, 
when  contrasted  with  the  knowledge  of  shell,  should  be  accepted  as 
arising  from  the  association  of  sense  (that  is,  intellect)  with  the 
absolutely  real  object.  It  should,  however,  be  noticed  here  that  from 
the  stand-point  of  other  schools,  it  is  said  that  the  knowledge  of  the  self 
arises  from  the  association  of  the  intellect  with  the  self. 

vide  :  aim  atmamateh  salsamprayogajanyalvam  pararilya  uktam,  SS. 

According  to  Advaita,  the  knowledge  of  the  self  arises  from  the 
Upani$adic  texts.  See  SS,  III,  295. 

[53] 

’rorrwf  ft- 

if%  i  wftrcrftr  i 

SftOTtfaftra  ft  it 

Apart  from  the  knowledge  of  the  self  arising  from 
the  Vedantas,  there  is  no  knowledge  in  the  three  worlds 
(which  may  be  regarded  as)  arising  from  the  association  of 
the  senses  with  the  real  object;  for,  (there  is  no  real  object 
except  the  self),  as  everything  (apart  from  the  self)  in  the 
universe  is  the  creation  of  avidycl. 

[54] 

sprsft  cpsraRfa  g  ’terror: 

ii 


284 


SAM  K§  EPASf  ARI RAKA 


Just  as  the  perceptual  knowledge  of  the  existent  objects 
is  real  (from  the  empirical  standpoint)  so  also  the 
knowledge  of  religious  rite  arising  from  the  injunctive  text 
is  (empirically)  real.  In  empirical  activity  both  (religious 
rite  and  the  existent  objects)  are  unknown.  But  at  the 
time  of  the  realization  of  the  self  (the  knowledge  of 
religious  rite  and  existent  objects)  is  no  longer  real. 

[55] 

The  druti  text  -  vacarambhanam ,l  etc.,  by  discar¬ 
ding  the  theory  of  transformation  and  adopting  the  theory 
of  transfiguration  is  intent  upon  totally  depriving  the 
perceptible  objects  of  reality. 

1.  vacarambhanam  vikaro  namadheyam,  Chand.,  VI,  i,  4. 

BASIS  FOR  THE  ACCEPTANCE  OF 
THE  PAR1NAMA-VADA 

[56] 

qiqqqiRmS^qf  =q  mm'*  fqqqqiqq;  I 

^qqqmfrqiqq^  gfTfimwqT^qqqTqqiw^r:  n 

Following  the  import  of  the  text  (found  in  the 
beginning)1  and  on  the  strength  of  the  text  -  vacarambhanam ,a 
etc.,  the  author  of  the  Brahma-sutra  deprives  the  other 
proofs  of  their  capacity  to  reveal  the  real  object.  Thus  he 
puts  forth  the  doctrine  of  transfiguration  as  his  final 
conclusion. 

1.  yendirutam  Srutarii  bhavati,  etc.,  Chand.,  VI,  i,  3. 

2.  vacarambhanam  vikaro  ndmadheyam,  ibid.,  VI,  i,  4. 

For  details  see  Introduction,  p.  122. 


SECOND  ADHTATA 


285 


[57] 

3lT^fRW^  <rftcw  3:1^  mm  m  sjjfc*:  II 

Tlie  disputants  frequently  argue  in  favour  of  the  theories 
of  creation,  aggregation,  transformation,  and  transfigura¬ 
tion.  The  venerable  sage  accepts  the  two  theories  (trans¬ 
formation  and  transfiguration)  by  discarding  the  theories 
of  creation  and  aggregation. 

[58] 

The  author  of  the  sutra,  in  order  to  remove  the  conflict 
(of  the  Upanisadic  teaching  with  perception),  and  to 
preserve  empirical  activity  necessary  to  carry  out  the 
injunction  of  rituals,  etc  ,  accepts  the  theory  of  transforma¬ 
tion  and  introduces  the  sutra  -  bhoktrapatteh ,  etc  / 

1.  vide  bhoktrapatteh  avibhu  «aScet '  sydllokavat,  BS,  II,  i,  13. 

For  details  sec  Introduction,  pp.  122-3. 

[59] 

II 

The  author  of  the  Brahma-sutra  conclusively  puts  forth 
the  doctrine  of  transfiguration  alone  as  his  final  view  as 
contrasted  with  the  doctrine  of  transformation.  But  the 
theory  of  transfiguration  could  be  maintained  in  the 
sutra  -  tadananyatvamarambhanadabdadibhyah  only  when  the 
theory  of  transformation  has  been  stated  (as  a  prelude  to  it). 


286 


SAMKS  EPAg  ARIRAKA 


[60] 

<rt  ffoTOrrarfagpi  u 

Only  after  having  ascended  the  ground  floor  one  can 
mount  the  next  floor.  (in  accordance  with  this  principle) 
the  Upanisadic  text  also  states  the  theory  of  transformation 
first  and  thereby  brings  out  the  relation  of  cause  and  effect. 
Later  it  rejects  the  theory  of  transformation  in  order  to 
establish  the  unreality  of  the  modifications.1 

1.  Sec  .Sis',  11,67. 


[61] 

m  swift  ftTOR:  II 

Iii  the  doctrine  of  the  Upanisads,  the  theory  of 
transformation  is  a  prelude  to  the  theory  of  transfiguration. 
When  once  the  theory  of  transformation  is  presented,  then 
the  doctrine  of  transfiguration  naturally  follows. 

Sec  Introduction,  p.  123. 


[62] 


swmftsft  tot  I 

gftijfc^  ftq§f*rg$  wwms  n 

Just  as  men  pursue  the  means  with  keen  desire  to 
achieve  the  end,  the  druti  text  and  the  venerable  sage 
(Sri  Badarayana)  speak  of  the  theory  of  transformation  in 
order  to  establish  the  theory  of  transfiguration- 


288 


SAM  K$EPAg  ARI RAKA 


The  appearance  of  many  unreal  and  varied  forms 
from  an  imutable  object  is  well  known  to  be  transfiguration, 
like  the  (appearance  of)  different  moons  OA'ing  to  different 
waves. 

UPANI§ADS  ADMIT  ONLY  THE  VIVARTA-VADA 

[67] 

3i 4  m  ^ifoqifcnql  qfwRiq^qr  1 

PTOJI  fqqqqjq  ^falf^Riq  II 

The  druti  text,  stating  the  theory  of  transformation 
first  in  the  words  ‘Let  me  be  born  and  multiply’  and  then 
stating  the  unreality  of  modifications,  establishes  the 
theory  of  transfiguration. 

The  Sruti  text  bahu  syarii  prajayjya,  ( Chand .,  VI,  ii,  3.)  states  the 
theory  of  transformation. 

Then  the  Upani?adic  text  — 

yadagne  rohilarii  riiparh  trjasah  India  path,  yacchuklam  tadapinh, 
yatkrsnarh  tadannasya  a p  d  ga  d ag  n  c  rag  nitva  di ,  vacarambhnnam  vikarn 
ndmadhcyam  trini  rupanitycva  satyam,  {Chand.,  VI,  iv,  1),  states  that 
the  modifications,  that  is,  fire,  etc.,  arc  indeterminable.  Thus  the 
iruli  text  indicates  that  fire,  etc.,  arc  the  unreal  modifications  or  the 
transfigurations  of  the  self. 

[68] 

qwsiRi^f^!  m  =q  vzh  fqqq  i 

■o 

dfcq  qqwfqqqifqqfWfl:  qwrW  n 

The  truti  and  the  smrti 2  texts  which  declare  avidya 
(to  be  the  material  cause  of  the  universe)  befit  the 
doctrine  of  transfiguration  by  depriving  the  universe  of 
reality  -  the  universe,  which  is  differentiated  as  cause  and 
effect  and  which  is  taken  to  be  real  on  the  basis  of  its 
perception  in  the  pre-realization  state. 


SECOND  ADHYAYA 


289 


1.  vide:  indro  rnayabhih  fmrurupa  iyate,  Brh.,  II,  xv,  19. 

2.  vide:  prakrlim  svarii  adhisthaya  sambhavdmydtma-mdyayd ,  Bh.G. 
iv,  6. 

REFUTATION  OF  THE  SAtilGFIATA-VADA 

[69] 

*  ft 

The  author  of  the  Brahma-sutra  refers  to  the  theory 
of  aggregation1  and  points  out  the  absence  of  the  uniting 
factor  as  a  defect  in  that  theory.  For  there  is  no  permanent 
uniting  factor  possessed  of  the  power  to  bring  about 
the  aggregation. 

1.  BS,  II,  ii,  18. 

For  details  tee  Introduction,  p.  112. 

REFUTATION  OF  THE  ARAKlBHA-VADA 

[70] 

fk  #4  qrajft  li 

The  author  of  the  Brahma-sutra  states  the  theory  of 
creative  evolution  and  points  out  to  the  Vai£e$ika  the  con¬ 
tradictions  in  his  arguments  from  his  own  standpoint.  It 
should  be  understood  that  just  as  the  visible  size  and  length 
(arise  from  the  invisible  size  and  minuteness),  the  insentient 
universe  (originates  from  the  sentient  Brahman). 

37 


290 


SAM  K$  EPAgARIRAKA 


According  to  the  Vai£e$ika,  from  invisible  atoms  and  from 
minute  and  invisible  binary  compounds,  ternary  compounds  which 
have  visible  size  and  length  are  produced.  Similarly,  the  insentient 
universe  could  arise  from  the  sentient  self.  The  author  of  the  Brahma- 
siitra  examines  the  Vai^e^ika  theory  in  the  aphorism  —  mahad-dirghavadva 
hrasvaparimandaldbhyam  (II,  ii,  11).  The  terms  hrasva  and  fiarimnrulala 
respectively  refer  to  ‘minuteness  in  length’  existing  in  the  binary 
compounds  and  the  ‘invisible  size’  present  in  the  atom.  Mahat  and 
dirgha  convey  the  ‘visible  size’  and  ‘visible  length’  existing  in  the 
ternary  compounds  and  other  higher  products. 

[71] 

at  imroiifawm 

fate  11 

The  author  of  the  Brahma-sutra  says  that  just  as  the 
ternary  compound,  produced  from  the  binary  compounds 
(that  have  invisible  size  and  minuteness)  is  not  accepted  as 
having  invisible  size  and  minuteness,  it  is  reasonable  that 
the  universe  originating  from  sentient  Brahman  is  (not 
accepted  to  be  sentient)  but  devoid  of  consciousness  and 
hence  insentient. 

[72] 

^  ^  %  t  11 

The  invisible  size  and  minuteness  present  in  the  binary 
compound  arise  not  from  the  atomic  size  (present  in  its 
cause,  namely,  atom)  but  from  duality  existing  in  its  cause 
(that  is,  two  atoms).  Similarly,  the  visible  size  and  length 


SECOND  ADHYAYA 


291 


present  in  the  ternary  compound  originate  from  triplicity 
of  its  cause  (that  is,  three  binary  compounds).1 

1.  vide:  karanabahulvdl-karanamahallvat-pracaya-viiesat  ca  mahat, 
Vaiiesika-sutra,  VII,  i,  9. 


[73  1 

sq^qr^q^q  gnftqq  q  q^qq#  n 

The  view  of  Kanada  is-that  a  binary  compound  arises 
from  the  combination  of  two  atoms  of  invisible  size  and  a 
ternary  compound  from  (the  combination  of)  three  binary 
compounds.  Nevertheless,  Kanada  does  not  maintain  this 
rule  of  causality  (regarding  the  effect  ‘visible  size’  and 
‘length’  present  in  the  ternary  product  from  ‘invisible  size’ 
and  minuteness  present  in  its  cause  —  the  binary  product.1 

1.  See  the  previous  verse. 


[74] 

sq^qpq^qqisR  qftm'q  qfq  qqiqwq:  I 
q  9  qqwftsq^  g'WtfW  qq  ftqtaq:  II 

The  quality  inhering  in  the  cause  is  not  considered  as 
an  invariable  antecedent  to  the  size  existing  in  the  binary 
and  the  ternary  compounds.  Having  this  as  the  ground, 
we  are  desirous  of  vanquishing  you. 

[75] 

=qfq  qsRir^qi^g'mti  sq$q^:  I 

* 

sq^qufew^  qqr  qRHTntsf^rqt  u 

If  the  VaiSrijika  accepts  the  origination  of  the  size  of 
the  binary  compounds  (the  ternary  compounds  and  other 


292 


SAM  K§EPAg  ARI RAKA 


higher  products)  from  the  quality  existing  in  their  cause, 
then  the  difference  in  the  size  existing  in  the  binary 

compounds,  etc.,  (from  the  one  existing  in  the  cause) 

would  be  open  to  contradiction* 

[7b] 

qformr^qpq  m  3ft:  1 

q#3*  3  ft  m  11 

Similarly,  the  author  of  the  sutra  refers1  to  the  theory 

of  transformation  (of  the  insentient  prakrti  into  the  universe) 
and  points  out  that  it  is  impossible  to  explain  the  orderly 
arrangement  (of  the  universe  on  the  basis  of  that  theory)* 
For  it  is  not  fitting  that  there  is  transformation  of  the 
insentient  object  without  (the  control  of)  God. 

1.  BS,  11,  ii,  1. 

METHOD  OF  REFUTATION  OF  THE 
RIVAL  THEORIES 

[77] 

3ft:  It 

While  refuting  the  views  of  other  systems,  the  author  of 
the  Brahma-sulra  refers  to  certain  views  only  to  refute  them. 
But  he  adverts  to  certain  other  views  to  answer  the 
objections  raised  against  his  views. 

See  the 'following  verse. 


[78] 

q^fSra^q^  qqRu^q  ftttq  tfa:  11 


SECOND  ADHTATA 


293 


The  author  of  the  Brahma-sutra  introduces  certain  views 
to  refute  them.  But  he  refers  to  some  other  views  to  meet 
the  objections  pointed  out  against  his  view  by  the  other 
schools.  And  this  is  the  difference. 

The  theory  of  aggregation  is  referred  to  only  to  be  refuted.  But 
the  theory  of  creation  ( arambha-vada )  is  examined  to  meet  the  objection 
how  the  insentient  universe  arises  from  the  sentient  self. 

[79] 

ftoamfg;:  n 

In  the  aphorism  bhoktrapalteh,  etc.,1  the  sage 
(Badarayana)  answers  the  objections  of  the  opponents  from 
the  view-point  of  the  theory  of  transformation.  He,  however, 
states  his  final  view  in  the  next  aphorism.3 

1.  BS,  II,  i,  13.  2.  ibid.,  II,  i,  14. 

[80] 

qftoTfdRq  & 

The  theory  of  transformation  is  very  near  to  the  esta¬ 
blishment  of  (the  theory  of  transfiguration  which  is)  the 
final  view  of  the  Vedantas;1  and  the  theories  of  aggregation, 
etc.,  referred  to  before,  are  remote-  On  this  ground,  it 
seems  to  some  men  who  have  lost  through  ignorance  their 
clear  discriminating  faculty  that  the  theory  of  transforma¬ 
tion  is  quite  acceptable  to  the  author  of  the  sutra. 

1.  cf:  sa  ca  (pradhanakaranavadah)  karya-karana-ananyatvabhyupa- 
gamdt  pratyasanno  vedantavadasya ,  BSB,  I,  iv,  28.  Here 


SECOND  ADI-IYAYA 


295 


The  view  that  the  universe  is  real  is  the  lowest  (preli¬ 
minary);  and  the  view  that  the  universe  is  not  real  lies  in 
between  (the  lowest  and  the  ultimate  views').  The  knowledge 
which  instructs  the  universe  to  be  unreal  and  which  anni¬ 
hilates  the  illusive  universe  is  ultimate.  The  blend  (of  the 
lowest  and  the  ultimate  views)  is  twofold  as  the  notion  of 
the  existence  of  only  one  individual  soul  and  the  notion  of 
existence  of  many  souls  longing  for  liberation.  Here  the 
negation  of  each  preceding  view  leads  to  each  succeeding 
view. 


[84] 

The  aspirant  sets  aside  the  notion  of  transformation 
and  then  cultivates  the  notion  of  transfiguration.  Dis¬ 
regarding  even  that  by  the  knowledge  of  the  (secondary) 
senses  of  the  terms  (tat  and  tv  am  in  the  sentence  tat  tvam  asi) 
he  attains  the  knowledge  of  the  oneness  of  the  self. 

vinioartqyali  —  viicscna  niicitya  varlqyali  ulpadayati,  SS. 

[85] 

The  aspirant  who  longs  for  liberation  and  who  is 
intended  to  be  conveyed  by  the  word  atha1  pursues  the 
variety  of  notions  in  due  sequence  as  mentioned  above. 
Then,  being  freed  from  the  knowledge  of  all  duality,  he 
remains  in  his  own  supreme  nature. 

1.  The  word  atha  in  the  su/ra  —atha to  brahmajijtlasa  (I,  i,  1)  refers 
to  the  aspirant. 


296 


SAMK$EPAgARIRAKA 


[86] 

Tfcrro  qsfts^  =q  i 

qftg^  d  qtf  q^foqqiRq  nftfar  li 

The  aspirant  first  considers  (the  universe  to  be)  the 
transformation  of  the  spirit  and  then  as  its  transfiguration. 
Here  he  first  thinks  that  there  are  many  individual  souls 
longing  for  liberation  and  then  he  concludes  that  there  is 
only  one  soul  desiring  release.  Then,  realising  the  supreme 
self  (to  be  his  true  nature),  he  remains  in  his  own  supreme 
mature  (that  is,  as  the  absolute  self). 

[87] 

qfcrrqfaqt  fqqddkqqi^ddqi  sqqfadr  i 
faq  qfd  n 

The  notion  of  transfiguration  is  determined  as  negating 
the  notion  of  transformation.  (But)  it  is  also  called  ‘super¬ 
position’  with  reference  to  the  knowledge  that  annihilates 
all  duality. 

The  notion  of  transfiguration  is  apavada  or  negating  factor  as  it 
negates  the  notion  of  transformation.  But  as  it  is  negatived  by  the 
realization  of  the  self,  it  is  termed  ‘superposition’  ( aropa )  also. 

[88] 

qsjqtdqqtlqt:  d  II 

Hence  the  notion  of  transfiguration  becomes  the 
blend  of  the  notion  of  transformation  and  the  know¬ 
ledge  of  the  self.  But  the  preliminary  and  ultimate 
views  (namely,  the  notion  of  transformation  and  the 
knowledge  of  the  self )  are  not  of  the  form  of  ‘blend’. 


SECOND  ADHYAYA 


297 


OBJECTION:  THREE  POINTS  OF  VIEW  RELATE 
TO  THREE  TYPES  OF  ASPIRANTS 

[89] 

3$i:  «?<nrafsa4  qui  n 

One  whose  mind  is  not  free  from  desire  (for  enjoy¬ 
ment)  here  or  hereafter  considers  the  world  to  be  the 
transformation  of  Brahman;  while  the  other  whose  mind  is 
free  from  sin  regards  the  universe  as  the  transfiguration  of 
the  self.  The  steady-minded  aspirant,  on  the  other  hand, 
sees  the  supreme  self  which  is  free  from  duality. 

In  this  and  the  following  verses  it  is  said  that  the  three  points 
of  view  are  put  forth  not  with  reference  to  only  one  person  but  with 
reference  to  three  different  kinds  of  persons.  This  view  is  refuted  in 
verse  91. 

[90] 

351  to*  *  u 

The  intermediate  notion  of  transfiguration  present  in 
a  person  whose  mind  is  freed  from  sin  is  two-fold  in  view 
of  two  kinds  of  persons.  One  of  the  two  observes  the  world 
as  having  many  souls  longing  for  release,  while  the  other 
is  not  so  (that  is,  considers  it  as  having  only  one  individual 
soul  desiring  release). 

THE  THREE  POINTS  OF  VIEW  RELATE  TO 
ONLY  ONE  ASPIRANT 

[91] 

38 


290  SAMK?EPAgARIRAKA 

Some  men  of  great  intellect  maintain  thus.  That  view, 
being  impossible,  is  defective.  The  author  of  the  sutra ,  by 
the  word  atha1,  points  out  one  aspirant  and  not  three  kinds 
of  aspirants. 

1.  vide:  BS,  I,  i,  1. 


[92] 

aw  r  l 

wsto  m  ^  fdgtn  swTwfa  srrtoW:  ii 

The  highest  stage  (that  is,  the  third  stage)  naturally 
approaches  the  aspirant  who  is  gradually  functioning  in 
the  three  stages.  To  him  who  remains  in  that  stage,  the 
distinctive  knowledge  of  cause  and  effect  (avidya  and  its 
products)  ceases  to  exist. 

uttamabhu mika  —  akhartdmdksa (karalaksarta  apava  dadrstih,  TB. 

[93] 

snito  to  *  ft  sRigtoa  ii 

The  Upani^adic  sentences,1  the  sutras  of  Bsdarayana, 
and  the  words  of  Sri  Sankara,  who  is  the  expert  in  deter¬ 
mining  the  import  of  these  two,  would  never  become 
appropriate  without  the  three  stages  mentioned  in  respect 
of  the  three  points  of  view. 

This  verse  is  restated  in  Stf,  III,  241. 

[94] 


1.  q'rlt-T  — 


nth  —  Pa 


SECOND  AD  HT AT  A 


299 


Hence  the  author  of  the  Brahma-sutra,  before  stating 
his  final  view,  eliminated  the  conflict  of  the  Upani$adic 
teaching  with  perception,  etc.,  1"  not  rejecting  the  view 
that  perception,  etc.,  are  capable  of  revealing  a  real  object. 

[95] 

Here,  on  the  basis  of  the  druti  text  -  vacararhbhanam, 
etc.1,  the  author  of  the  sutra,  in  order  to  remove  the  conflict 
of  the  import  of  the  Upani^adic  passages  with  perception, 
etc.,  rejects  the  capacity  of  perception,  etc.,  in  revealing  a 
real  object. 

1.  vide:  Chand.,  VI,  i,  4. 


[9fi] 

The  knowledge,  arising  from  the  sentences  whose 
import  (has  been  determined)  and  having  for  its  content 
the  partless  (self),  will  doubtless  fade  away  at  once,  if  per¬ 
ception,  etc.,  reveal  the  real  objects. 

[97] 

sRfo  T§  li 

While  determining  the  significative  power  of  the  words 
it  has  been  said  before  (that  is,  in  the  first  adhyaya  of  the 
present  work)  that  the  terms  ( tat  and  tvam)  present  in  the 
Upani^adic  sentence  [tat  tvam  a  si)  convey  the  partless  and 
absolute  self- 


$00 


SAMK^EPAgARIRAKA 


'[98  p 

m*$l  p:  qqqqfsqqqq)  n 

Hence  to  establish  the  removal  of  conflict  (of  the  Upa- 
ni?adic  teaching  with  perception,  etc.),  we  have  refuted  the 
view  that. perception,  etc.,  reveal  a  real  object.  But  their 
empirical  validity  is  coriser ved  and  hence  everything 
(namely;  the  import  of  the  ■>  Upani^adjc  teaching  and  the 
empirical  validity)  is  faultless. 

[99] 


It  is  well  known  that  the  conscious  self  itself  is  the 
cause  of  its  manifestation.  But  avidya  abiding  in  the  cons¬ 
ciousness  veils  it  and  presents  contrary  notions. 

[100] 

qq:  5PJ^ :  li 

Though  avidya  present  in  the  self  rules  out  the  capacity 
of  mind,  etc.,  in  revealing  a  real  object,  yet  it  does  not 
preclude  their  capacity  in  maintaining  empirical  validity 
(of  the  phenomenal  world). 

[101] 

M:  flfopsq  fdgft  q 


SECOND  ADHYAYA 


301 


Avidya  docs  not  obstruct  the  power  of  the  Upani$adic 
sentences  in  giving  rise  to  the  knowledge  of  the  self.  It  only 
obstructs  the  manifestation  of  the  self f  arisinc  by  itself 
(namely,  the  self)  and  not  the  knowledge  of  the  self  arising 
from  the  Upani$adic  sentences- 

[102] 

smr^q  I 

tft  q^qiqm^q  ii 

Avidya  is  a  defect  in  respect  of  perception,  etc.,  and  not 
in  respect  of  the  Upani$adic  texts.  As  4t  yeilsr  the.  absolute 
and  true  self  and  brings  about  duality,  it  is  a  defect. 

[103  ] 

fa  =q  Hqjstqfeqfasj 

*qq?  ^  tfqqfd  ^qfqqiqfaV*  ii 

All  the  Upani$ads  convey  the  inner  self  while  the. 
other  proofs  are  directed  only  towards  the  external  objects. 
There  cannot  be  any  conflict  between  the  knowledge  of  the 
inner  self  and  the  knowledge  of  the  external  objects,  as  the 
two  objects  are  clearly  marked  off. 

[104] 

vtfim  $q  qj:  q£  i 

q£sfa  q?t  fq^qq  qs:  ii 


1.  3*nf:  —  I’i,  T4 


—  Mi,  Tj,  T2,  T3 


302 


SAMK?EPAgARIRAKA 


The  cloth  is  perceived  as  unitary  and  not  even  a  trace 
of  difference  is  found  in  it.  If  difference  is  admitted  in  the 
cloth,  then  it  would  be  torn  to  shreds.  Where  then  is  (the 
existence  of)  the  cloth? 

For  details  see  Introduction,  p.  62. 

[105] 

to  Sctocf  I 

q  qqfaq;  m  ^  toqfto^  n 

If  it  is  admitted  that  the  cloth  is  different  from  pot» 
then  there  is  the  contingency  of  difference  being  super¬ 
imposed.  A  thing  which  depends  on  another  thing  for  its 
existence  is  not  real  (that  is,  superimposed).  And  this  point 
•wilfbe  explained  (later)1  carefully. 

1.  vide:  Sg,  IN,  188-93. 

i 

‘Difference  from  pot’  exists  in  cloth.  Here  ‘difference’  existing 
in  cloth  involves  a  reference  to  ‘pot’  and  hence  it  depends  on  ‘pot’ 
for  its  existence  and  as  such  it  is  not  real. 


[106]  (( 

*  qqto  tofq  i 

*  fqii^q  *«q&  srtofaqtmkfq  n 

The  cognition  of  difference  is  not  reasonable  without 
a  previous  knowledge  of  the  correlative  and  counter-corre¬ 
lative.  And  the  knowledge  of  correlative  and  counter- 
correlative  is  not  reasonable  without  a  prior  knowledge  of 
difference. 


For  details  see  Introduction,  p.  62. 


SECOND  ADHYAYA 


303 


[107] 

*  %s$ft3tqqw  *  m  ft^TCT  I 
^  iiftstf  fa  tos  n 

The  cognition  (that  two  objects  possess)  contradictory 
attributes  is  riot  reasonable  without  a  previous  knowledge 
that  the  two  objects  are  mutually  different.  And  the  latter 
also  does  not  hold  good  without  the  former.  Thus  there 
results  the  defect  of  mutual  dependence.  Hence  let  the  two 
cognitions  be  superimposed. 

[108] 

sreRtnure*  *  fa  ^jsrffsFrre:  ii 

The, result  of  the  proofs  of  external  objects  is  not  the 
removal  of  (doubt  which,  should  be)  either  an  existent 
entity  or  a  non-existent  entity  or  an  entity  which  is  existent 
and  non-existent  at  once.  For  this  reason  also,  perception, 
etc.,  do  not  contradict  the  knowledge  (of  the  self) 
arising  from  the  Upani$adic  sentences. 

Perception,  etc.,  are  not  valid  because  they  do  not  produce  any 
tangible  result.  If  it  be  said  that  the  removal  of  doubt  regarding  the 
object  is  the  result  of  perception,  then  it  does  not  hold  good.  For 
the  doubt  of  the  object  that  is  said  to  be  removed  should  either  be 
real  or  unreal  or  both.  A  real  thing,  like  the  self,  cannot  be  removed. 
An  unreal  thing  also,  like  the  horn  of  a  hare,  does  not  exist  and 
hence  cannot  be  removed.  And  an  object  cannot  be  real  and  unrea} 
at  once;  for,  such  a  notion  is  discrepant.  Other  systems  of 
philosophy  do  not  accept  the  concept  of  anirvacaniya,  in  which  case 
it  can  be  said  that  the  proofs  remove  the  object  which  is  ■  anirvacaniya. 
Hence  perception,  etc.,  do  not  produce  any  result  and  hence  they  are 
not  valid.  When  such  is  the  case,  there  is  no  question  of  their 
contradicting  the  knowledge  of  the  self  arising  from  the  Upanijads. 


304 


SAMK$EPAS?  ARIRAKA 


[109] - 

'RtRRW  g^Rlft:  I 

STSRRmST  Ttf  rl^sfq  *  II 

The  result  of  the  proofs  of  external  objects  is  not  the 
rise  (of  knowledge)  which  is  either  non-existent  or  existent 
or  existent  and  non-existent  at  once-  For  this  reason  also, 
perception,  etc.,  (are  not  valid  and  hence  they)  do  not  con¬ 
tradict  the  Upani^adic  teaching. 

[110] 

srar&rfN  ft  $*ra:  rss  ti?T  ft  i 

The  knowledge  of  insentient  objects  is  not  the  result 
(of  sense  of  sight  and  other  senses)  that  function;  for 
function  also  (being  an  effect)  should  be  accepted  as  the 
result  of  a  thing  that  functions.  (And  so  on,  ad  infinituv\). 
If  one  says  that  (the  knowledge  of  insentient  objects)  is  the' 
result  (of  sense  of  sight,  etc.)  that  do  not  function,  then  this 
evil-minded  person  will  be  laughed  at  even  by  children. 

[in]  '■ 

sdi  d  f|  worm  tissspsriat:  l 

R  *  STRRiqft  sfed;  n 

If  knowledge  is  existent,  then  it  cannot  be  produced 
because  of  its  very  existence  (like  the  self).  If  it  is  non¬ 
existent,  then  also  it  cannot  be  produced,  because  of  its 
non-existence  (like  horn  of  a  hare).  It  is  not  reasonable  (to 
hold)  that  it  is  existent  and  non-existent.  Hence  knowledge 
is  not  a  tiling  that  can  be  produced. 


SECOND  ADHYAYA  S05 

It  cannot  be  said  that  perception,  etc.,  are  valid  by  giving  rise  to 
the  knowledge  of  objects. 


[112] 

^  ft  5i%*fa  i 

qft  p  wfW  n 

It  is  not  commendable  to  hold  that  ‘knowledge’  which 
is  capable  of  being  produced  is  originated  (by  perception, 
etc.);  for,  then  there  would  arise  the  contingency  of 
‘capability’  being  produced  (and  so  on  ad  infinitum).  If  it 
is  admitted  (by  one)  that  ‘knowledge’  which  is  not  capable 
of  being  produced  is  generated,  then  one  may  very  well  be 
asked  to  powder  ether  immediately  by  means  of  a  club,  etc., 
(which  is  impossible). 

What  is  Originated  ( utpadya )  is  an  entity  which  possesses  or  which 
is  associated  with  the  iakti  or  the  capability  of  being  produced.  The 
entity  which  is  associated  with  such  iakti  is  termed  iakya. 

Now,  the  point  of  criticism  is  the  origination  of  iakya  or  the  entity 
which  is  associated  with  iakli  would  not  be  possible,  if  iakti 
which  is  adjectival  is  not  originated.  If  iakti  also  is  originated, 
then  it  -must  be  admitted  that  this  iakli  possesses  or  is 
associated  with  another  iakti  or  the  capability  of  being  produced. 
Exactly  similar  consideration  applies  to  the  third  sakti  which  is 
admitted;  and,  thus  we  are  led  to  the  fallacy  of  infinite  regress. 

C  113  J 

• 

As  the  result  of  the  proofs  of  the  insentient  objects 
cannot  be  determined,  (the  proofs  are  not  valid)  and  hence 
the  true  nature  of  the  insentient  objects  is  indeterminable. 

39 


306 


SAMK?EPA$ARIRAKa 


Therefore  perception,  etc.,  do  not  contradict  even  through 
their  objects  the  sense  of  the  Upani$ads. 

arthato'pi  —  visayato'pi,  TB. 

See  Introduction,  p.  63. 


[114] 

Or  else,  let  all  the  proofs  be  valid  in  respect  of  the  self 
(which  is  cosmic).  And  we  deliberately  admit  that  the  Upa- 
ni$ads  are  clearly  in  conflict  with  them.  Even  then,  the 
knowledge  of  the  self  arising  later  from  the  Upani§ads  in 
the  case  of  an  aspirant,  sublates  perception,  etc.,  which 
have  arisen  earlier. 

atmanyeva  -  saprapaiicatmani  ityarthah,  S. 

THE  MAXIM  THAT  THE  ANTECEDENT  ONE  IS 

INEFFECTIVE 

[115]  , 

my 

HsfR  I 


The  subsequent  knowledge  revealing  the  true  nature  of 
a  barren  land  oannot  arise  without  sublating  the  erroneous 
knowledge  of  mirage  which  arose  earlier.  Just  as  it  arises 


SECOND  ADHTATA 


307 


only  by  sublating  the  knowledge  of  mirage,  similarly  only 
by  sublating  the  knowledge  of  duality  the  knowledge  of  the 
self  arises  from  the  Upanisads. 

[116] 

3^  3f|  tftar  li 

Jaimini,  in  the  sixth  chapter  (of  the  Purva-mima  msa- 
sutra)  has  said  that  the  antecedent  one  is  ineffective  when 
there  is  the  relation  of  antecedence  and  subsequence.1  We 
shall  explain  to  you  all  the  details  connected  with  it  and 
you  fix  your  attention  on  them. 

1.  vide  paurvaparye  purvadaurbalyarh  prakftivat, 

Purva-mima  msa-sutra,  VI,  v,  19/54. 

[117] 

f%  qr  tfkm- 

aqr  qt  n 

At  the  time  of  the  performance  of  a  ritual  (that  is,  when 
going  round  the  sacrificial  fire),  if  the  priests  UdgatS  and 
Pratiharta,  successively  let  go  (the  waist-cloth  of  the  priest 
in  front),  then  there  arises-  the  doubt  whether  the  sacrifice 
is  to  be  concluded  by  giving  the  entire  wealth  (of  the 
sacrificer  as  the  fee)  to  the  priests  or  without  giving  any  fee, 
On  this,  the  sage  Jaimini  has  said  that  the  latter  is  effective. 

The  section  VI,  v,  17/49-50  of  the  Purva-mima  msa-sutra  discusses 
the  passage  - 

yadyudgata  apacchindydt  adak$inam  tamyajfiarh  iffva.  punaryajeta, yadi 
pratihartd  sarvavcdasam  dadyat 


SAKI  K$EPAg  ARIRAKA 

In  the  Jyotistoma  sacrifice,  the  priests  should  go  round  the  sacri¬ 
ficial  fire  by  holding  the  waist-cloth  of  the  priest  in  front.  If  Udgata 
—  the  priest  who  chants  the  hymns  of  the  S a  ma-ve da  —  lets  go  the 
waist-cloth  of  the  priest  in  front  of  him,  then  to  expiate  this,  the 
sacrifice  should  be  concluded  without  giving  any  sacrificial  fee  to  the 
priests.  If  Pratiharta  —  the  priest  who  chants  the  hymns  of  the 
Q.g-veda  —  does  so,  then  the  sacrifice  should  be  completed  by  giving  the 
entire  wealth  of  the  sacrificer  as  the  sacrificial  fee.  If  the  two  let  go 
the  waist-cloth  successively,  then  the  sacrificer  should  conclude  the 
sacrifice  by  giving  as  fee  that  which  relates  to  the  later  loss  of  grip. 

This  is  discussed  in  the  Purva-mima msa-sutra,  VI,  v,  19/54. 

[118] 

When  there  arises  a  conflict  between  the  accessories 
of  the  model  sacrifice  {prakpti-yaga)  and  the  accessories  of  the 
sacrifice  modelled  ori  it  ( vikrti-yaga ),  the  accessories  of  the 
latter  supersede  the  accessories  of  the  former,  as  the 
knowledge  of  the  two  sets  of  ancillaries  arises  successively^ 
Though  there  may  be  the  reversal  of  the  order  of  the  texts 
(that  enjoin  the  prakrti-yaga  and  the  vikrli-yaga),  there 
exists  the  sequence  in  the  knowledge  of  the  accessories.  The 
knowledge  of  the  accessories  of  the  model  sacrifice  arises 
earlier  and  the  knowledge  of  the  other  arises  later.  It  is 
only  thus  that  the  knowledge  arises. 

Jaimini  has  said  that  the  subsequent  one  is  ineffective  when  there 
is  the  relation  of  antecedence  and  subsequence  between  two 
cognitions;  and  this  maxim  he  explains  by  making  a  reference  to  a  model 
sacrifice  (prakjtivat) . 


SECOND  ADHYAYA 


309 


vide-,  paurvaparye purvadaurbalyarh  prakftival,  Pu rva-mi ma rhsa-sutra.% 

VI,  v,  19/54- 

Thc  meaning  of  the  expression  prakftivat  is  explained  in  this  verse. 
There  are  two  kinds  of  sacrifices,  one  a  model  sacrifice  (prakfti-yaga) 
and  another  a  sacrifice  modelled  on  it  (vikfti-yaga).  There  is  a  maxim 
that  vikrti-yaga  must  be  performed  like  prakfti-yaga.  It  follows  from 
this  that  the  accessories  prescribed  in  respect  of  prakfti-yaga  would 
exactly  apply  to  vikfti-yaga.  But  in  certain  cases  the  Vedic  text  speci¬ 
fically  prescribes  with  reference  to  vikfti-yaga  an  accessory  different 
from  the  one  prescribed  in  respect  of  prakfti-ySga. 

Now  according  to  the  maxim  that  vikfti-yaga  must  be  performed 
like  prakfti-yaga,  the  knowledge  of  prakfti-yaga  arises  first  and  the 
knowledge  of  vikfti-yaga  arises  later.  Even  if  the  order  of  the  Vedic 
texts  which  enjoin  the  performance  of  prakfti-yaga  and  vikfti-yaga  is 
reversed,  then  also  the  knowledge  of  prakfti-yaga  alone  would  arise 
first.  It  is  because  the  performance  of  vikfti-yaga  depends  upon  the 
knowledge  of  prakfti-yaga. 

Thus,  since  the  knowledge  of  prakfti-yaga  and  its  accessory  arises 
earlier,  the  knowledge  of  the  vikfti-yaga  with  a  different  accessory 
which  arises  later  cannot  arise  without  sublating  the  knowledge  of  that 
accessory  of  prakfti-yaga.  The  point  that  is  of  importance  here  is  that 
the  subsequent  one  sublates  the  antecedent  one. 

[119] 

When  the  earlier  and  later  cognitions  are  inter¬ 
dependent,  then  the  earlier  one  is  the  sublating  factor  and 
the  later  one  is  sublated.  The  knowledge  arising  from  the 
word  veda  found  in  the  beginning  is  powerful  and  not  the 


SAMKREPASTARIRAKA 


510 

one  arising  from  the  word  rk  found  at  the  end  of  the 
■  passage.  And,  the  word  veda  found  in  the  beginning  is 
taken  in  its  primary  sense,  while  the  word  rk  is  taken  in  its 
secondary  sense. 

In  the  section  dealing  with  jyotiftama  saciificc  there  exists  the 
passage  —  Irayo  veda  asrjyanta,  ague  fgvedati,  vayoryajurvedah,  ddityd t 
samavedah  —  where  the  word  veda  is  present.  In  the  end  there  is  the 
passage  —  uccaih  fed  kriyale,  upamdu  yaju$a,  ttccaih  sdmna  —  where  the 
words  j-k,yajus,  and  sdman  are  found.  Now  there  arises  the  doubt  whether 
the  word  rk  signifies  the  Rg-veda  or  the  metrical  hymns  found  in  any 
veda.  It  is  said  that  as  the  knowledge  of  the  word  rk  found  in  the  end 
is  related  to  the  knowledge  of  the  word  veda  in  the  beginning,  the 
meaning  of  the  word  rk  is  determined  by  the  Rg-veda  that  occurs  at 
the  beginning.  The  woid  rk  is,  therefore,  taken  in  its  secondary  sense 
of  the  Rg-veda. 

This  is  discussed  in  the  Pdroa-mlmamsa -sutra,  III,  iii,  1/1-9. 


[120] 

As  regards  the  two  words  brahma  and  puccha  present  in 
the  sentence  brahma  puccham  {protista),1  ihe  word  brahma 
(occurring  at  the  beginning)  is  more  powerful  than  the 
other  word  puccha  and  hence  it  is  accepted9  that  the  word 
puccha  should  be  taken  in  its  secondary  sense. 

1.  Taitt.  II,  v,  1. 

2.  vide\  BSB,  I,  i,  19. 


[121] 


SECOND  ADHTATA 


Sll 


If  the  beginning  portion  contains  a  few  particulars, 
while  the  concluding  one  many,  and  if  there  arises  conflict 
between  the  two,  then  the  concluding  portion  alone  is 
powerful. 

The  Cha ndogyo’panisad — asya  lokasya  ka  gatiriti,  akdia  iti  hovaca, 
sarvaixi  ha  va  imatii  bhutani  akaiadeva  samutpadyante,  aka  i  am  pratyastam 
gacclianti  (I,  ix,  1)  is  considered  in  BS  -  akaiastallingat  (I,  i,  22). 
Here  the  word  akaia  which  means  ‘ether’  is  taken  to  signify 
the  self  in  accordance  with  the  concluding  portion  which 
mentions  all  the  prominent  characteristics  of  the  self  as  existing  in 
akaia.  Here  the  concluding  portion  is  more  powerful  than  the 
beginning  one. 

[122] 

31*1  I 

w  srr^:  H 

The  beginning  portion  containing  a  few  particulars 
but  conveying  the  intended  sense  is  the  sublating  factor, 
while  the  concluding  portion  containing  many  particulars 
but  conveying  the  unintended  sense  is  sublated. 

The  Aitareyo’ panifad  texts  atma  va  idameka  eva  agre  dsit  (I,  i)  and 
sa  imdn  lokanasrjata  (I,  2)  are  considered  in  BS  -  dtmagrhitiritaravadu- 
ttaral  (III,  iii,  16). 

Here  the  beginning  sentence  conveys  the  oneness  of  the  self 
which  is  the  intended  sense.  The  concluding  portion  which  conveys 
the  creation  of  the  universe  by  the  self  refers  to  the  qualified  self  and 
hence  it  is  sublated.  Though  the  concluding  portion  contains  many 
details,  still,  as  the  beginning  containing  a  few  details  happens  to 
contain  the  chief  import,  it  supersedes  the  end  which  contains  many 
details. 

[123] 


312 


SAKl  K$EPAg  ARI RAKA 


Just  as  an  inferential  cognition,  the  object  of  which  is 
mediate,  is  contradicted  by  perception,  the  object  of  which 
is  immediate,  even  so  the  knowledge  arising  from  per¬ 
ception  is  contradicted  by  the  knowledge  from  the 
Upani$ads  that  has  for  its  content  the  inner  self  (which  is 
the  most  immediate). 

The  object  of  perception  is  immediate,  while  the  object  of 
inferential  knowledge  is  mediate.  But  the  self  which  is  the  ohject  of 
the  knowledge  arising  from  the  Upani$ads  is  the  most  immediate. 
Hence  the  Upani$adic  teaching  stultifies  perception. 

[124] 

qfaqsqt  at  JnrmRt 
qpqq&ft  qRq^qrq^rcforq;  ^  i 

sm^q  3  ^fqq'qtqmt  q«u  mh  n 

Moreover,  all  the  proofs  (other  than  Vedanta)  reveal 
their  objects  only  on  the  strength  of  the  content  of  the 
Upani$ads,  namely,  the  self,  and  hence  they  arc  dependent 
on  the  self.  The  object  which  depends  on  a  particular 
thing  is  not  capable  of  sublating  the  latter,  that  is,  the 
thing  on  which  it  depends,  when  there  arises  conflict 
between  the  two,  just  as  the  smrti  text  is  not  authoritative 
when  it  is  in  conflict  with  scripture.1 

(1)  vide:  virodhe  tvanapeksyam  syat  asati  hi  anumanam, 
Purva-mimamsa-sutia,  I,  iii,  2. 

[125] 

mf&te  sto 

fqqT  mm  3 

at  m  qrqw  11 


SECOND  ADHYAYA 


313 


The  mental  state  arising  from  the  Upanisads,  on  the 
strength  of  the  reflection  of  the  self  in  it,  annihilates  the 
group  of  senses  and  their  objects  that  arise  from  avidya 
abiding  in  the  self.  The  knowledge  arises  (from 
the  Upanisads)  by  having  the  absolutely  real  object  as  its 
content.  But  avidya  is  devoid  of  reality,  and  hence  the 
knowledge  of  the  self,  by  its  mere  rise  annihilates  it  (that  is, 
avidya),  just  as  the  sun,  by  its  very  rise,  dispels 
darkness 

grahaganarii  —  indriyani;  aiigrahah  —  visayah,  AP. 

vide :  Drh.,  Ill,  ii,  2  and  5. 

[126] 

few 

You,  being  an  expert  in  applying  the  great  weapon  in 
the  form  of  firm  knowledge  of  the  self,  shall  cut  down  the 
tree  of  samsara  which  has  put  forth  shoots  from  the  root- 
cause,  namely,  dense  avidya  abiding  in  the  self,  and  to 
which  passion  and  hatred  are  the  two  principal  branches; 
the  mental  states  that  reveal  the  qualities  of  excellence  (and 
defect)  as  present  in  the  external  objects  are  the  subsidiary 
branches;  and  the  varied  experiences  of  happiness  and 
misery  arising  from  the  performance  of  the  deeds  leading 
to  merit  and  demerit  arc  the  sprouts. 

[127] 

irq  q;rw 

sqRq  sfteroqte  fmnqqq  I 

qw  <?;q  fqsra  w  dqqr  gqfft%foq: 

d  3  wbI  ^  *T*IT  STTdft  II 


314 


SAM  K$EPAgARIRA  KA 


Avidya  which  has  the  self  as  its  locus  and  object 
is  termed  illusion,  darkness,  material  cause  (of  the  universe), 
pitch  darkness,  root-cause  (of  the  universe),  and  ignorance. 
The  universe  characterised  by  the  difference  of  preceptor, 
etc.,  is  its  transformation  and  is  fancied  by  you  (that  is,  the 
aspirant).  The  universe  has  no  independent  existence 
apart  from  the  self  like  the  objects  of  the  dream  state. 

pratyagoastunah — pratyakcaitanya  £ rita ,  SS. 

[128] 

THE  DISTINCTION  OF  RELEASE  AND  BONDAGE 
ACCORDING  TO  THE  EKA-JIVA-VADA 

31  M 

The  released  and  bound  souls,  the  mystic  and  the 
ignorant,  and  the  universe  from  ether  to  the  earth  are 
different  from  you  and  should  be  understood  to  be  the 
transformation  of  your  intellect  which  has  arisen  from  your, 
avidya.  Do  not  take  them  otherwise. 

Sarvajnatman  advocates  the  theory  of  only  one  individual  soul 
( eka-jiua-vada )  in  this  and  the  following  verses.  He  maintains  the 
theory  of  many  individual  souls  ( aneka-jiva-vada )  also. 

[129] 

The  time  that  had  passed  is  beginningless  and  the 
future  is  endless.  The  released  and  ignorant  souls  existed 
before  and  will  exist  hereafter-  (As  this  view  is  correct) 
if  you  doubt  that  it  is  not  reasonable,  do  not  disbelieve 
(what  I  have  said);  for  it  holds  good  when  viewed  in  the 
light  of  dream  experience. 


312 


SAKl  K$EPAg  ARI RAKA 


Just  as  an  inferential  cognition,  the  object  of  which  is 
mediate,  is  contradicted  by  perception,  the  object  of  which 
is  immediate,  even  so  the  knowledge  arising  from  per¬ 
ception  is  contradicted  by  the  knowledge  from  the 
Upani$ads  that  has  for  its  content  the  inner  self  (which  is 
the  most  immediate). 

The  object  of  perception  is  immediate,  while  the  object  of 
inferential  knowledge  is  mediate.  But  the  self  which  is  the  ohject  of 
the  knowledge  arising  from  the  Upani$ads  is  the  most  immediate. 
Hence  the  Upani$adic  teaching  stultifies  perception. 

[124] 

qfaqsqt  at  JnrmRt 
qpqq&ft  qRq^qrq^rcforq;  ^  i 

sm^q  3  ^fqq'qtqmt  q«u  mh  n 

Moreover,  all  the  proofs  (other  than  Vedanta)  reveal 
their  objects  only  on  the  strength  of  the  content  of  the 
Upani$ads,  namely,  the  self,  and  hence  they  arc  dependent 
on  the  self.  The  object  which  depends  on  a  particular 
thing  is  not  capable  of  sublating  the  latter,  that  is,  the 
thing  on  which  it  depends,  when  there  arises  conflict 
between  the  two,  just  as  the  smrti  text  is  not  authoritative 
when  it  is  in  conflict  with  scripture.1 

(1)  vide:  virodhe  tvanapeksyam  syat  asati  hi  anumanam, 
Purva-mimamsa-sutia,  I,  iii,  2. 

[125] 

mf&te  sto 

fqqT  mm  3 

at  m  qrqw  11 


SECOND  ADHYAYA 


313 


The  mental  state  arising  from  the  Upanisads,  on  the 
strength  of  the  reflection  of  the  self  in  it,  annihilates  the 
group  of  senses  and  their  objects  that  arise  from  avidya 
abiding  in  the  self.  The  knowledge  arises  (from 
the  Upanisads)  by  having  the  absolutely  real  object  as  its 
content.  But  avidya  is  devoid  of  reality,  and  hence  the 
knowledge  of  the  self,  by  its  mere  rise  annihilates  it  (that  is, 
avidya),  just  as  the  sun,  by  its  very  rise,  dispels 
darkness 

grahaganarii  —  indriyani;  aiigrahah  —  visayah,  AP. 

vide :  Drh.,  Ill,  ii,  2  and  5. 

[126] 

few 

You,  being  an  expert  in  applying  the  great  weapon  in 
the  form  of  firm  knowledge  of  the  self,  shall  cut  down  the 
tree  of  samsara  which  has  put  forth  shoots  from  the  root- 
cause,  namely,  dense  avidya  abiding  in  the  self,  and  to 
which  passion  and  hatred  are  the  two  principal  branches; 
the  mental  states  that  reveal  the  qualities  of  excellence  (and 
defect)  as  present  in  the  external  objects  are  the  subsidiary 
branches;  and  the  varied  experiences  of  happiness  and 
misery  arising  from  the  performance  of  the  deeds  leading 
to  merit  and  demerit  arc  the  sprouts. 

[127] 

irq  q;rw 

sqRq  sfteroqte  fmnqqq  I 

qw  <?;q  fqsra  w  dqqr  gqfft%foq: 

d  3  wbI  ^  *T*IT  STTdft  II 


314 


SAM  K$EPAgARIRA  KA 


Avidya  which  has  the  self  as  its  locus  and  object 
is  termed  illusion,  darkness,  material  cause  (of  the  universe), 
pitch  darkness,  root-cause  (of  the  universe),  and  ignorance. 
The  universe  characterised  by  the  difference  of  preceptor, 
etc.,  is  its  transformation  and  is  fancied  by  you  (that  is,  the 
aspirant).  The  universe  has  no  independent  existence 
apart  from  the  self  like  the  objects  of  the  dream  state. 

pratyagoastunah — pratyakcaitanya  £ rita ,  SS. 

[128] 

THE  DISTINCTION  OF  RELEASE  AND  BONDAGE 
ACCORDING  TO  THE  EKA-JIVA-VADA 

31  M 

The  released  and  bound  souls,  the  mystic  and  the 
ignorant,  and  the  universe  from  ether  to  the  earth  are 
different  from  you  and  should  be  understood  to  be  the 
transformation  of  your  intellect  which  has  arisen  from  your, 
avidya.  Do  not  take  them  otherwise. 

Sarvajnatman  advocates  the  theory  of  only  one  individual  soul 
( eka-jiua-vada )  in  this  and  the  following  verses.  He  maintains  the 
theory  of  many  individual  souls  ( aneka-jiva-vada )  also. 

[129] 

The  time  that  had  passed  is  beginningless  and  the 
future  is  endless.  The  released  and  ignorant  souls  existed 
before  and  will  exist  hereafter-  (As  this  view  is  correct) 
if  you  doubt  that  it  is  not  reasonable,  do  not  disbelieve 
(what  I  have  said);  for  it  holds  good  when  viewed  in  the 
light  of  dream  experience. 


SECOND  ADHTATA 


315 


[130] 

3^3.*  ^qqiqsfq  qq&  I 

q?fc#fft;qqRTM  =q  srm^  qtsr^frq^  11 

A  person  who  is  asleep  (that  is,  who  is  dreaming) 
perceives,  within  a  short  time,  innumerable  years  that  had 
passed  and  innumerable  years  that  are  yet  to  come.  And 
this  experience  should  be  applied  to  the  waking  state. 

[131] 

^-7  ^ 

The  time  (that  had  passed)  is  beginningless  and  there 
(the  sage)  3uka  and  others  attained  release.  The  time 
(that  is  yet  to  come)  is  endless  and  some  others  will  attain 
release.  Thus,  (on  the  lines  of  dream  experience)  the 
distinction  of  release  and  bondage  would  exist  till  the 
realization  of  the  self. 


[132] 

*faraf  qftfqiq$sqqgqf  fq*ttq^  srsrfa  1 
ftsM  3T5Tfe  ^  fqsnM*  3* 

^2R5f*rqiRfq^qpi  513:  II 

Some  hold  thus:  just  as  a  generic  attribute  is  present 
in  the  individual  souls,  so  also  avidya  which  is  the  cause  of 


i.  ?m;*«Ttsnq  —  T4. 


316 


SAtiK$EPAg  ARIRA  KA 


all  appearances  and  which  has  for  its  object  the  self  that  is 
viewed  as  the  original,  abides  in  the  individual  souls  that 
are  viewed  as  the  reflections  of  the  self.  Just  as  a  generic 
attribute  which  leaves  out  the  individual  body  that  is  lost 
and  abides  in  the  one  that  exists,  this  avidya  also  leaves  out 
the  sage  and  abides  in  the  ignorant  person- 

Sarva j nStman  in  this  and  the  following  verses  states  seven 
different  views  regarding  the  distinction  of  the  released  and  the  bound 
souls;  and  later,  he  criticises  all  the  seven  views.  The  view  set  forth 
in  this  verse  is  examined  in  ,S S',  II,  139-141. 

[133] 

Some  men  of  little  learning  whose  intellect  is  oppressed 
by  ill-fate  hold  thus:  there  are  plurality  of  avidya  and  also 
many  individual  souls  consisting  of  the  wise,  the  ignorant  and 
those  desirous  of  release.  They  (severally)  attain  liberation 
in  each  cosmic  age  (provided  they  have  the  knowledge  of 
the  supreme  self).  Maya  abides  in  the  supreme  self;  and 
being  dependent  on  it,  it  is  the  cause  of  the  universe.  i 

Those  who  advocate  the  view  set  forth  in  this  verse  maintain  that 
nescience  (ajftana)  and  illusion  ( maya )  are  different. 

The  view  set  forth  in  this  verse  is  examined  in  Stf ,  II,  142  ff. 

[134] 

fare  i 


SECOND  ADHYAYA 


317 


Some  desirous  of  maintaining  the  distinction  (of  release 
and  bondage)  hold  the  (following)  view  as  faultless:  just 
as  there  is  the  existence  as  well  as  the  non-existence  of  a 
bird  in  the  ether,  so  also  there  fs  the  existence  as  well  as  the 
non-existence  of  avidya  in  the  self  which  is  free  from  any 
impurity,  which  is  of  the  form  of  consciousness  and  hence 
free  from  agency,  which  is  unassociated  with  anything,  and 
which  is  attributeless,  eternal,  absolute,  free  from  origina¬ 
tion,  and  destruction,  and  partless. 

One  perceives  a  bird  in  the  ether  and  at  the  same  time  another 
person  does  not  perceive  it  in  another  region  of  the  ether.  As  the 
ether  is  partless,  it  should  be  held  that  the  existence  and  the  non¬ 
existence  of  the  bird  are  present  in  one  substratum,  namely,  ether. 
Similarly,  avidya  exists  and  does  not  exist  in  the  partless  self. 

The  view  set  forth  in  this  verse  is  examined  in  S$ ,  II,  152. 

[135] 

33  srcaft  wn 

Some,  however,  hold :  though  avidya  which  is  the 
material  cause  (of  the  universe)  abides  in  the  pure  self,  yet 
it  is  present  only  through  the  mind  which  is  an  adventitious 
condition.  The  mind  always  remains  subtle  and  extraneous 
to  the  self;  and  it  is  determinative  of  (the  existence  of) 
avidya  in  the  self. 

The  view  set  forth  in  this  verse  is  examined  in  SS,  II,  159  If. 


318 


SAMK$EPA&  ARIRAKA 


[136] 

^  s^r^sr  ^  i 

dTOH  fos  ftw*  ^  ^qfa^tqq^- 

}q  flq*q-TF4r  q^qw  susrMfa  n 

Some  (however)  hold  :  the  self  which  is  the  locus  of 
avidya  is  reflected  in  the  intellects.  Then  by  its  own  avidya, 
it  becomes  the  immovable  and  the  movable  objects,  and 
it  attains  release  in  some  cases  (due  to  the  knowledge  of  the 
self)  and  in  other  cases  it  remains  bound  (due  to  lack  of 
the  knowledge  of  the  self).  And  avidya ,  being  possessed 
of  parts,  is  annihilated  in  the  self  and  yet  remains  in  it- 
Thus  the  distinction  (of  release  and  bondage)  relating  to 
the  supreme  self  very  well  holds  good. 

The  view  set  foith  in  this  verse  must  be  taken  as  refuted  in 
Sg,  II,  15G-158.  See  TB,  on  Sg,  II,  162. 

[137] 

fa«qmr  , 

Maya  which  causes  bondage  (in  respect  of  the  individual 
souls)  which  is  the  power  of  Lord  Visnu,  and  which  gives 
rise  to  the  external  as  well  as  the  internal  elements,  like 
the  net  of  a  fisherman  is  expanded  with  reference  to  the 
ignorant  souls  and  contracted  from  the  mystics,  at  the  will 
of  God.  It  is  real;  or,  let  it  be  unreal.  Its  contraction 
and  expansion  depend  on  the  will  of  the  Lord. 

sviibhavikau  —  iioarecchanibandhanau,  AP. 


SECOND  ADHYATA 


319 


[  138} 

srfcRt  m^r 

#=qifW  s^r^HT^  <w  i 
mm  rt  sfcrwqr  ^  it 

Some  others  hold  :  the  series  of  erroneous  cognitions 
and  their  mental  impressions  constitute  avidya  which)  being 
of  the  nature  of  a  continuous  stream,  is  beginningless. 
(This  avidya)  has  the  supreme  self  as  its  object,  and  it  is 
different  in  each  individual  soul.  By  annihilating  avidya 
by  the  combination  of  knowledge  and  action  an  aspirant 
becomes  released;  while  the  other  being  devoid  of  knowledge 
and  action,  undergoes  transmigration.  And  avidya  is 
present  in  the  individual  soul. 

The  view  set  forth  in  this  verse,  according  to  TD  and  AP  is 
advocated  by  Mandanami^ra.  Sec  Brahmasiddhi,  pp.  10-11. 

[139] 

mm  3  srar  m  ii 

From  the  self-luminous  knowledge  in  the  form  “I  am 
ignorant”  it  is  established  that  the  inner  self  is  the  locus  of 
avidya  But  how  is  it  established  that  the  supreme  self  is 
the  object  of  avidya ?  Is  it  established  by  valid  knowledge 
or  .by  erroneous  knowledge  or  by  self-luminosity  (of 
the  self)? 

Now  Sarvajnatman  begins  to  examine  critically  the  first  four 
views.  And,  in  this  and  the  following  twelve  verses  he  examines  the 
first  two  views. 


320 


SAMK§EPAg  ARIRAKA 


[140] 

5fT^  ^r^TTq'^  I 

asnfa  mmmx  ^3  11 

If  it  is  held  that  the  supreme  self  as  the  object  of  avidya 
is  established  by  valid  knowledge,  then  it  would  become 
insentient,  like  a  pot-  If  it  is  held  that  avidya  as  having 
the  self  as  its  object  is  established  by  valid  knowledge,  then 
it  (namely,  avidya )  would  be  real  like  the  supreme  self. 

jddyath  tasya,  etc.  —  jhanavisayasya  jadatvaniyamal  brahtnann’pi 

lalhatvam,  SS. 

tayapi  syat  satyala  —  brahmano’jila nasiddhau  tasyajilanasyapi 

pramanasiddhatvat  satyala  syat,  SS. 

[141] 

snf^rrar^uiT:  d^ifq  I 

swra  ?rr  *nfqgT  m  11 

If  it  is  held  that  the  supreme  self  (as  the  object  of  avidya) 
is  established  by  erroneous  knowledge,  then  the  supreme 
self  would  become  a  superimposed  entity  like  avidya.  If  you 
say  that  the  supreme  self  as  the  object  of  avidya  is  self- 
luminous,  then  do  not  assert  like  this;  for  we  do  not  have 
any  such  experience  (in  the  form:  the  supreme  self  is 
ignorant). 

[142] 

*rrtoh^I5  i 

m  \\ 

Understand  that  the  defects  which  we  pointed  out  in 
the  view  that  the  supreme  self  is  the  object  of  avidya  are 
applicable  to  the  view  that  the  self  is  the  locus  of  mdyd 
(which  is  accepted  by  you  as  different  from  nescience). 


SECOND  ADHTAYA 


321 


Explain  to  us  whether  the  self  as  the  locus  of  illusion  is 
established  by  erroneous  knowledge  or  self-luminosity  or 
valid  knowledge. 

The  view  put  forth  in  SS,  II,  133  is  examined  here. 

[  143] 

qHlfte  5TH  iTRlPf  ITRRT:  II 

If  it  is  held  that  the  supreme  self  as  the  locus  of  maya 
is  established  by  erroneous  knowledge,  then  the  self  also, 
like  maya  would  become  a  superimposed  entity.  If  it  is 
held  that  the  supreme  self  as  the  locus  of  maya.  is  established 
by  valid  knowledge,  then  maya  would  become  real  and  the 
supreme  self  would  become  insentient. 

See  Notes  on  SJ,  II,  140. 


[144] 

tRniifq  m  qwfa  i 

If  the  supreme  self  as  the  locus  of  maya  is  self-luminous, 
then  maya  also,  like  the  supreme  self  would  become  self- 
luminous.  If  it  is  held  that  the  supreme  self  alone  is 
self-luminous  and  it  reveals  maya ,  then  this  view  is 
contrary  to  experience. 

There  is  no  such  experience  to  the  effect  that  the  supreme  self  as 
different  from  the  inner  self  is  self-luminous.  See  the  following  verse. 

[145] 

mm  qzi  5I5RST#  qifa  m  m  ^spTCST^  I 

v  mgrac  —  B2. 

41 


322 


SAM  K$EPAg  ARI RAKA 


The  supreme  self  as  the  locus  of  maya  is  not  self- 
luminous  unlike  the  inner  self  which  is  the  locus  of  avidya. 
If  the  supreme  self  different  from-  the  inner  self  which  is 
the  locus  of  avidya  is  also  self-luminous,  then  two  self-lumi¬ 
nous  entities  would  manifest  themselves. 

vide:  firatvagbhinnatya  brahmanah  soapr aka dataj) a  anubhavabhavadeva 
virodhah,  TB. 

[146] 

If  it  is  held  that  the  individual  souls  which  differ 
among  themselves  (and  from  the  supreme  self )  are  known 
by  the  supreme  self,  then  indisputably  the  individual  souls 
are  insentient,  like  a  wall.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  it  is 
held  that  the  individual  souls  (being  different  from  them¬ 
selves  and  from  the  supreme  self  )  are  not  known  by  the 
supreme  self,  then  the  contradiction  to  the  omniscience  of 
the  supreme  self  is  inevitable- 

[147] 

^  *tt  swt  n 

If  it  is  held  that  the  individual  souls  are  self-luminous 
and  as  such  they  manifest  themselves  as  different  from  the 
supreme  self,  then  (we  ask)  whether  the  difference  from  the 
supreme  self  present  in  the  individual  soul  is  self-luminous 
or  not.  We  point  out  irrefutable  defects  in  both  the 
alternatives. 

[  148] 

m  i 

Ufa  ^  II 


SECOND  ADHYAYA 


323 


Tf  the  difference  from  the  supreme  self  present  in  the 
individual  souls  is  admitted  to  be  self-luminous,  then 
‘difference’  also  like  the  individual  souls  would  become 
real.  If  it  is  held  that  the  ‘difference’  is  to  be  known  and 
not  self-luminous,  then  (it  is  said  that)  it  is  impossible  to 
know  it  without  knowing  the  individual  souls  and  the 
supreme  self  (which  are  the  correlatives  and  the  counter¬ 
correlative  respectively). 


[149] 

afar:  qfe  srat  m  I 

qgf  q^j  ^  aft  ii 

Are  all  the  individual  souls  revealed  to  you  by  valid 
knowledge,  or  self-luminosity,  or  by  erroneous  knowledge? 
Tell  me  which  one  of  these  views  is  acceptable  to  you. 

[150] 

sfcn:  m  qf  m  ^31%^  fqig^qr  mi \  11 

If  the  difference  among  the  individual  souls  is  estab¬ 
lished  by  valid  knowledge,  (then  it  is  real)  and  hence  it 
cannot  be  established  that  the  supreme  self  is  absolute. 
The  assertion  that  the  individual  souls  are  known  to  me  by 
self- luminosity  (of  the  individual  souls)  is  contradicted  by 
one’s  own  experience. 


[151] 

fqS'WraTj^qq:  mil  || 

If  the  difference  among  the  individual  souls  is  estab¬ 
lished  by  erroneous  knowledge,  then  it  should  be  admitted 


324 


SAM  K$EPAg  ARI RAKA 


that  difference  is  sublated  by  valid  knowledge.  The  snake 
appearing  in  a  rope  is  known  by  erroneous  knowledge  and 
its  sublation  is  effected  by  the  valid  knowledge  (of  the 
rope). 


[152] 

^nm\  =3  rrq  p 

Existence  and  non-existence  in  one  substratum  are 
never  seen  in  ordinary  experience,  as  only  one  thing  can 
be  present  in  one  substratum.  The  existence  and  the  non¬ 
existence  of  a  bird,  etc.,  are  spoken  of  in  one  unitary 
ether;  still  they  are  present  only  in  the  different  delimited 
parts  of  the  ether. 

The  view  set  forth  is  Sg,  II,  134  is  refuted  in  this  and  the 
following  six  verses. 


[153] 

mk  a trq  || 

If  the  limiting  adjuncts  also  exist  and  do  not  exist  in 
the  ether,  then  it  should  be  admitted  that  (the  existence 
and  the  non-existence  of  the  limiting  adjuncts  are  present 
in  the  parts  of  the  ether)  delimited  by  some  other  limiting 
adjuncts.  If  the  latter  limiting  adjuncts  also  exist  and  do 
not  exist  in  the  ether,  then  certainly  they  do  so  in  the 
ether  delimited  by  some  other  limiting  adjuncts. 


SECOND  ADHTATA 


325 


[154] 

sn£  $1  dt  mfo  I 

m  5J$t  $%^fd*d5T  f%  *TT  II 

(If  the  purvapaksin  says  that)  in  this  case,  the  defect 
of  infinite  regress  cannot  be  avoided,  then  we  say-‘Yes’. 
It  is  acceptable  to  us  and  it  does  not  amount  to  any  defect. 
Do  we  not  accept  infinite  regress  in  this  case,  namely,  the 
living  body  arises  as  a  result  of  past  actions,  while  the 
latter  arises  from  the  living  body  in  the  previous  birth? 

[155] 

ffoHTfa  %€t:  I 

[The  Siddhantin  asks]  :  moreover,  on  what  grounds  do 
you  understand  the  existence  and  the  non-existence  of 
avidya  in  the  self?  [The  Purvapaksin  replies] :  the  knowledge 
of  the  existence  of  avidya  is  established  by  the  experience  in 
the  form  ‘I  am  ignorant';  and  the  knowledge  of  its  non¬ 
existence  is  established  from  the  knowledge  of  its  annihila¬ 
tion  in  the  case  of  a  released  soul. 

[156] 

[The  Siddhantin  asks]  tell  me  on  what  grounds  do  you 
understand  that  avidya  is  annihilated  in  the  case  of  a 


32G 


SAMKSEPAgARIRAKA 


released  soul.  Does  the  knowledge  that  ‘avidja  is  annihi¬ 
lated  in  the  case  of  a  released  soul’  arise  from  valid  experi¬ 
ence,  or  from  erroneous  experience,  or  by  self-luminosity? 

[157] 

^  5tf:  sre:  ^  i 

If  it  is  held  that  (the  knowledge  that  avidyd  is  annihi¬ 
lated  in  the  case  of  a  soul  at  the  time  of)  release  is  estab¬ 
lished  by  valid  experience,  then  indeed  in  your  view  the 
released  soul  would  become  insentient  like  a  wall.  If  the 
knowledge  relating  to  release  is  established  by  erroneous 
experience,  then  the  released  soul  would  become  similar 
to  the  snake  appearing  in  a  garland  (that  is,  indeterminable). 

[158] 

ixRt  m  qr'ft  fessr  I 

^i  5tT7:  :  n 

The  assertion  that  the  released  soul  is  revealed  to  me 
by  my  self-luminosity  is  contrary  to  experience.  Without 
studying  the  scripture  (dealing  with  the  released  souls)  no 
person  could  know  that  sage  3uka  and  others  are  released. 

If  it  is  said  that  the  experience  that  avidja  is  annihilated  in  the 
case  of  a  released  soul  is  self-luminous  it  amounts  to  saying  that  the 
released  soul  is  known  to  me  by  my  self-iuminosity.  And  this  is 
contrary  to  experience. 


[159] 


SECOND  ADHYAYA 


327 


It  has  been  said  before  that  avidya  gets  into  the  self- 
luminous  consciousness  through  the  adventitious  limiting 
adjunct  (the  intellect)  and  thereby  there  exists  the  distinc¬ 
tion  of  bondage  and  release.  And  you  understand  that 
the  afore-mentioned  defects  (are  applicable)  to  this  view 
also. 

The  view  put  forth  in  SS ,  II,  135,  is  restated  in  this  verse  and 
refuted  in  the  following  verses. 

[160] 

qi^^qifaTf  qfq  snaftsrfife  mm  l 

qgtq  II 

If  it  is  said  that  just  as  fire-brand  is  the  medium 
through  which  fire  gets  into  (a  house,  etc.,)  even  so  if  the 
adventitious  limiting  adjunct  is  the  medium  through  which 
avidya  gets  into  the  self-luminous  self,  then  avidya  would 
not  exist  only  in  a  part  (that  is,  it  would  pervade  the 
whole  self  and  consequently  it  cannot  be  said  that  avidya 
exists  and  does  not  exist  in  the  self). 

[161] 

Just  as  fire  which  is  thrown  into  a  house  through  a 
fire-brand  not  only  pervades  the  whole  fuel  but  also  the 
whole  house,  even  so  avidya  which  gets  into  the  self 
through  the  limiting  adjunct  pervades  the  entire  self. 

iidhina  —  upadliina;  astam  —  ksiptam,  S. 

[162] 

sfoRiq  qpqifarqr  qiq^  3  *q*^  1 

tqfwr  ^q^qq  sftqsrnjwqiCtmq  ^rqam  ^  q=$q;  11 


328 


SAM K§EPA!)  ARIRAKa 


Hence  the  supreme  self  attains  the  state  of  the  indivi- 
dual  soul  due  to  avidya  and  it  remains  as  your  true  nature 
and  it  perceives  the  group  of  individual  souls  and  the 
universe  from  ether  to  the  earth  which  are  superimposed 
by  your  avidya. 

tvactiUena  —  air  a  citlaSabdena  avidya  uryalc,  AP. 

The  view  which  holds  that  viaya  is  the  power  of  Visnu  and 
which  is  set  forth  in  55 ,  II,  137,  is  untenable  on  the  grounds 
mentioned  in  verses  II,  139-141.  And,  the  view  which  maintains 
that  the  series  of  erroneous  cognitions  and  their  mental  impres¬ 
sions  constitute  avidya  and  which  is  set  forth  in  53,  II,  138,  is 
also  untenable  on  the  ground  that  the  series  of  erroneous 
cognitions  and  their  mental  impressions  cannot  exist  without  a 
material  cause;  and,  that  cause  should  be  avidya  which  is 
positive  in  nature. 

For  details  see  AP  on  55,  II,  163. 

[163] 

The  knowledge  of  the  self  arises  to  the  aspirant  (who 
is  the  only  individual  soul)  from  the  preceptor,  the 
Upanisads  and  the  principles  of  interpretation  which  are 
the  illusory  appearances  of  one’s  avidya.  The  aspirant 
whose  avidya  is  annihilated  by  the  rise  of  the  knowledge  of 
the  supreme  self  remains  in  his  own  self-luminous  nature. 

nyayah  —  brahmami marina,  55. 

[  164] 

sirrft  srar  ^  ^  w£*roroqw 

grows:  i 

*  ft  aswretf  qrisg  s- 


SECOND  ADHTAYA 


329 


The  supreme  self  (that  is,  the  pure  consciousness)  being 
the  locus  and  the  object  of  avidya  attains  the  state  of  an 
individual  soul.  Avidya  (present  in  the  pure  consciousness) 
not  being  perceptible  in  the  state  of  deep  sleep  becomes 
clearly  manifest  (in  the  waking  state),  owing  to  its  relation 
to  the  reflection  of  the  pure  consciousness  in  the  intellect. 
Avidya  when  present  in  the  pure  consciousness  is  not  so 
clearly  perceptible,  as  it  is  when  the  pure  consciousness  is 
reflected  in  the  intellect.  (And  as  the  reflection  of 
the  pure  consciousness  in  the  intellect  is  the  individual 
soul),  the  statement  that  the  individual  soul  is  the  locus  of 
avidya  is  reasonable. 

For  details  see  Introduction,  p.  78. 

[165] 

sfcffftlWTf'ra 

Avidya  in  its  aspect  of  projection1  is  present  outside  the. 
individual  soul  (that  is,  in  God);  and,  in  its  aspect  of  being 
removable  by  valid  knowledge,  it  appears  in  the  individual 
soul  in  the  experience  ‘I  am  ignorant’.  Hence  the  state¬ 
ment  that  the  individual  soul  is  the  locus  of  avidya  is 
reasonable.  Of  the  two  aspects  of  avidya ,  one  (namely,  the 
aspect  of  being  removable  by  valid  knowledge)  always 
in  mifests  in  the  individual  soul,  while  the  other  aspect  is 
not  so. 

1.  See  note  on  the  following  verse. 

Avidya  is  active  in  its  aspect  of  projection  only  in  the  case  of  God. 
Sec  notes  on  Stf ,  II,  188. 

42 


330 


SAM  K$  EPAg  ARl  RAKA 


[166] 


Ssfonrea  asraffraai  Jif  fa:  n 

In  its  aspect  of  insentience  ( viksepa ),  avidya  which  is  the 
(transformative)  material  cause  of  the  universe,  and  which 
depends  on  the  supreme  self  that  is  the  sole  (transfigurative) 
material  cause  of  the  universe,  gives  rise  to  the  effects, 
namely,  ether,  air,  etc. 

Avidya  in  its  viksepa  aspect  misrepresents  the  supreme  self  as  the 
unreal  universe. 

jadai aklima  travapusa  —  viksepgi aktipradha  nd karena,  AP. 


[167] 

dhupfr  irf  MM  3^  i 

aifessr  sft  n 


This  very  same  avidya  which  is  the  cause  of  the  entire 
universe  and  which  influences  the  individual  soul  ^nd 
which  js  of  the  nature  of  being  revealed  by  the  witness- 
self  manifests  itself  in  the  form  *1  am  ignorant’  in  the  case 
of  the  individual  soul  which  is  conditioned  by  the  gross  and 
the  subtle  body. 

For  details  see  Introduction,  p.  78. 

iaririnam  —  slhuladehavacchinnam ;  purusam  —  lingadehavaccliinnam, 

TB. 

sphuranaikagocaravapuh  —  sa  ksimd  Iravisayaru  pa ,  AP. 


[168] 

mi  ssi  aft  ar  asft:  I 
Nft^raT*TCfls:  iw  yitti  aft  ga:  11 


In  the  case  of  God,  avidya  manifests  as  one  deprived 
of  reality  by  the  consciousness  that  is  (figuratively  spoken 


SECOND  ADHYATA 


331 


of  as)  the  power.  But  in  the  case  of  the  individual  soul 
which  is  delimited  by  the  gross  and  the  subtle  body,  it 
manifests  as  one  concealing  (the  true  nature  of  the  indi¬ 
vidual  soul,  that  is,)  the  consciousness. 

[  1G9  ] 

1 1 

Maya  relating  to  God  should  be  inferred  as  of  the  nature 
of  avidya  on  the  grounds  that  it  is  perceptible,  insentient, 
dependent,  and  abiding  in  the  consciousness,  and  on  the 
strength  of  the  examples  such  as  the  objects  of  dream,  the 
illusory  silver,  the  intellect,1  the  erroneous  cognitions  of 
quarters,  and  the  moon  (as  two)  and  mirage. 

The  insentient  power  abiding  in  the  pure  consciousness  when 
related  to  God  is  termed  may  a,  and  when  related  to  the  individual 
soul  is  termed  avidya.  Maya  and  avidya  are  identical.  See  SB,  II,  190. 

1.  lingadeliah  —  antahkaranam,  TB. 

[170] 

^Trqn$T5Pit  5T*ld 

The  entire  universe  beginning  with  ether  is  assumed 
to  be  created  from  the  single  avidya',  for,  whichever  is 
sublated  (later)  is  assumed  to  be  created  from  avidya  like 
the  dream  state.  This  universe  is  accepted  by  you  to  be 
sublated  ( badhya )  and  hence  it  is  the  creation  of  avidyS. 
Th e  probans  (that  is  badhyalva )  is  free  from  fallacies,  as  it 


332 


SAMK$EPAg  ARIRAKA 


possesses  the  five  characteristic  features1  like  the  probans 
-  smoke  (in  the  syllogism:  The  mountain  has  fire;  for,  it  has 
smoke).  c, 

1.  A  probans  would  give  rise  to  valid  inferential  knowledge  only 
when  it  possesses  the  five  characteristic  features,  namely,  (i)  pakse 
satlvam,  (ii)  sapakse  sallvam,  (iii)  vipaksddvyavrttatvam,  (iv)  a-sal- 
pratipaksilatvam,  and,  (v)  aba dhitatvam. 

These  may  be  explained  as  follows: 

i.  A  paksa  is  that  in  which  there  is  no  certainty  of  the  thing 
to  be  inferred;  and,  the  probans  must  exist  in  the  paksa.  The 
existence  of  the  probans  in  the  paksa  is  known  as  pakse  satlvam. 

ii.  A  sapaksa  or  a  similar  instance  is  what  is  definitely  known 
to  be  possessed  of  the  thing  to  be  inferred;  and,  the  probans 
must  exist  in  the  sapaksa.  The  existence  of  the  probans  in  the 
sapaksa  is  known  as  sapakse  satlvam. 

iii.  A  vipaksa  or  a  contrary  instance  is  what  is  definitely  known 
to  be  devoid  of  the  thing  to  be  inferred,  and  the  probans  must 
not  exist  in  the  vipaksa.  The  non-existence  of  the  probans  in  the 
vipaksa  is  known  as  vipaksa  dvy a  vrltatvam. 

iv.  A  probans  which  establishes  a  particular  thin£  that  is  to  be 
inferred  is  said  to  be  sal-pralipaksila  or  counterbalanced  if 
there  is  another  probans  which  seeks  to  establish  the  absence 
of  that  thing  which  is  to  be  inferred,  e.g. 

(i)  Sound  is  eternal,  because  it  is  audible. 

(ii)  Sound  is  non-eternal,  because  it  is  a  product.  In  these 
two  syllogisms,  the  probans  are  sal-pralipaksila  as  each  one 
is  faced  with  another  probans  that  seeks  to  establish  the 
absence  of  the  thing  which  it  aims  to  establish  as  the  thing 
to  lie  proved.  If  the  probans  is’  not  faced  with  another 
probans  of  the  above  mentioned  nature,  then  the  former 
one  is  known  as  a-satpralipaksita. 

(v)  A  probans  in  a  syllogism  is  said  to  be  badhita  if  the  paksa  in 
that  syllogism  is  devoid  of  the  thing  to  be  inferred;  and  it  is 
abadhila  if  tire  paksa  consists  of  the  thing  to  be  inferred. 


SECOND  ADHYAYA 


333 


Now,  the  probans  —  smoke  —  in  the  syllogism  ‘The  mountain 
lias  fire,  because  it  has  smoke’  possesses  the  five  characteristic  features 
explained  al&vc.  In  the  same  way,  the  probans  —  badhyatva  —  in  the 
syllogism  ‘The  universe  is  the  effect  of  avidya,  because  it  is  sublated 
(badhyatva)’  also  pcs.,  the  five  characteristic  features  and  hence 
there  would  arise  valid  inferential  cognition  from  this  probans. 

[  1 7 1 '] 

3RqRqi»Rfq$s;fq5  qftqrfcit  qR  m  I 
q  qqtsftfcq  sRqjqftqr^  immm  qq:  n 

If  the  disputants  hold  that  the  (aforesaid)  inference 
is  contradicted  by  the  (import  of  the)  Upanisads,  then  it  is 
wrong;  for  there  is  no  Upani?adic  statement  which  teaches 
the  material  cause  of  the  universe  to  be  other  than  avidya. 

THE  SELF  —  THE  LOGUS  OF  AVIDYA. 

[172] 

friqq^'TTR  mi  *qi- 
£qqiqfRq*3  ii 

The  erroneous  cognition  arises  regarding  the  consci¬ 
ousness,  not  owing  to  the  defects  present  in  the  object  and 
sense  organ,  but  only  owing  to  avidya.  Similarly,  the 
cognition  of  all  duality  in  the  illustrious  absolute  self  is 
erroneous  and  is  caused  by  avidya. 

This  verse  is  found  in  the  first  adhyaya  of  this  work.  See  I,  30. 

[173] 

swq  ^  m  5?FRra^5fa  i 

*nq 


S34 


SAMK$EPA$ARIRAKA 


The  misery  born  of  avidya  pertains  to  the  individual 
soul  which  is  devoid  of  knowledge  of  its  true  nature.  But  it 
(namely,  the  misery)  is  not  even  seemingly  present  in  God. 
The  group  of  qualities  such  as  omniscience,  etc.,  belongs 
to  God  and  not  to  the  individual  soul  whose  true  nature  is 
concealed  by  avidya  (in  its  aspect  of  concealment). 

[174] 

m  *Tf 

qftfcq  11 

Lord  Kr?na  who  is  the  master  of  the  hoary  tradition 
has  said  in  the  topic  dealing  with  a  person  liberated  while 
embodied1  that  the  individual  soul  is  the  locus  of  avidya. 
And  that  too  is  to  be  viewed  in  the  light  of  what  is 
mentioned  before,2  and  considering  the  earlier  and  later 
portions  (of  the  Gita).  Similarly,  the  statements  of  Sri 
£>a  hkara  (regarding  the  individual  soul  being  the  locus  of 
avidyaY  found  in  different  texts  should  be  interpreted  in 
the  aforesaid  manner  by  examining  the  prior  and  the  later 
portions.  But  the  view  of  Mandana4  (that  the  individual 
soul  is  the  locus  of  avidya )  should  be  rejected,  as  it  presents 
a  different  view-point.5 

1.  Dh.  G.,  II,  52. 

2.  See  Ss\  IT,  164. 

3.  See  Introduction,  p.  77. 

4.  Mandana  advocates  the  view  that  jiva  is  the  locus  of  avidya 
while  the  self  is  its  content. 

See  Brahmasiddhi,  p.  10. 

5.  Sec  Prof.  Kuppuswami  Sastri’s  Introduction  to  the  Brahma¬ 
siddhi  for  details  regarding  the  divergent  views  on  Advaita 
held  by  Mandana.  pp.  XXVI.  ff. 


SECOND  ADHTAYA 


335 


DIFFERENCE  BETWEEN  JIVA  AND  TSVARA 

[175] 

w*  qfcq^n 

The  bhasya  text  “The  nescience  abides  in  the  indivi¬ 
dual  soul  which  is  delimited  by  the  gross  and  the  subtle 
body,  which  is  associated  with  passion,  etc.,  and  which  is 
ignorant  of  its  true  nature  by  being  concealed  by  nescience. 
And  the  true  knowledge  belongs  to  God  who  is  free  from 
the  veil  of  nescience,”1  should  be  interpreted  in  the  manner 
mentioned  before- 

1.  avidya  vii  is  tah  karyakarario’pa  dhiratma  jiva  ucyale, 

nityaniratidayajilanaSaktyupa  dhiratma  antaryami  iivara  ucyate, 
S’ B  on  Brh.,  Ill,  viii,  12. 

[176] 

There  is  the  clear  manifestation  of  avidya  (in  the  form 
of ‘I  am  ignorant’)  in  the  case  of  the  individual  soul,  while 
there  is  no  such  manifestation  in  the  case  of  God.  Hence 
it  (namely,  avidya)  is  denied  in  respect  of  God  who  stands 
as  the  original  or  as  the  reflected  image  of  the  supreme  self 
in  avidya,1  and  who  is  pure  consciousness  that  is  free  from 
the  veil  in  the  form  of  the  subtle  and  the  gross  body. 

1.  See  Introduction,  pp.  102-3. 

[  177  ] 

fa  fairer  qRsnqfaqeh  spirit  swq  im  I 

m ft  II 


1-  -  Pi,  T4. 


336 


SAM  K$EPAg  ARI RAKA 


The  individual  soul,  whose  eternal  true  nature  has 
been  veiled  by  avidya ,  possesses  finite  knowledge,  while 
Gud,  being  free  from  avidya  (in  its  concealing  phase)  and 
its  effects  such  as  intellect,  etc.,  possesses  infinite  knowledge. 
Thus  in  this  light  the  bhasya  text1  is  quite  appropriate. 

1.  See  note  on  SS,  II,  175. 

[178] 

TOI  3*r:  3PS  3*:  l 

3rsnfaTO*?t$faf3rcR4  'wm  ^  31%  11 

God  does  not  have  the  experience  in  the  form  ‘I  am 
ignorant’.  And  the  individual  soul  does  not  have  the 
knowledge  ‘I  am  omniscient’.  Here  the  reason  is:  God  is 
devoid  of  intellect  while  the  individual  soul  possesses  it 
(that  is,  the  intellect). 

[179] 

ffarcr  jrfaffarcasr 

Except  the  embodied  form,  that  is,  the  excellent  body 
assumed  on  His  own  will  to  bring  about  welfare  to  the 
entire  universe,  it  is  impossible  to  attribute  the  association, 
of  the  intellect  to  God  who  remains  as  the  original  or  as 
the  reflected  image  of  the  self  in  avidya.1 

See  Introduction,  pp.  102-3. 

[  180] 

^lo^sq^qirqffi  1 

s.  as^dt  —  Bi. 


SECOND  ADHYAYA 


327 


It  has  been  said  before  that  avidya  gets  into  the  self- 
luminous  consciousness  through  the  adventitious  limiting 
adjunct  (the  intellect)  and  thereby  there  exists  the  distinc¬ 
tion  of  bondage  and  release.  And  you  understand  that 
the  afore-mentioned  defects  (are  applicable)  to  this  view 
also. 

The  view  put  forth  in  SS ,  II,  135,  is  restated  in  this  verse  and 
refuted  in  the  following  verses. 

[160] 

qi^^qifaTf  qfq  snaftsrfife  mm  l 

qgtq  II 

If  it  is  said  that  just  as  fire-brand  is  the  medium 
through  which  fire  gets  into  (a  house,  etc.,)  even  so  if  the 
adventitious  limiting  adjunct  is  the  medium  through  which 
avidya  gets  into  the  self-luminous  self,  then  avidya  would 
not  exist  only  in  a  part  (that  is,  it  would  pervade  the 
whole  self  and  consequently  it  cannot  be  said  that  avidya 
exists  and  does  not  exist  in  the  self). 

[161] 

Just  as  fire  which  is  thrown  into  a  house  through  a 
fire-brand  not  only  pervades  the  whole  fuel  but  also  the 
whole  house,  even  so  avidya  which  gets  into  the  self 
through  the  limiting  adjunct  pervades  the  entire  self. 

iidhina  —  upadliina;  astam  —  ksiptam,  S. 

[162] 

sfoRiq  qpqifarqr  qiq^  3  *q*^  1 

tqfwr  ^q^qq  sftqsrnjwqiCtmq  ^rqam  ^  q=$q;  11 


328 


SAM K§EPA!)  ARIRAKa 


Hence  the  supreme  self  attains  the  state  of  the  indivi- 
dual  soul  due  to  avidya  and  it  remains  as  your  true  nature 
and  it  perceives  the  group  of  individual  souls  and  the 
universe  from  ether  to  the  earth  which  are  superimposed 
by  your  avidya. 

tvactiUena  —  air  a  citlaSabdena  avidya  uryalc,  AP. 

The  view  which  holds  that  viaya  is  the  power  of  Visnu  and 
which  is  set  forth  in  55 ,  II,  137,  is  untenable  on  the  grounds 
mentioned  in  verses  II,  139-141.  And,  the  view  which  maintains 
that  the  series  of  erroneous  cognitions  and  their  mental  impres¬ 
sions  constitute  avidya  and  which  is  set  forth  in  53,  II,  138,  is 
also  untenable  on  the  ground  that  the  series  of  erroneous 
cognitions  and  their  mental  impressions  cannot  exist  without  a 
material  cause;  and,  that  cause  should  be  avidya  which  is 
positive  in  nature. 

For  details  see  AP  on  55,  II,  163. 

[163] 

The  knowledge  of  the  self  arises  to  the  aspirant  (who 
is  the  only  individual  soul)  from  the  preceptor,  the 
Upanisads  and  the  principles  of  interpretation  which  are 
the  illusory  appearances  of  one’s  avidya.  The  aspirant 
whose  avidya  is  annihilated  by  the  rise  of  the  knowledge  of 
the  supreme  self  remains  in  his  own  self-luminous  nature. 

nyayah  —  brahmami marina,  55. 

[  164] 

sirrft  srar  ^  ^  w£*roroqw 

grows:  i 

*  ft  aswretf  qrisg  s- 


SECOND  ADHTAYA 


329 


The  supreme  self  (that  is,  the  pure  consciousness)  being 
the  locus  and  the  object  of  avidya  attains  the  state  of  an 
individual  soul.  Avidya  (present  in  the  pure  consciousness) 
not  being  perceptible  in  the  state  of  deep  sleep  becomes 
clearly  manifest  (in  the  waking  state),  owing  to  its  relation 
to  the  reflection  of  the  pure  consciousness  in  the  intellect. 
Avidya  when  present  in  the  pure  consciousness  is  not  so 
clearly  perceptible,  as  it  is  when  the  pure  consciousness  is 
reflected  in  the  intellect.  (And  as  the  reflection  of 
the  pure  consciousness  in  the  intellect  is  the  individual 
soul),  the  statement  that  the  individual  soul  is  the  locus  of 
avidya  is  reasonable. 

For  details  see  Introduction,  p.  78. 

[165] 

sfcffftlWTf'ra 

Avidya  in  its  aspect  of  projection1  is  present  outside  the. 
individual  soul  (that  is,  in  God);  and,  in  its  aspect  of  being 
removable  by  valid  knowledge,  it  appears  in  the  individual 
soul  in  the  experience  ‘I  am  ignorant’.  Hence  the  state¬ 
ment  that  the  individual  soul  is  the  locus  of  avidya  is 
reasonable.  Of  the  two  aspects  of  avidya ,  one  (namely,  the 
aspect  of  being  removable  by  valid  knowledge)  always 
in  mifests  in  the  individual  soul,  while  the  other  aspect  is 
not  so. 

1.  See  note  on  the  following  verse. 

Avidya  is  active  in  its  aspect  of  projection  only  in  the  case  of  God. 
Sec  notes  on  Stf ,  II,  188. 

42 


330 


SAM  K$  EPAg  ARl  RAKA 


[166] 


Ssfonrea  asraffraai  Jif  fa:  n 

In  its  aspect  of  insentience  ( viksepa ),  avidya  which  is  the 
(transformative)  material  cause  of  the  universe,  and  which 
depends  on  the  supreme  self  that  is  the  sole  (transfigurative) 
material  cause  of  the  universe,  gives  rise  to  the  effects, 
namely,  ether,  air,  etc. 

Avidya  in  its  viksepa  aspect  misrepresents  the  supreme  self  as  the 
unreal  universe. 

jadai aklima  travapusa  —  viksepgi aktipradha  nd karena,  AP. 


[167] 

dhupfr  irf  MM  3^  i 

aifessr  sft  n 


This  very  same  avidya  which  is  the  cause  of  the  entire 
universe  and  which  influences  the  individual  soul  ^nd 
which  js  of  the  nature  of  being  revealed  by  the  witness- 
self  manifests  itself  in  the  form  *1  am  ignorant’  in  the  case 
of  the  individual  soul  which  is  conditioned  by  the  gross  and 
the  subtle  body. 

For  details  see  Introduction,  p.  78. 

iaririnam  —  slhuladehavacchinnam ;  purusam  —  lingadehavaccliinnam, 

TB. 

sphuranaikagocaravapuh  —  sa  ksimd  Iravisayaru  pa ,  AP. 


[168] 

mi  ssi  aft  ar  asft:  I 
Nft^raT*TCfls:  iw  yitti  aft  ga:  11 


In  the  case  of  God,  avidya  manifests  as  one  deprived 
of  reality  by  the  consciousness  that  is  (figuratively  spoken 


SECOND  ADHYATA 


331 


of  as)  the  power.  But  in  the  case  of  the  individual  soul 
which  is  delimited  by  the  gross  and  the  subtle  body,  it 
manifests  as  one  concealing  (the  true  nature  of  the  indi¬ 
vidual  soul,  that  is,)  the  consciousness. 

[  1G9  ] 

1 1 

Maya  relating  to  God  should  be  inferred  as  of  the  nature 
of  avidya  on  the  grounds  that  it  is  perceptible,  insentient, 
dependent,  and  abiding  in  the  consciousness,  and  on  the 
strength  of  the  examples  such  as  the  objects  of  dream,  the 
illusory  silver,  the  intellect,1  the  erroneous  cognitions  of 
quarters,  and  the  moon  (as  two)  and  mirage. 

The  insentient  power  abiding  in  the  pure  consciousness  when 
related  to  God  is  termed  may  a,  and  when  related  to  the  individual 
soul  is  termed  avidya.  Maya  and  avidya  are  identical.  See  SB,  II,  190. 

1.  lingadeliah  —  antahkaranam,  TB. 

[170] 

^Trqn$T5Pit  5T*ld 

The  entire  universe  beginning  with  ether  is  assumed 
to  be  created  from  the  single  avidya',  for,  whichever  is 
sublated  (later)  is  assumed  to  be  created  from  avidya  like 
the  dream  state.  This  universe  is  accepted  by  you  to  be 
sublated  ( badhya )  and  hence  it  is  the  creation  of  avidyS. 
Th e  probans  (that  is  badhyalva )  is  free  from  fallacies,  as  it 


332 


SAMK$EPAg  ARIRAKA 


possesses  the  five  characteristic  features1  like  the  probans 
-  smoke  (in  the  syllogism:  The  mountain  has  fire;  for,  it  has 
smoke).  c, 

1.  A  probans  would  give  rise  to  valid  inferential  knowledge  only 
when  it  possesses  the  five  characteristic  features,  namely,  (i)  pakse 
satlvam,  (ii)  sapakse  sallvam,  (iii)  vipaksddvyavrttatvam,  (iv)  a-sal- 
pratipaksilatvam,  and,  (v)  aba dhitatvam. 

These  may  be  explained  as  follows: 

i.  A  paksa  is  that  in  which  there  is  no  certainty  of  the  thing 
to  be  inferred;  and,  the  probans  must  exist  in  the  paksa.  The 
existence  of  the  probans  in  the  paksa  is  known  as  pakse  satlvam. 

ii.  A  sapaksa  or  a  similar  instance  is  what  is  definitely  known 
to  be  possessed  of  the  thing  to  be  inferred;  and,  the  probans 
must  exist  in  the  sapaksa.  The  existence  of  the  probans  in  the 
sapaksa  is  known  as  sapakse  satlvam. 

iii.  A  vipaksa  or  a  contrary  instance  is  what  is  definitely  known 
to  be  devoid  of  the  thing  to  be  inferred,  and  the  probans  must 
not  exist  in  the  vipaksa.  The  non-existence  of  the  probans  in  the 
vipaksa  is  known  as  vipaksa  dvy a  vrltatvam. 

iv.  A  probans  which  establishes  a  particular  thin£  that  is  to  be 
inferred  is  said  to  be  sal-pralipaksila  or  counterbalanced  if 
there  is  another  probans  which  seeks  to  establish  the  absence 
of  that  thing  which  is  to  be  inferred,  e.g. 

(i)  Sound  is  eternal,  because  it  is  audible. 

(ii)  Sound  is  non-eternal,  because  it  is  a  product.  In  these 
two  syllogisms,  the  probans  are  sal-pralipaksila  as  each  one 
is  faced  with  another  probans  that  seeks  to  establish  the 
absence  of  the  thing  which  it  aims  to  establish  as  the  thing 
to  lie  proved.  If  the  probans  is’  not  faced  with  another 
probans  of  the  above  mentioned  nature,  then  the  former 
one  is  known  as  a-satpralipaksita. 

(v)  A  probans  in  a  syllogism  is  said  to  be  badhita  if  the  paksa  in 
that  syllogism  is  devoid  of  the  thing  to  be  inferred;  and  it  is 
abadhila  if  tire  paksa  consists  of  the  thing  to  be  inferred. 


SECOND  ADHYAYA 


333 


Now,  the  probans  —  smoke  —  in  the  syllogism  ‘The  mountain 
lias  fire,  because  it  has  smoke’  possesses  the  five  characteristic  features 
explained  al&vc.  In  the  same  way,  the  probans  —  badhyatva  —  in  the 
syllogism  ‘The  universe  is  the  effect  of  avidya,  because  it  is  sublated 
(badhyatva)’  also  pcs.,  the  five  characteristic  features  and  hence 
there  would  arise  valid  inferential  cognition  from  this  probans. 

[  1 7 1 '] 

3RqRqi»Rfq$s;fq5  qftqrfcit  qR  m  I 
q  qqtsftfcq  sRqjqftqr^  immm  qq:  n 

If  the  disputants  hold  that  the  (aforesaid)  inference 
is  contradicted  by  the  (import  of  the)  Upanisads,  then  it  is 
wrong;  for  there  is  no  Upani?adic  statement  which  teaches 
the  material  cause  of  the  universe  to  be  other  than  avidya. 

THE  SELF  —  THE  LOGUS  OF  AVIDYA. 

[172] 

friqq^'TTR  mi  *qi- 
£qqiqfRq*3  ii 

The  erroneous  cognition  arises  regarding  the  consci¬ 
ousness,  not  owing  to  the  defects  present  in  the  object  and 
sense  organ,  but  only  owing  to  avidya.  Similarly,  the 
cognition  of  all  duality  in  the  illustrious  absolute  self  is 
erroneous  and  is  caused  by  avidya. 

This  verse  is  found  in  the  first  adhyaya  of  this  work.  See  I,  30. 

[173] 

swq  ^  m  5?FRra^5fa  i 

*nq 


S34 


SAMK$EPA$ARIRAKA 


The  misery  born  of  avidya  pertains  to  the  individual 
soul  which  is  devoid  of  knowledge  of  its  true  nature.  But  it 
(namely,  the  misery)  is  not  even  seemingly  present  in  God. 
The  group  of  qualities  such  as  omniscience,  etc.,  belongs 
to  God  and  not  to  the  individual  soul  whose  true  nature  is 
concealed  by  avidya  (in  its  aspect  of  concealment). 

[174] 

m  *Tf 

qftfcq  11 

Lord  Kr?na  who  is  the  master  of  the  hoary  tradition 
has  said  in  the  topic  dealing  with  a  person  liberated  while 
embodied1  that  the  individual  soul  is  the  locus  of  avidya. 
And  that  too  is  to  be  viewed  in  the  light  of  what  is 
mentioned  before,2  and  considering  the  earlier  and  later 
portions  (of  the  Gita).  Similarly,  the  statements  of  Sri 
£>a  hkara  (regarding  the  individual  soul  being  the  locus  of 
avidyaY  found  in  different  texts  should  be  interpreted  in 
the  aforesaid  manner  by  examining  the  prior  and  the  later 
portions.  But  the  view  of  Mandana4  (that  the  individual 
soul  is  the  locus  of  avidya )  should  be  rejected,  as  it  presents 
a  different  view-point.5 

1.  Dh.  G.,  II,  52. 

2.  See  Ss\  IT,  164. 

3.  See  Introduction,  p.  77. 

4.  Mandana  advocates  the  view  that  jiva  is  the  locus  of  avidya 
while  the  self  is  its  content. 

See  Brahmasiddhi,  p.  10. 

5.  Sec  Prof.  Kuppuswami  Sastri’s  Introduction  to  the  Brahma¬ 
siddhi  for  details  regarding  the  divergent  views  on  Advaita 
held  by  Mandana.  pp.  XXVI.  ff. 


SECOND  ADHTAYA 


335 


DIFFERENCE  BETWEEN  JIVA  AND  TSVARA 

[175] 

w*  qfcq^n 

The  bhasya  text  “The  nescience  abides  in  the  indivi¬ 
dual  soul  which  is  delimited  by  the  gross  and  the  subtle 
body,  which  is  associated  with  passion,  etc.,  and  which  is 
ignorant  of  its  true  nature  by  being  concealed  by  nescience. 
And  the  true  knowledge  belongs  to  God  who  is  free  from 
the  veil  of  nescience,”1  should  be  interpreted  in  the  manner 
mentioned  before- 

1.  avidya  vii  is  tah  karyakarario’pa  dhiratma  jiva  ucyale, 

nityaniratidayajilanaSaktyupa  dhiratma  antaryami  iivara  ucyate, 
S’ B  on  Brh.,  Ill,  viii,  12. 

[176] 

There  is  the  clear  manifestation  of  avidya  (in  the  form 
of ‘I  am  ignorant’)  in  the  case  of  the  individual  soul,  while 
there  is  no  such  manifestation  in  the  case  of  God.  Hence 
it  (namely,  avidya)  is  denied  in  respect  of  God  who  stands 
as  the  original  or  as  the  reflected  image  of  the  supreme  self 
in  avidya,1  and  who  is  pure  consciousness  that  is  free  from 
the  veil  in  the  form  of  the  subtle  and  the  gross  body. 

1.  See  Introduction,  pp.  102-3. 

[  177  ] 

fa  fairer  qRsnqfaqeh  spirit  swq  im  I 

m ft  II 


1-  -  Pi,  T4. 


336 


SAM  K$EPAg  ARI RAKA 


The  individual  soul,  whose  eternal  true  nature  has 
been  veiled  by  avidya ,  possesses  finite  knowledge,  while 
Gud,  being  free  from  avidya  (in  its  concealing  phase)  and 
its  effects  such  as  intellect,  etc.,  possesses  infinite  knowledge. 
Thus  in  this  light  the  bhasya  text1  is  quite  appropriate. 

1.  See  note  on  SS,  II,  175. 

[178] 

TOI  3*r:  3PS  3*:  l 

3rsnfaTO*?t$faf3rcR4  'wm  ^  31%  11 

God  does  not  have  the  experience  in  the  form  ‘I  am 
ignorant’.  And  the  individual  soul  does  not  have  the 
knowledge  ‘I  am  omniscient’.  Here  the  reason  is:  God  is 
devoid  of  intellect  while  the  individual  soul  possesses  it 
(that  is,  the  intellect). 

[179] 

ffarcr  jrfaffarcasr 

Except  the  embodied  form,  that  is,  the  excellent  body 
assumed  on  His  own  will  to  bring  about  welfare  to  the 
entire  universe,  it  is  impossible  to  attribute  the  association, 
of  the  intellect  to  God  who  remains  as  the  original  or  as 
the  reflected  image  of  the  self  in  avidya.1 

See  Introduction,  pp.  102-3. 

[  180] 

^lo^sq^qirqffi  1 

s.  as^dt  —  Bi. 


SECOND  ADHYAYA 


327 


It  has  been  said  before  that  avidya  gets  into  the  self- 
luminous  consciousness  through  the  adventitious  limiting 
adjunct  (the  intellect)  and  thereby  there  exists  the  distinc¬ 
tion  of  bondage  and  release.  And  you  understand  that 
the  afore-mentioned  defects  (are  applicable)  to  this  view 
also. 

The  view  put  forth  in  SS ,  II,  135,  is  restated  in  this  verse  and 
refuted  in  the  following  verses. 

[160] 

qi^^qifaTf  qfq  snaftsrfife  mm  l 

qgtq  II 

If  it  is  said  that  just  as  fire-brand  is  the  medium 
through  which  fire  gets  into  (a  house,  etc.,)  even  so  if  the 
adventitious  limiting  adjunct  is  the  medium  through  which 
avidya  gets  into  the  self-luminous  self,  then  avidya  would 
not  exist  only  in  a  part  (that  is,  it  would  pervade  the 
whole  self  and  consequently  it  cannot  be  said  that  avidya 
exists  and  does  not  exist  in  the  self). 

[161] 

Just  as  fire  which  is  thrown  into  a  house  through  a 
fire-brand  not  only  pervades  the  whole  fuel  but  also  the 
whole  house,  even  so  avidya  which  gets  into  the  self 
through  the  limiting  adjunct  pervades  the  entire  self. 

iidhina  —  upadliina;  astam  —  ksiptam,  S. 

[162] 

sfoRiq  qpqifarqr  qiq^  3  *q*^  1 

tqfwr  ^q^qq  sftqsrnjwqiCtmq  ^rqam  ^  q=$q;  11 


328 


SAM K§EPA!)  ARIRAKa 


Hence  the  supreme  self  attains  the  state  of  the  indivi- 
dual  soul  due  to  avidya  and  it  remains  as  your  true  nature 
and  it  perceives  the  group  of  individual  souls  and  the 
universe  from  ether  to  the  earth  which  are  superimposed 
by  your  avidya. 

tvactiUena  —  air  a  citlaSabdena  avidya  uryalc,  AP. 

The  view  which  holds  that  viaya  is  the  power  of  Visnu  and 
which  is  set  forth  in  55 ,  II,  137,  is  untenable  on  the  grounds 
mentioned  in  verses  II,  139-141.  And,  the  view  which  maintains 
that  the  series  of  erroneous  cognitions  and  their  mental  impres¬ 
sions  constitute  avidya  and  which  is  set  forth  in  53,  II,  138,  is 
also  untenable  on  the  ground  that  the  series  of  erroneous 
cognitions  and  their  mental  impressions  cannot  exist  without  a 
material  cause;  and,  that  cause  should  be  avidya  which  is 
positive  in  nature. 

For  details  see  AP  on  55,  II,  163. 

[163] 

The  knowledge  of  the  self  arises  to  the  aspirant  (who 
is  the  only  individual  soul)  from  the  preceptor,  the 
Upanisads  and  the  principles  of  interpretation  which  are 
the  illusory  appearances  of  one’s  avidya.  The  aspirant 
whose  avidya  is  annihilated  by  the  rise  of  the  knowledge  of 
the  supreme  self  remains  in  his  own  self-luminous  nature. 

nyayah  —  brahmami marina,  55. 

[  164] 

sirrft  srar  ^  ^  w£*roroqw 

grows:  i 

*  ft  aswretf  qrisg  s- 


SECOND  ADHTAYA 


329 


The  supreme  self  (that  is,  the  pure  consciousness)  being 
the  locus  and  the  object  of  avidya  attains  the  state  of  an 
individual  soul.  Avidya  (present  in  the  pure  consciousness) 
not  being  perceptible  in  the  state  of  deep  sleep  becomes 
clearly  manifest  (in  the  waking  state),  owing  to  its  relation 
to  the  reflection  of  the  pure  consciousness  in  the  intellect. 
Avidya  when  present  in  the  pure  consciousness  is  not  so 
clearly  perceptible,  as  it  is  when  the  pure  consciousness  is 
reflected  in  the  intellect.  (And  as  the  reflection  of 
the  pure  consciousness  in  the  intellect  is  the  individual 
soul),  the  statement  that  the  individual  soul  is  the  locus  of 
avidya  is  reasonable. 

For  details  see  Introduction,  p.  78. 

[165] 

sfcffftlWTf'ra 

Avidya  in  its  aspect  of  projection1  is  present  outside  the. 
individual  soul  (that  is,  in  God);  and,  in  its  aspect  of  being 
removable  by  valid  knowledge,  it  appears  in  the  individual 
soul  in  the  experience  ‘I  am  ignorant’.  Hence  the  state¬ 
ment  that  the  individual  soul  is  the  locus  of  avidya  is 
reasonable.  Of  the  two  aspects  of  avidya ,  one  (namely,  the 
aspect  of  being  removable  by  valid  knowledge)  always 
in  mifests  in  the  individual  soul,  while  the  other  aspect  is 
not  so. 

1.  See  note  on  the  following  verse. 

Avidya  is  active  in  its  aspect  of  projection  only  in  the  case  of  God. 
Sec  notes  on  Stf ,  II,  188. 

42 


330 


SAM  K$  EPAg  ARl  RAKA 


[166] 


Ssfonrea  asraffraai  Jif  fa:  n 

In  its  aspect  of  insentience  ( viksepa ),  avidya  which  is  the 
(transformative)  material  cause  of  the  universe,  and  which 
depends  on  the  supreme  self  that  is  the  sole  (transfigurative) 
material  cause  of  the  universe,  gives  rise  to  the  effects, 
namely,  ether,  air,  etc. 

Avidya  in  its  viksepa  aspect  misrepresents  the  supreme  self  as  the 
unreal  universe. 

jadai aklima  travapusa  —  viksepgi aktipradha  nd karena,  AP. 


[167] 

dhupfr  irf  MM  3^  i 

aifessr  sft  n 


This  very  same  avidya  which  is  the  cause  of  the  entire 
universe  and  which  influences  the  individual  soul  ^nd 
which  js  of  the  nature  of  being  revealed  by  the  witness- 
self  manifests  itself  in  the  form  *1  am  ignorant’  in  the  case 
of  the  individual  soul  which  is  conditioned  by  the  gross  and 
the  subtle  body. 

For  details  see  Introduction,  p.  78. 

iaririnam  —  slhuladehavacchinnam ;  purusam  —  lingadehavaccliinnam, 

TB. 

sphuranaikagocaravapuh  —  sa  ksimd  Iravisayaru  pa ,  AP. 


[168] 

mi  ssi  aft  ar  asft:  I 
Nft^raT*TCfls:  iw  yitti  aft  ga:  11 


In  the  case  of  God,  avidya  manifests  as  one  deprived 
of  reality  by  the  consciousness  that  is  (figuratively  spoken 


SECOND  ADHYATA 


331 


of  as)  the  power.  But  in  the  case  of  the  individual  soul 
which  is  delimited  by  the  gross  and  the  subtle  body,  it 
manifests  as  one  concealing  (the  true  nature  of  the  indi¬ 
vidual  soul,  that  is,)  the  consciousness. 

[  1G9  ] 

1 1 

Maya  relating  to  God  should  be  inferred  as  of  the  nature 
of  avidya  on  the  grounds  that  it  is  perceptible,  insentient, 
dependent,  and  abiding  in  the  consciousness,  and  on  the 
strength  of  the  examples  such  as  the  objects  of  dream,  the 
illusory  silver,  the  intellect,1  the  erroneous  cognitions  of 
quarters,  and  the  moon  (as  two)  and  mirage. 

The  insentient  power  abiding  in  the  pure  consciousness  when 
related  to  God  is  termed  may  a,  and  when  related  to  the  individual 
soul  is  termed  avidya.  Maya  and  avidya  are  identical.  See  SB,  II,  190. 

1.  lingadeliah  —  antahkaranam,  TB. 

[170] 

^Trqn$T5Pit  5T*ld 

The  entire  universe  beginning  with  ether  is  assumed 
to  be  created  from  the  single  avidya',  for,  whichever  is 
sublated  (later)  is  assumed  to  be  created  from  avidya  like 
the  dream  state.  This  universe  is  accepted  by  you  to  be 
sublated  ( badhya )  and  hence  it  is  the  creation  of  avidyS. 
Th e  probans  (that  is  badhyalva )  is  free  from  fallacies,  as  it 


332 


SAMK$EPAg  ARIRAKA 


possesses  the  five  characteristic  features1  like  the  probans 
-  smoke  (in  the  syllogism:  The  mountain  has  fire;  for,  it  has 
smoke).  c, 

1.  A  probans  would  give  rise  to  valid  inferential  knowledge  only 
when  it  possesses  the  five  characteristic  features,  namely,  (i)  pakse 
satlvam,  (ii)  sapakse  sallvam,  (iii)  vipaksddvyavrttatvam,  (iv)  a-sal- 
pratipaksilatvam,  and,  (v)  aba dhitatvam. 

These  may  be  explained  as  follows: 

i.  A  paksa  is  that  in  which  there  is  no  certainty  of  the  thing 
to  be  inferred;  and,  the  probans  must  exist  in  the  paksa.  The 
existence  of  the  probans  in  the  paksa  is  known  as  pakse  satlvam. 

ii.  A  sapaksa  or  a  similar  instance  is  what  is  definitely  known 
to  be  possessed  of  the  thing  to  be  inferred;  and,  the  probans 
must  exist  in  the  sapaksa.  The  existence  of  the  probans  in  the 
sapaksa  is  known  as  sapakse  satlvam. 

iii.  A  vipaksa  or  a  contrary  instance  is  what  is  definitely  known 
to  be  devoid  of  the  thing  to  be  inferred,  and  the  probans  must 
not  exist  in  the  vipaksa.  The  non-existence  of  the  probans  in  the 
vipaksa  is  known  as  vipaksa  dvy a  vrltatvam. 

iv.  A  probans  which  establishes  a  particular  thin£  that  is  to  be 
inferred  is  said  to  be  sal-pralipaksila  or  counterbalanced  if 
there  is  another  probans  which  seeks  to  establish  the  absence 
of  that  thing  which  is  to  be  inferred,  e.g. 

(i)  Sound  is  eternal,  because  it  is  audible. 

(ii)  Sound  is  non-eternal,  because  it  is  a  product.  In  these 
two  syllogisms,  the  probans  are  sal-pralipaksila  as  each  one 
is  faced  with  another  probans  that  seeks  to  establish  the 
absence  of  the  thing  which  it  aims  to  establish  as  the  thing 
to  lie  proved.  If  the  probans  is’  not  faced  with  another 
probans  of  the  above  mentioned  nature,  then  the  former 
one  is  known  as  a-satpralipaksita. 

(v)  A  probans  in  a  syllogism  is  said  to  be  badhita  if  the  paksa  in 
that  syllogism  is  devoid  of  the  thing  to  be  inferred;  and  it  is 
abadhila  if  tire  paksa  consists  of  the  thing  to  be  inferred. 


SECOND  ADHYAYA 


333 


Now,  the  probans  —  smoke  —  in  the  syllogism  ‘The  mountain 
lias  fire,  because  it  has  smoke’  possesses  the  five  characteristic  features 
explained  al&vc.  In  the  same  way,  the  probans  —  badhyatva  —  in  the 
syllogism  ‘The  universe  is  the  effect  of  avidya,  because  it  is  sublated 
(badhyatva)’  also  pcs.,  the  five  characteristic  features  and  hence 
there  would  arise  valid  inferential  cognition  from  this  probans. 

[  1 7 1 '] 

3RqRqi»Rfq$s;fq5  qftqrfcit  qR  m  I 
q  qqtsftfcq  sRqjqftqr^  immm  qq:  n 

If  the  disputants  hold  that  the  (aforesaid)  inference 
is  contradicted  by  the  (import  of  the)  Upanisads,  then  it  is 
wrong;  for  there  is  no  Upani?adic  statement  which  teaches 
the  material  cause  of  the  universe  to  be  other  than  avidya. 

THE  SELF  —  THE  LOGUS  OF  AVIDYA. 

[172] 

friqq^'TTR  mi  *qi- 
£qqiqfRq*3  ii 

The  erroneous  cognition  arises  regarding  the  consci¬ 
ousness,  not  owing  to  the  defects  present  in  the  object  and 
sense  organ,  but  only  owing  to  avidya.  Similarly,  the 
cognition  of  all  duality  in  the  illustrious  absolute  self  is 
erroneous  and  is  caused  by  avidya. 

This  verse  is  found  in  the  first  adhyaya  of  this  work.  See  I,  30. 

[173] 

swq  ^  m  5?FRra^5fa  i 

*nq 


S34 


SAMK$EPA$ARIRAKA 


The  misery  born  of  avidya  pertains  to  the  individual 
soul  which  is  devoid  of  knowledge  of  its  true  nature.  But  it 
(namely,  the  misery)  is  not  even  seemingly  present  in  God. 
The  group  of  qualities  such  as  omniscience,  etc.,  belongs 
to  God  and  not  to  the  individual  soul  whose  true  nature  is 
concealed  by  avidya  (in  its  aspect  of  concealment). 

[174] 

m  *Tf 

qftfcq  11 

Lord  Kr?na  who  is  the  master  of  the  hoary  tradition 
has  said  in  the  topic  dealing  with  a  person  liberated  while 
embodied1  that  the  individual  soul  is  the  locus  of  avidya. 
And  that  too  is  to  be  viewed  in  the  light  of  what  is 
mentioned  before,2  and  considering  the  earlier  and  later 
portions  (of  the  Gita).  Similarly,  the  statements  of  Sri 
£>a  hkara  (regarding  the  individual  soul  being  the  locus  of 
avidyaY  found  in  different  texts  should  be  interpreted  in 
the  aforesaid  manner  by  examining  the  prior  and  the  later 
portions.  But  the  view  of  Mandana4  (that  the  individual 
soul  is  the  locus  of  avidya )  should  be  rejected,  as  it  presents 
a  different  view-point.5 

1.  Dh.  G.,  II,  52. 

2.  See  Ss\  IT,  164. 

3.  See  Introduction,  p.  77. 

4.  Mandana  advocates  the  view  that  jiva  is  the  locus  of  avidya 
while  the  self  is  its  content. 

See  Brahmasiddhi,  p.  10. 

5.  Sec  Prof.  Kuppuswami  Sastri’s  Introduction  to  the  Brahma¬ 
siddhi  for  details  regarding  the  divergent  views  on  Advaita 
held  by  Mandana.  pp.  XXVI.  ff. 


SECOND  ADHTAYA 


335 


DIFFERENCE  BETWEEN  JIVA  AND  TSVARA 

[175] 

w*  qfcq^n 

The  bhasya  text  “The  nescience  abides  in  the  indivi¬ 
dual  soul  which  is  delimited  by  the  gross  and  the  subtle 
body,  which  is  associated  with  passion,  etc.,  and  which  is 
ignorant  of  its  true  nature  by  being  concealed  by  nescience. 
And  the  true  knowledge  belongs  to  God  who  is  free  from 
the  veil  of  nescience,”1  should  be  interpreted  in  the  manner 
mentioned  before- 

1.  avidya  vii  is  tah  karyakarario’pa  dhiratma  jiva  ucyale, 

nityaniratidayajilanaSaktyupa  dhiratma  antaryami  iivara  ucyate, 
S’ B  on  Brh.,  Ill,  viii,  12. 

[176] 

There  is  the  clear  manifestation  of  avidya  (in  the  form 
of ‘I  am  ignorant’)  in  the  case  of  the  individual  soul,  while 
there  is  no  such  manifestation  in  the  case  of  God.  Hence 
it  (namely,  avidya)  is  denied  in  respect  of  God  who  stands 
as  the  original  or  as  the  reflected  image  of  the  supreme  self 
in  avidya,1  and  who  is  pure  consciousness  that  is  free  from 
the  veil  in  the  form  of  the  subtle  and  the  gross  body. 

1.  See  Introduction,  pp.  102-3. 

[  177  ] 

fa  fairer  qRsnqfaqeh  spirit  swq  im  I 

m ft  II 


1-  -  Pi,  T4. 


336 


SAM  K$EPAg  ARI RAKA 


The  individual  soul,  whose  eternal  true  nature  has 
been  veiled  by  avidya ,  possesses  finite  knowledge,  while 
Gud,  being  free  from  avidya  (in  its  concealing  phase)  and 
its  effects  such  as  intellect,  etc.,  possesses  infinite  knowledge. 
Thus  in  this  light  the  bhasya  text1  is  quite  appropriate. 

1.  See  note  on  SS,  II,  175. 

[178] 

TOI  3*r:  3PS  3*:  l 

3rsnfaTO*?t$faf3rcR4  'wm  ^  31%  11 

God  does  not  have  the  experience  in  the  form  ‘I  am 
ignorant’.  And  the  individual  soul  does  not  have  the 
knowledge  ‘I  am  omniscient’.  Here  the  reason  is:  God  is 
devoid  of  intellect  while  the  individual  soul  possesses  it 
(that  is,  the  intellect). 

[179] 

ffarcr  jrfaffarcasr 

Except  the  embodied  form,  that  is,  the  excellent  body 
assumed  on  His  own  will  to  bring  about  welfare  to  the 
entire  universe,  it  is  impossible  to  attribute  the  association, 
of  the  intellect  to  God  who  remains  as  the  original  or  as 
the  reflected  image  of  the  self  in  avidya.1 

See  Introduction,  pp.  102-3. 

[  180] 

^lo^sq^qirqffi  1 

s.  as^dt  —  Bi. 


SECOND  ADHYAYA 


337 


Without  the  association  of  the  intellect,  the  experience 
of  avidya  (in  the  form  £I  am  ignorant’)  is  not  possible  in 
the  case  of  one  (that  is,  God)  who  is  ever  released  and  who 
is  free  from  merit  and  demerit.  And,  without  the  experience 
of  avidya,  the  concealment  of  the  essential  nature  of  God, 
who  manifests  in  His  true  nature,  cannot  even  be  conceived 
of 


[101] 

TWOTf 

»Tft  H5TH  dd  Rfef  II 

Though  God  assumes  the  embodied  form  at  His  own 
will,  y<ft  in  view  of  His  control  over  avidya,  He  does  not 
have  the  experience  of  avidya  in  the  form  ‘I  am  ignorant’. 
In  the  case  of  the  individual  souls,  owing  to  the  influence  of 
avidya  over  them,  there  is  the  manifestation  of  avidya  in  the 
form  ‘I  am  ignorant’.  And  God  does  not  have  this 
experience. 


[182] 

Owing  to  Jflis  pre-determination  in  the  form  ‘I 
shall  remain  ignorant  for  some  period’,  there  was  the 
experience  of  avidya  in  the  case  of  Sri  Rama  (an  incarna¬ 
tion  of  Lord  Visnu).  And,  when  the  purpose  of  the  divine 
beings  had  been  achieved,  He  cast  off  (His  assumed  state 
of  ignorance  on  receiving  instruction  from  Lord  Brahma 
(the  creator)  which  is  only  a  seeming  cause. 

43 


338 


SAMK?EPAg  ARIRAKA 


[183] 

qtftercts'fi  ^  I 

STR  f^TqWRSqJJsq  WfS#q*?r  HRWN  qd)sqfq^r:  II 

God,  being  free  from  the  superimposition  of  the  intel¬ 
lect  and  being  unconcealed  by  avidya,  is  omniscient  and  his 
knowledge  is  not  veiled.  But  the  knowledge  of  the 
individual  soul  is  veiled  by  avidya  and  hence  the  individual 
soul  is  ignorant. 

[  184] 

mm  *  sfa:  I 
HR  ^  smwq  n 

God  has  in  Himself  the  aggregate  of  empirical  cogni¬ 
tions  which  are  the  results  of  all  the  proofs,  but  not  the 
individual  soul.  Hence  the  knowledge  of  God  is  free  from 
concealment,  while  that  of  the  individual  soul  is  veiled  in 
view  of  the  specific  reason  (that  it  is  limited). 

[185] 

3RRd3R.%3  STIT^IRVUm 

d-7RT%  fliq’tff  1 

HR  ff  || 

God  (as  His  true  nature  is  unconcealed)  is  proximate 
(to  the  universe)  and  always  manifests  by  its  own  light, 
avidya,  and  its  effect,  namely,  the  entire  universe.  But  as 
the  individual  soul  does  not  (manifest  the  universe),  its 
knowledge  is  said  to  be  veiled  while  that  of  God  is  said  to 
be  unconcealed. 

V  35ftq  —  p^. 


SECOND  ADHTATA 


339 


[186] 


t'T  qr  SUTrqq  fft  ftqqSI  II 

Wiiat  is  there  unknown  in  this  world  to  God  who  is  of 
the  form  of  pure  consciousness,  who  is  the  reflected  image  of 
the  pure  consciousness  in  the  .ratoa-predominant  avidya,  who 
is  free  from  avidya  (in  its  concealing  aspect),  who  is  always 
revealed,  and  who  is  immanent  in  the  hearts  of  all  the 
individual  souls? 

amalasatlvard ieh  —  sal Ivapradha  nama yd pratibimbitasya,  S. 

This  verse  is  from  the  Visnu-purana,  V,  xvii,  32. 

[187] 

^qifqqiqqaqqsrat 

sflsrrwq  ft  q$  faqqtaqiqT^  II 

The  passage  f.om  the  Puianas,  namely,  ‘This  omni¬ 
present  God  always  controls  the  illusion  and  expands  it  in 
the  form  of  universe  ,  is  quite  reasonable.  [As  illusion 
{mdydv and  nescience  ( ajhdna )  are  identical]  God  controls 
His  nescience  which  depends  on  the  self  for  its  existence. 

[188] 

dSRTtflflsmfat  I?  ^  II 

Thus  all  the  statements  found  in  different  contexts 
regarding  the  attribution  of  avidya  to  the  individual  soul 
and  its  denial  in  God  should  be  viewed  in  the  light  of  what 


340 


SAM  K$EPAg  ARI RAKA 


is  said  before.  Hence  our  view  (that  the  inner  self  is  the 
locus  and  the  object  of  avidya )  is  congruous  and  the  state¬ 
ments  of  3rl  Slankara  are  quite  harmonious  with  our  view. 

If  avidya  is  denied  in  the  case  of  God  what  is  meant  is  that  avidya 
is  controlled  by  God  and  it  is  not  operative  in  its  aspect  of  concealment 
in  His  case.  Similarly,  if  it  is  said  that  the  individual  soul  is  the  locus 
o £  avidya  what  is  intended  to  be  conveyed  is  that  avidya  is  clearly 
perceptible  in  the  form  ‘I  am  ignorant’  in  the  case  of  the  individual 
soul.  It  influences  the  individual  soul  and  it  is  fully  active  in  its 
aspect  of  concealment  in  the  individual  soul  by  concealing  the  unity 
of  the  self  from  it. 


[189] 

The  pure  consciousness  which  is  the  locus  and  object  of 
avidyS,  being  omniscient,  creates  this  universe  which 
comprises  the  divisions,  namely,  the  individual  soul,  God, 
and  the  phenomenal  world.  And  this  is  the  well-known 
settled  doctrine  of  the  Upam’sads. 

[  190] 

vm  nr  i 

*1#  ^  31 1  II 

The  insentient  power  of  the  all-pervasive  self  gives  rise 
to  the  individual  souls,  God,  and  the  phenomenal  world- 
The  same  power  when  associated  with  God  is  termed  may  a 
and  when  associated  with  the  individual  soul  is  termed 
avidya.  And  God  deludes  the  individual,  souls  and  the 


SECOND  ADHYATA 


341 


individual  souls  arc  deluded-  Hence  God  is  always  omnis¬ 
cient,  and  the  individual  souls  are  often  ignorant. 

See  Sg,  II,  169. 


[191] 

WHH]  *T'71d  3 

fa 

fa^srai  n 

The  misery  of  the  individual  soul  is  born  of  avidya. 
The  characteristic  of  being  the  cause  of  the  world  present 
in  God  is  born  of  maya.  Therefore  (by  virtue  of  avidya 
abiding  in  the  self),  the  invariable  distinction  between  the 
individual  soul  and  God  is  well  known  in  the  Upani$ads. 

[192] 

ip:  q||:  n 

Wise  men  hold  that  the  individual  soul  is  the  revealing 
medium  of  the  beginningless  power,  namely,  avidya  which 
abides  in  the  self  They  say  that  avidya  when  related  to 
the  individual  soul  is  clearly  presented.  Hence  it  is  said 
^by  the  wise  men)  that  the  individual  soul  is  the  locus  of 
avidya. 

jivatvam  — jivasvarupam,  TD. 

See  Introduction,  pp.  77-78. 

[193] 

sifa  sfc  i 

mmk  ftffara  11 


342 


SAM  K$EPAg  ARIRAKA 


The  author  of  the  Brahma-suira,  firmly  holding  the 
view  (that  the  self  is  absolut;  and  the  universe  is  indeter¬ 
minable)  introduces  certain  sutras  intending  to  admit  the 
opponent’s  view.  And  they  (should  be  taken  as)  reasonably 
interpreted  by  us  in  the  manner  (set  forth  above)- 

In  the  light  of  what  has  been  said  so  far,  it  is  clear  that  the  pure 
self,  owing  to  its  association  with  avidya,  appears  as  God,  the 
individual  soul,  and  the  universe.  But,  the  Pui  vapaksin  holds  that 
this  view  is  wrong,  as  the  author  of  the  Brahma-suira  holds  the  view 
of  transformation  of  the  self  in  the  sulra  —  bhoktrapalt  h  avibhagah  cet 
syallnkavat,  II,  i,  13. 

Sarvajnatman  answers  this  objection  by  contending  that  the 
author  of  the  Brahma-suira  accepts  the  theory  of  transformation  only  from 
the  empirical  stand-point.  His  final  view  is  the  theory  of  transfigura¬ 
tion  and  he  puts  forth  this  in  the  sulra  —  tadananyatvam  arambhana&abdd- 
dibhyah,  II,  i,  14. 

The  translation  and  notes  follow  S. 

praudhipradari anaparah  —  abliyupaqamava  di  sail,  S 

[194] 

The  author  of  the  Brahma-suira  clearly  and  firmly  puts 
forth  his  view  in  the  sulra  —  sarvadhannopapattesca.  (In 
his  bhasya  on  that  aphorism),  the  author  of  the  bhasya  also 
who  is  very  keen  on  maintaining  the  omniscience,  etc.,  (of 
the  self)  propounds  this  view  with  great  effort. 

1.  BS,  II,  i,  35. 

The  bhasya  text  kept  in  view  by  the  author  in  this  verse  is: 

sarvajnam  sarvadakli  mahamayam  brahma,  BSB,  II,  i.  ^>5. 

What  $ri  Sankara  means  by  this  text  is  that  the  self,  owing  to 
avidya,  acquires  the  qualities  of  omniscience,  etc.,  and  appears  as 
God,  the  individual  soul,  and  the  universe.  And  this  is  the  theory 
of  transfiguration  of  the  self 


SECOND  ADIITATA 


343 


[195] 

%WHrI  dT  I 

*m£t  *mfe:  li 

If  it  is  said  that  the  self  by  its  being  the  locus  of  avidyS 
attains  the  state  of  the  individual  soul,  then  it  is  not 
reasonable  to  hold  that  avidya  abides  in  the  individual  soul. 
If  it  is  held  that  avidya  (which  abides  in  the  self  and  which 
gives  rise  to  the  state  of  the  individual  soul)  is  different 
from  avidya  (that  abides  in  the  individual  soul),  then  alas! 
there  is  the  strained  assumption  (of  plurality  of  avidya.)1 

1.  vide:  ckdjiia nenaiva  nikhilavyavaha  ropapattau  anekajh a nakalpanam 
kastamilyarthah,  TD. 


[196] 

In  the  view  (that  the  individual  soul  is  the  locus  of 
avidya)  there  is  the  contingency  of  the  pure  self  becoming 
the  Jocus  of  avidya.  This  is  not  acceptable  (to  you),  but 
this  cannot  be  avoided.  If  the  pure  self  also  is  admitted 
to  be  associated  with  avidya,  then  on  what  grounds  do  you 
abandon  our  (that  is,  the  Siddhantin’s)  views? 

Those  who  advocate  the  view  that  the  individual  soul  is  the  locus 
of  avidya  hold  thus:  The  pure  self,  owing  to  its  association  with  avidya 
attains  the  state  of  individual  soul,  and  avidya  abides  in  the  individual 
soul. 

This  view  is  objected  to  on  two  grounds.  In  the  first  place,  if  the 
pure  self,  by  its  association  with  avidya,  attains  the  state  of  individual 
soul,  then  avidya  which  is  prior  to  the  individual  soul  cannot  abide  in 
the  individual  soul  which  is  later.  In  the  second  place,  the  advocates 
of  this  view  hold  that  the  pure  self  by  its  association  with  avidya  attains 
the  state  of  the  individual  soul.  This  association  is  false  and  it  is  only 


344 


SAMK$EPA$ARIRAKA 


the  relation  of  being  the  substratum  and  the  superimposed  between 
the  self  and  avidya.  So  they  have  to  admit  that  the  pure  self  also  is 
the  locus  or  the  substratum  of  avidya.  When  such  is  the  case,  how 
can  they  reject  the  Siddhantin’s  view  that  the  pure  self  is  the  locus  of 
avidya ? 


[197] 

M  Win  it 

If  it  is  said  that  (the  Siddhantin’s  view  that  the  self 
is  the  locus  of  av idya)  is  abandoned  in  order  to  maintain 
the  pure  nature  of  the  self,  then  it  is  said  that  in  our 
(Siddhantin’s)  view  also  the  self  is  pure  (even  if  it  is  the 
locus  of  avidya)-  If  it  is  said  that  (though)  in  our  (Siddhan¬ 
tin’s)  view  the  purity  of  the  self  is  real  (yet  there  is 
impurity  owing  to  the  superimposition  of  avidya),  then  (it 
is  asked):  is  the  purity  of  the  self  fancied  in  your  view? 

Ibis  said  by  the  Purvapak$in  that  though  the  self  is  pure,  yet 
owing  to  the  superimposition  of  avidya  there  is  the  contingency  of 
impurity.  The  Siddhantin  replies  that  in  the  Purvapakjin’s  view  also 
the  sfclf  is  really  pure  and  the  purity  is  not  fancied.  Yet  there  arises 
some  impurity  by  its  being  the  substratum  of  the  universe.  And  the 
Purvapakjin  maintains  that  this  impurity  is  merely  fancied  and  this 
does  not  conflict  with  the  purity  of  the  self.  Sarvajnatman  argues 
that  this  line  of  argument  can  be  extended  to  the  Siddhantin’s  view. 
The  impurity  which  is  said  to  be  present  in  the  self,  owing  to  the 
superimposition  of  avidya  on  it,  is  fancied  and  it  does  not  conflict  with 
the  purity  of  the  self. 


[  1-8  ] 


SECOND  ADHTATA 


345 


The  doctrine  of  the  self  (not  being  the  locus  of  avidya ) 
fancied  by  one  who  is  of  confused  mind  and  who  swerves 
from  the  path  that  leads  to  liberation,  is  vcf*y  inappropriate. 
Hence  it  should  be  abandoned  by  the  wise  men  and  our 
view  (that  the  self  is  the  locus  of  avidya)  which  leads  to 
liberation  should  be  accepted  by  those  who  (long  for) 
liberation. 


[  1 9P] 

wforar  ^  winter  mi  n 

If  it  is  said:  just  as  it  is  admitted  that  bird,  etc.,  are 
existent  and  non-existent  in  one  substratum,  that  is,  in  the 
unitary  ether,  so  also  nescience  is  accepted  to  be  existent 
and  non-existent  in  one  substratum  (that  is,  the  unitary 
self). 

The  view  put  forth  in  Stf  II,  134,  is  restated  here  and  is  refuted 
in  the  following  verses. 


[  200] 

[The  Siddhantin  refutes]  this  is  not  sound.  If  the 
view  that  the  existence  and  the  non-existence  (of  the  same 
object)  in  one  substratum  is  accepted,  then  this  view  in 
which  the  association  of  existence  and  non-existence  (in 
one  substratum)  is  intended,  involves  the  rejection  of  your 
accepted  view.1 

1.  See  the  following  verse. 


tmfh'a  —  Bj,  Pi,  P2. 

44 


346 


SAM  K$EPAg  ARI RAKA 


[201] 

^Tcof  hr^t  t:  u 

If  smoke  is  existent  and  non-existent  in  the  mountain, 
then  is  the  (existence  of  the)  cause  of  the  smoke  (that  is, 
fire)  inferred  in  the  mountain?  And  without  the  effect 
(that  is,  the  probans),  there  cannot  be  the  inference  of  the 
cause  (that  is,  the  probandum).  When  such  is  the  case, 
how  could  there  be  the  inference  of  the  cause  in  your  view 
which  (  affirms  the  existence  and  the  non-existence 
of  smoke  which  is  the  probans )  ? 

[202] 

mm  gsrroi  i 

«RFT?  II 

One  who  advocates  that  the  association  of  existence  and 
non-existence  (of  the  same  object)  in  one  substratum  is 
consistent,  (has  to)  deny  the  inference  of  ‘cause’  from  its 
‘effect’  So  one  should  not  advocate  this  strained 
assumption. 


[  203  ] 

fsm  di^iifd  ^  n 

[The  Purvapaksin  objects]  just  as  it  is  accepted  in 
your  view  that  though  in  the  unitary  consciousness  there  is 
manifestation  (owing  to  its  self-luminosity)  and  non-mani¬ 
festation  (owing  to  avidvd)  yet  theie  is  no  contradiction, 
so  also  let  both  the  existence  and  the  non-existence  (of 
avidya  in  the  unitary  conciousness)  be  (compatible)- 


SECOND  ADHYATA 


347 


[  204] 

*  gsfRjRi  ftsi  I 

But  it  is  not  so.  The  manifestation  of  the  self  is 
intrinsic;  while  the  non-manifestation  is  extrinsic  and  it 
arises  from  avidya.  There  is  no  other  example  that  can  be 
cited  to  establish  the  association  of  the  existence  and  the 
non-existence  of  avidya  (in  one  substratum). 

See  the  following  verse. 


[205] 

The  manifestation  and  the  non-manifestation  of  the 
self  are  not  considered  as  existent  and  non-existent  (entities). 
For  the  consciousness  constituting  the  self  is  manifestation 
and  avidya  which  has  the  self  as  its  locus  and  object  is  said 
to  be  non-manifestation. 


[206] 

ft  dsni 

The  self’s  being  the  locus  of  avidya  does  not  give  rise 
to  the  state  of  the  individual  soul.  fBut)  it  is  reasonable 
that  avidya  contributes  to  the  states  of  individual  soul  (and 
God)-  The  word  jiva  is  well-known  to  be  denotative  of  the 
consciousness  associated  with  the  subtle  body. 

pranopadheh  —  pranaiabdena  jil a nakriyd d aktya tmakarh  pranendri- 
ydntahkaranasamghatarupam  ajhanasya  prathamakaryam  lingaiarirarh 
J  ivaksyate,  AP. 


348 


SAM  K$EPA&  ARFRAKA 


[  207  ] 

#q  PRRfaf  | 

3\m  fMre:p?fc<r  =r  <rem- 

it 

It  is  well-known  among  the  learned  that  the  word  jiva 
signifies  the  reflected  image  of  the  self  in  the  subtle  body, 
which  is  the  product  of  avidya.  And  etymologically  also 
the  word  jiva  denotes  this  same  sense.1  Hence  the  cons¬ 
ciousness  conditioned  by  the  subtle  body  is  the  individual 
soul. 


1.  jiva  pranadharane  iti  dhatvanusarat  karana  tmakaliri  go’ pahita- 
caitanyameva  jivaiabdarthah,  S. 


[208] 


sr&nsrrft  dwRl  dTit  ^ 

^  di  to 

Vl  HfR  II 

Hence  the  self  alone  is  capable  of  being  the  locus  and 
object  of  avidya  and  none  else,  as  they  are  insentient.  And 
avidya  cannot  abide  in  itself  (or  its  products).  Moreover, 
as  avidya  cannot  be  annihilated  except  by  the  knowledge  of 
the  self  and  as  the  latter  cannot  arise  in  the  case  of  the 
objects  that  are  the  products  of  avidya,  there  cannot  be  the 
annihilation  of  avidya  (if  it  resides  in  its  products  which  are 
insentient).  And  in  the  absence  of  the  rise  of  the  mental 
state  that  could  reveal  the  self,  there  cannot  be  the 
removal  of  avidya. 


SECOND  ADHTATA 


349 


avagati . . janmanlarena  : — 

avagatih  —  visaya  bhivyaktih,  tajjanakam  yat  anlahkaranavrttirupam 
jilanam  tasya  janma  vina  ityarthah. 

[  209  ] 

S<P?i«rcfar^g  m  ^  <r:  ti 

The  object  which  is  of  the  nature  of  avidya  cannot  be 
the  locus  of  avidya.  And  the  self  in  the  aspect  of  jiva  is 
not  accepted  to  be  external  to  the  form  of  avidya ■  Hence 
in  your  (namely,  the  Purvapaksin’s)  view  the  individual 
soul  is  not  fit  to  fall  within  the  range  of  the  locus  of  avidya. 
Let  avidya  abide  in  the  pure  consciousness;  and  indeed  it  is 
fit  to  be  present  only  there. 

If  the  self  in  its  aspect  of  jiva  is  admitted  to  be  the  locus  of  avidyai 
then  it  amounts  to  admitting  that  the  self  associated  with  the  intellect 
is  the  locus  of  avidya.  The  result  of  this  argument  is  that  intellect  also 
becomes  the  locus  of  avidya.  But  this  cannot  be,  as  the  intellect  itself 
is  the  effect  of  avidya.  And,  avidya  cannot  abide  in  its  effect. 

[210] 

n 

[The  Punwpaksin  objects:  ] 

The  manifestation  of  avidya  as  having  the  supreme 
self  as  its  locus  is  never  possible,  because  the  supreme  self 
is  not  experienced.  The  manifestation  of  avidya  would 
hold  good,  only  when  its  locus  is  experienced.  But  here 


SECOND  ADHYATA 


341 


individual  souls  arc  deluded-  Hence  God  is  always  omnis¬ 
cient,  and  the  individual  souls  are  often  ignorant. 

See  Sg,  II,  169. 


[191] 

WHH]  *T'71d  3 

fa 

fa^srai  n 

The  misery  of  the  individual  soul  is  born  of  avidya. 
The  characteristic  of  being  the  cause  of  the  world  present 
in  God  is  born  of  maya.  Therefore  (by  virtue  of  avidya 
abiding  in  the  self),  the  invariable  distinction  between  the 
individual  soul  and  God  is  well  known  in  the  Upani$ads. 

[192] 

ip:  q||:  n 

Wise  men  hold  that  the  individual  soul  is  the  revealing 
medium  of  the  beginningless  power,  namely,  avidya  which 
abides  in  the  self  They  say  that  avidya  when  related  to 
the  individual  soul  is  clearly  presented.  Hence  it  is  said 
^by  the  wise  men)  that  the  individual  soul  is  the  locus  of 
avidya. 

jivatvam  — jivasvarupam,  TD. 

See  Introduction,  pp.  77-78. 

[193] 

sifa  sfc  i 

mmk  ftffara  11 


342 


SAM  K$EPAg  ARIRAKA 


The  author  of  the  Brahma-suira,  firmly  holding  the 
view  (that  the  self  is  absolut;  and  the  universe  is  indeter¬ 
minable)  introduces  certain  sutras  intending  to  admit  the 
opponent’s  view.  And  they  (should  be  taken  as)  reasonably 
interpreted  by  us  in  the  manner  (set  forth  above)- 

In  the  light  of  what  has  been  said  so  far,  it  is  clear  that  the  pure 
self,  owing  to  its  association  with  avidya,  appears  as  God,  the 
individual  soul,  and  the  universe.  But,  the  Pui  vapaksin  holds  that 
this  view  is  wrong,  as  the  author  of  the  Brahma-suira  holds  the  view 
of  transformation  of  the  self  in  the  sulra  —  bhoktrapalt  h  avibhagah  cet 
syallnkavat,  II,  i,  13. 

Sarvajnatman  answers  this  objection  by  contending  that  the 
author  of  the  Brahma-suira  accepts  the  theory  of  transformation  only  from 
the  empirical  stand-point.  His  final  view  is  the  theory  of  transfigura¬ 
tion  and  he  puts  forth  this  in  the  sulra  —  tadananyatvam  arambhana&abdd- 
dibhyah,  II,  i,  14. 

The  translation  and  notes  follow  S. 

praudhipradari anaparah  —  abliyupaqamava  di  sail,  S 

[194] 

The  author  of  the  Brahma-suira  clearly  and  firmly  puts 
forth  his  view  in  the  sulra  —  sarvadhannopapattesca.  (In 
his  bhasya  on  that  aphorism),  the  author  of  the  bhasya  also 
who  is  very  keen  on  maintaining  the  omniscience,  etc.,  (of 
the  self)  propounds  this  view  with  great  effort. 

1.  BS,  II,  i,  35. 

The  bhasya  text  kept  in  view  by  the  author  in  this  verse  is: 

sarvajnam  sarvadakli  mahamayam  brahma,  BSB,  II,  i.  ^>5. 

What  $ri  Sankara  means  by  this  text  is  that  the  self,  owing  to 
avidya,  acquires  the  qualities  of  omniscience,  etc.,  and  appears  as 
God,  the  individual  soul,  and  the  universe.  And  this  is  the  theory 
of  transfiguration  of  the  self 


SECOND  ADIITATA 


343 


[195] 

%WHrI  dT  I 

*m£t  *mfe:  li 

If  it  is  said  that  the  self  by  its  being  the  locus  of  avidyS 
attains  the  state  of  the  individual  soul,  then  it  is  not 
reasonable  to  hold  that  avidya  abides  in  the  individual  soul. 
If  it  is  held  that  avidya  (which  abides  in  the  self  and  which 
gives  rise  to  the  state  of  the  individual  soul)  is  different 
from  avidya  (that  abides  in  the  individual  soul),  then  alas! 
there  is  the  strained  assumption  (of  plurality  of  avidya.)1 

1.  vide:  ckdjiia nenaiva  nikhilavyavaha  ropapattau  anekajh a nakalpanam 
kastamilyarthah,  TD. 


[196] 

In  the  view  (that  the  individual  soul  is  the  locus  of 
avidya)  there  is  the  contingency  of  the  pure  self  becoming 
the  Jocus  of  avidya.  This  is  not  acceptable  (to  you),  but 
this  cannot  be  avoided.  If  the  pure  self  also  is  admitted 
to  be  associated  with  avidya,  then  on  what  grounds  do  you 
abandon  our  (that  is,  the  Siddhantin’s)  views? 

Those  who  advocate  the  view  that  the  individual  soul  is  the  locus 
of  avidya  hold  thus:  The  pure  self,  owing  to  its  association  with  avidya 
attains  the  state  of  individual  soul,  and  avidya  abides  in  the  individual 
soul. 

This  view  is  objected  to  on  two  grounds.  In  the  first  place,  if  the 
pure  self,  by  its  association  with  avidya,  attains  the  state  of  individual 
soul,  then  avidya  which  is  prior  to  the  individual  soul  cannot  abide  in 
the  individual  soul  which  is  later.  In  the  second  place,  the  advocates 
of  this  view  hold  that  the  pure  self  by  its  association  with  avidya  attains 
the  state  of  the  individual  soul.  This  association  is  false  and  it  is  only 


344 


SAMK$EPA$ARIRAKA 


the  relation  of  being  the  substratum  and  the  superimposed  between 
the  self  and  avidya.  So  they  have  to  admit  that  the  pure  self  also  is 
the  locus  or  the  substratum  of  avidya.  When  such  is  the  case,  how 
can  they  reject  the  Siddhantin’s  view  that  the  pure  self  is  the  locus  of 
avidya ? 


[197] 

M  Win  it 

If  it  is  said  that  (the  Siddhantin’s  view  that  the  self 
is  the  locus  of  av idya)  is  abandoned  in  order  to  maintain 
the  pure  nature  of  the  self,  then  it  is  said  that  in  our 
(Siddhantin’s)  view  also  the  self  is  pure  (even  if  it  is  the 
locus  of  avidya)-  If  it  is  said  that  (though)  in  our  (Siddhan¬ 
tin’s)  view  the  purity  of  the  self  is  real  (yet  there  is 
impurity  owing  to  the  superimposition  of  avidya),  then  (it 
is  asked):  is  the  purity  of  the  self  fancied  in  your  view? 

Ibis  said  by  the  Purvapak$in  that  though  the  self  is  pure,  yet 
owing  to  the  superimposition  of  avidya  there  is  the  contingency  of 
impurity.  The  Siddhantin  replies  that  in  the  Purvapakjin’s  view  also 
the  sfclf  is  really  pure  and  the  purity  is  not  fancied.  Yet  there  arises 
some  impurity  by  its  being  the  substratum  of  the  universe.  And  the 
Purvapakjin  maintains  that  this  impurity  is  merely  fancied  and  this 
does  not  conflict  with  the  purity  of  the  self.  Sarvajnatman  argues 
that  this  line  of  argument  can  be  extended  to  the  Siddhantin’s  view. 
The  impurity  which  is  said  to  be  present  in  the  self,  owing  to  the 
superimposition  of  avidya  on  it,  is  fancied  and  it  does  not  conflict  with 
the  purity  of  the  self. 


[  1-8  ] 


SECOND  ADHTATA 


345 


The  doctrine  of  the  self  (not  being  the  locus  of  avidya ) 
fancied  by  one  who  is  of  confused  mind  and  who  swerves 
from  the  path  that  leads  to  liberation,  is  vcf*y  inappropriate. 
Hence  it  should  be  abandoned  by  the  wise  men  and  our 
view  (that  the  self  is  the  locus  of  avidya)  which  leads  to 
liberation  should  be  accepted  by  those  who  (long  for) 
liberation. 


[  1 9P] 

wforar  ^  winter  mi  n 

If  it  is  said:  just  as  it  is  admitted  that  bird,  etc.,  are 
existent  and  non-existent  in  one  substratum,  that  is,  in  the 
unitary  ether,  so  also  nescience  is  accepted  to  be  existent 
and  non-existent  in  one  substratum  (that  is,  the  unitary 
self). 

The  view  put  forth  in  Stf  II,  134,  is  restated  here  and  is  refuted 
in  the  following  verses. 


[  200] 

[The  Siddhantin  refutes]  this  is  not  sound.  If  the 
view  that  the  existence  and  the  non-existence  (of  the  same 
object)  in  one  substratum  is  accepted,  then  this  view  in 
which  the  association  of  existence  and  non-existence  (in 
one  substratum)  is  intended,  involves  the  rejection  of  your 
accepted  view.1 

1.  See  the  following  verse. 


tmfh'a  —  Bj,  Pi,  P2. 

44 


346 


SAM  K$EPAg  ARI RAKA 


[201] 

^Tcof  hr^t  t:  u 

If  smoke  is  existent  and  non-existent  in  the  mountain, 
then  is  the  (existence  of  the)  cause  of  the  smoke  (that  is, 
fire)  inferred  in  the  mountain?  And  without  the  effect 
(that  is,  the  probans),  there  cannot  be  the  inference  of  the 
cause  (that  is,  the  probandum).  When  such  is  the  case, 
how  could  there  be  the  inference  of  the  cause  in  your  view 
which  (  affirms  the  existence  and  the  non-existence 
of  smoke  which  is  the  probans )  ? 

[202] 

mm  gsrroi  i 

«RFT?  II 

One  who  advocates  that  the  association  of  existence  and 
non-existence  (of  the  same  object)  in  one  substratum  is 
consistent,  (has  to)  deny  the  inference  of  ‘cause’  from  its 
‘effect’  So  one  should  not  advocate  this  strained 
assumption. 


[  203  ] 

fsm  di^iifd  ^  n 

[The  Purvapaksin  objects]  just  as  it  is  accepted  in 
your  view  that  though  in  the  unitary  consciousness  there  is 
manifestation  (owing  to  its  self-luminosity)  and  non-mani¬ 
festation  (owing  to  avidvd)  yet  theie  is  no  contradiction, 
so  also  let  both  the  existence  and  the  non-existence  (of 
avidya  in  the  unitary  conciousness)  be  (compatible)- 


SECOND  ADHYATA 


347 


[  204] 

*  gsfRjRi  ftsi  I 

But  it  is  not  so.  The  manifestation  of  the  self  is 
intrinsic;  while  the  non-manifestation  is  extrinsic  and  it 
arises  from  avidya.  There  is  no  other  example  that  can  be 
cited  to  establish  the  association  of  the  existence  and  the 
non-existence  of  avidya  (in  one  substratum). 

See  the  following  verse. 


[205] 

The  manifestation  and  the  non-manifestation  of  the 
self  are  not  considered  as  existent  and  non-existent  (entities). 
For  the  consciousness  constituting  the  self  is  manifestation 
and  avidya  which  has  the  self  as  its  locus  and  object  is  said 
to  be  non-manifestation. 


[206] 

ft  dsni 

The  self’s  being  the  locus  of  avidya  does  not  give  rise 
to  the  state  of  the  individual  soul.  fBut)  it  is  reasonable 
that  avidya  contributes  to  the  states  of  individual  soul  (and 
God)-  The  word  jiva  is  well-known  to  be  denotative  of  the 
consciousness  associated  with  the  subtle  body. 

pranopadheh  —  pranaiabdena  jil a nakriyd d aktya tmakarh  pranendri- 
ydntahkaranasamghatarupam  ajhanasya  prathamakaryam  lingaiarirarh 
J  ivaksyate,  AP. 


348 


SAM  K$EPA&  ARFRAKA 


[  207  ] 

#q  PRRfaf  | 

3\m  fMre:p?fc<r  =r  <rem- 

it 

It  is  well-known  among  the  learned  that  the  word  jiva 
signifies  the  reflected  image  of  the  self  in  the  subtle  body, 
which  is  the  product  of  avidya.  And  etymologically  also 
the  word  jiva  denotes  this  same  sense.1  Hence  the  cons¬ 
ciousness  conditioned  by  the  subtle  body  is  the  individual 
soul. 


1.  jiva  pranadharane  iti  dhatvanusarat  karana  tmakaliri  go’ pahita- 
caitanyameva  jivaiabdarthah,  S. 


[208] 


sr&nsrrft  dwRl  dTit  ^ 

^  di  to 

Vl  HfR  II 

Hence  the  self  alone  is  capable  of  being  the  locus  and 
object  of  avidya  and  none  else,  as  they  are  insentient.  And 
avidya  cannot  abide  in  itself  (or  its  products).  Moreover, 
as  avidya  cannot  be  annihilated  except  by  the  knowledge  of 
the  self  and  as  the  latter  cannot  arise  in  the  case  of  the 
objects  that  are  the  products  of  avidya,  there  cannot  be  the 
annihilation  of  avidya  (if  it  resides  in  its  products  which  are 
insentient).  And  in  the  absence  of  the  rise  of  the  mental 
state  that  could  reveal  the  self,  there  cannot  be  the 
removal  of  avidya. 


SECOND  ADHTATA 


349 


avagati . . janmanlarena  : — 

avagatih  —  visaya  bhivyaktih,  tajjanakam  yat  anlahkaranavrttirupam 
jilanam  tasya  janma  vina  ityarthah. 

[  209  ] 

S<P?i«rcfar^g  m  ^  <r:  ti 

The  object  which  is  of  the  nature  of  avidya  cannot  be 
the  locus  of  avidya.  And  the  self  in  the  aspect  of  jiva  is 
not  accepted  to  be  external  to  the  form  of  avidya ■  Hence 
in  your  (namely,  the  Purvapaksin’s)  view  the  individual 
soul  is  not  fit  to  fall  within  the  range  of  the  locus  of  avidya. 
Let  avidya  abide  in  the  pure  consciousness;  and  indeed  it  is 
fit  to  be  present  only  there. 

If  the  self  in  its  aspect  of  jiva  is  admitted  to  be  the  locus  of  avidyai 
then  it  amounts  to  admitting  that  the  self  associated  with  the  intellect 
is  the  locus  of  avidya.  The  result  of  this  argument  is  that  intellect  also 
becomes  the  locus  of  avidya.  But  this  cannot  be,  as  the  intellect  itself 
is  the  effect  of  avidya.  And,  avidya  cannot  abide  in  its  effect. 

[210] 

n 

[The  Punwpaksin  objects:  ] 

The  manifestation  of  avidya  as  having  the  supreme 
self  as  its  locus  is  never  possible,  because  the  supreme  self 
is  not  experienced.  The  manifestation  of  avidya  would 
hold  good,  only  when  its  locus  is  experienced.  But  here 


SECOND  ADHYAYA 


351 


[213] 

3!f  R^Rg^fq  c®^ITS?f?q 

wwf^r  fojsmt  ti 

Those  whose  intellect  is  spoiled  by  immodesty  argue 
out  of  ignorance  that  the  empirical  knowledge  reveals  itself 
and  does  not  reveal  itself.  Similarly  here  though  the 
absolute  consciousness  is  always  luminous,  the  ignorant  hold 
that  it  is  not  luminous. 

The  inner  self  is  admitted  to  be  self-revealing  and  at  the  same 
time  veiled.  This  point  is  explained  by  a  reference  to  the  empirical 
knowledge.  The  Prabhakara  school  holds  that  the  empirical 
knowledge  is  self-luminous.  This  means  that  it  manifests  without  the 
aid  of  any  external  factor.  Yet,  there  arises  the  contrary  notion  that 
the  empirical  knowledge  does  not  manifest.  This  contrary  notion 
presumptively  implies  that  the  empirical  knowledge  is  the  object  of 
ignorance.  The  point  that  is  to  be  noted  in  this  connection  is:  the 
empirical  knowledge  which  manifests  itself  on  its  own  accord  becomes 
the  object  of  ignorance  also.  In  the  same  way,  the  inner  self  which 
is  self-revealing  becomes  the  object  of  avidya. 

[214] 

R9#  qifd  I 

3?53<qf%  JUTOlfd  ^  II 

The  empirical  knowledge  reveals  itself,  though  it  is  the 
object  of  ignorance.  Similar  is  the  case  with  the  absolute 
self  also.  And  the  pure  consciousness  reflected  in  the 
mental  state  arising  from  the  study  of  the  Upani?ads 


s.  —  P2. 


—  P2. 


352 


SAM  K$EPAg  ARIRAKA 


manifests  itself  by  annihilating  avidja.  Hence  the  objection 
(advanced  before)1  cannot  be  raised  against  our  view. 

I.  vide  Ss',  II,  210. 

DISTINCTION  BETWEEN  RELEASE  AND  BONDAGE 

[215] 

q-it  mum  qTqq^Hfas*  11 

[The  PUrvapaksin  holds:] 

In  this  case,  the  scripture  dealing  with  the  distinction 
of  bound  and  released  souls  would  be  contradicted.  [The 
Siddhantin  replies]  it  would  not  become  so;  for,  until 
the  self  is  realized  this  scripture  is  valid-  All  the  distinctions 
of  the  bound  and  the  released~sou.ls  and  the  mystic  and 
the  ignorant  are  admitted  as  long  as  there  is  avidya. 

[216] 

f$  %clf^  *RSH^  I 

f%  $4  fqa^i^  11 

Moreover  is  the  scripture  dealing  with  the  distinc¬ 
tion  of  bondage  and  release  strictly  intent  on  conveying 
the  nature  of  liberation?  Or  does  it,  by  restating  thei 
state  of  liberation  (which  is  known  from  the  usage  of  elders), 
primarily  convey  it  as  of  the  nature  of  the  self? 

[217] 

qn#  siq^qt  ^qq  1 

It  is  admitted  that  such  scripture  is  not  intent  on 
conveying  the  liberation  (of  Vamadeva  and  other  released 
souls);  for,  the  knowledge  of  their  release  is  futile.  Hence 


SECOND  ADHYATA 


353 


it  is  reasonable  to  hold  that  the  scripture  is  purposeful  by 
giving  rise  to  the  firm  belief  in  the  identity  of  the  supreme 
self  and  the  individual  soul  (which  is  liberation).  And 
this  is  acceptable  to  us. 


[218] 

q^  qr  q  qifo^  i 

^T3^qr  fq^TO  *113  sfast  «l3^n 

[  The  disciple  says  ] 

As  the  view  that  “apart  from  me,  no  person  fit  for 
bondage  or  release  either  existed  or  exists  or  would  exist” 
is  contrary  to  experience,  I  do  not  rejoice  in  accepting 
this  view- 


[219] 

fa  tqrgqqt  fqitqqqqi*  fa  qi  qfts^qq 
qs:r  qifeRsiqfts^qgqqt  fqitqiqs:  1 
qilqi^qi  sjfq  ^qfq  3^  q^ 
qrfq  qq:  11 

[  The  preceptor  asks  ] 

Is  the  experience  of  duality  contrary  (to  the  view  that 
you  are  the  only  soul)  or  the  experience  “I  am  the  supreme 
self?  Or  else,  is  there  any  experience  other  than  these  two 
that  leads  to  contradiction?  The  statement  that  the 
experience  of  identity  (of  the  supreme  self  and  the  individual 
soul)  leads  to  the  contradiction  (of  the  oneness  of  the  self)  is 
not  reasonable.  And  the  experience  pointing  to  duality  also 
is  not  contrary  to  it  (that  is,  the  oneness  of  the  self),  as  the 
former  is  sublated  by  the  knowledge  that  there  is  only 
one  soul. 

45 


354 


SAM  K$EPAg  ARI RAKA 


[  220  ] 


rff^rsuqtsfa  sfaq:  i 

^3*iq  faiT^Rt 

qiftjR  q  ^  ^^qi5;4  II 

If  it  is  held  that  the  view  (that  you  are  the  only  soul) 
is  sublated  by  the  experience  that  comprehends  duality 
(between  the  supreme  self  and  the  individual  soul)  and 
identity  (of  the  supreme  self  with  the  individual  soul),  then 
(it  is  said  that)  there  is  no  such  experience  in  the  case  of 
any  individual  soul  in  the  three  states  (of  waking,  dream, 
and  deep  sleep).  No  person  in  this  world  is  seen  to  have 
the  experience  of  the  association  of  the  sun  and  darkness. 
But  if  one  could  have  the  experience  of  the  association  of 
duality  and  identity,  then  why  cannot  there  be  the 
experience  of  the  association  of  the  sun  and  darkness? 

[221] 

In  the  light  of  what  has  been  said,  not  even  a  trace 
of  contradiction  presents  itself  in  this  view  (that  there  is 
only  one  soul).  So  let  this  view  which  conforms  to  the 
texts  accepted  by  the  tradition  of  the  teachers  be  admitted 
with  faith. 


[222] 

qftvrrfd  mszz  ssqq;  qiqqqqt^rcfqi  n 


SECOND  ADHTATA 


355 


This  entire  universe  is  fancied  in  the  form  cl  God  and 
the  individual  soul  by  avidya  firmly  superimposed  on  your 
self.  Though  the  universe  is  indeterminable,  it  appears  as 
if  real,  until  the  rise  of  the  sun  in  the  form  of  the  knowledge 
of  the  self. 

lava  —  svaprakd  d  ccaitany  asvaru pasya 
udhena  —  tada  tmyadhyasaprdptena,  TB. 
adrdlnvn  —  anirvacaniyam,  S. 

[223  ] 

There  is  nothing  strange  that  in  the  case  of  the 
persons  whose  true  nature  is  concealed  by  avidya,  there 
arise  the  cognitions  that,  ‘God  is  omniscient’,  ‘I  am 
miserable’,  and  ‘The  universe  is  a  wonderful  creation’- 

[224] 

3PW  I 

?r  ift:  n 

The  sage  of  self-control  who  realizes  his  true  nature 
which  is  free  from  transmigration,  which  is  eternal  and  is 
of  the  form  of  unconditioned  bliss,  does  not  experience  any 
misery;  for,  he  annihilates  the  entire  universe  by  the  know¬ 
ledge  of  his  (true)  nature. 

INDETERMINABLE  ENTITY  COULD  CONVEY 
THE  REALITY 

[  225] 


356 


SAM  K$EPAS?  A  RIRAKa 


Your  intellect  arisen  from  aviiya  abiding  in  the  self 
falsely  creates  the  entire  universe.  The  teacher  (also)  is 
your  false  creation.  And  he  teaches  you  your  absolute 
nature- 


[  226  ] 

^  ft  srftTsmfsr  i 

No  object  which  is  knowable  by  the  intellect  is  found 
to  be  real  in  this  world-  The  entire  universe  is  like  the 
snake  appearing  in  a  rope.  Hence  it  is  established  that  it 
is  illusory. 

[  227  ] 

qfcfiT^sfq  m  3  §  II 

The  preceptor,  though  fancied,  is  (fancied  as)  omnis¬ 
cient  and  (hence)  he  himself  imparts  (the  knowledge  of) 
absolute  self.  The  serpent,  though  superimposed,  causes 
death  but  not  the  impurity  (superimposed  on  the  ether). 

It  might  be  said  :  if  the  preceptor  who  is  fancied  could  impart  the 
knowledge  of  the  self,  then  the  pot,  etc.,  also  could  impart  the 
knowledge  of  the  self  because  they  are  also  fancied. 

To  this  the  author  replies  that  though  all  the  objects  are  fancied, 
yet  there  is  difference  among  them.  The  serpent  is  suprimposed  on 
the  rope,  like  impurity  on  the  ether.  But  the  unreal  serpent  some¬ 
times  causes  death,  while  impurity  on  the  ether  never  causes  death. 

[228  ] 


SECOND  AD  HE  AT  A 


357 


If  it  is  held  that  an  object  could  impart  knowledge 
only  as  being  real,  then  the  knowledge  of  fire  can  well 
arise  even  from  the  cloth  (as  the  cloth  is  real)-  If  it  is  held 
that  an  unreal  object  cannot  give  rise  to  (any)  knowledge, 
then  indeed  (according  to  the  Purva-mimamsa  school)  the 
(unreal)  injunctive  text1  also  could  not  convey  the  true 
knowledge  (of  the  means  to  heaven,  etc.). 

1.  See  the  following  verse. 


[229  ] 

Here  the  injunctive  text,  being  unreal,  gives  rise  to  the 
valid  knowledge  of  “the  thing  to  be  achieved”  (that  is, 
sacrifice).  The  group  of  articulate  sounds  is  naturally  real, 
but  when  associated  with  different  qualities  of  tone,  they 
are  unreal. 

The  injunctive  text  is  real  in  so  far  as  it  is  made  up  of  the 
articulate  sounds.  But  it  is  unreal  when  viewed  from  the  stand-point 
of  the  particular  order  in  which  the  several  articulate  sounds  occurring 
in  it  are  placed,  and  the  qualities  of  tone  like  accents  with  which  it 
is  associated.  And  it  is  in  this  capacity  alone  that  the  injunctive  text 
gives  rise  to  the  valid  knowledge  of  ‘the  thing  to  be  achieved’.  Thus 
the  unreal  injunctive  text  gives  rise  to  the  real  knowledge  of  ‘the  thing 
to  be  achieved’. 


[  230] 

$rct  to*  Tf  3  i 

h  mm  n 

A  Vcdic  text  uttered  falsely  without  the  particular 
accent  or  letter  does  not  convey  the  intended  sense.  The  false 
utterance  of  the  text  is  (like)  a  thunderbolt  and  it  destroys 


samk$epaxariraka 

the  sacrificer,  just  as  the  word  indra  iatru  did  by  the  wrong 
use  of  accent. 

Sarvajnatman  cites  this  verse  to  prove  that  a  sentence,  only  as 
associated  with  the  qualities  of  tone  like  accents,  could  convey  the 
intended  sense. 

Tvasta  a  divine  being  desirous  of  a  son  who  would  kill  Indra, 
performed  a  sacrifice  by  uttering  the  text  indrai atrurvardhasva.  The 
word  indrai atru,  if  it  is  taken  as  a  lalpiirusa  compound,  means  one 
who  kills  Indra.  In  this  case,  the  udatta  accent  should  fall  on  the 
final  syllable.  If  the  udatta  accent  falls  on  the  first  syllabic,  then  the 
word  is  a  bahuvrihi  compound  and  it  means  ‘one  who  is  killed  by  Indra’. 

Tva?ta  used  the  udatta  accent  on  the  first  syllable,  by  mistake, 
and  so  Indra  killed  the  son  born  to  him. 

This  verse  is  from  Paninlya-iiksd ,  52. 

[231] 

Wise  men  do  not  accept  that  the  injunctive  text  could 
exist  without  the  proup  of  letters-  If  it  is  held  that  the  real 
object  alone  could  convey  the  knowledge,  then  it  clearly 
amounts  to  saying  that  the  injunctive  text  also  is  not  valid. 

The  injunctive  text,  as  associated  with  the  accents  which  are  the 
qualities  of  tone,  is  unreal. 

See  W,  II,  229. 

[232] 

w  swift  11 

In  the  view  of  Kanada,  the  sense  of  hearing  is  the 
erroneously  assumed  part  of  ether  present  in  the  auricular 
orifice;  and  it  reveals  the  group  of  words  that  are  real. 


SECOND  ADHYAYA 


359 


The  ether  is  accepted  by  the  Vai^e^ikas  to  be  unitary,  all- 
pervasive  and  eternal,  and  it  does  not  have  parts.  Yet  the  sense  of 
hearing  is  accepted  to  be  the  part  of  ether  conditioned  by  the 
auricular  orifice.  Thus  the  sense  of  hearing  is  the  erroneously  assumed 
part  of  the  ether  present  in  the  auricular  orifice  and  it  gives  rise  to  the 
real  knowledge  of  words. 


[233  ] 

stored  a*  l 

Oh!  dear,  when  there  arises  the  knowledge  of  the  self 
by  means  of  the  two  (namely,  the  teacher  and  the  scripture) 
fancied  (by  your  avidya ),  there  is  the  realization  of  the  self 
and  by  this  you  cross  this  unfathomable  ocean  of  trans¬ 
migration  which  is  the  (false)  creation  of  your  avidya- 

[234] 

S'ir  crctmRm  5r  ii 

The  great  sages  like  Kanada  and  others  (that  is, 
Jaimini)  hold  as  their  tenets  the  mistaken  thing  (that  is,  the 
injunctive  texts  consisting  of  letters  associated  with  accents, 
order,  etc.)  and  the  erroneously  assumed  thing  (that  is,  the 
sense  of  hearing).  Though  these  two  are  unreal,  yet  they 
are  accepted  to  be  giving  rise  to  the  result  (in  the  form  of 
correct  knowledge).  When  such  is  the  case,  why  should  not 
the  objects  created  by  avidya  give  rise  to  some  (real)  result 
in  our  view? 


See  the  following  verse. 


360 


SAM  K$  EPAtf  ARI RAKA 


[  235  ] 

am# 

faf*ra  i 

»t  vm  ^qxrnnsnfi  fcraifo. 

5#5  *  *mf  ii 

According  to  your  desire,  when  an  unreal  object  could 
give  rise  to  some  (real)  result,  why  cannot  an  entity  created 
by  avidya  (which  is  different  from  unreal  objects)1  produce 
some  real  result?  It  is  really  wonderful  (to  say  that  it 
cannot  produce  any  real  result).  And  you  are  highly  quali¬ 
fied  to  assert  so,  while  we  are  not  competent. 

1.  The  objects  created  by  avidya  are  neither  real  nor  unreal,  but 
different  from  both. 


[  236] 

The  pure  consciousness  itself  when  concealed  by  avidya 
is  the  cause  of  the  entire  universe  and  hence  it  is  the  source 
of  misery.  The  pure  consciousness  itself  when  fully  realized 
leads  to  the  highest  bliss- 


[  237  ] 

m  #  m  wm  i 

W  #  KWWfa  ft#  tRJ  II 

By  engaging  your  intellect  on  external  objects,  when 
you  do  not  realize  your  nature,  your  form  itself  is  the 
source  of  misery  to  you.  And  when  you  realize  your  nature 
by  annihilating  avidya,  it  itself  is  a  source  of  bliss  to  you. 


SECOND  ADHTATA 


361 


[  238  ] 

d^T  dlWdtf^HfTfa^t  5^*%  d^faft  II 

Mere  knowledge  of  your  true  nature  is  to  be  acquired 
and  mere  avidya  is  to  be  annihilated.  And  the  Upani$adic 
text  tat  tvam  asi  gives  rise  to  the  knowledge  of  your  true 
nature  and  the  annihilation  of  avidya- 

[  239] 

d*  S*I  d  gdSdd  l^fd  I 

d*T  ^  ddf  ^  II 

There  is  no  change  in  your  form  (that  is,  the  self) 
either  before  or  after  the  rise  of  the  realization  of  the  self 
to  you.  Before  the  rise  of  your  realization  of  the  self,  there 
existed  avidya  and  after  that  it  is  annihilated.  And  apart 
from  avidya,  there  did  not  exist  any  other  thing. 

[  240  ] 

*  dftsfa  d^tftw  i 

d*T  ^  3  d*ft  foffiidd  II 

Avidya  also  did  not  exist  (really  in  the  self)  before  the 
realization  of  the  self;  and  so  there  is  no  (real)  annihilation 
of  avidya  at  the  time  of  the  realization  of  the  self.  And  the 
cognitions  (that  avidya  existed  and  avidya  is  annihilated)  are 
merely  owing  to  avidya.  And  without  the  (illusory  existence 
of)  avidya  nothing  existed  in  the  self. 

'  l  241  ] 

d  d*B  ddflt  ITfdddT  ftSW  I 

|ld  m  d*T  ^  ftlf^dd^ddta#  II 

4G 


362 


SAM  K$EPA$  ARlRAKA 


The  explanation  of  the  removal  of  avidya  cannot  be 
had  without  avidya\  and  hence  it  is  (figuratively)  spoken  of 
as  avidya.  But  (in  fact)  the  annihilation  of  avidya  is  not 
of  the  form  of  avidya. 

The  annihilation  of  avidya  points  to  the  substratum,  namely,  the 
self  on  which  avidya  is  superimposed. 


SCOPE  OF  THE  TEXTS  ENJOINING 
SACRIFICE,  ETC. 

[  242  ] 

frm  qwfqqqn  qfefafa  i 

fa  qq  RiMft  mm  w 

The  injunctive  texts  concerned  with  religious  rites  are 
addressed  to  you  whose  true  nature  is  veiled  by  your  own 
avidya  and  whose  intellect  is  engaged  in  external  objects. 
When  avidyd  is  annihilated  by  the  true  knowledge  of  the 
self,  how  could  (you)  engage  (yourself  )  in  the  religious  rites. 

cf  :  avidyavadvisayanyeva  pratyaksci  dini  pramanani  da  strain  ca. 

A  dhya  sa-bhasya 


r  243  ] 

fqfs^  wiqq:  q*ir  qft^q:^  qTW?HJW  i 
qq  tjjirqT  ^  fqfaq  qifanqiiqq:  n 

When  the  supreme  status  of  the  lord  which  is  absolute 
(that  is,  free  from  any  difference)  is  realized,  you  attain 
liberation  and  (hence)  you  enjoy  the  highest  bliss  and  you 
are  free  from  any  desire.  (When  such  is  the  case)  how 
could  you  engage  yourself  in  the  religious  rites? 


SECOND  ADHTATA 


363 


[  244  ] 

ft  mj  q^wqqiqqs  snqgq:  i 
OTrfqqmfqsqi^pqaqT  fqqq*?rqq  q^T?qq^:  n 

The  injunctive  texts  prescribing  the  black-art  are 
stultified  following  the  prohibition  of  its  result  (by  the  other 
texts).1  Similarly,  in  the  case  of  one  who  has  realized  the 
self,  the  injunctive  texts  are  contradicted,  as  the  instrument, 
etc.,  (of  volitional  activity)  cease  to  exist  (that  is,  they 
are  annihilated  by  the  realization  of  the  self). 

1 .  The  Vedic  text  —  iyenena  abhicaran  yajeta  —  does  not  prompt 
one  to  activity,  as  the  result  of  the  sacrifice,  namely,  injury  to  enemy 
is  prohibited  by  the  Vedic  text —  na  hiihya  t  sarva  bliutani.  And  nobody 
can  act  without  some  result  in  view. 

[  245  ] 

qfc  q  ^  q^qiqqr  I 

qqqrfqqrqfq^  mi  fqfq^OT  qscT  q  q  qig  n 

If  volitional  activity  does  not  hold  good  in  the  absence 
of  its  result,  how  can  it  hold  good  in  the  absence  of  its 
means,  etc.  And  the  sense  of  injunction  is  not  appropriate 
without  volitional  activity, 


[  246  ] 

qfqqqRq  q  fqqq  q  fqqr  r  fqq|qif$$qqR<R&  i 
q  fqqi  qq^cl^qq  fq%ITcqqq  q  q^  II 

The  knowledge  of  niyoga  is  not  reasonable  without  a 
competent  person  (to  execute  it)  and  a  content.  And  both 
these  are  not  possible  without  avidya.  And  avidya  is  not 
possible  in  the  case  of  one  who  has  realized  the  oneness  of 
the  self. 


364 


SAMKSEPAg  ARt  RAKA 


[  247  ] 

sqjftq  ^m$\  ufaftq  fq&r  %<m  qqi$3q  M 

Having  borne  in  mind  that  all  the  injunctive  texts 
point  to  empirically  real  objects,  conclude  that  the 
Upani^adic  texts  are  not  in  conflict  with  the  injunctive 
texts. 


[  248  ] 

si#  ^  wr.  i 

tq^qqiH 

’&at  qRT^mfq  ^  fqfa:  11 

Thus  when  the  identity  of  the  absolute  self  and  the 
inner  self  is  realized  through  the  Upanisadic  sentences, 
when  avidya  which  is  the  cause  of  all  duality  is  annihilated 
immediately,  when  you  remain  as  the  pure  consciousness 
and  have  attained  liberation  and  are  experiencing  the 
highest  bliss,  even  the  trace  of  the  other  proofs  is  hardly 
known.  Hence  there  is  no  occasion  for  their  conflict  with 
the  Upanisadic  teaching. 


352 


SAM  K$EPAg  ARIRAKA 


manifests  itself  by  annihilating  avidja.  Hence  the  objection 
(advanced  before)1  cannot  be  raised  against  our  view. 

I.  vide  Ss',  II,  210. 

DISTINCTION  BETWEEN  RELEASE  AND  BONDAGE 

[215] 

q-it  mum  qTqq^Hfas*  11 

[The  PUrvapaksin  holds:] 

In  this  case,  the  scripture  dealing  with  the  distinction 
of  bound  and  released  souls  would  be  contradicted.  [The 
Siddhantin  replies]  it  would  not  become  so;  for,  until 
the  self  is  realized  this  scripture  is  valid-  All  the  distinctions 
of  the  bound  and  the  released~sou.ls  and  the  mystic  and 
the  ignorant  are  admitted  as  long  as  there  is  avidya. 

[216] 

f$  %clf^  *RSH^  I 

f%  $4  fqa^i^  11 

Moreover  is  the  scripture  dealing  with  the  distinc¬ 
tion  of  bondage  and  release  strictly  intent  on  conveying 
the  nature  of  liberation?  Or  does  it,  by  restating  thei 
state  of  liberation  (which  is  known  from  the  usage  of  elders), 
primarily  convey  it  as  of  the  nature  of  the  self? 

[217] 

qn#  siq^qt  ^qq  1 

It  is  admitted  that  such  scripture  is  not  intent  on 
conveying  the  liberation  (of  Vamadeva  and  other  released 
souls);  for,  the  knowledge  of  their  release  is  futile.  Hence 


SECOND  ADHYATA 


353 


it  is  reasonable  to  hold  that  the  scripture  is  purposeful  by 
giving  rise  to  the  firm  belief  in  the  identity  of  the  supreme 
self  and  the  individual  soul  (which  is  liberation).  And 
this  is  acceptable  to  us. 


[218] 

q^  qr  q  qifo^  i 

^T3^qr  fq^TO  *113  sfast  «l3^n 

[  The  disciple  says  ] 

As  the  view  that  “apart  from  me,  no  person  fit  for 
bondage  or  release  either  existed  or  exists  or  would  exist” 
is  contrary  to  experience,  I  do  not  rejoice  in  accepting 
this  view- 


[219] 

fa  tqrgqqt  fqitqqqqi*  fa  qi  qfts^qq 
qs:r  qifeRsiqfts^qgqqt  fqitqiqs:  1 
qilqi^qi  sjfq  ^qfq  3^  q^ 
qrfq  qq:  11 

[  The  preceptor  asks  ] 

Is  the  experience  of  duality  contrary  (to  the  view  that 
you  are  the  only  soul)  or  the  experience  “I  am  the  supreme 
self?  Or  else,  is  there  any  experience  other  than  these  two 
that  leads  to  contradiction?  The  statement  that  the 
experience  of  identity  (of  the  supreme  self  and  the  individual 
soul)  leads  to  the  contradiction  (of  the  oneness  of  the  self)  is 
not  reasonable.  And  the  experience  pointing  to  duality  also 
is  not  contrary  to  it  (that  is,  the  oneness  of  the  self),  as  the 
former  is  sublated  by  the  knowledge  that  there  is  only 
one  soul. 

45 


354 


SAM  K$EPAg  ARI RAKA 


[  220  ] 


rff^rsuqtsfa  sfaq:  i 

^3*iq  faiT^Rt 

qiftjR  q  ^  ^^qi5;4  II 

If  it  is  held  that  the  view  (that  you  are  the  only  soul) 
is  sublated  by  the  experience  that  comprehends  duality 
(between  the  supreme  self  and  the  individual  soul)  and 
identity  (of  the  supreme  self  with  the  individual  soul),  then 
(it  is  said  that)  there  is  no  such  experience  in  the  case  of 
any  individual  soul  in  the  three  states  (of  waking,  dream, 
and  deep  sleep).  No  person  in  this  world  is  seen  to  have 
the  experience  of  the  association  of  the  sun  and  darkness. 
But  if  one  could  have  the  experience  of  the  association  of 
duality  and  identity,  then  why  cannot  there  be  the 
experience  of  the  association  of  the  sun  and  darkness? 

[221] 

In  the  light  of  what  has  been  said,  not  even  a  trace 
of  contradiction  presents  itself  in  this  view  (that  there  is 
only  one  soul).  So  let  this  view  which  conforms  to  the 
texts  accepted  by  the  tradition  of  the  teachers  be  admitted 
with  faith. 


[222] 

qftvrrfd  mszz  ssqq;  qiqqqqt^rcfqi  n 


SECOND  ADHTATA 


355 


This  entire  universe  is  fancied  in  the  form  cl  God  and 
the  individual  soul  by  avidya  firmly  superimposed  on  your 
self.  Though  the  universe  is  indeterminable,  it  appears  as 
if  real,  until  the  rise  of  the  sun  in  the  form  of  the  knowledge 
of  the  self. 

lava  —  svaprakd  d  ccaitany  asvaru pasya 
udhena  —  tada  tmyadhyasaprdptena,  TB. 
adrdlnvn  —  anirvacaniyam,  S. 

[223  ] 

There  is  nothing  strange  that  in  the  case  of  the 
persons  whose  true  nature  is  concealed  by  avidya,  there 
arise  the  cognitions  that,  ‘God  is  omniscient’,  ‘I  am 
miserable’,  and  ‘The  universe  is  a  wonderful  creation’- 

[224] 

3PW  I 

?r  ift:  n 

The  sage  of  self-control  who  realizes  his  true  nature 
which  is  free  from  transmigration,  which  is  eternal  and  is 
of  the  form  of  unconditioned  bliss,  does  not  experience  any 
misery;  for,  he  annihilates  the  entire  universe  by  the  know¬ 
ledge  of  his  (true)  nature. 

INDETERMINABLE  ENTITY  COULD  CONVEY 
THE  REALITY 

[  225] 


356 


SAM  K$EPAS?  A  RIRAKa 


Your  intellect  arisen  from  aviiya  abiding  in  the  self 
falsely  creates  the  entire  universe.  The  teacher  (also)  is 
your  false  creation.  And  he  teaches  you  your  absolute 
nature- 


[  226  ] 

^  ft  srftTsmfsr  i 

No  object  which  is  knowable  by  the  intellect  is  found 
to  be  real  in  this  world-  The  entire  universe  is  like  the 
snake  appearing  in  a  rope.  Hence  it  is  established  that  it 
is  illusory. 

[  227  ] 

qfcfiT^sfq  m  3  §  II 

The  preceptor,  though  fancied,  is  (fancied  as)  omnis¬ 
cient  and  (hence)  he  himself  imparts  (the  knowledge  of) 
absolute  self.  The  serpent,  though  superimposed,  causes 
death  but  not  the  impurity  (superimposed  on  the  ether). 

It  might  be  said  :  if  the  preceptor  who  is  fancied  could  impart  the 
knowledge  of  the  self,  then  the  pot,  etc.,  also  could  impart  the 
knowledge  of  the  self  because  they  are  also  fancied. 

To  this  the  author  replies  that  though  all  the  objects  are  fancied, 
yet  there  is  difference  among  them.  The  serpent  is  suprimposed  on 
the  rope,  like  impurity  on  the  ether.  But  the  unreal  serpent  some¬ 
times  causes  death,  while  impurity  on  the  ether  never  causes  death. 

[228  ] 


SECOND  AD  HE  AT  A 


357 


If  it  is  held  that  an  object  could  impart  knowledge 
only  as  being  real,  then  the  knowledge  of  fire  can  well 
arise  even  from  the  cloth  (as  the  cloth  is  real)-  If  it  is  held 
that  an  unreal  object  cannot  give  rise  to  (any)  knowledge, 
then  indeed  (according  to  the  Purva-mimamsa  school)  the 
(unreal)  injunctive  text1  also  could  not  convey  the  true 
knowledge  (of  the  means  to  heaven,  etc.). 

1.  See  the  following  verse. 


[229  ] 

Here  the  injunctive  text,  being  unreal,  gives  rise  to  the 
valid  knowledge  of  “the  thing  to  be  achieved”  (that  is, 
sacrifice).  The  group  of  articulate  sounds  is  naturally  real, 
but  when  associated  with  different  qualities  of  tone,  they 
are  unreal. 

The  injunctive  text  is  real  in  so  far  as  it  is  made  up  of  the 
articulate  sounds.  But  it  is  unreal  when  viewed  from  the  stand-point 
of  the  particular  order  in  which  the  several  articulate  sounds  occurring 
in  it  are  placed,  and  the  qualities  of  tone  like  accents  with  which  it 
is  associated.  And  it  is  in  this  capacity  alone  that  the  injunctive  text 
gives  rise  to  the  valid  knowledge  of  ‘the  thing  to  be  achieved’.  Thus 
the  unreal  injunctive  text  gives  rise  to  the  real  knowledge  of  ‘the  thing 
to  be  achieved’. 


[  230] 

$rct  to*  Tf  3  i 

h  mm  n 

A  Vcdic  text  uttered  falsely  without  the  particular 
accent  or  letter  does  not  convey  the  intended  sense.  The  false 
utterance  of  the  text  is  (like)  a  thunderbolt  and  it  destroys 


samk$epaxariraka 

the  sacrificer,  just  as  the  word  indra  iatru  did  by  the  wrong 
use  of  accent. 

Sarvajnatman  cites  this  verse  to  prove  that  a  sentence,  only  as 
associated  with  the  qualities  of  tone  like  accents,  could  convey  the 
intended  sense. 

Tvasta  a  divine  being  desirous  of  a  son  who  would  kill  Indra, 
performed  a  sacrifice  by  uttering  the  text  indrai atrurvardhasva.  The 
word  indrai atru,  if  it  is  taken  as  a  lalpiirusa  compound,  means  one 
who  kills  Indra.  In  this  case,  the  udatta  accent  should  fall  on  the 
final  syllable.  If  the  udatta  accent  falls  on  the  first  syllabic,  then  the 
word  is  a  bahuvrihi  compound  and  it  means  ‘one  who  is  killed  by  Indra’. 

Tva?ta  used  the  udatta  accent  on  the  first  syllable,  by  mistake, 
and  so  Indra  killed  the  son  born  to  him. 

This  verse  is  from  Paninlya-iiksd ,  52. 

[231] 

Wise  men  do  not  accept  that  the  injunctive  text  could 
exist  without  the  proup  of  letters-  If  it  is  held  that  the  real 
object  alone  could  convey  the  knowledge,  then  it  clearly 
amounts  to  saying  that  the  injunctive  text  also  is  not  valid. 

The  injunctive  text,  as  associated  with  the  accents  which  are  the 
qualities  of  tone,  is  unreal. 

See  W,  II,  229. 

[232] 

w  swift  11 

In  the  view  of  Kanada,  the  sense  of  hearing  is  the 
erroneously  assumed  part  of  ether  present  in  the  auricular 
orifice;  and  it  reveals  the  group  of  words  that  are  real. 


SECOND  ADHYAYA 


359 


The  ether  is  accepted  by  the  Vai^e^ikas  to  be  unitary,  all- 
pervasive  and  eternal,  and  it  does  not  have  parts.  Yet  the  sense  of 
hearing  is  accepted  to  be  the  part  of  ether  conditioned  by  the 
auricular  orifice.  Thus  the  sense  of  hearing  is  the  erroneously  assumed 
part  of  the  ether  present  in  the  auricular  orifice  and  it  gives  rise  to  the 
real  knowledge  of  words. 


[233  ] 

stored  a*  l 

Oh!  dear,  when  there  arises  the  knowledge  of  the  self 
by  means  of  the  two  (namely,  the  teacher  and  the  scripture) 
fancied  (by  your  avidya ),  there  is  the  realization  of  the  self 
and  by  this  you  cross  this  unfathomable  ocean  of  trans¬ 
migration  which  is  the  (false)  creation  of  your  avidya- 

[234] 

S'ir  crctmRm  5r  ii 

The  great  sages  like  Kanada  and  others  (that  is, 
Jaimini)  hold  as  their  tenets  the  mistaken  thing  (that  is,  the 
injunctive  texts  consisting  of  letters  associated  with  accents, 
order,  etc.)  and  the  erroneously  assumed  thing  (that  is,  the 
sense  of  hearing).  Though  these  two  are  unreal,  yet  they 
are  accepted  to  be  giving  rise  to  the  result  (in  the  form  of 
correct  knowledge).  When  such  is  the  case,  why  should  not 
the  objects  created  by  avidya  give  rise  to  some  (real)  result 
in  our  view? 


See  the  following  verse. 


360 


SAM  K$  EPAtf  ARI RAKA 


[  235  ] 

am# 

faf*ra  i 

»t  vm  ^qxrnnsnfi  fcraifo. 

5#5  *  *mf  ii 

According  to  your  desire,  when  an  unreal  object  could 
give  rise  to  some  (real)  result,  why  cannot  an  entity  created 
by  avidya  (which  is  different  from  unreal  objects)1  produce 
some  real  result?  It  is  really  wonderful  (to  say  that  it 
cannot  produce  any  real  result).  And  you  are  highly  quali¬ 
fied  to  assert  so,  while  we  are  not  competent. 

1.  The  objects  created  by  avidya  are  neither  real  nor  unreal,  but 
different  from  both. 


[  236] 

The  pure  consciousness  itself  when  concealed  by  avidya 
is  the  cause  of  the  entire  universe  and  hence  it  is  the  source 
of  misery.  The  pure  consciousness  itself  when  fully  realized 
leads  to  the  highest  bliss- 


[  237  ] 

m  #  m  wm  i 

W  #  KWWfa  ft#  tRJ  II 

By  engaging  your  intellect  on  external  objects,  when 
you  do  not  realize  your  nature,  your  form  itself  is  the 
source  of  misery  to  you.  And  when  you  realize  your  nature 
by  annihilating  avidya,  it  itself  is  a  source  of  bliss  to  you. 


SECOND  ADHTATA 


361 


[  238  ] 

d^T  dlWdtf^HfTfa^t  5^*%  d^faft  II 

Mere  knowledge  of  your  true  nature  is  to  be  acquired 
and  mere  avidya  is  to  be  annihilated.  And  the  Upani$adic 
text  tat  tvam  asi  gives  rise  to  the  knowledge  of  your  true 
nature  and  the  annihilation  of  avidya- 

[  239] 

d*  S*I  d  gdSdd  l^fd  I 

d*T  ^  ddf  ^  II 

There  is  no  change  in  your  form  (that  is,  the  self) 
either  before  or  after  the  rise  of  the  realization  of  the  self 
to  you.  Before  the  rise  of  your  realization  of  the  self,  there 
existed  avidya  and  after  that  it  is  annihilated.  And  apart 
from  avidya,  there  did  not  exist  any  other  thing. 

[  240  ] 

*  dftsfa  d^tftw  i 

d*T  ^  3  d*ft  foffiidd  II 

Avidya  also  did  not  exist  (really  in  the  self)  before  the 
realization  of  the  self;  and  so  there  is  no  (real)  annihilation 
of  avidya  at  the  time  of  the  realization  of  the  self.  And  the 
cognitions  (that  avidya  existed  and  avidya  is  annihilated)  are 
merely  owing  to  avidya.  And  without  the  (illusory  existence 
of)  avidya  nothing  existed  in  the  self. 

'  l  241  ] 

d  d*B  ddflt  ITfdddT  ftSW  I 

|ld  m  d*T  ^  ftlf^dd^ddta#  II 

4G 


362 


SAM  K$EPA$  ARlRAKA 


The  explanation  of  the  removal  of  avidya  cannot  be 
had  without  avidya\  and  hence  it  is  (figuratively)  spoken  of 
as  avidya.  But  (in  fact)  the  annihilation  of  avidya  is  not 
of  the  form  of  avidya. 

The  annihilation  of  avidya  points  to  the  substratum,  namely,  the 
self  on  which  avidya  is  superimposed. 


SCOPE  OF  THE  TEXTS  ENJOINING 
SACRIFICE,  ETC. 

[  242  ] 

frm  qwfqqqn  qfefafa  i 

fa  qq  RiMft  mm  w 

The  injunctive  texts  concerned  with  religious  rites  are 
addressed  to  you  whose  true  nature  is  veiled  by  your  own 
avidya  and  whose  intellect  is  engaged  in  external  objects. 
When  avidyd  is  annihilated  by  the  true  knowledge  of  the 
self,  how  could  (you)  engage  (yourself  )  in  the  religious  rites. 

cf  :  avidyavadvisayanyeva  pratyaksci  dini  pramanani  da  strain  ca. 

A  dhya  sa-bhasya 


r  243  ] 

fqfs^  wiqq:  q*ir  qft^q:^  qTW?HJW  i 
qq  tjjirqT  ^  fqfaq  qifanqiiqq:  n 

When  the  supreme  status  of  the  lord  which  is  absolute 
(that  is,  free  from  any  difference)  is  realized,  you  attain 
liberation  and  (hence)  you  enjoy  the  highest  bliss  and  you 
are  free  from  any  desire.  (When  such  is  the  case)  how 
could  you  engage  yourself  in  the  religious  rites? 


SECOND  ADHTATA 


363 


[  244  ] 

ft  mj  q^wqqiqqs  snqgq:  i 
OTrfqqmfqsqi^pqaqT  fqqq*?rqq  q^T?qq^:  n 

The  injunctive  texts  prescribing  the  black-art  are 
stultified  following  the  prohibition  of  its  result  (by  the  other 
texts).1  Similarly,  in  the  case  of  one  who  has  realized  the 
self,  the  injunctive  texts  are  contradicted,  as  the  instrument, 
etc.,  (of  volitional  activity)  cease  to  exist  (that  is,  they 
are  annihilated  by  the  realization  of  the  self). 

1 .  The  Vedic  text  —  iyenena  abhicaran  yajeta  —  does  not  prompt 
one  to  activity,  as  the  result  of  the  sacrifice,  namely,  injury  to  enemy 
is  prohibited  by  the  Vedic  text —  na  hiihya  t  sarva  bliutani.  And  nobody 
can  act  without  some  result  in  view. 

[  245  ] 

qfc  q  ^  q^qiqqr  I 

qqqrfqqrqfq^  mi  fqfq^OT  qscT  q  q  qig  n 

If  volitional  activity  does  not  hold  good  in  the  absence 
of  its  result,  how  can  it  hold  good  in  the  absence  of  its 
means,  etc.  And  the  sense  of  injunction  is  not  appropriate 
without  volitional  activity, 


[  246  ] 

qfqqqRq  q  fqqq  q  fqqr  r  fqq|qif$$qqR<R&  i 
q  fqqi  qq^cl^qq  fq%ITcqqq  q  q^  II 

The  knowledge  of  niyoga  is  not  reasonable  without  a 
competent  person  (to  execute  it)  and  a  content.  And  both 
these  are  not  possible  without  avidya.  And  avidya  is  not 
possible  in  the  case  of  one  who  has  realized  the  oneness  of 
the  self. 


364 


SAMKSEPAg  ARt  RAKA 


[  247  ] 

sqjftq  ^m$\  ufaftq  fq&r  %<m  qqi$3q  M 

Having  borne  in  mind  that  all  the  injunctive  texts 
point  to  empirically  real  objects,  conclude  that  the 
Upani^adic  texts  are  not  in  conflict  with  the  injunctive 
texts. 


[  248  ] 

si#  ^  wr.  i 

tq^qqiH 

’&at  qRT^mfq  ^  fqfa:  11 

Thus  when  the  identity  of  the  absolute  self  and  the 
inner  self  is  realized  through  the  Upanisadic  sentences, 
when  avidya  which  is  the  cause  of  all  duality  is  annihilated 
immediately,  when  you  remain  as  the  pure  consciousness 
and  have  attained  liberation  and  are  experiencing  the 
highest  bliss,  even  the  trace  of  the  other  proofs  is  hardly 
known.  Hence  there  is  no  occasion  for  their  conflict  with 
the  Upanisadic  teaching. 


352 


SAM  K$EPAg  ARIRAKA 


manifests  itself  by  annihilating  avidja.  Hence  the  objection 
(advanced  before)1  cannot  be  raised  against  our  view. 

I.  vide  Ss',  II,  210. 

DISTINCTION  BETWEEN  RELEASE  AND  BONDAGE 

[215] 

q-it  mum  qTqq^Hfas*  11 

[The  PUrvapaksin  holds:] 

In  this  case,  the  scripture  dealing  with  the  distinction 
of  bound  and  released  souls  would  be  contradicted.  [The 
Siddhantin  replies]  it  would  not  become  so;  for,  until 
the  self  is  realized  this  scripture  is  valid-  All  the  distinctions 
of  the  bound  and  the  released~sou.ls  and  the  mystic  and 
the  ignorant  are  admitted  as  long  as  there  is  avidya. 

[216] 

f$  %clf^  *RSH^  I 

f%  $4  fqa^i^  11 

Moreover  is  the  scripture  dealing  with  the  distinc¬ 
tion  of  bondage  and  release  strictly  intent  on  conveying 
the  nature  of  liberation?  Or  does  it,  by  restating  thei 
state  of  liberation  (which  is  known  from  the  usage  of  elders), 
primarily  convey  it  as  of  the  nature  of  the  self? 

[217] 

qn#  siq^qt  ^qq  1 

It  is  admitted  that  such  scripture  is  not  intent  on 
conveying  the  liberation  (of  Vamadeva  and  other  released 
souls);  for,  the  knowledge  of  their  release  is  futile.  Hence 


SECOND  ADHYATA 


353 


it  is  reasonable  to  hold  that  the  scripture  is  purposeful  by 
giving  rise  to  the  firm  belief  in  the  identity  of  the  supreme 
self  and  the  individual  soul  (which  is  liberation).  And 
this  is  acceptable  to  us. 


[218] 

q^  qr  q  qifo^  i 

^T3^qr  fq^TO  *113  sfast  «l3^n 

[  The  disciple  says  ] 

As  the  view  that  “apart  from  me,  no  person  fit  for 
bondage  or  release  either  existed  or  exists  or  would  exist” 
is  contrary  to  experience,  I  do  not  rejoice  in  accepting 
this  view- 


[219] 

fa  tqrgqqt  fqitqqqqi*  fa  qi  qfts^qq 
qs:r  qifeRsiqfts^qgqqt  fqitqiqs:  1 
qilqi^qi  sjfq  ^qfq  3^  q^ 
qrfq  qq:  11 

[  The  preceptor  asks  ] 

Is  the  experience  of  duality  contrary  (to  the  view  that 
you  are  the  only  soul)  or  the  experience  “I  am  the  supreme 
self?  Or  else,  is  there  any  experience  other  than  these  two 
that  leads  to  contradiction?  The  statement  that  the 
experience  of  identity  (of  the  supreme  self  and  the  individual 
soul)  leads  to  the  contradiction  (of  the  oneness  of  the  self)  is 
not  reasonable.  And  the  experience  pointing  to  duality  also 
is  not  contrary  to  it  (that  is,  the  oneness  of  the  self),  as  the 
former  is  sublated  by  the  knowledge  that  there  is  only 
one  soul. 

45 


354 


SAM  K$EPAg  ARI RAKA 


[  220  ] 


rff^rsuqtsfa  sfaq:  i 

^3*iq  faiT^Rt 

qiftjR  q  ^  ^^qi5;4  II 

If  it  is  held  that  the  view  (that  you  are  the  only  soul) 
is  sublated  by  the  experience  that  comprehends  duality 
(between  the  supreme  self  and  the  individual  soul)  and 
identity  (of  the  supreme  self  with  the  individual  soul),  then 
(it  is  said  that)  there  is  no  such  experience  in  the  case  of 
any  individual  soul  in  the  three  states  (of  waking,  dream, 
and  deep  sleep).  No  person  in  this  world  is  seen  to  have 
the  experience  of  the  association  of  the  sun  and  darkness. 
But  if  one  could  have  the  experience  of  the  association  of 
duality  and  identity,  then  why  cannot  there  be  the 
experience  of  the  association  of  the  sun  and  darkness? 

[221] 

In  the  light  of  what  has  been  said,  not  even  a  trace 
of  contradiction  presents  itself  in  this  view  (that  there  is 
only  one  soul).  So  let  this  view  which  conforms  to  the 
texts  accepted  by  the  tradition  of  the  teachers  be  admitted 
with  faith. 


[222] 

qftvrrfd  mszz  ssqq;  qiqqqqt^rcfqi  n 


SECOND  ADHTATA 


355 


This  entire  universe  is  fancied  in  the  form  cl  God  and 
the  individual  soul  by  avidya  firmly  superimposed  on  your 
self.  Though  the  universe  is  indeterminable,  it  appears  as 
if  real,  until  the  rise  of  the  sun  in  the  form  of  the  knowledge 
of  the  self. 

lava  —  svaprakd  d  ccaitany  asvaru pasya 
udhena  —  tada  tmyadhyasaprdptena,  TB. 
adrdlnvn  —  anirvacaniyam,  S. 

[223  ] 

There  is  nothing  strange  that  in  the  case  of  the 
persons  whose  true  nature  is  concealed  by  avidya,  there 
arise  the  cognitions  that,  ‘God  is  omniscient’,  ‘I  am 
miserable’,  and  ‘The  universe  is  a  wonderful  creation’- 

[224] 

3PW  I 

?r  ift:  n 

The  sage  of  self-control  who  realizes  his  true  nature 
which  is  free  from  transmigration,  which  is  eternal  and  is 
of  the  form  of  unconditioned  bliss,  does  not  experience  any 
misery;  for,  he  annihilates  the  entire  universe  by  the  know¬ 
ledge  of  his  (true)  nature. 

INDETERMINABLE  ENTITY  COULD  CONVEY 
THE  REALITY 

[  225] 


356 


SAM  K$EPAS?  A  RIRAKa 


Your  intellect  arisen  from  aviiya  abiding  in  the  self 
falsely  creates  the  entire  universe.  The  teacher  (also)  is 
your  false  creation.  And  he  teaches  you  your  absolute 
nature- 


[  226  ] 

^  ft  srftTsmfsr  i 

No  object  which  is  knowable  by  the  intellect  is  found 
to  be  real  in  this  world-  The  entire  universe  is  like  the 
snake  appearing  in  a  rope.  Hence  it  is  established  that  it 
is  illusory. 

[  227  ] 

qfcfiT^sfq  m  3  §  II 

The  preceptor,  though  fancied,  is  (fancied  as)  omnis¬ 
cient  and  (hence)  he  himself  imparts  (the  knowledge  of) 
absolute  self.  The  serpent,  though  superimposed,  causes 
death  but  not  the  impurity  (superimposed  on  the  ether). 

It  might  be  said  :  if  the  preceptor  who  is  fancied  could  impart  the 
knowledge  of  the  self,  then  the  pot,  etc.,  also  could  impart  the 
knowledge  of  the  self  because  they  are  also  fancied. 

To  this  the  author  replies  that  though  all  the  objects  are  fancied, 
yet  there  is  difference  among  them.  The  serpent  is  suprimposed  on 
the  rope,  like  impurity  on  the  ether.  But  the  unreal  serpent  some¬ 
times  causes  death,  while  impurity  on  the  ether  never  causes  death. 

[228  ] 


SECOND  AD  HE  AT  A 


357 


If  it  is  held  that  an  object  could  impart  knowledge 
only  as  being  real,  then  the  knowledge  of  fire  can  well 
arise  even  from  the  cloth  (as  the  cloth  is  real)-  If  it  is  held 
that  an  unreal  object  cannot  give  rise  to  (any)  knowledge, 
then  indeed  (according  to  the  Purva-mimamsa  school)  the 
(unreal)  injunctive  text1  also  could  not  convey  the  true 
knowledge  (of  the  means  to  heaven,  etc.). 

1.  See  the  following  verse. 


[229  ] 

Here  the  injunctive  text,  being  unreal,  gives  rise  to  the 
valid  knowledge  of  “the  thing  to  be  achieved”  (that  is, 
sacrifice).  The  group  of  articulate  sounds  is  naturally  real, 
but  when  associated  with  different  qualities  of  tone,  they 
are  unreal. 

The  injunctive  text  is  real  in  so  far  as  it  is  made  up  of  the 
articulate  sounds.  But  it  is  unreal  when  viewed  from  the  stand-point 
of  the  particular  order  in  which  the  several  articulate  sounds  occurring 
in  it  are  placed,  and  the  qualities  of  tone  like  accents  with  which  it 
is  associated.  And  it  is  in  this  capacity  alone  that  the  injunctive  text 
gives  rise  to  the  valid  knowledge  of  ‘the  thing  to  be  achieved’.  Thus 
the  unreal  injunctive  text  gives  rise  to  the  real  knowledge  of  ‘the  thing 
to  be  achieved’. 


[  230] 

$rct  to*  Tf  3  i 

h  mm  n 

A  Vcdic  text  uttered  falsely  without  the  particular 
accent  or  letter  does  not  convey  the  intended  sense.  The  false 
utterance  of  the  text  is  (like)  a  thunderbolt  and  it  destroys 


samk$epaxariraka 

the  sacrificer,  just  as  the  word  indra  iatru  did  by  the  wrong 
use  of  accent. 

Sarvajnatman  cites  this  verse  to  prove  that  a  sentence,  only  as 
associated  with  the  qualities  of  tone  like  accents,  could  convey  the 
intended  sense. 

Tvasta  a  divine  being  desirous  of  a  son  who  would  kill  Indra, 
performed  a  sacrifice  by  uttering  the  text  indrai atrurvardhasva.  The 
word  indrai atru,  if  it  is  taken  as  a  lalpiirusa  compound,  means  one 
who  kills  Indra.  In  this  case,  the  udatta  accent  should  fall  on  the 
final  syllable.  If  the  udatta  accent  falls  on  the  first  syllabic,  then  the 
word  is  a  bahuvrihi  compound  and  it  means  ‘one  who  is  killed  by  Indra’. 

Tva?ta  used  the  udatta  accent  on  the  first  syllable,  by  mistake, 
and  so  Indra  killed  the  son  born  to  him. 

This  verse  is  from  Paninlya-iiksd ,  52. 

[231] 

Wise  men  do  not  accept  that  the  injunctive  text  could 
exist  without  the  proup  of  letters-  If  it  is  held  that  the  real 
object  alone  could  convey  the  knowledge,  then  it  clearly 
amounts  to  saying  that  the  injunctive  text  also  is  not  valid. 

The  injunctive  text,  as  associated  with  the  accents  which  are  the 
qualities  of  tone,  is  unreal. 

See  W,  II,  229. 

[232] 

w  swift  11 

In  the  view  of  Kanada,  the  sense  of  hearing  is  the 
erroneously  assumed  part  of  ether  present  in  the  auricular 
orifice;  and  it  reveals  the  group  of  words  that  are  real. 


SECOND  ADHYAYA 


359 


The  ether  is  accepted  by  the  Vai^e^ikas  to  be  unitary,  all- 
pervasive  and  eternal,  and  it  does  not  have  parts.  Yet  the  sense  of 
hearing  is  accepted  to  be  the  part  of  ether  conditioned  by  the 
auricular  orifice.  Thus  the  sense  of  hearing  is  the  erroneously  assumed 
part  of  the  ether  present  in  the  auricular  orifice  and  it  gives  rise  to  the 
real  knowledge  of  words. 


[233  ] 

stored  a*  l 

Oh!  dear,  when  there  arises  the  knowledge  of  the  self 
by  means  of  the  two  (namely,  the  teacher  and  the  scripture) 
fancied  (by  your  avidya ),  there  is  the  realization  of  the  self 
and  by  this  you  cross  this  unfathomable  ocean  of  trans¬ 
migration  which  is  the  (false)  creation  of  your  avidya- 

[234] 

S'ir  crctmRm  5r  ii 

The  great  sages  like  Kanada  and  others  (that  is, 
Jaimini)  hold  as  their  tenets  the  mistaken  thing  (that  is,  the 
injunctive  texts  consisting  of  letters  associated  with  accents, 
order,  etc.)  and  the  erroneously  assumed  thing  (that  is,  the 
sense  of  hearing).  Though  these  two  are  unreal,  yet  they 
are  accepted  to  be  giving  rise  to  the  result  (in  the  form  of 
correct  knowledge).  When  such  is  the  case,  why  should  not 
the  objects  created  by  avidya  give  rise  to  some  (real)  result 
in  our  view? 


See  the  following  verse. 


360 


SAM  K$  EPAtf  ARI RAKA 


[  235  ] 

am# 

faf*ra  i 

»t  vm  ^qxrnnsnfi  fcraifo. 

5#5  *  *mf  ii 

According  to  your  desire,  when  an  unreal  object  could 
give  rise  to  some  (real)  result,  why  cannot  an  entity  created 
by  avidya  (which  is  different  from  unreal  objects)1  produce 
some  real  result?  It  is  really  wonderful  (to  say  that  it 
cannot  produce  any  real  result).  And  you  are  highly  quali¬ 
fied  to  assert  so,  while  we  are  not  competent. 

1.  The  objects  created  by  avidya  are  neither  real  nor  unreal,  but 
different  from  both. 


[  236] 

The  pure  consciousness  itself  when  concealed  by  avidya 
is  the  cause  of  the  entire  universe  and  hence  it  is  the  source 
of  misery.  The  pure  consciousness  itself  when  fully  realized 
leads  to  the  highest  bliss- 


[  237  ] 

m  #  m  wm  i 

W  #  KWWfa  ft#  tRJ  II 

By  engaging  your  intellect  on  external  objects,  when 
you  do  not  realize  your  nature,  your  form  itself  is  the 
source  of  misery  to  you.  And  when  you  realize  your  nature 
by  annihilating  avidya,  it  itself  is  a  source  of  bliss  to  you. 


SECOND  ADHTATA 


361 


[  238  ] 

d^T  dlWdtf^HfTfa^t  5^*%  d^faft  II 

Mere  knowledge  of  your  true  nature  is  to  be  acquired 
and  mere  avidya  is  to  be  annihilated.  And  the  Upani$adic 
text  tat  tvam  asi  gives  rise  to  the  knowledge  of  your  true 
nature  and  the  annihilation  of  avidya- 

[  239] 

d*  S*I  d  gdSdd  l^fd  I 

d*T  ^  ddf  ^  II 

There  is  no  change  in  your  form  (that  is,  the  self) 
either  before  or  after  the  rise  of  the  realization  of  the  self 
to  you.  Before  the  rise  of  your  realization  of  the  self,  there 
existed  avidya  and  after  that  it  is  annihilated.  And  apart 
from  avidya,  there  did  not  exist  any  other  thing. 

[  240  ] 

*  dftsfa  d^tftw  i 

d*T  ^  3  d*ft  foffiidd  II 

Avidya  also  did  not  exist  (really  in  the  self)  before  the 
realization  of  the  self;  and  so  there  is  no  (real)  annihilation 
of  avidya  at  the  time  of  the  realization  of  the  self.  And  the 
cognitions  (that  avidya  existed  and  avidya  is  annihilated)  are 
merely  owing  to  avidya.  And  without  the  (illusory  existence 
of)  avidya  nothing  existed  in  the  self. 

'  l  241  ] 

d  d*B  ddflt  ITfdddT  ftSW  I 

|ld  m  d*T  ^  ftlf^dd^ddta#  II 

4G 


362 


SAM  K$EPA$  ARlRAKA 


The  explanation  of  the  removal  of  avidya  cannot  be 
had  without  avidya\  and  hence  it  is  (figuratively)  spoken  of 
as  avidya.  But  (in  fact)  the  annihilation  of  avidya  is  not 
of  the  form  of  avidya. 

The  annihilation  of  avidya  points  to  the  substratum,  namely,  the 
self  on  which  avidya  is  superimposed. 


SCOPE  OF  THE  TEXTS  ENJOINING 
SACRIFICE,  ETC. 

[  242  ] 

frm  qwfqqqn  qfefafa  i 

fa  qq  RiMft  mm  w 

The  injunctive  texts  concerned  with  religious  rites  are 
addressed  to  you  whose  true  nature  is  veiled  by  your  own 
avidya  and  whose  intellect  is  engaged  in  external  objects. 
When  avidyd  is  annihilated  by  the  true  knowledge  of  the 
self,  how  could  (you)  engage  (yourself  )  in  the  religious  rites. 

cf  :  avidyavadvisayanyeva  pratyaksci  dini  pramanani  da  strain  ca. 

A  dhya  sa-bhasya 


r  243  ] 

fqfs^  wiqq:  q*ir  qft^q:^  qTW?HJW  i 
qq  tjjirqT  ^  fqfaq  qifanqiiqq:  n 

When  the  supreme  status  of  the  lord  which  is  absolute 
(that  is,  free  from  any  difference)  is  realized,  you  attain 
liberation  and  (hence)  you  enjoy  the  highest  bliss  and  you 
are  free  from  any  desire.  (When  such  is  the  case)  how 
could  you  engage  yourself  in  the  religious  rites? 


SECOND  ADHTATA 


363 


[  244  ] 

ft  mj  q^wqqiqqs  snqgq:  i 
OTrfqqmfqsqi^pqaqT  fqqq*?rqq  q^T?qq^:  n 

The  injunctive  texts  prescribing  the  black-art  are 
stultified  following  the  prohibition  of  its  result  (by  the  other 
texts).1  Similarly,  in  the  case  of  one  who  has  realized  the 
self,  the  injunctive  texts  are  contradicted,  as  the  instrument, 
etc.,  (of  volitional  activity)  cease  to  exist  (that  is,  they 
are  annihilated  by  the  realization  of  the  self). 

1 .  The  Vedic  text  —  iyenena  abhicaran  yajeta  —  does  not  prompt 
one  to  activity,  as  the  result  of  the  sacrifice,  namely,  injury  to  enemy 
is  prohibited  by  the  Vedic  text —  na  hiihya  t  sarva  bliutani.  And  nobody 
can  act  without  some  result  in  view. 

[  245  ] 

qfc  q  ^  q^qiqqr  I 

qqqrfqqrqfq^  mi  fqfq^OT  qscT  q  q  qig  n 

If  volitional  activity  does  not  hold  good  in  the  absence 
of  its  result,  how  can  it  hold  good  in  the  absence  of  its 
means,  etc.  And  the  sense  of  injunction  is  not  appropriate 
without  volitional  activity, 


[  246  ] 

qfqqqRq  q  fqqq  q  fqqr  r  fqq|qif$$qqR<R&  i 
q  fqqi  qq^cl^qq  fq%ITcqqq  q  q^  II 

The  knowledge  of  niyoga  is  not  reasonable  without  a 
competent  person  (to  execute  it)  and  a  content.  And  both 
these  are  not  possible  without  avidya.  And  avidya  is  not 
possible  in  the  case  of  one  who  has  realized  the  oneness  of 
the  self. 


364 


SAMKSEPAg  ARt  RAKA 


[  247  ] 

sqjftq  ^m$\  ufaftq  fq&r  %<m  qqi$3q  M 

Having  borne  in  mind  that  all  the  injunctive  texts 
point  to  empirically  real  objects,  conclude  that  the 
Upani^adic  texts  are  not  in  conflict  with  the  injunctive 
texts. 


[  248  ] 

si#  ^  wr.  i 

tq^qqiH 

’&at  qRT^mfq  ^  fqfa:  11 

Thus  when  the  identity  of  the  absolute  self  and  the 
inner  self  is  realized  through  the  Upanisadic  sentences, 
when  avidya  which  is  the  cause  of  all  duality  is  annihilated 
immediately,  when  you  remain  as  the  pure  consciousness 
and  have  attained  liberation  and  are  experiencing  the 
highest  bliss,  even  the  trace  of  the  other  proofs  is  hardly 
known.  Hence  there  is  no  occasion  for  their  conflict  with 
the  Upanisadic  teaching. 


352 


SAM  K$EPAg  ARIRAKA 


manifests  itself  by  annihilating  avidja.  Hence  the  objection 
(advanced  before)1  cannot  be  raised  against  our  view. 

I.  vide  Ss',  II,  210. 

DISTINCTION  BETWEEN  RELEASE  AND  BONDAGE 

[215] 

q-it  mum  qTqq^Hfas*  11 

[The  PUrvapaksin  holds:] 

In  this  case,  the  scripture  dealing  with  the  distinction 
of  bound  and  released  souls  would  be  contradicted.  [The 
Siddhantin  replies]  it  would  not  become  so;  for,  until 
the  self  is  realized  this  scripture  is  valid-  All  the  distinctions 
of  the  bound  and  the  released~sou.ls  and  the  mystic  and 
the  ignorant  are  admitted  as  long  as  there  is  avidya. 

[216] 

f$  %clf^  *RSH^  I 

f%  $4  fqa^i^  11 

Moreover  is  the  scripture  dealing  with  the  distinc¬ 
tion  of  bondage  and  release  strictly  intent  on  conveying 
the  nature  of  liberation?  Or  does  it,  by  restating  thei 
state  of  liberation  (which  is  known  from  the  usage  of  elders), 
primarily  convey  it  as  of  the  nature  of  the  self? 

[217] 

qn#  siq^qt  ^qq  1 

It  is  admitted  that  such  scripture  is  not  intent  on 
conveying  the  liberation  (of  Vamadeva  and  other  released 
souls);  for,  the  knowledge  of  their  release  is  futile.  Hence 


SECOND  ADHYATA 


353 


it  is  reasonable  to  hold  that  the  scripture  is  purposeful  by 
giving  rise  to  the  firm  belief  in  the  identity  of  the  supreme 
self  and  the  individual  soul  (which  is  liberation).  And 
this  is  acceptable  to  us. 


[218] 

q^  qr  q  qifo^  i 

^T3^qr  fq^TO  *113  sfast  «l3^n 

[  The  disciple  says  ] 

As  the  view  that  “apart  from  me,  no  person  fit  for 
bondage  or  release  either  existed  or  exists  or  would  exist” 
is  contrary  to  experience,  I  do  not  rejoice  in  accepting 
this  view- 


[219] 

fa  tqrgqqt  fqitqqqqi*  fa  qi  qfts^qq 
qs:r  qifeRsiqfts^qgqqt  fqitqiqs:  1 
qilqi^qi  sjfq  ^qfq  3^  q^ 
qrfq  qq:  11 

[  The  preceptor  asks  ] 

Is  the  experience  of  duality  contrary  (to  the  view  that 
you  are  the  only  soul)  or  the  experience  “I  am  the  supreme 
self?  Or  else,  is  there  any  experience  other  than  these  two 
that  leads  to  contradiction?  The  statement  that  the 
experience  of  identity  (of  the  supreme  self  and  the  individual 
soul)  leads  to  the  contradiction  (of  the  oneness  of  the  self)  is 
not  reasonable.  And  the  experience  pointing  to  duality  also 
is  not  contrary  to  it  (that  is,  the  oneness  of  the  self),  as  the 
former  is  sublated  by  the  knowledge  that  there  is  only 
one  soul. 

45 


354 


SAM  K$EPAg  ARI RAKA 


[  220  ] 


rff^rsuqtsfa  sfaq:  i 

^3*iq  faiT^Rt 

qiftjR  q  ^  ^^qi5;4  II 

If  it  is  held  that  the  view  (that  you  are  the  only  soul) 
is  sublated  by  the  experience  that  comprehends  duality 
(between  the  supreme  self  and  the  individual  soul)  and 
identity  (of  the  supreme  self  with  the  individual  soul),  then 
(it  is  said  that)  there  is  no  such  experience  in  the  case  of 
any  individual  soul  in  the  three  states  (of  waking,  dream, 
and  deep  sleep).  No  person  in  this  world  is  seen  to  have 
the  experience  of  the  association  of  the  sun  and  darkness. 
But  if  one  could  have  the  experience  of  the  association  of 
duality  and  identity,  then  why  cannot  there  be  the 
experience  of  the  association  of  the  sun  and  darkness? 

[221] 

In  the  light  of  what  has  been  said,  not  even  a  trace 
of  contradiction  presents  itself  in  this  view  (that  there  is 
only  one  soul).  So  let  this  view  which  conforms  to  the 
texts  accepted  by  the  tradition  of  the  teachers  be  admitted 
with  faith. 


[222] 

qftvrrfd  mszz  ssqq;  qiqqqqt^rcfqi  n 


SECOND  ADHTATA 


355 


This  entire  universe  is  fancied  in  the  form  cl  God  and 
the  individual  soul  by  avidya  firmly  superimposed  on  your 
self.  Though  the  universe  is  indeterminable,  it  appears  as 
if  real,  until  the  rise  of  the  sun  in  the  form  of  the  knowledge 
of  the  self. 

lava  —  svaprakd  d  ccaitany  asvaru pasya 
udhena  —  tada  tmyadhyasaprdptena,  TB. 
adrdlnvn  —  anirvacaniyam,  S. 

[223  ] 

There  is  nothing  strange  that  in  the  case  of  the 
persons  whose  true  nature  is  concealed  by  avidya,  there 
arise  the  cognitions  that,  ‘God  is  omniscient’,  ‘I  am 
miserable’,  and  ‘The  universe  is  a  wonderful  creation’- 

[224] 

3PW  I 

?r  ift:  n 

The  sage  of  self-control  who  realizes  his  true  nature 
which  is  free  from  transmigration,  which  is  eternal  and  is 
of  the  form  of  unconditioned  bliss,  does  not  experience  any 
misery;  for,  he  annihilates  the  entire  universe  by  the  know¬ 
ledge  of  his  (true)  nature. 

INDETERMINABLE  ENTITY  COULD  CONVEY 
THE  REALITY 

[  225] 


356 


SAM  K$EPAS?  A  RIRAKa 


Your  intellect  arisen  from  aviiya  abiding  in  the  self 
falsely  creates  the  entire  universe.  The  teacher  (also)  is 
your  false  creation.  And  he  teaches  you  your  absolute 
nature- 


[  226  ] 

^  ft  srftTsmfsr  i 

No  object  which  is  knowable  by  the  intellect  is  found 
to  be  real  in  this  world-  The  entire  universe  is  like  the 
snake  appearing  in  a  rope.  Hence  it  is  established  that  it 
is  illusory. 

[  227  ] 

qfcfiT^sfq  m  3  §  II 

The  preceptor,  though  fancied,  is  (fancied  as)  omnis¬ 
cient  and  (hence)  he  himself  imparts  (the  knowledge  of) 
absolute  self.  The  serpent,  though  superimposed,  causes 
death  but  not  the  impurity  (superimposed  on  the  ether). 

It  might  be  said  :  if  the  preceptor  who  is  fancied  could  impart  the 
knowledge  of  the  self,  then  the  pot,  etc.,  also  could  impart  the 
knowledge  of  the  self  because  they  are  also  fancied. 

To  this  the  author  replies  that  though  all  the  objects  are  fancied, 
yet  there  is  difference  among  them.  The  serpent  is  suprimposed  on 
the  rope,  like  impurity  on  the  ether.  But  the  unreal  serpent  some¬ 
times  causes  death,  while  impurity  on  the  ether  never  causes  death. 

[228  ] 


SECOND  AD  HE  AT  A 


357 


If  it  is  held  that  an  object  could  impart  knowledge 
only  as  being  real,  then  the  knowledge  of  fire  can  well 
arise  even  from  the  cloth  (as  the  cloth  is  real)-  If  it  is  held 
that  an  unreal  object  cannot  give  rise  to  (any)  knowledge, 
then  indeed  (according  to  the  Purva-mimamsa  school)  the 
(unreal)  injunctive  text1  also  could  not  convey  the  true 
knowledge  (of  the  means  to  heaven,  etc.). 

1.  See  the  following  verse. 


[229  ] 

Here  the  injunctive  text,  being  unreal,  gives  rise  to  the 
valid  knowledge  of  “the  thing  to  be  achieved”  (that  is, 
sacrifice).  The  group  of  articulate  sounds  is  naturally  real, 
but  when  associated  with  different  qualities  of  tone,  they 
are  unreal. 

The  injunctive  text  is  real  in  so  far  as  it  is  made  up  of  the 
articulate  sounds.  But  it  is  unreal  when  viewed  from  the  stand-point 
of  the  particular  order  in  which  the  several  articulate  sounds  occurring 
in  it  are  placed,  and  the  qualities  of  tone  like  accents  with  which  it 
is  associated.  And  it  is  in  this  capacity  alone  that  the  injunctive  text 
gives  rise  to  the  valid  knowledge  of  ‘the  thing  to  be  achieved’.  Thus 
the  unreal  injunctive  text  gives  rise  to  the  real  knowledge  of  ‘the  thing 
to  be  achieved’. 


[  230] 

$rct  to*  Tf  3  i 

h  mm  n 

A  Vcdic  text  uttered  falsely  without  the  particular 
accent  or  letter  does  not  convey  the  intended  sense.  The  false 
utterance  of  the  text  is  (like)  a  thunderbolt  and  it  destroys 


samk$epaxariraka 

the  sacrificer,  just  as  the  word  indra  iatru  did  by  the  wrong 
use  of  accent. 

Sarvajnatman  cites  this  verse  to  prove  that  a  sentence,  only  as 
associated  with  the  qualities  of  tone  like  accents,  could  convey  the 
intended  sense. 

Tvasta  a  divine  being  desirous  of  a  son  who  would  kill  Indra, 
performed  a  sacrifice  by  uttering  the  text  indrai atrurvardhasva.  The 
word  indrai atru,  if  it  is  taken  as  a  lalpiirusa  compound,  means  one 
who  kills  Indra.  In  this  case,  the  udatta  accent  should  fall  on  the 
final  syllable.  If  the  udatta  accent  falls  on  the  first  syllabic,  then  the 
word  is  a  bahuvrihi  compound  and  it  means  ‘one  who  is  killed  by  Indra’. 

Tva?ta  used  the  udatta  accent  on  the  first  syllable,  by  mistake, 
and  so  Indra  killed  the  son  born  to  him. 

This  verse  is  from  Paninlya-iiksd ,  52. 

[231] 

Wise  men  do  not  accept  that  the  injunctive  text  could 
exist  without  the  proup  of  letters-  If  it  is  held  that  the  real 
object  alone  could  convey  the  knowledge,  then  it  clearly 
amounts  to  saying  that  the  injunctive  text  also  is  not  valid. 

The  injunctive  text,  as  associated  with  the  accents  which  are  the 
qualities  of  tone,  is  unreal. 

See  W,  II,  229. 

[232] 

w  swift  11 

In  the  view  of  Kanada,  the  sense  of  hearing  is  the 
erroneously  assumed  part  of  ether  present  in  the  auricular 
orifice;  and  it  reveals  the  group  of  words  that  are  real. 


SECOND  ADHYAYA 


359 


The  ether  is  accepted  by  the  Vai^e^ikas  to  be  unitary,  all- 
pervasive  and  eternal,  and  it  does  not  have  parts.  Yet  the  sense  of 
hearing  is  accepted  to  be  the  part  of  ether  conditioned  by  the 
auricular  orifice.  Thus  the  sense  of  hearing  is  the  erroneously  assumed 
part  of  the  ether  present  in  the  auricular  orifice  and  it  gives  rise  to  the 
real  knowledge  of  words. 


[233  ] 

stored  a*  l 

Oh!  dear,  when  there  arises  the  knowledge  of  the  self 
by  means  of  the  two  (namely,  the  teacher  and  the  scripture) 
fancied  (by  your  avidya ),  there  is  the  realization  of  the  self 
and  by  this  you  cross  this  unfathomable  ocean  of  trans¬ 
migration  which  is  the  (false)  creation  of  your  avidya- 

[234] 

S'ir  crctmRm  5r  ii 

The  great  sages  like  Kanada  and  others  (that  is, 
Jaimini)  hold  as  their  tenets  the  mistaken  thing  (that  is,  the 
injunctive  texts  consisting  of  letters  associated  with  accents, 
order,  etc.)  and  the  erroneously  assumed  thing  (that  is,  the 
sense  of  hearing).  Though  these  two  are  unreal,  yet  they 
are  accepted  to  be  giving  rise  to  the  result  (in  the  form  of 
correct  knowledge).  When  such  is  the  case,  why  should  not 
the  objects  created  by  avidya  give  rise  to  some  (real)  result 
in  our  view? 


See  the  following  verse. 


360 


SAM  K$  EPAtf  ARI RAKA 


[  235  ] 

am# 

faf*ra  i 

»t  vm  ^qxrnnsnfi  fcraifo. 

5#5  *  *mf  ii 

According  to  your  desire,  when  an  unreal  object  could 
give  rise  to  some  (real)  result,  why  cannot  an  entity  created 
by  avidya  (which  is  different  from  unreal  objects)1  produce 
some  real  result?  It  is  really  wonderful  (to  say  that  it 
cannot  produce  any  real  result).  And  you  are  highly  quali¬ 
fied  to  assert  so,  while  we  are  not  competent. 

1.  The  objects  created  by  avidya  are  neither  real  nor  unreal,  but 
different  from  both. 


[  236] 

The  pure  consciousness  itself  when  concealed  by  avidya 
is  the  cause  of  the  entire  universe  and  hence  it  is  the  source 
of  misery.  The  pure  consciousness  itself  when  fully  realized 
leads  to  the  highest  bliss- 


[  237  ] 

m  #  m  wm  i 

W  #  KWWfa  ft#  tRJ  II 

By  engaging  your  intellect  on  external  objects,  when 
you  do  not  realize  your  nature,  your  form  itself  is  the 
source  of  misery  to  you.  And  when  you  realize  your  nature 
by  annihilating  avidya,  it  itself  is  a  source  of  bliss  to  you. 


SECOND  ADHTATA 


361 


[  238  ] 

d^T  dlWdtf^HfTfa^t  5^*%  d^faft  II 

Mere  knowledge  of  your  true  nature  is  to  be  acquired 
and  mere  avidya  is  to  be  annihilated.  And  the  Upani$adic 
text  tat  tvam  asi  gives  rise  to  the  knowledge  of  your  true 
nature  and  the  annihilation  of  avidya- 

[  239] 

d*  S*I  d  gdSdd  l^fd  I 

d*T  ^  ddf  ^  II 

There  is  no  change  in  your  form  (that  is,  the  self) 
either  before  or  after  the  rise  of  the  realization  of  the  self 
to  you.  Before  the  rise  of  your  realization  of  the  self,  there 
existed  avidya  and  after  that  it  is  annihilated.  And  apart 
from  avidya,  there  did  not  exist  any  other  thing. 

[  240  ] 

*  dftsfa  d^tftw  i 

d*T  ^  3  d*ft  foffiidd  II 

Avidya  also  did  not  exist  (really  in  the  self)  before  the 
realization  of  the  self;  and  so  there  is  no  (real)  annihilation 
of  avidya  at  the  time  of  the  realization  of  the  self.  And  the 
cognitions  (that  avidya  existed  and  avidya  is  annihilated)  are 
merely  owing  to  avidya.  And  without  the  (illusory  existence 
of)  avidya  nothing  existed  in  the  self. 

'  l  241  ] 

d  d*B  ddflt  ITfdddT  ftSW  I 

|ld  m  d*T  ^  ftlf^dd^ddta#  II 

4G 


362 


SAM  K$EPA$  ARlRAKA 


The  explanation  of  the  removal  of  avidya  cannot  be 
had  without  avidya\  and  hence  it  is  (figuratively)  spoken  of 
as  avidya.  But  (in  fact)  the  annihilation  of  avidya  is  not 
of  the  form  of  avidya. 

The  annihilation  of  avidya  points  to  the  substratum,  namely,  the 
self  on  which  avidya  is  superimposed. 


SCOPE  OF  THE  TEXTS  ENJOINING 
SACRIFICE,  ETC. 

[  242  ] 

frm  qwfqqqn  qfefafa  i 

fa  qq  RiMft  mm  w 

The  injunctive  texts  concerned  with  religious  rites  are 
addressed  to  you  whose  true  nature  is  veiled  by  your  own 
avidya  and  whose  intellect  is  engaged  in  external  objects. 
When  avidyd  is  annihilated  by  the  true  knowledge  of  the 
self,  how  could  (you)  engage  (yourself  )  in  the  religious  rites. 

cf  :  avidyavadvisayanyeva  pratyaksci  dini  pramanani  da  strain  ca. 

A  dhya  sa-bhasya 


r  243  ] 

fqfs^  wiqq:  q*ir  qft^q:^  qTW?HJW  i 
qq  tjjirqT  ^  fqfaq  qifanqiiqq:  n 

When  the  supreme  status  of  the  lord  which  is  absolute 
(that  is,  free  from  any  difference)  is  realized,  you  attain 
liberation  and  (hence)  you  enjoy  the  highest  bliss  and  you 
are  free  from  any  desire.  (When  such  is  the  case)  how 
could  you  engage  yourself  in  the  religious  rites? 


SECOND  ADHTATA 


363 


[  244  ] 

ft  mj  q^wqqiqqs  snqgq:  i 
OTrfqqmfqsqi^pqaqT  fqqq*?rqq  q^T?qq^:  n 

The  injunctive  texts  prescribing  the  black-art  are 
stultified  following  the  prohibition  of  its  result  (by  the  other 
texts).1  Similarly,  in  the  case  of  one  who  has  realized  the 
self,  the  injunctive  texts  are  contradicted,  as  the  instrument, 
etc.,  (of  volitional  activity)  cease  to  exist  (that  is,  they 
are  annihilated  by  the  realization  of  the  self). 

1 .  The  Vedic  text  —  iyenena  abhicaran  yajeta  —  does  not  prompt 
one  to  activity,  as  the  result  of  the  sacrifice,  namely,  injury  to  enemy 
is  prohibited  by  the  Vedic  text —  na  hiihya  t  sarva  bliutani.  And  nobody 
can  act  without  some  result  in  view. 

[  245  ] 

qfc  q  ^  q^qiqqr  I 

qqqrfqqrqfq^  mi  fqfq^OT  qscT  q  q  qig  n 

If  volitional  activity  does  not  hold  good  in  the  absence 
of  its  result,  how  can  it  hold  good  in  the  absence  of  its 
means,  etc.  And  the  sense  of  injunction  is  not  appropriate 
without  volitional  activity, 


[  246  ] 

qfqqqRq  q  fqqq  q  fqqr  r  fqq|qif$$qqR<R&  i 
q  fqqi  qq^cl^qq  fq%ITcqqq  q  q^  II 

The  knowledge  of  niyoga  is  not  reasonable  without  a 
competent  person  (to  execute  it)  and  a  content.  And  both 
these  are  not  possible  without  avidya.  And  avidya  is  not 
possible  in  the  case  of  one  who  has  realized  the  oneness  of 
the  self. 


364 


SAMKSEPAg  ARt  RAKA 


[  247  ] 

sqjftq  ^m$\  ufaftq  fq&r  %<m  qqi$3q  M 

Having  borne  in  mind  that  all  the  injunctive  texts 
point  to  empirically  real  objects,  conclude  that  the 
Upani^adic  texts  are  not  in  conflict  with  the  injunctive 
texts. 


[  248  ] 

si#  ^  wr.  i 

tq^qqiH 

’&at  qRT^mfq  ^  fqfa:  11 

Thus  when  the  identity  of  the  absolute  self  and  the 
inner  self  is  realized  through  the  Upanisadic  sentences, 
when  avidya  which  is  the  cause  of  all  duality  is  annihilated 
immediately,  when  you  remain  as  the  pure  consciousness 
and  have  attained  liberation  and  are  experiencing  the 
highest  bliss,  even  the  trace  of  the  other  proofs  is  hardly 
known.  Hence  there  is  no  occasion  for  their  conflict  with 
the  Upanisadic  teaching. 


352 


SAM  K$EPAg  ARIRAKA 


manifests  itself  by  annihilating  avidja.  Hence  the  objection 
(advanced  before)1  cannot  be  raised  against  our  view. 

I.  vide  Ss',  II,  210. 

DISTINCTION  BETWEEN  RELEASE  AND  BONDAGE 

[215] 

q-it  mum  qTqq^Hfas*  11 

[The  PUrvapaksin  holds:] 

In  this  case,  the  scripture  dealing  with  the  distinction 
of  bound  and  released  souls  would  be  contradicted.  [The 
Siddhantin  replies]  it  would  not  become  so;  for,  until 
the  self  is  realized  this  scripture  is  valid-  All  the  distinctions 
of  the  bound  and  the  released~sou.ls  and  the  mystic  and 
the  ignorant  are  admitted  as  long  as  there  is  avidya. 

[216] 

f$  %clf^  *RSH^  I 

f%  $4  fqa^i^  11 

Moreover  is  the  scripture  dealing  with  the  distinc¬ 
tion  of  bondage  and  release  strictly  intent  on  conveying 
the  nature  of  liberation?  Or  does  it,  by  restating  thei 
state  of  liberation  (which  is  known  from  the  usage  of  elders), 
primarily  convey  it  as  of  the  nature  of  the  self? 

[217] 

qn#  siq^qt  ^qq  1 

It  is  admitted  that  such  scripture  is  not  intent  on 
conveying  the  liberation  (of  Vamadeva  and  other  released 
souls);  for,  the  knowledge  of  their  release  is  futile.  Hence 


SECOND  ADHYATA 


353 


it  is  reasonable  to  hold  that  the  scripture  is  purposeful  by 
giving  rise  to  the  firm  belief  in  the  identity  of  the  supreme 
self  and  the  individual  soul  (which  is  liberation).  And 
this  is  acceptable  to  us. 


[218] 

q^  qr  q  qifo^  i 

^T3^qr  fq^TO  *113  sfast  «l3^n 

[  The  disciple  says  ] 

As  the  view  that  “apart  from  me,  no  person  fit  for 
bondage  or  release  either  existed  or  exists  or  would  exist” 
is  contrary  to  experience,  I  do  not  rejoice  in  accepting 
this  view- 


[219] 

fa  tqrgqqt  fqitqqqqi*  fa  qi  qfts^qq 
qs:r  qifeRsiqfts^qgqqt  fqitqiqs:  1 
qilqi^qi  sjfq  ^qfq  3^  q^ 
qrfq  qq:  11 

[  The  preceptor  asks  ] 

Is  the  experience  of  duality  contrary  (to  the  view  that 
you  are  the  only  soul)  or  the  experience  “I  am  the  supreme 
self?  Or  else,  is  there  any  experience  other  than  these  two 
that  leads  to  contradiction?  The  statement  that  the 
experience  of  identity  (of  the  supreme  self  and  the  individual 
soul)  leads  to  the  contradiction  (of  the  oneness  of  the  self)  is 
not  reasonable.  And  the  experience  pointing  to  duality  also 
is  not  contrary  to  it  (that  is,  the  oneness  of  the  self),  as  the 
former  is  sublated  by  the  knowledge  that  there  is  only 
one  soul. 

45 


354 


SAM  K$EPAg  ARI RAKA 


[  220  ] 


rff^rsuqtsfa  sfaq:  i 

^3*iq  faiT^Rt 

qiftjR  q  ^  ^^qi5;4  II 

If  it  is  held  that  the  view  (that  you  are  the  only  soul) 
is  sublated  by  the  experience  that  comprehends  duality 
(between  the  supreme  self  and  the  individual  soul)  and 
identity  (of  the  supreme  self  with  the  individual  soul),  then 
(it  is  said  that)  there  is  no  such  experience  in  the  case  of 
any  individual  soul  in  the  three  states  (of  waking,  dream, 
and  deep  sleep).  No  person  in  this  world  is  seen  to  have 
the  experience  of  the  association  of  the  sun  and  darkness. 
But  if  one  could  have  the  experience  of  the  association  of 
duality  and  identity,  then  why  cannot  there  be  the 
experience  of  the  association  of  the  sun  and  darkness? 

[221] 

In  the  light  of  what  has  been  said,  not  even  a  trace 
of  contradiction  presents  itself  in  this  view  (that  there  is 
only  one  soul).  So  let  this  view  which  conforms  to  the 
texts  accepted  by  the  tradition  of  the  teachers  be  admitted 
with  faith. 


[222] 

qftvrrfd  mszz  ssqq;  qiqqqqt^rcfqi  n 


SECOND  ADHTATA 


355 


This  entire  universe  is  fancied  in  the  form  cl  God  and 
the  individual  soul  by  avidya  firmly  superimposed  on  your 
self.  Though  the  universe  is  indeterminable,  it  appears  as 
if  real,  until  the  rise  of  the  sun  in  the  form  of  the  knowledge 
of  the  self. 

lava  —  svaprakd  d  ccaitany  asvaru pasya 
udhena  —  tada  tmyadhyasaprdptena,  TB. 
adrdlnvn  —  anirvacaniyam,  S. 

[223  ] 

There  is  nothing  strange  that  in  the  case  of  the 
persons  whose  true  nature  is  concealed  by  avidya,  there 
arise  the  cognitions  that,  ‘God  is  omniscient’,  ‘I  am 
miserable’,  and  ‘The  universe  is  a  wonderful  creation’- 

[224] 

3PW  I 

?r  ift:  n 

The  sage  of  self-control  who  realizes  his  true  nature 
which  is  free  from  transmigration,  which  is  eternal  and  is 
of  the  form  of  unconditioned  bliss,  does  not  experience  any 
misery;  for,  he  annihilates  the  entire  universe  by  the  know¬ 
ledge  of  his  (true)  nature. 

INDETERMINABLE  ENTITY  COULD  CONVEY 
THE  REALITY 

[  225] 


356 


SAM  K$EPAS?  A  RIRAKa 


Your  intellect  arisen  from  aviiya  abiding  in  the  self 
falsely  creates  the  entire  universe.  The  teacher  (also)  is 
your  false  creation.  And  he  teaches  you  your  absolute 
nature- 


[  226  ] 

^  ft  srftTsmfsr  i 

No  object  which  is  knowable  by  the  intellect  is  found 
to  be  real  in  this  world-  The  entire  universe  is  like  the 
snake  appearing  in  a  rope.  Hence  it  is  established  that  it 
is  illusory. 

[  227  ] 

qfcfiT^sfq  m  3  §  II 

The  preceptor,  though  fancied,  is  (fancied  as)  omnis¬ 
cient  and  (hence)  he  himself  imparts  (the  knowledge  of) 
absolute  self.  The  serpent,  though  superimposed,  causes 
death  but  not  the  impurity  (superimposed  on  the  ether). 

It  might  be  said  :  if  the  preceptor  who  is  fancied  could  impart  the 
knowledge  of  the  self,  then  the  pot,  etc.,  also  could  impart  the 
knowledge  of  the  self  because  they  are  also  fancied. 

To  this  the  author  replies  that  though  all  the  objects  are  fancied, 
yet  there  is  difference  among  them.  The  serpent  is  suprimposed  on 
the  rope,  like  impurity  on  the  ether.  But  the  unreal  serpent  some¬ 
times  causes  death,  while  impurity  on  the  ether  never  causes  death. 

[228  ] 


SECOND  AD  HE  AT  A 


357 


If  it  is  held  that  an  object  could  impart  knowledge 
only  as  being  real,  then  the  knowledge  of  fire  can  well 
arise  even  from  the  cloth  (as  the  cloth  is  real)-  If  it  is  held 
that  an  unreal  object  cannot  give  rise  to  (any)  knowledge, 
then  indeed  (according  to  the  Purva-mimamsa  school)  the 
(unreal)  injunctive  text1  also  could  not  convey  the  true 
knowledge  (of  the  means  to  heaven,  etc.). 

1.  See  the  following  verse. 


[229  ] 

Here  the  injunctive  text,  being  unreal,  gives  rise  to  the 
valid  knowledge  of  “the  thing  to  be  achieved”  (that  is, 
sacrifice).  The  group  of  articulate  sounds  is  naturally  real, 
but  when  associated  with  different  qualities  of  tone,  they 
are  unreal. 

The  injunctive  text  is  real  in  so  far  as  it  is  made  up  of  the 
articulate  sounds.  But  it  is  unreal  when  viewed  from  the  stand-point 
of  the  particular  order  in  which  the  several  articulate  sounds  occurring 
in  it  are  placed,  and  the  qualities  of  tone  like  accents  with  which  it 
is  associated.  And  it  is  in  this  capacity  alone  that  the  injunctive  text 
gives  rise  to  the  valid  knowledge  of  ‘the  thing  to  be  achieved’.  Thus 
the  unreal  injunctive  text  gives  rise  to  the  real  knowledge  of  ‘the  thing 
to  be  achieved’. 


[  230] 

$rct  to*  Tf  3  i 

h  mm  n 

A  Vcdic  text  uttered  falsely  without  the  particular 
accent  or  letter  does  not  convey  the  intended  sense.  The  false 
utterance  of  the  text  is  (like)  a  thunderbolt  and  it  destroys 


samk$epaxariraka 

the  sacrificer,  just  as  the  word  indra  iatru  did  by  the  wrong 
use  of  accent. 

Sarvajnatman  cites  this  verse  to  prove  that  a  sentence,  only  as 
associated  with  the  qualities  of  tone  like  accents,  could  convey  the 
intended  sense. 

Tvasta  a  divine  being  desirous  of  a  son  who  would  kill  Indra, 
performed  a  sacrifice  by  uttering  the  text  indrai atrurvardhasva.  The 
word  indrai atru,  if  it  is  taken  as  a  lalpiirusa  compound,  means  one 
who  kills  Indra.  In  this  case,  the  udatta  accent  should  fall  on  the 
final  syllable.  If  the  udatta  accent  falls  on  the  first  syllabic,  then  the 
word  is  a  bahuvrihi  compound  and  it  means  ‘one  who  is  killed  by  Indra’. 

Tva?ta  used  the  udatta  accent  on  the  first  syllable,  by  mistake, 
and  so  Indra  killed  the  son  born  to  him. 

This  verse  is  from  Paninlya-iiksd ,  52. 

[231] 

Wise  men  do  not  accept  that  the  injunctive  text  could 
exist  without  the  proup  of  letters-  If  it  is  held  that  the  real 
object  alone  could  convey  the  knowledge,  then  it  clearly 
amounts  to  saying  that  the  injunctive  text  also  is  not  valid. 

The  injunctive  text,  as  associated  with  the  accents  which  are  the 
qualities  of  tone,  is  unreal. 

See  W,  II,  229. 

[232] 

w  swift  11 

In  the  view  of  Kanada,  the  sense  of  hearing  is  the 
erroneously  assumed  part  of  ether  present  in  the  auricular 
orifice;  and  it  reveals  the  group  of  words  that  are  real. 


SECOND  ADHYAYA 


359 


The  ether  is  accepted  by  the  Vai^e^ikas  to  be  unitary,  all- 
pervasive  and  eternal,  and  it  does  not  have  parts.  Yet  the  sense  of 
hearing  is  accepted  to  be  the  part  of  ether  conditioned  by  the 
auricular  orifice.  Thus  the  sense  of  hearing  is  the  erroneously  assumed 
part  of  the  ether  present  in  the  auricular  orifice  and  it  gives  rise  to  the 
real  knowledge  of  words. 


[233  ] 

stored  a*  l 

Oh!  dear,  when  there  arises  the  knowledge  of  the  self 
by  means  of  the  two  (namely,  the  teacher  and  the  scripture) 
fancied  (by  your  avidya ),  there  is  the  realization  of  the  self 
and  by  this  you  cross  this  unfathomable  ocean  of  trans¬ 
migration  which  is  the  (false)  creation  of  your  avidya- 

[234] 

S'ir  crctmRm  5r  ii 

The  great  sages  like  Kanada  and  others  (that  is, 
Jaimini)  hold  as  their  tenets  the  mistaken  thing  (that  is,  the 
injunctive  texts  consisting  of  letters  associated  with  accents, 
order,  etc.)  and  the  erroneously  assumed  thing  (that  is,  the 
sense  of  hearing).  Though  these  two  are  unreal,  yet  they 
are  accepted  to  be  giving  rise  to  the  result  (in  the  form  of 
correct  knowledge).  When  such  is  the  case,  why  should  not 
the  objects  created  by  avidya  give  rise  to  some  (real)  result 
in  our  view? 


See  the  following  verse. 


360 


SAM  K$  EPAtf  ARI RAKA 


[  235  ] 

am# 

faf*ra  i 

»t  vm  ^qxrnnsnfi  fcraifo. 

5#5  *  *mf  ii 

According  to  your  desire,  when  an  unreal  object  could 
give  rise  to  some  (real)  result,  why  cannot  an  entity  created 
by  avidya  (which  is  different  from  unreal  objects)1  produce 
some  real  result?  It  is  really  wonderful  (to  say  that  it 
cannot  produce  any  real  result).  And  you  are  highly  quali¬ 
fied  to  assert  so,  while  we  are  not  competent. 

1.  The  objects  created  by  avidya  are  neither  real  nor  unreal,  but 
different  from  both. 


[  236] 

The  pure  consciousness  itself  when  concealed  by  avidya 
is  the  cause  of  the  entire  universe  and  hence  it  is  the  source 
of  misery.  The  pure  consciousness  itself  when  fully  realized 
leads  to  the  highest  bliss- 


[  237  ] 

m  #  m  wm  i 

W  #  KWWfa  ft#  tRJ  II 

By  engaging  your  intellect  on  external  objects,  when 
you  do  not  realize  your  nature,  your  form  itself  is  the 
source  of  misery  to  you.  And  when  you  realize  your  nature 
by  annihilating  avidya,  it  itself  is  a  source  of  bliss  to  you. 


SECOND  ADHTATA 


361 


[  238  ] 

d^T  dlWdtf^HfTfa^t  5^*%  d^faft  II 

Mere  knowledge  of  your  true  nature  is  to  be  acquired 
and  mere  avidya  is  to  be  annihilated.  And  the  Upani$adic 
text  tat  tvam  asi  gives  rise  to  the  knowledge  of  your  true 
nature  and  the  annihilation  of  avidya- 

[  239] 

d*  S*I  d  gdSdd  l^fd  I 

d*T  ^  ddf  ^  II 

There  is  no  change  in  your  form  (that  is,  the  self) 
either  before  or  after  the  rise  of  the  realization  of  the  self 
to  you.  Before  the  rise  of  your  realization  of  the  self,  there 
existed  avidya  and  after  that  it  is  annihilated.  And  apart 
from  avidya,  there  did  not  exist  any  other  thing. 

[  240  ] 

*  dftsfa  d^tftw  i 

d*T  ^  3  d*ft  foffiidd  II 

Avidya  also  did  not  exist  (really  in  the  self)  before  the 
realization  of  the  self;  and  so  there  is  no  (real)  annihilation 
of  avidya  at  the  time  of  the  realization  of  the  self.  And  the 
cognitions  (that  avidya  existed  and  avidya  is  annihilated)  are 
merely  owing  to  avidya.  And  without  the  (illusory  existence 
of)  avidya  nothing  existed  in  the  self. 

'  l  241  ] 

d  d*B  ddflt  ITfdddT  ftSW  I 

|ld  m  d*T  ^  ftlf^dd^ddta#  II 

4G 


362 


SAM  K$EPA$  ARlRAKA 


The  explanation  of  the  removal  of  avidya  cannot  be 
had  without  avidya\  and  hence  it  is  (figuratively)  spoken  of 
as  avidya.  But  (in  fact)  the  annihilation  of  avidya  is  not 
of  the  form  of  avidya. 

The  annihilation  of  avidya  points  to  the  substratum,  namely,  the 
self  on  which  avidya  is  superimposed. 


SCOPE  OF  THE  TEXTS  ENJOINING 
SACRIFICE,  ETC. 

[  242  ] 

frm  qwfqqqn  qfefafa  i 

fa  qq  RiMft  mm  w 

The  injunctive  texts  concerned  with  religious  rites  are 
addressed  to  you  whose  true  nature  is  veiled  by  your  own 
avidya  and  whose  intellect  is  engaged  in  external  objects. 
When  avidyd  is  annihilated  by  the  true  knowledge  of  the 
self,  how  could  (you)  engage  (yourself  )  in  the  religious  rites. 

cf  :  avidyavadvisayanyeva  pratyaksci  dini  pramanani  da  strain  ca. 

A  dhya  sa-bhasya 


r  243  ] 

fqfs^  wiqq:  q*ir  qft^q:^  qTW?HJW  i 
qq  tjjirqT  ^  fqfaq  qifanqiiqq:  n 

When  the  supreme  status  of  the  lord  which  is  absolute 
(that  is,  free  from  any  difference)  is  realized,  you  attain 
liberation  and  (hence)  you  enjoy  the  highest  bliss  and  you 
are  free  from  any  desire.  (When  such  is  the  case)  how 
could  you  engage  yourself  in  the  religious  rites? 


SECOND  ADHTATA 


363 


[  244  ] 

ft  mj  q^wqqiqqs  snqgq:  i 
OTrfqqmfqsqi^pqaqT  fqqq*?rqq  q^T?qq^:  n 

The  injunctive  texts  prescribing  the  black-art  are 
stultified  following  the  prohibition  of  its  result  (by  the  other 
texts).1  Similarly,  in  the  case  of  one  who  has  realized  the 
self,  the  injunctive  texts  are  contradicted,  as  the  instrument, 
etc.,  (of  volitional  activity)  cease  to  exist  (that  is,  they 
are  annihilated  by  the  realization  of  the  self). 

1 .  The  Vedic  text  —  iyenena  abhicaran  yajeta  —  does  not  prompt 
one  to  activity,  as  the  result  of  the  sacrifice,  namely,  injury  to  enemy 
is  prohibited  by  the  Vedic  text —  na  hiihya  t  sarva  bliutani.  And  nobody 
can  act  without  some  result  in  view. 

[  245  ] 

qfc  q  ^  q^qiqqr  I 

qqqrfqqrqfq^  mi  fqfq^OT  qscT  q  q  qig  n 

If  volitional  activity  does  not  hold  good  in  the  absence 
of  its  result,  how  can  it  hold  good  in  the  absence  of  its 
means,  etc.  And  the  sense  of  injunction  is  not  appropriate 
without  volitional  activity, 


[  246  ] 

qfqqqRq  q  fqqq  q  fqqr  r  fqq|qif$$qqR<R&  i 
q  fqqi  qq^cl^qq  fq%ITcqqq  q  q^  II 

The  knowledge  of  niyoga  is  not  reasonable  without  a 
competent  person  (to  execute  it)  and  a  content.  And  both 
these  are  not  possible  without  avidya.  And  avidya  is  not 
possible  in  the  case  of  one  who  has  realized  the  oneness  of 
the  self. 


364 


SAMKSEPAg  ARt  RAKA 


[  247  ] 

sqjftq  ^m$\  ufaftq  fq&r  %<m  qqi$3q  M 

Having  borne  in  mind  that  all  the  injunctive  texts 
point  to  empirically  real  objects,  conclude  that  the 
Upani^adic  texts  are  not  in  conflict  with  the  injunctive 
texts. 


[  248  ] 

si#  ^  wr.  i 

tq^qqiH 

’&at  qRT^mfq  ^  fqfa:  11 

Thus  when  the  identity  of  the  absolute  self  and  the 
inner  self  is  realized  through  the  Upanisadic  sentences, 
when  avidya  which  is  the  cause  of  all  duality  is  annihilated 
immediately,  when  you  remain  as  the  pure  consciousness 
and  have  attained  liberation  and  are  experiencing  the 
highest  bliss,  even  the  trace  of  the  other  proofs  is  hardly 
known.  Hence  there  is  no  occasion  for  their  conflict  with 
the  Upanisadic  teaching. 


II  #qts«?w  n 


MEANS  OF  THE  KNOWLEDGE  OF  THE  SELF 

[  1  ] 

^TcfTT^H  rftfW  5T^fqm*nq:  II 

After  ascertaining  the  non-stultification  by  the  other 
proofs  of  the  Upani?adic  teaching,  and  also  knowing  that 
the  knowledge  of  the  identity  of  the  supreme  self  and  the 
inner  self  arising  as  the  import  of  the  Upani$ads  is  reason¬ 
able,  the  aspirant  who  is  desirous  of  knowing  the  entire 
means  that  would  give  rise  to  the  knowledge  of  the  self 
whose  immediate  result  is  liberation,  asks  thus  : 

brahma tmala phalaiiraskamnlv.  —  brahmatmata  —  moksah,  AP. 

[2'] 

Let  the  partless  self  which  has  been  elucidated  before 
as  the  import  of  the  Upani$adic  passages,  be  not  sublated 
by  the  other  proofs.  But  is  there  any  other  means  apart 
from  the  Upani^adic  texts  that  can  be  pursued  for  the  rise 
of  the  knowledge  which  would  annihilate  avidyci  that  has 
for  its  object  the  existent  self? 


i-  «r«its*r  —  P2- 


S A  MKS  EP A  g  A  RtRAK A 


ai:»o 


parinis  thitasvavisayadhva  ntacchidah  —  siddhabrahmavisayavidyani- 
varlikayah,  TB. 


[3] 

Intense  detachment  (from  desire  for  enjoyment  here 
or  hereafter),  the  knowledge  of  the  import  of  the  terms 
■tat  and  tvam,  the  knowledge  of  the  exact  extent  of  all  the 
sentences  pointing  to  the  attributeless  self  on  the  basis  of 
the  arguments  (mentioned  in  the  third  pada  of  the  third 
adhydya  of  the  Brahma-sutra) ,  and  the  discriminative 
knowledge  of  the  proximate  and  the  remote  means  (helpful) 
to  the  (rise  of  the)  correct  knowledge — all  these  are  the 
means  to  know  the  import  of  the  sentence  and  they 
should  be  pursued  by  the  ascetic. 

This  verse  summarizes  the  subject-matter  of  the  four  parts  of  the 
third  adhydya  of  the  Brahma-sulra  : 

vide:  anena  trtiyddhydyapddacatuslf.ydrlhah  samksiplah  V,  p.  147a 
vide  also  :  padacatustayena  pratipa dyama naiii  vaii a gya disa dhanajatam 
yatnena  mumuksupd  sampa  dandy  am,  teim  vind  na  vdkyadeva  tadbuddhih 
sambhavati,  Ved.  p.  300. 


[4] 

wi- 


II  #qts«?w  n 


MEANS  OF  THE  KNOWLEDGE  OF  THE  SELF 

[  1  ] 

^TcfTT^H  rftfW  5T^fqm*nq:  II 

After  ascertaining  the  non-stultification  by  the  other 
proofs  of  the  Upani?adic  teaching,  and  also  knowing  that 
the  knowledge  of  the  identity  of  the  supreme  self  and  the 
inner  self  arising  as  the  import  of  the  Upani$ads  is  reason¬ 
able,  the  aspirant  who  is  desirous  of  knowing  the  entire 
means  that  would  give  rise  to  the  knowledge  of  the  self 
whose  immediate  result  is  liberation,  asks  thus  : 

brahma tmala phalaiiraskamnlv.  —  brahmatmata  —  moksah,  AP. 

[2'] 

Let  the  partless  self  which  has  been  elucidated  before 
as  the  import  of  the  Upani$adic  passages,  be  not  sublated 
by  the  other  proofs.  But  is  there  any  other  means  apart 
from  the  Upani^adic  texts  that  can  be  pursued  for  the  rise 
of  the  knowledge  which  would  annihilate  avidyci  that  has 
for  its  object  the  existent  self? 


i-  «r«its*r  —  P2- 


S A  MKS  EP A  g  A  RtRAK A 


ai:»o 


parinis  thitasvavisayadhva  ntacchidah  —  siddhabrahmavisayavidyani- 
varlikayah,  TB. 


[3] 

Intense  detachment  (from  desire  for  enjoyment  here 
or  hereafter),  the  knowledge  of  the  import  of  the  terms 
■tat  and  tvam,  the  knowledge  of  the  exact  extent  of  all  the 
sentences  pointing  to  the  attributeless  self  on  the  basis  of 
the  arguments  (mentioned  in  the  third  pada  of  the  third 
adhydya  of  the  Brahma-sutra) ,  and  the  discriminative 
knowledge  of  the  proximate  and  the  remote  means  (helpful) 
to  the  (rise  of  the)  correct  knowledge — all  these  are  the 
means  to  know  the  import  of  the  sentence  and  they 
should  be  pursued  by  the  ascetic. 

This  verse  summarizes  the  subject-matter  of  the  four  parts  of  the 
third  adhydya  of  the  Brahma-sulra  : 

vide:  anena  trtiyddhydyapddacatuslf.ydrlhah  samksiplah  V,  p.  147a 
vide  also  :  padacatustayena  pratipa dyama naiii  vaii a gya disa dhanajatam 
yatnena  mumuksupd  sampa  dandy  am,  teim  vind  na  vdkyadeva  tadbuddhih 
sambhavati,  Ved.  p.  300. 


[4] 

wi- 


THIRD  ADHYAYA 


367 


By  truly  ascertaining  the  defects  of  transmigration, 
there  arises  unswerving  renunciation  in  your  mind.  And 
when  renunciation  becomes  intense,  it  leads  to  the  exami¬ 
nation  of  the  senses  of  the  terms  tat  and  tvarn  (in  the 
sentence  tat  tvam  asi). 

nifprakathpam  —  nigealam 

rdgdkrSntacittasya  padarthadvayatattvavadharanasambhavat  vairagye 
sati  tu  tatsambhavat  padarthajrlanapurvakavdkyarthSvadhararidnukUle 
iravanadau  pravfttih,  vairagyakrta-upakarah,  AP. 

TRANSMIGRATION 

[5] 

mm 

You  be  convinced  of  the  nature  of  transmigration,  on 
hearing  which  there  would  arise  revulsion  towards  it  and 
which  will  be  explained  (by  me)  in  the  manner  in  which 
the  scripture1  conveys  the  transmigration  of  the  individual 
soul  who  is  gradually  subjected  to  birth  and  death. 

I.  See  Brh.,  IV,  iii,  35;  Chand.,  V,  ix,  1. 

[6] 

lit  *  ^ 

^ifwiT  ft  m  m 


i.  —  Ti. 


HFTf*T  —  T3. 


368 


SA  M  K$  EPA  g  A  Rt  RAKA 


The  supreme  self,  which  is  free  from  any  defect  and 
which  transcends  both  speech  and  mind  does  not  (naturally) 
experience  the  intolerable  misery  of  transmigration.  But, 
associating  itself  with  the  subtle  body  owing  to  its  avidya , 
the  supreme  self  attains  the  state  of  the  individual  soul  and 
undergoes  transmigration. 


[7] 

mi 

The  supreme  self  itself  undergoes  transmigration  and 
attains  release.  There  is  the  transmigration  of  the  self 
by  having  (the  subtle  body)  as  the  operating  condition. 
And  the  state  of  remaining  in  the  pure  consciousness  cons¬ 
titutes  its  liberation.  The  transmigration  is  caused  by  its 
own  avidya ,  and  liberation  by  the  knowledge  of  its  true 
nature. 


[8] 

snrrcu^TJ  g*;  , 

»T  <mfkdT  *  c!3T  *- 

mrc  *$$3^  m  11 

The  pure  consciousness  itself  is  the  locus  and  content 
of  its  avidya.  Its  knowledge,  however,  cannot  reasonably 
abide  in  the  pure  conciousness,  unless  the  lattter  becomes 
a  blend  of  the  nature  of  its  association  with  intellect.  It  is 
not  that  avidya  cannot  abide  in  the  immutable  consciousness. 


IRD  ADHYAYA 


369 


d  in  our  view  there  arises  no  change  in  the  consciousness 
ring  to  the  existence  of  avidya).  Hence  it  is  proper  to 
cpt  this  subtle  distinction  between  them  (namely, 
jwledge  and  avidya). 

Knowledge  is  the  attribute  of  a  knower.  And  to  be  a  knower  is 
ie  the  substratum  of  knowledge.  The  self  which  is  immutable 
sciousness  cannot  become  the  knower,  unless  it  is  associated  with 
llect.  Hence  knowledge  which  is  the  attribute  of  a  knower  abides 
he  self  associated  with  intellect. 

But  avidya  exists  in  the  self  itself  and  not  in  the  self  associated  with 
llect.  For,  intellect  is  the  effect  of  avidya  and  as  such  it  is  posterior 
vidya.  So  the  latter  cannot  abide  either  in  the  intellect  or  in  the 
associated  with  intellect.  It  is,  therefore,  said  that  avidya  is 
ent  only  in  the  self  -  the  pure  consciousness. 

vide:  anadisiddhajhanasya  tatkaryalingatadupahita- 

cida  irayatvd nupapalteh  iuddha  cideva  tadairayo  visayaica,  SS. 

[9] 

m  vw  mn- 

5.:%  ftwr 

Avidya  abiding  in  the  pure  consciousness  gives  rise  to 
aggregate  of  eight  factors.1  When  associated  with 
a,  there  arises  the  three-fold  misery®  (to  the  pure 
ciousness)  which  is  termed  ‘transmigration*  and  which 
determinable  like  colour  in  the  .  sky.  The  individual 
does  not  have  different  nature  from  that  of  the  pure 
ciousness  (that  is,  the  supreme  self  )■ 

The  eight  factors  are  explained  in  Stf,  III,  16. 

For  the  three-fold  misery  see  Ssf,  I,  342. 

47 


sAmsmttewmm 


EwnJ’nobznoa  ml)  ni  ajui/nfa  [plP?j)?.nK  om if t  v.aiv  nio  ni  hnA 
«1  ‘laqoiq  n  ,!i  -nmlf  (vWVnu^lo  •orr.Ji'ix'J  aill  ol  ^uiwo) 
rY.focrwus)  mW  *  it^^lUd^  3^};lu^fl)l^%[l'',H2  ?ii!)  Hpa  r, 

si  uwonf  c  ;M'  Sl 

ald.'iltfmmi  A  rbhfw  lbs  31IT  ■^•!.r>lv.oiH  'in  rriu.Uviifcdi^  y  !  01 
(Iliw  h;>1j:i;)OH?r  )i  MiM  ui  i 

*:>l.)id  i^T^}  A  li  :: 


ynyiiomno') 


ividiial'^ul  1^  JrT6  £ 1  ai'  ii  ^  r  t>  ife  ci  '"tfci 1 f  le1!  tV»  er1  1  fa?  art 


of  the  supreme  self  or  its  t ra  nsfof  rna  t  ion  or1  H i ffereh^  from  ff. 
^Vh^is  drso  Mt>fc  §61<^cc'ef>ted’i  'a,sv  dfticfftfiie?  there  •‘'would 
M'rise't5bfiflidf1with'Mthe-vgro\ipi,4iP  (:l5pa'iii^ai;c)"statdmeiits1 
^6nVe^n^1'thd  ;;fde'hfitV’rj  '6’fd'th'b’,n§u^ih6'1,self  jffl’d  the 

‘‘indlVid udl ^ feotll ■"  0’ioh  mij  ,?,<  Jl  .laalbini  r! S i  //  lK)U:ho?.:r.  lb- 

,  . ,  _  ,  ._2Wis#?ab2ii03  o-iuq  ail)  -  lb?  ads  ni  vino  tn**nq 

1.  vide:  Brh.,  Ill,  vn,  23. 

•.i'v»V'Va\ts3 iuhytii'Mirt  vvp6>n\>iM.to'V> 

vailuVi>t  diX  l  tik-Wi  V  {)'.)'■  » 

3?fq  =*?  ^  <rcqTt*w  i 

*r^§  gffcra  ^  s  aatsfa*:  n 

-t:;  jr.  im?  -fcsy? 

How  could  the  individual  soul  be  different  from  the 

a  *  '■ >  r  * 

supreme  selflWlieri  ffierelbre  fhef'Up&tiipdic  passages  such 
as  ‘The  supreme  fojr^n of  t|i^  selfpit^ejfj  jias  entered  the 
universe’,1  which  like  true  friends,  convey  the  identity  of 
the  self  as  thfeiiPiftpOffr^^^y^^pp  ?p--!F 

1.  Tniit.,  TI,  vi,  1;.  Chcind;  VI,  iii,  2.  .  ,  .  .  _  .  , 

oi  am  r:v-M«  r.<.an?iroiO£iiua  aujq  aiu  ni  yuiuidfi  Uibnk 


d*isv  i>  bo  n-trlV;  f  npb  1  ‘O.etmssfi  m; 

tmiq  {  A  bn  b.b!  •- ^tii !  _  r‘  A  ?n\  as  ,icjri> 

rlniri  [Mi  'HP  IPW 

Uubivit-ni  •.•AT  ''.nn 

?um  ?ri?  1  o  .  •;.•  au't!  -t-aj/m  lusiaHiL'  son  lot 

Mi  .iicuimnoo 

apsiii^Tgm^T^.ji.  t  I 


i.  Tsp 


-T3-- 


THIRD  ADHYATA 


371 


The  manifestation  of  the  object  which  is  other  than  the 
self,  as  different  from  the  self  depends  on  the  immutable 
unitary  consciousness.  On  the  basis  of  this  inference,1 
conclude  that  everything  (different  from  the  self)  is 
superimposed  on  it. 

1.  vide:  vipralipannam  pralyakcinma Ira dadhikaru path 
pratyakeidekarasa  dinap)  akd  Sam,  pratyakcidaliriktatva  t, 

Bgdma payitvd dvd  buddhySdivat,  V,  p.  148a. 
pracySvi  vastu  —  pracyotum  Silam  asyeti  pracydvi, 
brahmasvarupatirikiamiti  yd  vat,  TB. 

[13] 


The  pure  consciousness  alone  (as  the  inner  self)  is  the 
locus  and  content  of  avidya ;  and  (the  pure  consciousness  as) 
the  absolute  self  is  not  the  locus  and  content  of  avidya. 
Previously  it  has  been  said1  that  the  absolute  self  is  the 
locus  of  avidya,  with  a  view  to  affirm  that  the  consciousness 
associated  with  intellect  is  not  the  locus  of  avidya. 

1.  vide  SB,  III,  7. 

The  view  set  forth  in  this  verse  has  been  discussed  in  SB,  II,  11-14. 

[14] 

mm  ^  i 

It  is  not  known  either  from  experience  or  from 
scripture  or  from  any  other  proof  that  (the  pure  conscious¬ 
ness  as)  the  absolute  self  is  the  locus  of  avidya.  Hence*  let 
the  inner  self  be  the  locus  and  content  of  avidya. 


372 


SAM  K$EPAg  ARI RAKA 


[15] 

gfofW  5rf5*  ^  l 

%pwg  $\m  *  ii 

Those  adept  in  reasoning  do  not  admit  that  pure 
consciousness  in  its  aspect  of  jlva  is  the  locus  of  avidya)  for, 
it  is  not  reasonable.  The  state  of  the  self  associated  with 
the  intellect  (is  the  effect  of  avidya,  and  hence  it)  is  (of  the 
form  of)  avidyd  itself,  and  avidya  cannot  abide  in  avidyS. 
So  let  the  consciousness  be  the  locus  of  avidya ,  and  there  is 
n<?  contradiction  to  it.1 

1.  See  note  on  Stf,  11,  209. 

[16] 

tWT  wfaf 

mm  mfi  ^  v  H 

The  eight  factors  are :  the  five  senses  of  action;  the  five 
senses  of  knowledge;4  the  four  modes  of  internal  organ  like 
mind,  etc  ;3  the  five  vital  airs;4  (the  five  elements)  ether, 
etc  ;6  desire,  action,  and  avidya. 

It  is  said  in  Stf,  III,  9  that  avidya  abiding  in  the  self  gives 
rise  to  an  aggregate  of  eight  factors.  And  the  eight  factors  are 
explained  in  this  verse. 


1.  ff  —  Mj. 


374 


SAM  K$EPAg  ARIRAKA 


2.  kacaria  vidyd  iastravihitd  devatddyupasanarupS  apara  tannisiddhS 
asaccha  slravisaya ,  anya  vihitasamd  vidhirh  vinapi  yadrcchaya  upapannS 
j,angd didart anarupa  ireyaskari,  kacinnisiddhasama  bibhatsita£avadivi$ay5 
sadyo  duhkhakariti  vidyayah  calurvidhyam.  evarh  karmanam  yagavadhS- 
h3 ra diru panamapi  vihitapralisiddhavihita pralifiddhabhedena  ca  turvidhyam 
drasfavyarn,  SS. 

3.  ■evarh  pu  rvapTajflukhyasamskaru’pi  mulct  nub  ha  v  a  dyanurodhena 

caturvidho  bandhaheluh  ityarthah.  SS. 

[19] 

few 

feWfTRT  I 

5^7  g  Rfed  ft  few h:  II 

The  subtle  body  is  included  in  the  ‘eight  factors’  and 
hence  the  latter  also  are  termed  ‘subtle  body’  in  some 
places.  Indeed  the  ‘eight  factors’  are  not  the  primary 
sense  of  the  word  ‘subtle  body’,  It  is  well  known  that  the 
(word)  ‘subtle  body’  primarily  means  the  seventeen 
factors. 

ahhaval  —  antarbhutam  abhavat,  TB. 

[20] 


sst.  mm  sfa  n 

Here  the  subtle  body  consists  of  ten  senses,  mind, 
intellect,  *  and  the  group  of  (five)  vital  airs.  And  the 
supreme  self  associated  with  this  becomes  the  (sense  of  the 
word)  ‘individual  soul’. 

pious  ah  —  cidu  tma,  SS. 


i-mi&fr  te.DHVJt'Mk  u 


'375 


;nuq  It  zgvv  ‘nvjft  bnr.  m:iqt[T5iii]v  ioil.tr>  oil)  unit)  on  •  /> 

.’todlr)  ;n:J  no  (I).>?/)qnfn'i([n?j  ou;  (  (ti •jmj'.ni  bin:  (li  in'i^  'boh 

3iij  irtH  4l  '>;!i,,li^ 

•x'ii’  fi  -vki)  juov  ;ri  <l*i(lw  fcjs'juiitK/i'JiJnoa  »'>v  > 

5i  3*ie$;r  mlM  li 

There  is  no  association  J  of  misery  in  the  form  of 
transmigration  to  your  nature, .  if „  the  flatter  is  free  from 
any  relition  to  tkehlght  fdctor^T JAncf  Vhire^is^  no*1  escape 
from  misery  £ ture, is^J^  ^t%e 

This  verse  is  based  on  the  Upanisadic  text  — 

■  iVH'airdnPdm  Aali&‘}AiUam  'ha  jmyapnje  sj>VJ  aia  h‘,  'iJian  ^.<,1  *^1 1 1 ,  xu„l. 
i a'ri i0 >  J/.'t  vHinlofcd  j  ’'f{*  iUiw  f>'i*iaoo**n  ton  3l*J *- 

iwJl  slrmIf  sV'.Wnfe  suPrm^H 

stat?  O^fan  indi^idudsaul  b^its  associat^n^with'jt^^u^e 
it  undergoes  transmigration  only  when  it  is  associ^tp^.^yitjij  ^jjejgi}1 
factors  in  which  tlie  subtle  body  also  is  included. 

vide  yadyafh  lihgasarii handheld  \jivatvarh,  samsaranam  tu  na 
puryastakam  vina  ityarlhah,  S  on  Sg ,  III,  20. 

i  mr5.2sni)«  iraiFSifpw  fewij*  m 

It  mm  FbiVil42^?'  H 

lu  J!:.,  ^ IfH 

j2ih,f  ^  ffiqqr’ ’h  ! ! 

no)  b'DaoqniivKjua  u  J&ilJ  tj)kv/  lo  nul  r?7ii  *mJ  r\  iiJnnir. 

Neater  isdhere4he  association  of  thef,(dight)  'factors^to 

your  nature  which  is  ever  released!  and  “of1  the '  fo7rhHof 

.bliss  and  cpnsciqusn^ss.  L  ,  And  the  .  association  of  Jhs^  (eight) 

factors  is  the  creation  of  avidya  and  (hence)  indeterminable 

(either  as  real  or  unreal). 

i^aijv'.si’xar.j  u'S  U'-v.w.,.  1  r  ; 

vilatham  —  mi  thy  a,  sadasadyilakspnami anirvqcaniyam  ytyarthah,  TB. 


376 


SAttK$EPAS>  ARIRAKA 


At  no  time  the  ether  was  impure  and  never  was  it  pure. 
Both  (purity  and  impurity)  are  (superimposed)  on  the  ether. 
Similarly,  the  transmigration  is  (superimposed)  on  the 
ever  free  consciousness  which  is  your  true  nature. 

[24] 

'rwrerfla  ^  m  *  faqfa  n 

A  thing  erroneously  created  and  (hence)  indetermin¬ 
able  is  not  associated  with  the  absolutely  real  object 
(namely,  the  self ).  Similarly,  the  absolutely  real  object 
does  not  associate  itself  with  any  object  that  is  falsely 
created  by  avidya. 


[25] 

^  ii 

The  barren  land  does  not  contain  the  river  full  of 
water  that  is  superimposed  on  it  by  deer  out  of  thirst. 
Similarly  the  river  full  of  water  that  is  superimposed  (on 
the  barren  land)  by  deer  out  of  thirst  does  not  come  into 
contact  with  the  barren  land. 

mrgalrdjalavahinim  —  mrgaili  trsavaiat  aropitajalapra  panimi- 
ty  art  hah,  SS. 

cf :  yd  ha  yndadhyasah  latkrlena  dosena  gunena  va  anumatrenSpi 
sn  na  sambadhyale,  Adhyasa-bhasya. 

[26] 

*  a*  qqfoiwsfa  i 

*  qsqqft  foqfa  II 


THIRD  AD  HI  A  I A 


3/7 


There  cannot  be  transmigration  cither  to  your  true 
nature,  which  is  all-pervasive  self,  or  to  the  eight  factors 
which  are  insentient.  Nor  is  there  any  entity  which  is 
composed  of  the  form  of  sentience  and  insentience  and 
which  is  capable  of  transmigration. 

Tins  verse  is  based  on  the  following  Upnni$n.(Uc  text 
mi  tasya  firiinci  ttlkramniili,  hra/imaira  s<w  In  ahmcipyeli, 

lirlt.,  IV.  iv,  (>. 


[27  | 

mm  i 

The  consciousness  associated  with  the  (eight)  factors  is 
not  capable  of  proceeding  through  the  'path  towards  the 
other  world.  The  ether  delimited  by  a  pot  does  not  move, 
when  the  pot  which  is  of  limited  size  moves. 

avitata — avyapi;  gha tasya  avitalvam  avyapitvam,  SS. 

I.  28  ] 

The  pot  alone  moves  and  the  ether  is  immovable.  But 
by  the  association  of  the  pot  that  moves,  there  arises  the 
ether  delimited  by  the  pot.  In  this  way>  (when  one 
proceeds  by  taking  the  pot) there  arise  many  delimited  ethers. 

[29] 

3^3  3331  3^  qft  HTfo  faft:  I 


l.  hr  —  Mj. 

48 


—  Bs,  T2. 


SA  M  fi'S  El  >A  S  A  Rl  RA  h .  i 


Slu 


Let  it  be  said  (by  the  purvapak  sin)'-  ‘On  the  lines  indicated 
above,  the  eight  factors  alone  move  and  the  consciousness 
is  immovable.  The  consciousness  is  delimited  by  the  eight 
factors  that  move,  and  hence  there  are  many  delimited 
consciousnesses. 

vulajrani  —  cidvulaySni ,  para  vncchiundni  caitunya  ni,  TB. 

Hie  view  set  forth  in  this  verse  is  untenable.  See  the  following 
verse. 

[  30] 

wnm  $tfasTOT  TO:  I 

mm  mww  fafas*  frn  11 

(In  the  view  held  by  the  purvapaksin),  as  the  soul  which 
is  the  agent  of  actions  (here)  does  not  go  (to  the  other 
world),  and  as  there  arises  another  soul  as  enjoyer  in  the 
other  world,  there  results,  in  effect,  the  attainment  of 
religious  merit  for  the  action  which  the  soul  (in  the  other 
world)  has  not  performed,  and  the  non-attainment  of  the 
religious  merit  for  the  action  which  the  soul  (in  this  world) 
has  performed.  Alas,  the  unavoidable  series  of  difficulties! 

L  31  1 

to  sjqi*?ffa?rcq  fa  9^3  i  ( 

*3  pq^sq  *  OTWfa  *  $°sffar  n 

When  a  thing  which  is  admitted  to  be  a  limiting 
adjunct  moves,  then  certainly  there  is  destruction  of  the 
thing  (previously)  delimited  by  it.  Indeed  when  ear-rings 
are  removed  from  a  person,  then  certainly  the  state  of  one 
wearing  the  ear-rings  is  destroyed. 

uiltnid —  oamanr,  vigamah  naiah,  TB. 


s  ififjnft;  ~  B2,  T2,  Mi. 


THIRD  ADHYAYA 


379 


[32] 

*  dq  mrnm  *{qfii  I 

qqi  q*S*Tr*m  *  SStsfq  ^5ffe  II 

Just  as  the  association  of  pot  with  ether  cannot  stand 
logical  examination  and  hence  is  unreal,  so  also  the  associa¬ 
tion  of  the  'eight  factors’  to  you,  who  are  of  the  nature  of 
pure  consciousness,  does  not  hear  logical  scrutiny,  and 
hence  is  unreal.  And  for  this  reason  also,  you  do  not 
proceed  to  the  other  world  by  being  associated  with  the 
eight  factors.1 

I.  lingaghatilah  —  pm  aril  is}  ah ,  IB. 

The  word  lingo  which  signifies  the  ‘subtle  body’,  conveys  the 
sense  of ‘eight  factors’ also.  See  S&,  III,  19. 

[33] 

ww  *  w  qfciqrctofq  i 

As  the  ether  is  devoid  of  parts,  the  pot  is  not  associated 
with  a  part  of  the  ether.  Nor  does  the  pot  delimit  the 
whole  of  ether,  as  otherwise  there  would  arise  the  contin¬ 
gency  of  the  absence  of  ether  (outside  the  pot). 

I.  34  ] 

wnwwn'rfHwf  3*  fir  w  i 

^  ^  qw  3^q  n 

As  the  supreme  self  is  partless,  the  ‘eight  factors'  do 
not  delimit  its  part.  Nor  is  the  ‘eight  factors’  capable  of 
delimiting  the  whole  of  the  supreme  self. 


380 


SAM  KS  ERAS'  ARJRAKA 


[  35  ] 

W  qw  qqft  #q<rcT  l 

=f  >#35^^  jt  ^  3$$*?  it  • 

Tf  the  whole  of  the  supreme  self  is  delimited  by  the 
‘eight  factors’  and  (thereby  it)  becomes  the  individual  soul, 
then  there  cannot  be  God  and  also  the  group  of  other 
individual  souls. 


[36] 

mA  Pht  fl$^FiTq?rfa  ^  3*ir  n 

Hence  the  relation  of  preceptor  and  disciple  will  not 
exist;  and  the  distinction  of  liberation  and  bondage  would 
not  hold  good.  (Moreover)  the  Upanisads  would  clearly 
become  futile  in  the  absence  of  the  preceptor  and  disciple- 

l  37  ] 


3  SfRqtsri  sqqfafli:  q^f^i  I 

fq^m  ^i?qqq£q  mi  qRqsfcqs  n 

( 

Hence,  like  the  relation  of  pot  to  ether,  the  relation 
of  the  '  eight  factors  ’  to  the  supreme  self  is  not  reasonable 
and  (hence)  it  is  not  real.  So  the  association  of  the  ‘eight 
factors’  (with  the  supreme  self  )  is  non-real. 

pnrikalpitam  —  nn  paramo  >  I  ham,  AR. 

|  38  1 

q;q*r^qqftm  *  tiq  i 


THIRD  ADHYATA 


379 


[132] 

q  3*1^9  i%3^?5  vmm\  a#?*:  i 

qqm  q*iT  TO««n«m*  =r  d^sfa  qsffa  n 

Just  as  the  association  of  pot  with  ether  cannot  stand 
logical  examination  and  hence  is  unreal,  so  also  the  associa¬ 
tion  of  the  ‘eight  factors’  to  you,  who  are  of  the  nature  of 
pure  consciousness,  does  not  hear  logical  scrutiny,  and 
hence  is  unreal.  And  for  this  reason  also,  you  do  not 
proceed  to  the  other  world  by  being  associated  with  the 
eight  factors.1 

I.  lingaghatilah  — jmravi  Sis  tali,  IB. 

The  word  linga  which  signifies  the  ‘subtle  body’,  conveys  the 
sense  of ‘eight  factors’ also.  See  S$ ',  III,  19. 


[33] 

As  the  ether  is  devoid  of  parts,  the  pot  is  not  associated 
with  a  part  of  the  ether.  Nor  does  the  pot  delimit  the 
whole  of  ether,  as  otherwise  there  would  arise  the  contin¬ 
gency  of  the  absence  of  ether  (outside  the  pot). 

|  34  ] 


q  3^*3  n 

As  the  supreme  self  is  partless,  the  ‘eight  factors’  do 
not  delimit  its  part.  Nor  is  the  ‘eight  factors’  capable  of 
delimiting  the  whole  of  the  supreme  sell  . 


THIRD  ADHYATA  38! 

In  this  way,  as  the  association  of  the  eight  factors  with 
your  (true)  nature  is  not  reasonable  without  avidya,  tlm 
movement  (of  consciousness  delimited  by  the  subtle  body) 
in  the  path  towards  the  other  world  is  fancied  by  your 
avidya  like  the  movement  (of  ether  delimited  by  pot). 

dat  Hpapaltipathani,  flat  —  {nuasathgamauam,  Til. 

1  39  | 

^  ssrfa  it 

By  superimposing  the  qualities  of  the  eight  factors  on 
the  self,  and  the  nature  of  the  self  (that  is,  consciousness) 
on  the  qualities  of  the  eight  factors,  and  similarly  fancying 
your  true  nature  and  your  eight  factors  to  be  one,  you, 
being  veiled  by  avidya  undergo  transmigration. 

vrajasi  —  samsaram  anubhavasi,  AT. 

The  view  of  mutual  superimposition  between  the  eight  factors  and 
the  self  is  based  on  the  following  bhasya  text 

rvarii  ahampralyayinam  aiesasvapraid rasakfini  pmtyagatmani  adhyasya 
lorn  cn  pralyagalmanam  sanwaksinmn  Indviparyayiiui  cntnhknraii&di.pi 
adhyasyal Adliya  salt  ha  sya. 

I  40  ] 

*  3mfq  qiq*rpr  m  tedi  h 

You,  bring  the  absolute  and  unitary  consciousness, 
always  remain  in  your  eminence  which  is  free  from  defects 
(such  as  agency,  etc.)-  Even  then,  without  the  knowledge 
(of  the  self )  arising  from  the  sentence  tat  tvam  a. si,  your 
true  nature  is  not  free  from  avidya  and  its  effrets. 

i.  paripu  t  nacid  /  asii'Tianah  —  paripUrnacaitanyaikasuiru  pah 

ii.  lu’i’/iltild  pniliyihridiia vidvd hiliri n'liiri/iitnld  J  II. 


332 


SAMK$EPAg  ARlRAKA 


[41  1 

3  m  sratfa.wrift  qfefqqqifa  fa  wrft  i 
w  ^  ni?<rifas?w  g*r  %wm  g^g  mm  n 

As  the  senses  always  have  external  things  as  their 
objects)  they  do  not  function  in  respect  of  your  self  Avidya 
is  beginningless  and  dense,  and  it  exceedingly  conceals  your 
true  nature.  Hence,  conditioned  by  the  eight  factors 
(falsely  created  by  avidya)  you  undergo  transmigration. 

i.  sahajam  —  anadisiddliam 

ii.  alimu  dhalamam  —  aUiayena  svasvarupaudrakam 

iii.  puramanuvrajasi  —  ptnopadhikagainanadisathsararh 

prdpnosi,  TB. 


[42] 

s  mm  i 

^  q^if^fq  sffaffas  n 

The  Upanisadic  text,  sa  samana1,  etc.,  propounds  the 
view  put  forth  so  far.  Hence,  let  there  never  arise  any 
thought  in  your  mind  that  what  has  been  said  is  merely 
conceived  by  me. 

1.  The  Upani$adic  text  .r a  samanah  sari  ubhau  lokau  aniiisatlcarati 
dhyayativa  lelayativa  (Bpli.,  IV,  iii,  7)  declares  that  the  self  being 
identified  with  intellect  undergoes  transmigration.  And  the  transmig¬ 
ration  of  the  self  is  attributable  to  its  identification  with  intellect,  and 
it  is  not  the  natural  state  of  the  self. 

[  43  J 

3^3^  ffat:  qfafcqri  ifafq  fawsig  i 

^qmgqifin  it 


in  JR/)  AD  HI' A  )  .1 


:ur; 

just  as  the  reflection  of'  the  sun  in  a  vessel  (filled)  with 
water  is  indeterminable,  so  also  the  reflection  of  the 
absolute  consciousness  in  the  eight  factors  is  indeterminable 
(either  as  sentient  or  insentient),  and  being  delimited,  it 
goes  to  the  other  world. 

citsadfiam  --  iidabhaxannm.  A!1. 

L  44  ] 

^  to  wiwtccir  gRmr  i 

Just  as  the  eight  factors1  .form  your  limiting  adjunct, 
the  insentient  power  well  known  as  avidyS  constitutes  the 
limiting  adjunct  of  God  who  is  all-pervasive-  And,  all 
this  is  well  known  from  the  Upani^ads.11 

1.  Sec  Stf  III,  Hi. 

2.  vide  S' vet.,  IV,  10. 


[  45  j 

d*ir  it 

Just  as  your  (true)  nature  (that  is,  consciousness), 
when  delimited  by  the  'eight  factors’  becomes  the  sense  of 
the  word  ‘individual  soul’,  so  also  the  pure  consciousness 
becomes  God  by  being  delimited  by  the  insentient  power 
(namely,  avidya). 

[46] 


1. 


3H4 


SAKi  K^HI'AS  ARI RAK  A 


According  to  (the  will  of)  God  whose  limiting  adjunct 
is  the  insentient  power  (that  is,  avidya),  the  consciousness 
associated  with  the  ‘eight  factors’  undergoes  transmigra¬ 
tion,  owing  to  its  avidya .  And  this  is  the  right  course 
(taught)  in  the  Upanisachs. 


I  47  ] 

f?  w  ^  n 

Being  controlled  by  the  all-pervasive  God,  you  move 
along,  groaning,  in  the  path,  of  the  other  world,  like  a 
cart  (which  moves  along,  creaking).  And  the  cart, 
being  dependent,  does  not  go  by  itself;  but  by  being 
directed  by  the  driver. 

This  verse  is  based  cm  the  Brhada  ranyaka  text,  IV,  iii,  33. 

[48  j 

The  individual  soul  which  is  delimited  by  the  ‘eight 
factors’  and  dependent  on  them  and  whose  form  is  identical 
with  the  reflected  image  of  the  pure  consciousness  in  the 
eight  factors,  experiences  the  result  of  his  actions  in  the 
heaven  and  in  the  hell,  and  is  again  born  in  this  world. 

puraUintiiiciimibltavibhiinuivapuh  —  cimiibhuli  ciddb/iasalj 

ladiibhinnasvarupo  jivali,  SB. 

ydtandbhuii  —  narakabhu  man,  TB. 


[  49  J 

wanRfcr  n  i 

*W*T  II 

The  individual  soul  goes  to  heaven  or  hell  according 
to  his  meritorious  or  sinful  deeds,  exhausts  those 
deeds  by  experiencing  their  result  and  again  owing  to 
avidya  descends  to  the  earth. 

This  verse  is  based  on  the  Chanilogya  text,  V,  x,  7. 

4  50  I 

qft  i\  qsqsnri  im  $r§$4t:  i 

g  for  qfaforasifi  n 

Or  else,  the  aspirant  who  aspires  for  enjoyment  (in 
the  world  of  Hirarjyagarbha)  reaches  the  abode  of  Hira^ya- 
garbha  by  performing  sacrifice  and  meditative  worship  (on 
jtf^upa-Brahman) .  Ignorant  as  he  is,  he  again  undergoes 
transmigration  after  the  expiry  of  the  present  cosmic  age. 

This  verse  is  based  upon  the  following  Upani$adic  text  — 
imam  mdnavam  avartam  ndvartante ,  Cliand.,  IV,  xv,  6. 

[51  j 

m  wrcwffi:  qR5^  aq&spwri:  i 

Or  else,  the  individual  soul  who  attains  the  knowledge 
of  the  supreme  self  (in  the  world  of  Hiraijyagarbha)  is 
freed  from  all  bondage.  And  this  is  (known  as)  ‘gradual 
liberation’  propounded  in  the  Upani$ads  of  all  the  Vedic 
recensions  and  it  is  quite  reasonable- 


49 


SAMKSEPAgARl  hAh<. 


m 


If  the  individual  soul  who  reaches  the  world  of  Hiranyagarbha 
pursues  the  Vcdantie  study,  reasoning,  and  meditation  there,  then  he 
is  liberated  along  with  Hiraijyagarbha  at  the  time  of  cosmic  dissolution. 
This  is  known  as  krama-mukti  or  gradual  liberation. 

I.  52  j 

Those  who  do  not  perform  cither  sacrifice  or  worship, 
and,  on  that  account)  do  not  proceed  (after  death)  along 
the  path  of  the  gods  or  the  manes  are  born  as  lower 
animals  in  this  world, 

This  verse  is  based  on  the  Chandogya  text,  V,  x,  U,  which 
is  discussed  by  Sri  Sankara  in  his  bhasya  on  BS,  III,  1,  7. 

For  details  regarding  devayana  and  pitryana  see  Chand.,  V,  x,  8 

[53] 

fTORfR  ^  II 

Alas!  you,  who  desire  enjoyment  (here  and  hereafter) 
and  who  are  ignorant,  have  undergone  numerous  transmi¬ 
grations.  And  with  a  mind  free  from  desire,  you  pursud  , 
the  means  to  liberation  in  this  spiritual  birth. 

MEANS  TO  LIBERATION 

[54] 

q^iR*  qurniTO*  i 

RIRfft  q^  II 


1.  —  P2. 


THIRD  ADHTAYA 


387 


Being  devoted  to  God  and  possessing  control  of  the  mind 
and  the  external  senses,  you  pursue  Vedantic  study,  etc., 
relating  to  the  self.  By  this  alone,  you  (shall)  realize  the 
transcendental  state  of  the  supreme  self. 

[  55  1 

^  m  sffwfijdisfcr  m  ii 

Just  as  there  is  no  happiness  to  a  person  whose  head  is 
scorched  by  the  burning  fire  except  from  cool  water,  so 
also,  if  you  do  not  realize  the  supreme  status  of  Vi$iju,  alas  ! 
there  is  no  happiness  to  you  whose  mind  is  tormented  by 
the  flame  of  fire  in  the  form  of  the  misery  (of  transmigra¬ 
tion)- 


[56] 

ft*#  i 

Thus  knowing  the  insuperable  three- fold  misery  which 
has  tvidya  as  its  root-cause,  you  pursue  the  means  to  the 
true  knowledge  of  your  nature  which  is  (identical  with) 
the  supreme  self,  which  is  self-luminous,  highest  bliss,  part¬ 
less,  free  from  any  defect,  absolutely  real,  eternal,  and  free 
from  any  association  with  the  group  of  (objects  characte¬ 
rized  by_)  duality.  And,  you  give  up  all  the  attachment  to 
the  worldly  objects. 


nirbandham  —  sukhasddhanatvd bhiniuei am ,  TB. 

SS  takes  the  word  nirbandha  to  mean  nitaram  ibandhakam- 
Hilt  the  meaning  given  by  TB  seems  to  bp  more  acceptable. 


388 


SAMK$EPAS  ARI RA  h'A 


CLARIFICATION  OF  THE  SENSES  OF  THE 
TERMS  TAT  AND  TV  AM 

[57] 

3*1  3W  5?fa- 

tlrfi  q^t  qf?W»T^ 
qiqqs^  ^  ii 

When  the  preceptor  .concluded  by  saying  so,  the 
disciple,  prompted  by  the  desire  to  know  (the  secondary 
senses  of  the  terms  tat  and  tvam)  enquires  about  the  second¬ 
ary  senses  conveyed  by  the  terms  tat  and  tvam  ;  for,  when 
renunciation  (from  worldly  enjoyment)  becomes  intense 
the  wise  ascetic  considers  the  great  misery  of  transmigration 
to  be  a  blazing  fire  on  his  head. 

1.  laltuariiiabdanigadyalaksyavisayah  —  ta.Uvamiabdabh.yam  nigadyah 
pratipadyah  yah  lakfyavisayah  laksyapadS rthah,  TB. 

[5b] 

1*r4  xq*?fq  $  spa 

wiffosF* 

IH  qumRRd  sri^ii 

Even  before  (examining  the  nature  of  transmigration), 
abnegation  from  (enjoyment  of)  worldly  objects  ,has  arisen 
to  me  from  the  worship  of  Lord  Visiju  by  the  performance 
of  sacrifices  without  any  expectation  of  fruit.  t But  alter 
investigating  the  nature  of  transmigration,  it  (that  is, 


468 


SAM  ICS  EP A  S’  A  R  /  R  A  K A 


Hence  ‘knowledge’  which  is  (really)  absolute,  is  not 
the  result  of  any  proof,  in  view  of  its  being  not  an  object. 
When  such  is  the  case,  it  can  never  be  held  that  knowledge 
is  the  result  of  a  proof,  and  being  related  to  the  universe,  it 
manifests  it. 


[  238  ] 

As  in  the  case  of  the  erroneous  perception  of  shell  as 
silver,  it  is  experienced  that  both  (the  self  and  matter)  are 
mutually  superimposed.  Hence,  let  there  be  the  mutual 
superimposition  of  the  self  and  matter  always  (that  is,  till 
avidya  exists). 


[  239  ] 

qrfr^qnqfcq- 

The  designation  of  ‘substrate’  ( adhisthdna )  is  well- 
established  not  in  the  substance  that  serves  as  the  locus 
adhara )  of  the  superimposed  object,  but  in  the  substance 
that  is  the  object  of  avidya  with  its  product.  Hence  the 
great  hasty  view,  owing  to  conceit  of  scholarship  of  pervert¬ 
ed  men  of  utter  ignorance,  is  improper  -  the  view,  namely, 
acceptance  of  the  mutual  superimposition  is  open  to  the 
objection  that  this  world,  being  devoid  of  a  substratum, 
would  become  a  void. 


This  verse  appears  in  the  first  ndhyaya  of  this  work.  See  Stf,  I,  31. 


THIRD  ADI  IT  A  TA 


4G9 


[  240] 

q^fe  rr:  qfeqRr  n 

In  accordance  with  the  three-fold  mental  states  of  men, 
namely,  lower,  intermediate,  and  higher,  there  is  the 
assumption  of  the  theory  of  transformation,  (the  theory  of 
transfiguration,  and  the  notion  of  negation  which  refers  to 
the  realization  of  the  self),  (The  theory  of  transfiguration 
is  two-fold  as  the  notion  of)  the  existence  of  many  indivi¬ 
dual  souls,  and  the  existence  of  avidya  in  the  supreme  self. 1 

One  who  adopts  the  theory  of  transfiguration  holds  a  two-fold 
notion  according  to  his  mental  state.  One  is,  that  there  are  many 
individual  souls  longing  for  liberation,  And  the  other  notion  is  that, 
the  supreme  self  alone  attains  the  state  of  the  individual  soul  owing  to 
avidya  superimposed  on  it.  Thus  th«re  is  only  one  individual  soul. 

For  further  details  see  Stf ,  II,  81  if.  The  translation  follows  TB. 

[241] 

ihwrth  sqfwr^qkfq  rrsi:  i 

qqR^q  ftsrrflraq  fqRT  ^  ft  srnsqqifcr  n 

The  Upani-jadic  sentences,  the  sutras  of  Badarayana, 
and  the  words  of  £>rl  Sankara  who  is  the  expert  in  deter¬ 
mining  the  import  of  these  two,  would  never  become 
appropriate  without  the  three  stages  mentioned  in  respect 
of  the  three  points  of  view. 

This  verse  occurs  in  the  second  adhya y  i  of  this  work.  See  Stf,  II,  93. 

[  242  ] 

qq  TrqfRt  it 


470 


SA  id  KS  EP  A  $  API R  AKA 


The  three  points  of  view,  set  forth  previously,  are  with 
reference  to  a  single  person.  Keeping  this  in  view,  we 
interpret  the  Upani^adic  texts  and  the  sutras  of  Badarayana. 

[  243  ] 

<mqfd  ^  foferrjq  I 

Following  the  theory  of  transformation  and  the  two¬ 
fold  notion  of  transfiguration  mentioned  in  the  Upanisads 
and  keeping  in  view  the  mental  state  of  the  aspirant,  the 
pre-eminent  and  wise  sage  (Badarayana)  composed  the 
Brahma-sulra. 

STATUS  OF  SCRIPTURE 

[  244  ] 

qft  qfoife^qi  fafg-qnfssj  ^  *qrr- 
£dfd  dg  d^Tdl  Idfa:  | 

df  dlddl  Wl^ERr  II 

If  the  universe  is  the  transformation  or  the  trans¬ 
figuration  of  the  self,  then  indeed,  there  arises  contradiction 
to  the  self-validity  of  the  scripture.  In  our  system,  its  self¬ 
validity  based  on  its  impersonal  origin,  does  not  fit  in,  if  it 
is  produced. 

[  245  ] 

dWSdfadfdd?  ssqdtar  d^idf 

sfd  fdddfd  fd9$fe- 

dft  ddfd  d  fd^dldlfd  fd^ll 


a .  ^qi —  IF>. 


THIRD  ADI  IT  AT  A 


471 


If  the  universe  is  the  creation  of  the  self,  then  there 
arises  the  objection  that  (as  the  scripture  which  is  a  part  of 
the  universe,  is  not  self-valid),  the  view  of  Ka^ada  (namely , 
the  scripture  has  only  extrinsic  validity)  should  be  assumed; 
or,  the  materialistic  stand-point  (namely,  the  scripture  is 
not  valid)  should  be  inevitably  accepted.  If  the  universe  is 
not  the  creation  of  self,  then  it  is  real,  (and  hence  the  Advaitic 
view  that  everything  apart  from  the  self  is  indeterminable 
does  not  hold  good). 

[  246  ] 

[The  Advaitin  replies  :] 

As  the  objection  equally  applies  to  the  views  of  both 
the  Mlmamsakas,  how  is  it  raised  only  against  our  view. 
The  words  are  significative  of  their  senses  only  when  they 
(that  is,  the  words)  are  known;  but,  knowledge  is  accepted 
to  be  momentary. 

The  words  convey  their  senses  only  when  they  (that  is,  the  words) 
are  known.  Hence  the  aspect  of  signification  present  in  the  words  is 
produced  by  the  knowledge  of  the  words.  But,  as  knowledge  is 
momentry,  the  aspect  of  signification  present  in  the  words  also  is 
momentary.  And  this  leads  to  the  momentariness  of  the  Veda 
itself. 

[  247  ] 

Tfdfad  df^T'df  II 


472 


SAM  KSEPAgARl  RAKA 


i-uTli.c  ,;groups  of  words  signify  their  senses , by;  depeiiding 
on  the  ’invariable  sequence  present  in  the  knowledge  of  the 
words.- nThUs,  the'  whole  scripture  becomes  momentary;  and 
hbvy.rdoes  itfSerVe  as  a  proof  ?  !;■;  r  nx'j  intqir  :u\i 

'THc'groups'iftf  words  placed  in  a  "particular 'order'  'constitute1  ■'  the 
Veda'.’ the  words  av  such  do  not'  have '  any  order.' '  Hence  the 
particular  order  pfMeh't’iri  the  knowledge  of  the  words  'accounts'  for' 
tilt  ordei‘  of  the  words '  that  constitute’  the1  Veda.  'As  knowledge"' is 
momentary,  the  particular  order  present  in  the(  words  also1  is  ''momen¬ 
tary.  And  this  leads  to  the  momentariness  of  the  Veda  itself. 


Ir- 


G  2,48,] 


: »' i !'  ’  1'  T” 


dTlH  I  i 

irr^efr^f 


3  ^  II  ■  „  n  I 

d  Jr  .<  If^thc  self  validity  of  ’the  scripture  is  accepted"  oh  the 
grbtirid 'that 'the  serrie'eonveyed  by  the  scripture'is  indepen¬ 
dent  of  human1  intellect,  then  this  ground  for  self-validity 

|  ,  *  1  .r  ■  r  ’  • .  1  ,  -  *  t  ^  , 

is  similar  when1  the  scripture  is  accepted  to  be  the  creation 
of  the  supreme  self  1 


{.  i,,o 


C  249  ] 


ft  33  sm:  prefer ' 

,!i 

vm  3  aw  fagraswqr 

qfrfi  n 


The  supreme  self,  like  , the  reciter  of  the  Veda,  ricites 
the  scripture  without  any  pre-meditation.  It  comes  out  of 
the  self  like  breaching,  arid  the  Upanisadic  text1  clearly  puts 
forth  this  view.  Hr 


3.  tffil—  :M,.  B>,  T,,fr,,  Tv 


THIRD  ADHYAYA 


473 


[  250] 

3[q 

^  W?qR^  I 

faqqfafa  fk  ^  ^r- 

%  ftqfa  *  =atq  n 

It  is  accepted  that  the  senses  arisen  from  the  past 
deeds  of  a  person  clearly  manifest  their  respective  objects 
by  being  independent  of  other  proofs.  Similarly  it  is 
accepted  in  the  case  of  the  scripture  also.  Hence  no  objec¬ 
tion  should  be  raised  by  you  against  our  view. 

It  might  be  said:  the  scripture  would  lose  its  self-validity,  if  it  is 
composed  by  a  person.  This  objection,  however,  is  wrong,  as  the 
sei  se-organs  which  are  produced  by  a  person  through  his  past  deeds, 
are  accepted  to  be  self-valid. 

vide:  svatah  sarvapramanandm  pramanyamiti  gamyatam, 

S'lnka-vd rlika,  II,  47. 

[251] 

qfa*rRfa  aa*a^*^  wm  lat:  i 
?fa  *3$  a;fo  w:  $as%- 

sm  m  siifta  mwi,  u 

If  you  think  that  as  numerous  V^dic  texts1  declare 
that  the  supreme  self  is  a  perceiver,  on  what  basis  it  is  not 
admitted  that  it  is  the  author  of  the  scripture  by  being  an 
intelligent  being,  then,  (it  is  said), ‘do  not  consider  so*. 
Why  ?  The  Upani$adic  texts  instruct  us  that  the  supreme 
self  is  devoid  of  any  sense-organ. 

1.  vide  Chdnd.  VI,  ii,  3. 

2.  vide:  Brh.,  Ill,  viii,  8 

GO 


474 


SAttK$EPAt>ARlRAKA 


[  252] 

Kit 

*\  3  wn^iq^oT  ii 

The  first  modification  of  the  insentient  power  (namely, 
avidya)  which  abides  in  the  pure  consciousness,  and  which, 
though  insentient,  acquires  the  character  of  sentience  owing 
to  its  superimposition  on  the  consciousness,  is  stated  to  be 
the  will  of  the  self  by  the  exponents  of  the  true  import  of 
the  Upani^adic  texts.  The  will  of  the  supreme  self  is  not 
the  modification  of  the  intellect  (as  in  the  case  of  the 
individual  soul). 


[  253  ] 


(Tf|  II 

[  The  Vaii>e§ika  contends  :  ]  — 

We  infer  that  the  significative  relation  of  every  word 
to  its  sense  is  formulated  by  an  individual  (that  is,  ISvara) 
like  that  of  the  words  clittha,  davittha,  etc.  Thus  on  the 
basis  of  this  illustration  which  exists  before  (making  the 
inference),  there  arises  the  inferential  cognition  1  And, 
is  there  anything  strange  about  this  ? 

1.  vimatah  Sabdarthasambandhah  sanketikah,  dnbddrthasambnndhatvat , 
ditlhadid abda  rthasambandhavat  iti  anumimi ma  hi. 

[254] 

m  swiur  qfafNft  i 


THIRD  ADHTATA 


475 


[The  view  of  the  Vai£e$ika  is  rejected]: 

Explain  how  it  is  inferred  on  the  basis  of  the  illustration, 
namely,  the  words  davittha,  etc-,  that  the  significative 
relation  of  the  words  cow,  etc.,  to  their  senses  is  formulated 
by  an  individual,  when  there  exists  the  sublating  proof 
(that  is,  the  knowledge  of  method  of  agreement  and 
difference)  which  is  indicated  by  the  beginningless  usage  of 
elders  1 

The  words  cow,  etc.,  signify  their  senses  only  when  those  words 
are  employed  with  reference  to  such  senses  by  elders.  If  not,  they  do 
not  signify  the  senses.  This  knowledge  of  method  of  agreement  and 
difference  subfiles  the  inferential  cognition  arrived  at  through  inference 
set  forth  in  the  previous  verse. 


[255] 

jfr?  fa  m  sr:  n 

Among  the  five  proofs  such  as  perception,  etc.,  which 
cognize  the  existent  objects,  there  is  no  proof  that  could 
establish  the  individual  (that  is,  Hvara)  who  is  said  to 
formulate  the  significative  relation  of  the  words  to  their 
senses-  Hence  in  your  (that  is,  in  the  Vai£e$ika)  system 
that  individual  has  become  similar  to  the  flower  of  the  sky 
because  of  its  non-apprehension. 

Hvara  as  the  formulator  of  the  significative  relation  of  the  words 
to  their  senses  is  not  known  through  perception;  nor  is  He  known  as 
such  through  inference  on  the  ground  mentioned  in  the  previous  verse. 
Since  Hvara  is  like  nothing  and  unlike  everything  we  perceive,  the 
proof  comparison  also  does  not  establish  God  as  the  formulator  of  the 
significative  relation  of  the  words  to  their  senses.  We  do  not  find 
any  scriptural  text  that  afiirms  God  as  of  the  above  nature.  Presump¬ 
tion  also  does  not  prove  God;  it  is  because  the  proof  presumption 
establishes  a  particular  object  without  which  something  known  or 


476  SAMK§EPA$  ARlRAKA 

heard  would  become  unintelligible.  Since  nothing  becomes  unintelligible 
without  Hvara  as  the  formulator  of  significative  relation  of  the  words 
to  their  senses,  the  latter  is  not  known  by  presumption. 

An  object  which  is  existent  should  come  within  the  scope  of  anyone 
of  the  above  five  proofs.  And  such  an  object,  owing  to  some  counterac¬ 
ting  factor  may  not  come  within  the  range  of  perception.  Its  absence 
then  is  known  through  the  proof  non-apprehension.  And  an  object 
which  does  not  come  within  the  range  of  any  of  the  above  five  proofs 
that  comprehend  the  existent  object,  is  an  absolute  nothing.  Here 
Hvara  as  the  formulator  of  the  significative  relation  of  their  words  to 
their  senses  does  not  come  within  the  range  of  any  of  the  five  proofs 
and  so  Bvara  as  such  is  an  absolute  nothing. 

[  25G  ] 

gfaasf*  ftqqt  *  wrofe  qrqRHt:  i 

If  the  object,  which  has  been  (previously)  perceived, 
does  not  (later)  come  within  the  scope  of  the  proofs  that 
cognize  the  existent  objects,  then  something  other  than 
non-existence  is  presumed  to  be  the  cause  of  its  non- 
apprehension. 

As  the  object  is  previously  perceived,  it  cannot  be  an  absolute 
nothing  like  horn  of  a  hare.  Hence  something  other  than  non-existencfe 
should  be  the  cause  of  its  non-apprehension. 

[  257  ] 

r  f|  fqqints^f 

—  Bi,  Mi,  Ti,  T2,  T3. 


THIRD  ADHTATA 


477 


The  absence  of  the  rise  of  five  proofs  in  the  case  of  a 
totally  non-existent  object,  is  the  cause  of  the  (knowledge 
of  the)  non-existence  of  the  object;  and,  wise  men  do  not 
accept  another  cause.  When  horn  is  not  found  in  the  hare, 
those  who  do  not  see  it,  do  not  seek  for  another  cause  to 
account  for  its  non-existence. 

Hence  li$vara  as  the  formulator  of  the  significative  relation  of  the 
words  to  their  senses  cannot  be  established. 

[258] 

How  can  Hvara,  being  unassisted,  formulate  the 
significative  relation  of  the  words  to  their  meanings,  by 
going  into  thousands  of  regions  which  are  uneven  and 
difficult  to  traverse. 

narah  -  naradrstanlanumitasya  narasamyamabhiprelya  esanara  ityuktam, 

SS. 

ekalah  -  ekaki,  AP. 

[  259  ] 

3ifq  ^  r  If  q<^fa  i 

srcfaw  qsj  w  RRRjfrq  $fcqft  mu  n 

Moreover,  as  there  is  no  word  significative  of  any  sense 
at  the  time  of  creation,  how  could  Hvara  without  pointing 
to  a  sense  by  a  word,  formulate  the  significative  relation  of 
the  words  to  their  senses? 


[  260] 

sfcqfd  ft  I 

h  ft  *ifq  ^  ii 


?.  q?  9=^1  —  B|. 


478 


SAM  K$EPAg  ARIRAfCA 


If  it  is  said  that  Hvara  formulates  the  significative 
relation  of  the  words  to  senses  by  gesture  (that  is,  by 
pointing  to  the  object  with  his  finger),  then  this  (also)  is 
highly  incompatible.  There  cannot  be  the  formulation,  by 
mere  gesture,  of  the  significative  relation  of  the  word  ‘cow’ 
(for  example)  to  its  sense  which  is  associated  with  thousands 
of  things  (such  as  limbs,  qualities,  activities,  and  generic 
attribute). 

[  261  ] 

=3  1%^  ^  I 

Moreover,  there  can  be  the  formulation  of  the  signi¬ 
ficative  relation  of  the  words  to  those  senses  which  are 
known  through  perception.  How  could  there  be  the  formu¬ 
lation  of  the  significative  relation  of  the  words  to  the  senses 
such  as  deities,  etc  ,  whose  nature  is  not  known  through 
perception. 

laukikamanam  -  pratyaks^m,  TB. 

[262  ] 

3lfq  =q  qgfSWJT  3^  SRR(  wA  f*l^  I 
3  m  ftqr  || 

[263  ] 

3  qi  aqi:  i 

q^rqq^qwifd  ftiroqfa  3  it 

[  264] 

qqft  iq3«Tsr:  m*l!ft3f3qw  W  I 
33  II 


THIRD  ADIIYAYA 


479 


Moreover  if  Hvara  has  formulated  the  significative 
relation  of  the  word  to  its  sense,  then  there  would  be  the 
recollection  of  Hvara  (when  using  the  words).  The  usage 
of  the  words  by  one  who  speaks  is  not  possible  without  the 
remembrance  of  the  author.  Wise  men  do  not  use  the 
terms  made  current  by  Panini1  and  Pingala®  without  remem¬ 
bering  them.  Hence  Lord  Siva,  the  Lord  of  the  universe, 
who  is  worshipped  by  the  great  sages  like  Kaijada  and  others, 
vAo  is  the  highest  of  the  intelligent  beings,  who  is  inferred 
on  the  strength  of  the  creation  of  earth,  .etc.,  and  who 
possesses  unlimited  powers  has  not  formulated  the  signi¬ 
ficative  relation  of  the  words  to  their  senses. 

1.  vrddhira daic,  Panini  -  Sutra,  I,  i,  1 

2.  dhid rixlri mitya dya  ,  SS. 

[  265  ] 

Moreover,  this  entire  universe  has  originated,  without 
any  previous  reflection,  from  the  son  of  Vasudeva  (that  is, 
Lord  Kr$na)  who  is  of  the  nature  of  unitary  consciousness 
which  is  devoid  of  origination  and  destruction  and  which  is 
(secondarily)  signified  by  the  Upani$ads  and  which 
transcends  both  speech  and  mind. 

anakadundubhih  -  vasudevah,  TB. 

[  266 ) 

qteqd  f fa  qf^^wgfa^  -| 


1  itffa  =3  -  Ml. 


480 


SA  a  ICS  EP  A  5 'ARIRAKA 


[The  Vai3e<jika  contends:] 

Indeed  it  is  observed  that  the  secular  sentences  are 
composed  by  the  intelligence  of  a  person.  Similarly  in  the 
case  of  scripture  also,  we  infer  thus:  the  sentences  of  the 
Upanisads  also  are  composed  by  the  intelligence  of  an 
individual,  like  the  sentences  composed  by  ordinary  men. 

[  267  ] 

^  i \  it 

If  it  is  said:  ‘  the  Vedic  text  is  not  capable  of  being  similar 
to  the  sentences  composed  by  the  intelligence  of  persons 
like  us;  and,  so  Lord  3iva  is  inferred  on  the  basis  of  the 
composition  of  the  scripture,  which  would  be  inexplicable 
in  the  absence  of  the  assumption  of  the  Lord  '  This 
(contention)  is  unsound;  for,  inference  cannot  become  the 
sublating  factor  of  the  Upanisads. 

vaidikaracana  balamisatah  -  vcdaracana  iiyatha  nupapaltya  ityarthah,  TB. 

[  268  ] 

*pf4  qraTqqidrgqi:!  ^  n 

One  text  declares  that  the  scripture  is  self-existing1 
and  another  states  that  the  scripture  is  like  breath  of  the 
supreme  self2  These  texts  immediately  supersede  the 
inference  that  the  scripture  is  the  conscious  creation  of  the 
lord.  If  not,  the  teachings  of  the  scriptrue  would  be 
contradicted. 

1.  parameslhi  brahmnno  brahma  svayambhu.  Brh.,  If,  vi, 

2.  asya  mahatn  bhutasya  nilvasitametadyadr ovedah ,  Brh.,  II,  iv,  10. 


THIRD  ADHTATA 


48 1 


C  269  ] 

w>  fnfom  fwsft  I 

3TRf%^f%f%  SR  nfH^F^T  II 

When  the  Upanigads1  declare  that  God  unintentionally 
creates,  protects  and  destroys  the  universe,  and  entering 
into  the  universe  controls  everything,  tell  me  how  could 
the  inference  that  God  intentionally  creates  the  scripture 
be  valid. 

1.  vide  :  Taitt,  III,  i,  1;  and  Brh.,  Ill,  vii,  1. 

[  270] 

iTRunft  I 

The  scripture  is  known  to  be  valid  only  when  it  is 
ascertained  that  it  is  uttered  by  a  trustworthy  person.  But 
only  when  it  is  ascertained  that  it  is  valid,  it  is  known  that 
it  is  uttered  by  a  trustworthy  person  (ISvara)-  Thus  there 
is  the  contingency  of  interdependence. 

[271] 

mm  ^  ^  n 

Hence  the  knowledge  arising  from  the  Vedic  texts 
should  be  accepted  as  intrinsically  known.1  And,  like 
its  apprehension,  it  is  really  intrinsically  produced,*  and 
not  otherwise  (that  is,  extrinsically) . 

1 .  prd ma  nyajna  nasya  svaprayuktatuarh  na  ma 
jflanasvarupagrahakapramdnadeva  gra hyatvam,  TB. 

2.  jndnotpa dakasa magrl ma  trajanyam,  AP. 

61 


482 


SAM  K$EFAg ARIRAKA 


[  272] 

*TRm  ^tEI  I 

Just  as  the  validity  of  the  knowledge  arising  from  the 
Vedic  texts  is  intrinsically  known  and  produced,  so  also,  its 
validity  in  manifesting  the  objects  also  is  intrinsic.  It  does 
not  require  any  other  factor  than  its  own  rise  in  manifesting 
the  objects. 

i.  pravpltau  - pravrttih  -  visayabhivyaktih 

ii.  samvide  -  visayabhivyaktilaksarinphalaya,  TB 

[  273  ] 

q<ilT  qfoi^  ql^qi^RI^  II 

What  the  scripture1  states,  namely,  the  rise  of  the 
universe  consisting  of  words  and  objects,  from  Lord  Vi$:pu 
is  similar  to  (His)  breathing,  is  true  in  the  light  of  what  is 
mentioned  so  far.  Hence  the  inference  of  personal  origin  of 
the  scripture  is  false. 

1,  vult:  Brh.,  II,  iv,  10. 

[  274] 

qRoiramdqHd:  qftq^urqfa  i 
^  =q  qsr-^fe  n 

Even  if  either  of  the  two  theories,  namely,  the  theory 
of  transformation  or  the  theory  of  transfiguration  is 
accepted,  there  is  not  even  a  trace  of  objection  against 
(the  self-validity  of)  the  scripture,  as  in  the  light  of  what 
has  been  said,  it  is  independent  (of  human  or  divine  intellect 
and  hence  self-valid). 


uSH-  qYwTVsft  —  Mi- 


—  Ti, 


THE  PRIMARY  AND  SECONDARY  SENSES 
OF  THE  TERMS  TAT  AND  TVAM 


[  275] 

3TTJftf|  aWT3f:  1 1 

Understand  the  four  senses  of  the  words  tat  by 
distinguishing  thus;  the  limiting  condition,  the  thing 
limited,  namely,  the  presence  of  the  self  in  it  and  the 
reflected  image  of  the  self,  and  the  self  that  remains  as  the 
original. 


[276  ] 

<w\  f^sfa  ^4  i 

Similarly  the  four  senses  of  the  word  tvam  should  be 
carefully  distinguished  thus:  the  intellect  (that  is,  the 
limiting  condition),  the  presence  of  the  self  in  it,  the  self 
that  remains  as  the  original,  and  the  reflected  image  of  the 

sell. 


[  277  ] 

• 

The  beginningless  avidya  is  the  limiting  condition;  and 
the  presence  of  the  self  in  avidya  is  the  criterion  for 
viewing  the  self  as  God.  And  the  self  present  in  avidya  is 
the  reflected  image  (and  it  is  God).  The  pure  self  is  stated 
to  be  the  original. 


484 


SAtoK$EPAa>  ariraka 


Avidyd,  the  presence  of  the  self  in  avidyd,  and  the  reflected  image 
of  the  self  in  avidyd — all  these  three  are  the  primary  senses  of  the  word 
tat.  The  self  that  serves  as  the  original  is  the  secondary  sense  of  the 
word  tat. 


[278] 

Similarly,  in  the  senses  of  the  word  tvam,  the  limiting 
condition  is  the  intellect;  the  presence  of  the  self  in  it  is  the 
criterion  for  viewing  the  self  as  jiva-  And  the  self  present 
in  intellect  is  the  reflected  image  (and  it  is  jiva)-  The  self 
unassociatcd  with  intellect  is  stated  to  be  the  original.1 

1.  The  self  that  transcends  the  intellect  is  the  original. 

[  279] 

gqiftRT  fasqi  | 

qm  ^qr  jr:  stqqttqfa  n 

Understand  that  the  limited  thing  along  with  its  limiting 
condition  is  completely  false.  In  the  reflected  image  of  the 
self  also,  a  part  is  false1.  But  the  original  self,  in  its  entirety, 
is  real. 

1.  The  reflected  image  of  the  self  consists  of  two  elements  s  the 
spiritual  element  and  the  phemomenal  element,  namely,  avidyd  or 
intellect.  The  phemomenal  element  is  false. 

[  280] 


v  nmtwsr  —  P2. 


THIRD  ADHYAYA 


485 


In  the  four  factors,  namely,  the  vessel  filled  with 
water,  the  presence  of  the  sun  in  it,  the  reflected  image  of 
the  sun  in  it,  and  the  sun  remaining  outside,  that  is,  in  the 
sky,  the  shining  sun  remaining  in  the  sky  cannot  be  denied. 

[281] 

St  ^  i 

m  q*  m  gsswfa  f*ror  ftiTqjpsrqqfc  n 

Similarly,  in  the  four  factors,  namely,  the  intellect, 
the  presence  of  the  self  in  the  intellect,  the  reflected  image 
of  the  self  in  it,  and  the  supreme  self  remaining  pure  out¬ 
side  the  intellect,  the  latter  cannot  be  rejected  even  by  the 
keenest  of  intellects. 

puram  -  antahkarnalaksanam,  TB. 

[  282] 

*  wq  qjfafistqqtn:  wife?:  i 

mi  fltrqqtw  n 

There  is  no  relation  of  the  qualities  of  real  nature  to 
the  self  even  through  a  limiting  adjunct.  And  the  possibi¬ 
lity  of  intrinsic  relation  of  qualities  to  the  self  is  far  removed. 

This  verse  occurs  previously  in  this  chapter.  See  Stf,  III,  146. 

[  283  ] 

vfo  flirqqw^  q^;  si«rTfqqi^r  ^  i 
tTfltsfq  fl^qi§;q^qdts?q^qi7gi  $sqfqj  ^  !jqq^  II 

It  has  been  explained  before  that  the  import  of  the 
Upanigadic  sentence  is  the  supreme  partless  self.  For  this 
reason  also,  it  is  impossible  to  attribute  any  form  other  than 
the  absolute  nature  to  the  supreme  self. 


486 


SAtiK$EPAg  ARt  RAKA 


[  284  ] 

(RSai  I 

The  Upani$adic  texts  belonging  to  every  branch  of 
Veda  and  conveying  the  qualified  self  have  as  their  import 
something  the  and  not  their  primary  sense  (namely,  the 
qualified  self).  When  a  text  which  does  not  have  as  its 
import  the  primary  sense  it  conveys  comes  into  conflict 
with  the  text  which  has  as  its  import  the  sense  it  signifies, 
then  the  former  is  a  recommendatory  passage. 

[  285  ] 

fk  3  5TCHT3JF  9^1  1 1 

When  recommendatory  passages  come  into  conflict 
with  the  injunctive  texts,  then  they  do  not  restrict  the  sense 
of  the  injunctive  texts.  But  their  sense  is  so  admitted  that 
they  would  be  consistent  with  the  import  of  the  injunctive 
texts. 

alambanam  -  vifayah,  TB. 


[286] 

w  11 

Just  as  the  sentence  which  enjoins  wild  sesamum  and 
which  is  read  in  the  context  of  the  injuction  of  the  goat’s 
milk,  discards  its  primary  sense,  owing  to  the  fear  of  con. 
tradiction  with  the  principal  religious  rite,  and  is  (hence) 


ThIrd  adhTata 


held  as  the  recommendatory  passage,  (so  also  the  Upani$a- 
dic  texts  conveying  the  qualified  self  should  be  held  as 
recommendatory  passages). 

With  reference  to  the  Agnihotra  rite  the  Vedic  text  reads : 

jartilayavagva  juhuyat,  gavidhukayavagva  juhuyat,  na  gramyan  paiun 
hinasti,  na  aranyan. 

The  oblation  to  the  Agnihotra  rite  may  be  gruel  made  from 
wild  sesamum  or  wild  wheat.  This  does  not  imvolve  injury  to 
the  domesticated  or  the  forest  animal. 

The  Vedic  text  further  proceeds  to  say  : 

atho  khalvahuh  -  anahutirvai  jartila  s'ca  gavidhuka  Sea,  ajaksirena  jahoti. 
Wild  sesamum  and  wild  wheat  are  not  to  be  offered  as  oblations.  One 
should  offer  goat’s  milk  as  the  oblation. 

The  import  of  the  entire  Vedic  passage  is  this :  the  gruel  made 
from  wild  sesamum  or  wild  wheat  is  prescribed  as  an  offering  in  the 
Agnihotra  rite.  In  the  same  way  the  goat’s  milk  also  is  prescribed 
as  an  oblation. 

Now  it  is  contended  that  one  can  offer  either  goat’s  milk  or 
gruel  made  from  wild  sesamum  or  wild  wheat  as  oblation  in  the 
Agnihotra  rite.  This  contention  is  wrong.  It  is  because  the  Vedic 
text  after  enjoining  gruel  made  from  wild  sesamum  or  wild  wheat 
immediately  prohibits  the  use  of  wild  sesamum  or  wild  wheat  in  the 
Agnihotra  rite  and  then  prescribes  goat’s  milk  as  an  offering. 

Since  wild  sesamum  and  wild  whe»t  are  prohibited,  the 
injunctive  text  which  prescribes  goat’s  milke  must  be  taken  as  primary. 
And,  the  Vedic  text  prescribing  the  gruel  made  from  wild  sesamum 
and  wild  wheat  must  be  understood  as  recommendatory  praising 
goat’s  milk  as  the  best  offering  in  the  Agnihotra  rite. 


For  details  See  Jaimini  Sutra,  X,  VIII,  4/7. 


488 


SAJtfK?  EPAg  A  RtRAKA 


[287] 

a^g  *ifa  ^  3T  vm  11 

When  such  is  the  case,  here  in  the  Vedanta  also  let  the 
texts  which  convey  the  qualified  self  and  which  are  in  con¬ 
flict  with  the  texts  that  convey  the  partless  self,  be  recom. 
xnendatory  passages.  Or  else,  let  those  texts  primarily 
convey  the  qualifications  of  the  self  that  are  brought  about 
by  avidya . 


[  288] 

3rew  a?qm*P»f!fi^rats?«raT  aifa  ii 

The  Upanisadic  text  dealing  with  the  qualified  self 
primarily  conveys  it  by  taking  into  account  the  superimpos¬ 
ed  qualities.  If  the  qualities  are  real,  then  the  text  [like 
tat  tvam  asi )  which  has  as  its  import  the  sense  it  conveys 
(namely,  the  partless  self)  would  be  contradicted  for  no 
valid  reason. 

[289  ] 

ffcf^qraaftfgars^a:  sfawfa  i 

From  the  passages  referring  to  the  worship  of  the 
supreme  self,  it  is  known  that  the  supreme  self  is  of  the 
form  of  smell  and  taste.1  And  those  forms  also  are  based 
on  the  qualities  that  are  fancied 

vide  :  saroagandhah  sarvarasah,  Chdnd.,  Ill,  xiv,  2. 


i.  vfft  ffcmt  —  B2. 


WlkD  adhtAta 


489 


[290] 

R  <13  flgaTqiqqfq^ftfiiTRi:  i 

^iwrsRfag  q^ftqfegq^qqfa^  n 

On  the  basis  of  conflict  with  the  texts  that  convey  the 
qualified  self,  it  is  not  desirable  to  make  the  text  discard  its 
primary  sense,  the  text  whose  import  is  the  partless  self  and 
the  syntactical  relation  of  whose  words  is  more  powerful. 

[291] 

RWTRq^piqq'lftftRqfaR  ^RRq^T 

qiqqiRtafq  qq  n 

By  examining  the  import  of  the  Upanisadic  texts  and 
by  reasoning,  you  understand  that  the  secondary  sense  of 
the  term  tat  which  is  related  to  the  sense  of  the  sentence 
(tat  tvam  asi)  and  which  is  self-luminous,  free  from  duality 
and  nescience,  existent,  eternal,  inward,  free  from  any 
colour,  smell,  or  taste  and  which  is  present  in  the  primary 
sense  of  the  term  tat  is  the  true  nature  of  Lord  Vi§^u. 

[  292] 

w^'riR^qRsqq  i 

3TRRRRR  RiRU  p  ftqiRflW  q^ST  %\l  II 

The  true  nature  of  Lord  Visnu  is  free  from  sound, 
touch,  colour,  change,  and  taste.  Similarly  it  is  eternal,  free 
from  smell,  beginningless,  infinite,  immutable,  and  it  trans¬ 
cends  Hiraijyagarbha.1  And  this  true  nature  of  Vis^u 
should  be  realized. 

1.  rnahatah  -  samos tibuddhirupahiranvagarbhSt,  SS. 

62 


480 


SA  Air  KS  EPA  S' A  RItiAK A 


This  verse,  with  slight  modification  in  the  last  quarter,  is  taken 
from  the  Kathopanisad,  I,  iii,  15.  The  last  quarter  in  the  original 
text  is  : 

nicayya  tanmrtyumukhat  pramucyale.  The  word  nicayya  is  interpreted 
by  3ri  Sankara  as  avagamya. 

[  293  ] 

Rt*q  qfidlt  ^  fqfqq  m*  ^  ^  I 

?JsqqR  3$;  qipqif  ^Fiiqrqq^  II 

It  has  been  explained  to  me  (by  the  sages),  that  the 
individual  soul,  the  phenomenal  world  and  God  are  (in 
essence)  the  supreme  self.  This  Upanisadic  text  states  that 
the  individual  soul,  God,  and  the  created  universe  arc  (in 
essence)  the  pure  self. 

The  first  half  of  this  verse  is  taken  from  $  vet.  I,  1  2. 

[294] 

^  ^  qfd:  qitejr  ft  q^smHiT  i 
»3rat  *mqrqqfwrdq  Rfaqfd  n 

By  the  knowledge  of  the  senses  of  the  words  you  do  not 
attain  the  ultimate  purpose,  as  the  knowledge  of  the  mean¬ 
ings  of  the  words  is  only  mediate.  Hence  the  knowledge 
that  would  annihilate  avidya  will  arise  only  from  the  major 
texts. 

Avidya  relates  to  the  identity  of  the  inner  self  and  the  supreme 
self.  It  will  therefore  be  removed  only  by  the  direct  knowledge  of  the 
identity  of  the  inner  self  and  the  supreme  self.  Such  a  knowledge 
arises  from  the  major  texts  only. 

[  295  ] 

wqpiwfcti  =q  i 

^qifqqr  qi^rr  g^qftR  11 


1.  IrTT  —  Ml,  rIY 
i.  ?rat  —  B^. 


THIRD  ADHTA  YA 


49  i 


The  major  texts  which  occur  in  the  Upanisad  portion 
of  one’s  own  recension  of  the  Vedas,  which  are  studied  in 
accordance  with  the  rules  prescribed  for  the  study  of  one’s 
own  Veda  and  which  are  kept  in  mind  with  faith,  when 
instructed  by  a  preceptor  who  is  an  ascetic  and  who  has 
realized  the  self,  are  the  direct  cause  of  liberation. 

[  296  ] 

The  Upanisadic  text  declares  that  ‘one  who  has  not 
studied  the  Veda  does  not  realize  the  absolute  self’-1  How 
would  this  text  be  reasonable  if  it  is  otherwise  (that  is,  if  the 
knowledge  of  the  self  can  be  had  even  without  the  major 
texts).  And  how  could  the  other  text®  zealously  characte¬ 
rize  the  self  with  the  qualification  that  it  could  be  known 
only  from  the  Upanisads. 

1.  navedavinmanule  lath  brhanUim,  a  lliydyanijry panisad,  4. 

2.  tain  tvaupanisadaiii  purusam  prcchami,  Brit,,  III,  ix,  26. 

[  297  ] 

*  StfA  II 

Philosophers  declare  the  major  texts  to  be  ‘Upanisad’ 
and  ‘Veda’  As  it  cannot  be  said  that  the  realization  of 
the  onenees  of  the  self  that  leads  to  ultimate  goal  can  be 
had  even  without  these  major  texts,  they  are  termed 
‘  Upanisad  ’  and  ‘  Veda’  with  grea.t  faith. 


492 


SAM  K$ EPAg  A  RIRA  KA 


[  298] 

gfdftrcfa  %*Jdm  I 
ftf  Sufaftft?  dfcft  ^T^qm%  II 

Hence  let  the  words  ‘Upanisad’  and  ‘Veda’  present  in 
the  tfruti  texts  be  employed  to  signify  this  major  texts.  As 
all  the  other  statements  uttered  along  with  the  major  text 
are  subsidiary  to  the  latter,  they  are  also  designated  by  the 
words  ‘  Upanisad  ’  and  ‘  Veda  ’ 

vide  the  Upanisadic  texts  cited  in  the  notes  on  S S',  III,  296. 

vide  also  : 

vedyate  jfldpyate’nena  param  brahma  iti  vedah  mahavakyarn, 
ladevopanayati  almanam  brahmatvena  ityupanisad.  S. 

[299  ] 

fqsrr  stows  m 

falSf  II 

Tbo  sentence  ‘He  has  realized  the  oneness  of  the 
self,1  which  occurs  in  the  Chandogyo' panipad,  follow¬ 
ing  the  instruction  of  the  father  in  the  form  ‘Thou  art 
that’,8  is  the  characteristic  mark  indicating  the  (follow¬ 
ing)  sense.  The  words  ‘Upanisad’  and  ‘Veda’  are  ever 
significative  of  the  major  texts.  As  all  the  sentences  other 
than  the  ‘major  texts’  are  proximate  (by  being  subsidiary) 
to  the  latter,  they  are  also  designated  by  the  words 
‘Upanisad’  and  ‘Veda’- 


THIRD  ADHYAYA 


493 


1.  laddhasya  vijajilau,  Clitind.,  VI,  xvi,  3. 

2.  tat  tvarn  asi,  C/iand,  VI,  ix,  4 

[  300  ] 

sqftqsw  qwrcqr#:  i 

q^qqq  qsiftft  q§^  ftq^wqq^q  g  n 

The  word  Upani?ad  signifies  the  knowledge  of  the  sup¬ 
reme  self  by  its  natural  significative  power;  and  it  refers  to 
the  major-texts  by  figuratively  identifying  the  knowledge 
of  the  self  (with  the  major-texts).  In  view  of  the  proximity 
(of  the  major.texts  to  the  knowledge  of  the  self),  (it  has 
been  previously  said1  that)  the  word  ‘Upanisad’  primarily 
conveys  the  major  texts. 

(1)  See  VS\  III,  298. 


[301] 

sqlro^rofafaKwh  feqfdqsiftft  3^qqq  i 
aqftq^  qqqfi^  q^fir  fqq^  11 

The  knowledge  of  the  self  is  conveyed  by  the  word 
‘  Upanisad  ’  In  scripture  and  in  ordinary  experience,  the 
word  is  used  primarily  in  respect  of  the  major  texts,  which 
are  proximate  (to  the  knowledge  of  the  self  by  being  its 
cause)  j  and  secondarily  with  reference  to  the  other  texts 
subsidiary  to  the  major  texts. 

[  302  ] 

qqt  q^qiqqq  w  pt  fqqf^qwq  %  i 
h  ^q  Mm?  Mqftw  to  11 


S.  —  Mi,  P2-  V  Wft  —  ?2. 

Bi. 


494 


SAM  K$EPAg  ARIRAKA 


As  it  is  known  (from  the  Sfruti  texts) 1  that  the  son  has 
realized  the  oneness  of  the  self  from  the  major  text  through 
his  father,  it  is  established  that  the  major  text  alone  is  the 
‘Upanisad’  and  the  ‘Veda’ 

(1)  The  tfruti  texts  are  referred  to  in  Stf ,  III,  299. 

[  303  ] 

fott  R^PfRRdl  R  SRiTOairtfo  | 

No  person  realizes  the  absolute  self  without  the  major 
texts.  Hence  the  knowledge  of  the  senses  of  the  terms  ( tat 
and  tvarn),  being  mediate,  liberation  is  not  attained  by  it. 

[  304] 

w  R  ^RNRl^RflfRlRfR;  | 

&R  RRT^R^%RtRl^:  R  RRR  || 

The  major  text  is  not  capable  of  giving  rise  to  the 
knowledge  culminating  in  the  realization  of  the  self,  with¬ 
out  the  knowledge  of  the  senses  of  the  individual  words. 
As  the  latter  is  thus  required,  it  is  explained  with  great 
effort. 


[  305  ] 

mrxk  RRfvmd  I 

RrRRrR  R  faRlM^  Ril'd  Rfr^RS  IRRT  RdHl  II 

The  absolute  is  known  from  the  term  tat  and  the  inner 
self  is  ascertained  from  the  term  tvam-  The  self  cannot  be 
inward  unless  it  is  absolute  and  it  cannot  be  absolute  with, 
out  being  inward. 


495 


THIRD  ADHTATA 


[  306] 

ftg  *T#fa  n 

The  inner  self  as  absolute  manifests  by  being  reflected 
in  the  mental  state  arising  from  ‘reasoning’  But  it  becomes 
immediate  when  reflected  in  the  unconditioned  mental 
state  arising  from  the  Upanisads.  And  this  is  the  difference 
(between  the  two  mental  states). 

1.  tarkapratitisamaye  -  vicarajanyabuddhivrUidatayam,  TR. 

2.  splmtataram  -  aparoksam ,  TB. 

[307  ] 

3J*WraH?3jfeft  ^qot  qwgfsft  I 

Just  as  one’s  face  is  reflected,  according  to  the  degree 
of  clarity  in  the  mirror  which  is  not  clear,  partially  clear 
and  very  clear  (at  different  times),  so  also  the  self  is  reflected 
in  the  mental  states  (arising  from  the  Vedanta  and  the 
reasoning  severally). 

pralipattisu  -  buddhirrtlisu,  S. 

[  308  ] 

;ngqi  n 

Perceiving  that  part  of  the  subject1  (which  is  associa¬ 
ted  with  the  probans),*  (people)  infer  its  other  part  (as 
associated  with  the  probandum ) 3.  As  there  is  the  interven¬ 
tion  of  the  knowledge  of  the  subject,  inference  is  not  capable 
of  giving  rise  to  the  immediate  knowledge  of  the  (partless)self. 


SAMK$  EPAs'ARlliAKA 


4y6 


It  may  be  objected  that  the  senses  of  the  two  terms  tat  and  tvam 
which  are  clarified  could  be  known  as  identical  through  the  following 
inferential  argument. 

“  The  sense  of  the  term  tat  is  identical  with  the  sense  of  the  term 
tvam;  because  the  two  are  not  of  diverse  nature 

The  result  of  this  argument  is  that  the  knowledge  of  identity 
between  the  senses  of  the  terms  tat  and  tvam  can  be  arrived  at  by 
inferential  argument  and  not  by  the  major  texts  of  the  Upanijads. 

This  contention  is  refuted  in  this  verse  the  sense  of  the  term  tat 
is  only  mediate  and  so  the  inferential  cognition  referring  to  the  identity 
of  the  senses  of  terms  tat  and  tvam  could  only  be  mediate  and  not 
immediate.  Since  only  the  immediate  knowledge  of  identity  between 
the  senses  of  the  terms  tat  and  tvam  alone  could  remove  avidya,  the 
knowledge  of  identity  arising  from  inferential  argument  is  not  effica¬ 
cious  in  dispelling  avidya. 

[  309] 

II 

Thus  the  senses  of  the  terms  tat  and  tvam  are  pure  by 
nature.  If  anything  should  be  known,  enquire  about 
that.  Remember  all  the  things  you  learnt,  and  direct 
your  mind  to  what  has  not  been  known  so  far. 

EXTENT  OF  THE  SUBSIDIARY  UPANI$ADIC 

TEXTS 

[310] 

o 


THIRD  ADHYAtA 


4^7 


Thus  knowing  the  senses  of  the  terms  tat  and  tvam  and 
desiring  to  realize  quickly  the  oneness  of  the  self  through 
the  sentence  tat  tvam  asi  which  is  present  in  the  Upanisads 
and  whose  import  is  the  partless  self ;  and  with  a  mind 
zealous  to  know  the  exact  extent  of  the  group  of  sentences 
subsidiary  to  it  (that  is,  the  sentence  tat  tvam  asi),  the  aspi¬ 
rant  again  enquired  thus. 


[311] 

qfWGRt  W.sqqfa  fa  | 

Even  now  I  am  devoid  of  the  knowledge  of  the  extent 
of  the  subsidiary  sentences.  Hence  the  major  texts  though 
reflected  every  day  are  incapable  of  giving  rise  to  the  know¬ 
ledge  of  the  sense  of  the  sentence  which  has  realization  (of 
the  self)  as  its  result. 


[312] 

q?fa  ^  fal  n 

The  group  of  sentences  which  conveys  the  self  in  the 
affirmative  manner  and  that  which  signifies  it  by  negating 
the  duality  -  these  are  termed  subsidiary  sentences.  Oh ! 
lord,  explain  to  me  the  extent  of  the  subsidiary  sentences. 

[313] 


i.  fuwfa  —  Bj,  B2,  Pi. 
63 


498 


SA  M  K?EPAg  ARtRAKA 


By  distinguishing  between  the  texts  that  point  to  the 
supreme  self  and  the  qualified  self,  and  by  gathering  the 
unrepeated  words  in  the  sentences  of  all  the  Upanisads, 
which  give  rise  to  the  knowledge  of  the  self  you  can  under¬ 
stand  yourself  the  extent  of  the  texts  (pointing  to  the  sup¬ 
reme  self). 


[314] 

for  i 

As  there  cannot  arise  the  knowledge  of  the  absolute 
self  without  gathering  the  unrepeated  words  from  the  other 
Upani§adic  texts,  bring  together  all  those  unrepeated 
words,  out  of  desire  for  the  knowledge  of  the  truth. 

tatastatah  -  tattacchakhcltah,  TB. 

[315] 

First  distinguish  between  the  texts  conveying  the  sup¬ 
reme  self  and  those  signifying  the  qualified  self  And  then 
gather  the  (unrepeated)  words.  Then  (from  the  texts 
conveying  the  supreme  self)  leave  out  with  effort  such 
qualities  as  joy  being  its  head  and  so  on,  as  they  are  quali¬ 
ties  liable  to  increase  and  decrease. 

Sec  the  following  verse. 


[316] 


THIRD  ADHYAYA 


499 


A  wise  man  will  never  relate  to  the  attributeless  self 
the  attributes  like  joy  being  its  head  and  so  on,  which  are 
the  qualities  prone  to  increase  and  decrease  as  they  are  said 
to  be  the  qualities  of  the  sheath  (of  bliss). 

This  verse  is  based  on  the  BS  -  priyai i rastva dyaprS ptirupacaya 
pacayau  hi  bhed?.  Ill,  iii,  12. 


[317] 

sr.f  fa  ar^fq  sw  <iq  n 

Thus  the  extent  of  the  affirmative  sentences  is  explained. 
Listen  to  the  extent  of  the  negative  sentences.  As  there  are 
many  things  that  are  to  be  negated,  gather  the 
unrepeated  words  (conveying  the  things  to  be  negated) 
from  the  other  texts  as  done  previously  (in  the  case  of  the 
affirmative  sentences). 


[318] 

qftfadqfdteffiqfa  it 

In  the  negative  sentences  also,  gather  many  words 
which  are  unrepeated  and  which  negate  the  things  that  are 
to  be  negated  in  the  self.  If  those  words  are  not  gathered, 
then  there  is  the  contingency  of  negation  of  only  limited 
objects  (in  the  self).  [Hence  the  self  cannot  be  established 
as  free  from  all  duality] 


[319] 

3  ^  q^  qqft  wqlrc^qq^  i 
qfafarasqqtS  <r  aw  wwi  u 


500 


SAltiK$EPA& ARtRAKA 


Each  word  in  the  affirmative  statement  has  two  func¬ 
tions,  that  is,  it  conveys  the  essential  nature  of  the  self  and 
(presumptively)  negates  the  superimposed  form-  But  it  is 
not  accepted  so  in  the  case  of  the  negative  sentences. 

[320] 

qft*  I 

*  3  faq^q*pi  q}  q^  n 

The  negative  statements  merely  negate  the  forms  in  the 
self  which  have  arisen  out  of  avidya.  They  do  not  (like 
affirmative  ones)  refer  to  some  form  and  convey  it  (as  the 
essential  nature  of)  the  supreme  status  of  God. 

[321] 

fqtrq  &  qfeqrf^t  i 

Thus  the  difference  between  the  affirmative  and  the 
negative  statement  has  been  explained-  But  the  gathering 
of  the  unrepeated  words  is  similar  to  both  the  affirmative 
and  negative  statements- 

[  322] 

rftfq  **<iq?T;gq3wN  ft  it 

The  thing  which  is  not  negated  by  the  words  which 
are  gathered  together  should  be  negated;  and  for  that 
purpose  the  word  which  would  convey  the  negation  (of  the 
thing  which  is  not  yet  negated)  also  must  be  added  to  the 
negative  statements.  This  is  accepted  by  the  druti  text 

?•  —  Bi,  wfastfatT;  —  B2. 

—  B2.  Ml-  V  !??  —  P2.  ».  —  B;. 

v9  \S  ^ 


468 


SAM  ICS  EP A  S’  A  R  /  R  A  K A 


Hence  ‘knowledge’  which  is  (really)  absolute,  is  not 
the  result  of  any  proof,  in  view  of  its  being  not  an  object. 
When  such  is  the  case,  it  can  never  be  held  that  knowledge 
is  the  result  of  a  proof,  and  being  related  to  the  universe,  it 
manifests  it. 


[  238  ] 

As  in  the  case  of  the  erroneous  perception  of  shell  as 
silver,  it  is  experienced  that  both  (the  self  and  matter)  are 
mutually  superimposed.  Hence,  let  there  be  the  mutual 
superimposition  of  the  self  and  matter  always  (that  is,  till 
avidya  exists). 


[  239  ] 

qrfr^qnqfcq- 

The  designation  of  ‘substrate’  ( adhisthdna )  is  well- 
established  not  in  the  substance  that  serves  as  the  locus 
adhara )  of  the  superimposed  object,  but  in  the  substance 
that  is  the  object  of  avidya  with  its  product.  Hence  the 
great  hasty  view,  owing  to  conceit  of  scholarship  of  pervert¬ 
ed  men  of  utter  ignorance,  is  improper  -  the  view,  namely, 
acceptance  of  the  mutual  superimposition  is  open  to  the 
objection  that  this  world,  being  devoid  of  a  substratum, 
would  become  a  void. 


This  verse  appears  in  the  first  ndhyaya  of  this  work.  See  Stf,  I,  31. 


THIRD  ADI  IT  A  TA 


4G9 


[  240] 

q^fe  rr:  qfeqRr  n 

In  accordance  with  the  three-fold  mental  states  of  men, 
namely,  lower,  intermediate,  and  higher,  there  is  the 
assumption  of  the  theory  of  transformation,  (the  theory  of 
transfiguration,  and  the  notion  of  negation  which  refers  to 
the  realization  of  the  self),  (The  theory  of  transfiguration 
is  two-fold  as  the  notion  of)  the  existence  of  many  indivi¬ 
dual  souls,  and  the  existence  of  avidya  in  the  supreme  self. 1 

One  who  adopts  the  theory  of  transfiguration  holds  a  two-fold 
notion  according  to  his  mental  state.  One  is,  that  there  are  many 
individual  souls  longing  for  liberation,  And  the  other  notion  is  that, 
the  supreme  self  alone  attains  the  state  of  the  individual  soul  owing  to 
avidya  superimposed  on  it.  Thus  th«re  is  only  one  individual  soul. 

For  further  details  see  Stf ,  II,  81  if.  The  translation  follows  TB. 

[241] 

ihwrth  sqfwr^qkfq  rrsi:  i 

qqR^q  ftsrrflraq  fqRT  ^  ft  srnsqqifcr  n 

The  Upani-jadic  sentences,  the  sutras  of  Badarayana, 
and  the  words  of  £>rl  Sankara  who  is  the  expert  in  deter¬ 
mining  the  import  of  these  two,  would  never  become 
appropriate  without  the  three  stages  mentioned  in  respect 
of  the  three  points  of  view. 

This  verse  occurs  in  the  second  adhya y  i  of  this  work.  See  Stf,  II,  93. 

[  242  ] 

qq  TrqfRt  it 


470 


SA  id  KS  EP  A  $  API R  AKA 


The  three  points  of  view,  set  forth  previously,  are  with 
reference  to  a  single  person.  Keeping  this  in  view,  we 
interpret  the  Upani^adic  texts  and  the  sutras  of  Badarayana. 

[  243  ] 

<mqfd  ^  foferrjq  I 

Following  the  theory  of  transformation  and  the  two¬ 
fold  notion  of  transfiguration  mentioned  in  the  Upanisads 
and  keeping  in  view  the  mental  state  of  the  aspirant,  the 
pre-eminent  and  wise  sage  (Badarayana)  composed  the 
Brahma-sulra. 

STATUS  OF  SCRIPTURE 

[  244  ] 

qft  qfoife^qi  fafg-qnfssj  ^  *qrr- 
£dfd  dg  d^Tdl  Idfa:  | 

df  dlddl  Wl^ERr  II 

If  the  universe  is  the  transformation  or  the  trans¬ 
figuration  of  the  self,  then  indeed,  there  arises  contradiction 
to  the  self-validity  of  the  scripture.  In  our  system,  its  self¬ 
validity  based  on  its  impersonal  origin,  does  not  fit  in,  if  it 
is  produced. 

[  245  ] 

dWSdfadfdd?  ssqdtar  d^idf 

sfd  fdddfd  fd9$fe- 

dft  ddfd  d  fd^dldlfd  fd^ll 


a .  ^qi —  IF>. 


THIRD  ADI  IT  AT  A 


471 


If  the  universe  is  the  creation  of  the  self,  then  there 
arises  the  objection  that  (as  the  scripture  which  is  a  part  of 
the  universe,  is  not  self-valid),  the  view  of  Ka^ada  (namely , 
the  scripture  has  only  extrinsic  validity)  should  be  assumed; 
or,  the  materialistic  stand-point  (namely,  the  scripture  is 
not  valid)  should  be  inevitably  accepted.  If  the  universe  is 
not  the  creation  of  self,  then  it  is  real,  (and  hence  the  Advaitic 
view  that  everything  apart  from  the  self  is  indeterminable 
does  not  hold  good). 

[  246  ] 

[The  Advaitin  replies  :] 

As  the  objection  equally  applies  to  the  views  of  both 
the  Mlmamsakas,  how  is  it  raised  only  against  our  view. 
The  words  are  significative  of  their  senses  only  when  they 
(that  is,  the  words)  are  known;  but,  knowledge  is  accepted 
to  be  momentary. 

The  words  convey  their  senses  only  when  they  (that  is,  the  words) 
are  known.  Hence  the  aspect  of  signification  present  in  the  words  is 
produced  by  the  knowledge  of  the  words.  But,  as  knowledge  is 
momentry,  the  aspect  of  signification  present  in  the  words  also  is 
momentary.  And  this  leads  to  the  momentariness  of  the  Veda 
itself. 

[  247  ] 

Tfdfad  df^T'df  II 


472 


SAM  KSEPAgARl  RAKA 


i-uTli.c  ,;groups  of  words  signify  their  senses , by;  depeiiding 
on  the  ’invariable  sequence  present  in  the  knowledge  of  the 
words.- nThUs,  the'  whole  scripture  becomes  momentary;  and 
hbvy.rdoes  itfSerVe  as  a  proof  ?  !;■;  r  nx'j  intqir  :u\i 

'THc'groups'iftf  words  placed  in  a  "particular 'order'  'constitute1  ■'  the 
Veda'.’ the  words  av  such  do  not'  have '  any  order.' '  Hence  the 
particular  order  pfMeh't’iri  the  knowledge  of  the  words  'accounts'  for' 
tilt  ordei‘  of  the  words '  that  constitute’  the1  Veda.  'As  knowledge"' is 
momentary,  the  particular  order  present  in  the(  words  also1  is  ''momen¬ 
tary.  And  this  leads  to  the  momentariness  of  the  Veda  itself. 


Ir- 


G  2,48,] 


: »' i !'  ’  1'  T” 


dTlH  I  i 

irr^efr^f 


3  ^  II  ■  „  n  I 

d  Jr  .<  If^thc  self  validity  of  ’the  scripture  is  accepted"  oh  the 
grbtirid 'that 'the  serrie'eonveyed  by  the  scripture'is  indepen¬ 
dent  of  human1  intellect,  then  this  ground  for  self-validity 

|  ,  *  1  .r  ■  r  ’  • .  1  ,  -  *  t  ^  , 

is  similar  when1  the  scripture  is  accepted  to  be  the  creation 
of  the  supreme  self  1 


{.  i,,o 


C  249  ] 


ft  33  sm:  prefer ' 

,!i 

vm  3  aw  fagraswqr 

qfrfi  n 


The  supreme  self,  like  , the  reciter  of  the  Veda,  ricites 
the  scripture  without  any  pre-meditation.  It  comes  out  of 
the  self  like  breaching,  arid  the  Upanisadic  text1  clearly  puts 
forth  this  view.  Hr 


3.  tffil—  :M,.  B>,  T,,fr,,  Tv 


THIRD  ADHYAYA 


473 


[  250] 

3[q 

^  W?qR^  I 

faqqfafa  fk  ^  ^r- 

%  ftqfa  *  =atq  n 

It  is  accepted  that  the  senses  arisen  from  the  past 
deeds  of  a  person  clearly  manifest  their  respective  objects 
by  being  independent  of  other  proofs.  Similarly  it  is 
accepted  in  the  case  of  the  scripture  also.  Hence  no  objec¬ 
tion  should  be  raised  by  you  against  our  view. 

It  might  be  said:  the  scripture  would  lose  its  self-validity,  if  it  is 
composed  by  a  person.  This  objection,  however,  is  wrong,  as  the 
sei  se-organs  which  are  produced  by  a  person  through  his  past  deeds, 
are  accepted  to  be  self-valid. 

vide:  svatah  sarvapramanandm  pramanyamiti  gamyatam, 

S'lnka-vd rlika,  II,  47. 

[251] 

qfa*rRfa  aa*a^*^  wm  lat:  i 
?fa  *3$  a;fo  w:  $as%- 

sm  m  siifta  mwi,  u 

If  you  think  that  as  numerous  V^dic  texts1  declare 
that  the  supreme  self  is  a  perceiver,  on  what  basis  it  is  not 
admitted  that  it  is  the  author  of  the  scripture  by  being  an 
intelligent  being,  then,  (it  is  said), ‘do  not  consider  so*. 
Why  ?  The  Upani$adic  texts  instruct  us  that  the  supreme 
self  is  devoid  of  any  sense-organ. 

1.  vide  Chdnd.  VI,  ii,  3. 

2.  vide:  Brh.,  Ill,  viii,  8 

GO 


474 


SAttK$EPAt>ARlRAKA 


[  252] 

Kit 

*\  3  wn^iq^oT  ii 

The  first  modification  of  the  insentient  power  (namely, 
avidya)  which  abides  in  the  pure  consciousness,  and  which, 
though  insentient,  acquires  the  character  of  sentience  owing 
to  its  superimposition  on  the  consciousness,  is  stated  to  be 
the  will  of  the  self  by  the  exponents  of  the  true  import  of 
the  Upani^adic  texts.  The  will  of  the  supreme  self  is  not 
the  modification  of  the  intellect  (as  in  the  case  of  the 
individual  soul). 


[  253  ] 


(Tf|  II 

[  The  Vaii>e§ika  contends  :  ]  — 

We  infer  that  the  significative  relation  of  every  word 
to  its  sense  is  formulated  by  an  individual  (that  is,  ISvara) 
like  that  of  the  words  clittha,  davittha,  etc.  Thus  on  the 
basis  of  this  illustration  which  exists  before  (making  the 
inference),  there  arises  the  inferential  cognition  1  And, 
is  there  anything  strange  about  this  ? 

1.  vimatah  Sabdarthasambandhah  sanketikah,  dnbddrthasambnndhatvat , 
ditlhadid abda  rthasambandhavat  iti  anumimi ma  hi. 

[254] 

m  swiur  qfafNft  i 


THIRD  ADHTATA 


475 


[The  view  of  the  Vai£e$ika  is  rejected]: 

Explain  how  it  is  inferred  on  the  basis  of  the  illustration, 
namely,  the  words  davittha,  etc-,  that  the  significative 
relation  of  the  words  cow,  etc.,  to  their  senses  is  formulated 
by  an  individual,  when  there  exists  the  sublating  proof 
(that  is,  the  knowledge  of  method  of  agreement  and 
difference)  which  is  indicated  by  the  beginningless  usage  of 
elders  1 

The  words  cow,  etc.,  signify  their  senses  only  when  those  words 
are  employed  with  reference  to  such  senses  by  elders.  If  not,  they  do 
not  signify  the  senses.  This  knowledge  of  method  of  agreement  and 
difference  subfiles  the  inferential  cognition  arrived  at  through  inference 
set  forth  in  the  previous  verse. 


[255] 

jfr?  fa  m  sr:  n 

Among  the  five  proofs  such  as  perception,  etc.,  which 
cognize  the  existent  objects,  there  is  no  proof  that  could 
establish  the  individual  (that  is,  Hvara)  who  is  said  to 
formulate  the  significative  relation  of  the  words  to  their 
senses-  Hence  in  your  (that  is,  in  the  Vai£e$ika)  system 
that  individual  has  become  similar  to  the  flower  of  the  sky 
because  of  its  non-apprehension. 

Hvara  as  the  formulator  of  the  significative  relation  of  the  words 
to  their  senses  is  not  known  through  perception;  nor  is  He  known  as 
such  through  inference  on  the  ground  mentioned  in  the  previous  verse. 
Since  Hvara  is  like  nothing  and  unlike  everything  we  perceive,  the 
proof  comparison  also  does  not  establish  God  as  the  formulator  of  the 
significative  relation  of  the  words  to  their  senses.  We  do  not  find 
any  scriptural  text  that  afiirms  God  as  of  the  above  nature.  Presump¬ 
tion  also  does  not  prove  God;  it  is  because  the  proof  presumption 
establishes  a  particular  object  without  which  something  known  or 


476  SAMK§EPA$  ARlRAKA 

heard  would  become  unintelligible.  Since  nothing  becomes  unintelligible 
without  Hvara  as  the  formulator  of  significative  relation  of  the  words 
to  their  senses,  the  latter  is  not  known  by  presumption. 

An  object  which  is  existent  should  come  within  the  scope  of  anyone 
of  the  above  five  proofs.  And  such  an  object,  owing  to  some  counterac¬ 
ting  factor  may  not  come  within  the  range  of  perception.  Its  absence 
then  is  known  through  the  proof  non-apprehension.  And  an  object 
which  does  not  come  within  the  range  of  any  of  the  above  five  proofs 
that  comprehend  the  existent  object,  is  an  absolute  nothing.  Here 
Hvara  as  the  formulator  of  the  significative  relation  of  their  words  to 
their  senses  does  not  come  within  the  range  of  any  of  the  five  proofs 
and  so  Bvara  as  such  is  an  absolute  nothing. 

[  25G  ] 

gfaasf*  ftqqt  *  wrofe  qrqRHt:  i 

If  the  object,  which  has  been  (previously)  perceived, 
does  not  (later)  come  within  the  scope  of  the  proofs  that 
cognize  the  existent  objects,  then  something  other  than 
non-existence  is  presumed  to  be  the  cause  of  its  non- 
apprehension. 

As  the  object  is  previously  perceived,  it  cannot  be  an  absolute 
nothing  like  horn  of  a  hare.  Hence  something  other  than  non-existencfe 
should  be  the  cause  of  its  non-apprehension. 

[  257  ] 

r  f|  fqqints^f 

—  Bi,  Mi,  Ti,  T2,  T3. 


THIRD  ADHTATA 


477 


The  absence  of  the  rise  of  five  proofs  in  the  case  of  a 
totally  non-existent  object,  is  the  cause  of  the  (knowledge 
of  the)  non-existence  of  the  object;  and,  wise  men  do  not 
accept  another  cause.  When  horn  is  not  found  in  the  hare, 
those  who  do  not  see  it,  do  not  seek  for  another  cause  to 
account  for  its  non-existence. 

Hence  li$vara  as  the  formulator  of  the  significative  relation  of  the 
words  to  their  senses  cannot  be  established. 

[258] 

How  can  Hvara,  being  unassisted,  formulate  the 
significative  relation  of  the  words  to  their  meanings,  by 
going  into  thousands  of  regions  which  are  uneven  and 
difficult  to  traverse. 

narah  -  naradrstanlanumitasya  narasamyamabhiprelya  esanara  ityuktam, 

SS. 

ekalah  -  ekaki,  AP. 

[  259  ] 

3ifq  ^  r  If  q<^fa  i 

srcfaw  qsj  w  RRRjfrq  $fcqft  mu  n 

Moreover,  as  there  is  no  word  significative  of  any  sense 
at  the  time  of  creation,  how  could  Hvara  without  pointing 
to  a  sense  by  a  word,  formulate  the  significative  relation  of 
the  words  to  their  senses? 


[  260] 

sfcqfd  ft  I 

h  ft  *ifq  ^  ii 


?.  q?  9=^1  —  B|. 


478 


SAM  K$EPAg  ARIRAfCA 


If  it  is  said  that  Hvara  formulates  the  significative 
relation  of  the  words  to  senses  by  gesture  (that  is,  by 
pointing  to  the  object  with  his  finger),  then  this  (also)  is 
highly  incompatible.  There  cannot  be  the  formulation,  by 
mere  gesture,  of  the  significative  relation  of  the  word  ‘cow’ 
(for  example)  to  its  sense  which  is  associated  with  thousands 
of  things  (such  as  limbs,  qualities,  activities,  and  generic 
attribute). 

[  261  ] 

=3  1%^  ^  I 

Moreover,  there  can  be  the  formulation  of  the  signi¬ 
ficative  relation  of  the  words  to  those  senses  which  are 
known  through  perception.  How  could  there  be  the  formu¬ 
lation  of  the  significative  relation  of  the  words  to  the  senses 
such  as  deities,  etc  ,  whose  nature  is  not  known  through 
perception. 

laukikamanam  -  pratyaks^m,  TB. 

[262  ] 

3lfq  =q  qgfSWJT  3^  SRR(  wA  f*l^  I 
3  m  ftqr  || 

[263  ] 

3  qi  aqi:  i 

q^rqq^qwifd  ftiroqfa  3  it 

[  264] 

qqft  iq3«Tsr:  m*l!ft3f3qw  W  I 
33  II 


THIRD  ADIIYAYA 


479 


Moreover  if  Hvara  has  formulated  the  significative 
relation  of  the  word  to  its  sense,  then  there  would  be  the 
recollection  of  Hvara  (when  using  the  words).  The  usage 
of  the  words  by  one  who  speaks  is  not  possible  without  the 
remembrance  of  the  author.  Wise  men  do  not  use  the 
terms  made  current  by  Panini1  and  Pingala®  without  remem¬ 
bering  them.  Hence  Lord  Siva,  the  Lord  of  the  universe, 
who  is  worshipped  by  the  great  sages  like  Kaijada  and  others, 
vAo  is  the  highest  of  the  intelligent  beings,  who  is  inferred 
on  the  strength  of  the  creation  of  earth,  .etc.,  and  who 
possesses  unlimited  powers  has  not  formulated  the  signi¬ 
ficative  relation  of  the  words  to  their  senses. 

1.  vrddhira daic,  Panini  -  Sutra,  I,  i,  1 

2.  dhid rixlri mitya dya  ,  SS. 

[  265  ] 

Moreover,  this  entire  universe  has  originated,  without 
any  previous  reflection,  from  the  son  of  Vasudeva  (that  is, 
Lord  Kr$na)  who  is  of  the  nature  of  unitary  consciousness 
which  is  devoid  of  origination  and  destruction  and  which  is 
(secondarily)  signified  by  the  Upani$ads  and  which 
transcends  both  speech  and  mind. 

anakadundubhih  -  vasudevah,  TB. 

[  266 ) 

qteqd  f fa  qf^^wgfa^  -| 


1  itffa  =3  -  Ml. 


480 


SA  a  ICS  EP  A  5 'ARIRAKA 


[The  Vai3e<jika  contends:] 

Indeed  it  is  observed  that  the  secular  sentences  are 
composed  by  the  intelligence  of  a  person.  Similarly  in  the 
case  of  scripture  also,  we  infer  thus:  the  sentences  of  the 
Upanisads  also  are  composed  by  the  intelligence  of  an 
individual,  like  the  sentences  composed  by  ordinary  men. 

[  267  ] 

^  i \  it 

If  it  is  said:  ‘  the  Vedic  text  is  not  capable  of  being  similar 
to  the  sentences  composed  by  the  intelligence  of  persons 
like  us;  and,  so  Lord  3iva  is  inferred  on  the  basis  of  the 
composition  of  the  scripture,  which  would  be  inexplicable 
in  the  absence  of  the  assumption  of  the  Lord  '  This 
(contention)  is  unsound;  for,  inference  cannot  become  the 
sublating  factor  of  the  Upanisads. 

vaidikaracana  balamisatah  -  vcdaracana  iiyatha  nupapaltya  ityarthah,  TB. 

[  268  ] 

*pf4  qraTqqidrgqi:!  ^  n 

One  text  declares  that  the  scripture  is  self-existing1 
and  another  states  that  the  scripture  is  like  breath  of  the 
supreme  self2  These  texts  immediately  supersede  the 
inference  that  the  scripture  is  the  conscious  creation  of  the 
lord.  If  not,  the  teachings  of  the  scriptrue  would  be 
contradicted. 

1.  parameslhi  brahmnno  brahma  svayambhu.  Brh.,  If,  vi, 

2.  asya  mahatn  bhutasya  nilvasitametadyadr ovedah ,  Brh.,  II,  iv,  10. 


THIRD  ADHTATA 


48 1 


C  269  ] 

w>  fnfom  fwsft  I 

3TRf%^f%f%  SR  nfH^F^T  II 

When  the  Upanigads1  declare  that  God  unintentionally 
creates,  protects  and  destroys  the  universe,  and  entering 
into  the  universe  controls  everything,  tell  me  how  could 
the  inference  that  God  intentionally  creates  the  scripture 
be  valid. 

1.  vide  :  Taitt,  III,  i,  1;  and  Brh.,  Ill,  vii,  1. 

[  270] 

iTRunft  I 

The  scripture  is  known  to  be  valid  only  when  it  is 
ascertained  that  it  is  uttered  by  a  trustworthy  person.  But 
only  when  it  is  ascertained  that  it  is  valid,  it  is  known  that 
it  is  uttered  by  a  trustworthy  person  (ISvara)-  Thus  there 
is  the  contingency  of  interdependence. 

[271] 

mm  ^  ^  n 

Hence  the  knowledge  arising  from  the  Vedic  texts 
should  be  accepted  as  intrinsically  known.1  And,  like 
its  apprehension,  it  is  really  intrinsically  produced,*  and 
not  otherwise  (that  is,  extrinsically) . 

1 .  prd ma  nyajna  nasya  svaprayuktatuarh  na  ma 
jflanasvarupagrahakapramdnadeva  gra hyatvam,  TB. 

2.  jndnotpa dakasa magrl ma  trajanyam,  AP. 

61 


482 


SAM  K$EFAg ARIRAKA 


[  272] 

*TRm  ^tEI  I 

Just  as  the  validity  of  the  knowledge  arising  from  the 
Vedic  texts  is  intrinsically  known  and  produced,  so  also,  its 
validity  in  manifesting  the  objects  also  is  intrinsic.  It  does 
not  require  any  other  factor  than  its  own  rise  in  manifesting 
the  objects. 

i.  pravpltau  - pravrttih  -  visayabhivyaktih 

ii.  samvide  -  visayabhivyaktilaksarinphalaya,  TB 

[  273  ] 

q<ilT  qfoi^  ql^qi^RI^  II 

What  the  scripture1  states,  namely,  the  rise  of  the 
universe  consisting  of  words  and  objects,  from  Lord  Vi$:pu 
is  similar  to  (His)  breathing,  is  true  in  the  light  of  what  is 
mentioned  so  far.  Hence  the  inference  of  personal  origin  of 
the  scripture  is  false. 

1,  vult:  Brh.,  II,  iv,  10. 

[  274] 

qRoiramdqHd:  qftq^urqfa  i 
^  =q  qsr-^fe  n 

Even  if  either  of  the  two  theories,  namely,  the  theory 
of  transformation  or  the  theory  of  transfiguration  is 
accepted,  there  is  not  even  a  trace  of  objection  against 
(the  self-validity  of)  the  scripture,  as  in  the  light  of  what 
has  been  said,  it  is  independent  (of  human  or  divine  intellect 
and  hence  self-valid). 


uSH-  qYwTVsft  —  Mi- 


—  Ti, 


THE  PRIMARY  AND  SECONDARY  SENSES 
OF  THE  TERMS  TAT  AND  TVAM 


[  275] 

3TTJftf|  aWT3f:  1 1 

Understand  the  four  senses  of  the  words  tat  by 
distinguishing  thus;  the  limiting  condition,  the  thing 
limited,  namely,  the  presence  of  the  self  in  it  and  the 
reflected  image  of  the  self,  and  the  self  that  remains  as  the 
original. 


[276  ] 

<w\  f^sfa  ^4  i 

Similarly  the  four  senses  of  the  word  tvam  should  be 
carefully  distinguished  thus:  the  intellect  (that  is,  the 
limiting  condition),  the  presence  of  the  self  in  it,  the  self 
that  remains  as  the  original,  and  the  reflected  image  of  the 

sell. 


[  277  ] 

• 

The  beginningless  avidya  is  the  limiting  condition;  and 
the  presence  of  the  self  in  avidya  is  the  criterion  for 
viewing  the  self  as  God.  And  the  self  present  in  avidya  is 
the  reflected  image  (and  it  is  God).  The  pure  self  is  stated 
to  be  the  original. 


484 


SAtoK$EPAa>  ariraka 


Avidyd,  the  presence  of  the  self  in  avidyd,  and  the  reflected  image 
of  the  self  in  avidyd — all  these  three  are  the  primary  senses  of  the  word 
tat.  The  self  that  serves  as  the  original  is  the  secondary  sense  of  the 
word  tat. 


[278] 

Similarly,  in  the  senses  of  the  word  tvam,  the  limiting 
condition  is  the  intellect;  the  presence  of  the  self  in  it  is  the 
criterion  for  viewing  the  self  as  jiva-  And  the  self  present 
in  intellect  is  the  reflected  image  (and  it  is  jiva)-  The  self 
unassociatcd  with  intellect  is  stated  to  be  the  original.1 

1.  The  self  that  transcends  the  intellect  is  the  original. 

[  279] 

gqiftRT  fasqi  | 

qm  ^qr  jr:  stqqttqfa  n 

Understand  that  the  limited  thing  along  with  its  limiting 
condition  is  completely  false.  In  the  reflected  image  of  the 
self  also,  a  part  is  false1.  But  the  original  self,  in  its  entirety, 
is  real. 

1.  The  reflected  image  of  the  self  consists  of  two  elements  s  the 
spiritual  element  and  the  phemomenal  element,  namely,  avidyd  or 
intellect.  The  phemomenal  element  is  false. 

[  280] 


v  nmtwsr  —  P2. 


THIRD  ADHYAYA 


485 


In  the  four  factors,  namely,  the  vessel  filled  with 
water,  the  presence  of  the  sun  in  it,  the  reflected  image  of 
the  sun  in  it,  and  the  sun  remaining  outside,  that  is,  in  the 
sky,  the  shining  sun  remaining  in  the  sky  cannot  be  denied. 

[281] 

St  ^  i 

m  q*  m  gsswfa  f*ror  ftiTqjpsrqqfc  n 

Similarly,  in  the  four  factors,  namely,  the  intellect, 
the  presence  of  the  self  in  the  intellect,  the  reflected  image 
of  the  self  in  it,  and  the  supreme  self  remaining  pure  out¬ 
side  the  intellect,  the  latter  cannot  be  rejected  even  by  the 
keenest  of  intellects. 

puram  -  antahkarnalaksanam,  TB. 

[  282] 

*  wq  qjfafistqqtn:  wife?:  i 

mi  fltrqqtw  n 

There  is  no  relation  of  the  qualities  of  real  nature  to 
the  self  even  through  a  limiting  adjunct.  And  the  possibi¬ 
lity  of  intrinsic  relation  of  qualities  to  the  self  is  far  removed. 

This  verse  occurs  previously  in  this  chapter.  See  Stf,  III,  146. 

[  283  ] 

vfo  flirqqw^  q^;  si«rTfqqi^r  ^  i 
tTfltsfq  fl^qi§;q^qdts?q^qi7gi  $sqfqj  ^  !jqq^  II 

It  has  been  explained  before  that  the  import  of  the 
Upanigadic  sentence  is  the  supreme  partless  self.  For  this 
reason  also,  it  is  impossible  to  attribute  any  form  other  than 
the  absolute  nature  to  the  supreme  self. 


486 


SAtiK$EPAg  ARt  RAKA 


[  284  ] 

(RSai  I 

The  Upani$adic  texts  belonging  to  every  branch  of 
Veda  and  conveying  the  qualified  self  have  as  their  import 
something  the  and  not  their  primary  sense  (namely,  the 
qualified  self).  When  a  text  which  does  not  have  as  its 
import  the  primary  sense  it  conveys  comes  into  conflict 
with  the  text  which  has  as  its  import  the  sense  it  signifies, 
then  the  former  is  a  recommendatory  passage. 

[  285  ] 

fk  3  5TCHT3JF  9^1  1 1 

When  recommendatory  passages  come  into  conflict 
with  the  injunctive  texts,  then  they  do  not  restrict  the  sense 
of  the  injunctive  texts.  But  their  sense  is  so  admitted  that 
they  would  be  consistent  with  the  import  of  the  injunctive 
texts. 

alambanam  -  vifayah,  TB. 


[286] 

w  11 

Just  as  the  sentence  which  enjoins  wild  sesamum  and 
which  is  read  in  the  context  of  the  injuction  of  the  goat’s 
milk,  discards  its  primary  sense,  owing  to  the  fear  of  con. 
tradiction  with  the  principal  religious  rite,  and  is  (hence) 


ThIrd  adhTata 


held  as  the  recommendatory  passage,  (so  also  the  Upani$a- 
dic  texts  conveying  the  qualified  self  should  be  held  as 
recommendatory  passages). 

With  reference  to  the  Agnihotra  rite  the  Vedic  text  reads : 

jartilayavagva  juhuyat,  gavidhukayavagva  juhuyat,  na  gramyan  paiun 
hinasti,  na  aranyan. 

The  oblation  to  the  Agnihotra  rite  may  be  gruel  made  from 
wild  sesamum  or  wild  wheat.  This  does  not  imvolve  injury  to 
the  domesticated  or  the  forest  animal. 

The  Vedic  text  further  proceeds  to  say  : 

atho  khalvahuh  -  anahutirvai  jartila  s'ca  gavidhuka  Sea,  ajaksirena  jahoti. 
Wild  sesamum  and  wild  wheat  are  not  to  be  offered  as  oblations.  One 
should  offer  goat’s  milk  as  the  oblation. 

The  import  of  the  entire  Vedic  passage  is  this :  the  gruel  made 
from  wild  sesamum  or  wild  wheat  is  prescribed  as  an  offering  in  the 
Agnihotra  rite.  In  the  same  way  the  goat’s  milk  also  is  prescribed 
as  an  oblation. 

Now  it  is  contended  that  one  can  offer  either  goat’s  milk  or 
gruel  made  from  wild  sesamum  or  wild  wheat  as  oblation  in  the 
Agnihotra  rite.  This  contention  is  wrong.  It  is  because  the  Vedic 
text  after  enjoining  gruel  made  from  wild  sesamum  or  wild  wheat 
immediately  prohibits  the  use  of  wild  sesamum  or  wild  wheat  in  the 
Agnihotra  rite  and  then  prescribes  goat’s  milk  as  an  offering. 

Since  wild  sesamum  and  wild  whe»t  are  prohibited,  the 
injunctive  text  which  prescribes  goat’s  milke  must  be  taken  as  primary. 
And,  the  Vedic  text  prescribing  the  gruel  made  from  wild  sesamum 
and  wild  wheat  must  be  understood  as  recommendatory  praising 
goat’s  milk  as  the  best  offering  in  the  Agnihotra  rite. 


For  details  See  Jaimini  Sutra,  X,  VIII,  4/7. 


488 


SAJtfK?  EPAg  A  RtRAKA 


[287] 

a^g  *ifa  ^  3T  vm  11 

When  such  is  the  case,  here  in  the  Vedanta  also  let  the 
texts  which  convey  the  qualified  self  and  which  are  in  con¬ 
flict  with  the  texts  that  convey  the  partless  self,  be  recom. 
xnendatory  passages.  Or  else,  let  those  texts  primarily 
convey  the  qualifications  of  the  self  that  are  brought  about 
by  avidya . 


[  288] 

3rew  a?qm*P»f!fi^rats?«raT  aifa  ii 

The  Upanisadic  text  dealing  with  the  qualified  self 
primarily  conveys  it  by  taking  into  account  the  superimpos¬ 
ed  qualities.  If  the  qualities  are  real,  then  the  text  [like 
tat  tvam  asi )  which  has  as  its  import  the  sense  it  conveys 
(namely,  the  partless  self)  would  be  contradicted  for  no 
valid  reason. 

[289  ] 

ffcf^qraaftfgars^a:  sfawfa  i 

From  the  passages  referring  to  the  worship  of  the 
supreme  self,  it  is  known  that  the  supreme  self  is  of  the 
form  of  smell  and  taste.1  And  those  forms  also  are  based 
on  the  qualities  that  are  fancied 

vide  :  saroagandhah  sarvarasah,  Chdnd.,  Ill,  xiv,  2. 


i.  vfft  ffcmt  —  B2. 


WlkD  adhtAta 


489 


[290] 

R  <13  flgaTqiqqfq^ftfiiTRi:  i 

^iwrsRfag  q^ftqfegq^qqfa^  n 

On  the  basis  of  conflict  with  the  texts  that  convey  the 
qualified  self,  it  is  not  desirable  to  make  the  text  discard  its 
primary  sense,  the  text  whose  import  is  the  partless  self  and 
the  syntactical  relation  of  whose  words  is  more  powerful. 

[291] 

RWTRq^piqq'lftftRqfaR  ^RRq^T 

qiqqiRtafq  qq  n 

By  examining  the  import  of  the  Upanisadic  texts  and 
by  reasoning,  you  understand  that  the  secondary  sense  of 
the  term  tat  which  is  related  to  the  sense  of  the  sentence 
(tat  tvam  asi)  and  which  is  self-luminous,  free  from  duality 
and  nescience,  existent,  eternal,  inward,  free  from  any 
colour,  smell,  or  taste  and  which  is  present  in  the  primary 
sense  of  the  term  tat  is  the  true  nature  of  Lord  Vi§^u. 

[  292] 

w^'riR^qRsqq  i 

3TRRRRR  RiRU  p  ftqiRflW  q^ST  %\l  II 

The  true  nature  of  Lord  Visnu  is  free  from  sound, 
touch,  colour,  change,  and  taste.  Similarly  it  is  eternal,  free 
from  smell,  beginningless,  infinite,  immutable,  and  it  trans¬ 
cends  Hiraijyagarbha.1  And  this  true  nature  of  Vis^u 
should  be  realized. 

1.  rnahatah  -  samos tibuddhirupahiranvagarbhSt,  SS. 

62 


480 


SA  Air  KS  EPA  S' A  RItiAK A 


This  verse,  with  slight  modification  in  the  last  quarter,  is  taken 
from  the  Kathopanisad,  I,  iii,  15.  The  last  quarter  in  the  original 
text  is  : 

nicayya  tanmrtyumukhat  pramucyale.  The  word  nicayya  is  interpreted 
by  3ri  Sankara  as  avagamya. 

[  293  ] 

Rt*q  qfidlt  ^  fqfqq  m*  ^  ^  I 

?JsqqR  3$;  qipqif  ^Fiiqrqq^  II 

It  has  been  explained  to  me  (by  the  sages),  that  the 
individual  soul,  the  phenomenal  world  and  God  are  (in 
essence)  the  supreme  self.  This  Upanisadic  text  states  that 
the  individual  soul,  God,  and  the  created  universe  arc  (in 
essence)  the  pure  self. 

The  first  half  of  this  verse  is  taken  from  $  vet.  I,  1  2. 

[294] 

^  ^  qfd:  qitejr  ft  q^smHiT  i 
»3rat  *mqrqqfwrdq  Rfaqfd  n 

By  the  knowledge  of  the  senses  of  the  words  you  do  not 
attain  the  ultimate  purpose,  as  the  knowledge  of  the  mean¬ 
ings  of  the  words  is  only  mediate.  Hence  the  knowledge 
that  would  annihilate  avidya  will  arise  only  from  the  major 
texts. 

Avidya  relates  to  the  identity  of  the  inner  self  and  the  supreme 
self.  It  will  therefore  be  removed  only  by  the  direct  knowledge  of  the 
identity  of  the  inner  self  and  the  supreme  self.  Such  a  knowledge 
arises  from  the  major  texts  only. 

[  295  ] 

wqpiwfcti  =q  i 

^qifqqr  qi^rr  g^qftR  11 


1.  IrTT  —  Ml,  rIY 
i.  ?rat  —  B^. 


THIRD  ADHTA  YA 


49  i 


The  major  texts  which  occur  in  the  Upanisad  portion 
of  one’s  own  recension  of  the  Vedas,  which  are  studied  in 
accordance  with  the  rules  prescribed  for  the  study  of  one’s 
own  Veda  and  which  are  kept  in  mind  with  faith,  when 
instructed  by  a  preceptor  who  is  an  ascetic  and  who  has 
realized  the  self,  are  the  direct  cause  of  liberation. 

[  296  ] 

The  Upanisadic  text  declares  that  ‘one  who  has  not 
studied  the  Veda  does  not  realize  the  absolute  self’-1  How 
would  this  text  be  reasonable  if  it  is  otherwise  (that  is,  if  the 
knowledge  of  the  self  can  be  had  even  without  the  major 
texts).  And  how  could  the  other  text®  zealously  characte¬ 
rize  the  self  with  the  qualification  that  it  could  be  known 
only  from  the  Upanisads. 

1.  navedavinmanule  lath  brhanUim,  a  lliydyanijry panisad,  4. 

2.  tain  tvaupanisadaiii  purusam  prcchami,  Brit,,  III,  ix,  26. 

[  297  ] 

*  StfA  II 

Philosophers  declare  the  major  texts  to  be  ‘Upanisad’ 
and  ‘Veda’  As  it  cannot  be  said  that  the  realization  of 
the  onenees  of  the  self  that  leads  to  ultimate  goal  can  be 
had  even  without  these  major  texts,  they  are  termed 
‘  Upanisad  ’  and  ‘  Veda’  with  grea.t  faith. 


492 


SAM  K$ EPAg  A  RIRA  KA 


[  298] 

gfdftrcfa  %*Jdm  I 
ftf  Sufaftft?  dfcft  ^T^qm%  II 

Hence  let  the  words  ‘Upanisad’  and  ‘Veda’  present  in 
the  tfruti  texts  be  employed  to  signify  this  major  texts.  As 
all  the  other  statements  uttered  along  with  the  major  text 
are  subsidiary  to  the  latter,  they  are  also  designated  by  the 
words  ‘  Upanisad  ’  and  ‘  Veda  ’ 

vide  the  Upanisadic  texts  cited  in  the  notes  on  S S',  III,  296. 

vide  also  : 

vedyate  jfldpyate’nena  param  brahma  iti  vedah  mahavakyarn, 
ladevopanayati  almanam  brahmatvena  ityupanisad.  S. 

[299  ] 

fqsrr  stows  m 

falSf  II 

Tbo  sentence  ‘He  has  realized  the  oneness  of  the 
self,1  which  occurs  in  the  Chandogyo' panipad,  follow¬ 
ing  the  instruction  of  the  father  in  the  form  ‘Thou  art 
that’,8  is  the  characteristic  mark  indicating  the  (follow¬ 
ing)  sense.  The  words  ‘Upanisad’  and  ‘Veda’  are  ever 
significative  of  the  major  texts.  As  all  the  sentences  other 
than  the  ‘major  texts’  are  proximate  (by  being  subsidiary) 
to  the  latter,  they  are  also  designated  by  the  words 
‘Upanisad’  and  ‘Veda’- 


THIRD  ADHYAYA 


493 


1.  laddhasya  vijajilau,  Clitind.,  VI,  xvi,  3. 

2.  tat  tvarn  asi,  C/iand,  VI,  ix,  4 

[  300  ] 

sqftqsw  qwrcqr#:  i 

q^qqq  qsiftft  q§^  ftq^wqq^q  g  n 

The  word  Upani?ad  signifies  the  knowledge  of  the  sup¬ 
reme  self  by  its  natural  significative  power;  and  it  refers  to 
the  major-texts  by  figuratively  identifying  the  knowledge 
of  the  self  (with  the  major-texts).  In  view  of  the  proximity 
(of  the  major.texts  to  the  knowledge  of  the  self),  (it  has 
been  previously  said1  that)  the  word  ‘Upanisad’  primarily 
conveys  the  major  texts. 

(1)  See  VS\  III,  298. 


[301] 

sqlro^rofafaKwh  feqfdqsiftft  3^qqq  i 
aqftq^  qqqfi^  q^fir  fqq^  11 

The  knowledge  of  the  self  is  conveyed  by  the  word 
‘  Upanisad  ’  In  scripture  and  in  ordinary  experience,  the 
word  is  used  primarily  in  respect  of  the  major  texts,  which 
are  proximate  (to  the  knowledge  of  the  self  by  being  its 
cause)  j  and  secondarily  with  reference  to  the  other  texts 
subsidiary  to  the  major  texts. 

[  302  ] 

qqt  q^qiqqq  w  pt  fqqf^qwq  %  i 
h  ^q  Mm?  Mqftw  to  11 


S.  —  Mi,  P2-  V  Wft  —  ?2. 

Bi. 


494 


SAM  K$EPAg  ARIRAKA 


As  it  is  known  (from  the  Sfruti  texts) 1  that  the  son  has 
realized  the  oneness  of  the  self  from  the  major  text  through 
his  father,  it  is  established  that  the  major  text  alone  is  the 
‘Upanisad’  and  the  ‘Veda’ 

(1)  The  tfruti  texts  are  referred  to  in  Stf ,  III,  299. 

[  303  ] 

fott  R^PfRRdl  R  SRiTOairtfo  | 

No  person  realizes  the  absolute  self  without  the  major 
texts.  Hence  the  knowledge  of  the  senses  of  the  terms  ( tat 
and  tvarn),  being  mediate,  liberation  is  not  attained  by  it. 

[  304] 

w  R  ^RNRl^RflfRlRfR;  | 

&R  RRT^R^%RtRl^:  R  RRR  || 

The  major  text  is  not  capable  of  giving  rise  to  the 
knowledge  culminating  in  the  realization  of  the  self,  with¬ 
out  the  knowledge  of  the  senses  of  the  individual  words. 
As  the  latter  is  thus  required,  it  is  explained  with  great 
effort. 


[  305  ] 

mrxk  RRfvmd  I 

RrRRrR  R  faRlM^  Ril'd  Rfr^RS  IRRT  RdHl  II 

The  absolute  is  known  from  the  term  tat  and  the  inner 
self  is  ascertained  from  the  term  tvam-  The  self  cannot  be 
inward  unless  it  is  absolute  and  it  cannot  be  absolute  with, 
out  being  inward. 


495 


THIRD  ADHTATA 


[  306] 

ftg  *T#fa  n 

The  inner  self  as  absolute  manifests  by  being  reflected 
in  the  mental  state  arising  from  ‘reasoning’  But  it  becomes 
immediate  when  reflected  in  the  unconditioned  mental 
state  arising  from  the  Upanisads.  And  this  is  the  difference 
(between  the  two  mental  states). 

1.  tarkapratitisamaye  -  vicarajanyabuddhivrUidatayam,  TR. 

2.  splmtataram  -  aparoksam ,  TB. 

[307  ] 

3J*WraH?3jfeft  ^qot  qwgfsft  I 

Just  as  one’s  face  is  reflected,  according  to  the  degree 
of  clarity  in  the  mirror  which  is  not  clear,  partially  clear 
and  very  clear  (at  different  times),  so  also  the  self  is  reflected 
in  the  mental  states  (arising  from  the  Vedanta  and  the 
reasoning  severally). 

pralipattisu  -  buddhirrtlisu,  S. 

[  308  ] 

;ngqi  n 

Perceiving  that  part  of  the  subject1  (which  is  associa¬ 
ted  with  the  probans),*  (people)  infer  its  other  part  (as 
associated  with  the  probandum ) 3.  As  there  is  the  interven¬ 
tion  of  the  knowledge  of  the  subject,  inference  is  not  capable 
of  giving  rise  to  the  immediate  knowledge  of  the  (partless)self. 


SAMK$  EPAs'ARlliAKA 


4y6 


It  may  be  objected  that  the  senses  of  the  two  terms  tat  and  tvam 
which  are  clarified  could  be  known  as  identical  through  the  following 
inferential  argument. 

“  The  sense  of  the  term  tat  is  identical  with  the  sense  of  the  term 
tvam;  because  the  two  are  not  of  diverse  nature 

The  result  of  this  argument  is  that  the  knowledge  of  identity 
between  the  senses  of  the  terms  tat  and  tvam  can  be  arrived  at  by 
inferential  argument  and  not  by  the  major  texts  of  the  Upanijads. 

This  contention  is  refuted  in  this  verse  the  sense  of  the  term  tat 
is  only  mediate  and  so  the  inferential  cognition  referring  to  the  identity 
of  the  senses  of  terms  tat  and  tvam  could  only  be  mediate  and  not 
immediate.  Since  only  the  immediate  knowledge  of  identity  between 
the  senses  of  the  terms  tat  and  tvam  alone  could  remove  avidya,  the 
knowledge  of  identity  arising  from  inferential  argument  is  not  effica¬ 
cious  in  dispelling  avidya. 

[  309] 

II 

Thus  the  senses  of  the  terms  tat  and  tvam  are  pure  by 
nature.  If  anything  should  be  known,  enquire  about 
that.  Remember  all  the  things  you  learnt,  and  direct 
your  mind  to  what  has  not  been  known  so  far. 

EXTENT  OF  THE  SUBSIDIARY  UPANI$ADIC 

TEXTS 

[310] 

o 


THIRD  ADHYAtA 


4^7 


Thus  knowing  the  senses  of  the  terms  tat  and  tvam  and 
desiring  to  realize  quickly  the  oneness  of  the  self  through 
the  sentence  tat  tvam  asi  which  is  present  in  the  Upanisads 
and  whose  import  is  the  partless  self ;  and  with  a  mind 
zealous  to  know  the  exact  extent  of  the  group  of  sentences 
subsidiary  to  it  (that  is,  the  sentence  tat  tvam  asi),  the  aspi¬ 
rant  again  enquired  thus. 


[311] 

qfWGRt  W.sqqfa  fa  | 

Even  now  I  am  devoid  of  the  knowledge  of  the  extent 
of  the  subsidiary  sentences.  Hence  the  major  texts  though 
reflected  every  day  are  incapable  of  giving  rise  to  the  know¬ 
ledge  of  the  sense  of  the  sentence  which  has  realization  (of 
the  self)  as  its  result. 


[312] 

q?fa  ^  fal  n 

The  group  of  sentences  which  conveys  the  self  in  the 
affirmative  manner  and  that  which  signifies  it  by  negating 
the  duality  -  these  are  termed  subsidiary  sentences.  Oh ! 
lord,  explain  to  me  the  extent  of  the  subsidiary  sentences. 

[313] 


i.  fuwfa  —  Bj,  B2,  Pi. 
63 


498 


SA  M  K?EPAg  ARtRAKA 


By  distinguishing  between  the  texts  that  point  to  the 
supreme  self  and  the  qualified  self,  and  by  gathering  the 
unrepeated  words  in  the  sentences  of  all  the  Upanisads, 
which  give  rise  to  the  knowledge  of  the  self  you  can  under¬ 
stand  yourself  the  extent  of  the  texts  (pointing  to  the  sup¬ 
reme  self). 


[314] 

for  i 

As  there  cannot  arise  the  knowledge  of  the  absolute 
self  without  gathering  the  unrepeated  words  from  the  other 
Upani§adic  texts,  bring  together  all  those  unrepeated 
words,  out  of  desire  for  the  knowledge  of  the  truth. 

tatastatah  -  tattacchakhcltah,  TB. 

[315] 

First  distinguish  between  the  texts  conveying  the  sup¬ 
reme  self  and  those  signifying  the  qualified  self  And  then 
gather  the  (unrepeated)  words.  Then  (from  the  texts 
conveying  the  supreme  self)  leave  out  with  effort  such 
qualities  as  joy  being  its  head  and  so  on,  as  they  are  quali¬ 
ties  liable  to  increase  and  decrease. 

Sec  the  following  verse. 


[316] 


THIRD  ADHYAYA 


499 


A  wise  man  will  never  relate  to  the  attributeless  self 
the  attributes  like  joy  being  its  head  and  so  on,  which  are 
the  qualities  prone  to  increase  and  decrease  as  they  are  said 
to  be  the  qualities  of  the  sheath  (of  bliss). 

This  verse  is  based  on  the  BS  -  priyai i rastva dyaprS ptirupacaya 
pacayau  hi  bhed?.  Ill,  iii,  12. 


[317] 

sr.f  fa  ar^fq  sw  <iq  n 

Thus  the  extent  of  the  affirmative  sentences  is  explained. 
Listen  to  the  extent  of  the  negative  sentences.  As  there  are 
many  things  that  are  to  be  negated,  gather  the 
unrepeated  words  (conveying  the  things  to  be  negated) 
from  the  other  texts  as  done  previously  (in  the  case  of  the 
affirmative  sentences). 


[318] 

qftfadqfdteffiqfa  it 

In  the  negative  sentences  also,  gather  many  words 
which  are  unrepeated  and  which  negate  the  things  that  are 
to  be  negated  in  the  self.  If  those  words  are  not  gathered, 
then  there  is  the  contingency  of  negation  of  only  limited 
objects  (in  the  self).  [Hence  the  self  cannot  be  established 
as  free  from  all  duality] 


[319] 

3  ^  q^  qqft  wqlrc^qq^  i 
qfafarasqqtS  <r  aw  wwi  u 


500 


SAltiK$EPA& ARtRAKA 


Each  word  in  the  affirmative  statement  has  two  func¬ 
tions,  that  is,  it  conveys  the  essential  nature  of  the  self  and 
(presumptively)  negates  the  superimposed  form-  But  it  is 
not  accepted  so  in  the  case  of  the  negative  sentences. 

[320] 

qft*  I 

*  3  faq^q*pi  q}  q^  n 

The  negative  statements  merely  negate  the  forms  in  the 
self  which  have  arisen  out  of  avidya.  They  do  not  (like 
affirmative  ones)  refer  to  some  form  and  convey  it  (as  the 
essential  nature  of)  the  supreme  status  of  God. 

[321] 

fqtrq  &  qfeqrf^t  i 

Thus  the  difference  between  the  affirmative  and  the 
negative  statement  has  been  explained-  But  the  gathering 
of  the  unrepeated  words  is  similar  to  both  the  affirmative 
and  negative  statements- 

[  322] 

rftfq  **<iq?T;gq3wN  ft  it 

The  thing  which  is  not  negated  by  the  words  which 
are  gathered  together  should  be  negated;  and  for  that 
purpose  the  word  which  would  convey  the  negation  (of  the 
thing  which  is  not  yet  negated)  also  must  be  added  to  the 
negative  statements.  This  is  accepted  by  the  druti  text 

?•  —  Bi,  wfastfatT;  —  B2. 

—  B2.  Ml-  V  !??  —  P2.  ».  —  B;. 

v9  \S  ^ 


THIRD  AD HT A  TA 


501 


also.  The  words  found  in  the  iru'i  text  merely  indicate 
the  things  to  be  negated  (and  they  are  not  exhaustive). 

[  323  ] 

agq^qqqi  si  foqfq  sqfa^n-qfaqi  qsg  ii 

But  in  the  case  of  the  self  no  additional  form  is 
accepted,  apart  from  the  forms  conveyed  by  the  words, 
which  are  mentioned  in  the  affirmative  statements  and 
which  are  associated  with  the  words  gathered  (later). 

[  324] 

iwrjr  ^  i 

foqfq  swg*  fk  m  ftqfq  nwirat  *  w  ii 

It  is  not  accepted  that  in  the  case  of  the  self  there  is 
any  form  which  is  not  signified  by  the  words  that  are  either 
studied  (in  the  texts)  or  later  gathered;  for  there  is  no 
proof  to  establish  such  a  form.  Hence  there  is  no  form  of 
the  self1  (apart  from  those  signified  by  the  words  studied 
or  grouped)  • 

1.  u Form  of  the  self”  means  the  essential  nature  of  the  self 
and  not  qualities. 

[325  ] 

giffiqr  fk  q^ift  qw*rc>  i 

garnoTt  gforawfirar  gift  qqft  m  fk  qq  n 

In  the  affirmative  and  the  negative  statements,  the 
words  stand  as  subservient  to  the  self  (by  giving  rise  to  its 
knowledge).  Wherever  there  is  the  principal  thing,  there 
the  group  of  subsidiary  things  is  present  as  dependent  on 
the  principal  thing- 


!502 


SAM  KfEPAtf  AR1RAKA 


[326] 

qftqFJffi*dq  *rci  Sfifad  I 

q^q*  aq  q*$  dfef  m  31a:  n 

[The  preceptor  says]  :  — 

On  the  basis  of  the  arguments,  the  extent  of  the 
affirmative  and  the  negative  statement  has  been  explained. 
If  there  is  any  other  thing  you  desire  to  know,  reveal  that 
in  our  presence  (by  putting  questions). 


THE  PROXIMATE  AND  THE  REMOTE 
MEANS  OF  KNOWLEDGE 

[  327  ] 

fTRSfriR  ^qqfaft:  || 

Explain  to  me  through  reasoning  the  means  to  the 
knowledge  (of  the  self ),  namely,  the  proximate  and  remote 
means  (by  mutually)  distinguishing  them  in  the  form  (this< 
one  should  be  observed’  and  ‘this  one  is  to  be  abandoned’. 

[328  ] 

qqqnqirf  quqfa  qfaft:  qq^  i 
<qrqq*rq  qfinwqM  q?qa:  qaaqtefaq^  n 

The  proximate  means  should  be  observed  with  effort 
by  the  ascetic  who  longs  for  the  knowledge  of  the  self. 
And  the  remote  means  should  be  abandoned  with  effort  by 


THIRD  AD HT Af A 


503 


the  ascetics  who  are  afraid  of  a  fall  (from  the  stage  of  an 
ascetic). 

apavargah  — jflanarn,  SS. 

[  329  ] 

3Rlf?srf5*W*ta<l*  II 

This  is  the  reply  •  listen,  I  shall  elucidate  to  you  the 
means  to  the  knowledge  (of  the  self),  the  means  which 
have  been  explained  by  the  author  of  the  Brahma- sutra  by 
distinguishing  them  as  proximate  and  remote. 

[  330] 

3RWWTS3  II 

All  that  which  is  heard  (that  is,  taught)  as  the  means  to 
the  rise  of  the  desire  for  knowledge,1  is  remote  means  (to 
the  knowledge  of  the  self).  And  that  which  is  heared  (that 
is,  taught)  as  the  means  to  the  knowledge  of  the  self  is 
proximate  means  * 

1.  Bfh.,  IV,  iv,  22. 

2.  Brh.,  IV,  iv,  23. 


[331] 

qf$  qsrcraqwwK*  are*  fw  i 
aifWiFffafc  3  qqfa  q?»rci3rci  n 

The  remote  means  to  the  knowledge  of  the  self  are 
known  to  be  the  productive  factors  (that  is,  sacrifice, 
penance,  etc).  The  proximate  means,  on  the  other  hand, 


504 


SAttk$kPAtfAktRAFA 


are  those  which  are  the  revealing  media  of  the  supreme  self 
(that  is,  Vedantic  study,  reasoning,  and  meditation). 

[  332] 

sqfPftfq  q^^R^n  m  qfddt  II 

Just  as  the  ascetic  swerves  from  his  state  the  moment 
he  observes  the  productive  factors,  so  also  he  falls  from  his 
state  the  moment  he  fails  to  pursue  the  media  revealing 
the  self. 


[  333  J 

qtqqmftqq  ft  fqfqf^gfoqa!  i 

*  fqftqt«msra^ii 

The  Vedic  text  Vividi§anti ,  etc.,1  declares  that  the  acts 
(sacrifice,  penance]  have  for  their  object  (the  desire  for 
the  knowledge  of  the  self,  which  is)  the  sense  of  the 
(desiderative)  suffix.  The  acts  are  not  employed  with 
reference  to  the  knowledge  of  the  self  (that  is,  the  sense  of 
the  root  vid). 

1.  Brh.,  IV,  iv,  22. 

The  desiderative  suilix  is  used  in  the  sense  of  desire  on  the  basis 
of  the  Papini-Sutra  : — 

dhitoh  karmanah  samd naf.artrkii dicchayO rh  vS,  III,  i,  7. 

[  334  ] 

*  qwqqsiq  q*rfq  qtfawwt  i 

tfqfcRqfd  *T  3  II 


i.  —  P2.  P2. 


7  IlIKI)  AD!  I  TATA 


505 


The  religious  acts  which  are  the  means  do  not  have 
a  ny  relation  with  ‘knowledge’  (that  is,  the  sense  of  the  root 
vid)  by  leaving  out  the  primary  sense  (that  is,  the  desire 
for  knowledge  which  is  the  sense  of  the  suffix).  The 
religious  acts  are  related  to  the  desire  for  knowledge  and 
never  with  knowledge. 

[  335  ] 

Venerable  Panini,  whose  rules  (on  grammar)  cannot 
be  disregarded,  states  as  a  general  rule  that  the  sense  of 
the  suffix  is  primary  (to  that  of  the  root).  Hence  here, 
knowledge  (being  the  sense  of  the  root  vid)  is  not  primary. 

1  vide  the  Pd nhii-Su ha 

pradlul napralyayd  rthavacanamarlhasyanyaprama nnl;>a  I,  I,  ii,  50. 

ulsasarja  —  utsargona  jhapitavan,  SS. 

[  33G  ] 

The  sage  (Paninil  has  not  stated  any  exception  in  the 
case  of  the  desiderative  suffix,  in  which  case  the  sense  of  the 
suffix  would  become  secondary  to  the  sense  of  the  root. 

Mllirti'/islitnali  —  il/iafvarlliasyti,  .V. 

Arlliarnsliiitiih  is  the  reading  adopted  in  S.  Others,  however, 
prefer  the  reading  nrthnvaslu  iitilj  and  construe  the  word  arthaoAslu  with 
[iriityarabhihitam  and  take  it  to  mean  icchakhyam  rastu  This  reading  is 
not  adopted,  as  we  have  to  take  the  sense  —  “the  sense  of  the  root” 
(which  is  got  by  adopting  the  reading  arthavaslwmh)  as  understood. 

64 


5or> 


,V/i  a'/  /cs  fj'as  A  /{Ira  ka 


[  337  ] 

Tldt:  Tdk  qrqno|ft^?S^- 

5f  ^d?qfwi  | 

f$  rlW  ^ 

f^RT  fRfRxT^qt  ’T^JT  gs^rl  II 

Oil  !  Long  lived  one.  The  Sulm  -  dlultoh  karmannh, 
etc.,  staled  by  Panini  does  not  verbally  eonvey  the 
primary  nature  of  the  sense  of  the  root  (that  is,  knowledge) 
which  is  required  for  the  relation  of  religious  acts  to  it  (that 
is,  the  sense  of  the  root  -  knowledge).  But  the  primary 
nature  of  the  sense  of  the  root  is  presumptively  known  and 
it  is  reasonable.  And  the  restriction  of  (the  scope  of)  the 
general  rule  without  any  (valid)  reason  is  not  appropriate. 

It  is  objected  :  the  sense  of  the  root,  being  the  object  of  desire 
that  is,  the  sense  of  sullix,  is  primary  and  hence  the  religious  acts  are 
related  to  the  sense  of  the  root,  that  is,  knowledge,  which  is  primary 
and  not  to  the  sense  of  the  suffix,  namely,  the  desire  for  the  knowledge 
of  the  self.  And  the  primary  nature  of  the  sense  of  the  root  is  known 
from  the  Panini-Sutra  — 

dhatoh  karmanah  samci nakarl rkadicchd  nl rii  ud,  III,  i,  7. 

This  objection  is  refuted  in  this  verse.  Sarvajiiatman  points  out 
that  the  sense  of  the  root  is  primary  only  by  being  the  object  of  the 
sense  of  the  suflix  and  hence  its  primary  nature  is  presumptively  known. 
The  religious  acts  could  have  relation  with  the  sense  of  the  root, 
namely,  knowledge,  only  when  the  primary  nature  of  the  latter  is 
verbally  expressed.  But  here,  as  its  primary  nature  is  only  presum¬ 
ptively  known,  religious  acts  cannot  have  relation  with  it,  that  is,  they 
cannot  be  subordinated  to  it. 

[  338  ] 

vnm:  rtctw 


THIRD  AD II)  A  T'A 


507 


trtSpi  g  qOTTqddqteiftd 

ddqiqstgqq^tfRqgdT  II 

The  Sutra  -  datoh  karmanah,  etc.,  is  general'  (that  is* 
it  does  not  point  out  whether  the  primary  nature  of  the 
sense  of  the  root  is  presumptively  known  or  verbally 
expressed,);  for,  in  this  Sutra  there  is  no  word  that  could 
indicate  whether  it  (that  is,  the  primary  nature  of  the  sense 
of  the  root)  is  verbally  expressed  or  presumptively  known. 
Here  the  word  that  signifies  the  sense  of  the  root  to  be  the 
object,  is  alone  used.  And  this,  being  reasonable  even 
when  it  is  presumptively  known  that  it  is  primary,  does  not 
supersede  the  general  rule  (that  the  sense  of  the  suffix  is 
primary). 

[  339  ] 

^iqifafd  HrTFqqsf 

smqq  dg  qg^wl  301^- 

q^frl  || 

The  word  iccha  used  by  the  author  of  the  Sutra  (Panini) 
would  be  reasonable,  only  if  the  sense  of  desire  is  primary 
and  not  indeed  when  the  sense  of  the  desiderative  suffix 
(that  is,  desire)  is  secondary.  If  desire  is  secondary,  then  he 
would  have  said  that  the  desiderative  suffix  should  be  used 
in  the  sense  of  the  root.  But  he  says  that  it  should  be  used 
in  the  sense  of  desire  and  hence  he  means  that  the  sense  of 
desire  is  primary. 

[  340  ] 

dSRdd  |q  qd:  | 
qmddqf  *Td 


SAKt  KfEPASf  ARIRAKA 


50!) 


Here  all  the  rituals  stated  by  the  scripture  are  the 
means  to  the  rise  of  the  desire  for  the  knowledge  of  the  self* 
Hence  all  of  them  should  be  carefully  abandoned  (by  one 
who  is  already  having  the  desire  for  the  knowledge  of  the 
self).  And  that  which  has  been  stated  in  the  tfruti  text  as 
the  means  to  the  knowledge  of  the  self  such  as  Vedantic 
study,  etc.,  should  be  necessarily  observed. 

1.  Brh.  II,  iv,  5. 

[341  ] 

qftqi^faql'TTlR  I 

smRi 

w^q^mq  ar  n 

And  here  the  Upani^adic  text  is  the  (direct)  cause  of 
the  knowledge  of  the  self  And  the  other  means  are  meant 
to  overcome  the  obstacles.  The  performance  of  sacrifices, 
etc.,  eliminates  all  sins  from  the  mind,  while  the  latter  ones 
(proximate  means  such  as  Vedantic  study,  etc.,)  remove 
cividya  regarding  the  senses  of  the  terms  tat  and  tvam. 

C  342  ] 

WR^R^if 

tfm^Rqrfw  ^  fam  ii 

From  the  standpoint  of  ordinary  men,  it  is  said  that 
nescience  has  the  senses  of  terms  tat  and  tvam  as  its  content. 
But  from  the  standpoint  of  those  who  know  the  true  import 
of  the  terms,  there  is  only  one  avidya  which  is  the  root-cause 
of  transmigration.  And  the  knowledge  of  the  self  has 
liberation  as  its  result. 


THIRD  ADIITATA 


509 


[  343  ] 

<H^raf5mTfoT  fomfci  fnif%Hfrf  n^qonf^Rifa  n 

Ignorance,  doubt,  and  erroneous  notion  regarding  the 
senses  of  the  terms  tat  and  tvam  are  the  obstacles  in  the  way 
of  realization  of  the  oneness  of  the  self.  And  the  repeated 
(Vedantic)  study,  reasoning  and  meditation  (upon  the  self) 
remove  all  these  obstacles. 

ajhdnam  —  td  tparyd  dijild  ndbhavah 

saiiidayali  —  ahum  brahma  I'd  na  va  ilyevama diru pah 

viparyayah  —  ahani  kar  hirer  amd  dir  u  pah ,  TB. 

I  3441 

5K$ifofqq4  wg-td  3*:  I 

q*3i^fqqq  f^^qar  3%^  n 

Wise  men  hold  that  the  ascertainment  of  the  import 
of  the  Upani^ads  by  the  six-fold  means1  is  known  as 
•study’  And  the  determination  of  the  unity  of  Being  by 
arguing  (within  oneself)  is  stated  to  be  ‘reasoning’. 

1.  yuktilah  —  upakramadibhih 

upakramn' pasamhard vabhyd so' pu  rvatd  phahim 
arlhavd dupapalli  calihyaiii  tdlparyanirnaye,  TB 

!.  '45  J 

Those  who  believe  in  the  Veda  hold  that  ‘meditation’ 
signifies  the  resting  of  the  mind  (in  an  intense  manner,) 
on  the  pure  consciousness.  Thus  the  proximate  means 
have  been  stated ;  and  pursue  them  for  attaining  the 
realization  of  the  supreme  self 


510 


SA  A/  KS  RPA  S'  A  RIRA  K  A 


[346] 

srpsRftstai  $?wsrhihh}  flu 

It  is  stated  by  wise  men  that  the  result  of  the  knowledge 
arising  from  Vedantic  study  and  reasoning  leads  to  the 
realization  (of  the  self).  And  the  knowledge  in  the  form 
(I  am  the  supreme  self)  which  arises  after  Vedantic  study 
and  reasoning  and  which  is  devoid  of  immediacy  is  indeed 
‘meditation’. 

In  this  view  ‘meditation’  need  not  be  pursued  like  Vedantic  study 
and  reasoning,  as  it  is  the  result  of  the  latter  two.  The  view  set  forth 
in  this  verse,  according  to  S', 9  is  advocated  by  Suits  vara. 
vide:  also  Sl.S,  p.  ‘id. 


[347  ] 

The  former  (means,  that  is,  sacrifice  etc.,)  remove  the 
obstacle  in  the  form  of  unseen  (demerit),  And  the  latter 
(means,  that  is,  Vedantic  study,  etc.,)  eliminate  the  obstacle 
in  the  form  of  erroneous  notion,  etc.,  (regarding  the  import 
of  the  Upani$ads).  When  all  these  obstacles  are  removed,  ' 
the  sentence  imparts  the  knowledge  of  the  absolute  partless 
self  which  is  not  so  far  realized. 

[  348  ] 

is  m\  \\ 


THIRD  AD!  DATA 


511 


To  those  whose  mind  is  free  from  all  demerits  by  the 
performance  of  sacrifices,  and  who  are  devoid  of  any 
attachment  to  the  three,  namely,  son,  (wealth  and 
world),1  and  who  have  clarified  the  concepts  of  the  two 
terms  'tat  and  tvam )  which  are  the  means  to  the  knowledge 
of  the  self,  there  gradually  arises  the  knowledge  of  the  self 
in  this  life  itself. 

I.  viihr.  Hr h,,  IV,  iv,  TK 

[  349] 

3J5TC  spifft  I 

The  intuitive  knowledge  of  the  self  leading  to  liberation 
would  arise  from  the  (Upani$adic)  sentence  in  this  life  itself. 
But,  owing  to  some  causes  which  obstructs  its  rise, 
knowledge  would  arise  in  the  next  life  ;  and  this  is  known 
from  the  Sruti  (and  smrti)  statements.1 

1.  See  t lie  following  verse. 


[  350  ] 

Uidfafo  ftu:  or 4  mtror  i 

*rm  sh-'wi  n 

After  studying  (the  scripture  declaring;  the  rise  of 
knowledge  to  Vamadeva  when  he  was  in  his  (mother’s) 
womb,  we  understand  that  he  should  have  adopted  the 
means  to  knowledge  in  his  previous  life.  Similarly  on  the 
basis  of  the  smrti  text  Togabhrasta,  etc.,  we  should  know 
that  Vamadeva  pursued  the  means  to  knowledge  in  his 
previous  life- 

The  sruli  and  smrti  texts  referred  to  here  are 

1.  Ail  ,  II,  i,  5.  2.  lth.  G  ,  VI,  41. 


512 


SA  M  KS  EPAg  A  III R A KA 


[351] 

mWTcWSl  I 

Understand  that  the  entire  means  give  rise  to  know¬ 
ledge  (either  in  this  life  or  in  the  next  life)  like  the  ritual 
named  Citra.  But  the  ritual  which  has  rain  as  its  fruit 
gives  its  fruit  here  itself,  owing  to  the  competence  of  the 
sacrificer  whose  crops  have  become  dry  for  want  of  rain  at 
the  time  of  performing  the  sacrifice.1 

1.  One  who  wants  rain  to  the  crops  which  are  dry  is  to  perform 
the  ritual  named  f\d riri.  The  ritual,  when  performed  according  to 
the  prescribed  rules,  invariably  gives  rise  to  rain  immediately. 

The  Vedic  texts  kept  in  view  in  this  verse  are 

i)  citmya  jiijiia  /w.s* iilrimalj 

ii)  Laiiiyd  ra/Wa  vrstikamah. 

[  352  ] 

^<7n*pqr:  I 

RqqRqqfqqqjmq  n 

The  remote  means,  when  dedicated,  according  to  the 
prescribed  rules,  to  the  lotus.like  feet  of  God,  who  is  the 
sovereign  of  the  universe,  remove  (even)  the  horrid  defects 
present  in  the  mind. 

[  353  ] 

But  the  proximate  means  such  as  control  of  mind  and 
external  senses  which  are  useful  in  giving  rise  to  the 
knowledge  (of  the  self)  are  not  so  (that  is,  they  need  not  be 
dedicated  to  God),  When  pursued  by  the  ascetics,  they 
give  rise  to  the  knowledge  of  the  supreme  self, 


THIRD  AD HV A  l  A 


Mi 


[354] 

qqqfqqifcftq^  % qqr  Suffer.  I 
qq4  qfa  ^qwr:  f*  n 

Lord  Kq^a  who  is  devoid  of  origin  and  destruction) 
and  who  is  keen  on  the  welfare  of  the  universe,  frequently 
says  with  compassion  (thus) :  “Being  attached  towards  me, 
do  the  religious  acts  that  purify  (the  mind)  by  dedicating 
(their  fruit)  to  me-”1 

1.  vide  fill.  G.,  in,  30;  XII,  10; 

[  355  ] 

q  ft  | 

Nowhere  does  he  state  the  renunciation  of  the  fruit  of 
the  proximate  means.  Since  the  latter  has  the  knowledge 
of  the  supreme  self  as  its  fruit,  it  is  known  that  it  should  be 
pursued  without  renouncing  its  fruit. 

[  356  ] 

sift  =q  qwtscw  ^  ’qqqq^wtwiftq:  i 

q  =q  w  ^  ^  h 

Moreover,  the  religious  rites  which  are  known  to  be 
the  cause  ol  bondage,  purify  the  mind  of  one  who  performs 
them  by  dedicating  their  fruit  to  God.  Then  they  do  not 
become  the  cause  of  bondage,  but  only  purify  the  mind. 

[  357  ] 

qfts  qiqqqprqm:  q  q*5RR|gqqT  gqq;  i 
JWqTf^qsr  3  q  || 

i.  «3Rism'ta3<n  —  Bi.  vr*g  —  P2.  ^3  —  Mi. 

65 


514 


SAM  K$EPAg AIURAKA 


But  the  means  to  the  knowledge  of  the  sell'  such  as 
control  of  mind  and  external  senses  are  not  known  to  be 
the  cause  of  any  other  fruit.  It  does  not  require  any  other 
factor  (that  is,  dedication  of  its  fruit  to  the  Lord)  to  give 
rise  to  the  knowledge  of  the  self. 

[  358  ] 

fq^rci  351:  f 

^  fq?ir  fqqiqR  ^  11 

So  far  the  group  of  the  means  for  the  rise  of  the  know¬ 
ledge  has  been  stated.  And  the  ascetic  is  prompted  towards 
the  means  (that  is,  Vcdantic  study,  etc.,)  by  the  Vedic 
injunction.1  The  entire  means  should  be  pursued  by  you 
through  the  annihilation  of  the  feeling  that  you  are  an 
agent,  which  (that  is,  annihilation)  is  contributory  to  the 
rise  of  the  knowledge.  Then  the  knowledge  will  become 
fully  ripened. 

1.  vide  Brh.,  II,  iv,  5. 

[  359  ] 

When  the  means  in  the  form  of  Vedantic  study,  etc-, 
arc  pursued  by  the  hermits,  householders,  one  who  has 
taken  the  vow  of  celibacy  and  by  others  belonging  to  any 
class  or  stage  of  life,  at  the  time  they  are  free  from  obliga¬ 
tory  rites,  they  give  rise  to  the  knowledge  of  the  self  in  the 


THIRD  ADHTAYA 


515 


next  life  (when  they  take  up  the  ascetic  stage  oflife). 
There  is  no  scripture  prohibiting  them  from  Vedantic 
study,  like  the  one  prohibiting  the  3udras. 

[  360] 

gfa:  Trut*  i 

3HR  aisr’isrs  ftgsqiTR:  11 

The  ascetic  who  is  having  his  head  shaved,  who  is  pure 
and  well-known  to  be  a  paramahariisa,1  and  who  is  directed 
towards  the  means  (namely,  Vedantic  study,  etc.,)  for  the 
rise  of  the  knowledge  (  of  the  self )  by  numerous  Sruti  and 
smrti  texts,  generally  attains  the  ripened  knowledge  in  this 
life  itself 

1.  vide  the  Jabalo'panisad,  5. 

[361] 

mrwqi^ld  nm  fl$3tsfq  rr 

ftqRRW:  II 

If  one  adopted  the  means  in  the  form  of  Vedantic 
study,  etc,,  in  the  previous  life  by  being  an  ascetic  (and  if 
knowledge  did  not  arise  owing  to  some  impediment  in  that 
life),  we  do  not  gainsay  that  one  would  attain  the  know¬ 
ledge  (of  the  self)  in  the  next  life  irrespective  of  the  stage 
oflife  which  one  leads  then. 

Sannyasa,  according  to  Sarvajnatinan,  becomes  the  means  of  the 
knowledge  of  the  self  by  giving  rise  to  unseen  merit.  The  impediments 


1 


516 


SA  to  KSEPAS'ARfRA  KA 


present  in  the  mind  of  the  aspirant  are  too  many;  some  are  removable 
by  the  unseen  merit  that'arises  from  the  performance  of  karma  without 
any  attachment  towards  its  fruit,  and  others  are  removable  by  the 
unseen  merit  that  arises  when  one  adopts  sannyasa-a  drama  and  pursues 
the  duties  relating  to  that  stage.  If  one  pursues  dravana ,  etc.,  by 
remaining  a  sannyasin  and  if  the  knowledge  of  the  self  does  not  arise 
in  this  birth  because  of  certain  impediments,  then  the  knowledge  of 
the  self  will  definitely  arise  to  one  in  the  next  birth.  It  one  pursues 
dravaiia,  etc  ,  without  being  a  sannyasin,  then  the  knowledge  of  the  self 
will  not  arise  in  this  birth  because  the  impediments  which  arc 
removable  by  the  unseen  merit  that  would  arise  from  adopting 
sannyasa-a  drama  exist  since  the  aspirant  has  not  taken  up  sannyasa. 
To  such  an  aspirant  the  knowledge  of  the  self  would  arise  in  a  next 
birth,  and  that  too,  after  he  adopts  sannyasa-a drama. 

Other  preceptors  hold  that  the  unseen  merit  arising  from  adopting 
sannyasa-a  d rama  is  one  of  the  qualifications  of  an  aspirant  who  pursues 
dravana,  etc. 

For  details  see  SLS,  pp.  427-f! . 

[  362  J 

ft  srerefts  qft  u 

Those  who  have  pure  mind  and  who  have  become 
ascetics  then,  and  who  pursue  (the  Vedantic  study,  etc.,)  by 
renouncing  everything,  ascertain  the  nature  of  the  self  by  the 
knowledge  arising  from  the  Upani§ads.  [And  because  the 
knowledge  is  not  ripened],  they  remain  in  the  world  of 
Hiratjyagarbha  and  having  the  ripened  knowledge  they 
attain  liberation. 


This  verse  is  from  Mund .,  Ill,  ii,  6. 


THIRD  ADHYATA 


517 


RENUNCIATION  FROM  ACTIVITIES -A 
PROXIMATE  MEANS  TO  MOK§A 

[  363  ] 

snswraifa  ^$dl  *TCW  ^  I 

There  is  no  other  wealth  in  the  case  of  a  Brahmin, 
than  solitude,  evenness  of  mind  (in  success  and  in  failure) 
truthfulness,  good  conduct,  keeping  within  bounds  of  mora¬ 
lity,1  abstention  from  injury  to  any  being,®  rectitude,  and 
renunciation  from  all  activities. 

This  verse  is  from  the  Mahabharata  [. Moksadharma ,  169-35.] 

1.  sthitih  -  maryada  natikramah 

2.  dandanidhanam  -  hiiiisanivrttih 

[  364] 

it  i 

^  liwft  II 

One  gets  released  from  the  thing  which  one  renounces. 
By  refraining  from  all  activities  one  does  not  experience 
even  an  iota  of  misery. 

[365  ] 

f%  ^  ^  i 

mu  far  ^  n 

Oh  !  brahmin,  as  you  arc  going  to  die  (at  one  time), 
what  is  the  use  of  wealth,  relatives  or  wife  ?  Where  have 


518 


SAMK$  EPAg  ARt  RAKA 


your  forefathers  and  father  gone  ? 
into  the  nature  of  the  self  that  dwells 


(Hence)  you  enquire 
in  the  intellect- 


gtth  am  pro  vis  tain  -  buddhyantaranupravistam,  AP. 


[  366  ] 

31W  ft:  SjRf  ^  ^  I 

srfcq  ^rqrf^  ^?r  ^  trqfaw  n 

Fraud  and  patience  are  the  sources  of  wealth  ;  hand¬ 
some  appearance,  young  age  and  beautiful  body  are  the 
sources  of  sensual  pleasure  ;  and  sacrifice,  etc.,  compassion 
and  control  of  senses  are  the  basis  of  virtue.  And  the 
renunciation  of  all  activities  is  the  basis  of  self  realization. 


I!  ii 

U] 

QUESTION  REGARDING  THE  FRUIT  OF  THE 
KNOWLEDGE  OF  THE  SELF 

m\  fk  JN'wfa  I 

5i?WT?*mfcR5T  HgqsrHfc^i  u 

[The  disciple  asks]*. 

Now,  there  arises  in  my  mind  the  desire  to  know  what 
kind  of  result  does  the  knowledge  of  the  inner  self  which 
arises  from  the  means  mentioned  before,  give  the  aspirant 
longing  for  liberation? 


C2] 

f%  i 

Does  the  knowledge  of  the  self  itself  unaided  by  any 
auxiliary  cause  give  the  result?  Or,  does  it,  by  being 
largely  assisted  by  the  external  means  give  the  result? 

[3] 

I  wish  to  know  this  also,  and  you,  having  the  mind 
overwhelmed  by  compassion  towards  me,  ascertain  this  (by 
removing  my  doubts).  And  indeed  is  not  developing  the 
knowledge  of  the  disciple  alone  the  characteristic  of  a 
compassionate  preceptor? 


520  SAM  h  SKPAS  ARIRAKA 

THE  FRUIT  OF  THE  KNOWLEDGE  OF  THE  SELF 


[4] 

'^q^qqfq  *  *q^q  q;^ifq;ft  =q  n 

It  is  replied  thus  :— The  result  of  the  knowledge  of  the 
self  is  none  other  than  the  annihilation  of  nescience.  And 
the  knowledge,  without  regard  for  the  other  means  in  the 
least,  gives  rise  to  its  result. 

[5] 

frqfq  m  =q  n 

Apart  from  the  annihilation  of  avidya  abiding  in  (the 
consciousness  delimited  by)  the  nacre,  no  other  result  is  seen 
(to  ensue)  from  the  rise  of  the  knowledge  of  the  nacre  as 
object.  And  it  (namely,  the  knowledge  of  nacre)  does  not 
have  any  other  auxiliary  cause  (to  annihilate  the  avidya 
present  in  the  consciousness  delimited  by  nacre). 

[6] 

^q^q  n 

Similarly,  apart  from  the  annihilation  of  avidya  abiding 
in  the  self,  no  other  result  arises  from  the  knowledge  of  the 
self.  And  the  knowledge  of  the  self  gives  forth  its  result 
without  requiring  any  other  auxiliary  cause. 

[7] 

qmq 


Roukrn  ad nr M a 


521 


$  SWRTq^feqwfq  T&  foNfa  qqWT^  II 

The  knowledge  of  the  self  indisputably  becomes  a 
proof,  and  there  is  no  controversy  about  this.  The  inner 
self  identical  with  the  supreme  self  is  unitary  and  it  does 
not  have  diverse  forms.  And  the  druti  texts  have  it  as  its 
import.  When  such  is  the  case,  the  annihilation  of  the 
root-cause  of  duality  is  the  result  of  the  knowledge  of  the 
absolute  self.  And  from  this  proof,  no  other  result  ensues 
apart  from  the  annihilation  of  avidya. 

r «] 

^  fw  JT  m  *K*?*;q^  II 

When  the '  prescribed  rituals  which  are  performed 
without  any  desire  for  the  result,  which  are  dedicated  to 
God  and  which  are  devoid  of  their  respective  desired  result, 
are  abandoned  by  the  knowledge  (in  giving  rise  to  its  result), 
the  rituals  which  are  performed  out  of  desire  for  the  result 
are  (certainly)  not  required  by  the  knowledge  (in  giving 
rise  to  its  result)- 

REFUTATION  OF  JMNAKARMA  - 
SAMUCGAYA  -  VADA 

[9] 

*  ft  suffer  faq:  qgffctdi 
W  3  m  siwqtqqfa:  n 

The  combination  of  rituals  and  knowledge  having  equal 
or  unequal  emphasis  is  not  reasonable;  for.  at  the  time  of  the 

66 


SAM  K?EPAgARIRAKA 


5‘22 

rise  of  the  knowledge  (of  the  self),  the  universe  does  not 
exist  (that  is,  it  is  annihilated).  Alas!  wherefore  can 
there  be  the  (existence  of  the)  group  of  the  prescribed 
rituals  and  how  is  the  combination  of  rituals  and  knowledge 
reasonable? 

[10] 

mfa  srrf ffcqrar 

^13  frolwrrcr  ii 

Moreover,  if  the  ascetic  who  has  renounced  all  desires, 
should  attain  the  intuitive  knowledge  of  the  self  by  the 
(proximate)  means,  how  could  there  be  the  requirement  of 
the  rituals  for  (the  rise  of)  the  intuitive  knowledge  (of  the 
self)?  Hence  let  there  be  liberation  to  the  aspirant  by 
knowledge  alone, 

[11] 

The  significative  element,  etc-,  convey  the  subsidiary 
nature  (of  a  particular  rite)  only  when  the  latter  comes 
within  the  scope  of  the  injunction  of  principal  rite.  The 
significative  element,  etc.,  are  not  present  in  the  case  of  the 
knowledge  of  the  self  (as  the  latter  does  not  come  within  the 
scope  of  any  injunction  of  the  principal  rite).  Hence,  in 
our  system,  the  knowledge  of  the  self  is  the  cause  of  human 
goal. 

1.  iruliliiigavBkyaprakaranaslhanasamSkhya,  etc.,  Jaimini-Suira, 

3 — 3—7/14. 

v  *t<t;  Mi;  »  —  Bj;  — P2;  V  °,n!!n —  Mi. 


FOURTH  ADHYAYA 


52$ 


Prayoga-vidhi  is  the  injunctive  text  which  prescibes  the  principal  rite 
and  which  is  associated  with  the  sentences  enjoining  the  subsidiaries  to 
the  principal  religious  rite. 

It  might  be  said  that  the  knowledge  of  the  self  is  subsidiary  to 
sacrifices,  by  giving  rise  to  some  unseen  merit  to  the  sacrifice!'.  This 
is  refuted  by  saying  that  the  significative  element,  etc.,  convey  the 
subsidiary  nature  of  a  thing.  But  the  latter  should  occur  in  the  con¬ 
text  of  injunction  of  principle  rite.  As  the  knowledge  of  the  self  does 
not  occur  in  the  context  of  any  injunction  of  the  principle  rite,  there 
is  no  significative  clement  which  could  convey  its  subsidiary  nature. 

NATURE  OF  THE  REMOVAL  OF  AVIDYA 

[12] 

The  removal  of  avidya  is  accepted  to  be  (of  the  form  of 
an  indefinable  fifth  kind)  different  from  being  real,  unreal, 
real-cum- unreal  and  indeterminable,  on  the  only  ground 
that  it  (namely,  the  removal  of  avidya)  would  be  inexplicable 
if  it  is  otherwise.  v 

For  details  see  Introduction,  p.  80. 
pralipaksam  -  vilaksanam,  TB 


[13] 

The  difficulties  present  in  the  view  that  the  removal  of 
avidya  is  (either)  real,  (or)  unreal,  (or)  real-cum-unreal  or 
indeterminable,  are  not  present  in  the  view  described  before- 


52* 


SAKfKSEPA^  ARtRAKA 


(that  is,  the  removal  of  nescience  is  different  from  being 
real,  unreal,  real-cum-unreal,  and  indeterminable). 

partibaddhSh  -  airildh ,  S. 

pratibhSsavrttayah  •  pratibhSsah,  TB 

U4] 

By  rejecting  (the  views)  that  the  removal  of  nescience 
is  either  different  from  the  self,  or  identical  with  it,  or 
different  from  and  identical  with  it  at  once,  or  indetermin- 
ble,  those  who  are  experts  in  (determining  the  nature  of) 
liberation  hold  (that  it  is  an  indefinable  fifth  kind). 

Here  the  epithet  muktikovidah,  refers  to  the  auther  of  the 
Iffasiddhi. 

See  Ijtasiddhi,  p.  85. 

[15] 

amr  fafefa  i 

Si^rfsRT  II 

Or  else,  the  attributeless  self  itself  becomes  the  seme  of 
the  word  'annihilation  of  nescience’,  throhgtr  the  limiting 
condition,  namely,  the  mental  state  arising  from  the 
(Upani§adic)  sentence  ( tat  tvam  asi). 

This  verse  puts  forth  the  Advaitins’  conclusive  view  on  the  nature 
of  the  removal  of  avidya, 

vide !  avidya  dhifthanabhutatmaiva  tannivrttih,  kalpitina madhif [hi 
nStiriktabhSvanirupa^at,  tataica  sS  sadrupaiva  iti  siddhd ntarahasyamO ha, 

SS. 


[16] 


525 


FOURTH  ADHTA  YA 

Just  as  the  word  drtihari 1  refers  to  a  dog  (through  the 
medium,  namely,  the  nature  of  being  an  animal),  so  also  the 
pure  consciousness  itself  is  spoken  of  as  the  annihilation  of 
nescience  abiding  in  (the  comciousness  delimited  by)  the 
nacre,  through  the  medium,  namely,  the  mental  state  having 
nacre  as  its  object. 

1.  vide  :  haraterdftuiathayoh  pad  an,  Pdnini-suira,  III,  ii,  25. 

Sec  the  following  verses. 


[17] 

g  tow  ii 

It  is  admitted  by  wise  men  that  the  word  drtihari  is 
significative  of  one  which  steals  leather.  And  the  nature  of 
being  an  animal  is  an  adventitious  condition  and  it  is  the 
ground  for  the  use  of  the  word  drtihari  in  the  sense  of  an 
animal  (which  takes  away  leather,  namely,  dog). 

For  further  details  see  Sfj ,  IV,  20. 

[18]  ^ _ 

TOW  SRTOIrqfofa  II 

Similarly  the  expression  annihilation  of  nescience ,  primarily 
conveys  the  inner  consciousness  (delimited  by  nacre), 
through  the  mental  state  in  the  form  of  nacre  which  is  the 
adventitious  condition  and  which  is  the  ground  for  the  use 
of  the  word  (annihilation  of  nescience)  in  that  sense  (inner 
consciousness). 

aftjasB  -  mukhjtiyii  vrtl.yu .  S'.V. 


526 


SAMK?EPAgAftfRAKA 


[19] 

jrfaqqpfcrct  i 

mm fq  *  *1^11 

Just  as  the  conscious  self  (delimited  by  nacre)  is  termed 
‘annihilation  of  nescience  abiding  in  the  nacre’,  only  when 
it  has  the  mental  state  in  the  form  of  nacre  as  its  adventitious 
condition,  so  also  the  faultless,  unitary  consciousness  is 
termed  ‘annihilation  of  nescience’  only  when  it  has  the 
mental  state  (arising  from  the  Upanisads)  as  its  adventitious 
condition  and  not  before  (the  rise  of  the  mental  state). 

[  20  ] 

In  ordinary  experience,  men  and  others  in  whom  the  act 
of  stealing  leather  is  present,  arc  not  termed  drtihari.  But 
the  animal  (the  dog)  in  which  the  act  of  stealing  leather  is 
simply  present  is  alone  termed  drtihari,  by  those  learned  in 
grammar,  in  view  of  (the  presence  of)  the  adventitious 
condition,  namely,  the  nature  of  being  an  animal. 

[2i] 

3mfa  qiqRRi 

s.  °fcsr  —  To  —  Bi,  B2 

0IiV-0  —  Pi  51!?^  —  Mi  °f?r  st*?:  —  P2. 


FOURTH  AD  nr  A  FA 


527 


zm  fk  n 

Though  the  supreme  self  which  is  of  the  nature  of  inner 
seif  remains  in  its  (true)  nature  evenj  before  the  rise  of 
the  mental  state  from  the  (Upani^adic)  sentence,  yet  it  does 
not  become  the  sense  of  the  expression  ‘annihilation  of 
nescience’  then,  because  of  the  absence  of  the  mental  state 
which  is  the  ground  for  the  use  of  the  word  (‘annihilation 
of  nescience’  in  the  sense  of  the  self). 

[22] 

Iraqis  sfci  anraiat 
qqm}  m  ^  qqmgta*  i 

The  expression  Annihilation  of  nescience’  is  not 
conventionally  used  in  a  particular  sense.  The  prior  and 
the  latter  word  ( ajnana  and  daha)  when  compounded 
become  unitary  and  hence  the  compound  ‘annihilation  of 
nescience’  ( ajnana-daha )  signifies  the  self  through  ‘the  rise 
of  the  mental  state’  which  is  the  adventitious  ground  for 
the  use  of  the -word  in  the  sense  of  self. 

See  Introduction,  p.  82. 

[23] 


.V.l  M  K$  UPAS'  A  ttiUAKA 


:»2  R 


Here  also  the  word  drtihari  signifies  an  animal  only 
when  compounded,  and  not  by  the  relation  of  the  meanings 
of  the  parts  (dpti  and  hari).  The  root  hr  is  well-known  to 
be  significative  (of  the  sense  of  taking  away  a  thing),  and 
the  suffix  in  employed  after  the  root  hT  is  significative  (of 
the  agent). 

If  the  relation  of  the  meanings  of  the  parts  of  the  word  dptihari 
is  intended,  then  the  word  would  mean  anything  which  carries  away 
leather.  But  when  two  words  dpti  and  hari  are  compounded,  they 
become  unitary  and  convey  only  the  animal  -  dog  that  takes  away 
leather. 


[  24  3 

The  knowledge  of  the  oneness  of  the  self  as  it  arises 
or  after  having  arisen  from  the  Upani?ads  annihilates  avidyS 
and  its  products.  Hence  it  annihilates  avidya  independent¬ 
ly  of  any  auxiliary  cause.  , 

[25] 

;=fI5T  I 


s.  °*r  —  B|  ».  vrsrwptfferqr  —  P2 


FOURTH  ADIIYAYA 


529 


The  disputant  does  not  evoke  controversy  on  the  point 
that  a  light  removes  darkness  by  its  mere  rise ;  or,  after 
having  arisen  it  removes  (the  darkness)  by  a  lapse  of  only 
one  moment-  Similar  is  the  case  with  the  realization  of 
the  self  that  annihilates  avidya. 

[26] 

ft  fa’ll  5^13- 

vftt  fqtjqfq  ^  II 

Knowledge,  in  order  to  give  its  result,  requires  only 
its  rise  and  nothing  else.  In  ordinary  experience  whichever 
is  a  productive  factor,  requires  something  other  than  its  rise 
to  give  its  result.  Knowledge  (being  a  revealing  medium 
and  not  a  productive  factor)  after  having  arisen  requires 
nothing  else  (to  give  its  result). 

[27J 

ifq  aq  ft 

11 

Jaiminii  who  has  keen  intellect,  desires  to  explain  this 
point  through  reasoning  in  the  aphorism-^*  samprayoge 1, 
etc.,  which  deals  with  (the  definition  of)  perception.  In 
that  aphorism,  the  expression  -  ‘the  rise  of  the  knowledge’ 
has  no  other  function  except  this  (namely,  it  conveys  that 
knowledge  does  not  require  any  other  thing  than  its  own 
rise  to  manifest  the  objects). 

s.  — B9 

67 


530 


SAM  K$EPAg  ARt  RAKA 


1.  salsa  iriprayoge  purusasytndriydndm  buddhij annul 
talpralyaksamanimiltarii  vidyama  nopalarhbhanatvd t,  Jnimini-su  Ira, 

I,  i,  4. 

The  word  janma  in  the  siitra  does  not  serve  any  purpose.  The 
sutra  would  be  intelligible  even  without  this  word;  and  the  sense  of  the 
latter  is  presumptively  known.  Yet,  Jaimini  has  used  the  word  to  show 
that  knowledge  does  not  require  any  other  thing  than  its  mere  rise  to 
manifest  the  objects. 


[28] 

*qq  =q 

qqnf  fofdfo  3  %qfq?qT  11 

Just  as  the  heated  iron  removes  the  water  fpoured  on 
it)  and  itself  becomes  removed  of  heat,  so  also  the  mental 
state  arising  from  the  Upani$ads,  by  its  mere  rise,  removes 
the  water  of  the  ocean  in  the  form  of  transmigration,  and 
itself  becomes  annihilated  by  leaving  only  the  pure 
consciousness. 

LIBERATION  IS  IDENTICAL  WITH  THE  SELF 

[29] 

^5qft?qq  3  fqqrrsrirfo  q^qq[  1 
armi  q«rr  ft  ^rqnftq^qft^  11 

Liberation  is  certainly  immutable  always,  because  it  is 
the  result  of  knowledge.  Whichever  is  so  (that  is,  the 
result  of  knowledge)  is  seen  to  be  of  such  a  nature  (that  is, 
immutable)  like  the  consciousness  delimited  by  shell,  etc.1 


1.  —  Mi. 


FOURTH  ADHYATA  531 

1.  The  true  knowledge  of  shell  removes  the  nescience  abiding 
in  the  consciousness  delimited  by  shell;  and  thereby  the  consciousness 
manifests  itself  The  manifestation  of  consciousness  is  said  to  be  the 
result  of  the  knowledge.  And  the  consciousness  is  immutable. 

[30] 

*  srat  ft  II 

The  consciousness  delimited  by  shell,  etc,,  is  devoid  of 
the  six-fold  change  of  an  entity,  namely,  origin,  etc.1 
Indeed  the  knowledge  of  the  antecedent  negation,  etc.,  of 
consciousness  is  not  reasonable  either  by  itself  or  by  another 
proof*. 

1.  jayate,  asti,  vardhate ,  viparinamate ,  apaksiyate,  nadvati, 

Nirukta,  I,  2. 

2.  Origin  of  a  thing  presupposes  the  antecedent  negation  of  the 
thing.  As  the  antecedent  negation  of  consciousness  cannot  be  known 
it  is  devoid  of  origin. 

See  the  following  verse. 


[31] 

wwrat  *ft  tff M  awrfcr  i 

*  ft  *  qft^qr  ftwsftdt:  11 

Without  comprehending  the  consciousness,  one  cannot 
know  the  factors  relating  to  it  (that  is,  its  antecedent  nega¬ 
tion  and  destruction).  Similarly  the  latter  cannot  be 
known,  if  consciousness  is  comprehended;  for,  then  as 
consciousness  is  known  it  becomes  an  object  and  (hence) 
ceases  to  be  consciousness.1 


i. 


—  P2. 


532 


SAM  K$EPAS  ARfRAKA 


1.  If  consciousness  becomes  an  object  of  knowledge,  then  it  i3 
analogous  to  jar,  etc.,  and  it  ceases  to  be  consciousness. 

[32] 

qsrfs  qfas;  n 

It  is  not  reasonable  to  hold  that  liberation  is  produced. 
Why  so?  (It  is)  because  of  the  aforementioned  probans, 
namely.it  is  the  result  of  knowledge.  In  ordinary  experience, 
whichever  is  known  to  be  produced  is  not  the  result  of 
knowledge,  like  ether,  etc. 


[33] 

fq'safq^sfll  fqqp^qifqs  qg^qq;  i 

q^TW  II 

As  liberation  which  is  of  the  nature  of  the  self  is  the 
result  of  knowledge  it  is  not  attainable  by  action.  Which¬ 
ever  is  so  (that  is,  the  result  of  knowledge)  is  seen  to  be  of 
such  a  nature  (that  is,  not  attainable  by  action),  like  the 
annihilation  of  nescience  abiding  in  rope,  etc. 

[34] 


fqqrqqtq^  R<m  qt  ^ 
qqq<qi%  qsrqteSTCqt  fq*m  ^%qq  I 
qi^faq  qwfqq 

qsqfqj  q  qfsesg  q?^  q  it  qq:  ii 

Intimate  association  (with  the  Lord)  which  is  the  sub¬ 
ject  of  controversy  cannot  be  the  highest  human  goal  (that 

s,  °rr^nfT°  —  ?2. 

r.  —  P2. 


FOURTH  ADHYAYA 


533 


is,  liberation)  because  it  is  produced.  In  ordinary  experi¬ 
ence,  whichever  is  so  (that  is,  produced)  is  not  seen  to  be 
the  highest  human  goal,  like  wall,  pot,  etc.  Intimate  associa¬ 
tion  is  produced  and  hence  it  cannot  be  the  highest  human 
goal.  As  a  product  is  not  seen  to  be  of  highest  goal,  it 
is  not  reasonable  to  assume  that  intimate  association  (being 
a  product)  is  different  (that  is,  it  is  the  highest  goal). 

[35] 

Liberation  is  not  the  rise  of  an  existent  or  a  non¬ 
existent  entity  ;  for  the  rise  of  the  existent  and  the  non¬ 
existent  entity  is  unreasonable-  (Similarly)  the  annihila¬ 
tion  of  an  existent  or  a  non-existent  entity  is  not  liberation; 
for  the  annihilation  of  the  existent  and  non-existent  entity 
is  unreasonable. 


[36] 

*  ^  fagTTtff  ft  ^  i 

*  qifcqfl^q  ftgrfni  m  II 

Liberation  is  not  the  rise  of  an  indeterminable  entity  ; 
for  it  is  unacceptable  and  indeed  more  undesirable.  As 
the  rise  of  the  indeterminable  object  is  indeterminable, 
liberation  (being  real)  is  not  accepted  to  be  the  rise  of  an 
indeterminable  entity- 

[37] 

Or,  if  it  is  accepted  that  liberation  consists  in  the 
annihilation  of  the  appearance  of  the  indeterminable  uni- 


534  SA  A?  KS  EPA&  ARIRA  KA 

verse,  then  this  view  is  free  from  any  defect  and  (hence) 
it  is  not  objected. 

THE  CONCEPT  OF  JIVANMUKTI 
[38] 

ftlto  ft 

miv*  ftRie  fa  ftp:  ftifopr  n 

The  fire  in  the  form  of  the  true  knowledge  of  the  self, 
set  ablaze  by  the  function  of  the  moving  wind,  namely,  the 
strength  of  the  self,  completely  annihilates  at  once  the 
nescience  and  its  products.  No  other  form  of  worldly 
existence  remains  in  the  least.  Hence  it  is  certain  that  one 
who  has  realized  the  self  (is  dissociated  from  his  body 
and  attains  immediate  liberation. 

In  this  verse  Sarvajnatman  sets  forth  the  view  that  one  who  has 
realized  the  self  is  immediately  dissociated  from  his  body  and  attains 
liberation.  He  holds  that  the  scripture  dealing  with  liberation  while 
embodied  is  merely  recommendatory. 

For  details  see  Introduction,  pp.  138-140. 

[39] 

tat:  n 

The  Upanisadic  texts  propounding  the  liberation  while 
embodied,  are  to  be  understood  as  treating  of  one  who  is 
fancied  as  liberated  while  embodied.  And,  by  this  alone 
the  Upani$adic  texts  become  fruitful.  On  this  basis, 
immediate  liberation  alone  is  reasonable. 


FOURTH  AD HT AT  A 


533 


is,  liberation)  because  it  is  produced.  In  ordinary  experi¬ 
ence,  whichever  is  so  (that  is,  produced)  is  not  seen  to  be 
the  highest  human  goal,  like  wall,  pot,  etc.  Intimate  associa¬ 
tion  is  produced  and  hence  it  cannot  be  the  highest  human 
goal.  As  a  product  is  not  seen  to  be  of  highest  goal,  it 
is  not  reasonable  to  assume  that  intimate  association  (being 
a  product)  is  different  (that  is,  it  is  the  highest  goal). 

[35] 

h  foliar  l 

Liberation  is  not  the  rise  of  an  existent  or  a  non¬ 
existent  entity  ;  for  the  rise  of  the  existent  and  the  non¬ 
existent  entity  is  unreasonable-  (Similarly)  the  annihila¬ 
tion  of  an  existent  or  a  non-existent  entity  is  not  liberation  ; 
for  the  annihilation  of  the  existent  and  non-existent  entity 
is  unreasonable. 

[36] 

h  ^  fagrinr  afe  ft  ^  i 

IT  ^  II 

Liberation  is  not  the  rise  of  an  indeterminable  entity  ; 
for  it  is  unacceptable  and  indeed  more  undesirable.  As 
the  rise  of  the  indeterminable  object  is  indeterminable, 
liberation  (being  real)  is  not  accepted  to  be  the  rise  ol  an 
indeterminable  entity- 

[37] 

Or,  if  it  is  accepted  that  liberation  consists  in  the 
annihilation  of  the  appearance  of  the  indeterminable  uni- 


534  SAtiKSEPAgARIRAKA 

verse,  then  this  view  is  free  from  any  defect  and  (hence) 
it  is  not  objected. 

THE  CONCEPT  OF  JIVANMUKTI 
[38] 

ssit  i 

ft  *  IRUMS? 

farw  toe  ftifapr  ii 

The  fire  in  the  form  of  the  true  knowledge  of  the  self, 
set  ablaze  by  the  function  of  the  moving  wind,  namely,  the 
strength  of  the  self,  completely  annihilates  at  once  the 
nescience  and  its  products.  No  other  form  of  worldly 
existence  remains  in  the  least.  Hence  it  is  certain  that  one 
who  has  realized  the  self  (is  dissociated  from  his  body 
and  attains  immediate  liberation. 

In  this  verse  Sarvajnatman  sets  forth  the  view  that  one  who  has 
realized  the  self  is  immediately  dissociated  from  his  body  and  attains 
liberation.  He  holds  that  the  scripture  dealing  with  liberation  while 
embodied  is  merely  recommendatory. 

For  details  see  Introduction,  pp.  138-140. 

[39] 

ssft  ifo:  gwtow  tat*  n 

The  Upanisadic  texts  propounding  the  liberation  while 
embodied,  are  to  be  understood  as  treating  of  one  who  is 
fancied  as  liberated  while  embodied.  And,  by  this  alone 
the  Upani$adic  texts  become  fruitful.  On  this  basis, 
immediate  liberation  alone  is  reasonable. 


FOURTH  ADI  IT  A  TA 


535 


[40] 

qsq  4*3^4  <rcqifq?jr&^qtqq%:  l 
w4ter  ftffiffoi  ftifaqsr  n 

Or  else,  the  scripture  (dealing  with  liberation  while 
embodied)  is  to  be  understood  as  treating  of  one  who  has 
realized  the  self.  And,  it  is  reasonable  that  the  trace  of 
nescience  persists  in  his  case.  The  trace  of  nescience  is 
annihilated  without  a  cause.  Or  else,  the  realization  of  the 
self  which  continues  annihilates  the  trace  (of  nescience). 

[41] 

qiq#  i 

Rift  TflT*l^  || 

The  cause  which  accounts  for  the  function  of  one  who 
is  liberated  while  living,  and  which  is  termed  ‘trace  of 
nescience',  ‘tinge  of  nescience’,  etc.,  is  neither  nescience 
nor  its  part.  For,  in  either  of  the  views  liberation  after  the 
final  fall  of  the  body  would  be  incompatible. 

[42] 

q^siqitstflTOwqr  fq^qr  i 

^rfqsrrqT  qifwqi:  qkfqq&iw^q  n 

By  considering  the  earlier  and  the  later  portion  (of 
3rl  Sankara’s  bhasya),  it  should  be  understood  that  in  the 
bhasya,  (the  persistence  of)  the  knowledge  of  the  annihila¬ 
ted  nescience  alone  is  termed  ‘trace  (of  nescience)’,  ‘shadow 
(of  nescience)’,  ‘tinge  (of  nescience)’,  and  ‘  impression 
(of  nescience),. 

The  Bhasya  text  kept  in  view  in  this  verse  is  as  follows : 


1  ■  %5T:  — T?.,  T3,  B2. 

gtfiwn’Zft:  —  Pi. 


—  Mi,  Ti,  Pi. 


536 


SAKl  ICSEPAtf  ARl  RAKA 


badhilamapi  hi  milhydjiuhwiii  dvicandrajnanavat 
samskaravaSat  kamcilkalamanuvarlate  eva,  DSB,  IV,  i,  15. 

The  view  expressed  in  this  verse  is  based  on  BSB,  IV,  i,  15. 

[43] 

95T  'qiftd  I 

The  state  of  liberation  while  embodied  is  (admitted) 
because  it  is  experienced.  And  as  the  shadow  of  duality 
is  experienced,  it  is  also  accepted.  And  the  trace  of  nes¬ 
cience  is  upheld  to  account  for  the  shadow  of  duality.  And 
these  views  are  based  on  one’s  experience. 

Tire  view  expressed  in  this  verse  is  based  on  BSB,  IV,  i;  15 
vide :  the  Bhasya  text  I 

api  ca  naivatra  vivaditavyam  brahmavida  kamcitkalam  Sari  rain  dhriyale 
na  vii  dhriyale  iti.  kalhaiii  hi  ckasya  svahfdayapralyayam  brahmavedanam 
dehadharanani  ca  aparcna  pralikseplum  Sakyeta. 

[  4*  ] 

5TINW4  I 

The  self  is  veiled  by  nescience  before  (dts  realization). 
And  when  it  is  realized,  it  becomes  free  from  the  interven¬ 
tion  of  nescience.  Even  them  the  trace  of  nescience  should 
be  admitted,  because  it  is  experienced  that  the  trace  of 
duality  continues  (to  exist). 

[45] 

ft^qi  g^dl^d  *Tlfd  1 1 


i.  *tt  —  P^. 


FOURTH  ADHYAYA 


537 


In  order  to  experience  the  result  of  the  fructified  deeds, 
the  mystic  remains  embodied  though  liberated.  And  after 
having  completely  experienced  the  result  which  is  the  out¬ 
come  of  the  trace  of  nescience,  he  attains  final  liberation 
(that  is,  liberation  after  the  falling  ofF of  the  body). 

[46] 

The  nescience  is  mutable.  The  one,  self-luminous 
self  (when  reflected  in  nescience)  is  God  and  it  is  Immutable 
and  immortal  and  it  controls  the  nescience  and  the  indivi¬ 
dual  souls.  By  meditating,  reasoning  and  (then)  realizing 
the  self,  the  illusory  universe  is  annihilated.  Nescience  in 
its  entirety  is  annihilated  after  experiencing  the  result  of 
the  fructified  deeds. 

This  verse  is  from  ivet.,  I,  10. 

For  details  see  Introduction,  pp.  143-4. 


THE  PATH  OF  MANES  AND  OF  GODS  NOT 
INTENDED  FOR  THE  LIBERATED  SOUL 

[47] 

From  the  scripture  it  is  known  that  Hira^yagarbha 
and  others  attain  liberation.  But  as  they  do  not  have  the 
well-known  path  of  Gods  (and  of  manes),  the  latter  should 
not  be  related  by  you  (the  Purvapaksin )  to  the  knowledge 
of  the  attributeless  self. 


v  —  P‘i- 
68 


53fi 


SAM  KSEPAg  ARIRAKA 


If  it  is  urged  that  one  who  is  liberated  attains  liberation  only  after 
reaching  the  other  world  by  proceeding  in  the  path  of  Gods,  then 
this  contention  is  refuted  in  this  verse. 

The  path  of  Gods  and  that  of  manes  are  referred  to  in  the  Bh.G. 

VIII,  24-5. 


[48] 

mi  fa  ii 

The  vital  airs  (of  one  who  has  realized  the  self)  do  not 
pass  out  through  the  vein  in  the  head.  Hence  it  should  be 
held  that  where  one  realizes  the  self,  there  one  attains 
liberation.  And  going  to  the  other  world  and  the  departure 
of  the  vital  airs  are  applicable  (only)  to  (one  who  has)  the 
other  knowledge  (that  is,  the  knowledge  of  the  conditioned 
self). 

KARMA-ONLY  A  PROXIMATE  MEANS 
TO  KNOWLEDGE 

[49] 

faifaf  *ifa  ffar  faf  ifatgi  i 

The  divine  beings  have  no  competence  for  the  religious 
rites  and  (hence)  knowledge  alone  is  the  cause  of  their 
liberation.  For  this  reason,  rites  pertaining  to  all  classes 
and  stages  of  life  are  (only)  ;ndirect  aid  to  (the)  knowledge 
(of  the  self). 

It  religious  rites  are  admitted  to  be  the  direct  means  of  the 
knowledge  of  the  self  then  it  amounts  to  saying  that  the  divine  beings 
who  are  not  competent  to  perform  religious  rites  cannot  attain  the 
knowledge  of  the  self.  Since  it  is  known  from  the  scriptural  texts 


i.  fctft:  —  P2. 


FOURTH  ADHYAYA 


539 


that  they  also  attain  the  knowledge  of  the  self,  it  follows  that  religious 
rites  are  only  indirect  aid  to  the  knowledge  of  the  self. 

[50] 

HT^rr^qr  Rfala?*ifaR(?TO;^s«n*pn5i  r^rj  ii 

It  is  known  from  the  iruti 1  and  the  smj-ti  passage*  that 
sacrifices,  etc.,  in  view  of  their  purifying  character,  are  the 
indirect  means  to  (liberation).  Thus,  when  we  carefully 
examine,  we  do  not  know  from  the  scripture  that  sacrifices, 
etc.,  are  the  direct  means  to  liberation. 

1.  vide  I  Bph.,  IV,  iv,  22. 

2.  vide  Bh  G.,  VI,  3. 


[51] 

liRRI  RRI  fRRR&T  f|d  83^  II 

The  absolute  self  which  is  set  forth  in  the  Upani?ads, 
which  is  explained  by  £>rl  Sankara  and  which  is  highly  bliss¬ 
ful  and  beneficial,  has  been  instructed  out  of  compassion  to 
you  -  the  aspirant. 

bahuirutabha  sitam  -  bahuirutah  -  bhagavan  bhasyakSrah,  TB. 

IN  PRAISE  OF  THE  KNOWLEDGE  OF  THE  SELF 

[52] 

fRSRfwiR'fiSTfR  gft:  I 

faflR  ^RRERpR 

fR^RRfd:  R  fro  n 

Thus  knowing  successively  from  the  preceptor,  the 
import  of  the  Upanisads,  the  removal  of  conflict  (of  the 


540 


SAMKSEPASf  ARlRAKA 


Upani$adic  teaching  with  perception),  the  means  to  the 
rise  of  knowledge  and  the  result  of  knowledge,  and  experi¬ 
encing  in  himself  the  result  of  the  knowledge  (that  is,  the 
identity  of  the  inner  self  and  the  supreme  self),  the  disciple 
with  a  feeling  of  having  attained  the  one  to  be  achieved, 
says  as  follows; 


[53] 

fifed  srcqsilsrcr- 

pnfitaffa  i 

qqitffefid  qq  3  mi  n 

I  certainly  experience  the  absolute  self  which  is  inward, 
concealed  by  nescience,  and  of  the  nature  of  consciousness, 
by  differentiating  it,  like  reeds  from  the  sedge, 1  with  the 
intellect  whetted  by  reasoning,  etc-,  from  nescience  and  the 
(five)  sheaths  which  are  its  modifications.  (Now)  where 
did  the  ocean  of  misery  in  the  form  of  transmigration  exist, 
where  is  it  present,  where  will  it  exist  and  where  has  it  gone? 

vide :  Kajlt.,  II,  iii,  17. 

[54] 

qsqifa  ^  u 

I  perceive  all  the  phenomenal  elements  as  if  they  arc  a 
mere  picture.  And  I  stand  firm  on  the  partlcss,  unitary, 
and  absolute  consciousness.  I  experience  the  self  which  is 
absolute,  unconditioned,  and  of  the  nature  of  bliss,  and  I 
perceive  the  universe  as  if  it  is  a  burnt  rope. 


FOURTH  AD  HT  AT  A 


541 


[55] 

ctf  ^  sfcRfa*  ^faumwR 

^  m\  Jtfasq  ii 

I  experience  the  absolute  (reality,  as  clearly)  as  a  bilva 
fruit  placed  in  one’s  palm;  and  I  perceive  my  body  to  be 
the  slough  of  a  snake.1  Hence  the  appearance  of  my 
embodied  nature  and  my  attainment  of  liberation  are 
established. 

1.  vide  :  Brh.,  IV,  iv,  7. 

nid  reyasa dhigamanam  ! 

The  reading  found  in  the  printed  texts  and  manuscripts  is 
ni&reyaso’ dhigamanam  or  niireyaso  nigamanam.  But,  according  to  the 
Panini-Sutra  •  acaturavicatura,  etc.,  [V,  iv,  77]  the  correct  grammatical 
reading  appears  to  be  nid  reyasa dhigamanam. 

[56] 

^  f&sV 

*R  simOTT  5TT^  I 

fcataTOnrew  fou- 

Alas  !  The  (experience  of  the)  absolute  fself)  has  now 
become  the  sublating  factor  of  the  phenomenal  elements 
which  were  once  the  sublating  factors  (of  the  experience) 
of  the  absolute  self.  Owing  to  avidya,  the  phenomenal 
elements  are  the  sublating  factors  of  the  (experience  of  the) 


%.  —  Mi.  5?r?i>TT«fT  ^  —  Mi- 

—  B|,  B2. 


542 


SA  Si  K§  EPA  g  A  R I RA  K A 


absolute  self.  And  the  absolute  self,  on  the  strength  of  its 
knowledge,  annihilates  the  phenomenal  elements. 

[57] 

fafam:  pqt  *  it 

^  fe&qWqfafalHSfll  II 

It  is  a  wonder  how  duality  previously  appeared  in  the 
self-luminous  consciousness  which  is  free  from  any  defect 
and  which  is  eternal.  Perhaps  the  Upanisadic  text  were 
not  studied  before ;  and,  because  of  that  there  was  the 
appearance  of  duality  brought  about  by  avidya  • 

[58] 

fa \  ^ 

mi  i 

^TO«R51WlW 

^  ^f^q(d  it 

Before  serving  your  lotus-feet,  the  supreme  self  though 
existing  appeared  as  not  existing.  Now  after  serving  your 
lotus-feet,  the  cognition  of  duality  neither  existed,  nor 
exists,  nor  shall  exist. 


[59] 

Since  you  have  undertaken  to  remove  my  disease  in 
the  form  of  transmigration  which  is  hard  to  cure,  I  shall 


i.  smwiftre  —  Ti. 


FOURTH  AD HT AT  A 


543 


worship  you  until  the  final  fall  of  my  body,  by  bearing  the 
dust  of  your  lotus  feet  on  my  head. 

PURPOSE  OF  THE  COMPOSITION  OF  THIS 
TREATISE 

[60] 

This  abridged  treatise  on  the  nature  of  the  embodied 
soul,  whose  study  is  the  cause  of  liberation  of  the  ascetics, 
is  composed  in  order  to  expound  the  import  of  the  Upani- 
sads,  after  knowing  the  truth  through  the  grace  of  the 
preceptor. 


DEDICATION  TO  GOD 

[61] 

qqrcros?  yqr 

gisSftq  nsft  mi  mwsqtsi  11 

Let  this  sacred  composition  which  contains  the  words 
weighty  with  sense,  which  bears  the  grace  of  the  dust  of 
the  lotus  feet  of  Lord  Padmanabha  and  which  gives  rise  to 
auspiciousness,  immediately  remove,  like  the  Ganges,  the 
impediments  to  prosperity  of  those  who  arc  wedded  to  the 
Vedantic  study- 

aviralapadapariktih  -  gambhi ra  rthapadavr ndaketyarthah ,  TB. 

[62] 

#^iqT^q$3R3Wq^Jii|q: 


544 


SA  tt  K$  SPAS'  ARTRAKA 


i4  mfh  n 

When  the  Ksatriya  king  who  shone  like  the  sun  of  the 
race  of  Manu,  who  was  possessed  of  glory  and  who  was 
having  supreme  sovereignty  over  the  earth  was  ruling,  the 
ascetic  by  name  Sarvajnatman  whose  mind  was  purified  by 
the  contact  of  the  dust  of  the  lotus  feet  of  3rl  SureSvara, 
composed  the  treatise  .  Sathksepat arirakam  to  develop  the 
knowledge  of  the  pious  men. 

[63] 

I! 

Salutations  to  Lord  Visiju  who  is  reposing  on  the  hood 
of  the  serpent  -  Adi^esa,  who  rides  on  the  Garu^a.  who 
broke  the  body  of  the  demon  (Ke^ika,  who  came)  in  the 
guise  of  a  horse  and  who  holds  the  disc  in  his  hand. 


Qw er> 


I 


INDEX  OF  QUOTATIONS  IN  THE  TEXT 


Verse 

Source 

1. 

srgrritfnfci 

III,  110 

Bh.  G.,  V.  15. 

2. 

I,  78 

BS,  I,  i,  1 . 

3. 

srotor^ 

I,  284 

Prakaranapaticika » 

p.  42. 

4. 

3T«r^I  I£r5 

III,  366 

Mahabharata 

5. 

Bit 

II,  51  Paiiini-sutra,  III,  iii,  169. 

6. 

3T5T^JT?Wr 

Ill,  292 

Kath.,  I,  iii,  15. 

7. 

I,  254.  256\  Brh.,  Ill,  viii,  8. 
263,  264  ) 

8. 

31$  cI^lf^T 

I,  293 

Brh.,  I>  iv,  10. 

9. 

n;snt 

III,  183 

tfvet.i  VI,  11. 

10. 

q^::  si®: 

I,  321 

Mahabharata 

11. 

q;jf  ff  m  irk 

III,  168 

Brh.,  II,  iv,  5. 

12. 

3fr?qf^rag 

II,  48 

Jaimini-sutra f  I,  i,  5. 

13. 

^TOT^ffcF^  *7 

III,  177 

BS,  III,  iii,  39. 

14. 

fl;  ^ 

III,  365 

Mahabharata 

15. 

ST*  hsir 

IV,  46 

tfvet.,  I,  10. 

16. 

STTRT  ^3 

III,  155 

S vet.,  I,  ii- 

17. 

!jrRIci77*3 

II,  186 

Visnupurana, 

V,  xvii,  32 

18. 

strjt  g 

iii,  no 

Bh  G  ,  V,  16. 

19. 

I,  90,  151;  *| 

160?  225;  1 

251?  256;  I  r,,_  ,  ~rT  ...  _ 
IT,  15;  238;  \Chand ,  VI,  vm.  7. 

Ill,  40; 

159;  299  J 

20. 

cRT 

I,  261 

BS.  I,  i,  4. 

21. 

I,  354 

S'abarabhasya, II,  i,  1. 

22. 

c!^r§T 

I,  513 

Taitt.,  Ill,  j,  1 

23. 

cfsiI  n^frr 

I,  216 

Panini-sutra >  II, 

iii,  46. 

24. 

II,  50?  51 

Brh..  II,  iv,  5. 

25. 

VTrnff:  5R^Jr: 

III,  337; 

938;  339 

Panini-sutra,  III,  i,  7 

26. 

Ff  cT^T 

III,  185 

Si  vet.,  VI,  9. 

27. 

«T  rT^  wq- 

III.  184 

Svet.,  VI,  8. 

20. 

»T  rTr^TX 

I,  40 

Adkyasa-bha  sya 

29. 

III,  296 

S’  3  thyayaniyopani- 

sad,  4. 

30- 

srr^  si?Rr5T: 

III.  no 

Bh.G.  VII,  25. 

31- 

ilfa 

I,  193;  262;  f 

414;  I 

111,162;  yBrh.,  II,  iii,  6. 

163;  164;  1 

170;  230  J 

32. 

Ftg;  ?rRrf^ 

I,  414 

Brh-,  IV,  iv,  19. 

33. 

JT-Trstf  5HWT47 

III,  363 

Mahabli&rata- 

Moksadharma,  1 69-35, 

34. 

qrrf^  qnfft 

II,  13 

Kath.,  IV,  1. 

35. 

III,  167 

Brh.,  IV,  iii,  23. 

36. 

II,  116 

Jaimihi-sutra,  VI, 

v,  54. 

37. 

II,  67 

Chand.,  VI,  ii,  3. 

38. 

agr  3^ 

II,  20 

Taitt.,  II,  v,  1. 

39. 

55§T 

III,  268 

Brh  ,  II,  vi,  3. 

40. 

£l|r7  ^ 

I,  307;  310;)  n  ,  T\r  ■  c 

311;  313  \  B-r/l *’  IV’  1V>  6* 

41. 

I,  143;  395 

;)  Sabarabhasya , 

482 

3  III',  iv,  40. 

42. 

wt*4 

III.  293 

S' vet- ,  I,  12. 

43. 

II,  58;  79 

BS,  II,  i,  13. 

44. 

II,  230 

Paniniya-iiksa ,  52. 

45. 

^4  =^cft  fa  3^ 

III,  364 

Mahabharata- 
Udyogaparvan,  36,  14. 

46 

??r  ?3ifa 

I,  507 

Taitt.,  Ill,  I,  1. 

47. 

’T'^r  5’Tt^frRr 

III,  150 

— 

48. 

I,  267 

Chand..  Ill,  xiv,  4. 

49. 

3T  3lfa 

1,  472 

Sabarabhasya  I,  i,  2- 

50- 

fa^fl 

III  299 

7 

Charnl  VI,  xvi,  3. 

5 !. 

III,  362 

Mund .,  VIII,  iii.  4. 

52- 

ZJ^r^f  rfTm 

I,  267 

Chand,.  VI,  xii.  2- 

53 

wv  STFTR^FcT  33T 

I,  263 

Taitt  II,  i.  1. 

54. 

vicsmrit 

11,  46 

)  Jainiini-Sulra, 

IV,  27 

5  I,  i.  4. 

55. 

II,  194 

BS,  II,  i,  35. 

56. 

*T 

III,  42 

Brh.  IV,  iii,  7. 

57. 

ri  rr -in  Dr 

III.  156 

Chand.,  VII,  xxv,  2. 

58. 

?4T^4  T-4crr 

I,  490 

Pdnini- Sutra,  II,  iv, 

24. 


II 


INDEX  OF  THE  VIEWS  OF  OTHER  AUTHORS 
REFERRED  TO  AND  IMPLIED  IN  THE  TEXT 
OF  THE  SAMKSEPASARIRAKA 

1.  Padmapada 

See  Pancapadika,  p.  167,  and  S$,  I,  257-8. 

2.  Sure  d  vara 

( 1 )  i 

I%^5:raF7r  || 

See  Na iska rm yasidd h i,  II,  55,  and  SS\  I,  170. 

(2)  sicq^qffrfflTT  SHTcJFT:  | 

*>^rrecPft?ger*Tr  n 

See  Kaiskarmyasiddlii ,  III,  11,  and  SSf,  I,  190. 

(3)  ?f  i 

See  Brhaddranyakavu rlika,  (2.4  220)  and  SSf,  III,  346. 
3-  Vimuktatman 

f^I%wr  i 

See  Istasiddhij  p.  85,  and  Stf,  IV,  14. 


36. 

q’tqfaq  crfftqsq 

II,  116 

Jaimihi-sutra,  VI, 

v,  54. 

37. 

qf  rtqr^q 

II,  67 

Chdnd .,  VI,  ii,  3. 

38. 

*»5I  3®sj 

II,  20 

Taitt.,  II,  v,  l. 

39. 

mmg 

III,  268 

Brh,  II,  vi,  3. 

40. 

I,  307;  310: 
311;  313 

’j  Brh..  IV,  iv.  6. 

41. 

i-jq  q^qrq 

I,  143;  395 
482 

S abarabhasya, 

\  III,  iv,  40. 

42. 

¥T>q7r  *fr*q 

III.  293 

tfvet .,  I,  12. 

43. 

qmn#: 

II,  58;  79 

BS,  II,  i,  13. 

44. 

JF=q>  vftq: 

II,  230 

Paniniya-iiksa ,  52. 

45. 

qqt  qat 

III,  364 

Maliabharata- 

Udyogaparvan,  36,  14. 

46 

qqt  qr  rqr?Jr 

I.  507 

Taitt.,  Ill,  I,  1  • 

4-7. 

qqr  fiq  sqtf^rcnr 

III,  150 

— 

48. 

q*q  (?qrqqr) 

I,  267 

Chand.,  Ill,  xiv,  4. 

49- 

qT  qrq 

1,  472 

S abarabhasya  I,  i,  2- 

50- 

fqwt 

III  299 

7 

Cliand  VI,  xvi,  3. 

5!. 

^TRrfqiTR 

III,  362 

Murid.,  VIII,  iii.  4. 

52- 

ZTJrjcf  *?tiq 

I,  267 

Cliand,.  VI,  xii.  2- 

53 

WrA  STRRR-cT  5foT 

I,  263 

Taitt  ,  II,  i.  1. 

54. 

Hcr4«qtn 

II,  46 
iV,  27 

)  Jaiinini-Suha, 

J  I,  i.  4. 

55. 

^qqrffqRqa' 

II,  194 

BS,  II,  i,  35- 

56. 

*? 

III,  42 

Brh.,  IV,  iii,  7. 

57. 

^  ^rf2  infi 

III,  156 

Chand.,  VII,  xxv,  2. 

58. 

^tt'5ET  qqqr 

I,  490 

Pdnini-Sulra,  II,  iv, 
0/1 

II 


INDEX  OF  THE  VIEWS  OF  OTHER  AUTHORS 
REFERRED  TO  AND  IMPLIED  IN  THE  TEXT 
OF  THE  SAKIKSEPASARIRAKA 

1.  Padmapada 

See  Pancapadika,  p.  167,  and  SSf,  I,  257-8. 

2.  Surei  vara 

( 1 )  i 

37cft  ii 

See  Naisharmyasiddhi ,  II,  55,  and  So ,  I,  170. 

(2)  ncq-T?^qffrf«TT  ^rwrr:  i 

See  Naisharmyasiddhi,  III,  1 1,  and  SSf ,  I,  190. 

(3)  n^rr-or  ?f  i 

See  Brhaddranyakava rlika,  (2.4  220)  and  S&,  III,  346. 

3-  Vimuktatman 

i 

See  Istasiddhij  p.  85,  and  SS ,  IV,  14. 


Ill 


INDEX  OF  TERMS  USED  IN  THE  TEXT 


1. 

partless 

1,104 

2. 

nescience 

1,21  342 

3. 

3T3TT^cTT 

redundancy 

1,189 

4. 

3TSTR 

nescience 

1,317 

5. 

3T%src 

object 

11,125 

6. 

aifclfNn 

immediate 

1,1 

7. 

difference 

1,162;  186 

8. 

substrate 

1,32 

9. 

superimposition 

1,31 

10. 

aHfRTOTiT 

self-luminous 

1,125 

11. 

indeterminable 

1,128 

12. 

self  which  is  of  the 

nature  of 

experience 

1,122 

13. 

awn: 

difference 

1,198 

14. 

SWfftfeT 

removal 

1,166 

.15. 

3TTq?T 

knowledge  of  the  self 

11,328 

16. 

3ITf?T 

contradicted 

1,432 

17. 

3I^frq 

nescience 

1,27 

18. 

non-difference 

1,230 

19. 

expression 

1,382,  383 

20. 

the  maxim  of  half¬ 
way-house 

1,397 

21. 

conflict 

111,131 

00 

*« i  — '  • 

3lfgff3T?T 

immutable 

1,1 

23. 

3153cqrf% 

nescience 

11,214 

24. 

slough  of  a  snake 

IV,  5  5 

25. 

anrarc 

locus 

1,32 

26. 

limiting  adjunct 

11,161 

27 

Vasudeva 

111,265 

28. 

3Tr^?^ 

object 

1,340 

29. 

3Tr^oT5i{% 

power  of  veiling 

1,20 

30. 

aTr^i^ 

mind 

IV, 62 

31. 

mutual  superimposi¬ 

tion 

1,37 

32. 

StfTW 

reed 

IV, 53 

33. 

later 

1,498 

34. 

worldly  usage 

1,39;  40. 

35. 

fire-brand 

11,160 

36. 

^w^rvr 

spider 

1,545 

37. 

barren  land 

11,115 

38. 

unassisted,  single 

111,258 

39. 

abstinence 

1,76;  79;  415 

40. 

productive  factor 

1,127 

41. 

213713 

fire 

1,119 

42. 

n-vj 

trace 

IV, 42 

43. 

*Z°T^ 

recommendatory 

text 

111,284 

44. 

sense-organ 

11,125  ' 

45. 

WJ{\ 

relation 

1,382;  384 

46. 

conscious  self 

1,29 

47. 

%r«r 

phenomenal 

eicment 

1,37,  38. 

48. 

551*77 

shadow  (trace) 

IV, 42 

49. 

cft«J 

preceptor 

1,92 

50. 

incompatibility 

1,103 

51. 

dog 

IV, 20 

52. 

operating  condition 

III, 7 

53. 

state 

11,127 

54. 

f^T'Tcrrr 

knowledge 

1,14.  11,115 

55. 

sun 

111,34 

56. 

ftsftrr 

mandate 

1,424 

57. 

attachment  to 
worldly  object 

111,56 

58. 

devoid  of  conscious¬ 
ness 

11,71 

59. 

f?n% 

import 

1.491 

60. 

f^s 

natural 

11,49 

61. 

self 

1,485;  550 

62. 

»r%rcr 

exclusion 

1,405 

63. 

HTTcT 

well-known 

11,99 

64. 

nrrr 

proof 

1,101,111 

65. 

deep  sleep  state 

1,23 

66. 

%fk 

speech 

1,356 

67. 

VTTq-fg 

sense  of  the  root 
( dhatvariha ) 

1,435 

68. 

S3 

sedge 

IV, 53 

69. 

indeterminable 
as  either  real 
or  unreal 

jl,20, 

^111,140 

70. 

&5T 

tinge  (trace) 

IV, 42 

71. 

fafTR 

difference  of  opinion 

1,374 

72. 

fgsm 

illusive  assumption 

1,375 

73. 

fqng 

particle 

1,302 

74- 

fsrawnfar 

power  of  projection 

1,20 

II. 213 

of  relation  1.374,  37S 

III, 359 
1,320,329,330 


7  5.  qqpq 
76. 

7  7 . 

78.  51^57 

79.  5riq;fi^ 

80. 

81. 

82.  ^r;q 

83.  STfq<| 

8  4. 

85.  5ftq 

86.  sqrftR 

87. 


immodesty 
knowledge 
interval 
blend 
driver 
air 

association 
dream  (state) 
knowledge, 
consciousness 
intimate  relation 
one’s  own 
permanent  being 
permanence 


III, 47 
111,166 
11,179 

1,339;  11,127 

1,53 

IV,  31 

I, 170 

II, 69 
1,48 


Part  III  INDEXES 


I 


INDEX  OF  QUOTATIONS  IN  THE  TEXT 


Verse 

Source 

1. 

srgrritfnfci 

III,  110 

Bh.  G.,  V.  15. 

2. 

I,  78 

BS,  I,  i,  1 . 

3. 

srotor^ 

I,  284 

Prakaranapaticika » 

p.  42. 

4. 

3T«r^I  I£r5 

III,  366 

Mahabharata 

5. 

Bit 

II,  51  Paiiini-sutra,  III,  iii,  169. 

6. 

3T5T^JT?Wr 

Ill,  292 

Kath.,  I,  iii,  15. 

7. 

I,  254.  256\  Brh.,  Ill,  viii,  8. 
263,  264  ) 

8. 

31$  cI^lf^T 

I,  293 

Brh.,  I>  iv,  10. 

9. 

n;snt 

III,  183 

tfvet.i  VI,  11. 

10. 

q^::  si®: 

I,  321 

Mahabharata 

11. 

q;jf  ff  m  irk 

III,  168 

Brh.,  II,  iv,  5. 

12. 

3fr?qf^rag 

II,  48 

Jaimini-sutra f  I,  i,  5. 

13. 

^TOT^ffcF^  *7 

III,  177 

BS,  III,  iii,  39. 

14. 

fl;  ^ 

III,  365 

Mahabharata 

15. 

ST*  hsir 

IV,  46 

tfvet.,  I,  10. 

16. 

STTRT  ^3 

III,  155 

S vet.,  I,  ii- 

17. 

!jrRIci77*3 

II,  186 

Visnupurana, 

V,  xvii,  32 

18. 

strjt  g 

iii,  no 

Bh  G  ,  V,  16. 

19. 

I,  90,  151;  *| 

160?  225;  1 

251?  256;  I  r,,_  ,  ~rT  ...  _ 
IT,  15;  238;  \Chand ,  VI,  vm.  7. 

Ill,  40; 

159;  299  J 

20. 

cRT 

I,  261 

BS.  I,  i,  4. 

21. 

I,  354 

S'abarabhasya, II,  i,  1. 

22. 

c!^r§T 

I,  513 

Taitt.,  Ill,  j,  1 

23. 

cfsiI  n^frr 

I,  216 

Panini-sutra >  II, 

iii,  46. 

24. 

II,  50?  51 

Brh..  II,  iv,  5. 

25. 

VTrnff:  5R^Jr: 

III,  337; 

938;  339 

Panini-sutra,  III,  i,  7 

26. 

Ff  cT^T 

III,  185 

Si  vet.,  VI,  9. 

27. 

«T  rT^  wq- 

III.  184 

Svet.,  VI,  8. 

20. 

»T  rTr^TX 

I,  40 

Adkyasa-bha  sya 

29. 

III,  296 

S’  3  thyayaniyopani- 

sad,  4. 

30- 

srr^  si?Rr5T: 

III.  no 

Bh.G.  VII,  25. 

31- 

ilfa 

I,  193;  262;  f 

414;  I 

111,162;  yBrh.,  II,  iii,  6. 

163;  164;  1 

170;  230  J 

32. 

Ftg;  ?rRrf^ 

I,  414 

Brh-,  IV,  iv,  19. 

33. 

JT-Trstf  5HWT47 

III,  363 

Mahabli&rata- 

Moksadharma,  1 69-35, 

34. 

qrrf^  qnfft 

II,  13 

Kath.,  IV,  1. 

35. 

III,  167 

Brh.,  IV,  iii,  23. 

36. 

II,  116 

Jaimihi-sutra,  VI, 

v,  54. 

37. 

II,  67 

Chand.,  VI,  ii,  3. 

38. 

agr  3^ 

II,  20 

Taitt.,  II,  v,  1. 

39. 

55§T 

III,  268 

Brh  ,  II,  vi,  3. 

40. 

£l|r7  ^ 

I,  307;  310;)  n  ,  T\r  ■  c 

311;  313  \  B-r/l *’  IV’  1V>  6* 

41. 

I,  143;  395 

;)  Sabarabhasya , 

482 

3  III',  iv,  40. 

42. 

wt*4 

III.  293 

S' vet- ,  I,  12. 

43. 

II,  58;  79 

BS,  II,  i,  13. 

44. 

II,  230 

Paniniya-iiksa ,  52. 

45. 

^4  =^cft  fa  3^ 

III,  364 

Mahabharata- 
Udyogaparvan,  36,  14. 

46 

??r  ?3ifa 

I,  507 

Taitt.,  Ill,  I,  1. 

47. 

’T'^r  5’Tt^frRr 

III,  150 

— 

48. 

I,  267 

Chand..  Ill,  xiv,  4. 

49. 

3T  3lfa 

1,  472 

Sabarabhasya  I,  i,  2- 

50- 

fa^fl 

III  299 

7 

Charnl  VI,  xvi,  3. 

5 !. 

III,  362 

Mund .,  VIII,  iii.  4. 

52- 

ZJ^r^f  rfTm 

I,  267 

Chand,.  VI,  xii.  2- 

53 

wv  STFTR^FcT  33T 

I,  263 

Taitt  II,  i.  1. 

54. 

vicsmrit 

11,  46 

)  Jainiini-Sulra, 

IV,  27 

5  I,  i.  4. 

55. 

II,  194 

BS,  II,  i,  35. 

56. 

*T 

III,  42 

Brh.  IV,  iii,  7. 

57. 

ri  rr -in  Dr 

III.  156 

Chand.,  VII,  xxv,  2. 

58. 

?4T^4  T-4crr 

I,  490 

Pdnini- Sutra,  II,  iv, 

24. 


II 


INDEX  OF  THE  VIEWS  OF  OTHER  AUTHORS 
REFERRED  TO  AND  IMPLIED  IN  THE  TEXT 
OF  THE  SAMKSEPASARIRAKA 

1.  Padmapada 

See  Pancapadika,  p.  167,  and  S$,  I,  257-8. 

2.  Sure  d  vara 

( 1 )  i 

I%^5:raF7r  || 

See  Na iska rm yasidd h i,  II,  55,  and  SS\  I,  170. 

(2)  sicq^qffrfflTT  SHTcJFT:  | 

*>^rrecPft?ger*Tr  n 

See  Kaiskarmyasiddlii ,  III,  11,  and  SSf,  I,  190. 

(3)  ?f  i 

See  Brhaddranyakavu rlika,  (2.4  220)  and  SSf,  III,  346. 
3-  Vimuktatman 

f^I%wr  i 

See  Istasiddhij  p.  85,  and  Stf,  IV,  14. 


36. 

q’tqfaq  crfftqsq 

II,  116 

Jaimihi-sutra,  VI, 

v,  54. 

37. 

qf  rtqr^q 

II,  67 

Chdnd .,  VI,  ii,  3. 

38. 

*»5I  3®sj 

II,  20 

Taitt.,  II,  v,  l. 

39. 

mmg 

III,  268 

Brh,  II,  vi,  3. 

40. 

I,  307;  310: 
311;  313 

’j  Brh..  IV,  iv.  6. 

41. 

i-jq  q^qrq 

I,  143;  395 
482 

S abarabhasya, 

\  III,  iv,  40. 

42. 

¥T>q7r  *fr*q 

III.  293 

tfvet .,  I,  12. 

43. 

qmn#: 

II,  58;  79 

BS,  II,  i,  13. 

44. 

JF=q>  vftq: 

II,  230 

Paniniya-iiksa ,  52. 

45. 

qqt  qat 

III,  364 

Maliabharata- 

Udyogaparvan,  36,  14. 

46 

qqt  qr  rqr?Jr 

I.  507 

Taitt.,  Ill,  I,  1  • 

4-7. 

qqr  fiq  sqtf^rcnr 

III,  150 

— 

48. 

q*q  (?qrqqr) 

I,  267 

Chand.,  Ill,  xiv,  4. 

49- 

qT  qrq 

1,  472 

S abarabhasya  I,  i,  2- 

50- 

fqwt 

III  299 

7 

Cliand  VI,  xvi,  3. 

5!. 

^TRrfqiTR 

III,  362 

Murid.,  VIII,  iii.  4. 

52- 

ZTJrjcf  *?tiq 

I,  267 

Cliand,.  VI,  xii.  2- 

53 

WrA  STRRR-cT  5foT 

I,  263 

Taitt  ,  II,  i.  1. 

54. 

Hcr4«qtn 

II,  46 
iV,  27 

)  Jaiinini-Suha, 

J  I,  i.  4. 

55. 

^qqrffqRqa' 

II,  194 

BS,  II,  i,  35- 

56. 

*? 

III,  42 

Brh.,  IV,  iii,  7. 

57. 

^  ^rf2  infi 

III,  156 

Chand.,  VII,  xxv,  2. 

58. 

^tt'5ET  qqqr 

I,  490 

Pdnini-Sulra,  II,  iv, 
0/1 

Ill 


INDEX  OF  TERMS  USED  IN  THE  TEXT 


1. 

partless 

1,104 

2. 

nescience 

1,21  342 

3. 

3T3TT^cTT 

redundancy 

1,189 

4. 

3TSTR 

nescience 

1,317 

5. 

3T%src 

object 

11,125 

6. 

aifclfNn 

immediate 

1,1 

7. 

difference 

1,162;  186 

8. 

substrate 

1,32 

9. 

superimposition 

1,31 

10. 

aHfRTOTiT 

self-luminous 

1,125 

11. 

indeterminable 

1,128 

12. 

self  which  is  of  the 

nature  of 

experience 

1,122 

13. 

awn: 

difference 

1,198 

14. 

SWfftfeT 

removal 

1,166 

.15. 

3TTq?T 

knowledge  of  the  self 

11,328 

16. 

3ITf?T 

contradicted 

1,432 

17. 

3I^frq 

nescience 

1,27 

18. 

non-difference 

1,230 

19. 

expression 

1,382,  383 

20. 

the  maxim  of  half¬ 
way-house 

1,397 

21. 

conflict 

111,131 

00 

*« i  — '  • 

3lfgff3T?T 

immutable 

1,1 

23. 

3153cqrf% 

nescience 

11,214 

24. 

slough  of  a  snake 

IV,  5  5 

25. 

anrarc 

locus 

1,32 

26. 

limiting  adjunct 

11,161 

27 

Vasudeva 

111,265 

28. 

3Tr^?^ 

object 

1,340 

29. 

3Tr^oT5i{% 

power  of  veiling 

1,20 

30. 

aTr^i^ 

mind 

IV, 62 

31. 

mutual  superimposi¬ 

tion 

1,37 

32. 

StfTW 

reed 

IV, 53 

33. 

later 

1,498 

34. 

worldly  usage 

1,39;  40. 

35. 

fire-brand 

11,160 

36. 

^w^rvr 

spider 

1,545 

37. 

barren  land 

11,115 

38. 

unassisted,  single 

111,258 

39. 

abstinence 

1,76;  79;  415 

40. 

productive  factor 

1,127 

41. 

213713 

fire 

1,119 

42. 

n-vj 

trace 

IV, 42 

43. 

*Z°T^ 

recommendatory 

text 

111,284 

44. 

sense-organ 

11,125  ' 

45. 

WJ{\ 

relation 

1,382;  384 

46. 

conscious  self 

1,29 

47. 

%r«r 

phenomenal 

eicment 

1,37,  38. 

48. 

551*77 

shadow  (trace) 

IV, 42 

49. 

cft«J 

preceptor 

1,92 

50. 

incompatibility 

1,103 

51. 

dog 

IV, 20 

52. 

operating  condition 

III, 7 

53. 

state 

11,127 

54. 

f^T'Tcrrr 

knowledge 

1,14.  11,115 

55. 

sun 

111,34 

56. 

ftsftrr 

mandate 

1,424 

57. 

attachment  to 
worldly  object 

111,56 

58. 

devoid  of  conscious¬ 
ness 

11,71 

59. 

f?n% 

import 

1.491 

60. 

f^s 

natural 

11,49 

61. 

self 

1,485;  550 

62. 

»r%rcr 

exclusion 

1,405 

63. 

HTTcT 

well-known 

11,99 

64. 

nrrr 

proof 

1,101,111 

65. 

deep  sleep  state 

1,23 

66. 

%fk 

speech 

1,356 

67. 

VTTq-fg 

sense  of  the  root 
( dhatvariha ) 

1,435 

68. 

S3 

sedge 

IV, 53 

69. 

indeterminable 
as  either  real 
or  unreal 

jl,20, 

^111,140 

70. 

&5T 

tinge  (trace) 

IV, 42 

71. 

fafTR 

difference  of  opinion 

1,374 

72. 

fgsm 

illusive  assumption 

1,375 

73. 

fqng 

particle 

1,302 

74- 

fsrawnfar 

power  of  projection 

1,20 

II. 213 

of  relation  1.374,  37S 

III, 359 
1,320,329,330 


7  5.  qqpq 
76. 

7  7 . 

78.  51^57 

79.  5riq;fi^ 

80. 

81. 

82.  ^r;q 

83.  STfq<| 

8  4. 

85.  5ftq 

86.  sqrftR 

87. 


immodesty 
knowledge 
interval 
blend 
driver 
air 

association 
dream  (state) 
knowledge, 
consciousness 
intimate  relation 
one’s  own 
permanent  being 
permanence 


III, 47 
111,166 
11,179 

1,339;  11,127 

1,53 

IV,  31 

I, 170 

II, 69 
1,48 


IV 

INDEX  OF  THE  VERSES 
OF  THE  SAWKSEPAgARIRAKA 


310 

?> 

qqqfqfqq 

* 

3Tf:qjqq$J  f^fq^qf 

3f^;qRfifqqqlqmq^q 

* 

°\5 

R 

V\ 

aifa:  %ms'3?3%q  q^T- 

* 

X^X 

af^ggq^qqRqra; 

X 

<x 

sR^Rqqiqfqq^q 

X 

3^'A 

3TfOH^qnicqr55^IT: 

R 

X'* 

^frqqjs'q  q-qs-q 

X 

\x\ 

3f?Flct  qfqqtqiq  ^,qiq; 

\ 

m 

Bffiqq^qqqlqq?:  qqjqf 

X 

XX* 

3{?iqq?fqqq>qq^q  qiq 

R 

<: 

sfsuqqqqqqtqfqg;  q  shk 
3tfRq#T^ftq'ElW- 

* 

rX 

qfwT 

X 

W\ 

ail  fqq#qqqfqq  qqtqfas 

X 

xx< 

mi 

9 

\ 

w» 

sfiiqqqrRpqq; 

3 

^’A 

3T3Ha^Tci|teciqi  Q# 

3itlR?is[  ?fq  %'T.q<‘ 

y 

wraisn^  ft  g^-q- 

X 

Sjo 

^3I^«lf33qtSW 

X 

up 

3ffRq5?  qfr  qigWcf 

3^uqqr-qfl?qiqqqi  nf«|: 

X 

m 

3ffiqqfef  eq;£  ft 

\ 

m 

3raiqqi?qfqqq  qqtjjgjT 

X 

3f3iqjflq*qq|qtfr  =q  UPH 

\ 

3iinqfq5T5T5qVifq^f|q;- 

qimr 

X 

3THiqclq  q  qfq'qfq 

ti 

•c 

3iffq^q  g  qeasqqcf 

3 

3Tnmf^qcrqr  q^'ra- 

dsq) 

?a 

3TifRe?rqfqq«iq^qqnfoT 

\ 

m Riw-q^g  qi^qqqr 

R 

3{fRIW  qf/q^^qq^q: 

3 

\ 

m 

aiiitq  m  qiq}  qqfq 

R 

sfsnTq  q&pKg^fq  qq; 

m ' 

3f?IRc-q  qjqmqt  q  qqqq;  ^ 

3{f[[fqcq  q^or^iqqtg 

:> 

\ 

x*>\ 

3[;f|H;q  q^oj|  sfjqcTT  %q 

?0^, 

afsuiqqt  qqfq  q'nfqqr- 

faq  qq; 

D 

\ 

3??[fqqt  qqfq  i^qqq 

R 

^3 

3{s?R  ^^Rh-qiqq^qi  = 

?  ^ 

3if  iq  ^^iftfiqiqqgqi  «q° 

D 

< 

3TsTI^ 

R 

m 

fqq^qfo  3RRfci^. 

qjqlq; 

? 

w 

ej?tS|fcqqqfqq  qi?j 

arateqqtfN  ^  cmqfq|- 

* 

3fc?t  fildw 

\ 

3f4t  q  q^I;fiqq:g  fq?fq 

{ 

wc 

3frT;  q^cq  g?q 

\ 

\<c^ 

Sflcl:  q^qqfa^Hqqjg; 

? 

yy*A 

sr^qigq^qq^fq  gq; 

Vv3 

3T^ic^rey  ffqfR:  qgftst- 

jqoj; 

y 

q^rfq  fqwgqqqq* 

* 

U’A 

miw.  qr^KrqaifMci- 

q^gqlq 

? 

=1°^ 

m\%  ssqq?  qq  ^qq1$ 

? 

^;a 

3fqq  ^qfq  qq^qqqqifq 

3 

3tqq  q*gfq  ?A  sqqftg- 

HH: 

R 

3i4l*qq  q  ra^  qqf4r*;if% 

3^1 

R 

V5 

3?q  qi^qqiqqqaa'q 

? 

y\c 

3W  %qf%qi?qq^qr 

? 

\ic 

3fq  q^qqtqfqqqq 

* 

y^<? 

arc  qqtqqfq^fq^qqi 

V 

V» 

m  qgqqiqqq^qqt 

Nil 

US 

\ 

\ 

'a'ai 

3ffifaq;iftaqi  SqqfaaT 

\ 

'AA* 

3ffiqsp[tR:  ^faqf.aqi: 

* 

\\^ 

aRifct^qqfi^'q 

aRlSR^  ftfftlfagT 

? 

sRpqfqsjiqEqqq^a 

? 

V’Atf 

3fgqqfqq&T  fq'?Kaql: 

? 

^^ftg^faftfqaqr 

? 

3J3qRqiqqfq^iq^ 

^l> 

'Al* 

mm  3: 

R\\ 

aigasref^tft^pFcT- 

? 

\ 

aF^W^fFSIsft 

3 

3pa*ffWh?l^%ft: 

sfctjSoii  wiqeft  q^q^fa 

* 

apq^i  qfs;  rrr  qqa; 

? 

w 

apqw  fq^qq^O  3$q*q 

V( 

^q  gqfqfqq^Rfqar- 

Rgr?- 

\ 

\uv 

3Pq  q^fcf  fq^qffqfqqt. 

a^q 

< 

w* 

an^$;qfqqqwq% 

l 

n 

arfq  q  ^3*3W°r  qta; 

\\\ 

3trq  q  fofasfa  sfaq^q; 

\ 

w 

sm  3  q^q;qi^qqqifaqi- 

JTqriqnrT- 

3 

r.°. 

awfaffafr  r  eraif%: 

* 

3n^wgrqq  qtqft  qf%- 

qfth: 

? 

V<?(3 

3F»cq^q^flfa[  xj  fa^RT- 

?IH  flPcT 

? 

vzm'm  ?  \\u 

3FP-J55lf3*R:  *?gNfJRfcHI- 
3F^q 


RR: 

3ft  R3f[qq  qg  M4  *qj 

\ 

Fm^.fcP&ra  qln^iRf 

* 

Ryo 

->ffRl5%fi  nqfa  1^<W- 


fogfci 

? 

3Tl'TiiqTI^iqRcIcTI  rfl^f 

K 

31i'T,Rl?)  fafqfll  cliq^qil 

l 

?c? 

3fR,RR!  S^nr  cTR^aRT 

? 

?<* 

3{RRI^  RRRI  ciiq^F 
3FRR  f^STR  JTlRcT 

< 

*r  qqf 


=i 


qi*r  ? 

3Tfflq  ^n«rfq  af%cTPcT-  ^  \»£ 

ft  \  v9.° 

an^re  ^r^fa 

auiri^^3^R  $  ?3pa 

8UfR^:  IfcsR:  qt?qq  $  ^\s 

aWl^qifaqfaqfacT 

^3:  ? 

8jir%  qft  r  '*  uv 

ejifqM  q  g  q^cTigqqq- 

^T:  ? 

aJlfRT  RflNUfa  q^R- 

^Jci  \  'Atf 


anaiis^:  ^3'T.i^  msA  3  ^ 


ar£*pn**pifa  ssqqfRqR  \ 

en^ra  qRifqq^Roi#  l  ^ 

aff^r^r  j^qgur^foi^- 

aixfT:  \  l 

3fi?i3  g^goi5Ji8jfoiqj- 

Rf€t:  l  V<T'A 

JTis^sfq  ^  \  \%\ 

3TR  #  cqq^qfeqr^  ^  'A' A 5 

stlfaqqg^ft  5is?gqt 

l  l  °'A 

SJR^q  RRcTI  RRcfRF  ?  Uc 

3FR^fqqfqqragq^T-  $ 

A 


isgfa  f-fefeta  nqr 

? 

R\° 

qfefef  3ffa- 

?fe> 

lA  q^qfefete^  ^ 

? 

R^ 

?si*3qmfet  ftfefa 

feat  ^ 

\ 

tsr^qi’w  ^  qfiifeiq: 

l 

yUs3 

ispgqiqt  ftfeiatihsi 

■y^'A 

si  q??ffqfe  q^qq: 

\ 

»^0 

^ma  ft  m  qq  q;g- 

fe 

?f  aiqq^qfe  qqST 

3 

ItrigqiSS^q'Jl^^q^ffe 

R 

ftA 

0 


|fea=qnafeq 

3 

swqufq  cf?q*affi: 

\  so 

3 

?V* 

3 

g^ewffeg^T  flat 

y 

? 

ggi  Hiqqqnaqq  flq;£ 

\ 

3-qq  q  qqflt  fq#H: 

y 

y 

3-qft  >j'5  ftfeq  erqq 

3 

3-"q  m  ft  f  raq^qfeafe 

3 

lR° 

3c'qfttflqflT  ft^qqjqf 

3 

R°l 

3cqftfe  f|  ffel 

y 

R\ 

Scq^feRfaucRftfaq- 

3cefa: 


Prer 

r< 

a 

3cRpq  rr  ftcTOiSTfl^cT- 

? 

Rc< 

3*T#iaT  q  *cTf  R^R- 

«o  *\ 

X 

yp 

^Rcn^jRq^^iRuii 

r< 

*RX 

3f^RRIRcRR^?TRiR- 

9 

\ 

V  A’O 

3foRRH  RRqqRR 

\ 

y'A°, 

R 

??* 

3?JpRRpi  cm  cip4  =R 

V 

sqPpqqPicqPi  r  Pqq 

B?,P 

SRpmRR  RR[R'-ft: 

300 

sqftqjqqifRfiRiRqp 

\ 

30* 

SqpRpPl  RT  ?fqq^ 

3 

v9\i) 

3rJpqf?f%^)  RR^im 

rrir. 

3 

sqqfmqqqPiRiPPT 

X 

'AV, 

gqqRRRR  fqqRRFTk. 

A'~’R 

sqqqiR  qRqqqiRRt 

X 

qq^HR  rrrwiPi  m 

U'  '* 
it  i 

aqisRcir  qf^mqR: 

'< 

hritrr:  ecqqi  qnfrr: 

* 

,J»  ^  ^ 

sqifaqr  qi%qifwq- 

3 

r^0, 

3qiPf^qiPi^RiRt  q 

o 

< 

\vi'A 

gqiPKfRRRifcfq^- 

3 

*VSO 

qqiPq^ci-.qFiw  ?*m 

\<>C 

tp  Rii'lS  ift 


? 

qq  flcftnfa  fq^qqR 

3 

q$  ^q^qf^^qqqiS^- 

q|q; 

l 

qq  flq^qfqftqfwflfq^r 

y 

qq  Ff.rfqfq  Sqifqfa  mi- 

*qq 

\ 

q^qqq'qogqfgfqqq 

3 

? 

q^qqfRmdf?q  ecr 

3 

q^qqcqgqqif^i^q 

* 

\%R 

^qq*q  q^lfqq  g^q: 

3 

W 

q^qq^g  qftw^wg: 

3 

'^qqqqqrctTj^q  ffqj 

\ 

\%\ 

q^qqoRfqf  fjfq^g  i\ 

3 

\\% 

3?} 

3rhqfo^  ?Tfom- 

\ 

v 

3^c-qf%%  f?  HqqRqW- 

g^- 

vc 

sFfci^qsngfgsnq^sq 

? 

\t\ 

Rfqq^  ^ 

? 

afcraVqfq^q  ft  q^- 

§fIcq^3T?q? 

? 

va’A 

3i%iet;q  qffag  qrr^t- 

K 

afcra>q  3^qqq^q[fq?!qi- 

•  \ 

V?^ 

$ 


cFiqgilfHqfciqf  q^qsftn 

rt^Jffi  \ 

SRWfaf 


m: 

X 

\*K 

^SfgfqfqBgxW 

X 

q^  wm  qfti^r  q*q^ 

3 

x*& 

qi^qqii;  w  qw^fafq- 

q)q- 

\ 

y 

q&qifc  ^  ^Wrqfaa 

\ 

q^f^fqfqq^q  cT^lfq 

\ 

*X 

\ 

X 

\% 

qrasrer^sfein^  =q  qqoi- 

X 

vet 

qflf^qifoj  *3c$  ?PTT 

qufar 

* 

X* 

5RS:  WM:  qs^qaTOBR: 

\ 

9e.C 

\ 

IX* 

qHTl^fSKlfflFqJTf  s&KOftq 

= 

\°R 

qqq if?  qq  q  qqfccHq 

%fq 

^'3'3 

qircqw  q^q  q^ong; 

\ 

qii^cqqfq  fq^ifqqg; 

\ 

Ux 

B 


? 

$ 

SROigrifHR^cif  aR^qKtm 

C!?lift 

\ 

qRoifac  fe^tfafoiw- 

apt: 

\*K 

qqgfsftfqgg^q 

? 

\°u 

qici  Tfl  qR|?? 

3 

m 

eR§8Ri5  qq  qiq'qfwfq- 

q|q- 

y 

q^qift  ^  ^qqqqftq 

3 

^R 

qqifq 

q;£ 

3 

Wl^tqqre^cqqqq: 

\ 

sqqq;io^t*^S^^- 

\ 

VR 

qiqjpqpsftqcr  =q  qqot 

* 

y<r<: 

qflf^qifoj  q?c$  q^  ?PTI 

qufci 

\ 

5Rg:  W&\  ^qcffl®5IR: 

R 

^.c 

wqi^qRqi?R$q*i%: 

\ 

qiiTif^qii^qqi  errors 

R 

R°R 

sRiqffa;  rise  ^  qqfccgq 

"N 

\ 

q;^q  afgoira; 

\ 

qiRiqcqqfq  facpuf^ 

\ 

?<< 

B 


quq^qmmim 

3 

\ 

RRV 

g  gfrfi^i 

V 

RR 

tsqopft:  qfaims#^ 

R 

f.qqq'iqqqsfjfqqj  gqf 

\ 

RV° 

foqigqqq  mi  qm*iiq: 

X 

y^'A 

q?f5R:m>qq 

X 

qm  f# 

R 

V3V9 

X 

y^s, 

^3R5^5^!J  rt^STR 

X 

y?v9 

\K  SMW?clIStR  £C: 

y 

ypA 

4k^  95  qq% 

3 

V 

mn  mzitf  qfamtW 

X 

r<°,^ 

*1. 

nsfiqs  %  ftawfaqrw- 

? 

rv*. 

y 

VR 

gqqqi  igr  q?jfq  qgm 

\RR 

gqal  goiff%^qq 

? 

X*R 

gq  f%qcqiRqq*foq 

RXR 

g^mqqdqqiqqHi- 

t 

0 

g^ramiqfqgit  fi  mg; 

3 

ntaaarct  g^gi  mq^r 

S 

R<^ 

qiqqi^qql:  fwmnqt 

R 

32  ^ 

\  Rt 

Sfjfcqjt  ffa  fc1>qq 

\  ^ol-\ 

qeq  sjqRqfwraw  viqg 

3  \\ 

fq^frfi:  q^SRRT 

\  R:  £ 

fqrancR^sm^m  ^st 

W: 

\  W 

fqft^q>tertq  m 

v 

f%raq^3%3Tqq:w  gq- 

R  H 

fqpiq^q: 

5  00 

\  '  • 

fofqtfRfiqifaqqg: 

?  \\c 

Tqqn^qfq  eiwicr- 

q*q 

\  "'A? 

r%?iqin:  qgq;55 

?  33R 

(!M 

=qq^3  Tqraqfqqiqqi 

yfe'A 

Icpqviq  3  qqfcr  ?z- 

qf? 

R  K°. 

%Fqq?gfqqqm  qq 

q|f: 

3  \\ 

R  \°R 

5T. 

srn^jwq  gqqq  zz 

\  U-V, 

q^?!^qqqftcltqqigX 

\ 

=q  clcTi® 

l 

V^O 

X 

^=o 

ciat  fqq;gqqq^ 

3 

R^ 

aatsig  ^qifefqtte^ 

? 

3,00 

Wq^faq^:  qqjqqR 

<5 

g  g?q: 

R 

V» 

qqffa  j$2qqfa  qif  g 

rix^- 

R 

Vo 

cisrifq  gqgqq«?  fonrc- 

qi£ 

R 

’AC 

rl^R?^R?fsWI 

R 

<^q  q^fqqq)  qq  qq 

q^q; 

X 

^oo 

mq  q^fqqq  <m 

3»R 

fiqr  qqiewwq: 

3 

ctqi  iqqqsfq  =qggq  qq; 

\ 

j^ 

qqi  «<ft  q^g 

qn% 

X 

v^v 

qqi  sfecaq^j^i^q 

l 

R^A 

qqf  ft  qm  q^ofifqqisi 

X 

n\ 

qqi  f|  *N;*gqj£gsft 

X 

vvv 

a^HRifaiir^ci:  wri  \m^ 

\ 

q^ftsqi^q^q?- 

l 

X 

v®,<a 

R^ 

^V3 

aWRfSfcqfefifl  R  |g- 

\ 

R?» 

awi^fasr  !^{^?m^- 

\ 

atRrctfnar^  Rfcmrf^q^ 

\ 

$»» 

aWISRIffctf^  qpifol  \ 

3'aR 

awi^pq  af?r- 

SO 

%<fa  a 

? 

m 

a^l^I@f«30i  fafmg: 

t 

awi^r  wapsmioi- 

R*? 

cFWiqwfoT  qpqqiWtjqi 

? 

*aR^ 

awRjRTifqsroi  sftqqiq 

R 

^R 

aWffi  RIRT^cIF  ft$qf- 

\ 

R^ 

aiswqataifsRisiq  flif: 

R 

VaR 

arseqataifsKS  qfc  sr 

R 

H° 

c!pqq  ^iq^oif  R  qgqqFR 

\ 

fcRJS  ^3  aw  =q  fcFgrt: 

R 

^R 

fsalslq  fq^aqpaq- 

s^ai 

\ 

cftfo  cF  fa  qi^F?W*WTfi 

< 

^R 

wa».  snMfaaro  q^gq^qq  { 

m 

fqfqicrq^qTaqiaqdi  faqi  ^ 

V 

?w.  walsif^a 

R 

RRR 

?q*qq  2Rf?qaq&fiwr  ftqfa 

?*» 

cq  q^w  i%fraq^q 

* 

<qq7ifeq  sH;qq 

* 

'A^,0 

g?qfqf  snnt  fo\: 

R 

5C. 

WK 

vTK'T<TIT?q[ST3T^  qB;  qqfa 

3°n^ 

? 

m\  ^  tfm 

3 

sr  wfr  ^[olsfq  aat  faqh:  \ 

yoo 

sr  ^ 

3 

Sf  TsIfS  "Rff!  ^^JTcftpJ- 

5q[?R 

? 

sf  ^  faiFTWR  3R: 

3 

V\° 

ST  *3% 

3 

?T  TsT^  R  cT3iST$ls?4l: 

■o 

3 

sr  ?g?41f5T  wi  qVflt 

l 

ST  s?  ftflfq  sf;  ^[4  stir 

\ 

sr  r  #g 

3 

?opA 

ST  =3  fa*T[*iTftfT?T5cTlfsT 

? 

»<r° 

ST  ^  R^PTfsicT  5lfq*TlffT  sft 

* 

fT  ^  a^IS^faRfliTIW. 

3 

sf  ff  cTJTtqq^sq  fqjp?T[ 

V 

sr  spfircrra: 

? 

=(3'A 

ST  ^  RURTssTTqVq^iqf 

t 

?f  =ET  nTR^PT^RcRMi 

O 

V 

<VA 

sr  ^  srsrfcT  facN^faa- 

sqtqsflW: 

? 

ST  =q  qilJT^qTT.cR^si 

$ 

R  q  qofgqqqgiq 

3 

R\X 

qg  3#7cj  qf?f  srinf^et 

q 

3q 

q  ^  qfqcTISqwq 

3 

q.°va 

qg  q  f%cqsf¥qqgife- 

q  q  Termini  qnw 

qfeq^q 

3  q^ 

f%f%?f*q 

? 

qg  qTsqpwqq^or 

q 

q?° 

q  q  5Tfrftf%  flC^Tf  ^  31  3 

<^ 

fT3  %fi^qfqfcta??jn<l 

q 

qo^ 

q  q  gq^ifoTqqRinqq 

3. 

qg  fqifqqpqgglfrq 

y^q) 

q  q  glqqTqqgql^qql: 

X 

qg  RigRTfrfqqqiqqcft 

q 

^\3 

q  *J3  fqfq:  qrfeqfq  q 

qg  qifq.qqqqi  qp#- 

q^ 

X 

'■\°\3 

qg  ^nqqfwgeqqq  w: 

q 

q^ 

qq:  qq5jqfflqK'TW  q 

X 

\0?, 

qg  gfqqfeqgqt  qqq; 

* 

py^ 

qq -.  t3e#qqgr'?q?gq: 

X 

y°3 

qg  ttajMi  q^^rwig 

q  WfS^^gqsfsq^: 

qpqig. 

qy^ 

q  qqisfqTwq^qgq 

\ 

qg  qqiftqqjqqqi 

* 

yqq> 

q  ?TT5r  qqqfq  3^571^ 

* 

q°^ 

qgfs^qfe  qin 

qo 

q  qgiW:  ^orfo  fqq 

R 

^°y 

qfqtqfqg  qqqfc  RR 

q  qRtsft  sqqnqq 

R 

5R33SH£3 

q«» 

q  cffT:  qfif^T  3*3^ 

l 

R*\ 

q;q;4t  n^^Tife  Riql 

q 

q^ 

q  ?n  fqq|: 

3 

qfqq  %g7qR^-q39TT 

q  qN 

?T  33  R3lfq  qqtqifq 

3 

•<*> 

qf|q  qfq 

^?oq 

fT  33T  3Rfqcqf?RlWl% 

\ 

tt'A 

qfqq  Tq^gfqq^sqqW 

q 

^y 

q  qw  q;i4  qqtfj  q  fqspi 

?<S8 

q  qi?q;qq)qi^rq  q^jR13: 

y^ 

n^TITcil^  q^fafcT  ffK: 

X 

W 

q  gq;qqsj  qq  faSHR: 

^q 

?T  fURqliTl  fT  3  qfgqlfT: 

X 

y^v 

q  gTifqq^sq  qqqfqg?: 

* 

q  ffBT'q^T^i^qsqf^cT:  X 

w 

q  gq?%q  Tferw  qq 

\ 

q^ 

fT  ffi^cqaifs;  fqrftq;  X 

w 

q  qqfqqq^q 

3 

q  fft55>q^T?n  fqd  sqf^- 

q  qqiqfqf  q^q  R.qq; 

33q 

ftsi: 

X 

w 

q  wiqp  efq  qqr^ 

q 

\  RRR 

qi^qfa 

faar  3  \  \\* 

^I^q-jgq^tflfqg  l  \o^ 

qiqiqqisw  ^  ^onw^raL  \  \R° 
qmqigqfeqt  qfa'qq  \  voxa 

3  RQA 

qie^sqqi%feq^:  \  ^ 

qiS^CTci}  3Rpa  qq*T-  l  ^ 
qtffft  q  q%sr  qnfaqiqt:  R 
qit  si^ifr  m  ai^?i  m*n  ^  U° 
aftr:  q**q  q  q  awfforc  ^  3.  \° 

fqqqmi  qf^Hct:  R  R° 


fqaisitvnftflfia  qqq;  R  \<z 
Pu«ii  q  wqq'qar 

wffa:  \  R^ 

fqsqq^qfq  q?g  q^t^q^  \  \R\ 

fq?q  fqqjRi  §q  srf?if%- 

faq  ^  R  \*\R 

fq<q:  §5t  f5g?RWfl^:  \  ^ 

fqfqq  q  q'lfqq  q^rfr  qq;  \  xa\r 
fqqtq  qlq  gmfajsq^  ^  y=v 
fqqV^teqisfq  q*i  q  ssfara;  \  *s\ 
fttfqsTqpj  q  ^I’qqjq-  \  %* 

fq^fwqfqqqfqqq^  v  <; 
iq?qqtqiqi  q  qqtsRqqif^^  3 


fq^fttfas  g  fqfaqqq 

X 

f^lftl^cT  fsfqqi  qf|:^cir 

? 

fqffqftoisfq  fqqiqfofs: 

X 

fqfq^foqi  <£:^fq'qf%t3: 

X 

va$ 

fqfqqfqqr  fl^Mq  qfcf 

X 

nc 

fqfq§:fqqr  s<qqiqiq  ql 

X 

*3$ 

fqfq^fqqi  q^cRqifqqi  m 

X 

yy° 

fq'qRoq  qfq%foqq*q 

X 

fq'qqfo  qf?  qi  g$qsra?q- 

X 

w 

fq'qi%n  Rq<qqrcqqq- 

spqi 

\ 

XX* 

fqpqqq  q  qt$j  Rpqqq: 

fqwfq; 

X 

\x* 

f^^fqq-qqfq?  fq^fq- 

qqqq 

X 

Xk 

qllNqrtq^qqr  fqqq 

q  q§*. 

X 

w 

q'te  gqpq  q^qqjpgsnqt 

X 

RV> 

qqq*5flfqfqqqtsfq  q^ 

X 

^qcqqiqqqq^  ?qqt  q  qjqq 

X 

qqf^R  R^qfqs  qfs:  wig: 

R 

^00 

qq^gfq  qt?qq*q  qqai 

qiqqq^qqqf 

X 

qqi??i  qis&RqiRq  fqq 

\ 

V& 

qq  qifctfqfaqqiRam 

\ 

x°°< 

qlspqfqc-qq  q^onq. 

X 

D 


S^f  $;?- 

t 

sfe  c*fescqqqf%  fcff 

3 

K 

3%^  qqfa  ctfq  q^q 

%ra 

\ 

3 

St  3«4 

\ 

Sfoi^rsfq  ^gqi- 

ft%*q 

'< 

3%^  Hqffl  qi-qqiTiq. 

m- 

? 

3°» 

Sqiaq?qqfrq(vqfqq|aiifq 

3 

3^0 

gqiq^pqqq^q  ff  qiRujcq- 

? 

? 

«°.3 

9qicq^qqi'Siq^rqfqq: 

W 

S3  fq^Kgqqoq  5$: 

* 

33° 

SSifq^q^f  siftqfafti 

? 

\*\ 

qqq  3013311  foqq  scftfa 

t 

3V 

’flqiqq  qq^qnii 

3 

RTi'T:  aqiisnfciR^  q  qra 

! 

33* 

q^qq-Tisjcq^i^it  f| 

? 

33* 

qfqq^isr^qi  sqRfifof 

? 

333 

13^  fqifqq  333 

? 

\ 

*3 

qxqffq  q>g  qf^flRq 

fq^Rjq-qi^ 

u 

3 1^33133333:  fl313 

? 

qfqqcqi^gairqqq  qfc  3f 

? 

^o 

X 

3 

at^iaer  fqdfqqw 

X 

X\R 

a^qwnqRqqwqqi 

* 

XR 

Rt^iaw  fq?qq!sfcw 

X 

yq.*A 

RXR 

ait  ^  qqg^q  sgfa. 

X 

ncq^c-q  ?3q?I*T: 

\ 

RR* 

sPTta^ffcraffa  qq;qaai 

y 

y<£ 

H?q^;fcreflte*rah  m^- 

R 

'a 

aifqqft^Fqqfqftp&fq- 

Rfq^fe^qqqifq 

X 

qqiffff 

X 

^y 

Rcq-a^a  f^ffq  fqq^fq- 

y 

aifqqfqqii^qq^q  qqqift 

X 

Rcqa^q  ^q^sq 

R 

ai^fli:  q#q-.  ae^f- 

X 

<A 

Rcqqq^fjqqqqfgfqq^qiq 

\ 

aiqi^lifq  qqq  atfqcfsq 

\ 

u° 

qc'qTqiq^iq^sf^q  pft 

X 

X'K 

faqftresrcrar  qistft 

3 

^0 

q^nqqqt  a  sr^fqqq; 

X 

R*\ 

aqigqifqrggicqfq  qfq- 

X 

V'V 

RsqqRffq^d  qf|: 

X 

^.3 

*T. 

aqqqqjq  qq  m  fqqq  nr- 

7) 

\ 

a^qi^qq  ft  qtfon 

\ 

qfl^qrqqfiqiag^: 

\ 

asqq  qft  a  qiqq^q; 

\ 

qf  fqq«r  fraa  i£!Mi 

X 

aqri^i  qRqifqftq 

R 

<i° 

qmr-qiRqqiq^aTq^qqt 

R 

aqqq^aiql  ft°iq  snrctfr 

snffcat  tfqfq3Tiq*q%- 

X 

qifia: 

aqqfq'f>  qfaftnsj'  qq 

X 

y^° 

fqfq^r  qifq  aafn  afa- 

R 

M 

a*j>q  qtef  fqoil 

7> 

\ 

<<3 

gr^^qfq/qacil^Rq^q 

\ 

V^o 

aaiqraf  aiftq  frfq^qwcrf: 

? 

*\X 

gfe  qR^qfqqqiqqft  - 

aniqfq^afatqqteqi 

\ 

W-5 

Rl^I 

R 

u 

qqqq^cqtqfqq-qq  cict: 

'X 

fiaai 

X 

aqfcfc  qiqqgqrq  %qi 

gtt^f  qiqqpqq^f 

X 

u° 

fqqjq 

X 

*?V 

^itrif^^iqcqfq  %qq)sq 

X 

^ys 

aqqq;  qiqqgqiq  aKai  ftq- 

■  X 

nx 

fes:i  qrqqTiqiqgaqrqqq 

3 

aifxi^tioT  qtsfq 

X 

c? 

q>q^aiqq;qpqgr^Scai 

X 

^y 

HqqRRlf^faqR:  fqqi 

3 

fat 

* 

Wl 

Rqfa  =q  g^i*fafR%4 

? 

\°1 

flsqqHtaifqqtn^ 

? 

%C\ 

UsqSRftrft  *T  ft 

\ 

VHRR  ^fafa  f%q  fqfa- 

5pqR 

* 

#R 

RSRR  RqgqR^qrT  f^q. 

\ 

R^l^lfc^RfaqRq  q 

\ 

VIWIg-qqaVWR^ 

'< 

\*v 

faRffwft  qJlfcwi 

\ 

3^Tf  RVr  gfRR^ftcfa 

\ 

n\ 

u 

qsqtq  qq}q^: 

\ 

VC\ 

RcFifa  m  Rtesg-I^ft 

\ 

\\ 

Rfiiqftgq  qq^fq  srsstRr: 

l 

*\° 

^\  *R: 

l 

qqqqqq^o 

\ 

qT^R^qq^I  flRRq[ 

\ 

$?«<fa:  fifeq^q  R?- 

•o 

\ 

^feqRqqfafag  sM 

\ 

\ 

R?’A 

q  vRj  q  faqfxl  vft 

l 

*A'A 

Rl^I  R|R  PtRcflt  3T  RcR[ 

\ 

R>Rif^q  qfarm?- 

VS^, 

RIRlfR^RRtq^R  3  RR} 

R 

^00 

wrcqqw  fRsqRRisxT- 

X 

V\V 

RiqifRfqqqgdwitq  qq 

R 

X^R 

^RfHi^ST'R:  ftfes^t 

R 

xn 

RIRIRRRRRRRfe^  3$fR 

R 

RR 

«rrf*RRcftfeifqqqt  R  R 

RRIRRl  Ri?[fRlf%RgT 

X 

X 

rrr 

RiqjR^t  fqgg^  fqg^Rf 

R 

^V3 

^rr^cT  R«fcRftg  =q  qqifqRR 

■R 

rr* 

RIRIRRRR:  flRRRRR^ 

R 

UR 

*T. 

RRIftRj  3TIR*  Stefan 

R 

Riqtqi3qs;q*q^q 

R 

\V£ 

RRR^ig  f%To5T: 

X 

R 

RRlfRR!  R  R[5lRRR^qR  RI  ^ 

RfqFRqqfaqfater4i 

R 

RX 

RRt^fR^fRRR:  m&  RRI^  R 

V 

RfRRRf  RR^  fRR'SR: 

R 

RR* 

fq^raiRi^q^RfR^ 

R 

X^X 

RRkq^s'qq^Ri  r^t- 

X 

fRSRIflRl^q:  f%f%q$ 

R 

X*R 

RRmiSRRR'RqR 

X 

VRt 

fa«TT  gfq:  flfqiXR^R'Rqgl  X 

RR* 

R'RiqqRRR^lRfq  Rft^g 

X 

y\a° 

RtRf%R5tfRRRR 

X 

r;r1  fte:  srcat  m 

R 

^° 

gRRIgRR^  fq^;4t  c-q^I 

R 

XRC 

r^r  rr>  qf|  q^jf^^g; 

R 

RR 

pRSfIR  RJqfRRR^R 

R 

\RR 

r&  fR^qf^  ^ 

R 

rXr 

gqgt  m  ^Rqrarajqiitfft- 

R 

X^ 

R^mfl^wfq  qrsjqit- 

X 

XR 

R 

RR  ° 

Rflg^SR  g^Rt  RRIRl 

X 

R<X 

y 

RR 

RlfjqqiOjmf^qfqRIRfR^ 

X 

X  X* 

RIRlRW^RRRtq^RifRR')  wre*.  \ 

X^R 

*r. 

RIRf'RllfRRRRI  f?  R  ^^IRI  X 

X^R 

q^R  fqfqftqfcqrq  rr; 

«o 

3 

RR° 

RRRWRfaRR  RqrpqRR 

X  ' 

'R%t 

qflf^8jfqR^R^Rqi5Rqi'Rf 

R 

rm 

RHFRwfanR  qf^fgci  qg;  \ 

RRV 

qR  ^RRR  R 

R 

RRX 

rirr  foiqqfR**  gqgr 

l 

V6a 

rr  qq^R|qqf%qq 

R 

R[R  R  RIRRlfRfR  qfqR 

rr!  RfiRffqR  qq  g*t 

R 

R°R 

gfq?qi 

X 

XR* 

qn>  qat  fRRR^ 

R 

RR* 

E 


|qf^5  3  ^ 

q^qqqqpiqpq  %-  ^  c 

qjf^mqq  qRw  $  \  Rq^ 

qqq  q?qfq  fq^lqgqkq  $  \  <?v 

qs/qrfqqfiqiqfqqu^qVq-  ?  ^<r 
qq?3  qsqqqisqqq  m^yq;  ?  <\^ 


qsiqqqrqqq  qq%<liqfqs  ^  ^v<: 

qsi  %?N  q'tqqpq  v  »° 

q?q^r4;  fqwfq  ^fqqqft- 

%q  qq;  R 

qfq  qq^qqrswq^  3  ^  ^ 

qnfqqqfqq,qqf?qq;qqq%gi  ? 

qfqqqqi  ^qisi  fqfpq:  \  ^ 


q^icfqniq^Tt  m  ^fetP^q  g  ^ 
q*q  qqtqfqfq^  qftnttai  s 


qq#  fgaP?  fqiqqqi 

VO 

fqqaaj[:  ^ 

qimqq  gqqqr  \  v<^ 

qr  qpqgf^q  $f?r:  si^i  ?  \\\ 

qr  'qqyfqfe'tqqfqqi  3  ?'a°, 

q^qq^q^qq't  3 
qiqq^^s-qf^f  sfaRtai- 
i«q  qq;  ? 

q>qqqq  qq  q^qqqlfq 

qtfq  {  ^ 

qpqq<#qqqqi  q  q 


qi-qmsw 


*  W 


^qra^qqfq  g*R3«q 

STSS - 

? 

S 

cJ^-q^^qgq^vq  c^ftg 

? 

w 

?Tf% 

* 

^yvs 

swMftrgjjr- 

\ 

! 

3«v 

^qjqqifra  qs*ra  ft 

qf  V:  ?I=d  qcfqsq 

55$m 

X 

ft  ^5: 

S 

U^ 

fe^teiftqfqwq  wm 

X 

q:  q%qq°sftqqsftftqt- 

\ 

<%t%  Rfs^ata^rftffira- 

X 

sfeq^Tt^isfe  q;ft  \ 

W 

T. 

^qrafasiTO^iqi 

X 

R*>° 

^qq%fc1HSf%  5T«T^  ^ 

X 

55i%  ft  qiqrftnar  q  qrai 

\ 

X 

W 

Sf. 

^intqjwra  fqqqgqe- 

FfTF- 

?  5  R 

sreRrcurai*  qtq- 

l 

V3 

3'^' 

UqsqftFifqqcil^Rqqrq 

3 

\  \  A 

qqcjfq^q  WJl  qft  ft^ST  \ 

^q  cnqq^^qq^- 

qq^Rfqq^qf^fq  vft^S- 

X 

\W> 

1  * 
sa- 

* 

qsraift  q?e  aq  qiftsa- 

^cq?ft  ^qftsfuftqg- 

asraw- 

X 

R\ 

cq^TRIH 

? 

Vo’A 

q^qiqfqqfqqq^q%- 

\ 

w 

^qiRft^qq^q  ft 

q^fqniq  |ft  ^vqqqf  jjcm 

X 

Rd'S 

R 

*** 

q*3^qq;qq  qg  ^  3fl:  ? 

^00 

q^-q^g  ftcqqq^tft*  3 

qjqq 

X 

rr* 

ssift^tsqqq  f%¥i<^ 

X 

qiqqqfftras^  =q 

ram 

^K: 

R 

VA 

X 

qiqqq^qqfqftf^^q^q- 

^^q^^q-^qpfiq  q  3y&nft  ^ 

qftq; 

X 

XRR 

3 

V.R 

fqfafe  307^:  qw-ifsfq 

f4c4 

X 

RR° 

fqfqqq^qq  3  qt  q^ 

R 

w% 

f^qisfq  q^Rt 

R 

RRX 

fqqr  TORqqal  q 

\ 

X 

fqqqqi^  ft  gr^fa: 

R 

M 

fawiRReft  RffrR  ss# 

} 

^00 

fq^^qfefa^qqffqRqw 

X 

fq^f^qfefq^qqffriR^q- 

X 

v,° 

ft4  ft^f?^  fTR^q 

3 

fqqqRfOTqfqr^  sr:  sffqft 

X 

3° 

fqqqqjwtfqiqi  *w-.  sftft 

R 

w 

fqqRjjRt^W: 

\ 

W 

fq^qsqicqqqtq  ft  s^M- 

R 

xw 

ftfRf  q?nfoT  WlftRWTR: 

X 

l^fi  qq^RRqqq;?iiqrr%tq 

X 

qqqiqqfqqqw  m<\\ 

R 

n 

q^iRqiqqqfd^q  qgqqro 

\ 

qqiRRqqqfactr  qfq#i}q 

y 

qqiRqiqqqfqqf  q^fRgft- 

R 

qqiRqRqftf  qiRORiRqft 

\ 

v*x 

q^FRqiqqfqf  4r  qqf  qi=4 

l 

qcTIRqiftRq^sfq  RUR*}^ 

\ 

RX^ 

q^i;afq?R§fqf$RRl: 

3 

\^R 

^sfq  sisfeffaRq  ^qr  1 

^AV3 

^isfernfaf^iw  sr?q- 

^  STT^dt- 

? 

#: 

\ 

qtqqpqfiira  qqqq^lsqfwq; 

,  ? 

^V9 

ST;;d  hsir  ffci 

3 

3 

qfe  qfqq 

\ 

*Rf4  fqqqs  ^#^fq  4 

V 

51s?:  STffrRJffit  ff  g 

sqftq^§fl^'4; 

? 

^vd’A 

? 

^frisqr.ifqqprf^q  ft  gt 

? 

m 

$>  00 

*\ 

5^ITR  Rraqfa  4t 

?  ^S: 

* 

\\\ 

5T^ciq4qqq^Bf%^tm^ci 

< 

w 

%  g%3R  q. 

? 

snsrjqq  qfafsragnqSl? 

* 

V 0 

5T- 

^I5?tfq*q?gflfqqq- 

?Tfrfi5q[fp!R^4^  aFRfq^ 

^°o 

fq?^ 

? 

sraft  2^wq|ft>£_ 

* 

?nw  ciiq^qt  cT- 

fe^qqqlqfqg  ^ 

5ti£  q#i3  ffiflgj 

qiqq 

? 

'A^ 

3?q^q 

* 

\ 

fa'qfqgf^Fiift  wfa- 

wmqftqFrarRqici; 

? 

t 

VV3 

^qojqjcqq^  fqq?f4 

? 

^Rfi'Tlfqqqg^qqf 

» 

5I^cq3Tff?iqq4t  q  fg 

sfaqqfqqq^sRrFT: 

V 

? 

=w 

S^folcSqqRcfmi- 

< 

^TS'^fefqqq  f4^q<4 

3 

aw 

U?fqi4  q§T0J^3q^  %g- 

UvS 

^i^f'q^gqqfqqR. 

3?:  q*f  q  ^  qi^qqg- 

fq^i 

\ 

sqqlq: 

3 

g?  q^g'q  q?rfq  qfqsifa 

Pn  »5\ 

m^F 

\ 

'iqp4 

F 


553?«ral;sifqct  fq^Rrftvijq 

? 

^oo 

\ 

«5^r  ^*qft  f|  ?q% 

l 

«Roi^gs^  qfqqfq^ 

swirf^R 

3 

^y 

Sfgiqpirq  q  f%q  q.qqq 

R 

y 

V* 

acrctwfefasnfsfq: 

o 

\ 

w 

yfqqqqqqq;  qfqq  q?t- 

3 

gfqqqqfq^qiimq  srrSts- 

? 

^oo 

3jfqqqf%  g^RRqifq  q 

?jfqqqiffl  gfqwiifq  *r 

3 

=w 

a^*i  cucqqq^o^^ 

■o 

3 

s^rsf^qgqqw^cq- 

\ 

9 

\ 

^qfta^qfqf  qft  qqfq  q?r 

? 

^srqqqifflftafasqT 

ecqfq 

V 

? 

y^\ 

^q^iqqqi  ?fq 

q  stts^e- 

? 

y^ 

^qi^qqfrtfwg 

snsrerei- 

3 

v<Z 

^Iqtflfaq^vqqqlf^g 

3 

l*y 

’tlffiqRqfqq^q:  3^: 

? 

^V3 

qgqqisqifqqsg^Rq  qq; 

3 

W 

q#  qiiqgqfaqift^ 

l 

gq^fafqq^qqqRq 

\ 

^S^ReK  5  q^ffqql 

\ 

eff*Krq^q  gq 

? 

qgqqiqqqqi?  gqfoq 

? 

»*£ 

e^g'qisqqg:  qiqqfa 

%f%q; 

< 

^y 

gqf  q  sfqfqfiq^  ft  qqq- 

U* 

qqft  qqfsw  q^ssj 

flqfsfq  qqqcqRgqftq 

*K 

qq:  qqrqifqRqj  q?ig 

w 

gqjqf  qft  gqr  q 

R 

y° 

gqrqgqfqtq  q^fq 

qiRq  q»g 

3 

m 

gqq?fq?qqqfqqfqqf  w 

yc 

qq^Nngq-q  ^ 

\ 

gq?£fqqqq  q  fcq: 

\ 

eqn^qq^qift  ggtfr 

? 

y$y 

«tqsr-qRq  fiiqqr  fiqqiqjq; 

* 

?<* 

q?q  qRqq;qfaqfiift^ 

RRiqqf  q*jq^ 

t 

TO 

flcq  q  qc'q^qRq  m 

3 

ecq  q^n  gqqRft  qiqq- 

qiq 

? 

i 


SR  q^ff  fq^psqq^l^rs- 

■R 

*K 

^qq)q  ffq  tfafq^qiR 

R 

^qc^e^qif?qq- 

V 

IR 

^ffl^fcn^qqRfciq?! 

V 

\\ 

srcspqq  q  fqgqqqj 

V 

ssssmsfaqqi  q^q° 

? 

e^qqrqwqr^qqi^qts 

3 

B  qf^sfct  q^SfRet  q  q>: 

\ 

^qqteqq;gf?[q;iJ,q 

\ 

eqqifqqiRqn^q  qqr 

R 

iwfqqqgg^qt  r  gq<it 

y 

sqtf|ataiqqqi  fe^qqi^ 

? 

ggq^q?i^R^qq: 

3 

s,q*?R«sqqqqq<5: 

Wfiqq^q  a 

3 

SR'ffRfqqR^:  sq*y- 

y 

^q^HRI^q^qf^r 

R 

^q^Rf^aT:  fef«q§ 

R 

^yo 

sR^Ri^fsfsq^sr 

R 

^V9 

*m  q*gs  ^liq^qq;ra 

l 

\  °\3 

gqqqiai^^qw^Tefq^ 

R 

^y 

^^fq^fctqqifq^q  qRqi? 

•o  ' 

3 

^0 

S?4  qtffjqqqrft  f|  RlRSTIcT 

R 

sq  q^fqf  q*g  qqRq  fo- 

-  ? 

^y 

sq  sqeg^qiq  qsq 

3 

b  ^qRfeqqfeqq 

3 

y?x 

eraif^fiRwqptq  fqqfe. 

R 

qfqqs^q  ^  \\\ 
eiwg  qfeq  arte  3  $v> 
si  qiqqqtff^  fqqfqoqq%-  \  \vr 
gi^q^fta^fq  q  foqq  fq-  ^  ^ 

qqi  3 

Sjfa-  r  \\% 

^mrafFT'n^t  qf^  qqft  gq;  \  \K% 
^r^ra^^q^sq  fqsfeftqi  ? 
gmiqqq  ^<q  ^rn^  3  ? 
flRqiRRq  5f^q  3R3,  \  ^ 

AiqqRqfq  qqq^qqi  \ 
qfqq^fqfqxiq%  3 
giRfqfewqq  q^:  ?  ?<V» 

eiqRifqq^oqqq  qqfa 

snq*q-  l 

giqRlfqqi^qq^qfq^T  \  R\* 
fliqpqa:  qqq^q  q^rffqos)  $  \\{ 
emifq  q  fqqm*g%t  3  ^ 
ei3=5qr^  fqqRqlq^-  y  \v 
fRraRqq  qf?  T^iRqqift 

w?  \  \v% 

Rragqqifeqqqs  q  qtoqifs  ?  y<:$. 

fafgftq  qsq  qfc  qjarw  ?  ^ 

gfq^f.q^qfq  wfo\  \  \Rv 
if^fqq&Krrcq  3  w\ 
§fq|*rqqt:  srsi  *w  ?  ^ 


gal  3r?g:  R^qRRsfq 

R 

u° 

^  cTj  wqqfRfq  fqfa 

sqjqR- 

\ 

RR{ 

^3Tfa  ^  fl^fct  Rg: 

\ 

w 

^fsRqfqRSRRqqqRq:’!- 

\ 

R\° 

stoqtawT  fqfaqq^i 

\ 

^]sqfq^fq  q?|«f^q#i 

? 

^°\9 

^sqnidRq  q  ^wisfq 

ff%: 

? 

fltsq  gntqqqmfqfq  qh^q 

? 

>Va 

eteq  gqifqfa  qq^qRqiRT  i 

tftsq  gRlftfaft  f|  g<R- 

t 

m 

qRR*^  qq;^ 

^f?q^q;qgqgq^q^ 

R 

UR 

Rf^q^Rl^qrtqq; 

V 

Hfiqqi^gqq^  g  m 

=1 

^raffHRRqiqqqq 

* 

W 

SR^srraf^sra  q  ssjoiis. 

? 

R\R' 

e*qRqqr  qqft  araforesifft:  \ 

R°\ 

sr^sr  qfs  qtg  s^q- 

? 

R°R 

W4:  HRRR  q^ 

? 

3VD® 

ftfqw^q^^fqq^q^q 

\ 

ri  fa  qftqqlqgqqi 

< 

V< 

rqfesq^fqqdlRlfq^cq 

3 

tifq?q<qi^T.  q^qqqfqqq 

q'toiaqiiqi 

? 

R*\ 

cRqf 

r\\ 

tffqsRiurazqi  Rfa  qUqar 

? 

RtR 

Rq?q  qf^c  qiqq#  rRi^ 

3 

<:* 

SGR^qqqqRqqf  qqiq^ 

3 

V 

e^R^qqqq-g  fq^qRIR 

R 

gfqsra%fqqq 

! 

rrr*[  Rferantffqqq 

3 

RRR 

OT^qqqfq  Rfqq*  mr 

R 

n< 

R2[ggfqiqqq|  R  cRRc^Jfft 

\ 

m 

RS  qqRT^qqq  q  ciq 

R 

Wiiqr^  q  qissRq:  e 

R 

q>°,A 

^fqfiqq^qfqgf%3R[ 

< 

Ri^qqqqqgq’-lfgf^: 

n 

R-T.R'Ji^'gmVqqR 

^ov 

Rqfsq^i  fqrcRq  fa 

l 

*R 

migfnf  T3gqqq- 

R 

Rfwqtsiq  g^aiRfq^q- 

qrqjg; 

\ 

n° 

rhsj  qiqRqqR'iq  qfq 

\ 

u®. 

rr  qqr?T5J[fqdi,ITqq[ 

H:*- 

l 

q  qmRcmRq  gRR. 

|at: 

\ 

U'A 

* 

\°\ 

ftcTC  clMlfq 

n\ 

^R; 

\ 

\1<Z 

^nqaf^*rf^R|w 

\ 

?VO 

swat  qPngt  f^ 

3 

srafefo  ^  f^a  «fcl: 

o 

3 

srfRSRfFqfRq- 

l 

R 

STCT^qfq^t  *raft 

\ 

<: 

SHcFsq^qtffTCT  ^OT^TJT- 

lf% 

\ 

M 

SIcflHfa  ^Hrf:  Rf# 

q^SR 

w 

^l^iqqjfqfjci  ftafttSTM 

\ 

vQ'A 

^rr^iqqvi  f*q  s^a- 

* 

u 

^F^RfcR^iq 

^v9 

sngwfera^taar 

\ 

w 

SRqifqqft  ft  fqqTpqaar 
smh 

\ 

V9^ 

*qi*nfqqft  fagsr:  qg 

at'qai  fT 

\ 

??» 

R 

tq^ifqfqfqaqgqw^q 

R 

u? 

5. 

%  wJI  5T  q[f  qq^  qfaqfxitg:  \ 

u° 

srangfl  sRrcqftcq|at: 

R 

RSTH8**  sqganqgfq^s:- 
5KS«I^ 

R 

\SV3 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Appayya  Dlk?ita  :  Siddha  nlaled asangraha  with  the  Commentary  of 
Kr$nanandatirtha;  Chowkhamba  Sanskrit  Series  Office,  Benares,  1916. 

Citsukha  Taltvap  rail  pika ,  Nirnayasagar  Press,  Bombay,  1915. 

Madhusudanasarasvatl  : 

i  Advaila-ralna-raksana,  Nirnayasagar  Press,  Bombay. 

ii  Advaita  -  Siddhi  with  Laghucandrika  of  Brahma  nandasara- 
svati,  Nirnayasagar  Press,  Bombay. 

iii  Gudliarthadipika ,  Nirnaya  Sagar  Press,  Bombay,  1912. 

iv  Siddha ntabindu,  with  Nyayiratnavali  of  Brahmanandasarasvatl 
and  Ndrayani  of  Narayan  atirtha,  Ka£i  Sanskrit  Series  No.  63, 
Benares,  1 928. 

v  Vedantakalpalatika ,  Sirasvati  Bhavana  Texts,  No.  3,  Benares, 

1920. 

Mandanami^ra  t  Brahmauddhi,  Govt.  Oriental  Manuscripts  Library, 
Madras,  1937 

NrsiinhaSrama  :  Bhavaprakadika,  Govt.  Oriental  Manuscripts  Library, 
Madras,  1958. 

Padmapada  :  Pahcapadika  with  Vivarana  of  PrakiUatman,  Govt. 
Oriental  Manuscripts  Library,  Madras,  1958. 

Salikanatha  :  Praka'anapahcika ,  Chowkhamba  Sanskrit  Series, 

No.  17, 1904 

Sarvajfiatman  :  Pahcaprakriya ,  Madras  University  Sanskrit  Scries. 
Subrahmanya  Sastri,  V  Brahma  nandiyahhavapraka  in,  Cochin,  1961. 

Sure^vara  :  i.  Naiskarmyasiddhi ,  Bombay  Sanskrit  and  Prakpt  Series, 
No.  XXXVIII,  1925. 
ii.  Brhada ranyako' panisad-bhasya-varlika, 

Anandas'rama  Sanskrit  Series,  Poona. 

Vacaspatimi£ra  :  Bhawati,  Nirnayasagar  Press,  Bombay. 


