THE 

REALIZATION OF 
THE ABSOLUTE 

by 

SRI SURE$VARA 

Translated by 
A. J. ALSTON 




$ 3 1+1 A JS is 1 *- 



THE 

REALIZATION OF THE 
ABSOLUTE 

THE 

“NAI§KARMYA SIDDHI” 

OF 

SRI SURESVARA 

Translated by 
A. J. ALSTON 




SHANTI SADAN 
29 Chepstow Villas, 
LONDON, W.ll. 




First published February, 1959 
Second edition 1971 



© English translation 1959 and 1971 
Shanti Sadan, 29 Chepstow Villas, London, W.ll. 



The Publishers gratefully acknowledge 
a generous grant from the Hari Prasad 
Shastri Charitable Trust towards the 
cost of the publication of this book. 




Most reverently 
dedicated to my Teacher 
Hari Prasad Shastri. 




INTRODUCTION 



The Realization of the Absolute ( Naiskarmva Siddhi) 
is a work of Suresvara Acarya, a direct pupil of Samkara 
Acarya, the founder of the Advaita Vedanta tradition 
in the form we know it today. By “naiskarmya”, literally 
actionlessness , Suresvara means the Self in its pure 
nature, “void of the world-process consisting in the 
whole system of acts, their component factors and 
results” (11.108, prose). And by “siddhi” he means the 
practical realization of one’s identity with this meta- 
physical principle. The work, which must be presumed 
to have been written in or about the first half of the 
eighth century A.D., deals with the method of Advaitic 
Self-realization. Of its four books, the first refutes the 
views of those who maintain that Self-realization or 
release is to be obtained by works alone or by works 
combined with knowledge; the second illustrates the 
mode of reflecting on the implications of experience 
which takes the aspirant to a theoretical understanding 
of the inner meaning of the mystic texts of Upanishadic 
revelation; the third explains the meaning of the 
cardinal text “that thou art”; and the fourth recapitu- 
lates and shows by means of quotations that the doc- 
trines now being taught agree with those of earlier 
Acaryas such as Gaudapada and Samkara. Each of the 
books consists of about one hundred stanzas intercon- 
nected by a prose commentary, which latter looks not 
backward to the verse just over but forward to the verse 
to come. 



vii 




Broadly speaking, the doctrine of Realization of the 
Absolute follows that of the Thousand Teachings of 
Samkara fairly closely, while expressing some of it in 
simpler terms. First the aspirant must perform rituals 
and unselfish actions as an offering to God for the 
purification of his mind. Then he must reflect on the 
instability of every element in experience except the 
witnessing-consciousness which views all else as object. 
Having thus distinguished between the ultimate prin- 
ciple of consciousness and the triad of knower, know- 
ledge and known which it illumines, that is to say, 
between the Self and the not-self, he must next see that 
the Self alone is real and eternal and that all else is 
different from it and is inert, transient and unreal. In 
the light of this conviction obtained from reasoning and 
experience, he must analyse the grammatical and logical 
structure of the texts “I am Brahman” and “that thou 
art". When he has performed this discipline and has 
observed the rules of purity laid down by Patanjali in 
addition, he is ready to receive the ultimate experience 
of reality as the compassionate gift of his Teacher. The 
final experience arises, and can only arise, as a result of 
hearing the texts from the lips of a Teacher when the 
preparatory discipline has been previously performed. 

The present translation represents a thorough revision 
of an earlier version that appeared in typescript form in 
1959. For convenience of reference the text has now 
been added in romanized form, following Hiriyanna’s 
edition with occasional deviations recorded in foot- 
notes. Extracts and observations from Jnanottama’s 
excellent Sanskrit commentary (of uncertain date) have 
been included in the notes and marked T. Page refer- 
ences to Professor P. Hacker’s Untersuchungen iiber 
Texte des friihen Advaita Vada, I, (Wiesbaden, 1951), 




which contains an extremely useful analysis of the 
doctrines and terminology of the Realization of the 
Absolute, have been given under the abbreviation 
“Texte”. Some help has been taken in places from S. S. 
Raghavachar’s rather heavy English translation of the 
work (University of Mysore, 1965), which includes 
notes and Devanagari text. A general account of 
Suresvara’s doctrines is found in Dr. Viramani Upadhy- 
aya’s Lights on the Vedanta (Banaras, 1959), but a more 
profound and critical treatment has appeared in a recent 
Sanskrit work, Saccidanandendra Svamin’s Vedanta 
Prakriya Pratyabhijha (Holenarsipur, 1964), pp. 210— 
276. 

A number of friends and colleagues have been good 
enough to help me in various ways at different stages of 
the production of the present work, and to all of them 
my thanks are due. 



ix 




TABLE OF CONTENTS 



Book I 

Verse 

1 The purpose of the work is the removal of ignorance 
of the Self, the one cause of pain and evil. 

1 Benedictory stanza. 

2 Reverence to the Teacher. 

6 The book was not written for personal fame. 

7 The nature of nescience and liberation. 

8 Knowledge, not ritual, destroys nescience. 

9 Statement of view that liberation comes from action. 

14 View that the Self-knowledge proclaimed by the 

Advaitin does not exist. 

17 Opponent quotes Jaimini and Isa Upanishad in his 
support. 

19 View that only imperative sentences are significant. 

19 View that if knowledge plays a role in liberation at all 
it is only in conjunction with action. 

21 Summary of prima facie view: action, not knowledge, 
produces liberation. 

22 Advaitin refutes the thesis that liberation arises 
through action alone. 

29 Action is natural : it is promoted by nescience and the 
Veda merely sheds light on its consequences. 

36 Right-knowledge of the Self ends nescience. 

39 Real message of Veda is “suppress your desires and 
end transmigration.” 

44 Ritualistic actions as remote cause of liberation . they 
purify the mind. 

55 Liberation not effected by action conjoined with 
knowledge. 

67 Refutation of Prasankhyana theory of liberation 
through creative meditation held by Brahma Datta 
and Mandana Misra. 




Verse 

68 Refutation of doctrine of liberation through action 
conjoined with knowledge as proposed by the 
Bhedabheda Vadins. 

80 Further arguments against Mimaipsaka doctrine of 
liberation through action alone. 

85 The Veda inculcates Self-knowledge, but not as a 
direct command. 

89 Self-knowledge is its own authority (not dependent 
on the Veda). 

92 Quotations of Jaimini and Isa Upanishad of no avail 
to opponent. 

98 Conclusion and summary of Advaitin’s case: libera- 
tion is through knowledge alone. 

Book II 

1 Liberation comes through the supreme texts of the 
Veda, especially “That thou art”. 

1 View that liberation arises not directly from hearing 
the texts themselves, but from subsequent action. 

2 Answer: the liberating knowledge arises invariably 
from the texts themselves, not from subsequent action. 

5 Self knowledge as gained through the texts does not 
conflict with other knowledge. 

10 The stages of Advaitic discipline: role of anvaya and 
vyatireka reasoning: the conviction that the body is 
not the Self. 

16 State of the man detached from the physical body and 
subtle body. 

19 Further reasons to show that the Self is other than 
the physical body. 

21 And other than the subtle body and ego. 

46 How the Self becomes identified with the ego through 
illusion. 

54 Why the Self is figuratively referred to as “I” in such 
texts as “I am Brahman”. 

57 Real nature of pure Self. 




Verse 

59 Pure Self as one self-luminous Witness of all intellects. 

75 Pure Self is not “the sufferer” (individual soul): it is 
other than the mind. 

78 Pure Self as Witness of the mind is isolated and 
detached. 

88 The Witness in all intellects is the same. 

93 The Self is not knowable as an object: parable of 
elephant. 

94 The Self is unqualified. 

95 The universe is merely imagined like the lights seen 
through pressing the eye-balls through closed lids. 

96 Inference can tell us what the Self is not, but not what 
it is. 

97 The Self is beyond all empirical means of knowledge. 

100 The Self as different from all objects, including the ego. 

103 Ignorance destroyed by right-knowledge, and trans- 
migration with it. 

106 The three factors in empirical cognition are all objects 
to a Witness. 

1 10 The Self alone is real : nothing else can be shown to be 
real. 

116 Conclusion and summary: error and suffering only to 
be overcome by right-knowledge acquired from Vedic 
texts through appropriate discipline. 



Book III 

1 The “locus” (asraya) and “object” (visaya) of ignor- 



ance. 



1 Upon a proper understanding of “That thou art 

egoity is dissolved. , . . , t , 

2 “That thou art” is the source of man s highest good. 
6 The “discrimination” (viveka) proposed by t e 

Sankhyas is inadequate for liberation. 

Refutation of Nyaya view that ignorance is mere 

absence of knowledge. 

The Self is what is not known in ignorance. 



xm 




Verse 

9 How the text “That thou art” gives rise to immediate 
knowledge of the transcendent. 

10 “That” cancels the direct meaning of the word “thou” 
and “thou” cancels the direct meaning of “that”. 

1 1 Why the terms “the knower” and “I” can be used as 
figurative names for the Self. 

12 Intelligence and inferiority are characteristics of both 
the intellect (or ego) and the Self, but in a different 
sense. 

20 Changing intellect presupposes changeless Witness 
different from itself. 

22 Anvaya and vyatireka reasoning a merely negative 
discipline: it must be completed by hearing the texts. 

23 Meaning of “that” and “thou” in ordinary secular 
usage. 

25 Interpretation of “that”, “thou” and “I” in the 
supreme texts. 

29 Importance of negative work of anvaya and vyatireka. 

31 Function of words in a sentence; how they are learned 
and how used. 

33 Reason leads ultimately to a denial of the Self: 
example of the Buddhists. 

35 Knowledge arising from the Vedic texts marks the 
highest stage beyond all dialectics. 

39 Vedic support for theory of Witness. 

43 Man comes to the Absolute (Brahman) through the 
ego-sense, but only after it is destroyed. 

44 The Veda not in conflict with perception. 

53 The Self as revealed by the Veda is different from the 
whole hierarchy of knowables. 

56 As physical objects presuppose an empirical subject, 
so the latter presupposes a Witness. 

57 The Self is beyond the distinction of “real” and 
“unreal”. 

58 Ignorance is present in deep sleep. 



xiv 




Verse 

59 The Self and the ego are respectively subject and 
object. 

60 The Self knows objects as “this”, the ego knows them 
as “mine”. 

61 The Self does not adopt the individual ego as “mine”. 

62 Sense in which the pure Self is specially manifest in 
deep sleep. 

63 Role of hearing of the supreme texts (sravana): the 
tenth man. 

66 Inscrutability of nescience. 

68 Return to the themes of the role of hearing in libera- 
tion and of the tenth man. 

71 The intellect is falsely taken for the Self. 

73 Further explanation of “that” and “thou”. 

94 Return to the theme that the Veda does not contradict 
perception. 

98 “Thou” and “I” are but figurative words for the Self : 
Self is like ego, but different. 

103 The Self is beyond all words in their direct meanings. 

104 Parallel between process of hearing the supreme texts 
and a man being awakened from sleep. 

110 Nescience is non-existent and has no ontological 
stability. 

114 But it cannot be overcome by reason: only through 
Vedic revelation. 

118 If the Veda fails to bring enlightenment it is not the 
fault of the Veda. 

1 19 Injunctions to act have their play before Self-realiza- 
tion, not after: inadequacy of Prasankhyana doctrine. 

126 The Advaitic path not completely outside the scope 
of Vedic injunctions, even though knowledge cannot 
be enjoined. 

Book IV 

1 The purpose of the present book is to summarise what 
has gone before. 

3 No knowledge of objects without a Self. 



xv 




I 'ersc 

4 All objects up to and including the intellect or ego 
are not-self. 

9 The ultimate fruit of unaided reason is doubt. 

17 The Veda alone unties the final knot. 

19 Our doctrine can be supported from the Upadesa 
Sahasri of the illustrious Samkara. 

20 The supreme Vedic texts are intelligible only as 
addressed to one who has not achieved complete 
discrimination. 

21 Yet Vedic texts can only liberate if discrimination has 
already been partly achieved by anvaya and vyatireka 
reasoning. 

22 Example of correct anvaya and vyatireka reasoning. 

24 How the Veda completes anvaya and vyatireka. 

26 Further illustrations of how anvaya and vyatireka 
co-operate with the Veda for liberation. 

33 Return to the theme of the tenth man. 

36 Enlightenment is waking from the sleep of ignorance. 

44 How the preceding verses were but quotations from 
Sri Samkara and Sri Gaudapada. 

45 The Self is changeless : the changing cannot belong to it. 

47 Non-duality the final truth: example of deep sleep. 

49 The enlightened man rejects all duality as unreal. 

51 But accepts it for what it’s worth. 

52 The doctrine here taught is the real import of the 
Upanishads. 

53 The consciousness of the enlightened man. 

60 Alternative explanation (from Mandana) of the con- 
tinued empirical experience of the enlightened man. 

62 The enlightened man is naturally good inall his actions. 

70 Only men of holy life will comprehend the import of 
the doctrine here presented. 

74 The present work offered to the wise for criticism. 

75 The good appreciate spiritual literature, but not the 
mean. 

76 Closing salutations to the holy Teacher Saipkara. 



xvi 




NA ISKARM YA-S1D DHIH 



prathamo ’ dhydyah 



a-br ahma-s tamba-paryantaih sarva-pranibhih sarva- 
prakarasyapi duhkhasya svarasata eva jihasitatvat tan- 
nivr tty-art ha pravrttir asti svarasata eva. duhkhasya ca 
dehopddanaik a-hetutvad dehasya ca purvopacita- 
dharmadharma-mulatvad anucchittih. tayos ca vihita- 
pratisiddha-karma-mulatvad anivrttih. karmanas ca 
raga-dvesaspadatvad raga-dvesavos ca 
sobhandsobhanddhyasa-n ibandhanat vad 
adhyasasya cdvicarita-siddha-dvaita-vastu nimittatvad 
dvaitasya ca suktikd-rajatadi-vat sarvasyapi svatas- 
siddhddvitiydtmanavabodha-mdtropddanatvdd 
avyavfttih. atah sarvanartha-hetur atmanavabodha eva. 
sukhasya canagamapayino ' para-tantrasydtma- 
svabhavatvat tasyanavabodhahi pidhanam. atas 

tasydtyantocchittavase?a-purusdrtha-parisamdptih. 
ajnana-n i vfttesca samyag-jhana-s varupa-labha-ma tra- 
hetutvat tad-upadanam. asesanartha-hetv- 
at maria vabodha- visayasya candg am ika-pr atyaksadi- 
laukika-pramdnd visayatvad vedantdgama-vdkyad eva 
samyag-jnbnan i . ato ' sesa-veddnta-sdra-samgraha- 
prakaranam idain arabhyate. tatrabhilasitartha- 
pracaydya prakarandrtha-samsutrandya cdyam ddyah 
slokah. 



B 



1 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

BOOK I 



Because all living beings from the Creator (Brahma) to 
a clump of grass naturally desire to avoid every kind 
of pain, it is equally natural and inevitable that they 
should take active steps to suppress it. Now, the sole 
cause of pain is the association with the body; and the 
body cannot be done away with, since it is rooted in 
previously amassed good and evil karma 1 ; and the latter 
cannot be averted either, since it arises inevitably from 
prescribed and prohibited deeds previously performed. 
Now action, in its turn, rests on desire (raga) and 
aversion (dvesa): and raga and dvesa are caused by a 
false superimposition of the notions of good and bad; 
and false superimposition is caused by our uncritical 
acceptance of duality as it is presented to our view. And 
the whole uncritically accepted world of duality is per se 
endless in that it rests on bare ignorance of the self- 
established non-dual Self, as the fancied silver rests 
on ignorance of the mother of pearl. Hence it is ignor- 
ance of the Self which is ultimately the cause of every 
evil, and which also, on the negative side, denies us that 
waveless and unconditional bliss which is the very nature 
of the Self. Total eradication of ignorance of the Self 
amounts, therefore, to the achievement of every good 
available to man. 

Now as eradication of ignorance can only be achieved 
through spiritual knowledge, the latter is its essential 
condition; and spiritual knowledge arises only from the 
scriptures of Vedanta, since the Self of man, being 

1 According to the Mimarpsakas, every act generates an unseen force 
(apurva) which inevitably produces “fruit” in the form of some bodily 
experience or other in future time. 



2 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 1 : 1 

obscured by that ignorance which we have seen to be the 
cause of all evil, cannot be known through perception 
and the other secular means of knowledge. Hence the 
present treatise is being written to stand as a compen- 
dium containing the essence of the entire Upanishadic 
teaching. And now follows the first verse, which has 
been composed as a benedictory stanza to secure the 
fructification of the work through transmission from 
teacher to pupil in the traditional way, and also as an 
epitome of the teaching of the treatise as a whole. 



khanilagny-ab-dharitry-antam srak-phanivodgatam 

yatah 

dhvanta-cchide namas tasmai haraye buddhisaksine 

[1] Reverence to that Hari, the destroyer of darkness 
and witness of the intellect, from whom the world con- 
sisting of ether, air, fire, water and earth has come forth 
in mere appearance — like the snake which appears to 
exist in a garland. 



s va-sampradayasya codi t a-pramana-purvakatva- 
jnapanaya visista-gima-sambandha-samkirtana- 
purvikd guror namaskdra-kriya 

Next, in order to show that his tradition has the requi- 
site authority, the author offers reverence to his guru, 
mentioning also his rare qualities. 

* "A teacher (who has realized the Self) is himself the author, ty. J 



alabdh vatisavam yasmad n dr, Has tamab-adayah 
gariyase namas tasma audya-granlhi-bhedme 



3 




1 ; 2 THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

[2] Reverence to that supreme guru who cut the knot 
of ignorance, in describing whom all superlatives fall 
short. 



namaskara-nimitla-svasayaviskaranarthah 

Now he explains his purpose (in writing the book), 
doing so in such a way as to include a (further) obeis- 
ance (to his guru). 

vedantodara-samgudham samsarotsari vastu-gam 
jnanam vyakrtam apy anyair vaksye gurv-anusiksaya 

[3] It is in obedience to the command of my guru that 
I expound the secret doctrine hidden in the heart of the 
Upanishads which ends transmigration and takes one 
to Reality. I am aware it has also been explained by 
others. 



kim visayam prakaranam iti cet tad-upanyasah 

Next, in case anyone should wonder “What is the 
subject-matter of the treatise?”, he states it. 

yat-siddhav idamah siddhir yad-asiddhau na kimcana 
pratyag-dhcirmaika-nisthasya yathatmyam vak?yate 

sphutam 

[4] Here is a clear statement of the true nature of the 
inner reality whose sole function is to exist as the witness 
and support of all. The existence and manifestation of 
all this world depends on its existence. If it did not exist, 
nothing would. 



4 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 1 ; 5 

v i vakf i t a-pr akaranartha-prarocandyanukta- 
duruktaprdmanya-karana-sanka-vyudasena sva-guroh 
pramanyopavarnanam 

In order to promote interest in the matters treated of 
in the present work he affirms the authority of his guru. 
It is not because anything essential was left unsaid or 
was badly said by the guru that the present work has 
come into existence. 

gurukto veda-raddhantas tatra no vacmy asaktitah 
sahasra-kirana-vyapte khadyotah kim prakasayet 

[5] The authoritative exposition of the wisdom of the 
Veda has already been made by my guru. Indeed, weak 
creature that I am, I have nothing to add. Can a fire-fly 
illumine the sky when it is already filled with the rays of 
the all-glorious sun ? 



gurunaiva vedarthasya parisamapitatvat prakaranoktau 
khyaty-ady apramanya-karandsanketi cet tad 
vyuddSartham aha 



Next he rebuts the suspicion that if the entire meaning 
of the Veda has already been brought out by the guru 1 
the present work should be disregarded, since its author 
can only be out for personal fame or the like. 

1 “In the Upadesa SahasrI and other independent treatises.” J 
The Upadesa SahasrI is probably the only independent treatise (i.e as 
opposed to the commentaries) of Sarpkara whose authenUcity is alto- 
gether secure today. J must have lived after the middle of the tenth 
century, but his testimony to a plurality ot independent treatises is 
interesting. 



na khydti-ldbha-pujartham grant ho 'smabhir udiryate 
sm-bodha-parisuddhy-artham brahma-vin-nikasdsmasu 



5 




1 : 6 the realization of the absolute 

[6] This book is written neither to gain fame, nor 
wealth, nor deferential treatment, but in order to test 
(the metal of) my own knowledge at the touch-stone of 
the God-realized sages. 1 

1 If he remained silent, the sages would be unable to lest and there- 
fore unable to correct his knowledge. .1 



anarthanartha-hetu-purusartha-tadd-hetu- 

prakarunartha-samgraha-jndpanayopanydsah 

Next he shows further that the essential subject-matter 
of the treatise is the nature of what is harmful to man 
and its cause, and the nature of man’s highest good and 
its cause. 

aikatmyapratipattir va svdtmdnubhava-samsraya 
sa ’ vidya samsrter bijam tan-naso muktir atmanah 

[7] Failure to realize that one’s own Self (atman) is the 
sole reality is called nescience (avidya). Its locus 1 is the 
Self as immediate experience (anubhava). It is the seed 
(bija) of transmigration (samsara). 2 Its destruction 
constitutes the liberation of the soul. 

1 The locus (sarpsraya for asraya) of nescience is the consciousness 
which is aware of nescience. The object (vijaya) of nescience is that 
which it conceals. For Suresvara, both the locus and the object of 
nescience are the pure Self. Cp. III. I (prose) below. 

For Suresvara, nescience proper is the initial “failure to apprehend 
the Self”. Positive false cognitions are its effects, as also are the world 
of duality (11.44,46, 112, 114), its component factors (11.51, 99), the 
ego which experiences the world (11.116, 111.77) and his empirical 
knowledge (1.38, 11.98, 106). The influence of the doctrine of the non- 
difference of the effect from its material cause is evident in places where 
Suresvara speaks of nescience as constituting the essence (svarupa, 
svabhava) of one of its effects 61 II. 1 , prose: III. 29). See Texte, pp. 61- 
66 . 

1 Cp. IV. 16 and 77 below. 




the realization of the absolute | ; 8 

purusdrtha-hetor avasiffatvat tad-abhivyaharah 

Since (of the four elements of the subject-msttcr men- 
tioned in the prose introduction to verse 7 above) the 
cause of man’s highest good has been left out, he states 
it now. 

vedavasana- vak yottha-samyag-jhanasusuk$anih 
demdahity atmano moham na karmapratikulatah 

[8] The fire of right knowledge arising from the great 
sentences of the Upanishads burns up utterly the delu- 
sion (moha) of the soul. But ritualistic action does not 
destroy ignorance, since the two are not incompatibly 
opposed. 



pratijnatartha-samsuddhy-artham purva-paksoktih. 
tatra jfianam abhyupagamya tavad upanyasah 

With a view to develop his doctrine, thus briefly stated, 
(that liberation arises only from knowledge attained 
through the Upanishadic texts) he states (the rival 
ritualistic argument as) a prima facie view (purva paksa). 
He begins with that form of the ritualist’s doctrine 
which admits (the possibility of) Self-knowledge (but 
denies that it is any part of the direct means to libera- 
tion). 1 

1 The reference is to theMimarnsaka Kumarila’s doctrine of liber- 
ation as expounded in the Sloka Varttika, especially the Sambandhak- 
sepa Parihara Section, verses 103-1 10. Kumarila there (verse 103) con- 
cedes that knowledge of the Self is enjoined in the Upanishads ( the 
Self is to be seen”, Brhad. Upan. II.iv.5, IV.v.6), but maintains (very 
implausibly) that the injunction is to do with rituals and not with 
liberation. Only if a man knows that his self (atman), conceived by the 
Mimarpsakas as a separate individual soul, is distinct trom the body 
and immortal will he engage in ritualistic action for the sake ot results 
which will only occur after death. His commentator Parthasarathi 

7 




1 : 9 THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

Misra, however, credits him at verse 108 with the view that knowledge 
is a remote auxiliary helping towards liberation, just as action is regar- 
ded as a remote auxiliary to liberation by the Advaitin (1.45-52 below). 
“When a man knows that the soul (atman) is distinct from the body, 
all-pervasive, not subject to death and free from pain, he loses attach- 
ment for the uses of the body", and from then on avoids any actions 
which will create conditions for rebirth and resorts to various ritualistic 
expedients for exhausting the effects of his past actions as quickly as 
possible. But it is the practice of these abstentions and these expedients, 
and not knowledge in any form, that actually brings about liberation. 

The Advaitin holds that because liberation must be eternal it can 
only occur through knowledge, viz. the once-and-for-all cancellation 
of an illusion. If it were produced through any action it would inevit- 
ably be transient. But Rumania's school hold that it can be achieved 
through action and yet be eternal because its nature is essentially nega- 
tive. It consists in achieving: the “non-existence” of embodied experi- 
ence and hence the "non-existence" of pain, and not, as the Advaitins 
hold, in realization of positive Existence-Knowledge-Bliss. It is because 
it is a mere “non-existence" that it can be produced and yet eternal. 
Whatever is produced positively is transient. But the “non-existence” 
of a pot, resulting from its destruction at a single blow with a stick, 
lasts for ever. It is not that the soul is destroyed in liberation as con- 
ceived by the M'tmarpsakas. What is destroyed is the soul’s embodied 
experience. A succint statement and refutation of this doctrine is found 
in Sarpkara's Taittiriya Bha$ya I, 1, Eng. tr. Gambhirananda, Eight 
Upanishads, Vol. I, p. 232 ff. 

mukteh kriyabhih siddhatvaj jnanam tatra karoti kim 
katham cec chrnu tat sarvam pranidhaya mano yatha 

[9] (Mimamsaka of the school of Kumarila): “Since 
liberation arises through ritualistic action (alone), what 
is the use of knowledge? If you want to know how 
(liberation comes about), compose your mind and 
listen. 1 

1 According to the Mimamsakas, rituals are of three kinds — daily, 
occasional and self-interested. Self-interested rituals carry a specific 
“fruit" in the form of some future embodied experience. This “fruit” is 
stated in the Veda in conjunction with the statement of the ritual, and 
it is for the sake of it that the ritual is performed. The daily and occa- 
sional rituals, on the other hand, do not carry any specific fruit and their 
performance does not bring on any new embodied experiences. Accord- 
ing to Kumarila and his school, they destroy the demerit contracted by 
previous sins. According to Prabhakara and his school, they have no 
effects, and are performed merely to avoid the sin of omitting deeds 
that have been enjoined in the Veda as obligatory. The typical daily 



8 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 



1:11 

(nitya) obligatory ritual is the Agnihotra. Professor Renou, L’lnde 
Classique, Tome I, Para 713, describes it as follows: “The Agnihotra, 
the ‘offering in the fire’, is the simplest of the solemn rituals and in a 
sense the most important: it is the sacrifice that every Brahmin or 
VaiSya head of a family should offer morning and evening his whole 
life. It takes place just before or after sunrise and at the time of the 
appearance of the first star. It is an offering to Agni consisting of milk, 
sometimes accompanied by vegetable substances. The hearths are 
cleaned and kindled, and then a cow is brought in which must be 
milked by an ‘Aryan’. The bowl in which the milk has been poured is 
warmed, several small ladlefuls are transferred to a large ladle and 
from this to the fire in two separate libations. Finally the sacrificer boils 
the remainder of the milk and offers libations of water to various 
divinities”. Obligatory rituals that do not have to be performed every 
day but only on special occasions are called “occasional” (naimittika). 
See Kr$na Yajvan, Mimatpsa Paribhasa, Eng. tr. Swami Madhavan- 
anda, p. 43f. 



akurvatah kriyah kamya nifiddhas tyajatas tatha 
nitya-naimittikam karma vidhivac canuti$thatah 

(10) “Liberation comes to him who avoids self- 
interested rituals and gives up forbidden acts entirely, 
and who performs the daily and occasional prescribed 
rituals according to rule. 



kim ato bhavati 



What results from this ? 



kamya-karmfi-phalam tasmad devadimam na dhaukate 
nifiddhasya nirastatvan ndraklm naity adho-jamm 



fill “In this way he avoids the fruit of self-interested 
rituals, such as the acquisition of the status of * g° d 
and at the same time, through renouncing forbidden 
acts, avoids lower births in hell. 



9 




] .]2 THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

deharambhakayos ca dharmadharmayor jnanina saho 
karminah samanau codya-pariharau 

And in regard to the merit and demerit (arising from 
actions in previous lives) that cause the present embodi- 
ment (i.e. the prarabdha karma), the advocates of 
rituals (Mimamsakas) raise the same objection and give 
the same answer as the advocates of (liberation through) 
knowledge. 

xartamdnam idam yabhyam sariram sukho-duhkha- 

dam 

arabdham punya-papabhyani bhogad era tayoh ksayah 

[12] “The stock of merit and demerit by which the 
present body with its appointed store of pleasure and 
pain has been set in motion (i.e. the prarabdha karma of 
the present body) can be exhausted only through 
experience. 



kamya-pratisiddha-karma-phalatvat samsarasya tan- 
nirasenaivasesanartha-nirasasya siddhatvat kim 
nityanusthaneneti cet, tan na. tad-akaranad apy 
anartha-prasakteh 

(In the next verse the ritualist argues as follows): If 
anyone says that since transmigration is the result of 
self-interested rituals and forbidden deeds all evil can 
be uprooted merely by avoiding them, and that the 
performance of the prescribed daily rituals is therefore 
useless, he is wrong. For evil arises even from the very 
neglect of them. 



10 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 1:14 

nityanufthana t as cainarn pratyavayo na samsprset 
anddrtyatma- vijnanam atah karmani sarnsrayet 

[13] And because he performs the daily prescribed 
rituals he is not visited with the impediments that assail 
those who neglect them. Let a man therefore place trust 
in ritualistic action and pay no attention to Self- 
knowledge at all.” 



abhyupetyaivam ucyate na tu yathavasthitatma- 
vastu-visayam jnanam asti. tat-pratipadaka- 
pramandbhavdt 

The above has been said on the supposition (of Kuma- 
rila that such a thing as Self-knowledge exists); but 
(Prabhakara and his followers hold that) no adequate 
knowledge of the Self exists, since there is no valid 
means of knowledge (pramana) to establish it. 

ydvantyas ceha vidyante srutayas smrtibhis saha 
vidadhaty uru-yatnena karmato bhuri-sadhanam 

[14] (Mimamsaka of the school of Prabhakara): “All 
the Vedic (sruti) and traditional (smrti) texts that exist 
enjoin action with all the emphasis at their command. 
Action is therefore the great means to release. 



syat pramandsambhavo bhavad-aparadhad iti cet, tan 
nci. yatah 

Next the opponent denies that the failure to discover 
any valid means of knowledge authorizing the possi- 
bility of Self-knowledge might be due to any error of his 
own. 



11 




1:15 THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

yatnato viksamano 'pi vidhim jhanasya na kvacit 
srutau smrtau va pasyami visvaso nanyato 'sti nah 

[15] “Though I have looked carefully, I can find no 
injunction to know anywhere, either in the Veda or in 
the traditional texts. We have no faith in any other 
sources but these two. 1 

1 Hiriyanna notes that this restriction of the Mimarpsakas’ faith to 
the Vedic or traditional texts applies only to matters relating to exist- 
ence after this life. In empirical matters, the Mimarpsaka recognizes 
other authoritative sources of knowledge, such as perception and 
inference, etc. 



syat pravrttir antarenapi vidhim loka-vad iti cet , tan 
na. yatah 

“Nor will it avail for you (the Advaitin) to say that 
though there may be no injunction to know in the 
traditional sources, yet there exists a natural inclination 
(towards Self-knowledge which prompts people to 
engage in the pursuit of it even without any Vedic 
injunction, just as men are naturally prompted to eat). 
For: 

antarena vidhim mohad yah kuryat samparayikam 
na tat syad upakaraya bhasmaniva hutam havih 

[16] “If someone through sheer stupidity engages in 
some pursuit not enjoined by the Veda but designed to 
bring about results in the after-life, it is as useless as if 
he were to pour oblations into extinct ashes instead of 
into a fire. 1 

1 On the illustration, cp. Chandogya Upan. V.xxiv.l. 



12 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 1:18 

abhyupagata-pramanya-vedartha-vij-jaiminy- 

attusdsanac ca 

Moreover, our doctrine derives from Jaimini, a Vedic 
scholar of accepted authority. 

“ amnayasya kriyarthatvad anarthakyam ” ito 'nyatha 

iti satopam ahoccair veda-vij jaiminih svayam 

[17] “The authority on Vedic matters, Jaimini himself, 
says with very great emphasis ‘since the ultimate pur- 
port of the Veda is to enjoin actions, the passages not 
enjoining actions are (in themselves) purportless’. 1 

1 Mimarpsaka Sutra I.ii.l. Jaimini’s statement was interpreted by the 
followers of Prabhakara to mean that all statements of fact in the Veda 
must be taken as subordinate elements in some injunction. On this view 
there is no inherent certainty that statements of fact found in the Veda 
are true: they may well be, and often are, fanciful statements inserted 
to encourage the hearer to perform a particular rite. It might have been 
better for the Mimamsaka if he had not dragged Jaimini into the 
argument. See e.g. verses 1.92 ff. below. 



mantra-varnac ca 

“And it derives also from a Vedic verse. 

“ kurvann eveha karmani jijivisec chatam samah 
iti mantro ' pi nissesam karmany ayur avasrjat 

[18] “And even a Vedic verse (Isa Upan. 2) itself en- 
joins life-long performance of rituals in the words ‘Let 
a man desire to live a hundred years here below per- 
forming rituals’. 



13 




1:19 THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

jnaninas ca vastuni vdkya-pramdnyabhyupagamad 
vakvasya ca kriya-pada-pradhanatvat tat as 
cdbh ipreta- jndnabl iavah 

“And there is another difficulty that faces the advocate 
of (liberation through bare) knowledge. He believes that 
it is the texts (of the Upanishads) that are the authority 
for knowledge of the (already existing) reality. But 
because sentences depend for their meaning on verbs 
denoting action, knowledge of the Self as he interprets 
it does not exist. 1 

1 Hiriyanna observes in his Notes: “Some schools . . . state that a 
collocation of words or a sentence, to serve as an independent means of 
testimony, should contain a verbal form (whether finite or not) denoting 
a command etc., so that the final import of a proposition is always an 
action. The argument here is based on this latter view.” If authoritative 
texts in the Veda necessarily proclaim action, they cannot yield infor- 
mation about any eternal changeless reality, such as the Self is claimed 
to be by the Advaitins. 

virahayya kriyam naiva samhanyante padany api 
na samasty apadam vakyam yat syaj jnana- 

vidhayakam 

[19] “Separate words cannot become syntactically 
united except by means of a verb implying something 
to be done. And no sentence, such as could convey 
knowledge, can exist without words. 



jnanabhyupagame 'pi na dosah. yat ah 

“And in any case, our position 1 is not jeopardized even 
if knowledge be admitted (as a factor in release). For: 

1 i.e., that liberation arises through ritualistic action, verse 1.9 above. 

karmano ' hgdhgi-bhavena sva-pradhanataya 'thava 
sambandhasyeha samsiddher jhane saty apy adosatah 



14 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 1 ;22 

[20] ‘Even if knowledge has a function in release, our 
position is not jeopardized, since knowledge may 
reasonably be combined with ritualistic action, either as 
the subordinate or principal factor, or as an equal 
partner. 



yasmaj jhanabhyupagamanabhyupagame 'pi na 
jnanan muktih 

“Thus we see that whether the existence of spiritual 
knowledge be admitted or not, in any case it cannot (of 
itself) lead to liberation. 

atah sarvasramanam hi vah-manah-kaya-karmabhih 
sv-anusthitair yatha-sakti muktih syan nanya- 

sadhanat 

[21] “Therefore men of all stations of life (asrama) 
acquire liberation through ritualistic action performed 
through speech, mind and body to the height of their 
powers — and in no other way.” 



cisad-artha-pralapo 'yam iti dusana-sambhavanayaha 

And now, as a prelude to its refutation, the author 
declares that all this is idle chatter. 



iti hrsta-dhiyam vacah sva-prajm "dhmdta-cetasam 
ghusvante yajha-salasu dhiimanaddha-dhiydm i a 



[22] These are the words spoken by the complacent 
denizens of the sacrificial temples, wise in t eir o 
conceit. It is the sacrificial smoke, perhaps, that has 
clouded their vision. 1 



15 




1 :23 THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

1 Sarpkara expresses a similar solicitude for the condition of the 
Mimaipsaka’s eyes when commenting on Bfhadaranyaka Upan. I.iv.7. 
The joke is in fact an old one, found at Taittiriya Brahmana III.x.xi.1. 



dusanopakramavadhi-jhapanayaha 

Now we define the method and scope of the refutation 
to follow: 

atrabhidadhmahe dosan kramaso nyaya-brmhitaih 
vacobhih purva-paksokti-ghatibhir nati-sambhramat 

[23] Now we shall show the errors in these views one 
by one by solid arguments destructive of their content 
and not by quibbling. 



catur-vidhasyapi karma-karyasya muktav asambhavan 
na mukteh karma-karyatvam 

Since liberation is not subject to any of the four pro- 
cesses involved in action 1 it cannot be attained through 
action. 

1 The four processes involved in action are producing, attaining, 
preparing and transforming; see verse 1.53 below. 

ajnana-hana-mdtratvan mukteh karma na sadhanam 
karmapamarsti najhanam tamasivotthitam tamah 

[24] Since liberation arises only from the destruction 
of ignorance, action is not the means to it. Action cannot 
remove ignorance any more than darkness arising from 
darkness (can remove darkness 1 ). 

1 Action is an effect of ignorance and hence cannot destroy it. The 
two are not incompatible either in respect of their nature or of their 
field of operation. J 



16 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 



1:25 



karma-karyatvabhyupagame 'pi dosa eva 

But even if it were granted that liberation were subject 
to any of the processes involved in action, further 
difficulties would remain: 

ekena va bhaven muktir yadi t a sarva-karmabhih 
pratyekam ced vrthanyani sarvebhyo 'py eka- karmata 

[25] Is liberation the fruit of one ritualistic action or of 
all together? If it were the fruit of one, then all the 
remaining injunctions of the Veda would have to be 
supposed useless: and if it were the fruit of all together, 
then the fruit of every ordained ritual would be the 
same, and the specific fruits mentioned in the Veda 
must be supposed false (which is absurd). 1 

1 As regards the first point, if any single ritual brought liberation as 
its fruit, then all other rituals would be superfluous, since an immeasur- 
ably greater fruit could be attained by the mere performance of the 
liberation ritual. Any piece of Vedic interpretation that could be shown 
to involve the uselessness or falsity of any part of the Veda should be 
regarded as condemned. The Advaitic \iew is not open to these stric- 
tures as it maintains that liberation comes through the destruction of 
ignorance and that all Vedic ritual has its validity within the realm of 
ignorance before liberation arises. 



sar va-prak arasyapi karmana utpattiia eva visista- 
sadhyabhisambandhan na parisesya-nyaya-siddhih 

Every kind of ritualistic action (without exception) is 
(on the Mimamsaka’s principles) enjoined as productive 
of some specific result through the “originating injunc- 
tion” itself. 1 If no specific result is mentioned in the case 
of a particular ritualistic act, it cannot be argued that 
its result must be liberation “for lack of any other 
alternative”. 2 



c 



17 




1 :26 THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

1 For the technical distinction between “originating injunctions” 
(ulpatti-vidhi) and "injunctions of application” (viniyoga-vidhi), see 
A. B. Keith, The Karma Mimarpsa, p. 86 f. 

* This is impossible because each ritual has its specific fruit laid down 
in the Veda. 

durita-kfapanarthat van na nit yam syad vimuktaye 

svargadi-phala-sambandhat kamyam karma tathaiva 

na 

[26] The obligatory daily rites do not produce liber- 
ation since their declared purpose is to consume the 
effects of our previous sins. 1 Neither can the rituals 
prescribed for particular self-interested ends produce 
liberation, since each is associated with some other 
specific fruit of its own. 

1 For the distinction between obligatory daily rites (nitya karma) 
and “rituals prescribed for particular self-interested ends” (optional 
rituals or kamya karma), see the note to 1.9 above. 



pramanasambhavac ca 

And because there can be no authority for the doctrine : 

sadhya-sadhana-bhavo 'yam vacanat paralaukikah 
nasrausam moksa-dam karma sruter vaktrat 

kathamcana 

[27] Moreover, all knowledge of ends and means in 
regard to the after-life comes from Vedic revelation. I 
have never heard from the mouth of the Veda (sruti) 
that ritualistic action yielded liberation in any sense 
whatever. 



abhyupagatabhyupagamac ca svasru-nirgacchokti-vad 
bhavato nisprayojanah pralapah 



18 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 



1:28 



And since you admit our whole basic position, your 
arguments are just idle talk like the mother-in-law 
saying “Go away” (in the story). 1 

1 The story of the mother-in-law is that a certain daughter-in-law, 
when living with her mother-in-law, turned away a beggar with the 
words “We've nothing for you here in the house.” The mother-in-law 
heard her and shouted “What right have you to tell beggars that there 
is nothing in the house?” Then she turned to the beggar herself and 
said “Go away, there's nothing for you here in the house.” J 

nifiddha-kamyayos tyagas tvayapiffo yatha maya 

nityasyaphalavattvac ca na mokfah karma-sadanah 

[28] The avoidance of prohibited acts and self- 
interested rituals is preached by you as well as by me. 
And since we also agree that the obligatory daily rituals 
produce no positive fruit, it follows that liberation is 
not to be achieved through rituals. 1 

1 The argument is that all actions of ritualistic significance can be 
classified under one or other of the three headings "forbidden deeds”, 
“selfish rituals”, or “obligatory daily rituals". Since the ritualist holds 
that the first two classes have to be avoided for liberation, and holds, 
further, that the third class (obligatory daily rituals) produces no positive 
fruit, it follows on his own principles that liberation cannot arise as the 
fruit of any ritualistic action. 



exam tavat "mukteh kriyabhih siddhatvat" iti nirasto 
'yam paksah. athadhuna sarva-karma-pravrtti-hetu- 
nirupanena yathaxasthitdtma-vastu-vi$aya-kevala- 
jhana-matrad eva sakala-samsaranartha-nivrttir 
itimam pak$am dradhayitu-kama aha. iha cedam 
pariksyate. kirn yatha prati?iddhe?u yadrcchike?u ca 
karmasu svabhavika-svasayottha-nimitta-vasad evedam 
hitam idam ahitam iti vise?an parikalpya 
mrgatr?nikodaka-pipasur iva laukika-pramana- 
prasiddhany eva sadhanany upadaya hita-praptaye 



19 




1:29 THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

’ hita-nirasaya ca svayam era pravartate nivartate ca 
tathaivadr star the su kamye$u nityefu ca karmasu kim 
vanvad era tatra pravrtti-nhjtti-nimittam iti. kim cato 
yadv evam ?' spiu, yadi tavad yathavasthita-vastu- 
samyagjhanam pramana-bhutam laukikam agamikam 
va praxrtti-nimittam iti nisciyate ni\jtti-sas1ram ca 
mbhyupagamyate tada hatah karma-tyagino bhranti- 
vijnana-mdtravastambhad alaukika- 
pramanopatta-karmanuslhana-tyagitvac ca. at ha 
mrgatrsn ik odaka-p ipasu-pra vrlt i-nim i t ta- vad ayatha- 
vastu-bhranti-vijhdnam ev a sarva-pravrtti-nimittam 
tada varddhamahe vavant hatah stha yuyam iti 

' Hirivanna has: kimcatah. yady evam, srnu. I have followed the 
Acyuta Grantha Mala Ed. in the pointing of these phrases. 

Having now thoroughly refuted the view embodied in 
the maxim 1 “Liberation is achieved through ritualistic 
action alone”, we proceed to advance arguments in 
support of the proposition “The cessation of all the 
evils of transmigration (samsara) arises only through 
bare knowledge of the real Self,” and we shall accom- 
pany these arguments with an enquiry into the causes 
that prompt activity (in the widest sense of the word). 

And here the question being considered is the follow- 
ing. It is admitted in regard to acts specifically forbidden 
in the Veda, and to that host of casual acts (such as 
eating, lying down, etc.) to which man is prompted by 
natural inclination, that man acts according to his 
imagination. Like a thirsty person desirous of drinking 
the water of a mirage he makes imaginary distinctions, 
such as “this would be pleasant, that would be un- 
pleasant”, and engages in action or restraint to acquire 
pleasant things and avoid unpleasant ones, resorting to 
means determined by secular sources of knowledge 



20 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 1 :29 

only. Now the question is, in regard to self-interested 
ritualistic acts, charged with unseen future fruits, and 
also in regard to the daily obligatory rituals, does he 
proceed in the same (unthinking) way, or is there 
something else which prompts him to engage in action ? 

Well, what is at stake here? Listen. If it be said that 
the cause for engaging in action is authoritative right 
knowledge, either secular or derived from the Veda, 
and the section of the Veda that teaches renunciation 
is rejected, then we (Advaitins) who have renounced 
action are lost. For our course will have been prompted 
merely by erroneous knowledge. 2 And our renunciation 
of ritualistic action will be in conflict with the super- 
natural (alaukika) authority of certain revealed texts. 3 
But if prompting to all action (whether secular or 
Vedic) arises from ignorance of the real, like the motives 
which prompt the thirsty man to drink at the mirage, 
then it is we (Advaitins and renunciates) who are in the 
ascendant and you (Mimamsakas or ritualists) who are 
lost. 

1 This is the principal point at issue between the Mimamsaka and the 
Advaitin. 

1 i.e. since right knowledge would have prompted us to a life of 
action. 

J quotes the text “He should offer the Agnihotra (daily) as long 
as he lives”, which has not been traced. Cp. the Upanishadic text 
quoted by the opponent at 1.18 above. 

hitam samprepsatam mohad ahitam ca jihasatam 

upavan prdpti-hanarthan sastrarn bhasayate rkavat 

[29] The Veda (sastra) is like the sun, illumining the 
means to acquiring and avoiding for the benefit of those 
who from sheer ignorance desire the pleasant and shun 
the unpleasant. 1 



21 




1 :30 THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

1 The notions of pleasant and unpleasant arise from nescience, cp. 
the introductory paragraph to the present work, 1.1 (prose) above. See 
also Sarpkara, Upadesa Sahasri, prose section, para. 42. 

It is especially in regard to ritualistic actions that will affect our future 
lives that the Veda sheds its illumination, for this is a sphere to which 
other means of knowledge give no access. The image of the sun, which 
illumines the road impartially for the sinner and saint, is perhaps 
chosen deliberately to illustrate the indifference of the Veda to our 
actions. Suresvara’s point is that all actions, even those laid down in 
the Veda, are resorted to through desire and aversion, and thus rest 
ultimately on ignorance of the nature of the Self as bliss. Hence also 
the image of the man trying to drink from a mirage. 



exam taxat prat yak sanumanagama- 
pramandxastambhad atmano niratisaya-sukha- 
hitaxyatireka-siddher ahitasya ea sastha-gocara-xat 
sxata exartabhisambandhad exam 
sxdbhdxyatmanaxabodha-mdtrad era hitam me syad 
ahifam me ma bhud iti mithya-jnanam tiisara- 
suktikanavabodhottha-mithyd-jndna-vat pravrtti- 
nimittam iti nirdharitam. sastram ca na padartha- 
sakty-adhana-krd iti. athaitasyaivottaratra prapaiica 
arabhyate 

Thus it has been shown on the authority of perception, 
inference and revelation that the Self is never separate 
from “the pleasant” in the form of supreme bliss, and 
that “the unpleasant” enters into no relation with it at 
all, and is like something non-existent, 1 And from this it 
follows that all action whatever is prompted by false 
knowledge (mithya-jnana) of the form “may 1 have the 
pleasant, may I not have the unpleasant” arising from 
bare natural unawareness of the Self (svabhavya-atma 
anavabodha-matra), like the notion of mirage and silver 
which arise from unawareness of the desert and of the 
mother-of-pearl. 2 Moreover, the function of the Veda 



22 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 1 :30 

is not to introduce new properties into anything. 3 An 
explanation of this subject is begun next. 

1 Literally, “as if an object of the sixth means of knowledge”, viz. of 
anupalabdhi which bears on non-existence. 

2 Suresvara usually, as here, distinguishes positive false cognition 
(mithya-jfiana) from “bare non-awareness” (anavabodha-matra), its 
cause. The two conceptions correspond roughly to the “non-percep- 
tion” and “wrong perception” of Gautjapada’s Karika 1.15, quoted at 
IV. 42 below. 

3 It should be noted that the sastra does not confer agency and the 
power to experience on the individual soul, nor does it convert heaven 
into an attainable goal or enable the sacrifice to function effectively as 
a means to an end. All it does is to throw light. Cf. Introduction Comm, 
to III. 93 below. 

na paripsam jihasam va pumsah sdstram karoti hi 

nije eva tu te yasmat pasv-adav api darsanat 

[30] For it is not the Veda (sastra) which generates in 
man desires to acquire and avoid. They are natural, as 
we know from the fact that they are also found in 
beasts (who have no access to the Veda). 1 

1 On the desire to acquire and avoid as common to man and beast, 
cp. Sarpkara, Vedanta Sutra Commentary I.i.l, introductory portion, 
trans. Thibaut, p. 7 f. 



uktam tavad anavabuddha-vastu-yathatmya eva 
ridhi-pratisedha-sastresv adhikriyata iti. athadhuna 
visaya-s vabha van urodhena pravrt ty-as ambha vam 
vaktu-kama aha 

So far it has been said that it is only the man who does 
not know reality who is affected by the part of the Veda 
(sastra) containing injunctions and prohibitions. Now, 
wishing to show that engaging in action is impossible in 
the very nature of the case, 1 he proceeds. 

1 Because no action can acquire the Sell which is already attained. 



23 




1:31 THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

lipsate jhanato 'labdham kanthe cdmikaram yatha 
varjitam ca svato bhrantya chayayam atmano yatha 
bhayan mohavanaddhatma raksah parijilursati 
vac caparihrtam vastu tatha labdham ca lipsate 

[31 and 32] It is through ignorance that one desires 
what one already has, such as a golden necklace hanging 
(forgotten) on one’s neck; again, it is through ignorance 
that, afflicted with delusion, one fears and tries to 
remove a goblin which seems to be in one’s shadow but 
which does not really exist. But (all this is quite distinct 
from cases where) one tries to avert unpleasant things 
(such as tigers and snakes that are real and present) or 
to attain (wealth and other empirically real and desir- 
able) things one does not possess. 



tatraitesu catursu visayesu praptaye pariharava 
ca vibhajva nyavah pradarsyate 

Next he shows how these four cases should be grouped 
in order to explain the facts of acquiring and avoiding: 

praptavya-pariharye?u jhatvopayah chruteh ppthak 
krtvatha prapnuyat prapyam tatha ’ nistam jahaty api 

[33] In regard to things that exist empirically and can 
genuinely be obtained or avoided, a man may learn 
from the Veda the correct means to obtain what is good 
and avoid what is evil, and having applied those means 
he may obtain or avoid them. 1 

1 Good and evil as affecting whole successions of future lives are 
more potent than good and evil as affecting this life only. Hence it is 
especially with regard to deeds which promote either svarga (heaven) 
or naraka (hell) that the Veda gives information. 



24 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 1 :34 

athavasistayoh svabhavata ev a 

In the two remaining cases, 1 the things stand “acquired" 

or “avoided" already by their very nature: 

1 i.e. in the case of desires to have what one already has or to avoid 
what is not really afflicting one, cp. verse 31 above. 

varjitavaptayor 1 bodhadd hana-prapti na karniana 
moha-matrantarayatvat kriyaya te na sidhyatali 

1 Reading adopted from a manuscript cited by Hiriyanna, in place 
of his own parihftavaptayoh, which as he himself points out, yields an 
extra syllable which spoils the metre. 

[34] In regard to things that one already has (but, 
being unaware of the fact, also wants to have) or has not 
(but supposes oneself to have and wishes to be rid of) 
“getting” and “avoiding” do not come through action. 
Since it is ignorance alone that is the obstacle (to realiz- 
ing that one already has or has not got them), the 
“getting” or “avoiding” of them is to be achieved by 
knowledge. 1 

1 Since ignorance is the only obstacle to one's “possession” of the 
necklace or “being rid of” the goblin, one “gets” the necklace or "gets 
rid of” the goblin only through knowledge and not through action of 
any kind, since it is knowledge alone and not action that destroys 
ignorance. It was shown above that the Self always has pleasure (bliss) 
and is ever free from pain. Thus although one obtains objects of the 
world through action, one “obtains” the Self through knowledge. 
Similar points are made by Padmapada, Pancapadika, Eng. Trans. 
Venkataramiah, p. 293 f., and by Suresvara himself at Sambandha 
Varttika 884—889, Ed. and trans. Mahadevan, p. 475 ff. 



kasmat punar atma-vastu-ydthdtmydvabodha-matiad 
e vabhilasita-niratisaya-sukha vapt i-nissesa-duhkha- 
nivrtti bhavato na tu karmaneti. ucyate 



25 




1 :35 THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

But, it may be asked, why is it that the acquisition of 
incomparable bliss and the cessation of every pain are 
to be obtained only through knowledge of the Self, the 
ultimate reality, in its true nature, and not through 
action? We reply: 

karmajnana-samutthatvan nalam mohapanuttaye 
samyag-jnanam virodhy asya tamisrasyamsuman iva 

[35] Action itself arises from nescience, hence it can- 
not destroy it. But right knowledge can destroy nesci- 
ence for it is the opposite of it, as the sun is the opposite 
of darkness. 



nan v atma-jnanam apy avidyopadanam. na hi sastra- 
sisydcaryady anupaday atma-jnanam atmanam labhata 
iti. naisa dosah. yata atma-jnanam hi svatas-siddha- 
paramarthatma- vastu-s varupa-matrasrayad e vavidya- 
tad-utpanna-karaka-grama-pradh vamsi svatmotpatta v 
eva sastrady apekpate notpannam avidya-nivrttau. 
karma punah svatmotpattav utpannam ca. na hi 
kriya karaka-nissprha kalpa-koti-vyavahita-phala- 
danaya svatmanam bibharti sadhyamana-matra- 
rupatvat tasyah. na ca kriyatma-jhana-vat svatma- 
pratilambha-kala eva svargadi-phalena kart dr am 
sambadhnati. atma-jnanam punah purusartha- 
siddhau notpadyamana-svarupa-vyatirekenanyad 
rupantaram sadhanantaram vapeksate. kuta etat.yatah. 

Now, an objector might say, “Is not nescience presup- 
posed 1 even in Self-knowledge? For unless texts, pupil 
and teacher etc. (all effects of nescience) are first 
supplied (upadaya), no one acquires Self-knowledge.” 



26 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 1 :36 

The objection does not stand. For Self-knowledge is 
based on the self-revealed reality alone, and its nature 
is to destroy nescience and the whole complex of factors 
of action that arise from it as effects. It depends on the 
Vedic texts, etc., only for its rise. Once risen, it does not 
depend on them for destroying nescience. But action 
depends on nescience both for its rise and (for the 
production of its effects) after it has arisen. For action 
is but a means resorted to by some agent. It does not 
maintain itself independently after its own component 
factors (agent, instrument, object etc.) have all disap- 
peared until, millions of world-epochs later, the time 
comes for it to yield its fruit. Nor does action supply its 
fruit, such as sojourn in heaven, to the agent simul- 
taneously with its own rise, as Self-knowledge does (to 
the knower). But knowledge of the Self guarantees the 
realization of the highest end of man through its mere 
rise, without needing to assume any new form 2 or to 
depend on any external factor (e.g. action). Why is this ? 
Because : 

1 Here we have to take the term upadana to mean “presupposition 
to comply with Suresvara's own etymological explanation of it in the 
following sentence. Texte, p. 64. 

2 Such as meditation, according to the doctrine mentioned at 1.66 
(prose) below, which maintains that knowledge of the Self, to become 
effective, must be supplemented by meditation. J 

bala-vaddhi pramanotthamsamyag-jnanamna badhyate 

akankscite na copy any ad badhanam prati sadhanam 

[36] Right-knowledge (of the Self) can never be con- 
tradicted since it is the highest canon of knowledge 
(pramana). 1 It depends on no other means for defence 
against itself being contradicted in the future. - 



27 




1:37 THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

1 In saying right-knowledge of the Self is the highest pramiina, 
Suresvara means that it is higher than and supersedes all the ordinarily 
accepted pramanas. See sloka 1.89 below, with note. 

- The verse opposes the idea that right-knowledge, once acquired, 
depends for its continuance on spiritual practices to ward off the latent 
effects of ignorance resulting from innumerable previous births. 
Sarpkara likewise insists that once perfect spiritual knowledge is 
acquired it is constant and perpetual. It never has to be regained by 
application to yogic concentration (samadhi) or other means involving 
external activity. See Samkara's Commentary to Gauijapada’s Karikas 
11.38 and IV.89. 



sva-paksasya hetv-avasfambhena samarthitatvan 
nirasarikam upasamhrivate 

Because he (the author) has fully supported his position 
by reasoning, he sums up confidently: 

tasmad duhkhodadher hetor ajnanasyapanattaye 
samyag-jndnam suparyaptam kriya cen nokta-hetutali 

[37] Therefore right-knowledge (samyag-jfiana) is the 
proper and sufficient means to get rid of nescience, 
which is the cause of the whole ocean of sorrow. If you 
say, “Action is the right means”, we say, “No,” and 
have given our reasons. 



nanu balavad api samyag-jnanarfi sad 
apramanotthenasamyag-jnanena badhyamanam 
upalabhamahe yata utpanna-paramartha-bodhasyapi 
kartrtva-bhoktrtva-raga-dvesddy-anavabodhottha- 
pratyaya avirbhavanti. na hy abadhite samyag-jnane 
tad-viruddhanam pratyayanam sambhavo ' sti . mi tad 
evam. kutah 



28 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 1 ;3g 

Objection: Even though right-knowledge is the highest 
canon of knowledge, yet we see that in fact it is some- 
times effectively contradicted by wrong knowledge, even 
though the latter is not a canon of knowledge at all. For 
even in the case of one who has known the highest 
reality, notions due to ignorance, such as the sense of 
being an agent and an experiencer, and feelings of 
desire and aversion, do actually appear. Notions 
opposed to right-knowledge could not arise unless 
right-knowledge had first been effectively suppressed. 
This objection does not stand, for: 

bddhitatvdd avidydyd vidyam sa naiva badhate 
tad-vdsand nimittatvam yanti vidya-smrter dhruvam 

[38] Since nescience itself has been overcome and sup- 
pressed, it cannot suppress knowledge. Such latent 
psychological tendencies (vasana) as arise from it 
infallibly prompt the sage (jnani) to remember the 
spiritual truth. 



“ kanndjndna-samutthatvdt ” itv ukto hetus tasya co 
samarthanam pur v am evdbhihitam "hit am 
samprepsatdm ' ity ddind. tad-abhyuccaydrtham 
avidydnvayena ca samsdrdnvayitvam 
pradarsayisydmity ata aha 

We have said (in verse 35 above) action itself 
arises from nescience”, and the grounds for this had 
already been declared earlier in verses such as (verse 29) 
“for the benefit of those who from sheer ignorance 
desire the pleasant” etc. We now proceed further to 



29 




1 :39 THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

substantiate this argument and also to show that who- 
ever is subject to nescience is necessarily subject to 
transmigration also. 

brahmany-ady-atmake dehe latva natmeti bhavanam 
sruteh kinkaratam eti van-manah-kaya-karmasu 

[39] Thinking that the body endued with Brahmin- 
hood etc. is the Self, a man becomes a slave to the Veda 
in thought, word and deed. 



vasmat karmajnana-samuttham ex a tasmat tad- 
vyavrttau nix art at a itv ucyate 

Since action arises from nescience, it ceases with the 
destruction of nescience. This is the principle now 
stated : 

dagdhdkhilddhikdras ced brahma-jnandgnina munih 
xartamanah sruter murdhni naiva syad veda-kinkarah 

[40] When all qualification for action has been burnt 
up in the sage by the fire of knowledge, 1 then he is no 
longer a slave of the Veda. Verily he stands above the 
Veda. 

1 i.e. when he ceases to identify his true Self with the body and so is 
no longer qualified for action. 



athetaro ghanataravidya-patala-samvitantahkarano 
’ ngikrta-kartftvddy-asesa-karmddhikdra-kdrano 
vidhi-pratisedha-codana-samdamsopadastah karmasu 

pravartamanah 



30 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 1 ;41 

But consider another man, not enlightened. His mind 
steeped in thick clouds of nescience, he accepts the idea 
of agency and all the other conditions making for 
competence for ritualistic action and then engages in 
such action, pinched in the grip of the two pincers of 
the Vedic prohibitions and commands. 

subhaih prapnoti devatvam nisiddhair narakim gatim 
ubhabhyam punya-papabhyam manusyam labhate 

’ vasah 

[41] By good acts he gradually rises to the status of a 
god : by crimes he sinks to hell. Practising both good and 
evil, he is reborn helplessly as a man. 



abrahma-stamba-paryante ghore duhkhodadhau 
ghati-yantra-vad arohavaroha-nyayenadhama- 
madhyamottama-sukha-duhkha-moha-vidyuc-capala- 
sampata-dayinir vicitra-yoniscandotpinjalaka- 
svasana-vegabhihatambhodhi-madhya-varti-suskaldbu- 
vac chubasubha-vyamisra-karma-vayu-samiritah 

Descending into the terrible ocean of pain called trans- 
migration (samsara) which comprehends all from 
Brahma to a blade of grass, pushed upwards and down- 
wards like a bucket at a well, and entering higher and 
lower wombs yielding experiences of pleasure, pain and 
delusion which appear and vanish like lightning in the 
sky, verily he floats hither and thither tossed by the 
winds of his good, evil and intermediate deeds like a 
dried pumpkin buffeted this way and that by tumultuous 
winds upon the sea. 



31 




1 :42 THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

exam cahkramyamano 'yam a vidyd-kdma-karn uibhih 
pasito jayalc Kami mriyate casukhavftah 

[42] Thus the man of desire perpetually revolves in a 
circle. He is born bound tight by the bonds of nescience, 
desire and his past actions. And he dies immersed in 
miseries. 



yathokte 'rtha adara-vidhdnaya pramanopanyasah 

We cite authorities to compel respect for the doctrine 
stated above : 

srutis cemam jagadartham kamasya vinivpttaye 
tan-mula samsrtir yasmat tan-naso 'jhana-hanatah 

[43] The Vedic text also has declared this in order to 
demolish pleasure-desire. All transmigratory experience 
has pleasure-desire for its root. The destruction of 
pleasure-desire arises from the destruction of ignorance. 



ka tv asau srutir iti cet 

You ask which is that Vedic text? 

“ yada sane pramucyanta" "iti mi" iti ca vajinah 
kama-bandhanam evedam xyaso 'py aha pade-pade 

[44] “When all the desires that lie in a man’s heart are 
resolved.” (then the mortal becomes immortal and 
attains Brahman): “thus (does the man who desires 
transmigrate; but the man who does not desire never 
transmigrates)". So says the Brhadaranyaka Upanishad. 
Vyasa also spoke of this, as in “this our bondage is 
verily bondage through desire”. 1 



32 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 1 :46 

* Brhadaraoyaka Upan. IV.iv.7 and IV.iv.6; the Vyasa quotation is 
untraced and likely to be either a Mahabharata or Purapa text. 



esa samsara-pantha vyakhyatah. athedanim tad- 
vyavrttaye karmany arad-upakarakatvena yatha 
mokfa-hetutam pratipadyante tathabhidhiyate 

Here we conclude our description of the process of 
transmigration, and, with a view to do away with it, 
proceed to declare how it is taught that ritualistic 
actions do serve as a remote preparation for liberation, 
and hence in a sense are a cause of it. 1 
1 Cp. Sarpkara’s Commentary to Vedanta Sutra IV.i. 16. 

tasyaivam duhkha-taptasya kathamcit punya-silanat 
nityehaksalita-dhiyo vairagyam jayate hrdi 

[45] Somehow, by very great good fortune, dispassion 
(vairagya) sometimes arises in the heart of the trans- 
migrating soul afflicted with pain, if he has amassed 
much merit and if his mind has been purified by the 
performance of the obligatory rites. 



khirg vairagyam utpadyata iti. ucyate 

You may ask, “What is meant by dispassion?’ The 
answer is: 

narakdd blur vathasyabhut far/nl kdmya-phalad api 
yathartha-darsanat tasmdn nil yam karma cikirsati 

[46] Through a glimpse ot the truth he becomes as 
terrified of the results of ritual performed tor individual 
ends as he formerly was of hell; hence he wishes only to 
perform the obligatory rites. 1 




1 ;47 THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

1 i.e. in the spirit of an offering to the Lord — see next verse. As so 
often in the "Nai$karmya Siddhi", we have here an echo of $ri 
Sarpkara's teaching in his Commentary to the Bhagavad Gita. 



exam nitya-naimirtika-karmdnu$thdnena 

Thus through application to the daily and occasional 
rituals: 1 

1 Cp. verse 1.9 above and note. 

sudhyamdnam tu tac-citfam isvararpita-karmabhih 
xairagyam brahma-lokadau vyanakty at ha sunirmalam 

[47] When his mind has been purified through the 
performance of actions dedicated to the Lord, pure 
indifference to all enjoyments from the heaven of 
Brahma downwards is generated in his heart. 



yasmad rajax-tamo-malopaxarfisrf(am eva cittam 
kama-badisenakrsya vi$aya-duranta-sunasthane$u 
nikfipyate tasman nitya-naimittika-karmdnu$(hana- 
parimdrjanenapa viddha-rajas- tamo-malam prasannam 
and ku lam sammdrjita-spha\ika-sild-kalpam bahya- 
vifaya-hetukena ca rdga-dvefdtmakenatigraha- 
hadisenandkrfyamdnam vidhutdse?a-kalma?am 
pratyah-mdtra-pravanam citta-darpanam avati?(hate. 
ata idam abhidhiyate 

When the mind is clogged by passion and delusion it is 
easily attracted by the bait of prospective pleasure and 
it finds itself thrown into the slaughterhouse of the 
world of sense-objects, escape from which is no easy 
matter. But by the dedicated performance of action the 



34 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 1 :49 

dirt of passion and delusion may be rubbed away from 
the mind till it becomes like a clear well-polished crystal. 
It is then no longer attracted by the all-consuming bait 
of desire and aversion generated by sense-objects. All 
the stains then melt away, and the mind becomes like 
a clear mirror, naturally turning towards the pure inner 
Self (and reflecting its light). 1 

1 Cp. the following from Mancjana's Brahma Siddhi, p. 121: 
“Because the Self as Consciousness is of the very nature of the Absolute 
(Brahman), realization of the Absolute consists in the manifestation of 
one’s own Self that results from the rubbing away of impurities as if 
from a crystal." 

vyutthitasesa-kamebhyo yada dhir avatisthate 
tadaiva pratyag-atmanam svayam evaviviksati 

[48] When the mind has risen clear of all desires, then 
of its own accord it desires to dissolve in the inner Self. 



atah pa ram avasitadhikarani karmani pratyak- 
pravanatva-simau krta-samprattikdni caritarthani santi 

From that point onwards there is no further scope for 
prescribed action. But the prescribed actions die with 
their affairs in good order as they have arranged with 
their son called “Intentness on Turning Within that he 
should attend to their business after they have gone! 

pratvak-pravanatdm buddheh karmany utpadya 

suddhilah 

kftarthanv astamdyant i pravrd-ante ghana iva 

[49] The actions, having given birth in the mind to 
“Intentness on Turning Within" by purifying it, die 
with their duties performed, like clouds at the end of the 
rainy season. 



35 




1 :50 THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

yato nitya-karmanusthanasyaisa mahima 

For the performance of rituals has the following great 
quality: 

tasman mumuksubhih karyam atma-jnanabhila§ibhih 
nit yam naimittikam karma sadaivatma-visuddhaye 

[50] Therefore seekers of liberation (mumuksu) who 
desire Self-knowledge should always perform the daily 
and occasional rituals for the purification of the mind. 



yathokte ’ rthe sarvajna-vacanam pramanam 

The words of the Omniscient One (i.e. Lord Krsna) are 
the authority for the truth of this matter being as we 
have described it : 

“ aruruksor muner yogam karma karanam ucyate 
yogarudhasya tasyaiva sama” eveti ca smrtih 

[51] As the traditional literature (smrti) 1 puts it, 
“Action (karma) is the means for the ascetic who wishes 
to attain the heights of yoga: restraint (sama) is the 
means when once he has attained them”. 2 

1 The term smrti is defined in contrast to sruti. The latter term means 
the Veda (Cp. Manu Smrti II. 10) and has been translated as such 
regularly in the present work. By the term Veda the Indians understood 
all the texts of all four Vedas, including the Upanishads. The term 
smrti embraced all authoritative traditional literature other than this. 
In Advaita Vedanta, smrti is regarded as a more powerful authority 
than reason but as less powerful than sruti. Included in smrti are the 
epics (the Ramayapa and the Mahabharata, including the Gita), the 
Purapas, the Law Books, the basic texts (Sutras) of the Six Orthodox 
Systems (darsana). Thus in here quoting the Gita, Suresvara is quoting 
a smrti text. 

2 Bhagavad Gita VI. 3. 



36 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 1 :52 

nitya-karmanusthanad dharmotpattir dharmotpatteh 
papa-hanis tatas citta-suddhis tatah samsara- 
yathatmyavabodhas tato vairagyam tato 
mumuksutvam tatas tad-upaya-paryesanam tatah 
sarva-karma-tat-sadhana-samnyasas tato yogabhyasas 
tatas cittasya pratyak-pravanata tatas tat-tvam-asy- 
adi-xakyartha-parijhdnam tato ’ xidyocchedas tatas ca 
sxdtmany exaxasthanam “brahmaixa san 
brahmapyeti ” “ximuktas ca ximucyate ” iti 

From performance of the daily rituals comes merit 
(dharma), from merit comes destruction of sin, from 
this comes purity of mind, from this comes a correct 
evaluation of transmigratory life, from this comes 
indifference to it, from this comes desire for liberation, 
from this comes a search for the means to the latter, 
from this comes the renunciation of all ritualistic action 
and its accessories, 1 from this comes practice of yoga, 
from this the focusing of the mind within, from this a 
knowledge of the meaning of texts like “That thou art”, 
from this the eradication of nescience, from this 
establishment in the Self alone, according to the texts 
“Verily, being the Absolute (Brahman), he attains the 
Absolute” and “Released, he is released”. 2 

1 E.g. a house, sacrificial fire, etc., but particularly the sacred thread. 
Cp. Sarpkara, Upadesa Sahasri (prose) Section 30. 

2 Brhadaranyaka Upan. IV.iv.6 and Katha Upan. V.l or (according 
to another system of numbering) Il.ii.l. 

paramparyena karmaivam svad avidya-nivfttaye 
jhana-van navirodhitvat karmavidyam nirasyati 

[52] Only as the result of a series of effects does action 
contribute to the overthrow of nescience. It does not 
destroy nescience directly, like knowledge, because it is 
not in contradiction with it. 



37 




1:53 



THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 



na ca karmanah k dry am anr api muktau sambhavyate 
ndpi muktau yat sambhavati tat karmapekpate. tad 
ucyatt. 

What be now proceeds to explain is that nothing what- 
ever that can be achieved by action is consistent with 
release and that what obtains in release is not dependent 
on action- 1 

: ~W'Sa' c<tnai< m rel e as e" — principal!}, being established in one’s 
own true name. J 

urpadyam apyam samskdryam vikdryam ca kriyd- 

phalam 

naivam mukrir vat as tasmat karma tasya na sadhanam 

[53] The result of action is something produced, 
attained (reached), prepared or transformed. 1 But liber- 
ation is something other than all this. Hence action is 
not a means to it 

1 The word “samsLaryam" is here translated “prepared” after 
Edgerton. Manarpsa Nvava Prakasa p. 296. The “saipskara” is a 
preparatory act designed to fit something for use in a rite, e.g. the 
husking of rice in rituals where husked rice has to be used. The doctrine 
expressed in the present verse is also found at Sarnkara’s Upadesa 
Sahasri (verse) XVII.50, and verse 1 .25 of the Manasollasa Commentary 
on the Daksina Murti Hymn, a Commentary attributed to Suresvara. 



evam tavat kevalam karma sakpad avidyapanuttaye 
na paryaptam iti prapaheitam. muktau ca mumuksu- 
jfidna-tad- vipaya-svabha vyanurodhena sarva- 
prakarasyapi karmano ’ sambhava ukto “hit am 
samprepsatam ” ity adina. yadrsas edrad- 
upakarakatvena jhanotpattau karmanarp samuccayah 
sambhavati tatha pratipaditam. avidyocchittau tu 
labdhatma-svabhdvasydtma-jhdnasyaivdsddharanam 



38 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 1:54 

sadhakatamatvarp nanyasya pradhana-bhutasya guna- 
bhutasya cety etad adhunocyate. tatra jnanam guna- 
bhiitam tavad ahetur ity etad aha 

Thus it has been shown that action alone cannot 
directly destroy nescience: and in regard to liberation 
the passage beginning “for the benefit of those who 
from sheer ignorance desire the pleasant . . (verses 
1.29 ff. above) has stated the impossibility of any kind 
of action consistent with the real nature of the one 
seeking liberation, his knowledge and its object, the 
Self. And it has been explained how a remote participa- 
tion of action in the production of knowledge could be 
admitted. Now it has to be shown how in the eradica- 
tion of nescience it is fully matured spiritual knowledge 
that is the sole (direct) means. Nothing else can function 
in conjunction with it, whether as dominant or subordi- 
nate partner. And we begin by explaining how know- 
ledge could not be a cause (of the destruction of 
nescience) if it were a subordinate partner. 

samnipatya na ca jnanam karmajhanam nirasyati 
sadhya-sadhana-bhavatvad eka-kalanavasthiteh 

[54] Knowledge cannot suppress nescience when com- 
bined with action as a subordinate partner. For since 
action and knowledge are respectively of the nature of 
means and end, they cannot exist simultaneously. 1 

1 Action is the means to knowledge through purification of the mind. 
As long as action is present functioning as a means, the goal (know- 
ledge) is not yet reached. When knowledge is “achieved”, the means to 
it (action for purification of the mind) is no longer needed, and in fact 
it cannot exist. At a certain point actions and duties “die” (verse 1.49 
above). 



39 




1:55 THE, REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

sama-pradhanayor apy asambhava eva 

Nor can knowledge and action coexist as equal partners. 

badhya-badhaka-bhavac ca pancasyoranayor iva 
eka-desanavasthanan na samuccayata lay oh 

[55] And again, there can be no conjunction of know- 
ledge and action (as equals), since the two stand to one 
another as contradictor and contradicted; (they are 
destroyer and victim) like the lion and the sheep. They 
cannot coexist in the same place. 



kuto badhya-badhaka-bhavah . yasmat 

Why are they respectively contradictor and contradic- 
ted? Because: 

ayatha-vastv-avidya syad vidya tasya virodhini 
samuccayas tayor evam ravi-sarvarayor iva 

[56] The sphere of nescience is the unreal; the sphere 
of knowledge is the highest reality : conjunction between 
the two is like conjunction between the sun and the 
night. 



tasmad akaraka-brahmatmani 
parisamaptavabodhasyasesa-karma-codananam 
acodya-svabhavyat kunthata. katham tat. abhidhiyate 

Thus in the case of one who has secured knowledge of 
the Absolute (Brahman) or Self (Atman), which is un- 
divided into the factors of action, all injunctions to 
action become pointless, because he is no longer subject 
to injunctions. How is that? We tell you: 



40 




1:59 



THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

brhaspati-save y ad-vat kfattriyo na pravartate 
brabnanatvady-aham-mani vipro vd ksattra-karmani 

[57] The man of the warrior caste (ksatriya) does not 
indulge in the Brhaspatisava (ceremony for Brahmins 
only), nor does the man who identifies himself with 
Brahminhood perform rituals (karma) laid down for 
men of the warrior caste (alone). 



yathayam dr st ant a evam darstantiko 'pity e tad aha 

We now explain how this illustration applies to the 
thing to be illustrated. 

videho vita-samdeho neti-nety-avasesitah 
dehady-anatma-drk tad-vat tat-kriyam viksate 'pi na 

[58] The one who becomes free from the body (videha) 
and loses his doubts (vita-samdeha) completely through 
the practice of “not thus, not thus” (neti neti), sees the 
body (and senses) etc. as not-self and pays no attention 
to their activity. 



tasyarthasya viskaranartham udaharanam 

An example to explain this: 

mrtsnebhake yathebhatvam sisur adhyasya valgati 
adhyasyatmani dehadin mudhas tad-vad vicestate 

[59] Just as a child imagines that his clay elephant is a 
real elephant and proceeds to play with it, so do the 
deluded people of the world superimpose the body etc. 
onto the Self and proceed to behave in various ways. 

41 




1 ;60 THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

na ca vayam jnana-karmanoh sarvatraiva 
samuccayam pratyacakpmahe. yatra prayojya- 
pravojaka-bhavo jhana-karmanos tatra nasmat- 
piirapi sakvate nivarayitum. tatra vibhaga- 
p radar sanci ' i odaharanam pradarsy 'ate 

We do not deny the conjunction of knowledge and 
action in all cases. Where they stand in the relation of 
prompter (knowledge) to thing prompted to be done 
(action) even one's own father could not succeed in dis- 
proving the conjunction. 1 In this connection we give an 
example to show how this distinction should be made. 

1 The examples to be given will show that knowledge functions as a 
prompter to action only when it is erroneous. 

sthanum coradhiyalaya bhito y ad-vat palayate 
buddhy-adibhis tathatmanam bhranto ' dhyaropya 

cestate 

[60] When a man takes the stump of a tree for a thief, 
he becomes frightened and runs away. In the same way, 
a deluded person wrongly identifies the Self with the 
intellect (and body) etc. and proceeds to act. 



e\am yatra-yatra jnana-karmanoh prayojya- 
pravojaka-bhavas tatra sarvatrayam nyayah. yatra tu 
na sama-kalam napi kramenopapadyate samuccayah 
sa visaya ucyate 

And whenever knowledge and action stand as prompter 
and prompted this is the principle at work. 1 Now we 
proceed to consider the case where neither a simul- 
taneous nor a successive conjunction of knowledge and 
action applies. 2 



42 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 



1:62 



i J h ?} is ’ superimposition and not correct knowledge is involved 
In the cases steady considered a simultaneous conjunction aDDlied 
where here was false knowledge (verse 60) and a successive conjunction 
where there was true knowledge (verses 54-56). <-unjuncuon 



sthanoh sa-tattva-vijhanam yatha nangam palayane 
dtmanas tattva-vijndnam tad-van nangam kriyd-vidhau 



[61 ] But just as correct knowledge of the stump cannot 
be a factor prompting to flight, so correct knowledge of 
the Self can never be a subordinate factor in an injunc- 
tion to action. 



yasmad gunasyaitat svabhavyam 

Because the following is the nature of a subordinate 
partner : 

yadd hi yasyanurodhena svabhavam anuvartate 
tat tasya guna-bhutam syan na pradhanad guno yatah 

[62] That is known as a subordinate partner which 
conforms to and follows the dominant partner. The 
subordinate partner cannot be such as to destroy the 
predominant one. 1 

1 Pradhanad = pradhana + ad = (lit.) predominant-eating. 



yasmat 

Therefore: 

karma-prakaranakahk?i jhanam karma-guno bhavet 
yadd hi prakarane yasya tat tad-ahgam pracaksate 
s varupa- labha-matrena yat tv avidyam nihanti nah 
na tad ahgam pradhanam va jhanam syat karmanah 

k vac it 



43 




1:63 THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

[63] The kind of knowledge (i.e. erroneous) which 
leads to action may be regarded as a subordinate partner 
in action, since that which contributes to the work of 
anything is a subordinate partner of that thing. 



[64] But that knowledge (which we Advaitins speak 
of), which by its mere manifestation destroys nescience, 
can neither be a subordinate nor a dominant partner 
with action in any circumstances whatever. 1 

1 Verse 54 showed that right-knowledge and action could never be 
conjoined with knowledge as a dominant factor. Verses 55-58 further 
showed that right knowledge and action cannot be conjoined as equal 
partners, while verses 59-64 showed that erroneous knowledge and 
action can be conjoined with knowledge as a subordinate factor. But 
ngAr-knowledge cannot be a subordinate partner of action since it 
destroys it (cp. sloka 1.62 above). 



samuccaya-paksa-vadinapy avasyam etad 
abhyupagantavyam. yasmat 

Even the advocates of (liberation through) a conjunc- 
tion of knowledge and action will nescessarily have to 
admit this. For: 

ajnanam anirakurvaj jnanam eva na sidhyati 
vipanna-karaka-gramam jnanam karma na dhaukate 

[65] Knowledge cannot establish itself without sup- 
pressing nescience. The factors of action (which proceed 
from nescience) being thus suppressed, knowledge and 
action cannot be conjoined. 



44 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 1 ;66 

idarn cdparam karanam jhana-karrrtanoh samuccaya- 
nibarhi 

The following is another ground for rejecting the 
doctrine of a conjunction of knowledge and action ; 

hetu-svarupa-karyani prakasa-tamasor iva 
virodhini tato nasti sahgatyam jhana-karmanoh 

[66] Knowledge and action are mutually contradictory 
both as to their causes, nature and effects, like darkness 
and light. There can be no association between them. 1 

1 The cause of knowledge is an authoritative means of knowledge 
(pramana). Its nature is the light of the Self or Supreme Reality. Its 
effect is destruction of nescience. The cause of action, on the other hand, 
is nescience in the form of attachment etc. Its nature (unlike that of 
knowledge) is non-luminous. Its effect is producing and acquiring. 
Thus, in their causes, natures and effects equally, knowledge and action 
are mutually contradictory. Hence knowledge and action cannot 
simultaneously coexist, hence they cannot co-operate and hence they 
cannot give rise to liberation by operating “in conjunction”. J 



evam upasamhrte kecit sva-sampraddya- 
balavastambhad dhur yad etad vedanta-vakyad aham 
brahmeti vijnanam samutpadyate tan naiva svotpatti- 
matrenajndnam.nirasyati. kim tarhi. ahany aham 
draghiyasa kdlenopasinasya sato bhavanopacayan 
nissesam ajnanam apagacchati “ devo bhutva devan 
apyeti ” iti sruteh. apare tu bruvate veddnta-vdkya- 
janitam ahant brahmeti vijnanam samsargatmakatva 
atma-vastu-ydthdtmvdvagdhy eva na bhavati. kim 
tarhi. etad eva gahgd-sroto-vat satatam abhyasyato 
'nyad evavakyarthatmakam vijnanantaram utpadyate. 
tad e vase$djhdn a-timirotsariti vijnaya prajham 
kurvita brdhmanah" iti sruter iti. asya paksa- 
dvayasya nivrttaya idam abhidhiyate. 

45 




1 ;67 THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

Having thus summed up, we proceed . 1 Some Vedantins , 2 
relying on their own (one-sided) tradition, say: That 
knowledge, ‘I am the Absolute', which arises from the 
Upanishadic sentences, does not dispose of nescience by 
its mere rise. Nescience entirely abandons only him who 
practises meditation daily for a long time and thereby 
accumulates mental conviction (bhavana). ‘Having 
become a god, he joins the gods’, says the Veda . 3 

And another school 4 maintains that the knowledge 
‘I am the Absolute’ generated by the Upanishadic texts 
is relational 5 and hence does not penetrate to the real 
nature of the Self. But they say that in the case of one 
who meditates on the meaning conveyed by the sen- 
tences as continuously as the Ganges flows, another 
cognition arises which is (not relational because it is) 
not the meaning of any sentence (avakyartha ). 6 It is 
this latter knowledge alone which eradicates all the 
darkness of nescience. And they quote the Veda, 
“Having first understood (the teaching), the Brahmin 
should proceed to meditate on it ”. 7 To refute these two 
views he says: 

1 The general topic is the incorrectness of theories which maintain 
that liberation is achieved through a conjunction of knowledge and 
action, and it is not now changed. But Suresvara proceeds now to 
consider some particular applications of the view. 

1 In Suresvara’s day, the term Vedantin meant those followers of 
Vedic tradition who regarded the Upanishads (Vedanta) as containing 
the essence of the Vedic teaching. In this they may be contrasted with 
the Mimamsakas who, as ritualists, regarded the ritualistic sections of 
the Veda as of prime importance, and not the Upanishads, which deal 
chiefly with mystical knowledge. Suresvara’s mention of Vedantins in 
the present passage is the first in the work. Up to now he has been 
concerned with the views of the Mimamsakas. Now he takes up criti- 
cism of the incomplete Vedantic views. And since, as Vedantins, they 
regard liberation as coming primarily through knowledge, we find him 
criticizing their theories of the nature of the liberating knowledge and 
°) lts ration with action. A commentator identifies the first of the 
views mentioned in the present verse as belonging to Brahmadatta, and 

ne second has been identified by Hiriyanna, no doubt rightly, as 

46 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 1:67 

belonging to Mandana Misra. It will be seen from the introductory 
prose to 1.68 below that Suresvara regarded both these views asexpres- 
sions of strict Advaita, that is, of the view that only the undifferentiated 
Absolute exists, the world of differentiation being an illusion. He deals 
with these views again later at II 1.9- 10, 89-93, and 119-126 below. 

3 Brhadaranyaka Upan. IV. i. 2. Their doctrine is that, having medita- 
ted again and again on a particular god, he joins him after death 
through the accumulation of mental conviction. 

4 It is difficult to be sure of Suresvara’s exact conception of the 
difference between the view now mentioned and its predecessor. But it 
is at least clear that the present view involves a new theory of meaning, 
according to which the Absolute cannot be known directly through 
verbal knowledge because words convey their meanings through being 
united in sentences, and the meanings necessarily involve some element 
of internal differentiation, some structural pattern corresponding to 
the grammatical structure of the sentence. Thus the Absolute beyond 
all differentiation cannot be known directly from hearing a text but 
only through meditating on that text continuously. It seems evident 
that Mandana taught a doctrine of this kind, see Brahma Siddhi, ed. 
Kuppuswami Sastri, Madras, 1937, pages 33, 134. 

6 Brahma Siddhi, p. 33, line 15. It is relational because it arises from 
words, being generated by the Upanishadic texts. 

9 That the Absolute is "avakyartha”, not the meaning of any sen- 
tence, is pointed out at Brahma Siddhi, p. 156. Later in the present 
work, Suresvara adopts the term himself, and develops in his own 
peculiar way the paradox that the Absolute can only be known through 
verbal revelation even though it is "not the meaning of any sentence . 
See Hiriyanna’s notes to verse III.2 of the Naijkarmya Siddhi and 
Texte, p. 79. 

7 Brhadaranyaka Upan. IV.iv.21, quoted Brahma Siddhi, p. 134. 

sakft-pravfttya mrdnati kriya-karaka-rupa-bhrt 
ajnanam agama-jndnarn sahgatyarn nasty ato nay oh 

[67] The knowledge derived from Vedic revelation 
demolishes nescience in its form as modified into the 
factors necessary for action at a single stroke. ence 
there can be no association between the two. 



1 ft b^we S en 5 kn 6 owSe and action as required by the disciplines 
proposed bv the two schools under J‘ sc ' us ^ 
against both views is that the discipline th y P P the meaning 

regard to the first view, it the student oik l Absolute he cannot any 
of the Vedic texts proclaiming ld ^ nt ''L'Y j ence to any Vedic injunction, 
longer practise daily meditation ln ° . . . body jh e doctrine 

since he no longer identifies h |™ el £ ^ conveyed by the Vedic 
peculiar to the second view, that kno g 




1 :68 THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

texts must be relational since it is conveyed by words, is refuted later 
by the doctrine of laksana, see III. 9 below. According to Suresvara, the 
meditations which these two views regard as final are in fact prelimin- 
ary. 



evam tavad ananatve brahmani jnana-karmanoh 
samuccayo nirdkrtah. athadhuna 
paksantarabhyupagamenapi pratyavasthane purva-vad 
andsvaso yatha tathabhidhiyate 

So far we have refuted the doctrine that the non- 
differentiated Absolute (Brahman) can be known 
through a conjunction of knowledge and action. We 
now show, even accepting another theory (viz. that the 
Absolute is one but characterized by identity in diver- 
sity), the rejected view (i.e. knowledge and action as 
combined) is still unacceptable . 1 

1 Hiriyanna refers this doctrine, no doubt rightly, to Sarpkara's 
predecessor Bhartrprapanca. See his Introduction to his edition of the 
Naiskarmya Siddhi, pp. xxvii-xxx, also his paper entitled “Bhartrpra- 
panca: an old Vedantin” reprinted in his Indian Philosophical Studies 
I, pp. 79 ff. An independent attempt to reconstruct Bhartrprapafica’s 
doctrine in detail (in Sanskrit) is that of §ri Saccidanandendra Svamin 
in his Vedanta Prakriya Pratyabhijfia, pp. 148-182. The doctrine is 
known as Bhedabheda Vada or “the doctrine of difference in identity”, 
and is a monism in which the one Absolute is held to undergo real 
differentiation to form individual souls and the world. 

While Bhartrprapanca's doctrine is referred to without doubt at 
1.78 below, it seems far from certain that SureSvara is directly con- 
cerned with it in the intervening verses. He speaks in a more general 
way of those who maintain that the Absolute undergoes differentiation, 
and then shows how such theorists may regard the Absolute so 
conceived as either identical with or different from the aspirant, but that 
there cannot in either case be liberation through a conjunction of 
knowledge and action. 

anutsarita-nanatvam brahma yasyapi vadinah 
iah-matenapi dus-sadhyo jhana-karma-samuccayah 



48 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 



1:69 



[68] The doctrine that the Absolute is known through 
a conjunction of knowledge and action is difficult to 
maintain even in the case of those whose Absolute is not 
devoid of differentiation. 



tasya vibhagoktir dusana-vibhaga-prajhaptaye 

Next he states two forms of the doctrine (of difference 
in identity) in order to prepare the way for the two 
forms of the refutation. 

bralimatma va bhavet tasya yadi vdnatma-rupakam 
atmanaptir bhaven mohad itarasyapy anatmanah 

[69] In the case of the exponent (of difference in 
identity) who takes the Absolute as identical with the 
Self 1 (even during the time of transmigration) non- 
realization of the Self can be due to nescience only. 
In the case of the other exponent (who takes the 
Absolute as different from the Self during transmigra- 
tion) the Absolute must be (and remain) not-Self. 2 

1 According to J, one school of the Bhedabheda Vadins taught that 
even in the period of transmigration the embodied Self is not different 
from the Absolute. Another school maintained that in transmigration 
the embodied Self and the Absolute were different, but that in liberation 
they became identical. 

- A real difference is not subject to cancellation. See 1.71 below. 



tatra yadi tavad vastavenaiva xrttena brahma 
prdptam atrua-svabhavyat kexalam asura- 
mohdpidhdna-matram evanapti-nimittam tasmin pakse 



E 



49 




1 :70 THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

In this connection, if the Absolute is ever-achieved (as 
the first view supposes), since it is the true nature of 
one’s own Self, it can only be the veil of demoniac 
(Asuric) ignorance that causes (the appearance of) its 
not being attained. In regard to this view we say: 

mohapidhana-bhangaya naiva karmani karanam 
jnanenoiva phalav aptes tatra karma nirarthakam 

[70] Actions are not the means to destroy ignorance. 
Since this is achieved by knowledge and knowledge 
only, actions are useless in this regard. 



anatma-rupake tu brahmani na karma sadhana- 
bhavam pratipadyate napi jnanam karma- 
samuccitam asamuccitam va yasmad anyasya svata 
era sadhakasya brahmano 'py anyatvam svata eva 
siddham. tatraivam 

And on the (other) view that the Absolute is different 
from the embodied Self, action cannot be the means to 
attaining it — nor can knowledge, either conjoined or 
not conjoined with action. For if the aspirant is inher- 
ently other than the Absolute, this otherness stands 
(ever) established in the very nature of things. Here like- 
wise (we proceed) : 

anyasydnyatmata-praptau na kvacidd hetu-sambhavah 
tasmin saty api nanastah paratmanam prapadyate 

[71] When two things are essentially different, there is 
nothing that can cause them to become identical. Even 
supposing there were some cause that could make them 
identical, one could not attain the nature of the other 
without undergoing destruction. 1 



50 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 1:73 

1 Reading nanastah with the Acyuta Grantha Mala Edition cd 
H iriyanna’s notes ad loc. 



aparasmims tu pakse xidhih 

On this last view (that the aspirant is other than the 
Absolute but can attain it after death) there is scope 
for an injunction. 

paramatmanukulena jndnabhydsena duhkhinah 
dxaitino 'pi pramucyeran na paratma-virodhina 

[72] Through the practice of knowledge in conformity 
with the highest Self even the miserable dualists could 
become liberated (after death) but not through anything 
contradictory to the highest Self (such as action). 



itarasmims tu pakse xidher evanavakasatvam. katham 

But on the other view (that the aspirant is identical 
with the Absolute) there is no scope for an injunction. 
Why? 

samasta-xyasta-bhutasya brahmany evavatisthatah 
bruta karmani ko hetuh sarxdnanyatxa-darsinah 

[73] And tell me, what possible cause could there be 
for action on the part of one who is established in the 
Absolute and has become everything, both individually 
and collectively, not seeing anything as other than 
himself? 



51 




1 .74 THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 
sarva-karma-nimitta-sambhavasambhavabhyam 

sarva-karma-sankaras ca prapnoti. yasmat 

Moreover (if he sees himself as one with all) total 
confusion of actions results, because the performance of 
all rituals by one man would be both possible and 
impossible; for 

sarva-jat v-adi-mattvc ' sya nitaram hetv-asambhavah 
visesam by anupadava karma naiva pravartate 

[74] Such a man would belong to all castes and stages 
of life (and therefore to no particular caste), so that a 
cause enabling him to perform ritualistic action would 
be even more of an impossibility. For ritualistic action 
never proceeds except on the basis of some specification 
(as to caste etc.). 



syad vidhir adhyatmabhimanad it i cen naivam. 
yasmat 

If it be said, “Injunctions can have force even for the 
individual who knows his identity with the Absolute, 
since he may continue to identify himself with his 
physical body,” we reply “Not so” : for 

na cadhyatmabhimano 'pi viduso ' sty asuratvatah 
viduso 'py asuras cet syan nisphalam brahma- 

darsanam 

[75] The Self-realized man cannot identify himself 
with the individual body and mind, since such identifica- 
tion is due to demoniac (Asuric) nescience. If the latter 
a power to afflict even the man of Self-realization, 
nowledge of the Absolute would be useless. 



52 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 1 ;77 

ajnana-k aryatvan na sama-kalatn napi kraniena 
jnana-karmanor vastv-civastu-tcmtratvat sangatir 
astity exam nirakrto pi kasam kusam vavalambyaha 

The opponent has now been thoroughly refuted, since 
we have shown that action is an effect of nescience, and 
that therefore there can be no association, either 
simultaneous or even successive, between knowledge 
and action, based on the real and the unreal respectively 
as they are. Still, he may go on clutching at straws and 
arguing further. 

athadhyatmam punar yayad asrito mudhatam bhavet 
sa karotv ev a karmani ko hy ajnam xinivarayet 

[76] If the man of Self-realization should once again 
identify himself with the individual body and mind he 
would be a victim of delusion. Then he certainly per- 
forms action — who can restrain the ignorant? 



siddhatxac ca na sadhyam. yatah 

Moreover, since (in the case of the man of Self-realiza- 
tion) all action is already achieved, action cannot be 
pursued. For: 

samanvetara-rupabhyam karmatmaivasya yoginah 
nissvdsocchvasa-vat tcisman na niyogam apeksate 

[77] Action in both its particular and universal aspects 
is the very Self of such a yogin (as the doctrine under 
discussion has in mind). It can no more be the subject 
of an injunction than breathing. 1 

1 The Bhedabheda Vadin affirms that the man of Self-realization 
must obey certain injunctions, while his theory of the nature of the man 
of Self-realization is such that this would be impossible. See Hiri- 
yanna’s Introduction to his edition of the present text, p. xxvm . 



53 




1 ;78 THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

asm tarhi bhinnabhinnatmakam brahma, tatha ca 
sati jhana-karmani sambhavato bhedabheda- 
visavatvat tayoh. tatra tavad ayam pak?a eva na 
sambhavati. kirn karanam. na hi bhinno ’ yam ity 
abheda-buddhim anirakrtya bheda-buddhih padartham 
alihgate. evam hy anabhyupagame bhinnabhinna- 
padarthayor alaukikatvam prasajyeta. atha 
nispramanakam apy asriyate tad apy ubhaya- 
paksabhyupagamad abheda-pakse duhkhi brahma syad 
ata aha 

Well, let us suppose that the Absolute were both 
differentiated and undifferentiated. A conjunction of 
knowledge and action would then (perhaps) be possible, 
the knowledge having reference to the undifferentiated, 
the action to the differentiated aspect of the Absolute. 

But this view will not stand either. For the notion of 
difference cannot arise in relation to any object without 
contradicting the previous notion that it was not 
different. Unless this be admitted, neither identical nor 
different things could be experienced in the world. 

If the opponent persists in maintaining his defenceless 
position, then, since his position accepts both difference 
and non-difference from the world as characteristic of 
the Absolute, he admits that the Absolute experiences 
pain (which is absurd). 

bhinnabhinnam visesais ced duhkhi syad brahma te 

dhruvam 

asesa-duhkhita ca syad aho prajhatma-vadinam 

[78] If the Absolute be both identical with and differ- 
ent from all particular things, then (in its aspect as 
identical with them) the Absolute would certainly be 



54 




1:79 



THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

subject to pain. Indeed, all the pai* that exists any- 
where would fall to its lot. Such is the wisdom of these 
exalted metaphysicians! 1 

1 Their wisdom consists in supposing that the Absolute is infinitely 
more miserable than any worldling— the sort of doctrine that is held by 
the Jains. J 



t asm at samyag evabhihitam na jnana-karmanoh 
samuccaya ity upasamhriyate 

Therefore we now sum up to the effect that our conten- 
tion that knowledge and action cannot be conjoined 
was evidently right. 

tamo ’ rigatvam yatha bhanor agnes sitafigata yatha 
varinas cosnata yad-vaj jhanasyaivam kriyangata 

[79] To say that knowledge can coalesce with action is 
like saying that darkness can coalesce with the sun, 
coolness with fire or heat with water. 1 

1 According to the Nyaya-Vaisesika system, the current physics of 
the time, coolness was a property of water. 



yathoktopapatti-balenaiva piirva-paksasyotsaritatvad 
raktavyam navasesitam ity atah pratipatti-karma-vat 
purva-paksa-pariharaya yat-kincid vaktavyam ity ata 
idam abhidhiyate 

The prima facie (purva-paksa) view (that liberation has 
anything to do with action) has now been refuted by the 
arguments given, and nothing further needs to be said. 
Still, with the idea that a few incidental arguments 
might be added by way of a tail-piece, 1 we proceed as 
follows: 

1 pratipatti-karman: literally, "a concluding rite or ceremony , see 
Monier Williams, Sanskrit-English Dictionary s.v. 

55 




1 ;80 THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

“ mukteh kriyabhih siddhatvat" ity ady anucitam bahu 
yad abhani tad anyayyam yathd tad adhunocyate 

[80] It is now proposed to demonstrate (again) how 
many things said (by the opponent) beginning with 
“since liberation arises through ritualistic action” are 
unreasonable. 1 

1 Verses 80-84 offer a further attack on the Mimamsaka doctrine 
that liberation is achieved through action alone. 



yo 'yam kamyanam pratisiddhanam ca tydgah 
pratijnayate sa pratijha tavan na sakyate 
' nusthatum . kirn karanam. karmano hi 
nirwttatmano dvabhyam prakarabhyam nivrttih 
sambhavaty arabdha-phalasyopabhogenanarabdha- 
phalasyasubhasya prayascittair iti. trtiyo 'pi tyaga- 
prakaro 'kartratmavabodhat sa tv atma- 
jhdndnabhyupagamdd bhavata nabhyupagamyate. tatra 
yany anupabhukta-phalany anarabdha-phalani 
tanisvarenapi kenacid api na sakyante parityaktum. 
atharabdha-phalani tyajyante tany api na sakyante 
tyaktum. kim karanam. anivrtteh. anirvrttam hi 
cikirsitam karma sakyate tyaktum pravrtti-nivrtti 
prati kartuh svatantryat. nirvrtte tu karmani 
tad-asambhavad duranustheyah pratijhatarthah. 
asakya-pratijhanac ca. na ca sakyate pratijhatum 
yavaj-jivam kamyani pratisiddhani ca karmani na 
karisyamiti sunipunanam api suksmaparadha- 
darsanat. pramanabhavac ca. na ca pramanam asti 
moksa-kamo nitya-naimittike karmani kuryat 
kamya-pratisiddhe ca varjayed arabdha-phale 
copabhogena ksapayed iti. anantyac ca. na 



56 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 180 

copacitanam karmandm iyattasti samsarasyanaditvat 
na ca kamyaih pratisiddhair va tesam nivrttir asti 
suddhy-asuddhi-sdmye saty avirodhad ity aha 

Now, the renunciation of self-interested rituals and 
forbidden acts which the ritualist prescribed is im- 
possible to carry out. For there are only two ways in 
which the effects of action , 1 once generated, can be 
destroyed. That portion of them which is in manifesta- 
tion in the present birth (prarabdha karma) can be 
exhausted by experiencing it; and those effects of bad 
(forbidden) action which are not in the course of fructi- 
fication in the present birth can be destroyed through 
certain prescribed penances. There is indeed a third 
method, that of cognition of the supreme Self, not an 
agent, but this is ruled out by you, since you do not 
admit Self-knowledge. 

Now, the fact is that not even a god could renounce 
the fruits of action that is not in the course of fructifica- 
tion. “Well,” you may say, “at least the fruits of that 
action which has begun to fructify could be renounced.” 
But the fact is that even these cannot be renounced. 
Why not? Because nothing can suppress them . 2 An 
action which is contemplated and which has not yet 
been performed can be renounced, since here the agent 
is free to act or abstain. But abstention is not possible 
with regard to acts already performed. 

Moreover, the course you propose involves a promise 
that is impossible of fulfilment. For no one in his life 
can undertake never to perform self-interested rituals or 
forbidden deeds, since we know that even the cleverest 
People make small mistakes occasionally. Nor is the 
course based on any authority. There is no authoritative 



57 




1 ;80 THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

statement declaring, “Whosoever desires liberation 
should perform the obligatory daily and occasional 
rituals, should avoid self-interested rituals and for- 
bidden acts, and should consume that portion of the 
effects of his past deeds which has begun to fructify in 
his present life (prarabdha karma) by experiencing it.” 

And, moreover, one’s past action is limitless in extent. 
Nor can any limit be assigned to the accumulated effects 
of our deeds, since transmigration is beginningless. 
Nor can the effects of one’s past actions be eradicated 
either by self-interested rituals or forbidden deeds. 3 For 
since the latter are on a par with the accumulated effects 
of one's deeds as regards purity and impurity, there is 
no contradiction between the two (whereby the per- 
formance of the self-interested rituals and forbidden 
acts could eradicate the effects of one’s past deeds). 

1 The Sanskrit \*ord “karma" can mean, inter alia, either “action” 
or “the effects of action in the form of seeds of future experiences.” It 
is evident from the context that the word has the second meaning here. 

* They must either be exhausted through enjoyment or counteracted 
through penance. J 

1 The other alternative that would (theoretically) remain over to the 
Mimarpsaka now that it has been shown that they cannot be eradicated 
through the performance of the "obligatory daily and occasional 
rites.” 

na krtsna-kamya-samtydgo ’ nantatvat kartum isyate 

nifiddha-karmanasceha vyatitananta-janmasu 

[81] And one cannot get rid of all the effects of the 
self-interested rituals and forbidden deeds 1 performed 
in one’s earlier lives, which are infinite in number, since 
these, too, are infinite. 

Reading ni$iddha-karmanaiceha from Hiriyanna’s footnote ad loc. 



58 




the realization of the absolute 1:83 
sym matam vyatitananta-janmopattanam karmariam 

The following view might also be advanced in regard to 

the effects of actions accumulated in infinite previous 
births : 



ksayo nityena tenant cet prayascittair yathainasah 
nisphalatvan na nityena kamy cider vinivaranam 

[82] And if you say they can be eradicated by perform- 
ance of the obligatory rituals, as sins are eradicated by 
prescribed penances, we reply “No, for (on your own 
view) the obligatory rituals are without fruit”. 1 

1 Compare verse 28 above. 



pramanabhavac ca. katham 

Nor is there any authority for the position. You ask 
why not? 

papapanuttaye vakyat prayascittam yatha tat ha 
gamyate kamya-hanartham nityam karma na 

vakyatah 

[83] There is Vedic authority declaring that the pres- 
cribed penances ward off the effects of forbidden deeds. 
But performance of the obligatory rituals does not 
destroy the effect of self-interested rituals in the same 
way, since there is no Vedic authority for such a view. 1 

1 This is to rebut the opinion of the Mimarpsaka, Kumarila Bhatta, 
and his followers, who held that the performance of the daily obligatory 
rituals was not fruitless but had the fruit of consuming the effects of past 
self-interested ritualistic action. The refutation is that there is no Vedic 
authority for the view. 



59 




1;84 THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

athapi syat kamyair era kamyanam purva- 
janmopacitanam ksayo bhavisyatfti. Ian na. yatah 

It might also be claimed that the effects of self-interested 
rituals in previous births might be exhausted through 
the performance of self-interested rituals in the present 
one: 

papmanam papmabhir nasti yathaiveha nirakriya 
kamyair api tathaivastu kamyanam avirodhatah 

[84] The self-interested rituals performed in this life 
do not eradicate those performed in previous lives, any 
more than the sins of this life eradicate previous sins, 
for there is no contradiction (between sins and sins or 
self-interested rituals and self-interested rituals). 1 

1 This verse completes the case. Since verse 80 we have been discus- 
sing the specifically Mimarnsaka doctrine that liberation comes through 
action alone, and no longer the unacceptable Vedantic theories of 
liberation through a conjunction of knowledge and action. Previously, 
verses 82 and 83. it was shown that obligatory rituals cannot ward off 
the effects of past action and hence cannot produce liberation. Libera- 
tion, on the Mimarnsaka views now under discussion, consists in the 
eradiction of the effects of past action, so that transmigration no longer 
proceeds. Knowledge, as such, has on this view nothing to do with 
liberation. Now it is shown that self-interested rituals and sins cannot 
ward off the effects of past actions either. But obligatory rituals, self- 
interested rituals and sins are the only three classes of action recog- 
nized by the Mimarnsaka as significant for the after-life. Hence it has 
now been shown that no type of action recognized by the Mimarpsaka 
as significant can ward off the effects of past action and hence produce 
liberation. 



exam tavat “ mukteli kriyabhih siddhatvat" iti 
nirakftam. athatma-jnanasya sad-bhave 
pramanasambhava uktas tat-pariharayaha 



60 




the realization of the absolute 1 :86 

So much (verses 80-84) by way of refutation of “since 
liberation arises through actions”. It has been said (by 
the opponent) that there is no possibility of an authority 
to establish the existence of Self-knowledge. 1 To refute 
this contention, we proceed : 

1 The charge was made in verses 1. 14-2 1 above, especially verse 15. 
srutayas smrtibhis sakam anantyat kaminam iha 
vidadhaty uru-yatnena karmato bahu-kdma-dam 



[85] Since the number of men afflicted with the desire 
for pleasure is infinite, the Veda (sruti) and traditional 
literature (smrti) laboriously lay down the ritualistic 
action which leads to the many different types of it. 



na ca bahulyam pramanye karana-bhavam 
pratipadyate. ata aha 

Now, numerical preponderance is nowhere said to be a 
cause of authoritativeness. Hence we say: 

pramanyaya na bahulyam na hy ekatra pramanatam 
vastuny atanti manani tv ekatraikasya manata 

[86] Numerical preponderance does not make for 
authoritativeness. For the different texts do not attain 
authority in relation to one and the same object. But 
each is authoritative in one place only. 1 

1 The charge which Suresvara is here rebutting is that whereas the 
passages in the Veda that speak of Self-knowledge are few and far 
between, those that enjoin action are legion, and that, therefore, the 
view that the Veda ultimately teaches action has more authority to 
support it than the view that it ultimately teaches Self-knowledge. 
Suresvara’s reply is that every text is authoritative in regard to its own 
subject-matter only. The Sell being one, texts about it are few. Desires 
for pleasure being legion, texts show ing how to obtain it are many, but 
each enjoins action for a different object. The competence of one text in 
its own sphere does not affect the competence of any other. And it is 
the texts proclaiming Sell-knowledge, though few and far between, 
which alone deal with the nature of reality. 

61 




j .g 7 THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

yat luktam “ yatnato xiksamano ’ pi ” iti tatrapi 
bhavata exaparadhah. kasmat. yatah 

Moreover, the statement at verse 15 above “though I 
have looked carefully I can find no injunction to know 
either in the Veda or in the traditional literature” rests 
on an error of your own. Why? Because: 

“pariksya lokan" ity adya atma-jnana-vidhayinih 
nai skarm i 'a-pra xanas sadhxih srutih kim na synosi tah 

[87] Have you never heard the excellent texts like 
"Having surveyed the worlds” 1 which inculcate Self- 
knowledge and promote a desire for the actionless 
state ? 

1 Mundaka Upan. I.ii.12. According to J, “inculcate Self-know- 
ledge” means “inculcate the preliminary steps towards it”, such as the 
approach to a teacher etc., since in the final view of Advaita Vedanta 
it is not admitted that knowledge can be the subject of a command. 



nanu “ atmety evopasita ” “atma va are drastavyah" 
ity apurva-xidhi-sruteh purusasyatma-darsana- 
kriyayam niyogo ’ vasiyata iti. naivam. apuru$a- 
tantratvad vastu-ydthatmya-jhanasya sakalanartha- 
bijatmanaxabodhotsarino mukti-hetor iti. xidhy 
abhyupagame 'pi napurxa-vidhir ayam. ata aha 

An objector might say: In the texts “he should meditate 
only on the Self” 1 and “the Self, indeed, is to be seen” 2 
we have "novel” injunctions from the Veda which 
prompt a man to engage in the activity of acquiring 
Self-knowledge through meditation. But he would be 
^ or right-knowledge of the nature of the Self, 
which eradicates ignorance of the Self, the seed of all 



62 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 1 ;88 

evil, is conditioned by the nature of reality and not 
fashioned by the will of man. 3 (Being outside the range 
of action, it cannot be the subject of a novel injunction.) 
And even if the existence of an injunction be admitted, 
it cannot be a novel one. 1 So we proceed: 

1 Brhadaranyaka Upan. I.iv.7. 

2 Ibid., II.iv.5. 

3 Knowledge is not created by action, but depends on the nature of 
the object known. 

4 Vedic injunctions are of three kinds— novel (apiirvavidhi), restric- 
tive (niyamavidhi) and negative (parisankhyavidhi). Only novel injunc- 
tions are injunctions properly so called. The restrictive injunctions are 
simply injunctions specifying how a given novel injunction must be 
carried out, e.g. if the novel injunction involves the husking of rice, 
there may be restrictive injunctions specifying whether this is to be done 
by gouging out the kernel with the nails or beating it out with a pestle. 

The negative injunction (parisankhyavidhi) has no injunctive force at 
all, and amounts to a prohibition (ni§edha). If the injunction “He 
should eat fish on Fridays” were interpreted as a parisankhyavidhi it 
would mean “We do not prescribe eating on Fridays at all, but if a man 
must eat then let him eat fish only, as to eat anything else would be 
definitely sinful.” On the distinction between novel, restrictive and 
exclusive injunctions, see Nyaya Mimaipsa Prakasa, Ed. and Tr. F. 
Edgerton, p. 134 f. 

niyamah parisankhya va vidhy-artho 'pi bhaved yatah 

anatmadarsanenaiva paratmanam upasmahe 



[88] There can be an injunction (to meditate on the 
Self) of either the restrictive or exclusive type. For we 
meditate on the supreme Self only by withdrawing our 



gaze from the not-Self. 1 

1 Suresvara here denies flatly what the objector (see introductory 
comm, immediately above) wishes to maintain— namely that medi a- 
tion on the Self leading to Self-knowledge can be the : subject .of a 
positive command to action such as is embodied in a no j - 

The Self, he says, can only be meditated upon if it is already ™m. 
Hence if phrases occur in the Veda having the JJ™ £ 

injunctions to meditate on the Self with a view toknw ^^“gt “ 
interpreted as negative injunctions not convey g 
anything fresh. 



63 




] -89 THE realization of the absolute 

vac coktam “ visvaso nanyato 'sti naif' iti tad api 
nidratura-cetasa tvaya svapnayamanena pralapitam. 
kirn karanam. na hi vayam pramana-balenaikatmyam 
pratipadyamaha aikatmyasya svata evanubhava- 
niatratmakatvat. ata cva sarra- 
pramanavatarasambhavam vaksyati. pramana- 
xyavasthayas cdnubhaxa-matvasrayatvat. ata aha 

And that other remark (verse 15 above) “we place our 
faith in nothing else (but the Veda)” you babbled in a 
dream with your mind half-asleep. Why? We do not 
base our doctrine of the Self on any of the authoritative 
means of empirical knowledge (pramana), since the Self 
by its very nature is bare immediate awareness. So we 
will show later (II. 1 flf.) that no means of empirical 
knowledge apply to it. The means of empirical know- 
ledge themselves rest in and depend on pure awareness. 1 

1 The pramanas (canons of correct knowledge) accepted in Vedanta 
are pratyaksa (perception), anumana (inference), upamana (comparison), 
arthapatti (presumption), sabda (speech), and anupalabdhi (apprehen- 
sion of non-existence). There is a brief account in A. Mahadeva Shastri 
“Minor Upanishads” Vol. II, p. 33. For a detailed treatment of the 
subject see either Vedanta Paribhasa” (tr. SwamIMadhavananda), or 
D. M. Datta “The Six Ways of Knowing”. In the time of Sarpkara 
and Suresvara elaborate discussion of the pramapas was not regarded 
as so important. The three most important ones are perception, 
inference, and verbal testimony (including sruti). 

vakyaika-gamyam yad vastu nanyasmat tatra visvaset 
na prameye svatas-siddhe ' visvasah katham atmani 

[89] In regard to matters known only from the Veda 
(e.g. the results of rituals in the after-life) it is right that 
he (i.e. the Mimamsaka) should place faith in the Veda 
a one. But why has he no faith in the Self which is self- 
revealed and depends on none of the empirical means of 
knowledge? 



64 




1:90 



THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

yad apy uktam “ antarena vidhim ” iti tad apy 
abuddhi-purvakam iva nah pratibhati. yasmat 
k a Ian tar a-phala-dayisu karmasv etad ghatate. 
atma-labha-kala eva phala-dayini tv atma-jhane 
naitat samahjasam ity aha 

And the remark (verse 16) that if someone engages in a 
pursuit not laid down in the Veda for a result in a life 
to come he is wasting his time, also strikes us as some- 
what lacking in intelligence. For it is true only of acts 
and rituals which produce their fruit at a later time, but 
not of Self-knowledge, which brings its fruits immedi- 
ately it is acquired. 

jhanat phale hy avapte 'smin pratyakse bhava- ghatini 
upakaraya tan neti na nyayyam bhati no vacah 

[90] Since the fruit of knowledge is immediately ex- 
perienced and destroys phenomenal existence for ever, 
your statement (implied in verse 16) that it is useless 
appears to us wide of the mark. 

yadapi jaiminiyam vacanam udghdtayasi tadapi tad- 
vivaksa ’ parijhanad evodbhavyate. kim karanam. 
yato na jaiminer ayam abhipraya amnayah sarva eva 
kriydrtha iti. yadi hy avam abhiprayo ’ bhavisyat 
“ athato brahma-jijhasa. janmddy asya yatah" ity 
e vain adi brahma - vastu-s varupa-md t r a-ydt hat my a- 
prakasana-param gambhira-nyayasamdrbdham 
sarva - vedantartha-mimamsanam srimac-charirakam 
nasutravisvat. asutravac ca. tasmaj jaiminer evayam 
abhiprayo yathaiva vidhi-vakydnam svartha-matre 
prdmdnyam evam aikdtmya-vdhyanam apy 

anadhigata-vastu-paricchedasamydd iti. at a idam 

abhidhiyate. 



F 



65 




1 '91 THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

And as for the quotation from Jaimini (verse 17), that, 
too was based on ignorance of that writer s real inten- 
tion. For Jaimini did not mean that all Vedic texts are 
concerned with injunctions to act or prohibitions from 
acting. If so, he would never have composed the 
Vedanta Sutras 1 beginning with “Now, therefore, the 
enquiry into the Absolute (Brahman)” and “He from 
whom all this came forth”, which are intent solely on 
proclaiming the true nature of the Absolute as the real, 
and which amount to a critical exposition of the mean- 
ing of the Upanishads when taken in their entirety, 
backed by profound reasoning. But as a matter of fact 
he did compose them. Therefore we conclude that 
Jaimini's real belief was that just as the injunctions are 
authoritative within their own sphere only, so the 
passages proclaiming the one Self are equally authorita- 
tive in theirs, the two classes of passages having both 
an equal claim to authority in that they deal with 
matters not previously knowable from any other source. 
So we proceed as follows: 



1 pie modern scholar, S. K. Belvalkar, held that the core of the 
Vedanta Sutras consisted in exegesis of texts from the Chandogya 
Upanishad deriving in the first instance from Jaimini. Sarpkara 
ascribes them to Badarayana, and Upadesa Sahasri XVI.67 suggests he 
may have identified Badarayana with Vyasa. From the point of view of 
modern scholarship they are a collection of aphorisms that were fre- 
quently altered, added to and re-moulded in the course of time, and are 
not assignable to any one specific author. Above all, they were probably 
originally part of the Mimamsaka Sutras, and Sri Sarrikara may well 
nave been the first man to have treated them separately. The previous 
commentator to whom he refers (Bhagavan Upavar?a) seems to have 
rea ed the two sets of aphorisms as one connected work. Perhaps 
imirt Var V/vr re re ^ err ‘ n g back to that tradition. However Hiriyanna 
(No . tes t0 his edition of “Naiskarmya Siddhi”, pp. 229 ff.) 
V e Han7 a cm 3, t00 ’r°iF ietimes s P eaks of the Mimarpsaka Sutras and 
Commentary, a iILiii 51 * ^ ° ne connected work > e.g. Vedanta Sutra 



66 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 1 '92 

adhicodanam ya amnayas tasyaiva syat kriyarthata 
tat-tvam-asy-adi-vakyanam bruta karmarthata 

katham 

[91] It is only the Vedic texts related to commands 
that bear on action. Just tell me how indicative sentences 
like that thou art could have the meaning of a 
command. 



api ca. aikatmya-paksa ivadrstartha-karmasu 
bhavat-pakse 'pi pravrttir durlaksya. yatah 

Moreover, it is just as difficult to establish the possibility 
of performance of ritualistic action with unseen results 
in the future on your principles as it is for those who 
adhere to the doctrine of the one Self: 1 

1 The MImamsakas believed in a persistent soul, capable of transmi- 
gration, but itself without motion and totally distinct in nature from the 
body, senses and cognitions. It was supposed to superintend and direct 
the activities of the body and mind, although it was itself motionless. 
But (Suresvara argues) such a soul would actually be incapable of 
becoming an agent, because this depends on motion. Therefore, not 
being an agent, it cannot enjoy the fruits of action. 

svargam yiyasur juhuyad agnihotram yatha-vidhi 
dehad vyutthapitasyaivam kartrtvam jaimineh katham 

[92] Jaimini says, “Whosoever desires heaven should 
perform the Agnihotra according to rule.” But how can 
Jaimini perform anything, seeing that (on his own 
principles) he is essentially distinct from the body? 



na ca pratyakhyatasesa-sarirddi-karma-sadhana- 

svabhavasydtma-matrasya karmasv adhikarah. 

yasmat. 



67 




1 ;93 THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

Nor is the Self alone, whose nature is such as to exclude 
all means to action such as a body, etc., able to engage 
in actions. For 

sarva-pramanasambhavyo hy ahamvrttyaika-sadhanah 
yusmad artham anaditsur jaiminih preryate katham 

[93] How can even Jaimini himself be impelled to 
action by a command, seeing that (on his own view of 
the soul) he is beyond all the empirical means of know- 
ledge, is void of every objective category 1 and is known 
only through the I-notion ? 

1 More literally, "cannot accept a ‘thou-meaning’.” 



pravrtti-karanabhavac ca. yasmat 

Again, there could be no cause able to promote action. 
For 

sukha-duhkhadibhir yoga atmano nahameksyate 
paraktvat pratyag-atmatvaj jaiminih preryate katham 

[94] The union of the soul with pleasure and pain, etc., 
is not perceived by the ‘I’ because they are external 
(while the soul is the internal overseer quite distinct in 
nature from them). Seeing that he is the inmost Self, 
how can Jaimini be motivated (to act)? 



kimca 

Moreover, 

na tavad yoga evasti sarirendtmanah sada 
visayair diirato nasti svargadau syat katham sukham 



68 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 1 :96 

[95] Indeed, there is never any real contact between 
the Self and the body, far less between the Self and 
objects. How then can even heaven be a source of bliss? 



yasmad anyatha nopapadyate 

As the matter cannot be explained otherwise, it follows 
that: 

narabhimaninam tasmat karakady-atma-darsinam 
mantra ahorarikrtya “ kurvan ” iti na nirdvayam 

[96] Thus the Vedic verse “Let a man desire to live a 
hundred years here below performing rituals” 1 was 
addressed to the one supposing himself to be an indi- 
vidual man and possessed of the means to action (a 
body etc.). It was not addressed to the non-dual (supreme 
Self). 

1 Isa Upanishad, verse 2. 



yac coktam “ virahayya ” iti tadapi na samyag eva. 
tathapi tu na yd kacit kriya yatra kva 
cddhydharamyd kim tu yd yatrdbhipreta-sambandham 
ghatayitum saknoty akdnksdm ca vakyasya purayati 
saivadhyaharaniya. evam-visista ca kriyasmabhir 
abhyupagataiva. sd tilpdditsita-vdkydrthdvirodhiny 
eva nabhutdrtha-prddurbhdva-phaleti. sad-bhava- 
vikara-rahitatma-vastuno nirdhutasesa- 
dvaitanarthasydparddhma-prakdsasya 
vijijnapa visit at vad asy-asmity-ddi-kriya-padam sva- 
mahima-siddhartha-pratipadana-samartham 

abh yupagantavyam na viparitartha-pratipadana- 
param iti 



69 




1 97 THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

And what was said in verse 19 about “except by means 
of a verb” (implying that we must relate all non- 
imperative factual sentences to some verb implying 
command to make them significant) is also incorrect. 
For we cannot construe verbs here, there and every- 
where just to bring out our own view of the meaning of 
sentences. We can only construe verbs in those places 
where they bring out the connections originally inten- 
ded, and even this only where the structure of the 
original sentence demands them. When verbs are 
construed in accordance with these principles, we 
(Advaitins) ourselves accept them. But we insist that 
they must not contradict the meaning that the original 
text was intended to convey nor result in a meaning 
that was not originally there. 1 The verbal forms “am” 
and “art” (in “I am Brahman” and “that thou art”) are 
intended to convey information about the real Self 
devoid of the six modes of change 2 (and hence not sub- 
ject to attainment through action), which is free from 
all the evils of duality and reveals itself by its own 
independent power. They should be accepted as having 
the power to convey the self-existent and self-revealing 
reality as their meaning, and accepted as not being 
concerned with any meaning contradictory to that: 

1 As they do in the Mimamsaka interpretation, according to which 
every verb in the indicative mood has to be artificially construed as 
subordinate to some command to act. 

2 The six modes of change are enumerated by Sri $arpkara at Upadesa 
Sahasri (prose section) para. 113. They are birth, existence, growth, 
maturity, decay and death. It is an ancient conception, found in the 
Vedic commentator Yaska. 



dhaved iti na danarthe padam yad-vat prayujyate 
edhity-adi tatha necchet svatah siddhartha-vacini 



70 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 1 ;98 

[97] Just as the word “run” is not used to mean 
“give”, so should one not try to read the (imperative) 
meaning “be thou” into words (like “am” and “art”) 
which proclaim self-evident facts. 



na ca yathokta- vas t u- vr tta-pr at ipadana- vyatirekena 
tat-tvam-asy-adi-vakyam vakyarthantaram vaktiti 
sakyam adhyavasatum ity aha 

In order to show that one cannot make out that texts 
like “that thou art” are really concerned with the 
meaning of some other text (implying a command to 
action, such as the imperative “he should meditate”), 
rather than with proclaiming true matters of fact about 
existing things, we proceed: 

tat-tvam-asy-adi-vakyanam svatas-siddhartha- 

bodhanat 

arthantaram na samdrastum sakyate tridasair api 

[98] Since the sentences like “that thou art” teach the 
existence of a reality that is revealed as self-evident, not 
even the gods could introduce a new meaning into them 
other than the one they already possess. 



y as mad evam 



Because this is so: 

at ah sarvasramanam tu vah-manah-kaya-karmabhih 
sv-anusthitair na muktih sydj jhanad eva hi sdyatah 



71 




1 -99 THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

[99] Therefore liberation does not arise for men of 
different stations of life through the diligent perform- 
ance of their duties in thought, word and deed — but 
through knowledge alone. 1 

1 This summarizes the case against the doctrine that liberation can 
be achieved through action alone and explicitly contradicts the case of 
the ritualist summarized in verse 21 above. The next verse echoes the 
beginning of the reply giv en in verse 22. 



tasmac ca karanad etad apy upapannam 

And therefore the following also was reasonable: 

sva-inano-ratha-samklpta-prajnddhmdta-dhiyam atah 
srotriyesv eva vacas tab sobhante natma-vedisu 
[100] “These, therefore, are words that come from a 
mind puffed up by its own fondly imagined wisdom.” 1 
They may become those learned in the letter of the 
Vedas, but they do not become those who know the 
Self. 

J The reference is to verse 22 above. Compare Bhagavad Gita 11.42-44. 



72 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 



dvitfyo 'dhyayah 

pratyaksadinam anevamvisayatvat tesam svarambhaka- 
visayopanipatitvad atmanas casesa-prameya- 
vailaksanyat sarvanarthaika-hetv-ajhanapanodi-jhana- 
d i vak ar odaya-helutvam vosl u-ftiQt r a-yotholmyo- 
prakasana-patiyasas tat-tvam-asy-ader vacasa eveti 
bahvibhir upapattibhih pradarsitam. atas tad-artha- 
pratipattau yat-karanam tad apanayanaya dvitivo 
'dhyaya arabhyate 



BOOK II 



Now, each of the senses is limited in its sphere to that 
material element of which it is itself composed 1 and 
hence none of them can have the Self for its object; and 
since the Self is also totally different from anything that 
can be known objectively through the authoritative 
means of knowledge, we have shown by many argu- 
ments that the cause of the rise of that sun of knowledge 



which dispels nescience — the one cause of every evil — 
lies in the great sentences of the Veda such as “that thou 
art” alone, sentences whose sole scope is to proclaim 
the nature of ultimate reality. Now in this chapter we 
proceed to remove certain causes of failure to under- 
stand their meaning. 



1 For the senses as limited each to its own element, rampare verse 
IV. 12 below, and the references to Samara there given in the note. 



73 




-> . j 7HE realization of the absolute 

sravito retti vakvartham no cct lat-tvam-asity atah 
txam-padarthanabhijnatvad atos lal-prakrivocyate 

[1] If the man who has heard the sentence “that thou 
art" in the traditional way does not understand the 
meaning of it, it will be because he does not understand 
the meaning of “thou". 1 We will explain, therefore, the 
sense in which it is used. 

1 See Samkara's Upadesa Sahasri (verse part) XVIII. 181-1 82. This 
chapter in fact proceeds to discover the meaning of the word “thou”by 
the method of reasoning through agreement and difference in just the 
way prescribed in Samkara’s work. 



yo 'yam aliam brahmeti xakyarthas tat-pratipattir 
vakyad eveti pratyaksadinam anevamvisayatvad ity 
avadisam tasva visuddhy-artham anaikantikatxam 
purva-paksal venopasthapyate 

It was remarked just now, with a view to show that 
realization of the meaning of the text “verily I am 
Brahman” is conveyed by the text alone, that the senses 
and other means of empirical knowledge did not have 
the Self for their object. With a view ultimately to clarify 
the main doctrine that the highest knowledge is con- 
veyed by the actual Upanishadic text proclaiming it 
alone, some prima facie exceptions to the view will be 
cited, as they might be put forward by an objector. 1 

1 The objector says that examples show that there are various ways 
in which men come to understand “I am the Absolute”, (verse 2). 
sometimes it just occurs naturally (verse 2), sometimes through con- 
rnuous pondering on a text proclaiming this truth, sometimes through 
oemg prompted to ponder on such a text by a teacher, sometimes 
u..I° Ue *K mef i ^ lear ‘ n 8 a text once accidentally (verse 3). Of these four 
nn^ft ♦ 0n ^ y , sur . e ? ne i. s that in which a pupil is prompted to ponder 

itcpir th » S ° L la V t ls . this Pondering over the text rather than the text 
itselt that is the decisive factor (verse 3). 



74 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 2‘. 2 

Against this, Surcivara maintains that it is only the text itself that 
produces the holy knowledge, for it is an authoritative m?i of know 
edge (pramuna) and the function of the authoritative means of know- 
ledge is to produce knowledge of its own accord (verse 5 introduction 
It is the activity of the pupil in regard to the text that is the accTdental 
factor. Enlightenment does not come through action. Even where en- 
hghtenment appears to be due to natural causes, the hidden functioning 
of the text heard on some previous occasion must be assumed Cd 
T exte, p. 96. y 



kftsnanatma-nivfttau ca kascid apnoti ninjtim 

sruta-vakya-smrtes canyah smaryate ca vaco 'parah 

[2] (Objection, verses 2-3): One man attains the 
highest good through the mere sudden disappearance 
of the entire not-Self, another through pondering over 
the text which he formerly heard, another through being 
made to ponder over it. 1 

1 The present brief account by the opponent of the different types of 
successful aspirant requires to be supplemented from the parallel 
account at IH.64 (prose) below. In the present verse and its successor 
four ways of becoming enlightened are mentioned by the objector and 
evaluated by him so as to exclude Suresvara’s doctrine that enlighten- 
ment arises through destruction of nescience following immediately 
upon the hearing and understanding of the supreme texts. J cites from 
the Veda instances of Self-knowledge arising in each of the three ways 
mentioned in the present verse. At Brhadaranyaka Upanishad I.iv.2 
Prajapati cries “Since there is nothing other than me, why am I afraid?” 
Here he awoke to the nature of the pure Self apparently without the aid 
of a text at all. Bhrgu was taught by his father (in Taittiriya Upanishad 
1II.1) that Brahman is that from which all these beings come forth, and 
after voluntarily undergoing ascetic discipline (tapas) he suddenly came 
to realize that Brahman is bliss, for it is from this bliss that all beings 
are bom. Here we have realization of the Self through pondering on 
the spoken word, where the pondering is undertaken voluntarily and 
without clear direction of aim. Thirdly, as an example of being made to 
ponder over the text, J cites the case of Svetaketu, to whom the formula 
“that thou art” had to be repeated nine times by the teacher (Chandog- 
ya Upanishad, Chapter VI). 



etat-prasangena srotrantaropanyasam ubhayatrapi 
sambha vandyaha 



75 




the realization of the absolute 



In this connection 1 he cites the case of another hearer, 
to show that both things are possible. 2 



i i e in connection with the question whether or not immediate 
comprehension of the text is the cause of liberation. 

i j e (0 s how that liberation may also arise from mere hearing of the 
text _ s0 that it is impossible to lay down any fixed laws on this subject 
whatever. 



vakva-sravana-matrac ca pisacaka-vad apnuyat 
trisu yadrcchiki siddhih smaryamane tu niscita 



[3] And again. Self-realization may be obtained 
through mere hearing of the words of the text (once 
accidentally), as in the case of the goblin. 1 Three of 
these four ways of acquiring Self-knowledge are due to 
chance; only in the case of the one who is made to 
ponder (on the text which he has previously heard) does 
Self-knowledge arise with certainty. 



1 A certain goblin (pisaca) overheard the conversation between 
Krsna and Arjuna and it aroused certain latent dispositions (sarpskara) 
acquired in previous lives and he attained illumination then and there. 
Vijflana Bhik$u refers to this tradition at his Pravacana Bhajya to the 
Sartkhya Sutras, IV.2 to prove that Sudras and women can acquire 
illumination from hearing texts originally intended for the ears of 
Brahmins. 

Here end the remarks of the objector. He claims that it is being 
prompted to ponder over the text that is the royal road to liberation. 
Wherever success has been found in other ways, it has been due to 
special and unusual circumstances. 



nayam anaikantiko hetuh. yatah 

This (pondering) is not the invariable cause (of Sell' 
realization), as 

sarvo yam mahima jfieyo vakyasyaiva yathoditah 
vakyartham rta hy fte vakyat kascij janati tattvatah 



76 




™ realiz ation of the absolute 2- 5 
[4] (Answer to the Objection)- Ait • 
ted to the miraculous powe^of ? “* * S t0 be attribu ' 

said. Indeed, no one can know th h ° y texts ’ as we bave 
reality conveyed bv the tPYt e nature of the ultimate 
themselves. 1 * * ^ «*** th ™gh the texts 

Prajapati r< acqufred knowlSge^fonow^n^^he^d^ 118 * 1 S ° me text that 

entire not-self. See verse 2, note 1 above” 8 ** disappearance of ‘he 



vakyatp ca pratipddanaya pravrttam sat 
pratipadayaty eva sarva-pramananam apv 
evamvrttatvat 



Those texts whose purpose is to make truths known do 
m tact make them known themselves (unaided), for this 
is the function of all authoritative means of knowledge 
(i.e. to make their subject-matter known unaided). 1 

a „‘ J - p , lains that whereas the prose affirms that the text, being an 
corrohnfa'tl^ T*™ of k knowled 8 e - requires and indeed admits of no 
^hZ.h , fr0m ° u er sources of knowledge, the verse that follows 
shows that it cannot be contradicted by other sources of knowledge 
(such as perception). 



naham-grahye na tadd-hine na pratyan napi duhkhini 
virodhah sad asity asmad vakyabhijnasya jayate 

[5] For the one who knows the real meaning of the 
text “thou art the real”, 1 it conflicts neither with what 
is knowable as “I”, 2 nor with what is not knowable as 
“I”, 3 nor with the inmost Self 4 nor with the sufferer. 5 



1 Perhaps refers to “that thou art”, Chand. Up. VI.viii.7 sqq. 

2 The complex of body and soul. In saying “thou art the real”, the 

text does not conflict with what is knowable as “I” and is not the real 

because it makes no assertion about it. Its concern is with the ultimate 

Self, different from what is revealed by the ego-notion, cp. II. 100 below. 



77 




p. 6 THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

» According to J, the senses are meant. They are experienced not as 
-I” but as instruments of the “I”. One feels, “I see with the eye”, not 
“I the eve see” The reports of the senses cannot conflict with the 
supreme texts because they bear on a different subject, the not-self. 
Cp. 1II.45, 111.48, III.88 below. 

4 Because it really is the real, the Absolute. 

6 The transmigrant, the one supposing himself to be undergoing 
empirical experience. The text, being concerned with the supreme Self, 
is not in conflict with “the sufferer” either. It makes no assertion about 
him, since he is different from the supreme Self, cp. II. 100 below. 



naviraktasya samsaran nivivrtsa tato bhavet 
na cam vrtta-trsnasya purusasya mumuksuta 

[6] No one who does not feel indifference (vairagya) 
towards worldly experience (samsara) can desire the 
cessation of it. Nor can the man whose thirst for 
pleasure is not extinct become a seeker of liberation 
(mumuksu). 



na camumuksor astiha guru-padopasarpanam 
na vina guru-sambandham vakyasya sravanam bhavet 

[7] And without desire for liberation no one resorts to 
the feet of a teacher (guru); and without association 
with a guru there can be no hearing (sravana) of the 
holy texts. 



tat ha pada-padarthau ca na sto vakyam rte kvacit 
anvaya-vyatirekau ca tax rte stam kim-asrayau 

[8] And without the hearing of the holy texts one does 
not come into possession of the necessary words and 
their meanings; and unless one is in possession of these, 
ow can one find a proper basis for the practice of 
reasoning according to the method of agreement and 
difference 7 1 



78 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 2:11 

1 Reasoning according to the method of agreement and difference 
(anvaya and vyatireka) consists in noting from one’s experience what 
things are constantly found in association and what things are variable. 
Spiritually applied, it leads to a critical examination of one’s own 
psychological experiences to try and find the permanent factor in them; 
and hence to the first approximation towards discrimination of the 
permanent from the impermanent. 



anvaya-vyatirekabhydm vina vakyartha-bodhanam 
na syat tena vinajhana-prahanam nopapadyate 

[9] Without reasoning by agreement and difference 
there is no understanding of the meaning of the holy 
texts, and without this nescience cannot be destroyed. 1 
1 Cf. Upadesa SahasrI XVIII. 96. 



vinajhana-prahanena purusarthah su-durlabhah 
tasmad yathokta-siddhy-artham paro grant ho 

'vat ary ate 

[10] Without destruction of nescience the final aim of 
human life is hard to attain; hence we proceed to a new 
section of the book devoted to the elucidation of the 
term “thou” on the basis of reasoning by agreement and 
difference. 



varcaskam tv anna-karyatvad vatha natmeti gamy ate 
tad-bhagah sendriyo dehas tad-vat kim iti neksyate 

[11] We infer that excreta are not the Self since they 
are derived from food. Why do you not see t Rt e 
body and senses are not the Self either, since t ey oo 
are composed of food? 



79 




2:12 



THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 



ady-antayor anatmatve prasiddhe madhye 'pi kali 
pratibandhah 

Since food is evidently not-self before and after con- 
sumption, what could alter this in the interval ? 

prag anatmaiva jagdham sad atmatam ety avidyaya 
srag-alepana-vad deham tasmat pasyed vivikta-dhih 

[12] Food is first manifestly not-self; being eaten, it 
seems to become assimilated to the Self, but only 
through delusion (avidya). Therefore the man of discri- 
minating intellect should likewise regard his body as 
something different from himself, as if it were ointment 
or a garland. 



athaivam api mad-vacanam nadriyase svayam 
evaitasmac charirad asuci-raser niraso bhavisyasi 

You do not listen to my words. Well, but the time will 
come when this heap of impurities called the body will 
drive you desperate. 

manyase tavad asmiti yavad asman na niyase 
svabhih krodi-krte dehe naivam tvam abhimamsyase 

[13] You think “I am (this body)” as long as you are 
not severed from it. When the dogs are quarrelling over 
this corpse you will no longer be identified with it. 



sir a akramya padena bhartsayaty aparan sunah 
drstva sadharanam deham kasmat sakto 'si tatra bhoh 

[14] See! One of the dogs has secured it! With his 
paw on the head he is snarling defiance at the others, 
eeing what a contemptible object the body is, why do 

you remain attached to it? 



80 




2:16 



THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

sruti-pariprapi t o yam artho 'natma buddhy-ddi- 
dehanta itidam aha 

To show that the whole complex from intellect to 
physical body is declared to be not-self by the Veda, he 
proceeds : 

busa-vrihi-palalamiair bijam ekam tridha yatha 
buddhi-mamsa-purisamsair annam tad-vad avasthitam 

[15] Just as the one seed differentiates threefold into 
chaff, grain and straw, so eaten food becomes intellect, 
flesh and excreta. 1 

1 The reference is to Chandogya Upanishad VI.v.l. This is Vedic 
support for the contention (made at verse 1 1 above) that the body is 
made of food, and hence is not the Self. The same applies to mind, 
which was regarded as a product of food. 



yathoktartha-pratipattau satyam na raga-dvefdbhyam 
vikriyate vipascid ity asyarthasya pratipattaye 
dr?(antah 

An example is now cited to show how, once the matter 
we are propounding is really grasped, the sage is no 
longer assailed by desire and aversion. 

varcaske samparityakte dofatas cdvadharite 
yadi do? am vadet tasmai kim tatroccaritur bhavet 

[16] If a man has voided excrement and regards it as 
impure, what will he care if others point out its im- 
purity ? 



tad-vat suk?me tathd sthule dehe tyakte vivekatab 
yadi do?am vadet tabhyam kim tatra vidu?o bhavet 




2:17 THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

[17] Similarly, if a man has rejected his gross and 
subtle bodies through discrimination, what will such an 
enlightened man (vidvan) care if others criticize these? 



elavad eva hy aham brahmasmiti vakyarthapratipattau 
kdranam yad uta buddhy-adau dehante hy aham 
mameti nissandhi-bandhano grahah. tad-vyatireke hi 
na kutascid vibhajyata ekala eva pratyag-atmany 
avatisthata ity aha * 

So much, then, for the continuous and obstinate bond- 
age which causes the notions of “I” and “mine” with 
regard to the complex of the human personality from 
the intellect to the body, and which is the main cause of 
failure to understand the true import of the words “I 
am Brahman”. When a man once escapes from this he 
does not feel separate from anything, but rests uniform 
and all-pervading in the inner Self. To illustrate this we 
say: 

ripau bandhau sva-dehe ca samaikatmyam 

prapasyatah 

vivekinah kutah kopah sva-dehavayavesv iva 

[18] How can the man of discrimination, who sees the 
same one Self in the friend, in the enemy and in his own 
body, feel anger, any more than he could do so against 
the limbs of his own body ? 



itas canatma dehadih 

And for the following reason also the body, etc., is not- 
self. 



82 




the realization of the absolute 2:20 

ghafadi-vac ca drsyatvat fair eva karanair drseh 
svapne cananvayaj jfieyo deho ’ ndtmeti suribhih 

^ Furtker > the wise know that the body is not the 
Self for, like a pot, it is an object to those very senses 
wh,ch perceive external objects, while in dream the 
continuity (of the body consciousness) is broken * 

anv^^and'^^rreka^^n^^^mai^^erMna^t^the 111 ant ^ l ^ erence > 

and hence real; but by comparison we know^ha/the hnH^i ' S cons , t ? nt 
it sometimes vanishes and we get a new one in dreams " ^ f ° r 



dehadi-kdrya-karana-samghata-vyatirekavyatireka- 

darsinah pratyak?ata eva viruddham karyam 
upalabhyate 

Whoso notes that the Self is sometimes identified with 
and sometimes distinguished from the individual per- 
sonality, with all its effects and instruments from the 
body up, perceives directly that the latter is an effect 
credited with contradictory properties (i.e. conscious- 
ness and inertness) in the two cases. 

caturbhir uhyate yat tat sarva-saktya sarirakam 
tulayate tad evaham-dhiyaghratam acetasam 

[20] That same body, which is only just lifted by four 
pall-bearers with all their efforts, becomes light as a 
flock of cotton when adopted by the ego of a fool. 



prasiddhat vat prakaranarthopasamharayaha 

Because the truth of this matter is widely recognized, 
we proceed (at once and without further argument) to 
summarize the topic under discussion: 

83 




2:21 THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

sthulam yuktya nirasyaivam nabhaso nilatam iva 
deham suk?mam nirakuryad ato yuktibhir atmanafi 

[21] Having discovered through reasoning that the 
physical body no more belongs to the Self than blueness 
to the sky, one should proceed to realize that the Self 
has no connection with the subtle body either, and this 
also through reasoning. 

katham deham suksmam nirakuryad id. ucyate 

How should one refute (the sense of identity with) the 
subtle body? We reply: 

aham-mamatva yatneccha natma-dharmah krsatva-vat 
karmatvenopalabhyatvad apayitvac ca vastra-vat 

[22] The notions of “I” and “mine”, effort and desire, 
etc., (which are factors making up the subtle body) are 
no more properties of the Self than leanness is, for they 
are perceived as objects and are as transitory as a 
garment. 



vaidharmye dr? font ah 
An example to illustrate this distinction : 

nofnimanam dahaty agnih svarupatvad yatha jvalan 
tathaivatmatmano vidyad aham naivavise?atah 

[23] Blazing fire does not burn up its own heat, since 

the latter is of its own nature (and not a different 

object). And, in the same way, if the ego were the Self 

or belonged to the Self, the Self could not know the ego 

as an object, since the two would not be distinct. 1 

But the Self does know the ego as an object, so the two must be 
distinct. Cp. UpadeSa Sahasri XVI. 13 ff. 



84 




2:24 



THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

ekasyatmanah karma-kartf-bhavah sarvathd 
nopapadyata iti srutva mimamsakah pratyavatiffhate 
aham-pratyaya-grahyatvad grahya-grahaka atmeti 
tan-nivrtty-artham aha 

On hearing our statement that the one Self cannot in 
any way function as subject and object simultaneously, 
the Mimamsaka (of Kumarila’s school) interposes with 
an objection. The self, he says, is both subject and 
object because it is the object of the ego-notion. 1 To 
refute this, we say: 

1 Taking the reading grahya-grahaka, not found in Hiriyanna, from 
the footnotes of the Acyuta Grantha Mala Edition. 

yat-karmako hi yo bhavo nasau tat-kartrko yatah 
ghafa-pratyaya-vat tasman naham syad drafts 

karmakah 

[24] That which is functioning as the object of a 
knowing subject, as for example, the idea of a pot 
(ghaja-pratyaya), 1 cannot have that knower as its own 
object. Hence the ego (which is witnessed as an object 
by the Self) cannot have the Self for its object. 2 

1 The idea of a pot is witnessed as an object by the Self and hence 
cannot at the same time be a knowing subject. t 

* This argument is directed against the Mimarpsaka of Kumarila a 
school, who regards the self as “object of the ego-notion”. 



atraha pratyak$enatmanah karma- 
kartjrt vabhyupagame tat-padopajivinanumanena 
pra tyakpo tsaranam ayuktam iti codyam tan- 
nirakaranaya pratyakfopanyasah 



85 




2 *25 THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

Here the opponent says: “The self is directly perceived 
as both subject and object in perception, and it is idle 
to use inference to refute perception when inference 
itself rests on perception.” To refute this objection, the 
following statement about perception is made: 1 

1 All the Hindu schools held that, since inference depends upon 
perception and cannot proceed without it, it is inferior to perception 
and must always be disregarded where it contradicts it. It can act 
merely as a supplement to perception. 

yatra yo drsyate dra$tra tasyaivasau guno na tu 

drastr-stham drsvatam yasmati naiveyad dratfr- 

bodha-vat 

[25] When anything (A) is perceived in another thing 
(B) by a perceiving subject, then A is a quality of B and 
not of the perceiving subject; for if it belonged to the 
subject it could not become an object of knowledge. 
Example— the perceiver’s knowledge, (which is known 
by him as an object and therefore cannot belong to him). 1 

1 On this verse, Professor Hacker writes, Texte, p. 48 f. : 

"At . . . verse 25 it is not only that the opponent’s objection is 
answered: the discussion, as so often with Sureivara, also shifts round 
into a somewhat new direction: whereas it had previously been shown 
that the ego is not of the nature of the Self, that is, not identical with it, 
and that it cannot know the Self, what is now shown is that it is not an 
attribute of the Absolute ('Self), that it does not belong to it. In each case 
here the concept “ego” is to be taken as “ego-notion”. Notions, in- 
deed, are qualities of the Self for the Mimarpsaka and Naiyayika, and 
so belong to it ; whereas for the Vedanta and Sankhya they are modifica- 
tions of form assumed by the inner-sense (antafikarapa)”. 

The perceiver of the empirical ego is the Witness (sakjin), 
i.e. the Seer himself. J. Suresvara admits (with the Mimarpsaka) that an 
ego is given objectively in perception, but denies that it can be the real 
Self, since (unlike the Mimarpsaka) he identifies the Self with knowledge, 
on the basis of Vedic revelation backed by reason. The Mimarpsakas 
thought of the Self as something inert that was revealed as an object by 
knowledge in every cognition, knowledge being something sui generis 
and different from the Self — something that arose in the Self as a result 
ot a collocation of certain causal factors — object, sense-organ, mind, 
sei etc. For Suresvara (on grounds of revelation and reason based on 



86 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 2:26 

revelation and personal experience) the real Self is knowledge and 
consequently the ego that it illumines in self-perception (or introspec- 
tion as we should call it today) ,s not the real Self but is a modifSn 
of the mind, i.e. a part of the not-self. 

^ imarpsaka s theory of perception and self-consciousnesa 
Me the chapter on Purva-Mimarpsa” in S. Radhakrishnan’s “Indian 
Philosophy (Vol. II: esp. pp. 380-386 and 395-417). 



pratyaksenaiva bha vad-abh imatasya 
pratyaksasyabhasikrtatvat su-stham 
evanumanam. atas tad eva prakriyate tatra 
ca vikalpa-dusanabhidhanam 



Perception itself reveals the falsity of your view that 
the Self is subject to peception, so that our inference 
(of verse 24) stands. We therefore now apply the 
argument further to refute alternative forms of the 
opposed position. 



natmana na tad-amsena gunah sva-stho ’ vagamyate 
abhinnatvat samatvdc ca niramsatvdd akarmatah 

[26] (Now, the ego is known as an object by the Self: 
but if it were a quality of the Self this would be impos- 
sible. For) a quality inhering in the Self cannot be 
known either by the Self or a part of the Self. For such 
a quality would not be different from the Self, and the 
Self, moreover, is homogeneous, partless and not an 
object. 1 



1 If the perceptible ego were a quality of the Self ‘' cou’d not be 
known by the Self as an object unless the! Self could 1 enow i tself as an 
object, which has been seen to be impossible (verses -3-_4 )■ 

Suresvara adds a further reason why the Self cannot k'^w^selforany 
quality of itself as an object— namely, because it is undifferentiated. 



87 




2:27 



THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 



aii Hip difficulties attaching to the view that the Self as a whole can 
know hselfasan object attach equally to the view that part of the Self 
can know the Self as an object— with the added difficulty that the Self 
k nartless 1 Hence we conclude that, since the Self cannot know itself 
as an object, the ego that is revealed objectively in introspection must 
be not-self. J 



na y'ugapan ndpi kramenobhayatha caikasya 
dharmino grahya-grahakatvam upapadyata iti 
pratipadanavaha 

To explain how one substance cannot function as 
subject and object either simultaneously or successively 
or both, we say : 

drastrtvenopayuktatvat tadaiva syan na drsyata 
kalantare ced drsyatvam na hy adratfrkam i$yate 

[27] When the seer is functioning as such it cannot at 
the same time function as a seen object. If you ask if 
it can function as a seen object at another time the 
answer is “No”, for a seen object without a seer is not 
admissible. 1 

1 The argument is : The Self is the sole knower. Should it at any time 
function as an object, then it could not be known, as there would be 
no knower to know it. Texte, p. 48. 



santu kamam anatma-dharma mamatvadayo 
yathokta-nyaya-balad anatmatayaiva ca te$u 
vyavaharad aham-rupasya tu pratyag-atma- 
sarpban dh it ay a i va prasiddher aharp brahmasmiti 
irutes canatma-dharmatvam ayuktam iti cet tan na 



88 




thb realization of the absolute 2:28 

Let us suppose that the opponent admits that “the sense 
of possession and other modifications 1 of the ego- 
notion are not-self for the reasons given, and also 
because they are perceived as such in ordinary empirical 
experience. Yet he might contend that the “I” itself, 
since it is experienced in direct relation to the inner 
Self, and since the Veda expressly declares it to be the 
Absolute in the phrase “I am Brahman”, should not be 
regarded as an element pertaining to the not-self. To 
this we reply, “No.” 

1 J specifies “wish” and “effort”. 

aham-dharmas tv abhinnas ced aham brahmeti 

vakyatah 

gauro ’ ham ity anaikanto vakyam tad-vyapanetr tot 

[28] If it be said that the ego-nature must be non- 
different from the highest Self on account of the text “I 
am Brahman”, 1 which must be understood on the 
analogy of “I am fair” (which predicates “fair” of the 
self), we reply that this analogy does not invariably 
hold. In fact, the text in question denies that the ego 
pertains to the Absolute. 

1 Bfhadaranyaka Upanishad, I.iv.10. 



kathatn vakyam tad-vyapanetr tad iti. ucyate 

How does the text “I am Brahman” deny that the ego 
pertains to the Absolute? We reply: 

yo 'yam sthanuh puman e?a pum-dhiya sthariu-dhir iva 
brahmdsmlti dhiya 'se$d hy aham-buddhir nivartyate 



89 




2:29 the realization of the absolute 

[29] As, in the judgement “this post is a man’’, the 
notion “man” cancels the notion “post”, so all notion 
of ego is cancelled by the conviction “I am the Absolute 
(Brahman)”. 1 

1 This verse has been quoted and discussed by Vidyaranya Svamin 
in his PaficadaSi VUI.42 f. and by Appaya Dik$ita at Siddhanta LeSa 
Sarigraha 1.34. The logical structure of the sentences “thou art that” 
and (especially) “1 am Brahman” was a theme of discussion among the 
Advaitins. Were they affirmative identity propositions like “This is that 
Devadatta”, or were they affirmative propositions involving concealed 
negations, like “this post is a man”, which really means “this post is 
not a post but a man” ? Here SurcSvara decides that they are proposi- 
tions involving negations. If ego and Brahman were identical, Brahman 
would suffer. But elsewhere in this work (111.2 sqq.) he interprets the 
mahavakyas as propositions affirming identity, a course which has the 
support of “Vakya Vptti” (verse 37). Perhaps the only real difference 
between the two courses is that in interpreting these sentences as 
identity propositions “lak$ana” (see iloka 11.54 below) is applied to 
the word in the text meaning “soul", whereas in the interpretation as 
negation the word is taken in its ordinary empirical sense. 



aham-pariccheda-vyavrttau na kimeid avyavrttam 
dvaita-jatam avasisyate dvitiya-sambandhasya tan- 
mulatmt. ata aha 

When the ego-limitation is removed, nothing in the 
whole range of duality is left standing, since that is the 
sole root of our relation with duality. So we proceed : 

nivrttayam aham-buddhau mama-dhih praviliyate 
aham-bija hi sa sidhyet tamo ’ bhave kutah phani 

[30] When the ego-sense ceases, the sense of posses- 
sion, too, departs; for the ego-sense is its only cause. 
Can there be (the appearance of) a false snake except 
when it is dark? 



90 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 2 '32 

VtVakf “ a-^lam^a.jnapanayc dntan.a-vyakhya ' 

Further explanation of the eynmnio * u • 

is meant by it (in the context) : ? ° brm8 ° Ut what 

tamo-bhibhuta-citto hi rajpdm pasyati ro ? anam 
bhrantya bhrantya vind tasman noragarn sraji^ate 

[31] It is only he whose mind is afflicted by darkness 
who sees a snake in a rope through error. Therefore no 
one sees a snake in a garland except through error. 



ananvayac ca natma-dharmo 'hamkarah 

The ego-sense is not a property of the Self, as it is not 
invariably associated with it: 

atmanas ced aharn-dharmo yaydn m uk t i-sufuptayoh 
yato nanveti tenayam anyadiyo bhaved aham 

[32] If the ego-sense were really a property of the Self 
it would continue after liberation and in deep sleep. 
Since it does not do so, we conclude that it is a property 
of something else. 



a t ma-dharmat vabhyupagame ’ pariharya-dosa- 
prasaktis ca 

Moreover, insurmountable difficulties arise on the view 
that it is a property of the Self: 

yady atma-dharmo 'hamkaro nityatvam tasya bodha- 

vat 

nit vat ve moksa-sastrandm vaiyarthvam prapnuyad 

dhruvam 



91 




2:33 THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

[33] Again, if the ego-sense were really a property of 
the Self it would be eternal, like Consciousness. But if 
it were eternal, the traditional treatises (Sastra) treating 
of liberation would have been composed in vain (which 
is absurd). 



syat pariharah svdbhavika-dharmatvabhyupagame 
’ py amradi-phala-vad iti cet tan na / 

If you say that even on the assumption that the ego- 
sense is a natural property of the Self the difficulties can 
be overcome by pointing to the example of a mango, 
that is wrong: 

dmradeh parinamitvad guna-hanir gunantaraih 
avikari tu tad brahma “ na hi dra$tur" iti sruteh 

[34] Physical objects like a mango-fruit are subject to 
modification and can acquire properties and lose them. 
But the Absolute is changeless. The Veda says, 1 “there 
is no break in the sight of the Seer”. 

1 Bfhadaraqyaka Upanishad IV.iii.23. The mango-fruit acquires 
successively the colours green and yellow and loses them. Yet these 
colours are at least as real as the mango, which therefore changes with 
them. Brahman does not have properties in this sense. 



ahamkarasya cagamapayitvat tad-dharminas 
canityatvam prapnoti 

Moreover, since the ego-sense comes and goes, the 
substance in which it inhered (as a real quality) would 
be changeable: 



92 




the realization of the absolute 2:36 

agamapayi-nitfhatvad anityatvam iydd drsih 
upayann apayan dharmo vikaroti hi dharminam 

[35] Change is the very nature of the ego-sense, since 
it comes and goes. But essential properties that change 
imply necessary change in the substance to which they 
belong. 



as tv anityatvam kam upalabhemahi 
pramanopapannatvad iti cet tan na 

If you say: “The Self must in fact be changeable, as it 
is proved to be such by authentic means of knowledge 
and we can find no fault here” — that is wrong. 

sada ’ vilupta-sakfitvam svatas-siddham na paryate 
apahnotum ghatasyeva kusagriya-dhiyatmanah 

[36] Not even a man of knife-sharp intellect can 
abolish the fact that the self-evident Self is the ever 
unbroken Witness. It is not like a pot (which comes and 
goes). 



etasmac ca hetor ahamkarasyanatma-dharmatvam 

avasiyatam 

And here is another reason for concluding that the ego- 
sense is a property of the not-self : 

pramanaiscavagamyatvad ghatadi-vad aham-dfseb 
yato rdddhih pramatidnam sa katham taih prasidhyati 



93 




2:37 THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

[37] Again, the ego-sense is subject to being known 
(as an object) through the authoritative means of cogni- 
tion, like a pot. But that Self which enables the means 
of knowledge to function at all (by illumining them) — 
how can it be known by them and how can it require 
them for a proof? 



dharma-dharminos cetaretara-viruddhatmakatvad 
asangatih 

Moreover, a substance and attribute of contradictory 
nature are impossible to combine : 

dharminasca viruddhatvan na drsya-guna-sangatih 
marulandolita-jvalam saityam nagnim sisrpsati 

[38] A totally contradictory property never comes to 
inhere in a substance. Coolness does not insinuate itself 
into a blazing fixe fanned by the wind. 



tasmad visrabdham upagamyatam 

Therefore it is safe to conclude : 

drastrtvam drsyata caiva naikasminn ekada kvacit 
drsya-drsyo na ca drasta drastur darsi dr sir na ca 

[39] One thing cannot at the same time be both seer 
and seen; the seer cannot be seen by the object that is 
itself the seen; nor can sight see the seer. 



sarva-samvyavahara-lopasca prapnoti. yasmat 



94 




THE realization of the absolute 2:41 

And (on the opponent's assumptions) an end to all 
empirical experience would follow, because: 

draftapiyadi driyaya atmeyat karmatam dhiyah 
yaugapadyam adrsyatvan, vaiyarthyan, capmySc 

chrutih 

[ 40 ] If the Self, which is the seer, could become the 
object of the intellect, which is already an object for 
the Self, neither could really be an object (because 
there would then be no subject). And the statement in 
the Veda ‘ there is no break in the sight of the Seer” 1 
would be rendered vain. 

1 Bfhadaraijyaka Upanishad IV.iii.23. 



kutah. yasmat 
Why? Because: 

nalupta-drster drsyatvam drsyatve drastrta kutah 
syac ced dfg ekam nirdrsyam jagad va syad 

asaksikam 

[41] The one of uninterrupted vision cannot ever be 
an object; if it were an object, how could it be the Seer? 
If it were (to become an object) then the Seer would be 
the one seen or else the world would be devoid of a 
Witness. 



ukta-yuktim drtfhikartum agamodaharanopanyasah 

Quotation from the Veda to support the afore-men- 
tioned reasoning: 



95 




2:42 THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

artam artyad dfseh sarvam neti netiti cdsakjt 
vadanti nirgunam brahma katham irutir upekfyate 

[42] How can one overlook the Veda which more than 
once denies the existence of what is other than the Seer 
with phrases like “Neti, neti” (“not thus, not thus”), 
and declares that the Absolute (Brahman) is void of 
qualities (nirguna). 



“ mahabhutany ahamkara ” ity etat ksetram ucyate 
na drser dvaita-yogo 'sti visvesvara-matad api 

[43] “The ego-sense and the great elements” — these 
belong to the “field”. 1 The Seer is not associated with 
duality. Such was the opinion of the Lord of the 
Universe. 2 r 

1 The “field” means the entire realm of duality. The “realm of 
duality” in Advaita is the realm of all that is different from undifferenti- 
ated Spirit. It has only apparent existence. 

1 Bhagavad Gita XIII 5 and 6. 



adhuna prakrtdrthopasamharah 

New the concluding summary of the subject under 
discussion : 

evam etadd hirug jheyam mithyd-siddham anatmakam 
moha-mulam sudurbodham dvaitam yuktibhir atmanah 

[44] Thus we have shown (by reason, as well as by 
Vedic and traditional authority) that this duality is 
different from the Self — this duality which is false, 
which has no definable essence, whose cause is ignor- 
ance and whose nature is hard to understand by mere 
reasoning. 



96 




the realization of the absolute 2-46 
ku,° mithya-siddhatvam dvadasyeU cel 

If you ask, -How is duality shown to be false?” w= 



naprthah natmana siddhir dtmano 'nyasya vastunah 
atma-vat kalpitas tasmdd ahamkaradir dtmani 

[45] It is impossible to establish the existence of anv 
real entity other than the Self, whether we See suS 
entity to be essentially identical with the Self o“ ess^S 
a y different. Therefore the ego-sense and the rest of 
duality are imagined in the Self as if they were the Self. 



tasmad ajhana-vijrmbhitam etat 

Therefore all this (world-appearance) comes forth from 
ignorance (ajfiana): 

drsydh sabdadayah kjptd drastr ca brahma nirgunam 
aharn tad ubhayam bibhrad bhrantim atmani yacchati 

[46] The objects, which are the elements beginning 
with sound, are imaginary. The subject is the quality- 
less Absolute. The ego, embracing both (subject and 
object), affects the Self and introduces an illusion. 1 

1 Cp. 11.53 below. 



tat a ever am abhinnasvatmano bheda-buddhih 

That is the very source for this notion of distinctions 
we have in the distinctionless Absolute (Self): 

drg eka sarva-bhiitesu bhati drsyair aneka-vat 
jala-bhajana-bhedena mayukha-srag-vibheda-vat 

97 



H 




2:47 THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

[47] The Seer in all creatures is one. It is only through 
the objects (in which He is reflected) that He appears to 
be many, as the one sun with his garland of rays be- 
comes apparently multiple when reflected in the multiple 
vessels of water. 1 

1 J writes: “It is not only the Self’s relationship with the not-self that 
is produced by the ego. The Self's apparent plurality as associated with 
different bodies is produced by it also." It is, however, with the intellect 
rather than with the physical body that Suresvara is primarily con- 
cerned here — see the next two verses. 



yathoktarthasya pratipattaye drstantah 

An example to bring home the doctrine as propounded: 

mitrodasina-satrut ram yathaikasyanya-kalpanat 
abhinnasya cites tad-vad bhedo ' n tahkaranasrayah 

[48] Just as one and the same man is at the same time 
friend, enemy and neutral — but only through the 
imagination of other people — so all distinctions in the 
one undifferentiated pure consciousness are due to the 
intellect of man. 



apaharo yatha bhanoh sarvato jala-patrakaih 
tat-kriyakrti-desaptis tatha buddhibhir atmanah 

[49] Just as the sun is kidnapped by the waterpots and 
made to share their action, shape and position, so is the 
Self appropriated by the multiple intellects of men. 



na ca viruddha-dharmanam ekatranupapattih. kirn 
karanam 



98 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 2:51 

Nor is it true that the co-presence of contradictory 
attributes is (always) impossible. Why? Because: 

kalpitanam avastutvat syad ekatrapi sambhavah 
kamaniya ’sucih svadvity ekasyam iva yofiti 

[50] A plurality of contradictory attributes may co- 
exist if they are imaginary. Thus the body of one and 
the same woman is respectively “desirable”, “impure” 
and “a tasty morsel”, to a gallant, a monk and a dog. 1 

1 The image derives from Buddhist writers, cp. Sloka Varrtika, 
Sutra 5, Sunya Vada Section, verse 59. Compare a (characteristically) 
somewhat milder version of it at Paftcadasi IV.23. The Self wears all 
the characteristics of everyone, but none affects it. All are imputed 
merely. It is qua corpse that the body is a “tasty morsel” to a dog, cp. 
verses 11.13 and 14 above. On the relevant Buddhist texts, see L. de la 
Vallee Poussin, Le Bouddhisme d'apres les sources brahmaniques, 
p. 21 f. 



na cayam kriyd-karaka-phalatmaka abhasa isad api 
paramartha-vastu spfsati tasya moha- 
matropadanat vat 

Nor does this whole illusory display (abhasa), consisting 
in action, its factors and results, touch the supreme 
reality in any way, since it is founded in mere delusion. 



abhutabhinivesena svatmanam vahcayaty ayam 
asaty api dvitive ’ rthe soma-sarma-pita yatha 



[51] Although no second thing exists apart from his 
own Self, man deceives himself with desires for what 
does not exist. He is like the father of Somasarma in 
the story. 1 

1 There was once a beggar who received more grains than heexpKted 
in his begging-bowl. Betaking himselt to the shade . 

down and began to daydream about how he ^uld se uire 

cows, propagate oxen with the cows, and sell the oxen and acqutre 



99 




2:52 THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

wealth. The daydream continued to develop until he had become a 
wealthy householder, much devoted to his son SomaSarma. Then 
Somasarma came running out of the house crying, with his mother in 
pursuit, and the beggar struck at his w ife in anger, thereby shattering 
the bowl of grain (w hich was unfortunately still in his hand) so that the 
contents were scattered to the wind. 

The story comes in the Paftcatantra, the charming collection of 
humorous moral tales, mainly about animals, which for centuries has 
been used as a primary reader by learners of Sanskrit. Perhaps it was so 
used by Sarpkara and Suresvara, for both of them appear to have been 
familiar with it. Both refer to the "story of the elephant” which occurs 
in it — the story of how different blind men gave different accounts of 
an elephant which they felt with their hands. Cp. verse 11.93 below, and 
Sarpkara, Chandogya Upanishad Commentary V.xviii.l. The story 
also occurs in Jalalu'ddin Rumi's Mathnawi III. 1259 ff. 



vasiu-vathatm) 'anavabodha-patala vanaddhak$ah san 

He whose eyes are covered by the bandage of not-being- 
awake-to-the-true-nature-of-reality: 

subhruh sunasa sumukhi sunetra edru-hasini 
kalpana-matra-sammohad ramety alingate ’ sucim 

[52] He (such a one) embraces an impure body think- 
ing, through sheer imagination born of infatuation, 
“Her eyebrows are lovely, her nose charming, her face 
and eyes are beautiful. How sweetly she smiles! Oh, 
she is delightful!” 1 

1 Infatuation for woman is taken as a symbol of that infatuation 
which alone gives reality to the world. 



sarvasyanartha-jatasya jihdsitasya mulam ahamkara 
eva tasyatmanatmoparagat. na tu paramarthata 
atmano ’vidyaya lat-karyena va sambandho 'bhud 
osti bhavisyati va tasyaparilupta-dr?ti-svabhavyat 



100 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 2 '53 

Verily it is the ego-sense (ahamkara) alone which is the 
root of all the evil which men desire to avoid, since it is 
coloured both by the Self and the not-self. Nevertheless, 
there neither was, is, nor will be any real contact between 
the Self and ignorance and its effects, since the Self is by 
nature the unbroken Witness. 

drsyanuraktam t ad-dr a^tr drsyam dra?tr-anuranjitam 

aham-vrttyobhayam raktam tan-nase ’ dvaitatatmanah 

[53] The perceiver of an object is coloured by that 
object; and the object is coloured by the perceiver. 
Both are intermingled through the ego-sense. When 
that is destroyed the Self remains non-dual. 1 

1 J follows Suresvara in using the term antahkarana, literally inner 
organ and so what we would call mind, to stand for the ego-sense. He 
writes : “The antahkarana, in intimate contact with the objects such as 
sound and the other elements, becomes a subject in relation to them 
owing to the presence in itself of a reflection (abhasa) of the pure light 
of consciousness. And yet, though dyed in the light of consciousness 
or Self, it remains in some sense an object illumined by the latter’s 
light. In this way, both the empirical perceiver and perceived exist by 
virtue of the ego-sense. When we have the experience “I know this”, 
the ego-sense is dyed with the nature of the object and the pure subject, 
both. Therefore it is the ego-sense alone which causes the connection 
between the pure subject and the object, these two being otherwise 
totally distinct in nature. Hence it is reasonable to suppose that when 
the ego-sense is destroyed the Self will shine in pure non-duality”. 



iha kecic codayartti yo ' yam anvaya-vyatirekabhyam 
anatmatayotsarito ’ hamkaro vakyartha-pratipattaye 
so ’ yam viparitarthah samvrtto yasmad aham 
brahmasmiti brahmaham-padarthayoh 
samanadhikaranya-sravanad anatmarthena 
samanadhikaranyam prapnoti. vaktavya ca pratyag- 
atmani tasva vrttir iti socyate prasiddha-lakfana- 
guna-vrttibhih 



101 




2:54 THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

Here some object as follows: “The ego has been dis- 
missed as not-self through reasoning by the method of 
agreement and difference pursued with a view to 
understanding the meaning of the supreme texts. But 
here (i.e. in the authoritative texts) the word “I” is used 
in a contradictory sense. For we have the text “I am 
the Absolute (Brahman)" in which “I” and “the 
Absolute (Brahman)" are set in apposition. And from 
this would result the setting in apposition of something 
which means not-self (with the Self). You must there- 
fore explain in what sense (the word “I”) is applied to 
the inmost Self (in the text “I am the Absolute”)”. 
(In reply) we proceed to explain the (different) senses 
(of the word “I”) viz. the familiar meaning (prasiddha), 
the indirect meaning (laksana) and the figurative mean- 
ing (guna ). 1 

1 Where the indirect usage (laksana vrtti) and the figurative usage 
(guna vrtti) are distinguished, indirect usage is based on the constant 
concomitance or proximity of what the word means in its primary 
sense with what it is used to indicate, whereas figurative usage is based 
on a common quality belonging to both the primary and figurative 
meanings. Cp. Samk$epa $ariraka, 1.172. 

On this classification, when we say “A village on the Ganges” to 
mean “A village on the bank of the Ganges” we have indirect usage, 
because there is no common quality (but only proximity) between the 
Ganges and its bank. But when we say “Devadatta is a lion” we have 
figurative usage, because the metaphor is based on common qualities 
belonging to Devadatta and a lion. 

In the verses to follow, verse 11.54 illustrates how the term ”1” may 
be applied to the Absolute or supreme Self by indirect usage, verse 11.55 
(cp. III. 100, 102) illustrates how it can be applied by figurative usage, 
and verse 11.56 shows how it can be applied to the supreme Self in its 
primary or usual meaning (of "ego”)— though in the last case it can be 
applied to the supreme Self only in so far as the latter is itself “qualified, 
limited and individualized by the mind or ego-sense”. In itself, the 
supreme Self cannot be designated by any word in its direct meaning, 
cp. verses III. 102, 103. It will be remembered that Suresvara has al- 
ready (verse 11.29 above) explained the text “I am the Absolute” with 
the word taken in its primary sense of “ego”. But there the text, 
a ” 1 ™ a t ,ve in form, was explained in a special way as involving a con- 
cealed negation. In the present verses he is exercizing his ingenuity to 

102 




2:55 



THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 



show that in whatever sense you choose to take the word “I” in that 
text whether pr'mary mdtrect or figurative, the text is in any case 
intelligible as teaching strict non-duality. On the meaning of the preSnt 
verse and its immediate successors, see, especially Texte pp 54 ff 



najnasisam iti praha su$uptad utlhito ’ pi hi 
ayo-dahadi-vat tena laksanam paramatmanah 



[54] “I knew nothing”, said the one who rose from 
sleep. In this we have (the word ‘I’ used as) an indirect 
indication (laksana) of the supreme Self, as (when one 
speaks of) the burning iron, etc. 1 

1 Professor Hacker writes: “When one wakes from dreamless sleep, 
one is conscious ‘I was aware of nothing (as I slept)’. The T that was 
aware of nothing in deep sleep cannot be the ego-sense, for in deep 
sleep the ego-sense does not exist. It must be the Atman (supreme Self), 
which is here called T. We have thus an inexact, derivative, approxi- 
mative designation (laksana) of the Self. A similar inexact or trans- 
posed designation occurs when one says ’the iron burns’. If the word 
‘burn’ were used in its primary sense, the sentence would have to run, 
‘the fire burns’. But the word can also be used to stand for a thing 
which stands in some relation or other to its proper object. In the same 
way, the word T can be related to the inmost Self (pratyagatman), 
because the ego ever stands in relation with the Self". (Texte, p.54 f. 
The distinction between laksana and laksana (for laksana-vrtti) must 
be noted. Suresvara speaks here of laksana or indirect designation. 
But the context (especially the use of the word vrtti in the next verse) 
shows that he is comparing different kinds of meaning or word- 
usage (vrtti). Hence he is in this verse describing indirect word-usage 
(laksana) as against the figurative usage (guna-vrtti) and direct usage 
(mukhya-vrtti) to follow'. 



pratyaktvad ati-suksmatvad atma-drsty-anusilanat 
ato vrttir vihaydnyd hy ahant- vrttyopalak syate 

[55] On account of the interiority of the ego-sense to 
everything else but the pure Self, on account of its 
subtlety, and because it behaves as if it were the per- 
ceiving Self— for these reasons all other notions^ (vrtti) 
are discarded and the ego-notion (i.e. the word I ) is 
chosen to represent figuratively the pure Self. 

103 




2 '56 the realization of the absolute 

1 This explains how the text “I am the Absolute (Brahman)” can 
be interpreted as a case of the figurative (gupa-vj-tti) usage of the term 
“I” w here the basis for the figurative usage is the presence of common 
qualities in the ego and in the Absolute. The hearer recognizes that 
figurative usage is in play because the identification of the limited ego 
(the direct meaning of the word “I”) with the infinite Absolute is 
impossible. 



atmana cavina-bhavam at ha va vilayam vrajet 
na tu pakpantaram yayad atas caham-dhiyocyate 

[56] And again, the ego-notion cannot exist without 
the Self or else it dissolves completely. It has no other 
possibility. For this reason, also, the Self may be 
referred to by the I-notion. 



kidjk punar vastu lakyyam 

What then is the nature of the principle which is 
indirectly indicated by the word “I” ? 

namadibhyah paro bhuma nipkalo ’ karako 'kriyah 
sa evatmavatam atma svatas siddhah sa eva nah 

[57] The Infinite (bhuman), 1 the partless, that which is 
actionless and not the factor of any action, the one that 
is beyond names and other categories — that self- 
revealed Self is the Self known by the Self-realized sages. 
That is the Self we teach. 

1 See Chandogya Upanishad VII. 23.1. 



104 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 2:58 

ajnanoltha-buddhy-adi-kartftvopadhim atmanani 
parigfhyaivan vaya- vyatirekabhyam aham sukhi 
duhkhi cety aharnkarader anatma-dharmatvam uktarn 
kevalatmabhyupagame ’ sakyatvat phalabhavac ca. 
athedanim avidya-parikalpitarn saksitvam asritya 
kartft vady-asesa-parinama-prati?edhayaha 

We have shown already that the ego-sense, consisting of 
such feelings as “I am happy” and “I am sad”, like 
other (elements of the empirical personality) is a pro- 
perty of the not-self. And in order to do so we took for 
consideration the Self as associated with the apparent 
limiting condition (upadhi) of agency, which is itself 
but a notion arising from ignorance. For had we taken 
the pure Self it would have been impossible to apply to 
it the process of reasoning called anvaya and vyatireka, 
and, indeed, to have done so would have been pointless. 
In a similar spirit we now concentrate on the nature of 
the Self as Witness (saksin) — even though witnesshood 
itself is merely imagined through nescience — and deny 
of the Self, even in this condition, all forms of modifica- 
tion such as agency. 

e$a sarva-dhiyam nrttam aviluptaika-darsanah 
viksate ’ vikfamano ’ pi nimi?at tad dhruvo 'dhruvam 



[58] This (Self) is the one unbroken witness of the 
dance of every intellect. Verily, itself eternal, it views 
the passing without the act of looking as if through 



half-closed eyes. 1 

1 The imaee of the Self as Witness of the dance of the intellect is 
devdop,i m i n Va»™3Ji Chapter X. For .he Witness as ajl 

bodies, see Upadesa Sahasri, verse P art > 1 yviii 159 Much of the 
actionless and without modifications, ibid. ■ . jjpadesa 

Naiskarmya Siddhi is a development of themes stated I in 
Sahasri. just as Sarvajnatma Muni's Samk^epa Sanraka develops 



105 




2 ’S9 THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

doctrines of the Naiskarmva Siddhi. The three works form a loosely 
connected trilogy. All three take as their central theme the explanation 
of the text "That Thou Art". 



nanu sar va-siddhan tanan 1 api sva-sva-dfsty- 
apeksayopapannat vad Hare tara-drsty-apeksaya 
dussthita-siddhikatvan naikatrapi visvasam pasyamo 
na ca sarva-tarkikair adusitam samarthitam sarva- 
tarkikopadravapasarpanaya vartma sambhavayamah. 
uevate. visrabdhaih sambhavyatam anubhava- 
matra-saranatvat sarva-tarkika-prasthananam. tad 
abhidhiyate 

Objection: Since every philosophical doctrine is right 
from its own standpoint yet demonstrably untenable if 
viewed from the standpoint of another doctrine, we do 
not find a single point on which there is general agree- 
ment, and consequently we cannot establish any path 
which is accepted by all disputants and not vulnerable 
to criticism, so that it could be safe from all attack. To 
this we reply: Such a path can be established, for all 
philosophical schools take their stand on bare experi- 
ence. This is the point being made. 

imam prasnikam uddisya tarka-jvara-bhrsaturah 
t vac-chiraska- vaco-jalair mohayantitaretaram 

[59] The logicians bemuse each other with a web of 
wherefores and therefores, heavily afflicted with the 
fever of debate. But it is to this experience that they 
make their final appeal. 



106 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 2:61 

atrapi codayanti. anubhavatmano 'pi 

vikr iyabhyupagame ’ nabhyupagame 'pi dosa eva. 

yasmdd aha 

Here it is objected: Suppose we admit that the reality 
of experience is accepted by all, and that experience is 
the Self. In that case we are wrong if we admit that the 
Self changes, and wrong again if we do not. Hence, 
(quoting two Buddhist texts), we say: 

“ varsatapabhyam kim vyomnas carmany eva tayoh 

phalam 

earmopamas cet so ' nityah kha-tulyas ced asat-samah” 

[60] What can rain and sun do to the sky? They 
exert their power on things like the human skin. If the 
Self is like the skin it is mortal. If it is like the sky it is 
useless. 1 

1 “Useless”, i.e. it cannot serve as the experiencer. J. This and the 
next verse are both quotations from Buddhist sources, writings con- 
cerned, precisely, to ridicule the notion of any permanent or transcen- 
dent Self. 



buddhi-janmani pumsas ca vikrtir yady anityata 
athavikrtir evayam pramateti rta yujyate 



[6 1 ] “If the Self of man changes with the rise of every 
new idea in his intellect, that Self is non-eternal; but 
if the Self does not change, it cannot be the knower ot 

that cognition.” 1 

sew JfcSsss 

verse 11.63 below. 



107 




2:62 THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 
asya pariharah 

Refutation of the above objection : 

urdhvam gacchati dhume kham bhidyate svin na 

bhidyate 

na bhidyate cet sthasnutvam bhidyate ced bhida 

’sya ka 

[62] When smoke is rising, is the sky (into which it 
rises) divided or not? If not, the smoke is not rising. If 
it is divided, then kindly tell us by what. 1 

1 This is apparently a counter-dilemma, the object of which would be 
to remind the opponent that extremely subtle things (like the ether of 
the sky and the Self) are beyond the range of action and change and 
even of differentiation. "Therefore the ether can only be apprehended 
in itself as ether, without reference to modifications and differentiations 
apparently introduced into it from without.” J 



ity etat-pratipatty-artham aha 

To explain this further we add: 

avikriyasya bhoktrtvam syad aham-buddhi-vibhramat 
nau-yana-vibhramad y ad-van nagesu gati-kalpanam 

[63] The notion that the changeless Self can be an 

experiencer is due to an error set up by the ego-sense; 

it is like the notion that mountains are moving due to 

the error set up by the motion of a boat. 1 

1 The boat image is found at Samkara’s Upadesa Sahasri, verse 
part, V.3. 



yathoktarthaviskaranaya dfstantantaropadanam 

Statement of another example to bring out the nature of 
the view being put forward: 



108 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 



2:66 



yatha jatya-maneh subhra jvalanti niscala sikha 
samnidhy-asamnidhanesu ghatadinam avikriya 

[64] The Self is like the radiant motionless light of a 
splendid jewel, which remains unchanged whether 
objects are placed in its ambit or not. 1 

1 It is, of course, here assumed that objects placed near the jewel 
become illumined by its light. 



ay am atramso vivaksita iti jhapanayaha 

To bring out the exact point in question we add: 

yad-avastha vyanaktiti tad-avasthaiva sa punah 
bhanyate na vyanaktiti ghatadinam asamnidhau 

[65] The condition of the jewel is one and the same 
whether, because of the proximity of objects, one says 
“it illumines”, or, because of the absence of objects, 
one says “it does not illumine (anything)”. 



tatra ca 



And in this connection: 

i lumines all intellects, u .-.unifications, 
presence and absence of mental modtfications. 

109 




2.67 THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

[67] No activity of “illumination” is to be found in it. 
When we credit it figuratively with the act of illumina- 
tion, what we mean is that an object has come within its 
light. 



maivam sankisthah samkhya-raddhanto ’ yam iti.yatah 

Do not suppose that this is the position of the Sankhya 
(school of philosophers): for 

yatha visuddha akase sahasaivabhra-mandalam 
bhutva vilivate tad-vad atmanihakhilam jagat 

[68] Just as a heap of clouds collects and then suddenly 
dissolves in the pure (uncontaminated ether of the) sky, 
so does the whole universe collect and dissolve in the 
Self. 1 

1 The previous verses have stressed the separateness of the Self from 
the mind and the world of objects. The Sankhya philosophers also 
made this separation. But they accepted the not-self as real and eternal. 
The Advaitin holds to the Upanishadic view that only the Self exists, 
one without a second. The not-self is unreal and subject to dissolution. 



tasmad esa kutastho na dvaitam manag api sprsati. 
yatah 

Thus this pure consciousness, “firm as a mountain peak” 
(kutastha), has no contact with duality whatever; 
wherefore 

sabdady-akdra-nirbhdsah ksana-pradhvamsinir drsa 
nityo 'krama-drg atmaiko vyapnotiva dhiyo ’ nisam 



110 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 2 :71 

[69] The one motionless Self, not subject to sequence 
or succession in time, the eternal Seer, constantly per- 
vades, as it were, the flickering modifications of the 
mind, which in turn illumine the forms of material 
objects. 



evam ca sati buddheh parinamitvam yuktam 

And it is permissible to think of the intellect as under- 
going modification: for 



atitanagatehatyan yugapat sarva-gocaran 

vetty atma-van na dhir yasmat teneyam parinamini 



[70] Unlike the Self, the intellect does not simultane- 
ously know all things, past, present and future. Hence 
since its knowledge comes piecemeal, we know it is 
subject to modification (parinamin). 

1 TW V aC fi t0r d one TheS 

Hence we infer that theknowledge of the Selt s ^ Cp Upade * a 

&SSSB. .H£? jfiSSyi. v» " ‘ 



tatas caitat siddham 

And through this the following points stand proved: 
actionless and puts forth no ettort. 



Ill 




2:72 THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

dvisantim advisann atma kupyantim capy akopanoh 
nirduhkho duhkhinim caiva nissukhah sukhinim api 

[72] The Witness feels neither pain nor pleasure nor 
hatred nor anger; these are properties of the mind. 



amuhyamano muhyanlim kalpayantim akalpayan 
smaranlim asmarams caiva sayanam asvapan muhuh 

[73] The Witness indulges neither in delusion, imagi- 
nation, memory nor sleep. These are properties of the 
mind. 



sarvdkaram nirakarah svartho ’ svartham niringanah 
nistrikalas irikala-stham kutasthah ksana-bhanguram 

[74] The intellect assumes all forms, the Self is form- 
less ; the intellect exists for the sake of another, the Self 
exists for itself; the intellect is subject to past, present 
and future and is destroyed momently ; the Self is beyond 
time, motionless, and firm as a mountain peak 
(kutastha). 



nirapeksas ca sapeksam paracim pratyag advayah 
savadhim nirgateyattah sarva-dehesu pasyati 

[75] The intellect is dependent on others, extroverted 
and limited in size. The Self is independent of any other 
thing, the inmost non-dual reality, limitless in extent, 
and the subtle Seer located in the body of everyone. 



112 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 



2:77 



etasmac ca karanad ayam artho vyavasiyatam 

And for this reason the following also is true: 

duhkhi yadi bhaved dtrnd kas saksi duhkhino bhavet 
duhkhinah sdksita 'yukta sak$ino duhkhita tathd 

[76] If the Self were ever in pain, who would be left as 
the Witness of the sufferer? A sufferer can never be the 
Witness, nor can the Witness be a sufferer. 1 

1 “The sufferer” (duhkhin) is Suresvara’s characteristic name for the 
individual soul. The term “jiva” does not occur in the Naiskarmya 
Siddhi. 



purvasyaiva vyakhyanartham aha 

To explain further what he has already stated we pro- 
ceed: 

narte syad vikriyam duhkhi saksita ka vikarinah 
dhi-vikriya-sahasrandm saksy ato ’ ham avikriyah 

[77] No sufferer can exist except he be subject to 
change and modification. How can such a one be the 
Witness ? Therefore I am in reality the motionless Wit- 
ness of the myriad modifications of the mind. 



exam sarvasmin vyabhicdriny atma-vastv _ 
evavyabhicarity anubhavato vyavasthapanayaha 

And so, in order to establish from direct experience ^hat 
the Self as the real is the invariable factor m all the 

variable, we say : 

113 



i 




2:78 THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

[78] There is no break in this my consciousness 
(samvit) amid the (flux of) right cognitions or cognitions 
masquerading as such. All that manifests apart from 
my Self is transitory. 1 

1 Here Suresvara appeals to the personal experience of the jflanl. J. 



utpatti-sthiti-bhangcsu kumbhasya viyato yatha 
notpalti-sthiti-nasas syur buddher evam mamapi ca 

[79] It is the pot that comes into existence, endures for 
a time, and is finally destroyed — and not the ether that 
it apparently encloses. Similarly, birth, life and destruc- 
tion pertain to the intellect and not to me. 



sukha-duhkha-tat-sambandhdnam ca pratyak?atvan 
na sraddha-matra-grahyam etat 

This is not a matter that has to be accepted on mere 
faith, as pleasures and pains and our relation with 
them are a matter of direct experience : 

sukha-duhkhadi-sambaddham yatha dandena dandinam 
radhako viksate buddhim saksi tad-vad asamhatah 

[80] The Witness perceives the intellect, attached as the 
latter is to pleasure and pain, itself remaining unaffected 
— just as an ascetic tranquilly observes his fellow ascetic 
who is burdened with a staff. 1 

1 The weight of the staff causes no trouble to him. Similarly, the 
Witness is aloof from, and not troubled by, the pains and pleasures that 
belong to the intellect. The man who carries the stick to some extent 
identifies himself with it, and in the same way the mind identifies itself 
with its own pleasures and pains. The appearance of a similar use of 
this curious and somewhat unusual image at Manasollasa Varrtika to 
the Daksinamurti Hymn (verse VII.ll, trans. Mahadeva gastrin. 
Minor Upanishads Vol. II, p. 136) is worth remarking. » 



114 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 2:82 

etasmac ca hetor dhiyah parinamitvam yuktam 

And for this reason, also, it is right to hold that the 
intellect is subject to modification (parinama): 

yenaivasya bhaved yogah sukha-kumbhddind dhiyah 
tam vidanti tadaivanyam vetti nato vikarini 

[81] The intellect knows only that with which it 
happens to be in contact — say a mood of happiness or a 
particular pot. At that time it knows nothing else. 
Hence we may be sure it is subject to modification. 1 

1 Because it is a characteristic of the intellect that it can only know 
one thing at a time, the fact that it can know many things proves that 
it must be subject to modification. 



asyas ca k?ana-bhaftguratve svayam evatma sakfi. 
na hi kufasthdvabodham antarena buddher 
evavirbhava-tirobhdvadi-siddhir asti 



And since the intellect is changing momently, it must 
be the Self itself that is the Witness. For the manifesta- 
tion and disappearance etc. of the intellect (in waking 
and deep sleep) could not be established without the 
presence of a fixed immutable consciousness (to witness 

them) : 



parindmi-dhiydm vrttam nitydkrama-drgdtmand 
sad-bha va- vikriyam eti vydptam khendnkuro yatha 



[82] The six changing states 1 of all intellects nse, 
mature and fall in the medium of the eternal ! achonta* 
Seer, the Self-just as the seed goes through ^the qyde 
of reproduction bathed in the medium of the physical 

ether. 

1 The six changing states— see Note to 1.97 above. 



115 




2:83 THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

sat a atmanas cavikaritve yuktih 

And here is the reasoning to show that the real, as the 
Self, is without modifications : 

smrti-svapna-prabodhesu na kascit pratyayo dhiyah 
drsavyapto ’ sty ato nityam avikari svayam drsih 

[83] There is not a single cognition of the mind, 
whether of the waking state, dream or memory, which 
is not pervaded by the light of the Seer. Hence the self- 
revealed Seer is eternal and not subject to modification. 



evam tavat parabhyupagata-prakriyd-prasthanena 
nirastase$a- vikaraikatmyam pratipaditam 
upapattibhih. athadhuna srautim prakriyam 
avalambyocyate 

This completes the exposition of the unity of the Self, 
devoid of all modification, according to logical argu- 
mentation as accepted by other schools. We now 
proceed to the method of exposition according to the 
Veda (Sruti) and say: 

astu va parinamo ’sya drseh kutastha-rupatah 
kalpito ’pi mf$aivasau dandasyevapsu vakrata 

[84] Even supposing the rock-firm (kutastha) Seer 
were capable of modification, such modification would 
be imaginary and false, like the imaginary crookedness 
of a stick seen half protruding from water. 



116 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 2:86 

fafsu bhava-vikarefu ni?iddhe$v evam atmani 
dofah kascid ihasaktum na sakyas tarkika-svabhih 

[85] Since the six states of change 1 have already been 
effectively negated of the Self, we are not vulnerable to 
the criticisms of those dogs of logicians. 2 
1 See Note to 1.97 above, cp. 11.82 above. 

1 The logicians held that pleasure and pain and certain other qualities 
ascribed by Advaitins to the mind arose and fell away as qualities (guna) 
of the self (Atman). Advaita shows logically that the Self as changeless 
must be simple and partless and not possessed of qualities. 



prakrtam evopadaya buddheh parinamitvam atmanai 
ca kutasthatvam yuktibhir ucyate 

Proceeding further with the same subject, we explain 
how the intellect is subject to modification and the 
Self is rock-firm and immutable, giving reasons: 

praty artham tu vibhidyante buddhayo visayonmukhah 
na bhida ’vagates tad-vat sarvas tas cin-nibha yatah 

[86] Each mental cognition of the external world is 
different according to its object. But the light which 
illumines these different cognitions is not thus differenti- 
ated, since all alike have the common form of con- 
sciousness. 1 

1 This argument for the existence of a Self as Witness behind the 
mind and different from it in nature is reproduced in the opening verses 
of Paflcadasi, Chapter I. 



sva-sambaddhartha eva 

But the intellect knows only that with which it stands 
in relation (at any time): 



117 




2:87 THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

savasesa-paricchediny ata eva na krtsna-vit 

no cet parinamed buddhih sarvajha svatma-vad bhavet 

[87] The intellect has determinate and limited know- 
ledge only and is hence not omniscient. If the intellect 
did not undergo modifications it would be omniscient 
like the Self. 



ato ’ vagater ekatvat 

Therefore, as immediate awareness (avagati) is one, 
(it follows that) : 

candala-buddher yad drastr tad eva brahma-buddhi- 

drk 

ekam tad ubhayor jyotir bhasya-bhedad anekavat 

[88] The Seer in the Candala 1 is one and the same as 
the Seer in Br ahm a. The one light that exists in the two 
beings appears as many due to differentiations in the 
objects it illumines. £ 

1 Capdala = meat-eating outcaste. Brahma — the Creator. 

* This has special reference to the many intellects which it illumines as 
objects. 



kasmat 

Why? 

avastha-desa-kaladi-bhedo nasty anayor yatah 
tasmaj jagad-dhiyam vfttam jyotir ekam sadeksate 



118 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 2:90 



[89] The light in the Candala and the light in Brahma 
is one and the same; differentiations due to time and 
space do not affect it. Hence the one light, the only 
reality, witnesses the life of every intellect in the 
universe. 



sarva-dehesv atmaikatve pratibuddha-paramartha- 
tattvasyapy apratibuddha-deha-sambandhad ase$a- 
duhkha-sambandha iti cet tan na 

It is not right to maintain that, if the Self is one in all 
bodies, he who has become awake to the supreme reality 
will be related with all pain through being related to all 
unenlightened intellects : 

bodhat prag api duhkhitvam ndnya-dehottham asti nah 
bodhad urdhvam kutas tat syad yatra svagatam apy 

asat 

[90] The pain experienced before illumination arises 
from one’s own body and from no one else’s. How can 
the pain arising from the bodies of others affect one 
after illumination, seeing that even the pain arising 
from one’s own is then known to have been an illusion? 



na ceyam sva-manisiketi grahyam. kutah, sruty- 
avastambhat 

Nor should you think, “He’s just thought it all up him- 
self.” Why not? Because it is based on the Veda 

(sruti): 

sabdddy-akara-nirbhasd hanopadana-dharmini 
bhasyety aha srutir dfstir atmano ’ parinaminah 

119 




2:91 THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

[91] That (empirical) seeing, which illumines other 
external objects (while conforming to their shape), 
which is subject to increase and decrease, has to be itself 
illumined by the unchanging (aparinamin) Self. So says 
the Veda (sruti). 1 

1 Quoted in the following verse. 



ka tv asau srutih 

What, then, is that Vedic text ? 

drster drastaram atmanam na pasyer drsyamanayd 
vijhataram are kena vijdniydd dhiyam patim 

[92] “Thou canst not see the Seer of seeing” by means 

of what is itself the seen. “With what, indeed, can one 

know the Knower of knowing”, the Lord of all minds 7 1 

1 Expanded versions of Bfhadaranyaka Upanishad III. iv. 2 and II. 
iv. 14 respectively. 



yasmat sarva-pramanopapanno ’yam arthas tasmad 
ato ’ nyatha-vadino jdty-andhd ivanukampaniya ity aha 

Since this point has already been established by all the 
recognized means of knowledge (pramana), those who 
argue otherwise are to be pitied, like the blind : 

tad etad advayam brahma nirvikaram ku-buddhibhih 
jdty-andha-gaja-drstye va kotisah parikalpyate 

[93] This formless non-dual Absolute (Brahman) is 
conceived in millions of ways by those of weak intellect, 
like the blind men guessing at the nature of the 
elephant. 1 

1 Elephant — cp. note to verse 11.51 above. 



120 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 



2:94 



pramanopapannasyarthasyasambhavanat tad- 
anukampaniyatva-siddhih. tad etad aha 

They are pitiable because they cannot believe what has 
been guaranteed by recognized means of knowledge: 

yad-yad visesanam drstam natmanas tad ananvayat 
khasya kumbhadi-vat tasmad atma syan nirvisesanah 

[94] No qualification seen anywhere belongs to the 
Self, for it conforms to no limitations, just as the ether 
is not touched by the limitations apparently imposed 
upon it by the shape of the pot. That is what is meant 
by saying, “the Self is without qualifications 
(nirvisesana)”. 1 



1 From the empirical point of view, the ether was regarded by the 
classical Advaitic philosophers as a subtle imperceptible stuff from 
which the world arose and in which it existed. Lower a pot into the 
water and pull it up, and a real qualification has been introduced into 
the volume of water enclosed by the pot. The water is made to conform 
to the shape of the pot and to move from place to place with the pot. 
Similarly with the air in the pot, when the latter happens to be empty 
of water. But not so the ether. The pot did not enclose any ether. Move 
the empty pot, and you certainly move the air in the pot, but not the 
ether. There is no ether actually enclosed in the pot, though our minds 
always automatically suggest to us that there is. In regard to the water 
or air actually enclosed in the pot, the pot is a vise?apa. In regard to 
the ether apparently enclosed in the pot, the pot is an upadhi. Com- 
menting on Brhadaranyaka Upanishad IV.iii.30, Sarpkara says that it 
is inaccurate to say that ether pervades all things, since it never assumes 
their forms. The qualification (vise?apa) is that which actually condi- 
tions a thing, as blue colour conditions a blue pot. Different from the 
qualification in nature is the adjunct, the upadhi, which stands in 
spatial relation to a thing and is taken as conditioning it, though in 
fact it does not do so — e.g. as when a crystal looks red due to the 
proximity of a red flower, although it has not in fact actually become 
red in any way. The upadhi in the form of the red flower appears to 
condition the crystal while in fact leaving it completely unaffected. ^ 
Here SureSvara is affirming that the Self is “without qualifications 
(nirvisesana). Just as the gross objects of the physical world all stand 
in spatial relation to the ether in which they exist, yet are unable to 
affect or condition the ether in any way, so the whole universe stands 
in apparent relation to the Self, but can introduce no distinctions or 
differentiations into it of any kind. Cp. Upadesa Sahasn (verse sec- 
tion), VI. 1 ff. 



121 




2:95 



THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 



at as catmano bhedasamsparso bhedasya mithya- 
svabhavyad ata aha 

Therefore the Self is not touched by distinction, for 
distinction is false (mithya) by nature. Hence we 
proceed : 

avagaty-atmano yasmad agamapayi kumbha-vat 
sahamkaram idam visvam tasmat tat syat kacadi-vat 

[95] Since this whole universe including the ego- 
notion appears and subsequently disappears in con- 
sciousness, and is thus as transitory as a pot, it follows 
that it is as unreal as the lights that appear when the 
eyes are closed and the eyeballs are pressed with the 
fingers. 1 

1 The argument for the unreality of the world here is based on the 
principle laid down by Gaudapada (Karika II.6 on the Mandukya 
Upanishad) — “whatever is non-existent at the beginning and non- 
existent at the end is necessarily non-existent also in between”. The 
stock example is a mirage. 

The idea expressed at the end of the verse is that if you close your 
eyes and press the eyeballs with the fingers hard enough, you see 
patterns of light, which purport to be outside of you and in front of 
you, and which, if taken as such, are manifestly delusive. There is no 
light in front of the eyes, it just seems as if there were. 



sarvasyaivanumana-vyaparasya phalam iyad eva yad 
viveka-grahanam. tad ucyate 

The net result of all reasoning is an (indirect) awareness 
based on discrimination (but not direct perception). 1 So 
we say: 

’The reference is to the “viveka-khyati” or “knowledge through 
discrimination” claimed by the Safikhya philosophers. Cp. prose 
introduction to verse 11.97 below. 



122 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 2:96 

buddher anatma-dharmatvam anumanat prasiddhyati 
atmano ’py advitiyatvam atmatvad eva siddhyati 

[96] Inference can show that the intellect is not a 
property of the Self. But the non-duality of the Self can 
be known only through becoming the Self. 



yadyapy ayam grahitr-grahana-grahya-grhiti-tat- 
phalatmaka a-brahma-stamba-paryantah samsaro 
'nvaya- vyatirekabhyam anatmataya rtirmalya-vad 
apaviddhah. tathapi tu naivasau svatas-siddhatma- 
vyatiriktanatma-prakrti-padartha-vyapasrayah 

samkhydnam iva. kim tarhi. svatas- 

siddhdnuditdnastamita-kutasthdtma-prajnana-matra- 

sarira-pratibimbitdvicarita-siddhdtmdnavabodhasraya 

eva tad-upaddnatvat tasyetimam artham nirvaktu- 
kama aha 



We may grant that this whole world of transmigration 
(samsara) from the Creator (Brahma) to the meanest 
clump of grass, which consists of the empirical subject 
and object, together with the subject’s cognitions as 
they emerge into the light of consciousness (phala) 
this whole world of transmigration, we admit, can be 
shown by reasoning through the method of agreement 
and difference (anvaya and vyatireka) 2 to be not-selt 
and by this means be rejected like a worn-out garland 
Nevertheless, we do not admit with the Sankhyas that 
its ultimate substratum is the “Nature (prakrti) y 
speak of, which is not-self and utterly separate from the 
Self that is self-revealed. We say tha its ultimate ^ 

stratum is that non-awareness-of-the-Self, wbicn is 

accepted only for lack of due enquiry (vicara), and which 

123 




2:9" THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

only exists as reflected in (i.e. as illumined by) the self- 
revealed pure Self, which is a mass of pure consciousness 
that neither rises nor sets, and which is firm and im- 
movable as a mountain peak.* For that is its necessary 
precondition. To explain this we say: 

1 phaia for pramana-phala = the flash of consciousness that results 
(phala - fruit) from the application of a means of cognition such as 
perception or inference. 

* See Note to verse II. 8 above. 

* Intellectual analysis is an incomplete discipline for Self-knowledge; 
it will show you that the Self and the world are different, but in knowing 
their difference one is committed to knowing two real things, the 
position of the Sankhyas. Reason alone is not enough. Hearing and 
assimilating the Upanishadic texts is also required. Cp. verses III.6, 
III.33, IV.16 below. 

fte jnanarn na santy artha asti jhanam rte 'pi tan 

exam dhiyo hirug-jyotir vivicyad anumanatah 

[97] The light (of the Self) can be known as different 
from the intellect through such inferences as, “objects 
do not exist except in the presence of knowledge: 
knowledge exists even when they are absent”. 



yasmat pramana-prameya-vyavahara 
atmanavabodhasraya eva tasmat siddham atmano 
' prameyatvam . naiva hi karyam sva-karanam 
atilahghyanyatrakdraka aspadam upanibadhnati. 
ata aha 

Because the whole play of empirical cognition with its 
objects rests on not-being-awake-to-the-Self, it follows 
that the Self can never be an object of empirical cogni- 
tion. An effect cannot “go beyond” its (material) 
cause and acquire a basis in something to which it 
is in no way related. So we say: 



124 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 2:99 

vyavadhiyanta evami buddhi-deha-ghatadayah 
at mat \ ad atmanah kena vyavadhanwn manag api 

[98] Intellect, body, and external object such as pot — 
all these are known mediately (through empirical 
cognition). But since the Self is already the Self, through 
what could (knowledge of) it be mediated in any way? 1 

1 In order to be known as an object, a thing must be separate from 
the knower, cp. verse 11.23 above. Hence the Self can never be known 
as an object. 



svayam anavagamatmakatvad anavagamatmakatvam 
ca moha-matropadanatvat 



For they (intellect, body, and external objects) are not 
themselves of the nature of consciousness, and that 
which is not itself of the nature of consciousness is 
conditioned (upadana) by mere delusion (moha- 
matra) : 



pramanam antarenaifdm buddhy-adinam asiddhata 
anubhuti-phalarthitvad atma jnah kim apekfate 



[99] The existence of the intellect, body and external 
objects cannot be established except through empirical 
means of knowledge and proof, since they require to 
illumined by consciousness in cognitions resulting from 
such means. But what (proof) does the pure Self as 
knower require for its existence, seeing that it constitutes 
all effective knowledge itself? 



vak;yamanetarelarmyisa-sMhyarlhamukta- 

vyatirekanuvadah 



125 




2:100 THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

We repeat the distinction (between Self and not-self) 
once again in order to demonstrate the existence of the 
mutual superimposition which we are going on to 
speak of. 

ghata-buddher ghatac cart had drastur yad-vad 

vibhinnata 

aham-buddher aham-gamyad duhkhinas ca tatha 

drseh 

[100] Just as the seeing subject (drastr) is different 
from both the objective pot and the mental notion of 
the pot, so also is the pure Self different from “the 
sufferer” (i.e. the individual soul) which it witnesses as 
an object, and from the ego-notion by which the sufferer 
is revealed. 



evam etayor atmanatmanoh svatah paratah siddhayor 
laukika-rajju-sarpadhyaropa- vad avidyopasraya 
evetaretaradhyaropa ity etad aha 

The Self is self-established, and the not-self is established 
by another: what we now say is that these two are 
mutually superimposed on the basis (asraya) of nesci- 
ence, just as the rope and the snake are superimposed 
in the example taken from the empirical world. 

abhra-yanam yatha mohac chasa-bhrty adhyavasyati 
sukhitvadin dhiyo dharmams tad-vad atmani manyate 

[101] Just as a man through sheer delusion attributes 
the motion of the clouds to the moon, so is it through 
sheer delusion that a man attributes happiness and 
other qualities of the intellect to the pure Self. 



126 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 2.103 

dagdhrtvam ca yatha vahner ayaso mcmyate ku-dhih 
caitanyam tad-vad dtmiyam mohat kartari manyate 

[102] And just as a stupid man thinks that the fire’s 
power of burning belongs to the (red-hot) iron, so 
through sheer delusion the consciousness pertaining to 
the pure Self is attributed to the agent. 



sarva evayam at manat ma-vibhagah pratyaksadi- 
pramana-vartmany anupatito 'vidyotsahga-varty eva 
na paramatma-vyapasrayah. asyas cavidyayah 
sarvanartha-hetoh kuto nivrttir iti cet tad aha 



Hence this distinction between the Self and the not-self 
exists only within the realm of perception and the other 
empirical means of knowledge. It is based on nescience 
(avidya) and not on the highest Self If you ask Ho 
may this nescience, source of all evil, be brought to 

end?” we reply: 

duhkha-rdser vicitrasya seyam bhrdntis cirantanl 
mulam s amsara-v r k ? asya tad-badhas tattva-darsanat 

[103] This primeval nescience is The i 'oot of '^ e 

worldly transmigration (saipsara) 

mass of variegated evils. It is destroyed through kno 

ledge of the reality. 



prasiddhih 



127 




2:104 THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

How do you support your statement that nescience can 
be negated through knowledge of reality? Answer: 
Everyone from learned scholars to cowherds and 
shepherds is quite certain of the following: 

apramottham pramotthena jndnam jnanena badhyate 
ahi-rajjv-adi-vad badho dehady-atma-mates tatha 

[104] Notions that are not based on properly tested 
knowledge are negated by (contradictory) notions that 
are, as in the case of the cancellation of the illusion of a 
snake seen in a rope, etc. The notion that the pure Self 
is the body is (finally) negated in just the same way. 



laukika-prameya- vailaksanyad atmano 
nehanadhigatadhigamah pramana-phalam 

Since the pure Self is different from objects of empirical 
knowledge, the result of correct knowledge of the Self is 
not, as in the case of correct empirical knowledge, 
knowledge of what was not known before : 

avidyd-ndsa-md.tr am tu phalam ity upacaryate 
ndjnata-jnapanam nyayyam avagaty-eka-riipatah 

[105] The “result” of proper knowledge of the Self is 
mere destruction of nescience, and (though nothing 
positive has happened) this is indeed figuratively spoken 
of as a “result”. To say that the result was knowledge of 
what was previously unknown would be wrong, for 
the Self is pure awareness 1 by nature. 

1 “Pure awareness”. For example it is beyond time (sec 11.69 and 
11.89 above). Nothing therefore can “happen” in it. We cannot sudden- 
ly come to know it as if it were unknown before. We know it now, but 
the knowledge is obstructed, just as the father heard his son’s voice in 
the schoolboy chorus but could not pick it out owing to the obstruction 
of the voices of the other boys. Paficadas!, 1.12. 

128 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 2:107 

yasmad dtmanavabodha-matropadanah pramatradayas 
lasmat 

Because the empirical knower (pramatr), knowledge 
and known are dependent on mere not-being-awake-to- 
the-Self, it follows that: 

tia vidanty atmanah sattarn drastr-darsana-gocarah 
no canyonyam ato ’ misam jneyatvam bhinna-sadhanam 

[106] (The three factors of empirical experience) 
knower, knowledge and known cannot each establish 
their own existence, nor can they establish one another’s 
existence mutually. Hence they are all objects known by 
something other than themselves. 1 

1 Cp. verse 11.109 below. 



drcistrdder asadharana-rupa-jnapanayaha 
In order to explain the distinctive nature of each of the 
three factors, knower, knowledge and known, we 
proceed : 

bahya akdra-van grahyo grahanam niscayadi-mat _ 
anvayy aham iti jneyah saksi tv atma dhruvah sada 



[107] (Of the three factors of empirical cognition), the 
“known” is the external object having visible form, 
“knowledge” is the succession of modifications in the 
mind (doubt, memory, certainty etc.), and the knower 
is the “I” which constantly accompanies these two; but 
the Witness is the Self which is constant and eternal. 



1 "Constant and eternal”: *'tha« ^ which 

absence of the other three and which is c ordinary experience 

the state of release”. J. Note that the JJ/S^heir objects. 

constantly accompanies the stream o because it disappears in 

But it is not constant in the absolute sense because Pf 

swoon, deep sleep, and samadhi. 



K 



129 




2 ; 1 OS THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

sarra-kdraka-kriyd-phala-vibhdgdtmaka-samsdra- 
siinw! armed kdraka-kriyd-phala-ribhdga-saksitvdd 
dtnnnuis tad aha 

We now state how the Self is void of the world-process 
(samsara) consisting of the whole system of actions, 
their factors and results, because it is the Witness of 
that system : 

grahaka-grahana-grahy-avibhdge yo ’ vibhaga-van 
hanopddanayos saksi hanopddana-varjitah 

[108] He (the Self) stands undivided amidst the divi- 
sion into perceiver, perception and perceived, the 
Witness of loss and gain. Himself without loss or gain. 



grahakadi-nisthaiva grahakadi-bhavabha va- vibhaga- 
siddhih kasman neti cet tad aha 

Why cannot the perceiver, perception and perceived 
determine their own existence or non-existence? In 
order to answer this question we proceed : 

sva-sadhanam svayam nasto na nasam vetty abhavatah 
ata eva na canyesam ato ’ sau bhinna-saksikah 

[109] What has been destroyed is not aware of its 
destruction as it no longer exists; nor could it (then) 
know its own (prior) origin, nor the origin or destruc- 
tion of other things. Therefore it must be witnessed by 
another. 1 

1 The fact that we know that the stream of our empirical experience 
contains breaks (sleep, swoon, etc.) is enough to prove that it must be 
witnessed by a Witness which is itself transcendent and exempt from 
the stream. Cp. verse 111.21 below. 



130 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 2:110 

grahakader anya-saksi-purxakatxa-siddheh sxa- 
saksino 'py anya-saksi-purxakatxad anaxastheti cet 
tan na sdksino xyatirikta-hetx-anapeksatxad ata aha 

Objection: The theory of a Witness leaves us in infinite 
regress, for any given Witness requires a further 
Witness to witness its existence. Answer: No. (Unlike 
the instruments of empirical knowledge, which are 
subject to modification and transient), the Witness 
requires no external support to establish its existence. 

dhi-xan napeksate siddhim at many asmad axikriyah 
nirapeksam apekfyaixa siddhyanty anye na tu sxayam 

[110] The unchangeable Self does not require to be 
established from outside as the intellect does. All else 
is established through reference to that independent 
One. But He Himself requires no proof. 1 

1 J points out that since everything else is known as an object by the 
Self, nothing can know the Self as an object, and hence nothing can 
prove its existence. It must be self-revealed and self-luminous, judging 
from the mere fact it is manifest at all. 



yato grahakadisv atma-bhaxo ’ vidya-nibandhana 

ex a tasmad anxaya-vyatirekabhydm xibhajyanatmanah 

sxayam 

The notion of “self” in relation to the perceiver, 
perceiving and perceived is due to nescience only. 
Therefore, having distinguished yourself from the mot- 
self through reasoning by the method of agreement an 
difference (know that): 

utpatti-sthiti-nase?u yo 'xagatyaixa xartate 
jagato ’ xikaraya ’xehi tam asmiti na nasxaram 

131 




2:111 THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

[111] He who remains as motionless consciousness 
throughout the successive creations and destructions of 
the universe— know Him as “I am that”, and not as 
what is perishable. 



sxatas-siddhatma-caitanya-pratibimbitdvicdrita- 
siddhikdtmanaxabodhotthetaretara-svabhdvdpeksa- 
siddhatvat svatas casiddher anatmano dvaitendra- 
jaJasva 

Because the not-self, the magic display of duality, is not 
self-established, but is established only in mutual 
dependence as something arising from ignorance of the 
Self, and also because it is something merely reflected 
(pratibimbita) in the self-established Self of the nature 
of consciousness, and is accepted at all only for lack of 
due investigation — for all these reasons it follows that: 

na svayam svasya nanatvam navagaty-atmana yatah 
nobhabhyam apy atas siddham advaitam dvaita- 

badhaya 

[112] The (display of) plurality cannot be established 
as real by the plurality itself, nor by the Self (as avagati), 
nor by the plurality and the Self taken together. Hence 
the reality of non-duality is proved, since duality 
negates itself. 1 

1 The plurality cannot establish its own reality since it is non- 
conscious; nor can it be established through the reality of the Self, 
since the identity of the conscious and non-conscious is impossible; 
nor can the Self and duality co-operate to establish the reality of 
duality, since none of the types of relation recognized by the logicians 
(sambandha, samavaya, etc.) can hold between them. J. Hiriyanna 
H°34 tS ° Ut verse * s close to Gaudapada’s Mandukya Karika 



132 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 2:114 

yathoktartha-pratipatt i-dradh inrne sruty- 
udaharanopanyasah 

Quotation of Vedic texts in support of the point just 
made: 

nityavagati-rupatvat karakadir na catmanah 
asthulam neti netiti na jayata iti srutih 

[113] The Self is changeless consciousness, and there- 
fore does not contain the factors of action. Hence the 
Veda said of it, “Not gross”, and “Not this, not this”, 
and “It is not born”. 1 

1 Brhadaranyaka Upanishad III. viii.8, II.iii.6, and Katha Upanishad 
Lii.18 (or 11.18). 



sarvasydsya grahakader dvaita- 
prapancasyatmana vabodha-matropadanasya svayam 
seddhum asakyatvad atma-siddhes canupadeyatvat 



Because all this duality consisting of knower, knowledge 
and known, which is dependent on mere ignorance of 
the Self, cannot establish itself and cannot be estab- 
lished through the Self either, it follows that: 



atmanas cen nivaryante buddhi-deha-ghatadayah 
sastha-gocara-kalpas te vijneyah paramarthatah 



[114] If the intellect, body and external objects like 
pots are rejected by the Self they must be known from 
the highest point of view as fit subjects for the sixth 
means of knowledge. 1 



1 “Fit subjects for the sixth means of knowledge”. 
of knowledge is anupalabdhi which apprehends non-existence. For th 
pramanas, see note to sloka 1.89 above. 



133 




2:115 THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

kuto nyaya-balad evam niscitam pratiyate. yasmat 

How do you prove strictly that they are non-existent? 
As follows : 

nityam samvidam asritya svatas siddham avikriyam 
siddhayante dhiyo bodhas lams casritya ghatadayah 

[115] The cognitions of the intellect (which come and 
go) establish themselves as real only by (false) self- 
identification with the eternal, changeless, self-revealed 
pure consciousness (samvit). The body and the pot 
depend for their reality on them. 1 

1 The intellect depends for its claims to reality on its supposed identi- 
fication with consciousness. But this identification must be false, 
because the intellect is changeable whereas consciousness is fixed. The 
body and external objects depend for their supposed reality on the 
cognitions of the intellect, already seen to be false. Hence it is clear, 
from data derived from immediate experience, that intellect, body and 
external objects are all unreal. J 



yasman na kayacid api yuktydtmanah karakatvam 
kriyatvam phalatvam copapadyate tasmad atma-vastu- 
ydthdtmyanavabodha-mdtropdddnatvan nabhasiva 
rajo-dhuma-tusdra-nihara-nilatvady-adhyaso 
yathoktatmani sarvo ’ yam kriya-karaka-phalatmaka- 
samsaro ’ ham-mamatva-yatnecchadi-mithyddhyasa 
eveti siddham imam artham aha 

It is impossible by any reasoning to show that the Self 
is either an agent or an action or the result of an action. 
Hence all this transmigration (samsara) consisting of 
actions, agents and results and of “I” and “mine” and 
striving and desire, since it is dependent on mere 
ignorance of the true nature of the Self as the real, 



134 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 2:117 

must all be a false superimposition on the pure Self, 
just as blueness, mist, fog, smoke and dust are falsely 
superimposed on the sky. To express this, we say: 

aham-mithyabhisapena duhkhy atma tad-bubhutsaya 
itah srutim taya netity-uktah kaivalyam asthitah 

[116] The pure Self suffers from the calumny of being 
thought to be the individual ego. Desirous of knowing 
his real nature he betakes himself to the Veda, which 
instructs him “Not this, not this”. Thus instructed, he 
applies himself to the Alone (kaivalya). 



tasydsya mumuksoh srautad vacasah svapna- 
nimittotsarita-nidrasyeveyam niscitartha prama jdyate 

Such an earnest spiritual enquirer (mumuksu) derives 
from the Vedic text the following definite conviction, 
even like one awoken from sleep by a sight seen in a 
dream: 1 

1 A sleeping man may begin to dream and may see a lion which so 
frightens him that he wakes up. Similarly, the Vedic text, though itself 
unreal, has power to wake the earnest spiritual enquirer up from the 
sleep of ignorance. 

naham na ca mamdtmatvdt sarvadanatma-varjitah. 
bhanav iva tamodhyaso ’pahnavas ca tatha mayi 

[117] There is no “I” or “mine”— for I am the pure 
Self, ever free from the not-self. Just as (the notion of) 
darkness in the sun is a superimposition, so is (the 
notion of) ignorance in me— and so, likewise, is (the 
notion of) its removal. 



135 




2:118 THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

so 'yam eram-pratipanna-svabhdvam atmanam 
pratipanno 'nukrosati 

When he comes to know the Self of the nature here 
expounded, he utters the following cry: 

vatra tv asyeti satopam krtsna-dvaita-nisedhimm 
protsarayantim samsaram apya srausam na kim srutim 

[118] Why did I not long ago hear the thundering roar 
of the text “But where all this has become the Self 
alone . . .". 1 that text which does away with worldly 
reincarnation and cancels the whole of duality once and 
for all ? 

1 Brhadaranyaka Upanishad IV.v.15. 



ity om ity avabuddhatmd niskalo ’ kdrako 'kriycdi 
virakta iva buddhyader ekakitvam upeyivan 

[119] So saying, he pronounces “OM” and becomes 
awake to the partless Self, beyond action and the factors 
of action. He acquires the solitary state, estranged as it 
were from the intellect, the body and the external 
objects. 1 

1 Estranged as it were : As if he had gone to live away from them as 
an ascetic leaves his family. J 



136 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 



3 : 1 



trtiyo ’ dhyayah 



sarvo yarn pcamiti-pramana-prameya-pramatr- 
laksana abrahma-stamba-paryanto mithyadhvasa 
eveti bahusa upapattibhir atisthipam. atma ca 
janmadi-sad-bhava- vikara- varjitah kutastha-bodha 
eveti sphutikrtam. tayos ca mithyddhyasa- 
kutasthatmanor nantarenajhanam sambandho 
’ nyatra codana-pariprdpitat yatha “ iyam evarg agnih 
sama" iti. tac cajndnam svatma-matra-nimittam na 
sambhavatiti kasyacit kasmimscid visaye bhavatity 
abhyupagantavyam. iha ca padartha-dvayam 
nirddharitam atmanatma ca. tatrdndtmanas tavan 
najnanenabhisambandhah. tasya hi svarupam 
evajhanam na hi svato 'jhdnasydjhanam ghatate. 
sambhaxad apy ajhana-svabhdve 'jhanam kam 
atisayam janayet. na ca tatra jhana-praptir asti vena 
tat-pratisedhdtmakam ajhanam syat. anatmanas 
cajhana-prasutatvat. na hi purva-siddham sat tato 
labdhatma-labhasya setsyata asrayasydsrayi 
sambhavati. tad-anapeksasya ca tasya 
nissvabhavatvat. etebhya eva hetubhyo nanatma- 
visayam ajhanam sambhavatiti grahyam. evam 
tavan nanatmano ' jhanitvam ndpi tad-visayam 
ajhanam. parisesyad atmana evastv ajhanam 
tasyajho 'smity anubhava-darsanat. so ham 
bhagavo mantra-vid evasmi natma-vit iti sruteh. 
na catmano ' jhana-svarupatd tasya caitanya-matra- 
-svdbhavyad atisayas ca sambhavati jhdna-viparilopo 
jhdna-prdptes ca sambhavas tasya jhana-karitvat. na 
cajhana-karyat vam kutasthatma-svabhavyad 



137 




• 1 THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

ainananapeksasya catmanah svata eva svarupa- 
siddher yuktam atmana exajnatxam. kirn xisavaip 
punas tad atmano ' jnanam . atma-xisayam iti brumal), 
nanx atmano 'pi jnma-svarupatvad ananyatvac ca 
jnana-prakrtitxadibhyas ca lietubhyo naivajnanam 
ghatate. giatata exa. katham. ajndna-matra- 
nimittatxdt tad-vibhdgasya sarpatmateva rajjvah. 
tasmat tad-apanuttau dvaitanarthabhavah. tad - 
apanodas ca vdkyad eva tat-pada-padarthabhijnasya. 
ato vakya-xydkhydndyddhyaya arabhyate. tatra 
xatkoktena prakarena tat-txam-asy-adi- 
xakvopanivista-pada-padarthayoh krtanvaya- 
xyatirekah. 



BOOK III 

We have shown at some length that all this (world) 
from the Creator (Brahma) to a clump of grass, con- 
sisting of the empirical knower, his instruments of 
knowledge, his knowledge and its objects, is but a false 
superimposition. And it has been made clear that the 
Self is the changeless rock-firm Consciousness, void of 
the six states of phenomenal existence beginning with 
birth 1 — and is that alone. And between the world (as 
false superimposition) and the rock-firm Self there is 
no connection except ignorance (ajnana), and wherever 
(in the Veda) a positive identity or connection is 
affirmed between the two, that is to be interpreted as 
forming part of an injunction to perform symbolic 
meditation, just like the fanciful meditation prescribed 
in the passage “This earth is verily (to be meditated on 
as) the Rg Veda, fire as the Sama Veda ”. 2 



138 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 3: 1 

Now, ignorance cannot exist in the void. It must 
always be ignorance oj someone about something . 3 
Further, we have already established that two cate- 
gories (padartha) exist, and two only, the Self and the 
not-self. From this it follows that the locus (asraya) of 
ignorance (i.e. the conscious being in which the ignor- 
ance exists) cannot be the not-self. For the very nature 
of the not-self is ignorance, and ignorance cannot 
experience ignorance on its own (since the existence of 
ignorance implies a knower or at least knowledge). 
Even if it could, what difference would the rise of ignor- 
ance in ignorance bring about (that we could say it was 
an event at all)? Nor is the attainment of knowledge 
possible in the not-self, that one could argue there must 
have been some contradictory ignorance in the not-self 
(for it to negate). Further, the not-self is born of 
ignorance. It is absurd to suppose that that which is 
logically and causally prior can only exist supported by 
and dependent on its own effect. Nor, again, has the 
not-self any form independent of and different from 
ignorance whereby it could serve as its locus and 
support. These arguments (which refute the possibility 
of the not-self serving as the locus of ignorance) also 
show it cannot be the object concealed by ignorance 
either. Therefore the not-self is neither the locus of 
ignorance (asraya of avidya) nor the object concealed 
by ignorance (visaya of avidya). 

Hence we conclude, as the only remaining alternative, 
that it is the Self alone which is both the locus (asraya) 
of and the object (visaya) concealed by ignorance. All 
of us have the experience “I do not know”, and in the 
Veda we hear “I am only a knower of the mantras, my 
lord; I do not know the Self ”. 4 (Nor do the arguments 

139 




31 THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

which tell acainst the not-self as locus of ignorance 
apply to the" Self). The Self, indeed, is not identical 
with ignorance, since its nature is pure Consciousness. 
Moreover, (the rise of) ignorance in the Self produces a 
difference in the form of an obscuration of knowledge. 
And attainment of knowledge is possible because the 
Self is the source of knowledge. Nor has the Self the 
characteristic of being an effect of ignorance, 5 since it 
is the rock-firm changeless Self by nature. And, finally, 
the conscious Self has a form and existence independent 
of those of ignorance whereby it can serve as the latter’s 
locus. Hence we conclude that it is the Self alone which 
is ignorant (ajna). 

What, then, is the object concealed by this ignorance 
pertaining to the Self? The Self is that object. Well, 
then, is it not a fact that ignorance is incompatible with 
the Self, since the latter is of the very nature of know- 
ledge, is without differentiation 9 and is that which 
produces knowledge, 7 and is contradictory to ignorance 
in other ways too ? 9 

To this objection we reply that ignorance is com- 
patible with the Self. For in reality the Self remains un- 
differentiated. It becomes differentiated into knower, 
knowledge and known through mere ignorance alone, 
just as it is through mere ignorance that the rope be- 
comes a snake — the Self and the rope remaining in 
reality quite unaffected. Hence when ignorance is 
shaken off there is complete absence of all the evils 
o duality. And the escape from ignorance occurs only 
t rough the holy texts when heard by a man already 
conversant with their words and the meanings of those 

t °. r , S ^ W ’ t * lere ft )re > we begin a new chapter devoted 
e exp anation of the meaning of the holy sentences 

140 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 3; 1 

(vakya), including a critical analysis of the words and 
their meanings 9 by the method of agreement and 
difference (anvaya and vyatireka) applied to “That 
thou art” and other Vedic texts . 10 



1 The six states of phenomenal existence— see note to I 97 (comm ) 
above. 



2 Chandogya Upanishad I.vi.l. 

3 That is, it must have a conscious “locus” or “support” (asraya) in 
which it exists and an object (visaya) which it conceals. 

4 Chandogya Upanishad VII.1.3. 

6 The not-self, being an effect of ignorance, cannot function as its 
locus or support. See above. 

' The objector supposes that because the Self is undifferentiated it 
cannot serve as the locus of ignorance since this function presupposes a 
distinction between locus and thing in the locus. J 

7 And hence could not be the locus of ignorance, any more than the 
sun could be the support of darkness. J 

8 For example, it is said in the Veda to be associationless. J 

9 Cp. Sarpkara Upadesa Sahasri XVIII. 177-183. 

10 The question here raised by Suresvara as to the nature of the asraya 
and visaya of avidya (or ajflana) was often discussed by the Advaitic 
writers. Sri Saipkara does not discuss the question polemically, but it 
is evident that he held that Brahman-Atman was both the asraya and 



visaya of ajflana, although from another point of view he would some- 
times refuse to return an answer to the question “whose is avidya?” on 
the ground that to do so would imply that avidya was real (“Upadesa 
Sahasri” XVIII.44 sqq. and Gita Bhisya XIII.2). 

The formal polemical discussions of the "question” of the asraya 
and visaya of avidya were first introduced by Sri Samkara’s pupil 
Suresvara with special reference to the views of the freelance Advaitin, 
Mandana Misra. Mandana Misra held that jiva is the locus of avidya, 
since it is absurd to suppose that Brahman-Atman as pure conscious- 
ness can be associated with ignorance in any way. If it were objected 
that jiva cannot be the locus or support of avidya since the very con- 
ception of jiva presupposes avidya, he answered that the whole situa- 
tion was due to maya and if it were logically explicable it would not be 
maya' Mandana Misra’s theory involves a multiplicity of jivaswitha 
Sale avidya and universe fo, each jiva. Each J,va e arr.es ts own 

sfsssss s«;rrn!= s poT ; °s 

was finally reached in the e k a ‘J' vava .. v ta cjHdhanta Muktavali”. 
Allf including Mandana 3 Midra.* agreed .ha. Brahman-A.man was .he 
object concealed by avidya (visaya). 



141 




v 1 THi: RliAl IZATION OF THH ABSOLUTE 

W lul kcnt the controversy alive was the fact that in his “Bhamali" 
com men tan* on Samara's "Brahma Sutra Bha.sya" the great scholar 
VSeaspati Misra tried to reconcile Sa.pkara's v.ews with some ot the 
main tenets of Mandana Misra’s “Brahma Siddhi on which latter 
work he also wrote a commentary, now unfortunately lost. The doc- 
trine that jiva and not Brahman is the locus (asraya) ot avidya, the 
doctrine that a plurality of avidyas exists, one for each jiva, and the 
doctrine that there is no one "public' avidya (mulavidya) all appear in 
the ‘‘Bhamati’’. together with many other of Manana Misra’s charac- 
teristic views. (The term mulavidya occurs, indeed, but the word is 
used in a special sense to mean the causal body of the individual jiva). 
Vacaspati’s theory of the rise of the “Brahmakara vrtti” in God- 
realization accords with the theory of Mariana Misra propounded in 
the introductory commentary to "Naiskarmya Siddhi” 1.67 above and 
not with the refutation of it in the sloka 1.67 itself, as may be seen from 
“The Bhamati of Vacaspati”, Ed. and English Trans, of Catussutri 
portion by S. S. Sastri and C. K. Raja, Theosophical Publishing House 
Madras, 1933 — Introduction pp. xxxix-xli. Compare note to III. 123 
below. The classical Advaitic tradition is that of Prakasatman’s 
“Vivarana", a commentary on Padmapada’s “Pancapadika”, itself a 
commentary on the first four sutras of Sri Samkara’s “Brahma Sutra 
Bhasya”. Vidyarartya Svamin belongs to this tradition, though he 
modifies the doctrine. Prakasatman refutes many of the theories 
that derive from Mandana Misra, just as Suresvara attacks 
Mandana Misra directly both here and in his Brhadaranyaka Varttika 
(sub-commentary). Some of the later scholars such as Appaya DIk§ita 
and Sadhu Niscala Dasa (author of “Vicara Sagara” and “Vrtti 
Prabhakara”, in Hindi) held that the various views were merely alter- 
native ways of expressing the same doctrine, though even they express a 
preference. The preference of Niscala Dasa was for the solipsism of the 
‘Vedanta Siddhanta Muktavali”, which, he said, agreed with the ajata- 
y? “ a , °f_ Gaudapada. All Advaitins accept that the ajatavada of 
Gaugapada is both the first and last word of the system, but few regard 
the Vedanta Siddhanta Muktavali” as the most reliable guide to the 
real implications of it. Both Suresvara and Padmapada attack views of 
Mandana Misra which Vacaspati Misra was later to adopt. But even so, 
, ls a difference in emphasis between the two writers. Padmapada, 
with 6 C , lca ‘Vivarana’’ school which followed him, are concerned 
nf th»° Sm . 0 0 ^ an< ^ w ‘ t i 1 giving some reputable philosophical account 
m n la viru*^ erna WOrl( | as grounded in Brahman. Hence they stress 
Brahman ,T causa ' avidya as a kind of stuff or substance grounded in 
comnarienn ° S ^ rno( i | fi ca hons form the external world. Suresvara, by 
cerned with’n S u SS con .£? rne 4 w ' l h the external world and more con- 
“Naiskarmva is har< % a sentence on cosmology in the 

it handles ah i ^ C0I ? trasl “Paficadasi”), though its author claims 

transfnrmc ;tffir e ?il a f?P ,cs - Avidya is not so much a substance which 



trancf . . .. ■ ***»*•.* ay vi 

Brahmam S ln S h^mn° l ^ e . 'f or L ld as an inexplicable force which hides 

non-existence nf th* ° y l ^ ls we ^ nc * Suresvara stressing the total 
-existence of the world in the consciousness of the jftani (in contrast 



142 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 3: 1 



to Pancadasi , for example). And again in harmony with the view that 
refuses to waste ^time examining avidya but is in a hurry to do away 
with it, we find Sarvajftatma Muni (early 10th century A.D.) denounc- 
ing the theory of the Vivarana school that pure Brahman (being action- 
less) depends on Maya for its power of causality in relation to the world. 
These two writers appear to keep closer to Sarpkara’s own standpoint 
than any of the other Advaitins. 



yadd nd tat-tvam-asy ader brahmasmity avagacchati 
pradhvastdham mamo naiti tada gir-manasoh srtim 

[1] When a man understands texts like “That thou 
art” in the proper sense as “I am the Absolute (Brah- 
man)”, his sense of egoity and his sense of possession 
are destroyed and he goes beyond the sphere of words 
and the mind. 



yadaiva tad-artham tvam-arthe ’’vaiti 
tadaivavakyarthatam pratipadyate gir-manasoh srtim 
na pratipadyata iti. kuta etad adhyavasiyate. yasmat 



The very moment he understands that the entity denoted 
by the words “that” and “thou” is one and the same, he 
comprehends that which is not the meaning of any 
sentence, being beyond the range of speech and 
mind. 1 Why is this so? The reason is as follows: 

dox'ttaMlKlffi 

»r, MSI - mbs 

out of the knowledge i thus comwri thi meaning of 
new knowledge was knowledge ot t meanings of the words 

any sentence. Suresvara teaches t , met hod of agreement and 

dlfferencefthe^ert/enee immediately awakensUie 

‘pUer andTS JtaSdfor an^ intermediary such as meduanon. 

143 




3 -2 THE realization of the absolute 

tat-padam prakrtartham syat tram-padant pratyag- 

nilotpala-vad etabhyam duhkhy-anatmatva-xdrane 

[2] The meaning of the word “that” is the topic under 
discussion: the word “thou” means the innermost Self. 
When this is known, the direct meanings of “that” and 
“thou”, namely “not-being-the-Self” and “suffering” 
(as the limited individual soul or jiva), are excluded 
immediately. The operation is as in the sentence “the 
lotus is blue”. 1 

1 J writes: "Through the statement The lotus is blue’, non-blueness 
and non-lotushood are excluded immediately”, i.e. non-blueness is 
excluded from lotus, non-lotushood from blue. Similarly, through the 
sentence “that thou art" non-Absolute is excluded from individual soul 
and not-being-the-Self (i.e. otherness) from the Absolute. But at once 
this takes us to a meaning that transcends mind and speech. 

At III. 75 f. below, we shall learn how, from a different point of 
view, the interpretation of “that thou art” is not like that of “the lotus 
is blue”. 



exam krtanxaya-xyatireko vakyad exdxakydrtham 
pratipadyata ity uktam atas tad-xydkhydndya 
sutropanyasah 

It has thus been taught that one who has performed 
reasoning (on the meaning of the words) by the method 
of agreement and difference understands from the very 
sentence itself that which is not the meaning of any 

sentence. To explain this further, an aphorism (sutra) 
is now added. 

samanadhikaranyam ca xisesana-xisesyata 
a ksya-laksana-sambandhah padartha-pratyag- 

atmanam 



144 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 3: 3 

[ 3 ] (In the case of the words “that” and “thou” in the 
text “that thou art”), the grammatical relation between 
the words is apposition, the relation between the 
meanings (of these two words) is qualifier (visesana) to 
qualified (visesya), and the relation between the me anin g 
of the whole sentence (arising from the word-meanings 
as thus mutually qualifying each other) and the supreme 
Self is that of indirect indicator (laksana) to indirectly 
indicated (laksya). 



asmin sutra upanyaste kascic codayati yo 'yam 
vakyartha-pratipattau purvadhyayenanvaya- 
vyatireka-laksano nyayah sarm-karma-sarnnydsa- - 
purvako ’ bhihitah kim ayam vidhi-pariprapitah kim 
va sva-rasata evatra puman pravartata iti. kimcatah. 
srnu. yady atma-vastu-saksat-karanayavidhi- 
pariprapito ' yam nyayas tada ' vasyam atma-vastu- 

sdksdt-karandya vydvrtta-subhdsubha-karma-rasir _ 
ekagra-mana anvaya-vyatirekabhyam yathoktabhyam 
atma-darsanam karoti. aparisamapyatma-darsanam 
tatah pracyavamana drudha-patito bhavati. yadi 
punar yadrcchatah pravartale tada na kascid do?a 1 1. 
vidhi-pariprdpita iti brumo yata aha 

At this point an objector intervenes in our argument and 

asks - “That rule you laid down in the previous cap , 

that in order to understand the meaning of the holy 
that in order 10 uu ritualistic activity and 

texts a man must first gi P vyatireka before 

S d a man Wpled by Minat,0D? Y °“ 






L 




3- 4 THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

say “Well, what then?” Listen. If he does all this pre- 
paratory discipline for the sake of direct knowledge of 
the Self as the real, then he will for this purpose neces- 
sarily have to turn away from all good and evil actions 
and behold the Self with one-pointed mind through 
reasoning by the method of agreement and difference as 
described. And if he is unable to attain the vision of the 
Self he will fall and become one who has suffered a 
relapse. 1 But if he takes up the life from natural inclina- 
tion, no such harm can result”. To this we reply, “It is 
at the behest of an injunction that he takes up the pre- 
paratory discipline for knowledge.” 

1 i.e. having embraced the life of a Parivrajaka and neglected his 
daily obligatory ritual. J says that in the following sentence the phrase 
“from natural inclination” is inserted to exclude the notion of raga — 
self-interested action prompted by feelings of attachment. Cp. Intro- 
ductory commentary to 1.29. 

One important reason why the preliminary discipline must be taken 
as resting on an injunction emerges at verse III. 126 below. Note that 
the injunction is to perform the preparatory discipline for knowledge. 
An injunction to know, though accepted for argument’s sake at verse 
1.88 above, is firmly rejected at 1.91. 

samadi-sadhanah pasyed atmany atmanam anjasa 
anvaya-vyatirekabhyam tyaktva yupmad a§e$atah 

[4] (The Veda gives an injunction when it says that) 
the man possessed of inner control (§ama) and the other 
qualities 1 should see the Self in the Self, 2 having given 
up the whole sphere of the you (yusmad) 3 as unreal, by 
reasoning through the method of agreement and 
difference (anvaya and vyatireka). 

Broadly speaking, the qualities in question are: £ama = restraint of 
tne mind; dama = restraint of the senses; uparati = turning away from 
outer objects; titik^a = braving discomforts and difficulties ;$raddha = 
laith m teacher and doctrine; samadhana = power to keep the mind 
concentrated on the holy Truth. 

' i e -. lelhim Perform the final discipline before seeing the Self in the 
» c if' " ear ' n S> reflection and prolonged meditation. J 
Sphere of the you — the not-self. 



146 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 3: 5 

yu?mad-arthe parityakte purvoktair hetubhih srutih 
viksapannasya ko , smiti tat tvam ity aha sauhfdat 

[5] To the man who has given up the sphere of the you 
completely for the reasons given above, and who falls 
into bewilderment and asks “Who am I?”, the Veda 
compassionately replies “That thou art”. 1 

1 Through reasoning one may determine what one is not, one then 
falls into bewilderment and requires the compassionate voice of revela- 
tion to be told what one is, cp. verse III.53 and IV.18 below. The 
implication is that the objector (III.4, prose introduction, above) was 
wrong to speak of the possibility of a relapse. If the preliminary condi- 
tions are fulfilled, logical reflection and revelation between them lead 
infallibly to success. Cp. Texte, p. 107. 



atrapi codayanti samkhydh. sarirendriya-mano- 
buddhifv anatmasv atmeti nissamdhi-bandhanam 
mithya-jhanam ajhanam tan-nibandhano hy atmano 
’ nekanartha-sambandhas tasya canvaya- 
vyatirekabhyam eva nirastatvan nirvisayam tat-tvam- 
asy-adi-vakyam praptam. tasmad vakyasya cai?a 
mahima yo ’ yam atmanatmanor vibhaga iti. tan- 
nirakaranayedam ucyate 



Here again the Sankhyas interpose and say: “Ignorance 
(ajnana) is that positive erroneous knowledge (mithya- 
inana) which consists in connecting what are not con- 
nected and attributing Selfhood to the body senses, 
lower mind (manas) and higher intellect (buddhi). It is 
the cause of the Self coming into contact with many 
evils. It can be overcome through the method ot 
reasoning through agreement and difference alone, an 
hence sentences like “that thou art are useless. The 
most that any text can ever do is to bnng about taow- 
ledge of the separateness of the Self and the not-self . 
To refute this we continue: 1 



147 




3:6 THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

i It will be seen that the Sahkhya conception of ignorance differs 
from that of Suresvara. For the Sahkhya, ignorance (ajflana) is itself 
fate-knowledge (mithya-jnana), whereas for Suresvara it is the cause 
of fete-knowledge. For the Sahkhya, Self and not-self, puru$a and 
nrakrti are both equally real. Duality is not the product of nescience. 
It is real The sole function of nescience is to cause the notion that 
separate purusa is inseparate from the world of nature (prakj-ti). This 
nescience which unifies what are really separate, can be overcome by 
discrimination (viveka-khyati as the Sankhyas call it), based on anvaya 
and vyatireka alone. All that is required is to know that two separate 
things are in fact separate, and for this reason is adequate. The Vedic 
texts are not needed. 

Thus for the Sankhyas, ignorance is a mere erroneous cognition 
which can be cancelled by a correct logical inference. For SureSvara, a 
correct logical inference is itself but a special case of erroneous cogni- 
tion. For him, ignorance is what lies behind all empirical cognition as 
its pre-condition. 

For the Sahkhya conception of ajflana, see Sahkhya Karikas 46 and 
Patahjali’s Yoga Sutras II.5. 



bheda-samvid idam jndnam bhedabhavas ca sdksini 
karyam etad avidyaya jhatmana tyajayed vacah 



[6] This knowledge is consciousness of difference 
(bheda), and there is no difference in the Witness- 
consciousness. This is an effect of ignorance. 1 One 
should give up the words through (awakening to) the 
Self as knowledge. 

1 “Such knowledge is an effect of ignorance” — compare introductory 
commentary to verse 11.103 above. 



jnatmana^ tyajayed vaca ity upasrutyaha kascit. 
™tihya-jnana-vyatirekendtmanavabodhasydbhdvat 
im vakyena nivartyate. ajhanam hi nama jhanabhavas 
tasya cdvastu-svabhavyat kutah samsara-karanatvam 
na y asatah saj-janmesyate “ kutas tu khalu 
somyaivam syat ” iti “ katham asatah saj jay eta” iti 
sruter iti. atrocyate 



148 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 3; 7 

Hearing that One should give up the words through 
(awakening to) the Self as knowledge”, someone ob- 
jects : Since there is no ignorance of the Self apart from 
false knowledge, what is it that is destroyed by the holy 
texts? 1 (Ignorance cannot be regarded as the cause of 
positive false knowledge), for ignorance is nothing but 
absence of knowledge, and since the latter is a non- 
entity (avastu) by nature, it cannot stand as the cause of 
transmigratory experience (samsara). For the existent 
cannot spring from the non-existent, since the Veda 
says, ‘How could it be so, indeed, my dear one, how 
could the existent spring from the non-existent?’.” 2 
To this it is replied: 

1 Suresvara’s own doctrine is that ignorance is what lies behind 
positive erroneous cognition as its pre-condition or cause. 

2 Chandogya Upanishad VI.ii.2. 

ajnata eva sarvo 'rthah prag yato buddhi-janmanah 

ekenaiva sata sams ca sann ajnato bhavet tatah 



[7] Since every object is unknown (ajnata) before the 
idea of it first arises in our minds, and since (even as 
unknown) it exists by the power of the one reality (sat) 
it is that reality which is (ultimately) the thing that is 
unknown. 1 



1 Professor Hacker explains : A thing is unknown and yet it exists. 
What is unknown in a thing is, precisely, its existence. But in so far as 
a thing exists it is identical with existence-in-itself, since the existent is 
only one and never falls into differentiation. It is therefore not exactly 
the individual object which is unknown in ignorance, but universal 
Being itself. Ignorance hides the primaeval principle of knowing and 
being (cp. introductory prose commentary to verse I1I.1 13 below). 
Being-and-knowledge in itself, however, is the Self . . . Thus the com- 
bating of the thesis that ignorance is a mere negation of knowledge 
leads over into an answer to the question as to what is the object of 
nescience. Suresvara does not explicitly state the logical conclusion of 
this line of thought, and we do not yet know whether the conclusion 
had already been drawn in his day. But later— and already by SureS- 
vara’s commentator JMnottama— it was drawn and expressed by the 



149 




3- 8 THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

-» IS .Sown ™ 

SS5i meaning here by verses II. 1 78-1 79 of his Tailtiriya Vamika. 
He Tavs there that ignorance properly-so-called has no other form or 
nature (rupa) than non-comprehension of the Self. The whole of the 
not self however, manifests as a result of it, and for this reason is 
itself loosely called ignorance (avidya). It is intelligible that ignorance 
may be a cause in this sense since it is only formally negative, as we 
speak of an enemy as a not-friend. On the last point, cp. Vyasa’s Com- 
mentary to Patanjali’s Yoga Sutra II. 5. 



sann ajnato bhavet tata ity uktam adhastanena 
slokena. ko ’ sau sann ajnata ity apek$ayam tat- 
svarupa-pratipadanayaha 

It has been said in the previous verse, “It is that reality 
which is the thing that is unknown”. As if expecting the 
question “What is the nature of that unknown reality ?” 
we proceed to explain it by saying: 

pramitsayam ya abhati svayam matr-pramanayoh 
sva-mahimna ca yas siddhah so ’ jnatartho '\asiyatdm 

[8] The Self, which is the reality manifesting itself in 
both knower and instrument of cognition (pramana) 
at the time when an empirical cognition is being striven 
for, and which is revealed by its own power — that is the 
thing which is unknown. 



atra kecid ahuh. yat-kimcid iha vakyam laukikam 
vaidikam va tat sarvam samsargatmakam eva 
vakyartham gamayati. atas tat-tvam-asy-adi- 
vdkyebhyah samsargatmakam aham brahmeti 
vijnaya tavan nididhyasita yavad avakyarthatmakah 
pratyagatma-visayo ’ vabodho ’ ham brahmeti 
samabhijayate . tasmad eva vijhanat kaivalyam 
apnotiti tan-nirakaranayedam ucyate 

150 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 3; 9 

Some say 1 that all sentences, whether secular or Vedic 
convey a synthetic meaning only. 2 Hence a man derives 
from such texts as that thou art” synthetic knowledge 
of the form “I am the Absolute (Brahman)”, and, having 
done so, he must practise sustained meditation on them 
until awareness of the inmost Self dawns in its (direct) 
form, inexpressible by any sentence. The state of final 
liberation (kaivalya) is achieved only by this knowledge. 
To refute this idea, we say: 

1 i.e. Mandana Misra. References to his Brahma Siddhi have been 
given in the notes to 1.67 above. 

1 That is to say, they maintain that the function of the sentence is to 
convey a unitary sentence-meaning which consists in a synthesis of the 
diverse meanings of the individual words. So conceived, the sentence- 
meaning is not a pure or homogeneous unity, and contains only that 
degree of unity proper to a synthesis of diverse elements. 

samanadhikaranyader ghatetara-khayor iva 

vyavrtteh syad avakydrthah saksdn nas tat-tvam- 

arthayoh 



[9] On our view, that which is not the meaning of any 
sentence {viz. the Self or Absolute) is immediately 
apprehended as the meaning of “that” and “thou” 
through the exclusion (vyavrtti) of meanings arising 
from the grammatical apposition of the words etc., 1 as 
in the case of the pot-ether and the other ether. 2 

1 “Etc ” i e from the grammatical apposition of the words, the 
relation of qualifier to qualified of the word-meanings, and the relation 
of indicator to indicated connecting the sentence-meaning with the 
Absolute. All this has been referred to at verse III- 3 J bo . v . e : “ 
same doctrine, almost word for word, that we find in t e anaso 
Varttika attributed to Suresvara on the pak^hanmrti Hy^. ^apter 
III, verses 15-16, trans. Mahadeva Sastn The Minor Upamshads , 

V °The sentence “Verily the ether in the pot is the ether in the sky” is 



151 




3 ‘10 THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

nf character of “great-ether-different-from-other- 
forms^jf ether” Thus it is seen that the words must refer indirectly 
K'ksaS) to bare ether in its pure essence,!. The reference to ether 
at Manasollasa Varttika III.21, taken in conjunction with the present 
vlrse St be thought a piece of evidence in favour of the authenticity 

of that work. 



kuto ’ vakyartho ’ vasiyata iti cet tat-pratipatty- 
-artham visesana-visesyayoh samarthyoktih 

How could anyone comprehend what is not the meaning 
of a sentence? To help towards an understanding of 
this he explains the meaning of the qualifier and 
qualified (in the text under discussion) : 

nirduhkhitvam tvam-arthasya tad-arthena visesanat 
pratyakta ca tad-arthasya tvam-padenasya samnidheh 

[10] The fact that the “thou” is not the sufferer (indi- 
vidual soul) is conveyed by its being qualified as the 
Absolute through the word “that” ; and the fact that the 
“that” (i.e. the Absolute) is the innermost Self is con- 
veyed by the presence of the word “thou” next to it. 1 

1 The reasoning is negative. “That thou art” affirms “that” of “thou” 
and “thou" of “that”. Now, by the law of contradiction, nothing can 
at the same time both be and not be the same thing. Hence, even if we 
take the sentence at its face value as affirming that “thou” is qualified 
by “that” and “that” by “thou”, it still points to a meaning beyond 
what is directly expressible in a sentence. For if “that” is in some sense 
“thou”, then all the not-thou is negated of “that” — in other words, all 
the not-sclf is negated of the Absolute. And, likewise, all that is not the 
Absolute is negated of the inmost Self. Hence the sentence “that thou 
art” points to a meaning beyond anything expressible directly in words. 
A plurality of words is necessary to indicate a meaning that in itself 
has no relation with plurality because the direct meaning of all words, 
laise in the present context, has to be excluded by the presence of other 
words. J 



152 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 3:11 

uktam samanadhikaranyam visesana- visesya-bha vas 
ca samksepato ' tha lak$ya-lak$ana-vydkhydndyaha 

The nature of grammatical apposition 1 and of being in 
qualified-qualifier relation has been stated briefly. So 
we now proceed with the following to explain the 
indicator-indicated relation: 2 

1 He has so far merely referred to the fact that the relation between 
the words “that” and “thou” is that of grammatical apposition, without 
defining the term further, cp. Texte, p. 77. The term is defined at 
Manasollasa III. 18-19 as follows: “Words are said to be used in 
apposition when they refer to one and the same entity but for different 
grammatical reasons (nimitta) and with different grammatical func- 
tions (vrtti)”. Cp. the very similar definition given in the Kasika 
Commentary to Panini’s Grammar, II.i.49. 

2 Even the indicator-indicated relation, subsisting between the 
sentence-meaning and the Absolute, is not really given till verse III.26 
below, and then only laconically. In the meantime Suresvara starts a 
completely new theme, the thesis, namely, that a word can be used to 
indicate the Absolute, the word “I”, and from this he passes over into 
a discussion of the relation between the Self and the ego. Cp. Texte, 
p. 77. 

kutastha-bodha-pratyaktvam animittam sad-atmanah 
boddhrtahamtayor hetus tabhyam tenopalaksyate 

[11] The consciousness and interiority of the Self firm 
as a mountain peak are (natural to it, and) not acciden- 
tal characteristics (introduced from without). The Self 
is the cause of the consciousness of the intellect and the 
interiority of the ego-sense. Hence it is referred to 
figuratively as “the knower” and as “I”. 



buddheh ku(astha-bodha-pratyaktva-nimitte 
boddhrta-pratyaktve ye tv asadharane tayor 
visefa-vacanam 



153 




3:12 THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

We now state the distinguishing features of the particu- 
lar knowership (boddhrta) and interionty 1 pertaining 
to the intellect (and ego), which are dependent on the 
consciousness and interiority of (the Absolute) firm as 
a mountain peak: 

1 The particular kind of interiority pertaining to the intellect is that 
of “functioning as the ego". 

boddhrta kartrta buddheh karmata syad ahamtayd 

tayor aikvam yathd buddhau purvayor evam atmani 

[12] The “knowership” (boddhrta) of the intellect is 
(a kind of) agency. 1 As ego, the intellect is an object. 2 
Just as these two 3 are one in the intellect, so are their 
prototypes (consciousness and interiority) one in the 
Self. 

1 It consists in modification into cognitions of the various objects 
known, and not in pure consciousness like that of the Absolute. J 

2 An object witnessed by pure consciousness. J 

* i.e. knowership and ego. Consciousness and interiority are one 
and the same thing: they only appear to be sundered when the intellect 
is viewed objectively, as in introspection. But even here they are only 
conceived as different through their opposites — inertness and exterior- 
ity. In themselves they are one and the same. J 



yathd buddhau purvayor evam atmanity atidesena 
buddhi-sadharmya- vidhanan nanatva-prasaktau 
tad-apavddartham aha 

It might be thought that the Self had been too far 
likened to the intellect in the phrase “just as these two 
are united in the intellect, so are their prototypes in the 
Self , so that consciousness and interiority would be 
stinct in the Self. To avert this suspicion we proceed: 

dharma-dharmitva-bhedo 'syahso 'pi naivatmano yatah 
pratyag-jyotir ato 'bhinnam bheda-hetor asambhavat 

154 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 3:14 

[13] The intellect, indeed, contains internal distinc- 
tions, since it consists of a substance and its attributes. 
Not so the Self, for it is the inmost light, itself undiffer- 
entiated. For there can be nothing to cause distinctions 
in it. 1 

1 J explains that, considered in relation to the intellect as substance, 
consciousness and interiority (as knowership and ego-sense) are 
qualities in it along with others. But consciousness and interiority are 
not to be conceived as mere inherent qualities in the case of the Self. 
For, unlike the intellect, the Self is not knowable as an object: and as it 
is in itself the undifferentiated inner light, there is no means of knowing 
it as associated with distinctions of any kind. 



bheda-hetv-asambhavam darsayann aha 

To explain further how there can be nothing to cause 
distinctions, we say: 

na kasyamcid avasthayam bodha-pratyaktvayor bhida 
vyabhicaro ’ thava dfsto yatha ’ ham-tad-vidos sada 

[14] Consciousness and interiority are never found to 
be different or found without each other in any state of 
consciousness whatever. But the ego and the knower of 
the ego are always experienced as different, and the 
knower is found without the ego. 1 
1 For example, in deep sleep. 



yastnad ajhdnopddanaya eva buddher bhedo 
natmanas tasmad etat siddham 



Because the distinction pertains only to the intellect, 
born of ignorance, and not to the Self, the follow, ng 
stands proved: 



155 




3*15 the realization of the absolute 

kutastha-bodhato ' dvaitamsaksat tvampratyagatmanah 
kutastha-bodhad boddhri dhih svato hiyam vinasvari 

[15] It is because the inmost Self is of the nature of 
changeless consciousness that it is immediately evident 
and without a second. It is by the power of this same 
changeless consciousness that the transient intellect 
functions as a knower (in the empirical sense). 



athadhuna prakrtasyaiva parinaminah kutasthasya ca 
laksanam ucyate 

Now the definitions of “changing” (parinamin) and 
“changeless” (kutastha) as understood in the present 
context are given : 

visesam kamcid asritya yat svarupam pratiyate 
pratyabhijha-pramanena parinami sa deha-vat 

[16] That (i.e. the empirical ego) which is known, now 
as this, now as that (e.g. now as happy, now as sad), 
and whose unity is determined by the faculty of recogni- 
tion (pratyabhijna) — that ego-sense is subject to trans- 
formation like the body. 1 

1 “Whose unity is determined by the faculty of recognition” : J 
writes: “Though the cognitions ‘I know the pot’, ‘I know the cloth’, ‘I 
am happy’, ‘I am sad’ etc. are different, yet through the power of 
recognition we have the knowledge ‘it is that very same I who was 
formerly sad that am now happy’.” 



samanyac ca visesac ca sva-mahimnaiva yo bhavet 
vyutthayapy avikari syat kumbhakasadi-vat tu sa) h 



156 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 



3:19 



[17] But that which exists in its own incomparable 
majesty beyond the particular and general alike— that, 
the changeless rock-firm principle (kutastha), is unaffec- 
ted, like the ether among pots. 1 

1 Cp. verse 11.94 above. 



dtmano buddhes ca bodha-pratyagatmatvam 
abhihitam tayor asadharana-laksanabhidhanartham 

aha 



It has been said that consciousness (bodha) and 
“being-an-inmost-Self” (pratyagatmatva) pertain to 
both the Self and the intellect. To give their particular 
definitions (in the two cases) we say: 

buddher yat pratyagdtmatvam tat sydd dehdd ^_, ray - t 

dtmanas tu svarupam tan nabhasah su?itd yathd 

MCI The “being-an-inmost-Self” of the intellect is 

relativeto the body etc. only. But the 

Self” of the Self is its very nature (svarupa), as hollo 

ness is of the sky. 



nam^l a “ifthe es S en t ,al nature of mountams to 
stand still. 1 



157 




3 '20 THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

1 When we sav of a horse, for instance, “it is standing still”, what we 
mean is "it happens to be standing still”: i.e. we are not asserting 
some thine which is necessarily bound up with the nature of the horse 
(essential 'property) but something which happens to be true of it due to 
particular circumstances (accidental property). But when we affirm 
“mountains stand still", we are asserting something about their very 
essence. In this sense, knowledge is but an accidental property of the 
mind while it is the essential nature of the Self. The same analogy is 
used by Sarpkara at Upadesa Sahasri (prose) 103 and elsewhere. 



tavoh kutasiha-parinaminor atmanaxabodha eva 
sanibandha-hetur no prnar xastaxah kascid api 
sambandha upapadyata ity aha 

The only cause of (apparent) relation between these 
two, the changeless and the changing, is not-being- 
awake-to-the-Self. There can be no real relation. To 
express this idea we say: 

samyak-samsaya-mithyatvair ddhir eveyam vibhajyate 
hdnopdddnata 'misam mohad adhyasyate dfsau 

[20] This intellect is differentiated into a series of 
correct, doubtful and false cognitions. The rise and fall 
of these cognitions is falsely attributed (adhyasa) to 
the Seer through delusion. 1 
1 UpadeSa Sahasri (verse section) XVIII.121. 



kutah kutasthatma-siddhir iti ced yatah. 

If you ask how the changeless Self is proved, it is 
because : 

na hanam hana-matrena nodayo ' piyata yatah 
tat-siddhih syat tu tadd-hine hanadana-vidharmake 



158 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 



3:22 



[21] The loss of a cognition cannot be cognized by 
that lost cognition, nor can the rise of a cognition be 
cognized by that cognition as it rises. The rise and fall 
of cognitions is established owing to the existence of a 
Principle that is itself incapable of increase and diminu- 
tion. 



exam 

Thus: 

agamapayi-hetubhyam dhutxa sarxan anatmanah 
tatas tat-txam-asity etadd hanty asmadi nijam tamah 

[22] After first rejecting all his false selves through the 
two kinds of reasoning, those, namely, on the (false) 
nature of what comes into being and the (false) nature 
of what passes away, a man then destroys the ignorance 
in his Self through hearing the text “That thou art . 

i Reasoning does not suffice for liberation it tells only what one is 
no t Th"e Veda tells one “That thou art”, cp. verses III.5, III.53 

and IV. 18. 



ityddi punah punar ucyate grantha-ldghavad 
prag apy elasya pradtatvad it, mam or, ham aha 

4 ,, fnrth We eo over the same ground repeatedly 

And so forth. g book easier tQ under stand, 

because by thus maki g ^^tand. 1 Now, it 

the subject becomes easier tu 

159 




3:23 



the realization of the absolute 

must be admitted that from texts like “that thou art” 
the unwanted ideas “not-directly-known and having- 
a-second” are conveyed along with the intended 
meaning, viz. the non-dual Self. Still, they do not form 
part of the meaning that the Vedic text is intended to 
convey, as they are already known before (the text is 
heard). 3 This is the point we now make: 

1 The presence of repetitive stanzas, and loose organization gener- 
ally, are distinctive features of the work, to which the author here 
himself refers. They are partly due to the ardent temperament of the 
writer, which left him with little patience for lengthy or coolly reasoned 
disquisitions, and partly to his deliberate effort to impress the same few 
truths on the mind of the reader by repetitions in slightly different 
language. This is another characteristic feature of many of the inde- 
pendent treatises (prakarana grantha) of Advaita, including those 
attributed to Samkara. They are not philosophical disquisitions so 
much as exemplifications of the spiritual mode of reasoning about the 
real. They repeat again and again the same few themes from Upanisha- 
dic tradition and add incidental reasons here and there. Repetition 
(abhyasa) and spiritual practice (sadhana) are closely related terms. 
The repetitions, defective from the point of view of exposition of a 
philosophical system, are deliberate, and are inserted because the final 
aim of the treatises is spiritual therapy and not mere intellectual 
analysis. In his Introduction to his Edition of the text of the present 
work, Hiriyanna points out that Suresvara also apologizes for self- 
repetition in his Brhadaraijyaka Varttika (III.ii.45, p. 1155). It is of 
some interest for the authenticity question of the Manasollasa Varttika 
on the Daksina Murti Hymn attributed to SureSvara that it also con- 
tains a similar verse — VIII.4. 

8 See the following verse, III.23. 

* The text is an authoritative means of knowledge (pramana). But 
an authoritative means of knowledge is only such when it conveys some 
piece of knowledge not already known. 

tad. ity etat padam loke bahv-artha-pratipadakam 
aparityajya paroksyam abhidhanottham eva tat 

I 23 l ordinary worldly usage, the word “that” is 
used with many different meanings. But it always brings 
wit it the notion of “not-directly-known”, so that is 
e basic meaning arising directly from the word. 



160 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 3:25 

tv am ity api padam tad-vat saksan-matrartha-vaci tu 
samsaritam asamtyajya sapi syad abhidhana-ja 

[24] On the other hand the word “thou” can refer 
directly (vaci) only to someone immediately present, 
and, moreover, someone enmeshed in transmigration, 
for that is the meaning arising (directly) from the word. 1 

1 The word “thou” cannot directly mean the supreme Self, which is 
beyond the universe of discourse. In its direct meaning, it can only 
refer to an empirical personality knowable as an object. But when the 
word "thou” is placed in a sentence in a particular context, the sentence- 
meaning can indicate the supreme Self indirectly without expressing it 
directly, cp. verses III. 3 and III. 10 above. 



viruddhoddesanatvac ca paroksya-duhkhitvayor 
avivaksitatvam ity aha 



And (in the sentence “that thou art”) the ideas “not- 
directly-known” and “the transmigrant” 1 are not part 
of the meaning to be conveyed, because these direct 
meanings are here contradictory. To show this we say: 
1 Lit. the sufferer. 

uddisyamanam vakya-stham noddesana-gunanvitam 
akahksita-padarthena samsargam pratipadyate 



[25] In the text (“that thou art”), the subject 1 con- 
sidered as possessing qualities denoted by the direct 
meaning of the word used to indicate it 2 cannot be united 
with the predicate 3 (considered in its direct meaning). 

1 i.e. the grammatical and logical subject; according to this verse, 
the text has to be taken as "thou (subject) art that (predicate) . 

2 j e the term “thou”, of which the direct meaning has just been 
shown to have been the transmigrant, present and immediately known 

a Because the predicate ("that”) has just been shown to have for its 
direct meaning “that which is not immediately known . Thus, if the 
sentence is taken in its prima facie meaning, a contradiction results 
through the identification of a subject which is “immediately known 
with a predicate which is “not immediately known . 



M 



161 




3:26 THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

rata etad evam ato 'nupaditsitayor apt tat-tvam 
arthayor visesana-visesya-bhavo bheda-samsarga- 
ralutavakyartha-laksanayai vety 1 upasamharah 

1 The reading avakyartha (in place of J's vakyartha) is that of the 
Sarartha Commentary, given by Hiriyanna in a footnote to his edition 
of the text of the Naiskarmya Siddhi, ad loc. 

Conclusion and summary of the topic: because this is 
so, the direct meanings of “that” and “thou” are not 
what the text intends to be understood. Their presence 
as qualifier and qualified 1 is for the purpose of indicating 
something which stands beyond either synthesis or 
exclusion , 2 and so is not the meaning of any sentence 
(avakyartha). 



1 The words “that” and "thou” are predicate and subject respectively; 
their meanings are qualifier and qualified respectively. Words in isola- 
tion stand for universal, according to Mimamsa and Vedanta theory. 
The meanings become narrowed down to particulars through mutual 
qualification. Here Suresvara says that it is the meaning of “that” 
which qualifies the meaning of “thou”. Cp. verse III. 10 above and 
Samkara’s Upadesa Sahasri XVIII.173. 

2 “Synthesis” and “exclusion” are the two ways in which a sentence 
can derive a single meaning from the diverse meanings of the words of 
which it is made up. These are exemplified in two linguistic theories 
which were developed well before Suresvara’s time. According to one 
theory, similar to that adopted by the Advaitins from the Mimarpsakas, 
the isolated word stands for a universal. The sentence-meaning con- 
sists in a synthesis of the meanings of the isolated words in which the 
universal meanings the words would have had in isolation become 



narrowed down to particulars through mutual qualification. In the 
phrase “the white cow”, the function of “white” is to associate the idea 
of white with cow, and this narrows down the meaning from cow in 
general to white cow. “White” is also a universal, and “cow”, by 
becoming associated with white, narrows down its meaning also. The 
idea at tne back of this theory is that the hearer must have prior 
knowledge of the meaning of the word if it is to be intelligible, and the 
word must, therefore, in its isolated state, mean the universal, since the 
earer cannot have prior knowledge of all the particulars comprehen- 
ded within the universal. 

nrTw other theory, championed by the old grammarian Vyadi and a 
P.ntjr-uf tl ater Budd hist apoha vada, finds the universal itself 
and C ' .if ls °l ate d word can refer to innumerable particulars, 

simniv thff T ^conveying positive knowledge of any universal but 
P y ugh excluding from the mind of the hearer the meanings of 



162 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 3:27 

all other words. Thus “cow" does not mean the universal “cowness" a 
quite imaginary entity, but may be used to refer to any particular cow 
through its power to exclude from the hearer’s mind the idea of any- 
thing else. And “white” does not associate a universal with “cow”, but 
simply excludes the idea of any particular cow that is not white. ’ 

The first theory is called the theory of synthesis (saipsarga) because 
the sentence-meaning is regarded as a synthetic unity arising from inter- 
related universals. The second theory is called the theory of exclusion 
(bheda) because it maintains that the sole function of a word is to 
exclude the hearer’s mind from something. Whatever the precise 
meaning of the phrase “synthesis or exclusion”, it seems clear that 
Suresvara is here saying that the meaning of “that thou art” is some- 
thing beyond the range of words in their normal function. 

For a discussion of this topic, see K. Kunjunni Raja, Indian Theories 
of Meaning, p. 191 fT. 

tado visesanarthatvam visesyatvam tvamas tat ha 
laksya-laksana-sambandhas tayoh syat pratyagatmana 

[26] “That” has for its meaning the qualifier, “thou” 
has for its meaning the qualified. The relation of these 
to the inmost Self is that of indicator to indicated. 



katham punar avivaksita-viruddha-nirasyamanasya 
laksanarthatvam 

But how can that which is contradictory and rejected 
and not intended as the meaning serve as an indication? 



laksanam sarpa-vad rajjvah praticah syad ahatn tatha 
tad-badhenaiva vakyartham vetti so 'pi tad-asrayat 



[27] The “I” is something which indicates the inmost 
Self, as the false snake indicates the rope. 1 When the 
“I” is negated, the meaning of the sentence is known, 
for that which it indicates is the substratum of the 1 . 

1 In the case of the rope mistaken for a snake in the dark. The rope 
is then skid to be the “substratum” of the snake-, Huston. 

2 Cp. verses 11.28 IT. above. 



163 




3:28 THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

iyam cavakyartha-pratipattir anvaya- 
vyatirekabhijiiasyaiva. yasmat 

Only he who understands the method of reasoning by 
agreement and difference can understand the (indicated) 
meaning that is not the meaning of any sentence : 

yavad vavan nirasyayam dehadin pratyagancati 
tavat tavat tad-artho ’ pi tvam-artham praviviksati 

[28] The more a man turns inward and negates the 
body etc., so much the more does the meaning of the 
word “that” tend to enter into the meaning of the word 
“thou” (for him). 1 

1 Cp. verse III. 75 below. J explains that this verse refers to the process 
of reasoning by the method of agreement and difference that must take 
place before the texts are finally “heard” (sravana) in the full sense. It 
is not that the holy texts, if properly understood, yield a kind of 
knowledge that admits of degrees. 



kasmat punah karanad dehady-anatmatva- 
pratipattav evatma tad-artham atmatvenabhilingate 
na viparyaya iti. ucyate. 

pratyagatmanavabodhasyanatma-svabhavyat tad- 
abhinirvfttas cayam buddhy-adi-dehantas tasminn 
atmatvam avidya-krtam evatmatvam ivanatmatvam 
api savidyasyaiva. yato niravidyo vidvan avakydrtha- 
rupa eva kevalo ’ vasipyate tasmad ucyate 

But why is it that the Self only becomes identified with 1 
the meaning of the word “that” when the body etc. 2 
have been seen to be not-self, and not otherwise ? We 
reply. Because not-being-awake-to-the-Self is not-self 
y ^ at ure (svabhavyat). And all this, from the intellect 
o t e body, has come out from not-being-awake-to-the- 

164 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 3:30 

Self. The view that this (whole complex of objectively 
knowable factors in the personality) is the Self is only 
the result of ignorance. And just as the notion that it is 
the Self is only possible for one associated with ignor- 
ance, so equally is the notion that it is not-self. 3 For 
the man of enlightenment, shorn of ignorance, himself 
subsists as the transcendent reality that is not the 
meaning of any sentence. Therefore we proceed: 

1 atmatvena abhilingate — lit. “embraces as its own self”. 

2 i.e. all elements in the psycho-physical organism that are knowable 
as objects from the ego down. 

3 Because it is a notion. 

dehadi vyavadhanatvat tad-artham svayam apy atah 

paroksyenaiva janati saksattvam tad-anatmanah. 

[29] Because the body etc. are a veil, one (at first) 
accepts the meaning of “that” as something not immedi- 
ately evident, even though it is really one’s own Self, 
and one takes as immediately evident what is (in fact) 
not of the nature of that Self, (i.e. the ego, mind and 
body etc.). 



yathoktartha-pratipatti-saukarydya drstantopadanam 

We give a simile to make the point as stated clearer to 
understand: 

pratyag udbhuta-pittasya yatha bahyartha-pitata 
caitanyam pratyagatmiyam bahir vad drsyate tatha 

[30] Just as in jaundice bile in the eye appears as 
yellow colour in an object perceived externally (such as 
a white conch), so (by a similar supenmposition) the 
consciousness constituting the inmost Self seems as if 
it were external. 



165 




3:31 THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 
vasniad evam ato visuddham avasiyatam 
This being so, 1 one should determine the true 2 meaning: 

1 J says this refers to the general argument of the last few verses that 
"that" and “thou" refer indirectly to the supreme Self. 

- visuddha— lit. pure, purified, emended. 

padanv uddhrtya vakyebhyo hy anvaya-vyatirekatah 
padartham llokato buddhva retti vakyartham anjasa 

[31] It is by isolating single words from their sentences 
and noting what is and is not regularly associated with 
them that one learns their meanings in the course of 
worldly experience. Having learnt them, one is in a 
position to understand the meaning of a sentence (which 
uses them). 1 

1 The standard example in Advaita works of how words are learned 
has been given by Sarvajnatma Muni. A small boy who does not know 
the meaning of the word "faggots" hears the statement “Purnika is 
in the kitchen, cooking rice with the help of the faggots”. What he 
then sees gives him his first idea of the meaning of the word “faggots”, 
and later he learns the meaning of the word thoroughly by finding that 
in all the different contexts in which it is used it is invariably associated 
with small bundles of wood used for cooking. See Sarpk$epa §ariraka 
1.362. 



kutah punah samanya-matra- \jtteh padasya 
vdkyartha-pratipatti-hetutvam iti. badham 

You ask, “How can a word, which stands only for a 
universal, 1 function in conveying the meaning of a 
sentence (which is often concerned with the par- 
ticular)?” All right, (we’ll show you): 

Cp. note 2 to III. 26 (prose introduction) above. 

sa many am hi padam brute vise$o vakya-kartfkah 
yruty-adi-pr at ibaddham sad visesartham bhavet padam 



166 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 3:33 

[32] A word expresses a universal; a particular is 
expressed through a sentence; a word comes to stand 
for a particular when its meaning is restricted through 
interpretation according to the (Mlmamsaka) criteria 
laid down for ascertaining subject and context. 1 

1 The term “sruty-adi” in the text refers to sruti, linga etc. which are 
the criteria laid down by the Mimarnsakas for determining where a 
subject begins and ends, and so, in the last analysis, for interpreting the 
meaning of any Vcdic passage. They are described at length in 
Mimamsa Nyaya Prakasa, trans. Edgerton, pp. 64-1 10. 



anvaya-vvatireka-purassaram vakyam eva 
sdmdnadhikaranyadmavidya-patala-pradhvamsa- 
dvarena mumuksum svarajye ' bhisecayati na tv 
anvaya-vyatireka-matra-sadhyo 'yam artha ity aha 



What we now proceed to say is that it is the holy text 
itself, analysed logically through the method of agree- 
ment and difference, that destroys the ignorance of the 
seeker of liberation through the relations of apposition 
etc. which it expresses 1 and anoints him in the realm of 
spiritual sovereignty, and that mere logical reason 
(practised in isolation from the holy text) cannot tulhl 
this function. 

• That is, through the grammatical relation of apPOMjro" ^ wh'ch 
conveys a qualified sentence-meaning, which tr turn mchtat 
meaning beyond all sentence-meanings, cp. verse IIU above. 

buddhy-adinam anatmatvam lihgad apUa sidhyati 

nivrttis lavata netity ato vakyam samasrayet 

[33] The knowledge that the intellect, etc are not-self 
may be attained through reasoning (linga). B “ l r “ s ° 
ing does not suffice to annihilate ignorance. Hence one 

must resort to the holy texts. 



167 




3 -34 THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

na kevalam anumana-matra-sarano 'bhilasitam 
artham na prapnotity anartham capnotity aha 

Moreover, resort to reason alone does not merely fail 
to carry one to the desired goal. It also produces 
positive evil : 

anadrtva srutim mohad ato bauddhas tamasvinah 
apedire niratmatvam anumanaika-caksusah 

[34] Neglecting the Upanishadic doctrines from pure 
delusion, the benighted Buddhists landed themselves in 
the doctrine of the non-existence of the Self, through 
adhering to inference as their only criterion of truth. 



na canadare karanam asti. yasmat sarvatraivanadara- 
nimittam pramanasya pramanantara-pratipanna - 
pratipadanam va viparita-pratipadanam va 
samsayita-pratipadanam va na va pratipadanam iti — 
na caitesam anyatamad api karanam asti. yata aha 

Nor is there any ground for (this) neglect of the Veda 
(sruti). For the only occasions for disregarding an 
authoritative source of knowledge are when it “reveals” 
something already revealed from another authoritative 
source of knowledge, when it “reveals” something 
contradictory (to known truths), where it “reveals” 
(only) a doubt or where it “reveals” nothing. And none 
of these grounds are present (in the case of the Veda). 
Hence we say : 

manantaranava^tabdham nirduhkhy-dtmanam ahjasd 
o hay anti srutih kena na pramanam itiryate 



168 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 3:37 

[35] Who would not accept the authority of the Veda 
which teaches with simplicity and directness the nature 
of the Self beyond pain, which is not knowable through 
any other authoritative means of knowledge (pramana) ? 



na ca samsayitavyam avagamayati. yatah 

Nor does it convey anything open to doubt: for 

sarva-samsaya-hetau hi niraste katham atmani 
jayeta samsayo vakyad anumanena yusmadi 

[36] When (the not-self with the ego etc. which is) the 
only cause of doubts has been rejected by reasoning, 
how can doubts about the Self be raised by the holy 
texts ? 



api ca 
Moreover : 

yatra syat samsayo nasau jheya atmeti panditaih 
na yatah samsaya-praptir dtmano ’vagatitvatah 

[37] Wheresoever there is doubt, there, the wise 
should know, the Self is not. For no doubts can rise in 
relation to the Self, since its nature is pure immediate 
consciousness. 



ana vabodhakatvam tu durotsdritam eva. yata aha 

And the notion that the Veda reveals nothing is alto- 
gether preposterous. Hence we say. 

169 




3:38 THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

bodhye 'pv anubhaxo yasya na kathamcana jayate 
ram katham bodhavec chastram lostam nara- 

samakrtim 

[38] He in whom enlightenment does not arise even 
though all the conditions for it are present — how could 
the Veda (sastra) enlighten such a one, clod of earth as 
he is in human form 7 1 

1 Quoted with a variant reading by Vidyaranya Svamin at PaficadaSi 
III. 19. 



anvaya-vyatireka-purassaram vakyam 
e va xdkyartha-rupam at marram pratipadayatity asya 
paksasya dradhimne sruty-udahararram upanyasyati 

Now we quote a Vedic text in support of our view, 
“only the holy text, as supported through reasoning by 
the method of agreement and difference, conveys know- 
ledge of that Self which is not the meaning of any sen- 
tence”: 

jighranimam aham gandham iti yo vetty avikriyah 
sa atma tat param jyotih sirasidam xacah sruteh 

[39] That changeless one who has experiences such as 
(the desire) “Let me smell this smell” 1 is the Self, as is 
declared in “He is the Self” 2 and “that is the 
highest Light”. 3 These texts form the crown of the Veda. 

1 Chandogya Upanishad VIIl.xii.4. 

2 Ibid. 

J Chandogya Upanishad VIII.xii.2. 



170 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 3:40 

yatha “ tat satyam sa dtma tat tvam asi" ity asya 
sesatvenanvaya-vyatireka-srutir yatha “ ya eso 
ksini puru?o drsyate" ity ddyd “ atha yo vededam 
jighrdni ” ity anta. tathd “aham brahmdsmi" ity asya 
sesah 

There exist passages like the one beginning “This 
spirit (purusa) in the eye” 1 and ending “He then who 
experiences the desire ‘let me smell (this smell)’,” 2 
which are subordinate to texts like “That is real, 
that is the Self, that thou art” 3 and are, in fact, 
illustrations of their meaning through agreement and 
difference (anvaya-vyatireka-sruti). Similarly, the fol- 
lowing is subordinate to the text “I am the Absolute 
(Brahman)”. 4 

1 Chandogya Upanishad VIII.vii.4. 

2 Chandogya Upanishad VIII.xii.4. 

3 Chandogya Upanishad VI.viii.7 etc. 

4 Brhadaranyaka Upanishad I.iv.10. 

ahamah pratyagatmartho nirastasesa-yusmadah 
bambhaniti srutir nyayya yo ’ yam ity adina 'sakrt 

[40] When the word “I” has been divested of all associ- 
ation with the not-self 1 it means the inmost Self 
(pratyag-atman). The Veda (sruti) regularly and re- 
peatedly declares this in such texts as “(Verily) he (is the 
great unborn Soul) who is this (Person consisting of 
knowledge among the senses)”. 2 

1 With duality. ... 

2 Brhadaranyaka Upanishad IV.ni.7. 



k at ham punar ayam artho ’ vasiyate aham- 
vydjendtrdtmdrtho bubodhayisita iti. yatah 



171 




3.41 THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

But how is it determined for certain that it is for pro- 
claiming the Self that the device of the “I” is resorted 
to? In this way: 

e sa alma svayam-jyotrravi-somagni-vaksu sah 
ftesv astain drg evaste bhasavams citta-cestitam 

[41] This is the Self, the self-luminous Light. When the 
sun. moon, fire and speech have set, 1 He remains alone 
as the Seer, illumining all the activities of the mind. 2 

1 i.e. in dream. 

2 This verse is based on Brhadaranyaka Upanishad, IV.iii.6. 



nimenekti ca prsto munih } 

And the sage (Yajnavalkya), being asked, gave a ruling: 

atmanaivety upasrutya ko ’ yam atmety udirite 
buddheh param svato muktam atmanam munir 

abhyadhat 

[42] Having heard the words “By the Self alone”, 
Janaka asked, “Who is this Self?” 1 . And the sage 
(Yajnavalkya) told him of the Self beyond the intellect, 
free by nature. 

1 Brhadaraijyaka Upanishad IV.iii.7. 



yasmac catmatraham-vyajena pratyan-matro 
jigrahayi?itas tasmad aham-vyttih svarupasya 
vilayenaiva vakyarthavagamaya karanatvam 
pratipadyata it imam artham aha 



172 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 3:44 

The point that we now propound is the following: 
because the aim is to convey a knowledge of the inmost 
(Self) alone through the device of the “I”, taken as the 
bare Self, it follows that the ego-notion (aham-vrtti) 
plays its part in conveying the meaning of the sentence 
by mere self-dissolution : 

aham-vrttyaiva tad brahma yasmad eso ’ vagacchati 
tat-svarupa-layenatah karanam syad ahamkrtih 

[43] It is true that it is through the ego-notion (aham- 
vrtti) that the seeker of liberation (mumuksu) comes to 
know the Absolute in the form “I am the Absolute 
(Brahman)”. But it is through dissolving itself (to make 
way for the supreme Reality) that the ego-notion serves 
as an instrument in this matter. 



ata eva ca yah pratijnato ’ rtho “naham-grahye na 
tadd-hine ” ityadih sa yuktibhir upapadita iti 
krtvopasamhriyate 

Thinking, therefore, that the doctrine proposed at 
verse II. 5 above in the words “it conflicts neither wi 
the object of the I-notion nor with that wtuch is not the 
object of the I-notion” has been well substantiated y 
arguments, we sum the matter up : 

[44] Suppose it ' s a ^ n Z h fonhttS”;Ttmyt 

‘•Because of ,he conflict with perception-. 



173 




3 *45 THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

But the knowledge conveyed by the holy texts is not in 
conflict with perception since they refer to the inmost 
Self and not to the world of duality. 1 

1 Lit. “the sphere of the you". 



purvasyaiva slokarthasya vispastartham aha 

To clarify further the meaning of the above verse, we 
proceed : 

parahcy eva tu sarvani pratyaksadini natmani 
praticv eva pravrttam tat sad asiti vaco 'hjasa 

[45] All the empirical means of knowledge bear out- 
wards; they do not bear on the Self. But texts like 
“Thou art that reality” (tat sad asi) 1 bear upon the 
inmost Self. 2 

1 Derived from Chandogya Upanishad VI.viii.7. 

2 The deliverances of revelation and sense-perception cannot 
contradict one another since they bear on a different subject-matter. 
Cp. verses II. 5 and 11.81-83 above. 



t asmat pramatr-pramana-prameyebhyo 
h iyamanopadiyamanebhyo 'n vaya- vyatirekabhyam 
muhjesika-vad asesa-buddhi-vikriya-sak?itayatmdnam 
niskrsya tat-tvam-asy-adi-vakyebhyo ’ purvadi - 
laksanam atmanam vijaniyat. tad etad aha 

Therefore, as one extracts a piece of munja grass from 
its stalk, so should one extract the Self from its fancied 
connection with the triad of the empirical knower, 
knowledge and known, subject as these are to destruc- 
tion and production, and should realize that the Self is 
t e Witness of all the changes undergone by the intellect. 

174 




3:46 



THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

This is the work of reasoning by the method of agree- 
ment and difference (anvaya and vyatireka). Then one 
should come to know the Self with its various character- 
istics such as “not to be known in any other way”. 1 
This, then, is what we say: 

1 When a thing is not to be known in any other way except from the 
Vedic texts, this is a sign that the Vedic texts are the authoritative 
means to its cognition. 

aham duhkhi sukhi ceti yenayam pratyayo 'dhruvah 
avagaty-anta abhati sa ma atmeti vakya-dhih 

[46] Cognitions such as “I am in pain”, “I am happy”, 
are transient. The spirit of the texts is, “That through 
which these transient cognitions shine and come to 
manifestation (avagati) is my Self”. 

pramanan tar ana vastabdham n irast asesa-k dr ya- 
karanatmaka-dvaita-prapancam satya-jhanananda- 
laksanam atmanam tat-tvam-asy-aham-brahmasnuty- 
adi-vakyam samsayita-mithya-jhdndjnana- 
pradhvamsa-mukhena saksad-aparoksat-kara-tala- 
nyastamalaka-vat pratipadayaty evety asakrd 
abhihitam. tatra kecid ahuh — tat-tvam-asy-adi- 
vakyair yathavasthita- vastu-ydthdtmyanvdkhyana- 
nisthair na yathokto 'rthah pratipatturn sakyate 
'bhidhd-srutitvat tesam. na hi loke 'bhidha-sruteh 
pramanantara-nirapeksaya nadyas tire phalani 
santity-adikayah pramanyam abhvupagatam. ato 
niyoga-mukhenai vabhidhd-sruteh pramanyam yuktam 
pramanantara-nirapeksatvan niyogasya. asya 
pariharartham asesapratyaksadi-prameyatva- 

nirdkarana-dvdrendtindriyartha-visayatva a i ci 

sruteh pramanyam supta-purusa-prabodhaka- 
vakyasyeva xaktavyam itv avam arambhah 

175 




3:47 THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

We have more than once declared that the holy texts 
like “That thou art”, “I am the Absolute (Brahman)”, 
etc., yield knowledge of the Self as reality-knowledge- 
bliss 1 that is as direct as that of a mango held in the 
palm of the hand. It is knowledge of that Self which is 
not knowable from any other source and whose very 
nature consists in the negation of the whole universe of 
duality differentiated into causes and effects. It ends 
wrong knowledge and doubt for ever. 

To this, some (a certain school of Mimamsakas) 
reply as follows. The Self under discussion cannot be 
taught by texts such as “That thou art”, etc., which are 
formally concerned with matters of fact, since these 
texts, being concerned with information, must be inter- 
preted as subordinate to some command, and are hence 
not authoritative in their own right. In ordinary usage 
in the world, a mere vague claim such as “there are 
fruits on the river-bank”, etc., is not significant unless 
subsequently confirmed by some other authoritative 
means of knowledge. Hence only such Vedic statements 
as convey information relative to some command have 
independent authority as a means to true knowledge, 
since the commands of the Veda (sruti) have authority 
independently of all other means of knowledge. 

In order to refute this idea we point out that the texts 
of the Veda (sruti) conveying information about the 
Self do have authority independently of any other 
means of knowledge. Their subject-matter is something 
beyond the senses, which can be known only through 
negating the notion that perception and the other means 
of empirical cognition have any validity whatever (as 
means of knowledge about the Self). They have the 



176 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 3:48 

same authority as a sentence (vakya) used to awaken a 
sleeping man. 2 

1 satya-jfiana-ananda: This phrase is practically equivalent to sac- 
cid-ananda— a phrase that is very common in the Advaitic literature of 
post-Sarpkara times but which is not to be found in the authentic 
commentaries of Sarpkara or in the Upadesa Sahasri, his most certainly 
authentic independent treatise. 

2 The words with which we waken a sleeper are not (for him) 
authoritative means of cognition of any object in the empirical world, 
yet they are authoritative in waking him up to a new state of conscious- 
ness. The same is true of the words "That thou art”. 

nil\a vagati-rupat vad anya-mananapeksanat 

sabdddi-guna-hinat vat samsayana vataratah 

[47] Because the Self is of the form of constant aware- 
ness, it requires no second means of knowledge to 
reveal it; because it is without sound or other attributes 
it is beyond the sphere of doubt. 



trsua-n is (hi vanair natma pratyaksadyaih pramiyate 
pratyagatmatva-hetos ca svarthatvad aprameyatah 



[48] The Self cannot be known through the empirical 
means of knowledge such as perception, etc., which are 
but phlegm coughed up by the thirst for life (trspa). 
Indeed, it is not a possible object of empirical cognition, 
since it is the innermost Self and since it exists for i s 

own sake. 1 ... . . 

accessible to the senses. 



srutir apimam art ham nirvadati 

The Veda also makes the same point. 




3:49 THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

didrksita-paricchinna-paragrupadi samsrayat 
viparitam a to dr sty a svato buddham rta pasyati 

[49] One cannot see with sight that which is self- 
revealed. The visible is limited, external and has a 
form, but the self-revealed is infinite, internal and 
formless. 



nyaya-siddham ato vakti drster drastaram atmanah 
na pasyet pratyagatmanam pramanam srutir adarat 

[50] Rightly, therefore, does the Veda say with respect 
to the inmost Self “thou canst not see the seer of 
seeing”. 1 It is a solemn utterance, and the Veda is the 
final authority in the matter. 2 

1 Brhadaranyaka Upanishad III.iv.2. 

1 The Veda is the final authority because perception and inference 
cannot rise to a knowledge of the Self. 



anumanavisayatve 'nyad api karanam ucyate 

We now mention another reason why it cannot be an 
object of inference : 

pratyaksasya paraktvan na sambandha-grahanam 

yatah 

atmano 'to ' numityasyanubhavo na kathamcana 

[51] Since sense-perception bears outwards it cannot 
establish contact with the Self. All the less can the Self 
be known through inference. 1 

1 Which depends on perception. All secular reasoning is based on 
perception in the sense that it depends on the perception of an object 
associated with a linga (or hetu), viz. a second object that, as known 



178 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 3:52 

from previous perception, is in constant concomitance (vyapti) with a 
third object not at present perceptible. E.g., “This hill has smoke, but 
I have always perceived smoke in association with fire, therefore this 
hill has fire”. But since the Absolute is never perceived we can never 
derive from perception its constant concomitance (vyapti) with any- 
thing else, so that nothing can serve as a ground (lirtga or hetu) to 
prove its existence. The lirtga or hetu may be translated “ground”, 
though the literal meaning of the term lirtga is “mark”. 

In Advaita, reason is regarded as metaphysically fruitful only when 
applied to the data of revelation and of mystical experience. A limited 
scope for metaphysical inferences is admitted at verse III. 56 below. 
See also Note to introductory commentary to 11.25 above. 



evam ayam pramatr-pramana-prameya-vyavaharah 
sarva eva paracina-visaya eva na praticinam 
atmanam avagahayitum alam. evam ca saty anenaiva 
yathokto 'rtho 'vasatum sakyata ity aha 

Therefore all the empirically accepted knower-know- 
ledge-known relates to the external and cannot compre- 
hend the Self which is by nature internal. This being so. 
the point now at issue can be solved only as follows : 

pramana-vyavaharo ’ yam sarva eva parag yatah 
suvicaryapy ato 'nena yusmady eva didr k sate 

[52] Because all this empirically accepted play of the 
means of knowledge bears only on the external, one 
will, after thinking about it hard, only apply them to the 
sphere of duality. 1 

1 Kant called the inveterate tendency to speak of the transcendent in 
terms of the categories of empirical experience the “transcendental 
illusion”. 



yasmal laukika prat yak sadi-pramananadhigamyo 
’ ham brahmasmiti vakyarthas tasmat 



179 




3:53 THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

Because the meaning of the text “I am the Absolute 
(Brahman)” cannot be comprehended by the secular 
means of knowledge, such as perception, it therefore 
follows that: 

anvaya-vyatirekabhyam nirasyapranato yateh 
viksapaanasya ko 'smiti tad asiti srutir jagau 

[53] To the ascetic who has negated everything up to 
his very life-breath by the practice of reasoning by the 
method of agreement and difference, who has reached 
bewilderment and who asks ‘‘Who am I?”, the Veda 
replies “thou art that”. 1 

1 Compare verse III. 5 above. 



so ’ yam anvava-vyatireka-nyaya etavan eva yad- 
avasano vakyarthas tad-abhijhasyaham brahmasmity 
avirbhavati. drastr-drsya- xibhagenagamapayi-saksi- 
vibhagena ca sruty-abhyupagamatah samksipyocyate 

This process of reasoning by agreement and difference 
takes one as far as (an understanding of) the meaning 
of the holy text: to him who has this understanding, 
(the truth) “I am the Absolute (Brahman)” becomes 
manifest. 1 We now expound the subject briefly accord- 
ing to the two distinctions “subject and object” and 
“the transient and its (non-transient) Witness”, both of 
which are accepted in the Veda (sruti). 

1 The knowledge yielded by rational analysis of the text remains 
within the realm of speech; but it is the vantage ground from which the 
final mystical intuition takes place, which is beyond the realm of 
speech. 

drsyatvad ghafa-vad deho deha-vac cendriydny api 
manas cendriya-vaj jheyam mano-van niscayadi-mat 

180 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 3:55 

[54] Because the body is an object of perception, it is 
not-self, like a pot. The senses are in the same case as 
the body, and the mind (manas) in the same case as the 
senses. The intellect, which has the power of decision 
and other faculties, 1 is in the same case as the mind. 

1 Here the intellect (buddhi) is the faculty of determinate cognition 
and fixed decision, as opposed to the mind (manas), the faculty of 
preliminary conceptions and wavering of the will. 



tatha sakala-karya-karanagamapayi- vibhaga- 
saksitvenapi 

The same thing (is now expounded) from the standpoint 
of the distinction between all transient causes and 
effects and their (non-transient) Witness: 

prag asad yati pascat sat sac ca yayad asat tatha 
anatmabhijanam tat syad viparitah svayam drsih 

[55] That which, (originally) non-existent, becomes 
existent, and which, having become existent, (again) 
becomes non-existent; that is of the nature of the 
not-self. But the self-evident Witness (of all this 
coming-to-be and passing-away) is of opposite nature 
(constant). 



tatra ghatadmam drsyanam anatmatvam 
drastratma-pur vakam prat yaksenai va 
pramanenopalabhyanatmanas casadharanan 
dharmdn avadharya fair drsyatvagamapayadibhii 
dharmaih sarirendriya-niano-niscayddi-vrttir 
anatmataya vyudasyaharn-vrttimato pi 
drsyatva vise sad dra^tr-piirvakatvam avasiyate. tad 
etad aha 



181 




3:56 THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

It is clear from mere perception that pots and other 
perceptible objects are not-self and that they require 
a conscious Self in the perceiver in order to be per- 
ceived. When one has realized this and has likewise 
determined the peculiar qualities of the not-self, and 
has rejected as not-self the body, the senses, the mind 
and the faculty of determinate knowledge (buddhi) 
because they have these qualities, such as being subject 
to perception and coming into being and passing away 
— one then proceeds finally to determine that the ego- 
notion (aham-vrtti) also, being an object like the others, 
presupposes a subject (i.e. the Witness). This is what 
we are now saying. 

ghatadayo yatha lirigam syuh paramparava 'hamah 
drsyatxad aham apy evam lirigam syad drastur 

atmanali 

[56] Just as the whole hierarchy of objects from the pot 
to the intellect supply a ground (lihga) for the inference 
of the existence of an “I” perceiving them — so this same 
“I”, because it is objectively known, is a ground for 
inferring the existence of the Self as Witness. 1 

1 The “I” (aham) here is the subject of empirical experience. It is the 
innermost and most superior thing in the empirical personality because 
it is that which views the mind and intellect as objects from within, for 
example in introspection. Nevertheless, it is not the real subject. The 
latter can never be known as an object, as we saw at sloka 11.27 above. 
(Cp. the pure ego of Kant, though the latter is a formal principle only, 
° ot t0 be confused with the Atman of Advaita, which is existence 
absolute). The “I” is itself the product of a superimposition (adhyasa), 
the first and most primordial superimposition of all. 



nanu drastj-darsana-dfsyandm jagrat-svapna- 
susuptefv agamapaya-darsanad yat-saksikau tesam 
agamapayau sa agamapaya-vibhaga-rahita atma 

182 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 3:57 

ycitha yan-nibandhanau jagatah prakasaprakasau sa 
prakasaprakasa-vibhaga-rahitah siirya iti. yada 
caivam tada vakyavagamyasyarthasyanuditanastamita- 
vijhana-matra-svabhavasyanumanenaiva 
pratipannatvat punar api vakyasya nirvisayatva- 
prasahgah. naisa dosah. lihga-vyavadhanena tat- 
pratipatteh. nanu saksad-aparoksad-atma- 
svabhdvenanatmano hanopadanayoh sambandha- 
grahanat kam atisayam vakyam kuryat. maivam 
vocah. lingadhinatvat tat-pratipatteh. na hi lihga- 
yyavadhanenatma-pratipattih saksat-pratipattir 
bhavati “ yam evaisa vrnute tena labhvah" iti sruteh. 
ata aha 

Objection: We see that the empirical knower, his 
knowledge and its objects are things that come and go 
in succession during the successive experiences of waking, 
dream and deep sleep. The Witness, therefore, of their 
coming and going, is the Self, which does not participate 
in the coming and going, as the sun is the cause of day 
and night on the earth, while being itself free from alter- 
nate conditions like day and night. This being so, the 
pure consciousness that never rises or sets, and which 
is taught in the Vedic texts, is perfectly accessible to 
inference, and the Vedic texts teaching it are redundant. 

Answer: No, because inference yields only mediate 
knowledge of the subject of the inference through the 
ground (linga) that it directly perceives . 1 

Objection: We are directly and immediately aware of 
the Self and of its relationship with the comings and 
goings of the not-self as Witness thereof. What could 
the text add ? 



183 




3:57 THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

Answer: Do not speak thus. For that is (mediate and) 
dependent on a ground (linga). 4 Perception of the Self 
through the medium of a ground cannot amount to 
direct awareness. Remember the Upanishadic passage 
“He whom this Self chooses, he only obtains the 
knowledge”. 3 So we proceed: 

1 Suresvara means that inference can at best tell us that the Self as 
pure consciousness exists, but cannot put us into immediate touch 
with it. W hen we see the smoke on the hill we infer the existence of fire, 
but this is but an indirect acquaintance with it. Cp. verse III.51, note 1 
above. 

2 At the time of making the inference that the Self must be the 
Witness of the not-self we are still identified with the not-self in the 
form of the mind etc. and are not aware of the Self in its true nature. 
On linga, cp. note to verse 111.51 above. 

3 Katha Upanishad I.ii.23 (or 11.23). 

litigant astitva-nisthatvan na syad xakyartha-bodhakam 

sad-asad-xyutthitatma 'yam ato vakyat pratiyate 

[57] An inferential ground (linga) proves only the 
existence of that of which it is the ground, so it cannot 
convey fully the meaning of the highest texts. 1 This Self 
is by nature beyond existence and non-existence, so it 
can be lfnown only from the holy texts. 

1 Inference, as we have seen, yields but indirect knowledge. Smoke 
rising from behind a hill proves the existence of fire but does not yield 
a direct apprehension of fire. The text, therefore, adds something more 
in that it throws the qualified hearer into immediate awareness of his 
own true nature as the Self of all. Cp. Verse 11.117 above. 



nanu yadi xyaxrtta-sad-asad-vikalpa-jalam vastv 
abhiftam xdkydd bhavatas tathapi tutsaryate 
vakya-vifaya tr?na — yasmad antarenapi vakya- 
sravanam nirastasesa-vikalpam dgopdldvipala- 
panditam sufupte vastu siddham ato nartho vakya- 
sravanena. naitad evam. kim karanam. sarvanartha- 



184 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 



3:58 



bijasyatmanavabodhasya susupte sambhavdt. yadi hi 
susupte 'jnanam nabhavisyad antarenapi vedanta- 
vakya-sra vana-manana-nididhyasanany aham 
brahmdsmity adhyavasayat sarva-prana-bhrtam api 
svarasata cva su$upta-pratipatteh sakala- 
samsdrocchitti-prasahgah. na ca kaivalydt punar- 
utthanam nyayyam anirmoksa-prasahgat . na canya 
eva susupto 'nya evotthita iti sakyam vaktum 
nddraksam aham susupte 'nyat kimcid apity 
utthitasya pratyabhijha-darsandt. tasmad avasvam 
susupte ' jnanam abhyupagantavyam. nanu yadi 
tatrajhanam abha visyad raga-d vesa-ghatajhanadi- vat 
pratyaksam abhavisyad yatheha loke ghatam na 
janamitv ajhanam avyavahitam pratyaksam. 
atrocyate. na. abhivyahjakabhavat . katham 
abhivvahjakabhava iti cecchrnu 

Objection: If all that were taught by your texts were 
reality as divorced from the whole complex of alter- 
native human notions such as “real” and “unreal” etc., 
then all interest in those texts would be at an end. For 
even without them reality as divorced from all human 
notions is attained by everyone from cowmen and 
shepherds to great scholars merely by falling asleep. 

Answer: Not so, for in sleep there is present that 
very ignorance of the Self which is the seed of all evil. 
And if this ignorance were not present in dreamless 
sleep, then it would be a fact that all living creatures 
would realize the complete destruction of transmigra- 
tory life (samsara) merely by falling asleep and without 
the discipline of hearing, cogitation and sustained 
meditation on “I am the Absolute (Brahman) and 
other Upanishadic texts. Nor can it be admitted that 



185 




3 : 5 $ THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

there is such a thing as liberation from which one 
subsequently returns. 1 for in that case the possibility of 
all liberation being but temporary would arise. 2 Nor 
can you say : One man went to sleep (and was thereby 
liberated), and the man who awoke was a different one 
— for we see people recognizing their identity with 
themselves as sleepers, as when they say “when I was 
asleep. 1 saw nothing". Hence for all these reasons the 
existence of ignorance in deep sleep must certainly be 
admitted. 

Objection: If ignorance were present in deep sleep 
then we ought to have direct awareness of the fact 
during the time of sleep, just as we are aware of our 
ignorance in reference to particular emotional states 
and external objects in the waking state. 3 For in waking 
experience we know through direct perception (at the 
time) “I cannot see the pot”. But in deep sleep we are 
not immediately aware of such ignorance. Hence there 
is no ignorance in deep sleep. 

Answer: You are wrong. The ignorance is there. It 
is merely that there is nothing to reveal it. If you ask, 
“What do you mean by saying there is nothing to 
reveal it?”, then listen: 

1 Sleep cannot be equated with liberation for the reason, among 
others, that sleep is a state from which one returns to ignorant waking 
experience, whereas liberation is not. 

2 i.e. the theory is to be rejected because it would undermine the 
doctrine of eternal liberation, the very thing the Vedanta exists to 
proclaim. 

3 e.g. the feelings “I do not know what is impelling me in this direc- 
tion ’ and “I cannot see the pot which you say is by the cloth”. 

bahyam vfttim anutpadya vyaktih syan nahamo yatha 

narte 'ntahkaranam tad-vad dhvantasya vyaktir anjasi 



186 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 3:58 

[58] Just as there is no manifestation of the “I” 
without a modification of the mind directed to the 
external, so there is no clear manifestation of ignorance 
unless the mind (antahkarana) 1 is itself manifest. 2 

1 Lit. "inner organ". 

2 According to Advaita doctrine, the mind undergoes absorption in 
deep sleep. 



kascid atikrantam pratismrtya "drsyatvad aham apy 
evarn l ingam syad drastur atmanah" id niryuktikam 
abhihitam ity aha. kirn karanam. aham-taj-jhatror 
vivekaprasiddheh. yatheha ghata-devadattayor 
grahya-grahakatvena sphutataro vibhagah prasiddho 
loke na tathehahamkara-taj-jhatror vibhago 'stiti 
tasmad asadhv etad abhihitam iti. atrocvate 

Someone suddenly remembering what was said before, 
complains: “When you said (verse III. 56 above), ‘so 
this same “I”, because it is objectively known, is a 
ground for knowing the existence of the Self as Witness', 
that was impossible. Why? Because it is impossible to 
establish a distinction between the “I” and the Witness 
of it. In the ordinary empirical experience of objects the 
difference between the knower and the known, between 
Devadatta and the pot, is perfectly obvious. But in the 
case of the “I” and its knower this manifest difference 
does not obtain. So what you said was wrong”. To this 
we reply: 

dahya-dahakataikatra yatha syad vahni-darunoh 
jneya-jnatrkataivam syad aham-jhatroh parasparam 



187 




3:59 THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

[59] Just as fire and wood are burner and burnt 
respectively, though appearing as one blazing indis- 
tinguishable mass, even so the “l” and the knower of 
the “1”, though indistinguishable in empirical experi- 
ence. are respectively known and knower. 



evani tavad avidyotthasvantahkaranasya bahya- 
\isaya-nimitta-nlpaxacchedayaham-\jttir vyapriyate. 
tavavacchinnani sat kutastha- 

pratyagatmopadanavabodha-rupasyavyavadhanataya 
visaya-bhavani pratipadyata iti. tatra tayor jiidtr- 
ahantta-rupayor avabhasaka vabhasyatva-sambandha- 
vyatirekena nanyat sambandhantaram upapadyate. 
ahamla-rupam tv atmasatkrtva ' ham-kancukani 
paridhayopakaryatvopakarakat va-ksamah san 
bahva-visayenopakarinapakarina vatmatmiyam 
sambandham pratipadvate. tad abbidhiyate 

The function of the ego-notion (aham-vrtti) is to 
delimit (and act as a focus for) the forms assumed 
(under the impress of external objects) by the mind 
(antahkarana), itself a product of nescience. As de- 
limited by the ego-notion, the mind becomes the direct 
object of an intuition arising from 1 the inmost Self, firm 
as a mountain-peak. In this situation, no other relation 
can be supposed to obtain between the Witness and the 
“I” than that of illumining subject and illumined object. 
But the Self goes further and assumes the very mask 2 
of the ego and thus becomes able to enter into com- 
merce with the external world. Hence its ability to come 
into contact with helpful and harmful objects with the 
feeling “they are mine”. 



188 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 3:60 

1 Lit. having for its upadana or material cause the inmost Self. 

- kancuka: literally, “waistcoat". Hiriyanna happily hits on “mask" 
in his note. Kaficuka is a technical term from Kashmiri Shaivism. 
Compare its use by Suresvara at Taittiriya Varttika 11.314 and its 
appearance at Manasollasa Varttika 111.30 and at Samksepa Sariraka 
111.132. 

idom-jnanam bhavej jnatur mama-jhanam tathahamah 
ajhdnopadhinedam syad vikriyato 'hamo mama 

[60] The Seer knows objects as “this”, the “I” (ego) 
knows them as “mine”. The notion “this” arises 
through the adjunct (upadhi) of ignorance (ajriana). 
“Mine” is thus a modification of the “1” (aham). 1 

1 The notions “this" and “mine” are touched on by Sarpkara at 
Upadcsa Sahasri XVIII. 93. 



ckasyaiva jnatur antar-bahya-nimitta-bheddd vibhinne 
'pi visaya idam mameti jhanam dvairiipyam jayata ity 
uktam. atropakriyamanapakriyamdnasyaiva jnatur 
visaye mama-pratyayo bhavati viparyaye cedam- 
pratyaya iti katham avagamyate. avagamyatam anvaya- 
vyatirekabhyam. tat katham ity aha 

It has been said that two different kinds of knowledge 
as “this” and “mine” arise in the one Witness with 
reference to one object according to differences in the 
instrument (nimitta) through which knowledge arises. 
How do we know that the Witness as associated with 
the ego-notion (and hence involved in advantages and 
disadvantages) sees things as “mine”, and that the same 
Witness not associated with the ego-notion sees them 
as “this”? We know through reasoning by agreement 
and difference. To explain how that is so, we proceed: 



189 




3:61 THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

anupakriyamanatvan na jhatuh syad aham mama 
ghatadi-vad idam tu syan moha-matra- vyapa.tr ay a t 

[61] Because nothing can make any contribution to 
the Witness, the “I” is not adopted by it with the 
feeling “mine”. On the contrary, it is a “this”, just like a 
pot (or any other object), because its basis is just 
ignorance. 



moha-tat-karyasrayatvaj jhatrtva-vikriyayoh 
purvatredam-mama-jhanan vayah pradarsitah . 
athadhuna tad-vyatirekena vyatirekapradarsanartham 
aha 

It has been said above that Witnesshood and empirical 
knowership, associated with knowledge as “this” and 
knowledge as “mine”, accrue to the Self (not really but) 
through ignorance and its effects alone. We now com- 
plete the argument negatively by showing that in the 
absence of ignorance neither of these two kinds of 
knowledge arises. 

vikriyd-jndna-sunyatvan nedam na ca mamatmanah 
utthitasya sato 'jhanam naham ajhasisam yatah 

[62] In itself the Self is free from ignorance and 
modification, 1 and hence feels neither “this” nor 
“mine”. For it is only the one who has woken up from 
sleep (i.e. the empirical knower) who experiences 
ignorance and feels “I did not know (anything then)”. 2 
1 Cp. III. 60 above. 

At the prose introduction to verse III. 58 above, Suresvara argued 
that because deep sleep did not produce liberation, ignorance must be 
present in deep sleep, at least in the sense of not-being-awake-to-the- 
tseit, cp. verse IV.40 below. In the present verse Suresvara is arguing 

190 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 



3:63 



that the Self is free from ignorance and from modifications, the 
necessary preconditions for knowing a “that” or a “mine”. Deep sleep 
is a proof of this because it is only when a person wakes up that he has 
the conception of ignorance in the form “I knew nothing when I slept”. 
There is no consciousness of ignorance and no relation with an ego in 
deep sleep, but the Self is nevertheless present. Cp. Texte, p. 53. 



at manat ma-vivekasyeyatta-pradarsanartham aha 

To bring out the limitations of purely intellectual 
discrimination between the Self and the not-self, we 
now say : 

vakya-pratyaksa-manabhyam iyan arthah pratiyate 
anartha-krt-tamo-hanir vakyad eva sad-atmanah 

[63] From perception and inference based on the holy 
texts one understands only so much. 1 But the permanent 
destruction of the ignorance of the Self, the source of 
(all) evil, proceeds only from the authoritative sentence 
itself. 

1 One knows the Self as distinct from the not-self. J 



dvitiyadhyayadau srotr-catustayam upanyastam. 
tatra krtsnanatma-nivrttau satydm yah 
pratyagatmany avakyarthatam pratipadyate sa 
ksapitasesdntaraya-hetur iti na tam prati vaktavyam 
kimcid apv avasifyate. yo ’ pi vdkya-sravana-mdtrdd 
eva pratipadyate tasyapy atindriya-saktimattvan na 
kimcid apy apeksitavyam asti. yas ca sravita-tat- 
tvam-asy-adi-vakyah svayam evanvaya-vyatirekau 
krtva tad-avasana eva vakyartham pratipadyate 'sav 
api yathartham pratipanna iti purva-vad 
evopeksitavyah. yah punar anvaya-vyatirekau 

191 




3:64 THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

karavitvapi punah punar vakyam srdvyatc yatha- 
bhutartha-pratipattaye tasya krtanvaya-vyatirekasya 
sat ah katham vakyam sravyata Hi. ucyate 

At the beginning of the second chapter there was 
mention of four kinds of hearers. 1 Of these, one knows 
“that which is not the meaning of any sentence” in his 
own inmost Self. For him, all the not-self has come to 
an end (nivrtta). As all his impediments have been 
destroyed, there is in his case nothing more to be said. 
Nor is there anything further to be said about the one 
who acquired realization merely from hearing the text 
(i.e. without having to reason on it at all). He, also, is in 
possession of some supernatural power. Then there is 
the one who had “that thou art” and other texts re- 
peated to him, and who then performed reasoning on 
them on his own and came to know the meaning of the 
texts at the end of it. He also can be left out of account 
like the two before, as he has attained right knowledge. 

The fourth one, even though he had been made to 
reason on the texts, also had to have them repeated to 
him again with a view to his getting a correct knowledge 
of their meaning. In his case, it might be asked why he 
had to have the texts repeated to him, since he was 
already performing reasoning on them. To this we reply: 
1 Verses 11.2-3 above. 



nava-samkhya-hrta-jnano dasamo vibhramad yathd 
no vetti dasamo 'smiti viksamdno 'pi tan nava 

[64] Just as the tenth man, whose wits were confused 
by the task of counting nine, did not know that he was 
the tenth even though engaged in looking at the other 
nine — 



192 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 



3:65 



atha dr?(anta-gatam artham darftantikarthe 
samarpayisyann aha 

Now we show how the illustration relates to the thing 
to be illustrated by saying: 

apaviddha-dvayo 'py exam tat-tvam-asy-adina vina 
vetti naikalam atmanam nanve?yam catra karanam 

[65] Even so the man who is penetrated by the spirit 
of duality does not know the one Self that is all in all 
unless he is told “that thou art”, etc. It is no use 
enquiring into the reasons for his delusion. 1 

1 The story of the tenth man is the story of the member of a party of 
ten who was deputed to count their number after they had crossed a 
river and forgot to count himself. The more he counted the others the 
more he only reached nine and thought that one of them was lost. But 
when a respected man said “thou art the tenth” he knew the truth at 
once with immediate certainty — there was no question of further 
counting, etc. The illustration is often used by Samkara — 
Bfhadaranyaka Commentary I.iv.7: Taittirfya Commentary II. 1: 
references in Upadesa Sahasri at XVIII.174, 189, 202 etc. Cp. PaflcadaSi 
VII. 57 ff. and VII.247 ff. 

The story can be used to emphasize several different points. The point 
that Suresvara wishes to emphasize here is that a man may go on and 
on practising reasoning (equivalent to counting nine) and he will for 
that very reason remain in the sphere of intellect and of mediate 
knowledge, hence of ignorance. He requires to be somehow thrown 
into a different kind of direct knowledge by the spoken word; but the 
spoken word will only be effective if the previous discipline of reasoning 
has been performed — just as the words “thou art the tenth” are only 
effective in introducing a new and immediate kind of knowledge if the 
mind has been brought to the brink of this realization by continually 
counting up to nine. 



nanve$yam catra karanam ity uktam tat kasmad 
iti codite pratydhdn ve$andsahi$nut vat. tat katham ity 
aha 

Why not enquire into the reasons for the man s delu- 
sion? Because ignorance is something that will not 
brook enquiry. How so? We answer: 

193 



o 




3:66 THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

seyam bhrantir niralamba sarva-nyaya-virodhini 
sahate na vicaram sa tamo yad-vad divakaram 

[66] This ignorance is without a cause and violates all 
rules and reasons. It no more brooks investigation than 
darkness brooks the light of the sun. 



tasyah khalv asya avidyaya bhranteh samyag- 
jnanotpatti-dvarena nivfttih 

This error of ignorance is destroyed by the rise of right 
knowledge : 

bubhutsocchedini casya sad asity-adina drdham 
pratici pratipattih syan nasau manantarad bhavet 

[67] The knowledge of the inmost Self which removes 
all need for further investigation arises with certainty 
from the texts like “that thou art”. It does not arise 
from any other means of knowledge (pramana). 



katham punar vakyam pratipadayaty eveti ced 
drstantoktih 

Offering of an example to meet the question, “But how 
could knowledge arise from the text?” 

jijnasor dasamam y ad-van navatikramya tamyatah 
tvam eva dasamo 'siti kuryad evam pramam vacah 

[68] Just as the words “thou art the tenth” enlighten 
the suffering enquirer (jijnasu) who is looking for the 
tenth beyond the other nine (among those who have 
crossed the river), so does the holy text (“that thou art” 
enlighten the suffering enquirer into the nature of the 
Self). 1 



194 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 



3:70 



1 Enlighten — lit. give right knowledge (prama) to. Hence it is implied 
that the texts are a means of correct knowledge (pramapa), since they 
produce right knowledge (prama) — a special sort of pramapa, differing 
from those obtaining in ordinary empirical experience. 



sa ca tat-tvam-asy-adi-vakya-sravana-ja 
pramotparmatvad eva. na ca naivam iti 
pratyayantaram jayate. tad etad dr?tdntena 
pratipadayati 

And this right knowledge (prama) generated by hearing 
the holy texts like “that thou art” stands established 
merely through coming into being. No other ideas in 
the form “this is not so” can arise. We explain this 
through the example (already given of the tenth man): 

dasamo 'siti vakyottha na dhirasya vihanyate 
adi-madhyavasdnefu na navasv asya samsayah 

[69] The conviction arising from the sentence “thou 
art the tenth” is never shaken. No doubts arise from 
(his perception of only) the (other) nine, before, during, 
or after (the rise of the knowledge “I am the tenth”). 

1 The verse is reproduced at Paftcadaii VU.60 with two variant 
readings which modify the sense. 



evam tat tvam asity asmad dvaita-nut pratyagatmani 
samyag-jnatatvam arthasya jayetaiva prama drtfhd 

[70] In the same way, from the sentence “that thou 
art”, in the case of one who has rightly understood the 
meaning of the word “thou”, there arises firm know- 
ledge of the inmost Self which excludes duality. 



195 




3:71 the realization of the absolute 

pratyagatmani pramopajayata ity uktam tatra 
codyate. kim yathaghatadi-prameya-visaya prama 
kartradi-karaka-bheda 'napahnavena jay ate 
tathaivotasesa-karaka-gramopamardena kartuh 
pratyagatmaniti. ucyate 

It has been said that right knowledge (prama) (of the 
Self) arises. In this connection a question is raised. 
Does it arise without prejudice to the distinctions 
between agent etc., (i.e. agent, act and instrument in 
the act of cognition), just as in the case of right cogni- 
tion of a pot or other object? Or does it rise in the 
inmost Self of the agent of cognition through the lapse 
of all the factors of action in their entirety? To this we 
answer: 

pratyakta 'sya svato rupam niskriyakarakaphalam 
advitiyam tad-iddha dhih pratyagatmeva lak$yate 

[71] Interiority is the very nature of the Self. (In the 
matter of cognition) it is without action, its factors and 
results; it is without a second (advaita). The intellect 
lit by its presence is taken loosely for the inmost Self. 



yasmad evam 
Hence it follows : 

vipascito 'py atas tasyam atma-bhavam vitanvate 
daviyassv indriyarthe$u k?iyate hy uttarottaram 

[72] Even the wise suppose the intellect to be the Self 
(in the course of empirical activity), though they have 
gradually withdrawn their sense of identity from the 
external sense-objects. 



196 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 



3:7 



aha. yadi vakyam eva yatha-bhutarthavabodhakam 
atha kasya hetor avidyotthapitasya kartftvader 
upadesa ity ukte pratividhiyate 

One might ask — if it is only the texts of the Upanishads 
that reveal reality as it is, why do we find therein 
teaching about the agency (and knowerhood etc.) of the 
Self, notions that all arise from ignorance ? We counter 
this as follows : 

bhranti-prasiddhya 'nudyartham tat tattvam bhranti- 

badhaya 

ayam nety upadisyeta tathaivam tat tvam ityapi 

[73] When a man wishes to dispel the erroneous no- 
tion of another, he first conforms his speech to that 
erroneous notion as if it were a fact, and then he says 
“it is not so”. The same is the case with “that” and 
“thou”. 

imam artham drstantena buddhav arohayati 

We implant this doctrine more deeply in the mind 
through an example: 

sthanuh sthanur itivoktir na nf-buddhim nirasyati 
vyanuvadat tathaivoktir bhrantim pumso na badhate 

[74] The mere repetition of the word “post, post”, 
without adding other words conforming to the hearer’s 
illusion, 1 will not serve to dispel the illusion that a post 
is a man. In the same way, the statement of the real 
nature of man would not cancel the hearer’s wrong 
notion of it unless (as is the case with “that thou art”) it 
conformed (initially) to that wrong notion. 

1 Whatever the logical objections that might be raised, one has to 
say, “that man is not a man but a post”. 

197 




3:75 the realization of the absolute 

vasmac chrotr-prasiddhanuvady eva tvam iti padam 
tasmad uddisyamana-sthatvad duhkhitvader 
arivakfitatvam eva. vidhiyamanatve hi sati virodha- 
prasahgo na tu vidhiyamananudyamanayor iti. 
sva-pradhanayor hi padayor virodhasahka 
samanyalihgitatvat tayor na viparyaye 

Because the word “thou” merely restates something 
already known to the hearer, qualities such as “being 
the sufferer” etc. belong merely to (the description of) 
the subject of the sentence and are not the meaning it 
is intended to convey . 1 If they had belonged to the 
predicate, there might have been a contradiction. But 
there cannot be a contradiction between what is merely 
restated and what is predicated . 2 Only if the two words 
(“that” and “thou”) had been used to convey the 
meanings they hold in isolation 3 could they fall into 
mutual contradiction, for they would then retain their 
(full) meanings as universals. They cannot do so when 
this is not the case . 4 

1 In a proposition of subject-copula-predicate form (such as “that 
thou art” = “thou art that”), the subject must already be known to the 
hearer or the proposition would not be intelligible. We must assume, 
however, that the proposition is intended to convey something to the 
hearer that he did not already know, or otherwise it would have been 
useless. Its meaning, therefore, lies not directly in the subject, but more 
in the predicate, and, above all, in the connection of the predicate with 
the subject. In order for the sentence to be intelligible at all, however, 
the bare subject must already be known to the hearer, and, as such, is 
not the meaning to be conveyed. It is said technically to be “repeated” 
or “restated”. 

1 Because what is only restated and not predicated is not “meant” 
and there must be two meanings before there can be a contradiction 
between them. 

* Cp. verse III. 32 above. 

* i.e. when they enter into a sentence such that their meanings be- 
come qualified and they lose that part of the universal meaning which 
is incompatible with other words in the sentence. Cp. verse III. 2 
above, with note. 



198 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 3:75 

analihgita-samanyau na jihasita-vadinau 
vyutthitau tat-tvamau tasmad anyony dbhisamiksan.au 

[75] The “that” and the “thou” no longer retain their 
universal meanings. They do not express that part of 
their meaning which (owing to incompatibility with 
other words in the sentence) has to be given up. Thus 
emancipated (from the incompatible elements in their 
meanings), they are able to coalesce (in an identity 
statement). 



apasta-samanyarthatvad anuvada-sthatvad 
vidhiyamanena ca saha virodhad duhkhitvader astu 
kamam jihasitarthayor asamsargo yathopanyasta- 
do?a-virahat tat-tvam-arthayoft samsargo ’ stu 
nilotpala-vad iti cen naivam apy upapadyate. yasmat 1 
1 Reading yasmat for tasmat with Professor Hacker, Texte p. 80. 

Objection: Let us admit that the words (“that” and 
“thou”) have given up their universal meanings. And 
let us admit that qualities such as “being the sufferer” 
belong to the subject and (have to be given up because 
they) are in contradiction with the predicate. In that 
case the meanings that have to be given up cannot be 
synthesized into a sentence-meaning. 1 But the (resultant 
purified) meanings of “that” and “thou”, being free 
from defects as shown above, can very well be synthe- 
sized into a sentence-meaning, as in the case of “the 
blue lotus.” 

1 It will be recalled that Suresvara maintains the paradox that the 
meaning conveyed by "that thou art is that which is not the meaning 
of any sentence, cp. above III. 2 and prose introduction to III. 9. 

Answer : This explanation is not right either. For: 

199 




3:76 THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

tad-arthayos tu nisthatma dxaya-paroksya-xarjitah 
nadvitiyam xinatmanam natma nitya-drsa xina 

[76] The meaning of both terms is the same Self, void 
of duality and not-other-than-immediately-evident. 
There is no non-dual reality except the Self ; there is no 
Self except the eternal Witness (nitya-drs). 1 

1 Thus the meanings of the two words cannot strictly be synthesized, 
as they are already eternally identical. 



atraha. kim iha jihasitam kim vopaditsitam iti. 
ucyate. pratyagatmarthabhidhayinas txam-padad 
ubhayam pratiyate 'ham duhkhi pratyagatma ca. 
tatra ca pratyagatmano 'ham duhkhity 
anenabhisambandha atma-ydthdtmydnaxabodha- 
hetuka eva. ato 'ham-artho 'narthopasrftatvad 
ajhanotthatvac ca hey a iti pratyaksato 'vasiyate. 
tad-arthe kim heyam kim xopadeyam iti 
navadhriyate. tata idam abhidhiyate 

Here the opponent asks “What (part of the meanings) 
has to be given up here, and what retained?”. Reply: 
The word “thou”, which is used to indicate the inmost 
Self, conveys both the sense of the sufferer (the indivi- 
dual soul) and the sense of the inmost Self. The relation 
of the inmost Self with this notion of “I am the sufferer” 
is caused by not-being-awake-to-the Self only. Hence, 
in the case of the word “thou”, it is quite obvious that 
the meaning “ego” must be given up, because the 
latter is afflicted with evil and arises from ignorance. 
But it is not yet determined what part of the meaning 
of the word “that” has to be given up and what retained. 
Hence the following is advanced : 



200 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 3:77 

paroksyam yat tad-arthe syat tadd heyam aham- 

art ha-vat 

praticevahamo ' bhedah parok$yenatmano 'pi me 

[77] The notion of “not-being-immediately-evident” 
conveyed by the word “that” must be rejected, as the 
notion “sufferer” is rejected (in the case of the word 
“thou”). The identification of the Self with the “not- 
immediately-evident” is as much due to ignorance as the 
identification of the ego with the inmost Self. 



katham punas tad-artho ' dvitiya-laksanah 
pratyagatmopasrayam sa-dvitiyatvam duhkhitvam 
niranvayam apanudatiti. ucyate. na caitayor 
nivartaka-nivartya-bhdvam vayam brumah. katham 
tarhi. tvam-arthe pratyagatmani 
praganavabuddhadvitiyata sanenavabodhyate. ato 
'navabodha-nirasena tad-utthasya sa-dvitiyatvasya 
tvam-artha-sthasya paroksatvasya ca tad-artha- 
sthasya nirasanan na vaiyadhikaranyadi- 
codyasyavasaro 'stiti. tad idam abhidhiyate 

But again, how can the non-dual reality indicated by the 
word “that” cancel once and for all the notions of pain 
and of duality associated with the inmost Self? We 
reply: We do not say that the non-dual reality indicated 
by the word “that” directly destroys the notions of 
suffering and duality. What we say is that the word 
“that” causes a waking up to the fact of non-duality to 
take place in regard to the inmost Self, denoted by 
“thou”, where previously there was ignorance in regard 
to it. It is through this destruction of ignorance that 



201 




3:78 THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

(for the enlightened man) the meaning “not-immedi- 
ately-known” stands rejected in the case of the word 
“that”, and the meaning “associated with duality” 
stands rejected in the case of the word “thou”. Hence it 
cannot be objected that the two words “that” and 
“thou” ought not to be put in apposition on the 
ground that they each refer to something quite different. 
This is what is being said. 

tat tvam-arthena samprkto nanatvam vinivartayet 

naparityakta-paroksyam tvam tad-artham sisrpsati 

[78] “That” when completely identified 1 with the 
meaning of “thou” negates all plurality : “thou” cannot 
mingle with the meaning of “that” unless the latter has 
been shorn of its meaning of “not-immediately- 
evident”. 2 

1 On the meaning of the word samprkta, see K. V. Abhyankar, A 
Dictionary of Sanskrit Grammar, Gaekwad’s Oriental Series, s.v. 
He quotes Patanjali ad Panini Sutra I.ii.32. 

’ When the pupil is properly prepared and on the brink of Self- 
realization he understands through the statement “thou art that” that 
“that” does not mean anything other than his own Self. This brings 
final destruction of all his erroneous notions about the Self and conse- 
quently illumination. And then, and not until then, does a situation 
arise in which all the objections raised about the actual grammatical 
structure of the sentence can be answered. Only when illumination has 
come do the two words refer to one undifferentiated entity. At the time 
they are actually pronounced the objection that they do not refer to one 
undifferentiated entity but affirm a predicate of a subject holds. But if 
the real meaning of the words is once grasped, it is seen that they can 
be placed in apposition only if they refer to one and the same undiffer- 
entiated entity (Cp. sloka III. 2 and note above). Hence in the end the 
holy texts are tautologous propositions and the grammatical objections 
that they cannot be such are rebutted. The process as a whole is summed 
up by Sarvajflatma Muni at “Sarnksepa Sariraka” 1.196 as follows: 
“First the group of words is taken as standing in apposition, and this is 
interpreted as pointing to the unity of a substance having qualities. 
Then a contradiction is seen here, and there follows interpretation of 
the words through secondary implication to mean the partless, seamless 
reality. This is the method of interpretation of the holy sentences 
practised by the wise.” 



202 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 3 .79 

In the sphere of empirical knowledge, tautologous propositions tell 
us nothing about the world, they are merely used by the speaker to 
define the sense in which he proposes to use certain words. Definitions 
are tautologous propositions par excellence e.g. “man is a reasoning 
animal.” But in the sphere of the Absolute, it is only tautologous propo- 
sitions that can possibly be true. As 6ri Vidyaranya expresses it (Paftca- 
da$i 11.21) there are no internal differentiations in the Absolute, 
it cannot be a substance qualified by attributes. It can be shown logic- 
ally that if it is not partless and simple and homogeneous it is not 
eternal and hence not the Absolute. Hence ordinary sentences affirming 
predicates of subjects do not apply to it, and, as SureSvara frequently 
insists, it is “that which is not the meaning of any sentence” (it is 
avakyartha). We have to search for the implied meaning — which is 
necessarily tautologous. 



kasmat punah karandt tad-artho ’ dvitiya-laksanas 
Ivam-arlhena pratyagdtmana ’ prthag-arthah 1 sann 
avidyottham sa-dvitiyatvam nihantiti. ucyate. 
virodhat. tad ucyate 

1 Accepting the reading of the Sarartha Commentary in place of the 
“prthag-arthah” of J. 

How is it, then, that the meaning of “that”, which is 
the non-dual reality and in no way different from the 
meaning of “thou”, which is the inmost Self, destroys 
the notion of duality which arises from ignorance? 
We say, “Because of a contradiction”. Hence the reply 
is given : 

samsaritadvitiyena paroksyam catmana saha 
prasangikam viruddhatvat tat-tvambhyam badhanam 

tayoh 

[79] “Being the transmigrant” and “not-being-imme- 
diately-evident” are only accidental characteristics of 
the Self, since they are in mutual contradiction. They 
are therefore both negated, (the first) by that , and 
(the second) by “thou”. 



203 




3:80 the realization of the absolute 

tat-tvam-arthayos tu badhakatve ’ nyad api karanam 
ucyate 

A further reason why the meanings of “that” and 
“thou” have the function of negation is added: 

ajhata-purusarthatvac chrautatvat tat-tvam-arthayoh 
svam artham aparityajya badhakau stam viruddhayoh 

[80] Because they concern Vedic doctrine and reveal 
a human good not to be known from any other source, 
it follows that “that” and “thou” retain their meanings 
but with the mutually contradictory elements negated. 1 

1 From the purely logical point of view, there is no reason why it 
should not be held that in “that thou art” the “not-immediately- 
evident” character of “that” cancels the “thou” (which is immediately 
evident) outright, and that the “immediacy” of “thou” cancels the 
“that” outright which by nature is “not immediately evident”. There 
would then be no meaning left in the sentence at all. But it cannot be 
right to interpret the text so. For it occurs in the Veda and hence must 
reveal a human good not knowable from any other source. The text 
can only be interpreted as befits a Vedic text if it be assumed that the 
“that” and the “thou” each retains that part of its meaning (should we 
call it “affirmation of pure Being”?) which is not contradicted by the 
other. Thus the text has at least partly a negating function. By bringing 
“that” and “thou” together in apposition, it negates the two ideas that 
the Absolute is altogether transcendent and unknowable and that the 
inmost Self of man is subject to duality and suffering. 



evam tavad yathopakrdntena prakriya- vartmana na 
pratyaksadi-pramanantarair virodha-gandho 'pi 
sambhavyate. yadd punah sarva-prakarenapi 
yatamana naivemam vakyartham sambhavayamah 
pratyaksadi-pramanantara-virodhata eva tasminn api 
pakpa ucyate 



204 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 3:81 

Thus, following the way we have explained above, not 
even a suggestion of contradiction with perception or 
any of the other accredited means of knowledge is 
possible. When, however, anyone says “Despite every 
kind of effort, we cannot find any meaning for such 
and such a text because it stands in contradiction with 
perception and other means of knowledge”, then, from 
that point of view, we say: 

pratyaksadi-viruddham ced vakyam artham vadet 

kvacit 

syat tu tad drsti-vidhy-artham yosagni-vad asamsayam 

[81] And if anyone should say that the meaning of a 
particular text was contradictory to perception and 
other means of cognition, that text would undoubtedly 
be for the sake of enjoining an imaginative meditation, 
like the text “the woman is fire”. 1 

1 Texts in the Veda which bear on matters accessible to perception 
and contradict it must be interpreted so 33 not to contradict it. The 
example “the woman is fire” is found a.t Chandogya Upanishad 
V.viii.l and Bfhadarapyaka Upanishad VI.ii.13. 



yada tu tat-tvam-asy-adi-vakyam sarva-prakarenapi 
vicaryamanam na kriyam katdksendpi vik?ate tada 
prasamkhydnddi-vyaparo dussambhavya iti. tad 
ucyate 

But as, in whatever way they are considered, texts like 
“that thou art” do not envisage action even indirectly, 
it is difficult to show that they imply activity like con- 
tinuous meditation (prasankhyana). 



205 




3:82 THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

vastv-eka-nistham vakyam cen na tasya syat 

kriyarthata 

vastutio hy eka-rupatvad vikalpasyapy asambhavah 

[82] Nevertheless, if the sentence refers only to the 
final reality it cannot at the same time have action (of 
any kind) as its meaning. For reality is one, and admits 
of no alternatives. 1 

1 Alternatives such as “it is either to be regarded as ever-present or 
else to be regarded as obtainable through meditation”. J 



bhinna-visayatvac ca na pramanantara-virodhah. 
katham. ucyale 

And one means of cognition cannot contradict another. 
For each means of cognition has its own special sphere. 1 
How is that? We are telling you: 

1 According to the Mimaipsa principle that an authoritative means of 
cognition is only such in relation to what cannot be known from any 
other source. It appears to have been held, in this connection, that 
what was known through an immediate source of knowledge could not 
at the same time be known through a more remote one. The presence of 
a fire, if already perceived, could not be inferred, say, from the presence 
of its smoke. 

apurvadhigamam kurvat pramanam syan na cen na tat 
na virodhas tato yukto vibhinnarthavabodhinoh 

[83] An authoritative means of knowledge (pramana) 
is one which conveys knowledge of a kind not obtain- 
able from any other source. Otherwise it is not a 
pramana. Hence there can be no contradiction between 
the deliverances of the Veda and perception. For both 
are accepted as pramanas and hence both deal with 
their own specific subjects. 



206 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 



3:84 



ya evam api bhinna-vi?ayanam virodham vakti so 
’ trapi virodham bruyat 

Of course, if anyone is prepared to admit that a contra- 
diction can arise between two entirely separate spheres, 
he can very well speak of a contradiction here. 

nayam sabdah kuto yasmad rupam pasyami caksusa 
iti yad-vat tathaivayam virodho 'ksa-ja-vakyayoh 

[84] “That is not a noise.” “Why not?” “Because I 
can see a colour with my eye.” It is contradictions of 
this sort that subsist between sense-perception and 
Vedic revelation. 1 

1 Cp. prose introduction to verse II. 1 above, opening sentence. 
“Each of the senses is limited in its sphere to that material element of 
which it is composed”. 



pramananam satam na virodhah srotradinam iva 
bhinna-visayatvat. yayos cabhinna-vipayatvam tayor 
dkhu-nakulayor iva pratiniyata eva badhya-badhaka- 
bhavah syat. atas tad ucyate 

There can be no contradiction between pramanas 
whose sphere of operation is different, any more than 
there can be contradiction between the bare reports of 
the eyes and ears. But whenever two cognitions give 
conflicting reports about the same thing, one must be 
right and the other wrong. 1 One must lose inevitably, 
as in a fight between a rat and a mongoose. To this we 
reply: 

1 So that only one can be a pramana, the other being a mere sem- 
blance of a pramana. 



207 




3:85 THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

pratyak$am cen na sabdam syac chabdam ced aksa- 

jam katham 

pratyakgabhasah pratyakse hy agamabhasa aganie 

[85] If a thing is perceived by the senses it cannot be 
revealed by the Veda ; if a thing is genuinely revealed by 
the Veda it cannot be an object of sense-perception. A 
perception (purporting to bear on a revealed subject is 
only) a semblance of a perception; and a revealed text 
(bearing on what is subject to perception is only) a 
mere semblance of a revelation. 



na ca pratijna-hetu-drstanta-nyaya iha sambhavati 
sabdadinam pratyekam pramanatvad ata aha 

Nor is it correct to suppose that the various means of 
knowledge must needs co-operate to produce authentic 
knowledge, as the various terms of the syllogism — the 
proposition, the ground, the example — have to co- 
operate in order to produce an inference. Each means of 
knowledge is authoritative within its own sphere. 1 

1 It is irrelevant, for example, to raise the question of how far our 
knowledge of a Vedic text depends on perception (in the form of 
hearing the words) and whether it is infected by defects inherent in the 
latter. If the Veda is a pramaija at all, it is a pramana in its own right. 

sva-mahimna pramanani kurvanty arthavabodhanam 
itaretara-sacivye pramanyam negate svatah 

[86] Each individual means of knowledge produces 
knowledge by its own power. If they were able to co- 
operate with one another, it would not be possible to 
maintain the doctrine of intrinsic validity. 1 



208 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 



3:87 



1 In Advaita, every means of cognition and every particular cognition 
is presumed correct until disproved, somewhat like the prisoner at the 
bar in English law. This principle was first formulated by the Mimarp- 
sakas in their efforts to provide a better defence against Buddhist 
scepticism than the logicians had done, but it was greatly developed by 
the Advaitins. Unless this principle is accepted, the philosopher is at 
the mercy of the "relativist". If a cognition is only true if it satisfies some 
test (i.e. if its validity is not intrinsic but requires to be proved by some 
extrinsic reference), then it is only true in reference to that test, and the 
test is only true in reference to some further test and so on. True 
knowledge turns out to be unattainable. The Advaitins were keenly 
aware of the unique and sui generis character of knowledge, quite 
different from the objects which it illumines, and their speculations on 
svatah pramanya (intrinsic validity of cognition) and on the related 
theme of the self-luminosity of pure consciousness (especially in the 
opening pages of the Tattva Pradipika of Citsukha) are regarded as 
being amongst the most philosophically interesting writings produced 
by the school. 



na ca sukha-duhkhadi-sambandho ’ vagaty-atmanah 
pratyaksadi-pramanair grhyate yena virodhah 
pratyaksadi-pramanair udbhavyate . 1 katham. srnu 

1 Accepting the reading udbhavyate (for udghatyate) from Hiri- 
yanna’s footnote to his edition of the text ad loc. 

And perception and other means of knowledge do not, 
in fact, reveal any connection between pleasure and 
pain etc. and the Self as pure consciousness (avagati), 
so that no conflict between perception etc. (and the 
revelations about the Self) can arise. You ask why? 
Listen: 

duhkh i ta vagatau 1 cet syan na pramiyeta satma-vat 
karmany eva prama nyayya na tu kartary api kvacit 

1 Adopting the reading avagatau for avagatis on Hiriyanna’s 
recommendation. 

[87] If there really were pain in pure consciousness, it 
could no more be subject to an authoritative empirical 
cognition (prama) than the Self is. For an authoritative 
empirical cognition bears necessarily on its object only 
and not on the subject (agent) of the cognition. 

P 209 




3:88 THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

abhyupagame 'pi ca prasamkhyana-satenapi naiva 
tvam sambhavita-dosan mucvase. at a aha 

And even if it were admitted (that the Self was really 
known to be connected with pain), then not even by a 
hundred acts of symbolic meditation (prasankhyana) 
could you escape from the defect that would arise. 1 

1 The protagonist of symbolic meditation claims that the Self is 
knowable now as afflicted w ith pain and that it is through meditating 
on it as if it were free from pain (although it is in fact not yet free from 
paint that it does actually become free from pain. 

pramana-baddha-rnulatvad duhkhitvam kena varyate 
agny-usna-van mvrttis cen nairatmyam hy eti saugatam 

[88] If the fact that the Self was “the sufferer” were 
really guaranteed by any competent means of know- 
ledge, its nature as “the sufferer” could not be removed, 
for the two would be like fire and heat. Or if it could be 
removed, this would imply the no-self doctrine of the 
Buddhists. 

atha matam 

But it might be argued : 

nirakuryat prasamkhyanam duhkhitvam cet 

svanufthitam 

pratyaksadi-viruddhatvat katham utpadayet pramam 

[89] And if it be maintained that symbolic meditations, 
well performed, do away with the limited, suffering 
nature of the Self, yet, even so, we ask, how could they 
produce right knowledge, since the knowledge they 
produce would be in conflict with perception and the 
other means of right knowledge. 1 

1 In this and the following four verses we return to a criticism of 
Brahmadatta and Mancjana Misra, cp. verse 1.67 above and the 
relerences there given in the notes. 

210 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 3:90 

nanu prasamkhyanam nama tat-tvam-asy-adi- 
sabdarthdn vaya- vyatireka-yukti-visaya- 
buddhyamredanam abhidhiyate taccanusthiyamanam 
pramiti-vardhanaya paripurnam pramitim janayati na 
punar aikagrya-vardhanayeti. yatha ’ sesasuci-nide 
stri-kunape kamimti nirvastukah purusayasa-matra- 
janitah pratyaya iti. tan na. yatah 

Objection: Meditation (prasarikhyana) consists in the 
repeated application of the mind to the ideas evolved 
by a reasoning through agreement and difference on the 
meaning of “that thou art” and other holy sentences. 
When properly performed it generates perfect know- 
ledge (pramiti = prama) and does so by improving on 
such knowledge as already exists, and not through 
merely improving the mind’s powers of concentration. 
It is not to be compared with the purely imaginary 
notion, arising through subjective mental activity, that 
the body of a woman, that receptacle of every impurity, 
is a charming object of desire. Answer : This objection 
is wrong, because : 

abhyasopacayad buddher yat syad aikagryam eva tat 
na hi pramanany abhyasat kurvanty arthavabodhanam 

[90] All that pondering can produce is the power of 
habitually concentrating the mind. It is not as a result 
of our pondering that the means of knowledge yield 
knowledge of their objects; (they do so directly). 



abhyasopacita krtsnam bhavana cen nivartayet 
naikantiki nivrttis syad bhavana-jam hi tat-phalam 



211 




3:91 THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

[91] If you say “through the spiritual conviction 
(bhavana) amassed through repeated meditation one 
brings all transmigration to an end", we reply, “in this 
case the cessation of transmigration would not be 
complete, for it would be a result arising from the 
creation of a spiritual conviction”. 1 

1 Liberation is not a result brought about. If it were, it would in- 
fallibly have a beginning and no less infallibly an end. 



api calm 
And moreover: 

duhkhy asmity api ced dhvasta kalpa-koty-upabrmhita 
svalpiyo ’ bhyasa-ja sthasnvi bhavanety atra ka prama 

[92] You suppose that the conviction “I am the 
sufferer”, amassed during millions of aeons, will be 
broken. What is the proof that your spiritual conviction 
based on a little meditation (in one life) will be inviol- 
able? 



nanu sastrat sthasnutvam bhavisyati. naivam. 
yathd-vasthita-vastu-yathdtmyavabodha-matra- 
karitvac chastrasya. na hi padartha-sakty-adhana- 
kfc chastram. prasiddham ca loke 

Objection: Well, the spiritual conviction will derive 
stability from (the support given to it in) the Veda. 
Answer: Not so. All the Veda does is to reveal the 
nature of things as they really are. It has no transfor- 
mative power over objects. 1 And it is a well-known fact 
in the world that: 

Cp. introductory commentary to verse 1.30 above. 

212 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 



3:93 



bhavam-jam p ha lam yat syad yac ca syat karmanah 

phalam 

na tat sthasnv iti mantavyam dravidesv iva sangatam 

[93] Neither the results of pondering nor those of 
direct action are to be regarded as stable. Both are as 
short-lived as friendship with a man of the South. 1 

1 Whatever is produced is perishable. It has been thought that the 
uncomplimentary reference to Southerners in this verse supplies 
evidence that Suresvara was a Northerner. See S. S. Raghavachar’s 
English Translation of the Naiskarmya Siddhi, Introduction, p. XIII. 



yadyapi pratyaksadi-pramanopattam atmano 
duhkhitvam. tathapi tat-tvam-asy-adi-vakyottha- 
pratyaya eva baliyan iti niscayo ’ vyabhicari- 
pramanya- vakyopattatvat prameyasya ca svata eva 
nirduhkhitva-siddheh. pratyaksades tu sa- 
vyabhicaritvat sambhavanayas ca purusa- 
parikalpana-matra vastambhatvac ceti. 

Now, the notion that the Self is the suffering individual 
soul admittedly rests on the deliverances of sense- 
perception and the other authoritative means of 
empirical cognition. Nevertheless, the conviction arising 
from “that thou art” and other Vedic texts is to be 
regarded as overweighing it, since the knowledge 
arising from the texts has eternal validity, and since the 
Self which they reveal demonstrates its freedom from 
pain and limitation by its own inherent power. 1 On the 
other hand, the deliverances of sense-perception and 
the other authoritative means of empirical cognition 
are (not eternally valid but) subject to exceptions and 
errors; their conclusions are tentative and rest on mere 
subjective interpretation. 

1 E.g., in deep sleep. 



213 




3:94 THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

nirduhkhitram svatas-siddham pratyakfddes ca 

duhkhitd 

ko hy atmanam anddrtya visvased bahya-manatah 

[94] The fact that one is free from pain is made mani- 
fest by the very power of the Self. The notion that one 
is the sufferer (individual soul) is due to perception and 
the others means of knowledge. Who would reject the 
testimony of his own Self and place confidence in 
suggestions coming from without? 



sambandhartha eva 

Continuing in the same vein: 

api pratyaksa-badhena pravrttih pratyagatmani 
“ parahci khanV ' 'ty etasmad vacaso gamyate sruteh 

[95] We know from the Veda itself in the passage “the 
senses are directed outwards” 1 that it is only through 
overcoming the grip of sense-perception that we turn 
to the Self within. 

1 Ka(ha Upanishad, IV. 1 (or Il.i.l). 



abhyupagamyaivam ucyate na tu pramanam sat- 
pramanantarena virudhyata ity asakrd avocama. 
yatrapi vakya-pratyaksayor virodhasanka tatrapi 
purusa-moha-vasad eva sa jdyate na tu paramarthata 
iti. ata aha 

We speak thus 1 (of the possibility of a conflict between 
Vedic revelation and perception) on the basis of a 
deliberate concession; otherwise we have more than 



214 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 3:96 

once remarked 2 that one means of cognition cannot be 
contradicted by another. 3 Whenever the notion that 
there is a contradiction between the holy texts and 
perception arises, that is due to the power of human 
ignorance. There is no contradiction in reality. So we 
say: 

1 From the prose introduction to verse III. 94 above. 

2 E.g. at verse 1 1 1. 83 above. 

3 Because each means of cognition is valid in its own sphere and in 
that only. The authority of sense-perception is confined to empirical 
experience: the authority of the Veda is confined to matters that 
transcend empirical experience. 

pramam cej janayed vakyam pratyaksadi-virodhinim 

gaunim prcityaksatam bruyan mukhvarthascimbhavad 

budhah 

[96] If the holy text produces correct knowledge 
which contradicts sense-perception and the other 
authoritative means of cognition, the enlightened man 
will declare that his sense-perception must be interpre- 
ted in an implied sense, since the direct meaning is 
impossible. 1 

1 Suresvara here applies the rules of Vedic exegesis to sense-percep- 
tion. In interpreting the Veda, the direct meaning of a given text has to 
be given up and an implied meaning sought for if it is deemed, after due 
consideration, that the direct meaning does not make sense. Strictly 
speaking, of course, it is only words and not experiences or cognitions 
that can have direct and implied meanings. Here Suresvara half- 
humorously says that the direct meaning of the deliverances of percep- 
tion must be given up if they conflict with the holy texts, and we must 
look for some implied or secondary meaning behind them. 



tasyarthasya sukha-pratipatty-artham udaharanam 

Examples are given to make this matter easier to 
understand: 



215 




3:97 THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

agnis samyag adhite 'sau jahasoccais ca mancakah 
yatha tad-vad aham-vrttya laksyate 'narhayapi sah 
[97] “Fire is reciting correctly” and “the gallery 
laughed at the top of its voice”. 1 In some such way as 
this the ego-sense is made to indicate the Self, though 
imperfectly. 2 

1 A keen and pure Vedic student (brahmacarin) would sometimes 
be called “Agni” (fire) because he was like fire. “Fire is reciting” 
would have to be taken as meaning “the little boy who is like fire is 
reciting”. Similarly, “the galleries shouted” means “the people in the 
galleries shouted”. 

2 Cp. verse III. 1 1 above. “Imperfectly” — because the ego-sense is in 
itself inert, cp. the following verses. SureSvara is here saying that all the 
time in our own ignorant empirical experience we all do, as a matter of 
hard fact, interpret our sense-experience in a secondary sense, and we 
do so illegitimately. Just as, in the illustrations, the words for “fire” 
and the “gallery", which are inanimate objects, are made to do duty as 
representing conscious human beings, so the word for the inert ego- 
sense (i.e. “I”) is continuously made to do duty for the conscious Self. 
But whereas the metaphorical usage of “fire” and “gallery” for 
conscious human beings is deliberate and no one is taken in by it, the 
equally metaphorical use of the “I” (individual ego-sense) for the Self 
is unconscious and the fruit of false identification. In other words the 
Self is not the “I”. Statements such as “I am the suffering jiva” are false 
if they are referred to the Self, as they usually are. 



kasmat punah kdranat sak§ad evatma nabhidhiyate 
kim anaya kalpanayeti tatrdha 

Why is the Self not directly named ? What is the pur- 
pose of this hypothesis (about the need for indicating 
it indirectly)? To answer this question we say: 

tvam ity etad vihayanyan na vartmatmavabodhane 
samastiha tvam-artho 'pi guna-lesena variate 



216 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 3:99 

[98] Except for the word “thou” 1 there is no other 
way of conveying knowledge of the Self. Even this 
word operates only indirectly on the basis of a mere 
suggestion of a common quality. 2 

1 And “1”, cp. verses III. 11 and III. 97 above. 

2 For the interpretation of guna-lesena vartate, cp. Texte, p. 55, 
note 2. 



kasmat punar hetor hy aham ity etad api guna-lesena 
vartate na punah saksad eveti. vidhuta-sarva- 
kalpana-karana-svabhavyad atmanah. ata aha 

But why is it that the word “I” only indicates the Self 
on the basis of a mere suggestion of a common quality ? 
Because the Self is by its very nature bereft of all 
grounds for conceptual representation. 1 So we say: 

1 These grounds are enumerated at verse III. 103 below. 

vyomni dhuma-tusarabhra-malinaniva dur-dhiyah 
kalpayeyus tatha mudhah samsaram pratyagatmani 

[99] Just as dull-witted persons suppose that smoke, 
mist, clouds and other impurities actually affect the sky, 
so do the deluded suppose that transmigratory life 
affects the inmost Self. 



nanu sarva-kalpananam apy atrnany atyantasambhave 
samdne ’ ham-vjrttau kah paksapate hetur yena 
vr-tty-antarani vidhuyaham- \rttyai vatmopalak syata 
iti. ucyate 



217 




3:100 THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

But if all conceptual representation of the Self is equally 
impossible, what is the reason for this preference for 
the ego-sense, in that other concepts are rejected and it 
is said that the Self can be indicated by the ego-sense 
only? 

cin-nibheyam aham-vrttih praticivatmano 'nyatah 
purvoktebhvas ca hetubhvas tasmad atmanayocyate 

[100] The ego-sense is like pure consciousness; it also 
resembles the Self in being more inward than anything 
else; for these reasons and others already mentioned 1 
the Self is indicated by the ego-sense. 

1 Cp. verses 11.56 and 57 above. 



i rttibhir yusmad-arthabhir laksyate ced drsih parah 
anatmatvam bhavet tasya vitatham ca vacah sruteh 

[101] If the transcendent Witness could be indicated 
through secondary implication by things that belong to 
the sphere of objectivity it would be not-self, and all the 
teachings of the Veda (sruti) would be in vain. 1 

1 The “sphere of objectivity” — literally “the sphere of the you”, 
where “you” means “object”. The usage is derived from the opening 
sentence of Sarpkara's Brahma Sutra (or Vedanta Sutra) Commentary. 
In this famous opening sentence the term “you” is used to mean the 
not-self, and the realm of the not-self is identified with objectivity. 
Here Suresvara is suggesting that in a certain sense the ego is privileged 
in the realm of the not-self in that, as belonging to the sphere of “I”, it 
does not belong to the sphere of the “you” and is not an object in 
quite the crass sense of other objects of the world. Hence it can be used 
to indicate the Self in such texts as “I am the Absolute (Brahman)”. 



yathoktena 

As has already been said : 



218 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 3:103 



anena guna-lesena hy aty-ahamkartr-karmaya 
laksyate ’ sav aham-vrttya nanjasatrabhidhiyate 

[102] Thus the Self is indirectly indicated but not 
strictly denoted by the ego-notion (aham-vrtti), which 
has the ego (aham-kartr) for its true object. 



nanjasatrabhidhiyata iti ko hetur iti cet 

If the question be raised, “Why do you say that the 
ego-notion cannot strictly denote the Self?”, then we 
reply: 

sasthi-guna-kriya-jati-rudhayah sabda-hetavah 

natmany anyatamo 'misam tenatma nabhidhiyate 

[103] Words can apply to things that have character- 
istics — such as relations, qualities or active powers — or 
else to things that can be subsumed under universal 
concepts (jati), or else that can be named through 
generally accepted convention. Not one of these condi- 
tions is fulfilled by the Self. Therefore it cannot strictly 
be denoted. 1 

1 Cp. Upadesa Sahasri (verse section) XVIII. 28. Suresvara here refers 
to a doctrine several times stated by Sarpkara in rather more detail. 
See, for instance, the latter’s famous passage in his Commentary on 
Taittiriya Upan. II. 1.2 (tr. Mahadeva Shastri, pp. 294 and 308-9) or his 
introductory commentary to the 7th section of the Marujukya Upani- 
shad (which comes immediately after the commentary of the ninth 
Karika of Gaudapada). Suresvara modifies Samkara’s doctrine a little. 
“Things that can be named through accepted convention”: Jftanottama 
gives as example three words which mean “the sky” — the sky, being 
subtle and motionless, is without relations, qualities or active powers; 
and being sui generis it cannot be subsumed under any universal. The 
introduction of the condition “common convention” suggests that the 
term “Self” was not regarded by the people at large as signifying the 
Absolute. It was a purely technical usage amongst "enquirers into 
Brahman” who studied Upanishadic or other texts, and hence not a 
genuine name. 



219 




3:104 THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 



vadi sabdo 'bhidhanabhidheyatva- 
sambandhahgikdrena natmani vartate katham 
sabdad aham brahmasmiti samyag-bodhotpattih. 
ucyate 

If no word can apply to the Self by way of the denoter- 
denoted relation, how can the right-knowledge “I am 
the Absolute (Brahman)” arise from verbal revelation? 
To this we reply: 

asatye vartmani sthitva nirupayam upeyate 
atmatva-karanad vidmo guna-vrttya vibodhitah 

[104] A means is found to attain that to which no 
means apply through a false route. 1 It is because it is 
the inmost Self that we can be awakened to it by a mere 
suggestion of a common quality (guna-vrtti). 

1 “False route”, e g. as when someone says “Arcturus is at the tip 
of that branch”. The statement is false, but it results in the man 
coming to know Arcturus for the first time. Similarly the holy texts like 
“That thou art” are themselves “false” in the sense that they purport 
to “apply to” what cannot be applied to by any other second thing. 
Still, if the remaining conditions are right, they communicate real 
knowledge in the form of Self-realization. Cp. Vakyapadiya 11.238. 

The last sentence in the verse wards off the suspicion that if the Self 
is beyond the range of words in their direct meanings it is unknowable 
and hence cannot be even indicated indirectly (Jftanottama). 



katham punar abhidhdnam 

abhidheyenanabhisambaddham sad anabhidheye 'rthe 
pramam janayatiti. srnu yathanabhisambaddham apy 
anabhidheye 'rthe ’ vidya-nirakarana-mukhena 
bodhayatity afia 

Still, we ask again, how can a name which is not in any 
relation with the thing named produce right knowledge 
in respect of that thing? We reply: “Listen to how a 

220 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 3:106 

name, not related to anything, can awaken someone to 
something not itself nameable by removing ignorance 
in regard to it”: 

sayanah prayaso loke bodhyamanah sva-namabhih 
sahasaiva prabudhyante yathaivam pratyagatmani 

[105] It is a fact of common experience that sleepers 
can usually be awakened by pronouncing their names. 
They wake up immediately! And the same is true of 
(awakening to) the inmost Self. 1 

1 Cp. Suresvara’s Sambandha Varttika 240, ed. and trans. T. P. 
Mahadevan, p. 123. 



na hi namnasti sambandho vyutthitasya sariratah 
tathapi budhyate tena yathaivam tat tvam ity atah 



[106] There is no direct connection between the name 
and the sleeper who has escaped from his body. Yet he is 
woken up by it. The same thing occurs in the case of 
the sentence ‘‘that thou art”. 1 



1 The problem is, how can a word generate knowledge about some- 
thing with which it has no direct connection? Holding that it does so in 
the case of “thou” in “That thou art”, Suresvara supports his view by 
showing that the same phenomenon occurs frequently in daily life. 
When John is asleep he is not aware of himself as John and indeed he 
is not John, since he has lost his individuality. Still, the word “John” 
has power to reach him inhisde-individualized state, and, what is more, 
to wake him up to his nature as John. Similarly, the word “thou’ , in 
suitable circumstances, can reach the inner Self and wake it up to its 
own real nature. We should not be surprised at this, since a similar 
phenomenon is occurring daily when sleepers are woken by calling 
their names. Neither the word “John” nor the word thou has any 
direct connection with the thing it refers to, yet they djstroy 
ignorance and hence generate knowledge in regard to it. in each case, 
however the power of the word is negative. The thing was already 
known and yet for the time being had become unknown through 
ignorance. The only power of the word in this function is to destroy 
ignorance. It cannot convey fresh knowledge. 



221 




3:107 THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 



yatha ca 
Moreover: 

bodhabodhau nabho 'sprstva krsna-dhi-nida-gau yatha 
bddhyetardtmakau syatam tathehatmani gamyatam 

[ 107] Just as the incorrect and the correct notions arise 
about the ether of the sky, to the effect that it is and is 
not blue respectively, and stand to each other as negated 
and negator, without affecting the ether itself in any 
way; so do the incorrect and the correct notions arise 
about the Self, standing to each other as negated and 
negator, but not affecting the Self in any way. 



“ asatye vartmani sthitva " ity upasrutyatmsmito 
mahata sambhramena kascic codayati 

Someone overhears us saying “a means is found by a 
false route” 1 and in very great surprise rushes in to 
object as follows : 

1 Verse III. 104 above. 

nasann upayo loke ’ sti paramartha-viniscaye 
nasal-lihgadd hi baspadeh kascid agnim prapadyate 

[108] In ordinary experience the false is not a valid 
means for attaining the real. Inferences arising from 
haze (taken for smoke) do not yield correct knowledge 
as to the presence of fire. 1 

1 Cp. Sambandha Varttika 898, ed. and trans. T.M.P.Mahadevan, 
and Maijqlana’s Brahma Siddhi, p. 1 3 f. 



tty evam codayed yo ’ pi jo$ayet tam ghatadina 
sad-asadbhyam vibhakto 'sau parydyas ca na canayoh 

222 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 3:110 

[109] If anyone speaks thus, one should remind him 
of the nature of every object. It is neither real nor un- 
real, nor yet real and unreal successively. 1 

1 The statement of the present problem given above at verse 108 
seems to follow Mariana's Brahma Siddhi p. 13 f., the same example 
of haze being taken for smoke being given. Mantfana then proceeds 
to argue that there is no rule that the false is not practically efficient in 
its own realm, the view attributed to Suresvara here in the Sarartha 
Commentary, quoted by Hiriyanna in his notes. Mantfana held that 
the false was “indeterminable as either real or unreal”, and Suresvara 
appears to be admitting this doctrine here. But it is probable that he 
never used the “indeterminable as real or unreal” formula on his own 
account, as Dr. V. Upadhyaya, who attributes the doctrine to him, is 
quite unable to produce an example of it from his works, “Lights on 
the Vedanta” p. 98. It is found in the doubtfully authentic work 
Manasollasa Varttika (on the Daksina Murti Hymn), verse VIII. 13, 
translated Mahadeva Sastrin, Minor Upanishads Vol. II, p. 154. 



evam ku-codyam unmulyathedanim prakrtam 
abhidhiyate. prakrtam canabhidheye katham 
abhidha-srutir avidya-dhvamsy atmani jnanam 
janayatiti. tatraiva karanantaram ucyate 

Having thus disposed of a silly objection we return to 
the subject in hand. And the subject in hand is — how 
can a Vedic text bearing on something that is (in 
principle) unnameable destroy ignorance and produce 
knowledge of the Self? And in this connection a further 
reason (why it can do so) is adduced: 

atidusstho ’ prabodho 'tra hy atmaivasya prabuddhata 
nimitta-matrdd vyety esa nasagre badaram yatha 

[110] Ignorance has got a precarious seat. Its power 
to manifest is due entirely to the Self. Anything will 
serve to dislodge it, it is like a badari fruit 1 balanced on 
the nose. 

1 A kind of plum. 



223 




3:111 THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

anuditanastamita-kutastha-bodha-inatra-svabhavyad 
at memo dussambhavyo 'vidya-sad-bhava iti cen na. 
avidya-prasiddhyaiva tat-sad-bhava-siddher uluka- 
nisa-vad ity at a idam ucyate 

Objection: Since the Self is the pure consciousness that 
neither rises nor sets, firm and changeless as a mountain 
peak, the very existence of ignorance is hard to justify. 
Answer: No; its existence is proved by our very famili- 
arity with it. 1 It is like the case of the owl finding 
darkness in the daylight. 

1 i.e. it may not be possible to justify it logically, but it asserts itself 
in experience all the same. 

aho dharstyam avidyaya na kascid ativartate 
pramanam vastv anadrtya paramatmeva tisthati 

[111] Oh! Who could outdo ignorance for sheer 
impudence? Paying not the slightest attention to 
reality or to authoritative canons of knowledge, it just 
stands there as if it were the supreme Self. 



yasmad avidya-prasiddhyai va vidya-sad-bhava-siddhir 
ata atma-vastu-vrttanurodhena na kathamcanapi 
tat-sambhavandpy asti yata aha 

Because the existence of ignorance rests only on our 
familiarity with it, it follows that it is in no way logically 
justifiable from the standpoint of the Self as reality. 
Wherefore we say: 

jhanam yasya nijam rupam kriya-karaka-varjitam 
sambhavanapy avidyayas tatra syat kena hetuna 



224 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 3:113 



[112] When the Self is pure knowledge by nature, void 
of the factors of knower, knowing and known, how 
could there be the faintest possibility of the existence of 
ignorance therein? 



so 'yam evam anuditanastamitavagati-matra-sarira 
dtmapi sann avicarita-prasiddhavidya-matra-vyavahita 
evatathaiveksyate yato 'tah 

Because it is the Self as pure unbroken 1 awareness 
which is concealed by bare ignorance, established on 
the basis of uncritically accepted familiarity, and which 
then appears as other than it is — it follows that: 

1 Literally, not rising and not setting. 

anumanad ayam bhavad vyavrtto 'bhavam asritah 
tato 'py asya nivrttih syad vdkyad eva bubhutsatah 

[113] Through inference the Self is conceived as 
different from the (empirically) existent — and hence as 
non-existent. The cessation of even this (false) concep- 
tion of the Self arises from the holy texts alone in the 
case of the serious enquirer. 



bhava-vad abhavad api nivrttir anumanad eva kim iti 
na bhavatiti cec chrnu 

Objection: But why is there any need for revelation? 
Reason can terminate the sense of non-existence in 
regard to the (transcendent) Self, just as it terminated 
the notion of its identity with the empirically existent. 
Answer : No. Listen: 



Q 



225 




3:114 THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

na vyavrttir vat ha bhavad bhavenai vavisesatah 
abhavad apy abhavatvad vyavrttir na tathe?vate 

[114] The Self cannot be distinguished from what 
exists empirically (such as the body, etc.) by virtue of its 
being existent, because both would equally exist. And 
in the same way it cannot be distinguished from the 
non-existent by virtue of its being other than the exist- 
ent. 1 

1 Hence it cannot be known through reason, the function of which is 
to distinguish, but only through the holy text. 



yato nanumanena vyaviddhasesa-kriya-karaka- 
phalatmani svarajye 'bhisektum sakyate tasmat 

Since one cannot through the mere exercise of reason 
be anointed king upon the throne of the Self that lies 
beyond action and the factors of action — therefore: 

avidya-nidraya so ’ yam prasupto durvivekaya 
bhavabhava-vyudasinya srutyaiva pratibodhyate 

[115] He who is sunk in the profound sleep of ignor- 
ance, which is immune to rational discrimination, is 
awoken from it by the Veda alone, which excludes both 
being and non-being. 1 

1 Because it is concerned with the Self which is “beyond being and 
non-being”, verse 111.57 above. 



a tr ahanuditanastam i ta- vijhanatma-matra-s varupat vad 
dussambhavya vidyeti. naitad evam. kutah. yata aha 



226 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 3:117 



It might be said here, “Since reality is by nature the 
Self as bare consciousness that neither rises nor sets, 
the whole concept of ignorance is indefensible”. But 
this is not so. Why not? To show why not, we say: 

kuto 'vidyeti codyam syan naiva pragg hetv - 

asambhavat 

kala-trayaparicchitter na cordhvam codya-sambhavah 

[116] The objection “How can ignorance exist (in 
face of the Self)” is illegitimate both before and after 
(spiritual realization). Before spiritual realization its 
presence cannot be contested, and after spiritual realiza- 
tion it stands destroyed for past, present or future. 



yasmat tat-t vam-asy-adi- vakyam evatmano ’ sesam 
avidyam niranvayam apanudati tasmat 

Because it is only the holy texts like “that thou art” 
which can throw off all ignorance without remainder, 
it follows that: 

adahatamam anadrtya pramanam sad asiti ye 
bubhutsante ' nyatah kuryus te 'ksnapi rasa-vedanam 

[117] Those who ignore the most direct means of 
knowledge, which is the holy text “that thou art and 
seek knowledge by other means, are verily in the 
position of a man trying to taste food with his eyes. 



evam apratihatam ahani brahmeti pramarn tat-tvam- 
asy-adi-vakyarn kurvad api na pratipadayatiti ced 
abhimatam na kutascanapi pratipattih syad ata aha 

227 




3:118 THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

Now, if it be thought that the holy texts like “that thou 
art” carry uncontradicted right knowledge in the form 
“1 am the Absolute (Brahman)” and yet are incapable 
of communicating it to anyone, then communication 
(of this) could not come from anywhere. So we say: 

idam ced anrtam bruyat satyam avagatav api 

na canyatrapi visvaso hy avagaty-avisesatah 

[118] If someone achieves knowledge by means of the 
holy texts and then proceeds to say “It is untrue”, then 
no other source of knowledge is of avail to him. For the 
most it could do would be to promote knowledge. 1 

1 The text promotes knowledge (avagati). If this is achieved and then 
rejected, then whatever knowledge comes from any other source will be 
liable to be similarly rejected. Marujana’s view (see prose introduction 
to 1.67 above) that the knowledge “I am the Absolute (Brahman)” 
generated by the holy texts does not penetrate to the real nature of the 
Self because it is relational, being based on words, and requires to be 
converted into another form of non-relational true knowledge arising 
from meditation, appears to be under fire here. See also the next verse. 



na copad it si tad vakyarthad vakyarthantaram 
kalpayitum yuktam. yasmat 

Nor is it right to pass from the true meaning of the 
sentence, supremely desirable in itself, to a quite 
different meaning. Wherefore : 

na ced anubhavo ’ tah syat padarthavagatav api 
kalpyam vidhy-antaram tatra na hy anyo 'rtho 

’ vagamyate 

[119] And if the meanings of the words are understood 
but the spiritual experience does not arise, it will not 
help to invoke purely imaginary injunctions to meditate. 
For there is no other meaning to be understood but that 
conveyed by the text itself. 



228 




the realization of the absolute 3:121 

na ca yathdbhimato 'rtho yathoktena nyayena 
navasiyate. ko ’ sau nyaya ity aha 

Nor is it true to say that the meaning as we have pro- 
claimed it cannot be made out by reasoning as we have 
described it. What is that method? To answer we say: 

namadibhyo nirakrtya tvam-artham nisparigrahah 
nissprho yusmad-arthebhyah samddi-vidhi-coditah 

[ 1 20] When a person has separated the meaning of the 
word “thou” from “name” etc. 1 and has become 
possessionless and without desire for anything in the 
objective field or subject to the injunctions as to 
restraint etc. . . . 

1 Chandogya Upanishad VII. i.5. 



bhahktva canna-mayadims tan pahcanatmataya 

'rgalan 

aham brahmeti vakyartham vetti cen ndrtha ihaya 

[121] .. . And has destroyed the five sheaths beginning 
with the one composed of food, 1 for the reason that, as 
not-self, they are obstacles (to the realization of Self), 
and then finally knows the meaning of the text “I am 
the Absolute (Brahman)"— then for him any further 
striving is meaningless. 

1 Taittiriya Upanishad Il.ii.l-Il.v.I. 



na ced evatti upagamyate vakyasya pramanasya sato 
’ pramanyam prapnoti. tad aha 

If this were not admitted, the holy text, which is an 
authority, would become a non-authority. 1 So we say: 

229 




3:122 THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

1 Advaita is not an independent rational enquiry but an interpreta- 
tion of texts already received as authoritative. Any explanation of 
those texts which would make them non-authoritative is thus self- 
contradictory and must be rejected. 

vad-artham ca praxrttam vad vakyam tatra na cec 

chrutam 

pramam utpadayet tasya pramanyam kena hetuna 

[122] If the Vedic texts do not promote correct know- 
ledge of the subject they refer to immediately they are 
heard, how can the Veda be regarded as authoritative 
at all? 1 

1 The advocate of liberation through meditation on the texts, the 
Prasaiikhyana Vadin, holds that the information conveyed by the holy 
texts about the Absolute is false or at least seriously inadequate by its 
very nature, because it depends on words in a sentence and therefore 
proclaims not complete non-duality without even internal distinctions 
but an entity having a structural pattern corresponding to the pattern 
of the meanings of the words of the sentence. It has to be converted 
into right knowledge of non-duality by the exertions of the meditator 
in meditation. But Suresvara maintains, with $arpkara, that if the holy 
texts are to be regarded as authoritative they must convey the liberating 
knowledge directly and correctly themselves. Otherwise we have the 
self-stultifying view that liberation cannot arise except in contradiction 
with the meaning of the holy text. Cp. Rama Tirtha’s Commentary to 
Upadesa Sahasri XVIII. 106. 



atha manyase 

Well, perhaps you will think: 

janiyac cet prasamkhyanac chabdas satya-vacah 

katham 

paroksyam sabdo nah praha prasamkhyanat tv 

asamsayam 



230 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 3:124 



[123] If an objector says, “Man comes to know 
reality through meditation (prasankhyana)” — then how 
can revelation be teaching the truth? The objector 
replies: “We hold that knowledge derived from words 
is mediate and indirect (paroksa), but that it becomes 
intuitive conviction of reality through meditation 
(prasankhyana) 1 ”. 

1 This doctrine is maintained and expounded by Manijana Misra at 
Brahma Siddhi, p. 134. 



na ca yukti-sabddvptti-laksanat prasamkhyanad 
vathd-vat pratipattir bhavisyatiti sambhavayamah. 
yasmat 

We cannot accept as logical the view that knowledge 
of reality can arise from Prasankhyana conceived as 
repeated hearing and reasoning. Wherefore: 

yukti-sabdau pur a 'py asya na ced akurutam pramam 
saksad avartanat tabhyam kim apurvam phalisyati 

[124] If the revealed texts as interpreted through 
reason do not produce correct and immediate 
(aparoksa) knowledge in the first place, how can they 
produce new right knowledge later through a mere 
repetition of the process? 1 

1 In the Advaita of Sarpkara's school, knowledge is said to be con- 
ditioned by the nature of the object (vastu-tantra) and not by the will of 
the knower. Consequently, if imperfect knowledge or wrong knowledge 
is conveyed by the holy texts, no amount of activity on the part of the 
hearer, regarded as an agent, in the form of contemplation, etc., can 
convert the previous inadequate knowledge into adequate knowledge. 
He requires fresh contact with reality. On Suresvara’s view, the holy 
texts give him just this, somewhat as the name John puts the sleeper 
into contact with his individual waking personality. 



231 




3:125 THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 



athaivam api prasamkhyanam antarena pranan 
dharayitum na saknositi cec chravanadav era 
sampadayisyamah. katham 

If you feel that your whole life depends on 
Prasarikhyana, all right, we will find a place for it in the 
preliminary discipline of hearing, cogitation and medi- 
tation. How? 

prasamkhyanam 1 srutav asya nyayo ’stv 

amredanatmakah 

isac-chrutam sami-srutam samyak srutvavagacchati 

1 Reading prasankhyanam for prasankhyane on MS authority 
quoted by Hiriyanna. 

[125] Prasankhyana (in the sense of repetition) can be 
accepted as part of the (preliminary) discipline of 
hearing. 1 A man comes to understand that which was 
partially heard or half heard (only) after hearing it 
properly. 2 

1 Cp. Brahma Sutra IV.i.l. 

1 The essential point to which Suresvara adheres is that ultimately 
knowledge has to be conveyed in the final hearing from the Teacher. 
Even if, on the basis of the Brahma Sutra texts, we accept that ponder- 
ing and meditation play a role, still, that role is purely preliminary and 
subordinate. Such activity can do no more than qualify the pupil to 
hear properly what he is being taught. 



nanu prasamkhyana-vidhim anabhyupagacchatah 
paramahamsi carya bauddhadi-carya-vad asastra- 
purvika prdpnoti tatas carudha-patitatvam 1 syad 
ase$a-karmanam ca nivrttir na prapnotiti. ucyate 

1 Omitting “na” on MS authority quoted by Hiriyanna. 



232 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 3:126 

Objection: Well then, if you do not admit that there 
exist injunctions in the Veda to perform Prasankhyana, 
then the discipline of the supreme renunciates (para- 
mahamsa samnyasin) stands outside the pale of Vedic 
teaching, just as the discipline of the Buddhists does. 
In that case they would be liable to a fall from grace, 
and the bringing to an end of action and its results 
would be impossible. Answer: To this we say: 

tvam-arthasyavabodhaya vidhir apy asrito yatah 
tam antarena ye dosas te 'pi ndyanty ahetavah 

[126] Since we accept the doctrine that there exists in 
the Veda an injunction to investigate the great sentences 
by hearing, cogitation and sustained meditation 
(sravana, manana and nididhyasana), our position is 
not open to the objections attaching to those courses of 
spiritual discipline for which there is no Vedic warrant. 



233 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 



4 : 1 



caturtho ’ dhyayah 

otn piirvadhvayesu yad vasiu xistarenoditam sphutam 
samksepato 'dhuna vaksye lad-eva-sukha-vittave 



BOOK IV 

[1] OM! Now we shall repeat in summary form the 
same material that has been dealt with at length in the 
previous books, that it may be the more easily under- 
stood. 



saniksepa-xistarabhyam hi mandottama-dhiydm nrnam 
xastucyamanam ety aniah-karanam tena bhanyate 

[2] For if one wishes a subject to be understood both 
by clever people and by less clever ones, one must first 
expound it at length and then append a summary. 1 

1 It would appear from J. that it is the weaker brethren who put 
their faith in summaries. 



aimanatma ca loke ’ smin pratyaksadi-pramanatah 
siddhas tayor anatma tu sarvatraivatma-purvakah 

[3] In this world both the Self and the not-self are 
known through the authoritative means of knowledge 
(pramana) such as perception, etc. But wherever the 
not-self is known, it is known as accompanied by the 
Self. 1 



234 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 4: 5 

1 “An object is never known in the absence of a subject". J. This does 
not mean that we know the subject in the same sense that we know the 
object (as the Mimamsaka Prabhakara and his school held), nor even 
that the subject supplies a “felt background” as some European 
idealists of the nineteenth century claimed. It is a general truth that one 
first becomes aware of through critical reflection on the implications of 
experience, by the method of agreement and difference. It is demon- 
strated brilliantly by Sarpkara in a passage of his commentary to 
Prasna Upanishad VI. 2. The implications of that passage are discussed 
in the light of the present verse of Suresvara by A. C. Mukerji in The 
Nature of the Self, pp. 121-128 and p. 366. 



anatmatvam svatas siddham dehad bhinnasya vastunah 
jnatur apy at mat a tad-van madhye samsaya-darsanam 

[4] The non-selfhood of objects external to the body 
is evident, as also is the Selfhood of the Witness. But in 
regard to what lies between (body, mind and senses) we 
find doubt. 



asadharanams tayor dharman jnatva dhumagni-vad 

budhah 1 

anatmano ’ tha buddhy-antan janiyad anumanatah 

1 A metrically irregular line, having an extra syllable. 

[5] The wise should note the characteristics that are 
peculiar to the Self (consciousness, permanence etc.) 
and those that are peculiar to the not-self (uncon- 
sciousness, perceptibility etc.). Having done so, he 
would realize by inference that all objects up to and 
including the intellect must be not-self. 



idam ity eva bahye 'rthe hy aham ity eva boddhari 
dvayam drstam yato dehe tenayam muhyate janah 



235 




4: 6 THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

[6] We think “this” in relation to external objects and 
“I” (aham) in relation to the knower within. But in 
relation to the body etc. we have both notions (i.e. 
“this” and “me”). Hereby men are bewildered. 



kena punar ny ay enat manat manor asva-mahisayor iva 
vibhagah kriyata iti. ucyate 

Objection: Well, but just tell us the method whereby the 
Self and the not-self may be clearly separated like horse 
and buffalo. Answer: To this we say: 

nyayah purodito ’ smabhir atmanatma-vibhaga-krt 
tenedam-artham utsarya hy aham ity atra yo bhavet 

[7] We have already described the method for separat- 
ing the Self and the not-self (viz. reasoning by the 
method of agreement and difference). When the “this” 
has been eliminated by it (as not-self) the “I” remains. 



vidyat tat tvam asity asmad bha vabha va-drsam sada 
anantaram abahyartham pratyak-stham munir ahjasa 

[8] Let the sage (muni) become clearly aware of the 
eternal inmost reality, the Witness of both existence 
and non-existence, ^in relation to which there is nothing 
within and nothing without. The means is the holy text 
“that thou art”. 



ucyatam tarhi kaya tu paripathya vakyartham 
vettiti. ucyate. anvaya-vyatirekabhyam 



236 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 4:10 

You must tell us, then, by what method the meaning of 
the holy text is to be understood. We reply: through 
reasoning by the method of agreement and difference. 1 

1 If the passage comprising verses 9-18 is viewed as a whole it is seen 
that the reply is a tentative one. Reasoning by the method of agreement 
and difference is an incomplete discipline in itself and requires to be 
completed by hearing the great Vedic texts. 

tyakta-krtsnedam arthatvat tyakto ’ ham iti manyate 
navagacchamy aham yasman nijatmanam anatmanah 

[9] A man will think, “because I have rejected all that 
I represent as ‘this’ I stand rejected myself. For I cannot 
comprehend my own Self shorn of the not-self”. 1 

1 This is the net result of reasoning by the method of agreement and 
difference. Hence the seeker for liberation must resort to the holy 
texts as well. Cp. verses III. 11 3-1 15 above. 



at ha sariradi-buddhi-paryantah sa sarvo natmaiveti 
pramandd viniscitya kim iti bubhutsato noparamate. 
srnu 



Having determined through correct cognition that all 
from the body to the intellect is not-self, why does not 
this enquiry end? Listen: 



anucchinna-bubhutsas ca pratyagg hetor anatmanah 
dolayamana-citto yam muhyate bhauta-van narah 



f 10] The mind of such a man lurches to and fro. His 
desire to know the inmost (Self) as distinct from the 
not-self remains unsatisfied and he remains deluded, 
like one possessed. 



237 




4:11 THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

a vilupta- vijnanatmana atmatvad eva nitya-sannidhyad 
bubhutsuh kim iti na pratipadyata iti. yasmat 

Since his Self is the Self of unbroken knowledge, ever 
present, why does a man not realize the fact? Because: 

yair adraksit puratmanam yam anatmeti viksate 
drster drastarani atmanam taih prasiddhaih pramitsati 

[1 1] Formerly he apprehended the body as the Self by 
means of the senses and mind, but now he knows it to be 
not-self. And he wishes to use those self-same instru- 
ments to discover “the Seer (Witness) of sight”! 1 

1 Suresvara graphically describes the plight of the seeker of know- 
ledge of the Self who relies on intellectual analysis alone. He knows that 
the senses formerly deceived him when they suggested that the body was 
the Self. But he remains absolutely dependent on them for knowledge. 
Knowing that the senses are incompetent to tell him the truth even 
about the nature of the physical body, he finds that he has no other 
instruments wherew ith to gather material for a knowledge of the highest 
Self, that which the Upanishads call the Seer of seeing! 



kasmat punar hetoh paracinabhih sabdady- 
avalehinibhir buddhibhir atmanam andtmavan na 
viksata iti. ucyate 

But why can he not perceive the Self as he perceives the 
not-self, through the externally orientated cognitions 
which apprehend sound and other objects? We reply: 

caksur na viksate sabdam atad-atmatva-kararidt 
yathaivam bhautiki drstir ndtmanam paripasyati 

[12] The eye does not see sounds since it is not made 
up of the quality of sound. Similarly, gross material 
perception cannot perceive the Self. 1 



238 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 



4:13 



1 Each sense-organ perceives only that part of matter that is made up 
of the same element as itself. E.g. the eye sees only the fire element, 
the ear hears only vibrations in the ether, the nose only perceives the 
quality of smell inhering in earth etc. See Upadesa Sahasri (verse part) 
XVI. 2 and Samkara’s Commentary on Brhadaranyaka Upanishad 
II.iv.ll. Compare also the opening sentence of the introductory prose 
commentary to verse II. 1 of the present work above. All honour to 
perception in its own sphere, say Sarpkara and Suresvara, but that 
sphere is not the Self. 



pratyaksadi-pramana-svabhavyanurodhena tavat 
tad-adarsana-karanam uktam. atha prameya- 
svabhavyamrodhena pratisedha ucyate 

The reason for the non-perception of the Self has been 
shown through an enquiry into the nature of the means 
of cognition like perception, etc. Now the possibility 
of perceiving the Self is negated through an enquiry 
into the nature of the (proposed) object of such a 
perception (viz. the inmost Self). 

dhi-vikriya-sahasranam hanopadana-dharminam 
sada saksinam atmanam pratyaktvan naham iksate 

[131 The ego (aham) cannot see the eternal Self on 
account of its interiority. The Self is the witness of the 
myriad contortions of the intellect, which bring proht 

and loss. 



kva punar iyam riveka-buddhih kim at many 
utanatmaniti. kimcdtah. yady dtmani kutasthatva- 
vyaghato ’ natma-darsitvat . athanatmam tasyap) 
acaitanydn na viveka-sambandha i/i. ucyat_e. 

“ dahya-dahakataikatra ” ity ukta-parihara 



239 




4:14 THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

Objection: Well, but this perception of distinctness 
(viveka) — does it belong to the Self or the not-self? 
Answer : What does it matter? Objection: If it belonged 
to the Self, then the Self could not be the changeless 
consciousness, firm as a mountain peak, because it 
would perceive the not-self (and so be subject to mo- 
tion). So it must be the not-self. But the latter is inert 
and hence can have nothing to do with discrimination. 
Answer: We have already dealt with this at verse III. 59 
above. “Just as fire and wood are burner and burnt 
respectively . . .” 

buddhav eva viveko ’ yarn yad-anatmataya bhida 

buddhim evopamrdnati kadalim tat-phalam yatha 

[14] Discrimination belongs to the intellect alone, for 
it is only because the intellect is not-self that distinctions 
arise at all. Finally discrimination destroys the intellect 
as the plantain-fruit destroys the parent tree. 1 

1 Distinction (viveka) is itself a modification of the mind and is 
attributed to the Self only through superimposition. Hence the changc- 
lessness of the Self is not affected by an act of discrimination. But the 
bare inert intellect itself is not the seat of discrimination. The intellect 
becomes a knower at all only through false identification with the 
Self. J. 



so ’ yam atattve tattva-drk 

Such a one sees the reality in what is not the reality: 

anumana-pradipena hitvd sarvan anatmanah 
samsaraikavalambinya tad-abhavam dhiyepsati 

[15] Having disposed of all not-selves through the 
light of inference, he hopes to do away with trans- 
migratory life through that very intellect which is its 
sole support! 



240 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 4:16 

yo yam anvaya-vyatireka-jo viveka atmanatma- 
vibhaga-laksano ’ natmasthah sthanau 
samsayavabodha-vat pratipattavyo ’ yatha-vastu- 
svdbhavydn mrga-tr$nikodaka-prabodha-vad ity ata 
aha 

This discrimination arising through reasoning through 
the method of agreement and difference, which separates 
the Self and the not-self, resembles doubt, such as the 
doubt whether a distant object is a post or a man. Even 
if taken as yielding clear knowledge, such “knowledge” 
is false like the “knowledge” of water in a mirage. 1 So 
we say: 

1 And hence, J adds, you cannot rely on reason alone for knowledge 
of the Self, but must resort to the holy texts. 

samsara-bija-samstho ' yam tad-dhiyd muktim icchati 
saso nimilaneneva mrtyum parijihirsati 

[16] He remains firmly based in the seed of trans- 
migratory life (ignorance) and at the same time wishes 
to obtain liberation through that very discriminatory 
intellect which brings transmigratory life about! He is 
like a hare trying to save itself from death by shutting 
its eyes. 



asyarthasya dradhimne sruty-udaharanam 

Veda-quotation to support this point: 

imam artham puraskptya srutya samyag udahrtam 
“ yac caksuse ” ti visrabdham “ na drste riti ca 

sphutam 



R 



241 




4:17 THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

[17] With this truth in mind, the Veda says, “That 
which the eye cannot see” 1 and “thou canst not see the 
Seer of seeing”. 2 

1 Kena Upanishad 1.7. 

2 Brhadaranyaka Upanishad, III.iv.2. 



buddhy-antain apaviddhyaivam ko rtvaham syam 

itiksituh 

srutis tat tvam asity aha sarva-manatigamini 

[18] To the one who has realized the unreality of 
everything, up to and including the intellect, and who 
still asks, “Well, then, who am I?”, the Veda, itself 
beyond the realm of empirical questioning and proof, 
replies “that thou art”. 1 

1 Both Samkara and Suresvara personify the Veda (sruti) as a com- 
passionate mother. “Kinder than a thousand parents”, says Samkara, 
commenting on Katha Upanishad Il.i. 15. 



e$a samksepatah purvadhyaya-trayasyartha uktah. 
so 'yam nyayyo 'pi vedantarthah sastracarya- 
prasada-labhyo 'py anapekfita-sastracarya-prasado 
'nanyapekfa-siddha-s vabha vat vat kaiscic 
chraddadhanair na pratiyate. te$am samgrahartham 
abhimata-pramanyoddharanam 

So we conclude our summary of the teachings of the 
three previous books. Now this well-known Vedanta 
doctrine we have expounded, though it has to be learned 
from the authoritative texts with the help and grace 
of a spiritual Teacher, by no means depends on the 
presence of the texts and the grace of a Teacher, but 



242 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 4:19 

exists and asserts itself as true in its own right. Neverthe- 
less there exist some pious people who cannot accept 
anything unless it is made dependent on some authority 
or other, and as a concession to them we subjoin some 
quotations from a recognized authority. 1 

1 Viz. Samkara. Suresvara seems to have regarded his Teacher 
Sarpkara as having become an authority on Advaita doctrine already 
in his own lifetime. At Taittiriya Varttika 1.2 and Brhadaraoyaka 
Varttika VI.v.25 he stresses his far-reaching fame. Cp. Texte, p. 13. 

bhagavat-pujya-padais capy 1 udaharyevam eva tu 

suvispasto 'smad-ukto ’ rthah sarva-bhuta-hitaisibhih 

1 Adopting the reading of the Sarartha Commentary to avoid a break 
in the sandhi. 

[19] What we are saying has all been clearly stated by 
the holy (Teacher) of Worshipful Feet (Samkara), the 
one who was devoted to the welfare of every living 
creature. 1 

1 Suresvara’s references to his master Samkara show that, while he 
did not regard him as an avatara either of Siva or of any other deity, 
he did regard him as a Teacher of quite exceptional magnitude. Both 
Suresvara and Padmapada refer to him usually as Bhagavan Pujyupada 
— the holy one whose feet are worthy of worship. 



kirn paramatmana upadesa utaparamatmana iti. 
kirn catah. yadi paramatmanas tasyopadesam 
antarenaiva muktatvan nirarthaka upadesah. 
athaparamatmanas tasyapi svata eva samsara- 
svabhdvatvan nifphala upadesah. evam ubhayatrapi 
do$a-vattvad at a aha 

Objection: Is the teaching for the highest Self or for 
the lower self? Answer : What are you driving at? 



243 




4:20 THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

Objection: If the teaching is for the highest Self, then 
because it is already liberated anyway without the 
teaching, the teaching is useless. But if the teaching 
is for the lower self, then, the lower self being irrevoc- 
ably transmigrant by nature, the teaching has no chance 
of success. So both views are faulty. Answer: With this 
objection in mind, we proceed: 

“ avivicyobhavam vakti srutis cet syad grahas tatha ” 
iti paksam upadaya purva-paksam nisatya ca 

[20] The statement of the Veda becomes intelligible if 
it be assumed that it is made in accordance with the 
standpoint of one not discriminating (the ego, the Self 
and the reflection of consciousness). 1 This is the view 
that the holy Teacher accepted, having refuted the 
other. 2 

1 This is the first half of Upadesa Sahasri (verse part) XVIII.78. 

2 It is thus the lower self for whom the teaching is made, but the 
latter is not “irrevocably a transmigrant” because its very existence 
depends on erroneous knowledge which is subject to cancellation by 
right knowledge. 



tac cedam avivekat svato viviktatmane tat tvam asity 
upadistam 

The teaching of “that thou art”, however, has to be 
directed to one who through lack of deep discrimination 
has made only superficial intellectual discrimination 
between Self and not-self. 

yusmad-asmad- vibhaga-jfie syad artha-vad idam vacah 

yato 'nabhijne vakyam syad badhiresv iva gayanam 

\ 



244 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 4:22 

[21] The holy texts are meaningful to those who know 
the difference between the Self and the not-self. When 
the difference between the Self and the not-self is not 
known, pronouncing the holy text is about as useful as 
singing songs before an assembly of the deaf. 1 

1 The first half of this verse is a quotation of Upadesa SahasrI 
XVIII. 90, and the remainder is Suresvara’s comment. 



tasya ca yusmad-asmad-vibhaga-vijhanasya ka yuktir 
upaya-bhavam prat ipady ate. srnu 

But what is the reasoning that serves as a means to the 
knowledge of the distinction between the Self and the 
not-self? Listen: 

“ anvaya-vyatirekau hi padarthasya padasya ca 
syad etad aham ity atra yuktir evavadharane" 

[22] For it is only by reasoning through considering 
examples of agreement and difference in the case of 
both words and the things denoted by words that one 
can determine the meaning of “I” in the present context 
(i.e. not from the standpoint of uncritical common- 
sense). 1 

1 This verse is a quotation of U padesa SahasrI XVIII.96. 



katham tau yuktir ity atraha 

How does reasoning by agreement and difference 
amount to the “reasoning (which serves as a means to 
this knowledge)”? To answer this question, we say. 



245 




4:23 THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

“ nadraksam aham ity asmin susupte ’ nyan manag api 
na varayati drstim svatn pratyayam tu ni$edhati ” 

[23] The feeling “I did not see anything else whatever 
in this (my recent) sleep" does not deny one’s own 
consciousness (in that state), but does deny all mental 
representation (pratyaya) in it. 1 

1 Upadesa Sahasri XVIII. 97. 



“ evam vijhata-vaeyarthe sruti-loka-prasiddhitah 
srutis tat tvam asity aha srotur mohapanuttaye" 

[24] When the primary meaning of the text has once 

been understood on the basis of ordinary scriptural and 

secular usage, the Veda (sruti) says “that thou art” for 

the removal of the hearer’s delusion (moha). 1 

1 Upadesa Sahasri XVIII.99, with the reading vacyarthe = primary 
meaning. 



tatra tvam iti padam yatra lak?anaya vartate so 
'rtha ucyate 

We explain the meaning of the word “thou” when it is 
used in an indirect sense (laksana): 

“ aham-sabdasya ya nistha jyotisi pratyagatmani 
saivokta sad asity evam phalam tatra vimuktata ” 

[25] It is in this way (i.e. without any further work 
requiring to be done) that the word “I” 1 reveals the 
light (jyotih), the inmost Self. That same revelation is 
given in the text “that thou art”. 2 The fruit here is 
liberation. 3 



246 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 4:27 

1 In “I am the Absolute (Brahman)”, Brhadaranyaka Upanishad 
I.iv.10. 

2 Literally, "thou art the real”, but it seems that Sarpkara and 
SureSvara used this phrase to stand for “that thou art”. 

3 This verse is a quotation of Upadesa Sahasri XVIII.101 . According 
to the commentator on that work, Rama Tirtha, the verse refers back 
to the preceding one and its meaning is that the operation of the 
sentences “I am the Absolute (Brahman)” and “that thou art” is as 
effortless and immediate as that of Brahma’s sentence to Rama, “O 
Rama, thou art Visnu and not just the son of Dasaratha”. 



anyaccan vaya- vyatirekodaharanam. tat ha 

Another example of reasoning by agreement and 
difference, thus: 

“ chittva tyaktena hastena svayam natma visesyate 
tat ha sis ten a sarvena yena yena visesyate 

[26] When a hand has been cut off, the Self is not 
affected by the lost hand. It is the same with all else by 
which the Self is qualified and which is (later) rejected. 1 
1 Upadesa Sahasri VI. 1. 



visesanam idam sarvam sadhv-alamkaranam yatha 
avidyadhyastam atah sarvam jhata atmany asad 

bhavet 

[27] All this array of qualities is like an external 
adornment. 1 They have been superimposed on the 
Self through ignorance. Therefore, when the Self is 
known, they prove to be unreal. 2 

1 That can be donned or removed without the wearer being affected . 

2 Upadesa Sahasri VI. 3. 



247 




4:28 



THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 



tasmat tyaktena hastena tulyam saw am visesanam 
anatmatvena tasmaj jho muktah sawa- visesanaih 

[28] Every qualifying characteristic (of the Self) is, 
as not-self, comparable to the lost hand. Therefore the 
Self is free from all qualifying characteristics. 1 

1 Upadesa Sahasri VI. 2. 



jnataivatma sada grahyo jheyam utsrjya kevalah 
aham ity api yad grahyam vyapetahga-samam hi tat 

[29] The Self should be ever realized as the knower to 
the exclusion of the knowable. Even that which is 
known objectively as “1” must be rejected. It is like a 
discarded limb. 1 

1 Upadesa Sahasri VI.4. Compare verses H.16-17 above. 



drsyatmd aham ity e?a natma-dharmo ghatadi-vat 
tathanye pratyaya jheya do?as catma ’ malo hy atah" 

[30] The ego-notion is not itself a property of the Self 
since it is perceived as an object like a pot. This applies 
equally to all other mental notions (pratyaya) and 
defects. For the Self is taintless. 1 
1 This is Upadesa Sahasri XV. 16. 



sawa-nyayopasamgrahah 

Summary of the whole argument: 

il nitya-muktatva-vijhanam vakyad bhavati nanyatah 
vakyarthasyapi vijhanam padartha-smfti-purvakam 

248 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 



4:33 



[31] The knowledge that one is (really) ever liberated 
comes from the holy texts and from no other source. 
And knowledge of the meaning of a text is not possible 
without first calling to mind the meanings of its (com- 
ponent) words. 1 

1 Upadesa Sahasri XVIII. 190, cp. verse III. 31 above. 



cmvaya-vyatirekabhyam padarthas smaryate dhruvam 
exam nirduhkham atmanam akriyam pratipadyate 

[32] Everyone agrees that the meaning of a word is 
recalled through reasoning on it by the method of 
agreement and difference. 1 In this way, one comes to 
know oneself as the actionless Self, free from pain. 

‘This verse is a reproduction of Upadesa Sahasri XVIII. 191. 
Commenting on the present verse, J explains that the agreements and 
differences referred to are those noted in “the speech usages or our 
elders”. 



sad e vety-adi- vakyebhyah prama sphutatara bhavet 
dasamas tvam asity asmad yathaivam pratyagatmani 



[33] The clearest (form of) authoritative knowledge is 
that of the inmost Self 1 which arises from such texts as 
“that thou art”, just in the same way that it does from 
“thou art the tenth”. 2 



1 i.e. the immediate awareness based on identity-filing. 

2 Upadesa Sahasri XVIII.192. For a collection of other references to 
‘thou art the tenth”, see note to verse III. 65 above. 



xiksapannasyoddharanam 

An example to illustrate the condition of the enquirer. 

249 




4:34 THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

“ nava-buddhy-apaharadd hi svatmanam dasa-puranam 
apasvan jhatum evecchet svam atmanam janas tatha 

[34] The man whose mind has been led away by the 
notion of nine, and is not aware of himself as complet- 
ing the ten, requires only to know his own self. 1 

1 No further action of any kind, such as meditation or rites, is re- 
quired. This is Upadesa Sahasri XV1II.174. 



avidva-baddha caksustvat kamapahfta-dhih sada 
viviktam drsim atmanam neksate dasamam yatha > ' > 

[35] And the one whose intellect is led away by desire 
because his eyes have been bandaged by ignorance, fails 
to see that his Self is pure Consciousness, ever distinct 
from all else, just as (the other man failed to perceive 
that he himself was) the tenth. 1 
1 Upadesa Sahari XVIII. 175. 



so ' yam evam avidya-patalavagunthita-drstih san 
katham utthapyata ity aha 

How is the one whose vision has been covered over by 
the veil of ignorance to be aroused? To answer this 
question we say : 

yatha svapa-nimittena svapna-dfk-pratibodhitah 
karanam karma kartaram svapnam naiveksate svatah 

[36] When one has awoken from sleep owing to the 
effect of a frightening object seen in a dream, one no 
longer sees the agent, means of action and objects of 
action that were visible in the dream. 1 

1 Here Suresvara himself takes up the argument which he has been 
quoting from Sarpkara. 



250 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 4:38 

andtma-jnas tathaimyam samyak srutyavabodhitah 
gurum sastram tatha mudham svatmano ’ nyam na 

pasyati 

[37] In the same way, one who was ignorant of the 
Self and who is awakened from this ignorance by the 
Vedic text (sruti) sees nothing other than his own Self. 
The Teacher (guru), the texts and he himself as deluded 
individual soul have all disappeared. 



sa kim sakala-samsara-praviviktam atmanam 
vakyat pratipadyata uta netiti. atra brumah. 
kutasthavagati-sesa-matratvat pratipatter ata aha 

Does the knowledge of the Self distinct from all the 
world of transmigratory existence arise from the text, 
or does it not? To this we answer, “It does arise (from 
the text), because such knowledge is nothing other than 
the changeless consciousness which remains (when all 
else is negated)”. Hence we say: 

dandavasana-nifthas syad danda-sarpo yatha tatha 
nityavagati-nistham syad vakyaj jagad asamsayam 

[38] As the snake imagined in a stick was really noth- 
ing other than the stick, so the universe turns out to be 
nothing other than the eternal pure consciousness, as 
we discover through the holy texts. 1 

1 This is an answer to the dilemma “Is the Absolute different from 
the universe or the same? If different, we have duality; if the same, we 
have pantheism (i.e. the Absolute is characterized by the limitations of 
the world)”. The verse answers the dilemma by stating that the world 
is neither the same as the Absolute nor different, since it is itself nothing 
real and is simply imagined in pure consciousness as a snake is imagined 
in a stick. When the stick is known, it is seen that there never was a 
snake. J 



251 




4:39 THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 
kuta etat. yasmat 
Why is this ? Because : 

pasyann iti yadahoccaih pratyaktvam ajam avyayam 
apurvanaparanantam tvama tad upalaksyate 

[39] That innermost essence, partless and unborn, 
which the Veda teaches in emphatic tones in the passage 
“that which in deep sleep (although not seeing), sees”, 1 
is the indicated meaning of the word “thou”. It is 
infinite. Nothing existed before it, nothing will exist 
after. 

1 Brhadaranyaka Upanishad IV.iii.23. 



tat-tvam-asy-adi-vakyottha-vijndnenaiva badhyate. 
yasmat 

(Duality) is cancelled only by the knowledge rising 
from such texts as “that thou art”. Wherefore: 

asmad yad aparam rupam nastity eva nirupyate 
anyatha-grahanabhavad bijam tat svapna-bodhayoh 

[40] Deep sleep is described in the Veda as “having no 
second” 1 because there is only lack of comprehension 
and no (positive) false vision. Nevertheless, the state of 
deep sleep is the seed of waking and dream and must be 
destroyed. 

1 Brhadaranyaka Upanishad IV.iii.23. 



asyarthasya dradhimna udaharanam 
A quotation in support of this idea: 



252 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 4:42 

‘karya-karana-baddhau tdv isyete visva-taijasau 
prajnah karana-baddhas tu dvau tau turye na 

sidhyatah ” 

[41] Visva and Taijasa are conditioned as both cause 
and effect. Prajna is conditioned as cause only. Neither 
of them is conceivable in Turya. 1 

1 This is Gauqlapada’s Karika 1. 1 1 on the Mandukya Upanishad. 
Visva is pure consciousness associated with the external world. Taijasa 
is pure consciousness associated with the dreams and mental experi- 
ences. Prajna is pure consciousness associated with undifferentiated 
ignorance in deep sleep. Turya is pure consciousness as it really is, 
different from Visva, Taijasa, and Prajna. It is to be realized through the 
process of God-realization as laid down in the Advaitic classics. 



“ anyatha-grhnatah svapno nidra tattvam ajanatah 
viparyase tayoh ksine turiyam padam asnute 

[42] Dream is the state of one whose vision is false. 
Sleep is the state of one who does not know reality. 
When the wrong knowledge characterized by these two 
states is destroyed, the plane of Turlya is reached. 1 

1 Gau<Japada Karika 1.15. The “plane of Turiya” (turlya-pada) 
means “sense of identity with the universal pure consciousness”. 
Sleep is the “avarana”, dream the “viksepa” of later writers. 
Gaudapada terms them agrahana and anyathagrahana respectively, 
i.e. non-comprehension and false-comprehension. 



tatha bhagavat-padiyam udaharanam 

So also says the text of the Bhagavatpada: 1 

1 i.e. “of the holy one”, Suresvara’s teacher Sarpkara. 

“ susuptakhyam tamo 'jhanam bijam svapna- 

prabodhayoh 

atma-bodha-pradagdham syad bijam dagdham yatha 

’ bhavam ” 



253 




4:43 THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

[43] When what is called sleep — darkness (tamas), 
ignorance (ajnana), the seed of waking and dream — is 
burnt up by awakening to the nature of the Self, then it 
becomes void of progeny, like a seed that has been 
burnt. 1 

1 Upadesa Sahasri, XVII. 26. In the previous verse Suresvara quoted 
a special conception of Gaudapada’s. In the present one he shows that 
it is found in Sarnkara too. 



ex am gauda ir draxidair nah pujyair ay am art hah 

prabhasitah 1 

ajhana-matropadhis sann aham-adi-drg isxarah 
1 Col. Jacob recommended dropping “ayam” to correct the metre. 

[44] Thus this doctrine has been proclaimed by the 
venerable ones of our school, the Gauda and the 
Dravida. 1 The Lord Himself, with only ignorance for 
His adjunct (upadhi), is the Witness of the ego, etc. 2 

1 The Gauda, or Northerner, means Gaudapada; the Dravida, or 
Southerner, means Samkara. 

J In Gaudapada’s Karikas the term prajfla means the subject who 
experiences deep sleep. In Mapdukya 6, it is said of Prajfla: “This One 
is the Lord of all . . .”. Throughout Sarpkara’s writings also it regularly 
means the Highest Lord (paramesvara or isvara). 



tatranyatha-grahana- vad anyatha-grahana-bijam 
agrahanam anatma-dharma evety aha 

Next we explain how, just like false comprehension, 
non-comprehension also, the seed of false comprehen- 
sion, is a property of the not-self : 

idam jhanam aham jhata jheyam etad iti trayam 
yo 'vikaro xijanati parag evasya tat tamah 



254 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 4:46 

[45] That darkness which is threefold in the form 
“This is my knowledge: I am the knower: and this is 
the object of my knowledge” is external to the change- 
less Self which witnesses it. 



yata etad evam at as tasyaiva bijatmanas tamasas 
ci t ta-dharma- visistasya s va-karya- 

d vitiyabhisambandho 

na tv avikarina atmana ity aha drstantena 

We explain through an illustration how, this being so, 
it is this darkness (tamas), of seed-like nature, invested 
with the qualities of the mind (citta-dharma), that is 
related to duality, its own effect, and not the immutable 
Self. 

rupa-prakasayor yad-vat samgatir vikriyavatah 
sukha-duhkhadi-sambandhas cittasyaivam vikarinah 

[46] Just as commerce between light and colours is 
possible only because both are changeable, so pleasure 
and pain and other qualities can only belong to some- 
thing changeable like the mind (and not to the highest 
Self). 



tad etad anvaya-vyatirekabhyam darsayi?yann aha 

With a view to demonstrate the same thing on the basis 
of argument by agreement and difference we say . 

samprasade ' vikaritvad astarn yate vikarini , 
pas vat o natmanah kinxcid dvitiyatn sprsate nv api 



255 




4:47 



THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 



[47] The state of deep sleep is changeless, and the 
changing has disappeared. Here the Self remains as 
pure luminosity, but is not in contact with any second 
thing. 



so 'yam kutastha-jhana-murtir atma 

This Self of the form of immutable knowledge — 

yatha prajne tathaivayam svapna-jagaritantayoh 
pasyann apy avikaritvad dvitiyam naiva pasyati 

[48] Just as in deep sleep, so also in dream and waking, 
the Self, though (in these two latter states apparently) 
seeing, in fact sees no second thing, because it is 
immutable. 



evam jhanavato nasti mamaham-mati-samsrayah 
bhasvat-pradipa-hastasya hy andhakara ivagratah 

[49] For him who knows the Self thus there is no 
more “I” and “mine”, any more than there is darkness 
in front of one who carries in his hand a lighted lamp. 



tatra dfptantah 

In this connection, an example : 

a prabodhad yatha ’ siddhir 1 dvaitad anyasya vastmah 
bodhad evam asiddhatvam buddhy-adeh 

pratyagatmanah 

1 Reading ’siddhir with Professor Hacker, Texte p. 102, note 1. 

256 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 4:52 

[50] Just as before enlightenment the existence of 
anything other than the world of duality was impossible 
to establish, so, after enlightenment, nothing can show 
that the intellect (and body) etc. belong to the inmost 
Self. 



sa esa vidvan hanopadana-sunyam atmanam atmani 
pasyan 

This enlightened man, seeing the Self, not subject to 
gain or loss, in the Self . . . 

sarvam evanujanati sarvant eva nisedhati 
bhedatma-labho ’ nujna syan nisedho 1 tat-svabhavatah 

[51] The enlightened man accepts everything and also 
negates it. The (apparent) rise of distinctions consti- 
tutes his acceptance : the fact that they are by nature not- 
self constitutes his negation of them. 



sarvasyoktatvad upasarnharah 

Because everything (we had to say) has now been said, 
we proceed to the concluding summary. 



paramarthatma-nistham yat sarva- vedan ta-n iscitarn 
tamopamd dhiyam jnanam tad etat kathitam maya 



1521 I have declared that knowledge of the highest 
reality, the Self, which is the import of the Upatushads 
in their entirety, and which destroys the darkness of 



the mind. 



s 



257 




4:53 



THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 



etavadihoktam 

What has been said here culminates in : 

nehatma-vin mad-anyo 'sti na mat to ’ jno ’ 'sti kascana 
ity ajanan vijanati yas sa brahma-vid uttamah 

[53] “There is no other Self-knower but I, and no 
other ignorant one but myself” — he who has this 
feeling is the highest knower of the Absolute (Brahman), 
though (in the worldly sense) he is not a “knower” at 
all. 1 

1 He is not identified with his mind (antabkaraga). 



evam dtmanam jnatva kim pravartitavyam uta 
nivartitavyam ahosvin mukta-pragrahateti. ucyate 

When the Self has thus been known, should one 
(continue to) obey the Vedic injunctions, or should one 
abstain from all action, or are the reins just let loose? 

jneyabhinnam idam yasmaj jneya-vastv-anusaryatah 
na pra\jttim nivrttim va katakfenapi vikfate 

[54] Because this knowledge conforms to its object, 
the real, it is non-different from its object. It does not 
even recognize the existence of (the two paths of) action 
or renunciation. 1 

1 So that it makes no sense to ask in regard to the jflani “should he 
live as a householder or a monk, should he live in the world or be a 
renunciate?” 

The jflani has vidvatsaijinyasa as opposed to vidisasarpnyasa. The 
latter is formal renunciation performed as part of the discipline for 
God-realization. The vidvatsarpnyasa of the jflani is simply his natural 
state. Whatever happens to his body and mental faculties he is no 
longer identified with them. He is a total renunciate whether he be 
nvmg in a lonely cave by the Ganges or in the midst of a hail of missiles 
on the battlefield. 



258 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 4:57 

kuta etaj jneyabhinnam iti. yatah 

Why is this knowledge non-different from its object? 
Because : 

pragatma-bodhad bodho ’ yam bahya-vastupasarjanah 
pradhvastdkhila-samsdra atmaikalambanah sruteh 

[55] Before Self-knowledge, knowledge is directed 
towards external objects. When all transmigratory 
experience has been destroyed through recourse to the 
Vedic texts, only the Self remains as the object (or 
support) of knowledge. 



evam avagata-paramartha-tattvasya na se^a-sefi- 
bhdvas tat-karanasyotsaritatvad ity aha 

We explain how he who has thus known the highest 
reality has gone beyond the realm where anything 
remains to be done, for all cause for such a situation 
has been uprooted. 

vastavenaiva vfttena nirunaddhi yato bhavam 
nivrttim api mrdndti samyag-bodhah pravrtti-vat 

[56] Through knowledge of reality he brings empirical 
being to an end. Right-knowledge destroys the path of 
renunciation as surely as it destroys the path of action. 



sakfd atma-prasutyaiva nirunaddhy akhilam bhavam 
dhvdnta-mdtra-nirasena na tato ' nydnyathd-matih 

[57] By merely rising once, this (knowledge) destroys 
all becoming, through negation of ignorance once and 
for all. There is no more wrong knowledge afterwards. 



259 




4:58 



THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 



desa-kalady-asambaddhad desader moha-karyatah 

nanutpannam adcigdham va jnanam ajnanam asty atah 

[58] Time and space, etc., are the effects of delusion, 
and do not inhere in the Self. Once the Self is known, 
there is no more knowledge to gain and no ignorance 
left unconsumed. 1 

1 The following objection and answer is taken from J’s commentary 
on the above verse. Objection: You say, “Through merely becoming 
aware of the Self once”. But how could knowledge achieved once (i.e. 
at a particular time and place) destroy all nescience? We know from 
ordinary experience that correct knowledge derived from the accepted 
means thereof annihilates the ignorance pertaining to the time and 
space occupied by the object now correctly known. It does not destroy 
all nescience in general. Answer: Objects such as pots are limited to a 
particular time and space and (as the text indicates by the word “etc.”) 
by the presence of other objects, and they are also themselves inert. 
But the Self is quite untouched by conditions such as space and time, 
which are themselves bom of nescience, and, unlike the particular 
objects, it is self-luminous. Hence (i.e. the Self being both unlimited and 
self-luminous), when the Self is known, no further ignorance exists to 
be annihilated, nor is any further knowledge, in the empirical sense, 
possible. Henceforward there is no more knowledge (to gain) and there 
is no ignorance (left unconsumed). 



samyag-jfidna-sikhi-plu?ta-moha-tat-kdrya-rupinah 
sakrn nivrtter badhyasya kirn karyam avasifyate 

[59] What further remains to be done for him who 
has once burnt up in the curling flames of spiritual 
knowledge that delusion, together with its effects, 
whose destruction is the real purpose of our lives ? 



vastavenaiva vftlendvidydyah pradhvastatvan na 
kimcid avasifyata ity uktah pariharabt. athaparas 
sampradayikah 



260 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 



4:61 



One answer (to the objection about the inexplicability 
of the condition of the enlightened man) has been 
given: it consists in saying that when ignorance has 
been destroyed by knowledge of the real, nothing fur- 
ther remains. Or else there is another view which is also 
traditional. 1 

1 The reference is almost certainly to Mandana Misra, see his Brahma 
Siddhi, p. 1 3 1 . Cp. also Sarpkara on Brahma Sutra IV.i. 1 5. 

nivrtta-sarpas sarpottham yatha kampam na muhcati 

vidhvastakhila-moho ’ pi moha-karyam tathatma-vit 

[60] Just as the trembling set up by fear of the snake 
persists for a time even after the snake has been negated, 
so the effects of delusion persist for a little while in 
the case of the Self-knower, though all delusion has 
been destroyed. 1 

1 The reference is to the “prarabdha karma” which maintains the 
activity of the body of the liberated one. J. 



yatah pravftti-bijam ucchinnam tasmat 

Because the seed of further action has been destroyed, 
it follows : 

tar or utkhata-mulasya sosenaiva yatha k$ayah 
tatha buddhatma-tattvasya nivrttyaiva tanu-ksayah 

[61] Just as a tree which has lost its roots withers 
away, so does the body of the one who has become 
awake to the real nature of the Self wither away through 
the cessation of ignorance. 1 

1 To him his body is completely illusory (pratibhasika), though not to 
others. J. 



261 




4:62 THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

athalepaka-pak?a-nirasartham aha 

Now, in order to refute the view that (because) he is 
stainless (he can therefore behave as he likes) we say: 

buddhadvaita-sa-tattvasya yathestacaranam yadi 
smdrn tattva-drsam caiva ko bhedo ' suci-bhak?ane 

[62] If the enlightened man could behave as he liked 
what would be the difference between a sage and a dog? 
Both of them would eat impure things. 1 

1 This verse and also IV.69 below are quoted at the end of 
Sad&nanda's Vedanta Sara, and the present verse also at PaflcadaSi 
IV.55. At Brahma Sutra II.iii.48 Sarpkara remarks that though the 
enlightened man is not bound by any rules, still, he does not behave 
just as he likes, since self-indulgent action of this kind is prompted in 
every case by false identification with something that is not-self, which 
the enlightened man has overcome. 



kasman na bhavati. yasmat 

Why does he not behave as he likes? Because: 

adharmaj jayate ’ jhdnam yatheffacaranam tatah 
dharma-karye katham tat syad yatra dharmo 'pi 

nepyate 

[63] Ignorance results from unrighteous deeds; un- 
controlled behaviour from ignorance. How can there 
be unrighteous deeds in the case of one who by acting 
righteously has already gone beyond the plane of 
righteousness ? 



pratyacakfana ahato yatheffacaranarn harih 
yasya sarve samarambhah" “ prakasam ce" ti 

sarva-drk 



262 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 



4:65 



[64] The omniscient Hari 1 forbade uncontrolled be- 
haviour in the words “He whose undertakings” and 
“Light”. 2 

1 i.e. Krsna, speaking in the Bhagavad Gita. 

2 The verses are: Bhagavad Gita IV. 19 (“He whose undertakings are 
all free from desires and intentions, whose activity is burnt up by the 
fire of knowledge — him the wise call a sage”) and Bhagavad Giti 
XIV. 22 (“Light, activity and delusion — these, O Papijava, he hates not 
when present nor desires when absent”). 



tifthatu tavat sarva-pravrtti-bija-ghasmaram 
inanam mumuksv-avasthayam api na sambhavati 
yathestacaranam. tad aha 

Quite apart from (the one who has achieved) the 
knowledge that destroys the seeds of all activity, there 
cannot be self-willed activity even in the state of mere 
desire for release. So we say: 

“yo hi yatra viraktah syan ndsau tasmai pravartate 
loka-traya-viraktatvan mumukfuh kim itihate ” 

[65] No one engages in activity in matters towards 
which he is indifferent. For what should the one 
desirous of liberation strive, seeing that he is indifferent 
to everything in the three worlds ? x 
1 A quotation of Upadesa Sahasri XVIII.231. 



tatra drffantah 

An example in this connection: 

“ k?udhaya pidyamano 'pi na vifartt hy attum icchati 
miffanna-dh vasta-tfd jdnan ndmudhas taj jighatsati 



263 




4:66 THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

[66] Even if he be afflicted by hunger, a man will not 
desire to eat poison knowingly. He, then, whose hunger 
has already been appeased by delightful food, will not 
desire to eat poison unless he be an utter lunatic. 1 
1 Upadesa Sahasri XVIII. 232. Quoted also at Paflcadasi VII. 142. 



yato ' vagata-paramartha-tattvasya yathestacaranam 
na manag api ghatate mumuksutve 'pi ca tasmat 

Because self-willed activity is not remotely possible in 
the case of one who has known the supreme reality, 
and is not even possible in the case of one who sincerely 
desires release, it follows that : 

rago lihgam abodhasya citta-vydydma-bhumi$u 
kutah sadvalata tasya yasyagnih kotare taroh 

[67] Attachment for the things that drain the energy 
of the mind is the very hallmark of ignorance. How can 
a tree with a fire blazing in the hollow of its trunk 
burgeon with green foliage 7 1 
1 This is an often quoted verse, e.g. PaficadaSi VII.191. 



sakala-puruyartha-samapti-karino ’ sydtmdvabodhasya 
kutah prasutir iti. ucyate 

When arises this awakening to the Self which comprises 
the attainment of all human ends ? We reply : 

amdnitvadi-niftho yo yas cadve$tr-ddi-sadhanah 
inanam utpadyate tasya na bahir-mukha-cetasah 



264 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 



4:69 



[68] He who is intent on “humility etc.” 1 and is 
equipped with virtues such as non-enmity, 2 acquires 
knowledge, but not he whose mind is turned outwards. 

1 For the qualities meant by “humility etc.”, see Bhagavad Gita 
XIII. 7 ff. 

* For “non-enmity” see Bhagavad Gita XII.13. 



utpanna atma-vijndne kim avidya-karyatvat pravftti- 
van nivrttydtmakdmanitvddayo nivartanta uta neti. 
neti brumah. kim karanam. nivrtti-sastraviruddha- 
svabhavyat paramatmano na tu niyoga-vasat. 
katham tarhi. srnu 

When knowledge of the Self has arisen, do the non- 
active virtues like “humility” cease just like the active 
tendencies, on account of their being (also) products of 
ignorance, or do they not cease? We say, “They do not 
cease”. Why not? Not on account of any injunction to 
perform them, but because the supreme Self is by nature 
in harmony with the texts devoted to the suppression of 
action. How is this? Listen: 

utpannatma-prabodhasya tv adve$tftvadayo guiidh 
ayatnato bhavanty asya na tu sadhana-riipinah 

[69] In the case of one who has achieved enlighten- 
ment, virtues like non-enmity persist naturally and 
without effort. They are no longer practised as a means 
to any end. 



yata etad evam atah 
Because this is so, it follows. 

265 




4:70 THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

imam grantham upaditsur amanitvadi-sadhanah 
yatnatah syan na durvfttah pratyag-dharmanugo hy 

ayam 

[70] Those who wish to profit from the present book 
ought to possess themselves of humility and the other 
qualities which are means to spirituality, and should 
avoid evil practices with all their power. For it is a book 
which teaches Self-realization and nothing less. 



na datavyaf cayam granthah 

And this book should not be given to (those who are 
not qualified) : 

naviraktaya samsdrdn nanirastai?anaya ca 
na cayama-vate deyam vedantartha-pravesanam 

[71] This introduction to the teachings of the Upani- 
shads should not be given to one who has not developed 
indifference to worldly experience, who has not laid 
aside his temporal desires, and who has not practised 
the discipline of yama. 1 

1 “The discipline of yama”: For this, see Patafljali’s Yoga Sutra, 
11.30. It is a group of disciplines centering on self-control. 



jnatva yathoditam samyag jnatavyam navasisyate 
na canirasta-karmedam janiydd anjasa tatah 

[72] When what has been said in this book has been 
rightly comprehended, nothing further remains to be 
known. But only the renunciates from all action will 
rightly understand it. 



266 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 



4:74 



nirasta-sarva-karmanah pratyak-pravana-buddhayah 
ni?kama yatayah santa janantidam yathoditam 

[73] Desireless, peaceful ascetics who have renounced 
all activities and whose minds are focussed within, will 
understand the teachings in the spirit in which they are 
meant. 



srimac-chahkara-pada-padma-yugalam 
samsevya labdhvocivan 
jnatiam paramahamsyam etad amalam 
svantandhakdrapanut 
ma bhud atra virodhini matir atah 
sadbhih parik?yam budhaih 
sarvatraiva visuddhaye matam idam 
santah param karanam 

[74] Having served the lotus feet of Sri Samkara I 
received this pure doctrine of the Paramahamsas, 1 and 
it destroyed the inner darkness of my soul. Lest my 
views 2 are regarded as controversial, I offer them to the 
wise for inspection. The wise, I am convinced, are the 
true source of the correction of our erroneous views. 

i Wandering monks following the strict Upanishadic path of Non- 

dU * a Matam idaip, taken in from the seventh line and construed with 
pariksyam. 



subhdfitam carv api ndmahatmanam 
divakaro nakta-drsdm ivdmalah 
prabhati bhdty eva visuddha-cetasam 
nidhir yathdpdsta-tr?am maha-dhanah 



267 




4:75 THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 

[75] Noble and inspiring spiritual literature, even 
when attractively written, does not illumine the hearts 
of the small-minded, any more than the bright sun 
illumines the dark paths of the owl. It manifests to 
those who have acquired purity of mind (desireless- 
ness), even as glorious treasures are showered on those 
who have renounced their desire for wealth. 1 

1 Cp. Patafljali, Yoga Sutra 11.37. J. 



visnoh padanugam yam nikhila-bhava-nudam 
samkaro 'vapa yogat 

sarvajnam brahma-samstham muni-gana-sahitam 

samyag abhyarcya bhaktya 

vidyam gahgam ivaham pravara-guna-nidheh 

prapya vedanta diptam 

karunyat tarn avocam jani-mrti-nivaha- 

dhvastaye duhkhitebhyah 

[76] Before addressing myself to the present work I 
duly reverenced Samkara, ever established in the 
Absolute (Brahman), surrounded by a host of sages. 
Having obtained, through the good deeds of previous 
births, this knowledge proclaimed by the Upanishads, 
which destroys the whole world of becoming, which is 
(purifying) like the Ganges and which leads to the abode 
of Visnu just as she 1 proceeds from it, and which, like 
her 1 also, was attained by Samkara through yoga — I 
have set it forth from motives of compassion alone, for 
the benefit of the suffering denizens of this world, that 
they may put a stop to the stream of births and deaths 
for ever. 2 



268 




THE REALIZATION OF THE ABSOLUTE 4:77 
1 The Ganges. 

* In this verse, which is full of double meanings which are impossible 
to translate, SureSvara likens himself to Bhagiratha, who brought the 
Ganges down from the head of Saipkara ( = God Siva) in the Himalayas 
to the plains. The Ganges, too, is cool and purifying, and comes from 
the feet (pada) of Vi$pu, just as the knowledge leads to His “abode” 
(pada in a different sense). Both the God Sarpkara (i.e. Siva) and the 
Teacher Samkara are omniscient, ever-established in the Absolute 
(Brahman), and surrounded by a host of sages. 



vedantodara-varti bhasvad amalam 
dhvanta-cchid asmad dhiyo 
divyam jhanam atindriye 'pi visaye 
vyahanyate na kvacit 
yo no nyaya-salakayaiva nikhilam 
samsdra-bijam tamah 
protsaryavirakarsid 1 guru-guruh 
pujyaya tasmai namah 

1 The metre of this line is irregular, a short syllable having been 
omitted before the final long syllable of avirakar§Id. 

[77] Reverence to that venerable Guru of Gurus who 
removed with the collyrium-stick of his reasoning the 
whole of that ignorance which is the seed of transmigra- 
tion, and who revealed to us that divine and glorious 
knowledge, embedded deep in the heart of the Upani- 
shads, which destroys the darkness in our intellects and 
which is nowhere confounded, though it bears on the 
realm of transcendence. 



/ 



269 




