THE 

VANMUKTI-VIVEK1 


OR  THE 


.TH  TO  LIBERATION  IN  THIS  LIFE- 


BY 
SWAM  I  S'RI  VIDYARANYASARSWATI 


RENDERED  INTO  ENGLISH 

BY 
MANILAL  N.  DVIVEDI,  B.  /., 

SOMETIME  PROFESSOR  OF  SANSKRIT,  BHAVNAGAR  COLLEGE 

AUTHOR  OF  "RAJA-YOGA,"  "MONISM," 

'IMITATION"  ETC.,  ETC. 


ifornia  PUBLISHED  BY 

mal 

f  TOOKARAM   TATYA,    F.  T.  S., 


1897. 

(All  rights  reserved.) 
Price  Rs.   1-8-0 


ADVANCE  BOOK 
COMPANY 

628  West  Eight  Street  -  Lot  Angeles 


vd  , 


•o       <L 

1    * 


o 


£ 


a.o' 

M 

H- 
O 

c» 

H' 
O 
3 


?9 

If 

is. 


vO 


?  r 


THE 

JIVANMUKTI-VIVEKA 

OK   THE 

PATH  TO  LIBERATION  IN  THIS  LIFE. 

BY 

SWAMI  S'R^VIDYARANYASARSWATI. 


RENDERED  INTO  ENGLISH 
BY 

MANILAL  N.  DVIVEDI,  B.  A. 

SOMETIME  PKOFESSOR  OF  SANSKRIT,  BHAV^AGAR  COLLEGE  ; 

AUTHOR  OF  "  RAJA-YOGA,"  "  MONISM," 

"  IMITATION "   ETC.,    ETC. 


PUBLISHED  BY  ^ 

TOOK  ARAM  TATYA,  F.T.  S., 
FOR   THE  THEOSOPHICAL   PUBLICATION   FUND. 


1897. 

Price  H  Rupees. 


PRINTED   AT  THE   "  TATVA-VIVECHA.KA. "   PRESS. 

• 


ERIE 

ft 


PREFACE. 


"THE  Path  of  Libertion"  by  Swami  Vidyaranya  is  a  weU- 
kiiown  book  unique  in  the  favour  it  finds  with  the  Sannydsins  of 
India.  My  friend  Mr.  Tookaram  Tatya  of  Bombay  who  has 
spared  no  pains  to  organise  the  Theosophic  Publication  Fund 
requested  me  to  render  the  work  into  English,  and  I  gladly  com- 
plied with  his  request  making  over  the  copy-right  of  this  first 
edition  to  the  useful  Fund  he  has  devoted  to  the  service  •  of 
Theosophic  Literature.  I  am  sure  the  following  pages  will  be 
found  substantially  useful  to  the  earnest  Student  in  search  of 
something  practical  as  an  aid  in  the  noble  line  of  his  inquiry. 


NADIAD, 

M.  N.  DVIVEDI. 
27th  January  1897. 


1003967 


INTRODUCTION. 


THE  "  Jivanmukti-Viveka  "or  "  The  Path  of  Liberation  in 
this  Life  "  is  a  compilation  from  several  important  works, 
by  the  great  scholar  Vidyaranya.  He  is  known  to  have  written 
on  almost  every  important  branch  of  literature,  in  his  time, 
with  such  grasp  and  finish  as  would  surprise  the  most-accurate 
writer  of  the  present  day.  He  lived  in  the  fourteenth  century. 
He  was  minister  of  the  king  of  Vijayanagara — Bukka  Raya — 
to  whom  he  has  dedicated  his  best  work — the  elaborate  scholia 
of  the  Veda.  S&yana  the  minister  became  in  after  life  Vidya- 
ranya the  -iannydsin.  He  has  compiled  this  work  after  he 
renounced  all  concern  with  the  world.  His  life  spent  in  the 
midst  of  varied  activity  at  the  court  of  Bukka  Raya  was  con- 
cluded in  the  quiet  bliss  of  supreme  spiritual  exhaltation. 
Vidyaranya  or  Sayana  is  an  illustrious  example  of  the  true 
Brahmana  and  his  very  life  nobly  illustrates  the  truth  of  his 
teaching.  He,  indeed,  found  "  Liberation-in-this-life,"  and 
''  The  Path  "  he  points  us  is,  no  doubt,  the  surest  road  to 
eternal  peace  and  happiness,  while  yet  in  the  world. 

Though  the  following  pages  are  largely  compiled  from 
several  authentic  works,  they  would  be  simply  lifeless  without 
the  living  nexus  supplied  by  the  sage  Vidyaranya..  The 
author,  himself  a  sannyAsin,  begins  and  ends  his  book  with  the 
technical  inquiry  whether  Renunciation  (Sannyasa)  is  the 
sine  qua  non  of  Liberation  or  not  ?  The  Path  of  liberation 
according  to  Vidyaranya  is  indicated  in  one  word — Renuncia- 
tion. Though  this  word  has  received  a  number  of  different 
shades  of  meaning  from  several  writers,  old  #nd  new,  Vidya- 
ranya would  not  understand  it  without  the  formal  orthodox 
sense  in  which  the  Brdhmanas  principally  employ  it.  Have 
no  concern,  bodily  or  mental,  direct  or  indirect,  with  the  world, 


VI 

live  in  entire  isolation,  so  to  speak,  and  wear  the  orthodox 
-insignia  of  the  order — this  is  sannyasa,  according  to  Vidya- 
^ranya.  He  divides  Renunciation  into  two  kinds.  One  he  calls 
Rennnciation.-of-the-seeker,  the  other  Renuuciation-of-the- 
Accomplished.  The  first  is,  in  fact,  a— preliminary  stage  of 
the  second.  One  may  apply  himself  to  study,  contemplation, 
and  assimilation  of  the  Vedanta  with  or  without  the  first  kind 
of  Renunciation.  But  having  found  the  Light,  Renunciation 
of  the  second  kind  must  surely  follow.  The  first,  if  at  all  it 
comes  about,  must  he  done  after  the  orthodox  fashion  ;  the 
second  is  bound  by  no  "  injunction  or  prohibition." 

This  in  short  is  the  substance  of  his  argument.     The  cosmo- 
politan nature  of  his  inquiry  may  best  be  judged  from  a  side- 
issue  he  raises  at  the  beginning  as  to  the  eligibility  of  women 
to  the  formal  kind  of  Renunciation.     He  decides  in  favour  of 
the  other  sex,  supporting  his  argument  by  examples  from 
ancient  scriptures.    The  question,  however,  remains  how  a  life 
of  entire  Isolation  and  Indifference  can  ever  be  identified  with 
Liberation  ;  can  ever,  in  fact,  be  the  end  and  object  of  existence  ? 
Would  it  not  be  more  adequate,  in  this  age  of  humanitarian 
ideals,  to  say  with  Lord  Krishna  "Sages  know  as  Renunciation 
the  relinquishment  of  works-with-desire."    To  me,  it  appears, 
Vidyaranya  does  not  put  Renunciation  as  pure  Indifference 
or  Isolation.     He  does,  no  doubt,  imply  '  relinquishment  of 
works  with  desire,'  but  he  would  have  none  of  '  work  '  or  even 
the  sense  of  duty,  which  '  work  '  though  it  be  without  desire, 
implies,  to  remain  after  Renunciation  or  Liberation  to  which 
Renunciation  leads.     If  the  Liberted  is  ever  oppressed  with 
any  the  least  sense  of  duty  '  he  is  just  so  many  removes  away 
from   gnosis.'     *  Injunctions  or  prohibitions '  exist  not  for  him, 
he  is  relieved  of  all  obligations,   temporal  or  spiritual.     He 
himself  is  all  good,  all  bliss,  all  purity,  all  holiness  ;  his  very 
being,  his  very  ty-eath  is  the  efflorescence  of  everything  good 
and  great.    His  sphere  of  doing  good  is  so  far  widned  as  to 
put  him  in  possession  of  a  power  which  accomplishes  its  results 
without  the  correlation  of  means  and  ends  by  which  mankind  is 


Vll 

known  to  work.  -  He,  in  fact,  is  a  magnet,  so  to  speak,  of  all 
that  is  best  and  sublime  ;  be  tbat  feels  the  force  of  his 
attraction  is  charged  with  so  much  of  his  power  as  he  can  ' 
imbibe.  He  is  not  nnoften  likened  to  the  Sun  who  though  he 
illumines  all  spots  equally,  is  reflected  more  elearly  and  even 
intensely  in  a  glass  than  in  a  piece  of  earth.  He  is  Atman, 
Brahman,  the  soul  and  substance  of  the  universe. 

And  while  speaking  of  Renunciation  and  Liberation  we  may 
conveniently  take  occasion  to  correct  an  error  into  which 
some  of  the  best  informed  minds  are  often  mislead.  Since 
the  spiritual  re-awakening  of  the  last  twenty-five  years 
application  to  ancient  scriptures  has  been  known  in  many 
instances  to  create  very  perverted  notions  of  true  Liberation 
and  Renunciation.  Minds  saturated  with  materialistic  learning 
fail  to  appreciate  the  worth  of  everything  not  put  to  them  in 
terms  of  chemical  combinations  and  mechanical  foot-pounds. 
The  idea  of  power,  a  power  beyond  ordinary  chemistry  or 
mechanics,  comes  almost  imperceptibly  to  be  associated  with 
spiritual  exhaltation  ;  and  '  hankering  after  (occult)  powers  * 
is,. in  ninety  nine  cases  out  of  hundred  the  true  reason  of  a  man 
sitting  at  the  feet  of  some  holy  'saint  or  joining  some  society 
for  the  promotion  of  spiritual  good.  That  such  applicants 
often  come  to  grief  goes  without  saying.  Vidyaranya  does  not 
deny  the  possibility  of  '  powers  '  such  as  these,  but  he  express- 
ly describes  them  as  mere  curiosities  for  which  the  Liberated 
feels  no  interest.  They  have  lost  all  interest  in  everything, 
and  absence  of  interest  is  the  true  renunciation  which  leads  to 
Liberation.  The  good  that  is  in  Liberation  is  not  through  or 
by  any  powers  whatever.  Nor  is  possession  of  powers  a  sign 
of  that  condition.  Whatever  is  known  as  the  highest  and 
best  in  holiness,  purity,  charity,  sacrifice,  morals,  is  fully  . 
implied  in  the  sense  of  Liberation  ;  and  the  acquisition  of 
'  powers,'  says  Vidyaranya  "  helps  not  a  jot  towards  nearing 
the  highest  condition  of  beatitude."  The  Liberted  is  the 
flower  of  humanity.  The  fragrance  is  wafted  on  every  breeze 
that  passes.  The  exhilarating  soothing  power  of  its  invisible 
essence  is  imperceptly  helping  the  relief  of  many  heart-burn- 


Vlll 

ings  and  much  weariness.  Power  such  as  we  understand  is 
entirely  out  of  question.  The  liberted  works  without  the 
correlation  of  means  and  ends  ;  he  works,  as  it  were,  with  the 
very  breath  of  Nature,  in  the  rain  that  nourishes,  in  the  Sun 
that  scorches,  in  the  storm  that  extinguishes.  He  is  the  All. 
Power  and  desire  for  power  has  all  to  be  entirely  renounced 
before  even  a  glimpse  of  the  spiritual  exhaltation  called 
Liberation  can  dawn  upon  one's  intelligence. 

Liberation  means  freedom.  Freedom  neither  bodily  nor 
mental,  but  true  freedom  of  the  spirit — the  spirit  that  is  the 
All.  That  this  freedom  might  not  be  understood  in  the  sense 
of  that  abuse  of  freedom  whiph  is  often  passed  off  under 
the  name  of  freedom,  Vidyaranya  has  in  the  fifth  chapter  of 
his  book  laid  particular  stress  upon  asceticim  as  the.  most 
essential  requisite  of  a  true  Paramakamsa  (the  Liberted).  That 
this  ascetism  does  not  consist  in  physical  exercises  or  formal 
observances  he  has  definitely  shown  several  times  in  the  body 
of  the  book. 

Vidyaranya  variously  explains  the  view  of  Liberation  and 
Renunciation  here  set  forth,  in  his  characterestically  lucid, 
analytic  manner.  He  touches  upon  several  minor  points  of 
importance  as  ways  and  means  to  realization  of  this  noble 
object.  A  brief  analysis  of  his  book  will  help  us  to  understand 
these  things  much  better. 

The  first  chapter  opens  [with  a  discussion  on  the  nature  of 
Renunciation,  and  the  two  devisions  we  have  already  touched 
upon  have  been  described  and  justified  by  scriptural  texts  and 
ancient  examples.  Then  is  explained  the  nature  of  Jivan- 
.  mukti,  liberation  in  this  life.  It  is  described  as  Freedom  from 
bondage.  '  Bondage  to  a  living  •  being  consists  in  those 
functions  of  the  mind  which  are  characterised  by  feelings  of 
pleasure  and  pain  concomitant  with  action  and  enjoyment.' 
It  is  not  necessary  that '  action '  should  entirely  be  suspended. 
The  impressions  (vdsand)  which  '  action  and  enjoyment '  create 
and  leave  behind  as  fruitful  source  of  future  '  action '  should 


IX 

be  neutralised  in  their  effect.  The  question  whether  the 
accomplishment  of  such  Freedom  is  within  human  possibility 
leads  the  author  into  a  discussion  of  the  nature  of  Necessity 
and  Free-will.  He  decides  in  favour,  of  the  latter  and  points 
the  way  to  this  Freedom  by  a  dialogue  between  Kama  and 
Vasishtha.  The  argument  on  the  nature  of  Jivanmukti  is 
closed  with  the  following  : — 

"  Though  ever  moving  about  in  the  world  of  experience, 
the  whole  of  it  exists  not  for  him  ; — all-pervading  ether- 
like  consciousness  alone  subsists.  Such  a  one  is  called 
Jimnyiukta" 

Discussion  as  to  the  nature  of  Jivanmukti  leads  to  a  descrip- 
tion of  the  nature  of  Videhamukti,  liberation  after  death.  The 
chapter  ends  with  illustrations  from  several  scriptures  to  bear 
out  the  author  in  his  arguments  on  the  nature  of  these  two 
degrees  of  Liberation. 

The  second  chapter  begins  with  mention  of  the  means  to 
acquire  the  condition  of  Jivanmukti.  These  are  three  in 
number;  Gnosis,  Dissolution  of  mind  and  Destruction  of  *  latent 
desire '  (vdsand).  The  whole  question  of  Liberation  is  easily 
solved  if  we  once  acquire  firm  grasp  of  the  nature  of  vasand 
and  understand  the  means  to  destroy  it.  The  second  chapter 
deals  with  this  most  important  question  in  a  thoroughly 
practical  manner,  and  the  earnest  student  is  sure  to  find  here 
what  he  may  elsewhere  seek  in  vain.  The  aim  and  object  of 
all  methods  of  the  higher  spiritual  exhaltation  have  Life-of 
the-High-Self  as  the  ideal  they  invariably  point  to  ;  and 
purification  and  enlargement  of  the  heart  is  inculcated  as  the 
most  important  practical  step  towards  this  realisation.  How 
this  could  be  done  is  thus  set  forth  "  The  mind  severed  from 
all  connection  with  sensual  objects,  and  prevented  from 
functioning  out,  awakes  into  the  light  of  the  heart  and  finds 
the  highest  condition."  'Latent  desire'  denies  this  light,  often 
quenches  it,  or  stifles  it  underjaome  spirit  of  extreme  narrowness. 
Conquer  this  latent  desire  and  Jivanmukti  is  within  easy  reach. 


Act  without  the  action  and  find  this  place  of  peace  beyond  the 
disturbance  of  mind  and  desire.  Latent  desire  is  described  in  all 
its  various  subdivisions ;  and  methods  are  shown  as  to  how  one 
desire  may  be  set  to  destroy  another  and  how  finally  the 
light  of  Self  may  be  used  to  dissolve  even  the  last  remnant  of 
this  desire.  The  whole  of  this  subject  is  best  read  with 
sufficient  clearness  in  the  original.  Life,  learning,  world,  all 
are  set  down  to  vdsand  as  objects  one  should  try  to  extricate 
himself  from  ;  and  thus  ''giving  up  all  attachment  from 
within"  one  should  acquire  that  "limitless  expansion  of  heart' 
which  is  the  secret  royal  road  to  Jivanmukti.  The  minor 
question  whether  '  intercourse  '  of  any  kind  is  possible  after 
v&sana,  the  active  cause  of  all  intercourse,  has  been  suspended, 
is  very  clearly  discussed  in  this  connection,  and  the  chapter 
closes  with  a  brief  analysis  of  the  characterestic  marks  of  such 
great  souls  as  have  been  remarkable  Jivanmuktas  known  to 
ancient  history. 

The  third  path  of  Liberation  is  Dissolation  of  mind.  The 
third  chapter  fully  deals  with  this  subject.  Mind  is  made  up  of 
latent  desires  of  kinds.  These  two,  mind  and  desires,  act  and 
react  upon  each  other  and  destruction  of  vdsand  is  never  con- 
firmed without  dissolution  of  mind.  The  two  methods  of 
dissolving  the  mind  are  then  described  ; — the  physical  and  the 
mental,  preference  being  given  to  the  latter.  Several  methods 
have  been  very  clearly  and  fully  pointed  out  with  a  view  to 
prevent  all  mental  activity.  Then  are  discussed  the  obstacles 
in  the  way  of  ecstatic-trance,  the  true  condition  of  the  Liberat- 
ed-in-this-life. 

All  this,  however,  need  not  create  the  impression  that 
Liberatian  is  a  condition  of  mindlessness,  akin  to  that  of 
material  objects.  For,  the  word  '  mind '  is  here  used  in  a 
sense  different  from  the  one  attached  to  it  in  the  text.  The 
mind  is  only  that  function  of  inner  activity  which  correlates  the 
doer  with  the  thing  done,  through  the  sense  of  egoism,  and 
creates  the  illusion  of  meum  and  tuum  which  makes  up  the 
world.  This  sense  of  separateness  being  merged  into  the 


XI 

vastness  of  that  inconceivable  whole  which  has  no  parts  what- 
ever, mind  is  said  to  be  dissolved  for  ever,  and  the  condition  of 
sublime  bliss  realised  for  all  eternity. 

The  next  chapter  therefore  aptly  opens  with  the  question  what 
is  the  aim  or  use  of  Jivanmukti.  These  aims  are  five  :  (1) 
Preservation  of  Gnosis,  (2)  Practice  of  Penance,  (3)  Universal 
Love,  (4)  Destruction  of  pain  and  misery,  (5)  Experience  of 
supreme  bliss  and  joy.  "  There  are  severally  described  and  dis- 
cussed in  the  fourth  chapter. 

The  fifth  chapter  concludes  the  original  inquiry  into  the 
nature  of  Renunciation,  the  true  Path.  The«  Renunciation 
described  in  this  chapter  is,  however,  Renunciation-of-the- 
Accomplished.  Renunciation  which  is  an  optional  condition 
preceding  the  realisation  of  Jivanmukti  ripens  into  that  true 
Renunciation  which  is  known  as  the  condition  of  the  Parama- 
Hamsa.  Parama,  means  Great  and  Hamsa,  as  interpreted  by 
the  Lord  S'ankara,  means  the  destroyer  of  all] Avidya,  viz., 
Atmdh  the  Self.  Whence  Parama-fJamsa  is  the  Great  Self, 
the  Great  Being,  the  Being  that  is  the  All.  The  fifth  chapter 
closes  with  a  description  of  the  condition  of  such  a  Being,  and 
concludes  the  inquiry  about  The  Path  of  Liberation  in  this 
Life. 

Such  sober  study  on  the  nature  of  Liberation  and  the 
means  to  realise  it  is  indeed  refreshing  in  these  days  of  quack 
prescriptions  of  kinds  for  the  acquisitions  of  spiritual  bliss. 
Living  the  Higher  Life  of  universal  peace  and  love  is  a  notion 
not  within  the  grasp  of  any  prescription  of  regulating  the 
breath  or  acquiring  any  skill  in  the  working  of  mesmeric  or 
spiritual  phenomena.  The  Higher  Life  is  all  the  work  of 
internal  thinking  with  a  view  to  purify  the  mind  and  melt  it 
away  in  the  Great '  Self.  And  the  use  of  this  word  Self 
suggests  a  difficulty  which  appears  in  certain  quarters  to 
have  created  a  misunderstanding  as  to  the  nature  of  Advaita 
liberation.  It  is  no  exhaltation  of  individual  selfishness  that 


Xll 

is  aimed  at  in  this  philosophy,  the  self  in  the  sense  of  indi- 
vidual is  rather  the  thing  principally  aimed  at  for  entire 
suppression  and  dissolution.  The  self  that  is  the  living  centre 
or  source  of  consciousness  in  all  individuals,  is  the  same 
throughout  in  its  transcendent  character,  and  what  is  in- 
culcated as  worth  striving  after  is  that  life  which  realising  this 
universal  nature  of  the  Self  rests  in  the  peace  and  love  which 
are  or  ought  to  be  its  characteristics. 


ERRATA. 


5 
6 

16 

20 

22 

22 

23 

25 

25 

31 

32 

37 

43 

44 

48 

Gl 

07 

74 

77 

77 

83 

88 

101 

111 

112 

112 

114 

128 

131 

137 

146 

156 

156 

155 

15-s 

162 

175 

177 

•  183 

183 

184 


•Line 

Incorrect 

20 

end 

25 

self-realizations 

25 

hold 

Foot  note 

Rajas 

22 

in 

34 

kapdlikdh 

27 

afraid 

4 
.    21 

Prdjna 
Sthitaprajna* 

22 

Skillful 

35 

Cat 

12 

b'eland 

31 

Purushottama  ; 

30 

and 

11 

there 

18 

vdsnd, 

11 

in  j  actions 

32 

Atman 

1 

v&sdnA 

Foot  note 

Page,  2 

24 

a  gnosis 

33 

lie  is 

35 

of  the 

4 

one  way  from 

20 

aphorism 

21 

same 

18 

Patanjali 

13 

a  light 

3 

these 

6 

lightest 

15 

one's  his  own 

13 

—  sakha 

26 

Chh&ndogydh 

31 

Yajash 

27 

whatver 

31 

necessity  for 

27 

of  though 

15 

theis 

2 

Sannyasinah 

8 

Sannyasin 

88 

leke 

Correct 

ends 

self-realization 

holds 

Rajas 

of 

hdpdlik&h 

affraid 

Prdjna 

Sthitaprajna 

Skilful 

Act 

belaud 

Purushottama  I 

(omit) 

three 

vdsand 

injunctions 

Atinan 

vdsanA 

Page,  4 

of  gnosis 

(omit) 

to  the 

one  away  from 

aphorisms 

some 

Patanjali 

the  light 

then 

highest 

one's  owfit 

— sAkhd 

ChhatidogAh 

Yajush 

whatever 

necessity  of 

though 

this 

Sannydsinah 

Sanny&sin 

like 


On  pages  26,  V7,  28  the  same  word  is  similarly  mis-spelt. 


THE  JIVANMUKTIVIVEKA 

OR 

THE  PATH  TO  LIBERATION  IN  THIS  LIFE. 
CHAPTER  I. 


OF  LIBERATION  IN  THIS  LIFE. 

I.  I  bow  to  the  Supreme,  Vidyatirtha,  whose  breath  is  the 
Vedas,  who  evolved  the  whole  cosmos  from  the    Veda. 

II.  AUM.     I  describe  henceforth  preliminary   renunciation 
(vtiidishdsannyasa)  as  distinguished   from  ripe   renunciation 
(vidvatsannyasa)  ;— the  former  being  the  cause  of  '  liberation 
after  freedom  from  the  body '  (videhamukti),   and   the   latter 
of  liberation  before. 

III.  The  canse  of  renunciation  (in  general)  is   non-attach- 
ment ;  and  as   the    S'ruti  enjoins    '  one   must   renounce  (the 
world)  the  very  moment  he   feels  complete   non-attachment.' 
The  stages  and  divisions  of  this  renunciation  are  all  matter  of 
the  puranas   (popular  exposition  of  esoteric  truths.)* 

IV — V.  Non-attachment  is  of  two  kinds  :  sharp  and  sharper ; 
the  former  leads  to  the  renunciation  proper  to  the  condition  of 
the  kutichaka,  which  being  ripened  develops  (the  sannyasiri) 
into  the  bahudaka.  Sharper  non-attachment  makes  the 
sannyasin  a  kamsa,  and  this  ripens  into  the  condition  of  the 
paramahamsa,  the  real  path  to  direct  self-realization.  | 

*  This  is  said  with  an  eye  upon  the  well-known  four  periods  (A' dramas) 
of  life,  according  to  which  renunciation  comes  fourth  and  last,  and  thus 
obviously  comes  to  be  postponed  to  old  age. 

f  Four  kinds  of  sannydsinah  are  known  in  sacred  books.  The  four 
enumerated  here  are  defined  and  described  in  IX  and  X.  The  kutichafa 
resides  in  a  secluded  hermitage,  the  bahudaJca  goes  from  one  sacred  place 
to  another,  the  hamsa  flies  like  a  swan  to  the  seventh  heaven,  the 
Parama-hnmsa  enjoys  liberation  in  this  very  life. 


VI.  Dull  non-attachment  ensues  for  the  time,  on  acciden- 
tal occasional  loss  of  child,  wife,  or  wealth,   it   being   of  the 
form  of  disgust  for  the  world  and  its  goods. 

VII.  Sharp  non-attachment  is  the  firm  resolve  of  the  intel- 
lect not  to  have  child,  wife  or  wealth  any  more  in  this  life. 

VIII.  Sharper  non-attachment  is  the  strong  disgust  for 
the   whole  of  this   world  whirling  through  the  circle  of  re- 
births.    In  dull  non-attachment  no  renunciation  is  possible. 

IX.  In  sharp  non-attachment  two    kinds   of  renunciation 
are  possible  according  as  the  power  of  locomotion  from   place 
to  place  subsists  in  full   strength   or   not.     The  former  is  the 
bahndakd,  the  latter  the  kiitichakx — both  being  tridandinak^ 

X.  In  the  sharper   kind  of  non-attachment   are   possible 
two  other   kinds  of  renunciation   according   as   it    leads   to 
brahma-loka}  or  to  final  and  absolute  liberation.     The  former 
condition  is  that  of  the  kamsa,  knowing  the  Essence,  the  latter 
that  of  the  p&rama-hamm  living  in  this  very  world. 

XI.  The  various  duties  and  actions  of  these   are   described 
in  the   Pard'sara-smrti ;   I  am  here   concerned  only  with  the 
parama-hamsa. 

XII.  Parama-hamsi  is  again  the  seeker  (of  knowledge — 
jijndsii)  or  the   accomplished   (jndniri)  ; — the  vdjasaneyinah 
ordain  renunciation  even  to  the  seeker.J 

XIII.  Sannydsitiah   renounce   (the  world)  desiring  "  that 
Loka  "  (sphere)  ; —  I  shall  explain  this  in   prose  for   the   en- 
lightenment of  those  who  are  dull  of  intellect. 

*  Holding  a  long  thin  bamboo-stick  -with  three  knots,  being  the 
emblems  of  the  triple  renunciation  of  everything  connected  with  body, 
mind,  and  speech,  and  being  therefore  constantly  immersed  in  That 
which  is  beyond  these  three. 

•{•  There  are  seven  lolcas  :  Bhur-,  Bhuvar-,  Srar-,  Jana-,  Mahar-,  Tapo- 
Satya-  or  Brahm&-loka, 

J  This  is  quoted  with  reference  to  his  first  division  of  Parama-hamsas 
for  the  question  is  likely  to  suggest  itself  why  a  seeker  should  renounce  ? 
Verse  XIII  is  quoted  in  corroboration  of  the  reply  to  this  question,  and  the 
first  section  of  this  chapter  deals  with  the  same  question  in  prose. 


EXPLANATION. 

Loka  is  of  two  kinds ;  the  atmaloka  (the  world  of  self)  and 
the  anatmaloka  (the  world  of  not-self.,)  The  first  is  described, 
in  its  triple  nature,  in  the  third  chapter  of  the  Brhaddranyaka  : 
"  Here  then  are  indeed  three  worlds — the  world  of  men,  the 
world  of  pitrs,  and  the  world  of  gods  ;  the  world  of  men 
can  be  mastered  by  begetting  a  son  and  by  no  other  act,  that 
of  the  pitrs  by  religious  rites,  and  that  of  gods  by  gnosis.  " 
Atmaloka,  too,  is  mentioned  there :  "  He  who  passes  away 
from  here  without  finding  his  own  world,  does  not  enjoy  that 
world,  for  he  has  no  knowledge  of  it ;  "  and  "  he  should  devote 
himself  to  the  atmaloka  ;  his  acts  never  fail  him  who  so  de- 
votes himself. "  In  other  words,  this  means  that  he  who, 
bound  up  in  this  material  body  of  flesh  and  blood,  passes  out 
of  it  without  finding  out  his  own  proper  world,  that  is  to  say, 
without  having  the  full  consciousness  '  I  am  Brahman,'  is  not 
able  to  enjoy  that  world ;  that  is  to  say,  is  not  able  ever  to  be  free 
from  sorrow,  delusion,  and  other  evils,  being  as  it  were  dead 
to  that  which  is  ever  free  from  these  evils,  on  account  of 
the  knowledge  of  that  world,  viz.,  Paramatman,  being  held  back 
from  him  by  the  intervening  veil  of  amdya  (ignorance).  The 
second  reference  also  means  that  the  acts  of  one  devoted  to 
the  real  world  (of  dtmari)  never  fail  him  (like  ordinary  acts 
of  devotion)  by  bringing  about  this  or  that  particular  result, 
but  lead  him  to  that  self-realization  which  is  the  sum  of  all  that 
can  be  desired.  Also  in  the  sixth  chapter  of  the  same:  "Why 
should  we  study  ?  For  what  object  should  we  worship  ?  What 
good  do  we  see  in  off-spring  ? — We  who  do  not  regard  this 
world  our  real  Self.  Desire  for  offspring  leads  to  the  burning- 
ground,*  non-desire  for  all  such  things  leads  to  immortality." 

Hence  it  appears  that  the  words  "  that  loka  "  (in  verse  xiii) 
refer  clearly  to  dtma-loka  as  the  proper  object  of  desire  for 
sannydsinah  ;  for  the  word  "  that"  refers  to  "  atman"  the  verse 
being  at  the  conclusion  of  a  section  dealing  with  dtman  in  the 
opening  words.  "This  dtman  is  unborn  and  unconditioned." 

*  The  place  where  the  dead  are  disposed  of  in  that  manner. 


That  by  which  one  sees,  observes,  experiences,  is  loka  ;  and  the 
verse  in  question  (which  is  a  quotation  from  the  S'rutf)  plainly 
implies  that  sannydsinah  renounce  the  world  for  the  purpose 
of  self-realization  (atmdnubkava) .  The  Smrti,  too,  bears  this 
out  :  "  The  Parama-kamsa,  should  unite  in  himself,  for  the 
purpose  of  Brahmajndna,  all  the  necessary  means,  viz.,  peace 
of  mind,  control  of  body,  and  the  like." 

As  this  sannyasa  comes  about  in  consequence  of  the  study, 
etc.,*  of  the  Veda  generating  strong  desire  for  knowledge,  it  is 
called  the  Reuunciation-of-the-Seeker  (vividishdsannyasa}. 
This  again  is  of  two  kinds:  (1)  the  renunciation  of  all  acts-with- 
desire  which  lead  from  birth  to  birth,  and  (2)  the  going  into 
the  order  by  assuming  all  its  emblems  such  as  the  Danda, 
etc.,  after  having  been  initiated  into  it  with  the  Praishochkara^ 
which  "ensures  to  the  mother  and  the  wife  re-birth  in  the  form 
of  a  male,  to  the  renouncer  realization  of  Brahman  and 
knowledge  of  Self." 

Renunciation  is  mentioned  in  the  Taittirtyaka  and  other 
Upanishads  :  "  Immortality  is  not  obtained  by  acts,  by 
offsprings,  or  by  wealth,  but  by  renunciation,  and  renunci- 
ation alone.*'  Females  also  are  entitled  to  this  kind  of 
renunciation.  The  Ckatwrdhari-tika  of  Mokshadharma  dealing 
with  the  controversy  between  Snlabha  and  Janaka,  uses 
the  word  "  Bhikshuki"  (female  beggar)  with  reference  to  the 
lady  in  question,  and  indicates  that  females  may  renounce 
before  marriage  or  after  the  death  of  their  husband,  and  may 
go  about  as  religious  mendicants,  may  learn  and  hear  the 
S'astras  dealing  with  moksha  (viz.,  the  Upanishads  and 
cognate  literature),  and  may  meditate  upon  Atman  in 
seclusion.  Following  the  arsrument  in  the  Devatadhikarana 


*  In  etc.,  are  included  the  performance  of  religious  duties,  certain 
austerities,  and  the  like  enjoined  by  the  Veda. 

f  That  is,  saying  the  PraisJta  which  is  a  formula  meaning  "  I  renounce 
the  Bhurloka,  the  Bhuvarloka^  and  the  svarloka"  In  these  words  the 
renouncor  declares  himself  free  from  all  desires  and  all  conditions  belonging 
to  this  world  or  the  next. 


(the  section  about  Decata)  in  the  fourth  chapter  of  the 
third  Book  of  the  S'driraka-Bhashya,  a  discussion  has  been 
started  as  to  the  rights  of  a  widower  (to  such  renuncia- 
tion), and  the  name  of  lady  Vachaknavi  has  been  mentioned. 
These  references  would  prove  the  right  of  Mai  trey  i,  the  wife  of 
Yajnyavalkya,  to  know  what  she  inquires  after  in  the  words  : 
"  tell  me  whatever  your  worship  knows  as  to  what  I  should  do  in 
order  to  be  free  from  mortality."  Even  in  the  case  of 
Brahmachdrinah,  Grahasthdh,  and  Vanaprasthah  (students, 
householders,  and  residents  in  hermitages)  who  are  unable, 
for  some  cause  or  other,  to  go  into  Sannydsa,  there  is  nothing 
in  the  way  of  mental  renunciation  for  the  purpose  of  attaining 
knowledge,  even  while  performing  the  duties  peculiar  to  their 
respective  sphere  of  life.  Many  instances  of  such  knowers 
occur  in  the  S'rutis,  Smrtis,  Purdnas,  Itikdsas,  as  also  in  the 
world.  The  condition  of  the  Parama-hamsa,  characterised 
by  the  Danda,  etc.,  taken  on  for  obtaining  knowledge,  has 
been  variously  described  by  former  teachers,  and  1  do  not 
think  I  have  anything  to  add  to  what  has  been  said  by  them 
in  respect  to  it.  Thus  end  the  section  treating  of  renuncia- 
tion-of-the-seeker. 

Henceforth  we  turn  to  Renunciation-of-the-accornplished 
(jcidvatsannydsa).  Renunciation  by  those  who  have  realized 
the  Essence  by  properly  carrying  out  study,  reflection,  and 
concentration  (zravana,  manana,  nididhydsana)  is  called 
llenunciation-of-the-accomplished.  This  is  seen  in  Yajuya- 
valkya.  The  worshipful  Yajnyavalkya,  the  crest-jewel  of  the 
learned,  having  discomfited  in  disputation  As  valayana  and  other 
vipras,  by  variously  describing  the  Essence,  and  having 
awakened  Janaka  in  a  variety  of  ways,  by  descriptions  long 
and  short,  to  the  condition  of  supreme  renunciation  (vitardga), 
set  himself  to  enlighten  Maitreyi,  his  wife,  and  in  order  to 
initiate  her  as  speedily  as  possible  into  the  Truth,  put  to  her 
sannydsa  as  the  thing  he  had  immediately  in  view  for  himself. 
Having  thus  enlightened  her  he  became  a  Sannydsin.  All  this 
is  found  at  the  beginning  and  end  of  the  Maitreyi-Brdhmanai 
"  Yajnyavalkya  about  to  enter  upon  another  stage  of  life 


6 

said,  oh  Maitreyi !    I  am  about  to  retire  from  this  stage,  for 
this  retiring  is  real  immortality.  Saying  so  he  made  renuncia- 
tion."    Even  in  the  Kahola-Brdhmana  we  find  this  Sannyasa 
mentioned  thus:  "Having  thus  realised  the  Atman,  Brdhmanas 
renounce  all  desire  for  offspring,  wealth,  and  world  (putres/tand, 
vittes/iand,  lokeshana)  and  go  about  as  mendicants."     It  should 
not  be  supposed  that  this  text  applies   to  the  first  kind  of 
sannyasa,  for  the  words  "  having  realised"  implying  priority 
of  realization  to  Sannydsa,  and  the  word  Brdhmana  meaning 
knower   of  Brahman,  stand  in  the   way  of  such  application. 
Nor  should  it  be  supposed  that  the  word  Brdhmana  refers  here 
to  the  class  so  called  ;    for  the   word  Brdhmana  is   used  with 
reference  to  that  realization  of  Brahman  mentioned  in  the 
clause  preceding  the  text   under  discussion,  which  is  brought 
about  by  study,  reflection,  and  concentration  described  there 
as   learning,    childhood,   and   silence.     If  it  be  said  that  the 
word  Brdhmana  here  refers  to  the  seeker  though  yet  devoted 
to   learning,    etc.,  and   that  this  construction  is  supported  by 
the  text  "  Hence  the  Brdhmana  having  passed  the  stage  of 
learning   must   maintain   himself   in  that  of  childhood"  ;  we 
say  that  this  cannot  be,   for  the  word  Brdhmana  is  used  in 
the   text  cited,   with  reference  to  the  future  condition  of  the 
seeker,  otherwise  the  use  of  the  particle  atha  (now)*  at  the 
beginning  of  the  text,  to  indicate  the  previous   fulfilment  of 
all  necessary  means  of  (self-realizations),  would  be  entirely  out 
of  place.     The  two  kinds  of  Renunciation  we  have  been  insist- 
ing on  are  clearly  mentioned  also  in  the  S'drira — Brdhmana  : 
"Knowing  It  they  melt  in  silence  ;  desirous  of  '  that  sphere' 
they  enter  sannydsa."     The  "melting  in  silence"  refers  to  the 
habit  of  contemplation  and  reflection,  and  this  is  possible  only 
when  there  is  nothing  to  distract  the   mind  from   it  ;  whence 
nothing  but  sannyasa  is  plainly  implied  in  these  words.     And 
this  has  been  rendered  more  clear  in  the  remaining  clause  (of 
the  said  text)  thus  :     "  This  is  that  before  which  the  knowers 
do  not  wish  for  progeny,  saying    what    shall   we    do   with 

*  Though  this  is  not  found  in  the  part  just  quoted,  the  full  text  does 
begin  with  this  particle. 


progeny  ? — we  whose  sphere  1ms  not  been  At  man.  They 
renounce  all  desire  of  offspring,  wealth,  and  world,  and  betake 
themselves  to  alms."  The  words  "  whose  sphere  has  not 
been  Atman"  mean  "  who  have  not  yet  realized  Atman" 

It  may,  however,  be  argued  that  having  put  forth  "  melting 
in  silence"  as  an  inducement,  "  renunciation-of-the-seeker" 
is  propounded  in  the  above  text  and  the  same  has  been  render- 
ed yet  further  clear  in  the  supplementary  clause  just 
examined  ;  and  that  therefore  no  renunciation  other  than  this 
ought  to  be  read  into  the  text.  To  this  we  demur  on  the  ground 
that  the  end  of  '  renunciation-of-the-seeker '  is  '  knowledge,' 
and  '  knowledge'  and  '  silence'  are  certainly  not  one  and  the 
same  thing,  for  they  stand  to  each  other  as  antecedent  and 
consequent,  as  is  well  put  in  the  text :  "  He  becomes  silent 
(muni)  after  knowing."  Still  ifc  may  be  contended  that 
'  silence'  is  only  the  ultimate  development  of '  knowledge,' 
therefore  only  another  and  higher  condition  of  knowledge, 
and  that  this  silence  is  but  the  result  of  renunciation  of  the 
first  kind,  through  knowledge.  This  contention  we 
admit,  and  on  the  strength  of  the  division  of  means  and  end 
put  forth  in  it,  we  divide  renunciation  into  two  kinds  :  the 
first  referring  to  the  means,  the  second  to  the  end.  As  the 
Seeker*  should  practice  study,  etc.,  to  the  end  of  attaining 
realization  of  the  Essence  (Tattva),  so  also  the  Accomplished 
must  accomplish  'destruction  of  the  mind'  (manondsa)  and 
*  obliteration  of  impression'  (vdsandkshaya),  which  two  will  be 
described  further  on. 

Though  several  divisions  of  these  two  sannydsas  are  well- 
known,  they  are  all  implied  under  the  denomination  Parama- 
hamsa,  and  the  Smrtis  have  consequently  spoken  of "  four 
kinds  of  mendicants."  That  the  two  renunciations  in 

*  This  word  will  be  used  throughout  to  indicate  the  Seeker  who  has 
gone  into  Sannydsa  of  the  first  kind,  viz.,  renunciation-of-the-seeker 
(vividishdsannydsa).  So  also  the  word  Accomplished  will  be  used  in  the 
sense  of  one  who  has  gone  into  the  second  kind,  renunciation-of-the- 
accomplished  (i-idvatsannydsa). 


8 

question  are  included  in  the  one  word  Parama-hamsa  is  ex- 
plained in  the  Jdbala-Sruti.  Janaka  there  inquires  of  Yajnya- 
valkya  after  the  nature  of  sannyasa,  and  the  latter  having 
explained  the  renunciation-of-the-seeker  along  with  the  renun- 
ciation that  would  follow  it,  by  presenting  a  scheme  of  the 
stages  of  development  (of  the  intellect  of  the  seeker),  meets 
the  objection  of  Atri  that  one  without  the  sacred  thread 
cannot  be  called  a  Brdhmana  by  saying  that  atmajndna 
(self-realization)  alone  is  the  real  sacred  thread.  Hence  it 
appears  that  (even  the  renouncer  of  the  first  kind)  has  no 
sacred  thread  on  him,*  and  that  therefore  he,  too,  is  included 
in  the  denomination — Parama-hamsa.  So  also  in  another 
section  (kandika)  of  the  same  which  opens  with  the  words 
*  Parama-hamsa  is  one'  etc.,  are  mentioned  the  names  of  many 
Jwanmuktas  like  Samvarta  and  others,  and  they  are  describ- 
ed as  'bearing  no  marks,  bound  to  no  forms,  behaving  like 
mad  men  though  not  mad'.  Hence,  too,  it  would  appear 
that  these  are  none  other  than  vidcatsannydsinah.  And 
further,  having  described  vividishdsannydsa  in  saying  that  the 
three  knots,  the  water-pot,  the  bag  for  holding  alms,  the  cup, 
the  tuft  of  hair  on  the  head,  the  sacred  thread,  all  should  be 
thrown  off  in  water,  reciting  the  words  "  aum  Bhiih  svdhd" 
(be  this  offered  to  the  nether  world),  it  is  plain  that  thus  should 
he  exchange  the  tridanda  for  the  ekadanda,  that  is  to  say,  take 
on  vidvatsannydsa,  that  condition  being  the  end  and  outcome 
of  the  first.  And  this  is  thus  further  amplified.  Such  a  one 
resumes  the  condition  he  was  in  at  the  moment  of  birth,  frees 
himself  from  all  the  pairs  of  opposites,  and  neither  receives  nor 
possesses  anything.  Ever  walking  in  the  way  of  Brahman,  with 
mind  ever  pure,  he  goes  about  begging  freely  at  the  proper 
time  using  his  belly  alone  as  his  bowl  of  alms,  with  the  sole 
object  of  keeping  breath  and  body  together.  And  remaining 
indifferent  to  gain  or  loss  he  finds  his  unfixed  abode  in  any 
place, — a  desolate  ruin,  a  temple,  a  hut  of  dry  hay,  an  ant- 

*  The  sacred  thread  is  worn  by  all  Brdhmanas  as  a  mark  of  initiation 
into  the  particular  order  of  the  Veda  to  which  his  father  belongs,  and  this 
he  renounces  when  he  enters  into  sannydsa  seeking  to  realize  the  All. 


9 

hill,  the  root  of  a  tree,  the  house  of  a  potter,  the  house  where 
the  sacred  fire*  is  kept,  the  sand-bank  of  a  river,  a  cave  in 
some  mountain,  the  hollow  of  a  tree,  the  side  of  a  rivulet,  the 
sacrificial  ground,  or  any  similar  place.  Above  all,  he  under- 
takes no  special  exertion,  fixes  his  mind  on  nothing  whatever, 
remains  rapt  in  divine  contemplation,  tries  to  uproot  his 
actions  (i.e.,  the  effects  of  his  actions),  good,  bad  or  indifferent, 
and  leaves  the  body  with  real  renunciation.  This  is  the  Para- 
mahamsa.  Thus,  it  is  clear  that  both  these  (renouncers)  are 
included  in  the  one  description — Parama-hamsa. 

But  though  both  kinds  of  sanmjasa  are  included  in  Parama- 
hamsa,  degrees  of  difference  must  be  admitted,  inasmuch  as 
the  two  renunciations  we  are  considering  have  peculiarities 
of  their  own,  running  counter  to  the  real  nature  of  each  other. 
This  contradiction  of  the  two,  on  account  'of  their  special 
peculiarities,  will  be  clearly  brought  out  by  a  reference  to  the 
Arum-  and  Parama-hamsa-Upaniskads.  The  pupil  Aruni  in 
asking,  "  Oh  Lord  !  how  could  I  completely  abandon  actions  "? 
plainly  asks  about  renunciation-of-the-seeker  which  consists 
in  complete  abandonment  of  the  tuft  of  hair  on  the  head,  the 
sacred  thread,  study  of  the  Veda,  repetition  of  the  Gdyatri,  and 
other  actions  of  every  kind.  And  the  teacher  Prajapati 
replies  accordingly,  when,  after  having  enjoined  complete 
renunciation  (of  everything)  in  the  words  "tuft  of  hair,  sacred 
thread,  etc.,  (must  be  given  up),  for  the  bamboo-stick,  "and  one 
covering  and  one  rag  to  wear,"  says  "  he  should  wash  himself 
at  each  of  the  three  Sandhyas,]  be  centred  in  the  Self  at  the 
moment  of  concentration,  and  should  constantly  study  that 
part  of  the  Veda  known  as  the  Aranyakas,  that  is  to  say,  the 

*  Aynihotra. 

•f-  Literally  the  point  where  any  two  periods  meet.  The  morning  and 
evening  are  two  such  well-known  periods  between  day  and  night.  But 
three  Sandhyds  are  here  spoken  of,  which  leads  us  to  the  inner  meaning  of 
the  word.  The  period  between  the  change  of  breath  from  sun  to  moon 
(right  to  left)  and  vice  tersft,  known  as  the  Sushumnd  is  called  Sctndhyd,  and 
this,  in  the  caso  of  a  practised  ascetic,  occurs  only  thrice  in  a  day.  The 
explanation  that  follows  bears  this  out. 

2 


10 

Upanishads"  Thus  are  described,  by  way  of  duties  peculiar 
to  that  particular  period  of  life,  all  the  means  which  lead  to 
real  knowledge.  And  again,  Narada,  having  initiated  a 
question  about  rennnciation-of-the-accomplished  in  the  words 
"  which  is  the  path  of  ascetics, — the  real  Parama-kamsah?'" 
the  teacher,  Lord  Prajapati,  hinted  first  at  renunciation  of 
every  thing  as  before  in  the  words  "sons,  friends,  and  all,"  and 
referred  to  the  "bamboo-stick,  the  cover,  and  the  rag"  as  the 
only  things  that  could  be  retained  with  a  view  to  protect  the  body 
and  oblige  the  world.  Even  the  taking  of  the  stick  is  spoken 
of  as  mere  convention,  for,  says  he,  it  is  not  the  chief  essential 
(of  this  condition  ),  and  therefore  not  part  of  the  (  necessary  ) 
injunctions  of  the  sacred  texts.  If  it  be  asked,  what  is  then  the 
essential  ?  he  adds,  not  certainly  the  stick,  nor  the  (disposing 
off  the)  tuft  of'  hair,  or  (of  the)  sacred  thread,  nor  ( the 
betaking  to  a  mere)  rag,  but  the  condition  of  the  Parama-hamsa 
is  the  real  essence  (of  all  that  is  here  said).  Thus,  it  is  pointed 
out  that  the  absence  of  the  stick,  etc.,  the  insignia  of  this 
condition,  is  not  against  the  spirit  of  holy  writ ;  and,  further, 
it  is  explained,  in  the  words  "  neither  cold  nor  heat  (affect 
him)  ;"  "he  is  clad  in  the  ample  folds  of  that  cloth  which  is 
made  up  of  space  extending  itself  in  the  ten  directions,  he  is 
beyond  the  convention  of  saluting,"  in  that  he  is  beyond  the 
usages  and  forms  of  the  world.  And  to  wind  up  the  whole, 
Prajapati  describes  this  condition  as  leading  only  to  the 
realization  of  Brahman,  when  he  says  at  the  end  of  this  discus- 
sion that  he  (the  Parama-hamsa)  has  all  his  desires  supremely 
satisfied,  on  his  finally  realizing  in  himself  that  Brahman 
which  is  all  bliss  and  light,  ever  full,  and  thus  experiencing 
the  full  force  and  meaning  of  the  text  " I  am  Brahman" 
From  all  this,  it  is  clear  that  these  two  (  kinds  of  renuncia- 
tion) are  apart  one  from  the  other  ;  that  the  characteristics  of 
each  are  distinctly  opposed,  one  to  the  other.  This  distinction 
is  emphasized  in  the  Smrti  also  : — 

"  Finding  the  world  entirely  worthless,  and  feeling  the 
*'  supremest  sense  of  non-attachment  within  themselves, 
*'  seekers  after  the  Essence  renounce  the  world  even  before. 


11 

"marriage.*  Yoga  (i.e.  Karma-Yoga — the  path  of  action) 
"  is  all  action,  Gtiosis  is  all  renunciation  ;  therefore  the  wise, 
*'  setting  Gnosis  above  everything,  should  renounce  the  world." 
Thus  far  it  is  remmciation-of-the-seeker.  But  further  on, 
"  when  the  eternal  supreme  Brahman,  the  real  essence  is 
"  realized,  then  taking  only  one  danda,  the  ascetic  must  give 
"  up  the  sacred  thread  and  the  tuft  of  hair  (on  the  head)  ;  he 
"  should  renounce  everything,  having  well  realized  the  supreme 
"  Brahman  ; "  it  is  reuunciation-of-the-accomplished. 

But  desire  for  knowledge  may  arise  from  the  mere  heat  of 
the  moment,  as  in  the  case  of  one  desirous  of  acquiring  an  art 
or  learning  a  science:  and  learning  too,  may  be  found  in  those 
whose  knowledge  may  not,  after  all  their  boast  of  scholarship, 
be  more  than  skin-deep  ;  and  yet  neither  the  one  nor  the 
other  are  ever  seen  to  renounce  (the  world).  The  question 
therefore  naturally  suggests  itself,  what  is  the  full  import  of 
the  "  desire  for  knowledge  "  and  "  learning  or  knowledge  '* 
itself?  The  reply  is  as  follows  : — As  when  hunger  is  gnawing 
with  all  its  might  no  action  other  than  eating  recommends 
itself  to  the  mind,  even  a  moment's  delay  becomes  annoyingly 
intolerable,  so  when  deep  disgust  becomes  settled  towards 
actions  and  their  results  birth  and  death,  and  strong  desire 
propels  to  study,  etc.,  the  real  "  desire  for  knowledge  "  has 
arisen.  And  this  leads  to  renunciation-of-the-seeker.  The 
limit  of  "knowledge"  or  "learning"  is  thus  defined  in  the 
Upade'sasdhasri : — 

"  He  is  liberated  even  without  his  wish  who  realizes  Self 
"  alone  even  as  he  once  realized  the  body  as  that  self,  being- 
"no  more  conscious  of  that  body  (or  anything  beside  Self)." 
So  also  the  S'ruti : — 

"The  knot  of  the  ego  tied  fast  in  the  heart  is  cut  asunder, 

*  With  marriage  begins  the  second  stage  of  life  called  Gthasthds'rama* 
Generally,  it  is  believed  that  sannydsa,  thu  fourth  stage,  cannot  be  entered 
upon  without  passing  through  the  preliminary  stages.  The  verse  quoted 
puts  it  that  the  sense  of  non-attachment  being  firm,  sannydsa  may  be  entered 
upon  oven  before  marriage,  or,  indeed,  at  any  time. 


12 

"  all  doubts  disappear,  all  Karma  fades  away,  on   realization 
"  of  the  Supreme." 

The  highest  condition  is  that  of  the  Hiranyagarbha,  but 
even  this  is  lower  than  the  Supreme  spoken  of  in  the  text  just 
quoted.  The  "  knot  in  the  heart  "  refers  to  the  identity  of 
intellect  with  the  ever-present  witness  brought  about  by 
beginningless  ignorance  ;  this  is  spoken  of  as  a  knot,  being  as 
fast  as  an  ordinary  knot.  The  "  doubts "  referred  to  in  the 
text  are  as  follow : — • 

Whether  the  Self  is  the  witness  or  the  actor  ?  Even  if  it  is 
the  witness  of  all,  is  it  Brahman  ?  If  it  is  Brahman,  can  it  be 
grasped  by  the  intellect  ?  Supposing  this  possible,  does 
liberation  consist  in  simple  knowledge  of  this  fact  ? 

The  '•'•Karma"  referred  to  in  the  text  means  that  Karma  which 
has  not  yet  ripened  into  action,  but  which  leads  to  and  awaits 
the  future  birth  (of  the  individual).  These  three  (the  knot, 
the  doubts,  and  the  Karma),  being  results  of  avidya,  disappear 
on  the  realization  of  Self. .  The  S'mrti  also  corroborates  the 
same : — 

"  He  who  does  not  relate  himself  to  action,  as  the  doer,  and 
"  does  not  allow  acts  and  objects  to  affect  his  mind,  stands 
"  ever  free,  and  does  indeed  never  kill  though  killing  all  the 
"  three  worlds  (at  one  sweep)." 

(This  may  be  thus  explained.)  That  knower  of  Brahman 
whose  very  being,  whose  nature,  whose  Self,  is  not  clouded 
from  within  by  being  identified  with  egoism,  whose  mind 
is  not  affected  by  objects,  that  is  to  say,  who  entertains 
no  doubts  whatever,  is  not  bound  (in  sin)  even  by  the  act  of 
destroying  all  the  three  worlds,  much  less  by  any  minor  acts. 

(To  return  then  to  the  point  at  issue.)  When  this  is  so,  and 
future  birth  is  prevented  by  gnosis  resulting  from  renuncia- 
tion-of-the-seeker,  and  it  is  impossible  to  do  away  even  with 
the  remaining  portion  of  the  present  life  without  actually 
enjoying  it  out,  what,  it  may  be  asked,  is  the  good  of  all  this 
trouble  about  renuuciation-of-the-accomplished  ?  Do  not 


13 


think  so.  This  renunciation  leads  to  "  liberation-while-living'' 
(JivanimtktC)}  and  as  the  first  kind  of  renunciation  is  necessary 
for  acquiring  gnosis,  this  second  kind  also  is  necessary  for 
realizing  this  condition.  Thus  far  is  described  renunciation- 
of-the-accoraplished. 

What,  it  is  here  asked,  is  this  Jivanmukti  (liberation  while 
living)?     What   proof  is  there  (of  its  possibility  )?     How  is 
it  brought  about  ?    And  what  is  the  good  of  it,  even  if  it  were 
possible    and    accomplished  ?       These    questions     are     thus 
answered  :    Bondage   to  a  living  being  consists  in  those  func- 
tions   of  the    mind  which   are  characterised   by   feelings    of 
pleasure  and  pain  concomitant  with   action  and  enjoyment, — 
and  which  therefore  are  so  many  distractions  (from  the  natural 
condition    of  bliss);    freedom  from   this    bondage  is  "libera- 
tion-while-liviug."     It  may  again  be  asked  whether  this  bond 
is  removed  from   upon  the   witness  or   the   mind  ?     For,  it 
cannot   certainly  be  removed  from  upon  the  witness,  because 
the  bond  dissolves  of  itself  by  gnosis;  nor  from  upon  the  mind, 
for  it  is  impossible.     The  doing  away    with  the  mind's  linking 
itself  to  actions  as  the  doer  is  as   much   impossible   of  accom- 
plishment as  the  doing  away  with  the  fluidity  of  water,  or  of 
the  heat  of  fire  ;  and  what  is  natural  is  everywhere  the  same. 
This  need,   however,  not  be  so  ;    for   even   though   complete 
annihilation  be  impossible,  we  need  not  despair  of  neutralizing 
the  nature  of  a  thing.     As  the  fluidity  of  water  is  counteracted 
by  mixing  earth  with  it,  or  as  the  heat  of  fire  is  neutralized 
by   the   well-known  jewel  or  by  some   powerful  incantation, 
so  even  are  all   '  functions   of    the    mind '    (  chittavrtayah  ) 
neutralised,  so  to  speak,  by  the  practice  of  Yoga,     But  it  may 
here  be  remarked  that  the  chain  of  necessity  (Prarabdhakarma) 
obstructs  the  course  of  gnosis  trying"  to  do  away  with   the 
whole  of  aricbja,  and  its  results,  and  drags  the  body  and  its 
organs  to  results  strictly  in  accord  with  its   design  ;  and  that, 
moreover,  the  feelings  of  pleasure  and  pain  are  nowhere  without 
the  functions  of  the  mind; — how  then  is  it  possible  to  neutralize 
these  functions  (and  by  what  can  the  bliss  of  such  neutraliza- 
tion, even  if  it  were  possible,  be  realized)?  This,  however,  is  not 


14 

so,  for,  Jivanmukti,  the  result  of  the  said  neutralization,  being 
of  the  nature  of  supreme  bliss,  does  not  cease  to  be  a  link  of 
what  you  call  the  chain  of  necessity.  But  it  should  not,  for 
this  reason,  be  supposed  that  necessity  alone  will  accomplish 
this  Jivanmukti,  and  that  free  action  on  the  part  of  the 
aspirant  is  entirely  out  of  question.  For,  such  a  line  of 
argument  would  apply  equally  to  husbandry,  commerce,  and 
all  human  intercourse  in  general  (and  bring  them  also  to  a 
stand-still).  If  you  say  that  necessity  being  beyond  the 
plane  of  experience,  and  the  results  produced  by  it  being  on 
the  plane  of  experience,  it  cannot  produce  these  results  unless 
assisted  by  some  means  on  the  plane  of  experience,  and 
husbandry,  etc.,  therefore,  require  the  free  action  of  men  ;  we 
ask  what  prevents  you  from  applying  the  same  line  of  argu- 
ment to  Jivanmukti  as  well  ?  Where,  in  the  case  of  husbandry, 
etc.,  the  result  does  not  accord  with  expectation  notwithstand- 
ing the  free  action  of  man,  we  have  necessarily  to  imagine 
some  other  more  powerful  Karma  as  obstacle  in  the  way. 
This  Karma  too  acts  as  obstacle  through  means,  such  as  want 
of  rain,  etc.,  favourable  to  itself,  borrowed  from  the  plane 
of  experience.  This  obstacle  again  is  removed  by  erecting  a 
neutralizing  force  in  the  form  of  Karma,  such  as  the  Kariri- 
Ishti*  etc.  ;  and  this  force  acts  to  neutralize  the  obstacle  by 
having  recourse  to  means  favourable  to  itself,  such  as  rain,  etc,, 
borrowed  from  the  plane  of  experience.  Enough  of  going  on 
in  this  line  ;  it  is  impossible  for  you,  supremely  devoted  as 
you  are  to  necessity  and  its  power,  even  to  think  of  the  futility 
of  free  human  action  of  the  form  of  Jfo^a-practice  ;  or  if  you 
like  we  have  no  objection  to  concede  that  as  (according  to 
yon)  necessity  is  superior  to  gnosis  (freedom),  let  Yoga  be 
superior  to  necessity.  It  being  so,  it  stands  to  reason  that 
Uddalaka,  Vitahavya,  and  other  ascetics  had  it  in  their  power 
to  give  up  life  at  pleasure.  Even  if  such  Yoga  be  impossible 
in  the  case  of  short-lived  mortals  like  us,  there  can  hardly  be 


*  Particular  sacrifice,  so  called  from  its  having  the  bringing  of  raia 
as  its  object. 


15 


any  trouble  in  that  Yoga  which  consists  solely  in  steadying 
the  active  functions  of  the  mind,  such  as  desire,  etc.* 

If  yon  do  not  admit  the  power  of  effort  put  forth  in  accord 
with  the  S'dstra,  all  efforts  beginning  with  diagnosis  (  of  the 
disease  called  ignorance)  and  ending  with  liberation  will  be 
simply  aimless.  Because  (free)  effort  fails  sometimes  of  its 
result,  we  cannot  argue,  from  that  circumstance  alone,  the 
futility  of  all  (free)  action  in  general  ;  for,  if  it  were  so,  all 
kings  once  defeated  ought  to  dismiss  the  whole  of  their  horses, 
elephants,  and  men,  making  up  the  army.  With  all  this  in 
mind,  has  Anandabodhacharya  said  : — 

"We  do  not  give  up  food  because  of  the  fear  of  indigestion, 
"  we  do  not  refrain  from  preparing  our  dishes  because  beggars 
"are  likely  to  swarm  around,  nor  do  we  renounce  our  bed 
"  because  bugs  are  sure  to  appear." 

The  supreme  power  of  (fre<?)  effort  in  accord  with  the  S'dstra 
is  plainly  put  by  Vasishtha  to  Rama  in  the  portion  (of  the 
Yogavdsishtha)  beginning  with  "  Everything  in  this  world," 
etc.,  and  ending  with  "  Giving  up  even  that,"  etc.  (This  is 
quoted  in  full  as  follows): — 

Vasishtha.: — "  Everything  in  this  world,  oh  child  of  the 
"  Raghus  !  is  accomplished  by  every  one,  by  free  action 
"  accompanied  with  well-directed  effort." 

Everything  means  progeny,  wealth,  heaven,  the  Brahma- 
loka,  etc.  '  Free  action  '  means  action  of  the  agent  consisting 
of  such  acts  as  the  Putra-kameshti,  husbandry  and  commerce, 
the  Jyotistkoma,  devotion  to  Brahman,  etc. 

"  Free  action  is  of  two  kinds  :  in  accord  with  the  S'dstra 
"  and  not  in  accord  with  the  S'dstra.  The  first  leads  to 
"  supreme  bliss,  the  second  to  supreme  evil." 


*  It  may  here  be  observed  that  two  kinds  of  Yoga  are  distinctly 
referred  to.  The  Yoga  described  as  impossible  to  us  mortals  is  HatJta- 
Yoga?  the  other,  consisting  in  controlling  the  activity  of  the  mind,  is 
Raja-  Yoga,. 


16 

Action  not  in  accord  with  the  S'dstra  is  snch  as  adultery, 
theft,  etc.  ;  that  in  accord  with  the  S'dstra,  is  such  as  observ- 
ing daily  and  occasional  (religious)  rites,  etc.  Bliss  is  heaven, 
and  the  highest  of  all  bliss — liberation.  Evil  is  hell. 

"  By  those  who  have  rendered  the  S'dstra,  company  of  good 
"  men,  and  the  like  quite  familiar  from  childho'od,  is  encom- 
"  passed,  through  free  meritorious  action,  that  end  which  is 
"  favourable  to  the  actor." 

"Quite,"  that  is  to  say,  in  the  proper  way.  The  sense  "meritori- 
ous "  is  obtained  by  taking  some  words  like  "  full  of  "  as 
understood  after  the  word  "merit"  in  the  text.  "Favourable" 
means  in  accord  with  the  supreme  bliss  (spoken  of  before). 

Rama  : — "  Oh  sage  !  I  stand  as  the  collection  of  previous 
"  impressions  directs  me,  what  else  can  a  poor  thing 
"  like  me  be  able  to  do  ?  " 

"Impressions"  are  the  potentiality  of  action  stored  up  in  the 
Jiva,  and  are  of  the  form  of  Dharma  and  Adharma  (religious 
merit  and  demerit). 

Vasishtha  : — "  Because,  oh  Rama  1  it  is  so,  thou  shalt 
"  obtain  eternal  bliss  by  action  brought  about  by  thy 
"  own  (free)  effort  and  by  no  other  means." 

Because  your  action  is  necessitated  by  the  activity  of 
previous  impressions,  action  moral,  mental  and  physical,* 
brought  about  by  your  own  free  effort,  is  doubly  necessary  to 
break  the  chain  which  thus  hold  you  in  bondage. 

"  And  even  '  the  collection  of  impressions  '  is  of  two  kinds : 
"  good  and  bad.  Which  of  these  exists  in  thy  case  ?  The 
"  first  or  the  second  (or  both)  ?  " 

The  question  is  whether  Dharma  and  Adharma  both 
necessitate  your  acts  or  only  one  of  them  ?  If  it  be  the  latter, 
whether  it  is  good  or  bad  ? 

"  If  thou  art  carried  away  by  the  force  of  good  impressions, 

*  I  include  Vdkprayatna  in  mental,  and  Mdnasa prayatnm  in  moral 
action. 


17 


thou  shalt,  by  that  very  course,  attain  the  eternal  in  no  length 
of  time." 

By  "if"  is  implied  the  choice  of  one  of  the  three  alternatives, 
and  the  first  is  understood  as  granted  by  Rama.     'By  that  very 
course,'  that  is  to  say,  by   the   good  impressions   themselves, 
without  any  other  effort.  '  The  eternal,'  that  is,  liberation. 

"  If  the  force  of  bad  impressions  lead  you  to  misery,  it 
"  belongs  to  previous  birth,  and  you  must  try  to  subdue  it  with 
"  your  own  effort." 

The  'effort'  here  implied  is  the  observance  of  religious  rites 
prescribed  by  the  S'dstrdni  as  capable  of  counteracting  the 
force  of  bad  impressions.  And  this  force  must  be  subdued  by 
one's  own  effort,  not  through  other  men  as  in  a  battle. 

"The  river  of  impressions  flows  on  the  good  as  well  as  the 
"  bad  course  ;  it  should  be  forced  into  the  good  alone  by  free 
•"  effort." 

In  either  case,  though  no  effort  is  necessary  in  the  case  of 
good  impressions,  the  bad  ought  to  be  displaced  by  the  good 
through  such  effort  as  the  S'dstrdni  should  prescribe. 

"  Oh  best  of  the  powerful !  one's  mind  engrossed  in  bad 
"  impressions  must  be  forced  back  into  the  good  course,  by 
"  strong  personal  effort." 

'  Bad  impressions '  consist  of  such  desires  as  adultery, 
theft,  and  the  like.  The  'good  course  '  consists  in  meditation 
on  the  import  of  sacred  texts,  on  some  god,  and  the  like. 
*  Effort '  meaning,  of  course,  free  effort. 

"  The  mind  moved  off  from  the  bad  resorts  to  the  good,  for, 
"  in  this  it  resembles  a  child  ; — whence  it  is  necessary  that  it 
"  should  be  forcibly  moved  away." 

As  it  is  possible  to  prevent  a  child  from  eating  clay,  and 
make  it  like  fruits  instead,  or  as  it  is  possible  to  prevent  it 
from  catching  at  pearls  and  jewels,  and  teach  it  to  amuse 
itself  with  artificial  dolls,  etc.,  so,  indeed,  it  is  possible,  by  the 
company  of  the  good,  to  turn  the  mind  away  from  bad  com- 
pany, from  objects  not  conducive  to  its  real  happiness. 
3 


18 

"  We  may  gain  over  the  child,  our  miiid,  very  easily,  by 
"  supreme  equanimity  consisting  in  evenness  of  feeling,  but 
"  not  so  soon,  and  therefore  by  degrees,  with  strong  effort." 

There  are  two  ways  of  leading  a  restive  animal  into  its 
stall  ;  the  enticing  it  into  it  by  showing  fresh  grass,  etc.,  or  by 
belabouring  it  with  a  stick,  etc.  The  first  method  will  succeed 
very  easily  ;  the  second  will  keep  the  beast  running  about 
here  and  there,  and  will  succeed  in  forcing  it  into  the  stall 
only  gradually.  In  the  same  way,  evenness  of  feeling,  consist- 
ing in  looking  with  equal  eye  on  foes  and  friends,  is  the  easy 
method  of  subduing  the  mind  ;  strong  effort,  consisting  of 
Prdndydma,  Pratydhdra,  etc.,  is  the  other  difficult  method. 
By  the  first  kind  of  easy  Yoga,  the  mind  may  soon  be  subdued, 
but  by  the  second  difficult  (Hatha  =  physical )  Yoga,  it  cannot 
be  easily  subdued,  and  it  should,  therefore,  be  used  by  degrees. 

"  Oh  conqueror  of  enemies  !  when  by  the  practice  of  the 
"  aforesaid  speedy  method,  impressions  dawn  upon  your  mind, 
"  know  that  your  study  has  borne  its  fruit." 

When  good  impressions  begin  speedily  to  arise  in  conse- 
quence of  the  softer  method  of  Yoga  (Raja-Yoga),  study  must 
be  said  to  have  borne  its  fruit.  It  should  not  be  supposed 
that  the  fruit  cannot  appear  in  so  short  a  time. 

"  Even  if  you  have  a  doubt,  continue  in  the  flow  of  good 
"  impressions  ;  in  adding  to  the  store  of  these,  oh  dear!  there 
<;  is  no  harm  whatever." 

Even  while  collecting  good  impressions,  the  doubt  may  arise 
whether  such  study  is  complete  or  not  ?  In  the  state  of  such 
doubt,  the  study  should  only  be  kept  up.  It  is  a  rule  in  telling 
the  beads  of  a  rosary  that,  when,  supposing  we  want  to  tell  the 
beads  over  a  thousand  times,  we  are  in  doubt  as  to  the  last 
hundred,*  we  must  tell  the  beads  over  again  a  hundred  times. 

*  For,  here  the  rosary  consists  of  108  beads,  generally  taken  to  repre- 
sent 100  onlj',  and  when  1,000  is  the  number  desired,  we  have  to  turn  the 
rosary  round  only  10  times.  The  words  '  last  hundred '  are  used  with 
reference  to  the  tenth  and  last  turning  of  the  rosary  which  may  be  doubt- 
ed through  f orgetfulness,  etc. 


19 

Thus  the  number  thousand  would  be  complete,  if  really  it  is 
incomplete,  and  even  if  the  other  hundred  were  mere  addition 
to  the  required  thousand,  the  merit  will  thereby  certainly  not 
vanish.  The  same  rule  may  be  followed  in  the  case  of  this 
study  also. 

"  As  long  as  you  have  not  acquired  complete  mastery  over 
"  the  mind,*  and  have  not  realized  that  condition,  go  on  follow- 
"  ing  what  ( sacred )  books  and  teachers  prescribe.  After 
"  that,  all  latent  desire  having  died  out,  and  the  thing  having 
"  been  realized,  you  should  give  up  even  the  collection  of  good 
"  impressions  in  the  last  act  of  supreme  concentration.  Follow- 
"  ing  the  very  good  path  of  the  wise,  with  sincere  feeling  and 
"clear  understanding,  acquire  that  condition  wherein  there  is 
"  no  second,  and  in  the  end  stand  ever  blissful  by  abandoning 
"  even  that." 

The  meaning  is  plain  enough. f 

Hence,  it  is  plain  that  desire,  etc.,  can  be  neutralized  by  the 
study  of  Yoga,  and  that  as  Jivanmukti  must  follow  such 
neutralization,  there  remains  no  ground  of  dispute  on  that 
point.  Thus  far  has  been  described  the  nature  of  "  liberation 
while  living  "  (  Jivanmukti). 

Texts  from  S'ruti  and  Smrti  bear  this  out.  •  They  are  found  in 
i\\QKathopanishad  and  other  works,  in  words  such  as  "the  liberat- 
ed is  liberated"  and  the  like,  which  mean  that  one  liberated  from 
the  bonds  of  experience  of  the  form  of  desires,  etc.,  is  liberated 
over  again,  being  placed,  on  the  demise  of  his  body,  beyond  all 
possibility  of  any  future  bondage  of  the  kind.  We  say  "  over 
again  "  for  this  reason.  The  aspirant  is  freed  from  desires, 
etc.,  by  the  practice  of  self-control  -and  cognate  virtues,  even 

*  Indicated  by  the  absence  of  doubts. 

•{•  It  would  much  help  to  make  the  meaning  plain  if  a  verse  of  the 
Aparokshanubhuti  be  referred  to  in  this  place.  "  In  consequence  of  the 
mind  being  free  from  transformation,  and  being  then  identified  with 
Brahman,  the  resulting  forgetfulness  even  of  this  identification  is  the  real 
Samddhi  called  Jndna."  124.  See  my  Raja- Yoga,  page  36  and  notes,  et  seq. 


20 

before  the  full  rise  of  gnosis,  but  in  that  condition,  desires,  etc., 
if  they  still  arise,  are  held  in  control  with  some  effort  ;  where- 
as here  there  being  nothing  like  'transformation  of  the  mind * 
(Dhi-vrtti),  desires,  etc.,  never  arise.  Thus,  it  is  proper  to  say,  he 
is  liberated  over  again.  In  other  words,  in  the  one  case,  the 
body  having  been  dissolved  at  the  moment  of  dissolution,  the 
liberted  is  free  from  future  connection  with  the  body  for  a  time, 
but,  in  the  other,  the  liberation  is  liberation  for  all  time 
whatever  ;  whence  the  words  "  over  again  "  are  well  used  in 
this  connection.  Says  the  Brhaddranyaka  : — 

"When  all  desires  occupying  his  heart  fall  off  entirely,  then,. 
"  indeed,  does  the  mortal  become  immortal,  and  realize  Brak- 
"  man  even  here." 

In  another  S'ruti  also  it  is  said  :  "  Though  with  eyes  (he) 
"  is,  as  it  were,  without  eyes  ;  though  with  ears  (he)  is,  as  it 
"  were,  without  ears  ;  though  with  mind  ( he  )  is,  as  it  were,, 
"  without  mind."  The  same  may  be  seen  from  other  texts 
also.  The  (Jivanmukta)  is  described  in  the  Smrtis  with 
epithets  such  as  Sthitaprajna  (one  whose  mind  is  entirely 
steady),  Bhagvadbhakta  (one  devoted  to  God),  Gunatita  (one 
beyond  the  three*  properties),  Brahn  ana  (one  who  has  realiz- 
ed Brahman),  Ativarnd'srama  (one  beyond  the  pale  of  the  four 
Varnah  and  Airamali),  and  the  like.  In  the  dialogue  between 
Vasishtha  and  Kama,  the  Jhanmukta  is  described  from  "  In 
men  devoted  to  gnosis"  etc.,  to  "  the  ineffable  sat  alone 
subsists  " :  — 

Vasishtha  : — "  In  men  devoted  to  gnosis  alone,  and  ever 
"  immersed  in  self-contemplation,  arises  that  condition 
"  of  '  liberation  in  life '  which  is  like  the  liberation 
"  following  upon  dissolution  of  the  body." 

'  Devoted  to  gnosis  alone/  i.  e.,  those  who  have  given  up 
the  observance  of  all   forms  prescribed  by  the    Veda  or  by 

*  Of  matter  (Prai/<i),  viz.,  Satva,  Rdjas,  TAmas  (passivity,  activity,  gross- 
ness). 


21 


social  convention.  *  Liberation  in  life  '  (Jivanmukti)  and 
'liberation  following  npon  dissolution  of  the  body'  (Videhamukti) 
differ  one  from  the  other  by  the  presence  or  absence  of  body 
and  the  senses,  for,  in  reality,  there  can  be  no  difference 
between  the  two  on  account  of  the  absence  of  duality  being 
common  to  both. 

Bama  : — "  Oh  Lord  !  Explain  to  me  the  characteristics  of 
"  the  Jivanmukta  and  the  Videhamukta,  that,  with  my 
"  eye  upon  the  S'dstra,  I  may  strive  in  that  direction." 

Vasistha  : — "  Though  ever  moving  about  in  the  world  of 
"  experience,  the  whole  of  it  exists  not  for  him  ; — all- 
"  pervading,  ether-like  consciousness  alone  subsists. 
"  Such  a  one  is  called  Jivanmukta" 

This  world  of  experience,  consisting  of  mountains,  rivers,, 
oceans,  and  so  on,  ceases  to  exist  in  its  present  form,  being 
drawn  within  himself  by  the  Supreme  Lord,  at  the  time  of  the 
great  cyclic  deluge,  along  with  the  body  and  senses  of  the 
cognizing  subject.  Not  so  this  non-existing  of  the  world.  Here 
all  intercourse  dependent  on  body  and  senses  does  exist ; 
mountains,  rivers,  etc.,  not  as  yet  being  drawn  within  himself 
by  the  Lord,  continue  to  exist,  and  are  distinctly  experienced 
as  such  by  the  rest  of  beings.  Only  for  the  Jivanmukta,  who 
has  not  the  mind  that  can  transform  itself  into  the  form  of 
these  things  and  produce  knowledge  of  them,  the  world  does 
not  exist,  as  in  sleep.  The  residuum  is  obviously  the  self- 
effulgent,  all-pervading  consciousness  alone.  Though  in  sleep 
even  those  who  have  not  yet  found  liberation  have  no  mind 
transforming  itself  into  the  form  of  objects,  and  they  are 
therefore  as  much  Jivanmukta  as  any,  still  there  is  a  difference 
in  the  germs  of  mind,  capable  of  future  transformation,  being 
present  in  the  case  of  the  non-liberated  sleeper. 

"  The  expression  of  his  countenance  neither  flushes  nor  fades 
"  under  pleasure  or  pain,  he  stands  unmoved  whatever 
"  may  come  or  go.  Such  a  one  is  called  Jivanmukta" 

The  flu  shing  of  the  face  means  joy.  The  Jivanmukta  finds 
no  cause  for  joy,  like  ordinary  men,  in  obtaining  enjoyments, 


22 

beginning  with  flowers,  ointaents,  respect,  and  so  on.  The 
fading  of  the  countenance  means  poverty  of  spirit.  The  Jivar/- 
mukta  does  not  show  any  want  of  spirit  even  when  loss  of 
wealth,  contempt  of  people,  and  similar  calamities  befall 
him.  'Standing  unmoved  whatever  may  come  or  go'  mean* 
remaining  content  with  whatever  may  be  obtained  in  the 
form  of  alms,  etc.,  sufficient  for  preserving  the  body,  only  in- 
the  course  of  that  stream  which  is  set  in  motion  by  previous 
Karma,  not  by  any  effort  of  his  own  in  the  present  condition. 
Concentration  being  firm,  he  has  no  sense  of  flowers,  ointments,, 
and  the  like  ;  and  even  if  he  should  have  a  sense  of  them  in 
moments  when  such  concentration  breaks,  the  strong  convic- 
tion of  discrimination  keeps  him  off  from  desiring  or  avoiding 
any  of  them,  and  thus  secures  him  in  that  condition  which  is 
free  from  pleasure  as  well  as  pain. 

"  He  is  awake  though  in  sleep,  he  knows  no  waking,  his 
"  knowledge  is  all  without  any  Vasanas : — He  is  the 
"  Jivanmukta" 

He  is  awake  because  all  his  senses  beginning  with  the  eyes 
exist  in  their  proper  place,  and  have  not  ceased  to  act.  He 
is  in  sleep  because  his  mind  knows  no  transformation.  Hence 
waking  in  the  form  of  connecting  his  Self  with  objects  through 
the  senses  is  not  known  to  him  any  longer.  Though  he  has 
full  knowledge  (of  the  unity  of  Self),  he  never  thinks  that  he 
is  a  great  knower  of  Brahman,  nor  does  he  ever  feel  any 
desire  for  enjoyment  of  any  kind.  Hence  all  evils  incidental 
to  desire  being  absent,  he  is  well  described  as  having  no 
Vdsana  (impression)  whatever. 

"  Though  acting  after  every  feeling,  such  as  love^  hate,  fear, 
"  and  the  like,  he  who  stands  unaffected  within,  like  the 
"  Akd&a,  is  said  to  be  the  real  Jivanmukta" 

Acting  after  love  may  include  such  acts  as  eating  and  the 
like ;  acting  after  hate  may  include  such  acts  as  turning  away 
from  the  Bauddhak,  t\\eKapalikah,  and  the  like  ;  acting  from 
fear  may  include  such  acts  as  escaping  from  snakes  and  the  like. 
The  '  like  '  may  include  jealousy,  etc.  ;  and  acting  after  jealousy 


23 

may  mean  the  assertion  of  oneself  as  superior  to  other  ascetics 
and  the  practising  of  closer  concentration,  etc.,  accordingly. 
Though  such  acts  may  come  about  in  moments  of  break,  on 
account  of  previous  habit,  he  remains  unaffected  within, 
being  free  from  all  affection  in  consequence  of  the  mind  being 
entirely  at  rest.  He  is  as  unaffected  as  the  Aka*a  which  con- 
tinues naturally  pure  though  filled  with  smoke,  dust,  clouds, 
and  the  like. 

"  He  who,  whether  active  or  at  rest,  links  not  his  ego  with 
"  the  act,  and  allows  not  his  mind  to  be  affected,  is 
"  said  to  be  the  real  Jivanmukta" 

The  first  half  has  been  explained  while  speaking  of 
renuuciation-of-the-accomplished.  When  a  man,  in  the  bonds 
of  ignorance,  performs  some  sacred  duty,  linking  his  ego  with 
the  act,  the  conscious  Self  within  takes  the  form  of  egoism. 
The  mind  is  affected  with  the  joy  of  obtaining  heaven  in  future. 
In  the  case  of  one  who  is  at  rest,  egoism  arises  in  the  proud 
consciousness  of  his  having  renounced  (-all  Karma};  and  the 
mind  becomes  affected  with  sorrow  for  the  impossibility  of  his 
ever  finding  his  way  to  heaven.  The  same  line  of  reasoning 
should,  as  occasion  requires,  be  applied  to  ordinary  acts  as 
well  as  to  acts  prohibited  (by  scripture).  Both  these  contingen- 
cies never  happen  to  the  Jivanmukta  inasmuch  as  he  never 
feels  such  joy,  etc.,  in  consequence  of  his  never  identifying  him- 
self with  acts  or  their  results. 

"He  whom  the  world  finds  no  cause  to  fear,  and  who  is 
"never  afraid  of  the  world,  ever  beyond  joy,  and 
"jealousy,  and  fear,  is  said  to  be  the  real  Jtvanmukta." 

The  world  finds  no  cause  to  fear  him  for  he  never  indulges 
himself  in  contempt  of  others,  or  in  dealing  out  chastisement. 
For  the  same  reason,  people  too  find  no  reason  to  contemn  or 
chastise  him.  Should  any  wicked  man  indulge  himself  in 
such  conduct  towards  him,  he  is  not  afraid  of  it  inasmuch  as 
his  mind  never  conceives  such  causes  of  irritation. 

"  With  the  woes  of  this  world  laid  entirely  at  rest,  he,  who, 
"  though  full  of  all  learning  and  art  is  yet  without  any, 


24 

"  who  though  with  mind  is  without  it,  is  said  to  be 

" the  real  Jivanmukta" 

'The  woes  of  this  world'  include  respecting  friends  or  rejecting 
foes;  and  he  is  above  all  that.  'All  learning  and  arts '  include 
the  64  well-known  arts,  and  this  person  though  well-versed  in 
every  one  of  them,  is,  as  it  were,  without  any  of  them,  for,  he 
never  professes  nor  exhibits  any.  Though  the  mind  is  there, 
it  is  said  naught  to  be,  for,  it  does  not  take  on  any  form. 
Where  we  have  the  reading  renderable  into  "is  yet  without 
any  anxiety  "  (in  place  of  "  is  yet  without  any  "),  the  meaning  is 
that  though  the  mind  taking  on,  through  the  force  of 
(previous)  impressions,  the  form  of  concentration  on  the  Self, 
does  exist,  he  is  free  from  anxiety  because  he  is  beyond  those 
affections  which  modify  the  mind  of  ordinary  men. 

"  He  who  though  deep  in  intercourse  with  all  things  is 

"  ever  as  cool  and  unconcerned    as    in    attending  to 

"  another's  business,  all  fullness    and  contentment,    is 

"  said  to  be  the  real  Jivanmukta" 

As  one  feels  no  joy  or  sorrow  for  gain  or  loss  in  business,  he 
attends  to  for  another,  such  as  is  being  involved  on  occasions 
of  marriage  or  other  ceremonies,  so  the  liberated  feels  quite 
unconcerned  even  in  his  own  business.  Not  only  is  he  cool 
on  account  of  being  free  from  the  worry  of  action,  but  on 
account  of  finding  his  complete  Self  in  all  he  does.  Thus 
far  the  characteristics  of  the  Jivanmukta. 

Henceforth,  the   Videhamulda  (liberated  after    dissolution 
of  the  physical  body) : — 
"After  leaving  the  condition  of  the  Jivanmukta,  one  enters 

"  the  condition  of  liberation  after  death,  even  like  the 

"  wind,    coming  to  a  standstill,  on  his   body   being 

"  dissolved  by  death." 

As  wind  stands  sometimes  quite  still,  foregoing  its  natural 
motion,  so  the  liberated  stands  in  the  Self,  leaving  off  the 
accident  of  this  world. 

"  The  liberated-after-death  neither  rises  nor  fades,  nor  is 

"  he  ever  laid  at  rest ;  he  is  neither  sat  nor  asat,  he  is 

"  never  distant,  and  he  is  neither  '  I '  nor  '  not-I.' " 


25 

He  has  no  rise,  no  fall,  nor  is  bo  at  rest.  He  who  is  thus 
free  from  all  conditions  having  his  snbtile  body  dissolved 
even  here,  cannot  fee  described  as  Sat,  that  is  to  say,  cannot 
be  called  the  Prajna  conditioned  by  Avidyd,  nor  Isvara, 
conditioned  by  Maya — the  root  of  the  world  of  experience. 
He  cannot  be  called  even  asat^  that  is  to  say,  formed  by  the 
material  elements.  In  saying  'he  is  never  distant'  it  is  implied 
that  he  cannot  be  described  as  beyond  Maya.  The  word'  and' 
is  introduced  with  a  view  to  preclude  his  being  near  the 
Sthulabhuk  (the  soul  that  has  the  material  plane  of  friuition 
assigned  to  it).  He  is  not  'I'  nor  'uot-I,'  that  is  to  say,  he 
is  neither  of  the  macrocosm  nor  of  the  microcosm,  nor 
of  the  many  ideas  which  might  appear  between  the  two. 

"There  subsists  as  residuum  the  indescribable  sat  unruffled 
"  iu  the  calmness  of  its  depth,  neither  light  nor  dark, 
"  uunameable,  unmanifest." 

Even  in  Jivanmukti,  inasmuch  as  it  is  likened  to  this 
Videhamukti  which  is  set  up  as  the  goal  it  leads  to,  the 
same  cxhaltation  may  be  experienced  whenever  there  is  excess 
of  absolute  ecstacy  (  Nirvikalpa  ).  The  knower  absorbed  in 
ecstacy  (Stkitaprajnd)  is  thus  spoken  of  in  the  second  chapter 
of  the  Bhagvudgitti  : — 

Arjuna  : — "  Oh  Kes'ava  !  what  speech  may  be  used  of  those 
"  who,  firm  iu  the  Essence  (  Prajnd  ),  are  lost  in  the 
*'  ecstacy  of  absolute  concentration;  what  do  such  say? 
"  whether  they  sit  still  or  walk  about  ?" 

Prajnd  means  knowledge  of  the  Truth.  It  is  of  two  kinds: 
settled  and  unsettled.  A  woman  lost  in  illicit  love  does  not 
lose  sight  of  her  paramour  in  all  her  acts  whatever,  and  dis- 
regarding the  evidence  of  her  senses,  forgets  even  such  (real) 
acts  of  household  management  as  she  attends  to  at  the  time.  The 
Truth  being  once  realized  by  one  who  having  reached  the  last 
stage  of  renunciation,  has,  through  clever  practice  of  Yoga, 
gained  complete  mastery  over  his  mind; — he  cannot  disengage 
his  consciousness  even  for  a  moment  from  the  Truth,  like  the 
4 


26 

said  woman  not  forgetting  her  paramour  even  for  a  second. 
This  is  being  lost  in  the  ecstacy  of  absolute  concentration. 
The  Truth  may  sometimes  be  realized  by  force  of  previous  good 
deeds,  bnt  the  realizer  being  wanting  in  the  said  qualifications 
may  forget  it,  like  the  said  woman  forgetting  her  love  in  the 
worry  of  her  household.  This  is  unsettled  knowledge  of 
Truth.  Vasishtha  says  with  this  very  distinction  in  mind  : — 

"  A  woman  addicted  to  another,  never  ceases  to  taste  the 
"  elixir  of  her  lover's  company,  though  all  intent  on  the 
"discharge  of  her  household  duties.  The  wise,  finding 
"  sweet  rest  in  the  supreme  undefiled  Truth,  continue  to 
"  enjoy  it  within,  though  going  in  the  ways  of  the  world, 
"  without." 

One  absorbed  in  such  ecstacy  (  Sthitaprajna  )  is  of  two  kinds, 
in  relation  to  two  different  times.  He  may  be  in  ecstacy  or 
out  of  it.  In  the  verse  (  from  the  Bhagvadgita  )  Arjnna  in- 
quires after  the  characteristics  of  both  these  conditions  by  the 
first  and  second  half  of  the  stanza.  What  speech  may  be 
nsed  of  those  who,  firm  in  the  Essence,  are  lost  in  ecstacy,  that 
is  to  say,  by  words  of  what  import  should  this  man  be  describ- 
ed by  the  world.  And  further,  when  he  is  out  of  such  ecstacy, 
what  speech  does  he  use  ?  how  do  his  sitting  and  going  about 
differ  from  those  of  the  uninformed  ? 

Krshna  : — "  Oh  son  of  Prtha  1  he  is  said  to  be  firm  in  the 
"  Essence  when  he  completely  clears  his  mind  of  all 
"  desires  whatever,  and  stands  in  the  Self  all  content 
"  with  Self." 

Desires  are  of  three  kinds  :  objective,  subjective,  and  of  the 
form  of  simple  impressions.  Sweetmeats,  etc.,  already  in  hand 
constitute  the  field  of  objective  desires,  those  that  exist  only 
in  hope  constitute  the  sphere  of  subjective  desires,  and  such 
desires  as  rise  up  accidently,  like  the  touch  of  grass  in  passing 
over  a  footpath,  make  up  those  desires  which  are  of  the  form  of 
simple  impressions.  One  who  exhalts  himself  to  the  ecstacy  of 
concentration,  has  so  much  control  over  his  mind  as  not  to 


27 

allow  it  to  take  on  the  form  of  anything,  and  gives  up  there- 
fore all  the  three  kinds  of  desires.  The  supreme  contentment 
he  feels  is  seen  in  the  cheerfulness  of  his  countenance.  This 
contentment  is  not  of  ('fulfilled)  desires  but  of  (realizing)  the 
Self,  for,  all  desires  have  already  been  given  up,  and  his 
intellect  is  nearest  the  Self,  being  all  supreme  ecstacy.  In  this 
state  of  ecstatic  trance,  this  supreme  bliss  is  not  cognized  by 
the  intellect,  as  in  acts  of  ordinary  concentration  (Sampra- 
jnata-Samadhi),  but  by  the  Self,  all  self-illumined  conscious- 
ness. The  contentment  too,  is  not  of  the  modification  of  his 
mind  that  way,  but  of  the  impression  left  by  the  said  self- 
cognized  bliss.  Such  is  the  language  and  such  the  import  of 
words  used  to  describe  one  in  this  ecstatic  trance  : — 

"  With  mind  unoverpowered  by  pain,  with  desires  unaffected 
"  by  happiness,  he  is  beyond  love,  fear,  and  anger.  This 
" silent  one  is  the  Sthitaprajnd," 

"  Pain  "  is  that  modification  of  the  mind  which  is  produced 
by  some  cause  as  love  or  attachment,  which  is  a  form  of  the 
energetic  property  (Rajoguna}  inherent  in  human  nature, 
which  is  of  the  nature  of  internal  heat,  and  which  is  disagree- 
able to  oneself.  Such  pain  being  on  him  he  never  indulges 
himself  in  that  sense  of  overpowering  which  too,  is  a  modifica- 
tion of  the  mind  expressed  in  such  words  of  repentence  as  "  Fie 
on  me,  I  have  been  a  sinner  of  the  last  degree,  I  have  been  a 
wicked  soul,"  and  so  on,  and  which  is  of  the  form  of  delusion, 
being  a  result  of  the  gross  nature  (Tamogwna)  inherent  in  man. 
Though  the  mind's  being  thus  overpowered  appears  like  turn- 
ing over  a  new  leaf  in  life,  if  it  tends  to  justify  itself  by 
precluding  the  possibility  of  sinful  action  in  some  future  birth, 
there  is  nothing  to  prevent  it  from  being  mere  delusion  in 
this  life.  Happiness  is  that  agreeable  modification  of  the 
mind  which  is  of  the  form  of  pleasure  at  some  acquisition, 
such  as  a  kingdom,  the  birth  of  a  son,  and  the  like,  and  which 
is  a  result  of  the  placidity  ( Sattva)  inherent  in  human  nature. 
Desire  is  that  craving  for  similar  happiness  in  future,  which 
arises  through  the  gross  side  of  human  nature,  after  experiencing 


28 

happiness  snch  as  this,  but  without  exciting  that  force  of 
holy  action  which  may  secure-  snch  object.  As  happiness  and 
pain  are  brought  about  by  necessity  (  Prdrabdha, ),  and  as  the 
mind  of  the  ascetic  out  of  ecstacy  is  open  to  modification, 
both  happiness  and  pain  are  possible  in  his  case;  but  these  are 
never  attended  with  desire  or  overpowering  strength  in  the 
case  of  the  enlightened.  Similarly,  love,  fear,  and  anger  being  of 
the  gross  part  of  nature  (  which  is  abseat  in  his  case),  and  not 
being  brought  to  him  by  necessity,  do  not  exist  in  him. 
The  Slhitaprajnd  so  described,  utters  words  expressive  of 
his  own  experience  to  enlighten  his  pupils  and  lead  them 
to  give  up  all  desire,  and  stand  unoverpowered  under  all 
calamity. 

"  He  is  firm  in  Truth  who,  free  from  all  attachment  what- 
"  ever,  feels  no  joy  and  no  hate  on  obtaining  good 
"  things  or  bad." 

That  is  called  attachment  in  the  presence  whereof  the  good 
or  evil  of  others  is  taken  on  oneself ;  it  is  a  modification  of 
the  grosser  mind  having  another  as  its  object.  Good  things 
consist  in  wife  and  the  like  capable  of  producing  happiness. 
Joy  is  that  modification  of  the  mind  which  sets  one  singing 
the  praises  of  such  objects.  This  song  of  praise  is  gross 
inasmuch  as  it  is  entirely  aimless,  not  being  meant  to 
please  another.  Bad  things  are  things  snch  as  the  learning, 
etc.,  of  another  which  make  him  miserable,  by  exciting  his 
jealousy.  The  mind  setting  itself  to  picking  holes  in  such 
things  is  in  the  condition  of  hate.  This  too,  is  gross,  for,  this 
indulging  in  jealousy  is  entirely  vain,  being  powerless  to 
affect  that  which  it  hates.  That  such  gross  ideas  cannot 
exist  in  the  enlightened  is  obvious. 

"  He  is  deep  immersed  in  the  Truth  when  he  draws  (within 
"  himself)  all  his  senses  from  contact  with  external 
"  objects,even  like  the  tortoise  drawing  all  its  limbs 
"  within  its  shell." 

The  foregoing  verses  show  that  the  grosser  kind  of  modi- 


29 

fications  of  the  mind  cannot  exist  even  at  moments  when 
the  ecstacy  of  trance  is  not  on  the  knower.  When,  however, 
the  ecstacy  is  on  him,  he  has  no  modification  whatever,  much 
less  either  the  gross  or  the  placid  one.  This  is  what  the 
verse  just  quoted  aims  to  explain. 

"  Objects  fall  off  from  him  who  takes  in  nothing,  though 
"they  leave  a  latent  sense  of  enjoyment,  but  even  this 
"vanishes  of  itself,  on  something  above  it  being 
"  realized." 

The  chain  of  necessity  brings  about,  of  itself,  the  several 
causes  of  pleasure  and  pain  in  the  form  of  objects  such  as 
the  rise  of  the  moon,  the  intervening  of  thick  darkness,  and 
the  like.  Other  things  like  house  and  land  and  the  like  are 
brought  about  by  independent  effort.  The  former  cease,  as 
it  were,  to  be,  by  complete  withdrawing  of  all  senses  into 
the  unity  of  trance,  and  by  no  other  means  whatever.  The 
latter  cease  to  be  even  without  this  means.  The  "  taking 
in  "  consists  in  putting  forth  effort  for  the  purpose,  and  house 
and  property  cease  to  be  in  one's  hands  as  soon  as  such  effort 
ceases.  The  "  latent  sense  "  is  mental  desire  for  such  objects, 
and  even  this  disappears  on  obtaining  sight  of  Supreme 
Brahman,  the  height  of  joy  and  bliss.  The  S'ruti  also  has  it : 
"  What  shall  we  do  with  offspring— we  the  sphere  of  whose 
Self  is  not  this  world." 

"  Oh  son  of  Kunti !  the  senses  with  their  overpowering  force 
"  prove  too  strong  even  for  the  knowing  one,  ever  on  the 
"  alert,  and  they  drag  away  his  mind  even  against  his  will. 
"  He  must  exercise  perfect  control  ever  these,  and  should 
"  concentrate  himself  on  Me  as  the  Supreme  ;  for,  he  is 
"  said  to  be  firm  in  the  Truth,  whose  senses  obey  his 
"  steady  control." 

The  study  of  concentration  is  useful  as  a  safeguard  against 
occasional  aberrations,  notwithstanding  effort,  renunciation, 
and  knowledge  of  Brahman.  This  verse  is  in  reply  to  the 
question  "  how  he  sits  ?" 


30 

"The  man  contemplating  upon  objects  finds  himself 
"strongly  attached  to  them.  Attachment  begets 
"  desire  which,  in  its  turn,  leads  to  jealousy  and  anger. 
"  From  auger  comes  forgetfnluess  which  darkens  all 
"  memory,  the  result  being  a  complete  stunning  of 
"  Reason.  And  this  is  the  way  to  entire  ruin." 

In  this  verse  is  described  the  nature  of  the  aberration  which 
may  come  about  for  want  of  the  practice  of  concentration. 
'Attachment'  means  proximity  of  the  object  of  thought.  'For- 
getfulness'  means  forgetfulness  of  the  sense  of  right  and  wrong. 
The  'darkening  of  all  memory'  means  the  being  turned  off  from 
the  realization  of  Truth.  The 'stunning  of  Reason' refers  to 
the  inability  of  gnosis  to  bring  about  liberation,  being  neutral- 
ized by  the  current  of  opposite  ideas  thus  set  agoing. 

"  Dealing  with  objects  through  the  senses,  feeling  no  love  or 
"  hate,  and  ever  under  the  control  of  Self,  he  who  has 
"  complete  mastery  over  his  mind  easily  finds  his  way 
"  to  the  Light." 

One  who  is  practised  in  Samddhi  ( concentration,  trance  ) 
finds  the  Light,  by  force  of  the  impressions  derived  from  such 
practice,  even  when  dealing  with  objects  through  the  senses, 
in  moments  when  the  trance  is  not  on  him.  This  verse  is  in 
reply  to  the  question  "how  he  goes  about?"  This  and  the  several 
verses  quoted  above  explain  the  nature  of  the  Sthitaprajna. 

A  question  naturally  occurs  at  this  point  ; — Does  not 
freedom,  love,  hate,  and  the  like,  precede  as  means,  the  first 
insight  of,  and  the  being  firmly  fixed  into,  the  Truth  ?  This,  no 
doubt,  is  true,  but  a  difference  has  to  be  made.  The  author 
of  the  S'reyomdrga  has  pointed  it  out  thus  : — • 

"  All  that  precedes  as  means  the  acquisition  of  ynosis,  being 
"  brought  about  by  effort,  is  the  natural  characteristic  of 
"  him  who  is  firm  in  the  Truth.  The  condition  of  one  so 
"  firmly  fixed  in  Truth,  wherein  all  sense  of  separateuess 
"  is  obliterated  by  the  uninterrupted  light  of  Self, 
"  is  called  Jimnmukti. 


31 


Bhagavan  S'ri  Krshna  has  described  his  devotee  in  the 
twelfth  chapter  (of  the  Bhagavdgita)  thus  : — 

"  Harbouring  no  hatred  for  any  being,  he  is  the  friend  and 
"  sympathiser  of  all,  there  is  nothing  which  he  calls 
"  his  own,  there  is  no  act  which  he  takes  on  himself, 
"  he  is  the  same  in  good  and  evil,  all  forbearance,  ever 
"  content,  constantly  fall  of  self-concentration,  having 
"  full  control  over  himself,  firm  of  resolve,  with  his 
"  mind  and  intellect  surrendered  entirely  to  Me.  He 
"  who  is  thus  a  devotee  of  mine  is  most  dear  to  me." 

Inasmuch  as  he  has  surrendered  his  mind  to  Tivara,  and 
has  thus  entered  the  condition  of  trance,  he  is  not  distracted 
by  any  other  thing  ;  nor  is  he  affected  by  good  or  evil  in 
moments  when  the  trance  is  broken,  for,  in  that  condition,  he 
keeps  himself  attached  to  the  condition  of  supreme  indif- 
ference. The  same  line  of  argument  applies  to  the  pairs  being 
described  thus  : — 

"  He  from  whom  the  world  finds  no  cause  to  fear,  and  he 
"  who  is  himself  not  afraid  of  the  world,  being  ever 
"beyond  pleasure,  jealous}7,  fear,  and  anxiety,  has  My 
"  unreserved  love.  He  who  is  devoted  to  me,  being  above 
"  desire,  all  pure,  highly  skillful,  indifferent,  free  from 
"  pain,  not  caring  to  undertake  anything,  has  my 
"  unreserved  love.  He  who,  being  full  of  devotion, 
"  experiences  no  likes  and  dislikes,  no  sorrow  and  no 
"  desire,  standing  above  good  as  well  as  evil,  has  my 
"  unreserved  love.  That  man,  full  of  devotion,  who  is 
"  equal  to  friends  and  foes,  who  meets  respects  and 
*'  insults  undisturbed,  who  braves  cold,  heat,  happiness, 
"  or  misery,  with  unaffected  mind,  who  is  free  from 
"  all  attachment,  who  regards  with  equal  eye  all 
"praise  and  reproach,  who  maintains  steady  silence, 
"  who  derives  contentment  from  anything  and  every 
"  thing,  who  has  no  fixed  abode,  and  whose  mind  is 
"always  fixed  in  peace,  has,  indeed,  my  unreserved 
"  love." 


32 

Here,  too,  the  Vartikakdra  has  explained  certain  special 
points  as  before. 

"  Universal  friendship  and  other  qualities  come  of  their 
"  own  accord,  without  any  effort,  in  one  who  has 
"  awakened  himself  to  the  light  of  Self,  they  are  not  so 
"  found  in  one  who  is  yet  on  the  way  to  this  supreme 
"  realization." 

One  who  has  transcended  the  sphere  of  the  gunah  (pro- 
perties), is  thus  described  in  the  fourteenth  chapter  (of  the 
'Bhagvadgita)  : — 

Arjuna : — "  Oh  lord !  tell  me  what  signs  indicate  the 
"  passage  of  one  beyond  the  three  gunah  ?  what  pray 
"  are  his  actions  ?  and  how  is  this  passage  effected  ?" 

The  three  gunah  are  Sattva,  Rajas,  Tamas  (placidity,  energy, 
grossness)  ;  and  the  whole  world  is  made  up  of  evolutes  of 
these  three.  Hence  one  beyond  the  gunah  is  he  who  is  not  of 
the  world,  in  other  words,  who  is  a  Jivanmukta.  '  Signs ' 
mean  marks  to  indicate  that  a  certain  man  is  a  gundtita 
(beyond  the  gunah).  The  question  about  the  '  how  '  of  the 
passage  '  beyond '  refers  to  the  means,  to  the  way  in  which 
such  a  one  would  conduct  his  mind,  with  such  an  end  in  view. 

Bhagavdn  : — "  Oh  son  of  Pandu  !  He  is  said  to  have 
"  passed  beyond  the  gunah  who  hates  not  action, 
"  desires  not  inaction,  feels  no  love  or  hate  for  joy, 
"  activity,  or  gross  inactivity.  Such  a  one  stands  like 
"  one  entirely  indifferent,  unmoved  by  any  gunah,  and 
"  stirs  not,  remaining  always  firmly  fixed  in  the  con- 
"  viction  '  all  action  is  of  the  gunah  (  not  mine  ).'  He 
"  looks  upon  happiness  and  misery  with  equanimity, 
"  looks  with  the  same  eye  on  a  lump  of  earth,  a  stone 
"  or  a  mass  of  gold,  makes  no  difference  of  likes  and  dis- 
"  likes,  and  remaining  ever  undisturbed,  meets  censure 
"  and  praise  without  concern.  Neither  insult  nor  respect 
"  affects  him,  friends  or  foes  cannot  influence  him ;  he  has 
"  nothing  to  do  with  planning  or  thinking  of  any  cat 


33 

"  whatever.  Moreover,  he  who,  above  all  this,  worships 
"  Me  with  entire    devotion   finds   himself  beyond   the 
"  gunah,  and  one  with  Brahman" 

Joy,  activity  and  gross  inactivity,  refer  to  the  three  gunah 
— Satva,  Rajas,  Tamas.  These  three  prevail  in  waking  and 
dream,  subside  in  sleep,  trance,  mental  abstraction  and  condi- 
tions of  that  kind. 

'Activity*  is  of  two  kinds:  agreeable  and  disagreeable.  The 
fool  hates  disagreeable  and  seeks  agreeable  activity  in 
the  waking  condition.  The  Gundtita,  being  beyond  every 
impression  of  agreeable  and  disagreeable,  feels  no  hate  and  no 
desire  ;  he  stands  entirely  indifferent,  being  unmoved  by  suc- 
cess or  defeat,  like  one  looking  upon  two  parties  fighting  with 
each  other.  He  is  'indifferent',  from  the  conviction  :  '  the 
gunah  act  in  and  upon  gunah,  I  have  nothing  to  do  with  them.' 
The  false  knowledge  '  I  am  the  doer  '  is  the  cause  of  '  moving,' 
and  all  false  knowledge  being  absent  from  the  Gundtita,  he 
stands  ever  '  unmoved.'  These  verses  make  a  reply  to  the 
qnerry  '  how  such  a  one  (the  sthitaprajnd)  acts  ?'  Looking  with 
equal  eye  on  happiness  and  misery  is  the  secret  sign  of  this 
condition.  "Worship  of  the  Supreme  accompanied  by  un- 
swerving devotion,  gnosis,  concentration,  and  practice,  leads 
beyond  the  gunah. 

The  Brdhmana  is  thus  described  by  Vyasa  and  others  : — 

"  The  Gods  know  him  to  be  a  Brdhmana  who,  -without  any 
"  upper  garment,  sleeping  upon  no  bed,  and  using  noth- 
"ing  but  his  hand  for  a  pillow,  remains  ever  at  peace 
"  (within  and  without)." 

The  word  Brdhmana  refers  to  the  knower  of  Brahman.  The 
S'ruti  describes  him  in  the  words  "  hence  the  Brdhmana" 
And  the  knower  of  Brahman  being  entitled  to  renunciation  of 
the  accomplished,  inasmuch  as  he  is  enjoined  to  be  principally 
above  all  give  and  take  by  the  S'ruti  in  the  words  "He  is  the 
Paramahamsa  who  without  any  covering  goes  about  as  he 
5 


34 

was  born"; — it  is  quite  proper  that  the  Brdhmana  should 
have  been  described  as  'he  who  is  without  the  upper  garment' 
and  so  on. 

"  The  Gods  know  him  as  a  Brdhmana,  who  covered  by  any, 
"  fed  by  any,  sleeps  in  any  indeterminate  place  what- 
"  ever." 

Though  a  place  where  food,  covering  and  sleep,  can  be  had 
is  expected,  through  the  necessity  of  keeping  up  the  body,  the 
Brdhmana  incurs  no  merit  or  demerit  in  going  about  for 
these  purposes.  The  mere  satisfying  the  craving  of  hunger, 
and  taking  real  substantial  nourishment,  being  both  equal  to 
him,  the  affection  of  the  mind  which  leads  to  merit  or  demerit 
is  entirely  out  of  question.  In  the  Bhagavat  too  it  is  said 
with  this  in  mind  : — 

"  Where  is  the  use  of  saying  too  much  on  the  nature  of  good 
"and  evil?  Evil  lies  in  the  eye  that  distinguishes 
"  between  good  and  evil,  the  good  is  beyond  the  one  as 
"  well  as  the  other." 

To  proceed, 

"  The  Gods  know  him  to  be  a  Brdjimana  who,  wearing  a  mere 
"  piece  of  cloth  on  his  loins  and  using  a  coat  of  worn- 
"  out  rags  for  cover,  goes  danda  in  hand,  ever  immers- 
"  ed  in  concentration,  constantly  diverting  himself  with 
"  himself,  all  alone  and  one." 

He  should  keep  to  the  danda  and  the  kaupina  ( piece  of 
cloth  for  the  loins)  in  order  that  people  may  have  faith  in  uni- 
versal love  by  his  presenting  it  in  a  superior  form,  while  treat- 
ing of  Brahman.  The  iruti  too  enjoins  "  The  rag,  the  stick, 
and  the  cover,  he  should  keep  as  much  for  self-preservation  as 
for  obliging  the  world."  '  He  should,  however,  never,  even  out 
of  the  strongest  sympathy,  exchange  even  a  word  about  the 
worldly  concerns  (of  his  pupils),  but  should  keep  himself  ever 
in  supreme  concentration.  The  sruti  has  it  "  know  well  that 
dtman  alone,  give  up  all  other  speech."  Also, 


35 

"  The  wise  man  of  patience  having  well  realized  It  should 
"  identify  himself  with  It,  on  no  account  should  he 
"  attach  his  mind  to  the  use  of  words,  for,  then,  it  is  all 
"  mere  waste  of  breath." 

Teaching  about  Brahman  is  not  any  dissimilar  "  use  of 
words  "  whence  it  cannot  be  against  the  gist  of  this  precept. 

This  "concentration"  is  carried  on  without  any  interruption 
in  solitude,  whence  another  Smrti  also  enjoins  : — 

"  The  mendicant  alone  and  solitary  is  the  one  described  above, 
"  for  two  makes  a  pair,  three  a  town,  and  four  a  city  ; 
"  never  make  city,  town,  or  pair,  for  even  between  a  pair 
"  it  is  quite  usual  to  exchange  local  gossips  or  even 
"  opinions  about  alms  etc."  Also  "  Love,  jealousy, 
"  are  easily  born  of  intercourse." 

To  proceed, 

"  Him  the  gods  know  as  a  Brdhmana  who  has  no  blessing 
"  to  give,  no  business  to  conceive  or  undertake,  no 
"  salute  to  exchange,  no  praise  to  hear  ;  who  thus,  with 
"  all  action  spent  up,  is  himself  ever  unspent." 

Men  of  the  world,  who  move  in  Society,  give  a  blessing  in 
return  for  salutation.  The  wishing  success  to  the  man  in  what- 
ever is  nearest  his  heart  is  the  general  meaning  of  this  '  bless- 
ing'; it  being  so,  and  people,  through  a  thousand  shades  of 
liking,  having  set  their  hearts  on  a  variety  of  things,  the  men- 
tal search  after  this  or  that  desire  of  the  man  on  whom  the 
blessing  is  conferred  must  necessarily  lead  to  considerable 
distraction.  This  distraction  runs  counter  to  gnosis.  Another 
Smrti  also  says  : — 

"  Gnosis  in  its  proper  form  is  never  realized  by  that  poor 
"  thing  who  attaches  himself  to  the  world,  to  the  pride 
"  of  learning,  or  to  the  preservation  of  his  body." 

This  would  apply  even  to  the  "  conceiving  and  undertaking  " 
something,  to  "  saluting  "  and  the  like  referred  to  above.  The 


36 

"  conceiving  and  undertaking  "  may  be  for  one's  own  end  or 
for  the  benefit  of  others,  and  it  may  consist  of  effort  to  acquire 
house,  land,  or  property  and  the  like.  The  liberated  must 
give  up  these  conceivings,  undertakings,  and  salutings.  It 
should  not  be  supposed  that  the  not  giving  a  blessing  in  re- 
turn will  disappoint  men,  for,  the  word  ndrdyana,  the  form 
enjoined  upon  all  the  liberated,  is  a  fit  replacement  of  the  ex- 
pected blessing,  as  it  is  capable  of  curing  both  inclination 
(of  the  ascetic)  towards  the  world,  and  possible  disappoint- 
ment (to  the  saluter).  All  undertaking  is  evil.  Says  the 
smrti:  — 

"  All  undertakings  are  enveloped  in  evil  even  like  fire  in 
"smoke." 

'Saluting  '  is  also  allowed  to  the  renunciation  of  the  seeker. 

"  He  who  is  a  sannydsin  even  from  before,  and  is  equal  in 
"  all  respects,  must  be  honoured  with  a  bow,  none  else 
"  deserves  the  honour." 

But  even  here,  considering  his  being  a  sannydsin  'from 
before'  and  his  being  *  equal  in  all  respects  '  leads  to  distrac- 
tion of  mind.  Hence  many  (sannydsinah)  are  found  quarrel- 
ling over  the  honour  of  a  mere  '  salute.'  The  vdrtikakara  has 
shown  the  cause  of  this  thus  : — 

"  Entirely  beside  themselves,  with  mind  entangled  in  the 
"  objective,  jealous,  even  sannydsinah,  with  heart  par- 
"  ched  up  under  the  curse  of  Fate,  are  found  to  take 
"  interest  in  disputes,  and  quarrels  without  end," 

It  has  been  even  shown  by  the  Lord  that  the  liberated  have 
nothing  to  do  with  this  'salute' : — 

"  When  he  is  firm  in  the  Unconditioned,  transcending  all 
"  name  and  form,  when,  in  fact,  he  thus  revels  in  the 
"  empire  of  Self,  whom  should  the  knower  of  Self  give 
"  a  salute  ?  He  has  nothing  to  do  with  any  action 
"  whatever," 


37 

Though  salnte  likely  to  darken  the  mind  is  thus  prohibit- 
ed, salutation  emanating  from  the  sense  of  universal  love, 
and  tending  to  add  to  the  peace  of  love,  is  admitted.  Says 
the  Smrti: — 

"  The  Lord  pervades  everything  as  the  Jiva  of  all,  salute 
"  should,  therefore,  be  given  to  all, — even  to  the  horse, 
"  the  Ckdndala,  the  cow,  the  ass." 

"  Praise  "  that  is  forbidden  is  praise  of  men,  not  of  God. 
Says  Bfhaspati  (in  his  Smrti)  : — 

"  As  men  belaud,  with  all  their  heart,  the  owner  of  wealth 
"  and  property,  with  a  desire  to  receive  some  share  of 
"  it,  if  even  so,  they  were  to  belaud  the  maker  of  the 
"  universe,  why  would  they  not  be  free  from  bondage  ?" 

To  resume, 

The  being  "  ever  unspent  "  means  the  absence  of  what  is 
known  as  poverty  of  spirit.  Hence  also  the  Smrti: — 

"  If  at  times  he  gets  no  food,  the  man  of  high  patience 
"  should  never  find  cause  to  be  disappointed,  nor 
"  should  he  ever  find  cause  for  exaltation  on  obtaining 
"  food  (and  the  like)  ; — for  both  the  obtaining  and 
"  not  obtaining  depend  entirely  on  Fate." 

The  being  with  "  all  actions  spent  up  "  refers  to  his  not  be- 
ing subject  to  religious  injunctions  and  prohibitions  ;  for,  as 
the  Smrti  has  it,  "  where  can  there  be  any  injunction  or  prohi- 
"  bition  to  him  who  walks  the  way  transcending  the  gundh" 
With  the  same  in  mind,  the  Lord,  too,  has  said  : — 

"  The  Veda  deals  with  the  three  gunah  and  all  that  is  relat- 
"  ed  to  them  ;  oh  Arjuua  !  transcend  the  gunak,  sink 
'*  all  duality,  be  ever  centred  in  supreme  peace,  care 
"  not  for  acquisition  or  protection,  and  above  all  be 
"  ever  in  thy  Self." 

Also  Narada  : — 

"  The  all-pervading  Vishnu  should  ever  be  at  heart,  not  lost 
*'  sight  of  even  for  a  moment,  all  injunctions  and  all 


38 

"  prohibitions  whatever  are  forced  to  serve  such  a  one's 
"  bidding." 

To  proceed,  then, 

"  Him  the  Gods  know  to  be  a  Brahmana  who  is  afraid 
"  of  the  gunah  as  of  a  snake,  of  conventional  respect 
"  and  forms  as  of  hell  itself,  and  of  woman  as  of  a 
"  dead  carcass." 

There  is  reason  for  them  to  be  '  afraid  of  the  gunah  as  of  a 
snake,'  for,  it  is  said  they  may  say  a  word  to  princes  and  the 
like.  As  'respect'  breeds  attachment,  and  thus  sets  up  ten- 
dencies adverse  to  the  true  aim  of  life,  it  is  described  as  'hell,' 
to  be  avoided  even  from  a  distance.  Hence  the  Smrti : — 

"  Insult  adds  to  the  force  of  austerities,  respect  undermines 
"  it  : — the  Vipra  annointed  and  worshipped  speeds  to 
"  decay  like  the  cow  that  is  being  milked  from  day  to 
"  day." 

With  this  very  idea  in  mind,  insult  is  spoken  of  as  worth 
courting,  in  the  Smrti  : — 

"  The  Yogin  must  so  conduct  himself,  taking  care  never  to 
"  go  astray  from  the  path  of  the  wise,  as  men,  receiv- 
"  ing  him  with  insult  and  contempt,  should  never  seek 
"  his  company." 

As  to  women,  they  are  open  to  two-fold  criticism  (from  the 
ascetic's  stand-point),  both  in  being  one  of  things  'prohibited' 
and  also  in  being  loathsome  by  nature.  The  *  prohibited' 
limit  may  sometimes  be  transgressed  through  overpowering 
attachment,  or  through  the  force  of  necessity  ;  and  it  has  been 
said  with  this  in  view  : — 

"  Never  share  the  same  bed  or  seat  even  with  mother,  sister 
"  or  daughter  ;  for,  the  host  of  senses  overthrows  even 
"  the  Informed,  by  its  overwhelming  force." 

And  loathsomeness  is  thus  put  forth  in  the  Smrti  : — 
*'  The  unnameable  part  of  woman,  the  fistula   ever  oozing, 
"  breaks  the  mind,  though  itself  unbroken,  and  mostly 


39 

"  deludes  all  men.  What  should  prevent  us  from 
"  likening  those  men  with  the  veriest  worm  who  find 
"  pleasure  in  that  piece  of  leather  with  a  slit  in  the 
"  middle,  ever  full  of  the  most  filthy  stench  emanating 
"  from  the  other  orifice  at  hand." 

Thus  the  point  in  comparing  woman  to  a  carcass  is  evident- 
ly to  bring  out  both  these  senses,  her  being  of  the  class  of 
things  prohibited,  and  also  a  thing  full  of  loathsomeness. 
To  continue, 

"  The  Gods  know  him  for  a  Brdhmana,  who  all  alone,  as  it 
"  were,  fills  the  whole  Akas'a,  and  who  finds  himself  in 
"  utter  solitude  though  in  a  place  full  to  overcrowding," 

Men  of  the  world  should  avoid  being  alone,  on  account  of 
their  being  thus  open  to  fear,  indolence,  and  the  like  ;  and 
they  should  court  company  to  be  free  from  these  vices. 
Yoginah,  being  unlike  these,  find  the  whole  of  space  entirely 
full  with  the  highest  bliss  of  Self  realized  in  concentration 
carried  on  without  interruption,  in  solitude.  Hence  there  is  • 
no  chance  of  fear,  indolence,  sorrow,  delusion,  and  the  like, 
in  their  case.  For,  as  the  S'ruti  puts  it, 

"  Where  can  there  be  any  delusion,  any  sorrow,  to  the  in- 
"  formed  who  experiences  the  oneness  of  all,  through 
"  realization  of  every  being  as  his  Self." 

"  Place  full  to  overcrowding  "  is  a  place  full  of  men  ;  and 
this,  on  account  of  talk  about  politics  and  the  like,  being 
adverse  to  concentration,  and  therefore  without  realization  of 
the  bliss  of  Self,  torments  the  mind  even  like  solitude.  The 
reason  for  this  is  that  the  world  is  all  illusion,  the  Self  is  all 
reality  and  fullness. 

One  who  is  beyond  class  (varna)  and  position  (ds'rama)  is  thus 
described  in  the  fifth  Chapter  of  the  section  on  Liberation,  in 
the  Suta-Sarnhita  : — • 

"  The  student,  the  householder,  the  forester,  the  mendicant, 
"  and  the  ascetic  belonging  to  no  varna  or  ds'rama  ; 
"  these,  if  properly  skilled  each  in  their  own  position, 


u  are  superior  one  to  the  other  in  the  order  mentione'd 
"  Of  all  grades  whatever,  the  ascetic  beyond  varna,  and 
"  asrama  is  the  master  ;  he  should  never,  oh  Purnsho- 
"  ttama  1  even  like  me,  become  the  pupil  of  any  one. 
"  Such  a  one  is  the  teacher  of  teachers,  there  is  verily 
"  none  equal  to  or  superior  than  him.  He  belongs  to 
"  the  order  beyond  varna  and  ds'rama,  who  has  realized 
"  the  witness  of  all,  transcending  body  and  senses, 
"  the  absolute  Intelligence,  all  bliss,  self-illumined, 
"  the  highest  Essence.  Oh  Kes'ava  I  he  is  beyond  varna 
"  and  ds'rama,  who  knows  his  Self  as  God,  from  hear- 
"  ing  (and  identifying)  the  great  texts*  of  the  Vedanta ; 
"  who  knows  the  great  Lord  transcending  all  (three) 
"  conditions,  though  the  permanent  witness  of  them  all ; 
"  and  who  has  firm  conviction  born  of  the  study  of  the 
"  Upanishads  that  varna  and  ds'rama  are  only  a  part 
"  of  the  web  of  illusion  woven  round  the  body,  they 
"  never  belong  to  my  Self,  all  thought.  He  has,  indeed, 
"  realized  that  condition  who  knows,  through  the  Upa- 
"  nis/iads,  that  the  whole  of  this  universe  fulfils  itself 
"  in  my  presence  just  as  men,  of  their  own  accord, 
"  fulfil  their  various  duties  in  the  presence  of  the  sun; 
"  that  the  world  is  projected  in  me  as  an  illusive  idea 
"  even  like  bracelets  and  a  variety  of  ornaments 
"  imagined  in  pure  immutable  gold ;  and  that  the  whole 
"  world  beginning  with  the  mahat  is  result  of  mere 
"  imagination  in  rne,  like  the  illusive  imagination  of 
"  silver  in  nacre.  The  great  Lord  pervades  like  dkd'sa^ 
"  all  things  high  or  low,  the  body  of  a  Chdnddla  or  a 
"  Brahmana,  of  bird  or  beast  ;  and  I,  indeed,  am  this 
"  Lord ;  thus  does  he  oh  Pnrushottama ;  realize  the 
"  truth  of  the  Upanishad.  He  has  transcended  all 
"  varnas  and  all  dsramas,  who  knows,  through  the  last 
"  word  of  the  Veda,  that  as  the  directions  all  appear  in 
"  their  proper  position  to  the  man  cured  of  delusion  of 

*  Such  as,  Thou  art  that,  I  am  Brahman,  and  the  like. 


41 


"  the  eye,  the  world  appears  to  me  as  naught,  being 
"  dissolved  by  proper  gnosis;  or  that  as  the  whole 
"  panorama  of  dream  is  mere  result  of  fancy  and 
"  illusion  in  me,  the  experience  I  receive  while 
"  awake  is  no  less.  He  no  doubt  is  removed  beyond 
"  varna  and  asrama  whom  the  veddnta  has  taught  to 
"  be  ever  centred  iu  the  Self,  rising  above  his  varna, 
"  and  dsrama,  on  the  dissolution  of  all  duties  peculiar 
"  to  the  one  or  the  other,  at  the  sight  of  his  real  self. 
"  The  knowers  of  the  essence  of  the  veda,  all  declare 
"  him  beyond  varna  and  dsrama,  who  giving  them  up 
"  stands  ever  centred  in  his  self.  The  body,  the  sen- 
"  ses,  the  vital  breath,  mind,  intellect,  egoism,  the 
"  thinking  principle,  nay  even  illusion  itself,  the 
"  cosmos  beginning  with  supreme  ether,  the  doer, 
"  the  sufferer,  the  director  of  one  or  other  ; — the  Self  is 
"  none  of  these  ;  it  is  all  pure  being,  all  pure  thought, 
"  all  pure  bliss,  it  is  in  every  respect  none  other  than 
"  Brahman.  As  the  sun  appears  to  move  through 
"  motion  of  the  water  (in  which  he  is  reflected),  the  Self 
"  is  supposed  to  pass  through  the  variety  of  this  world 
"  through  the  activity  of  egoism.  Therefore  oh  Kesava! 
"  the  varna,  the  dsrama  and  everything  belonging  to 
"  them  are  all  belongings  of  some  one  other  than  the 
"  Self,  they  are  only  attributed  through  delusion  to 
"  dtman,  the  true  knower  of  Self  has  nothing  to  do  with 
"  them.  Injunction,  prohibition,  nay  the  idea  that 
"  something  deserves  giving  up,  some  other  thing 
"  deserves  being  taken  up,  and  all  the  rest  of  such 
"  imaginings  do  not,  oh  Janardana  !  belong  to  the 
"  knowers  of  dtman;  oh  lotus-eyed  one  I  1  know  the 
"  true  condition  of  the  dtmajndnin,  mortals  deluded  by 
"  mdya  cau  never  understand  it.  These  eyes  of  flesh 
"  can  never  see  this  condition  of  the  knowers  of  Brah- 
"man,  it  comes  of  itself  to  those,  oh  Kesava  !  who  know. 
"  The  ascetic  is  ever  awake  there  where  all  men  are 
"  fast  asleep,  and  he,  oh  Kesava  !  is  fast  asleep  there 
6 


42 

"  where  men  are  fall  awake.  He  is  said  to  be  the 
"  true  ativarndsramin  (one  beyond  varna — class — and 
"  dsrama — position  ),  the  best  of  teachers,  who  has 
"  realized  by  self-experience  what  he  is  taught  at  the 
*'  end  of  the  veda  in  regard  to  Self,  ever  without  a  second, 
"  unaffected,  unconditioned,  ever  pure,  beyond  illusion, 
*'  all  thought,  the  height  of  immortality." 

Thus,  then,  srutayak  such  as  "  the  liberated  is  liberated 
over  again"*  and  texts  from  the  smrtayah  speaking  of  the  'libe- 
rated in  this  life,*  the  'ascetic  firm  in  the  essence,'  the  *  devotee 
of  the  Lord/  the  'knower  beyond  the  gundh^  the  true  '  Brak- 
mana'  and  the  lativarndsramin,' — all  bear  out  the  truth  and 
possibility  of  what  is  called  *  liberation  in  this  life '  (Jivan- 
muktC). 

End  of  the  first  Chapter  on  « Liberation  in  this  life.' 


CHAPTER  II. 

ON  THE  DESTRUCTION  OF  LATENT  DESIRE. 

We  shall  now  address  ourselves  to  the  means  which  lead 
to  '  Liberation  in  this  Life.'  These  are  gnosis,  '  dissolution  of 
inind,'t  and  '  destruction  of  latent  desire.'  Hence,  in  the 

*  The  liberated  that  is  to  say  liberated  in  this  life,  is  liberated  over  again 
that  is  to  say  at  death.  In  this  text  are  hinted  both  J-ieanmukti  and  VicLeli»- 
mukti.  The  ward  Vidvhamukti  will,  however,  have  its  meaning  slightly  modi- 
fied in  the  next  Chapter. 

f  This  word  should  be  understood  hot  in  the  sense  of  that  which  is 
opposed  to  matter,  viz.,  spirit,  but  in  the  sense  of  the  intelligent  or  think- 
ing principle.  The  inner  sense- — antahlcarann — has  four  functions  (1) 
simple  thinking,  sensation;  (2)  localising  ideas  in  external  objects,  percep- 
tion; (3)  connecting  the  thinking  ego  with  all  thoughts  and  acts,  will;  (4)  the 
last  act  which  decides  the  will  one  way  or  other,  reason.  The  action  then 
passes  into  the  outer — physical — plane.  The  first  of  these  four  is  what  is 
meant  by  'mind'  in  the  present  instance.  It  may  conveniently  be  mentioned 
here  that  the  other  three  processes  are,  in  Sanskrit,  called  chitta,  a/w»w- 
kdra,  and  buddbi. 


43 

Vasishtha  say?,  while  dealing  with  *  The 
body  of  the  Jivanmukta'  at  the  end  of  the  Chapter  on 
Supreme  Pacification : — 

"  Oh  best  of  intellects  !  destruction  of  latent  desire,  gnosis 
"  and  dissolution  of  mind,  attended  to  simultaneously 
"  for  sufficient  length  of  time,  bear  the  desired  fruit." 

Having  thus  shown  the  concomitance  of  these  and  the 
result,  the  sage  points  out  also  the  concomitance  of  the 
absence  of  these  means  with  the  absence  of  the  result : — 

*'  Till  these  three  are  not  well  attended  to  with  sufficient  and 
"  repeated  trials,  the  Condition  can  never  be  realized, 
"  even  at  the  end  of  a  hundred  years." 

The  defect  in  not  carrying  out  these  three  processes  at  the 
same  time  is  thus  hinted  at : — 

*'  If,  even  for  a  long  time,  these  should  be  attended  to,  one 
"  after  another,  they  bear  no  fruit,  like  incantations 
"  invariably  joined  to  one  another." 

The  '  besprinkling  '  which  is  a  part  of  the  '  Twilight-adora- 
tion'-ceremony,  must  be  accompanied  with  repetition  of  the 
three  Rchdh  beginning  with  '  apo  hi  shthd?  etc.  If  one  of 
these  three  be  repeated,  day  after  day,  the  ceremony,  as  laid 
down  by  scripture,  will  not  have  been  accomplished  at  all. 
Again,  if  one  incantation  after  another  were  recited,  at  intervals, 
from  those  incantations  which  always  go  in  hexads,  no  result 
will  follow.  Or  lastly,  if  even  in  our  temporal  affairs,  vegetable, 
soup,  rice,  and  the  like  were  served  out  one  every  day,  a  dinner 
will  certainly  not  have  been  given.  The  simultaneous  study 
of  the  aforesaid  three  means  must  therefore  be  understood  after 
these  illustrations. 

The  object  of  long  study  is  thus  set  forth : — 

"  These  three  attended  to  for  a  long  time,  untie  the  knots 
"  which  bind  themselves  fast  about  the  heart,  leaving 


44 

"  no  trace  of  doubt  behind,  even  like  the  breaking  of 
"  the  threads  on  the  cutting  up  of  a  lotus-stock  into 
"  two." 

The  contrary  relation,  too,  is  thus  described : — 

"  The  experience  of  this  world  acquired  in  hundreds  of 
"  previous  incarnations,  is  never  dissolved  without  long 
"  study." 

Not  only  does  isolation  of  these  in  study  lead  to  no 
result,  but  it  prevents  even  the  proper  realization  of  the 
character  of  each  : — 

*'  Gnosis,  dissolution  of  mind,  and  destruction  of  latent 
"  desire,  being  causes  one  of  the  other,  are  difficult  to 
"  accomplish." 

Two  and  two  formed  out  of  these  three  give  three  pairs. 
The  reciprocal  causal  relation  between  the  pair  made  of  'des- 
truction of  latent  desire  '  and  '  dissolution  of  mind,'  is  thus 
get  forth,  by  way  of  the  concomitance  of  their  absence  ; — 

"  Latent  desire  is  not  destroyed  till  the  mind  is  not  dissolved, 
"  and  the  mind  is  never  at  rest  till  latent  desire  is  not 
«  killed  out." 

The  internal  sense  (antahkarana)  passing  out  into  various 
transformations,  each  as  continuous  as  the  jet  of  a  lamp,  is  call- 
ed  mind,  on  account  of  its  performing  mental  action.  The 
dissolution  of  this  mind  means  its  giving  up  all  connection  with 
these  transformations  and  remaining  in  a  state  of  supreme 
control.  Says  Patanjali  in  his  Yoga-Sutras :  "  The  being  held 
in  supreme  control  is  the  obtaining  of  the  moment  of  control  on 
the  mind,  when  impressions  impelling  it  to  transform  being 
neutralized,  other  impressions  holding  it  in  position  gain 
ascendency."  Impressions  propelling  to  transformation  being 
neutralized,  and  impressions  holding  the  mind  in  control  mani- 
fest themselves  ;  and  the  moment  of  control  gains  power  over 
the  mind.  This  is  all  that  is  meant  by  'dissolution  of  mind.' 
That  mental  impression  which  is  the  cause  of  transformations 


45 

of  the  mind  into  functions  such  as  anger  and  the  like,  all  of  a 
euddeu,  and  without  any  thought  of  past  or  future,  is  called 
vdsand  (latent  desire),  for,  it  is  something  that  saturates  thes 
mind  with  vdsand  ( lit-smell  or  fragrance  )  from  every  experi- 
ence it  receives.  The  destruction  of  this  latent  desire  means 
the  impossibility  of  the  rise  of  auger  and  the  like,  even  in  the 
presence  of  appropriate  causes,  on  good  vdsands  such  as 
contentment,  self-control,  and  the  like  being  firmly  fixed  in  the 
mind.  If  mind  is  not  dissolved  and  it  continues  to  function 
through  transformations,  some  accidental  external  cause 
may  excite  anger  and  the  like  ; — which  being  so,  there  can 
be  no  destruction  of  vdsand.  On  the  other  hand,  as  long  as 
vasand  is  not  destroyed,  transformation  of  mind  continues 
as  before  and  there  is  no  dissolution  of  mind. 

The  reciprocal  causual  relation  of  gnosis  and  dissolution  of 
mind  is  thus  set  forth  by  way  of  the  concomitance  of  their 
absence  : — 

"  Whence  could  there  be  rest  of  mind  till  there  is  no  gnosis ; 
"  and  gnosis  too  is  impossible  as  long  as  the  mind  is 
"  not  entirely  at  rest." 

Forms  and  tastes  and  all  that  makes  up  experience  is  a  world 
of  illusion,  it  has  no  reality  whatever  ;  all  is  self; — conviction 
such  as  this  is  real  gnosis.  This  gnosis  being  unaccomplished, 
objects  do  exist  as  the  substratum  of  form  and  taste  and  other 
properties,  and  nothing  can  prevent  the  mind  from  transform- 
ing itself  into  a  number  of  functions  in  relation  to  these 
objects,  even  like  the  flame  of  fire  which  cannot  be  stopped  as 
long  as  we  continue  to  feed  it  with  fuel.  Forms  and  the  like 
being  experienced  through  transformations  of  the  mind,  not 
prevented  on  account  of  its  not  being  yet  laid  at  rest,  gnosis 
cannot  dawn  upon  realisation  of  the  meaning  of  such  texts  as 
'  There  verily  is  here  no  distinction  whatever  ' ;  for,  the  import 
of  the  text  running  counter  to  experience,  even  like  the 
import  of  the  words  "  the  worshipper  is  a  clump  of  the  Ku'sa- 
grass  "  will  ever  suggest  that  doubt  which  prevents  conviction 
of  the  unity  of  everything  in  one  eternal  Brahman* 


46 

t 

The  reciprocal  causal  relation  of  'destrnction  of  latent  desire* 
and  gnosis  is  thus  set  forth  by  way  of  the  concomitance  of 
their  absence  : — 

"  Where  could  there  be  access  to  gnosis  as  long  as  latent 
"  desire  is  not  killed  out  ;  latent  desire  can  never  be 
"  destroyed  till  full  gnosis  is  not  realized." 

Gnosis  never  conies  about,  for  want  of  the  means  consist- 
ing of  self-control  and  the  like,  on  account  of  the  latent  power 
of  anger  and  the  rest  not  being  laid  entirely  at  rest.  Till 
unity  of  the  All  is  not  fully  realized  that  false  knowledge 
which  invests  the  causes  of  anger  and  its  brood  with  a  semb- 
lance of  reality  are  not  done  away  with,  and  latent  desire  is 
not  killed  out. 

I  proceed,  now,  to  show  the  reciprocal  causal  relation  of 
the  said  three  pairs  by  way  of  their  constant  concomitance. 
The  mind  being  dissolved,  and  there  being  no  consciousness  of 
any  external  cause  which  can  develop  mental  impression 
into  full  presentation,  latent  desire  fades  away  of  itself;, 
latent  desire  having  died  out,  there  remains  no  cause  for  that 
functioning  of  the  mind  which  we  call  anger  and  the  like,, 
and  the  mind  is  at  once  dissolved.  This  is  the  pair  of 
'  dissolution  of  mind '  and  '  destruction  of  latent  desire.'  It 
is  inferible  from  the  S'ruti :  "  It  is  seen  with  the 
pointed  intellect*,"  that  as  that  mind  alone  which  has 
all  its  functioning  attuned  solely  to  the  oneness  of  Self, 
can  see,  the  destruction  of  all  other  functions  is  plainly 
the  only  cause  of  proper  gnosis.  Gnosis  having  arisen,, 
the  whole  world  of  experience  reduces  itself  to  naught, 
and  the  mind  ceases  from  thinking  of  it  as  from  thinking 
of  the  '  horns  of  a  man'  and  similar  impossibilities  ;  and  more- 
over thinking  in  any  form  is  no  more  of  use  after  dtman 
has  been  fully  seen  ;  the  mind,  thus,  dies  out  like  fire  not 
fed  with  fuel.  This  is  the  pair  of  gnosis  and  '  dissolution  of 

*  From  the  Kathopaniskad  :  "  This  is  tke  concealed  Self  of  every  being, 
never  mainfest ;  It  is  seen  with  the  pointed  intellect  by  those  who  are 
accustomed  to  minute  observation," 


47 

mind.'   The  author  of  the  Vdrtika   shows  the    part   of  gnosis 
in  the  destruction  of  vdsandk  such  as  of  auger  and  the  like  : — 

"  That  man  of  discrimination  who  sees  even  oneness  of 
"  Self  in  friends  and  foes  as  well  as  in  his  own  Self, 
"  can  find  no  cause  of  being  angry  with  any  one,  as  he 
"  certainly  finds  no  cause  of  being  angry  with  the 
"  parts  of  his  body." 

Self-control  and  the  like  consisting  in  destruction  of  the 
latent  sense  of  anger  and  the  like  are  well  known  as 
the  proper  means  of  gnosis.  Says  Vasishtha  also  : — 

"  Virtues  such  as  self-control  and  the  like  derive  nourish- 
"  ment  from  gnosis,  and  gnosis  ripens  into  full  de- 
"  velopment  through  these  virtues  ; — these  conduce  to 
**  the  well-being  of  each  other  like  the  lotus  and 
"  the  pond  wherein  it  grows." 

This  is  the  pair  of  gnosis  and  '  destruction  of  latent  desire.* 

The  means  for  accomplishing  all  these  three  beginning 
with  gnosis  are  thus  described  : — 

"  Therefore,  oh  Raghava  !  with  free  personal  effort  accom- 
"  panied  by  right  discrimination,  avoid  at  a  distance 
*'  all  desire  for  enjoyment,  and  well  betake  thyself 
"  to  these  three." 

'  Personal  effort '  consists  of  that  energetic  resolve  which 
sets  about  anyhow  accomplishing  a  thing  without  fail. 
'  Discrimination'  means  proper  discernment  and  conviction 
after  due  analysis  and  observation.  S'ravana  and  the  rest* 
are  means  to  gnosis;  Yoga  is  the  means  to  dissolution  of  mind  ; 
and  setting  up  an  opposite  current  (of  vdsana)  the  means  to 
destruction  of  vdsana.  Avoid  desire  for  enjoyment  'at  a 
distance]  because  the  smallest  desire  being  admitted,  there 
will  be  nothing  to  prevent  it  from  going  to  any  excess,  even 

*  Study,  contemplation,  and  assimilation:  S'ravaiM,  3Ta/uina,  and  Nidid* 
liyasana. 


48 

like   "  fire  continually  increasing  on  being  constantly    fed 
with  fuel." 

A  doubt  occurs  at  this  point.  It  has  before  been  shown 
that  gnosis  follows  renunciation-of-the-seeker  and  that 
Jivanmukti  follows  renunciation-of-the-accomplished.  It  would 
appear  from  this  that  one  having  acquired  gnosis  should  go 
into  rennnciation-of-the-accomplished,  and  should,  while  living 
in  that  condition,  try  to  break  the  bonds  which  hold  him,  viz., 
latent  desire  and  the  functioning  of  mind.  At  the  point  we 
have  reached,  you  ask  us  to  carry  on  gnosis,  destruction  of 
latent  desire,  and  dissolution  of  mind,  all  there,  at  the  same 
time.  Does  this  not  contradict  what  has  been  said  be- 
fore ?  It  does  not  ;  for,  by  taking  one  as  principal  and  the 
rest  as  subordinate,  we  can  easily  reconcile  the  two  statements. 
To  the  seeker,  gnosis  is  principal,  and  dissolution  of  mind  and 
destruction  of  latent  desire  are  subordinate.  The  reverse  is 
true  of  the  accomplished.  Whence  it  would  appear  that 
simultaneous  attention  to  these  three  does  not,  either  way, 
contradict  what  goes  before.  Nor  should  it  be  suspected 
that  subsequent  study  is  of  little  use  to  him  who  has  accom- 
plished everything  in  accomplishing  gnosis  ;  for,  the  useful- 
ness of  this  '  subsequent  study '  will  be  found  in  the  object 
of  Jivanmukti,  to  be  touched  upon.  If,  however,  it  be  asked 
what  may  become  '  subsequent  study '  to  the  accomplished 
who  has  no  use  of  the  means  of  gnosis  such  as  S'ravana  and 
the  rest,  and  who  has  nothing  to  do  for  gnosis  which  once 
accomplished  cannot  be  taken  on  or  given  away  at  plea- 
sure ; — we  reply  :  frequent  remembrance  of  the  Essence, 
through  any  means  whatever,  is  all  that  should  make  up 
this  '  subsequent  study '  in  his  case.  Such  study  has  been 
pointed  out  in  the  episode  about  Lila.* 

"  Think  of  That,  speak  of  That,  enlighten  each  other  in 
"  That  ; — this  indeed  is  being  ever  in  the  One  ;  the 
"  wise  call  this  the  study  of  gnosis.  The  objective 
"  was  never  in  existence  from  the  beginning,  the  whole 

*  In  the  Yogavasishtha. 


49J 

"  world  of  experience,  made  up  of  subject  and  object, 
"  is  for  ever  all  naught  ; — this  is  the  best  form  of 
"study." 

Application  to  dissolution  of  mind  and  destruction  of  latent 
desire  is  also  set  forth  in  the  same  place  : — 

"  They  are  the  students  proper  who  try,  through  books  and 
"  skilful  devices,  to  realize  the  absolute  non-existence 
"  of  subject  and  object." 

The  knowledge  that  the  distinction  of  subject  and  object 
is  all  futile,  is  knowledge  of  their  non-existence  ;  and  the 
absence  even  of  their  experience,  is  the  realization  of  their 
*  absolute  non-existence.'  '  Skilful  devices '  refer  to  Yoga.  This, 
therefore,  implies  application  to  dissolution  of  mind. 

"  Love  and  hate  having  been  reduced  to  the  most  trans- 
"  parent  thinness  ,  through  realization  of  the  non- 
"  existence  of  the  objective,  there  arises  a  kind  of 
"  novel  sense  of  pleasure  ; — this  is  called  study  of 
•*  Brakman." 

This  is  application  to  destruction  of  latent  desire. 

If  it  be  doubted  which  of  these  three,  thus  set  forth  as 
equal  one  to  the  other,  is  principal  and  which  subordinate  ? 
we  say  there  need  be  no  such  doubt  whatever  ;  for,  the  divi- 
sion is  easy  to  make  according  to  the  object  one  has  in  view. 
To  one  desirous  of  liberation,  the  two  objects  are  Jivanmukti 
and  Videkamukti ;  and  it  is  said  also  in  the  S'ruti  with  the 
same  in  view:  ' the  liberated  is  liberated  over  again,'  Life 
of  the  Higher  Self  (ctaiviprakrti)  leads  the  living  man  to  libera- 
tion ;  Life  of  the  Lower  Self  (asuriprakrtf),  to  bondage.  This 
has  been  mentioned  by  the  Lord  in  the  sixteenth  chapter  (of 
the  Bhagavadgita)  :— 

"  Life  of  the  Higher  Self  leads  to  mohskct, ;  life  of  the  Lower 

"  Self  puts  into  bondage." 
7 


50 

These  two  '•lives''  are  also  thus  described  in  the  same 
place : — 

"  Fearlessness,  pnrity  of  heart,  constant  application  to 
"  ffnosis,  charity,  self-control,  sacrifice,  observance  of 
"  the  duties  of  his  order,  proper  austerity,  straight- 
"  forwardness,  universal  love,  truthfulness,  freedom 
"from  anger,  renunciation,  internal  peace,  freedom 
"  from  jealousy,  compassion  for  all  beings,  indifference  to 
"  objects  of  sense,  softness  of  heart,  modesty,  serenity, 
"  brightness  (  of  intellect  ),  forbearance,  fortitude, 
"  purity,  kindness  to  all,  absence  of  self-pride ; 
"  — these  oh  Bharata  !  are  seen  in  those  who  are 
"born  to  Life  of  the  Higher  Self.  Vain  glorious- 
"  ness,  impudence,  self-conceit,  anger,  harshness,  and 
"  ignorance  are  seen,  oh  child  of  Prtha  !  in  those 
"  who  are  born  to  Life  of  the  Lower  Self." 

And  this  '  Life  of  the  Lower  Self  is  described  in  the  same 
strain  to  the  end  of  the  chapter.  The  point  is  that  evil 
vdsandh  born  of  Life  of  the  Lower  Self  inherent  in  one  from 
birth,  and  running  counter  to  the  teachings  of  sacred  texts, 
may  be  put  out  by  good  vasanah  brought  about  from  Life  of 
the  Higher  Self,  accomplished  by  personal  effort,  and  carried 
on  in  accord  with  the  word  of  scripture.  This  being  done, 
Jivanmukti  is  easily  accomplished. 

Dissolution  of  mind  too  is  mentioned  as  a  cause  of  Jivan- 
mukti,  like  the  destruction  of  latent  desire  : — 

"  Mind  alone  is  to  man  the  cause  of  bondage  or  libera- 
"  tion  ;  lost  in  enjoyment  it  leads  to  bondage,  emptied 
"  of  the  objective  it  leads  to  liberation.  As  mind 
"  emptied  of  the  objective  leads  to  liberation,  one 
"desirous  of  liberation  must  always  try  to  wipe  off  the 
"objective  from  the  plane  of  his  mind.  The  mind 
"  severed  from  all  connection  with  sensual  objects,  and 
"prevented  from  functioning  out,  awakes  into  the 


**  light  of  the  heart,  and  finds  the  highest  condition. 
*'  The  mind  should  be  prevented  from  functioning,  till 
"  it  dissolves  itself  in  the  heart ;  this  is  gnosis,  this 
"  is  Concentration,  the  rest  is  all  mere  concoction  of 

"  untruth." 

• 

Bondage  is  of  two  kinds :  fast  and  loose.  Life  of  the  Lower 
Self  being  direct  cause  of  misery  makes  up  the  former  kind  of 
bondage.  The  mere  sense  of  duality  being  in  itself  entirely 
harmless  is  the  other  kind  of  bondage,  inasmuch  as  it  leads.only 
to  Life  of  the  Lower  Self.  Destruction  of  latent  desire  destroys 
the  former,  dissolution  of  mind  dissolves  both.  It  should,  how- 
ever, not  be  supposed  that  dissolution  of  mind  alone  will  do, 
and  that  destruction  of  latent  desire  is  a  mere  superfluity;  for, 
the  mind  being  called  again  into  being,  by  the  force  of  Neces- 
sity about  to  apportion  out  some  fruition  or  other,  destruction 
of  latent  desire  would  stand  in  good  stead  as  preventing  the 
faster  kind  of  bondage  from  being  generated  in  the  process. 
And  fruition  such  as  this  may  fulfil  itself  even  with  the  other 
kind  of  loose  bondage  also.  Transformation  of  the  mind 
related  to  the  property  of  grossness  constitutes  'fast 
bondage';  transformation  of  the  mind  under  the  sway  of 
energy  and  placidity  makes  '  loose  bondage.'  This  has  been 
explained  when  it  is  said  : — 

"  Undisturbed    under     misery,    in    happiness    unswayed 
by  desire." 

Even  thus,  it  should  not  be  supposed  that  the  loose 
kind  of  bondage  being  unobjectionable,  and  that  the 
other  kind  of  bondage  being  destroyed  with  the  des- 
truction of  latent  desire,  dissolution  of  mind  need  not  be 
insisted  upon;  for  it  is  necessary  for  warding  off  the  effect  of 
guch  fruition  as  may  necessarily  be  brought  about  by  feeble 
Necessity,  as  it  is  called.  And  it  has  been  said,  with  the 
possibility  of  warding  off  the  results  of  feeble  Necessity  in 
mind,  as  follows: — 

"If  things   happening  through  unavoidable  necessity  were 


52 

"  at  all  possible  to  prevent,  Nala,  Rama  and  Yndhish- 
"  thira,  would  never  have  been  dragged  into  misery." 

Thus  *  destruction  of  latent  desire,'  and  *  dissolution  of 
mind,'  being  direct  means  of  'liberation  in  this  life,'  are 
the  principal  ;  whereas  gnosia  is  subordinate,  being  only  a 
mediate  cause  through  the  first  two  which  it  produces.  The 
S'ruti  frequently  mentions  gnosia  as  the  cause  of  Vdaanctkahaya 
(destruction  of  latent  desire)  :— 

*'  Knowledge  of  the  Divine  dissolves  all  bonds,  and  gives 
**  freedom  from  every  kind  of  misery,  including  birth 
"and  death.  The  wise  realizing  the  effulgent  one, 
"  through  the  Yoga  of  Atman,  gain  freedom  from  all 
"joy  and  all  sorrow."  Also  "The  knower  of  Atman 
"rises  above  misery;"  "  What  delusion,  what  sorrow  can 
"  come  to  him  who  realizes  oneness  ;"  "  He  is  freed  from 
"  all  bonds  whatever  on  knowing  the  effulgent," 

That  gnosia  conduces  to  '  dissolution  of  mind  '  is  also  seen 
from  the  S'ruti,  It  is  said  with  the  condition  of  the  informed 
in  view  ;  "  Where  all  is  one  self  to  him,  who  can  see  what  with 
what  ?  who  can  smell  what  with  what  ?"  S'ri  Gauda- 
charya,  too,  says  ;— 

"  When  from  proper  realization  of  the  truth  of  Atman,  he 
"  ceases  from  all  imagining,  he  reaches  the  condition 
"  wherein  there  is  no  mind,  for,  it  then  dies  out  for 
"  want  of  having  anything  to  relate  itself  to." 

As  *  destruction  of  latent  desire  '  and  *  dissolution  of  mind/ 
are  the  principal  causes  of  Jivanmukti;gnosis,  being  the  direct, 
is  also  the  principal  cause  of  Videhamukti  (liberation  after 
death).  Says  the  Smrti : — 

"Gnosia  alone- conduces  to  Kaivalya  which  leads  to  libe- 
ration." 

Kaivalya  is  the  condition  of  Self,  alone-ness,  so  to  speak,  being 
without  the  appendage  of  body  and  the  like.  This  Kaivalya 
is  attainable  by  gnosis  alone ;  for,  the  condition  of  materia- 


53 

lity  in  the  form  of  body,  etc.,  comes  of  ignorance,  and  is  capable 
of  being  dissolved  only  through  knowledge.  The  words  atom 
and  only  added  to  qualify  gnosis  and  knowledge,  are  meant  to 
exclude  formal  religion  {Karma),  for,  the  S'ruti  also  has  it: 
"  neither  by  Karma  nor  by  progeny."  He  wliOj  without  pro- 
perly studying  the  philosophy  of  gnosis,  brings  about  '  dis- 
solution of  mind  '  and  *  destruction  of  latent  desire' through 
some  means  or  other,  and  devotes  himself  to  Brahman  with 
character,  never  realizes  Kaivalya,  for,  his  subtile  body  is  not 
destroyed.  Thus  alone  and  only  exclude  this  devotion  also. 
The  words  '  which  leads  to  liberation '  mean  that  Kaivalya 
being  brought  about  by  gnosis,  frees  the  individual  from  all 
bonds  and  conditions  whatever.  Such  bonds  are  of  various 
kinds.  The  knot  of  Avidya,  the  conviction  *  I  am  not  Brahman* 
the  tie  which  binds  egoism  to  the  heart,  doubt.  Karma,  desire 
for  things,  death,  re-birth,  these  and  many  others  are  all 
the  different  forms  of  this  bond.  Bondage  comes  of  ignorance, 
and  can  be  dessolved  by  gnosis.  Say  the  S'rutayah :  "  oh 
good  one  !  he  cuts  asunder  the  knot  of  Avidya,  who  finds  It 
ever  present  in  the  cavity  (of  the  heart)"  ;  "  He  becomes  Brah- 
man who  knows  Brahman" ;  "  A  sight  of  that  which  trans- 
cends all  having  been  obtained  the  tie  which  binds  the 
heart  to  egoism  is  at  once  dissolved,  all  doubts  disappear,  all 
Karma  vanish  into  nothing" ;  "  He  knows  It  fixed  in  the 
cavity  (of  the  heart)  in  the  highest  Akdsa" ;  "He  enjoys  all 
desires  (with  the  all-seeing  Brahman)"',  "  Knowing  him  thus 
he  transcends  death;"  "He  finds  that  condition  whence  there  is 
no  return  who  full  of  gnosis  is  without  mind  and  ever  pure"; 
M  Who  knows  '  I  am  Brahman?  becomes  the  All."  These  and 
many  other  texts  bearing  on  all-knowingness,  etc.,  may  here  be 
cited.  This  condition  of  liberation-after-death  comes  about  in 
the  moment  in  which  gnosis  appears ;  for,  these  and  similar 
bonds  falsely  imagined  in  Brahman  being  destroyed  by  gnosis, 
can  never  again  come  into  being  nor  be  ever  again  experienced 
as  such.  This  simultaneity  of 'gnosis  and  liberation  is  mentioned 
by  the  Bhdshyakara  under  the  aphorism  "  On  its  attainment 
past  and  future  sins  are  kept  off  and  destroyed,  it  being  so  ex- 


54 

plained.*"  Several  put  it  that  Videhamukti  comes  after  the 
dissolution  of  this  body  ;  the  Sruti  also  says:  "  He  delays  only 
as  long  as  he  is  not  free,  for,  on  being  free  he  is  one  with  the 
All."  In  the  Vakyavrtti,  too,  it  is  said  : — 

"  When  through  the  force  of  previous  Karma  one  attains 
"  the  condition  of  the  Jivanmukta,  he  continues  for  a 
"  time  to  enjoy  out  the  remainder  of  that  Karma  which 
"  has  been  the  cause  of  his  present  embodiment.  This 
"  being  done  he  finds  that  supreme  condition  of  the 
"all-pervading,  called  Kaivalya,  full  of  that  bliss 
"  which  knows  no  degree,  and  whence  there  is  no  return 
"  at  any  time." 

Even  the  author  of  the  Vedanta-Sutra  says :  "  He  be- 
comes It  having  spent  these  two  up  through  fruition," 
meaning  by  '  these  two '  the  good  or  evil  attending  the  fulfil- 
ment of  previous  Karma.  So  also  Vasishtha  : — 

"  Leaving  the  condition  of  the  Jivanmukta,  he  enters,  like 
"  the  wind  coming  to  a  standstill,  the  condition  of 
"  disembodied  liberation,  on  his  body  being  dissolved 
"  by  death." 

This,  however,  does  not  matter ;  for,  both  opinions  are  possible, 
without  one  contradicting  the  other,  in  accord  with  the  stand- 
point taken  by  the  speaker.  The  word  deha  (body)  in  the  word 
Videhamukti  being  referred  by  many  to  all  kinds  of  bodies,  they 
have  described  Videhamukti  in  their  own  fashion.  We  have 
been  using  the  word  only  in  the  limited  sense  of  'future  body,' 
(i.  e.  embodiment  after  the  decease  of  the  present  body),  and 
we  think  gnosis  is  acquired  to  the  end  of  preventing  this  future 
embodiment.  This  present  body  has  been  formed  from  before,  and 
even  gnosis  cannot  undo  it  ;  nor  is  the  dissolution  of  this  body 
a  result  of  gnosis,  for,  even  the  ignorant  find  that  dissolution 
when  the  causes  forming  the  present  body  have  all  work- 
ed themselves  out.  If  it  be  suggested  let  dissolution  of  the 
present  subtile  body  be  the  result  of  gnosis,  for,  nothing  but 

*  Yedanta-Sutras,  IV.  I.  13. 


55 

gnosis  can  dissolve  it,  we  do  not  admit  the  suggestion, 
because  that  hody  too  continues  to  survive  gnosis,  as  witness  in 
the  Jivanmukta. 

One  might  here  say  gnosis  stands  powerless,  for  a  time, 
being,  as  it  were,  neutralized  by  the  force  of  previous  Karma, 
but  it  does  accomplish  dissolution  of  the  subtile  body  on  the 
neutralizing  force  being  removed.  We  do  not  admit  even 
this,  for,  the  author  of  the  Panchapadika  has  plainly  said  : 
"gnosis  dispels  ignorance  only."  If  it  be  asked  what  can  be 
the  means  of  dissolving  the  subtile  body,  we  say  the 
destruction  of  the  conditions  which  make  up  that  body.  An 
effect  is  destroyed  in  one  of  two  ways  :  by  the  presence  of  its 
opposite,  or  by  destroying  the  conditions  of  its  being.  The 
lamp  is  put  out  by  its  opposite  viz.,  the  strong  blast  of  wind, 
or  by  removing  the  conditions  of  the  lamp,  viz.,  the  wick,  oil, 
etc.  We  do  not  see  any  direct  opposite  of  the  subtile  body. 
As  to  its  conditions  they  are  of  two  kinds  :  active  and  in- 
active. In  the  case  of  the  ignorant,  both  these  conditions 
conduce  to  the  existence  of  the  subtile  body  in  this  world  and 
the  next.  In  the  case  of  the  informed,  inactive  conditions 
are  destroyed  by  gnosis,  active  conditions  are  destroyed  by 
living  them  out ;  and  their  subtile  body  comes  to  be 
destroyed  like  the  lamp  put  out  on  the  removal  of  the  wick, 
oil,  etc.  Hence  it  is  plain  dissolution  of  this  body  is  not 
the  result  of  gnosis. 

If  it  be  said,  prevention  of  future  embodiment  also  may, 
on  this  showing,  be  set  down  to  gnosis,  we  ask  whether 
gnosis  has  prevention  of  embodiment  for  result,  or  the  mere 
preparation  of  the  conditions  of  such  prevention  ?  The  first  is 
not  possible,  for,  future  embodiment  being  as  yet  under  the 
category  of  antecedent  non-existence  stands  prevented  from 
the  very  beginning  of  time  ;  nor  is  the  second  alternative 
worth  considering,  for,  we  can  easily  keep  up  the  antecedant 
non-existence  of  future  embodiment  simply  by  destroying  the 
inactive  conditions  of  such  embodiment.  If  it  be  suggested 
total  doing  away  with  future  embodiment  cannot  be  the  result 


56 

of  gnosis,  for,  gnosis  destroys  ignorance  alone,  we  say  no,  for, 
prevention  of  future  embodiment,  etc.,  have  been  mentioned  as 
results  of  gnosis  by  competent  authorities.  The  S'rutayah 
beginning  "with  "  whence  there  is  no  return  "  quoted  before, 
bear  testimony  of  this.  Nor  should  it  be  supposed  that  this 
result  of  gnosis  is  in  any  way  opposed  to  the  destruction  of 
ignorance  already  mentioned  as  result ;  for,  the  author  of  the 
Panchapadika  takes  the  word  '  ignorance  'in  the  sense  of 
*  all  that  exists  away  from  Brahman"  by  a  kind  of  constant 
concomitant  relation  with  ignorance.  If  this  sense  were  not 
read  into  the  word,  the  text  will  evidently  contradict  expe- 
rience ;  for,  in  actual  experience  we  find  that  *  all  that  exists 
away  from  Brahman '  is  dissolved  with  the  ignorance  which 
gnosis  destroys. 

Thus,  therefore,  Videhamukti  in  the  sense  of  preclusion  of 
future  embodiment  is  simultaneous  with  the  rise  of  gnosis. 
Yajnavalkya  is  heard  to  say* :  "  Oh  Janaka!  thou  hast  reach- 
ed the  condition  of  supreme  fearlessness,"  and  also  "  This 
verily  is  real  immortality.  Another  S'ruti  also  says  :  "  Who 
knows  thus  becomes  immortal  even  heref."  If  Videhamukti, 
the  result  of  gnosis,  should  not  immediately  follow  upon  the 
rise  of  gnosis,  but  should  come  about  after  some  time,  it 
will  be  necessary  to  imagine  something  ultm-gnosis,  in  the 
middle,  to  accomplish  Videhamukti  in  course  of  time,  just  as  it 
is  usual  to  imagine  something  ultra-mundane  between  heaven 
and  the  sacrifice  which  is  prescribed  as  the  means  leading 
to  heaven.  It  being  so,  the  whole  of  the  philosophy  of  gnosis 
(Jndna-Sastra)  will  refuse  to  stand  without  the  province  of 

*  In  the  Brhaddranyalcopanishad. 

•f  It  will  be  observed,  at  the  conclusion  of  this  argument,  that  the 
author  has  altered  the  sense  of  the  word  Videhanwlcti  from  '  liberation* 
o/ier-death'  to  *  liberation-/ro»u-f  uture-embodiment.'  I  have  rendered  the 
word  with  the  first  expression  up  to  this,  purposely  with  the  view  of 
bringing  out  this  peculiar  second  rendering  which  the  author  puts  upon 
the  word.  It  will  be  agreeable  to  the  author's  gist  of  argument  if  hence- 
forth we  use  the  word  as  it  is,  without  giving  any  equivalent  rendering. 
The  reader  may  be  left  to  gather  the  sense  from  the  context. 


57 

formal  religion  (Karma-S1  astro).  If  you  suggest  a  way  out 
of  this  difficulty  by  saying  that  gnosis  being,  as  it  were,  neu- 
tralised by  previous  Karma,  even  like  fire  rendered  powerless 
through  some  incantation,  will  bear  fruit  in  time  (i.  e.  on  the 
removal  of  the  neutralizing  cause),  the  argument  is  only 
pointless,  for,  we  do  not  grant  the  opposition  between  gnosis 
and  previous  Karma  on  which  you  base  the  reasoning.  The 
Videhamukti  we  speak  of,  precludes  all  possibility  of  future 
embodiment,  and  has  nothing  to  do  with  that  previous  Karma 
which  rules  only  the  present  embodiment  of  the  man.  There 
being  no  relation  between  the  two,  previous  Karma  cannot  neu- 
tralize gnosis.  Moreover,  you  will  thus  make  gnosis  only  a 
momentary  condition ;  and  such  gnosis  not  being  present 
at  the  time  to  which  you  would  postpone  Videhamukti, 
how  would  this  mukti  take  place  at  all?  If  you  say 
gnosis  will  produce  another  gnosis  of  the  form  of  '  final  reali- 
zation,' we  deny  the  supposition,  there  being  no  means  to  pro- 
duce this  other  gnosis.  What  would  you  point  to  as  the 
means  of  wiping  away  the  whole  of  the  phenomenal  world 
consisting  of  teachers,  books,  bodies,  senses,  and  the  like, 
along  with  the  suspension  of  the  neutralising  power  of  previ- 
ous Karma  ?  If  thus  pressed  you  ask  what  can  be  the  mean- 
ing of  such  texts  as  "  And  in  the  end  comes  the  dissolu- 
tion of  the  illusion — this  world"?  we  reply  the  whole  of  the 
effects  consisting  of  body,  senses,  and  the  like,  is  destroyed 
on  the  cause — previous  Karma — having  exhausted  itself  out 
This  is  the  only  meaning  of  the  text  under  reference.  If,  not- 
withstanding all  we  can  say,  you  still  have  liking  for  your 
idea  of  Videhamukti  of  the  form  of  '  liberation-after-death  (of 
the  present  body)'  you  are  welcome  to  have  it  after  dissolu- 
tion of  the  present  body;  but  you  would  allow  us  our  idea  of 
Videhamukti  as  liberation  (from  future  embodiment)  simul- 
taneous with  the  rise  of  gnosis.  The  Lord  S'esha,  too,  says 
with  this  very  idea  in  mind  : — 

"  Whether  in  some  holy  place  or  in  the  house  of  a  Chdndala, 
"  whether  conscious  or  unconscious,  he,  with  all  cause 
"  of  sorrow   entirely    destroyed,   and   liberated   in  the 
8 


58 


"  very  moment  of  the  rise  of  gnosis,  finds  Kaiwdya  ort 
"  giving  up  the  body." 

Thus  gnosis  is,  no  doubt,  the  true  principal  means  of  Videha- 
mukti; '  destruction  of  latent  desire'  and  'dissolution  of  mind* 
are  only  subordinate  means  (of  Videhamukti)  being  mediated 
by  gnosis.  S'ruti  and  Smrti  alike  bear  testimony  to  this. 
Life  of  the  higher  Self  is  spoken  of  as  producing  gnosis 
through  destruction  of  the  impressions  of  Life  of  the  Lower 
Self.  Says  the  S'ruti :  "The  self-restrained,  self-controlled,  in- 
different, and  forbearing  one  should  acquire  pacification,  and 
find  Self  in  himself."  The  Smrti  (Bhagavadgita)  also  says  : — 

"  Simplicity  of  disposition,  plainness  of  conduct,  universal 
"  compassion,  forbearance,  straightforwardness,  devo- 
'•  tion  to  the  teacher,  parity,  steadiness,  self-control, 
"  non-attachment  to  objects  of  sense,  absence  of 
"  egoism,  having  the  eye  constantly  on  the  misery  and 
"  evil  concomitant  with  birth,  death,  age,  and  decay,  no 
"  clinging  to  wife,  child  or  property,  nor  any  painful 
"  attachment  to  them,  constant  evenness  of  mind  under 
"  agreeable  as  well  as  disagreeable  circumstances,  one 
"  sole  devotion  to  Me  in  complete  identification  with 
"  myself,  love  of  solitude,  no  liking  for  the  company 
"  of  men,  unswerving  conviction  of  the  absolute  truth 
"  of  self-knowledge,  looking  at  things  through  gnosis  ; 
"  — this  is  all  that  it  meant  by  gnosis,  the  rest  is  all 
"  ignorance." 

By  painful  "attachment"  is  meant  the  identification  of  one's 
ego  with  the  ego  of  another.  The  word  "gnosis"  at  the 
end,  means,  by  a  kind  of  metaphor*,  '  the  means  of  gnosis.'' 
That  "dissolution  of  mind'  also,  conduces  to  §nosis  is  mentioned 
alike  by  S'ruti  and  Smrti.  The  S'ruti  says  :  "  The  contem- 
plator  then  sees  Him  the  characterless  ;"  "  The  wise  one  rises 
above  joy  and  sorrow  finding  the  (Self-)effulgent  Lord  through 
the  Yoga  of  self-knowledge."  The  latter  text  implies  that  he 

*  The  word  used  in  Sanskrit  is  Jndna  and  it  is  derived  by  the  author 
grammatically,  as  that  which  leads  to  gnosis  (Jndyate  anena)." 


59 

realizes  the  effulgent  one,  through  that   Yoga,  which  consists 
of  meditation  on  the  subjective  self.     The  Smrti  also  says  : — 
."  Bow  to  that  self,  all  gnosis,  the  light  which  is   fully  seen 
"  by  those  ascetics  who,  all  awake,  with  the  breath  held 
"  under  full  sway,  all  control,  and  exercising  supreme 
"  check  over  the  senses,  devote  themselves  to  It  through 
"  Yoga." 

Thus  is  established  the  principal  and  subordinate  relation, 
one  to  the  other,  of  the  three  beginning  with  gnosis,  from 
the  stand-point  of  Jivanmukti  and  Videhamukti. 

It  may,  at  this  stage,  be  asked  whether,  if  these  three 
are  already  accomplished  in  the  condition  of  renmiciation-of- 
the-seeker,  they  continue  as  automatic  result  of  previous 
habit  in  the  condition  of  renunciation-of-the-accomplished,  or 
whether  any  fresh  effort  is  necessary,  even  in  this  second  con- 
dition, to  accompalish  these  three  over  again  ?  The  first  alter- 
native is  not  possible,  for,  the  other  two  being  accomplished 
like  gnosis  without  any  effort,  there  would  remain  no  room 
for  any  effort  coming  up  from  liking  generated  by  look- 
ing upon  (any  of  these  three)  as  principal.  The  second  alter- 
native also  will  not  do.  Gnosis  too  will  depend  upon  effort 
like  the  other  two  ;  the  indifference  resulting  from  knowledge 
of  its  subordination  will  be  impossible.  This  need  be  no 
difficulty,  for,  we  do  admit  the  mere  automatic  survival  of 
gnosis  and  the  necessity  of  effort  to  encompass  the  other  two. 
To  explain.  The  student  fit  to  receive  the  last  word  of  gnosis 
is  of  two  kinds:  he  who  has  passed  through  the  course  of  devotion, 
and  he  who  has  not  yet  finished  it.  If  he  enters  upon  gnosis 
having  gone  through  devotion  to  the  extent  of  actually  rea- 
lising the  object  of  devotion,  destruction  of  vdsana  and  dis- 
solution of  mind  being  fully  accomplished,  renunciation-of-the- 
accomplished  as  well&sjivanmukti  will  immediately  follow  upon 
gnosis.  Such  student  is  the  real  student  spoken  of  in  the 
S'dstra  ;  for,  the  Sdstra  lays  it  down  that  (liberation  and 
gnosis}  are  simultaneous  in  the  case  of  such  a  one. 

Renunciation -of -the -accomplished  and  Renunciation- of  - 
the-seeker  though  sufficiently  distinct  each  from  the  other, 


60 


appear  as  if  they  were  mixed  up  in  chacracter.  Men  in  the 
present  times  are  found  generally  to  turn  to  gnosis  out  of 
mere  curiosity,  without  having  passed  through  the  prelimi- 
nary stage  of  devotion,  Updsand.  Still  they  do  get  themselves 
rid  of  vdsana  and  manas  immediately  (on  the  rise  of  gnosis.) 
This  being  done,  study,  contemplation,  and  assimilation  (of  the 
Vedanta)  are  also  fully  accomplished  ;  and  these  three  demo- 
lish ignorance,  doubt,  false  perception,  and  lead  to  real 
gnosis.  Gnosis  once  realized  never  fades  or  totters,  inasmuch 
as  there  is  nothing  which  can  destroy  it,  and  as  there  is  no 
cause  whatever  which  can  resuscitate  ignorance  from  the  void 
it  has  been  reduced  to.  Destruction  of  latent  desire  and  disso- 
lution of  mind  come  about  easily  of  themselves  in  consequence 
of  there  being  no  experience  which  can  keep  up  mind  and 
vdsa?id,  and  also  in  consequence  of  these  two  being  put  out, 
even  like  the  lamp  exposed  to  the  breeze,  by  previous  Karma 
apportioning  out  its  proper  fruition  from  time  to  time.  Says 
Vasishtha  : — 

"  Effort  in  this  direction  is  more  difficult  than  that  men- 
"  tioned  before,  for,  destruction  of  latent  desire  is  very 
"  hard  to  accomplish,     harder    than    uprooting    the 
"  mountain  Meru  from  his  base." 
Arjuna,  too,  observes: — 

"  Oh  Krshna  !  restless  and  overpowering,  this  mind  is  over- 
"  whelmingly  strong  ;  I  think  we  might  as  easily  gain 
"  control  over  the  wind  as  over  this." 

Thus,  therefore,  the  accomplished  of  the  present  day  have 
gnosis  as  automatic  survival ;  but  it  remains  to  bring  about  de- 
struction of  latent  desire  and  dissolution  of  mind  by  personal 
effort. 

If  it  be  asked  what  is  meant  by  this  'latent  desire'  (vasana), 
destruction  of  which  is  so  often  prescribed  as  the  object  of 
personal  effort,  we  proceed  to  describe  its  nature.  Says 
Vasishtha  : — 

"  Latent  desire  may  be  described  as  that  indiscriminate 
"  hankering  after  things  which  is  forgetful  of  autece- 
"  dence  and  consequence  on  account  of  the  overpower 


61 

"  ing  impression  they  produce.  He  becomes  that 
"  which  he  identifies  himself  with,  by  force  of  strong 
"  and  deep  attachment,  and  loses,  oh  strong-armed 
"one  !  all  other  memory  in  the  act.  The  man  thus 
"  subdued  by  vasana,  fixing  his  eye  on  anything  what- 
"  ever,  is  deluded  into  believing  it  as  the  best  of  its 
*'  class  ;  and  the  perceiver  being  entirely  under  the 
"  impulse  of  vasand,  the  object  thus  perceived  is  not 
"  cognized  in  its  real  form.  Thus  does  he,  with  be- 
"  clouded  eye,  perceive  everything  like  one  under  the 
"  power  of  strong  intoxication,  quite  in  this  deluded 
"  fashion." 

One  universal  instance  of  this  may  be  seen  in  the  likes  an^ 
dislikes  men  have  for  words  (accidently)  endowed  with  import 
polite  or  impolite,  through  circumstances  such  as  country, 
manners,  family,  religion,  language,  and  the  like.  Particular 
instances  will  be  noticed  after  treating  of  the  divisions  of  vasana. 
The  Brhadaranyaka,  too,  has  it,  with  the  said  vasna  in  view  : — 

"  He  has  such  ideas  as  accord  with  his  desires,  he  does  such 
"  acts  as  fulfil  his  idea,  he  becomes  that  which  he  does." 
The  kinds  of  Vdsanah  are  mentioned  by  Valmiki  : — 

•*'  Vasana  is  of  two  kinds:  pure,  and  impure;  the  former 
"  leads  to  frequent  incarnation,  the  latter  puts  an  end 
"  to  all  incarnation  whatever.  The  wise  describe  the 
"  second  kind  of  Vasana  as  of  the  form  of  thick  igno- 
"  ranee,  made  up  of  immovable  self-assertion,  ever 
"  dragging  to  one  incarnation  after  another.  The 
"  other,  like  seeds  sown  after  being  baked  on  fire, 
"  bears  not  the  sprout  of  re-incarnation,  and  having 
"  known  the  Thing  to  be  known,  continues  only  as  long 
"  as  the  body  continues  to  exist." 

'  Ignorance  '  is  that  which  veils  the  distinction  of  the  three 
bodies,  the  five  sheaths,  and  the  transcendent  witness  of  them 
all.  Being  '  of  the  form  of  thick  ignorance'  means  being 
darkly  built  of  this  ignorance.  As  milk  becomes  coagulated 
on  being  mixed  with  whey,  or  as  liquid  clarified  butter  being 


62 

exposed  to  cold  turns  to  thickness,  so  does  this  Vasana  become 
thick  (through  ignorance).  Thickness  in  this  instance  refers 
to  the  depth  of  delusion  brought  about  by  Vdsand.  The  Lord 
refers  to  this  msana  while  explaining  Life  of  the  Lower  Self. 
"  Men  born  to  Life  of  the  Lower  Self  do  not  understand,"  etc.;  — 
the  three  verses  beginning  with  these  words  should  be  before 
the  rnind,*  and  the  following  verses  should  be  read  in  connec- 
tion with  them  : — 

"  They  (i.  e.  those  born  to  Life  of  the  Lower  Self)  indulge 
"  themselves  in  desires  never  to  be  satisfied,  betake 
"themselves  to  hypocrisy,  self-assertion  and  pride,  and 
"  being  addicted  to  acts  entirely  impure,  they  keep  them- 
"  selves  fastened  to  evil  resolves  through  delusion. 
*'  With  unlimited  anxiety  even  up  to  the  end  of  the 
"  great  deluge,  with  desire  and  enjoyment  as  the  only 
"  standard  of  life,  with  faith  in  nothing  more  than 
"  what  is  thus  assured  to  them,  held  fast  in  the  net  of 
"  innumerable  hopes,  ever  prone  to  desire  and  anger, 
"  they  do  not  grudge  to  grasp  wealth  and  means  even 
"  with  injustice,  for  enjoyment  up  to  the  last  limit 
"  of  their  desire." 

Egoism,  too,  is  touched  upon  in  the  same  place  : — 
"  This  I  have  accomplished  in  the  course  of  to-day,  that 
"  desire  of  mine  I  shall  satisfy  later  on  ;  I  possess 
"  this  much,  and  so  much  of  wealth  I  may  safely  count 
"  upon  ;  I  have  done  up  with  that  adversary  of 
"  mine,  I  shall  attend  to  the  rest  of  them  in  time  ; 

*  Vide,  Chapter  XVI  BhagvadgitS.  The  three  verses  may  be  thus 
rendered :  "  Men  born  to  Life  of  the  Lower  Self  do  not  understand  the 
distinction  between  action  and  inaction,  nor  do  they  know  purity,  polite- 
ness, or  truth.  They  maintain  that  there  is  no  truth,  no  foundation  of 
things,  that  the  world  rests  not  upon  any  divine  Intelligence,  that  it  is 
the  result  of  sexual  intercourse  brought  about  by  the  sexes  seeking  each 
its  own  satisfaction.  Laying  hold  of  this  philosophy  these  small-minded 
men  commit  self -suicide,  and  being  always  evilly  inclined  and  fond  of  out- 
rageous deeds,  act  with  might  and  main,  in  a  manner  inconsistent  with  the 
peace  or  well-being  of  the  universe." 


63 

"  I  am  the  lord,  the  real  enjoyer  of  life,  nay  I  am 
"  possessed  of  all  power,  I  am  the  strong,  I  am  the 
"  happy  one  ;  I  have  no  lack  of  means,  there  is  no 
"  flaw  in  my  birth-right,  there  is  none  equal  to  me  ;  I 
"  shall  celebrate  sacrifices,  I  shall  give,  I  shall  please 
"  myself  as  I  like  ; — thus  deluded  through  ignorance, 
«  "  distracted  by  multifarious  mental  activity,  and  en- 
"  trapped  into  the  net  of  illusion,  these,  bound  to  desires 
"  and  enjoyments,  find  their  way  to  the  unholiness  of 
"  hell." 

This  explains  also  the  cause  of  re-incarnation  ;  this,  how- 
ever, is  again  touched  upon,  thus  : — 

"  Confirmed  in  the  pride  of  self,  full  of  conceit,  puffed  up 
"  with  the  vanity  of  wealth  and  honour,  they  worship 
"  with  nominal  sacrifices  merely  for  show  and  without 
"  any  proper  ceremony  whatever.  Ever  full  of  self- 
"  assertion,  conceit,  vanity,  desire,  anger,  and  being  at 
"  the  height  of  jealousy  and  hate,  these  disregard  Me  in. 
"  themselves  and  others.  These  cruel,  hating,  inauspi- 
"  cious,  low  animals,  I  ever  consign  in  this  world  to 
"  Life  of  the  Lower  Self.  Being  there,  oh  son  of  Kunti 
"  these  fools  not  gaining  sight  of  Me,  in  life  after  life, 
"  descend  lower  and  lower  in  the  scale  of  incarnation." 

The  pure  kind  of  Vdsand  has  "  known  the  Thing."  The 
form  of  the  Thing  to  be  known  is  thus  set  forth  by  the  Lord 
in  Chapter  XIII  (of  the  Bhagvadgitd)  : — 

"  I  explain  to  thee  that  real  Thing  knowledge  whereof 
"  confers  immortal  enjoyment ; — It  is  supreme  Brah- 
"  man  without  beginning,  beyond  being  as  well  as  non- 
"  being.  It  is  all  hands,  all  feet,  all  eyes,  all  heads, 
"  all  mouths,  all  ears.  It  stands  embracing  the  whole 
"  universe  within  its  ample  folds.  It  illumines  all 
"  sensible  objects  though  void  of  every  sense,  It  sus- 
"  tains  all  though  void  of  all  relation,  It  reaps  the 
"  fruition  of  all  activity  though  void  of  every  property ; 
"  — -It  is  within  and  without  all  beings,  It  is  immova- 


64 


"  ble  and  yet  ever  moving,  It  is  minutely  unknowable, 

"  and  yet  constantly  near  though  ever  afar.     Though 

"  ever  unpartitioned  It  stands  as  if  divided  in  all  be- 

"  ings;  It  is  the  sustainer,  master  and  destroyer  of  all." 

Herein  are  set  forth  both   forms   (of    Brahman),  with    and 

without  character,  in  order  to  explain  Its  nature  by  description 

as  well  as  definition.    That  is  a  description  which  describes 

the  Thing    in  relation  to  a  particular   portion  of  time  ;  as 

the  house  of  Devaclatta  (in  describing   Devadatta).     That  is 

a  definition  which  defines  the   Thing  in  relation  to  all  time 

whatever  ;  as  the  moon  is  that  which  is  possessed  of  the  best 

luminosity. 

It  may  here  be  asked:  Vdsand  has  been  described  as  that 
which  is  'forgetful  of  antecedence  and  consequence'  (that  is  to 
say  which  is  void  of  all  proper  reflection);  knowledge  of  the 
Thing  (which  is  set  down  to  pure  Vasana)  cannot  be  acquired 
without  reflection;  ivant  of  reflection  being  the  form  of  Vdsand, 
how  can  an  act  of  reflection  be  made  part  of  Vdsand?  This  need 
not  be  so,  for,  in  the  description  of  Vdsand,  the  words  'on 
account  of  the  overpowering  impression  they  produce'  have  been 
added.  As  on  account  of  the  overpowering  force  of  habit  in 
numerous  previous  incarnations,  impure  Vdsanah  of  the  form  of 
egoism,  meum,  teum,  desire,  anger,  and  the  rest  come  to  us  in, 
this  life,  without  any  instruction  whatever,  so  the  Thing  ever 
stands  before  the  mind,  like  jars  etc.,  directly  cognisable  by 
the  senses,  without  the  help  of  any  words,  explanation  or 
reasoning,  in  consequence  of  entire  identification  with  It, 
by  long  continuous  and  ardent*  application,  after  obtaining 
first  sight  thereof  through  reflection.  Pure  Vdsand  is 
that  activity  of  the  senses  which  is  still  pervaded  with  an 
under-current  of  this  reflection  ;  it  is  of  use  only  in  the  pre- 
servation of  the  body  ;  it  leads  neither  to  Life  of  the  Lower 
Self  consisting  of  hypocrisy,  vanity,  and  the  rest,  nor  to  pro- 
duction of  Dharma  and  Adkarma  (religious  merit  and  demerit) 

*  These  words  refer  to  a  well-known  Sutra  of  Patanjali :  Dirghakdla-nair- 
antaryfrsatkdrasevito-drdhabhumih:  Ecstacy  is  confirmed  when  carried 
on  with  long  continuous  and  ardent  application. 


65 

tending  to  future  incarnation.  Seeds  baked  on  fire  may  become 
of  use  only  to  fill  a  grainary,  they  can  be  of  no  use  either  for 
fdod  or  for  producing  any  fresh  corn. 

Impure  Vdsand  is  of  three  kinds  :  world,  learning,  and  life 
are  the  three  sources  of  its  rise.  Loka-vasana  (concern  for  the 
opinion  of  the  world)  consists  in  that  strong  desire  of  the 
mind  which  leads  it  to  think  and  act  in  a  manner  to  court  the 
praise  or  avoid  the  censure  of  the  world.  This  desire  is  impure 
inasmuch  as  it  is  impossible  to  accomplish.  Valmiki  asked  io 
many  ways:  "Who,  at  the  present  day,  in  this  world  is  virtuous 
and  great?"  and  Narada  said  in  reply  "  He  verily  is  Rama,  the 
child  of  the  Ikshvakus,  known  to  all  the  world."  And  yet  the 
world  spared  not  Sita,  the  wife  of  this  Rama,  the  crest-jewel 
of  chastity,  the  mother  of  the  whole  world,  and  attached  an 
unheard-of  stigma  to  her  name.  If  such  spotless  beings  fared 
thus  at  the  hands  of  the  world,  what  can  be  said  in  regard  to 
the  treatment  of  ordinary  beings  ?  Moreover,  people  are 
found  to  scandalize  one  another  in  pride  of  the  country  they 
belong  to  ;  the  southern  Brahmanas  upbraid  their  northern 
fellows,  well  versed  in  Vedic  lore,  as  flesh-eaters  ;  northern 
Brdhamanas  retaliate  by  finding  fault  with  the  southern 
custom  of  marrying  the  daughter  of  a  maternal  uncle,  and 
of  carrying  earthen  wares  in  travel.  The  Bakvrchah  look 
upon  the  Asvalaijana-S'akha  as  superior  to  the  Kanva-S'akhd; 
the  Vdjasaneyinah  think  otherwise.  Thus  from  the  learned 
down  to  women  and  ignorant  herdsmen  is  found  this  general 
tendency  to  praise  one's  own  family,  section,  relatives,  gods, 
and  so  on,  and  to  censure  those  of  others.  It  has  been  said 
with  this  in  mind  : — 

"  Purity  is  laid  down  as  the  black  art,  cleverness  as  pre- 
"  sumption,  forbearance  as  weakness,  power  as  cruelty, 
"  absence  of  mind  as  thievishness,  beauty  as  lewdness  ; 
"  — who  can  please  the  world  ! "  Also  :  "  There  is  no 
"  remedy  within  knowledge  which  can  satisfy  each 
"  and  all.  Attend,  every  way,  to  thy  own  good,  what 
«'  can  the  many-tongued  world  do  to  thee  ?  " 
9 


66 

Looking,  therefore,  npon  this  Vasand  of  pnblic  opinion  as 
entirely  impure,  books  treating  of  liberation  advise  the  lord 
of  ascetics  to  be  above  censure  and  above  praise. 

Pride  of  learning  (S'astra-camna)  is  of  three  kinds.  Addic- 
tion to  study,  addiction  to  many  subjects,  and  addiction  to 
the  observance  of  injunctions  laid  down  in  religious  books. 
The  first  kind  of  this  vice  is  seen  in  Bharadvaja  who,  though 
he  applied  himself  to  the  Veda  in  three  successive  lives, 
began,  on  being  incited  by  Indra,  to  study  the  remainder  of 
Vedic  lore  even  in  the  fourth.  As  this  kind  of  study  has  no 
end,  and  is,  therefore,  impossible  to  accomplish,  it  is  set  down 
among  impure  VdsandL  Indra,  of  course,  cured  Bharadvaja 
of  this  vice  by  enlightening  him  into  the  knowledge  of 
Brahman  with  character.  This  has  been  described  in  the 
Taittiriya-Brdhmana. 

Addiction  to  many  subjects  of  study  is  similarly  of  the 
nature  of  impure  Vdsana,  inasmuch  as  it  is  not  the  last  aim  of 
existence.  This  is  seen  in  the  Kavasheya-G%a.  A  sage  by 
name  Durvasas  came  with  a  cart-load  of  S'astra-books  to  pay 
his  respects  to  the  god  Mahadeva.  In  the  learned  assembly 
of  that  god,  Narada  aimed  a  joke  at  him  in  the  parable  of  the 
ass  carrying  a  load  on  his  back  ;*  whereupon  he  was  fired  with 
such  anger  as  led  him  to  throw  away  all  his  books  in  the 
ocean.  The  god  Mahadeva  thereafter  initiated  him  into  the 
mystery  of  Self-knowledge  ;  for,  Self-knowledge  never  comes 
from  the  study  of  books,  to  him  who  has  not  acquired  the 
faculty  of  intro-vision  nor  the  favour  of  a  competent  teacher. 
The  S'ruti,  too,  has  it :  "  This  self  is  not  realizable  by  study, 
nay,  not  even  by  intelligence  or  much  learning."  Elsewhere 
too,  it  has  been  said  : — 

"  What  is  the  good  of  vainly  chewing  the  dirty  rag  of  talk 
"  about  many  Sastrani  ?  Those  who  desire  to  know 

*  Vide  Vttara-Oitd :  "  As  the  ass  carrying  a  load  of  sandal-wood  is  con- 
scious only  of  the  burden,  not  of  the  fragrant  wood,  so,  indeed,  does  he 
carry  them  about  like  a  mere  burden  who  having  studied  the  S'astras 
knows  not  their  real  import  and  essence."' 


67 

"  the  essence  must  by  all  means  try  to  catch  a  glimpse 
"  of  the  Light  within."  "He  knows  not  the  true  essence 
"  of  Brahman,  even  like  the  laddie  that  knows  not 
"  the  flavour  of  the  food  it  helps  to  cook  though  he 
"  should  have  stndied  all  the  four  Vedah  and  all  the 
"  Dharma-S'astrani  in  the  world." 

Narada  though  well  versed  in  all  the  sixty-four  subjects  of 
real  education  was  still  ignorant  of  self ;  and  feeling  remorse 
submitted  himself  to  Sanatkumara  as  his  teacher.  This  has 
been  described  in  the  Chhandogyopanishad. 

Addiction  to  the  observance  of  religious  injuctions  is  seen 
in  Nidagha  as  described  in  the  Vishnu-Purana.  It  is  said 
in  the  Yogavasistha  :  "  Nidagha  of  the  Dasuras,  though 
frequently  enlightened  by  Rbhu,  was  not  cured  of  the  igno- 
rance that  gave  him  blind  faith  in  the  observance  of  religious 
injunctions;  moreover,  through  this  blindness  of  stnpid  faith 
he  was  not  able  to  select  any  pure  place,  throughout  the 
world,  for  the  performance  of  his  religious  ceremonies."  This 
mad  desire  for  Karma,  being  the  cause  of  re-incarnation,  is  set 
down  among  impure  Vasandh.  Says  the  Mundaka(-  Upanishad 
of  the  Atharvaveda): — 

"  The  sacrifice  which  the  eighteen*  partake  in,  is  all  in- 
"  ferior  Karma,  it  drowns  itself  and  those  who  betake 
"  themselves  to  it.  Those  fools  who  imagine  any  good 
"  in  this,  are  led  again  and  again  into  the  wheel  of 
"  decay  and  death.  Groping  about  in  the  night  of 
"  Amdya,  fools  flatter  themselves  with  wisdom  and 
"  learning,  and  continue  to  tumble  about,  without  end, 
"  like  the  blind  led  by  the  blind.  Children  think 
"  themselves  all  happy  though  ever  stumbling  this 
"  way  and  that  in  the  maze  of  ignorance  ;  men  ad- 
"  dieted  to  Karma  do  not  see  this  in  consequence  of 
"  the  haze  of  desire  over  their  mind  ;  but  being  led  to 
"  heaven  they  necessarily  return,  on  their  merit  being 

*  Sixteen  priests,  the  master  of  the  house  and  his  wife,  make  up  the 
eighteen. 


"  exhausted,  Those  men  of  stupid  intellect  who  ima- 
"  gine  S'rauta  and  Smarta  Karma  as  the  height  of 
"  religion,  and  know  no  good  besides,  attain  to  heaven, 
"  and  having  lived  out  their  good  Karma,  return  again 
"  into  this  world  or  even  into  a  lower  one." 

The  Lord  also  has  said  (in  the  Bhagvadgita)  : — 

"  Men  not  having  the  eye  to  see,  bound  to  the  ritual  of  the 
"  Veda,  maintaining  that  there  is  nothing  beside, 
"  carried  hither  and  thither  by  numerous  desires, 
"  looking  forward  to  heaven  alone  as  the  goal  of 
"  existence,  maintain  this  flowery  speech  (setting  forth 
"  the  usefulness  of  Karma — formal  religion),  sure  to 
"  lead  to  rebirth  and  fruition,  through  enjoyment, 
"  power,  and  the  like,  being  replete  with  numerous 
"  forms  of  Karma  to  this  end.  These  with  their 
"hearts  set  upon  enjoyment  and  power,  and  their 
"inner  sense  blinded  by  the  said  speech,  can  never 
"  gain  that  true  insight  which  leads  to  the  peace  of 
"blissful  trance.  The  Veddh  deal  with  the  three 
" gundh',  oh  Arjuna !  rise  above  the  gunah,  shake  off  all 
"  duality,  be  ever  centred  in  supreme  peace,  abandon 
"  all  anxiety  for  acquisition  or  protection,  and  above 
"  all  know  thy  Self.  A  small  reservoir  might  serve 
"  the  same  purpose  as  a  large  collection  of  water  ;  the 
"  knowing  Brahmana  understands  the  whole  of  the  Veda 
"  in  the  same  manner  (through  the  simple  knowledge  of 
"  Brahman  )." 

Inasmuch  as  pride  of  learning  (S'astra-vdsana)  is  a  cause  of 
vanity  it  is  impure.  It  is  mentioned  in  the  sixth  chapter  of 
the  Chhandogya  that  S'vetaketu  having  mastered  all  the 
Vedah  in  a  short  time,  was  so  much  puffed  up  as  to  be  rude 
even  to  his  father.  So  also  the  Kaushitaki-Brahmana  and 
the  Brhaddrnyakopanishad  speak  of  Balaki  who,  vain  with  his 
knowledge  of  a  few  forms  of  devotion  (Upasana),  went  the 
round  of  many  countries  beginning  with  Usiaara,  everywhere 
asserting  his  omniscience  and  dealing  insolent]y  even  with 


69 

the  best  of  Brtihmanas;  and  who  lastly  had  the  impudence  to 
go  to  Ktisi  and  offer  to  instruct  Ajatsatru,  the  crest-jewel  of 
all  knowers  of  Brahman. 

Desire  for  body  (De/ia-vasand)  divides  itself  into  three  kinds : — 
False  identification  with  Self  ;  false  edifying  ;  and  false  con- 
valescence.    Identification  of  the  physical  body  with  Self  has 
been  thus  set  forth  by  the  Bhdshyakara:  "The  body  with  con- 
sciousness is  the   Self,  thus  do  understand  the  Lokayatikah 
(i.e.   the     Charvdkdh)    and   men     of    vulgar     intelligence." 
The  Taittiriyopanishad  explains  this  same  idea  of  the   vulgar 
when  beginning  with  "  This  purusha  is  all  food  and  water  " 
it  ends  with  saying  "-therefore  It  is  food."     The    Chhandogya, 
also  mentions  how  Virochana,  though  enlightened  by   Praja- 
pati,  understood  the  teaching  after  the  perverse   bent   of  his 
mind  and  deriving  confirmation  therefrom  of  his  false  convic- 
tion that  the  body  is  the  Self,  taught  the  same  to  his  people— 
the  Asurah.     Edifying  of  the  body   may  be  twofold  :  by  the 
ordinary  ways  of  the  world,  or  by  means  such  as  are  set  forth 
in  religious  books.     The  acquisition  of  a  good  polite  tone  of 
voice  may  be  set  down  in  the  first  kind.     People  are    seen 
striving  to  bring  about,  by  drinking  oil  or  swallowing  pepper 
and  similar  things,  a  mild  soft  voice  such  as  may  be  of  use  in 
vocal  performances  of  every  kind.     Men  use  really  nutritious 
food  and  medicine  to  get  a  soft  fair  skin  ;   they    use   fragrant 
anointings,   powders,    fine  clothes,  rich,  delicate,  ornaments, 
to  impart  grace  to  the  form  ;  they  use  sandal   and  flowers  and 
the  like  for   perfume.      The  second   kind  of  '  edifying  '  they 
bring  about  by  a  dip  in  the  waters  of  the  holy  stream-the  Ganges 
— ,  by  a  visit  to  the  S'aligrama  and  other  places  of  pilgrimage, 
and  so  on.     The  convalescence  referred  to  as  the  third  kind  of 
'  desire  for  life '  may  consist  in  removing  disease  with   the 
use  of  such  medicines  as  may  be   prescribed   by  some  doctor, 
and  also  in  daily  rinsing  the  mouth,  and  the  like.     This  is  all 
ordinary  convalescence.      The  extraordinary  may  consist  of 
washing,   swallowing  holy  water    (Achamana)  and  the  like 
prescribed  by  the  Veda.     The  impurity  of  all  this  Deha-vasana 
will  just  be  explained.    Identification  of  Self  with  the  body 


70 

being  unsupported  by  any  evidence,  and  being  the  source  of 
much  misery,  is  certainly  most  '  impure.'  All  former 
teachers  have  written  against  this  with  might  and  main. 
The  '  edifying '  too  does  not,  in  our  eye,  accomplish  itself  in 
any  manner.  Well-known  musicians  and  teachers  fail  to 
acquire  a  good  voice  notwithstanding  unremitted  effort  in  that 
direction.  Soft  skin  or  healthy  body  is  not  a  necessary 
consequence  of  human  effort.  Grace  and  fragrance  are  all 
in  flowers  and  things  which  produce  them,  not  in  the  body 
which  is  meant  to  possess  them.  Says  the  Vishnu-Purana  :— 

"  If  the  deluded  fool  loves  the  body,  a  mere  heap  of  flesh, 
"  blood,  muscles,  fat,  bones,  and  other  offensive  things, 
"  what  prevents  him  from  being  similarly  in  love  with 
"  the  very  hell  itself !  That  bluntness  of  feeling  which 
"receives  no  shock  at  the  nasty  smell  from  one's 
"  own  body  can  hardly  be  taught  any  better  argument 
"  for  non-attachment." 

The  '  edifying '  that  comes  of  observing  religious  injunc- 
tions is  easy  to  nullify  by  other  injunctions  more  powerful 
than  the  first.  The  injunction  "  Kill  no  being  whatever  "  is 
rendered  powerless  in  presence  of  the  stronger  injunction 
"  The  victim  must  be  sacrificed  in  the  Agnishtoma"  Also  : — 

"  That  man  who  sees  Self  in  the  carcass  which  is  a  mere 
"  collection  of  the  three  humours,  who  regards  wife, 
"  child  and  the  rest  as  really  his,  who  offers  worship  to 
"  the  gross  and  the  material,  who  sees  the  holiness  of  a 
"  place  of  pilgrimage  in  the  water  that  is  found  there, 
"  and  who  has  no  relation  whatever  with  the  wise  and 
"  the  informed  ; — such  a  one  is  verily  the  ass  that 
u  serves  only  to  carry  the  fodder  for  cows  and  oxen. 
"  The  body  is  all  impurity  ;  the  Self  is  all  purity  ; 
"  knowing  the  difference  of  the  two,  what  remains  to 
"  purify  ?" 

Though  these  verses  appear  to  discourage  attempts  at 
relieving  the  body  of  inherent  evil,  not  the  attempt  to  'edify,' 
still  the  point  is  only  to  discourage  all  attempts  at 


edifying  which  is  thus  shown  to  be  absolutely  impossible  on 
account  of  the  presence  of  snch  irremediable  native  impurity  in 
the  very  nature  of  the  body.  The  supreme  impurity  of  the 
body  is  set  forth  in  the  Maittrayani-S1  dkha : — 

"  What  is  the  use  oh  Lord  !  of  desires  and  enjoyments  for 
"  this  body,  an  impure  heap  of  bones,  skin,  muscles,  fat, 
"  flesh,  semen,  blood,  bile,  tears,  a  very  dung-hill  of 
"  urine,  fosces,  and  the  well-known  three  humours. 
"  This  body  produced  by  mere  sexual  intercourse,  void 
"  of  conscious  thought,  put  as  it  were  into  the  veriest 
"  hell,  comes  out  of  the  urinary  orifice,  gains  structure 
"from  bones,  becomes  filled  with  flesh  and  covered 
"  with  skin,  turns,  as  it  were,  into  a  store-house  of  such 
"  wealth  as  fceces,  urine,  bile,  cough,  fat,  chyle,  and 
"  numerous  humours  of  the  same  kind." 

Whence,  it  is  not  always  certain  that  medical  treatment 
will  relieve  the  evil  one  may  be  suffering  from.  Disease 
once  allayed  may  re-appear.  How  is  it  possible  to  cleanse 
this  nasty  make  with  as  many  as  nine  orifices  continually 
oozing  out  the  dirtiest  filth,  and  numerous  pores  ever  pouring 
out  the  most  stinking  perspiration?  Former  teachers  have 
well  said  : — 

"  Bodies  with  nine  holes  bored  in  them  continue  to  ooze 
*'  like  earthen  pots  ;  no  amount  of  external  washing 
"  can  purify  them  ;  and  purifying  within  is  simply  of 
"  no  use." 

Hence  Deka-vdsand  is  all  impure.  Vasishtha,  too,  has  the 
same  in  mind  when  he  says  : — 

'"  The  conviction  '  I  am  only  this  form  made  by  father  and 
"  mother '  is  oh  Rama  !  all  false  know-ledge,  and 
"  leads  to  bondage.  That  is  the  way  into  the  web 
"  of  destruction,  that  is  the  net  dragging  into  the 
"  overwhelming  waves  of  illusion,  that  is  the  forest 
"  of  swords, — the  thought  :  '  I  am  this  body.'  This 
"  way  of  thought  must,  by  all  means,  be  given  up  ; 


72 

"  one  desirous  of  his  own  good  should  not  bring  him- 
"  self  even  in  contact  with  it,  as  with  the  Pnlkasa 
"  carrying  the  flesh  of  dogs." 

These  three  Vasanak  then,  world,  learning,  and  life 
though  apparently  thought  agreeable  by  the  uninformed  should 
entirely  be  given  up  by  those  who  have  acquired  discri- 
mination ;  for,  they  obstruct  the  rise  of  knowledge, 
in  those  who  are  seekers  of  knowledge,  and  interfere  with 
the  condition  of  gnosis  acquired  by  the  accomplished. 
Hence  the  Smrti: — 

"  The  light  of  gnosis  breaks  not  in  full  force  upon  that 
"  puny  thing  which  is  all  beclouded  with  fear  of  the 
"  world,  with  pride  of  learning,  and  with  love  of 
"  life." 

Vdsand  of  the  form  of  hypocrisy,  vanity,  and  the  like, 
making  up  Life  of  the  Lower  Self,  is  all  mental,  and  is  too  well 
known  as  the  way  to  perdition.  These  four  kinds  of  Vasandh 
should,  therefore,  be  destroyed,  by  one  means  or  another. 

Mind,  too,  must  be  dissolved  like  Vdsand.  The  Vaidika 
accepts  not  the  definition  of  mind  given  by  the  Tdrkika 
that  the  mind  is  an  eternal  substance  of  atomic  dimen- 
sion. Destruction  of  mind  is,  therefore,  not  impossible  to 
them  ;  for,  the  mind,  is,  to  them,  that  substance  which  has 
parts,  which  is  not  eternal,  which  is  ever  capable  of  trans- 
forming itself,  like  wax  and  gold  and  such  things,  into  any 
form  whatever.  The  Vajasaneyinah  (Brhadaranyakopanishad) 
thus  describe  its  nature  and  use  as  instrument  of  knowledge  : 
"  Love,  thought,  doubt,  belief,  unbelief,  patience,  impati- 
ence, intelligence,  shame,  fear,  all  make  up  the  mind." 
These  transformations  beginning  with  love  and  coming  about 
on  occasions,  are  clearly  perceived  in  the  light  of  the  Wit- 
ness, like  earthernwares,  etc.,  in  the  light  of  the  eye.  The 
material  cause  of  all  these  percepts  is,  therefore,  the  mind. 
This  explains  the  nature  of  the  mind.  Its  use  as  instrument 
of  knowledge  is  thus  set  forth  in  the  same  place  :  "  My  mind 
was  occupied  elsewhere,  and  I  did  not  see ;  my  mind  was 


occupied  elsewhere,  ancL  I  did  not  hear ;"  "  He  sees  through 
the  niiud,  through  the  mind    he  hears."     Pots,  etc.,  exposed 
to  full  light  and  in  direct  contact  with  the  eye,  are  seen  or 
not  seen,  Vedic  mantrdh  and  the  like  loudly  repeated  in  the 
most  proximate  vicinity  of  the  ear  are  heard  or    not   heard, 
according  as  the  mind  attends  to  them  or  not.     That   which 
is  thus  proved  by  concomitant  relation,  both  of  its  presence 
and  absence,  to  be  the  cause  of  all  perception    whatever   is 
the  mind.     The  texts  just  quoted  imply  this  meaning.     The 
mind  being  thus  defined  and  shown  to  be  an  instrument  of 
knowledge,  the  illustration   that  one,  though  touched  on  the 
back,  perceives    the  .touch  through  mind,    stands  to  reason. 
Devadatta,  /or  example,  though   touched  upon  his   back  by 
some  one  feels  the   touch   particularly  as  of  the  hand,   the 
fingers,  and  so  on.-    The  eye  cannot  see  the  spot,  even  the 
skin  can  cognize  but  the  hardness  or  softness  of  the  touch 
and  nothing  more  ;  whence  it  would  follow,  by  the   law  of 
residual  survival,  so  to  speak,  that  mind  alone  is  the  cause 
of  such  particular  knowledge.     It  is  called  Manas  from  its  func- 
tion   of   simple   thinking   or  sensation  ;  it  is  called    Chitta, 
when  .  it  localizes  the  sensation,  in  other  words,  performs  an 
act  of  perception.     Chitta    shows    intelligence,     action    and- 
false  perception.     Whence  it  is  inferred  that  it  possesses  the 
three    forms  :      Light   (Satva),   energy   (Rajas),   and   gross- 
ness  (Tamas).    Intelligence   and  the  rest  are  pointed  out  as 
results   of  these  forms  in  the   description  of  the    Gundtita 
(in  the  Bkagvadgitft)  ;  for,  it  is  said  "  Oh  son  of  Pandu  !  Light, 
energy,  and  also  material  grossness."     So  also  the  Sankhya: 
"  Light,  energy  and  material  grossness  are  mentioned  as  prin- 
cipal headings."  Light  here  means  intelligence,  knowledge, 
not  the  form  white  and  shining,  for,  it  has  been  said:     "  Satm 
leads   to   knowledge,    Rajas   to   ambition    and    desire,   and 
Tamas  produces  careless  indifference,  idle  delusion  and  stupid 
ignorance."     Bliss  too,  is,  like  knowledge,  a  result  of  Satva, 
for,  we  have  it :    "  Satea    predominates   in    bliss,    Rajas   in 
action,  and  Tamas,  serving  as  a  thick  cover  over  intelligence, 
predominates  in  careless  Indifference.."     The  gunah  constant- 
10 


ly  chasing  one  form  after  another  in  a  series,  like  the  waves 
of  the  ocean,  allow  any  one  of  themselves  to  gain  mastery 
over  the  rest  which  stand  neutralized  for  the  time.  It  has 
been  said  : — 

"  Satva,  oh  son  of  Bharata!  predominates  over.  Rajas  and 
"  Tamas  which  stand  neutralized  for  the  time  ; 
"  Rajas,  predominates  over  Satva  and  Tamas  which 
"  stand  neutralized  in  their  turn  ;  and  Tamas  pre- 
dominates over  the  rest  whom  it  holds  powerless 
"  for  the  moment."  Also  "  They  destroy  and  become 
"  destroyed  like  waves  on  the  ocean." 

Supremacy  of  Tamas  leads  to  Life  of  the  Lower  Self ; 
predominance  of  Rajas  gives  sway  to  the  three  Vdsandh  of 
world,  learning,  and  life  ;  mastery  of  Satta  establishes  Life 
of  the  Higher  Self.  It  has  been  said  with  this  in  view: — 

"  When  in  this,  body,  light  flashes  in  through  all  avenues, 
"  bringing  knowledge  in  its  train  it  should  be  known 
"  that  Satva  is  on  the  increase." 

Though  the  '  inner  sense '  (mind)  appears  with  all  three 
properties,  its  principal  material  cause  is  nothing  but  Satva 
alone.  Those  that  subserve  the  material  cause  are  accessories, 
and  Rajas  and  Tamas  are  only  accessories  of  the  mind. 
Hence  it  is  that  Satva  is  the  residual  native  form  of  the 
man  of  gnosis  who  has  done  away  with  Rajas  and  Tamas 
through  application  to  Yoga.  It  has  been  said  with  this  in 
mind :  "  The  mind  of  the  knower  is  no  mind  at  all,  for,  his 
mind  is  called  Satva.*' 

This  Satva  being  void  of  all  Rajas,  the  cause  of  activity  and 
change,  is  always  self-centred.  It  is,  also  very  fine  in  con- 
sequence of  its  bein£  void  of  Tamas,  the  cause  of  the  gross 
forms  of  non-self,  the  child  of  false  imagination.  Being  so,  this 
Satva  is  fit  to  receive  the  light  of  Atman.  Says  the  S'ruti: 
"  It  is  seen  with  the  pointed  intellect  by  those  who  are 
accustomed  to  minute  observation,'' 


75 

It  is  not  possible  to  examine  jewels,  pearls,  and  the  like, 
with  a  view  to  determine  their  value,  in  the  light  of  a  lamp 
flickering  under  the  breeze  ;  nor  can  a  large  ploughshare 

help  to  sew  a  piece  of  cloth,  like  a  fine  needle. 

\ 

This  Sati'a,  then,  being  invisibly  held,  as  it  were,  in  sus- 
pension, in  Rajas  mixed  with  Tamas,  -becomes  the  mind  of 
the  Yogin,  being  variously  fired  into  consciousness  by 
numerous  imaginings  proceeding  from  the  sense  of  duality. 
This  mind  gathers  to  itself  elements  making  up  Life  of  the 
Lower  Self,  when  ruled  by  the  property  of  Tamas.  Says 
Vasishtha  :— 

"  The  mind  finds  the  elements  of  fattening  itself  from 
"  imagining  Self  in  non-self,  from  taking  the  body  for 
"  Self,  and  also  from  attachment  to  child,  wife, 
"  relatives,  and  the  like.  The  mind  certainly  regales 
"  itself  in  the  various  dishes  of  egoism,  and  fattens 
"itself  upon  thoughts  of  meum  and  teum,  upon  the 
"  pleasure  it  derives  from  the  fantastic  whirl  of  the 
"  dust  of '  mine-ness  '  it  creates.  The  various  forms  of 
"  disease — mental  and  physical — ,  the  numerous  ways 
"  in  which  the  world  is  looked  upon  as  a  source  of 
"unmixed  good,  the  conventionality  which  divides 
"  things  into  good  and  bad,  affection,  greed,  the 
"  apparently  alluring  and  gratifying  possession  of 
"jewels,  wealth,  women, — all  tend  to  nourish  and 
"  fatten  the  mind.  The  serpent  of  the  mind  grows  up 
"  on  draughts  of  the  milk  of  hope,  it  derives  strength 
"  from  inhaling  the  wind*  of  enjoyment,  and  it  exer- 
"  cises  itself  on  the  field  of  faith.'* 

"  Faith"  here  refers  to  the  false  faith  one  has  in  the 
permanence  of  things  which  are  really  illusory.  Thus  is  set 
forth  the  nature  of  vdsand  and  manas  the  couple  to  be  got 
rid  of. 

*  Serpents  are  supposed  to  live  at  times  upon  air_alone, 


76 

Now  we  turn  to  destruction  of  vasand  and  dissolution  of 
manas.  Yasishtha  refers  to  the  method  of  bringing  about  the 
former  in  the  following  : — 

"  Bondage  is  none  other  than  the  bond  of  vasand,  liberation 
"  is  only  the  destruction  of  this  msana  ;  give  up  rasana 
"  and  with  it  the  desire  for  liberation  as  well.     Before 
"  giving  up  mental  v&san&k,  detach  thyself  from  such 
"  v&sandk  .as  relate  themselves  to  objects  and  enjoy- 
"  ment ;   set  up  then  the  current  of  such  pure  vdsandh 
"  as  friendship  and  the  like.*  Give  up  even  these  from 
"  within,  though  acting  upon  them  without,  and  with 
"  all  internal    attachment   whatever  laid  entirely  at 
"  rest,   live  only  in  the  full  vdsand  of  simple  being. 
"  Give  up  even  this  as  conceived  through  mind  and 
. "  intellect.     Give  up  the  instruments  whereby  this  may 
"  be  accomplished,  and  remain  in  the  continual  peace 
"  of  supreme  pacification  in  the  residuum" 

The  words  "  mental  vdsanah  "  (manasa-vasand)  refer  to  the 

three  vdsanah   mentioned  before  :  world,  learning,  and  life. 

"Such  vasanah  as  relate  themselves  to  objects  and  enjoyment " 

(visJiaya-msund)  refer  to  Life  of  the  Lower  Self  consisting  in 

hypocrisy,   impudence,    and  the   like.      The    weakness     or 

strength  of  vdsand  is  the   point  where    these  two  become 

divided  each  from  the  other.     Vdsanah  relating  themselves  to 

objects   may   refer  to  the  more   familiar   meaning  of    the 

'expression.      By  "objects"   are   m^eant   sound,  touch,   form, 

taste,   smell  and   substances   which  these    imply.      Mental 

vdsand  is  that  impression  which  is   born   of  desire  for  these ; 

vdsanah  relating  themselves  to   objects  are  impressions   born 

of  actual  enjoyment   of  desired  things.     With  this  rendering 

before  the  mind,  We  may  consider  the  fourf  kinds  of  vasandh, 

just  referred  to,  as  included  in  these  two  ;  for,  there  can  be  no 

vdsand  beyond  the  mind  within  and  objects  without. 

*  This  refers  to  a  well-known  Sutra  of  Patanjali  referred  to  at  length 
later  on. 
f  Life,  learning,  world,  and_mental  vdsan&h. 


77 

It  may  be  asked  how  is  it  possible  to   'give  up'  vasdna-; 
for,   vasand  has   no  form   such   as  can  be  pushed  .out   with 
the  hand  like  dust  straw  and  the  like  which  can  be   removed 
with  a  brush.     This  need  not  trouble  you;  for  this   giving  up 
is  as  much  possible  as  the  'giving  up'   implied  in-  fasts   and 
vigils.  Eating  and  sleep,  the  natural  course  of  beings,  have  no 
form  whatever,  and  yet  all  keep  fasts  and   vigils   which  con- 
sist only  in  giving  these  up.     The   same   may   apply   in  .the 
present  instance.  If  you  say  the  vow  we  take  in  the  prescribed 
form  '  I  shall  pass  this  day  without  food,'  and  the  care  we  take 
thereafter  to  avoid  all  nourishment,  make  all  the  '  giving  up ' 
implied  in   fasts;    we   reply   there  stands   nothing,   no   one 
with   a  club,    to   prevent  you  from  entering   on  the   same 
line   of  argument  with   regard  to   the  '  giving   up '   in  this 
instance  also.   For,  the    vow  here    consists  in  uttering  the 
formula  of  renunciation  (praiska),*  after  which  you  may  keep 
the  vow  with  all  possible  care.     Those  who  cannot  pronounce 
the  Vedic  formula,  may  take  the  vow  in  their  own  vernacular. 
If  you  say,  in  the  first  instance  we  do  not  touch   vegetables, 
rice,  soup,  and  the  like,  here  too  you  must  avoid  all  contact  with 
flowers,  ointments,  women,  and  the  like.     Whereas  you  have, 
in  the  first  instance,  pastimes  provided  of  the  form  of  hearing  the 
Purdnas  explained,   of  worshipping  different  gods  or  of  reli- 
gious dance,  music,  and  the  like,   which  all  tend  to  draw  the 
mind  away   from  hunger,  sleep,  or  sloth ;    you    have  here 
good  or  even  better  pastime  for  the  mind   in  "Friendship  and 
the  rest."  Patanjali  speaks  of  '  Friendship  and  the  rest'  in  his 
aphorisms :     "The  mind  is  cleared  of  impurity  from  the  exercise 
of  Friendship,  Compassion,  Rejoicing,  and  Indifference,  with 
regard  respectively  to  happiness,  misery,  holiness,  and  sin." 

The  mind  is  muddled  by  love,  hate,  holiness  and  sin. 
Patanjali  thus  defines  love  and  hate  :  "  Love  is  that  (modi- 
fication of  mind)  which  follows  happiness  ;  hate  that  which 
follows  misery."  Some  peculiar  modification  of  mind,  some 
strong  feeling  of  the  form  "  may  all  this  happiness  be  mine," 

*  See  foot-note  page,  2. 


78 

follows  upon  any  and  every  deep,  loving,  enjoyment  of  happiness. 
This  happiness  may  be  within  reach  or  beyond,  and  may, 
therefore,  be  easy  or  difficult  to  obtain  for  want  of  proper 
means.  The  attachment  to  or-  love  of  that  happiness  thus 
born,  blights  the  transparent  clearness  of  the  mind.  If,  how- 
ever, such  a  one  should  feel  supreme  friendship  for  all,  should 
consider  in  himself  possession  of  the  happiness  he  covets  and 
should  so  far  identify  himself  with  those  who  are  happy  as  to 
feel  that  they  are  all  his,  he  will  at  once  feel  himself  in  full 
enjoyment  of  that  happiness  and  the  attachment  or  love  lurking 
in  his  heart  will  at  once  disappear.  This  may  be  understood  after 
the  illustration  of  a  retired  sovereign,  still  believing  himself 
ruling  in  the  rule  of  his  son  or  some  other  relative.  Attachment 
being  thus  put  out,  the  mind  settles  into  calm  purity  like  the 
waters  of  some  river  becoming  limpid  and  transparent  during 
the  S'arat-season*  following  the  rainy  one. 

Just  as  the  mind  transforms  itself  into  the  feeling  of  attach- 
ment, it  transforms  itself  into  one  of  hate  or  dislike  of  the  form 
"let  such  evil  never  be  mine."  This  feeling  of  hate  or  dislike  is, 
however,  not  easy  to  put  out  as  long  as  enemies,  tigers,  and  the 
like  continue  to  exist ;  and  it  certainly  is  entirely  impossible 
to  do  away  with  each  and  every  cause  of  evil.  Thus,  then,  the 
feeling  of  hate  or  dislike  continues  to  parch  up  the  heaTt  into 
a  desert.  The  mind  becomes  all  peace  on  the  disappear- 
ance of  hostility,  dislike  and  the  like,  when,  through  the  exer- 
cise of  compassion  for  every  miserable  being,  one  feels  that 
none,  even  like  himself,  should  ever  experience  whatever  is 
disliked  by  them.  It  has  been  said  with  this  in  view  :— 

"  Life  is  as  dear  to  all  beings  as  it  is  to  oneself;  feel  compas- 
"  sion  for  every  being,  taking  thy  own  Self  as  the 
"  measure," 

The  Great  show  how  this  can  be  done  : — 

"  Let  all  be  happy  ;  let  all  enjoy  perfect  health;  let  all  find 
"the  good  of  their  heart,  let  no  one  come  to  grief." 

*  The  season  between  autumn  and  winter. 


79 

Moreover,  all  beings  do,  by  nature,  never  carry  out  what  is 
good  and  holy,  they  do  act  towards  the  sinful.  It  is  said  : — 

"  Men  love  the  benefit  of  holiness  not  holiness  itself,  and 
"  though  not  wishing  for  the  fruit  of  sin,  they  bind 
"  themselves  to  sin  itself." 

These  acts,  holr  and  sinful,  produce  consequent  heart-burn- 
ing— the  form  of  which  the  S'ruti  describes  thus  :  "Ah  !  I  never 
did  good,  I  indulged  myself  in  sin."  If  one  fill  the  mind  with 
the  sense  of  rejoicing  at  all  persons  of  holy  merit,  he  himself 
would  be  careful  to  approach  what  he  rejoices  at.  If,  in  the 
same  manner,he  shows  supreme  indifference  towards  the  sinful, 
he  easily  keeps  himself  off  from  sin.  Thus  there  being  no 
cause  for  heart-burning,  the  mind  settles  down  into  undis- 
turbed calm. 

From  the  feeling  of  friendliness  for  those  who  are  happy 
there  follows  not  only  absence  of  attachment  but  also  the 
disappearance  of  jealousy,  malice,  and  the  like.  Jealousy  is 
impatience  of  the  superiority  or  virtue  of  another ;  malice  is 
attributing  vice  to  virtue.  "When  friendliness  makes  the 
happiness  of  others  inseparable  from  our  own,  how  can 
jealousy  and  malice  ever  find  place  in  the  heart?  Freedom 
from  other  vices  of  the  same  kind  may  be  accomplished  in 
the  same  manner.  As  hate  propelling  to  destruction  of  an 
enemy  cools  down  from  continual  application  to  the  idea  of 
compassion  for  the  miserable,  so  also  disappears,  from  the 
same  cause,  that  impudence  which  comes  of  imagining  oneself 
in  the  condition  of  that  which  is  opposed  to  misery,  viz., 
happiness.  This  impudence  has  been  touched  upon  before, 
while  speaking  of  egoism,  under  Life  of  the  Lower  Self : — 

"  I  am  the  lord,  the  real  enjoyer  of  life,  nay  I  am  possessed 
"  of  all  power.  I  am  the  strong,  I  am  the  happy  one  ; 
"  I  have  no  lack  of  means,  there  is  no  flaw  in  my  birth- 
"rightj  there  is  none  equal"  to  me." 

It  may  here  be  -asked  acquisition  of  holy  merit  which  is 
shown  as  the  result  of  filling '  the  mind  with  the  idea  of  re- 
joicing in  the  holy  merit  of  others,  is  of  no  use  to  the  real 


80 

Yogin,  for,  it  has  before  been  said  that  all  religions  or  holy 
merit  is  only  part  of  the  impure  vdsand  of  learning.  This 
neednot.be  so,  for,  only  those  religions  acts  which  are  done 
with  desire,  and  are  of  the  form  of  S'rauta  and  Smdrta  cere- 
monies, etc.,  are  implied  nnder  that  impure  vasand,  as  being 
causes  of  re-embodiment.  The  holiness  here  implied  is  that 
result  of  Toga  which,  being  neither  black  nor  white,  does  not 
lead  to  re-embodiment.  Being  neither  black  nor  white,  is 
thns  explained  by  Patanjali  :  "  Karma  neither  white  nor 
black  is  only  in  the  case  of  Yoginah,  it  is  threefold  for  the 
rest."  Karma  with  desire,  being,  enjoined  (by  scripture)  is 
white,  Karma  prohibited  by  scripture  is  black,  and  that  which 
partakes  of  both  is  mixfcd  Karma.  All  these  three  are  found 
in  '  the  rest,'  i.e.,  ' those  who  devote  themselves  to  activities- 
other  than  Yoga.''  These  three  lead  to  three  kinds  of  re- 
embodiment.  Says  Visvarnpacharya : — 

"  Good  Karma  gxhalts  to  heaven,  bad  degrades  to  hell ; 
"  mixture .  of  holiness*  and  sin  leads  forcibly  to  the 
"  condition  of  man." 

If  yon  say  though  Yoga  is  not  black  Karma  inasmuch  as  it 
is  not  prohibited,  there  is  nothing  to  prevent  it  from  being 
white,  it  being  enjoined  (by  scripture),  we  say  no.  For,  Yoga 
is  described  as  not-white  with  a  view  to  point  out  its  being 
free  from  desire.  Hence  the  Yogin  avoids  all  action  tending, 
to  white  or  black  merit. 

If  you  still  ask,  on  this  showing,  even  Yoginah  having  filled 
their  mind  with  the  idea  of  rejoicing  will  try  to  accomplish 
religious  and  holy  acts,  we  say  let  them  so  try,  for,  those  only 
are  real  Yoginah  who  pacify  the  mind  with  Friendship  and 
the  rest.  Whence  this  implies  also  Life  of  the  Higher  Self  set 
forth  under  "  Fearlessness,  purity  of  heart,  "  etc.,  the  means  of 
gnosis  mentioned  nnder  "  Humility,  simplicity,"  etc.,  and  the 
characteristic  of  the  Jivanmukta,  Sthitaprajna,  and  the  rest. 
All  these  being  of  the  form  of  pure  or  indifferent  vdsa?idk  tend 
to  destroy  all  impure  vdsandh  whatever. 


81 

If  yon  say  there  is  no  end  of  pure  vdsanak,  no  one 
can  afford  to  exercise  himself  in  all  of  them,  and  it  wonld 
appear  that  effort  for  such  exercise  is  all  vain  ;  we  reply 
it  is  not  so.  For,  evil  vasanah  to  be  put  down  by  pure 
vdsanah  are  also  innumerable,  and  no  one  man  has  all  of 
them  in  him.  It  is  not  possible  for  one  man  to  try  on  him- 
self all  the  medicines  given  in  the  Ayurveda-,  nor  is  it  at  all 
likely  that  all  the  diseases  for  which  these  medicines  are 
prescribed  should  appear  in  one  and  the  same  person.  It  being 
so,  one  should  examine  his  own  mind,  and  should  apply  him- 
self to  the  study  of  such  good  vasanah  as  are  thought  neces- 
sary, in  proportion,  to  the  time  and  number  of  evil  vdsanah. 
As  one  harassed  by  children,  friends,  wife,  and  the  like,  feels 
much  disgust  for  them  all  and  betakes  himself  to  renunci- 
ation, so  should  one  afflicted  with  the  intoxicating  pride  of 
learning,  riches,  family,  politeness,  and  the  like,  apply 
himself  to  'discrimination.'  Discrimination  has  been  pointed 
out  by  Jauaka  : — 

"  Those  who,  to-day,  are  at  the  head  of  the  great,  sink,  in 
"  course  of  time,  to  the  lowest  depth  ;  oh  mind  I  how 
"  canst  thou  trust  to  this  kind  of  greatness  ?  "Where  has 
"  gone  the  old  splendour  of  riches  in  which  rolled  kings 
"  and  emperors  ?  Where  the  innumerable  creations  of 
"  Brahma?  What  means  this  foolish  faith  of  thine  ? 
"  Millions  of  Brahmdnah  have  come  and  gone,  numerous 
'•  series  of  creations  have  been  and  not  been,  potentates 
"  have  passed  away  like  the  lightest  dust,  what  confid- 
"  ence  is  there  in  this  life  ?  Personages  in  a  sight  or 
"  wink  of  whose  eye  lay  the  sustenance  or  destruction  of 
"  worlds  have  passed  out  of  memory  ;  who  cares  what 
"  becomes  of  a  petty  thing  like  me." 

It  may  here  be  asked :  this  discrimination  precedes  the 
rise  ofgnosis,  for,  knowledge  of  Brahman  is  not  possible  with- 
out the  means  beginning  with  discrimination  of  the  eternal 
from  the  non-eternal.  Means  leading  to  destruction  of  vdsandk 
are  in  this  place  meant  to  be  described  with  the  object  of 
bringing  the  knower  of  Brahman  to  enjoy  the  bliss  of  Jivan- 
11 


82 

mukti ;  whence  this  talk  about  discrimination  wonlcl  appear 
entirely  out  of  place.  This  is  no  fault.  Knowledge  of  Brahman 
follows  mastery  of  the  four  means ;  this  has  been  the  high 
royal  road  trod  alike  by  all  men  on  their  way  to  Raja-yoga. 
Janaka's  is  an  exceptional  case  ;  through  force  of  previous 
holy  merit,  gnosis  dawned  upon  him  all  of  a  sudden,  from 
his  having  heard  the  Siddha-Gita,  even  like  the  fall  of  a  fruit 
from  heaven.  Whence  he  has  to  undertake  discrimination 
as  above  for  peace  of  mind  ;  and  what  has  been  said  is, 
therefore,  quite  in  its  proper  place.  If  it  still  be  said  : 
discrimination  thus  adjusted  in  its  place  appears  to  follow 
immediately  upon  gnosis,  but  there  being  no  impure  vasanak 
at  the  time,  such  application  to  pure  vas.andh  is  practically  of 
no  use  whatever ;  we  say  it  has  its  use,  for,  though  Janaka 
had  nothing  surviving  in  him  of  the  form  of  impure  vdsanak, 
Yajnavalkya,  Bhagiratha,  and  others  showed  enough  of  them. 
In  Yajnavalkya  and  in  his  opponents  Ushasta,  Kahola,  and 
others,  there  appears  considerable  pride  of  learning,  for,  they 
are  all  seen  to  take  part  in  disputation  with  the  object  of 
silencing  each  his  opponent.  If  you  say  they  were  learned 
in  some  lore  other  than  Brahma-vidya,  we  say  no;  for,  questions 
and  answers  exchanged  in  the  progress  of  the  debate  refer 
distinctly  to  Brahman.  We  cannot  accept  also  the  sugges-^ 
tion  that  though  referring  to  Brahman,  these  men  had  only 
superficial  and  not  real  knowledge  of  the  same;  for,  that  line 
of  argument  would  make  all  unreal  even  the  knowledge  we 
have  had  from  their  words  and  instructions.  Nor  is  the  idea 
worth  entertaining  that  though  real,  their  knowledge  must, 
at  least,  be  indirect;  for,  we  find  questions  principally  referring 
to  direct  cognition  (of  Brahman)  in  words  such  as  '  that  which, 
is  directly  cognised '  aud  so  on .  You  may  yet  say :  the  Acharya* 
does  not  tolerate  pride  of  learning  in  the  knowers  of  Self,  as 
witness  what  he  says  in  the  Upades'asahasri  :  "  He  alone  is 
the  knower  of  Self  and  no  one  else,  who  has  in  the  same 
manner  given  up  the  idea  that  he  knows  Brahman"  and  also 

*  S'ankara. 


83 


what  is  said  in  the  Naishkarmyasiddhi :  "  The  knower  has  no 
pride  of  spiritual  knowledge,  for  pride  belongs  to  life  of  the  Lower 
Stlf ;  if  this  life  of  the  Lower  Self  should  impart  its  colour 
to  the  Knower^  knowledge  of  Brahman  remains  of  no  use 
whatever."  But  this  need  not  matter,  for,  the  '  knowledge  ' 
implied  in  these  quotations  is  knowledge  which  ends  in 
Jivanmukti ;  and  we  too  do  not  countenance  pride  of  learning 
in  the  Jivanmukta.  If  you  say  there  can  be  no  light  of  Atman 
in  those  who  engage  themselves  in  disputation  with  a  view  to 
gain  the  better  of  some  one',4  argument,  ;for,  even  the  Acharya 
has  said: — 

"  Attachment  to  any  one  of  the  many  fields  which  the 
"  mind  visits  for  exercise,  is  the  surest  sign  of  ignorance; 
"and  greenness  is  certainly  impossible  in  the  tree 
"  that  conceals  a  consuming  fire  in  its  hollow  ;" 

we  say  you  have  misread  the   lord's   meaning,  for  he  himself 

has  allowed  these  very  things  in  the  words: — • 
* "  Let  love  and  its   kind  by   all  means  remain  ;  their  mere 
"  existence  can  certainly  give   no  offence  ;  for,  avidyd, 
"  the  she-serpent  now  deprived  of  her-  poisonous   fangs 
"  is  powerless  to  do  any  harm." 

Moreover,  this  is  no  contradiction,  for,  it  is  possible  to  under- 
stand both  these  opinions  wtth  reference  respectively  to  the  as- 
cetic of  well-poised  intellect  (sthita-prajna)  and  the  man  agnosi>s. 
Even  thus,  admitting  love,  hate  and  the  like  in  the  men  of 
gnosis  will  lead  to  his  future  embodiment  through  holy  or  un- 
holy merit.  This  need  not  be  so  ;  for,  true  love  and  hate  are 
those  which  are  initiated  by  ignorance,  as  they  alone  can  lead  to 
future  birth  like  unbaked  seeds.  In  the  man  of  gnosis  there  is 
mere  apparition  of  love  and  its  likes,  like  (the  mere  'name  of 
seed  used  with  regard  to)  seeds  already  baked  on  fire.  It  has 
been  said  with  this  in  view: — 

"  Love  and  the  like  are  burnt  up  by  the  fire  of  dis- 
"  crimination  as  soon  as  they  are  born,  there  can  be  no 
"  chance  of  their  growing  up  (into  any  further  develop- 
"  ment.)" 


84 

If  you  say,  on  the"same  showing,  what  would  prevent  us 
from  allowing  love  and  the  like  even  to  the  ascetic  of  well- 
poised  intellect,  we  reply  much.  Even  apparitions  are,  fdr 
the  time,  as  potent  as  realities  ;  the  rope-snake  is  seen,  for 
the  time,  to  cause  as  much  fear  as  a  real  snake.  If  you  urge 
there  is  no  harm  in  acting  to  the  tune  of  a  mere  apparition 
(known  as  such),  we  say  '  long  life  to  you,'  for  this  very  idea 
Is  the  one  we  have  been  trying  to  set  up  as  Jivanmukti. 

(To  revert  then  to  the  point  at  issue)  Yajnavalkya,  while  en- 
gaged in  disputation,  was  surely  not  in  this  condition,  and  for 
the  same  reason,  he  was  about  to  enter  upon  renunciation-of- 
the-accomplished,  with  a  view  to  obtain  peace  of  mind.  He 
shows  not  only  desire  to  refute,  but  also  greed  of  gold, 
for,  carrying  away  the  prize  of  a  thousand  cows  adorned  with 
costly  ornaments  offered  to  all  the  knowers  of  Brahman 
there  assembled,  he  says  "We  salute  all  knowers  of  Brahman, 
we  have  a  desire  for  these  cows."  If  it  be  thought  that  this  was 
only  a  clever  turn  of  expression,  covering  insult  thus  given  to 
the  assembly,  this,  indeed,  will  be  another  vice  in  him  ;  for, 
other  knowers  of  Brahman,  finding  themselves  deprived  of  the 
prize,  flew  into  anger,  and  he — Yajnavalkya — quite  beside  him- 
self with  anger  cursed  S'akalya  to  death.  But  all  the  same,  it 
should  not  be  supposed  that  such  heinous  sin  would 
bar  his  liberation;  for,  say  the  KaushitaJtinah:  "  He  loses  not 
that  condition  by  any  act  whatever,  whether  it  be  matricide, 
patricide,  or  foeticide."  S'esha,  too,  says  in  his  Aryd-Pancha- 
shiti : — 

"  The  knower  of  the  Absolute,  being  ever  pure,  is  never 
"  touched  with  holiness  or  nnholiness,  from  the  per- 
"  formance  of  a  million  horse-sacrifices  or  even  from  an 
"  equal  number  of  .Bra/mana-murders." 

It  is  no  use  dwelling  longer  on  the  theme  ;  it  is  plain  that 
knowers  of  Brahman,  like  Yajnavalkya  and  others,  were  acting 
under  some  impure  vasand  at  the  time.  Vasishtha  has 
put  it,  in  an  episode  of  his  great  work  Yoga- Vasishtha,  that 
Bhagiratha,  though  he  knew  the  Essence,  derived  not  mental 


85 

peace  while  engaged  in  the  exercise  of  sovereignty,  and 
renounced  everything  to  obtain  it.  Hence  it  follows  that  the 
present  form  of  impure  t'dsand  found  in  ourselves  should  be 
carefully  diagnosed,  even  like  the  faults  we  carp  at  in  others, 
and  that  we  should  at  once  apply  ourselves  to  the  remedy  of 
the  disease.  With  this  in  view  the  Smrti  has  it  : — 

"  If  the  wise  man  of  world  who  carefully  picks  holes  in 
"  the  character  of  others,  expends  the  same  skill  on 
"himself,  what  would  prevent  him  from  breaking 
"  through  the  bonds  (of  ignorance)." 

In  the  first  place,  then,  it  may  be  asked,  what  is  the  remedy 
for 'pride  of  learning'?  It  should  be  known  whether  the 
question  refers  to  such  pride  in  oneself  as  tends  to  make 
others  feel  their  inferiority,  or  to  such  as  being  in  others  tends 
to  make  one  feel  his  own  inferiority.  If  it  is  the  first,  you 
must  constantly  have  before  your  mind  the  idea  that  such 
pride  will  somewhere  be  crushed  out  under  superior  power. 
For  instance,  S'vetaketu  went  to  the  court  of  king  Pravahana, 
in  all  the  pride  of  learning,  but  was  silenced  by  the  prince 
with  a  question  about  the  Panchdgnindya  of  which  he 
(S'vetaketu)  was  ignorant.  Whereupon  the  king  took  him  to 
task,  and  he,  returning  crest-fallen  to  his  father,  expressed 
great  sorrow  at  his  defeat.  The  father,  having  no  pride  of  the 
kind  in  him,  went  hereupon  to  the  prince,  and  obtained  that 
vidya,  of  him.  Impetuous  Balaki  also,  being  taken  to  task 
by  king  Ajatas'atru,  turned  his  pupil  ;  Us'asta,  Kahola, 
and  others  entering  in  dispute,  through  pride,  were  all  ousted 
in  argument.  If  this  pride  be  of  the  second  kind,  that  is  to 
say,  if  it  appears  in  some  one  other  than  ourselves  and  tends 
to  make  us  feel  our  inferiority  at  every  step,  the  best  course 
will  be  to  think  '  the  other  man  is  simply  beside  himself,  let 
him  slander  or  insult  me  either  way,  I  cannot  come  to  grief.' 
Hence  it  has  been  said  : — 

"  If  they  slander  the  Self,  they  slander  themselves  of 
"themselves,  if  they  slander  my  body,  they  are  more 
"  my  friends  than  my  foes.  That  ascetic  whom  slander 


86 

"  and  insult  verily  serve  for  ornament,  can  never  have 
"  his  intellect  moved  even  an  inch  by  the  babble  of 
"  idle  prattlers." 

In  the  Naishkai'imjasiddhi  also  it  has  been  said  : — 

"  What  can  be  said  to  him  who  finds  fault  even  with  him  who 
"  values,  at  its  proper  worth,  all  rubbish  and  its 
"  belongings !  In  the  same  manner  the  gross  and 
"  the  subtile  being  both  given  up  through  discrimiua- 
"  tion,  if  one  should  find  fault  with  either  of  them, 
"  what  recks  the  kuower  for  such  slander  ?  Grief,  joy, 
"fear,  anger,  ambition,  illusion,  desire,  birth,  death, 
"  and  the  like  belong  to  egoism,  not  to  the  Self." 

Slander  is  spoken  of  as  an  ornament  in  the  Jnanankusa  : — 

"  When  men  desirous  of  doing  good,  give  up  even  wealth 
"acquired  with  considerable  pains,  for  the  pleasure  of 
"  others,  I  Would  consider  it  an  unmixed  good,  brought 
"  about  without  any  trouble,  if  men  should  find  satis- 
"  faction  in  speaking  ill  of  me.  In  this  world  where 
"  we  stumble  upon  poverty  of  spirit  at  every  step,  and 
"  which  is  devoid  of  every  kind  of  happiness,  if  any 
"  being  should  find  pleasure  in  speaking  ill  of  me,  let 
"  him  by  all  means  indulge  himself  in  the  feeling,  either 
"in  my  presence  or  behind;my  back,  for,  in  this  world 
"all  misery,  it  is  very  hard  to  come  across  even  a  single 
"  moment  of  such  pleasure." 

The  Smrti  enjoins  insult  as  an  ornament : — =• 

"  The  ascetic  should  so  conduct  himself,  without  leaving 
"  the  path  of  wisdom,  as  men,  feeling  repelled,  should 
"  not  seek  his  company." 

The  pride  of  learning,  pertaining  to  themselves  as  also  to 
others,  which  is  seen  in  Yajnavalkya,  Ushasta  and  others  has 
to  be  done  away  with  by  proper  discrimination.  Love  of 
wealth,  also  anger,  are  to  be  allayed  in  the  same  manner. 
Discrimination,  as  applied  to  the  former,  may  run  thus  : — 
"Misery  attends  the  acquisition  of  wealth,  and  misery 


87 


"  attends  the  protection  of  wealth  acquired  ;  there  is 

"  misery  in  its  coming  ;  there  is  misery  in  its  going  • — 

•          "oh  fie  upon  wealth,  the  abode  of  misery  out  and  out." 

* 

Anger  again  is  of  two  kinds  :  anger  in  oneself  pertaining  to 
others,  and  anger  in  others  pertaining  to  oneself.  With  regard 
to  the  first  it  has  been  said  : — 

''If  thou  feelest  anger  at  him  who  does  by  thee  the  smallest, 
-"  evil,  why  dost  thou  not  feel  anger  at  the  passion, 
"  itself  which  entirely  spoils  all  the  four  cheif  aims  of 
"existence: — Religion,  Property,  Enjoyment,  Libera- 
"tion.  Bearing  as  fruit  the  destruction  of  holy  merit, 
"  name,  and  wealth,  consuming  the  whole  body,  doing 
"no  good  either  here  or  in  the  next  world  ; — if  anger 
"is  this  evil  thing,  how  should  it  find  place  within  the 
"miad  of  the  good  !" 

With  reference  to  the  second  kind  of  anger  it  has  been 
said : — 

"  Give  no  place  even  to  the  thought :  '  I  have  given  no 
"offence,  why  should  people  be  jealous  of  me';  consider 
"  that  as  the  gravest  offence  which  lies  in  so  much  as 
"  thou  hast  not  yet  secured  freedom  from  future  incarna- 
"tion.  Bow  to  the  God  of  anger,  the  merciless 
"  consumer  of  its  own  seat,  the  producer  of  the  sense 
"  of  renunciation  in  me-^the  object  of  its  action — the 
"teacher  of  the  evil  of  existence," 

Love  of  wife  and  child  should  also  be  cleared  away,  like 
love  of  wealth  and  like  anger,  by  proper  discrimination, 
Vasishtha  refers  to  discrimination  as  applied  to  women 
thus : — 

"  This  doll  of  flesh,  held  together  by  some  arrangement  of 
"  bones  and  muscles ; — what  good  can  there  be  in  the 
"  skeleton  of  her  body  moving  like  a  machine  !  Open 
"  your  eyes,  and  see  if  there  is  any  thing  of  beauty 
"  in  the  heap  of  skin,  flesh,  blood,  air  and  water  ; — 


88 

"  why  this  vain  silliness!  Muktah*  are  seen  rolling  here  in 
"  a  row  upon  the  breasts,  enjoying  as  it  were  the  lofti- 
"est  heights  of  the   Mern  and  showing  swiftness  of  the 
'*  (white)  waters  of  the  Ganges.   The  same  sweet  breast 
"of  woman  is,   however,     devoured,   on   occasion,   by 
"  dogs  in  some  out-of-the-way  spot  or  on  the  burning- 
"  ground,    even   like  a  ball  of  rice.     Bearing  the  soot 
"  of  her  hair  and  therefore  best  untouched  though 
"  attractive  to  the  eye,  the  female  is   the  veriest  lamp 
"  of  sin,   consuming  men  like   so  much    straw  ;  for, 
"  females  are  the  most  terrible  fuel  of  the  fire  of  hell, 
"  burning  at  a  distance,  they  being  entirely  dry  though 
"  appearing   all    juicy   and  green.      They   are   verily 
"  traps  laid   to   catch  the   birds,   all   men   of  deluded 
"  heart,  by  the  bird-catcher  cupid.     To  the  fishes,  these 
"  men,  in  the  pond   of  birth  and  death,  wallowing  in 
"the  slough  of  the  mind,   bad  latent  desires  serve 
"  for  the  line   to  which  the  woman  stands  attached  as 
"the  treacherous   bait.      Enough   with   woman, — the 
"  gilded  box  of  all  the   best  jewels  of  sin,  the  eternal 
"  chain  of  torturing  misery.     Flesh  here,  blood  there 
"  and  bones  in  a  third  place  ;  though  thus  formed,  the 
"poison,  this   female   form,    assumes,   oh   Brahman  I 
"  the  enticing  form  of  beauty  through  habitual   attach- 
"ment  even  of  a  few  days.  He  feels  desire  for  enjoyment 
"  who  has  woman  about  him  ;    there  can  be  no  place  of 
"  enjoyment  to  the  woman-less.    Abandon  woman,  and 
"you  abandon   the   whole     world ;     abandoning    the 
"  whole  world,  you  find  supreme  happiness." 

Discrimination  as  applied  to  the  love   of  children  is  thus 
set  forth  in  the  part  devoted  to  Brahmdnanda  : — 

"  The  son  as  long  as  he  is  not  obtained  remains  a  cause  of 
"  serious  anxiety  to  the  parents  ;   even  after  he  is 

*  There  is  obviously  a  double  entendre  on  this  word  ;  it  means  pearls, 
and  the  liberated. 


"  hope  of  obtaining  one  there  is  every  danger   of  abor- 
"  tion,   or  of  some  trouble   at   the  moment   of  birth. 

*  "  Planets  or  maladies  pursue   him    as   soon   as   he   is 
"  born,  the  fear  of  his  remaining   a   fool  is   a   fruitful 
"  source  of  trouble  in   childhood  ;  he   may  while  away 
"his   time    in   ignorance   even   under   charge   of  the 
"  teacher,   he   may  not   find   a   good   wife  though  he 
"  should  pick  up  all  the  learning  in  the  world.     Youth 
"  lays  him  open  to  the  temptations  of  vice,  becoming  a 
"  family-man  he  is  in  constant  danger  of  poverty,  even1 
"if  he  should  fare  well  with  all  these,  death  ceases  not 
"  to  pursue  him.  There  is  no  end  of  the  father's  misery!" 

As  impure  vasanah  pertaining  to  learning,  wealth,  anger, 
woman,  son,  are  done  away  with  by  proper  discrimination,  so 
also  should  be  allayed  other  similar  vasanah  by  skillfully 
discriminating  the  evil  attendant  on  each  of  them.  This 
being  done,  the  highesc  condition,  called  Jivanmukti,  is  within 
eaSy  reach.  Says  Vasishtha  with  this  in  view  : — 

"  If  thou  shalt  put  forth  effort  sufficient  to  destroy  all 
"  vasanah,  all  thy  ills,  physical  and  mental,  will 
"  dissolve  of  themselves  in  a  moment.  Forcibly  tear 
"  thyself  away  from  vasanah,  by  strong  personal  effort, 
"  stand  in  the  condition  (of  harmonious  evenness)  ; 
"  thou  shalt  immediately  gain  access  to  the  highest 
"  place  of  rest." 

*  Personal   effort '  here  means   discrimination   of  the  evils 
attendant  on  objects  ;  and  this  has  been  described  before,  this 
discrimination  though  often  exercised  is   as   often  baffled   by 
the  activity  of  the  senses  which  are,   by  nature,  overwhelm- 
ingly powerful.     Says  the  Lord  :— 

"  Oh  son  of  Kunti !  even  in  the  wise,  ever  on  the  alert, 
"  the  senses  prove  themselves  overwhelmingly  power- 
"  ful,  and  draw  off  his  mind.  Of  the  senses,  acting 
"  each  in  its  own  sphere,  that  whereto  the  mind 
"  attaches  ^itself  carries  off  the  intellect,  like  wind  a 
"  boat  on  the  ocean." 
12 


90 


It  being  so,  the  senses  should  be  held  under  proper  control 
to  preserve  discrimination  once  acquired.  Even  this  has  been 
hinted  at,  in  the  same  place,  in  the  verses  that  follow  :— 

"  Holding  all  these  (senses)  in  proper  control,  the  ascetic 
"  should  sit  all  intent  on  Me,  for,  the  intellect  of  him 
"  alone  is  said  to  be  firm  who  has  his  senses  under  full 
"  control.  Therefore,  oh  strong-armed  one  !  he  is  firm 
"  in  the  Light  (of  Self)  who  has  all  his  senses  properly 
"  turned  off  from  their  respective  objects  and  held  every- 
"  way  under  strong  control." 

In  another  Smrti  also  it  is  said  : — 

"  He  is  not  an  ascetic  whose  hands  and  feet  are  not  free 
"  from  activity,  whose  eyes  are  not  at  rest,  and  he  also 
"  is  not  an  ascetic  whose  tongue  is  not  under  control. 
"  Due  attention  to  these  makes  up  the  true  ascetic." 

The   same  has  been  explained  in  brief  and  at    length, 
;thus  : — 

"  Tongue-less,  emasculated,  lame,  blind,  deaf,  and  mad  ; — 
"  the  mendicant  with  these  six  characteristics  finds 
"  certain  liberation.  He  is  tongue-less  who  even  while 
"  eating  does  not  attach  himself  to  the  food  regarding 
"  it  as  agreeable  or  disagreeable,  and  who  above  all 
'*'  speaks  moderately  and  always  tells  the  truth  with  a 
"view  to  do  good.  He  is  emasculated  who  remains  as 
"  nnaifected  in  the  presence  of  a  full-blown  woman  of 
"  sixteen  as  in  the  presence  of  a  girl  born  this  moment 
"  or  of  a  dame  bent  low  with  the  load  of  a  hundred 
"  years.  He  who  walks  not  beyond  a  yojana  (nearly 
"five  miles)  whether  for  begging  alms  or  for  answering 
"  calls  of  nature  is  every  way  lame  though  with  the 
"  right  use  of  his  feet.  He,  the  ken  of  whose  eye, 
*'  whether  standing  or  walking,  does  not  extend  far,  is 
"  the  really  blind  Sannydsin  who  has  renounced 
"  the  whole  earth  in  all  the  four  Yugas.  Though  hear- 
"ing  beneficial,  moderate,  pleasing,  exhilirating  words 


91 


"  lie,  as  it  were,  hears  not ; — such  a  one  is  ever  deaf. 
"  That  mendicant  who  even   in   the  close  proximity  of 

•  "objects    of    enjoyment    retains  self-possession,    and 
"  keeping  his  senses  under  full  control,  ever  acts,   as   if 
"  in  sleep,  is  always  mad  though  all  wise  and  waking. 
"  Never  indulge  yourself  in  censure  or  praise,  never  hit 
"  any  one  on  a  touchy  point,  never  use  your  tongue  too 
"  much,  be  equal  in  all  conditions.  Never  sit  tete-a-tete 
"  with  any  woman,  never  remember  any  one  of  the  other 
"  sex  seen  before,  leave  aside  all  talk  about  her,   never 
"  consider  her  even  in  a  picture." 

As  some  one  should  carefully  carry  out,  without  break,  the 
vow  he  has  taken,  such  as  eating  only  at  night,  or  once  in 
twenty-five  hours,  or  not  eating  at  all,  or  keeping  silence,  and, 
so  on,  so  the  ascetic  firm  in  the  vows  of  tongue-less-ness 
and  the  rest  referred  to  above  should  take  care  to  carry  out  the- 
vow  of  proper  discrimination.  Thus  through  discrimination 
arid  control  of  sense,  carried  on  for  a  sufficient  length  of 
time,  without  break  and  with,  ardent  application,  comes  about 
the  destruction  of  impure  impressions.  Then  even  like  the 
coming  in  and  going  out  of  the  breath  or  like  the  twinklings 
of  the  eye  arises  constant  flow  of  "  Friendship  amd  the  rest " 
without  any  conscious  effort.  Though  acting  in  the  ways  of 
the  world,  he,  being  all  full  of  the  ideas  of  "  friendship  "  and 
the  rest,  relates  himself  not  with  the  success  or  otherwise  of 
his  efforts,  and  lays  to  rest  all  acts  whatever  looking  upon 
them  as  sleep,  dream,  or  mere  imagination.  This  being 
accomplished,  he  should  apply  himself  to  study  of  the  vdsand 
of  "  simple  being"*  Then  the  whole  universe  appears  of  it- 
self, made  up  of  conscious  and  unconscious  things.  Though 
the  senses  have  as  the  very  reason  of  their  being,  the  cogni- 
tion of  material  (unconscious)  things,  such  as  words,  touch  and 
the  like,  as  mentioned  in  the  text  "  The  self-existent  laid  a 
curse  upon  the  senses  inasmuch  as  he  endowed  them  with,  the 

*  Vide  page  76   and  verses  quoted  there.     All  up  to  this  and   what 
still  follows  is  in  explanation  of  those  verses. 


92 


tendencey  to  objectivise,"  still,  inasmuch  as  consciousness  as 
the  material  cause  of  all  being  whatever  is  not  possible  to  over- 
look, all  cognition  even  of  the  material  (unconscious)  must 
presuppose  that  of  the  ground  if  its  existence,  viz.,  conscious- 
ness or  being.  Even  the  S'ruti  has  it:  "  everything  shines  in 
"the  shining  of  Its  lustre,  all  this  is  illumined  with  Its  light." 
Having  thus  resolved  that  the  noumenon,  the  transcendent 
consciousness  underlying  all  phenomena  which  appear  in 
and  after  it,  is  the  natural  and  real  form  of  everything,  he 
should  acquire  the  firm  '  vasand  of  pure  being.'  This  is  ren- 
dered further  plain  from  the  questions  and  answers  of  Bali 
and  S'ukra  : — 

"  What  is  there  here  in  all  this?  What  is  it  made  of? 
"  What  is  it  in  itself?  Who  are  you  ?  Who  am  I  ? 
"  What  are  these  worlds?  Pray  explain  this  to  me. 
•'  All  this  is  chit  (thought,  simple  being),  all  this  is 
"  made  of  chit,  thou  art  chit  and  so  am  I,  nay  these 
"  worlds  too  are  all  chit.  This  in  short  is  the  whole 
"  truth." 

As  a  goldsmith  buying  a  bracelet  of  gold  fixes  his  mind 
only  on  the  weight  and  colour  of  the  thing,  not  at  all  on 
the  beauty  or  otherwise  of  its  form,  just  in  the  same  manner 
should  the  mind  be  fixed  entirely  in  chit  (simple  being)  alone. 
Till  the  material  is  entirely  obliterated  and  consciousness  of 
simple  being  becomes  as  unconsciously  natural  as  the  coming 
in  and  going  out  of  breath,  effort  to  keep  up  the  '  vasand  of 
simple  being '  should  not  be  discontinued. 

It  may  here  be  said,  let  the '  vdsand  of  simple  being '  which 
alone  is  sufficient  to  do  away  with  impure  vdsand,  be  attended 
to  from  the  beginning,  where  is  the  use  of  this  crooked  method 
of  passing  to  it  through  "  friendship  and  the  rest  "?  We  say 
this  doubt  is  of  no  value,  inasmuch  as  the  '  vdsand  of  pure 
being '  will  then  have  nothing  to  rest  upon.  The  house  with 
walls  and  pillars  does  not  stand  without  a  secure  foundation; 
medicine  conduces  not  to  health  if  taken  without  clearing  the 
stomach  by  proper  purgatives,  etc. 


93 

If  you  still  argue  that  inasmuch  as  you  say  '  give  up  even 
this '  (i.  e.  the  vdsana  of  simple  being),  it  would  appear  that 
'  vdsana  of  simple  being'  has  also  to  be  given  up  like  the  rest; 
but  this  is  not  possible,  for  there  is  nothing  else  in  whose 
favour  the  mind  can  afford  to  give  up  this  vdsana  ;  we  reply 
this  is  not  so.  '  Vdsana  of  simple  being  '  is  of  two  kinds  : 
one  conceived  through  mind  and  intellect,  the  other  subsisting 
without  them.  The  '  mind '  (manas)  is  the  instrument ;  the 
condition  which  connects  the  doer  with  the  act  is  '  intellect ' 
(buddhi).  '  I  shall,  with  concentrated  mind,  fix  myself  on  the 
idea  of  simple  being ' — this  first  form  of  the  '  vdsana  of  simple 
being  '  arising  from  co-ordination  of  doer  and  instrument 
is  called  concentration  (dhyana),  and  it  is  this  that  has  to  be 
given  up  (in  favour  of  the  higher  process  called  samadhi — 
trance).  This  co-ordination  of  doer  and  instrument  goes 
out  of  attention,  when  constant  practice  confirms  the  vdsana 
into  a  habit  ;  this  is  called  ecstasy  or  trance  (samadhi),  and 
this  has  to  be  taken  up  (as  the  next  and  last  step).  Patan- 
jali  thus  defines  dhyana  and  samadhi  :  "  The  continuity  of 
the  mind  on  that  (idea)  is  dhyana  ;  the  same,  conscious  only  of 
the  object,  and,  as  it  were,  emptied  of  itself,  is  samadhi" 
Having  been  firm  in  such  ecstasy  with  long  continuous  and 
arduous  application,  he  should  give  up  even  the  effort  which 
has  to  be  put  forth  for  escaping  the  said  co-ordination  of  doer 
and  instrument, 

You  may  still  argue  :  this  being  so,  the  effort  to  give  up 
this  must  be  given  up  and  so  on  and  on  up  to  a  regressus  in 
infinitiim  ;  we  say  no.  For,  the  last  effort  we  have  just 
mentioned  puts  down  what  is  desired  to  put  down  and  also 
itself  like  the  powder  of  Kataka.  As  Kataka  dust  put  into 
turbid  water  settles  down  with  the  mud  in  the  water,  so  would 
the  effort  (for  doing  away  with  the  co-ordination  of  doer  and 
instrument)  put  down  the  consciousness  of  doer  and  instru- 
ment as  also  itself.  This  being  accomplished,  the  mind 
stands  emptied  of  all  vdsana  whatever,  for  pure  vdsanah 
also  would  thus  have  disappeared  like  the  impure  vasandk 


94 


sought  to  put  out.     Vasishtha   says   with  this  very  thing 
in  view  : — 

"  The  mind,  therefore,  experiences  bondage  through  vdsand, 
"  void  of  vdsana  it  is  ever  liberated.    Oh  Rama  !  try  as 
"  soon  as  possible  to  acquire  the  condition  free  from 
*'  vasand.      Vdsana  melts  away  on  acquiring  proper 
"  vision  through  Truth,  the  mind  attains  the  condition* 
"  of  supreme  tranquil ity  on  the  dissolution  of  vdsana. 
"  He  is  the  real  Jivanmukta  who  is  wide  awake  though 
"  in  sleep,  who  does  not  even  know  waking,  and  whose 
" knowledge  is  ever  free  from  all  vasand" 
Also, 

"  With  mind  ever  wiped  clear  of  all  existence,  though  still 
"  waking  even  as  in  sleep,  sought  after  by  the  wise 
"  like  the  moon  full  of  all  the  Kalas*: — such  a  one  is 
~"  here  called  the  truly  liberated  (mukta).  He  is  the 
"  liberated,  great  Isvara,  who,  renouncing  all  and  every- 
"  thing  from  off  his  heart,  stands  ever  free  from  all 
"misery  and  evil.  He  may  or  may  not  attend  to 
"  Samddhi  and  the  Karma  prescribed  to  his  order, - 
**  he  is  still  liberated,  having  acquired  limitless 
•"  expansion  of  heart  by  giving  up  all  attachment  from 
•"  within.  He,  with  mind  cleared  of  all  vdsand,  has 
**  nothing  whatever  to  do  with  the  performance  or  non— 
"  performance  of  Karma,  nor  has  he  any  concern  with 
"  efforts  to  pacify  the  mind  into  harmony  or  with 
•"  methods  such  as  telling  the  beads  of  a  rosary  while 
"  mentally  repeating  particular  formulae.  I  have 
•**  studied  enough  of  philosophy,  nay  I  have  talked  and 
"  taught  it  to  my  full ;  I  am  convinced  there  is  no  con- 
*'  dition  higher  than  that  Silence  which  comes  of  the 
"  abandonment  of  all  'latent  desire.'" 

It  should  not  be  thought  that  intercourse  (with  the  world) 
•which  is  the  prime  cause  of  keeping  body   and  soul  together 

*  Kola,  means  learning  and  art,  as  also  the  digits  of  the  moon- 


95 


will  thus  be  put  out.  Is  it  intercourse  through  eyes  and  the 
•senses  that  is  thus  thought  of  ?  Or  is  it  intercourse  through 
imiud  ?  The  first  is  thus  explained  by  Uddalaka  : — 

"  The  senses  beginning  with  the  eye  tend  of  themselves  to 
"  their  objects  without,  even  in  the  absence  of  any 
"  vdsana  to  put  them  in  activity  ; — whence  it  appears 
"  vdsand  is  not  the  cause." 

Vasishtha  explains  the  second  thus  : — 

"  As  the  eye  perceives  space  and  things  presented  in  space, 
"  in  the  course  of  nature,  and  feels  no  attachment  what- 
"  ever,  so  should  the  wise  man  of  firm  intellect  engage 
"  himsef  in  all  action  whatever." 

The  same  sage  argues  in  favour  of  enjoying  out  with  such 
"*  intellect,'  all  such  experience  as  may  come  from  previous 
Karma  : — 

"  Enjoyment  well  enjoyed,  through  gnosis,  conduces  to  su- 
"  preme  contentment ;  the  thief,  admitted  into  com- 
"  pany,  with  knowledge  of  him  as  thief,  becomes  more 
"  a  friend  than  a  foe.  As  wayfarers  coming  upon  a 
"  village-scene,  without  having  at  all  expected  it,  see 
"  and  enjoy  the  bustle,  so  do  those  who  know  look  upon 
"  and  enjoy  all  the  glory  of  wealth  and  pleasure." 

He  puts  the  difference  between  one  with  vasana  and  one 
without  vasana,  even  at  the  moment  of  actual  enjoyment, 
•thus  : — 

"  He  feels  no  dejection  in  calamity  like  the  gold-lotus  in  the 
"  night,  he  attends  to  nothing  but  the  actual  present, 
"joyfully  treading  the  way  of  the  wise.  Internal  full- 
"  ness  (of  heart),  unruffled  evenness,  peaceful  pleasant 
"  beauty  such  as  of  the  moonlight  ; — this  they  never 
"  forsake  even  in  calamity,  like  the  moon  her  native 
"  coolness.  Constantly  remaining  within  limits  like  the 
"  ocean,  they,  with  all  desires  of  the  heart  entirely  put 
"  out,  never  swerve  from  the  path  of  necessity  even 
"  like  the  Sun." 


96 


Even  Janaka  is  described   to  act   in  the   same  manner  in 
moments  when  he  is  oat  of  trance  : — 

"Having  remained  long  in  the  condition  of  (ecstatic)  silence, 
"  Janaka  on  regaining  ordinary  consciousness  be- 
"  thought  himself,  with  mind  all  at  peace,  of  the  life 
"  and  ways  of  men.  He  considered  what  was  worth 
"  being  taken  up,  what  awaited  effort  to  accomplish, 
"  what  were  the  imaginings  in  this  consciousness,  self- 
"  sustained  and  ever  pure.  I  desire  not  what  I  have 
"  not,  I  care  not  to  part  from  what  I  have,  I  stand  in 
"  the  immovable  eternal  Self,  let  that  be  mine  which 
"  has  been  mine.  T?hns  taking  thought,  Janaka 
"  addressed  himself,  without  the  least  attachment  (to 
"  results),  to  whatever  came  up  in  the  course  of  duty, 
"  even  like  the  Sun  running  his  diurnal  course.  He 
"  relates  himself  not  with  the  future,  nor  with  what  has 
"  gone  by  ;  he  lives  the  present  out  with  smiling  heart." 
Thus  it  is  plain  that  on  the  destruction  of  vasana  in  ths 

manner  described,   Jivanmukti  of  the  kind   explained  herein, 

immediately  follows. 

End  of  the  second  Chapter  on  '  destruction  of  vdsand.' 


CHAPTER  III. 

ON  THE  DISSOLUTION  OF  MIND. 

Hence  we  proceed  to  the  next  means  of  Jivxnmuktt,  viz., 
'dissolution  of  mind.'  The  whole  of  Vasana  having  been 
entirely  destroyed,  the  mind  is  obviously  dissolved  with  it  ; 
yet  careful  study  of  '  dissolution  of  mind '  as  an  independent 
subject,  has  its  use  in  confirming  the  destruction  of  vasana 
once  accomplished.  Nor  should  it  be  imagined  that  constant 
application  to  what  has  been  set  forth  before  in  the  verses 
"  Tongue-less,  emasculated  "  and  so  on,  is  itself  sure  security 
against  all  future  rise  of  vdsand ;  for,  '  dissolution  of  mind  ' 


97 

has  this  additional  advantage  that  the  '  constant  application  ' 
there  implied  remains  no  longer  necessary  and  there  is  so 
mi*ch  less  of  trouble.  If  it  be  urged  attention  to  '  dissolution 
of  mind '  is  an  essential  under-current  in  the  line  of  effort 
implied  in  "  tongue-less,"  etc.,  we  say  let  it  so  be,  for,  the 
practice  of  *  tongue-less  '-ness,  etc.,  severed  from  application 
to  '  dissolution  of  mind  '  remains  desultury  and  unconfirmed. 
Janaka  speaks  of  the  mind,  as  object  of  dissolution,  with  all 
this  in  mind  ; — - 

"  The  tree,  this  world,  with  innumerable  branches,  sprouts, 
"  fruits,  leaves  and  so  on,  has  the  mind  assigned  to  it 
"  as  its  root.  The  root  of  the  mind  lies  in  '  thinking* 
*'  whence  I  believe  it  to  be  none  other  than  thinking 
"  itself.  On  the  cessation  of  thinking  it  is  possible  to 
"  parch  the  mind  up,  in  a  manner  to  parch  up  even 
"  the  said  tree,  this  world.  I  have  seen  the  Sight!  I 
"  have  found  the  Light !  I  have  caught  hold  of  the  thief 

t  "  that  steals  my  Self! — Mind  is  his  name  ;  I  shall  now 
"inflict  the  last  penalty  on  him  in  return  of  many 
"  continued  tortures  he  has  inflicted  on  me." 

Vasishtha  too  has  said  : — 

**  The  tree,  this  world,  the  bearer  of  all  kinds  of  ills  and 
"  calamities  for  fruit ; — one  alone  is  the  remedy  to  destroy 
"  it, — full  control  of  one's  mind.  Misery  verily  consists 
"  in  activity  of  the  mind,  real  bliss  in  its  destruction ; 
"  the  mind  of  the  knower  is  destroyed  in  no  time;  to  the 
"  ignorant  it  attaches  itself  like  an  ever  lengthening 
*'  chain  of  sorrow  and  sin.  The  midnight-witches — desires 
44 — suck  at  the  heart  only  so  long  as  the  mind  is 
"  not  subdued  by  deep  constant  application  to  the  one 
"  Essence.  All  desire  for  enjoyment  dies  out,  even  like 
"  the  lotus-bed  fading  away  in  the  cold  season,  in  him 
*'  who  has  lost  all  mental  pride  and  has  held  in  powerful 
"  check  his  arch-enemy — the  senses.  Pressing  hand 
"  to  hand,  setting  tooth  against  tooth,  curbing  limb  with 
*'  limb — try  at  the  beginning  to  control  your  mind. 
13 


98 

"  On  the  face  of  this  wide  earth  those  alone  are  the 
"  really  happy  enlightened  souls  deserving  the  first 
"  rank  in  the  list  of  heroic  humanity,  who  are  not 
"  subdued  by  the  mind.  Bow  to  that  immutable 
"  moon-like  effulgence  of  him  from  whose  heart  has  died 
"  out  the  serpent  of  the  mind  ever  lying  there  in  a  coil, 
"  emitting  with  every  breath  the  terrible  venom  of 
"  endless  desire.  The  mind  is  the  navel  of  this  all- 
"  whirling  wheel  of  Illusion  ;  if  thou  can'st  stand  out 
"  of  it  (the  navel)  there  is  nothing  which  can  affect 
"  thee." 

Gaudapadacharya  too  has  said  : — 

"  In  all  ascetics  whatever,  the  condition  of  fearlessness 
"  depends  on  control  of  mind,  which  leads  also  to 
"  destruction  of  misery,  perfect  light  and  inexhausti- 
"  ble  peace." 

What  Arjuna  says  in  the  following  : — 

"  The  mind,  oh  Krshna  !  is  very  fickle,  overwhelmingly 
"  powerful,  it  were  easie.r  to  control  the  wind  than 
"  this  mind  ;"  refers  to  physical  Yoga. 

Whence  Vasishtha  too  has  said : — 

"  He  who  understanding  the  mind  applies  himself,  again 
"  and  again,  to  subduing  it,  gains  no  success  without 
"  the  help  of  some  consummate  plan,  even  like  one 
"  who  fails  to  subdue  a  mad  elephant  without  the  iron 
"  hook.  Vasishtha  has  well  set  forth  the  means  con- 
"  ducing  to  dissolution  of  mind  ;  he  has  his  mind 
"  under  control  who  follows  them  with  care.  Control 
*'  is  accomplished  in  one  of  two  ways:  by  physical  prac- 
"  tices  or  by  mental  training.  The  first  consists  in 
"  exercising  control  over  the  inner  senses  through 
"  control  over  the  outer  physical  organs.  This  comes 
"  out  successful  at  times,  and  tends  to  control  of  mind 
"  as  well.  On  the  other  hand,  application  to  spiritual 
"  science,  company  of  the  good,  abandonment  of  latent 


99 


"  desire,  restraining  the  flow  of  breath, — these  are  some 
"  of  the  most  useful  means  of  mental  training  leading 
"  to  control  of  mind.  Those  who,  in  face  of  these? 
"  try  to  control  it  through  physical  practices,  lose 
"  sight  of  the  lamp  while  vainly  dispelling  darkness 
"  with  darkness.  The  fools  who  set  themselves  about 
"gaining  mastery  over  the  mind  through  physical 
"  practices  try  to  hold  the  mad  lord  of  elephants  with 
"  lotus-fibres." 

Control  is  of  two  kinds  :  control  by  (brute)  force  and  control 
by  degrees.  In  the  first,  the  inner  senses — eye,  ear  and  the 
rest— as  also  the  outer  organs — tongue,  hands  and  the  rest — are 
held  in  control  by  main  force  on  exercising  sufficient  check 
over  the  outer  physical  receptacle  of  each.  Fools  arguing  from 
the  analogy  of  the  senses  are  often  led  into  the  delusion  that 
mind  too  will  be  controlled  by  similar  means.  But  this 
never  happens  ;  for,  it  is  entirely  impossible  to  bring  any 
external  control  to  bear  upon  the  seat  of  mind,  viz.,  the  heart. 
Whence  control-by-degrees  is  the  only  means  to  this  end. 
*  Application  to  spiritual  science '  (gnosis)  and  the  rest  are 
the  means  of  this  control-by-degrees.  >  Gnosis  enlightens 
one  as  to  the  illusory  nature  of  all  objects  and  the  self- 
illumined  substance  of  the  Subject.  This  being  done,  the 
mind,  finding  no  interest  in  objects  within  its  ken,  perceives 
the  inscrutableness  of  the  one  substance — the  eternal  Subject, 
— and  is  thus  for  ever  laid  at  rest  in  its  own  place  like  fire 
not  fed  with  fuel.  It  has  well  been  said  : — 

"  As  fire,  not  fed  by  fuel,  subsides  into  its  place,  so,  indeed, 
"  does  all  thinking  (the  mind)  die  out  into  its  source, 
"on  not  being  led  into  modifications  of  any  kind." 

The  '  source  '  here  means  the  Self. 

'  Company  of  the  good'  is  the  only  remedy  for  those  who, 
though  often  enlightened,  are  unable  to  grasp  the  Truth,  as 
well  as  for  those  who  forget  it  as  often  as  they  grasp  it.  The 
'good'  constantly  inculcate  the  Truth,  and  ever  remind  their 


100 

hearers  of  the  same.  He  who  afflicted  with  the  evil  vasand  of 
arrogance,  born  of  much  learning  and  the  like,  cannot  afford 
to  seek  company  of  the  good  must,  by  the  process  of  dis- 
crimination just  described,  try  to  eradicate  all  vasand  what- 
ever from  his  heart.  If  vasanah  prove  too  powerful  to  be  thus 
pat  out,  the  next  remedy  may  best  be  sought  through  '  res- 
traint of  the  flow  of  breath;'  for,  inasmuch  as  flow  of  breath  and 
vasand  are  the  motive  forces  of  the  mind,  restraint  of  mind 
follows  upon  restraint  of  these.  This  character  of  the  two 
is  thus  touched  upon  by  Vasishtha  : — 

"  Of  the  tree — this  mind — surrounded  with  the  hedge  of 
"  numerous  modifications,  two  are  the  seeds — flow  of 
"  breath  and  strong  vdsana.  Flow  of  breath  quickens 
"  that  consciousness  which  stands  all-pervading,  and 
"this  active  quickening  leads  to  endless  mental 
"  agony." 

As  the  smith,  blowing  the  air  upon  fire  covered  with  ashes 
through  the  bellows,  quickens  it  into  a  bright  blaze,  so  does 
consciousness  covered  by  ignorance,  the  material  cause  of  the 
mind,  quicken  itself  into  innumerable  mental  creations  on 
being  energized  by  the  flow  of  breath.  And  from  this 
quickening  viz.  this  blazing  out  of  consciousness  into 
mental  forms,  arise  all  ills  and  considerable  mental  agony. 
This  is  generation  of  the  mind  through  the  action  of  Prana 
(vital  breath).  The  same  sage  describes  the  second  cause  of 
mind  thus  : — 

."  Oh  child  of  the  Raghus  I  I  tell  thee  the  second  phase 
"  of  the  birth  of  mind,  the  phase  wherein  vasand 
"  works  to  this  end,  and  which  produced  by  simple 
"ideation  in  consciousness  is  experienced  through 
"ideas  and  imaginations.  Mind  the  cause  of 
"decay  and  death  is  born  in  all  its  fickle  active 
"  nature  through  exclusive  constant  thinking  of  objects 
**  experienced  with  interest  for  a  considerable  length 
"  of  time." 


101 

Not  only  are  Prana  and     Vdsana  thus   the  causes  of  mind, 
but  they  are  reciprocally  the  cause  each  of  the  other  as   well. 

*Says  Vasishtha  : — 

"  Vdsana  acts  on  flow  of  Prana,  which  in  its  turn  re-acts  on 
"  vdsana  ;  whence  these  two  are  like  the  seed  and  the 
"  sprout  in  the  matter  of  producing  the  tree — this 
"  mind." 

Hence  does   he   speak  of  the  destruction   of  both  from 
destruction  of  any  one  of  the  two  : — 

"Two  are  the  seeds  of  the  mind — flow  of  breath  and  latent 
"  desire ;  one  of  these  being  destroyed  the  other 
"  disappears  in  no  time." 

Thus  are  set  forth  the  means  of  destruction  and  the  result 
of  such  destruction  :— 

"  Flow  of  Prdna  obeys  control  through  that  Yoga  which 
,  "  consists  of  constant  steady  application  to  Pranayama 
"  with  such  tact  as  the  teacher  may  prescribe,  accom- 
"  panied  by  proper  posture  and  diet.  Vdsana  is 
"  deprived  of  its  activity  by  performing  the  duties  of 
"ordinary  intercourse  without  any  attachment,  by 
"  chasing  out  all  imaginations  of  worldly  things 
"  from  the  mind,  and  by  never  losing  sight  of  the 
"  perishable  nature  of  the  body.  Vdsana  being  rooted 
*'  out  mind  becomes  no-mind,  and  control  is  at  once 
"  established  over  the  flow  of  breath  ; — this  being 
"  accomplished  you  are  free  to  act  in  any  manner  you 
"  choose.  The  mind,  oh  Raghava !  means  this  on  the 
"  whole  :  the  intense  and  interested  brooding  within 
"over  any  objective  thing  in  a  manner  to  create 
"an  imaginary  subjective  actuality  of  the  object. 
"Nothing  remains  to  form  the  mind  when  no  ima- 
"gination  about  things  acceptable  or  otherwise 
"  continues,  and  when  you  stand  all  quiet  giving  up 
"  every  cause  of  disturbance.  The  condition  known  as 
"amanskatd.  (total  mindlessness)  conducive  of  the 


102 

"  highest  peace,  comes   of  depriving  the  mind   of  its 
"  functioning  character,  through  destruction  of  vdsand." 

<r 

The  impossibility  of  any  peace  whatever  in  the   absence 
of  this  condition  of '  mindlessness '  is  thus  set  forth: — 

"  Neither  friends  nor  relatives,  neither  teachers  nor  men, 
"  can  help  that  poor  thing  which  has  no  power  over 
"  his  mind." 

Of  the 'posture' and  'diet'  spoken  of  at  the  beginning  of 
this  reference,  posture  is  thus  described  in  three  aphorisms 
with  its  characteristics  and  results,  by  Lord  Patanjali:  "Posture 
is  that  which  is  steady  and  easy  ;"  "  By  slackening  activity  and 
by  contemplation  on  the  Ananta;"  "Thence  impervious  ness  to 
the  pairs."  Any  posture  such  as  the  Padma,  or  the  Svastika 
or  any  position  of  the  body  which  one  finds  easy  and  comfort- 
able as  causing  no  strain  or  pain  in  any  of  the  limbs  and 
which  keeps  the  body  in  a  condition  so  steady  as  to  be  free 
from  jerks  or  tremblings  is  to  him  the  best  posture  he  can  take. 
One  ordinary  means  of  accomplishing  this  is  the  '  slackening 
of  activity,'  that  is  to  say,  the  slackening  of  that  mental  fervour 
which  propels  to  energetic  action  such  as  moving  about, 
attending  household  duties,  going  about  sacred  places,  taking 
baths,  offering  sacrifices,  etc.  If  this  mental  fervour  were  not 
allayed,  it  is  sure  to  overthrow  the  body  and  lead  it  off  from 
the  position  assumed.  The  extraordinary  means  to  steady 
any  posture  is  '  contemplation  on  the  Ananta,'  viz.  such 
attitude  of  the  mind  as  would  identify  one's  Self  with  the 
(fabulous)  serpent  S'esha  (or  Ananta)  who  stands  unmoved 
supporting  the  globe  of  this  earth  on  his  thousand  hoods. 
This  identification  generates  that  Unseen  Force  which  easily 
confirms  the  posture  assumed.  Posture  being  gained,  the 
'  pairs  '  of  opposites,  such  as  good  and  evil,  cold  and  heat, 
respect  and  contempt,  cease  to  trouble  as  before  ;  but  to  this 
end  it  is  necessary  that  a  proper  place  guarded  against 
any  chance  of  these  should  be  selected.  This  is  thus 
described  : — 

"  One  taking  a  comfortable  posture  in.  some  solitary  place, 


103 


"  with  supreme  (bodily  and  mental)  parity  and  holding 
"  his  neck  and  head  in  a  line,"  etc. 

*"  In  a  place  even,  pure,  free  from  pebbles,  fire  and  sand,  as 
"also  away  from  noise  and  any  great  watercourse, 
"  always  pleasant  and  never  painful  to  look  at,  one 
"  should  try  to  conquer  his  mind  in  the  corner  of  some 
"  cave  protected  from  the  breeze." 

Thus  far  the  yoga,  relating  to  '  Postures.'  The  yoga  relating 
to  *  diet '  consists  in  one  word  '  moderation ' : — 

"  The  yogin  should  neither  over-eat  nor  starve." 
The  Lord  too  says  : — 

"  Yoga  is  not  possible  in  him  who  eats  much,  nor  is  it 
"  possible  in  him  who  eats  too  little.  It  is  not  possi- 
"  ble  in  him  who  likes  to  spend  all  his  time  in  sleep, 
"nor  in  him,  oh  Arjunal  who  forces  himself  to  be 
"  awake  all  the  while.  Yoga  conduces  to  the  destruc- 

•  "  tion  of  misery  in  him  who  with  moderate  noarish- 
"  ment,  moderate  enjoyment,   and  moderate  attention 
"  to  business,  takes  moderate  rest  and  keeps  himself 
"  moderately  awake." 

The  destruction  of  mind  in  him  who  having  gained  a 
steady  posture  tries  to  that  end  through  restraint  of  Prana 
(Prdndydma)  is  thus  set  forth  in  the  S'vetasvatara  : — 

"Bring  the  three*  in  a  line  and  keep  the  body  perfectly 
"  straight,  press  the  mind  to  lead  all  senses  into  the 
"  heart ;  thus  should  the  knower  cross — in  the  boat, 
"  Brahmanf — to  the  other  side  of  the  tempestuous 
"waters  of  the  river — (this  illusion);  (or)  having 
"  gained  proper  control^:  he  should  apply  himself  to 
"restraint  of  breath  which  being  accomplished  he 

*  Head,  neck  and  chest. 

•j-  The  word  of  glory-Aum-symbolic  of  Brahman  is  here  meant,   as  the 
one  syllable  on  which  the  knower  should  contemplate. 
t    J  Over  the  senses, and  over  their  respective  actions. 


104 

"should  accustom  himself  to  breathe  only  through  the 
"  nose,  exercising  vigilant  check  over  his  mind  even 
"  like  a  driver  over  restive  horses." 

To  two  orders  belong  Yoginah  ;  one  devoid  of  life-of-the- 
lower-self  consisting  in  pride  of  learning  and  the  like,  the  other 
bound  to  that  life.  The  first  succeed  in  restraining  the  breath 
which  is  invariably  bound  up  with  the  mind  from  controlling 
the  latter  by  meditation  on  Brahman.  The  verse  beginning 
with  *  Bring  the  three  in  a  line'  is  addressed  to  such  a  one. 
The  second  succeed  in  excersing  control  over  the  mind 
invariably  bound  up  with  the  vital  breath  from  exersising 
control  over  the  latter.  To  these  is  addressed  the  verse 
begining  with  '  Having  gained  proper  control '  etc.  The  method 
of  restraining  the  breath  will  just  be  described.  This  restraint 
being  accomplished  'proper  control'  is  at  once  secured ; 
and  the  activity  of  the  mind  such  as  pride  of  learning 
and  the  rest  is  speedily  put  out.  An  illustration  to  elucidate  the 
action  of  restraint  of  breath  on  control  of  mind  is  thus  given 
in  another  place  : — 

"As  heat  separates  the  ore  from  the  pure  metal  and  burns 
"  up  all  dross,  so  is  burnt  up  all  evil  born  of  the 
"senses  through  restraint  of  breath." 

This  is  set  to  reason  by  Vasishtha  thus : — 

"  Flow  of  breath  means  activity  of  the  mind;  the  wise 
"  should  therefore  put  forth  the  best  effort  towards 
"  checking  the  former." 

(In  explanation  hereof  may  be  studied  the  following 
parable).  The  gods  presiding  over  mind,  speech,  sight  and 
other  senses  having  taken  the  vow  of  fulfilling  each  his  own 
proper  functions  were  all  swallowed  up  by  never-ceasing  Death. 
He  (Death)  however  was  not  able  to  reach  Prdna  (vital  breath). 
Hence  it  is  that  Prdna,  though  constantly  going  out  and 
coming  in,  never  feels  the  fatigue  of  his  activity.  The  same 
has  been  thus  expressed  by  students  of  the  Vajasaneyi- 
(S'dkhd);  "This,  of  all  of  us,  is  the  best;  he  feels  no  pain 


105 

whether  iu  motion  or  rest,  he  never  goes  to  decay,  we  are 
all  his  forms  ;  inasmuch  as  all  are  his  forms  he  is  called 
ib$  vital  breath  of  all."  Hence  the  senses  are  plainly 
forms  of  this  vital  breath,  meaning  that  they  are  under  the 
control  of  breath.  This  too  has  been  set  forth  in  the  Antar- 
yami-Brahmana  while  speaking  of  the  Sutrdtman:  "Oh 
Gautama !  the  air  indeed  is  that  Sutra  (thread),  this  world 
and  the  next,  all  beings  whatever,  are  held  together  by  the 
air ;  hence  again,  Oh  Gautani !  it  is  said  of  a  dead  man 
that  his  limbs  are  all  broken  asunder,  the  thread  of  this 
air  alone  can  sew  them  togethsr  once  more."  Thus  Prdna 
and  Manas  (mind)  being  so  far  concomitants  of  each  other 
control  of  the  former  leads  to  control  of  the  latter. 

It  may  here  be  asked  how  this  concomitance  is  born  out? 
for,  in  sleep  the  mind  does  not  appear  to  be  active  though  the 
flow  of  breath  has  not  ceased.  This  is  easy  to  answer,  for, 
the  mind  being  then  in  a  condition  of  potential  existence 
only  is  as  good  as  not  in  existence  altogether. 

It  has  been  said  control  of  breath  being  accomplished 
"  breathe  only  through  the  nose."  This  is  a  contradiction,  for 
we  do  never  find  any  breath  in  the  body  forsaken  by  Prdna. 
and  therefore  dead ;  nor  is  destruction  of  Prdna  possible  in 
the  case  of  one  breathing  the  breath  of  life.  This  is  no 
difficulty,  for  absence  of  violent  flow  is  all  that  is  meant  by 
destruction  of  Prdna  in  the  present  instance.  The  heavy 
confused  breathing  observable,  for  the  time,  in  one  busied  in 
digging  the  ground,  or  felling  a  tree,  or  ascending  a  hill- 
top, or  running  by  the  road-side,  is  not  seen  in  one  who  has 
gained  control  or  who  is  sitting  in  some  suitable  posture  for 
the  purpose.  One  who  has  acquired  the  secret  of  Prdnaydma 
has  his  flow  of  breath  thinned  to  a  very  low  point.  It  is  said 
with  this  very  thing  in  mind  :— 

"  Having  drawn  the  breath  iu  at  some  length,  he  should  then 
give  it  out  very  slowly." 

As  a  chariot  with  restive  horses  is  drawn  away  from  its 
14 


106 

coarse  to  any  place  whatever,  till  the  driver,  checking  the  horses 
through  the  reins  in  his  hand,  restores  them  to  the  right  path, 
BO  the  mind,  dragged  hither  and  thither  by  the  senses,  is  held 
in  perfect  check  on  the  string  of  Prdna  being  held  tight  in 
control. 

It  has  been  said,  'he  should  apply  himself  to  restraint  of 
breath, '  and  so  on.  This  *  restraint  of  breath '  is  elsewhere  thus 
described  : — - 

"  With  Prdna  properly  laid  out  one  should  thrice  repeat  the 
"  Gayatri  with  the  Vyahrti,t\iQ  Pranava  and  the  S'iras;' 
"  — this  is  Prdnaydma.  Reckaka,  Puraka  andKumbhaka 
"  are  the  three  Prandydmah.  Drawing  the  air  up,  and 
"  entirely  emptying  the  dkdsa,  one  should  concentrate 
"on  the  idea  of  this  supreme  void: — this  is  Rechaka. 
"As  one  sucks  in  water  by  elongating  the  lips  to  make, 
"  as  it  were,  a  pipe,  resembling  the  stalk  of  a  lotus,  so 
"  should  the  air  be  drawn  in  for  Prdnaydma : — this  is 
*'  Puraka.  Neither  giving  up  nor  taking  in  any  air, 
"  nor  moving  any  of  the  limbs,  one  should  concentrate 
"  on  the  idea  of  this  supreme  fullness  : — this  is 
"  Kumbhaka," 

In  order  to  expel  all  air  from  within  the  body,  the  dkd'sa, 
that  is  the  body,  should  be  emptied  of  all  air,  by  raising  it  up 
from  within.  Having  thus  emptied  the  body  of  all  air,  not  a 
particle  should  be  allowed  to  re-enter,  and  control  should  be 
exercised  oa  this  idea  of  perfect  void  : — this  is  Reckaka. 

Kumbhaka  is  of  two  kinds  :  internal  and  external.  Vasishtha 
thus  describes  both  : — 

"  The  Apdna  having  died  out,  Prdna  does  not  rise  in  the 

"heart,— this  condition  is  that  of  Kumbhaka  experienced 

"by  ascetics.       Prdna  having  subsided  without  the 

"  body,  Apdna  does  not  rise  up  within — this   condition 

"  of  fullness  is  that  of  external  Kumbhaka" 

Inspiration  interferes  with  internal  Kumbhaka,  expiration 

with  external ;  motion   of  any  one   of  the   limbs  interferes 


107 

•with  either,  for  inspiration  or  expiration  necessarily  accom- 
panies all  motion.  The  sage  Patanjali  describes  Prdnd- 
ydnna,  which  is  the  next  stage  after  posture,  in  his  Aphorisms, 
thus:  "  This  (posture)  being  accomplished,  Prandydma  follows 
the  cutting  off  of  the  course  of  inspiration  and  expira- 
tion." It  should  not  be  thought  that,  though  there  is  sus- 
pension of  this  course  in  Kumbhaka,  it  is  impossible  for  that 
suspension  to  be  present  in  Rechaka  and  Puraka  ;  for,  by 
constant  practice  with  gradual  lengthening  of  the  several 
periods,  the  natural  even  course  of  Prdna  is  invariably  modi- 
fied to  some  perceptible  extent.  This  practice  is  spoken  of 
by  Patanjali  thus  :  "  It  is  external,  internal,  or  steady  ; 
regulated  by  place,  time,  and  number  ;  and  is  long  or  short ;' 
"  Rechaka  refers  to  external  (breath) ;"  "  Puraka  to  internal 
(breath)  ;"  Kumbhaka  to  (the  breath)  held  within."*  Each  of 
these  has  to  be  measured  by  place,  etc.  In  the  natural  course 
of  Rechaka,  the  breath  rising  from  the  heart  expires  out  at 
the  nostrils,  and  becomes  imperceptible  at  a  distance  of  twelve 
digits  from  the  tip  of  the  nose.  Practice  gradually  raises 
the  breath  from  the  navel  or  the  rectum  (instead  of  from  the 
heart),  and  renders  it  imperceptible  at  a  distance  of  twenty- 
four  or  even  thirty-six  digits.  The  rising  of  the  breath  from 
the  navel  or  regions  below,  through  excessive  effort,  is  dis- 
cernible within  by  the  sensation  round  the  region  whence  it 
rises.  Externally  we  can  measure  the  length  by  holding  a 
piece  of  cotton  against  which  the  expired  breath  may 
strike  and  indicate  its  existence  by  affecting  the  lump.  This 
is  measuring  by  '  place/  Let  the  student  next  ascertain 
how  many  times  he  is  able  to  (mentally)  repeat  the  '  word-of- 
glory '  during  one  Rechaka  (as  it  naturally  flows).  Suppos- 
ing this  number  stands  at  ten  or  twenty  or  thirty,  let  him 
measure  the  time  by  this  number,  and  let  him  then  take 
measure  of  the  times  he  does  the  Rechaka,  such  as  ten  this 
month,  twenty  the  next,  thirty  the  one  following,  and  so  on. 

*  These  three  Sutras  from  Rechaka,  etc.,  are  not  found  in  the  published 
editions  of  the  Yoga-Sutras  ;  vide  my  translation,  page  51. 


108 

Thus,  through  time,  may  be  measured  number  also.  Thus 
is  Prdndydma  measured  by  place  and  time.  Number  is 
measured  by  doing  ten,  twenty  or  thirty  Prdnaydmah,  per 
diem.  The  same  should  apply  equally  to  Puraka.  Though 
in  Kumbhaka  it  is  impossible  to  apply  the  place-measure, 
there  certainly  is  no  difficulty  in  measuring  it  by  time.  As  a 
thick  lump  of  cotton  becomes  long  and  thin  on  being  spread 
out,  so  does  Prdna  become  long  and  thinly  perceptible  on  being 
made  the  subject  of  proper  study  through  slow  increase  of  the 
measure  of  place,  time  and  number.  Patanjali  speaks  of  a 
kind  of  Prdndydma,  other  than  the  three  beginning  with 
Rechaka  thus  :  "  The  fourth  is  that  which  has  no  reference 
to  the  external  and  internal."  The  Kumbhaka,  following 
upon  expiration  of  all  breath  from  within  according  to  one's 
power,  is  external  Kumbhaka  ;  the  same  after  inspiration  of 
breath  according  to  one's  power,  is  internal  Kumbhaka.  The 
Kumbhaka  that  snbsits  independently  of  these  two  is  the  fourth, 
described  as  other  than  the  one  described  before  and  known  as 
Kevala-Kumbhaka.  The  three  processes  beginning  with 
Rechaka  are  for  those  who  find  in  themselves  strong  tendency 
to  sleep,  slothfulness,  and  the  like  ;  the  fourth — Kevala- 
Kumbhaka — is  for  those  who  are  beyond  such  tendencies. 

The  result  of  Prdndydma  is  thus  set  forth  in  the  same  book  of 
Aphorisms:  "  Thence  is  destroyed  the  covering  of  light." 
The  Light  is  the  light  of  Sattva;  that  which  obscures  this 
native  light  is  the  cause  which  manifests  itself  in  sleep,  sloth- 
fulness,  and  the  like  ;  this  is  removed  by  the  practice  of 
Prdndydma.  Also  "  The  mind  becomes  fit  for  absorption." 
Absorption  is  contemplation  from  fixing  of  the  mind  on  some 
place,  such  as  the  seven  plexuses  distributed  in  the  body 
respectively  at  the  rectum,  the  genetive  organ,  the  navel,  the 
heart,  the  throat,  the  middle  of  the  eye-brows,  the  crown  of  the 
head.  "  Contemplation  is  the  fixing  of  the  mind  on  some- 
thing." The  S'ruti  too  corroborates  this  : — 

"  Fix  thyself  first  on  the  mind,  the  ever  active  instrument 
"  of  internal    imaginings,  then  fix  it  on   Atman,   and 


100 

"  remain  fall  of  the  idea  of  Self ; — this  to  the  wise  is 

"  proper  contemplation." 
• 

The  mind  freed,  through  Pranaydma  of  its  native  restless- 
ness caused  by  the  inherent  property  of  energy  (Rajas)  and  of 
its  native  indolence  cansed  by  the  inherent  property  of 
grossness  (Tama),  becomes  fit  for  such  contemplation. 

Now  in  the  words  "application  to  Pranaydma  with  such 
tact  as  the  teacher  may  describe,"  the  word  'tact'  used 
in  this  connection  implies  any  one  of  the  several  processes 
well-known  to  Yoginah,  such  as  the  whirling  of  the  Meru,  viz. 
the  head,  the  moving  of  the  Uvula  with  the  tip  of  the  tongue, 
contemplation  on  the  Light  at  the  navel-plexus,  use  of  drugs 
calculated  to  stupify  and  exhalt  the  senses,  and  so  on. 

This  finishes  the  several  ways  of  dissolving  the  mind,  viz. 
application  to  spiritual  science,  company  of  the  good,  aban- 
donment of  latent  desire,  restraint  of  breath,  enumerated  (in 
a'verse*)  at  the  beginning  (of  this  section). 

Henceforward  we  touch  upon  '  trance '  as  another  means  to 
the  same  end.  The  last  two  of  the  five  stages  of  the  mind, 
with  total  forgetfulness  of  the  preceding  stages,  make 
up  what  is  called  'trance*.  'Distraction,  dormancy, 
constraint,  concentration,  absorption,  are  the  five  stages 
of  the  mind'  (i.  e.,  of  mental  activity).  The  mind  led 
away  into  life-of-the-lower-Self  or  into  the  world  and  its 
ways  or  into  concern  of  the  body  and  its  surroundings 
is  in  the  stage  of  distraction.  The  mind  over-powered  by 
sleep  or  slothfulness  is  in  the  stage  of  dormancy.  The  mind 
obeying  control,  only  on  occasion,  and  resting  in  contempla- 
tion for  a  time  is  in  the  state  of  constraint.  Of  these  three  the 
first  and  second  stages  of  mental  activity  have  nothing  what- 
ever to  do  with  trance.  The  mind  being  distracted,  no  Toga  is 
possible;  for,  trance  which  is  a  (collected)  condition  of  the  mind 
cannot  then  be  maintained.  In  other  words,  trance  is  destroyed 

*  See  page  98. 


110 

in  no  time,  in  consequence  of  the  mind  being  in  a  state  of  dis- 
traction, even  like  seeds  which  are  immediately  burnt  to  ashes 
in  hot  embers.  That  condition  which  gives  placid  sight  of  tke 
thing  on  which  the  mind  is  fixed  for  the  time,  which  puts  an 
end  to  all  ills,  which  loosens  the  tie  of  Karma,  and  which  leads 
it  (the  mind)  to  the  state  of  utter  suspension  of  active  function- 
ing is  called  Samprajnata-Yoga  (conscious  trance).  When 
all  functioning  (of  the  mind)  is  at  end,  the  same  is  called 
Asamprajnata  (unconscious  ecstacy).  The  concentration 
which  is  the  ground  of  the  former  kind  of  trance  is  thus 
spoken  of  in  an  aphorism  :  "  Then  again  the  repressed  and 
the  revived  are  equally  (present  in)  consciousness  ;  this  is 
that  condition  of  the  mind  which  is  transformation  into 
unity."*  The  '  repressed '  are  impressions  put  '  out,  and 
therefore  past.  The  *  revived  '  are  impressions  produced,  and 
therefore  present.  They  are  present  in  consciousness,  i.  e.,  in 
the  mind.  The  repressed  and  the  revived  are  equal  only 
when  each  of  them  relates  itself  to  the  same  thing  in  succession. 
Such  transformation  of  the  mind  is  called  'transformation 
into  unity ',  in  other  words.,  concentration.  Trance,  the  stage  of 
ripened  concentration,  is  thus  described  :  "  Trance-transforma- 
tion is  the  setting  and  rising  of  distraction  and  concentration 
respectively. "f  The  mind  moved  by  the  property  of  Energy 
(Rajas)  runs  after  objects,  one  after  the  other.  This '  distraction ' 
slowly  diminishes  by  special  effort  put  forth  in  that  behalf  by 
the  ascetic,  and  i£  succeeded  by  'concentration.'  The  trans- 
formation of  the  mind  into  such  concentration  is  called 
'trance.' 

Of  the  eight  stages,  leading  to  this  trance,  Forbearance, 
Observance,  Posture,  Regulation  of  Breath,  and  Abstraction 
are  only  exterior.  Forbee ranee  is  thus  spoken  of  in  the 
Aphorisms  :J  "  Forbearance  consists  in  abstaining  from 
killing,  falsehood,  theft,  incontinence,  and  greediness."  For- 
bearance (Yama)  is  that  which  bids  one  forbear  from  prohi- 

*  Yogi-Sutra  Ch.  III.,  Aph.  XIL 
t  Ch.  m;  Aph.  XL  J  Ch.  II.,  Aph.  XXX. 


Ill 

bited  acts  such  as  killing  and  the  rest.  Observances  are  set 
forth  thus  :*  "  Observance  consists  in  purity,  contentment, 
mortification,  study,  and  resignation  to  Is'vara"  Observance 
(Niyama)  is  that  which  turning  one  way  from  acts  with 
desire,  the  cause  of  incarnation,  leads  him  to  observe  such 
duties  as  tend  to  liberation.  The  difference  in  the  keeping 
of  these  two  is  thus  shown  in  the  Smrti : — 

"  The  wise  should  attend  every  moment  to  Forbearance,  it 
"  matters  not  if  he  ever  neglects  Observance  ;  for,  one, 
"  devoted  solely  to  Observance,  falls  from  neglect  of 
"  Forbearance.  One  devoted  to  Observance  and  neglect- 
"  ing  Forbearance  meets  with  sure  destruction,  not  one 
"  careless  of  Observance  but  sure  of  Forbearance.  Thus 
"  taking  correct  measure  of  the  strength  of  each,  the 
"  wise  should  direct  his  mind  mostly  to  Forbearance." 

The  results  of  Forbearance  and  Observance  are  thus 
described:!  "  Suspension  of  antipathy  (on  the  habit  of  non- 
"  killing  being  acquired),  fruitfulness  of  all  acts  (on 
"  veracity  being  confirmed),  approach  of  all  jewels  (on 
"  theft  of  all  kinds  being  given  up),  attainment  of 
"  supreme  vigour  and  freedom  from  the  danger  of  rebirth 
"  (on  giving  up  incontinence),  and  knowledge  of  the  how 
"  and  wherefore  of  existence  (on  abstinance  from 
"  greediness)."  "  From  purity  arise  disgust  for  one's 
"  own  body  and  non-intercourse  with  others  ;  clear 
"  passivity,  pleasantness  of  mind,  fixity  of  attention, 
"  subjugation  of  the  senses,  and  fitness  for  commu- 
"  nion  with  soul."  "  Superlative  happiness  from  content- 
"  ment."  "  From  mortification,  after  the  destruction 
"  of  impurities,  arise  occult  powers  in  the  body  and  the 
"  senses."  "  By  study  is  produced  communion  with  the 
"  desired  deity."  "  From  resignation  to  Isvara  (results) 
"  the  accomplishment  of  Samddki  (trance)." 
Posture  and  Regulation  of  breath  have  been  defined  and 
explained  before. 

*  Ch.  II.,  Aph.  XXXII.  t  Ok  IL>  APh-  XXXI— XLV. 


112 

Abstraction  is  thus  given  :* — "  Abstraction  is,  as  it  were, 
the  imitation  of  the  thinking  principle  by  the  senses,  on 
withdrawing  themselves  from  their  respective  object?." 
Sonnd,  touch,  form,  taste,  smell,  are  the  objects  turned  away 
from  which  the  senses  ear  and  the  rest,  stand  abstracted 
within,  imitating  as  it  were  the  then  condition  of  the  mind. 
Says  the  S'ruti : — 

"  The  five  having  sound  and  others  for  their  objects  and 
"  mind  ever  restlessly  active  should  all  be  meditated 
"  upon  as  so  many  rays  of  the  one  effulgent  Self ; — this 
"  is  Abstraction." 

'  The  five  having  sound  and  others  for  their  objects '  are  the 
five  senses  beginning  with  the  ear.  These  and  the  mind  which 
makes  the  sixth  sense  should  all  be  turned  off  from  their 
respective  objects  and  should  be  thought  of  as  so  many  rays  of 
the  inner  Self.  This  is  called  Pratydhara — Abstraction.  The 
result  of  Abstraction  is  thus  given  :f  "  Then  follows  the 
greatest  mastery  over  the  senses." 

Then  are  described  Contemplation,  Meditation,  and  Trance 
in  three  other  aphorism  4  "  Contemplation  (Dhdrana)  is  the 
fixing  of  the  mind  on  same  place."  "  Meditation  (Dkydna)  is 
continuous  flow  of  consciousness  in  regard  to  the  eame." 
"The  same  when  conscious  only  of  the  object,  as  if  unconsci- 
ous of  itself,  is  Trance  (samddki)"  The 'place'  has  been 
spoken  of  before  while  talking  of  the  plexuses.  Other  '  places ' 
are  also  thus  hinted  at : — 

"  The  wise  fixing  his  mind  upon  the  ever  functioning  char- 
"  acter  of  itself  should  reduce  it  to  the  Self— the 
"  unfailing  subject  of  contemplation.  This  is  contem- 
"  plation." 

The  rnind  thinks  of  every  possible  object,  let  it  think  every 
way  of  nothing  but  the  Self;  effort  in  this  direction  is  the 
'reducing '  of  the  mind  to  the  Self. 

*  Ch.  II.,  Aph.  LIV. 
t  Ch.  II.,  Aph,  LV.  +  Ch.  HI.,  Aph.  I-III. 


113 


The  'continuous  flow  of  consciousness'  spoken  of  in 
reference  to  Meditation  means  one  unbroken  consciousness 
of*some  one  Tattva.  This  is  of  two  kinds  :  broken  at  times 
and  entirely  unbroken.  The  former  is  Meditation,  the  latter 
Trance.  These  two  are  thus  spoken  of  by  the  great  ascetic 
Sarvanubhava  : — 

"  As  gnosis  of  the  kind  just  described  comes  of  concentra- 
"  tion  of  the  mind,  hence  is  given  out  the  proper 
"  method  of  Meditation — the  means  to  such  gnosis. 
"  Meditate  upon  that  blissful  consciousness  (chida- 
''  nanda),  the  residual  Ens  (sat),  after  all  distractions 
"  have  been  done  away  with  by  pitting  one  image 
"  against  another,  as  thoughts  come  in  and  go  out  of 
"  the  mind."  Also  "  That  continuous  mental  attitude 
"  wherein  runs  the  unbroken  flow  of  consciousness, 
" '  I  am  Brahmin?  devoid  of  all  tinge  of  egoism,  is 
"  called  Samprajndta-Samadhi  (conscious  trance),  the 
"  ripened  condition  of  Meditation. 

This  has  been  thus  explained  by  the  feet  of  our  divine 
Lord  (S'ri  S'ankaracharya)  : — 

"  The  native  form  of  the  subject,  highly  transcendant  like 
"A/edsa,  self-illumined  for  once  and  for  ever,  unborn, 
"  one,  immutable,  unconditioned,  all-pervading,  without 
"  a  second  ; — I  am  this,  the  ever  liberated  word  of 
"  glory.  The  subject  is  my  Self  all  pure  and  beyond 
"  all  modification  whatever,  having  by  nature  nothing 
"  for  its  object ;  the  unconditioned  All,  pervading 
"  every  thing  before,  after,  above  or  below  stands  fully 
"  reflected  in  this  Self.  I  am  unborn,  immortal,  un- 
"  decaying,  undying,  self-illumined,  all-pervading, 
"  without  a  second,  transcending  all  causation,  en- 
"  tirely  pure,  ever  content,  whence  verily  ever  liberat- 
ed." 

It  may  here  be   asked    why  '  conscious  trance  '    which   is 
only  a  subordinate  kind  of  trance,  should  be  described  thus  in 
15 


place  of  that  trance  which  comes  after  Meditation  as  the 
eighth  in  order  (from  Yama,  etc.).  This  is  no  mistake,  for, 
there  is  no  such  sharp  distinction  between  the  two.  To 
illustrate.  Manavaka  learning  the  Veda  stumbles  at  every 
step  and  regains  the  right  point  every  time  he  so  stumbles  ; 
having  finished  the  whole  course,  and  being  master  of  the 
subject,  he  never  stumbles,  even  to  the  extent  of  making  no 
mistake  while  inattentively  taking  a  nap  over  the  lesson 
he  teaches.  In  the  same  manner,  different  stages  of  perfection 
mark  the  difference  between  meditation,  trance  and  conscious 
trance,  the  point  to  be  gained  being  the  same  throughout. 
Contemplation,  Meditation  and  Trance  are  internal  means 
of  Conscious  trance,  being  confined  to  the  mind.  The  five 
beginning  with  Yama  are  external.  This  has  been  thus* 
spoken  of :  "  The  three  are  more  intimate  than  the  others/' 
The  internal  means  being  gained  from  some  past  or  present  good 
acts,  much  labour  towards  accomplishing  the  external  ones  is 
not  necessary.  Though  Patanjali  has  variously  described 
Samprajndta — and  Samkalpa — and  other  kinds  of  trance  in 
reference  to  the  physical  elements,  their  subtile  counterparts, 
the  senses  and  egoism,  we  pay  no  heed  to  them  inasmuch  as 
they  have  for  their  aim  the  acquisition  of  certain  occult 
powers  such  as  disappearance,  etc.,  and  inasmuch  as  they  each 
and  all  run  counter  to  the  real  (absolute)  trance  which  leads  to 
liberation.  Thus  run  the  Aphorismsf  in  this  connection  : 
"  These  are  obstacles  in  the  way  of  Samddhi  (absolute  trance), 
and  are  powers  in  moments  of  suspension."  "  (There  should 
be)  entire  destruction  of  pleasure  or  pride  in  the  invitations 
by  the  powers  (of  various  places),  for  there  is  possibility  of  a 
repetition  of  evil."  The  '  powers  of  various  places  '  are  the 
several  gods.  It  is  heard  that  Uddalaka,  though  thus 
favoured  by  the  gods,  disregarded  them,  and  took  to  absolute 
trance  (Nirmkalpa-Samadhi)  alone.  The  same  is  gathered 
from  the  following  dialogue  : — 

*  Ch.  IIP.,  Aph.  VII. 

t  Ch.  HI.,  Aph.  XXXVII  and  LI. 


115 


llama  :— 

"  Oh  best  of  the  knowers  of  Self,  tell  me  why  in  those  who 
"are  liberated  while  yet  living  (Jivanmukta)  are  not 
"  seen  poicers  such  as  soaring  up  in  the  sky  and  the 
"like?" 

Vasishtha  : — 

"  One  ignorant  of  Self  being  yet  in  bondage  hankers  after 

"  occult  powers  such  as  soaring  up  in  the  sky  and   the 

"  well-known  eight  siddhis  beginning  with  animd.    Oh 

"  Raghava  !  these  are  attainable  by  proper  materials, 

"  proper     incantations,   proper  practices,    proper   ob- 

"  servance    of    time,  and   proper    devices  ; — ^this    is 

"  no   sphere  of  the  knower  of  Self,   he  has  eye    for 

"  nothing  but  the  Self.     Content  in   Self  with  Self  he 

"  pursues  not  the  imps  of  Acidyd  (ignorance),  he  knows 

"  all  things    whatever  as   so  many  forms   of  gross 

"  ignorance.     How  is  it  possible  for  the  knower  of  Self 

"  who  has  risen  above  ignorance   to   drown   himself  in 

"them?  The  power  of  materials,  incantations,  action, 

"  time,  and  the  rest,  though  conducing  to  the  acquisi- 

"  tiou  of  occult  powers,  helps  not  a  jot  towards  nearing 

"  the   highest  condition   of  beatitude.     The   light    of 

"  Self    which    dawns    npon   the    attainment  of  self- 

"consciousness,  only  on   the  cessation   of  all    desire 

"  whatever,  can  never  be  found  by  one  whose   mind   is 

"  yet  immersed  in  the  desire  for  occult  powers."   Also, 

"  None  of  the  objects   of  this  world  afford  pleasure  to 

"•  the  real  knower,  even  as   rude   village-women    have 

"  no  charm  for  the  gallant  in  fast  love  with  the  polished 

"  lady   of  fashionable  life/'     And  again  "  The   Jican- 

"  mukta  feels  no  surprise   nor   wonder  even  if  the  sun 

"  were    to  cool   down     to  the    lowest    point    or   the 

"  moon  to  rise  in  temperature  to  the   highest  degree, 

"  nay  even  if  the  flame  of  fire  were  to   burn   below  the 

"  fuel  instead  of  above  it.     He  feels   no  curiosity  .for 

"any  of  these  and  many  other  wonderful  things,  look- 


116 

"  ing  upon  them  all  as  so  many  forms  of  the  one  Self, 
"  expressing  himself  in  a  variety  of  ways  during  expe- 
"  rience."  And  he  concludes,  "  He  who  even  after 
"realisation  of  Self  desires  occult  powers  will  easily 
"  gain  them,  by  degrees,  from  means  tending  to  that 
"end." 

•  Conscious  trance  (Samprajnata-Samfidki)  relating  to  Self, 
leads  to  destruction  of  Vdsand  and  absolute  ecstacy 
(Nirodha-Samadhi)  ;  whence  I  have  spoken  about  it  at  some 
length. 

Hence  I  begin  to  describe  this  absolute  ecstacy  with  its 
five  stages.  This  ecstacy  is  thus  defined  in  the  Aphorisms  :"* 

"Intercepted  transformation  is  the  transformation  of  the 
mind  into  the  moment  of  interception, — the  impressions  of 
distraction  and  interception  going  out  and  rising  up  re- 
spectively." The  '  impressions  of  distraction '  are  unfavour- 
able to  Samddhi.  These  have  been  set  forth  while  speaking 
of  the  trance  of  Uddalaka  : — 

"  When  shall  I  find  undisturbed  rest  in  that  holy  of  holies, 
"  free  from!  all  thinking  whatever,  even  like  a  cloud 
"  resting  on  the  top  of  mount  Meru  !  Uddalaka  with  this 
"anxiety  daily  at  heart  forced  himself  into  a  posture 
"  for  the  study  of  deep  Meditation.  His  mind  being 
"  drawn  hither  and  thither  like  a  restless  monkey,  with 
"various  objects  of  enjoyment,  he  found  not  that 
"steadiness  in  trance  which  leads  to  the  supreme 
"  ecstacy  of  bliss.  The  ape — his  mind — drawn  off  at 

*  Ch.  III.,  Aph.  IX.  The  words '  intercepted  transformation  '  is  a 
literal  rendering  of  that  transformation  of  the  mind  which  is  called 
Nir  dlia-parindma  leading  to  Nirodha-Samddhi,  here  rendered  by  the  words 
'  absolute  ecstacy.'  The  point  is  the  utter  emptying  of  the  mind  of  all 
thought  other  than  the  one  on  which  it  stands  intercepted,  so  to  speak. 
The  supreme  fullness  of  the  mind  with  this  idea  even  up  to  the  forget- 
fulness  of  such  experience  may,  taking  the  positive  aspect  of  the  state, 
be  described  as  '  absolute  ecstacy.' 


117 

"  times  from  external  objects  would  run  to  the   variety 
"  of  things  stored  within  ;  from  them  again   it   would 
•        "  now   and   then  break   away   to  external    objects  ; — 
"  his  mind  thus  kept  up  flying  hither  and  thither  like  a 
*'  frightened  bird.     He  saw  at   times   a  large  patch  of 
"  light,   resembling  the   rising  sun,  at   other  times   lie 
"  saw  the   Aka'sa  or  heaven  immersed  in  utter   dark- 
"  ness.     These  images   thus   rising  up   at  random,  he 
"  cut  them  off  with  one  strong  effort  of  his  mind  even 
"like   a   valiant   hero   cutting   off  his   enemies   with 
"one  stroke   of    his   sturdy   weapon.     The    crowd  of 
"  imaginings  being  thus  laid  at  rest,  there  dawned  in  the 
"  Akasa  of  his  heart  the  sun  of  Discrimination  dimmed 
"  with  the  clouds  of  ignorance  floating   over  the   sur- 
"face   like   so   many     thin     coatings   of  black   soot. 
<:  Even  this  he  dispelled  with  the  light   of  the   sun  of 
"  proper  gnosis  ;    and,  on  all  darkness  being  dispelled, 
"  he     saw    a    huge  mass   of  effulgence   within.      He 
"  scattered   it   off,  like  the  young  elephant  a  forest   of 
"  lotuses  ;  the  light  having  disappeared,   the   mind   of 
*'  the  sage  began  to  reel  in   slothful  indolence,  ending 
"in  that  sleep  which  is  experienced  by   lotuses  at  the 
"  close  of  day.  He  soon  shook  offeven  this,  when  he  found 
"  himself  awake  to  the  consciousness  of  all-pervading 
"  AJta'sa.     This   too  being  demolished,  his   mind  sank 
"  into  stupefaction,  whence  this  large-hear  ted  sage  raised 
"  it  out   with   effort.     Thus   attaining    at   the  end  the 
"  indescribable  condition  beyond  light,  darkness,  sleep, 
"  stupefaction,  and  the  like,  the  mind  of  the  silent  as- 
"  cetic  found  supreme  rest  for  a  moment." 
These    '  impressions   of  distraction '  are  daily   and  hourly 
wiped  off  from  effort  put  forth  by  the  ascetic   in   that  behalf, 
and  '  impressions  of  interception  '  continually   grow   in  their 
place.    '  Interception  '   (of  transformation)  being  thus  accom- 
plished,  the   impressions   (of  interception)    follow   the  mind 
in  all  and  every  moment.      Thus   is  accomplished   the  mind's 
4  transformation  into  the  moment  of  interception.' 


118 


It  may  here  be  asked :  the  rule  is  '  all*objects  whatever 
except  consciousness  continue  to  undergo  transformation  every 
moment ';  and  the  mind  should,  in  accord  with  this  rule,  be 
stated  to  undergo  unbroken  transformation  for  all  time  what- 
ever. This  is  no  doubt  true.  This  continuity  of  transforma- 
tion is  plain  in  the  mind  out  of  trance.  The  question  remains 
how  about  the  mind  in  trance  ?  With  the  view  of  meeting 
this  difficulty,  the  next  Aphorism  is  made  to  say  :  "  Its  flow 
becomes  steady  by  impressions."  As  fire  burns  more  bright 
with  every  fresh  addition  of  sacred  fuel  and  clarified  butter, 
and  as  on  the  material  being  burnt  up  it  burns  at  first  a 
degree  lower  than  before,  and  continues  gradually  to  burn, 
lower  and  lower  ;  so,  indeed,  does  the  mind  taught  the  way  of 
'  intercepted  transformation '  become  more  and  more  con- 
firmed in  the  habit,  and  acquire  unbroken  steadiness.  In  the 
acquisition  of  this  habit,  the  impression  born  of  every  pre- 
vious effort  serves  as  cause  of  the  steadiness  that  subse- 
quently follows.  The  Lord  thus  clearly  describes  this  '  steady 
flow  ':— 

"  When  the  mind  brought  under  control  stands  centred  in  the 
"Self,  and  when  the  studentstands  regardless  of  all  de- 
"  sires  whatever,  then,  indeed,  is  he  said  to  be  in  the  condi- 
"  tion  of  Yoga.  We  are  put  in  mind  of  the  flame  of  a 
"lamp  protected  in  some  place  not  open  to  the  breeze, 
"and  therefore  not  flickering  any  way.  The  well- 
"  controlled  mind  of  the  Yogin,  applying  himself  to  the 
"  Yoga,  of  Self,  is  verily  in  that  condition.  Know  that 
"  to  be  the  best  Yoga  wherein  the  mind  held  fast  in 
"  steady  application  finds  supreme  rest,  wherein  seeing 
"Self  with  Self  (in  all  things  whatever)  it  loses  itself 
"  in  the  bliss  of  Self.  Then  he  knows  that  absolute  bliss, 
"which  is  revealed  only  in  the  light  of  supreme  in- 
"  telligence  (Buddhi),  being  beyond  the  senses ;  and 
"  experiencing  this  nothing  moves  him  away  from  it. 
"  Having  found  it,  he  looks  down  upon  all  gain  what- 
"  ever  and  howsoever  large;  even  crushing  evil  or  misery 
"shakes  him  not  from  his  position.  Know  this  as  the 


119 

"true  Yoga  which  is  characterised  by  the    absence  of 
"  all    touch  of  evil ;     this    should,  by    all  means,    be 
*        "  practised  with  hearty  untiring  resolution." 

Next  are  mentioned  the  means  of  absolute  ecstacy  : — "  That 
is  the  other  which  is  born  of  effort  leading  to  the  suspension 
of  transformation  and  which  has  only  impressions  for  re- 
sidual." '  Suspension  of  transformation  '  is  suspension  of  the 
mind's  activity  ;  and  '  effort '  for  bringing  about  this  suspension 
refers  to  strong  personal  effort  which  being  frequently  re- 
peated accomplishes  the  suspension.  It  is  'other'  than 
conscious  trance  spoken  of  in  the  preceding  Aphorism  ;  that 
is  to  say,  it  is,  so  to  speak,  unconscious  'absolute  ecstacy' 
{Asamprajndta-Samddhi}.  The  mind  knowing  no  transforma- 
tion in  that  condition  is  difficult  to  understand  whence  it  is 
said  'which  has  only  impressions  for  residual.'  In  other 
words,  the  mind  is  there  but  only  in  the  form  of  residual  im- 
pressions. The  being  produced  (of  this  condition)  from 
'  e'ffort  leading  to  the  suspension  of  transformation '  is  thus 
clearly  set  forth  by  the  Lord  : — 

"  Completely  abandon  all  desires  born  of  imagination,  and 
"  exercise  control  every  way  on  the  senses  through  the 
"  mind.  With  patience  and  perseverance  as  its  guides, 
"  the  mind  may  pacify  itself  gradually  and  by  slow 
"  degrees.  Turn  the  mind  firmly  to  (thy)  Self,  cease 
"  to  think  of  anything  besides  ;  control  it  back  into 
"  the  Self  from  wherever  this  unstable  slippery  thing 
"should  run  out  of  itself." 

Garlands,  perfumes,  women,  children,  friends,  mansions, 
property,  and  the  like,  though  full  of  many  evils,  well-known 
to  the  discriminating  souls  versed  in  the  science  of  liberation, 
deceive  through  the  power  of  begiimingiess  Audya,  by  pro- 
ducing an  illusion  which  makes  you  imagine  the  very  evil  as 
so  much  good.  From  such  '  imagination'  arise  'desires'  of 
the  form  of  a  peculiar  hankering  after  these  objects.  It  has 
been  said  : — 


120 


"  All  desire  has  its  root  in  imagination,  even  sacrifice  is 
"  born  of  imagination  ; — Oh  Desire  !  I  have  learnt  the 
"  secret  of  thy  birth,  it  is  Imagination  ;  I  shall  take 
"  care  to  avoid  all  imagination,  and  I  am  sure  thou 
"  shalt  in  no  time  die  out  with  thy  root  and  source." 

Discrimination  being  brought  to  bear  on  objects,  and  the 
evils  attendant  on  them  being  rendered  clearly  palpable,  desire 
turns  itself  away  from  them  as  from  the  preparation  of  milk 
taken  in  and  vomited  out  by  a  dog.  The  word,  '  all '  is  used 
to  qualify  '  desires  '  with  the  view  of  suggesting  that  even  the 
desire  for  a  place  in  the  heaven  of  Brahma  or  for  the  eight 
occult  powers  should  be  abandoned  as  much  as  the  desire  for 
garlands,  perfumes,  and  the  rest.  The  word  'completely* 
is  used  to  prevent  the  recurrence  of  desire.  One  taking  on  the 
vow  of  not  using  any  cereals  for  a  month  abstains  from  them 
for  the  time,  but  gets  the  desire  at  the  end  of  the  period. 
The  word  '  completely '  implies  :  let  it  not  be  so  in  the  case 
of  this  destruction  of  desire.  Though  on  the  abandonment  'of 
desire,  all  action  with  mental  intention  ceases,  senses  like  the 
eye  and  the  like  cannot  be  prevented  from  cognising  forms 
and  the  like  in  consequence  of  their  very  nature.  This 
activity  too  may  be  controlled  by  strong  mental  effort. 
The  words  '  every  way '  used  in  connection  with  exercise  of 
control  over  the  senses  imply  the  suspension  even  of  such 
activity  as  has  visits  to  holy  places  and  sacred  images  for  , 
its  end.  The  words  '  gradually  and  by  slow  degrees'  suggest 
that  pacification  is  to  be  gained  step  by  step,  stage  by 
stage. 

These  stages  are  seen  to  be  four  in  the  Kathopanishad : 
"  The  wise  should  fuse  all  speech  into  the  mind,  the  mind 
into  the  Self  that  discriminates  (buddki),  the  discriminating 
Self  into  the  great  Self  (makat),  and  he  should  fuse  this  great 
Self  into  the  Self,  all  peace  and  tranquility." 

'  Speech '  is  of  two  kinds  :  temporal  and  spiritual  (vaidika). 
The  first  consists  of  all  the  ordinary  prattle  we  find  in  the 
world,  the  second  of  certain  forms  of  incantations,  etc., 


121 

enjoined  by  the  Veda.  Of  these,  temporal  speech  being  the 
cause  of  considerable  distraction,  the  ascetic  should  have 
nobbing  to  do  with  it,  even  in  moments  of  break.  It  has  been 
noticed  with  this  in  view  :— 

"  The  bearer  of  one  danda*  must  have  these  seven  :  silence, 
posture,  meditation,  indifference,  love  of  solitude,  careless- 
ness, equanimity." 

The  second  kind  of  speech  consisting  of  Vedic  incantations 
etc.,  should  be  given  up  at  the  time  of  absolute  ecstacy.  This 
is  the  first  stage  relating  to  speech.  Having  mastered  this 
stage  with  strong  effort  in  a  few  days  or  months  or  years,  the 
student  should  apply  himself  to  the  second  stage  referring  to 
the  mind.  If  all  the  stages  be  attempted  simultaneously,  the 
higher  stages  will  faii  through  failure  of  any  one  of  the 
lower  steps.  Eyes  and  the  rest  of  the  senses  have,  no  doubt, 
to  be  brought  under  control,  but  their  control  may  be  con- 
sidered as  part  of  the  control  of  mind  or  speech. 

(With  reference  to  this  first  stage)  it  may  be  asked  what 
means  the  fusion  of  speech  in  mind  ?  Never  does  one  sense 
get  merged  into  another.  This,  however,  comes  of  misunder- 
standing, for  it  is  not  actual  merging  that  is  meant  by  the 
said  fusion.  Speech  and  mind  produce  innumerable  dis- 
tratious,  auJ  speech  being  brought  under  control  at  the 
beginning,  mental  activity  alone  will  remain  to  be  dealt 
with.  This  is  all  that  is  meant  by  the  fusion. 

Control  of  speech  being  confirmed  into  a  habit  as  in  the  case 
of  cows  and  horses  and  buffalos  and  the  like,  the  mind  should  be 
fused  into  the  '  Self  that  discriminates/  The  Self  is  described  as 
three-fold  :  '  The  Self  that  discriminates,'  '  the  great  Self,' and 
'the  Self  that  is  all  peace  and  trauquility.'  That  which 
knows  'here  is  this  Self,'  in  fact,  the  condition  of  knowing, 
the  sense  of  egoism,  is  here  implied  by  the  word  '  discriminat- 
ing'used  to  qualify  the  word  Self.  The  instrument  of  such 
discrimination  ciz.,  the  mind  being  separately  mentioned,  this 


*  Tlio  Ekadundin  as  this  unler  uf  Sunnydsinah  is  called. 

16 


122 

discriminating  Self  is  none  other  than   the  sense  of  egoism* 
Egoism  is  again  twofold  :    Individual  and  Cosmic.     '  Here  I  l 
am,  the  son  of  so  and   so  ' — egoism  of  this  form  belongs*  to 
the  first  kind.     The  second  kind   of  egoism   consists   in   the 
mere  consciousness  '  I  am,'  which,  being  common  to  all  beings 
is  called  '  Cosmic'  i.  e.  great  (Mahat\   The  Self  conditioned  by 
these  two  kinds  of  egoism  is  the  '  Self  that  discriminates'  and 
the  *  Great  Self. '     The  Self  beyond  condition  is  the  '  Self  that 
is  all  peace  and  tranquility.'    All  this  proceeds  from  within 
without ;  that  is   to   say,   the  Self  all  peace  and  tranquility 
is  the  inmost  consciousness  of  all,   being  all  pure  thought  ; 
in   It  subsists  original   matter  (Mulaprakrti),  the  force  of 
manifestation,    called    the    Unmanifest    ( avyakta ).       This 
manifests  itself  (  further )  as  that  which  we  described  as  Cosmic 
egoism,  being   then  called  the  Mahat.     This  Mahat  continues 
to  externalise   itself    (still  further)  as     individual   egoism, 
which  further  develops  itself  into  the  mind  expressing  itself 
into  the  final  development  of  speech  and  other  senses.     The  ' 
sruti,  with  all  this  in  mind,  speaks   of  this  series   and   the 
relation  of  its  links  from  within  without  : — 

"  Objects  transcend  the  senses,  the  mind  transcends  objects, 
"  the  intellect  transcends  the  mind,  the  Mahat  trans- 
"  cends  intellect,  the  unmanifest  transcends  the  Mahat  ^ 
"  consciousness  (puru&ha,*)  transcends  the  unmanifest, 
"  — beyond  the  purusha  there  is  nothing  which  can 
"  transcend  Him  or  prevent  Him  from  being  the  last 
"  essence,  the  last  resort  (of  all )." 

It  being  so,  it  stands  to  reason  how  the  mind,  the  source 
of  all  the  variety  of  analytic  and  synthetic  thought,  should  be 
fused  in  ( individual )  egoism  ;  in  other  words,  giving  up  all 
mental  imaginings  how  the  student  should  stand  in  the  sense 
of  egoism  alone.  It  should  not  be  supposed  that  this  is  impos- 
sible to  do.  For,  the  Lord  has  well  said  in  reply  to  Arjuna's 
observation  "It  were  easier  to  control  the  wind  than  this 
(miud)":— 


123 


"  Indeed,  oh  long-armed  oue  !  the  miad  is  very  fickle  and 
"  difficult  to  control ;  but  oh  son  of  Kunti !  application 

•  "  and  renunciation  are  sure  to  hold  it  in  check.  I  am 
"  of  opinion  that  yoga  is  impossible  in  him  who  has 
"  not  his  mind  under  full  control  ;  he  who  strives  with 
"  his  mind  in  control  attains  to  it  by  proper  means." 

'Application  '  and  'renunciation'  will  be  explained  in,  the 
aphorisms  of  Patanjali.  One 'who  has  not  his  mind  under 
full  control '  is  he  who  has  not  acquired  firm  steady  mastery 
of  the  stage  preceding  the  one  he  is  in.  He  who  is  thus 
equipped  is  one  '  with  his  mind  in  full  control.'  Gaudapada- 
charya  has  well  explained  with  illustration  the  means  which 
lead  to  yoga  : — 

*•'  That  patience  which  would  empty  the  ocean  drop  by  drop 
"  at  the  tip  of  a  straw  of  the  £wm-grass,  will,  untir- 
"  ingly  sustained,  establish  control  over  the  mind. 
"  Though  thou  mayest  be  powerful  enough  never  stand 
"  against  many  at  the  same  time  ;  such  a  one  is  sure 
"  to  meet  with  defeat  even  as  the  ocean  was  foiled  by 
"  the  tittibha" 

Students  relate  a  parable  in  this  connection,  as  told  from 
of  old  by  their  teachers.  The  ocean  carried  with  the  ebbing 
of  his  tide  the  eggs  of  some  bird  laid  somewhere  on  the 
sand  bank.  The  angry  bird  resolved  upon  drying  up  the 
ocean,  and  began  to  throw  out  drop  after  drop  of  the  water 
with  its  bill.  Other  birds  of  its  kind  pointed  out  to  it  the 
folly  and  impossibility  of  the  act  ;  but  nothing  daunted  the 
bird  made  allies  even  of  its  critics  and  advisers.  The  sage 
Narada  observing  the  trouble  and  worry  of  so  many  birds 
constantly  flying  to  and  from  the  ocean  took  compassion  on 
them,  and  moved  Garuda,  the  lord  of  birds,  to  go  and  assist 
his  kindred.  The  ocean  feeling  the  drastic  force  of  Garuda's 
wings  was  humbled  into  compliance,  and  restored  its  eggs  to 
the  puny  bird. 

Just  as  the  eagle  favoured  the  small  bird,  the  Lord  favours  the- 


124 

aspirant  continuing  with  untiring  application  in  the  highest 
religion — control  of  mind.  This  untiring  application  conies 
of  using  expedients  favourable  to  it  from  time  to  time  during 
the  course  of  study.  This  is  after  the  manner  of  one  eating 
cooked  rice  taking  liquid  vegetables  and  condiments  etc.,  in 
the  interval  of  every  mouthful.  Vasishtha  says  with  this  in 
mind  : — 

"  Half  the  mind  must  be  occupied  with  enjoyment,  a  fourth 
"  with  philosophy,  and  the  remaining  fourth  with 
"  devotion  to  the  Teacher  ;— this  is  the  course  for  those 
"  who  have  as  yet  made  no  progress.  Having  advanced 
"  even  a  little  occupy  only  a  fourth  of  the  mind  with 
"  enjoyments,  half  with  devotion  to  the  teacher,  and 
"  the  remaining  fourth  with  contemplation  of  philo- 
"sophy.  The  point  being  fully  achieved  the  mind 
"  should  be  divided  half  and  half  between  philosophy 
"  and  renunciation  on  the  one  hand  and  meditation 
"and  contemplation  of  the  Guru  on  the  other." 

By  '  enjoyment '  is  here  meant  the  going  about  for  alms  to 
keep  body  and  life  together,  or  such  duties  as  may  occur  in 
the  way  of  one's  class  and  station  (  Varna  and  dsrama).  Apply 
yourself  to  yoga,  for  say  twenty-five  or  fifty  minutes  according 
to  your  capacity,  spend  the  next  hour  in  attending  to  what  the 
Gum  may  explain  in  philosophy  or  failing  that  in  serving  the 
Guru  in  any  manner  you  can  ;  then  leave  the  body  at  rest  for 
about  an  hour  whereafter  study  some  work  on  yoga  for  about 
the  same  time,  arid  apply  yourself  again  to  the  practice  of  yoga. 
Thus  give  prominence  to  yoga  in  all  your  acts  throughout  the 
day,  fulfil  them  speedily  and  at  once,  and  count  when  in  bed 
at  eve  the  total  period  of  time  you  have  spent  upon  yoga 
during  the  day.  Taking  note  of  this  try  to  add  to  this  time 
the  next  day  or  the  next  week  or  the  next  fortnight  or  the 
next  month.  If  you  thus  increase  the  time  by  an  hour  or 
even  by  a  few  minutes  every  now  and  then  you  will  find  at 
the  end  of  a  year  that  you  are  able  to  spend  the  greater  part 
of  twenty-four  hours  on  yoga,  and  yoga  alone. 


125 


It  should  not  be  thought  th.it  prominence  being  thus  given 
to  yoga  other  activity  of  every  kind  will  come  to  an  end  ;  for 
li*  alone  is  fit  for  yoga  who  is  totally  free  from  all  other 
activity  of  every  kind.  It  is  for  this  reason  that  Rennnci- 
ation-of-the-accomplished  is  thought  necessary.  One  should 
take  on  this  condition,  and  ascend  to  Yoga*  stage  by  stage, 
like  any  ordinary  student  or  apprentice  acquiring  knowledge 
of  his  subject.  As  a  student  learns  part  or  a  quarter  of  one 
K/(,  then  a  quarter,  then  a  half,  then  a  whole  Rff,  two  Rchak, 
then  a  whole  section  and  so  on,  and  becomes  a  teacher  in  tea 
or  twelve  years  ;  or  as  some  apprentice  engaging  in  trade 
acquires  one  coin,  two  coins,  and  slowly  collecting  his  gains 
becomes  a  rich  millionaire  ;  so  taking  after  the  student  and 
the  apprentice,  nay  working  as  if  with  the  same  sense  of 
emulation  and  rivalry  why  should  one  not  find  himself  at  the 
highest  stage  of  Yoga  in  the  same  period  of  time  ?  Suppres- 
sing, therefore,  even  like  Uddalaka,  all  imaginings  welling 
up  in  the  mind,  by  main  personal  effort,  '  fuse  the  mind  into 
the  Self  that  discriminates'  xiz.  into  Egoism. 

Having  gained  mastery  over  this  second  stage  indicated  by 
entire  suspension  of  mind,  confirmed  into  a  habit  as  in  the 
case  of  children  and  dumb  persons,  the  aspirant  should  fuse 
this  'Self  that  discriminates'  viz.,  the  sense  of  individual 
egoism,  into  Cosmic  egoism  viz.  the  Mahat.  As  even  under 
the  effect  of  the  slightest  tendency  to  sleep  we  find  natural 
suspension  of  individual  egoism,  so  indeed,  does  individual  (i.  e. 
particular)  egoism  cease,  even  without  sleep,  in  the  case 
of  one  who  is  trying  effectively  to  forget  it.  This  condition 
resembling  what  is  known  to  the  world  as  the  slothmlness 
that  predisposes  to  sleep  and  answering  to  what  is  called 
formless  perception  (  nircikalpaka  jnana  )  by  the  logicians 
(NaiyAyi&as)  is  the  third  stage  having  nothing  in  it  but 
(  consciousness  of)  the  Mahat. 

Having  mastered  this  stage  by  dint  of  application,  the 
aspirant  should  fuse  this  'great  Self  of  the  form  of  Cosmic 
egoism'  into  the  Self,  which  on  account  of  being  beyond  all 


conditions,  is  'all  tranquilly  and  peace'  and  whose  nature  is 
nil  pure  consciousness.  It  has  been  said  :  "  Having  subordi- 
nated the  Ma/tat  let  pure  consciousness  alone  subsist."  Hepe 
too,  the  aforesaid  effort  at  forgetfulness  is  even  more  useful 
than  in  that  stage.  A  student  learning  the  sastra  requires 
every  line  to  be  interpreted  and  explained  to  him  till  he  is 
able  to  understand  any  lines  whatever  at  first  sight,  but  as 
soon  as  he  acquires  this  power  the  rest  of  the  book  is 
plain  to  him  without  any  help.  In  the  same  manner  the 
aspirant  who  has  mastered  every  preceding  stage  finds  of  him- 
self the  means  to  accomplish  the  stage  that  succeeds.  The 
commentator  on  Yoga  says  to  the  same  end : — 

"  Yoga  should  be  known  by  Yoga,  Yoga  grows  from  Yoga  ; 
"that  Yogin  who  applies  himself  to  Yoga  with  steady 
"application  finds  supreme'bliss  (in  Yoga}.9' 

Yoga  here  means  the  stage  that  succeeds,  this  should  be 
approached  through  Yoga  ;  that  yogin  who  carefully  considers 
the  connection  of  stage  with  stage  and  goes  from  one  to  th'e 
other  in  this  manner  gains  supreme  bliss. 

(A  doubt  suggests  itself  at  this  point).  As  between  the 
*  great  Self  and  the  'Self  that  is  all  peace  and  tranquility '  the 
*  avyakta  (unmanifest,  undifferenced)  has  been  given  in  the 
Sruti  as  the  material  cause  of  Maha.t,  it  remains  to  see  why 
the  Ma/iat  is  not  fused  into  this  avyakta  before  it  passes  to  the 
'Self  that  is  all  peace  and  tranquility.'  The  reply  is  that  the 
passage  is  not  through  this  atyakta  because  it  would  tend  to 
what  is  known  as  lay  a  (dissolution).  As  a  jar  (of  earth)  is 
not  dissolved  on  being  kept  in  water  which  is  not  its  material 
o,ause,  but  is  fused  with  the  clay  which  is,  so  is  the  makat  not 
dissolved  in  the  Self,  though  it  will  be  dissolved  in  the 
avyakta.  And  annihilation  of  one's  self  is- certainly  not  the 
aim  of  existence.  (Again  because)  interception  (nirodha}  of 
Mahal  in  the  atyakta  is  of  no  use  in  the  realization  of  Self, 
which  is  attained  only  'by  the  sharp  intellect  of  those  who  are 
trained  to  minute  observation.'  And  moreover,  in  the  section 
under  consideration  '  realization  of  Self  being  set  forth  as  an 


127 

object,  'interception,'  if  at  all  desirable,  is  given  only  as  the 
means  of  acquiring  this  '  sharp  intellect.'  And  lastly  this  kind 
o£  annihilation  like  dissolution,  is  within  daily  experience  at 
the  time  of  sleep  ;  no  special  effort  is  necessary  to  accomplish  it. 
(Thus  is  interception  in  avyakta  not  necessary  nor  useful). 

( Another  doubt  may  here  conveniently  find  its  answer ) 
Conscious  eestacy  (  samprajndta-samadhi )  to  be  brought  about, 
by  contemplation,  meditation,  and  trance  being  of  the  form 
of  one-pointedness  of  all  mental  transformations  is  useful  as  a 
means  towards  the  Sight  (  of  the  Self  that  is  all  trauquility  and 
peace).  When,  however,  the  mind  is  intercepted  in  the  'Self 
that  is  all  peace  and  tranquility'  and  thus  thrown  into  the  condi- 
tion of  unconscious  ecstacy  (  asn.mprajndta-samddhi  ),  how  can 
it  be  of  any  use  towards  the  Sight  ?  The  reply  is  that  sight  (  of 
the  Self)  being  ever  self-sustained  is  impossible  to  prevent ; 
and  that  it  has  been  said  in  the  S'reyomarga  with  the  same  in 
view  :  "  The  mind  ever  stands  by  nature  taking  on  the 
"  form  of  the  Self  and  not-Self  ;  it  should  be  made  to  take  on 
"  the  form  of  Self  to  the  exclusion  of  not-Self."  A  jar  of  earth 
as  soon  as  it  is  produced  conies  forth  full  of  all-pervading 
Akd*a ;  human  effort  turns  it  to  the  use  of  fetching  water  or 
storing  rice  and  so  on,  after  its  production.  Though  the 
water  etc.,  thus  put  into  the  jar  may  be  taken  out,  .the  dkd'sa, 
(in  the  jar  adhering  into  it  since  its  production)  cannot  at  all 
be  disturbed ;  nay  so  much  so  that  it  continues  to  be  there 
even  though  the  jar  be  hermetically  sealed.  In  the  same 
manner  the  mind  as  soon  as  it  is  born  is  all  full  of  the  conscious- 
ness of  Self  (  dtmachaitanya  ).  It  takes  on,  from  religious 
merit  and  demerit,  the  cause  of  all  fruition  whatever,  the 
form  of  jars,  cloths,  colour,  taste,  pleasure,  pain,  and  modifica- 
tions of  the  same  kind,  even  like  melted  copper  poured  into 
crucibles  of  various  size  and  make  taking  on  the  form  of  that 
size  and  that  make.  And  though  the  mind  be  prevented 
from  taking  on  the  form  of  not-Self  such  as  colour,  taste,  and 
the  like,  it  is  not  possible  to  prevent  it  from  taking  on  the 
form  of  the  Self,  for  no  external  cause  is  required  in  the 
process.  Thus  then  the  mind  prevented  from  all  modification 


128 

by  trance  which  consists  of  the  practice  of  '  interception  ' ; 
rendered  sufficiently  sharp  and  acute  in  consequence  of  being, 
as  it  were,  the  residuum  of  all  impressions  whatever ;  confined 
to  one  point  because  turned  to  the  unit  of  consciousness 
alone  ; — such  a  mind  realises  the  sight  of  Atman  without  any 
break  or  obstacle.  The  anchor  of  the  Vartika  as  well  as 
Sarvanubhava  Yog  hi  say  to  the  same  effect  : — 

"  The  mind  takes  on  the  form  of  pleasure  and  pain  and  the 
"  like  from  causes  born  of  ( spiritual )  merit  and 
"  demerit ;  it  becomes  all  light — the  causeless  native 
"  form  of  Self — from  taking  on  the  form  of  the  Thing 
"  {viz.  the  Self).  This  condition  of  the  mind  free  from 
"  all  modifications  whatever,  resembling  a  light  of 
"supreme  bliss,  is  unconscious  ecstacy  (asamprajndta- 
"  samadhi}  the  favourite  of  the  Yoginah" 

Though  thus  realization  of  Self  is  ever  undisturbed  and  by 
nature  eternal,  application  to  the  practice  of  'interception' 
is  useful  in  that  it  prevents  modification  (  of  the  mind  )  into 
the  not-Self.  It  has,  therefore,  been  said  :  "  Fix  the  mind 
in  the  Self  and  think  of  nothing  besides." 

As  the  science  of  Yoga  concerns  itself  only  with  diagnosis 
and  treatment  of  the  mind  and  its  ailments,  we  find  no  direct 
mention  of  the  realization  cf  Self  where  it  speaks  of  trance 
induced  by  interception.  This,  however,  is  suggested  -by 
implication  ;  for  having  begun  with  "  Yoga  is  the  supression 
of  the  transformations  of  the  thinking  principle  "  it  says 
in  the  very  next  aphorism  :  "  Then  the  seer  abides  in  him- 
self.*" Though  the  '  seer '  being  always  unaffected  stands 
in  himself,  it  appears  as  if  disturbed  from  want  of  discri- 
mination as  to  its  own  reflections  in  the  variety  of  mental 
modifications  arising  in  the  course  of  evolution.  Even  this 
has  been  given  in  the  very  next  aphorism  :  "  But  otherwise 
lie  becomes  assimilated  with  transformations."  Elsewhere 
too  it  has  been  said:  "Fruition,  being  for  another,  is  the 

*  Yoga  Sairas  Ch.  I,  A^li.  II.  &  III. 


129 

indistinctness  of  sattva  and  purusha  ever  apart*  "  ;    and   also 
"  Consciousness  ever   uureflected  meditating  on  itself  finds 

itself.f" 

Though  thus  by  -  Intercepted-trance  ( niodha-samddhi )  is 
clearly  understood  and  realized  the  '  substratum  of  the-  ego  * 
(  Tcam-paddrtha ),  a  higher  modification  ( of  the  mind ), 
called  Brakma-vidyd  (  g  no  sis  ),  must  be  induced  through  the 
Great  Text  (  Mahd-vakya  )  in  order  that  this  individual  ego 
may  realize  itself  as  the  universal  All  (Brahman).  Nor,  even 
in  realization  of  the  pure  (individual)  ego  is  Intercepted- 
trance  the  only  means  ;  for,  this  realization  comes  even  of 
careful  discrimination  of  the  conscious  and  the  unconscious. 
Hence  does  Vasishtha  say  : — 

"•  Two  oh  Raghava  !  are  the  paths  leading  to  suspension  of 
"  thinking^  :  yoga  which  consists  in  controlling  trans- 
"  formations  of  the  thinking  principle,  and  gnosis 
"  which  consists  in  the  proper  eye  for  experience. 
"  Some  find  it  difficult  to  practice  yoga,  others  cannot 
"grasp  the  analysis  of  gnosis  ; — hence  the  Lord 
"  pointed  out  these  two  paths." 

But  this  '  careful  discrimination '  too  is  nothing  apart  from 
yoga,  for,  that  modification  which  the  mind  undergoes  at  the 
moment  of  realization  (of  this  distinction)  is  a  kind  of 
momentary  conscious-trance.  This  is  so  ;  still  the  distinction 
between  conscious  and  unconscious  trance  is  very  great,  both 
from  their  nature  as  from  the  means  leading  to  them.  The 
difference  in  nature  is  plain  from  the  presence  or  absence  of 
*  modifications.'  As  to  means,  contemplation  and  the  rest 
being  similar  in  nature  to  conscious-trance  are  immediate 
means  of  inducing  it,  whereas  they  being  dissimilar  by  nature 
to  '  unconscious-trance '  which  implies  absence  of  all  '  modi- 
fication '  whatever,  are  only  mediate  means  of  inducing  that 

*  Ch.  Ill,  Aph.  XXXV. 

t  Ch.  IV,  Aph.  XXII. 

J  Meaning  modifications  of  the  mind. 

17 


130 

trance.     So  runs  also  the  aphorism  :  "Even  it,*  is  foreign  to 

the  unconscious." 

t 

But  this  though  'foreign'  to  the  'unconscious  '  is  of  use  in 
that  it  prevents  modifications  of  the  mind  into  things  which 
are  not-self.  This  has  been  rendered  clear  in  an  aphorism  : 
"  In  others  ( it )  is  preceded  by  faith,  energy,  memory  and 
discrimination.!"  Having  said,  in  the  aphorism  preceding 
this,  that  gods  and  others  understand  trance  from  the  very 
moment  of  birth,  this  aphorism  has  been  addressed  to  men. 
This  yoga  alone  is  to  me  the  highest  means  of  attaining  the 
ultimate  end  of  existence  ; — conviction  of  this  kind  is  called 
'  faith.'  Such  faith  is  born  of  frequently  hearing  the  praises 
and  benefits  tfyogi.  It  is  said  : — 

"Theyo^m  is  greater  than  the  ascetic,  nay  even  than  the 
man  of  gnosis.  He  is  greater  even  than  the  man  devoted  to 
action.  Try,  oh  Arjuna  !  to  be  an  yogin" 

•  Yoga  is   higher  than  asceticism  of  the  kind  of  Krchchh'ra, 
Chdndrdyana  and  other  austerities   of  the   same  kind,  inas- 
much as  it  leads  to  higher  conditions  of  being.     It  is   greater 
than  gnosis  inasmuch  as  it  is  the  intimate,  immediate,  cause 
of  gnosis  and  is  also   the  cause  of  bringing  the  mind  to  a  state 
of  peacefnlness.    This  kind  of  faith  being  confirmed,  a  peculiar 
'energy'  of    the  form 'I  shall   anyhow   accomplish    yoga? 
comes     of    it    in     the   mind.       £rom   this    energy    comes 
*  memory  '  of  all  the  means  of  yoga  to  be  then  put  into  practice. 
Trance  being  properly  induced  after   this  '  memory '  and   the 
light  of  self  being  realized,  there  comes  about  that   '  discrimi- 
nation '  which  is    all  '  truth-bearing.'  •  Unconscious   trance  is 
preceded  by  this   '  discrimination  '    and   has   this  '  discrimi- 
nation '  as  cause,  in  the  case  of  '  others '  i.  e.,  in  the  case 
of  that  order  of  beings  which  is  lower  than  gods,   viz.,  in   the 
case   of  men.      This  '  discrimination '  is   thus   given   in    the 

*  That  is  Samyama  which   is   one  name  for  contemplation,  meditation 
and  trance.  Ch.  III.  Aph.  VIII. 

t  Ch.  I.  Aph.  XX. 


131 

aphorisms  :  "  The  intellect  is  then  truth-bearing."*  '  Truth  ' 
means  the  proper  knowledge  of  things  as  they  are  ;  and  that 
wiiich  gives  snch  knowledge  is  '  truth-bearing.'  '  There '  that 
is  to  say  in  the  light  of  self  brought  about  b,y  the  height  of 
trance.  This  '  truth-bearing '  is  further  justified  in  an 
aphorism  which  runs  :  "  Its  subject  is  different  from  that  of 
revelation  and  inference,  for  it  refers  to  particulars."f 
Subtle,  mediate,  and  distant  things  are  not  directly  cognized 
by  those  who  are  not  yoginah  ;  such  things  are  known  by 
'revelation'  and  'inference'  by  ordinary  men.  Knowledge 
derived  from  'revelation'  and  'inference'  has  reference 
always  to  the  general  nature  of  things.  The  knowledge  that 
is  here  spoken  of  as  peculiar  to  yoginah  has  reference  to  the 
particular  nature  of  things  and  is  properly  called  '  truth-bear- 
ing' on  that  account.  That  this  peculiar  perception  of  the 
yogin  is  a  mediate  means  of  unconscious  ecstacy  is  proved  by 
showing  its  usefulness  towards  that  condition  :  "  The  impres- 
sion thereof  stands  in  the  way  of  other  impressions. "$  Having 
described  the  mediate  means  of  unconscious-trance  the 
author  proceeds  to  describe  effort  towards  prevention  even 
of  the  condition  (of  these  means)  as  the  immediate  cause 
of  unconscious-trance  :  "The  prevention  of  that  even 
leads  to  the  prevention  of  all,  and  thus  to  meditation 
without  seed§"  (t.  e.  unconscious  ecstacy).  This  trance  is 
similar  to  sleep  and  is  capable  of  being  experienced  by  that  . 
portion  of  consciousness  which  is  the  *  witness.'  It  should  not 
be  supposed  that  this  condition  is  none  other  than  sleep,  as 
in  it  too  there  remains  no  modification  of  the  mind  ;  for,  the 
distinction  between  the  two  lies  in  the  potentraLexistence  or 
non-existence  of  mind.  It  has  been  said  by  Gaudapada- 
charya  : — 

"The  condition  of  the  'well-controlled  mind  of  the  en- 
"  lightened  in  .unconscious  ecstacy  is  different  from 
"sleep,  not  at  all  like  it.  It  (the  mind)  is  absorbed 

*  Ch.  I.  Aph.  XLVIII.  f  Ch.  I.  Aph.  XLIX. 

I  Ch.  I.  Aph.  XL.  §  Ch.  I.  Aph.  LI. 


132 

"in  sleep,  in  this  state  of  interception  it  is  not 
"absorbed,  but  is  itself  all  Brahman  fall  of  the  light 
"of  gnosis  out  and  ont."  • 

It  has  been  said  also  in  the  Maadukya-SWa:— "Non-cogni- 
"tion  of  duality  is  common  both  to  the  Prdjna  and 
"the  fourth ;  but  the  first  has  the  seed  of  sleep  in  hini- 
"  self  whereas  the  second  has  it  not.  The  first  two 
"  have  dreamy  sleep  joined  to  them,  the  Prdjna  has 
"only  dreamless  sleep  ;  those  who  are  confirmed  in  the 
"fourth  perceive  neither  dream  nor  sleeps  Dream  comes 
"of  perverted  cognition,  sleep  is  ignorance  of  the 
"truth  ;  the  inversion  implied  in  the  two  being  set 
"right,  the  condition  of  the  fourth  is  easily  realized." 

"The  first  two"  •%.  e.  Visva  and  Taijasa.  "Perverted 
cognition"  means  cognizing  the  Unit  as  dual,  cognizing  the 
Advaita  as  Dvaita.  This  'perverted  cognition'  of  the  Visva 
and  the  Taijasa  is  called  dream.  Ignorance  of  the  truth  is 
called  sleep.  Sleep  exists  in  Visva,  Taijasa  and  Prdjna. 
The  false  knowledge  of  these  two— dream  and  sleep — being  put 
to  end  through  Vidyd,  the  fourth  that  is  the  condition  of  the 
Advaita  is  easily  realized. 

It 'may  here  be  asked  ;  let  there  be  all  this  distinction 
between  unconscious-trance  and  sleep.  Though  this  trance 
may  be  of  use  to  one  desirous  of  realizing  the  truth,  as  a 
means  helping  to  the  realization,  still  to  one  who  has  realized 
the  truth  that  trance  is  no  longer  necessary  to  bring  about 
Jivanmukti ;  for,  bondage  of  the  form  of  likes  and  dislikes  is  easy 
to  destroy  e>jen  by  sleep.  This  is  not  so.  Is  it  sleep  that  comes 
on  occasionally  of  itself  every  day,  the  destroyer  of  bondage,  or 
sleep  that  may  last  all  time  as  the  result  of  such  study  ?  If  you 
grant  the  first  alternative  is  it  bondage  prevailing  during  the 
time  of  such  sleep  that  is  destroyed  or  any  other  bondage  also  ? 
The  first  is  not  possible  inasmuch  as  such  argument  is  irrele- 
vent.  Even  fools  experience  no  bondage  of  the  form  of  mental 
suffering  in  sleep;  for,  if  it  were  otherwise  the  possibility 
of  effort  too  cannot  be  denied  to  that  condition.  The  second 


133 

contingency  is  quite  absurd  ;  sleep  coming  on  at  a  particular 
time  can  certainly  not  deal  with  bondage  having  existence  at 
same  other  time.  If  it  were  so  every  fool  will  easily  free  him- 
self of  all  the  mental  pain  he  has  acquired  during  waking  and 
dream.  And  as  to  '  sleep  that  may  last  all  time '  it  is  impossible 
to  induce  such  sleep  by  study,  for  sleep  in  itself  is  entire 
suspension  of  all  activity  whatever.  It  is  therefore  plain  that 
even  those  who  have  realized  the  truth  must  resort  to  uncon- 
scious-trance for  the  purpose  of  destroying  mental  suffering. 

The  first  stage  of  such  trance  is  restraint  of  speech  as  in 
cows  and  the  like;  the  second  is  mindless-ness  as  in  children 
and  idiots  and  the  like.  The  third  stage  consits  of  absence  of 
all  sense  of  egoism  as  in  the  condition  of  semi-conscious  sleep. 
The  fourth  stage  is  freedom  from  all  relation  with  cosmic 
egoism  (Mahaf)  as  in  deep  sleep.  It  is  with  reference  to 
these  four  stages  that  it  has  been  said  *  "  Pacify  (the  mind) 
gradually."  Of  this  pacification  the  'intellect  sustained  by 
strong  patience '  is  the  surest  means ;  for,  the  greatest 
patience  is  required  in  exercising  proper  control  over  cosmic 
and  individual  egoism  as  also  over  the  mind  and  the  rest 
which  all  forcibly  tend  to  externalize  themselves,  even  as 
in  intercepting  the  flow  of  a  stream  running  with  main  force 
undermining  even  the  banks  between  which  it  runs.  The 
intellect  here  means  proper  discrimination.  One  should 
pass  on  to  the  second  stage  after  having  carefully  understood 
through  this  discrimination  whether  the  first  stage  is  master- 
ed or  not.  If  the  very  first  stage  be  not  as  yet  fully  gained, 
the  same  should  be  studied  over  again,  by  carefully 
discriminating  the  course  of  development  every  time.  "Fix 
the  mind  in  the  self":f — the  words,  initiating  the  other  half 
of  the  verse,  refer  to  the  fourth  stage  and  study  proper  to 
that  stage.  Says  Gaudapadacharya: — 

"  The  mind  distracted  by   desires   and   lost   in  enjoyment, 
"  as   also   finding   easy    comfort   in    oblivius  lethargy 

*  In  the  Bhagavadgita.  Ch.  IV. 

f  This  is  the  beginning  if  the  other  half  of  the  verse  referred  to  above. 


134 

"should  be  brought  back  to  itself  by  proper  remedies, 
"for,  lethargy  and  desire  are  equally  injurious.  It 
"  should  be  turned  away  from  the  pleasures  of  hope 
"and  desire  by  memory  of  the  evil  that  pervades  all 
"mortal  things;  it  sees  not  the  things  of  this 
"  world  as  soon  as  it  is  filled  with  the  idea  of  all  being 
"  nothing  apart  from  the  Unborn.  Arouse  the  mind 
"  if  it  fall  into  lethargy  ;  pacify  it  back  into  its  place 
"if  it  run  out ;  persuade  it  by  proper  knowledge  if 
"it  tend  to  the  objective  ; — touch  it  not  when  it  has 
"  found  the  condition  of  evenness.  Taste  not  the  bliss 
"  thereof,  be  intellectually  free  form  all  attachment, 
"thus  bring  the  mind  to  a  point  and  make  it 
"  absolutely  steady  with  every  possible  effort.  When 
"  the  mind  rises  above  lethargy  and  distraction,  then 
"indeed  it  becomes  that  Brahman  which  has  no 
"  character  and  which  has  nothing  to  do  with  study 
"  of  any  kind." 

Lethargy,  Distraction,  Cupidity  and  Evenness  are  four  condi- 
tions of  the  mind.  The  mind  in  the  attempt  to  intercept  its 
activity  and  bring  it,  to  a  point,  though  turning  away  from 
objects,  may  run,  from  acquired  tendency,  into  lethargy  and 
sleep;  at  such  moment  it  should  be  roused  into  action  by 
effort  or  by  warding  off  the  cause  of  sleep.  The  causes  of 
such  lethargy  are  keeping  "immoderately  awake,  indigestion, 
heavy  meals,  over-feeding  and  fatigue: — 

"  Take  necessary  sleep,  eat  as  much  as  may  be  -easily  di- 
"gesged,  find  out  some  solitary  corner  free  from 
"  fatigue  and  fatiguing  things,  sit  there  rising  above  all 
"  desire  without  much  effort,  or  practice  pr&nayama 
"  after  the  manner  prescribed  for  study." 

If  the  mind  roused  from  lethargy  should,  from  daily  expe- 
rience of  wakefulness,  run  out  to  the  pleasures  of  hope  and 
desire,  bring  it  back  to  itself  by  memory  of  the  misery  of  all 
pleasure  and  hope  as  set  forth  by  persons  who  know  ;  or 
by  wiping  away  all  things  from  sight  on  filling  it  with 


135 

memory  of  the  Unit — Brahman — described  as  unborn  and 
BO  forth  in  philosophic  treatises.  Cupidity  is  a  very  acnte  form 
of  mantal  disease;  it  is  of  the  form  of  strong  vivid  impressions 
of  like  and  dislike.  The  mind  absorbed  in  cupidity  appears 
as  if  in  trance,  being  above  lethargy  and  distraction  ;  but  in 
truth  it  is  fixed  to  a  point  all  misery  and  evil.  The  mind 
thus  fixed  should  be  distinguished  from  the  mind  fixed  in 
trance.  Having  understood  that  this  is  no  trance,  one  should 
set  himself  about  curing  it  of  this  cupidity  like  lethargy  and 
distraction,  Evenness  refers  to  Brahman;  for  it  has  been  said: 

."  The  highest  lord  pervading  all  is  Evenness  itself." 

'Lethargy,  Distraction,  Cupidity'  being  overcome  the  mind 
betakes  itself,  as  it  were  by  the  law  of  residual  survival,  lo 
the  condition  of  Evenness.  Move  not  the  mind  when  it  has 
found  that  condition,  through  any  misunderstanding  of  the 
condition  as  lethargy  or  cupidity.  Learn  to  distinguish 
between  this  condition  and  lethargy  and  cupidity  by  sharp 
intelligent  discrimination  and  keep  the  mind  for  as  long  as 
you  can  in  this  condition.  The  mind  being  fixed  in  this 
condition,  highest  bliss,  the  very  essence  of  Brahman,  is  well 
realized.  This  bliss  is  described  as: — 

*'  The  bliss  that  is  transcendent,  understood  of  the  intellect 
"alone,  beyond  the  reach  of  sense." 

The  S'ruti  too  has  it: — 

"That  bliss  which  is  experienced  by- the  mind  purified  of 
"  all  dross  from  the  practice  of  trance  and  fixed  in 
"  Atman  cannot  be  described  in  words,  it  is  understood 
"by  the  inner  sense  alone." 

The  bliss  of  B rahman  thus  revealed  in  trance  is  spoken  of 
in  the  said  Smrti  and  S'ruti  as  cognizable  by  the  intellect  ; 
the  master*  on  the  other  hand",  says  "  Taste  not  the  bliss 
thereof "  and  does  not  leave  this  bliss  to  the  cognizance  of 
the  intellect.  How  should  this  be  reconciled  with  what  has 

*  Gaudapadacharya. 


136 

been  said  above?    This    is     not    difficult.      The     master's 
reference  is   not   to   the   bliss   coming   of  intercepting   (the 
modifications  of  the  mind),  but  to  such  bliss  as  attaches  itself 
to   moments   of  break.     The   pleasure     of    cold     sensations 
experiensed  by  one  immersed  in  the  depths  of  the    Ganges 
at  midday   in "  the   hot  season  passes   all  description   at   the 
time,    but    is   capable    of  being  described   on   coming  out 
of  the  waters  ;   the   bliss  of  self  though   being   experienced, 
even  during  sleep,   by   certain   subtle   forms   of  avidyd,    is 
impossible  to  perceive   by   formal  modifications  of  the  inner 
sense,   at  the  time,   but  is   clearly  inferrible  on  waking.     In 
the   same    manner  the    experience   of  bliss   during  trance, 
spoken  of  in   the  said  text,  is  through  the  mind  free  from  all 
modifications  whatever  or  existing  in  a   very  subtle  condition 
being  only  of  the  form  of  residual  impressions  (of  itself).   The 
*  Taste '  spoken  of  by  the  master  is  of  the  kind  of  formal  infer- 
ence of  excessive  bliss  experienced  in  trance  ; — this  inference 
happenning  in  moments  of  break.     It  is  this  indulgence  in  the 
memory  of  this  sense  of  gratulation  during  moments  of  break 
that  is  deprecated   by   the  Master  in  the  words  "  Taste  not 
the  bliss  thereof."     It   is  added — "  be  intellectually  free  from 
all  attachment " — to  bring  out  this  very  meaning   as   plainly 
as  possible.  Definite  formal  knowledge  is  'Intellect '  (Prajna) ; 
give  up  all  connection  with  this  intellect ; — this  is   all  that  is 
meant  by  "  be  intellectually   free."     Or  '  Intellect '  (Praj no) 
may  refer  to  the  '  intellect   sustained   by  strong   patience ' 
quoted  at  the  beginning.    By  these  means  one  should  try  to  be 
free  from  this  sense  of  'Taste'  consisting  of  the  experience  and 
description  of  the   bliss  of  trance.     If  the   mind  immersed  in 
the  bliss  of  Brahman,  during  trance,  should  some  time  go  out 
for  the  pleasure  of  enjoying  such  bliss  or  from  causes    such  as 
heat,  cold,  mosquitos  and  the  like,  it  should  at  once  be  turned 
into  the  fixity  of  trance  ; — So  fast  should  it  be  identified  with 
Brahman.    The  means  to  this  end  is  constant  application  to 
interception  (of  the  modifications  of  the  mind).     This  identi- 
fication is  rendered  clear  in  the  words   '  when  the  mind  rises 
above  Lethargy  and  Distraction  '  etc.    The  words  *  which  has 


137 

too  character  and  which  has  nothing  to  do  with  study  of  any 
kind'  refer  to  the  absence  of  Cupidity  and  Taste  respectively, 
^he  mind  free  of  Lethargy,  Distraction,  Cupidity  and  Taste, 
becomes  undisturbedly  fixed  in  Brahman.  It  has  been  said 
in  the  Kathopanishad,  with  the  same  in  view : — 

"  That  is  called  the  lightest  condition  wherein  all  the 
"  five  senses  and  the  mind  remain  in  full  control 
"  and  wherein  even  the  intellect  does  not  pass  out  to 
u  other  desires.  This  steadying  of  the  senses  is  called 
"  Yoga,  the  Yogin  is  full  awake  in  that  condition,  for, 
"  Yoga  is  creating  accompanied  with  giving  up." 

Neglect  of  Yoga,  creates  activity  in  the  senses ;  properly 
attended  to  it  pacifies  them,  makes  them  give  up  the  activity. 
Hence  it  is  that  Yoga  is  defined  :  "  Yoga  is  the  suppression 
of  the  transformations  of  the  thinking  principle."*  It  may  be 
doubted  that  these  "  transformations  "  being  endless,  it  is 
impossible  to  suppress  them ;  the  limit  has  therefore  been 
thus  fixed  :  "  the  transformations  are  fivefold  :  and  painful  or 
not  painfal."f  Transformations  such  as  belong  to  Life-of-the 
lower-self  and  having  the  form  of  likes,  dislikes  and 
similar  distractions  are  "  painful."  Transformations  other 
than  these  and  belonging  to  Life-of-the-higher-Self  are 
"not-painful."  Though,  "painful"  as  well  as  "not 
painfnl"  are  all  included  in  the  "five"  transformations, 
still  the  "not-painful"  are  also  mentioned  along  with  the 
"  painful "  ones  lest  the  ignorant  be  misled  into  suppos- 
ing that  "painful"  transformations  alone  have  to  be  sup- 
pressed. Then  follow  six  other  aphorisms  to  explain  the 
scope  and  nature  of  the  five  "transformations": — "They 
are  right  knowledge,  wrong  knowledge,  fancy,  sleep  and 
memory  ;"  "  Right  knowledge  is  direct  cognition  or  inference 
or  testimony:"  "Wrong  knowledge  is  false  conception  of 
a  thing  whose  real  form  does  not  correspond  to  that  con- 
ception ;"  "  Fancy  is  the  notion  called  into  being  by 

*  Yoga  Sutras :  Ch.  I  Aph.  II.  f  Oh.  I.  Aph.  V. 

18 


138 

mere  words,   having  nothing  to   answer  to  it  in   reality ;" 
"That  transformation   which   has   nothingness  for   its  basis 
is  sleep;"   "  Memory  is  the  not-allowing  a  thing  to   escape.*'* 
That  is  transformation  into  "nothingness"  wherein  on  account 
of  the  veil  of  darkness   is   found  the  absence  of  all  objects 
whatever.     Sleep  indeed  is  that  transformation   of  the   mind 
•which  has  this    "darkness"     as   its   subject.       The    "not- 
allowing     a  thing  to   escape"    means   the   preservation   of 
the  continuity  of  impressions   between   a  thing  or   thought 
directly  cognized  and  its  subsequent   rememberance.     Then 
are  given  the  means  of  "  suppressing"  these  five  kinds  of  "  trans- 
formations :"    "Its  suppression  is  secured  by  application   and 
non-attachment." f     As  it  is  possible  to   obstruct  by   a  dam 
the    strong    current    of    a     river    and    force    it   sideways 
through   canals   into  fields   and   plots   of  ground    specially 
prepared  ;   even   so   is   the  stream  of  objects  filling  this  river 
of  the  mind   forced   away  by   "non-attachment"  into  that 
steadiness  which  from  application  to  trance  results  in  complete 
pacification.     It  may  here  be  doubted  that  application  of  the 
form  of  frequent  repetition  is  possible  in  the  case  of  incan- 
tations, meditation  of  some  God,  and  so  on,  for   these   are   of 
the  form  of  action  of  some   kind ;   but  it  is  not   possible  in 
the   case  of  trance   which   means  Suspension  of  all  action 
whatever.     It  has  been  said  with  the   view  of  demolishing 
this  doubt:   "Application  is   the   effort  towards   the  state.t 
*  The    state '    means     complete    steadiness,    the    condition 
wherein  all  transformations   are    suppressed,   the    moment 
of  interception.     "Effort"  is   direction   of   mental    energy 
towards  it.     Frequent  turning  of  the  mind  to  the  energetic 
resolve  "I  snail  restrain  the  mind  back  into  its  source  from 
its  inherent  tendency  to  go  over  to  objects,"   is   the  kind  of 
"application"  here  implied.    Then  follows  an  aphorism  to  ex- 
plain how  this   "application"  just  commenced  and  there- 
fore  necessarily    unconfirmed  will   succeed    in   neutralising 
impressions   of    unsteadiness   operating   from    time    out   of 

*  Ch.  I.  Aphs.  VI— XI.       f  Ch.  L  Aph.  XII.      +  Ch.  I.  Aph.  XIII. 


139 

memory :  "It  becomes  a  position  of  firmness,  being  practised 
for  a  long  time,  without  intermission,  and  with  perfect  de- 
votion."* People  usually  argue  after  the  manner  of  fools 
and  say  the  Vedah  are  only  four  in  number,  and  it  is  a 
wonder  why  Manavaka  who  went  to  study  them  has  not 
returned  though  it  is  already  five  days  since  he  left.  The 
same  logic  they  apply  to  Yoga  and  think  it  can  be  accom- 
plished in  a  few  days  or  months  or  years.  It  has  been  said 
as  against  this  popular  view  that  Yoga  should  be  "  practised 
for  a  long  time."  So  also  the  Smrli:  — 

"  He  finds  the  highest  condition  on  being  thoroughly  pre- 
"  pared  for  it  through  numerous  incarnations." 

But  even  then  if  yoga  is  practised  at  intervals,  during  this 
"  long  time,"  impressions  of  break  which  follow  immediately 
upon  impressions  of  yoga  will  overpower  the  latter  and  what 
is  said  by  thef  author  of  Khandanakhandakhadya  will  be  true 
in  this  case  also.  The  practitioner  will  have  nothing  to  stand 
upon  like  one  running  forward  and  falling  back  or  like  one 
learning  a  lot  of  things  and  forgeMng  them  the  next  minute. 
Hence  it  is  that  this  practice  has  to  be  "  without  iute  emis- 
sion." "  Devotion  "  refers  .to  the  respectful  attitude  of  the 
mind  towards  this  practice.  Want  of  devotion  will  make 
true  what  has  fceen  said  by  Vasistha  : — 

"  Whether  attending  to  this  or  not  attending,  if  the  mind  is 
"  engrossed^  with  impressions  of  things  and  their  enjoy- 
"  ment,  the  state  is  similar  to  that  of  one  attending  a 
"  religious  lecture  with  his  mind  fixed  on  something 
"at  a  distance." 

Want  of  "  devotion  "  means  the  not  carefnlly  doing  away 
with  the  four  obstacles  of  trance,  viz.,  Lethargy,  Distraction, 

*  Ch.  I.  Aph.  XIV.  t  s/ri  Harsha. 

J  The  reading  is  Chetaschet  KsKina-vsisanam  which  must  mean  "  if  the 
mind  is  emptied  of  all  impressions."  This  however  is  inconsistent  with 
the  argument  and  I  have  altered  the  reading  to  suit  the  meaning,  though 
without  authority. 


140 

Cupidity  and  Taste.    Hence  this   practice  shonld   be  "  with 
devotion."     Trance   thns   practised   becomes   a  "  position  of 
firmness,"  that  is  to  say,  it  becomes  so  far  confirmed  as  n&t 
to  be  disturbed  by  impressions   of  the  .pleasure   attending 
objects  and  their  possession  or  by  impressions   of  any  painful 
experience  whatever.     This  is  referred  to  by  the  Lord  :— 
"  Finding  which  he  deems  no  other  benefit  greater  than 
"  that,  nor  does   any   pain   or   misery  however  great 
"  succeed  in  disturbing  him  from  the  point." 

Vasishtha  has  illustrated  by  the  history  of  Kacha  how  "he 
deems  no  other  benefit  greater  than  that." 

"  Kacha  rising  once  upon  a  time  from  trance,  with  mind 
"  full  of  pleasantness,  spoke  to  himself,  in  a  lonely 
"  spot,  in  words  full  of  much  pitiful  pathos  :  '  what 
"  shonld  I  do,  where  should  I  go,  what  shonld  I  take 
*'  and  what  give  up  ;— Self  fills  the  whole  universe, 
"  even  like  the  waters  of  the  cyclic  deluge.  Within, 
"  without,  below,  above,  everywhere,  all  is  Self,  herd 
"and  there; — there -^is  no  not-Self  anywhere.  There 
"is  nothing  which  I  can  fix  upon  as  my  abode, 
"  there  is  nothing  which  .  is  not  in  me,  what  should 
"  I  desire  when  the  whole  world  is  one  web  of 
"universal  Consciousness!  The  mountains  fabled 
"  to  hold  up  the  globe  of  this  earth  are  but  the  foam 
"  over  the  waters  of  this  pure  ocean  of  all-pervading 
"  Brahman,  the  great  lump  of  luminosity — the 
"  Sun — is  but  the  light  of  this  Consciousness,  the  wealth 
"  and  riches  of  the  world  are  only  a  mirage  (in  the 
"  plane  of  Brahman)."1 ' 

The  being  unmoved  under  the  heaviest  pain  or  misfortune 
is  thus  illustrated,  by  the  same  sage,  in  the  trance  of  Sikhi- 
dhvaja  which  lasted  for  three  long  years  : — 

"  She*  there  saw  the  lord   of  earth  immersed  in  supreme 
"  ecstacy,   and  bethought  within   herself  I   may  now 

*  His  wife  Chudala. 


141 

"  awake  my  lord.  Hereupon  she  made  a  noise  as  big 
"  as  the  lion's  roar,  once,  twice,  frequently,  frightening 
•  "  all  beasts  of  the  forest.  When  she  found  that  he 
"  cannot  be  moved  by  this  noise,  though  thus  frequently 
"  repeated,  she  approached  him  and  began  to  shake  him 
"  into  consciousness.  But  though  shaken  or  dragged 
"  the  king  would  not  awake  to  the  life  of  the  ordinary 
"  world." 

The  same  is  illustrated  even  in  the  account  of  Prahlada  : — 

"  Wrapt  in  this  thought,  Prahlada,  the  destroyer  of  the 
"  best  of  his  foes,  lost  himself  in  the  supreme  bliss  of 
"ecstatic  trance.  While  in  this  condition  he  looked  a 
"  mere  picture  of  himself  ;  he  continued  in  this  condi- 
"  tion,  with  body  ever  fresh  and  bright,  and  with  the 
"  eye  fixed  only  upon  one  point,  for  a  period  of  five 
"  thousand  years.  The  Lord  Vishnu  approaching  him 
"  said  '  awake  ye  great  soul  !'  and  saying  so  he 
"blew  his  conch — Panchajanya — filling  the  quarters 
"  with  the  sound  thus  evoked.  The  impact  of  .this 
"  sound  proceeding  from  the  vital  breath  of  Vishnu, 
"  brought  the  lord  of  the  asurdh  to  himself  by  slow 
"  degrees." 

The  trance  of  Vitahavya  and  others  also  may  serve  for 
illustration  of  the  same. 

"  Non-attachment "  is  of  two  kinds  :  Inferior  and  superior. 
The  inferior  kind  of  non-attachment  is  again  fourfold  :  Trial, 
Separation,  Isolation,  and  Mastery.  Patanjali  referring  to 
the  first  three  by  mere  implication  speaks  of  the  fourth  in  the 
aphorism  :  "  The  consciousness  of  having  mastered  (every 
d.esire)  in  the  case  of  one  who  does  not  thirst  for  objects 
perceptible  or  heard  is  non-attachment."*  "  Objects  percepti- 
ble "  are  such  as  flowers,  ointments,  women,  children,  friends, 
property,  wealth,  and  so  on.  Objects  "  heard  "  are  such  aa 

*  Oh.  I.  Aph.  XV. 


142 

are  revealed  by  the  Veda,  to  wit,  heaven  and  the  like.  Desire 
being  there  for  both  the  one  as  well  as  the  other  the  fonr 
stages  spoken  of  are  marked  by  the  degrees  of  vividness  of 
this  desire  brought  about  from  careful  discrimination.  Trial- 
is  the  condition  of  striving  with  a  view  to  understand  with 
the  help  of  books  and  teachers  what  is  good  and  what  is  not 
good  in  this  world.  Separation — is  the  finding  out,  with 
proper  discrimination,  how  many  of  the  evil  thoughts  previ- 
ously existing  in  the  mind  have  been  put  out  and  how  many 
are  still  subsisting.  Isolation — is  that  condition  of  the  mind 
which  is  all  ardent  desire,  simple  and  pure,  after  all  activity 
for  objects  '  perceptible '  as  well  as  '  heard '  has  been  given  up 
with  knowledge  that  it  is  all  evil  and  misery.  Mflstery — 
is  cessation  of  all  desire  whatever.  This  fourfold  non-attach- 
ment being  initiative  of  the  eight  stages  (of  Yoga)  constitutes 
the  most  immediate  means  of  conscious-trance.  Of  unconsci- 
ous-trance it  is  only  the  mediate  cause.  That  non-attachment 
which  is  the  immediate  cause  of  unconscious-trance  is  thus 
described  :  "  That  is  the  highest  (superior)  wherein,  from 
being  the  purusha,  there  is  entire  cessation  of  any  the  least 
desire  for  the  gunah"*  Constant  practice  of  conscious- 
trance  leads  to  discrimination  of  Purusha,  from  Pradkana 
which  is  all  the  three  gunah  in  a  state  of  equilibrium  ; 
and  this  discrimination  leads  to  realization  of  the 
Purusha.  The  highest  non-attachment  consists  in  complete 
absence  of  desire  for  each  and  all  of  the  three  gunah 
and  their  effects,  after  this  realization.  Patanjali  refers  to 
the  degrees  of  rapidity  in  the  attainment  of  ecstatic  trance, 
from  degress  in  the  nature  of  this  non-attachment  thus:  "  It 
is  nearest  to  those  whose  feeling  is  most  ardent."f  The 

*  Oh.  I.  Aph.  XVI. 

f  Ch.  I.  Aph.  XXI.  There  are  two  readings  of  this  aphorism  "  Tivra- 
samvegdnamdsannah  samddhildbhah ;  and  Tivrasamvegondmdsannah  etc., 
The  former  is  here  adopted  for  obvious  reasons:  the  point  of  the 
aphorism  being  only  to  show  the  way  of  approach  to  Samddhi,  and  not  to 
define  the  nature  of  samvega. 


143 

"  ardent "  feeling  referred  to  here  is  the  feeling  of  non- 
attachment.  Yoginah  again  are  of  three  kinds  according  to 
the  degrees  of  this  ardentness  of  feeling,  to  wit  those  whose 
feeling  is  mild,  those  whose  feeling  is  moderate,  and  those 
whose  feeling  is  excessive  ;  it  has  been  said  :*  "A  further 
distinction  arises  on  account  of  mild,  moderate,  and  excessive." 
Mild,  moderate,  excessive  refer  to  the  degrees  of  ardentness  ; 
and  these  lead  sooner  to  the  result  in  the  order  they  are  here 
mentioned.  The  best  Yoginah  such  as  Janaka  and  Prahlada 
belong  to  the  class  of  excessively  ardent  practitioners,  for  they 
can  at  a  moment's  thought  throw  themselves  into  the  condi- 
tion of  ecstatic  trance.  Uddalaka  and  others  of  the  inferior 
sort  belong  to  the  class  of  mildly  ardent  practitioners,  for 
they  can  find  the  cdndition  of  trance  only  after  considerable 
attempt  at  reflection.  The  same  test  may  apply  to  other  prac- 
titioners as  well.  The  excessively  ardent  Yogin  finds  that 
"  position  of  firmness  "  which  is  ecstatic  trance  (unconscious- 
trance)  ;  and  there  being  no  possibility  of '  break,'  his  rnind  is 
entirely  dissolved.  Destruction  of  vdsand  being  thus  con- 
firmed from  dissolution  of  mind,  Jivanmukti  is  placed  within 
firm  grasp  of  such  Yogin.  It  should  not  be  supposed  that 
dissolution  of  mind  is  no  Jivanmukti  but  Vedehamukti ;  for, 
the  following  dialogue  settles  the  point : — 

Rama : — "  Tell  me,  oh  sage !  where  in  the  Yogin,  do  the 
"  virtues  '  friendliness  '  f  and  others  reside  after  the 
"  mind  and  its  form  are  all  dissolved  on  the  rise  of 
"proper  discrimination." 

Vasishtha  : — "  Dissolution  of  mind  is  of  two  kinds,  the 
"formal  and  the  formless.  The  first  belongs  to  Jivan- 
"  mukti,  the  second  to  Videhamukti.  That  which  makes 
"  much'of  the  gundh  belonging  to  Prajtrti  as  if  they 
"  belong  to  itself  and  thus  feels  itself  happy  or  miser- 

*  Oh.  I  Aph.  XXII. 

•f  The  reference  is  to  the  aphorism  which  speaks  of  friendliness  towards 
equals,  indifference  towards  adversaries,  couiplascence  towards  superiors 
and  pity  towards  inferiors. 


144 

"able  is  called  the  mind.  Thus  have  I  described 
"to  thee  the  nature  and  existence  of  the  mind,  hear 
"henceforward,  oh  best  of  questioners  !  the  mode »of 
"  its  destruction.  That  man  of  supreme  firmness  whose 
"  balance  no  condition  whether  of  pleasure  or  pain 
"  disturbs  in  the  least,  and  on  whom  all  desires  fall 
"  flat  like  ordinary  breath  on  the  lord  of  mountains, — 
"  the  mind  of  such  a  one  is  verily  dead  and  gone  for  ever. 
"  His  mind  is  indeed  quite  dead  who  is  never  moved  by 
"  calamity,  poverty,  pleasure,  pride,  dullness,  festivals, 
"  and  the  like.  When  the  mind  which  is  but  another 
"word  for  hope,  is  entirely  destroyed,  then,  oh 
.  "  Raghava !  rises  sattva  full  of  the  virtues  friendliness 
"and  others  in  question.  The  mind  of  the  Jivanmukta 
"is  thus  -for  ever  freed  from  repeated  incarnations. 
"  This  is  the  formal  dissolution  of  mind  peculiar  to  the 
"Jivanmukta.  The  formless  dissolution  of  mind 
*'  referred  to  at  the  beginning  is  found,  oh  best  of  the 
"  Raghus  !  only  in  the  condition  of  Videhamukti,  it 
"being  without  any  descriptive  parts  or  properties. 
"  Even  sattva  though  full  of  all  the  best  virtues  is 
"  dissolved  for  ever  in  Videkamukti,  the  holiest  con- 
"  dition  of  highest  bliss.  The  liberated  great  souls 
"  having  the  all-pervading  dkdsa  for  their  body  live  in 
"  that  condition  which  is  beyond  all  misery,  'in  no 
"  relation  whatever  with  matter,  all  uniform,  full  of 
"  bliss  and  joy,  free  from  Rajas  and  Tamas, — being 
"  without  the  least  touch  of  mind,  for  ever  dissolved." 

"  The  Jivanmukta  never  forgets  himself  in  any  condition  of 
"  pleasure  or  pain  ;  he  may  or  may  not  act  in  accord 
"  with  the  tendency  of  his  prakrti."  • 

• 

"  Thus  it  is  plain :  formal  dissolution  of  mind  is  the  right 
"  way  to  Jivanmukti" 

End  of  the  third  Chapter  on  "  Dissolution  of  mind." 


145 

CHAPTER  IV. 

.          THE  AIM  OF  SELF-REALIZATION  IN  THIS  LIFE. 

The  three  questions :  (1)  What  is  Jieanmitkti?  (2)  What  ia 
the  authority  on  which  it  rests?  (3)  What  are  the  means  that 
lead  to  it  ?  have  been  Disposed  of  in  the  preceding  chapters. 
Here  is  attempted  an  ans\ver  to  the  fourth  question  What  is 
the  aim  of  Jivanmukti  even  if  it  could  be  realized?  The  aims 
are  five  in  number  :  (I)  Preservation  of  Gnosis,  (2)  Practice  of 
Tapas>  (3)  Universal  love,  (4)  Destruction  of  pain  and  misery, 
(5)  Experience  of  supreme  bliss  and  joy. 

It  may  be  asked  where  is  the  chance  of  putting  ,qut  Gnosis 
brought  about  by  proper  instruments  of  knowledge  ?  and,  it 
being  so,  where  is  the  use  of  Jicanmukti  for  '  preservation  of 
Gnosis"?  The  answer  is  -doubt  and  false  knowledge  crop  up 
in  the  mind  if  it  lose  its  condition  of  peaceful  equilibrium. 
Visvamitra  has  well  illustrated  this  possibility  of  doubt, 
before  he  attained  the  condition  of  peaceful  tranquility,  even 
in  Raghava  who  was  well  initiated  in  Gnosis — 

"  Oh  child  of  the  Raghus  !•  the  best  of  knowers'!  there  is 
"  nothing  tttat  remains  for  thee  to  know,  thou  hast 
"known,  through  thy  sharp  intellect,  all  that  is  to  be 
•*  known.  The  mind,  though  well  enlightened  in 
"  regard  to  all  that  is  worth  knowing,  requires,  even 
*'  like  that  of  S'nka,  the  sou  of  the  revered  Vyasa,  to  bo 
•"  put  into  the  condition  of  peaceful  equilibrium." 

As  to  S'uka,  he  having  himself  found  the  Gnosis  and  not 
stilt  being  free  from  doubt  applied  himself  to  his  father  who 
taught  him  only  what  he  already  knew.  Not  being  satisfied 
even  with  that  he  submitted  himself  to  Janaka  who  also 
repeated  what  his  father  had  already  said. 

Hereupon,  said  S'uka  to  Janaka  : — 

.  "I  knew  this  of  myself  even  before  .through  proper  discri- 
"  mination,    and  my   father  too  taught  me  the  very 
"  same  thing  on  being  asked  about  it.    Oh  best  of  the 
19 


146 

"knowers  of  the  Word!  Yon  also  say  the  same; 
"  the  same  again  is  in  perfect  accord  with  what  is 
"  fonnd  in  books  on  the  subject.  This  world  called 
"into  being  by  qne's  own  imagination  disappears, 
"even  as  if  it  were  rednced  to  ashes,  on  the  suspension 
"  of  imagination  ;  it  is  verily  .all  an  empty  chimera  ;— 
"  this  is  the  absolute  truth.  Explain  this  to  me,  oh 
"  valiant  sire  1  Tell  me  the  real  truth  of  the  matter  ; 
"  for,  my  mind  wandering  through  the  universe  finds 
"  rest  and  peace  in  your  revered  presence." 

Janaka'. — "The  truth  is  none  other  than  what  you  say  ; 
"  you  have  known  it  of  yourself  and  have  heard  it  from 
"  your  teacher  also.  All  this  is  one  sole  Purusha,  all 
"  unbroken  consciousness,  there  is  nothing  else  besides  ; 
"  bondage  comes  of  one's  his  own  imagination,  from  sus- 
"  pension  of  imagination  comes  liberation.  Thus  have 
"  you  already  known  all  that  is  to  be  known  about  the 
"  glorious  Self ;  you  have  learnt  to  dislike  objects,  nay 
"  you  have  diverted  your  vision  from  the  whole  of  the 
"objective  (into  the  real  subject).  Yon,  with  mind 
"  full  to  its  extreme,  have  acquired  all  that  is  worth 
"acquisition,  you  put  forth  no  effort  towards  the 
"  objective,— oh  Brahman  \  thou  art  ever  liberated, 
"give  up  the  opposite  belief  that  troubles  thee. 
"Thus  advised  by  this  great  Soul— Janaka — S'uka 
"  rested  himself  in  the  complete  silence  and  peace  of 
"  the  Thing.  Free  from  sorrow,  fear,  effort,  desire  and 
"  doubt,  he  went  to  the  top  of  the  Meru  for  raising 
"  himself  into  the  spotless-condition  of  ecstatic  trance. 
"  Having  there  spent  a  thousand  years  in  such  trance, 
• "  he  dissolved  himself  in  the  Self  even  like  the  flame 
"  of  a  lamp  going  into  itself  for  want  of  oil  to  feed  it." 

It  is  thns  plain  that  doubt  crops  up  as  in  S'uka  and 
Raghava  even  after  knowledge  of  the  Truth,  from  want -of 
propei  rest  and  peace.  The  Lord  too  says  with  the  same  in 
view  : — 


147 

"  The  ignorant,  the  faithless   and   the  sceptic  meets  with 
"  destruction  ;  neither  this  world  nor  the  next  belongs 
•        "to  him  ; — he  who  is  all  doubt  can  find  no  happiness 
"  whatever." 

"  Ignorance  **  means  false  knowledge  ;  this,  will  be  explain- 
ed farther  on.  Whereas  ignorance-  and  false  knowledge  stand 
in  the  way  of  liberation  alone,  doubt  prevents  both  liberation 
as  well  as  ordinary  happiness  coming  of  worldly  enjoyments  ? 
for,  doubt  always  hangs  itself  between  top  opposite  extremes. 
Thus  when  one  desire*  worldly  enjoyments  doubt  draws  him 
towards  liberation  and  prevents  enjoyment ;  and  vice  versa 
when  he  desires  liberation  doubt  drags  him  to  worldly  enjoy- 
ments and  stands  in  the  way  of  liberation.  Hence  it  has  beeD 
said  "  he  who  is  all  doubt  can  find  no  happiness  whatever." 
One  desirous  of  liberation  should,  therefore,  get  himself  rid 
of  all  doubt  whatever.  The  S'ruti  also  says  :  "  All  donbts 
disappear."  The  story  of  Nidagha  is  illustrative  of  false 
knowledge.  Rbhu  repaired,  out  of  pity,  to  the  house  of 
Nidagha  and  having  enlightened  him  by  a  number  of  means 
returned  to  his  abode.  Though  thus  informed,  Nidagha 
having  no  faith  in  what  he  heard,  got  the  false  conviction 
that  ritual  worship  was  the  be-all  and  end-all  of  existence, 
and  applied  himself  to  ceremonial  worship  as  before.  The 
teacher  anxious  lest  his  pupil  should  be  misled  from  the  true 
aim  of  existence  returned  in  full  compassion  to  Nidagha  and 
advised  him  again.  Even  then  his  false  conviction  was  not 
shaken.  The  teacher  repeated  his  visit  a  third  time,  when,  on 
proper  expostulation,  the  pupil  gave  up  his  false  knowledge., 
Doubt  and  false  knowledge  of  the  nature  respectively  of 
having  no  grasp  of  the  truth  and  having  only  a  perverted 
glimpse  of  the  same, — prevent  knowledge  from  bearing  its 
real  fruit.  Says  Parasara  : — 

"  Fire  though  well  lighted  is  powerless  to  burn  any  fuel,  its 
"  power  being  neutralised  by  the  strength  of  certain 
"jewels,  incantations  or  herbs.  The  fire  of  gnosis* 
"  though  produced  and  fanned  into  a  splendid  blaze,  is 


148 

"  powerless  to  destroy  sin  and  sorrow  if  its  power  is 
"  neutralised  by  the  strength  of  doubt  and  false  know- 
"  ledge.  Having  perverted  glimpse  of  the  trnth  rfs 
"  well  as  having  no  grasp,  of  it  both  stand  alike,  oh 
"  S'aka  I  in  the  way  of  gnosis  and  its  resnlt." 

Thus  in  the  case  of  one  whose  mind  is  not  at  rest  there  is 
possibility  of  gnosis  being  rendered  powerless,  from  doubt 
and  false  knowledge,  to  bear  its  proper  fruit.  Hence  Preser- 
vation of  gnosis,  that  is  to  say,  doing  away  with  what  prevents 
it  from  bearing  its  proper  fruit,  is  no  doubt  a  proved  and  real 
necessity.  In  the  case  of  one  whose  mind  is  at  rest,  in  other 
words  whose  mind  is  so  far  dissolved  as  not  to  make  him 
conscious  of  the  world  and  the  whole  panorama  of  the 
objective, — in  the  case  of  such  a  one  there  certainly  is  no 
possibility  of  doubt  or  false  knowledge.  The  knower  of 
Brahman  unconscious  of  the  objective  is  able  to  sustain  his 
body  and  everything  connected  with  it,  without  any  conscious 
effort ;  for  the  vital  breath  in  the  body  acting  under  tho 
guidance  of  God*  is  of  itself  sufficient  to  the  end.  Hence  is 
it  said  in  the  Chhandogya  :— 

"  He  remembers  not  what  otters  see  viz.  his  body  ;  the 
"  vital  breath  doe's  uH  even  like  'an  animal  appointed 
"to  his  task." 

That  which  "  others  see  "  is  what  is  most  near  tlhe  eyes  of 
men  viz.,  the  body  of  the  liberated  ;  the  knower  of  Brahman 
acts  as  if  completely  oblivious  of  his  body.  Those  near  him 
see  his  body,  whereas  he  himself  being  void  of  mind  never 
remembers  it  as  belonging  to  him.  "  An  animal  appointed  to 
his  task"  refers  to  a  broken  horse  or  ox  yoked  to  a  vehicle 
who  being  often  driven  on  the  road  by  the  driver,  takes  the 
same  course  whether  thus  guided  or  not,  and  reaches  the 
carriage  to  the  appointed  place.  The  vital  breath  does, 

*  The  word  God  is  here  used  in  the  sense  of  that  reflection  of  Supreme 
consciousness  in  Mdyd,  which  as  the  sum  total  (Samashti)  of  all  conscious 
units  ia  in  charge,  so  to  speak,  of  the  world  and  all  individual  beings 
below  itself  in  the  order  of  development.  See  Panchadasi— Ch.  II. 


149 

similarly,  accomplish  all  that  is  necessary  for  life,  thongh 
acted  npon  or  not  by  individual  effort,  being  under  control  of 
the  Snprerae  Lord  of  all.  The  same  is  given  in  the  Bhaga- 
vata  also  : — 

"  This  mortal  habitant  brought  about  or  carried  off  by 
"  chance — the  accomplished,  inasmuch  as  he  has 
"  found  him-Self,  recks  not  whether  it  stands  or  falls  ; 
"  even  like  the  drunkard  blind  with  intoxication  who 
"  recks  not  whether  the  cloth  he  wears  remains  or  falls 
"  away." 

So  also  Vasishtha  : — 

"  They  share  in  such  intercourse  as  come  to  them  in  the 
"  current  of  general  activity  on  being  led  into  it  by 
"  persons  standing  by,  even  like  one  awakened  from 
"  sleep  ;  and  yet  they  are  always  unaffected  with  the 
"act." 

'It  may  be  said  it  is  a  contradiction  in  terms  to  say  "  the 
accomplished  recks  not "  and  "  they  share  in  such  intercourse 
as  comes  to  them."  This  is  no  contradiction,  for,  both  these 
conditions  are  possible  in  consideration  of  the  various  degrees 
of  rest.  The  Sruti  says  with  these  '  degrees  of  rest '  in  view  : 
"this  the  highest  knower  of  Brahman  acts  to  the  end  of  playing 
with  Self,  pleasing  Self  with  Self."  These  degrees  are  four  in 
nnmber.  The  knower  of  Brahman  of  the  first,  second,  third, 
and  fourth  degree  belonging  respectively  to  the  fourth,  fifth, 
sixth  and  seventh  of  the  seven  stages  of  Yoga.  These  stages 
are  thus  described  by  Vasishtha  : — 

"  The  first  stage  is  Ardour,  the  second  Contemplation,  the 
"  third  Attenuation,  the  fourth  Pacification,  the  fifth 
"  Indifference,  the  sixth  Oblivion  and  the  seventh 
"  Transcendence.  The  desire  accompanied  with  deep 
"sense  of  non-attachment,  coming  from  repentence 
"  for  one's  ignorance  and  leading  to  study  of  philosophy 
"  and  company  of  the  wise  is  the  first  stage  called 
"Ardour.  The  second — Contemplation — consists  of 


150 

"  that  constant  flow  of  good  thoughts  born  of  philoso- 
"  phy,  company  of  the  wise,  non-attachment  and 
"  repeated  application.  The  daily  wearing  away,  to 
"almost  imperceptible  thinness,  of  the  deep  attach- 
"  ment  to  objects  of  sense,  under  force  of  Ardour  and 
"Contemplation,  leads  to  the  third  stage  called 
"  Attenuation.  When  from  constant  application  to> 
"  these  three  stages  the  mind,  being  emptied  of  all  that 
"  belongs  to  the  objective,  finds  complete  rest  in  the 
"  pure  bliss  of  saitva,  the  fourth  stage  called  Pacifica- 
<:  tion  dawns  upon  the  ascetic.  That  condition  which 
"  results  from  carefully  going  over  these  four  stages 
"  and  which  being  void  of  all  contact  with  the  object- 
"  ive  is  all  wondrous  sattva  is  called  Indifference. 
"  The  total  absence  of  all  objects,  external  as  well  a* 
"  internal,  from  sight,  in  consequence  of  accomplishing 
"  the  five  preceding  stages,  and  the  resulting  fusion 
"  of  the  objective  in  the  subjective,  as  also  the  state  of 
"  being  called  to  action  from  the  desire  of  others,  is  all 
"collectively  described  as  the  sixth  stage  called 
"  Oblivion.  When  these  six  stages  are  passed,  and 
"when  all  sense  of  separateness  is  at  end,  the 
"condition  of  Self-realization  which  results  is  the 
"  seventh  stage  called  Transcendence." 

The  first  three  stages  mentioned  here  are  only  the  means  of 
gnosis  and  are  therefore  not  included  in  Brakma-mdycS 
proper  ;  for  in  them  a  sense  even  of  pseudo-reality  attaches- 
itself  to  separateness.  These  three  are  therefore  assigned  to. 
the  waking  condition.  It  has  been  said  :— 

"  These  three  stages  oh  Rama  !  belong  to  the  waking  con- 
"  dition,  for  the  world  is  seen  as  it  is,  through  the 
"  sense  of  separateness,  only  in  that  condition." 

Then  comes  undoubted  direct  realization  of  the  unity  of 
Self  and  Brahman,  from  contemplation  of  the  sense  of  the 
Great  Texts  of  the  Vedantaj  this  is  the  fourth  stage,  the 


151 

result  of  the  first  three,  called  Pacification.  One  in  the 
fourth  stage  having  gained  firm  conviction  of  the  real  essence 
04*  the  Unit — Brahman — the  material  cause  of  the  phenomenal 
world,  clearly  realizes  the  illusory  nature  of  all  name  and 
form  which  go  to  make  up  what  is  known  as  the  world  ima- 
gined in  Brahman.  This  stage  may  correspond  to  dream, 
in  consideration  of  the  preceding  stage  which  answers  to 
waking. 

"  Duality  having  disappeared  from  before  and  unity  being 
"realized,  those  in  the  fourth  stage  look  upon  the 
"  world  like  a  dream.  Bow  to  that  Hari  who  appears 
"  to  the  Yog  in  as  the  residual  being  of  all,  whose 
"  knowledge  dissolves  everything  beside  himself  even 
"  like  clouds  in.  the  autumn.  Oae  thus  carried  into 
"the  fourth  stage  stands  all  full  of  the  sense  of 
"  Being  alone,  and  nothing  besides." 

The  ascetic  in  this  fourth  stage  is  said  to  be  the  knower  of 
Brahman  belonging  to  the  first  degree.  The  three  stages 
beginning  from  the  fifth  are  only  degrees  of  the  condition  of 
Jivanmukti ;  they  arise  from  differenc}  in  the  degree  of  peace- 
fulness  coming  from  constant  practice  of  unconscious-trance. 
Unconscious-trance  in  the  fifth  stage  may  be  broken  of  itself. 
The  ascetic  in  this  stage  is  the  knower  of  Brahman  belonging 
to  the  second  degree.  These  two  stages  are  said  to  corres- 
pond to  sleep,  and  deep  sleep  respectively.  It  has  been  said  : — 

"  Having  approached  the  fifth  stage  called  sleep,  the  ascetic 
"  stands  in  the  sole  consciousness  of  the  Unit,  all 
"  difference  being  laid  entirely  at  rest.  Though 
"  pursuing  mental  images  projecting  themselves  with- 
"out,  he  is  ever  centered  in  himself  within,  and  appears 
"  as  if  all  sleepy  being  wearied  of  the  external — con- 
"  stant  practice  in  this  sta^e  leads  the  Yogin  by 
"  degrees  into  the  sixth  stage  corresponding  to  deep 
"  sleep.  There  he  is  free  of  all  meum  and  tuumt  he  is 
"  neither  being  nor  not-being, — he  is  above  all  mental 
"  imaginings,  he  stands  beyond  unity  as  well  as  dua- 


152 

ulity.  Some  attach  themselves  to  duality,  others  to 
"  unity,  few  know  BraJiman  which  is  beyond  .duality 
"and  unity,  the  equilibrium  wherein  neither  appea**. 
"  He  is  empty  within  as  well  as  without  even  like  the 
"jar  standing  empty  in  the  wide  dkd'sa  ;  he  is  full 
"within  and  full  without  like  the  jar  in  the  surging 
"  ocean." 

One  who  has  gained  the  condition  of  unconscious-trance 
tas  the  mind  existing  only  in  the  state  of  hazy  potential  im- 
pressions of  mental  experience  ;  it  has,  therefore,  no  power 
to  call  up  castles-in-the-air  or  create  external  objects  of 
any  kind  whatever.  Such  a  mind  is  *  empty '  within  and 
without  like  the  jar  lying  in  space.  It  is  all  ''full '  within 
and  without  like  the  jar  filled  with  water  and  placed  in  the 
ocean,  because  it  is  immersed  in  the  uniform  ones-ness  of 
Brahman,  all  self-illumined  thought  and  bliss.  The  ascetic 

•in  the  seventh  .stage  of  Transcendence  knows  -no  break  (of 
his  ecstatic  trance)  either  of  himself  or  from  the  desire  of 
any  one  else.  It  has  been  said  "  this  mortal  habitat  etc." 

,in  the  Bhagavata  Qnly  with  referenee  .to  the  condition  of 
such  a  Yogin.  Tljis  indeed  is  the  end, of  all  Yoga,  and  books 
on  Yoga, — this , realization  of  unconscious — or  ecstatic  trance. 
The  Yogin  in  this  condition  is  the  knower  of  Brahman  belong- 
ing to  the  third  and  last  degree. 

Thus  the  '  contradiction  in  terms'   apparently  involved  in 

,the  two  statements  «.the  accomplished  recks  not'  and  '  they 

:share  in  such  intercourse  as.  comes  to  tfrem'  which  was  the 

,cause  of  starting  this  controversy  is  .easily   explained.     This, 

However,  is  the   substance   of  the- whole  :   the   three   stages 

.beginning  .with  the  fifth  having  been  reached,  that  is  to   say 

Jivanmukti  of  that  kind  having  been   realized,  there   is   no 

possibility  of  doubt  and  false  knowledge  on   account  of  the 

,  absence  of  all  duality  in  those   conditions  ;  ,and  gnosis   once 

.brought  .about  is  fully  presevered  and  protected   thereafter. 

,So  then,  this  ^Preservation  of  Gam*  is   the   first  aim  of 

Jivanrnu/tti. 


153 

N  The  second  aim  is  Practice  of  Tapas.  The  stages  of  Yoga 
may  be  said  to  make  up  this  '  Practice  of  Tapas '  on  account  of 
their  being  the  cause  of  exalting  the  ascetic  to  the  condition 
of  gods  and  other  higher  beings.  This  is  fairly  illustrated 
by  the  dialogue  between  Arjima  and  the  Lord  or  that  between 
Rama  and  Vasishtha  :  — 

Arjuna  : — "  Tell  me  oh  Krshna  !  what  is  the  course  of  that 
"  aspirant  who,  not  yet  a  full  Yogin,  but  having  faith 
"in  Yoga  (passes  away)  without  reaching  the  Goal  ? 
"Does  he  not  meet  with  destruction  like  some 
"  piece  of  cloud  separated  from  between  two  adjacent 
"  clouds  ; — being  yet  without  any  firm  hold,  oh  power- 
"  ful-armed  one  !  on  the  path  of  Brahman  ?" 

The  Lord  : — "  Oh  son  of  Prtha  !  destruction  meets  him  not 
"  either  here  or  elsewhere,  for,  know  my  dear  !  no  one 
"  who  is  devoted  to  the  path  of  goodness  ever  meets 
"  with  evil  fate." 

Arjnna  : — "  Solve  this  my  doubt  oh  Krshna  !  to  its  utter 
"  limit,  for,  there  is  none  besides  you  who  can  address 
"himself  to  the  proper  solution  of  this  question.'* 

The  Lord  : — One  fallen  from  Yoga  passes  on  to  the  world 
"  he  has  merited  by  his  acts,  remains  there  for  several 
"  long  ages,  and  returns  ultimately  to  life  in  the  house 
"  of  some  pious  man  of  riches,  or  is  born  in  the  family 
*•  of  some  highly  developed  Yogin  ; — this,  however,  is 
"  difficult  that  one  should  be  born  in  conditions  like 
"  these.  He  invariably  finds  that  wealth  of  wisdom 
"  which  he  has  amassed  in  previous  births,  and  finds 
"  the  way,  oh  son  of  the  Kurus  !  prepared  for  farther 
"  advance  along  his  favourite  line  towards  the  goal." 

Rama  :  — "  Tell  me  oh  revered  sire  !  what  coarse  awaits 
"  one  who  passes  away  from  the  first  or  the  second  or 
"  third  stage  ?" 

Vasishtha  : — "  The  evil  tendencies  of  that  being  who  passes 
"  away  from  any  one  of  the  stages  of  Yoga   melt  away 
20 


154 

44  in  proportion  to  the  development  he  has  acquired 
"  in  that  stage.  He  enjoys  in  company  of  his  beloved 
"  the  groves  in  the  gardens  extending  on  the  Mern  or 
"  wanders  about  for  pleasure  in  celestial  balloons  or  in 
"  the  towns  and  cities  of  the  gods.  His  previous 
"  works  good  as  well  as  bad  being  thus  enjoyed  out  in 
"course  of  time,  the  ascetic  comes  to  life  on  this  earth 
"  again.  He  is  born  in  the  house  of  some  pious  rich 
"  man,  adorned  with  all  the  best  virtues.  .  Having 
.  "then  rapidly  passed  through  the  three  stages  he  has 
"  already  gone  over,  he  goes  on  to  the  higher  stages 
"  and  resumes  his  progress  as  before." 

In  this  manner  do  the  '  stages  '  lead  to  the  life  of  gods.  If 
it  be  still  asked  what  makes  for  Practise  of  Tapas  in  all  that? 
the  answer  is  given  in  the  S'ry,ti  "  Penance  exhalts  to  the 
condition  of  the  gods,  the  Rshis  came  to  be  gods  through 
penance,  choosing  that  condition  gained  it."  The  three  stages 
preceding  Gnosis  being  of  the  nature  of  this  kind  of  Penance 
the  three  stages  coming  after  rise  of  Gnosis  and  beginning 
with  the  fifth  which  corresponds  to  ecstatic  trance  are  of 
necessity  implied  to  be  much  more  so.  Hence  has  it  been 
said  : — 

"  The  highest  penance  consists  in  steadying  the  mind  and 
"  senses  to  a  point ;  this  is  the  best  of  all  religious 
"  practices,  it  is  the  highest  religion." 

Though  this  penance  leads  not  to  re-birth,  still  it  is  useful 
in  that  it  does  good  to  the  world.  Says  the  Lord  :— 

"  It  behoves  thee  to  carry  this  out  even  with  regard  to  the 
"  good  thou  wilt  do  to  the  world  at  large." 

The  '  world '  to  be  thus  obliged  may  be   divided  into  three 

kinds  of  men  :   pupils,  devotees,  neutrals.     The  first   has   the 

highest  faith  in  the  truthfulness  of  the  teacher  who  is  a  real 

Yogin  ever  centred  within  ;  he  grasps  the  truth  taught  by  his 

master,  in  full  trust  and  confidence,  and  is  able  to  attain 


155 

mental  peace  iu  a   very   short   spaca   of  time.     Hence   is   it 
sa.id  : — 

"  He  who  is  absolutely-  devoted  to  God  and  looks  npon  his 
"  teacher  as  his  God  ; — to  that  great  soul  is  revealed 
"  the  truth  of  what  is  given  him  by  the  master." 

The  Smrti  also  says  : — 

"  The  faithful  finds  the  truth,  being  absolutely  devoted  to  it, 
"  with  senses  held  in  proper  check  ;  having  found  the 
"  truth  he  acquires  supreme  tranquility  in  no  timV" 

The  second  kind  of  men,  devotees,  share  in  the  penance 
practised  by  the  Yogin,  merely  from  the  circumstance  of  their 
being  helpful  to  him  by  way  of  accommodating  him  in  the 
matter  of  food,  habitation,  and  the  like.  Says  the  S'ruti 
"  Sons  share  the  patrimony,  friends  his  good  deeds,  enemies 
his  sins." 

•Neutrals  again  are  of  two  kinds  :  Believers  and  Unbelievers. 
The  first  imitate  the  Yogin  and  try  to  follow  in  his  foot- 
steps. The  Smrti  has  it  : — 

"  The  world  follows  the  lead  of  great  souls  in  what  they 
"  do  ;  whatever  they  sanction,  men  accept." 

Even  the  unbeliever  is  rid  of  his  sins  on  being  graced  with 
a  sight  of  the  Yogin.  It  has  been  said  : — 

"  He  whose  intellect  has  grasped  the  Truth  to  the  extent 
"  of  proper  self-realization  ; — Every  one  of  those  on 
"  whom  falls  the  eye  of  such  a  Yogin,  is  delivered 
"  from  all  his  sins/' 

In  the  same  manner  does  he  do  good  to  all  ;  this  is  set 
forth  thus : — 

w  He  has  had  a  dip  in  the  holy  waters  of  all  sacred 
"rivers  ;  he  has  given  the  whole  earth  in  pious 
"  gift ;  he  has  offered  a  thousand  sacrifices  ;  he  has 
"  satisfied  all  the  Gods  in  heaven  ;  he  has  lifted  his 
"ancesters  out  of  the  circle  of  birth  and  death  ;  he 


155 

"deserves  worship  of  all  the  three  worlds  ; — the 
"  man  whose  raiud  has,  even  for  a  moment,  tasted 
"of  peace  in  the  absorbing  idea  of  Brahman? 

"  From  him  is  reflected  all  holiness  on  the  whole  of  his 
"family,  of  him  is  the  highest  .fulfilment  of  his 
"mother's  disire,  the  earth  is  fall  of  all  pions  merit 
"through  him; — the  man  whose  mind  is  dissolved  in 
"  that  Supreme  Brahman  which  is  the  infinite  ocean 
"  of  thought  and  bliss." 

It  is  not  only  such  intercourse  of  the  Yogin  as  is  sanctioned 
by  religious  works  that  constitutes  penance,  but  all  his 
activity  whatever  is  of  that  nature.  The  followers  of  the  Taitti- 
riya-iakkd  speak  of  the  glory  of  the  knower,  in  the  first 
anuvaka  of  their  book.  In  the  first  part  of  that  anuwka  they 
speak  of  the  members  of  the  Yogin  as  the  several  parts  and 
adjuncts  of  the  sacrifice  :  "  Of  the  knower,  all  sacrifice,  soul 
"  is  the  sacrificer,  faith  is  the  wife,  the  body  is  the  sacred  fuel, 
"  the  breast  is  the  sacrificial  altar,  the  hair  on  the  body  is  the 
"  exterior  Veda,  his  heart  is  the  sikhd,  desires  make  the 
"  sacrificial  post,  anger  is  clarified  butter,  penance  is  the 
"  victim,  cor.trol  is  the  fire,  charity  is  the  gift  given  to 
"  priests,  speech  is  the  Hotd,  vital  breath  is  the  Udgata,  the 
"eye  is  Adhvaryuh,  the  mind  is  Brahma,  the  ear  is  the 
"  Agnit"* 

In  this  description  the  words  '  charity  is  the  gift  given  to 
the  priests  '  must  be  understood,  say  the  Chhandogyah,  to  mean 
"Penance,  charity,  straightforwardness,  universal  love,  truth- 
fulness,—these  are  the  gifts  he  gives."  Again,  in  the  middle 
of  the  said  Anuvdka,  all  activity  of  the  Yogin,  nay  the  very 

*  The  five  names  from  Hotd  onward  are  names  of  five  different  officers 
in  a  sacrifice.  The  first  belongs  to  the.  Rgueda,  the  second  to  the  Yajash, 
the  third  to  the  Sdma— and  the  fourth  to  the  Atharvana.  The  first  offers 
obtations,  the  second  superintends  the  operations,  the  third  invokes  the 
gods,  the  fourth  presides  over  the  whole.  The  fifth  Agnit  may  not  belong 
to  any  special  Veda  though  he  is  generally  a  Rgvedin  and  his  office  is  to 
praise  the  fire  on  the  altar. 


natural  functions  of  life,  are  identified  with  parts  of  the 
Jyotis/tthoma-sficTifi.ce,  as  also  with  the  concluding  part  of 
every  sacrifice,  whatever,  thus  :  "  Whatever  he  takes  is  his 
"  vow,  whatever  he  eats  is  the  oblation,  what  he  drinks  is  his 
"  sotna-drink,  what  he  plays  is  the  upasada-koma*  what  he 
"  goes  about  sits  or  stands  is  the  Pravargya-homa,  his  mouth 
"  is  the  Akavanit/a-fire,  what  he  speaks  is  offering,  his 
"  knowledge  is  the  oblation,  what  he  eats  in  the  morning,  at 
"noon  and  in  the  evening  is  the  sacred  fuel,  what  is  morning 
"  mid-day  and  evening  are  the  three  savandni,  day  and  night 
"  are  the  Da.rta-  and  Puniamdsa-  sacrifices,  months  arid  fort- 
"  nights  are  the  Chdturmdsya-s&crifice,  the  seasons  are  the 
"  ties  that  hold  the  victim,  years  and  half  years  are  the 
"  ahargandh  ; — in  short  this  is  a  Sacrifice  in  which  everything 
"  becomes  the  gifts  he  gives  away,  his  death  being  the  Ava- 
" bhrtha"]  The  word  'this'  in  the  last  line  refers  to  the  whole 
life-period  of  a  Yogin  as  made  np  of  days,  nights,  months  and 
years  just  referred  to  in  the  text  quoted.  In  other  words,  it  is 
implied  that  his  whole  life  is  a  Sacrifice  attended  with  the 
giving  of  varions  gifts  all  the  time. "  In  the  latter  part  of 
the  last  Anuvdka  is  mentioned  the  fruit  viz.,  liberation  by 
gradual  stages,  as  characterised  by  identification  with  Brahman 
the  cause,  as  well  as  Brahman  the  effect,  in  the  form  of  the 
Moon  and  the  Sun.  This  fruit  is  reaped  by  one  who  devotes 
himself  to  such  a  Yogin,  all  Sacrifice  from  end  to  end. 
"  This  is  the  immortal  Agnihotra-S&crifLce,  he  who  thus  know- 
"  ing  passes  off  in  the  Uttardyana  attains  to  the  glory  of  the 
"gods  and  becomes  one  with  the  Sun;  he  who  passes  off  in  the 
"  Dakshindyana  attains  to  the  glory  of  t\\&pitarah  and  becomes 
"  one  with  the  Moon,  resides  in  the  regions  of  the  moon  ;  the 
"  knower  of  Brahman  understanding  this  secret  of  the  sun  and 

*  A  particular  form  of  oblation  with  specified  mantrdni;  see  S'raufa- 
paddrtha-Nirvachana  page  297  &o.  137.  The  Pravargya  is  also  a  parti- 
cular form  of  offering  with  particular  mantrdni.  See,  idem.  P.  281 
No.  85. 

•j-  It  is  the  bath  taken  at  the  conclusion  of  a  Sacrifice.  It  is  supposed 
to  bo  very  holv. 


'•  the  moon  is  master  of  everything  : — he  -thus  gains  the  glory 
"  of  .Bra^wa^hedoes  indeed  gain  it.  Thussays  the  Upanishad" 
The  whole  life  of  the  Yogin  up  to  decay  and  death  is  one 
continuous  Affin-kotra-Sa.criG.ee  spoken  of  in  the  Veda,  ending 
with  the  yearly  Sacrifice  there  mentioned.  He  who  thus 
devotes  himself  to  the  Yogin  becomes  identified  with  the 
snn  or  the  moon,  from  the  strength  of  his  faithful  resolve. 
If  his  faith  is  anyhow  less  fervid  he  gains  some  world  equal 
to  his  own  and  having  then  experienced  the  favour  of  the 
sun  and  the  moon,  he  rises  further  to  the  world  of  truth  and 
acquires  the  glory  of  the  four-faced  Bra/imd.  Having  gained 
gnosis  up  to  full  realization,  while  in  that  sphere,  he  gains 
the  glory  of  Brahman,  all  being,  thought  and  bliss  ;  in  other 
words  finds  Kaivalya.  The  words  '  Thus  says  the  Upanishad  ' 
indicate  the  conclusion  of  the  argument  in  behalf  of  the  truth 
revealed  as  also  of  the  text  treating  of  that  truth.  Thus  is 
established  the  second  aim  of  Jivanmukti  viz.,  the  practice  of 
Tapas. 

The  third  aim  of  Jivajimukti  is  Universal  Love.  The  Yogin 
being  all  centred  within  and  detached  from  all  external  inter- 
course, no  one  whether  informed  or  uninformed,  ever  thinks 
anything  against  him.  This  '  thinking  against  him r  is  of 
two  kinds ;  dispute  and  censure.  The  ascetic  being  ever  beyond 
anger  and  the  rest,  the  uninformed  can  ever  find  cause  for 
dispute  with  him.  It  has  been  said  : — 

"  Return  not  anger  for  anger,  wish  him  well  who  menaces 
"  evil,  put  up  with  all  scandal  whatver,  displease  no 
"  one.0 

It  may  here  be  questioned  rennnciation-of-the-accomplished 
is  anterior  to  Jivanmukti,  -realization  of  gnosis  is  anterior 
even  to  that  renunciation,  and  remuneration-of-the^seeker  is 
anterior  again  to  gnosis  ; — how  then  is  it  possible  to  preach 
absence  of  anger  and  similar  virtues  at  this  stage  ?  This  is 
true  ;  and  it  is  because  of  this  that  there  is  not  even  so  much 
as  a  shadow  of  anger  and  the  like,  in  the  Jivanmukta.  If 
anger  and  the  rest  are  not  found  in  renunciation-of-the- 


159 

seeker,  much  less  could  they  be  present  in  ytwsis,  not  at  all 
in  renunciation-of-the-accomplished,  and  least  of  all  in 
Jtvanmukti.  Hence  no  man  of  the  world  (the  uninformed) 
can  ever  find  cause  to  quarrel  with  the  ascetic.  Nor  is  there 
possibility  of  the  second  kind  of  adverse  thinking  viz.,  scandal  ; 
for,  it  is  not  possible  to  attach  scandal  to  any  particular 
individual.  It  has  been  said  : — 

"  Who  knows  not  being  or  non-being,  ignorance  or  learu- 
"  ing,  character  or  no-character — He  alone  is  the  true 
"  ascetic." 

'Being  or  non-being'  refer  to  high  or  low  birth.  Even 
as  to  the  '  informed/  what  is  it  he  would  make  ground  of 
dispute  with  the  Yogin  ?  Whether  the  meaning  and  import 
of  philosophic  treatises  ?  or  the  asctie's  life  as  a  Yogin  ? 
As  to  the  first,  the  Yogin  never  meddles  with  what  may 
be  taught  in  other  views  of  life  ;  the  injunction  runs : 
''know  the  one  self  alone,  have  nothing  whatever  to  do 
with  other  words  ;  be  n  ot  deluded  by  words,  it  is  all 
waste  of  breath."  Nor  does  he  care  to  establish  the 
position  of  tlie  philosophy  he  follows,  before  such  as 
dispute  it  : — 

"  Leave  aside  all  books  whatever  after  knowing  the  supreme 
"  Brahman,  even  like  so  much  straw  after  taking  away 
"  the  corn  from  it  ; — nay,  touch  not  books  as  if  they 
"  were  so  many  fire-brands." 

When  he  looks  even  upon  a  disputant  as  part  of  himself 
where  is  the  room  for  desire  of  victory  ?  Nor  is  it  possible 
that  believers  of  whatever  school,  except  materialists,  having 
faith  in  the  reality  of  liberation,  will  ever  take  exception  to 
the  Yogin  and  his  ways.  For,  though  the  Jaina,  the  Buddha, 
the  Vaiseshika,  the  Naiyayika,  the  Saiva,  the  Vaishnava, 
the  S'akta,  the  Sdnkhya,  the  Yoga — all  disagree  as  to  the 
nature  of  liberation,  they  are  unanimous  in  respect  of  Yama, 
Niyama,  and  the  rest  of  Yoga  as  being  the  means  to  liberation. 


160 

Thna  is  the  Yogin  an  object  of  universal  favour.  Says  Vasishtha 
with  this  in  mind  : — 

"  Oh  best  of  intellects  !  in  him  specially  enters  the  most 
"  spotless  gnosis  whose  present  life  is  but  the  last, 
"  even  as  pearls  seek  the  bamboo  of  ages'  growth.. 
"  Goodness,  placability,  friendliness,  quiet,  freedom, 
"  knowledge — all  constantly  repair  to  him  as  do  women 
"into  the 'interior  of  the  house.  Sweet  with  polished 
"  open  conduct,  he  is  sought  by  all  men,  like 
"  the  sweet  lute,  saught  after  by  the  deer  in  a  forest. 
"  He  is  the  liberated  one  who  on  account  of  the  sup- 
"  reme  quiet  of  his  mind,  ever  remains  as  it  were  in  a 
>  "  kind  of  sleep  though  mentally  wide  awake,  who  is 
"  ever  sought  after  by  the  wise  like  the  moon  full  of 
"  all  the  Kaldk."* 

Also, 

"  In  him,  all  peace,  do  confide  and  become  calm  all  beings 
"  whatever — whether  cruel  or  docile — even  as  in  their 
"  own  mother.  The  man  of  peace  stands  above  all — 
"  men  of  penance,  men  of  learning,  men  of  religious 
"  piety,  nay  even  kings  and  potentates,  or  men  of 
"  great  character  and  virtue." 

Thus  is  clearly  made  out  the  third  aim  of  Jivanmukti — 
Universal  love. 

The  fourth  and  fifth  objects  viz.,  Destruction  of  misery  and 
Gaining  of  Bliss,  which  consist  respectively  in  Gnosis  and 
supreme  joy,  are  described  in  the  fourth  chapter  speaking  of 
Srakmdnanda.  An  abstract  is  here  set  forth.  Says  the 
S'ruti  :— 

K  If  he  knows  his  self  as  the  Self,  what  desire,  what  object, 
"  should  burn  his  body  in  the  fever  of  care  and  anxiety." 

This  is  said  to  imply  that  all   temporal  evil  is  destroyed, 

*  There  is  a  double  entendre  on  the  word.  As  to  the  moon  it  means 
digits,  an  to  the  liberated  it  means  the  fine  arta  and  learning. 


161 

in  the  knower.  The  Sruti:  "He  never  regrets  he  did  not 
do  good,  he  erred  or  sinned  so  and  so,"  speaks  of  the  entire 
absence  of  that  religious  merit  or  demerit  which  is  the  cause 
of  connecting  beings  with  the  next  world.  The  '  gaming 
of  bliss '  is  threefold  :  the  fulfilment  of  all  desires,  accom- 
plishment of  everything,  gaining  the  supreme  end.  The 
second  again  is  threefold  :  being  the  witness  of  all,  being  un- 
affected with  desire  at  any  place  or  time,  being  the  enjoyer  of 
all  enjoyments  whatever.  He  who  knows  '  I  am  Brahman 
which  is  the  witness  in  all  beings  whatever  from  Hiranya- 
garbha  to  the  beings  of  the  lower  material  plane '  is  necessarily 
the  witness  of  all  even  as  he  is  the  witness  of  his  own  beingi 
The  S'ruti  says  to  the  same  effect  :  "  He  enjoys  all  desires 
whatever  with  Brahman,  the  witness  of  all."  The  'being 
unaffected  with  desire  '  for  the  enjoyments  seen  in  the  world 
is  called  '  fulfilment  of  all  desires';  and  this  is  confirmed  in  the 
knower  of  the  Essence  perceiving  evil  under  every  good  set 
up  as  such  by  the  world.  Hence  has  the  Strati  laid  particular 
stress  on  the  "knower  of  the  Veda  above  all  desires  what- 
ever "  while  speaking  of  the  degrees  of  bliss  increasing  a 
hundredfold  at  every  stage  up  to  the  Hiranyagarbha,  in  the 
section  on  *  Universal  Empire.'  He  who  has  gained  self- 
realization  through  Being,  Thought  and  Bliss  as  the  essential 
being  of  all  things  is  necessarily  the  '  enjoyer  of  all  enjoy- 
ments whatever.'  Hence  has  it  been  said  in  the  S'ruti:  "I 
am  all  food,  I  am  all  food  ;  I  am  the  eater,  I  am  the 
eater." 

'  Accomplishment  of  every  thing '  is  thus  set  forth  in  the 
Smrti ; — 

"  Regaling  all  content  in  the  nectar  of  gnosis,  fully  satis* 
"fied  in  supreme  fulfilment  of  every  duty,  there  re- 
"  mains  nothing  for  the  Yogin  to  do ;  if  anything  re- 
"  main,  he  must  be  just  so  many  removes  behind  gnosis. 
"  He  who  is  harmonised  in  self,  who  finds  full  bliss  in 
"  Self  and  who  is  all  content  in  self,  has  no  call  of 
"  duty  to  disturb  him." 
21 


The  '  gaining  the  supreme  end '  is  thus  touched  upon  in 
the  Sfruti : — "  Thou,  oh  Janaka  !  hast  realized  entire  fearless- 
ness ;"  "  Hence  he  is  the  All ;"  "  The  knower  of  Brahman 
becomes  Brahman" 

It  may  be  asked  these'  two  '  destruction  of  misery  '  and  the 
'  gaining  of  bliss  '  go  with  gnosis,  and  ought  not  to  be  set 
down  as  the  end  of  Jivanmukti.  This  however  is  not  correct ; 
for,  all  that  is  here  meant  in  regard  to  these  two  is  their  safe 
preservation.  That  is  to  say  gnosis  though  produced  even 
before  Jivanmukti  becomes  confirmed  after  it,  and  through 
gnosis  are  more  firmly  preserved  the  two  in  question. 

Thus  Jivanmukti  having  been  shown  to  have  these  five  ends 
in  view,  it  is  plain  the  Yogin  centred  in  the  ecstacy  of  Jivan- 
mukti  is  superior  to  the  knower  yet  in  the  world.  This  is 
rendered  clear  in  a  dialogue  between  Rama  and  Vasishtha. 

Rama  : — "  Oh  Lord  1  the  best  of  beings  !    Tell  me  which  of 

.    "  the  two  is  better  than  the  other  :   he  who  is  ever  at 

""rest,     though   mixing  in  the   world,  even  like  one 

"  awakened  from  a  prolonged  trance,  and  he  who  rises 

"  to  and  remains  in  trance  in  some  solitary  corner." 

Vasishtha  :— "  Trance  is  only  that  internal  calm  which 
"comes  of  looking  upon  this  world  and  the  Gunas 
**  which  .create  it,  as  all  not-self.  Having  gained  this 
"  pleasant  calm  within  from  the  conviction  '  I  have 
"  no  touch  with  the  objective '  the  Yogin  may  remain 
"  in  the  world  or  shut  himself  up  in  meditation, 
"  Both,  oh  Rama  !  are  equally  good  if  the  fire  of 
"desire  is  entirely  cooled  down  within,  for  this 
"  internal  calm  is  the  result  of  endless  penance." 

This,  however,  need  not  mislead,  for  the  point  here  is  to 
emphasize  the  necessity  for  utter  *  destruction  of  Vdsand ' 
implied  by  *  internal  calm.'  It  by  no  means  follows  that 
therefore,  '  dissolution  of  mind '  which  is  the  next  stage  is 
not  superior  to  this.  For,  Vasishtha  himself  has  amplified 


163 

his  meaning  in   farther   explaining  this  '  internal  calm '  by 

'  destruction  of  desire  ' : — 

• 

"  Internal  calm  having  been  gained  the  whole  world 
"  becomes  cool  and  calm  ;  to  persons  burning  in  the 
"  fire  of  internal  desires  the  world  is  one  whole 
"  conflagration." 

It  may  still  be  pointed  out  that  the  following  passage 
places  the  '  being  in  the  world  '  above  '  solitary  trance  ': — 

"  If  the  mind  of  the  Yogin  sitting  for  trance  is  distracted 
"  with  various  desireS,  such  effort  is  nothing  better 
"  than  a  kind  of  mad  acting.  But  if  the  mind  were 
"  all  at  peace  though  in  the  midst  of  a  mad  tumult,  - 
"  even  such  devil-dance  will  be  equal  to  the  best 
"  trance." 

This,  however,  is  not  correct ;  for  it  is  not  meant  to  place 
Samadhi  above  vdsana.  The  words  may  be  explained  in  this 
manner.  Though  trance  is  superior  to  intercourse  with  the 
world,  still  if  such  trance  were  affected  with  any  the -slightest 
tinge  of  vdsana,  intercourse  without  Vdsana  would  of  course 
be  far  superior  to  such  trance.  It  is  in  fact  no  Samadhi 
whatever.  Where  the  man  in  trance  as  well  as  the  man  of 
the  world  are  both  ignorant  of  gnosis  and  with  Vdsand, 
trance  is  of  course  better  than  intercourse  with  the  world,  on 
account  of  its  being  such  religious  merit  as  exhalts  to  heaven. 
When  both  are  fully  initiated  in  gnosis  and  •  entirely  above 
all  vdsana,  trance  of  the  form  of  '  dissolution  of  mind '  is 
better  as  a  strong  protection  of  Jivanmukti  which  is  absence 
of  all  vdsana.  It  is  plain  the  Yogin  is  the  best. 

Thus  it  is  clear  that  Jivanmukti  with  its  five  ends  has 
everything  to  support  it. 

Eud  of  the  Fourth  Chapter  on  "  The  end  of  Jivanmukti." 


164 

CHAPTER  V. 

« 
RENUNCIATION-OF-THE-ACCOMPLISHED. 

Henceforth  Renunciation-of-the-accomplished,  as  being 
largely  beneficial  to  Jivanmukti.  This  renunciation  has  been 
described  at  length' in  the  Paramahamsopanishad.  The  plan 
here  adopted  is  to  quote  this  Upanishad  and  explain  it  as  it 
proceeds. 

"Now  Na'rada  approached  the  Lord  and  asked 
"  which  is  tlie  path  of  tliose  ascetics  who  are 
"  Parama-hamsa'h  ?  what  is  their  condition  ?" 

There  is  apparently  nothing  here  which  can  be  implied  to 
precede  this  question  and  the  word  '  now'  would  evidently 
appear  to  be  merely  redundant ;  still  we  should  not  forget 
that  the  question  here  refers  to  Renunciation-of-the-accom- 
plished,  and  that  therefore  one  knowing  the  real  Essence  arid 
being  yet  troubled  with  worldly  distractions  of  all  sorts, 
seeks  naturally  to  find  mental  peace  in  this  kind  of  Renunci- 
ation. Hence  the  word  'now*  implies  that  knowledge  of 
the  Essence  must  have  been  thoroughly  acquired  before  one 
has  the  right  to  propound  the  question  under  considera- 
tion. That  a  mere  'ascetic*  or  a  mere  * Parama-hamsa,'  has 
nothing  to  do  with  such  inquiry  is  suggested  by  coupling 
the  two  words  together.  The  mere  ascetic  having  no  glimpse 
of  the  Essence  attaches  himself  to  such  powers  as  clairvoyance, 
floating  in  the  air,  and  other  occult  wonders  of  the  same  kind 
and  devotes  himself,  through  various  means  beginning  with 
contemplation  and  the  rest,  to  gain  such  powers.  Thus  he 
.swerves  away  from  the  real  aim  of  existence.  The  aphorism 
touching  on  this  has  been  quoted  before  "These  are  obstacles 
in  the  way  of  Sdmadhi ;  and  are  powers  in  moments  of 
suspension."*  The  mere  Parama-hamsa,  on  the  other  hand, 
having  full  realization  of  the  Essence,  looks  down  upon  such 

-•  -        "  "•  •.-* 

*  Yoga-Sutra  Ch.  Ill  Aph.  XXXVII, 


165 

tras  h  and  contents  himself  in  the  bliss  of  supreme  renunci- 
ation,    It  has  been  said  : — 

3 

"These  powers  thus  shine  out  of  the  self  that  is  all 
"  consciousness,  the  knower  feels  not  the  least  touch 
"of  curiosity  for  all  this  panorama  of  change  and 
"  wonder." 

Being  thus  fall  of  renunciation,  he  disregards  injunctions 
and  prohibitions,  through  excess  of  satisfaction  in  the  bliss  of 
Brahman.  It  has  been  said  "  What  means  injunction  or  pro- 
hibition to  one  who  walks  the  way  transcending  the  gundk." 
Good  men  having  faith  in  injunctions  and  prohibitions  thus 
censure  such  conduct: — 

"The  cycle  of  strife  and  struggle  will  place  Brahman 
"  in  the  mouth  of  all ;  none,  oh  Maitreya  !  will  show 
"  it  in  the  act,  being  really  intent  on  the  pleasures  of 
"  sex  and  stomach." 

In  one  who  is  an  '  ascetic '  as  well  as  a  '  Parama-hamsa ' 
none  of  these  faults  occur.  The  excellence  of  such  a  one  is 
also  otherwise  set  forth  in  the  following  dialogue. 

Rama: —  "  Oh  revered  sire  !  even  then  what  extraordinary 
"  excellence  is  seen  in  the  Jivanmukta  full  of  pure 
"  intellect  and  firm  in  the  realization  of  self  ?  " 

Vasistha: — "  The  mind  of  the  kuower,  Oh  my  dear  !  attaches 
"  itself  mainly  to  any  one  thing,  for  he,  all  content 
"  and  at  peace,  ever  rests  himself  in  dtman.  Many  are 
"  those  who  perform  such  wonders  as  floating  in  the 
"  air  and  the  like, — the  mantrikdh^  the  tdntrikd/i,  the 
"  practitioners  of  severe  penance  ;  in  this  there  cer- 
"  tainly  is  nothing  extraordinary.  A  very  thin  parti-- 
"tion  divides  ecstacy  from  madness,  for  in  the  former 
"  the  mind  having  lost  all  faith  is  quite  clear  of  every 
"  tinge  of  attachment.  Of  the  knower  of  the  Thing, 
"  all  content,  on  the  absolute  disappearance  of  the  be- 
"  ginningless  illusion  of  the  circle  of  birth  and  death, 
"  and  having  a  form  without  parts  and  magnitude,  this 


166 

"  alone  is  the  characteristic  sign  that  passion,  anger, 
"  sorrow,  desire,  avarice,  calamity  all  grow  daily  attenu- 
"  ated  into  imperceptible  thinness/' 

Thus  then  it  is  proposed  to  inquire  after  the  'path'  and 
'condition'  of  those  who  are  free  from  both  the  above  mention- 
ed faults.  '  Path'  refers  to  external  appearance,  speech,  and 
the  like  ;  'Condition'  to  the  internal  peace  consequent  on 
cessation  of  mental  activity.  The  four-faced  '  Lord'  proceeds 
to  answer  the  question  thus  propounded,  in  the  words  which 
follow.  Then  is  extolled  the  said  '  path '  with  the  object  of 
confirming  the  questioner's  faith:  — 

"  This  path  of  the  parama-hamsa  is  very  difficult 
"in  this  world;  it  is  not  at  all  common." 

That  is  to  say  the  path  about  which  the  inquirer  is  anxious 
to  know.  The  word  'this'  refers  to  the  path  about  to  be 
described  in  the  part  that  follows  ;  it  consists  of  covering  etc. 
for  the  body,  being  the  absolute  principal '  path*  necessary 
for  living  out  the  present  life  in  a  manner  to  make  it  useful 
by  supreme  benevolence.  This  path  is  '  very  difficult'  because 
renunciation  of  that  extreme  degree  is  not  met  with  in  the 
world.  But  this  does  not  imply  that  this  path  is  impossi- 
ble :  and  with  this  in  mind  the  Lord  modifies  his  opinion  in 
the  words  'it  is  not  at  all  common'.  [The  change  of 
termination  in  the  Sanskrit  word  for  '  common'  is  a  grammati-  ; 
cal  license  allowed  to  Vedic  texts.]  Even  then,  if  this  path 
were  really  so  very  difficult  it  is  useless  to  strive  towards  that 
end.  The  Upaniskad  proceeds  to  show  the  object  as  well  as 
the  possibility  of  gaining  the  '  Path  :'— 
"  Even  if  there  be  only  One  (  who  has  found  the 

"  path  )  he  alone  is  always  in  the  ever  Holy, 

"  he  is  the  Veda-pur usha ;  thus  say  those  who 

"  know." 
"  Few  of  thousands  endeavour  to  gain  the  End,  and  of  the 

"  accomplished  that  so  endeavour  few  know   my   real 

"Essence." 


-1G7 

IQ  accord  with  the  argument  shown  in  this  verse  of  the 
Bhagvadgita,  it  goes  without  .saying  that  any  single  Parama- 
hamsa  found  anywhere  is  really  the  one  who  is  "  always  in 
the  ever  Holy  "  vi ~.,  Paramdtman,  for  the  S'ruti  describes 
at  man  in  the  words  "  the  atman,  above  all  sin."  The  word 
'  alone'  excludes  those  who  are  mere  ascetics  or  mere  Parama- 
hamsdk  from  those  implied  in  the  text.  The  first  knows  not 
the  "  ever  Holy  ;"  the  second,  though  knowing,  runs  after 
the  objective,  having  no  internal  peace,  and  rests  not  in 
Brahman.  '  Veda-pur  mho1  means  the  purusha  shown  in  the 
Veda.  '  Those  who  know'  are  persons  well  versed  in  that 
science  which  brings  realization  of  Brahman  accompanied 
with  mental  peace.  All  men  regard  the  ascetic parama-hamsa 
as  being  in  Brahman  ;  but  the  said  '  knowers,'  not  content  with 
this,  look  upon  him  as  Brahman  itself.  Says  the  sruti: — 

"  He  who  stands  centred  entirely  in  him-Self,  taking  no 
"  heed  of  perception  or  no-perception  is  not  simply  a 
"  kuower  of  Brahman  but  Brahman  itself." 

Hence  there  is  no  room  to  doubt  the  object  of  such  re- 
nunciation. 

The  Lord  proceeds  to  explain  the  being  "  always  in  'the 
ever  Holy"  and  being  the  "  Veda-pur usha"  and  thus  replies 
to  the  question  about  the  Paramahamsa's  '  condition': — 

"  The  great  being  has  his  mind  ever  centred  in 
•  "  me,  and  in  consequence  I  manifest  myself 
"  always  in  him." 

The  ascetic  Parama-hamsa  being  at  the  top  of  men  entitled 
to  the  performance  of  vedic  rites  and  ceremonies  is  justly 
called  'the  great  being.'  This  great  being  (mahdtm'an) 
always  keeps  his  mind  absorbed  in  me,  for,  all  mental  func- 
tions connected  with  the  world  and  its  intercourse  are  in  his 
case  entirely  suspended  by  'practice  and  non-attachment.' 
It  being  so,  the  Lord  Prajapati  speaks  of  himself  as  Brahman 
spoken  of  in  philosophic  treatises,  for,  he,  having  acquired  com- 
plete self-realization,  can  hardly  think  of  Brahman  as  apart 
from  himself.  Thus  it  is  that  he  says  '  his  mind  is  ever 


168 

centred  in  me.*  Aud  because  he  is  so  centred,  the  Lord  says 
he  too  always  'mainfests  himself  in  him,'  not  in  others  bound 
tip  in  ignorance,  for  they  are  as  yet  under  the  spell  of  amdyA. 
The  Lord  manifests  himself  not  even  in  such  knowers  of  the 
Essence  as  are  not  real  ascetics,  for,  their  mind  is  constantly 
occupied  with  activity  tending  to  the  objective. 

Henceforth  is  described  the  <  Path'  which  Narada  wanted  to 
know  at  the  beginning: — 

"He  should  give  up  wife,  children,  relatives, 

"  friends  and  the  rest  along  with  the  tuft  of 

"  hair  on  his  head,  the  sacred  thread  round 

"  his  trunk,  and  the  study  of  the  Veda,  all 

"ceremonial  worship  of  every  description, 

"  nay  even  the  whole  universe,  and  should 

"  betake  himself  to  a  mere  rag,  a  bamboo- 

"  stick,  and  a  small  covering  simply  to  keep 

"  life  and  body  together  for  its  natural  term 

"  and  thus  to  do  good  to  the  world  at  large." 

This  is  addressed  to  that  householder  who,  from  the  results 

of  past  good  Karma,  addresses  himself  to  'study,  contemplation 

and  assimilation/  without  taking  on  formal  rennnciation-of- 

the-seeker,   on'  account  of  responsibilities   growing  upon   him 

from  relations  such  as  mother,  father  and  the  like  ; — and  even 

thus  finds  the  Essence  to  his  entire  satisfaction.     Such  a  one 

feels  distracted  with  the  thousand  and  one  forms  of  temporal 

and  spiritual  activities  which  make  so   many  calls  on  his 

attention    while  he   is  a    householder,   and  he    naturally 

desires  for  rest  in  the  condition  of  renunciation  peculiar  to 

the  '  accomplished.'    The  above  is  obviously  addressed  to  one 

in  this  condition  ;  for,  there  is  no  possibility  of  '  wife,  children, 

relatives,  friends'  etc.  in  the  case  of  one  who  having  found  the 

Essence  after  Renunciation-of-the-seeker  desires  to  take  on 

the  condition  of  Rennnciation-of-the-accoinplished. 

It  may  here  be  asked  whether  this  Renunciation-of-the 
accomplished  has  to  be  brought  about  like  the  other  renuncia- 
tion (w*.,  renunciation-of-the-seeker)  by  way  of  the  forms  pre- 


scribed  for  it,  tiz.,  the  saying  of  the  Praisha*  and  the  rest,  of 
\^hether  it  consists  in  ordinarily  abstaining  from  the  world 
like  keeping  away  from  an  infected  town  or  like  giving  up 
a  worn  oat  cloth  ?  The  first  is  not  obviously  possible,  for,  the 
accomplished  knower  of  the  Essence  cannot  relate  himself 
to  any  action  whatever  and  can  not  therefore  address  himself 
'  to  ceremonies  by  formal  injunctions  and  prohibitions.  Says 
the  Smrti : — 

"  Regaling  all  content  in  the  nectar  of  Gnosis,  fully  satis- 
"  fied  in  supreme  fulfilment  of  every  duty,  there  re- 
"  mains  nothing  for  the  Yogin  to  do  ;  if  any  thing 
"  remain  he  must  be  just  so  many  removes  behind 
"  Gnosis." 

Nor  will  the  second  alternative  do,  for  we  hear  of  the  rag, 
the  stick  and  other  insignia  of  the  order. 

This  is  no  difficulty,  for,  this  renunciation  has  a  dual  aspect 
like  what  is  known  as  the  Prati^atti-Karma,.  To  explain. 
In  the  sacrifice  called  the  Jyotishthoma  the  worshipper  having 
taken  the  vow  is,  for  the  time,  not  allowed  to  scratch  his 
body  directly  with  the  hand,  but  with  the  small  horn  of  a 
black  antelope  ;  for,  if  the  faithful  should  scratch  with  the 
hand  he  would  have  children  affected  with  itches,  it  being 
said :  the  faithful  should  be  as  if  uncovered  ;  whence  the 
horn  of  a  black  antelope  should  be  used.  Now  this  horn 
being  no  longer  of  use  at  the  end  of  the  vow  and  being  also 
inconvenient  to  carry  about,  has  of  course  to  be  given  up. 
This  giving  up,  with  the  form  peculiar  to  it,  is  spoken  of 
in  the  Veda  where  it  is  enjoined  :  the  prize-money  being  distri- 
buted to  the  priests  the  horn  may  be  thrown  away  in  a  part  of 
the  sacrificial  ground  near  the  altar.  This  is  called  Prati- 
patti-Karma,  and  it  is  spiritual  as  well  as  temporal.  Similar- 
ly Renunciation-of-the-seeker  is  of  two  kinds.  It  is  not 
proper  to  allege  that  the  knower  of  the  Essence  is  entirely 
free  from  all  active  relation  whatever.  Though  the  ignorance 
which  ascribed  this  action  to  pure  consciousness  is  laid  at 

^  I  '  I  \ 

*  Seo  foot-note  page  4, 

22 


170 

rest  by  gnoais,  once  for  all,  it  is  impossible  to  think 
that  the  natural  activity  of  the  accident  which  makes 
the  internal  sense  (mind)  and  which  is  full  of  a  thousand 
activities  of  various  kinds,  can  ever  come  to  a  stand-still,  while 
it  yet  continues  to  exist  as  such.  Nor  should  it  be  supposed 
that  thus  we  shall  be -arguing  agaiust  the  verse  just  quoted  : 
"  regaling  all  content "  etc. ;  for,  though  gnoai*  has  been 
gained,  there  is  no  contentment  from  want  of  peace,  and 
consequently  there  can  be  no  'supreme  fulfilment  of  every 
duty,'  there  evidently  remaining  the  duty  of  establishing  the 
mind  in  perfect  rest  and  peace.  It  may  again  be  asked  if 
thus  the  Knower  were  to  obey  formal  injunctions,  he  would, 
of  course,  lay  by  that  unseen  store  (of  Karma,  called  Dharma 
by  the  Mimdnwk&K)  which  would  necessarily  relate  him  to 
future  birth.  But  this  need  not  be  so ;  for,  that  « unseen 
store '  having  spent  itself  out  on  something  tangibly  present 
even  here  cz>.,  the  doing  away  with  what  stands  in  the  way 
of  mental  peace,  there  remains  no  logical  necessity  to  imagine 
an  unseen  future  effect  for  this  unseen  cause.  For,  if  that 
were  logic,  even  *  study,  contemplation,  and  assimilation ' 
which  do  way  with  what  stands  in  the  way  of  realization  of 
Brahman  will  be  supposed  to  lead  to  future  birth*  Thus, 
therefore,  there  being  no  objection  in  obeying  formal  Vedic 
injunctions,  the  housholder  who  has  already  accomplished 
gnosis  may,  like  one  who  as  yet  seeks  gnosis,  take  up  renun- 
ciation with  such  formal  ceremonies  as  the  Ndndi-srdddka,* 

*  The  offering  of  oblations  to  the  maaes  of  the  ancestors  on  occasions 
of  joy— especially  when  a  son  is  about  to  be  born,  or  is  about  to  be 
initiated  into  that  sanctum  passing  through  which  he  becomes  a  '  twice* 
born '  and  gains  the  right  of  continuing  the  line  by  offering  such  oblations 
in  time  to  come.  The  occasion  of  formal  sannydsa  (renunciation)  is  one  of 
highest  joy  in  the  family,  for  its  efficacy  extends  up  to  relieving  even 
the  manes  of  all  the  ancestors  from  the  bondage  of  their  peculiar  exis* 
tenoe  and  place  them  within  easy  reach  of  final  liberation.  *  Taking  up 
renunciation '  is  perhaps  awkward  English,  but  the  importance  attached 
to  renunciation  which  is  a  distinct  stage  in  life  with  duties  peculiar  to 
its  kind  is  best  expressed  by  that  awkward  phrase  corresponding  to  one's 
taking  up  a  responsible  office, 


171 

keeping  fasts,  vigils,  and  the  like.  Though  the  sr&ddha  spoken 
of  is  not  distinctly  enjoined  preliminary  to  taking  np  renuncia~ 
tton-of-the-AccornpUshed  still  this  renunciation'  being  only 
another  more  advanced  form  of  renunciation-of-the-Seeker  must 
follow  the  rules  of  its  original,  This  follows  even  from  the 
analogy  of  the  agniahthomct  sacrifice,  the  type  of  the  atiratra 
and  other  sacrifices  which  therefore  follow  the  rules  of  their 
original,  Thus  therefore  even  this  renunciation-of-the-acoom- 
plished  should  be  done  like  the  other  renunciation  with  reciting 
the  Praisha  etc.,  and  giving  up  "  wife,  children  "  and  the  rest 
spoken  of  in  the  text. 

The  words  *  and  the  rest '  put  after  wife,  children,  relatives, 
friends,  refer  to  servants,  animals,  houses,  fields,  and  all  other 
temporal  goods.  The  word  'and'  before  'the  study  of  the  Veda* 
creates  a  kind  of  syntactical  hiatus  which  has  the  object  of 
implying  that  even  those  things  should  be  given  up  which  are 
of  use  in  uuderstauding  and  applying  the  Veda,  viz.,  grammar, 
logic,  the  Epics,  the  Purdnas  and  the  like.  The  giving  up  of 
poetry,  drama  and  light  literature  of  kinds  which  con- 
duces  only  to  temporary  relief  of  mental  strain  caused 
by  artificial  curiosity  and  excitement,  goes  without  saying. 
'  All  ceremonial  worship  of  every  description '  refers  to  all 
Karma  whatever:  spiritual,  temporal,  constant,  occasional 
prohibited,  propitiatory  and  the  like.  Giving  up  '  children ' 
and  the  rest  implies  the  giving  up  of  every  temporal  good ; 
giving  up  'all  ceremonial  worship  of  every  description'  implies 
the  giving  up  of  the  hope  of  enjoyment  in  the  next  would, — 
hope  which  acts  as  a  strongly  distractive  cause.  Giving  np  the 
'  whole  universe'  means  giving  up  that  devotional  worship  of 
the  Virat  which  has  mastery  over  the  whole  universe  as  its 
fruit.  The  word  'even'  suggests  abandonment  of  devotion 
to  the  Hiranyagarbka  which  leads  to  mastery  over  the  plane 
of  the  Sutrdtman  ;  as  also  of  "  study"  and  the  rest  conducing 
to  realization  of  the  Essence.  He  should  give  up  all  that 
tends  to  happiness  in  this  world  or  the  next,  beginning  with 
wife,  children  and  the  rest  and  ending  with  devotion  to  the 
Hiranyagarbha,  This  is  done  by  reciting  the  formula  called 


172 

Praisfut,  The  renonncer  should  then  keep  only  the  rag 
etc.,  with  him.  The  word  'and'  before  'a  small  covering* 
implies  that  he  may  take  wooden  shoes  etc.,  for  use.  Say's 
the  mrti : — 

"  Two  rags,  a  cloth,  a  covering  to  ward  off  cold,  and  wooden 
"  shoes,  these  he  may  keep ;  nothing  besides." 

The  *  use'  suggested  in  the  words  '  keep  life  and  body  to- 
gether/ consists  in  concealing  the  secret  parts  under  the  rag, 
in  keeping  away  animals  and  venomous  reptiles  with  the 
bamboo-stick,  in  providing  against  cold  with  the  covering, 
and  in  keeping  away  from  contact  with  unclean  spots  on 
the  way  by  moving  in  the  wooden  shoes  implied  by  the  word 
'  and.'  The  doing  '  good  to  the  world  at  large'  consists  in 
enabling  people  to  aquire  good  Karma  by  offering  proper 
salutation ,  food  etc.  to  the  sannyasin  recognised  by  the  insignia 
of  his  order,  viz.,  the  bamboo-stick  and  the  rest.  This  also 
implies  that  the  sannyasin  should  attend  to  such  conduct  as  is 
proper  to  the  station  he  belongs  to  and  is  seen  to  be  proper 
from  similar  conduct  in  others  in  the  same  line. 

It  is  further  said  with  the  view  of  suggesting  that  the 
adopting  of  the  rag  etc.,  for  use  is  not  a  necessary  injunction, 
but  a  convenient  arrangement  only: — 

"And  this  is  not  necessary."^ 

That  the  Paramahamsa  should  take  up  the  'rag'  and  the 
rest  is  no  necessary  injunction,  it  is  only  a  contingent  or  con- 
venient suggestion.  This  and  the  bamboo-stick  in  particular, 
is  however  necessary  in  the  case  of  one  who  is  only  in  the 
order-  styled  Rennnciation-of-the-Seeker.  Parting  with  the 
stick  is  thus  upbraided  in  the  smrti : — 

"  The  contact  of  the  body  with  the  stick  is  enjoined  as 
"  constant ;  never  go  without  the  stick  even  over  space 
"  covered  by  thrice  the  length  an  arrow  flies  off  the 
"  bow." 

The  penance  for  this  breach  is  spoken  of  in  the  snfrti 
and  is  set  down  at  a  hundred  Pr&n&yAmM  :  "He  must  do 


173 

a  hundred  on  parting  frota  the  stick.*'  The  text  proceeds 
to  explain  the  *  necessary  condition '  of  the  paramahamsa  in 
the  following  question  and  answer  : — 

"What  is  then  'necessary?'  only  this:  'no  stick 
"  no  tuft  of  hair  on  the  head,  no  sacred  thread 
"no  covering-/— the  Paramahamsa  goes  about 
"(as  he  likes)." 

As  one  in  Reuunciation-of-the-Seeker  has  absence  of  the 
tuft  of  hair  and  the  sacred  thread  necessarily  enjoined  to 
him,  so  is  absence  of  stick  and  covering  a  necessary  character 
of  the  true  ascetic  ;  for,  otherwise  the  mind  being  distracted 
with  thoughts  about  the  preservation  or  obtaining  of  the 
bamboo-stick  and  the  covering,  will  never  find  that  yoga  which 
consists  in  "  suppression  of  transformations  of  the  thinking 
principle."  This  is  not  good,  for,  as  the  rule  has  it,  "  the  bride 
is  never  espoused  at  the  cost  of  the  bridegroom's  life."  The 
text  adds  by  way  of  suggesting  an  answer  to  the  doubt  how 
he  should  manage  on  occasions  of  cold  etc.  :— 

"  Neither  heat  nor  cold,  neither  pleasure  nor  pain, 
"  neither  respect  nor  rebuff,— he  is  above  all 
"  the  six  (conditions)." 

The  ascetic  with  his  mind  entirely  suspended  from  action 
knows  no  cold,  for,  he  does  not  feel  it.  As  a  child  engaged 
in  play  feels  no  cold  even  on  a  winter  morning  though  all 
uncovered,  so  does  the  ascetic  engrossed  •  in  the  supreme  Self 
know  no  cold  whatever.  The  absence  of  the  feeling  of  heat 
in  the  hot  season  may  be  similarly  explained.  So  also  the 
absence  of  all  feeling  for  the  downpour  of  rain  on  his  body 
in  the  rainy  season.  Since  he  feels  neither  cold  nor  heat  it 
goes  without  saying  that  he  knows  not  "  pleasure  or  pain  " 
coming  of  these  two  sources.  Cold  produces  pleasurable  sensa- 
tions in  the  hot  season  and  heat  in  the  cold  season.  "  Respect " 
refers  to  the  reception  and  general  wamth  of  feeling  showed 
by  others  ;  "  Rebuff"  refers  to  the  coldness  shown  by  others. 
When  the  ascetic  has  none  beside  himself  in  the  whole 


174 

universe  there  is  no  room  for  "respect  or  rebuff."  The  at> 
Bence  of  "respect  or  rebuff"  refers  also  to  the  absence  of  all 
the  pairs  of  likes  and  dislikes  for  friends  and  enemies  etc. 
The  "six  conditions  "are  Jiunger  and  thirst,  grief  and  delu- 
sion, decay  and  death.  These  three  pairs  belong  respectively 
to  the  vital  breath,  the  mind,  and  the  body,  and  as  the  ascetic, 
one  with  the  Self,  knows  none  of  these,  there  is  nothing  impro- 
per in  his  transcending  the  "six  conditions. "  It  may  still  be 
doubted,  all  this  may  be  possible  in  the  condition  of  trance,  how 
can  distraction  coming  of  scandal  and  the  like  be  kept  off 
from  the  ascetic  during  moments  of  break  ?  It  has  been  said 
with  this  in  mind ; — 

"  He  lias  given  up  scandal,  pride,  rivalry,  self- 
"  praise,  self-assertion,  desire,  revenge,  plea- 
sure, pain,  passion,  anger,  avarioe,  per- 
"verseness,  Joy,  jealousy,  egoism  and  the 
"like." 

"  Scandal "  is  the  attributing  of  evil  to  any  one  by  others. 
"  Pride "  consists  in  the  feeling  of  one's  superiority  over 
others.  "  Rivalry  "  is  the  desire  to  equal  others  in  learning, 
wealth  etc.  "  Self-praise  "  consists  in  declaring  one's  spiri- 
tual (or  other)  performances  before  others.  "  Self-assertion  " 
expresses  itself  in  suppressing  or  awing  others  for  one's  be- 
nefit. "  Desire  "  is  greed  of  wealth  and  chattel.  "Revenge" 
is  burning  desire  for  the  destruction  of  one's  foes.  "  Pleasure  " 
comes  of  fulfilment  of  some  desire  or  the  happening  of 
something  agreeable.  "Pain "is  the  opposite  of  pleasure. 
"  Passion  "  is  desire  for  the  company  of  women.  "  Anger  " 
is  the  excitement  of  feeling  born  of  interrupted  desire. 
"  Avarice  "  manifests  itself  in  the  pain  one  feels  on  parting 
with  wealth.  "  Perverseness"  refers  to  perverseness  of  intel- 
lect such  as  is  seen  in  those  attached  to  things  not  really  good, 
taking  them  to  be  good  and  vice  versa.  "  Joy  "  is  that  feeling 
which  is  indicative  of  mental  pleasure,  and  is  also  conducive 
to  the  increase  of  that  pleasure.  "Jealousy  "  is  that  which 
views  even  merits  ia  the  opposite  light.  "  Egoism  "  is  mistak- 


ing  the  body  senses  and  the  like  for  the  real '  ego. '  The  words 
"  and  the  like  "  refer  to  the  feeling  of  possession,  goodness, 
etc.,  in  personal  objects  and  belongings.  It  is  meant  that  the 
ascetic  gives  up  the  things  enumerated  in  the  text  as  also  their 
opposites  viz.,  praise,  humility,  etc.  The  point  is  that  he  should 
give  up  all  these,  and  stand  above  all,  haying  got  himself  rid 
of  all  vdsana  in  the  manner  prescribed  before. 

The  text  proceeds  to  reply  to  the  question  how,  while   the 
body  yet  exists,  could  it  be  possible  to  give  it  up. 

"  One's  body  is  looked  upon  as  if  it  were  dead, 
"  inasmuch  as  it  has  already  been  separated." 

That  body  which  at  first  belonged  to  him  is  now  looked  up- 
on by  the  ascetic  as  dead,  because  it  has  been  shown  to  be 
other  than  that  consciousness  which  is  his  real  Self.  As  a 
religious  person  holds  himself  aloof  from  a  dead  body  and 
looks  at  it  only  from  a  distance  lest  its  touch  might  pollute 
him,  so  does  the  ascetic  always  look  upon  his  body  as  apart 
from  his  real  self,  all  consciousness;  and  this  he  does  with  all 
possible  care  lest  any  confusion  should  lead  to  the  sense  of 
false  identification  of  the  two  (body  and  self).  The  reason 
for  this  is  that  "  it  has  already  been  separated  ; "  it  has  been 
shown  to  be  other  than  Self,  by  the  teacher's  explanations,  by 
the  word  of  holy  Scripture,  and  by  personal  self-experience. 
The  meaning  is  that  it  is  possible  to  cease  slander  and  censure 
by  looking  upon  the  body  as  upon  a  carcass,  it  being  quite 
void  of  consciousness.  Confusion  as  to  points  of  the  compass 
of  though  dispelled  with  the  rise  of  the  sun,  may  possibly 
arise  at  some  future  time ;  similarly  on  doubt  etc.,  arising 
to  create  confusion  of  body  and  consciousness,  censure  and 
the  rest  may  possibly  give  pain.  It  has  been  further  said 
with  this  in  mind  : — 

"  He  is  oonstantly  free  from  the  cause  of  doubt, 
"  false  knowledge  and  illusion." 

"  Doubt "  is  the  thought  whether  Atman  is  doer  and  suffer- 
er or  not  ?  *  False  knowledge '  is  knowledge  that  the  body  is  the 


176 

self.  Both  these  refer  to  the  doer  ;  the  '  illusion '  here  referred 
to  has  connection  with  objects  of  enjoyment,  and  this  illusions 
manifold  as  explained  in  that  verse  of  the  Bhagvad-Gitd  which 
sa^s  "  give  up  all  imaginings  "  etc.  The  cause  of  this  illusion 
viz..  Ignorance,  is  fourfold  :  "  Ignorance  (  avidya  )  is  taking  the 
non-eternal,  impure,. evil  and  non-dtma?i,  to  be  eternal,  pure, 
good  and  dtman  "says  an  aphorism*  of  Patanjali.  The  first 
is  believing  mountains,  streams,  and  the  like  which  are  im- 
permanent, to  be  permanent  ;  the  second  consists  in  mistaking 
for  quite  pure  the  impure  body  of  wife,  child  and  the  like  ;  the 
third  arises  from  regarding  husbandry,  commerce,  and  the  like 
as  good  though  they  are  really  all  evil ;  the  fourth  is  taking  the 
body  of  wife  child  and  the  rest  which  is  only  subordinate  to  self 
and  entirely  false,  to  be  one's  real  self  from  confounding  the  phy- 
sical sheath  (of  food)  with  the  self  beyond  it.  The  cause  of  these 
»/#.,  'doubt*  and  the  rest,  is  ignorance  and  impressions  born  of 
ignorance  which  cover  the  essence  of  the  Unit — Brahman,  This 
ignorance  of  the  Paramakamsa-SiSCQkic  is  destroyed  with  know- 
ledge of  the  import  of  the  great  Texts  ;  and  impressions  of  igno- 
rance are  done  away  with  by  the  practice  of  Yoga.  In  the  con- 
fusion about  points  of  the  compass  just  referred  to  by  way  of 
illustration,  there  is  possibility  of  its  repetition  because,  though 
the  original  cause  is  removed,  impressions  born  of  that  cause 
have  not  been  demolished.  In  the  case  of  the  (Paramakamsa 
whoia  an  )  ascetic  both  these  causes  of  illusion  having  been  laid 
at  rest,  there  is  no  possibility  of  *  doubt '  and  its  accompani- 
ments. Considering,  therefore,  the  impossibility  of  a  return 
of  doubt  and  the  rest,  it  has  been  well  said  that  the  ascetic  is 
"  constantly  free  "  from  those  causes.  This  destruction  of  the 
causes  of"  doubtetc,"  is  "  constant "  inasmuch  as  this  destruc- 
tion of  ignorance  and  its  impressions  can  never  be  undone  after 
it  is  once  accomplished.  The  text  further  refers  to  the  cause 
of  this  destruction  being  *  constant ' : — 

"  He  is  permanently  enlightened  in  It." 
The  pronoun '  It '  refers  to  that  well-known  supreme  Atman 
*  Oh.  IL  Aph,  V. 


177 

which  is  the  one  object  of  all  the  Upaniskads.  This  ascetic  is 
for  ever  awake  in  the  light  of  this  supreme  Atman.  For,  it  is 
only  the  ascetic  who,  bearing  in  mind  the  text  :  "The  patient 
Brdhmana  having  known  It  should  harmonise  himself  in  the 
Self,  he  should  not  be  deluded  away  by  words  ;  it  is  mere  waste 
of  breath  ;"  gets  over  all  mental  destruction  with  the  force  of 
Yoga,  and  acquires  "  harmony  in  the  Se'lf^'.  Thus  this  "en- 
lightenment "  being  permanent  and  eternal,  the  destruction  of 
ignorance  and  its  impressions  which  must  disappear  with  the 
light  of  this  knowledge,  is  bound  to  be  equally  permanent  and 
eternal. 

The  text  then  proceeds  to  distinguish  this  supreme  Atman, 
thus  revealed,  from  the  personal  Creator  of  the  logicians  : — 

"And  this  is  mere  harmony  in  the  Self." 

f 

Brahman,  the  object  of  all  Upaniskad-tesichmg,  is  none 
other  than  one's  Self  ;  the  Yogin  gains  conviction  of  theis  truth 
and  rests  himself  in  peace  and  harmony.  Next  is  described 
the  nature  of  the  Illumination  thus  breaking  upon  the  as- 
cetic : — 

"I  am  that  cloud  of  thought— all  peace,  im- 
"  moveable,  one,  all  bliss  ;—  that  is  my  highest 
"  glory". 

The  ascetic  gains  the  conviction  :  I  am  that  Supreme  Being, 
all  peace  ;  free  from  all  distraction  beginning  with  anger  and 
the  like;  immoveable  from  having  no  action  whatever;  above  all 
distinction  of  like  and  unlike,  ofpart  and  whole  ;  one  uniform 
essence  of  existence,  thought  and  bliss.  This  essential  Brah- 
man  is  the  real "  glory,  "  the  real  form  or  nature  of  the  Yogin. 
This  has  no  relation  with  doing  or  suffering  ;  for,  all  doing  and 
suffering  is  of  illusion.  It  may  be  asked  if  pure  bliss  were  the 
nature  of  Brak man  and  if  the  self  within  is  nothing  but  this 
Brahman,  how  is  it  that  we  do  not  feel  this  native  bliss  in  this 
our  present  'condition  ?  This  realization  of  bliss  is  there- 
fore thus  explained  with  illustration  bv  those  who  know  : — 
23 


178 

"  Bntter,  though  present  in  every  limb  of  the^eow  conduces 
"naught  to  her  nourishment;  it  serves  as  the  best 
"  medicine  to  its  producer  on  being  worked  out  into  ife 
"  proper  form.  In  the  same  manner,  the  highest  ef- 
fulgent Lord,  present  in  all  beings,  even  like  the  said 
"butter,  is  never  of  any  practical  use  to  them  till  pro- 
"  perly  realized  through  the  force  of  devotion." 

If  teacher,  father,  brother  and  others  who  stood  in  that  rela- 
tion to  the  ascetic  in  his  previous  station  of  life,  shonld,  being 
themselves  yet  devoted  to  the  path  of  action  and  being  full  of 
ignorant  faith,  try  to  unsettle  his  mind  by  upbraiding  him  for 
having  given  up  the  tuft  of  hair,  the  sacred  thread,  the  three 
daily  adorations  and  the  like,  he  should  presently  seek  satis- 
faction in  the  following  conviction : — 

,"That  is  the  tuft,  That  the  thread,— the  adoration 
"consists  in  the  destruction  of  all  sense  of 
"  separateness  from  the  knowledge  of  supreme 
"Atman  as  the  only  one  unit." 

'That'  refers  to  the  knowledge  of  Brahaman  set  forth  in  and 
attainable  from  the  Upanishads  ;  this  itself  now  serves  the 
purpose  of  all  external  marks  such  as  the  tuft  and  the  thread 
and  all  external  forms  of  worship  like  the  three  adorations, 
etc.  That  heaven  which  is  the  promised  result  of  all  wor- 
ship and  its  forms  such  as  the  tuft,  etc.,  is  not  beyond  the 
reach  of  Brahman  ;  for  all  objective  happiness  is  nothing 
but  a  mere  particle  of  the  bliss  of  Brahman-,  "  The  rest  of 
beings  live  only  by  a  particle  of  this  bliss."*  The  dtharvani- 
kdh  have  this  very  idea  in  mind  when  they  say  in  the  Brahmo- 
panishad : — 

"  The  enlightened  having  shorn  his  head  clear  of  the  tnft 
*'  of  hair  shonld  give  up  also  that  external  sign,  the 
"sacred  thread  ;  he  should  henceforward  bind  himself 
"to  that  thread  which  is  the  immutable  supreme 
"Brahman.  It  is  a  thread  inasmuch  as  it  binds, 

*   BrhaddranyaJu*. 


179 

«*  holds  together  ;  and  this  thread  is  no  donbt  the 
*'  highest  essence  ;  that  Brdhmana  who  understands 
J  *'  this  thread  has  entered  into  the  inner  secret  of  the 
"  whole  of  the  Veda*  The  thread  on  which  hangs  the 
*'  whole  of  the  phenominal  even  like  so  many  jewels 
*'  on  a  string, — that  the  ascetic  who  understands  yoga, 
"  and  has  seen  the  light,  should  wear  about  him.  The 
*'  knower,  firm  in  the  highest  Yoga,,  should  cast  away 
"  the  objective  thread  he  wears,  the  living  conscious 
"  intellegence  must  find  its  place  on  the  thread  of 
"  Brahman.  Having  found  that  place  nothing  pollutes 
"him,  nothing  makes  him  unholy — such  is  the  power 
"of  that  thread  of  gnosis  thus  running  within.  Those 
•"  indeed  are  the  true  knowers  of  the  thread,  the  true 
"•bearers  of  the  sacrificial  badge,*  who  have  gnosis  for 
"  the  tuft  of  hair  on  the  head,  gnosis  for  their  ground 
**  of  faith,  gnosis  for  the  thread  which  gives  title 
"  to  formal  sacrifice.  Gnosis  indeed  is  the  highest 
"  aim  of  their  life,  for  gnosis  is  all  pure  and  holy. 
"  He  who  has  no  other  tuft  of  hair  but  the  flame 
"  of  gnosis  going  out  of  him  even  like  the  up- 
"  rising  flame  of  fire  is  the  true  knower  keeping 
"  the  necessary  tuft  over  his  head,  not  those  who 
"  wear  the  hair  in  any  prescribed  or  beautiful  form. 
"  Such  Brdhmanak  and  others  as  are  entitled  to 
**  certain  religious  rites  prescribed  in  the  Veda  should 
*'  bear  this  thread  alone,  for,  that  is  the  real  mark  of 
*'  having  got  the  right  to  perform  the  said  rites.  He  is 
"  said  by  the  knowers  of  Brahman  to  be  the  whole 
"  Brdhmana  who  wears  the  tuft  as  well  as  the  thread 
"Q?  gnosis  and  gnosis  alone.  This  sacrificial  thread  is 
*'  the  highest  resort,  the  supreme  step  ;  the  knower 
"  should  wear  this  thread ;  he  is  the  real  worshipper, 
"  say  those  who  know." 

*  For,  that  thread  is  supposed  to  give  the  necessary  spiritual  capacity 
to  perform  sacrifices  etc.  Before  the  thread  is  formally  given  no  ono 
can  perform  any  .religious  rites. 


180 

Thns  it  is  plain  the  ascetic  has  got  both  tUe  '  tuft '  and 
the  'thread.'  So  also  the  'twilight-worship.'  Knowledge 
of  the  oneness  of  Paramdtma  spoken  of  in  the  idstram, 
and  Jivdtmd  present  as  the  egoistic  subject  of  all  con- 
scious acts,  brought  about  from  knowledge  of  the  sense 
of  the  great  Text,  demolishes  the  whole  of  that  sense 
of  separateness  which  is  born  of  illusion.^  The  impossibility 
of  the  rise  of  this  illusion  again,  is  the  peculiar  merit 
of  this  demolishion  thus  accomplished.  This  direct  convic- 
tion of  the  one-ness  of  the  two —  soul  and  supreme  soul —  is 
brought  about  at  the  point  where  the  two  fuse,  so  to  speak, 
into  each  other ;  and  this  is  the  real  twilight-worship*  which 
the  Veda  assigns  to  the  time  when  day  and  night  meet 
together.  It  being  so,  the  blind  devotees  of  faith  will  never 
be  able  to  move  the  ascetic  in  any  manner. 

Thus  is -answered  the  question  "which  is  the  path"  in  the 
words  beginning  with  "  He  should  give  up  wife  children"  etc. 
The  question  "  what  is  their  condition"  is  answered  in  th'e 
words  "  what  is  then  necessary  etc. ;"  and  this  is  further  ampli- 
fied in  the  words  "  He  is  constantly  free  from  etc."  The  text 
now  proceeds  to  sum  up  and  finish  the  subject  thus  : — 

"Having  given  up  all  desire  lie  is  centred  in  the 
"  highest  Unit." 

Anger,  avarice,  and  the  like  spring  from  desire  ;  desire 
being  given  up  all  such  faults  of  the  mind  disappear.  The 
Vajasaneyinah  say  with  this  in  mind  :  "  It  has  been  said  this 

*  The  word  is  Sandhyi  which  means  «  a  joint.'  Ordinarily  the  joint  is 
placed  at  the  beginning  and  end  of  day  when  '  night  joins  with  day.' 
This  is  the  moment  of  twilight-worship.  Raja-yoga  interprets  it  to  mean 
tho  point  where  the  individual  soul  merges  into  the  supreme  soul  and 
onenoss  is  realized.  Hatha-yoga  also  has  its  own  interpretation  of  Sandhyd. 
The  fusion  of  the  Ida,  and  Pingala, —  the  sun-  and  moon-  breaths  in 
the  SushumnA  when  both  flow  together,  is  the  real  point  of  all  formal 
twilight-worship  and,  true  enough,  such  fusion  does  take  place  at  both 
the  twilights  and  at  midday  and  midnight. 


181 


puruska   is  all  desire."     The  mind  of  the  yogin   freed    from 
desire  rests  uninterruptedly  in  the  Unit. 

'  It  may  here  be  considered  such  Sanny&sinah  as  have  not 
yet  been  able  to  give  up  the  vdsand  of  carrying  out  Vedic 
injunctions  and  therefore  go  about  with  the  prescribed  stick 
in  hand, — these  Sannydsinah  who  are  only  'seekers,'  do  not 
respect  the  Paramakamsa  carrying  no  prescribed  stick,  like 
them.  It  has  been  said  with  the  view  of  answering  this 
doubt : — 

"  He  is  called  the  bearer  of  one  stick  (  Ekadandin  )  who 
';  bears  the  true  stick  ofgnosis  ;  the  bearer  of  the  wooden 
"  stick  is  bound  to  hope  andr  desire,  he  is  void  of  all 
"  true  gnosis.  He  who  is  void  of  the  virtues,  forbear- 
"  ance,  knowledge,  renunciation,  self-control  and  the 
"  like  finds  his  place  in  the  most  terrible  hell  called 
"  Raurava.  He  who  lives  only  for  alms  is  the  sinner 
"  violating  the  vow  of  the  real  Sannyasin" 

This  difference  will  make  it  clear  who  is  the  real  Parama- 
hamsa.  The  'one  stick'  which  the  Paramahamsa  bears  is 
of  two  kinds  :  spiritual  and  physical,  just  as  much  as  the 
*  three  sticks  '  of  a  Tridandin  truly  consist  of  vocal,  mental, 
corporeal.*  These  three  are  thus  described  by  Manu. 

"  Restraint  (danda)  of  speech,  restraint  of  mind,  restraint 
"  of  act, — he  who  carries  these  three  firmly  in  his 
"  intellect  is  the  real  Tridandin.  Having  controlled 
"  himself  with  these  three  in  his  relations  to  all  beings 
'  "  whatever  and  having  controlled  all  desire  and  anger, 
"  he  finds  the  highest  bliss  possible.5' 

The  nature  of  these  is  thus  described  by  Daksha  : — 

"  Restraint  of  speech,  restraint  of  mind,  restraint  of  act, — 
"  he  who  carries  these  three  firmly  about  him  is  the 

*  That  is  to  say  the  word  danda  which  means  *  stick  '  as  well  as  '  re- 
straint '  is  made  to  mean  restraint  of  speech,  restraint  of  mind,  re- 
straint of  body ; — these  are  the  three  sticks  ordained  as  the  mark  of 
an  ordinary  Sannydsin. 


"  real  Tridandin.  The  first  consists  in  silence,  the 
"third  in  absence  of  desire,  the  second  comes  about 
"  from  the  practice  of  Prdndydma."  • 

Another  Smrti  explains  "Restraint  of  act"  by  "  moderation 
in  diet."  These  marks  of  the  Tridandin  are  found  in  the 
Paramahamsa  also.  Says  Pitamaha: — 

"  The  bscetic-Paramahamsa  is  the  one  belonging  to  the 
"fourth  order  spoken  of  in  the  Veda;  he  is  bound 
"  by  all  observance  and  forbearance,  he  is  the  tri- 
"  dandin,  the  form  of  Vishnu  incarnate. 

It  being  so,  as  silence  "and  others  are  considered  to  be  each 
a  danda  in  consequence  of  its  being  useful  in  restraint  of 
speech,  etc.,  just  so  should  gnosis  which  destroys  ignorance 
and  its  effects  be  looked  qj3on  as  a  danda.  He  is  the  real 
Ekadandi,  the  real  Paramahamsa  who  carries  the  danda 
of  pure  gnosis.  It  may  some  time  happen  that  this  spiritual 
danda  might  escape  the  mind  for  a  moment  in  consequence 
of  some  distraction  ;  it  is  therefore  that  its  opposite — the 
physical  stick—is  mentioned  side  by  side  with  it  to 
preclude,  as  it  were  by  association,  the  chance  of  this  trick  of 
memory.  He  who  not  knowing  this  essential  truth  of  the 
Veda  should  delude  himself  into  the  belief  that  he  has  gained 
the  end  of  existence  by  the  simple  change  of  dress  which 
sannyasa  enforces,  and  thus  goes  about  with  a  wooden  stick  in 
hand,  finds  his  place  in  the  most  terrible  hell  called  Raurava ; 
for,  a  variety  of  ills  continue  to  oppress  his  mind.  The  reason 
is  obvious.  Seeing  that  one  is  clad  in  the  garb  of  a  Parama- 
hamsa people  invite  him,  as  in  duty  bound,  for  a  meal  at  their 
house.  This  fellow  being  desirous  of  satisfying  the  palate 
makes  no  distinction  as  to  what  he  should  take  and  what  he 
should  not  take,  and  thus  gathers  sin  through  ignorance. 
"  Pollution  touches  not  the  sannyasin  through  food"  ;  "  Take 
of  all  the  four  varndh"  ;— these  and  similar  texts  from  the 
Smrti  refer  to  the  real  knower  alone.  The  one  under  con- 
sideration is  an  ignoramus  and  must  deserve  hell.  It  is  be- 


•183 

canse  of  this  distinction   that  Mann  prescribes  the  rule  abont 
alms  to  ignorant  sannyasinah  : — 

"Never  obtain  alms  by  telling  fortune  or  interpreting 
"  signs,  by  astrology  or  medicine,  or  by  teaching  gram- 
"  mar  and  logic.  Go  about  for  alms  but  once,  never 
"  be  attached  to  any  form,  for,  the  ascetic  attached  to 
"  aims  becomes  easily  attached  to  objects." 

As  to  the  sannyasin  who  is  the  true  knower,  it  has  been 
said : — 

"  The  Paramahamsa  may  eat  once  or  twice  as  he  likes,  he 
"  should,  by  all  means,  keep  up  the  flow  of  gnosis 
"  within." 

It  being  so,  there  is  obvious  difference  between  the  spiritual 
stick  and  the  wooden  stick,  the  former  being  superior  to  the 
latter.  Bearing  this  in  mind  it  must  plainly  follow  that  he 
alone  who  carries  the  spiritual  danda  is  the  true  Paramahamsa. 

Let  the  knower  have  this  spiritual  danda  alone  ;  no  parti- 
cular emphasis  be  laid  on  the  wooden  danda  ;  but  then  the 
qnestion  arises  how  should  the  Paramahamsa  regulate  him- 
self with  respect  to  the  rest  of  his  conduct  ?  The  text  proceeds 
to  answer -this  : 

"  Clad  only  in  the  cloth  of  the  directions,  above 
"  all  salutation,  all  ceremonies  of  the  dead, 
"  beyond  praise  or  blame,  he  should  become 
"  the  mendicant  of  mere  chance.  No  invoca- 
"  tion,  no  dismissal,  no  form,  no  meditation, 
"  no  devotion,  no  objects,  no  void,  no  separa- 
"  tion,  no  union,  no  meum,  no  tuum,  nothing 
"  at  all —  he  has  not  even  the  place  where 
"  to  rest.  He  should  never  touch  gold  etc., 
"  he  should  never  look  at  the  world." 

What  the  Smrti  lays  down  in  ; — 

» 

"  Above  the  ktiees  and  below  the  naval  should  he  wear  one 


184' 

"  piece  of  cloth  aud  keep  another  for  the  upper  part  of 
"  the  body.     Thus  should  he  go  about  for  alms  ;" 

refers  to  such  as  are  not  Yoginah.  It  is  with  this  difference 
in  mind  that  it  has  been  said  before:  he  is  not  the  real  sannyasin. 
And  what  has  been  said  in  yet  another  S?nrti  : — 

"  He  who  has  been  a  sannyasin  from  before  and  is  equal  in 
"  all  other  respects,  to  him  might  salutation  be  made, 

"  and  to  no  one  else  ;" 

. 

refers  to  such  as  are  no  ascetics;  for  the  Paramahamsa 
has  no  salutation  to  make.  Hence  has  it  been  said  while 
defining  a  Brahmana  "  he  is  above  praise,  beyond  saluta- 
tion/' Being  above  "'all  ceremonies  of  the  dead  "  refers  to  the 
absence  of  all  duty  in  the  Paramahamsa  for  offering  oblations 
to  anscesters  at  holy  places  like  the  Gay  a,  through  excess  of 
ignorat  faith.  The  reference  to  "praise  and  blame"  made 
before  was  meant  to  prevent  any  vexation  from  praise  aud 
blame  coming  from  others.  The  reference  in  this  place  is 
meant  to  show  that  the  Paramahamsa  himself  gives  no  graise 
or  blame.  The  words  '  he  should  become  the  mendicant  of 
mere  chance'  refer  to  his  being  bound  by  no  particular 
resolve  as  to  ordinary  things.  The  resolve  about  'worship 
of  God'  spoken  of  in  the  Smrti  : — 

"  Going  about  for  alms,  telling  the  beads  of  the  rosary, 
"  cleanliness,  bath,  meditation,  worship  of-  God  :— 
"  these  six  should  always  be  attended  to  as  invariably 
"  as  some  penal  order  of  the  ruler ;" 

relates  only  to  one  who  is  not  yet  a  full  asectic.  It  has 
been  said  with  this  in  mind  "no  invocation  etc."  The  difference 
between  '  meditation  '  and  '  devotion  '  lies  in  the  former  being 
limited  to  a  short  time  and  the  latter  to  all  time.  As  the 
ascetic  has  no  temporal  intercourse  whatever  of  the  form  of 
praise,  blame  and  the  like,  or  as  he  has  no  spiritual  duties 
of  the  form  of  worship  and  the  like,  so  he  has  nothing  to  do 
with  the  philosophy  of  gnosis  consisting  of  discussions  about 
the  sense  of  words  and  texts  and  the  like 


185 

That  form  of  consciousness  which  is  the  Witness  of  all,  is 
tlie  implied  meaning  of  the  term  'Thou*  in  the  great  text 
"  Thou  art  That :"  The  plain  sense  of  the  term  is  that  form 
of  consciousness  which  is  encased  in  the  body.  This,  however, 
is  not  the  implied  sense."  In  its  plain  sense  the  term  is  other 
than  the  "That"  spoken  of  as  one  with  it  in  the  said  text; 
the  sense  of  meum  connected  with  all  acts  of  any  individual 
whatever  is  part  of  this  plain  sense  which  refers  to  his  body 
and  is  other  than  the  implied  sense  ;  the  same  referring  to  the 
body  of  another  causes  the  sense  of  tuum  with  regard  to 
others  ;—All  else  besides  this  implied  and  plain  form  of 
consiousness  is  the  unconscious^  and  is  known  as  the  *  world.' 
These  and  similar  thoughts  never  enter  the  ascetic's  mind, 
inasmuch  as  his  mind  is  for  ever  lost  in  Brahman. 

Hence  he  "  has  nob  even  the  place  where  to  rest "  for,  if 
he  acquires  any  place  such  as  a  monastary  or  the  like  as 
his  permanent  residence,  he  would  become  attached  to  the 
sense  of  meum  and  tuum  and  his  mind  will  feel  the  force  of 
distraction  in  moments  when  this  object  of  meum  and  tuum 
should  suffer  or  prosper.  Says  Gaudapadacharya  with  this 
in  view : — 

"  He  is  above  praise  or  salutation,  beyond  the  duty  of 
"offering  oblations  to  the  manes  of  his  ancesters  ;  his 
"  place  is  neither  fixed  nor  moving — he  is  the  pet  of 
«'mere  chance." 

He  should  not  keep  any  utensils  of  silver,  gold,  or  any 
other  metal  either  for  alms  or  for  use  in  worship  just  as  much 
as  he  should  not  bind  himself  to  any  place  whatever.  Says 
Yama  : — 

"  The  ascetic  should  keep  no  ntensils,  not  of  gold  nor  of  iron 
"  he  should  have  nothing  to  do  with  any  of  them." 

Also  Mann : — 

"  He  may  keep  hole-less  pots  other  than  those  of  metals  :— 
"  these  may  be  purified  with  mere  clay  like  the  laddie 
.24 


186 

"  in  a  sacrifice.  The  pot  may  be  made  of  wild  cucumbers 
"  wood,  clay  or  bamboo ;  for,  these  alone  are  the  polj, 
"  allowed  to  the  ascetic  by  Manu  the  son  of  Prajapati." 

And  Baudhayana  too  : — 

"  He  should  eat  of  leaves  plucked  and  brought  with  his 
"  own  hands.  But  never  use  the  leaf  of  the  Batayan  or 
"  the  Peepal  or  the  Karanja.  Even  under  the  narrow* 
"  est  straits  should  he  never  eat  off  a  bronze-plate,  for 
"  one  eating  off  a  bronze-plate  eats  nothing  but  dirt 
"  and  filth  ;  nor  should  he  use  gold,  silver,  copper,  tin, 
"  lead  or  clay  for  his  pots." 

He  should  further  receive  no  pupils.    Says  Manu  : — 

"  He  should  go  about  all  alone  with  mind  intent  on  the 
"goal  to  be  attained.  Spiritual  power  finding  only 
"  one  to  attach  itself  to,  does  never  leave  him,  does 
"never  decline." 

Also  Medhatithi  i — 

"  Fixed  abode,  desire  of  fine  pots,  etc.,  for  use,  laying  by  a 
"  store,  the  taking  of  pupils,  sleeping  by  day,  vain 
"talk, — these  six  degrade  the  ascetic  into  bondage. 
"  Fixed  abode  refers  to  staying  over  one  day  in  a 
"  village,  and  over  five  in  a  city,  at  any  time  other 
"  than  the  rainy  season.  Desire  of  fine  pots,  etc.,  for 
"  use  has  reference  to  the  collection  of  pots  made  of 
"  wild  cucumber  and  the  like;  not  one  of  these  should  be 
"  preserved  though  it  be  of  use  for  eating  or  collecting 
"  alms.  Laying  by  a  store  refers  to  laying  by  some 
"  stick  or  the  like  for  use  at  some  future  time  when 
"  the  present  stick  may  have  to  be  abandoned  as  worn 
"  out  or  useless.  Taking  of  pupils  refers  to  accepting 
"  pupils  for  service,  wages,  worship,  notoriety  or  .even 
"  through  compassion.  Day  is  gnosis '  both  being 
"all  light;  night  is  ignorance,  indifference  towards 
..-. !  "gnbsis  is  sleeping  by  day.  Vain  talk  consists  of 


187 

.  ...  "  such  prattle  as  refers  not  to  spiritual  matters  but 
"to  alms  or  praise  of  gods  and  the  like,  or  even  to 
"  answering  questions  out  of  compassion,  while  going 
'k  by  the  road  side." 

Not  only  should  he  take  no  pupils,  but  he  should  not  even 
so  much  as  see  them,  for,  even  such  seeing  creates  bondage. 
The  text  further  implies  that  the  ascetic  should  not  concern 
himself  with  other  things  prohibited  in  the  Smrti.  These  are 
pointed  out  by  Medhatithi : — 

"  The  ascetic  should  never  take,  even  as  he  does  not  touch 
"urine  or  foeces,  these'<six  :  moveables,  immoveables, 
"  seeds,  metals,  poisons  and  arms.  He  should  avoid  at 
'Sa  distance,  like  the  wife  of  another,  chemical  opera- 
"  tions,  grammar,  astrology,  bargains,  and  the  like." 

• 

Thus  are  described  all  those  spiritual  or  temporal  things 
.that  stand  in  the  way  of  the  ascetic.  Naw  the  text  proceeds 
to  j)oint  out,  by  way  of  question  and  answer,  the  greatest 
obstacle  in  his  way,  and  insists  on  avoiding  it  altogether  : — 

"If  asked  is  there  any  strong  obstacle  in  the 
"way?  and  what?  the  answer  is  there  are 
"  obstacles.  These  consist  in  that  interest 
"with  which  if  the  mendicant  looks  at  gold, 
"he  becomes  the  killer  of  Brahman,  with 
"  which  if  he  touches  gold  he  becomes  a 
"  Paulkasa,  with  which  if  he  takes  gold  he 
"becomes  the  killer  of  his  Self.  Hence 
,•..-;.."..  .".should  the  free  mendicant  never  look  at, 
"  touch,  or  take  gold  with  interest." 

The  Sanskrit  word  for  'strong  obstacle'  (dbddha)  con- 
sists of  a  particle  (a)  attached  to  the  word  obstacle  (bddka)  ; 
and  this  particle  adds  to  the  word  *  obstacle '  the  sense  of 
'strong'  in  accordance  with  the  rule  of  PAnini  "the  particle 
(a)  limits  or  expands  the  meaning."  An  obstacle  that  covers 
a  large  ground  is  of  course  a  '  strong  obstacle.'  Having  said 


188 

that  there  is  'strong  obstacle,'  gold  is  instanced  as  such 
obstacle.  If  gold  is  looked  at  with  'interest*  that  is  to  say 
with  sense  of  greed  accompanied  with  strong  desire,  then 
the  mendicant  becomes  the  killer  of  Brahman.  His  mind 
being  intent  on  gold,  he  constantly  strives  to  obtain  and 
preserve  it ;  not  only  so  bat  with  a  view  to  establish  the  re- 
ality of  such  trash  he  sets  himself  against  the  teaching  of 
the  Vedanta  which  declares  all  things  to  be  mere  illusion. 
Thus  he  consoles  himself  with  the  reality  of  his  desired 
object — gold.  In  this  manner  does  the  mendicant,  as  it  were, 
kill  or  destroy  that  Brahman  whose  truth  is  proved  and 
proclaimed  in  the  sdstram.  He  is,  thus  the  killer  of 
Brahman.  Says  the  Smrti  :— 

"  He  who  says  there  is  no  Brahman,  he  who  sets 
"  himself  against  the  Knower  of  Brahman,  and  he  who 
"professes  to  know  Brahman  without  having  become 
"  It,  are  all  killers  of  Brahman.  Know  him  the  killer 
"  of  Brahman,  he  is  beyond  the  pale  of  all  religion 
"  and  intercourse." 

If  the  mendicant  touches,  gold,  with  interest,  he  falls  into 
sin  and  becomes  a  Paulka&a-  a  zemi-Mlechhcha.  The  sin  is 
thus  set  forth  in  the  Smrti : — 

"That  medicant  falls  in  no  time  who  consciously  parts 
"  with  his  semen  and  who  begins  to  lay  by  a  store  of 
"  wealth." 

Nor  should  gold  be  taken  with  interest.  If  he  still  takes  it, 
the  mendicant  by  this  his  act,  puts  the  self;  al!l  consciousness, 
the  witness  of  body  and  senses,  ever  free>— into  contact  and 
bondage  ;for,  he  thus  disbelieves  in  the  freedom  of  self  and 
makes  it  the  enjoyer  of  gold  and  the  like.  This  delusion  is 
the  root  of  all  sin.  Says  the  Smrti : — 

14  Who  understands  self  to  be  otherwise  than  what  ifc  really 
"is— what  sin  does  that  thief  not  commit  in  thus 
"  stealing  hia  own  Self," 


189 

And  moreover  the  killer  of  Self  has  in  store  thai  worfd 
which  is  void  of  the  least  •  tinge  of  happiness  and  which  is 
full  of  a  thousand  forms  of  dire  pain  and  misery. 

"  Those  who  destroy  Self  go,  after  death,  to  the 
"  sphere  called  asurya  (without  the  sun)  ail  enveloped 
"  in  thick  darkness." 

In  the  looking  at  and  the  touching  of  gold  spoken  in  the  text 
is  implied  also  talking  or  hearing  of  gold.  In  the  taking  of  gold 
is  similarly  implied  dealing  in  gold.  The  meaning  is  that  all 
intercourse  in  gold — whether  hearing  about  it  or  its  benefits 
or  dealing  in  it — with  internal  interest,  is  as  much  sin  as 
the  looking  at,  touching  and  taking  spoken  of  in  the  text.  As 
looking  at  gold  with  interest  is  cause  of  sin  the  mendicant 
should  not  look  at  gold  or  touch  it  or  take  it.  The  good  of 
this  keeping  aloof  from  gold  is  thus  set  forth  r— - 

"All  desires  turn  away  from  his  mind;  lie  wavers 
"  not  under  pain,  lie  is  indifferent  to  pleasure ; 
"renunciation  or  attachment  he  is  not 
"attached  to;  having  no  attachment  for 
"  anything  good  or  bad  he  neither  hates  nor 
"  loves;  all  activity  of  his  senses  is  easily  put 
"  out;  he  is  then  centred  in  the  Self." 

Children,  wife,  hoase>  property  and  the  like  are  objects,  of 
desire  dependent  on  gold  (i.  e.  wealth) ;  whence  gold  being 
abandoned  all  desire  of  every  kind  turns  away  from  the  mind, 
doe*  not  stay  in  the  mind.  Even  after  cessation  of  desire, 
pain  or  pleasure  might  come  from  previous  Karma*  but  even 
these  cause  no  sorrow  or  desire.  This  has  been  fully  explained 
in  connection  with  the  sthitaprajna.  Temporal  pain  and 
pleasure  being  thus  ignored  even  spiritual  bliss  and  desire  for 
such  bliss  is  easily  put  out,  for,  one  feels  desire  for  the  bliss 
of  heaven  only  by  inference  from  the  pleasure  he  experiences 
in  this  world ; — and  it  is  but  proper  that  he  having  become 
indifferent  to  temporal  pleasure  must  grow  indifferent  to  the 
pleasure  that  might  await  him  in  the  life  after  death.  It 


190 

\ 

being  so,  he  becomes  void  of  all  attachment  whatever  to  any- 
thing good  or  bad,  that  is  to  say  agreeable  or  disagreeable  in  this- 
world  as  well  as  the  next.  This  implies  that  he  feels  no  hate, 
for,  such  a  knower  hates  not  even  his  direst  enemy.  Nor  does 
he  love  any  one  doing  good  to  him.  The  person  who,  thus  aftove 
love  and  hate,  stands  ever  in  dtman  has  the  activity  of  all  his 
senses  at  an  end.  This  .being  accomplished  ecstatic  trance  is 
never  interrupted. 

The  question  "  what  is  their  condition  "has  been  answered 
before  in  brief  and  at  length  ;  the  same  has  been  enlarged  upon 
in  this  place  in  connection  with  the  advisability  of  avoiding 
all  contact  whatever  with  gold  and  the  like. 

The  text  then  proceeds  to  conclude  the  subject  ©fRenun-r 
ciation^of-the-accomplished : — • 

"He  becomes  delightfully  satisfied   in  theful- 

„  ft '_'  fllment of  #11 duties  by  the  .knowledge -' I  am 

."  Brahman'  the  permanent  source  of  alltfans- 
"cendent;  bliss,  the  one  fountain,  of  all  light." 

Th{sParama-kamsa-a,scetic  acquires  the  delightful  "condition 
of  Mfiling  all  duties  whatever  On  gaining  the  conviction 
?'!'  am  Brahman'  described  in  the  Upaniskads  as  that  su- 
preme self  which  is  all  joy  and  all  light.  Says  the  Snirti: — 

-        '  .  _  ,^.  '  .  .     .  .  '  *     • .••:-. 

"  Regaling  all  content  in  the  nectar  of  gnosis,  fully  gatis- 
"  fied  in  supreme  fulfilment  of  every;  dotty,  there 
"remains  nothing  for  the  Yogin  to  do,  if  anything 
".remain,'' he  must  be  just  "so  many  removes  behind 

"  gnosis" 

•   -  '  -  ;...•-  ::-;.!'i 

May  the  Lord  Vidyatirtha  thus  destroying  the  tie  of 
bondage  from  the  heart,  give  us  the  whole  of  the  last  and 
supreme  end  of  existence. 

End  of  the  fifth  Chapter  on  "Renuciation- 
of-the-accomplished." 


191 

Separateness  and'  non-separateness  have  fallen~away  in  a 
moment,  holiness  and  sin  have  melted  away,  illusion  and 
false  knowledge  are  destroyed  in  no  time,  all  doubt  is  put 
out  in  the  twinkling  of  the  eye, — oh  I  what  means  (Vedic) 
injunction  or  prohibition  to  the  sage  walking  the  way 
transcending  the  three  properties,  after  having  found  that 
essence  of  light  which  is  beyond  all  speech,  beyond  all  that 
comes  of  the  three  properties. 

Ascetics  firm  in  the  knowledge  of  self  repair  not  to 
sacred  streams  all  nothing  but  mere  water,  nor  to  Gods 
and  their  images,  all  stone  and  mortar. 

The  God  of  the  twice-born  is  Fire,  the  God  of  the  Silent 
one  is  his  heart  ;  poor  intelects  find  their  God  in  Idols  ; — 
the  even-eyed  enlightened  one  sees  God  everywhere. 

Those  who  have  not  the  eye  for  knowledge  perceive  not 

tbe  swayer  of  men  pervading  every  nook    and   corner   of  the 

universe,  alt  quiet  and  peace  ;  like  the  blind  who  cannot  see 
the  fall  blaze  of  the  Sun. 

End  of  "  The  Path  of  Liberation  in  this  life." 


WORDS  NOT  ENGLISHED  IN  THE  TEXT. 


Akargana  — 

Days  peculiar  to  sacrifice. 

Animd  — 

One  of  the  eight  occult  powers  of 
physical  yoga.  The  power  of 
becoming  as  small  as  an  atom. 

Anuvdka  — 

A  section,  especially  a  section  of 
the  Veda. 

Apdna  — 

One  of  the  five  breaths  ;  the  breath 
at  the  lower  regions. 

Asat— 

Non-Being. 

Asurdh  — 

PI.  of  asura  -demon  j  non-sura 
(god). 
AtirAtra  — 

A  particular  sacrifice  of  the  dark- 
er kind. 


Ne-science  ;  that  which  makes  the 
sense  of  scparateness  in  Brahman, 
makes  in  fact  the  Jiva. 

AAavaniya— 

One  of  the  three  fires  kept  by  a 
householder  in  what  is  called  the 
Agnihotra. 

Akdsa  — 

The  first  all-pervading  formless 
element. 

Atma-Jndnin-^- 
The  knower  of  Self, 
25 


Ayur-veda — 

The  Science  of  life,  particularly 
of  medicine  which  preserves  life. 

Brdhmana — 

The  knower  of  Brahman. 

Buddha — 

The  Enlightened ;  the  Lord  Bud- 
dha. 

Ck&nddla — 

The  child  begotten  by  a  S'udra 
upon  a  Brdhmana- woman. 

Chdndrdyana — 

A  kind  of  penance,  in  which  one 
has  to  eat  only  one,  two,  three 
monthfuls  and  so  on,  for  the  first 
fifteen  days,  and  lessen  them  in  the 
same  order  the  next  fifteen. 

Chdturmdsya — 

. 
A  particular  sacrifice. 

Dakshindyana — 

The  period  when  the  sun  is  in  the 
summer  solstice. 

Danda — 

A  stick. 
Eka-d.— 

One  bearing  a  single  stick. 

Tri'd.— 

One  bearing  three  sticks  or  the 
stick  with  three  knots. 

Dar'sa — 

The  oblation  offered  every  fifteen- 
th day  of  the  dark  fortnight. 


194 


Dvaita— 

Duality ;  opposed  to  Advaita. 

Gdyatri — 

A  particular  metre  of  that  name. 
The  one  such  metrical  line  which  is 
particularly  efficacious  when  recited. 

Hirnyagarbha — 

The  cosmic  manifestation  of 
Brahman  upon  the  subtile  plane. 

fsvara — 

•    The  reflection  of  consciousness  in 
cosmic  illusion.     •* 

liihasa — 

History. 
Jaina — 

Follower  of  the  Jina. 
Jivdtmd — 

The  individual  Soul. 

Jyotishtoma — 

Also  called  agnisthoma, ;  A  parti- 
cular formal  sacrifice. 

Karrfla— 

Formal  religion ;  also  the  law  of 
karma. 

Kataka — 

A  root  whose  dust  put  into  water 
purifies  it  of  dirt. 

Krchckhra — 

A  kind  of  penance  in  which  one 
eats  only  once  by  day  for  the  first 
three  days,  then  only  once  by  night 
for  the  next  three,  and  keeps  three 
fasts  after  that. 

Mahat— 

The  cosmic  principle  of  indivi- 
duality. 

MantrAk— 

Incantations. 


Mdntrikdk— 

Those  believing  in  or  practising 
in-cantations. 

Maya — 

Illusion ;  cosmic  illusion. 

Niyama — 

See  Yoga  Sutra— aph.  XXXII, 
Oh.  II. 

Parmatma — 

The  Supreme  Soul ;  'Brahman. 

Paurnamdsya — 

Oblations  offered  every  fifteenth 
day  of  the  bright  fortnight. 

Pitarah — 

PI.  of  Pit  r-  manes  of  ancestors. 

Pradhana — • 

Undifferenced  cosmic  matter  in 
the  condition  of  evolution ;  so  call- 
ed by  the  Sdnkhya. 

Pranava — 

The  world  of  glory — aum. 

Pranay&ma — 

The  process  of  inhaling  retaining 
and  exhaling  the  breath. 

Pratyahdra — 

See  Yoga-Sutra  aph.  LJV.  Ch.  II. 

Prajna — 

The  manifestation  of  Brahman 
on  the  causal  plane. 

Purdna — 

Religious  fables. 

Purusha — 

The  conscious  principle  "of  the 
Sankhya-philosophy ;  the  individual 
Soul. 


195 


Putrakameshti— 

'    A    particular   form   of  'sacrifice 
having  the  power  to  beget  a  son. 

Sat— 
Being. 

Samprajndta — 

See  Yoga-Sutra  aph.  XVII,  Ch.  I. 
Savana — 

Sacrifice. 

Samkalpa — 

See  Yoga  Sutra  aph.  XVII.  Oh.  I. 

Sdnkhya — 

Philosophy  bearing  that  name. 

Siddhi — 

Occult  power. 

Smdrta — 

Enjoined  by  the  smrti. 

Sutrdtman — 

See  Hirnyagarbha. 

S'dkta— 

Follower  of  S'dkti,  the  energising 
female  principle  in  nature. 

S'ikhd— 

The  tuft  of  hair  on  the  head. 
S'iras — 

The  mantra  dpajyoti  etc.  attach- 
ed to  the  gdyatri  while  reciting  it,  is 
so  called.  See  Yajnv,  Smr.  ch.  I,  23. 

S'rauta — 

Enjoined  by  srutit 


Taijasa — 

The  individual  manifestation  of 
Brahman  on  the  subtile  plane. 

Tantrikdh — 

Believers  in  sleight-of-hand, 

Uttarayana — 

The  period  when  the- sun  is  in  the 
winter  solstice. 

Vai'sheshika — 

One  belonging  to  the  school  of 
that  name. 

Vedanta — 

The  end  of  the  Veda ;  the  Upani- 
shads;  the  philosophy  of  the 

Advaita, 

Vidyd — 

Gnosis. 

Vipra — 

A  Brdhmana ;  one  belonging  to 
the  class  so  called. 

Virdt— 

The  cosmic  manifestation  of 
Brahman  on  the  gross  plane. 

Vishnu — 

The  God  of  that  name. 

Vyahrti — 

Pranava  and  the  syllables  Bhur 
etc.  which  are  prefixed  to  the 
Gdyatri  while  reciting  it, 

Yama — 

See  Yoga-Sutra  aph,  XXX.  Ch.  II, 


196 

,   .    WORKS  BY  THE  SAME  AUTHOR. 
V*  Obtained  at  the  Sudar&ma- Office,  Nadiad, 
Bombay  Presidency, 


RAJA- YOGA. 

(THIRD  THOROUGHLY  REVISED  EDITION,  IN  PREPARATION-) 

Translation  of  the  '  Philosophy  of  Subject  and  Object 
(Drgdrsyaviveka)  of  Bharatitirtha,  and  of  a  treatise  on 
4  Direct  Cognition'  (Aparokshanubhuti)  by  S'ankara  ; 
with  copious  explanatory  notes  and  an  introduction 
putting  the  'Absolute  Philosophy'  (Advaita)  to  the 
modern  reader. 


"  Nor  does  Poona  or  Bombay  contain  any  Shfistreo  with  clearer  conclus- 
ions on  Hindu  Theology  and  Philosophy,  better  command  of  lucid 
language,  or  ideas  more  enlightened  and  profound." — The  Daily  Tele- 
graph, London  (Sir  E.  Arnold). 

"  You  have  produced  a  very  learned  and  useful  little  work." — SirM. 
William. 

"Anything  that  emanates  from  Prof ,  Dvivedi'3  pan  is  sure,  oi  a  warm 
reception  at  the  hands  of  our  readers." — Theosophiet, 

"  It  is  advisable  to  recommend  most  strongly  the  study  of  Prof.  Dvi- 
vedi's  translation  and  commentaries." — Lucifer. 

TARKA-KAUMUDI. 

(Price  Ana.  12. ) 

(Copy-right  made  over  to  the  Government  Educational 
Department,  Bombay.) 

A  Compendium  of  Nydya-Vaiteshika — Philosophy 
by  Laugakshi  Bh&skara.  Edited  with  Sanskrit  Text, 
copious  Notes,  and  Introduction. 


"  Undoubtedly  a  valuable  contribution  to  our  knowledge  of  the  sub- 
,  jeot":— Prof .  W.  D.  Whitney. 

"The  result  of  his  labours  is  all  that  could  have  been  desired.  His 
full  and  yet  very  concise  notes  shew  that  he  has  thoroughly  mastered  the 
subject,  and  that  he  is  also  able  to  explain  it  to  others."- — Indian  Antiquary 
(Dr.  F.  Kielhorn); 

"  Appears  to  be  a  very  scholarly  edition  which  is  likely  to  supply  a 
great  want." — Dr.  Rost  (India  Office). 

"  Find  it  very  good." — Dr.  G.  Biihler       • 

"  Himself  deeply  imbued  with  the  system,  and  well-read  in  cognate 
literature,  as  also  not  unfamiliar  with  Western  Logic,  his  interpreta- 
tions are  quite  welcome.  I  recommend  the  young  Sankritist  to  go 
through  it  minutely  and  repeatedly." — Vienna  Oriental  Journal  (Dr.  H. 
Jacobi). 

MONISM  OB  ADVAITISM? 

(Price  Rs.  2.) 

Introduction  to  the  Advaita-Philosophy  in    the   light 
of  Modern  Speculation. 

-     "  Clever  and  thoughtful."— Sir  B.  West. 

"I  have  examined  your  work  with  much  interest."— E.  B.  Tylor., 

"A  very  interesting  contribution  to  the  History  of  Indian  Philosophy." 
— The  Mind,  London. 

"  The  learned  Prof.  Dvivedi  seems  to  admit  that  the  principles  of  Ad- 
vaita  Philosophy  find  a  very  convenient  expression  in  European  Monism.'1 
—Open  Court  (Dr.  P.  Carus). 

"  The  little  work  will  be  an  interesting  one  for  students  of  the  Advaita." 
— Theosophist. 

"The  book  is  worth  placing  on  every  serious  student's  shelves."— 
Luoifer.. 

THE  YOGA-SUTEAS.         ~~ 

(Price  Rs.  1-8-0.) 

(Copy-right  of  the  first  1,000  given  to  the  Theosophical  Publication 
Fund,  Bombay). 

The  aphorisms  of  Patanjali  translated  into   English 
with  copious  Notes  from  different  Commentaries. 

"The  best  edition  yet  presented  to  the  English-reading  public,"— Lucifert 


198 


MANDTJKYOPANISHAD. 

(Price  Rs.  1-8-0.) 

(Copy-right  of  the  first  1,000  made  over  to  the  Theosophical 
Publication  Fund,  Bombay). 

The  Mdndukya  translated  into  English  with  Gauda- 
pada's  Kdrikas  and  S'ankara's  Gloss  on  both  ;  prefaced 
with  an  interesting  critical  Introduction. 


"  I  am  much  delighted  with  the  ability  and  keenness  with  which  you 
treat  your  various  subjects." — Dr.  P.  Carus. 

"Mr.  Dvivedi  is  a  zealous  champion  of  the  Advaita  system,  and'  knows 
how  to  connect  its  formal  teachings  with  all  the  grave  questions  of  Modern 
Society." — The  Monist. 

"Mr.  Dvivedi  is  to  be  congratulated  on  the  ability  and  industry  he  has 
displayed." — Theosophist.  • 


SAMADHI-SATAKA. 

(Copy-right  of  the  first  500  given  to  the  publisher,  Mr.  G.  H.j  Ahmedabad.) 

Sanskrit  text  of  a  Jaina  book  on  the  Nature  and 
Study  of  the  Soul,  with 'English  translation.' 

THE  IMITATION  OF  S'ANKAEA. 

(Rs.  3  India ;  5s.  Europe  and  America — George  Redway 
9  Hart -Street,  Bloomsbury,  London). 

A  collection  of  about  700  texts  from  over  50 
authentic  '  works  on  the  Advaita,  translation  with 
original,  arranged  under  different  sections,  with 
Introduction,  Indices,  vocabulary  etc.  • 


-    199 

"  Has 'not  failed  to  sustain  his  well-established  reputation  as  an  oriental 
scholar.  The  work,  is  an  able  successor  of  the  Imitation  of  Buddha  and 
far  excels  it  as  an  acute  philosophical  work.  The  oriental  scholar  will  get 
a  better  glimpse  of  S'ankara  and  his  doctrines  from  the  work  of 
Mr.  Dvivedi "  : — THE  LIGHT  OF  THE  EAST,  (Calcutta). 

"  We  gladly  welcome  the  book  and  are  sure  that  it  will  be  helpful '  in 
creating  an  interest  in  S'ankara's  philosophy": — THE  BBAHMAviDiN, 
(Madras). 

"  Mr.  Manilal's  compilation  promises  a  very  wide  circulation  among  all 
who  thirst  for  the  spiritual  betterment  of  the  race." — THE  THEOSOPHIC 
GLEANER  (Bombay). 

"  We  heartily  welcome  this  book The  want  has  been  admirably 

-met  by  the  learned  Prof.  Dvivedi :  " — THE  THEOSOPHIST  (Madras). 

"  Mr.  Manilal  N.  Dvivedi  one  of  the  most  representative  spirits  of  India 
has  condensed  in  a  neat  book,  the  philosophy  of  the    Advaita.      No  one 
that  is  interested  in  Indian  lore  can  dispense  with  it.    Mr.  Dvivedi  is,  in  • 
his  own  line  of  thought,  one  of  the  ablest  thinkers  and  a  philosophical 
author  of  great  vigour :  " — THE  MONIST  (Dr.  P.  Carus  ;  Chicago). 

"  At  once  topic  and  aid  to  reflection  : " — THE  LAMP  (Toronto). 

"  Charecteristic  of  this  author's  work  in  its  clearness  of  arrangement :" 
— THE  MERCURY  (San  Francisco), 

"  So  much  for  a  title  that  is  likely  to  estrange  many  who  otherwise 
would  read  with  delight  and  profit  so  admirable  a  collection  :  " — LUCIFER 
(London). 

"  Possesses  considerable  interest  as  an  indication  of  the  many-sidedness 
of  religious  life  in  India.  The  general  result  is  neither  unpleasing.  nor 

uninstructive.     Truly  a  noble  philosophy  ! Prof.  Dvivedi   is  no 

novice  in  Sanskrit  literature  and  philosophy:  " — THE  INQUIRER. 

"  To  those  who  are  sufficiently  imbued  with  the  Eastern  spirit  this  book 
may  be  of  service  as  a  manual  of  devotion : " — BOOK-SELLING. 

"  The  anthology  is  an  interesting  one ;  "—CAMBRIDGE  REVIEW. 
"  I  like  what  I  have  read  of  it :  " — DR.  MAX  MD'LLEB. 

"  We  recommend  this  little  book  to  those  English  readers,  who  desire  to 
know  something  of  ancient  Indian  thought.  .  .  .  .  All  these  Great  Indian 
writings  proceed  from  minds  purified,  delivered  from  the  ordinary  cares 
and  earthly  troubles,  dwelling  for  ever  in  a  region  of  peace  and  purity :" — 
NEW  ACE. 


\ 


200  • 

(IN  PREPARATION.) 

SYADVADA-MANJAEI. 

(Copy-right  made  over  to  the  Government    Educational  Dept.,  Bombay.) 

A     Manual     of  Jaina.  Philosophy.     Sanskrit   text, 
with  copious  Notes,  and  Introduction. 

(  IN   PREPARATION.  ) 


(  Comprising. ) 


Hinduism  A  paper  con- 
tributed to  and  read  at  the 
Parliament  of  Religions;  pub- 
lished in  the  first  volume  of 
0  The  World's  Parliament  of  Re- 
ligions." 

"A  profound  Philosopher."  —  Chi- 
cago Herald. 

The   Pnra'nas  (Published 

in  Transactions  of  the  Inter- 
national Congress  of  Orientalists, 
held  at  Stockholm,  1889).  The 
Puranas  explained  in  the  light 
of  Symbology  as  against  Philo- 


"  The  paper  is  learned  and  forcible, 
but  ia  even  more  extraordinary  for 
the  perfection  of  its  English.  Such 
rich,  mellow,  varied,  delicately-tint- 
ed diction  might  well  be  the  envy 
of  a  cultivated  native."  —  The  Path. 

Jainism  and  Bra'hma- 
nism  (A  paper  read  at  the 
International  Congress  of  Orien- 
talists, London,  1891  and  award- 
ed a  Certificate  of  Merit). 

The    Advaita     philoso- 


phy of  S'ankara  (contributed 
to  the  Oriental  Journal,  Vienna.) 

Essays  and  Translations: 

Idol-Worship,  Sanskaras,  Gra- 
ruda-Pur&na,  etc.,  and  trans- 
lations of  Yajnavalkya  -  Yoga- 
Samhita,  SNruti-Sarasamuddha- 
rana,  etc.,- (contributed  to  '  The 
Oriental  Department '  —  N  e  w 
York.) 

Suggestions  ( proposing 
changes  in  -the-text-bpoks  of  the 
Government  Educational  Depart- 
ment.) 

Letters  on  Widow  Re- 
marriage (Contributed  to  the 
Indian  Papers.) 

Necessity  of  Spiritual 
Culture  (  a  paper  read  before 
the  'Young  Men's  Association,' 
Baroda.) 

Contributions  to  the 
Theosophist,  the  Doctrine  of 
M£ya ;  Theism  and  Pantheism, 
etc ;  and  other  Miscellaneous 
writings. 


201 


GUJARAT!    BOOKS. 


(  Poems.) 
MALATI-MADHAVA     (  Transla- 
tion.) 

UTTARA-RAMA-CHARITA  (do.) 
IUNTA(APlay.) 
PURVA-DARS'ANA  (a  brief  out- 
line of  Indian  history.) 
NARI-PRATISTHA  (on  the  posi- 
tion of  woman.) 
PRBMA-JIVANA  (Poems.) 
SIDDHANTA-SARA       ( Philoso- 
phy-) 

PRANAVINIMAYA  (Mesmerism.) 
SANKSHIPTA-SUVAKYA  (Trans- 
lation.) 

'KAVYA-MAYUKHA      (  Poetics.  ) 

In  preparation. 
THE  SUDARS'ANA     ( Periodical 

Vol.  XII.) 
BALA-ViLAsA  (Moral  essays.) 

PARAMARGA-DARS'ANA    ( Eeli- 

gious  essays.) 
<  /HARITRA  (Character.) 
ABHEDORMI  (Poems.) 
GUL.AB-SINHA  (Novel.)In  press. 
ATMANIMAJJANA  (Poems.) 

BRAHMNAS       OF      GUJARAT 
(Essay.) 

THE  BHAGAVAD-GITA  (Transla- 
tion and  commentary.) 
CRITICISM  (Essay.) 
PANCHAS'ATI  (Philosophy.) 


NYAYA  (Inductive  logic.)    In 
preparaiou. 

Works   undertaken   and  prepared  on 
behalf  of  H.  H.  the  Maharajah 

Gaekivar  of  Baroda  : — 
(Translations  from    Sanskrit.) 


DVYAS'RAYA  (History.) 
BHOJA-PRABANDHA  (Poetry.) 
CHATURVINSHATI-  PRABANDHA 

(History.) 
VIKRAMA-CHARITA  (Tales.) 

SAM-lDHI-S'ATAKA       (  PhiloSO- 


ANUBHAVA-PRADIPIK!  (Philo- 

sophy.) 
S'RtiTi-SiRA  -  SAMUDDHARANA 

(Philosophy.) 

BUDDHI-SAGARA  (Morals.) 
TARKA-PARIBHASH!   (Logic.) 

GORAKSHA-S'ATAKA  (  Yoffa.  ) 

SHAD-DARS'ANA-SAJIUCHCHAYA 
(Philosophy.) 

SlRA-SANGRAtfA  ;  No.  I  (Abs- 

tract of  historical  works.) 
SARA-SANGRAHA  ;  No.  II  (do.) 
PATTAN  BHANDARAS  (Catalo- 
.    gue  of  books.) 
VASTUPALA-CHARITA  (Biogra- 


KUMARAPALA-CHARITA     (  Bio- 

graphy.)     ^ 

SAMARADITYA  CHARITA  (Rele- 
.  gious  history.)    Incomplete. 


202 


YOGA-BINDU  {Yoga.) 

ANEAKANTA-VADA-P  R  A  V  E  S'A 

(Philosophy.) 


(Old  Gujrati  works  edited.) 


PANCHOPAKHYANA     (Transla- 
tion.) 


(Sanskirt  texts  edited.) 


TARKA-PARIRHASHA  (Logic.) 

ALAMKARA-CHUDAMANI  (Rhe- 
toric.) Incomplete. 

JYOTISHKARANDA  (Astronomy.) 
Incomplete. 

VRTTARATNAKARA  WITH  NEW 
COMMENTARY  (Prosody.) 

S'lSUPALA-VADHA    WITH     NEW 

COM.   (Poem.)    Incomplete. 

S'RNQARATILAKA    OF     RUDRA 

(Poetry.)  Incomplete. 
RASAMANJARI  (Rhetoric.) 
CHHANDONUS'ASANA  (Prosody.) 

Incomplete. 
NAISHADHA  WITH    NEW  COM. 

(Poem.)    Incomplete. 
SHADDARS'ANA  -  SAMUCHOHAY  A 

(Philosophy.) 


-  RATKAKARAYATA- 
(Philosophy.)      In- 
complete. 

ANEKANTAVADA-PRAVES'A 
(Philosophy.) 

ABHINANDANA-KAVYA  (Poem.) 

Incomplete. 


Compilations  from     English 
(Jnanamanjusha-series.) 


CHETANA-S  'ASTRA  (Psycho- 


{Law  Committee). 


ViVADA-TANDAVA     (law)    In 
preparation. 

Translations  undertaken  and  executed 

on  behalf  of  H.  H.  the  Rao 

of  Kutch. 


RHETORIC. 

CULTURE  AND  SELF-CULTURE. 


Work  underken  on  behalf  of  the 

Gujarat  Vernacular  Society, 

Ahmedabad. 

Copy-right  of  the  first  1000  made 
over  to  the  Society.) 


(Deductive  logic.) 


BOOKS  FOR  SALE. 


(The  prices  include  Indian  Postage.) 


ENGLISH  SERIES. 


Bs.  a. 

Isavasyopnishad      ...       ...  o  12 

Tattva-Kaumudi  (Sankhya)     2    0 

Gheranda  Samhita ...  o  12 

The  Twelve  Principal  Upanishads ...       ...  4    Q 

Monism  or  Advaitism     2    0 

The  Mandukyopanishad,  with  Gaudapada's  Karikas     1  12 

The  Yogasara-Sangraha,  or  the  Philosophy  of  Yoga-Shaetra   ...  1    0 

A  Guide  to  Theosophy      2    9 

The  Yoga  Sutras  of  Patanjali 1    8 

Bhagawat-Gita,  translated  by  Mr.  Charles  Wilkins 1    2 

Discourses  on  The  Bhagawat-Gita 0  14 

Prabodha  Chandrodaya  Nataka ...    • 0    9 

The  Purpose  of  Theosophy      ;  o    5 

Sankhya  Karika     2    6 

Yoga  Philosophy 0  10 

A  Compendium  .of  The  Raja-Yoga  Philosophy ...  112 

Letters  to  an  Indian  Raja,  by  an  Indian  Eecluse 1    1 

Hatha  Yoga  Pradipika "  ...       ...  l    8 

The  Uttar  Gita       0    4 

The  Philosophy  of  Brahmanical  Sandhya  and  Gayatri      ...  0    6 

The  "  Mahimnastotra " 0    2 

A  ho  Higher  Life,  or  Rules  of  Raj  a- Yoga          ...        0    2 

An    Introduction  to  the  Study  of  the  Yoga  Aphorisms  of 

Patanjali 0     4 

An  Introduction  to  the  Mantra  Shastra 0    6 

A  Collection  of  all  the  Writings  of  Mr.  SnbbaBao  ..*        ...  2    Q 

The  Bhagavat  Gita,  Translated  by  Mrs.  Annie  Besant        2    0 

Do.                  do.        cheap    edition        0    8 


204 

Tte.  a. 

The  Seven  Principles  of  Man,  by  Mrs.  Annie  Besant       1    0 

Reincarnation  •                                         do.          1    0 

Death— and  After                                     do.           1    0 

Birth  and  Evolution  of  the  Soul            do.          1    0 

Karma                                                     do.          ...'      l    0 

The  Theosophical  Essays                       do.           2    0 

The  Chaldsen  Oracles  of  Zoroaster    2    8 

Indian  Palmistry,  by  J.  B.  Dale...        ...  1    0 

The  Astral  Plan-e,  by  C.  W.  Leadbeater 1    0 

The  Path  of  Initiation,  by  A.  P.  Sinnett        1    0 

The  Lunar  Pitris                           do 1    0 

The  Mental  Cure  with  Notes,  by  Dr.  W.  F.  Evans 2    0 

The  Mental  Medicine                          do.      .        2    8 

The  Divine  Law  of  Cure                        do.              2    0 

The  Primeval  Mind  Cure                    do.              2    0 

Soul  and  Body       .                                do.              l    8 

The  Esoteric ".        1    o 

Dreams            , 1    o 

In  the  Outer  Court i  u 

The  Self  and  its  Sheaths         0  H 

The  Path  of  Discipleship         1    6 

The  Building  of  the  Kosmos 1    0 

• 

Tc  be  had  of  Mr:  Tookaram  Tatya,  65,  Esplanade  Road, 
Fort;  Bombay. 


University  of  California 

SOUTHERN  REGIONAL  LIBRARY  FACILITY 

305  De  Neve  Drive  -  Parking  Lot  17  •  Box  951388 

LOS  ANGELES,  CALIFORNIA  90095-1388 

Return  this  material  to  the  library  from  which  it  was  borrowed. 


J-J-2CC-3 
SRLF 

2  WEEK  LC 


A     000  401  160     7 


Ui 


