$£  ,  STT5T  «Tf  Tf  T  WT^ft  shot^h  araroft  M 
fig  Laf  Bahadur  Shastric  Aademy  #£ 

2?  of  Administration  £C 

if  n*  2 

JCi  MUSSOORIE  Jj 

j£  SRPFT*nr  ft 

g  LIBRARY  a 

&  sreTfcr  *TW  i^yya —  I Y\  w< 

Accession  No . . l.U.f:.^ 

«nf  #^TT  .ft 

-  jc . .l&l:..4: . Jjjl 

,  ft 

^  Book  No . . 


THE  INTEGRAL  PHILOSOPHY 
OF  SRI  AUROBINDO 


AURO^rtDO 


THE  INTEGRAL  PHILOSOPHY 
*  OF 

SRI  AUROBINDO 


A  Commemorative  Symposium 


EDITI  D  BY 

HARIDAS  CHAUDHURI 
FREDERIC  SPIEGELBERG 


Ruskin  blouse 

GEORGE  ALLEN  &  UNWIN  LTD 


museum  srHrri  London 


FIRST  PUBLISHED  IN  i960 


This  book  is  copyright  under  the  Berne  Convention. 
A  part  from  any  fair  dealing  for  the  purpose  of  private 
study,  research,  criticism  or  review ,  as  permitted 
under  the  Copyright  Act ,  1956,  no  portion  may  be 
reproduced  by  any  process  without  written  permission. 
Enquiries  should  be  addressed  to  the  publisher. 

©  Cultural  Integration  Fellowship,  San  Francisco, 
i960 


PRINTED  IN  GREAT  BRITAIN 

in  11  on  12  point  Old  Style  type 

BY  UNWIN  BROTHERS  LIMITED 
WOKING  AND  LONDON 


TO  SRI  AUROBINDO 

Whose  w&rd  wai  the  voice  of  the  dynamic  world  spirit 
Whose  vision  was  the  light  of  the  cosmic  truth 


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 


Grateful  acknowledgement  is  made  to  the  following  publishers  for 

the  inclusion  in  this  volume  of  excerpts  from  the  publications 

indicated: 

Alfred  A.  Knopf  Inc.,  New  York,  and  George  Allen  &  Unwin  Ltd., 
London:  Oswald  Spengler,  The  Decline  of  the  West,  1945. 

Sri  Aurobindo  Ashram  Press,  Pondicherry:  .Sri  Aurobindo,  Last 
Poems,  1952;  Letters  of  Sri  Aurobindo,  First  Series,  1950;  The 
Renaissance  in  India,  1946;  Savitri,  1954.  Haridas  Chaudhuri, 
The  Philosophy  of  Integralism,  1954. 

Sri  Aurobindo  Ashram,  Pondicherry,  and  E.  P.  Dutton  &  Co.,  New 
York:  Sri  Aurobindo,  The  Life  Divine,  1953:  Essays  on  The  Gita, 
1950;  The  Human  Cycle,  1949;  The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity,  1953. 

The  Beacon  Press,  Boston:  Pitirim  A.  Sorokin,  The  Ways  and  Power 
of  Love,  1954. 

The  Commonwealth  Fund,  New  York,  and  Harvard  University 
Press,  Mass.:  Andras  Angyal,  Foundations  for  a  Science  of  Per¬ 
sonality,  1941. 

The  Duke  University  Press,  N.C.:  Andras  Angyal,  ‘A  Theoretical 
Model  for  Personality  Studies’,  in  Journal  of  Personality,  Septem¬ 
ber  1951. 

Harper  &  Brothers,  New  York:  S.  Radhakrishnan,  The  Bhagavad- 
gita,  1949. 

The  Macmillan  Co.,  London  and  New  York:  F.  S.  C.  Northrop, 
The  Meeting  of  East  and  West,  1950;  Howard  H.  Brinton,  The 
Mystic  Will,  1930;  Milton,  Paradise  Lost,  1934. 

Pantheon  Books,  New  York:  C.  G.  Jung,  Psychology  and  Religion, 
I958, 

John  Wiley  &  Sons,  New  Y’ork:  Calvin  S.  Hall  and  Gardner  Lindzey 
Theories  of  Personality,  1957. 


PREFACE 


The  idea  of  this  Commemorative  Symposium  on  the  integral 
philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo  was  first  conceived  while  celebrating 
his  birthday  anniversary  at  San  Francisco  Ashram  in  August  1957. 
It  was  felt  that  the  time  was  ripe  for  the  message  of  Sri  Aurobindo 
to  be  increasingly  known  to  the  wider  public  in  different  parts  of  the 
world.  It  is  a  message  which  silently  took  shape  over  a  long  period 
of  time  in  the  medium  of  a  life  such  as  transcended  all  geographical 
and  national  boundaries,  and  unconditionally  offered  itself  at  the 
altar  of  human  welfare,  or  rather  at  the  altar  of  the  Divine  in  human 
evolution.  The  message  is  one  of  human  unity,  and  of  ‘the  out- 
flowering  of  the  Divine  in  collective  humanity'.  Occasioned  by  an 
intermingling  of  the  two  broad  streams  of  culture,  eastern  and 
western,  it  envisages  a  new  world-order  of  peace,  progress  and 
international  harmony,  broadbased  upon  a  radical  change  of  man's 
collective  consciousness.  It  indicates  the  lines  along  which  the 
unification  of  all  human  races  is  to  be  achieved  through  increasing 
participation  in  the  creative  adventure  of  the  world-spirit.  It  utters 
forth  the  secret  of  collective  and  co-operative  living  toward  the 
fulfilment  of  the  ultimate  destiny  of  man. 

The  present  symposium  consists  of  various  articles  contributed  by 
some  eminent  scholars  of  Aurobindonian  literature.  It  cannot 
possibly  claim  to  cover  all  the  aspects  of  Sri  Aurobindo's  teaching. 
Nor  is  the  list  of  contributors  included  herein  to  be  taken  in  any  way 
exhaustive  of  the  vast  and  ever-growing  volume  of  scholarship  in 
the  field.  Different  contributors  had  full  freedom  in  expressing  their 
own  interpretation  and  evaluation  of  the  approach  and  outlook 
which  has  now  come  to  be  known  as  integral  nondualism  ( piirna - 
advaita ).  Editors  have  proceeded  on  the  assumption  that  truth  in  its 
creative  aspect  lies,  not  in  reproducing  a  static  thought  structure, 
but  in  the  free  self-expression  of  different  individuals  in  the  applica¬ 
tion  and  evaluation  of  a  dynamic  spiritual  message. 

The  symposium  has  five  parts:  Philosophy,  Epistemology  and 
Psychology,  Yoga  and  Ethics,  Literature,  and  Miscellaneous.  The 
part  called  ‘Miscellaneous'  includes  tributes  to  Sri  Aurobindo,  an 
outline  of  the  historical  setting  in  which  his  message  was  formulated, 
his  political  thoughts  on  freedom  and  world  unity,  and  a  brief 
sketch  of  his  life.  ( 

Dr  Frederic  Spiegelberg's  article  'Sri  Aurobindo  and  Existential¬ 
ism'  is  based  upon  one  of  the  three  talks  which  he  gave  at  San 
Francisco  Ashram  on  August  21,  1958,  in  connection  with  the 
celebration  of  Sri  Aurobindo's  birthday.  Dr  Pitirim  A.  Sorokin's 


II 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 

article,  The  Integral  Yoga  of  Sri  Aurobindo',  is  taken  from  his 
book,  The  Ways  and  Power  of  Love  (Boston:  The  Beacon  Press, 
1:954),  pp.  371-6.  Editors  wish  to  take  this  opportunity  of  expressing 
their  grateful  thanks  to  Dr  Sorokin  and  his  publisher  for  their  kind 
permission  in  this  respect.  Professor  Richard  P.  Marsh's  paper, 
The  Organismic  Psychology  of  Andras  Angyal  in  Relation  to  Sri 
Aurobindo's  Philosophy  of  Integral  Nondualism',  represents  the 
essay  which  won  him  the  first  prize  in  the  Aurobindo  Essay  Contest 
which  was  held  in  1958  among  the  students  of  Indian  philosophy  in 
Northern  California.  Sri  A.  B.  Purani’s  brief  life-sketch,  'Sri 
Aurobindo',  was  first  broadcast  from  the  B.B.C.,  London,  in 
December  1955,  and  has  been  incorporated  here  by  courtesy  of  the 
B.B.C. 

No  words  would  be  adequate  to  express  the  gratitude  of  the 
editors  to  the  eminent  contributors  who  have  most  graciously 
co-operated  with  them  by  joining  this  symposium.  Editors  are  also 
grateful  to  Cultural  Integration  Fellowship,  San  Francisco,  for 
sponsoring  the  symposium.  Finally,  sincere  thanks  are  due  to  Bina 
Chaudhuri,  Esther  Weissman,  Bernice  Littlewood,  Myrtle  Vepsala, 
and  Blanche  Beat,  who  have  assisted  in  various  ways  in  the  prepara¬ 
tion  of  this  volume,  and  to  the  Mother  of  the  Sri  Aurobindo 
Ashram  of  Pondicherry  for  permission  to  quote  extensively  from 
the  works  of  Sri  Aurobindo. 


HARIDAS  CHAUDHURI 

San  Francisco  Frederic  spiegelberg 

October  15,  1958 


12 


CONTENTS 


page 

PREFACE  BY  THE  EDITORS  II 

PART  one:  PHILOSOPHY 

1.  haridas  CHAUDHURL'i'fe  Integral  Philosophy 

of  Sri  A  urobindo  1 7 

2.  satischandra  chatterjee:  Mind  and 

Supermind  in  Sri  Aurobindo’s  1  nlegralism  35 

3.  Frederic  spiegelberg:  Sri  Aurobindo  and 

Existentialism  47 

4.  s.  k.  maitka:  Sri  Aurobindo  and  Spongier: 

Comparison  between  The  Integral  and  The  Plural¬ 
istic  Philosophy  of  History  60 

5.  CHARLES  A.  MOORE:  Sri  Aurobindo  on  East 

and  West  Hi 

6.  k.  c.  varadaciiari  :  Sri  Aurobindo  and  the 

Future  of  Philosophical  Studies  111 

7.  ernest  wood:  The  Concept  of  Integral  Unity  120 

8.  R  a  y m  0  n  d  f  .  p  1  p e  r  :  Cosmic  1  ntegration  124 

g.  R.  s.  srivastava:  The  Integral  ist  Theory  of 

Evolution  133 

10.  n.  A.  nik  am  :  The  Problem  of  Creation:  Concepts 

of  May d  and  Lila  143 

11.  ruth  reyna:  1  ntcgralism:  A  Philosophic 

Perennis  1 49 

12.  j.n.mohanty:  I  ntcgralism  and  Modern  Philo¬ 
sophical  A  nthropology  1 55 

PART  two:  epistemology  and  psychology 

13.  ninian  smart:  Integral  Knowledge  and  the 

Four  Theories  of  Existence  167 

14.  h.  p.  sullivan:  The  Integration  of  Knowledge  174 

15.  IN  DR  A  sen  :  The  Indian  Approach  to  Psychology  184 

16.  RICHARD  p.  marsh:  The  Organismic  Psycho¬ 
logy  of  Andr as  Angyal  in  Relation  to  Sri  A  uro¬ 
bindo*  s  Philosophy  of  Integral  Nondualism 


192 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 


part  three:  yoga  and  ethics 

17.  pitirim  a.  sorokin:  The  Integral  Yoga  of 

Sri  Aurobindo  205 

18.  rishabhchand:  The  Philosophical  Basis  of 

Integral  Yoga  213 

19.  hajimenakamura:  Practice  of  Selfless  A  ction  223 

20.  anilbaran  roy:  Gita,  the  World  Scripture  231 

21.  JAY  R.  mccullough:  The  Integral  Approach 

in  Sri  A  urobindo  and  Jacob  Boehme  239 

part  four:  literature 

22.  K.  D.  sethna:  The  Poet  of  Integralism  257 

23.  arab  in  da  basu:  The  Integration  of  Spiritual 

Experience  270 

24.  JUDITH  m.  tyberg  ( j  yotipri y a)  :  The 

Drama  of  Integral  Self-Realization  284 

part  five:  miscellaneous 

25.  swami  sivananda:  Sri  Aurobindo:  The  Con¬ 

summate  Expression  of  the  Indian  Spirit  of 
Synthesis  297 

26.  t.  m.  p.  mahadevan:  The  Significance  of  Sri 

A  urobindo  299 

27.  sisir  kumar  mitra:  The  Nineteenth-Century 

Upsurge  303 

28.  Sidney  kartus:  World  Unity  313 

29.  taraknath  das:  The  Political  Philosophy  of 

Sri  Aurobindo  321 

30.  a.  b.  purani:  Sri  Aurobindo:  A  Brief  Life- 

Sketch  332 

notes  on  the  contributors  341 

bibliography  :  A  Complete  List  of  all  the  Published 

Books  of  Sri  Aurobindo  in  English  348 


PART  ONE 


PHILOSOPHY 


I 


HARIDAS CHAUDHURI 

The  Integral  Philosophj  of  Sri  Aurobindo 


The  philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo  is  all-comprehending  in  its 
integration  of  the  past,  and  prophetic  in  its  vision  of  the  future. 
As  a  connected  view  of  the  totality  of  existence,  it  brings  to 
light  the  ultimate  unifying  principle  of  life.  On  the  basis  of  a 
balanced  appreciation  of  the  multifarious  values  of  life,  it  shows 
how  to  reconcile  the  various  conflicts  of  our  human  existence. 
Out  of  a  broad  survey  of  cosmic  evolution  it  evolves  a  creative 
idea  which  bids  fair  to  impart  a  new  rhythm  to  the  historical 
order.  In  reaffirming  the  eternal  truths  of  ancient  wisdom  in  the 
context  of  our  present-day  problems,  it  creates  new  values  and 
opens  up  new  vistas  of  human  progress.  In  an  endeavour  to 
meet  the  challenge  of  the  present  age,  it  gives  a  new  dynamic 
form  to  the  spiritual  heritage  of  the  human  race — a  unified  and 
integrated  form  to  the  highest  cultural  values  of  East  and  West. 
With  a  penetrative  insight  into  the  profound  meaning  of  life 
it  lays  the  foundation  for  a  complete  art  of  harmonious  and 
creative  living. 

When  a  great  idea  is  bom,  it  shows  limitless  capacity  for 
transcending  fixed  moulds  of  thought,  and  for  reconciling 
diverse  viewpoints.  It  goes  on  growing  and  expanding,  refusing 
to  be  confined  within  the  stone  walls  of  any  rigidly  fixed 
thought  structure.  As  a  living  spiritual  force  it  goes  on  fertiliz¬ 
ing  the  spiritual  soil  of  the  world,  giving  rise  to  varied  forms 
of  practically  useful  self-expression.  Remaining  the  same  in  its 
central  truth-vision  it  may  undergo  changes  and  modifications 
with  the  passing  of  time  in  accordance  with  the  divergent 
needs  of  the  human  psyche  and  the  changing  requirements  of 

*7 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 


social  growth.  Sri  Aurobindo  has  given  to  the  world  such  a 
living  spiritual  force,  a  dynamic  truth-vision. 

We  arc  living  today  at  a  critical  juncture  of  human  history. 
It  is  a  transitional  phase  of  the  development  of  human  culture. 
The  traditional  cultural  values  of  the  past  have  been  thrown 
into  the  melting  pot,  creating  a  large  spiritual  vacuum  in  the 
minds  of  thinking  people.  But  nothing  new  and  positively 
satisfying  to  the  human  soul  has  clearly  emerged  to  fill  the 
vacuum.  There  are  some  who  think  that  philosophy  is  a  kind  of 
sublimated  mythology.  Some  maintain  that  philosophy, 
dealing  as  it  does  with  such  trans-empirical  concepts  as  God, 
soul,  immortality,  essence,  etc.,  is  a  mighty  fabric  of  meaning¬ 
less  propositions  or  contentless  emotional  ejaculations.  Some 
again  hold  that  philosophy  is  a  kind  of  escape  mechanism  for 
those  who  shudder  to  face  the  responsibilities  of  independent 
and  mature  living.  But  after  everything  has  been  said  against 
philosophy,  the  fact  remains  that  the  most  glorious  periods  of 
human  history  have  been  those  which  were  animated  by  a 
lofty  world-view  ( Weltanschauung ),  inspiring  men  to  high 
creative  endeavour  and  to  noble  deeds  of  self-sacrifice  at 
the  altar  of  truth  and  beauty  and  justice.  Consciously  or 
unconsciously,  every  man  is  guided  by  some  kind  of  philosophic 
outlook,  whether  positive  or  negative,  self-coherent  or  inchoate 
and  incoherent.  Only  a  satisfactory  world-view  can  sustain 
man  through  all  the  stonn  and  stress  of  life,  release  the  most 
creative  energies  of  his  soul,  and  channel  them  toward  the 
fulfilment  of  the  higher  ends  of  evolution.  As  Dr  Albert 
Schweitzer  puts  it:  "...  all  human  progress  depends  on  progress 
in  its  theory  of  the  universe,  whilst,  conversely,  decadence  is 
conditioned  by  a  similar  decadence  in  this  theory.  Our  loss  of 
real  civilization  is  due  to  our  lack  of  a  theory  of  the  universe/1 
Now,  a  soul-satisfying  theory  of  the  universe  or  world-view 
has  to  come  to  terms  with  the  recent  developments  in  science 
and  psychology,  and  with  recent  changes  in  man’s  social 
structure.  So,  what  we  most  imperatively  need  today  is  a 
comprehensive  and  dynamic  world-view  based  upon  a  critical 
revaluation  of  the  values  of  life  and  a  thinking  reconsideration 

1  Albert  Schweitzer,  The  Philosophy  of  Civilization  (London:  A.  &  C. 
Black  Ltd.,  1950),  p.  xii. 


18 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 

of  the  fundamental  concepts  of  ethics  and  religion.  The 
philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo  is  a  world-view  of  precisely  that 
nature  which  takes  into  account  the  challenge  of  the  present 
age,  the  variety  of  human  experience,  the  fundamental  demands 
of  the  human  psyche,  and  the  indications  of  the  evolving 
world-spirit.  An  outline  of  that  philosophy  will  be  briefly 
presented  here  by  the  writer  in  his  own  way. 

integral  nondualism  (puknadvaita) 

The  philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo  may  aptly  be  described  as 
integral  nondualism  (purna-advaita) ,  or  integral  idealism 
(purna-vijnana) ,  or  just  integralism  (purnavada).  Nondualism 
is  the  dominant  keynote  of  Indian  culture,  and,  on  the  whole, 
of  Oriental  culture.  It  is  prompted  by  an  intuitive  approach  to 
life  and  existence — an  approach  which  seeks  to  understand 
reality  in  its  undivided  wholeness  and  fundamental  oneness. 
Differences  which  we  observe  are  looked  upon  as  developments 
taking  place  within  the  framework  of  the  all-inclusive  unity  of 
the  Real.  Turning  to  the  West  we  find  that  dualism  has  been 
for  long  the  dominant  keynote  of  Western  philosophic  thinking. 
As  Dr  Schweitzer  rightly  says:  'That  (the  world-view)  of  India 
is  monistic  and  mystical,  ours  is  dualist ic  and  doctrinaire/1 
The  dualistic  outlook  of  European  thought  has  been  prompted 
by  the  rationalistic  approach  to  life  and  existence — the 
approach  which  stresses  the  relational  or  logical  structure  of 
reality,  and  converts  the  rationally  defined  polarities  of 
existence  into  separate  entities.  For  instance,  spirit  and  nature, 
god  and  world,  mind  and  matter,  good  and  evil,  the  divine  and 
the  undivine,  and  the  like,  are,  to  the  rationalistic-dualistic 
way  of  thinking,  separate  metaphysical  principles  and  eternally 
fixed  values.  Integral  nondualism  integrates  the  significant 
distinctions  of  ethics,  religion,  logic  and  metaphysics  in  its 
nondualistic  philosophical  outlook,  without  deprecating  their 
value  and  importance.  It  reconciles  the  dualities  of  thought  and 
existence  in  the  unity  of  integral  experience,  integral  living, 
and  the  integral  sweep  of  cosmic  evolution.  According  to 

1  Albert  Schweitzer,  Indian  Thought  and  Its  Development  (London:  A.  &  C. 
Black  Ltd.,  1951),  p.  10. 


19 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 

rationalistic  dualism  the  value-distinctions  of  reality  and 
appearance,  good  and  evil,  god  and  devil,  etc.  are  eternally 
fixed  and  absolute,  whereas  according  to  integral  nondualism 
such  distinctions  are  valid  but  not  eternally  fixed — they  are 
real,  but  not  indicative  of  any  ultimate  division  in  existence. 
Fully  acknowledging  the  validity  of  the  ethico-logical  approach, 
integralism  sublates  it  in  a  higher  standpoint  of  identity- 
consciousness  (advaita-jndna) . 

THE  BASIC  CONVICTION  OF  NONDUALISM 

Common  to  all  forms  of  nondualism  is  the  conviction  that 
reality  in  its  inmost  essence  is  non-dual,  non-verbal,  and 
non-concept ual.  It  is  indeterminable  and  logically  indefinable, 
but  accessible  to  direct  experience  on  the  non-verbal  level,  to 
the  penetrative  insight  of  spiritual  intuition  born  of  the  inte¬ 
gration  of  human  personality.  As  non-dual,  reality  is  beyond 
the  scope  of  application  of  all  human  categories  including  that 
of  number.  Strictly  speaking,  monism,  unitarianism,  trini- 
tarianism,  pluralism,  etc.,  are  our  different  human  ways  of 
intellectual  comprehension  of  the  various  aspects  of  reality. 
Even  monism,  which  utters  a  profound  truth  in  proclaiming 
the  fundamental  unity  of  existence,  commits  the  rationalistic 
fallacy  of  identifying  reality  with  a  conceptually  formulated 
principle  or  intellectual  scheme.  Rationalistic  monism  interprets 
the  essence  of  reality  in  terms  of  the  concept  of  unity,  and 
endows  the  One  with  a  determinate  logical  or  dialectical 
structure,  or  a  sum  of  well-defined  powers  and  qualities. 
Nondualism  is  opposed  to  such  identification  of  reality  with  a 
determinate  principle  of  unity.  The  conceptually  formulated 
One,  whether  the  infinite  substance  of  Spinoza,  or  the  absolute 
idea  of  Hegel,  represents  only  a  particular  metaphysical 
standpoint,  a  specific  rationalistic  way — one  among  many 
ways — of  comprehending  the  nature  of  reality.  According  to 
nondualism  ( advaita ),  reality  is  beyond  one  and  many,  beyond 
substance  and  quality,  beyond  cause  and  effect,  and  beyond 
any  rigidly  conceived  thought  structure.  It  is  not  to  be  equated 
with  any  conceptual  formulation  or  logical  construction,  or 
system  of  words  and  symbols.  It  is  this  conviction  which  is 


20 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 


expressed  in  the  concept  of  Nirguna  Brahman  in  Vedanta,  in 
the  concept  of  Sunyata  in  Buddhism,  in  the  concept  of 
Tattvatita  in  Tantra,  in  the  concept  of  Tao  in  Chinese  philo¬ 
sophy,  and  in  the  concept  of  Zen  in  Japan.  Sri  Aurobindo  shares 
the  same  conviction  and  holds  that  reality  is  in  essence  inde¬ 
terminable,  Reality  is  ‘indefinable  and  inconceivable  by  finite 
and  defining  Mind;  it  is  ineffable  by  a  mind-created  speech;  it 
is  describable  neither  by  our  negations,  neti  neti — for  we 
cannot  limit  it  by  saying  it  is  not  this,  it  is  not  that — nor  by 
our  affirmations,  for  we  cannot  fix  it  by  saying  it  is  this,  it  is 
that,  Hi  ill,1  The  concept  of  the  indeterminable  implies  that  no 
metaphysical  system  or  conceptual  scheme  can  be  equated 
with  ultimate  reality  and  regarded  as  the  last  word  of  wisdom. 
It  implies  that  the  multiform  fullness  of  reality  can  hardly  be 
exhausted  in  any  logically  differentiated  system  of  terms  and 
relations,  however  comprehensive.  That  would  make  reality 
limited.  Nor  can  reality  be  regarded  as  'a  vacancy  of  pure 
existence  ...  a  mystery  of  infinite  blankness  ...  a  supreme 
sum  of  negations’,2 3  or  a  colourless  and  featureless  void  incapable 
of  self-determination.  That  would  make  reality  limited  too, 
identified  with  a  determinate  notion  of  the  human  mind. 

The  nondualistic  view  of  reality  as  the  indeterminable  and 
inexhaustible  plenum  of  pure  experience  has  been  subjected  to 
varying  degrees  of  misunderstanding  and  inadequate  compre¬ 
hension.  It  has  been  interpreted  by  some  as  the  sum-total  of 
the  sensuous  world  disclosed  in  its  not-yet-differentiated  all- 
embracing  oneness  to  man’s  aesthetic  intuition.  Professor 
F.  S.  C.  Northrop  says:  ‘Brahman  in  Hinduism  is  the  same 
immediately  apprehended,  undifferentiated  aesthetic  con¬ 
tinuum  which  was  found  to  be  Tao  in  Taoism,  jen  (human¬ 
heartedness)  in  Confucianism,  and  Nirvana  in  Buddhism. ’3 
Further  on  he  says:  ‘Chit  or  Atman,  the  undifferentiated 
aesthetic  continuum,  is  in  the  immediately  apprehended 
natural  object  in  its  empirically  given  aesthetic  character  as 
much  as  it  is  in  mind.’4  Now,  Professor  Northrop  is  perfectly 


1  Sri  Aurobindo,  The  Life  Divine  (Pondicherry,  Sri  Aurobindo  International 

University  Centre,  1955),  P-  292-  2  Ibid.,  p.  291. 

3  F.  S.  C.  Northrop,  The  Meeting  of  East  and  West  (New  York:  The 
Macmillan  Company,  1950),  p.  367.  4  Ibid.,  p.  368. 


21 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 

right  in  his  contention  that  Oriental  culture  is  nondualistic  in 
its  outlook,  emphasizing  as  it  does  the  fundamental  oneness  of 
existence.  It  is  also  true  that  the  basic  unity  of  existence  is 
revealed  to  some  kind  of  immediate  experience.  But  that 
immediate  experience  is  not  sensuous  or  aesthetic  intuition 
conceived  as  the  prius  of  logical  differentiation.  It  is  not  sentient 
immediacy  but  some  kind  of  supersensuous  and  supra-rational 
immediacy  in  which  sense  and  intellect  are  consummated  in  a 
higher  unity  of  consciousness.  It  is  that  deeper  spiritual 
intuition  variously  called  bodhi,  prajha,  Brahma-jnana ,  etc., 
in  which  the  immediately  apprehended  datum  and  the  media¬ 
tion  of  rational  thinking  are  both  transcended  and  transformed. 
Likewise,  the  basic  unity  of  existence  revealed  to  such  spiritual 
insight  is  not  a  continuum  of  sense-experience  but  that  higher 
unity  in  which  the  sensuous  total  and  the  differentiations  of 
the  conceptual  understanding  are  brought  together  in  a  higher 
synthesis.  Professor  Northrop  is  grievously  mistaken  in 
interpreting  the  central  concept  of  nondualism  as  The  imme¬ 
diately  apprehended  aesthetic  continuum’.  Vedanta  clearly 
and  emphatically  maintains:  'Brahman  is  unseen  but  seeing, 
unheard  but  hearing,’1  that  it  cannot  be  the  object  or  datum  of 
any  sensuous  intuition,  because  it  'cannot  be  seen  or  seized’.2 
The  immediate  datum  of  sensuous  apprehension  ( idam ),  as 
distinguished  from  the  knower  [aham),  has  been  called  in 
Hindu  philosophy  Prakrti  (the  matrix  of  becoming).  Purusa, 
Atman,  Brahman,  etc.  (pure  existence)  is  that  deeper  unity  in 
which  the  dualistic  experience  of  knower  and  known,  self  and 
not-self,  aham  and  idam,  is  transcended  and  integrated. 
Brahman  is  not  to  be  identified  either  with  the  undifferentiated 
aesthetic  continuum  or  with  the  theoretical  continuum  of 
modern  experimental  physics.  Brahman  is  pure  existence  or 
ultimate  reality.  Both  the  aesthetic  continuum  and  the 
theoretical  continuum  are  different  phases  in  the  creative¬ 
evolutionary  self-expression  of  Brahman. 

In  recent  times  Dr  Carl  G.  Jung  has  made  a  signal  contribu- 

1  Swami  Vireswarananda,  trans.,  Brahma-Sutras  (mayavati:  Advaita 
Ashram,  1948),  pj>.  86-9.  See  also  Haridas  Chaudhuri’s  article,  'The  Concept 
of  Brahman  in  Hindu  Philosophy*  in  Philosophy  East  and  West  (Honolulu: 
University  of  Hawaii  Press,  April  1954),  PP-  57~9-  *  Ibid,,  p.  88. 


22 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 

tion  to  the  understanding  of  the  spiritual  wisdom  of  the  East. 
His  notion  of  ‘the  collective  unconscious’  throws  a  flood  of 
light  upon  some  of  the  basic  concepts  of  Eastern  thought.  He 
interprets  Brahman  as  the  true  centre,  essence  or  energy 
(libido)  of  the  collective  unconscious,  and  interprets  the 
Vedantic  doctrine  of  the  identity  of  Self  and  Reality  (Atman 
and  Brahman)  as  ‘a  deeper  layer  of  unity  in  the  unconscious 
below  or  beneath  the  world  of  personal  fantasies  and 
instincts’.1 * 3  Dr  Jung  talks  of  ‘the  remarkable  agreement  between 
the  insights  of  yoga  and  the  results  of  psychological  research’, 
and  says:  ‘Modem  psychology  knows  that  the  personal 
unconscious  is  only  the  top  layer,  resting  on  a  foundation  of  a 
wholly  different  nature  which  we  call  the  collective  unconscious 
.  .  .  the  images  in  the  deeper  unconscious  .  .  .  (are)  of  a  purely 
supra-personal  nature  and  are  therefore  common  to  all  men.'1 
The  aim  of  Indian  yoga  is,  as  Jung  sees  it,  to  realize  this  deeper 
layer  of  unity  in  the  collective  unconscious,  which  is  reflected 
in  the  great  Upanisadic  statement,  ‘That  art  thou’.  The  indi¬ 
vidual  realizes  at  this  stage  his  essential  oneness  with  the  All  of 
existence.  The  collective  unconscious  is  'a  universal  and 
homogeneous  substratum  whose  homogeneity  extends  even 
into  a  world-wide  identity  or  similarity  of  myths  and  fairy 
tales’.! 

Now,  Jung  shows  profound  psychological  insight  in  inter¬ 
preting  the  concept  of  Brahman  as  the  universal  psychical  or 
spiritual  substratum  of  our  human  existence,  the  individual 
being  existentially  and  essentially  one  with  it.  But  a  proper 
understanding  of  the  concept  of  Brahman  would  reveal  that  the 
blanket-term  ‘collective  unconscious’  is  too  inadequate  for 
this  universal  spiritual  substratum.  We  have  seen  that  the 
undifferentiated  aesthetic  continuum  and  the  differentiated 
theoretical  continuum  are  different  phases  in  the  creative 
self-expression  of  Brahman  which  is  pure  existence.  Similarly, 
the  collective  unconscious,  the  rational-ethical  consciousness 
of  the  civilized  man,  and  the  cosmic  consciousness  of  the 

1  C.  G.  Jung,  ‘Psychology  and  Religion'  in  Collected  Works,  Vol.  XI, 

(London:  Routledge  &  Kegan  Paul  Ltd.,  1958),  p.  573.  *  Ibid,  p.  573. 

3  C.  G.  Jung,  Psychological  Types  (London:  Routledge  &  Kegan  Paul 
Ltd.,  1949),  p.  624. 


23 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 

religious  mystic,  are  different  phases  in  the  creative  self- 
expression  of  Brahman  which  is  pure  consciousness  (cit).1  Pure 
consciousness  or  intelligence  is  egoless  unobjective  conscious¬ 
ness,  beyond  all  categorized  and  verbalized  expression.  It  is 
essentially  different  from  mental  consciousness,  which  is 
characterized  by  the  polarized  subject-object  structure.  It  is 
also  essentially  different  from  the  unconscious,  which,  as 
unrealized  potentiality,  seeks  higher  fulfilment  on  the  conscious 
level.  The  unconscious  appears  darker  by  comparison  with  the 
conscious  rational  mind.  But  pure  consciousness  is  that 
unobjective  light2  which  on  the  one  hand  lights  up  the  darkest 
corners  of  the  unconscious  mind,  and  on  the  other  hand 
represents  the  supreme  fulfilment  of  the  gropings  and  aspira¬ 
tions  of  the  rational  mind.  Moreover,  this  pure  consciousness 
which  is  also  pure  existence  (sat-cit),  is  the  ultimate  ground 
of  both  the  psychological  and  the  physical  orders  of  existence. 
According  to  Dr  Jung,  egoless  consciousness  is  a  contradiction 
in  terms,  because,  in  his  view,  relatedness  to  The  ego*  is  an 
essential  condition  of  consciousness.  T  cannot  imagine  a 
conscious  mental  state  that  does  not  relate  to  a  subject,  that  is, 
to  an  ego’,3  says  Jung.  This  is  because  Jung  considers  the 
objective  and  empirical  consciousness  of  the  rational  mind  as 
the  prototype  of  all  consciousness.  Actual  realization  of  what 
Dr  Jung  himself  has  called  'a  deeper  layer  of  unity  in  the 
unconscious’  would  make  it  possible  for  anyone  to  grasp  the 
profound  meaning  of  egoless  consciousness,  which  is  otherwise 
incommunicable  and  inexpressible.  Brahman,  the  principle  of 
pure  intelligence,  is,  in  the  collective  unconscious,  in  a  state  of 
self-alienation  or  involution  in  apparent  opposites.  Conscious 
personality  emerges  out  of  the  collective  unconscious  in  the 
course  of  evolution.  Higher  religious,  mystical,  and  yogic 
experiences  are  different  modes  of  self-expression  in  the  human 
medium  of  the  structureless  light  of  Brahman.  Since  the  egoless 
consciousness  of  Brahman  is  radically  different  from  the 
polarized  consciousness  of  the  mind  as  well  as  the  darkness  of 
the  unconscious,  Sri  Aurobindo  has  called  it  The  luminous 

1  Brhaddranyaka  Upanisad,  4.5.13. 

a  Brahma-Sutras,  op.  cit.,  pp.  115-16.  Sec  also  Mundaka  Upanisad,  2.2.1 1. 

3  Jung,  'Psychology  and  Religion’,  op.  cit.,  p.  289. 

24 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 

uttermost  Superconscience’  as  distinguished  from  ‘the  Night 
of  inconscience’.1  ‘The  conscious  existence  is  .  .  .  stretched  out 
as  it  were  horizontally  between  two  other  extensions;  below  is 
the  dark  sleep  of  the  subconscient,  above  is  the  luminous 
secrecy  of  the  superconscient.  These  are  the  upper  and  the 
lower  oceans/2  says  Sri  Aurobindo.  A  failure  to  distinguish 
properly  between  these  two  layers  of  the  universal  psycho¬ 
logical  substratum  of  human  existence  is  responsible  for  Jung’s 
inadequate,  although  otherwise  remarkable,  comprehension  of 
the  ultimate  objective  of  Indian  yoga.  His  inadequacy  of 
understanding  is  reflected  in  passages  like:  ‘The  European 
seeks  to  raise  himself  above  this  world,  while  the  Indian  likes 
to  turn  back  into  the  maternal  depths  of  Nature/3  This  clearly 
shows  Jung’s  failure  to  understand  the  concept  of  Brahman 
as  the  unity  of  above  and  below,  as  the  transcendent  unity  of 
maternal  Nature  (Maya)  and  the  heavenly  Spirit  (Iswara). 
The  highest  ideal  of  Indian  yoga  is  neither  to  turn  back  into 
the  maternal  depths  of  Nature,  nor  to  rise  up  to  the  heavenly 
Spirit,  rejecting  Nature,  but  to  discover  that  ultimate  ground 
of  existence  in  which  Nature  and  Spirit  are  unified.  In  realizing 
the  ultimate  ground  of  existence  (Brahman),  one  has  to  come 
to  terms  on  the  one  hand  with  the  forces  of  the  unconscious 
mind,  and  develop  to  the  highest  limit,  on  the  other  hand,  the 
rational  and  ethical  consciousness  of  human  personality.  It  is 
such  an  integration  of  the  unconscious  psyche  and  the  rational- 
ethical  consciousness — and  not  a  falling  back  into  the  depths 
of  the  unconscious — which  has  been  affirmed  by  Indian  sages 
as  the  pathway  to  that  yogic  union  with  ultimate  reality  which 
is  the  source  of  all  wisdom,  love  and  peace. 

DIFFERENT  TYPES  OF  NONDUALISM 

It  has  already  been  stated  that  the  nondualistic  outlook  which 
is  inspired  by  the  intuitive  apprehension  of  reality  in  its 
undivided  wholeness  and  fundamental  oneness  is  not  the  same 
as  rationalistic  monism.  Rationalistic  monism  identifies  the 

1  Aurobindo,  The  Life  Divine,  p.  289. 

a  Aurobindo,  On  the  Veda  (Pondicherry:  Sri  Aurobindo  Ashram  Press, 
1956),  p.  123.  3  Jung,  'Psychology  and  Religion',  op.  cit.,  p.  570. 

25 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 

essence  o f  reality  with  a  conceptually  formulated  determinate 
principle  of  unity.  It  has  assumed  various  forms  in  Western 
thought,  e.g.  naturalism,  pantheism,  voluntarism,  vitalism, 
absolute  idealism,  etc.  Naturalism  designates  the  essence  of 
reality  as  Nature  with  her  unconscious  physical  energy  and 
blind  mechanical  causation,  and  seeks  to  explain  mind,  spirit, 
value,  etc.,  as  accidental  by-products  of  the  interaction  of 
physical  forces.  Pantheism  designates  the  essence  of  reality  as 
a  logically  defined  spiritual  substance  wholly  immanent  in  the 
realm  of  Nature.  Voluntarism  designates  the  ultimate  unifying 
principle  of  existence  as  universal  Will.  Vitalism  conceives  of 
the  ultimate  unifying  principle  as  the  cosmic  life  force  ( elan 
vital).  Absolute  idealism  envisages  the  ultimate  unifying 
principle  as  Absolute  Idea  or  a  unified  thought  structure,  or 
some  kind  of  cosmic  mind.  But  according  to  the  nondualist ic 
philosophical  outlook,  unconscious  nature  and  conscious  spirit, 
matter  and  mind,  cosmic  will  and  absolute  idea,  universal 
life-force  and  cosmic  mind,  etc.,  are  different  interrelated  factors 
in  the  creative  self-expression  of  the  indeterminable  reality. 
Since  reality  is  essentially  indeterminable,  it  is  not  to  be 
identified  either  with  any  one  of  them  exclusively,  or  with 
all  of  them  collectively. 

It  follows  from  the  above  that  according  to  intuitional 
nondualism,  the  multiform  fullness  of  reality  refuses  to  be 
exhaustively  formulated  in  terms  of  any  particular  philo¬ 
sophical  system  or  theological  scheme.  But  nondualism  also 
has  assumed  various  forms  in  the  East,  e.g.  Vedanta,  Tantra, 
Vaisnavism,  Taoism,  and  Zen  (which  is  an  offspring  of 
Mahayana  Buddhism  coupled  with  Taoism).  Common  to  them 
all  is  the  conviction  that  the  ultimate  essence  of  existence, 
variously  designated  as  Brahman,  Tattvatita,  Purusottama, 
Tao,  Sunyata,  etc.,  is  beyond  exhaustive  conceptual  formula¬ 
tion  or  verbalized  expression,  but  accessible  to  intuitive 
realization.  It  is  also  readily  perceived  that  there  can  naturally 
be  different  lines  of  approach  to  the  intuitive  apprehension  of 
that  pure  existence.  That  is  why  a  Chinese  can  at  the  same 
time  be  a  Buddhist,  a  Confucian,  and  a  Taoist.  A  Japanese  can 
at  the  same  time  be  a  Buddhist  and  a  Shintoist.  An  Indian  can 
at  the  same  time  be  a  Vedantist,  a  Vaisnava  and  a  Tantrist. 

26 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 


Differences  between  various  thought  systems  are  readily  under¬ 
stood  in  the  East  to  be  differences  in  emphasis,  relative  value, 
local  suitability,  etc.  They  are  not  construed  as  radical  and 
disjunctive  distinctions.  They  are  ultimately  unified  in  the 
multiform  richness  of  reality.  They  are  also  capable  of  being 
reconciled  in  the  dynamic  spiritual  growth  of  individuals.  It  is 
this  nondualistic,  all-embracing  outlook  which  has  produced 
the  conviction  that  different  ethico-religious  systems  or  yoga 
techniques  are  various  spiritual  pathways  leading  to  the  same 
supreme  goal.  Likewise,  in  the  practical  sphere,  nondualism  is 
productive  of  the  belief  that  different  socio-political  ideologies 
such  as  capitalism,  socialism,  communism,  etc.,  may  be 
accepted  as  mutually  compatible  ruling  principles  of  social 
existence,  relatively  valid  with  reference  to  the  varying  social, 
economical  and  political  conditions  obtaining  in  the  different 
countries  of  the  world. 

Let  us  now  have  a  little  closer  look  into  the  main  points  of 
distinction  between  the  traditional  nondualistic  systems  of  the 
East.  They  are  fundamentally  agreed  upon  the  ultimate  goal 
of  life,  which  is  immediate  experience  of  pure  existence  in 
which  the  individual  and  the  universal,  the  sensuous  and  the 
rational,  and  the  intellectual  and  the  emotional  are  reconciled 
and  unified.  One  major  difference  between  them,  specially 
noteworthy  from  our  standpoint  here,  is  that  which  arises 
from  their  respective  predilections  for  different  paths  or  lines 
of  approach  leading  to  the  same  goal. 

Taoism  recommends  the  method  of  wei  wti  wei,  effortless 
and  spontaneous  living,  intelligent  co-operation  with  the 
spirit  of  Nature.  The  concept  of  wei  wn  wei}  which  is  a  key 
concept  in  Chinese  mysticism,  implies,  'acting  without  action 
...  it  means  to  get  along  as  Nature  does:  the  world  gets  created, 
living  things  grow  and  pass  away  without  any  sign  of  effort’.1 
As  one  lives  thus  in  effortless  harmony  with  the  spirit  of 
Nature,  the  latter  gradually  and  unconsciously  leads  him  on 
to  higher  levels  of  experience  and  achievement.  Zen  Buddhism 
in  its  most  revolutionary  form  of  development  recommends 
the  method  of  'non-clinging'  to  any  form,  object,  or  state  of 

*  Lao-Tzu,  The  Way  of  Life ,  R.  B.  Blankey  trans.  (London:  Frederick 
Muller  Ltd.,  1956),  p.  39. 


27 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 


consciousness,  and  thereby  attaining  the  'Samadhi  of  formless¬ 
ness',1  the  spiritual  freedom  of  'no-mind'  (wu-hsin).*  It  is  'the 
self-seeing  type  of  meditation' 3  which  consists  in  'seeing  into 
nothingness',  and  not  clinging  to  even  purity,  tranquillity, 
illumination,  emptiness,  etc.  It  is  the  art  of  seeing  things  and 
doing  deeds,  without  clinging  to  any  of  them,  and  without 
allowing  the  mind  to  be  defiled  or  stained  by  any  of  them. 
Tantra  recommends  that  one  can  best  advance  spiritually  by 
awakening  the  central  psycho-physical  power  latent  in  man, 
by  rousing  his  dynamic  spiritual  potential  called  the  Kunda - 
lint. 4  When  this  spiritual  potential  or  fundamental  psychic 
energy  is  mobilized  and  channelled  along  higher  constructive 
lines,  living  becomes  effortless  and  spontaneous,  attuned  to  the 
ultimate  goal  of  existence.  Vaisnavism  recommends  the  method 
of  love  and  devotion,  i.e.  whole-hearted  self-surrender  ( bhakti ) 
to  God, 5  who  is  the  sovereign  reality  and  the  synthetic  unity 
of  the  higher  values  of  life.  Christian  mysticism  and  Sufism 
have  close  resemblance  to  Vaisnavism  in  this  respect.  'Let  Thy 
Will,  not  mine,  be  done'  is  the  secret  of  spiritual  growth  here. 
Vedanta  lays  stress  upon  the  method  of  critical  self-inquiry. 
It  includes  discrimination  between  truth  and  falsehood,  or 
between  the  self  and  the  not-self  (viveka)  and  also  detachment 
or  renunciation  of  emotional  attachments  to,  and  fixations  on, 
the  not-self  (vairagya).  As  soon  as  false  identifications  with,  and 
emotional  attachments  to,  the  not-self  are  removed,  the 
indwelling  light  of  truth  revealing  the  nature  of  pure  existence 
which  is  also  pure  consciousness  and  pure  bliss  is  revealed.6 

THE  DISTINCTIVE  CHARACTER  OF  INTEGRALISM 

According  to  integralism  the  opposition  between  the  so-called 
lower  nature  and  the  higher  nature  develops  within  the  cosmic 
self-expression  of  the  same  ultimate  reality.  The  lower  nature 
is  the  source  of  physical  forces  in  the  world,  and  of  instinctual 

1  Suzuki,  Zen  Buddhism,  William  Barrett  ed.  (New  York:  Doubleday 
&  Company,  1956),  p.  177.  3  Ibid.,  p.  163.  3  Ibid.,  p.  178. 

«  Sir  John  Woodrofle,  The  Serpent  Power  (London:  Mizae  &  Co.  Ltd.,  1953), 
pp.  245-6. 

5  Swami  TyagiSananda,  trans.,  Narada  Bhakti  Sutras  (Madras:  Sri 
Ramkrishna  Math,  1952),  p.  6. 

6  Sri  Sahkaricharya,  Vivckachudamani,  slokas  149-55. 

28 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 

drives  in  the  unconscious  mind.  The  higher  nature  comprises 
man's  rational  self-consciousness  and  his  ethical  and  religious 
aspirations.  The  lower  nature  is  the  realm  of  brute  fact  and 
blind  energy,  whereas  the  higher  nature  is  the  realm  of  intelli¬ 
gence,  value  and  ideal.  In  spite  of  all  apparent  opposition 
between  them,  the  higher  nature  evolves  out  of  the  matrix  of 
the  lower  nature  through  the  operation  of  the  superconscient 
creative  dynamism  ( sakti )  of  ultimate  reality.  This  super¬ 
conscient  dynamism  is  not  to  be  identified  with  either  the 
drive  of  the  unconscious  or  the  power  of  the  self-conscious;  it 
is  vastly  superior  to  both,  and  immanently  operative  in  both. 
Unconscious  material  nature  as  well  as  the  self-conscious 
human  nature  is  ultimately  derived  from  it,  the  supernal 
nature  {para  prakrti)  of  the  Absolute.1  Having  brought  forth 
into  manifestation  the  rational-ethical-religious  being  that 
man  is  out  of  the  depths  of  material  nature,  the  .superconscient 
dynamism  seems  now  to  be  steadily  working  toward  the 
transformation  of  man  into  a  still  higher  form  of  self-expression 
such  as  supermanhood,2  or  a  new  world  order  of  abiding  peace, 
international  harmony  and  unimpeded  human  progress.  It  is 
this  superconscient  creative  force  of  evolution,  called  the 
Divine  Mother  by  Sri  Aurobindo,  with  which  man  has  fully 
to  co-operate  in  order  to  attain  integral  and  dynamic  realiza¬ 
tion  of  ultimate  reality.  Such  co-operation  implies  a  balanced 
integration  of  our  relations  to  material  nature  on  the  one  hand, 
and  to  the  ethico-religious  or  spiritual  ideal  on  the  other  hand. 
We  can  afford  neither  to  suppress  material  nature  nor  blindly 
to  follow  all  her  promptings.  Similarly,  we  can  hardly  afford 
either  to  ignore  the  demands  of  the  spirit,  or  to  be  carried  off 
by  them  in  utter  disregard  of  the  elemental  forces  of  material 
nature.  Tantra  and  Taoism,  in  course  of  their  historical  develop¬ 
ment,  tended  at  times  to  yield  in  too  much  to  the  urges  of  the 
unconscious,  encouraging  spiritual  malpractice  and  bringing 
disrepute  upon  themselves.  This  happened  when  the  spirit  of 
unconscious  nature  had  been  endowed  with  special  significance 
as  revelatory  of  the  nature  of  ultimate  reality.  Vedanta  and 

1  Anilbaran  Roy  ed.,  The  Message  of  the  Gita  (London:  George  Allen  & 
Unwin  Ltd.,  1946),  pp.  108-13. 

a  Aurobindo,  The  Life  Divine,  pp.  5-7. 

29 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 


Buddhism,  in  the  course  of  their  historical  development, 
encouraged  at  times  the  ascetic  life-negating  tendency,  over¬ 
emphasizing  the  ideal  of  renunciation,  and  thus  undermining 
the  foundations  of  social,  economical  and  political  development. 
This  happened  when  the  self-transcending  spiritual  aspiration 
or  longing  for  the  infinite  had  been  endowed  with  special 
significance  as  revelatory  of  the  nature  of  ultimate  reality. 
Integralism  stresses  the  concept  of  balanced  harmony  between 
the  material  and  the  spiritual.  An  intelligent  organization, 
controlled  fulfilment,  and  constructive  channelling  of  the 
material  unconscious,  can  bring  it  more  and  more  in  line  with 
the  spiritual  ideal.  On  the  other  side,  an  intelligent  bridling  of 
the  spiritual  yearning  consistently  with  one's  firm  stand  on 
mother  earth  and  one’s  firm  hold  on  the  concrete  realities  of 
the  physical  environment  would  place  it  in  the  proper  setting 
of  material  evolution.  As  Sri  Aurobindo  puts  it:  The  touch  of 
Earth  is  always  reinvigorating  to  the  son  of  Earth,  even  when 
he  seeks  a  supra-physical  Knowledge  .  .  .  the  supra-physical  can 
only  be  really  mastered  in  its  fullness — to  its  heights  we  can 
always  reach — when  we  keep  our  feet  firmly  on  the  physical.’1 
The  urge  of  the  unconscious  material  nature,  and  the  ideals  of 
man’s  ethical  and  religious  consciousness,  are  different  modes 
of  manifestation  of  the  one  ultimate  creative  purpose  or  will 
which  is  superconscient  in  character.  Integralism  stresses  the 
need  for  contacting  and  co-operating  with  this  superconscient 
Will  or  dynamic  Divine  through  balanced  self-development 
and  self-perfection.  Knowledge  of  this  superconscient  creative 
purpose  would  impose  the  ideal  of  being  true  to  the  kindred 
points  of  heaven  and  home,  i.e.  true  to  the  reality  and  signifi¬ 
cance  of  material  nature  as  also  to  the  sublimity  and  grandeur 
of  the  spiritual  ideal.  It  is  such  a  balanced  growth  of  personality 
and  integral  self-opening  to  the  superconscient  creative  Will 
which  alone  can  enable  man  to  fulfil  his  destiny  as  a  dynamic 
instrument  of  higher  advancement  in  cosmic  evolution.  The 
more  man  can  open  himself  without  reserve  to  the  evolutionary 
world-spirit,  the  more  it  would  become  possible  for  humanity 
to  be  the  vehicle  of  higher  patterns  of  perfection  realizable  in 
the  world. 


1  Aurobindo,  The  Life  Divine,  p.  13. 

30 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 


THE  CONCEPT  OF  EVOLUTION  IN  INTEGRAL 
PHILOSOPHY 

It  should  be  evident  from  the  above  that  in  integralism  the 
traditional  nondualistic  outlook  of  the  East  is  fruitfully 
combined  with  the  concept  of  creative  evolution  and  unlimited 
progress  in  the  material  world,  which  has  been  an  essential 
factor  in  the  growth  of  modern  Western  civilization.  The 
notion  of  evolution  has,  however,  been  substantially  modified 
and  transformed  in  order  to  fit  into  the  nondualistic  picture, 
and  harmonize  with  the  central  conception  of  reality  as 
essentially  beyond  space,  time  and  relativity.  Or  it  may  be 
said  that  Integralism  carries  the  nondualistic  outlook  on  life 
to  its  most  comprehensive  formulation  such  as  entails  an 
affirmation  of  the  full  reality  and  significance  of  material 
evolution  and  progress.  According  to  integralism,  evolution  is 
not  simply  an  increasingly  complex  configuration  of  matter 
and  motion,  presided  over  by  chance.  Nor  is  it  The  rattling-off 
of  a  chain  forged  innumerable  years  ago',  presided  over  by  an 
extra-cosmic  divine  mind.  Nor  is  it  the  gradual  emergence,  in 
accidental  fashion,  of  new  qualities  and  superior  values,  all  out 
of  the  void.  In  the  view  of  Integralism,  the  evolutionary 
impetus  is  the  superconscient  power  of  creative  self-expression 
of  pure  supra-evolutionary  existence.  The  dynamism  of  time 
is  the  self-expansive  urge  of  the  timeless  transcendence. 
The  process  of  evolution  is  the  infinitely  diversified  self- 
determination  of  the  essentially  indeterminable  reality. 
Nondual  reality  is  cosmically  manifested  as  the  one  dynamic 
world-spirit,  and  evolution  is  the  creative  adventure  of  the 
world-spirit  in  the  unchartered  ocean  of  material  inconscience, 
so  that  the  infinite  possibilities  inherent  in  reality  may  be 
infinitely  expressed  in  material  conditions.  The  superconscient 
dynamism  of  the  world-spirit  is  endlessly  productive  of  fresh 
novelties,  higher  developments,  and  new  emergent  values  in 
the  course  of  cosmic  evolution.  Minerals,  the  vegetable  king¬ 
dom,  the  animal  creation,  human  rationality,  etc.,  provide  the 
concrete  illustration  of  such  emergence.  But  they  do  not 
emerge  into  being  out  of  the  void;  they  are  precipitated  in  the 
space-time  continuum  out  of  the  infinite  riches  of  the  creative 

31 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 


world-spirit.  At  the  human  stage,  the  process  of  evolution  is  in 
travail  with  the  production  of  still  higher  values,  namely,  the 
embodied  supermind  or  supermanhood.  Supermanhood  would 
be  the  ‘outflowering  of  the  Divine  in  collective  humanity',  or 
the  emergence  of  a  new  world-order  characterized  by  peace, 
progress  and  unity. 


integral  yoga 

Since  creative  evolution  in  the  material  medium  is  the  diversi¬ 
fied  self-expression  of  the  world-spirit,  and  since  man  is 
essentially  a  dynamic  centre  of  operation  of  the  latter,  his 
highest  destiny  is  fully  to  co-operate  with  the  latter  by  way  of 
advancing  the  cause  of  evolution.  This  is  the  practical  bearing 
of  integral  nondualism.  Sri  Aurobindo  has  called  it  integral 
yoga.  It  is  a  dynamic  spiritual  ideal  definable  as  the  art  of 
harmonious  and  creative  living.  The  essence  of  integral  yoga 
lies  in  free,  active,  and  effective  co-operation  with  the  super- 
conscient  force  of  evolution  or  the  dynamic  Divine.  But  how 
do  you  co-operate  with  the  dynamic  Divine,  or  the  evolutionary 
world-spirit? 

Broadly  speaking,  there  are  two  essential  factors  in  such 
co-operation,  which  constitute  the  distinctive  features  of 
integral  yoga  as  a  way  of  living.  These  are:  first,  the  balanced 
unity  of  meditation  and  action;  and  secondly,  an  intelligent 
correlation  of  the  ascending  and  descending  movements  of 
consciousness.  By  stressing  the  need  for  a  balance  between 
meditation  and  action,  integral  yoga  points  out  that  it  is  by 
harmonizing  the  introverted  and  extraverted  tendencies  of 
human  nature  that  a  person  can  attain  self-perfection  and 
fruitful  self-fulfilment.  Through  meditation  one  more  and  more 
realizes  one's  true  self  as  a  free  centre  of  self-expression  of  the 
dynamic  world-spirit.  Through  action  one  more  and  more 
relates  oneself  to  other  fellow-beings  in  love,  fruitful  co-operation 
and  constructive  endeavour  toward  the  fulfilment  of  the  Divine 
in  society.  Through  meditation  one  explores  the  inner  regions 
of  the  unconscious,  removes  the  internal  conflicts  and  tensions, 
and  acquires  profound  spiritual  insights.  Through  action  one 
keeps  a  firm  hold  on  the  concrete  realities  of  the  physical 

32 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 


world,  so  that  the  glories  of  the  spirit  may  be  increasingly 
expressed  in  the  material  medium.  Through  meditation  one 
tears  the  veil  of  ignorance  (may a),  and  removes  those  obstacles 
in  the  unconscious  mind  which  hinder  the  right  perspective, 
i.e.  the  vision  of  things  as  they  are  in  their  true  proportions  and 
in  the  context  of  the  eternal.  Through  action  one  seeks  to 
express  that  inner  vision  toward  the  fulfilment  of  the  pro- 
foundest  possibilities  of  human  life  and  nature.  Free  and  full 
co-operation  with  the  dynamic  Divine  naturally  assumes  the 
form  of  llld ,  i.e.  divine  play,  because  it  is  spontaneous  and 
joyful,  free  of  any  sense  of  compulsion  or  any  burden  of  anxiety. 
It  is  relaxed  action,  which  combines  the  impulse  of  creative 
joy  with  the  spirit  of  non-attachment  to  fixed  forms  and 
stubborn  desires.  It  is  illuminated  action  which  combines  the 
calmness  of  self-poise  with  the  fullness  of  enthusiasm  in  the 
cause  of  truth  and  human  welfare. 

The  second  distinctive  feature  of  integral  yoga  is,  as  has 
been  stated  above,  an  intelligent  correlation  between  the 
ascending  and  descending  movements  of  consciousness.1  The 
ascending  movement  consists  in  the  gradual  broadening  of 
spiritual  outlook,  in  rising  to  higher  levels  of  consciousness,  and 
eventually  in  apprehending  reality  as  at  once  the  supra-cosmic 
silence  and  the  cosmic  manifestation,  as  the  formless  inde¬ 
terminable  (Siva)  and  the  power  of  infinite  self-determination 
(Sakti),  as  timeless  perfection  and  the  evolutionary  force  of 
time.  Integral  experience  of  reality  reveals  the  truth  that 
spiritual  ascent  is  an  incomplete  achievement  without  material 
descent.  So  the  descending  movement  of  integral  yoga  lies  in 
bringing  down  the  light  and  power  of  higher  consciousness  into 
all  the  strata  of  our  material  existence.  It  consists  in  trans¬ 
forming  the  physical,  the  vital  and  the  mental  into  effective 
channels  of  expression  of  universal  love  and  all-unifying  truth, 
instead  of  rejecting  them  as  an  unreal  superimposition  upon 
the  pure  self.  It  consists  in  transmuting,  and  making  con¬ 
structive  use  of,  such  material  forces  as  health,  sex,  money, 
social  position,  political  power,  etc.,  toward  the  higher  ends  of 

1  Aurobindo,  On  Yoga  (Pondicherry:  Sri  Aurobindo  Ashram,  1955),  p.  292. 
See  also  Sri  Aurobindo,  The  Riddle  of  this  World  (Pondicherry:  Sri  Aurobindo 
Ashram,  1951),  pp.  16-22. 


B 


33 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 

human  unity  and  progress,  instead  of  rejecting  them  as  mun¬ 
dane,  secular  or  undivine.  Such  a  co-ordination  of  ascent  and 
descent  in  the  practice  of  integral  yoga  is  broadbased  upon  the 
integral  conception  of  evolution  as  the  progressive  self¬ 
manifestation  of  the  superconscient  world-spirit  in  material 
conditions.  It  is  inspired  by  an  ‘awareness  of  the  whole  world 
as  the  expression,  play,  or  Ilia 1  of  the  Divine. 

1  Sri  Aurobindo,  The  Yoga  and  Its  Objects  (Pondicherry:  Sri  Aurobindo 
Ashram,  1952),  p.  10. 


34 


2 


S.  CHATTERJEE 

Mind  and  Supermind  in  Sri  Aurobindo’s 
Integral  ism 


Sri  Aurobindo  is  one  of  those  great  Indian  saints  who  have 
maintained  the  continuity  of  Indian  culture  through  the  ages. 
The  foundation  of  this  culture  was  laid  in  the  Vedas  and  the 
Upanisads.  Since  then,  there  is  an  unbroken  succession  of 
different  teachers  and  religious  leaders  at  different  times  and 
places  in  this  ancient  land  of  India.  They  have  infused  new  life 
into  the  body  of  Indian  culture  and  saved  it  from  the  attacks 
of  rival  cultures  by  expanding  and  enlarging  it,  so  that  it  might 
assimilate  the  best  in  them  or  absorb  them  altogether.  There 
were  certain  periods  of  Indian  history  which  presented  a  crisis 
in  Indian  culture  and  threatened  it  with  disruption  and 
disintegration.  But  Providence  has  so  ordained  it  that  at  every 
such  juncture,  one  or  more  of  India's  great  teachers  and 
reformers  have  sprung  up  and  met  the  challenge  effectively. 
The  result  is  that  although  there  have  been  ebb  and  tide,  rise 
and  fall  in  the  stream  of  India's  cultural  life,  it  has  maintained 
an  unbroken  continuity  from  the  hoary  past  to  the  living 
present.  Sri  Aurobindo’s  life  and  philosophy  constitute  a 
golden  link  in  the  chain  that  connects  the  past  with  the  present 
in  India's  cultural  life. 


THE  CONFLICT  OF  PHILOSOPHIES 

The  world  of  philosophy,  eastern  as  well  as  western,  has 
been  the  scene  of  an  ever-recurrent  clash  and  conflict  between 
two  opposed  camps,  almost  from  the  very  beginning  of  its 

35 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 

history  down  to  the  present  day.  These  two  are  the  camps  of 
materialism  and  idealism,  naturalism  and  spiritualism.  The 
entire  course  of  philosophical  speculation  from  its  inception 
up  to  this  time  oscillates  between  these  two  extremes  in 
alternating  rhythms.  On  the  one  hand,  there  appeared  some 
thinkers  who  based  their  metaphysics  on  sense  experience  and 
accepted  the  physical  world  as  the  only  real  world,  and  regarded 
matter  as  the  only  ultimate  reality.  They  are  variously 
designated  as  materialists,  phvsicalists,  naturalists,  panhylists, 
panobjectivists  and  positivists.  Whatever  may  be  the  names 
given  to  them,  they  all  agree  in  holding  that  only  matter  and 
the  physical  world  are  real,  and  in  negating  what  is  called 
mind,  soul,  spirit  or  God.  These  they  look  upon  with  suspicion 
and  distrust,  and  reduce  them  either  to  certain  epiphenomena 
arising  out  of  matter  and  its  complex  organization  or  to 
illusions  and  fictions  fabricated  by  the  feverish  brain  and 
fear-stricken  mind  of  man.  On  the  other  hand,  there  are  the 
idealists  and  spiritualists,  the  panpsychists  and  subjectivists, 
who  look  upon  mind,  soul  or  spirit  as  the  only  reality,  and 
negate  matter  and  physical  reality.  These  they  reduce  to  ideas 
and  thoughts  of  the  mind,  and  disparage  as  products  of  the 
unregenerate  mind  and  uncultured  brain  of  man.  Thus  drawn 
up  in  battle  array,  the  materialists  and  the  idealists  have  gone 
on  fighting  with  one  another,  and  moved  up  and  down  in 
cycles,  so  to  say,  without  either  side  being  able  to  win  a 
decisive  and  final  victory  over  the  other,  or  to  achieve  a 
peaceful  and  permanent  reconciliation  with  each  other. 

SRI  AUROBINDO1 S  RECONCILIATION  OF  THE 
CONFLICT 

Sri  Aurobindo’s  integral  idealism  is  a  monumental  synthesis 
and  happy  reconciliation  of  ordinary,  one-sided  idealism  and 
militant  materialism.  His  idealism  has  its  roots  in  the  Vedas 
and  Upanisads  and  the  Bhagavad-glta,  and  it  thrives  on  the 
modern  scientific  and  philosophical  thought  of  the  West.  In 
speculative  boldness  it  is  almost  unrivalled  and  unparalleled  in 
the  history  of  human  thought.  He  draws  to  a  focus  divergent 
currents  of  thought — Vedic,  Tantric,  Buddhist,  Sankhya, 

36 


Mind  and  Supermind  in  Sri  Aurobindo’s  Integralism 

Yoga,  ViSistadvaita  and  Advaita,  and  modern  western  science 
and  philosophy — and  welds  them  into  a  synthetic  philosophy 
through  sddhancl  (i.c.  a  course  of  arduous  and  strenuous 
spiritual  training  and  discipline),  and  an  intense  life  of 
continuous  meditation. 

REALITY  AS  OMNIPRESENT  SAT-CIT-AN  AND  A 

The  central  and  basic  concept  of  Sri  Aurobindo’s  integral 
idealism  is  that  'All  this  is  the  Brahman’,  that  ‘An  Omni¬ 
present  Reality  is  the  Brahman,  not  an  omnipotent  cause  of 
persistent  illusions’.1  Brahman  being  Reality  omnipresent, 
everything — great  or  small,  mental  or  physical,  spiritual  or 
material — is  in  Brahman,  manifests  Brahman  and  is  Brahman. 
Sri  Aurobindo  starts  with  this  conception  of  an  omnipresent 
Reality  of  which  neither  the  non-being  at  the  one  end  nor  the 
universe  at  the  other  are  negations  that  annul;  they  are  rather 
different  states  of  the  reality,  obverse  and  reverse  mani¬ 
festations.  This  omnipresent  Reality  is  the  truth  of  all  life  and 
existence,  whether  absolute  or  relative,  whether  corporeal  or 
incorporeal,  whether  animate  or  inanimate,  whether  intelligent 
or  unintelligent.  The  reality  is  one  in  all  its  infinitely  varying 
and  even  conflicting  self-expressions.  From  that  all  variations 
begin,  in  that  all  variations  consist,  to  that  all  variations 
return.  The  reality  or  Brahman  is  the  alpha  and  omega  of  all 
existence.  The  Brahman  is  the  One  besides  whom  there  is 
nothing  else  existent.  In  it  all  affirmations  are  denied  only  to 
lead  to  a  wider  affirmation,  and  all  antinomies  confront  each 
other  in  order  to  recognize  one  truth  in  their  opposed  aspects 
and  embrace  by  the  way  of  conflict  their  mutual  unity.  This, 
Sri  Aurobindo  says,  is  ‘The  real  Monism,  the  true  Advaita  .  .  . 
which  admits  all  things  as  the  one  Brahman  and  does  not  seek 
to  bisect  Its  existence  into  two  incompatible  entities,  an 
eternal  Truth  and  an  eternal  Falsehood,  Brahman  and  non- 
Brahman,  Self  and  not-Self,  a  real  Self  and  an  unreal,  yet 
perpetual  Maya’.2  ‘The  highest  experience  of  this  Reality  in 
the  universe  shows  it  to  be  not  only  a  conscious  Existence,  but 
a  supreme  Intelligence  and  Force  and  a  self-existent  Bliss,  and 

1  Aurobindo,  The  Life  Divine,  p.  31.  1  Ibid.,  p.  31. 

37 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 


beyond  the  universe  it  is  still  some  other  unknowable  existence, 
some  utter  and  ineffable  Bliss/1 

When  we  look  at  the  world  around  us  in  a  calm  and  dis¬ 
passionate  spirit,  what  we  observe  is  a  boundless  energy  of 
infinite  existence  and  infinite  movement  pouring  itself  out  in 
infinite  space  and  unlimited  time.  Modern  science  and  some 
modern  western  thinkers  like  Samuel  Alexander  assure  us  that 
the  universe  is  a  play  of  this  infinite  energy  and  movement. 
But  what  is  this  all,  this  infinite  and  omnipotent  energy?  The 
Vedanta  declares  that  this  movement  presupposes  and  is  an 
aspect  of  a  great  timeless,  spaceless,  motionless  existence  which 
is  immutable,  inexhaustible,  actionless,  though  containing  all 
this  action.  This  is  pure  existence — existence  without  quantity, 
without  quality,  without  name  and  form,  and  so  ineffable  and 
indescribable.  This  is  the  nirguna  Brahman  of  the  original 
Vedanta,  i.e.  the  Upanisads. 

We  have  then  two  fundamental  facts  or  realities,  the  fact  of 
pure  existence  and  the  reality  of  energy  or  movement.  We  have 
to  accept  the  double  fact,  admit  both  Siva  and  Kali,  the 
motionless  and  the  moving,  and  try  to  understand  their 
relation.  Is  this  universal  energy  an  unintelligent  power,  an 
unconscious  mechanical  force,  or  is  it  a  conscious  energy,  an 
intelligent  power?  Sri  Aurobindo's  answer  is:  ‘It  is  really  the 
power  of  city  conscious  force,  in  its  nature  of  creative  self¬ 
conscience/  This  conscious  force  as  inherent  in  pure,  absolute 
existence — the  dynamic  principle  at  the  root  of  the  world 
process — is  Kdli,  the  Mother.  Behind  the  cosmic  energy  which 
we  observe  all  around  us,  there  is  thus  a  cosmic  consciousness 
of  which  cosmic  energy  is  an  outflow  and  manifestation. 

The  ultimate  existence  of  the  Vedantins  is  not  bare  existence; 
it  is  a  conscious  existence  or  conscious  energy,  the  very  nature 
of  which  is  bliss.  An  absolute  existence  which  is  infinite  energy 
of  consciousness  is  bliss  itself.  Absoluteness  of  conscious 
existence  is  illimitable  bliss  of  conscious  existence;  the  two 
are  only  different  descriptions  of  the  same  thing.  Brahman  is 
thus  infinite  bliss  or  the  infinite  delight  of  the  creative  play  of 
force.  The  self-delight  of  Brahman  is  not  limited.  Just  as  its 
energy  of  consciousness  is  capable  of  throwing  itself  into 


Mind  and  Supermind  in  Sri  Aurobindo’s  Integralism 

infinite  forms,  so  also  its  self-delight  is  capable  of  movement 
and  variation,  of  revelling  in  the  infinite  flux  of  innumerable 
universes.  The  one  existence-consciousness  that  is  Brahman 
manifests  itself  in  numberless  universes  to  enjoy  the  infinite 
movement  and  variation  of  its  self-delight. 

It  should  be  noted  here  that  although  conscious  energy  or 
force  presupposes  and  inheres  in  pure  being  or  existence,  yet  it 
is  not  the  essence  of  all  existence,  and  does  not  bind  it  or 
constrain  it  to  be  always  active  and  creative.  If  it  were  so, 
Brahman  would  be  limited  by  Sakti  as  It  seems  to  be  in  the 
Tantra  and  in  Maya-Vada.  Rather,  we  are  to  say  that  the 
conscious  force  inherent  in  the  pure  existent  may  be  at  rest  or 
it  may  be  in  motion.  But  if  the  conscious  force  of  Brahman, 
which  may  be  at  rest  and  remain  equilibrated,  is  yet  found  to 
be  active  and  creative,  the  only  reason  for  creation  is  the 
delight  of  it.  It  is  for  the  sheer  joy  of  the  thing  that  the  Absolute 
creates  and  sustains  the  world.  ‘World-existence  is  the  ecstatic 
dance  of  Siva  ...  its  sole  absolute  object  is  the  joy  of  the 
dancing/1 

So  far  we  have  found  that  the  omnipresent  Reality  is 
Sat-cit-ananda  and  that  all  things  are  Saccidananda.  But  how 
from  Reality  the  phenomenal  world  arises  requires  explanation. 
That  there  is  a  process  and  a  law  guiding  it  is  recognized  by  us 
when  we  study  the  history  of  the  world.  This  law  cannot  be, 
as  some  thinkers  suppose  it  to  be,  a  blind  mechanical  law  of 
the  equilibrium  of  forces  working  by  the  accident  of  develop¬ 
ment  and  the  influence  of  the  past.  Since  force  is  a  self- 
expression  of  conscious  existence,  the  line  of  development 
which  force  has  taken  must  correspond  to  a  perception  of  some 
self-truth  and  the  determination  of  the  line  must  result  from 
a  power  of  self-directive  knowledge  inherent  in  consciousness 
which  enables  it  to  guide  its  own  force  along  the  chosen  line. 
That  is,  evolution  must  proceed  from  God's  self-determining 
power  to  think  or  perceive  (ik§ana)  a  certain  truth  in  Himself 
and  to  guide  His  force  of  creation  along  the  line  of  that  truth. 
God  as  infinite  consciousness  can  produce  only  infinite  results. 
To  settle  upon  a  fixed  truth  or  order  of  truths  and  build  a 
world  in  conformity  with  that  which  is  selected  out  of  infinite 

1  Aurobindo,  The  Life  Divine,  p.  74. 

39 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 


possibilities  requires  a  selective  faculty  of  knowledge  com¬ 
missioned  to  shape  finite  appearance  out  of  the  infinite  Reality. 

This  faculty  or  power  was  called  maya  by  the  Vedic  seers. 
Maya  meant  for  them  the  power  of  infinite  consciousness  to 
form  name  and  shape  out  of  the  vast  illimitable  truth  of  infinite 
existence.  It  is  by  maya  that  the  Infinite  finitizes,  the  static 
being  becomes  dynamic  becoming,  and  out  of  the  Absolute  the 
world  of  phenomena  emerges,  for  the  play  of  one  existent  with 
another,  of  one  self  with  others.  The  mental  play  or  the  illusion 
of  maya  conceals  the  truth  from  man  and  misleads  him  into 
the  belief  that  he  is  one  against  others  and  not  inseparably 
one  with  the  rest  of  existence.  But  he  has  to  emerge  from  this 
error  into  the  supramental  play  or  the  truth  of  maya  where  the 
‘each’  and  the  ‘all'  co-exist  in  the  unity  of  the  one  truth  and 
manifold  symbol  or  appearance.  We  have  first  to  embrace  the 
lower  or  mental  maya  and  then  transcend  it ;  for  it  is  God’s  play 
with  division  and  limitation,  strife  and  suffering.  The  other  or 
higher  maya  has  to  be  overpassed,  then  embraced;  for  it  is 
God's  play  of  the  infinities  of  existence,  of  the  lights  of 
knowledge  and  the  ecstasies  of  love,  that  for  which  God’s 
energy  went  out  of  Him  at  the  first  and  in  which  she  finds  her 
fulfilment  at  the  last. 

There  is,  therefore,  no  ground  for  pessimism  and  illusionism 
in  the  Vedanta.  Those  who  declare  the  world  as  full  of  misery 
and  suffering,  or  disparage  it  as  void  of  reality,  miss  the  link 
between  the  lower  and  the  higher  maya.  To  them  the  mental 
maya  is  the  creatrix  of  the  world  and  a  world  constructed  by 
the  mental  maya  is  an  inexplicable  paradox,  and  a  fixed  yet 
floating  apparition  which  can  be  called  neither  real  nor  unreal. 
But  on  Sri  Aurobindo’s  interpretation  of  the  Vedanta,  there  is 
a  relation  between  reality  and  appearance,  the  truth  behind 
and  the  conceptive  phenomenon  in  front,  a  relation  which  is 
not  merely  that  of  an  opposition.  For  him  the  creative  Idea  is 
the  Real-Idea,  that  is  to  say,  a  power  of  conscious  force 
expressive  of  real  being,  born  out  of  real  being  and  partaking 
of  its  nature.  The  world  is,  therefore,  not  a  figment  of  con¬ 
ception  in  the  universal  mind,  but  a  conscious  birth  of  that 
which  is  beyond  mind  into  forms  of  itself.  A  truth  of  conscious 
being  supports  these  forms  and  expresses  itself  in  them,  and 

40 


Mind  and  Supermind  in  Sri  Aurobindo's  Integralism 

the  knowledge  corresponding  to  the  truth  thus  expressed 
reigns  as  a  supramental  truth-consciousness  ( rtacit ).  To  this 
supreme  truth-consciousness,  Sri  Aurobindo  has  given  the 
name  'Supermind'.  It  is  the  link  between  Saccidananda  and 
the  finite  world.  The  world  thus  expresses  a  foreseen  truth, 
obeys  a  predetermining  will,  realizes  an  original  formative 
self-vision — it  is  the  growing  image  of  a  divine  creation. 

SUPERMIND 

The  supermind  as  an  infinite  principle  of  creative  will  and 
knowledge,  organizing  real  ideas  in  a  perfect  harmony  before 
they  are  cast  into  the  mental-vital-material  mould,  is  the 
creator  of  the  worlds.  But  such  an  infinite,  omniscient,  omni¬ 
potent  mind  would  be  quite  different  from  what  we  know  as 
mind;  it  would  not  be  mind  at  all,  but  the  supramental  truth. 
Yet  it  is  not  entirely  alien  to  us.  We  can  not  only  infer  and 
glimpse  that  truth,  but  we  are  capable  of  realizing  it.  In  fact, 
it  is  the  truth  which  our  gradual  self-expression  in  the  world 
aims  at  and  is  meant  to  achieve.  In  it  the  truth  of  being  is 
luminously  one  with  all  its  manifold  expressions.  It  is  the 
comprehensive  and  creative  consciousness  which  by  its  power 
of  pervading  and  comprehending  knowledge  is  linked  to  that 
self-awareness  by  identity  which  is  the  poise  of  the  Brahman, 
and  by  its  power  of  projecting,  confronting,  apprehending 
knowledge  is  the  parent  of  that  awareness  by  distinction  which 
is  the  process  of  the  mind.  It  has  the  knowledge  of  the  One, 
but  is  able  to  draw  out  of  the  One  its  hidden  multitudes;  it 
manifests  the  many,  but  does  not  lose  itself  in  their  differentia¬ 
tions.  The  supermind  contains  and  upholds  the  diffusion  of 
the  One  into  the  many  and  prevents  it  from  being  a  real 
disintegration.  It  possesses  the  power  of  development,  of 
evolution,  of  making  explicit,  and  that  power  carries  with  it 
the  other  power  of  involution,  of  envelopment,  of  making 
implicit.  In  the  divine  and  creative  supermind  all  is  one  in 
being,  consciousness,  will  and  delight,  yet  with  an  infinite 
capacity  of  differentiation  that  deploys  but  does  not  destroy 
the  unity.  We  have  to  regard  the  supermind  as  the  nature  of 
the  Divine  Being,  not  indeed  in  its  absolute  self-existence,  but 
* 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 


in  its  action  as  the  lord  and  creator  of  its  own  worlds.  This  is 
the  truth  of  what  we  call  God,  although  it  is  not  the  too 
personal  God  of  ordinary  theism. 

The  supermind  is  the  necessary  intermediate  link1  between 
Saccidananda — the  one  existence,  consciousness  and  bliss — 
and  the  phenomenal  world  of  the  many — of  mind,  life  and 
matter,  of  space,  time  and  causality.  For  in  itself  Saccidananda 
must  be  a  spaceless  and  timeless  absolute  of  conscious  existence 
that  is  bliss;  but  the  world  is  an  extension  in  time  and  space 
and  a  movement,  a  development  of  relations  and  possibilities 
by  causality.  That  which  thus  develops  all  things  must  be  a 
knowledge-will  or  conscious-force  which  is  the  essential  nature 
of  existence.  But  the  developing  knowledge-will  cannot  be 
mental;  for  mind  does  not  know  and  cannot  control  the  divine 
law  of  development  of  all  things  out  of  conscious-force,  but  is 
governed  by  it,  is  one  of  its  results  and  moves  in  the  phenomena 
of  the  self-development  and  not  at  its  roots.  Further,  the 
creative  knowledge-will  which  develops  all  must  be  in  possession 
of  the  unity  of  things  and  must  out  of  it  manifest  their  multi¬ 
plicity;  but  mind  is  not  in  possession  of  that  unity,  it  has  only 
an  imperfect  possession  of  a  part  of  the  multiplicity.  Therefore, 
there  must  be  a  principle  superior  to  the  mind  which  is  adequate 
to  explain  the  creation  of  worlds  in  time  and  space.  The 
supermind  is  this  principle.  It  is  Saccidananda  itself,  but 
Saccidananda  not  resting  in  its  pure  infinite  consciousness,  but 
proceeding  out  of  this  primal  poise  into  a  movement  which  is 
its  form  of  energy  and  instrument  of  cosmic  creation. 

In  the  principle  of  supermind  there  are  three  general  poises 
or  sessions  of  its  world-founding  consciousness.2  The  first 
founds  the  inalienable  unity  of  things.  It  is  not  the  pure 
Unitarian  consciousness  of  Saccidananda  in  itself  which  is 
timeless  and  spaceless,  and  does  not  cast  itself  out  in  any  kind 
of  extension.  On  the  contrary,  it  is  an  equal  self-extension  of 
Saccidananda  as  it  comprehends  all,  possesses  all  and  consti¬ 
tutes  all  things.  But  this  all  is  one,  not  many;  there  is  no 
individualization.  In  it  all  is  developed  in  unity  and  as  one;  all 
is  held  by  this  divine  consciousness  as  forms  of  its  existence, 
not  in  any  degree  as  separate  existences.  It  is  the  pure  divine 

1  Aurobindo,  The  Life  Divine ,  p.  133.  *  Ibid.,  p.  135. 

42 


Mind  and  Supermind  in  Sri  Aurobindo's  Integralism 

ideation  and  formation  in  the  Infinite,  not  an  unreal  play  of 
mental  thought,  but  a  real  play  of  conscious  being. 

In  the  second  poise  of  the  supermind  the  divine  conscious¬ 
ness  stands  back  in  the  idea  from  the  movement  which  it 
contains,  realizing  it  by  a  sort  of  apprehending  consciousness, 
following  it,  seeming  to  distribute  itself  in  its  forms.  In  each 
name  and  form  it  would  realize  itself  as  the  stable  conscious- 
self,  the  same  in  all;  but  also  it  would  realize  itself  as  a  con¬ 
centration  of  conscious-self  following  and  supporting  the 
individual  play  of  movement  and  upholding  its  differentiation 
from  other  play  or  movement — the  same  everywhere  in  soul- 
essence,  but  varying  in  soul-form.  This  concentration  supporting 
the  soul-form  would  be  the  individual  divine  or  jlvatman  as 
distinguished  from  the  universal  divine  or  one  all-constituting 
self.  There  would  be  no  essential  difference  between  them,  but 
only  a  practical  differentiation  for  the  play  which  would  not 
abrogate  the  real  unity.  The  universal  divine  would  know  all 
soul- forms  as  itself  and  yet  maintain  a  different  relation  with 
each  separately  and  in  each  with  all  the  others.  The  individual 
divine  would  know  itself  as  a  soul-form  and  soul-movement  of 
the  One,  and  by  a  comprehending  action  of  consciousness  enjoy 
its  unity  with  the  One  and  with  all  soul-forms,  and  by  an 
apprehending  act  of  consciousness  support  and  enjoy  its 
individual  movement  and  its  relations  of  a  free  difference  in 
unity  both  with  the  One  and  with  all  its  forms.  It  would 
maintain  its  individual  existence  and  yet  realize  itself  as  the 
One  that  has  become  all,  and  enjoy  even  in  its  particular 
modification  its  unity  with  God  and  all  its  fellows. 

The  third  poise  of  the  supermind  further  modifies  it  so  as  to 
support  the  evolution  of  a  diversified  individuality  which,  by 
the  action  of  Ignorance,  becomes  in  us  at  a  lower  level  the 
illusion  of  the  separate  ego.  Here  the  individual  divine  would 
so  predominantly  make  the  play  of  relations  with  the  universal 
and  its  other  forms  the  practical  field  of  its  conscious  experience 
that  the  realization  of  utter  unity  with  them  would  be  only 
the  far-off  end  and  culmination  of  all  experience.  This  third 
poise  would,  therefore,  be  that  of  a  sort  of  fundamental  blissful 
dualism  in  unity  between  the  individual  divine  and  its  universal 
source,  i.e.  Saccidananda. 


43 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 


These  three  poises  of  the  supermind  involve  no  departure 
from  the  supreme  truth-consciousness,  no  lapse  into  the 
falsehood  and  the  ignorance.  For  the  secondary  and  tertiary 
supermind  would  only  develop  and  apply  in  the  terms  of  the 
divine  multiplicity  what  the  primary  supermind  had  held  in 
the  terms  of  the  divine  unity.  The  supermind  is  thus  the 
creative  idea  which  retains  to  the  full  the  truth  of  the  supreme 
Spirit.  Mind,  life  and  matter  are  an  inferior  expression  of  it  and 
are  inevitably  drawn  towards  it  and  try  to  reach  it  as  their 
final  goal. 


MIND  AND  SUPERMIND 

Although  mind  is  an  expression  of  supermind  and  ever  tries  to 
reach  and  attain  it,  yet  in  its  essence  it  is  a  consciousness  which 
divides,  limits,  cuts  out  and  separates  forms  of  things  from  the 
indivisible  whole  of  existence  in  which  they  really  are  and  must 
always  be.  It  is  true  that  mind  has  a  constant  urge  to  go  beyond 
the  parts  and  grasp  the  whole.  But  by  its  inherent  limitations 
it  always  fails  in  its  attempts.  If  it  goes  beyond  and  tries  to 
conceive  a  real  whole,  it  loses  itself  in  a  foreign  element;  it  falls 
from  its  own  ground  into  the  ocean  of  the  intangible  and  the 
infinite  where  it  can  neither  perceive,  conceive,  sense,  nor  deal 
with  its  subject  forcreation  and  enjoyment.  ‘Mind  cannotpossess 
the  infinite,  it  can  only  suffer  it  or  be  possessed  by  it;  it  can 
only  lie  blissfully  helpless  under  the  luminous  shadow  of  the  Real 
cast  down  on  it  from  planes  of  existence  beyond  its  reach/1 
This  essential  faculty  and  the  essential  limitation  that 
accompanies  it  are  the  truth  of  mind  and  fix  its  real  nature  and 
action,  svabhava  and  svadharma .  Its  function  is  to  translate 
infinity  into  the  terms  of  the  finite,  to  limit,  depiece.  In  our 
consciousness  it  actually  does  this  to  the  exclusion  of  all  true 
sense  of  the  infinite.  Thus  mind  is  the  nodus  of  the  great 
ignorance,  because  it  is  that  which  originally  divides  and 
distributes  the  infinite  into  the  terms  of  the  finite.  Since, 
however,  the  finite  is  only  an  appearance  of  the  infinite,  there 
must  be  an  original  consciousness  which  contains  and  views 
both  at  the  same  time  and  is  conscious  of  all  their  relations.  In 
that  consciousness  there  is  no  ignorance,  because  in  it  the 

1  Aurobindo,  The  Life  Divine ,  p.  151. 

44 


Mind  and  Supermind  in  Sri  Aurobindo’s  Integralism 

finite  is  not  separated  from  the  infinite  as  an  independent 
reality;  but  still  there  is  a  subordinate  process  of  delimitation — 
otherwise  no  world  of  finites  could  exist — a  process  by  which 
mind,  life  and  matter  come  into  phenomenal  being.  This 
subordinate  process  of  the  eternal  seer  and  thinker  may  be 
called  the  divine  mind.  And  it  must  obviously  be  a  subordinate 
and  not  really  a  separate  working  of  the  supermind,  and  must 
operate  through  the  apprehending  movement  of  the  truth- 
consciousness.  That  apprehending  consciousness,  the  Prajnana, 
places  the  working  of  the  indivisible  all — the  supermind — as 
an  object  of  creative  knowledge  before  the  consciousness  of  the 
same  all,  somewhat  as  a  poet  views  the  creations  of  his  owm 
consciousness  placed  before  him  as  if  they  were  things  other 
than  himself,  while  really  they  are  no  more  than  formations  of 
his  own  being  and  are  indivisible  from  him.  Thus  Prajnana 
makes  the  fundamental  division  which  leads  to  all  the  rest,  the 
division  of  the  Purusa,  the  conscious  soul,  and  the  Prakrti,  the 
force-soul  or  nature-soul.* 

Thus  the  elements  of  division  have  come  into  being,  the 
infinity  of  the  One  has  translated  itself  into  an  extension  of 
conceptual  time  and  space;  the  omnipresence  of  the  One  in 
that  extension  translates  itself  into  a  multiplicity  of  the 
conscious  soul,  the  many  purusas  of  the  Sankhya;  the  multi¬ 
plicity  of  the  soul-forms  has  translated  itself  into  a  divided 
habitation  of  the  extended  unity,  their  many  mind-bodies. 
But  there  is  as  yet  no  real  division  and  separation.  It  is  as  yet 
only  ‘as  if,  for  the  divine  mind  is  not  deluded,  it  is  aware  of  all 
as  phenomenon  of  being  and  keeps  hold  of  its  existence  in  the 
reality  of  being;  it  does  not  forfeit  its  unity.  A  new  factor,  a 
new  action  of  conscious  force  is  therefore  needed  to  create  the 
operation  of  a  hopelessly  limited  mind  as  opposed  to  a  freely 
limiting  mind,  of  the  creative  mind  as  opposed  to  the  divine. 
That  new  factor  is  avidya,  ignorance,  the  self-ignoring  faculty 
which  separates  the  action  of  mind  from  the  action  of  the 
supermind  that  originated  and  still  governs  it  from  behind  the 
veil.  Thus  separated  mind  perceives  only  the  particular  and 
not  the  universal,  or  conceives  the  particular  in  an  unrelated 
universal  and  no  longer  both  as  phenomena  of  the  infinite. 

1  Aurobindo,  The  Life  Divine ,  pp.  152-3. 

45 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 


This  limiting  avidya  or  ignorance  which  spells  the  fall  of  mind 
from  supermind  and  gives  rise  to  the  idea  of  real  division, 
proceeds  from  the  individualized  soul  viewing  everything  from 
its  own  standpoint  and  excluding  all  others,  concentrating 
itself  upon  itself  and  ignoring  all  others,  forgetting  the  fact 
that  all  others  are  also  itself.  It  is  due  to  the  individual  souls 
losing  sight  of  the  obvious  fact  'that  all  minds  are  One  Mind 
taking  many  standpoints,  all  lives  One  Life  developing  many 
currents  of  activity,  all  body  and  form  one  substance  of  Force 
and  Consciousness  concentrating  into  many  apparent  stabilities 
of  force  and  consciousness  .  .  Z1 

This  ignorance  is  further  deepened  in  man  when  he  identifies 
his  self  with  the  body  and  wrongly  thinks  his  mind  to  be 
determined  by  the  body,  especially  the  brain  and  the  nervous 
system  which  it  uses  as  the  instrument  of  its  conscious  super¬ 
ficial  action.  But  behind  this  corporeal  mentality  there  is  the 
subconscious  or  subliminal  mind  which  knows  itself  to  be 
more  than  the  body  and  is  capable  of  escaping  from  this 
absorption  in  body  and  life.  This  higher  mind  is  able  to  perceive 
and  deal  with  other  souls  as  other  forms  of  its  pure  self.  But 
even  the  higher  mind  does  not  escape  from  the  original  error 
of  mind.  For  there  is  still  the  veil  of  avidya  between  the 
mental  and  the  supramental  action.  It  is  only  when  the  veil  is 
rent  and  the  mind  becomes  responsive  to  a  supramental  action 
that  it  gets  back  to  the  truth  of  things  and  becomes  instru¬ 
mental  to  the  supermind.  In  truth  mind  is  a  subordinate 
action  and  instrument  of  supermind.  It  fulfils  its  function  in 
the  truth,  which  is  to  hold  forms  apart  from  each  other  by  a 
phenomenal,  a  purely  formal  delimitation  of  their  activity.  It 
has  to  uphold  an  individualization  of  conscious  force,  delight, 
substance,  which  derives  all  its  reality  from  the  supreme 
universal  behind.  What  we  call  the  ignorance  does  not  create 
a  new  thing  and  absolute  falsehood,  but  only  misrepresents 
the  truth.  The  ignorance  is  the  mind  separated  in  knowledge 
from  its  source  of  knowledge  and  giving  a  false  appearance  of 
opposition  and  conflict  to  the  harmonious  play  of  the  supreme 
truth  in  its  universal  manifestation,  or  of  the  truth  of  Sac- 
cidananda  as  the  manifest  universe  (visva-rupa). 

1  Aurobindo,  The  Life  Divine,  pp.  155-6. 

46 


3 


FREDERIC  SPIEGELBERG 


Sri  Aurobindo  and  Existentialism 


The  spirit  of  Sri  Aurobindo,  of  course,  is  alive,  like  the  spirit 
of  all  great  masters — is  and  remains  alive.  But  after  Sri  Auro¬ 
bindo  is  no  longer  with  us  for  over  seven  years,  it  seems  time 
now  to  review  the  situation  and  ask  ourselves  how  Sri  Aurobindo 
and  his  teaching  fits  into  present-day  thinking. 

There  are  today  a  number  of  systems  at  work,  particularly 
among  western  people,  of  which  Sri  Aurobindo  was  hardly 
aware,  could  hardly  be  aware,  since  they  were  only  in  the 
beginning  stages  developing  in  Europe.  But  in  the  meantime 
they  have  developed  so  strongly  and  quite  independent  from 
other  systems,  particularly  from  Indian  systems,  that  we  have 
to  ask  ourselves  bluntly:  Is  there  still  a  great  message  in  Sri 
Aurobindo's  system  after  we  have  studied  existential 
philosophy? 

What  do  we  mean  by  the  word  'existentialism?  I  know  that 
everybody  who  has  read  any  newspapers  in  the  last  weeks  wall 
think  of  the  'Beatniks'  of  the  North  Beach  gang  of  young  artists 
or  pseudo-artists  in  San  Francisco,  who  all  of  them  know  a 
great  deal  more  about  existentialism  than  most  of  us  do, 
because  they  use  this  word  as  a  live  slogan,  as  a  new  type  of 
philosophy  of  life.  Some  of  you,  however,  may  think  a  little 
bit  more  deeply,  of  Sartre,  and  of  the  various  novelists  who 
have  built  on  this  French  philosopher's  ideas.  Very  few  of  us 
probably  are  aware  of  the  longer  historical  background  of 
this  sweeping  modern  European  movement,  which  actually 
should  be  followed  down  to  the  Middle  Ages,  to  the 
thirteenth  and  fourteenth  centuries,  when  a  new  movement  in 

47 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 

western  thought,  in  the  early  scholastic  time,  took  over:  that 
is  the  philosophy  of  nominalism. 

William  of  Occam  and  a  number  of  his  successors  preached 
the  philosophy  of  nominalism,  which  instantly  became  very 
questionable  to  the  Church,  and  was  ruled  out  later  on  as  a 
heretic  view.  What  was  this  bold  new  philosophy  of  nominal¬ 
ism  in  the  Middle  Ages?  Well,  to  understand  it  we  have  first  to 
realize  what  the  prevailing  philosophy  of  the  time  was.  You 
might  briefly  say  it  was  'Platonism'  with  various  derivations 
and  changes.  But  it  was  Platonism  in  so  far  as  one  believed  in 
the  priority  of  the  'idea',  of  the  pattern  that  stands  behind 
events,  behind  everyday  reality  and  of  which  this  reality  of  ours, 
our  living  day,  was  only  a  shadow,  a  very  doubtful  imprint, 
not  truly  giving  us  the  fullness  of  that  greater  power  that  stood 
above,  below,  or  behind,  or  however  you  want  to  express  it, 
outside  the  reality  of  our  every  day. 

The  nominalists  were  the  first  ones  to  challenge  this  Platonic 
thinking  and  thereby  to  become,  to  a  certain  extent,  anti- 
Christian  or  at  least  suspicious  to  the  straight  line  of  orthodox 
fundamentalist  Christianity  of  the  time.  Because  Christianity, 
as  one  of  the  recent  greatest  existentialists,  Martin  Heidegger, 
has  said-— Christianity  was  really  ‘Platonism  for  the  folks'.  It 
was  somehow  whittled  down  Platonism  that  was  not  any  more 
on  the  level  of  high  understanding  but  Platonism  for  every¬ 
body,  easy  to  grasp  without  containing,  of  course,  the  full 
essence  of  Platonism  and  of  the  Platonic  idea  doctrine.  Nominal¬ 
ism  stated  what  Sartre,  the  French  philosopher,  has  repeated 
in  our  time — and  this  is  probably  the  most  frequently  repeated 
sentence  of  all  existentialist  philosophers — Sartre  says: 
‘Existence  precedes  essence',  and  that  is  the  key  message  of 
existentialism.  All  philosophies  before  had  said  'Essence  pre¬ 
cedes  existence',  that  meant  to  say — to  give  an  example — if  we 
would  speak  of  a  man,  a  concrete  man,  a  human  being  on  the 
one  hand  and  humanity  on  the  other  hand,  the  idea  of  Platonism 
and  of  Christianity  would  have  been  that  humanity  is  the  basic 
pattern,  is  the  real  creation  of  God.  It  is  there  in  the  beginning. 
A  single  man  on  earth  today,  here  and  now,  is  derived  from  that 
great  idea  of  humanity,  is  a  special  case  of  it — a  minor  case  of 
minor  importance.  The  idea  precedes  what  we  would  call  the 

48 


Sri  Aurobindo  and  Existentialism 

visible  appearance  behind  it.  But  Sartre  reverses  this  position 
when  he  claims  just  the  other  way  around,  'Existence  precedes 
essence1.  Of  course  there  are  single  men,  many  single  men 
really  around  us,  and  we  can  see  them  with  our  eyes  here  and 
now.  Therefore,  we  can  secondarily  arrive  at  the  idea  of  man¬ 
kind  and  of  humanity,  which  in  itself  has  not  the  same  powerful, 
immediate  existence  value  as  the  human  being  with  whom  I 
am  here  and  now  in  contact.  You,  here  in  this  room,  obviously 
are  a  lot  more  important  to  me  than  the  idea  of  mankind  which 
is  somewhere  in  the  ether,  vaguely  overhead.  What  does  it 
mean  to  me?  But  you  mean  a  great  deal  to  me,  right  here  and 
now.  So  you  precede  whatever  there  may  be  as  an  idea  of 
mankind. 

William  of  Occam,  the  founder  of  this  mediaeval  nominalistic 
system,  went  so  far  as  to  say  that  an  idea  is  merely  a  flatus 
voci,  which  means  an  exhalation.  It  is  just  a  noise  like  ‘blah, 
blah*.  It  is  ruminating  ether  which  we  have  set  into  motion; 
‘mankind’,  in  other  words — is  just  a  word.  It  is  not  tangible. 
No  one  has  ever  touched  or  seen  mankind.  We  can  talk  about 
it  in  mathematical,  abstract  ways.  It  is  not  a  matter  of  direct 
experience.  Ideas  were  ultimately  dethroned  from  their  high 
place  of  honour,  on  which  Plato  had  put  them,  by  the  nomina¬ 
lists  of  the  Middle  Ages.  This  particular  tradition  has  been  very 
suspicious  to  Christians  throughout  the  times,  because  they  are 
clinging  to  popularized  Platonism  more  and  more. 

This  idea  of  nominalism  has,  as  it  were,  a  revival  today  in 
the  philosophy  of  existentialism.  This  is  not  all  that  exis¬ 
tentialism  has  to  say,  but  it  is  one  of  its  important  aspects. 
Modem  existentialism  goes  back  to  the  Middle  Ages,  and  even 
in  our  century,  in  its  revived  form,  does  not  yet  start  with 
Sartre,  but  really  with  the  Danish  theologian  Kierkegaard  in 
the  last  century,  and  with  Karl  Jaspers,  and  finally  comes  to 
Sartre  and  to  Madame  Beanvoir,  and  to  a  long  line  of  French 
literates  who  are  now  sitting  in  the  various  Boulevard  cafes  on 
the  Left  Bank  discussing  existentialism,  almost  in  the  style  in 
which  our  'Beatniks’  in  San  Francisco  have  taken  it  up  in  their 
Co-Existence  Bagel  Shop  and  in  the  old  Spaghetti  Factory.  We 
have  in  Paris  and  in  San  Francisco  very,  very  related  move¬ 
ments.  However,  the  Sartre  clan  and  related  literary  groups 

49 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 

today  do  not  represent  the  highest  and  best  form  of  exis¬ 
tentialist  philosophy.  And  while  Kierkegaard  was  not  yet 
a  systematic  philosopher,  and  the  'Beatniks'  are  no  more 
systematic  philosophers,  there  is  one  man  outstanding  in  the 
middle  who  has  given  the  most  illuminating  expression  to  the 
ideas  of  existentialism — that  is,  Martin  Heidegger.  If  Heidegger 
could  only  be  translated  into  English,  you  would  all  agree  with 
me  that  here  are  profound  ideas.  Unfortunately,  Heidegger  is 
not  translatable  into  English.  It  has  not  been  done  and  it 
probably  cannot  be  done  properly.  I  would  not  dare  to  do  it 
and  I  do  not  know  anyone  who  can,  because  Heidegger,  like  so 
many  of  the  modem  German  philosophers,  philosophizes  partly 
by  creating  a  new  language — a  new  German — new  words  all 
along.  He  uses  a  great  many  terms,  which,  just  as  the  famous 
Japanese  terms  of  Zen-Buddhism  are  completely  untranslatable, 
cannot  be  rendered  into  English.  And  many  of  his  words,  which 
are  quite  obvious  and  quite  intelligible  to  a  German,  remain 
to  us  as  vague  and  as  strange  as  any  Haiku,  which  also,  of 
course,  cannot  be  translated  from  the  Japanese  into  English. 
It  is  a  vague  rendering  of  something  that  is  in  it,  but  you 
do  not  have  the  essence — you  do  not  have  the  real  life  blood 
of  it. 

Martin  Heidegger  himself  is  a  very  extraordinary  personality. 
He  has  a  great  deal  of  defeatism,  a  negativistic  attitude  to  life 
that  you  also  find  in  extremes  in  Sartre  and  the  'Beatnik' 
followers.  This  attitude  came  out  in  his  personality  in  the  way 
he  talked.  He  always  stood  bent  and  he  always  talked,  as  it 
were,  in  a  circle — back  into  himself.  He  did  not  project  and  he 
did  not  try  to  project,  and  'death'  was  his  third  word.  The 
second  word  was  'non-being'.  Negative  expressions  were  pre¬ 
vailing  and  had  a  definite  preference  over  positive  expressions. 
There  were  more  expressions  for  the  darkness  and  negativities 
of  life — far  more  than  ever  for  its  possible,  but  very  doubtful, 
brightnesses  and  positivities. 

Martin  Heidegger  has  never  studied  Indian  philosophy.  He 
remained  and  remains  today,  as  far  as  I  know,  unaware  of 
Sri  Aurobindo,  unaware  of  Vedanta  even,  though  he  has  shown 
recently  signs  of  becoming  interested  to  start  looking  into  this 
field,  because  it  was  too  obvious  to  too  many  of  his  students 

50 


Sri  Aurobindo  and  Existentialism 

that  a  certain  amount  of  parallels  were  there  which  may  be 
interesting  to  the  creator  of  an  existentialistic  system  itself 
further  to  investigate.  Because,  back  of  Heidegger's  system  in 
all  of  his  many  writings,  you  would  find,  if  you  could  read 
it  in  its  original,  that  there  is  a  great  deal  of  mysticism,  of 
deepest  metaphysical  thought,  of  religion,  of  theology.  Martin 
Heidegger  himself  would  be  the  last  one  to  admit  that.  In 
fact,  he  is  highly  insulted  if  anybody  ever  dares  to  suggest  that 
some  of  his  existentialist  statements  have  a  religious,  mystical, 
theological  implication.  That  is  good  so.  Because  Heidegger 
does  not  want  to  speak  a  religious  theological  language  and  so 
he  deliberately  keeps  away  from  all  kinds  of  old-fashioned 
expressions  wrhich,  for  many  of  us,  would  be  dead.  The  expres¬ 
sions  of  traditional  theology  and  even  of  traditional  spiritism 
and  mysticism  have  taken  on  with  many  of  us,  with  many  of 
our  best  searchers  and  experts,  so  much  negative  characteristics 
that  it  would  only  deflect  our  attention  from  Heidegger  if  he 
would  use  them.  And,  in  the  attempt  to  wrestle  for  entirely 
new  expressions  for  an  entirely  new  experience,  w’e  gain  a  great 
deal  more  by  the  novelty  of  words  than  if  he  would  have  used 
perfectly  adequate  and  possible  expressions  of  the  past.  Of 
course,  there  is  a  drawback  in  the  fact  that  he,  himself,  remains 
unaware  of  his  interrelation  with  the  great  thoughts  of  tradi¬ 
tional  metaphysics  and  religions,  as  well  as  with  the  great 
thoughts  of  Indian  philosophy.  He  would  reject  any  such 
analogy  most  sternly;  this,  of  course,  is  a  personal  limitation 
which,  however,  I  think  is  not  so  bad  for  us  to  bear  as  if  he 
would  instead  have  given  us  his  experiences  in  an  old  language, 
which  would  not  open  our  eyes  and  any  windows  to  what  is 
above  us. 

Now  very  briefly — what  is  this  central  message  of  Martin 
Heidegger  as  the  most  systematic  of  all  the  existentialists?  In 
mediaeval  Latin,  one  might  call  it  the  emphasis  on  the  hie  and 
nunc ,  the  here  and  now.  As  I  said,  in  relation  to  nominalism, 
not  words,  verbalization,  not  ideas,  but  the  direct  experience 
of  the  things  is  what  matters,  of  things  that  touch  us,  that  are 
around  us.  An  ever  repeated  sentence  of  Martin  Heidegger, 
and  all  of  the  followers  in  the  existentialist  group,  is  to  say 
that  nobody  knows  any  reality  at  all  until  he  is  in  it — until  he 

5i 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 

has  become  a  part  of  it.  The  standing  over  against,  in  objective 
witness-consciousness,  does  not  give  us  any  knowledge. 

Heidegger,  who  usually  dressed  in  a  forester's  coat  and  with 
wool  socks  to  the  knees,  and  was  fond  of  hiking  through  the 
fields  and  forests  of  the  Black  Forest  region  in  southern 
Germany,  said  again  and  again  that  a  man  who  walks  through 
the  fields  and  admires  the  beautiful  colour  of  the  earth,  of  the 
grain,  of  the  flowers  (which  are  weeds),  of  the  clouds,  of  the 
sunshine,  does  not  know  those  fields;  only  the  farmer  does, 
because  to  him  alone  it  is  a  life  issue.  A  mere  aesthetic  apprecia¬ 
tion  or  understanding  is  a  misunderstanding.  It  does  not  go  to 
the  core.  The  man  who  takes  a  hike  through  the  woods  does 
not  know  these  woods.  It  is  only  the  forester  who  can  tell  what 
the  woods  are  all  about,  when  he  with  chalk  marks  the  trees 
which  are  not  so  good  and  ought  to  go  down  soon.  And  so  on 
in  all  other  fields  of  life,  any  kind  of  science,  any  kind  of 
knowledge  means  primarily  and  first  of  all  leading  experi¬ 
mentally  into  things,  participation  in  them.  If  you  do  not 
become  like  the  children,  you  will  not  understand  the  children. 
You  will  not  know  the  children  at  all.  As  a  foreign  observer,  as 
an  adult,  you  will  look  at  them  in  their  cuteness,  but  you  will 
know  nothing  truly  about  them. 

In  this  respect  I  do  feel  there  is  a  great  deal  of  similarity 
between  Heidegger  s  new  existentialist  emphasis  on  direct 
experience  and  direct  participation  with  things,  rather  than 
on  looking  at  them  from  outside,  with  traditional  Indian 
philosophy,  and  with  the  traditional  Indian  epistemological 
approach  which  also  rules  out,  like  the  existentialists,  the 
only  importance  of  reasoning  and  inference.  It  has  its  place 
but  it  will  not  ever  get  us  to  the  full  understanding  of  reality. 
You  have  to  realize  it.  You  have  to  open  your  eyes.  It  has  to  be 
right  in  front  of  you  and  you  have  to  visualize  it.  It  has 
to  become  an  experience.  This  is  the  statement  of  Vedanta. 
This  is  the  statement  of  Aurobindo.  And  this  is  also  the 
statement  of  Heidegger,  very  much  in  contrast  to  the  high 
esteem,  sometimes  the  overestimation,  in  which  reason  and 
thinking  is  held  among  all  other  kinds  of  philosophers.  There 
is  a  great  deal  of  overemphasis  and  overestimation  given  to 
thinking.  Herein,  Heidegger  and  Aurobindo  agree. 

52 


Sri  Aurobindo  and  Existentialism 


What  is  thinking,  after  all?  Have  you  been  thinking  lately? 
Am  I  thinking  at  this  moment?  You  are  digesting  my  words 
and  I  let  them  come.  Or,  as  Aurobindo  says  in  answer  to  a 
letter  of  Dilip  Kumar  Roy  when  he  asked  him  a  by-the-way 
question  like:  'Do  you  think,  O  Master,  that  it  is  this  way  or 
that  wav’,  Aurobindo  does  not  answer  this  question  itself,  but 
he  says  instead:  'What  you  call  thinking,  I  never  do.  I  see  or 
I  don’t  see.  That  is  all.’  This  is  a  word  which  Heidegger  could 
very  well  make  his  own.  He  does  not  think.  He  does  not  believe 
in  the  importance  of  thinking,  but  rather  in  the  importance  of 
living,  and  of  realizing,  and  of  experiencing. 

Heidegger  has  one  word  which  is  of  foremost  importance  in 
his  own  system.  That  is  the  word,  Sein.  His  first  book  was 
called  Sein  Unci  Zeit ,  'Being  and  Time’.  Sein ,  in  German,  is 
unfortunately  mistranslated  by  calling  it  Being.  It  is  the 
be-power  itself.  This  particularly  emphasized  state  of  being, 
for  which  the  Sanskrit  language  would  use  the  word  sat  rather 
than  the  word  bhava .  It  is  the  essence  and  the  key  word  of 
Heidegger’s  existentialism.  Everything  is  Sein.  And  there 
cannot  be  anything  that  is  not  ultimately  a  part  of  that  all¬ 
comprising  Beingness.  Even  becoming  is  an  expression  of 
Being.  This  statement  can  be  found  in  Aurobindo.  When  am 
I  an  existentialist?  The  moment  in  which  I  abandon  mere 
abstract  thinking,  because  I  am  disgusted  with  it,  because  I 
feel  that  it  does  not  get  me  anywhere.  The  moment  that  I  get 
over  the  narrow  limitations  of  my  reasoning  and  feel  driven 
instead  to  experience  the  bewildering,  monstrous  miracle  of 
this  our  being  here  and  now,  in  this  moment  on  earth,  I  am 
an  existentialist.  When,  instead  of  raising  my  eyes  to  nowhere 
beyond  in  order  finally  to  hallucinate  some  Life  Power  there; 
if,  instead  of  doing  anything  like  that,  I  am  puzzled,  stimulated, 
enthused  by  the  hardness  of  metal,  by  the  clicking  of  time,  by 
the  warmth  of  your  breath,  by  the  sound  of  my  own  voice  and 
the  movement  of  my  own  fingers.  The  moment  that  I  touch 
this  bewildering,  surprising,  unexplainable,  perfectly  miracu¬ 
lous  reality  itselfias  an  astounding  mystery,  I  have  become  an 
existentialist.  In  this  again,  Heidegger  and  Aurobindo,  without 
knowing  of  the  existence  of  each  other,  agree  at  depths. 

The  subjectivity  of  man,  his  thinking,  his  reasoning,  has 

53 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 


unfortunately  replaced  the  reality  of  his  Sein,  of  his  being 
itself.  We  put  up  a  veil  ourselves.  It  is  not  a  veil  of  maya.  It  is 
a  veil  of  our  own  making.  It  is  a  veil  of  my  own  subjectivity 
with  which  I  cloak  the  wonderful,  bewildering  reality  before 
my  eyes  all  the  time  and  which  I  make  the  standard  for  the 
evaluation  of  even  the  divine  powers.  They  become  subject 
to  man’s  standards.  God  becomes  the  highest  value  and  what 
replaces  the  Divine  is  not  superman.  It  is  not  as  it  should  be — 
the  gnostic  being — but  my  own  limited  personal  subjectivity. 

Even  philosophy,  so  says  Heidegger,  will  eventually  dis¬ 
appear;  so  will  religion;  because  they  are  too  rational,  because 
they  are  too  far-fetched.  They  are  not  existentialist  as  they 
should  be.  They  will  lose  their  appeal.  Sri  Aurobindo  says  in 
one  of  his  letters,  'it  seems  today  that  all  religions  are  somehow 
"off  shade". ’  They  do  not  hit  any  more.  You  can’t  select  any 
one  of  them  as  primary  and  as  true  nor  can  you  make  a  mixture 
out  of  all  of  them  in  order  to  have  a  true  religion.  This  state¬ 
ment  can  be  found  in  Aurobindo’s  The  Life  Divine ,  as  well  as 
in  a  number  of  articles  of  Martin  Heidegger.  Here  they  agree 
completely.  Man,  it  seems,  through  his  stressed  rationality  has 
disposed  of  the  miracle  of  Being  and  of  the  Divine.  The  only 
hope  lies  in  an  approach  beyond  man.  Heidegger  quotes 
Nietzsche  and  his  idea  of  superman.  So  does  Aurobindo.  When 
it  comes  to  testify  to  a  mentality  that  is  greater  than  the 
degenerated  mentality  in  which  we  find  ourselves  as  a  whole 
in  this  century,  superman  is  called  for,  and  to  characterize  him 
we  must  say  he  will  have  true  existentialist  mentality,  which 
looks  for  the  direct  experience  rather  than  for  the  taming  of 
reality  by  our  mentality.  This  superman  will  have  to  be  more 
daring  than  any  man  who  ever  walked.  And  therefore,  because 
he  is  more  daring,  he  will  be  able  to  say  more. 

Our  task  is  beyond  us.  Aurobindo  says  there  has  been  too 
much  SOS  crying  of  the  soul  in  recent  centuries  in  all 
religions,  as  if  to  save  our  souls  were  the  highest  goal  to  be 
achieved  by  man.  Salvation  is  only  a  side  line,  something  that 
comes  out  anyway  if  we  are  going  after  a  great  task,  which  is 
more  important  than  to  save  our  little  and  precious  souls. 
Therefore,  we  should  stretch  beyond  this  mortifying  drive 
toward  redemption  and  atonement  toward  the  real  task  over 

54 


Sri  Aurobindo  and  Existentialism 

which  wc  can  forget  the  necessity  of  redemption  and  atonement 
and  all  such  minor  things.  What  is  the  task  then,  if  it  is  not 
man?  Aurobindo  and  Heidegger  have  both  the  same  answer: 
the  earth.  That  does  not  mean  just  this  little  planet  in  the 
solar  system  in  contrast  to  saturn  and  venus  and  other  planets, 
but  it  means  matter.  Earth  is  almost  identical  in  Aurobindo’s 
language  with  Prakrti,  with  matter  itself. 

Heidegger  proclaims  these  things  by  quoting  poetry.  He 
does  not  quote  the  saints  of  the  Church,  he  does  not  quote  the 
Bible,  and  he  does  not  quote  theological  doctrines:  he  quotes 
poetry.  And  his  most  famous  poet  is  one  who  ended  in  insanity, 
naturally,  because  he  could  not  be  sane  and  still  be  appreciated 
by  the  entire  rational  existentialists.  I  translate  the  poem  of 
Holderlin  that  Heidegger  puts  into  the  centre  of  his  discussions 
of  man's  task  to  transform  earth: 

Earth.  Is  not  this  what  you  long  for? 

To  be  resurrected  invisibly  in  us. 

Is  it  not  your  dream  one  day  to  become  invisible? 

Earth  invisible. 

What,  if  not  transformation 
Would  be  your  urgent  task? 

Earth — O  you  Beloved  One, 

I  will. 

With  this  Heidegger  agrees  and  with  this  Aurobindo  agrees. 
Many  of  you,  who  have  read  the  gigantic  epic  of  our  time, 
Aurobindo's  Savitri,  will  agree  with  me  that  but  for  the 
rhythm,  this  could  be  almost  a  quotation  from  one  of  the 
chapters  of  that  epic,  wherein  Aurobindo  speaks  so  often  of 
This  green,  dangerous,  wonderful  earth'.  Earth  needs  man  to 
liberate  her — maybe  even  Being  itself.  Das  Sein  needs  man. 

It  has  not  been  a  very  popular  trend  in  the  great  w7orld 
religions  for  several  centuries  to  speak  of  God's  need  for  man. 
One  has  concentrated  on  emphasizing  man's  need  for  God.  Is 
it  not  just  about  time  to  reverse  the  position  now?  I  know 
many  men  who  today  would  not  be  satisfied  if  they  were  told 
that  their  need  for  the  Divine  would  be  satisfied  and  everything 
will  come  out  fine  in  the  end.  We  want  more  than  that.  I  have 
heard  such  seemingly  blasphemous  statements  as:  T  don't  care 

55 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 

whether  I  be  damned  or  saved,  as  long  as  I  know  I  have  done 
the  work  that  matters/  This  is,  of  course,  logical  nonsense, 
because  nobody  who  has  done  the  work  that  matters  can  ever 
truly  be  called  damned  in  any  real  sense,  and  if  God  would 
damn  such  a  man,  he  would  not  be  a  God  but  a  demon — a 
devil,  actually.  So  we  meet  here  an  utter  confusion  of  terms. 
It  is  interesting  to  note  that  Aurobindo  is  not  alone  in  empha¬ 
sizing  once  more  the  necessity  of  man  to  work  for  Being,  for 
Saccidananda,  for  the  Ultimate,  rather  than  to  be  comforted 
only  by  it.  For  this  also  is  emphasized  in  existentialist  philo¬ 
sophy,  particularly  in  Heidegger,  but  also  in  many  of  his 
followers.  Man  feels  himself  once  more  as  a  crusader,  as  a 
fighter,  as  a  knight  with  a  great  task  which  is  foremost,  and 
over  which  he  can  almost  forget  the  divinities  around  him.  He 
fights  the  fight  for  its  own  sake  rather  than  to  please  anybody 
who  dishes  out  a  reward  to  him  afterwards.  Foremost  among 
these  existentialist  poets  is  Rainer  M.  Rilke,  the  great  Swiss- 
Austrian  mystic,  who,  in  his  many  poems  of  The  Book  of  Hours , 
and  in  his  later  poems,  emphasizes  again  and  again  how  God  is 
in  need  of  man,  how  He  waits  for  man,  longingly,  to  do  His 
work.  How  pitiful  God  is,  if  He  is  left  alone,  and  man  does  not 
care  for  Him  any  more! 

In  one  of  these  poems  God  is  called  the  Great  Neighbour. 
I  shall  try  to  paraphrase  it. 

O  Neighbour  God 

You  live  up  on  the  mountain  in  your  little  old  cottage 
All  by  yourself  alone. 

I  wish  I  could  go  and  keep  you  company. 

But  it  is  not  easy  to  find  your  place 
Because  for  such  a  long  time 

Nobody  has  walked  the  path  that  was  leading  up  there 

And  the  sands  of  time 

And  the  winds,  have  blown  the  path  over. 

One  can  hardly  find  it  any  more. 

But,  if  I  should  manage  to  find  the  way 
And  knock  at  your  door, 

I  know  I  would  be  awfully  welcome. 

O  Neighbour  God, 

So  few  have  called  on  you  lately. 

56 


Sri  Aurobindo  and  Existentialism 


This,  probably,  in  the  eyes  of  an  orthodox  Christian,  would 
sound  like  impious  blasphemy.  But,  of  course,  it  is  not  to  be 
taken  as  such.  Here  is  the  same  spirit  at  work  as  we  find  in 
Aurobindo's  emphasis  that  whatever  is,  is  ultimately  a  reflex 
of  Saccidananda,  the  supreme  Reality,  be  it  ever  so  dark.  Also 
becoming  is  ultimately  a  kind  of  being.  That  means  that  the 
higher  philosophy,  as  Heidegger  says,  does  not  have  to  deny 
the  lower  ways  of  thinking,  the  lower  ways  of  serving;  only  the 
higher  philosophy  has  to  deny  the  stubbornness  of  the  claim 
of  the  lower  thinking  to  be  everything — to  be  the  highest. 

All  ways  of  life,  even  the  lowest  ones,  can  be  accepted  by  the 
existentialists  in  so  far  as  they  express  one  aspect  of  Das  Sein , 
of  this  being  power.  Aurobindo  says  all  has  to  be  accepted,  but 
all  has  to  be  transformed.  In  the  transformed,  in  the  newly 
visualized  state,  all  has  its  meaning,  all  has  its  place.  Nothing 
should  be  repressed,  rejected,  thrown  out,  denied,  destroyed. 

Heidegger  says  a  philosophy  of  ultimate  being  cannot  exist. 
Why  not?  Because  we,  men,  are  ourselves  the  philosophy  of 
higher  being.  God  philosophizes,  but  He  docs  not  do  that  by 
sitting  down  and  thinking  out  thoughts,  but  by  creating  men. 
They  are  His  thoughts.  So  therefore,  we  men  cannot  now 
pretend  to  have  a  philosophy  of  higher  being,  because  we  are 
ourselves  the  philosophy  of  higher  being.  This  idea  is  very 
related  to  the  greatest  of  our  living  theologians — Paul  Tillich — 
who  has  said,  that  what  we  need  today  is  not  what  all  these  dia¬ 
lectical  theologians  have  said,  a  philosophy  of  broken  thinking, 
because  we  are  living  in  a  poor  time  where  everything  is 
broken.  We  do  not  need  'a  philosophy  of  broken  thinking', 
but  we  need  'broken  thinking'.  In  other  words:  only  in  the 
acceptance  of  this  brokenness  can  we  find  meaning. 

There  is  in  all  our  wildest  drives,  whether  they  are  sexual  or 
artistic  or  power  drives,  an  element  of  urgency.  This  bursting 
power  within  us  drives  us  on  to  live  and  to  die — to  do  anything 
— to  have  goals  and  to  look  forward — to  press  on:  it  is  the 
greater  being  that  works  through  me.  It  is  the  Ultimate  itself, 
searching  itself  through  us  because  without  us,  it  could  not 
find  itself.  This  again  is  an  idea  which  is  related  to  the  Indian 
doctrine  of  Itld,  the  playfulness  of  Brahman,  who  hides  like 
a  mother  does — playfully  behind  the  main  pillar  of  the  house 

57 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 

so  that  the  child  can  find  her  again.  Joy  is  in  the  re-finding,  in 
the  renewed  acquaintance,  rather  than  in  the  steady  staying  of 
it.  This  is  very  much  what  Heidegger  expresses  and  what  is 
traditionally  known  also  in  the  history  of  Christian  theology. 
We  find  it  in  St  Augustine's  Confessions.  In  the  very  first 
chapter,  St  Augustine  starts  to  speculate  about  God  and  he 
says,  ‘O  God,  do  I  know  You  or  do  I  not  know  You?  If  I  would 
know  You,  I  would  not  search  for  You  because  I  would  have 
You.  If  I  did  not  know  You  at  all,  I  could  not  possibly  search 
for  You,  because  I  would  not  know  what  to  search  for.  So, 
this  power  in  me  that  strives  and  longs  and  looks  upward — 
this  is  You.  I  don't  find  You  behind  the  stars  or  above  the 
mountains;  but  in  my  own  striving,  in  my  own  longing.  You 
live.' 

This  is  very  much  what  Heidegger  expresses  when  he  says 
that  our  looking  up  longingly,  that  striving,  that  urgent 
searching,  which  is  so  familiar  to  man,  is  that  very  thing  that  is 
not  familiar  at  all  to  God.  Because  He  does  not  look  up  longingly 
and  yet  He  does,  because  we  are  His  looking  up  longingly. 
Heidegger  insists  that  he  is  not  a  theologian,  not  a  religious 
man,  not  a  mystic— by  no  means — yet  he  happens  to  say  that 
Das  Scin — Being  itself — comes  to  self-consciousness  in  our 
own  longing.  We,  in  our  poverty,  in  the  time  of  scarcity,  give 
in  this  expression  of  searching  and  urgent  longing  a  form  to 
that  tendency,  that  life  blood,  which  circulates  in  Being  itself 
as  its  major  characteristic.  The  world  of  science  and  technique 
does  not  at  all  preclude  a  jump  beyond  itself,  says  Heidegger. 
We  do  not  have  to  get  away  from  civilization,  to  do  away  with 
all  our  gadgets  and  with  the  all-too-fast  progress  of  technique 
and  science.  Rather,  the  more  you  go  into  science,  the  more 
you  talk  to  the  great  men  of  science,  the  more  you  meet  an 
awareness  of  the  mystery,  the  more  it  becomes  possible  to  take 
science  itself  as  a  jumping  board.  It  does  not  any  more  today 
seem  that  science  would  drive  us  away  from  the  opening  of 
greater  gates  toward  higher  realization.  Aurobindo  in  his 
Sdvitn  has  said  that  many  times.  He  agrees  completely  with 
the  existentialist  message  as  Heidegger  presents  it. 

The  beginning  is  the  result.'  Whom  do  I  quote,  Heidegger 
or  Aurobindo?  Both.  They  both  say  the  beginning  is  the  result. 

58  ' 


Sri  Aurobindo  and  Existentialism 


And,  only  in  so  far  as  Das  Sein  has  shadowed  itself  down  into 
our  scarcity  and  poor  existential  being  today,  is  it  possible  for 
us  to  live— to  live  upward  again  to  that  from  where  we  come. 
Involution  precedes  evolution  because,  so  says  Aurobindo, 
Saccidananda,  the  Ultimate  itself,  has  shadowed  itself  down 
into  the  lowest  level  of  the  unconscious,  of  the  atom  itself,  and 
of  the  lowliness  and  forgetfulness  in  our  life;  therefore  we  can 
remember  again;  therefore  we  can  awaken.  We  can  turn  and 
grow  upwards  again.  That  is,  you  might  call  it,  the  ricochet  of 
the  ultimate  Being  and  of  the  rotating  movement  of  Brahman, 
that  in  a  cosmic  breathing  exhales  and  inhales.  And  we 
ourselves  are  both  the  exhaling  as  well  as  the  inhaling  of 
Brahman. 


59 


4 


S.  K.  MAITRA 

Sri  Aurobindo  and  Spengler: 
Comparison  between  The  Integral  and 
The  Pluralistic  Philosophy  of  History 


I  welcome  heartily  the  idea  which  the  sponsors  of  this  volume 
have  of  publishing  a  collection  of  essays  on  different  aspects  of 
the  integral  philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo,  and  thank  them  for 
the  opportunity  they  have  given  me  of  making  my  humble 
contribution  to  it.  As  for  the  subject  of  my  contribution,  I  feel 
that  as  I  have  written  on  various  other  aspects  of  this  integral 
philosophy  in  other  places,  it  will  be  most  fitting  if  I  write  for 
this  volume  on  his  integral  philosophy  of  history,  especially  as 
the  West  has  thrown  in  the  person  of  Oswald  Spongier  a 
serious  challenge  to  this  philosophy  from  the  side  of  the 
pluralistic  interpretation  of  history.  This  is  my  apology  for 
the  present  paper,  which  makes  a  brief  comparison  between 
Sri  Aurobindo’s  integral  philosophy  of  history  and  Spengler’s 
pluralistic  philosophy  of  history. 


spengler's  'the  decline  of  the  west7 

Spengler  has  stated  his  philosophy  of  history  in  his  great  work, 
Der  Untergang  des  Abendlades  ('The  Decline  of  the  West').  It  is  a 
remarkable  book  from  more  than  one  point  of  view.  It  created 
quite  a  sensation  when  it  appeared  in  Germany,  and  it  had  a 
phenomenal  reception,  for  we  are  told  that  90,000  copies  of  it 
were  sold  in  the  course  of  a  few  months.  Considering  that  the 
book  is  a  difficult  philosophical  work,  this  is  really  very 

60 


Sri  Aurobindo  and  Spengler 

remarkable.  The  only  book  of  its  kind  with  which  it  can  be 
compared,  so  far  as  its  phenomenal  success  is  concerned,  is 
Houston  Stewart  Chamberlain's  book  Die  Grundlagen  des 
Neunzehnten  Jahrhunderts  (‘Foundations  of  the  Nineteenth 
Century').  It  is  one  of  the  most  outstanding  books  of  the  present 
century.  Not  only  is  its  theme  very  grand,  but  its  style  also  is 
quite  in  keeping  with  the  grandeur  of  its  theme.  Every  word 
of  this  great  book  tells,  and  there  are  hundreds  of  thousands  of 
them.  The  reader,  in  fact,  is  simply  bewildered  by  the  grandeur 
of  its  theme,  the  mass  of  imposing  words,  each  one  of  which 
gives  him  a  thrill,  and  also  the  marvellous  scholarship  which 
it  exhibits.  Philosophy,  history,  poetry,  drama,  and  even 
mythology  have  been  laid  under  contribution  in  order  to  find 
materials  for  constructing  the  grand  edifice  of  the  philosophy 
of  history  which  this  book  represents.  Science  has  also  not  been 
forgotten  as  a  source  from  which  to  draw  materials  for  this 
mighty  structure.  And  although  the  sources  from  which  the 
materials  have  been  collected  have  been  so  varied  and  so 
multifarious,  yet  the  edifice  built  with  them  shows  a  wonderful 
unity. 

Such  is  the  general  character  of  what  we  may  call  the 
external  side  of  this  book.  But  it  is  only  when  we  come  to  grips 
with  the  contents  of  this  book  that  the  marvellous  genius  of 
the  author  comes  fully  into  view. 

DESTINY  AS  THE  MOVING  PRINCIPLE  OF  HISTORY 

The  moving  force  behind  history  Spengler  calls  'Schicksal'  or 
'Destiny'.  This  term  plays  a  very  important  part  in  Spengler's 
philosophy,  and  it  is  therefore  very  necessary  to  understand 
its  meaning.  Spengler  uses  this  term  mainly  on  account  of  its 
freedom  from  all  traces  of  teleology,  much  as  Bergson  uses  the 
terms  'creative  evolution'  and  ' elan  vital *  to  indicate  that  the 
principle  behind  the  movement  of  evolution  is  a  pure  spon¬ 
taneity,  completely  free  from  all  determination  by  any  purpose 
or  design.  Destiny,  in  fact,  in  Spengler's  philosophy,  has 
almost  the  same  significance  as  Bergson's  dan  vital.  Only,  he 
will  not  use  the  word  'vital'  because  of  its  association  with  life. 
His  object  is  to  employ  a  term  which  is  free  from  all  association 

61 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 


with  matter  or  life  or  mind.  Destiny  in  his  view  is  precisely  the 
word  which  serves  this  purpose,  for  it  cannot  be  identified  with 
a  material  or  a  vital  or  a  mental  process.  Its  absolutely  indeter¬ 
minate  character  is  a  sufficient  guarantee  of  its  freedom 
from  all  material  or  vital  or  mental  leanings.  Perhaps  he  got 
this  idea  of  a  pure  driving  force  untrammelled  by  any  leanings 
towards  a  material,  vital  or  mental  force,  from  Goethe's 
comparison  of  it  with  the  wind,  as  we  have  in  his  well-known 
lines: 

Seek  dcs  Menschen  wie  gleichst  dtt  dem  W asset 
Schicksal  dcs  Menschen  wie  gleichst  die  dem  Wind 
(‘Soul  of  Man,  how  thou  resemblest  water! 

Destiny  of  Man,  how  thou  resemblest  the  wind!') 


DESTINY  AND  CAUSALITY 

He  puts  it  in  sharp  contrast  to  the  principle  of  Causality.  In 
fact,  the  opposition  between  Destiny  and  Causality  is  the 
main  theme  of  his  book.  He  sees  in  this  opposition  the  key  to 
the  understanding  of  the  problem  of  history.  He  explains  its 
nature  as  follows: 

The  Destiny-Idea  demands  life-experience  and  not  scientific 
experience,  the  power  of  seeing  and  not  that  of  calculating,  depth 
and  not  intellect.  There  is  an  organic  life,  an  instinctive,  dream- 
sure  logic  of  all  existence  as  opposed  to  the  logic  of  the  inorganic, 
the  logic  of  understanding  and  of  things  understood — a  logic  of 
direction  as  against  a  logic  of  extension — and  no  systematist,  no 
Aristotle  or  Kant  has  known  how  to  deal  with  it.1 

From  this  paragraph  we  see  that  not  only  the  idea  of  Destiny 
but  even  the  words  which  he  uses  to  show  its  difference  from 
that  of  Causality,  for  instance,  'a  logic  of  direction,  as  against 
a  logic  of  extension',  'organic  life,  ...  as  opposed  to  . . .  the  logic 
of  understanding  and  of  things  understood',  'life-experience  and 
not  scientific  experience',  'the  power  of  seeing  and  not  that  of 
calculating',  'depth  and  not  intellect',  suggest  very  strongly 
the  influence  of  Bergson. 

1  The  Decline  of  the  West,  Vol.  I  (London:  Allen  &  Unwin  Ltd.,  1932),  p.  117 
authorized  English  translation  by  Charles  Francis  Atkinson. 

62 


Sri  Aurobindo  and  Spengler 

In  the  further  development  of  the  principle  of  destiny  also 
we  notice  very  clearly  the  same  influence.  In  the  following 
passages,  for  example,  where  he  speaks  of  the  necessity  of 
keeping  the  process  of  thinking  in  abeyance,  in  order  to  grasp 
the  nature  of  the  working  of  destiny,  he  comes  very  close  to 
Bergson's  view  that  to  know  the  nature  of  the  creative  force 
or  the  elan  vital ,  one  has  to  give  up  the  guidance  of  intellect  or 
reason  and  have  recourse  to  intuition : 

He  who  comprehends  the  light-world  that  is  before  his  eyes,  not 
physiognomically  but  systematically,  and  makes  it  intellectually  his 
own  by  the  methods  of  causal  experience ,  must  necessarily  in  the  end 
believe  that  every  living  thing  can  be  understood  by  reference  to 
cause  and  effect,  that  there  is  no  secret  and  no  inner  directedness. 
He,  on  the  other  hand,  who,  as  Goethe  did,  and  for  that  matter  as 
everyone  does  in  nine  out  of  ten  of  his  working  moments,  lets  the 
impression  of  the  world  about  him  work  merely  upon  his  senses, 
absorbing  these  impressions  as  a  whole,  feels  the  become  in  its 
becoming.  The  stiff  neck  of  causality  is  lifted  by  mere  ceasing  to 
think.  Suddenly,  Time  is  no  more  a  riddle,  a  notion,  a  ‘form’  or 
'dimension1  but  becomes  an  inner  certainty,  destiny  itself ;  and  in  its 
directedness,  its  irreversibility,  its  livingness,  is  disclosed  the  very 
meaning  of  the  historical  world-picture.  Destiny  and  Causality  are 
related  as  Time  and  Space.1 

These  words  could  very  well  have  been  put  into  the  mouth 
of  Bergson.  Bergson's  Time  as  pure  flow  is  Reality,  and  all 
intellectual  apprehension  of  Reality,  including  the  viewing  of 
it  from  the  standpoint  of  causality,  is  a  spatialization  of  it.  To 
escape  from  spatialization  it  is  therefore  necessary,  says 
Bergson,  to  discard  the  intellect  and  take  recourse  to  intuition. 
Exactly  similarly  Spengler  says  that  to  give  up  the  spatial 
view  of  things  which  the  intellect  brings  with  it,  all  that  is 
necessary  is  to  have  recourse  to  pure  feeling.  Feeling,  in  fact, 
in  Spengler  takes  the  place  of  intuition  in  Bergson. 

OPPOSITION  BETWEEN  CULTURE  AND  CIVILIZATION 

The  free  movement  of  destiny  is  checked  in  the  course  of  time, 
and  thus  there  arises  the  rigid  condition  which  is  called  civiliza- 

*  The  Decline  of  the  West,  Vol.  I,  p.  118. 

63 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 


tion.  Opposed  to  civilization  is  culture,  where  the  free  flow  of 
destiny  is  preserved.  The  present  state  of  human  evolution  in 
the  West,  in  Spengler's  view,  is  a  civilization  and  not  a  culture. 
It  is  therefore  a  sign  of  degeneration,  and  for  this  reason 
Spengler  gives  his  great  work  the  title  The  Decline  of  the  West , 
as  its  object  is  to  show  how  in  the  course  of  centuries,  culture 
in  the  West  has  lost  its  elasticity  and  become  rigid — a  sure 
indication  of  its  degeneration. 

Civilization  is  soulless,  whereas  culture  is  soul  itself.  As 
Spengler  puts  it,  4A  Culture  is  Soul  that  has  arrived  at  self- 
expression  in  sensible  forms,  but  these  forms  are  living  and 
evolving.  .  .  .  This  Culture  is  not  only  a  grand  thing  but  wholly 
unlike  any  other  thing  in  the  organic  world.  It  is  the  one  point 
at  which  man  lifts  himself  above  the  powers  of  Nature  and 
becomes  himself  a  Creator/1  Creativity  in  its  intensest  form, 
therefore,  is  what  expresses  itself  in  Culture.  With  the  gradual 
loss  of  creativity,  due  to  regard  for  stereotyped  laws  and 
conventions,  Culture  slowly  merges  into  Civilization,  which 
represents  man's  loss  of  his  soul  in  his  infatuation  for  rigid 
forms.  This  change  may  be  characterized  as  one  from  Time  to 
Space.  Culture  which  is  pure  Time  slowly  decays  and  hardens 
into  Space,  when  it  passes  into  Civilization. 


FOR  SPENGLER  THERE  IS  NOT  ONE  CULTURE 
BUT  SEVERAL 

From  what  we  have  said  above,  it  is  clear  that  for  Spengler 
there  is  not  one  culture  but  a  number  of  cultures,  not  one 
history  but  a  number  of  histories.  Each  culture  is  distinct 
from  the  others;  each  has  its  own  morphology,  its  own  self- 
expression  which  is  rooted  to  the  soil  on  which  it  grows.  There 
is  not  one  sculpture,  one  painting,  one  mathematics,  one 
physics,  but  many,  each  in  its  deepest  essence  different  from 
the  others.  Every  truth  has  reference  to  its  age.  There  are  no 
eternal  truths.  Every  philosophy  is  an  expression  of  its  age 
and  its  age  alone.  There  is  no  universal  system  of  philosophy 
for  all  ages. 


1  The  Decline  of  the  West ,  Vol.  II,  p.  331. 

64 


Sri  Aurobindo  and  Spengler 


This  view  of  the  multiplicity  of  cultures  is  an  off-shoot  of 
the  principle  of  destiny,  which  is  the  root  idea  of  the  whole 
book.  Destiny  precludes  the  idea  of  any  fixed  course;  it  treats 
everything  as  unique  and  irrepeatable. 

Spengler,  however,  has  not  been  able  to  keep  strictly  to  this 
watertight-compartment  view  of  culture.  Otherwise  he  could 
not  have  spoken  of  the  blending  of  three  different  cultures  in 
the  culture  of  the  West.  Nor  could  he  have  spoken  of  the 
parallelisms  of  different  cultures. 

This  view  of  the  multiplicity  of  cultures  has  been  severely 
criticized  by  Toynbee,  Sorokin  and  others,  and  rightly  so.  It  is 
another  evidence  of  the  fundamental  weakness  of  his  initial 
standpoint  of  a  purposeless,  unconscious  destiny  as  the 
moving  force  in  history. 


DIFFERENT  TYPES  OF  CULTURE  DUE  TO  THE  DIFFERENT 
TYPES  OF  SOUL  REPRESENTED  BY  THEM 

The  soul  being  the  essence  of  culture,  it  follows  that  the 
different  types  of  culture  that  have  evolved  historically  are 
due  to  the  different  types  of  soul  of  which  they  are  the  expres¬ 
sion.  Nine  main  types  he  has  recognized,  of  which  three  have 
played  an  important  part  in  the  shaping  of  Western  culture, 
namely,  the  Apollinian,  the  Faustian  and  the  Magian.  There 
are,  consequently,  three  different  types  of  culture  which 
western  history  has  exhibited.  The  characteristics  of  these 
three  different  types  have  been  clearly  shown  by  Spengler. 
In  fact,  one  of  the  chief  merits  of  the  book  is  in  his  wonderful 
delineation  of  the  characteristics  of  these  three  different  types 
of  soul.  European  history,  according  to  Spengler,  is  the  result 
of  the  mixing  of  these  three  types.  The  Faustian  is  the  most 
dynamic  of  these  three  types,  and  the  Apollinian  the  most 
graceful.  The  Magian  soul  differs  from  both  in  being  more 
inclined  towards  mysticism.  Each  of  these  types  of  soul  has 
left  its  mark  upon  European  history,  and  it  is  the  commingling 
of  these  different  types  that  has  given  us  the  European  culture 
as  we  find  it  today. 


c 


65 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 


CHARACTERISTICS  OF  THESE  THREE  TYPES  OF  SOUL 

We  now  propose  very  briefly  to  deal  with  the  characteristics  of 
these  three  types  of  soul.  The  Apollinian  soul  is  the  soul  that  is 
responsible  for  classical  culture.  Its  chief  characteristic  is  its 
fondness  for  grace  and  symmetry  and  love  of  order  and 
harmony.  The  Apollinian  soul  takes  the  individual  body  fixed 
in  all  directions  as  the  ideal  type  of  the  extended.  Examples  of 
the  product  of  the  Apollinian  soul  are:  'mechanical  statics,  the 
sensuous  cult  of  the  Olympian  gods,  the  politically  individual 
City-States  of  Greece,  the  doom  of  Oedipus  and  the  phallus- 
symbol*.  Opposed  to  the  Apollinian  is  the  Faustian  soul,  whose 
prime  symbol  is  pure  and  limitless  space,  and  whose  'body'  is 
the  Western  culture  that  blossomed  forth  with  the  truth  of  the 
Romanesque  style  in  the  tenth  century,  in  the  northern  plain 
between  the  Elbe  and  the  Tagus.  The  main  features  of  the 
Faustian  soul  are  thus  indicated  by  the  author: 

To  battle  against  the  comfortable  foregrounds  of  life,  against  the 
impressions  of  the  moment,  against  what  is  near,  tangible  and  easy, 
to  win  through  to  that  which  has  generality  and  duration  and  links 
past  and  future — these  are  the  sum  of  all  Faustian  imperatives  from 
earliest  Gothic  to  Kant  and  Fichte,  and  far  beyond  them  again  to 
the  Ethos  of  immense  power  and  will  exhibited  in  our  States,  our 
economic  systems  and  our  technics.1 

The  contrast  between  the  Apollinian  and  the  Faustian  soul 
he  further  indicates  as  follows:  The  carpe  diem ,  the  saturated 
being  of  the  classical  standpoint,  is  the  most  direct  contrary  of 
that  which  is  felt  by  Goethe  and  Kant  and  Pascal,  by  Church 
and  freethinkers,  as  alone  possessing  value — active,  fighting 
and  victorious  being.'2  The  Apollinian  soul  is  statically  poised 
within  fixed  limits,  whereas  the  Faustian  soul  craves  for 
unlimited  expansion.  The  Apollinian  soul  can  therefore  be 
called  a  soul-body,  whereas  the  Faustian  soul  is  soul-space. 

Opposed  to  both  the  Apollinian  and  the  Faustian  soul  is  the 
Magian  soul.  It  is  bodyless  as  well  as  spaceless.  It  cannot 
therefore  be  represented  by  a  statue.  It  is  iconoclastic.  It  is, 
however,  dualistic.  For  it  there  is  the  good  soul  and  the  bad 

1  The  Decline  of  the  West,  Vol.  I,  p.  315.  *  Ibid. 

66 


Sri  Aurobindo  and  Spengler 

soul  in  eternal  conflict  with  each  other.  But  neither  of  these 
souls  has  a  body  or  dwells  in  space.  This  dualism  takes  the 
form  of  the  recognition  of  two  substances,  called  respectively, 
the  spirit  and  the  soul,  the  falling  from  the  world-cavern  into 
humanity,  abstract  and  divine,  and  the  other  a  substance 
permeating  the  body.  In  the  Magian  conception  it  is  the  spirit 
which  evokes  the  higher  world,  and  through  this  creation, 
triumphs  over  mere  life,  the  ‘flesh’  and  nature.  There  thus 
runs  through  the  Magian  conception  the  distinction  between 
the  flesh  and  the  spirit.  There  is  also  clearly  evident  the  cavern 
idea,  the  idea  of  everything  being  topped  by  the  All-Highest, 
which  is  symbolized  in  all  Magian  culture  by  the  dome.  The 
idea  of  the  dome  or  of  everything  being  under  a  Divine 
Principle,  and  the  dualism  of  flesh  and  the  spirit  are  the 
characteristic  features  of  all  Magian  culture.  In  the  impact  of 
the  Magian  culture  with  the  Faustian,  the  dualism  of  flesh  and 
the  spirit  is  often  toned  down,  but  not  the  idea  of  the  dome, 
which  is  a  perpetual  reminder  that  everything  is  under  a 
Divine  Order  or  Principle. 

CAUSES  OF  THE  DECLINE  OF  WESTERN  CULTURE, 
ACCORDING  TO  SPENGLER 

All  these  types  of  culture — the  Apollinian,  the  Faustian  and 
the  Magian — have  combined  to  produce  the  culture  which  goes 
by  the  name  of  the  Western.  Its  beginnings  are  no  doubt  to  be 
traced  to  the  Apollinian  culture,  but  as  it  evolved,  it  developed 
the  characteristics  of  the  Faustian  culture,  distinguished  by 
their  greater  dynamic  power  and  urge  towards  spatial  expan¬ 
sion.  Afterwards  Christianity  brought  with  it  the  Magian 
characteristics,  the  notion  of  God  and  the  Devil  and  the  cavern 
idea.  The  Faustian  characteristics  are,  however,  gradually 
slowing  down,  and  this  is  causing  a  steady  decline  in  Western 
culture.  Culture  becomes  ossified  into  civilization  when  it  loses 
its  dynamic  character.  This  is,  according  to  Spengler,  what  is 
rapidly  happening  in  the  West. 

The  rapid  advance  of  science  is  one  of  the  contributory 
causes  of  this  decline,  for  it  has  led  to  the  apotheosis  of  law 
as  the  chief  guiding  principle  of  the  universe.  But  respect  for 

67 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 


law  runs  counter  to  the  spirit  of  adventure  and  conquest  which 
supplies  the  chief  dynamic  element  in  culture.  Certain  social 
changes,  such  as  the  abolition  of  nobility  and  rapid  industriali¬ 
zation,  have  also  furthered  the  process  of  the  decline  of  the 
dynamic  element  in  culture.  The  result  is,  Western  culture  is 
fast  losing  its  inward  ballast  of  dynamic  power. 

It  is  curious  that  Spengler  looks  upon  nobility  as  the  chief 
reservoir  of  the  dynamic  power  of  a  nation.  Thus,  he  says: 

Culture  and  class  are  interchangeable  expressions;  they  arise 
together,  and  they  vanish  together.  For  that  very  reason  there  is 
found  in  every  culture  a  sharp  sense  of  whether  this  or  that  man 
belongs  thereto  or  not.  The  classical  notion  of  the  Barbarian,  the 
Arabian,  of  the  Unbeliever  (Amhaarez,  Giaour),  the  Indian,  of  the 
Sudra — however  differently  the  lines  of  cleavage  were  arrived  at — 
are  alike  in  that  the  words  do  not  primarily  express  contempt  or 
hatred  but  establish  that  there  are  differences  in  pulse  of  Being 
which  set  an  impassable  barrier  against  all  contacts  on  the  deeper 
levels.1 

He  further  makes  clear  the  superiority  of  the  nobility  over 
the  other  classes  from  the  point  of  culture  by  contrasting  it 
with  priesthood: 

Every  nobility  is  a  living  symbol  of  Time,  every  priesthood  of 
Space.  Destiny  and  second  Causality,  History  and  Nature,  the 
When  and  the  Where,  race  and  language,  sex-life  and  feeling-life — 
all  these  attain  in  them  to  their  highest  possible  expression.  The 
noble  lives  in  a  world  of  facts,  the  priest  in  one  of  truths,  the  one 
has  shrewdness,  the  other  knowledge,  the  one  is  a  doer,  the  other  a 
thinker.2 

This  adoration  of  nobility  at  the  expense  of  the  other  classes 
seems  rather  strange  in  these  days,  for  nobility  is  nowadays 
associated  with  conservatism,  with  a  tendency  to  stick  to 
traditional  laws  and  customs  and  possesses  therefore  less  dynamic 
power  than  the  other  classes.  Moreover,  the  qualities  which 
Spengler  finds  in  nobility,  namely,  that  it  lives  in  a  world  of 
facts,  rather  than  in  a  world  of  truths,  that  it  has  shrewdness 
and  not  knowledge,  that  it  is  associated  with  doing  and  not 

*  The  Decline  of  the  West,  Vol.  II,  p.  332.  *  Ibid.,  p.  335. 

68 


Sri  Aurobindo  and  Spengler 

with  thinking,  do  not  to  modern  eyes  seem  to  be  qualities 
suggesting  greater  dynamic  power,  for  truth  is  certainly  more 
dynamic  than  facts.  Moreover,  how  can  shrewdness  be  supposed 
to  have  more  dynamic  power  than  knowledge?  Knowledge  by 
common  consent  has  enormous  driving  force,  whereas  shrewd¬ 
ness  by  itself  has  no  dynamic  quality  and  gets  whatever 
dynamism  it  possesses  through  association  with  the  knowledge 
which  it  helps  to  acquire.  It  is  knowledge  which  is  the  cause  of 
the  most  revolutionary  changes  in  the  social  as  well  as  in  other 
spheres,  whereas  mere  shrewdness  is  a  quality  of  doubtful 
value,  unless  combined  with  knowledge. 

Priesthood  may  deserve  all  the  hard  things  that  Spengler 
has  said  about  it,  though  in  our  country  it  must  be  remembered 
that  the  Brahmanas  who  represent  the  priestly  class  were 
always  in  the  vanguard  of  progress.  Spengler  has  evidently  in 
mind  the  Christian  Church  in  the  Middle  Ages,  wThich  was  of 
course  an  incarnation  of  orthodoxy  and  prejudice.  But  nobility 
is  also  not  free  from  these.  It  believes  in  an  inflexible  code  of 
morality  and  further  regards  it  as  the  privilege  of  its  own  class 
to  follow  it.  Nobility  signifies  the  possession  of  certain  qualities, 
such  as  courage,  whereas  priesthood  represents  other  qualities, 
such  as  greater  love  for  knowledge,  and  by  no  stretch  of 
imagination  can  it  be  said  that  the  former  are  more  dynamic 
than  the  latter. 

'MAN  MAKES  HISTORY,  WOMAN  IS  HISTORY' 

But  nowhere  perhaps  does  Spengler’s  fondness  for  the  division 
of  human  beings  into  different  classes  and  his  love  for  a 
pluralistic  view  of  history  find  better  expression  than  in  his 
famous  statement:  'Man  makes  history,  woman  is  history/1 
What  exactly  does  Spengler  mean  by  it?  Evidently  it  brings 
women  much  nearer  to  the  general  direction  of  the  historical 
process  than  men.  He  seems  to  have  gone  here  much  further 
than  Goethe  has  done  in  the  last  line  of  Faust:  ‘Das  Ewig- 
Weibliche  zieht  uns  liman’  (The  Eternal-Feminine  draws  us  on 
and  upwards’).  Woman  here  for  Goethe  represents  the  supra- 
rational  factor,  which  is  the  driving  principle  in  evolution. 

1  The  Decline  of  the  West,  Vol.  II,  p.  327. 

69 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 


Spengler’s  idea,  however,  is  somewhat  different.  True  to  his 
love  for  division  and  pluralism,  he  wants  to  divide  history  into 
two  types — history  as  it  is  in  itself,  which  is  woman,  and 
history  as  it  is  made,  which  is  the  role  of  man.  Thus,  after 
saying  that  man  makes  history  and  woman  is  history,  he 
continues: 

Here,  strangely  clear  and  yet  enigmatic  still,  we  have  a  dual 
significance  of  all  living  happenings — on  the  one  hand,  we  sense 
cosmic  flow  as  such,  and  on  the  other  hand,  the  chain  and  train  of 
successive  individuals  brings  us  back  to  the  microcosms  themselves 
as  the  recipients,  containers  and  preservers  of  the  flowing.  It  is  the 
‘ second’  history  that  is  characteristically  masculine — political, 
social,  more  conscious,  freer  and  more  agitated  than  the  other. 
Feminine,  on  the  contrary,  is  the  eternal,  the  maternal,  the  plantlike 
(for  the  plant  has  ever  something  female  in  it),  the  cultureless 
history  of  the  generation-sequence,  which  never  alters  but  uniformly 
and  stilly  passes  through  the  being  of  all  animal  and  human  species 
through  all  short-lived  individual  cultures.  In  retrospect  it  is 
synonymous  with  Life  itself.1 

Woman,  therefore,  for  Spengler  stands  for  life  itself,  what 
is  not  subject  to  any  regulation.  For  man,  on  the  other  hand, 
there  is  a  certain  contradiction.  As  he  puts  it,  ‘lie  is  this  man, 
and  he  is  something  else  besides*.  This  something  else  woman 
neither  admits  nor  understands,  but  ‘feels  it  to  be  a  robbery 
and  violence  upon  that  which  is  holiest’.  There  is  thus,  accord¬ 
ing  to  Spengler,  an  eternal  wrar  going  on  between  the  two 
sexes,  which  will  continue  as  long  as  the  human  race  continues. 

Thus  there  are  two  kinds  of  history — woman's  history  and 
man’s  history.  Woman’s  history  is  destiny  itself.  It  is  cosmic. 
Man’s  history,  on  the  other  hand,  is  political.  This  is  a  funda¬ 
mental  dualism  which  nothing  can  remove.  ‘There  are  public 
life  and  private  life,  public  law  and  private  law,  communal 
cults  and  domestic  cults.  .  .  .  This  double  significance  of 
directional  Time  finds  its  highest  expression  in  the  idea  of  the 
State  and  the  Family.’2 

There  is  no  escape,  according  to  Spengler,  from  this  funda¬ 
mental  dualism.  It  belongs  to  the  essential  nature  of  time,  that 

1  The  Decline  of  the  West ,  Vol.  II,  pp.  327-8. 

70 


*  Ibid.,  p.  329. 


Sri  Aurobindo  and  Spengler 


is,  of  the  life-process  itself.  It  represents,  in  fact,  two  aspects 
of  the  life-process,  as  pure  flow  and  as  concretization  into 
definite  objects.  This  double  aspect  of  the  life-current  is  very 
similar  to  the  double  movement  of  the  elan  vital  in  Bergson. 
In  fact,  as  we  have  seen  already,  Spengler 's  whole  conception 
of  history  is  thoroughly  Bergsonian. 

THE  CRISIS  OF  HISTORY!  CULTURE  CRYSTALLIZES 
INTO  CIVILIZATION 

It  is  a  natural  consequence  of  this  view  of  the  double  aspect 
of  the  life-current  that  as  it  proceeds,  it  goes  on  hardening, 
until  it  loses  its  original  elasticity.  This  is  what  happens  to  all 
culture,  sooner  or  later.  The  elasticity  of  the  life-current  goes 
on  slowly  diminishing,  until  it  is  lost  entirely.  This  is  what 
Spengler  calls  the  change  from  culture  to  civilization.  Culture 
represents  the  free  untrammelled  flow  of  the  life-current; 
civilization  its  hardening  into  rigid  forms.  This  is  what  has 
happened  already  to  Western  culture.  It  is  bound  to  happen 
to  other  cultures  also,  according  to  Spengler,  for  it  is  the 
fundamental  process  of  evolution.  Of  course,  it  is  a  sign  of 
decay,  and  the  object  of  his  great  work,  The  Decline  of  the  West, 
is  to  show  how  and  why  this  decay  has  set  in  in  Western 
culture. 

The  resemblance  with  Bergson's  philosophy  here  is  also  very 
striking.  Just  as  Bergson  says  that  when  the  life-current  slows 
down,  matter  emerges,  so  also  Spengler  asserts  that  with  the 
gradual  hardening  up  of  the  life-force,  civilization  results. 
Matter  in  Bergson,  and  civilization  in  Spengler,  though  them¬ 
selves  the  product  of  the  life-force,  yet  have  this  as  their  main 
characteristic,  that  they  impede  the  flow  of  it.  But  whereas  in 
Bergson  the  impediment  is  only  temporary  and  the  life-current  is 
in  a  position  to  chalk  out  a  path  for  itself  in  another  direction 
when  it  is  obstructed,  in  Spengler  this  obstruction  is  more 
permanent  and  only  ceases  when  a  new  culture  emerges  on  the 
complete  disappearance  of  the  old.  And  there  is  no  knowing 
when  it  will  emerge  and  whether  it  will  emerge  in  the  same 
place.  And  what  is  worse,  there  is  no  guarantee  that  it  will  be 
an  improvement  upon  the  old. 

7i 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 


DENOUEMENT  OF  PLURALISTIC  PHILOSOPHY  OF 
HISTORY:  SRI  AUROBINDO  COMES  TO  OUR 
RESCUE  HERE 

This  is  the  sad  denouement  of  Spengler's  pluralistic  philosophy 
of  history.  And  our  disappointment  is  all  the  greater  because 
of  the  grandeur  of  Spengler's  work.  This  disappointment  I 
expressed  in  another  connection  some  years  ago;  and  I  cannot 
do  better  than  quote  the  words  which  I  used  then: 

I  ask  in  all  seriousness:  Is  this  to  be  the  fate  of  history?  Is  history 
to  be  a  destiny  without  a  destination?  Is  the  end  of  man,  with  his 
Apollinian,  Faustian  and  Magian  soul,  to  be  ‘swallowed  up  and  lost 
in  the  wide  womb  of  uncreated  Night'?  It  is  clear  a  reorientation  of 
the  philosophy  of  history  is  absolutely  needed  if  it  is  to  be  saved 
from  this  fate.  Fortunately  for  us  there  has  emerged  in  the  person 
of  Sri  Aurobindo  a  philosopher  who  has  rescued  history  from  this 
fate.  History,  he  says,  is  no  doubt  the  expression  of  man’s  destiny. 
But  this  destiny  is  not  something  indefinite  and  inchoate.  On  the 
contrary,  it  is  another  name  for  the  Spiritual  Principle  which  is 
involved  in,  and  towards  which  is  moving,  the  universe.  It  is  not 
mere  drifting,  it  is  not  mere  flow,  but  it  is  movement  towards  a 
definite  goal.  Destiny  without  destination  is  absolutely  meaningless.1 

Indeed,  the  conception  of  destiny  of  Spengler,  with  its 
absolutely  indeterminate  character,  is  the  root-cause  of  all  the 
difficulties  that  one  notices  in  his  philosophy  of  history.  Its 
pluralism  is  also  a  direct  consequence  of  it.  It  is  because  the 
process  of  history,  as  conceived  by  him,  has  no  definite  goal 
before  it,  that  the  directions  along  which  it  moves  are  multi¬ 
farious.  The  difficulty  is  the  same  here  as  in  Bergson's  creative 
evolution.  Just  as  creativity  with  Bergson  means  only  absolute 
arbitrariness,  so  here  also  destiny  introduces  us  to  the  idea  of 
complete  indeterminateness,  leading  to  hopeless  pluralism.  For 
as  there  is  no  directive  principle  guiding  the  march  of  history, 
its  paths  must  necessarily  be  infinitely  multifarious. 

It  is  a  fear  complex  that  is  at  the  root  of  this  resort  to 
indeterminateness.  This  is  the  fear  of  falling  into  the  meshes 
of  reason  with  its  principle  of  causality.  Here  Sri  Aurobindo 

*  ‘The  Philosophical  Interpretation  of  History*  (Bulletin  of  the  Ramakrishna 
Mission  Institute  of  Culture,  February  1954). 

72 


Sri  Aurobindo  and  Spengler 

will  join  Spengler  in  resisting  the  tendency  to  fall  into  the 
snares  of  the  causal  or  rational  explanation  of  history.  Nobody 
has  more  clearly  pointed  out  than  he  the  defects  of  the  causal 
interpretation  of  history,  which  is  a  product  of  the  apotheosis 
of  reason.  Every  page  not  only  of  The  Life  Divine  but  also  of 
his  other  books  is  a  repudiation  of  the  idea  that  man's  greatest 
gift  is  reason  and  that  all  his  activities  are  to  be  judged  by  the 
measuring  rod  of  reason  or  intellect.  Innumerable  quotations 
can  be  made  from  his  writings  to  prove  this.  We  give  below 
as  a  sample  a  quotation  from  The  Human  Cycle  to  prove  this: 

Therefore,  too,  this  perfection  cannot  come  by  the  mental  idea 
dealing  with  the  Spirit  as  it  deals  with  Life.  The  idea  in  mind 
seizing  upon  the  central  will  in  Spirit  and  trying  to  give  this  higher 
force  a  conscious  orientation  and  method  in  accordance  with  the 
ideas  of  the  intellect  is  too  limited,  too  darkened,  too  poor  a  force 
to  work  this  miracle.  Still  less  can  it  come  if  we  chain  the  spirit  to 
some  fixed  mental  idea  or  system  of  religious  cult,  intellectual  truth, 
aesthetic  norm,  ethical  rule,  practical  action,  way  of  vital  and 
physical  life,  to  a  particular  arrangement  of  forms  and  actions  and 
declare  all  departure  from  that  a  peril  and  a  disturbance  or  a  devia¬ 
tion  from  spiritual  living.  ...  In  fact,  as  we  have  seen,  the  mind  and 
the  intellect  are  not  the  key-power  of  our  existence.  For  they  can 
only  trace  out  a  round  of  half-truths  and  uncertainties  and  revolve 
in  that  unsatisfying  circle.1 

In  the  same  strain  Sri  Aurobindo  speaks  also  in  another 
passage  of  this  book: 

The  ultimates  of  life  are  spiritual  and  only  in  the  full  light  of  the 
liberated  self  and  spirit  can  it  achieve  them.  That  full  light  is  not 
intellect  or  reason,  but  a  knowledge  by  inner  unity  and  identity 
which  is  the  native  self-light  of  the  fully  developed  spiritual  con¬ 
sciousness — and,  preparing  that,  on  the  way  to  it,  a  knowledge  by 
intimate  inner  contact  with  the  truth  of  things  and  beings  which  is 
intuitive  and  born  of  a  secret  oneness.2 

We  need  not  make  further  quotations.  It  is  perfectly  clear 
from  the  whole  trend  of  Sri  Aurobindo's  philosophy  that  he  is 

1  The  Human  Cycle  (Pondicherry:  Sri  Aurobindo  Ashram  Press,  1949), 
P-  3°3*  *  Ibid.,  pp.  211-12. 

♦ 


73 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 


opposed  to  the  view  which  looks  upon  reason  with  its  principle 
of  causality  as  the  determining  factor  of  the  historical  process. 
He  is,  therefore,  perfectly  in  agreement  with  Spengler  in  the 
latter's  revolt  against  the  determinism  of  reason.  But  while 
Spengler  thinks  that  the  only  way  to  escape  from  this  deter¬ 
minism  is  to  pass  into  complete  indeterminism,  Sri  Aurobindo 
expresses  in  clear  and  unambiguous  terms  that  to  get  rid  of  the 
determinism  of  reason  it  is  not  at  all  necessary  to  pass  into 
complete  indeterminism.  In  fact,  complete  indeterminism  is  the 
negation  of  all  philosophy.  There  is  a  higher  determinism  and 
a  lower  determinism.  Evolution,  in  fact,  is  a  passage  from  a 
lower  to  a  higher  determinism.  What  is  wrong  wTith  causal 
determination  is  not  that  it  is  determination,  but  that  it  is 
determination  by  an  outside  agency.  The  cause  is  never 
perfectly  united  with  the  effect,  so  that  causal  determination 
never  loses  the  character  of  an  imposition  by  an  outside  agency. 

In  the  higher  determinism  there  is  the  complete  disappear¬ 
ance  of  this  sense  of  an  imposition  by  an  outside  agency. 
Determination  then  becomes  completely  self-determination. 
But  can  one  say  that  what  is  self-determined  is  less  determinate 
than  what  is  determined  by  an  outside  agency?  Rather  it  is 
more  determinate.  This  will  enable  us  to  understand  the 
difference  between  the  determinacy  of  our  mental  consciousness 
and  that  of  the  supramental  consciousness.  In  the  following 
passage  from  The  Life  Divine,  Sri  Aurobindo  explains  this 
difference  very  clearly: 

But  the  being  and  action  of  the  Infinite  must  not  be  therefore 
regarded  as  if  it  were  a  magic  void  of  all  reason;  there  is,  on  the 
contrary,  a  greater  reason  in  all  the  operations  of  the  Infinite,  but 
it  is  not  a  mental  or  intellectual,  it  is  a  spiritual  and  supramental 
reason;  there  is  a  logic  in  it,  because  there  are  relations  and  con¬ 
nections  infallibly  seen  and  executed;  what  is  magic  to  our  finite 
reason  is  the  logic  of  the  Infinite.  It  is  a  greater  reason,  a  greater 
logic  because  it  is  more  vast,  subtle,  complex  in  its  operations;  it 
comprehends  all  the  data  which  our  observation  fails  to  seize,  it 
deduces  from  them  results  which  neither  our  deduction  nor  induction 
can  anticipate,  because  our  conclusions  and  inferences  have  a  meagre 
foundation  and  are  fallible  and  brittle.1 


1  Aurobindo,  The  Life  Divine ,  p.  298. 

74 


Sri  Aurobindo  and  Spengler 


The  mode  of  working  of  the  higher  consciousness  is  no  doubt 
very  different  from  the  mode  of  working  of  our  ordinary  mental 
consciousness.  It  may  even  be  quite  unintelligible  to  this 
consciousness,  and  not  only  unintelligible  but  even  contrary  to 
the  logic  of  this  consciousness;  but  far  from  this  proving  that 
it  has  no  logic  or  method,  it  proves  just  the  opposite.  Sri 
Aurobindo,  therefore,  warns  us  against  the  facile  conclusion 
that  because  its  mode  of  working  is  very  different  from  that  of 
our  mental  consciousness,  therefore,  there  is  no  method  in  its 
working  and  it  operates  absolutely  arbitrarily: 

It  is  evident  that  such  a  Consciousness  and  Will  need  not  act  in 
harmony  with  the  conclusions  of  our  limited  reason  or  according  to 
a  procedure  familiar  to  it  and  approved  by  our  constructed  notions 
or  in  subjection  to  an  ethical  reason  working  for  a  limited  and 
fragmentary  good;  it  might  and  does  admit  things  deemed  by  our 
reason  irrational  and  unethical  because  that  was  necessary  for  the 
final  and  total  Good  and  for  the  working  out  of  a  cosmic  purpose. 
What  seems  to  us  irrational  and  reprehensible  in  relation  to  a  partial 
set  of  facts,  motives,  desiderata,  might  be  perfectly  rational  and 
approvable  in  relation  to  a  much  vaster  motive  and  totality  of  data 
and  desiderata.  Reason  with  its  partial  vision  sets  up  constructed 
conclusions  which  it  strives  to  turn  into  general  rules  of  knowledge 
and  action  and  it  compels  into  its  rule  by  some  mental  device  or 
gets  rid  of  what  does  not  suit  with  it:  an  infinite  Consciousness 
would  have  no  such  rules,  it  would  have  instead  large  intrinsic  truths 
governing  automatically  conclusion  and  result,  but  adapting  them 
differently  and  spontaneously  to  a  different  total  of  circumstances, 
so  that  by  this  pliability  and  free  adaptation  it  might  seem  to  the 
narrower  faculty  to  have  no  standards  whatever.1 

But  once  we  root  out  this  foundational  idea  of  Spengler  upon 
which  his  whole  view  of  history  is  based,  which  is  a  legacy 
from  Bergson,  namely,  that  the  historical  process  is  a  pure  flow 
which  does  not  know  towards  what  it  is  flowing,  and  which  is 
absolutely  undetermined  by  any  goal  or  destination,  the  rest 
of  the  Spenglerian  edifice  crumbles  very  quickly.  For  then  it 
cannot  be  maintained  that  civilization  will  make  an  end  of  all 
culture,  for  if  culture  (which  is  another  name  for  the  historical 


1  Aurobindo,  The  Life  Divine,  p.  299. 

75 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 


process)  has  a  definite  goal  before  it,  then  it  cannot  be  stopped 
before  it  reaches  this  goal.  Sri  Aurobindo  has  also  pointed  out 
very  clearly  that  hardening  or  crystallization  is  not  the  last 
word  about  a  culture,  but  that  after  this  hardening,  a  fresh 
wave  sets  in  to  save  it.  As  he  puts  it:  'Each  movement  indeed 
tends  to  petrify  after  a  shorter  or  longer  activity,  but  a  fresh 
shock,  a  new  wave  arrives  in  time  to  save  and  regenerate/1 


WHAT  IS  TRUE,  FROM  SRI  AUROBINDO'S  POINT  OF  VIEW, 
IN  SPENGLER’S  VIEW  OF  THE  CRYSTALLIZATION 
OF  CULTURE  INTO  CIVILIZATION 

To  do  Spongier  justice,  however,  it  must  be  said  that  he  has 
done  great  service  in  pointing  out  the  danger  which  threatens 
Western  civilization  at  the  present  moment.  If  he  had  lived 
in  the  present  atomic  age,  he  would  surely  have  painted  in  his 
own  inimitable  way  an  even  darker  picture  of  the  dangers 
which  lurk  in  that  civilization  today.  Sri  Aurobindo  would 
heartily  have  joined  him  in  this  task — which  is  undoubtedly  a 
very  important  one — of  warning  us  of  the  terrible  fate  which 
awaits  this  civilization  if  it  goes  on  in  the  way  in  which  it  has 
proceeded  during  the  last  few  centuries.  As  Sri  Aurobindo  has 
repeatedly  pointed  out,  the  crisis  which  threatens  human — and 
not  merely  Western — civilization  at  the  present  moment  is  the 
apotheosis  of  science,  to  the  neglect  of  the  other  and  greater 
values,  that  has  gone  on  unchecked  for  so  many  centuries.  But 
Sri  Aurobindo  does  not  stop  by  merely  pointing  out  the  danger. 
He  shows  also  the  way  in  which  the  danger  can  be  averted.  It 
is,  he  points  out,  the  inevitable  result  of  the  growth  of  mental 
evolution,  and  the  remedy  therefore  lies  in  creating  an  atmo¬ 
sphere  favourable  for  the  appearance  of  a  consciousness  higher 
than  the  mental  which  will  slowly  but  surely  change  the 
present  civilization  into  something  higher. 

Unfortunately,  Spengler,  while  he  points  out  very  clearly 
the  danger,  does  not  suggest  any  remedy.  In  fact,  according 
to  him,  there  is  no  remedy.  The  present  Western  civilization  is 
doomed,  and  nothing  can  save  it.  This  is,  however,  totally 


1  Sri  Aurobindo,  The  Human  Cycle,  p.  237. 

76 


Sri  Aurorindo  and  Spengler 


opposed  to  Sri  Aurobindo’s  view,  according  to  which  the 
process  of  evolution  can  never  stop,  and  that  it  is  bound  to 
reach  its  goal,  which  is  nothing  less  than  the  complete  diviniza- 
tion  of  man.  It  is  something  even  more:  it  is  also  the  transforma¬ 
tion  of  nature  into  supernature.  This  is  very  beautifully 
expressed  in  the  following  concluding  passage  of  The  Life 
Divine : 

If  there  is  an  evolution  in  material  Nature  and  if  it  is  an  evolution 
of  being  with  consciousness  and  life  as  its  two  key-terms  and  powers, 
this  fullness  of  being,  fullness  of  consciousness,  fullness  of  life  must  be 
the  goal  of  development  towards  which  we  are  tending  and  which 
will  manifest  at  an  early  or  later  stage  of  our  destiny.  The  self,  the 
spirit,  the  reality  that  is  disclosing  itself  out  of  the  first  inconscience 
of  life  and  matter,  would  evolve  its  complete  truth  of  being  and 
consciousness  in  that  life  and  matter.  It  would  return  to  itself — or, 
if  its  end  as  an  individual  is  to  return  into  its  Absolute,  it  could 
make  that  return  also — not  through  a  frustration  of  life  but  through 
a  spiritual  completeness  of  itself  in  life.  Our  evolution  in  the  Ignor¬ 
ance  with  its  chequered  joy  and  pain  of  self-discovery,  its  half 
fulfilments,  its  constant  finding  and  missing,  is  only  our  first  state. 
It  must  lead  inevitably  towards  an  evolution  in  the  knowledge,  a 
self-finding  and  self-unfolding  of  the  Spirit,  a  self-revelation  of  the 
Divinity  in  things  in  that  true  power  of  itself  in  Nature  which  is 
to  us  still  a  Supernature.1 

SRI  AUROBINDO'S  DISSENT  FROM  THE  CYCLIC 
VIEW  OF  THE  HISTORICAL  PROCESS 

Another  important  point  where  Sri  Aurobindo  differs  from 
Spengler  is  on  the  question  of  the  cyclical  view  of  the  historical 
process.  Spengler,  as  we  have  seen,  is  an  advocate  of  the 
cyclical  view.  Each  culture,  according  to  him,  has  got  its  four 
epochs,  spring,  summer,  autumn  and  winter,  indicating 
respectively  growth,  maturity,  decline  and  final  fall.  There  is 
some  resemblance  here  with  our  Indian  conception  of  the  four 
yugas,  but  there  are  great  differences  also.  For  one  thing,  all 
the  four  epochs  exist  in  every  culture.  It  is  not  that  one  culture 
succeeds  another  culture  as  one  yuga  succeeds  another.  In  fact, 
so  far  as  the  different  cultures  are  concerned,  Spengler  has  not 

1  Aurobindo,  The  Life  Divine,  p.  947. 

77 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 

placed  them  in  an  ascending  or  descending  scale.  He  has,  on 
the  contrary,  shown  their  parallelisms. 

Sri  Aurobindo  is  definitely  of  opinion  that  the  process  of 
history  is  not  cyclical.  In  fact,  in  his  view,  the  cyclical  view  of 
evolution  will  make  evolution  a  farce,  for  if  one  epoch  takes  it 
upward,  another  epoch  will  bring  it  down,  and  the  net  result 
will  be  a  big  cipher.  This  is  as  true  of  our  Indian  conception  of 
evolution  characterized  by  the  four  yitgas ,  as  of  Spengler's 
conception  of  it  characterized  by  his  theory  of  the  four  epochs. 
For  Sri  Aurobindo  evolution  is  an  onward  march  from  lower 
to  higher  levels,  and  ultimately,  to  the  highest  level,  namely, 
Saccidananda  or  the  Absolute.  It  is  progress  all  through,  not 
progress  followed  by  regress  and  vice  versa.  There  may  be,  and 
indeed  there  are,  occasional  setbacks,  but  they  cannot  impede 
the  onward  march  of  evolution.  Even  in  the  case  of  rebirth  in 
the  present  state  of  our  evolution,  Sri  Aurobindo  does  not 
accept  the  traditional  view  of  our  country,  namely,  that  the 
fate  of  the  soul  after  death  is  determined  by  the  law  of  Karma. 
For  him  the  law  of  Karma  is  to  yield  to  the  higher  principle  of 
the  evolution  of  the  Spirit,  and  therefore  there  is  no  lapse  into 
a  lower  state.1 

Apart  from  this,  there  is  another  reason  why,  from  the 
standpoint  of  his  integral  philosophy,  it  is  not  possible  for 
Sri  Aurobindo  to  accept  the  cyclical  view  of  the  historical 
process.  The  cyclical  view  believes  in  the  emergence  of  a  new 
epoch  on  the  total  extinction  of  the  previous  one.  From  the 
point  of  view  of  integral  philosophy,  the  new  epoch  does  not 
emerge  on  the  extinction  of  the  previous  one,  but  by  trans¬ 
forming  it.  There  is  no  wiping  out  of  any  previous  stage  when 
evolution  passes  to  a  higher  stage,  but  the  previous  stages 
exist  though  in  a  changed  form,  in  which  the  principle  of  the 
lower  stages  is  more  integrated  with  that  of  the  higher  stage 
than  before.  This  is  known  as  the  principle  of  transformation 
and  is  an  important  principle  in  Sri  Aurobindo's  philosophy  of 
history. 

1  Aurobindo,  The  Life  Divine,  p.  725. 


78 


Sri  Aurobindo  and  Spengler 


SRI  AUROBINDO'S  OBJECTION  TO  SPENGLER'S  THEORY 
OF  A  BIPARTITE  DIVISION  OF  HISTORY  INTO 
A  WOMAN'S  HISTORY  AND  A  MAN'S  HISTORY 

From  the  point  of  view  of  integral  philosophy,  history  is  one, 
and  therefore  there  cannot  be  a  division  of  history  into  a 
woman's  history,  which  is  cosmic,  and  a  man's  history,  which 
is  political.  One  is  called  by  Spengler  'history  as  flow',  and  the 
other,  'history  as  made'.  History  as  made  is  also  as  much  a 
part  of  cosmic  history  as  history  as  flow,  for  the  persons  who 
'make'  history  are  themselves  products  of  cosmic  history. 

Spengler  here  in  this  bipartite  division  of  history  has  gone 
much  beyond  where  Goethe  would  have  liked  us  to  go.  For  the 
closing  line  of  Goethe’s  Faust1  only  speaks  of  the  Feminine 
Principle,  which  is  nothing  else  than  the  suprarational  prin¬ 
ciple,  as  the  ultimate  directive  force  of  the  universe.2  There  is 
nothing  in  it  to  suggest  a  bipartite  division  of  history  into  a 
woman's  history  and  a  man's  history,  far  less  any  conflict 
between  the  two. 

What  we  have  said  above  about  Spengler 's  division  of 
history  into  a  woman's  history  and  a  man's  history  applies 
equally  to  his  division  of  human  culture  into  Apollinian, 
Faustian,  Magian,  etc.,  though  here  we  must  say  Spengler  is 
less  inclined  to  keep  the  different  cultures  completely  apart  as 
he  is  in  his  bipartite  division  of  history,  for  he  speaks  of  a 
mingling  of  these  cultures  to  form  the  Western  culture  of  the 
present  day. 

The  great  need  of  the  day  is  to  realize  the  fundamental  unity 
of  the  human  race.  Here  nobody  has  done  greater  service  than 
Sri  Aurobindo.  But  the  way  in  which  he  has  done  it  is  very 
different  from  the  way  in  which  the  nineteenth-century 
humanists  in  the  West  tried  to  do  it.  Their  view  of  man  was 
confined  to  what  man  is  at  the  present  moment,  that  is  to  say, 
a  mental  man  full  of  egoism  and  other  limitations  incidental  to 
the  mental  stage  of  evolution.  But  Sri  Aurobindo  is  definite 

1  'Das  Ewig-Weibliche  zieht  uns  hinan'  (‘The  Eternal  Feminine  draws  us  on 
and  upwards*). 

2  S.  K.  Maitra,  The  Meeting  of  the  East  and  the  West  in  Sri  Aurobindo* s 
Philosophy  (London:  Luzae  &  Co.  Ltd.),  1956,  p.  381. 

79 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 

that  with  this  view  of  man,  it  is  impossible  to  think  of  effecting 
any  real  human  unity.  Unless  we  look  upon  man's  present 
stage  as  a  temporary  stage  which  he  is  bound  to  transcend  in 
his  march  to  his  ultimate  goal,  the  idea  of  human  unity  is 
absolutely  chimerical.  In  fact,  the  unity  of  man  can  only  be 
realized  through  the  idea  of  the  divinity  of  man,  as  Sri 
Aurobindo  has  very  clearly  and  very  forcibly  stated  in  the 
following  passage: 

A  spiritual  religion  of  humanity  is  the  hope  of  the  future.  By  this 
is  not  meant  what  is  ordinarily  called  a  universal  religion,  a  system, 
a  thing  of  creed  and  intellectual  belief  and  dogma  and  outward  rite. 
Mankind  has  tried  unity  by  that  means;  it  has  failed  and  deserved 
to  fail,  because  there  can  be  no  universal  religious  system,  one  in 
mental  creed  and  vital  form.  The  inner  spirit  is  indeed  one,  but  more 
than  any  other  the  spiritual  life  insists  on  freedom  and  variation  in 
its  self-expression  and  means  of  self-development.  A  religion  of 
humanity1  means  the  growing  realization  that  there  is  a  secret 
Spirit,  a  divine  Reality,  in  which  we  are  all  one,  that  humanity  is 
its  highest  present  vehicle  on  earth,  that  the  human  race  and  the 
human  being  are  the  means  by  which  it  will  progressively  reveal 
itself  here.  It  implies  a  growing  attempt  to  live  out  this  knowledge 
and  bring  about  a  kingdom  of  this  divine  Spirit  upon  earth.  By  its 
growth  within  us  oneness  with  our  fellowmen  will  become  the 
leading  principle  of  our  life,  not  merely  a  principle  of  co-operation 
but  a  deeper  brotherhood,  a  real  and  an  inner  sense  of  unity  and 
equality  and  a  common  life.  There  must  be  the  realization  by  the 
individual  that  only  in  the  life  of  his  fellowmen  is  his  own  life 
complete.  There  must  be  the  realization  by  the  race  that  only  on 
the  free  and  full  life  of  the  individual  can  its  own  perfection  and 
permanent  happiness  be  founded.2 

This  is  Sri  Aurobindo’s  conception  of  the  ideal  of  human 
unity — an  ideal  towards  which  human  evolution  is  moving 
and  which  it  is  bound  to  realize. 

1  We  need  hardly  point  out  that  this  'religion  of  humanity'  is  very  different 
from  the  ‘religion  of  humanity’  as  conceived  by  Auguste  Comte. 

a  Sri  Aurobindo,  The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity  (Pondicherry:  Sri  Aurobindo 
Ashram  Press,  1949),  p.  378. 


80 


5 


CHARLES  A.  MOORE 

Sri  Aurobindo  on  East  and  West 


At  this  time  of  great  concern  about  mutual  understanding 
between  Asia  and  the  West  and  of  a  recognition  of  the  potential 
fruitfulness  of  an  East-West  cross-fertilization  of  ideas,  just 
where  does  Sri  Aurobindo  stand  on  these  matters?  Because  of 
his  overall  point  of  view,  it  is  very  easy  to  think  of  Sri  Aurobindo 
as  promoting  and  even  employing  a  synthesis  of  East  and  West, 
as  will  be  indicated  in  detail  later  in  this  paper.  It  is  easy  for 
a  Westerner  to  understand  and  appreciate  the  appeal  which 
Sri  Aurobindo  has  to  many  thinkers  in  modem  India  because 
the  modern  Indian  thinker  has  had  intellectual  contact  with 
the  West  and  has  almost  inevitably  been  influenced  by  that 
contact.  It  is  also  easy  to  understand  Sri  Aurobindo's  unpopu¬ 
larity  among  some  Indians  because  there  seems  to  be  a  high 
degree  of  Westernization  or  at  least  influence  from  the  West  in 
his  work  which  can  easily  make  it  unacceptable  to  thoroughly 
traditional — and  especially  nationalistic-minded  Indians.  It  is 
easy,  further,  for  the  Westerner  himself  to  appreciate  the 
philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo,  because,  although  it  is  an  Indian 
philosophy  and  although  it  depends  fundamentally  upon 
traditional  Hindu  thought — the  Vedas,  the  Upanisads,  the 
Gita,  and  the  Vedanta — nevertheless  there  are  very  many 
elements  within  the  complex  of  Sri  Aurobindo's  thought  which 
strike  a  familiar  note  to  the  Westerner  and  wrhich  he  therefore 
welcomes.  There  is  an  apparent  inclusion  in  the  totality  of 
Sri  Aurobindo's  system  of  many  ideas  which  are  fundamentally 
indigenous  and  perhaps  unique  to  the  West.  All  of  these  factors 
make  for  a  welcome  impression  that  Sri  Aurobindo  has  achieved 
the  goal  of  the  modern  world — a  synthesis  and  harmony  of 

81 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 

East  and  West  in  basic  ideas  and  ideals.  And  when  we  add  to 
this  the  fact  that  Sri  Aurobindo  is  rather  highly  critical  in  his 
own  tradition  of  some  of  the  extremes  in  terms  of  which  the 
West  (and  many  in  the  East,  too)  has  generally  interpreted  and 
understood  the  East  (especially  India),  his  appeal  to  the 
Westerner  becomes  even  stronger.  It  would  seem  that  he  has 
thereby  furthered  the  cause  of  synthesis  by  injecting  Western 
ideas  into  the  Indian  tradition  and  by  removing  from  the 
Indian  tradition  those  special  features  which  through  the  ages 
have  made  Hinduism  unappealing  to  the  West  generally 
and  unacceptable  to  Westerners — except  for  some  extreme 
idealists. 

This  is  the  impression  which  one  draws  from  a  general — and 
possibly  from  a  comprehensively  detailed — study  of  Sri 
Aurobindo’s  writings.  However,  the  matter  is  not  so  simple. 
Sri  Aurobindo’s  philosophical  relation  to  the  West  seems  to  be, 
instead,  extremely  complex  and  difficult  to  understand.  Simply 
for  the  sake  of  identifying  his  true  point  of  view  and  attitude, 
it  is  worth  while  to  examine  the  question.1  And,  more  important, 
since  the  achievement  of  philosophical  synthesis  between  East 
and  West  is  an  ideal,  if  not  a  necessity,  of  the  modern  world,  it 
is  essential  that  we  determine  how  far  in  this  direction  Sri 
Aurobindo  has  travelled  and  to  what  extent  he  has  succeeded — 
to  determine  both  the  degree  of  success  and  the  manner  in 
which  he  has  achieved  this  success. 

As  one  studies  Sri  Aurobindo's  basic  writings  in  detail,  one 
discovers  many  attitudes  and  many  relationships,  compatibili¬ 
ties  and  incompatibilities,  opposition  and  cordiality,  deliberate 
rejection  and  deliberate  or  veiled  acceptance,  etc.  To  sum¬ 
marize  these  various  relationships  in  order  to  point  out  the 
complexity  of  the  problem,  we  find:  (i)  strong  contrasts  of 
East  and  West;  (2)  general  and  detailed  criticisms  (expressed 
or  implied)  of  the  West  in  view  of  its  falsities,  its  inadequacies, 
its  limitations;  (3)  the  acceptance  of  many  general  attitudes  of 
the  West  as  far  as  they  go,  but  the  necessity  of  going  beyond 

1  This  paper  is  not  to  concern  itself  with  the  deeper  and  more  philosophical 
phases  of  Sri  Aurobindo’s  doctrines  or  the  detailed  ways  in  which  he  harmo¬ 
nizes  or  reconciles  theories  of  East  and  West.  Much  has  been  done  on  this 
aspect  of  the  problem  by  scholars  much  more  qualified  than  the  present 
writer.  Nor  are  we  concerned  here  with  political  issues. 

82 


Sri  Aurobindo  on  East  and  West 

the  Western  points  of  view  in  line  with  the  wisdom  of  tradi¬ 
tional  Indian  Vedanta;  (4)  suggestions  of  significant  contribu¬ 
tions  of  the  West  to  the  East,  perhaps  especially  in  the  areas  of 
social  philosophy,  but  even  in  the  area  of  methodology  and, 
possibly,  in  metaphysics;  (5)  a  decided  emphasis  upon  the 
East's  superiority  to  the  West1  in  terms  of  replacing  Western 
doctrines,  or  modifying  them,  or  demanding  their  development 
into  higher  and  farther  reaches;  (6)  a  distinct  impression  (by 
the  reader)  that  Sri  Aurobindo's  philosophy  does  in  fad  consist 
of  a  synthesis  of  ideas  from  the  West  and  ideas  from  the  East; 
(7)  an  insistence  throughout  that  ideas  or  ideals  of  merit  in  the 
West  which  seem  to  be  implied  in  the  development  of  his 
thought  are  not  Western  in  origin  but  are  derived  from  an 
accurate  understanding  and  correct  interpretation  of  the 
traditional  Vedantic  philosophy  of  India;  and  (8)  criticism  of 
certain  basic  popular  or  traditional  interpretations  of  Indian 
thought  in  terms  of  attitudes  or  ideas  that  seem  to  be  Western 
but  which  are  not  accepted  as  such. 

Clearly,  then,  the  complexity  and  difficulty  of  the  problem 
with  which  we  are  concerned  cannot  be  denied  or  ignored. 

The  situation  is  further  complicated  by  what  might  be  called 
psychological  factors  which  defy  adequate  analysis  or  exact 
determination  of  their  significance.  Such  factors  are  the  typical 
Indian  respect  for  tradition,  the  modem  Indian  sense  of 
nationalism,  the  almost  inevitable  psychological  influence  of 
his  thorough  acquaintance  with  Western  thought  (and  his  long 
residence  in  the  West) ;  and  the  inevitable  intermingling  of  the 
two  bases  of  knowledge,  one  Indian,  the  other  Western.  These — 
and  perhaps  other — psychological  considerations  complicate 
the  question  and  probably  doom  any  investigation  to  failure. 

This  situation  strikes  one  as  very  similar  to  the  Socrates- 
Plato  problem,  one  of  the  famous  ‘Platonic  questions',  as  to 
where  in  Plato's  philosophy  or  in  the  Dialogues  Socrates  stops 
and  Plato  begins.  What  is  Platonic  and  what  is  Socratic  in  the 
Dialogues?  I  tend  to  agree  with  one  of  my  revered  professors 

1  ‘India  has  got  to  get  back  entirely  to  the  native  power  of  its  own  spirit’ 
( The  Renaissance  in  India )  (Calcutta;  Arya  Publishing  House,  194b),  p.  43 
(italics  are  mine).  Also,  he  says  she  must  so  transmute  and  indianize  whatever 
the  West  offers,  so  absorb  it  and  so  transform  it  entirely  into  itself  that  its 
foreign  character  disappears.  Ibid.,  p.  33  (italics  are  mine). 

83 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 


who  held  that  not  even  Plato  could  answer  this  question. 
I  suspect  that  Sri  Aurobindo  would  face  the  same  difficulty. 

Be  all  this  as  it  may,  there  is  one  seemingly  indubitable  fact, 
and  that  is  that  in  the  essential  substance  of  this  metaphysics 
and  in  the  method  by  which  he  achieves  his  conclusions — 
omitting  in  this  consideration  the  mystical  approach — the 
basic  ideas  of  East  and  West  do  in  fact  come  together  in  a 
synthesis  or  harmony,  regardless  of  psychological  difficulties  of 
interpretation  and  other  complexities  of  the  ways  and  means 
by  which  this  synthesis  has  been  achieved.  Regardless  of  the 
origin  or  basis  of  this  synthesis,  there  is  no  denying  the  fact 
that  in  his  overall  point  of  view  East  meets  West  and  West 
meets  East  in  one  of  the  most  attractive  syntheses  the  mind 
of  man  has  ever  achieved.  In  fact,  one  may  even  this  early  in 
this  study  venture  the  opinion  that  his  method  of  synthesis  is 
the  only  one  which  holds  any  promise  of  success,  namely,  by 
way  of  evolution,  development,  ascent,  actuated  or  imple¬ 
mented  by  involution  and  directed  toward  spiritual  fulfilment 
and  perfection. 

Before  citing  specific  ideas  or  doctrines  which  seem  especially 
compatible  with  the  West  as  well  as  the  East,  let  us  note  the 
simple  and  obvious  fact  that  his  entire  point  of  view — the 
integral  point  of  view — would  almost  automatically  dispose  his 
mind  toward  a  synthesis  of  ideas  drawn  from  various  sources, 
Eastern  and  Western,  with  constant  emphasis  upon  synthesis 
in  general,  as  well  as  in  innumerable  instances  dealing  with 
specific  philosophical  problems.  His  integral  point  of  view  is 
inevitably  open  to  all  evidence,  all  suggestions,  and  the  full 
range  of  his  experience.  His  is  essentially  a  synthetic  mind.  His 
genius  consists  in  finding  synthesis  or  harmony  where  others 
find  only  contrast,  opposition,  divisive  distinction.  It  seems 
inevitable  that  a  synthesis  of  East  and  West  should  be  part  of 
the  approach  and  result  of  a  thinker  who  appeals  for  'an 
integral  human  experience’1  or  ‘the  all-view  of  the  Absolute’.2 
The  whole  tenor  of  his  thought  and  work  is  that  of  synthesis 
and  integration  of  those  ideas  and  ideals  which  by  themselves 
are  guilty  of  the  sin  of  divisiveness  but  which  as  parts  of  an 
ever-growing  or  developing  whole  become  significant  and  true. 

*  Aurobindo,  The  Life  Divine,  p.  n.  a  Ibid.,  p.  347. 

84 


Sri  Aurobindo  on  East  and  West 


Sri  Aurobindo  wants  'a  larger  and  completer  affirmation*.1  He 
wants  'the  rich  totality  of  a  supreme  and  integral  realization  of 
eternal  Being*.2  This  is  the  language  of  totality,  which,  in  a 
sense,  probably  knows  no  East  and  West  in  the  deeper  resources 
of  his  mind,  and  can  (and  does)  draw  from  the  entire  storehouse 
of  resources  of  his  rich  and  full  mind  to  bring  about  the  complete 
affirmation  he  considers  the  only  ultimate  truth. 

In  addition  to  this  overall  point  of  view,  there  are,  as  has 
been  said,  almost  innumerable  specific  instances  of  ideas, 
ideals,  doctrines,  and  methods,  in  which  a  synthesis  has  been 
achieved  between  typical  Eastern  and  typical  Western  ten¬ 
dencies.  Among  these  are  many  ideas  or  attitudes  which 
Westerners  recognize,  which  appeal  to  Westerners,  and  which 
therefore  make  them  see  in  Sri  Aurobindo*s  thought  a  synthesis 
of  their  Western  points  of  view  with  the  Eastern,  specifically 
the  Indian.  Among  these  may  simply  be  listed, 3  without  any 
elaboration  whatsoever,  the  following:  the  idea  and  method  of 
evolution  and  development  from  the  more  material  to  the 
highest  spiritual;  possibly  the  idea  of  involution  (as  perhaps  in 
Aristotle,  Hegel,  Leibniz,  and  others);  possibly  even  the  idea 
of  the  necessity  of  the  expression  of  the  Absolute  in  the  non- 
Absolute;4  a  demand  for  realism  as  opposed  to  the  alleged 
illusionism  of  Hinduism;?  the  reality  of  the  individual  as  well 
as  the  overall  One,  or  at  least  the  significance  of  the  individual 
properly  understood;6  the  demand  for  the  active  as  wrell  as  the 
passive;?  an  insistence  on  the  importance  of  the  outer  man  as 

1  Aurobindo,  The  Life  Divine,  p.  24.  See  also  ibid.,  Chapters  II  and  III 
together.  2  Ibid.,  p.  210. 

3  See  note,  p.  82.  The  writer  deliberately  (and  wisely)  leaves  detailed 
analyses  to  others. 

4  This  topic  (or  question)  could  well  be  the  subject  of  a  very  important 
study.  It  is  rather  crucial  in  comparing  Sri  Aurobindo's  view  of  the  Absolute 
with  the  views  of  Western  Absolutists.  References  to  the  point  are  very 
numerous  in  The  Life  Divine,  with  seemingly  different  possibilities  of  inter¬ 
pretation.  See,  e.g.,  pp.  103,  105,  163,  217,  284-6,  310,  41 1,  416,  and  432. 

5  E.g.,  see  ibid.,  pp.  95,  393,  396,  405,  417,  419,  427,  569,  604-5,  782i  also 
Book  I,  Chapters  XIII  and  XXVIII. 

6  See,  e.g.,  ibid.,  pp.  35-41,  117,  142,  147,  291,  330  ff.,  516,  570,  589.  See 
also,  for  contrary  view,  ibid.,  p.  323. 

7  E.g.,  see  ibid.,  p.  753;  also  ibid..  Chapters  II  and  III,  especially  the  latter. 
See  also,  perhaps  especially.  The  Renaissance  in  India,  pp.  65-7,  quoted 
in  part  below,  note  3,  p.  86.  He  speaks  disapprovingly  of  ‘the  loss  of  the  gust  of 
life',  ibid.,  p.  80. 


85 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 


well  as  the  inner  man;1  the  demand  for  the  living,  dynamic  life 
as  well  as  the  life  of  asceticism;2 3 * 5  the  compatibility  of  spirituality 
and  life  as  we  know  it  in  the  here  and  now; 3  the  contention  that 
truth  of  life  and  truth  of  spirit  are  to  be  united;4  the  belief  that 
matter  has  a  part  to  play  in  the  universal  scheme,  that  it  is  'fit 
and  noble';  5  that  may  a  does  not  mean  illusion  but  energy, 
force,  the  dynamic  element  in  reality;6 7  that  reason  and  intellect 
are  not  only  useful  up  to  a  point  but  indispensable ;7  that  even 
ignorance  is  essential,  toward  the  development  of  complete 
insight,  knowledge  and  spirituality;8 9  that  'The  Indeterminates, 
Cosmic  Determinations,  and  the  Indeterminable’  are  all  real 
and  necessary ;9  that  'Brahman,  Purusha,  Ishwara — Maya, 
Prakriti,  Shakti’  are  all  real  and  essential;10  that  both  the 
personal  and  the  impersonal  are  indispensable  parts  or  aspects 
of  reality.11 

At  times  Sri  Aurobindo  does  not  seem  to  be  opposed  at  all 
to  the  recognition  of  a  synthesis  of  East  and  West.  He  says  in 
so  many  words:  To  this  mutual  self-discovery  and  self¬ 
illumination  by  the  fusion  of  the  old  Eastern  and  the  new 
Western  knowledge  the  thought  of  the  world  is  already 
turning/12  He  distinctly  opposes,  however,  any  artificial  addi¬ 
tion  of  the  two  traditions  and  a  distortion  of  Eastern  wisdom 
through  modification  by  the  West.1 3  He  wants  ‘no  mere  Asiatic 


1  Aurobindo,  The  Life  Divine,  p.  366. 

I  See  above,  note  7,  p.  85;  see  especially  ibid.,  Chapter  HI.  See  also  note  3, 
below. 

3  See,  e.g.,  The  Renaissance  in  India,  pp.  46,  77-8.  He  docs  not 'regard 

earthly  life  as  a  temporal  vanity’.  Nor  does  lie,  in  his  ideal,  ‘mean  the  exclusion 
of  anything  whatsoever  from  our  scope,  of  any  of  the  great  aims  of  human 
life,  any  of  the  great  problems  of  our  modern  world,  any  form  of  human 
activity.  .  .  .\  ibid.,  pp.  65-68.  4  See,  e.g..  The  Life  Divine,  p.  890. 

5  The  Renaissance  in  India,  pp.  8-9.  See  also  The  Lije  Divine,  pp.  431,  876, 
and  Chapter  XXV.  See  also  Sri  Aurobindo,  Evolution  (Pondicherry:  Sri 
Aurobindo  Ashram,  1950),  Chapter  III,  especially  pp.  30-33. 

6  See  above,  note  5,  p.  85 ;  also  The  Life  Divine,  Book  II,  Part  I,  Chapters  II, 
V,  VI. 

7  See  ibid.,  pp.  12-13,  20,  33,  65-6,  331,  780,  782.  See  also  Evolution,  p.  34. 

8  See,  e.g.,  The  Life  Divine,  pp.  446,  504,  505-7,  549.  Also,  of  course,  ibid., 
Book  II,  Part  I,  Chapters  VII,  VIII,  XI,  XII,  XIII. 

9  Ibid.,  Book  II,  Part  I,  Chapter  I.  *o  Ibid.,  Book  II,  Part  I,  Chapter  II. 

II  See  above,  note  10;  ahso,  e.g.  ibid.,  pp.  880-2.  Ibid.,  p.  107. 

*3  The  Renaissance  in  India,  pp.  33,  38-43,  77-8. 

86 


Sri  Aurobindo  on  East  and  West 


modification  of  the  West',1  no  'incongruous  assimilation',2  but 
a  'subtle  fusing’3  seems  to  meet  with  his  approval.  He  speaks 
of  the  period  of  Western  influence  upon  Indian  thought  as  a 
period  of  'crude  reception^  but  also  says  that  it  .  .  left  behind 
it  results  that  were  of  value  and  indeed  indispensable  to  a 
powerful  renaissance/.  5  Without  belabouring  the  point,  then, 
there  is  over-abundant  evidence  of  what  amounts  to  a  synthesis 
of  East  and  West  in  the  philosophy  and  writings  of  Sri 
Aurobindo. 

Very  tellingly  Sri  Aurobindo  says:  ‘We  have  both  made 
mistakes,  faltered  in  the  true  application  of  our  ideals,  been 
misled  into  unhealthy  exaggeration.  Europe  has  understood 
the  lesson,  she  is  striving  to  correct  herself;  but  she  does  not 
for  this  reason  forswear  science,  democracy,  progress,  but 
purposes  to  complete  and  perfect  them,  to  use  them  better,  to 
give  them  a  sounder  direction.  She  is  admitting  the  light  of  the 
East,  but  on  the  basis  of  her  own  way  of  thinking  and  living, 
opening  herself  to  the  truth  of  spirit  but  not  abandoning  her 
own  truth  of  life  and  science  and  social  ideals.  We  should  be 
as  faithful,  as  free  in  our  dealings  with  the  Indian  spirit  and 
modern  influences;  correct  what  was  wrong  with  us;  apply 
our  spirituality  on  broader  and  freer  lines,  be  if  possible  not 
less  but  more  spiritual  than  were  our  forefathers;  admit 
Western  science,  reason,  progressiveness,  the  essential  modern 
ideas,  but  on  the  basis  of  our  own  way  of  life  and  assimilated 
to  our  spiritual  aim  and  ideal;  open  ourselves  to  the  throb  of 
life,  the  pragmatic  activity,  the  great  modem  endeavour,  but 
not  therefore  abandon  our  fundamental  view  of  God  and  man 
and  Nature.  There  is  no  real  quarrel  between  them'  (East  and 
West);  'for  rather  these  two  things  need  each  other  to  fill 
themselves  in,  to  discover  all  their  own  implications,  to  awaken 
to  their  own  richest  and  completest  significance’.6 

This  is  not  to  deny,  however,  that  Sri  Aurobindo  sets  up 
oppositions  between  East  and  West  on  many  points,  that  he  is 
highly  critical  of  many  of  the  West's  points  of  view,  methods, 
and  goals  (especially  its  alleged  goal)  and  that  he  insists  rather 
constantly  that  the  true  view — that  derived  from  Indian 

1  The  Renaissance  in  India ,  p.  35.  a  Ibid.,  p.  43.  3  Ibid.  p.  42. 

4  Ibid.,  p.  38.  5  Ibid.,  p.  38.  6  Ibid.,  pp.  77-8. 

87 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 

tradition — transcends  or  goes  beyond  the  range  of  the  Western 
mind. 

The  interpretation  that  Sri  Aurobindo  is  consciously  seeking 
a  synthesis  of  East  and  West  is  strongly  brought  into  doubt  by 
the  fact  that  he  is  constantly  setting  East  and  West  against 
each  other,  almost  always,  though  not  without  exception,  to 
the  discredit  of  the  West.  It  is  this  rather  constant  criticism  of 
the  West  as  West  which  makes  it  difficult  to  believe  that  he  is 
thinking  in  terms  of  East  and  West  as  a  partnership  in  ideas. 
However,  his  criticisms  of  the  West  are  of  the  West  as  the  West 
in  its  exclusive  and  one-sided  perspective.  This  criticism  of 
Western  ideas  is  criticism  of  those  ideas  by  themselves  and  in 
abstraction  from  the  total  perspective  which  he  requires  and 
in  which  many  of  these  Western  ideas  can  find  a  sound  and 
important  place.  The  criticism  consists  largely  in  the  fact  that 
these  ideas  are  wrong  because  they  are  isolated,  partial  points 
of  view;  the  West  is  wrong  because  it  takes  these  one-sided 
points  of  view  to  be  the  ultimate  and  complete  truth.  There  is 
no  question  that  he  places  higher  value  on  the  contrasting 
Indian  points  of  view  in  just  about  every  case,  but  this  is 
because  he  is  thinking  of  these  Indian  ideas  in  the  larger 
perspective,  in  the  totality  of  view  which  in  his  interpretation 
represents  the  true  meaning  and  essence  of  Indian- Vedanta 
philosophy.  Indian  ideas  are  truer  because  they  are  inclusive; 
the  West’s  are  unsound  because  they  are  exclusive.  Although 
he  recognizes  the  partial  significance  of  practically  all  of  the 
major  Western  points  of  view,  he  is  highly  critical  of  what  he 
considers  to  be  characteristic  Western  points  of  view.  If  one 
were  to  compile  a  list  of  characteristics  which  he  applies  to  the 
East  and  another  of  those  which  he  applies  to  the  West,  one 
would  find  them  in  sharp  contrast  almost  item  by  item. 
Anyone  who  is  acquainted  with  Indian  philosophy  or  with  the 
philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo — or  of  any  Vedantin  for  that 
matter — will  find  nothing  surprising  in  the  following  list  of 
criticized  concepts  and  attitudes,  but  it  is  significant  that  these 
contrasts  and  criticisms  represent  a  major  phase  of  his  overall 
attitude  on  East  and  West.  This  is  found  in  his  specific  criti¬ 
cisms  of  Western  ideas  and  also  in  his  comparative  description 
of  the  Western  and  Indian  points  of  view. 

88 


Sri  Aijrobindo  on  East  and  West 


The  major  point  at  issue  here  is,  of  course,  the  lack  or 
inadequacy  of  spirituality  in  the  West  or  the  impossibility  of 
achieving  full  spirituality  through  the  attitudes  and  methods 
of  the  Western  mind.  This  is  expressed  many  times  in  the 
works  by  Sri  Aurobindo1  and  constitutes  the  basic  motif  of  his 
entire  criticism,  of  course,  because  the  achievement  of  complete 
or  full  spirituality  is  the  goal  of  Sri  Aurobindo's  life  and 
teachings.  In  detail,  Sri  Aurobindo  is  critical  of  the  West's 
exaggerated  emphasis  upon  life;2 * * 5  its  ‘value  of  life'  as  opposed 
to  ‘truth  of  spirit';  its  ‘intellectual,  rationalistic,  .  .  .  anti- 
religious'  point  of  view; 3  its  excessive  or  exclusive  use  of  logic, 
science,  reasons  its  materialism,  coupled  with  reason,  to  such 
an  extent  that  the  West  seems  to  be  identified  in  his  mind  with 
‘rationalistic  Materialism'. 5  He  feels  that  pure  reason,  the 
method  of  Western  philosophy,  may  reach  metaphysical 
principles,  but  it  cannot  reach  ‘integral  being',  which  is 
achievable  only  by  intuition  and  direct  insight.6 *  Reason 
accepts  and  rejects,  whereas  integral  knowledge  is  not  guilty 
of  such  unsound  (untrue)  divisiveness  and  abstraction. 7  He 
opposes  its  seemingly  complete  separation  of  religion  and 
spirituality,  on  the  one  hand,  and  intellectuality  and  practical 
life,  on  the  other,  as  ‘two  entirely  different  things';8  its  inade- 


1  See  below,  notes  6,  7;  also  The  Renaissance  in  India,  pp.  31,  45,  65.  See 
also  The  Human  Cycle,  pp.  275,  277-8. 

2  The  Renaissance  in  India,  p.  30,  3  Ibid.,  p.  46. 

4  This  point  is  made  constantly  and  repeatedly,  in  practically  every 

reference  to  the  West  as  compared  with  the  East,  c.g.  The  Life  Divine, 
Chapter  II. 

5  At  many  places  in  Sri  Aurobindo's  writings,  e.g.  ibid.,  p.  12. 

6  Ibid.,  pp.  58  ft.,  63.  67,  118,  119,  121,  128-9,  156,  165,  366,  184-7,  3°4> 
323,  347.  4r5.  44°.  493,  781,  827,  842,  910-11,  926,  as  examples  of  very  many 
references. 

y  ‘What  to  the  mental  reason  are  irreconcilable  differences  present  them¬ 
selves  to  the  Overmind  intelligence  as  coexistent  correlations;  what  to  the 
mental  reason  are  contraries  to  the  Overmind  intelligence  complementaries'. 
The  Life  Divine,  p.  258.  Elsewhere  he  speaks  of  'supramental  rationality', 
ibid.,  p.  341.  This  is  the  process  by  which  lie  achieves  the  integral  philosophy 
and  its  synthesis  of  Western  incompatibles,  such  as  the  one  and  the 
many,  the  Absolute  and  the  empirical,  reason  and  intuition,  spiritual  and 
worldly  or  material,  finite  and  infinite,  inner  and  outer,  form  and  formlessness, 
personal  and  impersonal,  etc.  Sec,  e.g.,  ibid.,  pp.  304-5. 

8  The  Renaissance  in  India,  p.  65. 

89 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 


quate  concept  of  the  very  meaning  of  religion  or  spirituality.1 
He  finds  fault  with  the  West's  concept  of  religion  and  with  its 
achievement  merely  of  a  personal  God  as  contrasted  with  the 
Indian  Supermind.3  He  condemns  its  interest  in  the  outer  man 
and  the  outer  approach  to  truth  rather  than  the  indispensable 
inner  way.  3  He  finds  Western  philosophy  of  little  value  as  in 
sharp  contrast  with  Eastern  philosophy  since  it  has  produced 
'nothing  of  the  first  importance  in  fact  which  India  has  not 
already  stated  in  forms  better  suited  to  her  own  spiritual 
temper  and  genius.  .  .  .'4  He  is  critical  of  Western  philosophy 
also  in  its  status  as  'a  dispassionate  enquiry  by  the  light  of  the 
reason  into  the  first  truths  of  existence,  which  we  shall  get  at 
either  by  observing  the  facts  science  places  at  our  disposal  or 
by  a  careful  dialectical  scrutiny  of  the  concepts  of  the  reason 
or  a  mixture  of  the  two  methods.’ 5  While  he  is  also  critical  of 
the  alleged  but  not  intrinsic  asceticism  of  India,  which  he 
calls  'bankruptcy  of  life',  he  is  even  more  strongly  critical  of 
what  he  considers  to  be  the  materialistic  point  of  view  of  the 
West,  which  amounts  to  'bankruptcy  in  the  things  of  the 
Spirit'.6  He  finds  the  greatest  possible  achievement  in  the 
West  to  be  an  overall  agnosticism?  as  contrasted  with  the 
possibility  of  the  achievement  of  absolute  truth  in  and  through 
the  methods  of  Indian  thought — inner  search  and  intuition. 
He  is  critical  of  the  West  because  of  its  limited  perspective  in 
terms  of  man  as  mere  humanity.8  He  thinks  of  the  West  as 
dominated  by  the  material,  the  vital,  and  the  mental,  which 
attitude  falls  short  of  the  range  and  heights  of  true  spirituality.9 
He  criticizes  the  West  for  concern,  at  best,  for  things  of  the 
mind,  as  contrasted  with  the  East's  concern  for  the  soul.10  The 
West  concerns  itself  with  ethical  evaluation  and  practice  as  of 
ultimate  importance  and  therefore  does  not  reach  the  truly 

1  Aurobindo,  The  Life  Divine,  pp.  782-3,  037;  also  The  Renaissance  in  India • 
p.  65;  also  The  Human  Cycle,  Chapter  XXI;  also  The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity, 
Chapter  XXXIV,  especially  pp.  361-2.  »  The  Life  Divine,  p.  123. 

3  See  above,  note  6,  p.  89,  for  some  references.  See  also  The  Renaissance  in 
India,  pp.  72-3.  4  Ibid.,  pp.  52-53,  72-73.  5  Ibid.,  pp.  72-3. 

6  The  Life  Divine,  Chapters  II  and  III.  See  especially  p.  11. 

7  Ibid.,  pp.  11-13,  373. 

8  Ibid.,  pp.  929,  938,  as  examples  of  many  references,  including  those 
referring  to  reality  as  beyond  matter,  life,  and  mind,  for  example,  ibid.,  p,  130. 

9  See  preceding  note.  10  Ibid.,  p.  157. 


90 


Sri  Aurobindo  on  East  and  West 

spiritual  or  the  higher  point  of  view,  which  transcends  the 
ethical  and  all  similar  values  and  levels  of  so-called  spirituality.* 
The  concept  of  individuality  and  even  the  concept  of  personality 
as  emphasized  so  strongly  in  Western  philosophy  and  religion 
are  subjected  to  criticism  as  being  the  result  of  the  intellectual 
approach,  which  is  incapable  of  reaching  The  original  undiffer¬ 
entiated  truth  of  things',2  in  which  individuality  and  personality 
are  seen  to  represent  a  partial  and  limited  point  of  view  and  of 
limited  reality.  He  constantly  contrasts  the  purpose  or  goal  of 
the  West,  which  he  always  interprets  as  worldly  or  even 
materialistic  in  a  narrow  or  broad  sense,  with  the  profound 
spiritual  goal  of  the  East. 

Such  a  detailed  and  item-by-item  listing  of  the  points  of 
criticism  of  the  West  or  of  distinct  opposition  or  difference 
between  East  and  West,  to  the  disparagement  of  the  West, 
could  continue  indefinitely,  so  as  to  include  practically  all  of 
the  major  ideas  and  ideals  which  the  Western  mind  has 
developed  as  its  fundamental  points  of  view.  Such  more 
extensive  elaboration  is  unnecessary  here,  however.  It  is  much 
more  significant  to  note  only  fundamentals.  At  two  or  three 
places  in  his  writings,  3  Sri  Aurobindo  has  concentrated  his 
attention  on  this  contrast  and  criticism  and,  despite  the  space 
involved,  it  seems  wise  to  quote  one  long  key  passage  to  bring 
his  overall  point  of  view  into  clear  and  unmistakable  focus. 
The  following  major  passage,  in  his  chapter  on  The  Evolution 
of  the  Spiritual  Man'  in  The  Life  Divine ,4  may  be  considered 
the  most  important  comprehensive  statement  of  his  attitude 
on  the  subject  under  discussion,  because  it  indicates  both  his 
recognition,  within  limits,  of  the  value  and  significance  of 
Western  points  of  view,  and  also  their  inadequacies  and  the 
necessity  of  going  beyond  them  or  rejecting  them  if  we  are  to 

1  Aurobindo,  The  Life  Divine,  pp.  884-7,  9°7-  S°e  a^so  Book  II,  Part  I, 
Chapter  XIV  in  its  entirety.  *  Ibid.,  p.  881. 

3  Of  course,  comparison  and  contrast  of  East  and  West  are  referred  to 
many  times  and  in  many  of  Sri  Aurobindo’s  works.  I  find  especially  helpful 
The  Renaissance  in  India  (in  its  entirety),  The  Life  Divine,  Chapters  II  and 
III.  Other  specific  and  somewhat  concentrated  treatments  may  be  found  in 
his  The  Significance  of  Indian  Art  (Pondicherry:  Sri  Aurobindo  Ashram  Press, 
*953);  Evolution,  The  Human  Cycle,  The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity,  and,  1  under¬ 
stand,  Foundations  of  Indian  Culture,  etc. 

«  The  Life  Divine ,  pp.  780-3. 


91 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 

reach  true  spirituality,  which,  of  course,  is  Aurobindo's  basic 
goal. 

This  key  passage  says  in  part : 

An  intellectual  approach  to  the  highest  knowledge,  the  mind's 
possession  of  it,  is  an  indispensable  aid  to  this  movement  of  Nature 
in  the  human  being.  Ordinarily,  on  our  surface,  man's  chief  instru¬ 
ment  of  thought  and  action  is  the  reason,  the  observing,  under¬ 
standing  and  arranging  intellect.  In  any  total  advance  or  evolution 
of  the  spirit,  not  only  the  intuition,  insight,  inner  sense,  the  heart's 
devotion,  a  deep  and  direct  life-experience  of  the  things  of  the  spirit 
have  to  be  developed,  but  the  intellect  also  must  be  enlightened  and 
satisfied;  our  thinking  and  reflecting  mind  must  be  helped  to  under¬ 
stand,  to  form  a  reasoned  and  systematized  idea  of  the  goal,  the 
method,  the  principles  of  this  highest  development  and  activity  of 
our  nature  and  the  truth  of  all  that  lies  behind  it.  Spiritual  realiza¬ 
tion  and  experience,  an  intuitive  and  direct  knowledge,  a  growth  of 
inner  consciousness,  a  growth  of  the  soul  and  of  an  intimate  soul 
perception,  soul  vision  and  a  soul  sense,  are  indeed  the  proper  means 
of  this  evolution:  but  the  support  of  the  reflective  and  critical  reason 
is  also  of  great  importance;  if  many  can  dispense  with  it,  because 
they  have  a  vivid  and  direct  contact  with  inner  realities  and  are 
satisfied  with  experience  and  insight,  yet  in  the  whole  movement  it 
is  indispensable.  If  the  supreme  trutli  is  a  spiritual  Reality,  then 
the  intellect  of  man  needs  to  know  what  is  the  nature  of  that  original 
Truth  and  the  principle  of  its  relations  to  the  rest  of  existence,  to 
ourselves  and  the  universe.  The  intellect  is  not  capable  by  itself  of 
bringing  us  into  touth  with  the  concrete  spiritual  reality,  but  it  can 
help  by  a  mental  formulation  of  the  truth  of  the  Spirit  which  explains 
it  to  the  mind  and  can  be  applied  even  in  the  more  direct  seeking: 
this  help  is  of  a  capital  importance.  .  .  .  For  the  action  of  our  intellect 
is  primarily  the  function  of  understanding,  but  secondarily  critical 
and  finally  organizing,  controlling  and  formative. 

The  means  by  which  this  need  can  be  satisfied  and  with  which 
our  nature  of  mind  has  provided  us  is  philosophy,  and  in  this  field 
it  must  be  a  spiritual  philosophy.  Such  systems  have  arisen  in 
numbers  in  the  East;  for  almost  always,  wherever  there  has  been  a 
considerable  spiritual  development,  there  has  arisen  from  it  a 
philosophy  justifying  it  to  the  intellect.  The  method  was  at  first  an 
intuitive  seeing  and  an  intuitive  expression,  as  in  the  fathomless 
thought  and  profound  language  of  the  Upanisads,  but  afterwards 
there  was  developed  a  critical  method,  a  firm  system  of  dialectics,  a 
logical  organization.  The  later  philosophies  were  an  intellectual 

92 


Sri  Aurobindo  on  East  and  West 


account1  or  a  logical  justification  of  what  had  been  found  by  inner 
realization;  or  they  provided  themselves  a  mental  ground  or  a 
systematized  method  for  realization  and  experience.2  In  the  West 
where  the  syncretic  tendency  of  the  consciousness  was  replaced  by 
the  analytic  and  separative,  the  spiritual  urge  and  the  intellectual 
reason  parted  company  almost  at  the  outset;  philosophy  took  from 
the  first  a  turn  towards  a  purely  intellectual  and  ratiocinative 
explanation  of  things.  Nevertheless,  there  were  systems  like  the 
Pythagorean,  Stoic,  and  Epicurean,  which  were  dynamic  not  only 
for  thought  but  for  conduct  of  life  and  developed  a  discipline,  an 
effort  at  inner  perfection  of  the  being;  this  reached  a  higher  spiritual 
plane  of  knowledge  in  later  Christian  or  Neopagan  thought-structures 
where  East  and  West  met  together.  But  later  on  the  intellectualiza- 
tion  became  complete  and  the  connection  of  philosophy  with  life 
and  its  energies  or  spirit  and  its  dynamism  was  either  cut  or  confined 
to  the  little  that  the  metaphysical  idea  can  impress  on  life  and 
action  by  an  abstract  and  secondary  influence.  Religion  has  sup¬ 
ported  itself  in  the  West  not  by  philosophy  but  by  a  credal  theology; 
sometimes  a  spiritual  philosophy  emerges  by  sheer  force  of  individual 
genius,  but  it  has  not  been  as  in  the  East  a  necessary  adjunct  to 
every  considerable  line  of  spiritual  experience  and  endeavour.  It  is 
true  that  a  philosophic  development  of  spiritual  thought  is  not 
entirely  indispensable;  for  the  truths  of  spirit  can  be  reached  more 
directly  and  completely  by  intuition  and  by  a  concrete  inner  contact. 
It  must  also  be  said  that  the  critical  control  of  the  intellect  over 
spiritual  experience  can  be  hampering  and  unreliable,  for  it  is  an 
inferior  light  turned  upon  a  field  of  higher  illumination;  the  true 
controlling  power  is  an  inner  discrimination,  a  psychic  sense  and 
tact,  a  superior  intervention  of  guidance  from  above  or  an  innate 
and  luminous  inner  guidance.  But  still  this  line  of  development  too 
is  necessary,  because  there  must  be  a  bridge  between  the  spirit  and 
the  intellectual  reason:  the  light  of  a  spiritual  or  at  least  a  spiritual¬ 
ized  intelligence  is  necessary  for  the  fullness  of  our  total  inner 
evolution,  and  without  it,  if  another  deeper  guidance  is  lacking,  the 
inner  movement  may  be  erratic  and  undisciplined,  turbid  and  mixed 
with  unspiritual  elements  or  one-sided  or  incomplete  in  its  catho¬ 
licity.  For  the  transformation  of  the  Ignorance  into  the  integral 
Knowledge  the  growth  in  us  of  a  spiritual  intelligence  ready  to 
receive  a  higher  light  and  canalize  it  for  all  the  parts  of  our  nature 
is  an  intermediate  necessity  of  greater  importance. 

1  E.g.  the  six  classical  systems  of  Hindu  philosophy. 

*  E.g.  the  Yoga  philosophy  of  Patanjali. 

93 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 


But  none  of  these  three  lines  of  approach  can  by  themselves 
entirely  fulfil  the  greater  and  ulterior  intention  of  Nature;  they 
cannot  create  in  mental  man  the  spiritual  being,  unless  and  until 
they  open  the  door  to  spiritual  experience.  It  is  only  by  an  inner 
realization  of  what  these  approaches  are  seeking  after,  by  an  over¬ 
whelming  experience  or  by  many  experiences  building  up  an  inner 
change,  by  a  transmutation  of  the  consciousness,  by  a  liberation  of 
the  spirit  from  its  present  veil  of  mind,  life,  and  body  that  there  can 
emerge  the  spiritual  being.  That  is  the  final  line  of  the  soul’s  progress 
towards  which  the  others  are  pointing  and,  when  it  is  ready  to 
disengage  itself  from  the  preliminary  approaches,  then  the  real  work 
has  begun  and  the  turning-point  of  the  change  is  no  longer  distant — 

The  question  inevitably  comes  to  the  mind  of  a  Westerner 
whether  or  not  the  foregoing  descriptions,  contrasts,  and 
criticisms  are  justified  and  what  is  their  precise  origin  and 
basis.  There  are  major  difficulties  here,  but  the  value  to  be 
derived  from  setting  the  account  straight,  as  it  were,  may 
outweigh  the  difficulties  and  the  probably  to-be-challenged 
interpretations  expressed. 

What,  then,  is  the  basis  and  validity  of  Sri  Aurobindo’s 
sharp  contrast  of  East  and  West,  his  setting  of  one  over  against 
the  other  rather  constantly,  and  his  consistent  and  compre¬ 
hensive  criticisms  of  the  West  from  the  Indian  perspective  and 
from  the  point  of  view  of  the  integral  or  total  truth  which  he 
is  seeking?  Sri  Aurobindo  himself  admits  the  significance  of 
what  I  have  previously  called  the  psychological  factors  which 
make  it  difficult  for  a  representative  of  one  tradition  adequately 
to  appreciate,  or  even  to  understand,  the  ideas  and  ideals,  the 
intuitions  and  insights,  of  another  tradition.1  It  is  submitted 
here  that,  in  spite  of  Sri  Aurobindo's  intimate  relationship 
writh  and  knowledge  of  the  West,  he  is  still  looking  for  the  light 
with  Indian  or  Eastern  eyes.  To  use  an  expression  employed 
by  Dr  S.  Radhakrishnan  in  another  connection,  we  are  all 
likely  to  consider  the  defects  of  another  culture  as  central  to 
that  culture,  whereas  we  consider  the  defects  of  our  own  culture 
as  merely  peripheral.  Sri  Aurobindo  seems  to  follow  this 
pattern  too  often.  The  Westerner  does  not  look  at  Western 
thought  and  culture  as  does  Sri  Aurobindo — and  as  do  most 

1  See  his  The  Significance  of  Indian  Art,  Chapter  I;  see  also  note,  p.  98 
below. 


94 


Sri  Aurobindo  on  East  and  West 

Asians.  Sri  Aurobindo  constantly  criticizes  the  Western 
interpretations  of  Eastern  thought  on  the  ground  that  they  are 
guilty  of  easy  over-generalization  or  over-simplification  of 
description  and  definition  in  terms  of  extremes  and  non¬ 
typical  points  of  view  or  attitudes  or  points  of  view  which  he 
considers  aberrations  of  the  Indian  tradition.  If  there  is  any 
unsound  note  in  Sri  Aurobindo's  treatment  of  the  East-West 
problem,  it  is  in  this  respect,  namely,  that  he  over-simplifies 
the  West,  identifies  it  with  points  of  view  which  are  not 
universal,  points  of  view  which  many  in  the  West  would  reject, 
points  of  view  which  also,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  the  ‘Great 
Tradition'  of  Western  thought  has  denied. 

The  West — a  vast  over-simplification  in  itself:  'the  West’ — 
is  not  materialistic,  is  not  a  slave  to  science,  is  not  devoted  to 
the  limitation  that  all  reality  consists  of  the  physical,  the  vital, 
and  the  mental — every  one  of  the  very  many  idealists  in  the 
entire  Western  tradition  and  in  what  has  been  called  the  ‘Great 
Tradition'  would  deny  these  allegations  and  interpretations. 
The  West's  goal  is  the  truth,  and  to  a  great  part  of  the  West's 
tradition  that  truth,  that  goal,  is  spiritual  as  is  India’s.  Nor  has 
the  West  limited  itself  to  truth  of  life  without  regard  for  ‘truth 
of  spirit’.  There  are  many  similar  misunderstandings  which 
unjustifiably  serve  to  isolate  the  West  from  the  East.  Perhaps 
there  is  a  difference  of  emphasis,  a  difference  of  preoccupation 
to  a  certain  extent  with  differing  approaches  to  life  and  reality, 
with  different  values,  but,  just  as  Sri  Aurobindo  rejects 
interpretations  of  India  and  Indian  culture  in  terms  of  certain 
specific,  though  emphasized,  characteristics,  so  the  West 
should  not  be  interpreted  in  a  similar  fashion.  Nor  is  it  quite 
sound  to  judge  the  significance  of  another's  point  of  view 
strictly  from  one's  own  point  of  view — as,  for  example,  Sri 
Aurobindo  does  in  evaluating  Western  religion.  Sri  Aurobindo 
puts  this  extremely  important  point  in  a  very  telling  manner 
by  saying  that  ideas  are  to  be  accepted  and  judged  by  their 
applicability  in  ‘opening  the  door  to  spiritual  experience’,  and 
that  it  is  ‘an  inner  realization  of  what  these  approaches  are 
seeking  after,  a  liberation  of  the  spirit  from  its  present  veil  of 
mind,  life  and  body’,  which  is  to  be  the  basis  of  judgment.1 

*  The  Renaissance  in  India,  pp.  7 7-8. 

95 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 

This  is  assuming  the  sole  validity  of  this  point  of  view  and 
judging  other  ideas  and  even  ideals  strictly  in  the  light  of  this, 
his  own  or  his  own  tradition's  particular  interpretation.  To  a 
Westerner  this  is  an  approach,  a  method,  a  basis  of  interpreta¬ 
tion  which  is  open  to  question,  and  which  is  no  better  in  this 
respect  than  his  own  provincial  and  question-begging  tendency 
to  reject  the  East  on  a  similar  basis. 

Furthermore,  to  emphasize  a  point  already  made  in  this 
connection,  it  would  seem  that  Sri  Aurobindo  may  be  encourag¬ 
ing  misunderstanding  of  the  West  by  ignoring  the  presence 
there  of  tendencies  of  which  he  approves  but  which  may  seem 
to  be  less  prominent,  less  emphasized,  in  the  West  than  in 
India — the  very  procedure  which  he  rejects  in  the  West's 
interpretation  of  India  in  terms  of  some  but  not  all  basic 
points  of  view.  It  will  be  recalled  that  he  rejects  the  Western 
interpretations  of  India  in  terms  strictly  of  its  metaphysical, 
other-worldly,  and  ascetic  attitudes,  although  these  emphases 
are  undoubtedly  a  major  part  of  the  Indian  thought-tradition.1 
So,  in  the  West,  for  all  its  use  of  reason  and  intellect,  for  all  its 
recognition  of  science,  for  all  its  interest  in  social  welfare  and  in 
worldly  improvement,  for  all  its  interest  in  Nature,  for  all  its 
interest  in  the  individual — it  is  not  justifiable  to  identify  the 
West  with  these  points  of  view,  because  there  are  also  strong 
elements  of  religion,  spirituality,  idealism,  social  harmony, 
opposition  to  individualistic  concern  and  selfishness,  interest  in 
man  and  in  the  soul  and  spirit  of  man,2  as  well  as  in  Nature,  a 
deep  concern  about  the  inner  spirit  of  man  as  well  as  outer  man 
and  outer  Nature,  3  and,  much  more  often  than  realized,  a 
recognition  of  intuition  and  an  insistence  on  the  limits  of 
reason  and  science. 4  The  West,  too,  as  well  as  India,  sees  The 
infinite  behind  all  things  finite  and  it  adjudges  the  values  of 
the  finite  by  higher  infinite  values  of  which  they  are  the 


*  The  Renaissance  in  India,  pp.  21-3. 

*  This  is  certainly  true  in  Judaism  and  Christianity,  which  have  been  very 
significant — though  greatly  ignored — influences  in  and  upon  Western  thought 
and  culture. 

3  The  West  is  often  thought  of  as  a  combination  of  Christianity  (and 
idealism)  and  science,  not  one  of  these  alone. 

4  Kant — the  only  one  prominently  noticed  in  India — and  many  other 
idealists  in  the  West  have  called  attention  to  the  limits  of  reason  and  science. 

96 


Sri  Aajrobindo  on  East 

imperfect  translation  and  towards  which,  to  a  truer  expression 
of  them,  they  are  always  trying  to  arrive’. *  The  West  also  ‘sees 
a  greater  reality  than  the  apparent  not  only  behind  man  and 
the  world,  but  within  man  and  the  world,  and  this  soul,  self, 
divine  thing  in  man  it  holds  to  be  that  in  him  which  is  of  the 
highest  importance.  .  .  It  is  not  sound  to  say  that  for  the 
Westerner  religion  smacks  too  much  of  things  external  such 
as  creeds,  rights,  external  piety.  Religion  in  both  East  and 
West  consists  essentially  of  The  attempt  to  know  and  live  in 
the  highest  self. 3  The  West,  too,  holds  to  the  spiritual  view 
that  'mind,  life,  body  are  man's  means  and  not  his  aims.  .  .  /4 

Sri  Aurobindo  often  expresses  forthright  appreciation  of 
specific  points  of  view  which  are  common  in  the  West,  such  as 
science,  reason,  progressiveness,  the  humanitarian  attitude, 
and  social  service — but  with  all  of  these,  as  well  as  in  the 
metaphysical  points  of  view  which  he  ascribes  to  the  West,  he 
always  finds  that  the  purpose  or  goal  is  worldly  and  material¬ 
istic.  This  is  not  the  interpretation  with  which  higher-minded 
Westerners,  corresponding  to  the  higher-minded  thinkers  of 
India,  and  higher-souled  thinkers  of  both,  would  describe  the 
ultimate  purpose  of  life  and  thought.  The  spiritual  goal  is  to  a 
very  great  extent  the  predominant — or  at  least  an  important — 
goal  of  the  Western  thought-tradition,  certainly  of  the  Great 
Tradition  of  Western  culture.  Without  much  doubt,  the  Indian 
perspective  has  emphasized  more  strongly  the  infinite,  the 
ultimate,  the  absolute  spirituality  of  man  and  the  world,  but 
not  exclusively,  as  Sri  Aurobindo  himself  insists.  5  It  is 
unquestionably  true  that  the  general  tenor  of  much  of  Indian 
thought  often  goes  beyond  the  reaches  of  Western  thought — 
especially  the  more  naturalistic  or  materialistic  aspect — but 
this  does  not  imply  lack  of  ultimate  perspective,  lack  of 
spiritual  concern,  or  lack  of  spiritual  aspiration  as  the  dominat¬ 
ing  motive  and  goal  of  thought  (and  life)  in  the  West. 

Be  all  this  as  it  may,  what  has  been  said  certainly  does  not 
belittle  the  tremendous  achievement  of  Sri  Aurobindo  as  a 
result  of  his  thinking  in  terms  of  the  East  in  relation  to  the 
West.  He  himself  says  that  the  comparative  approach  is  of 


1  The  Renaissance  in  India ,  p.  70. 

3  Ibid.,  p.  80.  4  Ibid p.  69. 

97 


2  Ibid.,  p.  70. 
5  Ibid.,  pp.  6-7. 


D 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 


vital  importance  in  helping  one  understand  his  own  culture 
and  tradition.  As  he  says,  ‘There  is  . .  .  still  a  utility  in  fathoming 
the  depths  and  causes  of  the  divergence/  And,  \  .  .by  the 
appreciation  excited  by  an  opposing  view  it’  (a  tradition)  ‘will 
be  better  able  to  understand  itself.  .  .  Z1  The  comparative 
approach  to  the  ultimate  truth  leads  Sri  Aurobindo  to  interpret 
and  explain  for  all — Easterners  and  Westerners — the  rich,  full, 
comprehensive,  and  real  content,  substance,  and  meaning  of 
Indian  philosophy  in  a  way  which  makes  it  infinitely  more  open 
to  appreciation  and  understanding  by  the  West  and  also 
infinitely  more  capable  of  accounting  for  and  including  the 
great  variety  and  range  of  life,  experience,  and  reality,  than 
earlier,  restricted,  almost  emancipated  interpretations  have 
been.  This  is  one  facet  of  the  greatness  of  Sri  Aurobindo  in  the 
East-West  situation.  In  this  achievement  he  has  not  only 
brought  Eastern  and  Western  cultures  and  thought-traditions 
closer  in  appreciation  and  understanding  but  has  also  suggested, 
in  his  final  achievement  of  the  integral  philosophy,  a  world 
philosophy  which  does  justice  to  both  East  and  West  and 
also  provides  at  least  one  formulation  of  the  goal  of  modem 
man,  a  philosophy  for  humanity  as  a  whole,  devoid  of  the 
antagonizing,  narrowing  provincialisms  of  East  and  West. 

In  this  elaboration  of  basic  Indian  thought  in  its  fullness  he 
may  or  may  not  have  been  directly  or  indirectly  conscious  of 
East  and  West — he  may  have  derived  none  of  his  ideas  from 
the  West — but  he  has  shown  the  world  that  Indian  philosophy 
in  its  fullness ,  without  its  extremes  and  aberrations  and 
distortions,  is  able  to  meet  not  only  the  problems  of  man  and 
his  destiny  in  terms  of  the  ultimate  spiritual  Absolute  but  also 
the  problems  of  man’s  life  and  experiences  in  the  here  and  now 
in  a  way  which  avoids  the  extremes  of  East  (‘denial’,  ‘asceti¬ 
cism’)  and  West  (‘materialism’  and  ‘intellectualism’).  He  also 
provides  an  answer  to  the  exaggerated  distortions  and  mis¬ 
interpretations  of  the  rich  Indian  heritage  which  have  made  it, 
in  the  eyes  of  many  in  East  and  West,  able  to  meet  the  needs 
of  the  man  of  the  spirit  but  not  of  man  in  the  world.  Sri 
Aurobindo ’s  integral  philosophy,  being  as  he  contends  only  the 

1  The  Significance  of  Indian  Art ,  p.  12;  see  also  passages  referred  to  in 
note  2,  p.  89,  and  note  2,  p.  90,  above. 

98 


Sri  Aurobindo  on  East  and  West 


explanation  of  traditional  Vedanta,  provides  for  the  world  an 
all-comprehensive  perspective  in  which  both  East  and  West 
can  feel  at  home  and  which  can  meet  the  aspirations  of  all  men. 

Here,  now,  in  his  own  words,  to  illustrate  the  in-fact 
synthesis  of  East  and  West  and  to  provide  a  basis  for  decision 
on  our  question,  are  statements  of  the  essential  principles, 
properly  interpreted,  of  the  wisdom  of  the  Indian  philosophical 
tradition — after  the  quoting  of  which  some  possibly  significant 
pertinent  observations  will  be  suggested. 

Spirit  without  mind,  spirit  without  body  is  not  the  type  of  man, 
therefore  a  human  spirituality  must  not  belittle  the  mind,  life  or 
body  or  hold  them  of  small  account:  it  will  rather  hold  them  of  high 
account,  of  immense  importance,  precisely  because  they  are  the 
conditions  and  instruments  of  the  life  of  the  spirit  in  man.  The 
ancient  Indian  culture  attached  quite  as  much  value  to  the  sound¬ 
ness,  growth  and  strength  of  the  mind,  life  and  body  as  the  old 
Hellenic  or  the  modern  scientific  thought,  although  for  a  different 
end  and  a  greater  motive.  Therefore  to  everything  that  serves  and 
belongs  to  the  healthy  fullness  of  these  things,  it  gave  free  play,  to 
the  activity  of  the  reason,  to  science  and  philosophy,  to  the  satis¬ 
faction  of  the  aesthetic  being  and  to  all.  the  many  arts  great  or  small, 
to  the  health  and  strength  of  the  body,  to  the  physical  and  economi¬ 
cal  well-being,  ease,  opulence  of  the  race.  .  .  .  Spirituality  is  not 
necessarily  exclusive;  it  can  be  and  in  its  fullness  must  be  all- 
inclusive.1 

Therefore  the  time  grows  ripe  and  the  tendency  of  the  world 
moves  towards  a  new  and  comprehensive  affirmation  in  thought  and 
in  inner  and  outer  experience  and  to  its  corollary,  a  new  and  rich 
self-fulfilment  in  an  integral  human  existence  for  the  individual  and 
for  the  race.2 

We  perceive  that  in  the  Indian  ascetic  ideal  the  great  Vedantic 
formula,  ‘One  without  a  second’,  has  not  been  read  sufficiently  in 
the  light  of  that  other  formula  equally  imperative,  ‘All  this  is  the 
Brahman’.  The  passionate  aspiration  of  man  upward  to  the  Divine 
has  not  been  sufficiently  related  to  the  descending  movement  of  the 
Divine  leaning  downward  to  embrace  eternally  Its  manifestation. 
Its  meaning  in  Matter  has  not  been  so  well  understood  as  Its  truth 
in  the  Spirit.  ...  As  we  have  seen  how  greatly  Materialism  has 
served  the  ends  of  the  Divine,  so  we  must  acknowledge  the  still 


1  The  Renaissance  in  India,  pp.  68-9. 

99 


3  The  Life  Divine ,  p.  11. 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 

greater  service  rendered  by  Asceticism  to  Life.  We  shall  preserve 
the  truths  of  material  Science  and  its  real  utilities  in  the  final 
harmony,  even  if  many  or  even  if  all  of  its  existing  forms  have  to 
be  broken  or  left  aside.  An  even  greater  scruple  of  right  preservation 
must  guide  us  in  our  dealing  with  the  legacy,  however  actually 
diminished  or  depreciated,  of  the  Aryan  past.1 

.  .  .  spirituality  itself  does  not  flourish  on  earth  in  the  void,  even 
as  our  mountain-tops  do  not  rise  like  those  of  an  enchantment  of 
dream  out  of  the  clouds  without  a  base.  When  we  look  at  the  past 
of  India,  what  strikes  us  next  is  her  stupendous  vitality,  her 
inexhaustible  power  of  life  and  joy  of  life,  her  almost  unimaginably 
prolific  creativeness.  For  three  thousand  years  at  least — it  is  indeed 
much  longer — she  has  been  creating  abundantly  and  incessantly, 
lavishly,  with  an  inexhaustible  many-sidedness,  republics  and 
kingdoms  and  empires,  philosophies  and  cosmogonies  and  sciences 
and  creeds  and  arts  and  poems  and  all  kinds  of  monuments,  palaces 
and  temples  and  public  works,  communities  and  societies  and 
religious  orders,  laws  and  codes  and  rituals,  physical  sciences, 
psychic  sciences,  systems  of  Yoga,  systems  of  politics  and  adminis¬ 
tration,  arts  spiritual,  arts  worldly,  trades,  industries,  fine  crafts  — 
the  list  is  endless.  .  .  .  Everywhere,  as  on  her  soil,  so  in  her  works 
there  is  the  teeming  of  a  superabundant  energy  of  life.  .  .  .  She 
lavishes  her  riches  because  she  must,  as  the  Infinite  tills  every  inch 
of  space  with  the  stirring  of  life  and  energy  because  it  is  the  Infinite.2 

Such  then  is  the  view  of  the  universe  which  arises  out  of  the 
integral  Yedantic  affirmation.  An  infinite,  indivisible  existence 
all-blissful  in  its  pure  self-consciousness  moves  out  of  its  funda¬ 
mental  purity  into  the  varied  play  of  Force  that  is  consciousness, 
into  the  movement  of  Prakrti  which  is  the  play  of  Mava.  The 
delight  of  its  existence  is  at  first  self-gathered,  absorbed,  sub¬ 
conscious  in  the  basis  of  the  physical  universe;  then  emergent  in  a 
great  mass  of  neutral  movement  which  is  not  yet  what  we  call 
sensation;  then  further  emergent  with  the  growth  of  mind  and  ego 
in  the  triple  vibration  of  pain,  pleasure  and  indifference  originating 
from  the  limitation  of  the  force  of  consciousness  in  the  form  and 
from  its  exposure  to  shocks  of  the  universal  Force  which  it  finds 
alien  to  it  and  out  of  harmony  with  its  own  measure  and  standard; 
finally,  the  conscious  emergence  of  the  full  Saccidananda  in  its 
creations  by  universality,  by  equality,  by  self-possession  and 
conquest  of  Nature.  This  is  the  course  and  movement  of  the  world. 

1  Aurobindo,  The  Life  Divine ,  pp.  24-5. 

*  The  Renaissance  in  India ,  pp.  11-13. 


100 


Sri  Aurobindo  on  East  and  West 


If  it  then  be  asked  why  the  One  Existence  should  take  delight  in 
such  a  movement,  the  answer  lies  in  the  fact  that  all  possibilities 
are  inherent  in  Its  infinity  and  that  the  delight  of  existence — in  its 
mutable  becoming,  not  in  its  immutable  being,  lies  precisely  in  the 
variable  realization  of  its  possibilities.  ...  In  this  creation  the  real 
Saccidananda  has  to  emerge.1 

Thus  by  the  very  nature  of  the  world-play  as  it  has  been  realized 
by  Saccidananda  in  the  vastness  of  his  existence  extended  as 
Space  and  Time,  we  have  to  conceive  first  of  an  involution  and  a 
self-absorption  of  conscious  being  into  the  density  and  infinite 
divisibility  of  substance,  for  otherwise  there  can  be  no  finite  varia¬ 
tion;  next,  an  emergence  of  the  self-imprisoned  force  into  formal 
being,  living  being,  thinking  being;  and  finally  a  release  of  the 
formed  thinking  being  into  the  free  realization  of  itself  as  the  One 
and  the  Infinite  at  play  in  the  world  and  by  the  release  its  recovery 
of  the  boundless  existence-consciousness-bliss  that  even  now  it  is 
secretly,  really  and  eternally.  This  triple  movement  is  the  whole  key 
of  the  world-enigma. 

It  is  so  that  the  ancient  and  eternal  truth  of  Vedanta  receives  into 
itself  and  illumines,  justifies  and  shows  us  all  the  meaning  of  the 
modern  and  phenomenal  truth  of  evolution  in  the  universe.  ...  To 
this  mutual  self-discovery  and  self-illumination  by  the  fusion  of  the 
old  Eastern  and  the  new  Western  knowledge  the  thought  of  the 
world  is  already  turning. - 

Therefore  we  arrive  at  this  truth  of  Matter  that  there  is  a  con- 
ceptive  self-extension  of  being  which  works  itself  out  in  the  universe 
as  substance  or  object  of  consciousness  and  which  cosmic  Mind  and 
Life  in  their  creative  action  represent  through  atomic  division  and 
aggregation  as  the  thing  we  call  Matter.  But  this  Matter,  like  Mind 
and  Life,  is  still  Being  or  Brahman  in  its  self-creative  action.  It  is  a 
form  of  the  force  of  conscious  Being,  a  form  given  by  Mind  and 
realized  by  Life.  .  .  .  Matter  is  Saccidananda  represented  to  His 
own  mental  experience  as  a  formal  basis  of  objective  knowledge, 
action  and  delight  of  existence. 3 

A  purely  impersonal  existence  and  consciousness  is  true  and 
possible,  but  also  an  entirely  personal  consciousness  and  existence; 
the  Impersonal  Divine,  Nirguna  Brahman,  and  the  Personal  Divine, 
Saguna  Brahman,  are  here  equal  and  coexistent  aspects  of  the 
Eternal.  Impersonality  can  manifest  with  person  subordinated  to  it 
as  a  mode  of  expression;  but,  equally,  Person  can  be  the  reality  with 

*  Aurobindo,  The  Life  Divine,  pp.  102-3.  *  Ibid.,  pp.  106-7. 

3  Ibid.,  p.  220. 


IOI 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 

impersonality  as  a  mode  of  its  nature:  both  aspects  of  manifestation 
face  each  other  in  the  infinite  variety  of  conscious  Existence.  .  . 

The  first  aspect  of  cosmic  existence  is  an  Infinite  which  is  to  our 
perception  an  indeterminate,  if  not  indeterminable.  In  this  Infinite 
the  universe  itself,  whether  in  its  aspect  of  Energy  or  its  aspect  of 
structure,  appears  as  an  indeterminate  determination,  a  ‘boundless 
finite',  paradoxical  but  necessary  expressions  which  would  seem  to 
indicate  that  we  are  face  to  face  with  a  suprarational  mystery  as 
the  base  of  things;  in  that  universe  arise — from  where? — a  vast 
number  and  variety  of  general  and  particular  determinates  which 
do  not  appear  to  be  warranted  by  anything  perceptible  in  the  nature 
of  the  Infinite,  but  seem  to  be  imposed — or,  it  may  be,  self-imposed — 
upon  it.  We  give  to  the  Energy  which  produces  them  the  name  of 
Nature,  but  the  word  conveys  no  meaning  unless  it  is  that  the 
nature  of  things  is  what  it  is  by  virtue  of  a  Force  which  arranges 
them  according  to  an  inherent  Truth  in  them;  but  the  nature  of 
that  Truth  itself,  the  reason  why  these  determinates  are  what  they 
are  is  nowhere  visible.  It  has  been  possible  indeed  for  human  Science 
to  detect  the  process  or  many  processes  of  material  things,  but  this 
knowledge  does  not  throw  any  light  on  the  major  question;  we  do 
not  know  even  the  rationale  of  the  original  cosmic  processes,  for 
the  results  do  not  present  themselves  as  their  necessary  but  only 
their  pragmatic  and  actual  consequence.  In  the  end  we  do  not  know 
how  these  determinates  came  into  or  out  of  the  original  Indetermi¬ 
nate  or  Indeterminable  on  which  they  stand  forth  as  on  a  blank  and 
flat  background  in  the  riddle  of  their  ordered  occurrence.  At  the 
origin  of  things  we  are  faced  with  an  Infinite  containing  a  mass  of 
unexplained  Unites,  an  Indivisible  full  of  endless  divisions,  an 
Immutable  teeming  with  mutations  and  differentiae.  A  cosmic 
paradox  is  the  beginning  of  all  things,  a  paradox  without  any  key 
to  its  significance. 

It  is  possible  indeed  to  question  the  need  of  positing  an  Infinite 
which  contains  our  formed  universe,  although  this  conception  is 
imperatively  demanded  by  our  mind  as  a  necessary  basis  to  its 
conceptions, — for  it  is  unable  to  fix  or  assign  a  limit  whether  in 
Space  or  Time  or  essential  existence  beyond  which  there  is  nothing 
or  before  or  after  which  there  is  nothing, — although  too  the  alterna¬ 
tive  is  a  Void  or  Nihil  which  can  be  only  an  abyss  of  the  Infinite  into 
which  we  refuse  to  look;  an  infinite  mystic  zero  of  Non-Existence 
would  replace  an  infinite  x  as  a  necessary  postulate,  a  basis  for  our 
seeing  of  all  that  is  to  us  existence.  .  .  ? 


1  Aurobindo,  The  Life  Divine ,  p.  258. 

102 


3  Ibid.,  pp.  270-1. 


Sri  Aurobindo  on  East  and  West 

It  might  be  said  again  that,  even  so,  in  Saccidananda  itself  at 
least,  above  all  worlds  of  manifestation,  there  could  be  nothing  but 
the  self-awareness  of  pure  existence  and  consciousness  and  a  pure 
delight  of  existence.  Or,  indeed,  this  triune  being  itself  might  well 
be  only  a  trinity  of  original  spiritual  self-determinations  of  the 
Infinite;  these  too,  like  all  determinations,  would  cease  to  exist  in 
the  ineffable  Absolute.  But  our  position  is  that  these  must  be 
inherent  truths  of  the  supreme  being;  their  utmost  reality  must  be 
pre-existent  in  the  Absolute  even  if  they  are  ineffably  other  there 
than  what  they  arc  in  the  spiritual  mind’s  highest  possible  experience. 
The  Absolute  is  not  a  mystery  of  infinite  blankness  nor  a  supreme 
sum  of  negations;  nothing  can  manifest  that  is  not  justified  by  some 
self-power  of  the  original  and  omnipresent  Reality.1 

It  may  be  noted,  however,  that  nowhere  in  the  Upanisads  is  it 
actually  laid  down  that  the  threefold  status  is  a  condition  of  illusion 
or  the  creation  of  an  unreality;  it  is  constantly  affirmed  that  all  this 
that  is,  -this  universe  we  are  now  supposing  to  have  been  con¬ 
structed  by  Maya, — is  the  Brahman,  the  Reality.  The  Brahman 
becomes  all  these  beings;  all  beings  must  be  seen  in  the  Self,  the 
Reality,  and  the  Reality  must  be  seen  in  them,  the  Reality  must  be 
seen  as  being  actually  all  these  beings;  for  not  only  the  Self  is 
Brahman,  but  all  is  the  Self,  all  this  that  is  is  the  Brahman,  the 
Reality.  That  emphatic  asseveration  leaves  no  room  for  an  illusory 
Maya.  .  .  .2 

At  the  basis  of  the  refusal  to  recognize  the  universe  as  real  is  the 
concept  or  experience  of  the  Reality  as  immutable,  featureless, 
non-active  and  realized  through  a  consciousness  that  has  itself 
fallen  into  a  status  of  silence  and  is  immobile  .  .  .  there  is  no  reason 
why  we  should  not  conceive  of  the  Reality  as  at  once  static  and 
dynamic.  It  is  perfectly  rational  to  suppose  that  the  eternal  status 
of  being  of  the  Reality  contains  in  it  an  eternal  force  of  being,  and 
this  dynamis  must  necessarily  carry  in  itself  a  power  of  action  and 
movement,  a  kinesis;  both  status  of  being  and  movement  of  being 
can  be  real.  .  .  .3 

The  one  thing  that  can  be  described  as  an  unreal  reality  is  our 
individual  sense  of  separativeness  and  the  conception  of  the  finite 
as  a  self-existent  object  in  the  Infinite.  .  .  .4 

In  ancient  Indian  spiritual  thought  there  was  a  clearer  perception 
of  the  difficulty;  the  practice  of  truth,  virtue,  right  will  and  right 
doing  was  regarded  as  a  necessity  of  the  approach  to  spiritual 

1  Aurobindo,  The  Life  Divine,  p.  291.  1  Ibid.,  p.  405. 

3  Ibid.,  pp.  410-11.  4  Ibid.,  p.  417. 


103 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 


realization,  but  in  the  realization  itself  the  being  arises  to  the  greater 
consciousness  of  the  Infinite  and  Eternal  and  shakes  away  from 
itself  the  burden  of  sin  and  virtue,  for  that  belongs  to  the  relativity 
and  the  Ignorance.  Behind  this  larger  truer  perception  lay  the 
intuition  that  a  relative  good  is  a  training  imposed  by  World- 
Nature  upon  us  so  that  we  may  pass  through  it  towards  the  true 
Good  which  is  absolute.  These  problems  are  of  the  mind  and  the 
ignorant  life,  they  do  not  accompany  us  beyond  mind;  as  there  is  a 
cessation  of  the  duality  of  truth  and  error  in  an  infinite  Truth- 
Consciousness,  so  there  is  a  liberation  from  the  duality  of  good  and 
evil  in  an  infinite  Good,  there  is  transcendence.  .  .  .l 

The  absolutist  view  of  reality,  consciousness  and  knowledge  is 
founded  on  one  side  of  the  earliest  Vedantic  thought,  but  it  is  not 
the  whole  of  that  thinking.  In  the  Upanisads,  in  the  inspired 
scripture  of  the  most  ancient  Vedanta,  we  find  the  affirmation  of 
the  Absolute,  the  experience-concept  of  the  utter  and  ineffable 
Transcendence;  but  we  find  also,  not  in  contradiction  to  it  but  as  its 
corollary,  an  affirmation  of  the  cosmic  Divinity,  an  experience- 
concept  of  the  cosmic  Self  and  the  becoming  of  Brahman  in  the 
universe.  Equally,  we  find  the  affirmation  of  the  Divine  Reality  in 
the  individual:  this  too  is  an  experience-concept;  it  is  seized  upon 
not  as  an  appearance,  but  as  an  actual  becoming.  In  place  of  a  sole 
supreme  exclusive  affirmation  negating  all  else  than  the  transcendent 
Absolute  we  find  a  comprehensive  affirmation  carried  to  its  farthest 
conclusion:  this  concept  of  Reality  and  of  Knowledge  enveloping 
in  one  view  the  cosmic  and  the  Absolute  coincides  fundamentally 
with  our  own;  for  it  implies  that  the  Ignorance  too  is  a  half-veiled 
part  of  the  Knowledge  and  world-knowledge  a  part  of  self-knowledge. 
The  Isha  Upanishad  insists  on  the  unity  and  reality  of  all  the 
manifestations  of  the  Absolute.  .  .  .2 

For  we  have  in  this  unfolding  of  knowledge  the  two  terms  of  the 
One  and  the  Many,  as  we  have  the  two  terms  of  the  finite  and  the 
infinite,  of  that  which  becomes  and  of  that  which  does  not  become 
but  for  ever  is,  of  that  which  takes  form  and  of  that  which  docs  not 
take  form,  of  Spirit  and  Matter,  of  the  supreme  Superconscient  and 
the  nethermost  Inconscience;  in  this  dualism,  and  to  get  away  from 
it,  it  is  open  to  us  to  define  Knowledge  as  the  possession  of  one  term 
and  the  possession  of  the  other  as  Ignorance.  The  ultimate  of  our 
life  would  then  be  a  drawing  away  from  the  lower  reality  of  the 
Becoming  to  the  greater  reality  of  the  Being,  a  leap  from  the 
Ignorance  to  the  Knowledge  and  a  rejection  of  the  Ignorance,  a 

x  Aurobindo,  The  Life  Divine,  p.  557.  »  Ibid.,  p.  567. 

IO4 


Sri  Aurobindo  on  East  and  West 


departure  from  the  many  into  the  One,  from  the  finite  into  the 
infinite,  from  form  into  the  formless,  from  the  life  of  the  material 
universe  into  the  Spirit,  from  the  hold  of  the  inconscient  upon  us 
into  the  superconscient  Existence.  In  this  solution  there  is  supposed 
to  be  a  fixed  opposition,  an  ultimate  irreconcilability  in  each  case 
between  the  two  terms  of  our  being.  .  .  . 

Our  conception  of  the  Knowledge  and  the  Ignorance  rejects  this 
negation  and  the  oppositions  on  which  it  is  founded:  it  points  to  a 
larger  if  more  difficult  issue  of  reconciliation.  For  we  see  that  these 
apparently  opposite  terms  of  One  and  Many,  Form  and  the  Form¬ 
less,  Finite  and  Infinite,  arc  not  so  much  opposites  as  complements 
of  each  other;  not  alternating  values  of  the  Brahman  which  in  its 
creation  perpetually  loses  oneness  to  find  itself  in  multiplicity  and, 
unable  to  discover  itself  in  multiplicity,  loses  it  again  to  recover 
oneness,  but  double  and  concurrent  values  which  explain  each 
other;  not  hopelessly  incompatible  alternatives,  but  two  faces  of 
the  one  Reality  which  can  lead  us  to  it  by  our  realization  of  both 
together  and  not  only  by  testing  each  separately — even  though 
such  separate  testing  may  be  a  legitimate  or  even  an  inevitable  step 
or  part  of  the  process  of  knowledge.  .  .  .r 

A  spiritual  evolution,  an  unfolding  here  of  the  Being  within  from 
birth  to  birth,  of  which  man  becomes  the  central  instrument  and 
human  life  at  its  highest  offers  the  critical  turning-point,  is  the  link 
needed  for  the  reconciliation  of  life  and  spirit;  for  it  allows  us  to 
take  into  account  the  total  nature  of  man  and  to  recognize  the 
legitimate  place  of  his  triple  attraction,  to  earth,  to  heaven  and  to 
the  supreme  Reality.  But  a  complete  solution  of  its  oppositions  can 
be  arrived  at  only  on  this  basis  that  the  lower  consciousness  of  mind, 
life  and  body  cannot  arrive  at  its  full  meaning  until  it  is  taken  up, 
restated,  transformed  by  the  light  and  power  and  joy  of  the  higher 
spiritual  consciousness,  while  the  higher  too  does  not  stand  in  its 
full  right  relation  to  the  lower  by  mere  rejection,  but  by  this 
assumption  and  domination,  this  taking  up  of  its  unfulfilled  values, 
this  restatement  and  transformation — a  spiritualizing  and  supra- 
mentalizing  of  the  mental,  vital  and  physical  nature.  .  .  . 

Mind  and  life  themselves  cannot  grow  into  their  fullness  except 
by  the  opening  up  of  the  larger  and  greater  consciousness  to  which 
mind  only  approaches.  Such  a  larger  and  greater  consciousness  is 
the  spiritual,  for  the  spiritual  consciousness  is  not  only  higher  than 
the  rest  but  more  embracing.  Universal  as  well  as  transcendent,  it 
can  take  up  mind  and  life  into  its  light  and  give  them  the  true  and 

1  Aurobindo,  The  Life  Divine ,  pp.  570-1. 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 

utmost  realization  of  all  for  which  they  are  seeking:  for  it  has  a 
greater  instrumentality  of  knowledge ,  a  fountain  of  deeper  power 
and  will ,  an  unlimited  reach  and  intensity  of  love  and  joy  and 
beauty.  These  are  the  things  for  which  our  mind,  life  and  body  are 
seeking,  knowledge,  power  and  joy,  and  to  reject  that  by  which  all 
these  arrive  at  their  utmost  plenitude  is  to  shut  them  out  from 
their  own  highest  consummation.  An  opposite  exaggeration  demand¬ 
ing  only  some  colourless  purity  of  spiritual  existence  nullifies  the 
creative  action  of  the  spirit  and  excludes  from  us  all  that  the  Divine 
manifests  in  its  being:  it  leaves  room  only  for  an  evolution  without 
sense  or  fulfilment — for  a  cutting  off  of  all  that  has  been  evolved 
is  the  sole  culmination;  it  turns  the  process  of  our  being  into  the 
meaningless  curve  of  a  plunge  into  Ignorance  and  return  out  of  it 
or  erects  a  wheel  of  cosmic  Becoming  witli  only  an  escape-issue.  .  .  . 
A  large  relation  of  unity,  an  integration,  restores  the  balance, 
illumines  the  whole  truth  of  being  and  links  together  the  steps  of 
Nature. 

In  this  integration  the  supracosmic  Reality  stands  as  the  supreme 
Truth  of  being;  to  realize  it  is  the  highest  reach  of  our  consciousness. 
But  it  is  this  highest  Reality  which  is  also  the  cosmic  being,  the 
cosmic  consciousness,  the  cosmic  will  and  life:  it  has  put  these  things 
forth,  not  outside  itself  but  in  its  own  being,  not  as  an  opposite 
principle  but  as  its  own  self-unfolding  and  self-expression.  Cosmic 
being  is  not  a  meaningless  freak  or  fantasy  or  a  chance  error; 
there  is  a  divine  significance  and  truth  in  it:  the  manifold  self- 
expression  of  the  spirit  is  its  high  sense,  the  Divine  Itself  is  the  key 
of  its  enigma.  A  perfect  self-expression  of  the  spirit  is  the  object  of 
our  terrestrial  existence.  This  cannot  be  achieved  if  we  have  not 
grown  conscious  of  the  supreme  Reality;  for  it  is  only  by  the  touch 
of  the  Absolute  that  wc  can  arrive  at  our  own  absolute.  But  neither 
can  it  be  done  to  the  exclusion  of  the  cosmic  Reality:  we  must 
become  universal.  .  .  . 

It  is  true  that  the  soul  can  ascend  into  worlds  of  a  greater 
consciousness  beyond  the  earth,  but  it  is  also  true  that  the  power  of 
these  worlds,  the  power  of  a  greater  consciousness  has  to  develop 
itself  here;  the  embodiment  of  the  soul  is  the  means  for  that 
embodiment.  .  .  . 

A  complete  involution  of  all  that  the  Spirit  is  and  its  evolutionary 
self-unfolding  are  the  double  term  of  our  material  existence.  ...  It 
is  a  perfected  and  divinized  life  for  which  the  earth-nature  is  seeking, 
and  this  seeking  is  a  sign  of  the  Divine  Will  in  Nature.1 

1  Aurobindo,  The  Life  Divine ,  pp.  603-7. 

I06 


Sri  Aurobindo  on  East  and  West 


This,  then,  is  the  true  wisdom  of  the  Indian  mind.  It  is  truly 
comprehensive.  It  includes  the  insights  of  the  East  and  the 
insights  of  the  West.  It  combines  their  respective  unique 
emphases.  It  provides,  from  the  point  of  view  of  idealism  and 
the  significance  of  spirituality,  what  might  be  the  inevitable 
synthesis  of  what  is  called  the  wisdom  of  the  East  and  the 
knowledge  of  the  West. 

Sri  Aurobindo  has  thus  arrived  at  a  comprehensive  and,  to 
all  intents  and  purposes,  all-inclusive  view  of  the  universe  and 
life,  providing  a  world  philosophy  which  in  effect  brings 
together  the  East  and  the  West.  The  question  of  the  basis  upon 
which  this  philosophy  is  founded  and  its  source  or  sources 
inevitably  arises.  There  are  three  possibilities  that  come  to 
mind.  First,  this  may  be,  as  Sri  Aurobindo  feels,  the  true 
conception  of  Indian  traditional  thought,  properly  and  fully 
explained  and  interpreted,  but  a  Westerner  cannot  help 
wondering  if  all  the  West-like  ideas  and  all  the  arguments  he 
uses  (e.g.  in  treating  the  problem  of  evil)  are  fully  and  exclu¬ 
sively  drawn  from  the  Indian  scene.  Second,  this  philosophy 
may  be  the  result  of  Sri  Aurobindo’s  own  experience,  derived 
mystically  rather  than  merely  by  bringing  out  the  truth 
embodied  in  traditional  Indian  wisdom.  Or,  third,  it  may  be, 
though  not  consciously  so,  the  inevitable  synthesis  of  the 
thought  of  the  East  and  the  thought  of  the  West  as  a  result  of 
his  intimate  knowledge  of  and  experience  in  both  traditions. 
(It  is  most  difficult  to  avoid  this  interpretation,  that  the  West 
has  been  significant  in  his  thinking,  although,  as  far  as  I  know , 
he  never  once  admits  such  influence.)  The  investigating  mind 
inevitably  asks  which  of  these  is  the  true  source  of  Sri 
Aurobindo’s  complete  philosophy.  As  already  suggested,  it  may 
be  next  to  impossible  even  for  Sri  Aurobindo  himself  to  identify 
any  one  source  to  the  elimination  of  others.  It  is  very  probably 
the  result  of  an  extremely  complex  mind  ready  to  bring  to  bear 
all  of  its  many  and  profound  experiences.  The  language  of  the 
quotations  just  cited  sometimes  seems  purely  Indian,  some¬ 
times  significantly  Western.  To  the  superficially  minded 
Westerner  it  is  quite  remarkable,  and  surprising,  to  find  that 
such  a  comprehensive,  worldly  as  well  as  other-worldly,  personal 
as  well  as  impersonal,  rational  as  well  as  intuitive,  pluralistic  as 

107 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 

well  as  monistic,  human  as  well  as  superhuman,  philosophy 
is  the  true  essence  of  Indian  traditional  thought.  It  is  to  Sri 
Aurobindo’s  everlasting  credit  that  he  has  overcome  the  error 
of  such  limited  thinking  by  pointing  out  the  remarkable 
richness  of  the  Indian  tradition. 

As  said,  the  investigating  and  inquiring  mind  inevitably  asks 
for  the  source,  but,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  is  it  necessary  to  answer 
this  question,  is  it  possible,  is  it  important?  The  suggestion  is 
offered  that,  regardless  of  source,  Sri  Aurobindo’s  philosophy 
provides  the  two  great  needs  of  the  time,  namely,  a  virtual 
synthesis  of  East  and  West  looking  toward  a  philosophy 
acceptable  to  all  mankind  and,  second,  a  rich,  full  interpreta¬ 
tion  of  Indian  thought,  correcting  abuses  and  aberrations,  thus 
providing  a  point  of  view  which  will  not  only  prepare  spiritual- 
minded  India  for  the  maintenance  of  its  deep  spirituality  but 
also  prepare  the  new  and  modern  India  for  a  healthy  and 
vigorous — but  not  exaggerated — interest  and  activity  in  the 
contemporary  world. 

While  these  seem  to  be  the  outstanding  results  of  Sri 
Aurobindo’s  integral  philosophy,  as  far  as  East  and  West  are 
concerned,  it  seems  to  this  writer  that  there  are  two  other 
results  or  by-products  which,  from  a  slightly  different  point  of 
view,  are  just  as  important,  possibly  more  so. 

The  first  of  these  is  one  which  Sri  Aurobindo  himself  might 
reject,  namely,  that  through  his  East-West  considerations  and 
through  hi s  inclusion  in  a  properly  interpreted  Indian  point  of 
view  of  many  of  the  major  and  generally  considered  unique 
Western  attitudes  he  has  thereby  indicated  that  the  East  and 
the  West  do  not  stand  at  opposite  poles  of  the  philosophical 
spectrum,  that  they  are  not  substantial  opposites,  that,  in  a 
word,  they  have  very  much  in  common.  It  is  important 
to  note  this,  because  such  agreement  in  so  many  funda¬ 
mentals — and  the  noting  of  that  agreement — would  seem 
to  be  the  most  fruitful  basis  of  an  approach  to  improved 
mutual  understanding  between  the  two  great  philosophical 
traditions. 

The  second  by-product,  and  one  which  Sri  Aurobindo  would 
probably  accept  because  he  has  made  the  point  many  times  in 
his  writings,  is  that,  as  just  indicated,  East  and  West — or 

108 


Sri  Aurobindo  on  East  and  WksT 

India  and  the  West — do  have  very  much  in  common  in  terms  of 
fundamental  convictions,  but  the  great  wisdom  of  India  and  of 
Sri  Aurobindo  lies  in  the  view,  barely  touched  upon  in  the 
foregoing,  that  both  in  the  details  of  many  of  its  particular 
doctrines  and  in  its  overall  point  of  view  the  West  does  not  go 
far  enough  and  that,  therefore,  it  is  essential  to  go  beyond  the 
more-or-less  typical  Western  points  of  view — in  practically  all 
areas  of  philosophy — in  order  to  reach  a  comprehensive  and 
therefore  adequate  philosophy.  It  is  contended  all  along  by 
Sri  Aurobindo,  in  what  I  have  called  his  synthesis  of  East  and 
West,  that  typical  Western  points  of  view  have  a  place  in  his 
total  or  integral  philosophy.  The  fallacy  of  the  West  lies,  as 
said  above,  in  the  exclusiveness  of  its  ideas  and  in  their  limited 
applicability  and  validity. 

Sri  Aurobindo  docs  not  reject  the  West's  interest  in  the 
physical,  the  vital,  the  mental,  but  it  is  necessary  to  go  beyond 
these  to  the  spiritual  in  order  to  provide  an  adequate  explana¬ 
tion  of  the  world  we  know.  He  does  not  reject  the  West's 
interest  in  and  use  of  the  intellect,  reason,  logic,  and  science, 
but  he  does  insist  that  these  cannot  reach  integral  knowledge 
or  the  truth;  it  being  necessary  to  supplement  them  by  intui¬ 
tion,  insight,  direct  experience.  He  does  not  reject  the  religious 
ideas  of  the  West,  even  the  West’s  interest  in  a  personal  deity, 
but  points  out  simply  that  these  do  not  represent  the  last  step 
in  the  search  for  or  nature  of  spirituality  and  spiritual  per¬ 
fection.  He  does  not  reject  the  ethical,  the  aesthetic,  and  other 
spiritual  values  of  life,  with  which  the  West  is  so  seriously 
concerned,  but,  again,  simply  points  out  that  they  are  not 
representatives  of  real  spirituality.  And  so  on  through  practi¬ 
cally  all  of  the  major  ideas  which  he  has  considered  in  his  work: 
we  must  for  the  truth  go  beyond  matter,  life,  and  mind  (the 
intellectual,  mental),1  beyond  Nature  and  the  terrestrial,3 
beyond  mind  to  supermind,  3  beyond  mind  to  soul, 4  beyond 
mind  by  yoga  to  the  deeper  recesses  of  the  subliminal  mind,  5 
beyond  God  to  Supermind,6  beyond  the  individual  to  the  One 
and  the  whole, 7  beyond  the  differentiated  many  to  the 

1  E.g.  Aurobindo,  The  Life  Divine,  p.  130.  2  Ibid.,  pp.  601,  604. 

3  Ibid.,  pp.  114,  151.  4  Ibid.,  p.  157.  5  Ibid.,  p.  280. 

6  Ibid.,  pp.  123,  139.  7  See  above,  note  6,  p.  85. 

109 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 

undifferentiated  One,1  beyond  man  and  humanity  to  Divinity,2 
beyond  reason,  intellect,  science,  and  ordinary  logic,  to  intui¬ 
tion,  3  beyond  metaphysics  to  integral  being, 4  etc. 

In  other  words,  it  may  be  that  the  greatest  single  contribu¬ 
tion  of  Sri  Aurobindo — and  it  seems  that  this  is  to  be  found  in 
much  of  Indian  traditional  philosophy,  especially  in  the 
Upanisads  and  Indian  philosophy  derived  therefrom — is  the 
need  to  advance  beyond  even  the  highest  reaches  of  traditional 
Western  philosophy  so  as  to  attain  a  higher  and  more  compre¬ 
hensive,  truer  view  which  will  not  only  include  the  partial 
points  of  view  of  the  West  but  also  bring  to  light  the  highest 
truth,  the  highest  reality,  spiritual  perfection.  In  this  sense, 
the  West  is  not  wrong  but  is  merely  inadequate  in  its  search 
for  truth.  But  it  is  mandatory  to  reach  higher  and  deeper. 
This  inadequacy  and  limitation  the  West  must  recognize — at 
least  as  worthy  of  or  requiring  most  serious  consideration.  The 
necessity  to  go  beyond  the  limits  of  the  restricted  Western 
points  of  view  does  not  set  East  and  West  over  against  each 
other,  does  not  constitute  a  rejection  of  the  West,  but  provides 
a  means  both  for  a  synthesis  of  East  and  West  and  also  for  a 
better  mutual  understanding  between  them.  This  is  most 
effectively  brought  out  by  Sri  Aurobindo  because  bv  ‘going 
beyond'  (my  phrase)  he  does  not  reject  either  but  includes 
both  in  his  total  vision,  which  is  the  essence  of  all  true 
philosophy. 

1  Aurobindo,  The  Life  Divine,  Book  IT,  Part  I,  Chapter  I. 

2  Ibid.,  pp.  Got,  929,  938;  see  also  Evolution ,  p.  36. 

3  See  above,  note  6,  p.  89.  4  Ibid.,  p.  59. 


IIO 


6 


K.  C.  VARADACHARI 

Sri  Aurobindo  and  the  Future 
of  Philosophical  Studies 


Among  the  many  important  discoveries  of  the  twentieth 
century  the  discovery  of  Sri  Aurobindo  must  be  reckoned  as 
one.  The  developments  in  the  fields  of  science  and  political 
theory  had  their  impacts  on  cultural  valuations.  The  seesaw 
of  interests  and  the  dialectics  of  thought  had  their  importance 
realized  in  the  diverse  ways  the  cultural  process  had  moved. 
It  is  indeed  a  very  significant  fact  that  during  these  five 
decades,  the  world  has  tended  to  come  together  and  its  parts 
have  begun  to  realize  that  though  each  area  has  its  distinctive 
treasures  of  thought  and  culture  to  preserve  and  offer  to  the 
whole,  the  total  picture  of  the  world  culture  is  bound  to 
sacrifice  some  of  the  'essentials’  so  called  of  each.  It  is,  however, 
not  easy  to  estimate  the  extent  of  sacrifices.  A  world  govern¬ 
ment  or  an  agency  that  will  look  after  the  whole  area  of  human 
civilization  is  already  in  embryo.  All  these  have  not  been 
achieved  in  a  day.  Two  wars  have  certainly  aided  this  move¬ 
ment  towards  world  government.  It  must  be  remembered  that 
the  work  of  promoting,  or  more  fundamentally,  of  germinating 
these  creative  thoughts  has  been  through  the  most  spiritual 
beings.  Significantly  the  work  was  undertaken  in  the  last 
quarter  of  the  last  century  and  we  owe  a  deep  debt  of  gratitude 
to  all  those  who  brought  the  world’s  ends  together,  who  worked 
for  the  present  experimentation  in  common  government, 
common  welfare  without  considerations  of  race  or  colour, 
ideology  or  forms  of  government.  Swami  Vivekananda  brought 
America  and  India  together  and  some  of  the  finest  minds 


hi 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 


of  America  had  impressed  India  with  a  love  for  human 
dignity,  and  years  that  have  rolled  by  have  only  enhanced 
the  reputation  of  America,  because  it  has  been  dynamically 
experimenting  with  common  solutions  in  the  idea  of  One 
World. 

We  have,  however,  passed  these  many  years  by  way  of 
preparation.  The  dignity  of  man  has  been  recognized  but  man 
himself  has  been  at  pains  to  discover  his  real  universal  nature. 
Humanity  has  itself  to  undergo  a  lot  of  change;  it  has  to  pass 
beyond  the  fragmentary  ways  of  thinking,  and  piecemeal 
planning;  it  has  to  adapt  itself  to  universal  needs  and  not 
merely  collective  security  (as  the  latter  involves  some  of  the 
most  ugly  features  of  the  maxim:  ‘all  ways  are  good  so  long  as 
we  win  or  hold  what  we  have’).  The  world  requires  of  man 
quite  a  different  kind  of  yoga  or  method  of  realizing  the  goal 
of  man.  The  goal  of  man  cannot  be  man  himself,  for  this 
self-concern  for  mankind,  however  laudable,  finally  makes  man 
a  stagnant  being  caring  only  for  his  physical  existence.  Man  is 
not  a  value  intrinsic;  what  is  intrinsically  valuable  is  surely 
something  more  than  man.  Whenever  a  living  being  rests  on  its 
own  achievement  and  begins  to  contemplate  on  its  own  beauty 
or  narcisstically  adores  itself,  that  living  being  cannot  evolve, 
and  must  in  due  course  become  static  and  arrested  and  live  a 
life  of  gradual  degeneration.  Mankind  in  several  parts  had  gone 
through  this  experience  whenever  it  arrived  at  this  conclusion, 
consciously  or  unconsciously.  One  of  the  important  ideas 
thrown  up  during  the  last  century  was  the  idea  of  evolution 
and  many  have  been  the  writers  who  have  discussed  it  thread¬ 
bare  as  a  scheme  of  philosophy  or  as  a  theory  of  science.  India 
too  had  not  remained  unaffected  by  this  doctrine.  The  idea 
that  man  is  not  the  goal  of  man  is  an  ancient  one.  Men-like- 
gods  has  been  a  common  conception.  Man  must  surpass  his 
mere  humanity  and  rise  to  divinity.  The  concept  itself  of  a 
higher  evolution  or  future  for  man  has  been  the  implicit  faith 
of  all  spiritual  striving,  and  that  entailed  the  discrimination  of 
the  nature  of  man  and  his  body  and  the  nature  of  individual 
life  and  spirit  or  self.  Sri  Aurobindo  had  the  fortune  of  being 
alive  to  this  basic  stimulus  of  the  evolution  theory  to  the 
modern  world.  Though  it  had  a  restricted  scientific  application 


112 


Sri  Aurobindo  and  the  Future  of  Philosophical  Studies 

in  the  biological  theories,  following  Herbert  Spencer  and 
Henri  Bergson  he  saw  that  it  was  a  vital  force  in  the  evolution 
of  the  human  consciousness  itself  and  would  set  free  the  forces 
of  humanity  to  new  and  fuller  endeavours  for  the  reconstruction 
of  a  new  One  World. 

Man  must  be  surpassed  or  transcended,  not  of  course  in  the 
sense  assumed  by  Nietzsche  by  denying  humanity  or  by 
enslaving  it,  but  by  getting  rid  of  his  ignorance  that  in  a 
myriad  ways  distorts  the  unity,  pulverizes  it  and  makes  it 
impossible  for  it  to  have  a  grasp  of  the  reality. 

Intellectual  thought  has,  despite  its  most  brilliant  exponents, 
failed  to  generate  that  dynamic  element  that  makes  for  higher 
evolution.  Evolution  itself  has  been  expounded  by  means  of 
the  dialectical  process  by  rationalistic  idealism,  and,  by  a 
strange  irony,  it  has  been  expounded  by  even  inverting  that 
philosophical  position.  Intellect  reveals  more  paradoxes  that 
arrest  evolution  rather  than  stimulate  it.  The  escape  into 
irrationalism  or  other  scientific  substitutes  for  it  has  not  been 
successful.  Intellect  becomes  a  mere  tool  and  no  more.  Its  high 
prestige  has  suffered  grievously.  It  is  impossible  to  think  that 
we  can  have  philosophies  of  the  intellect  at  all  in  the  future. 
Though  it  is  the  finest  tool  or  instrument  or  organon  of 
knowledge  that  man  has  devised  and  perfected  in  a  sense  that 
even  the  earliest  of  the  geniuses  could  never  have  envisaged, 
it  has  become  just  a  human  instrument,  useful  for  man  as  he 
is  and  wishes  to  be — it  cannot  lead  man  to  higher  perceptions 
or  help  crossing  his  ignorance. 

Sri  Aurobindo  sees  that  the  present  age  requires  a  new 
organon,  a  need  felt  also  by  the  Russian  Ouspensky.  It  is  not 
for  me  here  to  enter  into  a  comparative  appraisal  of  the  merits 
of  the  tertium  organum  of  the  latter  writer.  The  ways  of 
intellect  had  led  to  a  lot  of  scholastic  word-chopping  and 
humanity  has  not  moved  forward.  Intellectual  activity, 
instead  of  being  moulded  in  the  patterns  of  growth,  has  become 
a  mere  tool  of  stabilizing  and  preserving  old  patterns  of  thought 
and  action;  in  other  words,  it  has  become  incapable  of  inspiring 
one  to  move  up  to  the  higher  levels  of  thought-existence 
so  clearly  declared  by  the  master-seers  of  humanity  at  the 
dawn  of  human  history.  The  mystical  writings  or  revelational 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 

scriptures  all  bear  witness  to  a  power  of  intellectual  activity 
that  urged  man  to  grow  beyond  his  intellect  itself.  This 
transcending  function  of  intellect  seems  to  have  lost  force 
during  the  centuries  that  followed  and  mankind  has  been  left 
with  an  intellect  that  is  incapable  of  performing  this  high 
evolutionary  function.  Thus  we  have  the  growth  of  several 
divergent  schools  of  intellectual  thought  so  called,  ranging 
from  rank  scepticism  and  materialism  to  idealistic  absolutism, 
static  and  impotent.  There  are  many  things  that  had  made  the 
renunciation  of  intellect  in  favour  of  some  kind  of  irrationalism 
very  unsavoury — especially  the  history  of  irrationalism  in  the 
fields  of  political  theories  had  been  bitter.  Suspicion  of  any  kind 
of  anti-intellectualism  is  justified.  But  it  is  precisely  here  that 
mankind  has  to  be  wary  and  vigilant.  Any  irrationalism  that 
abridges  the  liberty  of  the  individual  must  be  false  and  con- 
demnable,  but  such  non-intellectualism  as  enhances  the  liberty 
of  the  individual  by  dispensing  the  perception  of  higher  values 
must  be  considered  different.  It  would  not  be  irrational,  nor 
regressive,  but  super-rational  and  progressive.  Indian  thought 
had  from  the  beginning  sought  to  arrive  at  a  vision  of  reality 
that  discloses  the  higher  values  of  life  such  as  can  transform 
and  integrate  our  actual  living. 

Sri  Aurobindc  in  showing  the  limits  of  intellect  did  not 
merely  rest  content  with  widening  the  operations  of  the 
intellect  by  applying  it  to  wider  fields  and  areas  of  human 
understanding  and  work,  but  showed  also  that  such  ‘trans- 
cendentar  applications,  if  we  may  so  speak  of  these  wider 
applications,  entailed  the  very  modification  of  the  principles  of 
intellectual  activity.  Not  merely  does  the  instrument  of  human 
understanding,  intellect  or  reason,  undergo  change  in  this 
process  of  self-adaptation  to  cosmic  needs,  it  also  reveals  its 
incapacity  to  change  or  adapt  beyond  a  particular  limit.  A  new 
faculty  in  man  has  to  be  drawn  out,  latent  as  it  is  in  him,  the 
true  spiritual  force  or  psychic  truth  in  him,  and  that  would  be 
able  to  do  the  work  of  a  cosmic  existence  and  a  new  world 
would  be  opened  to  the  vision  of  man.  Such  a  faculty  or  power 
is  not  only  a  psychological  possibility  but  also  an  evolutionary 
principle  emerging  in  man  at  the  present  time.  This  evolu¬ 
tionary  force  is  the  supermind  or  gnostic  mind;  its  operations 

114 


Sri  Aurobindo  and  the  Future  of  Philosophical  Studies 

far  exceed  the  operations  of  the  human  intellect,  both  in  respect 
of  the  finite  world  and  the  infinite  spirit. 

No  longer  is  man  satisfied  with  an  intellectual  apprehension 
or  systematization  of  reality  which  he  grasps  by  sections  and 
fragments  and  unifies  in  terms  of  his  own  laws  of  systematiza¬ 
tion,  such  as  consistency  or  coherency,  which  indeed  are 
incapable  of  achieving  their  own  ideal.  Man  lives  in  a  world  of 
increasing  complexity  in  social  and  international  and  inter¬ 
racial  relationships  as  well  as  inter-ideological  perceptions.  To 
plead  for  the  status  quo  or  to  seek  a  divorce  between  different 
areas  of  human  life  cannot  carry  him  far.  The  fundamental 
need  today  is  that  of  integrating  the  different  segments  of 
human  life,  and  the  ultimate  integrating  principle  is  that 
higher  power  of  consciousness  which  Sri  Aurobindo  has  called 
the  supermind.  Sri  Aurobindo  has  clearly  seen  that  the  opera¬ 
tions  of  the  supermind  arc;  necessary  and  inevitable,  sooner  or 
later.  Global  thinking  demands  universal  perceptions  rather 
than  collective  thinking,  which  is  all  that  the  human  mind  has 
been  able  to  improvise  at  the  present  time.  The  notion  of  the 
general  will  in  politics  during  the;  past  two  centuries  has  this 
forestalling  effect  of  the  real  universal  will,  though  the  Absolute 
of  the  Hegelians  as  the  rational  is  a  pseudo-universal,  which 
has  failed  of  its  purpose. 

The  intuition  of  philosophers  has  its  own  history,  even  as  the 
intellect  has.  The  higher  consciousness  alone  synthetically 
presents  the  truth  of  Reality  which  somehow  comes  to  man 
severed  as  intuition  and  intellection,  as  apprehension  and 
coherence.  The  operation  of  the  higher  mind  is  something 
known  to  all  those  who  have  closely  studied  the  facts  of 
perception  and  reasoning.  We  shall  not  enter  into  a  survey  of 
the  history  of  philosophy  to  show  how  analytical  thinking 
prone  to  atomistic  intellectuality  makes  it  impossible  to  arrive 
at  the  original  synthesis  presented  to  the  higher  consciousness 
of  man.  The  unity  of  the  inward  psychological  life,  thanks  to 
ignorance  or  attachment  to  particularities  and  fragments  of 
experience  or  concentration  on  them,  gets  divided  and  hence 
arises  the  difficulty  of  restoring  the  original  oneness  or 
synthesis. 

Though  mankind  in  the  course  of  its  cultural  history  became 

ii5 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 

aware  of  several  levels  of  mind  beyond  the  intellect,  such  as 
inspiration,  overmental  consciousness,  intuition,  and  so  on,  it 
was  rather  a  difficult  thing  for  them  to  present  a  comprehensive 
account  of  Reality.  There  is  one  exception  however.  Indian 
thought  had  reckoned  as  the  most  important  pramdna  or 
source  of  right  knowledge  in  respect  of  transcendental  facts, 
£abda  or  £ruti.  The  whole  of  the  Vedas  was  considered  to  be 
the  direct  perception  of  Reality,  not  by  sense  nor  by  reason  or 
intellect,  nor  even  by  the  analogizing  mind  of  the  poet.  It  is 
something  that  is  granted  by  the  divine  vision  or  divya-jndna 
or  dtma  darsana.  Its  knowledge  about  Reality  is  intimate  and 
is  available  in  Yoga  and  is  achieved  by  yajna  (self-offering) 
and  yaga  (self-sacrifice) — all  understood  in  the  psychological 
sense  (adhydtma).  Veda  is  a  pramdna,  and  it  is  only  when  man 
becomes  possessed  of  this  seer-vision  (r$i-jhdna),  that  he  begins 
to  perceive  Reality  wholly  and  as  indivisible  and  transcendental 
( nirguna ),  and  as  supreme  value  (that  which  grants  value  to 
everything,  being  the  ground  of  all).  Sri  Aurobindo  thus  found 
that  this  achievement  of  the  Veda-pramana  in  one's  psycho¬ 
logical  consciousness  is  the  most  urgent  need,  for  therein  lies  a 
key  to  the  new  philosophical  understanding  of  Reality.  But 
when  he  himself  undertook  this  task  of  applying  this  supra- 
mental  understanding  or  Vedic  understanding  to  the  Vedas 
themselves,  he  found  that  it  was  the  first  step  rather  than  the 
final  step  in  knowledge  or  integral  knowledge.  He,  therefore, 
declared  that  the  Veda  opens  a  way  to  the  still  higher  levels 
and  pramdnas  (instruments  of  knowledge).  The  understanding 
of  the  Veda-pramana  unfortunately  became  so  thoroughly 
scholastic  and  intellectual  during  the  past  thousand  and  odd 
years  that  it  no  longer  was  considered  to  be  an  organon  of 
knowledge  like  the  intellect  or  mind  but  a  book  and  a  scripture, 
to  be  understood  as  best  as  one  may.  This  seems  to  have  been 
much  more  serious  in  the  case  of  other  sacred  revelational 
literatures  also.  The  spiritual  instrument  of  transcendental 
Reality  was  not  used  at  all;  instead  the  intellect  was  made  to 
interpret  and  exegetize  them.  The  result  was  scholasticism,  and 
divergences  in  interpretations,  clever,  contradictory  and 
confusing.  Systems  (darsanas)  began  to  spring  up  instead  of  a 
darsana ,  the  integral  vision.  Schisms  developed  within  them. 

116 


Sri  Aurobindo  and  the  Future  of  Philosophical  Studies 

Heretical  systems,  first  differing  from  certain  accepted  kinds 
of  interpretation,  later  abandoned  dependence  on  the  original 
revelational  scriptures,  feeling  that  intellect  can  explain 
adequately  the  Reality.  A  careful  look  at  the  darsanas  or 
schools  of  thought  will  present  certain  circumscribing  limits 
fixed  for  the  understanding,  and  the  total  apprehension  was 
surrendered  even  as  an  ideal.  Some  like  Buddhism  and  Jainism 
and  the  other  darsanas  gave  up  the  attempt  to  see  the  whole 
steadily  and  as  one.  Sri  Aurobindo  seeks  in  his  magnum  opus 
to  undo  precisely  this  disintegrative  process  of  the  ddrsanikas , 
though  his  presentation  was  addressed  to  all  philosophical  and 
other  enterprises  of  the  schools  Eastern  and  Western.  Under¬ 
lying  his  great  and  original  exposition  through  his  pramdna 
(divydnubhava)  so  nearly  resembling  the  Veda-pramana,  and 
supplementing  and  correcting  it,  is  this  discernment  of  the 
defects  of  an  intellectualizing  of  scholasticism,  which  even  the 
modem  mind  has  not  escaped  from.  We  are  yet  governed  by 
the  logic  of  the  finitizing  mind,  its  dichotomies  and  dialectical 
procedures. 

If  Sri  Aurobindo  had  not  throughout  his  work  proceeded  to 
expound  his  vision  of  the  one  integral  Reality  through  the 
supermind,  it  might  have  become  utterly  alien  to  the  human 
mind  of  the  present  age.  One  suspects  that  the  perception 
would  be  as  radically  distinct  even  as  Sankara  had  stated  about 
his  two  worlds,  the  pdramarthika  and  vyavahdrika,  the  ultimate 
and  the  conventional.  But  the  integral  conception  of  Sri 
Aurobindo  bridges  the  gulf  and  shows  that  in  the  vast  percep¬ 
tion  of  the  supermind,  the  appearance  gains  rather  than  loses 
the  Real,  and  the  Real  permeates  the  appearance;  the  super¬ 
mind  transfigures  the  mental  world  and  rids  it  of  the  ignorance 
and  mortality.  The  logic  of  the  supermind  is  the  ‘logic  of  the 
Infinite*,  it  is  usually  said.  That  at  many  times  in  history  men 
thought  of  the  logic  of  the  Infinite  is  true.  But  the  definitions 
of  the  nature  of  the  Infinite  and  the  lack  of  perception  that  it 
is  not  merely  a  limiting  concept  of  the  intellect  prevented  a 
more  definite  formulation  of  the  logic  and  law  of  the  Infinite 
Being.  Ideational  mathematics  had  somehow  developed  on 
abstract  lines.  It  must  be  said  that  after  the  complete  overthrow 
of  the  abstract  ideas  from  the  field  of  philosophy,  thanks  to 

ii  7 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 


British  empiricists,  it  was  found  that  they  can  have  play  only 
in  mathematics.  Modern  mathematical  and  symbolic  logicians 
have  unfortunately  not  learnt  the  lesson  of  history.  The 
Infinite  is  not  only  a  category  of  mathematics  but  is,  as  Being, 
a  category  of  integral  philosoph)',  recognized  by  the  integral 
pramdna  or  consciousness,  as  experience. 

A  full  and  fair  presentation  of  this  application  of  the  integral 
consciousness  to  the  several  problems  of  philosophy  has  been 
done  by  distinguished  exponents  of  Sri  Aurobindonian  thought, 
such  as  l)r  S.  K.  Maitra  and  Dr  Haridas  Chaudhuri,  in  recent 
years. 

Thus  the  future  of  philosophical  studies  should  be  considered 
to  be  bright.  The  inanities  of  the  past  twenty  years  would  be 
things  of  the  past.  Aware  that  there  is  a  new  method  of 
approaching  the  problems  of  philosophy  and  life,  and  indeed  a 
true  creative  method  is  inevitable  if  human  intellect  itself 
should  cease  to  despair  of  its  own  future,  man  may  boldly  go 
forward  towards  an  international  discovery  of  this  new  principle 
in  himself.  We  know  that  though  all  men  are  rational,  it  is 
hardly  this  reason  that  we  draw  out  in  the  affairs  of  the  world. 
Democracy  in  its  true  sense  should  attempt  to  draw  out  this 
inward  principle  of  man  in  all  affairs  social,  political  and 
spiritual,  so  that  the  universality  affirmed  of  reason  might  be 
operating  at  all  times  and  continuously.  This,  however,  is  not 
being  done,  or  else  it  is  seen  that  this  reason  is  circumscribed 
and  limited  to  welfare  socialisms  and  politics  which  more  often 
than  not  divide  nations  and  people.  The  creative  obligation  is 
forgotten  and  man  tends  to  wither  for  lack  of  incentives  to 
inward  peace  and  spiritual  progress. 

Supramental  Yoga  would  entail  the  constant  attempt  to 
apply  the  logic  of  the  supermind  or  the  infinite.  In  all  affairs 
there  is  need  for  drawing  out  this  inward  psychic  principle,  for 
the  very  fulfilment  of  man  entails  this  self-transcendence. 

Sri  Aurobindo  has  with  a  penetrating  insight  surveyed  the 
fields  of  sociology  and  political  theory  for  the  reformulation  of 
the  dharma  of  the  modern  age  in  terms  of  eternal  values. 
Individual  psychology  has  itself  to  undergo  modifications;  and 
the  regressive  interpretations  of  the  human  in  terms  of  the 
rabbit  and  the  rat  and  other  species  or  in  terms  of  the  abnormal 

118 


Sri  Aurobindo  and  the  Future  of  Philosophical  Studies 

have  to  be  checked  and  revalued.  A  large  ‘transvaluation  of 
values'  not  in  terms  of  Nietzschean  ideology  but  in  terms  of  the 
supermind  has  to  take  place  and  the  theory  of  ‘beyond  good 
and  evil'  has  to  be  reformulated  in  terms  of  the  Real  Good. 
But  all  these  do  not  involve  the  liquidation  of  the  human  and 
his  world  and  values  but  ‘open’  up  the  ‘closed'  societal  condi¬ 
tions  and  individual  consciousness. 

In  religious  consciousness  and  the  methods  of  attainment  of 
the  supramental  experience  again  one  has  to  pass  beyond  the 
purely  aesthetical  conception  and  limitation  of  religious 
experience  and  arrive  at  the  integral  method  of  total  approach. 
Thus  to  the  psychology  of  religious  experience  and  the  science 
of  yoga  Sri  Aurobindo  has  brought  the  approach  of  the  integral 
mind. 

Daring  and  original  as  these  contributions  have  been,  it  must 
be  clear  that  the  philosophical  method  of  the  integral  conscious¬ 
ness  or  supermind  is  not  capable  of  being  appreciated  at  once. 
The  integral  approach  releases  a  new  creative  movement  that 
‘breaks'  through  the  shell  of  ‘closed’  finite  mental  intellections 
as  well  as  abstract  intellectual  constructs,  even  as  the  elan  vital 
of  Bergson  is  said  to  do.  But  with  a  difference;  the  integral 
approach  seeks  to  comprehend  both  being  and  becoming, 
eternity  and  time,  status  and  dynamis,  in  its  sweeping  vision. 
The  Infinite  opens  up  its  unlimited  horizons  to  the  supermind 
and  man  realizes  his  real  being  and  existence  in  terms  of  it. 

Thus  it  can  be  seen  that  Sri  Aurobindo  reveals  a  new  and 
dynamic  possibility  for  the  philosophical  enterprise  in  the 
years  to  come,  different  from  any  past  renaissance  or  mystical 
resurgence  or  intellectual  revival,  based  upon  sceptical  modes 
of  thought  and  contradictions  between  theory  and  practice. 

From  an  unbiased  and  open-minded  study  of  Sri  Auro- 
bindonian  literature,  it  would  be  plain  that  Sri  Aurobindo  has 
opened  a  new  chapter  in  philosophic  thinking — a  chapter  of 
all-embracing  integration  of  the  fundamental  categories  of 
existence  and  values  of  life.  In  the  years  to  come  he  would 
more  and  more  be  recognized  as  the  most  dynamic  thinker  of 
the  twentieth  century. 


7 


ERNEST  WOOD 

The  Concept  of  Integral  Unity 


It  is  well  known  that  men  are  never  satisfied  with  their  human 
situation.  Man,  it  has  been  said,  will  never  be  happy  until  he  is 
God  and  knows  himself  as  such.  There  must  be  no  more  worlds 
to  conquer  before  he  can  contemplate  a  future  eternity  of 
happiness.  It  seems,  therefore,  that  there  is  something  wrong 
with  himself  rather  than  with  either  chaos  or  cosmos.  On  this 
ground  some  of  the  ancient  thinkers  of  India  developed  a  triple 
classification  of  the  causes  of  human  trouble,  which  may  be 
expressed  in  modem  terms  as  troubles  arising  from  the  material 
world,  troubles  arising  from  others,  and  troubles  arising  from 
oneself.  This  practical  issue  culminated  in  the  Yoga  and 
Vedanta  schools,  which  announced  that  man  acts  wrongly, 
feels  wrongly  and  thinks  wrongly,  when  he  has  not  understood 
himself.  The  Yoga  school  gives  five  troubles  thus  arising: 
ignorance,  egotism,  emotional  attachments  and  repulsions,  and 
material  possessiveness,  which  have  to  be  first  weakened  by 
good  conduct  towards  the  world  and  oneself  (yama  and 
niyama)1  and  finally  removed  by  deep  meditation.  The  Vedanta 
schools  proceeded  on  the  basis  of  the  question:  'Do  you  want 
heaven  or  do  you  want  God?'  The  last  line  of  Emerson's  well 
known  poem  'Brahma'  puts  the  Vedantic  advice  in  a  nutshell 
with  the  words:  ‘Seek  Me  and  turn  your  back  on  heaven.' 
Heaven,  it  is  to  be  noted,  involves  the  five  sources  of  trouble 
(klesas)  including  possessiveness,  liking  and  egotism;  in  that 
state  man  has  what  he  likes  and  does  what  he  likes.  The  three 


1  Patanjali,  Yoga  Sutras ,  II,  pp.  30-45. 
120 


The  Concept  of  Integral  Unity 


fundamental  verbs  of  human  language,  to  be,  to  do  and  to  have, 
corresponding  to  our  being,  doing  and  having — the  mental,  the 
emotional  and  the  material — sum  up  the  heaven  situation 
pretty  well.  These  verbs  are  also  connected  with  the  three 
great  laws  of  life  and  the  world — unity  (or  entity),  harmony 
and  variety.  Man  wants  to  have  all  these.  He  wants  to  be  an 
entity  among  entities,  a  conscious  entity  among  material 
entities.  Tt  is  quite  clear  in  the  world',  he  says  to  himself,  That 
variety  is  subordinate  to  unity,  since  it  is  all  one  universe,  and 
not  a  speck  of  dust  can  get  away  by  itself,  separate  from  the 
rest/  The  human  body,  he  also  sees,  now  exemplifies  these 
three  principles — the  limbs  and  organs  the  variety,  the  fact 
that  they  work  to  sustain  one  another  the  harmony,  and  the 
deeper  cause  for  them  to  do  so  (that  impulse  of  the  conscious¬ 
ness  which  we  call  the  instinct  of  self-preservation — The  first 
law  of  nature')  the  unity.  It  is  good  science  as  well  as  good 
philosophy  to  recognize  the  supremacy  of  unity  in  the  world 
and  in  the  human  being;  indeed,  in  the  latter,  when  the 
conscious  impulse  is  not  there,  the  harmony  goes  and  even  the 
varieties  disintegrate. 

When,  then,  the  classical  Vedantic  philosophers  set  themselves 
to  interpret  the  relation  of  man  to  God,  they  followed  the  same 
three  lines,  according  to  their  preferences.  We  find  Sankara 
holding  the  position  that  the  unity  in  man  is  absolutely  the 
same  nature  as  the  unity  of  God,  so  that  the  two  are  indis¬ 
tinguishable,  since  it  excludes  variety.  Ramanuja, however, found 
man's  ultimate  goal  in  harmony  with  God,  and  Madhva  found 
it  in  his  difference  but  eternal  presence.  So  were  set  up  these 
three  distinct  schools  of  thought,  which  have  fought  one 
another  verbally  through  the  centuries. 

Modern  Vedantists  often  carry  on  this  contest,  but  Sri 
Aurobindo  has  been  conspicuous  by  his  insistence  that  the 
three  are  not  inconsistent  and  can  be  combined  in  one  integral 
conception. 

It  appears  that  man's  error  has  been  not  so  much  in  his 
seeing  of  variety  and  harmony  as  in  his  failure  to  see  the  unity, 
and  the  fact  of  his  divine  discontent  as  the  indication  of  the 
supremacy  of  unity  over  the  other  two.  To  realize  this  one 
must  perceive  what  was  pointed  out  by  a  less  known  thinker, 


121 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 


H.  P.  Blavatsky,1  about  eighty  years  ago,  that  unity  has 
nothing  to  do  with  number — not  even  the  number  one — but  is 
more  in  the  nature  of  a  power,  indeed  a  supreme  power  in  man 
and  in  the  world.  Number  one  does  not  differ  in  nature  from 
number  two  or  any  other  number.  Five,  for  example,  is  a  five — 
five  trees  constitute  a  five  of  trees — and  is  thus  a  one,  and  one 
is  two  from  the  standpoint  of  a  half  or  a  four  from  the  stand¬ 
point  of  a  quarter.  So  unity  is  not  to  be  contrasted  with  variety, 
but  is  something  that  permeates  it  and  does  not  exclude  it.  It 
is,  in  fact,  a  totally  different  conception,  not  based  on  any 
sensuous  perception  as  to  what  things  are . 

Thus  God  is  not  one  among  many,  differing  from  the  others 
in  being  all-powerful,  but  is  inherently  different  and  totally 
unrelated,  as  unaffected  by  them  as  space  is  unaffected  by  the 
objects  which  in  popular  speech  we  say  are  ‘in  it\ 

Metaphysically,  if  we  then  call  the  Unity  the  Absolute  or 
the  Unlimited,  we  are  bound  to  admit  the  paradox  that  the 
unlimited  can  at  the  same  time  be  the  limited,  for  if  one  denies 
its  capacity  for  being  limited  one  denies  the  unlimitedness. 
When  the  philosopher  refers  to  it  as  ‘not  this',  one  remembers 
that  ‘this'  includes  the  ‘not’,  and  one  is  at  the  same  time  faced 
with  ‘not  not’  and  a  whole  Chinese  nest  of  paradoxes. 

This  does  not  mean  that  man  cannot  know  the  Unity,  the 
Self,  or  the  God.  He  does  know  it,  but  he  cannot  compare  it  with 
various  or  particular  objects  or  their  qualities  and  actions.  He 
knows  it  because  it  is  with  him,  and  is  indeed  himself.  He  has 
to  look  at  it  with  a  looking  which  is  not  that  of  a  subject 
perceiving  an  object,  but  one  in  which  subject  and  object  are 
a  pair  of  varieties  existing  in  harmony  with  each  other.  But 
he  has  to  beware  of  making  this  pair  into  a  new  combined 
object,  and  the  Self  into  a  new  subject.  There  is  no  such 
relation,  nor  anything  which  we  can  call  relation,  in  terms  of 
either  presence  or  absence. 

I  have  not  attempted  in  these  few  remarks  to  present  the 
reasons  and  arguments  given  by  Sri  Aurobindo  in  his  volu¬ 
minous  works,  but  merely  to  indicate  the  importance  of  his 
integral  ‘truth-vision'  in  reference  to  the  conflict  of  opinions 

1  H.  P.  Blavatsky,  The  Secret  Doctrine ,  Vol.  I  (London:  The  Theosophical 
Publishing  House,  1952),  p.  152. 


122 


The  Concept  of  Integral  Unity 


among  the  followers  of  the  schools  of  the  classical  thinkers  on 
this  subject.  But  I  do  wish  to  offer  my  respectful  tribute  to 
him  for  his  assiduous  labours  to  prevent  us,  the  moderns,  from 
falling  into  the  error  of  accepting  'simple  solutions'  of  the 
age-old  problems  and  paradoxes  which  beset  the  path  of  the 
Vedantic  thinker,  and  no  doubt  ultimately  provoke  his  awaken¬ 
ing  and  illumination. 


123 


8 


RAYMOND  F.  PIPER 

Cosmic  Integration 


THE  INCLUSIVE  PROCESS  OF  CUMULATIVE 
TRANSFIGURATION  OF  THINGS,  PF.RSONS,  AND 
SOCIETIES  IN  SPIRITUAL  EVOLUTION 

This  action  of  elevation  and  expansion  .  .  .  includes  a  taking  up 
of  that  which  is  lower  into  the  higher  values:  the  divine  or  spiritual 
life  will  not  only  assume  into  itself  the  mental,  vital,  physical  life 
transformed  and  spiritualized,  but  it  will  give  them  a  much  wider 
and  fuller  play  than  was  open  to  them  so  long  as  they  were  living 
on  their  own  level.  .  .  .  They  can  and  do  become  much  richer, 
greater,  more  powerful  and  more  perfect:  in  their  divine  change 
they  break  into  possibilities  which  in  their  unspiritualized  condition 
could  not  be  practicable  or  imaginable.1 

In  the  three-stage  transmutation  of  the  dialectical  method  of 
the  eminent  German  philosopher,  G.  W.  F.  Hegel,  there  is  an 
illuminating  similarity  to  the  integral  transformation  of  Sri 
Aurobindo.  In  both  thinkers  the  process  is  precisely  integral 
in  the  basic  sense  of  lifting  up  and  linking  components  of  one 
stage  into  a  whole  which  is  higher  and  richer  in  spiritual  values, 
and  which  contains  a  more  solid  harmony. 

Hegel's  striking  technical  name  for  this  transformation  is 
aufheben  (to  lift  up;  past  participle,  aufgekobcn).  J.  G.  Hibben 
declares,  The  verb  aufheben  possesses  the  three-fold  meaning 
in  Hegel:  to  destroy,  to  re-create  in  a  new  form,  and  at  the 
same  time  to  elevate'.  For  example,  a  lumberman  cuts  down  a 
tree  and  throws  away  the  branches;  the  sawmiller  saws  it  into 
various  boards;  the  cabinet-maker  constructs  out  of  them  a 

1  Aurobindo,  The  Life  Divine,  pp.  648-9. 

124 


Cosmic  Integration 


piece  of  furniture  to  contribute  to  the  comfort  and  harmony  of 
a  beautiful  living  room.  Thus  Frank  Thilly  points  out,  ‘What 
is  implicit  in  the  lower  form  becomes  explicit  or  is  made  mani¬ 
fest  in  the  higher.  Every  stage  in  the  process  contains  all  the 
preceding  stages  and  foreshadows  all  future  ones/ 

In  establishing  his  theory,  Hegel  illuminated  many  phases 
of  history  by  showing  how  antithetical  ideas  or  movements 
became  differentiated,  correlated,  and  transmuted  into  higher 
truths.  Thus  in  early  Greek  philosophy  Parmenides  said  that 
being  is  permanent;  Heraclitus,  that  it  is  in  constant  change; 
the  Atomists  asserted  that  being  is  neither  but  both:  atoms 
abide  while  their  relations  change. 

Both  Hegel  and  Sri  Aurobindo  apply  the  principle  of  evolu¬ 
tionary  integration  to  all  existence.  Hegel  excels  in  the  logical 
compactness  and  tightness  of  his  system,  and  in  the  abundance 
of  his  historical  illustrations.  Sri  Aurobindo  shines  and  excels 
in  presenting  four  monumental  achievements:  (a)  The  seven¬ 
fold  chord  of  being',1  which  includes  the  descent  or  involution 
from  supermind  to  matter  and  the  reverse  of  synthetic  evolu¬ 
tion  from  matter  to  supermind,  (b)  Cosmic  integration,  which 
displays,  with  unparalleled  richness  and  grandeur,  the  phases 
and  ideals  of  evolving  spiritual  or  divine  life.  The  two  pre¬ 
ceding  achievements,  set  forth  in  Hie  Life  Divine ,  represent 
perhaps  the  most  profound,  comprehensive,  and  creative 
metaphysics  in  human  history.  ( c )  ‘Synthetic  yoga',  with  its 
wealth  of  psychological  and  mystical  wisdom  and  techniques 
for  realizing  spiritual  evolution.  ( d )  The  cosmic  epic  poem 
called  Savitri :  A  Legend  and  a  Symbol ,  in  23,813  lines  of 
exquisite  English  blank  verse,  probably  the  greatest  epic  in 
any  language. 

This  little  essay  is  concerned  with  fact  (b).  The  stages  of 
waking,  elevation,  and  transmutation  pass  from  the  atom  to 
life,  to  mind,  and  finally  to  spirit.  The  first  step  is  the  elevation 
of  physical  atoms  or  the  unconscious  energy  of  matter.  This 
happens  when  the  life-force  organizes  atoms  into  the  cells, 
functions,  and  sensitive  characteristics  of  living  organisms. 
Vital  organisms  are  lifted  and  intensified  by  the  emergence  in 
them  of  mind,  which  is  marked  by  perceptual  and  intellectual 

1  Aurobindo,  The  Life  Divine ,  p.  243. 

125 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 


capacities,  individual  subject-object  consciousness,  and  pur¬ 
posive  action.  Thus,  ‘mind  takes  up  the  lower  grades  and  gives 
to  their  action  and  reaction  intelligent  values1.1  Spirit  imparts 
to  mind  vast  powers  for  growth  in  consciousness  and  divine 
living  which  mind  by  itself  could  not  attain. 

Thus  at  every  stage  the  lower  factors  are  aufgehoben  or  lifted 
up  into  a  new  whole  which  integrates  everything  valuable 
which  has  gone  before  into  a  more  worthful  and  powerful  plane 
of  consciousness.  This  process  is  called  ‘ascent  and  integration’, 2 
‘synthetic  evolution’,  or  often  transmutation.  Each  advance 
deserves  the  wonderful  name  of  transfiguration — mud  becomes 
roses;  roses  become  aesthetic  perception  and  delight;  aesthetic 
perception  and  reflection  become  spiritual  intuition,  cosmic 
truth — the  fullness  and  bliss  of  gnostic  being. 

Let  us  examine  how  the  senses  may  be  intensified  and 
expanded  on  the  astral  plane  of  being  as  reported  in  Chapter  43 
of  Autobiography  of  a  Yogi,  by  Paramhansa  Yogananda.  His 
deceased  master,  Sri  Yukteswar,  is  resurrected  before  his 
astonished  eyes  and  tells  how  he  had  been  sent  by  God  as  a 
saviour  to  the  ‘illumined  astral  planet’  called  Hiranyaloka. 
The  astral  beings  there  have  more  senses  than  we  do,  especially 
a  third  eye  and  ‘the  all-inclusive  intuitional  sense’.  All  their 
senses  manifest  an  increased  range,  refinement,  and  capacity 
of  response  to  ‘subtle  vibrations’  of  many  kinds,  especially  of 
light  and  colour  and  ‘the  ethereal  music  of  the  spheres’.  Because 
these  beings  may  change  themselves  or  the  astral  cosmos  as 
they  wish,  within  the  laws  of  astral  being,  they  may  enjoy,  by 
the  thousand,  whatever  fragrant  flowers,  fruits  of  indescribable 
flavours,  ‘luminous  raylike  vegetables’,  variegated  costumes, 
jewels,  or  palaces  they  may  wish.  They  communicate  by 
telepathy  and  television,  travel  through  space  freely  by  levita¬ 
tion,  develop  rich  and  extensive  friendships,  and  enjoy  the 
‘infinitely  beautiful,  clean,  pure,  and  orderly  astral  world’. 

The  fruitful,  unwitting  use  of  the  principle  of  integral 
transformation  in  a  wide  variety  of  institutions  and  situations 
confirms  its  validity  and  value.  Thus  the  venerable  Chinese 
practice  of  compromise  illustrates  the  process.  I  was  in  Shanghai 
once  when  sugar  dealers  and  customs  officers  had  to  determine 

1  Aurobindo,  The  Life  Divine ,  p.  636.  *  Ibid.,  p.  626. 

126 


Cosmic  Integration 

the  rate  of  import  duty.  The  dealers  confessed  that  they  might 
accept  one  cent,  while  the  officers  insisted  that  they  must  have 
at  least  ten  cents  (my  figures  may  be  incorrect).  After  three 
days  of  festivities  and  discussion,  mostly  irrelevant,  they 
shortly  decided  on  five  cents  and  everybody  went  home  happy. 

The  method  of  creative  conference  employed  by  Bahais, 
Quakers,  certain  business  firms,  and  other  groups  has  the 
purpose  of  discovering,  purifying,  enlarging,  and  combining 
the  suggestions  of  individuals  until  a  satisfactory  solution  may 
be  reached  which  no  individual  could  have  attained  by  himself. 

T.  V.  Smith  is  noted  for  his  elaboration,  in  political  philo¬ 
sophy,  of  the  idea  that  the  indispensable  essence  and  means  of 
successful  democratic  government  is  the  compromise  and 
balance  of  the  conflicting  interests  of  diverse  parties  into  a 
workable  common  plan  which  is  acceptable  to  the  majority 
and  experimentally  observed  by  all. 

Transfiguring  integration  is  illustrated  also  in  the  principle 
of  reconciliation  set  forth  in  the  letters  of  St  Paul:  each  hostile 
or  contending  party  is  persuaded  to  accept  the  spirit  of  love 
as  proposed  by  a  mediating  friend,  and  often  this  goodwill  will 
grow  until  an  adjustment  or  integration  is  realized  in  which 
past  grudges  are  forgotten  and  all  persons  involved  become 
far  finer,  happier,  and  more  winsome  personalities. 

This  principle  of  spiritual  integration  will  apply  more  and 
more  to  the  growing  interrelations  among  the  world's  religions. 
These  religions  will  both  learn  from  each  other  and  at  the  same 
time  encourage  each  faith  to  cultivate  the  special  religious 
values  that  distinguish  them  in  the  hope  that  others  may 
eventually  benefit.  As  Professor  Hocking  has  said,  we  do  not 
want  any  religion  to  disappear  without  bequeathing  to  the 
rest  of  us  whatever  values  it  has  verified. 

Sri  Aurobindo,  in  his  extensive  writings  on  social  philosophy, 
applies  the  principle  of  transfiguration  to  social  interrelations 
for  the  purpose  of  attaining  the  important  desideratum  of  ‘a 
new  world,  a  change  in  the  total  life  of  humanity,  ...  by  the 
evolution  of  the  Truth-consciousness,  .  .  .  consolidating  a 
common  life'.1  'Unity,  mutuality,  and  harmony  must  be  the 
inescapable  law  of  a  common  or  collective  gnostic  life/* 

*  Aurobindo,  The  Life  Divine,  p.  914.  *  Ibid.,  p.  916. 

127 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 


'A  perfected  community  can  exist  only  by  the  perfection  of  its 
individuals  .  .  .  and  the  discovery  by  all  of  their  spiritual 
unity.'1 

The  comprehensive  goal  of  spiritual  or  gnostic  life  is 
described  in  the  incomparable  last  two  chapters  of  The  Life 
Divine.  The  plan  of  this  chapter  does  not  include  a  description 
of  that  life.  Here  is  a  condensed  statement  of  its  chief  aspects: 
There  is  an  exaltation,  exultation,  excitement,  a  highest 
intensity  of  the  joy  of  the  heart.  ...  In  the  highest  ascents  of 
spiritual  bliss  .  .  .  there  is  an  illimitable  intensity  of  parti¬ 
cipation  in  an  eternal  ecstasy  which  is  founded  on  the  eternal 
Existence  and  therefore  on  a  beatific  tranquillity  of  eternal 
peace.  ^ 

The  ideal  of  balance  and  harmony  in  spiritual  integration  is 
so  difficult  to  realize  that  history  exhibits  many  failures.  For 
example,  Nietzsche  proposed  the  fertile  idea  of  a  transvaluation 
of  all  values  ( Umwerlnng  alter  W eric)  which  was  to  create  new 
values  and  a  new  civilization  of  the  superman,  but  he  destroyed 
the  symmetry  and  usefulness  of  his  system  by  exaggerating 
egoistic  power  at  the  cost  of  goodwill.  Sri  Aurobindo  explains 
how  the  Hindu  ideal  of  self-realization  through  the  four  stages 
of  life  failed  because  it  persisted  in  assigning  an  excessive 
weight  to  the  principle  of  renunciation. 

Let  us  now  seek  a  more  definite  conception  of  the  grandeur 
of  spiritual  integration  by  the  study  of  a  particular  field  of 
values;  namely,  the  expansion  of  aesthetic  values  of  beauty. 
First,  we  need  to  view  it  among  its  associates  in  an  inclusive 
table  of  seventeen  human  values  in  which  every  value  should 
have  a  fitting  place.  The  following  table  expresses  a  three- 
dimensional  theory  of  value: 

A.  The  horizontal  dimension:  the  kinds,  range,  or  quantity 
of  values: 

1.  Utilitarian  or  material  values:  health,  wealth,  work. 

2.  Social  values:  love,  justice  or  social  security,  co-operation 
(skill  in  social  adjustments). 

3.  Cultural  values:  wisdom,  beauty,  recreation,  goodness, 
hardihood  (capacity  to  deal  with  suffering  or  evil). 

1  Aurobindo,  The  Life  Divine,  p.  931.  2  Ibid.,  p.  879. 

128 


Cosmic  Integration 


4.  Philosophic  or  total  values: 

Personal  existence:  life  and  self-consciousness. 

Integration  or  unity  of  self  or  personality,  aided  by:  self- 
realization  through  education. 

Holiness,  wholeness,  or  religious  values  of  all  kinds. 

Freedom  and  self-reliance,  where  freedom  means  all  the 
skills  presupposed  above,  for  the  mastery  of  the  conditions 
necessary  for  realizing  one's  legitimate  wishes  in  this  kind 
of  world. 

Adventure:  the  joys  from  realizing  and  expanding  the 
preceding  values  and  discovering  new  ones. 

B.  The  vertical  dimension:  quality  or  degree  in  each  kind  of 
value.  Each  type  has  many  levels  and  ramifications  of  realiza¬ 
tion  from  rudimentary  beginning  of  appreciation  to  compre¬ 
hensive  grasp  and  synthetic  bliss.  For  example,  there  exist 
many  degrees  of  sensitivity  and  capacity  in  the  enjoyment  of 
symphonic  music. 

C.  The  spherical  dimension  or  spiritual  integration:  the 
realization  of  possible  values  in  a  balanced  proportion  through 
a  long  well-ordered  unfoldment  in  time.  The  interpretation  of 
every  kind  of  value  as  a  form  or  aspect  of  love  offers  one  way 
of  unifying  them. 

Spiritual  evolution  is  postulated  as  eternal  since  we  cannot 
picture  perfection  as  a  fixed  terminal  state  or  condition  of 
spirit.  Perfection  rather  is  a  direction  or  process  of  endless 
expansions,  rhythms  of  consciousness,  and  combinations  of 
values.  Sri  Aurobindo  likes  to  call  the  supreme  cosmic  Being 
Saccidananda:  existence-consciousness-bliss.  Bliss  encompasses 
three  factors:  love,  beauty,  and  joy.  Joy  is  the  climactic  good 
of  reality  but  it  is  an  effulgence  that  interpenetrates  all  other 
aspects  of  the  divine  life.  Note  the  important  fact  that  beauty 
is  an  integral  attribute  of  the  supermind. 

Let  us  now  stretch  our  thought  and  imagination  to  the 
utmost  to  envisage  some  of  the  possible  developments  of 
beauty.  This  inclusive  name  embraces  all  the  aesthetic  delights 
realized  in  the  vast  ranges  of  nature  and  in  the  endless  artistic 
creations  of  spiritual  beings.  In  The  Journal  of  Aesthetics  and 

e  129 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 

Art  Criticism  for  September  1957,  Thomas  Munro  classifies 
more  than  400  arts  and  types  of  art.  Each  of  these  arts  has  its 
own  kind  of  vast  potentialities  for  expansion  and  enjoyment. 
Let  us  confine  our  attention  to  one  of  the  400,  painting,  the 
art  that  exploits  light  and  colour  in  expressive  forms.  In  1949 
the  Museum  of  Art  in  Providence,  Rhode  Island,  exhibited 
samples  of  twenty-nine  isms  or  styles  of  recent  painting.  All  of 
these  styles  invite  exploration,  and  after  rejecting  all  that  is 
bad  in  the  history  of  painting,  there  remain  multitudes  of 
creations  that  will  add  to  our  aesthetic  enjoyment,  not  to 
mention  the  thousands  that  are  being  added  daily  to  earth's 
treasurehouse  of  beauty. 

But  in  painting  we  have  only  begun  to  set  forth  the  possi¬ 
bilities  of  light  and  colour.  Released  from  static  canvas, 
luminous  colour  may  be  aesthetically  developed  in  many  other 
ways,  some  of  which,  as  Sri  Aurobindo  would  say,  are  now 
'impracticable  and  unimaginable’.  Some  of  these  future 
wonders  are  suggested  by  the  marvellous  colour  effects  realized 
in  more  or  less  abstract  motion  pictures  like  Fantasia ,  in 
lumia  (the  art  of  mobile  colour  as  developed  by  the  genius  of 
Thomas  Wilfred),  in  fireworks  or  in  fountains  of  water.  Even 
the  beginnings  of  lumia  are  so  magnificent  that  it  is  difficult  to 
imagine  how  in  the  future  it  will  be  developed  to  beautify  our 
homes,  temples,  and  public  buildings,  by  the  play  of  appro¬ 
priate  living  light  and  colour. 

I  cannot  resist  some  speculations  about  new  arts  of  luminous 
colour  which  may  be  developed  on  a  plane  like  Hiranyaloka. 
If  astral  people,  for  instance,  have  twice  as  many  colours 
as  we  enjoy,  with  expanded  vision  to  receive  them,  the  possi¬ 
bilities  of  new  combinations  and  of  aesthetic  enjoyment  are 
infinitely  multiplied.  These  creative  beings  might  invent 
controls  for  producing  colour  symphonies  that  would  resemble 
a  sustained,  ordered,  magnified  aurora  borealis.  From  radiant 
disks  and  planes  suspended  in  the  sky,  from  flashing  fountains 
in  variegated  lakes  and  seas,  and  from  other  unforeseeable 
constructions,  such  beings  could  produce  colour  symphonies 
of  indescribable  grandeur,  accompanied  by  vast  mystical  music 
and  breezes  of  gently  rhythmic  fragrances,  produced  by  vast 
perfumery  organs  or  gardens  of  multifarious  flowers. 


130 


Cosmic  Integration 


Such  remote  speculations  force  upon  us  by  contrast  the 
urgency  of  using  the  vast  knowledge  and  skills  we  now  possess 
for  the  increase  of  human  happiness  on  earth.  In  every  realm 
of  value  there  are  prophets  and  masters  who  know  the  secrets 
for  bringing  to  mankind  vast  expansions  of  their  special  kinds 
of  good,  if  only  the  masses  would  listen.  Because  of  the 
perennial  difficulties  of  awakening  lower  minds  to  the  treasures 
of  the  spiritual  life,  masters  and  avatars  will  always  be  needed 
and  summoned  to  descend  in  order,  skilfully  and  gently,  to 
release  those  who  dwell  in  the  great  ignorance,  and  to  lead 
them  up  the  stairway  of  spiritual  evolution.  This  taking  up  of 
the  lower  parts  of  life  reveals  itself  as  a  turning  downward  of 
the  master  eye  of  the  secret  evolving  spirit  or  of  the  universal 
Being  in  the  individual  from  the  height  to  which  he  has  reached 
on  all  that  now  lies  below  him/1 

Thus  finally  we  come  to  perhaps  the  most  distinctive 
charact eristic  of  vSri  Aurobindo’s  conception  of  spiritual  inte¬ 
gration:  the  powerful,  redemptive  retroaction  of  every  advance 
in  insight,  illumination,  or  love.  We  read  that  That  downward 
eye  of  knowledge  and  will  with  a  view  to  an  all-round  heighten¬ 
ing,  deepening  and  subtler,  finer  and  richer  intensification  is 
the  secret  Spirit’s  way  from  the  beginning’.1 

A  few  examples  follow  of  the  retroactive,  permeating  effect 
of  a  new  insight  or  emotion.  Thus  a  young  man  who  has  fallen 
in  love  awakens  to  many  new  values  in  his  daily  work,  observa¬ 
tions,  and  social  relations.  In  Pilgrim  s  Progress ,  when  the 
pilgrim  discovered  the  Christ  consciousness,  the  whole  universe 
was  transmuted  for  him  into  beauty  and  joy.  During  an  art 
exhibition  in  1921  of  4,000  works  of  the  ‘independent  artists’ 
in  Paris,  I  encountered  a  painting  called  The  Infinite  which 
suddenly  brought  forth  in  me  an  aesthetic  conversion  in  which 
I  discovered  the  beauty,  power,  and  wonder  of  colour.  For 
the  first  time  in  my  life  I  saw,  in  a  kind  of  expansive  explosion, 
the  enchantments,  the  adventures,  and  the  possibilities  of 
coloured  patterns.  This  one  fresh  insight  radically  changed  my 
whole  successive  life.  It  inspired  extensive  new  researches  in 
the  fine  arts,  new  university  courses,  books,  and  travel.  It 
transformed  my  home  life:  progressively  improved  interior 

1  Aurobindo,  The  Life  Divine,  p.  636.  »  Ibid.,  p.  637. 

131 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 

decorations  from  basement  to  attic ,  and  stimulated  the  develop¬ 
ment  of  landscaping  and  flower  growing  outside  the  house.  The 
most  important  consequence  has  been  the  establishment  of 
scores  of  delightful  new  friendships  around  the  world.  In  short, 
a  fundamental  principle  in  Sri  Aurobindo's  philosophy  is  that 
any  advance  in  value  appreciation  reacts  to  lift  all  of  one's 
lower  or  earlier  life  into  richer  perspectives  and  harmony. 

We  end  by  three  more  statements  by  Sri  Aurobindo  himself, 
selected  from  hundreds:  ‘An  integral  spiritual  consciousness  .  .  . 
links  the  highest  to  the  lowest  through  all  the  mediating  terms 
and  achieves  an  indivisible  whole.'1  The  lower  consciousness 
of  mind,  life  and  body  cannot  arrive  at  its  full  meaning  until  it 
is  taken  up,  restated,  transformed  by  the  light  and  power  and 
joy  of  the  higher  spiritual  consciousness.'2  ‘An  integral  con¬ 
sciousness  will  become  the  basis  of  an  entire  harmonization  of 
life  through  the  total  transformation,  unification,  integration 
of  the  being  and  the  nature.' 3 


1  Aurobindo,  The  Life  Divine,  p.  566. 
a  Ibid.,  p.  604.  .1  Ibid.,  p.  646. 


132 


9 


R.  S.  SRIVASTAVA 

The  Integralist  Theory  of  Evolution 


In  the  renaissance  of  Indian  Philosophy,  Sri  Aurobindo  may 
be  regarded  as  the  most  revolutionary  and  creative  thinker. 
Evolution  is  the  pivot  on  which  his  whole  philosophy  rotates. 
He  synthesizes  the  truths  of  both  the  Eastern  and  the  Western 
theories  of  evolution.  The  Western  theories  are  existential, 
intellectual  and  cosmic  in  outlook,  but  they  lack  the  requisite 
spiritual  standpoint.  The  West  require  conversion  from  their 
excessive  realistic  approach  to  the  idealistic  and  spiritual  one. 
The  Indian  views  are  thoroughly  spiritual.  But  their  main 
defect  is  that  they  have  an  individualistic  outlook  and  they 
are  static  in  character.  The  Indian  theories  of  evolution  con¬ 
centrate  upon  the  evolution  of  the  individual — in  all  his 
stages,  purpose,  self-realization  and  attainment  of  salvation. 
They  neglect  the  cosmic  aspect  of  evolution,  but  they  must 
break  the  bonds  of  narrow  individualistic  outlook  and  acquire 
a  dynamic  and  cosmic  character. 

Sri  Aurobindo  is  a  synthetic  thinker  in  the  sense  that  for 
him  the  truth  of  evolution  lies  in  the  assimilation  of  the  Indian 
and  Western  theories  in  a  spiritual,  integral,  cosmic  and 
dynamic  philosophy  of  evolution.  Evolution  is  the  process  of 
the  revelation  of  the  Spirit.  The  Supreme  Spirit  (Saccidananda) 
creates  the  universe  and  manifests  itself  in  higher,  spiritual 
and  divine  principles.  The  unfoldment  of  consciousness  in 
matter  is  the  ceaseless  process  of  evolution.  The  Divine  involves 
itself  in  ignorance  and  inconscience.  It  apparently  negates 
itself  in  matter  or  non-being  and  gradually  manifests  its 
spiritual  and  divine  character.  The  full  emergence  of  Saccid¬ 
ananda  in  the  cosmos  brings  about  the  life  divine  on  earth. 

133 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 


SPIRITUAL  VIEW  OF  EVOLUTION 

Sri  Aurobindo's  philosophy  of  evolution  is  thoroughly  spiritual. 
Spirit  is  the  source  of  creation  and  evolution  and  also  the  final 
end  of  realization.  The  materialistic,  vitalistic  and  idealistic 
theories  cannot  adequately  explain  the  truth  of  evolution.  The 
materialistic  theories  are  self-contradictory,  for  an  unconscious 
principle  cannot  evolve  life  and  consciousness  from  it.  In  a 
purely  materialistic  philosophy,  there  is  an  unconscious  move¬ 
ment  of  development,  and  we  cannot  talk  of  any  direction  or 
goal.  The  biological  theories  of  evolution,  propounded  by 
Darwin,  Spencer,  Lamarck  and  others,  believed  in  the  pro¬ 
gressive  adjustment  of  the  individual  to  his  environment, 
leading  ultimately  to  the  annulment  of  all  conflict  between  the 
two,  as  the  goal  of  evolution.  But  the  human  individual  must 
not  accept  his  environment  as  something  fixed  and  immutable. 
The  vitalistic  theories  fail  to  explain  evolution,  because  in  the 
ordinary  version  of  vitalism,  such  as  that  of  Bergson,  there  is 
only  a  ceaseless  process  without  a  goal.  Bergson  speaks  of  an 
unchecked  and  unimpeded  flow  which  is  not  a  movement 
towards  any  goal.  Evolution,  for  him,  is  not  a  process  of  ascent 
and  steady  manifestation  of  the  higher  spiritual  and  divine 
principle.  It  is  an  aimless  flow  without  direction,  with  up  and 
down,  blind  movements  leading  to  blind  alleys.  Bergson  tried 
to  give  us  deliverance  from  the  mechanical  theory  of  evolution, 
but  in  rejecting  all  teleology  he  has  himself  fallen  into  the  same 
dreaded  mechanistic  theory.  If  creative  movement  is  not  a 
movement  towards  anything,  if  it  does  not  know  what  it  is  to 
create  and  if  it  is  not  guided  by  any  purpose,  how,  we  ask,  can 
it  be  called  'creative'?  Bergson's  sourceless  and  aimless  evolu¬ 
tion  is  a  temporal  mechanism  in  place  of  the  spatial  mechanism 
of  the  biologist.  Bergson  calls  his  view  of  evolution  'creative', 
but  unless  evolution  has  a  goal  it  can  in  no  way  be  called 
'creative'.  The  idealistic  theories  of  evolution  which  believe 
reason  to  be  the  ultimate  principle  give  also  an  entirely 
unsatisfactory  account  of  evolution.  If  reason  be  the  highest 
principle,  then  assuredly  there  can  be  no  evolution  beyond  it. 
Having  reached  the  stage  of  reason,  evolution  must  cease 
forever.  We  should  bid  farewell  to  all  cosmic  evolution.  The 


134 


The  Integralist  Theory  of  Evolution 


destiny  of  man  is  also  very  dismal  on  such  a  theory.  He  remains 
a  finite,  limited,  ephemeral,  and  ignorant  being  forever.  A 
higher  destiny  of  man  is  only  possible  in  a  philosophy  which 
admits  higher  grades  of  consciousness  that  are  incomprehensible 
to  human  reason. 

Sri  Aurobindo  envisages  a  thoroughly  spiritual  view  of 
evolution.  It  is  an  evolution  of  consciousness  in  matter  until 
the  former  becomes  explicit,  open,  revealed  and  perceptible. 
As  spirit  is  involved  in  matter,  its  manifestation  in  grades  of 
consciousness  is  the  ‘truth'  of  evolution.  Sri  Aurobindo  says: 
‘A  spiritual  evolution,  an  evolution  of  Consciousness  in  Matter 
as  a  constant  developing  self-formation  until  the  form  can 
reveal  the  indwelling  spirit,  is  then  the  key-note,  the  central 
significant  motive  of  this  terrestrial  existence.  This  significance 
is  concealed  at  the  outset  by  the  involution  of  the  Spirit,  the 
Divine  Reality,  in  a  dense  material  Inconscience,  a  veil  of 
Inconscience;  a  veil  of  insensibility  of  Matter  hides  the  Uni¬ 
versal  Consciousness-Force  which  works  within  it,  so  that  the 
Energy,  which  is  the  first  form  the  Force  of  creation  assumes 
in  the  physical  universe,  appears  to  be  itself  inconscient  and 
yet  does  the  work  of  a  vast  occult  Intelligence.'1 


INVOLUTION  AND  EVOLUTION 

Evolution  is  the  reverse  of  the  process  of  involution.  Evolution 
of  higher  principles  from  the  lower  ones  is  possible  only  when 
the  former  are  already  involved  implicitly  in  the  matter.  Life 
emerges  from  matter,  only  because  it  is  already  involved  in  the 
latter.  The  emergence  of  mind  from  physical  and  vital  realities 
is  possible  because  it  lies  embedded  in  them.  There  is  no 
magical  emergence  of  the  non-existent  realities.  All  the  higher 
spiritual  and  divine  grades  of  principles  remain  implicitly 
embedded  in  the  lower  reality.  ‘For  there  seems  to  be  no 
reason',  says  Sri  Aurobindo,  ‘why  life  should  evolve  out  of 
material  elements  or  Mind  out  of  living  form,  unless  we  accept 
the  Vedantic  solution  that  Life  is  already  involved  in  Matter 
and  Mind  in  Life,  Life  a  form  of  veiled  consciousness — and 

■  Aurobindo,  The  Life  Divine,  Book  II,  Part  II,  pp.  734-5. 

135 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 


then  there  seems  to  be  little  objection  to  a  further  step  in  the 
series  and  the  admission  that  mental  consciousness  may  itself 
be  only  a  form  and  a  veil  of  higher  states  which  are  beyond 
Mind/1  Involution  of  Saccidananda  precedes  Its  manifestation. 
The  act  of  involution  is  graded  descent  from  Saccidananda 
to  supermind,  overmind,  intuition,  illumined  mind,  higher 
mind,  mind,  soul,  life  and  finally  to  matter.  As  Sri  Aurobindo 
remarks:  'Evolution  is  an  inverse  action  of  the  involution,  what 
is  an  ultimate  and  last  derivation  in  the  involution  is  the  first 
to  appear  in  the  evolution,  what  was  original  and  primal  in  the 
involution  is  in  the  evolution  the  last  and  supreme  emergence/* 
The  immanent  dynamic  movement  of  the  Supreme  Spirit 
(Saccidananda)  takes  place  because  of  the  involution-evolu¬ 
tion  process  in  diverse  and  multiple  forms.  Though  the  Absolute 
is  transcendent  even  to  its  manifestations,  and  is  not  limited 
by  its  expression,  it  remains  immanent  in  the  cosmos.  Involu¬ 
tion-evolution  is  the  mode  in  which  the  power  of  the  Absolute 
becomes  active,  i.e.  expresses  itself.  The  Absolute  is  absolute 
because  it  is  not  bound  by  its  self-expression  and  it  remains  the 
Absolute  both  in  and  beyond  its  self-expression. 

TRIPLE  PROCESS  OF  EVOLUTION 

Evolution  has  a  triple  character,  viz.  widening ,  heightening , 
and  integration.  The  lower  principles  become  wide,  open, 
receptive,  sublime,  refined  and  adaptive  when  it  has  to  ascend 
to  a  higher  state.  For  instance,  matter  must  undergo  a  process 
of  complication,  self-differentiation,  subtle  and  intricate 
organization  in  order  that  the  higher  principle,  life,  may  evolve 
in  it.  If  matter  remains  a  simple,  hard,  and  therefore  an 
unadjust  able  stuff,  life  can  never  evolve  in  it.  The  process  of 
widening  of  a  principle  means  its  increasing  organization, 
expression  and  differentiation  so  that  it  may  be  capable  of 
evolution  of  higher  principles  from  it  and  within  it  as  a  base. 
If  there  is  life  in  an  animal,  it  is  only  because  its  body  has 
become  sufficiently  organized,  subtle  and  complex.  If  mind 
inhabits  a  man,  it  is  because  his  body  has  a  higher  degree  of 

1  Aurobindo,  The  Life  Divine,  Book  I,  p.  5. 

1  Ibid.,  Book  II,  Part  II,  pp.  759-60. 

136 


The  Integralist  Theory  of  Evolution 


complexity  than  plants  and  stones  and  has  the  capacity  and 
organization  for  the  reception  of  the  mental  consciousness. 

Secondly,  evolution  is  a  process  of  heightening  of  the  force 
of  consciousness  to  higher  and  higher  grades.  Matter  evolves 
into  life,  mind  and  other  grades  of  consciousness  until  the 
consciousness-force  (cit-iakti)  becomes  explicit  and  fully 
manifest.  Sri  Aurobindo  states  with  characteristic  lucidity 
thus:  'All  evolution  is  in  essence  a  heightening  of  the  force  of 
consciousness  in  the  manifest  being,  so  that  it  may  be  raised 
into  the  greater  intensity  of  what  is  still  unmanifest,  from 
matter  into  life,  from  life  into  mind,  from  the  mind  into  the 
spirit/1 

Integration  of  the  new  higher  principle  with  the  lower 
principles  is  the  essential  feature  of  evolution.  Evolution  is  not 
confined  to  the  manifestation  of  higher  principles  in  abstraction 
from  the  lower  evolved  beings;  it  establishes  a  larger  field  of 
life  in  which  the  power  of  the  new  principle  may  have  sufficient 
play  and  room  for  its  emergence.  Evolution  is  a  triple  and 
indivisible  process  of  heightening,  widening  and  integration  of 
the  lower  principles. 

INTEGRAL  EVOLUTION 

Sri  Aurobindo  takes  an  'integral'  view  of  evolution.  Evolution 
is  not  a  process  of  the  addition  of  higher  principles  to  the 
realities  that  are  pre-existent  in  relation  thereto.  When  a 
higher  principle  emerges,  the  lower  realities  get  transformed. 
With  emergence  of  life,  matter  does  not  cease  to  evolve.  Both 
matter  and  life  are  together  transformed,  when  the  higher 
principle  of  mind  emerges  in  a  being  possessed  of  these  realities. 
Matter  becomes  more  sensitive  and  life  more  powerful  in  the 
human  beings.  Similarly,  when  the  supermind  emerges,  the 
entire  cosmos  of  matter,  life  and  mind  is  vitally  transformed. 
Samuel  Alexander  commits  a  blunder  when  he  conceives  the 
emergence  of  higher  beings  which  have  no  capacity  to  trans¬ 
form  the  lower  realities.  The  lower  principles  are  not  affected 
and  benefited  in  the  least  by  the  emergence  of  the  higher 
principles.  When  the  higher  principle  emerges,  the  lower 

1  Aurobindo,  The  Life  Divine,  Book  II,  Part  II,  p.  634. 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 

principle  ceases  to  evolve.  It  is  forever  dominated  by  the 
higher  principle.  In  opposition  to  Samuel  Alexander,  Sri 
Aurobindo  conceives  an  integral  ascent  of  all  the  lower  prin¬ 
ciples.  The  principles  have  infinite  capacity  to  develop  and 
become  a  mould  and  form  fit  for  the  truer  manifestation  of  the 
Divine.  Even  the  entire  cosmos  undergoes  a  gradual  process 
of  radical  transformation.  Sri  Aurobindo  very  strongly  refutes 
the  mistaken  view  that  in  evolutionary  development  the  new 
principles  emerge  only  on  the  condition  that  the  lower  principles 
be  condemned  to  remain  forever  in  their  lower  state  of  existence. 

It  is  also  quite  wrong  to  hold  that  the  realization  of  higher 
principles  or  grades  of  consciousness  is  possible  only  when 
there  is  an  absolute  dissociation  of  the  lower  principles.  Simi¬ 
larly  it  is  also  erroneous  to  suppose  that  man  only  advances 
when  he  dissociates  himself  from  the  baser  principles  of  body, 
life  and  mind.  The  Advaita-Vedantins  commit  this  error.  They 
believe  that  the  soul  can  only  realize  the  Divine  when  it  is 
absolutely  dissociated  from  the  lower  principles.  The  ordinary 
view  that  the  lower  principles  remain  always  lower  and  are  to 
be  dropped  in  the  spiritual  ascent  of  man  is  absolutely  wrong. 
If  body,  life  and  mind  are  simply  rejected  and  not  taken  up 
and  transformed,  then  there  can  be  no  evolution  in  the  stricter 
sense  of  the  term.  For  Sri  Aurobindo,  when  man  is  supra- 
mentalized,  his  body,  life  and  mind  are  also  transformed 
supremely.  As  Sri  Aurobindo  strongly  asserts:  ‘The  divine  or 
spiritual  life  will  not  only  assume  into  itself  the  mental,  vital, 
physical  life  transformed  and  spiritualized,  but  it  will  give 
them  a  much  wider  and  fuller  play  than  was  open  to  them  so 
long  as  they  were  living  upon  their  own  level.  Our  mental, 
physical,  vital  existence  need  not  be  destroyed  by  our  self- 
exceeding  nor  are  they  lessened  and  impaired  by  being 
spiritualized,  they  can  and  do  become  much  richer,  greater, 
more  powerful  and  more  perfect:  in  their  divine  change  they 
break  into  possibilities  which  in  their  unspiritualized  condition 
could  not  be  practicable  or  imaginable.’1 

The  lower  principles  are  lower  creations  of  Saccidananda  in 
which  the  superconscient  existence,  consciousness-force,  bliss 
and  supermind  secretly  lie  concealed.  It  is  the  constant 

1  Aurobindo,  The  Life  Divine ,  Book  II,  Part  II,  pp.  648-9. 

138 


The  Integralist  Theory  of  Evolution 

sadhana,  or  yoga  of  nature  itself,  to  manifest  the  superconscient 
powers  in  the  evolving  matter,  life,  soul  and  mind. 

Nature  labours  to  ascend  with  all  its  principles.  But  the 
process  of  transformation  is  a  slow  process  and  the  complete 
transformation  and  perfect  integration  is  not  possible  until  the 
supramental  gnosis  emerges  in  material  nature.  It  is  by  the 
continuous  working  of  the  supermind  in  the  principles  of 
inconscience  and  ignorance  that  there  can  be  total  conversion 
of  the  realities  of  the  universe. 

It  is  the  supreme  supramental  gnosis  which  thoroughly 
divinizes  the  principles  and  effects  their  inherent  integration 
with  one  another.  As  the  three  constituent  principles  of 
Saccidananda,  viz.  existence,  consciousness-force  and  bliss, 
are  one  in  being  and  yet  serve  as  differentiated  powers  and 
have  an  absolute  integration,  so  also  matter,  life  and  mind, 
which  are  nothing  else  than  the  Spirit  at  different  levels,  are 
integrated  by  the  action  of  the  supermind.  The  indwelling 
divine  principles  then  become  explicit  in  these  lower  principles. 
Matter  reveals  the  existence,  life  manifests  the  consciousness- 
force,  the  soul  realizes  the  bliss  and  mind  expresses  the  super¬ 
mind.  But  such  a  radical  conversion  is  possible  only  when  the 
supermind  descends  into  the  lower  nature.  In  his  inspiring  way, 
Sri  Aurobindo  says:  Tf  there  is  to  be  an  entire  transformation, 
it  can  only  be  by  the  full  emergence  of  the  law  of  the  spirit, 
its  power  of  supermind  or  gnosis  must  have  entered  into  matter 
and  it  must  evolve  in  matter.  It  must  change  the  mental  into 
the  supramental  being,  make  the  inconscient  in  us  conscious, 
spiritualize  our  material  substance,  erect  its  law  or  gnostic 
consciousness  in  our  whole  evolutionary  being  and  nature/1 

The  supermind  uncovers  the  veil  of  ignorance  and  inconscience 
and  envisages  the  integral  transformation  of  man.  Salvation  of 
the  individual  means  the  realization  of  the  highest  conscious¬ 
ness,  blessedness,  omnipotence  and  perfection.  It  is  a  state  of 
being  transformed  into  gnostic  being  or  superman.  It  is  a  divine 
birth.  To  become  a  gnostic  being  is  to  have  omniscience, 
omnipotence,  blessedness  and  immortality.  It  is  to  realize  the 
supermind  or  God,  where  mind  recovers  its  divine  light,  the 
soul  realizes  its  divine  self  in  the  all-blissful  dnanda,  life  regains 

1  Aurobindo,  The  Life  Divine,  Book  II,  Part  II,  p.  629. 

139 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 


its  divine  power  in  the  omnipotent  conscious-force,  and  body 
reveals  its  divine  existence. 

COSMIC  YOGA 

The  integral  divinization  of  man  into  the  gnostic  being  is 
possible  only  when  the  cosmos  manifests  and  reveals  the  Spirit. 
Both  the  individual  and  the  cosmos  evolve  simultaneously.  As 
the  individual  realizes  spiritual  and  divine  existence,  the  world 
is  also  gradually  transformed  into  an  unveiled  manifestation 
of  the  Divine.  There  is  integral  evolution  of  man  and  nature. 
A  divine  being  cannot  emerge  in  an  undivine  universe.  Nature 
seeks  to  manifest  the  Divine  in  the  individual,  and  the 
individual  being  so  divinely  transformed,  remains  ever 
engaged  in  the  act  of  the  divinization  of  nature.  The 
supramental  consciousness  of  the  gnostic  being  is  one  and 
continuous  with  the  earth-consciousness.  He  transforms 
material  nature  into  the  divine  nature  by  his  conscious-force. 
'A  complete  and  radical  change  can  only  be  brought  about  by 
bringing  persistently  the  spiritual  light  and  intimate  experience 
of  the  spiritual  truth,  power,  bliss  into  the  recalcitrant  elements 
until  they  too  recognize  that  their  own  way  of  fulfilment  lies 
there,  that  they  are  themselves  a  diminished  power  of  the 
spirit  and  can  recover  by  this  new  way  of  being  their  own  truth 
and  integral  nature/1  But  such  a  divine  transformation  of  the 
cosmos  is  only  possible  by  the  supramental  conscious-force. 
The  lower  principles  can  only  partially  transform  and  imperfectly 
integrate  the  cosmic  principles.  It  is  the  gnostic  beings  that 
supramentalize  the  inconscient  earth.  The  ascent  of  the  human 
consciousness  to  the  supramental  consciousness  has  the  cosmic 
purpose  of  supramentalization  of  the  very  earth-consciousness. 
It  may  be  considered  as  a  vast  yoga  of  nature.  But  cosmic 
yoga  is  possible  only  through  the  supramental  beings.  Indi¬ 
vidual  yoga,  therefore,  is  only  a  prelude  to  cosmic  yoga  or  the 
union  and  oneness  of  Nature  with  God.  Unless  God  and  Nature 
unite  in  the  supramental  gnosis,  the  synthesis  of  yoga  cannot 
be  considered  complete. 

The  gnostic  individual  will  gradually  transform  nature  into 

1  Aurobindo,  The  Life  Divine,  Book  II,  Part  II,  pp.  831-2. 

140 


The  Integralist  Theory  of  Evolution 


the  superconscient  supernature.  The  divine  consciousness  will, 
through  the  medium  of  superman,  descend  on  earth  and  will 
manifest  its  consciousness-force  in  nature.  Sri  Aurobindo  very 
beautifully  expresses  it  in  the  following  stanzas  of  Savitri: 

When  superman  is  bom  as  Nature’s  King 
His  presence  shall  transfigure  Matter’s  work. 

He  shall  light  up  Truth’s  fire  in  Nature’s  night, 

He  shall  lay  upon  the  earth  Truth’s  greater  law; 

Man  too  shall  turn  towards  the  Spirit’s  call.1 

EVOLUTION  IN  KNOWLEDGE 

Supramental  evolution  is  evolution  through  knowledge. 
Evolution  in  knowledge  is  a  process  of  the  pure  manifestation  of 
the  Spirit  in  myriad  illumined  expressions  of  consciousness-force 
and  bliss.  It  is  a  process  of  the  glorious  revelation  of  the  Divine 
in  newer  and  infinite  diverse  vistas.  As  Sri  Aurobindo  remarks: 
The  evolution  in  the  Knowledge  would  be  a  more  beautiful 
and  glorious  manifestation  with  more  vistas  ever  unfolding 
themselves  and  more  intensive  in  all  ways  than  any  evolution 
could  be  in  the  Ignorance.  The  delight  of  the  Spirit  is  ever  new, 
the  forms  of  beauty  it  takes  innumerable,  its  godhead  ever 
young  and  the  taste  of  delight,  rasa ,  of  the  Infinite  eternal 
and  inexhaustible.’2 

The  consummation  of  the  evolution  in  knowledge  is  the 
realization  of  the  triune  aspect  of  Saccidananda.  The  integral 
supramental  consciousness,  in  the  process  of  evolution,  merges 
in  the  Unitarian  consciousness  of  Saccidananda.  The  highest 
summit  of  supramental  consciousness  is  Saccidananda  and, 
therefore,  the  descent  of  Saccidananda  will  be  the  consumma¬ 
tion  of  the  spiritual  and  supramental  evolution  of  nature.  As 
Sri  Aurobindo  observes:  'At  the  higher  end  of  the  evolution  the 
ascending  ranges  and  summits  of  supermind  would  begin  to 
rise  towards  some  supreme  manifestation  of  the  pure  spiritual 
existence,  consciousness  and  delight  of  being  of  Saccidananda. ’3 

In  conclusion,  we  may  reaffirm  our  faith  that  Sri  Aurobindo’s 

1  Savitri,  Book  XI,  Canto  i  (Pondicherry:  Sri  Aurobindo  Ashram,  1950), 
P*  33  *  Aurobindo,  The  Life  Divine,  Book  II,  Part  II,  p.  861. 

3  Ibid.,  p.  861. 

141 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 


philosophy  of  evolution  has  certain  tendencies  which  domi¬ 
nantly  influence  the  growth  of  modern  Eastern  and  Western 
philosophies.  Firstly ,  the  conception  of  cosmic  salvation 
(sarva-mukti)  appeals  to  all  shades  of  mind  in  the  world  of 
today.  We  are  all  thinking  in  terms  of  world-economy,  world 
government,  world-peace  and  world-soul.  Sri  Aurobindo 
envisages  the  salvation  of  the  entire  humanity.  Secondly , 
salvation  means  the  rebirth  of  an  individual  into  the  Divine 
Life.  It  is  to  become  God  incarnate  with  transformed  body, 
life  and  mind.  He  discards  the  view  that  in  salvation  the  soul 
enters  into  a  calm,  serene  and  unchangeable  consciousness  of 
the  Divine,  whereas  mind,  life  and  body  perish  in  nature. 
Thirdly,  the  destiny  of  man,  as  Sri  Aurobindo  conceives  it,  is 
to  become  superman.  It  is  to  attain  divine  transformation  of 
his  entire  embodied  existence.  It  is  to  achieve  an  unveiled 
manifestation  of  the  Divine  in  human  society. 


142 


10 


N.  A.  NIKAM 

The  Problem  of  Creation: 
Concepts  of  Maya  and  Lila 


It  is  the  merit  of  Sri  Aurobindo’s  philosophy  to  treat  the 
problem  of  ‘creation’  as  a  problem  of  the  nature  of  existence. 
Why  is  there  'creation?  is  a  question  which  is  a  question 
about:  what  is  the  nature  of  reality,  of  existence? 

BEING,  FREEDOM,  DELIGHT 

The  Upanisads  state  the  problem  of  existence,  of  being,  thus: 
being  is  freedom:  ‘to  be’  is  ‘to  be  free’.  The  Upanisads 
distinguish,  however,  between  two  senses  of  freedom:  (a)  ‘to 
be’  is  ‘to  be  free’,  i.e.  to  be  free  from  fear;  ( b )  ‘to  be’  is  ‘to  be 
free’,  i.e.  to  be  free  because  of  the  discovery  of  the  delight  of 
existence  {ananda).  But  there  is  a  gap  between  the  two;  for 
one  may  be  free  from  fear  and  yet  not  have  discovered  ‘the 
delight  of  existence’  {ananda).  This  distinction  may  be  indi¬ 
cated  by  citing  the  following  passage  from  the  Fourth  Brahmana 
of  the  Brihad-Aranyaka  Upanisad:  the  passage  speaks  of  the 
creation  of  the  manifold  world  from  the  Unitary  Soul: 

1.  In  the  beginning,  this  world  was  Soul  {Atman)  alone,  in  the 
form  of  a  Person.  Looking  around,  he  saw  nothing  else  than  himself. 
He  said,  first:  ‘I  am  .  .  .’ 

2.  He  was  afraid.  Therefore,  one  who  is  alone  is  afraid.  This  one 
then  thought  to  himself:  ‘Since  there  is  nothing  else  than  myself, 
of  what  am  I  afraid?’  Thereupon,  verily,  his  fear  departed,  for  of 
what  should  he  have  been  afraid?  Assuredly  it  is  from  a  second  that 
fear  arises. 

3.  Verily  he  had  no  delight.  Therefore  one  alone  has  no  delight. 
He  desired  a  second  .  .  .  (The  italics  are  mine.) 

143 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 


comment 

Removal  of  fear  is  a  necessary  condition  for  the  discovery  of 
the  delight  of  existence.  The  awareness  that  there  is  no  'other' — 
no  'second' — is  an  awareness  of  absoluteness:  of  absoluteness 
of  conscious  existence.  'Absoluteness  of  conscious  existence  is', 
Sri  Aurobindo  says,  'illimitable  bliss  of  conscious  existence; 
the  two  are  only  different  phrases  for  the  same  thing.  All 
illimitableness,  all  infinite,  all  absoluteness  is  pure  delight.'1 

What  is  'absoluteness  of  conscious  existence'?  In  absolute 
existence  'there  can  be  no  nothingness,  no  night  of  inconscience, 
no  deficiency'.  Yet,  the  Upanisad  says,  there  was  no  delight; 
for,  'one  who  is  alone  has  no  delight'.  Therefore,  as  the  Upanisad 
says,  'He  desired  a  second’.  This  means  that  while  removal  of 
fear  is  a  'necessary'  condition  it  is  not  a  'sufficient'  condition 
for  the  discovery  of  the  delight  of  existence.  To  affirm  absolute¬ 
ness  of  one’s  existence  is  only  a  phase  of  the  discovery  of  the 
delight  of  existence.  To  'loose  forth'  this  delight  in  the  discovery 
of  one's  self  in  a  'second'  is  a  self-delight  which  is  not  content 
to  possess  merely  its  absoluteness  of  self-being.  If  this  move¬ 
ment  of  loosing  forth  in  the  discovery  of  one's  self  in  others 
were  not  possible,  it  would  be  a  limitation  of  absoluteness  of 
self-being.  Therefore,  'The  self-delight  of  Brahman',  as  Sri 
Aurobindo  says,  'is  not  limited,  however,  by  the  still  and 
motionless  possession  of  its  absolute  self-being'.2 

The  passage  cited  from  the  Upanisad  distinguishes  between 
two  senses  of  the  'second'.  It  is  from  a  'second'  that  fear  arises. 
Therefore,  absoluteness  of  existence  is  the  'conquest'  or 
removal  of  the  'second'  from  whom  fear  arises.  This  is  a  move¬ 
ment  within  the  nature  of  absoluteness  of  existence,  necessary 
for  the  affirmation  of  the  absoluteness.  There  is  another  sense 
of  a  'second'  which  is  the  source  of  the  delight  of  existence;  for 
absoluteness  of  conscious  existence  is  another  movement  which 
is  a  ‘loosing  forth'  in  the  discovery  of  one's  self  in  a  'second'. 
This  movement  is  also  a  necessary  part  of  the  affirmation  of 
the  absoluteness  of  conscious  being.  The  nature  of  reality  is 
an  interplay  of  movement  between  these  two  apparently 
opposed  and  antinomial  movements. 

1  Aurobindo,  The  Life  Divine ,  p.  86. 

144 


*  Ibid.,  p.  87. 


The  Problem  of  Creation:  Concepts  of  Maya  and  LIla 

The  Upanisad  says,  ‘He  desired  a  second*.  Now,  desire  is 
'want*;  it  is  a  ‘deficiency*  as  we  know  it  in  our  experience. 
But  we  must  distinguish  between  the  desire  which  is  ‘want* 
and  ‘deficiency*  and,  as  such,  arises  from  limitation  and  finitude, 
and  the  ‘desire*  which  arises  out  of  the  fullness  of  being.  Desire 
in  the  first  sense  is  something  which  issues  forth  in  an  activity 
whose  end  is  economic  satisfaction.  This  raises  no  problems. 
It  is  ‘desire*  arising  in  the  absolute  consciousness  of  existence 
which  raises  the  problem:  Why  should  Brahman,  perfect, 
absolute,  and  ‘desiring  nothing*,  yet  ‘desire  for  a  second'?  The 
answer  must  be  discoverable  in  the  nature  of  the  ‘absoluteness* 
of  conscious  being;  for  its  nature  is  such  that  it  is  free;  and 
it  is  so  free  that  it  is  not  bound  cither  by  desire ,  or  even  by 
desirelessness. 

Furthermore,  the  nature  of  the  ‘absoluteness*  of  conscious 
existence  is  a  ‘creative*  or  self-expressive  activity  or  force, 
which  has  the  centre  of  its  being  in  self-delight,  and  it  enjoys 
issuing  forth,  in  endless  forms,  the  fundamental  fact  of  its 
existence.  Delight  and  freedom  are  the  two  ‘attributes*  of  its 
self-expression.  If  this  is  the  case,  then  ‘creation*  is  not  an 
'illusion*.  It  is  not  the  transformation  into  actuality  of  what  is 
merely  ‘potential*.  Creation  is  not  an  ‘accident*;  it  is  not  even 
purposive*  in  the  usual  sense  of  the  term.  'Why  should 
Brahman,  perfect,  absolute,  infinite,  needing  nothing,  desiring 
nothing  at  all,  throw  out  force  of  consciousness  to  create  in 
itself  these  worlds  of  forms?*  This  question  cannot  be  answered 
if  the  ‘why*  seeks  to  discover  a  ‘purpose*  in  or  behind  creation.1 

In  Sri  Aurobindo's  treatment  of  the  problem  there  are  two 
points  to  be  noted:  (a)  Why  the  Infinite  becomes  the  finite  is  a 
wrong  question  because  we  do  not  understand  the  true  meaning 
of  the  word  ‘Infinite*.  The  Infinite  is  that  in  which  ‘all  possi¬ 
bilities  are  inherent  in  its  Infinity',  as  Sri  Aurobindo  says,  and 
so,  the  ‘delight*  of  its  existence  ‘lies  precisely  in  the  variable 
realization  of  its  possibilities*.  The  ‘possibilities'  are  not  there 
in  the  Infinite  as  unrealized  potentialities,  but  are  there  in  their 
eternal  realization:  ‘Form  in  itself,  world  in  itself,  are  eternal . . . , 
they  have  an  eternal  recurrence  if  not  an  eternal  persistence, 
an  eternal  immutability  in  sum  and  foundation  along  with  an 

*  Aurobindo,  The  Life  Divine,  p.  86-7. 

145 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 


eternal  mutability  in  aspect  and  apparition.*1  Secondly: 
(b)  The  variable  realization  of  its  possibilities  is  a  movement  in 
which  the  Infinite  ‘looses  itself*,  as  Sri  Aurobindo  says,  by 
‘concealment*  in  that  which  seems  to  be  its  own  opposite ;  so, 
in  another  sense,  ‘creation*  is  a  process  of  evolution  in  which 
the  absoluteness  of  conscious  existence,  or  Saccidananda,  has 
to  ‘emerge*.  All  creation  or  Becoming  is  nothing  but  this 
self-manifestation. 2 


MAYA 

According  to  Sri  Aurobindo  there  are  two  ways  in  which  we 
can  regard  world-existence:  (a)  ‘in  relation  to  pure,  infinite, 
indivisible,  immutable  existence*;  (6)  ‘in  its  relation  to  the 
self-delight  of  eternally  existent  being*.  In  its  first  relation, 
Sri  Aurobindo  admits  that  we  are  entitled  to  regard  world- 
existence  and  to  describe  and  realize  it  as  Maya  in  the  original 
sense  of  this  term,  as  that  which  limits ,  measures  and  gives 
form  to  the  formless.  The  original  sense  of  Maya  in  the  Vedanta 
seems  to  correspond  to  the  Pythagorean  philosophy  of  Form, 
and  the  opposition  between  the  Limit  and  the  Unlimited.  ‘The 
Unlimited  is  that  which  is  potentially  capable  of  Form;  it  is 
that  which  receives  and  becomes  Form.  Both  the  Unlimited 
and  the  Limit  or  Form,  are  areas  of  change.  Form  is  the 
Actuality  of  the  Unlimited;  it  is  ever-changing.  The  Unlimited 
is  the  ever-lasting  possibility  of  a  change  which  is  never 
constant.  .  .  .  Form  is  the  condition  of  change,  of  multiplicity; 
everything  takes  on  Form  in  proportion,  i.e.  in  Number  and 
Measure.  *3 

Later  in  the  development  of  the  Vedanta  the  term  maya 
acquired,  as  Sri  Aurobindo  indicates,  ‘a  pejorative  sense  of 
cunning,  fraud  or  illusion*. 4  It  is  in  this  sense  that  the  term  is 
used  in  the  schools  of  the  later  Vedanta.  The  world  is  maya 
because  it  is  not  the  essential  truth  of  infinite  existence,  but 
rather  a  creation  of  self-conscious  being:  a  phenomenal  truth 
of  its  free  multiplicity  and  infinite  mutability,  and  not  truth 

1  Aurobindo,  The  Life  Divine,  p.  95.  *  Ibid.,  p.  103. 

3  N.  A.  Nikam,  article  on  ‘Pythagoras’  (Amalner,  India:  The  Philosophical 
Quarterly,  January  1958).  4  Aurobindo,  The  Life  Divine,  p.  95. 

146 


The  Problem  of  Creation:  Concepts  of  Maya  and  Lila 

of  its  fundamental  and  immutable  unity.  The  world  is  not  the 
essential  truth  but  a  phenomenal  truth  in  the  sense  that  what 
'appears'  or  is  manifested,  is  capable  of  manifestation,  capable 
of  non-manifestation,  or  capable  of  other-manifestation. 

lIla 

In  relation  to  Sacciddnanda ,  or  the  self-delight  of  the  eternally 
self-existing  being,  the  world,  according  to  Sri  Aurobindo,  is 
not  maya  but  lild:  i.e.  a  play,  and  joy  of  play,  wherever  this 
is  found:  'the  child's  joy,  the  poet's  joy,  the  actor's  joy,  the 
mechanician's  joy  .  .  the  cause  and  purpose  of  play  is:  ‘being 
ever  busy  with  its  own  innumerable  self-representations.  .  .  . 
Himself  the  play,  Himself  the  player.  Himself  the  playground.'1 

There  is  behind  all  our  experiences  one  reality,  one  indivisible 
conscious  being,  supporting  our  experiences  by  its  inalienable 
delight.  The  delight  of  being  is,  or  ought  to  be,  therefore,  our 
real  response  in  all  situations.  The  experience  of  pain,  pleasure, 
and  indifference,  is  only  a  superficial  arrangement  effected  by 
the  limited  part  of  our  selves,  caused  by  what  is  uppermost  in 
our  waking  consciousness.2  There  is  the  anandamaya  behind 
the  manomaya ,  as  the  Upanisad  states  it:  a  vast  bliss  behind 
our  mental  being. 

Sri  Aurobindo  indicates  that  this  conception  of  reality  as  the 
self-delight  of  being  has  practical  consequences;  and  this  is  the 
most  attractive  and  liberating  part  of  his  teaching.  There  is  a 
'discovery'  which  we  have  yet  to  make,  the  discovery  of  the 
self-delight  of  being.  When  the  discovery  of  self-delight  of 
being  is  really  made — this  is  possible  for  everyone — then  we 
have  mastered  the  great  art  of  living.  The  habitual  way  of  our 
life  is  to  feel  pain  when  things  go  wrong,  and  to  feel  pleasure, 
when  they  go  according  to  our  wishes.  But,  'there  is  no  real 
obligation  on  us  to  return  to  a  particular  contact  a  particular 
response  of  pleasure,  pain  or  neutral  reaction,  there  is  only  an 
obligation  of  habit’. 3  (The  italics  are  mine.) 

If  we  discover  the  real  nature  of  our  self  as  the  self-delight  of 
being,  then  we  could  alter  the  habitual  mode  of  our  living.  ‘It 
is  equally  within  our  competence  to  return  quite  the  opposite 

1  Aurobindo,  The  Life  Divine ,  p.  96.  2  Ibid.,  p.  98.  3  Ibid.,  p.  98. 

147 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 

response,  pleasure  where  we  used  to  feel  pain,  pain  where  we 
used  to  have  pleasure'1 — Santa  dakkha  sukham,  as  the  Gita  says, 
a  perfect  gladness,  or  a  perfect  indifference  in  all  situations  of 
pain  or  pleasure. 

The  human  individual  has  this  destiny  before  him:  To 
become  the  master  of  his  own  responses  to  the  world's  con¬ 
tacts.  .  .  .' 2  How  this  may  be  possible  is  the  practical  teaching 
of  the  'integral'  yoga  of  Sri  Aurobindo. 

1  Aurobindo,  The  Life  Divine,  p.  98.  »  Ibid.,  p.  99. 


148 


II 


RUTH  REYNA 

Integralism:  A  Philosophic  Perennis 


The  insistent  demand  of  reason  for  essential  and  permanent 
verities  in  a  world  characterized  by  change  and  inconstancy, 
has  been  the  force  precipitating  man's  quest  for  a  universal 
view,  a  search  for  a  perspective  that  will  not  only  embrace  all 
the  aspects  of  human  experience,  but  at  the  same  time  will 
relate  human  values  and  ideals  to  the  ultimate  ground  of  the 
universe. 

As  a  result  of  this  seeking  there  have  emerged  sharp  contra¬ 
dictions  of  philosophical  systems,  effecting  a  fragmentation  of 
philosophy  into  totally  diverse  sections  and  preventing  the 
examination  of  philosophical  problems  from  a  truly  universal 
point  of  view.  Were  we  to  review  the  evolution  of  doctrines 
from  the  primitive  ages  of  India  down  to  the  present  time  and 
take  cognizance  of  the  progress  achieved  by  contemporary 
scientific  philosophy,  we  could  do  no  less  than  infer  the  indefi¬ 
nite  progress  of  philosophical  thought.  There  are  those  who 
have  allowed  themselves  to  be  enamoured  of  this  ideal  dream. 
Auguste  Compte's  'law  of  the  three  stages',  Herbert  Spencer's 
evolutionism,  Hegel's  indefinite  becoming  of  the  spirit,  the 
Marxian  historical  materialism  and  the  like,  sweep  philosophy 
along  in  an  ever  cresting  tide  toward  an  ideal  perfection, 
dependent  upon  a  pertinent  time  and  upon  an  interminable 
course  of  evolution,  a  perfection  whose  finality  is  inaccessible 
to  the  clairvoyant  genius  of  man. 

There  have  been  attempts  to  mediate  between  those  systems 
that  hold  philosophy  to  be  variable  and  relative  and  those 
which  claim  to  have  discovered  a  criterion  of  certainty,  an 

149 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 

attempt,  that  is,  to  point  the  way  to  a  coherent  and  ultimately 
satisfactory  view  of  the  world  that  allows  for  the  integration 
of  the  material  and  spiritual  values  of  life.  So  it  is  formulated 
by  Sidgwick,  who  lays  down  as  'the  final  and  most  important 
task  of  philosophy,  the  problem  of  connecting  fact  and  ideal  in 
some  rational  and  satisfactory  manner'.1  Philosophy  thus 
becomes  the  struggle  for  a  Weltanschauung  in  which  the 
experiences  of  mankind  can  be  brought  into  a  common  pool  of 
human  knowledge;  and  this  is  altogether  possible,  for  side  by 
side  with  the  changes  that  belong  to  the  condition  of  man's 
finitude,  there  is  a  fragment  of  unchangeable  truth  underlying 
his  most  patent  systems  and  haunting  the  human  mind  in  its 
most  incurious  investigations. 

Secretly  operative  within  the  variations  of  historic  systems 
there  lies  a  philosophic  perennis,  which  embodies  those  universal 
truths  to  which  no  one  people  or  era  can  make  an  exclusive 
claim — a  clear  atmosphere  of  truth  circumscribing  the  cen¬ 
turies,  its  subtle  presence  somehow  sensed  in  spite  of  illusion  and 
mist.  The  truth  Pythagoras  sought,  and  Plato,  and  Aristotle, 
is  the  same  that  Augustine  and  Aquinas  pursued.  So  far  as  it  is 
developed  in  history,  truth  is  the  daughter  of  time;  so  far  as  it 
contains  within  itself  a  content  independent  of  time  and 
therefore  of  history,  it  is  the  daughter  of  eternity.2 

It  is  this  conflict — the  attempts  of  man  to  convert  his  obscure 
physical  mentality  into  supramental  illumination,  to  recognize 
and  to  possess  a  self-existent  and  permanent  truth  in  the  face 
of  transitory  persuasions — to  seek  an  infinite  freedom  in  a 
world  governed  by  mechanical  inevitabilities,  and  to  realize 
immortal  life  in  a  body  subjected  to  death  and  decay,  that 
makes  the  search  for  a  world  philosophy  not  only  one  of 
curious  theoretical  speculation,  but  of  the  greatest  practical 
urgency.  The  fuller  idea  of  life  demands  of  man  that  he  find  an 
integral  living  based  upon  a  permanent  truth,  a  way  that  will 
provide  him  the  joy  of  the  creative  fulfilment  inherent  in  his 
nature,  yet  resting  upon  an  unchanging  premise  of  truth — the 


1  Sidgwick,  Philosophy ,  Its  Scope  and  Relations  (London:  The  Macmillan 
Co.,  1902),  p.  30. 

1  Willman,  Geschichte  des  Idealismus,  II  (Braunschweig:  Friedrich  Vieweg 
und  Sohn,  1907),  p.  472  ff. 

150 


Integralism:  A  Philosophie  Perennis 


way  of  creative  living  in  conscious  union  with  the  one  universal 
creative  principle. 

This,  then,  is  the  basic  problem  of  a  philosophie  perennis — it 
must  satisfy  man  as  to  the  fundamental  truth  of  existence,  and 
at  the  same  time  offer  a  motility  for  his  self-expression  that  will 
enable  him  to  conform  to  the  creative  purposes  of  life.  It  must 
provide  for  the  agreement  of  unchangeable  truths  with  the 
intellectual  life  while  retaining  that  fluidity  indispensable  to 
spiritual  unfoldment. 

The  philosophical  position  of  Sri  Aurobindo  comes  auspi¬ 
ciously  close  to  meeting  the  requirements  for  a  universal  point 
of  view.  By  a  unique  spiritual  perception  he  has  conceived  the 
universe  through  a  fresh  vision  of  reality,  and  has  compre¬ 
hended  into  one  concordant  whole  a  total  response  to  our 
human  situation,  thereby  presenting  an  intellectually  accept¬ 
able  integration  of  the  material  and  spiritual  values  of  life 
while  at  the  same  time  making  possible  the  retention  of  man's 
loyalties  in  the  plurality  of  human  cultures. 

Since  the  individual  as  functional  uniqueness,  in  the  view  of 
Aurobindo,  is  none  other  than  ultimate  reality  in  differential 
mode,  the  highest  goal  of  human  life  cannot  consist  of  self- 
annihilation  into  a  static  and  absolute  truth.  The  path  of 
fulfilment  lies  rather,  as  Integralism  points  out,  in  the  active 
self-identification  with  the  creative  purposes  of  life,  that  is, 
with  the  ultimate  integrating  principle  of  the  universe — the 
principle  of  infinite  creativity. 

What  differentiates  integral  idealism  with  its  principle  of 
unending  creativity,  from  the  eternal  variabilities  and  the 
indefinite  evolutionism  of  certain  western  philosophies,  is  its 
confinement  of  variability  within  a  field  of  manifestation  typal 
in  nature.  In  this  integralism  posits  a  seeming  logical  impossi¬ 
bility — that  of  including  both  immutability  and  mobility  as 
coattributes  of  the  one  Reality.  But  in  spite  of  this  logical 
contradiction  it  is  quite  possible  to  reconcile  the  idea  of  fixed 
and  definite  goals  with  a  progressive  self-manifestation  of  the 
Spirit  in  time  and  in  infinitely  variant  conditions  embracing  all 
the  diverse  forms  of  human  experience.  In  the  meaning  of 
integralism,  the  ultimate  nature  of  the  Real  is  a  composite  of 
the  Spirit  existing  simultaneously  in  different  poises;  that  is  to 

151 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 


say,  there  are  different  orders  of  self-fulfilment  of  the  Supreme 
Spirit:  as  supra-cosmic  Transcendence  and  absolute  freedom 
beyond  the  sphere  of  relativity;  as  infinite  Consciousness 
creatively  sustaining  the  sphere  of  relativity;  and  as  the 
multiplicity  of  unique  individuals  functioning  as  channels  of 
self-expression  of  the  universal  reality. 

The  supreme  spirit  as  the  cosmic  creative  principle  sustains 
various  planes  of  existence  and  consciousness  as  diversified 
modes  of  its  self-fulfilment.  While  the  visible  material  world 
is  the  sphere  of  evolutionary  growth,  the  invisible  planes  of 
pure  mind,  supermind,  etc.,  are  typal  or  non-evolutionary 
in  character,  with  fixed  forms,  modes  of  existence  and  patterns 
of  perfection.  These  are  ‘fields  of  manifestation  of  fixed  types, 
and  whatever  takes  place  in  them  is  in  the  nature  of  increasing 
self-expression  within  the  limits  of  these  types'.1 

The  material  world  is  that  in  whicli  matter  functions  as  the 
basic  and  dominant  principle;  and  while  the  other  planes  are 
typal  in  nature,  the  material  world  is  essentially  evolutionary, 
for  teaches  Aurobindo,  ‘An  involution  of  the  Divine  Existence, 
the  spiritual  Reality,  in  the  apparent  inconscience  of  Matter  is 
the  starting-point  of  the  evolution'.2 3  Matter,  therefore,  being 
the  lower  form  of  manifestation  of  the  Spirit  in  the  element  of 
sat  (existence)  must  implicitly  contain  within  itself  such  other 
powers  of  the  Spirit  as  life  and  mind  and  all  the  others.  It  is 
because  these  principles  are  from  the  beginning  present  and 
secretly  operative  in  matter  that  it  can  be  said  that  ‘matter 
then  contains  the  promise  and  potency  of  all  terrestrial  life, 
not  as  an  absolutely  non-spiritual  blind  entity,  but  as  an 
apparently  unconscious  mode  of  operation  of  the  super- 
conscient  creative  energy  of  the  Spirit'. 3 

Matter  is,  without  doubt,  the  starting  point  of  the  divine 
manifestation  in  the  terrestrial  plane.  ‘My  supreme  Nature  has 
become  the  living  being  and  the  world  is  upheld  by  it  .  .  .  all 
beings  have  this  for  their  source  of  birth. '4  Thus  we  come  to 
the  understanding  that  the  creative  will  of  the  divine  Sakti, 


1  Haridas  Chaudhuri,  The  Philosophy  of  Integralism  (Pondicherry:  Sri 
Aurobindo  Ashram  Press,  1954),  P-  215- 

*  Aurobindo,  The  Life  Divine,  p.  814 

3  Haridas  Chaudhuri,  op.  cit.,  p.  157.  4  Gild,  VII,  pp.  5,  6. 

152 


Integralism:  A  Philosophie  Perennis 


functioning  through  the  medium  of  matter  endowed  as  it  is 
with  all  of  the  principles  of  the  Spirit,  brings  forth  into  articu¬ 
late  expression  on  ascending  planes  of  consciousness,  forms 
more  and  more  adapted  to  its  own  completer  expression.  This 
integral  emergence  is  the  goal  of  evolving  Nature. 

Consciousness  in  life,  responding  to  the  pressures  from  above 
of  vital,  mental,  and  supramental  planes  of  existence,  throws 
off  the  primal  inconscience  of  material  nescience,  and  in  evolu¬ 
tionary  phases  strives  for  emergence  into  true  Reality,  an 
eternal  existence  (sat) ,  consciousness  (cit),  and  delight  of 
existence  (clnanda) .  In  man,  the  enlivening  consciousness 
appears  as  mind,  more  clearly  aware  of  itself  and  things,  but 
still  fragmentary  and  limited,  yet  possessing  an  irrepressible 
urge  from  within,  and  vividly  aware  of  an  ennobling  force 
from  above.  It  is  the  co-operation  of  this  ' upward-tending  force 
from  below ’  and  the  ‘ upward-drawing  force  from  above'1  that 
compels  man  to  ascend  on  the  path  of  spiritual  progress,  and 
through  which  his  first  conceptive  potentiality  and  the  promise 
of  integral  emergence  is  revealed. 

The  philosophy  of  integralism  points  up  the  responsibility 
of  the  individual  to  follow  his  inward  urge  of  aspiration,  to 
strive  toward  an  ever  higher  consciousness;  for  it  is  only 
through  growth  of  the  individual  that  the  cosmic  Spirit  can 
organize  the  collective  being  and  make  itself  expressive.  It  is 
only  through  the  individual  that  nature  is  raised  from  the 
inconscience  to  the  superconscience  and  exalted  to  meet  the 
transcendent.  T  have  arisen  from  earth  to  the  mid-world,  I 
have  arisen  from  the  mid-world  to  heaven,  from  the  level  of 
the  firmament  of  heaven  I  have  gone  to  the  Sun-world,  the 
Light/2 

It  is  the  first  duty  of  man,  using  the  material  instruments  at 
hand,  to  evolve  into  ever  higher  consciousness  and  finally  to 
exceed  himself.  He  must  gather  his  fragmentary  being  into  a 
complete  being,  his  partial  consciousness  into  an  integral 
consciousness;  he  must  master  his  own  environment  and  apply 
it  to  world-union  and  world-harmony;  he  must  discover  his 

1  Haridas  Chaudhuri,  op.  cit.,  p.  231. 

1  Yajur  Veda,  17.67.  These  correspond  with  what  Sri  Aurobindo  has  called 
the  planes  of  matter,  life,  pure  mind,  and  supermind. 

153 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 

individuality  and  then  extend  it  into  a  greater  cosmic  self  in 
the  universal  harmony  of  the  spiritual  delight  of  existence. 
To  exceed  ego  and  be  our  own  true  self,  to  be  aware  of  our 
real  being,  to  possess  it,  to  possess  a  real  delight  of  being,  is 
therefore  the  ultimate  meaning  of  our  life  here;  it  is  the 
concealed  sense  of  our  terrestrial  existence/1 

Sri  Aurobindo’s  theory  of  evolution  as  the  Spirit's  pro¬ 
gressive  self-manifestation  in  infinitely  variable  conditions, 
offers  a  rational  and  integral  expression  of  immediate  contact 
with  the  Real  by  embodying  a  reconciliation  of  the  reality  of 
the  world-process  with  the  eternal  perfection  of  the  Spirit.  In 
this  light,  the  philosophy  of  integralism  is  seen  as  an  art  of  life 
fashioned  from  the  continuity  of  the  creative  process  which 
integrates  man  with  mankind,  quickening  each  individual  to  a 
genuinely  creative  self-reliance  while  deepening  and  enhancing 
his  communion  with  the  universe.  Its  purpose  is  to  show  that 
the  integral  experience  of  the  Spirit  imparts  meaning  and 
significance  to  the  whole  universe,  offering  a  new  vision  in 
terms  of  world  and  human  development  while  revealing  and 
securing  the  intimate  correlation  between  universality  and 
individuality. 

In  an  enlarged  meaning  of  life,  integralism  has  widened 
human  spiritual  horizons  beyond  all  parochial  and  sectarian 
restrictions;  it  implies  a  new  vision  of  man  in  his  organic  and 
spiritual  unity,  and  envisages  what  man  may  yet  attain  when 
enjoined  by  an  unyielding  inner  necessity,  to  press  forward  to 
the  aspiration  that  is  most  exalted  in  him. 

1  Aurobindo.  The  Life  Divine,  pp.  817-8. 


154 


12 


J.  N.  MOHANTY 

Integralism  and  Modern 
Philosophical  Anthropology 


The  purpose  of  this  discussion  will  be  to  help  an  assessment  of 
the  concept  of  man  in  Sri  Aurobindo’s  philosophy  in  the  light 
of  what  is  getting  known,  on  the  European  continent,  as 
‘philosophical  anthropology’.  Our  procedure  will  be  to  start 
with  laying  down  the  main  lines  of  research  brought  together 
under  the  title  ‘Philosophical  Anthropology’  and  then  to 
follow  it  up  with  a  statement  of  Sri  Aurobindo’s  concept  of 
man,  assessing  its  value  and  relevance  for  the  contemporary 
discussion  of  this  theme.1 


i 

The  term  ‘Philosophical  Anthropology’  was  introduced  in  our 
time,  and  the  task  of  the  discipline  outlined,  by  Max  Scheler 
in  his  Die  Stellung  des  Menschen  im  Kosmos  (1928).  But  Scheler 
had  already  formulated  the  main  ideas  in  an  essay  ‘Zur  Idee 
des  Menschen’  as  early  as  1914.  The  central  problem  with 
which  Scheler’s  philosophy  is  concerned  is:  What  is  man?  And, 
what  is  his  status  in  relation  to  Being?  This  problem  is  handled 
by  Scheler  in  many  of  its  aspects.  The  specific  nature  of  human 
feelings  is  discussed  in  Wesen  und  Formen  der  Sympathie :  the 
relation  of  man  to  history  is  discussed  in  the  essay  'Mensch 
und  Geschichte’;  the  possibility  of  human  development  is 

1  Compare,  for  this  entire  theme,  the  author's  Modern  Philosophical 
Anthropology  and  the  Concept  of  Man  in  Sri  Aurobindo' s  Philosophy  (Bombay: 
Sri  Aurobindo  Circle  Annual,  1956). 


155 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 


the  theme  of  a  lecture,  ‘Der  Mensch  im  Weltalter  des 
Ausgleichs'.1 

Two  passages  from  Scheler  may  be  quoted  to  outline  the 
major  themes: 

Philosophical  anthropology  is  a  fundamental  science  of  the 
essence  and  essential  structure  of  man;  of  his  relation  to  the  realms 
of  Nature  (the  inorganic,  plants  and  animals),  as  well  as  to  the  basis 
of  all  things;  of  his  metaphysical  origin  as  well  as  of  his  physical, 
psychical  and  spiritual  beginning  in  the  world;  of  the  forces  and 
powers  that  move  him  and  which  he  sets  in  motion,  of  the  basic 
directions  and  laws  of  his  biological,  psychical,  cultural-historical 
and  social  development,  of  their  essential  possibilities  as  much  as 
of  their  actualities.2 3 

It  is  the  task  of  a  philosophical  anthropology  to  show  exactly 
how,  from  the  basic  structure  of  human  being,  all  the  specific 
monopolies,  creations  and  activities  of  man  follow:  language, 
conscience,  crafts,  weapons,  ideas  of  justice  and  injustice,  state, 
leadership,  the  representative  functions  of  the  arts,  mythology, 
religion,  science,  historicality,  and  sociality.3 

It  will  readily  be  appreciated  by  those  acquainted  with  the 
contents  of  Sri  Aurobindo's  works,  that  his  philosophy  has  to 
make  a  substantial  contribution  to  these  themes. 

Philosophical  anthropology  on  the  European  continent  has: 
(i)  tried  to  isolate  the  distinctive  nature  and  status  of  man, 
as  compared  with  the  other  realms  of  being,  living  and  non¬ 
living.  In  doing  this,  philosophical  anthropology  has  (2)  freed 
itself  from  a  narrow  ‘naturalistic-scientific/  approach.  It  has 
rightly  seen  that  neither  physics  nor  chemistry,  neither  biology 
nor  physiology,  nor  even  psychology  can  adequately  study  the 
nature  of  man,  although  the  data  of  each  of  these  sciences  are 
not  without  any  relevance.  A  truer  indication  of  man's  essential 
nature  is  in  language,  mythology  and  poetry,  art  and  religion, 
science  considered  as  man's  achievement,  and  history,  that  is 
to  say,  through  what  is  vaguely  called  'culture'.  Hence  the 
intimate  connection  between  philosophical  anthropology  and 

1  These  essays  are  included  in  the  volume  Philo sophische  Weltanschauung 

(Mftnchen,  1954).  *  Ibid.,  p.  62. 

3  Max  Scheler,  Die  Stellung  des  Menschen  im  Kosmos  (Manchen,  1947), 
p.  80. 

156 


Integralism  and  Modern  Philosophical  Anthropology 


what  is  called  cultural  anthropology  in  the  United  States.1 
Further,  insight  is  provided  by  analysis  of  the  basic  feeling- 
tones  of  human  existence:  hope  and  despair,  love  and  hatred, 
trust  and  anxiety;  hence,  the  inevitable  alliance  between 
philosophical  anthropology  and  ‘existence'-philosophy.  As 
much  attention  is  to  be  paid  to  a  static-morphological  study  as 
to  a  historical  study,  for  man's  understanding  of  himself  has 
unfolded  itself  in  history  and  an  important  part  of  a  study  of 
man  is  the  study  of  man's  growing  understanding  of  himself. 
Such  understanding  of  himself  constitutes  an  essential  feature 
of  man's  nature.  (3)  With  this  comprehensive  programme 
before  it,  it  is  but  natural  that  modern  philosophical  anthro¬ 
pology  cannot  rest  satisfied  with  any  one-sided  formulation  of 
human  nature  but  struggles  towards  an  integral  philosophy  of 
man.  The  spirit  of  it  is  best  expressed  again  by  Max  Scheler: 

Through  his  process  of  becoming,  man  has  proved  himself  to  be  a 
being  of  enormous  plasticity.  It  is  therefore  of  the  greatest  danger 
for  any  philosophical  opinion  to  formulate  the  Idea  of  Man  too 
narrowly ,  to  derive  it  from  any  one  naturalistic  or  only  historical 
form.  .  .  .  The  idea  of  ‘animal  rationale’  in  the  classical  sense  was 
much  too  narrow;  the  ‘homo  faber’  of  the  positivists,  the  ‘dionysian 
Man’  of  Nietzche,  Man  as  ‘the  disease  of  life’  of  the  new  panromantic 
teachings,  the  ‘Superman’,  the  ‘homo  sapiens’  of  Linne,  the  Thomme 
machine’  of  Lemettries,  the  merely  ‘Power’ — the  merely  ‘libido’ — 
the  merely  ‘economic’— man  of  Machiavelli,  Freud  and  Marx,  the 
fallen  creature  Adam — all  these  representations  are  much  too 
narrow,  since  they  are  required  to  comprehend  the  whole  man. 
Further,  they  all  are  at  the  same  time  Ideas  of  Things .  Man,  how¬ 
ever,  is  not  a  thing — he  is  a  direction  of  movement  of  the  universe 
itself.  .  .  ?  (The  italics  are  mine.) 


II 

Sri  Aurobindo  has  given  us  such  an  integral  philosophy  of  man. 
The  cardinal  principle  of  this  philosophy  is  the  principle  that 
man  is  what  he  can  be;  that  human  existence  is  full  of  possi- 

*  Compare  H.  Wein,  'Trends  in  Philosophical  Anthropology  and  Cultural 
Anthropology  in  Postwar  Germany’  ( Philosophy  of  Science,  Vol.  24,  No.  1, 
January  1957).  PP-  46-56. 

1  Philosophische  Weltanschauung  (Munchen,  1954),  P-  96. 

157 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 

bilities;  that  man  as  such  has  an  unavoidable  tendency  towards 
self-exceeding.  ‘It  is  in  his  human  nature,  in  all  human  nature, 
to  exceed  itself  by  conscious  evolution,  to  climb  beyond  what 
he  is.’1  This  coincides  with  the  findings  of  such  researchers  as 
Martin  Heidegger:  what  distinguishes  human  existence  from 
other  lower  modes  of  being  is  that  whereas  in  those  modes  of 
being  actuality  dominates  over  possibility,  human  existence 
consists  in  its  possibilities.  Heidegger,  however,  is  concerned 
with  what  may  be  called  ‘horizontal’  possibility:  the  possibility 
of  oscillating  on  the  genuine  dimension  of  existing.  Sri 
Aurobindo  supplements  this  phenomenological  with  a  genetic¬ 
evolutionary  standpoint.  Man  has  not  only  the  possibility  of 
leading  a  more  inwardized,  more  self-conscious  (i.e.  the 
‘existentialistic’)  life  as  contrasted  with  the  externalized  life  of 
the  sensational  man;  he  has  also  the  possibility  of  growing 
beyond  himself  as  the  spearhead  of  the  cosmic  evolutionary 
process. 

This  integral  philosophy  of  man  has  two  major  aspects: 
morphological  and  genetic-evolutionary.  The  former  reveals  a 
horizontal  cross-section  of  human  existence,  brings  to  light  the 
sedimented  structures  within  it,  the  immense  complexity  of 
man’s  nature;  but  it  has  also  to  show  the  endless  existential 
possibilities  according  as  man  lets  any  one  of  the  principles 
dominate  the  rest.  The  latter,  i.e.  the  genetic-evolutionary 
aspect  locates  man  in  the  cosmic  evolutionary  process  and 
thereby  determines  his  status  and  destiny.  These  two  aspects 
are  not  unconnected,  for  which  one  reason  amongst  others  is 
that  the  morphological  complexity  of  human  existence  is  but 
a  consequence  of  the  precise  place  man  occupies  in  the  cosmic¬ 
evolutionary  process.  Before  we  enter  into  short  sketches  of 
these  major  aspects,  we  may  mention  that  the  evolutionary 
aspect  again  shall  include  within  it  a  subordinate  theme:  the 
evolution  of  man  himself,  as  contrasted  with  cosmic  evolution! 


Looking  for  the  complexity  of  human  existence,  one  has  learnt 
in  our  times  to  go  beyond  the  simple  rationalism  of  the  past 

1  Aurobindo,  The  Life  Divine,  p.  638,  also  cp.  p.  750. 

158 


INTEGRALS  AND  MODERN  PHILOSOPHICAL  ANTHROPOLOGY 

centuries.  Christianity  had  already  challenged  the  Greek 
rationalism  and  had  set  up  against  the  latter  the  extremely 
difficult  notion  of  ‘sin’,  of  the  powerful  irrationalism  before 
which  reason  is  helpless  and  to  get  rid  of  which  one  has  to  take 
the  help  of  'faith'  and  ‘grace’.  In  recent  times,  Marxism  and 
psycho-analysis  have,  in  different  ways,  undermined  the 
eighteenth-century  rationalism  by  exhibiting  the  irrational 
forces,  economic  and  vital,  that  dominate  man’s  rational 
activities.  The  concept  of  ‘sin’  continues  to  influence  even 
these  anti-religious  modes  of  thought.  The  overall  picture  that 
today  is  in  our  mind  is  that  of  the  dark  irrational  dominating 
reason — 'moral  sin’,  'class  interest’,  'will  to  power’,  'libido’  are 
only  different  aspects  of  this  infra-rational  part  of  our 
nature. 

In  fact,  'infra-rational’  is  too  vague  a  designation  of  this 
part  of  our  being.  Lowest  are  the  physical  and  vital  strata;  for 
the  body  is  there  with  a  physical  existence,  just  as  there  is 
also  'a  vitality  working  in  this  bodily  form  and  structure  as  in 
the  plant  or  lower  animal’.  Yet,  of  both  these  strata  of  our 
existence,  we  are  aware  only  of  a  little.1  The  true  subconscious 
lies  above  these  basic  strata:  'it  is  the  Inconscient  vibrating  on 
the  borders  of  consciousness  sending  up  its  motions  to  be 
changed  into  conscious  stuff,  swallowing  into  its  depths 
impressions  of  past  experience  as  seeds  of  unconscious  habit 
and  returning  them  constantly  but  often  chaotically  to  the 
surface  consciousness.’2  (The  italics  are  mine.)  This  is  what  has 
been  recognized  in  modern  psycho-analysis,  the  1  dlaya-vijnana’ 
of  the  Vijnanavadin  Buddhists.  It  is  this  subconscious  which 
is  the  ‘dream-builder’. 

But  the  word  'subconscious’  may  be  used  in  a  wider  sense, 
in  which  case  the  subconscious  cannot  be  taken  to  be  identical 
with  the  infra-rational,  but  the  infra-rational  would  only  be 
the  lower  part  of  the  subconscious.  For,  the  subconscious 
would  also  include  the  subliminal.  The  subliminal  is  not  like 
the  unconscious  a  storehouse  of  irrational  impulses,  but  has  its 
own  powers  and  modes  of  action  that  surpass  the  capacities  of 
the  waking  consciousness.  Such  phenomena  as  clairvoyance, 
telepathy,  thought-reading  are  only  manifestations  of  this 

*  Aurobindo,  The  Life  Divine,  p.  498.  »  Ibid.,  pp.  499,  654. 

159 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 


subliminal  part  of  our  being.1  Besides,  it  is  the  subliminal 
which  can  directly  enter  into  other  people's  consciousness  and 
accounts  for  many  supernormal  experiences.  The  subliminal  is 
responsible  for  much  of  the  best  in  art  and  literature,  and  it  is 
false  to  trace  all  human  culture  to  the  infra-rational,  the 
unconscious  alone,  as  psycho-analysis  has  tried  to  do. 

Besides  the  subconscious  and  the  subliminal  parts  of  our 
being,  there  is  the  higher,  the  superconscient.  Whereas  modern 
psychology  has  got  hold  of  the  first  and,  at  its  best  (as  with 
Jung),  has  got  glimpses  of  the  second,  we  are  to  turn  to  the 
yogic  psychology  and  also  to  the  spiritual  psychologies  of  all 
countries  to  get  to  know  about  the  last,  i.e.  the*  superconscient. 

Sri  Aurobindo  has  given  us  a  rich  phenomenology  of  these 
three  spheres  of  our  being,  especially  of  the  subliminal  and  the 
superconscient.  Each  of  these  spheres  has  its  own  inner  stratifi¬ 
cation,  and,  of  course,  points  of  contact  between  them  are  not 
lacking.  There  is  no  rigid  pigeon-holing,  but  there  are  left 
possibilities  of  movement  from  the  one  into  the  other.2 

It  is  interesting  to  see  how  the  status  and  function  of  reason 
is  delimited  upon  this  canvas.  Lying  midway  between  two 
spheres,  the  infra-rational  and  the  supra-rational  (including 
the  subliminal  and  the  superconscient),  reason  is  no  original 
law-giver,  no  autonomous  faculty,  not  its  own  master  (except, 
perhaps,  in  a  limited  region  of  purely  formal  thinking).  Reason 
is  a  mediator  ‘between  the  subconscient  All  that  we  come  from 
in  our  evolution  upwards  and  the  superconscient  All  towards 
which  we  are  impelled  by  that  evolution'. 3  In  the  subconscient, 
consciousness  is  involved  in  action;  in  the  superconscient, 
action  is  transformed  into  knowledge.  Standing  in  between 
them,  reason  fulfils  an  evolutionary  role:  it  releases  conscious¬ 
ness  as  it  were  from  its  ‘imprisonment  in  the  act'  and  prepares 
it  ‘to  resume  its  essential  primacy’.4  While  this  is  the  evolu¬ 
tionary  function  of  reason,  in  its  multifarious  activities  reason 
is  not  under  any  one  master.  Now  she  obeys  the  lower  vital, 
now  the  higher  vital,  now  the  subconscious,  now  the  subliminal 
and  at  rare  moments  also  the  superconscient.  In  ordinary  life, 
reason  justifies  one's  physical-vital  tendencies,  economic  class- 

1  Aurobindo,  The  Life  Divine,  p.  470.  »  Ibid.,  p.  480  f. 

3  Ibid.,  p.  62.  4  Ibid.,  p.  63. 

160 


Integralism  and  Modern  Philosophical  Anthropology 


interests,  traditional  beliefs,  etc.  To  turn  reason  from  its 
servitude  to  the  lower  strata  of  our  being  and  to  make  it  a 
luminous  medium  for  the  truths  of  the  higher  regions  is  the 
task  before  every  individual. 


IV 

The  above  sketch  of  a  phenomenology  of  human  nature  is 
connected,  in  Sri  Aurobindo's  philosophy,  with  an  evolutionary 
account  of  the  origin  and  destiny  of  man.  Sri  Aurobindo,  as  is 
well  known,  advocates  a  kind  of  evolutionary  philosophy  in 
which  there  is  a  series  of  successive  emergents,  the  whole 
process  of  emergence  following  upon  a  prior  process  of  involu¬ 
tion.  These  emergents  have  been:  matter,  life,  animal  conscious¬ 
ness  and  human  self-consciousness.  This  process  of  emergence 
is  characterized  by  three  features:  first,  as  the  lower  stratum 
advances  sufficiently  in  complexity  and  configuration,  a  higher 
form  emerges.  Secondly,  this  higher — inert  matter,  life  or 
consciousness  as  the  case  may  be — when  it  appears  does  not 
reject  the  lower  but  takes  it  up  as  it  were  (compare  Hegel's 
aufheben)  and  transforms  it  radically;  thus  life  transforms 
matter  in  the  sense  that  a  living  organism  though  material  yet 
exhibits  properties  not  to  be  found  in  inert  matter!  While  the 
old  and  the  lower  is  thus  taken  up  and  transformed,  the  new 
and  the  higher  seeks  to  expand  its  own  domain  and  to  prepare 
itself  for  the  emergent  next-to-appear! 

Man,  standing  as  he  does  at  the  apex  of  the  evolutionary 
process,  includes  in  himself  all  the  lower  principles,  not  as  such 
but  as  transformed  and  integrated  under  the  dominant  principle 
of  his  being:  mental  consciousness.  He  is  a  material  body  and 
also  a  living  organism;  but  he  is  primarily  a  self-conscious 
mental  being.  Not  only  are  the  lower  principles  integrated  in 
his  being  under  the  dominant  principle  of  mental  awareness; 
but  even  the  higher  principles,  higher  forms  of  awareness,  are 
involved  in  him,  even  if  under  the  limitations  permitted  by 
mental  awareness.  Hence  the  immense  complexity  of  his 
nature,  as  well  as  the  way  the  various  aspects  of  his  being 
cluster  around  man's  self-consciousness. 

In  the  preceding  paragraph,  we  have  spoken  of  integration 

161 


F 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 

under  a  dominant  principle.  It  should  immediately  be  added, 
if  we  are  to  be  true  to  the  facts,  that  this  integration,  so  far  as 
man's  present  stage  of  self-awareness  is  concerned,  is  too 
imperfect.  The  elements  of  that  complex  nature  which  is  man's 
do  jar  and  conflict;  hence,  the  conflicts  within  the  individual 
and  also  in  human  history.  The  growth  of  man's  self-awareness 
is  a  growing  process  of  integration,  rather — what  amounts  to 
the  same — a  search  for  a  mode  of  self-awareness  which  would 
prove  more  effective  in  harmonizing  the  lower  and  the  higher! 
It  is  Sri  Aurobindo’s  singular  vision  that  this  mode  of  self- 
awareness  is  beyond  the  separative  mental  consciousness  and 
nearer  that  divine  self-consciousness — towards  which  man  is 
growing — for  which  unity  and  plurality  do  not  jar. 

The  evolutionary  philosophy,  while  it  provides,  as  we  have 
seen,  the  rationale  of  the  peculiar  complexity  as  well  as  the 
plasticity  of  human  nature,  also  affords  us  with  the  funda¬ 
mental  existential  responsibility  that  is  man's  and  from  which 
should  follow  all  his  religious,  ethical  and  social  'ought-to-do's' 
and  'ought-to-be's'. 

The  evolutionary  philosophy  teaches  that  the  appearance  of 
man  signifies  a  'crucial  step,  a  decisive  change  in  the  cause  and 
process  of  the  evolution;  it  is  not  merely  a  continuation  of  the 
old  lines’.1  'In  him  .  .  .  the  substitution  of  a  conscious  for  a 
subconscious  evolution  has  become  conceivable  and  practicable. 
...  In  the  previous  stages  of  the  evolution  Nature's  first  care 
and  effort  had  to  be  directed  towards  a  change  in  the  physical 
organization,  for  only  so  could  there  be  a  change  of  conscious¬ 
ness.  .  .  .  But  in  man  a  reversal  is  possible,  indeed  inevitable; 
for  it  is  through  his  consciousness,  through  its  transmutation 
.  .  .  that  the  evolution  can  and  must  be  effected.’2 

It  is  possible  now,  and  indeed  it  is  his  spiritual  responsibility, 
that  man  should  consciously  co-operate  with  the  cosmic 
process.  The  urge  is  towards  a  higher  (in  the  sense  of  being  more 
integrated,  harmonious,  all-comprehensive  and  based  not  on 
separation  but  on  identity)  mode  of  consciousness.  The  task  is 
to  prepare  the  ground  for  the  emergence  of  such  a  mode  of 
consciousness,  morality,  individual  and  social,  religion,  personal 
and  institutional,  art  and  literature,  science  and  technology, 

1  Aurobindo,  The  Life  Divine,  p.  750.  *  Ibid.,  p.  751. 

162 


Integralism  and  Modern  Philosophical  Anthropology 

education  and  social  ordering — all  these  activities  of  man  may 
be  understood  and  evaluated  in  the  light  of  this  most  funda¬ 
mental  responsibility  that  is  placed  on  man  by  virtue  of  his 
unique  position  in  the  evolutionary  process.  Man,  to  recall 
Scheler's  words  (quoted  above),  is  'a  direction  of  movement  of 
the  universe  itself';  he  is  not  only  a  direction,  but  the  dominant 
direction. 


v 

While  the  preceding  section  lays  down  the  basis  of  Sri 
Aurobindo’s  philosophy,  to  this  must  be  added  an  account  of 
the  spiritual  evolution  of  man  himself.  For  this  one  has  to  turn, 
to  start  with,  to  the  chapter  entitled,  The  Evolution  of  the 
Spiritual  Man'  in  The  Life  Divine ;  but  to  be  able  to  appreciate 
the  comprehensiveness  of  Sri  Aurobindo's  approach,  one  must 
inevitably  take  into  consideration  The  Human  Cycle . 

Since  the  evolutionary  process  is  everywhere  aiming  at  a 
comprehensive  change,  and  not  merely  at  emergence  of  some¬ 
thing  new,  the  evolution  of  the  spiritual  man  is  bound  to  be  a 
slow  and  laborious  process.  For,  it  is  not  enough  if  the  spiritual 
being  alone  is  developed;  it  is  also  required  that  the  outer 
crusts  of  our  being  also  shall  be  developed  and  transformed. 
The  evolution  of  man  therefore  has  a  twofold  aspect;  an 
evolution  of  our  outward  nature  and  an  evolution  of  our  inner 
being.  In  the  case  of  man,  the  former  means  primarily  the 
development  of  our  mind  To  its  greatest  possible  range,  height, 
subtlety;  for  only  so  can  be  prepared  the  unveiling  of  an 
entirely  intuitive  intelligence'.1 

There  is  an  original  ‘amalgam  of  religion,  occultism  and 
mystic  experience',2  which  characterizes  the  early  human  mind. 
This  belongs  to  what  is  called  in  The  Human  Cycle  the  symbolic 
age.  There  is  however  a  growing  ‘tendency  towards  intellectuali- 
zation',  along  with  which  the  occult  element  diminishes;  and 
there  arises  ‘a  movement  to  cut  out  everything  but  creed, 
institution,  formal  practice  and  ethics'.  This  characterizes  the 
typal  age  of  The  Human  Cycle .  Soon  all  spiritual  content 
vanishes,  leaving  behind  nothing  but  conventions.  It  seems  as 
x  Aurobindo,  The  Life  Divine,  p.  763.  »  Ibid.,  p.  771. 

163 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 

if  the  spiritual  evolution  of  man  would  be  totally  frustrated. 
But  Nature  has  her  own  way  of  working.  The  age  of  convention 
helps  the  dawning  of  a  new  era  of  individualism  and  rationalism. 
The  individual  revolts  against  conventions  and  takes  to  reason 
as  his  guiding  principle — science  and  socialism  are  the  twin 
outcome  of  this  era.  Curiously  enough,  as  The  Human  Cycle 
vividly  portrays,  in  the  hands  of  both  the  individual  is 
swallowed  up,  and  reason  proves  a  poor  guiding  principle. 
After  attaining  to  a  high  watermark  of  development,  rational¬ 
ism  has  yielded  room  to  a  new  search  for  the  soul,  a  deeper 
subjectivism  which  according  to  Sri  Aurobindo  would  provide 
the  basis  for  the  future  of  mankind. 

It  is  clear  that  here  again  the  emphasis  is  on  integration. 
The  future  of  mankind  lies  in  more  and  more  of  integration  of 
the  different  principles  constituting  his  complex  nature. 

Intellectualization  of  the  earlier  spiritual  cultures  was  not  a 
falling  away,  a  retrogression;  it  was  the  beginning  of  a  new  line 
of  development,  an  attempt  towards  the  perfecting  of  a  new 
faculty,  i.e.  intellect.  What  the  primitive  man  had  vaguely 
sensed  through  intuition  was  later  sought  to  be  apprehended 
through  a  perfected  reason.  The  consequence  was  beneficial  to 
both.  For  we  cannot  say  that  the  vague  intuitions  of  the 
primitive  man  were  perfect;  all  that  was  only  a  beginning. 
Ages  of  human  experiments  through  which  human  mind  has 
been  perfecting  itself  are  making  possible  a  richer  intuitive 
grasp  of  the  truth  of  things  and  therefore  a  more  integrated 
form  of  awareness. 

We  have  considered  Sri  Aurobindo’s  philosophy  of  man  in 
three  of  its  aspects:  (i)  in  the  morphological  analysis  of  human 
nature,  (2)  in  relation  to  the  cosmic  evolutionary  process,  and 
finally  (3)  in  relation  to  the  story  of  the  spiritual  evolution  of 
man  himself.  Bearing  in  mind  Scheler’s  demand  for  an  integral 
philosophy  of  man,  we  may  look  up  to  Sri  Aurobindo's  works 
for  a  satisfying  answer. 


164 


PART  TWO 


EPISTEMOLOGY  AND  PSYCHOLOGY 


13 


NINIAN  SMART 

Integral  Knowledge  and  the  Four  Theories 
of  Existence 


The  massive  yet  intricate  beauty  of  The  Life  Divine  can 
conceal  from  us  how  a  paragraph,  a  sentence  even,  may  contain 
within  itself  a  vast  range  of  thought.  It  is  part  of  the  genius 
of  the  work  that  its  doctrines  are  exhibited  not  in  a  dry,  and 
therefore  unilluminating,  sequence,  but  in  the  manner  of  a 
painting:  each  new  brush-stroke  gives  novel  significance  to  the 
others,  and  the  features  emerge  not  by  being  mechanically 
filled  in,  but  by  a  kind  of  patterned  growth.  It  is  therefore 
hard  to  deal  briefly  even  with  what  at  first  seems  a  small 
fragment.  For  instance,  one  reads  that  'the  hard  logical  and 
intellectual  notion  of  truth  as  a  single  idea  which  all  must 
accept,  one  idea  or  system  of  ideas  defeating  all  other  ideas  or 
systems,  ...  is  an  illegitimate  transference  from  the  limited 
truth  of  the  physical  field  to  the  much  more  complex  and 
plastic  field  of  life  and  mind  and  spirit’;1  yet  one  can  hardly 
discuss  this  vital  point  without  adverting  to  the  whole  edifice 
of  Sri  Aurobindo’s  thought.  But  perhaps  it  is  not  entirely 
nugatory  to  link  this  sentence  specifically  to  his  classification 
of  different  kinds  of  metaphysical  or  religious  theories.1 

But  first,  a  general  word  about  schemes  of  classification.  It 
is  evident  that  any  metaphysical  view  must  give  some  account 
of  its  possible  competitors.  For  instance,  some  views  (ones 
which  are  indirectly  criticized  in  the  above  quotation  and 
which  I  shall  refer  to  as  ‘exclusivist’,  since  they  hold  that  one 

1  Aurobindo,  The  Life  Divine,  p.  788. 

*  Ibid.,  the  classification  is  elaborated  in  Part  II,  Chapter  XVII,  p.  609. 

167 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 


picture  or  other  of  spiritual  truth  is  exclusively  correct)  have 
a  simple  account  of  their  rivals:  that  they  are  just  wrong. 
Opposed  to  this  way  of  treating  possible  opponents  is  the 
synthetic  approach,  whereby  other  doctrines  are  absorbed,  not 
rejected.1  The  Judaic  religions,  for  instance,  tend  to  be  exclusi- 
vist,  Hinduism  synthetic.  And  in  particular,  Sri  Aurobindo’s 
integralism  is  a  majestic  attempt  at  synthesis.  But  perhaps, 
though  the  contrast  here  depicted  is  just,  it  should  not  be 
drawn  too  sharply;  for  it  often  comes  about  that  a  religion, 
in  so  far  as  it  is  at  all  missionary  and  inasmuch  as  it  encounters 
other  faiths  that  cannot  just  be  dismissed  as  demonic,2 3  must 
provide  some  convincing  interpretation  of  the  spiritual 
experience  and  dynamism  of  others.  This  usually  involves  a 
description  of  other  faiths,  not  quite  in  their  own  terms,  but  in 
terms  of  one’s  own. 3  A  similar  remark  may  apply  to  Sri 
Aurobindo’s  classification  of  the  theories  of  existence.  To  this 
we  now  turn. 

The  four  theories  are  respectively:  the  supracosmic;  the 
cosmic  and  terrestrial;  the  supraterrestrial;  and  the  integral  or 
synthetic  or  composite.  The  first  of  these  holds  that  the 
supreme  Reality  is  alone  entirely  real;  while  the  second  takes 
cosmic  and  terrestrial  reality  (or  becoming)  as  alone  real.  The 
third  recognizes  both  the  reality  of  the  world  and  that  of 
something  higher — characteristically,  we  have  here  belief  in 
human  immortality  and  a  view  of  life  as  a  temporary  sojourn 
in  which  ethical  and  spiritual  development  constitutes  the  path 
to  ultimate  salvation.  Finally,  there  are  views  built  up  out  of 
two  or  more  of  these,  and  in  particular  there  is  the  integral 
theory  of  Sri  Aurobindo  himself.  The  most  typical  instance  of 
supracosmicism  is  the  Advaita  Vedanta ;  on  the  other  hand  the 
cosmic  view  is  more  characteristically  found  in  Western  tradi¬ 
tion.  This  is  not  to  say  that  there  are  no  instances  of  the  former 


1  Absorbed,  or  sublated;  see  Appendix  A,  A  Glossary  of  Sanskrit  Terms  in 

the  Life  Divine  (Pondicherry,  1952). 

3  Consider,  e.g.  the  view  of  Roman  and  Greek  gods  in  early  Christianity. 

3  Cp.,  for  a  similar  point,  Austin  Farrer  in  his  article  on  ‘Examination  of 
Theological  Belief'  in  Faith  and  Logic ,  ed.  Basil  Mitchell  (London:  Allen  & 
Unwin  Ltd.,  1957),  P-  where  he  distinguishes  between  those  things  off 
which  we  read  religious  truths  and  those  into  which  we  read  them;  a  like 
remark  applies  to  the  histories  and  doctrines  of  religions. 

168 


Integral  Knowledge  and  the  Four  Theories  of  Existence 

theory  in  the  West,  for  there  are  systems  of  idealistic  meta¬ 
physics  such  as  that  of  Bradley,  which  in  some  respects  bear 
a  remarkable  formal  resemblance  to  Sankara's — though  in  view 
of  the  directly  spiritual  reference  of  Advaita ,  a  nearer  parallel 
would  be  found  in  some  of  the  writings  of  Eckhart.1  On  the 
other  hand,  though  naturalistic  views  have,  in  consonance  with 
the  rise  of  science  and  the  decline  of  Christendom,  become 
widespread  in  the  West,  there  are  instances  of  them  in  the 
East,  e.g.  the  Carvdka  metaphysics. 

Sri  Aurobindo  criticizes  these  two  theories  as  being  incom¬ 
plete.  In  regard  to  cosmicism:  it  denies  the  simple  affirmation 
that  there  is  a  'beyond’. 2 3  It  ignores  the  teaching  of  spiritual 
experience  and  so  will  not  ultimately  satisfy  human  nature.  On 
the  other  hand,  supracosmicism  normally  issues  in  the  feeling 
that  the  world  is  illusory,  a  dream,  a  mirage;  and,  even  where 
it  docs  not,  it  yet  assigns  no  ultimate  significance  to  the  indi¬ 
vidual  being.  And  thus  it  negates  something  which  cannot  be 
dismissed  ‘as  a  device  for  a  minor  operation,  the  coiling  and 
uncoiling  of  an  insignificant  spiral  amid  the  vast  circlings  of 
the  Eternal’s  becoming  in  the  universe’. 3 

But  when  we  turn  to  supraterrestrialism,  we  might  think  at 
first  glance  that  it  is  a  kind  of  synthesis,  for  it  affirms  the 
reality  of  both  the  Transcendent  and  the  material  cosmos. 
Thus,  it  has  been  remarked  by  William  Temple  that  Christianity 
is  the  most  materialistic  of  the  world’s  religions.  This  is  partly 
because  theistic  faiths  do  not  normally  stress  the  illusoriness 
of  the  cosmos  (for  the  dualism  implicit  in  theism — the  dualism 
between  Creator  and  creature,  Object  of  worship  and  wor¬ 
shipper — must  affirm  the  reality  of  each  term  in  the  relation 
and  must  also  see  the  world  as  purposive  and  hence  becoming 
in  its  own  right  subsistent);  and  partly  because  in  particular 
the  Christian  doctrine  of  the  Incarnation  contains  the  idea  that 
God  Himself  sanctifies  material  existence.  It  may  be  noted  in 

1  See  Rudolf  Otto’s  classic,  Mysticism  East  and  West  (London:  Macmillan 
&  Co.  Ltd.,  1932).  Eckhart ’s  description  of  the  world,  on  one  occasion,  as 
*a  mere  nothing’  is  reminiscent  of  what  Sri  Aurobindo  calls  a  sense  of  ‘the 
vanity  of  cosmic  existence’  (The  Life  Divine,  p.  436). 

*  Cp.  The  Life  Divine,  p.  18. 

3  Ibid.,  p.  459:  the  reference  is  to  the  Vedanta  of  the  Upani§ads,  where, 
says  Sri  Aurobindo,  the  becoming  of  Brahman  is  accepted  as  a  reality. 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 


passing  that  the  prevalent  materialism  in  some  Western 
societies  is  perhaps  a  reflection  of  this  feature  of  Christianity: 
theism  without  the  Theos  leaves  matter;  whereas  the  equation 
does  not  quite  hold  in  India:  remove  the  personal  God  and 
you  may  be  left  with  the  Absolute.  There  are  two  directions  in 
which  one  may  desert  an  Is  vara.1 

Why  then  is  supraterrestrialism  not  a  synthesis  in  Sri 
Aurobindo's  sense?  It  must  be  borne  in  mind  that  on  his  view 
there  are  three  elements  which  must  be  preserved,  and  held 
together,  in  any  picture  of  reality  which  paints  it  in  its  full 
richness:  first,  the  reality  of  the  cosmos;  second,  the  reality  of 
that  which  transcends  it;  and  third,  the  reality  of  the  indi¬ 
vidual  being.  Now  certainly — at  least  superficially — theistic 
religion  preserves  these  three  elements.  But  if  we  consider 
Sri  Aurobindo's  main  criticisms  of  sup>raterrestrialism,  we  gain 
a  clue  towards  understanding  the  matter.  For  he  remarks  that 
its  defect  lies  in  the  way  it  treats  man's  existence  in  the  present 
world;  for  although  the  view  contains  the  truth  that  there  is  a 
higher  realm  of  being  (often  described  as  a  heaven  or  paradise), 
the  picture  of  man  as  in  a  fallen  or  unsatisfactory  state  in  this 
world,  such  that  his  ultimate  salvation  lies  in  another  realm, 
neglects  the  truth  that  the  worlds  of  higher  consciousness  are 
not  the  only  possible  habitation  for  a  perfected  soul.2  This  life 
also  is  part  of  the  Spirit's  self-expression.  Hence,  suprater¬ 
restrialism  falls  into  an  error  similar  to  that  of  supracosmicism 
— it  represents  an  improper  notion  of  the  status  of  the  cosmos 
and  of  human  existence. 

One  or  two  subsidiary  questions  arise  out  of  the  above 
scheme  of  classification  of  views.  A  notoriously  difficult  meta¬ 
physical  system  to  dovetail  into  any  general  account  of  reli¬ 
gions  is  that  of  Buddhism  and  in  particular  the  Theravuda.  For 
it  cannot  be  said  that  according  to  the  latter  there  is  a  unitary 
absolute;  hence,  it  is  hard  to  count  it  as  supracosmic.  Moreover, 
the  impermanence  of  all  entities  in  the  cosmos  is  not  full-blown 
unreality.  On  the  other  hand,  the  Theravuda  is  not,  in  the  sense 

1  Aurobindo,  The  Life  Divine,  p  621:  'The  higher  self-knowledge  begins 
therefore  as  soon  as  man  has  got  beyond  his  preoccupation  with  the  relation 
of  Nature  and  God  to  his  superficial  being,  his  most  apparent  self.’ 

a  Ibid.,  p.  472. 


170 


Integral  Knowledge  and  the  Four  Theories  of  Existence 

in  which  the  Judaic  group  of  faiths  is,  supraterrestrial,  in  that 
it  is  agnostic  about  individual  immortality,1  and  there  is  no 
God  to  provide  a  heaven  for  His  creatures.  But  neither  is  it 
simple  cosmicism,  for  there  is  an  unborn,  an  uncompounded: 
there  is  nirvana.  Perhaps  it  is  best  to  see  the  Theravada  as 
combining  elements  of  the  cosmic  and  supracosmic  views. 
For,  like  supracosmicism,  its  supreme  goal  is  a  kind  of  self- 
annihilation;  but  like  cosmicism,  it  docs  not  preach  a  sub¬ 
stantive  Reality  beyond  the  cosmos. 

This  points  to  a  formal  or  logical  feature  of  composite  and 
synthetic  theories.  For  the  two  simpler  views,  cosmicism  and 
supracosmicism,  are  overtly  exclusivist:  not  merely  is  it  said 
that  the  cosmos  or  the  Absolute  is  reality,  but  that  it  is  the 
only  reality.  Materialism,  for  instance,  rejects  what  is  yielded 
in  spiritual  experience.  It  is  absurd  to  suppose  that  a  synthetic 
view  can  absorb  all  the  features  of  that  which  it  synthesizes; 
for  clearly  the  synthesis  itself  cannot  reject  spiritual  intuition, 
even  though  it  may  delight  in  the  clearing  away  of  cobwebs 
induced  by  such  a  rejection.2  What  it  admires  is  the  positive 
elements,  or  at  least  some  of  these;  what  it  denies  is  the 
rejections.  But  how  is  one  to  hit  upon  the  right  method  of 
synthesizing?  Sri  Aurobindo's  procedure  here  is  of  the  greatest 
moment — for,  as  glimmers  forth  from  his  reflections  upon  the 
fundamental  theories,  he  is  illumined  by  experience  in  selecting 
the  main  facts  to  be  accounted  for.  And  the  dark  flaw  in 
cosmicism,  for  example,  is  that  it  is  blind  to,  and  denies,  a 
living  facet  of  experience,  just  as  supracosmicism  rejects  the 
witness  of  the  individual  being.  Similarly,  but  for  different 
reasons,  supraterrestrialism — at  least  as  it  is  found  in  the 
West — is  exclusivist;  and  we  have  in  Sri  Aurobindo's  strictures 
a  reflection  of  the  long  tradition  of  Hinduism:  that  no  one 
theory  can  declare  others  to  be  utterly  false.  Yet  the  real  defect 
in  supraterrestrialism,  on  his  view,  is  again  that  it  neglects  the 
possible  opening  up  of  a  wider  experience,  as  implied  in  the 
notion  of  a  higher  existence,  in  this  visible  world  that  we  know 

1  Majjhima-Nikaya,  Vol.  I,  p.  483  ff.,  etc. 

*  Aurobindo,  The  Life  Divine,  p.  13:  ‘Rather  \vc  shall  observe  with  respect 
and  wonder  the  work  that  Atheism  has  done  for  the  Divine  and  admire  the 
services  that  Agnosticism  has  rendered  in  preparing  the  illimitable  increase 
of  knowledge/ 

171 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 

so  well.  It  wrongly  creates  a  great  gulf  between  the  cosmos 
and  the  higher  realm,  to  the  detriment  ultimately  of  the 
former  and  the  distortion,  in  some  degree,  of  the  latter. 

So  much  then,  all  too  briefly,  for  the  reasons  why  the  syn¬ 
thesis  has  to  embrace  the  insights  of  the  three  fundamental 
world-views.  It  is  now  perhaps  worth  reflecting  on  some 
points  about  the  synthetic  method.  I  have  remarked  above 
that  Sri  Aurobindo  looks  to  experience  and  intuition1  for  the 
basic  facts  of  existence  which  need  to  be  woven  together  into 
an  integral  theory.  And  indeed  it  may  be  said  that  it  is  different 
varieties  of  experience  which  yield  the  three  fundamental 
views.  Now  this  points  towards  an  important  aspect  of  the 
present  predicament.  In  the  West,  with  the  permeation  of 
society  by  science  and  naturalism  and  the  decay,  in  some 
regions,  of  traditional  religion,  there  exist  two  main  ways  in 
which  spiritual  truth  can  be  defended.  The  first  is  by  philo¬ 
sophical  metaphysics  and  the  second  is  by  appeal  to  experience 
and  intuition.  Yet,  as  Sri  Aurobindo  remarks,  ‘the  concepts  of 
metaphysical  knowledge  do  not  in  themselves  fully  satisfy  the 
demand  of  our  integral  being.  .  .  .  Our  nature  sees  things 
through  two  eyes  always,  for  it  views  them  doubly  as  idea  and 
as  fact  and  therefore  every  concept  is  incomplete  for  us  and  to 
a  part  of  our  nature  almost  unreal.  .  .  /2  But  worse;  it  is 
doubtful  whether  much  trust  can  be  placed  in  philosophical 
metaphysics  of  the  old  sort — for  the  play  of  logic  upon  concepts 
such  as  causality ,  to  generate  conclusions  about  a  First  Cause, 
and  so  on,  is  by  no  means  evidently  legitimate.  It  may  be  true 
that  those  who  have  intimations  of  the  spiritual  find  their 
beliefs  encouraged  by  the  natural  metaphysical  feeling  that  the 
existence  of  the  cosmos  cries  for  an  explanation.  Yet  it  can 
hardly  be  thought  that  there  is  a  method  of  a  priori  reasoning 
which  can  by  itself  yield  sure  truths  about  reality.3  Hence, 
belief  must  defend  itself  by  reference  to  experience,  and  this 
is  where  there  arises  a  painful  paradox  for  exclusivism.  To 
claim  there  is  one  revelation,  and  to  back  the  claim  by  appeal 

1  For  the  use  of  this  term  see  The  Life  Divine,  footnote  p.  63. 

*  Aurobindo,  The  Life  Divine,  p.  59. 

3  Ibid.,  p.  64:  ‘Intuition  brings  to  man  those  brilliant  messages  from  the 
Unknown  which  are  the  beginning  of  his  higher  knowledge.  Reason  only 
comes  in  afterwards  to  see  what  profit  it  can  have  of  the  shining  harvest.* 

172 


Integral  Knowledge  and  the  Four  Theories  of  Existence 

to  humanity's  deeper  intuitions,  is  seemingly,  in  the  light  of 
the  facts,  a  contradiction.  For  the  facts  tell  us  unmistakably 
that  the  spiritual  adventure  of  men,  whether  at  a  superficial 
or  profound  level,  is  not  constricted  to  one  culture  or  family  of 
cultures.  Such  an  illusion  has  been  generated  by  ignorance  of 
others,  but  neither  the  Holy  Roman  Empire  nor  J  ambudvtpa 
was  the  full  circle  of  humanity,  nor  was  the  outsider  justly 
named  barbarous  or  mleccha .  A  deeper  acquaintance  with  alien 
cultures  must  lead  one  to  recognize  their  spiritual  as  well  as 
their  other  glories.  Hence  an  appeal  to  experience,  though  it 
may  be  harmonized  with  the  view  that  one’s  own  Weltans¬ 
chauung  gives  the  fullest  picture,  or  the  quintessential  picture, 
cannot  be  consonant  with  extreme  exclusivism. 

It  therefore  seems  inevitable  at  the  present  juncture  for 
religions  to  take  the  path  towards  synthesis.  Hinduism,  it  may 
be  replied,  does  not  need  to  do  this,  since  it  has  already  done 
it.  Yet  there  are  points  where  traditional  Hindu  theories  need 
supplementation  perhaps;  and  indeed  it  is  Sri  Aurobindo's 
genius  that  he  has  provided  a  framework  of  thought  which, 
while  it  grows  out  of  such  ancient  concepts  as  Brahman , 
purusa,  prakrti ,  prana,  etc.,  yet  does  not  have  merely  a  static 
view  of  things,  but  absorbs  the  sense,  gained  from  both  science 
and  history,  of  the  unfolding  of  man's  spirit.  The  importance 
of  this  lies  not  just  in  its  presentation  of  matter  and  life  as 
evolving,  but  in  its  evolutionary  description  of  religion  and 
metaphysics.  Fogazzaro,  in  his  moving  novel  11  Santo ,  made 
the  point  that  a  new  set  of  teachings,  a  new  spiritual  movement, 
needs  not  merely  ideas  to  express  it,  but  a  saint  to  give  it 
power  and  legitimacy.  Even  those  who  do  not  adhere  to  Sri 
Aurobindo's  teachings  must  surely  ask — though  without  the 
irony  of  the  original: 

kavlyamanah  ka  iha  pra  vocad ? 
devarh  manah  kuto  adhi  prajdtam P1 

('Who  has  here,  like  a  poet-seer,  given  this  teaching? 

Where  has  this  divine  mind  sprung  from?') 

And  to  ask  the  question  is  already  to  grant  the  need  for  some 
synthesis  or  reinterpretation  of  belief. 

1  Rg-Veda,  1. 164.1 8. 

173 


*4 


H.  P.  SULLIVAN 

The  Integration  of  Knowledge 


'Knowledge',  as  this  word  is  commonly  understood  and  used 
in  Western  philosophy,  refers  to  those  thought-constructs  of 
the  rational  mind  which  arise  in  the  intellective  process  of 
unifying,  interpreting  and  verifying  sensory  data.  To  some 
philosophers  knowledge  must  possess  a  testable  logical  certainty 
as  articulated  statements.  To  yet  others  any  external  valida¬ 
tion  or  test  of  logical  certainty  applied  to  knowledge  is  irrele¬ 
vant,  contradictory  and  in  the  last  analysis  impossible,  since 
basically  all  knowledge  is  of  a  'subjective'  nature,  derived  from 
an  irreversible  causal  activity  within  the  brain. 

Apart  from  this  sort  of  difference  of  definition  and  others 
perhaps  somewhat  more  basic  (such  as  whether  or  not  know¬ 
ledge  is  an  activity  or  relationship  between  subject  and  object 
or  whether  it  is  already  self-contained  in  the  mind),  contem¬ 
porary  Western  epistemological  theory  and  speculation  is  with 
few  exceptions  preoccupied  with  'objective'  knowledge, 
knowledge  of  the  external  world  of  objects.  It  is  indeed  rare 
that  one  finds  serious  discussion  of  the  possibility  or  actuality 
of  suprasensory  cognition  such  as  intuitive  or  non-rational 
knowledge,  experience  of  spiritual  truth  and  'pure  conscious¬ 
ness'  or  supraconscious  awareness.  More  often  than  not,  such 
modes  of  knowing  and  the  knowledge  derived  are  characterized 
as  'unscientific',  'fantasy',  or  at  the  best  'faith'  or  'belief*  as 
opposed  to  testable  or  tested  'knowledge'.  True  knowledge  of 
ultimate  Reality,  in  so  far  as  most  professional  philosophy 
(apart  from  surviving  Hegelian  elements  and  occasional 
'right-wing'  existentialists  like  Marcel  and  Jaspers)  is  con¬ 
cerned,  is  highly  suspect  and  is  usually  relegated  to  the  realm 


The  Integration  of  Knowledge 

of  pious  opinion  and  even  superstition  of  the  religionist  and 
theologian. 

The  traditions  of  Eastern  philosophy  and  metaphysics  to 
the  present  day  stand  in  sharp  contrast  to  Western  traditions 
in  their  final  elevation  of  the  intuitive  and  suprarational  or 
spiritual  over  the  rational  intellect  as  the  means  of  valid 
knowledge.  Rather  than  being  the  most  reliable  and  infallible 
means  of  knowledge  (as  it  is  in  the  West)  the  rational  intellect 
is  the  most  uncertain  means,  just  because  the  primary  sensory 
data  upon  which  it  must  rely  come  from  a  world  of  imperma¬ 
nence,  change  and  illusion,  and  are  filtered  through  a  not 
altogether  reliable  sense-mind.  In  the  last  analysis,  it  is  from  the 
non-rational,  the  highest  intuition,  the  'spiritual  experience’, 
that  the  truest  knowledge  of  Reality  comes. 

In  the  metaphysical  system  of  Sri  Aurobindo,  we  find  the 
consummation  of  this  approach  to  knowledge.  What  is  unique 
in  his  treatment  of  the  epistemological  problem  is  the  attempt 
to  reconcile  the  rational-theoretical  standpoint  of  Western 
metaphysics  with  the  suprarational-practical  understanding 
of  Eastern  (and  primarily  Indian)  traditions  in  a  grand 
synthesis.  In  doing  so  he  avoids  two  extremes:  the  denial  of 
spirit  by  the  West  and  the  annihilation  of  intellect  by  the 
East.  Each  knowledge,  the  spiritual  and  the  rational,  is 
necessary  to  the  other  if  there  is  to  be  achieved  an  integral 
knowledge,  a  wholistic  understanding  of  Reality,  both  empirical 
and  absolute;  one  is  incomplete  without  the  other.  Sri  Aurobindo 
recognizes  that  there  are  levels  of  knowledge  with  corre¬ 
sponding  levels  of  consciousness  and  ways  of  knowing.  His 
goal  is  to  arrive  at  an  integration  of  knowledge  through  an 
integration  of  the  various  levels  of  consciousness. 

Sri  Aurobindo  distinguishes  four  main  ways  of  knowing 
Reality:  knowledge  by  identity;  knowledge  by  direct  contact; 
knowledge  by  separation  from  the  object  of  observation;  and 
knowledge  gained  through  a  completely  separate  and  indirect 
contact  with  the  object.  On  the  cognitive  mode  employed  will, 
of  course,  depend  the  level  and  type  of  Reality  known.  Know¬ 
ledge  is,  in  other  words,  teleological;  it  is  selective  of  its  own 
content  and  determined  by  its  own  interests  and  motivation. 
Thus  it  is  that  most  of  the  time  we  operate  in  terms  of  a 

175 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 


separative  cognition  of  subject  and  object  (rather  than  a 
knowledge  by  identity)  and  gain  only  a  knowledge  of  separate 
existence.  Whereas  in  self-awareness  we  directly  experience 
ourselves — that  is,  part  of  the  subjective  consciousness  can 
remain  detached  from  the  flow  of  thought  and  sensation  and 
observe  and  even  control  this  flow  while  another  part  of 
consciousness  enters  into  and  becomes  completely  identified 
with  the  internal  states — in  our  knowledge  of  things  and  events 
outside  us,  we  distinguish  ourselves  from  that  which  is  not-self. 
We  function  as  knowing  subjects  separate  from  an  objective 
reality  external  to  consciousness.  As  Aurobindo  points  out: 
‘We  do  not  identify  ourselves  with  external  objects,  not  even 
with  other  men  though  they  are  beings  of  our  own  nature;  we 
cannot  enter  into  their  existence  as  if  it  were  our  own,  we 
cannot  know  them  and  their  movements  with  the  directness, 
immediateness,  intimacy  with  which  we  know — even  though 
incompletely — ourselves  and  our  movements/1 

Our  knowledge  of  others,  however,  most  often  lacks  not 
only  identity,  but  direct  contact  as  well.  There  is  no  real 
participation  of  one  being  in  another  being;  no  true  meeting 
of  one  consciousness  with  another.  Our  awareness  of  most  of 
the  external  world  is  confined  to  generalized  sensory  impressions 
which  lack  any  real  directness  or  intimacy.  If,  however,  we 
were  to  remain  at  the  level  of  mere  sensible  impressions  of  our 
external  world,  we  would  not  be  able  to  function  cffectivclyinthat 
world.  At  this  point  reason  operates  upon  the  chaotic  mass  of 
sense  data  to  achieve  some  sort  of  structured  order  whereby  we 
are  able  to  relate  our  existence  to  other  existents.  This  action 
of  the  human  reason  is  what  Aurobindo  characterizes  as  'mixed' 
or  'dependent'.2  It  is  confined  to  sensible  experience,  regards 
only  phenomena  and  is  concerned  only  with  appearances. 

There  is,  however,  another  action  of  the  mind  which  may  be 
termed  'pure'.  This  occurs  when  the  mind  starts  with  appear¬ 
ances  but  instead  of  stopping  there,  it  goes  beyond  them  and 
strives  for  general  principles  and  concepts  which  will  give  a 
wholistic  meaning  to  the  appearances.  This  'pure'  action  of 
the  mind  is  eminently  necessary  since  our  field  of  sensible 
experience  is  so  restricted  and  the  knowledge  derived  there- 

1  Aurobindo,  The  Life  Divine,  p.  472.  1  Ibid.,  p.  59!. 

176 


The  Integration  of  Knowledge 


from  so  limited  and  fractionated.  It  is  of  the  very  nature  of  the 
pure  reason  to  exceed  the  mass  of  sensible  phenomena  in  the 
quest  for  those  unifying  principles  which  offer  the  greatest 
possible  truth  of  things. 

This,  then,  is  the  movement  of  the  mind  from  purely  physical 
knowledge  to  metaphysical  knowledge.  But  something  more 
is  demanded  by  our  integral  being,  a  knowledge  greater  than 
mere  intellectual  truth  or  a  mental  conception  concerning  the 
nature  of  ultimate  Reality;  for  no  concept  of  metaphysical 
knowledge — no  matter  how  'polished* — is  really  in  itself 
complete.  We  see  existence  through  two  eyes,  the  eye  of 
sensory  experience  and  the  eye  of  pure  reason,  and  thus  it  is 
seen  doubly  as  fact  and  as  idea.  As  a  consequence,  meta¬ 
physical  concepts  do  not  provide  truly  integral  knowledge,  for 
they  have  a  'split*  existence.  The  truths  which  constitute  the 
innermost  reality  of  our  existence  are  derived  neither  from 
observations  of  the  senses  nor  from  the  constructions  of  the 
pure  reason;  they  are  truths  of  the  supraphysical  which  can 
be  had  only  through  suprarational  and  super-psychological 
experience.  The  central  aim  of  Knowledge*,  says  Aurobindo, 
'is  the  recovery  of  the  Self,  of  our  true  self-existence.  .  .  .**  To 
know  the  truth  of  our  own  being — to  detect  and  set  right  its 
disorders,  confusions,  and  its  false  identifications  with  aspects 
of  its  surface  nature  such  as  mind,  body,  emotions,  desires, 
etc. — is  the  goal  of  all  knowledge.  This  is  the  task  of  self- 
knowledge,  self-identity,  integrity,  or  what  Jaspers  calls 
'authentic  selfhood*.  Only  in  knowing  ourselves  do  we  truly 
know  the  self  in  others  and  the  Reality  in  Nature  and  History 
and  that  which  is  the  All  behind  all  Reality.  By  discovering 
the  truth  of  our  own  being  we  overcome  the  barrier  between 
our  individuality  and  the  universe  and  achieve  a  'correspon¬ 
dence*  of  truth  and  an  identity  between  our  particularity  and 
the  totality  of  existence.  Only  then  do  we  universalize  our 
conscious  existence  and  know  all  Being  through  identity  with 
our  own  being.  Realizing  in  ourselves  the  T  am  He*  of  the 
Vedanta,  we  cannot  but  realize  in  looking  upon  all  around  us 
the  identical  knowledge  on  its  other  side,  'Thou  art  That*. 

■  Aurobindo,  The  Synthesis  of  Yoga  (Pondicherry:  Sri  Aurobindo  Ashram, 
1955).  P-  382. 


1 77 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 


For  Aurobindo,  therefore,  the  True  truth  of  things'  as 
distinguished  from  the  'practical  truth  of  relation'  is  knowledge 
by  identity — that  which  is  known  apart  from  the  media  of 
sense  or  ratiocination.  It  is  knowledge  of  ourselves  derived 
solely  from  psychological  experience,  but  psychological  experi¬ 
ence  on  a  certain  level  and  of  an  exact  kind.  For  in  a  sense  all 
our  experience  is  psychological  experience.  But  the  psychologi¬ 
cal  experience  in  question,  too,  like  the  cognitions  of  the 
reason,  is  of  a  mixed  and  a  pure  nature.  When  we  seek  to 
become  aware  of  the  external  world  in  any  of  its  features  or 
dimensions,  we  employ  the  five  senses  to  collect  the  data  which 
we  refer  to  our  ‘sixth  sense',  or  what  the  ancient  Indian 
philosophers  called  manas,  the  sense-mind.  This  is  the  mixed 
nature  of  psychological  experience;  the  sense-mind  is  wholly 
dependent  upon  the  senses.  However,  when  it  seeks  to  become 
aware  of  itself — the  subject — then  its  nature  is  pure,  for  its 
perception  of  itself  is  one  by  identity.  That  is  to  say,  we  are 
capable  of  an  immediate  experience  of  ourselves;  we  are  aware 
directly  of  our  thoughts  and  emotions,  of  our  existence.  This, 
then,  is  the  autonomous  nature  or  functioning  of  psychological 
experience  which  produces  knowledge  by  identity  and  is  that 
very  knowledge.  Moreover,  this  knowledge  by  identity  is  the 
only  means  to  the  ‘true  truth  of  things';  the  knowledge  derived 
from  sensible  experience  is  but  the  ‘practical  truth  of  things'. 

It  is  Aurobindo's  contention  that  the  real  nature  of  all 
cognitive  experience  is  knowledge  by  identity,  but  because  of 
the  exclusive  demands  of  the  ego,  we  have  separated  ourselves 
from  that  which  we  now  know  as  'external  reality',  creating 
distinctions  of  'subject'  and  'object'  and  necessitating  thereby 
the  development  of  processes  and  organs  whereby  we  can 
achieve  contact  with  and  knowledge  of  that  which  by  force  of 
the  ego  we  have  excluded  from  the  consciousness  of  our  being.1 

1  Gabriel  Marcel  propounds  a  similar  view  of  what  he  terms  'knowledge  by 
participation’.  In  knowledge  of  oneself,  which  is  the  only  real  knowledge, 
since  it  is  knowledge  of  the  knower,  Descartes’  cogito  formulation  is  of  no  help 
since  it  is  not  related  to  the  whole  self  of  will,  body,  feelings,  consciousness, 
but  only  to  the  ego  as  an  organ  of  cognition.  Descartes  was  concerned  with  a 
thinking  subject  standing  over  against  a  world  of  objects  and  not  with  the 
whole  Self  as  contained  in  Being-Itself.  As  Marcel  says,  ‘knowledge  is  con¬ 
tingent  on  a  participation  in  being  for  which  no  epistemology  can  account 
because  it  continually  presupposes  it*  (The  Philosophy  of  Existence ,  p.  8). 

178 


The  Integration  of  Knowledge 


In  order  to  regain  knowledge  by  identity,  we  must  regain 
knowledge  of  our  true  self.  For  only  when  we  know  the  self  of 
our  own  being  can  we  know  the  Self  in  all  being  by  identity . 
That  which  is  the  ultimate  reality  of  the  individual  is  the 
ultimate  reality  of  all  existence.  At  the  base  of  all  true 
knowledge  of  existence  is  a  consciousness  of  identity  and  by 
identity;  a  full  awareness  of  all  as  oneself  and  oneself  in  all. 
This  consciousness  lies  behind  all  mental  awareness  but  is  not 
subject  to  the  distinctions  of  temporal  modes  of  separate 
knowledge,  for  it  possesses  an  integral  knowledge  of  self¬ 
existence  in  time  and  in  all  modes  of  past,  present  and  future 
at  once  and  totally.  To  enter  into  this  supramental  conscious¬ 
ness,  to  know  all  being  as  one's  own  being  and  all  selves  as 
one's  own  self,  is  the  goal,  the  perfection  and  the  integration 
of  all  knowledge. 

To  become  aware  of  this  consciousness  and  to  enter  into  it, 
we  must  withdraw  from  our  usual  mental  activity  of  frag¬ 
mented  and  separative  knowing  and  from  the  abstractions  and 
rigid  constructions  of  our  ego-controlled  rational  intellect.  For 
if  we  are  confined  to  mind  and  its  temporarily  determined 
perceptions  and  constructions,  we  can  never  achieve  a  know¬ 
ledge  which  is  more  than  that  of  our  immediate  time-space 
relationships.  In  other  words,  we  can  never  know  reality  which 
is  other  than  spatial  or  temporal.1  We  must  instead  radically 
'open'  ourselves  to  that  consciousness  which  stands  behind 
our  ordinary  mental-knowing  and  conscious  self-experience. 
We  must  see  ourselves  as  more  than  a  particular  mind-body 
complex  and  go  beyond  our  separative  individuality  and  self- 
limiting  ego  construction  to  the  realization  of  an  existence 
behind  and  beyond  the  phenomenal  flow  of  differentiated 

1  As  Pascal  pointed  out,  man  cannot  hope  to  comprehend  his  own  nature 
by  means  of  the  sort  of  knowledge  whereby  as  a  subject  he  apprehends  the 
external  world  of  ‘things’.  ‘The  nature  of  our  existence  hides  from  us  the 
knowledge  of  our  first  beginnings  which  are  born  of  the  Nothing;  and  the 
littleness  of  our  being  conceals  from  us  the  sight  of  the  Infinite.  Our  intellect 
holds  the  same  position  in  the  world  of  thought  as  our  body  occupies  in  the 
'expanse  of  nature.  .  .  .  This  is  our  true  state;  this  is  what  makes  us  incapable 
of  certain  knowledge  and  of  absolute  ignorance.  When  we  think  to  attach 
ourselves  to  any  point  and  fasten  to  it,  it  wavers  and  leaves  us;  and  if  we 
follow  it,  it  eludes  our  grasp,  slips  past  us  and  vanishes  forever*  ( Pensies , 
Modern  Library  Edition,  No.  72). 


179 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 


self-experience,  of  a  timelessness  of  an  eternal  present  beyond 
all  temporal  distinctions. 

In  short  we  must  have  an  experience  of  that  ultimate 
Reality  which  is  the  ground  and  essence  of  all  existence, 
empirical  and  absolute.  Such  an  experience  is  not  a  fantasy. 
On  the  contrary,  it  is  possible  for  man  to  enter  into  the 
consciousness  of  the  Absolute  since  it  is  that  very  conscious¬ 
ness  which  is  involved  in  and  is  the  essence  of  his  own 
consciousness  and  of  his  very  existence.  Thus,  the  experience 
of  absolute  Consciousness,  of  the  individual  self  as  one  with 
the  universal  and  ultimate  Self,  is  the  highest  knowledge;  it  is 
the  culmination  of  knowledge  by  identity.  Human  conscious¬ 
ness,  therefore,  contains  within  itself  the  consciousness  of  the 
Absolute  as  a  light  whereby  all  things  are  made  known.  As 
St  Thomas  Aquinas  declared,  ‘ praeexistunt  in  nobis  quacdam 
scientianim  semina1  (‘We  possess  within  ourselves  the  germ  of 
all  knowledge'). 

The  problem  of  the  integration  of  knowledge  thus  demands 
an  exploration  of  all  possible  levels  of  consciousness,  including 
that  of  spiritual  experience;  for  the  supraphysical  is  as  real  as 
the  physical  and  in  order  to  have  complete  knowledge  of 
Reality,  it  is  essential  that  we  know  all  realms  of  existence. 

Such  knowledge,  however,  is  often  branded  as  occultism. 
Nonetheless  it  is  part  of  human  experience,  and  the  secret  inner 
workings  of  mind,  life  and  matter  can  and  must  be  known. 
The  spiritual  domain  is  occult  only  in  the  sense  that  it  tran¬ 
scends  normal  experience,  but  just  because  it  does,  it  is  possible 
to  discover  here  the  inner  nature  of  consciousness  and  being 
and  by  the  discovery  of  the  inner  laws  of  psychical  and  spiritual 
nature  to  transform  human  existence.  In  a  similar  sense 
science  is  occultism  in  that  it  seeks  to  discover  and  to  bring 
into  effect  the  laws  of  physical  nature.  It  discovers  the  hidden 
knowledge  of  nature  and  uses  that  knowledge  to  control  the 
operations  of  natural  energies.  In  its  own  way  it  has  evolved  as 
a  vast  system  of  physical  magic,  utilizing  the  secret  powers 
and  processes  of  nature. 

Supraphysical  knowledge  is  necessary  for  the  completion  of 

1  Contra  Gentiles,  IV,  2,  ad  Rursus  consider andum  est,  quoted  in  Etienne 
Gilson,  The  Christian  Philosophy  of  St  Thomas  Aquinas,  p.  215. 

180 


The  Integration  of  Knowledge 


physical  knowledge;  for  in  themselves,  materialistic  doctrines 
of  knowledge  are  inadequate.1  This  is  not  to  say,  however,  that 
such  doctrines  are  unnecessary.  On  the  contrary,  it  would  be 

1  At  this  point  Aurobindo  has  a  strong  Western  ally  in  the  person  of  Karl 
Jaspers  (vide  Von  der  Wahrheit,  Munich,  1047,  and  Der  Philosophische  Glaube, 
Basel,  iq.jH,  translated  by  R.  Manheim  and  published  in  English  under  the 
title:  The  Perennial  Scope  of  Philosophy,  London,  1950). 

jaspers  distinguishes  between  ‘understanding’  (Verstand),  whereby  we  are 
able  to  deal  with  the  objective  world  and  obtain  phenomenal  knowledge,  and 
‘reason’  (Vernunft),  which  is  involved  in  'transcending  thinking’.  Vernunfl 
penetrates  beyond  finitude,  seeks  the  Transcendent  which  is  behind  concepts, 
and  goes  beyond  both  the  surface  knowledge  of  things  which  science  provides 
and  the  common-sense  conventional  meanings  which  we  attach  to  our  every¬ 
day  empirical  existence.  By  virtue  of  Vernunft  we  are  able  to  transcend 
immanence  ( Dasein )  and  attain  true  Selfhood  ( ILxistenz ). 

Both  Aurobindo  and  Jaspers  agree  that  agnosticism  and  nihilism  play  a 
necessary  transitional  role  in  the  quest  after  ultimate  truths  in  that  they 
reveal  the  precariousness  of  any  attempt  to  construct  a  total  interpretation 
of  Reality  within  the  confines  of  objective  knowledge.  Also,  they  both  agree 
that  science  cannot  provide  a  comprehensive  and  unified  view  of  existence, 
since  the  existing  individual  is  always  more  than  the  sum  total  of  what  can 
be  known  about  him  objectively.  Even  if  it  were  possible  to  construct  a  single, 
consistent  system  from  the  totality  of  our  phenomenal  knowledge  derived 
from  the  natural  and  human  sciences,  the  complex  of  meaning  which  is  man 
could  still  not  be  fully  contained  in  that  system.  Cognition  of  the  phenomenal, 
objective  world  can  never  grasp  that  ultimate  primal  ground  (Ursprung, 
Brahman)  of  our  existence.  The  sciences — even  the  human  or  social  sciences 
such  as  psychology  and  sociology — do  not  grasp  the  essential  nature,  the 
selfhood  of  man  qua  personal  existence,  but  rather  they  characterize  aspects 
of  him  in  terms  of  psychological,  sociological  and  biological  forces.  But  the 
self  is  more  than  any  force  or  the  totality  of  forces.  Conceptual  knowledge 
may  throw  some  light  on  man’s  essential  existence  (what  Jaspers  calls 
Existenzerhellung  —‘lighting  up  existence'),  but  it  can  never  directly  illumine 
his  self. 

Aurobindo,  however,  goes  beyond  Jaspers  by  extending  the  possible 
boundaries  of  knowledge  to  include  ultimate  Reality.  Jaspers  seems  to  deny 
the  possibility  of  man  ever  really  having  any  direct  and  immediate  conscious¬ 
ness  and  thus  knowledge  of  what  he  calls  the  Transcendence — ultimate 
Reality;  avc  must  instead  rely  on  symbolic  revelations  (‘ciphers’)  (vide  D.  E. 
Roberts,  Existentialism  and  Religious  Belief,  New  York,  1957,  pp.  257-68). 
Being  itself  forever  transcends  us;  there  is  ever  a  hiatus  between  human 
consciousness  and  the  Ultimate.  Aurobindo  would  agree  with  Jaspers's 
insistence  that  no  predicates  derived  from  ordinary  knowledge  and  experience 
are  applicable  to  Bcing-Itsclf.  For  as  the  ancients  declared,  all  that  can  be 
said  of  Brahman  is  ‘neti,  neti!’ — 'not  this,  not  this!'  But,  on  the  other  hand, 
men  can  and  do  have  an  experience  of  ultimate  Reality  and  are  compelled  to 
express  that  experience  in  word  and  deed  even  though  the  expression  is 
always  inadequate  to  the  original  experience.  There  is  a  verifiable  conscious 
experience  of  the  Many  in  the  One  and  the  One  becoming  the  Many,  of  the 
absolute  unity  of  all  modes  of  reality  contained  in  Being-Itself. 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 


difficult  to  assess  fully  the  indispensable  role  played  by 
rationalistic  materialism  in  leading  man  to  true  knowledge.  By 
its  insistence  upon  a  chastened  and  disciplined  intellect  in 
dealing  with  natural  phenomena  it  has  saved  us  from  much 
superstition  and  irrational  dogma  which  in  the  past  often 
impeded  the  advance  of  knowledge.  As  Aurobindo  declares: 
'It  is  necessary,  therefore,  that  advancing  Knowledge  should 
base  herself  on  a  clear,  pure  and  disciplined  intellect.  ...  It 
may  even  be  said  that  the  supraphysical  can  only  be  really 
mastered  in  its  fullness — to  its  heights  we  can  always  reach — 
when  we  keep  our  feet  firmly  on  the  physical/1 

Granting  the  relative  value  and  truth  of  the  materialistic 
critique  of  knowledge,  we  must  yet  not  lose  sight  of  the  fact 
that  behind  physical  nature  is  a  supraphysical  force.  Matter  is 
not  the  sole  or  fundamental  reality;  it  is  but  the  structure  of  a 
primal  energy,  of  conscious  force.  The  exclusively  materialistic 
interpretation  of  existence  reveals  a  one-sided  preoccupation 
with  one  aspect  of  total  reality,  just  as  does  an  exclusive 
concentration  upon  either  life  or  mind  regarded  as  the  sole  and 
fundamental  reality.  Spirit,  the  Self  in  all  things,  is  the  funda¬ 
mental  reality  of  existence.  But  even  asserting  that  fact,  we 
must  not  be  exclusively  preoccupied  with  spirit  if  we  are  to 
achieve  a  truly  integrated  knowledge  of  all  existence. 

Integral  knowledge  is  not  an  intellectual  knowledge  which 
can  be  learned;  it  is  knowledge  which  must  be  experienced  and 
'realized'.  In  the  last  analysis  the  highest  integration  of 
knowledge  can  come  only  through  an  evolution  of  conscious¬ 
ness  which  will  transform  our  total  being — mind,  body  and 
spirit.  To  use  Aurobindo's  own  words: 

...  it  will  mean  the  knowledge  of  the  Absolute  as  the  origin  of  all 
things;  the  knowledge  of  the  Self,  the  Spirit,  the  Being  and  of  the 
cosmos  as  the  Self’s  becoming,  the  becoming  of  the  Being,  a  mani¬ 
festation  of  the  Spirit;  the  knowledge  of  the  world  as  one  with  us 
in  the  consciousness  of  our  true  self,  thus  cancelling  our  division 
from  it  by  the  separative  idea  and  life  of  ego;  the  knowledge  of  our 
psychic  entity  and  its  immortal  persistence  in  Time  beyond  death 
and  earth-existence;  the  knowledge  of  our  greater  and  inner  existence 
behind  the  surface;  the  knowledge  of  our  mind,  life  and  body  in  its 

1  Aurobindo,  The  Life  Divine,  pp.  12-13. 

182 


The  Integration  of  Knowledge 


true  relation  to  the  self  within  and  the  superconscient  spiritual  and 
supramcntal  being  above  them;  the  knowledge,  finally,  of  the  true 
harmony  and  true  use  of  our  thought,  will  and  action  and  a  change 
of  all  our  nature  into  a  conscious  expression  of  the  truth  of  the 
Spirit,  the  Self,  the  Divinity,  the  integral  spiritual  Reality.1 

1  Aurobindo,  The  Life  Divine ,  p.  584. 


183 


15 


INDRA  SEN 

The  Indian  Approach  to  Psychology 


In  order  to  be  able  to  understand  the  distinctive  Indian 
approach  to  psychology  and  evaluate  its  insights  and  judg¬ 
ments,  it  is  necessary  that  we  must  not  allow  ourselves  to  be 
limited  by  any  of  the  particular  conceptions  and  definitions  of 
psychology  evolved  in  recent  years  and  current  now.  All  great 
cultures  of  world  history  present  distinctive  patterns,  and 
their  motivations  in  the  pursuit  of  life  and  knowledge  have 
been  peculiar  to  them.  The  scientific  age,  whose  child  modern 
psychology  is,  has  been  essentially  built  upon  a  concept  of 
nature,  a  method  of  analysis  and  experimentation  and  a 
separation  of  the  empirical  from  the  Real.  Indian  culture,  on 
the  other  hand,  founded  itself  on  the  idea  of  the  unity  of  all 
existence,  and  all  disciplines  of  knowledge  were  to  it  different 
approaches  to  and  expressions  of  the  same  ultimate  Reality. 
Here  the  empirical  was  an  intimate  part  of  the  Real,  the 
theoretical,  the  seeking  for  knowledge  as  such,  essentially 
bound  up  with  the  practical,  the  seeking  for  growth  in  conscious¬ 
ness,  and  psychology,  in  particular,  was  closely  connected  with 
ethics  and  metaphysics.  Evidently,  if  we  wish  to  understand 
Indian  psychology,  we  cannot  afford  to  take  the  approach  of 
any  such  concept  of  psychology,  which  excludes  by  assumption 
any  part  of  the  data,  methods  or  judgments  of  Indian  psycho¬ 
logy.  We  must,  therefore,  take  psychology  in  the  broadest, 
widest  and  a  plastic  sense  as  a  discipline  of  life  and  knowledge 
concerned  with  human  personality  and  its  consciousness.  This 
is,  however,  altogether  provisional  and  experimental,  intended 
to  facilitate  the  best  perception  and  appreciation  of  things 
psychological  in  Indian  culture,  life  and  knowledge. 

184 


The  Indian  Approach  to  Psychology 


There  is  no  doubt  that  psychology  has  been  a  great  and 
persistent  interest  in  India.  Its  expression  has  been  the 
characteristic  Indian  seeking  of  Almanam  Viddhi  (Know 
Thyself).  This  seeking  has  been  perhaps  the  strongest  and  the 
most  popular  in  all  Indian  culture  and  it  differentiated  itself 
out  in  innumerable  forms  resulting  in  a  large  number  of 
sddhands  or  yogas.  These  sadhands  or  yogas  are  often  present 
as  an  integral  part  of  almost  all  philosophies  as  well  as  religions, 
and  also  as  independent  disciplines  of  knowledge.  These  are 
essentially  psychological  in  their  standpx>int,  method,  scope 
and  important  judgments,  since  the  human  consciousness  is 
their  essential  concern.  They  study  the  human  consciousness 
in  its  present  form  as  also  its  possibilities  of  growth  and 
perfection.  In  doing  so  introspection  is  the  essential  and  the 
most  important  method  and  the  human  experience  in  the 
widest  and  the  highest  ranges  is  the  scope.  And  the  judgments 
they  arrive  at  all  concern  human  personality,  at  its  average 
level  as  well  as  the  highest  level.  Thus  psychology  has  been  a 
traditional  interest  in  India  and  introspection  is  almost  a 
national  habit.  However,  its  form  has  been  distinctive  and  it 
needs  to  be  properly  formulated  so  that  it  may  be  correctly 
understood  and  appreciated. 

Not  only  has  psychology  been  a  great  interest,  it  even 
determined  the  standpoint  for  philosophy  and  religion  in  India. 
Philosophy  and  religion  here  have  conceded  that  truths,  in 
order  to  be  real,  must  admit  of  being  experienced.  Thus,  they 
submit  to  the  test  of  psychological  experience  as  the  last  proof 
of  validity.  Psychology,  therefore,  enters  intimately  into  the 
structure  and  thought  of  philosophy  as  well  as  religion.  The 
advantage  of  it  to  them  has  been  very  great.  They  have 
remained  close  to  life.  They  have  really  guided  life  and  have 
been  themselves  moulded  and  modified  by  it.  But  that  shows 
that  the  standpoint  of  psychology,  that  of  conscious  experience, 
was  widely  determining  for  Indian  life  and  culture. 

It  is  evident  that  "Know  Thyself  has  been  the  basic  urge 
for  psychology  in  India  and  that  the  different  systems  of 
sddhana  and  yoga  are  the  Indian  counterpart  of  Western 
psychology.  Now,  what  has  been  their  characteristic  approach? 

The  approach  of  Indian  psychology,  covering  under  the 

185 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 


term  all  the  systems  of  sddhana  or  yoga  existing  either  as 
independent  formulations  and  treatments  of  psychological 
issues  or  as  integral  parts  of  philosophy  and  religion,  shows  a 
certain  community  of  outlook  and  we  will  have  to  define  it 
carefully.  Western  psychology  is  a  natural  science.  It  deals 
with  the  phenomena  of  mind  and  behaviour.  The  psychologist 
treats  them  as  objects,  impersonal  events  and  as  they  are.  In 
Indian  psychology,  the  psychological  interest  seems  to  take 
the  form:  ‘What  1  am  at  present,  what  I  can  become  in  future, 
and  howT  can  that  be  achieved? '  This  seems  to  be  the  essential 
attitude  of  the  yogic  systems  and  the  same  they  tend  to  evoke 
in  the  mind  of  a  student.  In  this  attitude  the  theoretical  and 
the  practical  motives  of  life  are  combined.  However,  both  of 
them  are  to  be  disinterested.  The  practical  is  not  utilitarian. 
It  is  that  of  seeking  growih  of  life  and  consciousness  for  its  own 
sake.  The  same  is  true  of  Indian  philosophy  too.  There 
knowledge  of  existence  as  such  is  not  entirely  satisfying.  That 
is  to  enable  and  facilitate  the  growth  of  personal  life  to  the 
status  of  Reality.  The  knowledge  of  Reality  is  not  divorced 
from  the  will  to  be  real  as  Reality  is.  This  personal  will  to  grow 
is  considered  necessary  on  another  ground  also.  Sri  Aurobindo 
argues  with  evident  cogency  that  ‘the  capacity  to  know  should 
be  equal  to  the  object  to  be  known'.  Ultimate  Reality,  which 
is  infinite,  requires  other  cognitive  functions  to  those  adapted 
to  the  perception  of  the  finite  objects.  These  must  be  developed 
as  a  part  of  the  philosophical  seeking  to  know  ultimate  Reality. 
Otherwise  this  seeking  itself  cannot  succeed.  On  this  account, 
some  Western  thinkers  continue  to  hold  that  Indian  philosophy 
is  not  philosophy.  It  is  religion.  We  have  here,  in  fact,  two 
standpoints  as  to  the  relation  of  the  theoretical  and  the 
practical.  The  aforesaid  argument  applies  to  our  knowledge  of 
personality  too.  So  far  as  the  normal  functions  of  the  waking 
consciousness  are  concerned  our  normal  introspection  is 
adequate.  But  if  we  wish  to  have  a  direct  access  to  the  sub¬ 
conscious  or  the  superconscious,  then  certain  distinct  develop¬ 
ments  of  introspection  are  needed. 

In  a  sense  and  degree  this  emphasis  of  Indian  philosophy 
and  psychology  on  the  growth  and  perfection  of  the  knower  is 
admitted  by  Western  science.  The  scientist  has  to  be  trained 

186 


The  Indian  Approach  to  Psychology 

to  observe.  He  must  learn  to  be  dispassionate  and  impartial. 
Bacon  had  wanted  the  scientific  investigator  to  free  his  mind 
from  a  number  of  deep-seated  prejudices.  However,  the  Indian 
demand  is  much  greater  and  if  that  is  incorporated  into 
psychology,  psychology  will  become  a  system  of  yoga  and  a 
student  of  psychology  an  aspiring  practitioner  of  yoga. 

Indian  psychology  is,  therefore,  deliberately  not  a  natural 
science  concerned  with  the  'is'  of  mental  life.  It  is  also  not  a 
normative  science  concerned  with  the  'ought',  the  ideal  alone. 
It  is,  we  might  say,  a  science  of  the  'becoming'  of  conscious 
life,  that  of  growth  from  the  actual  to  the  possible.  This 
characterization  gives  us  the  first  determinant  of  the  Indian 
approach  to  psychology. 

The  second  factor  in  the  approach  may  be  described  as  the 
insistence  on  taking  conscious  life  as  a  whole  and  refusing  to 
be  limited  to  the  empirical  function  of  the  waking  consciousness 
alone.  The  empirical  and  the  real  are  a  single  unity  to  the 
Indian  standpoint.  It,  therefore,  does  not  divide  and  separate 
the  two.  In  fact,  it  rightly  seeks  the  true  explanations  of  the 
empirical  issues  in  the  Real.  However,  the  Real  is  for  psychology 
as  even  for  philosophy  not  a  speculative  reference,  but  a  fact 
to  be  experienced.  Thus,  the  soul  in  psychology  is  no  mere 
metaphysical  assumption  or  affirmation.  It  is  the  self-existent 
consciousness,  as  distinct  from  the  environment-dependent 
consciousness  of  mind,  which  can,  through  proper  training  and 
discipline,  be  experienced,  as  we  do  our  normal  mental 
processes. 

In  the  West,  Jung  is  the  one  psychologist  who  has  had  the 
urge  and  the  impulse  to  inquire  into  the  nature  of  personality 
to  its  very  roots.  And  this  he  has  carried  out  by  means  of  the 
various  pathways  of  dreams,  cultural  history,  mythology  and 
analysis.  By  all  these  he  finds  himself  impelled  to  posit  a 
'centre'  in  personality,  which  he  endows  with  the  capacity  of 
integrating  all  the  experiences  of  life.  This  'centre'  is  a  unique 
fact  and  is  the  basis  of  all  uniqueness  in  the  manifestations  of 
personality.  Now  this  centre  is,  to  Jung,  a  matter  of  inference, 
a  logical  necessity  inherent  in  certain  processes  of  the  empirical 
consciousness,  which  he  has  observed.  This  centre  has  an 
obvious  resemblance  to  the  spirit  or  the  soul  principle  of  the 

187 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 

yogic  disciplines.  But  to  them  spirit  or  soul  is  an  objective  of 
experience  and  until  it  is  experienced,  yoga  remains  unsuccess¬ 
ful.  Hence,  it  is  not  quite  correct  to  compare  yogic  psychology 
with  the  metaphysical  psychology  of  the  West.  Indian  psycho¬ 
logy  is  all  empirical,  only  the  term  empirical  is  not  taken  as 
implying  the  experience  of  the  normal  waking  consciousness, 
but  all  experience,  normal  as  well  as  supernormal. 

The  attitude  of  taking  conscious  life  as  a  whole  and  the 
refusal  to  limit  the  approach  to  the  process  of  the  waking 
consciousness  has  enabled  Indian  psychology  to  recognize  the 
bohirmukha  manas  (the  outward-directed  mental  conscious¬ 
ness)  as  only  a  part  of  our  conscious  life  and  discover  besides 
it  a  field  of  the  samskdras,  the  past  experiences,  and  a  large 
and  wide  realm  of  the  superconscious,  a  field  of  consciousness 
marked  by  a  higher  degree  of  luminosity  and  integration  or 
unity.  These  spheres  are  evidently  interrelated  and  the  prob¬ 
lems  of  the  one  cannot  be  satisfactorily  answered  in  terms  of 
its  own  limited  experience.  The  problems  of  conflict  and 
integration  of  the  waking  consciousness  surely  have  a  relation 
to  the  superconscious,  where  integration  exists  as  a  fact. 
Indian  psychology  has  been  extremely  happy  in  taking  a 
larger  approach  to  personality  and  its  discovery  of  the  dimen¬ 
sions  of  personality,  in  particular  of  the  superconscious,  which 
is  of  great  promise  so  far  as  some  of  the  most  difficult 
problems  of  conflict  and  division  of  normal  personality  are 
concerned.  The  same  has  enabled  it  to  give  to  the  mental 
consciousness  its  place  as  a  part  in  the  whole  of  personality. 
In  Western  psychology  this  part  has  become  the  whole  and 
thus  arise  many  of  its  insoluble  problems. 

The  third  feature  of  the  Indian  approach  can  be  mentioned 
as  its  emphasis  on  the  supernormal  and  the  possible  of  the 
human  nature.  This  it  does  to  such  an  extent  that  the  normal 
and  the  actual  human  nature,  which  is  the  whole  matter  for 
Western  psychology,  seems  to  receive  a  scanty  treatment. 
Indeed,  we  do  not  have  the  wealth  of  detail  and  classification 
of  the  normal  processes  in  Indian  psychology  as  we  have  in 
Western  psychology.  But  the  control,  power  and  effective 
modification  is  more  in  Indian  psychology.  This  is  due  to  the 
fact  that  while  it  does  not  seem  to  have  cared  for  the  detailed 

1 88 


The  Indian  Approach  to  Psychology 


conditions  of  the  differentiations  of  mental  processes,  it  has 
had  a  firm  hold  over  the  essential  dynamism  of  them  all.  For 
example,  the  willing  aspect  of  mind  has  been  identified  as 
involving  impulse,  habit,  instinct,  voluntary  action,  and  then 
under  each  of  them  we  have  a  wealth  of  detail.  Indian  psy¬ 
chology,  as  in  particular  represented  in  the  Gita,  considers 
them  all  under  the  principle  of  desire.  'Desire'  is  to  it  a 
fragmentary  willing,  the  willing  of  a  part  of  our  personality  for 
a  particular  finite  object.  It  is  accompanied  by  a  sense  of  want 
and  deficiency  and  it  seeks  an  external  object  or  satisfaction. 
Further,  desires  are  innumerable  and  they  involve  essentially 
a  principle  of  opposition  or  dualism,  divandwa.  Such  is  the 
picture  of  normal  human  life — an  indefinite  number  of  desires 
for  all  sorts  of  objects  with  an  essential  dualism  existing  among 
them.  The  problem  presented  by  them  is  that  of  integration, 
how  this  state  of  multitudinous  willing  can  be  changed  into  a 
state  of  whole-willing.  In  answering  this  question  Indian 
psychology  is  in  an  entirely  happy  and  confident  state.  The 
individual  must  dissociate  himself  from  the  fragmentary 
willing  of  desires  and  seek  to  live  and  act  out  of  a  state  of 
wholeness.  That  is  the  state  of  desirelessness,  when  described 
with  reference  to  desires.  Most  Indian  sadhands  and  yogas 
are  agreed  on  their  reading  of  desire  and  the  necessity  of 
achieving  for  human  living  progressive  integration  and  ulti¬ 
mately  a  state  of  felt  and  lived  wholeness.  They,  however, 
have  their  distinctive  means  and  methods  for  achieving  it.  We 
cannot  say  that  Western  psychology  is  equally  confident  as  to 
the  possibility  of  integration  and  wholeness  and  the  means  of 
achieving  it.  Now  while  Western  psychology  has  a  greater 
fullness  of  knowledge  of  the  conative  processes,  Indian 
psychology  is  in  possession  of  the  essential  key  and  the  per¬ 
spective,  which  gives  it  greater  confidence  in  being  able  to 
answer  to  the  essential  problem  of  practical  living,  education 
and  culture. 

Similarly,  on  cognitive  and  affective  aspects  Indian  psy¬ 
chology  lacks  vast  detail,  but  it  possesses  the  essential 
dynamism. 

Life  is  not  a  static  fact.  It  is  a  movement  of  growth.  It  is 
perhaps  the  appreciation  of  this  fact  that  made  Indian 

189 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 

psychology  look  at  personality  as  it  is  tending  to  become  and 
not  lay  an  exclusive  sort  of  emphasis  on  what  mental  life 
actually  is.  At  any  rate  much  of  the  descriptive  detail  of 
Western  psychology  is  due  to  the  avowed  motive  to  analyse 
and  study  it  as  it  is.  And  that  really  means  missing  the 
essential  movement  of  life  and  consciousness,  its  trend  for 
growth. 

Teleological  determination  or  goal-seekingness  is  recognized 
in  Western  psychology  as  the  essential  attribute  of  mind  as 
distinguished  from  matter.  McDougall  seeks  to  give  to  this 
characteristic  the  first  place  in  his  psychological  studies  and, 
therefore,  chooses  to  call  his  standpoint  purposivism.  But  it  is 
interesting  how  his  purposivism  falls  back  upon  the  psycho¬ 
physical  antecedents  of  instincts  to  explain  the  growth  of  the 
entire  cultural  life  of  the  human  adult.  In  contrast  to  this  the 
purposivism  of  Indian  psychology  affirms  the  quality  of 
wholeness  of  the  superconscious  as  the  true  goal  and  all  life  is 
growth  towards  it  and  into  it.  Instincts  are  past  determinations. 
They  are  not  goals.  They  are  adaptations  already  achieved, 
which  must  now  be  modified  into  the  form  of  an  integrated 
consciousness. 

We  have  here  in  Indian  psychology  a  purposivism  of  a 
challenging  kind,  a  purposivism  which  throws  other  purposiv- 
isms  into  the  category  of  mechanical  determinations. 

It  is  the  distinctive  ideas  of  causation  of  the  East  and  West 
that  have  led  to  these  differentiations.  In  the  West  the  cause 
is  the  antecedent  and  so  strong  has  been  this  idea  that,  when 
one  thinks  of  a  purpose,  that  too  is  sought  to  be  reduced  to  an 
antecedent  condition.  In  the  East  all  growth  is  from  or  in 
something  and  it  is  towards  something.  One  is  the  base,  the 
other  is  the  goal.  The  goal  is  also  a  fact  of  consciousness  already 
existing,  which  exercises  its  own  force  and  influence  on  the 
process  of  growth.  The  Upanisads  describe  the  cosmos  as  an 
aswatha  tree  with  roots  above.  The  cosmos  as  a  process  of 
growth  considered  from  below  consists  of  the  anna ,  the  prana 
and  the  manas  (matter,  life  and  mind),  but  the  process  of 
growth  has  been  essentially  drawn  out  and  determined  by 
what  is  above  it.  The  higher  and  the  lower  both  co-operate  in 
a  process  of  growth  and  the  higher  is  the  true  purposive  factor 

190 


The  Indian  Approach  to  Psychology 

and  the  lower  and  its  conditions  of  working  constitute  the 
mechanical. 

Indian  thought  has  an  essential  truth  on  this  point  and  the 
same  gives  a  great  strength  of  insight  to  Indian  psychology  so 
far  as  the  growth  of  human  personality  is  concerned. 

These  are  a  few  most  important  general  features  of  Indian 
psychology.  The  concept  of  the  different  dimensions  of  con¬ 
sciousness  is  almost  innate  to  it.  The  waking  consciousness 
carries  with  it  the  subconscious  and  the  superconscious  parts. 
An  integralism  is  thus  characteristic  of  all  Indian  psychology. 
However,  at  the  hands  of  Sri  Aurobindo,  it  receives  an  elabo¬ 
rate  treatment,  which  enables  Indian  psychology  to  take  the 
form  of  a  well-developed  integral  psychology.  This  paper  is  no 
more  than  a  broad  characterization  of  the  background  of  the 
psychological  system  of  Sri  Aurobindo. 


i6 


RICHARD  P.  MARSH 

The  Organismic  Psychology  of  Andras  Angyal 
in  Relation  to  Sri  Aurobindo’s  Philosophy 
of  Integral  Nondualism 


Comparative  studies  of  Eastern  and  Western  psychological 
and  religious  concepts  often  make  references  to  the  works  of 
Dr  C.  G.  Jung,  the  founder  of  analytical  psychology.  This  is 
altogether  proper.  Dr  Jung,  as  is  well  known,  has  undertaken 
various  forms  of  psychological  research  with  an  inevitable 
appeal  to  students  of  Asian  thought.  He  has,  in  addition, 
communicated  the  results  of  his  research  with  a  sensitivity  and 
a  resourcefulness  which  have  added  to  their  appeal. 

Similarly,  the  achievement  of  Sri  Aurobindo  in  creating  the 
philosophy  of  integral  nondualism,  a  remarkable  blend  of 
original  thought  with  much  that  is  first  rate  and  enduring  in 
both  the  Eastern  and  the  Western  traditions,  has  led  to  cross 
comparisons  from  the  other  side.  In  reading  Aurobindo,  one 
constantly  experiences  the  shock  of  recognition.  It  is  as  though 
in  Aurobindo  one  had  rediscovered  the  West,  or  as  if  one  had 
come  across  a  new  Dr  Jung  with  a  startling  new  vocabulary 
and  a  curiously  vivid  and  massive  style.  So  much  of  Jung  is 
there,  although  cut  to  the  pattern  of  a  different  idiom:  the 
phenomenon  of  introversion,  the  concept  of  the  collective 
unconscious,  the  relationship  of  ego  to  self,  even  in  a  sense  the 
classification  into  psychological  types — these  and  more  are  in 
Aurobindo,  inviting  comparison. 

But  scholars,  in  their  attempts  to  spread  enlightenment  by 
tracing  the  parallels  between  these  two  giants,  have  tended  to 

192 


The  Organismic  Psychology  of  Andras  Angyal 


lose  sight  of  the  fact  that  the  universality  of  Aurobindo’s 
thought  is  such  that  echoes  of  it  may  be  found  in  systems  of 
Western  psychology  quite  apart  from  Dr  Jung's.  If  Aurobindo's 
insights  into  general  human  nature  are  valid — and  this  writer 
believes  that  they  are — then  inevitably  the  insights  not  merely 
of  one  but  of  many  Western  psychologists  are  bound  to 
approach  them  sooner  or  later. 

Many  insights  approaching  those  of  Aurobindo  have  already 
occurred,  in  fact,  among  that  large  body  of  European  and 
American  psychologists  who  constitute  what  is  sometimes 
loosely  referred  to  as  'the  organismic  school'.  The  integralism 
of  Sri  Aurobindo  and  the  organismic,  holistic  thinking  of  this 
school  are  radically  related.  This  is  not  surprising  in  view  of 
the  fact  that  the  organismic  viewpoint  has  emerged  as  a  reaction 
against  earlier  dualistic  and  pluralistic  attempts  to  frag¬ 
mentize  the  unfragmentizable  individual. 

In  their  recently  published  survey  of  contemporary  per¬ 
sonality  theories,  Calvin  S.  Hall  and  Gardner  Lindzey  have 
described  the  emergence  of  organismic  psychology  in  these 
words: 

Ever  since  Descartes  in  the  seventeenth  century  split  the  indi¬ 
vidual  into  two  separate  yet  interacting  entities,  body  and  mind, 
and  Wundt  in  the  nineteenth  century,  subscribing  to  the  tradition 
of  British  associationism,  atomized  the  mind  by  reducing  it  to  the 
elementary  particles  of  sensations,  feelings,  and  images,  there  have 
been  recurrent  attempts  to  put  the  mind  and  the  body  back  together 
and  to  treat  the  organism  as  a  unified,  organized  whole.  One  notable 
attempt  which  has  attracted  a  large  following  within  recent  years 
is  known  as  the  organismic  or  holistic  viewpoint.1 

That  this  attempt  to  restore  wholeness  where  fragmentation 
has  existed  is  perfectly  in  keeping  with  the  thought  of  Sri 
Aurobindo  is  apparent  to  anyone  who  has  read  The  Life 
Divine  or  any  of  Aurobindo's  major  works.  It  is  also  the  thesis 
of  this  paper. 

The  similarity  of  organismic  theory  to  integralism  is  evident 
from  a  survey  of  the  chief  tenets  of  the  former.  The  essence  of 

*  Calvin  S.  Hall  and  Gardner  Lindzey,  Theories  of  Personality  (New  York: 
John  Wiley  &  Sons,  1957),  P-  29^. 


G 


193 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 

organismic  theory  is  that  the  human  organism  is  a  unity,  a 
psycho-physical  system  in  which  the  part  and  the  whole  are 
inseparable  so  that  what  affects  the  one  affects  the  other  as 
well.  It  sees  the  organism  as  a  body-mind  unit  which,  although 
it  may  be  studied  from  one  point  of  view  by  the  physiologist, 
and  from  other  points  of  view  by  the  psychologist,  the  socio¬ 
logist,  the  anthropologist,  and  the  like,  may  not  be  studied 
successfully  from  any  of  these  points  of  view  in  isolation. 

Because  of  this  preference  for  studying  the  individual  in 
his  totality,  organismic  theory  stresses  the  integration  and 
coherence  of  the  normal  personality  rather  than  the  disorganiza¬ 
tion  of  pathological  states  so  commonly  emphasized  by  many 
other  theories — the  Freudian,  for  example — which  have  taken 
disease  as  their  starting  point. 

Likewise,  because  it  prefers  to  start  with  the  whole  and 
proceed  to  the  part,  organismic  theory  may  be  contrasted  to 
the  behaviouristic  and  the  stimulus-response  systems  of 
psychology,  which  prefer  to  start  with  isolated  data — and 
which  consequently  often  remain  at  the  level  of  the  part  and 
so  fail  to  attain  to  the  level  of  the  whole. 

As  a  result  of  this  emphasis  on  the  organism  in  the  round, 
organismic  theory  draws  extremely  close  to  integral  non¬ 
dualism  at  a  crucial  point;  it  ‘assumes  that  the  individual  is 
motivated  by  one  sovereign  drive  rather  than  by  a  plurality  of 
drives'.1  To  this  sovereign  motive,  Dr  Kurt  Goldstein,  one  of 
the  leading  proponents  of  organismic  theory,  has  applied  the 
terms  self-actualization  and  self-realization.  The  concept  of 
self-actualization  presupposes  that  there  is  at  work  within  the 
individual  a  prior  drift,  an  innate  tendency  towards  wholeness, 
which  operates  in  such  a  way  that  the  individual  normally 
moves  towards  the  realization  of  his  inherent  potentials. 

The  individual  in  his  developed  form  is  thus  not  the  result 
of  a  mechanical  interaction  with  his  environment.  In  part,  to 
be  sure,  his  development  is  a  function  of  his  environment.  But 
the  drive  towards  self-actualization  is  logically  prior  to  the 
impact  of  the  environment;  consequently,  the  individual 
responds  to  his  environment  selectively.  Therefore,  unless  the 
environment  is  hopelessly  inadequate,  the  individual  will 

1  Theories  of  Personality,  p.  298. 

194 


The  Organismic  Psychology  of  Andras  Angyal 

select  those  elements  in  it  to  react  to  which  will  move 
him  relentlessly  in  the  direction  of  the  self  that  he  poten¬ 
tially  is. 

It  is  possible  to  see  in  this  a  parallel  to  the  doctrine  of  llld 
as  developed  by  Sri  Aurobindo,  the  doctrine  of  divine  play 
which  gives  rise  to  the  struggles  of  the  isolated  individual  in 
the  relentless  upward  thrust  by  which  he  co-operates  with  the 
awakening  divinity  within  and  eventually  transcends  his 
isolation  in  the  attainment  of  the  supramental  self.  It  may  also 
be  apparent  by  now  that  organismic  psychology  is  very  much 
in  harmony  with  some  of  the  basic  tenets  of  C.  G.  Jung  and 
that  Jung  might  well  be  classified  among  the  organismic 
theorists  of  personality. 

In  point  of  fact,  he  has  often  been  so  classified,  together  with 
a  host  of  other  contemporary  personality  theorists.  The  list  of 
names  is  long:  not  only  Jung  and  Goldstein,  but  Angyal, 
Maslow,  Lecky,  Allport,  Murray,  Murphy,  Rogers,  Freud,  and 
many  others,  despite  radical  differences,  have  in  one  sense  or 
other  an  organismic  orientation.  Indeed,  as  Hall  and  Lindzey 
ask,  'Who  is  there  today  who  is  not  a  proponent  of  the  main 
tenets  of  organismic  theory  .  .  .  P’1  Some,  however,  have  been 
identified  so  closely  with  organismic  theory  that  they  have 
received  the  label  of  organismic  theorists  per  se. 

Among  these,  none  has  developed  a  model  of  the  personality 
which  compares  more  startlingly  with  Sri  Aurobindo's  con¬ 
ception  than  has  Dr  Andras  Angyal.  Dr  Angyal,  formerly  on 
the  faculty  at  Yale  University,  is  now  in  private  practice  as  a 
psychiatrist  in  Boston.  Perhaps  he  would  be  astonished  to  see 
his  name  linked  with  Aurobindo's,  but  consider  for  a  moment 
his  conceptualization  of  the  personality.  To  convey  his  sense 
of  the  totality  of  the  individual,  Angyal  has  coined  the  word 
biosphere.  The  word  refers  to  both  the  individual  and  the 
environment,  'not  as  interacting  parts,  not  as  constituents 
which  have  independent  existence,  but  as  aspects  of  a  single 
reality  which  can  be  separated  only  by  abstraction'.2  It  is 
apparent  from  this  that  Angyal's  view  of  the  personality  is 

1  Theories  of  Personality ,  p.  329. 

a  Andras  Angyal,  Foundations  for  a  Science  of  Personality  (Oxford  Uni¬ 
versity  Press,  1941),  p.  100. 


*95 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 


nondual  with  a  vengeance,  and  to  this  extent  at  least  it  is 
similar  to  Aurobindo's.  But  consider  further. 

The  biosphere  is  seen  as  a  system  of  interlocking  systems  so 
arranged  that  any  given  sub-system  of  the  biosphere  is  both 
the  container  of  lesser  systems  and  the  contained  of  a  greater 
system  or  systems.  The  interplay  of  the  interlocking  systems 
creates  a  tension  which  gives  rise  to  the  energy  which  is  available 
to  the  personality.  Moreover,  the  biosphere  as  a  whole  is 
characterized  by  a  fundamental  polarity  which  gives  rise  to  its 
most  fundamental  energy.  This  polarity  arises  from  the  fact 
that  the  environment  pulls  in  one  direction  and  the  organism 
in  the  other. 

To  these  fundamental  yet  opposed  pulls  of  the  biosphere, 
Angyal  has  given  the  names  of  autonomy  and  homonomy , 
respectively.  Autonomy  is  the  relatively  egoistic  pole  of  the 
biosphere:  it  represents  the  tendency  to  advance  one's  interests 
by  mastering  the  environment,  by  asserting  oneself,  so  to 
speak,  as  a  separate  being.  Homonomy  is  the  relatively  'selfless' 
pole  of  the  biosphere:  it  is  the  tendency  to  fit  oneself  to  the 
environment  by  willingly  subordinating  oneself  to  something 
that  one  perceives  as  larger  than  the  individual  self.  In  place 
of  the  words  autonomy  and  homonomy,  Angyal  has  also  used 
the  terms  self-determination  and  self -surrender  to  describe  these 
opposing  yet  co-operating  directional  trends  of  the  biosphere, 
and  he  has  felicitously  summed  up  the  individual’s  relationship 
to  them  with  the  remark  that,  'the  human  being  comports 
himself  as  if  he  were  a  whole  of  an  intermediate  order’  * 

It  would  be  difficult  to  find  a  closer  parallel  to  Aurobindo's 
way  of  thinking.  For  who  can  fail  to  hear  in  it  a  clear  echo  of 
Aurobindo's  concept  of  the  involution  and  the  evolution — the 
involution  by  which  the  eternal  Brahman  buries  itself  in  the 
dark  centre  of  inconscient  matter  waking  it  to  that  separative 
consciousness  that  provokes  the  individual  ego  to  realize  its 
difference  from  all  other  individual  centres,  the  evolution  by 
which  the  consciousness  reascends  until  the  isolated,  auto¬ 
nomous  ego  is  aroused  to  the  unitary  awareness  of  its  radical 

1  Andras  Angyal,  ‘A  Theoretical  Model  for  Personality  Studies*.  In 
Clark  E.  Moustakas,  ed.,  The  Self:  Explorations  in  Personal  Growth  (New 
York:  Harper  &  Brothers,  1956),  p.  46. 

196 


The  Organismic  Psychology  of  Andras  Angyal 

identity  with  all  other  centres  of  consciousness?  The  individual 
does  indeed  'comport  himself  as  if  he  were  a  whole  of  an 
intermediate  order',  because  that  is  precisely  what  he  is: 
related  on  the  one  side  by  avidyd  or  ignorance,  in  a  principle 
of  separateness,  to  a  world  of  diversity  and  conflicting  entities; 
related  on  the  other,  through  vidyd  or  knowledge,  in  a  principle 
of  homonomy,  to  a  world  of  unity  and  absolute,  seamless 
integration. 

Nor  is  it  fanciful  to  push  the  comparison  this  far.  While 
Angyal  writes  as  an  empirical  scientist  and  therefore  makes  no 
conclusive  statements  about  the  reality  of  a  divine  principle,  he 
specifically  allows  for,  even  emphasizes,  the  possibility.  'The 
superordinate  whole’  sought  by  the  pull  towards  homonomy 

may  be  represented  for  a  person  by  a  social  unit  -family,  clan, 
nation — by  a  cause,  by  an  ideology,  or  by  a  meaningfully  ordered 
universe.  ...  Its  clearest  manifestation,  however,  is  in  the  religious 
attitude  and  religious  experience.1 

Thus,  for  the  individual  at  least,  there  is  no  limit  to  the  trend 
towards  homonomy  except  the  limits  of  his  own  perception, 
awareness,  and  experience. 

Moreover,  it  would  appear  to  be  only  the  limiting  force  of 
one's  own  perception,  awareness,  and  experience  that  sets  up 
the  illusion  of  a  difference,  a  tension,  between  the  poles  of  self- 
determination  and  self-surrender.  If  the  biosphere  is  dominated 
by  the  'single  sovereign  drive’  of  self-actualization — and 
Angyal  agrees  with  Goldstein  that  it  is — how  can  there  be  any 
genuine  split  within  it?  It  would  be  absurd  to  suppose  that  a 
self-actualizing  individual  could  be  the  result  of  a  compromise 
between,  say,  x  per  cent  of  autonomy  and  y  per  cent  of 
homonomy.  Actually,  autonomy  and  homonomy,  like  heredity 
and  environment,  must  be  seen  as  presupposing  each  other  and 
being  therefore  mutually  essential.  Then  it  would  follow  that 
the  fully  self-actualized  person  represents,  not  a  mechanical 
compromise  but  an  integral  fusion  of  ioo  per  cent  autonomy 
and  ioo  per  cent  homonomy  which  is  at  the  basis  of  his  self- 
actualization.  This  is  evident  in  Hall  and  Lindzey's  discussion 


1  The  Self:  Explorations  in  Personal  Growth ,  p.  46. 

I97 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 

of  self  ^expansion,  the  equivalent  in  Angyal’s  system  to  self- 
actualization  in  Goldstein's: 

Although  autonomy  or  self-determination  and  homonomy  or 
self-surrender  may  appear  to  be  opposed  to  one  another,  they  are 
really  two  phases  of  a  more  inclusive  trend  of  the  biosphere,  that  of 
self-expansion  .  .  .  the  chief  system  principle  of  the  biosphere.1 

In  other  words,  since  the  polar  tendencies  of  the  biosphere 
are  merely  ‘phases  of  a  more  inclusive  trend'  they  are  not  in 
reality  opposed  but  rather  they  are  aspects,  conditions,  of  each 
other.  Taken  together,  they  constitute  a  single  phenomenon: 
the  movement  towards  self-expansion.  Moreover,  this  tendency 
towards  wholeness  and  the  ascent  towards  supermind  described 
by  Aurobindo — what  are  these  but  the  same  nondual,  bipolar 
process  glimpsed  from  slightly  different  points  of  view?  Angyal 
tells  us  that  ‘the  human  being  comports  himself  as  if  he  were  a 
whole  of  an  intermediate  order'.  This  carries  the  clearest 
possible  hint  of  Aurobindo's  concept  of  the  overmental  con¬ 
sciousness:  that  global  awareness  which  is  separative  in  its 
action  and  unitary  in  its  knowledge,  tending  simultaneously 
downward  into  the  realm  of  the  autonomous  ego  and  upwards 
into  the  realm  of  homonomy  and  the  eternal  self.  The  double 
and  simultaneous  pull  in  opposite  directions  constitutes  for 
Angyal  the  process  of  self-expansion  by  which  the  biosphere 
constantly  differentiates,  enlarges,  and  unifies  itself.  For 
Aurobindo  it  is  the  process  by  which  individualization,  uni¬ 
versalization,  and  transcendentalization  occur  simultaneously, 
not  as  negations,  but  as  functions,  fulfilments,  of  one  another. 
In  his  words: 

We  have  .  .  .  the  transcendent  and  the  cosmic,  the  universal  and 
the  individual  .  .  .  each  member  of  these  pairs  is  contained  in  its 
apparent  opposite.  The  universal  particularizes  itself  in  the  indi¬ 
vidual;  the  individual  contains  in  himself  all  the  generalities  of  the 
universal.  ...  So  too,  the  cosmic  contains  in  all  itself  and  in  each 
thing  in  it  the  complete  immanence  of  the  transcendent.  .  .  .  The 
transcendent  contains,  manifests,  constitutes  the  cosmos  and  by 


Theories  of  Personality,  pp.  320-1. 

198 


The  Organ ismic  Psychology  of  Andras  Angyal 

manifesting  it  manifests  or  discovers,  as  we  may  say  in  the  old 
poetic  sense  of  that  word,  its  own  infinite  harmonic  varieties.1 

For  both  Angyal  and  Aurobindo,  therefore,  the  self  has 
triple  reference  points.  Angyal  sees  it  as  an  intermediate 
system  containing  lesser  systems  and  contained  by  a  greater. 
Aurobindo  sees  it  as  involving  a  'triple  transformation'  of 
mind  to  overmind  to  supermind.2  This  triplicity  of  the  self, 
moreover,  is  reflected  in  still  another  parallel  between  the 
thought  of  these  two  men. 

Angyal  observes  that  the  personality  has  three  structural 
dimensions.  The  so-called  vertical  dimension,  extending  'from 
overt  behaviour  at  the  surface  of  the  biosphere  down  into  the 
central  core  of  the  biosphere', 3  suggests  the  depth  of  personality 
characteristic  of  the  fully  transcendentalized  individual  in 
Aurobindo's  system  who  has  attained  to  a  realization  of  the 
paramdtman  or  transcendental  self.  The  transverse  dimension, 
consisting  of  'the  co-ordination  of  discrete  acts  into  a  larger, 
better  integrated  and  more  effective  behaviour  unit', 3  suggests 
the  breadth  of  personality  characteristic  of  the  fully  universa¬ 
lized  person  who  has  attained  to  the  realization  of  the  jivdtman 
or  the  individual's  pure  spiritual  self.  And  the  progressive 
dimension,  the  directionality  which  results  when  'a  series  of 
acts  brings  a  person  closer  and  closer  to  a  final  goal',  3  suggests 
the  personal  uniqueness  of  an  individual  who  has  attained  to 
an  effective  working  relationship  with  his  antardtman ,  the 
inner,  private  self  that  leads  one  to  his  specific  destiny. 

But  more  even  than  in  their  agreement  about  the  triple 
nature  of  the  bipolar  personality,  Angyal  and  Aurobindo  meet 
in  their  agreement  about  the  distinguishing  characteristics  of 
the  self-realized  man.  They  are  for  Angyal  the  presence  of 
mastery,  resulting  from  fulfilment  of  the  autonomous  impulse, 
combined  with  the  capacity  to  love  and  be  loved  which  results 
from  the  satisfactory  expression  of  the  pull  towards  homonomy. 
Absence  of  mastery,  in  Angyal's  view,  leads  to  that  peculiar 
feeling  of  powerlessness  so  characteristic  of  modern  regimented 
man.  The  inability  to  love  and  be  loved  is  the  source  of 

1  Aurobindo,  The  Life  Divine,  p.  342.  3  Ibid.,  Chapter  XXV. 

3  Theories  of  Personality,  p.  319. 


199 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 

neurotic  anxiety,  which  in  turn  is  not  so  much  a  'mental 
phenomenon'  as  'a  state  of  limitation  of  life',1  which  narrows 
our  lives  to  impoverished  simulacra  of  what  they  might  have 
been. 

Love  itself  Angyal  analyses  in  a  manner  astonishingly 
reminiscent  of  the  central  tenets  of  integral  nondualism.  It  is 
based  on  a  recognition  of  the  value  and  otherness  of  the  loved 
one  combined  with  an  experience  of  sameness  with  him.2  This 
is  Angyal's  recognition  of  the  phenomenon  of  identity-in¬ 
difference  so  emphasized  by  Aurobindo.  The  loved  one  must 
be  'other'  in  order  to  be  loved  rather  than  merely  identified 
with,  and  yet  also  'the  same’  as  oneself  in  order  not  to  be  alien 
and  therefore  unlovable.  This  is  similar  to  Aurobindo's  con¬ 
ception  of  the  relationship  of  the  individual  to  the  Eternal: 
between  them  there  is  both  a  gulf  that  separates  and  an 
identity  that  unites,  the  gulf  and  the  identity  related  as 
adoration  is  related  to  rapture. 

Aurobindo's  vision  of  the  fulfilled  individual  is  similar  to 
Angyal’s,  although  it  differs  as  a  lightning  flash  differs  from 
the  spurt  of  a  match.  The  light  created  by  the  one  is  supremely 
beyond  that  created  by  the  other,  yet  the  outlines  of  what  they 
illuminate  are  similar.  The  ‘gnostic  being’ 3  which  Aurobindo 
conceives  as  the  goal  of  evolution  emerges  as  a  sort  of  colossal, 
transcendentalized  counterpart  of  the  self-actualized  individual 
described  by  Angyal.  When  he  appears,  he  will  exercise  a  total 
mastery  as  an  autonomous  individual  absolutely  unfettered 
by  a  reluctant  environment  and  his  capacity  to  love  and  be 
loved  through  his  homonomous  identity  with  the  universe  will 
be  guaranteed  by  his  status  as 

an  infinite  and  universal  being  revealing  ...  its  eternal  self  through 
the  significant  form  and  expressive  power  of  an  individual  and 
temporal  self-manifestation. 4 

There  will  be  no  question  of  the  anxiety  which  results  from 
the  separateness  of  the  unloving  and  the  unlovable.  Inevitably, 
the  gnostic  being  will 

1  Angyal,  op.  cit .,  in  The  Self,  pp.  46-7.  3  Ibid.,  p.  54. 

3  Aurobindo,  The  Life  Divine,  Book  II,  Chapter  XXVII. 

4  Ibid.,  p.  884. 


200 


The  Organismic  Psychology  of  Andras  Angyal 

act  in  a  universal  awareness  and  a  harmony  of  his  individual  self 
with  the  total  self,  of  his  individual  will  with  the  total  will,  of  his 
individual  action  with  the  total  action.1 

Thus,  there  will  be  simply  no  difference  between  his  status  as 
separate  from  others  and  his  status  as  identical  with  them. 
The  assertion  of  his  autonomy  will  be  identical  with  the 
assertion  of  his  homonomy.  His  desires,  individually,  will 
correspond  exactly  to  the  universal  intention,  and  he  will  love 
in  the  same  rhythm  as  his  breathing. 

Love  will  be  for  him  the  contact,  meeting,  union  of  self  with  self, 
of  spirit  with  spirit,  a  unification  of  being,  a  power  and  joy  and 
intimacy  and  closeness  of  soul  to  soul,  of  the  One  to  the  One,  a  joy 
of  identity  and  the  consequences  of  a  diverse  identity.2 

It  will  be  out  of  this  very  condition  of  what  might  be  called 
his  absolute  homonomy — that  is,  his  diverse  and  loving 
identity  with  the  One — that  the  limitless  mastery  of  his 
absolute  autonomy  will  arise.  He  will  neither  submit  with 
impotence  to  the  conditions  of  matter  and  social  existence 
which  frustrate  the  individual  who  has  failed  to  achieve 
autonomy  within  the  biosphere,  nor  will  he  impotently  retreat 
from  life  and  the  world  in  the  manner  of  the  loveless  and 
bewildered  ascetic.  Instead: 

The  gnostic  being  will  take  up  the  world  of  Life  and  Matter,  but 
he  will  turn  and  adapt  it  to  his  own  truth  and  purpose  of  existence; 
he  will  mould  life  itself  into  his  own  spiritual  image,  and  this  he  will 
be  able  to  do  because  he  has  the  secret  of  a  spiritual  creation  and  is 
in  communion  and  oneness  with  the  Creator  within  him.3 

Thus,  the  polarity  of  the  biosphere  which  opposes  autonomy 
to  homonomy,  dividing  ego  from  self  and  necessity  from 
freedom,  will  stand  revealed,  in  its  fullest  sense,  as  a  polarity 
which,  in  fact,  combines  rather  than  separates,  or  which 
separates  in  order  only  to  combine.  The  integrally  self- 
actualized  being,  therefore,  instead  of  succumbing  to  the 
conditions  of  matter  or  retreating  from  those  conditions 

1  Aurobindo,  The  Life  Divine,^.  865.  *  Ibid.,  p.874.  3  Ibid.,  p.  868. 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 


altogether  in  a  flight  of  transcendence,  will  freely  manifest 
himself  in  endlessly  varying  forms,  not  so  much  self-actualized 
as  self-actualizing,  never  'completed'  but  creatively  continuing, 
not  'having  arrived'  but  always  arriving. 

To  the  biosphere,  as  Aurobindo  would  have  seen  it,  what 
limits  are  possible?  What  can  lie  beyond  self-actualization  but 
the  self-actualization  beyond? 


202 


PART  THREE 


YOGA  AND  ETHICS 


i7 


PITIRIM  A.  SOROKIN 

The  Integra]  Yoga  of  Sri  Aurobindo 
(1872-1951) 


Ski  Aurobindo’s  integral  yoga  is  an  attempt  to  give  a 
synthesis  of  all  the  main  yogas  and  of  their  philosophies.  It 
endeavours  to  integrate  into  one  system  their  valuable  parts,  as 
well  as  what  is  valuable  in  the  Western  science  and  religions. 
The  main  distinctive  points  of  the  integral  yoga  are  as 
follows: 

(1)  Most  of  the  surveyed  yogas  and  their  philosophies  have 
a  somewhat  negative  attitude  towards  the  world  of  the  senses 
and  our  empirical  life.  The  manifold  sufferings  of  our  life  are 
viewed  by  the  yogas  as  ‘conditioned  by  our  entanglement 
either  in  the  meshes  of  prakrti  (Sdnkhya),  or  in  the  cobwebs 
of  maya  [Sankara  Vedanta),  or  in  the  fetters  of  karma  ( Budd¬ 
hism ).  The  supreme  goal  of  life  must,  therefore,  consist  in  total 
liberation  from  Nature,  in  complete  emancipation  from  the 
bonds  of  prakrti ,  maya,  or  karma/  ‘The  main  endeavour  of 
yoga  has  been  to  realize  mukti  or  transcendental  freedom  by 
rising  above  the  limitations  of  body,  life,  and  mind  which  are 
supposed  to  be  made  of  some  alien  or  illusory  stuff,  and  to  rest 
permanently  in  that  state  of  freedom  on  some  lofty  summit  of 
spiritual  attainment'1  (absorption  in  Brahman,  in  nirvana,  or 
in  ‘kaivalya’,  the  state  of  freedom  from  nature  or  prakrti 
for  ever  and  ever). 

In  difference  from  this,  the  integral  or  purna  yoga  views 
even  the  material  nature  as  a  lower  form  of  the  true  reality — 

*  Chaudliuri,  Sri  Aurobindo:  The  Prophet  of  Life  Divine  (Calcutta:  Sri 
Aurobindo  Pathamandir,  1951),  pp.  44-5. 

205 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 

the  supermind — imperceptibly  passing  into  a  finer  and  finer 
form  of  the  Divine.  In  the  course  of  the  evolution  the  matter 
tends  to  be  increasingly  divinized.  The  trend  towards  diviniza- 
tion  of  the  whole  material  world  is  the  main  trend  of  world 
evolution.  The  prakrti  is  not  separated  from  the  puru$a  by 
an  unbridgeable  chasm,  but  is  a  ‘low-grade7  manifestation 
of  the  Divine  of  which  the  purusa  or  self  is  the  higher  form. 
Respectively,  the  highest  goal  of  a  yogin  is  not  simply  an 
attainment  of  the  transcendental  mukti  or  freedom,  but  an 
active  participation  in  the  creative  joy  of  the  Divine  and 
co-operation  with  it  in  the  divinization  of  the  empirical  world 
and  of  the  whole  ‘embodied  life7,  here  and  now.  As  Chaudhuri 
aptly  says,  the  goal  is  ‘to  live  a  life  of  divine  activity  after  the 
attainment  of  individual  liberation,  so  that  Nature  herself  may 
be  assisted  in  her  liberation,  that  is,  in  the  complete  fruition  of 
the  creative  urge  concealed  in  her  bosom.  .  .  .  Having  reached 
the  pinnacle  of  the  supramental  realization,  the  integral  yogi 
is  again  to  descend;  he  is  to  come  to  the  point  of  his  departure, 
to  the  physical  consciousness,  and  he  is  to  bring  down  there 
the  light  and  power  of  the  supramental  Truth-Consciousness7.1 

‘Our  Yoga7,  says  Sri  Aurobindo,  ‘is  a  double  movement  of 
ascent  and  descent;  one  rises  to  higher  and  higher  levels  of 
consciousness,  but  at  the  same  time  one  brings  down  (the 
divine)  power  not  only  into  mind  and  life,  but  in  the  end  even 
into  the  body.  And  the  highest  of  these  levels  is  .  .  .  the  Super¬ 
mind.  Only  when  that  can  be  brought  down  is  a  divine  trans¬ 
formation  possible  in  the  earth-consciousness.7  s 

Integral  yoga  contends  that  the  union  with  the  divine 
supermind  is  possible  not  only  in  a  spiritual  trance  or  ecstatic 

1  Chaudhuri,  op.  cit.,  p.  46. 

3  Sri  Aurobindo,  The  Riddle  of  This  World,  pp.  2-3,  and  The  Life  Divine , 
pp.  34  ft.,  232  ff.  Passing  by,  it  is  to  be  noted  that  the  idea  of  the  descent  of 
the  liberated  yogin  back  into  the  empirical  world  is  not  so  new  as  Chaudhuri 
says.  In  Buddhist  sutra,  the  ‘ Lankdvatura* ,  we  are  told  that  there  are  two 
classes  of  ‘the  liberated'  or  'enlightened'  yogis:  the  Arhats  who  desire 
Nirvana,  or  quiescent  bliss  only  for  themselves  and  want  to  stay  in  Nirvana 
forever,  and  the  Bodhisattvas  who  after  attaining  the  true  Buddhahood,  do 
not  desire  Nirvana’s  bliss  just  for  themselves,  and  turn  back  or  descend  to 
assist  humanity  in  its  long  road  to  the  Enlightenment  and  Nirvana.  In 
Christianity,  Jesus,  the  Virgin  Mary,  and  some  of  the  saints  and  the  mystics 
also  function  in  this  role.  They  descend  to  humanity  and  help  it  in  its  salvation. 
The  Son  of  God  became  man  in  order  to  help  mankind  in  its  divinization  and 

206 


The  Integral  Yoga  of  Sri  Aurobindo 


samadki  in  which  the  waking  consciousness  fades  out,  but  also 
in  the  state  of  a  full  waking  consciousness  as  well.  Its  objective 
is  not  only  and  not  so  much  a  transcendental  liberation  of  the 
individual,  as  it  is  the  divinization  of  the  whole  embodied  life 
and  the  collective  liberation  of  mankind.  The  purna  yoga 
strives  to  join  hands  with  the  evolutionary,  creative  effort  of 
nature,  through  infusion  of  the  eternal  in  the  temporal,  the 
supermind  in  matter.  It  endeavours  to  transform  the  empirical 
humanity  into  the  divinized  superman;  to  build  progressively 
the  'kindgom  of  God'  in  this  life,  on  this  planet,  here  and  now\ 

In  conformity  with  this  goal,  the  techniques  of  the  integral 
yoga  are  integral  also.  They  consist  mainly  in  dynamic  self- 
identification  of  every  integral  yogin  with  the  supreme  creative 
power — the  supermind  or  the  Divine  Mother,  as  it  is  called 
metaphorically  by  Sri  Aurobindo.  This  supreme  creative 
power  constantly  guides  (behind  the  scene)  the  course  of  the 
evolution  of  nature  and  man,  and  assists  man's  efforts  to  divi¬ 
nize  himself.  The  integral  yoga  strives  to  help  man's  active 
union  and  co-operation  with  the  creative  Divine  in  the  building 
of  the  divinized  supermanhood  on  this  planet.  For  that  purpose 
the  co-operation  of  man’s  aspiration  from  below  and  the  super¬ 
mind's  grace  from  above  is  necessary. 

The  techniques  of  the  purna  yoga  largely  dispense  with  the 
posture  and  breathing  exercises  of  hatha  yoga  and  the  raja 
yoga,  and  to  some  extent  with  Patanjali's  superhuman 
exercises  in  mental  concentration  and  withdrawing  of  the 
senses. 

Likewise,  Integral  Yoga  does  not  believe  that  its  objective 
can  be  reached  exclusively  through  religious  sentiment,  rituals, 
and  endless  repetition  of  the  prayers  and  mantras;  or  exclusively 

salvation.  One  of  the  first  acts  of  Christ  after  his  bodily  death  was  his  descent 
into  and  liberation  of  the  souls  from  the  Inferno. 

Similarly,  the  idea  of  the  evolutionary  divinization  of  the  whole  material 
and  bodily  world  is  also  not  quite  new.  Among  other  thinkers,  Clement  of 
Alexandria,  N.  F.  Fedorov,  and  then  V.  Solovyev,  developed  it  in  as  great 
detail  as  Sri  Aurobindo.  See  N.  F.  Fedorov,  Filosofia  obschevo  dela  (‘The 
Philosophy  of  Common  Cause’)  (new  edition,  Kharbin,  1928-30)  and  V. 
Solovyev,  Lectures  on  God-Man,  ‘The  Justification  of  Good’,  and  the  ‘Spiritual 
Foundations  of  Life’  in  his  IFor/js  (in  Russian)  (St  Petersburg,  second  edition, 
1903),  Vols.  Ill,  VIII;  Eugdne  de  Faye,  Clement  d’Alexandrie  (Paris,  1898), 

pp.  256-93. 


207 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 


through  the  moral  force  of  nonviolence  and  good  deeds;  or  by 
devotion  and  love;  or  wisdom  and  knowledge.  Instead,  its 
techniques  require  a  sort  of  a  synthesis  of  all  these  procedures; 
first,  an  unconditional  opening  and  complete  self-surrender  to 
the  supermind  or  The  Divine  Mother1  and  incessant  co-opera¬ 
tion  with  this  cosmic  creative  power;  second,  'psychization' 
and  then  ‘spiritualization*  of  one's  whole  life — thoughts,  words, 
and  deeds.  Third,  for  stilling  the  storms  and  tumult  in  our 
mental  life  the  integral  yoga  prescribes  effortful  exercises  to 
obtain  successively  four  mental  states:  (i)  quiet;  (2)  calm; 
(3)  peace;  and  (4)  silence.  (This  is  not  fundamentally  different 
from  the  mental  exercises  of  raja  yoga.)  Fourth,  its  Triple 
path'  tries  to  integrate  the  separate  ways  of  raja  yoga,  karma 
yoga,  jnana  yoga,  and  bhakti  yoga;  the  path  of  wisdom  and 
knowledge,  of  love  and  devotion,  and  of  good  deeds  and  work. 
It  tries  to  enlist  and  louse  the  forces  of  thinking,  feeling,  willing, 
emotions,  and  actions.  In  brief,  the  integral  yoga  endeavours  to 
unite  into  one  philosophical,  moral,  and  technical  system  most 
of  the  positive  ideas  and  techniques  of  all  the  other  yogas,  as 
well  as  Eastern  and  Western  philosophies,  science,  and 
techniques. 

In  this  ‘integration'  lies  its  strong  and  weak  points.  Its 
strong  points  have  been  emphasized  above;  the  main  weakness 
is  a  sort  of  eclecticism  that  pervades  especially  the  techniques  of 
integral  yoga.  Rejecting  as  one-sided  the  techniques  of  other 
yogas,  and  trying  to  give  its  own  system  of  techniques,  the 
purna  yoga  hardly  gives  any  of  its  own.  It  simply  puts  together, 
side  by  side,  several  techniques  taken  from  other  yogas. 
Neither  its  prescriptions  of  self-opening  and  self-surrender;  nor 
of  co-operation  with  the  cosmic  power;  nor  psychization  and 
spiritualization;  nor  calming  and  stilling  the  bodily  mind;  nor 
the  triple  path,  are  new.  They  all  are  given  and  developed  in 
other  yogas,  and  in  the  techniques  of  various  ‘mystic  ways' 
outside  of  India.  For  these  reasons  the  integral  yoga  hardly 
contributes  much  that  is  original  to  this  field. 

On  the  other  hand,  by  its  ideological  integration  of  several 
religious,  philosophical,  and  scientific  currents  of  the  East  and 
the  West,  Sri  Aurobindo's  ‘philosophy'  is  a  notable  achievement 
in  this  age  of  considerable  aridity  in  these  areas.  His  attempts 

208 


The  Integral  Yoga  of  Sri  Aurobindo 

to  put  together  various  techniques  of  spiritualization  and 
divinization  of  man  and  humanity  also  make  an  important 
contribution  to  the  field  of  the  techniques.  After  all,  in  some 
way  the  numerous  diverse  procedures  have  to  be  taken  stock 
of,  and  somehow  have  to  be  unified  into  a  system.  If  Sri 
Aurobindo  only  partly  succeeded  in  this  task,  this  partial 
success  is  already  of  some  importance.  The  whole  task  is  so 
gigantic  that  no  single  man  can  achieve  it  in  its  full  totality.  It 
is  up  to  subsequent  intellectual  and  moral  seers  to  bring  it 
nearer  to  its  full  fruition.  So  much  about  the  integral  yoga. 

PERVERTED  TECHNIQUES  OF  THE 
rSEUDO-YOGA  LIBERTINES 

Finally,  in  passing,  the  perverted  techniques  of  the  pseudo¬ 
yoga  libertines  may  be  mentioned.  Once  in  a  while,  in  a  religious 
or  ethical  movement  persons  and  groups  appear  that  pervert 
the  creed,  the  moral  commandments,  and  the  techniques  of 
spiritualization  or  altruization  for  their  own  egoistic  purposes. 
The  objective  result  of  such  a  perversion  is  not  an  altruization 
but  a  demoralization  of  respective  persons  and  groups.  Among 
the  Indian  'denominations',  the  Tantra  or  the  cult  of  the  Great 
Mother  has  been  accused  of  such  perversions.  A  more  careful 
study  has  shown,  however,  that  the  accusations  have  been 
largely  baseless,  so  far  as  the  Tantrika  religion  and  practices 
are  concerned.1  If,  however,  now  and  then  a  few  instances  of 
perversion  occur,  such  rare  cases  happen  in  many  religious, 
political,  and  ethical  movements.  With  this  reservation,  the 
following  examples  illustrate  the  pseudo-yoga  techniques. 

Among  the  Tantrikas  and  in  the  sect  of  the  Sahajiya  in 
Bengal,  a  mystical  eroticism  in  the  form  of  the  maithuna  is 
supposed  to  be  practised.  Connected  with  their  religious  cult,  a 
long  ritual  preparation  takes  place  before  the  sexual  act  is 
permitted.  The  purpose  of  this  preparation  is  to  make  the 
initiated  a  master  of  his  senses  and  desires  by  the  combined 
method  of  'teasing  and  stimulating’  his  sex  passion  and  teaching 
him  at  the  same  time  to  control  it,  especially  at  the  highest 

1  Cf.  on  that  Sir  John  Woodroffe,  Shakti  and  Shakta  (Madras-London, 
1929),  Chapter  XXVII,  et  passim. 


209 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 


moment  of  the  passion.  This  is  achieved  by  the  training  of  the 
initiated  in  a  gradual  approach  to  ‘the  selected  woman*  (nayikd) : 
during  four  months  he  should  serve  her  as  servant,  sleeping  in 
the  same  room,  at  her  feet,  and  not  touching  her;  then  during 
the  next  four  months  he  sleeps  on  her  ‘left  side*,  then  on  her 
‘right  side*,  then  in  embracing  position.  Finally,  he  is  allowed 
to  have  sexual  pleasure — in  order  to  express  Nirvanic  beatitude 
— but  he  must  control  and  stop  the  seminal  emission,  even  to 
make  (by  his  effort)  the  semen  go  back  into  his  body.  Otherwise, 
he  is  supposed  to  be  damned  to  law  of  karma .  All  this  is  followed 
by  some  ideologies  aiming  to  prove  that  by  this  technique  his 
process  of  liberation  is  accelerated,  that  he  receives  some 
experience  of  remote  resemblance  to  egoless  bliss,  and  so  on.1 
In  connection  with  this  maithuna ,  these  groups  have  been 
accused  of  sex  and  other  orgies.  As  mentioned,  a  great  deal  in 
these  accusations  is  either  baseless  or  represents  a  wicked 
misinterpretation  of  the  socially  sanctioned,  religious,  and 
moral  rituals  of  marriage  and  sex  relationships.  A  careful 
study  of  the  sexual  life  of  the  Tantrikas  shows,  if  anything,  a 
much  purer  and  less  loose  sexual  life  among  them  than  that 
among  the  populations  of  Western  accusers. 

Similar  accusations  have  been  made  against  many  sects  and 
movements  in  practically  all  countries,  including  the  West: 
against  the  early  Christians  accused  of  ‘nocturnal  orgies*  by  the 
non-Christians;  against  the  Manichaeans,  the  Montanists,  the 
Priscillianists,  the  Cathari,  the  Waldenses,  the  Antinomians, 
the  Brethren  of  the  Free  Spirit,  and  so  on,  up  to  the  contem¬ 
porary  sects  of  the  Khlysty,  Scopzi  and  others.  Most  of  these 
accusations  have  been  again  baseless.  Once  in  a  while,  however, 
among  these  and  many  other  groups  there  happen  to  be  a  few 
who  have  been  guilty  of  libertinian  perversion  of  their  credos 
and  rituals  for  satisfaction  of  their  lusts  and  sexual 
abnormalities.2 

Whatever  ‘ideological  justifications*  these  libertines  have 
offered,  the  objective  result  has  been  negative  for  our  purposes: 
hardly  any  eminent  altruist,  or  even  spiritual  leader,  has  ever 
emerged  from  these  libertines.  As  a  rule  they  seem  to  have 

1  See  the  details,  literature,  and  sources  in  M.  Eliade,  Yoga,  pp.  209,  212, 
231  ff 238,  243  fL  1  See  on  this  Sir  John  WoodrofTe,  op.  cit.,  pp.  593  fL 


210 


The  Integral  Yoga  of  Sri  Aurobindo 


remained  either  outstanding  egoists,  or  at  best  just  ordinary 
persons  neither  too  altruistic  nor  too  egotistic,  neither  too 
religious  and  spiritual  nor  too  atheistic  and  coarsely  materialis¬ 
tic.  All  such  techniques  are  unfit  for  altruization;  more  often 
than  not  they  are  definitely  harmful  from  this  standpoint.  In 
spite  of  their  ingenious  ideologies,  these  perverted  techniques 
demoralize  and  enervate,  rather  than  integrate  their  prac¬ 
titioners.  With  this  we  may  dismiss  them. 


GENERAL  CONCLUSIONS  ON  THE  YOGA  TECHNIQUES 

For  the  rank  and  file  of  human  beings  the  techniques  of 
Patanjali's  raja  yoga  are  hardly  accessible.  Taken  as  a  whole 
they  far  exceed  the  physical  and  mental  capabilities  of  the 
overwhelming  majority  of  human  individuals.  In  a  diluted  form, 
however,  a  part  of  these  techniques  can  be  practised  by  the 
rank  and  file. 

By  a  very  few  'religious  and  moral  athletes',  the  raja  yoga 
techniques  can  be  fruitfully  used  for  moral  and  spiritual  trans¬ 
figuration;  however,  even  for  these  few  not  all  of  these  tech¬ 
niques  are  equally  good  and  efficacious.  A  combination  of  some 
of  these  techniques  with  those  of  the  other  yogas  and  the  non¬ 
yoga  procedures  seems  to  be  more  practical  for  a  greater  part  of 
even  the  religious  and  moral  leaders. 

For  the  ordinary  human  beings  the  techniques  of  the  karma 
yoga  and  the  bhakti  yoga  seem  to  be  more  suitable  than  those 
of  the  raja  yoga.  The  karma  yoga  techniques  consist  mainly 
in  performance  of  good  deeds  and  altruistic  conduct.  The 
Bhakti  Yoga  techniques  are  based  mainly  on  deep  devotion,  self¬ 
surrender,  and  love  of  God.  The  jnana  yoga  techniques  are 
mainly  intellectual;  the  karma  yoga  techniques  are  predomi¬ 
nantly  'operational',  based  upon  the  retroactive  effects  of  good 
actions  upon  the  mind  and  conduct  of  the  karma  yogin;  while 
the  bhakti  yoga  techniques  are  preponderantly  'emotional 
and  affective',  powered  by  the  fuel  of  devotional  emotions  and 
feelings.  The  techniques  of  good  deeds  and  of  intense  devotion 
to  God  have  been  used  by  millions,  while  the  exacting  tech¬ 
niques  of  the  raja  yoga  have  been  practised  only  by  very  few 
individuals.  The  system  of  the  techniques  of  each  yoga  contains 


211 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 


in  itself  some  of  the  techniques  of  other  yogas.  The  integral 
yoga  of  Sri  Aurobindo  (and  also  the  various  techniques 
practised  by  Ramakrisha)  deliberately  attempts  to  unite  the 
main  techniques  of  all  the  yogas.  In  this  point  the  integral 
yoga  is  on  the  right  track.  The  techniques  should  vary  in 
accordance  with  the  character  of  the  persons  and  groups 
undergoing  altruistic  transformation,  as  we  have  seen.  In  spite 
of  this  variation,  all  the  efficacious  techniques,  and  especially 
those  applied  to  millions  of  the  rank  and  file,  are  to  be  a  unified 
mixture  of  the  techniques  of  all  yogas  and  of  many  non-yoga 
techniques.  They  have  to  contain  some  physical  training, 
some  intellectual  concentration,  meditation,  and  creativity, 
some  emotional  and  affective  self-discipline,  and,  finally,  the 
operational  performance  of  good  deeds.  Besides  the  supra- 
conscious,  they  have  to  use  the  physical,  biological,  intellectual, 
emotional,  volitional,  and  actional  forces  of  an  individual  to 
empower  the  drive  of  the  transformation.  In  brief,  the  most 
efficacious  system  of  techniques  of  altruistic  transformation  is 
always  integral  in  this  or  that  form.  What  sort  of  integration  is 
best  for  what  sorts  of  persons  and  groups  has  to  be  decided  by 
the  experience  of  the  individual  and  by  the  wisdom  of  his 
moral  counsellors. 


212 


i8 


RISHABHCHAND 

The  Philosophical  Basis  of  Integral  Yoga 


The  integral  yoga  of  Sri  Aurobindo  did  not  spring  full-grown 
from  any  philosophical  basis,  like  Minerva  from  the  head  of 
Jove.  It  is  not  the  product  of  any  philosophical  thought  and 
speculation.  It  is  a  natural  outcome  of  Sri  Aurobindo’s  spiritual 
realizations  which,  as  the  following  quotations  will  show,  con¬ 
verged  upon  an  all-inclusive  unity  and  integrality. 

Sri  Aurobindo’s  first  decisive  spiritual  experience  was  of 
Nirvana,  but  curiously  enough,  instead  of  being  an  end  in 
itself,  it  opened  doors  upon  higher  experiences  of  an  increasing 
comprehensiveness. 

.  .  to  reach  Nirvana  was  the  first  radical  result  of  my  own 
Yoga.  It  threw  me  suddenly  into  a  condition  above  and  without 
thought,  unstained  by  any  mental  or  vital  movement;  there 
was  no  ego,  no  real  world — only  when  one  looked  through  the 
immobile  senses,  something  perceived  or  bore  upon  its  sheer 
silence  a  world  of  empty  forms,  materialized  shadows  without 
true  substance.  There  was  no  One  or  many  even,  only  just 
absolutely  That,  featureless,  relationless,  sheer,  indescribable, 
unthinkable,  absolute,  yet  supremely  real  and  solely  real.  This 
was  no  mental  realization  nor  something  glimpsed  somewhere 
above — no  abstraction — it  was  positive,  the  only  positive 
reality — although  not  a  spatial  physical  world,  pervading, 
occupying  or  rather  flooding  and  drowning  this  semblance  of  a 
physical  world,  leaving  no  room  or  space  for  any  reality  but 
itself,  allowing  nothing  else  to  seem  at  all  actual,  positive  or 
substantial.  I  cannot  say  there  was  anything  exhilarating  or 
rapturous  in  the  experience,  as  it  came  to  me — (the  ineffable 

213 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 


Ananda  I  had  years  afterwards) — but  what  it  brought  was  an 
inexpressible  Peace,  a  stupendous  silence,  an  infinity  of  release 
and  freedom.  I  lived  in  that  Nirvana  day  and  night  before  it 
began  to  admit  other  things  into  itself  or  modify  itself  at  all, 
and  the  inner  heart  of  experience,  a  constant  memory  of  it  and 
its  power  to  return  remained  until  in  the  end  it  began  to  dis¬ 
appear  into  a  greater  Superconsciousness  from  above.  But 
meanwhile  realization  added  itself  to  realization  and  fused  itself 
with  this  original  experience.  At  an  early  stage  the  aspect  of  an 
illusory  world  gave  place  to  one  in  which  illusion1  is  only  a  small 
surface  phenomenon  with  an  immense  Divine  Reality  behind 
it  and  a  supreme  Divine  Reality  above  it  and  an  intense  Divine 
Reality  in  the  heart  of  everything  that  had  seemed  at  first  only 
a  cinematic  shape  or  shadow.  And  this  was  no  reimprisonment 
in  the  senses,  no  diminution  or  fall  from  supreme  experience,  it 
came  rather  as  a  constant  heightening  and  widening  of  the 
Truth;  it  was  the  Spirit  that  saw  objects,  not  the  senses,  and 
the  Peace,  the  Silence,  the  freedom  in  Infinity  remained  always 
with  the  world  or  all  worlds  only  as  a  continuous  incident  in  the 
timeless  eternity  of  the  Divine/2 

It  is  clear  from  the  above  description  that  Sri  Aurobindo’s 
yoga  tended  from  the  very  beginning  towards  an  integrality.  It 
did  not  follow  the  beaten  track  of  either  the  yoga  of  knowledge 
or  the  yoga  of  love  and  devotion  or  that  of  will  and  action.  Nor 
was  it  a  mere  synthesis  of  these  different  paths.  It  proceeded 
with  a  progressive  inclusion  and  affirmation,  a  harmonization 
of  the  various,  even  contradictory,  aspects  of  Reality,  and 
hewed  its  way  through  many  an  unexplored  region  of  Spirit 
to  the  supreme  Truth-Consciousness  which  is  the  timeless  origin 
of  all  creation  and  manifestation,  and  the  meeting  ground  of  all 
cosmic  divergences  and  contradictions.  Nirvana  led  to  the 
Divine,  behind  and  above  and  at  the  heart  of  everything.  He 
has  vividly  described  his  realization  of  the  Divine  in  his  famous 
Uttarpara  speech: 

1  Sri  Aurobindo,  Sri  Aurobindo  on  Himself  and  on  the  Mother  (Pondicherry: 
Sri  Aurobindo  Ashram,  1953),  pp.  154  f.:  'In  fact  it  is  not  an  illusion  in  the 
sense  of  an  imposition  of  something  baseless  and  unreal  on  the  consciousness, 
but  a  misinterpretation  by  the  conscious  mind  and  sense  and  a  falsifying 
misuse  of  manifested  existence/  »  Ibid.,  pp.  153-5. 


214 


The  Philosophical  Basis  of  Integral  Yoga 


‘.  .  .  His  strength  again  entered  into  me.  I  looked  at  the  jail 
that  secluded  me  from  men  and  it  was  no  longer  by  its  high 
walls  that  I  was  imprisoned;  no,  it  was  Vasudeva1 *  who 
surrounded  me.  I  walked  under  the  branches  of  the  tree  in 
front  of  my  cell,  but  it  was  not  the  tree,  I  knew  it  was  Vasudeva, 
it  was  Sri  Krishna  whom  I  saw  standing  there  and  holding  over 
me  His  shade.  I  looked  at  the  bars  of  my  cell,  .  .  .  and  again  I 
saw  Vasudeva.  It  was  Narayana3  who  was  guarding  and  standing 
sentry  over  me.  Or  I  lay  on  the  coarse  blankets  that  were  given 
me  for  a  couch  and  felt  the  arms  of  Sri  Krishna  around  me,  the 
arms  of  my  Friend  and  Lover.  This  was  the  first  use  of  the 
deeper  vision  He  gave  me.  I  looked  at  the  prisoners  in  the  jail, 
the  thieves,  the  murderers,  the  swindlers,  and  as  I  looked  at 
them  I  saw  Vasudeva,  it  was  Narayana  whom  I  found  in  those 
darkened  souls  and  misused  bodies/ 3 

Having  realized  the  Divine  everywhere,  within  himself  and 
without,  Sri  Aurobindo  began  his  herculean  ascent  from  level 
to  level  of  spiritual  consciousness  in  quest  of  the  plane  which 
permits  of  a  simultaneous  realization  of  the  divine  status  and 
the  divine  dynamism,  the  eternal  divine  repose  and  the  eternal 
divine  movement,  pravrtti  and  nivrtti,  and  which  can,  by 
transforming  the  physical  consciousness  and  the  material  body 
of  man,  make  him  enjoy  a  complete  and  constant  union  with 
the  Supreme  in  his  active  life  on  earth.  He  ascended  to  the 
higher  mind,  'a  mind  of  Spirit-born  conceptual  knowledge', 
which  is  ‘An  all-awareness  emerging  from  the  original  identity, 
carrying  the  truths  the  identity  held  in  itself,  conceiving 
swiftly,  victoriously,  multitudinously,  formulating  and  by 
self-power  of  the  Idea  effectually  realizing  its  conceptions’. 4 
From  the  higher  mind  he  rose  to  the  illumined  mind  which  is 
not  a  mind  of  higher  thought,  but  of  spiritual  light  and  vision. 
‘Here  the  clarity  of  the  spiritual  intelligence,  its  tranquil 
day-light,  and  illumination  of  the  Spirit:  a  play  of  lightnings 
of  spiritual  truth  and  power  breaks  from  above  into  the 

1  A  name  of  Sri  Krishna. 

*  The  Divine  dwelling  in  the  heart  of  man. 

3  Sri  Aurobindo,  Speeches  (Pondicherry:  Sri  Aurobindo  Ashram  Press, 
1952),  pp.  56-7.  *  Aurobindo,  The  Life  Divine,  p.  835. 

215 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 


consciousness,  ...  a  fiery  ardour  of  realization  and  a  rapturous 
ecstasy  of  knowledge/1  Leaving  the  illumined  mind,  Sri 
Aurobindo  ascended  to  intuition  which  has  a  fourfold  power: 
a  power  of  revelatory  truth-seeing,  a  power  of  inspiration  or 
truth-hearing,  a  power  of  truth-touch  or  immediate  seizing  of 
significance,  and  a  power  of  true  and  automatic  discrimination 
of  the  orderly  and  exact  relation  of  truth  to  truth.2  But  here 
too  Sri  Aurobindo  did  not  find  the  secret  of  the  ultimate 
dynamic  unity  of  the  One  and  the  many,  of  Spirit  and  Matter, 
of  the  transcendent  silence  and  the  universal  movement.  His 
next  ascent  was  to  the  overmind,  which  is  'a  power  of  cosmic 
consciousness'  and  ‘a  principle  of  global  knowledge',  in  which 
‘the  predominance  of  the  centralizing  ego-sense  is  entirely 
subordinated,  lost  in  largeness  of  being  and  finally  abolished; 
a  wide  cosmic  perception  and  feeling  of  a  boundless  universal 
self  and  movement  replaces  it.  .  .  .'3  Speaking  of  the  overmind, 
Sri  Aurobindo  says  that  most  of  the  spiritual  seekers  who  set 
out  to  discover  the  solution  of  the  ultimate  mystery  of 
existence,  stopped  short  at  it,  taking  the  torrential  downpour 
of  its  massed  lustres  for  the  supreme  light,  the  gnosis,  of  the 
creative,  divine  truth-consciousness.  But  the  overmind  failed 
to  give  Sri  Aurobindo  the  all-harmonizing,  all-transforming 
truth  he  was  seeking.  Its  golden  lid,  as  it  is  termed  in  the 
Ha  Upanisad,  hid  the  face  of  the  Truth. 

The  next  stage  of  the  epic  ascent  took  Sri  Aurobindo  quite 
a  number  of  strenuous  years  to  reach.  Passing  through  its  two 
lower  statuses,  he  attained  at  last  to  the  summit  of  the  truth- 
consciousness,  called  rta-cit  in  the  Veda,  and  vijndna  in  the 
Upanisad.  It  is  the  poise  of  Saccidananda  as  the  supreme  Lord, 
Parameswara,  of  the  whole  universe.  It  is  the  highest  integ- 
ralizing  power  and  principle  of  existence.  Sri  Aurobindo  calls 
it  the  Supermind.  In  its  all-revealing  sun-blaze,  all  problems 
of  life  disappear  in  integral  knowledge,  and  life  with  its  ever- 
developing  diversity  is  viewed,  not  as  an  illusion  or  an 
unaccountable  freak  of  chance  or  as  necessity,  but  as  a  creative 
movement  of  the  supramental  force  and  a  perennial  field  for 
the  working  out  or  realization  of  the  infinite  potentialities  of 
Spirit.  It  must  be  noted  here  that  at  each  step  of  the  spiritual 

1  Aurobindo,  The  Life  Divine,  p.  839.  *  Ibid.,  p.  843.  3  Ibid,,  p.  844. 

216 


The  Philosophical  Basis  of  Integral  Yoga 

ascension  of  Sri  Aurobindo's  consciousness,  there  was  a  corre¬ 
sponding  descent  of  the  characteristic  light  and  force  of  the 
plane  attained,  to  change  the  consciousness  and  being  of  Sri 
Aurobindo  into  its  own  image.  He  had  to  pass  through  a  series 
of  conversions  of  his  consciousness  and  transformations  of  his 
being.  The  descent  of  the  supermind  was  the  consummating 
movement.  But  as  it  was  not  a  personal  supramentalization 
that  he  was  seeking  for,  but  the  ascent  of  the  consciousness  of 
humanity  from  mind  to  supermind  as  the  next  inevitable  step 
of  evolution,  he  had  to  wage  a  long  war  with  the  forces  of 
ignorance  and  inconscience  which  still  rule  the  earth-nature. 
The  descent  of  the  supermind  into  matter  and  the  answering 
emergence  of  the  supermind  involved  in  matter  can  alone,  he 
knew,  bring  about  a  radical  transformation  of  the  integral 
being  and  consciousness  of  man  and  the  establishment  of  the 
life  divine  on  earth. 

The  single  secret  of  Sri  Aurobindo’s  conquest  of  the  truth- 
consciousness  was  a  complete,  unreserved,  integral  surrender 
of  his  whole  being  to  the  Divine  and  His  supreme  force — a 
surrender  not  only  of  the  mind  or  the  heart  or  the  will  and  life's 
activities,  but  of  every  part  of  his  being  and  every  movement 
of  his  nature.  The  divine  force,  or,  as  Sri  Aurobindo  terms  it, 
the  Divine  Mother,  did  the  yoga  in  him,  and  led  him  to  his 
goal. 

We  have  reviewed  at  some  length  Sri  Aurobindo’s  spiritual 
experiences  and  explorations  in  order  to  show  that  his  integral 
yoga  was  a  natural  evolution  out  of  them,  and  not  out  of  any 
philosophical  speculation.  But  nevertheless,  like  every  other 
Indian  yoga,  it  has  a  philosophical  basis,  and  a  very  wide  one 
at  that,  supporting  its  massive  structure. 

If  we  study  the  evolution  of  Nature  deeply  and  compre¬ 
hensively,  passing  beyond  its  biological  aspect,  we  find  that 
what  she  aims  at  is  a  continuous  self-transcendence  by  the 
triple  method  of  ascent,  widening  of  the  field  and  base,  and 
integration.  Her  evolution  is  nothing  but  a  progressive  ascent 
from  matter  to  spirit.  All  evolution  presupposes  an  involution. 
According  to  the  Veda  and  the  Upani§ad,  what  is  involved 
here  in  unconsciousness  is  the  Absolute,  the  superconscient 
Saccidananda.  From  inconscience  matter  emerges  as  the  first 

217 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 


evolute,  then  a  little  of  the  submerged  consciousness  trickles 
out  with  life,  and  more  of  it  with  mind.  But  the  human  mind, 
wrhich  is  a  mind  of  ignorance,  seeking  for  knowledge  but  not 
finding  it,  cannot  be  the  last  term  of  evolution.  If  the  Super- 
conscient  with  Its  infinite  knowledge,  power  and  bliss  are 
involved  here,  it  must  inevitably  evolve.  The  next  principle 
to  evolve,  according  to  Sri  Aurobindo,  is  the  supermind. 
During  all  the  various  stages  of  this  graded  evolution,  one 
can  very  well  perceive  the  intention  and  method  of  Nature. 
She  does  not  reject  matter  when  she  rises  to  the  play  of  life, 
but  vitalizes  it  and  raises  it  up  into  a  sort  of  active  and  intimate 
alliance  with  life.  Similarly,  when  she  evolves  mind  and  rises 
to  the  play  of  consciousness  with  thought  and  reason  and 
imagination  as  its  principal  faculties,  she  does  not  cut  out  from 
herself  matter  and  life  as  obstructive  elements  and  a  drag  on 
her  upward  advance.  She  mentalizes  matter  and  life  both,  so 
that  a  physical  mind  and  a  vital  mind  are  developed  out  of 
that  integration.  The  basic  principle  of  the  mind,  which  is 
consciousness  or  rather  self-consciousness,  permeates  the  whole 
organism,  and  the  evolutionary  being  of  man  comes  to  have  a 
vital  ego  and  a  physical  ego  as  well  as  a  mental  one.  It  is, 
therefore,  obvious  that  it  is  not  Nature's  way  to  renounce  and 
annul  the  lower  principle  as  soon  as  a  higher  one  is  evolved. 
She  goes  on  lifting  the  lower  into  the  higher,  and  both  into  the 
next  higher,  till  she  reaches  Spirit,  integrates  to  It  and  unites 
with  It  in  a  dynamic  and  creative  unity  all  that  she  has  evolved. 

This  process  of  the  Divine  Nature — for  she  is  there  directing 
from  behind  the  frontal  aspect  of  mechanical  Nature — witnesses 
to  the  teleology  of  earthly  evolution,  which  is  an  integral 
manifestation  of  spirit  in  matter.  Viewed  in  this  light,  all  life 
appears  to  be  a  stupendous,  incalculable  yoga  of  Nature. 

Tn  the  right  view  both  of  life  and  of  Yoga,  all  life  is  either 
consciously  or  subsconciously  a  Yoga.  .  .  .  All  life,  when  we  look 
behind  its  appearance,  is  a  vast  Yoga  of  Nature  attempting  to 
realize  her  perfection  in  an  ever-increasing  expression  of  her 
potentialities  and  to  unite  herself  with  her  own  divine  reality/1 

The  aim  of  the  integral  yoga  is  identical  with  the  secret  aim  of 

1  Sri  Aurobindo,  On  Yoga,  p.  4. 

218 


The  Philosophical  Basis  of  Integral  Yoga 

Nature  in  her  evolution — it  is  the  epiphany  of  the  Supramental 
Divine  in  the  material  world  by  the  self-transcending  ascent  of 
the  consciousness  of  man  and  its  transforming  and  integrating 
descent.  But  though  the  aim  is  the  same,  their  methods  are 
somewhat  different.  Nature's  universal  ascent  is  slow  and 
leisurely,  for  she  has  to  proceed  tentatively,  with  many  a  detour 
and  set-back,  through  the  inconscience  or  subconscience  of  her 
evolutionary  elements,  as  if  she  were  groping  her  way  in  the  dark. 
But  yoga  has  this  advantage  that  it  enlists  from  the  very  start 
the  conscious,  willed  and  active  co-operation  of  the  individual; 
and  this  co-operation  considerably  accelerates  the  pace  of 
evolution.  The  work  of  several  lives  can  thus  be  accomplished 
in  the  course  of  a  single  life,  or  even  a  few  concentrated  years. 

As  an  illustration  of  the  dual  movement  of  ascent  and  descent, 
which  is  common  to  both  the  integral  yoga  and  the  yoga  of 
Nature,  .Sri  Aurobindo  traces  the  evolution  of  spirituality  in 
India  in  the  following  words: 

\  .  .  in  India  the  reign  of  Intuition  came  first,  intellectual 
Mind  developing  afterwards  in  the  later  philosophy  and  science. 
.  .  .  The  effect  of  the  Vedic  mystics  revealed  to  them  the  things 
behind  through  a  power  of  inner  sight  and  hearing.  .  .  .  The 
Vedic  age  was  followed  by  a  great  outburst  of  intellect  and 
philosophy  which  yet  took  spiritual  truth  as  its  basis  and  tried 
to  reach  it  anew,  not  through  a  direct  Intuition  or  occult 
process,  .  .  .  but  by  the  power  of  the  mind’s  reflective,  specula¬ 
tive,  logical  thought;  at  the  same  time  processes  of  Yoga  were 
developed  which  used  the  thinking  mind  as  a  means  of  arriving  at 
spiritual  realization,  spiritualizing  the  mind  itself  at  the  same 
time.  Then  followed  an  era  of  the  development  of  philosophies 
and  Yoga  processes  which  more  and  more  used  the  emotional 
and  aesthetic  being  as  the  means  of  spiritual  realization  and 
spiritualized  the  emotional  level  in  man  through  the  heart  and 
feeling.  This  was  accompanied  by  Tantric  and  other  processes 
which  took  up  the  mental  will,  the  life-will,  the  will  of  sensations 
and  made  them  at  once  the  instruments  and  the  field  of 
spiritualization.  In  the  Hathayoga  and  the  various  attempts  at 
divinization  of  the  body,  there  is  also  a  line  of  endeavour  which 
attempted  to  arrive  at  the  same  achievement  with  regard  to 

219 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 


living  matter.  .  .  .  We  may  say  therefore  that  the  universal 
Consciousness  after  its  descent  into  Matter  has  conducted  the 
evolution  there  along  two  lines,  one  of  ascent  to  the  discovery 
of  self  and  Spirit,  the  other  of  descent  through  the  already 
evolved  levels  of  mind,  life  and  body  so  as  to  bring  down  the 
spiritual  consciousness  into  these  also  and  to  fulfil  thereby 
some  secret  intention  in  the  creation  of  the  material  universe. 
Our  Yoga  [the  Integral  Yoga]  is  in  its  principle  a  taking  up 
and  summarizing  and  completing  of  this  process,  an  endeavour 
to  rise  to  the  highest  possible  supramental  level  and  bring  down 
its  consciousness  and  power  into  mind,  life  and  body/1 

Another  point  to  consider  is  the  immanence  of  the  Divine 
in  the  world.  If  we  accept  the  world  as  a  real  creation  of  God, 
we  have  to  admit  that  His  immanence  in  it  can  have  only  one 
purpose  behind  it — an  increasingly  flawless  expression  of 
Himself;  unless  we  choose  to  regard  the  Immanent  only  as  a 
passive  leaven  or  an  agent  for  recruiting  ripe  souls  and  packing 
them  off  to  the  Transcendent.  The  hierarchy  of  the  planes  of 
consciousness  and  their  distinctive  principles,  powers  and 
instrumental  faculties,  if  they  have  any  teleological  significance 
at  all,  confirm  the  hypothesis  of  the  will  of  the  Immanent  to  an 
integral  self-manifestation  in  the  world.  The  essential  unity  of 
the  world  and  the  harmony  and  organic  correlation  of  its 
multitudinous  elements  and  energies  also  argue  an  integral 
consummation. 

In  Indian  philosophy  there  are  three  different  kinds  of 
liberation,  each  pursued  separately  to  the  exclusion  of  the  other 
two.  Those  who  aim  at  sdyujya,  or  a  complete  merger  in  the 
transcendent  Brahman,  follow  the  exclusive  path  of  knowledge, 
using  the  intellect  as  the  means  of  realization.  Those  who  seek 
an  intimate  closeness  to  the  Divine,  sdmipya  or  sdlokya,  and  a 
union  and  communion  in  an  eternal  relation  of  love  and 
devotion,  but  not  a  self-abolition,  follow  the  path  of  the  heart's 
feelings  and  emotions  turned  exclusively  to  their  Lover  and 
Beloved.  Those  who  seek  union  with  the  Divine  in  His  Will  and 
Power,  seek  to  assume  the  nature  of  the  Divine  and  enjoy  its 

1  Sri  Aurobindo,  Letters  of  Sri  Aurobindo  (First  Series)  (Pondicherry:  Sri 
Aurobindo  Ashram  Press,  1950),  pp.  6-8. 


220 


The  Philosophical  Basis  of  Integral  Yoga 

dynamic  freedom,  sarupya .  But  man  is  an  integer,  or  an  organic 
and  composite  entity,  every  part  of  which  has  an  undeniable 
right  to  a  total  and  dynamic  union  with  the  Divine  from  whom 
alone  it  is  originally  derived.  The  integral  yoga  aims  at  a 
complete  fusion  of  the  three  liberations. 

In  the  Upanisad,  Atman  or  Brahman  is  described  as  having 
a  fourfold  poise — the  poise  of  the  waking  self,  jagrat  pdda\  the 
poise  of  the  dream  self  or  the  subliminal  self,  swapna  pada\  the 
poise  of  the  sleeping  self  or  the  blissful,  creative  self,  susupti 
pada ;  and  the  ineffable,  transcendent  self,  tiiriya  pada.  The 
four  poises  together  constitute  the  integrality  of  Brahman.  In 
later  Vedanta,  the  turiya  or  the  unthinkable  transcendent 
alone  was  regarded  as  Reality,  and  the  other  three  poises  of 
Brahman  were  negated  and  dismissed  as  illusion.  The  integral 
yoga  envisages  this  fourfold  integrality  as  its  goal. 

According  to  Indian  philosophy,  the  soul  lives  simultaneously 
in  five  sheaths  which  are  called  kosas.  The  first  two  of  these  are 
the  immortal  sheaths  of  the  soul  so  long  as  it  remains  in  the 
world  of  manifestation;  they  are  the  sheaths  of  vijndna  and 
dnanda ,  supramental  knowledge  and  supernal  bliss.  The  other 
three  are  the  temporal  sheaths  of  mind,  life  and  matter.  In 
each  sheath  the  soul  presides  as  a  purusa  or  being,  which  is  a 
self-projection  or  self-formation  of  its  central  essence  of  entity. 
The  Upanisad  speaks  of  these  purusas  and  traces  the  evolution 
of  the  soul  from  the  physical  to  the  vital,  from  the  vital  to  the 
mental,  from  the  mental  to  the  supramental,  and  from  the 
supramental  to  the  pnrusa  of  bliss  or  dnanda.  Each  of  these 
Purusas  seeks  its  individual  perfection  and  fulfilment  in  an 
integral  manifestation  of  the  Divine.  To  eliminate  the  three 
lower  formulations  of  the  soul,  the  material,  vital  and  mental, 
and  aim  at  the  exclusive  fulfilment  of  the  higher  two,  or  to 
eliminate  all  the  five  and  shoot  into  the  featureless  Absolute, 
cannot  certainly  be  an  integral  fulfilment  of  the  soul  in  the 
world  of  God’s  self-expression.  To  fulfil  God  in  the  world  is  the 
mission  of  the  soul.  The  simultaneous  perfection  and  fulfilment 
of  the  five  purusas  or  the  composite  being  of  man  is  the  aim  of 
the  integral  yoga  of  Sri  Aurobindo. 

To  realize  a  complete  union  with  the  Divine  means  to  be  one 
with  Him  in  all  the  poises  of  His  being,  in  all  the  modes  of  His 


221 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 


nature,  in  all  the  states  of  His  consciousness,  in  all  the  worlds  of 
His  self-expression  and  in  all  the  infinite  powers  and  principles 
through  which  He  veils  and  reveals  Himself.  His  utmost 
transcendence,  His  universal  immanence  and  His  individual 
presence  in  the  heart  of  every  being  and  every  thing  have  to  be 
simultaneously  embraced  in  an  active  and  dynamic  union  as 
well  as  in  an  eternal  silence  and  repose,  if  he  wants  to  realize  the 
Divine  integrally. 

One  of  the  main  strands  of  the  philosophical  basis  of  the 
integral  yoga  is  the  indivisible  unity  of  God,  Man  and  Nature; 
of  Being  and  Becoming.  To  cut  oneself  off  from  the  becoming 
in  order  to  enter  into  the  Ineffable  is  a  unilateral  movement 
which  denies  all  spiritual  reality  and  significance  to  man  and 
nature.  An  integral  philosophy  of  existence  must  reckon  with 
both  being  and  becoming,  for  if  being  is  real,  its  becoming, 
though  mutable,  is  equally  real. 

Tt  is  possible  for  the  soul  in  the  Becoming  to  know  itself 
as  the  Being  and  possess  the  Becoming,  to  know  itself  as  Infinite 
in  essence  but  also  as  the  Infinite  self-expressed  in  the  finite, 
the  timeless  Eternal  regarding  itself  and  its  works  in  the  found¬ 
ing  status  and  the  developing  motion  of  Time-eternity.  This 
realization  is  the  culmination  of  the  Becoming;  it  is  the  fulfil¬ 
ment  of  the  Being  in  its  dynamic  reality.  This  too  [along  with 
the  truth  of  the  eternal  stillness  of  the  Being]  must  be  part  of 
the  total  truth  of  things,  for  it  alone  gives  a  full  significance  to 
the  universe  and  justifies  the  soul  in  manifestation;  an  explana¬ 
tion  of  things  that  deprives  cosmic  and  individual  existence  of 
all  significance  cannot  be  the  whole  explanation  or  the  solution 
it  proposes  the  sole  true  issue/1 

To  be  as  perfect  on  earth  as  God  is  perfect  in  heaven,  to  be 
one  with  the  Divine  not  only  in  His  being  but  also  in  His 
nature,  to  fulfil  His  will  on  earth,  and  to  realize  in  active  life 
the  triple  formula  of  the  Upanisad — Brahman  is  in  all,  all  are  in 
Brahman,  and  all  are  Brahman — this  is  the  object  of  the 
integral  yoga  of  Sri  Aurobindo.  It  is  an  integral  approach  to 
the  integral  Reality. 

1  Aurobindo,  The  Life  Divine,  p.  588. 


222 


19 


HAJIME  NAKAMURA 

Practice  of  Selfless  Action 


The  integralism  of  Sri  Aurobindo  has  little  been  known  to  the 
Japanese  in  general.  When  the  writer  of  the  present  paper  stayed 
in  America,  he  came  to  take  notice  of  the  fact  that  some  leading 
scholars  in  America  had  stimulated  the  interest  of  intellectuals 
in  Aurobindo,  which  was  rather  surprising  to  the  Japanese 
visitor.  A  report  by  him  to  this  effect  was  published  in  the 
Indogaku  Bukkydgaku  Kenkyu  (i.e.  Journal  of  Indian  and 
Buddhist  Studies — Vol.  I,  No.  i,  July  1952,  edited  by  the 
Japanese  Association  of  Indian  and  Buddhist  Studies,  Tokyo, 
pp.  209,  213-14).  It  was  not  known  that  so  many  intellec¬ 
tuals  were  to  be  attracted  by  the  thought  of  Aurobindo. 
Recently  Professor  Koshiro  Tamaki  of  Tokyo  University, 
Tokyo,  discussed  his  philosophy  very  briefly  in  A  History  of 
Indian  Ethical  Thought  (in  Japanese)  (edited  by  H.  Nakamura, 
Tokyo,  Gakugeishobo,  1958).  Some  Japanese  have  come  to 
hear  the  name  of  Aurobindo  through  Japanese  translations  of 
Romain  Rolland’s  works.  On  the  occasion  of  the  unesco 
Symposium  attached  to  the  IXth  International  Congress  for 
the  History  of  Religions,  Tokyo  1958,  the  writer  of  the  present 
paper  read  in  his  paper  ‘The  influence  of  Eastern  Culture  on  the 
West’  as  follows:  ‘The  tendency  to  appreciate  Indian  civilization 
which  is  the  rage  among  some  highly  Westernized  Japanese 
intellectuals,  is  chiefly  due  to  the  influence  of  Romain  Rolland. 
.  .  .  The  thought  of  Aurobindo  Ghosh  is  now  propagated  by  the 
American  Academy  of  Asian  Studies  group  in  San  Francisco 
and  Professor  Herbert  in  Switzerland.’ 

This,  so  far,  is  almost  all  that  has  been  said  about  Aurobindo 
in  the  academic  circle  of  Japan.  Japanese  scholars  knew  so 

223 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 


little  about  the  gospel  of  Aurobindo  that  they  would  refrain 
from  saying  anything  to  English-reading  people  who  know 
much  of  it.  The  writer  wants  to  deal  with  only  one  thing  which 
is  relevant  to  Aurobindo. 

Briefly  speaking,  Aurobindo  aimed  at  the  discovery  of  the 
fundamentals  of  life  and  existence  and  of  the  true  methods 
which  could  lead  to  fulfilment  and  perfection  of  man  and  his 
culture.  His  messages  sound  very  convincing,  as  if  he  were 
speaking  words  of  revelation  with  full  confidence.  It  is  very 
difficult  to  analyse  and  review  his  sayings  until  one  has  grasped 
the  whole  body  of  his  abstruse  and  profound  thought.  In  so  far 
as  the  writer  has  come  to  know,  it  seems  that  some  main  points 
of  his  thought  were  especially  based  upon  the  Bhagavadgita 
on  which  he  so  enthusiastically  elaborated.  According  to  it, 
the  aim  of  human  life  can  be  fulfilled  by  selfless  actions,  although 
so  many  things  are  taught  in  the  Gita.  The  writer  wants  to 
review  the  passages  which  lay  such  stress  upon  selfless  action 
in  the  Gita  first,  and  then  compare  the  ideas  therein  with  that 
in  Mahayana  Buddhism. 

The  battle  of  the  Bharatas  which  forms  the  main  story  of  the 
Mahabharata  was  fought  between  a  hundred  princes  of  the 
Kuru  people  and  the  five  princes  of  the  King  Pandu.  They  were 
related  to  each  other  as  cousins.  However,  they  had  to  fight. 
The  two  nearly  related  but  hostile  clans,  after  disputes  extend¬ 
ing  over  many  years,  made  ready  for  open  combat,  and  advanced 
against  one  another  with  the  forces  and  allies  on  either  side  on 
the  plain  of  the  Kurus  in  the  neighbourhood  of  modern  Delhi. 
On  the  field  of  the  Kurus  the  ranks  of  the  two  rival  armies 
drew  up  against  each  other,  and  all  was  prepared  for  the  opening 
trumpet  blast.  When  they  were  about  to  begin  fighting, 
Arjuna,  a  prince  who  was  the  son  of  the  King  Pandu,  felt  himself 
very  sad  on  his  deplorable  destiny.  Although  Arjuna  was  a 
famous  archer  of  that  race,  he  hesitated  to  begin  the  fight  at  the 
sight  of  his  near  relatives  in  the  hostile  army;  he  did  not 
know  what  he  should  do;  his  mind  whirled.  Being  unable  to 
distinguish  the  right  from  the  wrong,  Arjuna,  in  despair,  turned 
to  his  friend  and  charioteer,  Krsna.  He  confided  his  inner  agony 
to  his  charioteer  who  was  in  reality  none  but  an  incarnation  of 
Visnu,  the  highest  god.  He  saw  there  relatives,  comrades  and 

224 


Practice  of  Selfless  Action 


friends,  teachers  and  pupils  arrayed  in  both  the  armies.  At  the 
sight  of  these  he  was  overcome  with  great  compassion.  His 
limbs  failed;  his  mouth  was  parched;  his  body  was  shaken  and 
his  hair  stood  on  end.  He  became  very  dubious  about  the 
significance  of  this  battle.  ‘I  never  perceive  any  good  in 
slaughtering  my  own  people  in  battle.'1  .  .  .  ‘How  can  we  ever 
be  happy  by  killing  our  own  people?'2  ...  ‘I  desire  neither 
victory  nor  empire  nor  even  any  pleasure:  of  what  avail  to  us  is 
empire,  of  what  avail  are  enjoyments  and  even  life  itself? '3 
‘Alas:  we  are  resolved  to  commit  a  great  sin,  in  that  we  are 
ready  to  slay  our  kinsmen  to  satisfy  our  greed  for  the  pleasure 
of  a  kingdom!'4  Arjuna,  suffering  from  agony,  cast  aside  his  bow 
and  arrow  and  sank  down  on  his  chariot  seat,  his  mind  being 
overcome  with  grief. 

He  was,  however,  recalled  to  a  sense  of  his  duty  by  Krsna.  To 
Arjuna,  who  was  thus  overwhelmed  with  pity,  and  whose 
troubled  eyes  were  filled  with  tears,  Krsna  spoke  these  words: 
‘In  this  crisis,  O  Arjuna,  whence  comes  such  lowness  of  spirit, 
unbecoming  to  an  Aryan,  dishonorable!  Do  not  yield  to  unman¬ 
liness!  It  does  not  become  you.  You  have  been  mourning  for 
those  who  should  not  be  mourned  for. '5  ‘It  is  most  desirable  for 
a  warrior  to  sacrifice  himself  in  a  righteous  war.  You  should  not 
avoid  battle.  Considering  your  own  duty  you  should  not  waver; 
for  to  a  warrior  nothing  is  better  than  a  righteous  war.'6  I.e. 
there  exists  no  greater  good  for  a  warrior  than  a  battle  enjoined 
by  duty.  ‘Happy  are  the  warriors  for  whom  such  a  war  comes  of 
its  own  accord  as  an  open  door  to  heaven.'?  ‘But  if  you  refuse 
to  wage  this  righteous  war,  then  renouncing  your  own  dharma 
and  honour,  you  will  certainly  incur  sin.'8  ‘People  will  tell  your 
infamy  forever.  And  to  a  man  who  has  been  honoured,  dishonour 
is  worse  than  death. '9  The  proper  duty  of  a  warrior  consists  in 
fighting  to  the  last  at  any  cost.  In  order  to  fulfil  his  own  duty, 
everything  else  should  be  given  up.  The  only  way  to  be  chosen 
by  a  warrior  is  to  fight.  ‘Regarding  alike  pleasure  and  pain, 
gain  and  loss,  success  and  defeat,  prepare  yourself  for  battle. 
Acting  in  this  way  you  will  incur  no  sin.'10 

*  Sir  S.  Radhakrishnan,  The  Bhagavadgita  (London:  Allen  &  Unwin  Ltd., 

1948),  I,  31.  *  Ibid.,  I,  37.  3  Ibid.,  I,  32.  4  Ibid.,  I,  45. 

5  Ibid.,  II,  11.  6  Hid.,  II,  31.  7  Ibid.,  II,  32. 

•  Ibid.,  II,  33.  9  Ibid.,  II,  34.  10  Ibid.,  II,  38. 

225 


H 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 

Here  we  shall  cite  an  admonition  given  to  warriors  in  ancient 
Japan  just  for  comparison.  There  is  nothing  important  except 
the  relationship  between  lord  and  retainer.  We  will  never  waver, 
even  if  we  should  be  admonished  to  do  something  else  by 
Shakyamuni,  Confucius  or  the  Effulgent  God  [i.e.  the  foremost 
ancestor  of  Emperors].  Let  us  be  doomed  to  hell,  or  let  us  be 
punished  by  gods,  we  have  nothing  to  do  in  mind  but  to  serve 
for  our  feudal  lord  whole-heartedly!  If  we  go  astray  on  this 
point,  we  shall  be  misled  by  banal  doctrines  of  Shintoism  or 
Buddhism.  We  are  sure  that  Buddhas  and  gods  will  approve 
our  attitude/1  In  the  feudal  age  of  Japan  loyalty  or  the  genuine 
or  sincere  attitude  to  the  feudal  lord  was  more  esteemed  than 
religious  reasons,  whereas  in  ancient  India  warriors  wanted  to 
justify  their  engagement  in  wars  on  religious  grounds.2 

According  to  such  a  conception  of  duty  in  the  Gita,  every 
action  should  centre  on  the  fulfilment  of  his  own  duty.  To 
action  alone,  you  are  entitled,  never  to  its  fruit.  Never  let  your 
motive  be  the  fruit  of  action,  nor  let  there  be  any  attachment 
to  non-action/3  A  man  should  perform  an  obligatory  action 
only  because  it  ought  to  be  done,  and  renounce  all  attachment 
to  the  fruit. 4  The  action  that  is  obligatory  and  is  done  without 
love  or  hate  by  one  who  desires  no  fruit  and  who  is  free  from 
attachment — that  action  is  said  to  be  of  goodness.* $  This  verse 
we  can  explain  as  follows:  man  should  do  his  duty  simply 
because  it  is  his  duty,  and  with  perfect  indifference  to  the  results, 
whether  they  are  favourable  or  not.  This  doctrine  is  called 
The  Way  of  Practice  of  Selfless  Action’  (karmayoga).  It  reminds 
us  of  Kant’s  categorical  imperative.  The  ethical  principle  in 
this  doctrine  of  karmayoga  requires  that  the  individual  should 
continue  carrying  on  his  usual  duties  and  activities  of  life  as 
before,  but  with  a  new  attitude  of  detachment  from  their 
fruits  or  results,  i.e.  from  the  possible  gains  or  losses  that  they 
will  entail. 

Against  the  view  that  all  action  should  be  abandoned,  since 

1  Hagakure,  Chapter  II. 

2  We  shall  refrain  from  getting  into  details  on  the  Way  of  Warriors,  Bushido , 
of  the  ancient  Japanese.  With  regard  to  the  Indian  replica,  cf.  M.  Winternitz: 
A  History  of  Indian  Literature,  Vol.  I,  published  by  the  University  of  Calcutta, 
1927,  pp.  385-7. 

3  The  Bhagavadgita,  II,  47.  <  Ibid.,  XVIII,  9-  5  Ibid.,  XVIII,  23. 

226 


Practice  of  Selfless  Action 


it  leads  to  bondage,  the  Gita  asserts  that  actions  of  worship, 
gifts  and  penance  should  not  be  abandoned.  'Actions  of  worship, 
gift  and  austerity  are  not  to  be  given  up,  but  should  be  per¬ 
formed.  For  verily,  actions  of  worship,  gift,  and  austerity 
purify  the  wise/1  But  they  should  be  done  without  selfish 
attachment  or  expectation  of  rewards.  ‘Even  these  works, 
however,  should  be  done  without  attachment  and  desire  for 
fruit/2‘It  is  indeed  impossible  for  an  embodied  being  to  renounce 
action  entirely.  But  he  who  renounces  the  fruit  of  action  [i.e. 
reward],  is  regarded  as  one  who  has  renounced/ 3  From  the  view¬ 
point  of  a  modern  thinker  the  purport  of  the  teaching  is 
explained  as  follows:  ‘When  we  do  our  work,  plough  or  paint, 
sing  or  think,  we  will  be  deflected  from  disinterestedness 
if  we  think  of  fame  or  income  or  any  such  extraneous  con¬ 
sideration.  Nothing  matters  except  the  good  will,  the  willing 
fulfilment  of  the  purpose  of  God/ 4  A  man  cannot  remain  inactive 
even  for  one  moment,  and  all  actions  have  some  measure  of 
defect.  Therefore,  we  must  say  that  work  prompted  by  one’s 
own  nature  is  not  harmful  as  a  whole.  ‘One  should  not  give  up 
the  activity  suited  to  one’s  own  nature,  even  though  it  may  be 
defective;  for  all  undertakings  are  enveloped  by  defects,  as  fire 
by  smoke.’ 5 

In  the  world  there  are  two  kinds  of  people.  Some  are  absorbed 
in  contemplative  life,  while  others  are  engaged  in  social  activity. 
The  latter  are  superior  to  the  former.  ‘The  renunciation  of 
works  and  their  unselfish  performance  both  lead  to  the  soul’s 
salvation.  But  of  the  two,  the  unselfish  performance  of  works  is 
better  than  their  renunciation.'6  ‘Do  your  allotted  action,  for 
action  is  superior  to  inaction.  And  even  the  bare  maintenance 
of  your  body  will  not  be  possible  if  you  remain  inactive/7  As 
daily  ethics  the  fulfilment  of  one's  own  duty  is  stressed.  ‘Better 
is  one’s  own  duty,  though  imperfectly  carried  out,  than  the 
duty  of  another  carried  out  perfectly.  One  does  not  incur  sin 
when  one  does  the  duty  ordained  by  one’s  own  nature’.8  On  this 
point  we  are  reminded  of  Plato’s  saying:  ‘One  man  should 


1  The  Bhagavadgita,  XVIII,  5. 

3  Ibid.,  XVIII,  11  (cf.  IV,  20;  21). 
5  Ibid.,  XVIII,  48. 

7  Ibid.,  Ill,  8  (cf.  XVIII,  7:  48). 


*  Ibid.,  XVIII,  0. 
4  Ibid.,  p.  1 1<>. 
6  Ibid.,  V,  2. 
8  Ibid.,  XVIII,  47. 


227 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 

practise  one  thing  only,  the  thing  to  which  his  nature  is  best 
adapted/1  It  was  asserted  that  in  a  well-ordered  state  one  should 
do  one/s  own  business.3 

Such  a  way  of  practice  is  the  karmayoga ,  or  it  is  simply 
called  yoga .  'He  who  in  action  sees  inaction,  and  action  in 
inaction,  is  wise  among  men;  he  is  a  yogin,  and  has  accom¬ 
plished  all  his  work/3 

We  find  a  similar  saying  in  China  also.  Lao-tzu  says: 

It  acts  without  action,  does  without  doing 
finds  flavour  in  what  is  flavourless, 

Can  make  the  small  great  and  the  few  many 
requites  injuries  with  good  deeds, 

Deals  with  the  hard  while  it  is  still  easy, 

With  the  great  while  it  is  still  small. 4 

This  saying  answers  to  the  attitude  of  the  man  of  stabilized 
mentality.  5 

This  conception  of  yoga  was  inherited  and  developed  by 
Aurobindo.  He  says:  'Yoga  is  a  generic  name  for  the  processes 
and  the  result  of  processes  by  which  we  transcend  or  shed  off 
our  present  modes  of  being  and  rise  to  a  new,  a  higher,  a  wider 
mode  of  consciousness  which  is  not  that  of  the  ordinary  animal 
and  intellectual  man.  Yoga  is  the  exchange  of  an  egoistic  for  a 
universal  or  cosmic  consciousness  lifted  towards  or  informed 
by  the  super-cosmic,  transcendent  Unnameable  who  is  the 
source  and  support  of  all  things/'6 

The  Gita  was  expounded  by  Aurobindo,  and  his  exposition 
was  translated  by  Professor  Jean  Herbert  into  French.  How 
far  the  notion  of  practice  of  selfless  action  in  the  Gita  was 
incorporated  and  developed  in  the  philosophy  of  Aurobindo 
must  be  made  clear  by  further  investigation. 

The  ideal  of  selfless  action  has  highly  been  esteemed  in 

1  Plato’s  Republic,  433;  The  Dialogues  of  Plato  translated  into  English  by 
B.  Jowett,  Vol.  I  (New  York:  Random  House,  1937),  696- 

2  (Charmides,  161).  3  The  Bhagavadgita ,  IV,  16. 

4  Tao  Te  Ching,  LXIII. 

5  Sthitaprajna  described  in  Radhakrishnan,  The  Bhagavadgita ,  p.  126. 

6  Science  and  Culture:  A  Selection  of  Passages  from  the  Writings  of  Sri 
Aurobindo  and  the  Mother,  compiled  by  Indra  Sen  (Pondicherry:  Sri  Aurobindo 
Ashram,  Aditi  Karyalaya,  1951),  p.  bo. 

228 


Practice  of  Selfless  Action 

Buddhism  also.  Especially  the  emphasis  has  been  put  on  the 
altruistic  inclinations  and  activities.  From  the  outset  the 
Bodhisattva  strives  towards  a  plane  where  there  are  no  differ¬ 
ences  between  his  ego  and  his  neighbour's;  he  identifies  his  ego 
absolutely  and  entirely  with  that  of  others.  And  yet  he  should 
not  have  the  conceit  that  he  has  helped,  or  has  been  helping 
others.  Help  or  service  should  be  done  without  attachment. 
‘Here,  O  Subhut i,  a  Bodhisattva  should  think  thus:  As  many 
beings  as  there  are  in  the  universe  of  beings — be  they  egg-born, 
or  born  from  a  womb,  or  moisture-born,  or  miraculously  born; 
be  they  with  form,  or  without;  be  they  with  consciousness,  or 
without  consciousness,  or  with  neither  consciousness  nor 
no-consciousness — as  far  as  any  conceivable  universe  of  beings 
is  conceived;  all  these  should  be  led  by  me  into  Nirvana,  into 
that  realm  of  Nirvana  which  leaves  nothing  behind.  And  yet, 
although  innumerable  beings  have  thus  been  led  to  Nirvana,  no 
being  at  all  has  been  led  to  Nirvana.  Why?  If  in  a  Bodhisattva 
the  consciousness  of  a  “being”  should  take  place,  he  would  not 
be  called  a  “being  destined  for  enlightenment”  (bodhi-sattva)/1 
If  a  Bodhisattva  should  be  self-conceited  that  he  has  helped 
others,  then  he  is  not  a  real  Bodhisattva.  A  famous  poem 
composed  by  an  Indian,  and  cited  and  recited  frequently  by 
Chinese  and  Japanese  Buddhists,  runs  as  follows: 

The  donator,  the  donatory  and  things  donated  should  be  thought 
of  without  attachment  in  the  past,  present  and  future.  We  are 
firmly  settled  in  the  highest  state  of  mind.  Thus  we  worship  all  the 
Buddhas  of  the  ten  Directions.2 

This  poem  is  called  the  Poem  of  Purity  of  the  Three.  It  means 
that  without  attachment  alone  the  above  mentioned  three  can 
be  pure,  without  defilement.  This  attitude  derives  from  the 
fact  that  the  practice  of  Mahayana  is  firmly  based  upon  the 
standpoint  of  the  Void  ( sunyatd ). 

From  the  consideration  set  forth  above,  we  are  led  to  the 

1  Buddhist  Texts  from  Japan,  ed.  F.  Max  Mueller  (Oxford:  Clarendon  Press, 
1881),  Anecdota  Oxoniensia,  Aryan  Series,  Vol.  1,  Part  1,  Sec.  3. 

2  Baijo-Honsho-Shimjikan-kyo,  Vol.  1,  The  Taisho  Tripitaka,  ed.  J. 
Takakusu  and  K.  Watanabe  (Taisho:  Issaikyo  Kankokai,  1924),  Vol.  3, 
p.  296b. 


229 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 

conclusion  as  follows:  the  ideal  of  selfless  activity  was  advocated 
by  both  the  Gita  and  Mahay  ana  Buddhism.  The  philosophical 
basis  of  the  one  may  be  fundamentally  different  from  that  of  the 
other.  The  ethics  of  the  Gita  is  based  upon  the  traditional  con¬ 
ception  of  Brahman  with  theistic  modifications,  whereas 
Mahayana  is  based  upon  the  conception  of  the  Void  which  is 
peculiarly  Buddhistic.  We  do  not  minimize  the  fundamental 
difference.  However,  in  the  spirit  of  selfless  action  they  coincide; 
practically  there  is  no  difference. 

It  might  be  too  absurd  to  jump  from  the  Gita  and  Mahayana 
which  came  into  existence  about  2,000  years  ago  straight  down 
to  Aurobindo  of  the  present  age.  The  writer  will  refrain  from 
drawing  any  conclusion  from  this  short  investigation.  However, 
we  should  not  deny  the  validity  of  the  fundamental  ethical 
principle  which  might  be  called  dharma  that  never  changes  in 
the  changing,  transient  human  life,  and  that  has  been 
propounded  in  various  ways  by  great  thinkers  of  humankind. 


230 


20 


ANILBARAN  ROY 

Gita,  the  World  Scripture 


As  the  tension  of  the  crisis  in  human  world-destiny  increases, 
‘the  feeling  that  there  is  no  other  solution  than  the  spiritual 
cannot  but  grow  and  become  more  imperative  under  the 
urgency  of  critical  circumstance’.1  So  says  Sri  Aurobindo  in 
the  concluding  chapter  of  The  Life  Divine.  But  people  have  as 
yet  no  clear  idea  of  spirituality,  and  they  readily  mistake  it  for 
religion  or  morality.  Religion,  however,  as  it  is  commonly 
understood  and  practised,  has  not  much  spirituality  in  it, 
though,  like  morality,  it  can  serve  as  a  preliminary  preparation 
if  pursued  rightly.  Religion  is  a  thing  of  creed  and  dogma;  people 
accept  certain  beliefs  and  practise  certain  prescribed  rites  and 
ceremonies  as  a  matter  of  custom  and  convention.  Though 
practised  all  over  the  world  from  very  ancient  times,  religion 
has  not  essentially  changed  human  life  and  society;  in  many 
respects,  man  still  continues  to  be  the  barbarian  though  under 
different  guises;  the  so-called  civilization  has  created  more  ills 
than  it  has  cured.  ‘A  total  spiritual  direction  given  to  the  whole 
life  and  whole  nature  can  alone  lift  humanity  beyond  itself.’2 
The  Gita  teaches  us  how  to  do  this  practically,  though  the  core 
of  its  teaching  has  not  yet  been  fully  understood  or  followed. 
People  go  to  the  temple,  church  or  mosque,  offer  prayers  and 
worship  according  to  rule  and  custom  and  think  they  have  done 
all  that  is  necessary.  But  this  by  itself  does  not  take  us  very  far. 
The  temple  or  church  is  only  a  symbol;  we  have  to  find  and  see 
Kr§na  or  Christ  eternally  seated  within  our  heart  and  establish 
a  conscious  and  living  relation  with  Him,  shaping  all  our  life 


1  Aurobindo,  The  Life  Divine ,  p.  939. 

231 


*  Ibid.,  p.  938. 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 

and  action  in  a  constant  union  with  the  Divine — that  is  what 
is  true  spirituality.  Krsna  described  in  the  Gita  as  seated  in  the 
chariot  of  Arjuna  in  the  battlefield  of  Kuruksetra  (which  is 
really  the  field  of  life  which  is  a  continuous  battle),  dispelling 
all  the  doubts  of  Arjuna,  removing  his  weakness  and  fear, 
giving  him  the  strength  to  do  his  divinely  appointed  work  in 
the  world  is  a  vivid  illustration  of  the  ways  of  God  to  man. 
God  is  not  a  being  sitting  only  in  some  distant  heaven,  to  whom 
our  prayers  may  or  may  not  reach.  He  is  very  near  to  us  and  is 
the  closest  friend  who  will  never  fail  us  if  we  sincerely  put  our 
trust  in  Him.  A  regular  perusal  of  the  Gita  will  impress  these 
spiritual  truths  deeply  in  our  mind  and  our  whole  life  will  be 
moulded  by  them. 

The  Gita  is  pre-eminently  the  Sastra  or  scripture  for  the 
modern  age  in  so  far  as  it  lays  the  philosophical  foundation  for 
the  unification  of  the  human  race.  There  are  other  great  scrip¬ 
tures  in  the  world,  but  the  difficulty  is  that  they  contain  many 
things  which  conflict  with  modern  knowledge  and  modern  ideas; 
that  is  why  the  men  of  our  time  have  their  faith  shaken  in 
spirituality  and  God.  But  without  God  there  is  no  meaning  and 
no  fulfilment  in  life;  that  is  being  realized  more  and  more  as  the 
crisis  in  world  affairs  is  deepening,  and  people  all  over  the  world 
arc  searching  for  a  saving  light.  The  Gita  is  a  great  depository 
of  that  light;  there  is  nothing  in  it  which  conflicts  with  modern 
knowledge,  while  it  gives  a  conception  of  God  which  satisfies 
the  soul  and  a  discipline  which  all  can  accept  and  follow  and 
proceed  towards  God-realization.  Truth’,  says  Sri  Aurobindo, 

.  .  is  one  and  eternal’,  but  it  'expresses  itself  in  Time  and 
through  the  mind  of  man;  therefore  every  Scripture  must 
necessarily  contain  two  elements,  one  temporary,  perishable, 
belonging  to  the  ideas  of  the  period  and  country  in  which  it  was 
produced,  the  other  eternal  and  imperishable  and  applicable 
in  all  ages  and  countries.  ...  In  the  Gita  there  is  very  little  that 
is  merely  local  or  temporal  and  its  spirit  is  so  large,  profound 
and  universal  that  even  this  little  can  easily  be  universalized 
without  the  sense  of  the  teaching  suffering  any  diminution 
or  violation;  rather  by  giving  an  ampler  scope  to  it  than  belonged 
to  the  country  and  epoch,  the  teaching  gains  in  depth,  truth  and 
power.  .  .  .  Thus  it  dwells  on  the  ancient  Indian  system  and  idea 


232 


Gita,  the  World  Scripture 

of  sacrifice,  as  an  interchange  between  gods  and  men — a  system 
and  idea  which  have  long  been  practically  obsolete  in  India  itself 
and  are  no  longer  real  to  the  general  human  mind;  but  we  find 
here  a  sense  so  entirely  subtle,  figurative  and  symbolic  given 
to  the  word  “sacrifice”  and  the  conception  of  the  gods  is  so  little 
local  and  mythological,  so  entirely  cosmic  and  philosophical 
that  we  can  easily  accept  both  as  expressive  of  a  practical  fact 
of  psychology  and  general  law  of  Nature  and  so  apply  them  to 
the  modern  conception  of  interchange  between  life  and  life  and 
of  ethical  sacrifice  and  self-giving  as  to  widen  and  deepen  these 
and  cast  over  them  a  more  spiritual  aspect  and  the  light  of  a 
profounder  and  more  far-reaching  Truth/1 

At  the  same  time  we  must  guard  against  the  error  committed 
by  many  modern  commentators  on  the  Gita  who  make  it  a 
mere  gospel  of  humanism  and  social  service.  Service  of  humanity 
is  the  modern  ideal  preached  by  the  West  and  no  doubt  its 
achievements  have  been  considerable.  Known  as  the  'religion 
of  humanity’,  it  was  a  mental  creation  of  the  rationalist  thinkers 
of  the  West  who  made  it  a  substitute  for  the  formal  spiritualism 
of  ecclesiastical  Christianity.  One  has  only  to  compare  human 
life  and  thought  and  feeling  a  century  or  two  ago  with  human 
life,  thought  and  feeling  in  the  period  preceding  the  two  world 
wars  to  see  how  great  an  influence  this  religion  of  humanity 
has  exercised  and  how  fruitful  a  work  it  has  done.  Writers  like 
Nietzsche  vehemently  attacked  the  orthodox  religions,  as  they 
had  no  faith  in  humanity  and  its  future;  they  looked  with  gloom 
and  sorrow  on  earthly  life  and  bade  men  to  suffer  all  the  ills  of 
life  hoping  for  a  better  life  after  death.  The  religion  of  humanity, 
on  the  other  hand,  \  .  .  to  some  degree  humanized  society, 
humanized  law  and  punishment,  humanized  the  outlook  of 
man  on  man,  abolished  legalized  torture  and  the  cruder  forms 
of  slavery,  raised  those  who  were  depressed  and  fallen,  gave  large 
hopes  to  humanity,  stimulated  philanthropy  and  charity  and 
the  service  of  mankind,  encouraged  everywhere  the  desire  for 
freedom,  put  a  curb  on  oppression  and  greatly  minimized  its 
more  brutal  expressions’.2  All  this  is  on  the  right  line  and  tends 
to  human  progress.  But  with  all  its  idealism  it  could  not  prevent 

1  Sri  Aurobindo,  Essays  on  the  Gita  (Pondicherry:  Sri  Aurobindo  Ashram, 
*949)  >  PP-  4-6.  *  Sri  Aurobindo,  The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity ,  p.  312. 

*  233 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 

the  two  world  wars  and  it  brought  forward,  as  a  sort  of  reaction, 
Nazism  and  Communism,  both  of  which  in  their  own  ways  are 
negations  of  the  religion  of  humanity.  If  this  new  religion  has  to 
fulfil  its  brilliant  promise,  we  must  see  and  cure  its  radical 
defect.  Its  fundamental  idea  that  mankind  is  the  godhead  to  be 
worshipped  is  an  intellectual  concept  and  in  spite  of  its  appeal 
it  cannot  counteract  the  opposing  tendencies  in  human  nature. 
Thus  the  Nazis  easily  substituted  the  German  race  for  mankind 
to  be  worshipped  and  respected  and  served  by  all.  Until  the 
religion  of  humanity  rises  above  the  intellectual  level  and  finds 
a  spiritual  basis,  it  cannot  entirely  prevail  over  its  own  principal 
enemy.  That  enemy,  the  enemy  of  all  real  religion,  is  human 
egoism,  the  egoism  of  the  individual,  the  egoism  of  the  class 
and  nation.'1  In  the  ego,  we  regard  ourselves  as  different  from 
all  other  beings  in  the  world  and  feel  justified  in  aggrandizing 
ourselves  at  the  expense  of  others.  But  this  ego  is  only  our 
superficial  self,  a  point  of  reference  created  by  our  mind;  under 
its  influence  we  identify  ourselves  with  the  body,  life  and  mind, 
but  these  do  not  constitute  our  true  self,  they  are  rather  its 
instruments  for  self-manifestation.  It  is  this  recognition  of  true 
self  as  something  beyond  our  body,  life  and  mind  that  consti¬ 
tutes  the  essence  of  spirituality.  Generally  people  do  not  make 
any  essential  distinction  between  mind  and  spirit;  thus  in 
German  and  French,  the  same  word  means  both  spirit  and  mind. 
Science  has  created  the  impression  that  matter  is  ultimate 
reality,  that  life  and  mind  have  somehow  appeared  in  it  and 
that  what  is  called  spirit  is  nothing  but  a  refined  function  of 
mind.  As  the  liver  secretes  bile,  so  the  brain  secretes  thought, 
and  as  the  flower  blooms  on  the  plant  so  it  is  only  the  mind 
which  blooms  as  the  spirit  which  has  no  independent  reality. 
'One  might  as  well  on  the  same  lines  have  concluded  that 
electricity  is  only  a  product  or  operation  of  water  and  cloud 
matter,  because  it  is  in  such  a  field  that  lightning  emerges; 
but  a  deeper  inquiry  has  shown  that  both  cloud  and  water  have, 
on  the  contrary,  the  energy  of  electricity  as  their  foundation, 
their  constituent  power  of  energy-substance:  that  which  seems 
to  be  a  result  is — in  its  reality,  though  not  in  its  form — the 
origin;  the  effect  is  in  the  essence  pre-existent  to  the  apparent 

1  The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity,  p.  313. 

234 


Gita,  the  World  Scripture 

cause,  the  principle  of  the  emergent  activity  precedent  to  the 
present  field  of  action/1 

Spirituality  emerging  in  mind  is  the  sign  of  a  power  which 
itself  has  founded  and  constituted  life,  mind  and  body  and  is 
now  emerging  as  a  spiritual  being  in  a  living  and  thinking  body. 
This  emergence  has  not  yet  gone  very  far,  that  is  why  men  in 
general  cannot  have  any  clear  conception  of  the  spirit.  But 
science  is  no  longer  an  obstacle  in  the  path  of  the  discovery  of 
the  spirit,  rather  scientific  thought  is  clearing  the  way  for  such 
discovery,  though  science  by  itself  cannot  achieve  that  discovery 
as  that  is  not  within  its  scope.  ‘Physical  research  aims  not  to 
disclose  a  real  existence  of  things  from  “behind”  the  appearance 
world,  but  rather  to  develop  thought  systems  for  the  control 
of  this  appearance  world/2 3  It  is  spiritual  research  which  aims 
at  disclosing  the  reality  behind  appearances  and  the  Gita  is 
pre-eminently  a  book  of  such  spiritual  research.  It  begins  with 
the  description  of  the  self  of  man  as  being  something  not 
mutable  or  destructible  like  the  body.  This  is  not  born,  nor 
does  it  die,  nor  is  it  a  thing  that  comes  into  being  once  and 
passing  away  will  never  come  into  being  again.  It  is  unborn, 
ancient,  sempiternal;  it  is  not  slain  with  the  slaying  of  the 
body/3  The  spirit  is  not  only  not  the  body,  it  is  not  also  the 
vital  operations  and  the  mind  and  the  intelligence  with  which 
we  ignorantly  identify  ourselves.  ‘Supreme,  they  say  (beyond 
their  objects),  are  the  senses,  supreme  over  the  senses  the  mind, 
supreme  over  the  mind  is  the  intelligent  will:  that  which  is 
supreme  over  the  intelligent  will,  is  he  (the  Purusha)/4  When 
we  discover  this,  our  true  self,  we  see  that  our  body,  life  and 
mind  are  only  its  instruments,  and  we  can  have  full  mastery  over 
them,  and  that  is  the  true  meaning  of  liberation  or  salvation. 
All  evils  of  life  arise  from  the  fact  that  we  have  no  control  over 
ourselves  and  our  passions  and  desires.  The  ordinary  method  of 
practising  self-control  by  following  certain  mental  and  moral 
rules,  such  as  the  ten  commandments  of  the  Christians  and  the 
pancha  silas  of  the  Buddhists,  do  not  take  us  very  far,  as  we 
violate  these  rules  in  spite  of  ourselves.  Thus  Arjuna  asks  in  the 

1  Aurobindo,  The  Life  Divine,  p.  759. 

*  Pas  and  Jordan,  Physics  of  the  20 th  Century. 

3  Gita,  II,  20.  4  Ibid.,  Ill,  42. 


235 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 

Gita,  what  is  this  in  us  that  drives  a  man  to  commit  sin,  as  if  by 
force,  even  against  his  own  struggling  will?  Thus  all  men  become 
sinners  as  if  by  necessity,  and  the  wages  of  sin  is  death.  That  is 
the  true  lesson  of  the  parable  of  Christ's  calling  for  a  person  who 
has  never  committed  any  sin  to  throw  the  first  stone  at  a  fallen 
woman.  It  is  not  by  practising  outer  austerity  that  we  can  get 
rid  of  desire,  which  is  the  root  of  all  sins  in  our  nature.  Only 
when  w*e  see  in  us  the  self  which  is  beyond  the  mind  and  life  can 
we  root  out  all  desires  from  our  nature  and  enter  into  the  eternal 
kingdom  of  peace  and  bliss.  The  Lord  says  to  Arjuna  in  the 
Gita:  Thus  awakening  by  the  understanding  to  the  Highest 
which  is  beyond  even  the  discerning  mind,  putting  force  on  the 
self  by  the  self  to  make  it  firm  and  still,  slay  thou,  O  mighty- 
armed,  this  enemy  in  the  form  of  desire,  who  is  so  hard  to  slay.'1 

It  may  be  objected  that  to  find  the  self  or  the  spirit  is  not  an 
easy  thing  and  cannot  be  put  forward  as  a  practical  solution  of 
man's  difficulties.  Even  if  it  be  so,  there  is  no  other  solution, 
for  to  hope  for  a  true  change  of  human  life  without  a  change  of 
human  nature  is  an  irrational  and  unspiritual  proposition.  Tt  is 
to  ask  for  something  unnatural  and  unreal,  an  impossible 
miracle’2  and  the  first  condition  of  changing  our  nature  is  to 
find  our  true  self,  the  spirit,  and  allow  that  to  shape  our  life 
and  action.  The  spirit  is  not  something  far  and  distant  but  it  is 
within  us  and  in  the  course  of  evolution  it  is  slowly  emerging, 
as  life  before  emerged  in  matter  and  mind  in  life.  But  man  can 
hasten  this  natural  process  of  evolution  by  conscious  effort  and 
that  is  what  is  meant  by  yoga  in  India,  of  which  the  Gita  is  an 
authoritative  scripture,  yogasdstra.  \  .  .  the  mental  human 
being  is  not  aware  of  a  soul  in  him  standing  back  from  the  mind 
and  life  and  body,  detaching  itself,  seeing  and  controlling  and 
moulding  their  action  and  formation;  but,  as  the  inner  evolution 
proceeds,  this  is  precisely  what  can,  must  and  does  happen — it 
is  the  long-delayed  but  inevitable  next  step  in  our  evolutionary 
destiny.' 3 

When  one  discovers  the  spirit  within  him,  he  realizes  that 
in  his  true  being  he  is  one  with  God  and  all  other  fellow  human 
beings  and  that  is  the  solid  spiritual  basis  of  human  unity.  Only 
then,  and  not  before,  can  love  become  the  law  of  life  and  peace 

1  Gita,  111,  43.  *  Aurobindo,  The  Life  Divine,  p.  938.  3  Ibid.,  p.  760. 

236 


GIta,  the  World  Scripture 

and  harmony  be  established  permanently  on  earth.  Only  then 
the  religion  of  humanity  will  find  its  firm  and  true  basis  and 
justification.  ‘For  that  essentially  must  be  the  aim  of  the  religion 
of  humanity,  as  it  must  be  the  earthly  aim  of  all  human 
religion,  love,  mutual  recognition  of  human  brotherhood,  a 
living  sense  of  human  oneness  and  practice  of  human  oneness  in 
thought,  feeling  and  life,  the  ideal  which  was  expressed  first 
some  thousands  of  years  ago  in  the  ancient  Vedic  hymn  and 
must  always  remain  the  highest  injunction  of  the  Spirit 
within  us  to  human  life  upon  earth/1  There  must  be  a  discipline 
by  which  this  spiritual  religion  of  humanity  ‘.  .  .  can  be 
developed  by  each  man  within  himself  so  that  it  may  be  deve¬ 
loped  in  the  life  of  the  face/2  All  our  philosophy,  science,  art, 
politics,  economics,  education  should  have  its  essential  aim  to 
help  man  to  discover  his  true  self.  The  required  spiritual 
discipline  will  be  found  elaborately  given  in  the  Gita  when  we 
read  it  with  the  help  of  Sri  Aurobindo’s  luminous  interpretation, 
which  brings  out  its  inner  significances  in  a  way  which  brings 
them  home  to  the  modern  mind.  In  order  to  follow  this 
discipline,  one  should  start  with  an  adequate  conception  of  God 
that  is  as  complete  as  possible.  He  is  the  creator  and  ruler  of  the 
world,  for  whose  sake  all  forces  and  all  beings  live  and  work.  He 
is  unfolding  the  universal  play  in  His  own  being  for  His  self¬ 
delight;  nothing  happens  in  the  world  without  His  will,  nothing 
can  resist  the  fulfilment  of  His  divine  plan  which  is  to  lead  all 
creatures  to  immortality  and  the  joy  of  the  god-life.  He  is  the 
supreme  and  loving  friend  of  all.  All  these  truths  about  God 
are  expressed  as  follows  in  the  Gita:  The  Lord  says:  ‘When  a  man 
has  known  Me  as  the  enjoyer  of  sacrifice  and  tapasyd  (of  all 
askesis  and  energisms),  the  mighty  lord  of  all  the  worlds,  the 
friend  of  all  creatures,  he  comes  by  the  peace/ 3  With  this  con¬ 
ception  of  God  fixed  in  the  mind,  one  should  learn  to  love  and 
serve  Him  in  all  ways,  sarva-bhdvena.  For  this  one  need  not  take 
the  help  of  a  priest  or  go  to  a  temple  or  a  holy  place,  but  should 
daily  devote  some  time  to  silent  meditation  and  also  worship 
the  Divine  in  a  simple  manner  as  indicated  by  the  Lord  Himself 
in  the  Gita:  ‘He  who  offers  to  Me  with  devotion  a  leaf,  a  flower, 

1  Aurobindo,  The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity ,  p.  313. 

2  Ibid.,  p.  323.  3  Gita,  IX,  24,  and  X,  3. 


237 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 

a  cup  of  water,  that  offering  of  love  from  the  striving  soul,  is 
acceptable  to  Me/1  The  Gita  does  not  require  that  one  should 
renounce  the  world  or  life  in  order  to  realize  the  Divine,  but 
insists  that  all  necessary  work  in  the  world,  sarva-karmdni, 
should  be  done  with  resolution  and  zeal,  and  it  should  be 
offered  as  a  worship  to  the  Divine.  ‘Whatever  thou  doest, 
whatever  thou  enjoyest,  sacrificest,  whatever  thou  givest, 
whatever  tapasyd  of  the  soul’s  will  or  effort  thou  puttest  forth, 
make  it  an  offering  unto  Me  (that  is,  do  all  these  things  in  a 
spirit  of  worship)/2 

Desire,  anger  and  greed,  the  greatest  enemies  of  men,  should 
be  controlled,  that  is,  nothing  should  be  done  under  their 
influence.  All  actions  should  be  decided  in  the  light  of  calm 
reasoning  until  one  unites  himself  directly  with  the  Divine  and 
becomes  a  conscious  instrument  of  His  will  and  power. 

As  an  aid  to  their  discipline,  one  should  regularly  study  the 
Gita  with  the  help  of  Sri  Aurobindo 's  soul-stirring  interpretation 
and  also  do  social  service  not  as  a  charity,  but  as  a  worship  of 
the  Divine  who  is  seated  in  all  beings.  ‘The  Yogin/  says  the 
Lord,  ‘who  has  taken  his  stand  upon  oneness  and  loves  Me  in  all 
beings,  however  and  in  all  ways  he  lives  and  acts,  lives  and  acts 
in  Me/3  By  serving  our  fellow  men  disinterestedly  as  a  means  of 
worshipping  God,  we  shall  realize  our  oneness  with  all,  we  shall 
find  the  one  Self  in  all  beings  and  that  is  the  foundation  of  true 
love.  ‘A  spiritual  oneness  which  would  create  a  psychological 
oneness  not  dependent  upon  any  intellectual  or  outward 
uniformity  and  compel  a  oneness  of  life  not  bound  up  with  its 
mechanical  means  of  unification,  but  ready  always  to  enrich 
its  secure  unity  by  a  free  inner  variation  and  a  freely  varied 
outer  self-expression,  this  would  be  the  basis  for  a  higher  type 
of  human  existence/4 

*  Gita,  IX,  26.  *  Ibid.,  IX,  27.  3  Ibid.,  VI,  31. 

4  Aurobindo,  The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity,  p.  323. 


238 


21 


jay  r.  McCullough 

The  Integral  Approach  in  Sri  Aurobindo 
and  Jacob  Boehme1 


From  time  to  time  and  from  age  to  age,  there  have  arisen  men 
of  far-reaching  vision  and  deep  insight  into  that  which  may  be 
termed  the  realm  of  spirituality.  The  degree  and  approach 
toward  integrality  of  this  vision  and  insight  appear  to  be  varied, 
and  the  reports  given  by  these  witnesses  of  the  experienced 
Fact  also  exhibit  an  apparent  variability,  strained  as  they  have 
been  through  the  individual  capabilities  of  the  seer-sages  and 
the  cultural-semantic  environment  within  which  they  developed. 
We  need  not  marvel,  however,  at  this  divergence,  for  that  is 
within  the  realm  of  logical  expectation.  What  truly  is  remarkable 
is  the  factor  of  identity  running  through  the  evidence  like  an 
eternal  organ-point  upon  whose  body  play  and  dance  the  ever- 
changing  Kali-figures  of  fugue  and  counterpoint  which,  as 
accidents,  embellish  it — and  even  these  ‘figures*  exhibit 
recurrent  patterns  and  nuances  of  similarity.  Examples  of  this 
similarity-in-difference  are  many,  and  any  choice  of  personali¬ 
ties  as  subjects  for  a  discussion  involves  a  certain  amount  of 
arbitrary  decision;  for  the  ‘seed  of  grandeur’2  eternallyisburied 

1  For  simplicity  and  as  a  matter  of  personal  preference  the  view-point  of, 
and  translations  from,  the  works  of  Boehme  are  from  Howard  H.  Brin  ton, 
The  Mystic  Will  (New  York:  The  Macmillan  Co.,  1930).  Brinton  bases  his 
references  upon  the  Schiebler  edition  of  Boehme’s  works,  in  seven  vols., 
Leipzig,  1843. 

3  Aurobindo,  Savitri,  p.  6: 

‘Ablaze  upon  creation’s  quivering  edge, 

Dawn  built  her  aura  of  magnificent  hues 
And  buried  its  seed  of  grandeur  in  the  hours/ 

Howard  H.  Brinton,  op.  cit.,  p.  118,  a  quotation  from  Boehme,  The  Threefold 
Life,  6,  5:  ‘If  you  make  a  little  circle  as  small  as  a  grain  of  seed,  so  the  whole 
birth  of  the  eternal  nature  is  therein  and  also  the  Trinity/ 

239 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 

within  the  flux  of  time  and  the  fruits  born  of  its  eternal  evolve- 
ment,  through  and  as  the  manifold,  are  rich,  varied  and 
far-flung. 

Any  attempt  to  portray  within  the  limited  framework  of  a 
short  article  the  spiritual  genius  of  two  men  such  as  Jacob 
Boehme  and  Sri  Aurobindo,  carries  with  it  the  necessity  to 
speak  in  generalities,  in  headlines  which  cannot  bear  the  light 
of  accurate  comparison.  An  academic,  comparative  study, 
however,  is  not  the  purpose  here.  The  aim,  rather,  is  to  indicate 
in  an  appreciative  manner  certain  meaningful  harmonics  which 
may  serve  to  yoke  in  integrality  the  views  of  the  relatively 
untutored  sage  of  Gorlitz  and  the  richly  endowed  and  highly 
educated  seer-philosopher  (rsi)  of  Pondicherry,  separated  as 
they  are  by  time,  geography  and  the  conceptual  imagery 
involved  in  cultural  and  personal  differences.  In  addition,  there 
is  no  wish  to  posit  any  thesis  of  causality  as  existing  between 
the  two  points  of  view,  nor  to  draw  any  definite  conclusions  as 
to  the  comparative  values  of  the  two  philosophies. 

Both  the  voluntaristic  mysticism  of  Boehme  and  the  integral 
idealism  of  Sri  Aurobindo  portray  a  cosmic  drama  wherein  the 
ineffable  basis  of  supreme  Reality  is  involved  as  a  darkly  buried 
seed  of  unseen  and  unseeing  light  which  evolves  by  the  triple 
play  of  opposites  (sharing  here  with  other  philosophical  systems 
the  motif  of  thesis,  antithesis  and  synthesis)  through  its 
inseparable  forms  and  ever  higher  levels  or  planes  of  mani¬ 
festation  which  emerge  from  the  murky  depths  of  the  'uncon¬ 
scious'  into  the  clear  awareness  and  concrete  experience  of 
transforming  divine  light,  power,  or  truth-consciousness.  In 
each  case,  however,  the  ascent  of  the  spirit  to  transcendence  is 
not  the  end  or  final  resting  place  of  the  journey.  It  is  but  the 
median-station,  the  illuminative  point  of  transformation. 
Neither  in  Boehme  nor  in  Sri  Aurobindo  is  there  a  place  for 
world  denial  or  the  obliteration  of  the  true  individuality  of  man. 
Each  sage,  in  his  own  way,  refuses  to  negate  an  apparent 
dualism  by  overtly  abolishing  one  of  the  terms.  Each,  again  in 
his  own  way,  affirms  not  only  the  divine  triune  ground  itself, 
but  the  world  and  the  individual  as  well,  not  in  the  purely 
egoical  sense,  but  integrally  emergent  as  all-of-a-piece  with  and 
fulfilled  in  Reality  itself.  For  Boehme  the  soul  is  reborn  from 

240 


Integral  Approach  in  Sri  Aurobindo  and  Jacob  Boehme 

darkness  to  light,  yet  the  'limitation'  is  not  banished  but 
becomes  transmuted,  as  it  were,  through  the  fiery  experience  in 
the  light  as  a  meaningful  vehicle  or  basis  for  the  light's  free 
manifestation.  In  a  somewhat  similar  vein  Sri  Aurobindo  in 
another  fashion  expresses  not  only  the  primal  descent  of  the 
triune  Divine  into  cosmic  being,  even  unto  the  lowest  reaches 
of  materiality,  but  the  ascent  of  man  from  egoity  through 
levels  of  wider  life,  mind  and  spirit  toward  the  Divine.  Further¬ 
more,  he  envisions  a  transforming  centre  of  experience  'where 
mind  and  supermind  meet’1  which  permits  the  liberating 
descent  of  that  supermind  through  men  to  matter  itself, 
transmuting  and  integrating  all  as  a  form  of  divine  existence, 
consciousness-force,  and  bliss. 

Thus  both  views  of  the  cosmic  drama  may  be  said  to  pertain 
to  the  way  of  alchemy.  Sri  Aurobindo  asks,  'By  what  alchemy 
shall  this  lead  of  mortality  be  turned  into  that  gold  of  divine 
Being?'2  and  gives  the  answer  by  establishing  as  the  heart  of 
his  yoga  the  pivotal,  yet  all-embracing,  supermind  as  that 
which  alone  may  transmute  all  of  manifestation  into  life  divine. 
Boehme  wrote  during  a  period  of  transition  from  the  old 
traditional  Hermetic  philosophy  to  the  beginnings  of  modern 
scientific  thought.  After  Boehme,  the  two  strains  of  German 
idealism  and  scientific  methodology  began  their  great  flow  into 
the  present,  but  Boehme  himself  tended  to  express  his  vital  and 
voluntaristic  mysticism  in  the  philosophical  language  and 
conceptual  patterns  of  spiritual  alchemy  fused  with  certain 
elements  of  neo-platonism,  gnosticism  and  the  kabbala.  Here 
the  prima  materia ,  the  as  yet  unconscious  possibility  of  embodi¬ 
ment,  is  acted  upon  and  in  turn  interacts  with  the  divine  power 
at  the  ‘heart  of  things', 3  the  philosopher's  stone  or  saviour. 
Thus  there  is  set  into  motion  from  within  a  redemptive  process 
to  be  traced  through  progressively  higher  'stages'  from  the 
chaotic  strife  of  materiality  to  the  utmost  perfection  both  of 
man  and  nature.  Man,  sharing  with  each  element  of  nature  its 
microcosmic-macrocosmic  identity  relationship,  plays  a  deci- 

1  D.  S.  Sarma,  The  Renaissance  of  Hinduism  (Benares:  Benares  Hindu 
University,  1944),  p.  327,  a  quotation  from  Sri  Aurobindo. 

a  Aurobindo,  The  Life  Divine ,  p.  48;  also  cf.  Brihadaratiyaka  Upani$ad, 

3>  28.  3  Brinton,  op.  cit.,  p.  86. 


24I 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 


sivc  part  in  carrying  out  the  plan  of  salvation  both  in  nature 
and  himself.  Through  the  ego-consuming  fires  of  'self-renuncia¬ 
tion'1 *  a  new  centre,  the  living  stone  of  transformation,  is  found 
and  the  power  of  the  stone  is  made  to  descend  with  its  trans¬ 
muting  light  through  man  and  nature,  even  unto  '.  .  .  the 
darkness’  depths’.3 * *  For  Sri  Aurobindo,  also,  the  ego  of  and  by 
itself  is  powerless  both  to  effect  the  illuminative  experience 
and  the  descent  of  transforming  force.  The  true  self  of  man, 
however,  is  not  the  ego  but  is  the  'secret  Purusha  within’3  us, 
the  jlvatman  as  an  undivided  portion  and  eternal  living  power 
of  the  supreme  Personality  itself.  It  is  the  power  of  this  true  and 
original  centre  of  man,  the  Self  which  lies  ‘in  the  heart  of  every 
being’, 4  which  offers  the  ego-surrender  and  the  opening.  It  is 
this  centre  which  'evolves’  or  ascends  into  the  harmonizing 
supermind  experience  of  freedom  and  enlightenment  and  it  is 
this  same  'perfecting  experience’  which  allows  and  permits 
the  divine  transmuting  power  or  saktis  to  descend  through  and 
as  the  now  perfected  centre  of  realization  which  may  act  as  a 
conscious  instrument  for  world  transformation.6 

It  is  to  the  core-centre  wherein  the  seemingly  dual  movements 
of  enlightenment  and  transformation  are  made  possible  that  we 
must  look  for  the  very  heart  and  spirit  of  the  insight-philosophies 
of  both  sages.  In  Boehme’s  pattern  or  doctrine  of  the  Seven 
Nature  Forms  that  centre  is  the  median-point,  the  Fourth  Form 
or  Transition  Point  where  man’s  transformation  is  accomplished 
and,  through  him,  the  world-transformation  into  the  Kingdom 
of  Heaven  is  to  be  achieved.  In  Sri  Aurobindo  ’s  pattern  of 
being  and  becoming,  the  involution  into  matter  of  the  ineffable 
Supreme,  the  nondual  but  three-in-one  Saccidananda,  through 
the  mediation  of  Supermind  (the  fourth  or  median-point) 
manifests  the  lower  triune  hemisphere  of  the  mental,  the  vital 
and  the  physical  as  veritable  harmonics  of  that  omnipresent 
and  absolute  pure  Existent  (Sat)  inseparable  from  absolute 

1  Brinton,  op.  cit.,  p.  233.  Cf.  tapoyajna  and  dtmasamarpana.  Also  Gita, 

18,  O5-6.  *  Savitrl,  p.  5. 

3  Aurobindo,  Essays  on  the  GUa,  p.  201.  4  Gila,  10,  20. 

5  Brinton,  op.  cit.,  pp.  183-202  (cf.  the  Divine  Virgin  Sophia  of  Boehme). 

6  Cf.  the  ideal  of  mahapurusha  as  Chakravartin — also  the  chintamani,  the 

transforming  Stone  or  Jewel  which  turns  all  things  toward  the  will  of  the 
Supreme. 

242 


Integral  Approach  in  Sri  Aurobindo  and  Jacob  Boehme 

Consciousness-Force  (Cit)  and  absolute  Delight  or  Bliss  of  Exis¬ 
tence  (Ananda).  In  both  patterns  the  real  nonduality  of  the 
‘above'  and  the  ‘below'  is  figured — one  from  the  background 
of  the  Emerald  Tablet  of  Hermes  Trismegistus  and  the  other 
from  the  less  cryptic  integral  insight  of  the  Vedas  and 
Upanisads.  The  coincidental  movements  of  man's  rise  or 
ascent  to  total  awakening  and  the  descent  of  that  trans¬ 
forming  light-power  into  nature  itself  is  traced  upon  the 
framework  of  these  two  rather  similar  pattern-forms. 

In  Sri  Aurobindo  the  long  journey  of  the  soul1  working 
upward  through  the  dual  form  of  its  desire-self  or  surface 
expression  encounters  in  its  emergence  and  development 
recurrent  dual  stresses  which  are  to  be  resolved  by  means  of  a 
higher  and  inner  synthesis  at  each  stage  of  its  progress.  Through¬ 
out  the  upward  unfoldment  and  manifestation  of  the  Divine, 
the  story  of  opposition  and  its  reconciliation,  ‘the  stuff  of 
which  life  is  made',  the  solving  of  the  fundamental  discords 
arising  anew  on  each  level  of  existence,  is  a  basic,  cyclical 
theme.2  The  conflict  between  passive  matter  and  the  creativity 
of  life  is  harmonized  in  the  living  world  through  the  union  of 
the  material  and  the  vital.  Life  and  mind  are  united  in  the 
animal  kingdom  when  mind  is  embodied  in  living  matter.  The 
manifestation  of  man  makes  possible  a  meaningful  harmony 
between  the  sense  mind  and  rational  mind,  and  the  opposition 
between  the  present  level  of  man  and  the  spirit  is  to  be  worked 
out  in  the  human  laboratory  by  the  energies  of  superman.  Just 
as  a  lotus  works  upward  from  the  ooze  of  a  lake  bed  through  the 
opaque  and  murky  veil  of  the  surrounding  waters,  the  mind  as 

1  The  psychic  being  or  true,  inner  subliminal  consciousness. 

Savitvi,  p.  27: 

‘A  spirit  that  is  a  flame  of  God  abides 

Immortal  in  our  mortal  poverty.' 

1  Ibid.,  p.  T59:  *A  contradiction  founds  the  base  of  life: 

The  eternal,  the  divine  Reality 

Has  faced  itself  with  its  own  contraries;' 

Ibid.,  p.  206:  ‘For  Contradiction  is  her  nature’s  law’. 

Ibid.,  p.  381:  ‘A  riddle  of  opposites  is  made  his  field:* 

Also  see  The  Life  Divine,  pp.  76-7;  and  Sri  Aurobindo,  Letters  of  Sri 
Aurobindo  (Bombay:  Sri  Aurobindo  Circle,  1947).  pp.  14-15. 

243 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 


a  microcosm  bearing  within  it  the  image  of  the  macrocosm 
works  upward  through  higher  mind  (the  truth  thought), 
the  illumined  mind  (the  more  immediate  and  intuitive  truth 
light),  the  intuitive  mind  (the  immediate  perception  of  the 
image  of  true  knowledge  and  action)  into  the  highest  reaches 
of  the  global  or  cosmic  consciousness  of  overmind,  past  the 
transparent  veil  of  the  'golden  lid'  marking  the  limit  of  the 
lower  hemisphere  into  the  fourth  and  central  point  of  the 
journey,  the  vijndnam  or  supermind,  the  source  and  fountain¬ 
head  of  evolvement  and  transformation.  Here  all  veils  are 
removed  and  the  interdependence  of  the  two  dynamic  move¬ 
ments  made  manifest  so  ‘That  the  eyes  of  the  Timeless  might 
look  out  from  Time  and  world  manifest  the  unveiled  Divine'. 

Boehme,  in  his  doctrine  of  the  Seven  Nature  Forms,  depicts 
the  ascent  through  the  first  three  forms  unto  its  culmination  in 
the  fourth,  the  point  of  transition  and  transformation,  the 
centre  for  the  return  or  descent  back  into  nature.1  In  this 
pattern  Boehme,  in  line  with  his  vitalistic  background,  accen¬ 
tuates  the  dynamic  volitional  element.  Here,  also,  the  stress 
between  two  opposing  wills  of  the  primary,  unseeing  and 
unconditioned  'Abysmal  Will'  underlying  the  nature  forms, 
finds  its  expression  in  nature.  Seen  from  the  'outside'  this 
activity  or  will  is  nature  manifesting  itself  in  all  things,  a  force 
of  attraction,  repulsion  and  ‘rotation’  which,  by  resolving  its 
series  of  inner  conflicts,  breaks  through  the  'bonds  of  nature 
into  the  higher  consciousness’.  Thus  begins  the  evolving  drama 
of  Will  striving  within  the  processes  of  contradictions  to  know 
itself.2  Two  opposing  types  or  ways  of  knowing,  therefore,  are 
(i)  this  negative,  in-going,  subjective  point  of  view  ( verstand ), 
a  one-pointed  will  toward  identity-knowledge,  a  ‘resigned  will' 
directed  toward  the  infinite  and  ultimate  primal  unity  of  the 

*  These  seven  nature  forms  are  interwoven  in  a  basic  manner  throughout 
all  of  Boehme's  major  works,  particularly  in  the  Aurora.  They  arc  stressed  in 
Brinton,  op.  cit.,  pp.  131-66  and  232-54. 

2  In  his  Essays  on  the  GUa,  p.  202,  Sri  Aurobindo  states  that  the  will  in 
nature  is  only  a  partial,  modified  reflection  of  the  will  of  the  free  Self.  It  is 
that  reflection  in  successive  moments  of  time  and  is  only  imperfectly  conscious. 
‘But  the  Will  within,  exceeding  the  moments  of  Time,  knows  all  these,  and 
the  action  of  Nature  in  us  is  an  attempt,  we  might  say,  to  work  out  under 
the  difficult  conditions  of  a  natural  and  egoistic  ignorance  what  is  foreseen  in 
full  supramental  light  by  the  inner  Will  and  Knowledge.’ 

244 


Integral  Approach  in  Sri  Aurobindo  and  Jacob  Boehme 

Abyss  from  which  multiplicity  arises  and,  (2)  that  out-going 
objective  will  {vernunft)  directed  in  a  'positive',  rational  and 
logical  manner  toward  knowing  the  external  and  historical, 
the  multiple  which  finds  its  universal  term  in  the  unity,  a 
self-assertive  action  (in  contradistinction  to  the  self- 
surrendering  action  of  verstand)  to  grasp  and  control  multiple 
phenomena  rather  than  reality-in-itself.  From  the  interpene¬ 
trations  and  reconciliations  of  these  flows  arises  meaning 
within  both  man  and  nature — for  here  the  stresses  separating 
man  and  nature-centred  wills  are  dissolved  through  the 
experience  which  witnesses  the  meeting  of  vernunft  in  its 
logical  development  from  the  multiple  to  the  unity,  with 
verstand  in  its  understanding  of  the  unity  which,  in  its  freedom, 
bears  within  it  all  possibility  of  multiplicity.  The  element  of 
exclusiveness ,  though,  the  out-going  will  manifested  in  crystal¬ 
lized  philosophical  and  religious  concepts  or  systems  which 
oppose  any  reconciliation,  must  be  eliminated.  Throw  away 
your  outer  reason',  says  Boehme,  'so  is  your  will  God's  will  and 
God's  spirit  will  seek  you  in  you.'1  Thus  the  dual  temporal  will 
is  resolved,  progressively,  through  appropriate  stages  toward 
a  common  goal,  the  one  eternal  will  which  also  is  the  source. 
Reason,  far  from  being  abolished,  is  now  the  'dwelling,  the 
localization  in  space  and  time',  of  the  verstand ,2  the  outward, 
inseparable  and  nondual  expression  of  the  deeper  inward 
insight.  The  objectification  or  determination  of  the  will3 
arises  from  a  process  of  'imagination'  or  creative  visualization 
mutually  reactive  with  the  will's  inner  contractions,  and  the 
recurrent  poises  of  reconciliation  or  temperature  of  the  deter¬ 
minate  will  form  life  stages  of  a  progressive  higher  unity 
unfolding  from  the  will's  opposition  to  itself.  Although  described 
linearly,  this  movement  is  to  be  conceived  as  a  circular  process 
of  the  threefold  will  in  thesis,  antithesis  and  synthesis. 

The  divine  imagination  or  plan  of  creation  arising  from  the 
first  creative  movement  was  personified  by  Boehme  as  a 
wisdom  or  'inherent  structure'  known  as  the  Virgin  Sophia — 

1  Brinton,  op.  cit.,  p.  125;  cf.  Gita,  18,  66. 

*  Ibid.,  op.  cit.,  p.  101;  cf.  Ha  Upanishad  1. 

3  Ibid.,  op.  cit.,  p.  109.  Here  Brinton  parallels  Schopenhauer’s  'objectification 
of  the  will’  with  Boehme's  ‘imagination’.  See  also  pp.  76,  77,  108,  118,  141, 
197  and  220. 


245 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 


that  which  is  discovered  through  the  will's  primal  objectifica¬ 
tion  of  itself  and  which  is  projected  in  the  out-going  will  as 
determinitive  of  all  action.1 

The  stage  now  is  set  in  the  drama  of  life  as  it  follows  the 
'upward  spiral'  through  Boehme's  pattern  of  the  seven  forms. 
Prior  to  nature  and  its  first  form  the  divine  Absolute  as 
Ungrund,2 3 4  the  eternally  ineffable  and  undifferentiated  'God'  as 
the  groundless,  indeterminate  will  (the  Father)  is  an  activity 
('a  will  to  seek  itself')  which  divides  circularly  into  opposites, 
the  in-going  'conceived  will'  as  the  Son  wherein  the  Father 
knows  himself,  and  the  out-going  will-to-p reject  creatively 
through  the  Son  as  the  Spirit,  thus  forming  an  esoteric,  ideal 
or  subjective  trinity.  This  unmanifested  trinity  of  possibilities 
becomes  in  the  seven  forms  a  manifested,  objective  trinity 
within  which  the  primordial  ‘Father’  becomes  the  dark  or  as 
yet  unknown  world  of  nature  and  the  ideal  'Son'  the  light 
world  wherein  the  ‘Father’  is  known.  Through  Boehme’s  seven 
nature  forms,  the  eternal  unmanifested  will  is  realized  objec¬ 
tively  both  in  the  modes  of  the  visible  and  the  invisible,  the 
temporal  and  the  eternal.  3  While  presented  logically  in 
sequence  they  are  in  reality  interdependent  with  each  other 
and  with  the  absolute  will.  Outwardly  (vernunft)  they  form 
the  appearance  of  the  physical,  and  inwardly  (verstand)  they 
appear  as  the  vital,  dynamic  and  universal  will-of-life  itself. 
The  internal,  then,  is  mirrored  in  the  external  which,  'in  the 
property  of  the  generation  of  all  forms'  becomes  a  'signature'4 
of  the  inward  Spirit. 

For  the  purpose  of  a  rough  correlation,  the  functions  of  the 
first  three  forms  of  Boehme,  in  which  the  physical  predominates, 

1  Cf.  the  thirty-six  Tantratattvas.  See  Sir  John  WoodrofTe  and  P.  N. 

Mukhyopadhyaya,  Mahamaya  (Madras:  Ganesh  &  Co.,  1929),  pp.  209-20, 
and  Woodroffe,  The  Garland  of  Letters  (London:  Luzae  &  Co.  Ltd.,  1951), 
pp.  89-98.  *  Cf.  'Creation  Hymn',  Rig  Veda,  10,  129. 

3  Cf.  the  seven  chakras  of  Kundalini  Yoga,  with  the  anahata  (liridpuru!?a) 
as  the  fourth  padma;  the  seven  lokas  and  their  relation  with  the  Gayatrl; 
Katha,  6,  i;  GUd,  15,  1-3;  Mundaka,  2,  t,  8. 

4  Brinton,  op.  cit.,  p.  99  (from  Boehme's  Signatura  Rerum ,  i,  3). 

Cf.  lines  from  Savitrl,  p.  86: 

'.  .  .  the  signature  and  fiery  seal 

Of  Wisdom  on  the  dim  Power's  hooded  work 

Who  builds  in  Ignorance  the  steps  of  Light.' 

246 


Integral  Approach  in  Sri  Aurobindo  and  Jacob  Boehme 

may  be  likened  unto  those  of  Sri  Aurobindo ’s  lower  hemisphere, 
while  the  last  four  of  the  forms  may  be  said  to  bear  some 
correspondence  to  the  upper  hemisphere  comprising  Super- 
mind  and  Saccidananda,  the  integrator  and  transformer  of  the 
lower.  The  first  of  the  seven  nature  forms  is  that  of  Contraction, 
the  physical  manifestation  of  unseeing  Desire.1  It  is  the  primal 
desire  or  in-going  will-to-be,  the  creative  fiat  contracted  upon 
itself  or  attracted  to  itself,  the  origin  of  individuality  and  the 
darkness  of  separateness.  This  contraction  cannot  exist  of  and 
by  itself,  for  it  needs  an  opposing  force.  This,  the  second  form, 
Expansion,  is  conceived  in  and  by  the  frustration  of  the  first 
as  its  outgoing  reflex  will  grasping  toward  an  impossible 
freedom  outside  of  the  Self.  The  tension  resulting  from  the 
interaction  of  two  equally  opposing  forces,  this  being  torn 
between  two  conflicting  wills,  generates  further  frustration  and 
darkness  which,  through  the  turning  of  desire  upon  desire 
(inward  and  outward)  creates  Rotation,  the  third  form.  Here 
is  the  wheel  of  life  and  death,  of  samsdra,  turning  hopelessly  in 
existential  anguish  and  rent  by  two  desires  seeking  self- 
satisfaction.  We  approach,  here,  a  twofold  possibility  of 
choice,  either  to  deny  one  of  the  desires  in  a  flight  either  from 
the  world  or  the  Spirit,  or  to  find  an  integral  meaning  through 
a  higher  synthesis  which  (and  here  we  borrow  the  terminology 
of  Sri  Aurobindo)  unites  an  inward,  introversive,  self-opening 
into  the  depths  of  the  subliminal  (compare  Christ's  descent 
into  hell)  with  the  extroversive  ‘free  soaring  into  the  sky  of  the 
superconscious’. 

Sri  Aurobindo  places  Supermind  in  the  intermediate  or 
fourth  place  (turiya)  between  the  triplicity  of  world  mani¬ 
festation  and  the  trinity  of  Saccidananda.  As  such  it  is  the 
connecting  or  unifying  link  between  the  absolute  and  the 
relative  ‘worlds’  and  it  alone  has  and  is  the  sovereign  power  of 
transformation.  Similarly,  Boehme’s  fourth  nature  form2  is 

1  Cf.  Greek  Eros  and  Indian  Kama  as  the  first  of  the  Gods;  also  Rig  Veda, 
io,  29:  'Thereafter  arose  Desire  in  the  beginning.  Desire  the  primal  seed  and 
germ  of  spirit.’ 

*  Suzuki  describes  the  Zen -experience  as  'Buddhahood,  in  which  all  the 
contradictions  and  disturbances  caused  by  the  intellect  are  entirely  harmo¬ 
nized  in  a  unity  of  a  higher  order’.  Quoted  by  R.  H.  Blyth,  Zen  in  English 
Literature  (Tokyo:  The  Hokuseido  Press,  1948),  p.  5. 

247 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 


called  the  Transition  Point',  the  place  of  rebirth  into  light,  the 
principle  of  transmutation,  where  'spirit  acquires  body  and 
body  acquires  spirit'  and  life-manifestation  arises  to  integral 
self-consciousness.  At  and  through  this  point  the  dark  lower 
ternary,  the  first  three  forms,  becomes  the  higher,  fiery  ternary, 
the  last  three  forms.  Within  this  nondual  point,  however, 
Boehme  speaks  of  three  planes  which  have  been  called:  (i)  the 
sinking  down  to  the  point,  or  the  resigned  will,  (2)  the  point  or 
the  abyss,  and  (3)  the  rising  beyond  the  point,  culminating  in 
the  integral  realization  of  the  Kingdom  of  Heaven  or  the 
seventh  form.1  Within  this  fourth  form  or  point  in  the  evolu¬ 
tionary  process,  there  may  be  traced,  then,  an  inward  move¬ 
ment  toward  the  depths  of  Being,  a  descent,  as  it  were,  into  a 
‘hell'  wherein  the  resigned  and  surrendered  outer,  subjective 
unity  is  shredded  into  anguished  multiplicity;  yet,  in  the 
deepest  depths  of  this  descent,  there  is  found,  if  a  surrender  be 
complete,  not  ‘hell'  but  the  Absolute  itself  as  the  primal  abyss. 
It  is  at  this  point,  the  core  centre,  that  a  new  unity  is  fused 
out  of  the  fractured  many,  an  integral  unity  which  flows 
outward  or  which  rises  to  the  transforming  power  and  realiza¬ 
tion  of  the  many  in  the  one  and  the  one  in  the  many. 

The  ‘sinking  down  to  the  point',  also  called  the  ‘resigned 
will'  or  ‘the  cross',  is  related  harmonically  to  the  lower  ternary 
of  nature  or  self-will  which  first  must  be  resigned  or  crucified 
in  order  to  be  reborn.  In  the  first  three  forms  the  will  has 
exercised  its  egoistic  freedom  to  be  bound  and  frustrated.  Now, 
on  the  cross  of  acceptance  or  surrender  through  an  equally  free 
act  of  resignation  it  endures,  if  the  resignation  be  perfect,  the 
anguish  or  hell  of  ego-effaccment  and  sinks  deep  into  the 
fundamental  subjectivity,  the  abyss  or  absolute  will — the 
ineffable  void  (as  in  sunyatd)  from  where  it  came. 

This  point  (comparable  to  the  Indian  bindu ,  which  is  also  the 
endless  expanse  of  the  ocean  or  sindhu),  the  neutral  and  static 
abyss  of  eternal  freedom,  the  absolute  will  of  the  omnipotent 
Godhead,  is  the  single  portal  through  which  man  and  all  of 


1  Brinton,  op.  cit.,  pp.  143-53.  The  triple  movement  within  the  fourth  form 
is  encountered  throughout  Boehme's  works,  particularly  in  the  Aurora,  The 
Forty  Questions,  The  Threefold  Life,  Signatura  Rerum,  The  Six  Points,  Clavis, 
and  Predestination,  according  to  Brinton. 

248 


Integral  Approach  in  Sri  Aurobindo  and  Jacob  Boehme 

manifestation  pass  to  rebirth.  Being  infinite,  the  point  also  is 
boundless.  As  the  centre  and  source  of  all  meaning,  it  trans¬ 
forms  relative  ignorance-knowledge  to  truth-knowledge.  It  is 
the  crossing  point1  from  a  partial  view  to  'God's  view'.  Here, 
following  the  agony  of  the  'sinking',  life  has  descended  beyond 
death  to  reach  the  uttermost  depths  of  the  ineffable  absolute 
will  to  find  therein  true  life  itself,  a  transformed  substance 
shining  in  its  own  light.  The  soul  and  nature,  forced  by  the 
fruits  of  frustration  into  total  acceptance-surrender,  has  gone 
within,  has  sunken  into  God  as  the  abyss  which,  so  to  speak, 
meets  it  in  a  union  of  total  completion.  This  union,  however, 
is  not  one  of  an  annihilation  of  individuality  but,  rather,  is 
eternal  freedom  itself  where  the  manifold,  the  many,  experi¬ 
ences  in  clear  awareness  not  only  the  mutual  interdepen¬ 
dence  of  its  parts  but  also  their  essential  and  original 
harmony  through  the  abstract,  ideal  wisdom  of  God,  the 
Virgin  Sophia. 

Poised  as  it  is  between  the  two  triads,  'where  light  and 
darkness  divide',2  the  centre  of  the  fourth  form,  this  point  or 
abyss,  also  is  the  point  of  freedom,  the  point  of  choice  between 
the  ternary  of  darkness  and  the  ternary  of  light,  between  a 
return  to  dark  ignorance  or  a  conscious  participation  as  an 
instrument  of  the  divine  in  the  transforming  descent  of  the 
light  into  nature.  If  the  darkness  dominates  the  will,  the 
surrender  is  not  true  and  complete  and  the  approach  to  the 
abyss  is  experienced  as  hell,  spiritual  rebirth  fails  to  take  place, 
and  there  is  a  return  to  the  first  three  nature  forms.  If  the  light 
of  transformation  dominates  the  will,  it  becomes  unitive,  at 
one  with  the  absolute  will  of  the  abyss  which,  from  within, 
remains  the  fundamental  unitive  basis  of  all  nature,  just  as  it 
is  prior  to  the  evolvement  of  the  seven  forms.  The  reborn  will 
now  return  to  nature,  not  on  its  periphery,  but  from  within, 
from  the  very  ground  of  nature  itself.  Here  it  is  in  living 
identity  with  nature,  based  on  the  synthesis  of  a  perfect 
freedom  and  an  understanding,  compassionate  harmony.  The 
will  now  sees  with  the  eye  of  the  eternal  rather  than  the 

1  Cf.  Mahayana  Buddhism's  doctrine  of  PrajUdparamita  as  the  ‘Crossing 
to  the  Other  Shore'. 

a  Brinton,  op.  cit.,  p.  146.  See  also  p.  247.  Cf.  note  3,  p.  225,  supra . 

249 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 

temporal,  and,  in  a  flash  of  integral  identity-knowledge, 
perceives  the  lower  ternary,  from  within,  as  changed  or  trans¬ 
formed  into  the  higher  ternary,  for  the  higher  eternally  is  the 
lower  seen  integrally.1  No  change  in  substance  is  indicated,  for 
the  first  three  forms  do  not  lose  their  identity  as  such;  they 
now  are  seen  in  their  true  light  as  the  unmanifested  material 
basis,  internally  harmonized  through  the  point  of  absolute  will, 
for  the  higher  ternary. 

The  subjective,  static,  mystical  vision  is  not  the  end  of  the 
cycle,  for  the  will  has  received  a  vision  of  the  possibility  of  its 
fulfilment  in  the  transforming  process  which  grows  out  of  the 
abyss.  The  vision  now  must  be  embodied,  the  transforming 
power  experienced  in  the  core  centre  of  the  fourth  form  now  is 
brought  into  the  realm  of  djmamic  actuality  and  the  living 
earth  transfigured  through  the  touch  of  divine  life.  From  the 
abyss  the  integrative  movement  is  ‘upward’  and  the  stage 
called  ‘rising  up  beyond  the  Point’  is  reached,  for  it  is  fulfilment 
itself,  a  fulfilment  realized  in  the  higher  ternary  which  emerges 
from  the  fourth  form.  This  ternary  is:  (5)  Love,  (6)  Expression, 
and  (7)  the  Kingdom  of  Heaven,  and  through  the  transfiguring 
power  generated  in  the  abyss,  expresses  eternal  nature  and 
its  infinite  love  and  wisdom.  This  is  the  new  world,  the  new 
life  as  an  incarnate  resurrection  of  the  old.  Particularity  is 
not  abolished  but  becomes,  instead,  the  body  for  the  new 
transformation  within  an  organic  self-consciousness.  The 
entire  complex  of  the  seven  forms  in  this  integral  union  compose 
eternal  Nature,  Absolute  Will  fully  realized  and  objectified. 
This  may  be  thought  of  as  comparable,  in  its  way,  to  the  full 
descent  of  the  Spirit  in  the  Aurobindonian  pattern  and  its 
culmination  in  the  life  divine.  In  this  harmonization  of  the 
seven  forms,  man’s  will  springs  from  a  new  centre,  for  it  has 
become  the  will  of  God,  and  divine  life  is  known,  not  through 
the  outward  rational  knowledge,  but  by  inward  identity- 
knowledge  (verstand).  ‘God  must  become  man’,  says  Boehme, 
‘man  must  become  God,  heaven  must  be  one  with  the  earth 

1  Brinton,  op.  cit.,  p.  234.  See  also  pp.  137,  146,  150,  213,  228,  239. 

Such  as  the  immediate,  spontaneous,  all-embracing  satori  of  Zen,  the 
non-verbal,  nondualistic  experience  of  the  identity  of  Nirvana  and 
Sams&ra. 


250 


Integral  Approach  in  Sri  Aurobindo  and  Jacob  Boehme 

and  the  earth  must  become  heaven.  Wouldst  thou  make 
heaven  out  of  earth,  then  give  the  earth  the  food  of  heaven/1 
When  the  will  of  man  is  merged  inwardly  with  the  light  of  the 
divine  Will,  man  becomes  an  instrument  of  God's  freedom, 
creating  outwardly  as  God  creates.  Man,  the  new  man,  does 
not  spurn  the  outer  world  of  men  and  nature  but  acts  as  a 
divine  means  for  its  redemption,  directing  the  inner  divine 
light  (met  in  the  fourth  nature  form  as  a  flash),  'into  the  dark 
places  of  the  world'2 3  and  raising  them  to  higher  levels  in  the 
light  by  the  light.  It  is  by  love,  creatively  determinate,  that,  in 
the  words  of  Brinton,  The  whole  comes  down  into  nature  as  a 
harmonizing  influence  and  the  three  struggling  forces  of 
nature,  contraction,  expansion,  and  rotation,  are  transformed 
into  the  last  three  nature  forms,  love,  expression,  and  eternal 
nature,  which  incarnates  the  living  God.  Nature  is  now  in 
temperature,  for  the  parts  act  under  the  influence  of  the 
whole. '3  The  fifth  form,  Love  (cf.  Kripa  and  the  Bodhisattva 
ideal),  the  transformation  of  'attraction'  (form  1)  through  the 
freedom  of  the  abyss  (form  4),  is  the  cohesive  or  in-going  power 
of  the  spiritual  or  higher  ternary  just  as  'attraction'  holds 
together  the  lower  ternary.  The  sixth  form,  Expression  (cf. 
Prajna  and  the  Bodhisattva  ideal),  arises  through  the  union  of 
'expansion'  (form  2)  and  the  freedom  of  the  abyss  (form  4).  It 
is  associated  with  speech  (logos,  sphota,  vak),  tone,  sound, 
and  understanding  as  expressions  of  love,  harmonically  exten¬ 
ding  it  beyond  the  confines  of  cohesion.  The  seventh  form,  the 
Kingdom  of  Heaven,  is  the  Diety  incarnate,  the  will  fully 
matured  and  integrated,  the  positive,  crowning  goal  of  the 
inseparable  sevenfold  process  which,  as  eternal  nature,  the 
perfection  of  life,  is  the  true  synthesis  of  the  one  and  the  many. 
Reminiscent  of  the  l£a  Upanisad,  Boehme  speaks  of  this  as 
the  'substance  of  spirit  which  the  spirit  of  God  wears  as  a 
garment  and  within  which  He  reveals  Himself,  otherwise  His 

1  Brinton,  op.  cit.,  p.  241,  a  quotation  from  Boehme's  Signatura  Rerum ,  10, 

48.  Cf.  Savitrl ,  p.  43:  ‘God  found  in  Nature,  Nature  fulfilled  in  God.'  Con¬ 
cerning  the  concept  of  'food',  cf.  Durga  as  Annapurna,  also  Annam  Brahman 
in  Brihaddrayyaka  Upanisad,  5,  12;  Taittiriya  Upanisad,  2,  2,  3,  1,  3,  10, 
2-6;  Taittiriya  Brahamana,  2,  8,  8.  *  Ibid.,  p.  222. 

3  Ibid.,  p.  221.  For  a  further  consideration  of  'temperature'  as  Harmony  or 
Integrality,  see  pp.  145-52,  233. 


251 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 

form  would  not  be  known’.1  But  this  is  not  the  end,  for  the 
pattern  of  the  mystic  will  is  one  of  an  eternal  spiral.  The  entire 
cycle  is  to  be  reflected  upon  itself  as  the  wisdom-mirror  (Virgin 
Sophia)  of  a  new  manifestation  of  the  Spirit,  a  continuation  of 
the  play  between  the  internal  and  external  within  the  pattern 
of  thesis,  antithesis  and  synthesis.  It  is  this  play  which  revolves 
in  timeless,  creative  repetitions  in  the  upward  spiral  toward 
the  light  which  is  its  centre. 

This  all-too-inadequate  sketch  of  Boehme’s  system  as 
projected  upon  equally  sketchy  sections  from  the  pattern  of 
Sri  Aurobindo’s  integral  yoga  admittedly  has  stressed  the 
similarities  existing  between  the  visions  of  these  two  men  of 
spiritual  genius,  for  in  the  similitude  itself  lies  that  which 
bears  witness  to  the  thrilling  universality  of  a  message  which 
spans  and  unites  two  cultures  seemingly  separated  by  time  and 
geography.  In  the  academic  world  of  purely  rational  philo¬ 
sophic  system-building  such  a  similarity  might  tend  to  lessen 
the  value  of  uniqueness  so  prized  by  some  facets  of  traditional 
Western  scholarship.  In  the  case  of  spiritual  insight,  however, 
similarity  well  may  be  one  of  the  hall-marks  of  that  thread  of 
unity  integrating  the  outwardly  varied  records  of  spiritual 
experience  left  by  seers  throughout  all  ages  and  in  all  lands.  It 
well  may  be  said,  and  with  a  certain  amount  of  justification, 
that  the  sage  of  Pondicherry  pursued  his  wisdom  deeper  into 
the  Truth  and  brought  back  into  the  everyday  world  a  more 
comprehensive  transformation.  We  also  may  say  that  the 
spirit  of  traditional  Indian  metaphysic  served  as  a  far  richer 
cultural  medium  for  the  development  and  growth  of  such  an 
all-embracing  insight.  But  that,  in  this  instance,  is  not  the 
point.  It  is  the  light  of  similitude  which  casts  its  beam  of 
illumination  upon  the  one  ‘seed  of  grandeur’  from  which  a  tree 
of  many  branches  and  infinite  leaves  has  grown,  and  the 
infinite  variety  of  differences  (and  admittedly  there  are  many 
profound  differences  existing  in  and  apparently  separating 
the  two  spiritual  experience-patterns)  provides  charmingly 
interesting  academic  investigation  problems  which  might  serve 

1  Brinton,  op.  cit.,  p.  156,  a  quotation  from  Boehme  in  The  Threefold 
Life,  5,  50.  See  Iia  Upanisad  1. 


252 


Integral  Approach  in  Sri  Aurobindo  and  Jacob  Boehme 

to  point  up  the  rich  possibilities  inherent  in  any  consideration 
of  the  many-in-the-one. 

Experience  of  the  nondual  supreme  Reality  may  be 
expressed  in  infinite  and  varied  ways,  and  there  appears  to  be 
no  absolute  justification  for  a  claim  that  any  one  particular 
way  or  pattern,  or  one  general  mode  of  formulating  patterns, 
constitutes  the  only  way  or  sddhana.  By  this  it  is  not  at  all  to 
be  inferred  that  each  way  is  to  be  thought  of  as  just  as  ‘good* 
or  'true'  as  any  other.  It  does  imply,  however,  that  in  the  play 
of  similitude  there  is  a  basis  for  an  inner  similarity  which 
unites  the  differing  views  of  reality-experience,  views  which 
on  their  periphery  appear  even  diametrically  opposed  and 
which  show  little  or  no  'sameness'  in  their  approach.  By  this 
it  is  to  be  suggested  that  'systematic'  sddhands  in  themselves, 
no  matter  how  integrally  formulated,  do  not  exhaust  the 
possible  ways  by  which  the  one  and  many  ar e  fully  experienced 
as  not  being  different  in  reality.  In  every  formulation  involving 
thesis,  antithesis  and  synthesis,  the  synthesis  itself  may 
become  a  new  thesis  which  engenders  its  own  antithesis 
ad  infinitum ,  and  even  the  concept  of  transformation  or 
transmutation  as  a  supreme  force  integrating  the  opposites  of 
materiality  and  spirituality  may  incur  the  semantic  danger  of 
re-establishing  the  One  through  the  practical  absorption  of  its 
opposition.  Patterns,  words,  charts  and  philosophies  in  and  by 
themselves,  no  matter  how  exact  and  intricate  their  make-up, 
cannot  contain  the  Fact-vision  of  the  seer  himself.  The  greatest 
similitude  may  well  be  the  integral  and  all-embracing  Fact 
behind  the  pattern.  The  experience  of  the  Fact,  patternless, 
void  and  uncharted,  but  fully  evident  in  the  smallest  fact  of 
the  everyday  world,  is  the  supreme  witness.  It  is  only  when  we 
have  come  face  to  face  with  this  Fact  that  we  can  communicate 
truly  with  the  sages  of  Gorlitz  and  Pondicherry. 


253 


PART  FOUR 


LITERATURE 


22 


K.  D.  SETHNA 

The  Poet  of  Integralism 


The  term  ‘integralism’,  in  our  treatment  of  Sri  Aurobindo  the 
poet,  the  wielder  of  an  intense  art-form,  must  go  beyond  the 
discovery  of  a  special  spiritual  experience  and  vision  which  we 
may  designate  by  it..  It  must  connote  primarily  an  integral 
style,  an  integral  word-power  to  match  that  experience  and 
vision.  But  this  style  and  this  word-power  cannot  be  defined 
just  by  saying  that  the  former  is  one  which  commands  with 
consummate  versatility  divers  modes  and  attitudes  of  speech 
and  that  the  latter  seizes  articulately  on  all  possible  objects 
with  a  vivid  intimacy  as  well  as  with  a  large  sense  of  their 
interrelations  within  a  world-harmony.  We  have  also  to  speak 
in  terms  of  ‘planes’  of  expression.  For,  no  matter  how  high  or 
wide  or  deep  the  state  of  consciousness,  how  supra-intellectual 
the  mystic’s  realization,  the  poetic  expression  may  take  the 
mould  of  the  mere  mind’s  manner  of  utterance,  the  moved 
imaginative  speech  proper  to  the  plane  distinguished  by  Sri 
Aurobindo  as  the  creative  intelligence  which  is  no  more  than 
a  particular  intensified  operation  of  the  same  mental  conscious¬ 
ness  we  find  in  the  bulk  of  human  activities.  Most  poetry  is 
written  from  the  creative  intelligence,  though  the  founts  of  it 
are  more  inward,  more  secret  than  those  of  our  habitual  mental 
life.  Rarely  do  those  founts  deliver  not  only  the  significance 
but  also  the  very  word  and  rhythm  native  to  their  greater 
inwardness  and  secrecy.  Poetic  integralism  would  lie  in  an 
expression  springing  straight  from  the  highest,  widest,  deepest 
fount  of  spiritual  experience  and  vision  instead  of  getting 
shaped  in  the  mere  mind  or  even  predominantly  in  the  inter- 

257 


i 


The  Poet  of  Integralism 


Now  look  at  Sdvitrl : 

The  huge  foreboding  mind  of  Night,  alone 
In  her  unlit  temple  of  eternity, 

Lay  stretched  immobile  upon  Silence’  marge. 

Almost  one  felt,  opaque,  impenetrable, 

In  the  sombre  symbol  of  her  eyeless  muse 
The  abysm  of  the  unbodied  Infinite;1 

A  long  lone  line  of  hesitating  hue 

Like  a  vague  smile  tempting  a  desert  heart 

Troubled  the  far  rim  of  life’s  obscure  sleep. 

Arrived  from  the  other  side  of  boundlessness 
An  eye  of  deity  pierced  through  the  dumb  deeps; 

Intervening  in  a  mindless  universe, 

Its  message  crept  through  the  reluctant  hush 
Calling  the  adventure  of  consciousness  and  joy 
And,  conquering  Nature’s  disillusioned  breast, 

Compelled  renewed  consent  to  see  and  feel. 

A  thought  was  sown  in  the  unsounded  Void, 

A  sense  was  bom  within  the  darkness’  depths, 

A  memory  quivered  in  the  heart  of  Time 
As  if  a  soul  long  dead  were  moved  to  live:2 

Into  a  far-off  nook  of  heaven  there  came 
A  slow  miraculous  gesture's  dim  appeal. 

The  persistent  thrill  of  a  transfiguring  touch 

Persuaded  the  inert  black  quietude 

And  beauty  and  wonder  disturbed  the  fields  of  God. 

A  wandering  hand  of  pale  enchanted  light 
That  glowed  along  a  fading  moment's  brink, 

Fixed  with  gold  panel  and  opalescent  hinge 
A  gate  of  dreams  ajar  on  mystery’s  verge.3 

The  passages  from  Milton  are  blank  verse  in  a  philosophico- 
religious  mood  conveying  strongly-cut  imaged  ideas  in  a  tone  of 
exalted  emotion  with  the  help  of  words  that  have  a  powerful 
stateliness  and  a  rhythm  that  has  a  broad  sweep.  But  Milton's 
substance,  as  Sri  Aurobindo  has  pointed  out  in  a  letter,  ‘is, 

1  Aurobindo,  Savitrl,  p.  3.  »  Ibid.,  pp.  2-3.  J  Ibid.,  pp.  3-4. 

259 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 

except  at  certain  heights,  mental — mentally  grand  and  noble'1 
and  his  'architecture  of  thought  and  verse  is  high  and  powerful 
and  massive,  but  there  are  usually  no  subtle  echoes  there,  no 
deep  chambers:  the  occult  things  in  man’s  being  are  foreign  to 
his  intelligence.’3  He  may  employ  certain  turns  resembling  Sri 
Aurobindo’s  and  there  is  the  largeness  of  breath  which  seems 
to  make  his  suggestions  break  through  the  intellectual  grip, 
yet  on  attending  closely  we  miss  the  sheer  spiritual  vision  going 
home  to  us  with  a  vibrant  vastness  and  stirring  up  in  us  an 
intuitive  sense  of  mystical  realities.  Something  in  the  rhythm 
remains  unsupported  by  the  sight  and  the  word.  God,  Light, 
Infinity,  Heaven  do  not  reveal  their  own  body,  as  it  were,  and 
do  not  utter  themselves  in  their  own  tongue:  they  are  reflected 
in  the  mental  imagination  and  given  forceful  speech  there.  But 
because  of  the  rhythm  the  critical  ear  is  likely  to  be  deceived 
about  the  mostly  intellectual-imaginative  quality  of  Milton  and 
it  is  with  this  possibility  in  view  that  Sri  Aurobindo,  for  all  his 
admiration  for  the  poetry  of  Paradise  Lost ,  has  warned  a 
disciple-poet  who  wanted  to  write  authentically  of  the  supra- 
intellectual:  The  interference  of  this  mental  Miltonic  is  one 
of  the  great  stumbling-blocks  when  one  tries  to  write  from 
“above”. *3 

What  Sri  Aurobindo  here  terms  writing  from  'above'  is 
generally  spoken  of  by  him  as  'overhead'  poetry  and  described 
as  an  inspiration  that  is  felt  in  yogic  experience  to  be  descending 
from  some  ether  of  self-existent  consciousness  extended  bound¬ 
lessly  beyond  the  brain-clamped  human  mind.  This  overhead 
inspiration  can  come  even  when  one  is  not  a  practising  mystic, 
but  then  it  manifests  like  a  shining  accident  and  is  a  rare  note; 
Milton  himself  at  times  catches  it  suddenly  and  at  least  in  one 
line  he  has  it,  according  to  Sri  Aurobindo,  at  its  highest  pitch: 

Those  thoughts  that  wander  through  Eternity .4 

Sri  Aurobindo  distinguishes  a  fourfold  gradation  of  the 

1  Sri  Aurobindo,  Life ,  Literature  and  Yoga  (Pondicherry:  Sri  Aurobindo 
Ashram,  1952),  p.  38. 

2  Letters  of  Sri  Aurobindo,  third  series  (Bombay:  Sri  Aurobindo  Circle,  1949), 

pp.  118-19.  3  Aurobindo,  Life,  Literature  and  Yoga,  p.  38. 

4  Milton,  Paradise  Lost,  Book  II,  line  148. 

260 


The  Poet  of  Integralism 

overhead  planes  as  having  acted  so  far  in  the  world's  literature 
on  a  few  occasions:  higher  mind,  illumined  mind,  intuition, 
overmind.  On  all  these  planes  the  experience  of  the  Infinite  is 
automatic  and  there  is  a  light  of  direct  knowledge  of  the 
universe’s  fundamental  being  and  becoming.  But  the  light  varies 
in  intensity.  The  higher  mind  is  like  a  broad  clear  day  revealing 
through  a  spiritual  rather  then  intellectual  thought  the  divine 
substance  and  its  multiform  activity:  it  is,  as  it  were,  the  arche¬ 
type  of  the  mental  Miltonic,  the  plane  active  behind  Milton's 
grand  style  but  unable  to  send  its  own  spiritual  stuff  of  thought 
in  an  authentic  shape  and  motion  through  his  genius.  The 
illumined  mind  is  more  a  luminous  seeing  than  a  luminous 
thinking:  it  is  a  play  of  spiritual  sight,  the  divine  secrecies 
are  disclosed  through  a  crowd  of  colourful  yet  subtle  images 
in  a  swift  or  slow  design  with  thought  as  a  subordinate  element. 
One  may  say  it  is  the  plane  active  behind  Shakespeare's  leap 
and  coruscation  and  felicitous  ingenuity  of  the  life-force  but 
mostly  translated  into  vivid  passion  and  sensation  and  idea- 
impulse  instead  of  being  transmitted  in  its  multi-toned  seerhood 
of  divine  values.  Intuition  is  not  what  usually  passes  by  that 
name,  a  quick  abbreviated  movement  of  thought  itself  or  a  rapid 
seizing  through  the  vital  drive:  it  is  a  profound  penetration 
into  the  essence  of  things  by  a  spontaneous  inner  intimacy 
on  a  superhuman  level.  It  differs  from  the  illumined  mind  in 
that  it  is  a  flash  by  which  divine  realities  bare  themselves 
rather  than  are  bared  by  a  flood  of  illumination  thrown  upon 
them.  Heart-beat  upon  essential  heart-beat  of  Truth  is  felt 
more  than  Truth's  opulent  limb-gesture  and  robe-undulation. 
Intuition  is  at  work  behind  the  revealing  reticence  that  is  the 
Dantesque  utterance,  only,  the  style  of  the  decisive  sparing 
stroke  in  La  Divina  Commcdia  mostly  converts  into  a  mental 
incisiveness  the  sheer  piercing  Truth-touch.  Even  in  that  touch, 
however,  the  direct  knowledge  is  not  complete;  the  whole  sense 
of  the  divine  being  and  becoming  is  not  caught  in  pure  identity. 
The  entire  directness  is  really  the  privilege  of  the  supermind,  the 
sovereign  truth-consciousness  that  is  the  special  dynamic  of 
the  Aurobindonian  yoga,  but  a  radiant  representative  of  it  is 
possessed  by  the  overmind  which  is  what  the  world  has 
hitherto  known  as  the  extreme  Godhead.  Also,  the  overmind 

261 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 


vision,  word  and  rhythm  are  at  once  intense  and  immense  to 
the  utmost.  The  line  of  poetry  charged  with  them  carries 
vastly  a  movement  as  if  from  everlasting  to  everlasting — 
thought,  image,  expression,  vibration  bear  a  value  and  a  form  in 
which  all  the  qualities  of  the  other  planes  fuse  in  something 
diversely  ultimate  and  variously  transfigured  by  an  inmost 
oneness  with  the  cosmic  harmony  and  with  the  supracosmic 
mystery.  The  voice  of  the  overmind  is  the  mantra ,  the  eternal 
word  spoken  of  and  sought  for  by  the  Vedic  Rsis. 

The  typical  mark  of  the  passages  quoted  from  Sri  Aurobindo 
is  the  general  overhead  atmosphere  breathing  one  or  another 
level,  either  distinctly  or  in  combination,  and  everywhere  a  lift 
towards  the  mantra ,  culminating  now  and  again  in  that  sover¬ 
eign  speech  itself.  The  higher  mind  inspiration  passes  distinctly 
through 

The  huge  foreboding  mind  of  Night,  alone1 

and  mixes  with  that  of  the  illumined  mind  in 

An  eye  of  deity  pierced  through  the  dumb  deeps2 

and  is  replaced  completely  by  it  with 

A  slow  miraculous  gesture’s  dim  appeal.3 

The  illumined  mind  works  up  to  the  intuition  in  the  phrases 
about  the  gold  panel  and  opalescent  hinge’4  fixed  by  the 
wandering  hand  of  dawn-glamour,  and  blends  exquisitely  with 
the  intuitive  revelation  in 

A  gate  of  dreams  ajar  on  mystery’s  verge.5 

We  may  note  also  something  of  the  ineffable  amplitude  that  is 
the  overmind's  power  in  all  the  lines,  a  pervading  influence 
which  perhaps  looms  out  most  undeniably  in  another  verse: 

The  abysm  of  the  unbodied  Infinite.6 

It  is  not  always  easy  to  distinguish  the  overhead  style  or  to 
get  perfectly  the  drift  of  its  suggestion.  There  must  be  as  much 

*  Ibid.,  p.  5. 

5  Ibid.,  p.  6. 

262 


1  Aurobindo,  Sdvitrl,  p.  3. 

4  Ibid.,  p.  6. 


3  Ibid.,  p.  5. 
6  Ibid.,  p.  3. 


The  Poet  of  Integralism 

as  possible  a  stilling  of  ourselves,  an  in-drawn  hush  ready  to 
listen  to  the  uncommon  speech;  and  we  must  help  the  hush  to 
absorb  successfully  that  speech  by  repeatedly  reading  the  poetry 
aloud,  since  it  is  primarily  through  the  rhythm  that  the  psycho¬ 
logical  state  with  which  overhead  verses  are  a-thrill  echoes 
within  us,  quickening  the  eye  to  open  wider  and  wider  on 
spiritual  secrecies  and  the  brain  to  acquire  a  more  and  more 
true  reflex  of  the  transcendental  that  is  the  truth  of  things, 
waiting  for  manifestation. 

The  truth  of  things,  however,  need  not  always  be  concerned 
with  the  occult  and  spiritual  and  we  should  by  ready  to  perceive 
the  overhead  utterance,  even  the  mantra ,  in  a  delineation  of 
earthly  matters.  Of  course,  Sri  Aurobindo  could  not  be  loyal  to 
his  revelatory  mission  if  Savitrl  did  not  give  wide  scope  to  the 
occult  and  spiritual  themselves,  and  with  the  vision  and  rhythm 
proper  to  the  summits,  seek  to  poetize  them — either 

The  superconscient  realms  of  motionless  peace 
Where  judgment  ceases  and  the  word  is  mute 
And  the  Unconceived  lies  pathless  and  alone,1 

or  the  domains  of  divine  dynamism,  either  the  solitary  Unmani¬ 
fest  or  the  'Wisdom-Splendour,  Mother  of  the  universe’ — 

O  radiant  fountain  of  the  world’s  delight 
World-free  and  unattainable  above, 

O  Bliss  who  ever  dwellst  deep  hid  within 
While  men  seek  thee  outside  and  never  find2 

either  the  levels  and  beings  of  the  mid-worlds  or  the  mysteries 
and  travails  of  cosmic  evolution,  like  that  dreadful  commerce 
of  Savitrl  with  one  to  whom  Sri  Aurobindo  gives  no  name: 

One  dealt  with  her  who  meets  the  burdened  great 

Assigner  of  the  ordeal  and  the  path 
Who  uses  in  this  holocaust  of  the  soul 
Death,  fall  and  sorrow  for  the  spirit’s  goods, 

The  dubious  Godhead  with  his  torch  of  pain 

Lit  up  the  chasm  of  the  unfinished  world 

And  called  her  to  fill  with  her  vast  self  the  abyss. 3 

Aurobindo,  Savitrl,  p.  39.  *  Ibid.,  p.  390.  3  Ibid  ,  p.  21. 

263 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 


Yes,  Sdvitri  would  hardly  be  the  unique  poem  that  it  is  if  it  did 
not  try  in  passages  like  these  to  bring  home  to  us  the  Unknown 
as  it  is  in  itself.  However,  it  is  a  poem  of  many  layers  and  no 
mean  part  of  its  excellence  lies  in  its  deploying  the  imponder¬ 
ables  of  sight  and  sound  and  remaining  intensely  spiritual  even 
when  its  innumerable  ranges  and  changes  are  not  ostensibly 
concerned  with  spirituality.  It  is  legend  as  well  as  symbol,  a 
story  with  many  scenes  and  levels  of  development  at  the  same 
time  that  it  is  instinct  with  a  mystical  light.  That  light  itself 
plays  over  many  regions  and  does  not  fail  to  cover  most  aspects 
of  world-thought. 

There  is  a  variety  not  only  of  matter  but  also  of  style  in 
Sdvitri .  The  double  phenomenon  may  be  illustrated  in  several 
ways.  The  Homeric  note  of  simplicity  and  depth  is  struck: 

But  Narad  answered  not;  silent  he  sat, 

Knowing  that  words  are  vain  and  Fate  is  lord.1 

The  Virgilian  accent  of  dignity  and  poignancy  reaches  us: 

His  words  were  theirs  who  live  unforced  to  grieve 
And  help  by  calm  the  swaying  wheels  of  life 
And  the  long  restlessness  of  transient  things.2 

Homer  and  Virgil  combine  in  an  Aurobindonian  tcrtium  quid: 

Bear:  thou  shalt  find  at  last  thy  road  to  bliss. 

Bliss  is  the  secret  stuff  of  all  that,  lives. 3 

The  descent  as  of  a  beatific  Beatrice  into  the  Inferno,  untouched 
by  its  flames,  is  felt  with  a  typical  Dantesque  brevity  of 
suggestion  at  the  end: 

His  steps  familiar  with  the  lights  of  heaven 
Tread  without  pain  the  sword-paved  courts  of  hell; 

There  he  descends  to  edge  eternal  joy. 4 

There  are  glimpses  of  Nature’s  moods,  coming  with  a  powerful 
haunting  evocation  as  in  that  transference  into  English  of  a 
phrase  of  Vyasa: 

some  lone  tremendous  wood 
Ringing  for  ever  with  the  crickets’  cry,  5 

1  Aurobindo,  Sdvitri,  p.  480.  a  Ibid.,  pp.  484-5. 

3  Ibid,,  p.  514.  4  Ibid.,  p.  668.  5  Ibid.,  p.  437. 

264 


The  Poet  of  Integrausm 

or  with  an  exquisite  profundity  that  hints  at  the  whole  secret  of 
art-expression: 

I  caught  for  some  eternal  eye  the  sudden 
Kingfisher  flashing  to  a  darkling  pool.1 

Glimpses  of  the  human  situation  mix  often  with  those  of  natural 
objects,  as  in  that  simile  cosmically  sublime  in  its  sweep: 

As  a  star  uncompanioned  moves  through  heaven 
Unastonished  by  the  immensities  of  space, 

Travelling  infinity  by  its  own  light, 

The  great  are  strongest  when  they  stand  alone.2 

The  inner  strength  of  the  great  is  also  made  intimately  vivid  in 
that  gesture  of  Savitri  when,  confronting  Death's  subtle 
arguments  and  refusing  to  employ  the  frail  artifices  of  Reason, 
which  are  vain  because  always  open  to  doubt,  she  chooses  to 
match  all  fate  with  the  nude  dynamism  of  her  heart  and  soul  in 
a  terrific  line  which  we  may  term,  in  a  phraseology  popular 
today,  superexistentialist: 

I  am,  I  love,  I  see,  I  act,  I  will. 3 

Here  is  an  utterance  deriving  its  force  and  resolution  from  deeper 
layers  of  being  than  the  famous  close  in  Tennyson's  poem  aboijt 
Ulysses  and  his  comrades: 

Made  weak  by  fate  and  time,  but  strong  in  will 
To  strive,  to  seek,  to  find,  and  not  to  yield.  4 

Those  deeper  layers  render  Sri  Aurobindo's  line  more  effective 
art  than  also  Shelley’s  memorable  words  put  into  the  mouth  of 
Rousseau's  ghost  in  his  Triumph  of  Life : 

Before  thy  memory, 

I  feared,  loved,  hated,  suffered,  did  and  died.  5 

The  insufficiency  of  the  mere  reason  as  compared  either  to 

1  Aurobindo,  Savitri ,  p.  458.  3  Ibid.,  pp.  522-3.  3  Ibid.,  p.  671. 

4  Poems  of  Tennyson,  1830-1870  (Oxford  University  Press,  1943),  p.  183. 

5  Carlos  Baker,  ed.,  The  Selected  Poetry  and  Prose  of  Percy  Bysshe  Shelley 
(Mew  York:  Modern  Library  College  Editions,  1951),  p.  349. 

*  265 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Au robin do 

the  inner  soul's  moved  perception  or  to  the  puissant  supra - 
intellectual  sight  is  pictured  with  an  inspired  conceit  the 
Elizabethans  or  the  Metaphysicals  would  have  welcomed  with 
a  whoop: 

A  million  faces  wears  her  knowledge  here 
And  every  face  is  turbaned  with  a  doubt.1 

As  unexpectedly  striking  and  happy,  though  in  a  different  key 
of  inspiration,  is  the  simile  applied  to  the  truth-direct  ways  of 
the  higher  harmonies  of  consciousness  to  which  Savitri’s  father 
Aswapathy  climbed: 

There  was  no  gulf  between  the  thought  and  fact, 

Ever  they  replied  like  bird  to  calling  bird.2 

The  felicity  and  the  novelty  that  are  prominent  features  of 
Sri  Aurobindo's  style  in  Sdviln  take  at  times  a  compact, 
strangely  figured  epigrammatic  form  heightened  as  well  as 
enlightened  the  more  by  being  immediately  followed  by  a  verse 
of  simple  surprise: 

Earth’s  winged  chimeras  are  Truth’s  steeds  in  Heaven, 
The  impossible  God’s  sign  of  things  to  be. 3 

Ancient  motifs  and  motifs  of  our  own  day  are  equally  caught 
up  by  the  integral  inspiration.  Even  modern  totalitarianism  is 
seized  in  its  essence  in  the  occult  figure  of  it  that  from  demoniac 
planes  behind  earth  precipitates  amongst  us  the  Hitlerite 
power  and  propaganda: 

A  bull-throat  bellowed  with  its  brazen  tongue; 

Its  hard  and  shameless  clamour  filling  space 
And  threatening  all  who  dared  to  listen  to  truth 
Claimed  the  monopoly  of  the  battered  ear; 

A  deafened  acquiescence  gave  its  vote, 

And  braggart  dogmas  shouted  in  the  night 
Kept  for  the  fallen  soul  once  deemed  a  god 
The  pride  of  its  abysmal  absolute. 4 


*  Aurobindo,  Sdvitrl,  p.  285. 

3  Ibid.,  p.  60. 

266 


*  Ibid.,  p.  371. 
4  Ibid.,  p.  245. 


The  Poet  of  Integrausm 


Even  the  new  physics  that  has  replaced  the  classical  concepts  in 
which  'all  was  precise,  rigid,  indubitable'  enters  the  poetry: 

Once  more  the  world  was  made  a  wonder-web, 

A  magic’s  process  in  a  magical  space, 

An  unintelligible  miracle’s  depths 
Whose  source  is  lost  in  the  Ineffable 

A  quantum  dance  remained,  a  sprawl  of  chance 
In  Energy’s  stupendous  tripping  whirl 

The  rare-point  sparse  substratum  Universe 
On  which  floats  a  solid  world’s  phenomenal  face. 

Alone  a  process  of  events  was  there 
And  Nature’s  plastic  and  protean  change 
And,  strong  by  death  to  slay  or  to  create, 

The  riven  invisible  atom’s  omnipotent  force.1 

But  here  too  the  accent  is  recognizably  Aurobindonian.  The 
overhead  breath  flows  everywhere  and  in  the  last  line  we  have 
its  art  at  top  pitch.  The  craftsmanship  of  that  line  is  superb, 
with  its  dense  humming  sound  dextrously  mixed  with  other 
expressive  vibrations,  and  all  moving  in  a  metre  packing 
fourteen  syllables  and  a  predominantly  anapaestic  run  into 
a  scheme  of  five  strong  stresses  which  are  helped  to  beat  out 
clearly  as  well  as  to  contain  the  overflowing  music  by  massed 
consonants  in  several  places.  The  four  T  s  and  the  four  'o’  s 
suggest  at  once  penetration  and  expansion,  the  latter  as  if 
from  an  all-round  fastness.  The  V  in  ‘riven’,  pronounced  as 
it  is  with  the  upper  teeth  touching  the  lower  lip,  aids  the  sense 
of  cutting  that  is  in  the  word,  while  the  V  in  'invisible’  not 
only  supports  and  increases  the  cutting  suggestion  but  also 
hints  by  occurring  in  that  particular  word  and  in  the  midst  of 
several  syllables  successively  short  in  quantity  the  marvellous 
carrying  of  the  power  of  fission  into  the  mystery  of  the  infini¬ 
tesimal  that  constitutes  the  unseen  atomic  nucleus.  Then  there 
are  the  two  'm’ s  with  their  movement  of  lip-closure  corre¬ 
sponding  to  the  closed  secrecy  that  is  being  spoken  of  and  they 
are  preceded  and  followed  by  the  labials  'b’  and  'p'  respectively 

*  Aurobindo,  Savitrl ,  pp.  288-9. 

267 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 

which  correspond  to  the  initial  motive  of  breaking  open  the 
closed  secrecy  and  to  the  final  accomplishment  of  that  explosion . 
The  hard  strokes  of  the  three  Y  s  mingle  a  further  nuance  of 
breaking.  The  'f  ’  of  'force’  picks  up  again  the  fission-power  of 
the  V  s  and  completes  it  with  its  own  acute  out-loosening 
sound  accompanied  by  the  somewhat  rolled  sibilance  at  the  end. 
The  sibilance  itself,  giving  clear  body  to  the  softer  sound 
of  the  pair  of  's’  s  earlier  in  the  line  achieves  the  idea  of  a  full 
escape  of  the  power  that  was  so  far  not  sweeping  out  of  the 
charmed  circle,  as  it  were,  of  the  atom’s  vibrant  energy. 

Indeed,  the  craftsmanship  of  the  line  is  superb,  but  its 
success  is  different  from  what  most  poets  might  have  attained, 
for  it  is  due  to  the  choice  and  collocation  of  particular  words  so 
as  to  create  a  particular  rhythm  embodying  the  vision-thrill  of 
an  overhead  consciousness.  One  could  be  grandly  resonant  or 
else  deploy  a  crowded  colourful  strength  and  prove  a  perfect 
poet  thereby,  yet  fail  to  charge  one’s  utterance  with  that  vision- 
thrill — especially  when  it  is  a  question  of  infusing  into  verses 
about  apparently  non-mystical  subjects  the  very  enthonsiasmos 
of  the  mantra.  Sri  Aurobindo  succeeds  everywhere  because  he 
not  only  is  familiar  both  as  mystic  and  artist  with  the  magni¬ 
tudes  and  intensities  of  our  subliminal  and  supraliminal  being, 
but  has  also  endeavoured  to  lay  on  the  poor  dust  of  the  outer 
self  'the  high  Transcendent’s  sunlike  hands’.  Man’s  earth-born 
heart  is  never  forsaken  by  him  and  it  is  shown,  on  the  one  side, 
the  misery  with  which  it  falls  short  of  the  Infinite,  and,  on  the 
other,  the  apocalyptic  fulfilment  here  and  now  that  is  possible 
to  it.  And  the  fulfilment  is  again  and  again  depicted  in  terms 
which  go  home  to  us  and  which  set  forth  in  a  colossal  clarity  the 
eternal  in  the  movements  of  time.  For,  Sri  Aurobindo  did 
not  write  his  epic  of  23,813  lines  with  the  disposition  of  either  a 
sworn  surrealist  wedded  to  the  obscurely  entangled  or  a  strict 
symbolist  cherishing  a  cult  of  the  glimmering  elusive.  Behind 
the  poet  in  him  is  the  master  of  the  integral  yoga  whose  work, 
however  distant  on  occasion  from  familiar  experience,  was  to 
enlighten  and  not  to  puzzle  and  who,  for  all  his  roots  in  India’s 
hoary  past  of  spirituality,  was  yet  a  modern  among  the  moderns 
and  the  seer  of  a  new  mystical  progression,  a  collective  advance 
in  dynamic  consciousness  from  mind  to  supermind,  a  whole 

268 


The  Poet  of  Integralism 

world  evolving  Godwards  and  breaking  the  fetters  not  only  of 
political  or  social  tyranny  but  also  of  mortal  ignorance.  A 
democracy  of  the  Divine  liberating  the  human  was  his  goal,  as 
in  those  words  he  puts  into  the  mouth  of  his  Savitrl: 

A  lonely  freedom  cannot  satisfy 
A  heart  that  has  grown  one  with  every  heart: 

I  am  a  deputy  of  the  aspiring  world, 

My  spirit's  liberty  I  ask  for  all.1 

*  Aurobindo,  Savitrl,  p.  728. 


269 


2  3 


ARABINDA  BASU 

The  Integration  of  Spiritual  Experience 


All  problems  of  life  are  problems  of  harmony.  This  is  the  key¬ 
note  of  Sri  Aurobindo's  wcllanshaiiung.  His  world-view  neces¬ 
sarily  includes  a  practical  ideal  of  life.  For  an  integral  philosophy 
must  be  not  only  a  statement  about  the  nature  of  Reality  but 
must  also  give  concrete  direction  for  the  realization  of  an  abso¬ 
lute  value.  Otherwise  its  title  to  being  integral  will  be  false. 
Similarly  the  ideal  of  life  in  such  a  philosophy  must  be 
realizable.  If  not,  it  will  not  be  a  truly  harmonious  philosophy. 
According  to  Sri  Aurobindo,  at  any  rate,  a  philosophy,  the 
principles  of  which  cannot  be  tested  and  proved  right  and 
true  in  experience,  is  barren.  It  may  be  brilliant  in  its  dialectic 
and  a  marvel  of  system-building.  But  it  cannot  be  described  as 
integral.  Sri  Aurobindo's  own  philosophy  lays  great  stress  on 
reconciliation  between  different  points  of  view,  between  theory 
and  practice,  between  metapliysic  and  ethic  in  the  broad  sense 
of  the  realization  of  a  spiritual  ideal. 

This  does  not  mean  that  the  philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo  is 
syncretic.  No,  it  is  rather  the  unfoldment  of  a  central  vision 
which  subsumes  under  it  the  viewpoints  of  different  philo¬ 
sophies.  It  is  integral  in  the  sense  that  the  basic  truths  of  most 
of  the  important  systems  of  thought  find  their  proper  places  in 
its  own  scheme  of  the  truths  of  existence  and  life.  For  one  thing 
the  integral  idealism  of  Sri  Aurobindo  is  a  truly  spiritual 
philosophy.  Its  material  is  provided  by  a  developing  pattern  of 
spiritual  experiences  and  realizations.  When  we  say  spiritual 
experience,  we  do  not  exclude  the  experience  of  senses  and  the 
intellect.  For  however  much  they  may  distort  and  fall  short  of 
the  spiritual  view  of  things,  Sri  Aurobindo's  concept  of  Spirit 
is  such  that  it  is  the  creative  force  of  the  Spirit  that  becomes  all 

270 


The  Integration  of  Spiritual  Experience 

that  appears  as  non-spiritual.  It  is  true  that  the  Spirit  is  not 
hemmed  in  by  the  body,  life-force  and  the  mind.  But  it  is  the 
power  of  the  Spirit  which  sustains  these  apparently  non¬ 
spiritual  elements  of  our  nature.  Spirit  itself  is  free  from  the 
limitations,  both  existential  and  functional.  The  Spirit  is  eternal, 
uncreated,  self-become,  being  and  consciousness  and  self- 
existent  delight.  As  consciousness,  it  is  self-revealing.  In  other 
words,  it  is  self-consciousness.  This  capacity  of  the  Reality 
for  self-consciousness  is  called  consciousness-force  (cit)  by  Sri 
Aurobindo.  It  is  this  consciousness-force  which  manifests  itself 
as  centres  of  the  Spirit's  self-knowledge  and  self-enjoyment. 
These  sparks  of  the  Spirit -flame,  these  centres  of  the  conscious 
Reality,  are  the  individual  selves. 

The  individual  selves  are  the  intermediate  links  between  the 
inalienable  unity  of  the  Divine  and  the  multiplicity  of  this 
world  in  which  unity  is  almost  a  chimera.  The  jivatman,  the 
individual  self,  is  not  involved  in  the  evolutionary  world. 
Something  of  its  essence,  a  portion  of  its  being  as  it  were,  is 
the  conscious  soul  here  on  the  earth.  At  the  beginning  it  is 
hidden  in  the  sheaths  of  the  body,  life-force  and  mind  and  as 
such  ineffective.  But  it  awakens  to  its  spiritual  nature  and 
destiny.  It  can  however  realize  its  relationship  with  the  Reality 
in  diverse  manner.  The  different  religions  of  the  world  and  the 
many  spiritual  philosophies  within  the  fold  of  Hinduism  are 
partial  expressions  and  rational  statements  respectively  of  one 
or  more  of  these  experiences  of  the  nature  and  ultimate  destiny 
of  the  evolving  soul  in  its  approach  to  the  supreme  Reality. 
In  the  integral  philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo,  all  manner  of 
realizations  are  set  forth  in  a  systematic  way;  the  spiritual 
seeker  must  have  all  these  different  realizations  if  he  wants  to 
know  God  in  all  his  aspects.  The  total  realization  must  include 
elements  of  knowledge,  love  and  will.  One  must  know  the 
ultimate  Absolute,  love  the  divine  Lord  and  Master,  and 
surrender  one’s  will  to  the  supreme  Will.  This  however  is  not 
a  new  ideal  in  Indian  philosophy.  The  originality  of  Sri 
Aurobindo  lies  in  this,  that  he  considers  this  reconciliation  of 
different  types  of  realization  to  be  the  basis  of  the  integral 
experience  which  he  himself  advocates.  The  soul  having 
realized  God  has  to  found  the  life  divine  on  earth.  The  trans- 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 


formation  of  nature  and  life  in  the  world  is  the  realization 
which  he  proposes  as  the  integral  ideal  of  man.  That  is  the 
consummation. 

In  this  brief  article  we  shall  essay  a  brief  exposition,  mostly 
in  Sri  Aurobindo's  own  wrords,  of  the  spiritual  saga  of  the 
individual  soul  as  presented  in  his  Last  Poems.  The  individual 
soul  is  the  most  important  category  in  Sri  Aurobindo's  system 
of  spiritual  pragmatism  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  actual 
realization  of  the  implications  of  his  metaphysic.  For  the 
individual  soul  is  the  repository  of  all  experiences,  both 
spiritual  and  non-spiritual.  It  is  the  soul  that  is  steeped  in  the 
mire  of  matter,  it  is  the  soul  again  which  rises  to  the  supernal 
heights  of  the  Divine. 

This  brings  us  to  the  question  of  the  nature  of  man.  In  the 
poems  under  study,  Sri  Aurobindo  unfolds  the  philosophy  of 
the  psychic  being  in  terms  of  his  own  experience,  as  the  repre¬ 
sentative  individual  soul,  as  it  were. 

I  am  a  centre  of  Thy  golden  light 
And  I  its  vast  and  vague  circumference, 

Thou  art  my  soul  great,  luminous  and  white 
And  Thine  my  mind  and  will  and  glowing  sense. 

Thy  spirit’s  infinite  breath  I  feel  in  me; 

My  life  is  a  throb  of  Thy  eternity.1 

Nay,  more.  Our  poet  declares 

And  yet  I  know  my  footprints’  track  shall  be 
A  pathway  towards  Immortality.2 

But  let  us  follow  the  soul’s  journey  from  the  starting  point, 
i.e.  from  his  ordinary  human  status.  What  is  man? 

A  trifling  unit  in  a  boundless  plan 
Amidst  the  enormous  insignificance 
Of  the  unpeopled  cosmos’s  iire-whirl  dance, 

Earth,  as  by  accident  engendered  man. 

A  creature  of  his  own  grey  ignorance, 

A  mind  half-shadow  and  half-gleam,  a  breath 
That  wTestlcs,  captive  in  a  world  of  death, 

To  live  some  lame  brief  years. 3 

1  Sri  Aurobindo,  Last  Poems  (Pondicherry:  Sri  Aurobindo  Ashram,  1952), 
p.  28.  *  Ibid.,  p.  5.  3  Ibid.,  p.  47. 

272 


The  Integration  of  Spiritual  Experience 


He  is  only 

a  transience  of  the  eternities.1 

And  yet  there  is  something  in  man  which  defies  mere  transience. 

I  with  repeated  life  death’s  sleep  surprise; 

I  am  a  transience  of  the  eternities.1 

But  is  man's  destiny  just  to  be  drowned  in  the  sleep  of  death 
and  again  rise  on  the  crest  of  life?  Is  he  only  fated  to  enjoy  a 
little  respite  in  a  ceaseless  flux?  Not  so,  for  the  poet  says  that 
there  is 

...  a  divinity  within, 

A  consciousness  in  the  inconscient  Night, 

To  realize  its  own  supernal  Light 
Confronts  the  ruthless  forces  of  the  Unseen. 3 

Indeed, 

There  are  two  beings  in  my  single  self. 

A  Godhead  watches  Nature  from  behind 
At  play  in  front  with  a  brilliant  surface  elf, 

A  time-born  creature  with  a  human  mind. 4 

What  is  the  nature  of  the  two  beings?  One  of  them  is  spiritual, 
the  other  purely  human  which  knows  nothing  of  its  divine 
origin. 

Tranquil  and  boundless  like  a  sea  or  sky, 

The  Godhead  knows  himself  Eternity’s  son. 

Radiant  his  mind  and  vast,  his  heart  as  free; 

His  will  is  a  sceptre  of  dominion. 

The  smaller  self  by  Nature’s  passions  driven. 

Thoughtful  and  erring  learns  his  human  task;5 

Because  of  these  two  beings  man  is  a  despot  of  the  contraries. 
In  the  spheres  of  knowledge,  will  and  emotions,  he  sways 
between  the  true  and  the  false,  strength  and  weakness,  right 
and  wrong,  pleasure  and  pain.  He  even  feels  himself  in  contact 

1  Aurobindo,  Last  Poems ,  p.  43.  *  Ibid.,  p.  43. 

3  Ibid.,  p.  47.  4  Ibid.,  p.  21.  5  Ibid.,  p.  21. 

273 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 

with  God  and  yet  in  his  nature  contradicts  the  divinity 
within. 

I  am  greater  than  the  greatness  of  the  seas 
A  swift  tornado  of  God-energy: 

A  helpless  flower  that  quivers  in  the  breeze 

I  am  weaker  than  the  reed  one  breaks  with  ease. 

I  harbour  all  the  wisdom  of  the  wise 
In  my  nature  of  stupendous  Ignorance; 

On  a  flame  of  righteousness  T  lix  my  eyes 

While  I  wallow  in  sweet  sin  and  join  hell’s  dance. 

My  mind  is  brilliant  like  a  full-orbed  moon, 

Its  darkness  is  the  caverned  troglodyte's. 

I  gather  long  "lime’s  wealth  and  squander  soon; 

I  am  an  epitome  of  opposites.1 

The  soul,  however,  discovers  its  deathless  being  and  that  new 
knowledge  opens  the  way  to  the  transcendence  of  this  duality. 

I  have  discovered  my  deep  deathless  being: 

Masked  by  my  front  of  mind,  immense,  serene 
It  meets  the  world  with  an  Immortal's  seeing, 

A  god-spectator  of  the  human  scene. 

No  pain  and  sorrow  of  the  heart  and  flesh 
Can  tread  that  pure  and  voiceless  sanctuary. 

Danger  and  fear,  Fate's  hounds,  slipping  their  leash 
Rend  body  and  nerve — the  timeless  .Spirit  is  free. 

Awake,  God's  rav  and  witness  in  my  breast, 

In  the  undying  substance  of  my  soul 
Flamelike,  inscrutable  the  almighty  Guest. 

Death  nearer  comes  and  Destiny  takes  her  toll; 

He  hears  the  blows  that  shatter  Nature’s  house: 

Calm  sits  he,  formidable,  luminous.2 

The  poet  now  feels  that 

There  is  a  need  within  the  soul  of  man 
The  splendours  of  the  surface  never  sate;3 

*  Aurobindo,  Last  Poems,  p.  43.  2  Ibid.,  p.  25. 


274 


3  Ibid.,  p.  13. 


The  Integration  of  Spiritual  Experience 

His  contact  with  the  Guest,  even  though  not  yet  very  close, 
enables  him  to  withstand  the  ordinary  sensations  of  life. 

I  am  held  no  more  by  life’s  alluring  cry. 

Her  joy  and  grief,  her  charm,  her  laughter’s  lute. 
Hushed  are  the  magic  moments  of  the  flute, 

And  form  and  colour  and  brief  ecstasy. 

I  would  hear,  in  my  spirit’s  wideness  solitary 
The  Voice  that  speaks  when  mortal  lips  are  mute: 

I  seek  the  wonder  of  things  absolute 
Born  from  the  silence  of  Eternity.1 

The  soul's  aspiration  for  things  of  eternity  is  a  process  which 
is  fulfilled  in  the  experience  of  liberation.  The  poet  feels  his 
identity  with  the  unnameable  Reality,  he  becomes  what 
before  time  he  was: 

My  mind,  my  soul  grow  larger  than  all  Space; 

Time  founders  in  that  vastness  glad  and  nude: 

The  body  fades,  an  outline,  a  dim  trace, 

A  memory  in  the  spirit’s  solitude. 


In  the  thrilled  happy  giant  void  within 

Thought  lost  in  light  and  passion  drowned  in  bliss, 
Changing  into  a  stillness  hyaline, 

Obey  the  edict  of  the  Eternal’s  peace. 

Life’s  now  the  Ineffable’s  dominion; 

Nature  is  ended  and  the  spirit  alone.1 

The  self's  infinity  is  now  his  status. 

I  have  become  what  before  Time  I  was. 

A  secret  touch  has  quieted  thought  and  sense: 

All  things  by  the  agent  Mind  created  pass 
Into  a  void  and  mute  magnificence. 


A  momentless  immensity  pure  and  bare, 

I  stretch  to  an  eternal  everywhere.3 

1  Aurobindo,  Last  Poems,  p.  13.  *  Ibid.,  p.  31.  3  Ibid.,  p.  20. 

275 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 

The  timeless  Self,  however,  says  one  of  the  Upanisads,  desired 
for  a  second,  it  willed,  it  went  forth.  This  is  the  movement  of 
the  Selfs  conscious-force  as  will  to  be  the  world.  This  is  the 
Absolute  as  the  lord  and  master  of  whom  this  world  is  the 
habitation.  Our  poet  as  the  aspiring  soul  has  realized  his 
identity  with  the  worldless  Self.  The  next  step  in  his  journey 
is  the  experience  of  unity  with  the  divine  Lord. 

He  is  in  me,  round  me,  facing  everywhere. 

Self-walled  in  ego  to  exclude  His  right, 

I  stand  upon  its  boundaries  and  stare 
Into  the  frontiers  of  the  Infinite. 

Each  finite  thing  I  see  is  a  fagade; 

from  its  windows  looks  at  me  the  Illimitable. 

In  vain  was  my  prison  of  separate  body  made; 

His  occult  presence  burns  in  every  cell. 

He  has  become  my  substance  and  my  breath; 

He  is  my  anguish  and  my  ecstasy. 

My  birth  is  His  eternity's  sign,  my  death 
A  passage  of  His  immortality. 

My  dumb  abysses  are  His  screened  abode; 

In  my  heart’s  chamber  lives  the  unworshipped  God.1 

His  unity  with  the  omnipresent  reality  enables  him  to  expand 
his  consciousness  to  embrace  everything  in  the  world.  Cosmic 
consciousness  is  now  his  natural  way  of  seeing. 

I  have  wrapped  the  wide  world  in  my  wider  self 
And  Time  and  Space  my  spirit’s  seeing  are. 

I  am  the  god  and  demon,  ghost  and  elf, 

I  am  the  wind’s  speed  and  the  blazing  star. 

All  Nature  is  the  nursling  of  my  care, 

I  am  its  struggle  and  the  eternal  rest; 

The  world’s  joy  thrilling  runs  through  me,  I  bear 
The  sorrows  of  millions  in  my  lonely  breast. 


*  Aurobindo,  Last  Poems ,  p.  35. 

276 


The  Integration  of  Spiritual  Experience 


I  have  learned  a  close  identity  with  all, 

Yet  am  by  nothing  bound  that  I  become; 

Carrying  in  me  the  universe's  call 
I  mount  to  my  imperishable  home. 

I  pass  beyond  Time  and  Life  on  measureless  wings, 

Yet  still  am  one  with  bom  and  unborn  things.1 

All  life  is  now  unified  in  him  and  he  feels  the  throb  of  every 
heart. 


I  housed  within  my  heart  the  life  of  things, 

All  hearts  athrob  in  the  world  I  felt  as  mine; 

I  shared  the  joy  that  in  creation  sings 
And  drank  its  sorrow  like  a  poignant  wine.2 

This  expansion  of  the  poet's  consciousness  does  not  however 
mean  that  his  individuality  is  abolished.  His  inner  being  grows 
as  the  soul  of  love  and  yearns  for  the  Beloved.  With  knowledge 
is  wedded  love,  with  identity  of  the  Absolute  is  married  the 
adoration  of  the  Lord. 

Because  Thou  art  All-beauty  and  All-bliss, 

My  soul  blind  and  enamoured  yearns  for  Thee; 

It  bears  Thy  mystic  touch  in  all  that  is 
And  thrills  with  the  burden  of  that  ecstasy. 

Behind  all  eyes  I  meet  Thy  secret  gaze 
And  in  each  voice  I  hear  Thy  magic  tune: 

Thy  sweetness  haunts  my  heart  through  Nature’s  ways; 
Nowhere  it  beats  now  from  Thy  snare  immune. 

It  loves  Thy  body  in  all  living  things; 

Thy  joy  is  there  in  every  leaf  and  stone: 

The  moments  bring  Thee  on  their  fiery  wings; 

Sight's  endless  artistry  is  Thou  alone. 

Time  voyages  with  Thee  upon  its  prow 
And  all  the  future's  passionate  hope  is  Thou. 3 

a  Ibid.,  p.  IO. 

2  77 


1  Aurobindo,  Last  Poems,  p.  9. 


3  Ibid.,  p.  38. 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 

This  last  line  brings  in  the  point  of  hope  as  an  essential  thing 
in  Sri  Aurobindo's  philosophy.  The  soul  widens  its  experience 
of  God  as  the  guide  of  life  and  in  the  world.  The  time  has  come 
for  the  poet  to  see  and  participate  in  God's  great  plan  of  the 
world.  He  is  calm  and  tranquil  and  prepares  himself  to  accept 
the  will  of  God. 

I  dwell  in  the  spirit’s  calm  nothing  can  move 
And  watch  the  actions  of  thy  vast  world-force, 

Its  mighty  wings  that  through  infinity  move 
And  the  Time-gallopings  of  the  deathless  Horse. 

All  this  I  bear  in  me,  untouched  and  still 
Assenting  to  Thy  all-wise  inscrutable  will.1 

We  have  seen  before  that  the  poet's  aspiring  soul  has  realized 
its  unity  with  the  transcendent  and  the  universal  aspects  of 
Reality.  But  now  the  devotee  in  him  flowers  out  as  the  divine 
worker.  He  surrenders  himself  to  God  and  prepares  to  do  His 
will  here  on  the  earth. 

O  Thou  of  whom  I  am  the  instrument, 

O  secret  Spirit  and  Nature  housed  in  me, 

Let  all  my  mortal  being  now  be  blent 
In  Thy  still  glory  of  divinity. 

I  have  given  my  mind  to  be  dug  Thy  channel  mind, 

I  have  offered  up  my  will  to  be  Thy  will: 

Let  nothing  of  myself  be  left  behind 
In  our  union  mystic  and  unutterable. 

My  heart  shall  throb  with  the  world-beats  of  Thy 
love; 

My  body  become  Thy  engine  for  earth-use; 

In  my  nerves  and  veins  Thy  rapture's  streams  shall 
move; 

My  thoughts  shall  be  hounds  of  Light  for  Thy 
power  to  loose. 

Keep  only  my  soul  to  adore  eternally 

And  meet  Thee  in  each  form  and  soul  of  Thee  A 

278 


1  Aurobindo,  Last  Poems ,  p.  7. 


*  Ibid.,  p.  23. 


The  Integration  of  Spiritual  Experience 


This  love  for  the  Divine,  the  surrender  to  the  Master,  makes 
our  poet  equal  in  all  circumstances.  He  feels  the  presence  of 
God  in  everything  and  always  and  thus  is  able  to  practise  the 
dedicated  service  of  God. 

I  face  earth’s  happenings  with  an  equal  soul; 

In  all  are  heard  Thy  steps:  Thy  unseen  feet 
Thread  Destiny’s  pathways  in  my  front.  Life’s  whole 
Tremendous  theorem  is  Thou  complete. 


In  this  rude  combat  with  the  fate  of  man 
Thy  smile  within  my  heart  makes  all  my  strength; 

Thy  Force  in  me  labours  at  its  grandiose  plan, 

Indifferent  to  the  Time-snake’s  crawling  length. 

No  power  can  slay  my  soul;  it  lives  in  Thee. 

Thy  presence  is  my  immortality.1 

The  poet  soared  with  measureless  wings  to  the  heights  of  the 
Absolute  which  cancelled  Nature.  There  was  a  stage  in  his 
experience  in  which  Nature  was  ended  and  there  was  the 
Spirit  alone.  But  now  a  deeper  and  wider  insight  reveals  to 
him  the  sovereignty  of  God. 

Now  more  and  more  the  Epiphany  within 
Affirms  on  Nature’s  soil  His  sovereign  rights. 

My  mind  has  left  its  prison-camp  of  brain; 

It  pours,  a  luminous  sea  from  spirit  heights. 


Nature  in  me  one  day  like  Him  shall  sit 
Victorious,  calm,  immortal,  infinite.2 

The  assurance  given  in  the  last  two  lines  is  possible  because 
the  inconscicnt,  which  betrays  no  sign  of  consciousness  at  all 
and  is  the  immediate  origin  of  all  things  in  the  world,  is  really 
nothing  but  a  veil  of  God. 

The  darkness  was  the  Omnipotent’s  abode, 

Hood  of  omniscience,  a  blind  mask  of  God.3 

1  Aurobindo,  Last  Poems,  p.  24.  *  Ibid.,  p.  26.  3  Ibid.,  p.  8. 

279 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 


Indeed  there  is  a  hidden  plan  which  now  unfolds  before  the 
awakened  sight  of  the  poet. 

However  long  Night’s  hour,  I  will  not  dream 
That  the  small  ego  and  the  person’s  mask 

Are  all  that  God  reveals  in  our  life-scheme, 

The  last  result  of  Nature’s  cosmic  task. 

A  greater  Presence  in  her  bosom  works; 

Long  it  prepares  its  far  epiphany: 

Even  in  the  stone  and  beast  the  godhead  lurks, 

A  bright  Persona  of  eternity. 

It  shall  burst  out  from  the  limit  traced  by  Mind 
And  make  a  witness  of  the  prescient  heart; 

It  shall  reveal  even  in  this  inert  blind 

Nature,  long  veiled  in  each  inconscient  part, 

Fulfilling  the  occult  magnificent  plan, 

The  world-wide  and  immortal  spirit  in  man.1 

The  soul  now  hears  a  silver  call.  To  it  is  revealed  a  godhead  of 
things  to  be  realized. 

There  is  a  godhead  of  unrealized  things 

To  which  Time’s  splendid  gains  are  hoarded  dross; 

A  cry  seems  near,  a  rustic  of  silver  wings 
Calling  to  heavenly  joy  by  earthly  loss. 


As  rain-thrashed  mire  the  marvel  of  the  rose, 

Earth  waits  that  distant  marvel  to  disclose.2 

The  poet’s  intrepid  soul  armed  with  God’s  might  makes  an 
assignation  with  the  night.  It  is  not  so  much  a  struggle,  this 
journey  through  the  darkness  is  rather  a  pilgrimage. 

I  made  an  assignation  with  the  Night; 

In  the  abyss  was  fixed  oui  rendezvous: 

In  my  breast  carrying  God’s  deathless  light 
I  came  her  dark  and  dangerous  heart  to  woo. 

1  Aurobindo,  Last  Poems ,  p.  4. 

280 


*  Ibid.,  p.  45. 


The  Integration  of  Spiritual  Experience 


I  left  the  glory  of  the  illumined  Mind 
And  the  calm  rapture  of  the  divinized  soul 
And  travelled  through  a  vastness  dim  and  blind 
To  the  grey  shore  where  her  ignorant  waters  roll. 


I  walk  by  the  chill  wave  through  the  dull  slime 
And  still  that  weary  journeying  knows  no  end; 

Lost  is  the  lustrous  godhead  beyond  Time, 

There  comes  no  voice  of  the  celestial  Friend, 

And  yet  I  know  my  footprints’  track  shall  be 
A  pathway  towards  Immortality.1 

The  pilgrim  of  the  night  now  passes  through  a  luminous  abode 
and  previsions  the  upward  evolutionary  ascent  of  the  creative 
Force.  From  the  inconscient  blossoms  forth  the  secret,  sleeping, 
dormant  consciousness.  Out  of  matter  blooms  forth  the  divine 
soul. 

I  passed  into  a  lucent  still  abode 
And  saw  as  in  a  mirror  crystalline 
An  ancient  Force  ascending  serpentine 
Of  the  ascending  spirals  of  the  aeonic  road. 

Earth  was  a  cradle  for  the  arriving  God 

And  man  but  a  half-dark  half-luminous  sign 
Of  the  transition  of  the  veiled  Divine 
From  Matter’s  sleep  and  the  tormented  load 
Of  ignorant  life  and  death  to  the  Spirit’s  light. 

Mind  liberated  swam  Light’s  ocean-vast, 

And  life  escaped  from  its  grey  tortured  line 
I  saw  Matter  illumining  its  parent  Night. 

The  soul  could  feel  into  infinity  cast, 

Timeless  God-bliss  the  heart  incarnadine.2 

The  rule  of  the  Spirit  over  nature  first  manifests  itself  as  a 
change  of  the  very  senses  of  the  poet.  Hearing  and  sight  and 
taste  undergo  a  radical  change.  This  presupposes  a  descent  of 
the  golden  light,  the  supramental  consciousness  into  the  poet's 
brain. 


1  Aurobindo,  Last  Poems ,  p.  5. 

281 


Ibid .,  p.  48. 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 


Thy  golden  Light  came  down  into  my  brain 

And  the  grey  worms  of  mind  sun-touched  became 
A  bright  reply  to  Wisdom’s  occult  plane, 

A  calm  illumination  and  a  flame.1 

The  light  comes  down  through  his  throat  and  his  heart,  the 
centres  respectively  of  expression  and  the  psychic  being,  to 
nether  regions.  Even  the  earth  is  bathed  by  it. 

Thy  golden  Light  came  down  into  my  feet 
My  earth  is  now  thy  playficld  and  thy  seat.2 

The  transformation  of  the  senses  is  expressed  categorically: 

Surely  I  take  no  more  an  earthly  food 
But  eat  the  fruits  and  plants  of  Paradise! 

For  Thou  hast  changed  my  sense’s  habitude 
From  mortal  pleasure  to  divine  surprise. 

Hearing  and  sight  are  now  an  ecstasy, 

And  all  the  fragrances  of  earth  disclose 
A  sweetness  matching  in  intensity 

Odour  of  the  crimson  marvel  of  the  rose. 

The  body  burns  with  Thy  rapture’s  sacred  fire, 

Pure,  passionate,  holy,  virgin  of  desire. 3 

The  pilgrim  of  the  night  now  arrives  at  a  new  islanci  on  which 
the  supramental  sun  streams  down  its  vivifying,  transforming 
rays  of  immortality.  The  poet  soars  into  the  very  heart  of  the 
sun  and  sees  the  revelations  of  the  new  world  to  be.  The 
power  surrounds  him  when  he  comes  back  to  the  earth  bringing 
like  Prometheus  from  heaven  the  flame  of  transformation  into 
the  womb  of  the  earth.  Nature  is  no  longer  the  field  of  opposites, 
the  cavern  of  darkness  and  a  denial  of  God.  The  epiphany  of 
the  collective  God  founds  the  life  divine  in  the  transformed 
field  of  human  nature. 

I  have  sailed  the  golden  ocean 
And  crossed  the  silver  bar; 

I  have  reached  the  Sun  of  knowledge 
The  earth-self’s  midnight  star. 

1  Aurobindo,  Last  Poems,  p.  n.  *  Ibid.,  p.  n.  3  Ibid.,  p.  42. 

282 


The  Integration  of  Spiritual  Experience 


Its  fields  of  flaming  vision. 

Its  mountains  of  bare  might. 

Its  peaks  of  fiery  rapture. 

Its  air  of  absolute  light. 

Its  seas  of  self-oblivion, 

Its  vales  of  Titan  rest. 

Because  my  soul’s  dominion. 

Its  Island  of  the  Blest. 

Alone  with  God  and  silence. 

Timeless  it  lived  in  Time; 

Life  was  His  fugue  of  music. 

Thought  was  Truth’s  ardent  rhyme. 

The  Light  was  still  around  me 
When  I  came  back  to  earth 
Bringing  the  Immortal’s  knowledge 
Into  man’s  cave  of  birth.1 

1  Aurobindo,  Last  JPoems,  p.  33. 


283 


24 


JUDITH  TYBERG 

The  Drama  of  Integral  Self-Realization 

( The  Spiritual  Message  of  Savitri) 


Sri  Aurobindo’s  Scivitn  is  an  epic  poem  of  high  spiritual 
challenge  in  the  yoga  of  integral  self-realization  it  presents. 
Its  spiritual  conception  is  so  all-encompassing,  so  integral  that 
it  gives  birth  to  a  power  which  transforms  life  on  earth  to  a  life 
of  divine  activity  rather  than  leading  to  an  escape  from  life. 
The  epic  is  the  mantric  expression  of  this  great  seer-sage's 
inner  findings  and  conquests,  leading  to  his  vision  of  an  age  of 
truth-consciousness  and  immortality.  It  portrays  in  living 
drama  the  daring  climb  within  of  a  king-soul  through  pro¬ 
gressive  states  of  consciousness  to  nirvanic  heights  and  beyond 
to  summits  ne’er  reached  before.  The  poet  reveals  how  at 
meditation’s  peaks  at  one  with  God,  where  many  cease  their 
search,  he  becomes  aware  of  a  Presence,  God’s  consciousness, 
power  and  bliss,  which  he  calls  the  Divine  Mother.  He  relates 
how  this  creatrix  of  boundless  love  and  wisdom-splendour 
comes  down  to  earth  to  transform  darkness  into  light,  the 
unreal  into  the  real  and  death  into  immortality. 

The  famous  Mahdbharata 1  legend  of  ‘Savitri  and  Satyavan’, 
the  story  of  ‘Love  Conquers  Death’,  is  made  the  basic  symbol 
of  this  mystic  scripture  of  ‘Divine  Life  on  Earth’.  The  legend 
tells  of  the  noble  and  virtuous  king  A&wapathy  performing  all 
kinds  of  austerities  in  order  that  God  might  be  pleased  and 
grant  him  a  child  to  uphold  his  kingdom.  After  eighteen  years 
the  goddess  Savitri,  wife  of  the  Divine  Creator,  issues  forth 

1  From  the  Pativrata  Mahatmya  Parva  in  Chapters  291-7  of  the  Aranyaka 
Parva. 


284 


The  Drama  of  Integral  Self-Realization 

from  the  sacrificial  flames  and  promises  the  king  a  radiantly 
spiritual  daughter  to  spring  from  her  own  being. 

The  child  is  born  and  is  named  Savitrl.  She  grows  up  like 
unto  the  ‘Goddess  of  Beauty’  herself  in  embodied  form  and  is 
blessed  with  godlike  qualities.  When  she  reaches  maturity, 
kings  and  princes,  overwhelmed  by  her  divine  character,  dare 
not  ask  her  hand.  So  her  father  sends  her  forth  to  seek  her  own 
lord.  Her  heart  finds  Satyavan,  the  faithful  son  of  Raja 
Dyumatsena,  a  blind  and  exiled  king  who  lives  in  a  forest 
hermitage. 

When  Savitrl  comes  to  declare  her  love  to  her  father,  she 
finds  him  in  conversation  with  Narada,  the  great  heavenly 
sage.  When  Narada  hears  Sfivitri’s  words  he  warns  that 
Satyavan,  though  endowed  with  all  high  qualities  and  with 
honour  constant  as  the  pole  star,  is  destined  to  die  in  a  year. 
The  parents  try  to  persuade  their  daughter  to  choose  another, 
but  in  vain.  Narada  advises  the  father,  however,  to  allow 
Savitrl  to  marry  Satyavan.  So  the  princess  is  married  and  lives 
a  simple  quiet  life  in  the  forest.  She  pleased  all  with  her  tender 
service,  self-denial,  evenness  of  temper,  her  skill  and  gentle 
speech  and  her  love  for  Satyavan. 

But  night  and  day  Narada’s  prophetic  words  are  present  in 
her  mind.  She  speaks  of  them  to  no  one.  When  the  appointed 
day  for  Satyavan’s  death  approaches,  Savitri  fasts  and  prays 
and  on  the  fated  day  she  begs  permission  to  follow  her 
husband  into  the  forest  in  order  to  see  the  blossoming  woods 
through  which  he  passed  daily.  Never  having  petitioned 
anything  previous  to  this  day,  she  is  granted  her  request. 
Satyavan  goes  ahead  to  make  way  for  her  and  soon  comes  to 
where  he  stops  to  cut  wood  for  the  home-fire. 

After  a  few  strokes  Satyavan  falls  smitten  with  pain  and 
Savitrl,  stricken  with  grief,  sits  and  holds  his  head  in  her  lap. 
Suddenly  she  beholds  Yama,  the  god  of  death,  standing  before 
her  with  a  noose  in  hand.  She  rises  and  asks  why  he  had  come 
himself  instead  of  sending  one  of  his  emissaries  as  was  his 
custom.  Yama  tells  her  that  this  prince  is  endowed  with  such  a 
sea  of  virtue  and  accomplishment  and  beauty  that  he  is  too 
worthy  to  be  borne  away  by  anyone  but  the  god  of  death 
himself.  Then  Yama  takes  the  soul  of  Satyavan  and  proceeds 

285 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 

southward.  Savitri,  undaunted,  follows  him.  Time  and  again 
Yama  turns  to  stop  her  but  with  wise  and  appealing  words 
she  moves  him  to  grant  one  boon  after  the  other,  save  the  life 
within  his  hand.  Still  she  continues  to  follow  him,  right  into 
his  dark  cave,  until  finally  her  devotion  and  unparalleled  love 
and  wisdom  move  Yama  to  return  the  soul  of  Satyavan. 
Savitri  hastens  to  the  woods  where  her  lord’s  body  lay  and 
woos  the  soul  back  into  consciousness  and  together  they 
return  to  their  home  and  all  the  boons  promised  by  Yama  are 
fulfilled. 

Adapting  this  legend  as  a  symbol  for  a  great  living  spiritual 
experience,  Sri  Aurobindo  changes  king  Aswapathy’s  sacri¬ 
ficial  asceticism  into  the  tapasyd  or  conscious  spiritualization  of 
an  aspiring  soul  of  humanity.  Savitri  is  not  only  the  incarnation 
of  a  goddess  but  divine  grace  born  in  answer  to  A£wapathy’s 
longing  for  help  in  bringing  some  living  form  of  God  on  earth 
to  relieve  it  of  its  burden  of  inconscience.  The  marriage  of 
Savitri  and  Satyavan  is  the  divine  linking  of  their  lives  for  the 
raising  of  the  world  and  man  to  God  and  the  bringing  of  God 
to  earth  to  transform  it  into  an  abode  of  divine  delight. 

Sri  Aurobindo  first  gives  a  panoramic  vision  of  the  character 
and  mighty  events  of  the  momentous  day  of  divine  conquest. 
Dramatically  he  opens  the  epic  with  a  description  of  the  dawn 
of  the  day  destined  for  Satya van’s  death  and  makes  it  the 
symbol  of  the  dawn  of  the  spiritual  tomorrow  which  is  to 
usher  in  an  age  of  truth-consciousness  and  immortality.  How 
this  wondrous  dawn  appears  to  humans  with  'time-born  eyes’1 
and  how  it  affected  Savitri  awaiting  her  mighty  struggle  with 
death  is  compared.  Telling  verses  give  the  key  to  the  source  of 
Savitri’s  power  to  rise  above  her  lone  grief  and  the  thoughts 
oppressing  her  mind.  Her  godlike  character  and  sensitive 
nature  are  set  forth  and  reveal  the  source  of  her  power  and  will 
in  the  battle  with  death. 

As  the  significant  day  of  death  arrives,  Savitri  is  pictured 
preparing  within,  struggling  with  the  burdens  of  her  karmic 
past,  seeking  the  aid  of  her  purified  will  to  help  her  disown  the 
trails  and  legacy  of  past  selves  which  were  ‘a  block  on  the 
immortal’s  road’.2  As  she  reviews  her  past  we  hear  the  radiant 

1  Aurobindo,  Savitri,  p.  8.  *  Ibid.,  p.  15. 


286 


The  Drama  of  Integral  Self-Realization 

prologue  to  this  day,  her  twelve  months'  life  in  the  secluded 
beauty  of  the  woodlands  where  there  was  ‘deep  room  for 
thought  and  God’.1 

Striking  verses  tell  of  how  when  faced  with  the  death  of 
Satyavan  her  ‘heart  stood  in  the  way  of  the  driving  wheels'  of 
the  ‘engines  of  the  universe’,2  how  she  kindled  her  divine 
strength,  how  pain  assailed  her  divinest  elements,  and  how  the 
truth  of  her  divinity  within  ‘broke  in  in  a  triumph  of  fire',  and 
empowered  her  to  smite  ‘from  Death's  visage  its  dumb  absolute' 
and  ‘burst  the  bounds  of  consciousness  and  Time'. 3 

After  this  survey  of  the  mighty  moments  of  the  epic  the  poet 
takes  up  the  sequence  of  events  in  accordance  with  the  original 
legend  commencing  with  a  description  of  the  spiritual  steps 
taken  by  Aswapathy  for  his  soul’s  release.  We  learn  how 
through  inner  concentration  and  a  steady  will  he  keeps  his 
consciousness  in  his  supernature  and  is  helped  in  turning  his 
‘frail  mud-engine  to  heaven-use'. 4  To  free  himself  from  ego  and 
its  liniteness,  from  mind's  limits  and  ‘the  lines  of  safety  reason 
draws' 5  is  his  task. 

Then  we  are  told  how  ‘these  large  wide-poised  upliftings' 
whose  peace  the  ‘restless  nether  members  tire  of'6  are  made  to 
endure,  how  the  spirit's  power  gradually  transforms  the  darker 
parts  of  man's  being,  even  the  body’s  cells,  and  makes  them 
feel  the  need  and  will  to  change  in  order  that  ‘this  immense 
creation's  purpose'7  may  not  fail.  What  he  must  check  crowding 
through  mind's  gates  under  ‘forged  signatures  of  the  gods',8 
what  the  silences  of  his  being  reveal,  and  what  priceless  riches 
he  finds  in  the  deep  subconscient  as  his  being  becomes  trans¬ 
figured,  all  are  here  described. 

The  secret  knowledge  follows,  giving  out  the  grandiose 
meaning  of  our  lives,  the  story  of  the  climb  of  the  god-spark 
through  the  kingdoms  of  the  earth  to  Godhood,  how  the 
spirit-guardians  of  the  silence  of  the  Truth  work  in  the  vicissi¬ 
tudes  of  our  lives,  what  the  true  sources  of  our  beings  are,  who 
the  cosmic  managers  are,  and  how  the  secret  God  within  makes 
himself  felt  in  our  lives.  But  still  unexplained  problems  made 

1  Aurobindo,  Savitrl,  p.  17.  2  Ibid.,  p.  24.  3  Ibid.,  p.  25. 

4  Ibid.,  p.  29.  S  Ibid.,  p.  31.  6  Ibid.,  p.  40. 

7  Ibid.,  p.  41.  8  Ibid.,  p.  44. 

287 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 

Aswapathy  plunge  into  'unplumbed  infinitudes'1  in  order  to 
find  the  key  to  what  could  join  spirit  and  matter,  join  what  is 
now  parted,  opposed  and  twain  and  fulfil  the  oneness  that  was 
the  stamp  of  Being. 

So  Aswapathy  moves  into  the  freedom  and  greatness  of  his 
spirit,  dares  'to  live  when  breath  and  thought  were  still'2  and 
steps  into  that  magic  place  where  all  is  self-known,  where  the 
riddle  of  the  world  'grew  plain  and  lost  its  catch  obscure'. 3  In 
magnificent  poetry  we  follow  him  as  he  rises,  leaving  earth- 
nature  s  summits  below  his  feet.  We  are  made  to  feel  the 
ecstasy,  might  and  sweetness  of  God’s  mystic  power,  as  he  is 
drawn  from  his  loneliness  into  God’s  embrace. 

As  he  climbs  his  sealless  eye  uncovers  a  series  of  graded 
kingdoms  twixt  life’s  poles  through  whose  'organ  scale  of 
consciousness’  souls  move.  Up  this  stairway  of  worlds  he  starts 
and  enters  into  another  space  and  time.  With  Aswapathy  we 
travel  and  become  acquainted  with  the  nature  of  these  spheres 
and  their  godheads.  Here  Sri  Aurobindo  unveils  occult  cosmo¬ 
gony  in  grandiose  and  vibrant  detail  in  a  clarity  of  language 
that  only  direct  experience  can  utter.  To  read  of  these  inner 
states  of  ourselves,  also  the  pattern  of  the  universe  to  be  seen 
within,  below,  without,  above,  is  to  more  fully  understand 
ourselves. 

Aswapathy  crosses  out  of  this  gross  material  world  into  a 
subtle  material  existence  where  the  patterns  of  our  forms  are 
found;  then  into  planes  of  pure  life-force,  where  in  the  lower 
regions,  'an  unhappy  corner  of  eternity', 4  the  little  cravings  of 
earth’s  beings  and  a  motley  mass  of  lower  vital  creatures 
abound;  while  in  its  higher  regions  live  the  higher  emotions, 
desires  and  aspirations,  where  unattained  ideas  are  beings  and 
kings.  Then  lower  into  the  dangerous  nether  regions  of  nescience 
with  its  brood  of  hate  and  selfishness  along  with  this  explorer 
we  go  to  find  the  causes  of  the  failure  of  the  desire-worlds  to 
fulfil  themselves.  There  we  see  the  twists  of  Nature.  Further 
below  into  Hell  we  penetrate  with  this  warrior-adventurer 
who  keeps  'a  prayer  upon  his  lips  and  the  great  Name'5  to 
protect  him  from  its  terrors  and  demoniacal  creatures.  What 


1  Aurobindo,  Sdvitvi,  p.  79. 

3  Ibid.,  p.  80.  4  Ibid.,  p.  171. 

288 


a  Ibid.,  p.  84. 
5  Ibid.,  p.  238. 


The  Drama  of  Integral  Self-Realization 


scenes  of  horror  and  yet  grim  majesty  are  portrayed!  Even  to 
'the  hidden  heart  of  Night',1  the  absolute  denial  of  Truth  and 
Being,  this  spirit-soul  dives,  where  the  'hypocrite  blooms',2  a 
'spiritless  blank  Infinity’, 3  a  home  of  the  dark  powers,  'a  studio 
of  creative  Death' 4  and  a  dire  place  of  torture.  Passing  through 
the  suffering  of  its  blackest  pit,  while  treasuring  ‘between  his 
hands  his  flickering  soul’ 5  Aswapathy  discovers  that  the 
highest  secrets  are  locked  in  these  abysmal  depths. 

Then  up  into  the  paradises  of  the  gods  of  life  and  hope,  we 
are  made  to  feel  the  sweetness  and  joys  of  this  state.  But  this 
too  he  quickly  leaves,  journeying  on  to  find  something  higher, 
that  which  makes  all  one;  for  to  remain  within  the  limits  of 
desire's  satisfactions  delays  the  discovery  of  that  immortal 
One  who  gives  all  one  could  desire  and  more.  The  kingdoms 
and  godheads  of  the  little  mind  show  him  their  ceaseless 
analytical  workings  and  we  are  introduced  to  the  three  dwarfs 
of  mind:  habit,  desire  and  reason.  Then  to  the  more  luminous 
planes  of  greater  mind,  where  few  are  guests,  he  enters  and 
finds  them  a  plane  which  God  uses  as  a  bridge  to  send  his  forms 
of  truth  to  man.  Inspiring  are  the  lines  outlining  what  could 
be  ours  if  we  opened  the  gates  leading  to  this  shining  corridor 
of  mind. 

Next  Aswapathy  ascends  to  the  blissful  heavens  of  the  Idea, 
the  home  of  the  source  of  our  spiritual  longings  wherefrom  we 
hear  ‘the  flutings  of  the  Infinite'6  which  rouse  the  soul  from 
its  depths.  From  this  beautiful  realm  where  mind's  radiant 
flower-children  dwell  he  enters  into  the  silence  where  the  Self 
of  mind,  the  witness  lord  of  nature,  has  his  secret  base. 
Aswapathy  watches  the  motive-thoughts  of  this  thinker,  but 
this  firmament  of  abstract  thought  he  observes  is  a  finder 
only,  but  not  a  knower  or  a  lover. 

Seeking  for  an  escape  from  these  limits  the  king-soul  goes 
through  a  brilliant  opening  carried  by  a  mysterious  sound 
into  the  Soul  of  the  world.  Here  the  poet  describes  the 
universal  harmonies,  sympathies  and  wisdom  of  this  cosmic 
consciousness,  home  of  souls  in  spiritual  sleep  between  lives  on 
earth.  We  learn  how  souls  plan  there  in  this  ‘fashioning  chamber 

1  Aurobindo,  Savitrl ,  p.  249.  *  Ibid.,  p.  251.  3  Ibid.,  p.  249. 

4  Ibid.,  p.  256.  5  Ibid.,  p.  261.  6  Ibid.,  p.  316* 

289 


K 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 


of  the  worlds’1  the  adventures  of  their  new  lives.  The  watching 
eye  of  this  spiritual  traveller  sees  there  his  own  soul,  and  now, 
soul-conscious,  becomes  aware  of  the  ‘Two-in-One’,2  the 
cosmic  Father-Mother  absorbed  in  deep  creative  joy,  and 
learns  of  their  works  and  powers.  In  awe  he  falls  before  this 
unveiled  Goddess,  knowing  he  is  nearing  the  heart  of  things. 
Now  our  hero-soul  steps  into  a  realm  of  boundless  silence 
"where  all  are  different  and  all  is  one’. 3  The  plenitudes  of 
wisdom  found  there  are  spread  before  us. 

Next  on  creation’s  heights  this  tireless  seeker  arrives  where 
only  a  formless  Form  of  Self  is  left.  There  appears  the  Godhead 
of  the  whole  with  ‘his  feet  firm-based  on  Life’s  stupendous 
wings’. 4  The  utter  aloneness,  stillness  and  inscrutability  of  this 
God  with  diamond  gaze  rejecting  from  itself  world  and  soul 
is  powerfully  set  forth.  Still  this  ‘consciousness  of  unshared 
immortal  bliss’s  did  not  satisfy  him.  He  sought  in  this  absolute 
silence  ‘an  absolute  Power’,6  for  he  knew  that  a  huge  extinction 
is  not  God’s  last  word,  that  the  escape  into  this  glad  divine 
abyss  is  not  the  crowrn  of  the  Self’s  mission  or  the  Self’s  power, 
or  the  meaning  of  this  great  mysterious  world.  Verses  of 
challenge  ring  forth  to  the  soul  who  might  seek  the  end  of  his 
being  in  nirvana . 

Passages  pregnant  with  deep  meaning  then  flow  forth  from 
the  poet  as  he  narrates  the  drawing  near  of  the  Divine  Presence 
behind  the  Godhead,  that  Luminous  Heart  which  Aswapathy 
had  been  yearning  for  with  the  passion  of  his  soul.  Here  was 
the  Glory  of  God,  the  Divine  Mother  of  All.  Soul-stirring  is 
his  prayer  to  the  Mighty  Mother  after  having  torn  ‘desire  up 
from  its  bleeding  roots’  and  ‘offered  to  the  gods  the  vacant 
place’. 7  The  poet  depicts  the  transformation  that  comes  over 
Aswapathy  as  his  heart  meets  the  Divine  Mother  and  describes 
the  vision  that  comes  to  him  of  the  new  creation  to  dawn  on 
earth,  bringing  with  it  a  harmony  of  all  contraries.  Splendid  and 
prophetic  passages!  Suddenly  the  Divine  Mother  rises  in  him 
and  speaks  in  his  heart’s  chambers,  warning  him  not  to  make 
too  soon  the  immeasurable  descent,  and  revealing  her  miracu¬ 
lous  powers.  But  Aswapathy,  who  has  now  beheld  this  wondrous 

1  Aurobindo,  Sdvitrf,  p.  333.  2  Ibid.,  p.  334.  3  Ibid.,  p.  340. 

4  Ibid.,  p.  348.  5  Ibid.,  p.  349.  6  Ibid.,  p.  353.  7  Ibid.,  p.  360. 


290 


The  Drama  of  Integral  Self-Realization 

Mother,  pleads  with  a  heart  grown  vibrant  with  love  for  all: 
'Incarnate  the  white  passion  of  thy  Force'.1  The  beauteous 
Immortal's  consent  and  her  promise  to  come  down  to  earth  is 
one  of  the  lofty  mantric  passages  of  the  epic.  So  to  change 
Nature's  doom  Savitri  is  born.  Exquisite  poetry  recounts  her 
childhood,  the  gradual  growth  of  the  flame  within  her,  the  call 
to  her  divine  quest  and  the  meeting  of  the  two  young 
lovers. 

Then  we  hear  Niirada,the  heavenly  sage,  not  only  announcing 
to  A£wapathy,  the  father  of  Savitri,  the  fated  death  of  Satyavan 
but  giving  out  with  singular  force  the  laws  and  ways  of  karma , 
fate  and  pain,  and  the  mystery  of  why  great  souls  suffer.2 
Like  the  despondency  of  Arjuna  in  the  Bhagavad-Gita,  the 
ordeal  of  the  foreknowledge  of  Satyavan's  death  and  her 
heart's  grief  are  shown  to  be  the  beginning  of  Savitri's  yoga, 
her  union  with  God.  With  the  poet  we  watch  her  struggles  with 
forces  of  indifference  and  inertia,  with  the  senses,  desire  and 
the  restless  brain,  against  truth  mixed  with  poison,  and 
against  weakness  of  heart.  The  strong  charge  of  her  soul  in 
response  to  her  request:  ‘Speak  to  my  depths,  O  great  and 
deathless  Voice,  Command,  for  I  am  here  to  do  thy  will',  3  is 
the  spiritual  charge  for  every  soul  seeking  to  serve  the  Divine 
and  conquer  darkness. 

Next  we  are  given  a  picture  of  what  Savitri  sees  when  she 
looks  into  herself  and  seeks  her  soul.  Closing  the  door  to  the 
God  within  are  serpents  of  temptations  of  all  kinds,  limitations 
luring  to  the  easier  paths  of  the  all-negating  absolute,  to 
escape  from  the  battle  with  life  and  to  nirvana .  How  she 
answers  these  and  pushes  them  away  is  told.  On  seeking  the 
occult  fire  within,  three  soul-forces  appear:  the  Mother  of 
Divine  Pity,  the  Mother  of  Might  and  the  Mother  of  Wisdom. 
Each  relates  her  various  form  and  work  in  the  world.  Finally 
the  poet  chants  of  Savitri's  finding  of  her  Secret  Deity. 

But  soon  the  portentous  yet  promising  day  of  Satyavan's 
death  arrives  and  it  is  portrayed  in  verses  of  poetic  pathos.  At 
the  moment  of  death  Savitri  enters  the  mystic  lotus  in  her 
head,  'a  thousand-petalled  home  of  power  and  light'4  and  rises 

*  Aurobindo,  Sdvitri,  p.  391.  *  Ibid.,  pp.  471-523. 

3  Ibid,,  p.  540.  4  Ibid.,  p.  647. 


291 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 

to  meet  the  dreadful  God,  the  limitless  denial  of  all  being.  The 
two  oppose  each  other,  Woman  and  universal  God  of  Death. 
The  poem  shows  Satyavan  moving  with  Death  into  the  silence 
beyond  and  Savitri  casting  off  her  sheaths  and  entering  into 
the  trance  of  her  soul  in  order  to  stay  with  Satyavan.  At  the 
brink  of  the  shadow-world  Death  peals  forth  his  abysmal  cry 
ordering  her  to  go  back.  But  silent,  she  dares  enter  into  the 
eternal  night  with  them.  Death  warns  her  to  go  no  further 
and  depicts  his  home  of  dark  immensity  and  the  helplessness 
of  all  in  his  power.  After  his  ruthless  speech  Savitri  answers 
what  to  her  is  a  black  lie  of  night  and  declares  her  spirit’s 
power  can  resist  him  and  then  demands  and  challenges  Death 
to  give  what  Satyavan  desired  in  his  life  for  his  parents.  Death 
smilingly  yields  but  demands  her  return  to  earth  lest  she  be 
destroyed.  But  Savitri  boldly  states  her  powers  which  like 
fire  can  destroy  him.  Death  in  mocking  verses  cries  forth  that 
he  is  the  originator  and  destroyer  of  all.  Savitri  then  meets 
scorn  with  scorn  and  in  dynamic  poetry  proclaims  the  wondrous 
might  of  her  God’s  will  and  love.  Death  refutes  all  her  state¬ 
ments,  claiming  his  power  can  deny  them  all,  make  all  things 
vain. 

Savitrl’s  soul  continues  to  wrestle  with  Death  and  to  ridicule 
his  words  of  reason.  Death  challenges  her  to  seek  to  know,  for 
knowledge  kills  love.  Quickly  comes  her  response  that  the 
nature  of  love  gives  birth  to  knowledge.  Drifting  along  with 
them  as  they  move  into  the  land  of  Nought,  we  hear  the  debate 
continue,  hear  them  pit  all  the  contraries  of  life  against  each 
other,  and  we  hear  from  Savitri  the  very  reason  of  Death’s 
existence.  Death  peals  forth  a  long  proclamation  how  he 
cancels  all  life’s  golden  truths.  To  his  dangerous  music  this 
warrior-maiden  gives  a  picture  of  what  her  God  of  Love  has 
done  and  will  yet  accomplish  and  dares  Death  to  produce  a 
greater  God  to  captivate  her  soul.  Death  sneeringly  interprets 
her  words  as  hallucinations  of  the  mind  and  gives  an  oration 
on  the  deceptions  of  mind  and  raises  unconsciousness  as  the 
pinnacle  of  all.  Savitri  answers  in  Death’s  own  words,  calling 
him  the  dark-browed  sophist  of  the  universe  masking  divinity 
with  his  dance  of  death.  She  sings  forth  in  glorious  poetry  the 
occult  spiritual  miracle  of  God’s  wonders  from  a  tiny  seed,  and 

292 


The  Drama  of  Integral  Self-Realization 

then  again  in  lines  of  majestic  power  speaks  of  her  assured 
triumph,  of  her  love  as  stronger  than  his  bonds  of  death. 

The  dark  King,  still  trying  to  discourage  her,  ironically 
speaks  of  her  fantasy  of  truth,  saying  that  truth  is  hard  as 
stone.  Back  and  forth  sparkle  the  words  of  the  debate.  Death 
uses  subtle  reason  and  arms  himself  with  all  man’s  faltering 
searches,  his  limiting  spiritual  goals,  and  exaggerated  and 
imperfect  understanding  of  truth  to  prove  the  futility  of  God’s 
power,  but  Savitri,  'delivered  from  all  twilight  thoughts’,1 
with  a  heart  of  truth  answers  his  lures.  Here  Savitri  chants 
lyrics  of  Nature's  miracles,  of  the  wonders  of  the  Infinite 
and  of  the  limitless  powers  of  a  soul  integrally  surrendered 
to  God. 

Death,  suspecting  her  to  be  the  Mother  of  the  Gods  embodied, 
challenges  her  to  show  a  body  of  living  truth,  for  has  matter 
ever  been  able  to  hold  truth?  Savitri  tells  Death  who  he  really 
is  and  warns  him  lie  will  cease  to  be  when  he  touches  the 
embodied  truth  supreme,  and  then  reveals  her  being  all  one 
with  God.  Death,  still  unconvinced,  makes  his  last  stand  in 
support  of  his  blind  force  and  dares  Savitri  to  reveal  the  power 
of  the  Divine,  for  many  have  truth  but  who  has  the  power  to 
radiate  it?  Then  is  given  a  picture  of  Savitri  as  she  becomes 
transformed  into  a  divine  being  with  all  her  cakras  or  lotuses 
of  power  scintillating.  The  most  powerful  speech  of  all  follows 
and  Savitri  exhibits  her  living  power  of  truth  and  proves  that 
death  is  needed  no  more.  Death  is  shown  gradually  vanishing 
and  finally  defeated,  eaten  by  light. 

In  the  silences  of  the  beyond  Savitri  and  Satyavan  are 
alone.1  Into  the  avenues  of  the  Spirit  they  roam  happily.  But 
even  there  voices  rise  enticing  them  to  come  to  a  blissful  home 
away  from  the  battles  of  life,  but  Savitri  again  meets  the  test 
with  strength.  With  sun-words  she  replies  that  she  was  born  on 
earth  to  dare  the  impossible,  that  imperfect  is  the  joy  not 
shared  by  all.  Then  God,  knowing  Sfivitri  now  to  be  absolutely 
at  one  with  his  diamond  heart,  rings  forth  the  final  joyous 
paean  of  the  divine  transformation  that  shall  be  on  earth  and 
sends  Savitri  as  his  power  and  Satyavan  as  his  soul  back  to 
earth  to  change  this  earthly  life  to  a  life  divine. 

*  Aurobindo,  Savitri,  p.  716.  *  Ibid.,  pp.  753-800. 


293 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aukobindo 

Savitri  falls  like  a  star  to  earth1  and  Satyavan  invisibly 
drawn  soars  past  her.  They  reunite  on  earth  and  the  epic 
closes  unveiling  the  age-long  secret  deep-guarded  in  the 
stillness — the  promise  of  a  greater  dawn. 

Iti  may  a  srutam — Thus  have  I  heard — 

Thus  have  I  heard  the  revelation  of  Savitri ,  Sri  Aurobindo's 
epic  poem,  truly  an  apocalypse  of  the  treasuries  of  spiritual 
experience  and  of  the  perfect  divine  existence. 

*  Aurobindo,  Savitri,  pp.  803-14. 


294 


PART  FIVE 


MISCELLANEOUS 


25 


SWAMI  SIVANANDA 

Sri  Aurobindo: 

The  Consummate  Expression 
of  the  Indian  Spirit  of  Synthesis 


Down  through  the  centuries,  with  the  exception  of  certain 
distinctive  periods  in  Indian  cultural  history  which  constrained 
and  fostered  the  development  by  isolation  of  one  or  the  other 
aspects  of  the  synthetic  thought  embodied  in  the  rich  and 
many-sided  philosophic  and  spiritual  traditions  of  the  country, 
India  had  always  borne  the  insignia  of  uniqueness  for  its 
irresistible  and  brilliant  tendency  towards  a  comprehensiveness 
of  experience  and  thought. 

Whether  it  is  yoga-sastra  (science  of  self-realization)  or 
arthasastra  (economics)  or  ayurveda  (science  of  medicine)  or 
jyotisa  (astrology)  or  simple  forms  of  religious  experience,  we 
can  always  be  given  the  awareness  of  having  been  taken  by 
surprise  and  immense  delight  at  the  power  and  persuasiveness 
with  which  it  comes  home  to  us  with  the  utility  of  a  message 
which  reveals  at  once  a  synthesis  in  its  conceptions  and  a 
comprehensiveness  in  its  techniques  of  actual  practice,  and 
this  feature  of  distinctiveness  for  integrality  it  owes  to  the  soil 
in  which  it  has  taken  its  origins,  the  soil  of  the  Vedas,  the 
background  of  the  Upanisadic  experience  and  endeavour,  the 
wide-ranging  experience  of  the  Indian  spiritual  realization. 

But  then,  as  has  already  been  hinted,  there  were  times  and 
trying  periods  in  the  vicissitudes  of  the  history  of  this  ancient 
land  of  India,  which  necessitated  and  encouraged  lop-sided 
developments  and  compartmental  monopoly  in  the  organic 
many-limbed  body  of  Indian  cultural  thought  .  .  .  and  it 

*  297 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 

remained  for  a  number  of  stalwart  saints,  mystics  and  men  of 
God  in  mediaeval  India  and  the  India  of  recent  past,  whose 
last  and  most  impressive  instance  in  the  synthesis  of  experience 
in  a  diversity  of  religion  has  been  Sri  Ramakrishna. 

And  it  needed  the  supreme  cultural  genius  of  a  Sri 
Aurobindo,  the  like  of  whom  the  spirit  and  the  creative  vision 
of  India  alone  can  create,  to  give  a  yet  bolder  or  rather  the 
boldest  manifestation  to  a  synthesization  of  insights  in  philo¬ 
sophic,  cultural  and  religious  or  spiritual  wisdom  and  experience 
and  to  an  invaluable  integral  conception  of  the  triple  Reality 
that  the  inquiring  reason  and  metaphysical  awareness  of  man 
encounters  in  creative  endeavours  against  the  facts  and  events 
of  experience  and  reflection.  Sri  Aurobindo  is  indeed  the 
consummate  expression  of  the  spirit  of  synthesis  inherent  in 
Indian  culture. 

Apart  from  the  greatness  we  discern  and  admire  in  the 
uniqueness  of  the  philosophic  experience  and  statement  of 
Sri  Aurobindo,  there  is  one  thing  more  which  needs  and  claims 
our  recognition  and  consequent  admiration,  the  fact  that  the 
methodology  Sri  Aurobindo  had  requisitioned  as  a  means  to 
his  grasp  of  the  fundamental  facts  of  existence,  of  the  great 
values  of  integral  life,  of  the  nature  of  the  Divine  in  the  human 
individual,  the  Divine  in  the  universe  and  the  Divine  in  its 
own  timeless  eternity  and  transcendentality,  was  constituted 
by  no  mere  power  of  speculative  reason,  no  mere  philosophic 
vision,  no  building  upon  what  has  been  handed  over  to  him  as 
his  heritage,  but  by  the  intuition,  the  new  brand  of  intuition, 
the  integral  insight  that  he  had  obtained  in  the  seclusion  of 
Pondicherry,  in  experience  of  the  supernormal  factors  in  the 
spiritual  world,  in  an  experimenting  richness  of  personal 
sddhand  and  siddhi . 

With  a  joy  that  only  a  mother  who  has  borne  a  genius-babe 
can  know,  India  is  proud  of  Sri  Aurobindo  and  the  phenomenon 
of  his  extraordinary  contributions;  but  the  profit  accruing  from 
the  gifts  of  Aurobindo  is  not  only  its  own,  it  is  of  all  the  world! 
May  the  spirit  of  Aurobindo  shower  its  choicest  blessings  upon 
all  mankind! 


298 


26 


T.  M.  P.  MAHADEVAN 

The  Significance  of  Sri  Aurobindo 


.Sri  Aurobindo  will  ever  be  remembered  as  a  mahd-yogt,  a 
purna-yogi,  a  great  teacher  of  integral  yoga.  Though  he  started 
his  public  life  as  a  patriot,  his  patriotism  was  of  a  unique  kind. 
It  was  no  narrow  nationalism  that  moved  him  as  a  pioneer  in 
the  movement  for  India’s  freedom.  His  conception  of  the 
motherland  was  not  that  of  a  geographical  component  of  the 
globe  'spotted  with  hills  and  lined  with  rivers  and  shaded  with 
plains’.  His  vision  of  India  was  that  of  a  spiritual  heritage 
whose  powers  had  to  be  liberated  for  the  lasting  benefit  of  the 
whole  of  mankind.  And  the  method  of  liberation  lay,  as  he 
said,  and  as  it  has  been  worked  out  completely  and  in  such 
great  detail  by  Mahatma  Gandhi,  in  supplanting  ksatriya-tejas 
or  brute  force,  by  brahma-tejas  or  soul  force.  When  the  time 
came  for  retirement  from  active  politics  in  response  to  an 
inner  call,  Sri  Aurobindo  was  prepared  for  it,  because  he  knew 
that  the  path  which  was  opening  out  before  him  led  to  wider 
horizons  and  loftier  realms. 

On  April  4,  1910,  Sri  Aurobindo  arrived  at  Pondicherry,  not 
as  a  political  refugee,  as  it  was  wrongly  imagined  in  some 
quarters  then,  but  as  a  spiritual  pilgrim,  determined  to  scale 
the  heights  of  yoga.  In  the  famous  Uttarpara  speech,  he  makes 
mention  of  the  way  he  was  attracted  to  yoga.  This  is  what  he 
says:  ‘When  I  approached  God  at  that  time,  I  hardly  had  a 
living  faith  in  Him.  The  agnostic  was  in  me,  the  atheist  was 
in  me,  the  sceptic  was  in  me,  and  I  was  not  absolutely  sure 
that  there  was  a  God  at  all.  I  did  not  feel  His  presence.  Yet 
something  drew  me  to  the  truth  of  the  Vedas,  the  truth  of  the 
Gita,  the  truth  of  the  Hindu  religion.  I  felt  there  must  be  a 

299 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 


mighty  truth  somewhere  in  this  yoga ,  a  mighty  truth  in  this 
religion  based  on  the  Vedanta/  So,  from  atheism  and  agnosti¬ 
cism  to  God-realization — what  a  rapid  and  great  march  it  was! 
And  this  grand  march  he  made  in  the  atmosphere  of  an 
asrama  which  arose  where  he  was.  The  realization  of  yogic 
experience  which  came  to  him  was  not  for  his  private  enjoy¬ 
ment;  it  was  meant  for  all,  as,  according  to  him,  the  goal 
of  spirituality  is  The  flowering  of  the  Divine  in  collective 
humanity'. 

In  The  Life  Divine  and  in  numerous  other  works,  Sri 
Aurobindo  has  expounded  his  philosophy  of  yoga.  In  exquisite 
language  clothed  in  poetic  beauty,  he  gives  us  not  only  intima¬ 
tions  of  the  immortal  life  but  also  sketches  the  method  by 
which  that  life  is  to  be  gained.  Adopting  the  well-known 
Vedantic  term,  Sri  Aurobindo  calls  the  ultimate  reality — 
Sacciddnanda.  'Sacciddnanda  ,  he  says,  ‘is  the  unknown, 
omnipresent,  indispensable  term  for  which  the  human  con¬ 
sciousness,  whether  in  knowledge  and  sentiment  or  in  sensation 
and  action,  is  eternally  seeking/  In  the  very  description  of 
Reality  as  Sacciddnanda  we  posit  three  entities  and  unite  them 
to  arrive  at  a  trinity.  We  say,  ‘existence,  consciousness,  bliss', 
and  then  we  say,  'They  are  one'.  This  is  not  all  that  is  to  be 
said  of  Reality.  Sat ,  cit  and  dnanda ,  which  Sri  Aurobindo 
translates  as  the  pure  existent,  consciousness-force  and  the 
delight  of  existence,  constitute,  along  with  the  fourth  principle, 
viz.  supermind,  the  higher  hemisphere  of  Being.  The  lower 
hemisphere  consists  of  mind,  life  and  matter.  While  in  the 
higher  hemisphere  knowledge  reigns,  in  the  lower,  ignorance 
rules.  But  it  should  be  noted  that  mind,  life  and  matter  are 
only  subordinate  powers  of  the  divine  quartemary.  Mind  is  a 
subordinate  power  of  the  supermind;  life  is  a  subordinate 
power  of  the  energy  aspect  of  Sacciddnanda ;  and  matter  is  a 
form  of  being  which  is  to  be  traced  to  the  existence  aspect  of 
Sacciddnanda .  Together  these  seven  constitute  the  sevenfold 
chord  of  Being.  All  of  them  are  essential  to  cosmic  creation. 
The  higher  trinity  is  the  source  and  basis  of  all  existence  and 
play  of  existence,  and  all  cosmos  must  be  an  expression  and 
action  of  its  essential  reality/ 

There  is  a  double  movement  at  work  in  Reality,  declares 

300 


The  Significance  of  Sri  Aurobindo 


Sri  Aurobindo — a  descent  and  an  ascent.  The  Divine  descends 
from  pure  existence  through  the  play  of  Consciousness-Force 
and  Bliss  and  the  Creative  medium  of  Supermind  into  Cosmic 
being;  we  ascend  from  Matter  through  a  developing  life,  soul 
and  mind  and  the  illuminating  medium  of  Supermind  towards 
the  Divine  Being/  These  two  movements  are,  in  fact,  comple¬ 
mentary  to  each  other;  there  is  no  contradiction  between  them. 
The  ascension  enables  the  divine  descent;  the  descent  fulfils 
that  for  which  the  ascension  aspires  and  which  it  makes 
inevitable.  In  the  past,  saints  and  sages  have  risen  from  the 
lower  levels  to  the  higher.  But  they  did  not  attempt,  says  Sri 
Aurobindo,  to  bring  the  supermind  down  into  the  consciousness 
of  the  earth  and  make  it  fixed  there.  This  is  a  consummation 
devoutly  to  be  desired;  this  is  the  life  divine — the  satyayuga, 
the  new  heaven  and  new  earth.  And  the  way  that  leads  to  the 
goal  is  ‘integral  yoga’ — the  yoga  in  which  all  the  powers  of 
being  ‘will  be  combined  and  included  in  the  transmuting 
instrumentation’. 

There  have  been  rival  views  in  Indian  thought  as  to  the 
nature  of  ultimate  Reality.  There  was,  for  instance,  the  great 
Sankara  in  classical  times  who  taught  that  Brahman  is  nirguna , 
devoid  of  characteristics  though  not  characterless,  and  that  the 
world  is  only  an  illusory  appearance.  It  is  a  disputed  question 
as  to  which  of  these  philosophical  views  or  spiritual  visions  is 
the  ultimate.  But  as  Sri  Aurobindo  himself  says  in  a  paper 
contributed  to  the  Silver  Jubilee  Volume  of  the  Indian  Philo¬ 
sophical  Congress,  ‘Whether  the  workings  of  the  Spirit  in  the 
universe  are  a  reality — or  only  a  half  reality,  self-descriptive 
Lila  or  illusory  Maya ,  whether  it  be  an  action  of  the  Infinite 
Energy,  Sakti,  or  a  figment  of  some  secondary  paradoxical 
consciousness  in  the  Eternal,  Maya ,  life  as  an  intermediate 
reality  is  nowhere  denied  by  any  school  of  Indian  think¬ 
ing'. 

All  the  saints  and  sages  of  India,  teachers  of  philosophy  and 
prophets  of  religion,  are  agreed  that  the  goal  of  life  is  spiritual 
perfection.  The  peculiarity  of  the  Indian  eye  of  thought  is',  in 
the  words  of  Sri  Aurobindo,  ‘that  it  sees  or  searches  everywhere 
for  the  Spirit,  and  the  peculiarity  of  the  Indian  will  in  life  is 
that  it  feels  itself  to  be  still  unfulfilled,  not  in  touch  with 

301 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 


perfection,  nor  justified  in  any  intermediate  satisfaction  so 
long  as  it  has  not  found  and  does  not  live  in  the  truth  of  the 
Spirit/  The  greatest  homage  that  we  can  pay  to  Sri  Aurobindo 
is  to  resolve  not  to  rest  until  we  reach  the  goal  which  is 
spiritual  perfection. 


302 


S.  K.  MITRA 


The  Nineteenth-Century  Upsurge 


Whii.k  the  critical  eighteenth  century  was  the  indirect  cause 
of  the  decisive  event  that  changed  India’s  political  destiny, 
the  century  that  followed  witnessed  the  beginnings  of  tre¬ 
mendous  movements  whose  consummation  in  the  twentieth 
was  one  of  the  greatest  events  in  all  history.  The  nineteenth 
century  was  the  veritable  seed-time  of  mighty  ideas  that  took 
shape  in  the  next.  It  was  indeed  for  the  whole  world  ‘a  century 
of  hope’,  as  F.  S.  Marvin  would  say,  for  which  evolutionary 
Nature  had  been  at  work  in  the  previous  century  through  wars 
and  revolutions.  Her  aim  in  the  nineteenth  century  appeared 
to  be  to  prepare  the  mind  of  the  race  for  its  regeneration  into 
a  new  consciousness  that  would  lead  to  and  sustain  a  fresh 
adventure  of  the  world’s  soul  towards  a  greater  and  grander 
fulfilment  in  the  future.  To  this  adventure  mankind  is  being 
impelled  largely  by  the  very  problems  it  itself  created  in  the 
nineteenth  century.  This  is  one  of  Nature’s  ways  to  realize  her 
aim  in  human  evolution. 

The  nineteenth  century  saw  the  birth,  growth  and  expansion 
of  remarkable  political  and  cultural  movements  in  Europe  and 
other  parts  of  the  world.  They  helped  forward  the  cause  of 
human  progress  as  nothing  else  had  done  before.  Large  ideas, 
vast  thoughts,  wonderful  visions  stirred  the  heart  and  soul  of 
man  and  he  began  to  feel  that  a  new  world  was  about  to  be 
bom.  Not  that  these  movements  solved  their  self-evoked 
problems  but  the  ideas  and  ideals  that  inspired  them  certainly 
brought  about  a  wholesome  reorientation  of  the  mental  outlook 
of  the  century. 

One  of  the  causes  of  the  all-round  change  in  the  life  of  man 

303 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 

was  the  Industrial  Revolution.  It  brought  in  wealth,  and 
wealth  gave  leisure,  and  leisure,  where  properly  utilized, 
prompted  cultural  creation.  Industrialization  gave  a  tre¬ 
mendous  push  to  commerce,  and  commerce  sought  expansion 
through  colonization,  and  colonization  backed  by  Christian 
missions  helped  in  spreading  European  ideas.  Thus  came  into 
being  colonies  and  spheres  of  influence  with  various  concomitant 
problems  some  of  which  are  still  defying  solution. 

Science,  which  has  made  so  much  for  industrial  progress,  is 
man's  outstanding  achievement  but  it  has  at  the  same  time 
released  forces  far  too  powerful  for  his  control.  While  rendering 
more  complex  the  individual  and  collective  life  of  man,  it  has 
been  at  once  his  weal  and  his  worry.  And  when  he  declared 
that  science  was  ‘the  only  means  of  certain  knowledge,  and 
that  anything  unknowable  to  science  must  remain  unknowable 
forever',  he  stood  self-blinded,  his  mind  self-condemned, 
condemned  to  its  own  limitations,  shutting  out  from  itself  the 
higher  values  of  the  infinite,  ever  open  to  it  above  its  own 
domain.  Another  self-created  problem. 

Yet  science  and  scientific  thought  have  considerably  helped 
in  developing  two  powers  of  man — reason  and  individualism. 
These  have  liberated  him  from  much  of  the  mediaeval 
obscurantism  that  sat  heavy  on  his  mind  and  soul.  But  by  them¬ 
selves  they  cannot  lead  him  to  the  highest  good,  though,  while 
serving  as  the  necessary  basis  of  his  quest,  they  may  point  to 
it  as  some  mysterious  ultimate.  Meanwhile,  man's  exclusive 
reliance  on  and  adherence  to  them  creates  yet  another  self- 
defeating  problem. 

The  eighteenth  century  was  ringing  with  the  cry  for  freedom 
and  its  first  outburst  was  the  movement  in  the  New  World  that 
culminated  in  the  birth  of  a  new  nation  whose  rapid  growth  in 
the  next  century  enabled  it  to  play  an  important  role  in  the 
international  life  of  humanity.  The  Revolution  in  France  was 
a  struggle  for  the  attainment  of  great  ideals  none  of  which 
has  been  fully  realized  as  yet  in  the  life  of  any  nation,  or,  for 
the  matter  of  that,  even  in  social  life  anywhere,  although  they 
were  the  flaming  ideals  of  the  inspired  thinkers  who  conceived 
and  proclaimed  them  as  the  ideals  of  the  whole  human  race. 

Nevertheless,  what  the  French  Revolution  did  was  by  itself 

304 


The  Nineteenth-Century  Upsurge 

an  achievement  necessary  at  that  stage  of  the  collective  evolu¬ 
tion  of  mankind.  The  overthrow  of  established  government  in 
America  and  France,  and  the  final  consolidation  of  the  demo¬ 
cratic  structure  of  the  British  Parliament  proved  to  be  the 
most  powerful  factors  in  the  growth  of  national  consciousness 
in  the  Continent.  The  result:  liberation  of  Italy,  unification  of 
Germany,  and  the  beginning  of  a  world-wide  movement  which 
eventually  brought  freedom  to  almost  all  subject  peoples  of 
the  world  by  the  mid-twentieth  century.  Among  the  revolu¬ 
tionary  ideals  of  the  eighteenth-  and  nineteenth-century 
Europe  that  inspired  this  movement  were  the  wonderful 
visions  of  a  glorious  future  of  mankind  in  the  development  of 
which  each  progressive  nation  had  its  own  contribution  to 
make  and  this  it  could  only  do  in  its  freedom.  The  great 
Italian  idealist  and  revolutionary  Giuseppi  Mazzini's  vision  of 
his  country's  freedom  was  a  magnificent  one;  while  it  aimed  at 
giving  Europe  a  new  message  and  a  new  civilization,  it  evoked 
a  ready  response  in  the  hearts  of  all  peoples  struggling  for 
freedom. 

But  as  nations  developed  in  their  consciousness  as  distinct 
collective  entities,  they  developed  also  extreme  forms  of 
national  egos  of  which,  in  recent  history,  mankind  has  seen 
two  brutal  exhibitions — a  third  problem,  perhaps  the  most 
baffling  of  all.  A  notable  political  step  taken  towards  a  solution 
was  the  introduction  of  a  system  of  international  control  of 
affairs  or  congressional  government  which,  after  a  series  of 
revolutions  and  wars,  was  tried  in  Europe  during  the  greater 
part  of  the  first  half  of  the  nineteenth  century.  However 
inchoate,  it  showed  a  healthy  and  hopeful  trend  of  things 
towards  the  future  unification  of  the  race. 

In  the  world  of  thought  the  rise  of  romantic  idealism  in 
Germany  was  an  important  event.  It  was  another  cosmic 
force  which  like  freedom  worked  in  the  mind  of  other  countries 
— France,  England,  America — pointing  to  a  brighter  future  for 
the  human  race.  Sri  Aurobindo  says  and  Gerald  Heard 
reiterates  that  Vedantic  ideas  from  India  were  an  important 
factor  in  the  rise  and  growth  of  this  movement  in  Germany. 
And  their  influence  in  the  three  other  countries  is  well  known. 
Kant  showed  in  his  concept  of  ‘Universal  History'  how  the 

305 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 


freedom  of  the  individual  to  develop  to  his  highest  possibilities 
could  be  reconciled  with  the  developing  society.  Hegel's  thesis 
in  his  Philosophy  of  History  was  that  man  was  a  progressive 
and  perfectible  being.  And  Nietzsche  was  dreaming  of  ‘a  new 
race  of  Supermen’.  It  is  well  known  how  the  ideas  of  the 
French  thinkers  were  among  the  inspiring  forces  of  the  French 
Revolution.  A  few  years  later  Condorcet  declared  that  man  is 
capable  of  'infinite  improvement’.  Human  ills  can  be  mitigated 
by  progress,  said  Comte  in  France;  by  the  spread  of  knowledge, 
said  Buckle  in  England.  Darwin’s  theory  of  evolution  and 
those  of  others  on  the  same  subject  showed,  however  vaguely, 
the  continuity  of  man’s  growth.  Spencer  identified  progress 
with  evolution.  The  English  romantic  poets  discovered  some¬ 
thing  of  heaven  in  things  of  the  earth.  Some  of  them,  called  by 
Sri  Aurobindo  'the  poets  of  the  Dawn’,  saw  visions  of  a  new 
world  of  freedom  and  harmony,  and  sang  of  its  glory.  The 
spiritual  impulse  is  even  more  marked  in  the  poetry  of  Whitman, 
Carpenter,  Yeats,  A.  E.  and  Tagore,  the  forerunners,  according 
to  Sri  Aurobindo,  of  the  coming  new  age  of  the  Spirit.  In 
America  the  transcendentalists  of  Concord  echoed  the  Vedantic 
idea  that  'within  man  is  the  soul  of  the  Whole.  .  .  .  Man  is  a 
stream  flowing  into  the  ocean  of  infinity’. 

The  nineteenth  century  is  also  marked  by  the  growth  of 
socialistic  ideas.  The  'birth  cry  of  modern  socialism’  broke  out 
from  its  two  famous  exponents  whose  influence  on  human  mind 
is  wide  but  not  deep  in  that  the  more  important  of  their 
prophecies  with  which  they  popularized  their  doctrines  are 
belied  by  later  developments.  Socialism  has,  however,  awakened 
the  masses  to  a  consciousness  of  their  rights  as  human  beings 
and  as  equal  citizens  of  the  State.  And  Nature  is  perhaps  using 
the  movement  as  an  indirect  medium  of  their  preparation  for 
a  larger  awakening  in  the  coming  age  of  the  Spirit. 

Another  remarkable  idea  that  governed  a  number  of  pro¬ 
gressive  minds  is  the  so-called  anarchistic  thought — that  much 
misunderstood  but  inevitable  phase  in  the  development  of  the 
human  spirit.  Its  inner  meaning  lies  in  the  evolutionary  nisus 
or  impulse  of  man’s  soul  to  break  through  all  artificial,  mind- 
made  bounds  to  a  wider  consciousness  which  is  for  man  to 
develop  as  the  condition  for  a  higher  life.  It  started  in  England, 

306 


The  Nineteenth-Century  Upsurge 

was  echoed  in  France,  but  found  its  larger  expression  in  Russia, 
maybe  because  of  the  mystic  clement  in  her  social  make-up,  as 
pointed  out  by  Nikolai  Davilisky.  It  was  a  great  ideal  which 
Nature  held  up  before  Europe  to  see  how  she  would  respond. 
The  ideal  is  still  there  awaiting  its  hour  of  realization  when  it 
would  be  a  dynamic  force  contributing  to  the  growth  of  the 
spiritual  revolution  through  which  man  will  rise  to  a  higher 
consciousness.  But  the  revolution  itself  may  largely  be  a 
subjective  one  with  subjective  results.  The  collectivist  anar¬ 
chists,  or  as  they  are  called  'social  idealists',  have  nihilism  for 
their  extreme  school  of  anarchism. 

The  ideologies  of  nihilism,  anarchism  or  revolution  aiming  at 
re-making  society  into  a  perfect  form  imbued  the  minds  of 
most  of  the  world-famous  Russian  writers  of  the  nineteenth 
century  who  vindicated  the  sovereignty  of  individual  freedom, 
and  portrayed  the  struggle  of  man's  soul  against  the  ills  that 
afflicted  him.  The  world-wide  influence  of  their  works  was 
certainly  a  new  force  in  the  nineteenth-century  upsurge. 

While  the  poetry  and  thought  of  the  nineteenth  century 
were  in  the  main  romantic  and  idealistic,  its  art  and  literature 
showed  a  marked  tendency  towards  realism.  The  impressionist 
was  realist,  although  somewhat  etherealized,  determined  to 
paint  only  the  visible.  He  was  vitally  interested  in  the  scientific 
interpretation  of  nature.  Realism,  as  a  distinct  literary  move¬ 
ment,  began  in  France.  It  had  its  exponents  in  England, 
Germany  and  Russia,  who  laid  bare  the  hidden  springs  of 
human  action  in  all  their  bare  reality.  Some  of  them  suggested 
that  human  nature  might  change  through  the  creation  of  a 
better  order  of  society. 

The  principal  ideas  that  motived  the  movements  developing 
in  Europe  did  not  take  long  to  spread  to  countries  beyond, 
particularly  to  those  with  which  European  nations  had  already 
come  into  contact  through  their  political  and  commercial 
expansion.  European  civilization  began  thus  to  extend  its 
influence  all  over  the  world,  rapid  means  of  communication 
accelerating  the  process.  But  with  these  ideas  also  arose  and 
grew  insistent  their  inevitable  problems.  If  Western  culture 
today  is  a  dominant  element  of  world  culture,  its  problems  too 
are  equally  pressing  world  problems.  This  is  the  main  justifica- 

307 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 

tion  for  the  reference  made  here  to  the  extraordinary  cultural 
phenomenon  of  the  nineteenth-century  Europe  with  which 
resurgent  India  is  intimately  bound  up.  In  fact,  the  cultural 
upsurge  of  the  nineteenth-century  India  forms  part  of  the 
world  upsurge  in  the  same  century. 

Both  in  the  world  of  culture  and  commerce  Europe  and  Asia 
knew  each  other  from  very  early  times.  China’s  silk-route 
carried  not  only  her  silk  but  her  ideas  to  Western  Asia  and 
Mediterranean  countries.  India’s  historical  connection  with 
Greece  and  Rome  from  pre-Christian  times  continued  for 
centuries.  The  contact  between  Europe  and  Asia  in  modern 
times  was  more  or  less  a  revival  of  old  relationships,  though 
in  the  beginning  it  was  of  a  different  nature  and  not  so  happy 
so  far  as  Asia  was  concerned.  Yet  it  is  an  event  that  seemed  to 
have  been  decreed  by  Nature  for  the  future  progress  of  the 
human  race.  Asia  and  Europe  must  unite  so  that  humanity 
might  advance  towards  a  new  cycle  of  life  in  the  One  World 
governed  by  a  new  synthesis  of  Asia’s  spirituality  and  Europe’s 
materialism. 

Whereas  the  impact  of  Europe  on  India  took  its  definitive 
turn  about  the  middle  of  the  eighteenth  century,  it  started  in 
Japan  about  the  middle  of  the  next.  But  Japan  being  a  free 
country,  European  culture  could  not  very  much  penetrate  her 
life.  A  Japanese  writer  once  said,  'We  borrowed  their  machine, 
not  their  Shakespeare’.  Nevertheless,  the  influence  was  there 
and  was  growing,  though  it  never  attained  the  form  of  a 
cultural  conquest.  Japan,  as  indeed  any  Asian  country,  never 
lost  her  soul  and  its  characteristic  inclinations  distinguish  her 
life  and  culture  even  today.  Yet  Japan  is  the  first  Asian  nation 
to  acquire  technological  modernity  and  become  a  modern 
nation. 

Soon  after  America’s  entry  into  their  country  for  purposes 
of  trade,  the  Japanese  realized  that  they  might  profit  by  their 
contact  with  America.  And  when  their  leaders  overthrew  the 
military  rule  of  the  Shogunate  and  restored  the  emperor,  and 
then  used  the  imperial  authority  to  overthrow  feudalism  and 
introduce  Occidental  industry,  the  New  Japan  was  bom, 
whose  rapid  rise  in  the  present  century  is  a  phenomenon  of 
great  significance.  With  much  of  what  was  really  beneficial  to 

308 


The  Nineteenth-Century  Upsurge 


her,  Japan  imbibed  some  of  Europe's  evils  too,  the  worst  of 
which  was  imperialism  and  something  of  her  'mechanism'.  But 
conditions  have  changed  and  seem  to  be  changing  fast  towards 
a  betterment  of  her  relations  with  others.  As  one  of  the  great 
peoples  of  Asia,  Japan  has  her  contributions  to  make  in  the 
creation  of  a  New  Asia,  and  along  with  it,  the  New  World  of 
tomorrow. 

In  the  beginning  China  looked  upon  the  Western  impact  as 
'the  White  Peril'.  Through  her  contact  with  the  nations  of 
Europe  that  entered  China  for  commercial  and  missionary 
purposes.  Western  ideas  began  to  enter  the  Chinese  mind,  and 
the  movement  that  started  in  the  nineteenth  century  resulted 
in  the  establishment  of  the  Chinese  Republic  early  in  the 
present  century  under  the  leadership  of  one  who  was  a 
Christian.  Whatever  China  may  be  today,  she  has  a  great 
destiny  to  fulfil  for  which  she  has  lived  on  through  the  ages. 
Her  ancient  idea  of  the  whole  human  race  as  one  family  in  the 
cosmic  Mother  of  Taoism  has  certainly  a  great  bearing  on  the 
future  unity  of  mankind. 

In  India  the  nineteenth-century  upsurge  started  first  in 
Bengal,  'chosen  by  the  Sakti  of  India  as  her  first  workshop',1 
where  she  threw  up  new  forces  and  new  personalities  that 
became  makers  of  a  new  epoch,  bringers  of  a  new  dawn  in 
every  sphere  of  national  life.  Plastic  in  her  mind,  open  in  her 
heart,  intuitive  in  her  soul,  'Bengal  has  eminently  the  gifts 
which  are  most  needed  for  the  new  race  that  has  to  arrive.  .  .  . 
She  has  a  mighty  will-power  which  comes  from  the  long 
worship  of  the  Sakti  and  practice  of  the  Tantra  that  has  been 
part  of  our  culture  for  many  centuries.'2  Naturally  therefore 
Bengal  soon  grew  up  into  a  centre  of  wider  awakening  in  the 
whole  country.  The  progressive  movements  that  had  their  birth 
in  Bengal  began  to  expand  to  all  India  and  prepare  her  for  the 
great  work  she  is  destined  to  do  for  the  spiritual  regeneration 
of  the  human  race. 

Historically  speaking,  the  nineteenth-century  upsurge  in 
Bengal  could  be  traced  back  to  the  eighteenth  century,  in 
1757.  Here  the  overwhelming  superiority  of  organized  resistance 

1  Aurobindo,  The  Renaissance  in  India,  p.  60. 

*  Aurobindo,  The  Brain  of  India,  pp.  33.  35. 

309 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 


was  undermined  by  the  great  betrayal.  Then  followed  the 
SannyasI  rebellion  of  a  dedicated  band  of  freedom-fighters. 
Next  the  Midnapur  uprising — that  unique  popular  revolt — and 
the  outbreak  of  1857:  the  first  bullet  at  the  foreigner  wrent  off 
from  Rarrackpur  in  Bengal.  Isolated  instances,  no  doubt.  But 
they  showed  the  will  to  freedom  that  had  never  deserted  the 
race. 

Bengal  was  the  first  in  India  to  receive  Western  culture.  In 
the  beginning  its  reactions  seemed  to  disrupt  her  own  order  of 
life  and  culture.  But  she  did  not  take  long  to  work  these  out 
and  become  herself  again.  What  she  achieved  then  is  her 
splendid  history  of  recent  times.  Tt  is  Bengal',  says  Sri 
Aurobindo,  ‘which  first  recovered  its  soul,  respiritualized 
itself;  forced  the  whole  world  to  hear  of  its  great  spiritual 
personalities,  gave  it  the  first  modern  Indian  poet  and  Indian 
scientist  of  world-wide  fame  and  achievement,  restored  the 
moribund  art  of  India  to  life  and  power,  first  made  her  count 
again  in  the  culture  of  the  world,  first,  as  a  reward  in  the  outer 
life,  arrived  at  a  vital  political  consciousness  and  a  living 
political  movement  not  imitative  and  derivative  in  its  spirit 
and  central  ideal/1 

All  these  and  many  more  Bengal  was  able  to  achieve  because 
she  had  in  the  nineteenth  century  a  galaxy  of  luminaries  who 
illumined  her  sky  from  horizon  to  horizon.  About  a  hundred  in 
number,  they  were  men  of  outstanding  genius  in  art  and 
literature,  religion  and  mysticism,  science  and  philosophy,  law 
and  politics,  who  along  with  their  compeers  in  other  parts  of 
the  country  enriched  the  world  of  culture  in  various  ways  and 
made  wonderful  contributions  to  the  growth  of  resurgent 
India.  It  was  indeed  a  springtide  of  cultural  activity  that  has 
left  a  rich  legacy  of  their  inspired  labours.  The  leading  figures 
in  these  movements  were  not  only  pioneers  but  makers  of  a 
New  India  with  her  part  to  play  in  the  making  of  a  New 
World. 

The  world-wide  upsurge  in  the  nineteenth  century  threw 
into  prominence  the  scientific  and  materialistic  character  of 
Western  civilization,  of  which  reason  was  the  very  soul  and 
centre.  And  it  is  by  the  cultivation  of  reason  that  the  mind  of 

1  Aurobindo,  The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity ,  p,  260. 

310 


The  Nineteenth-Century  Upsurge 

modern  man  has  been  very  near  fulfilling  its  utmost  possibilities 
through  which,  and  afterwards  exceeding  which,  man  would 
grow  in  readiness  for  a  higher  power  than  reason,  the  next 
destined  step  of  human  evolution.  Here  ends  the  basic  work 
of  the  West  and  begins  the  yet  greater  work  of  the  East. 

But  before  she  sets  about  it  the  East  must  have  a  knowledge 
of  the  essential  truths  of  Western  civilization,  a  direct 
experience  of  its  ways  of  life.  Hence  the  impact  on  her  of  the 
West — the  impact  which  gave  to  the  somnolent  peoples  of  Asia 
a  rude  awakening,  an  awakening  to  their  own  ancient  heritage 
in  whose  immortal  ideals  they  found  the  source  of  their 
strength,  the  strength  that  had  sustained  them  through  the 
long  millenniums  of  their  history.  The  experience  of  the  shock 
of  events  and  the  return  to  the  moorings  of  their  soul  started 
them  on  a  new  life  inspired  with  a  new  sense  of  hope  and 
confidence.  But  to  their  ancient  ideals  the  Asian  peoples, 
especially  the  Indians,  began  to  turn  with  their  reasoning 
mind  sufficiently  quickened  by  their  contact  with  the  West. 

All  these  point  to  a  new  movement  that  was  to  grow  and 
ultimately  lead  towards  the  creation  of  the  spiritual  civilization 
of  the  future.  Notwithstanding  the  fact  that  modern  Western 
culture  is  the  mother  of  many  progressive  ideas  which  are 
more  or  less  intimations  of  a  greater  future  for  humanity,  it 
has  raised  also  serious  problems  that  are  now  confronting  both 
East  and  West  and  causing  world-wide  tension. 

These  problems  are  fundamentally  problems  of  harmony,  of 
peace,  freedom  and  unity  culminating  in  harmony.  Intrinsi¬ 
cally,  this  harmony  is  the  harmony  of  the  Whole  that  exists  in 
the  home  of  the  infinite  Truth  where  One  is  All  and  All  is  One 
and  which  is  far  beyond  the  world  of  mind.  Man  has  therefore 
to  rise  to  a  consciousness  above  the  mental  and  discover  there 
the  truth  of  this  harmony.  The  soul  of  Asia  enshrines  this 
vision,  and  as  India  is  the  hoary  guardian  of  this  Asian  idea 
and  its  profound  spiritual  secrets,  her  reawakening  in  recent 
times  is  j^art  of  the  world  movement  which  is  India's  portion 
to  foster,  first,  by  herself  revisioning  the  ancient  Truth,  and 
then  declaring  it  to  others,  and  herself  living  it  so  that  the 
most  glorious  synthesis  of  the  greatest  achievements  of  the 
mystic  East  and  of  the  pragmatic  West  may  find  their  highest 

3“ 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 


fulfilment  in  the  coming  age  of  the  Spirit  which  will  see  the 
birth  of  a  New  World  of  truth  and  light.  This  is  the  under¬ 
lying  reason  of  the  resurgence  of  India  that  started  in  the 
nineteenth  century  and  that  has  since  been,  under  the  veil, 
gaining  in  strength  from  moment  to  moment. 


3^2 


28 


SIDNEY  KARTUS 

World  Unity 


THE  IDEAL  OF  HUMAN  UNITY 

Sri  Aurobindo,  the  prophet  of  modem  India,  laid  down  his 
political  pen  after  his  early  leadership  of  the  struggle  of  India 
for  independence  from  the  British  Empire.  He  took  it  up  again 
only  when  the  first  world  war  made  urgent  and  necessary  all 
the  vision  that  mankind  could  summon  in  order  to  prevent 
such  catastrophes  in  the  future  and  to  make  human  unity 
possible. 

To  this  end  and  for  this  purpose,  he  wrote  his  book  entitled 
The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity,  published  serially  in  the  Ary  a  from 
1915  to  1918,  and  in  book  form  in  19x9.  In  1950,  after  the 
conclusion  of  the  second  world  war,  and  in  the  last  year  of  his 
life,  another  edition  of  the  book  was  published  with  revisions 
made  before  the  second  conflict  and  a  postscript  chapter 
written  after  it. 

The  writings  of  Aurobindo  for  Indian  independence  at  the 
beginning  of  the  twentieth  century  had  been  so  powerful  and 
distinctive  that,  even  when  published  anonymously,  the 
British  knew  that  only  Aurobindo  could  be  the  author.  They 
imprisoned  him  thrice  to  silence  his  pen  and  voice.  His  book 
written  for  human  unity  in  the  world  has  all  the  power  and 
uniqueness  in  this  wider  field  that  his  polemics  of  an  earlier 
period  had  for  the  liberation  of  his  own  people  on  the  sub¬ 
continent  of  India. 

The  Western  world  know's  far  more  of  Marx’s  call  to  the 
working  men  of  the  world  to  unite  than  it  does  of  Aurobindo’s 
message  to  humanity  to  unite.  Yet  it  is  a  message  such  as  that 
of  Aurobindo  with  which  humanity  must  become  familiar  and 

313 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Auroihndo 


which  it  must  heed  in  order  to  attain  human  unity.  In  this 
book  of  enormous  scholarship  and  prophetic  vision,  Aurobindo 
traces  the  rise,  mutations,  and  decline  of  the  civilizations  of 
man  from  the  facts  of  history  and  sociology.  He  begins  by 
saying  that  ‘our  whole  thought  and  action  with  regard  to  our 
collective  life  is  shallow  ...  it  does  not  base  itself  on  a  firm  .  .  . 
and  complete  knowledge.  .  .  .  The  moral  is  not  the  vanity  of 
human  life  .  .  .  and  of  the  ideals  it  pursues,  but  the  necessity  of 
a  wiser,  larger,  more  patient  search  after  its  true  law  and 
aim.  .  .  .  Today  the  ideal  of  human  unity  is  more  or  less  vaguely 
making  its  way  to  the  forefront  of  our  consciousness  ...  is 
evidently  a  part  of  Nature’s  eventual  scheme  and  must  come 
about.’ 1 

Having  thus  begun  with  the  thesis  that  human  unity  will  be 
attained,  Aurobindo  next  takes  up  the  question  of  what  will 
bo  the  nature  of  the  society  in  which  such  unity  will  exist,  and 
of  the  relationship  in  it  between  the  individual  and  the  social 
group.  He  arrives  at  a  compatibility  in  which  there  is  no  clash 
between  the  two  but  a  harmony  and  proportion  of  each  in  its 
respective  sphere  and  in  conjunction  with  the  other. 

The  perfect  society’,  he  writes,  ‘will  be  that  which  most 
entirely  favours  the  perfection  of  the  individual;  the  perfection 
of  the  individual  will  be  incomplete  if  it  does  nut  help  him 
towards  the  perfect  state  of  the  social  aggregate  to  which  he 
belongs  and  eventually  to  that  of  the  largest  possible  human 
aggregate,  the  whole  of  a  united  humanity.’2 

Aurobindo  then  considers  the  question  of  what  form  this 
largest  possible  human  aggregate  will  assume,  what  means  of 
organization  it  is  to  embody,  along  what  lines  its  political 
machinery  is  destined  to  operate.  In  social  aggregates  there 
are  always  two  types.  One  is  state  supremacy  over  the  indi¬ 
vidual;  in  the  other  the  state  yields  as  much  as  possible  to  the 
‘freedom,  dignity,  and  successful  manhood’  of  the  individual. 
The  former  would  lead  to  a  dominant  world  state,  the  latter  to 
a  world  union.  Under  one  or  the  other  of  these  two  types  of 
global  government  the  human  race  is  fated  to  live  as  it  draws 
physically  closer  together  and  becomes  constantly  more 
economically  interdependent. 

Aurobindo,  The  Ideal  oj  Human  Unity,  pp.  •>,  7.  »  Ibid.,  p.  8. 

314 


World  Unity 


At  present,  the  first  type,  state  supremacy,  is  plunging 
ahead  under  the  banner  of  a  socialist  world  state.  Yet,  declares 
Aurobindo,  the  idea  of  a  world  state  is  inadequate.  It  would 
not  unite  humanity,  nor  hold  together  its  hegemony,  socialist 
or  otherwise,  even  if  temporarily  achieved.  Founded  on 
compulsion  and  ruled  from  the  centre,  such  states  or  empires 
have  decayed  and  fallen  throughout  history.  Reaction  against 
the  compulsive  nature  of  a  socialist  world  state  might  well 
bring  on  a  greater  conflict  than  any  which  the  world  has 
heretofore  experienced,  one  from  which  mankind  might  not 
emerge.  If  civilization  did  survive,  it  would  resume  its  pro¬ 
gression  towards  human  unity  on  a  sounder  basis. 

A  world  state  is  therefore  to  be  avoided.  Rut  the  idea  of  a 
world  union  of  free  nations  is  adequate  and  sound.  It  would  be 
a  true  world  democracy  against  which  there  would  be  no 
reaction.  It  would  unite  humanity,  and  preserve  the  unity 
that  it  brought  about.  It  would  not  be  a  source  of  fined  conflict 
but  a  chapter  of  final  peace.  In  the  words  of  Aurobindo: 
*.  .  .  freedom  is  as  necessary  to  life  as  law  and  regime;  diversity 
is  as  necessary  as  unity  to  our  true  completeness.  Existence  is 
only  one  in  its  essence  and  totality,  in  its  play  it  is  necessarily 
multiform.  Absolute  uniformity  would  mean  the  cessation  of 
life  .  .  .  diversity  is  essential  for  power  and  fruitfulness  of  life, 
unity  is  necessary  for  its  order,  arrangement  and  stability. 
Unity  we  must  create,  but  not  necessarily  uniformity/1 
'Human  society  progresses  really  and  vitally  in  proportion  as 
law  becomes  the  child  of  freedom;  it  will  reach  its  perfection 
when,  man  having  learned  to  know  and  to  become  spiritually 
one  with  his  fellow-man,  the  spontaneous  law  of  his  society 
exists  only  as  the  outward  mould  of  his  self-governed  inner 
liberty/2 

The  ideal  solution,  says  Aurobindo,  is  a  free  grouping  of 
mankind.  This  made  its  first  appearance  with  the  League  of 
Nations.  The  league  failed,  but  it  was  succeeded  by  the  United 
Nations  Organization  in  which  the  idea  survived  and  persisted 
and  gained  strength.  Such  a  powerful  nation  as  the  United 
States  elected  to  stay  out  of  the  league,  while  today  all  nations 
desire  to  be  members  of  the  United  Nations  Organization  and 

1  Aurobindo,  The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity,  p.  181.  1  Ibid.,  p.  185. 

315 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 

knock  at  its  door  to  be  recognized  and  admitted,  a  notable 
progression  in  attitude  between  the  demise  of  the  one  organiza¬ 
tion  and  the  birth  of  the  other. 

The  same  urge  for  unity  which  joined  warring  tribes  in  the 
larger  aggregates  of  great  nations  is  moving  to  join  the  nations 
of  the  earth  in  world  union.  The  same  process  which  worked 
to  bring  the  ideal  of  the  nation  to  the  forefront  of  human 
consciousness  will  bring  forward  the  ideal  of  world  union.  That 
union  when  fully  formed  and  realized  will  enjoy  all  of  the 
devotion  once  reserved  to  the  nation,  the  latter  not  yielding  in 
the  process  anything  that  will  not  be  to  its  benefit  to  yield. 
Such  will  be  the  steps  of  evolution  toward  a  peaceful  society 
and  a  united  world.  In  it  the  individual,  the  smaller  unit  of 
government,  the  nation,  and  the  world  union  will  live  and  be 
free  in  a  diverse  unity. 

The  prototype  of  such  a  union  is  being  evolved  in  the  United 
States.  Having  instituted  a  central  federal  government  to  unite 
a  number  of  sovereign  states,  with  power  to  maintain  its 
authority,  preserve  order,  provide  for  the  general  welfare,  and 
to  control  inter-state  commerce  and  international  relations, 
the  founding  fathers  hedged  it  about  with  constitutional 
guarantees  of  individual  and  local  liberty  and  a  judiciary 
empowered  to  enforce  those  guarantees  against  the  legislative 
and  executive  branches.  Thus  nature's  law  of  diversity  within 
unity  was  preserved  inviolate  in  the  organic  law  of  the  newly 
independent  nation;  thus  it  must  be  preserved  in  the  world 
which  will  achieve  its  independence  in  the  future. 

ECONOMISM 

In  modern  social  development,  writes  Aurobindo,  The  eco¬ 
nomic  conception  of  life  overrides  all  others'.1  Church,  aristo¬ 
cracy,  military,  letters,  and  culture  have  surrendered  their 
former  pre-eminence  to  economism.  Time  has  seen  the  levelling 
out  of  many  inequalities  among  men.  The  gap  has  been 
virtually  closed  between  monarchy  and  nobility,  and  between 
nobility  and  the  middle  class.  Today  the  struggle  is  between 
the  middle  classes  and  the  working  classes  who  stand  at  the 

1  Aurobindo,  The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity ,  p.  263. 

316 


World  Unity 


bottom  of  the  social  ladder  and  on  whom  the  curse  of  poverty, 
and  lack  of  learning  and  opportunity,  rests  most  heavily.  It  is 
a  struggle  which  dwarfs  all  of  its  precursors  in  scope  and 
intensity;  it  is  world-wide  and  may  become  interstellar.  This, 
says  Aurobindo,  is  because  economic  equality  is  necessary  to 
existence  itself,  and  therefore  is  that  equality  which  Nature 
allows  to  be  violated  with  the  least  impunity. 

It  is  questions  of  The  proper  organization  and  administration 
of  the  economic  life  of  society’  which  are  'preparing  the  diffi¬ 
culties  of  the  future’ .  .  .  the  propertied,  and  professional  classes 
and  the  bourgeoisie  who  governed  in  the  name  of  the  people’,1 
but  in  recent  years  labour  unions  ‘have  attained  an  equal 
power  with  the  other  classes’2  and  an  equal  voice  in  the 
decision  of  these  economic  questions. 

‘Capital  and  Labour  .  .  .  are  now  engaged  in  a  .  .  .  conflict  for 
sole  possession  in  which  the  completion  of  the  downward  force 
of  social  gravitation,  the  ultimate  triumph  of  Labour  .  .  .  seems 
to  be  the  visible  writing  of  Fate. ’3  This  ‘will  be  a  change  from 
one  side  of  economism  to  the  other,  but  not .  . .  from  economism 
to  the  domination  of  some  other  and  higher  motive  of  human 
life’. 4  Yet  such  a  change  is  inevitable;  a  higher  motive  is 
evolving  as  a  religion  of  humanity. 

THE  RELIGION  OF  HUMANITY 

Aurobindo  says  that  this  religion  of  the  future  stems  from  what 
he  terms  the  ‘intellectual  religion  of  humanity’  mind-born  in 
eighteenth-century  Europe,  mainly  in  France.  From  it,  the 
ideal  of  individual  liberty,  happiness,  and  equality,  has  been 
impressed  indelibly  on  the  human  race.  But  this  motive  or 
religion  must  become  something  beyond  what  it  has  been  if 
that  ideal  is  to  be  perfected  and  if  the  ideal  of  human  unity  is 
also  to  be  perfected  and  indelibly  impressed  on  human  con¬ 
sciousness.  This  to  which  the  past  of  mankind  owes  much  and 
to  which  the  future  will  owe  everything,  Aurobindo  sums  up  in 
the  following  stirring  passages  which  form  the  climax  of  his 
book: 

*  Aurobindo,  The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity,  p.  152. 

*  Ibid,,  p.  243,  footnote.  3  Ibid,,  pp.  262-3. 

317 


4  Ibid.,  p.  266. 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aitrobindo 


War,  capital  punishment,  the  taking  of  human  life,  cruelty  of  all 
kinds  whether  committed  by  the  individual,  the  State,  or  society, 
not  only  physical  cruelty,  but  moral  cruelty,  the  degradation  of  any 
human  being  or  any  class  of  human  beings  under  whatever  specious 
plea  or  in  whatever  interest,  the  oppression  and  exploitation  of  man 
by  man,  of  class  by  class,  of  nation  by  nation,  and  all  those  habits 
of  life  and  institutions  of  society  of  a  similar  kind  which  religion  and 
ethics  formerly  tolerated  or  even  favoured  in  practice,  whatever  they 
might  do  in  their  ideal  or  creed,  are  crimes  against  the  religion  of 
humanity,  abominable  to  its  ethical  mind,  forbidden  by  its  primary 
tenets,  to  be  fought  against  always,  in  no  degree  to  be  tolerated. 
Man  must  be  sacred  to  man  regardless  of  all  distinctions  of  race, 
creed,  colour,  nationality,  status,  political  or  social  advancement. 
The  body  of  man  is  to  be  respected,  made  immune  from  violence 
and  outrage,  fortified  by  science  against  disease  and  preventable 
death.  The  life  of  man  is  to  be  held  sacred,  preserved,  strengthened, 
ennobled,  uplifted.  The  heart  of  man  is  to  be  held  sacred  also,  given 
scope,  protected  from  violation,  from  suppression,  from  mechaniza¬ 
tion,  freed  from  belittling  influences.  The  mind  of  man  is  to  be 
released  from  all  bonds,  allowed  freedom  and  range  and  opportunity, 
given  all  its  means  of  self-training  and  self-development  and 
organized  in  the  play  of  its  power  for  the  service  of  humanity.  And 
all  this  too  is  not  to  be  held  as  an  abstract  or  pious  sentiment,  but 
given  full  and  practical  recognition  in  the  persons  of  men  and  nations 
and  mankind.  This,  speaking  largely,  is  the  idea  and  the  spirit  of  the 
intellectual  religion  of  humanity.1 

The  intellectual  religion  of  humanity  already  to  a  certain  extent 
exists,  partly  as  a  conscious  trend  in  the  minds  of  a  few,  partly  as  a 
potent  shadow  in  the  consciousness  of  the  race.  It  is  the  shadow  of 
a  spirit  that  is  yet  unborn,  but  is  preparing  for  its  birth.  .  .  . 
Democracy,  socialism,  pacificism  are  to  a  great  extent  its  by¬ 
products,  or  at  least  owe  much  of  their  vigour  to  its  inner  presence. 3 

But  still  in  order  to  accomplish  all  its  future,  this  idea  and  religion 
of  humanity  has  to  make  itself  more  explicit,  insistent,  and  cate¬ 
gorically  imperative.  For  otherwise  it  can  only  work  with  clarity  in 
the  minds  of  a  few  and  with  the  mass  it  will  be  only  a  modifying 
influence  but  will  not  be  the  rule  of  human  life.  3 

.  .  .  the  enemy  of  all  real  religion  ...  is  human  egoism,  the  egoism 
of  class  and  nation.  These  it  could  for  a  time  soften  .  .  .  :  curb  their 
more  arrogant,  open  and  brutal  expressions,  oblige  to  adopt  better 

1  Aurobindo,  The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity,  pp.  362-3. 

*  Ibid.,  pp.  361-2.  3  Ibid.,  p.  365. 

318 


World  Unity 


institutions,  but  not  to  give  place  to  the  love  of  mankind,  not  to 
recognize  a  real  unity  between  man  and  man.  For  that  essentially 
must  be  the  aim  of  the  religion  of  humanity,  as  it  must  be  the  earthly 
aim  of  all  human  religion,  love,  mutual  recognition  of  human 
brotherhood,  a  living  sense  of  human  oneness  and  practice  of  human 
oneness  in  thought,  feeling  and  life  .  .  .  which  was  expressed  first 
some  thousands  of  }'oars  ago  in  the  ancient  Vedic  hymn  and  must 
always  remain  the  highest  injunction  of  the  Spirit  within  us  to 
human  life  on  earth.  Till  that  is  brought  about,  the  religion  of 
humanity  remains  unaccomplished.  With  that  done,  the  one 
necessary  psychological  change  will  have  been  effected  without 
which  no  formal  and  mechanical,  no  political  and  administrative 
unity  can  be  real  and  secure.  If  it  is  done,  that  outward  unification 
may  not  even  be  indispensable,  or  if  indispensable  it  will  come  about 
naturally,  not  as  now  it  seems  likely  to  be,  by  catastrophic  means, 
but  by  the  demand  of  the  human  mind,  and  will  be  held  secure  by 
an  essential  need  of  our  perfected  and  developed  human  nature  .  .  . 
achieved,  as  an  outward  expression  of  the  larger  inward  life.  .  .  .1 

Yet  is  brotherhood  the  real  key  to  the  triple  gospel  of  the  idea  of 
humanity.  The  union  of  liberty  and  equality  can  only  be  achieved 
by  the  power  of  human  brotherhood  and  it  cannot  be  founded  on 
anything  else.  But  brotherhood  exists  only  in  the  soul  and  by  the 
soul;  it  can  exist  by  nothing  else  .  .  .  freedom,  equality,  unity  arc  the 
eternal  attributes  of  the  Spirit.  ...  It  is  the  practical  recognition  of 
this  truth,  it  is  the  awakening  of  the  soul  in  man,  and  the  attempt  to 
get  him  to  live  from  his  soul  and  not  from  his  ego  which  is  the  inner 
meaning  of  religion,  and  it  is  that  to  which  the  religion  of  humanity 
also  must  arrive  before  it  can  fulfil  itself  in  the  life  of  the  race.2 

Since  the  eighteenth  century  this  religion  of  humanity  has 
been  ethical  and  rational.  All  else  has  been  pushed  aside  as  in 
the  realm  of  the  speculative  or  mystical.  Rationalism,  either 
professed  or  unprofessed,  rules  the  world  today.  It  is  no  accident 
that  Paine  referred  to  it  as  that  'rational  world’  of  which  he 
was  the  'friend  of  its  happiness*.  But  two  world  wars  have  now 
proven  man’s  inability  to  cope  with  his  problems  by  pacts, 
agreements,  political  devices,  and  organizational  methods  of  a 
rational  order  alone.  Rationalism  is  nevertheless  determined, 
and  with  justification,  not  to  surrender  its  hard-won  forts  or  to 
give  up  what  it  has  so  recently  wrung  from  the  stalwarts  on 

1  Aurobindo,  The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity,  pp.  365-6,  368. 

4  Ibid.,  pp.  368*9. 


319 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 

the  mystic  side,  and  one  thing  that  rationalism  will  not  permit 
man  to  do  is  to  suffer  again  what  he  has  suffered  in  the  past 
at  the  hands  of  dogmatic  and  inquisitorial  religion  and  auto¬ 
cratic  government. 

But  the  rationalist  is  not  faced  with  a  choice  between  the 
past  errors  of  religion  and  government  and  the  impasse  which 
his  rationalistic  world  has  reached  in  such  a  short  period  of 
time,  a  world  now  capable  of  more  incredible  confusion  and 
more  terrible  suffering  and  damage  than  any  with  which  it 
could  be  previously  charged  under  mysticism. 

The  rational  world  can  turn  instead  to  that  more  imperative 
religion  of  humanity  which  will  not  violate  the  tenets  of 
rationality  or  the  theories  of  science.  The  political  scientist,  like 
the  physical  scientist,  will  then  find  himself  face  to  face  with  a 
realm  not  divided  from  his  own  but  greater  and  all-encompassing 
from  which  ‘the  truth  of  the  Spirit  may  step  in  and  lead 
humanity  to  the  path  of  its  highest  possible  happiness  and 
perfection'.1  Such  is  the  philosophy  of  Aurobindo  from  which 
arises  his  conception  of  human  unity  and  brotherhood.  His 
philosophy  affirms  the  reality  of  universal  being,  variously 
expressed  and  diversely  creative,  an  enlightened  awareness  of 
the  spiritual  unity  of  our  existence  through  which  enduring 
world  unity  can  be  achieved. 

1  Aurobindo,  The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity,  p.  379. 


320 


29 


TARAKNATH  DAS 

The  Political  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 


Aurobindo  was  the  greatest  intellectual  of  our  age  and  a  major 
force  for  the  life  of  the  spirit.  India  will  not  forget  his  services  to 
politics  and  philosophy  and  the  world  will  remember  with  gratitude 
his  invaluable  work  in  the  realm  of  philosophy  and  religion.1 

The  above  passage,  a  tribute  from  Dr  Sarvepalli  Radhakrishnan, 
India’s  Vice-President  and  world  renowned  philosopher,  gives 
an  estimate  of  Sri  Aurobindo  as  a  man  who  in  his  early  life 
gave  his  services  to  the  cause  of  the  freedom  of  India,  not  for 
India’s  aggrandizement  but  for  humanity’s  welfare  and 
progress.  Today  the  world  knows  Sri  Aurobindo  as  the  Saint  of 
Pondicherry,  who  worked  for  spreading  a  philosophy  of  life, 
based  on  the  teachings  of  the  Rg  Veda,  the  earlier  Upanisads, 
the  Vedanta  and  the  Bhagavad  Gita  and  supported  by  the 
modern  scientific  knowledge  of  man’s  potentialities  for  great¬ 
ness.  But  Sri  Aurobindo  also  made  distinct  contributions  in 
the  field  of  political  philosophy,  which  would  vastly  influence 
our  course  of  social  evolution. 


i 

Man's  religious,  social  and  political  ideals  or  philosophies  are 
interwoven  into  a  whole;  and  these  cannot  be  compartmental¬ 
ized.  Thus  a  man’s  political  philosophy  is  a  segment  of  his 
total  world-view  which  he  cherishes  or  which  is  in  the  process 
of  transition.  His  philosophy  of  life  is  the  product  of  the 
cumulative  heritage  of  the  group  in  which  he  is  bom  and  it  is 

1  D.  Mackenzie  Brown,  The  White  Umbrella  (Berkeley:  University  of 
California  Press,  1958),  p.  124. 

L  321 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 

modified  by  inner  evolution  of  the  individual  as  influenced  by 
outside  forces — local  and  world-wide.  This  was  also  the  case 
with  Sri  Aurobindo. 

Aurobindo  was  the  product  of  Indian  renaissance  during 
which  the  most  enlightened  of  her  people  were  consciously 
engaged  in  reassertion  of  the  best  of  Indian  thought  and  at  the 
same  time  interested  in  assimilation  of  the  best  of  the  West. 
This  renaissance  of  India  began  in  Bengal  roughly  from  the 
time  of  Raja  Ram  Mohon  Roy  (1772-1833),  the  founder  of  the 
Brahmo  Samaj  movement  (reformed  Hinduism),  a  pioneer  in 
the  field  of  comparative  religion  and  an  advocate  of  political 
and  social  reforms  in  the  India  of  his  time.  Sri  Aurobindo  was  born 
in  a  most  cultured  family  of  Konnagar  in  Western  Bengal.  His 
grandfather  was  a  leader  of  the  Brahmo  Samaj  movement  and 
was  a  pupil  of  David  Hare  of  Calcutta,  noted  for  his  educational 
activities.  His  father,  Krishnadhan  Ghose,  after  receiving 
medical  education  at  Calcutta,  was  sent  to  Aberdeen  University 
for  higher  studies  where  he  took  an  M.D.  degree.  After  his 
return  from  England,  he  entered  the  Indian  Medical  Service 
and  served  as  Civil  Surgeon  in  various  parts  of  India.  He  was 
a  cosmopolitan  and  his  home  became  a  common  meeting  place 
for  Europeans  and  Bengalees. 

Aurobindo  was  born  in  1872,  some  fifteen  years  after  the 
outbreak  of  the  so-called  Sepoy  Mutiny  (1857)  which  was  an 
effort  to  overthrow  British  domination  in  India.  In  1885  the 
All  India  Congress  movement  came  into  existence,  but  during 
the  quarter  of  a  century  between  the  Queen's  Proclamation 
(1858)  and  the  inauguration  of  the  Congress  movement,  the 
spirit  of  the  intelligentsia  of  India  was  permeated  with  activities 
for  cultural,  social,  economic  and  political  regeneration  of  the 
people. 

Aurobindo's  father  believed  that  India  must  adopt  western 
methods  of  civilization.  He  felt  that  his  children  should  be 
given  the  best  of  western  education.  Thus  Aurobindo  got  his 
early  education  in  the  Loretto  Convent,  Darjeeling.  In  1879, 
Aurobindo  and  his  brothers  were  sent  to  England  for  further 
education  which  was  entrusted  in  the  care  of  Mr  and  Mrs 
Drewett,  then  residing  in  Manchester.  Mr  Drewett  was  an 
accomplished  Latin  scholar  and  he  inculcated  the  study  of 

322 


The  Political  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 


Latin  and  Greek  in  him.  In  1885  Aurobindo  was  sent  to 
St  Paul's  school  in  London.  After  five  years'  study  in  the  school 
and  making  remarkable  progress  in  classical  studies,  Aurobindo 
obtained  a  senior  classical  scholarship,  and  proceeded  to  King's 
College,  Cambridge.  ‘Soon  after  entering  Cambridge  he 
appeared  for  the  Indian  Civil  Service  Examination  and  was 
given  record  marks  in  Greek  and  Latin.  .  .  .  Aurobindo  passed 
the  first  part  of  the  Classical  Tripos  Examination  in  the  First 
Class  at  the  end  of  his  second  year  at  Cambridge,  and  during 
these  years  also  managed  to  spend  part  of  his  time  studying 
modern  languages  and  in  writing  Greek  and  Latin  verse,  for 
which  in  one  of  the  years  he  won  all  the  prizes  given  at  King's 
College.'1 


11 

Aurobindo  was  at  Cambridge  to  enter  the  Indian  Civil  Service, 
but  things  happened  that  changed  the  whole  career  of  the  man. 
During  his  stay  in  England  as  a  student  at  King's  College  he 
absorbed  the  political  theories  and  ideals  of  freedom  and  at 
the  same  time  felt  very  keenly  about  the  condition  of  the 
people  of  India,  an  enslaved  people  under  foreign  domination. 
After  fourteen  years  in  England,  at  the  age  of  twenty-one,  in 
1893  Aurobindo  left  for  India.  But  it  is  said  that  while  a 
student  in  London,  he  had  joined  a  secret  society  entitled 
The  Lotus  and  Dagger',  dedicated  to  the  cause  of  Indian 
freedom.  At  the  age  of  twenty-one  Aurobindo  was  actively 
engaged  in  carrying  out  his  political  creed  of  freedom  for  man 
by  championing  the  cause  of  freedom  of  the  people  of  India. 

In  1893  he  took  an  appointment  in  the  Civil  Service  of  the 
State  of  Baroda  where  he  worked  for  nearly  thirteen  years. 
During  the  latter  part  of  his  stay  there,  he  was  Vice-Principal 
of  Baroda  College,  which  is  now  Baroda  University. 

Fourteen  years  spent  in  England  (from  the  age  of  seven  to 
twenty-one)  for  education,  laid  the  foundation  of  his  future 
career  as  a  man  of  vision  and  world  perspective.  But  thirteen 
years  spent  at  Baroda  were  spent  not  merely  for  the  service  of 

*  G.  M.  Langley,  Sri  Aurobindo  (London:  Royal  India  and  Pakistan 
Society,  1949).  p.  14. 


323 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 

the  State  (Baroda  was  the  most  progressive  of  all  Indian 
States,  specially  in  the  field  of  education),  but  for  self-education 
in  the  field  of  acquiring  clear  comprehension  of  India’s  legacy 
in  the  spiritual  field  and  for  the  formulation  of  a  revolutionary 
programme  for  Indian  freedom  as  a  necessary  factor  to  the 
freedom  of  Asia  and  the  spiritual  regeneration  of  the  world. 


It  may  be  interesting  to  note  that  the  year  1893  is  the  most 
important  one  in  the  history  of  modern  India.  It  was  in  1893  that 
Swami  Vivekananda  came  to  the  Parliament  of  Religion  held 
at  Chicago  and  represented  Hinduism.  Vivekananda’s  speech 
at  the  Parliament  of  Religion  created  a  sensation  all  over  the 
world,  specially  in  India.  The  message  was  simple  but  revolu¬ 
tionary.  The  young  Hindu  sannyasin  proclaimed  the  old  truth 
of  the  ancient  sages  that  there  are  many  ways  to  reach  the 
destination  of  man’s  supreme  interest  in  achieving  God- 
consciousness,  and  that  no  religion  has  the  monopoly  of  salva¬ 
tion.  Every  individual  has  the  potentiality  of  divine  existence 
and  the  thing  that  is  necessary  is  to  develop  this  'God-in-man’ 
through  one’s  sad-hand .  The  human  soul  is  immortal  and  thus 
it  never  dies  and  the  true  nature  of  man  is  the  source  of  all 
good  and  beyond  all  fear.  This  was  the  message  of  freedom  and 
fearlessness  in  search  after  truth  as  was  being  taught  by 
Vivekananda,  the  disciple  of  Sri  Ramakrishna.  Aurobindo 
recognized  the  significance  of  Vivekananda’s  activities — in  a 
sense,  conquering  the  thought  world.  This  gave  him  double 
inspiration  to  drink  deep  at  the  fountain  of  knowledge  of  the 
ancient  sages  of  India.  As  a  student  of  Greek  philosophy  he 
was  quite  conscious  of  the  fact  that  through  knowledge  man 
may  become  free.  But  in  studying  the  Upani§ads,  the  Bhagavad 
Gita  and  other  works  of  the  ancient  Hindus,  he  was  deeply 
impressed  with  the  teachings  of  karma  yoga.  At  this  stage  of 
his  life  he  was  thinking  in  terms  of  activities  leading  to  the 
freedom  of  India. 

Sri  Aurobindo,  during  his  Cambridge  days,  was  deeply 
interested  in  Indian  politics  and  later  he  became  the  leader  of 
an  Indian  revolutionary  movement.  If  the  teachings  of 

324 


The  Political  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 

Ramakrishna  and  Vivekananda  gave  him  the  firm  spiritual 
foundation  for  political  activities,  it  was  Bal  Gangadhar  Tilak, 
one  of  the  Congress  leaders,  but  later  on  termed  as  the 
‘extremist1  leader  of  the  Congress  party,  who  roused  the  spirit 
of  political  activities,  not  merely  for  some  small  concessions  to 
be  given  to  the  Indian  people  towards  self-government,  but 
for  freedom  of  the  land  from  a  foreign  yoke.  In  Hindu  philosophy 
a  man's  liberation  is  not  based  on  grace  of  somebody,  but  is  to 
be  attained  by  action.  To  be  spiritually  free  there  must  be 
‘the  will  to  be  free'.  Tilak  represented  the  school  of  Indian 
political  thought  which  advocated  that  if  India  were  to  be  free 
then  there  must  be  a  resolute  will  to  be  free,  supported  by 
actions  which  might  lead  to  suffering.  A  political  leader  must 
be  a  karma  yogi  and  not  an  opportunist.  It  is  not  the  place 
for  me  to  discuss  Tilak  in  action,  but  I  want  to  emphasize  that 
Aurobindo  was  influenced  by  Bal  Gangadhar  Tilak  so  much  that 
he  wrote  an  essay  on  ‘Appreciation  of  Tilak'  as  an  Indian 
national  leader. 

Another  man,  who  influenced  Sri  Aurobindo's  political  and 
social  ideals  as  well  as  internationalism,  was  Rabindranath 
Tagore,  the  first  Asian  to  win  the  coveted  recognition  of  a 
winner  of  the  Nobel  Prize  in  literature.  Tagore  was  not  only  a 
poet,  dramatist,  educator,  and  musician,  but  he  was  a  philosopher 
and  a  revolutionist.  To  be  a  revolutionist,  one  is  not  required  to 
be  a  ‘bomb-thrower'  or  a  so-called  ‘terrorist'.  A  true  revolu¬ 
tionist  is  a  torch-bearer  of  truth  and  fearlessness.  Rabindranath 
Tagore  was  such  a  man,  possibly  one  of  the  greatest  personalities 
of  modern  times. 


IV 

During  the  end  of  the  nineteenth  century  and  early  years  of 
the  twentieth  century,  many  things  were  happening  in  the  field 
of  world  politics  which  had  their  effects  upon  the  mind  of 
Asian,  specially  Indian,  leaders.  The  Boer  War  left  an  impression 
that  a  small  nation  willing  to  fight  for  freedom  can  carry  on  the 
struggle  against  such  a  powerful  force  as  the  British  Empire. 
Japan  defeated  China  and  later  Japan's  victory  over  Russia 
shattered  many  of  the  myths  regarding  the  inferiority  of  Asian 

325 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 


peoples  in  the  arena  of  international  affairs  and  politics.  While 
these  changes  were  going  on  in  the  world,  including  Turkish 
and  Persian  revolutions,  a  new  political  force  was  developing 
in  India.  The  All  India  National  Congress,  which  came  into 
existence  in  1885  and  was  working  for  political  reforms  of 
British  administration  in  India,  primarily  through  the  good 
will  of  the  British  rulers,  by  the  end  of  the  nineteenth  century 
and  early  twentieth  century  was  not  gaining  the  end  and  there 
was  a  new  demand  for  action  such  as  might  lead  to  the 
complete  independence  of  India. 

It  was  during  the  administration  of  Lord  Curzon,  as  the 
Governor-General  of  India,  that  the  British  authorities  decided 
to  partition  Bengal,  the  most  politically  advanced  and  the  largest 
of  the  provinces  in  India.  The  British  authorities  thought  that 
their  programme  would  be  carried  out  without  much  resistance; 
but  the  new  spirit  of  India  asserted  itself  and  there  was  the 
struggle  for  Indian  freedom.  By  this  time  Sri  Aurobindo  was 
one  of  the  leaders  of  an  underground  revolutionary  movement, 
a  link  between  Maharastra  led  by  Bal  Gangadhar  Tilak  and  the 
revolutionists  of  Bengal. 

Here  it  may  be  asserted  that  the  real  movement  for  Indian 
freedom  from  British  rule  was  under  the  direction  of  the 
underground  revolutionists  who  were  influenced  by  revolutions 
in  various  parts  of  the  world,  specially  by  the  writings  of 
Mazzini  for  the  establishment  of  united  Italy — a  republic.  It 
may  surprise  many  western  scholars  of  the  Indian  freedom 
movement  to  know  Mazzini’s  writings,  such  as  Duties  of  Man 
and  other  works,  which  were  translated  into  Bengali;  and  the 
working  principles  of  the  Italian  Carbonari  Society  were  well 
known  among  them.  The  initiates  of  the  Bengal  revolutionary 
movement  had  to  study  the  life  of  Garibaldi,  the  Bhagavad 
Gita  and  some  special  writings  of  Swami  Vivekananda.  Above 
all  the  story  of  the  SannyasI  revolt  in  Bengal  which  happened 
during  the  early  days  of  the  nineteenth  century  and  as  it  was 
depicted  in  the  drama,  Ananda  Math ,  was  a  source  of  inspira¬ 
tion  to  Indian  nationalists  and  the  song  'Bande  Mataram* 
(Hail  Mother)  was  sung  as  the  national  anthem.  'Bande 
Mataram'  became  the  watchword  or  words  of  greeting  among 
the  youth  of  Bengal.  At  this  time  Aurobindo's  visits  to  Bengal 

326 


The  Political  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 


from  Baroda  became  frequent  and  he  played  the  most  important 
role  in  formulating  the  programme  and  activities  of  Indian 
revolutionists  who  were  trying  to  capture  the  Congress 
organization. 

Aurobindo  played  an  important  part  in  formulating  that 
Swaraj  (self-rule  or  independence)  will  be  the  goal  and  this 
must  be  attained  by  national  efforts  of  constructive  activities 
of  development  of  national  industries  and,  at  the  same  time, 
special  emphasis  was  to  be  put  in  furthering  national  education, 
in  which  Indian  national  culture  must  be  given  proper  recogni¬ 
tion,  and  Indian  history  must  be  interpreted  in  the  proper 
perspective  of  Indian  national  aspirations.  It  was  through 
the  efforts  of  Indian  revolutionists  under  the  leadership  of 
Aurobindo  that  the  programme  of  Swaraj,  Swadeshi  and 
National  Education  became  accepted  by  the  nation.  To  be  sure 
many  other  prominent  leaders  played  their  role  and  supported 
the  movement.  It  was  in  1905  and  1906  that  the  real  foundation 
for  Indian  freedom  was  laid. 


v 

Aurobindo  was  not  a  visionary  and  he  felt  the  immediate  need 
of  an  organ  of  the  so-called  extremists  of  Indian  nationalists 
to  preach  the  ideal.  Thus  a  daily  paper  entitled  Bande 
Mdtaram  was  established  with  Aurobindo  as  its  editor.  The 
files  of  the  Bande  Mdtaram  contain  many  articles  by  Aurobindo 
which  must  be  carefully  studied  by  those  who  wish  to  under¬ 
stand  the  spirit  of  Indian  nationalism.  The  Indian  revolu¬ 
tionists,  with  Aurobindo  as  their  leader,  were  the  first  who 
were  convinced  that  for  the  success  of  their  cause  for  freedom, 
the  nation  as  a  whole  must  be  awakened;  thus  they  went  to 
villages  to  work  among  the  peasants.  At  this  time  the  National 
Council  for  Education  in  Bengal  was  organized  at  Calcutta 
and  the  first  national  college  was  established  and  Aurobindo 
was  its  first  principal,  while  men  like  Rabindranath  Tagore, 
Ananda  Coomarswamy  and  others  were  associated  with  this 
great  educational  movement.  This  national  college  became 
Bengal  National  Technical  College  and  is  now  the  Jadavpur 
University,  one  of  the  foremost  technical  colleges  in  India.  It 

327 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 


may  be  noted  that  the  youth  of  Bengal  and  the  students  at 
colleges  and  universities  responded  to  the  call  which  Aurobindo 
and  his  associates  spread  through  newspapers,  public  meetings 
and  secret  meetings.  Tens  of  thousands  of  students  joined  the 
nationalist  movement.  At  the  same  time  Rabindranath  Tagore 
through  his  songs  roused  the  patriotic  emotions  of  the  people 
verging  to  religious  ecstasy.  It  was  Rabindranath  Tagore  who 
prepared  his  concrete  proposal  of  ‘creation  of  a  State  within 
State'  in  his  book,  Swadeshi  Samdj. 


VI 


From  the  above-mentioned  facts,  it  must  be  clear  that 
Aurobindo  was  not  a  visionary  but  a  karma  yogi  engaged  in 
dharma  yuddha  (fight  for  righteous  existence  or  supremacy 
of  right  over  might).  It  also  makes  clear  that  some  fifteen 
years  or  longer  before  the  inauguration  of  the  non-co-operation 
movement  (after  the  special  session  of  the  All  India  National 
Congress  at  Calcutta  by  Mahatma  Gandhi),  Bengal  revolution- 
istsunder  the  leadershipof  Aurobindowere  engaged  in  practising 
non-co-operation  and  organizing  a  ‘State  within  the  State'. 

Lest  there  be  any  misunderstanding  about  Aurobindo's 
relations  with  terrorist  activities  in  Bengal,  it  may  be  safely 
asserted  that  he  was  never  personally  implicated  in  any 
terrorist  act;  but  Aurobindo  was  not  a  pacifist  like  Mahatma 
Gandhi  and  must  have  known  that  a  section  of  the  revolu¬ 
tionists  were  willing  to  die  for  freedom  and  thus  giving  fight  to 
the  tools  of  repression.  In  August  1907,  Aurobindo  was  arrested 
on  the  charge  of  preaching  sedition  and  inciting  terroristic 
activities.  He  was  kept  in  Alipur  jail  for  nearly  a  year  during 
the  period  of  the  trial.  Ultimately  he  was  acquitted  through 
the  efforts  of  his  lawyer,  the  late  Chittarajan  Das.  Chittarajan 
Das  held  that  Aurobindo  would  readily  and  gladly  admit  ‘having 
propagated  the  message  and  elucidated  the  meaning  of  national 
independence',  and  that  for  this  ‘he  would  be  willing  to  suffer 
to  the  uttermost'.1  Chittarajan's  final  appeal  to  the  judges  was 
significant: 


1  K.  R.  Srinivasa  Iyengar,  Sri  Aurobindo  (Pondicherry:  Sri  Aurobindo 
Ashram  Press,  1950),  p.  162. 


328 


The  Political  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 

'My  appeal  to  you  is  this,  that  long  after  this  controversy 
will  be  hushed  in  silence,  long  after  this  turmoil  and  agitation 
will  have  ceased,  long  after  he  is  dead  and  gone,  he  will  be 
looked  upon  as  the  poet  of  patriotism,  as  the  prophet  of 
nationalism,  and  the  lover  of  humanity.  His  words  will  be 
echoed  and  re-echoed,  not  only  in  India,  but  across  distant 
seas  and  lands/1 

While  Aurobindo  was  the  editor  of  the  Bande  Malar  am,  he 
was  reputed  to  be  the  author  of  a  pamphlet  entitled,  ‘Bhawani 
Mandir',  the  theme  of  which  is  that  they  must  build  a  temple 
to  Bhawani,  the  Mother,  as  the  source  of  their  strength;  and 
that  attached  to  the  temple  there  must  be  a  new  order  of 
karma-yogis  prepared  to  renounce  all  in  the  service  of  the 
Mother.  The  work  of  the  order  must  be  based  upon  knowledge 
as  upon  a  rock.  What  knowledge,  it  will  be  asked?  The  answer 
is  given  categorically — the  knowledge  enshrined  in  the  mighty 
formula  of  the  ancient  gospel  of  Vedanta.  And  to  what  end? 
The  answer  is  given  without  hesitation — to  the  end  that  India 
may  fulfil  the  high  destiny  reserved  for  her.  ‘It  is  she  who 
must  send  forth  from  herself  the  future  religion  of  the  entire 
world,  the  eternal  religion  which  is  to  harmonize  all  religions, 
science  and  philosophies  and  make  mankind  one  soul/2 

It  is  quite  clear  from  the  future  development  of  Sri 
Aurobindo’s  life  that  while  he  was  in  Alipur  jail,  which  he 
later  termed  Alipur  Ashram,  he  had  time  to  contemplate 
on  the  above  ideal  and  what  he  should  do  for  his  own  develop¬ 
ment  and  about  his  ultimate  mission.  Aurobindo  wrote  about 
his  jail  experience  in  this  way:  ‘God  seemed  to  whisper,  “I  have 
had  another  thing  for  you  to  do,  and  it  is  for  that  I  have 
brought  you  here,  to  teach  you  here  what  you  could  not  learn 
for  yourself,  and  to  train  you  for  my  work”/ 3 

In  February  1910,  Aurobindo  retired  from  Calcutta  and 
withdrew  from  political  movements  and  went  to  Chandanna- 
gore  and  a  few  months  later  settled  down  at  Pondicherry  and 
attracted  many  disciples.  He  passed  away  from  this  mortal 
world  on  December  5,  1950,  leaving  a  distinct  place  for  himself 
in  Indian  politics,  and  the  world  of  philosophy  and  religion. 

1  G.  M.  Langley,  Sri  Aurobindo,  p.  16. 

2  Ibid.,  Lord  Zetland’s  preface,  p.  vii. 

*  329 


3  Ibid.,  pp.  16-17. 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 


vii 

Aurobindo's  political  philosophy  was  not  merely  that  of 
revolutionary  changes  to  be  brought  about  in  the  world.  He 
felt  that  in  order  to  build  a  new  structure  we  may  have  to  tear 
down  old  buildings  unsuited  to  new  conditions,  so  we  may 
usher  into  existence  a  new  and  better  social  order.  How  should 
the  new  social  order  be  run?  It  should  be  directed  by  the 
wisest  and  the  best  of  the  society  and  not  by  a  privileged  class. 
What  should  be  the  spirit  behind  the  activities  of  the  rulers? 
They  should  practise  Wajdharma  or  ethical  and  spiritual  laws 
governing  the  activities  of  the  ruler  in  the  field  of  administra¬ 
tion  of  a  state  of  human  relations.  According  to  Hindu 
philosophy  this  concept  of  duty  or  self-imposed  obligation  of 
a  ruler  is  to  carry  on  the  government  of  a  State,  to  uphold  the 
welfare  of  the  people  and  to  protect  them  from  oppression, 
external  or  internal.  The  ruler  should  possess  the  power  of 
intelligence  and  knowledge,  economic  support  as  well  as 
support  of  the  people  so  that  he  will  be  able  to  fulfil  his 
obligations,  but  never  to  use  power  for  self-aggrandizement 
and  despotically.  Aurobindo  not  only  believed  in  the  funda¬ 
mental  principles,  but  he  practised  them  in  his  political  career. 
The  greatest  tribute  that  was  ever  paid  to  Aurobindo  was  the 
poem  written  by  Rabindranath  Tagore  extending  his  salutation 
to  him,  indicating  that  he  (Tagore)  and  all  India  were  willing  to 
follow  his  leadership,  because  he  was  not  only  a  political  leader 
but  a  risi  (a  seer  of  truth).1 

Aurobindo's  political  philosophy  was  not  limited  to  national¬ 
ism  but  he  was  thinking  of  a  world  State  in  which  nations  will 
play  their  own  part  and  in  which  their  existence  would  be 
integrated  harmoniously  on  the  basis  of  the  cultural  assets  of 
various  peoples.  Thus  he  was  opposed  to  partitions,  or  arti¬ 
ficial  division  of  states  by  imperialist  powers.  Although  he  was 
retired  from  politics  he  expressed  strong  dissent  against  the 
partition  of  India  in  1947.  As  he  was  an  apostle  of  the  infinite 
possibilities  of  individual  development,  so  was  he  one  of  the 
foremost  supporters  of  freedom  of  the  subject  peoples,  and  thus 

1  Rabindranath  Tagore,  Salutation  to  Sri  Aurobindo  (Pondicherry:  Sri 
Aurobindo  Ashram,  19.19). 


330 


The  Political  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 

freedom  of  Asian  and  African  peoples.  He  was  opposed  to 
racial  and  cultural  imperialisms  of  all  kinds  and  was  an  advocate 
of  the  brotherhood  of  man. 

Although  the  world  speaks  of  Gandhi  as  the  liberator  of  India, 
the  fact  remains  that  all  of  the  ideas  of  Gandhi,  except  absolute 
pacificism,  were  preached  by  others — specially  Vivekananda, 
Tagore  and  Aurobindo;  and  the  latter,  as  a  revolutionary 
leader,  preached  and  practised  the  ideal  of  freedom  in  India 
and  ushered  a  revolutionary  era  leading  to  her  political  free¬ 
dom.  Aurobindo  was  not,  however,  content  with  the  political 
freedom  of  India.  As  soon  as  he  realized  that  the  attainment  of 
political  independence  was  only  a  question  of  time,  and  that  it 
was  sure  to  come  as  a  result  of  the  rising  tide  of  Indian 
nationalism  combined  with  the  pressure  of  favourable  inter¬ 
national  forces,  he  devoted  himself  heart  and  soul  to  the  task 
of  dynamizing  the  opulent  spiritual  heritage  of  India  so  that 
she  might  make  the  most  constructive  use  of  her  newly  gained 
freedom  toward  the  fulfilment  of  her  spiritual  mission  in  the 
world. 


331 


30 


A.  B.  PURANI 

Sri  Aurobindo:  A  Brief  Life-Sketch 


i 

Ok  all  the  Indians  who  have  recently  contributed  to  the  mould¬ 
ing  of  man’s  higher  values  in  the  modem  world,  apart  from 
politicians,  none  is  less  known  to  Englishmen  than  Sri 
Aurobindo.  Yet,  of  all  the  Indians  who  have  been  writers  or 
leaders,  none  but  Sri  Aurobindo  had  the  benefit  of  being  brought 
up  entirely  in  the  best  English  tradition  and  none  dived  deeper 
into  the  profundities  of  Indian  spirituality. 

Born  on  August  15,  1872,  he  was  brought  to  England  as 
a  child.  He  became  in  his  life  the  great  philosopher-yogi 
ranking  in  spiritual  attainment  with  giants  like  Ramakrishna 
Paramahansa  and  Raman  Maharshi  who  had  an  entirely 
Indian  background.  Yet,  this  great  leader  of  men  wrote  only 
in  English  and  has  given  an  epic,  Savitri,  to  the  English  language. 

His  father.  Dr  K.  D.  Ghose,  had  his  medical  training  in 
Edinburgh  and  became  so  enamoured  with  the  English  way  of  life 
that  he  decided  to  bring  up  his  children  in  the  English  tradition. 
He  employed  an  English  governess,  Miss  Pagett,  for  his  child 
in  Calcutta  so  that  he  might  grow  up  in  complete  ignorance  of 
the  Indian  language,  social  forms,  tradition  and  religion. 

In  1879  he  brought  his  three  sons  to  England  and  left  the 
youngest,  Aurobindo,  aged  seven,  with  the  Rev.  William 
Drewett,  a  Congregational  Minister  in  Manchester,  where  he 
remained  from  1879  to  1884. 

Aurobindo  did  not  attend  any  school  in  Manchester,  but  he 
was  taught  Latin,  the  elements  of  history,  geography,  arith¬ 
metic,  English,  etc.,  at  home  by  the  Drewetts— husband  and  wife. 
At  an  early  age  he  read  English  poetry  and  wrote  verses  for 

332 


Sri  Aurobindo:  A  Brief  Life-Sketch 


the  Fox  Family  Magazine !  In  1881  Mr  Drewett  resigned  his 
Church  and  emigrated  to  Australia  leaving  young  Aurobindo 
in  charge  of  one  Mr  Acroyd,  whose  name  appears  with  Sri 
Aurobindo’s  in  the  Register  of  St  Paul's  School  as  ‘Arabinda 
Acroyd  Ghose’!! 

From  Manchester  he  was  taken  to  London  and  admitted  to 
St  Paul's  School  in  October  1884.  The  famous  Dr  Walker  was 
then  High  Master  and  took  a  personal  interest  in  him,  coaching 
him  in  Greek.  He  proved  a  very  promising  student  and  won  an 
Open  Scholarship  in  Classics  to  King's  College,  Cambridge. 

While  at  St  Paul’s,  life  was  hard  for  the  young  scholar 
because  remittances  from  his  father  had  become  irregular  for 
some  years.  He  also  had  difficulty  in  finding  lodgings  and  it 
was  an  Englishman  who  helped  him  to  stay  in  the  office  of  the 
city  Liberal  Club  and  continue  his  studies. 

This  benefactor  was  James  Cotton  who  was  born  at  Coonoor 
in  India  and  who  took  a  personal  interest  in  these  young 
Indian  boys  and  provided  the  eldest  with  some  work  in  the 
office  of  the  club,  thus  enabling  him  to  live  on  the  premises. 
This  James  Cotton  was  brother  of  Sir  Henry  Cotton  who  was 
among  the  pioneers  of  the  Indian  National  Congress.  In  the 
office  of  the  club,  there  were  no  heating  arrangements  and 
young  Aurobindo  suffered  much  in  winter.  He  had  not  even  an 
overcoat:  sometimes  he  went  short  of  food. 

But  no  privations  interfered  with  his  thirst  for  knowledge, 
nor  was  he  driven  to  seek  a  life  of  material  success  and  comfort. 
Towards  the  end  of  his  school  career,  Sri  Aurobindo  gave  more 
attention  togeneral  extra-curricular  reading — literature,  fiction, 
poetry,  etc.  He  also  studied  French,  German,  Italian  and 
Spanish  and  spent  much  time  writing  poetry. 

11 

At  Cambridge  from  1890-2  he  was  mainly  occupied  with  the 
study  of  the  classics,  with  writing  poetry,  and  with  the  question 
of  Indian  freedom.  In  1892  he  took  a  First  Class  in  the  Classical 
Tripos  Part  I,  and  obtained  prizes  in  Greek  and  Latin  poetry. 
He  was  selected  for  the  Indian  Civil  Service,  again  securing 
record  marks  in  Classics.  However,  he  did  not  take  his  degree — 

333 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 


as  it  meant  spending  two  years  longer  at  the  university,  and 
not  wishing  to  go  through  the  routine  of  the  I.C.S.,  he  absented 
himself  from  the  riding  test  and  consequently  was  not  selected 
for  active  service. 

One  of  the  reasons  for  his  attitude  towards  the  I.C.S.  may 
have  been  his  participation  in  the  newly  formed  ‘Majlis’,  an 
association  of  Indian  students  at  Cambridge,  in  which,  on 
several  occasions,  he  advocated  in  very  strong  terms  the  cause 
of  Indian  independence.  In  fact,  this  was  an  indication  of  one 
of  the  major  trends  of  his  future  career. 

Writing  poetry  was  another  preoccupation.  He  had  taught 
himself  sufficient  German  and  Italian  to  read  Goethe  and 
Dante  in  the  original.  His  first  collection  of  poems,  ‘Songs  to 
Myrtilla’,  was  published  at  Baroda  in  1895.  It  was  Laurence 
Binyon,  then  a  student,  who  read  them  at  Cambridge  and 
pressed  him  to  print  them. 

When  he  had  finished  his  studies  at  King’s  the  question  of 
employment  became  acute.  It  was  again  Mr  James  Cotton  who 
introduced  him  to  the  late  Gaekwar  of  Baroda,  then  in  London. 
As  a  result  of  the  introduction,  Sri  Aurobindo  joined  the  service 
of  the  Baroda  State  as  the  professor  of  English  and  French. 

hi 

Sri  Aurobindo  was  in  Baroda  from  1893  to  1905.  Almost 
immediately  on  his  return  to  India  his  interest  in  Indian 
politics  showed  itself  in  a  series  of  articles  in  which  he  attacked 
in  very  strong  terms  the  moderate  policy  of  the  Congress.  He 
emphasized  the  inalienable  right  of  Indians  to  freedom,  and  in 
place  of  the  moderate  policy  of  prayer,  petition  and  protest,  he 
advocated  the  virile  policy  of  self-reliance,  sacrifice  and 
organization.  He  asked  Congress  to  bring  in  the  masses  to 
support  the  movement  of  freedom.  During  every  vacation  in 
the  college  he  visited  Bengal,  studied  the  political  atmosphere 
and  started  revolutionary  groups  of  young  men  in  several 
districts. 

The  years  in  Baroda  were  not  only  full  of  formative  but 
creative  activity.  He  studied  Indian  culture  and  several  Indian 
languages  with  the  same  avidity  and  zeal  with  which  he  had 

334 


Sri  Aurobindo:  A  Brief  Life-Sketch 


studied  Greek  and  Latin  and  European  culture  in  England. 
He  wrote  poems,  some  of  which  were  later  published  as  Ahana 
and  Other  Poems . 

As  a  professor  he  was  the  idol  of  the  students.  When  he 
came  back  from  Surat  to  Baroda  from  the  historic  session  of 
Congress,  the  students  unyoked  the  horses  of  his  carriage  and 
pulled  it  to  his  house. 

In  1906  he  resigned  his  post  in  the  Baroda  State  which  was 
a  lucrative  and  promising  one,  and  in  answer  to  the  call  of 
'Mother  India'  went  to  Calcutta  as  the  Principal  of  the  newly 
started  national  college,  on  a  mere  subsistence  basis. 

IV 

Actually,  twelve  years  from  1898  to  1910  was  the  period  of 
Sri  Aurobindo's  political  activity,  including  the  vacations  from 
1893;  but  for  the  first  six  years  he  worked  from  behind  the 
scenes.  Only  after  1904  he  began  to  come  out  openly  and  in 
1906  he  became  a  recognized  leader  when  the  agitation  against 
Lord  Curzon's  partition  of  Bengal  created  a  political  storm  in 
India.  The  poet  and  the  professor  became  a  flaming  patriot 
and  national  leader. 

Apart  from  his  participation  in  Congress,  he  edited  a  national 
daily  and  weekly  journal,  Bande  Mataram,  from  1906  to  1908, 
which  gave  to  the  Nationalist  movement  its  philosophy  and 
raised  politics  to  the  plane  of  spirituality.  He  naturally  came 
up  against  the  administration  of  Lord  Minto  and  was  charged 
with  sedition  but  acquitted  by  the  court.  A  second  time  he  was 
implicated  in  the  historic  Alipore  bomb  case  but  at  the  end  of 
a  long  drawn  out  trial  he  was  again  acquitted.  As  sometimes 
happens  in  life,  there  was  strangely  a  dramatic  irony  in  the 
situation,  since  Mr  Charles  Beachcroft,  who  was  second  to 
Sri  Aurobindo  in  Classics  in  the  I.C.S.  at  Cambridge,  was  the 
Sessions  Judge  and  Sri  Aurobindo  was  the  accused. 

It  was  then  that  Tagore  wrote  that  famous  poem:  'O 
Aurobindo!  accept  the  salutation  of  Rabindra',  and  called  him: 
The  Voice  incarnate  of  the  Soul  of  India.' 

His  political  work,  though  short  in  duration,  made  a  lasting 
contribution  to  the  political  ideology  of  India  at  a  most  critical 

335 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 


time  of  her  history.  His  wide  study  of  European  history,  his 
keen  and  comprehensive  mind,  his  unrivalled  mastery  of 
English  and  above  all  his  utter  sincerity  and  readiness  to 
sacrifice  are  now  matters  of  Indian  political  history.  It  was 
he  who,  along  with  Tilak  and  Bepin  Chandra  Pal,  first  advo¬ 
cated  the  policy  of  passive  resistance,  Swadeshi  and  boycott, 
together  with  the  constructive  programme  of  national  educa¬ 
tion  and  arbitration  courts.  He  wrote  a  series  of  seven  articles 
on  passive  resistance  in  1907,  declaring  forty  years  ago:  ‘India 
awakes  not  for  herself  but  for  humanity.1 

Though  he  approved  of  revolutionary  activity  as  a  right  of 
the  suppressed  nation,  his  mind  turned  away  from  it  from 
1914;  for,  he  knew  that  India  would  be  free  without  violence. 
He  told  this  to  me  in  December  1918,  when  Indian  freedom 
was  not  visible  even  on  the  distant  political  horizon:  ‘You  can 
take  it  from  me  it  is  as  certain  as  the  rising  of  the  sun  tomorrow/ 

Sri  Aurobindo  fully  represented  not  only  the  nationalist 
mind  of  India  but  based  his  political  philosophy  on  the  true 
spirit  of  Indian  culture  which  always  stresses  and  relies  more 
upon  moral  and  spiritual  forces  than  upon  outer  aids  and 
material  means.  It  was  by  stressing  those  inner  spiritual  forces 
of  man  and  activating  them  that  India  has  brought  some  of 
the  elements  of  her  culture  to  the  forefront  of  international 
life  today. 


v 

During  the  year  of  detention  under  trial,  Sri  Aurobindo  found 
time  to  resume  the  practice  of  inner  discipline — called  yoga — 
for  which  he  was  longing  but  which  his  political  preoccupation 
had  prevented  him  from  pursuing.  Yoga  is  an  inner  and 
conscious  effort  at  spiritual  growth.  It  can  be  a  very  natural 
and  normal  process. 

This  inner  discipline,  consisting  of  definite  psychological 
practices,  gave  him  a  very  concrete  spiritual  experience,  an 
illumination,  in  which  in  his  cell  in  jail  and  even  in  the  court 
of  trial,  he  experienced  the  omnipresent  Reality  as  the  basic 
truth  of  the  individual  and  the  cosmos.  He  gave  public  utterance 
to  this  experience  in  1909,  on  his  release,  in  the  famous  speech 

336 


Sri  Aurobindo:  a  Brief  Life-Sketch 

delivered  at  Uttarpara,  a  suburb  of  Calcutta.  It  is  interesting 
to  mention  that  the  Government  of  India  have  now  kept  this 
cell  as  an  historical  monument. 

The  spiritual  illumination  was  another  turning  point  in 
Sri  Aurobindo’s  life.  The  experience  gripped  him  and  he  cut 
himself  off  from  politics  and  retired  first  to  the  French  town  of 
Chandernagore  and  ultimately  settled  at  Pondicherry  in  the 
South  where  he  remained  from  1910  till  his  death  in  1950. 

But  this  did  not  mean,  as  most  people  supposed,  that  he 
had  retired  into  some  height  of  spiritual  experience  devoid  of 
any  further  interest  in  the  world  or  in  life.  It  could  not  mean 
that,  for  the  very  principle  of  his  yoga  is  not  only  to  realize 
the  Divine  and  attain  to  a  complete  spiritual  consciousness, 
but  also  to  take  all  life  and  all  world  activity  into  the  scope  of 
this  spiritual  consciousness  and  action  and  to  base  life  on  the 
Spirit  and  give  it  a  spiritual  meaning.  In  his  retirement  Sri 
Aurobindo  kept  a  close  watch  on  all  that  was  happening  in 
the  world  and  in  India  and  actively  intervened  whenever 
necessary,  but  solely  with  a  spiritual  force  and  silent  spiritual 
action,  for  it  is  part  of  the  experience  of  those  who  have 
advanced  in  yoga  that  besides  the  ordinary  forces  and  activities 
of  the  mind  and  life  and  body  in  matter,  there  are  other  forces 
and  powers  that  can  and  do  act  from  behind  and  from  above; 
there  is  also  a  spiritual  dynamic  power  which  can  be  possessed 
by  those  who  are  advanced  in  the  spiritual  consciousness, 
though  all  do  not  care  to  possess,  or  possessing,  to  use  it,  and 
this  power  is  greater  than  any  other  and  more  effective.  It  was 
this  force  which  Sri  Aurobindo  used  at  first  only  in  a  limited 
field  of  personal  work,  but  afterwards  in  a  constant  action  upon 
the  world  forces. 

Twice  he  went  out  of  his  way  and  found  it  necessary  to  make 
public  pronouncements  on  important  world  issues,  which  shows 
distinctly  that  renunciation  of  life  is  not  a  part  of  his  yoga. 
First,  during  the  second  world  war  when  Paris  fell,  he  declared 
himself  openly  on  the  side  of  the  Allies  and  made  financial 
contribution  in  answer  to  appeal  for  funds;  the  second  time,  he 
pleaded  for  the  acceptance  of  Sir  Stafford  Cripps’s  offer  by  the 
Indian  National  Congress. 

He  wanted  to  discover  whether  this  experience  of  the 

337 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 

omnipresent  Reality  could  be  made — by  training — the  normal 
part  of  man's  consciousness.  And  if  it  could  be  so  made,  he 
wanted  to  work  out  the  psychological  result,  the  transforma¬ 
tion,  that  would  follow  in  the  life  of  the  individual  and  of  the 
group.  To  him  this  illumination  was  at  once  the  revelation  of 
man's  destiny  on  earth  and  its  attainment  the  one  key  to  the 
solution  of  man's  problems. 

From  1914  to  1920,  he  conducted  a  philosophical  monthly 
called  The  Ary  a  in  which  he  published  the  results  of  his 
experience,  experiments,  meditation  and  thought.  He  arrived 
at  what  he  called  'a  grand  synthesis  of  human  knowledge*.  All 
his  great  works,  The  Life  Divine,  The  Synthesis  of  Yoga ,  Ideal 
of  Human  Unity,  Human  Cycle,  Future  Poetry,  and  original 
interpretations  of  Indian  lore — the  Veda,  Upanisad  and 
Gita — were  published  serially  in  this  monthly.  It  was  with 
reference  to  his  metaphysical  masterpiece,  The  Life  Divine, 
that  the  late  Sir  Francis  Younghusband  acclaimed  him  as  'the 
greatest  contributor  to  contemporary  philosophy  after  Bergson'. 

This  contribution  to  English  literature,  though  insufficiently 
known  to  the  intelligentsia  in  England,  deserves  study  and 
consideration;  for,  he  brings  to  his  synthesis  a  unique  detach¬ 
ment  towards  both  East  and  West.  He  brings  to  Indian  culture 
the  rich  gifts  of  his  European  training,  his  emphasis  on  the 
acceptance  of  life  in  any  scheme  of  spiritual  regeneration  of 
man  and  the  importance  of  collective  life,  the  need  for  outer 
perfection  and  organization  coupled  with  spiritual  realization 
and  ascent  to  higher  levels  of  consciousness.  To  the  West,  he 
brings  the  true  spiritual  basis  of  reconstruction  of  individual 
and  collective  life,  by  insisting  and  proving  that  man's  problem 
is  mainly  inner  and  psychological  and  can  therefore  be  solved 
only  by  bringing  about  an  inner  change  in  man's  nature,  by 
rising  to  a  higher  level  of  consciousness  beyond  intellect. 

In  his  Life  Divine  he  shows  that  behind  the  appearances  of 
the  universe  there  is  the  reality  of  a  Being  and  Consciousness, 
a  Self  of  all  things,  one  and  eternal.  All  beings  are  united  in 
that  One  Self  but  divided  by  a  certain  separativeness  of 
consciousness.  It  is  possible  to  remove  this  veil  of  separative 
consciousness  by  a  certain  psychological  discipline  and  become 
aware  of  the  true  Self,  the  Divinity  within  us  and  all. 

338 


Sri  Aurobindo:  A  Brief  Life-Sketch 


This  One  Being  and  Consciousness  is  involved  here  in  matter. 
Evolution  is  the  method  by  which  it  liberates  itself;  conscious¬ 
ness  appears  in  what  seems  to  be  inconscient  and  once  having 
appeared  is  self-impelled  to  grow  higher  and  higher  and 
enlarge  towards  a  greater  and  greater  perfection.  Evolution 
begins  with  matter,  goes  up  to  life  and  has  reached  mind. 
This  evolution  is  not  a  linear  progression,  it  is  emergent,  each 
phase  revealing  altogether  new  powers  not  found  in  the  last 
one,  e.g.  life  has  characteristics  different  from  matter,  mind 
has  powers  that  mere  life  has  not.  Man  is  the  representative 
of  this  mental  consciousness.  But  evolution  has  not  come  to  its 
end;  man  is  not,  and  is  not  intended  to  be,  its  final  product. 
Man  is  a  transitional  being,  he  has  to  exceed  his  present  mental 
consciousness  and  reach  the  higher  level  of  truth-consciousness, 
which,  though  supraconscient  to  him  at  present,  is  potential 
to  him,  and  attainable.  In  his  reading  of  man's  future,  Sri 
Aurobindo  is  the  seer  of  the  new  age. 

The  basis  of  all  experience  is  consciousness;  consciousness 
therefore  is  the  fundamental  fact  of  existence.  This  conscious¬ 
ness,  as  seen  in  man,  is  capable  of  ascent  and  enlargement — it  is 
not  confined  to  one  (horizontal)  plane  but  is  multi-dimensional. 
If  in  our  modern  outlook  we  accept  and  work  out  the  unlimited 
possibilities  of  matter  and  energy,  there  is  no  reason  to  limit 
the  potentiality  of  life  and  mind  and  human  spirit. 

He  shows  that  the  ultimate  Reality  from  which  creation 
flows  is  not  a  void,  or  zero  or  a  contentless  remote  Absolute 
or  an  anthropomorphic  God — unconnected  with  the  cosmos. 
Rather,  it  is  the  omnipresent  Reality  immanent  in  the  cosmos 
— a  dynamic  divine  Reality — if  one  may  say — a  Mother- 
Consciousness  as  much  as  a  Father  Consciousness — that  holds 
this  creation  to  its  bosom.  It  is  the  sustaining  power  of  the 
Divine  that  keeps  the  universe  going  so  that  one  day  man  may 
realize  on  earth  his  divine  destiny. 

From  1926  Sri  Aurobindo,  in  response  to  some  people's 
demands,  started  the  Ashram  at  Pondicherry  with  a  view  to 
realizing  the  goal  of  divine  life  on  earth.  It  has  now  an  Inter¬ 
national  University  attached  to  it  to  which  people  come  from 
all  over  the  world,  including  Europeans  and  Americans. 

He  wrote  two  volumes  of  Collected  Poems  and  an  epic, 

339 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 


‘ Sdvitri *  extending  to  2,700  lines.  Throughout  his  long  life,  he 
retained  his  unflagging  seeking  for  knowledge,  his  thirst  for 
freedom  and  will  to  perfection,  and  never  hesitated  to  sacrifice 
material  prospects  to  attain  progress.  He  preached  and  lived 
the  freedom  of  man,  the  unity  of  mankind,  and  the  divinity 
of  man. 

He  represents  the  type  of  transformed  humanity  of  the 
future — and  in  that  sense  is  the  founder  and  precursor  of  the 
divine  race  of  men. 


340 


NOTES  ON  THE  CONTRIBUTORS 
TO  THIS  VOLUME 


arabinda  basu.  Spalding  Lecturer  in  Indian  Philosophy  and 
Religion,  University  of  Durham,  Durham,  England.  Spalding 
Visiting  Lecturer,  Hebrew  University  of  Jerusalem,  Israel. 
Member,  Committee  of  Experts  on  Translation  of  Representative 
Works,  International  Council  for  the  Study  of  Philosophy  and 
Humanities.  B.A.  and  M.A.,  University  of  Calcutta. 

sat  i  sen  an  dr  A  chatterjee.  Head  of  the  Department  of  Philo¬ 
sophy,  University  of  Calcutta.  Visiting  Professor  at  the  University 
of  Hawaii,  1952.  Author  of:  The  Nydya  Theory  of  Knowledge; 
Fundamentals  of  Hinduism;  Problems  of  Philosophy;  An  Intro¬ 
duction  to  Indian  Philosophy  (co-author  with  I).  M.  Datta). 
M.A.,  P.R.S.,  and  Ph.D.,  University  of  Calcutta. 

haridas  ciiaudiiuri.  Professor  of  Indian  Philosophy  and  Chair¬ 
man  of  the  Department  of  South  Asia,  American  Academy  of 
Asian  Studies,  San  Francisco.  President,  Cultural  Integration 
Fellowship,  California.  Lecturer  in  Indian  Culture,  Rudolph 
Schaeffer  School  of  Design,  San  Francisco.  Formerly  Professor 
and  Head  of  the  Department  of  Philosophy,  Krishnagar  Govern¬ 
ment  College,  West  Bengal.  Fellow  of  Yoga-Vedanta  Forest 
Academy,  Rishikesh,  India.  Delegate  to:  The  Silver  Jubilee 
Session  of  the  Indian  Philosophical  Congress,  Calcutta,  1950; 
The  Sixth  National  Conference  of  the  U.S,  National  Commission 
for  UNESCO,  San  Francisco,  1957.  Author  of:  Sri  Aurobindo: 
The  Prophet  of  Life  Divine;  The  Philosophy  of  Integralism;  The 
Rhythm  of  Truth ;  Prayers  of  Affirmation;  Indian  Culture  (co-editor 
with  Dr  Matilal  Das);  and  some  books  in  Bengali.  M.A.  and 
D.Phil.,  University  of  Calcutta. 

taraknath  das.  One  of  the  co-workers  of  Sri  Aurobindo  during 
the  first  Indian  Independence  Movement.  Lecturer  in  different 
American  colleges  and  universities  including  The  Catholic  Uni¬ 
versity  of  America,  City  College  of  New  York,  Queen’s  College, 
New  YTork  University,  Columbia  University,  University  of 
Hawaii,  University  of  Southern  California,  University  of  Mary¬ 
land,  and  Pace  College,  New  Yoik  City.  Co-founder  and  the 
present  Director  of  Taraknath  Das  Foundation,  New  York. 
Author  of:  Is  Japan  a  Menace  to  Asia;  India  in  World  Politics; 
Indian  Struggle  for  Freedom;  Foreign  Policy  in  the  Far  East;  and 

341 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 

others.  A.B.  and  M.A.,  University  of  Washington.  Ph.D.,  George¬ 
town  University;  Ph.D. (Hon.),  University  of  Munich,  Germany. 

Sidney  kartus.  Member  of  the  Arizona  State  Legislature 
(1944-56).  Observer  for  Arizona  State  Legislative  Council  of 
Colorado  River  Litigation  before  U.S.  Supreme  Court.  Reflected 
member  of  Arizona  House  of  Representatives  for  1959-60.  Author 
of  reports  and  articles  on  reclamation,  historical  and  other  subjects 
including  the  pamphlet  Aurobindo:  Prophet  of  Modern  India. 

s.  k.  maitra.  Honorary  Professor  of  Philosophy  and  formerly 
Head  of  the  Department  of  Philosophy,  Banares  Hindu  Uni¬ 
versity.  Director  of  The  Indian  Institute  of  Philosophy,  Amalner, 
1917-18.  President,  Indian  Philosophical  Congress,  1948.  Author 
of:  The  Neo-Romantic  Movement  in  Contemporary  Philosophy; 
The  Philosophical  Currents  of  the  Present  Day;  Social  Organization 
in  North-East  India  in  Buddhas  Time;  An  Introduction  to  the 
Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo;  Studies  in  Sri  Aurobindo' s  Philo¬ 
sophy;  The  Meeting  of  the  East  and  West  in  Sri  Aurobindo' s 
Philosophy;  'The  Spirit  of  Indian  Philosophy ;  Whither  Philosophy; 
and  numerous  articles  published  in  different  journals.  M.A.  and 
Ph.D.,  University  of  Calcutta. 

T.  M.  P.  mahadevan.  Professor  and  Head  of  the  Department  of 
Philosophy,  University  of  Madras.  Visiting  Lecturer  in  Cornell 
University,  1948-9.  President,  Indian  Philosophical  Congress, 
1955.  Delegate  to  Goethe  Bicentennial  Convocation  at  Aspen, 
Colorado,  and  to  East-West  Philosophers'  Conference  at  the 
University  of  Hawaii,  1949.  Publications  include:  The  Philosophy 
of  Advaita;  The  Upanisads:  An  Anthology;  The  Fundamentals 
of  Logic;  Whither  Civilization  and  Other  Broadcast  Talks;  Cauda - 
pdda:  A  Study  in  Early  Advaita;  Time  and  the  Timeless;  The  Idea 
of  God  in  Saiva-Siddhanta ;  Outlines  of  Hinduism.  M.A.  and  Ph.D., 
Madras  University. 

richard  p.  marsh.  Lecturer  in  English  and  Assistant  Professor 
of  Radio-TV,  San  Francisco  State  College.  Formerly  Lecturer  at 
College  of  San  Mateo,  California.  Writer,  producer  and  staff 
announcer  at  different  radio  stations  of  Northern  California. 
Member  of  the  Guild  for  Psychological  Studies,  San  Francisco 
and  Middleton.  Winner  of  the  Aurobindo  Essay  Contest  in 
Northern  California,  1958.  A.B.,  S.F.  State  College;  M.A., 
University  of  California;  Ph.D.,  College  of  the  Pacific,  through 
The  American  Academy  of  Asian  Studies. 

jay  r.  mccullough.  Assistant  Professor  of  Philosophy,  San  Jose 

342 


Notes  on  the  Contributors  to  this  Volume 

State  College,  California.  A  travelling  scholar  of  oriental  culture 
in  the  Far  East  in  1956.  Member,  Board  of  Governors,  American 
Academy  of  Asian  Studies.  Publications  include:  ‘Indian  Theism 
and  the  Importance  of  Moral  Acts/  in  The  Review  of  Religion , 
November  1956;  ‘Human  Understanding  in  a  Technical  Age',  in 
The  Ananai,  Shimizu,  Japan,  January  1958;  and  others.  B.S.  and 
M.A.,  University  of  Arizona;  Ph.D.,  College  of  the  Pacific, 
Stockton,  through  The  American  Academy  of  Asian  Studies. 

sisir  kumar  mitra.  Professor  of  History  of  Civilization  and  Joint 
Director  of  Education,  Sri  Aurobindo  International  University 
Centre,  Pondicherry.  Formerly  Lecturer  in  Cultural  History  at 
Rabindranath  Tagore’s  Viswabharati  (World  University),  Shanti- 
niketan.  Author  of:  Cultural  Fellowship  of  Bengal ;  India's 
Cultural  Empire  and  Her  Future;  The  Vision  of  India;  The  Dawn 
Eternal;  The  Secret  of  India's  Evolution;  The  Liberator — Sri 
Aurobindo;  India  and  the  World;  Sri  Aurobindo  and  the  New 
World. 

jitendranath  MOHANTY.  Lecturer  in  Philosophy,  Calcutta  Uni¬ 
versity.  Lecturer  at  Sri  Aurobindo  Pathamandir,  Calcutta. 
Publications  include:  Nicolai  Hartmann  and  A.  N.  Whitehead; 
A  Study  in  Recent  Platonism.  B.A.  and  M.A.,  Calcutta;  Dr.  Phil., 
Gottingen,  Germany. 

Charles  a.  moore.  Chairman,  Department  of  Philosophy,  Uni¬ 
versity  of  Hawaii.  Former  Member  of  the  Department  of  Philo¬ 
sophy,  Yale  University.  Sometime  Acting  Director,  Oriental 
Institute,  University  of  Hawaii.  Chairman,  East-West  Philo¬ 
sophers’  Conferences,  1939, 1949.  Editor  and  co-author,  Philosophy 
— East  and  West.  Co-editor,  Jungiro  Takakusu’s  The  Essentials  of 
Buddhist  Philosophy .  Co-editor,  A  Source  Book  in  Indian  Philo¬ 
sophy.  Programme  Director  of  the  Philosophy  and  Religion 
Section,  the  sixth  conference  of  the  U.S.  National  Commission 
for  unesco,  San  Francisco,  1957.  Director,  East-West  Philo¬ 
sophers’  Conference,  Honolulu,  1959.  A.B.  and  Ph.D.,  Yale. 
Sabbatical  study  as  Guggenheim  Fellow  in  India  and  at 
Oxford,  1947-8. 

hajime  nakamura.  Professor  of  Indian  and  Buddhist  Philosophy, 
University  of  Tokyo.  Visiting  Professor,  Stanford  University, 
195 1-2.  Delegate  to:  Congress  on  Cultural  Freedom  in  Asia, 
Rangoon,  1955;  The  Buddhist  Symposium  held  by  the  Govern¬ 
ment  of  India,  New  Delhi,  1956.  Member  of  The  Bhandarkar 
Oriental  Research  Institute,  Poona;  The  American  Oriental 

343 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 

Society;  The  International  Academy  of  the  Jains.  Editor  of: 
The  Bulletin  of  the  Okurayama  Oriental  Research  Institute;  Monu- 
menta  Nipponica;  Science  of  Thought .  Author  of:  A  History  of 
Early  Vedanta  Philosophy ,  four  vols.  (in  Japanese)  (awarded  the 
Imperial  prize  by  the  Academy  of  Japan);  Ways  of  Thinking  of 
Eastern  Peoples ,  two  vols.  (in  Japanese)  (translated  by  the 
Japanese  Commission  for  unesco  into  English);  and  sixteen 
other  books  in  Japanese.  D.  Lit.,  University  of  Tokyo. 

N.  a.  nikam.  Professor  of  Philosophy,  Mysore  University.  General 
Secretary,  Indian  Philosophical  Congress.  Associate  Fellow, 
Siiliman  College,  Yale.  Member  of:  Executive  Committee  of  the 
International  Institute  of  Philosophy,  Paris;  Executive  Com¬ 
mittee  of  the  International  Federation  of  Philosophical  Societies, 
Brussels;  UNESCO  International  Committee  on  Inquiry  into  the 
Teaching  of  Philosophy;  East-West  Philosophers’  Conference, 
Canberra,  1957;  UNESCO  East-West  Colloquium,  Brussels,  1958; 
Institute  on  Ethics,  New  York.  Writer  of  the  Annual  Proceedings 
of  the  Indian  Philosophical  Congress.  Author  of:  An  Introduction 
to  Kant's  Critique  of  Pure  Reason ;  the  article  entitled  'Realisin'  in 
History  of  Philosophy ,  Eastern  and  Western ;  The  Writs  of  Asoka 
(under  publication  by  the  Chicago  University  Press).  M.A., 
St  John’s  College,  Cambridge. 

Raymond  f.  piper.  Professor  of  Philosophy,  Syracuse  University, 
1917-54.  Visiting  Lecturer,  University  of  California,  summer  1926. 
Delegate  to:  International  Congresses  of  Philosophy,  1920,  1926, 
19 37;  International  Congress  of  Aesthetics,  Paris,  1937.  Member 
of:  Phi  Beta  Kappa;  American  Philosophical  Association;  Ameri¬ 
can  Society  of  Aesthetics;  University  Methodist  Church.  Publica¬ 
tions  include:  The  Fields  and  Methods  of  Knowledge  (co-author 
with  Dr  Paul  W.  Ward) ;  Preface  to  Philosophy:  Book  of  Readings 
(co-author  with  Chancellor  Wm  P.  Tolley  and  Dr  Ross  E. 
Hoople);  The  Hungry  Eye:  An  Introduction  to  Cosmic  Art;  four 
articles  in  Encyclopedia  of  the  Arts.  A.B.,  Wisconsin;  S.T.B.  and 
Ph.D.,  Boston. 

A.  B.  purani.  Member  of  Sri  Aurobindo  Ashram,  Pondicherry. 
Translator  of  Sri  Aurobindo’s  main  works  in  Guzrati.  Visiting 
Lecturer  in  South  Africa  under  the  sponsorship  of  the  Tagore 
Gandhi  Trust  Association,  1954.  Visiting  Lecturer  in  the  United 
Kingdom,  1955.  Author  of:  Sri  Aurobindo:  His  Life  and  Teachings; 
On  Art;  Sri  Aurobindo' s  Sdvitri:  An  Approach  and  a  Study;  Sri 
Aurobindo  in  England.  B.A.,  St  Xavier's  College,  Bombay. 

344 


Notes  on  the  Contributors  to  this  Volume 

ruth  reyna.  Research  scholar  in  Indian  Philosophy  in  the  Uni¬ 
versity  of  Florida.  Member  of:  Phi  Beta  Kappa;  Pi  Epsilon  Theta, 
and  the  like.  Author  of  Contemporary  Interpretations  of  the  Concept 
of  Maya  in  Hinduism  (in  the  press).  A.B.,  University  of  Southern 
California;  M.A.,  Florida  State  University. 

rishabhchand.  Member  of  Sri  Aurobindo  Ashram,  Pondicherry. 
Author  of:  The  Integral  Yoga  of  Sri  Aurobindo ,  two  vols.;  The 
Divine  Collaborators ;  In  the  Mother's  Light,  two  parts.  B.A., 
University  of  Calcutta. 

anilbaran  roy.  Extension  Lecturer,  Sri  Aurobindo  International 
University  Centre,  Pondicherry.  Formerly  Professor  of  Philosophy, 
West  Bengal.  Sometime  member  of  the  Bengal  Legislative 
Council.  Author  of:  The  Gita;  The  Message  of  the  Gita  as  Interpreted 
by  Sri  Aurobindo  (editor);  Mother  India;  The  World  Crisis;  Songs 
from  the  Soul;  India's  Mission  in  the  World;  Sri  Aurobindo  and 
the  New  Age;  and  several  books  in  Bengali. 

indra  sen.  Professor  of  Psychology,  Sri  Aurobindo  International 
University  Centre,  Pondicherry.  Former  Professor  of  Psychology, 
Delhi  College.  Author  of:  Integral  Education  (compiled  from  the 
writings  of  Sri  Aurobindo  and  the  Mother);  and  Science  and 
Culture  (compiled).  M.A.  and  Ph.D. 

K.  D.  sethna.  Member  of  Sri  Aurobindo  Ashram,  Pondicherry. 
Editor  of  Mother  India.  Author  of:  Essays  on  Wells,  Shaw , 
Chesterton  and  Hardy;  The  Secret  Splendour;  The  Adventure  of 
the  Apocalypse;  The  Poetic  Genius  of  Sri  Aurobindo;  Evolving 
India;  The  Indian  Spirit  and  the  World's  Future;  The  Passing  of 
Sri  Aurobindo.  B.A.,  Bombay  University;  Ellis  Prize  winner. 

sri  swami  sivananda.  Founder  and  Director  of  The  Life  Divine 
Society,  Rishikesh.  Founder  and  Chancellor  of  Yoga-Vedanta 
Forest  University,  Rishikesh.  A  practising  physician  in  the 
Federated  Malaya  States,  1913-23.  A  wandering  monk,  1924-36. 
Author  of  about  200  books  including:  Principal  Upanisads; 
World  Religions;  Raja  Yoga;  Hatha  Yoga;  Kundalini  Yoga; 
Yoga  Vedanta  Dictionary;  All  About  Hinduism;  Brahma  Sutras; 
Mind,  Its  Mysteries  and  Control;  The  Moral  and  Spiritual 
Regeneration  of  the  World;  Spiritual  Experiences;  Srimad 
Bhagavad  Gita;  etc. 

ninian  smart.  Lecturer  in  the  History  and  Philosophy  of  Religion, 
University  of  London.  Former  Lecturer  in  the  University  of 
Wales.  Visiting  Lecturer  in  Philosophy  at  Yale  University, 

345 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 

1955-6.  Author  of  a  book  on  Buddhism  and  Vedanta  which  is 
shortly  to  appear.  B.A.  and  M.A.,  London. 

pitirim  A.  Sorokin.  Professor  of  Sociology  and  Director  of  the 
Harvard  Research  Centre  in  Creative  Altruism.  Author  of: 
Contemporary  Sociological  Theories;  Social  and  Cultural  Dynamics ; 
Social  Mobility;  Crisis  of  Our  Age;  Reconstruction  of  Humanity; 
The  Ways  and  Power  of  Love;  Social  Philosophies  of  an  Age  of 
Crisis;  and  many  other  works  translated  into  many  languages. 
Editor  of:  Explorations  in  Altruistic  Love  and  Behavior:  A  Sympo¬ 
sium;  Forms  and  Techniques  of  Altruistic  and  Spiritual  Growth: 
A  Symposium .  M.A.  and  Ph.D. 

Frederic  spiegelberg.  Professor  of  Asiatic  and  Slavic  Studies, 
Stanford  University,  since  1941.  Former  Lecturer  at  Columbia 
University,  University  of  Rochester,  University  of  California, 
Berkeley,  etc.  Sometime  Director  of  Studies,  American  Academy 
of  Asian  Studies,  San  Francisco.  Visiting  Lecturer,  Institute  foi 
Analytical  Psychology,  Zurich,  Switzerland,  autumn  1956.  Publi¬ 
cations  include:  The  Bible  of  the  World  (co-editor);  Alchemy  as  a 
Way  of  Salvation;  The  Religion  of  N 0- Religion ;  Spiritual  Practices 
of  India;  The  Living  Religions  of  the  World.  Research  in  India 
under  a  Rockefeller  grant,  1949.  S.T.M.,  Hamburg;  Ph.D., 
Tubingen.  Fellow  of  Yoga- Vedanta  Forest  Academy  Rishikcsh. 

rama  shankar  srivastava.  Professor  of  Philosophy,  Ranchi 
College,  Behar.  Member  of  the  Board  of  Philosophical  Studies, 
Behar  University.  Former  Head  of  the  Department  of  Philosophy, 
Gaya  College.  Author  of  Sri  A  urobindo  and  the  Theories  of  Evolu¬ 
tion  (in  the  press).  M.A.,  Banares  Hindu  University;  D.  Litt., 
Patna  University. 

h.  p.  sullivan.  Research  scholar  at  the  School  of  Oriental  Studies, 
University  of  Durham,  England.  B.D.,  University  of  Chicago. 

judith  M.  tyberg.  Founder  and  Director,  East-West  Cultural 
Centre,  Los  Angeles,  1953.  Visiting  Lecturer  at  different  cultural 
centres  in  England,  Wales,  Germany,  Scandinavia,  etc.,  1935-6. 
Research  work  in  Banares  Hindu  University  and  Sri  Aurobindo 
Ashram,  Pondicherry,  1947-50.  Professor  of  Sanskrit,  American 
Academy  of  Asian  Studies,  San  Francisco,  1951.  Author  of:  First 
Lessons  in  Sanskrit  Grammar  and  Reading;  The  Sanskrit  Key  to 
India's  Wisdom.  M.A.,  M.Th.  and  Ph.D.,  The  Theosophical 
University,  Point  Loma;  M.A.  in  Indian  Religion  and  Philosophy, 
Banares  Hindu  University. 


346 


Notes  on  the  Contributors  to  this  Volume 

k.  c.  varadachari.  Reader  in  Philosophy,  Sri  Venkatesvara 
University,  Andhra.  Former  Lecturer  at  Madras  Christian 
College  and  Union  Christian  College.  Author  of:  Metaphysics  of 
Sri  Ramanuja  s  Sribhdsya;  Theory  of  Knowledge  in  Sri  Ramanuja's 
Philosophy ;  Living  Teaching  of  the  Vedanta;  Idea  of  God ;  Aspects 
of  Bhakti;  Introduction  to  Logic;  and  other  works  on  Mysticism, 
Yoga  and  Psychology.  M.A.  and  Ph.D.,  Madras  University. 

ernest  wood.  President  and  Dean,  American  Academy  of 
Asian  Studies,  San  Francisco,  1957-58.  Formerly  Founder 
and  President,  Wood  National  College,  Madanapalle,  1913; 
Founder  and  Principal,  D.G.  Sind  National  College,  Hyderabad, 
1917;  Organizing  Secretary,  National  University  of  India,  1917. 
Publications  include:  The  Glorious  Presence;  Practical  Yoga; 
Great  Yoga  Systems  of  India;  Yoga  Dictionary;  Mind  and  Memory 
Training;  Occult  Training  of  the  Hindus;  The  Bhagavadgita 
Explained;  and  many  others. 


347 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


A  Complete  List  of  all  the  books  published  in  English 

by 

SRI  AUROBINDO 

(Unless  otherwise  indicated,  these  works  are  published  in  India 
by  the  Sri  Aurobindo  Ashram  of  Pondicherry.  Many  are  also 
published  in  Great  Britain  by  Luzac  &  Co.,  and  in  the  United  States 
of  America  by  E.  P.  Dutton  &  Co.  Inc.) 

Ancient  Scriptures:  Commentaries  and  Translations 
On  the  Veda.  Sri  Aurobindo  International  University  Centre,  1956. 
Hymns  to  the  Mystic  Fire.  2nd  ed.,  1952. 

Isha  Upanishad.  5th  ed.,  1951. 

Kena  Upanishad.  1952. 

Eight  Upanishads.  1953. 

Essays  on  the  Gita.  1949.  New  York:  Sir  Aurobindo  Library,  1950. 

Philosophy 

The  Life  Divine.  Sri  Aurobindo  International  University  Centre, 
1955. 

A  Glossary  of  Sanskrit  Terms  in  ‘The  Life  Divine 
The  Mind  of  Light.  1953. 

Ideals  and  Progress.  4th  ed.,  1951. 

The  Superman.  4th  ed.,  1950. 

Evolution .  5th  ed.,  1950. 

Thoughts  and  Glimpses.  5th  ed.,  1950. 

Heraclitus.  2nd  ed.,  1947. 

The  Supramental  Manifestation  upon  Earth.  1952. 

The  Problem  of  Rebirth.  1952. 

Thoughts  and  Aphorisms.  1958. 


Yoga 

The  Synthesis  of  Yoga  (complete)  or  On  Yoga.  I.  Sri  Aurobindo 
International  University  Centre,  1955. 

The  Mother.  8th  ed.,  1956. 

The  Yoga  and  its  Objects.  6th  ed.,  1952. 

Lights  on  Yoga.  6th  ed.,  1956. 

Bases  of  Yoga.  7th  ed.,  1955. 

Elements  of  Yoga.  1953. 


348 


Bibliography 


On  Yoga  II,  Tomes  One  and  Two,  Sri  Aurobindo  International 
University  Centre,  1958. 

The  Riddle  of  this  World.  4th  ed.,  1951. 

More  Lights  on  Yoga.  1953. 

Letters  of  Sri  Aurobindo.  1st  series,  2nd  ed.  Bombay:  Sri  Aurobindo 
Circle,  1950. 

Letters  of  Sri  Aurobindo .  2nd  series,  2nd  ed.,  1954. 

Letters  of  Sri  Aurobindo.  4th  series.  Bombay:  Sri  Aurobindo  Circle, 
I95i* 

Letters  of  Sri  Aurobindo  on  the  Mother .  1952. 

The  Hour  of  God .  1959. 


Nationalism 

Foundations  of  Indian  Culture.  New  York:  Sri  Aurobindo  Library, 
1953. 

Bankim  Tilak  Dayananda.  3rd  ed.,  1955. 

Bankim  Chandra  Chatter jee:  An  Essay.  1954. 

The  Renaissance  in  India.  4th  ed.  Calcutta:  Arya  Publishing  House, 
1952. 

The  Ideal  of  the  Karmayogin.  7th  ed.,  1950. 

A  System  of  National  Education.  3rd  ed.,  1948. 

The  National  Value  of  Art.  1953. 

The  Significance  of  Indian  Art.  1953. 

The  Spirit  and  Form  of  Indian  Polity.  Calcutta:  Arya  Publishing 
House,  1947. 

The  Brain  of  India.  4th  ed.  Calcutta:  Arya  Publishing  House,  1948. 
Uttarpara  Speech.  5th  ed.,  1950. 

The  Speeches  of  Sri  Aurobindo.  3rd  ed.,  1952. 

The  Doctrine  of  Passive  Resistance.  2nd  ed.,  1952, 

World  Affairs 

The  Human  Cycle.  1949.  American  ed.,  1953. 

The  Ideal  of  Human  Unity.  2nd  enlarged  ed.,  1950.  American  ed., 

I953- 

War  and  Self-Determination.  3rd  ed.,  1957. 

Messages  of  Sri  Aurobindo  and  the  Mother.  1949  and  1952. 

After  the  War  (World  War).  1949. 

Literature ,  including  Poems  and  Plays 
Vyasa  and  Valmiki.  1956. 

Kalidas.  1950  and  1954. 

Views  and  Reviews.  2nd  ed.,  1946. 

349 


The  Integral  Philosophy  of  Sri  Aurobindo 

Letters  of  Sri  Aurobindo .  3rd  series.  Bombay:  Sri  Aurobindo  Circle, 
1949. 

Letters  of  Sri  Aurobindo  on  Savitri.  1951. 

Life-Literature-Yoga:  New  Letters  with  Questions.  1952. 

The  Future  Poetry.  1953. 

Conversations  of  the  Dead.  1953. 

The  Phantom  Hour  (a  short  story).  1951. 

Collected  Poems  and  Plays.  2  vols.,  1942. 

The  Herod  and  the  Nymph  (Vikramorvasie).  3rd  ed.,  1952. 

The  Century  of  Life .  3rd  ed.,  1948. 

Love  and  Death:  A  Poem.  4th  ed.,  1948. 

Baji  Prabhou:  A  Tale  of  Mahratta  Chivalry  in  Verse.  3rd  ed.,  1949. 
Poems ,  Past  and  Present.  2nd  ed.,  1952. 

Chitrangada  (a  fragment).  1949. 

Songs  of  Vidyapati.  1956. 

Poems  from  Bengali.  Sri  Aurobindo  International  University  Centre, 
1956. 

Savitri:  A  Legend  and  a  Symbol.  Sri  Aurobindo  International  Uni¬ 
versity  Centre,  1954. 

Ilion:  An  Epic  in  Quantitative  Hexameters. 

The  Birth  of  the  War  God.  1952. 

Last  Poems  (with  facsimile  plates).  1952. 

More  Poems.  1957. 

Perseus  the  Deliverer:  A  Drama.  1955. 

V asavadatti :  A  Dramatic  Romance.  1957. 

Miscellaneous 

Sri  Aurobindo  on  Himself  and  the  Mother.  Sri  Aurobindo  Inter¬ 
national  University  Centre,  1953. 

Sayings  of  Sri  Aurobindo  and  the  Mother.  1952. 

Food  and  Life:  A  Selection  from  the  Writings  of  Sri  Aurobindo  and 
the  Mother. 

Science  and  Culture  (selected  extracts).  1951. 

The  Message  and  Mission  of  Indian  Culture  (selected  extracts).  1951. 


350 


GEORGE  ALLEN  &  UNWIN  LTD 

London:  40  Museum  Street,  W.C.i 

Auckland:  24  Wyndham  Street 
Bombay:  15  Graham  Road,  Ballard  Estate,  Bombay  1 
Buenos  Aires:  Escritorio  454-45(4,  Florida  165 
Calcutta:  xy  Chittaranjan  Avenue,  Calcutta  13 
Cape  Town:  109  Long  Street 
Hong  Kong:  F1I12  Mirador  Mansions,  Kowloon 
Karachi:  Metherson’s  Estate,  Wood  Street,  Karachi  2 
Mexico:  Villalongin  32-10,  Piso,  Mexico  5,  D.F. 
New  Delhi:  13-14  Ajmeri  Gate  Extension,  New  Delhi  1 
Sao  Paulo:  Avenida  9  de  Julho  1138-Ap.  51 
Singapore:  36c  Princep  Street,  Singapore  y 
Sydney,  iV.S.TU.:  Bradbury  House,  55  York  Street 
Toronto:  91  Wellington  Street  West 


SRI  AUROBINDO  AND  THE 
SOUL  QUEST  OF  MAN 

NATHANIEL  PEARSON 


Sri  Aurobindo,  the  great  Indian  philosopher  who  died  in  1950,  opens  out  new 
realms  of  spiritual  truth  in  his  great  work  The  Life  Divine.  He  saw  and  wrote 
from  a  universal  vision  which  traversed  many  paths  of  knowledge,  and  this 
makes  it  difficult  for  the  reader  to  follow  the  main  theme  without  becoming 
lost  in  an  intricate  maze  of  by-paths.  Nathaniel  Pearson,  who  has  been  a 
member  of  the  Sri  Aurobindo  Ashram  for  the  last  six  years,  has  made  an 
intensive  study  of  The  Divine  Life.  His  book  deals  with  the  first  twelve 
chapters,  which  are  of  fundamental  importance,  and  provides  a  clear  and 
illuminating  exposition  of  the  basic  metaphysical  principles  of  Sri  Aurobindo. 
He  was  in  close  personal  contact  with  the  great  spiritual  teacher  and  was  able 
to  have  his  views  corrected  according  to  the  actual  meaning  they  were  intended 
to  convey. 

The  three  steps  to  spiritual  knowledge  with  which  he  deals  are  the  funda¬ 
mental  stages  studied  in  the  twelve  chapters.  The  first  step  is  to  establish  the 
Divine  Unity  of  all  things;  the  second  is  to  reveal  the  soul  of  man  as  forming 
the  basis  of  a  higher  development;  and  the  third  is  the  knowledge  of  the 
Divine  Nature. 

Nathaniel  Pearson  shows  how  the  new  spirituality  propounded  by  Sri 
Aurobindo  bridges  the  gap  between  the  ancient  and  the  modern  knowledge, 
particularly  in  the  scientific  field.  In  his  refreshing  approach  to  the  subject  of 
modern  man  in  search  of  a  soul  he  has  subjected  some  of  the  current  scientific 
theories  to  critical  examination. 

‘Mr  Pearson  writes  well  and  seems  to  have  thoroughly  absorbed  Aurobindo's 
views;  and  he  manipulates  the  formidable  mass  of  "other-worldly"  terminology 
with  dexterity  and  precision.'  Philosophy 

Demy  8vo.  105.  6 d.  net 


THE  BRAHMA  SUTRA 

RADHAKRISHNAN 


The  illustrious  scholar-statesman  Dr.  Radhakrishnan,  to  whom  we  already 
owe  many  standard  works  on  religion  and  philosophy,  here  gives  us  another 
classic.  The  spiritual  tradition  of  India  is  based  on  the  three-fold  canon 
prasthanatraya,  the  Upanisads,  the  Bhagavadgltd  and  the  Brahma  Sutra. 

This  study  of  the  Brahma  Sutra  is  a  notable  contribution  to  the  development 
of  solidarity  in  thought  to  which  our  world  is  committed.  It  is  no  exaggeration 
to  say  that  this  book  in  its  theme  and  in  its  serene  prose  will  prove  invaluable 
to  all  those  who  are  interested  in  the  problems  of  man's  spiritual  quest  and 
fulfilment.  A  book  of  the  highest  erudition  and  authority. 

Demy  8 vo.  42 s.  net 


GEORGE  ALLEN  &  UNWIN  LTD 


srra  srfTfT  torpt  3PFTstft, 

Lai  Bahadur  Shastri  National  Academy  of  Administration  Library 

MUSSOORlE 

fa*5Tff%5T  aTTter  ^  ^tfasr  1 1 
This  book  is  to  be  returned  on  the  date  last  stamped. 


Date 


^TTT^tT5? 
€\  ^f^TT 
Borrower's 
No. 


Date 


WIT 

Borrower's 

No. 


isrsr 

NUh  LIBRARY 

LAL  BAHADUR  SHA8TRI 

National  Academy  of  Administration 

MUSSOORIE 


Accession  Na. 


1.  Books  aro  Issued  tor  19  days  only  but 
may  have  to  bo  recaRM  stiller  If  organ* 
By  required.  »  f  »' 

8.  An  avofdua  ehargd  «f  flPalse  par  day 
per  vMema  will  be  charged. 

I  Books  pay  be  renewed*  on  request,  at 
toe  discretion  of  the  Librarian. 

4.  Periodicals,  Rari  and  Refrance  books 
may  not  be  Issued  and  may  be  con* 
suited  only  In  the  Library.  * 

I.  Books  lost,  defaced  or  Injured  to  any 
way  shall  have  to  be  replaced  or  Its 
double  price  shall  he  paid  by  the 
borrower. 


