
The Philosophy of Integralism 

The Metaphysical Synthesis in Sri Aurobindo’s Teaching 


BY 

HARIDAS CHAUDHURI 
Professor of Philosophy, American 
Academy of Asian Studies, San Francisco; and 
President, Cultural Integration Fellowship 


WITH A FOREWORD BY 

FREDERIC SPIEGELBERG 

Professor of Asiatic and Slavic Studies, 
Stanford University, Northern California 



SRI AUROBINDO ASHRAM 
PONDICHERRY 



First Edition : 1954 
Second Enlarged Edition : 1967 



* 


*V 






jc) Sri Aurobindo Ashram Trust 1967 
Published by Sri Aurobindo Ashram, Pondicherry' 
Printed at Sri Aurobindo Ashram Press, Pondicherry 

Printed in india 1967 





























TO 

SRI AUROBINDO 


Who brought into the author's life 
A new rhythm and. a new light 





Foreword 


Sri Krsna says in the Gita (17, 2f) that man's devotion is of 
three kinds; it is characterised by sattva, rajas, and tamas. 
That is, the quality given to one’s devotion depends on one’s 
particular psychological nature, which may be bright and 
intelligent, fierce and moody, or dull and lethargic. In Sri 
Aurobindo s translation; ” Fhe faith of each man takes the 
shape given to it by his stuff of being.” 

What is true for sradha, faith, is equally true for the attitude 
of a man to his guru. Observing the history of religions 
through the ages, we find that after the great periods of reve¬ 
lation by a powerful teacher, usually an immediate downfall 
sets in, because disciples of the prophet, the starters and 
organizers of a new movement, are often determined by the 
characteristics of rajas or tamas, either fiercely fighting in an 
unreasonable and intolerant way, or destroying the quality 
of their message by prejudices and stubbornness. Destructive 
crusades on the one hand and over-organization that leads 
to stagnation on the other hand have been the determining 
factors of religious decadence throughout all history. 

Just as this is true for all past periods, so can we equally 
observe the same process today in many new movements; 
ew great visions of mankind have escaped the fate of be- 
coming a cult. This has happened and is happening today in 
East and in West. Westerners observing developments in 
India are in addition to that often worried about the time- 
honored trend of guru-worship which, in spite of its tremen- 
ous advantages, carries in it also the danger of blind alle¬ 
giance, m which the master’s ideas are preserved, to be sure 
but, as it were, in frozen form, and without the expanding 
possibilities, without the exploding, dynamic element which 



11 


FOREWORD 


they carried while still connected with a live prophetic vision. 

Apostolic succession has this double character of preser¬ 
vation and petrefaction. For an illustration, let us take the 
example of the artistic tradition. To live up to the high 
standards of the masters of classical periods has all too often 
been misinterpreted as having the meaning of copying them 
slavishly. Such imitation, perfect as it may seemingly be, 
lacks the most decisive element of the master’s own style, 
i.e., his creativity, and is in so far not an ‘‘imitation” at all. 

The great creative masters of India’s philosophic renais¬ 
sance have shared this same fate. The refreshing greatness of 
Vivekananda consisted primarily in the fact that he was not 
slavishly following his great master, Sri Ramakrishna at all. 
In the same way it is most gratifying to see in Haridas 
Chaudhuri a thinker at work who is truly both a devoted 
follower of a great master and an independent thinker of the 
widest possible scope of erudition. Ghaudhuri’s authenticity 
as a foremost interpreter of Sri Aurobindo’s all-pervading 
system is guaranteed by the master’s own approval of Chau- 
dhuri’s coming to the American Academy of Asian Studies 
in San Francisco as the most reliable teacher of this culmi¬ 
nation of India’s spirituality. 

On the other hand, Chaudhuri’s creative thinking and 
systematic combining ability has become obvious to all who 
have come into the sphere of his winning personality and who 
have heard his lectures and contributions to the regular 
colloquium-sessions, where the members of the faculty were 
wrestling with each other in the most radical search for truth 
and for its expression in human thought, with fierce concen¬ 
tration on this highest goal alone, withholding necessarily at 
the same time all regard for personal and ali-too-personal 
feelings and weaknesses of the participants. To join with 
Chaudhuri in this “ruthless” process of the colloquium has 
proved to all those participating to be an acid bath of the 


FOREWORD 


111 


mind, cleaning unrelentingly all prejudices and cherished 
half-truths away. 

The reading of this book will have the same effect on the 

reader. Chaudhuri happily combines the technique of a 

complete perusal of all possible theories on the subject 

on the basis of his profound erudition in philosophy 

East and West with the light-giving solution that he 

has found in treading the path opened by his sublime guru’s 
vision. 


I' REDERIC SPIEGELBERG 




Preface to the Second Edition 


It is gratifying to know that there is a widespread demand 
for a second edition of my book “The Philosophy of Inte- 
gralism”. Appreciation from different parts of the globe has 
been very much encouraging. 

A thorough revision and considerable re-writing has 
gone into the present edition. Those portions of the first 
edition which seemed a little obscure or not so vitally re¬ 
lated to the central theme have been eliminated. Newly 
added in this edition are such small chapters as “Integral 
Nondualism”, “The Integral World-View”, “Existentialism 
and Rationalism”, and “Existentialism and Essentialism”. 
An attempt has been made to bring the argument of this 
book up to date, showing how integralism reconciles opposite 
extremes of contemporary philosophical thinking. 

It is not the purpose of this book to provide a summary or 
succint exposition of the ideas of Sri Aurobindo. The pur¬ 
pose is rather to express in philosophical form the most fun¬ 
damental spiritual intuitions of Sri Aurobindo. And to 
present his basic metaphysical position in the context of 
present-day thmking. In doing so supernaturalistic notions and 
trans-empirical concepts have been avoided as far as possible. 
Following the principle of Ockham’s razor, an irreducible 
minimum of metaphysical categories have been used. 

The writings of Sri Aurobindo abound in a rich profusion 
of intuitive flashes and original insights. An attempt has 
been made in the following pages to translate them into 
philosophical language in terms of a few categories of utmost 
generality. For instance, instead of using such diverse words 
as Brahman , Uwara , Paramdtman , Saccidananda , etc., the single 
word Being has been used. The idea is to stress the fact that 



VI 


PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION 


the former represent different modes of manifestation of 
the same Being (Brahman). Being is the multi-dimensional 
fullness of existence with many facets and forms. Similarly, 
instead of using such diverse words as Jlvdtman , Antardtman , 
Caitya Purusa , deputy selves, etc., the single expression “the 
individual self” or just the self (dtman) has been used, indi¬ 
cating that the former represent its various dimenisons of 
being. Words often prove misleading by conveying the im¬ 
pression of separate metaphysical entities corresponding to 
them. The reader often unconsciously yields to the tempta¬ 
tion of substantializing words. So, the principle of Ockham’s 
razor, i.e., the economy of terms and metaphysical notions, 
can have a healthy liberating influence in this respect. 

The fundamental metaphysical categories needed for the 
presentation of the integral world-view are : Being (Brah¬ 
man), energy (Sakli), the eternal (amrtam), the self (atman), 
the Divine (Siva), space and time. The word Supreme has 
occasionally been used to denote Being in its integral full¬ 
ness (purnam). All other concepts such as nature, society, 
history, world, etc. can be derived from the above. 

Being implies the fullness of existence, the cosmic whole, 
the absolute, the ultimate ground of all being, including one 
and many, matter and mind, nature and spirit, God and 
world, the timeless status and the dynamism of time. Cos¬ 
mic energy need not be understood along the lines of tradi¬ 
tional metaphysics as some mysterious transcendent force, 
or as the activity of one infinite substance. It may be inter¬ 
preted phenomenologically as the world-process, or the 
totality of all such processes as attraction and repulsion, 
expansion and contraction, birth, growth, decay and death, 
creation, endurance and destruction, going on within the 
matrix of the cosmic whole. 

The eternal need not be understood as an unchanging and 
unchangeable substance mysteriously underlying all chan- 



PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION Vii 

ging phenomena. Phenomenologically, it is the datum of 
all authentic mystical experience. It is that nontemporal 
dimension of existence which embraces every moment of 
time as “eternal now”. It is that mode of experience beyond 
space and time, in which the individual realizes himself as 
essentially one with the universal, just as a volume of finite 
space enclosed within the walls of a room is essentially one 
with the infinite, undivided space. 

Fhe self is the individual viewed in its essential structure 
as an integral part of the cosmic whole. The Divine is the 
creative impulse inherent in the structure of Being. There 
is a profound wisdom in that creative impulse, essentially 
and radically different from the polarized structure of human 
knowledge. Or, the Divine may be interpreted as the unity 
of all such intrinsic values as truth, beauty, love, joy, unity, 

righteousness, freedom, etc. which impart a sense of direc¬ 
tion to human life. 

Space and time are two fundamental categories of human 
experience. Space is the order of co-existence of different 
items of experience. It may be material or spiritual. Material 
space is the order of co-existence of the objective manifold 
in seemingly mutual exclusion. It constitutes the medium of 
objective self-manifestation of Being. Spiritual space is the 
boundless expansion of being and consciousness in its un¬ 
divided and indivisible essence. It is the substance of authen- 
tic mystical experience. In Hindu philosophy it is described 
as “the space of consciousness*’ (cidakasa). It is the order 

of co-existence of finite spirits embraced in the indivisible 
essence of Being. 

Time is inseparable from material or objective space. 
Space-time is the medium of self-expression of cosmic energy. 
It is the outward form of creative and destructive processes, 
t is the scene of the cosmic dance of life and death, of self¬ 
expansion and self-withdrawal. 



PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION 

In discussing such central philosophical issues as the one and 
the many, being and thinking, existence and essence, change 
and permanence, individual and universal, death and im¬ 
mortality, good and evil, etc., the most significant viewpoints 
from eastern and western traditions have briefly been passed 
in review in the following pages. The integral outlook has 
-been developed out of a critical evaluation thereof. 

The author wishes to express his deep sense of gratitude 
to the Mother, Sri Aurobindo Ashram, Pondicherry, for 
her kind acceptance of the book for publication from the 
Ashram Press. Sri Prithwi Singh Nahar, who is in charge 
of the Ashram’s publication department, has been very 
helpful with his valuable suggestions and whole-hearted 
cooperation. The Ashram Press has been very patient and 
considerate in regard to the authro’s last minute corrections 
and additions. Mr. Arner Hermanson kindly agreed to 
check the page proofs and to make an Index for the book. 
The author’s sincere thanks are due to all of them. 


Author 



CONTENTS 


Foreword 

Preface to the Second Edition 

I* The Integral Approach of Sri Aurobindo 1 

Sri Aurobindo as a dynamic seer-philosopher.. 1 ; integral 
interpretation of Vedanta. . 1 ; harmonization of experience 
..3; comprehensive synthesis. .5; Sankara and Plato.. 5; 
reality of names and forms. .6; intrinsic value of individua¬ 
lity.. 7; foundation of integral yoga. .9. 

II. The Integral World-View 10 

The concept of fullness. .10; Vedanta and Buddhism. .11; 
theistic schools of Vedanta. .14; theistic schools of Tantra 
• •16; synthesis of the Bhagavad Gita.. 17; India’s spiri¬ 
tual renaissance. .19; reconciliation of East and West. . 19. 

HI. Integral Nondualism 21 

An East-West synthesis.. 21; nondualism as distinguished 
from monotheism.. 22; nondualism as distinguished from 
monism. . 25 ; nondualism as distinguished from pantheism 
and panent'neism. .27; nondualsm as distinguished from ab¬ 
solutism . . 28; the essence of nondualism. . 29; integral non¬ 
dualism. .31; reconciling mysticism and rationalism.. 33; 
reconciling mysticism and evolutionism. . 33. 

IV. Existentialism and Rationalism 35 

Thought and existence. .35; I am, therefore I think.. 36; 
danger of anarchy inherent in existentialism.. 37; neither 
thought nor existence is the absolute.. 38; consciousness 
as a wider category than thought..38; mutuality of exis- 



tence and consciousness. .40; both existence and con¬ 
sciousness as expressions of Being..42. 

V. Existentialism and Essentialism 44 

Reason as awareness of universal essences. .44; essentialism 
as a factor in human progress. .44; fallacy of hypostatizing 
essence..46; existentialist emphasis upon the priority of 
existence over essence. . 47; the excess of existentialism in 
denouncing essence..48; value of essence..48; both exis¬ 
tence and essence as expressions of Being. .49. 

VI. The Idea of the Absolute 54 

The meaning of the absolute. .54; the absolute as a self¬ 
validating concept. .55; triune essence of the absolute. .58; 
the physical absolute. .59; the vital absolute. .61; the men¬ 
tal absolute.. 62; the absolute as supermind.. 64; the 
absolute as spirit..65; the absolute as indeterminable 
Being. .66. 

VII. The Integral View of the Absolute 69 

The absolute as the unity of the natural, the supernatural, 
and the eternal.. 69; as multi-dimensional Being.. 70; 
as the psycho-cosmic continuum ..71; as the ground of 
all existence.. 73; as the ground of truth, beauty and 
goodness ..75. 

VM. Change and Permanence 78 

The doctrine of flux.. 78; change as illusory.. 79; change 
as a subordinate feature of reality. . 81; change as ultimately 
real. .83; criticism of the doctrine of change. .89; dualism 
of change and permanence. .91; change and permanence 
as inseparable dimensions of Being..93. 

IX. The Meaning of Evolution 94 

Evolution as progressive change for the better..94; emer- 



gcncc of higher species. .95; different planes of existence 
..95; involution as the prius of evolution.. 96; evolu¬ 
tion as a progressus ad infinitum . .97; as progressive self- 
manifestation of the infinite. .99; as emergence of novel¬ 
ties. . 100; nisus of evolution .. 103. 


X. The Goal of Evolution 105 

The pioblcm of goal. .105; theory of unconscious teleology 
..106; theory of superconscious teleology. . 108; driving- 
forces behind evolution. . 109; is man the limit of evolution? 
..Ill; vision of supermanhood ..114. 


XI. The Principle of Individuality 116 

The individual as existentially identical with the absolute 

. .116; the monadic theory ..117; views of Leibnitz, Howi- 

son and McTaggart. . 118; the Sankhya view.. 120; the 

modal or adjectival theory. .122; tire view of Spinoza. ,’l22; 

views of Bradley and Bosanquet. . 123; views of Sankara 
and Buddha..126. 


XII. The Integral View of the Individual 128 

The self as different from the ego.. 128; ego-centric and 

cosmo-centnc individuality. . 128 ; freedom and self-exis¬ 
tence.. 130; triune essence of individuality. . 131 • self-inte 
gration. . 132. 


XIII. The Longing for Immortality 134 

* ^ ,. as immanent in consciousness. . 134- Social 

immortality ..135; idealistic immortality ..135; personal 
immortahty.. 13 ^; supernaturalistic theory of immortality 
•I 38 ; immortality in Vaisnava mysticism.. 138. 

XIV. Immortality as Essence of the Spirit 142 

as an atT^T^ 10 lmmortal,t y • 142; immortality 

as an attribute of enlightenment. . 143; immortality as libe- 



ration.. 145; integral theory of immortality.. 148; immor¬ 
tality as the goal and as the end of life. . 149; four aspects 
of immortality. .151. 

XV. The Problem of Evil 154 

Statement of the problem.. 154; dualistic submission to 
evil.. 155; views of Plato and Zoroastrianism.. 156; San- 
khya view. . 157; view of William James. . 157; pantheistic 
denial of evil.. 158; criticism of the pantheistic position 
..160; theistic interpretation of evil as perversity of will 
• • 162; original sin as a mode of ignorance. . 165. 

XVI. Evil, Suffering and Growth 167 

Theory of evil as an educative agency.. 167; evil as inci¬ 
dental accompaniment of spirit’s self-manifestation in 
matter. . 169; pain as abnormal to our being. . 172; pain 
as a consequence of pent-up evolutionary energy.. 173; 
suffering as a passing feature of life. .174; different modes of 
reaction to suffering. . 175; ethical aspect of the problem 
of suffering. . 178; conclusion. . 180. 



CHAPTER I 


The Integral Approach of Sri Aurobindo 


Sri Aurobindo ranks among the world’s foremost mystic 
seers, poets and philosophers. As a spiritual leader he is 
amazingly dynamic. As a speculative thinker he is pro¬ 
foundly creative. He has given to the world a very compre¬ 
hensive philosophical system, a new spiritual synthesis, an 
inspiring weltanshauung. But what is more important, he 
has also given to the world a complete art of integral living. 
It points the way to dynamic integration of the material 
and spiritual values of life. It is a call to the reconstruction 
of human life and society on the basis of abiding spiritual 
values. The basic principles of integral living are outlined 
in Sri Aurobindo’s “The Synthesis of Yoga”. The central 

concepts of the integral world-view are elucidated in his 
magnum opus “The Life Divine”. 

The philosophical synthesis inherent in the teaching of 
Sii Aurobindo may variously be described as Integral 
Vedanta, Integral Nondualism, or just Integralism. The im¬ 
plications of the above designations may briefly be stated here. 

The philosophical outlook of. Sri Aurobindo may be 
designated Integral Vedanta insofar as it is the reaffirmation 
of the original teaching of the Vedas, the Upanisads, and the 
Bhagavadgita in all the richness of their spiritual insight. His 
commentaries on these ancient scriptures present the timeless 
truth in a form especially appropriate to the present times. 

The Integral Interpretation of Vedanta 

Broadly speaking, there are three principal modes of inter¬ 
pretation of Vedanta : unqualified nondualism (kevala- 



^ THE PHILOSOPHY OF INTEGRALISM 

advaita), qualified nondualism (visista-advaita), and dualism 
(dvaita). Unqualified nondualism lays stress upon the 
concept of Being as formless and indeterminable (Nirguna 
Brahman). So much so that the unique individual and the 
creative universal (Jiva and Iswara), even though they are 
not considered non-existent, are declared unreal from the 
standpoint of ultimate reality. The practical bearing of this 
way of thinking is a greater or lesser degree of world-negating 

and life-denying ascetic tendency. Monastic life represents 
the spiritual path par excellence. 

Qualified nondualism in its various forms lays stress upon 
the concept of Being as the all-embracing personal God 
(Saguna Brahman), endowed with supernatural qualities 
and powers. Impersonality is explained as the all-pervasive 
radiance of the Divine Person. Formlessness is explained as 
the immeasurable richness of form, just as the priceless means 
immeasurable price. The unqualified is explained as that 
which is void of impure natural qualities, but endowed with 
excellent supernatural qualities without number. The prac¬ 
tical bearing of this way of thinking is a religious-emotional 
way of living oriented to the supernatural. Under its influ¬ 
ence a person easily abandons himself to religious rapture 
and ecstasy, somewhat unmindful of the need for social parti¬ 
cipation on the one hand and the serenity of wisdom on 
the other. 

Dualism lays stress upon the concept of Being as an exter¬ 
nal transcendent Deity ruling the multitude of finite spirits. 
Individual selves are existentially separate not only from 
each other, but also from the sovereign God. The conse¬ 
quence of this way of thinking is an accentuation of the indi¬ 
vidual s feeling of sinfulness and his absolute dependence 
upon an external Power. Dualism compromises the unity, 
infinity and all-comprehending character of the Divine. It 
militates against the mystic realization of the individual’s 


THE INTEGRAL APPROACH OF SRI AUROBINDO 


3 


intrinsic freedom and essential oneness of being with the 
Supreme. 

Sri Aurobindo maintains that according to the original 
teaching of the Vedas, the Upanisads, and the Gita, imper¬ 
sonal Being, personal God, and individual self, are three 
inseparable and equally real modes of existence of the same 
supreme reality. They are all essential factors in the struc¬ 
ture of Being. Impersonality signifies the formless and 
boundless essence of Being. Personal God represents the 
power of creative intelligence inherent in Being. The indi¬ 
vidual self represents Being in its individualized mode of 
existence. Every individual self represents a distinct and 
unique value. It reflects the joy of self-differentiation of the 
cosmic energy. The cosmic energy is personal in the sense 
that it has a deep interest in creating and preserving the 
unique values of individuality. It is only by a one-sided and 
exaggerated emphasis upon either the individual or the 
universal or the transcendent that the traditional schools of 
Vedanta get entrenched in their opposition to each other. 

Harmonization of Experience 

Integral Vedanta is integral nondualism. Or, it may just 
be called integralism. Integralism is a comprehensive and 
connected view of the nature of the universe on the basis 
of an integration of all the cognitive resources of human 
personality. Most of the conflicting philosophical systems 
in the West lay exaggerated emphasis upon this or that parti¬ 
cular area of human experience. For instance, materialism 
is usually the philosophical outlook of a physicist or natural 
scientist, whereas spiritualism is a religious man’s philosophy 
of life. Vitalism is usually the philosophy of a biologist turned 
philosopher; whereas a moralist usually builds his philosophy 
along the lines of ethical idealism or idealistic evolutionism. 



4 


THE PHILOSOPHY OF INTEGRALISM 

Pragmatism is usually the philosophy of a man of action; 

whereas absolute idealism is the Weltanschauung of a specula- 

tive thinker of retiring disposition. Integral philosophy 

holds that in order to develop a synoptic vision of reality a 

co-ordination of the different areas of human experience is 

imperatively necessary. Such a co-ordination is in its turn 

possible only on the basis of a perfect integration of the 

different aspects of human personality. An integral view 

of icality can grow only out of an integration of one’s total 
being. 

An integral vision of reality implies two things. First, it 
implies immediate contact with ultimate reality in its mani¬ 
fold richness of content. Secondly, it implies a breadth of 
vision, a comprehensive outlook, reconciling such different 
areas of human experience as common sense, science, art, 
morality and leligion, and also such different phases of the 
spirit in man as waking, dream, sleep and mystic experience. 

While the piactical man overstresses the reality of time, 
the mystic often overemphasizes the reality of the timeless.' 
Mystic experience is sometimes carried to such an extreme 
that the world of plurality is condemned as an unreal appear¬ 
ance, void of intrinsic significance. Integral philosophy re¬ 
conciles supersensuous mystic experience with sensuous world 
experience. According to Sri Aurobindo, the fullness of 
spiritual realization re-aflirms the world of space and time 
on the unshakable foundation of the eternal. It harmonizes 

all fragmentary human experiences in a comprehensive 
truth-vision. 

It is vital to the understanding of the philosophy of inte- 
gralism to realize that a harmonization of experience is 
not possible through mere criticism of the categories of 
common sense and science. Nor is it possible through mere 
logico-empirical analysis of the different types of pro¬ 
position. Nor is it, on the other hand, possible by means of 


5 


THE INTEGRAL APPROACH OF SRI AUROBINDO 

rationalization of onesided mystical experience. An harmon¬ 
ization of experience can be achieved only by means of full 
self-integration i.e., integration of the intellectual, moral, 
emotional, and spiritual aspects of personality. 


Comprehensive Synthesis 

Integral philosophy embodies a very comprehensive meta¬ 
physical synthesis. It reconciles the doctrines of change 
and permanence. It reconciles evolutionism and eternalism. 
It reconciles mysticism and monadism. 

Modern thought posits change as the stuff of all existence. 
As Bergson says, “To exist is to change, and to change is to 
grow and mature”. 1 It may be added that to matuie is to 
realize some new emergent value. This is in striking contrast 
with ancient metaphysical thinking. Ancient metaphysics 
lays stress upon permanence as the essence of reality. It 
assumes that the eternal alone is real. Being must be un¬ 
changing and unchangeable. The logical sequel to that 
assumption is that change is more or less unreal or illusory. 

For instance, the doctrine of permanence is common to 
both Sahkara-Vedanta and Platonic Idealism. But it 
acquires different meanings and values in the two different 
systems. Sankara-Vedanta identifies the permanent as the 
formless and indeterminable Being. So the world of perish¬ 
ing things and mortal beings must be unreal. It is the pro¬ 
duct of nescience (Maya). Even though existent from the 

standpoint of ignorance, it is illusory from the standpoint 
Ot the eternal. 

Platonic idealism identifies the permanent as eternal 
essences forms, ideas. Ideas are unchanging and unchange¬ 
able self-subsistent entities. They are the components of 

1920) BergSO "’ Creativc Evolution (London: Macmillan & Co., 



6 


THE PHILOSOPHY OF INTEGRALISM 

pure being. The world of flux and flow is torn between being 
and non-being. Ever-changing objects of the world are 
shadows or imitations of the ideal world of perfection. 
Their ontological status is vitiated by the contamination of 
an alien stuff, formless matter. 

According to integral philosophy, change is no less real 
than permanence. Change and permanence represent two 
equally real dimensions of Being. The temporal and the 
nontemporal represent two equally real aspects of existence. 
Evolution and perfection arc equally significant poises of 
being of the Supreme. 

According to ancient oriental metaphysics, determinate 
objects are unreal names and forms (nama-rupa) of one 
fundamental substance. For instance, different types of 
gold ornament, however valuable and beautiful, are unreal 
modifications of their basic substance, gold. They are 
fashioned out of gold, and are eventually re-absorbed into 
gold. According to Platonic idealism, the aesthetic forms 
or designs embodied in different types of gold ornament 
are the basic reality. Particular gold ornaments are only 
images or imitations of immutable designs. The recalcitrant 
stuff of gold somewhat compromises the perfection of those 
designs. They also undergo wear* and tear and have even¬ 
tually to be melted back into gold. So they are unreal. 

The integral viewpoint holds that particular things are 
no less real than the universal substance of which they are 
made. A beautiful piece of gold ornament is no less real 
than the substance of gold on the one hand and the aesthetic 
design on the other. In fact, it partakes of the reality of both. 
Both matter and form receive their fulfilment in it. It 
represents a unique emergent value. It is the meeting-point 
of two dimensions of permanence. On the one hand, it is a 
determinate mode of expression of gold. On the other, it 
is the actualization of a beautiful design or idea. Without 


THE INTEGRAL APPROACH OF SRI AUROBINDO 


7 


particular determination, gold has little use or value. With¬ 
out definite actualization, design is lifeless abstraction. 

Similarly, the little rose that blossoms in the garden 
is no less real than the elements of earth, water, light, etc. 
of which it is made. Nor is it less real than the idea of rose¬ 
ness. Both matter and form combine here to give rise to a 
very precious and unique emergent value, which is supreme¬ 
ly real, however transient. 

Similarly again, an individual human being whose indi¬ 
viduality has blossomed to the full is no less real than the 
universal life-force or the eternal pattern of humanity which 
it embodies. In truth, the highly evolved individual carries 
reality to a new height. He hits a new depth of existence. 
He is the meeting-point of time and eternity. On the one 
hand, he is a unique mode of expression of formless Being 
(Brahman). On the other, he is the incarnation of an eternal 
value, an imperishable idea. Formless Being and bodyless 
Form combine to make him doubly real and supremely 
valuable. He adds to permanence the new dimension of 

actuality. He actualizes a unique potential of the creative 
urge of Being. 

In order to appreciate fully the significance of the integral 
view of reality as the unity of change and permanence, it is 
necessary to shake loose from the old obsessional metaphysics 
of permanence. It is necessary to revise some of our old rigid 
habits of thinking. It is necessary to grasp the meaning and 
reality of change and evolution, of growth and progress, 
without discarding the ancient sages’ view of the eternal as 
the stable foundation of all change. 


The Value of Individuality 

It should be evident from the above that individuality is an 
intrinsic value, an essential component of reality. It is a signi- 



8 


THE PHILOSOPHY OF INTEGRALISM 


ficant mode of expression of Being. In its inmost essence, 
it is the product, not of ignorance, but of the superconscient 
creative urge of Being. It is an active center of dynamic self- 
expression of the Supreme. In that case, true wisdom cannot 
consist in mere self-negation in an absolute void, or in self- 
annihilation in the formless absolute. The path of wisdom 
rather lies in the realization of one’s essential oneness with the 
whole of existence and in the reconstruction of one’s life 
on the basis of that realization. 

Since the individual is essentially an active and unique 
center of the universal life-force, the highest goal of human 
life cannot consist in withdrawal from life and social action. 
It cannot consist in mere emancipation from the cycle of 
birth and death. Or in mere liberation from the dualities 
ofjoy and sorrow, knowledge and ignorance. It must assume 
the form of dynamic self-identification with the creative 
purpose of life, with the forward march of the evolutionary 
world-spirit. 

Since inherent in Being is an evolutionary urge, a creative 
impulse, the summum bonum of life cannot consist in mere 
static contemplation of eternal verities or in mystic flight 
into transcendental ecstasies. The full fruition of life lies 
in active participation in the boundless joy of creation. 

Finally, since the human individual, by virtue of his 
self-consciousness, is capable of discovering the element of 
pure transcendence and freedom in life, he is most creative 
when he is free. On the attainment of spiritual liberation, 
he may freely choose either to remain in static transcenden¬ 
tal peace, or to participate in the creative flow of life. The 
latter alternative is no doubt a fuller ideal of life, because 
it implies a fuller experience of Being as the unity of tran¬ 
scendence and creativity. It implies a complete integration 
of human personality, harmonizing its introverted and 
extroverted tendencies. 


THE INTEGRAL APPROACH OF SRI AUROBINDO 


9 


Foundation of Integral Toga 

The philosophy of integralism is the foundation of integral 
yoga. It is the theoretical basis of the art of harmonious and 
creative living. The secret of integral yoga lies in integrated 
living, true to the kindred points of time and eternity. 
Inwardly, it is union with the eternal. Outwardly, it is dedi¬ 
cation to the cosmic purpose of evolution. Inwardly, it is 
blissful self-realization. Outwardly, it is creative self- 
expression out of inner illumination. On the one hand, it is 
self-transcendence in the vastness of the infinite. On the 
other, it is self-transformation as a fit vehicle of the infinite. 
It is complete self-fulfilment in terms of wisdom, love and 
selfless action, harmoniously blended together. 

Integral philosophy embodies an insight into the fullness 
of Being. To know Being steady and whole is to grasp the 
reality of evolution as the creative self-expression of the 
eternal. Evolution and timeless perfection are inseparable 
aspects of Being. So when a person attains full wisdom, he 
cannot remain passive, aloof and withdrawn from life, 
turning a deaf ear to the cries of human anguish. Compas¬ 
sion spontaneously flows from the right kind of wisdom. 
And compassion knows no rest until it issues forth into the 
right kind of action. It sets forth the ideal of constructive 

refashioning of life and society into a growing image of the 
divine. 



CHAPTER II 


The Integral World-View 

Integral philosophy aims to comprehend Being in its multi¬ 
dimensional fullness. It carries to fruition the concept of 

fullness in the Upanisads. It_has been stated in the ISa 
Upanisad i 1 


That is full; this is full. 

The full comes out of the full. 

Taking the full from the full 
The full itself remains. 

This is an affirmation of the supreme truth that God and 
the world, the infinite and the finite, the universal and the 
individual, are inseparable aspects of the same Being. The 
Upanisads declare that Being is on the one hand indeter¬ 
minable (nirguna), and on the other the creative source 
of all determinations (saguna). The indeterminable silence 
and the creative eloquence are two equally real dimensions 
of ultimate reality. Neither of them should be reduced to an 
unreal appearance, or to a subordinate feature of the other. 

Even nonbeing is an essential element in the structure of 
total Being. An adequate grasp of this profound truth can 
lay the foundation for reconciliation of Hinduism and 
Buddhism which have fought with each other for centuries 
in the history of Indian thought. 

Buddhism affirms that Nonbeing, the absolute void or 
emptiness (sunyata) is the key concept of spiritual philo¬ 
sophy. All existing things emerge into being out of the 

1 Radhakrishnan, The Principal Upanitads (New York: Harper and 
Brothers, 1953) p. 566. 



THE INTEGRAL WORLD-VIEW 


1 1 

creative vastness of Nonbeing. They run their course of 
transient existence like passing clouds, or rolling waves, or 
lightening flashes, and then vanish into nothingness again. 
But this Nonbeing is, for Buddha, not a mere abstraction of 
thought. Nor is it a nihilistic concept, a powerless zero. 
Nonbeing is for him the substance of supreme spiritual 
enlightenment. It is the most fundamental experiential 
fact. It is endowed with infinite creativity. That is why the 
Buddha’s message of the creative void ushered into existence 
the golden age of Indian history. It brought about a new 
all-round cultural efflorescence characterized by boundless 
creativity in art, philosophy, religion, social service, and 
humanitarian work, in trade and commerce and even in 
political empire building upon the basis of universal com¬ 
passion. It produced the greatest empire of ancient India. 
It produced in Asoka, the great saint-emperor, one of the 
greatest emperors of the world. It established itself as the 
beacon light of spiritual unfoldment to the whole continent 
of Asia, nay, to the whole civilized world known at the time. 

Sankara Vedanta repudiated Buddhism mainly for its 
heretical tendency. Followers of the Buddha, much contrary 
to the master’s distaste for new sects and metaphysical 
systems, became increasingly engaged in founding new 
metaphysical schools and religious orders. They went 
beyond the master’s avowed mission of restoring the ancient 
way, that is, the original teaching of the Upanisads by clear- 
mg away the roadblocks of ritualism, intellectualism, and 
extreme asceticism. In other words, followers of the Buddha 
were trying to establish Buddhism as a separate religion, 
denying the authority of the Vedas and Upanisads. As a 
result of this devisive tendency the continuity of Hindu 
culture was in danger of being disrupted. So the great 
philosopher Sankara wanted to stop this. He laid stress 
upon the positive aspects of the concept of Being. He 


12 


THE PHILOSOPHY OF INTEGRALISM 

interpreted the pure essence of Being in terms of formless 

existence, undifferentiated consciousness, and spontaneous 
delight. 

Sankara sought to preserve the continuity of Indian cul¬ 
ture stemming from the Vedas and the Upanisads. He fought 
with all his might to eliminate heretical and disruptive forces. 
He made concessions to popular imagination in the interests 
of peace and order in society. He made compromises with 
the upholders of the social status quo in the interest of peace¬ 
ful evolution. He regarded even personal God as a mani¬ 
festation of Being, viewed from the standpoint of the world. 
He had no difficulty in providing a philosophical basis even 
for the many gods of popular imagination. They are real 
from the standpoint of ignorance, answering to the emo¬ 
tional needs of ordinary people. They vanish as unreal on 
the attainment of spiritual enlightenment. Thus Sankara 
tried to biidge the gulf between philosophy and religion, 
between mystic vision and popular imagination. 

Buddha’s emphasis upon Nonbeing as the negation of 
all anthropomorphic notions of God and of wishful thoughts 
about human destiny, was consistent with his historic mis¬ 
sion as an uncompromising social and religious reformer. 

In a later period of time, Sankara’s positive formulation 
of Being in the light of the highest terms of human experience 
became historically necessary. Sankara was concerned with 
the preservation of the continuity of Indian culture and the 
spiritual cohesion of Hindu society. 

Now, from the spiritual standpoint, Buddha’s creative 
Non-being and Sankara’s formless Being are identical. 
They are two aspects, negative and positive aspects, of the 
same ontological Fullness (Purnam). Being which is void 
of any particular feature or attribute is indistinguishable 
from Non-being. Both creative non-being and indeterminable 
being represent reality in its pure supra-cosmic transcend- 



THE INTEGRAL WORLD-VIEW 


13 


ence. Pure transcendence is indeed the profoundest depth 
of man’s spiritual insight. 

Hegel made a very profound statement when he said 
that pure being is identical with non-being. But unfortunately, 
for Hegel, both being and nonbeing were mere abstractions 
of thought. They were only conceptual generalities. 
That is only to be expected. Hegel’s approach to reality 
was detached, all too logical, and abstractly speculative. He 
had no existential concern in truth. He had only a theo¬ 
retical interest in the objective image of truth. Consequently 
he had no experiential contact with the timeless essence of 
Being. It was beyond his depth to comprehend the full 

existential and ontological significance of Being as identical 
with Nonbeing. 

An integral insight into the oneness of being and non- 
being in pure transcendence provides the basis upon which 
to reconcile Buddhism and Hinduism. In the Upanisads 
we find that sometimes it is stated that Nonbeing was at 
the beginning, all existing things came out of Nonbeing . 1 
Sometimes again it is stated that at the beginning was Being 
all existing things came out of being.2 Properly understood,’ 
there is no contradiction here, because Being which is the 
source of all things is no-thing in particular. It is no-being 
no determinate mode of existence. In the ultimate ontolo¬ 
gical reference, being and nonbeing are indeed identical. 

But be it noted here that the experience of supra-cosmic 
transcendence is also only a phase of spiritual growth, not 
its ultimate goal. Just as an ordinary person is blindly 
attached to the world, an ascetic mystic or contemplative 
can e blinded by the dazzling light of transcendence. He 
may be so dazzled as to ignore the reality and significance 
of the world process. Whereas the man in bondage is blind 

1 Taittiriya Upanifad II. 7. 1. 

2 Chandogya Upanifad VI 2. 1. 



14 


PHILOSOPHY OF INTEGRALISM 


to the transcendental grandeur of the spirit, the mystic 
may become blind to the creative glory of life. 


Theistic Schools of Vedanta 

Exclusive emphasis upon the transcendental aspect of 
Being tends to produce a negative attitude to life and the 
world. This is not necessary, but this is a fact of history. Such 
an exclusive emphasis is a reaction against the average 
man's blind attachment to the vanities of life and to the tran¬ 
sient things of the world. It is a necessary phase of man’s 
search for spiritual values. But it is only a phase of spiritual 
growth, not its ultimate goal. From attachment to material 
goods one may swing at the opposite extreme into an attach¬ 
ment to an ascetic denial of the material. Out of the frying 
pan of transience one may fall into the fire of all-negating 
transcendence. And that is exactly what happened in the 
medieval asceticism, super-naturalism, other-worldliness 
and transcendentalism. It happened in all those countries, 
Eastern and Western, which were seriously searching for the 
highest spiritual truth. The monastic order became the 
symbol of self-perfection. In the West supranaturalism and 
religious other-worldliness were the main forms that tran¬ 
scendentalism assumed. In India transcendentalism was 
more mystical and philosophical in outlook. It received its 
highest expression in Buddha and Sankara. It performed 
no doubt an important function in man’s quest of the spiri¬ 
tual truth. But in the course of time its negative feature— 
its world and life negation character—began to come to 
the fore. Consequently, we find that the transcendentalism 
of the Buddha and Sankara had to be strenuously combated 
in later times by the theistic schools of Vedanta. All such 
Vedanta teachers as Ramanuja, Nimbarka, Vallabha, 
Madhava and Chaitanya voiced their protest against tran- 



THE INTEGRAL WORLD-VIEW 


15 


scendentalism and its concomitant negativism. They did so 
even at the sacrifice of full comprehension of the value and 
significance of formless Being. They considered Sankara 
as only a Bauddha in disguise. 

Theistic Vedanta teachers emphasied dynamic Being or 
Personal God as the Supreme. In their view, attributeless- 
ness does not signify any superior dimension or mode of exis¬ 
tence of Being. It is only a characteristic of the sovereign 
Godhead. Being is attributeless.not in the sense that it is 
void of powers and attributes, but because it is endowed 
with infinite attributes. It is qualityless not because it is 
void of qualities but because its qualitative richness is im¬ 
measurable. When we say that a diamond is priceless we 
do not mean that it has no value but only that its value is 
immeasurable. Similarly God is quality-less in the sense that 
he possesses an infinite number of such auspicious qualities 
as wisdom, love, mercy, benevolent power, beatitude, etc. 
Moreover God is free from all negative and vicious qualities 
and powers. Or it may be said that God is endowed with 

supernatural qualities and powers and is untarnished by 
the natural qualities. 


Now, as hinted above, the theistic position is a fall from 
the lofty vision that Buddha and Sankara attained. It is a 
fall from the height of pure nondualistic vision of the truth 
and of the formless essence of Being. But it represents the 
historical necessity to call people’s attention back to the real¬ 
ity and spiritual significance of the world. The reality of 
the world can be founded only on the concept of dynamic 
Being. The spiritual significance of the world can be based 
only upon the concept of some kind of divine creator. And 
the intrinsic value of life, especially of human personality 
can be based only upon the concept of a divine ruler of the 

universe personally interested in the growth and preserva- 
tion ot finite spirits. 


16 


THE PHILOSOPHY OF INTEGRALISM 


The concept of a personal God is necessary to sustain a signi¬ 
ficant scheme of spiritual values in life. God is a just and mer¬ 
ciful ruler of the world. He is the loving world-spirit guiding 
the destinies of man. He stands for such supreme values as 
truth, justice, love, mercy, etc. He represents a disapproval 
of greed and violence, injustice and barbarism, cruelty and 
wickedness. He sets a definite standard for ethical conduct. 
He provides the metaphysical and religious foundation for 
the conception of duty. He also fulfills man’s emotional need 
for love and devotion, for prayer and worship. He answers 
to man’s longing for security and affectionate dependability. 

So theistic schools of Vedanta began to flourish in later 
Hinduism. Their influence permeated the masses of the 
people. All manner of anthropomorphic conceptions of 
personal God began to appear. And such anthropomorphic 
conceptions began also to be taken often literally, giving 
rise to idolatrous tendencies in religious practice. 

The theistic schools of Vedanta were joined by the theistic 
schools of Tantra. Tantra contributed to the spiritual 
heritage of India a very bold affirmative note. It not only 
emphasized the positive spiritual attributes of God as the 
creative world-spirit (Siva-Sakti). It also laid much emphasis 
upon the basic spirituality of Nature—of Nature inside man 
as well as Nature in the outside world. According to Tantra, 
in ultimate analysis, Nature is a mode of operation of the 
divine Spirit. So one must obtain a passport from Nature 
in order to enter into the kingdom of Spirit. If Nature 
binds man, she also liberates man. She alone can completely 
liberate man through his intelligent cooperation with her. 

Emphasis on the basic spirituality of Nature naturally 
produces a bold affirmative attitude to life. The concept 
of Pravrtti (fulfilment of desires) sums up that affirmative 
attitude. The natural desires of man must not be suppressed 
or annihilated. They should be intelligently organized and 



THE INTEGRAL WORLD-VIEW 


17 


lawfully satisfied. Therein lies the way of intelligent coopera¬ 
tion with Nature. Such cooperation alone can bestow upon 
man health and happiness, strength and beauty, growth and 
longevity. Moreover, as man learns to cooperate with nature 
intelligently, nature helps him to transcend her grosser forms 
and discover her finer forms. She helps him to rise above 
her lower material aspect and discover her higher spiritual 
aspect. The supernatural is the higher form and spiritual 
aspect of nature herself. Material nature is the involved 
operation of Supernature, or the supernatural creative 
energy of the Spirit. So when man intelligently follows the 
guidance of nature, nature herself unfolds before him in the 
fullness of time higher and higher spiritual values. With infi¬ 
nite care and patience, she guides him finally towards union 
with the eternal,—with the formless essence of Being. 

Now at the popular lever, this healthy affirmative attitude 
of Fantra has often been misunderstood and misapplied. It 
has been construed as a go-ahead signal for unbridled grati¬ 
fication of the unconscious drives of human nature. In the 
guise of Tantric religious practice, sexual promiscuity, drug 

addiction, cannibalism and gluttony etc. have often masquer¬ 
aded. 

I heistic schools, Vedantic or I antric, could however 

never quite overcome the overall non-dualistic framework 

of Indian thought. Buddha and Sankara stood as the two 

great giants presiding over the entire course of development 

of Indian culture during the middle ages. All other spiritual 

influences were like eddies and whirlpools in that mighty 
stream. 

In the Bhagavad-Gita a wonderful synthesis of nondualism 
and theism was attempted, a magnificent reconciliation 
of the transcendental and the cosmic aspects of Being was 
achieved. It was indicated how one can be united with the 
eternal and formless Being on the one hand, and on the other 



18 


THE PHILOSOPHY OF INTEGRALISM 

participate in the creativity of the dynamic world-spirit. 
The Gita pointed out that the formless eternity that tran¬ 
scends the world and the creative intelligence that sustains 
the world are two inseparable aspects of the same Being. 

But medieval India was not quite ready for the grand syn¬ 
thesis, the master message of the Gita. Consequently we find 
that each estaohshcd school of theology got busy exploiting 
the Gita as the vindication of its own creed. Each religious 
or metaphysical school tried to interpet the teaching of the 
Gita as a stepping stone to its own specific ideal of liberation, 
supernaturalistic or transcendental. 

Sankara Vedanta said that the Gita’s gospel of action and 
evolutionary participation was meant only for a particular 
caste of Hindu society, namely, the Ksatriya. Other castes 
have a different role in society. Moreover the Gita’s em¬ 
phasis upon action applies only to the preparatory stage of 
the spiritual aspirant. It is intended to purify a person 
through selfless action and thus qualify him for entrance into 

the final phase of renunciation and pure transcendental 
knowledge. 

Theistic schools were eager to prove that the Gita’s 
message was only a stepping stone to the higher spiritual 
phase of supernatural love and devotion. Through social 
action one purifies one’s nature. After that one is ready to 
direct the finer sentiments of the heart to the supernatural 
Deity. The ultimate goal is rapturous communion with the 
Divine from everlasting to everlasting in some transcendental 
abode of bliss and beatitude. 

Direct confrontation with the evolutionary and historical 
dynamism of the modern West was needed for India to re¬ 
discover the integral outlook of the Gita. And to rediscover 
with a deeper understanding the hidden treasures of the 
Vedas and Upanisads which are presented in dynamic form 
in the Gita. Successive waves of foreign invasion drove the 


THE INTEGRAL WORLD-VIEW 


19 


creative soul of India into a state of slumber. The shocking 
impact of revolutionary changes taking place in the outside 
world brought about her spiritual reawakening. 

The great leaders of India’s spiritual renaissance went 

back to the original teaching of the Vedas and Upanisads. 

Raja Rammohan, Sri Ramakrishna, Rabindranath Tagore, 

Swami Vivekananda, Swami Dayananda, Mahatma Gandhi, 

Sii Aurobindo,—all of them harkened back to the main- 

springs of Aryan culture. And all of them laid special 

emphasis upon the profound spiritual synthesis that shines 

through the pages of the Bhagavad-Gita. The synthesis of 

spirit and life; of knowledge and action; of wisdom and 

compassion; of life transcendence and life participation; of 

world renunciation and world affirmation; of nondualistic 

vision of the eternal and dualistic appreciation of the struggle 

between truth and falsehood characteristic of human evolu¬ 
tion. 

From a renewed contact with the mainsprings of Indian 
culture, the leaders of renascent India came up with a very 
comprehensive outlook. They found that the distinctive 
values of East and West can be harmoniously blended within 
the framework of that outlook. We may call that the integral 
outlook. It has been the source of inspiration to the neo- 
Hindu and neo-Vedantic movement in India. It stresses the 
need for a comprehensive philosophy of life as the foundation 
for integrated living, reconciling both material and spiritual 
values. It embodies a creative synthesis integrating the 
highest cultural values of East and West. It reconciles the 
economical, political, scientific and humanistic values of the 
modern West with the psychological, ontological and uni¬ 
versal-religious values of the East. 

Now no value synthesis can strike deep roots and become 
a dynamic force in society unless it is given adequate philo¬ 
sophic expression. It must be animated with a compre- 



20 


THE PHILOSOPHY OF INTEGRALISM 


hensivc and consistently thought-out world-view. Man is by 
his veiy nature metaphysical. He is at his best when he has 
a sense of purpose and a vision of destiny. He performs his 
noblest action when he has a grasp of the meaning of exis¬ 
tence. And his sense of meaning and mission can flow only 
from an inspiring world-view. In our present age we need a 
world-view which takes into account the fundamental re¬ 
quirements of the age as well as the basic aspirations of man’s 
evolving psyche. We need a world-view which shows how 

our deepest aspirations are related to the essential structure 
of the universe. 

It was given to the great genius of Sri Aurobindo to outline 
the kind of comprehensive world-view which is essentially 
needed for the present age. The integral outlook which was 
germinally present in the Vedas and Upanisads, which be¬ 
came a dynamic force in the spiritual renaissance of India 
since early nineteenth century, received its complete philo¬ 
sophic expression in the writings of Sri Aurobindo. It gained 
a perfectly self-consistent and mature form, which may be 
designated integral nondualism. It incorporates the evolu¬ 
tionary perspective of the contemporary West into the non- 
dualistic vision of the timeless and formless Being. 

Thus the creative soul of India found a new voice in Sri 
Aurobindo. The great Indian poet Rabindranath Tagore 
paid a visit to Sri Aurobindo at Pondicherry on February 
16, 1928. He said to Sri Aurobindo, “You have the Word 
and we arc waiting to receive it from you. India will speak 
through you through your voice, harken unto me.” The 
poet’s words proved prophetic. Through Sri Aurobindo the 
soul of India has spoken to the world out of the accumulated 
wisdom of thousands of years. And it is a call to pool the 
cultural and spiritual resources of East and West toward the 
establishment of a unique world order on the spiritual foun¬ 
dation of creative freedom and integral truth-consciousness. 

vhrm r Lib * 

// / /<r 





CHAPTER III 


Integral Nondualism 


In the previous chapter we have seen that the integral world- 
view represents a comprehensive philosophical synthesis. It 
reconciles the nondualistic outlook of the East with the 
evolutionary perspective of the modern West. It may there¬ 
fore be aptly described as integral nondualism. It is non¬ 
dualism in dynamic form. In imparting to nondualism an 
evolutionary orientation, it activates the creative potential of 
eastern mysticism. Whereas traditional mysticism aims at 
the liberation of union with the eternal, integral nondualism 
impregnates that union with a dynamic vision of the future. 

In order to grasp fully the significance of integral non¬ 
dualism as a supreme East-West synthesis, it might be de¬ 
sirable to have some precise understanding of traditional 
nondualism in its purest form. Is it true to say that non¬ 
dualism ( Advaito ) is a uniquely distinctive feature of eastern 
culture? Is not nondualism present also in western culture 
in the shape of monotheism, monism, pantheism, etc? 

The purpose of this chapter is to show how nondualism in 
its pure form is different from monism, monotheism, pan¬ 
theism and the like. In spite of considerable resemblance, 
nondualism differs from the latter in some essential respects. 
Nondualism in its pure form is India’s very unique contri¬ 
bution to the spiritual heritage of man. An adequate grasp 
of it is essentially needed to lay a stable philosophical and 

spiritual foundation for abiding world peace and human 
progress. 

1 he fundamental requirement of our present age is to 
enlarge and enrich the nondualistic outlook with a creative 
sense of history. A harmonious blending of eastern 



22 


THE PHILOSOPHY OF INTEGRALISM 


nondualism and western historicism can provide a com¬ 
prehensive philosophy of life such as can inspire the future 
progress of civilization. Traditional nondualism (< advqita ) 
must be dynamically reoriented so that India may play her 
role effectively in the march of world affairs. On the other 
side evolutionism and historicism must be non-dualistically 
founded so that creative energies of the West may be peace¬ 
fully channeled in the interest of total human welfare. 

What is Monotheism? 

What is monotheism? Monotheism is the religious belief 
in one personal God. It rejects the polytheistic faith in many 
gods and goddesses. The one personal God which mono¬ 
theism affirms is endowed with certain well defined attributes 
and powers such as justice, mercy, wisdom, love, etc. He is 
believed to be the living embodiment of a determinate 
combination of certain social, ethical and religious values. 

It is further believed that it is only by accepting such a deter¬ 
minate conception of God that people can attain salvation. 

The great merit of monotheism lies in its unifying and 
organizing power. A well-knit organization requires some 
well defined organizing principle. It requires unquestioning 
faith in a fixed set of values. One God, one prophet or 

messiah, one book of revelation-that is the great formula of 

an organized religious fraternity. Exactly such a triple for- - 
mula is applied by monotheism. 

The chief defect of monotheism is that it tends to make its 
followers dogmatic, intolerant and aggressive. The one God 
of monotheism is endowed with some definable powers and 
attributes. These are crystallized in definite dogmas and 
creeds which are believed to represent the absolute truth. 
Those who do not accept these dogmas and creeds are 
branded as heretics and atheists. The faithful feel religiously 



INTERGRAL NONDUALISM 


23 


justified to persecute the latter. They feel justified to wage a 
holy war against the infidels and non-believers. Such perse¬ 
cution and holy crusades are not only justified on religious 
grounds; they are even considered a supreme religious duty, 
a divine commandment. Thus hatred and hostility, violence 
and inquisition, crusade and conversion, are paradoxically 
born of one’s faith in one loving and merciful God. 

Monotheism is oftener than not dualistic in outlook 
from the metaphysical standpoint. It believes in one 
God, but it usually imagines the world to have an in¬ 
ferior mode of existence outside of God, the most high and 
perfect. God is the upholder of the supernatural kingdom 
of heaven. In the heavenly region, He is surrounded by a 
graded hierarchy of angels. The world is the abode of sin 
and suffering, of trial and tribulation. It is the place of 
punishment for the violation of the Divine Will. It is the 
prison-house for those who fall from divine grace by eating 
the forbidden apple. 

I he oneness of God is thus compromised, metaphysically 
speaking, by the separate existence of the world as a realm of 
evil and imperfection. It is also compromised by the separate 
existence of the devil or Satan. The devil frequently chal¬ 
lenges the authority of God and foils His noble designs. 
1 here ensues thus a continuous struggle between the forces 

of God and the forces of the devil in the benighted world of 
imperfection. 

I he dualism of God and world makes the followers of 
monotheism other-worldly and supernaturalistic. Nature is 
regarded as the antithesis of spirit. Religious striving assumes 
the form of a perpetual struggle between the flesh and the 
spirit, between passion and reason. It encourages a rebellion 
against the natural order in one’s search for the supernatural. 

The dualism of God and the devil generates an aggressive 
and proselytizing zeal in the ranks of the faithful. Those 



24 


THE PHILOSOPHY OF INTEGRALISM 


who do not accept the right creed—the only creed that 
represents the will of God—must be under the spell of the 
devil. So they must be either converted or crushed in order 
to win the world over to God. Thus the followers of differ¬ 
ent monotheistic systems may find themselves locked in a 
mortal combat, each side fighting in the name of one abso¬ 
lute God. The God of each monotheistic system becomes, 
therefore, the devil in relationship to the God of the other 
system. And those who do not believe in God at all, the 
atheists and agnostics, must be doubly accursed, incorrigibly 
corrupted by the devil’s devil. 

Philosophical reflection exposes in no time the self-con¬ 
tradiction inherent in monotheism in its popular form. If 
God is one, infinite and absolute, He cannot exist outside of 
and beyond the world. God must be the One all-embracing 
and all-pervading Spirit. There cannot also be any devil 
existing separately outside of God. The devil, if there should 
be one, must somehow be an integral part of the existence of 
the absolute Godhead, functioning as the dialectical element 
in H is objective self-manifestation. 

In other words, if God is infinite, the world must exist 
within God, not outside Him. God must be omnipresent and 
all-encompassing, not a supernatural Other. One must at 
least be able to say that God is both immanent and tran¬ 
scendent. On the one hand God is the great Beyond, and on 
the other He is the inner life and the controlling power of the 
entire universe. But, in consequence of such a modification, 
monotheism gets transformed into monistic theism or theistic 
monism. It becomes a religious version of the monistic world¬ 
view. For the sake of full clarity, it would be good at this 
time to say a word about monism. 



INTEGRAL NONDUALISM 

What is Monism? 


25 


Monism as a philosophical world-view holds that the woi Id, 
with all its bewildering variety of things and beings, is the 
offspring of one universal creative principle. Monism fur¬ 
ther proceeds to endow this universal principle with a deter¬ 
minate character. Different ways of conceiving the one 
supreme principle give rise to different systems of monism. 

The universal creative principle may be conceived as 
matter or material energy. That would establish mater¬ 
ialistic monism. It may be conceived as one universal life- 
force. That would establish vitalistic monism. It may be 
conceived as one universal Mind or Reason. That would 
establish idealistic monism. It may be conceived as one all- 
embracing and all-transcending personal God, endowed 
with such attributes as all-powerful, all-wise, all-good, all- 
merciful, etc. That would establish theistic monism 


Transition To Pantheism 

Further philosophical reflection detects self-contradiction 
inherent in monism. In Western philosophy, a critique of 
monism prepared the ground for pantheism, panentheism 
and absolutism. These are the closest parallels in the West 
to what is known as nondualism in the East. Eastern non- 
duahsm is embodied in such systems as Advaita Vedanta 
Kasmir Saivism, Mahayana Buddhism, Taoism and Zen! 

cstern pantheism, with slight variations, is embodied in 

the great speculative systems of Plotinus, Spinoza, Bradley 
Bosanquct, etc. 

Spinoza’s formulation of pantheism is classical. In his 
view, the ultimate ground of existence is one infinite subs- 
ance. We cannot limit this infinite substance by ascribing 
to it a specific combination of determinate qualities as 



26 


THE PHILOSOPHY OF INTEGRALISM 


theism does. Because to determine is to limit. All deter - 
minatio est negatio. So God as the infinite substance must 
be either void of all attributes or endowed with infinite 
attributes, embracing and reconciling such human oppo¬ 
sites as love and hate, joy and sorrow, good and evil, etc. 

Of the infinite attributes of God, two are especially known 
to us human beings, namely consciousness and extension. 
These are parallel manifestations of the Divine Essence. 
Corresponding to every conscious process there is the 
material process, and vice versa. Other attributes of God 
are unknown to the average human being at his present 
stage of growth. Different material objects are modifications 
of one God as extended. Different finite spirits are modifica¬ 
tions of God as conscious. So God is absolutely immanent 
in the all of existence. God is identical in the world of nature 
and man. 

The German philosopher Krause coined the word panen- 
theism by way of suggesting an improvement upon Spinoza’s 
pantheism. Pantheism means all is God. This makes God 
absolutely immanent in the world, and that ignores His 
transcendental aspect as the great Beyond. Panentheism 
means all is in God. Which implies that God embraces and 
pervades the entire universe, and at the same time transcends 
it as the inexhaustible and the unmanifest. In pantheism 
finite spirits are modes of God’s infinite consciousness. Con¬ 
sequently they have no independent existence and real 
freedom of their own. In panentheism finite spirits are 
relatively independent substances endowed with a relative 
measure of freedom, even though for all their freedom and 
independence, they still live, move and have their being 
within the all-embracing medium of divine existence. 

Such absolutist philosophers as Hegel, Bradley and Bosan- 
quet tried to reform pantheism in another direction. If the 
ultimate ground of existence is not to be identified with 



INTEGRAL NONDUALISM 



any fixed set of determinations, as Spinoza rightly points 

out, then it is not proper to call it God. God is a specifically 

religious category. God is the sovereign personal Being- 

endowed with certain ethical and religious attributes. The 

personal God of religion must therefore be only an 

appearance, a phenomenal manifestation, of the Absolute. 

The Absolute—the truly infinite and eternal Being—must 

transcend all theological determinations that is to say, all 

dogmas and creeds expressing determinate characteristics 
of God. 


Moreover, Spinoza’s notion of the one, infinite, indeter¬ 
minate substance is self-contradictory. If the One is indeter¬ 
minable, then how can you determine It by the category 
of substance? Substance—attribute is the category of the 
human mind. It is man’s imperfect way of arranging the 
manifold facts of experience. It applies, therefore, only to 
the realm of phenomenal appearances. It cannot be ex¬ 
tended as Emanuel Kant pointed out, to ultimate reality. 
So Bradley concludes that ultimate reality is the logically 
indefinable system of all experience. Multitudinous pheno¬ 
mena that we experience—appearances as the facts of expe- 
nence-are the stuff of which the Absolute is made. The 
Absolute unifies and transforms them all. But It has no assets 

beyond appearances. 1 The notion of the Beyond contradicts 

he fundamental idealistic premise that all is experience. 
Anything beyond experience is an empty hypothesis. 


The Essence of Nondualism 

As we noted before, pantheism, panentheism and abso¬ 
lutism are Western parallels to Indian nondualism. But 
nonduahsm cannot be quite equated with any of them. 

Press, , I9 F 625 I p Br 433 h:y ’ Appea,anCt and ***» (London: Oxford University 



28 THE PHILOSOPHY OF INTEGRALISM 

It has some distinctive features of its own which have yet to 
be investigated. 

Buddha and Sankara are the two most consistent expo¬ 
nents in India of nondualism in its purest and highest form. 
The key concept of Sankara is formless Being (Nirguna 
Brahman ). The key concept of Buddha is Nonbeing (Sunyata). 
From the spiritual standpoint, Being and Nonbeing are 
identical. There is no doubt that there are many differences 
between the teachings of these two great masters. But 
underlying such differences there is a profound measure of 
agreement. They agree in affirming the concept of pure 
Transcendence as the indefinable and non-temporal depth 
dimension of all existence. And that is an essential ingredient 

of nondualism. 

Neither pantheism nor panentheism is quite the same as 
pure nondualism. The word “Theos” signifies God. Now 
God is a Being endowed with ethical and religious attributes. 
God is therefore a determinate form of Being. He is a 
Being, not the ground of all being. So He cannot be equated 
with Being as such. Being in its inmost essence is indeter¬ 
minable and formless. Indeterminable Being is not to be 
interpreted as one infinite substance. The notion of one 
infinite substance is an intellectual construction. The mys¬ 
tery of Being can hardly be fathomed by such categories ot 
the intellect as substance, quality, unity, plurality, etc. 

The absolutism of Bradley and Bosanquet also a s s ° 
of pure nondualism. Absolutism is right in holding t tat 
ultimate reality is beyond one and many, beyond substance 
and quality, beyond immediate experience and rationa 
mediation. But there are at least two essential respects m 

which nondualism differs from it. 

First, western absolutism shows no full compre icn.uon 
of the aspect of Being as supracosmic transcendence. T e 
reason probably lies in the fact that philosophers like Bradley 



INTEGRAL NONDUALISM 


29 


and Bosanquet, for all their intellectual brilliance, had no 
first-hand mystical realization. Bradley states that appear¬ 
ances are the stuff of which the Absolute is made. “The Abso- 
litte has no assets beyond appearances.This is like saving 
that the ocean has no assets beyond the waves. Or like say¬ 
ing that the space-time continuum has no assets beyond visible 
and tangible material objects. To say that the Absolute 
means only the transmuted unity of all appearances is to 
betray a lack of understanding of the non-temporal depth 

dimension of the universe. The ocean is much more than the 
transmuted unity of its waves. 

Secondly, in declaring that ultimate reality is the Abso¬ 
lute, Bradley and Bosanquet suggest that ultimate reality 
must be a rationally self-coherent system. It was difficult 
for them to shake off the hang-over from Hegelian rational¬ 
ism. Did not Hegel say that all that is real is rational, and 
all that is rational is real ? So the piinciple of self-consis¬ 
tency must be the ultimate criterion of truth. Ultimate 
reality must be, on the one hand, all-inclusive, and, on the 

other, rationally self-coherent. In one word, it must be a 
system. 

But according to nondualism, Being is beyond all systems. 
Different systems, that is, intellectually constructed wholes, 
are only different perspectives of the fullness of Being. It is 
true that Being has an aspect of harmony and consistency 
But it is no less true that there is an irrational factor in the 
structure of reality. There is in life an irreducible surd which 
just won’t lend itself to any rational deduction. This is what 
Vedanta calls maya. The absolutist’s claim that his philo¬ 
sophical system is absolutely true from the intellectual 
standpoint is false. All philosophical systems are only 
relatively valid from a particular standpoint, at a given 

1962) F p H 4 ?3 adley ° nd Realily ( O ^ord: The Clarendon Press, 



30 


THE PHILOSOPHY OF INTEGRALISM 


stage of evolution. Only the formless Being is absolute. But 
the formless Being is the common source of inspiration to all 
metaphysical systems, monistic, pluralistic, dualistic and 
otherwise. 

Ancient nondualism at its best, as we find it in the teach¬ 
ings of Buddha and Sankara, represents mysticism at its 
loftiest. Theistic, pantheistic and other forms of mysticism 
are pale reflections thereof. The core of nondualistic mys¬ 
ticism lies in the conviction that the supreme truth is the 
timeless and formless Being, or Nonbeing. Reality is essen¬ 
tially indefinable and non-verbal. It is beyond all opposites, 
—nondual. Beyond all limitations of cosmic expression, 
it is still the source and support of the cosmic manifold. 

A Hindu theistic mystic may say, “I am at one 

with Krsna.” Insofar as he is a theist, and not a non- 

• • • 

dualist in the strict sense of the word, he finds it difficult to 
rise above the Krsna-form. Indeterminable Being is for 
him only an abstraction. At best it is the limitless power and 
glory of the determinate Krsna-form. Similarly, a Christian 
mystic, who is usually a theist, says, I am at one with 
Christ, or with God the Father, who is inseparable from 
Christ.” He finds it extremely difficult to rise above the 
Christ-form and comprehend Being in its transcendent- 
universal essence. He cannot think of Being apart from 
Christ, nor can he approach Being except through Christ. 
Similarly, an Islamic mystic, insofar as he is a theist, says, 
“I am at one with the essence of Mohammed.” He finds it 
difficult to rise above the Mohammed-form. All theists, 
Hindu, Jewish, Christian, Islamic, etc., find it difficult to 
shake loose from the dualistic conception of God as a 
Being, a sovereign Person, and comprehend what Paul 
Tillich calls Being itself, the ground of all being. It is Being 
itself the tathata or suchness of Mahayana Buddhism, and 
indeterminable Being (nirguna Brahman) of Advaita 



INTERGRAL NONDUALISM 


31 


Vedanta, which is the ultimate category of nondualism. 

When a nondualist says “I am in essence one with formless 
Being,” he goes beyond all forms and determinations and 
reaches the rock-bottom realization of Being as such in its 
boundless universality. Formless Being is the common 
ground of all such specific symbols of the Divine, as Krsna, 
Buddha, Christ, Mohammed, Moses, etc., with all their 
histoiical particularities. The latter represent historical 
forms of the trans-historical reality. The theist equates the 
historical form with the trans-historical. Consequently the 
trans-historical reality appears to him as a person. Failure 
to rise above personalities and to comprehend the 
super-personal divine ground introduces an element of 
parochialism into his religious outlook. He fails to appreciate 
the common universal essence of all religions. He sets up 
one religion against other religions, one particular prophet 
above all other prophets. Nondualistic experience of Being- 
itself can alone discover the ultimate unity of all prophets 
and all religions, resulting in a genuine universality of out- 
ook. Short of that, some degree of religious narrow-minded¬ 
ness is bound to remain. Pure nondualism is a spiritual 
breakthrough beyond all limitations of dogma and creed. 

t is the experience of Being in its formless essence and all- 
comprehensive unity. 


Integral Nondualism 

Let us now raise the final question : How does Integral 

nondualism differ from the nondualism of Buddha and 

Sankara ? Is it a restatement of Vedantic-Buddhist non- 

dualism in modern terms ? Or has it any unique and dis- 
tinctive features of its own. ? 

Integral nondualism differs from ancient nondualism at 
least in two essential respects. 



32 


THE PHILOSOPHY OF INTEGRALISM 


Integral nondualism transforms ancient nondualism into 
an affirmative and dynamic attitude to life by incorporating 
into it the evolutionary perspective. Ancient nondualism 
aims at ecstatic union with the eternal. Integral nondualism 
is dynamic and creative union with the eternal. 

Secondly, integral nondualism affirms Being as the un¬ 
divided unity of the formless and multiple forms. According 
to ancient nondualism, ultimate reality is the formless, the 
indeterminable. Forms and determinations are unreal from 
the ultimate standpoint. In the view of integral nondualism, 
forms and determinations also are very real from the ulti¬ 
mate standpoint. They arc the glory of the creative urge 
inherent in Being. They provide meaning and reality to the 
self-expressive impulse of Being-. If we are to use a human 
analogy, the formless corresponds to the creative depth, 
the boundless potentiality, of a master artist. Different 
forms inhere in the determinate works ol art accomplished 
by his genius. We know that his finished products of art 
are no less real than his inarticulate and as yet unmanifest 

inner vision. 

In the Vedantic-Buddhist spiritual tradition, dominant 
emphasis is upon the formless Being. Names and forms 
( nama-rupa ) are unreal ( milhya ). Unreal because they are 
ever-changing, ephemeral, evanescent ( anilya ). In contrast 
to this denial of forms and names, it was given to the genius 
of ancient Greek philosophers like Plato and Aristotle to 
emphasize the reality of names and forms. According to 
Plato, particular things and beings are no doubt ever chan¬ 
ging and perishing, but their essential forms (Ideas) are 
eternally real. They are the formative principles of things. 
They are the archetypal models of existence. Forms and 
ideas arc indeed supremely real. Concepts and definitions 
are real insofar as they are the structural principles of 
things. Thus Plato’s doctrine of ideas laid the groundwork 



INTERGRAL NONDUALISM 


33 


for a different line of cultural development from the Oriental 
mystical tradition. In the fullness of time it gave rise to the 
approach of precise scientific formulation and logical articu¬ 
lation. It stressed the need for the organized way of doing 
things according to definite principles and ideologies. 
Science’s emphasis upon mathematical formulation and 
well-defined laws as the essence of things is the logical culmi¬ 
nation of the Platonic doctrine of ideas. The gradual per¬ 
fecting, in the West, of social and political institutions has 
also been, in a large measure, due to the rationalistic 
regard for determinate forms as structural elements of reality. 

Integral nondualism reconciles the mystical truth of 
formless Being with the rationalistic theory of forms and 
ideas. It holds that it is wrong to identify reality exclusively 
with formless transcendence. Forms and ideas are no less 
real. Formless transcendence on the one hand, and eternal 
forms and ideas on the other, may be said to represent two 
equally real dimensions of Being. Realization of the form¬ 
less transcendence is essential for attaining spiritual depth 
and universality of outlook. Whereas realization of the 
reality and value of forms, ideas, determinate principles, 
etc., is essential for human progress in scientific, technolo¬ 
gical, social, economical and political spheres. The former is 
necessary for world peace and harmony. The latter is neces¬ 
sary for the gradual improvement of human institutions, 

and for continuous betterment of the conditions of living 
in this world. 

Integral nondualism reconciles mysticism with evolution¬ 
ism. Mystics affirm the reality of the non-temporal depth 
dimension of Being. Realization of the non-temporal is 
essential for supreme peace and serenity, for wisdom and 
universal compassion, for the authentic spirit of universal 
brotherhood, free of master-race or master-creed complex. 
But ancient mysticism was not fully aware of the reality and 



34 


THE PHILOSOPHY OF INTEGRALISM 


importance of evolution and history. Dazzled by the glory 
of the eternal, it minimized the importance and value of 
time. Attracted by the bliss of the timeless present, it lost 
the historic vision of the future. 

The theory of evolution upholds an optimistic vision of 
the future. It calls attention to the supreme reality of life 
as a creative process. It stresses the truth that man’s reality 
cannot be separated from his historicity. It is through parti¬ 
cipation in history that he can evolve and manifest the un¬ 
suspected glories of his inner being. Integral nondualism 
holds that the non-temporal and the evolutionary are two 
inseparable aspects of Being. The non-temporal is the form¬ 
less depth of Being. The evolutionary is the creative energy 
(Sakti) inherent in Being. So by enlarging the concept of 
of energy ( Sakti) or determinate Being (Saguna Brahman ), 
which is already there in Vedanta, mysticism and evolu¬ 
tionism can be perfectly reconciled. 

It follows from the above that man, who is a self-conscious 
mode of expression of Being, has also two inseparable aspects. 
On the one hand he has the formless and timeless depth di¬ 
mension of his existence. He needs to realize that in order 
to attain peace, wisdom, freedom and love in their perfec¬ 
tion. But, on the other hand, he has the historical dimension 
of his being. He is born in a specific historical context and 
part of his ultimate goal of life lies in playing an active role 
in the march of history. It is no doubt by diving into the 
depths of his being that he can glimpse life’s supreme values. 
But it is by actively participating in the evolutionary move¬ 
ment of life that he can increasingly manifest higher values 
in society and human relations. 


CHAPTER IV 


Existentialism and Rationalism 


Existentialism is a very significant form of the philosophical 

movement in the West today. It is a protest against the 

traditional rationalism and rationalistic idealism of Western 

culture. It is also a protest against traditional religiosity 

in the form of supernaturalism, pessimism, and other-world¬ 
li ness. 

Existentialism has rendered a signal service to modern man 

in his search for truth. It has cleared away a good deal of 

mythological speculation and meaningless verbiage. It has 

shaken the foundation of rationalistic castle building inspired 

by the dogma that the real is the rational. But in doing so it 

commits excesses of its own, equating reality with the absurd, 
the irrational. 

It is indeed important to be able to know the truth in its 
naked form, however overwhelming the experience. But it 

is also essential to comprehend the truth in its total form_in 

its integral fullness—however painstaking the effort. Integral 
philosophy is an attempt to present the truth in its multi¬ 
dimensional fullness. In doing so it brings together in a 
balanced outlook the refreshing insights of existentialism on 

the one hand and the imperishable values of rationalism and 
idealism on the other. 


Thought and Existence 

Traditional speculative philosophy affirms the primacy 
of thought as the vehicle of truth. Existentialism affirms the 
subordination of thought to existence as the fundamental 
structure of reality. Integral philosophy holds that thought 



36 


THE PHILOSOPHY OF INTEGRALISM 


and existence are inter-dependent modes of expression of the 
same timeless Being (Brahman). 

Descarte says : “I think therefore I am; cogito ergo sum.” 
He starts with thought. Existence is revealed through 
thought. Naturally therefore thought is regarded as the es¬ 
sence of existence. And existence is understood in terms of 
such categories of thought as substance, permanence, cause, 
unity, etc. So the human reality is conceived as a permanent 
thinking substance ontologically separate from the body. 
The puzzles and problems stemming from such dualistic 
thinking are common knowledge today. The insoluble 
problem of interaction between the body and the soul, matter 
and mind, is artificially created. It opens the door to skep¬ 
ticism, solipsism, and the world-negating flights of idealism. 

Once thought is accepted as the vehicle of truth, the ground 
is prepared for the eventual enthronement of thought as the 
absolute. So rationalism reaches its ultimate fulfilment in 
absolute idealism. And this is what precisely happened in 
Hegel’s Philosophy. Hegel draws the ultimate inevitable 
conclusion from the Cartesian premise. For Hegel, 
all that is real is rational, and all that is rational is 
real. Thought is identical with ultimate reality. The sup¬ 
reme truth is absolute idea, an organic structure of the cate¬ 
gories of thought. Nature can be derived from absolute 
idea as a form of its objective self-manifestation oi self-exter- 
nalization. Human existence also can be derived from abso¬ 
lute idea seeking self-expression in and through the evolu¬ 
tionary movement of nature. The existing individual 

/ a 0 

becomes thus an image or reproduction of the Hegelian 
absolute. He is a shadow cast by the light of absolute 
thought. His destiny therefore lies in losing himself in the 
absolute. In the political field his destiny lies in losing him¬ 
self in the state as a concrete manifestation on earth of the 
absolute. Thus we see how rationalism can lead to absolute 



EXISTENTIALISM AND RATIONALISM 


37 


idealism and how absolute idealism can prepare the way 
for Nazism, Fascism, Statism and political dictatorship. 

This whole line of thinking comes in for sharp criticism at 
the hands of modern existentialist thinkers. What is needed 
is a complete reversal of the rationalistic premise. “I am, 
therefore I think”—that would sum up the fundamental 
existentialist position. Existence cannot be derived from 
thought and its categories. On the contrary, thought is a 
mere function of existence. Besides thought, existence in¬ 
volves such non-rationalistic factors as immediate sense expe¬ 
rience, emotion, love, action, intuition, etc. Moreover 
the existence of every human individual is an ultimate irre¬ 
ducible fact. It is unique, and incapable of duplication. 
The individual is just the individual. 

Jean-Paul Sartre has drawn the ultimate logical conclu¬ 
sion from the existentialist emphasis upon the uniqueness 
of the existing individual,—an emphasis which started 
with Soren Kierkegaard in modern times. If the individual 
is an ultimate unit of existence, he must be absolutely free. 
His freedom can know no bounds. It cannot be limited by 
any ethical standard or norm. Nor should it be limited 
by any social or political authority. Nor should it be 
curbed by any religious injunction. Whatever flows from 
the individual’s exercise of absolute freedom, must be 
good. Free choice is the essential criterion of goodness. 
Free choice is also the key to the understanding of 
individuality. 

If absolutism prepares the ground for dictatorship, exis¬ 
tentialism can easily lead to anarchy or unbridled individual¬ 
ism. This is what we are witnessing today in the thoughts 
and actions of our present day young generation who call 
themselves neo-existentialists and in some cases beatniks. 
They feel that they are the lost generation. For them abso¬ 
lute freedom is the supreme value. It does not matter how 



38 


THE PHILOSOPHY OF INTEGRALISM 


that freedom is used so long as it is freely expressed. It may 
assume the form of drunkenness, vandalism, drug addiction, 
sexual promiscuity, etc. The gospel of freedom can dress 
them all up in decent form. A new idealistic flavor can 
be given them too. Thus freedom is emptied of its 
content. It loses its norm. It is reduced to an abstract 
form, a meaningless catch-word, a shining gem of 
nothingness. 

According to integral philosophy neither thought can be 
derived from existence nor existence can be derived from 
thought. If existence in a sense transcends thought, thought 
also in a sense transcends existence. If thought is dependent 
upon existence in some respect, existence also is dependent 
upon thought in some respect. Both thought and existence 
are closely inter-related modes of manifestation of the cosmic 
creative energy (Sakti) of the timeless Being (Brahman). 

The existing human individual is a unique focalized ex¬ 
pression of Being. The physical basis of his existence is pro¬ 
vided by the highly developed nervous system crowned by 
that specific constellation of neurons known as the cerebrum. 
It is a wonderful instrument of intelligent communication 
with the outside world, an amazingly flexible responsiveness 
to the changing circumstances of life. It is the locus of a 
large variety of unconscious instinctual drives, functional 
dispositions and creative urges. 

But the greatest of all miracles is that the human organism 

is characterized by consciousness. Consciousness (Cit) is 

indeed of the essence of human reality. It is coextensive with 

existence. Descartes was in a sense right in emphasizing con- 

• • 

sciousness as the defining characteristic of the human spirit. 
But his big mistake was the mistake of rationalism which 
equates consciousness with rationality and reflective thinking. 
The truth is that consciousness is a much wider category than 
rational thinking. 


EXISTENTIALISM AND RATIONALISM 


39 


The word consciousness can be accepted as the defining 
characteristic of existence when it is used in a broad com¬ 
prehensive sense including non-reflective as well as reflective 
modes of awareness. Consciousness covers different levels 
of awareness and insight. It implies the intuitive insights 
of the unconscious mind and the purposiveness of instinctual 
drives. It implies the awareness characteristic of dream 
states. It implies the witness consciousness present even 
in the condition of deep sleep. In deep sleep the waking mind 
does indeed go out of action. There may even be little or no 
dream. But still there is a sort of unobjective consciousness. 
That is why after a period of deep dreamless sleep, a person 

is in a position to remark that he had a very peaceful sleep 
which he enjoyed much. 

1 hen there is an element of consciousness in states of swoon 
and hypnosis in drug-induced trance and hallucination 
(e.g. hallucination produced by L.S.D., mescalin, etc.). 
The ordinary waking consciousness is blacked out. Strange 
fascinating experiences may keep pouring in. Or a person 
may find himself tormented by hellish experiences. He may 
feel helplessly in the grip of uncontrollable forces. But still 
deep within himself there is an element of consciousness 
taking note of what is happening. Ancient mythology 
testifies to the presence of this deep-seated witness conscious¬ 
ness in man. In the course of his adventures Ulysses reached 
the charmed island of Circe. His men were converted by 
Ciice into swine. They were absolutely helpless to do any¬ 
thing about this degrading metamorphosis. But still they 
knew what was happening and by virtue of this fact that the 
light of consciousness was kept alive inside them, the hope 

of 1 edernption was not lost. They were again liberated into 
human form. 

I he word consciousness also signifies the light of tran¬ 
scendental consciousness. By the power of consciousness a 



40 


THE PHILOSOPHY OF INTEGRALISM 


man can always make a new unpredictable decision in a new 
situation. He can thus stultify all predictions about his 
behavior pattern. He can rise above the determinism of 
his impulses and instincts. He can also rise above the social 
and political circumstances. With reckless abandon he may 
prefer death to capitulation to the enemy. Thus the self- 
transcending power of consciousness brings to man a bound¬ 
less measure of freedom. 

Consciousness also implies man’s discovery of the spiritual 
dimension of his being. By virtue of consciousness, for all 
his finitude, he can glimpse the reality of the infinite. Despite 
his imperfection, he can envision the glory of perfection, 
for all his transience and contingency of life, he can contact 
the non-temporal basis of existence. However much he may 
be torn by the discords and discrepancies of life, the vision 
comes to him of higher and higher values inspiring him to 
selfless deeds of love and sacrifice at the altar of truth, beauty 
and human welfare. Finally, it is by virtue of consciousness 
that man gains insight into the scheme of cosmic evolution 
of which he is an integral part. He has a deep sense of fulfil¬ 
ment from intelligent cooperation with the creative force of 
evolution. Consciousness thus becomes the most dynamic 
form of self-fulfilment through self-transcendence. It is the 
power of nature brought to self-awareness in man. The 
creativity of nature acquires in him a new dimension of 
self-expression. 

• • 

In the light of the above discussion we are now in a posi¬ 
tion to understand better the mutuality of existence and con¬ 
sciousness. Consciousness depends upon existence, because 
without the evolutionary growth of man’s nervous system 
consciousness as we know it in man would not have come into 
being. It is a unique emergent value. It is a novel charac¬ 
teristic which emerges into being on the perfecting of the 
human cerebral structure. But consciousness also transcends 



EXISTENTIALISM AND RATIONALISM 


41 


existence, because it reveals the cosmic whole as it essentially 
is. It reveals the eternal as it timelessly is. It glimpses the 
grandeur of Being as pure transcendence. It is the vision of 
the eternal which inspires the individual to deeds of sacrifice 
and love. 

On the other hand it may be said that existence is depen¬ 
dent upon consciousness. For man is born not as a finished 
product but as an unfinished task. Animals are bom as fixed 
types of nature. But the human bodv is born as the most 

j 

helpless creature in the world. But it is precisely in this 
weakness that man’s glory lies. His initial helplessness stems 
from the fact that he is born with the most flexible nervous 
system. It can be shaped and moulded in an endless variety 
of ways. It can adjust and readjust itself to most revolution¬ 
ary changes in the environment. In other words, man is 
born with a rich promise and a boundless potential. He is 
born with the freedom to recreate himself in the image of 
perfection he carries in his heart. He is born with a very 
responsible task,—the task of finishing nature’s unfinished 

, _ o 

job. The task of becoming man. Whereas animals are born 
as animals, men are born with the free potentiality of be- 

9 

coming men. And that potentiality is indeed immeasurable. 
Consciousness is awareness of this task, of man’s boundless 
freedom and potentiality. The more consciousness evolves, 
the more existence becomes what it potentially is. 

But existence also in a sense transcends consciousness. 
1 he consciousness of an individual has no doubt the power 
to S° beyond the individual and to cognize the outside world 
and the infinite. But with all this power of going beyond it, 
|t is still the self-transcending characteristic of the existing 
individual. It presupposes the existence of the individual as 
its solid foundation. And paradoxically enough, by virtue of 
this very self-transcending power of consciousness, existence, 
far from being abrogated, is more and more enriched. It 



42 


THE PHILOSOPHY OF INTEGRALISM 


becomes more and more of existence. It becomes more and 
more individuated by its vision of the supra-individual. 
Therefore the perfect individual is he who discovers the 
universal in his life. The richest and most colorful individual 
is he who surrenders to the eternal and learns to refashion 
his whole being in the light of the eternal. 

How can this paradoxical fact be understood? How can 
existence and consciousness which seem to go beyond each 
other be still interdependent facets of the same living indi¬ 
vidual? The paradox of the situation can be comprehended 
when we remember that the individual is, in ultimate ana¬ 
lysis, a unique center of self-expression of Being. Being is on 
the one hand cosmic energy and on the other formless eter¬ 
nity. Man’s concrete nervous system is a specific creation of 
cosmic energy. Consciousness which emerges into being as a 
characteristic of the nervous system reflects the self-lumino¬ 
sity of timeless and formless Being. The self-light of the form¬ 
less Being, when reflected upon the animal level, may be 
called the unconscious. When reflected upon the average 
human brain, it is consciousness. When developed in man to 
the limit of its power, when expanded to the dimensions of 
the universe, it may be called by some such name as cosmic 
consciousness, unitive consciousness, undivided and un¬ 
objective consciousness, etc. But the self-light of the formless 

Being (or the creative void) as it is in itself is an unfa- 

# * 

thomable mystery to which even the word cosmic conscious¬ 
ness would perhaps be inadequate. Whereas consciousness is 
an emergent value, the self-light of the eternal is the 

primordial reality. 

Sri Aurobindo’s word Superconscience 1 is perhaps better 
descriptive of that mysterious self-light of Being. It is the 
source of higher and higher levels of consciousness emerging 

1 Sri Aurobindo, The Life Divine (Pondicherry : Sri Aurobindo Ashram, 
1955), p. 379. 



EXISTENTIALISM AND RATIONALISM 


43 


in the course of inner evolution. In itself it is beyond both 
existence and consciousness. It is beyond both nature and 
spirit. It is beyond both matter and mind. But by virtue of 
cosmic energy—the evolutionary urge of Being—Being is 
manifested in the form of ail manner of dualities. 



CHAPTER V 


Existentialism and Essentialism 


One of the most salient features of man’s rational con¬ 
sciousness is its ability to transcend the sense impressions of the 
passing moment. The animal mind is immersed in the flux 
of sensuous immediacy. Guided by instinct, it responds to the 
stimulus of momentary sense data. But the human mind 
can look beyond the immediacy of sensuous prehension. 
It can grasp universals. It can cognize the common and 
essential characteristics that bind together in a single class 
multitudinous particulars. It can contemplate what Plato 
called archetypal ideas, essences, forms. 

For instance, a dog sensuously apprehends different human 
beings that approach him in their particularity. He is not 
reflectively aware of the qualitative essence characteristic 
of all human beings. Man’s reflective awareness of the 
essence of man liberates him from the particularity of sen¬ 
suous immediacy. It enables him to build up increasing 
knowledge about the behavior patterns of the human race. 
It enables him to extract valuable information from his ex¬ 
periences of the past in human relations. It enables him 
also to anticipate and predict human behavior within cer¬ 
tain limits. 

In short it is the rational comprehension of universal 
essences and forms—of Platonic ideas—which has played a 
significant role in the growth of civilization. It lays the 
foundation for the understanding of causal connections be¬ 
tween phenomena. It initiates chains of reasoning leading 
from the present to the past and the future, from the ob¬ 
served to the unobserved, from the known to the unknown. 
The development of science is ultimately traceable to the 



EXISTENTIALISM AND ESSENTIALISM 


45 


comprehension of pure essences and their inter-relationships. 
Plato’s doctrine of Ideas, modified in some respects, laid the 
ground work for precise formulation of the laws of science. 
Only the essences are no longer conceived in science as 
self-subsistent entities beyond the realm of phenomena. On 
the contrary, they are understood as tools or instruments of 
rational comprehension. They have no reality apart from 
phenomena. They acquire reality by “being ingredient” 
in phenomena or the passage of events, as Whitehead puts it. 

In art also a clear vision of significant forms or structural 
patterns performs a very important function. It is by ar¬ 
ranging a multiplicity of sense impressions within the unity 
of the structural design that the artist creates harmony and 
beauty. The sensuous manifold is the mere chaos. Order is 
brought out of such chaos by the ordering power of some 
significant form that is revealed to the artist’s mind. 

It was the comprehension of universal essences which was 

also responsible for the evolution of thought in religion and 
philosophy. 


Existentialism and Essentialism 

I he concept or essence of matter serves as the unifying 
principle of the whole class of material phenomena. The 
concept or essence of mind serves as the unifying principle of 
the whole class of mental or psychological phenomena. The 
concept or essence of life serves as the unifying principle of 
the whole class of biological phenomena. Now, both reli¬ 
gion and philosophy are motivated by the search for the 
unity beyond all such unities,—for the ultimate unifying 
principle of the entire universe composed of matter, life and 
mind. It is believed that the ultimate unity must be the 
Essence of all essences, the Universal of all universals. Reli¬ 
gion calls it God. Philosophy calls it the Absolute. 



46 


THE PHILOSOPHY OF INTEGRALISM 


In medieval times universals were conceived as self- 
subsistent reals. The sensuous world of actual entities or 
existing particulars was believed derived from the self- 
subsistent realm of eternal Ideas or Essences. Ideas or Es¬ 
sences in turn were believed to be unified in God. God was 
affirmed as the Idea of all Ideas, or as the universal Mind 
to which all Ideas owe their reality and interrelations. Thus 
the notion of God as the self-existent unity of all Ideas pro¬ 
vided the ultimate principle of explanation for the entire 
universe of nature and man. 

Philosophy perceives self-contradiction in the religious 
notion of God. God conceived as a self-existent spiritual 
substance or Person is recognized as a particular entity, 
however omniscient and omnipotent. He ceases to be the 
universal Essence or Idea. He must be in order to function 
as the ultimate unifying principle of the world. He becomes 
a “Primus inter pares”, or “an each among eaches”, as 
William James puts it. Such a God, for all his sovereignty, 
can hardly function as the ultimate principle of unity. 

So philosophy carries its search for unity beyond the 
Personal God of religion. In doing so rationalistic philoso¬ 
phy develops the notion of the Absolute as the systematic 
unity of all Ideas, Forms and Essences. It was given to 
Hegel to draw this conclusion in its logical perfection. The 
Absolute is, in the view of Hegel, Absolute Idea, the organic 
unity of all ideas and categories. Everything in heaven and 
earth can be explained as a mode of objective self-expression 
of the Absolute Idea. Nature is Idea in the form of self¬ 
estrangement. 1 History is the process of accomplishing what 
is in essence eternally accomplished. “The Good, the ab¬ 
solutely Good,...needs not wait upon us, but is already by 
implication, as well as in full actuality, accomplished”. 

1 Hegel, Encyclopedia of Philosophy , Gustav Emil Mueller trans. (New York : 
Philosophical Library, 1959), p. 166. 



EXISTENTIALISM AND ESSENTIALISM 47 

It is an “illusion which makes it seem yet unaccomplished.” 1 

But the Idea of Hegel, however absolute, is no better 
than an abstraction of thought,—the abstraction of all abs¬ 
tractions. It is the most all-inclusive of all abstractions. 
For all its infinitude in the realm of abstraction it has not the 
power to create or explain a single infinitesimal particle 
of matter or process of mind. If the religious notion of 
Personal God errs on the side of particularity, the 
philosophic notion of Absolute Idea errs on the side of 
abstract universality. A personal god is too much of a 
particular existent to serve as the ultimate unifying principle 
of the world. The absolute idea is too much of an abstract 
universal to explain the existence of the actual world. It 

only sums up the categorical features, the structural cha¬ 
racteristics, of the actual world. 

The importance of the present day existentialist move¬ 
ment hes in its rejection of the priority of essence over exis¬ 
tence. All attempts to derive existence from essence are 
oredoomed to failure for the simple reason that existence 
is existence. Existence is irreducible fact incapable of being 
resolved into non-existential terms. “What-is is” as Martin 
Heidegger says.* It cannot be resolved into a complex 
o essences. It cannot be reduced to a tissue of bloodless 
ca egories. The mystery of Being cannot be fathomed in 
erms of concepts and laws, however elaborately formu¬ 
lated. Human reality is not a deterministic scheme It 
transcends all definable laws. It has the freedom to burst 
through all bonds of determinism, social, economical, poli- 
ical and theological. Existential freedom brooks no limita¬ 
tion from any quarter. Neither from the state, nor from the 

T/ " ** 0fHee “ (L ° ndon = Oxford University 
^ **•* «**«**> : Henry Roguery Co., 



48 


THE PHILOSOPHY OF INTEGRALISM 


will of a personal god. That is why tyranny in any form, 
political or theological, sows the seed of its own destruction 
by provoking eventual rebellion or revolution. 

Now the point to be noted here is that every protest move¬ 
ment comits an excess of its own. Existentialism is right 
in pointing out that existence cannot be derived from essence, 
or that the realm of actuality cannot be derived from the 
realm of ideas. Existence precedes essence, as Jean-Paul 
Sartre puts it. But it seems to us that in exposing the cosmo¬ 
logical pretension of essentialism, the existentialist philo¬ 
sopher makes the grievous mistake of ignoring the value of 
of ideas, essences and universals in the structure of reality. 
It is like throwing the baby away with the bath water. 

Let us make the point clear again. Existence cannot cer¬ 
tainly be derived from essence. But at the same time it must 
not be forgotten that essences form a vital factor in the mean¬ 
ing of existence. True, the particular existent is not a mere 
complex of universals or ideas. But at the same time it must 
not be forgotten that ideas provide the key to our under¬ 
standing of the structure of the existing individual in his 
relationship to the universe. They embody the structural 
elements in the scheme of existence. 

Essences or ideas become real only as they are ingredient 
in the actual existence of the world. They are the defining 
characteristics of all objects and events. They are the 
differentiating features of the flux of phenomena. What 
integral philosophy wishes especially to emphasize in this 
connection is that there is an important sense in which 
both essence and existence are unified in the structure of 
Being. They are two inseparable aspects of Being. 

Existing individuals cannot certainly be resolved into 
essences. Nor can they be accepted as ultimately real. They 
are obviously contingent and conditioned. They have a 
beginning in time and an end in time. They derive their 



EXISTENTIALISM AND ESSENTIALISM 


49 


existence from the fruitful combination of other existents. 
And their particularity or individuality is eventually dis¬ 
solved into other modes of existence. 

In ultimate analysis, the particular existents of the world 
may be said to be the offspring of the cosmic creative energy 
of Being. Mountains and rivers, plants and vegetables, 
animals and men, are formed and reformed, are born and 
reborn, out of the cosmic creative energy. The cosmic energy 
is not blind and mechanical. To be sure, it is not to be 
anthropomorphically conceived in the image of man’s ra¬ 
tional consciousness. Nor is it to be mechanistically con¬ 
ceived after the fashion of a man-made machine. There 
seems to be a kind of deep intuitive non-reflective intelligence 
operative in the creative energy of the world. It is guided 
in its creative-functioning by intuitive apprehension of va¬ 
rious possibilities and forms of self-expression. And therein 
lies the ultimate ontological foundation of the Platonic 
doctrine of Ideas or universals. Universals in ultimate 
analysis represent the infinite possibilities inherent in the 
structure of Being. They are reflections in human con¬ 
sciousness of the dynamic potentials of life and existence. 

Thus we see that existence is the concrete expression of 
Being. Essence is the abstract potentiality of Being. Essence 
is not real apart from existence. Prior to actualization in 
existence it is a mere possibility. On the other hand, exis¬ 
tence is meaningless apart from essence. Existence represents 
the actualizing of certain essences, certain potentials, of the 
universal life-force, plus a depth dimension of being beyond 
all essences. Theie is no existence without some recognizable 
characteristics which can be defined in terms of essence 
or idea. But after all the characteristics of an existent have 
been taken note of, there is an indefinable and indeter¬ 
minable dimension which remains beyond all definition. It 
is the depth dimension of the existing individual. This is 

4 



50 


THE PHILOSOPHY OF INTEGRALISM 

where man’s freedom lies. This is where the unfathomable 
mystery of Being lies. This is also the explanation of the 
unpredictable behavior of even a tiny electron, not to speak 
of a highly evolved human individual. The finest spiritual 
achievements of man have been due to his insight into the 
unfathomable mystery of Being. Awareness of the mystery 
of his own existence leads him to the discovery of his rooted¬ 
ness in the vastness of cosmic Being. 

Now, it is not without significance that essences or uni¬ 
versal forms are also called ideas. Essences are the class 
characteristics of different types of object and different 
species of living beings. For instance, the universal of 
tableness or tablehood is the defining essence of all those 
items of furniture known as tables. The universal of dogness 
is the defining essence of the species of animals known as 
dogs. The universal goodness is the defining essence of all 
those modes of conduct which can be considered good. Now 
such definable essences of different types of being are in a 
large measure the result of the defining activity of thought. 
Various essences are not distinguishable without the distin¬ 
guishing activity of the rational mind. They are abstracted 
by reason from the flux of experience. 

So the question now arises : Are not the distinct essences 
or universals colored by the distinguishing activity of 
thought ? Thought is not a mere process of mirroring. It is 
a creative function. In distinguishing definable features of 
reality, it also creates them in a profound sense. Viewed 
from another standpoint, thought distorts and disfigures 
them to some degree. Nothing can remain quite the same 
when it is abstracted or torn out of its own original context 
and transferred from the concrete to the abstract. The 
so-called universal characteristics are one thing when sub¬ 
merged in the flux of experience. They become another 
thing when transferred from the chaotic mass of sense impres- 



EXISTENTIALISM AND ESSENTIALISM 


51 


sions to the rarefied region of conceptual abstraction. 

It follows then that universals like tableness, dogness, 
goodness etc. have a dual aspect. In one aspect they are dis¬ 
tinguishable objective features of reality. In another aspect 
they are products of the distinguishing activity of thought. As 
contemplated by man, they are real-unreal. They are sub¬ 
ject-object determinations. They are different modes of ex¬ 
pression of Being as colored by thinking or knowing. They 
are objective features of reality, subjectively determined. 
If the rationalist is right in emphasizing the objective reality 
of Ideas, the pragmatist is right in stressing their subjective 
aspect and pragmatic validity. It is only in the fitness of 
things that as scientific knowledge expands, our concepts of 
tableness, dogness, goodness, etc. are substantially modified. 

One very important conclusion follows from the above. 
We noted before that essences do not exist apart from the 
concrete world of changing particulars. They are real only 
insofar as they are ingredient in the concrete changing pheno¬ 
mena. Failure to understand this fact gave rise to super- 
naturalistic theology and dualistic metaphysics. Now we 
are in a position to grasp another important truth about 
Ideas. They are not unalterably fixed truths. They are not 
unchanging and unchangeable patterns of perfection. Ideas 
have to be reinterpereted in order to retain their pragmatic 
validity. With the change of social-political structure, with 
the alteration of the intellectual climate, our concepts of 
different types of being, our concepts of war and peace, of 
justice and injustice, of good and evil, have to be remolded. 

That is why in every new age the necessity arises for 
reconstructing our ethical, political and religious ideas about 
essential truths. Our ideas of God, soul and immortality, 
of freedom, justice and equality, have to be recast and re¬ 
interpreted in the changing epochs of history. Every now and 
then the necessity arises in the history of civilization for a 



52 


THE PHILOSOPHY OF INTEGRALISM 


fresh look at our basic notions of truth, beauty, goodness, 
freedom, etc. Those who wish to be rigidly conservative 
under all circumstances, clinging to old ideas as unalterably 
fixed truths, betray a closed mind. They turn a blind eye 
to the challenge of altered situations. They close them¬ 
selves tragically to new vistas of thought and new dimen¬ 
sions of reality. 

The integral outlook reconciles idealism and pragmatism. 
It also reconciles essentialism and existentialism. Essences 
or ideas reflect the objective features of reality. But they are 
also subjectively colored by thought and by the changing 
need of the human psyche. Their value consists in their 
practical usefulness in different circumstances of life. 
Essences thus owe their reality on the one hand to the funda¬ 
mental structure of the universe and on the other to the 
requirements of our practical life. 

Human existence is not void of an essential structure. It 
is not shot out of a pistol. It is in the nature of “supervenient 
perfection” emerging upon a protracted process of evolution. 
Human reality cannot be understood except in terms of its 
organic relationship to evolutionary nature. The creativity 
of nature comes alive with a new organ of articulation in 
man. Organic relationship to nature is thus an essential 
characteristic of human reality. Another essential feature 
of human reality consists in his organic relationship to society. 
Considered apart from his social background, he is a mere 
abstraction. He cannot completely fulfill himself apart 
from his social medium. Still another essential characteristic 
of man is his relationship to the realm of value. He has a 
growing insight into the potentialities of life, and can accord¬ 
ingly set before himself worthy ideals to strive for. 

Man cannot fulfill himself as man by running contrary 
to the essential truths about himself. Freedom divorced 
from such essential truths is an empty and abstract form. 



EXISTENTIALISM AND ESSENTIALISM 


53 


No amount of abstract freedom asserted absolutely or solemn¬ 
ly proclaimed from the housetop can produce any authentic 
value. Nor can it bring fulfilment to the human psyche. 

Let us consider the case of a person who wantonly destroys 

a neighbor’s property for sheer fun of it or poisons his rich 

uncle to get his property. Such behavior may be a pure act 

of freedom but would not make a positive value. On the 

contrary it would be monstrous abuse of freedom, giving 

rise to a reprehensible disvalue. Such essential principles 

as justice, truth, love, etc. can alone provide definite content 

to freedom. Freedom is a value only as an unimpeded and 

unrestrained channel of expression of determinate higher 
values. 

Man gradually becomes man by living in the light of his 
growing insight into the essential structures of his being. 
His existence acquires depth from his actual relationship to 
the realm of objective values. His freedom becomes fruitful 
in proportion to his concern for higher values which are 
objectively rooted in his relationship to the cosmic whole. 

oA 



CHAPTER VI 


The Idea of the Absolute 


The idea of the absolute is fundamental to philosophical 
thinking. It is the central theme of all metaphysical specu¬ 
lation. It is the nisus of inspiration to all ontological quest. 

Just as matter is the key notion of physics, life is the key 
notion of biology, mind is the key notion of psychology, God 
is the key notion of religion, so also the absolute is the key 
notion of philosophy. For, philosophy is essentially an in¬ 
quiry into the essential structure of the universe as a whole. 
The absolute is the universe in its wholeness. It is Being in 
its fullness. It is the all of existence in its allness. 

% 

The Meaning of the Absolute 

“The absolute” essentially means that which is not related 
to anything outside of it. Whatever is related to an external 
entity is finite, relative and conditioned. The absolute'* y 
infinite, all-comprehensive and unconditioned. 

In its positive essence, the absolute is the cosmic whole. 
The cosmic whole is not related to anything external, for 
the simple reason that there is nothing external to it. It is 
the totality of all that is. It is the ultimate ground of all 
being. It is the all-encompassing medium of existence in 
which all things and creatures live, move and have their 
being. Out of which everything arises, and into which every¬ 
thing is dissolved again. 

As all-comprehensive, the absolute is essentially nondual. 

It embraces the one as well as the many. Therefore, it can¬ 
not be identified with either the one or the many. Some phi¬ 
losophers interpret the universe pluralistically, whereas some 



THE IDEA OF THE ABSOLUTE 


55 


interpret it monistically. But both pluralism and monism 
presuppose the notion of the absolute as the cosmic whole. 
Both pluralism and monism are affirmed as absolutely true 
versions of the universe as a whole. They are put forward 
as final truths about the absolute. 

For instance, both Bertrand Russell and William James 
affirm a pluralistic universe. They reject the notion of any 
universal creative principle. But both are trying to say 
something about the universe as a whole. For Russell the 
universe in its primordial essence is the sum total of sense-data 
which are neither material nor mental. Material and mental 
phenomena are different modes of configuration of neutral 
sense-data. Even when material and mental phenomena arc 
differentiated, they do not cease to be sense-data arranged 
and rearranged in various ways. 

Similarly, William James describes the primordial stuff of 
existence as the flux of pure experience. All manner of sensa¬ 
tions and relations intermingle in the structure of pure ex¬ 
perience such as the big booming buzzing confusion” of 
the infant’s mind. With the growth of intellectual faculties, 
different types of sensation and relation are gradually dis- 
tinguished. Mind and matter are different modes of confi¬ 
guration of the multitudinous items of pure experience. As 
among the items of experience there exist all manner of re¬ 
lations such as conjunctions and disjunctions, harmonies 
and discords, attractions and repulsions, etc. Which means 

that the world in which we live is not a symmetrical block 
universe, but a pluralistic scheme. 

But, be it noted here, that a pluralistic scheme is still 
asserted to be an absolute truth about the universe as a whole. 
Had pluralism been an affirmation of truth about only a 
portion of the universe, it would have been only a partial 
truth, subject to radical transformation in the wider context 
of the whole. Pluralism denies the oneness of the universe. 



56 


THE PHILOSOPHY OF INTEGRALISM 


But it is still concerned with the wholeness of the universe. 
It repudiates the substantive character and the centralized 
structure of the absolute. But nonetheless it itself employs 
the notion of the absolute. If further light can be obtained 
regarding the structure of the absolute via experiences other 
than sensuous observation and scientific thinking, pluralism 
can have no reasonable objection to that. That is why we 
find that in his “Varieties of Religious Experience”, William 
James, by virtue of his sterling quality of open-mindedness, 
seems willing to accept a non-temporal dimension of reality 
transcending both unity and plurality, conjunction and 
disjunction. The reality of such a nontemporal dimension 
of Being seems to be the unequivocal testimony of the pro- 
foundest religious experiences of mankind. 

Now, in contrast with pluralism, monism offers a monistic 
interpretation of the cosmic whole. It identifies the whole 
as one universal creative principle. It proceeds to derive the 
plurality of phenomena from that principle of creative unity. 
From the standpoint of pure intellect, it is extremely difficult 
to decide whether the monistic interpretation is true or not. 
It may be true. But again it may not be true. In the absence 
of verification in terms of universal experience, monism is, 
logically speaking, a mere hypothesis. It has a great emo¬ 
tional appeal. It has a good deal of religious importance. 
But it is necessarily a big question mark in rational thinking. 

In any event, let us repeat, even when monism is rejected 
as a cosmological theory, that does not amount to a rejection 
of the idea of the absolute. We have seen that pluralism 
presupposes the notion of the absolute no less than monism. 
Only, monism adds something more to the notion of the 
absolute. It adds the concept of the One as creator of the ^ 
Many. It identifies the absolute as the One. Such an identifi¬ 
cation may perhaps be vindicated on the basis of religious and 

• • 

mystical experience. But it is also possible that the monistic 



THE IDEA OF THE ABSOLUTE 


57 


conception of the absolute as the One is only an “Idea of 
Reason”, to use an expression of Immanuel Kant. It may be 
just a speculative ideal, an heuristic maxim for our intel¬ 
lectual operations, but not an objective reality. On intellectual 

grounds, one can never be quite sure of the truth of the 
monistic hypothesis. 

But regardless of the truth or falsity of the monistic hypo¬ 
thesis, the concept of the absolute stands. It is the all-compre¬ 
hensive existence-total. Phenomenologically, this total is the 
unity of all phenomena. Theistically interpreted, it is God, 
the creator of all phenomena. Pantheistically, it is the un¬ 
derlying spiritual substance and ground of all phenomena. 

The idea of the absolute is to be found in scientific think¬ 
ing as well as in mystical testimony. Science envisages the 
absolute as the vast space-time continuum within which worlds 
without number are formed, broken and re-formed. Or, the 
absolute may be posited as that unified field of energy within 
which gravitational as well as electro-magnetic phenomena 
are controlled by some ultimate uniform laws. 

Mystical experience reveals the absolute as the one all- 
encompassing ocean of consciousness. Or, it may even go 
deeper and posit the absolute as the boundless void, the 
nameless nondual, which gives birth to the conscious as 
well as the unconscious, to the real as well as the unreal. 

Integral philosophy reconciles science and mysticism. It 
conceives of the absolute as the dynamic Being, of which the 
space-time continuum is the medium of self-expression. It is 
t e unified field of energy, which is non-temporal in its 
depth dimension. It is the limitless matrix, out of which 
the material and the spiritual evolve as closely interrelated 
processes. Also emerge from it in the course of evolution 
such gradations of its self-manifestation as the unconscious, 
the conscious and the superconscious. 

Now, inherent in the structure of the absolute or the uni- 



58 


THE PHILOSOPHY OF INTEGRALISM 


verse as a whole there are some interrelated forces. A crea¬ 
tive urge, a sustaining power, and a destructive impulse co¬ 
exist within the absolute. The Hindu trinity of Brahma, 
Visnu and f^tuclr^i is a religious way of representing these 
interrelated forces in the structure of Being. Phenomeno¬ 
logically speaking, these concepts are descriptive of such 
obvious and introvertible processes of life as birth, growth 
and death, creation, survival and destruction. A philoso¬ 
pher is under no obligation to visualize such processes as 
activities of one infinite substance or first cause such as God. 
The idea of God as one universal creative Mind is bound 
to remain always a mere article of faith and an unverifiable 
hypothesis. But it is part of the task of philosophy to make it 
clear that creation, existence, and destruction are inter¬ 
twined processes inherent in the structure of reality. They 
are processes continuously going on within the compre¬ 
hensive unity of the cosmic whole. This is a fundamental 
truth about reality which is beyond all doubt and dispute. 

It is evident from the above that the absolute is nondual 
(advaita) in more than one sense. It is nondual insofar as it 
embraces both conjunctions and disjunctions, harmonies and 
discords, unities and pluralities, as indubitable facts of expe¬ 
rience. It is also nondual insofar as it embraces both physical 
and psychical phenomena, matter and mind, nature and 
spirit, unconscious and conscious, as interrelated processes 
of our experience-continuum. Furthermore, it is nondual 
insofar as it embraces both creation and destruction, birth 
and death, as interrelated processes in the cosmic flow. 

Having clarified the meaning of the absolute as the key 
concept of philosophy, we are now in a position to undertake 
a brief survey of some of the representative theories regarding 

the distinctive character of the absolute. 

The absolute has indeed been conceived in widely divergent 
ways. Consequent upon wide differences of approach, we 



THE IDEA OF THE ABSOLUTE 


59 


have the physical absolute, the vital absolute, the mental 
absolute, and the mystical or spiritual absolute. According 
to the integral viewpoint, different theories of the absolute are 
different perspectives of the same multi-dimensional Being. 
They are different modes of interpretation of the essence of 
ultimate reality. But like blind men’s conflicting versions of 
the same elephant, they represent partial and fragmentary- 
truths regarding sundered aspects of the same Being. 

The Physical Absolute (Armani Brahmaii) 

Materialism is inspired by the notion of the physical 
absolute. In its view, the universe in its primordial essence 
is matter. Matter is the ground of all existence. All things 
including plants, animals and men are born out of matter, 
sustained by matter, and dissolved again into matter. 
Matter contains, as Tyndall says, “the promise and potency 
of the whole of terrestrial life.” 

Now, what is matter ? Descartes defined it as that abso¬ 
lutely unconscious substance which is the polar opposite 
of mind. So the physical absolute may be conceived as the 
one infinite unconscious substance which gives rise to all the 
things and beings of the world. Or, it may be conceived 
as an infinity of further irreducible, unconscious particles 
of substance called atoms. Some believe that these atoms, 
each self-existent and self-contained, were originally whirl- 
ing through infinite space, jostling with one another, com¬ 
bining and re-combining to form all manner of complex 
structures. 

Today, the notion of material substance as the unchanging 
and unchangeable substratum of physical phenomena has 
been rejected as a trans-empirical concept. We always per¬ 
ceive change. The unchanging is an illusion of intellect. 
We always perceive phenomena. Any mysterious substance 



60 


THE PHILOSOPHY OF INTEGRALISM 


behind phenomena is an unnecessary hypothesis. 

Modern physics has also established that electrons which 
are essential components of atoms, are no more particles 
than waves. They behave sometimes like waves and some¬ 
times like particles. However contradictory it may sound, 
they are “wavicles”, i. e., both waves and particles. Which 
suggests that the whole conception of electron is only a 
mental picture of some unknown force which is unpredictable 
in behavior. 

In modern science, the former dualism of mass and motion 
has been resolved into the monistic conception of energy. 
In his Special Theory of Relativity, Albert Einstein demon¬ 
strates the equivalence of matter and energy. While motion 
is kinetic energy, mass is potential energy. The energy that 
slumbers in mass can be released. But are there not radically 
different types of energy ? On the one hand, there are gra¬ 
vitational forces. On the other, there are such electro¬ 
magnetic forces as light, heat, X-rays, radio-waves, gamma 
rays, etc. Gravitational phenomena are reduced by Einstein 
to a geometrical property of the space-time continuum. But 
electro-magnetic phenomena are explained by Max Planck 
in terms of the concept of energy-quanta, i.e., discrete units 
of energy. Thus there seems to exist an abysmal gulf between 
the gravitational phenomena of outer space and the electro¬ 
magnetic phenomena of atomic energy. 

In his Unified Field Theory, which is the final triumph of 
Einstein’s creative genius, he bridges the gulf. He catches a 
glimpse of the unified structure of the universe. He shows 
how gravitational electro-magnetical phenomena are insepa¬ 
rably related to each other. They are unified within one 
basic superstructure of universal law. They are interrelated 
modes of manifestation of one all-encompassing energy- 
field. 

Another interesting form in which the physical absolute 



THE IDEA OF THE ABSOLUTE 


61 


has been conceived in recent times is that of Space-Time. 
Professor S. Alexander has conceived of Space-Time as one 
infinite and continuous whole, of which Space may be meta¬ 
phorically described as the body, and Time as the mind . 1 
Space and time are not to be regarded as the forms of any 
ontologically prior substance such as matter. Space-Time 
itself is the most fundamental stuff of which all things, whe¬ 
ther as substances or under any category, are made . 2 It is 
envisaged as one all-encompassing system of motion within 
which different empirical existents are differentiated as 
different complexes of motion. Material objects, plants 
and vegetables, different species of animals, human beings, 
etc. form a graded hierarchy of qualitative differences 
emerging from the evolutionary movement of Space-Time. 
Space-Time is essentially impregnated with a creative nisus. 
Evolution is the outcome of the creative urge inherent in 
Space-Time. Matter, life, mind, spirit, etc. are the emer¬ 
gent offspring of that creative urge. 


The Vital Absolute (Prana Brahman ) 

Vitalism is inspired by the concept of the absolute as one 
universal life-force. Henri Bergson is a forceful exponent of 
the vitalistic position. In his view, the universe in its primor¬ 
dial form is not matter, but life. Not physical energy but vital 
impulse, the elan vital. Static matter is an illusion of intellect. 
The intellect, which is a tool of our practical life needs static 
positions from which to move. It needs halting stations where 
to rest in the course of life’s movement. And it also needs 
satisfactory destinations for which to strive. So by virtue of 


1934) Ale *g nder ’ S P ace > Time and Deity* Vol. II (London : 

2 S. Alexander, Space, Time and Deity , Vol. I (London • 
1927) p. 341. V * 


Macmillan & Co., 
Macmillan & Co., 



62 


THE PHILOSOPHY OF INTEGRALISM 


its built-in cinematographic mechanism it takes immobile 
snapshots of the mobility of the real. Matter represents 
these static snapshots. No wonder then that intellect should 
be perfectly at home in the realm of matter. But it misses 
the living mobility of ultimate reality. 

Whereas Alexander starts with Space-Time, Bergson 
starts with Time. Time is the absolutely free principle of 
creativity. In its creation of ever-new forms and qualities, 
it is not determined either mechanistically or teleologically. 
Life is the spontaneous creativity of time. Space is only the 
trajectory of time’s free movement. It is the external appear¬ 
ance of the mobility of time. 

Reality then is time, change, movement. Life represents 
the forward movement of reality making itself. Matter 
represents the backward movement of reality already made 
and then unmaking itself. Let us say reality is like a fire¬ 
works display. Matter would then be like ‘‘black cinders 
of the spent rockets that are falling dead '’. 1 Life would then 
be the upward movement of fresh rockets blazing a fiery 
path across those black cinders. 

Life is an unconscious principle of creativity. Mind, spirit, 

etc. progressively evolve in the course of the creative pro¬ 
cess. The highest spiritual ideal consists in active co-opera¬ 
tion with the creative force of evolution. The meaning of 
God is to be found in the creativity of the “original impetus 

of life ”. 2 


The Mental Absolute (Manas Brahman ) 

Much of religious idealism is inspired by the concept ol 
the absolute as one universal mind, called God. Mind with 

1 Henri Bergson, Arthur Mitchell trans., Creative Evolution (London : M ac 

millan & Co., 1920) p. 264. 

2 Ibid., p. 92. 



THE IDEA OF THE ABSOLUTE 


63 


its superior attribute of consciousness is a richer category. 

1 he attempt therefore to derive mind from either matter or 

life amounts to producing something out of nothing. It is 

a violation of the fundamental maxim of thought: Ex nihilo 
nihil fit. 

Both materialism and vitalism, according to religious 

idealism, commit the fallacy of hysteron proteron , i.e., putting 

the cart before the horse. The concepts of both matter and 

life, as we understand them, presuppose the reality of the 

understanding mind. Perception and understanding make 

them what they are. In other words, they presuppose the 

mind of which perception and understanding are essential 

functions. Not the mind of any particular human being, but 

the universal mind which functions through different finite 
spirits. 


So it is the universal mind, that is God, to which both 
matter and life owe their existence. The universal mind 
me udes in lts connotation being plus energy plus intelli¬ 
gence. So matter and life can be derived from it. But neither 

matter nor life, none of which is endowed with intelligence 
can possibly create the intelligent mind. 

Now the universal mind is usually conceived in dualistic 
terms, because mind is essentially dualistic in thinking Reli¬ 
gion posits the universal mind as the mind of a sovereign 
Being known as God, who is extra-cosmic and transcendent 
in chaacter. The world of nature and man, created by God 
.Relieved to exist outside of Him as the object of His paternal 


But the notion of an extra-cosmic universal mind is for 
obvious reasons philosophically untenable. The sovereign 
md insofar as it is over and above the imperfect world § is 
limited by the external existence of the world. So for al 
ns sovereign power it ceases to be the absolute. Moreover by 
reason of its existence in space outside of the world of 



64 


THE PHILOSOPHY OF INTEGRALISM 


matter, it ceases to be spiritual in the strict sense of the 
term. 


The Absolute as Supermind (Vijhanam Brahman) 

Spiritual nondualism is inspired by the concept of the 
absolute as Supermind. The supermind is the sovereign 
dynamism of ultimate reality. It is the creative light of 
Being. It is the all-embracing consciousness, nondualistic 
in structure. 

The supermind originates and unifies both matter and 
mind, even though it is radically different from both in cha¬ 
racter and mode of operation. In ultimate analysis, neither 
mind is derived from matter, nor matter is derived from 
mind. Matter and mind are relative to each other. They 
presuppose each other. They are involved in each other. 
If matter is the physical support for mental operations, 
mind is the organizing principle in the organization of 
matter. Both of them owe their existence to a higher creative 
principle. They are different grades of manifestation of 
Being through the creativity of the supermind. 

The supermind embraces and unifies both the conscious 
and the unconscious. Rational consciousness cannot be 
derived solely from unconscious mentality. Nor can the 
unconscious mind be explained as a kind of rational intelli¬ 
gence which has “collapsed into immediacy”. The uncon¬ 
scious and the conscious are different grades of manifestation 
of Being through the creativity of the supermind. In the 
course of evolution, that is, the progressive self-manifesta¬ 
tion of Being, the unconscious, the conscious and the super¬ 
conscious appear as more and more luminous reflections 
within the evolving organism of the self-light of Being. 

The supermind transcends and yet unifies the one and the 
many. The one and the many interprenetrate in the concrete 



THE IDEA OF THE ABSOLUTE 


65 


texture of the universe. Being is to be identified neither with 
the one nor with the many. It is an infinitely rich principle 
of unity-in-plurality and plurality-in-unity. The manifold¬ 
ness of the world cannot be reduced to a mere illusion of 
perception. Nor can the unity of existence be reduced to a 
mere illusion of intellect. In the organismic structure of the 
world there is an all-pervasive presence of each in all and 
all in each. The uniqueness of existing individual things 
and beings is no less an important aspect of life than their 
impregnable togetherness in the cosmic whole. 

The supermind does not exist over and above the world. 

It embraces the entire universe within its comprehensive 

unity, rheic is no ontological gulf separating the universe 

from the supermind. The universe of countless solar systems 

and galaxies exists like a string of islands within the limitless 

ocean of Being of which the supermind is the dynamic self¬ 
luminosity. 


The Absolute as Spirit (Anandam Brahman) 

A single ray from the supermind can afford us a glimpse 
of the absolute as spirit. Which means that such spiritual 
values as truth, beauty and goodness, love, joy and freedom, 
are objectively rooted in the structure of Being. They are 
not merely elements of man's wishful thinking. They are the 
secret driving forces in the process of cosmic evolution. 
They are the values that set the direction in which the world 
is moving. They represent the hidden potentialities of life 
The supreme reality is the unity of such values. 

All intrinsic values can be summed up in the concept of 
bliss ( dnanda ). Bliss is the experience of such absolute values 
as truth, beauty, justice, love, freedom, etc. It is the practice 
of such values. It is the actual fulfilment of such values 
Bliss is pure existence. To exist is to experience joy. And to 



66 


THE PHILOSOPHY OF INTEGRALISM 


experience joy is to continue to exist. Bliss is also pure con¬ 
sciousness. To exist is to be aware,—to be aware of thing’s 

as they are. And to be aware of things as they are is the 
glory of existence. 

So the absolute is now revealed as pure existence, pure 
consciousness, and pure joy. It is the indivisible unity of 
these absolute values. It is Saccidananda, i.e., existence- 
knowledge-bliss. In a very important sense, existence and 
knowledge are attributes of bliss. As the Upanisad says, 1 the 
world with its endless variations springs into existence out of 
the fullness of joy. All existing things abide in joy. They are 
also fulfilled in joy. So the absolute is the fullness of joy. 
It is that fullness of joy which sustains every creature in his 
self-existence, inspires him in his self-expression, and com¬ 
pletes him in his self-fulfilment. 


The .Absolute as Indeterminable Being (Nirguria Brahman) 

Having perceived the significance of Spirit (Saccidananda) 
as a key to the understanding of the absolute, critical intelli¬ 
gence is likely to discover that even Spirit is not the last 
word. Consciousness and bliss, or love, joy, beauty, truth, 
etc. are, after all, human experiences. They are in the last 
analysis, anthropomorphic notions. In characterizing the 
absolute in terms of such notions, the human mind does 
indeed reach the highest limit of its ability to fathom the 
mystery of Being. But the absolute is higher than the 
highest (paratpara). It cannot be equated with anthropo¬ 
morphic notions or with any construction of the human 
intellect. Such notions do certainly afford us a profound 
insight into the structure of Being. But they can hardly be 
said to exhaust the mystery of Being. That is why when an 
authentic mystic is truly admitted into the mystery of Being, 

1 'faittirlya Upanifad, III.6.1. 


THE IDEA OF THE ABSOLUTE 


67 


transcending the furthest bounderies of the human mind, 
he becomes speechless. He finds his experience to be abso¬ 
lutely incommunicable. He realizes the supreme truth as 
the great Silence. (Santam Brahman). 

So the great Buddha characterized the ultimate mystery 
of Being as Emptiness (Sunyata). Sankara characterized 
it as Formlessness (Nirgunata). Meister Eckhart describes 
it as the absolute nudity of pure Being”. Berdyaev calls 
it “the ineffable Nothingness”. 1 


A direct encounter with the ultimate mystery of Being 
introduces a spiritual seeker to the pure nontemporal di¬ 
mension of existence. He beholds that aspect of Being which 
Sri Aurobindo designates as supra-cosmic Transcendence. 2 
From the standpoint of that transcendental experience, the 
world of space-time appears at the beginning as a realm of 
shadows. Or it may appear as valueless impermanence 
(tuccha), or as objective unreality (bhavarupa mithya). 

When the splendour of mystic illumination hits the eye 
of the soul, one is much too dazzled for a while to see the 
world any more. After a while when the world is seen again, 
it appears for some time as an objective unreality, as an 
illusory shadow-show. It takes a good deal of time for the 
dazzling light of mystic experience to be fully integrated 
into the maturing personality. It requires indeed the matu¬ 
rity of complete self-integration to appreciate fully the reality 
and intrinsic value of the world—the world of space, time 

and manifold individuality—as a field of ever-new creation 
and value-emergence. 

Until the complete integration of personality is attained, 
the true spirit of creative fellowship with the Supreme can- 


books, iC i°957^^07 ^ ^ ** (New York : Hai pcr Torch- 

p 2 4 | riAurobindo - The Life Divine (Pondicherry : Sri Aurobindo Ashram, 1960) 



68 


THE PHILOSOPHY OF INTEGRALISM 


not develop. On the contrary, a mystic might be inclined to 
maintain an attitude of indifference to the world, or an atti¬ 
tude of pity and condescension. The attitude of indifference 
holds forth the ideals of stoicism, asceticism, and monastic- 
ism as the most exalted modes of spiritual living. The atti¬ 
tude of pity prompts a career of patronizing social service 
imbued with the idea of the utter vanity, worthlessness or 
unreality of the world, or the abysmal sinfulness of life. Both 
of these attitudes of indifference and pity are rooted in a 
world-and-life-negating outlook. They stem from excessive 
pre-occupation with the exclusive reality of the eternal. 
They betray a lack of understanding of the ontological 
significance of time. So long as the reality of Nature and 
the glory of life are not fully appreciated, so long as the 
dynamic presence of the eternal in time is not adequately 
grasped, there can hardly be any full participation in life 
and society with a view to transforming this very world— 
the natural world of war and peace, of hatred and love—into 
a better image of the absolute. 


CHAPTER VII 


The Integral View of the Absolute 


Integral nondualism is based upon the concept of the Abso¬ 
lute as fullness (purnam), as multi-dimensional Being, as 
the integral whole. 

The absolute as the integral whole comprises the natural, 
the supernatural, and the eternal. 

Naturalism affirms the world of matter, life and mind as 
the absolute. It rejects the notion of the supernatural. It 
rejects also the reality of the eternal. It considers the objec¬ 
tive world of perceptive experience, the natural order of 
processes and events, as the one absolute reality. 

Supernaturalism is animated by a glimpse of the eternal. 
But it misconstrues the eternal and, in consequence, makes 
two grievous mistakes. First, it drives the wedge of onto¬ 
logical dualism between the natural and the supernatural 
orders. It violates the indivisibility of Being. The truth is 
that both Nature (apara prakrti) and Supernature (para 
prakrti) are closely interrelated and inter-penetrating modes 
of manifestation of the same Being. Nature is the materialized 
orm of expression of Supernature. And Supernature is the 
subtler mode of operation of Nature. Both Nature and 

Supernature are intertwined modes of operation of the same 
creative energy (Sakti) of Being. 

Secondly, supernaturalism often makes the mistake of 
equating the eternal with the supernatural. It thus fails to 
grasp the inmost essence of the eternal as the timeless dimen¬ 
sion of existence. The supernatural is an exalted mode 
of existence in time. It is imagined as an extension of exis¬ 
tence—a kind of etherealized and idealized existence— 
beyond the grave. But however etherealized, protracted 



70 


THE PHILOSOPHY OF INTEGRALISM 


and beatified, it is nonetheless in time and therefore termi¬ 
nable in time. That is why, according to Vedanta, existence 
in heaven is believed to terminate as soon as one’s religious 
merit is exhausted through enjoyment. Existence in heaven 
(swarga)is, therefore, not the ultimate goal, but only a passing 
phase of one’s evolution toward the ultimate goal, namely 
union with the true eternal (moksa). The eternal can be 
realized here and now in this very natural order. For, that 
which is essentially timeless pervades all the moments of 
time. It is not an attribute of the future. It is eternal now. 

Exclusive mysticism goes to the other extreme, and ex¬ 
cludes from ultimate reality both the natural and the su¬ 
pernatural. It overstresses the reality of the eternal to the 
extent of de-realizing the space-time continuum. It over¬ 
emphasizes the spiritual to the extent of denouncing the 
value and reality of the material. It glorifies mystic expe¬ 
rience to the extent of undermining the will to live 
and the impulse to participate in the creative adventure 
of life. 


The Absolute as Multi-dimensional Being 

The truth is that Being is multi-dimensional. The absolute 
is multi-dimensional Being. The natural, the supernatural, 
and the eternal, are different dimensions of the same indi¬ 
visible Being. The eternal is not the negation of time. It 
contains within itself the creativity of time. The world- 
process is time in its creative flow. The natural and the 
supernatural are different modes of manifestation of time s 
creative urge. 

In its inmost essence Being is indeed indeterminable 
(Nirguna). For, whatever is determinate including the Deity 
is a Being, not Being as such. But the term “indeterminable 
is not to be understood negatively as an incapacity to produce 


THE INTEGRAL VIEW OF THE ABSOLUTE 71 

determinations . 1 On the contrary, it has to be comprehended 
positively as the boundless and inexhaustible energy in 
endless varieties of determinate modes of existence, and yet 
to remain full and infinite (purnam). That which is truly 
indeterminable is in its positive essence the creative source of 
endless determinations. That which is truly formless is, in 
its positive essence, the inexhaustible source of limitless 
forms. Indeterminable Being is indeed one with infinite 
energy. Siva is one with Sakti. Sakti is not an attribute of 
Siva, nor is Siva an appendage to Sakti. Siva and Sakti, 
existence and energy, are two inseparable aspects of the same 
Being. Just as the existence of fire and the burning capacity 
of fire are one and the same thing. 


The Absolute as the Psycho-Cosmic Continuum 

The absolute is the integral whole not only in the sense 
that it is the totality ol all objective phenomena. The objec¬ 
tive total, the cosmic panorama, is only one aspect of Being. 
It is relative to the subject which knows, just as the subject 
is relative to the object which is known. The cosmic order is 
as much relative to the psyche,—to the ordering and uni¬ 
fying power of the psyche,—as the psyche is relative to the 
cosmos,—to the function of the cosmos as its sustaining me¬ 
dium. Subject and object interpenetrate in the structure of 
Being. The absolute is, therefore, to use a term of Karl Jas¬ 
pers,* “the Comprehensive”, in which the dichotomy of 
su ject and object is dissolved. It is the psycho-cosmic con¬ 
tinuum from which psyche and cosmos, for all their differ- 
cntiation, cannot break away. 

p.*376 AUr0bind0,r ^ L ^ D ' W '“ (POndich ' rry : SriAur °b>ndo Ashram, I960; 
p > 3 Kart Jaspers, Way to Wisdom (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1954) 



72 


THE PHILOSOPHY OF INTEGRALISM 


In a full understanding of the absolute, affirmation has to 
be followed by negation, and negation again must be fol¬ 
lowed by deeper affirmation. In one’s search for the absolute, 
one has first of all to push beyond the barriers of superficial 
observation and isolating imagination. Rigorously follow¬ 
ing the path of negation, one has to reject the claims of 
matter, life, mind, etc. to be the absolute. They represent 
delimited or abstracted areas of experience. They signify 
fragmentary aspects of Being. So, none of them can be 
exalted to the rank of the absolute. The absolute in its essen¬ 
tial structure must transcend all determinate modes of exis¬ 
tence in order to creatively embrace them all. 

But having gained an insight into the pure and tran¬ 
scendent essence of Being, our attention has once more to be 
directed to the concrete fullness of Being. Within the frame¬ 
work of our comprehensive truth-vision, matter, life, mind, 
etc. have again to be affirmed, not in their superficial ap¬ 
pearance, but in their essential structure. They would now 
fall into their right place as the richly diversified content of 
Being. They would now be understood as inter-related 
factors in the creativity of Being. 

Being in its inmost essence is not matter, not life, not mind, 
not reason, etc. But from that the conclusion is not to be 
drawn that any of them is unreal. Negatives must be supple¬ 
mented by affirmatives. Superficial affirmation needs to be 
corrected by negation. But that negation must again be 
negated in total and integrated affirmation. The essence of 
wisdom lies in one’s ability to say that Being is matter, Being 
is life, Being is mind, Being is reason, etc. without committing 
the fallacy of false equation. The true absolute ‘"takes all re¬ 
lativities in its embrace.” 1 It is because the absolute is nothing 
in particular that it can produce everything in its full glory. 

1 Sri Aurobindo, The Life Divine (Pondicherry : Sri Aurobindo Ashram, 
1960) p. 384. 


THE INTEGRAL VIEW OF THE ABSOLUTE 


73 


The Absolute as the Ground of all Existence and Value 

When the word existence is used to mean the finite and 
contingent existence of an individual, the absolute is beyond 
both existence and non-existence. Both existing things and 
non-existing facts and ideas are embraced within the unity of 
the absolute. But there is a sense in which the absolute may 
be characterized as infinite existence, provided that sense is 
carefully noted. It is infinite existence not in the sense that 
it is an infinite self-existent substance. That would be an 
intellectual construction resulting from the application of 
the human category of substance-quality. That would be 
an interpretation of Being, and not Being as such. Nor can 
the absolute be said to be infinite existence in the sense that 
existence is an immutable Platonic Idea that shines in a 
heavenly abode. Existence is no Idea or complex of Ideas. 
As the ground of all Ideas, it has ontological priority over 
them. Ideas are mere abstractions of thought apart from 
existence. They are real only as possibilities inherent in the 
structure of Being. They become valid only by virtue of 
‘ingression” 1 in actual phenomena. 

The absolute can be said to be infinite existence only in 
the sense that it is the ground of all existing things which 
emerge from it and again get dissolved in it. Truly speaking, 
the absolute is no existent, not even an infinite existent, but 
the source and ground of all existence. 

It is in the same way that we have to understand the 
meaning of infinite consciousness, infinite love, etc. The 
absolute is not an infinite substance endowed with the attri¬ 
bute of consciousness. That would make the absolute a 
product of human categorizing or rational interpretation. 
AH conscious substances are related to consciousness in the 

Alfred North Whitehead, Process and Reality (New York : Harper & 
Brothers, Harper Torchhooks, 1960). p. 34. 



74 


THE PHILOSOPHY OF INTEGRALISM 


same way that all material objects are related to space. 
Material objects are in essence particular configurations of 
events which are differentiated within the matrix of one 
infinite space or energy-field. Likewise, conscious subs¬ 
tances are particular configurations of events which are 
differentiated within the matrix of one infinite and undivided 
consciousness (nirvibhaga citi) or existence-field. 

Nor can the absolute be said to be infinite consciousness in 
the sense that it is an immutable Platonic Idea or Essence of 
consciousness shining in an eternal abode. The Idea of 
consciousness is an abstraction of thought, whereas con¬ 
sciousness is the presupposition of all thinking. The Essence 
of consciousness is an object of reason, whereas consciousness 
is the prius of all reasoning. The Idea or Essence of con¬ 
sciousness is real only as a possibility inherent in the structure 
of Being. Whenever suitable empirical conditions arise, 
Being is manifested in the form of a conscious being, a spiri¬ 
tual entiry. So, the absolute can be said to be infinite 
consciousness only in the sense that it is the ground of all 
conscious being. As creatures evolve in respect of their 
inward refinement and receptivity to the glory of Being, they 
become more and more conscious. 

Similarly, the absolute is not infinite love in the sense that 
it is an infinite substance endowed with universal love. That 
would de-absolutize the absolute, reducing it to “an each 
among caches”, a Primus inter pares. Hateful creatures 
would fall outside of the life of the absolute. We shall be 
back to the deistic conception of a Loving Deity presiding 
over sinful creatures who take delight more in hatred than 
in love. Moreover, by virtue of our wishful thinking the 
absolute would be transformed into an anthropomorphic 
Being, fashioned after the image of man. 

The absolute cannot also be said to be infinite love in the 
sense that it is the Idea or Essence of universal love. The 


THE INTEGRAL VIEW OF THE ABSOLUTE 


75 


Idea of love is a mere abstraction of thought apart from 
actual love relations. It is real only as a possibility inherent 
in the structure of Being. 

The absolute can be characterized as infinite love only in 
the sense that it is the ground and source of all love relations. 
Whenever a person acts, thinks and lives in harmony with 
the structure of Being, he experiences love in his heart. And 
in the depth of his love he experiences the absolute. On the 
contrary, whenever a person lives out of tune with the struc¬ 
ture of Being, or in violation of his relationship with the 
absolute, he experiences hatred. And in hatred he expe¬ 
riences his alienation from Being, from the ground of his own 
existence. 


Truth , Beauty and Goodness 

The absolute is the ultimate ground of all such values as 
truth, beauty and goodness. They are relational, not in¬ 
trinsic characteristics of the absolute. Truth is the absolute 
insofar as it is known or unveiled. Beauty is the absolute in¬ 
sofar as it is felt or immediately perceived in sense-impres¬ 
sions. Goodness is the absolute insofar as it is expressed in 
integrated actions. In other words, the absolute is truth as 
the harmony of thoughts and ideas. The absolute is beauty 
as the harmony of feelings and sensations. The absolute is 
goodness as the harmony of desires and actions. 

Let us further clarify the matter with specific reference 
to truth. What will be found to be true with regard to truth 
will also apply to the other values. 

Truth is the absolute qua known or revealed to the mind. 
It is, therefore, to use a suggestive phrase of Professor 
Alexander, 1 “a subject-object determination”. It is the value 

, ‘ ^ A1 ?r der ’ Space ’ Time and Deity ' VoL 11 ( London : Macmillan & Co. 



76 


THE PHILOSOPHY OF INTEGRALISM 


that emerges from the mind’s contact with the absolute. 
Now, the mind’s contact with the absolute, is knowledge,— 
very essential knowledge. Truth is therefore the object of 
knowledge. 

But human knowledge is always by its very nature rela¬ 
tive. It is what the knowing mind gains by contemplating 
Being under certain circumstances from a certain standpoint. 
In thus contemplating Being it is always a particular aspect, 
characteristic, or dimension of Being which is revealed at a 
given time. Truth as an object of knowledge is, therefore, 
always a definite perspective of Being. It can hardly be abso¬ 
lutely equated with the absolute. In transcending the 
knowcr-known distinction, the absolute transcends truth. 
That is why Kena Upanisad says : “If thou thinkest that 
thou knowest It well, little indeed dost thou know the form 
of the Brahman.” 1 But yet the absolute is not unknown and 
unknowable, as Agnosticism would have us believe. Because 
the absolute is increasingly unveiled in respect of its various 
aspects in the gradual expansion of our knowledge. In its 
essence, the absolute is immediately encountered in our 
intuitive realization or nondualistic experience. The abso¬ 
lute is not to be identified with any object of knowledge. 
But it is the all-inclusive basis of the knower-known distinc¬ 
tion. It is the ground of all knowledge. It is the ground of 
all true judgements and propositions. When a person makes 
a statement in which some aspect of Being is revealed, his 
statement is true to that extent. If his statement is out of 
tune with the intended aspect of Being, it is false. 

Now, we are in a position to say that truth is a mode of 
manifestation of the absolute. It is identical with the abso¬ 
lute in the sense that it is the absolute as unveiled. It is differ¬ 
ent from the absolute on the ground that whereas it is a 

1 Sri Aurobindo, Kena Upanisad (Pondicherry : Sri Aurobindo Ashram, 
1952) p. 5. 


THE INTEGRAL VIEW OF THE ABSOLUTE 


77 


definite object of knowledge, the absolute which is in essence 
indeterminable transcends the subject-object polarization. 

What unmistakably follows from the above is that all 
humanly known truth is essentially relative. All humanly 
known religious dogmas, philosophical doctrines, and 
political ideologies are only relatively true. They are valid 
and useful under certain circumstances and for certain pur¬ 
poses. But none of them can be absolutely valid for all times 
and for all peoples. An unconscious identification of any 
definitely formulated truth with the absolute is the prolific 
source of dogmatism, fanaticism, ideological aggressiveness, 
and holy crusades. 

A clear understanding of the relativity of all humanly 
known truths is an essential condition of abiding world peace. 
And of humble and harmonious co-operation among the dif¬ 
ferent religious and political groups of the world in the best 
interests of the progress of civilization. 



CHAPTER VIII 


Change and Permanence 


Recognition of the reality of change and the significance of 
evolution is the most distinctive feature of modern thought. 
Time is acknowledged today as an ultimate category. It is 
not only an image of eternity. It is a component of ultimate 

reality. 

There can be no denying the fact that the world is always 
astir with movement. It is indeed a perpetual flux and flow. 
Change is the ‘stuff 5 of which the world is made. It is above 
everything else a spatial-temporal scheme. The Sanskrit 
word for the world is Jagat , which means that it is always 
on the go, whithersoever it may be going. The perpetually 
changing and moving nature of the world is brought out into 
relief in such analogies as the running stream, the burning 
flame, the flying bird, etc. 

Heraclitus says that the world is like a flowing river in 
which a man cannot take his bath twice. When he gets down 
into a river to take his bath for the second time, he is sure to 
find it a different river, because the waters in whch he had 
his first bath must have flown far away during the interval. 

A disciple of Heraclitus remarks that a person cannot bathe 
even once in the same river. Standing on the bank of the 
river he concentrates on a mass of water where he is going 
to have a dip. By the time he reaches there it has gone far 
away and replaced by another moving mass of water. 

The Hindu-Buddhist tradition has laid much stress upon 
the impermanence of the world. Nothing lasts long here. 
Everythig is ephemeral, evanescent, transitory. Not a mo¬ 
ment passes without leaving its marks upon phenomena. 
Time bites into everything, penetrates it, and sweeps it along 



CHANGE AND PERMANENCE 


79 


in a process of continuous change. The world is indeed an 
ever-changing, fast-moving process, not a finished product. 

Now, what is the precise significance of the perpetual 
change characteristic of the world ? Is change ultimately 
real ? If not, how far, or in what sense can it be said to be 
real ? The metaphysical inquiry about change concerns 
its ontological status or mode of existence from the ultimate 

standpoint, and its mode of connection with the ultimate 
philosophical principle. 


Theories of Change as Illusory 

A widespread belief of ancient times is that that which 
changes is ipso facto unreal. Permanence or stability is 
affirmed to be the very essence of reality. The real is that 
which abides, which defies all changes and scoffs at all muta¬ 
tions. Consequently, change is another name for nonbeing; 
it is a process of losing and gaining, which is an evident mark 
of imperfection. As immutable being, the real is eternal 
perfection; it has no excellence to gain, and no deficiency 
to cast out. Change or becoming is not only a mark of im¬ 
perfection, but is also believed to be incomprehensible to 
thought. Zeno, the great dialectician of ancient Greece 
points out that the alleged change or movement of a thing' 
when it is submitted to critical examination, discloses fatal 
self-contradictions within it. The dialectic of thought re¬ 
solves it into a string of paradoxes. This emboldens his 
renowned successor Parmenides to declare that Being- 
unchanging and unchangeable Being-is the only reality 
and that becoming is a mere illusion. Zeno’s destructive 
criticism of the concept of Becoming prepares the ground 

for Parmenides’ emphatic affirmation of Bein^ as the sole 
ultimate reality. 

The above view is believed to be further reinforced by 



80 


THE PHILOSOPHY OF INTEGRALISM 


the following consideration. Had Reality been subject to 
change, it would have to become either more or less than 
itself, whether in respect of quantity or in respect of quality. 
But reality cannot become more than itself, because that 
would be flagrant violation of the fundamental maxim of 
thought, 4 ‘Nothing comes out of nothing” (ex nihilo nihil fit). 
Reality cannot also become less than itself, because that 
would involve the notion of total annihilation of some por¬ 
tion of reality. The conception of total annihilation is no 
less absurd and inconsistent than the conception of absolute 
creation out of nothing. 

Furthermore, according to rationalists, reality is insepa¬ 
rable from knowledge. It is essentially rational, intelligible, 
or knowable. Had re;ility been constantly changing, it 
would have been simply incapable of being known. No 
sooner we grasp a thing than it becomes something other than 
itself. What we succeed in knowing is always the dead past 
of a continuous process of change. So, Plato concludes that 
reality must be a fixed system of eternal and unchangeable 
Forms or Ideas. The world of becoming is only a realm 
of shadows, and it is perpetually torn between being and 
nonbeing. 

The Sarikeirite School of Indian Philosophy does not re¬ 
duce change, like Parmenides , to a pure illusion of the senses. 
The changing world of phenomena represents in its view a 
particular type, order or level of reality. It enjoys what 
has been called empirical, conventional, or pragmatic type 
of reality (vyavaharic sattva ). It is real from the standpoint 
of primal ignorance (maya or avidya). It is not a mere func¬ 
tion of the senses, or a subjective modification of the perci¬ 
pient mind. It is a product of the creative activity of the 
cosmic principle of nescience (maya) and is therefore pre¬ 
sented as an independent datum to the mind that perceives 
it. But as a creation of nescience, the world of change stands 



CHANGE AND PERMANENCE 


81 


condemned as a positive falsehood ( bhavarupamithya ) as 
soon as the temporal point of view is transcended and 
replaced by the non-temporal standpoint of ultimate reality. 
This view amounts, not to a categorical denial of change 
as an empty nothing, but to the affirmation of the world of 
change as a real-unreal sort of reality, an indescribable 
mystery. While it is real from one standpoint, it is unreal 
from another. Real from the standpoint of ignorance, 
unreal from the standpoint of supreme knowledge. 


Theories of Change as a Subordinate Element of Reality 

The above view of the world of change as an objective 
falsehood is quite naturally unacceptable to the rationalistic 
way of thinking. Hegelian philosophers, for instance, prefer 
to look upon reality as a principle of permanence-in-change, 
not a principle of permanence beyond change. The world 
of change is, in Hegel’s view, organically related to the eter¬ 
nally perfect Real. The eternal embraces the endless time- 
order, and yet transcends it. The bewildering variety of 
changes that characterize the temporal flux constitute the 
wealth of manifestation of the eternal perfection. Change is 
an essential factor in that which is permanent, not an eter¬ 
nally cancelled falsehood. Change and permanence are in 
truth inseparable aspects of the one concrete reality. 

Be it, however, noted here that though change is an 
essential aspect of Reality, it is, after all, conceived as a 
subordinate feature of that reality. The essential and funda¬ 
mental structure of Reality is ever unaffected by the cease¬ 
less flux of change or becoming. Moreover, there is an 
element of the inexpressible or inexhaustible in the nature of 
the principle of permanence. It defies exhaustive expression 
in terms of change and time. It is believed that a clue to 
the understanding of such an unchanging principle behind 

G 



82 


THE PHILOSOPHY OF INTEGRALISM 

change is provided by our own self-consciousness. We are 
constantly changing along with the changes around us; we 
are moving with the movement of the universe. But when 
we arise to an awareness of this all-pervasive change and 
make a survey of the stream of becoming, we are assuredly 
lifted into a point of view which is that of the eternal. By 
virtue of our self-consciousness, we seem to participate in 

the nature of that which embraces the flux of existence, and 
yet transcends it. 

Biitish Neo-Hegelians like Green and Caird have ela¬ 
borated this view with great force and lucidity. The Ameri¬ 
can Neo-Hegelian Josiah Royce lays emphasis upon the 
character of the infinite stream of becoming as a totum simul 
present at a stroke to the Absolute. 1 It is supposed to fall 
with all its endlessness within the infinite span of conscious¬ 
ness, the eternal presence, of the Supreme Spirit. In support 
of this view, Royce has invoked the modern psychological 
theory of the “specious present” and the modern mathe¬ 
matical theory of the infinite as a self-representative system. 

The Italian neo-idealist, Gentile, also considers the 
temporal as an objective factor in the reality of the non¬ 
temporal. He speaks of the “resolution of the temporal into 
eternal history”, and maintains that the “eternal is time 
itself considered in the actuality of mind”. 2 The march of 
humanity through space and time is in his view “but the 
empirical and external manifestation of the immanent 
eternal victory, the full and absolute victory of mind over 
nature.” 3 

Fhe Hegelian tradition undergoes a significant modifica¬ 
tion in the hands of Bradley and Bosanquet. They agree 

1 Josiah Royce, The World and the Individual , 2nd Series (London: The Mac¬ 
millan & Co., 1929) p. 141. 

2 Giovanni Gentile, The Theory of Mind as Pure Act (London : Macmillan 
& Co., 1922) p. 209 

3 Ibid., p. 250. 


CHANGE AND PERMANENCE 


83 


that the temporal scheme of change falls as an essential 
factor within the supreme synthesis of the non-temporal 
absolute. It is essential because changing appearances are 
the ‘stuff’ of which reality is made. But although changing 
appearances are, in a sense, the stuff of reality, they are 
obviously self-contradictory appearances. They owe their 
existence to the finitude of the human mind, to the discrimi¬ 
nating activity of human thought. In the supra-rational 
experience of the absolute, changes are transformed beyond 
recognition. In the timeless perfection of the real, time is a 
radically transmuted process. Past, present and future exist 
only for the finite mind. In the all-comprehensive experience 
of the Absolute they blend together into an Eternal Now. 

But with the distinctions of past and future gone, strictly 
speaking, even the concept ofthe present or the “eternal now” 
loses its meaning. From the standpoint of the absolute, even 
the distinction of time and eternity is reduced to a nullity. 

Doctrine of Change as Ultimately Real 

According to idealism, then, change is unreal in some sense 
or other. Time is a prisoner in the house of the spirit. Reality 
in its essential structure is timeless perfection. But at the 
opposite end of the philosophical spectrum is the doctrine 
of change as ultimate reality. In modern Western thought 
Henri Bergson leads the way to the reaffirmation of the 
Heraclitean doctrine of universal flux. Bergson takes his 
stand upon the ultimate reality of change, change which is 
conceived as total and perpetual, pure and undiluted. 
Change is, in his view, emphatically not a mere element in 
the superior reality of permanence; it is rather permanence 
which is an abstraction from the continuous flow of change. 
The indisputable fact of change can by no means be ex¬ 
plained as a stream of static phases or immobile positions 



84 


THE PHILOSOPHY OF INTEGRALISM 


of a persistent entity. Immobilities without number placed 
in endless juxtaposition can by no trick produce the appear¬ 
ance of mobility. But it is quite possible to carve out of the 
continuous mobility of the real an endless number of immo¬ 
bile views or static snapshots. 

This is abundantly illustrated by the operation of the cine¬ 
matograph. In order to transcribe the movement of a 
thing, say, a marching regiment of soldiers, the cinemato¬ 
graph first obtains a sufficiently large number of snapshots 
of the moving regiment of soldiers in their different positions. 
These static snapshots placed in juxtaposition in a definite 
order have then to be put into the movement of a machine 
in order to produce the appearance of a moving picture. 
This clearly shows that even an artificial reproduction of 
motion requires the introduction of real motion somewhere. 
Static or immobile elements, however numerous, are 
essentially incapable of generating mobility; nay, they are 
incapable of producing even the illusion of mobility without 
the aid of some real motion. Thus, it follows, that perma¬ 
nence can neither be the source of change, nor an essential 
factor in the nature of change. It is just a characteristic of 
an abstract view of change. It is a derivative of change 
traceable to the cinematographic mechanism of thought. 
While, instability is the essence of concrete actuality, stability 
belongs to the region of abstract possibility. 

But if motion, change, time, or development, embodies 
the final truth of things, how is it that thought which is con¬ 
cerned with knowledge and truth should pervert it into a 
mere moving image of the Eternal ? How can the very 
organ of knowledge be a deliberate attempt to obscure knowl¬ 
edge into a tissue of errors ? Bergson answers this question 
with an emphatic repudiation of the view that thought is 
an organ of knowledge. In his opinion the faculty by virtue 
of which one can feel the pulse of reality in its creative 


CHANGE AND PERMANENCE 


85 


flow is not thought, but intuition. While thought moves 
round and round’ an object in a mist of uncertainty, 
intuition alone can take one straight to the heart of things. 
Thought is, in Bergson’s view, a mere pragmatic function, 
a tool of practical life fashioned in the course of evolution. 
The categories of thought, therefore, answer to necessities 
of practical life. Permanence or stability is the essence of all 
such categories. Action is not possible where everything is 
in constant flux. In order to render action possible, we 
require points of rest in the flux of events; we require to 
proceed from rest to rest so that we may control and regulate 
our movements. That is why in surveying the movement of 
a thing, thought is chiefly concerned with its possible or 
imaginary stopping places, or with static snapshots thereof. 

Then again, that which is most important in practical 
life is the fulfilment of some desire or the attainment of some 
definite end. The means which are adopted are entirely 
subordinate to the goal or end. The end is in essence 
the negation of movement; it brings movement to restful 
termination. It is, therefore, natural that in active life our 
attention should be fixed upon the immobile ends of our 
movement. Whereas, the immobility of the starting point 
supplies the basis for a possible course of action, the immobility 
of the goal or design imparts to that course of action its order 
and definite direction. Herein lies the source of inspiration 
for intellectualists’ philosophy. Intellectualism ignores the 
pragmatic character of thought and glorifies it as the essential 
structure of reality. It conceives of the unchanging eternal 
as the alpha and omega, the first cause and the final reason 
of the flux of empirical existence. 

Bergson maintains that a complete reversal of the intellec¬ 
tual bent of the mind in favor of intuitive penetration into 
the heart of reality would produce a radical transformation 
of our outlook. We then realize that it is not permanence 



86 


THE PHILOSOPHY OF INTEGRALISM 


but change which is the real essence of all things. Turning 
our gaze inwards within ourselves we can immediately 
perceive that our psychical existence means continuous 
change. “To exist is to change, to change is to mature, to 
mature is to go on creating one’s self endlessly .” 1 Thus, the 
world of life and mind is undoubtedly a process of change. 
It is the process of continuous making and re-making. 

The material world also is no exception to this funda¬ 
mental law of existence. Matter is, however, in Bergson’s 
opinion, continually unmaking itself. It is moving and 
changing in the direction opposite to that of life. It is the 
process of running down while life is the process of rising up. 
There is ample corroboration of this view from the side of 
science today. Modern physics has resolved matter entirely 
into energy, into the vibratory motion of charges of electri¬ 
city. And the second law of thermo-dynamics has brought 
to light the gradual degradation of the energy of the material 
world. Now, Bergson holds that change which is the essence 
of reality is pure, perpetual and total. Change is perpetual 
in the sense that there is a radical recasting of the entire 
reality going on at every moment. It is total in the sense that 
it extends to the whole of existence, to everything that is real, 
to matter, life, mind, and other things. Change is pure 
in the sense that it does not imply any persistent entity or 
unchanging thing that changes. The so-called ‘thing is in 
point of truth a period of change taken in a block. The 
alleged principle of permanence-in-change is, in Bergson s 
judgment, only a practical, useful construction of the intel¬ 
lect. But this pure change is not to be construed as abstract, 
colorless change, or as the featureless generality of becoming. 
Bergson takes care to guard against this possible misconstruc¬ 
tion. Change or becoming, which is the soul of reality, is 

1 Henri Bergson, Creative Evolution (London : Macmillan and Co., Ltd., 
1920) p. 8. 



CHANGE AND PERMANENCE 


87 


conceived by him as infinitely variegated becoming. It is 
the interpenetration of an infinite wealth of content ever 
marching into the future. “An infinite multiplicity of becom- 
i n §> variously colored, so to speak, passes before our eyes .” 1 

Bergson distinguishes between qualitative movements, 
evolutionary movements, and extensive movements. And 
he shows how they differ profoundly from one and another. 
That which goes from yellow to green is not like that which 
goes from green to blue; they are different qualitative move¬ 
ments. That which goes from flower to fruit is not like that 
which goes from larva to nymph and from nymph to perfect 
insect, they are different evolutionary movements. The 
action of eating or drinking is not like the action of fighting; 
they are different extensive movements. In Bergson’s con¬ 
sidered opinion, the fundamental principle of change, the 
vital impetus, is not a blank, featureless entity, but some¬ 
thing like an explosive energy which bears within itself an 
unstable balance of divergent tendencies. 

The outstanding merit of Bergson is that he is a forceful 
representative of the spirit of the modern age. Dynamism 
is indeed the characteristic tendency of present times. The 
notions of activity and change, becoming and process, 
receive today much emphasis and significance. The concept 
of evolution is erected into an ultimate metaphysical cate¬ 
gory, and we hear today not only of a philosophy of evolu¬ 
tion, but of evolutional philosophy. The truth of absolute 
being lies, in the judgment of many modern thinkers, in 
absolute becoming, and we have on this point a meeting 
of radical extremes in contemporary philosophy. Vitalists° 
pragmatists, new idealists, and new realists, have all joined 
their voices to swell one mighty current of evolutionary 
outlook. They are votaries of change, high priests of evolution. 

borne of the causes which have served to bring about 
Ibid., p. 321. 


1 



88 


THE PHILOSOPHY OF INTEGRALISM 


this energetic reaction from the classical tradition in philo¬ 
sophy may be briefly stated here. 

In the first place, there is a maximum intensification in 
modern life of the struggle for existence. There is a rapid 
disappearance of the scope for armchair reflection, and clois¬ 
tered contemplation. A spirit of restless activity and inces¬ 
sant drive is to be noticed everywhere. 

Secondly, in a new awakening to the higher values of 
life, there is an over-emphasis on the moral point of view, 
and an acceptance of moral values as final and supreme. 
The moral point of view translates perfection into unending 
perfectibility, and therefore is inclined to look upon ultimate 
reality as an unceasing creative effort and not as an eternal 
calm. Dr. Bosanquet rightly remarks in this connection : 
“the very extremes of philosophy, insofar as it assumes the 
character of a philosophy of change, concentrate themselves 
round the moral point of view. The moral point of view is 
that in which man takes his realization in an endless process, 
and so perpetually feels the impulse to transcend his existing 
reality .” 1 

Finally, the present age is a period of critical transition 
through which humanity is passing. It is a preparation for 
the next saltus in evolution. The philosophy of change is 
the first reaction of the reflective mind to the consciously 
felt urge of evolution. The stubborn fact of change is felt 
to be a positive refutation of the postulate of permanence 
at the heart of reality. 

William James ridicules the absolutist’s conception of 
reality as a “Block Universe”, and points out that the world 
process is necessarily reduced in absolutist philosophy to a 
mere “dull rattling off of a chain forged innumerable years 
ago.” He formulates his view of the world as a concatenated 

i Bernard Bosanquet, The Meeting of Extremes in Contemporary Philosophy (Mac¬ 
millan and Co. Ltd., 1924) p. 214. 



CHANGE AND PERMANENCE 


89 


series of changes, and holds that it is a living, moving, and 
growing sort of the universe that we inhabit. 

Croce, the neo-idealist, emphasizes the endless perfectibi¬ 
lity of man and speaks of the “endless dialectic of the spirit.” 
He conceives of reality as infinite possibility flowing into an 
infinite actuality as a continual surpassing of itself. He 
equates reality with history. 

Samuel Alexander, the neo-realist, looks upon the world 
as an all-encompassing system of motion, a scheme of perpe¬ 
tual change and restless striving. Even the deity of religion 
is, in his opinion, only a future possibility with which the 

universe is in travail and towards which it is constantly 
straining forward. 

Alfred North Whitehead emphasizes the actual world 
as a continuous passage of events, as activity ever merging 
into the future, as the creative advance of nature. He inter¬ 
prets this creative advance, not as a succession of instanta¬ 
neous events, not as perpetual recreation at each instant, 
but as a temporary, indivisible complex of activity with 
internal relations between its various factors. He expresses 
great delight at the emancipation of modern physics from the 
Newtonian conception of nature at an instant. All inter¬ 
relations of matters of fact must, in his view, involve transi¬ 
tion in their essence . 1 He speaks, no doubt, of eternal objects, 
but these eternal objects are supposed by him to belong to 
the realm of possibility. They can be said to be real only 
insofar as they are capable of being “ingressed” into the 
passage of events or actual entities. 


Criticism of the Doctrine of Change 
The doctrine of the exclusive reality of change cannot, 

1 Alfred North Whitehead, Modes of Thought (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1938), p. 200. 



90 


THE PHILOSOPHY OF INTEGRALISM 


however, bear the light of critical examination. Change 
is, without doubt, a fact within the universe, but that gives no 
warrant for concluding that it is a fact of the universe, or 
that it is the final truth about the totality of all being. The 
concept of change is a limited concept inasmuch as it is 
limited in its application to phenomena of the world. It 
does not apply to the world as the unity of all phenomena. 
The whole of the universe can hardly be conceived in terms 
of expansion or diminution; nor can it ever depart from its 
fundamental nature and structure. “The whole of what 
exists cannot move away from its fundamental characters 
—say its categories—and values ”. 1 

Change is without doubt an essential characteristic of 
the universe, but it does not follow that change is the 
whole truth about the universe. The very affirmation that 
change alone is real is intended to be an eternal truth. Thus, 
the apostles of change are confuted out of their own mouth. 
To deny permanence as an aspect of reality is to affirm one’s 
belief as a permanent truth about reality. Eternalism 
and temporalism are thus complementary half truths. They 
represent two inseparable aspects of the same reality. 

Bergson is right in pointing out that much of our thinking 
is pragmatic in function and outlook. But he ignores the 
truth that thought is a self-transcending activity of man. It 
has a purely theoretical as well as a practical side. It is quite 
capable of rising above the limitations of practical life and 
commanding a detached view of the fundamental structure 
of reality. The unchangeableness of Reality in respect of 
its fundamental structure is disclosed, not by the pragmatic 
understanding, but by the pure reason. 

This disclosure of the pure reason is further reinforced by 
the spiritual intuitions of mankind. Mystic seers the world 

1 Bernard Bosanquet, The Meeting of Extremes in Contemporary Philosophy , op. 
cit, p. 193. 




CHANGE AND PERMANENCE 


91 


over are in full agreement with speculative thinkers in 

affirming the reality of the eternal as an essential aspect of 
the Real. 

It is true that particular things and objects of the world 
are always changing. But it is no less true, that certain 
patterns, certain structural forms, always abide and repeat 
themselves in the midst of all changes. Then again, there 
are some basic laws of nature which unchangingly regulate 
all the changes of nature. Truths which are verified as true 
about the temporality of the world are non-temporal. The 
supreme values of life, such as truth, beauty, goodness, free¬ 
dom, unity, etc. are like the beacon light of Eternity on lifers 
voyage on the sea of change. As objects of devoted apprecia¬ 
tion, they form the shining goal of the pyramid of knowledge. 
A refusal to admit the objective and supreme reality of these 
values would amount to a wholesale condemnation of the 

most central experiences of mankind, such as science, art, 
morality and religion. 

Absolute Dualism of Change and Permanence 

Some philosophers, such as Prof. C. E. M. Joad frankly 
admit the reality of both change and permanence. They 
represent them as two entirely separate and discontinuous 
spheres of reality. In their view, there is a yawning chasm 
between the dynamic flux of change and the static realm of 
eternal perfection. Neither can actual entities be said to 
participate in eternal Forms, nor can eternal Forms be said 
to “ingress” into actual occasions and thus to contribute ac¬ 
tively to their shaping and molding. The relation between 
the world of change and the world of permanence is con¬ 
ceived by Joad as one of “non-significant resemblance”. 
By this he means that it is a matter of arbitrary contingent 
fact that some physical object appears to imitate the eternal 



92 


THE PHILOSOPHY OF INTEGRALISM 


ideal Form. No rational explanation can be afforded of this 
fact of imitation in terms of an organic relation of causatic 
connection between the two spheres of reality. Joad consi¬ 
ders it impossible “that the unchanging can enter into 
and give shape to the changing, without either itself par¬ 
taking of the nature of change, or causing the changing to 
take on some of the character of the changeless.” All that 
one can say is that the actual world includes certain consti¬ 
tuents which exhibit certain qualities. It is a matter of brute 
contingency that these qualities appear as a selection from 
an infinite realm of possibility. 

The above doctrine of absolute bifurcation of reality into 
the changing and the unchanging violently clashes with our 
fundamental conviction about the unity of all existence. It 
is due to our perception of the basic unity of all existence that 
no sooner do we posit the Many than we proceed to bring 
together the elements of the Many by some sort of interaction 
or organic connection. With regard to particulars and uni- 
versals, Plato’s doctrine of “participation,” and Whitehead’s 
theory of “ingression” are examples to the point. Had the 
changing and the unchanging been entirely separate and 
discontinuous in being, it would have been impossible for 
the changing mind to have any cognitive contact with the 
changeless world of universal values. Knowledge pre¬ 
supposes the identity of being or confluence of existence. 
Moreover, it would have been impossible for a man to give 
concrete shape and embodiment in the changing world to 
his vision of the idea, if the changing material were not 
adaptable to the idea, or if the ideal had no effective power 
of control over the actual. In his eagerness to do justice to 
both the terms of the antithesis, Joad puts them on two sides 
of an unbridgeable discontinuity. 



CHANGE AND PERMANENCE 


93 


Change and Permanence as Two Dimensions of Being 

It, therefore, seems to us that the view which looks upon 
change and permanence as separate and discontinuous 
spheres of existence, and the view which reduces one of them 
to a mere illusory shadow of the other, are equally unsatis¬ 
factory extremes of thought. The changing and the un¬ 
changing, the dynamic and the static (ksara and aksara) are, 
in our judgment, two poises of being, two equally real 
modes of manifestation, of the same Supreme Being. 

Whitehead is right when he says that eternal objects are 
elements of possibility which are capable of being actualized. 
But these elements of possibility are not like floating entities; 
they are possibilities inherent in the structure of Being. In 
the course of time, selections from these infinite possibilities 
are made for actualization in the changing world. The 
changing world cannot be condemned as unreal even from 
the ultimate standpoint. It is, as we have seen, a genuine 
manifestation of the self-expansive, creative joy of Being. 

The ultimate truth is neither change nor permanence, 
neither time nor eternity. The ultimate truth lies in the 
multidimensional fullness of Being. When a person one-sidedly 
starts with the abstract concept of eternity, he feels intel¬ 
lectually constrained to demonstrate time as unreal. When, 
on the contrary, he one-sidedly starts with the concept of 
time, with the abstract concept of time, he feels an inner 
compulsion to repudiate eternity as an illusion. It is when we 
are guided from the very beginning with an integral view of 
Being in its multidimensional fullness that we can hope to 
understand philosophically the total truth as the identity of 
change and permanence, of the temporal and the eternal. 



CHAPTER IX 


The Meaning of Evolution 


Evolution does not mean mere change. The concept of 
evolution is far greater than that of mere change or passage 
of events. It signifies change of a specified character, change 
for the higher and the better. It means development, crea¬ 
tive advance, continual enrichment of being, progressive 
manifestation of ever higher and more desirable qualities. 

The theory of evolution represents the movement of time 
as an upward curve of development which gradually un¬ 
folds unsuspected treasures and brings into existence ever 
higher values. In the doctrine of evolution, time is thus cre¬ 
dited with a vast, creative importance. It is indeed regarded 
as the very principle of creativity. 

Evolution does not merely consist of progress within the 
limits of a particular species. It implies the emergence 
of higher and higher species, endowed with new emergent 

qualities. 

Besides gradual self-development, evolution implies per¬ 
petual self-overcoming and self-transcending. It is the in¬ 
creasing self-fulfilment of the cosmic creative urge in and 
through different types of self and different kinds of species. 

That is why it has been possible for a lower species of ani¬ 
mal to evolve into a higher species of animal. It has been 
possible for the animal to evolve into the human form. And 
it is also perhaps quite possible for man to evolve one day 

into the superman or the divine man. 

It is possible that there are other planes of cosmic exis¬ 
tence, supraphysical or preternatural planes. But these are 
all probably typal in character, and not, strictly speaking, 
evolutionary. Supraphysical planes of existence allow for 



THE MEANING OF EVOLUTION 


95 


progress of some sort, for growing self-fulfilment within the 
limits of fixed types. But there is no scope in them for self- 
exceeding and development into radically different types. 
In terrestrial evolution, however, there is not only progress 
of individuals within the limits set by their class essence, there 
is also the bursting of the universal life force beyond the 
limits defined by class patterns. There are various modes of 
self-fulfilment through self-transcendence. That is why we 
witness here boundless varieties of species, which can all be 
arranged in a hierarchical order, and in which the higher 
species is believed to evolve out of the lower species. 

Sri Aurobindo has made a significant contribution to the 
concept of evolution, and has thrown a flood of light upon 
the nature and significance of terrestrial evoltion. He 
holds that there are different orders of self-fulfilment of the 
Supreme Being. There are, for instance, supernal worlds of 
infinity—worlds of infinite existence, infinite consciousness, 
and infinite delight—in everyone of which one of the infinite 
components of ultimate reality functions as the basic and 
dominant principle. There are also worlds or planes in which 
the Supermind functions as the basic and dominant prin¬ 
ciple. Again, there are purely mental planes in which 
the mind functions as the basic and dominant principle. 
All these worlds or planes are typal in nature. They are 
elds of manifestation of fixed types, and whatever takes 
place in them is in the nature of increasing self-expression 
within the limits of these types. Mystics the world over bear 
affirmative witness to such supraterrestrial spheres of exis¬ 
tence, or planes of consciousness. Vedic seers speak of seven 
worlds,-the worlds of matter (Bhuh), life (Bhuvah), mind 
(Svah), Supermind (Maha), pure delight (Jana), pure 
consciousness-force (Tapas), and pure being (Satya) The 
material world is that in which matter functions as the 
basic and dominant principle. The material world is cssen- 



96 


THE PHILOSOPHY OF INTEGRALISM 


tially evolutionary in character, while the other worlds are 
typal in nature. 

In the scheme of evolution characteristic of the material 
world the point of departure is matter, and the purpose of 
evolution is to bring forth into full revelation the riches of 
the Supreme under the conditions provided by matter. But 
is it bare matter empty of all other principles which is to serve 
as the point of departure and the nurse of all becoming ? 
That would have led to the stultification of reason and would 
have rendered inexplicable the emergence of life, mind, etc. 
one after another, in ordered succession. That would have 
left the cosmic drift without any significant driving force 
which might give it a definite direction. We have no objec¬ 
tion to admit with Tydall that “matter contains the pro¬ 
mise and potency of the whole of terrestrial life.” Only, 
we must add that this matter is not what we, in our 
profound ignorance, take it to be; it is the most primordial 
form of manifestation of the Supreme. It is the grossest 
form of manifestation of the element of infinite being, or 
existentiality (Sat) in ultimate reality which is in the 
nature of being-consciousness-delight (Saccidananda ). 

It should be further noted that the seven or eight prin¬ 
ciples of which the web of existence is woven are identical 
in being, even though they may be diverse in outward action. 
So in the stulf of matter which constitutes the starting-point 
of terrestrial evolution there must be involved from the very 
beginning all the other component principles of ultimate 
reality. Having descended through gradual self-alienation 
into the inconscience of matter, the Spirit gets involved 
therein with all the other elements of its nature. It is this 
involution of all in one which constitutes the necessity ot evolu¬ 
tion and imparts a specific direction to the cosmic drift. It 
is because life energy is already involved in matter in a form 
suited to it,—in the subvital form, as Sri Aurobindo puts 


THE MEANING OF EVOLUTION 


97 


it,—that life appears in its distinctive form at a subsequent 
stage of evolution. Similarly, it is because mind is already 
involved in matter and life that the force of evolution can, 
in fulness of time, bring it forth into explicit manifestation. 
The evolutionary self-expression of the Spirit has thus, for 
its necessary presupposition, the involutionary self-conceal¬ 
ment of the Spirit in nature. 

The above theory of evolution aims to reconcile the time¬ 
less perfection of Being with the temporal process of the 
world. It also reconciles the notions of evolution as a teleo¬ 
logical process and as an absolutely free act of creation. 

Evolution has been conceived by some as an asymptotic 
approximation to an infinite ideal. This is evidently inspired 
by an exclusive stress upon the moral point of view, which 
drives a wedge of separation between the actual and the 
ideal. This gives out the notion of a progressus ad infinitum , 
in which the gates of the future are ever open. But a slight 
reflection will show that a progressus ad infinitum is a contra¬ 
diction in terms. When the goal is ever-receding and always 
illusive, like the horizon, there is no meaning in an increasing 
approximation thereto. The theory of evolution as an 
endless approximation to an unattainable goal is opposed 
by those who believe in a definite consummation of the 
march of evolution. They put forward what may be called 
the theory of progressus ad fini turn , which implies faith in a 
“far-off divine event to which the whole of creation moves.” 
f aith in such a finality of achievement would mean a shutting 
of the gates of the future. Dr. McTaggart speaks of the fu¬ 
turity of the whole , 1 and believes in the resolution of the 
time series sustained by ignorance in the timeless perception 
of truth to be attained at a certain future date. Mr. Joad 
holds that the final goal of evolution is unfettered contcmpla- 

1 John McTaggart, The Nature of Existence , Vol. II, (Cambridge : The Uni¬ 
versity Press, 1927), Ch. LXI. 

7 


98 


THE PHILOSOPHY OF INTEGRALISM 


tion of the world of values by humanity as a whole and that 
this goal is not impossible of achievement . 1 But to suggest 
that the attainment of a definite goal is the last word about 
the process ol evolution is to ignore the infinite character 
and inexhaustible richness of Being. Finality of achievement 
is incompatible with the infinity of the Real. 

Croce therefore maintains that the true conception of 
progress must steer clear of the opposite extremes of an aim 
completely attained, and an aim essentially unattainable. 
It must avoid the one-sidedness of progressus adfinitum on the 
one hand, and that of progressus ad infinitum on the other. 
Progress rightly conceived is, according to Croce, “a perpe¬ 
tual solution and a perpetually renascent problem demand¬ 
ing a new solution .” 2 At every instant, there is an attainment 
of the true and the good, and there is the raising of a doubt 
at every fresh instant, without however losing what has been 
attained. 

Now, with regard to a definite goal, if it be said to be auto¬ 
matically realized at every moment of advance, then either 
it is not, as Joad points out, a goal at ail truly so-called, 
but merely a part of the process, or, there is no real advance. 
When there is a fixed goal, it cannot perpetually obtain 
realization and yet await realization. It seems to us that the 
course of terrestrial evolution is throughout controlled by 
the idea of a definite goal—the goal of a certain mode of 
manifestation of Being in terrestrial conditions. From the 
standpoint of this goal, the evolution of man into superman, 
or the race of gnostic beings would be a great advance. But, 
the attainment of this goal would not mean cessation of fur¬ 
ther progression in time. In the first place, it would mean 
replacement of progression in the Ignorance by progression 

1 C.E.M. Joad, Matter , Life and Value p. 374. 

2 C.E.M. Joad, Introduction to Modern Philosophy (Oxford : The Clarendon 
Press, 1925) p. 43. 



THE MEANING OF EVOLUTION 


99 


in the knowledge. While progression in the Ignorance is a 
zig-zag course, a slow and protracted evolution through 
ups and downs, an uphill journey through serious errors and 
setbacks, progression in the Knowledge would be a rapid 
transformation, a triumphant march from truth to truth, 
and from glory to glory. The end of evolution in the Igno¬ 
rance would indeed herald the dawn of a new era of infinitely 
variable self-expression in truth and love and beauty. In 
the second place, the complete fruition of the present cycle of 
evolution would perhaps be followed by other cycles of 
evolution, other modes of evolutionary self-fulfilment. 

Thus we see that evolution can very well be conceived 
as an increasing manifestation of the infinite richness of 
Being. The infinite richness of Being presents itself to the 
temporal point of view as an endless variety of definite goals 
or purposes. Each of these purposes presides over a parti¬ 
cular cycle of evolution. Just as there is no dead finality 
about the process of evolution, so also on the other hand, 
evolution is no indefinitely prolonged endless drift or 
fruitless pursuit of an ever-receding ideal. It is quite possible, 
as we have just now indicated, to reconcile the notion of 

fixed and definite goals with that of infinite progression in 
time. 

Sri Aurobindo’s theory of evolution as the Supermind’s 
progressive self-manifestation in infinitely diversed condi¬ 
tions does also embody a reconciliation of the reality of the 
world process with the eternal perfection of the Spirit. It 
does not reduce the flux of sensible existence, either to an 
illusion or to “a tale told by an idiot full of sound and fury 
signifying nothing”. Nor, does it reduce it to a degradation 
01 diminution oi the essence of Being, or to the vicious circle 
of paradise lost and paradise regained. True, the Supreme 
descends down the slope of self-alienation in order to take 
a plunge into the inconscience of matter. But this adven- 


100 


THE PHILOSOPHY OF INTEGRALISM 


turous plunge into the inconscience is prompted by the 
purpose of self-manifestation in terms of matter. True, the 
evolutionary descent is followed by evolutionary ascent, but 
that docs not amount to a vicious circle. Because the re¬ 
ascent of evolution does not aim at merely getting the Spirit 
oack to its original timeless perfection of unitary experience. 
Evolution aims at progressive unveiling of the Spirit in ever 
unique sets of conditions. The purpose of cosmic evolution 
is a kind of purposeless purpose. It is the purpose of creative 
joy, of Being’s joyful self-expression. It is not procuring 
something from without, but objectifying something from 
within. It is actualizing the riches of inwardness. It is the 
spontaneous outflow of inward fulness. After a day’s hard 
labor and weariness, when a person takes a hearty meal and 
relaxes on the sofa, he begins to feel again very full inside. 
What does he want to do then ? Out of a sense of inward 
fulness, he may feel like singing or dancing, or writing 
poetry or playing a game. Such activities are neither mean¬ 
ingless nor utilitarian. They are a joyful outpouring of the 
inner self. Similarly, evolution is a spontaneous unfoldment 
of the creative urge of Being. 

Evolution as Emergence of Novelties 

It will not be out of place to institute here a brief compa¬ 
rison between Sri Aurobindo’s theory of terrestrial evolution 
as progressive self-manifestation of the Supreme in material 
conditions and Prof. S. Alexander’s theory of emergent 
evolution. 

Prof. Alexander looks upon matter, not as the basic stuff 
of existence, but as the first emergent quality which comes to 
qualify specific configurations of spatio-temporal elements or 
events. But while, according to Alexander, that which is 
prior to matter, that which functions as “the matrix of all 



THE MEANING OF EVOLUTION 


101 


existence and the nurse of all becoming, ” is hyphenated 
Space-Time conceived as a comprehensive system of motion, 
Sri Aurobindo identifies this ultimate principle as unfathom¬ 
able Being, of which Space -1 ime is the medium of self- 
expression. 

Being is not space-time but the ground of all existence in 
space-time. Being is not mind, or reason, or thought, but the 
creative source of them. Being is not love or joy or beauty, 
but the sustaining ground of them. As the root and basis of 
all existence, knowledge and joy, Being may, from our hu¬ 
man standpoint, be defined as infinite existence-knowledge- 
bliss (Saccidananda). 

Prof. Einstein is perfectly right when he says that space- 
time is not itself the basic stuff but rather a form of some more 
ultimate stuff or substance, the precise nature of which is 
more than science can determine. Sri Aurobindo maintains 
that space and time are cosmic forms of the Infinite’s self¬ 
extension and self-revelation. They are the media in which 
the Supreme Being pours out its inexhaustible riches and 

* . space and infinite 

time are in essence a priori forms, whether forms of existence 

or forms of perception. So, no amount of hyphenating will 

convert them into the ultimate stuff or creative principle of 
the world. 

Alexander regards matter, life, mind, etc. as a series of 
emergent qualities which appear on the scene of empirical 
rea lty on the attainment of an increasingly greater degree of 
complexity of structure and function on the part of point- 
instants or events. But, as to the source of these unique 
emergent qualities, he leaves us completely in the dark. The 
act of emergence he is inclined to treat as a miracle, and he 
invites us to accept it as the final inexplicability. But that is 
hard for reason to swallow. Belief in miracles,' in whatever 
iorm, has no respectable place in philosophical thinking 


102 


THE PHILOSOPHY OF INTEGRALISM 


Dr. Pringle Pattison has tried to explain the emergence of 
qualitative differences by tracing them to the hitherto un¬ 
manifest riches of the Absolute. He holds that the series of 
emergent qualities are the “progressive revelation ” 1 on the 
empirical plane of the inexhaustible riches of the eternal. 

The view of Pringle Pattison is surely an improvement on 
Alexander’s conception of the matter, but there is a serious 
defect lurking even in this position. According to Pringle 
Pattison, as also according to Alexander, the emergent quali¬ 
ties emanate from without or from above, and do not gra¬ 
dually evolve from within. They are, as it were, thrust into 
the evolutionary series at certain critical stages. They are 
not conceived to have any organic connection with their 
substructure. Life, for instance, supervenes from above 
having no organic relationship to its material substructure. 
Likewise, mind is a supervenient perfection having no strictly 
organic connection with its vital or nervous substructure. 

n 

But the facts of experience flatly contradict any such lack 

of organic continuity. It is not true that a configuration of 
purely material processes comes to be qualified mysteriously 
by an extraneous quality of vitality at a higher stage of evo¬ 
lution. The life energy is in point of truth an organically 
related aspect of physical forces, having been secretly oper¬ 
ative in matter from the very beginning. It does not super- 
venc from above. Having been always latent in matter, it 
becomes overtly operative in living beings in the course of 
evolution. Similarly, it is not true that a specific configura¬ 
tion of purely vital processes comes to be qualified by men¬ 
tality thrust into it, as it were, from without or from above. 
Mentality was already present in the lower forms of organism 
in a submental or subconscious form. In the fulness of time, 
it is brought into explicit self-realization by the forward 


1 A Seth Pringle-Pattison, The Idea of God , (New York: Oxford 
Press, 1920) p. 154. 


University 



THE MEANING OF EVOLUTION 


103 


march of evolution. 

The fresh novelties which appear in the course of evolu¬ 
tion are neither miracles nor supervenient surprises. They 
are not devoid of organic connection with their substructure. 
They are in the nature of the outflowering of such factors as 
were implicitly operative in the lower levels from the very 
beginning. It was possible for them to emerge in the course 
of evolution only because they were already involved in 

matter as closely interwoven aspects of one and the same 
reality. 

Similarly, intelligence is implicitly present in the animal 
consciousness. In the course of evolution, when empirical 
conditions become suitable, when the appropriate nervous 
system is perfected, intelligence becomes overtly operative, 
resulting in the emergence of man as a distinct species. 


The Nisus of Evolution 

It is now clear that it is because life, mind, spirit, etc. had 
already been involved in the inconscience of matter that the 
march of evolution could bring them forth in successive order 
into explicit self-fulfilment. But though the fact of involu¬ 
tion gives a certain necessity and a definite orientation to the 
course of evolution, it is not sufficient to account for the 
creative impulse of evolution. Let us therefore turn now our 
attention to a consideration of the creative impulse or nisus 
of evolution. Let us try to have an idea of that which consti¬ 
tutes the driving power behind the evolutionary process. 

Various attempts have been made in philosophy to account 
for the process of evolution-its nisus and its determinate 
or er without resorting to any principle of cosmic intelli¬ 
gence or conscious teleology. Professor Alexander says that 
the drive of evolution is to be traced to a creative nisus, an 
ini ia urge, with which Space-Time is originally endowed. 



104 


THE PHILOSOPHY OF INTEGRALISM 


But whence is this creative nisus in Space-Time? The pre¬ 
sence of the creative impulse in Space-Time seems to point 
to the leality of some fundamental cosmic energy, of which 
space-time is in ultimate analysis the medium of self- 
expression. And that cosmic energy cannot be blind and me¬ 
chanical. The world of space-time as an evolutionary scheme 
shows evidence of order and direction. So, the cosmic 
energy must be endowed with some kind of ordering intelli¬ 
gence. The emergence of novel forms in the course of evolu¬ 
tion indicates the immanence of some formative power in the 
basic creative energy. Professor Radhakrishnan is perfectly 
right when he observes: “Unless we assume the nisus to be 
a spiritual power ever drawing on its resources and ever 

expressing new forms, Alexander’s whole account becomes 
unsatisfactory .” 1 

Bergson has not much difficulty with the problem of nisus 
insofar as his ultimate principle is itself a creative nisus, 
an infinite, vital surge, an elan vital. But Bergson s elan vital 
is too determinate a principle to function as the philosophical 
ultimate. Having defined the fundamental creative energy 
as the life force, Bergson finds himself under the necessity of 
explaining matter on the one hand, and the mind and spirit 
on the other, in terms of life-force. But life can no more 
explain matter than matter can explain life. Likewise, mind 
or reason can no more explain the existence of matter and 
life than matter or life can explain mind or reason. In order 
to account for the emergence of matter, life, mind, spirit, as 
distinctive values, the ultimate creative energy must not be 
identified with any one of them. 


1 S. Radhakrishnan, An Idealistic View of Life (London : George Allen & 
Unwin Ltd., 1932) p. 323. 



CHAPTER X 


The Goal of Evolution 


It has been noted before that we can think of change without 
any definite direction or goal. But we cannot think of evolu¬ 
tion apart from some goal, finite or infinite. Evolution is 
definitely a goal-oriented process. It is the emergence of 
ever-new higher qualities, forms and values. 

Now the term ‘higher’ has no meaning unless we accept 
some intrinsic and absolute values as the most desirable 
end of all process and change. For instance, we consider 
life as higher than matter, because a living organism shows 
certain characteristics of self-existence which is accepted as 
the ideal and most perfect mode of being. It has the powers 
of self-regulation, self-healing, immanent self-development 
from within, self-reproduction, etc. Similarly, we consider 
mind as higher than life, because it shows further charac¬ 
teristics of self-existence. It has greater self-movement, 
flexibility ol response, self-adjustment to changing circum¬ 
stances, etc. Rational consciousness is considered a still higher 
quality, because it can change outward circumstances to 
suit the requirements of inner life. It can initiate entirely 
new changes calculated to secure optimum happiness, to 
produce increasing knowledge, power, harmony and co¬ 
operation, and to open wider vistas of truth, beauty, love 
and freedom. 

Now, the question is, How does the goal operate in the 
process of evolution ? Much of man’s deliberate action is 
characterized by conscious and rational planning. But 
it would be sheer anthropomorphism to attribute the human 
kind of rational planning to Nature. Gone are the days when 
a carpenter theory of creation or a watchmaker theory of 



106 


THE PHILOSOPHY OF INTEGRALISM 

evolution could be accepted, postulating an omnipotent 

Mind up there somewhere beyond Nature. Attempts to 

understand the creativity of Nature after the fashion of 

man s conscious teleology are bound to appear anachronistic 
today. 

Moreover, it appears upon deeper reflection that even the 
plans and designs of man’s rational mind are not the ultimate 
moving force in his life. They seem rather to be reflections 
at the level of the rational mind of much deeper unconscious 
motivations. Unfathomed forces working from the depths 
of his inner psyche seem to be the prime mover of his life. 
There are clear indications that man’s conscious teleology 
is only an imperfect instrumentation of some enormously 
vast unconscious or superconscious intelligence immanently 
operative at the very center of life and nature. 

In consideration of the unknown forces immanently regu¬ 
lating the process of evolution, various theories of uncon¬ 
scious and superconscious teleology have been propounded. 

It might be rewarding to consider here briefly some of these 
views. 


Theory of Unconscious Teleology 

We come across a theory of unconscious teleology in the 
Sahkhya system of Indian philosophy. According to the 
Sdhkhya , Nature is essentially and completely unconscious 
(jada). Yet there are significant happenings in Nature. There 
are valuable results emerging in implicit obedience to na¬ 
tural laws. Now, the Sahkhya believes that behind all the 
workings of nature is the constant presence of a detached but 
ever-awake onlooker, a self-luminous spirit ( purusa ), for whose 
sake nature works and to whose contact her evolution owes 
its initial start. This gives a different complexion to the 
Sahkhya doctrine of unconscious teleology, and sharply 



THE GOAL OF EVOLUTION 


107 


distinguishes it from the theories of unconscious teleology 
which we find in western philosophy. According to the Saii- 
khya, even though the primal stuff and the driving power of 
evolution is intrinsically unconscious, the principle that 
silently presides over the course of evolution, that which 
affords inspiration and also lends significance to the evolu¬ 
tionary urge, is an eternally perfect, self-subsistcnt principle 
of consciousness. 

Mr. Hoernle’s attitude to the problem of teleology has 
been crystalized into the formula “not mechanism or vital¬ 
ism, but mechanism and teleology .” 1 He admits that every 
new order of existence, such as life or mind, is without doubt 
the outcome of a mechanistic scheme of things and the 
result of unconscious forces. There is no need to posit any 
intelligent principle of consciousness to preside over the 
mechanically determined course of events. But we may 
speak of teleology in the sense that after a new order of 
existence appears on the scene, we find it supremely valu¬ 
able and desirable. It is this valuable and desirable charac¬ 
ter of the new product of evolution which justifies our 
language of teleology. Since the values are not only intrin¬ 
sically good but also necessary facts by reason of being 
rigorously determined, the total scheme of the universe can¬ 
not be said to be cjuitc indifferent to them which it produces 
and sustains. 

Now, a little leflection will show that the above view 
involves an attempt to hide the real difficulty about the 
matter and to cover it under a mist of misleading phrases. 
The position of Hoernlc is, to put it plainly, that there 
is only mechanism, and that life, mind, etc. result from the 
conjunction of mechanical forces, albeit these mechanically 
produced things may also be immensely valuable in our 
human eyes. And it is precisely here that the sting of 

Hocrnlc, Studies in Contemporary Metaphysics , Chaps. VI and VII. 



108 


THE PHILOSOPHY OF INTEGRALISM 


the problem lies. How can an ascending series of supreme 
values, such as life, mind, and personality, be brought into 
being by a set of blind forces which are blind without 
qualification ? To speak of an unconscious teleology in this 
sense, is simply to state the fact without any attempt at 
explanation. 


Theory of Super-Conscious Teleology 

Dr. Bosanquet speaks of superconscious as well as un¬ 
conscious forms of teleology, in addition to the conscious 
teleology of human activity . 1 Bosanquet holds that explicitly 
conscious teleology which we notice at the human level is, 
far from being the only type and vehicle of teleology, only 
an intermediate form of expression of a deeper teleology, 
which is operative in the cosmic process. The beautiful 
flower that we admire is neither a chance product thrown 
off by the wanton play of blind forces, nor a miracle super¬ 
induced on the course of things by an arbitrary will of God. 
It is rather the immanent development of its own 
environment in which His plan was deeply imbedded. This 
is unconscious teleology characteristic of the infra-human 
levels of nature. 

Similarly, there is superconscious teleology which is 
exemplified in such superindividual structures as a civilisa¬ 
tion or the political organization of a state. Take any civili¬ 
zation of the present day you like, and it will be immediately 
evident that it was never explicitly present in all its present 
proportions and significance to the consciousness of any 
single individual or group of individuals. But still there can 
be no disputing the fact that it is not an accidental forma¬ 
tion, but the concrete realization of a deeper purpose imma- 

1 B. Bosanquet, The Principle of Individuality and Value (London : Macmillan 
and Co., 1927) pp. 153-4. 



THE GOAL OF EVOLUTION 


109 


nent in the scheme of reality. It is the fulfilment of a profoun¬ 
der plan which has worked through the coordination of the 
conscious activities of generations of people. The apparent 
motives of our human actions provide the instrumentation 
through which the deeper plan of history operates. 

Even in the case of finite conscious teleology it is the deeper 
plan which is of capital importance. The aim which is con¬ 
stantly held before our minds undergoes continuous modifica¬ 
tion and reshaping under the pressure of the secret nature of 
things as we press forward with our work of self-realization. 
1 he de facto end is, as Dr. Bosanquet is never tired of reiter¬ 
ating, nevei the thing of primary or decisive importance. 
It is always determined by the nature of a system, part of 
which has already been actualized, and the residual part of 
which awaits realization for the completion of the whole. 
So, Bosanquet concludes that “teleology is only a sub-form 
of harmony”. There are teleological movements in nature 
inasmuch as there is immanent in every finite part a spirit 
of harmony, or a principle of totality which impels it to a self- 
transcending, and consequently to a fuller self-realizing. 
The deeper plan in the nature of things is the result of the 
all-pervasive immanence of the Absolute in the universe. 

Now, this deeper plan cannot, we submit, be in any way 
inferior to our finite consciousness. It must in truth be infi¬ 
nitely superior to human intelligence. It must be a kind 
of super-conscious intelligence. To use a significant expres¬ 
sion of Sri Aurobindo, it is “the superconscient creative 
energy” of Being. 


Modus Operandi of Superconscious Teleology 

It is then the superconscient energy of Being which con¬ 
stitutes the real nisus of the onward march of evolution 
But the dynamism of Being operates not wantonly and arbi- 



110 


THE PHILOSOPHY OF INTEGRALISM 


trarily, but through a machinery of laws and forces. In sha¬ 
ping the course of evolution, the creative energy functions 
through two closely cooperating forces. 

First, there is an upward-tending force from below bringing 
forth into articulate expression an ascending series of ever- 
new qualities, powers and values. This upward drive results 
from the involution of the higher into the lower, the involu¬ 
tion of the Spirit in mind, of mind in life, and of life in 
matter. Secondly, there is a n upward-drawing force from above 
which results from the constant pressure exerted by the 
higher orders of existence upon the lower. This pressure 
and the consequent upward-drawing attraction not only 
help and accelerate the upward-tending force from below 
but also very largely determine the special ways in which it 
is eventually realized. 

We have already seen that the material world of our 
experience is, as Sri Aurobindo points out, only one among 
a large variety of distinct modes of self-fulfilment of the 
Supreme Being. Whereas, in the material world, matter is 
the dominant principle and the starting-point of the evolu¬ 
tionary process, with other principles involved in it and gra¬ 
dually evolving from it, there are most probably other orders 
of Being’s self-fulfilment. In one of them life may function 
as the determinant principle. In another still it is perhaps 
the Supermind which functions as the principal determinant. 
This separate dominance of different principles of being 
in different planes of existence is not only a philosophic 
possibility, but a verifiable reality to which many mystics 
bear affirmative witness. The cooperation of the upward- 
tending force from below and the upward-drawing force 
from above in determining the course of evolution is specially 

in evidence in the history of human self-development. Man 
has a more or less vivid awareness of an iriepressible urge 
from within and also of uplifting and ennobling forces from 



THE GOAL OF EVOLUTION 


111 


above. The higher a man ascends on the path of spiritual 
progress, the keener his perception of the inner urge of aspi¬ 
ration, and the livelier his feeling of the impact of higher 
planes of consciousness. 


Is Alan the Limit of Evolution ? 


We have now an idea of the forces which are at work 
behind the emergence of qualitative differences in the 
material world. The question that next arises is : Are we 
to suppose that the evolutionary process has reached its 
highest limit with the birth of human personality ? Or that 
man is the crowning consummation of evolution ? Is it a 
fact that the only direction in which further progress lies 
would be in carrying to the utmost limit of development 
the latent capacities of the mind and in an increasing reali¬ 
zation of man’s moral and social ideals ? 


Such a supposition would involve a complete misreading 

of the fundamental trend of evolution. There are numerous 

indications in the human mind which point beyond the 

limited mentality and underscore the necessity of mind’s 

self-completion beyond itself. It is notorious that mind, left 

to its own resources, can never reconcile its own paradoxes 

or self-discrepancies. It suffers from a radical division within 

itself, such as the conscious and the unconscious. It is torn 

by such conflicts as passion and reason, ego and non-ego, 

etc. Such basic divisions and conflicts can be solved only bv 

going beyond the limits of the mind and attaining a higher 

level of consciousness. To suggest that man as the mental 

being ‘ S the crown of evolution or the measure of things, is 

ke dl e fabled frog-in-the-well imagining that the ocean 
might be just another well. 

It may be argued that even though man may not be the 
ast word of evolution, he himself is not capable of developing 



1 12 THE PHILOSOPHY OF INTEGRALISM 

into a higher form of existence, such as the Superman. In 
that case, Supermanhood can hardly be presented as man’s 
own ideal of self-perfection. The Superman would rather 
belong to a separate and independent level of creation. 
Taking for granted that there is likely to be an evolutionary 
leap of saltus from man to the Superman, that would not be 
a case of man himself getting transformed into the Superman, 
but just a case of nature by-passing the human level to lay 
the foundation for a totally different level of creation. 

It is indeed true that that has hitherto been the character 
of nature’s evolutionary leap. Nature by-passed the plant 
in creating the animal. She by-passed the animal in creating 
the human species. So also it might not be altogether un¬ 
reasonable to infer that nature would perhaps one day by¬ 
pass man in creating the next higher sspecies of Superman. 
Moreover, every great type or pattern of being, answers to 
a peculiar form of delight of the creative energy. “Each 
form and way of being has its own appropriate way of the 
delight of being.” Like all other beings, man too has his 
own native law, limits, special kind of existence, swabhdua, 
swadharma ; within these limits, he can extend and develop, 
but he cannot go outside them. If there is a perfection to 
which he has to arrive, it must be a perfection in his own 
kind, within his own law of being,—the full play of it, but 
by observation of its mode and measure, not by transcend- 

dence.” 1 

Now, it must be observed by way of criticism that though 
every pattern of living answers to a peculiar form of delight 
of being, that is no argument against the possibility that the 
creative delight includes also the joy of gradual working 
out of a Truth inherent in Being. The cosmic plan includes 
no doubt the preservation of various types or patterns, but 
that does not surely preclude the joy of growing into a higher 

1 Sri Aurobindo, The Life Divine , op. cit., p. 990. 



THE GOAL OF EVOLUTION 


113 


pattern by exceeding the limits of the lower. 

■‘A drama without denouement may be an artistic possi¬ 
bility.. (and) the drama of the earth-evolution might con¬ 
ceivably be of that character, but an intended or inherently 
predetermined denouement is also and more convincingly 
possible.” 1 True, the plant itself did not develop or get 
transformed into the animal, nor did the animal itself 
develop or get transformed into man. Nature by-passed 
the animal in creating man. That is because the plant and 
the animal are in the nature of unconscious vehicles of the 
evolutionary urge. They are obviously incapable of con¬ 
scious cooperation with the inherent purpose of evolution. 

But the case is entirely different with man. Nature has 
come to attain self-consciousness in him. The impulse of 
self-exceeding seems to be an essential part of the law of 
self-development of man. The means for a conscious transi¬ 
tion seems to be provided for among his unique spiritual 
powers. “Man has seen that there can be a higher status of 
consciousness than his own; the evolutionary oestrus is there 
in his parts of life and mind, the aspiration to exceed himself 
is delivered and articulate within him....In him, then, the 
substitution of a conscious for a subconscious evolution has 
become conceivable and practicable, and it may well be 
concluded that the aspiration, the urge, the persistent 
endeavor immanent is a sure sign of Nature’s will for a 
higher way to fulfilment, the emergence of a greater status”. 2 

So, the objections to the possibility of man’s self-growth 
into a higher pattern of being are quite unfounded. This 
is not, however, to suggest that the whole human race is 
likely one day to rise in a block to the Supermental level. 

I lie human mental status will perhaps always, or at least 
for a very long period of time, be there, but it will be there 

1 Ibid., p. 995. 

Sri Aurobindo, The Life Divine , op. cit., p. 1005. 



114 


THE PHILOSOPHY OF INTEGRALISM 


not as an unsurpassable type or pattern, but as an open step 
towards the spiritual and supermental status. 


The Vision of Supermanhood 

The foregoing account of the nature and scope of evolution 
brings us to a vision of supermanhood as the next higher 
possibility of terrestrial evolution. There have been glimpses 
almost in all religions of a divine fulfilment of the human 
aspiration. In Christianity there has been the dream of a 
Kingdom of Heaven, or of a reign of the Saints on earth. 
Similarly, in Hinduism, we have the vision of a new Satya 
luga , or Kingdom of Truth emerging out of the ruins of 
destruction of the Iron age. 

True, there are people who believe that heaven is heaven 
and earth is earth, and that ‘the twain shall never meet.’ 
They imagine an essential incompatibility between heaven 
and earth—between the glories of spiritual realization and the 
conditions of embodied existence in material circumstances 
—so that though the possibility of the emancipation of the 
human soul from its bondage on earth into a heavenly 
region of infinite knowledge and bliss is admitted, the descen¬ 
ding of heaven on earth or a transformation of earth into 
heaven, is strenuously combated. But it has been our con¬ 
tention in the foregoing pages that the possibility of a divine 
transformation of human existence, or of the conscious 
evolution of man into Superman, is not only perfectly 
reasonable, but the secret and sovereign purpose of terres¬ 
trial evolution. The emergence of reason in the course of 
evolution made it possible for man to appear on earth. 
Through man’s conscious cooperation with the creative force 
of evolution, the higher power of Supermind may be called 
into overt operation in human life and society. The emer¬ 
gence of the Supermind would transform man into Super- 



THE GOAL OF EVOLUTION 


115 


man. It would effectuate a radical transformation of man’s 
collective consciousness. It would lay the foundation for a 

unique world order governed by the forces of love, peace 
and progress. 

The vision of Supermanhood gives a definite shape to 

the popular idea of the Kingdom of Heaven on earth, and 

places it on the firm footing of philosophical reasoning. 

Just as life was previously latent in matter, making its 

appearance at a subsequent date in the course of evolution, 

and just as mind was previously latent in life, making its 

appearance at a subsequent date in the course of evolution, 

so also Supermind which is now latent and secretly operative 

in our human mentality, is destined one day to be brought 

forth into explicit operation in the fulness of time. The 

complete unveiling of the Spirit in material conditions by 

means of the Supermind is indeed the ultimate goal of terres¬ 
trial evolution. 



CHAPTER XI 


The Principle of Individuality 


The fundamental affirmation of nondualism is that the indi¬ 
vidual self (Atman) is existentially identical with the Abso¬ 
lute. It is Being in its individualized mode of self-expression. 

In its transcendental aspect, Being is the non-temporal 
root of all that is. It is the indeterminable ground of all 
existence. In its universal aspect, Being is cosmic creative 
energy. It is the all-originating, all-sustaining, all-consum¬ 
mating reality. Integral nondualism holds that the individual 
in its inmost essence is a unique focus of the non-temporal. 
It is an active center of the cosmic creative energy. In 
existence, it is identical with the Absolute. In form and 
function, it is different from the Absolute. In respect of both 
this identity and difference, individuality is a very real and 
significant component of Being. 

I he individual self is not a mere abstract power of the Ab¬ 
solute. Nor is it an unrecognizable element in the life of the 
Absolute. Nor is it a self-subsistent member of the Absolute 
conceived as a Republic of Selves. As a unique focus of the 
Absolute, the individual is essentially identical therewith, 
and therefore it contains within itself the seed of perfection 
and freedom. 

The individual in his wholeness is not to be equated 
with the mind-body complex with which he is normally 
identified in his empirical life. There is a depth-dimension 
of human personality. Non-mental and non-personal factors 
are present in the depth-dimension of being. The individual 
is also not to be equated with the ego principle which is an 
organizing principle of man’s conscious experiences. The 
ego is the principle of exclusive particularity. It is that which 



THE PRINCIPLE OF INDIVIDUALITY 


117 


separates an individual from other beings. The non-personal 
factor in him is that which unites him with the universal 
and the eternal without abrogating his individuality. 

The purpose of this chapter is to make a comparative and 
critical study of some important theories concerning the 
principle of individuality. The elements of truth in those 
theories are duly acknowledged and harmoniously blended 
in the integral view of the individual. 

The Monadic Theory 

While discussing the problem of individuality, one is 
confronted at the very outset with what has been called the 
monadic theory of the individual. Monadism is the result 
of the application of the principle of atomism to the realm 
of spirit. It is inspired by the assumption that the utlimate 
constituents of the world are an infinite number of simple, 
indivisible, independent and self-contained units. 

Leibnitz says that the really simple or indivisible unit 
must be non-extended, immaterial, or spiritual in character; 
because whatever is material is extended in space and what¬ 
ever is extended is divisible. It is such immaterial consti¬ 
tuents of the world—spiritual atoms or monads—which 
provide, in his view, true instances of individuality. The 
monadic theory is an extreme logical sequel to the conception 
of the individual as an exclusive particular. Ordinarily, the 
term ‘individual’ is used to signify an entity which has an 
independent existence and a distinctive character of its own, 
so that it can easily be distinguished from the rest of the 
world. The individual thus conceived as an exclusive parti- 
culai or repellent unit is affirmed by monadism to be the 
only thing concretely real and substantial. Leibnitz holds 
that the individual monad or soul is substantial insofar as it 
is independent in respect of its action. It is an active force 



110 T H PHILOSOPHY OF INTEGRALISM 

(m acliva), and it pursues its independent line of action 
entirely uninfluenced by any external agency. Individual 
souls are, in his view, ‘windowless’. They do not receive any 
influence from without, nor do they exert any influence upon 
others. They are individual insofar as they combine ex¬ 
clusive particularity with substantiality. 

In the case of the human individual, the monadic theory 
is reinforced by ethical considerations. The human indi¬ 
vidual is manifestly capable of free actions which are expres¬ 
sions of his own unique nature. He acts out of his own spon¬ 
taneity, and owns responsibility for his actions. Mr. Howison 
contends that the human individual conceived as a moral 
personality is lifted above the sphere of efficient causality. 
He can by no stretch of imagination be said to be derived 
from antecedent factors, and fashioned a extra. He is, in 
respect of his spiritual nature, self-molding and self-made. 
He refuses to be coerced, and is opened only to persuasion. 
He cannot be molded even by the superior power of God, 
unless and until he identified himself with that power and 
thus makes it his own. It has been rightly observed that even 
God has to wait outside and knock on the doors of the heart 
of man. I his leads Prof. Howison to develop his spiritualis¬ 
tic pluralism which treats human spirits as ontologically 
underived or as existents in their own ri^ht. 

O 

But the spiritualistic pluralism of both Leibnitz and Howi¬ 
son founders upon the inescapable fact of the interrelation 
and interdependence of the individual components of the 
universe. Individuals cannot be interrelated unless they are 
members of one system. And they can be members of one 
inclusive system only as modes of manifestation of the prin¬ 
ciple of totality that informs the system. That is why both 
Leibnitz and Howison feel constrained in the end to qualify 
their individualism with some principle of “ideal harmony”. 
Leibnitz speaks of finite souls or monads as “fulgurations” of 



THE PRINCIPLE OF INDIVIDUALITY 1 19 

one Supreme Monad, the Monus Monadum. And Howison 
constantly refers the finite self to the Divine Centre which is, 
in his view, the final cause of their development. 

Individualism is, however, carried, to its furthest logical 
extreme at the hands of Dr. McTaggart. If the individual is 
to maintain his character as a self-subsistent entity, he cannot 
be existentially subordinate to any central presiding self or a 
Primus inter pares . McTaggart holds that a self that enjoys 
being-for-self cannot be imagined to exist as part of the exist¬ 
ence of another self. Likewise, whatever is part of the exis¬ 
tence of a universal self must be a psychological content of 
that self,—its perception or idea or feeling. Consequently, it 
cannot itself enjoy selfhood. Once you posit the existence of 
a Universal Self which is capable of comprehending within its 
being other selves, you feel logically constrained to exalt it 
into the all-engulfing Absolute. The admission of the 
Absolute Self amounts to a reduction of all finite spirits to 
mere modes of consciousness of the Absolute. The finite self 
can hardly maintain its selfhood consistent with its inclusion 
in the existence of one, all-embracing Spirit. So, MicTaggart 
affii ms that the individual selves are, in their deepest essence, 
eternally self-subsistent. To use his terminology, individual 
selves are “primary parts” of the Universe. 1 

But even though individual selves are self-subsistent, 
according to Mcl aggart they are certainly not self-enclosed. 
They exist not in isolation, but in harmonious association 
with one another. They are not shut up within the enclosure 
of their detached personality, living out an insular existence 
of their own, strong in solid singleness like Lucretian atoms. 
T he assumption of isolated existence of individual selves 
violently clashes with the patent facts of spiritual communion 
and social interdependence. Individuals are in point of 

1 John McTaggart, The Nature of Existence , Vol. II (Cambridge: The Uni¬ 
versity Press, 1927) p. 120. 



120 


THE PHILOSOPHY OF INTEGRALISM 


truth interrelated members of an organic or super-organic 
system. McTaggart conceives of this system as the imperso¬ 
nal unity of a society or a college.This unity is sustained, not 
by the all-engulfing consciousness of any universal self, but 
by the relations of love and perfect mutual understanding 
in which the plurality of selves stand to one another. The 
logical sequal to the basic assumptions of McTaggart is that 
individual selves are beginningless and endless in their 
self-subsistence, and that they are underived and imperi¬ 
shable, which conclusion McTaggart boldly faces. If empi¬ 
rical facts appear to run counter to this conclusion, a little 
metaphysical distinction would be enough to remove that 
difficulty. McTaggart maintains that it is only sub specie 
tempons that individual selves appear to be gradually pro¬ 
gressing towards an ideal perfection. Sub specie aeternitatis 
they are in actual possession of eternal perfection. In other 
words, empirical selves are manifestations in time of tran¬ 
scendent selves who enjoy timeless perfection. 

Individualism is not only the outcome of certain logical 
and ethical considerations, but has also the support of a 
particular type of spiritual experience. It is in reliance 
upon a profound spiritual realization that the Sankhya 
School of Indian philosophy declares that the individual 
spirits (purusas) are, in respect of their intrinsic nature, 
eternally perfect and beyond birth and death, growth and 
decay. The individual self is, according to the Sankhya, in 
the nature of pure, unobjective consciousness, eternally 
placed above the ephemeral joys and sorrows of worldly 
life. The empirical self which is its manifestation in time is 
an organization of the elements of nature (Prakrti), a phy¬ 
sical-vital-mental complex, which is penetrated by the light 
of pure consciousness. It is this empirical self which has to 
struggle through the various colorful experiences of birth, 
death and rebirth. In all its struggles and thrilling adven- 



THE PRINCIPLE OF INDIVIDUALITY 


121 


tures in the cosmic drama, the empirical self is, however, 
sustained by that unique transcendent self whose shadow or 
empirical counterpart it is. The multiplicity of empirical 
selves is not an illusion, but a reflection of the real multi¬ 
plicity of transcendent selves. 

The unity of our world of experience is traceable, accord¬ 
ing to the Sankhya, not to the nondualism of one ultimate 
Self, but to the identity of one common Nature (Prakrti). 
It is because Nature is one common stuff of our experience 
that the universe presents the appearance of being one all- 
embracing whole. But that does not destroy the manifold¬ 
ness of the individual self. The Sankhya contends that there 
is an overwhelming mass of empirical evidence in support 
of the doctrine of plurality of selves, which evidence is pro¬ 
vided by the scheme of bondage and liberation ( bandha - 
moksa-vyavastha) and the scheme of pleasure and pain ( sukha - 
duhkha-vydvastha ). The liberation of one individual does 
not mean the liberation of other individuals, and the joys 
and sorrows of one individual are entirely different from 
those of others. 

The Sankhya position has however been criticized on the 
ground that the schemes of liberation and bondage, and 
pleasure and pain, can pretty well be explained on the basis 
of wide differences among empirical selves. It is unneces¬ 
sary for their explanation to carry the element of differen- 
tiation to the transcendent spiritual reality. Different 
individuals are happy or miserable, elated or depressed, ac¬ 
cording to their identification with different bodies and their 
involvement in different social situations. Such differences 
are no proof of any real division within the life of the pure 
spirit. Moreover the Sankhya thinkers fail to supply any 
principle of differentiation which would mark off one tran¬ 
scendent self from another. The pure undifferentiated con¬ 
sciousness which is affirmed to be the essence of the self can 



122 


THE PHILOSOPHY OF INTEGRALISM 


admit of no differentiation or plurality except by associatism 
with the divisions of matter. So, the Vedanta points out that 
the self which is in its inmost essence pure consciousness, 
must needs be like one infinite space, undivided and indi¬ 
visible. The plurality of selves are real only from the empi¬ 
rical standpoint of Ignorance. They are like artificially 
created divisions within one infinite space. 

The Modal or Adjectival Theory 

The theory of the individual as a self-subsistent exclusive 
entity is rejected by those who take their stand upon the 
fundamental unity of all existence. Spinoza conceives of 
reality as one infinite substance such as embraces all finite 
existents within itself. This is true of spiritual as well as of 
material things. Human personalities, dependent as they 
are upon the one infinite personality we call God, can hardly 
be treated as ‘substances’, because independent existence is, 
according to Spinoza, of the very essence of substantiality. 

Spinoza therefore looks upon individuals as mere modes 
or modifications of one ultimate Reality. In respect of their 
spiritual nature, they are modes of the infinite consciousness 
of God. In respect of their physical existence, they are modes 
of the infinite extension of God. Human beings who are 
mind-body complexes, are modifications of God who is 
self-conscious and self-extended. As such, they do not enjoy 
real freedom of will and initiative of action. God is entiiely 
immanent in them. And all the thoughts and actions of 
men are finally to be explained in terms of the Divine im¬ 
manence. Their appearance of substantiality and freedom 
owes itself to the isolating standpoints of sensuous imagin¬ 
ation. All talk of self-contained existence and detached 
spontaneity is in fact but meaningless verbiage. 

The pantheistic doctrine of finite individuality as a mere 



THE PRINCIPLE OF INDIVIDUALITY 


123 


mode of appearance is strongly reinforced by the dialectic 
of absolutism. Whereas Spinoza denies the substantiality of 
the human individual on the ground that he is not inde¬ 
pendent in existence, Bradley and Bosanquet repudiate his 
reality on the ground that he is shot through and through 
with logical contradictions. Immediately one starts exa¬ 
mining the nature of the individual self, one is confronted 
with a swelling mass of self-discrepancies. The self provides 
no satisfactory principle of uniting the one and the many. 
Bradley points out that like all other finite things it can be 
said in regard to the self also that its nature or ‘what 5 travels 
beyond the limits of its existence or ‘that 5 inasmuch as it 
depends for its nature upon the relation to other selves and 
objects. The self is said to be infected bv the relations in 
which it stands with the rest of the universe; “external rela¬ 
tions enter its essence and so ruin its independency 551 . It pas¬ 
ses one s understanding how the variety of its functions, 
states and objects can be brought into harmonious union 
with its oneness and simplicity. 

What is the relation in which the identical and permanent 
self may be said to stand to the changing diversity of psychical 
contents? If the relation in question be a vital and essential 
one, then one fails to comprehend how the self can main¬ 
tain its identity or unity. If on the contrary the relation 
be a non-essential one,—if, that is to say, the self stands alone 
from the psychic plurality, either having no character of its 
own 01 <i chaiactcr unknown and unknowable,—then it may 
be a fine thing in itself, but it would be sheer mockery to 
call it the self of a man . 2 True, the self is somehow expe¬ 
rienced by us as a principle of unity in diversity, but so long 
as the principle cannot be made self-coherent to rational 
comprehension, it cannot be affirmed to be real in the 

1 F. H. Bradley, Appearance and Reality , op. cit., p. 103. 

2 Ibid., p. 74. 



124 


THE PHILOSOPHY OF INTEGRALISM 


form in which we experience it. So far as it is known and com¬ 
prehended, the self proclaims its unreality by betraying self¬ 
discrepancies within itself. But still, though the self is not 
an ultimately real form, it is, according to Bradley, the high¬ 
est form of experience we possess. It is a concept immensely 
helpful in organizing systematically the manifold experiences 
of an individual. 

The modal or adjectival theory of the finite individual 
has a most vigorous and eloquent advocate in Dr. Bosan- 
quet. He holds that the Absolute is the one true individual 
reality, and that finite individuals are “in ultimate analysis 
connections of content within the real Individual to which 
they belong ” 1 and of which they are “ultimately predicates”. 
This follows from the view that individuality means system¬ 
atic character, of which self-coherence and comprehensive¬ 
ness are two inseparable aspects. As finitude is by its very 
nature the seat of self-discrepancy, the Absolute is the only 
perfect embodiment of the principle of individuality, for the 
Absolute alone is a perfect system. It is the most self-coherent 
as well as most comprehensive unity of all experiences. A 
finite individual is “here and now beyond escape, an element 
in the Absolute”, and can by no means be treated as a self- 
subsistent member thereof. Although he occupies a unique 
position in the realm of appearance, still he cannot escape 
the common fate of an all-pervasive transfusion in taking 
his place in the Absolute. 

The individual self is no doubt the highest embodiment 
directly known to us of the principle of totality. The unique 
function of finite individuality is that it is the living copula 
between the Absolute and external Nature. Every self is a 
representative center of the external world; some portion of 
Nature ‘comes alive’ in it. It is an empty principle of total- 

1 Bernard Bosanquet, Logic Vol. II (London : Oxford University Press, 
1911) p. 258. 



THE PRINCIPLE OF INDIVIDUALITY 


125 


ity having no prior content or organization of its own. '‘All 
finite minds focus and draw their detail from some parti¬ 
cular sphere of external nature ”. 1 “ The spiritual individual”, 
says Bosanquet, “has no separately distinguishable nucleus; 
he is the utterance of his place and time, a sub-variant of the 
content of his age, and a derivative of his family stock, 
like a bead on a plant.” He is the appearance at a certain 
stage of an omnipotent principle, which elicits its whole defi¬ 
nite content and development from its surroundings. 

Nature or the realm of externality lives in the lives of con¬ 
scious beings. All conscious beings also live in and through 
nature. “The self which makes the environment is itself 
all soaked in environment”. The Absolute is the “perfect 
union of mind and nature, absorbing the world of nature by 
and through the world of selves .” 2 

It is “the totality of a hold on reality which permeates in 
its degree all the conscious creatures of the creation, and use 
all its externality .” 3 The Absolute lays hold of external na¬ 
ture by and through finite selves, just as the mind of a great 
dramatist lays hold of certain portions of the external 
through the characters of his drama. 

The view that finite individuality is after all a vanishing 
quantity has also the backing of a particular type of spiritual 
experience. There is a level of spiritual realization in which 
individuality appears to be entirely liquidated. The mystic’s 
via negativa or path of negation reveals the Spirit in its aspect 
of pure undifferentiated consciousness, or featureless unity. 
When the purified and spiritualized intellect of man catches 
the reflection of that featureless unity, he experiences a dis¬ 
tinct loss of the sense of separative existence. There is 
indeed a dissolution of exclusive individuality on the attain- 


1 Bernard Bosanquet, The Principle of Individuality and Value , op. cit., p. 371. 

2 Ibid., p. 382. 3 Ibid., p. 382. 



126 


THE PHILOSOPHY OF INTEGRALISM 


fncnt of liberation from the bonds of Ignorance. Aforeover, 
having attained liberation, it is quite possible for the soul to 
choose to remain, by an exercise of freedom, absorbed in 
the static calm of unitary experience. The advaitavdda of 
Sankara and the uirvdtio.-vdda of Buddha build upon such 
transcendental spiritual experience. They look upon indi¬ 
viduality as entirely a product of Ignorance. 

Buddhism treats the individual as a continuous stream of 
cognitions, which loses itself in the sea of ineffable impersonal 
delight that JSfirvaiia is. Advaitisrr. holds that since individuality 
is a product of Ignorance it is no more than an illusion, a 
fleeting phenomenon. It is therefore as untenable to maintain 
that the Absolute is a synthetic unity of finite selves as to sug¬ 
gest that the individual self is a modification of the Absolute. 
It is more in accord with the spirit of Advaitism to say that 
the individual self is non-different from the Absolute than to 
say that they are identical, because the notion of identity 
necessarily presupposes some amount of difference. While 
for Bradley, the individual self is in the ultimate context a 
submerged element of the overruling harmony of the 
Absolute, according to Sankara, the individual self is in res¬ 
pect of individuality an eternally cancelled unreality and 
in respect of selfhood the eternally accomplished Absolute. 
The Sarikarite position is an extreme logical sequel to ascetic 
nondualism. It is also the outcome of an exclusive emphasis 
upon the transcendental mode of spiritual experience. 

But if individuality be in the last analysis an unreality, 
then our life in the world must be void of ultimate signi¬ 
ficance. Individuality is the center of all actions and the 
support of all effort and initiative in the world. If the indi¬ 
vidual be only a passing appearance, then the entire stream 
of life, which is an unceasing stream of activity, must be 
reduced to a meaningless dream. To suggest that life begins 
with the appearance of individuality and aims at the disso- 



THE PRINCIPLE OF INDIVIDUALITY 


127 


lution of the same in the Supreme, is to reduce creation to a 
game of illusion. To affirm with Bradley that the individual 
self is an organ of imperfect and self-contradictory self-arti¬ 
culation of the Absolute is to admit that life and creation 
are in essence a cosmic blunder. It implies that the Absolute 
perpetually indulges in an absurd scheme of self-manifestation 
in terms of the relative and the finite,—a scheme which is 
foredoomed to failure. 



CHAPTER XII 


The Integral View of the Individual 

All theories which affirm the unreality of the individual 
are vitiated by a confusion between the true individual and 
the exclusive particular or between the individual self and 
the ego. True, in the crucible of pure spiritual experience 
exclusive particularity undergoes a process of dissolution. 
But such a dissolution hardly amounts to loss of authentic 
individuality. Freedom from the shackles of maya or lower 
prakrti undoubtedly implies the liquidation of the ego, but 
that is an essential condition for the discovery of the authen¬ 
tic individual self. True it is that on the attainment of 
liberation from the bonds of Ignorance the individual self 
can choose freely either to fall quiescent in the static con¬ 
sciousness of the Supreme, or to go in for conscious coopera¬ 
tion with the evolutionary urge of the Supreme. But such 
exercise of freedom on the attainment of illumination is itself 
the strongest argument in support of the reality of the indi¬ 
vidual self. Even when the self chooses to merge itself in the 
fathomless depth of Being, the reality of self as free choice is 
demonstrated. The integral view of the individual reveals 
him as a real component of Being. Individuality is neither 
an unreal appearance nor a self-subsistent entity. It is a real 
and significant center of self-expression of Being. It is instru¬ 
mental to the self-representation of Being in infinitely diverse 
forms. It is the agency by which ever new values are created. 

Ego-Centric and Cosmo-Centric Individuality 

A distinction of vital importance is that between ego¬ 
centric individuality and cosmo-centric individuality. The 



THE INTEGRAL VIEW OF THE INDIVIDUAL 129 

former is the product of Ignorance, and therefore in a sense 
unreal. The latter is inspired by an understanding of the 
cosmic purpose of Being. When a person is dominated in 
his thinking and living by his exclusive self-interest, his 
individuality is ego-centric. When a person discovers his 
ultimate ground of existence, his authentic individuality 
emerges. He begins to feel a spiritual kinship with the entire 
universe. He experiences a sense of responsibility for the en¬ 
tire living creation. His heart beats in unison with the all 
of existence. His soul is aflame with the spirit of dedication 
to cosmic welfare. In fine, he becomes cosmo-centric. He 
understands how uniqueness and universality, I-ness and 
Thou-ness, are inexplicably interwoven in the concrete tex¬ 
ture of his being. 

What is liquidated on the attainment of spiritual liberation 
is the ego-centric individuality of an individual. Out of the 
ashes of the ego is reborn a new individual. His deepest po¬ 
tentiality as an active center of Being is dynamized. He 
learns to respond to the world in its wholeness by virtue of 
his inner realization of the wholeness of Being. 

The individual in his individualized form is neither an 
illusory appearance nor a self-contained substance. Nothing 
in the world is absolutely self-contained. Self-subsistent 
individuality exists only as an abstraction in the mind of the 
supreme egotist. Everything real in the world lives in cons¬ 
tant interaction and interdependence with the rest of the 
world. It is a link in the vast system of interrelationships 
that the universe is. Each is in all and all is in each. Every 
individual, therefore, is essentially a unique and specific 
configuration of the elements of universal energy. He is a 
specific constellation of the space-time continuum, endowed 
with some emergent powers and qualities. 


9 



130 


THE PHILOSOPHY OF INTEGRALISM 

Freedom and Self-Existence 


The most prerogative feature of the human individual 
is this potential for freedom and self-existence. But even in 
his case, existence does not mean self-contained being or 
absolutely isolated being, cut-off from the rest of the uni¬ 
verse. Absolutely isolated existence is the path of perdition, 
not of self-realization. The authentic self is the individual as 
related in his wholeness to the Whole. Selfhood is the inte¬ 
grated wholeness of being of the individual, not the subsis¬ 
tence of a detached entity. Every self is a unique way of 
mirroring the universe, not a way of negating it. 

So, true self-existence means one’s ability to live in the 
world out of the depth of one’s own being. The ability to 
relate one’s self to the world in the light of one’s inner vision 
of truth. The ability to cultivate the best within one’s self 
and offer one’s best to the world in one’s own freely chosen 
manner. 

True freedom is indeed an attribute of man’s self conscious¬ 
ness. It does not mean absence of all determination. Abso¬ 
lute indeterminism is a myth of wishful thinking. It is a 
figment of undisciplined imagination. Authentic freedom 
inherent in human individuality is the ability to transcend 
all fixed determinations. The animal is determined by his 
instinct. By virtue of his reason and his imagination of 
boundless possibility man can transcend the determinism 
of instinct. He can allow his conduct to be determined by 
his awareness of ever-new principles and values. Man is 
essentially a rule-making creature. He is always breaking 
past rules and forging new ones. His mind is always 
exploring new possibilities of self-development and self- 
expression. His evolution is marked by ever-changing 

modes of self-determination. 

A conservative chooses to be determined by some well- 



THE INTEGRAL VIEW OF THE INDIVIDUAL 


131 


established and time-tested laws of society. A liberal wants 
to modify established laws in recognition of changing times. 
He is willing to accept time as an essential determinant of 
human conduct. 

An orthodox religious person is well-satisfied with the 
established religious authority as the determinant of his 
religious conduct. A mystic considers that to be a subtle 
form of bondage. He wishes to break the bonds of authori¬ 
tarian religion. But in doing so he is willing to move into 
another form of self-determination. He allows his whole 
life to be determined by the will of God as revealed to his 
inward consciousness. 


Uniqueness , Relatedness and Transcendence 

Individuality is in its essence, as Sri Aurobindo puts it, 
a poise of being of the Absolute. As a particular existent, 
every individual has his aspect of uniqueness. He is a focal¬ 
ized expression of the universe. He represents a special 
and peculiar combination of talents and limitations, poten¬ 
tialities and dispositions. 

But he has also his aspect of relatedness,—relatedness 
to the whole. He hungers for the whole. The spirit of the 
whole is dynamically present at the center of his being. He 
wishes to complete himself by association with others. He 
wishes also to make himself whole by harmonizing the 
diverse elements of his own nature,—by integrating his ins¬ 
tincts, emotions, thoughts and insights. Characteristic of 
the individual psyche is its integrative power, its self-healing 
and whole-making ability. 

The indwelling presence of the whole or the absolute 
in the individual also generates a self-transcending urge. 
Consequently, no individual is satisfied with his given 
actuality, with his ‘is-ness’. He is always reaching out for 



132 


THE PHILOSOPHY OF INTEGRALISM 

something higher and greater. He is always trying to over¬ 
come himself. He is always projecting himself into the future 
in pursuit of ever-new values. 

This self-transcending impulse may assume social, cultural, 
or pure spiritual forms. Culturally, an individual sacrifices 
himself at the altar of some such cultural value as scientific 
pursuit, aesthetic creation, philosophic integration, etc. 
Socially, he transcends himself by subordinating his private 
self-interest to the larger interests of the family, community, 
nation, political party, humanity, etc. Spiritually, he tran¬ 
scends himself by an act of total self-offering to the Divine. 
He allows all other interests and pursuits of life to be sub¬ 
merged in his one overmastering impulse to fathom the 
mystery of Being and to live in union with Being. 

Socio-moral transcendence reaches ultimate fulfilment 
in the spirit of universal love and compassion. Cultural 
self-transcendence reaches fulfilment in the spirit of dedica¬ 
tion to some cultural value. Spiritual self-transcendence 
reaches ultimate fulfilment in the discovery of one’s absolute 
relationship to the Absolute. In the balanced growth of an 
individual the social, ethical, cultural and spiritual aspects 
of personality have to be harmoniously fulfilled. 

Self-In tegra lion 

An integrated individual is one who becomes aware of 
his rootedness in the Supreme. Therein lies the essence of 
his enlightenment and freedom. He breaks the bonds of 
Ignorance and egotism in all forms. But since the world is 
the diversified expression of the Supreme, the enlightened 
person necessarily experiences a vivid feeling of oneness 
with the world. Genuine wisdom cannot but produce the 
spirit of universal love. The experience of wisdom and 
love enables an individual to function at his best in the 



THE INTEGRAL VIEW OF THE INDIVIDUAL 133 

service of God and man. 

Wisdom transcends individuality. The wise man lives as 
a unique focus of pure Transcendence. He is freed from the 
fetters of the ego. He conquers fear and anxiety, doubt and 
despair. He is united with the depth of his being. So, the 
Mundaka Upanisad says, “When a person beholds the 
Supreme, his knot of the heart is cut and all doubts are 
dispelled . 5 ’ 1 

Love universalizes individuality. The individual who 
experiences the love that flows from wisdom knows how to 
sacrifice all personal comfort for the sake of others. 

Creativity intensifies individuality. The individual of 
light and love knows how to mobilize the resources of his 
personality in creating new values. Guided by his vision of 
truth and spirit of love, he offers his best for the good of 
others. With a profound stirring of the soul, there is a free 
and spontaneous release of psychic energy in meaningful 
self-expression. 

Love is the way of self-expansion. It is the flame that con¬ 
sumes the particularity of an individual and fills the world 
with his universal essence. It is the way of the candle which 
burns itself while filling the whole room with its light. 
It is the way of the flower which withers away while filling 
the environment with its charm and fragrance. It is the way 
of the star which explodes while dispelling the darkness of 
the night. 




1 Mundaka Upanisad, II, 2.9. 



CHAPTER XIII 


The Longing for Immortality 


The desire for immortality has been throughout history a 
powerful motivation of human conduct. It has inspired the 
noblest and most daring of human deeds. Man has embraced 
death with a smiling face with a view to conquering death. 
He has accepted extinction in one form in order to gain 
imperishable glory in another form. He has sacrificed life 
evanascent in order to gain life everlasting. The longing for 
immortality has indeed expressed itself in various ways. 

Immortality is essentially an attribute of consciousnes. 
It is an attribute of wisdom, love and dedication to higher 
values. By boldly looking death in the face, man overcomes 
death. By realizing the fundamental truth about life and 
death, he goes beyond life and death. By perceiving his 
eternal relationship to the Supreme, he participates in the 
life eternal of the Supreme. By gaining insight into the mys¬ 
tery of time, he is lifted out of the perishing moments of time. 

By virtue of his identification with higher values and 
in proportion to his fulfilment of them in life, man appro¬ 
priates the imperishable property of higher values. 

Finally, man attains immortality by achieving integration 
of personality, and by probing into the non-temporal dimen¬ 
sion of his being. A thoroughly integrated person becomes 
fearless because he discovers his rootedness in the eternal. 

Let us see in what different ways down through the ages 
man’s basic longing for immortality has sought fulfilment. 



THE LONGING FOR IMMORTALITY 


135 


Social Immortality 

First of all, the passion for immortality seeks fulfilment in 
society. It may assume the form of desire for children,— 
for bright and illustrious children. Through the uninterrup¬ 
ted continuation of progeny, a person gains a sense of 
immortality. His name is immortalized in the annals of the 
family tree. 

The longing for immortality may also assume the form of 
leaving some creditable achievement for succeeding genera¬ 
tions to admire. Ancient rulers of Egypt used to create py¬ 
ramids. The great emperor, Sajahan wanted to immortalize 
his wife by creating the magnificent Taj Mahal. By immort¬ 
alizing his beloved wife he also secretly desired to immortal¬ 
ize himself. Creative thinkers, poets, painters, etc. attain 
immortality by leaving behind them immortal works of 
of artistic creation. Social workers achieve immortality 
by pouring out their life blood in building some great 
social institution, such as a school, a hospital, a research 
institute, a church, etc. Martyrs gain immortality by giving 
their life for a noble cause. Politicians seek immortality 
through self-identification with the prosperity and the glory 
of the mother land. Humanitarians identify themselves 
with the survival, welfare and progress of the human race. 


Idealistic Immortality 

The longing for immortality may seek fulfilment through 
the contemplation and realization of timeless ideas, forms, 
or values. When that happens, immortality assumes the 
pure idealistic form. 

An artist beholds the enchanting form of beauty in a little 
flower or in a charming landscape. In contemplating the 
timeless essence of beauty he feels lifted above the realm of 



136 


THE PHILOSOPHY OF INTEGRALISM 


perishable things. He has a feeling of participation in its 
non-temporal being. His own existence is merged in it, 
through contemplative oneness. He may feel that now that 
he is one with the immortal form of beauty, it does not matter 
if he dies as a particular physical entity. 

Similarly, a scientist may be searching for truth in a parti¬ 
cular sphere of nature. He has a sense of dedication to 
truth and identification with truth. Once in a while, he 
catches a glimpse of the truth he is trying to articulate and 
establish. By virtue of his vision of truth, he participates in 
truth’s non-temporal being. At the exalted moment of his 
truth-vision, he experiences immortality. He feels lifted out 
of the realm of death into the imperishable abode of light 
and knowledge. His inner being is suffused with the pro¬ 
found joy of communion with truth. 

Let us now sum up the foregoing. Social immortality 
consists in one’s feeling of oneness with the society,—with its 
survival, welfare, and progress. By virtue of devotion to a 
noble social cause, the individual dies to live in the advance 
of society. Idealistic immortality consists in one’s dynamic 
self-identification with some cultural values, such as scienti¬ 
fic pursuit, aesthetic creation, ethical perfection, etc. It is 
unitive contemplation of the timeless essence of some great 
Idea. 


Personal Immortality 

It should, however, be observed here that man s longing 
for immortality is not completely satisfied in terms of social, 
cultural, or idealistic immortality. The average human 
being secretly desires for the immortality of his own indi¬ 
vidual existence as a unique and distinct person. I his may 
be called personal immortality. If the ostensible facts of 
experience do not lend support to personal immortality, his 



THE LONGING FOR IMMORTALITY 


137 


creative imagination proceeds to fulfill this irrepressible 

psychic need in sublimated forms. 

Broadly speaking, there are two types of people. They are, 
to use the words of William James, the tough-minded and 
the tender-minded. The tough-minded people are hard 
boiled, realistic and extroverted. I hey are willing to adjust 
themselves to the harsh realities of life. They are satisfied 
with socio-cultural immortality, that is, the immortality of 
some great achievement in social or cultural fields. 

But those who are tender-minded secretly wish for the pro¬ 
longation of their own personal, individualized existence. 
It is not enough for them to leave at death a legacy of crea¬ 
tive action. In order that life may make sense, one must also 
individually continue to live after death in some form or 
other. A valuable social or cultural achievement would, for 
the tender-minded, lose its value if it cannot contribute to 
the author’s prolongation of life beyond the grave. If the 
facts of actual experience—the facts of common sense, science 
and self-realization—do not lend support to the idea of indefi¬ 
nite, personal immortality, the miracle of faith must be in¬ 
voked to fulfill one’s irrepressible psychic need for it. 

So, the notion of personal immortality—the indefinite 
prolongation of the individual after death—plays a domi¬ 
nant role in popular religion and theology. It assumes 
various forms. 

Some visualize personal immortality in terms of bodily 
resurrection. It is considered possible for the virtuous and 
the faithful to rise from tombs one day and make a triumphal 
entry into the supernatural Kingdom of Heaven in order 
to enjoy the immortal company of the merciful Godhead. 

If and when it is realized that the gross physical body is 
not an indispensable component of an individual human 
being’s spiritual existence, the idea of disembodied immorta¬ 
lity on higher spiritual planes gains prominence. A virtuous 



138 


THE PHILOSOPHY OF INTEGRALISM 


and faithful person goes back to the paradise from which he 
had a fall on account of his sinful defiance of divine authority. 
He acquires a new celestial body. It is made of subtle, super¬ 
natural substance. It enables him to participate in the in¬ 
describable glory and supernatural delight of at-one-ment 
with the Heavenly Father in paradise. Thus, the Christian 
idea of paradise regained through atonement with the 
Father in Heaven arises. 

The above may be called the supernaturalistic theory 
of immortality. Supernatural immortality may be static or 
dynamic. Some people conceive of supernatural immorta¬ 
lity in terms of eternal rest and supernal peace in heaven. 
It is the ecstatic joy of a renewed existence in the kingdom 
of heaven which is the realm of perfection. But some people 
—those who are especially ethically-minded—conceive of 
supernatural immortality in terms of unceasing progress. 
It is a kind of asymptotic approximation to the infinite goal 
of perfection. In its upward journey the soul passes through 
higher and higher levels of consciousness, through the ever- 
expanding splendors of the Infinite Spirit. Different ideas 
of supernatural immortality reflect different types of emo¬ 
tional urge of the human psyche. Vaisnava supernaturalism 
in India has elaborately dealt with different types of super¬ 
natural self-fulfilment. 

Some spiritual seekers wish to dwell in the same lofty plane 
of existence as that of God ( sdlokya ). Some wish to acquire 
the same form as that of God ( sarupya ). Some wish to acquire 
the same law of action as that of God (sadharmya ). Some wish 
to acquire the same supernatural powers, or the ability to 
work miracles such as belong to God ( sarsti ). Some wish 
to enter into the celestial body of God and get merged in 
His blissful and universal substance, ( sayujya ). Some wish 
to serve God unconditionally, having set aside all personal 
desires including even the desire for salvation or liberation 



THE LONGING FOR IMMORTALITY 


139 


(seva). The Bengal School of Vaisnavism holds that the spirit 
of unconditional surrender and service is the loftiest spiri¬ 
tual ideal. Even the notion of salvation appears egotistic 
when compared with this idea of divine service, regardless 
of all personal considerations, such as sin and salvation. 

But, it should be noted here that behind the willingness 
to renounce even the desire for liberation, the desire to serve 
God as a definite individual entity persists. Such a desire 
to serve God with utmost self-surrender is very commendable 
so long as one is alive. But when such a desire is projected 
beyond death, seeking fulfilment in some supernatural 
realm, the Vedantic criticism that this also is a product of 
Ignorance becomes very pertinent. From the standpoint 
of supreme wisdom the notions of a personal God, the super¬ 
natural region, the desire for personal immortality, even 
though such personal immortality is visualized in terms of 
utmost surrender to the Deity,—all this belongs in the realm 
of maya. 

But, the ideal of selfless service of the Supreme here and 
now in this very world is an element of permanent value in 
Vaisnava mysticism. Let us illustrate this ideal with the aid 
of an ancient anecdote. 

One time the great sage Narada went to have a visit with 

the Lord Krsna in his heavenly abode. On hearing that 

Krsna had a little headache, Narada was eager to help in 

whatever way he could. Krsna suggested that a little dust 

taken from the feet of a perfect devotee might cure him of 

his headache. Narada thought that such a therapeutic 

item must be easy enough to obtain. Because, was not the 

whole world full of Krsna’s devotees ? 

• • • 

He first went to some well-known ascetics and yogis. But 
all of them were shocked to hear the purpose of Narada’s 
visit. How could they allow a particle of dust from their 
feet to be applied to the great lord Krsna’s forehead ? Would 



140 


THE PHILOSOPHY OF INTEGRALISM 


not that amount to a great act of sinfulness on their part ? 

So, they thought that the whole thing was either a big joke, 
or a devil’s trap. 

Narada now realized the gravity of the situation and the 
difficulty of his undertaking. So, he now proceeded to Sri 
Krsna’s wife, Rukmini Devi. But no sooner had she learned 
of the purpose of Narada’s visit than she bit her tongue in 
shame. The Hindu wife’s proper place is at the feet of her 
lord. How can dust from her feet be applied to the husband’s 
forehead ? That would indeed be an unthinkable sin. And 
a shameless violation of social decorum. 

Disappointed and disillusioned, Narada went to Sri Krsna 
to report the whole matter. Krsna smiled. He then recom¬ 
mended the final solution to the problem. He told Narada 
to go to the remote and obscure village of Vrndavan and 
seek the cooperation of his humble devotee, Sri Radha. 
Travelling a long distance, Narada went to Radha and told 
her everything. Now, Radha’s first reaction was that she 
was not probably the right kind of devotee who could be of 
real help to her Lord. Who was she, after all, when there 
were so many world-famous ascetics, yogis, mystics and phi¬ 
losophers ? But Narada assured her that in Krsna’s own 
estimation she was an authentic devotee. At that, Radha 
was delighted. She said, “Narada, take this dust from my 
feet and go to Krsna’s place as fast as you can. He must be 
relieved of his headache at the earliest opportunity. This 
may be an act of sinfulness, a violation of ethical code and 
social decorum on my part. It may cost me my salvation 
and my place in heaven. But when Krsna is in trouble, 
nothing matters. The happiness of my Lord is my only 
concern.” 

According to the Bengal School of Vaisnavism , uncondi¬ 
tional service of the Lord ( seva ) is the very essence of love 
and devotion. Love is total self-giving to the Divine. The 



THE LONGING FOR IMMORTALITY 


141 


only concern of love is to be ready to serve the beloved in a 
spirit of total dedication. Considerations of personal sin 
and suffering fade into insignificance before the joy of divine 
service. By virtue of such self-effacing love, the devotee 
is most intimately united with the Divine after death on 
the supernatural kingdom of heaven. 


CHAPTER XIV 


Immortality as Essence of the Spirit 

According to the teaching of the Upanisads, all men are 
in essence “children of immortality .” 1 They are modes of 
manifestation of the Eternal, just as waves are modes of 
manifestation of the ocean. Or, just as finite spaces are 
modes of manifestation of the one, undivided, and indivisible 
space. Men as finite spirits are modes of manifestation of the 
one, undivided and indivisible ocean of consciousness. 

Immortality is, according to the Upanisads, the very 
birthright of man. It is his divine heritage. It is within 
his power to lift the veil of ignorance and consciously realize 
the heritage of immortality. 

* 

The Democratic Theory of Immortality 

Since all men are essentially children of immortality, 
they are all destined sooner or later to attain immortality. 
Since immortality is immanent in the spiritual essence of 
man, as soon as he realizes the essential structure of his being, 
he attains life eternal. This may be called the democratic 
theory of immortality. It is a rejection of the doctrine of 
eternal damnation. No soul can be totally lost, because every 
soul is essentially a focus of the eternal. Every soul repre¬ 
sents a unique value, and so it is eternally preserved in the 

bosom of the Infinite. 

The concept of universal salvation is based upon both 
ontological and religious grounds. Ontologically, every 
individual self (Atman), by virtue of its essential non-differ¬ 
ence from the Eternal, is destined in the course of evolution 

1 Amrtasya puirdh. •See Qvetasvatara Upanifad , II. 5. 



IMMORTALITY AS ESSENCE OF THE SPIRIT 


143 


to realize its union with the eternal. The growth of personal¬ 
ity aims at the realization of what one essentially is. 

Religiously speaking, universal salvation is guaranteed 
by the higher conception of God as absolute love. The no¬ 
tion of eternal damnation stems from the idea of God as 
ruthless justice. The ruling power of the world is conceived 
as relentless and vindictive, ready to torture individuals for 
the pitfalls of finitude over which they have little control. 
Religion evolves a higher conception of God when law is 
combined with love, justice is tempered with mercy. This 
found expression in the conception of God as absolute love 
(Buddha, Krsna, Christ, etc.) It found expression in the idea 
of Visnu as the loving ruler of the world. God as love pre¬ 
serves all values. In the scheme of the world there is no 
room either for Divine partiality and favoritism or for eternal 
punishment in the fires of hell. There is abundant and re¬ 
peated opportunity for all individuals to realize the spiritual 
potential of their existence. 

According to Vedanta, immortality in its ultimate spiritual 
significance is not the continuation of existence after death. 
Rather, it is essentially in the nature of awareness of the eter¬ 
nal that dwells at the center of one’s being. The eternal 
is the very foundation of one’s being. It is not to be identi¬ 
fied either with the past or with the durational present or 
with the future. It is not to be construed as continued exis¬ 
tence in time. It is in truth a mode of self-poise beyond time 
and its different periods, beyond life and death. In conse¬ 
quence, the eternal can be realized at any moment of time. 
One need not wait for it until after death. One can realize 
it here and now while living in the flesh. 

According to Vedanta, immortality is a characteristic 
of authentic self-awareness. It is an attribute of spiritual en¬ 
lightenment. The moment a person overcomes his self¬ 
alienation, and realizes his inmost self and his rootedness in 



144 


THE PHILOSOPHY OF INTEGRALISM 


the eternal, he partakes of immortality. When he experiences 
immortality, in a sense, nothing changes. There is just the 
awareness of things as they are, essentially and eternally. It 
is like a man desperately searching for his spectacles in every 
nook and corner of his room, and then suddenly finding out 
that they are already on his eyes. Or, it is like a poor orphan 
boy, suffering untold misery, one day coming to know that 
he is the heir to a large real estate which his deceased uncle 
left for him long ago. Now, this is only the discovery of what 
already is and what has been. It involves no change in 
the order of things and events. But, from another standpoint, 
everything changes. In the case of the poor orphan, it is a 
sudden and radical transition from poverty to opportunity, 
from despair to hope, from misery to happiness. There is 
a world of difference between ignorance and knowledge. 
A person who comes to know what Eternity is, suddenly 
experiences a complete transfiguration. He sloughs off the 
old skin and is reborn, as it were, in an entirely different 
world. He becomes one with the Eternal. 

Let us imagine that a wave rolling upon the surface of 
the ocean begins one day to feel depressed about its despi¬ 
cable nothingness. It is surrounded on all sides by countless 
other waves clashing with one another and threatening 
to swallow it any moment. It is afraid of being crushed 
at any time by the vast, infinite ocean. But, suddenly, a 
new insight unfolds in its mind. It need not be afraid of the 
tempestuous vastness of the ocean. For is it not an integral 
part of the ocean itself ? Is it not the ocean itself in a parti¬ 
cular mode of expression ? The supreme joy of its individua¬ 
lized existence lies in playing with other waves to the tune 
of time. All the waves together make a total drama of music 
and movement on the bosom of the ocean. By virtue of the 
new insight, the wave immediately conquers its depression 
and despair; its previous feeling of nothingness and insigni- 



IMMORTALITY AS ESSENCE OF THE SPIRIT 


145 


ficance melts away. It begins to partake of the glory of the 
vast ocean. That does not mean it ceases to be a wave. Nor 
that it gets lost and dissolved in the ocean. On the contrary, 
enriched and delighted by the new insight, it enjoys the 
merriment of the wavy drama. 

The wave was in depression so long as it was ignorant. 
It had the illusion of existential separation from the ocean 
and from the other waves. The moment the illusion is shat¬ 
tered, there is a sudden transformation of outlook. There is 
no more any blind clinging to its particular wave form. 
By virtue of oneness with the ocean, liberation is achieved 
from ignorant identification with the impermanent. The 
glory of each wave-form lies in running its full course with 
gracefulness and joy. 

Immortality conceived as conscious realization of one’s 
existential oneness with the eternal is known in Vedanta 
as moksa. It is emancipation from Ignorance and self-aliena¬ 
tion. Ignorance is separative consciousness. It produces 
the illusion that a person exists by himself like a Lucretian 
atom. He believes that he is separate from God and thus 
is sinful. That he is separate from fellow-beings and there¬ 
fore can afford to ignore them or destroy them for his self- 
aggrandizement. On account of such separative conscious¬ 
ness, he desperately clings to his individualized form as the 
supreme value of life. Thus, ignorance leads to egotism or 
narcissistic concern. And, out of ignorance and egotism, 
there arises a bumper crop of fear and anxiety, greed and 
violence, hatred and hostility, etc. The light of truth alone 
can destroy such a poisonous crop of darkness. It is through 
crucifixion of the individualized form that the reality of the 
self can arise in its eternal glory. 

But is not the human individual much more than a wave ? 
Is there not a self-subsistent and permanent spiritual subs¬ 
tance underlying all bodily and material changes ? Does 

10 



146 


THE PHILOSOPHY OF INTEGRALISM 


not the Vedantic view amount to a denial of the reality and 
substantiality of the human spirit ? Is not man’s freedom 
an attribute of his substantive reality ? 

These are issues of crucial importance indeed. In discuss¬ 
ing them we have to set aside mere metaphors and analogies 
and examine the categories of thought involved in these 
questions. 

The categories of substance and free-will, understood as 
supernatural or mystical entities, are only the relics of medie¬ 
val metaphysics. In modern science, psychology and philo¬ 
sophy, such categories are rejected as exploded myths, as 
metempirical notions. In physical science, the notion of 
material substance has been replaced by the notion of energy, 
process, action. In psychology the notion of soul substance 
has been replaced by that of psychic energy or libido. In 
modern philosophy, the notion of metaphysical substance 
has been replaced by that of Being beyond substance and 
quality, cause and effect. 

Let us explain this matter a little further. From the popu¬ 
lar standpoint, there is an absolute distinction between a 
substance and a wave. There is also an absolute distinction 
between the free-will of man and a natural process. These 
distinctions are certainly valid. But it is time to realize 
that such distinctions are only relatively valid. They are not 
absolutely valid to the extent of implying fundamental, 
ontological divisions at the heart of reality. We are dealing 
here with qualitative differences characteristic of the differ¬ 
ent modes of expression of the same Being, not with separate 
ontological categories. We are dealing here with different 
standpoints, not with different realities. For instance, from 
the standpoint of eternity, even a mountain is nothing but 
a wave on the ocean of cosmic energy. The individual 
human soul, supposing it covers in its evolution a period of 
one million years, is also nothing but a wave of birth, growth, 



IMMORTALITY AS ESSENCE OF THE SPIRIT 


147 


decay and death,—or of life, death, rebirth and release,— 
rolling on the ocean of timeless consciousness. 

Similarly, the free choice or decision of a human indivi¬ 
dual certainly differs qualitatively from the blossoming of a 
flower. But is it not possible that even this distinction is only 
relatively valid? The free choice of a person is also in ulti¬ 
mate analysis a natural process of his psychical existence. It 
is a psychical process accompanied by the emergent quality 
of consciousness. It is a mental process animated by the 
consciousness of higher values. In subduing some lower 
impulse, it is still inspired (or determined) by some other 
impulse, say the impulse of devotion to some such value as 
truth, justice, perfection, etc. 

In popular imagination, a rock and a wave are absolutely 
different ontological categories. But modern science would 
say that even a rock is nothing but a kind of wave. It is a 
specific configuration of energy vibrations existing as a modi¬ 
fication of the wider field of energy. It does not exist by 
itself. Nor is its permanence everlasting. Time bites into it. 
Time gave it birth and will one day devour it. In ultimate 
analysis, change is the stuff of which it is made. For all its 
apparent solidity, it is indeed a wave of energy,—a wave 
formed on the vast ocean of energy. 

The same is true of the human individual. He is a highly 
evolved constellation of energy vibrations. He evolves to 
the extent that the novel and emergent quality of conscious¬ 
ness distinguishes him and sets him apart from the rest of 
creation. Compared with the rock, the human individual is 
a very feeble and broken reed. But he is a conscious reed. He 
overcomes his feebleness and fragility by being conscious of 
these characteristics. He even can overcome change and 
time by discovering his eternal relatedness to cosmic Being. 
Therein lies his glory. And his boundless possibility. Con¬ 
sciousness yields ever new insights into the structure of Being. 



148 


THE PHILOSOPHY OF INTEGRALISM 


It unfolds ever new values. So, the human being, conscious 
as he is, learns to determine his conduct by his unfolding 
vision of new values and determinants. 

Man’s freedom is a characteristic of his consciousness. 
There is no mysterious faculty within him which would be 
called free will. The notion of free will as a distinct faculty 
belongs to the exploded myth of old Faculty Psychology. 
Man is free to the extent of his increasing awareness of new 
possibilities, new ideas, new goals of life. As they are dis¬ 
closed in his consciousness, he is being perpetually reborn. 
He is always breaking with the past, and beholding new 
visions of the future. His old determinants are discarded in 
favor of new ideas. Therein lies his freedom. Expanding 
consciousness is indeed of the essence of freedom. Freedom 
is not absence of all determination. It is the ability to re¬ 
nounce the determinism of instinct and blind impulse and 
to replace them by newly apprehended values and principles. 
By virtue of his unfolding consciousness, man is always 
breaking the bonds of the past and creatively advancing into 
the future. This spirit of creative advance is the reality of 
his freedom. And it is freedom which confers immortality 
upon him. The more he shakes loose from the fetters of 
ignorant attachment to the perishing things of time, the more 
he partakes of the immortality of the Eternal. 


The Integral Theory of Immortality 

We are now in a position to state briefly the integral 
theory of immortality. The integral view is the complete 
statement and logical culmination of the nondualistic 
approach of Vedanta. 

Immortality is an attribute of enlightened consciousness. 
All men therefore have the potentiality of immortality by 
virtue of their consciousness. When the personality of an 



IMMORTALITY AS ESSENCE OF THE SPIRIT 


149 


individual is harmonized and integrated, he attains en¬ 
lightenment. He gains insight into his existential oneness 
with the all-encompassing Being. The veil of ignorance and 
separative consciousness is lifted from his eyes. P eelings of 
fear and insecurity, anxiety and personal unworthiness, are 
overcome. There is an enlargement of Being and joyful 
participation in the life of the Infinite. In one word, an indi¬ 
vidual experiences immortality here and now. 

But the experience of participation in the life eternal of the 
Infinite does not mean self-annihilation in the Infinite. 
Immortality is an attribute of consciousness, of enlightened 
existence, not of non-existence. What is annihilated on the 
attainment of immortality is not the self, but the ignorant and 
separative consciousness of the alienated self. The veil of 
ignorance torn apart, the individual self can now enter into 
real and fruitful union with the eternal. When the finite 
space enclosed within a house becomes aware of its exis¬ 
tential oneness with the infinite space, the house does not get 
demolished. When a particular wave becomes aware of the 
fact that it is the ocean itself in an individualized mode, it 
does not perish as a wave. Similarly, when a human indivi¬ 
dual becomes aware of his inmost self as it is, namely, as an 
active center of the one, undivided Being, it does not get lost 
and liquidated. On the contrary, it shines with all the glory 
of the Supreme Being. 

The true meaning of immortality has often been obscured 
by the confusion between the goal of life and the end of life. 
The doctrine of liberation or moksa in Vedanta has two 
subtle implications. Moksa may mean the highest goal of 
life, namely, spiritual enlightenment. It may also mean 
the final end or terminus of an individualized form of exis¬ 
tence, its re-absorption in the formless eternity. Confusion 
between these two meanings of moksa has often been respon¬ 
sible for much misguided spiritual endeavors. 



150 


THE PHILOSOPHY OF INTEGRALISM 


Higher mysticism rightly affirms that all individualized 
forms of existence have an end in time. No individualized 
form has any need to endure for eternity, for instance, for 
billions of years. Nor is there any sense in that. The doctrine 
of personal immortality in the sense that a person must be 
rewarded for his virtue with continued existence for billions 
of years without end is an illusion of the ignorant mind. It is 
the sublimated wish-fulfilment of the unconscious psyche. 
It represents the egotistic desire of the unenlightened. It 
springs from one’s blind attachment to the individualized 
form of one’s being. It is the result of ignorant identification 
with the body, gross or subtle, physical or psychic. So, 
Vedanta and Buddhism rightly affirm that the individual 
as a particular existent is bound one day to be reabsorbed 
into the Infinite, whether conceived as formless Being or as 
Nonbeing. That is the ultimate chronological end of all life. 
Not to be able to accept this ultimate end fearlessly and 
cheerfully is a mark of ignorance and egotism. 

But the unfortunate thing is that many spiritual seekers 
and mystics look upon the ultimate end as also the goal of 
life. The goal of life is enlightenment, not annihilation in the 
formless Being. It is self-realization, not self-liquidation. It 
is the transformation of the ego, the I-sense, not its total 
destruction. It is the knowledge of things as they are, not 
the destruction of the self as it is. But, on account of the con¬ 
fusion in this respect, some mystics set before themselves the 
goal of self-annihilation in the Absolute. In consequence, 
they follow the policy of withdrawal from life and society. 
They tread the path of slow but sure suicide. They smother 
the will to live, and unconsciously yield to the dark death- 

wish slumbering in their psyche. 

The most valid spiritual ideal of life is to transform one s 
whole being into an image of the Divine, and not to get lost 
in the abyss of the Infinite. When an individual learns to 



IMMORTALITY AS ESSENCE OF THE SPIRIT 151 

live as an individual, that is, as a unique creative center of 
the Eternal, he attains living immortality (jlvanmukti). 

It may be said that authentic immortality has four essen¬ 
tial aspects. First, immortality implies an individual dis¬ 
covery of the nontemporal dimension of his existence. To 
discover the nontemporal depth is to experience essential 
oneness with the Eternal, here and now, while living in the 
flesh. This may be described as living immortality ( jlvan - 

mukti). It is reflected in the statement C T am in essence one 
with the Supreme (Brahman ).” 

Secondly, immortality implies conscious union with the 
Infinite, without loss of personal existence or individuality. 
It is participation in the life of the Infinite without loss of 
freedom and personality. The I-sense is not liquidated, but 
purged of impurities. It bursts through the shell of separa¬ 
tive consciousness and experiences itself as a unique and 
active center of the cosmic whole. Individuality is not lost, 
but illuminated. Emancipated from the fetters of ego- 
centricity, it becomes cosmocentric. This may be called 
existential immortality (sarvatma bhava). 

Thirdly, immortality implies intelligent participation in 

the creative advance of life. Not egotistically with blind 

attachment and with consequent fear, anxiety, ambition 

and impatience. But in a spirit of non-attachment and with 

creative vision of the future, in harmony with the cosmic 

purpose of life. Immortality now assumes the form of 

conscious cooperation with the cosmic force of evolution,— 

with the dynamic world-spirit. There is a sense of 

deathless continuity in such a spirit of cosmic cooperation. 

I his may be called evolutionary immortality (sadharmya 
mukti) 

Finally, the concept of immortality implies a harmoni¬ 
zation of the entire personality and a transformation of the 
physical organism as an effective channel of expression of 



152 


THE PHILOSOPHY OF INTEGRALISM 


higher values. This may be called material immortality 
(rupantar mukti) 

There are some mystics and spiritual seekers who strength¬ 
en and purify their bodies just enough to be able to expe¬ 
rience the thrilling touch of the Divine. They use the body 
as a ladder, by climbing which the pure spiritual level—the 
domain of immortality—is to be reached. On attaining that 
level, the body is felt as a burden, as a prison house, as a 
string of chains that holds one in bondage. Dissociation 
from this last burden of the body is considered a sine qua non 
for complete liberation. Continued association with the body 
is believed to be the result of the last lingering trace of Igno¬ 
rance ( avidya lesa). When the residual trace of ignorance is 
gone, the spirit is finally set free from the shackles of the 
body. 

The above view is based upon a subtle misconception 
about the purpose of life and the significance of the body. 
The body is not only a ladder that leads to the realm of im¬ 
mortality, but also an excellent instrument for expressing 
the glory of immortality in life and society. It is capable of 
being thoroughly penetrated by the light of the spirit. It is 
capable of being transformed into what has been called the 
“Diamond Body”. As a result of such transformation, the 
body does not appear any more to be a burden upon the 
liberated self. On the contrary, it becomes a perfect image of 
the self. It shines as the Spirit made flesh. It functions as a 
very effective instrument for creative action and realization 
of higher values in the world. It is purged of all inner 
tension and conflict. It is liberated from the anxiety of re¬ 
pressed wishes. It is also liberated from the dangerous grip 
of the death impulse born of self-repression. Mystics who 
look upon the body as a burden suffer from the anxiety of 
self-repression and the allurement of the death wish. 

Material immortality means decisive victory over both of 



IMMORTALITY AS ESSENCE OF THE SPIRIT 


153 


these demons. It conquers the latent death instinct in man, 
and fortifies the will to live as long as necessary, as a channel 
of expression of the Divine. It also liquidates all forms of 
self-suppression and self-torture and self-mutilation. As a 
result the total being of an individual becomes strong and 
steady, whole and healthy. There is a free flow of psychic 
energy. It is increasingly channeled into ways of meaningful 
self-expression. Under the guidance of the indwelling light 
of the eternal, it produces increasing manifestation of the 
spirit in matter. 



CHAPTER XV 


The Problem of Evil 

The problem of evil is one of the most baffling and persistent 
problems of our life. It stares us in the face, however much 
we may philosophize and try to argue it out of existence. 
We may fly on the wings of fancy into a world of all joy and 
radiance, but the moment we come down to our terra jirma , 
the existence of evil assumes the frightful proportions of a 
final inexplicability. Reflection upon the nature of evil has 
indeed been the starting-point of most daring adventures of 
the human spirit. It is a riddle which life, like Sphinx, con¬ 
stantly poses to us. The deepest movements of life have 
always sprung from an attempt at its solution. 


Statement of the Problem 

David Hume’s statement of the problem of evil is classical. 
The inescapable presence of evil in life seems to make the 
divine attributes of all-wise and all-good incompatible with 
the attribute of all-powerful. A God who is essentially good 
can hardly tolerate His creation being disfigured by endless 
sufferings and miseries, and by tragic frustrations and ano¬ 
malies. If then God is an all-good-Being, either He is not 
all-powerful, or He is not all-wise. Either His noble inten¬ 
tions are thwarted by some malicious forces of darkness, or 

He is out-witted by superior diabolical powers. 

If omniscience be affirmed to be of the essence of God, 
then either His holiness is to be questioned, or He must be 
declared powerless as against the superior might of the devil. 

If again one insists upon equating God with omnipotence, 
one must be prepared to see either wisdom, or goodness or 



THE PROBLEM OF EVIL 


155 


both departing from the Divine Nature. It is inconceivable 
that the omnipotence of an all-wise and all-good God should 
not be employed to crush all hostile opposition with a view 
to making His creation a thing of perfect beauty and seamless 
harmony. If God be omnipotent, but neither omniscient nor 
holy, then God ceases to be God, and is lost into the darkness 
of some blind physical energy. That would be a solution of 

the problem of evil at the cost of our deep-rooted faith in the 
reality of the Divine. Instead of being a patient untying, it 
would be an impatient, one-stroke cutting asunder of the 
knot of evil. With blind matter as the source of all existence, 
and with mechanical law as the support of all becoming, the 
deepest aspirations of our life would be stultified, and the 
profoundest revelations of the Spirit set at nought. 

Reflection upon the problem of evil has given rise to many 

interesting extremes of philosophic thinking. While some 

have tried to solve the problem by denying the reality of God, 

some have impugned the very existence of evil. While some 

have looked upon evil as a permanent feature of reality, 

some have reduced to unreality not only the phenomenon 

of evil but even the world itself. We shall pass in review some 

representative attitudes of thought in regard to the problem 

of evil, and then show that evil is neither a permanent, 

unconquerable feature of reality, nor a sphere of unreality 

or illusion. It is rather an incidental circumstance of the 

gradual process of self-manifestation of Reality. It is a real 

factor of life, which, for all its reality, is capable of being 
subdued. 


Dualistic Submission to Evil 

There are some philosophers who prefer to sacrifice the 
absoluteness of the Divine in order to make room for evil. 
1 hey posit an alien principle or hostile power on which the 



156 


THE PHILOSOPHY OF INTEGRALISM 


responsibility for evil can be foisted. 

Plato, for instance, postulates Nonbeing and holds that 
the world of our experience is compounded of Being and 
Nonbeing. Nonbeing is the basic, formless stuff out of 
which the universe has been fashioned. The tragic features 

of our life are to be traced to the fact that the patterns of 
perfection (ideas or forms) can receive only an imperfect, 
and often clumsy, embodiment in the medium of Non- 
being, or formless matter. To put it in plain language, the 
good intentions of God are in a large measure thwarted by 
the recalcitrant stuff which matter or nonbeing is. Hence, 
the evil that disfigures the creation of God. 

While Plato traces the phenomenon of evil to formless 
matter or nonbeing, Zoroastrianism traces it to a kind of 
evil god. Zoroastrianism takes its stand upon the unmiti¬ 
gated dualism of two ultimate principles which are radically 
opposed to each other. One is a good God, Ahura Mazda, 
and the other is an evil God, Ahriman. The world is a 
battle-ground of these two hostile powers. All that is good 
and beautiful, lofty and noble, sublime and harmonious, is to 
be set down to the credit of Ahura Mazda. And whatever is 
ugly and abominable, tragic and repulsive, sinful and dis¬ 
cordant in our life, is an indication of the active presence of 
Ahriman. 

Some East African tribes solve the problem with utmost 
simplicity. Their solution is perfectly in tune with Zoroas- 
trian dualism, only stated in a cruder form. They hold that 
all the good things of life come from God who is all good, 
but every now and then God’s good intentions and noble 
plans are thwarted by his half-witted, half-brother. This 
half-brother is often quite intolerable, but goodness pre¬ 
vents the big brother from killing him. 

Dualism in some form or other,—dualism that drives a 
wedge between the imperfect world of actuality and the 



THE PROBLEM OF EVIL 


157 


perfect world of values,—appears in widely divergent schools 
of philosophic thinking. The Samkhya school of Indian 
philosophy postulates the absolute dualism of matter and 
spirit, Prakrti and Purusa , the dynamic source of all variations 
and the static poise of timeless perfection. The evils and im¬ 
perfections of our life flow from lack of discrimination on 
the part of the individual as to these entirely divergent 
principles. They are a necessary consequence of the Spirit’s 
self-identification with unconscious Nature through begin¬ 
ningless non-discrimination (anadi aviveka ). Our body, life, 
mind, and intellect, are but different modifications of Nature 
so that it is a colossal mistake to regard them as integral 
factors in the life of the Spirit. All our sufferings and miser¬ 
ies are the penalties we have to pay for that initial mistake, 
—for our original sin of eating from the tree of objective or 
empirical consciousness. 

William James, the celebrated pragmatist, looks upon 
evil as the rock on which all forms of monism are wrecked. 
Perpetual conflict in our life between Light and Darkness 
opens before him a pluralistic universe, in which side by side 
with the forces of evil there is also “an ideal tendency in the 
nature of things.” God is, in his view, not a unique all- 
comprehensive reality, not an omnipotent sovereign who 
rules over all that he surveys. God is just a superior power 
who is immensely greater than man and who is constantly 
tending towards the realization of higher values. His 
triumph over the forces of darkness is not a fait accompli , not 
a pre-destined certainty, but is conditional upon the right 
type of cooperation from man. The world is not a deter¬ 
ministic scheme, not a scene for “the rattling off of a chain 
forged innumerable years ago”. It is a melioristic universe 
that we live in, a universe in which we have just a fighting 
chance of safety. 

The above tendency to equate God with Goodness and at 



158 


THE PHILOSOPHY OF INTEGRALISM 


the same time to reduce Him to “an each among eaches 55 , 
or to a “primus inter pares 55 ,—to a Being who has always to 
contend with powerful opponents,—has found favor with 
many ethically minded philosophers. But a limited God, a 
God who is simply good but not infinite and absolute, can 
function neither as the Ultimate of philosophy nor as the 
highest category of religious interpretation. The reality of 
one all-comprehensive Being sustaining the bewildering 
variety of phenomenal existence is an immediate certainty 
of the profoundest spiritual experience. No amount of diffi¬ 
culty in the way of our reflective understanding, and no 
amount of protestation by the senses, can override that 
immediate certainty. So the hypothesis of a pluralistic or 
dualistic universe torn by perpetual conflict between irre- 
ducibly ultimate powers is inconsistent with the fundamental 
intuitions of mankind. 


Pantheistic Denial of Evil 

Those who have caught a glimpse of the Spirit in its inef¬ 
fable purity are often inclined to overlook the obdurate pre¬ 
sence of evil. Their eyes too full of the light of the Spirit, 
they fail to make a realistic approach to the dark and gloomy 
features of life. Pantheism is the product of such one-sided 
perception. It seeks to explain evil away, rather than at¬ 
tempt a sincere and systematic explanation thereof. The 
phenomenon of evil is, in the view of pantheism, a mere 
appearance, a passing illusion. It is entirely relative to our 
sensuous imagination, to our narrow and ignorant way of 
thinking. Evil is bound to melt away upon the emergence 
of a total and comprehensive view of reality, a view of reality 
sub specie aeternitatis. It takes all sorts to make a thing of 
beauty. To produce a picture of unimpeachable beauty, 
what is needed is a judicious combination of different shades 



THE PROBLEM OF EVIL 


159 


of color, dark as well as bright,—a skilful mixture of shade 
and light. The dark shades of the picture appear ugly only 
to an all-too-analytical seeing, which knows not how to ap¬ 
preciate beauty. To a synthetic appreciation—even the 
darkest spots reveal themselves as elements of a marvellous 
harmony. The picture is a thing of spotless beauty, not 

in spite of, but because of, all the spots that it is made to 
contain. 

But how far can the above analogy carry us ? Is the cos¬ 
mic situation analogous to the harmony of an aesthetic 
product ? It seems to us that the pantheistic denial of evil 
is based upon the fallacy of false analogy. A painting or 
picture is a frozen image of reality. It is an abstraction from 
the flux of existence. It can never represent reality in its 
conciete fulness. It is the artist s snapshot view or perspec¬ 
tive of the real at a given moment. The static picture, for all 
its harmony and beauty, can, by no means, reproduce the 
dynamic flow of the real in its concrete mobility. Nor can 
it represent Being in its multidimensional fulness. 

In contemplating a great work of art we admire its beauty 
and perfection. But at the same time we know that it is a 

finished product. It expresses the artist’s emotional reaction 
to reality viewed from a certain angle. 

In contemplating life in its livingness, we are vividly aware 
of the fact that it is an unfinished business. So, our reaction 
is twofold. On the one hand, we respond with joy and admi¬ 
ration. If, we have any philosophic insight or spiritual wis¬ 
dom, we are in a position to appreciate the beauty of life 
as a moving image of eternity. We see how the glory of 
the eternal is reflected in the multicolored richness of life. 
And when the ontological insight is integral, our compre¬ 
hension of the meaning of life gains full depth. We have a 
feeling of re-awakening by the shocking challenge of life. 
Life appears to us not only as beauty, but also as duty. Life 



160 


THE PHILOSOPHY OF INTEGRALISM 


discloses to us not only its glory, but also its boundless 
potentialities. It is not enough to contemplate evil as a 
natural part of life and thus develop an attitude of peaceful 
resignation. An integral vision of truth is bound to inspire 
a creative urge. It is sure to induce a complex emotional 
reaction, such as combines wonder with creative inspiration, 
admiration with compassion, peace with action. 

An integral insight into the structure of Being reveals life 
as the creative adventure of the eternal in time. It lights 
up the dynamic potentialities of existence. It opens up ever 
new possibilities waiting to emerge in the course of evolution. 
Consequently, evil appears not just as the shadow of good 
to be tolerated. It comes as a challenge to be boldly faced 
and overcome. It is the power of darkness which can be dis¬ 
pelled by the power of light. When thus overcome, it gives 
rise to new values. But if tolerated or connived at in a spirit 
of slothful resignation, the reign of darkness is further 
consolidated. 

Pantheism is passive submission to evil as a product of 
Ignorance. The argument is that since life on the whole is 
good as an image of God, evil as a necessary part of life 
must be an element of goodness, too. To think otherwise is 
ignorance. Evil is an illusion insofar as it is the result of igno¬ 
rance. So, wisdom lies in accepting evil as a contributory 
factor in the divine beauty of Life. Such a line of thinking 
is crystallized in the dictum: Whatever is, is good. What¬ 
ever happens is the will of God. The invisible hand of God 
is there, behind all events. Does not God dwell equally in 
all men, saints and sinners alike ? Is not God at the helm 
of all affairs, prosperity and adversity, freedom and bon¬ 
dage, war and peace ? 

This is very dangerous teaching indeed. Dangerous, 
not because it is false, but because it is a half-truth, mixed 
up with falsehood. Of course, God is present in all, saints 



THE PROBLEM OF EVIL 


161 


and sinners alike. But, that does not make the sin committed 
by a sinner good or the expression of the divine will. God is 
present in both saints and sinners as the fundamental spiri¬ 
tual potentiality of man as man. Sinful actions are a viola¬ 
tion of that spiritual potentiality. They are a violation of the 
essential nature of man as a spark of the Divine. Sinful actions 
such as murder out of greed, wanton destruction for fun, 
treachery, robbery, kidnapping, raping, etc. are a profana¬ 
tion of one’s latent divinity. In the life of a saint, the indwell¬ 
ing divinity is brought to some degree of manifestation. In 
the case of a sinner, it remains suppressed. But, nonetheless, 
it is not totally absent. That is why the possibility of a sinner 
turning into a saint is always there. Condemnation of evil 
or sin is the human way of calling the sinner’s attention to 
this potential divinity. But sinfulness must be regarded as a 
reprehensible fact of existence to be condemned and over¬ 
come. 

The attitude of passive resignation to all the happenings 
of life has, to be sure, a spiritual quality. It is conducive to 
to personal purity and peace of mind. It also generates 
some amount of transforming power. For instance, when a 
saint refuses to recognize the sinfulness of a sinner and em¬ 
braces him with genuine love in his heart, he may work 
thereby a conversion of consciousness in the sinner. But this 
does not prove the unreality of the sinner’s acts of sinfulness. 
It proves the superior reality and power of love and wisdom. 
Evil is not unreal, but an inferior reality. It is not to be to¬ 
lerated but transmuted by the power of the spirit. When 
practised by those who have not the ability to conquer 
and transform evil, the motto of ‘No Evil’ would amount 
to cowardice and connivance. So, the great poet Tagore 
very rightly observed that a person who connives at evil 
is no less guilty than a person who perpetrates evil. Both of 

them deseive to burn in the wrath of divine justice. 

11 


162 


THE PHILOSOPHY OF INTEGRALISM 

When practised on the social level, the pantheistic doctrine 
of no-evil proves all the more disastrous. It encourages an 
attitude of careless indifference and apathy to the ills and 
evils of society, such as illiteracy, poverty, child mortality, 
unsanitary living conditions, uncontrolled family enlarge¬ 
ment, unbridled greed in trade and commerce, selfish 
complicity in tyrannical rule or foreign domination, etc. 
It lends support to the policy of withdrawal from society for 
the sake of personal purity and salvation. The spirit of re¬ 
form and social reconstruction is laid in cold storage. There 
is an abdication of responsibility for the betterment of life 
under the shallow pretext of religious piety. 

The metaphysical truth that evil is an offspring of Igno¬ 
rance does not make evil unreal. Ignorance itself is a posi¬ 
tive evil to be conquered. Divine omnipresence, rightly 
understood, provides no justification for resignation to evil. 
On the contrary, it should inspire us with boundless self- 
confidence in fighting God’s battle for the reign of peace and 
love. It should give us strength in fighting Krsna’s battle 
in establishing the kingdom of dharma, that is to say, truth, 
justice and righteousness in human society. Evil is a positive 
force of Ignorance that offers resistance to higher evolution. 

It is a real obstruction to the vision of higher values. At its 
worst, it is the ugly face of human stupidity. It is a power of 
darkness that devours the values that we cherish. At its 
best, it is a stimulating challenge to life. 

Theislic Interpretation of Evil as Perversity of Will 

Theism rejects the view that Ignorance ( avidya ) is the 
root cause of evil. In its view, evil stems not from Ignorance 
but from the perversity of will. The perversity of will is a 
symptom of the evil doer’s subjection to Satan or the devil. 
Criminal action is the result of the devil’s overpowering 


THE PROBLEM OF EVIL 


163 


influence in the life of the criminal. 

A man, for example, knows that robbing a bank or killing 
a person for money is an evil. But still he goes ahead and 
commits the crime in spite of his knowledge that it is a crime. 
He chooses evil out of greed and selfishness. Evidently his 
choice is determined, not by his ignorance, but by his per¬ 
versity of will. 

Let us analyze the situation a little closely. When a person 
robs a bank or kills a person, what is his mental condition ? 
Probably, he is in the grip of an overmastering impulse to 
rob or kill. Considerations of good and evil are simply shut 
out of the mind. His entire being becomes one irresistible 
urge to commit the crime. The person himself may not 
know why he is doing it. But he cannot help doing it. 
Psychoanalysis rightly diagnoses it as ‘mental sickness’. 
The notion of a mysterious wil 1 power causing such sickness 
or capable of preventing such sickness is just an unscientific 
myth. This myth is based upon the now exploded faculty 
psychology of medieval times. The mental sickness respon¬ 
sible for the irrational and compulsive criminal action is due 
to lack of insight into one’s unconscious emotional conflicts. 
It is due to lack of insight into one’s true identity, one’s 
authentic self, one’s purpose of life, and position in society. 
In one word, it is due to what is called avidya , ontological 
ignorance, in the Hindu-Buddhist tradition. 

Metaphysical ignorance ( avidya ) does not mean ignorance 
about the laws of society. A criminal certainly violates a law 
of society in spite of his full knowledge about it. Avidya is 
a much deeper kind of ignorance. It is ignorance about 
one’s authentic self, and its ultimate relationship to the 
world. The removal of such basic ignorance is enlighten¬ 
ment, or authentic self-understanding. Criminality melts 
away like mist in the sunlight of adequate self-under¬ 
standing. 


164 


THE PHILOSOPHY OF INTEGRALISM 


We may also imagine that the criminal while performing a 
criminal action, such as robbing or shooting, may have 
some private reasons of his own justifying his deeds. In that 
case, he feels that his private reasons have priority over the 
rationality of social laws. He has here certain doubts about 
the wisdom of social laws. He may feel cheated by society. 
He may nurse strong resentment against society, on account 
of the hardship and suffering unjustly caused to him and his 
family by the existing social order. He may even believe 
that the existing social laws are basically unjust insofar as 
they are traceable to the greed and exploitation of the powers 
that be. He may think that they are a clever device of the 
privileged class to exploit the pure and illiterate masses. 
Or, he may believe that those who are responsible for the 
administration of social justice or enforcement of socio-ethical 
laws are themselves incorrigibly corrupt and hypocritical. 

In the above-mentioned case, all that can be said is that 
the evil action of the criminal is due to his wrong judgment. 
He h as a distorted view of his relationship to society, and of 
the moral basis of the social order. He has very imperfect 
knowledge about his ultimate self-interest and also about 
the effective means of righting a social wrong. Thus, we 
come back again to the conception of basic Ignorance. It 
is Ignorance about the self as related to society, or about the 
means and ends, which is the root cause of evil. 

Theism considers original sin as the ultimate cause of 
human suffering. Now, what is this Original Sin ? God 
commanded Adam and Eve, living in paradise, not to eat 
from the tree of knowledge. But, at the wily suggestion of 
the serpent they disobeyed the divine command. But, why 
did they disobey ? Because they felt persuaded by the ser¬ 
pent that God did not want them to be all-knowing like 
God Himself. Knowledge would liberate them from child¬ 
ish dependence upon the divine authority. It would confer 



THE PROBLEM OF EVIL 


165 


upon them a status of equality with God. This coincided 
splendidly with the secret desire of Adam and Eve. They 
wanted to outgrow their bondage to the apron strings of 
benevolent paternalism, however celestial. They wanted 
to have a life of their own and assert their own individuality 
and freedom. There is a joy of freedom in the very act of 
defying authority. Can we blame the earliest progenitors 
of the human race for this very noble desire to exercise their 
freedom, to attain independent growth, and acquire fuller 
knowledge for themselves ? 

If there was anything wrong about their defiance of the 
divine commandment, it was their Ignorance. Ignorance 
about the precise nature of their ultimate self-interest; igno¬ 
rance about the true motive of God; ignorance as to how 
to go about fulfilling their legitimate desires for fuller know¬ 
ledge. So, under closer scrutiny, original sin resolves itself 
into primal ignorance ( avidya ). In flouting the divine will, 
Adam and Eve certainly knew that they were committing 
the wrong of disobedience. But they thought—whether 
rightly or wrongly—that it was through such disobedience 
that they could fulfil their desire for knowledge, power, 
freedom, and independent growth. Disobedience occurred 
to their mind a much lesser evil than subjugation to crippling 
authority and paternal despotism. 

The serpent itself symbolizes this primal ignorance. It 
is the unconcious psyche. The whisper of the serpent that is 
heard denotes the suggestion and motivation that comes 
from the unconscious psyche. There is ignorance there. 
But there is also intuitive wisdom there. Imbedded in the 
unconscious are very meaningful impulses and drives for 
knowledge, for freedom, for power and self-existence. In 
order to achieve balanced growth of personality, one must 
come to terms with them. One must integrate them 
into the concrete texture of the evolving mind. One must 


166 THE PHILOSOPHY OF INTEGRALISM 

patiently and tactfully channel them into the higher ends of 
existence. 

Thus we see that evil in the form of human sinfulness is 
in ultimate analysis due not to any inexplicable perversity 
of a mysterious faculty of the mind such as free will. Nor is 
it due to the overpowering influence in man’s life of any 
devil or Satan that exists independently of God. The root 
cause of sinfulness is nescience. Original sin is no other than 
basic ignorance about the authentic self ( atman) and its re¬ 
latedness to Being {Brahman ). The devil is no other than the 
positive power of such ignorance. Sri Aurobindo has shown 
in great detail and with utmost clarity how ignorance in 
various forms causes sin and suffering in human life . 1 


i Sri Aurobindo, The Life Divine , op. cit., Vol. II, Part I, Ch. XI. 



CHAPTER XVI 


Evil, Suffering and Growth 

It has been suggested by some that the reason for the exis¬ 
tence of evil in the world is that it is through constant struggle 
with the forces of evil that personality can be developed and 
character moulded. “Soul-making”, they contend, is the 
typical business of the universe. In order to accomplish that 
end it is necessary that our Jife in the world should be a 
“chapter of accidents”. The^world is intended to be a 
“vale of soul-making”, not a land of lotus-eating. It is in 
the medium of an apparently hostile environment that the 
moral fibre of character is strengthened and the heroic types 
of soul produced. If it appears to us that “contingency is 
writ large across the face of Nature”, or that “there is an 
unfathomable injustice in the nature of things”, we need not 
be overwhelmed by such appearances. It is the very contin¬ 
gent and tragic features of Nature which make her the fittest 
medium of development and excellent training-ground of 
the soul. • 

It must be conceded that there is a profound truth in this 
view of the matter. We should not ignore the depth or 
insight that inspires it. But still the view of evil as an educa¬ 
tive agency sounds, in the last analysis, like a sort of consola¬ 
tion philosophy. Lotze’s criticism that a better and more 
decent machinery might have been devised by the All- 
mighty for the moulding of perfect souls is not without 
application to the above view. Even though all anguish and 
injustice, cruelties and tragedies might be forgotten in the 
attainment of holiness or an exalted state of beatitude, that 
does not justify as inevitable their having been suffered . 1 

Herman Lotze, Outlines of a Philosophy of Religion (London : George Allen 



168 


THE PHILOSOPHY OF INTEGRALISM 


It has been suggested that the cruelty and hostility of the 
world process is a means to the moral end of perfection so that 
the Absolute may thereby obtain an increasing enrichment 
of being. The contingence of the world is contributory to 
the perfection of the whole . 1 But can there be a further 
enrichment of That which is essentially perfect ? Can 
there be any further addition to the perfection of the Abso¬ 
lute ? Moreover, can the really perfect Being desire or 
permit an enrichment of being through terrible sufferings 
endured by others ? Could not His own enrichment and the 
development of individual selves have been achieved through 
a system of means consistent with His loving and merciful 
nature ? 

The difficulty as to the fulfilment of the divine purpose 
through sufferings endured by others is further accentuated 
by the hypothesis of an extra-cosmic God. If God be of such 
a nature that He works out His own purpose through the 
intense sorrows and sufferings of other people, then we can¬ 
not help thinking of Him as an essentially undivine and 
Satanic principle. 

But, why start with the assumption that the Absolute is 
an extra-cosmic Deity ? • Or that God remains aloof from 
our sufferings, and that the cries of the human heart do but 
occasionally and faintly reach His ears ? He is in truth indi- 
visibly present in every man, and all creatures arc but God 
Himself manifested in various forms. It is therefore God 
Himself who undergoes untold sufferings in the shape of 
human beings. And He does so for His own fuller mani¬ 
festation in and through different individual centers. Suffer¬ 
ing; then is not to be conceived as God’s device for the 

O m _ • • 

shaping of separate moral personalities. It is in fact an mci- 

and Company, 1911) p. 144. , . 

1 A. Seth Pringle-Pattison, The Idea of God (New York : Oxford Universit> 

Press, 1920) p. 416. 



EVIL, SUFFERING AND GROWTH 


169 


dental circumstance accompanying the process of God’s 
increasing self-manifestation in the apparent contraries of 
His nature. 

Evil as Incidental Accompaniment of Spirit's Self-Manifestation 

in Matter 

When Pringle Pattison says that soul-making is the typical 
business of the universe, he utters indeed a profound truth. 
But this soul-making, the shaping and moulding of unique 
personalities, is not surely intended to enrich the being 
of God. There can be no addition to perfection, no further 
enrichment of that infinitely rich Being who remains infinite 
even after an infinite is subtracted from Him. 

So the truth behind the moulding of human personalities 
is the progressive manifestation of the Infinite in the finite, 
the increasing self-revelation of the Divine in human form, 
the gradual self-unfoldment of the Spirit in self-created 
conditions apparently opposed to, and toto caelo different 
from, His nature. The supreme is pure existence, pure 
knowledge, pure bliss. It seeks self-manifestation in such 
apparent contraries of its nature as the nonbeing, incon¬ 
science, and inertia of matter. This gives us the profound- 
est secret of the world-process, the deepest mystery of the 
cosmic drama. It is, as it were, the play of hide and seek 
between Spirit and Matter, between God and Nature. 
The Spirit first hides itself behind Nature, and then seeks 
its rediscovery through her evolutionary endeavours. Nature 
first gets separated from Spirit, and then seeks reunion 
through the finite’s longing for the Infinite. 

But is not God absolute bliss itself ? If delight is the very 
stuff and essence of Divine Being, what point is there in 
asserting that God seeks delight through a protracted pro¬ 
cess of self-manifestation in apparent contraries of His na- 



170 


THE PHILOSOPHY OF INTEGRALISM 


ture ? Fullness or abundance of delight can hardly be said 
to leave scope for any further longing after delight. 
Perfection renders meaningless all further seeking and 
yearning. 

But on deeper reflection it will be found that the above 
criticism rests upon a poor idea about the divine delight. 
Why limit the essence of Being to one form of delight only, 
to the delight of immutable being, or to the unvarying delight 
of timeless self-absorption ? There is, as Sri Aurobindo points 
out , 1 a delight of becoming as much as a delight of being, a 
delight of change and movement as much as a delight of per¬ 
manent tranquillity. The essence of the delight of becoming 
consists in unending creation, or to put it more philosophi¬ 
cally, in expressing in infinite time the infinite possibilities 
that are inherent in the infinite. In its intrinsic being, the 
supreme Spirit is above all change and movement, and is 
surely self-sufficient in its pure delight. But the Spirit has 
also an aspect of becoming, an aspect of free creation and self- 
expression. Its delight of becoming consists in the variable 
manifestation of the infinite possibilities of its being. It is 
the self-expansive urge of the delight of becoming which 
accounts for its will to manifest in the contraries of its nature. 
The self-luminous Spirit makes a plunge into the dark incon¬ 
science of matter in order that through a conquest of 
darkness the glories of spirit may be manifested in material 
conditions. Evil is the name we give to the obstruction 
and hostility of the material medium to the creative self- 
expression of the Spirit. 

Lotze is perfectly right when he says that evil is due not 
to the uniform operation of a system of natural laws, but to 
the inner nature and changeability of the “things merely 
given which might be otherwise, and whose reality depends 


1 The Life Divine y op. cit., p. 123. 



EVIL> SUFFERING AND GROWTH 


171 


on the Divine activity .” 1 Following the guidance of reason, 
he sees no way of reconciling the fact of evil with our concep¬ 
tion of the Divine. So he abandons in despair all rational 
approach to the problem and chooses to fall back upon 
God’s inscrutable wisdom. 

Plato maintains that the ultimate source of all evil is non- 
being or intractable matter. In order to vindicate the 
absolute purity of God and the incorruptibility of the Form 
of the Good, he interposes a yawning chasm of ontological 
discontinuity between nonbeing and being, matter and 
form, nature and soul. This is obviously a kind of unmiti¬ 
gated dualism. Whereas Lotze in stressing the fundamental 
unity and ultimate goodness of existence takes shelter behind 
divine inscrutablity, Plato gives up the attempt at any 
final reconciliation. He is frankly satisfied with a dualistic 
position,—the dualism of matter and form, existence and 
essence. 

But cannot a final reconciliation be achieved, without 
either invoking the inscrutable as Lotze does, or resorting 
to dualism as Plato does ? What if matter or nonbeing, 
which causes by its recalcitrance the tragic features of life, 
be, in ultimate analysis, a form of expression of the Spirit 
itself ? It is quite possible, as mystics suggest, that matter 
is the objective manifestation of the spirit under the aspect 
of space-time. It is no other than spirit in a sta^e of involu¬ 
tion in its apparent opposite, to wit, inconscience, so that 
inconscient Nature by her evolutionary endeavor may 
progressively realize the riches of spirit in the realm of ex¬ 
ternality. Matter is indeed, in ultimate analysis, the lowest 
limit of self-alienation of the self-luminous spirit. For all 
its apparent inertia, hostility and recalcitrance, it provides an 
excellent stage on which the exciting drama of life is enacted. 

1 Hermann Lotze, Outlines of a Philosophy of Religion (London : George Allen 
& Company Ltd., 1911), pp. 142-43. 


172 


THE PHILOSOPHY OF INTEGRALISM 


Pain as Abnormal to Our Being 

The problem of suffering is particularly acute for those 
who look upon the world as a manifestation of the fullness of 
divine delight. Granted that matter is the source of all 
sufferings that torment our embodied existence. Granted 
further that “eternal and immutable delight of being moving 
out into infinite and variable delight of becoming” is the 
root-cause of the Spirit’s falling asleep in matter with a view 
to re-awakening in unique conditions. But still the question 
would arise: is not the essential painfulness of embodied 
existence an outrage upon the nature of the Spirit which 
is made of the stuff of pure delight? Is not there a palpable 
incongruity between the inherent delight of the Spirit and 
the endless suffering of its manifestation? 

It should be pointed out here that the view that our life is 
essentially and overwhelmingly painful is an error of our 
perspective. It is an exaggeration due to the magnifying 
power of our emotional susceptibility. To a detached and dis¬ 
passionate view of the matter the sum of pleasure is sure to 
appear far greater than the sum of pain, suggestions to the 
contrary notwithstanding. The universal and overpower¬ 
ing instinct of self-preservation and the overmastering will- 
to-live present in all creatures, are to be traced to the im- 
mance of delight in existence. Pain affects us much more 
intensely, and the sum of pain looms much larger than the 
greater sum of pleasure, precisely because pain is abnormal 
to our being, contrary to our natural tendency, and is ex¬ 
perienced as an outrage on our existence, an offence and a 
shocking blow to what we are and what we seek to be. The 
normal satisfaction of our existence which is always there 
regardless of objective circumstances affects us as something 
neutral and as neither palpably pleasant nor painful. It is 
because pleasure is normal that we donot treasure it, hardly 



EVIL, SUFFERING AND GROWTH 


173 


even observe it, unless it intensifies into some acuter form 
of itself, into a wave of happiness, a crest of joy or ecstasy. 

Paul as a Consequence oj Pent-up Evolutionary Energy 

Researches in modern anthropology lend support to the 

view that pain is an indication of the undue hoarding or 

storing of that primal creative energy which is intended for 

further evolution. “All pain is a measure, if a crude one,” 

says Gerald Heard, “Of the degree of vital creative energy 

in any creature, animal or man.” The animal does not 

suffer much because he is a living fossil; there is not much of 

unused vital energy within him. The savage suffers most 

when injured, because there is a huge reservoir of untapped 

evolutionary energy within him which is wasted in suffering. 

A cultured man, a man given to the higher pursuits of life, 

or, in other words, engrossed in creative endeavors, does 

not suffer much, because he succeeds in drawing off' an 

amount of his pent-up energy and in directing it along higher 
channels. 

The acute sufferings of the present day are due to the fact 
that our evolution, baulked and thwarted, lopsided and un¬ 
balanced, has reached an unpredecented crisis. Prevented 
from a gradual expansion or a growing universalisation, our 
consciousness has been strangulated into separative egoism, 
both individual and collective. Since then suffering is a pa¬ 
thological symptom of evolution baulked and thwarted, there 
must be a way out of it, and that way lies in letting the evo¬ 
lutionary energy resume in us the work of universal harmony 
through a radical change of our consciousness. 

It is entirely wrong to suppose that suffering is an inherent 
and inalienable feature of life. What is needed to get out of 
suffering is not to turn one’s back upon Life and its divergent 
currents. The root-cause of suffering is not the will-to-live, 


174 


THE PHILOSOPHY OF INTEGRALISM 


but rather a failure to cooperate with the growing evolution 
of the Creative Energy. The remedy for suffering is to release 
the pent-up primal energy to allow it to energize higher 
centers of consciousness and to lift ourselves out of the 
stagnant pools of strangulated individualized consciousness. 
As Henri Bergson maintains, it is through dynamic self- 
identification with the creative impetus,—the impetus which 
is all-embracing love,—that we can aspire to a state of un¬ 
alloyed joy which is beyond all mixed feelings of pleasure 

and pain. 

Suffering as a Non-Essential Passing Feature of Life 

That suffering is not an essential or inalienable feature of 
life but only a passing phase, a vanishing quantity, has been 
demonstrated by Sri Aurobindo in his The Life Divine. 
Suffering is the shadow cast by evolving Ignorance in its 
gradual movement towards Knowledge. Or, to look at it 
from another side, pain and pleasure are alike distorted re¬ 
flections on the surface, or on the screen of Ignorance which 
envelops our surface being, of the secret delight of existence. 
They serve a transitional end, and appear on close exami¬ 
nation to be an outcome and arrangement of our imperfect 

evolution. 

Pleasure, pain and neutral feeling are, so observes Sri 
Aurobindo, mechanical reactions of our nervous and mental 
being to the touches or shocks of the external world. There is 
no absoluteness or necessity in these reactions except the 
necessity of habit. The habit, however, ought to change in 
the course of evolution. It can be changed by a strong will 
to evolve. It is common knowledge that things which are 
agreeable to some are disagreeable to others, and appear 
either agreeable or disagreeable to the same individual in 
different conditions or at different stages of development. 



EVIL, SUFFERING AND GROWTH 


175 


Our mind is more flexible in its responses to the world’s 
touches than the nervous being which is more a slave of habit 
and more accustomed to a certain constancy of response. 
To our nervous being, victory, success, honor and good 
fortune of all kinds are pleasant things in themselves, abso¬ 
lutely; whereas their opposites such as defeat, failure, 
disgrace, and bad fortune of all kinds, appear to be un¬ 
pleasant things in themselves, absolutely. But experience 
shows that man can rise above this necessity of habitual 

reactions, and can meet all the shocks of the world either 
with a perfect indifference or with an equal gladness. 

But what is the reason behind these habits of response 
which account for the triple vibration of pleasure, pain and 
indifference of our sensational being? It seems to us that these 
habits of reaction are the devices of Nature for the protection 
of imperfectly developed beings against the attack of external 
forces. From the standpoint of the individual, the world is 
a play and a complex of multitudinous forces. Some of these 
forces are unfavorable to the individual at his present stage 
of imperfect growth, and so he recoils or shrinks from them 
through pain. The Sanskrit term “Jugupsa” is very appro¬ 
priate to denote this attitude of recoil or shrinking. The 
shocks and touches which are favorable appear pleasant and 
thrilling. This diversity of reaction continues so long as 
the soul is subject to matter and to egoistic limitation of 
the mind. At the present stage of development, the con¬ 
sciousness-force within us is extremely limited, cut off as it is 
by primal ignorance from the universal Consciousness-Force, 
bo it cannot receive equally and calmly the multifarious 
shocks of the world. Pain and pleasure, as Sri Aurobindo 
puts it , 1 are in truth but currents, one imperfect and the other 
perverse but still currents,—positive and negative currents, 
° the same delight of existence. Owing to the egoistic 

The Life Divine , op. cit., p. 117. 




176 


THE PHILOSOPHY OF INTEGRALISM 


limitation of our being and the strangulation of our con¬ 
sciousness, we cannot properly receive these currents and 
perceive the rasa , the essence of delight, which is in every¬ 
thing. Art and Poetry give us a glimpse into this universal 
rasa through a detached and delightful representation of 
the sorrowful, the terrible, and even the horrible or repel¬ 
lent . 1 2 The aesthetic perception of currents is however only 
a partial and imperfect representation of the delight of exis¬ 
tence, and it is conditioned by the liberation of one part of 
our nature from practical attachment or egoistic craving. 

The pure delight in all things, the rasa in the heart of all 
existence, is in truth supra-mental and supra-aesthetic in 
character. An adequate experience of this delight is possible 
only through our liberation in all the parts of our nature. It is 
the “universal aesthesis, the universal standpoint of knowl¬ 
edge, the universal detachment from all things and yet 
sympathy with all in our nervous and emotional being, 
which alone can give us an access to the universal rasa in 
its purity. While the aesthetic attitude is one of passive 
contemplation of the underlying harmony and beauty, the 
spiritual attitude is one of active participation in the creative 
delight. The aesthetic attitude considers sorrow, terror, horror 
and disgust as features of existence in spite ol which an un¬ 
derlying harmony is perceived to be there. The spiritual 
attitude, instead of stopping short at a mere perception ol 
the underlying harmony, proceeds actively to eliminate all 
discrepant and painful features of life in response to a deeper 
realization and with a view to a fuller manifestation of the 
pure unalloyed joy which is hidden in the heart of things. 


1 Ibid., p. 129. 

2 Ibid., p. 130. 


EVIL, SUFFERING AND GROWTH 

Different Modes of Reaction to Suffering 


177 


Four different stages may be distinguished in one s attitude 
to sorrow and suffering. An individual’s instinctive reaction 
to pain is, as has already been observed, one of immediate 
recoil and shrinking {Jugupsa ). Such a reaction has a pur¬ 
pose to fulfil so long as the soul remains bound to the fetters 
of ego-centric existence. An aspiration to grow into the 
freedom of a fuller life in harmony with others must replace 


jugupsa by titiksa , that is to say, must replace the attitude of 
shrinking and contraction by that of boldly lacing, enduring 
and conquering all shocks of existence. I he spirit of brave 
endurance and conquest further leads on to what has been 
called Equality ( Samata ). 

This equality or equanimity of mind may be of two kinds. 
First, there is what may be called equal indifference to all 
external contacts. This consists in the maintenance of un- 
pcrturbable calm and balance of mind in the presence of 
the dualities of existence. The stoic indifference to pains 
and pleasures, to joys and sorrows alike, and the ascetic 
detachment and serenity in the face of life’s vicissitudes, are 
expressions of this sort of equality. This equal indifference 
or passive non-responsive serenity is based upon perception 
of the transcendental element in our nature. 

There is, however, also a deeper kind of equality or poise 
of being such as springs from an integral realization of the 
Spirit both in its cosmic universality and supra-cosmic tran¬ 
scendence. Such equality does not express itself as an equal 
indifference to all contacts, but as an equal gladness in all 
contacts. It may be described as spiritual equality, to which 
all the world’s touches are but messages of joy. It is born of 
freedom from egoity and a consequent perception of every¬ 
thing in its inmost essentiality. Sustained by the delight of 

being, it proceeds to participate in the variable delight of 

12 



J THE philosophy of integralism 

becoming. As a result, it actively issues in an unceasing 

effort towards a fuller manifestation of that creative delight. 

The equal reception of all events as variations of delight is 

not necessarily always the result of an indirect process run- 

ning thiough different stages. It can also be straightway 

developed, as Sri Aurobindo points out, through a direct 

transformation 1 of the triple vibration of pain, pleasure 

and indifference into ananda or pure delight, although such 

a direct transformation is exceedingly difficult for an average 
person. 


Ethical Aspect of the Problem of Suffering 

I he ethic al aspect of the problem of suffering calls for some 
consideration before the chapter can be brought to a close. 
Why is it that God invents torture as a means of test or as a 
passport to a fuller mode of life ? Is not such a God inferior 
to the highest moral ideal that animates His creatures ? 
Is suffering to be regarded as a mode of punishment that God 
inflicts lor the sins committed by men ? But sins are in fact 
born of man s limited knowledge and his limited powers, his 
ignorance and his weakness, which are ultimately traceable 
to the creative act of God Himself. The real cause of sin 
is not indeed the freedom of man, but rather his inadequate 
freedom, his subjection to the cravings and desires of the 
lower nature. Responsibility for the human soul’s entangle¬ 
ment in the lower nature, or non-discriminating self-identi¬ 
fication therewith, must ultimately be borne by God Himself. 

But all these difficulties can be set down to one initially 
wrong supposition, namely that, God is an extra-cosmic 
Being, an external ethical Personality, who conducts the 
business of creating and governing all creatures according 
to some eternally fixed ethical principles. This is a subtle 
1 Ibid., p. 130. 



EVIL, SUFFERING AND GROWTH 


179 


form of anthropomorphism,—an application of the charac¬ 
teristics of human nature to the understanding of the signi¬ 
ficance of the world-process. The view of the world as the 
handiwork of an extra-cosmic Deity belongs to the primitive 
phase of philosophic thinking. It has been our contention 


that the world is a spontaneous outpouring of creative joy 
in the heart of the Supreme. And the Supreme is dyna¬ 
mically present in the world. It is the Supreme itself in hu¬ 
man form that undergoes the varied experiences of pleasure 


and pain with a view to a richly diversified manifestation 


of the joy of self-expression. The sinfulness and 


inherent 


self-discrepancy of man marks a stage in the movement of 
the Spirit from the inconsciencc of material Nature towards 


the superconscient harmony of gnostic existence, from an 
existence of blind uniformity and iron necessity to a life of 
luminous unity and complete freedom, perfect mutuality 
and profoundest love. 


Western thinkers like F. H. Bradley and Bernard Bosan- 
quet had the depth of insight to realize that the ethical 
point of view could by no means be treated as absolute. 
The moral distinctions are relative to a definite transitional 


stage in the self-unfoldment of the Absolute. As such they 
must not be used as a key to the interpretation of ultimate 
reality. Relative as they are to the divided consciousness 
of man, they are bound to change, and change radically, 
when he grows into the undivided consciousness of the 
Absolute. At the pre-human levels are non-moral or infra- 
ethical modes of existence. The inherent self-discrepancies 
of human morality point to its self-completion in a supra- 
moral consciousness such would lay the foundation of a far 
bettei and fuller life, the life of truth and beauty and free¬ 
dom and love. The fundamental thing,—that which is 
common to all grades of evolution—is the gradual unfold¬ 
ing and self-expression of the Absolute. At the human 



180 


THE PHILOSOPHY OF INTEGRALISM 


stage, whatever hurts this self-expression, whatever impedes 
the progressive development of man’s limited personality, is 
considered evil. On the contrary, whatever helps, stimulates, 
ennobles it, is accounted good. With the gradual develop¬ 
ment of the human personality, with the increasing self- 
expression of the Absolute within him, he must outgrow the 
morality of his divided consciousness and act spontaneously 
on the basis of a conscious realization of the absolute unity 
of all existence in the identity of the Absolute. 


Conclusion 

It is thus the evolutionary perspective which contains the 
best solution to the problem of evil. It throws a new light 
not only on moral evil but also upon physical evil. None of 
these different types of evil should be regarded as an insepa¬ 
rable aspect of life or a permanent feature of the world. As 
there can be no pain in the realm of inconscient matter, 
physical evil in the shape of pain and suffering enters the 
world with the emergence of Life in the course of evolution. 
It is occasioned by the living being’s incapacity for adequate 
reception of the contacts of the external world. 

Moral evil enters the world with the emergence of the 
finite rational will in the course of evolution. It is occasioned 
not so much by an exercise of freedom as by man’s inade¬ 
quate freedom and subjection to the forces of darkness and 
ignorance. True freedom belongs not to the mental will, but 
to the Self. It is possible that at the next higher stage of 
evolution man will attain spiritual maturity by being lifted 
into the full freedom of the Self. That will mean the elimi¬ 
nation of moral evil and the transformation of life into an 
expression of divine freedom and spontaneity. 

It is also quite possible that at the suprahuman stage of 
evolution, inadequate reception of the world’s external con- 


EVIL, SUFFERING AND GROWTH 


] 81 


tacts will be replaced by a clear perception of the divine de¬ 
light in all things and events. Blind attachment to exclusive 
particularity will be replaced by an expansion of conscious¬ 
ness to the dimensions of the entire universe. That will mean 
the elimination of sorrow and suffering and the transforma¬ 
tion of life into a sacred poem of divine delight. 

Integral self-development consists in overcoming man’s 
primal ignorance in all its forms. It implies a growing spiri¬ 
tual insight into the essential structure of the self and the 
supreme purpose of life. It also implies an intelligent and 
constructive channelling of unconscious drives and urges 
toward the creative fulfilment of one’s authentic self. With 
the increasing elimination of primal ignorance from life and 
society, evil can be more and more conquered. Conquest of 
evil is an essential pre-requisite to the kingdom of heaven 
on earth. The kingdom of heaven on earth is an heuristic 
maxim for actualizing man’s profoundest potential here and 
now in this very world. It is the outflowering of the Divine 
in human society. It is the eventual triumph of light and 
love over darkness and hatred, of knowledge and freedom 

over ignorance and bondage, of justice and peace over 
barbarism and war. 




INDEX 




INDEX 


Absolute, the 27, 29, 36, 54, 59, 64-6, 
69, 70, 73, 116, 119, 124, 131, 168. 
169 

Absolutism 25, 28 
Absolute dualism 91 
Absolute idealism 36 
Advaita (nondualism) 21.22 
Advaita Vedanta 25, 30 
Alexander, S. 61n., 62, 75n., 89, 100, 
103 

dnanda (bliss) 65 

ananda Brahman (Being as Bliss'! 65 
Anitya (impermanent) 32 
Annam Brahman (Being as Matter) 59 
apara prakrti (Lower Nature) 69 
Aristotle 32 

Aurobindo, Sri 1, 3, 4, 19, 20, 42n, 
67n, 71, 72, 76n, 95, 99, 101, 109, 
110, 112n, 113n, 131, 166, 170, 

175, 178 

Berdyaev, Nicolas 67n 
Bergson, Henri 5, 61, 62n, 83, 85, 
86n, 87, 104, 174 
Bhagavadgita 1, 3, 17-9 
Bosanquet, Bernard 25, 26, 28, 29, 
82, 88n, 90n, 108n, 123, 124n 
Bradley, F.H. 25-8, 29n, 82, 123 
Brahma (God as creator) 58 
Brahman (Being) 7, 36, 38, 151, 166 
Buddha 11, 12, 14, 15, 17, 28, 30, 
31, 67, 143 
Buddhism 11, 13, 150 

Chaitanya 14 

Chandogya Upanishad 13n 
Christ 30, 31, 143 
Christian 30 
Circe 39 

Consciousness 39-42, 44 


Cosmic cnergv 49 

Cosmo-centric individuality 128 

# 

Descartes 36, 38 

Dualism 2 
Dvaita (dualism') 2 

Ego-centric individuality 128 
Einstein, Albert 60, 101 
Essentialism 44, 45, 48 
Evil 154, 157, 160, 162, 167, 169 
Evolution 78, 94, 95, 97, 99, 103, 

105, 111 

Evolutionism 34 

Existence 35, 40-2, 48, 49, 73 

Existentialism 35, 44, 45, 48 

Fascism 37 

Gentile, Giovanni 82n 

Heard, Gerald. 173 
Hallucination 39 

Hegel 13, 26, 29, 36, 46n, 47n. 
81 

Heidegger, Martin 47n 
Heraclitus 78 

Hindu 18, 30 
Hinduism 13 

Hindu-Buddhist tradition 78 
Howison, Prof. 118 
Hume, David 154 
Hypnosis 39 

Immortality 134-6, 142, 148 
India 18, 19, 21 

Individuality 116-133 
Intcgralism 1, 3 

Integral nondualism 1, 3, 21, 31, 
32, 69, 148 



INDEX 


Integral philosophy 4, 6, 9, 10, 35, 
38, 57 

Integral Vedanta I, 3 

Integral Yoga 9 

Isha Upanishad 10 

Ishwara (the Lord of the universe) 2 

James, William 46, 55, 56, 88, 137, 
157 

Jaspers, Karl 61 n 
jlva (the living individual) 2 
Joad. C.E.M. 91. 98n 

Kant, Immanuel 27, 57 
Kashmir Shaivism 25 
Kevala Advaita (exclusive non- 

dualism) I, 2 
Kierkegaard, Soren 37 
Krause 26 
Krishna 30, 31, 143 
ksatriya (the warrior class) 18 

Leibnitz 117, 118 

Lotze, Herman 167, 170, 171 

Madhva 14 
Mahatma Gandhi 19 
Mahayana Buddhism 25, 30 
Materialism 3 

may a (Nescience) 5, 29, 80, 128, 139 

McTaggart, John 97n, 1 19n 

mithyd (unreal) 32 

Modal theory, the 122fT 

Mohammed 30, 31 

Monad 1 1 7 

Monism 21, 24, 25 

Monotheism 21-4 

Mystic 30, 131 

Mysticism 30, 33, 34, 139 

(Name and Form) 6. 32 
Nazism 37 
Nimbarka 14 

nirguna (qualityless, indeterminable) 

2,’ 70 


nirguna Brahman (indeterminable 
Being) 28, 30, 66 
Nondualism 22, 27-30, 33, 34, 116 
120, 148 

Pain 172, 174 

Panentheism 25, 26, 28 

Pantheism 25, 26, 28, 160 

para prakrti (Higher Nature) 69 

Parmenides 79, 80 

pardlpara (higher than the highest) 66 

Planck, Max 60 

Plato 32, 45. 80, 91, 156, 171 

Platonic idealism 5, 6 

Plotinus 25 

Political dictatorship 37 
Pragmatism 4 

prakrti (Nature) 120, 121, 157 
pravrtti (the life affirming attitude) 16 
Pringle-Pattison, A. Seth 102n, 168n. 
169 

piirnam (Fullness) 12, 69, 71 
punts a (Person) 120, 157 

Qualified nondualism 2 

Radhakrishnan, Sarvepalli 104n 
Ramakrishna, Sri 19 
Ramanuja 14 
Rammohan, Raja 19 
Rationalism 35fT 
Royce, Josiah 82n 
Rudra (God as destroyer) 58 
Russell, Bertrand 55 

Saccidananda (Existence-Knowledge- 

Bliss) 66, 96 
saguna (determinate) 2 
saguna Brahman (determinate Being) 

34 

sakti (Energy) 34, 38, 69, 71 
Shankara 11, 12, 14, 15, 17, 18, 28, 
30, 31 

Shankara Vedanta 5, 1 1 



INDEX 


Sankhya 106, 120, 157 
Sartre, Jcan-Paul 37, 48 
Sat (existence) 96 
Sin, Original 164, 166 
iiva-iakti (Being-Energy) 16, 71 
Spinoza 25-7, 122, 123 
Spiritualism 3 
Statism 37 

iunyatn (Emptiness; 28 
Supermind 64, 65, 95, 99, 114 
Swami Dayananda 19 
Swani Vivekananda 19 

Tagore, Rabindranath 19, 20, 161 

Taittiriya Upanishad 13n, 66n 

Tantra 16, 17 

Taoism 25 

talhata (suchness) 30 

Teleology 106, 108, 109 

Theism 26, 162 

Theist 30 

Thcistic Schools of Vedanta 14 
Theos 28 
Tillich, Paul 30 


Ulysses 39 

Unqualified nondualism 1 

Upanisads 1, 3, 11, 12, 18-20 

Vallabha 14 

Vedanta 1,3, 14, 16, 18, 29, 30, 34, 
70, 122, 143, 148, 150 

Vedas 1, 3, 11, 12, 18-20 

vijndnam Brahman (Being as Super¬ 
mind) 64 

F/i///fl-advaita (qualified nondualism) 

2 

Vishnu (God as the sustaining and 
ruling power of the universe) 58 

Vitalism 3, 61 

vyavahdrika sattd (the pragmatic or 
conventional type of reality) 80 

Weltanschauung 1, 4 

Whitehead, Alfred North 45, 89n, 
91 

Zen 25 

Zoroastrianism 156 








ALLAHA IQBAL LIBRARY 





161215 


