A COMPANION TO 
SPINOZA 


Edited by 
VOUS SUAS Cs eleva eh) DB, 


WILEY Blackwell 


A Companion to Spinoza 


Blackwell Companions to Philosophy 


This outstanding student reference series offers a comprehensive and authoritative survey of philosophy as a whole. Written by 
today’s leading philosophers, each volume provides lucid and engaging coverage of the key figures, terms, topics, and problems 
of the field. Taken together, the volumes provide the ideal basis for course use, representing an unparalleled work of reference for 


students and specialists alike. 


1. The Blackwell Companion to Philosophy, Second Edition 28. A Companion to African Philosophy 
Edited by Nicholas Bunnin and Eric Tsui-James Edited by Kwasi Wiredu 
2. ACompanion to Ethics 29. A Companion to Heidegger 
Edited by Peter Singer Edited by Hubert L. Dreyfus and Mark A. Wrathall 
3. A Companion to Aesthetics, Second Edition 30. A Companion to Rationalism 
Edited by Stephen Davies, Kathleen Marie Higgins, Edited by Alan Nelson 
Robert Hopkins, Robert Stecker, and David E. Cooper 31. A Companion to Pragmatism 
4. A Companion to Epistemology, Second Edition Edited by John R. Shook and Joseph Margolis 
Edited by Jonathan Dancy, Ernest Sosa and Matthias Steup 32. A Companion to Ancient Philosophy 
5. A Companion to Contemporary Political Philosophy Edited by Mary Louise Gill and Pierre Pellegrin 
(two-volume set), Second Edition 33. A Companion to Nietzsche 
Edited by Robert E. Goodin and Philip Pettit Edited by Keith Ansell Pearson 
6. A Companion to Philosophy of Mind 34. A Companion to Socrates 
Edited by Samuel Guttenplan Edited by Sara Ahbel-Rappe and Rachana Kamtekar 
7. ACompanion to Metaphysics, Second Edition 35. A Companion to Phenomenology and Existentialism 
Edited by Jaegwon Kim, Ernest Sosa and Edited by Hubert L. Dreyfus and Mark A. Wrathall 
Gary S. Rosenkrantz 36 ACompanion to Kant 
8. A Companion to Philosophy of Law and Legal Theory, Edited by Graham Bird 
Second Edition 37. A Companion to Plato 
Edited by Dennis Patterson Edited by Hugh H. Benson 
9. ACompanion to Philosophy of Religion, Second Edition 38. A Companion to Descartes 
Edited by Charles Taliaferro, Paul Draper, Edited by Janet Broughton and John Carriero 
and Philip L. Quinn : 39. A Companion to the Philosophy of Biology 
10. A Companion to the Philosophy of Language, Second Edited by Sahotra Sarkar and Anya Plutynski 
Edition (two-volume set) 40. A Companion to Hume 
Edited by Bob Hale and Crispin Wright Edited by Elizabeth S. Radcliffe 
11. A Companion to World Philosophies 41. A Companion to the Philosophy of History and 
Edited by Eliot Deutsch and Ron Bontekoe Historiography 
12. A Companion to Continental Philosophy Edited by Aviezer Tucker 
Edited by Simon Critchley and William Schroeder 42. AC ompanion to Aristotle 
13. A Companion to Feminist Philosophy Edited by Georgios Anagnostopoulos 
Edited by Alison M. Jaggar and Iris Marion Young 43. A Companion to the Philosophy of Technology 
14, A Companion to Cognitive Science Edited by Jan-Kyrre Berg Olsen, Stig Andur Pedersen, 
Edited by William Bechtel and George Graham and Vincent F. Hendricks 
15. A Companion to Bioethics, Second Edition 44, A Companion to Latin American Philosophy 
Edited by Helga Kuhse and Peter Singer Edited by Susana Nuccetelli, Ofelia Schutte, and Otavio 
16. A Companion to the Philosophers Bueno 
Edited by Robert L. Arrington 45. A Companion to the Philosophy of Literature 
17. A Companion to Business Ethics Edited by Garry L. Hagberg and Walter Jost 
Edited by Robert E. Frederick 46. A Companion to the Philosophy of Action 
18. A Companion to the Philosophy of Science Edited by Timothy O'Connor and Constantine Sandis 
Edited by W.H. Newton-Smith 47. A Companion to Relativism 
19, A Companion to Environmental Philosophy Edited by Steven D. Hales 
Edited by Dale Jamieson 48. A Companion to Hegel 
20. A Companion to Analytic Philosophy Edited by Stephen Houlgate and Michael Baur 
Edited by A.P. Martinich and David Sosa 49. A Companion to Schopenhauer 
21. A Companion to Genethics Edited by Bart Vandenabeele 
Edited by Justine Burley and John Harris 50. A Companion to Buddhist Philosophy 
22. A Companion to Philosophical Logic Edited by Steven M. Emmanuel 
Edited by Dale Jacquette 51. A Companion to Foucault 
23. A Companion to Early Modern Philosophy Edited by Christopher Falzon, Timothy O'Leary, and 
Edited by Steven Nadler Jana Sawicki 
24. A Companion to Philosophy in the Middle Ages 52. A Companion to the Philosophy of Time 
Edited by Jorge J.E. Gracia and Timothy B. Noone Edited by Heather Dyke and Adrian Bardon 
25. A Companion to African-American Philosophy 53. A Companion to Donald Davidson 
Edited by Tommy L. Lott and John P. Pittman Edited by Ernest Lepore and Kirk Ludwig 
26. A Companion to Applied Ethics 54. A Companion to Rawls 
Edited by R.G. Frey and Christopher Heath Wellman Edited by Jon Mandle and David Reidy 
27. ACompanion to the Philosophy of Education 55. A Companion to W.V.0 Quine 


Edited by Randall Curren 


Edited by Gilbert Harman and Ernest Lepore 


66. 


A Companion to Derrida 

Edited by Zeynep Direk and Leonard Lawlor 

A Companion to David Lewis 

Edited by Barry Loewer and Jonathan Schaffer 
A Companion to Kierkegaard 

Edited by Jon Stewart 

A Companion to Locke 

Edited by Matthew Stuart 

The Blackwell Companion to Hermeneutics 
Edited by Niall Keane and Chris Lawn 


. ACompanion to Ayn Rand 


Edited by Allan Gotthelf and Gregory Salmieri 


The Blackwell Companion to Naturalism 
Edited by Kelly James Clark 


. ACompanion to Mill 


Edited by Christopher Macleod and Dale E. Miller 
A Companion to Experimental Philosophy 
Edited by Justin Sytsma and Wesley Buckwalter 


. ACompanion to Applied Philosophy 


Edited by Kasper Lippert-Rasmussen, Kimberley Brownlee, and 
David Coady 

A Companion to Wittgenstein 

Edited by Hans-Johann Glock and John Hyman 


70. 


A Companion to Simone de Beauvoir 
Edited by Laura Hengehold and Nancy Bauer 


. AConcise Companion to Confucius 


Edited by Paul R. Goldin 


. The Blackwell Companion to Substance Dualism 


Edited by Jonathan J. Loose, Angus J.L. Menuge, and J.P. 
Moreland (Editor) 

A Companion to Nineteenth-Century Philosophy 
Edited by John Shand 


. ACompanion Atheism and Philosophy 


Edited by Graham Oppy 


. A Companion to Adorno 


Edited by Peter E Gordon and Espen Hammer, and Max 
Pensky 


. A Companion to Rorty 


Edited by Alan Malachowski 
A Companion to Chomsky 
Edited by Nicholas Allott, Terje Lohnda, and Georges Rey 


5. A Companion to Spinoza 


Edited by Yitzhak Y. Melamed 


A Companion to Spinoza 


Edited by 
Yitzhak Y. Melamed 


WILEY Blackwell 


This edition first published 2021 
© 2021 John Wiley & Sons Ltd 


All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, 
in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, except as 
permitted by law. Advice on how to obtain permission to reuse material from this title is available at 
http://www.wiley.com/go/permissions. 


The right of Yitzhak Y. Melamed to be identified as the author of the editorial material in this work has been 
asserted in accordance with law. 


Registered Offices 
John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030, USA 
John Wiley & Sons Ltd, The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 8SQ, UK 


Editorial Office 
111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030, USA 


For details of our global editorial offices, customer services, and more information about Wiley products visit us 
at www.wiley.com. 


Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats and by print-on-demand. Some content that 
appears in standard print versions of this book may not be available in other formats. 


Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty 

While the publisher and authors have used their best efforts in preparing this work, they make no 
representations or warranties with respect to the accuracy or completeness of the contents of this work and 
specifically disclaim all warranties, including without limitation any implied warranties of merchantability 

or fitness for a particular purpose. No warranty may be created or extended by sales representatives, written 
sales materials or promotional statements for this work. The fact that an organization, website, or product is 
referred to in this work as a citation and/or potential source of further information does not mean that the 
publisher and authors endorse the information or services the organization, website, or product may provide 
or recommendations it may make. This work is sold with the understanding that the publisher is not engaged 
in rendering professional services. The advice and strategies contained herein may not be suitable for your 
situation. You should consult with a specialist where appropriate. Further, readers should be aware that 
websites listed in this work may have changed or disappeared between when this work was written and when it 
is read. Neither the publisher nor authors shall be liable for any loss of profit or any other commercial damages, 
including but not limited to special, incidental, consequential, or other damages. 


Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication data applied for 
ISBN 9781119538646 (Hardback) 


Cover Design: Wiley 
Cover Image: Culture Club/getty Images 


Set in 10/12pt Photina by SPi Global, Pondicherry, India 


10 9 8 7 65 43 2 1 


Contents 


Notes on Contributors 


List of Abbreviations 


Introduction 
Yitzhak Y. Melamed 


PartI Life and Background 


1 


Spinoza’s Life 
Piet Steenbakkers 


Spinoza’s Philology 
Piet Steenbakkers 


Avicenna and Spinoza on Essence and Existence 
Stephen R. Ogden 


Spinoza and Maimonides on True Religion 
Warren Zev Harvey 


Spinoza and Scholastic Philosophy 
Emanuele Costa 


Spinoza and Descartes 
Denis Kambouchner 


Spinoza’s Dutch Philosophical Background 
Henri Krop 


Spinoza and Hobbes 
Michael LeBuffe 


Part II Metaphysics and Natural Philosophy 


9 


10 


Spinoza’s Monistic Metaphysics of Substance and Mode 


Don Garrett 


Spinoza and Eternity 
Pierre-Francois Moreau 


xvii 


15 


30 


41 


47 


56 


68 


81 


93 
95 


108 


vii 


CONTENTS 


11 


12 


13 


14 


15 


16 


17 


18 


19 


20 


21 


22 


23 


Part III Epistemology, Philosophy of Mind, and Psychology 


24 Spinoza on Human and Divine Knowledge 


25 


26 


27 


28 


viii 


Spinoza on Causa Sui 
Yitzhak Y. Melamed 


Spinoza’s Physical Picture 
John Carriero 


Spinoza’s Mereology 
Tad M. Schmaltz 


Spinoza’s Metaphysics of Time 
Raphael Krut-Landau 


Spinoza’s Infinities 
Luce deLire 


Spinoza on Diachronic Identity 
Dominik Perler 


Spinoza on Relations 
Zachary Gartenberg 


Spinoza on Numerical Identity and Time 
John Morrison 


Spinoza on Universals 
Karolina Htibner 


Spinoza’s Ontology of Power 
Juan Manuel Ledesma Viteri 


Spinoza’s Modal Theory 
Olli Koistinen 


Spinoza on Determination 
Noa Shein 


Spinoza’s Physics 
Alison Peterman 


Ursula Renz and Barnaby R. Hutchins 
Reflective Knowledge 

Kristin Primus 

Spinoza Against the Skeptics 
Stephan Schmid 


Spinoza on Ideas of Affections 
Lia Levy 


The Mind-Body Union 
Chantal Jaquet 


116 


126 


144 


158 


170 


179 


189 


204 


214 


222 


231 


240 


251 


253 


265 


276 


286 


296 


CONTENTS 


29  Spinoza’s Non-Theory of Non-Consciousness 304 
Daniel Garber 

30 Spinoza on the Passions and the Self 328 
Andrea Sangiacomo 

31 The Serpent and the Dove: Spinoza’s Two Paths to Enlightenment 338 
Michah Gottlieb 

PartIV_ Ethics, Politics, and Religion 349 

32  Spinoza’s Moral Philosophy 351 
Steven Nadler 

33 Spinoza on the Constitution of Animal Species 365 


34 


35 


Susan James 


Essence, Virtue and the State 375 
Erin Islo 
Law and Dissolution of Law in Spinoza 384 


Pina Totaro 


36 Spinoza’s Notion of Freedom 394 
Moira Gatens 

37  Spinoza’s “Republican Idea of Freedom” 402 
Michael A. Rosenthal 

38 Spinoza and Economics 410 
Eric Schliesser 

39 Spinoza and Feminism 422 
Hasana Sharp 

40 Spinoza and International Law 431 
Moa De Lucia Dahlbeck 

41 The Intellectual Love of God 440 
Clare Carlisle 

42 Spinoza and Scripture 449 
Dan Arbib 

Part V Aesthetics and Language 463 

43  Spinoza’s Aesthetics 465 
Domenica G. Romagni 

44 Following Traces in the Sand: Spinoza on Semiotics 474 


45 


Lorenzo Vinciguerra 


Spinoza and the Grammar of the Hebrew Language 483 
Guadalupe Gonzalez Diéguez 


CONTENTS 


Part VI Spinoza’s Reception 493 

46 Leibniz and Spinoza on Plenitude and Necessity 495 
Jean-Pascal Anfray 

47 Spinoza in France, ca. 1670-1970 506 
Mogens Leerke 

48 Kant and Spinoza 517 
Colin Marshall 

49 Nietzsche and Spinoza 527 
Jason M. Yonover 

50 Schelling with Spinoza on Freedom 538 
Daniel Dragi¢evi¢é 

51 Hegel on Spinozism and the Beginning of Philosophy 548 


José Maria Sanchez de Leon Serrano 


52 Schopenhauer’s Critique of Spinoza’s 


Pantheism, Optimism, and Egoism 557 
Mor Segev 

53 Spinoza and Popular Philosophy 568 
Jack Stetter 

Index 579 


Notes on Contributors 


Jean-Pascal Anfray is Associate Professor of Philosophy at the Ecole Normale Supérieure, 
PSL University. His research focuses on late scholastic and early modern metaphysics. His 
recent publications include “The Unity of Composite Substance: Some Scholastic 
Background to the Vinculum Substantiale in Leibniz’s correspondence with Des Bosses” and 
“Leibniz and Descartes” (in the Oxford Handbook to Descartes and Cartesian Philosophy). 


Dan Arbib is Assistant Professor of Philosophy at the Ecole Normale Supérieure (Paris). 
He is the author of Descartes, la métaphysique et l’infini, the editor of Les Meditationes 
métaphysiques de Descartes. Objections et Réponses, Un commentaire, and the editor in chief of 
the Bulletin cartésien. He is also a specialist in Levinas and of the philosophy of Judaism, 
and is currently preparing a new French translation of the Theological-Political Treatise. 


Barnaby R. Hutchins is a postdoctoral research fellow at Ghent University, Belgium. 


Clare Carlisle is Professor of Philosophy and Theology at King’s College London. She is 
the author of several books, including Philosopher of the Heart: The Restless Life of Seren 
Kierkegaard (2019) and Spinoza’s Religion (2021), and she is also the editor of Spinoza’s 
Ethics, Translated by George Eliot (2020). 


John Carriero is Professor of Philosophy at the University of California, Los Angeles. He 
is author of Between Two Worlds: A Reading of Descartes’s Meditations (Princeton, 2009) 
and co-editor, with Janet Broughton, of a Companion to Descartes (Blackwell, 2008). He is 
currently working on a book on Spinoza’s Ethics. 


Emanuele Costa is Visiting Scholar in Philosophy at Vanderbilt University, Nashville, 
Tennessee. His scholarship covers themes in early modern philosophy, metaphysics, and 
philosophy of religion. His publications include several articles on Spinoza, Leibniz, and 
Hans Jonas. 


Luce deLire is a philosopher. She is interested in infinity, metaphysics, and contemporary 
politics. Find out more at: www.getaphilosopher.com 


Moa De Lucia Dahlbeck is a postdoctoral research fellow at the School of Business, 
Economics and Law, Gothenburg University. She is the author of Spinoza, Ecology and 
International Law: Radical Naturalism in the Face of the Anthropocene. She currently investi- 
gates artificial intelligence and international humanitarian law from the perspective of 
Spinoza’s metaphysics and political philosophy. 


Daniel Dragiéevicé is a PhD student at the University of Hamburg. His main interests 
include Spinoza and the philosophy of eighteenth and nineteenth centuries (especially 


xi 


NOTES ON CONTRIBUTORS 


German Idealism and Marx). He is about to finish a book titled “On God, Man, and His 
Freedom” which tries to unfold the nature of Schelling’s Spinozism. 


Daniel Garber is the A. Watson Armour III University Professor of Philosophy at 
Princeton University. His principal interests are the relations between philosophy, science, 
religion, and society during the Scientific Revolution. In addition to numerous articles, he 
is the author of Descartes’ Metaphysical Physics (1992), Descartes Embodied (2001), and 
Leibniz: Body, Substance, Monad (2009) and is co-editor with Michael Ayers of the Cambridge 
History of Seventeenth-Century Philosophy (1998). 


Don Garrett is Silver Professor of Philosophy at New York University. He is the author of 
Cognition and Commitment in Hume’s Philosophy, Hume, and Nature and Necessity in Spinoza’s 
Philosophy. He is the editor of The Cambridge Companion to Spinoza. 


Zachary Gartenbersg is a doctoral student in philosophy at Johns Hopkins University. His 
articles and reviews have appeared in the Journal of the History of Philosophy, Philosophers’ 
Imprint, the European Journal of Philosophy, the British Journal for the History of Philosophy, 
and The Leibniz Review. 


Moira Gatens is Challis Professor of Philosophy at the University of Sydney. She is author of 
several articles on Spinoza’s philosophy and is currently finishing a book on Spinoza and Art. 


Guadalupe Gonzalez Diéguez is Assistant Professor of Religious Studies at the University 
de Montréal. She works on medieval Jewish thought, and on the cultural interactions 
among Jews, Muslims, and Christians in medieval Iberia. She has published a translation 
into Spanish of Spinoza’s Hebrew Grammar, Compendio de gramatica de la lengua hebrea 
(Trotta, 2005). 


Michah Gottlieb is Associate Professor of Jewish Thought and Philosophy in the Skirball 
Department of Hebrew and Judaic Studies at New York University. His first monograph 
Faith and Freedom: Moses Mendelssohn's Theological Political Thought (2011) focuses on 
Moses Mendelssohn’s reception of Spinoza and the political ramifications of the 
Pantheismusstreit. His forthcoming book The Jewish Reformation: Bible Translation and the 
Middle-Class German Judaism as Spiritual Enterprise (2021) explores the axiological dimen- 
sions of bourgeois German Judaism. 


Warren Zev Harvey is Professor Emeritus in the Department of Jewish Thought at the 
Hebrew University of Jerusalem. He is the author of “A Portrait of Spinoza as a 
Maimonidean” (1981) and Physics and Metaphysics in Hasdai Crescas (1998). He is an 
EMET Prize laureate in the humanities (2009). 


Karolina Hiibner is Associate Professor at the Sage School of Philosophy at Cornell 
University. She works primarily in the metaphysics of mind and has published extensively 
on Spinoza. 


Erin Islo is a graduate student in philosophy at Princeton University. Her work focuses on 
Spinoza and other early modern thinkers, with special regard to the intersection of meta- 
physics, politics, and law. 


Chantal Jaquet is Professor in Early Modern Philosophy at University Paris 1 Panthéon- 
Sorbonne. Her research interests include early modern philosophy, philosophy of the body 
(smell), social philosophy (class-passing). She has written five books on Spinoza including 
Affects, Actions and Passions in Spinoza, The Unity of Body and Mind (Edinburgh Press, 2018). 


xii 


NOTES ON CONTRIBUTORS 


Susan James is Professor of Philosophy at Birkbeck College London. Her main areas of 
interest are early modern philosophy, feminist philosophy, political philosophy, and the 
philosophy of art. Among her publications are Passion and Action: The Emotions in Early- 
Modern Philosophy (Oxford 1997); Spinoza on Philosophy Religion and Politics: the 
Theological-Political Treatise (Oxford, 2012); and Spinoza on Learning to Live Together 
(Oxford, 2020). 


Denis Kambouchner is Professor Emeritus at University Paris 1 Panthéon-Sorbonne. 
He is the chief editor of the Complete Works of Descartes (Gallimard, 8 vols, in progress). 
His publications include L’Homme des passions, Descartes et la philosophie morale, Descartes 
na pas dit and other studies on seventeenth-century philosophy. He has also published 
several essays on culture and education, including L’Ecole, question philosophique, and some 
books for young readers. 


Olli Koistinen is Professor of Philosophy at the University of Turku, Finland. He works on 
both early modern philosophy and contemporary metaphysics. His publications include 
Cambridge Companion to Spinoza’s Ethics (editor, Cambridge 2009), Spinoza: Metaphysical 
Themes (editor, with John Biro, Oxford, 2002) and many papers on Spinoza, as well 
publications on Kant and Descartes. 


Henri Krop is a Lecturer in the History of Philosophy and Endowed Professor of Spinoza 
Studies at the Erasmus University Rotterdam. He is an author and editor of the Bloomsbury 
Companion to Spinoza and the Dictionary of Seventeenth and Eighteenth-Century Dutch 
Philosophers. He has also published an annotated Dutch version of Spinoza’s Ethics. 


Raphael Krut-Landau received his PhD from Princeton University in 2017. Since then 
he has been a Teaching Fellow in the Integrated Studies Program at the University of 
Pennsylvania. You can find him at plicat.io. 


Mogens Leerke is senior researcher at the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 
(CNRS), affiliated with the Maison Francaise d’Oxford (MFO) and the research centre 
IHRIM (UMR 5317) at the ENS de Lyon. Monographs include Leibniz lecteur de Spinoza 
(2008), Les Lumiéres de Leibniz (2015), and Spinoza and the Freedom of Philosophizing 
(2021). 


Michael LeBuffe is Professor and Baier Chair of Early Modern Philosophy at the University 
of Otago. He has interests across early modern philosophy and the History of Ethics. His 
most recent book is Spinoza on Reason. 


Juan Manuel Ledesma Viteri is an assistant professor and doctoral candidate at the 
Université Paris Nanterre. His field of interest includes metaphysics, ontology, logic, ethics, 
and political theory. He has mainly published articles on Spinoza. 


Lia Levy is a professor of philosophy at the Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul. Her 
research interests include metaphysics and theory of knowledge in early modern philos- 
ophy, with particular attention to Descartes and Spinoza. She is the author of the L’Automate 
spirituel. La naissance de la subjectivité moderne d’aprés I’Ethique de Spinoza. 


Colin Marshall is Associate Professor of Philosophy at the University of Washington, 
Seattle. Alongside various articles on Kant, Spinoza, and Schopenhauer, he is the author 
of Compassionate Moral Realism and the editor of Comparative Metaethics: Neglected 
Perspectives on the Foundations of Morality. 


xiil 


NOTES ON CONTRIBUTORS 


Yitzhak Y. Melamed is the Charlotte Bloomberg Professor of Philosophy at Johns Hopkins 
University. He works on early modern philosophy, German idealism, medieval philosophy, 
and some issues in contemporary metaphysics and political philosophy. He is the author of 
Spinoza’s Metaphysics: Substance and Thought (Oxford University Press). 


Pierre-Francois Moreau is professor of philosophy at the Ecole Normale Supérieure de 
Lyon. He is the author of Spinoza. L’Expérience et l’éternité. He has also published articles 
and books on Lucretius, Hobbes, Kant, Victor Cousin, and the history of materialism. 


John Morrison is Associate Professor of Philosophy at Barnard College, Columbia 
University. His research focuses on Spinoza’s metaphysics as well as contemporary debates 
in the philosophy of mind. 


Steven Nadler is the William H. Hay II Professor of Philosophy and Evjue-Bascom 
Professor in Humanities at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. His authored books 
include A Book Forged in Hell: Spinoza’s Scandalous Treatise and the Birth of the Secular Age 
and Think Least of Death: Spinoza on How to Live and How to Die, and he is co-editor of the 
Oxford Handbook to Descartes and Cartesianism. 


Stephen R. Ogden is Assistant Professor of Philosophy at the Catholic University of 
America. His recent publications include “Avicenna’s Emanated Abstraction” and “On a 
Possible Argument for Averroes’s Single Separate Intellect.” He is revising a book manu- 
script entitled Averroes on Intellect: From Aristotelian Origins to Aquinas’s Critique. 


Dominik Perler is Professor of Philosophy at the Humboldt University, Berlin. His 
research focuses on medieval and early modern philosophy. His books include Feelings 
Transformed. Philosophical Theories of the Emotions, 1270-1670 (author), The Faculties: A 
History (editor) and Causation and Cognition in Early Modern Philosophy (co-editor). 


Alison Peterman is Associate Professor of Philosophy at the University of Rochester. She 
works on metaphysics, philosophy of science, and philosophy of mind, especially from the 
early modern period. She has written about Spinoza, Cavendish, Newton, Leibniz, and 
others. 


Kristin Primus is an assistant professor at University of California Berkeley. Her recent 
work on Spinoza has focused on the “infinite modes” and scientia intuitiva. She is currently 
writing a book on Spinoza’s Ethics. 


Ursula Renz is Professor of Philosophy at the University of Graz, Austria, and speaker of 
the working unit History of Philosophy. Her publications include the monographs Die 
Rationalitdt der Kultur (2002), The Explainability of Experience (2010 in German, 2018 in 
English), which won the JHP book prize, as well as Was denn bitte ist kulturelle Identitdt? Eine 
Orientierung in Zeiten des Populismus (2019). She has edited a number of volumes including, 
most recently, Self-Knowledge: A History (Oxford University Press 2017). 


Domenica G. Romagni is an Assistant Professor at Colorado State University. She special- 
izes in early modern philosophy, philosophy of music, and history, and philosophy of sci- 
ence. Her current research focuses on philosophy perception in the seventeenth century, 
explanatory virtues and scientific theory-building in the Early Modern period, and musical 
perception. 


Michael A. Rosenthal is Grafstein Professor of Jewish Philosophy at the University of 
Toronto. He is the co-editor of Spinoza’s Theological-Political Treatise: A Critical Guide, and 


xiv 


NOTES ON CONTRIBUTORS 


the author of articles on early modern, Jewish, and German philosophy. He is currently 
working on a book on Spinoza’s political philosophy and critique of religion. 


José Maria Sanchez de Leon Serrano is a research associate at the University of 
Hamburg. His publications include Zeichen und Subjekt im logischen Diskurs Hegels, and 
“The Place of Skepticism in Spinoza’s Thought.” 


Andrea Sangiacomois an assistant professor of philosophy at the University of Groningen. 
He is the author of Spinoza on Reason, Passions, and the Supreme Good (Oxford 2019). 


Eric Schliesser is Professor of Political Science at the University of Amsterdam. He is the 
author of Adam Smith: Systematic Philosopher and Public Thinker; and Newton's Metaphysics: 
Essays, both with Oxford University Press. 


Tad M. Schmaltz is a professor of philosophy at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor. 
He specializes in early modern philosophy, and is the author of Malebranche’s Theory of the 
Soul (1996), Radical Cartesianism (2002), Descartes on Causation (2008), Early Modern 
Cartesianisms (2017), and The Metaphysics of the Material World: Sudrez, Descartes, Spinoza 
(2020). 


Stephan Schmid is Professor of the History of Philosophy at the Philosophy Department 
at Universitat Hamburg, Germany, where he is also co-director of the Maimonides Centre 
for Advanced Studies: Jewish Scepticism. He works on epistemology, metaphysics, and phi- 
losophy of mind in the early modern and late scholastic periods. 


Mor Segev is an associate professor of philosophy at the University of South Florida. His 
publications include Aristotle on Religion (Cambridge University Press) and “‘Obviously all 
this Agrees with my Will and my Intellect’: Schopenhauer on Active and Passive Nous in 
Aristotle’s De Anima III.5,” British Journal for the History of Philosophy. 


Hasana Sharp is Associate Professor of the Department of Philosophy at McGill University. 
Among other works, she is author of Spinoza and the Politics of Renaturalization and co- 
editor, with Yitzhak Melamed, of Spinoza’s Political Treatise: A Critical Guide. 


Noa Shein is a senior lecturer in philosophy at Ben Gurion University of the Negev. Her 
publications include “The False Dichotomy between Objective and Subjective 
Interpretations of Spinoza’s Theory of Attributes” and, more recently, “Not Wholly Finite: 
The Dual Aspect of Finite Modes in Spinoza.” 


Jack Stetter is a visiting assistant professor of philosophy at Loyola University New 
Orleans. He is co-editor, with Charles Ramond, of Spinoza in Twenty-First Century American 
and French Philosophy (Bloomsbury Academic). He is also co-editor, with Stephen Howard, 
of the forthcoming Edinburgh Critical History of Early Modern and Enlightenment Philosophy 
(Edinburgh University Press). He has published papers on Spinoza and Spinoza’s critics in 
several venues. 


Piet Steenbakkers was a senior lecturer in the history of modern philosophy at Utrecht 
University, and holder of the chair of Spinoza Studies at Erasmus University Rotterdam. He 
retired in 2016 and is currently affiliated with Utrecht University as researcher. With 
Fokke Akkerman and Pierre-Francois Moreau he coedited Spinoza’s Ethica. 


Pina Totaro is Senior Researcher at the ILIESI-CNR in Rome. Her books include: Spinoza, 
philosophe grammairien. Le Compendium grammatices linguae hebraeae, Paris 2019 (with 
Jean Baumgarten, Iréne Catach); The Vatican Manuscript of Spinoza’s Ethica, Leiden-New 


XV 


NOTES ON CONTRIBUTORS 


York 2011 (with L. Spruit); Instrumenta mentis. Contributi al lessico filosofico di Spinoza, 
Florence 2009. 


Lorenzo Vinciguerra is Professor of Moral Philosophy at the University of Bologna and 
Professor of Aesthetics at the University of Amiens. He is author of Spinoza and Sign. The 
Logic of Imagination and co-author (with Pierre-Francois Moreau) of Spinoza and Arts. 


Jason M. Yonover is a dual PhD candidate (Philosophy and German) at Johns Hopkins 
University. He works primarily in the history of philosophy, with a focus on German 
thought and its engagement with Spinoza in particular. His work has been published in the 
British Journal for the History of Philosophy as well as the Goethe Yearbook, and is forth- 
coming in the European Journal of Philosophy and several other venues. 


xvi 


AT 
CSM 


List of Abbreviations 


Descartes’s Works 


Adam and Tannery (eds.), Oeuvres de Descartes 
Cottingham, Stoothoff, and Murdoch (ed. and trans.), The Philosophical Writings 
of Descartes (third volume edited by A. Kenny also) 


Hobbes’ Works 


Elements of Law 

De Cive (cited by chapter and paragraph) 

Leviathan (cited by chapter, page and line number in Malcolm’s edition) 
De Corpore (cited by part, chapter, paragraph) 


Spinoza’s Works 


Cogitata Metaphysica (an appendix to Spinoza’s DPP) 

Renati des Cartes Principiorum Philosophiae Pars I and II| Descartes’s Principles 
of Philosophy) 

Epistolae | Letters 

Spinoza Opera, edited by Carl Gebhardt. 4 vols, 1925. 

Korte Verhandeling van God de Mensch en deszelfs Welstand| Short Treatise on 
God, Man, and his Well-Being) 

Tractatus de Intellectus Emendatione | Treatise on the Emendation of the Intellect 
Ethica| Ethics 

Tractatus Theologico-Politicus | Theological Political Treatise 

Compendium Grammatices Linguae Hebraeae | Compendium of Hebrew Grammar 
Nagelate Shriften (1677 Dutch edition of Spinoza’s Works) 

The Vatican Manuscript of Spinoza’s Ethics, edited by Leen Spruit and Pina Totaro, 
Leiden, NL: Brill, 2011. 

Spinoza Oeuvres IV: Ethica. Texte établi par Fokke Akkerman et Piet Steenbakkers. 
Traduction par Pierre-Francois Moreau. Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 
2020. 


Xvii 


LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS 


Passages in Spinoza’s Ethics are referred to by means of the following abbreviations: 
a-(xiom), c-(orollary), e-(xplanation), l-(emma), p-(roposition), pref- (ace), s-(cholium), 
and app-(endix); “d” stands for either “definition” (when it appears immediately to the 
right of the part of the book) or “demonstration” (in all other cases). The five parts of the 
Ethics are cited by Arabic numerals. Thus “E1d3” stands for the third definition of Part 1 
and “Elp16d” for the demonstration of proposition 16 of Part 1. Passages from DPP are 
cited using the same system of abbreviations used for the Ethics. 

References to Spinoza’s original Latin and Dutch texts rely on the pagination of Spinoza 
Opera (ed. Carl Gebhardt, 1925) and follow this format: volume number/ page number/ 
line number. Hence “II/200/12” stands for volume 2, page 200, line 12. 

Passages from Adam and Tannery (eds.), Oeuvres de Descartes, are cited by volume and 
page number. Thus “AT VII 23” stands for page 23 of volume 7 of this edition. 


XViii 


Introduction 


The second half of the twentieth century witnessed a substantial surge of interest in 
Spinoza’s philosophy, first in France and in Europe more generally, and then, toward the 
end of the century, in North America as well. At present, Spinoza’s philosophical legacy 
seems remarkably full of promise in comparison with other major figures in the history of 
philosophy, and it is part of the aim of this Companion to exhibit the vitality, versatility, and 
vision of scholarly attention devoted to Spinoza in recent years. 

As this volume is about to go to press, we read about the just street protest targeting 
statues of Enlightenment philosophers such as Hume and Kant due to their disturbing 
racial prejudices. Spinoza, too, was not wholly immune to such prejudice, whether as 
expressed in his lazy inference that since women are subjugated everywhere, this must be 
due to their nature (TP 11| IM/360/14) — a claim one could expect from many philoso- 
phers, but not from one who relishes challenging commonly-accepted-yet-poorly-justified 
‘truisms’ — or his occasional rehashing of anti-Jewish and anti-Muslim stereotypes. Still, 
I believe, it would be fair to say that in comparison with his contemporaries, Spinoza’s 
views on politics and human equality are far more decent and far less naive. Indeed, in 
many ways, his progressive realism is more morally and politically respectable than 
prevailing attitudes of our time. 

The past three centuries have exhibited a wide plurality of different Spinozisms. While 
Spinoza has been celebrated as a paragon or precursor of a great variety of political 
stances, none (so far) has been of the monstrous kind. Is it a mere coincidence that the 
Nazi Kantianism fostered during the Third Reich, has no Spinozist twin? I would like to be 
able to answer the last question with a solid “no,” but such an answer might be premature, 
and the question better be left hanging in the air. 

The invitation to edit this volume came almost five years ago. At the time, I asked the 
Blackwell editors to postpone this project by a few years, in order to create a healthy dis- 
tance between this volume and the Oxford Handbook of Spinoza which came out in 2017. 
During this long period — about as long as three elephant pregnancies — I have worked with 
several Blackwell editors: Charlie Hamlyn, Marissa Koors, Rachel Greenberg, Manish 
Luthra, and Mohan Jayachandran, and I would like to thank each and every one of them 
for their trust, care, and support. 

There are several substantial editorial decisions I wish to explain here briefly. To facili- 
tate diversity (of gender, geography, philosophical tradition, and stage of career 
development), I have decided to commission a larger number of chapters. This decision has 
also allowed the Companion to cover topics which are rarely addressed in similar publica- 
tions. Yet, insofar as the length of the entire Companion had to be restricted within certain 
reasonable limits, most of the chapters had to be concise. Moreover, in order to recruit top 


xix 


INTRODUCTION 


scholars — who are frequently not tempted to write mere summaries and textbook entries —I 
invited contributors to use their chapters to develop new ideas and cutting-edge research, 
rather than merely summarize existing scholarship. Thus, the contributors were placed — 
by me — in an uneasy and challenging situation: they were asked to provide a brief over- 
view of their subject matter while presenting serious, original scholarship, all in a rather 
short space. While I do not wish to break the Talmudic rule that a “baker may not attest to 
the quality of his own loaf,” my personal feeling is that this challenge has been met even 
better than I could have hoped, and I would like to thank my collaborators in this volume 
for their immense investment, talent, and intellectual generosity. 

In January 2020, the Maimonides Center at Hamburg University hosted a workshop in 
which a small group of the papers in this volume were presented, and I would like to thank 
the center and its co-director, my friend, Stephan Schmid for this generous initiative. 
Finally, I wish to thank Jonathan Arking, Rosemary Morlin, and Shyamala Venkateswaran, 
for their outstanding assistance in the copyediting and production of this Companion. 


Yitzhak Y. Melamed 


Baltimore, MD 
June 2020 


xx 


Part I 


Life and Background 


ih 


Spinoza’s Life 


PIET STEENBAKKERS 


Apart from his works Spinoza did not leave many traces. Though certainly not a recluse, he 
led an inconspicuous life. Some periods in it are hardly documented, so that any biography 
of the philosopher must to some extent be lacunary. The following account of his life is as 
coherent as the historical material and the format of this Companion permit. This chapter 
is an extract from a substantially longer, footnoted version that will appear in Garrett 
(2021), to which I refer for corroboration of the details presented here. My work on 
Spinoza’s biography has profited greatly from a standing collaboration with Jeroen van de 
Ven, who is preparing a detailed chronicle of the philosopher’s life. 


1. Family 


Spinoza was born in Amsterdam in 1632. He died in The Hague in 1677. As far as we 
know he never left the Dutch Republic. His mother was born in Amsterdam, but his father 
and his grandparents on both sides were from Portugal. From the end of the sixteenth 
century onwards, many Sephardic Jews came to Amsterdam to escape from the persecu- 
tion they suffered in Spain and Portugal. Medieval Iberia (Sepharad in Hebrew) had been 
ruled by Muslims for a very long time, and though it was not free from oppression, it had 
allowed Jews to profess their religion. After nearly nine centuries, however, the situation 
changed dramatically: in 1492 Ferdinand II of Aragon and Isabella I of Castile (known as 
los Reyes Catolicos) conquered Spain, and immediately expelled the Jews. Most of them 
went to Portugal, but in 1497 the Portuguese king Manuel I married the daughter of the 
Spanish ‘Catholic Monarchs.’ On their insistence, he forced all Jews to convert to 
Christianity. Those who continued to practice Judaism were, however, not actively perse- 
cuted until half a century later. Then many conversos (or ‘New Christians’), who were 
indiscriminately suspected of Judaizing in secret, fled Portugal to escape the Portuguese 
Inquisition. In 1580 Spain and Portugal were politically united under Philip II of Spain, 
and in the decades that followed many Jews sought refuge abroad, often in seaports — so as 
to stay in touch with their network of overseas merchants. Thus they came to French har- 
bor towns (Bordeaux, Nantes, Rouen) and to Antwerp and Amsterdam in the Low 


A Companion to Spinoza, First Edition. Edited by Yitzhak Y. Melamed. 
© 2021 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2021 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd. 


PIET STEENBAKKERS 


Countries. Many Sephardi immigrants settled on Vlooienburg, an embankment in the 
river Amstel created in 1593 as part of the urban expansion of Amsterdam. 

Michael de Spinoza, the philosopher’s father, was born in 1587 or 1588 in Vidigueira, 
Portugal. In 1605 his parents, Pedro Rodrigues Espinosa and Mor Alvares, fled to Nantes 
with their three children. Michael moved to Amsterdam in the early 1620s. Around 1623 
he married Rachel de Spinoza, a first cousin. They had two children, both stillborn. Rachel 
died in 1627. Michael then married Hana Deborah Senior, with whom he had five chil- 
dren: Miriam, Isaac, Bento (or Baruch), Gabriel, and Rebecca. Michael and Hana Deborah 
named their third child Baruch, after his maternal grandfather (who officially received 
that name only when he was circumcised after his death in 1647). As a child he was called 
Bento, the Portuguese translation of Baruch (‘blessed’). The philosopher himself seems 
not to have used the Hebrew version of his name: he signed legal documents as ‘Bento,’ 
letters as ‘Benedictus,’ or just the initial ‘B.’ Just before Bento turned six, on 5 November 
1638, his mother died. Michael’s third and last marriage, with Hester de Spinoza, remained 
childless. 

Spinoza’s family lived on the edge of Vlooienburgh. The house in which Bento was born 
and raised, a handsome merchant's residence on the north quay of the Houtgracht, close 
to the old Amsterdam synagogue, was pulled down in the nineteenth century. On its prem- 
ises the Mozes en Adronkerk was built. The former island of Vlooienburgh has become a 
square, the Waterlooplein. Michael de Spinoza and his family stayed in the same house for 
decades, so Bento lived there from his birth on 24 November 1632 up to at least 1656, 
when he was expelled from the Portuguese-Jewish community of Amsterdam. 


2. The Amsterdam Years (1632-ca. 1660) 


As a child Spinoza attended ‘Ets Haim’, a nearby cheder (elementary school). He received a 
solid Jewish education, though he did not attend the school’s highest forms. He was never 
trained to become a rabbi, but joined his father’s trading firm in his early teens. Michael de 
Spinoza was a respected and active member of the Jewish community in Amsterdam. He 
imported and exported commodities such as raisins, almonds, wine, and olive oil. Bento’s 
stepmother Hester died in 1652, and his father Michael in 1654. Isaac had died in 1649, 
Miriam in 1651, and Rebecca moved out in 1650, so after 1654 the two brothers Gabriel 
and Bento were the only remaining family members still living in the parental home on the 
Houtgracht. They took over their father’s firm, but it soon became clear that it was weighed 
down with debts as a result of severe losses in the years 1651-1653, owing to piracy and 
war. In order to escape bankruptcy, Bento, then 23 years of age, had himself declared a 
minor under Dutch law and placed under tutelage on 16 March 1656. By this maneuver 
he was released from the insolvent estate. Apparently Gabriel managed to continue the 
company on his own until October 1664: he then granted power of attorney to the mer- 
chant brothers Moses and David Juda Lion, and set off to Barbados. 

On 27 July 1656, just a few months after Spinoza’s spectacular legal escape from the 
family business, he was ritually expelled from the Amsterdam Jewish community, with a 
formal ban (herem) pronounced in the synagogue of the Talmud Tora congregation. The 
exact reasons for the ban are not specified in the archival record we have of it — presumably 
a summary (in Portuguese) of a lost official text in Hebrew. It states that the synagogue’s 
board of governors (the Mahamad) expelled ‘Baruch espinoza’ because of his evil opinions 
and activities, and of the horrible heresies he had practiced and taught, as well as the 


4 


SPINOZA'S LIFE 


monstrous acts he had committed. As far as we know, Spinoza had not yet published 
anything at the time when the herem was promulgated. Yet the wording of its record indi- 
cates that teaching heretical ideas was among the abominations he was accused of. To all 
appearances, Spinoza’s philosophy was already gestating in the middle of the 1650s, in 
some form or another. As the earliest letters show, he had acquired a reputation as a 
redoubtable philosopher by 1661. He obviously flourished in the heterodox circles in 
which he moved in the latter half of the 1650s. Unfortunately, this formative period in 
Spinoza’s life is very poorly documented. That his philosophical views had something to do 
with the heresies imputed to him is also asserted in testimonies of two Spanish travelers 
who had associated with Spinoza in Amsterdam in 1658-1659. Tomas Solano, an 
Augustinian monk from Tunja (in Colombia, then part of the Spanish empire) and Captain 
Miguel Pérez de Maltranilla were part of a group that frequently gathered in the residence 
of Joseph Guerra, a nobleman from the Canary Islands, who was in Amsterdam to be cured 
of leprosy. Spinoza and another excommunicated Jew, Juan de Prado, often attended these 
gatherings. In August 1659, Solano and Pérez de Maltranilla were interrogated by the 
Spanish Inquisition in Madrid, primarily about a Spanish actor who had converted to 
Judaism in Amsterdam. They also told the Inquisition about their meetings with Spinoza 
and Prado; according to them these men had been expelled from the Jewish community 
because of their rejection of Jewish law. Solano in addition mentioned their views that the 
soul is mortal and that God exists only philosophically. 

It would have been possible for Spinoza to be readmitted to the community, if he had 
made amends. That was a price he did not want to pay. Spinoza accepted the herem as a 
fact: for him, the break with Judaism was definitive. He never joined another religious 
denomination either. There are some indications that he reacted to the ban with a written 
statement, a vindication of his dissent from Judaism. If that is true, it is tempting to 
assume that part of it may have found its way into his works, particularly the Theological- 
Political Treatise. 

The five years after Spinoza’s excommunication from the synagogue are shrouded in 
haze. All contacts with relatives (including his brother and business partner Gabriel) and 
Jewish acquaintances were severed. It is unlikely that he could have continued to live in 
the parental home on the Houtgracht with Gabriel. Just what he did in Amsterdam after 
1656 and where he lived is a mystery. We know that he associated with freethinking 
Christians and apostate Jews. He had already befriended Jarig Jelles, Pieter Balling, and 
Simon Joosten de Vries — Mennonite merchants he had met while still in business. He 
became acquainted with his future publisher Jan Rieuwertsz, and with Jan Hendriksz 
Glazemaker, the professional translator who was to translate most of Spinoza’s works. At 
the age of 25, in 1657-1658, Spinoza attended the private Latin school run by the former 
Jesuit Franciscus van den Enden. The story that he fell in love with the teacher’s daughter 
Clara Maria (then 15 years old) has been eagerly exploited in biographical accounts and 
(more appropriately) in works of art and fiction about the philosopher, but it has an air of 
romanticized hearsay about it. 

In the period between 1656 and 1661, Spinoza was setting out on a new course. One 
gets the impression that he left Vlooienburgh after the herem and found temporary 
accommodation with various friends. Thus, he may have lived as a boarder in Van den 
Enden’s school. His talents burgeoned. By the time he moved to Rijnsburg, Spinoza had 
gained renown as a philosopher, had mastered the art of grinding lenses, and was profi- 
cient in Latin, the international language of scholarly and scientific communication. The 
genesis of his early works, the Treatise of the Emendation of the Intellect and the Short Treatise 


5 


PIET STEENBAKKERS 


of God, Man and his Well-Being, can be dated from the years before 1662. If the Treatise of 
the Emendation of the Intellect is indeed, as present-day scholarship is inclined to assume, 
the earliest of his extant works, it is likely to have been written during his last years in 
Amsterdam. Throughout his life, he entertained thoughts of revising and finishing it, but 
eventually he never updated the manuscript. When his friends decided to publish it as part 
of his posthumous works in 1677, they revised and polished the unsophisticated or per- 
haps even awkward Latin in which this early text was written. 

In the remaining years in or around Amsterdam, Spinoza moved in various circles, with 
the common denominator that they were heterodox and tolerant. Quite a few of the people 
he associated with in the latter half of the 1650s stayed in touch with him and remained 
loyal friends. When Simon de Vries died in 1667, he remembered Spinoza in his will, leav- 
ing him a yearly pension of 250 guilders. Many of his old friends were actively involved in 
getting Spinoza’s works published: Lodewijk Meyer oversaw the publication of his Principia 
philosophiae & Cogitata metaphysica in 1663, Pieter Balling supplied a Dutch translation in 
1664, and Johannes Bouwmeester and Hendrick van Bronckhorst contributed dedicatory 
poems. Jan Rieuwertsz published all of Spinoza’s works, both in Latin and in Dutch. Jan 
Hendriksz Glazemaker translated the remainder of the Latin texts. In 1677 Jarig Jelles, 
Bouwmeester, Meyer, and Rieuwertsz took care of Spinoza’s philosophical legacy. 

Colerus reports that Spinoza did not move directly from Amsterdam to Rijnsburg, but 
that he first learned how to grind lenses and then moved in with someone who lived outside 
town, on the road to Ouderkerk. Another early source, Monnikhoff, adds that Spinoza 
moved to Rijnsburg together with that same person. There is no further evidence to support 
this information. A persistent legend, relayed by the anonymous (and entirely unreliable) 
pamphlet La Vie et l’esprit de Monsieur Benoit de Spinosa, has it that Spinoza was banished 
from the city of Amsterdam by its magistrates, at the instigation of the spiteful rabbi Saul 
Levi Morteira. That story is certainly fictitious. Spinoza had nothing to fear from the city 
magistrates. Indeed, he returned there several times without any trouble. Another possible 
reason why Spinoza left Amsterdam is given by Pierre Bayle: allegedly Spinoza was attacked 
by someone with a knife. If, when, and why this attack took place remains in the dark. 
Spinoza’s friend Jarig Jelles does not refer to it when mentioning his move in the preface to 
De nagelate schriften: “To get rid of all the worldly worries and troubles that commonly 
hinder the search for truth, and in order to be the less disturbed by all his friends, he left the 
city where he was born, Amsterdam, and took up residence first in Rijnsburg.” 


3. Spinoza in Rijnsburg (ca. 1660/61—April 1663) 


Why Spinoza chose Rijnsburg, then the center of the Collegiant movement, is a matter of 
speculation. There are no indications that he himself was actively involved in the meetings 
(‘colleges’) of that informal latitudinarian current in Dutch Protestantism, which attracted 
Arminians, Mennonites, and Socinians. But several of his friends were Collegiants, so that 
may have played a part. An asset of the village was also that it was within walking distance 
of the university town of Leiden. Spinoza was in touch with students and professors of the 
university and he may well have attended lectures there, though concrete evidence that he 
did so is lacking. 

When exactly Spinoza left Amsterdam and settled in Rijnsburg is unknown. One trav- 
eler’s report of 17 May 1661 mentions atheists in Amsterdam, among them “an impudent 
Jew”; quite likely a reference to Spinoza. At any rate he had moved to Rijnsburg by July 


6 


SPINOZA'S LIFE 


1661, for in the first extant letter to Spinoza (Ep. 1, 26 August 1661) Henry Oldenburg 
refers to the visit he had paid him there. Travelers who came to Rijnsburg in September 
1661 also mention him as a local celebrity. Spinoza rented a room in a cottage that had 
been built between 1656 and 1660 by his landlord, the surgeon Herman Homan. 

Though he lived in Rijnsburg for just two years, this was a very productive period for 
Spinoza, in which he laid a firm foundation for his philosophical system. The first exposi- 
tion of it was the Short Treatise of God, Man and his Well-Being. He wrote the Short Treatise 
in Latin, but the work has survived in a contemporary Dutch translation, which was only 
discovered in the 1850s. From its contents we can infer that the Short Treatise was initially 
intended as an outline of his thought for a small circle of friends. He never finished it. 
While Spinoza was in the process of revising it, in 1661-1662, he decided to start anew, 
this time rearranging the material in ‘geometrical order’: as a tight framework of defini- 
tions, axioms, propositions, demonstrations, and scholia. Because the argument is gradu- 
ally put together, as it proceeds from elementary definitions to a highly complex 
concatenation of proofs, this type of presentation was traditionally called ‘synthesis.’ The 
model was Euclid’s Elements, the classic geometry textbook. In the Rijnsburg years, Spinoza 
was experimenting with the synthetic form as a philosophical tool: he employed it in three 
texts, the (lost) enclosure to letter 6 (April 1662), the first appendix to the Short Treatise, 
and, more audaciously, his didactic précis of Descartes’s Principles of Philosophy, Parts I and 
II (written in the winter of 1662-1663). Between May 1662 and January 1663 Spinoza 
embarked on what was to become the pinnacle of the genre: the Ethics. It took him 12 
years to complete this unparalleled project. In February 1663, Simon Joosten de Vries 
wrote Spinoza a letter in which he describes the regular meetings of a group (collegium) of 
friends in Amsterdam to discuss a work by Spinoza. The references and quotations both in 
De Vries’s letter and in Spinoza’s reply leave no doubt as to what the friends had at their 
disposal: an early installment of the Ethics, consisting of definitions, axioms, at least 19 
propositions, and several scholia. 

Another lodger in Homan’s house in Rijnsburg, at least for a while, was Johannes 
Casearius, a student of divinity. Spinoza gave him a private course on part II of Descartes’s 
Principia philosophiae, writing a synthetic (‘geometric’) rundown of the text for the occasion. 


4. Spinoza in Voorburg (April 1663—Winter 1669/70) 


In April 1663 Spinoza moved to Voorburg, a village near The Hague. He rented rooms in 
the house of a painter, Daniel Tydeman, in the Kerklaan (now called Kerkstraat). During a 
visit to Amsterdam he showed his friends the partial adaptation of Descartes’s Principles he 
had written for Casearius, with an additional set of remarks on metaphysics (Metaphysical 
Thoughts). They implored him to expand this material for publication. He did so, drawing 
on the Principia and on several other Cartesian texts. The result was edited by Lodewijk 
Meyer, who touched up Spinoza’s Latin and supplied a preface. At the philosopher’s own 
request, Meyer emphasized that the book presented Descartes’s views, not Spinoza’s. The 
book came out in Amsterdam in 1663, a Dutch translation (by Pieter Balling) followed in 
1664. 

Spinoza was well aware that his philosophical project would meet with formidable opposi- 
tion from zealots. In fact, he had already acquired some notoriety in Voorburg. When his 
landlord Tydeman became involved in a quarrel in the local Reformed Church, the alleged 
atheism of his lodger was held against him. The public church was a political factor to reckon 


7 


PIET STEENBAKKERS 


with, and its power was supported by what Spinoza saw as an idolatrous interpretation of the 
Bible. Thus the authority of God’s Word became a pivotal political issue. Rumor had it that 
Spinoza was the author of a notorious book that came out in 1666, Philosophy the Interpreter 
of Scripture (Philosophia S. Scripturae Interpres), but it is certain that he did not write it. It did, 
however, originate in the circle of Spinoza’s friends: early on, Meyer had been identified as its 
author, and it is possible that Johannes Bouwmeester had a hand in it, too. Yet Spinoza’s own 
view of the relationship between philosophy and Scripture, as developed in the Theological- 
Political Treatise, is markedly different from the argument set forth in the Interpres. 

Spinoza lived in Voorburg for six years. Initially he continued working on the Ethics, but 
between the summer of 1665 and the end of 1669 he was immersed in the composition of 
his second masterpiece, the Theological-Political Treatise. It seems that work on the Ethics 
was temporarily suspended. There was much at stake. In the deteriorating political climate 
in the Netherlands, it would be difficult for Spinoza to publish his Ethics. Writing the 
Theological-Political Treatise became a priority: with this passionate plea for the freedom to 
philosophize, he took a stand in contemporary debates on religion, philosophy, and politics. 
He summarized his motives for doing so in a letter to Oldenburg: (1) exposing and repudi- 
ating the prejudices of the theologians, (2) rebutting the accusation of atheism, and (3) 
defending the freedom to philosophize and to say what we think, against the aggression of 
the preachers (Ep. 30, around 1 October 1665). 

The letters Spinoza wrote when he lived in Voorburg testify to the broad range of his 
interests and activities. Several are related to his work on the Ethics. Thus letter 28 (June 
1665, to aclose friend, possibly Bouwmeester) reveals that by then he had advanced ‘up to 
proposition 80 of part II.’ This means that he must have split up the third part later, for in 
its final shape it has no more than 59 propositions. His exchange with the Amsterdam bur- 
gomaster Johannes Hudde (Ep. 34—36) is about God as substance, echoing propositions 
8-14 of Ethics, I. With other correspondents Spinoza discusses philosophical issues in con- 
nection with his book on Descartes’s Principles and its metaphysical appendix. A peculiar 
exchange that started from there was with Willem van Blijenbergh, a grain broker from 
Dordrecht (Ep. 18-24 and 27). The two men discussed a wide range of philosophical 
topics, without getting any closer to each other: free will, freedom, and necessity, deter- 
minism, the origin of evil, moral responsibility, the authority of Holy Writ, and reason and 
revelation. Letters with other correspondents deal also with scientific and alchemic exper- 
iments (Ep. 13, 40, 41), with dioptrics and lens-grinding (Ep. 36, 39-40) and with the 
calculation of probabilities (Ep. 38). By the way: two anonymous Dutch treatises on the 
calculation of chances and on the rainbow, published in The Hague in 1687, have been 
attributed to Spinoza, but erroneously so. It is now certain that their author was a certain 
Salomon Dierquens. Spinoza did indeed write about the rainbow (as Jelles asserts in the 
preface to De nagelate schriften), but that work is lost. 

A dramatic episode took place in 1668-1669. Two brothers, Adriaan and Johannes 
Koerbagh, who had moved in the circle of Spinoza’s Amsterdam acquaintances in the 
early 1660s, had developed radical views of their own, under his influence. They had met 
Spinoza several times, though there are no indications that they were very close. In 1668 
Adraan was arrested for having attempted to publish a sacrilegious book, A Light Shining in 
Dark Places. When interrogated, he admitted to have visited Spinoza, but denied that he 
had spoken to him about this book. Adriaan Koerbagh was sentenced to ten years prison, 
subsequent banishment, and a huge fine. He died of exhaustion in October 1669. We do 
not know how Spinoza took the news. Neither in his works nor in his letters, as far as they 
are extant, did he ever refer to Koerbagh’s fate. 


8 


SPINOZA'S LIFE 


5. Spinoza in The Hague (1669/70-1677) 


No document indicates when exactly Spinoza left Voorburg, but toward the very end of 1669 
or the beginning of 1670 he moved to The Hague. He first rented a room in a house on the 
Veerkade. In the summer of 1671 he moved to a cheaper accomodation, just around the 
corner, on the Paviljoensgracht, where he became a lodger of the painter Hendrik van der 
Spyck and his family. It was a fortunate coincidence that the pastor of the Lutheran parish in 
The Hague in the period 1693-1707, Johannes Colerus, later on rented a room in the very 
same house on the Veerkade, and even more so that the Van der Spyck family (with whom 
Spinoza spent his last years) belonged to his parish. Colerus thus was in a good position to 
collect material for the well-researched biography of Spinoza he published in 1705 — together 
with a sermon in which he denounced Spinoza’s philosophy as incompatible with Christianity. 

Just around the time Spinoza moved to The Hague, his Theological-Political Treatise came out. 
As soon as it began to circulate, church councils, clergymen, and academics started campaign- 
ing to have it banned. Though formally prohibited only in 1674, there were attempts to have it 
proscribed from the very beginning. In 1670 the Dutch political system was still officially that 
of the “True Freedom’ boasted by Johan de Witt, then Grand Pensionary, but tensions had been 
building up. They came to a head in 1672, known in Dutch history as the Year of Disaster, 
when De Witt failed to ward off simultaneous invasions from the south, the east, and the west- 
ern seaboard, mounted respectively by the French King Louis XIV, two German bishoprics, and 
the English. The French gained several military successes and occupied part of the Republic, 
including the city of Utrecht. Incited by Orangist leaders, a violent mob brutally lynched Johan 
de Witt and his brother Cornelis on 20 August 1672 in The Hague. In the night after the 
murder of the De Witt brothers, Spinoza set out to go to the site of the crime (where the naked 
and mutilated corpses of the victims were still on display) with a placard that said ‘Utter barbar- 
ians,’ but his landlord blocked the door for fear that his lodger would be slaughtered, too. 

The French occupation lasted until the end of 1673. In the meantime, Prince William 
of Orange had become stadholder of the Dutch Republic. He inaugurated a period of 
autocracy, zealously supported by the ministers of the public church. Though never a par- 
tisan of De Witt, Spinoza had enjoyed relative freedom as long as the latter’s States faction 
was in power. After 1672, he thought it wiser not to publish anymore unless conditions 
improved. That, however, did not come to pass in his lifetime. 

One of the most puzzling events in Spinoza’s life is a visit he made to the occupied town 
of Utrecht in July-August 1673. Spinoza never was much of a traveler: as far as we know 
he had never been outside the province of Holland up to that point. Though Utrecht was 
not far from The Hague, it was at that moment a precarious destination, where no one 
would go without a very good reason. It required one to enter occupied territory that could 
be reached only by crossing the inundated area of the ‘water line,’ equipped with passports 
so as to be allowed to leave the United Provinces, enter the occupied town, and eventually 
return home again. What urgent reason did Spinoza have to go to Utrecht in those circum- 
stances? His own motives for accepting the invitation and undertaking the journey, and his 
exploits there, remain obscure. Broadly, there are two options: Spinoza may have gone to 
Utrecht in order to be of service to friends or acquaintances (in the circle of Cartesians, or 
perhaps also among French officers), or for political reasons, such as negotiating with the 
French. There is, so far, not a scrap of evidence to substantiate the second option. Yet it 
seems that Spinoza’s contemporaries did suspect a political motive, namely that Spinoza 
was a spy who had dealings with the enemy. These rumors alarmed his landlord, who 
expected a riot upon his return, but Spinoza assuaged his fears. 


PIET STEENBAKKERS 
6. Final Years (1675-1677) 


After having published the Theological-Political Treatise, Spinoza took up the Ethics again. 
He completed it late in 1674 or early in 1675. From his correspondence with Oldenburg, 
we know that he went to Amsterdam to have the work printed in the summer of 1675, but 
then decided to put the manuscript away. The recent discovery by Leen Spruit of a hand- 
written copy of the work executed by Pieter van Gent now enables us to date the comple- 
tion of the text more precisely. The copy was made at the request of Ehrenfried Walther von 
Tschirnhaus, who took it with him on his Grand Tour through Europe. Tschirnhaus had 
been a student in Leiden from 1669 till early spring 1674, and became acquainted with 
Schuller, Van Gent, and (through them) with Spinoza. By the end of 1674 he returned to 
the Netherlands, where he remained until May 1675. During his stay he obtained Spinoza’s 
permission to have Pieter van Gent copy the completed Ethics. This allows us to conclude 
that Spinoza had finished the text toward the end of 1674 or in the first months of 1675. 
A detailed comparison of the text as it appears in Van Gent’s copy and the printed version 
of the Opera posthuma shows that Spinoza never systematically went through the entire 
work again after having completed it in 1674/75. Instead, he seems to have turned his 
attention mainly or exclusively to a treatise on politics that was to remain unfinished: the 
Tractatus politicus. This was conceived as a systematic exposition of his political thought, 
developed on the foundation provided by the Ethics and the Theological-Political Treatise. 
Spinoza’s death prevented him from completing the work. It contains ten chapters and 
breaks off just after the beginning of Chapter 11, on democracy. Spinoza first deals with 
politics in general and then with the three forms of government he sees as basic: mon- 
archy, aristocracy, and (a fragment on) democracy. From one of Spinoza’s last letters we 
know that he had planned to add considerations on laws and on specific political issues. 

Toward the end of 1676, Spinoza’s health began to deteriorate. He died on Sunday 21 
February 1677. Although it has commonly been assumed that his health had always been 
frail and that he suffered from (hereditary) phthisis, a fresh examination of the available 
evidence has shown that in fact his physical condition must have been surprisingly 
good — at any rate good enough to have an adequate resistance against many infectious 
diseases. ‘Phthisis’ is now commonly interpreted as a designation of pulmonary tubercu- 
losis, but in Spinoza’s time it was a catch-all term that covered a range of lung diseases 
involving coughing (and coughing up blood) and respiratory problems. When, therefore, 
his early biographers speak of phthisis or consumption as the cause of Spinoza’s death, 
that does not get us very far. If it had been pulmonary tuberculosis, he would have died 
earlier, and he would not have been able to come down the stairs on the day he died. In a 
letter to Leibniz of 26 February 1677, Schuller wrote: “I had to tell you that the excellent 
and acute Mr Spinoza passed away on 21/11 February, after having suffered from extreme 
atrophy.” If that is indeed a reliable and accurate description of the cause of Spinoza’s 
death, he may have died of what is now designated as a cachexia, a wasting of the body 
due to severe chronic illness. 

The most detailed report of his death is that by Colerus, based on the information he had 
obtained from the couple in whose house Spinoza breathed his last: 


I will now turn to Spinoza’s demise. On this topic I find so many wrong descriptions, that I 
cannot help being astonished that scholars did not come up with better research, but divulged 
their stories merely on the basis of hearsay. [...] I will therefore give an impartial description of 
his death and corroborate it with proofs, given that his demise as well as his burial took place 


10 


SPINOZA'S LIFE 


here in The Hague. [...] None of the others who lived in the house entertained the least idea 
that his end was so near and that death was to overtake him so suddenly. [...] Sunday morning 
before divine service he came downstairs again and talked with the landlord and his wife. He 
had sent for a doctor, a certain L. M. from Amsterdam. [...] In the afternoon the people of the 
house went to church together, while the aforementioned doctor L. M. stayed alone with him. 
Upon their return from the church, however, they were informed that Spinoza had passed 
away at three o'clock, in the presence of this physician. The latter did not bother about the 
deceased any more, but made off with some money that Spinoza had left lying on the table, viz. 
a ducaton and some change, as well as with a silver-handled knife. 


The identity of the physician from Amsterdam, indicated by Colerus by his initials, L.M., is 
uncertain. Colerus obviously had in mind Spinoza’s lifelong friend Lodewijk Meyer, whom 
he refers to as ‘L.M.’ elsewhere in his biography, too. There are, however, indications that 
the physician at Spinoza’s deathbed may have been Georg Hermann Schuller rather than 
Meyer. In a letter to Leibniz, dated 17 April 1677, Tschirnhaus says that Schuller had 
informed him “that our friend died in The Hague, in the presence of Mr Schuller, clear- 
headed and after having arranged what was to be done with his manuscripts.” The reli- 
ability of Schuller is problematic, so his testimony — here related by Van Gent — should be 
taken with a pinch of salt. There is more to it, though: the name of one of the witnesses 
mentioned in the first inventory of Spinoza’s legacy, drawn up by the notary public Willem 
van den Hove on the day Spinoza died, is given as d’heer Georgius Hermanus (without sur- 
name). But the words have been struck out again, and Schuller did not sign. The evidence, 
then, is inconclusive. For Meyer we have the (generally reliable) testimony of the Van der 
Spycks, transmitted by Colerus, for Schuller his own (not always dependable) information, 
as well as the ambiguous indications in the notarial inventory. All we know for sure, then, 
is that Spinoza died in the presence of a medical doctor, who, unfortunately, did not leave a 
written report himself. 

Immediately after Spinoza’s demise, Van der Spyck sent for a public notary, Willem van 
den Hove, who came the same day to draw up a first, unspecified inventory of the goods 
Spinoza had left, after which he sealed the deceased tenant’s rooms. Spinoza was buried on 
Thursday, 25 February, in a rented grave inside the Nieuwe Kerk, a nearby Reformed 
Church in The Hague. The burial was arranged by Van der Spyck, while Spinoza’s pub- 
lisher Jan Rieuwertsz stood surety for the expenses. Graves were rented for a certain 
number of years, after which the relatives (or acquaintances) of the deceased had to renew 
the lease. If they did not do so, the grave was cleared. Spinoza’s grave was emptied some- 
time in the eighteenth century, and his remains (together with those of other bodies) were 
dispersed over the surface of the churchyard of the Nieuwe Kerk and dug in. Although he 
is, strictly speaking, indeed still buried on the site, there is no locatable plot that can be said 
to contain Spinoza’s body. A monument just outside the Nieuwe Kerk commemorates the 
philosopher. In front of it is a large black slab with the Latin inscription: “The earth here 
covers the bones of Benedict de Spinoza, formerly buried in the New Church.” 

When Spinoza’s relatives — his sister Rebecca and her stepson Daniel de Casseres — heard 
about his demise, they came to The Hague to claim the inheritance, if there was any. They 
asked for a complete inventory, which was made by the same notary public Van den Hove 
on 2 March. (It is in this inventory that we find a list of the books then in Spinoza’s library.) 
Eventually, when they found there were still debts to be settled, Rebecca and Daniel waived 
all their rights to an inheritance. 

Before he died, Spinoza had made arrangements with his landlord, his publisher, and 
his friends in Amsterdam that they would see to the publication of his Ethics. A writing box 


11 


PIET STEENBAKKERS 


that contained manuscripts and letters was sent to Rieuwertsz by Van der Spyck very soon 
after Spinoza passed away. A number of people were involved in preparing Spinoza’s post- 
humous works for publication: Johannes Bouwmeester, Lodewijk Meyer, Jarig Jelles, Jan 
Hendriksz Glazemaker, Jan Rieuwertsz, Georg Hermann Schuller, and Pieter van Gent. In 
about nine months, they managed to bring out simultaneously the Opera posthuma (in 
Latin) and De nagelate schriften (in Dutch). The two tomes contained the Ethics, the Political 
Treatise, the Treatise of the Emendation of the Intellect, and the letters. The (unfinished) 
Hebrew Grammar was published only in the Opera posthuma. We have no clue as to when or 
why Spinoza wrote this grammar; perhaps when he was at Van den Enden’s school, or 
when he was doing research for the Theological-Political Treatise. Around 1680, Rieuwertsz 
ordered an engraved portrait from an unkown artist. It was printed on a loose sheet, and 
could be bought by customers to have it bound in with their copy of the Opera posthuma or 
De nagelate schriften. The portrait came with a Latin poem, but there is also a Dutch version 
that is pasted on to the Latin text in some copies. Though made after Spinoza’s death, it is 
assumed to present a fair likeness of Spinoza — one would not expect Rieuwertsz to sell it as 
a portrait if the resemblance had been poor. Another early portrait is the oil painting in the 
collection of the Herzog August Bibliothek in Wolfenbiittel. The two portraits closely 
resemble each other. Perhaps the Wolfenbiittel painting was made after the engraving, or 
they may both stem from a common unknown original. 

On 4 November 1677, Spinoza’s possessions were auctioned. For our knowledge of 
Spinoza’s development the most relevant element of the auction was his library, with his 
collection of optical instruments and tools for lens production as the runner-up. An almost 
complete reconstruction of the library as described in the inventory is now kept in the 
Spinozahuis museum in Rijnsburg. 

The posthumous works were printed in December 1677 and distributed as from January 
1678. Spinoza’s life’s work was completed, and salvaged for posterity — in spite of all 
attempts to suppress his works and discredit his thought. 


References 


Ancona, J. d’ (1940). Komst der Marranen in Noord-Nederland: De Portugese gemeenten te 
Amsterdam tot de vereniging (1639). In: Geschiedenis der Joden in Nederland (ed. H. Brugmans and 
A. Frank), 201-269. Amsterdam: Van Holkema & Warendorf. 

Anon. (1719). La Vie et l’esprit de Monsieur Benoit de Spinosa. Amsterdam: Levier. (Entirely fictitious 
account of Spinoza’s life. Often dated to the 1680s, and attributed to Jean-Maximilien Lucas; both 
claims are unwarranted. For its labyrinthine transmission see Walther and Czelinski 2006, II, 10-15.) 

Bloksma, N. (2018). Spinoza: A Miraculously Healthy Philosopher. Rijnsburg: Uitgeverij Spinozahuis. 
Mededelingen vanwege Het Spinozahuis, vol. 113. (New findings about Spinoza’s health and the 
cause of his death.) 

Bodian, M. (1997). Hebrews of the Portuguese Nation: Conversos and Community in Early Modern 
Amsterdam. Bloomington: Indiana University Press. 

Colerus, J. (1705). Korte, dog waaragtige levens-beschryving van Benedictus de Spinosa, uit autentique 
stukken en mondeling getuigenis van nog levende personen opgestelt. Amsterdam: Lindenberg. 

Freudenthal, J. (1899). Die Lebensgeschichte Spinoza’s in Quellenschriften, Urkunden und nichtamtlichen 
Nachrichten. Leipzig: Von Veit. (First major collection of documents relating to Spinoza’s life, still 
valuable.) 

Garrett, D. (ed.) (2021/forthcoming). The Cambridge Companion to Spinoza. 2nd edn. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 


12 


SPINOZA'S LIFE 


Gootjes, A. (2020). Spinoza between French Libertines and Dutch Cartesians: The 1673 Utrecht 
visit. Modern Intellectual History 17 no. 3, 591-617. (DOI: 10.1017/S1479244318000471). 

Koerbagh, A. (2011). A Light Shining in Dark Places, to Illuminate the Main Questions of Theology and 
Religion (ed. and trans. M. Wielema). Leiden: Brill. 

Meinsma, K.O. (1896). Spinoza en zijn kring: Historisch-kritische studién over Hollandsche vrijgeesten. 
The Hague: Nijhoff. Repr. Utrecht: Hes, 1980 (seminal work on Spinoza’s circle). 

Walther, M. and Czelinski, M. (eds.) (2006). Die Lebensgeschichte Spinozas (2nd expanded and newly 
annotated edition of Freudenthal 1899). Vol. I: Lebensbeschreibungen und Dokumente, vol. II: 
Kommentar. Stuttgart-Bad Canstatt: frommann-holzboog. (The best collection of documents 
relating to Spinoza’s life to date. Contains virtually all early biographical accounts and documents 
on which the present chapter draws. Invaluable extensive bibliography in vol. II, 283-464.) 


Further Reading 


Curley, E. (2015). Spinoza’s Lost Defense. In: The Young Spinoza (ed. Y.Y. Melamed), 1-32. New York: 
Oxford University Press. 

Ekkart, R. (1999). Spinoza in beeld: Het onbekende gezicht/Spinoza in Portrait: The Unkown Face. 
Voorschoten: Vereniging Het Spinozahuis. (Critical survey of portraits allegedly representing 
Spinoza. Only the OP engraving and the Wolfenbiittel painting, of which the painting in The 
Hague is a copy, offer plausible likenesses.) 

Kaplan, Y. (1982). The social functions of the herem in the Portuguese-Jewish community of 
Amsterdam in the seventeenth century. In: Dutch Jewish History: Proceedings of the Symposium on 
the History of the Jews in the Netherlands (ed. J. Michman and T. Levie), 111-155. Jerusalem: 
Institute for Research on Dutch Jewry. 

Kaplan, Y. (2016). On the burial of Spinoza’s grandfather and grandmother. Zutot: Perspectives on 
Jewish Culture 3: 6-39. 

Mignini, F. (1987). Données et problémes de la chronologie spinozienne entre 1656 et 1665. Revue 
des sciences philosophiques et théologiques 71: 9-21. (Argues that TIE is older than KV.) 

Nadler, S. (2018). Spinoza: A Life (2nd edn). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Nahon, G. (1979-80). Amsterdam, métropole occidentale des Sefarades au XVII° siécle. Cahiers 
Spinoza 3: 15-50. 

Offenberg, A. (1973). Spinoza’s library: the story of a reconstruction. Quaerendo 3: 309-321. 

Révah, I.S. (1959). Spinoza et le Dr Juan de Prado. The Hague: Mouton. 

Révah, I.S. (1995). Des marranes a Spinoza (ed. Henry Méchoulan, Pierre-Francois Moreau and 
Carsten Lorenz Wilke). Paris: Vrin. 

Saraiva, A.J. (2001). The Marrano Factory: The Portuguese Inquisition and its New Christians, 1536- 
1765 (trans., revised, and augmented H.P. Salomon and I.S.D. Sassoon). Leiden: Brill. 

Spinoza, B. (1677a). B.d.S. Opera Posthuma. Amsterdam: Rieuwertsz. 

Spinoza, B. (1677b). De Nagelate Schriften van B.d.S. Amsterdam: Rieuwertsz. 

Spinoza, B. (2020). Guvres, IV: Ethica/Ethique (Latin text ed. F. Akkerman and P. Steenbakkers, trans. 
P.-E. Moreau, introd. and notes by Moreau and Steenbakkers, with appendices by F. Audié, A. 
Charrak, and P.-F. Moreau). Paris: Presses Universitaires de France. (On the textual history of the 
Ethics: Introduction, 13-47.) 

Spruit L. and Totaro, P. (eds.) (2011). The Vatican Manuscript of Spinoza’s Ethica. Leiden: Brill. 
(Introduction on historical background and discovery of the manuscript; edition of the Latin text.) 

Steenbakkers, P. (2021/forthcoming). Spinoza’s life. In: The Cambridge Companion to Spinoza (ed. D. 
Garrett, 2nd edn). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. (A substantially expanded, fully docu- 
mented and referenced version of the present chapter.) 

Vaz Dias, A.M. and van der Tak, W.G. (1932). Spinoza Mercator et Autodidactus: Oorkonden en andere 
authentieke documenten betreffende des wijsgeers jeugd en diens betrekkingen. The Hague: Nijhoff. 
(Archival documents relating to Spinoza’s family and his Amsterdam years.) 


13 


PIET STEENBAKKERS 


Vaz Dias, A.M. and van der Tak, WG. (1934). De firma Bento y Gabriel de Spinoza. Leiden: Brill. 
Mededeelingen van wege Het Spinozahuis, vol. 1. (Documents relating to Spinoza’s business.) 

Vaz Dias, A.M. and van der Tak, W.G. (1982). Spinoza merchant and autodidact: charters and other 
authentic documents relating to the philosopher’s youth and his relations. Studia Rosenthaliana 
16: 103-195. (English translation of Vaz Dias and van der Tak 1932 and 1934.) 

Ven, J. van de (2011). Spinoza’s life and time: an annotated chronology based upon historical docu- 
ments. In: The Continuum Companion to Spinoza. London: Continuum (ed. W. van Bunge et al.), 
1-57. (2nd edn 2014, as The Bloomsbury Companion to Spinoza. London: Bloomsbury. Van de Ven 
is preparing an exhaustive book-length Spinoza chronicle.) 

Ven, J. van de (2015). “Crastina die loquar cum Celsissimo principe de Spinosa”: new perspectives on 
Spinoza’s trip to the French Army headquarters in Utrecht in late July 1673. Intellectual History 
Review 25: 147-165. 

Vet, J. de (2005). Salomon Dierquens, auteur du Stelkonstige reeckening van den regenboog et du 
Reeckening van kanssen. In: Spinoza to the Letter: Studies in Words, Texts and Books (ed. F. Akkerman 
and P. Steenbakkers), 169-188. Leiden: Brill. (Conclusively shows that the author of two Dutch 
scientific treatises published in 1687 was Dierquens, not Spinoza.) 

Vlessing, O. (1997 [2003]). The excommunication of Baruch Spinoza: a conflict between Jewish and 
Dutch law. Studia Spinozana 13, 15-47. (Argues that Spinoza’s herem had an economic 
background.) 


14 


2 


Spinoza’s Philology 
PIET STEENBAKKERS 


1. Introduction 


In the present chapter we shall understand by ‘Spinoza philology’ the application of a 
specific approach to the texts written by Spinoza. In reading, translating, and editing his 
works, we encounter problems that are typical of the transmission of written heritage. 
This raises questions such as: does the text we have before us offer a reliable presentation 
of what the author wrote? How can this be assessed, and what does reliability mean here? 
How are we to understand the meaning of words in older texts, given the fact that lan- 
guages are incessantly changing? How did specific historical practices and circumstances 
— such as oral transmission, copying, editing, censorship — affect the shape of a text? The 
scholarly discipline that seeks to answer these and similar questions is now generally 
known as philology. It investigates the provenance, vicissitudes, and credentials of written 
documents from a text-critical and historical perspective. As a method it first came into 
being in Hellenistic Alexandria in the last three centuries pcz, when poets and scholars 
sought ways to establish reliable texts of older Greek works (especially Homer’s), which 
had been handed down in many different versions. In the Renaissance, humanist scholars 
successfully applied a philological approach to the Greek and Latin texts of Antiquity. It 
was especially in the area of classical studies that philology then further developed into a 
powerful tool. Its results inspired scholars to apply it to biblical texts as well. In doing so, 
they could build on earlier textual work (in particular the Septuagint and Jerome’s Vulgate). 
Despite theological reluctance to treat the Word of God as a historically determined collec- 
tion of stories, written by human authors and transmitted by fallible scribes, biblical criti- 
cism developed into an impressive line of research — Spinoza himself turned its results to 
his advantage in his TTP (Touber 2018; Grafton 2017). 

In philosophy most philological efforts have traditionally been spent on the texts of 
ancient authors. Philosophers from later periods have on the whole fared less well: whereas 
it is obvious that texts from long ago, in ‘dead’ languages, cannot be understood without a 
thorough study of their linguistic peculiarities, historical context, and transmission, we do 
not usually deem this necessary for recent works, written in languages we are familiar 
with. As we shall see below, this asymmetry also accounts for the relatively late rise of a 


A Companion to Spinoza, First Edition. Edited by Yitzhak Y. Melamed. 
© 2021 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2021 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd. 


15 


PIET STEENBAKKERS 


distinct Spinoza philology. Spinoza and his contemporary readers shared a common 
culture in which Latin was the preferred language for scholarly and scientific communica- 
tion, and in which everyone was familiar with roughly the same classical and biblical 
sources. As long as the fabric of this shared culture remained intact, there was no incen- 
tive to question the constitution and transmission of the texts that circulated in print. 
As time goes by, and the past becomes more of a foreign country, we must deploy philolog- 
ical skills in order to arrive at a critical assessment of Spinoza’s texts, and to establish reli- 
able editions of his works. 

Philological Spinoza scholarship has so far not been charted systematically, so the pre- 
sent chapter cannot be more than a first sketch. To begin with, it will be useful to call to 
mind some of the historical circumstances that are relevant for an understanding of the 
transmission of Spinoza’s texts. I will then offer a brief chronological survey of Spinoza’s 
works, explaining the particular aspects of the way they have been transmitted. The con- 
cluding section outlines the philological work done so far. 


2. Historical Background 


2.1. Spinoza’s Languages 


Spinoza wrote all his known works in Latin. Born in 1632 in Amsterdam into a Portuguese- 
Jewish family, his mother tongue was Portuguese. At the Jewish school he attended the lan- 
guage used for teaching was Spanish. At school and in the synagogue he acquired an 
excellent command of Hebrew as well. He received a solid training in Latin in the school of 
Frans van den Enden, in the late 1650s. Growing up in the Netherlands and moving in cir- 
cles of Amsterdam merchants as a young man, he also had Dutch. Spinoza wrote a number 
of letters in Dutch, to gratify some of his correspondents, but he clearly preferred Latin when 
it came to expressing himself accurately in philosophical issues (cf. Ep. 19; GIV, 95.12-15). 

Spinoza wrote the kind of Latin that had been the standard for scholarly and academic 
purposes throughout Europe since the Renaissance. Known as Neo-Latin, it would main- 
tain that function well into the nineteenth century. Grammatically, it does not differ from 
the literary language of Ancient Rome. It consciously attempts to reinstate the norms of 
Classical Latin, rejecting the allegedly barbarian degeneration of the language in the 
Middle Ages. As the revived language was used for a wide variety of subjects unknown to 
the Ancients, Neo-Latin developed a rich vocabulary of its own. Though Spinoza did not 
receive an academic education, he mastered enough Latin to express himself clearly, accu- 
rately, and forcefully. In the TTP, he gracefully wields a range of effective rhetorical tools. In 
his maturest works, the Ethics and the Political Treatise, his Latin shows remarkable elo- 
quence and sophistication (Leopold 1902, 2005; Akkerman 1977, 1989, 1985, 2013; 
Kajanto 2005; Beyssade 2005). 


2.2. Manuscripts 


In studying the transmission of Spinoza’s texts we must be aware that none of them (bar a 
few letters and a handful of notes) has survived in the philosopher’s own handwriting. 
Most of his works have come down to us in their seventeenth-century printed form only. 
The Short Treatise was never printed: it was preserved in a Dutch translation in two 


16 


SPINOZA’S PHILOLOGY 


manuscript copies. As arule, printers would jettison the autograph manuscript or fair copy 
from which they had worked once a book was published. It is, however, certain that there 
was a lively circulation of manuscripts of several of Spinoza’s works in the seventeenth 
and early eighteenth centuries. Hardly any have survived. 


2.3. Editions 


The Amsterdam publisher Jan Rieuwertsz brought out all Spinoza’s books: DPP and CM in 
1663 (Dutch in 1664), TTP in 1670 (subsequently reprinted four times) and Opera 
Posthuma (in Dutch De Nagelate Schriften) in 1677. In all these cases, a group of dedicated 
friends assisted the philosopher. Among them were Pieter Balling, Jarig Jelles, Simon 
Joosten de Vries, Lodewijk Meyer, Johannes Bouwmeester, Jan Rieuwertsz, Pieter van Gent, 
Georg Herman Schuller. They were involved in translating, copying, copy-editing, and 
proofreading his works. Spinoza supervised their activities and gave them instructions, but 
he was happy to let them decide in minor details. It is not always clear who did what, and 
in what follows, we shall refer to them generically as ‘the editors.’ 

These original seventeenth-century editions have been studied by Land (1882a, 1882b), 
Bamberger (1961, 2003), Kingma and Offenberg (1977). An exhaustive descriptive bibli- 
ography is now being prepared by Jeroen van de Ven. Rieuwertsz was a publisher and book- 
seller: he never owned a printing press. Until recently it was unknown who printed 
Spinoza’s books. Careful bibliographical research has now revealed that the TTP and the 
postumous works were printed by Israél de Paull, and DPP-CM by Daniel Bakkamude and 
Herman Aeltsz (Jagersma and Dijkstra 2013; cf. Gerritsen 2005). 

It was not until the beginning of the nineteenth century that the need for a new edition 
of his works made itself felt. This was the result of a renewed interest in Spinoza’s philos- 
ophy after the polemics known as the pantheism dispute (Pantheismusstreit) in Germany in 
the 1780s (see, e.g. Murrmann-Kahl 2012). In this dispute Friedrich Heinrich Jacobi had 
accused the late Gotthold Ephraim Lessing of Spinozism and thus — by implication — of 
atheism, and Moses Mendelssohn had come to Lessing’s defense. Five new editions came 
out in Germany between 1802 and 1877: Paulus 1802-1803, Gfrorer 1830, Riedel 1843 
(TIE and TP only), Bruder 1843-1846, Ginsberg 1874-1877. These were not critical edi- 
tions, nor did they pretend to be. Even though these editors were capable of philological 
work, they limited themselves to making the texts available again to an academic audience 
for which reading (and writing) Latin was still the norm. Their editorial interventions did 
not go beyond minor typographical and orthographical adjustments (Kingma 2005; 
Steenbakkers 2007). 


3. Spinoza’s Works 
It will be convenient to treat the transmission of Spinoza’s texts in the following order: 
¢ the works printed during Spinoza’s lifetime, to wit DPP-CM and TTP (including the 
Adnotationes); 
¢ the texts published in the posthumous works of 1677, OP and NS (1677): E, TP, TIE, the 


correspondence (as published in OP/NS, plus subsequent finds), and CGH; 
¢ the manuscripts of KV. 


17 


PIET STEENBAKKERS 


Two anonymous Dutch treatises, on the calculation of chances and on the rainbow, pub- 
lished in The Hague in 1687, have erroneously been attributed to Spinoza. Though these 
spurious works have been included in Spinoza editions since Van Vloten and Land, it has 
now been established beyond doubt that their author was a certain Salomon Dierquens (De 
Vet 2005). They will not figure in this account. 


3.1. DPPandCM 


Spinoza’s earliest publication, and the only one that has his name on the title page, was an 
outline of parts of Descartes’s Principia Philosophiae, and its appendix Metaphysical Thoughts, 
drawn from contemporary scholastic philosophy. From the correspondence, we know that 
Spinoza wrote a substantial part of these texts for a private course he taught to a student of 
divinity who lived in the same house in Rijnsburg, Johannes Casearius (Ep. 8-9). After 
Spinoza had moved from Rijnsburg to Voorburg, in April 1663, he went to see his friends in 
Amsterdam and showed them the manuscript. They implored him to expand the text for 
publication. Spinoza complied: within the next two weeks he added DPP I, for which he 
drew on a broader range of Cartesian texts (Ep. 13). He was able to supply this well-wrought 
addition at short notice because in the preceding years he had already amassed notes on 
Descartes. Though written and published within half a year, his first book relied on an 
underlying manuscript tradition that must have reached back several years. 

We know from Spinoza’s correspondence (Ep. 12A, 13, 15) and from Lodewijk Meyer’s 
preface (GI, 129.32—130.13) that the book was copy-edited by Meyer, under the philoso- 
pher’s supervision. For the Latin text of DPP and CM, there is only a single source: the 
printed version of 1663. Within a year, a Dutch translation came out, made by Spinoza’s 
friend Pieter Balling. (Balling died shortly afterwards, in December 1664.) The Dutch ver- 
sion contains some eight passages that are not to be found in the Latin original. Gebhardt 
concluded from these interpolations that the Dutch translation comes down to an autho- 
rized second edition of the text (GI, 611), but according to Akkerman (1982, p. 21) they 
must be explanatory elaborations added by Balling. As we shall see, this change of approach 
marks a turning point in Spinoza philology. 


3.2. TTP 


The only other book published by Spinoza himself (this time anonymously) was the 
Theological-Political Treatise. It came out in 1670. We know from the correspondence that 
he started writing it in the summer of 1665 (Ep. 29-30). He must have finished it towards 
the end of 1669 (Steenbakkers 2010, pp. 33-35). Again, his friends were keen on having 
the book published in a Dutch translation as well, and they asked the professional trans- 
lator Jan Hendriksz Glazemaker to supply one. He must have worked fast (as he always did), 
for his Dutch version was being typeset as early as February 1671.Then, however, Spinoza 
intervened: the Latin TTP had already caused such an uproar that he implored his friends 
to call the whole project off, for fear that the publication of a Dutch translation would give 
the authorities a pretext to ban the TTP altogether, the Latin edition as well (Ep. 44). It 
would last until 1693 before a Dutch translation was published, followed by another one a 
year later. Between 1670 and 1693, however, handwritten copies were circulating — an 
instance of “scribal publication” (Van der Deijl 2020). One manuscript, which contains a 
corrected version of Glazemaker’s translation, has survived. It is now kept in the Royal 
Library in The Hague, in a codex that also contains the oldest manuscript of the KV and a 


18 


SPINOZA’S PHILOLOGY 


Dutch translation of the Adnotationes (shelf mark 75 G 15). It is an intriguing manuscript: 
typesetters’ marks and ink smudges reveal that it once served as printer’s copy 
(Akkerman 2005). That these marks stop abruptly on p. 379 can only mean that the 
attempt to publish the book was interrupted. Akkerman postulated that this was the text 
whose printing Spinoza had prevented in 1671. While this is certainly possible, Van der 
Deijl (2020, pp. 214, 217) rightly observes that it may also have been the printer’s copy 
used for another abortive attempt: in 1687, the council of the Reformed Church in 
Amsterdam forced printer Jan Claesz ten Hoorn to abandon publication of a Dutch TTP 
translation. The appearance of lengthy quotations from yet another translation in a book 
by Spinoza’s correspondent Van Blijenbergh, De waerheyt van de christelijcke godts-dienst 
(1674), confirms once more that there was a lively circulation of the TTP in Dutch (Van de 
Ven 2019). The textual history of the Dutch manuscript tradition is obscure. It starts with 
Glazemaker’s translation, traces of which survive in the three extant versions. On their 
similarities and differences, see the meticulous analysis by Van der Deijl (2020). 

The Latin text of the TTP was reprinted five times in the seventeenth century 
(Land 1882b; Bamberger 1961; Steenbakkers 2010). The successive printings have been 
numbered T.1 to T.5 by Bamberger (T short for TTP). Four of these were quartos: T.1 (end 
of 1669 or early 1670), T.2 and T.2a (1672), T.4 and T.5 (both after 1677). The four 
quartos are very similar, and apart from T.2, which has 1672, they all pretend to have been 
published in 1670. T.3 came out in octavo, together with a reprint of Philosophia S. 
Scripturae interpres, the anonymous treatise commonly attributed to Spinoza’s friend 
Lodewijk Meyer. T.3 was circulated with five different title pages, four of them dated 1673, 
one 1674. Spinoza himself was not involved in any of the successive reprints; they were 
produced and circulated by his publisher. A critical edition must therefore be based on T.1, 
the only printing Spinoza saw through the press (Akkerman 1999, p. 21). 


3.3. Adnotationes ad TTP 


Once Spinoza had finished a text, he did not return to it for corrections or revisions. He did, 
however, enter a set of explanatory notes in the margins of his own copy of the T.1. That 
copy disappeared in the eighteenth century, but another T.1 with five of these annotations 
in his own hand is still extant. The book, which he donated to Jacobus Statius Klefmann on 
25 July 1676, is now kept in Haifa University Library. In two letters of 1675 (Ep. 68, 69) 
Spinoza mentioned his intention of publishing a set of such notes, but nothing came of it. 
Instead, these so-called Adnotationes ad Tractatum theologico-politicum started to circulate in 
manuscripts. A Dutch translation survives in the codex with KV and TTP now in the Royal 
Library in The Hague (Spruit 1997), and in 1678 a set of notes was published in French, 
as an appendix to the first French translation of the TTP. In 1802 Christoph Gottlieb von 
Murr published the Latin text of the Adnotationes to the TTP, based on a transcript he had 
received from a descendant of Spinoza’s publisher Jan Rieuwertsz (as he recounts in Von 
Murr 1803). In 1835 an edition of Spinoza’s own handwritten notes in the Klefmann copy 
of the TTP came out. Wilhelm Dorow presented himself as the editor (Dorow 1835), but in 
fact the transcriptions were made by Rafael Bock. The Latin text has survived in several 
manuscripts. Taken together, the total number of Adnotationes amounts to 39. The five 
that Spinoza himself copied into Klefmann’s book occur in all other sources. Not all the 
other 34 stem from Spinoza: the numbers 15, 18, 20, 27-30, 33, 35, and 39 are most 
likely reader’s comments that were added after Spinoza died and subsequently merged 
with his own notes (Akkerman 2005, pp. 213-223). 


19 


PIET STEENBAKKERS 
3.4. OP and NS 


Spinoza started working on the Ethics between May 1662 and January 1663 (for a detailed 
discussion see Moreau and Steenbakkers 2020, pp. 13-38). When he began writing the 
TTP, in the summer of 1665, he most likely suspended his work on the Ethics, only to 
resume it fully in 1669 or 1670. The text was finished early in 1675, but Spinoza decided 
to defer publication until the political situation was less hostile. Just before he died in 
February 1677, he instructed his friends to have it printed. They did so within nine months, 
bringing out not only the Latin text of the Ethics, but in addition three unfinished treatises 
that they also found among his papers: TP, TIE and CGH, as well as 75 letters from and to 
Spinoza. Together these texts make up B.d.S. Opera Posthuma. Moreover, they simulta- 
neously published a twin volume with the same works (but for the CGH) in Dutch transla- 
tions: De Nagelate Schriften van B.d.S. Both title pages give his initials instead of his full 
name, and the place of publication and the name of the publisher are withheld. 

The textual situation of E, TP, and TIE is comparable in that they were all simultaneously 
published in Latin (OP) as well as in Dutch (NS). The manuscript material that served as 
printer’s copy is lost, but as the Dutch translations were made from the same manuscripts, 
we have in fact two witnesses of them. Thus variants between OP and NS may assist us in 
identifying editorial interventions (for some examples see Moreau and Steenbakkers 2020, 
pp. 31-33, 50, 540-541, 578-579, 593). Within this group, the Ethics is the only text for 
which an additional Latin source is available: the manuscript copied by Pieter van Gent for 
Ehrenfried Walther von Tschirnhaus between November 1674 and May 1675, now in the 
Vatican Library (Spruit and Totaro 2011). Another distinctive feature of the Ethics is that 
its Dutch translation in NS is a fusion of two elements: Parts I and II were translated in 
1663-1664 by Pieter Balling, the rest in 1677 by Jan Hendriksz Glazemaker 
(Akkerman 1980, pp. 126-176; Moreau and Steenbakkers 2020, pp. 18-19). 


3.5. TP 


After having finished the Ethics, Spinoza did not return to that text, at least not systemati- 
cally (Moreau and Steenbakkers 2020, pp. 63-66). Instead, he concentrated on a new 
treatise, the TP. From a letter to a close (unidentified) friend, written in the second half of 
1676, it appears that he had started writing this classic politica at the recipient’s instiga- 
tion, and that he had advanced to Chapter 7. When Spinoza died, on 21 February 1677, 
he had finished ten chapters and started on the eleventh. His friends found this unfinished 
treatise among his papers and published it in the OP. Glazemaker translated the text from 
the manuscript for the Dutch parallel volume. There are some discrepancies between the 
Latin and the Dutch texts: several passages were omitted by the typesetter but translated by 
Glazemaker. Conversely the OP offers a few bits of text that are absent from NS. They may 
have been marginal additions, overlooked by Glazemaker (Proietti 2005, p. 53). Given the 
short time between its composition and publication, it is most unlikely that the TP ever cir- 
culated in manuscript. 


3.6. TIE 


Spinoza never finished the TIE. He probably began composing it very early. In a number of 
publications (Mignini 1979, 1986, 1987, 2009a), Filippo Mignini has plausibly argued 
that the TIE must precede the KV, which implies that it was written before 1661. Most 


20 


SPINOZA’S PHILOLOGY 


scholars now share this view, although conclusive evidence remains one of the desiderata 
of Spinoza philology. From the correspondence it is clear that his friends knew about the 
existence of this treatise (Ep. 59), but they did not have access to it until after his death 
(Steenbakkers 1994, p. 56). As in the case of the TP, manuscript circulation can be 
excluded (Miginini 2009a, p. 36). The divergences between the OP and NS versions are 
mainly the result of the interventions of the editors in Spinoza’s Latin — which they deemed 
immature and unsophisticated (Akkerman 1987). 


3.7. Ep. 


The correspondence gathered in OP and NS is a motley collection (for an overview see 
Steenbakkers 2019). The letters Spinoza’s friends had at their disposal were partly in 
Latin, partly in Dutch. For the OP, they translated the Dutch letters into Latin, for the NS 
it was the reverse. (Van Vloten and Land mistakenly thought that Spinoza himself had 
done the translations; see Akkerman 1980, pp. 47-50.) Some of the manuscripts they 
had were drafts or copies, in other cases they could use the letters that had actually 
been dispatched. For quite a number of letters, additional witnesses (mostly manu- 
scripts) are available. This means that the textual situation of each letter must be dis- 
cretely assessed. The correspondence is also the section of the posthumous works in 
which the editors intervened most drastically: many names were replaced with initials 
so as not to endanger people; passages deemed irrelevant or politically hazardous were 
removed. 

Of the 88 letters from and to Spinoza that are still extant, the vast majority (75) was 
published in the posthumous works: the correspondence section contains 74 of them, one 
served as a preface to the TP. The other 13 were discovered later. Eight letters have been 
transmitted in manuscript only; 20 both in manuscript and in the posthumous works. 
Thirteen letters have survived in Spinoza’s own handwriting (Ep. 6, 9, 12a, 15, 23, 27, 28, 
32,43, 46, 49, 69, 72). 


3.8. CGH 


Among Spinoza’s works, the unfinished Hebrew grammar is the odd one out. The only 
source for it is the OP; it is absent from its Dutch counterpart, the NS, and no other versions 
of it are known to exist or have existed. As with the other works printed in the OP, Spinoza’s 
manuscript is lost. (Intriguingly, the Dutch jurist and civil servant Pieter van Ghert wrote 
in a letter to Hegel in 1813 that he had acquired a manuscript of Spinoza’s Hebrew 
grammar; see Hoffmeister 1969, p. 10. It may have been copied from the OP. Unfortunately 
we do not know what happened to it.) According to the editors’ preamble, Spinoza began 
writing the CGH at the request of some friends (G I, 286). It may have been intended as a 
textbook for private tuition, but it also develops a philosophical conception of the Hebrew 
language (Baumgarten, Rosier-Catach, and Totaro 2019). Because of its uncertain 
philosophical status, the CGH is not always included in editions and translations, not even 
in those that are otherwise complete. It is also the least studied of Spinoza’s works. Not sur- 
prisingly, the research that has been done is predominantly linguistic rather than 
philosophical or philological (e.g. Klijnsmit 1992). Thematically, the CGH is obviously 
close to Spinoza’s extended discussion of Hebrew in the TTP, but so far we have no clue at 
all to situate the work chronologically in Spinoza’s oeuvre. 


21 


PIET STEENBAKKERS 
3.9. KV 


Spinoza wrote the Short Treatise in Latin (Mignini 1986, pp. 71-80; Mignini 2009b, 
pp. 168-169). He never finished it: instead, he started composing an entirely new exposi- 
tion of his philosophy, the Ethics in 1662-1663. His first attempt, the KV, was therefore 
never published, neither by Spinoza himself, nor by the friends who edited his posthumous 
works. No Latin manuscript ever came to the surface, but a few early allusions indicate 
that a Dutch translation did circulate in manuscript. In the early 1850s, a Dutch outline 
(Korte Schetz) of the argument of the KV was discovered (Boehmer 1852). Shortly after- 
wards, an eighteenth-century manuscript of the KV in Dutch came to light. It was pub- 
lished with a Latin translation by Van Vloten in 1862. Even while Van Vloten was preparing 
his edition, a seventeenth-century manuscript of the KV surfaced. That was published by 
Schaarschmidt in 1869. In the meantime, Antonius van der Linde (1864) had identified 
the scribe of the Korte Schetz and the eighteenth-century KV manuscript: it was the 
Amsterdam physician Johannes Monnikhoff. The two manuscripts turned out to be closely 
connected: the later one (edited in 1862 by Van Vloten), now known as manuscript B, had 
been copied by Monnikhoff from the older manuscript A (edited in 1869 by Schaarschmidt). 
Monnikhoff had also entered some captions, notes, corrections, and additions to A itself. 
He must have copied A when it was still in the possession of someone else, namely the sec- 
tarian Willem Deurhoff (of whom he was a follower), and later inherited Deurhoff’s man- 
uscript. Both manuscripts, A and B, are now kept in the Royal Library in The Hague (shelf 
marks 75 G 15 and 75 G 16); manuscript A is also accessible online. 

Gebhardt and Mignini have taken manuscript A as their reference text. It must have 
been copied from a lost manuscript that contained a Dutch translation circulating among 
Spinoza’s friends in the early 1660s. Its translator is unknown; again, Balling is a possible 
candidate. 


4. The Development of Spinoza Philology in Outline 


The initial transmission of Spinoza’s works was taken care of by a small group of dedicated 
friends, who copy-edited his texts, had them translated, printed, and distributed. Spinoza 
himself explicitly asked them to polish his style when he published his first works, and they 
obliged. But they did not interfere with the content. When Spinoza asked them to publish 
the Ethics after his death, they limited their interventions to what they saw as mistakes, 
ambiguities, or awkward formulations. Inevitably, their assessment was sometimes off the 
mark. They also published three unfinished treatises and a number of letters, though 
Spinoza had not (as far as we know) explicitly asked them to do so. Since he had not 
destroyed them but left them in the writing box that was sent to his publisher at his request, 
one may say that Spinoza consented, at least tacitly. 

The results of the editorial activities of the circle around Spinoza were sufficient to meet 
the demand for his works for 125 years. Then, between 1802 and 1877, as many as five 
editions of his works were published in Germany. As we have already observed, these were 
not critical editions. Still there was some progress in the nineteenth century. Several publi- 
cations were occasioned by the manuscripts of the Adnotationes and the KV, as well as by 
newly discovered letters, and a noteworthy contribution towards a philological approach 
to Spinoza’s texts came from translators. Unlike the editors, they could not just relay the 
Latin as they found it, but had to make sense of it in the vernacular (cf. Moreau and 


22 


SPINOZA’S PHILOLOGY 


Steenbakkers 2020, p. 39). Thus several textual conundrums in the Ethics were solved by 
the German translators Valentin Schmidt (1812) and Auerbach (1841), the French trans- 
lator Saisset (1842) and others. 

Spinoza philology in a strict sense only began to take off in 1880, with an analysis of 
the first edition of Spinoza’s letters in OP and NS by the Dutch Hebraist Jan Pieter Nicolaas 
Land. Two years later he published two sequels: one on the text of the Ethics (Land 1882a) 
and another on the printing history of the TTP (Land 1882b). Land’s significance for the 
rise of Spinoza philology is twofold. To begin with, he was the first scholar who realized the 
importance of the contemporary Dutch translations in De Nagelate Schriften: as Spinoza’s 
posthumous works were published simultaneously in Latin and Dutch, the translations 
had been made from manuscripts, not from the printed Latin texts. The Dutch editions 
published in the seventeenth century thus constituted independent textual witnesses: 
when they contain a variant, it might indicate a manuscript reading different from the one 
found in the Opera Posthuma. A critical edition of Spinoza’s works should therefore take the 
NS variants into account, not occasionally, but systematically. And second, Land identified 
the four successive impressions of the TTP quartos by studying their title pages as well as 
textual variants resulting from compositors’ errors. He thus started a line of bibliograph- 
ical enquiry in Spinoza philology that was further developed in the twentieth century. As 
Spinoza wrote his works in Latin, it makes sense to follow the models and practices of phi- 
lology as applied to classical authors (Altphilologie, as it is called in German). Yet the age 
and culture in which Spinoza lived are decidedly modern, and so are the means of commu- 
nication by which his works were transmitted. This means that we also need the scholarly 
tools developed for studying modern authors, mostly writing in the vernacular 
(Neuphilologie). Specifically, this requires a study of the impact of printing on the process of 
transmission. One of the received practices of Altphilologie is the presentation of ancient 
texts in regularized spelling and punctuation, whereas in the works of modern authors it 
is often deemed preferable to follow their own conventions in these areas. If we had auto- 
graphs of Spinoza’s philosophical texts, it would be requisite to edit them in a diplomatic 
transcription, that is, reproducing exactly what Spinoza wrote. As it is, editors must decide 
which seventeenth-century conventions they should follow, keeping before their eyes a 
twenty-first-century audience that is no longer familiar with Latin. (For some observations 
on spelling, capitalization, accents, and punctuation in Spinoza, see Akkerman 1999, 
pp. 22—26; Moreau and Steenbakkers 2020, pp. 52-54.) 

As compared with the five editions that had preceded it, the Benedicti de Spinoza Opera 
quotquot reperta sunt edited by Johannes van Vloten and Jan Land in 1882-1883 was a 
major step forward: it had a modest critical apparatus, it justified its choices, and it was 
based on a comparison of all known sources, including the Dutch translations. Although 
the title page gives precedence to Van Vloten, the philological work was done by Land. Van 
Vloten died in 1883, Land in 1897. Their edition was reprinted in 1895, apparently 
without Land’s supervision, for it has a number of printing errors not found in the first 
edition. A carefully corrected separate edition of Van Vloten and Land’s Ethica text was 
published in 1905 by Willem Meijer (Moreau and Steenbakkers 2020, p. 44). A third 
printing of the entire Opera quotquot reperta sunt came out in 1914, adding a lot of new 
errors. In fact, the 1914 printing has been carried out so carelessly that it must be avoided 
for scholarly purposes. Unfortunately it also happens to be the most widely circulated of 
the three successive printings. 

Though Land had pointed out the importance of variants in the NS translations, the 
Dutch classicist and poet Jan Hendrik Leopold criticized Van Vloten and Land’s edition 


23 


PIET STEENBAKKERS 


precisely because in practice it had failed to comply with the principle that Spinoza’s Latin 
works had to be collated systematically with the contemporary Dutch translations. In his 
trail-blazing treatise Ad Spinozae Opera posthuma (1902, in Latin) Leopold deftly formulates 
the exigencies of a truly critical edition: it should be based on a collation of the Latin and 
Dutch texts that is carried out sedulously, faithfully and comprehensively (“sedulo et fideli- 
ter et per totum opus,” 1902, p. 57). Leopold’s booklet is a treasure trove: in an appendix he 
treats seventy problematic passages in the OP texts. Disappointed by the shortcomings of 
Land’s edition, Leopold wanted to bring out a new critical edition of Spinoza’s works, 
together with Willem Meijer, but that project did not materialize. 

Inspired by Land and Leopold, Carl Gebhardt turned their theses about the status of the 
Dutch versions into the guiding principle of his own edition of the complete works (1925). 
Unselfconsciously, he labeled it the editio definitiva (G IV, 437). Aware of the significant dif- 
ferences between OP and NS, in particular in the text of the Ethics, Gebhardt developed the 
hypothesis that Spinoza incessantly kept revising his texts and that the different stages 
reveal themselves in the variants between the Latin and Dutch versions of his works. In his 
view, the Dutch text of the Ethics was translated during Spinoza’s lifetime from previous 
manuscript versions, and the printed Latin text was the final stage. Along the same lines, 
he argued that the differences between parts I-II on the one hand and parts III-V on the 
other were also to be accounted for as representing successive authorial versions 
(Gebhardt 1916, p. 22). 

Once editions have established themselves as received texts, they are not easily dislodged. 
Decades after the publication of Van Vloten and Land’s superior edition in 1882-1883, one 
still finds quotations and translations from Bruder’s edition. Similarly, Van Vloten and 
Land’s Opera edition was not immediately superseded by Gebhardt’s. In the second half of 
the twentieth century, however, Spinoza scholars generally accepted Gebhardt’s beautifully 
printed Spinoza Opera as the definitive edition: translations, commentaries, glossaries, and 
other scholarly publications were henceforth based on it. Yet in spite of its impressively rich 
Textgestaltung (a prolix apparatus at the end of each volume), Gebhardt’s edition is funda- 
mentally flawed. As Fokke Akkerman demonstrated in his PhD thesis (Akkerman 1980), 
Gebhardt misconstrued the way Spinoza worked and thereby the relationship between the 
Latin and Dutch versions of his texts. Akkerman studied the differences between these ver- 
sions systematically, and came to a diametrically opposite conclusion: after finishing a text, 
Spinoza did not look back. The variant readings do not reflect successive stages in the com- 
position of the work: they are traces of the activities of translators, commentators, editors, 
and typesetters. Owing to the status of Gebhardt’s edition, however, his mistaken theory 
that Spinoza kept on changing his texts also gained acceptance. 

Just around the time when Akkerman presented the results of his research, a group of 
French scholars headed by Pierre-Francois Moreau decided that new French translations 
were urgently needed. As a result of the surge in Spinoza studies in France and Italy in the 
1960s and 1970s, the shortcomings of the existing translations became visible. 
Akkerman’s work convinced Moreau that a new Latin edition was now in order, too. This 
was the beginning of the series Spinoza CEuvres. So far, four volumes have appeared: Volume 
I, Premiers écrits (KV, TIE) in 2009; Volume II, Tractatus theologico-politicus/Traité 
théologico-politique, in 1999; Volume IV, Ethica/Ethique, in 2020, and Volume V, Tractatus 
politicus/Traité politique, in 2005. A spin-off of the project is the edited volume Spinoza to 
the Letter (Akkerman and Steenbakkers 2005). 

For Volume I, the early works, Filippo Mignini edited both the Latin text of the TIE (on 
the basis of the OP) and the Dutch text of the KV (based on manuscript A). For the TIE, 


24 


SPINOZA’S PHILOLOGY 


Mignini adopted the paragraph numbers Bruder had introduced in his edition of 1844. 
Mignini had already published KV editions in 1982 and 1986. His contribution to Spinoza 
(Euvres offers a slightly revised version of the same text, and (in line with the principles of 
this series, see Moreau 2009, pp. 14-17) a summary of the huge Introduction and com- 
mentary of the 1986 publication. Editors of Spinoza must deal with an oeuvre that came 
into being in a Dutch setting, and part of which has come down to us in Dutch. Not sur- 
prisingly, then, important philological work has been done by Dutch scholars (Land, 
Leopold, Akkerman). It is the more remarkable that the research into Spinoza’s KV, philo- 
logically and otherwise, was innovated by an Italian scholar. 

The Latin text of the TTP (and the Adnotationes) in Volume III was established by Fokke 
Akkerman, on the basis of T.1. For the TTP, too, Bruder had proposed a division of the 
almost uninterrupted chapters into short numbered paragraphs, but unlike his TIE num- 
bers, they never caught on. (Recently, though, Curley 2016 adopted Bruder’s system.) 
Akkerman applied a division into larger numbered sections, based upon the rhetorical 
structure of Spinoza’s argument. 

Volume IV contains the Ethics. The work on that edition set out as an elaboration of the 
drastic reorientation that Fokke Akkerman had accomplished in his PhD thesis (1980). 
This reorientation implied three things. To begin with, the Latin text was to based rigor- 
ously on the OP, which had to be collated fully and systematically with the Dutch transla- 
tion in the NS. Second, the divergences between OP and NS had to be explained; at any rate 
they did not reveal successive layers in the composition of the work. Third, Spinoza’s 
Latinity and its grounding in a culture of learning shared by scholars in early modern 
Europa was to be taken into account. Akkerman asked me to assist him in the project. Just 
when the constitution of the text began to take shape, in the spring of 2011, we received 
news from our colleagues Pina Totaro and Leen Spruit in Rome that they were preparing 
an edition of Vaticanus Latinus 12838, a manuscript Spruit had discovered in the Vatican 
Library in 2010 (see Spruit and Totaro 2011, p. 26, n. 74; cf. also Totaro, Spruit and 
Steenbakkers 2011). It was the manuscript copied by Pieter van Gent between November 
1674 and May 1675. On the basis of her earlier research, Totaro had already inferred that 
this copy was to be found in the archives of the Inquisition or in the Vatican Library 
(Totaro 1995, 2000). Akkerman and I collated the Vatican manuscript with the OP, and 
took its variants into account in our edition. On 13 January 2017, Akkerman died unex- 
pectedly. The constitution of the text of our edition was ready, and over the years we had 
gathered a lot of material for the apparatuses, Introduction and annotation. But it took 
three more years, and the steadfast support of Pierre-Francois Moreau, to turn all that into 
a book. In our Introduction (Moreau and Steenbakkers 2020, pp. 47-48), we have 
explained why Akkerman and I take the OP as our reference text. Van Gent’s copy is a pre- 
cious source that allows us to reconstruct the genesis of the text and to solve a number of 
problems, but it does not aim at presenting Spinoza’s autograph verbatim. It was written in 
great haste, for the personal use of Tschirnhaus; the resulting manuscript had not been 
checked by Spinoza, nor even by Van Gent himself. The editors of the OP, on the other 
hand, published Spinoza’s Ethics at the author’s own request, and according to his explicit 
instructions. It is not without errors, but — as long as we cannot retrieve Spinoza’s lost 
autograph — it is the only source that is authoritative. 

Volume V of Spinoza Guvres contains the Latin text of the TP, edited by Omero Proietti. It 
is again based on the OP, systematically collated with Glazemaker’s Dutch translation in the 
NS. As Proietti points out in the Introduction (Proietti 2005, pp. 46-53), the Dutch version 
cannot have been made from the printed text, so it must have relied on the same manuscript 


25 


PIET STEENBAKKERS 


material that served as the compositor’s copy. Proietti is more inclined to interventions than 
the other editors in the series Spinoza (Euvres: he repeatedly restores Spinoza’s Latin to what 
he considers its original state, with reference to NS readings and to the sources Spinoza used 
or may have used. The apparatuses are more packed than in the other volumes. Proietti has 
many publications on Spinoza, many of them bearing on philological issues, and virtually all 
in Italian. Together with Mignini, he published Spinoza Opere, a hefty one-volume translation 
of Spinoza’s complete works except the CGH (Mignini and Proietti 2007, 2015). It is in his 
capacity of translator that Proietti brought upon himself the wrath of Walter Lapini, a Greek 
scholar who had critically commented upon the rendering of the expression pueriles ineptias 
in the TTP preface (ed. Akkerman 1999, p. 58, |. 13) in a large number of Spinoza transla- 
tions (Lapini 2008). In the ensuing polemics (Mignini 2008; Lapini 2010), Lapini relent- 
lessly censures Proietti’s work, in particular the translations; but in passing he also criticizes 
the superfluous references in the source apparatus of the TP edition (Lapini 2010, p. 30 n. 5). 

This outline has concentrated on the editorial work in Spinoza scholarship since the end 
of the nineteenth century. It does not pretend to be complete. Additional areas of research 
that have contributed to Spinoza philology, such as lexicography and the huge (and ever 
increasing) number of translations of Spinoza’s works, could not be dealt with here. I limit 
myself to mentioning the names of Paolo Cristofolini (e.g. 2008, 2010), Emilia Giancotti 
(e.g. 1969, 1970) and Pina Totaro (e.g. 1997, 2009), whose publications have been of 
particular importance in this respect — there is a noteworthy Italian strand in Spinoza 
scholarship. And last but not least I recommend the philological assets of Edwin Curley’s 
(1985, 2016) English translation of the Collected Works. My arguments can be found in an 
extended review of Curley’s Volume II (Steenbakkers 2018). 


References 


Akkerman, F. (1977). Spinoza’s tekort aan woorden: Humanistische aspecten van zijn schrijverschap. 
Mededelingen vanwege Het Spinozahuis, vol. 36. Leiden: Brill. 

Akkerman, F. (1980). Studies in the posthumous works of Spinoza: on style, earliest translation and 
reception, earliest and modern edition of some texts. PhD thesis. University of Groningen. http:// 
hdl.handle.net/11370/b7aaa2e2-3561-4892-afd7-fb9daca9 562b (accessed 22 October 2020). 

Akkerman, F. (1982). Over de vertaling. In: Spinoza, Korte geschriften (ed. and trans. F. Akkerman, 
H.G. Hubbeling, F. Mignini, M.J. Petry, N. van Suchtelen and G. van Suchtelen), 20-22. Amsterdam: 
Wereldbibliotheek. 

Akkerman, F. (1985). Pauvreté ou richesse du latin de Spinoza. In: Acta conventus Neo-Latini 
Bononiensis: Proceedings of the Fourth International Congress of Neo-Latin Studies, Bologna 26 August 
to 1 September 1979 (ed. R.J. Schoeck), 197-204. Binghamtom, NY: Medieval and Renaissance 
Texts and Studies. 

Akkerman, F. (1987). La Latinité de Spinoza et |’authenticité du texte du Tractatus de intellectus 
emendatione. Revue des sciences philosophiques et théologiques 71: 23-29. 

Akkerman, F. (1989). La Pénurie de mots de Spinoza: aspects humanistes de son métier d’écrivain. 
In: Lire et traduire Spinoza (trans. A. van de Lindt and J. Lagrée), 9-37. Groupe de recherches spi- 
nozistes: Travaux et documents, no. 1. Paris: Presses de l'Université de Paris-Sorbonne. French 
translation of Akkerman 1977. 

Akkerman, F. (1999). Notice sur le texte latin. In: Spinoza, Guvres III: Tractatus theologico-politicus/ 
Traité théologico-politique (ed. F. Akkerman, trans. P.-F. Moreau and J. Lagrée), 19-37. Paris: PUF. 

Akkerman, F. (2005). Tractatus theologico-politicus: Texte latin, traductions néerlandaises et 
Adnotationes. In: Spinoza to the Letter: Studies in Words, Texts and Books (ed. F. Akkerman and P. 
Steenbakkers), 209-236. Leiden: Brill. 


26 


SPINOZA’S PHILOLOGY 


Akkerman, F. (2013). Taal en tekst van Spinoza. Voorschoten: Uitgeverij Spinozahuis. 

Akkerman, F. and Steenbakkers, P. (eds.) (2005). Spinoza to the Letter: Studies in Words, Texts and 
Books. Leiden: Brill. 

Bamberger, F. (1961). The early editions of Spinoza’s Tractatus Theologico-Politicus: a bibliohistorical 
reexamination. Studies in Bibliography and Booklore 5: 9-33. 

Bamberger, F. (2003). Spinoza and Anti-Spinoza Literature: The Printed Literature of Spinozism 166 5— 
1832 (ed. L.S. Wolfson and D,J. Gilner). Cincinnati: Hebrew Union College Press. 

Baumgarten, J., Rosier-Catach, I. and Totaro, P. (eds.) (2019). Spinoza, philosophe grammairien: Le 
Compendium grammatices linguae hebraeae. Paris: CNRS Editions. 

Beyssade, M. (2005). Deux latinistes: Descartes et Spinoza. In: Spinoza to the Letter: Studies in Words, 
Texts and Books (ed. FE. Akkerman and P. Steenbakkers), 55—67. Leiden: Brill. 

Blijenbergh, W. van (1674). De waerhyt van de Christelijcke Godts-dienst en de authoriteyt der H. 
Schriften, beweert tegen de argumenten der ongodtsdienstige, of een wederlegginge van dat Godt- 
lasterlijcke boeck, genoemt Tractatus theologico-politicus. Leiden: Daniel van Gaesbeeck. 

Boehmer, E. (ed.) (1852). Benedicti de Spinoza Tractatus de Deo et Homine eiusque felicitate lineamenta, 
atque Adnotationes ad Tractatum theologico-politicum. Halle on Saale: Lippert. 

Bruder, K.H. (ed.) (1843-1846). Benedicti de Spinoza Opera quae supersunt omnia, vol. I, 1843; vol. II, 
1844; vol. III, 1846. Leipzig: Tauchnitz. 

Cristofolini, P. (2008). Piccole chiose al testo dell’ Ethica. Historia philosophica 6: 131-139. 

Cristofolini, P. (ed. and trans.) (2010). Spinoza, Etica, edizione critica del testo latino e traduzione 
italiana, 2nd, rev. ed. 2014. Pisa: ETS. 

Curley, E. (ed. and trans.) (1985). The Collected Works of Spinoza, vol. I. Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press. 

Curley, E. (ed. and trans.) (2016). The Collected Works of Spinoza, vol. II. Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press. 

Deijl, L. van der (2020). The Dutch translation and circulation of Spinoza’s Tractatus Theologico- 
Politicus in manuscript and print (1670-1694): a computational reconstruction. Quaerendo 50: 
207-237. 

Dorow, W. (ed.) (1835). Benedikt Spinoza’s Randglossen zu seinem Tractatus theologico-politicus, aus 
einer in Kénigsberg befindlichen noch ungedruckten Handschrift bekannt gemacht. Berlin: Logier. 

Gebhardt, C. (1916). Inedita Spinozana. Sitzungsberichte der Heidelberger Akademie der 
Wissenschaften, Philosophisch-historische Klasse, vol. 13. Heidelberg: Winter. 

Gebhardt, C. (ed.) (1925). Spinoza, Opera, vols I-IV: 1925,71972, vol. V: 1987. Heidelberg: Winter. 

Gerritsen, J. (2005). Printing Spinoza: some questions. In: Spinoza to the Letter: Studies in Words, Texts 
and Books (ed. E. Akkerman and P. Steenbakkers), 251—270. Leiden: Brill. 

Gfrorer, A.F. (ed.) (1830). Benedicti de Spinoza Opera philosophica omnia. Stuttgart: Mezler. 

Giancotti, E. (1969). Sul concetto spinoziano di mens. In: Richerche lessicali su opere di Descartes e 
Spinoza (ed. G. Crapulli and E. Giancotti), 119-169. Rome: Ateneo. 

Giancotti, E. (1970). Lexicon Spinozanum, 2 vols. The Hague: Nijhoff. 

Ginsberg, H. (ed.) (1874-1877). Spinozae Opera philosophica im Urtexte, vol. I (Die Ethik) Leipzig: 
Koschny, 1874, 1875; vol. II (Der Briefwechsel) Leipzig: Koschny, 1876; vol. HII (Der theologisch- 
politische Tractat) Leipzig: Koschny, 1877; vol. IV (Die unvollendeten lateinischen Abhandlungen) 
Heidelberg: Weiss, 1882. 

Grafton, A. (2017). Spinoza’s hermeneutics: some heretical thoughts. In: Scriptural Authority and 
Biblical Criticism in the Dutch Golden Age: God’s Word Questioned (ed. D. van Miert, H. Nellen, P. 
Steenbakkers and J. Touber) 177—196. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Hoffmeister, J. (ed.) (1969). Briefe von und an Hegel, vol. 2: 1813-1822, 3d, rev. edn. Hamburg: 
Meiner. 

Jagersma, R., and Dijkstra, T. (2013). Uncovering Spinoza’s printers by means of bibliographical 
research. Querendo 43: 278-310. 

Kajanto, I. (2005), Spinoza’s Latinity. In: Spinoza to the Letter: Studies in Words, Texts and Books (ed. F. 
Akkerman and P. Steenbakkers), 35—54. Leiden: Brill. 


27 


PIET STEENBAKKERS 


Kingma, J. (2005). Spinoza editions in the nineteenth century. In: Spinoza to the Letter: Studies in 
Words, Texts and Books (ed. F. Akkerman and P. Steenbakkers), 273-281. Leiden: Brill. 

Kingma, J. and Offenberg, A.K. (1977). Bibliography of Spinoza’s Works up to 1800. Studia 
Rosenthaliana 11: 1-32. 

Klijnsmit, A. (1992). Spinoza and the grammarians of the Bible. In: History of Linguistics in the Low 
Countries (ed. J. Noordegraaf, K. Versteegh and E. Koerner), 155-200. Amsterdam: Benjamins. 
Land, J.P.N. (1880). Over de eerste uitgaven der brieven van Spinoza. Verslagen en Mededcelingen der 

Koninklijke Akademie van Wetenschappen, Afdeeling Letterkunde, 2nd ser., vol. 9: 144-155. 

Land, J.P.N. (1882a). Over de uitgaven en den text der Ethica van Spinoza. Verslagen en Mededeelingen 
der Koninklijke Akademie van Wetenschappen, Afdeeling Letterkunde, 2nd ser., vol. 11: 4-24. 

Land, J.P.N. (1882b). Over vier drukken met het jaartal 1670 van Spinoza’s Tractatus Theologico- 
Politicus. Verslagen en Mededeelingen der Koninklijke Akademie van Wetenschappen, Afdeeling 
Letterkunde, 2nd ser., vol. 11: 148-158. 

Lapini, W. (2008). Spinoza e le inezie puerili. Rivista di Storia della Filosofia 63: 289-293. 

Lapini, W. (2010). Spinoza e le inezie puerili. Genoa: Il Melangolo. 

Leopold, J.H. (1902). Ad Spinozae Opera posthuma. The Hague: Nijhoff. 

Leopold, J.H. (2005). Le Langage de Spinoza et sa pratique du discours. In: Spinoza to the Letter: 
Studies in Words, Texts and Books (ed. F. Akkerman and P. Steenbakkers, trans. M. Beyssade), 9-33. 
Leiden: Brill. French translation of Leopold 1902, 1-37. 

Linde, A. van der (1864). Notiz zur Literatur des Spinozismus. Zeitschrift ftir Philosophie und philoso- 
phische Kritik 45: 301-305. 

Mignini, F. (1979). Per la datazione e l’interpretazione del Tractatus de intellectus emendatione di B. 

Spinoza. La Cultura 17 (1-2) 87-160. 

Mignini, F. (1986). Introduzione. In Spinoza, Korte Verhandeling van God, de mensch en deszelvs wel- 

stand/Breve trattato su Dio, l’'uomo e il suo bene (ed. and trans. F. Mignini), 11-118. L'Aquila: 

Japadre. 

Mignini, F. (1987). Données et problémes de la chronologie spinozienne entre 1656 et 1665. Revue 

des sciences philosophiques et théologiques 71: 9-21. 

Mignini, F. (2008). Risposta a Lapini. Rivista di Storia della Filosofia 63: 294-300. 

Mignini, F. (2009a). Introduction au Tractatus de intellectus emendatione. In: Spinoza, CEuvres I: 

Premiers écrits (ed. F. Mignini, transl. M. Beyssade and J. Ganault), 21—58. Paris: PUF. 

Mignini, F. (2009b). Introduction au Court Traité. In Spinoza, (Euvres I: Premiers écrits (ed. F. Mignini, 

trans. M. Beyssade and J. Ganault), 159-180. Paris: PUF. 

Mignini, F. and O. Proietti (trans.) (2007). Spinoza, Opere. Milan: Mondadori. New revised edition 

2015. 

Moreau, P.-F. (2009). Introduction générale aux Guvres de Spinoza. In: Spinoza, (Euvres I: Premiers 

écrits (ed. F. Mignini, trans. M. Beyssade and J. Ganault), 7-17. Paris: PUF. 

Moreau, P.-E, and Steenbakkers, P. (2020). Introduction; Notes. In: Spinoza, (Euvres IV: Ethica/ 

Ethique (ed. F. Akkerman and P. Steenbakkers, trans. P-F. Moreau), 13-96 (Introduction), 499— 

609 (Notes). Paris: PUF. 

Murr, C.G. von (1802). (ed.) Benedicti de Spinoza Adnotationes ad Tractatum theologico politicum. The 

Hague, s.n. 

Murr, C.G. von (1803). Nothwendige Bemerkungen zu No. 28. der ALZ 1803. Intelligenzblatt der 

Allgemeinen Literatur-Zeitung 41 (26 February 1803), col. 351-352. 

Murrmann-Kahl, M. (2012). Der Pantheismusstreit. In: Philosophisch-theologische Streitsachen: 
Pantheismusstreit, Atheismusstreit, Theismusstreit (ed. G. Essen and C. Danz), 93-134. Darmstadt: 
Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft. 

Paulus, H.E.G. (ed.) (1802-1803). Benedicti de Spinoza Opera quae supersunt omnia. Jena: In bibliopo- 
lio academico, vol. I, 1802; vol. II, 1803. 

Proietti, O. (1997). La tradizione testuale del Tractatus politicus: Examinatio per un’edizione critica. In: 
Spinoziana: Ricerche di terminologia filosofica e critica testuale. (ed. P. Totaro), 125-153, Rome: Olschki. 


28 


SPINOZA’S PHILOLOGY 


Proietti, O. (2005) Notice sur la constitution du texte. In: Spinoza, CEuvres V: Tractatus politicus/ 
Traité politique, ed. O. Proietti, transl. and notes C. Ramond. Paris: PUF, 45-75. 

Riedel, C. (1843) (ed.) Renati des Cartes et Benedicti de Spinoza Praecipua opera philosophica, 2 vols. 
Leipzig: Hartung. 

Schaarschmidt, C. (1869) (ed.) Benedicti de Spinoza Korte verhandeling van God, de mensch en deszelfs 
welstand: Tractatuli deperditi de Deo et homine ejusque felicitate versio Belgica. Amsterdam: Muller. 
Spruit, L. (1997) I manoscritti nederlandesi delle Adnotationes al Tractatus theologico-politicus di 
Spinoza: Edizione critica. In: Spinoziana: Ricerche di terminologia filosofica e critica testuale (ed. P. 

Totaro), 185-231. Rome: Olschki. 

Spruit, L. and Totaro, P. (eds). (2011). The Vatican Manuscript of Spinoza’s Ethica. Leiden: Brill. 

Steenbakkers, P. (1994). Spinoza’s Ethica from Manuscript to Print: Studies on Text, Form and Related 
Topics. Assen: Van Gorcum. Accessible online as PhD thesis, University of Groningen. http://hdl. 
handle.net/11370/832e0al f-eed2-4a78-8 7 2f-e3a58dfOf050 (accessed 22 October 2020). 

Steenbakkers, P. (2007). Les éditions de Spinoza en Allemagne au XIX siécle. In: Spinoza au XIX° 
siécle (ed. A. Tosel, P-F. Moreau, and J. Salem), 21—32. Paris: Publications de la Sorbonne. 

Steenbakkers, P. (2010). The text of Spinoza’s Tractatus Theologico-Politicus. In: Spinoza’s Theological- 
Political Treatise: A Critical Guide (ed. Y.Y. Melamed and M.A. Rosenthal), 29-40. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 

Steenbakkers, P. (2018). Review of E. Curley (ed. and trans.) The Collected Works of Spinoza, vol. II. 
Notre Dame Philosophical Reviews 2018.02.25. https://ndpr.nd.edu/news/the-collected-works-of- 
spinoza-volume-ii/ (accessed 22 October 2020). 

Steenbakkers, P. (2019). Spinoza’s correspondentie. In: Spinoza en zijn kring: Balans van veertig jaar 
onderzoek, 7-18. Rijnsburg: Uitgeverij Spinozahuis. 

Totaro, P. (1995). Niels Stensen e la prima diffusione della filosofia di Spinoza nella Firenze di Cosimo 
Ill. In: L’Hérésie spinoziste: La discussion sur le Tractatus theologico-politicus, 1670-1677, et la récep- 
tion immeédiate du spinozisme (ed. P. Cristofolini), 147-168. Amsterdam-Maarssen, APA-Holland 
University Press. 

Totaro, P. (ed.) (1997). Spinoziana: Ricerche di terminologia filosofica e critica testuale. Rome: Olschki. 

Totaro, P. (2000). Documenti su Spinoza nell’ Archivio del Sant’ Uffizio. Nouvelles de la République des 
Lettres 20: 95-120. 

Totaro, P. (2002). “Ho certi amici in Ollandia”: Stensen and Spinoza. In: Niccolé Stenone (1638- 
1686) anatomista, geologo, vescovo: Atti del seminario organizzato da Universitetsbiblioteket i Tramso e 
Accademia di Danimarca, 23 ottobre 2000 (ed. K. Ascani, H. Kermit and G. Skytte), 27-38. Rome: 
L’'Erma, . 

Totaro, P. (2009). “Instrumenta mentis”: Contributi al lessico filosofico di Spinoza. Florence: Olschki. 

Totaro, P., Spruit, L., and Steenbakkers, P. (2011). L’Ethica di Spinoza in un manoscritto della 
Biblioteca Apostolica Vaticana (Vat. lat. 12838). Miscellanea Bibliothecae Apostolicae Vaticanae 18: 
583-610. 

Touber, J. (2018). Spinoza and Biblical Philology in the Dutch Republic, 1660-1710. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press. 

Ven, J. van de (2019). “Van bittere galle by een gebonden”: Over de laat zeventiende-eeuwse 
Nederlandse vertalingen van Spinoza’s Tractatus Theologico-Politicus. In: Spinoza en zijn kring: 
Balans van veertig jaar onderzoek, 106-115. Rijnsburg: Uitgeverij Spinozahuis. 

Vet, J. de (2005). Salomon Dierquens, auteur du Stelkonstige reeckening van den regenboog et du 
Reeckening van kanssen. In: Spinoza to the Letter: Studies in Words, Texts and Books (ed. F. Akkerman 
and P. Steenbakkers), 169-188. Leiden: Brill. 

Vloten, J. van (ed.). (1862) Ad Benedicti de Spinoza Opera quae supersunt omnia supplementum. 
Amsterdam: Muller. 

Vloten J. van and J.P.N. Land [revised by W. Meijer] (eds). (1905) Benedicti de Spinoza Ethica ex editione 
Operum quotquot reperta sunt seorsum repetita. The Hague: Nijhoff. Second edition 1914. 


29 


3 


Avicenna and Spinoza on Essence 
and Existence 


STEPHEN R. OGDEN 


Ido not think it worthwhile to refute here those Authors who think differently than we do, nor 
to examine their definitions or descriptions of essence and existence. For in this way we should 
render a clear thing more obscure. Since we can give no definition of anything without at the 
same time explaining its essence, what do we understand more clearly than what essence is, 
and what existence is? 

(Spinoza, B. (1985) CMI 2) 


Just as some find in Spinoza’s thought a maximal confluence of plenitude and unity, we 
can also find a maximal confluence of philosophical tradition and innovation. Following 
Wolfson’s (1934) monumental study of Spinoza against the backdrop of medieval phi- 
losophy, many have written valuable contributions on Spinoza’s relation to Jewish phi- 
losophy (e.g. Nadler 2014). The same goes for Latin Scholasticism and Descartes. Yet 
little in-depth work has been done on Spinoza and Avicenna (Ibn Sina, d. 1037) (though 
see Manekin 2014; Richardson 2014). I think of all precedents, Avicenna’s system quite 
possibly stands the closest to Spinoza’s own, affording unique opportunities for reading 
them in dialogue (cf. Carriero 1991, p. 55). Though I certainly cannot fully substantiate 
that claim here, my task is to highlight briefly this contention regarding essence and 
existence. 

Spinoza’s employment of essence and existence is well-known (Rivaud 1906; 
Jarrett 2001; Wolfson 1934, pp. 121-132). There are precursors to Avicenna for the 
essence/existence distinction — for example, in Aristotle, other Muslim philosophers, and 
Islamic theology (kalam) (Menn 2013; Wisnovsky 2003). Avicenna, however, firmly 
establishes the distinction and many of the surrounding arguments for the rest of the 
Islamic, Jewish, and Christian traditions. Although there are myriad possible links, it is 
worth considering how Avicenna himself factors into Spinoza’s views since he is the 
major source for this essence/existence tradition. I aim to show even tighter textual and 
conceptual connections between these philosophers, delineating how Spinoza drew 
from Avicenna (directly or indirectly) on the definition of essence and the essence/ 
existence distinction. Nevertheless, Spinoza departs from Avicenna, potentially regarding 
the tendency of essences for existence and especially regarding their universality and 
particularity. 


A Companion to Spinoza, First Edition. Edited by Yitzhak Y. Melamed. 
© 2021 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2021 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd. 


30 


ESSENCE AND EXISTENCE 


1. From Avicenna to Spinoza 


While perhaps most scholars think it unlikely that Spinoza read Avicenna directly, it is cer- 
tainly possible given that Latin and Hebrew translations of many of Avicenna’s works 
were available and that Jewish commentators on Maimonides often noted Avicenna’s doc- 
trines (Melamed 2012, p. 91, fn. 43). It is even more likely that Spinoza read Avicenna 
(perhaps unwittingly) via al-Ghazalt’s Magasid al-Falasifa (Intentions of the Philosophers, 
hereafter IP). The IP is mostly an Arabic translation (with slight adaptation) of Avicenna’s 
Persian Daneshname (Janssens 1986), which was then translated further into Latin and 
Hebrew. In fact, the Hebrew translations garnered extensive commentary from Jewish 
thinkers like Moses Narboni, and it served as a textbook within Jewish communities until 
the sixteenth century (Wolfson 1929, p. 10; Freudenthal and Zonta 2012). 

If Spinoza did not read the IP, it was almost certainly used by one of his definite sources, 
namely, Hasdai Crescas. In addition to the IP, Crescas took major Avicennian teachings 
from al-Tabrizi, a Muslim commentator on Maimonides’s Guide of the Perplexed 
(Langermann 2012), including Premises 19-21 which feature Avicenna’s essence/ 
existence distinction (Wolfson 1929, pp. 302-305). While Scholastics like Duns Scotus 
may have impacted Crescas, too, he easily could have read Avicenna’s al-Najat (Salvation), 
which existed in both Latin and Hebrew translation. 

Avicenna’s Najat and the IP are the most likely sources for Maimonides’s own 
knowledge of Avicenna (Freudenthal and Zonta 2012). Regardless, the impact of 
Avicenna on Maimonides was surely transmitted to Spinoza, especially essence/existence 
in Guide I 57 (Maimonides 1963, I/132-—133). The doctrine is also relayed by Averroes 
(Ibn Rushd) in works later translated into Latin (2003, p. 390; 2004, p. 313/6). Both 
Maimonides and Averroes fatefully and forcefully portray the Avicennian doctrine in 
such a way that existence is added to essence as an ‘accident.’ Finally, Spinoza probably 
knew Avicenna’s distinction through Scholastics like Aquinas and through Descartes. 
In short, multiple doses of Avicennianism likely made their way into Spinoza’s 
bloodstream. 


2. Essence: The ‘Definition’ 
Spinoza gives his definition of essence in E2d2: 


I say that to the essence of any thing belongs that which, being given, the thing is [NS: also] 
necessarily posited and which, being taken away, the thing is necessarily [NS: also] taken 
away; or that without which the thing can neither be nor be conceived, and which can neither 
be nor be conceived without the thing. (G II/84/17-20) 


Numerous commentators question whether this can truly be a definition of essence given 
its placement in Part 2 of the Ethics, well after Spinoza has already given the notion a 
workout in Part 1. One partial explanation, however, might lie in the quotation from CM I 
2, used as this chapter’s opening epigraph above. Whenever we consciously attempt to 
define essence, we thereby reveal that we already understand it. Indeed, both ‘essence’ and 
‘existence’ are already known more clearly than anything else. 

That rationale follows Avicenna’s. In his Metaphysics of the Shifa@? (Cure) (hereafter, 
Shifa’-Met.) 1 5, Avicenna begins with three primary notions (ma‘ani): 


31 


STEPHEN R. OGDEN 


The notions of ‘the existent’ (al-mawjiid), ‘the thing’ (al-shay’), and ‘the necessary’ (al-dariu7) 
are impressed in the soul in a primary way. This impression does not require better known 
things to bring it about. . . . If the expression denoting them does not come to mind or is not 
understood, then it would be impossible to know whatever is known through them... . 
(Avicenna 2005, p. 22, trans. modified) 


Regarding ‘thing,’ Avicenna argues that the very idea of knowing what a thing is constitutes 
a prerequisite for the whole business of defining (things!) in the first place (2005, p. 24). 

As Avicenna proceeds, he aligns ‘thing’ (prominent in pre-Avicennian kalam debates) 
with ‘quiddity’ (mahiyya), and he replaces ‘existent’ with ‘existence’ (al-wujid) (2005, 
p. 24, cf. Druart 2001, Wisnovsky 2003, Bertolacci 2012). Then, he notes that ‘quiddity’ 
and ‘existence’ are two different concepts and, in fact (somewhat confusingly), mark two 
different kinds of existence: (1) ‘affirmative existence’ (al-wujid al-ithbati) and (2) ‘proper 
existence’ (al-wujid al-khass). This pair eventually becomes esse existentiae and esse essentiae 
in the Scholastics and Spinoza (CM I 2). Avicenna’s point is that there is a clear distinction 
between a thing’s actual (affirmative) existence and the reality by which a thing is what it 
is, namely, its essence. Again, these notions are ‘primary’ in the sense that they cannot be 
defined by any clearer or more basic terms (cf. Aquinas 1976, p. 369/3—5). Essence and 
existence also appear basic in Spinoza’s CM I 2, while their distinction undergirds the 
Ethics ‘definition’ of essence (presuming it can be defined), especially in its criteria of 
mutual existential and conceptual relations — “be or be conceived.” 

Spinoza’s definition bears an even more remarkable affinity to passages in the Logic of 
Avicenna’s Najat and al-Ghazali’s IP (for the former, see Arnaldez 1978, pp. 168-169). 
First, from the Najat: 


The ‘essential’ (al-dhati) sets down the quiddity (mahiyya) of that of which it is said. It is not 
sufficient in the explanation of the essential to say, “It is what does not separate.” For many 
things which are not essential are still inseparable. Nor is it sufficient to say that its meaning is 
“what neither separates in existence (wujiid), nor truly separates in imagination (tawahhum), 
such that if it were removed (rafa‘a) from the imagination, the described thing [i.e., the subject] 
would go out of existence.” Many things that are not essential have this attribute (sifa), such 
as the sum of the angles of a triangle being equal to two right angles. ... For many necessary 
accidents (lawdzim) of a thing which follow after the fixed quiddity are [the quiddity’s] clear 
consequence (uziim). But rather the essential is that which, if its meaning is understood and 
brought to mind and [so too] is the meaning of [the subject] that has it. . ., then it is impossible 
that the essence of the subject be understood unless first this meaning [of the essential] is 
already understood to belong to it. For example, . . .you cannot understand ‘human’ unless 
you first understand ‘animal.’(Avicenna 1985, 11/4—16; 2011, pp. 6—7, trans. modified) 


This same idea is summarized in al-Ghazah’s IP (Avicenna’s Daneshname) both in the 
Arabic (al-Ghazah 1961, p. 44) and in the Latin and Hebrew translations. The Latin 
reads: “When you understand the essential and what has the essential, it is impossible to 
imagine (imaginari) or understand (intelligere) the [latter] subject unless you understand 
the essential existing in it (existere in eo); nor can the subject be understood in any way 
without it” (al-Ghazah 1965, 247; cf. the Hebrew with Narboni’s commentary in 
Chertoff 1952, II/25 ff.). 

In these passages, Avicenna argues that we cannot characterize the essential merely by 
way of inseparable (i.e. necessary) accidents, properties, or propria. The example of the 
sum of a triangle’s angles is repeated as such a proprium in Avicenna (1985, p. 16); the 


32 


ESSENCE AND EXISTENCE 


Latin and Hebrew of al-Ghazali’s IP (1965, pp. 248-249; Chertoff 1952, II/30—32); 
Descartes, Meditation V (AT VII 66, CSM 46); and in Spinoza himself (DPPI p5 | GI/158). 
Many contemporary metaphysicians defend distinguishing the essential from such 
necessary properties, and Spinoza implies the same since the latter only fall under the first 
part of his E2d2 definition. Indeed, it is important for Spinoza that attributes constitute 
and express the substance’s (God's) essence (E1d4 and d6), while the infinite modes neces- 
sarily “follow (sequi) from” God's nature (E1p16 and d) (Melamed 2013, pp. 50-53). 
Spinoza elsewhere states that a definition must “explain the inmost essence of the 
thing,” without reliance on propria (TIE §95 | GII/34/29-31; cf. KVI7 | GI/45). Moreover, 
as mentioned above, the second part of the E2d2 definition puts this deeper explanation in 
terms of symmetric conception and existence (cf. the important explanation in E2p10s | G 
11/94). Avicenna in the Najat goes on to suggest that what a thing is (ma huwa), in other 
words, its essence, isthe “totality” (jumla) of allits many essential attributes (Avicenna 1985, 
pp. 12-13; 2011, pp. 8-9), a claim reminiscent of Spinoza’s one “substance consisting of 
an infinity of attributes, of which each one expresses an eternal and infinite essence” 
(Eld6 | G II/45/23-25; cf. Elp10s). For both Avicenna and Spinoza, then, the complete 
essence determines a thing’s unique way of being what it is (al-wujid al-khdss / esse essen- 
tiae), as well as its causal powers (E1 p36; cf. Newlands 2018, ch. 5; Ward 2011). Rationality 
and animality express and explain my essence, while risibility and the power to sing stanzas 
from a Mozart opera are properties that merely, albeit necessarily, follow from my essence. 


3. Essence and Existence: The Distinction 


We have already seen the beginnings of Avicenna’s essence/existence distinction in Shifa- 
Met.1 5. He continues to argue that just as the notions are known individually in a primary 
way, so too is the distinction between them: 


It is known that the reality (Haqiqa) proper to each thing [i.e., its quiddity] is something other 
than the existence that is synonymous with the affirmed [kind of existence]. . . . [I]f you said, 
“The reality of such a thing exists either in extra-mental reality (ff [-a‘yan), or in the soul, or abso- 
lutely, being common to both,” this would have a realized and understood meaning. But if you 
were to say... “The reality of such a thing is a reality,” this would be superfluous and useless talk. 
(Avicenna 2005, 24, trans. modified) 


This is not much of an argument, but that is Avicenna’s point — the distinction is ‘known’ 
and cannot be demonstrated on the basis of better known principles. Aristotelians are 
familiar with the separate questions of what X is (essence, proper existence) versus whether X 
is (existence in reality, affirmed existence). Yet even a child might ask, “What is a unicorn?” 
or, separately, “Do unicorns actually exist?” Spinoza, for his part, advises speaking to a sculp- 
tor or woodcutter if you need assistance grasping this idea (CMI 2 | GI/239/27-33). 

Avicenna ties essence/existence to another pair of primary notions, i.e. the necessary 
and the possible: 


Whatever is a possible existent is always, considered in itself (dhati-hi), a possible existent; but it 
may happen that its existence becomes necessary through another (bi-ghayri-hi). . .. Because 
what belongs to it considered in itself is other than what belongs to it from another. It attains its 
identity (huwiyya) in existence from both together. (Avicenna 2005, p. 38, trans. modified) 


33 


STEPHEN R. OGDEN 


What belongs to a thing “in itself” (dhati-hi) in Arabic can also literally mean “in its 
essence.” But for most things with a merely possible essence, whether it actually exists is 
another open question. If something’s essence, say a juniper bush, is such that it might or 
might not exist, then the bush’s existence must be explained by some other cause. Yet an 
existing juniper is nonetheless still only possible in itself (and not necessary in itself!), so 
Avicenna adopts a third category of modality, namely, “necessary through another.” All 
the more reason why, with respect to the juniper and the like, what belongs to it in itself (in 
its essence) is other than what belongs to it from another (i.e. its caused existence). 

Spinoza adopts this same Avicennian framework of modality, most explicitly in CMI 3. 
While God is “necessary in respect to its essence,” other things are necessary (or impos- 
sible) “in respect to their cause” (G I/240/23-27). This understanding of modality is like- 
wise rooted in the essence/existence distinction: “For if we consider only their essence, we 
can conceive it clearly and distinctly without existence. Therefore, they can never exist by 
the power and necessity of their essence, but only by the power of their cause, God, the 
creator of all things” (G I/240/28-31). 

Because merely possible essences might or might not exist, Avicenna occasionally 
explains that their existence “occurs” to them or to their essence as an “accident” 
(Avicenna 2005, p. 153). But this is just another way of expressing that the essence in 
itself can be either (1) actually existent or (2) not. If (1), then Avicenna acknowledges two 
different kinds of actual existence, alluded to above — either (1.a) in extra-mental reality 
or (1.b) in the mind (al-dhin). The latter distinction, in turn, roughly explains how a 
“common” essence in itself can be either (1.i) particular or (1.ii) universal — hence, 
Avicenna’s famous dictum that horseness in itself is just horseness, neither particular nor 
universal (2005, p. 149); “neither of the two are included in its essence” (2005, p. 154, 
trans. modified). Avicenna, however, is careful to insist that the essence in itself does not 
enjoy some third type of actual/affirmed existence, say (1.c/1.iii). This is just a way of 
considering the pure essence apart from (1) (and its various subdivisions above) and (2). 
He does not (as it was later accused) think of the essence in itself as somehow already 
existing (quasi-Platonically) prior to receiving the accident of existence! (See, e.g. 
Rahman 1958; Black 1999; Lizzini 2014.) He argues that the essence must exist as either 
(1.a) or (1.b), though neither exclusively (2005, pp. 25 and 153), just as number must 
exist as either even or odd. 

Avicenna’s Najat-Met. Il begins with the modal distinction elaborated in terms of 
existential conceivability: “The necessarily existent (al-wajib al-wujid) is the existence that 
when it is assumed to be non-existent, an absurdity occurs from [the assumption]. The pos- 
sibly existent is that which when it is assumed to be either non-existent or existent, an 
absurdity does not occur” (1985, p. 546/3-—5). Spinoza begins the Ethics similarly, but even 
more explicitly in the register of the essence/existence distinction: “D1: By cause of itself I 
understand that whose essence involves existence, or that whose nature cannot be conceived 
except as existing” (Eld1 | G II/45, emphasis mine). However, Avicenna’s modal distinc- 
tion of necessary in/through itself versus necessary through another — the latter of which 
applies to a panoply of different substances and beings — becomes transformed by Spinoza 
into an account of only substance as necessary in/through itself, while everything else 
exists as necessary in another, the one substance, God or Nature: 


D3: By substance I understand what is in itself (in se) and conceived through itself (per se)... 


D5: By mode I understand the affections of a substance, or that which is in another (in alio) 
through which it is also conceived. (G II/45) 


34 


ESSENCE AND EXISTENCE 


Just as a substance’s essence involves existence, a mode’s essence (like Avicenna’s possibly 
existent) does not: “A7: If a thing can be conceived as not existing, its essence does not 
involve existence” (G II/46), so they “must, to exist, have an external cause” (E1p8s2 | G 
II/51/13-14; cf. KV16 | GI/42 and TIE §92 | GII/34). Since everything but God must be 
in and conceived through God (E1p15), and since everything else’s essence does not involve 
existence (Ela7 and E1p24), God is the cause of their existence, both of their “beginning 
to exist” and “of their persevering in existing” (p24c | GII/67; cf. E2p10s | GII/93). 

In fact, even this latter distinction boasts an origin in Avicenna. In his Shifa’-Met. VI 2, 
Avicenna identifies God and other eternal substances as “essential” or “true” metaphysical 
efficient causes, which are simultaneous with their effects. Because God is the ultimate 
cause “of the existence of the essence” and of the “complete existence” of a thing (2005, 
203, pp. §§8-9), we might summarize that God is the cause of both the existence and the 
essence of everything that exists (cf. 2005, 287, §13; also Aquinas 1889, Ia.104.1, and 
1976, pp. 376-377/90-146). This is precisely what Spinoza concludes in El p25: “God is 
the efficient cause, not only of the existence of things [p24], but also of their essence” (G 
Il/67; cf. E5p22 and CM13 | GI/241/17-22). 

Modes, however, are not just the causal effects of God but are also affections or prop- 
erties of the one substance: “outside the intellect there is nothing except substances and 
their affections” (El1p4d; cf. Ep. 4 | GIV/14, and Eld5). It follows that Spinoza must think 
that modes exist as particular accidents (Carriero 1995; cf. Melamed 2013, pp. 57-59). 
Though Spinoza had an explicit substance-accident ontology (Ep. 4), he later rejected the 
terminology because he came to regard accidents as modes of thinking and thus as insuf- 
ficiently ontologically robust (CM 11 | G I/236-237; cf. I/235-236/30-—5). In medieval 
philosophy, including Avicenna, however, accidents are real (albeit not substantial) beings 
and are, therefore, isomorphic to Spinoza’s modes. I have already explained that Avicenna 
does not really conceive of existence as an ontological accident, despite later development 
and criticism of his views. In light of this historical controversy, it is intriguing to discover 
a slightly different, but important, sense in which Spinoza’s overhaul of Avicennianism 
implies that (modal) existence is very much an accident! 


4. God’s Essence is Existence 


As may already be clear and is well-attested, Avicenna and Spinoza agree (along with 
Maimonides and Aquinas) that the essence/existence distinction only holds for things 
other than God. By contrast, essence and existence are identical in God. Though there is 
some debate about whether Avicenna considers God to even have an essence, I think it is 
clear that whenever Avicenna makes claims to that effect, he does so precisely to point 
out the failure of the distinction and the reality of the identity. God, as the Necessary 
Existent, “has (lahu) no quiddity” (Avicenna 2005, p. 276, §13) precisely because he is 
his essence: “The One, insofar as he is the Necessary Existent, is what he is through him- 
self, and he is his essence (huwa dhati-hi)” (2005, p. 278/17, my translation). “[T]here is 
no quiddity for the Necessary Existent other than its being the Necessary Existent” 
(2005, p. 276, §9). The same goes for Spinoza: “|T]hat itself which constitutes God’s 
essence at the same time constitutes his existence. So his existence and his essence are 
one and the same” (E1p20d | G II/64—65; Melamed 2012). For Spinoza, the identity of 
essence and existence in God is evident “since his essence cannot be conceived without 
existence” (CMI 2 | GI/238/26-29). 


35 


STEPHEN R. OGDEN 


5. Essentially Different? 


Wolfson rightly argues that Spinoza draws his thought on the essence/existence distinction 
from two separate wells. Most of the preceding comes from the Islamic-Jewish tradition, but 
Spinoza takes from Descartes the conceit that the identity of God’s essence and existence (seen 
above) furnishes the starring premise in an ontological proof for God’s existence (Wolfson 1934, 
pp. 121-122 and 129). Though somescholars have attempted to find an ontological argument 
based solely on Avicenna’s notion of the necessary in itself, Avicenna’s theistic arguments are 
a posteriori demonstrations (see, e.g. McGinnis 2010, pp. 165-167; De Haan 2016). 
“Undoubtedly, there is existence (huna wujid),” as one version begins, seemingly relying upon 
an indubitable datum of experience (Avicenna 1985, p. 566/16). He then proceeds to refute 
the notion that everything is merely possible in itself by showing how that supposition leads 
to contradictions. In other words, Avicenna’s argument is a reductio from the assumption of 
possibility, not a deduction from the concept of necessity. On the other hand, the majority of 
Spinoza’s arguments for God’s existence in E1p11d are, as he tells us, a priori (pl 1s, GI 54/1- 
5), relying on the definition of God as causa sui in d1 (cf. Elp8s2 | G If 51/14—-18). In fact, 
perhaps the thinkers’ distinct paths for proving God’s existence are related to Avicenna’s 
apparent rejection of the notion of causa sui (if it means anything other than uncaused) 
(Avicenna 2005, pp. 30 and 277, §16). To close this chapter, however, I wish to identify at 
least two more differences with Avicenna regarding essence/existence, though each calls for 
further study. 

First, there is a potential divergence between Avicenna and Spinoza concerning an 
essence’s tendency towards existence, i.e. whether essence in itself has a ‘default’ for 
existence or non-existence. Sometimes each philosopher characterizes essences as purely 
indifferent, with both existence and non-existence requiring a cause. So Avicenna argues 
that “whatever is possible in existence when considered in itself, its existence and nonexis- 
tence are both due to a cause” (2005, p. 31). Spinoza’s explanation is nearly identical, but 
without Avicenna’s scope limitation: “For each thing there must be assigned a cause, or 
reason, as much for its existence as for its nonexistence” (Elp11d | GII/52). 

Avicenna, however, further explains these causes: 


In short, one of the two cases [existence or non-existence] necessarily comes about for [the pos- 
sible thing], not from itself, but from a cause. In the case of existence, it is by a cause, which is an 
existential cause (“lla wujiidiyya). In the case of non-existence (al-‘adami), it is by a cause, which 
is the non-existence of the existential cause. (Avicenna 2005, p. 31/10-—12, my translation) 


This looks like a purely privative account of the cause for non-existence, namely, a lack of 
an existential cause. In other places, Avicenna suggests that the default for an essence in 
itself is non-existence: “[Creation] is the giving of existence to a thing after absolutely not 
[existing]. For it belongs to the effect [i.e. the thing] in itself to be non-existent and [then] to 
be, by its cause, existing” (2005, p. 203, trans. modified). 

Spinoza, on the other hand, in E1p11d, within the same proof for God’s existence as 
above, states that “a thing necessarily exists given that there is no reason or cause which 
prevents it from existing” (G II/53/10-12, trans. modified). Also, in Spinoza’s conatus 
argument: “Each thing, as far as it can, insofar as it is in itself (quantum in se est), strives 
to persevere in its being” (E3p6 | G II/146, trans. modified). His argument here and in 
following propositions depends on p4, the demonstration for which states that “the defi- 
nition of any thing. . .posits the thing’s essence and does not take it away. So while we 


36 


ESSENCE AND EXISTENCE 


attend only to the thing itself, and not to external causes, we shall not be able to find 
anything in it which can destroy it” (E3p4d | G II/145). Spinoza’s arguments in these 
early propositions of E3, then, strongly suggest the essence in itself leans towards 
(indeed, strives for!) existence, though E3p7 and CM I 3 (G I/240—241/26—7) may com- 
plicate matters. 

Avicenna and Spinoza differ more obviously on the issue of whether the essences of 
things are in themselves particular: Spinoza probably says yes, and Avicenna says no. One 
of the most central and well-known corollaries of Avicenna’s essence/existence distinction 
is (as we saw above) that the essence in itself is neither particular nor universal, but rather 
a “common nature.” Avicenna meticulously argues for this view’s coherence and thus pro- 
vides an influential version of ‘moderate,’ Aristotelian realism about natures, under- 
writing an essential (pun-intended!) connection between the universal essence existing in 
the mind and the particular essence existing in the world. Again, Avicenna denies that the 
common essence in itself ever has independent existence; rather it must exist in one or the 
other of the aforementioned states. The only proto-existence Avicenna ever seems to attri- 
bute to essences in themselves falls within the divine mind. Animal in itself “is [the thing] 
whose existence is specified as being divine existence (al-wujid al-ilahi) because the cause 
of its existence, inasmuch as it is animal, is the providence of God” (2005, p. 156). Though 
the latter is ambiguous, Avicenna’s standard view is that God knows only universals (and 
particulars only insofar as they are universal) (2005, pp. 287-291; 1985, pp. 246-249), 
so the essences in the divine mind must actually be universal. 

Despite the marked similarity of Avicenna’s and Spinoza’s positions on essence/ 
existence, Spinoza certainly has no such obvious doctrine of common natures. He acknowl- 
edges two types of essence — actual and formal. Actual essence is that of some singular 
thing existing now, responsible for that thing’s striving to maintain its real existence (E3p7; 
cf. E4p4). Spinoza’s actual essence is roughly akin to Avicenna’s essence insofar as it exists 
in a particular. Arguably, however, Spinoza’s more prevalent idea of essence and the one 
more readily distinguished from existence is that of a formal essence (Garrett 2009, 
p. 286). A formal essence appears to be the idea of a singular thing (mode) as contained in 
God’s attributes: “The ideas of singular things, or of modes, that do not exist must be com- 
prehended by God’s infinite idea in the same way as the formal essences of the singular 
things, or modes, are contained in God’s attributes” (E2p8 | G II/90). Similarly, E5p22 
states that “in God there is necessarily an idea that expresses the essence of this or that 
human Body, under a species of eternity,” and (p22d) that “God is the cause, not only of 
the existence of this or that human Body, but also of its essence” (by 1p25), (G H/295). 
Given the eternity of these formal essences, some argue they should be identified as infinite 
modes (Garrett 2009; Ward 2011). The most natural and common way to take the pas- 
sages above is that formal essences (like actual essences) are also particular — my formal 
essence is Stephen-Ogden-ness, not a universal or common humanity. There are formidable 
arguments that the definition of essence in E2d2 and E2p37d rule out universal essences 
(Della Rocca 1996, p. 87; Ward 2011, pp. 26-27). In turn, there is ample evidence for 
Spinoza’s general rejection of universals. 

Avicenna and Spinoza remain comparable here, since both hold that the most prior 
existence of essences is (unsurprisingly) rooted in God — i.e. (for Avicenna) God’s eternal 
and necessary emanation of all existence, including the various essences and (for Spinoza) 
the eternal containment of formal essences in (and their following from) God’s attributes. 
On both views the consequent essences are involved as partial, but true, metaphysical 
causes of the particular and actual essence bearers generated and corrupted within time. 


37 


STEPHEN R. OGDEN 


But the dissimilarity seems greater, even with respect to God. Spinoza attacks the notion 
of universal ideas in God’s intellect and the especially Avicennian view that God’s 
knowledge and providence only extend to universal kinds, rather than particulars: 


But we have rightly regarded this as indicating their ignorance; for all and only the particulars 
have a cause, not the universals, because they are nothing. God, then, is a cause of, and pro- 
vider for, only particular things. So if particular things have to agree with another nature, 
they will not be able to agree with their own. .. .Peter must agree with the Idea of Peter, as is 
necessary, and not with the Idea of Man... .” (KV16 | GI/43) 


He also deliberately upends Avicenna’s explanation of God’s knowledge of universals (and 
of particulars only insofar as they are universal), on the grounds that universals “neither 
exist nor have any essence beyond that of singular things. We, on the contrary, attribute a 
knowledge of singular things to God, and deny him a knowledge of universals, except 
insofar as he understands human minds” (CM17 | GI/263/4—9). 

Some recent interpretations argue that Spinoza allows for universals and commonality 
(Htibner 2016; Martin 2008). But even so, the universality of essence would almost cer- 
tainly be starkly derivative (produced by finite minds) in comparison with all the (primarily) 
particular essences (esp. Hibner 2016). Universality presents a neuralgic point for Spinoza’s 
metaphysics, but, at the very least, he resists following the traditional Avicennian essence/ 
existence distinction towards any clear system of common natures or of universal essences 
in God’s mind. Spinoza’s apparent insistence on essence as particular in itself seems to me a 
more fundamental contrast with Avicenna and a more obviously modern/late medieval 
innovation than Spinoza’s utilization of God’s nominal essence in an ontological proof. 


6. Conclusion 


While Avicenna’s influence on Spinoza has often been acknowledged, it has not usually 
been traced in historical and conceptual detail, perhaps understandably because of the 
vast river of philosophy flowing under the bridge between the two. We rightly continue to 
study what Spinoza adopted and adapted from figures we know he read directly 
(Maimonides, Aquinas, Crescas). I would argue, however, that we have only just started to 
explore the potentially fruitful dialogue between Avicenna’s and Spinoza’s masterful and 
strikingly similar systems, not least with respect to essence and existence. 


References! 


Aquinas, T. (1889). Summa Theologiae. Opera Omnia, vol. 5. Rome: Ex Typographia Polyglotta S.C. 
Propaganda Fide (Leonine). 

Aquinas, T. (1976). De Ente et Essentia. Opera Omnia, vol. 43. Rome: Editori di San Tommaso 
(Leonine). 

Arnaldez, R. (1978). Spinoza et la pensée arabe. Revue de Synthése 99: 151-173. 


! All translations of Spinoza are Curley’s in Spinoza 1985, unless otherwise noted. I have indicated significant 
departures from Marmura’s translation in Avicenna 2005 and other modifications. Other translations, where 
only an edition is cited, are my own. 


38 


ESSENCE AND EXISTENCE 


Averroes (2003). Tahafot at-Tahafot (ed. M. Bouyges, 4th edn.). Beirut: Dar el-Machreq. 

Averroes (2004). Tafstr Ma Ba‘d at-Tabr“at, vol. 1 (ed. M. Bouyges, 5th edn.). Beirut: Dar el-Machreq. 

Avicenna (1985). Kitab al-Najat (ed. M. Danishpazuh). Tehran: Danishgah-yi Tihran. 

Avicenna (2005). The Metaphysics of the Healing (parallel English-Arabic text) (ed. and trans. M. 
Marmura. Provo, UT: Brigham Young University Press. 

Avicenna (2011). Deliverance: Logic (trans. A. Ahmed). Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Bertolacci, A. (2012). The distinction of essence and existence in Avicenna’s metaphysics: the text 
and its context. In: Islamic Philosophy, Science, Culture, and Religion (ed. F. Opwis and D. Reisman). 
Leiden: Brill. 

Black, D. (1999). Mental existence in Thomas Aquinas and Avicenna. Mediaeval Studies 61: 45-79. 

Carriero, J. (1991). Spinoza’s views on necessity in historical perspective. Philosophical Topics, 19: 
47-96. 

Carriero, J. (1995). On the relationship between mode and substance in Spinoza’s Metaphysics. 
Journal of the History of Philosophy 33: 245-273. 

Chertoff, G. (1952). The logical part of al-Ghazali’s Magasid al-Falasifa. PhD thesis. Columbia 
University. 

De Haan, D. (2016). Where does Avicenna demonstrate the existence of God? Arabic Sciences and 
Philosophy 26: 97-128. 

Della Rocca, M. (1996). Representation and the Mind-Body Problem in Spinoza. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press. 

Druart, T. (2001). Shay’ or res as concomitant of being in Avicenna. Documenti e Studi sulla Tradizione 
Filosofica Medievale 12: 125-142. 

Freudenthal, G. and Zonta, M. (2012). Avicenna among medieval Jews: the reception of Avicenna’s 
philosophical, scientific and medical writings in Jewish cultures, East and West. Arabic Sciences and 
Philosophy 22: 217-287. 

Garrett, D. (2009). Spinoza on the essence of the human body and the part of the mind that is 
eternal. In: A Companion to Spinoza’s Ethics (ed. O. Koistinen). Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press. 

al-Ghazali (1961). Magqasid al-Falasifa (ed. S. Dunya). Cairo: Dar al-Ma‘arif. 

al-Ghazali (1965). Logica Algazelis: introduction and critical text (ed. C. Lohr). Traditio 21: 
223-290. 

Htibner, K. (2016). Spinoza on essences, universals, and beings of reason. Pacific Philosophical 
Quarterly 97: 58-88. 

Janssens, J. (1986). Le Danesh-Nameh d’Tbn Sina: un texte a revoir? Bulletin de philosophic médiévale 
28: 163-177. 

Jarrett, C. (2001). Spinoza’s distinction between essence and existence. Iyyun: The Jerusalem 
Philosophical Quarterly 50: 245-252. 

Langermann, Y. (2012). No reagent, no reaction: the barren transmission of Avicennan dynamics to 
Hasdai Crescas. Aleph 12: 161-188. 

Lizzini, O. (2014). “A Mysterious order of possibles”: some remarks on essentialism and on Beatrice 
Zedler’s interpretation of Avicenna and Aquinas on creation (al-Ilahiyyat, the Quaestiones de 
Potentia). American Catholic Philosophical Quarterly 88: 237-270. 

Maimonides, M. (1963). The Guide of the Perplexed, 2 vols (trans. S. Pines). Chicago: University of 

Chicago Press. 

Manekin, C. (2014). Spinoza and the Determinist Tradition in Medieval Jewish Philosophy. In: 

Spinoza and Medieval Jewish Philosophy (ed. S. Nadler). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Martin, C. (2008). The framework of essences in Spinoza’s Ethics. British Journal for the History of 

Philosophy 16: 489-509. 

McGinnis, J. (2010). Avicenna. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Melamed, Y. (2012). Spinoza’s Deification of Existence. Oxford Studies in Early Modern Philosophy 6: 
75-103. 


39 


STEPHEN R. OGDEN 


Melamed, Y. (2013). Spinoza’s Metaphysics: Substance and Thought. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Menn, S. (2013). Avicenna’s Metaphysics. In: Interpreting Avicenna: Critical Essays (ed. P. Adamson). 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Nadler, S. (2014). Spinoza and Medieval Jewish Philosophy. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Newlands, S. (2018). Reconceiving Spinoza. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Rahman, F. (1958). Essence and existence in Avicenna. Medieval and Renaissance Studies 4: 1-16. 

Richardson, K. (2014). Avicenna and the principle of sufficient reason. Review of Metaphysics 67: 
743-768. 

Rivaud, A. (1906). Les Notions d’essence et d’existence dans la philosophie de Spinoza. Paris: Ancienne 
Librairie Germer Balliére. 

Spinoza, B. (1985). The Collected Works of Spinoza, vol. I. (trans. E. Curley). Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press. 

Ward, T. (2011). Spinoza on the essences of modes. British Journal for the History of Philosophy 19: 
19-46. 

Wolfson, H. (1929). Crescas’ Critique of Aristotle. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 

Wolfson, H. (1934). The Philosophy of Spinoza, 2 vols. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 

Wisnovsky, R. (2003). Avicenna’s Metaphysics in Context. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press. 


40 


4 


Spinoza and Maimonides on True Religion 


WARREN ZEV HARVEY 


It is well known that Maimonides and Spinoza disagree fundamentally regarding popular 
religion. Maimonides, for example, requires the multitude to observe many ceremonial 
commandments (see his Code of Jewish Law, Mishneh Torah), while Spinoza makes no such 
demand (TTP5). Again, Maimonides forbids the multitude to believe that God has emo- 
tions, like jealousy (Maimonides 1963, 1:36, 82-85), while Spinoza explicitly allows them 
to hold such false beliefs (TTP15). It is, however, less well known that Maimonides and 
Spinoza agree on many points regarding true religion. H.A. Wolfson has written aptly: “[T] 
he religion of reason which Spinoza. . .outlines. . .is nothing but a modified form of the 
philosophic conception of Judaism as described by Maimonides” (Wolfson 1934, pp. ii, 
328). The close affinity between the views of Maimonides and Spinoza concerning true 
religion has been noted also by L. Roth (1924), A. Hyman (1963), S. Nadler (2011, 
pp. 147-152), and C. Fraenkel (2012). I too have written briefly on this subject 
(Harvey 1981, p. 167). I should like now to expand on some of the main points of 
agreement between Maimonides and Spinoza on true religion, the religion of reason, or 
philosophic religion. 


1. Definition of Religion 


Spinoza defines religio or true religion at E4p37s1: “whatever we desire and do of which 
we are the cause insofar as we have the idea of God, or insofar as we know God, I refer to 
as religion.” Similarly, he defines there pietas: “the desire to do good generated in us by our 
living according to the guidance of reason, I call piety.” The knowledge of God or Nature 
required for true religion is “knowledge of the third kind” or scientia intuitiva (E2p40s2; 
see pp. 45-47). This is clear from the reference to the “idea of God” (idea Dei). The idea of 
God is identified by Spinoza with “the absolute infinite Intellect” (E1p21d, E2p4, cf. E2p3 
and E4p68s; see Melamed 2013, pp. 179-191), and is the “adequate” and “eternal” 
cause of the third kind of knowledge (E5p3 1-33, 36d, and 39d; cf. E2p25d). Knowledge 
of the third kind is theocentric (per Deum), that is, it proceeds from the idea of God (E5p30, 
cf. p31d). 


A Companion to Spinoza, First Edition. Edited by Yitzhak Y. Melamed. 
© 2021 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2021 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd. 


41 


WARREN ZEV HARVEY 


True religion, according to Spinoza’s definition, is thus not identical with the knowledge 
of God, but is that which derives from it. Amor Dei intellectualis, the love of God that arises 
necessarily from knowing God by the third kind of knowledge, is the quintessential form of 
true religion and our greatest joy (E5p32—41). However, true religion includes also piety, 
that is, moral conduct, which follows from the rational life. In portraying the life of the 
sapiens, Spinoza couples piety with religion (pietas et religio) (E5p41). 

Sometimes Spinoza uses the word “religion” equivocally to refer to non-philosophical 
creeds, including the irrational vulgi religio (TTPpraef) and his own dialectical “dogmas of 
universal faith” or “dogmas of Scripture” (TTP14). As Hyman aptly explained: “Between 
the. . . [true] religion of the philosopher and the superstitious religion of the masses lies 
[the religion based on Spinoza’s dogmas]. . . [It is] the foundation for popular morality [= 
piety| in harmony with the dictates of human reason” (Hyman 1963, pp. 183-184, 195). 
The non-philosophical forms of religion are not based on the knowledge of God, but on 
fictions of the imagination or on obedience to authority. 

As for Spinoza’s definition of “piety” as “the desire to do good generated in us by our 
living according to the guidance of reason,” it is in effect a loose paraphrase of E4p37: 
“The good which everyone who seeks virtue wants for himself, he also desires for other 
human beings” (see also E4p73s and E5p4s). Since piety, according to its definition, is 
intrinsic to a life according to the guidance of reason, it is strictly speaking a quality of the 
philosopher. However, the piety of the non-philosopher is behaviorally similar to that of 
the philosopher, although it is based on obedience to authority, not reason. The piety of the 
non-philosopher is a sort of rote imitation of the piety of the philosopher: but if the latter 
is a religious virtue, the former is a political virtue. In TTP14, Spinoza explains the piety of 
the non-philosopher, who follows, for example, the “dogmas of universal faith”: “The goal 
of faith [fides as opposed to ratio]. . is obedience and piety”; and “Scripture teaches very 
clearly and in many places what each person must do to obey God:. . . namely, love one’s 
neighbor” (Leviticus 19:18; cf. Matthew 22:39 and parallels). Thus, the piety of the phi- 
losopher and the non-philosopher both consist in doing good to others. Nonetheless, there 
is an enormous difference between the philosopher motivated by reason and the non-phi- 
losopher motivated by obedience to authority, for reason knows not authority and authority 
knows not reason (TTP16adn34). 

Maimonides’ approach to true religion adumbrates Spinoza’s. In his Guide of the Perplexed, 
3:51, he describes the intellectual worship of the individual who knows God, that is, who has 
achieved scientific knowledge of the world. It is “the worship of one who has apprehended 
the true realities.” This worship, he explains, “can be engaged in only after apprehension has 
been achieved.” He identifies this worship with the “passionate love” of God (Arabic: ‘ishq; 
Hebrew: hesheq), which is “to apply intellectual thought in passionately loving Him always,” 
and which is our greatest joy (Maimonides 1963, 618, 620, 621, 628). Spinoza’s concept of 
amor Dei intellectualis echoes Maimonides’ concept of the passionate intellectual love of God 
(see Harvey 2014, pp. 100-102). According to Maimonides and Spinoza, therefore, true reli- 
gion is not knowledge of God, but what follows from that knowledge. 

Spinoza’s concept of piety is also adumbrated in Maimonides. In the climactic final par- 
agraph of the Guide, Maimonides, expounding Jeremiah 9:22—23, reiterates that the ulti- 
mate human perfection is knowledge of God, that is, the scientific knowledge of the world, 
and adds that there follows necessarily from this knowledge the moral virtues of “loving- 
kindness, righteousness, and judgment” (hesed, sedaqah, mishpat) (Maimonides 1963, 3:54, 
638). In an earlier chapter of the Guide, he interpreted Exodus 34:6—7, and taught that the 
knowledge of God, that is, the knowledge of all existing things, gives rise to the moral 


42 


SPINOZA AND MAIMONIDES ON TRUE RELIGION 


virtues, e.g. “mercy, graciousness, forbearance, and loving-kindness (ibid., 1:54, 124-125). 
Moral conduct, according to Maimonides, follows necessarily from the knowledge of God. 

Maimonides and Spinoza both hold that the scientific knowledge of the world constitutes 
the knowledge of God, and true religion is possible only after this knowledge has been 
achieved. Although Maimonides says that this scientific knowledge is not knowledge of 
God’s essence (Maimonides 1963, 1:54, 124) and Spinoza says that it is (E2p47), the two 
agree that it is what is properly meant by the knowledge of God. Both associate this true reli- 
gion with the intellectual love of God, which Maimonides called hesheq and Spinoza called 
amor Dei intellectualis. Both philosophers also hold that exemplary moral behavior follows 
necessarily from the knowledge of God. Spinoza called this moral behavior pietas. Maimonides 
identified it with the biblical virtues of “loving-kindness, righteousness, and judgment,” as 
well as with those of “mercy, graciousness, forbearance,” et al. In TTP7, Spinoza described 
religion as charitas, which corresponds to the Hebrew hesed (“loving-kindness”). 

It should be noted that when Maimonides identifies knowledge of God with knowledge of 
“all existing things” or scientific knowledge of the world, he refers to knowledge of the Active 
Intellect, that is the World Mind, the lowest of the “separate intellects,” which governs the 
physical world of the four elements (Maimonides 1963, 2: 4, 257-259; 12, 280). Knowledge 
by means of the Active Intellect is analogous in Spinoza to knowledge by means of idea Dei. 


2. The Natural Divine Law and the Summum Bonum 


The Maimonidean thrust of Spinoza’s concept of true religion is evident in his discussion 
of “the divine Law” (lex divina) or, more precisely, “the natural divine Law” (lex divina natu- 
ralis) and the summum bonum in TTP4. His discussion echoes the first four chapters (= 
Foundations of the Law 1—4) and the last chapter (= Repentance 10) of Maimonides’ Book 
of Knowledge, the first volume of his Mishneh Torah. 

At the outset, Spinoza affirms: “All our knowledge. . .depends on knowledge of God.” 
Maimonides affirms: “The foundation of foundations and the pillar of the sciences is to 
know that there is a First Existent” (Foundations of the Law 1:1). 

Spinoza states: “Nothing can be or be conceived without God.” Maimonides states: “If it 
were supposed He does not exist, nothing could exist” (Foundations of the Law 1:2). 

Spinoza writes: “The more we know natural things, the greater. . .is the knowledge of 
God we acquire.” In his discussion of the knowledge of God, Maimonides devotes four 
chapters to the knowledge of natural things (Foundations of the Law 1-4). 

Spinoza: God is the “cause of all things” (omnium rerum causa). Maimonides: God “brings 
into existence every existent thing” (mams? kol nimsa’) (Foundations of the Law 1:1). 

Spinoza: To know and love God may be called “commandments of God” (jussa Dei) since 
they derive from the idea of God. Maimonides counts to know and love God as divine “com- 
mandments” (misvot) (Foundations of the Law 1:6; 2:1), and the love God is said to follow 
“immediately” from the knowledge of Him (ibid., 2:2). 

That dicta derived from intellectual cognition may be considered “commandments” is 
affirmed by Maimonides already in his early Commentary on the Mishnah, Eight Chapters, 
Chapter 2. He remarks there that there is a dispute among the philosophers on this 
question, but he holds the affirmative view (Maimonides 1912, p. 48). In Mishneh Torah, 
Foundations of the Law 1-2, he codifies the laws concerning the knowledge and love of 
God in accordance with this view. It is this view that enables Spinoza to speak of the 
knowledge and love of God as “commandments.” 


43 


WARREN ZEV HARVEY 


Spinoza: “The only one who follows the divine Law is the one who devotes himself to 
loving God, not from fear of punishment, nor from love for another thing, such as plea- 
sures or reputation, etc., but only because he knows God.” Maimonides: 

“A person should not say, I perform the commandments of the Law. . .in order to receive 
blessings. . .or avoid curses’. . .[t is not proper to serve God. . .out of fear. . .[but only] out of 
love. . ..One should not say:] ‘I study the Law in order to become rich’ [or] ’in order to be 
called rabbi’. . .Whatever you do [in the service of God], do it out of love!” (Repentance 
10:1, 4). 

Spinoza: “The idea of God dictates. . . that the knowledge and love of God is the ultimate 
end toward which all our actions ought to be directed.” Maimonides: “Do not be like ser- 
vants who serve the Master in order to receive a reward, but because He is the Master one 
ought to serve Him [cf. Mishnah, Abot 1:3]. This means: Serve Him out of love!. . .One does 
not love God except with the knowledge with which one knows Him, and in proportion to 
the knowledge shall be the love” (Repentance 10:4, 6), 

Spinoza thus follows Maimonides in preaching that our summum bonum as human 
beings is the knowledge and love of God, which amounts to true religion. 


3. Two Maimonidean Examples of Divine Commandments 


Continuing his discussion in TTP4, Spinoza gives two biblical examples of divine com- 
mandments, that is, commandments that concern “eternal necessary truths” or belong to 
the natural divine Law. The first is God’s commandment to Adam not to eat of the Tree of 
Knowledge of Good and Evil (Genesis 2:16—17). The second is God’s commandments to the 
Israelites on Mt. Sinai to know Him and to worship only Him (Exodus 20:2-3). Both exam- 
ples are distinctively — indeed, uniquely! — Maimonidean. According to Maimonides, the 
commandment given to Adam and the first two commandments revealed at Mt. Sinai 
concerned intelligibilia (Arabic: ma‘qulat; Hebrew: muskalot), not conventions or generally 
accepted opinions (Arabic: mashshirat; Hebrew: mefursamot). In other words, they are 
known by the unaided human intellect just as the propositions of mathematics or physics 
(Maimonides 1963, 1:2, 24-25; 2:33, 364). It is striking that in the entire Guide the com- 
mandment to Adam and the first two commandments revealed at Mt. Sinai are the only 
two examples cited of commandments that concern intelligibilia, and these two examples 
are also the only two examples given by Spinoza of biblical texts illustrating the natural 
divine Law. 

Spinoza states that Adam and the Israelites did not know these commandments 
concerned eternal necessary truths. Maimonides’ opinion on this question is open to 
interpretation. 


4. King Solomon on Wisdom or Scientia 


In one of his finest homiletical discourses, found subsequently in TTP4, Spinoza rehearses 
his views on true religion, wisdom, and morality. The discourse concerns the teachings of 
King Solomon, the paradigmatic sapiens, as recorded in Proverbs 2:3—5, 9-10; 3:13-17; 
13:14; and 16:22. According to Spinoza’s resourceful exegesis, wisdom or scientia is the 
source of eternal life, and guides one to the fear and love of God, which is “true religion” 


44 


SPINOZA AND MAIMONIDES ON TRUE RELIGION 


(religio vera); and it also teaches “true ethics and politics,” which is “justice, judgment, and 
equity” (sedeq, mishpat, mesharim), that is, true piety. Spinoza explains that this wisdom or 
scientia proceeds from the “idea of God” (Dei idea), and the true ethics and politics (i.e. true 
piety) are “deduced” (deduci) from this wisdom or scientia. It is evident that by “scientia” 
Spinoza refers to scientia intuitiva. 

Spinoza enunciates here his Maimonidean views on knowledge of God (= wisdom or 
scientia), love of God, and piety. The reference to “justice, judgment, and equity” recalls 
Maimonides reference to “loving-kindness, righteousness, and judgment” in his exegesis 
of Jeremiah 9:22-23. 

Maimonides in several places cites King Solomon as an example of a philosopher (e.g. 
Maimonides 1963, 3:54, 633-634), but does not explicitly call him one. Spinoza does 
explicitly call him “the Philosopher” (TTP6). 


5. Why Does a Book on Ethics Begin with Deus? 


It is a tautology that Spinoza’s Ethics is a book on ethics. It is about “the mind’s power over 
the affects,” human freedom, and the moral life in accordance with wisdom (E5p42s; cf 
TP2.1). Why does a book on ethics begin with Deus? 

The structure of the Ethics reflects Spinoza’s definition of true religion: “whatever we 
desire and do of which we are the cause insofar as we have the idea of God, or insofar as we know 
God.” The foundation of true virtue is the knowledge of God. Thus, (1) Part I of the Ethics 
must deal with the knowledge of God (= physics and metaphysics). (2) The following four 
parts deal with ethics, (3) concluding with the apex of true religion: amor Dei intellectualis. 

In his discussion of the natural divine Law in TTP4, Spinoza refers to the “principle of 
living” required by the knowledge of God, and calls it “universal ethics” (ethica universalis). 
Universal ethics, based on the knowledge of God, is the subject-matter of the Ethics. In a 
1665 letter to Van Blijenbergh, Spinoza refers to the subject-matter of his yet unpublished 
Ethics, and describes it as ethics “based on physics and metaphysics” (Ep27, cf. Ep23), that 
is, on the knowledge of God. 

This same order of (1) God, (2) ethics, (3) intellectual love of God is found already in 
Maimonides’ Book of Knowledge. The Book of Knowledge opens with the knowledge of God 
based on physics and metaphysics (Foundations of the Law 1-4), continues with ethics 
(Moral Traits or De‘ot), and concludes with the intellectual love of God (Repentance 10). 
Maimonides’ main ethical commandment is Deuteronomy 28:9, “Thou shalt walk in His 
ways” (Moral Traits 1:6). However, one cannot walk in the ways of God if one does not first 
know Him. Similarly, one cannot love God if one does not first know Him (Repentance 
10:6). For Maimonides, as for Spinoza after him, ethics, like religion, begins with the 
knowledge of God (= physics and metaphysics) and is deduced from it. 

Both Maimonides and Spinoza teach a religion and an ethics based on reason, that is, 
on physics and metaphysics, not on imagination or generally accepted opinions. The rad- 
ical nature of their common doctrine may be seen from the fact that they both state explic- 
itly that a purely rational human being (like Adam before his sin) could not even conceive 
of the subjective notions of “good” and “bad,” which form the contents of popular religion 
and conventional ethics (Maimonides, 1:2, 25; Spinoza, E4p68s). In Maimonides’ lan- 
guage, true religion is based on the intelligibilia and popular religion on generally accepted 
opinions. In Spinoza’s language, true religion is based on knowledge of the third kind and 
popular religion on that of the first kind. 


45 


WARREN ZEV HARVEY 


6. Conclusion 


True religion, the religion of reason, or philosophic religion, begins, according to 
Maimonides and Spinoza, with the knowledge of Deus sive Natura; and from this knowledge 
follow necessarily pious ethical conduct and, ultimately, amor Dei intellectualis, which is 
our greatest joy. This true religion differs from popular religion as intellect differs from 
imagination. 


References 


Fraenkel, C. (2012). Philosophical Religions from Plato to Spinoza. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 

Harvey, W.Z. (1981). A portrait of Spinoza as a Maimonidean. Journal of the History of Philosophy 19: 
151-172. 

Harvey, W.Z. (2014). Ishq, hesheq, and amor Dei intellectualis. In: Spinoza and Medieval Jewish Philosophy 
(ed. S. Nadler), 96-107. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Hyman, A. (1963). Spinoza’s dogmas of universal faith in the light of their medieval Jewish 
background. In: Biblical and Other Studies (ed. A. Altmann). Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press. 

Maimonides, M. (1912). The Eight Chapters of Maimonides on Ethics (ed. J.I. Gorfinkle). New York: 

Columbia University Press. 

Maimonides, M. (1949-2020). The Code of Maimonides (Mishneh Torah), 14 vols. (trans. J.J. 

Rabinowitz, A.M. Hershman, I. Klein, et al.). New Haven, CT: Yale University Press. 

Maimonides, M. (1963). The Guide of the Perplexed (trans. S. Pines). Chicago: University of Chicago 

Press. 

Melamed, Y.Y. (2013). Spinoza’s Metaphysics. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Nadler, S. (2011). A Book Forged in Hell. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 

Roth, L. (1924). Spinoza, Descartes, and Maimonides. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Wolfson, H.A. (1934). The Philosophy of Spinoza, 2 vols. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 


46 


5 


Spinoza and Scholastic Philosophy 
EMANUELE COSTA 


Spinoza’s writing style has been judged, by various commentators, alternatively as exces- 
sively dry or lavishly rich, depending on the precise text that these scholars had in mind 
when making such — perhaps wholly unnecessary — judgments. On one point, however, I 
think that every observer can agree. Spinoza is characteristically parsimonious when it 
comes to quotes and references, often leaving the reader to wonder which thinker, tradi- 
tion, or opinion he is responding (or contributing) to; and, sometimes, whether or not he 
has a specific target in mind at all. 

This is one of the main reasons that make it nearly impossible to establish the exact 
measure of his interaction with the internally differentiated entity that we identify with 
the name “Scholastic philosophy.” Such difficulty has discouraged scholars of all ages, 
with some notable and precious exceptions, such as the recent French volume curated by 
Manzini (2011), and the essay collection edited by Renz and Schnepf (2008). The history 
of this scholarly enterprise, however, had found its first masterpiece in the work of 
Freudenthal. His Spinoza und die Scholastik (1887) remains — in many ways — the 
fundamental pillar for every successive account of the relationship between Spinoza and 
Scholasticism. In this monumental work, Freudenthal pinpoints the Cogitata Metaphysica 
as the primary site of interaction between Spinoza and his Scholastic predecessors. In this 
chapter, I will largely follow this lead, while acknowledging the fundamental difficulty of 
basing any comprehensive reading of Spinoza’s thought on this juvenile work. A deeper 
analysis of the compatibility of the CM with Spinoza’s mature works stretches beyond the 
scope of this chapter. However, several important studies (Vanni Rovighi 1960; Di 
Vona 1960, 1969, 1977; Scribano 1990) have already shown how Spinoza, in the CM, 
channels (at least some part of) his own theories through the canonical Scholastic debates. 
This is particularly interesting, as the CM is tied to Spinoza’s rendering of Descartes’ 
Principles of Philosophy, which many interpreters read as rejecting (in a certain measure) 
fundamental Scholastic premises. 

In the first section of this chapter, I offer an overview of a selected list of Scholastic 
debates intersecting the CM. I highlight how Spinoza consciously intervenes in them, 
showing a certain awareness of the intricacies of Scholastic discourse. We can presume 
that he had acquired such familiarity through the courses that he supposedly attended in 


A Companion to Spinoza, First Edition. Edited by Yitzhak Y. Melamed. 
© 2021 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2021 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd. 


47 


EMANUELE COSTA 


Leiden, where Franco Burgersdijk (1590-1635) and Adriaan Heereboord (1614-1659), 
two of the most significant profiles in Dutch late Scholasticism, were teaching (see 
Chapter 7). In this first section, I emphasize Spinoza’s interest in three specific problems: 
the issue of the division of being into “real being” and “being of reason”; the eternity of 
God and its distinction from duration; and, finally, God’s omnipresence. The description of 
each of these issues will be limited to a quick sketch, due to the restricted scope of this 
chapter. However, my aim is to show how Spinoza (at least in the CM) does not completely 
stray away from the path of the Scholastics. Furthermore, I shall focus in particular on 
how Spinoza can be interpreted as responding to the canonical thought of Francisco 
Suarez, since the Leiden Scholastics interacted especially with the Escuela de Salamanca (cf. 
van Ruler 1993; Hutton 2015, 79). Of course, the list of issues here presented had to be 
restricted. Many other themes might have been of interest for the reader, including 
Spinoza’s take on the proofs for God’s existence (both cosmological and ontological), and 
the being of essences. 

However, the latter theme (quite Avicennian at its core) partially intersects the second 
section, in which I focus on one specific problem, very close to Spinoza’s heart: the issue of 
the distinction between God’s intellect and God’s will, which is intimately tied to the 
question of the intentionality of God’s creation. Spinoza’s answer to this problem, as I shall 
prove, is already fully formed in the CM and remains substantially unchanged in the Ethics, 
thus emphasizing the continuity between this early work and Spinoza’s more mature 
system. 


1. The CMas an Intervention in Scholastic Debates 


Spinoza opens the CM (I.1) with a discussion of the term “being,” claiming that “being is 
badly divided into real being and being of reason” (I/235/3). Such accusation to the 
Scholastic “common Logic and Philosophy’ is based on Spinoza’s own definition of ‘being,’ 
which a few lines earlier he had characterized as “whatever, when it is clearly and dis- 
tinctly perceived, we find to exist necessarily, or at least to be able to exist” (I/233/20). As 
Scribano points out (1990, p. XXVII) this definition shows evident signs of Descartes’ 
influence on the early Spinoza (the emphasis on clear and distinct perception being a 
fundamental marker here). Therefore, Spinoza is setting out to discuss the Scholastic 
notion of being, but he is starting such discussion from a point of view that is already idi- 
osyncratically opposed to Scholastic discourse. 

As a paradigmatic example, we can contrast it with the notion of being described by 
Thomas Aquinas. The latter follows Aristotle in distinguishing one meaning of term being — 
“taken one way,” which “is divided in ten categories” (cf. Aristotle, Metaphysics V 7, 1017a22- 
35) — from the meaning that he equates to “the truth of propositions. The difference between 
the two is that in the second sense anything can be called a being if an affirmative proposition 
can be formed about it, even though it is nothing positive in reality” (Aquinas 1968, 
pp. 29-30). Now, it is plain to see that from Spinoza’s point of view, Aquinas’ definition of 
being leads the Scholastics astray. It is because of that initial error, of that equivocity inserted 
in the very notion of being, that their notion of being ends up including all sorts of things, 
such as “Chimaeras, Fictitious Beings, and Beings of Reason” (I/23 3/24). The latter category 
captures “nothing but a mode of thinking, which helps us to more easily retain, explain, and 
imagine the things we have understood” (I/233/31). This austere taxonomy leads Spinoza to 
famously exclude universals and relations from “real being.” The latter pertains only to 


48 


SPINOZA AND SCHOLASTIC PHILOSOPHY 


substance(s) — the plural may not be preposterous, yet, at this stage of his philosophical evolu- 
tion — and modes (despite the reductionist attempts of most Idealist readers of Spinoza). 

Yet, Aquinas’ definition of being was not shared by all of the Scholastics, as noted by Di 
Vona (1969, p. 78). Suarez, for example, excluded beings of reason from the proper domain 
of metaphysics (Scribano 1990, p. XXX). Just like Spinoza, he exclusively attributed being 
to the ens reale. Real being, for Suarez, is that which possesses “a real essence, which is not 
feigned nor chimerical, but true, and fit for existing in reality” (my translation, adapted 
from Suarez 1856, vol. XV, Disputationes Metaphysicae, disp. II, sect. IV.5). The debate 
regarding this definition of being, involving among others Thomists, Scotists, and fol- 
lowers of Suarez, was likely known to Spinoza, as it pervaded Scholastic Dutch circles at 
the turn of the seventeenth century (Coppens 2004; Muller 2012). Moreover, the defini- 
tion used by Suarez — contra Aquinas — would not be entirely rejected by Spinoza, even 
though it obviously lacks the criterion of “clear and distinct perception” that Spinoza 
inherits from Descartes. There is a noticeable resonance between Suarez’s “apta ad realiter 
existendum” and Spinoza’s “ad minimum posse existere,” which leads us to conclude that 
Spinoza, on the matter of real being, was probably much closer to Suarez and to other 
Scholastics than he would have cared to admit. 

Another key issue that Spinoza discusses in the first part of the Cogitata Metaphysica is 
the notion of eternity, and how it is distinguished from duration. This distinction arises, 
according to Spinoza, from the distinction between “being whose essence involves existence 
and being whose essence involves only possible existence” (CM 1.4 | I/244/14), i.e. the dis- 
tinction between the being of God and the being of everything else. This definition of eter- 
nity, even at these early stages, is certainly Spinozist at its core. In particular, its modal 
characterization and its connection with the concept of necessary existence — juxtaposed 
with the notion of duration as contingent, or “only possible” — remains unchanged in 
Spinoza’s mature works. In the Ethics, for example, Spinoza defines eternity as follows: “By 
eternity I understand existence itself, insofar as it is conceived to follow necessarily from 
the definition alone of the eternal thing” (E1d8). Combining this notion of eternity with 
the concept of God as substance, the Spinoza of the Ethics concludes (E1p7): “It pertains to 
the nature of a substance to exist.” The connection between eternity and necessity (i.e. the 
involvement of existence in the nature, or essence, of a given thing) is thus clearly 
established in Spinoza’s mature thought. 

What about the CM? Here, Spinoza associates eternity with the “infinite existence of 
God,” and duration with “the existence of created things insofar as they persevere in their 
actuality” (I/244/18—20). However, as noted by Schmaltz, the distinction between a God 
that is eternal and other things, situated “outside of him,” which are “created,” starkly 
contrasts with the panentheistic monism that Spinoza was already developing during 
those years (Schmaltz 2015, p. 209). Nonetheless, this radical difference between Spinoza’s 
one substance — God — and the infinity of modes inhering in God persists, as a difference 
between eternity and duration. As Spinoza explains in CMII.1, eternity is attributed to God 
“so as not to ascribe [him] any duration. . . since God’s existence is of his essence, we can 
attribute no duration to him. Whoever attributes duration to God distinguishes his 
existence from his essence” (I/250/13-17). Such description is pregnant with meaning for 
Spinoza’s post-Scholastic readers. It can be interpreted as aimed directly at Suarez’s con- 
ception of eternity as an “infinite” or “uncreated” duration (Coppens 2004; Bexley 2012). 

Suarez assigns to God a perpetual duration “because He always exists, while creatures 
do not exist always, but we say that they endure when they exist” (my translation, adapted 
from Suarez 1856, vol. XVI, Disputationes Metaphysicae, disp. L, sect. I.1). Prima facie, 


49 


EMANUELE COSTA 


Spinoza’s attack appears to strike at the very heart of Suarez’s conception of eternity: the 
latter explicitly relates eternity with perpetual existence. However, Suarez’s position seems 
(again) to stand much closer to Spinoza’s, when considered in its entirety. In fact, in section 
Ill of the Disputatio L, Suarez specifies that “uncreated duration is said to be eternity sim- 
pliciter, or essential. [. . .| Eternity by essence is attributed exclusively to God” (my transla- 
tion, adapted from Suarez 1856, vol. XVI, Disputationes Metaphysicae, disp. L, sect. II. 1 and 
IlI.3). The Suarezian text, then, establishes a strong connection between eternity and 
God’s essence (Esposito 2001), even though it does not push as far as Spinoza, and does not 
equate eternity with the involvement or entailment of existence in God’s essence. Yet, it 
does equate “intrinsic time” with substantial being, and ultimately with the existence and 
motion of created beings (see Disputationes Metaphysicae, disp. L, sect. [X.1—2). 

Similarly to Suarez (and even more, to Aquinas; see Coppens 2004), Heereboord also 
ascribes to God a kind of eternity which is centered on the immutability of the divine sub- 
stance (see the accusation Spinoza moved to this kind of approach, in CMII.1 | 1/251/17- 
19). However, he moves a step closer to Spinoza since he admits that God — properly 
speaking — cannot be measured, and therefore it is impossible for the human intellect to 
attribute to God any kind of duration. Through the notion of eternity, we are imperfectly 
trying to understand something unintelligible, the notion of “divine duration.” Instead, 
following Boethius, Heereboord defines eternity as “life, possessed wholly and perfectly. . .an 
eternal now” (Heereboord 1665, I.XXV.1.I-IV, 94). However, he admits that such defini- 
tion is “quantum fieri potest,” only an approximation, and cannot be considered to capture 
eternity “properly speaking.” To this admission, Spinoza would probably answer that the 
necessity of such approximation comes directly from the lack of consideration for God’s 
form of existence — that is, essential necessity. In fact, he says as much in CMII.1. Scholastic 
authors failed to grasp the proper meaning of eternity, thus attributing God an eternal 
duration, insofar as they “attempted to explain eternity without attending to God, as if 
eternity could be understood without contemplation of the divine essence — or as if it were 
something beyond the divine essence” (I/251/9-11; see also Prelorentzos 1996). The 
“proper order of philosophizing,” so important for Spinoza, had been disregarded. 

Let us now move to the study of a third, classical, Scholastic problem that Spinoza takes 
into account in the Cogitata Metaphysica, i.e. God’s omnipresence. This issue, already 
central for canonical Scholastic philosophers, gains paramount importance for Spinoza, 
who will later become — if he is not already in 1663 — a substantial monist who sees finite 
things as inhering in God as in their “place” (Melamed 2013, pp. 24-25; Schmaltz 2015). 

Spinoza affirms that God is to be called “absolutely infinite, insofar as we find that he really 
consists of infinite perfection. But he can also be called immense, or interminable, insofar as 
we consider the fact that there is no being by which God’s perfection can be limited” (CM II.3 
| 1/253/29-30). In this definition, he stresses that God's infinity is something “most positive,” 
ie. should not be understood — in the Ancient Greek fashion — as the lack of a limitation, and 
therefore of some conclusive perfection. “Nevertheless,” Spinoza continues, “usually when 
authors deal with God’s immensity, they seem to ascribe quantity to him” (I/254/9-10). As 
noted by Curley (1985, fn.5) the target of this polemical description is Burgersdijk. “If God, 
they say, is pure act, as indeed he is, he must be everywhere and infinite. For if he were not 
everywhere, either he would not be able to be wherever he wishes to be, or he would neces- 
sarily — note this — have to move” (I/254/16-19). Not only this is a verbatim quote of 
Burgersdijk’s Institutiones Metaphysicae (1653, p. 267), as noted by both Freudenthal and 
Coppens, but it pinpoints exactly Spinoza’s argument against the Scholastic conception 
of immensity — or omnipresence. The latter actually presupposes an understanding of 


50 


SPINOZA AND SCHOLASTIC PHILOSOPHY 


immensity that is derived from “the properties of extension,” as Spinoza says — a reasoning 
similar to the one employed in the case of eternity. Just like eternity is not infinite duration, for 
Spinoza, immensity cannot be derived from infinite extension. 

Oddly enough, an indirect proof that Spinoza was already a panentheist might be 
derived from the demonstration he provides for God’s immensity: “we have already demon- 
strated this more than sufficiently when we showed that nothing can exist for even a 
moment that is not produced by God at each moment” (I/254/25-28). As Curley correctly 
mentions (1985, fn. 6), this is an implicit reproduction of a traditional Cartesian argument. 
The world needs God to be continuously sustained in existence. God is not just a “spectator 
at a play” (I/254/34), who would observe the unfolding of a creation which only needed 
his initial input. Spinoza, nonetheless, in his siding against Burgersdijk is aligning himself 
not just with Descartes, but with both Aquinas and Suarez. Aquinas affirms that God must 
always be present to allow each thing to persist in its existence (Summa Theologica I, Q. VIII, 
art. 1; see also Coppens 2004). This thesis is similarly defended by Suarez, who rests on 
scriptural sources to affirm that at any time — if creation is to be preserved — all things have 
to be “from God, through God, and in God,” therefore making it necessary for God to pos- 
sess ubiquity (see Disputationes Metaphysicae, disp. XXI, sect. I.5—6). 

Where did the Scholastics go wrong, then, according to Spinoza? He accuses them of 
having distinguished three different kinds of immensity in God: “immensity of essence, 
of power, and of presence” (see also Scribano 1990, p. XL). That is “foolish,” Spinoza 
says, “for they seem to distinguish between God’s essence and his power.” The target of 
this attack is Aquinas’ doctrine of the separation between God’s essence and power 
(Summa Theologica, I, Q. VII, art. 3). A thesis which, as Spinoza himself shows, is repeated 
by Heereboord, who described God as ubiquitously present in power, but not in essence 
(Heereboord 1665, I.XXVII.1.IH-IV, 101). This separation between God’s power and his 
essence, that Spinoza describes as “foolishness” here, is actually part of a bigger attack 
that he launches against the Scholastics. Any discrimination or distinction between 
God’s power, God’s essence, God’s existence, and God’s will is for Spinoza cause for error. 
Thus, to limit God’s omnipresence and immensity to only one of these features of God, 
excluding the others, cannot but lead to contradiction and confusion. In the next sec- 
tion, I analyze more accurately what a separation between God’s will and power would 
entail, according to Spinoza. 

In this section, however, I have already shown how Spinoza — in the Cogitata Metaphysica — 
consciously intervenes in the debates of late Dutch Scholasticism, openly quoting both 
Burgersdijk and Heereboord. Through them, however, he reaches Suarez and Aquinas. He 
treats the latter as polemical targets, but also as useful resources towards positioning himself 
with respect to the Cartesian system he was discussing in the DPP. In the subtleties of Scholastic 
discourse, Spinoza might have found fertile ground to covertly introduce his own philosophy as 
arival to Descartes’ system. 


2. The Inseparability of God’s Will and God’s Intellect 


One of Spinoza’s main piéces de résistance is the doctrine of the inseparability between the 
will (voluntas) and intellect (intellectus) of God. This is a theme that he returns to time and 
again, from the earliest works to the most mature drafts of the Ethics. In discussing this 
issue, Spinoza is perfectly aware to be in the position of interacting with a long-standing 
tradition of thinkers that stretches back at least as far as Maimonides and Aquinas. 


51 


EMANUELE COSTA 


In CM 11.8, Spinoza declares his thesis: i.e. that God’s essence, his intellect, and his will, 
are indistinguishable. He begins by announcing that we “do not know” how these three 
are distinguished with respect to the internal differentiation of God. He situates this issue 
“inter desiderata,” thus expressing deep unsatisfaction towards the classical Scholastic solu- 
tion, which — according to his own words — made use of the notion of divine “persons” to 
account for this distinction (I/264/10-14). 

However, Spinoza has a much stronger thesis regarding the “external” identity of God’s 
intellect, power (potentia), and will. By the term external, he indicates that he is referring to 
God’s action towards what, in a Scholastic context, may be called the creatural realm. The 
distinction between God’s intellect and will, according to Spinoza, derives from the erroneous 
notion of a distinction between the source of the essences and existences of finite things. 
“God decreed, not only that things would exist, but also that they would exist with such a 
nature. That is, that their essence and their existence had to depend on the will and power of 
God” (I/264/19-21). Here, Spinoza ties God’s intellect — which understands finite beings — to 
the essences of such things. In a parallel way, their existences are tied to God’s will (or power), 
on which they depend. For God’s intellect and will to be separated, essences would have to be 
outside of the reach of God’s power, effectively making him a Platonic “demiurge” who sees 
essences (as perfect) and creates things on the basis of such models. This is the accusation 
that Spinoza brings against the Scholastics. In a thesis that is certainly Cartesian in its origin, 
we can still trace the seed of what will become the so-called “principle of plenitude” of the 
Ethics: God creates — or expresses — all possible essences, effectively nullifying contingency. 

In Spinoza’s later works, this thesis evolves. He abandons the initial reticence that had 
made him distinguish between God’s “internal” and “external” perspective, and that perhaps 
derived from the connection between the CM and Descartes’ Principles (see Scribano 1990, p. 
XLII). In the Theological-Political Treatise, for example, the distinction between the necessity 
of essences and existences is completely abandoned. In Chapter IV, Spinoza describes the 
“properties of the triangle, insofar as they too are conceived as eternal truths” as depending 
“only on the necessity of the divine nature and intellect.” The nature of the triangle, a hypo- 
thetical essence laying beyond the reach of God’s power, is discarded in this context. “When 
we do that, then the same thing we called God’s intellect we call God’s will. . .we affirm one 
and the same thing when we say that from eternity God decreed and willed that the three 
angles of a triangle are equal to two right angles, or that God understood this” (III/63/2-27). 
Eternal and necessary truths depend on the intellect of God, then, just like the necessity of 
their application, or expression, necessarily depends on God’s power or will. 

Aquinas, on his part, had differentiated the meaning of the term “essence”: in one 
sense, essence is “that which makes a thing to be what it is.” In another sense, “anything is 
called a nature [or essence] which the intellect can grasp in any way; for a thing is intelli- 
gible only through its definition and essence” (Aquinas 1968, p. 31). However, in both 
these senses God must understand, and will into existence, finite beings: in primis, because 
God understands himself and his power, and a thing’s power — according to Thomas — 
cannot be understood unless “the things to which that power extends are known.” Second, 
it is because God’s very being is his act of understanding. If, says Aquinas, all beings “pre- 
exist in God as in a first cause, then they must exist in His very act of understanding, and 
all of them must exist in Him according to an intelligible mode” (Summa Theologica I, Q. 
XIV, art. 5, resp. — translated by A. Freddoso; see also Knasas 2002). As we can see, Aquinas 
equates a thing’s essence and its existence — with respect to God — and similarly equates 
God’s being with his understanding. This position, one might argue, is not as far from 
Spinoza’s as one could imagine. 


52 


SPINOZA AND SCHOLASTIC PHILOSOPHY 


However, in the Quaestio XIX of the Summa, dedicated to God’s will, Aquinas distinguishes 
things that God wills necessarily — such as, his own goodness, which belongs to his essence 
—and things that he wills conditionally. The latter are things that he only wills insofar as they 
are ordered to him as their final cause: and yet, as Aquinas says, once they have been willed 
into existence, God is not able to not will them, since his will cannot change. This applies even 
in the case of things that he has willed into existence from eternity — for Thomas, the condi- 
tionality of God’s will is not forced into necessity by a thing’s essence. Such conditional form 
of being stems “from a defect that belongs by its nature to the thing willed — more specifically, 
because the thing is such that God’s perfect goodness can exist without it. Indeed, this defect 
is endemic to every created good” (Summa Theologica I, Q. XIX, art. 3, obj. 4, resp. — translated 
by A. Freddoso). For Aquinas, there still remains a residual distinction between God’s intel- 
lect and his will, even though it entirely depends on the nature of the thing willed, which is 
thus beyond God’s power — from a Spinozian point of view. 

Now, Spinoza’s attack clearly strikes at the very core of Aquinas’ system, putting under 
stress the notion of a real distinction between essence and existence. There is, however, at 
least one more option from the Scholastic tradition that stands untouched by Spinoza’s 
attack. Suarez, in fact, posits a mere distinction of reason between the essence and existence 
of created things (Suarez 1983, p. 51). The argument he provides against the real distinc- 
tion of essence and existence is actually very pertinent to the debate at hand. If an essence 
was something really distinct from the existence which God creates, then God’s will would 
have to be — at least in part — necessitated in creating beings modeled on such essences 
(Suarez 1983, p. 60). As a matter of fact, Suarez follows the same path as Spinoza, 
acknowledging that the necessity or contingency of essence must stand or fall together 
with the existence of created things, and that — were such essences necessary — they would 
necessitate God’s will, as his intellect must be supposed to know all eternal truths. However, 
Suarez chooses the opposite horn of that dilemma, attributing to God’s will and power the 
ability to create the world as he understands it, without being necessitated by “eternal 
truths,” which only have reality insofar as their objects exist. Otherwise, they only can be 
said to exist potentially (Suarez 1983, p. 62). The Avicennian doctrine — according to 
which God’s infinite essence necessarily caused the world — was therefore abandoned in 
the late Scholastic period (Douglas 2015, 74) and outright condemned by Burgersdijk 
(1653, 1.10.6) (see also Chapter 3). 

It is against this last position that Spinoza sets forth his argumentations in the Ethics. 
The first two corollaries to E1p16 establish that “God is the efficient cause of all things 
which can fall under an infinite intellect” (Elp16c1) and that “God is a cause through 
itself and not an accidental cause” (E1p16c2). To act through oneself, for Spinoza, means 
to act from the exclusive necessity of one’s nature. Thus, he appropriately concludes “that 
God alone is a free cause. For God alone exists only from the necessity of his nature, and 
acts from the necessity of his nature” (El p17c2). In this sense, according to Spinoza, “nei- 
ther intellect nor will pertain to God’s nature” (E1p17s | II/62/3). By this, Spinoza does 
not mean to deny God any intellect or will. Instead, he specifically attacks those who “still 
do not believe that he can bring it about that all the things he actually understands exist” 
(II/62/9) or, in other words, who separate the essences of things, which God understands, 
from their existences. 

God’s causal power is thus established not just with respect to the existence of finite 
beings, but also with respect to their essences. Spinoza attacks the analogic discourse 
(implicitly directing this attack against Descartes as much as against the Scholastics) that 
seeks to understand God’s intellect and will start from the notions of intellect and will 


53 


EMANUELE COSTA 


we find in finite beings, and specifically human beings. Our intellect, Spinoza says, is 
posterior to the thing understood. But God, as Spinoza shows in Elp16c1, is “prior in 
causality to all things. On the contrary, the truth and formal essence of things is what it is 
because it exists objectively in that way in God’s intellect” (II/63/7—9). Thus, we can only 
attribute intellect to God if we understand such intellect in a radically different way, as 
identical to God’s will. 

It is in this sense that Spinoza concludes, in E1p25, that “God is the efficient cause, not 
only of the existence of things, but also of their essence.” Appropriately, he signals in the 
scholium to this proposition the strong connection with E1p16, “from the given divine 
nature both the essence of things and their existence must necessarily be inferred” (E1p25s 
| II/68/6-8). God’s intellect is prior to the essences of things, just like God’s will is prior to 
their existence. The necessity of the inference does not break God’s freedom because 
Spinoza’s concept of freedom involves only priority and not contingence, or indifference 
(see Elp16s | 1/62/14). The Scholastic dilemma is solved, like Alexander’s Gordian knot, 
with a forceful strike. For Spinoza, will and intellect are identical, and they are both neces- 
sitated: not by the essences of finite beings, but by the very essence of God. 


Acknowledgments 


I would like to thank G. Luise for his very helpful comments on an earlier version of this 
chapter, and for our decade-long friendship. 


References 


Aquinas, T. (1968). On Being and Essence (ed. and trans. E. Maurer). Toronto: Pontifical Institute of 
Mediaeval Studies. 

Bexley, E. (2012). “Quasi-absolute time in Francisco Suarez’s Metaphysical Disputations.” Intellectual 
History Review 22: 5-22. 

Burgersdijk, F. (1653). Institutionum metaphysicarum libri duo, London: Crook and Baker. 

Coppens, G. (2004). Spinoza et la conception scolastique de Dieu dans le contexte hollandais. In: Les 
Pensées Métaphysiques de Spinoza (ed. C. Jacquet). Paris: Editions de la Sorbonne. 

Curley, E. (ed. and trans.) (1985). The Collected Works of Spinoza, vol. I. Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press. 

Di Vona, P. (1960). Studi sull’ontologia di Spinoza I. Florence: La Nuova Italia. 

Di Vona, P. (1969). Studi sull’ontologia di Spinoza IT. Florence: La Nuova Italia. 

Di Vona, P. (1977). Spinoza e i trascendentali, Naples: Morano. 

Douglas, A. (2015). Spinoza and Dutch Cartesianism: Philosophy and Theology. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press. 

Esposito, C. (2001). The concept of time in the metaphysics of Suarez. In: The Medieval Concept of 
Time: Studies on the Scholastic Debate and its Reception in Early Modern Philosophy (ed. P. Porro). 
Leiden: Brill. 

Freudenthal, J. (1887). Spinoza und die Scholastik. Leipzig: Fues Verlag. 

Heereboord, A. (1665). Meletemata philosophica, in quibus plereeque res Metaphysice ventilantur, Ethica 
explicatur, Physica exponitur, summa rerum Logicarum per Disputationes traditur. Amsterdam: 
Joannem Ravesteinium. 

Hutton, S. (2015). British Philosophy in the Seventeenth Century. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Knasas, J. (2002). Contra Spinoza: Aquinas on God’s free will. American Catholic Philosophical 
Quarterly 76: 417-429. 


54 


SPINOZA AND SCHOLASTIC PHILOSOPHY 


Manzini, F. (ed.) (2011). Spinoza et ses scholastiques. Paris: PUPS. 

Melamed Y. (2013). Spinoza’s Metaphysics: Substance and Thought. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Muller, R. (2012). Not Scotist: understandings of being, univocity, and analogy in early modern 
Reformed thought. Reformation and Renaissance Review 14: 127-150. 

Prelorentzos, Y. (1996). Temps, durée et éternité dans les “Principes de la philosophie de Descartes” de 
Spinoza. Paris: PUPS. 

Renz, U. and Schnepf, R. (eds.) (2008). Studia Spinozana 16. An International and Interdisciplinary 
Series / Spinoza and Late Scholasticism, Wurzburg: Konigshausen & Neumann. 

Schmaltz, T. (2015). Spinoza on Eternity and Duration: The 1663 Connection. In: The Young Spinoza: A 
Metaphysician in the Making (ed. Y. Melamed). Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Scribano, E. (1990). Introduzione. In B. Spinoza, Principi della Filosofia di Cartesio e Pensieri Metafisici, 
V-LI. Rome-Bari: Laterza. 


55 


6 


Spinoza and Descartes 


DENIS KAMBOUCHNER 


When considering the philosophical relationship between Spinoza and Descartes, there 
are three or four initial points. Spinoza discovered and studied Descartes’s philosophy 
(which was called at this time “the new philosophy”) at the school of Van den Enden and 
then at the University of Leiden. Around 1661, most of his friends were Cartesians, and he 
was known himself as “someone who excelled in Cartesian philosophy” (Nadler, 1999, ch. 
7). In 1663, on the basis of Descartes’s Principia Philosophie and of some other texts, 
Spinoza undertook to set out in his own way the principles of Descartes’s philosophy 
(metaphysics and physics), from which came the only book published under his name dur- 
ing his lifetime. But he had already sketched (in the Treatise on the Emendation of the Intellect) 
avery different concept of method and knowledge, and (in the Short Treatise) a metaphysics 
which clearly breaks with Descartes’s on a whole series of capital points: the definition of 
substance and modes; the nature and power of God; the definition of the human mind and 
the relationship between body and mind; and the reality of human free will. On all these 
points, Spinoza is seen as providing metaphysical views of unparalleled audacity, which 
remain highly exciting and still offer a source of inspiration and a source of theoretical 
models in a wide variety of fields, including neurobiology. One cannot say the same about 
Descartes, who, on the contrary, is often seen as having continued or even promoted some 
philosophical illusions which Spinoza came to deconstruct. 

In such an account, the complexity and depth of the links between the two authors 
remains underestimated. And yet, evidence of this complexity is given by Spinoza’s Letters. 
In Letter 2 to Oldenburg (September 1661), Spinoza lists the errors to be found in the phi- 
losophy of Descartes and of Bacon: “The first and greatest error is that they have wandered 
so far from knowledge of the first cause and origin of all things. Second, they did not know 
the true nature of the human Mind. Third, they never grasped the true cause of error” 
(IV/8—9). Much later, he will write to Tschirnhaus (Ep. 81, May 1676 |IV/332) that “from 
extension, as Descartes conceives it (i.e., as a mass at rest), it is not only difficult but com- 
pletely impossible to demonstrate the existence of bodies.” He adds: “For this reason, I did 
not hesitate, previously, to affirm that Descartes’s principles of natural things are useless, 
not to say absurd.” And in Letter 83 July 1676 | IV/334): “Descartes defines matter badly 
by Extension.” Meanwhile, he had criticized Descartes’s errors (Cartesii precipitantia), 


A Companion to Spinoza, First Edition. Edited by Yitzhak Y. Melamed. 
© 2021 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2021 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd. 


56 


SPINOZA AND DESCARTES 


either concerning the rings of Saturn (Ep. 26 to Oldenburg, May 1665), or about the 
Dioptrics (Ep. 39 to Jelles, March 1667). Nevertheless, in Letters 6 and 13 to Oldenburg, 
Spinoza had defended Descartes’s demonstrations against Robert Boyle’s claims; in Letter 
32 to the same Oldenburg, he denies having indicated that Descartes’s rules of motion — 
and not only the sixth — are “almost all false” (Ep. 32 | IV/174); in Letter 21 to Blyenbergh 
(Jan. 1665 |IV/129-130), he had declared himself in agreement with Descartes on some 
important aspects of the relationship in the human mind between will and understanding; 
and in Letter 40 to Jelles as well as in Letter 58 to Schuller, Descartes’s account of free will 
is criticized in a rather moderate way. 

The least we can say is that between the two thinkers, there is no complete and universal 
opposition. In DPP as well as in the other works, Spinoza’s critical distance from Descartes 
varies from one theoretical Jocus to another. Even in the Ethics, there is not the same view 
of Descartes in the more ethical parts and in the more metaphysical ones. Similarly, just as 
the TIE, which contains no direct allusion to Descartes, has anti-Cartesian aspects, so the 
TTP, a treatise from which Descartes is also absent, exhibits at certain points a kind of 
Cartesian inspiration. 


1. Rewriting Descartes: The Principles of Philosophy 


The most Cartesian of Spinoza’s works is of course the one in which he undertakes to expose 
the principles of Descartes’s philosophy, initially for instructing a young and not too gifted 
student, Casearius, to whom he began by dictating the exposition of the second part. The 
real purpose of this unfinished work is not easy to define. According to Louis Meyer, to 
whom Spinoza had entrusted the task of setting out his intentions in a preface, this presen- 
tation aims to be rigorously faithful to Cartesian thought. This is doubly questionable, 
because the author does not hesitate to fill a certain number of gaps in Descartes’s own text 
(“our Author has only set out the opinions of Descartes and their demonstrations, insofar as 
these are found in his writings, or are such as ought to be deduced validly from the founda- 
tions he laid,”I/131/25-27), and also because the scholia do not fail — especially in the first 
part — to point out some notable divergences. In fact, following Spinoza’s requests (Ep. 13 to 
Oldenburg, IV/63), Meyer begins by indicating (I/131—133) that the author’s opinion is 
quite different from that of Descartes on some crucial points such as free will, the definition 
of human mind, and the capacity of human understanding. 

The most general of Spinoza’s intentions is to expound here in accordance with “the 
prolix Geometric order” (E4p18s) what Descartes had left in a more informal one. This is 
why the exposition of the first part is particularly based on the Appendix more geometrico 
of the Replies to the Second Set of Objections (Arguments proving the existence of God and the 
distinction between the soul and the body, arranged in geometrical fashion). Although Meyer's 
preface (I/129/5-13) duly quotes Descartes’s introduction for this Appendix (AT VII 155— 
159), neither Meyer nor Spinoza take in account the reasons why, having written this 
Appendix at the request of Mersenne, Descartes himself found it rather unconvincing. In 
Descartes’s opinion, the way of demonstrating by definitions, axioms, demands, etc., is not 
really suitable for metaphysical matters, with regard to which the main thing consists in 
gaining a true intelligence of some “first notions” that are commonly obscured by preju- 
dices: consequently, there is little sense to propose their definition at the start. Even in 
geometry, only an exposition retracing the true and somehow informal order of invention 
can give complete satisfaction to “the minds of those who desire to learn” (AT VII 156, 15). 


57 


DENIS KAMBOUCHNER 


Unlike this kind of “Analysis,” the “synthetic” apparatus will always remain too heavy and 
in fact artificial. This is to say that the main part of metaphysical reasoning coincides with 
a process that Descartes calls meditation, along which the reader is invited to “converse 
with his own thoughts” (AT VI, 11), and to accustom his mind to the truths he has discov- 
ered. While recognizing that all the matter of the Meditationes de prima philosophia, notably 
the “reasons to doubt,” cannot be exposed in the geometric order, Spinoza systematically 
neglects the need of such an habituation to the “first truths” and “first notions” as such. 
He censures (see e.g. DPP1p7s) the Cartesian use of fictions, and in fact refuses to take seri- 
ously the hyperbolical doubt, especially insofar as it involves the inconceivable hypothesis 
of a deceiving God. In order to explain why, in summarizing the various steps of Descartes’s 
metaphysical program, the Prolegomenon (preamble) does not use the mos geometricus, 
Spinoza argues that the prolixity of the Geometric order would not allow that all these 
things could “be seen in a single act of contemplation [uno obtutu], as in a picture” 
(I/141/15-16). And yet, generally speaking, it is from the new rigor of the geometric order 
that a new clarity is expected. This clarity will of course not suffice to convert each mind to 
the “true philosophy” (which cannot precisely be that of Descartes), but it will bring some 
assistance to certain Cartesians who, while adhering to the new principles, have failed to 
grasp this real order (Preface, I/129-130). 

Spinoza therefore accomplishes for the principles of Cartesian philosophy what 
Descartes himself had failed to accomplish: the presentation of the whole according to an 
order both impeccable and fully explicit. This is how a demonstration is produced for the 
epistemic primacy of “Iam” (DPP1p1-4), and how the attributes of God, in the definition 
given here, are meticulously enumerated. But the writing of the first part — completed, 
astoundingly, at the editor’s request in two weeks — appears less careful (in the scholia) 
than that of the second, which was previously conceived with the beginning of the third. 
This second part offers an extraordinary reconstruction of the principles and rules of 
Cartesian mechanics (including the demonstration of the rules of motion), where the 
same divergences do not show up as they do in Spinoza’s presentation of Cartesian meta- 
physics. This is because, at least in 1663, Cartesian physics can be considered as more 
exact than metaphysics (and just as in Descartes, the Spinozan facies totius universi (Ep. 64, 
IV/278) will take the form of a machine with unlimited dimensions). In any case, this 
physics provides a basis for a more perfect philosophical exercise. But here again, Spinoza 
innovates at several points, such as the distinction between the force of determination and 
the force of motion (DPP2p27cs; see Gabbey, 1996: 161-165), by which it appears again 
that he has understood Descartes better than Descartes understood himself. As for the 
third part, reduced to a few pages setting out the premises of Cartesian cosmology, it seems 
to be rather casual to publish only this fragment, with the mention: Reliqua desiderantur. 
But Meyer did refer (I/131/6—13) to a more complete second edition. Moreover, even if 
Spinoza did not think like Pascal: “We must say in general: ‘this is made by figure and 
motion’, for this is true; but to say which ones, and to compose the machine, is ridiculous; 
for it is useless, uncertain, and painful” (Pensées, fr. 84 Lafuma; Pascal 1963, p. 510a), he 
could judge that he had pushed his own effort far enough. 

Beyond Spinoza’s commitment to Descartes’s principles of physics and to certain 
points of metaphysics, his non-Cartesianism is illustrated in the Appendix delivered with 
the DPP: the Cogitata Metaphysica, which in no way presents a lexicon of Cartesian meta- 
physics, but rather is a critical presentation of concepts and principles drawn from school 
literature, whether this is inspired by Descartes (for example in Heereboord) or not. It is 
also a short treatise on the attributes of God, more complete than what is included 


58 


SPINOZA AND DESCARTES 


(already with no Cartesian equivalent) in the first part of the DPP. The name of Descartes 
is mentioned here only three times (CM I 3 | I/240/5; I 5 |1/257/20; 11 12| 1/278/4), 
and if it happens that the proposed views coincide with those of Descartes (for instance 
on the reconciliation of the freedom of human will and of divine preordination, 1.3 | 
1/243-244), nothing appears less Cartesian, for example, than the distinction between 
the being of essence, the being of existence, the being of idea and the being of power (I 
2); or than this proposition: “If we were to conceive the whole order of nature, we should 
discover that many things whose nature we perceive clearly and distinctly, that is, whose 
essence is necessarily such, can not in any way exist” (I 3 | I/241/30-34); or the formula 
that identifies ideas with “narratives or mental histories of nature” (I 6, I/246/30-32). 
Even the final developments (II 12) of the freedom of the will go far beyond what 
Descartes had said. 


2. Going beyond Descartes: Method and Metaphysics 


Spinoza’s original distance from Cartesian conceptions, before becoming obvious in the 
metaphysical views of the Ethics (previously sketched in the Short Treatise), is already 
noticeable in the TIE. One cannot fail to compare this treatise on the method with the 
Discourse on the Method, especially the autobiographical style of the beginning of the trea- 
tise and the adoption of several rules of life (§17). But there is also a similarity with the 
Regule ad directionem ingenii (although Spinoza probably could not know this text, first 
published, in Dutch, in 1684, and in Latin in 1701), with respect to the project of defining 
the means available to the mind to reach the highest level of human knowledge. However, 
apart from certain points of contact, the differences are obvious. In the highly stylized pro- 
logue of the TIE, the author presents himself as exposed to a mortal danger (§7) which 
makes him seek his salvation in the union of his mind with an eternal object. But in 
Descartes, there was never any question of such a danger of loss of oneself (except, very 
briefly, in the first dream of November 10, 1619), nor, in fact, of a true quest for salvation: 
the only danger consists in remaining in uncertainty or in error, and if the search for truth 
guarantees the greatest satisfaction to the mind, one cannot say of those who neglect it 
that they lose themselves. This is why the Cartesian reform of understanding (for there is 
one, and Bacon had imposed this theme on a long line of philosophers) was never pre- 
sented as a regeneration. Besides, for Spinoza, the whole salvation of the mind and all its 
science will be given with the true or adequate idea of a supreme object (§35): “the most 
perfect method will be the one that shows how the mind is to be directed to the standard of 
the given idea of the most perfect Being” (§38), an idea which is itself the most perfect (cf. 
§49, 108; DPP1p4c| 1/154; E2p49s. . .); and “if someone had proceeded [. . .] in investi- 
gating nature [.. .] in the proper order, |. . .] everything would have flowed to him of its own 
accord” (§44); and this, especially since the soul acts “according to some laws, like a 
spiritual automaton” (§85). The TIE is therefore, for the most part, a treatise of the true 
idea (distinguished from fiction, and from the false and doubtful ones), of which Descartes’s 
work does not provide any equivalent. As curious as it may seem, Descartes has never 
directly associated the problematics of method with that of ideas; he rarely uses the expres- 
sion vera idea (cf. AT VII, 45, 364, 368), and reserves it for the ideas that are authentically 
innate and not forged by the mind. Besides, for him too, the purpose is to remain in a reg- 
imen of clear and distinct perception, for the conclusions as well as for the principles, but 
only in the framework of determined questions (a condition which applies to all sciences, 


59 


DENIS KAMBOUCHNER 


including metaphysics). Knowledge of nature is never considered in one piece, and even if 
Meditation III presents the true idea of God as “the clearest and most distinct of all” (AT VH, 
46, 28), it is not this idea, but rather the Ego cogito, ergo sum — which is not an idea — which 
provides the standard of true knowledge. The self-direction of the mind, with the optimal 
use of its resources, consists partly in planning, partly in controlling its own operations in 
any question likely to be resolved: it is not, and it will never be, an immersion in a unitary 
cognitive experience. 

Except for the doctrine of knowledge, the philosophy of Spinoza is very little exposed in 
the TIE. Nevertheless, the considerable differences which are classically noted between 
Spinoza and Descartes in metaphysical matters are all linked to these two features: the rela- 
tion (“union”) of the mind to a total object (“nature” in the TIE; God, according to the KV 
and the Ethics); and the existence of an order among thoughts, which is not subject to will. 
The God of Spinoza is, so to speak, infinitely infinite (in the infinity of his attributes); being 
an extended thing no less than a thinking thing, his presence in existing singular things is 
not just metaphysical. These things are not his creatures, but certain “modes” of the unique 
substance in which he consists. Consequently, between the human mind and this God, the 
distance found in Descartes is in some way abolished. When Spinoza presents the human 
mind as “a part of the infinite understanding of God” (E2p11c), and when he attributes to 
it “the adequate knowledge of the eternal and infinite essence of God” (E2p47), he certainly 
does not deny the ontological difference between the finite and the infinite, nor the absence 
of any proportion between them (Letter 54 to Boxel |IV/253/8-—9). Nevertheless, he never 
speaks of God as “incomprehensible”; and when he speaks about the mind as well as about 
human understanding, he carefully avoids — except precisely when he accounts for 
Descartes’s conceptions — the language of finiteness. In a certain sense, it is God himself 
who thinks through our mind (“not insofar as he is infinite, but insofar as he constitutes the 
nature of the human mind,” E2p11c), and insofar as we have a true idea of God, there is 
therefore a kind of evidence of his existence. The existence of God does not have to be labo- 
riously demonstrated from the existence of his idea in the mind: insofar as an explicit con- 
cept of God as “a substance consisting of an infinity of attributes...” is not required at start, 
this existence can be expressed directly in an a priori argument (KV I, I, 1-2 and 10). 

Equally foreign to Cartesian metaphysics is the Spinozistic conception of the nature of 
the mind. Spinoza acknowledges that the properties of the mind are quite different from 
the properties of the body, and of course revokes the idea, which was revived in Gassendi, 
that the human soul is like a subtle body spread in a coarse one. But, as we know, this 
dualism of properties in no way implies a dualism of substances. By presenting the human 
mind as the idea of the human body, and emphasizing that everything that happens to the 
body has its expression in the mind (to the point that this idea that is the mind is composed 
of the very large number of ideas of bodily parts: E2p15d), Spinoza makes the ideas of the 
mind and the “affections of the body” two sides of a single reality (E3p2s). Although this 
doctrine intends to provide — like a little later those of Malebranche and Leibniz—a solution 
to the difficulties linked to the Cartesian conception of the union of soul and body (which 
is strongly attacked in E5Pref.), no doubt Descartes himself would have considered it unin- 
telligible. The same can be said of the central proposition (E2p7), anticipated in the TIE, 
according to which “the order and connection of ideas is the same as the order and 
connection of things”; and of the mere fact that one can speak of God “insofar as he con- 
stitutes the nature of human mind,” or “is explained by the nature of the human mind” 
(E2plic), or “is considered to be affected by the ideas of a great many singular things” 


60 


SPINOZA AND DESCARTES 


(E2p19d) — not to mention the final propositions of the Ethics, which refers to “the mind’s 
intellectual love of God” as “a part of the infinite love by which God loves himself” (E5p36). 

In all of this, the opposition of styles is obvious as well as that of philosophical per- 
spectives. While Descartes’s clear and distinct ideas and “first notions” are what a pre- 
pared mind can fully appropriate, the Spinozistic definition of the way to “intuitive 
science,” that is, to the ultimate kind of knowledge, involves the highest degree of 
conceptual invention. As for Spinoza’s propositions, their necessity, highlighted as it is 
by the Geometric order, is far from being always based on a perfect transparency of 
content: many of them rather represent an effort of thought, and, so to speak, the initi- 
ation of a virtual intuition. In this respect, this declaration of Letter 32 (IV/170/3-7) is 
paradigmatic: “I already said [. . .] that Idon’t know [absolutely] how [all parts of Nature] 
really cohere an how each part agrees with its whole [. . .], To know that would require 
knowing the whole of Nature and all its parts. So I shall try to show the reason which 
compels me to affirm this.” 

However, if we go into the details of Spinoza’s philosophy, the contrasts will give way to 
amore complex relationship. It is Descartes who establishes as a principle that of anything 
whatsoever, one may ask for the cause or the reason why it exists (AT VII, 108, 164): 
Spinoza is committed to a thoroughgoing application of this principle. It is also from 
Descartes that he holds the license to apply to God a scheme of self-causality. The God of 
Descartes is the free creator of a whole nature, whose internal order and laws cannot 
therefore be said to “follow from the necessity of divine nature”; nevertheless, he is not 
much less impersonal than the God of Spinoza. He understands, wills and accomplishes 
everything by a single act, identical and perfectly simple (Princ. 1.23), without one opera- 
tion preceding the others, even conceptually, and without any kind of truth being 
independent from his will (ATI, 152-153 | CSMK 26): this is to say that his way of under- 
standing, willing, and acting differs toto ceelo, radically (E1p17s| I1/63/1), from what we 
experience in ourselves. For Spinoza, the coextension of God and nature and the very 
necessity of divine nature, as well as the definition of the human mind, do not allow for 
affirmation of any sheer incomprehensibility; but the fact remains that the two authors 
denounce the same error, which consists in imagining God’s plans and in reasoning from 
final causes. 

As for human free will, the illusion of illusions, Spinoza’s criticism was announced in 
Meyer’s preface to the DPP: the will is not distinct from the understanding, and “the faculty 
of affirming and denying is a mere fiction” (I/132/19-20). Nevertheless, in defending the 
will-understanding identity, the long final scholium of E2p49 abstains from any explicit 
reference to Descartes, perhaps because Descartes’s thought is more complex than it liter- 
ally appears in Meditation IV or in the teaching of some Cartesians. In fact, Descartes 
agrees that we want nothing that we do not perceive in a certain way: the extension of the 
will beyond perception is understood only for perceptions which are not clear and distinct 
(see AT VII, 377); and the human will is nowhere presented as free from all kind of 
necessity. At the same time, when it is affected by certain ideas, the human soul continu- 
ally experiences certain inclinations, of varying intensity, which make these ideas 
something very different from “mute pictures on a panel” (E2p49s| II/132/10). But it is 
true that, to Descartes’s eyes, it does not make sense to say that the will would be ever con- 
strained, or volition purely determined by anything else: even if its modalities are never 
explained, the will involves a faculty of self-determination whose daily experience is sup- 
posed to give evidence. 


61 


DENIS KAMBOUCHNER 


3. Transforming Descartes: The Subject of Ethics 


In metaphysics, the Spinoza-Descartes relationship is complex, but cannot be said to take 
the form of an implicit dialogue or a community of inspiration. It is not the same for the 
theory of affects, nor for the subsequent ethics or the related conception of society and 
institutions. In other words, the privileged interlocutor of Spinoza is the author of The 
Passions of the Soul (translated into Latin from 1650) and of the Letter to Voetius of 1643 
(immediately translated into Dutch and included in 1650 in the Elsevier edition of the 
Opera Philosophica). This is evidenced, for example, by the fact that Chapters 5 to 14 of the 
KV examine the passions in the very order in which Descartes has studied them; and 
chapter 19 deals with union of mind and body in a still very Cartesian way (see KV 2.19.9 
|1/92/24—31: “when I stretch out my arm, and thereby bring it about that the [animal] 
spirits, which previously were moving in a different direction, now however have this one 
[. . .], the cause of this is, and can only be, that the soul, being an Idea of the body, is so 
united with it, that it and this body, so constituted, together make a whole”). 

What remains of the interaction between soul and body in the KV (cf. Garber, 2015) has 
of course been withdrawn from the Ethics. According to the preface to Part 3, “the cele- 
brated Descartes” did not succeed in explaining the first causes of the affects, and was mis- 
taken as regards the control of the human mind over them. Mind and body are “one and 
the same thing, which is conceived now under the attribute of Thought, now under the 
attribute of Extension” (E3p2s | II/141/24—26). Given that this is so, the Cartesian attempt 
to show how the passions are excited in the soul by internal modifications of the body, and 
how the soul can strive to control them, loses much of its purpose. All the affects (at least 
all those which are passions) are explained by the effort of the individual to persevere in his 
being and to increase his power of acting, insofar as this effort meets various circum- 
stances. However, the Cartesian distinction between the mind and the body (which is not 
“our best part,” but “the least”: Passions, art. 138) seems to rule out the unity of this effort. 
In this respect, even if the Spinozistic definition of the conatus owes much to the two first 
laws of nature of the Principia Philosophie (II, art. 37-39), the whole account of the affects 
as following from a kind of vital motion seems to owe much more to Hobbes than to 
Descartes. Conversely, in Descartes’s eyes, the notion of “the Body’s power of acting” and 
its identification with “the Mind’s power of thinking” would have literally made no sense. 

The difference between the principles does not, however, exclude here a certain common- 
ality of thought. Even if the human brain in Spinoza (who does not provide on this topic any 
kind of detail) is not structured as it is in Descartes around the conarium, Spinoza cannot 
have failed to acknowledge the Cartesian connection between the regulation of the affects, 
the capacity for action and what Descartes calls the “disposition of the brain” (Passions, art. 
36, 39, 50). And if the Physiological Digression of Part 2 retains considerable connection 
with Descartes’s physics, concerning the conditions under which a very composed body (“an 
individual”) keeps its form and unity, it is in particular to a cerebral physiology, although 
never specified, that one must refer what Spinoza calls the ability “to do many things at once, 
or to be acted on in many ways at once” (E2p13s). Furthermore, the fact remains in Descartes 
that the two parts of the human compound, the rational soul and the body, tend as far as 
possible to unity. It is only under extreme circumstances (ordeal or experimentation) that the 
Cartesian soul withdraws “in its interior” (Passions, art. 147-148): the rest of the time, the 
exchanges between these two parts are continuous, and if the “natural use” of “simple and 
primitive” passions is “to incite the soul to consent and contribute to actions which can serve 


62 


SPINOZA AND DESCARTES 


to preserve the body or render it more perfect in some way” (Passions, art. 137), it is indeed a 
certain power of acting which needs to be conserved or increased. Moreover, the few state- 
ments that Descartes devotes to “the strength of the soul” are far from making this strength 
completely independent from both the disposition of the brain and the “temperament of the 
body” (Passions, art. 36; see Kambouchner, 2017). Except in some complicated cases, one 
should rather speak here of an integrated system. 

Besides the depreciation of wonder, which Descartes had recognized as “the first of all 
passions” (Passions, art. 53), and which is now reduced to a stop in the flow of ideas 
(E3DA4), another anti-Cartesian feature has been found in the Spinozistic demotion of 
love. But this is based on several misunderstandings (Kambouchner 2019): the definition 
of love criticized in the Ethics (E3DA 6ex) is not exactly that of Descartes; and to define love 
as “a joy with the accompanying idea of an external cause” explains the generation of love 
rather than characterizes the subsequent mental state (as Descartes did to a greater 
extent). A broad convergence remains between the two authors about the causes of love, 
of which Descartes, before Spinoza, has mentioned the accidental aspects (association of 
ideas, communication of affects). Of course, instead of emphasizing in the sequence of 
affects a geometric necessity, in accordance with the “laws and rules of nature” which “are 
everywhere and always the same,” E3Pref.), Descartes generally spoke of usual connec- 
tions, which do not give rise to any systematic account. But if, in principle, the Cartesian 
mind has to use its reason to control its passions, nevertheless, their actual control — and 
with it what is called virtue — depends not on pure reasoning (cf. KV II 21n.1), but on the 
power of certain passions which are associated (or, in Spinoza, identified) with certain 
ideas especially settled in the mind (cf. Passions, art. 47-49, 160-161). 

Notwithstanding Descartes’s emphasis on the use of free will, the gap between the two 
authors in matters of moral anthropology is therefore quite limited. According to both of 
them, the sad passions are to be avoided or reduced as much as possible in favor of joyful 
passions, with which the individual increases the capacity for reasoned action, at the same 
time as the society he forms with his fellows gets improved and strengthened. True 
knowledge is, in any case, the condition for an entire positivity of the affects: it eliminates 
some of them and installs some others. Should we hold that for Spinoza, this knowledge is 
that of God, while it was for Descartes a self-knowledge, highlighted in “true generosity” 
(Passions, art. 152-161)? The difference in emphasis does not entail that the two aspects 
can be dissociated. In Descartes, a “noble and strong soul” acknowledges the extent of 
divine power and the worth of what God has given us (AT IV, 291-293, 608-609 | CSMK 
265-266, 309-310); and in Spinoza, the true knowledge of God will prevent us from 
unduly comparing ourselves with other men, as well as from thinking of ourselves more or 
less highly than is just (E3p26s, etc.). On the contrary, the twin passions of pride and self- 
abasement (abjectio) remain the most harmful of all, especially when certain social institu- 
tions encourage and nourish them under a false appearance of religion. 


4. Inthe Wake of Descartes: The libertas philosophandi 
In his Note in Programma (1648), Descartes has distinguished between three kinds of 
truths: some are a matter for reason alone, others for faith alone, others for both reason and 


faith. It is of the utmost importance that philosophy would respect this division, and also 
that it be respected by all those who hold some authority — and especially by theologians. 


63 


DENIS KAMBOUCHNER 


In accordance with tradition, Descartes admits in principle a supernatural light which 
delivers the truths of faith and makes them “more certain” than any natural knowledge 
(AT VII, 148). Although Spinoza does not admit such a light (TTP 7.19, etc.), the 
difference is less profound than it seems: not only, in Descartes, the natural certainty of 
clear and distinct perceptions will always appear fuller than that of faith (see e.g. AT III, 
799 | CSMK 216), but the purely revealed truths do not seem to need a continual 
meditation; rather, they must be preserved from all doubt and professed whenever 
necessary. With the teaching of charity (“the basis and foundation of all virtues”: Letter 
to Voetius, AT VIII-2, 111), Christian religion involves an ethical element of great worth, 
the same which, according to Spinoza, constitutes the word of God, the divine law and 
“the unique standard of the whole universal faith [catholica|” (TTP 14.10). But these 
“laws of charity” can be discovered by natural reason: they coincide with what a gen- 
erous soul has understood by itself, and to “follow virtue,” this soul needs no promise: its 
self-satisfaction, acquiescentia in seipso (E3p30s, E3DA25, etc.: an expression Spinoza has 
taken from the Latin translation of The Passions of the Soul) involves a kind of 
transcendental security. Conversely, this is a far cry from the teaching of charity to the 
people to the real practice of this supreme virtue — not only by the people, but also by the 
teacher. 

The reference to Descartes is completely absent from the TTP, where it would in no case 
have been in place. In this treatise, the Cartesian rules of philosophical caution are reso- 
lutely infringed, and the most doctrinal passages (e.g. chapters 3 and 4) abound in meta- 
physical statements which are hardly Cartesian. Nevertheless, even if we leave aside all 
that concerns the interpretation of Scripture, the TTP is in several aspects very close to 
what Descartes wrote when he wanted to say something about the relationship between 
philosophy and religion, the role of theologians and the peace of Republics. 

For both Descartes and Spinoza, the greatest danger for the peace and stability of 
political society comes from those who believe themselves invested with a higher right, 
and thus authorized to scorn the division of the fields of competence and to rule over or 
correct everything. It was such a formidable troublemaker that Descartes had encoun- 
tered in the person of Gijsbert Voetius (1589-1676), who of course was also known to 
Spinoza (his slanders against Descartes are mentioned in Letter 43 | IV/220b/27). The 
portrait of the Calvinist theologian in the Letter to Father Dinet of 1642 strikingly pre- 
figures what we can read in Chapters 18 and 20 of the TTP, and from its Preface: “the 
love of propagating divine religion degenerated into sordid greed and ambition”; and 
“the temple itself became a Theater, where one hears, not only ecclesiastics, but ora- 
tors, each possessed by a longing, not to teach the people, but to carry them away with 
admiration for himself, [and] to censure publicly those who disagree” (TTP Pref. | 
IH/8/14-18). 

Faith, Spinoza adds, “is nothing now but credulity and prejudices.” Though this rad- 
ical conclusion is not at all in Descartes’s style, both authors agree that the crux, or one 
of the cruxes, of the political problem lies in the relationships between civil power, reli- 
gious authority, and the community of those who love philosophy. Can one cut a part of 
this knot by submitting sacred things to the sole right of the sovereign, and having pious 
obligation regulated by the civil authority (TTP 19)? As a Roman Catholic, Descartes 
could not dare to make such a proposition. His own propositions were limited to some 
rules for the direction of minds. However, the acknowledgment of the true philosophy 
as such by an increasing number of men of good sense could not be devoid of effects 
at the theologico-political level: it could not fail to impress the Princes as well as the 


64 


SPINOZA AND DESCARTES 


magistrates and, step by step, to open men’s eyes to all that is not the true religion. This 
is the hardly veiled suggestion of the Letter-Preface of the Principles of Philosophy (AT 
IX-B, 18). As for Spinoza, he has no strategy to develop apart from a clear claim and 
direct practice of the sharpest rational criticism. For both authors, the question remains 
what role there would be for theologians in a well-established Republic. 

In the Conversation with Burman (AT V, 176), which Spinoza cannot have known except 
in a very indirect way, theology is said to be all the more valuable as “it is kept in its sim- 
plicity.” By “theology,” one cannot understand here anything other than the word of God 
itself, preserved from any alteration by human reasoning. In TTP, 18.22, one reads that 
everything “is much more stable if [the ministers of sacred affairs] are held in check, so 
that they don’t give any answers except when asked, and in the meantime teach and put 
into practice only things that have already been accepted and are very familiar [recepta et 
maxime usitata].” In sum, theology, whose object is basically a kind of moral teaching, must 
be confined to absolutely traditional practices and discourses. No doubt both authors, 
Spinoza and Descartes, experienced the difficulty of indicating what is a really useful 
theological discourse. Besides, this would have meant a clear transgression of the distinc- 
tion of realms, extending the rights of philosophy over theology. But it remained a 
Spinozistic truth that “to have true philosophers” is “the greatest good that a State can 
enjoy,” and that “each nation is all the more civilized and refined as men here philosophize 
better” (AT IX-B 3 | CSMI 180). This is to say that the possible contrasts between the two 
authors are to be conceived only on the background of a common cause, that of the 
freedom to philosophize. 


Notes 


All quotations of Spinoza’s texts are taken from Curley (1985, 2019). 
Many thanks to Yitzhak Melamed and to Tad M. Schmaltz for their accurate reading and invaluable 
comments. 


References 


Curley, E.M. (1985, 2016). The Collected Words of Spinoza, 2 vols. Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press. 

Gabbey, A. (1996). Spinoza’s natural science and methodology. In: The Cambridge Companion to 
Spinoza (ed. by D. Garrett), 142-191. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Garber, D. (2015). Spinoza’s Cartesian dualism in the Korte Verhandling. In: The Young Spinoza (ed. 
Y.Y. Melamed), 121-132. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Kambouchner, D. (2012). Spinoza et le probleme de |’ Abjectio. In: Emotional Minds. The Passions and 
the Limits of Pure Inquiry in Early Modern Philosophy (ed. S. Ebbersmeyer), 105-119. Berlin: De 
Gruyter. 

Kambouchner, D. (2017). Descartes on the Power of the Soul. A Reconsideration. In Descartes and 
Cartesianism: Essays in Honour of Desmond Clarke (ed. S. Gaukroger and C. Wilson), 177-188. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Kambouchner, D. (2019). Spinoza and the Cartesian Definition of Love. In: Mind, Nature and 
Morality, A Volume Honoring Lilli Alanen (ed. F. Svensson and M. Reuter), 226-238. Abingdon: 
Routledge. 

Nadler, S.M. (1999). Spinoza: A Life, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 


65 


DENIS KAMBOUCHNER 


Further Readings 


Beyssade, J.-M. (1990). De l’émotion intérieure chez Descartes a1’affect actif spinoziste. In: Spinoza, Issues 
and Directions, 176-190: Leiden: Brill. Repr. (2002) In: Etudes sur Descartes, 337-362. Paris: Seuil. 

Carraud, V. (2002). Causa sive ratio. La Raison de la cause, de Suarez a Leibniz. Paris: PUF. 

Cottingham, J. (1988). The intellect, the will and the passions: Spinoza’s critique of Descartes. Journal 
of the History of Philosophy 26 (2): 239-257. 

Curley, E.M. (1978). Spinoza: expositor of Descartes. In: Hessing, Speculum Spinozanum 1677-1977 
(ed. Hessing), 133-142. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul. 

Della Rocca, M. (1996). Spinoza’s Metaphysical Psychology. In The Cambridge Companion to Spinoza 
(ed. by D. Garrett), 192-266. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Douglas, A. (2015). Spinoza and Dutch Cartesianism. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Duchesneau, F. (1974). Du modeéle cartésien au modéle spinoziste de |’étre vivant. Canadian Journal 
of Philosophy 3: 539-562. 

Frankfurt, H.G. (1987). Les désordres du rationalisme. In: Le Discours et sa méthode, (ed. N. Grimaldi 
and J.-L. Marion), 395-411. Paris: PUF. 

Garber, D. (1994). Descartes and Spinoza on persistence and conatus. Studia Spinozana 10: 43-67. 

Gueroult, M. (1960). Le Cogito et l’ordre des axiomes métaphysiques dans les Principia Philosophiae 
Cartesianae de Spinoza. Archives de philosophie 23:171-185. 

Gueroult, M. (1968,1974). Spinoza, I. Dieu; II. L’dme. Paris: Aubier-Montaigne. 

Hubbeling, H.G. (1980). Spinoza comme précurseur du reconstructivisme logique dans son livre sur 
Descartes. Studia Leibnitiana 12: 88-95. 

Israel, J. (2007). Spinoza as an expounder, critic, and “Reformer of Descartes.” Intellectual History 
Review 17 (1): 59-78. 

James S. (1997). Passion and Action. The Emotions in Seventeenth-Century Philosophy. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press. 

Jaquet, C. (2004). L’unité du corps et de l’esprit. Affects, actions et passions chez Spinoza. Paris: PUF. 

Lachiéze-Rey, P. (1950). Les origines cartésiennes du Dieu de Spinoza. Paris: Vrin. 

Lagrée, J. (1987). Louis Meyer et la Philosophia S. Scripturae Interpres. Projet cartésien, horizon spi- 
noziste. Revue des Sciences Philosophiques et Théologiques 71: 31-43. 

Lécrivain, A. (1977-1978). Spinoza et la physique cartésienne. Cahiers Spinoza, 1-2: 235-265, 
93-205. Repr. (1986) in, eds., Spinoza and the Sciences (ed. M. Grene, M. and M. Nails), 15-60. 
Dordrecht-Boston: Reidel. 

Manzini, F (2006). Les Pensées Métaphysiques. In: Lectures de Spinoza (ed. P.-F. Moreau and C. 

Ramond), 17-23. Paris: Ellipses. 

Matheron, A. (1969). Individu et communauté chez Spinoza. Paris, Minuit. 

Melamed, Y.Y. (2013). Spinoza’s Metaphysics. Substance and Thought. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Moreau,P.-F. (1994). Spinoza. L’expérience et l’éternité, Paris: PUF. 

Moreau, P.-F. (2006). Problémes du spinozisme. Paris: Vrin. 

Naaman-Zauderer, N. (2018). Human action and virtue in Descartes and Spinoza. Philosophical 

Explorations 21 (1): 25-40. 

Nadler, S.M. (2005). Descartes’s soul, Spinoza’s mind. In: Receptions of Descartes: Cartesianism and 

Anti-Cartesianism in Early Modern Europe (ed. T.M. Schmaltz), 99-112. London: Routledge. 

Nadler, S.M. (2019). Spinoza, Descartes and the “stupid Cartesians.” In The Oxford Handbook of 
Descartes and Cartesianism (ed. S. Nadler, T.M. Schmaltz, and D. Antoine-Mahut), 659-677. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press. 

Pascal, B. (1963). Guvres completes (ed. L. Lafuma). Paris: Seuil. 

Schmaltz, T.M. (2013). Spinoza and Descartes. In: The Oxford Handbook of Spinoza, (ed. M. Della 
Rocca), 63—8 3. Oxford: Oxford. 

Schmaltz, T.M. (2000). The disappearance of analogy in Descartes, Spinoza, and Regis. Canadian 
Journal of Philosophy 30: 85-114. 


66 


SPINOZA AND DESCARTES 


Scribano, M.E. (1988). Da Descartes a Spinoza. Percorsi della teologia razionale nel Seicento. Milan: 
FrancoAngeli. 
Van der Hoeven, P. (1974). The significance of Cartesian physics for Spinoza’s theory of knowledge. 
In: Spinoza on knowing, being and freedom (ed. J.G. Van der Bend), 114-125. Assen: Van Gorcum. 
Verbeek, T. (1992). Descartes and the Dutch: Early Reactions to Cartesian Philosophy. Carbondale, IL: 
Southern Illinois University Press. 

Verbeek, T. (1999). Spinoza and Cartesianism. In: Judwo-Christian Intellectual Culture in the Seventeenth 
Century (ed. A.P. Coudert, S. Hutton, R.H. Popkin, G.M. Weiner), 173-184. Springer. 

Voss, S. (1981). How Spinoza enumerated the affects. Archiv ftir Geschichte der Philosophie 63 (2): 
167-179. 

Wolfson, H.A. (1934). The Philosophy of Spinoza. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 


67 


7 


Spinoza’s Dutch Philosophical Background 
HENRI KROP 


Spinoza seldom refers to Dutch philosophers. In the Cogitata Metaphysica (CM 2.12), how- 
ever, we find a quotation of 12 lines ending with: “these are the very words of Professor 
Heereboord of Leiden” (Spinoza 1985, p. 345). This quotation of the Leiden professor’s 
Collegium Ethicum strongly suggests that Spinoza had the text at hand. However, the 
conclusion Spinoza draws from it, is clearly at odds with the gist of the original argument. 
Heereboord rejected the views of Aquinas (1225-1274) and Duns Scotus (1268-1309) 
and stated that he did not want to adduce theological arguments. That would be a 
categorical mistake, or a metabasis eis allo genos — the Aristotelian phrase had been printed 
in Greek letters (Heereboord 1659, p. 47). It shows that we need to distinguish between 
Leiden Scholasticism, deeply influenced by humanist preoccupations, and Medieval 
Scholasticism. 

Although Spinoza knew Leiden Scholasticism intimately, he rejected it. He saw Heereboord 
as a “Writer on Metaphysics,” who dealt with “obscure things,” which Spinoza intends to 
clarify. In the same vein Meyer’s introduction of the Philosophiae Principia Renati des Cartes 
(PPC) decries the uselessness of Scholasticism, huge books of which created an “edifice of 
learning to be destroyed by the slightest blow.” This dubious scholarship is like a “violent 
sea,” which prevented the seamen from reaching “the desired harbour of knowledge.” 

This chapter will outline the intellectual world of the Netherlands during Spinoza’s life- 
times. The first section will start with Scholasticism, which dominated Leiden, the coun- 
try’s leading university, during the first half of the seventeenth century. The second section 
will deal with Cartesianism, which inspired Spinoza, especially in its non-academic forms. 


1. Leiden Scholasticism 


The teaching of philosophy in the early years of Leiden University, established in 1575, was 
inspired by humanist ideals of education. It had an introductory and philological nature, 
and lacked metaphysical training. Professors in humanities such as Lipsius and Scaliger 
were held in high esteem, but the three statutory chairs of logic, physics, and ethics were 
often left vacant. It was mainly in response to the needs of Reformed theology that the study 


A Companion to Spinoza, First Edition. Edited by Yitzhak Y. Melamed. 
© 2021 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2021 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd. 


68 


SPINOZA’S DUTCH PHILOSOPHICAL BACKGROUND 


of philosophy was revived. The acrimonious debate on predestination between two profes- 
sors of theology, Jacobus Arminius (1560-1609) and Franciscus Gomarus (1563-1641), 
which started in the 1600s, and divided the Reformed Church to its core, stimulated the 
study of Scholasticism, because it provided the terms to deal with the intricate problem. 

In 1591 the States of Holland and West Frisia established the so-called Staten College in 
order to train the ministers of the new Reformed Church. It provided a full course in philos- 
ophy (Dibon 1954, p. 25). Such courses required the systematization we find in the man- 
uals of (Renaissance) Scholasticism, mainly written by Roman Catholic authors. Their 
actual use at Leiden was established by a 1607 disputation with extensive references to 
Suarez, Fonseca, Toledo, and Javelli, but also to medieval scholars such as Ockham, Duns 
Scotus, and Albert the Great (Volmarius 1607). However, Scholasticism remained contro- 
versial at Leiden. In 1604, the governors of the university once again decided against the 
idea of public lectures on metaphysics. In a 1615 outline of academic studies, Hugo 
Grotius asked for short and clear textbooks in logic and physics instead of Aristotle’s works, 
which are verbose and often deal with topics of little use. In moral philosophy the student 
was advised to read other authors besides Aristotle (Grotius 1645, p. 4). Gilbert Jacchaeus 
(1578-1628) and in particular Franco Burgersdijk (1590-1635) wrote such concise and 
eclectic manuals. 

In 1610 Burgersdijk went to Leiden University in order to study theology. He received a 
complete humanist formation, by attending lectures on Latin, Greek, Roman history, and 
rhetoric. Burgersdijk unwaveringly adhered to the Contra-Remonstrant faction. He 
attended the lectures of the theologians Gomarus and Gijsbert Voetius (1589-1676). The 
latter became the informal leader of the scholastic faction in the Reformed Church. In 
1614 Burgersdijk left Leiden to undertake a grand tour. After some months, however, he 
decided to stay at the Protestant Academy of Saumur, where he continued his theological 
studies with Gomarus, who had left Leiden in 1611 because of the ascendancy of 
Arminianism. In 1619 he returned to Leiden, where he was appointed professor of logic in 
one of the vacancies caused by the purges after the Synod of Dordt. From 1620 onwards 
he also taught moral philosophy. In 1629 he exchanged the latter chair for that of physics. 
In 1630 as rector he enrolled Descartes as student of mathematics. 

Notwithstanding his staunch Calvinism, Burgersdijk contributed to the transformation 
of philosophy into an independent discipline. He adopted Aquinas’s view stating that 
although theology and philosophy both study ta onta kai ta deonta (being and duty) in order 
to make man happy, they argue from different principles: the light of natural reason versus 
the light of revelation (Burgersdijk 1620, A3v). Accordingly, Burgersdijk acknowledged 
the authority of Roman Catholic Scholasticism. This view of philosophy as a discipline an 
independent of theology facilitated the quick acceptance of Cartesianism. 

After the Synod of Dordt (1618-1619) the States of Holland decided to reform the 
teaching of logic at the Latin Schools of their province. In order to meet this demand, 
Burgersdijk wrote a handbook and a synopsis for younger pupils. Both books were in print 
until the end of the century. In the preface to the first work the Leiden professor argues that 
textbooks, which closely follow the text of Aristotle, as previous manuals did, are of little 
use. However, Petrus Ramus, when avoiding the Scylla of scholastic terminology and 
rightly emphasizing the need for a concise method, fell upon the Charybdis of mutilating 
logic because he left out the discussion of proof (Burgersdijk 1626). Burgersdijk, therefore, 
wanted his manual to be eclectic and clearly structured. All chapters consist of theorem(s) 
followed by a commentary, which explains the terms, provides the sources, and deals with 
deviant opinions. 


69 


HENRI KROP 


Burgersdijk devoted two manuals to physics. The introductory Idea philosophiae naturalis 
(1622) is conceived as a “guide” for disputation, presenting the material with definitions 
and short theses. Since the so-called “new” authorities — Zabarella, Pereira, Toletus, and 
the commentators of Coimbra — wrote profusely and without method, the aim of the Idea 
is to arrange the topics in such a way that it meets the nature of this science very well. The 
more extensive Collegium deals with a synthetic order with motion, place, the world, the 
heavens, the elements and the soul. 

Notwithstanding his Scholasticism, Burgersdijk acknowledged recent discoveries, such 
as the circulation of the blood and the “Copernican hypothesis.” If, he stated, diurnal 
motion is attributed to the celestial bodies and not to the earth, their speed, arguing from 
an observation by the Dutchman Philippus van Lansbergen, would be no less than 
643,000 German miles per second, which is implausible (Burgersdijk 1632, p. 113). It 
should be noted, however, that these observations were not integrated into the Aristotelian 
framework of physics. 

Burgersdijk also wrote two manuals on practical philosophy. In his Idea philosophiae 
moralis (1623) he advanced a non-theological morality, which promises “man to take part 
in the divine” and acquire the main virtues of probity towards his fellow men and piety, 
that is the love for God. Following the example of Lipsius, Burgersdijk devotes an important 
part of the Idea philosophiae moralis to the passions, “a main cause of our actions” 
(Burgersdijk 1623, p. 82). He refutes the Stoic view that they are erroneous and in them- 
selves bad, but brought in harmony with the judgment of reason they are great instru- 
ments to attain our ultimate happiness. 

In his Idea politicae doctrinae Burgersdijk imitates Lipsius’s Politica, which as a speculum 
principum, deals with the intellectual and moral virtues of the prince and his education. He 
underlines the need to teach him the lessons of ancient and modern history (Burgersdijk 
1643, pp. 42-43). The second part deals with his tasks. His primary duty is to maintain 
order and peace. Other duties are education, food supply, health care and religion. He also 
has to protect true religion, but with moderation, since the main social good of religion is 
unity. Therefore, the prince has to take precautions that theological controversy will not 
threaten social stability as happened in the years before the Synod of Dordt. In itself, how- 
ever, religious diversity among the citizens causes no social danger. Although the manual 
clearly focuses on monarchy, it argues that a federation of independent commercial cities 
as the Dutch Republic may be more suited for a mixed constitution of aristocracy and 
democracy. 

Burgersdijk’s successor at Leiden was Adriaan Heereboord. He was born in 1613. As 
bursar of the Staten College he studied philosophy. In 1641 he became professor of logic. 
In his inaugural address he stressed the need to purify philosophy, after Luther reformed 
religion and Erasmus the humanities. This purification requires a strict separation of phi- 
losophy and theology. The diversity of medieval schools is a clear sign of the falsity and 
slavish nature of Scholasticism. Scholastics “swear by the words of their Master” — the 
very thing that Spinoza criticized Heereboord for, as we saw — and do not open the door to 
nature itself. That is why the outstanding Reformation of philosophy implies the freedom 
to philosophize and a need for eclecticism (Heereboord 1659, pp. 4-6). The address was 
included in an open letter to the Governors of Leiden University with a detailed account of 
Cartesian crisis at Leiden. In this letter Descartes is lavishly praised as the “upholder, 
restorer and protector of Truth and the liberty to philosophize” and “the greatest luminary 
of all philosophers,” who “disclosed the secrets of nature” (Heereboord 1659, p. 13). 
Heereboord admires his philosophy, which unlike Scholasticism promises certainty in 


70 


SPINOZA’S DUTCH PHILOSOPHICAL BACKGROUND 


physics and metaphysics by using the mathematical method. However, since philosophy 
should be “natural knowledge of God by means of the natural light and His worship in 
accordance with the law of nature” and Descartes did not deal with moral philosophy, 
Scholasticism did not lose its significance (Heereboord 1665, p. 1). Heereboord argues that 
instead of following “a sect” we should be a “friend of truth” and in order to remove our 
blindness to discover truth we need disputation. It is only by means of a plurality of eyes we 
will see what one eye was unable to do, so he resumes his plea for eclecticism 
(Heereboord 1659, p. 330). 

Through an unhappy marriage Heereboord was linked with the de la Court family. In 
1642 he became subregent of the Staten College and in 1644 ethics was added to his chair. 
In 1652 the Senate decided that due to his excessive drinking he was incapable of continuing 
his teaching, but he still presided over some disputations until his death in 1661. 

Heereboord published a schoolbook on logic, based upon Burgersdijk’s manual, the 
Herméneia logica, seu Explicatio synopseos logicae Burgersdicianae, which was widely circu- 
lated until the end of the century. He also published the Meletemata philosophica 
(Philosophical, mainly metaphysical meditations), which consists of two sets of 50 dispu- 
tations each. It is anything but a concise manual in the tradition of Leiden humanist 
Scholasticism; rather it is a hapless collection of disputations. Nonetheless, the book had at 
least six editions. A copy of the 1659 edition preserved at the University Library of 
Lausanne had a handwritten table of contents added, arranging the disputations in accor- 
dance with the scholastic distinction between general and special metaphysics. The first 
part deals with “being” and its divisions, “ideas” and causality, the second part with God 
and His attributes, and the angels. Heereboord also edited metaphysical textbooks of 
Burgersdijk, Johannes Maccovius (1588-1644) and Johannes H. Bisterfeld (1606—1655)- 
the Synod of Dordt reprimanded Maccovius for his excessive Scholasticism. In the preface 
of Burgersdijk’s manual of metaphysics (Burgersdijk 1640, unpaginated) and of 
Maccovius’s Metaphysics, Heereboord underlines its use in order to solve theological prob- 
lems and to that end he added an index, listing where the reader could find their solutions 
(Heereboord 1658). This continued use in theology explains why Scholasticism remained 
relevant even after the arrival of Cartesianism. 


2. Dutch Cartesianism 


Cartesianism is both part of Spinoza’s historical context and a source of inspiration for 
him. Jelles wrote in his short biography that, after his theological studies, Spinoza discov- 
ered writings of the “noble philosopher Descartes” (Spinoza 1677). Descartes spent the 
greatest part of his adult life in the Netherlands. His philosophy was taught at the Dutch 
universities, but translations into the local language made them accessible to a non- 
academic public as well. 

During the 1640s we see the exploration of his ideas in the Netherlands. In 1641 Henricus 
Regius (1598-1679), professor of medicine at the new University of Utrecht, argued for 
Copernicanism and the Cartesian conception of the soul. He rejected the Aristotelian doc- 
trine of substantial forms. This implied that man is merely an “accidental being.” Voetius, the 
doyen of the theological faculty, reacted with dismay because Copernicanism undermined 
the reliability of the Bible. The rejection of substantial forms made basic theological notions 
such as Incarnation and Trinity inconceivable. After some months of controversy the Utrecht 
municipality, the university’s highest authority, withdrew Regius’s license to teach physics 


71 


HENRI KROP 


and reinstated the clear separation between medicine and philosophy. In March 1642 the 
senate of the university condemned the new philosophy, in as far it was prejudicial to the 
other faculties and “orthodox theology in particular.” However, a moderate freedom to phi- 
losophize should remain. All these measures were intended to guarantee the orderly contin- 
uation of teaching (Testimonium 1643, p. 56). 

Descartes, however, decided to continue the fight. In his Letter to Dinet he depicted 
Voetius as a “rabble-rouser” and denied that his philosophy intruded into the domain of 
theology. Voetius reacted furiously and asked former student Martin Schoock (1614— 
1669) to write a philosophical critique of Cartesianism. In his Admiranda Methodus 
(Bewildering method) of 1643, he refuted Cartesian epistemology. Descartes answered 
with an open letter to Voetius, and slandered the theologian’s character once more. He also 
denounced Voetius’s attitude in a political-theological dispute he had with a colleague at 
Groningen. Notwithstanding these controversies, Cartesianism continued to find students. 
In 1652 the first Cartesian professor, Johannes de Bruyn was appointed at Utrecht, fol- 
lowed by two Cartesian theologians in the 1660s (Bunge 2001, p. 44). 

The Leiden crisis was slower in the making. In his 1641 inaugural address, as we saw 
before, Heereboord called for a reformation of philosophy, but only in 1644 was Cartesian 
doubt defended in his disputations. In 1646, at the end of a disputation, the theologian 
Jacob Trigland protested loudly against the Cartesian method fearing its corruption of the- 
ology. A year later Heereboord’s superior at Staten College, the theologian Jacobus Revius 
denounced not only Descartes’s method, but also his proof and concept of God. Informed 
by theologian Abraham Heidanus (1597-1678), Descartes intervened by writing a letter 
to the governors of the university dated 4 May 1647. He stated that these ill-founded accu- 
sations of atheism and skepticism attacked his honor. The governors thereupon decided 
that all professors should refrain from citing Descartes’s name and discussing his opinions. 
However, at the end of 1647, Heereboord’s colleague, Adam Stuart, scheduled a meta- 
physical disputation on God, which opposed Cartesianism. The opponent, Johannes de 
Raey (1621-1702) argued, that it did not respect the governor’s decree. Moreover the 
Cartesian conception of natural knowledge of God was not at odds with the Reformed tra- 
dition (Heereboord 1659, p. 19). 

In 1651 Count Louis Henry of Nassau asked the Dutch universities for their view on the 
new philosophy. Their answers were that the main motive to prohibit the teaching of 
Cartesianism was a political one. Most universities pleaded for a liberal study of Descartes’s 
works. However, they differentiated between the parts of his philosophy. His physics met no 
objection, but his metaphysics, they felt, was difficult to reconcile with orthodoxy 
(Verbeek 1992, pp. 84-85). These statements of the universities show that after a decade 
the universities accepted Cartesianism and until the end of the century Aristotelian and 
Cartesian professors were appointed even-handedly. 

The 1650s saw the development of two main kinds of Cartesianism in the Netherlands. 
The first is an academic one, which respected the boundaries of Reformed orthodoxy. In 
the theological faculty Heidanus became interested in Descartes. The first reason is that his 
philosophy enabled the Reformation to realize its desire to get rid of Scholasticism. In his 
1648 inaugural address he denounced its impure mixture of Aristotle and Paul, as if the- 
ology needs “a pagan philosopher to understand God’s word” (Heidanus 1648, p. 77). 
Johannes Cocceius (1603-1669), Heidanus’s colleague at Leiden, developed a scriptural 
theology, which he claimed to be more in line with the Reformation. Moreover, both divines 
used Cartesianism in their dispute with the Further Reformation, as Voetius pleaded for. 
According to the Utrecht theologian and his puritan followers, the Reformation had to be 


72 


SPINOZA’S DUTCH PHILOSOPHICAL BACKGROUND 


accomplished by a sanctification of ordinary life. The Christian magistrate should not only 
enforce doctrine, but also forbid gambling, theater, and the disturbance of Sunday rest 
(Krop 1999, p. 109). Heidanus, Cocceius, but also Schoock argued that this appeal denied 
Christian freedom restored by the Reformation, and Christ’s repeal of Old Testament laws 
(Schoock, 1658, p. 51). From the 1650s onwards “Cocceian” and “Voetian” became 
names of factions in the Reformed Church, which to a large extent coincided with the sup- 
porters and opponents of Descartes. However, there is no logical relation between 
Cartesianism and Cocceianism, Heidanus argued (1676, 17). 

The disbandment of scholastic theology implied a new view of Scripture. Already 
humanist hermeneutics had introduced the idea that God, by using human language in 
the Bible, accommodated Scripture to mankind. The Holy Ghost just like any human 
author dictated his message in such a manner that the readers would understand it. 
Therefore, the Bible intended for ordinary men, is ad captum vulgi. In 1653 a later professor 
of theology at Leiden Christopher Wittich (1625-1687) published two dissertations. The 
first denounced the nefarious abuse of the Bible by those who attempted to create a “holy 
physics,” because philosophy is based upon the light of reason and theology on revelation. 
Moreover, physics aims at truth and Scripture at human salvation. Consequently, when 
the Bible deals with “natural matters” it speaks of how things appear to the senses and not 
in a philosophical way. In such cases, the words of Scripture should not to be taken literally. 
However, the practical goal of the Bible does not imply that theology is only a moral sci- 
ence, as Heidanus argued, for the mysteries of Faith are the cornerstone of theology 
(Wittich 1671, pp. 1-4). In the second dissertation Wittich defended Cartesian physics by 
showing its harmony with the Bible, if interpreted along these lines. 

In the 1650s the Utrecht regent Lambertus van Velthuysen (1622-1685), a former 
student of theology, addressed the problem of biblical hermeneutics as well. He defended 
Cartesianism and Copernicanism in several Dutch pamphlets. He observed that the system 
of Descartes, “a philosopher who has not seen his equal for centuries” rests on the motion 
of the earth (Bunge 2001, p. 76). However, since the opponents of Cartesianism cannot 
produce any substantial philosophical arguments, they turn the question into a theological 
one and depict Cartesians as atheists or heretics. In this way they stir up the people against 
philosophy, exhort the magistrate to take action and endanger Christian freedom. 

The main premise of Van Velthuysen’s hermeneutics is the divine origin of Scripture. Its 
authority, however, rests upon the meaning of the texts and not upon the words used. 
Otherwise, the Bible would contradict itself. Thus, for example, it says on the one hand that 
God suffers emotions and on the other it states that God is pure spirit. Also Joshua 10:13 
taken literally as relating to a physical observation about the Sun implies a contradiction. 
Here reason provides the device to discern the true meaning of Scripture. Yet the Bible 
teaches also the mysteries of Faith, which are beyond reason and we simply should believe. 
This the Holy Ghost makes obvious by the context. In this manner Scripture provides us 
with the “essentials” of Faith and the basic tenets of the Church. Moreover, in cases when 
the Bible is incomprehensible, philosophy will be of little help. The feebleness of our intel- 
lect will create endless differences of opinion. Hence, the individual believer is provided 
with the liberty to read the Bible as he judges best. In further pamphlets Van Velthuysen 
turned against the “papist” view of the “Voetians,” who attributed an infallible authority 
of the ministers over the Faithful. The Church of the Reformation is a “democratic” society 
of believers and like all societies subjected to the laws of the state. As a member of the 
States faction Van Velthuysen wanted to extend the power of the state over the Church as 
far as possible (Krop 1999, pp. 115-117). 


73 


HENRI KROP 


In 1656 the States of Holland incorporated the separation of philosophy and theology 
in an official document. They stated that the first science provides knowledge by means of 
natural reason and the second discipline rests upon revelation. However, it acknowledged 
that on the one hand theologians often make use of philosophical terms and on the other 
by means of natural reason philosophers demonstrate theological tenets. Therefore, the 
States admonish the professors of their university to use the “liberteyt in ’t philosopheren” 
with moderation in order to preserve peace and tranquility. For this reason they ordered 
“the discontinuation” of the teaching of some unspecified “Cartesian ideas” (Resolutien 
1706, pp. 273-274). 

However, Cartesian theologians did subsequently cross the boundary between philos- 
ophy and theology. In the Theologia Pacifica Wittich lists the benefits of Cartesianism for 
theology (Wittich 1671, p. 13). Theologians might learn from its method to “captivate 
their minds by Faith” in order to understand the Divine mysteries better than an intellect 
without the light of revelation. We might learn how to conceive God’s omnipotence, the 
nature of the soul and human freedom. Wittich, for example, explained Original Sin by 
means of the Cartesian doctrine of the will. Before the Fall the mind acted out of original 
justice and man was free because he acted out of his own essence. However, the Fall blinded 
the faculty of judgment and the mind became the slave of the passions. Divine grace will 
restore the uncorrupted nature of our mind. Wittich underlined that this doctrine is fully 
orthodox, and often referred to the decrees of the Synod of Dordt. 

Cartesianism did not only transform the theological view of the Bible, but also changed 
theology itself. Already in 1645 Heidanus adopted Cartesian notions in order to explain 
Reformed doctrine (Bunge 2003, pp. 398-399). In his theological course he uses a 
dualism, which distinguishes between corporeal and spiritual substance. Man is an intelli- 
gent substance united with a body and he denounces the Aristotelian definition of man as 
a rational animal. Man is a composite entity, since his bodily motions are sharply distinct 
from his mental activity. His knowledge is spiritual, if the intellect takes ideas as its object 
and not objects in the outside world (Heidanus 1686, p. 456). In his concept of sin 
Heidanus explained its causes. The natural inclinations of our body produce our passions, 
which, as established by God, serve to stimulate our mind and preserve our body. However, 
after the Fall our judgment became blinded, and unruly passions cause sinful actions. We 
became subjected to “the law of sin” (Heidanus 1686, p. 434). Only Divine grace can 
emancipate us. 

The last example is Van Velthuysen. He stated that “conscience” is a gift of God, which 
leads us to life’s goal: eternal bliss. Conscience is only submitted to the authority of God 
and to no human law (Krop 1999, p. 113). He gave the notion a Cartesian twist, stating 
that it is the container of our innate knowledge and provides us with knowledge by means 
of God — the word conscientia is composed of cum (with) and scientia. In our consciousness 
— in Latin conscientia as well — we find the idea of God. Methodically analyzing this notion, 
we will be able to solve all kinds of theological problems, such as predestination, and to 
answer objections against the Trinity (Velthuysen 1680, p. 864). In Franeker the Cartesian 
theologians, Hermann Roéll (1653-1718) and his pupil Ruardus Andala (1665-1727) 
further developed this symbiosis of theology and philosophy. Using the innate notion of 
God, Roéll observed, reason teaches us a natural doctrine of God and inspires us to love 
Him in a proper way (Roéll 1700, p. 17). 

In the philosophical faculties, Cartesians tended to distinguish between moral and 
natural knowledge and to limit the scope of philosophy. With the exception of Arnout 
Geulincx (1624-1669), whose Gnothi seauton, sive Ethica was published posthumously, no 


74 


SPINOZA’S DUTCH PHILOSOPHICAL BACKGROUND 


Cartesian philosopher wrote on morals. Like Heereboord previously, Johannes Clauberg 
(1622-1665) and Johannes de Raey (1621-1702) made the new and old philosophy com- 
plementary. In the Difference between the Cartesian and Scholastic Philosophy (1657) available 
in Latin editions and in Dutch and German, Clauberg argued that Scholasticism is a form of 
ordinary knowledge, that is without precision for its generality. Its base is corporeal nature 
and pagans and monks developed it. A Christian, however, created Cartesianism and by 
using “the divine light of nature” it provides an infallible knowledge of God and myself 
(Clauberg 1679, pp. 19-20). Clauberg compared scholastic philosophy with an old city, 
because it is without order and imperfect, although it contains some nice houses. Cartesian 
method, however, provides a better understanding of the world and enables scientific dis- 
coveries. However, Clauberg felt that Scholasticism continued to be relevant in society and 
he resumed his book with the following quotation of Bacon: “there is a great distinction 
between matters of state and the arts ... In matters of state a change even for the better is 
distrusted, because it unsettles what is established: these things resting on authority, con- 
sent, fame and opinion, not on demonstration” (Clauberg 1679, p. 44). 

So, Scholastic philosophy remains useful. Moreover, our knowledge is always related to 
our social life and human history. At elementary school we acquire knowledge of particular 
things with the help of our senses and memory. At the university, philosophy teaches us 
the causes of particular things by reason, but the higher sciences of jurisprudence, medi- 
cine, and theology, which require the study of books by hermeneutics, ultimately teach us 
to use our learning for the benefit of society. Moreover, the use of language is needed in 
order to transfer knowledge to the people. Hence we have to combine the new Cartesian 
logic of science with the old logic of academic tradition (Clauberg 1691, I, p. 781). 

Clauberg also dealt with ontology along the same lines. General notions and 
transcendental terms are “modes of thinking.” They refer to the same object, but express it 
with different words. He gave examples of the different connotations of German and Latin 
words. An outline of basic terms is an indispensable part of the philosophical introduction 
Clauberg gave to students of theology and jurisprudence. This introduction also included 
an outline of Cartesian First Philosophy, dealing with God and the soul (Clauberg 1691, I, 
pp. 596-597). 

A second example is de Raey, who in 1653 was appointed professor of natural philos- 
ophy at Leiden. In his inaugural address he deals with experience. Through the senses we 
know the nature and qualities of individual things. Therefore, empirical knowledge is 
essential to commerce and politics, and all the arts, which, “as Bacon said,” by observation 
discover new things (Raey 1654, p. 44). However, this knowledge is always open to error 
as Scholasticism amply exemplifies. The other source of knowledge is the intellect, which 
aims at “first principles, axioms or common notions.” Intellectual knowledge de Raey calls 
“science,” because it meets the Aristotelian criteria of science. We find it in metaphysics, 
mathematics, and in physics, because “the internal light of the mind” makes some princi- 
ples “a priori” known. This implies that medicine, chemistry, observational physics are no 
science, but “natural history.” Therefore, academic disciplines do not form a tree, as 
Descartes stated, because their nature is different. On the one hand there are sciences such 
as logic, metaphysics, mathematics, and physics and on the other hand the arts, such as 
medicine and morality (Raey 1677, p. 712). Later de Raey began to use this distinction to 
meet the challenge of Radical Cartesianism. The higher studies requiring an “interpreta- 
tive logic” will never adopt a strict method. Unlike Meyer and Spinoza, Descartes “pru- 
dently and modestly” underlined “the linguistic competence needed to study the bonae 
litterae of the ancients, history, eloquence and poetry,” he stated (Raey 1692, p. 638). 


75 


HENRI KROP 


During the 1710s Dutch Aristotelians and Cartesians crossed swords for the last time 
at Franeker, and Andala proudly outlined the successful history of the new philosophy. 
However, false adherents had mingled “the noble way of thinking of Descartes with 
‘unwise and un-orthodox opinions’” (Andala 1716, p. 3). These “all but Cartesians” 
include Spinoza, Geulincx, Meyer, and Christian libertines such as the basket-maker 
Willem Deurhoff (1650-1717), the Reformed ministers Pontiaan van Hattem (1641- 
1706) and Frederik van Leenhof (1647-1712) (Andala 1719, p. 51). They rejected 
Cartesian dualism and argued for a “Stoic” definition of substance. Moreover, they uncrit- 
ically adopted the “geometrical” or synthetic method to all sciences, and therefore 
regarded theology and biblical revelation as false. This Cartesianism may be called “rad- 
ical” since it did not heed the boundaries academic Cartesianism respected. It attracted 
laymen, who wanted to search truth free “from fixed usages and arbitrary orthodoxy” 
(Deurhof 1715 I). 

Early “radical Cartesians” were related to Spinoza’s circle. However, although Pieter 
Balling (d. 1664) and Adriaan Koerbagh (1634-1669) published their works before the 
(1670) Tractatus-theologico Politicus (TTP), only the Philosophiae Sacrae Scripturae 
Interpres (1666) develops a particular form of Cartesianism. Lodewijk Meyer, its author 
was born in Amsterdam in 1629. He helped his half-brother A.L. Kok in translating 
philosophical and theological works into Dutch. In 1654 he edited a popular Dutch dictio- 
nary, the Nederlandtsche Woorden-schat. In the same year he went to Leiden in order to study 
philosophy and medicine. In 1660 he defended a thesis on Cartesian mechanics. In 1666 
he anonymously published the Philosophiae Sacrae Scripturae Interpres, which was often 
reissued together with the TTP. A Dutch version appeared a year later. He became a member 
of the literary society Nil volentibus arduum. He wrote on emotions in drama and several 
plays. In 1677 Meyer was one of the editors of the Opera Posthuma and translated Jelles’s 
preface into Latin. He died in 1681. 

In the preface for the PPC Meyer deplores the “wretched plight” of philosophy until “the 
brightest star of our age, Descartes appeared.” By his new method he made new discov- 
eries in mathematics and “uncovered firm foundations for philosophy.” However he did not 
write in the geometrical style and therefore, his followers, like the Scholastics, only memo- 
rized Descartes’s doctrines and “babbled” (Spinoza 1985, p. 226). Apparently, since Dutch 
Cartesianism had developed the same confusion and controversy as Scholasticism, Meyer 
felt it required reform as well. Meyer observed that he himself wished to rewrite Cartesian 
philosophy in accordance with the “synthetic method,” but was unable to fulfill this impor- 
tant task and he pressed Spinoza to do so. At the end of the preface Meyer noted the main 
differences between Spinozism and Cartesianism. According to Descartes the mysteries of 
theology surpass human understanding, but Spinoza and Meyer disagreed. 

In the preface of the Interpres, Meyer observed that the confusion in Christianity resulted 
in sects, which became “mortal enemies” (Meyer 1666). Theology is until now without a 
sure method and the result is “miserable.” Also hermeneutics was unable to prove 
anything. However, the “successful” method of Descartes already restored the original 
splendor of philosophy. In order to adopt this method in theology we have to assume that 
the Bible is the Word of God. Only Koerbagh dared to reject this idea (Koerbagh 1668, 
pp. 95-96). In Chapter 5 Meyer defines philosophy, as “certain and true knowledge, free 
from prejudices” we acquire “by adopting apodictic demonstrations in the most certain 
light of Truth” (Meyer 1666, p. 40). According to Meyer, God is not only the primary cause 
of philosophy, but he is also fully known by it. Owing to the logical order between the 
essences of things we will reach the principle, God, which causes this order. In this way 


76 


SPINOZA’S DUTCH PHILOSOPHICAL BACKGROUND 


Meyer identifies theology and philosophy. Meyer continues by referring to the hermeneu- 
tical principle, that an author is the best interpreter of his own words. However, this is only 
true in the case of the absolutely reliable God. Hence, true philosophical knowledge of God 
makes a correct interpretation of the Bible possible and by reaching consensus, peace will 
reign in the Church. 

In order to maintain peace early radical Cartesians argued that the Church and its min- 
isters had to be subjected to the state. However, as such this view is not radical in the con- 
fessional state. The Union of Utrecht (1579) — basically a defense treaty of seven sovereign 
provinces — both decreed that every citizen enjoyed freedom of conscience and religion and 
that they made the Reformed Church its public church. This implied that the town magis- 
trates paid for their church. Its delegates attended ecclesiastical bodies with the right of 
veto and the provinces took care of the education of ministers. According to Protestant 
tradition, the state had to provide for religion and to enforce the Ten Commandments, that 
is to say not only the rules regarding inter-human relations, but also those regarding the 
service due to God. In order to avoid full Erastianism, Voetius acknowledged the magis- 
trate’s authority in ecclesiastical matters, but he added the restriction: “as far as they per- 
tain to this world.” In purely spiritual matters the Church should have an authority of its 
own. It also implies that the Church may criticize the magistrate if “major truths of reli- 
gion are at stake and it is obvious that it speaks on behalf of God” (Krop 2012, p. 75). 
Lipsius and Grotius introduced the notions “ius circa sacra,” which the state had in religious 
matters versus the “ius in sacris” of the Church. 

In 1663 this theoretical debate became politically relevant. The States of Holland 
decided to change the form of the office prayer of the minsters due to “merckelijcke ende 
essentiele incongruiteyten,” such as praying for the prince of Orange, who during Johan de 
Witt’s regime of “True freedom” (1650-1672) had no office at all (Resolutien 1706, 
p. 660). His supporters, the so-called Orangists, reacted vehemently, but Koerbagh, using 
the programmatic pseudonym Vrederijck Waermont (Realm of Peace Mount of Truth), 
gave historical and biblical arguments why the magistrate had full authority to decide in 
ecclesiastical matters. In 1665 under the pseudonym Lucius Antisthius Constans De jure 
ecclesiasticorum appeared. In the state of nature all men are free, it is observed, because 
they are provided with parts of the divine power. They are free and equally entitled to do 
whatever contributes to their self-preservation. In order to live well, people transfer their 
original divine power to a magistrate, who is fully entitled to give rules to order society and 
everything related, such as the Church, because the magistrate is a prodeus, a substitute of 
God (Constans 1665, p. 23). However a man cannot transfer his reason, since it is the sub- 
stance of his soul and we will always have the power to judge, therefore the author distin- 
guishes between an inner and external or public religion, which is related to the actions of 
man’s body. 

Not surprisingly, in this “Radical Cartesian” text Hobbesian notions are used. During 
the 1650s the “Erastianism” of the States Party became increasingly associated with 
Hobbes. Already in 1651 Van Velthuysen wrote an apology of De Cive, stating that Hobbes 
put politics into doubt in order to provide unquestionable principles. “Apparently, Hobbes’ 
views were perceived as supplying the political philosophy Descartes had failed to deliver” 
(Bunge 2001, p. 85). In 1667 a Dutch version of Leviathan was published which circulated 
amongst Dutch republicans. However, the brothers Johan (1620-1660) and Pieter de la 
Court (1618-1685), alongside Spinoza the most important Dutch republicans, combined 
a Cartesian apriorism with an extensive study of existing regimes — the Turkish Empire, 
France, and the republics of Venice and the Netherlands. Their rhetorical argumentation 


77 


HENRI KROP 


is interlaced with fables and proverbs. Pieter, who edited Johan’s manuscripts after his 
untimely death, tried to explain the mechanism of politics by means of passionate nature. 
Self-love is the cause of all human actions, he observed, which are good, if they urge man 
to self-preservation or bad, if they injure other men (Court 1662). Passions originate in the 
womb and should be regulated by experience and argument, which teaches us to prefer a 
future instead of an apparent actual good. Reason in itself is powerless to determine our 
actions and therefore a polity curbing the self-destructive passions is necessary for human 
survival. Apparently, this Machiavellian political realism, radical Cartesians cultivated, is 
not only part of Spinoza’s Dutch philosophical background, but also a source of 
inspiration. 


References 


Andala, R. (1719) Cartesius verus spinozismi eversor, et physicae experimentalis architectus. Franeker: 
Wiebe Bleck. 

Bos, E. and Krop, H. (eds.) (1991). Franco Burgersdijk (1590-1635): Neo-Aristotelianism in Leiden. 
Amsterdam: Rodopi. 

Bunge, W. van (2001). From Stevin to Spinoza: An Essay on Philosophy in the Seventeenth-Century Dutch 
Republic. Leiden: Brill. 

Bunge, W. van, e.a. (eds.) (2003). The Dictionary of Seventeenth and Eighteenth-century Dutch philoso- 
phers, 2 vols. Bristol: Thoemmes Press. 

Bunge, W. van, e.a. (eds.) (2011). “Influences.” In: The Continuum Companion to Spinoza, 58-84. 
London: Continuum. 

Burgersdijk, F. (1620). Problema utrum quod est verum in theologica possit esse falsum in philosophia aut 
vice versa. Leiden: Jacob Marck. 

Burgersdijk, F. (1622). Idea philosophiae naturalis, sive methodus definitionum et controversiarum. 
Leiden: Elsevier printshop, 1622. Dutch trans. A.L. Kok, Amsterdam, 1648. 

Burgersdijk, FE. (1623). Idea philosophiae moralis, sive Compendiosa institution, Leiden: Elsevier printshop. 

Burgersdijk, F. (1626). Institutionum logicarum libri II, nova methodo ac modo formati, atque editi. 
Leiden: Abraham Crommelin, 1626. Dutch trans. A.L. Kok, Amsterdam, 1646. 

Burgersdijk, F. (1632). Collegium physicum disputationibus XXXII absolutum. Leiden: Bonaventura and 
Abraham Elsevier, 1632. Dutch trans. A.L. Kok, Amsterdam, 1648. 

Burgersdijk, F. (1640). Institutionum metaphysicarum libri II. Leiden: Hieronymus de Vogel. 

Burgersdijk, F. (1644). Idea oeconomicae et politicae doctrinae. Leiden: Adriaan Wijngaarden. 

Clauberg, J. (1679) Differentia inter Cartesianum et alias in Scholis usitatam Philosophiam. Groningen: 
n.p. Dutch trans. 1658. 

Clauberg, J. (1691). Opera omnia philosophica, 2 vols. Amsterdam: Johannes Theodoor Schalbruch. 

Constans, L.A. (1665). [De La Court, Meyer], De Iure ecclesiasticorum, liber singularis Alethopolis 
(=Amsterdam): Cajus Valerius Pennatus. 

V.H. [=Court, Pieter de la] (1662). Consideratien van staat, ofte politike weeg-schaal, waar in met veele 
reedenen, omstandigheden, exempelen, en fabulen wert overwogen; welke forme der regeeringe . . . onder de 
menschen de beste zy, Amsterdam: Joannes Cyprianus vander Gracht. 

Dibon, P. (1954). La Philosophie néerlandaise au siécle d’or. Tome I. L’enseignement philosophique dans les 
universités a l’époque précartésienne, (1575-1650), Amsterdam: Elsevier. 

Deurhof, W. (1715). Overnatuurkundige en schriftuurlyke zaamenstellinge van de H. godgeleerdheid, 2 vols. 
Amsterdam: Nicolaas ten Hoorn.Krop, H. (1999). “Spinoza and the Calvinist Cartesianism of 
Lambertus van Velthuysen.” Studia Spinozana 15: 161-131. Wurzburg: K6nigshausen & Neuman 

Geulincx, A. (1697). Gnothi seauton, sive Ethica, Johannes de Vivié, 1683. Dutch trans. 1697. 

Grotius, H. et al. (1645). ‘Epistola ad Benjaminum Maurerium’ (1615), in Dissertationes de studiis 
instituendis. Amsterdam: Lodewijk Elsevier, p. 1-6. 


78 


SPINOZA’S DUTCH PHILOSOPHICAL BACKGROUND 


Heereboord, A. (1659). Meletemata philosophica, in quibus pleraeque res metaphysicae ventilantur, tota 
ethica explicatur, universa physica per theoremata et commentarios exponitur, summa rerum logicarum 
per disputationes traditur. Leiden: Franciscus Moyaerd. 

Heereboord, A. (1665). Philosophia naturalis cum commentariis peripateticis . . . & novis commentariis, 
partim e nob. D. Cartesio, Cl. Berigardo, H. Regio, aliisque praestantioribus philosophis, petitis, partim ex 
propria opinione dictatis, explicata. Leiden: Cornelis Driehuysen. 

Heereboord, A. (ed.) (1658). Johannis Maccovii Metaphysica, ad usum quaestionum in philosophia ac 
theologia adornata et applicata. Leiden: Frans Hack. 

Heidanus, A. (1645). De causa Dei, dat is, de sake Godts, verdedight tegen den mensche, ofte wederlegginge 
van de Antwoorde van M. Simon Episcopius, wijlen professor der h. theologie, op de Proeve des 
Remonstantschen Catechismi. Leiden: Paulus van Ravesteyn. 

Heidanus, A. (1648). Oratio inauguralis de singularibus Scripturae. Leiden: Bonaventura and Abraham 
Elsevier. 

Heidanus, A. (1658). De Sabbato et die Dominico. Disputatio. Leiden: Hendrick Verbiest. 

Heidanus, A. (1676). Considerationes ad res quasdam nuper gestas in Academia Lugduno-Batava. Leiden: 
Arnold Doude. Dutch original 1676. 

Heidanus, A. (1686). Corpus theologiae christianae in XV. locos digestum, 2 vols. Leiden: Jordanus 
Luchtmans. 

Jelles, J. (1684). Belydenisse des algemeenen en christelyken geloofs .. . in een Brief aan N.N. Amsterdam: 
Johannes Rieuwerts. 

Koerbagh, A. (1668). Een bloemhof van allerley lieflijkheyd sonder verdriet geplant door Vreederijk 
Waarmond, ondersoeker der waarheyd... of een vertaaling en uytlegging van al de Hebreusche, Grieksche, 
Latijnse, Franse, en andere vreemde bastaart-woorden. Amsterdam: for the author. 

Krop, H. (2011) La Scolastique elusive. Les traces de la scolastique dans |’Ethique. In:, (ed.): Spinoza et 
ses scolastiques. Retour aux sources et nouveaux enjeux (ed. F. Manzini), 15-30. Paris: PUPS. 

Krop, H. (2012). The general freedom, which all men enjoy in a confessional state: the paradoxical 
language of politics in the Dutch Republic. In: Paradoxes of Religious Toleration in Early Modern 
Political Thought (ed. J.C. Laursen and MJ. Villaverde), 67-90. Lanham, MD: Lexington Books. 

Meyer, L. (1666). Philosophia S. Scripturae Interpres: Exercitatio Paradoxa, in qua, veram Philosophiam 
infallibilem S. Literas interpretandi Normamesse, apodictice demonstratur. Eleutheroplis (=Amsterdam): 
[Rieuwerts]. [He published also a Dutch version]. 

Raey, Johannes de (1654). Clavis philosophiae naturalis seu Introductio ad naturae contemplationem 
Aristotelico-Cartesiana. Leiden: Elsevier printshop. Enlarged 2n edn 1677. 

Raey, J. de (1692). Cogitata de Interpretatione, quibus natura humani sermonis et illius rectus 
usus, . . . ab hujus seculi errore et confusione vindicantur. Accedunt note recentes. Amsterdam: 
Hendrik Wetstein. 

Resolutien der Staaten van Hollandt ende West-Vriesland ... 2e Augusti 1653... 19e December 1668 
(1706). Utrecht: Willem van de Water. 

Roéll, H. (17004). Dissertatio de religione rationali. Franker: Johannes Gyslaar. [Original edition 
1686] 

Schoock, M. (1658). Tractatus de praecisitate vera oppositus pseudopraecisimo pro vindiciis genuinae 
praxios pietatis, Groningen: Hendrik Lussinck. 

Spinoza, B. de (1985). The Collected Works I (ed. and trans. Edwin Curley). Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press. 

Spinoza, B. de (1677). Opera Posthuma [Amsterdam]: [Rieuwerts]. 

Testimonium Academiae Ultrajectinae, et narratio historica qua defensae, qua exterminatae novae philoso- 
phiae (1643). Utrecht: Wilhelm Strick. 

Strazzoni, A. (2015). The Foundation of Early Modern Science: Metaphysics, Logic and Theology, 
Rotterdam: Ridderprint. 

Velthuysen, L. van (1680). Opera Omnia, Rotterdam: reinier Leers. 

Verbeek, T. (ed. and trans.) (1988). La Querelle d’Utrecht: René Descartes and Martin Schoock, Paris: Les 
impressions nouvelles. 


79 


HENRI KROP 


Verbeek, T. (1991). “Tradition and novelty. Descartes and some Cartesians.” In: The Rise of Modern 
Philosophy: The Tension Between the New and Traditional Philosophies from Machiavelli to Leibniz (ed. 
T. Sorell), 167-196. Oxford: Clarendon Press. 

Verbeek, T. (1992). Descartes and the Dutch: Early Reactions to Cartesian Philosophy, 1637-1650, 
Carbondale, IL: Southern Illinois University Press. 

Volmarius, J. (1607). Quodlibetae et paradocae theses, Leiden: Jan Paets. 

Wittich, C. (1671). Theologia pacifica, . . . usus philosophiae Cartesianae in diversis theologiae partibus 
demonstratur. Leiden: Cornelis Doude. 


Further Reading 


Andala, R. (1716). Examen Ethicae Clar. Geulingii, sive dissertationum philosophicarum pentas. Franeker: 
Wiebe Bleck. 

Balling, P. 1662 (16647). Het licht op den kandelaar. Dienende, tot opmerkinge van de voornaamste dingen; 
in het boekje genaamt De verborgentheden van het rijke Ghodts. Amsterdam, for the author. 

Clauberg, J. (1647). Elementa philosophiae sive ontosophia. Groningen: Johannes Nicolai. 

Clauberg, J. (1658). Logica vetus & nova: modum inveniendae ac tradendae veritatis, in genesi simul & 
analysi, facili methodo exhibens. Amsterdam: Elsevier printshop. 

Koerbagh, A. (1668). Een ligt schijnende in duystere plaatsen om te verligten de voornaamste saaken der 
Godsgeleerdtheyd en Godsdienst. Amsterdam: for the author, 1668 [confiscated during printing]. 
Schoock, M. (1643). Admiranda Methodus Novae Philosophiae Renati Des Cartes, Utrecht: Joannes van 

Waesberge. 

Schoock, M. (1660). Disquisitio circa decalogum, speciatim quartum preceptum de sabbat, Groningen: 
Frans Bronchorst. 

Velthuysen, L. van (1651). Epistolica dissertatio de principiis justi et decori, continens apologiam pro trac- 
tatu clarissimi Hobbaei de Cive. Amsterdam: Lodewijk Elzevier. 

Velthuysen, L. van (1656). Bewys dat noch de leere van der sonne stilstant, en des aertryx bewegingh, noch 
de gronden vande philosophie van Renatus Des Cartes strijdig sijin met Godts woort. Utrecht: Dirck van 
Ackersdijc and Gijsbert van Zijll. 

Wittich, C. (1653). Dissertationes duae, prior... de S. Scripturae in rebus philosophicis abusu . . ., altera 
..., sententiamque Cartesii de motu terrae defendit, Amsterdam: Lodewijk Elsevier. 


80 


8 


Spinoza and Hobbes 
MICHAEL LeBUFFE 


The English philosopher Thomas Hobbes directly influenced and, possibly, was also influ- 
enced by Spinoza. Spinoza studied two of Hobbes’s works — the third objections to 
Descartes’s Meditations and On the Citizen, both of which were in his library — before the 
completion of his own major works (Van Rooijen 1889, pp. 152-153, 188-189). He 
mentions Hobbes in a note to Chapter 16 of the Theological-Political Treatise (G IN/263 
ADN 33) and in a 1674 letter (NS, Letter 50). Some scholars push further, arguing that 
Spinoza’s work also shows, directly or indirectly, the influence of Hobbes’s masterpiece, 
Leviathan, which was available in a Dutch translation of the 1651 English edition and in 
a Latin version in the late 1660s, when Spinoza was still working (Malcolm 2002, p. 47). 
Although Spinoza’s works are too late to have had much effect on Hobbes’s writings, 
Hobbes also may have studied Spinoza or have known about Spinoza from mutual 
acquaintances such as Henry Oldenburg. The best evidence for this is a passage in Brief 
Lives (Aubrey 1898, I, p. 357) in which Hobbes reportedly says of the Theological-Political 
Treatise, that Spinoza, “had cut through him a barre’s length, for he durst not write so 
boldly.” 

While the manner and extent of Spinoza’s interaction with Hobbes holds great 
interest, it is also valuable to study the philosophers side by side for the insight that each 
gives us into the other. Hobbes and Spinoza were both aware of the advanced science of 
mid-seventeenth-century Europe and of the uncomfortable fit of that science with tradi- 
tional moral and religious doctrines. Although in different countries and different 
cultural contexts, both also lived through religiously charged civil turmoil, in the English 
Civil War and the Rampjaar respectively, which informed their political writings. In 
addition to this shared background, many of their projects and commitments are sim- 
ilar. Both are causal determinists and, although Spinoza’s commitments in metaphysics 
go further than Hobbes’s, both work toward a complete deterministic account of the 
world in corporeal terms. Both admired geometry, and that admiration reveals itself in 
their works. Hobbes (L33-—39, 44) and Spinoza (TTP 7) both offer something close to a 
Scriptural hermeneutics. Although Spinoza abandoned this language eventually (in the 
TP), both build accounts of the basis of society in a contract (pactum) in which each 
person transfers natural right to a sovereign (Hobbes, DC5.6—9; L17 260-261) or social 


A Companion to Spinoza, First Edition. Edited by Yitzhak Y. Melamed. 
© 2021 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2021 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd. 


81 


MICHAEL LeBUFFE 


order (Spinoza, TTP 16) that remains unbound (see Curley 1991 and Garrett 2010 for 
useful comparative accounts). Both argue that the political sovereign holds, or ought to 
hold, significant control over the practice of religion in a state (DC6.11; L18; TTP 19). 
Finally, both Hobbes and Spinoza start from a broadly egoistic conception of human 
emotion and build upon it a theory of the good. From the most basic term for human 
desire (conatus) to the definitions of particular passions, to accounts of the good that 
associate it with the satisfaction of desire, the theories’ similarity is striking. It is for good 
reason, then, that some of the most widely read and most valuable critical resources 
urge students of Spinoza’s ethical theory to begin from a comparison to Hobbes (for 
example, see Curley 1988 and Garrett 1996). 

This last topic is my focus here. One aim of this chapter is to introduce the most relevant 
doctrines to readers for whom they are new. I also offer an argument, however. A close 
comparison of the authors’ psychologies is useful because it helps to emphasize what is 
distinctive of each view and, subsequently, to explain further, more dramatic differences in 
the authors’ moral theories and conceptions of the state. I argue in Section 1 that for 
Hobbes, desire is always caused by external objects; for Spinoza, although external objects 
frequently and even typically cause desire, they do not always do so. Moreover, Spinoza 
distinguishes, where Hobbes does not, among different degrees to which external objects 
cause desire. A second subtle difference emerges in the authors’ conceptions of human 
nature, the topic of Section 2. Hobbes seems to assume that our passions, in one sense, are 
stable. It is for him unimportant, unlikely, or impossible that a human being dominated by 
fear, for example, can come to be dominated by love. For Spinoza, however, such flexibility 
is a prominent feature of human nature. In Section 3, I argue that these differences in the 
authors’ moral psychology explain Spinoza’s much more robust theory of value and his 
conviction, lacking in Hobbes, that the purpose of the state is the improvement of its 
citizens. 


1. Desire and Causation 


A striking similarity in the authors is their emphasis on conatus, or striving, in their 
accounts of desire. Conatus for Hobbes is infinitesimal motion: “motion made through the 
length of a point, and in an instant or point of time” (DCo3.15.2). In animals, including 
human beings, conatus aims at preservation or — and Hobbes takes these aims to be closely 
related — pleasure and the avoidance of pain: 


.. df vital motion be helped by motion made by sense, then the parts of the organ will be 
disposed to guide the spirits in such manner as conduceth most to the preservation and 
augmentation of that motion. . .[I]n animal motion this is the very first endeavour [cona- 
tus] and found even in the embryo; which while it is in the womb, moveth its limbs with 
voluntary motion, for the avoiding of whatsoever troubleth it, or for the pursuing of what 
pleaseth it. (DCo4.25.12) 


This passage starts by limiting its account to that vital motion “helped by motion made by 
sense.” The invocation of sense suggests that something outside of the body causes the 
body to move in order to preserve itself. The end of the passage reinforces this suggestion: 
an embryo is troubled or pleased by something and so moves to avoid or pursue it. 


82 


SPINOZA AND HOBBES 


In Hobbes’s human psychology, conatus grounds theories of desire and the most basic 
passions: 


These small beginnings of motion, within the body of man, before they appear in. . .visible 
actions, are commonly called ENDEAVOUR [conatus]. 

This endeavour, when it is toward something which causes it, is called APPETITE [appeti- 
tus], or DESIRE [cupido]. . .And when the endeavour is fromward something, it is generally 
called AVERSION. (L6.78.21—28; the language in brackets is from the Latin version of 
Leviathan L6.79.23) 


Desire, as Hobbes defines it here, always has an external cause, which brings an individual 
to strive either to pursue or to avoid it. We have no desire that is originally or wholly our 
own. Instead, we are always like the fetus in the womb: each of our actions is a response to 
some external stimulus. 

Spinoza similarly emphasizes conatus in his account of desire: “Each thing, insofar as it 
is in itself, strives [conatur] to persevere in being” (E3p6). There are however a great variety 
of such doctrines in the history of ideas (see LeBuffe 2010, pp. 101-102), and despite their 
surface similarity, Spinoza’s version of the doctrine differs substantially from Hobbes’s. 
First, the theory for Spinoza is a perfectly general one: all singular things — human beings 
and animals, but also non-animal bodies such as toasters and non-corporeal entities such 
as minds — strive. Hobbes’s notion of conatus describes bodies only, and it does so in terms 
of a physical concept, motion. Second, perseverance in being associates systematically 
with conatus in Spinoza (E3p6; see also DPP 2p14). As we have seen, Hobbes associates 
the conatus for preservation with animal bodies only. His discussions of motion at a point 
that refer to bodies more generally (for example, DCo3.15.5—7) do not mention preserva- 
tion. Finally, Spinoza does not introduce the conatus for perseverance, as Hobbes intro- 
duces the conatus for preservation, as a response to external causes. How to understand 
Spinoza’s views remains a matter of critical debate (see Hiibner 2010 for a useful sum- 
mary). Nevertheless it is clear that, for Spinoza, all things strive; each strives to persevere; 
and each strives even where it is a total cause of its own action. 

This last point — that the author’s doctrines of conatus differ with respect to external 
causation — is evident in the structure of the authors’ presentations. As we have seen, 
Hobbes’s account of desire at Leviathan 6 begins with a definition of ‘endeavor’ and pre- 
cedes immediately to a definition of ‘desire’ that incorporates the notion of an external 
cause. Spinoza’s accounts of conatus and desire (cupiditas) in Ethics 3 arise only after a 
discussion of action and passion. Before introducing the conatus doctrine, Spinoza explic- 
itly sets out senses in which things, and specifically human beings, may behave either in 
response to external causes (this is passion) or in a way that is wholly their own (this is 
action). He starts by distinguishing senses of causation in which a thing is an adequate (or 
total) cause or a inadequate (or partial) cause of what it does: 


E3d1: I call a cause “adequate” whose effect can be clearly and distinctly perceived through it. 
I call “inadequate,” however, or “partial” that whose effect cannot be understood through it 
alone. 


The doctrine is complex. For the present purpose, however, all we need note is that Spinoza 


distinguishes between total and partial causation at 3d1. In subsequent passages, Spinoza 
moves quickly to a specifically human and mental account of such causation: 


83 


MICHAEL LeBUFFE 


E3d2: I say that we “act” when something happens, either in us or outside of us, of which we 
are the adequate cause. . . .On the other hand, I say that we are “acted on” when something 
happens in us or outside of us, or something follows from our nature, of which we are not the 
cause, except in part. 


E3p1: Our mind does some things [i.e. acts] but undergoes other things, viz. insofar as it has 
adequate ideas, it necessarily does some things, and insofar as it has inadequate ideas, it nec- 
essarily undergoes other things. 


At E3d2, Spinoza introduces the terminology that he will use in discussing human activity 
as an adequate or inadequate cause. Then, he argues at E3p1 that in fact we are sometimes 
adequate causes and sometimes inadequate causes. Our adequate ideas belong fully to us, 
so we will be the adequate causes of our effects insofar as we have adequate ideas. Our 
inadequate ideas, however, do not belong fully to us, so we will be inadequate or partial 
causes of effects that follow from them. It is Spinoza’s emphasis on action from adequate 
ideas that distinguishes him from Hobbes. 

Spinoza sets out the view that all things strive for perseverance in being in a brief, much 
discussed argument from E3p4—p6. The account of desire that follows synthesizes the 
main points — human minds are both total and partial causes (E3p1), and we strive for per- 
severance in being (E3p6) — that precede it. 


E3p9: The mind, both insofar as it has clear and distinct ideas and also insofar as it has con- 
fused ideas, strives to persevere in being. . . 


At E3p9, Spinoza argues that the striving doctrine characterizes what we do both as ade- 
quate and as inadequate causes. The definition of desire that follows inherits this 
generality: 


E3p9s: This striving. . .when it is referred to mind and body at once is called ‘appetite’. . . 
.. Between appetite and desire there is no difference, except that desire is generally related to 
men insofar as they are conscious of appetite. So desire can be defined as appetite together 
with consciousness of appetite. 


Here, Spinoza defines ‘appetite’ in terms of striving and ‘desire,’ in turn, in terms of appe- 
tite. Tracing the discussion back to E3p9, then, we may conclude that, for Spinoza, human 
desires are striving from clear and distinct ideas as well as from confused and obscure ideas 
and, therefore, human desires include activity as a total as well as a partial cause. Some of 
our desires, then, have no cause other than ourselves. Spinoza draws this conclusion 
explicitly near the end of Ethics 3: 


E3p58: In addition to the joy and desire that are passions, there are other affects of joy and 
desire, which are ascribed to us insofar as we act. 


The basis for Spinoza’s theory of desire in an account of causation implies that the distinc- 
tion between activity and passivity may be incremental: just as, generally, one of two causes 
may have more influence in a given effect, so in the specific case of desire, a given mind may 
be a greater or lesser cause of its own desires. The word ‘insofar’ (quatenus), which appears 
at both E3p9 and E3p58, suggests that Spinoza accepts this implication. Whereas Hobbes 
bluntly defines ‘desire’ as arising from an external cause and offers no finer grained account 


84 


SPINOZA AND HOBBES 


of human causal activity in desiring, then, Spinoza builds an account of desire that includes 
a whole range of causal activity, from desires that arise entirely from us to desires that reflect 
the defeat of our nature by external causes (see E4p20s). 


2. Emotions and Human Nature 


For both Hobbes and Spinoza, the emotions are basic enough to psychology that a theory 
of them amounts to a theory of human nature: it tells us what, in a very basic way, human 
beings are like. This section addresses the authors’ views on the question of whether and 
how human beings can change. I argue that Spinoza emphasizes, where Hobbes does not, 
the variety and plasticity of human emotion. 

Many definitions of particular passions in Leviathan 6 refer to appetite, desire, or 
aversion. Love, for example, Hobbes makes the same thing as desire, “save that by desire we 
always signify the absence of the object; by love, most commonly the presence of the same” 
(L6.80.5—8). Hope, he makes “appetite with an opinion of attaining” (L6.84.18). Such 
passages suggest that, typically, Hobbes takes passions just to be varieties of desire. 

Hobbes finds a kind of variety in human nature: the objects of our passions vary. This 
view is evident in the Introduction to Leviathan, where Hobbes qualifies his approval of 
introspection as a guide to understanding others’ passions by noting that it cannot help us 
to understand the objects of others’ passions: 


I say the similitude of passions, which are the same in all men, desire, fear, hope, &c; not the 
similitude of the objects of the passions, which are the things desired, feared, hoped, &c: for these 
the constitution individual, and particular education, do so vary, and they are so easy to be 
kept from our knowledge. . . (LI.18.21-25) 


The qualification suggests that as our circumstances vary, so the objects of our passions 
will vary. 

Although this is not explicit in the Introduction, other passages suggest that the objects 
of a single person’s passions may change over time, that is, that they are plastic. At the 
other end of Leviathan, the “Review and Conclusion,” Hobbes praises Sidney Godolphin for 
the objects that attach to his passions: 


Nor is there any repugnancy between fearing the laws, and not fearing a public enemy; nor 
between abstaining from injury, and pardoning it in others. There is therefore no such incon- 
sistence in human nature, with civil duties, as some think. I have known clearness of judg- 
ment, and largeness of fancy; strength of reason, and graceful elocution; a courage for the 
war, and fear for the laws, and all eminently in one man; and that was my most noble and 
honoured friend Mr. Sidney Godolphin. (LR&C.1133.9-15) 


Godolphin is praiseworthy because his courage is for war and his fear is for the laws. The 
passage suggests, if Godolphin is a model of virtue, that others should follow him: each of 
us ought to work to attach our fear to the laws rather than to war and, of course, a sover- 
eign ought to work to transform citizens’ passions in this way. If we should change the 
objects of passions, however, then those objects must be flexible. One and the same person 
may fear different objects in different circumstances. 

Setting aside the plasticity of the objects of passion, however, Hobbes seems to assume 
that human passions do not vary greatly. There is evidence that, in the interpersonal case, 


85 


MICHAEL LeBUFFE 


they do vary somewhat. The argument of Leviathan emphasizes fear, the passion “to be 
reckoned upon” (L14.216.7-—8). In Leviathan 11, “Of the Difference of Manners,” however, 
Hobbes characterizes different kinds of people as predominantly fearful, competitive, vain- 
glorious, and so on for the particular purpose of assessing their sociability. The account 
suggests that different people have different passions. An interpretation of Hobbes’s 
account of society must give an account of the passions, and especially of the importance 
of fear, that accommodates this degree of variety. 

To turn to the intrapersonal case, there is little evidence that Hobbes thinks that an 
individual’s passions are plastic and little evidence that such change matters to him. One 
passage, from Leviathan 15 might seem to be such evidence. It includes the warning that 
we require a sovereign because we each have different desires and even, “the same man in 
divers times differs from himself” (L15.242.8—9; cf. DC3.31). The passage might initially 
be taken for a view on which different passions — fear, hope, and anger perhaps — charac- 
terize a person over time. We have seen, however, that Hobbes emphasizes the plasticity of 
objects. That view suffices to explain the plasticity described here: it may be now fear of 
war and later fear of law that characterizes the same man. In his account of good character, 
moreover, where one might expect Hobbes to invoke a change in passion, he does not. 
Godolphin remains fearful. He is distinguished by fearing the right object. 

Spinoza’s metaphysics of desire requires different terminology. His broadest term for the 
emotions is ‘affect’ (affectus). He takes passions to be those affects that have partial external 
causes but also includes active emotions among our affects. In some passages, as at E3p58, 
Spinoza identifies desire with passion as Hobbes does. Strictly, however, Spinoza makes the 
basic passions, joy (laetitia) and sadness (tristitia), changes in the power of conatus (or 
desire, 3p11s), and he frequently takes particular desires to arise from rather than simply 
be forms of passion (see, e.g., 3p37, 3p43, 3p44). 

Spinoza shares Hobbes’s view about the plasticity of the objects of emotion (3p51). 
Spinoza, however, emphasizes where Hobbes does not the plasticity of human affects gen- 
erally. A single person’s affects typically change frequently. The contrast is clearest perhaps 
in Spinoza’s accounts of fear and society. Hobbes famously emphasizes fear of violent 
death in the state of nature, and he relies on fear of the law in citizens of acommonwealth. 
Spinoza mentions fear in the Introduction to the TTP, but it is not so prominent: 


If men could manage all their things by a fixed plan, or if fortune always favored them, no one 
would be held by superstition. Often, though, they are driven into such difficulties that they 
are capable of producing no plan and usually they desire the uncertain goods of fortune, vac- 
illate miserably between hope and fear, and so have a great tendency to believe anything what- 
ever. The mind, when it is in doubt, is easily pushed this way or that way, and all the more 
easily when it is hung up, shaken by hope and fear. (G III/5/2-9) 


This passage suggests that it is vacillation between fear and hope, and the resulting vulner- 
ability to superstition, that characterizes the state of nature. Returning to the subject in 
Chapter 16, which introduces the notion of contract, Spinoza suggests that it is the variety 
of harmful passions and the lack of coordination that they produce that is the principal 
problem. Notice that fear does not appear in this account: 


It is far from true that everyone can always be led under the guidance of reason alone. For 
each is drawn by his own delight, and the mind is so often filled with avarice, ambition, envy, 
anger and so on that no place remains for reason. (G III/193/1-4; cf. G TII/278/8-9 and 
4p37s2 at G I/237/26-33) 


86 


SPINOZA AND HOBBES 


Fear might well have appeared here. Spinoza takes it to be a harmful and prominent pas- 
sion (4p47). It is the variety of passion and lack of coordination, however, that for him 
characterizes the state of nature. 

Spinoza’s argument that our emotions can change in the Ethics gives him reason to 
hope that, at least in some circumstances, we might come to act from a different emotion. 
For example, he argues at E4p63s that the sick man eats food he dislikes because of fear of 
death but that the healthy man enjoys what he eats. This amounts, I think, to a qualified 
recommendation of the latter course: some of us can enjoy our food, and we should. 
Spinoza’s account of the state reflects similar hope. Even where reason might not move 
everybody, Spinoza can still rely on a different passion, devotion, as a means of attaining 
cooperation: 


Two things above all others compelled [Moses to introduce religion]: the defiant character of 
the people of course (because it would not permit them to be compelled by force alone); and the 
approach of war, in which, if things are to go favorably, it is necessary to encourage soldiers 
rather than intimidating them with penalties and threats. In this way each will work more to 
make himself famous for virtue and greatness of spirit than simply to avoid punishment. That 
is why Moses by divine power and command introduced religion into the Republic: so that the 
people would do their duty not so much from fear as from devotion. (GIII/75/14-21) 


Spinoza suggests here that whatever passions, or vacillation among passions, character- 
ized the Hebrews beforehand, Moses was able to bring them under the influence of devo- 
tion, a form of love. Fear and other passions, however potent they might be in particular 
cases, are not fixed features of an individual’s character. 

Spinoza, then, takes people to be plastic in a way that Hobbes does not. Hobbes writes 
little about changes in the passions themselves, as opposed to the objects of the passions. 
No element of his argument depends upon such change. Spinoza, however, takes plasticity 
to be a great problem for many of us: our passions change frequently with external 
influence. He also takes this plasticity to be something that we, or others, can exploit. 


3. Value and the State 


This section presents consequences of the philosophers’ accounts of human nature for 
their ethics and politics. In their theories of value, Hobbes and Spinoza start from a 
common theory of use: I call whatever I desire “good.” Hobbes’s substantive accounts of 
value and the state offer little beyond this theory: he simply takes as good what is desired. 
Spinoza, however, in both his ethics and his politics adds a great deal to this doctrine. He 
emphasizes ways in which individuals can become better, or more free. 

Hobbes offers an account of the use of ‘good,’ ‘evil,’ and ‘vile’ (that is, following the 
sense of vilis, valueless) in the course of introducing the passions in Leviathan 6. The 
appearance of the definition there suggests that, in the first instance at any rate, this is an 
account of use and a doctrine of Hobbes’s psychology: 


But whatsoever is the object of any man’s appetite or desire, that is it which he for his part cal- 
leth good: and the object of his hate and aversion, evil; and of his contempt, vile and inconsider- 
able. For these words of good, evil, and contemptible, are ever used with relation to the person 
that useth them: there being nothing simply and absolutely so; nor any common rule of good 


87 


MICHAEL LeBUFFE 


and evil, to be taken from the nature of the objects themselves; but from the person of the man 
(where there is no commonwealth:;) or, (in a commonwealth,) from the person that represen- 
teth it; or from an arbitrator or judge, whom men disagreeing shall by consent set up, and 
make his sentence the rule thereof. (L6.80.29-6.82.4) 


The passage begins with an assertion that our use of value terms reflects our desires. 
Because it does so, Hobbes goes on to note, there is nothing that is simply good. Goodness, 
understood in these terms is, after all, a relation: chocolate is good for me because I want it. 
If you neither want nor are averse to chocolate, then it is contemptible for you. In the final 
clause here, Hobbes foreshadows his account of value in a commonwealth: good and evil 
in a commonwealth are determined by the sovereign (see L18.274.1-10). This may be 
understood as a significant consequence of his initial account rather than amendment: in 
the commonwealth, as outside of it, the good for me is what I desire. In the commonwealth, 
however, the sovereign’s laws and pronouncements both reflect my desires, through my 
consent, and also, where the sovereign is effective, create circumstances that shape my 
natural desires. I will be averse to punishment, for example, and so will, like the sovereign, 
find violation of the law to be evil. 

Similar views may be found in the Ethics. At E3p9s Spinoza offers an account of the 
ordinary use of ‘good’ that emphasizes desire: “It is clear that we neither strive for, nor will, 
neither want, nor desire anything because we judge it to be good; on the contrary, we judge 
something to be good because we strive for it, will it, want it, and desire it.” At the end of E4 
Preface, Spinoza offers a description of good, evil, and indifference as relations: 


As far as good and evil are concerned, they also indicate nothing positive in things, considered 
in themselves, nor are they anything other than modes of thinking, or notions we form 
because we compare things to one another. For one and the same thing can be good, and evil, 
and also indifferent. For example, Music is good for one who is melancholy, evil to one who is 
mourning, and neither good nor evil to one who is deaf. 


Finally, at E4p37s2, he builds from desire-satisfaction to an account of ‘good’ and ‘evil’ in 
the state: 


Anyone who is in the state of nature. . determines what is good and what evil for himself and 
insofar as he takes it to contribute to his own advantage. . .However in a civil state what is good 
and what is evil is determined by common consent and all must submit to the state. 


It is perhaps in these views that Spinoza most closely resembles Hobbes. They warrant a 
close study of relevant passages (including DC3.31 and DC6.9) for hints about historical 
influence. 

Although this shared ground is significant, it is noteworthy that Hobbes rests here. His 
account of the laws of nature, which he also calls virtues, starts with each person’s right 
“to use his own power, as he will himself” from “his own judgment and reason” (L14.198.5). 
That is, it starts from what each of us calls good. At the end of the account of the laws, he 
reiterates his use of ‘good’ and ‘evil’ in the sense of Leviathan 6 in characterizing moral phi- 
losophy: “For moral philosophy is nothing else but the science of what is good and evil in 
the conversation and society of mankind. ‘Good’ and ‘evil’ are names that signify our 
appetites and aversions” (L15.242.1—4). Hobbes acknowledges, as we have seen, that dif- 
ferent people vary in what they find good, but he argues that we agree about the laws of 
nature: “all men agree on this, that peace is good; and therefore also the way or means of 


88 


SPINOZA AND HOBBES 


peace (which, as I have shewed before), are justice, gratitude. . .and the rest of the laws of 
nature” (L15.242.13-16). Hobbes takes the laws of nature, then, to be the science of 
moral philosophy and also what all alike desire and so call good. 

Hobbes forcefully dismisses as false more robust theories of value. At the beginning of 
Leviathan 11, he rejects a series of common doctrines that characterize Thomistic and 
other traditional ethics: “[T]he Felicity of this life consisteth not in the repose of a mind 
satisfied. For there is no such Finis ultimus (utmost aim) nor Summum Bonum (greatest 
Good) as is spoken of in the books of the old Moral Philosophers” (L11.150.7-10). The 
passage rejects as baseless any view that takes one aim or purported good to be better than 
another. Hobbes’s theory of value, after all, does not offer a means outside of his accounts 
of desire, reason, and society by which we might find one end to be better than others. 

Spinoza, however, does not rest at a theory of value based upon what people find 
valuable. This is clear in his definitions of ‘good’ and ‘evil’ at the beginning of Ethics 4: 


E4d1: By ‘good’ I shall understand this, what we certainly know to be useful to us. 


E4d2: By ‘evil,’ however, I shall understand this, what we certainly know prevents us from 
being masters of some good. 


Desires do not always depend upon certain knowledge, so good and evil here are more than 
simply what one wants. They are what we know helps us to become more like the best or 
most free human being (see E4 Preface). 

Where Hobbes rejects all of the doctrines of the old moral philosophers, Spinoza, albeit 
in his own way, endorses them: 


In life, therefore, it is especially useful to perfect, as far as we can, the intellect, or reason, and 
in this one thing consists man’s greatest felicity, or blessedness. Indeed, blessedness is nothing 
but that acquiescentia of mind that arises from the intuitive knowledge of God. And perfecting 
the intellect is nothing other than understanding God and the attributes and actions of God 
which follow from the necessity of his nature. Therefore, the final goal [finis ultimus] of a man 
who is led by reason, that is, the highest desire by means of which he tries to regulate all the 
others is that by which he is moved to an adequate conception of himself, and also of all things 
that can fall under his understanding. (E4App.4) 


On Spinoza’s account, because we are more free, powerful, and perfect (see Eld7, E2d6, 
and E4d8 for definitions of these terms) insofar as we act or are adequate causes, desires in 
which we are more active are better. The best desire, he writes here, is one for under- 
standing, and Spinoza presents each of the traditional doctrines that Hobbes rejects in 
similar terms. The finis ultimus is understanding, and the knowledge of God is Spinoza’s 
highest good or summum bonum (see also E4p28). 

These doctrines depend upon Spinoza’s convictions that the extent of activity in differ- 
ent affects varies and that our affects can change. In Ethics 4, he describes the harm that 
passions can do to us and the ways in which we are and can become more free of that 
harm. In Ethics 5, he builds an account of how the mind can come to be more free from the 
influence of passion or, in other words, more active. It is because our affects are in varying 
degrees active and because they are plastic that Spinoza can defend these views about the 
“growth” (incrementum) of affects and how they might “be restrained” (coercere). Some of 
the most important passages for this theme in the Ethics are E4p5, E4p7, E4p14, E4p15, 
E4App.2, and E5p20s. 


89 


MICHAEL LeBUFFE 


Spinoza, then, offers an account of value and well-being that draws upon his rich moral 
psychology to go beyond Hobbesian desire-satisfaction. This difference recurs in the philos- 
ophers’ accounts of the state. Their accounts of the condition of human beings outside of 
the commonwealth are similar: 


Whatsoever therefore is consequent to a time of war, where every man is enemy to every man, 
the same consequent to the time wherein men live without other security than what their own 
strength and their own invention shall furnish them withal. In such condition there is no 
place for industry, because the fruit thereof is uncertain: and consequently no culture of the 
earth; no navigation, nor use of the commodities that may be imported by sea; no commo- 
dious building; no instruments of moving and removing such things as require much force; no 
knowledge of the face of the earth; no account of time; no arts; no letters; no society; and 
which is worst of all, continual fear, and danger of violent death; and the life of man, solitary, 
poor, nasty, brutish, and short. (L13.192.20—30) 


Society is very useful not only for securing one’s life against enemies, but also for lightening 
the many tasks that must be done. Indeed, it is necessary for this. For unless men were willing 
to give work to each other, anyone would lack both the skill and the time to be able to provide 
for his own sustenance and survival. Indeed, all are not equally suited to all tasks, and no one 
alone could provide the things which he most needs. Each alone would lack both the strength 
and the time, I say, to plow, to sow, to reap, to grind, to cook, to weave, to sew, and to do all the 
many things which must be done to sustain life — not to mention, the arts and sciences, which 
are absolutely necessary to the perfection of human nature and to blessedness. We see, then, 
that those who live barbarously without a state lead a miserable and almost brutish life. 
(G III/59/13-27) 


Two differences in Spinoza account, however, deserve note. The first is an absence: Spinoza 
does not emphasize fear. We have seen why he does not. It is not fear but vacillation and 
vulnerability to new passion that causes the misery of human beings outside the state. The 
second is an invocation of those doctrines of the old moral philosophers that Hobbes 
rejects. Spinoza concludes by arguing that in the state of nature we lack the means to 
attain human perfection or blessedness. 

We institute states, on Hobbes’s account, because they help us to get what we want. 
They help us to escape death and also to get the basic securities and comforts that are so 
uncertain otherwise. This is clear, I think, in his account of the office of the sovereign: 


The office of the sovereign. . .consists in the end for which he was trusted with the sovereign 
power, namely, the procuration of the safety of the people. . . [not simply] a bare preservation, 
but also all other contentments of life, which every man by lawful industry, without danger or 
hurt to the commonwealth, shall acquire to himself. (L30.520.2—10) 


Spinoza, however, has a great interest in the function of the state in cultivating the best 
human affects. As we might put it today, he has a comprehensive conception of the good, 
which he takes it to be the office of the sovereign to promote: 


It is not, I say, the end of the State to change men from rational beings into beasts or automata, 
but the opposite, that their mind and body may perform their functions safely and that they 
may use this same reason freely, and that they should not quarrel in hatred, anger, or deceit, 
or hold unkind feelings toward one another. The end of the state, therefore, is really freedom. 
(G Ill/241/3-8) 


90 


SPINOZA AND HOBBES 


Hobbes’s account of the office of the sovereign reflects his conviction that the good is 
simply what we desire: safety and the “contentments of life.” Spinoza takes the purpose of 
the state to be our freedom and rationality, notions that trace back to 3p1. For him, ends 
such as peace and security are instrumental for these further ends, which are good whether 
or not people desire them at the moment. Moreover ends that some of us desire “without 
danger or hurt to the commonwealth” will be valueless if they do not really make citizens 
better people, that is, if they do not promote freedom and rationality. In his politics, then, 
as in his ethics, Spinoza depends upon his theory of causation in human affects and his 
conviction that the degree to which we cause our own actions can change. 


4. Conclusion 


Scholars recommend that students of Spinoza’s ethical and political theory start with 
Hobbes for good reason. The philosophers’ methods and many of their doctrines are sim- 
ilar. Spinoza, however, maintains where Hobbes does not that human emotions are highly 
variable and highly plastic. His moral and political theory reflects this commitment. 


References 


Aubrey, J. (1898) Brief Lives. Oxford: Clarendon Press. 

Curley, E. (1988). Behind the Geometrical Method. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 

Curley, E. (1991). The state of nature and its law in Hobbes and Spinoza. Philosophical Topics 19: 
97-117. 

Garrett, D. (1996). Spinoza’s ethical theory. In: The Cambridge Companion to Spinoza, 267-314. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,. 

Garrett, D. (2010) “Promising” ideas: Hobbes and contract in Spinoza’s political philosophy. In: 
Spinoza’s Theological-Political Treatise: A Critical Guide, 192—209. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press. 

Htibner, K. (2018). Spinoza’s unorthodox metaphysics of the will. In: The Oxford Handbook of Spinoza, 
343-369. New York: Oxford University Press. 

LeBuffe, M. (2010). From Bondage to Freedom: Spinoza on Human Excellence. New York: Oxford 
University Press. 

Malcolm, N. (2002). Hobbes and Spinoza. In: Aspects of Hobbes, 27-52. Oxford: Clarendon Press. 

Van Rooijen, A.J. (1889). Inventaire des livres formant la bibliotéque de Bénédict Spinoza. The Hague: 
Martinus Nijhoff. 


91 


Part II 


Metaphysics and Natural Philosophy 


9 


Spinoza’s Monistic Metaphysics of 
Substance and Mode 


DON GARRETT 


Spinoza claims in his Ethics to demonstrate his own theologically inflected version of what 
has come to be called ‘substance monism’: 


Elp14c1: God is unique, that is, . . . in Nature there is only one substance, and. . . it is abso- 
lutely infinite. 


He also claims to demonstrate a corresponding thesis that we might call ‘the modality of 
particulars’: 


E1p25c: Particular things are nothing but affections of God's attributes, or modes by which 
God’s attributes are expressed in a certain and determinate way. 


These are among his most famous theses, but what exactly does he mean by them, and what 
reasons lie behind them? What use does he make of them in his own metaphysics, and what 
applications do they have to contemporary metaphysics? These questions have been central to 
the resurgence of historical and philosophical interest in Spinoza’s metaphysics in recent years. 


1. The Meaning of the Two Theses 


In order to understand Spinoza’s two theses, it is essential to understand what he means by 
‘substance’ (‘substantia’), ‘mode’ (‘modus’), and ‘God’ (‘Deus’). His definitions of the first two 
terms are complementary: 


E1d3: By substance I understand what is in itself and is conceived through itself, that is, that 
whose concept does not require the concept of another thing, from which it must be formed. 


E1d5: By mode, I understand the affections of a substance, or that which is in another through 
which it is also conceived. 


The two key notions or concepts used in these definitions are both of relations: that of being 
inand that of being conceived through. In order to understand the two definitions, therefore, 
it is essential to understand, in turn, how he understands these two relations. 


A Companion to Spinoza, First Edition. Edited by Yitzhak Y. Melamed. 
© 2021 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2021 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd. 


95 


DON GARRETT 


The relation of being in that Spinoza invokes in his definitions is not that of spatial contain- 
ment (as the bread is ‘in’ the cupboard) nor that of part and whole (as the chemistry 
department is ‘in’ the division of natural sciences). Rather, as the standard seventeenth- 
century philosophical usage of the term ‘mode’ requires — and as Spinoza’s use of the 
alternative technical term ‘affections’ (‘affectiones’) confirms — it is a relation that is typically 
taken to hold between a quality and the thing that in some way has or ‘bears’ that quality. 
Philosophers often call such a relation ‘inherence,’ and it is generally taken to be expressible, 
at least in many cases, through linguistic predication. Furthermore, as a relation between 
qualities and the things that have or bear them, it is typically understood to involve a kind of 
ontological dependence of the quality on the ontological support provided by the thing. Yitzhak 
Melamed has argued convincingly that Spinoza retains these traditional aspects of the notion 
of being in (Melamed 2013; for many other important points about substance in Spinoza, see 
also Melamed forthcoming). That Spinoza’s understanding of the relation differs to at least 
some extent from that of his predecessors, however, is shown by the fact that he not only 
regards a mode as being in a substance but also regards any substance as being in itself. As he 
understands it, something is in itselfif and only if it is ontologically self-supporting. The first 
axiom of Ethics Part 1 states: “Whatever is, is either in itself or in another” (Elal). Hence, 
according to Spinoza, everything that exists is ontologically supported. 

For a thing to be conceived through another is for the existence and content of a thought 
or (in Spinoza’s terminology) ‘idea’ of the first thing to depend on the existence and 
content of the thought or idea of the second. Just as some things can be ontologically self- 
sufficient, in his view, so too can the thoughts or ideas of some things be conceptually 
self-sufficient. Indeed, the second axiom of Ethics Part 1 states: “Whatever cannot be con- 
ceived through another must be conceived through itself” (Ela2). Hence, according to 
Spinoza, everything must be able to be conceived. 

Twice in Ethics Part 1 — in Elp4d and again in E1p15d-— Spinoza infers from Elal that 
everything is either a substance or a mode. (In E1p4d, he uses the equivalent term ‘affec- 
tion’ and also cites the definitions E1d3 and E1d5.) He thus takes it for granted that nothing 
can be in itself yet conceived through something else or in something else yet conceived 
through itself. In this respect — as in many others for him — there is a fundamental 
parallelism between how things are and how they are conceived. 

God, according to Spinoza’s definition, is a substance satisfying a dual condition that he 
calls being ‘absolutely infinite’: 


E1d6: By God I understand a being absolutely infinite, that is, a substance consisting of an 
infinity of attributes, of which each one expresses an eternal and infinite essence. 


This definition employs the two notions or concepts of essence and attribute. The essence of 
something, as Spinoza understands it, is its very nature, that which makes it what it is 
(E2d2). Those qualities of a thing that the thing cannot be without — its ‘properties’ in a 
technical sense (Latin: ‘propria’) —necessarily follow from the essence of the thing (El p1 6d). 
An attribute, as he defines it, is “what the intellect perceives of a substance, as constituting 
its essence” (E1d4). Since the intellect does not perceive falsely (E2pp40-41; see also 
E4app4), an attribute of a substance does, at least in some way, constitute its essence. 
Spinoza’s technical term ‘attribute’ corresponds in many respects to Descartes’s technical 
term ‘principal attribute’. For Descartes, every substance created by God has one principal 
attribute — either Extension (i.e. spatial dimensionality) for a body or Thought (i.e. men- 
tality) for a mind — which constitutes its essence, making it the kind of substance it is. In 


96 


SPINOZA'S METAPHYSICS OF SUBSTANCE AND MODE 


addition, every quality that is in a substance is so specifically as a mode of — literally, a ‘way’ 
of having — that attribute. Thus, a body’s shape or size is a mode of extension in an extended 
substance, while a mind’s judgment or passion is a mode of thought in a thinking sub- 
stance. But while Spinoza agrees that an attribute constitutes the essence of a substance and 
that every other quality in a substance is a mode of an attribute, he differs (i) in allowing that 
a substance may have more than one such attribute and (ii) in maintaining that Thought 
and Extension are just two of infinite attributes, the rest of which are unknown to us. 

Commentators have offered many interpretations over many years of the nature and 
status of the attributes in Spinoza’s metaphysics, but attributes are best understood as 
diverse manners (or kinds or domains) of existence, so that a substance having more than 
one attribute exists in more than one manner. (I avoid using the more natural term ‘way’ 
chiefly because of its close connection with ‘mode.’) Each attribute then constitutes the 
essence of the substance for that manner of existence. Importantly, then, attributes such as 
Thought or Extension are not, for Spinoza, maximally general qualities or modes of a sub- 
stance, but rather multiple manners of existence that the various qualities or modes of a 
substance may have (Garrett 2017). E1d6 thus signifies that God, if it exists, is a substance 
having an unlimited diversity of attributes, each of which constitutes its essence for a dif- 
ferent manner or domain of existence, and each of which is unlimited within that manner 
or domain — so that, for example, there would be no thought that was not God’s thought, 
and no extension that was not God’s extension. 

Taken alone, Spinoza’s statement that God is the only substance might be thought to 
offer an unusual answer to the question, “How many substances are there?” but to do so 
primarily as a consequence of his having adopted a rather philosophical form of theism 
together with an unusually high metaphysical standard for something to qualify as a ‘sub- 
stance.’ This would be in keeping with the approach of Descartes, who distinguishes a spe- 
cial strict sense of ‘substance’ — as a being that does not in any way depend for its existence 
on anything else — that applies only to the Deity (CSM II 210). Spinoza goes much further, 
however, in stating that particular things (Latin: ‘res particulares’) — for which he later uses 
the more technical term ‘singular things’ (‘res singulares’) (E2d7) — are nothing but modes 
of God’s attributes. For he is claiming that such things as rocks, trees, and human beings 
are themselves qualities ontologically dependent on and supported by God in something 
much like the way in which the qualities commonly attributed to such particular things 
have been thought to be ontologically dependent on and supported by those things. 
Together, the two theses comprise much of the core of Spinoza’s monistic metaphysics of 
substance and mode. How does he come to these striking conclusions? 


2. Arguments for the Two Theses 
Spinoza infers the first thesis, Elp14c1 — that is, the uniqueness of God as the only, and 
absolutely infinite, substance — directly from the proposition of which it is said to be a 
corollary: 
E1p14: Except God, no substance can be or be conceived. 
In support of drawing the corollary from this proposition, he cites only E1d6 (the definition 
of ‘God’) and E1p10s-— the former to support the characterization of God as absolutely infi- 


nite, and later to remind the reader that a substance may have more than one attribute. 


97 


DON GARRETT 


The demonstration of E1p14, in turn, draws on the definition of ‘God’ and two proposi- 
tions demonstrated previously in Part 1 of the Ethics: 


E1p5: In Nature there cannot be two or more substances of the same nature or attribute. 


Elp11: God, or a substance consisting of infinite attributes, each of which expresses eternal 
and infinite essence, necessarily exists. 


Given these two propositions as premises, the demonstration itself is straightforward. If 
God exists, then by definition it has all attributes, and so any other substance would have 
to share an attribute with God. But substances cannot share attributes, by E1p5, and it is 
necessary that God exists, by Elp11. Hence, there cannot be any substance other than 
God; and, indeed, since God’s existence is necessary, it cannot even be conceived how there 
could be a substance other than God. But how does Spinoza establish these two key propo- 
sitions that serve as premises? 

Spinoza’s demonstration of El1p5, the proposition that substances cannot share an 
attribute, takes the form of a dilemma. If two substances could share an attribute, he 
asserts, then they would have to be distinguished from one another in some way. (This 
assertion goes unargued, but it might be regarded as the result of including differences 
within the scope Elal’s claim that everything must be conceivable.) Yet neither of two 
jointly exhaustive alternatives — one concerning differences of attribute and one 
concerning differences of modes (‘affections’) — can do so successfully, he argues; hence, 
two substances cannot share an attribute. The argument has elicited considerable contro- 
versy, but I believe that there are two keys to understanding its content. First, it must be 
recognized that, for Spinoza, any two substances sharing an attribute would have to be 
distinguishable within the manner or domain of existence that is that attribute — that is, it 
must be possible to distinguish what, existing in that manner and in that domain, per- 
tains to the first substance and what pertains to the second. Second, it must be recognized 
that modes, and hence any differences among them, must be fully conceivable through the 
nature or essence of the substance — that is, through the relevant attribute — of which 
they are modes. 

Utilizing these two keys, the argument may be understood as follows. As previously 
argued in Elp4d, there exists nothing but substances and modes. Hence, the difference 
between two substances both existing in the domain of the same attribute would have to 
be found either in (i) the essence of the two substances themselves within that domain, or 
(ii) in the nature of their modes within that domain. But the essence of a substance within 
the domain of an attribute is that attribute itself, so a difference of essence between the two 
substances in this domain would entail that the substances were not sharing the same attri- 
bute after all. Yet because modes are, by definition, conceived through their substance, any 
difference in the modes of two substances within the domain of the attribute would have to 
be conceived through a difference in the essential nature of the substance — and again, it 
would not be a case of two substances sharing the same attribute. (Garrett (1990) provides 
a partial history of discussions of the demonstration and an early version of this line of 
interpretation; Melamed and Bledin (unpublished) provides more analysis and an effective 
formalization.) Thus, by taking seriously the conception of a substance as an entirely self- 
sufficient thing through which everything about its modes must be fully conceived, Spinoza 
rejects the Cartesian doctrine that two substances could differ in their modes while having 
the same essential attribute. 


98 


SPINOZA'S METAPHYSICS OF SUBSTANCE AND MODE 


In Elp11d, Spinoza offers several proofs for the second premise of Elp14d, that “God, 
or a substance consisting of infinite attributes, each of which expresses eternal and infinite 
essence, necessarily exists.” His primary proof is as follows: 


Dem: If you deny this, conceive, if you can, that God does not exist. Therefore (by E1a7) his essence 
does not involve existence. But this (by E1p7) is absurd. Therefore God necessarily exists, q.e.d. 


This line of argument confirms the basic approach of what is usually called ‘the ontological 
argument’ for God’s existence (put forward in one version by Descartes and in a much ear- 
lier version by Anselm). According to that approach, one can come to know that God must 
necessarily exist — that is, cannot possibly not exist — simply by conceiving the essence (that 
is, the nature) of God; for this essence, as expressed in a definition that captures it, necessi- 
tates the existence of that whose essence it is, so that denying its existence is a logical con- 
tradiction. Spinoza describes anything the essence of which has this extraordinary 
characteristic as having an “essence that involves existence.” Accordingly, E1p11d chal- 
lenges the reader to try to conceive that God, as defined, does not exist; in failing to do so, 
the reader will instead see that God does necessarily exist. 

Spinoza’s proof does not simply leave this to the reader’s own intellectual experiment, 
however; rather it argues that the attempt must fail, because, by Ela7, whatever has an 
essence that involves existence cannot be conceived as not existing, and, by Elp7, it is 
‘absurd’ that God not have an essence involving existence. This is absurd because God is by 
definition a substance, and El1p7 states that “it pertains to the nature of a substance to 
exist,” which is equivalent, according to Elp7d, to saying that “its essence necessarily 
involves existence.” Since El p7 is a claim about the nature of substance in general, it is best 
understood as the claim that the essence of any possible substance must be an essence that 
involves existence; and Elp11d then simply applies this general claim specifically to God. 

Spinoza’s argument for the crucial Elp7, in turn, appeals to the relation of causation: 


Dem. A substance cannot be produced by anything else (by Elp6c); therefore it will be the 
cause of itself, that is (by Eld1), its essence necessarily involves existence, or it pertains to its 
nature to exist. 


The requirement of the cited definition (E1d1) that whatever is cause of itself must have an 
essence involving existence is a reasonable one; for only if a thing’s existence was necessi- 
tated by its own essential nature, so that its non-existence would be a contradiction, could 
it plausibly lay claim to being the self-explanatory source of its own existence. He offers 
two arguments for the premise that “a substance cannot be produced by anything else” 
(Elp6c), but the simpler of the two appeals to his so-called ‘Causal Axiom’: 


Ela4: The knowledge of an effect depends on, and involves, the knowledge of its cause. 


Because he identifies ‘knowledge’ (‘cognitio’) with conception, this entails (at least) that if 
one thing is caused by another, then it is also conceived through that other. But since a 
substance, by its nature and definition (E1d3), cannot be conceived through anything else, it 
follows from the necessity of this axiom that it could not be caused by anything else, either; 
hence, any possible thing that could be caused to exist by something else is by its nature not 
a possible substance. 


99 


DON GARRETT 


To conclude from this result that any possible substance will be the cause of itself requires 
two further assumptions: (i) that a possible substance must have some possible cause of its 
existence and (ii) that whatever can be the cause of its own existence will be the cause of its 
own existence. The first assumption is a consequence of a principle that he states explicitly 
in Elplld: “There must be a cause for the existence or non-existence of each thing.” 
Although he does not argue for this principle there, it appears to follow from the conjunction 
of Ela2 (stating that everything must be conceivable, either through itself or through 
another) and Ela4 (interpreted as requiring also that whatever is conceived through 
something is caused by it). The second assumption, too, is a reasonable one for Spinoza to 
make: something can be the cause of itself only if its essence involves existence, but if its 
essence involves existence, then it also must cause its own existence by necessitating it. 

Spinoza’s second proof of God’s necessary existence in Elp11d states the principle just 
quoted, that “there must be a cause for the existence or non-existence of each thing” and 
then argues that nothing could possibly cause God’s non-existence. Insofar as substances 
differ in their attributes, they have nothing in common (by Eld2) and so cannot cause 
anything about one another (by Elp3); hence, nothing other than God could cause God 
not to exist. But God could be the cause of its own non-existence, Spinoza argues, only 
through having an essence that itself involved a contradiction, like that of a ‘square circle.’ 
In the case of an absolutely infinite being, however, which involves no negation or limita- 
tion, this is said to be absurd; hence, God is self-caused and so necessarily exists. The third 
proof of Elp11, in both of its versions, depends on a principle that ‘being able to exist is 
power,’ while ‘being able not to exist’ is lack of power. Since an infinite being must have 
more power to exist than a finite and limited thing, Spinoza argues, it follows that God nec- 
essarily exists if anything does — even ourselves, which we know to exist. Indeed, he adds, 
it follows directly that God, as having an infinite power of existence, does necessarily exist. 
(For discussion of the purpose of this third line of proof, see Garrett 1979.) 

After establishing his substance monism, Spinoza states his second thesis, the modality 
of particulars — “particular things are nothing but affections of God’s attributes, or modes 
by which God’s attributes are expressed in a certain and determinate way” — as a corollary 
to Elp25. Yet the argument he provides for the thesis makes no reference to or obvious use 
of Elp25, which reads “God is the efficient cause, not only of the existence of things, but 
also of their essence.” On the contrary, he appeals for support only to E1d5 (the definition 
of ‘mode’) and to E1p15, which concerns that definition’s crucial relations of being in and 
being conceived through: “Whatever is, is in God, and nothing can be or be conceived without 
God.” The demonstration of E1p15, in turn, appeals directly to E1p14 plus the definitions 
of ‘substance’ and ‘mode’ and the first axiom of Part 1. According to E1p14, as we have 
seen, there cannot be or be conceived a substance other than God; but (by E1d5) modes 
must be and be conceived through a substance; and (from Elal, as already inferred in 
E1p4d) there is nothing other than substance and modes. Hence all of the particular things 
that exist — which, as particular, are finite and hence not God — can only be modes of God. 

Because Spinoza’s argument for Elp25c does not depend on any elements of the Ethics 
subsequent to E1p15, it seems that he could have given it immediately after E1p15.That he did 
not do so is presumably explained by the fact that the intervening propositions are concerned 
with other topics. One of these topics is the so-called infinite modes, which are pervasive and 
eternal throughout an attribute (El pp21—23); they are an important further element of his 
metaphysics of substance and mode, and one deserving of a full treatment in its own right, 
although their character can only be adumbrated here. It is only at Elp26 that he begins to 
turn to particular things which, as finite modes, have a limited scope and duration. 


100 


SPINOZA'S METAPHYSICS OF SUBSTANCE AND MODE 


3. Spinoza’s Uses of the Two Theses 


Both Elp14cl and Elp25c play important roles in the demonstrations of many later prop- 
ositions and corollaries of the Ethics, and the distinctive monistic metaphysics of substance 
and mode crystalized in the two theses serves many crucial explanatory purposes in his 
philosophy. In this section, I will briefly describe some of the most important of these 
purposes. 

As we have already observed, Spinoza maintains in E1p11d that there must be a cause 
for the existence of each thing that exists, as well as for the non-existence of each thing 
that does not. This principle is a manifestation or expression of his more general commit- 
ment to a strong version of what is commonly called the ‘Principle of Sufficient Reason’ 
(a term originated by Leibniz) according to which there is always a sufficient reason why 
things are as they are and not otherwise. His monistic metaphysics of substance and 
mode helps him to explain how this causal principle is satisfied for everything that exists. 
First, particular things are all finite modes of a single substance, in which they inhere, 
through which they are conceived, and hence (according to Ela4, the Causal Axiom) by 
which they are caused to exist. Indeed, as we have observed in the discussion of Elp5d, 
every feature of these modes must be determined by the essential nature of the substance 
— that is, the attribute — of which they are modes. The infinite modes, too, are in, con- 
ceived through, and so caused by the one substance, God (El pp21—23). Finally, this sub- 
stance itself in which all modes inhere, through which they are conceived, and by which 
they are caused is, in turn, the cause of its own existence in virtue of having an essence 
that involves existence. It is important to emphasize that although causation, as Spinoza 
understands it, is an explanatory relation and always involves the expression of power on 
the part of the cause, it is not a requirement that all causes precede their effects in a dura- 
tional sequence. On the contrary, because all of the modes of a substance are also its 
‘properties’ (E1p16d) in the technical sense already mentioned, the way in which the 
properties of a thing follow necessarily from its essence is a paradigm example of causa- 
tion, even though the essences of things cannot exist prior to their properties in a dura- 
tional series. 

Spinoza’s monistic metaphysics of substance and mode also allows him to offer an 
appealing conception of the nature of space. Space is not, in his view, an empty meta- 
physical container for material substances, the substantial character of which may be 
problematic. Nor is it a complex whole arising from the combination of related parts. 
Instead, the real thing corresponding to the term ‘space’ is simply the one infinite extended 
substance itself. Because it is essentially extended, it is capable of sustaining different qual- 
ities of itself — that is, affections or modes — in what might be called a regionalized way that 
allows them to stand in spatial relations to one another. But Spinoza is emphatic that this 
does not imply that extended substance itself is either composed of parts or divisible into 
parts, whether infinite or finite in number (El pp12—13 and Elp15s). In his view, parts (in 
the proper sense of the term) are always metaphysically and conceptually prior to the 
wholes that comprise them, and the nature of a whole is therefore explained through the 
nature and relations of its parts (Elp12d and Ep. 35 (G IV/181/25)). The relation bet- 
ween a substance and its modes, in contrast, is one in which the substance is metaphysi- 
cally and conceptually prior to the modes, whose nature is instead explained through the 
nature of the substance itself. In the case of God as an extended substance, it is the nature 
of particular extended things, as modes, that is explained through the attribute of 
extension, as an essence of the one substance. 


101 


DON GARRETT 


Furthermore, Spinoza’s monistic metaphysics provides the basis for a positive account 
of how particular things constitute things at all. (This account is explicit for the attribute of 
Extension, whose particular things are bodies, but a parallel account applies to other 
attributes (E2p7s).) He describes the infinite mode that follows ‘immediately’ from the 
attribute of extension as ‘motion and rest’ (Ep. 64 (G IV/278/25)). Descartes conceives of 
motion and rest as a kind of force distributed among various extended substances (bodies) 
that causes their changes of place relative to one another. This force is, as we might say, 
bipolar and complementary: that is, the greater the ‘quantity of motion’ a body has, the less 
‘quantity of rest’ it has, and vice versa. In Cartesian physics, finite extended substances are 
distinguishable from one another through their different (higher and lower) quantities of 
motion and (correspondingly lower and higher) quantities of rest, by which they move at 
different speeds and hence change place relative to one another. For Spinoza, I have argued 
(Garrett 1994), ‘motion and rest’ is again a bipolar and complementary force, but one that 
is distributed throughout the one extended substance in a variegated and differentiated 
way, so that here is a greater quantity of motion and less of motion, and there —in a spatial 
relation to the first quantity — is a greater quantity of rest and less of motion. From the 
nature of motion and rest there follows, for Spinoza, other pervasive infinite modes consti- 
tuting what we think of as ‘laws of physics’ (Curley 1969) of varying degrees of generality 
or specificity, determining how a given distribution and arrangement of motion and rest is 
succeeded in a durational order by a different distribution and arrangement of motion and 
rest. 

The ‘simplest bodies’ (‘corpora simplicissima’) as described in Spinoza’s so-called 
‘Physiological Digression’ followed E2p13, are not substances but simply internally homo- 
geneous regional distributions (of various shapes and volumes) of this force, capable of 
increasing or decreasing their degree of motion homogeneously in accordance in the laws 
of physics. Combinations of simplest bodies that may differ in their own degrees of motion 
and rest result in ‘individuals,’ and combinations of individuals give rise to individuals of 
higher degrees of complexity. What all such individuals, of whatever degree of complexity, 
have in common, however, is that they tend through the workings of the laws of physics to 
maintain a fixed pattern (‘ratio’) of motion and rest among their simpler parts in the face of 
changes in their surroundings. Consider, for example, the case of an individual that is a 
book. Some of its component pages may acquire more motion without others doing so, but 
this has limits; if one tries to carry away some pages of the book, the other pages of the 
book will receive communicated motion from them and accommodate themselves to it so 
as preserve the structural integrity of the whole even as the entire book increases its 
motion. Animal and human bodies are simply very complex individuals, with very complex 
internal patterns of motion and rest in the one substance. 

The permanent and pervasive capacities of the one extended substance to sustain such 
individuals under at least some circumstances, following the laws of physics, constitute (or 
so I have argued in Garrett 2009) the infinite modes that Spinoza calls the ‘formal essences’ 
of such individuals. When existing circumstances combine to bring such a pattern of 
motion and rest into actual existence, the result is a particular thing that — by its very 
nature as a thing of the kind it is — tends and therefore ‘strives’ to preserve itself in the 
face of surrounding things and circumstances. Because particular things, as persisting 
patterns of motions and rest, strive to preserve themselves in this way, they qualify for 
Spinoza as partial causes of their own continuing in existence, if not also of their original 
coming into existence. In this respect, they are finite approximations to a substance — and 
thereby to some extent things — by being partly in themselves, conceived through themselves, 


102 


SPINOZA'S METAPHYSICS OF SUBSTANCE AND MODE 


and causes of themselves (E3p6; see Garrett 2002). Thus, a collection of extended bodies 
composes a whole, for Spinoza, if and only if they instantiate a pattern of motion and rest 
that has, through the laws of nature, at least some power to preserve itself, which power he 
calls the particular thing’s ‘actual essence’ (E3p7). The more such power a particular thing 
has, the more it can act — that is, the more of what happens can be explained through its 
own nature or essence (E3d2). The more power for action a particular thing has, in turn, 
the greater its finite degree of perfection (i.e. ‘“completeness’) and reality (E4pref) — that is, 
although it is not a substance, the more of a thing it is. 

Finally, Spinoza’s monistic metaphysics of substance and mode allows him to provide 
a distinctive and appealing explanation of the relation between the physical and the 
mental in general, and between bodies and minds, in particular. In his view, as we have 
observed, the one substance God has multiple fundamental manners of existence, of 
which Extension and Thought are two. Each of these attributes is or constitutes God’s 
essence, from which its modes follow as properties, in its own manner of existence. A 
human body is thus not a substance but a mode of God as the one extended substance, 
while a human mind is not a substance but a mode of the same God as a thinking sub- 
stance. By the Causal Axiom, Ela4, God conceives things in the same order in which the 
things conceived by God cause one another; hence, there is a particular mode of God’s 
thought that is of each particular mode of God’s extension. In the case of human beings, 
Spinoza argues, God’s idea of the human body is the mind of that body, as an awareness 
of its states (E2p13). Furthermore, because the body and the mind are modes of one and 
the same substance, which is both extended and thinking, they can and must be also one 
and the same mode of that substance, as existing in the extended manner and in the 
thinking manner, respectively (E2p7s). Moreover, the same relationship holds between 
any particular mode of extension and the idea of that mode of extension, so that that idea 
is therefore the mind of that mode of extension (E3p1d). The result is a doctrine of mind- 
body identity in the context of a more general view that everything that exists has a 
thinking (i.e. mental) nature. 


4. Contemporary Applications of the Two Theses 


Of all the philosophers of the seventeenth century, arguably none has more direct bearing 
on recent work in metaphysics than Spinoza. 

One important topic in recent metaphysics, first brought to new prominence by 
Jonathan Schaffer, is monism itself (Schaffer 2010). Schaffer calls the version of monism 
that he defends ‘Priority Monism,’ defined as the thesis that “the cosmos is the one and 
only metaphysically basic actual concrete object, prior to any of its proper parts.” He con- 
trasts Priority Monism with the stronger thesis of ‘Existence Monism,’ which holds that 
“the cosmos is the one and only actual concrete object in existence.” He rejects Existence 
Monism, as being incompatible with everyday evidence that there is a plurality of concrete 
things, but he argues for Priority Monism in two main ways: first, by appeal to evidence 
from contemporary physics that the cosmos is an entangled system at the quantum level: 
and second, by arguing that Priority Monism is (a) metaphysically possible and (b) meta- 
physically necessary if it is metaphysically possible. As we have had occasion to observe, 
Spinoza’s own monism is intended, in its own way, to clarify the metaphysics of seven- 
teenth-century physics; and he infers that the one absolutely infinite substance necessarily 
exists from the metaphysical possibility of there being such a substance. 


103 


DON GARRETT 


Although Schaffer acknowledges Spinoza as a forebear, Spinoza’s own monism is poten- 
tially difficult to classify in Schaffer’s terms, and, as such, constitutes an especially inter- 
esting model of monism (Guigon 2012). Certainly, Spinoza’s God, which exists in itself and 
not in another, is metaphysically basic, in Schaffer’s sense. Furthermore, it is ‘concrete,’ at 
least in the sense of being spatial (extended, as Spinoza would say), causally efficacious, and 
not conceivable only through abstraction (because conceived through itself). Schaffer’s 
term ‘cosmos’, however, is potentially ambiguous in application to Spinoza’s monism. It 
might be taken to refer to Spinoza’s ‘infinite individual’ (described in the Physiological 
Digression), which has all finite individuals as parts and which, as a whole, is presumably 
not metaphysically prior to those parts on his view. Or it might refer to what he calls ‘natura 
naturata’ (E1p29s) that is, Nature as all of the modes (infinite and finite) following from 
God’s essence — which again is not the most fundamental thing. If we understand the term 
as referring to God itself, however, then the cosmos is indeed the one metaphysically basic 
concrete thing. 

Whether Spinoza’s metaphysics of substance and mode should also be described as 
Existence Monism — denying that there is more than one concrete object — depends on 
whether we limit Schaffer’s term ‘object’ to genuine substances or allow it also to apply to 
particular things, which only approximate to being substances in a finite and limited way. 
In either case, however, Spinoza shares with Existence Monism the view that the one basic 
concrete object has no parts, at least on Spinoza’s understanding of the part/whole rela- 
tion. To be sure, his one substance is regionally modified by things that are (as extended) in 
spatial relations to one another; but these are modes, not parts, in his view, and they are in 
the substance by way of inherence rather than by way of composition. 

A second important topic in recent metaphysics is the relation of grounding, brought to 
new prominence by Kit Fine (1994 and 2012) and others. This is understood to be a rela- 
tion of metaphysical explanation — as, for example, the relation between the existence of 
parts and the existence of a whole or between the existence of the members of a set and the 
existence of that set — expressible through such phrases as ‘in virtue of,’ ‘because,’ and 
‘accounts for their being.’ In Fine’s view, the relation is one of necessitation that finds its 
source in the essences of things. The kind of priority that Spinoza finds in the relations of 
being in and being conceived through therefore has an excellent claim to being a version of 
the grounding relation, in its dual aspects of metaphysical support and explanatory force, 
respectively. 

It is typically supposed that the grounding relation is non-causal, whereas we have seen 
that being in and being conceived through entail being caused by, on Spinoza’s view. However, 
Spinoza’s understanding of causation itself is very different from that of most contempo- 
rary philosophers, especially those influenced by Hume. Like grounding, Spinoza’s causal 
relation is metaphysically necessitating (Ela3), not merely necessitating in a weaker 
manner; and the source of its necessitation lies precisely in the essences of things. It is also 
typically held that nothing is self-grounding; and if there are many essences of things, the 
result is that there are many facts — such as the existence of those essences themselves — 
that evidently lack metaphysical support and explanation. For Spinoza, however, all 
essences of particular things are in, conceived through, and caused by God, and God is in, 
conceived through, and caused by itself. More specifically, God is caused by itself through its 
own essence, which Spinoza argues is identical with God’s existence (E1p20). 

The topic of grounding is closely related, in turn, to a third important topic in recent 
metaphysics: rationalism. Metaphysical rationalism, brought to heightened prominence by 
Michael Della Rocca (2008) and Shamik Dasgupta (2016) among others, affirms the 


104 


SPINOZA'S METAPHYSICS OF SUBSTANCE AND MODE 


Principle of Sufficient Reason — that is, that there is a sufficient reason for everything. 
Because it forswears any explanatorily appeal to unsatisfying brute facts, such rationalism 
offers an attractive ideal in metaphysics and, as Della Rocca and Dasgupta both emphasize, 
Spinoza provides a powerful model of a thoroughgoing commitment to and use of the 
Principle of Sufficient Reason — one sufficiently strong to entail necessitarianism, the thesis 
that everything is metaphysically necessary (see also Garrett 1991). Moreover, Dasgupta 
explicitly construes sufficient reasons in terms of grounding. 

A fourth important topic in recent metaphysics is degrees of reality or being, returned to 
prominence especially by Kris McDaniel (2013). As he observes, it is widely agreed that 
some things that exist are more fundamental, more ‘natural,’ and more explanatory than 
other things that exist; furthermore, he argues, this commonplace thesis is well conceptu- 
alized in terms of the historical theory of ‘degrees of reality’ or ‘degrees of being.’ In 
McDaniel’s view, the most fundamental things are completely real, while other things exist 
with lesser degrees of reality. Moreover, he proposes that this same kind of fundamentality 
lies at the heart of the proposed relation of grounding, so that one thing’s grounding of 
another can be understood as the first thing’s being more real than second, together per- 
haps with a suitable further provision — such as, for example, that the second thing inheres 
in the first. The parallels to Spinoza’s relation of being in, conceived as a relation of both 
grounding and inherence, are obvious. 

In Spinoza’s monism, of course, there is only one perfectly real being, which grounds 
and is more real than all of the other existing things, and in which they inhere. In addition, 
Spinoza deploys degrees of reality in explaining the principles governing composition — that 
is, the conditions that must be satisfied in order for a combination of things to constitute a 
real or existing whole of which they are parts. For him, as we have seen, a combination of 
extended things results in an existing whole when the result is a pattern of motion and rest 
whose essential tendency or striving to persist and maintain itself plays an explanatory role 
with respect to what occurs in its surroundings. (As noted, a parallel account of composi- 
tion applies to other attributes.) The resulting existing whole has greater or lesser reality, 
moreover, the greater or lesser the explanatory role it is able to play. 

A fifth important topic in contemporary metaphysics is ontological pluralism, also 
brought to recent prominence by Kris McDaniel (2009). This is the thesis that there are 
multiple kinds or manners of existence or being, each of which must be expressed in 
logical terms by a different kind of quantifier. McDaniel’s proposed examples include 
concrete and abstract being, universal and particular being, divine and mundane being, 
existence and subsistence as distinguished by Meinong, and object and function as distin- 
guished by Frege. For Spinoza, as interpreted here, the distinction between Extension and 
Thought — and among different attributes more generally — is a paradigm example of 
ontological pluralism. In most versions of ontological pluralism, however, the same things 
need not — and often even cannot — exist in more than one manner. For Spinoza, in con- 
trast, God and all of the modes of God exist in each of the infinite manners of existence 
there are. 

A sixth and final topic of importance in contemporary metaphysics is panpsychism, 
recently brought to renewed prominence by David Chalmers (2015) and others. Panpsychism 
is the doctrine that mentality is ubiquitous in nature. As Chalmers and others have argued 
persuasively, panpsychism has many theoretical virtues over purely materialist or dualist 
accounts of the nature of mind and its relation to body. Chalmers’s recent proposals for 
defending panpsychism have appealed to Russellian monism, according to which physics 
describes only the extrinsic and relational qualities of things, whereas their intrinsic nature 


105 


DON GARRETT 


is mental and so accounts for consciousness and thought. A fundamental challenge for pan- 
psychism is to explain how the mental characters of wholes are related to the mental 
character of their parts. If the former are grounded in the latter, then there is a obvious 
‘combination problem’ of explaining how this occurs despite their presumed mental differ- 
ences. Yet if the specific mental character of a given whole is not grounded in the character 
of its parts, then it is hard to see how that character can be explained at all. 

Spinoza’s ontological pluralism of Extension and Thought, together with the universal 
identity of bodies and their corresponding minds, offers the prospect of an appealing non- 
Russellian alternative version of panpsychism in which the intrinsic character of the 
physical as well as that of the mental can be knowable. Several features of his psychology 
of sense perception (in Ethics Part 2) and of the emotions (in Ethics Part 3) offer resources 
for addressing the combination problem of grounding the mental character of wholes in 
the mental character of their parts, all the way up to the ‘infinite individual.’ Yet particular 
minds and bodies for Spinoza, while having parts and composing larger wholes, are not 
themselves substances and are not parts of any substances, but are instead modes of the 
one substance, God. Thus, Spinoza’s panpsychism at the same time provides a model of 
cosmopsychism, in which the mental character of the cosmos — understood as the one 
monistic substance — grounds the mental character of each particular thing. 

Much more deserves to be said both about each of these topics and about Spinoza’s dis- 
tinctive bearing on them. I hope, however, that this is enough to show that the recent 
resurgence of philosophical as well as historical interest in Spinoza’s metaphysics in recent 
years is eminently justified. 


References 


Bledin, J. and Melamed, Y.Y. Ethica more logico demonstrata. Unpublished 

Chalmers, D. (2015). Panpsychism and panprotopsychism. In Panpsychism: Contemporary Perspectives 
(ed. G. Bruntrup and L. Jaskolla), 19-47. New York: Oxford University Press. 

Curley, E.M. (1969). Spinoza’s Metaphysics. Cambridge MA: Harvard University Press. 

Dasgupta, S. (2016). Metaphysical rationalism. Notis 50: 370-418. 

Della Rocca, M. (2008). Spinoza. London: Routledge. 

Fine, K. (1994). Essence and modality. Philosophical Perspectives 8: 1-16. 

Fine, K. (2012). A guide to ground. In: Metaphysical Grounding: Understanding the Structure of Reality 
(ed. FE. Correia and B. Schnieder), 37-80. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Garrett, D. (1979). Spinoza’s ontological argument. Philosophical Review 88: 198-223. Reprinted in 
Garrett 2018. 

Garrett, D. (1990). Ethics Ip5: shared attributes and the basis of Spinoza’s monism. In: Central Themes 
in Early Modern Philosophy: Essays Presented to Jonathan Bennett (ed. J.A. Cover and M. Kulstad), 
127-158. Indianapolis: Hackett Publishing. Reprinted in Garrett 2018. 

Garrett, D. (1994). Spinoza’s theory of metaphysical individuation. In: Individuation in Early Modern 
Philosophy (ed. K. Barber and J.J.E. Gracia). Albany: State University of New York Press. Reprinted 
in Garrett 2018. 

Garrett, D. (2002). Spinoza’s “conatus” argument. In Spinoza: Metaphysical Themes (ed. O. Koistinen 
and J. Biro), 73-101. New York: Oxford University Press. Reprinted in Garrett 2018. 

Garrett, D. (1991). Spinoza’s necessitarianism. In God and Nature: Spinoza’s Metaphysics (ed. Y. Yovel), 
191-218. Leiden: Brill. Reprinted in Garrett 2018. 

Garrett, D. (2009). The essence of the body and the part of the mind that is eternal. In A Companion to 
Spinoza’s Ethics (ed. O. Koistinen), 284—302. Cambridge University Press. Reprinted in Garrett 2018. 


106 


SPINOZA'S METAPHYSICS OF SUBSTANCE AND MODE 


Garrett, D. (2017). The indiscernibility of identicals and the transitivity of identity in Spinoza’s logic 
of the attributes. In Spinoza’s Ethics: A Critical Guide (ed. Y.Y. Melamed), 12—42. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. Reprinted in Garrett 2018. 

Garrett, D. (2018). Nature and Necessity in Spinoza’s Philosophy. New York: Oxford University Press. 

Guigon, G. (2012). Spinoza on composition and priority. In Spinoza on Monism (ed. P. Goff), 183-205. 
Houndmills: Palgrave Macmillan. 

McDaniel, K. (2009). Ways of being. Metametaphysics (ed. In D. Chalmers, D. Manley, and R. 
Wasserman), 290-319. Oxford: Clarendon Press. 

McDaniel, K. (2013). Degrees of being. Philosophers’ Imprint 13, 1-19. 

Melamed, Y.Y. (2013). Spinoza’s Metaphysics: Substance and Thought. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Melamed, Y.Y. (forthcoming) Spinoza’s metaphysics of substance. In The Cambridge Companion to 
Spinoza (ed. D. Garrett), 2nd edn. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Schaffer, J. (2010). Monism: the priority of the whole. The Philosophical Review 119: 31-76. 


107 


10 


Spinoza and Eternity 


PIERRE-FRANCOIS MOREAU 


A specter haunts the Tractatus de intellectus emendatione: eternity. It is a specter, for it never 
appears there in person, except at the end, in the genitive, that is to say, to determine 
another word — species. But it nevertheless haunts this text, which bears entirely on that 
question, from the very first sentence of the initial narrative. The narrator recounts that he 
has realized that the goods of everyday life are vain and futile; it will later be understood 
that they are above all subject to disappearance, and that the joy of possession thus van- 
ishes, whereas the whole meaning of life seemed to consist in seeking them out. These 
goods, however, do not at first seem negligible: they fill the mind with satisfaction; they 
provide material benefits that are necessary for human life: pleasure contributes to health; 
social relations are necessary because the individual needs to establish links with others, 
and money finally enables one to obtain the means by which existence develops. 
Nevertheless, over time, experience teaches us the difficulties and dangers associated with 
these goods. Their quest bears the seal of precariousness: either they are simply lost, and 
the pleasure they afforded is extinguished; or they give rise to an infinite quest, each object 
conquered throwing the shadow of another goal still unattained and giving rise to a new 
chase without final appeasement; or again, finally, their enjoyment, having reached satu- 
ration, turns into disgust which makes one feel the emptiness of what one once enjoyed. It 
is therefore because they do not keep their own promises that they are disappointing, and 
not as a result of an external or transcendent condemnation: if they kept their promises, 
there would be no reason to turn away from them. It is by the very positivity of ordinary 
life that a critical examination of its limits and dangers is engendered. For there is a danger: 
if we continue to pursue what is lost, we risk losing ourselves too. Indeed, we are not 
content to enjoy them: we adhere to them, and therefore we are conquered by them as 
much as we conquer them, and it is the very life of the person who seeks them that becomes 
identified with their destiny. If the individual defines himself only by his adherence to their 
prestige, then their precariousness is his precariousness. From this very dissatisfaction is 
born an aspiration: an aspiration that has as yet no content — it is defined only by what it 
no longer wants, or rather by what it still wants but in another form. Joy, such as the goods 
of ordinary life used to provide; but a joy that no longer has the fragility that transformed 
those goods into sources of disappointment. How can we characterize this other good that 


A Companion to Spinoza, First Edition. Edited by Yitzhak Y. Melamed. 
© 2021 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2021 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd. 


108 


SPINOZA AND ETERNITY 


we now seek? In other words, what little is known about it when the narrator’s journey 
begins? A true good, certainly, while others make us doubt their truth; but, above all, 
something that would affect the mind in a different way: continua ac summa in aeternum 
fruerer laetitia — “which would continuously give me the greatest joy, eternally [or: for- 
ever].” “Continuous” is obviously the opposite of “perishable”; and “the greatest” implies 
that this good, and the joy it generates, must be radically superior to that of ordinary life. 
In short, the same thing, designated by the same word (joy), but determined otherwise. 
However, the important word here is: in aeternum. It is not a technical term (as aeternitas 
would be): should it be translated by an expression of common language (“forever”) or 
formalized as “eternally”? The rest of the text will seek to determine how to arrive at this 
joy in aeternum. And, of course, the good that is its source, to which one must adhere out 
of love, is also an “eternal thing” (res aeterna). 

The first stage of the journey that then begins will consist in rehabilitation of these pre- 
carious joys by considering them as means to reach the sovereign Good. Their content is 
therefore of the order of an anthropological necessity, ethically neutral (and the Ethics will 
remember that): health without the excess of pleasure, sociability without the games of 
power, and finally money but only as much as it takes to maintain life, health, and relations 
with others. The search for eternal joy does not, therefore, involve asceticism or contempt 
for what ascetics call the goods of this world. The second stage is the quest for this sover- 
eign Good and it implies the search for adequate knowledge: it is not eternity itself that is 
the object of this quest, but the “eternal truths” and the “series of fixed and eternal things.” 
Thus, once again the noun remains in the shadows, still without definition, overshadowed 
by the adjectives by which it qualifies the objects of knowledge, as it earlier qualified the 
goal of the journey. The third stage is to identify the nature of understanding, which serves 
to form the true ideas by which we know the fixed things and the singular changing things 
that depend on them: and one of the essential features of understanding is that it knows 
these things sub specie aeternitatis — without this expression being explained as yet. Here is 
eternity at last, designated by its name, but that name is part of an expression that refers 
not to eternity as such, but to the way in which the narrator looks at things on the horizon 
of eternity. It is therefore never considered in itself in this text, which nevertheless seems to 
revolve around it. 

If we take stock of this itinerary by refusing to project on it in advance what we will read 
in the Ethics, three facts are striking: 1) the eternity we are talking about here is not defined 
by reference to God (who, moreover, is never named in the Treatise: there is only mention of 
a res aeterna, of which one knows nothing as yet); 2) eternity is not directly opposed to time 
nor to duration (the latter, except in the last sentence on the species aeternitatis, is moreover 
quoted only fleetingly, in connection with memory); it is opposed rather to the fragility and 
precariousness of things; 3) eternity appears in person only at the end to designate the 
specificity of the adequate knowledge by which man understands the world. It is as if the 
path led from a longing for the eternal to possession of a vision that, far from leaving this 
world, implies something of eternity in the knowledge of the world itself. But what is this 
eternity itself? If it is not defined, the reader of the seventeenth century can always project 
on it what he thinks he knows by his pre-comprehension of this word before reading the 
text: either the common conception, by which eternity is simply the character of that 
which lasts forever; or the apparently more refined conception elaborated by the Greek 
philosophical tradition and by Jewish and Christian theologies, a tradition which, on the 
contrary, is bent on distinguishing between eternity and perpetuity; but it must be remem- 
bered that the first of these traditions, at the time of Spinoza’s writing, found theoretical 


109 


PIERRE-FRANCOIS MOREAU 


legitimization in Hobbes’s thought, which to the loss in philosophical weight of the second 
term. In any case, aspiration, objects of knowledge, or form of knowledge itself and its var- 
iations concern man, whereas eternity forms the weft of his itinerary: from aspiration to a 
joy in aeternum to knowledge sub specie aeternitatis. Nevertheless, at this point in Spinoza’s 
evolution, the concept of eternity lacks a positive content, which appears to be both central 
and indeterminate. It is the Cogitata that will begin to produce it, paradoxically. 

We witness indeed to a complete reversal of the textual situation in the Cogitata meta- 
physica, where Spinoza constructs a metaphysical lexicon by reworking that of Aristotelian 
and Cartesian scholasticism and, therefore, the conceptual heritage carried by that lex- 
icon. The work treats, very classically, first of all of general metaphysics (that is to say, what 
others call ontology: being and its affections, whatever the beings in question); then of 
special metaphysics (that is to say of certain particular beings, with a strong imbalance: 
11 chapters on God, only one chapter on the human mind — as for the world, it will still 
wait a little longer to enter into this part of metaphysics). Eternity has hardly any place in 
the first part, which means that it is not a general characteristic of being — so much so that 
in Chapter 4 time and duration can be treated independently, eternity being simply 
designated in passing as “an attribute under which we conceive the infinite existence of 
God” and its treatment postponed to a later date: it is therefore the object of a theological 
treatment. 

There is however in this first part another passage which mentions eternity and which 
indicates what one might call the ontological root of this theological treatment. The sec- 
ond chapter notes that formal essences are neither created nor a se. What then is their 
status? They can be said to be eternal in the precise sense that they depend on the divine 
essence. This question of the eternity of essences does not come out of the blue: it was 
already mentioned in the Korte Verhandeling. It takes on a particular dimension here from 
the fact that, throughout the first part, the thought is very largely governed by the distinc- 
tion between essence and existence, a usual distinction but here underlined as a strict sep- 
aration in everything that is not God. It must be emphasized, because Spinoza uses this 
complex — eternity of essences, strict separation between essence and existence — as an 
instrument to define eternity. It is, in a way, the ontological basis from which, in the pars 
specialis, the positive content of the concept of eternity can be determined. 

The second part of the Cogitata, indeed, gives considerable room to the question of eter- 
nity, in the chapters devoted to God. While, in creatures, essence is distinct from existence, 
in God, on the contrary, they are identical, which means that existence is infinite and the 
specific name of this infinite existence is: eternity. Thus, much more than by opposition to 
time or duration, which is only a consequence, eternity is defined by the internal necessity 
of divine existence. It is therefore an existence which has all the power of essence. It is this 
identity that ensures the immutable character of God. It goes without saying that nothing 
concerning duration has the same quality. This prevents identification of eternity with 
immortality or perpetuity. But in choosing, in everything that is traditionally associated 
with eternity, to emphasize immutability, Spinoza seems to be answering implicitly the 
question posed at the beginning of the TIE, when he was looking for something to adhere 
to. The immutability of divine existence is the opposite of the precariousness of the goods 
mentioned at the beginning of the TIE. 

Eternity has therefore finally found its definition — and this definition links it closely to 
divine existence (and therefore to the divine essence). The logical consequence is that it is 
not mentioned once in Chapter 12, de mente humana. In this new approach, man does not 
seem concerned by this conception of eternity. The questioning of the TIE thus seems to be 


110 


SPINOZA AND ETERNITY 


put aside, as if the price to pay for this strong definition was to lose sight of the link — not to 
say that it disappears — which links man to eternity and which was, precisely, what the def- 
inition should have helped us to understand. In short, we found what we were looking for, 
but we no longer know what to do with it. 

At this point, we can suggest a hypothesis: the TIE led to a questioning about eternity; 
so we had to think how man could access it; but the philosophical tradition does not pro- 
vide the means to think of such access other than by representing it in the form of the 
immortality of the mind. If Spinoza does not want to take this path, he must make a detour 
and first think of eternity in itself, so to speak, by temporarily disregarding man. He there- 
fore explores the heritage of the same philosophical tradition by reconsidering it from 
God’s point of view. It is the firm distinction between essence and existence that serves as 
an instrument for this reconsideration. And it is only from this point that human partici- 
pation in eternity can, after new conceptual progress, be found. 

So this is where Spinoza launches the writing of the Ethics: on the one hand, man 
haunted by eternity; on the other, an eternity without man. There is, however, a third 
element to note: one of the occurrences of the adjective “eternal” in the Cogitata concerns 
the eternal laws of Nature. Likewise, the TIE had mentioned, without giving more details, 
that everything that happens happens “according to the eternal order and according to 
certain laws of Nature” (The laws were not yet “eternal,” but they were associated with the 
order which was eternal.) This is a theme that can also be found in the Theologico-Political 
Treatise: the eternal decrees of God are the eternal laws of Nature. Therefore, a question 
arises: does God’s eternity have anything to do with the laws of Nature? Does the discovery 
and affirmation, at the time of the Scientific Revolution, of laws of Nature which increas- 
ingly restrict the apparent contingency of the world lead to redefining eternity, or at least 
to give it a content which is it not immediately dependent in the traditional conception of 
divine eternity? Is the necessity of infinite existence not the necessity of laws that eternally 
regulate what takes place in the multiplicity and perpetual change of natural beings — in 
the system of causes and effects by which the apparent inconsistency of the world is 
explained according to a rigorous order? If this is so, eternity as an infinite existence can 
thus be logically detached from the divine being, which will become simply its source and 
its first instance. 

The Ethics synthesize the three approaches. Eternity now plays a major and very com- 
plex role. We can condense what is said in three main items: eternity as existence (in the 
first part); knowledge of and through eternity (mainly in the second part); access of man 
to eternity (in the fifth part). 

(1) From the beginning of the first part, eternity is immediately determined as existence; 
but it is no longer directly the existence of God, although this part is called De Deo. It is 
indeed defined as “existence itself, insofar as it is conceived to follow necessarily from the 
definition alone of the eternal being” (def. 8). We thus maintain the conclusion of the 
Cogitata: it is not just existence; it is existence with necessity — the reference to the eternal 
thing ensuring its infinity. It then takes a number of demonstrations to get to God. Once 
again, it is the notion of res aeterna which comes first. Thus, all of a sudden, within the def- 
inition that had been reached in the Cogitata, a deepening of the concept makes it available 
to apply to something other than God. The divine figure seems to have been only a sort of 
scaffolding for thinking eternity under the category of existence. But above all, it appears, 
as we progress in the first part, that to exist is to produce effects, and that this capacity 
belongs to all things. This idea of productive power is perhaps the ultimate ontological 
sense of eternity. 


111 


PIERRE-FRANCOIS MOREAU 


The scholium of the last proposition of the first part states that everything that exists 
expresses in a very precise and determined way the nature, that is to say the essence, of 
God, i.e. his power, which is the cause of all things; and thus it must follow some effect of 
that power. In other words, perhaps the title of this part, De Deo, meant that it was to intro- 
duce, in the final analysis, what is divine in all things. The Appendix will repeat: “All things 
proceed by a certain eternal necessity of nature and with the greatest perfection.” It is now 
clearly assumed that there are two kinds of existence, or ways of conceiving existence, and 
that this distinction does not reflect the distinction between God and singular things, since 
the latter also participate in eternal necessity. Thus, “by existence here, I do not under- 
stand duration, i.e. existence insofar as it is conceived abstractly, and as a certain species of 
quantity. For Iam speaking of the very nature of existence, which is attributed to singular 
things because infinitely many things follow from the eternal necessity of God” (II, 
prop. 45, scholium). This obviously does not eliminate the transitive causality that links 
singular things to one another, but this very causality is only possible by the perseverance 
of these things in being, which is underpinned by eternal necessity: “For even if each one 
is determined by another singular thing to exist in a certain way, still the force by which 
each one perseveres in existing follows from the eternal necessity of God’s nature” (ibid.). 
This time it is no longer only the laws of nature that participate in divine eternity; singular 
things also do so. It will be noted that this does not concern men in particular but all things. 

Eternity has therefore now become a general characteristic of being and no longer the 
characteristic reserved for God. In this sense, if we were to maintain the scholastic termi- 
nology of the Cogitata, we would say that eternity has gone from metaphysica specialis to 
metaphysica generalis. It therefore now appears as a constitutive element of an ontology — 
but this is not yet explicitly an ontology of power. This last step will be taken in Spinoza’s 
ultimate work, at the start of the Political Treatise, where the backbone of the system is 
presented in its latest version. We read in §2 of the second chapter a deduction of the 
power of things which at first glance seems to refer back to the Cogitata, and which is 
indeed based on their main theoretical instrument: “any natural thing whatever can be 
conceived adequately, whether it exists or not. So just as the beginning of a natural thing’s 
existence cannot be inferred from its definition, neither can its perseverance in existing. 
For the ideal essence of these things is the same after they have begun to exist, as it was 
before.” Again we find the original distinction between essence and existence, and the 
characterization of singular things by their distinction. But the consequence that is drawn 
from this is now the opposite: “So [just] as their beginning to exist cannot follow from their 
essence, neither can their perseverance in existing. The same power they require to begin 
to exist, they do require to continue to exist. From this it follows that the power by which 
natural things exist, and so by which they have effects, can’t be anything than the eternal 
power of God itself.” Far from fading away when faced by divine power, the action of 
singular things is irrigated by this very power. The distinction between essence and 
existence no longer serves to separate them as much as possible from God, but on the con- 
trary to bring them closer, and to give them something of his eternity — something that is 
decisive, since now existence is identified with action and power. Where Spinoza is true to 
his own thought, and far from Descartes, he is so precisely with the instruments borrowed 
from Descartes, but completely transformed: the distinction between essence and existence, 
and the thesis of continued creation. The conceptual development started in the Cogitata is 
thus carried to completion. 

(2) The second dimension of eternity, in the Ethics, is the role it plays, as at the end of the 
TIE, in the theory of knowledge: the second of the three genres, Reason, consists in 


112 


SPINOZA AND ETERNITY 


conceiving things “under a certain species of eternity” (Ethics II, Prop 44, coroll. 2). It 
remains to be seen what is meant by this enigmatic expression, “sub specie aeternitatis,” first 
encountered in the TIE, and which now finds its definition: “We conceive things as actual 
in two ways: either insofar as we conceive them to exist in relation to a certain time and 
place, or insofar as we conceive them to be contained in God and to follow from the necessity 
of the divine nature. But the things we conceive in the second way as true or real, we con- 
ceive under a species of eternity and to that extent they involve the eternal and infinite 
essence of God” (Ethics, V, prop. 29, scholium). Thus we now know what it is to conceive in 
the species of eternity: it is to conceive of things as they follow from the necessity of the 
nature of God. The double form of actuality refers to the double form of existence. It thus 
becomes easy to understand what will be stated in the fifth part: “The more we understand 
the singular things, the more we understand God” (Ethics, V, prop. 25). However, we have 
seen that every singular thing, in particular every body of extension, implies the eternal 
necessity of God; therefore, any idea of a body will imply knowledge of this eternal 
necessity; it is deduced from this (Ethics, II, prop. 47) that, since it has ideas of bodies and 
singular things, “the human mind has an adequate knowledge of the eternal and infinite 
essence of God”; and since the demonstration of this proposition is not based on the greater 
or lesser rationality of the individual, the scholium can conclude: “the infinite essence of 
God and his eternity are known to all.” It must be emphasized that this phrase does not 
apply only to men guided by Reason. There is therefore, on this point, no separation bet- 
ween wise men and others. All men have this knowledge present in their minds, whether 
they are aware of it or not. This is, moreover, what founds (scholium of Ethics, IV, 37) the 
fact that they have the same common good. The mind’s relationship to eternity is therefore 
twofold: on the one hand — even when it is overwhelmed by imagination, prejudice, errors 
of the senses — it always has an adequate knowledge of the eternal divine essence (but this 
knowledge can very well remain masked by ideas of duration?); on the other hand, it can 
in some cases come to know things itself from the point of view of eternity. The whole 
question will be to articulate these two aspects. 

All that has been said so far is condensed in the scholium of Proposition 20 in Part Five, 
which takes stock of the progress made in the analysis of affects, their power, and the 
relative power that Reason can exercise on them: “we easily conceive what clear and dis- 
tinct knowledge — and especially that third kind of knowledge [. . .| whose foundation is the 
knowledge of God itself — can accomplish again the affects. Insofar as the affects are pas- 
sions, if clear and distinct knowledge does not absolutely remove them [. . .| at least it 
brings it about that they constitute the smallest part of the Mind.” Beyond this power over 
affects and this mastery of behavior, a second effect brings us back to the initial aspiration, 
with the distinction between the different types of objects of love: “And then it begets a Love 
toward a thing immutable and eternal [. . .| which we really fully possess [. . .] and which 
therefore cannot be tainted by any of the vices which are in ordinary Love, but can always 
be greater and greater [.. .] and occupy the greatest part of the Mind [. . .] and affect it 
extensively” (prop 20 sc, §4). We must stop at this notion of “greater part of the mind,” 
which did not appear in the TIE and which is now linked to the idea, also new, of increasing 
love. It does not imply that there are degrees of eternity, no more than there are degrees of 
necessity, but that the mind accesses eternity increasingly. We will therefore have to define 
what determines this part. 

(3) Finally, the third dimension is constituted by the access of man to eternity. This 
theme, which plays an essential role at the end of the fifth part, corresponds, mutatis mu- 
tandis, to the appeal to “in aeternum” at the beginning of the TIE. It is exposed in the second 


113 


PIERRE-FRANCOIS MOREAU 


section of the fifth part. This deals with the mind outside its relation to the duration of the 
body — but not outside its relation to the essence of the body: there is in the mind, which is 
the idea of the body, a part which is the idea of the essence of this body. Now this essence 
is an eternal truth. Thus, “the human Mind cannot be absolutely destroyed with the body, 
but something of it remains, which is eternal” (Ethics, V, prop. 23). Nothing suggests that 
this eternity is specifically human: if it is simply a question of refracting in a certain way 
the fact that all things follow the eternal laws of Nature, then we could say that all minds 
of all bodies are part of eternity — including those of animals, plants, and minerals; but this 
is a passive eternity. What is it in the human part, which makes it an active part? This part 
is precisely that which is able to conceive of things by the third kind of knowledge: “the 
Mind is eternal, insofar as it conceives things under a species of eternity” (Ethics, V, 
prop. 31). We thus see here in association the two aspects of the discourse of Ethics on eter- 
nity. This conjunction is itself inscribed in our body: “He who has a body capable of a great 
many things has a Mind whose greatest part is eternal” (Ethics, V, prop. 39). Indeed, if it is 
the knowledge of things that ensures the active eternity of the mind, this knowledge cor- 
responds perfectly to the functioning of the body: the more it has aptitudes, the more it can 
be affected by external bodies and affect them, the more ways it has of knowing them. 
Hence the degrees in the part of eternity: its greater or lesser extension is due to the greater 
or smaller number of things to which the body is fit. This statement is difficult to under- 
stand for anyone who sticks to a “Platonic” interpretation of Spinoza, where the mind 
should free itself from the influence of the body. 

There is one last question concerning this relationship between man and eternity: it is 
not only passive, like non-human modes, but active. But do we know it? In other words, is 
it both active and perceived as such? This is where one of the best-known and least under- 
stood phrases of Ethics comes in: “we feel and know by experience that we are eternal” 
(Ethics, V, prop. 23 sc). Spinoza introduces almost immediately a nuance: even if all men 
have this experience, they are certainly well aware of the eternity of their mind, but they 
most often confuse it with duration and they attribute it to imagination or to memory, 
which they believe remains after death. They therefore translate eternity in terms of the 
immortality of the mind (Ethics, V, prop. 34, scolium). Man talk a lot about this experience. 
It should be noted that this is in no way a mystical experience, no more than an experience 
of Reason: both, in fact, are only given to a few, while this is a feeling (and not an adequate 
idea!) common to all men. How is such an experience possible? If infinite existence is pre- 
sent in a finite being, that being feels and experiences it, be it only by the promises and 
disappointments that it may feel with regard to its own finitude. This is not new: this is 
what the first sentence of the TIE already expressed — the decision to turn to the search for 
a much safer solution is taken “after experience has taught” the narrator the vanity of 
what is commonly encountered. It was when he considered finite things that he already 
felt, without knowing it, the desire to seek another good. One might say that he was the 
only one, but that is not so: he was the only one to find the right path, but not the only one 
to feel disappointment: common life is full of it, and that is why men commonly fling them- 
selves from one action to another, from one desire to another. In God, in the mind, in the 
body, in knowledge, in things, and even in the distress of those who do not think of it, eter- 
nity presents itself as ultimately more common than rare. It animates the whole world 
before our eyes. 

Under these conditions, it would be astonishing if eternity did not also concern the 
community of men. Indeed, in the Political Treatise, we see this idea of eternity applied to 
the constitution in a monarchy, as opposed to current laws linked to circumstances: the 


114 


SPINOZA AND ETERNITY 


constitution represents the “eternal decree of the king,” that the subjects must follow even 
against his arbitrary decisions, just as the Ulysses’ sailors had received orders from him not 
to obey his perilous orders when their boat passed the reef of the Sirens. Likewise, the 
fundamental laws of an aristocracy are eternal, and Spinoza sometimes speaks explicitly 
of the eternity of the state. More precisely, he wonders how the state can be made eternal. 
One might be tempted to say that, here, eternity must be understood in the weak sense of 
perpetuity, and that the use of the term by Spinoza comes from the fact that he reads it in 
Quintus Curtius, the historian of Alexander, who puts it in the mouth of his hero when he 
explains what laws must protect his empire from collapse. It would therefore be a philolog- 
ical, not a conceptual heritage. However, the whole context shows that what interests 
Spinoza here is not the duration of the City for itself, but the internal causes that make this 
duration necessary. He recalls, by generalizing a quote from Tacitus about Rome, that cities 
are more threatened by their own citizens than by external enemies. It is therefore their 
structure which must explain their continuity. In short, a good constitution produces a 
necessary existence by an internal necessity: we are not so far from the strong sense of the 
term. All the elements which produce such a necessity are not known a priori; they are, 
says the first chapter of the book, delivered to us by historical experience, without which 
we fall into utopia. Here, too, it is the appeal to experience that ultimately summons 
eternity. 

All in all, the eternity that was promised in the first writings and which we find at the 
end of the Spinozian journey is not an eternal present isolated from the empirical world 
and reserved for the asceticism of a few elect, far from the human community, in a hypo- 
thetical transcendence. In one form or another, it permeates the mind, but also the state, 
bodies, and the whole visible world. 


It has been found again 

What ? — Eternity 

It is the sea fled away 

With the sun 

(Rimbaud, Collected poems, translated by Oliver Bernard, 1962) 


Acknowledgment 


I would like to thank Antony McKenna for his most helpful comments on an earlier version 
of this chapter. 


115 


alg 


Spinoza on Causa Sui 


YITZHAK Y. MELAMED 


The very first line of Spinoza’s magnum opus, the Ethics, states the following surprising 
definition: 


By cause of itself I understand that whose essence involves existence, or that whose nature 
cannot be conceived except as existing | Per causam sui intelligo id, cujus essentia involvit existen- 
tiam, sive id, cujus natura non potest concipi, nisi existens]. 


As we shall shortly see, for many of Spinoza’s contemporaries and predecessors the very 
notion of causa sui was utterly absurd, akin to a Baron Munchausen attempting to lift himself 
above a river by pulling his hair up. How can a thing cause itself into existence, if before the 
causal activity, the cause did not exist at all? Indeed, in one of his earliest works, Spinoza him- 
self claimed: “No thing, considered in itself, has in itself a cause enabling it to destroy itself (if 
it exists), or to make itself [te konnen maaken] (if it does not exist)” (KV II 26 |1/110/14-16). 
Moreover, in other early works, Spinoza refers to God as an “uncreated thing” (TIE §97) or 
“uncreated substance” (CM II 1 |1/237/20), and not as a cause-of-itself as in the Ethics. What 
made Spinoza desert the common, traditional, view of God as the uncaused first cause, or 
uncreated substance, and adopt instead the apparently chimerical notion of God as causa sui? 

A very likely explanation for this development suggests that Spinoza’s rationalism, his 
commitment to the principle that everything must have a reason both for its existence and 
for its non-existence — a commitment stated clearly both in the Ethics (see, for example, 
Elp8s2 and Elpll1d2), and in Spinoza’s other writings (see, for example, Ep. 34 
(IV/179/29)) —made him realize that the notion of an uncreated, or uncaused, thing is of 
nouse for him: if everything must have a cause, then the first cause, or the most fundamental 
being, must be a cause-of-itself. 

All this is well and good, but we should not let Spinoza off the hook so easily, for the 
immediate question which arises now is whether Spinoza is not simply cheating his 
readers. Does Spinoza have a reason — i.e. argument — that could convince us that causa sui 
is indeed a more adequate characterization of God and not merely an opportunistic and ad 
hoc facade for the good old uncaused cause? While there are many important questions 
surrounding Spinoza’s notion of causa sui, it is the last question which will be the focus of 
this short chapter. 


A Companion to Spinoza, First Edition. Edited by Yitzhak Y. Melamed. 
© 2021 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2021 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd. 


116 


SPINOZA ON CAUSA SUI 


In the first part of this chapter, I study, briefly, Descartes’ engagement with the notion of 
causa sui. In the second part, I show that Spinoza understood the causation of causa sui as 
efficient, and not formal, causation. The third and final part will attempt to locate precisely 
the alleged problem with the notion of causa sui, and consider how could Spinoza defend 
the intelligibility of this notion. Regrettably, limitations of space will force us to leave the 
examination of Spinoza’s closely related notion of being-conceived-through-itself [per se 
concipitur] for another occasion (cf. Melamed and Lin 2018, pp. 11-13). 


1. Causa sui in Descartes 


Proving the existence of God was the stated aim of Descartes’ Third Meditation (AT VII 
14] CSM II 10). In the course of developing his proof, Descartes noted that whatever 
“derives its existence from oneself [a se]. . . is itself God [illam ipsam Deum esse]” (AT VII 
49-50] CSM II 34). Addressing this claim, Johannes Caterus, a Dutch theologian and the 
author of the First Set of Objections appended to the Meditations, asked Descartes whether 
by describing God’s existence as being “from itself” he used the expression as “everyone 
takes the phrase,” namely, as merely indicating that God is not caused by another, or 
whether, alternatively, Descartes positively meant that God is its own cause, and thus 
“bestows its own existence upon itself” (AT VII 95| CSM II 68. Cf. Douglas 2015, 
pp. 75-78). Caterus continued his critique by arguing that the traditional, negative sense 
of being “from itself” is ill-fitted for yielding the conclusion Descartes attempted to derive. 
Caterus did not elaborate on the alternative, positive sense of the phrase, as he apparently 
considered it absurd, and thus wished to avoid ascribing it to Descartes. But here awaited 
him a surprise. 
Responding to Caterus’ query Descartes writes: 


I did not say that it was impossible for something to be the efficient cause of itself. This is obvi- 
ously the case when the term ‘efficient’ is taken to apply only to causes which are prior in time 
to their effects, or different from them. But such a restriction does not seem appropriate in the 
present context. First, it would make the question trivial, since everyone knows that something 
cannot be prior to, or distinct from, itself. Second, the natural light does not establish that the 
concept of an efficient cause requires that it be prior in time to its effect. On the contrary, the 
concept of a cause is, strictly speaking, applicable only for as long as the cause is producing 
[producit] its effect, and so it is not prior to it. However, the light of nature does establish that if 
anything exists we may always ask why it exists; that is, we may inquire into its efficient cause, 
or, if it does not have one, we may demand why it does not need one. (AT VII 108 | CSM II 78; 
italics added) 


Descartes’ response to Caterus is pretty simple: he denies that efficient causation must 
be spread in time. In fact, he argues, in its strict sense, efficient causation requires that the 
cause and its effect are concurrent. Thus, one major obstacle to the possibility of efficient 
self-causation seems to be removed. At this point, Descartes is ready to launch a counter- 
attack on those who deny the possibility of self-causation. 


Hence, if I thought that nothing could possibly have the same relation to itself as an efficient 
cause has to its effect, I should certainly not conclude that there was a first cause. On the con- 
trary, I should go on to ask for the cause of the so-called ‘first’ cause, and thus I would never reach 
anything which was the first cause of everything else. However, I do readily admit that there can 


117 


YITZHAK Y. MELAMED 


exist something which possesses such great and inexhaustible power that it never required the 
assistance of anything else in order to exist in the first place, and does not now require any 
assistance for its preservation, so that it is, in a certain way, its own cause; and I understand God to 
be such a being. (AT VII 108-9 | CSM II 78; italics added) 


If I understand the first two sentences of this last passage correctly, Descartes asserts 
here that the only alternative to self-causation is an infinite regression of causes. The 
possibility that God, qua first cause, simply has no cause is not considered a viable option 
in this passage, apparently, because it would constitute a blatant violation of the ex nihilo 
nihil fit principle which Descartes clearly endorsed (see, for example, AT VI 34| CSM 128 
and AT VII 135| CSMII 297). True, even in this passage we sense a certain hesitation on 
Descartes’ side as he qualifies the claim that God is its own (efficient) cause by the 
modifier: “in a certain way [quodammodo].” Still, we should take notice that in this 
passage God is not described as having no cause, but rather it is God’s inexhaustible 
power — a causal faculty — which explains why God needs no other assistance, or cause, 
for its existence. 

This state of things seems to change slightly in the axiomatic excerpt which appears at 
the very end of the Second Set of Replies. Here, Descartes posits the following axiom: 


Concerning every existing thing it is possible to ask what is the cause of its existence. This 
question may even be asked concerning God, not because he needs any cause in order to exist, 
but because the immensity of his nature is the cause or reason [ipsa ejus naturae immensitas est 
causa sive ratio] why he needs no cause in order to exist. (AT VII 165| CSM II 116) 


There are three tiny but still noteworthy differences between the last two excerpts. (1) 
The First Replies excerpt suggests that God’s inexhaustible power explains why he does 
not need the assistance of (another) cause. In the Second Replies excerpt, it is God’s 
immense nature which provides the explanation. In his correspondence, Descartes sug- 
gests that God’s power and essence are not distinct (AT V 342| CSM III 372). Thus, 
this first difference seems a mere nuance. (2) In the First Replies excerpt, God is said to 
need no “assistance,” i.e. an external cause, in order to exist. In the Second Replies, God 
is said to need “no cause,” with no further qualification that the cause in question is an 
external cause. (3) In the First Replies excerpt, God’s power seems to be the cause that 
makes the assistance of another cause redundant. In the Second Replies, God’s nature 
is the “cause or reason” why he needs no cause. In the Second Set of Replies, Descartes 
seems to be trying to somewhat play down the claim that God is its own cause — or, to 
use his own admission in a closely related context, he has “deliberately altered [the 
formulation] so that I might suit a wide variety of minds” (AT VII 120| CSM II 85). 
But was Descartes also truly withdrawing from the claim that God is its own efficient 
cause? 

Descartes’ surprising response to Caterus drew the attention of Antoine Arnauld, the 
author of the Fourth Set of Objections, and, at the time, a doctoral student of theology at 
the Sorbonne. For Arnauld, any positive interpretation of the claim that God derives its 
existence a se is simply absurd. It makes no sense to claim that God preserves itself, claims 
Arnauld, just as it makes no sense to claim that God creates itself (AT VII 212| CSM II 
149). Things which require creation and preservation by an efficient cause are things 
whose existence is not guaranteed by their very essence (AT VII 213| CSM II 150). 
Responding to Descartes’ claim in the First Replies that if we deny the possibility of divine 


118 


SPINOZA ON CAUSA SUI 


self-causation, we have no other resort but to accept an infinite regression of causes, 
Arnauld writes: 


Not at all. If I thought we ought to look for the efficient cause, or quasi-efficient cause, of any 
given thing, then what I would be looking for would be a cause distinct from the thing in question, 
since it is completely evident to me that nothing can possibly stand in the same relation to itself 
as that in which an efficient cause stands to its effect. (AT VII 213-4| CSM II 150; italics added) 


At first glance, Arnauld’s response to Descartes seems quite odd, as he appears not to 
address at all the threat — pointed out by Descartes — of an infinite regression of causes. But 
upon closer reading, it becomes evident that Arnauld is providing an interesting rebuttal. 
Were I to believe unrestrictedly that everything must have an efficient cause and thus 
follow an endless regression of causes in an attempt to explain why something, or the 
world, exists — claims Arnauld—I would thereby show that Iam not satisfied with an answer 
suggesting that the world is self-caused (for if I were satisfied with such an answer, I would 
not inquire about the world’s cause and the infinite causal regression would never get off 
the ground). But why would I not be satisfied with the suggested that the world is self- 
caused? Because “it is completely evident to me that nothing can possibly stand in the 
same relation to itself as that which an efficient cause stands to its effects.” In other words, 
what Arnauld seems to be saying is that our standard practice of looking for external effi- 
cient causes indicates that we rule out the possibility of self-causation and consider it a 
clear absurdity. 

Descartes addresses Arnauld’s objection in great detail in the Fourth Set of Replies. Yet, 
as Tad Schmatz has recently argued, “Descartes was not entirely on top of his game” in 
drafting his response (Schmaltz 2011, p. 113; for a different evaluation, see Marion 1991, 
pp. 427-244). Descartes begins by asserting that his claim in the First Replies that “‘God is 
in a sense his own cause’ cannot possibly be taken to mean an efficient cause” (AT VII 
236| CSMII 65). Against Arnauld, Descartes argues that if we deny the universality of the 
requirement to inquire about the efficient causes of all things, we would block “the pri- 
mary and principal way, if not the only way, that we have of proving the existence of God” 
(AT VII 238 | CSM II166). Thus, maintaining, like Arnauld, that God has “no cause at all” 
is not an option for Descartes (AT VII 239 | CSM II 167). Instead, Descartes suggests the 
following observation: 


Those who follow the sole guidance of the natural light will in this context spontaneously 
form a concept of cause that is common to both an efficient and a formal cause: that is to say, 
what derives its existence ‘from another’ will be taken to derive its existence from that thing as 
an efficient cause, while what derives its existence ‘from itself’ will be taken to derive its existence 
from itself as a formal cause — that is, because it has the kind of essence which entails that it does not 
require an efficient cause. (AT VII 238 | CSM II 166; italics added). 


For Descartes, the proper cause of essences is formal, not efficient (AT VII 243 | CSM II 
169). As we shall shortly see, on this issue, Spinoza will develop a very different view. 
Descartes also stresses that describing God as an (efficient) ‘effect of itself’ is an indig- 
nity to God, insofar as the effect of an efficient cause is commonly regarded as inferior 
to the cause (AT VII 242| CSM II 169). Here too Spinoza will demur. Yet, despite all 
these pressures against the view of God as an efficient causa sui, even in the Fourth 
Replies Descartes would not completely withdraw from this view, and instead insist 


119 


YITZHAK Y. MELAMED 


that since in God’s case, essence and existence are not distinct, God’s essence qua 
“formal cause will be strongly analogous to an efficient cause, and hence can be called 
something close to an efficient” (AT VII 243 | CSM II 170). It is not completely clear to 
me why Descartes insists on defending a scaled-down, analogical version, of his claim 
that God is an efficient cause of itself, especially given the fact that for the Scholastics 
this view was almost an anathema (Aquinas 1975, Summa contra gentiles, | 13 iv; 
Aquinas 1964, Summa Theologiae, I 2 iii; Anselm 1998, Monologion, Ch. 6, p. 18); cf. 
Carraud, 2002, p. 267 and Lee, 2006, pp. 93-109). Perhaps it was the threat posed to 
the possibility of proving God’s existence, once the universality of the demand for 
explanation through efficient causes is revoked, that made Descartes dig in his heels 
and insist that there is still a sense — analogical and non-literal as it is — in which even 
God has an efficient cause, or — if we adhere to Descartes’ formulation — God is its own 
efficient cause. 


2. Spinoza’s Causa (efficiens) sui 


The young Spinoza must have watched Descartes’ struggle with the notion of causa sui 
with great interest. We know for a fact that Spinoza read the Objection and Replies quite 
carefully, as he frequently cites them in his own works (see, for example, DPP1p5s, and KV 
I, vii| I/I/47/10; cf. Kambouchner 2021). We have already seen that in his early Treatise 
on the Emendation of the Intellect (§97), and the Cogitata Metaphysica (1/23 7/20), Spinoza 
was not yet ready to introduce the notion of causa sui. Instead, he would refer to God as an 
uncreated thing, or uncreated substance. One passage in the TIE comes close to endorsing 
the notion of causa sui: “that Thought is also called true which involves objectively the 
essence of some principle that does not have a cause, and is known through itself and in itself 
[per se, & in se cognoscitur]” (TIE §70; italics added). Here, the said principle has no cause, 
yet it is known through itself. The Cogitata Metaphysica — an early text of Spinoza that may or 
may not represent his own views at the time — also rejects the notion of divine, continuous 
self-creation (CM II 1| I/250/25). 

In the Short Treatise, the notion of causa sui already appears explicitly in the text, though 
in a relatively marginal note. In this context, Spinoza does not miss the opportunity to 
scold Aquinas for holding that God has no cause. 


But God, the first cause of all things, and also the cause of himself |de oorzaak syns zelfs|, makes 
himself known through himself. So what Thomas Aquinas says — that God could not be proved 
a priori, because he supposedly has no cause — is not of much importance. (KV I 1| I/18/25; 
italics added) 


A further development occurs in a text commonly referred to as the first appendix to the 
Short Treatise, though if my argument elsewhere (Melamed 2019) is correct, this excerpt is 
in fact the earliest draft of the Ethics we currently have. In this text, causa sui appears as a 
key concept in the sixth axiom of this excerpt: “What is a cause of itself [een oorzaak van zig 
zelfs| could not possibly have limited itself” (I/114/19). 

The Ethics opens with the definition of causa sui (Eld1) in a manner that seems 
almost nonchalant. What kind of causation is the causation of causa sui (in the Ethics)? 
In a recent important work, Vincent Carraud argued that Spinoza’s causa sui should be 


120 


SPINOZA ON CAUSA SUI 


read along Cartesian lines, and that it is “much closer to the formal cause than the 
Cartesian efficient cause” (Carraud 2002, p. 324). Moreover, Carraud argues that, 
since for Spinoza God’s self-activity is the paradigm of all causation (Carraud 2002, 
p. 313), Spinoza’s causes, in general, should be read as formal rather than efficient 
causes. With regard to both claims I beg to differ. We do not have the space here to dis- 
cuss the general nature of causation in the Ethics, but let me make three brief observa- 
tions. (1) The term ‘causa formalis’ is virtually absent in the Ethics: it appears only once 
(E5p31), apparently as an analogy (“tanquam a formali causa”), and not in a very 
central place. (2) Throughout the Ethics, Spinoza uses ‘causa’ as interchangeable with 
‘producing [producere]|’. The terminology of production is tightly associated with effi- 
cient causation in both medieval and early modern philosophy (see Schmid 2015). (3) 
The terms ‘causa efficiens,’ ‘causa immanens,’ and ‘causa transiens’ are very common in 
the Ethics. Spinoza introduces the latter two terms in E1p18, and the reliance of Elp18d 
on Elpl6c1, makes clear that the dichotomy between immanent and transient causa- 
tion is a bifurcation between two sub-species of the efficient cause: an immanent cause 
is an efficient cause whose effect inheres in the cause, while a transient cause is a cause 
whose effect does not inhere in the cause (see Melamed 2013, pp. 61-66, for detailed 
discussion). In the Short Treatise, Spinoza presents explicitly the distinction between 
immanent and transient causation as a distinction within the efficient cause (KV I 7 | 
1/35/20). For all these reasons, I think the case for reading Spinoza’s concept of cause, 
in general, as formal, rather than efficient, is not strong. Still, I believe Carraud put his 
finger on an important issue in Spinoza’s understanding of causation, namely, that 
Spinoza extends significantly the traditional functions of the efficient cause and assigns 
to the efficient cause functions which his predecessors would ascribe to the other 
Aristotelian causes. 

Surprising as it may seem to some, I also believe that Spinoza is committed to the view 
that God is the efficient cause of itself, i.e. that the causation of the causa sui is efficient. In 
this sense, one can observe some continuity between Spinoza’s and Descartes’ discussions 
of causa sui, though, unlike Descartes, Spinoza is much more resolute and unapologetic in 
employing this crucial notion. Here is, very briefly, the main textual evidence supporting 
this conclusion. 

(1) In Elp6c, Spinoza proves that “a substance cannot be produced by anything else 
[substantiam ab alio produci non posse|” The terminology of ‘producere’ is a clear indication 
that the causation at stake in E1p6c is efficient. In E1p7, Spinoza relies on Elp6c and on a 
tacit premise that everything must have a cause in order to infer that a substance must be 
a cause of itself, and thus (per Eld1) have essence involving existence. Now, suppose the 
tacit premise were not restricted to efficient causation, i.e. that it only required that every- 
thing must have a cause, either efficient or not. In such a case, the argument of Elp7d 
would be invalid: not being efficiently caused by anything else, a substance could still have 
a cause without being causa sui, by being non-efficiently caused by another. Thus, in order 
to be valid, the tacit premise must strictly require that everything must have an efficient 
cause. But this strict version of the tacit premise yields the conclusion that substance is an 
efficient cause of itself. 

(2) Elp16 is probably the most central juncture of the Ethics. The proposition reads, 


From the necessity of the divine nature there must follow infinitely many things in infinitely 
many modes (i.e. everything which can fall under an infinite intellect). 


121 


YITZHAK Y. MELAMED 


Relying on this proposition Spinoza infers the following corollary: 


From this it follows that God is the efficient cause of all things [omnium rerum] which can fall 
under an infinite intellect. (E1p16c1; italics added) 


For Spinoza, God itself is a thing [res] (see, for example, E2p1), and this infinite thing is 
known by God’s intellect (per E2p3d and E2p4). Thus, from Elp16c1, we can immediately 
infer that God is also the efficient cause of itself (insofar as God actually “falls under an 
infinite intellect”). 

(3) In Ep. 60 (dated January 1675), Spinoza explains why he does not employ in the 
Ethics the common definition of God as ens pefectissimum. A proper definition of a thing, 
claims Spinoza, should “express the efficient cause” of the thing (IV/2 70/23; italics added; 
cf. TIE §96). However, Spinoza notes, “when I define God as a supremely perfect being [ens 
summe perfectum] . . . that definition does not express the efficient cause (for I understand 
the efficient cause to be both internal and external).” Unlike those who consider all effi- 
cient causes as external, Spinoza stresses that an efficient cause might well be internal (or 
immanent) (see E1p18d, KV II 2 |1/35/12-20, and KV II 26| I/110/23). Spinoza is clearly 
well aware of the fact that many (though not all) of his predecessors would reject the pos- 
sibility of an internal efficient cause (see KV I 2 | I/30/22-25). By allowing efficient causes 
to be also internal, Spinoza opens the path for the possibility that even God — outside of 
which there is nothing (Elp15) — has an efficient cause. Indeed, in the last quote from 
Ep. 60, Spinoza insists that even in the case of God, the proper definition (of God) must refer 
to the efficient cause (of the thing defined), from which one can clearly infer that God has 
an efficient cause (though, an internal efficient cause). Now, the efficient cause of God, 
cannot be anything other than God itself, for if the efficient cause were anything but God, 
God would have to be conceived through that cause (per Ela4), and thus God would be 
conceptually posterior to its cause which would contradict the definition of God as sub- 
stance (E1d6). 

(4) In Ep. 34 (dated January 1666), Spinoza presents his standard and fundamental 
distinction between the ground of the existence of God, or the substance, and the 
grounds for the existence of things which can be “many in number.” God exists solely by 
virtue of its essence while all things which can be many in number exist by virtue of 
causes that are distinct from the things themselves. In this context, Spinoza tellingly 
characterizes existence-by-virtue-of-mere-essence as “being produced by the force of its 
own nature [suae naturae vi produci]” (IV/1 80/21; italics added). As we mentioned before, 
the terminology of production is a clear mark of efficient causation. Spinoza’s 
employment of the terminology of production to describe existing by virtue of one’s own 
essence alone seems to indicate that, for Spinoza, existence by virtue of essence is a case 
of efficient causation. 

(5) In Elp25 Spinoza proves that God is also the efficient cause of the essence of things 
(recall that for Descartes (AT VII 243 | CSM II 169), causation of essence belongs to formal 
causation). This intriguing proposition and its demonstration read: 


E1p25: God is the efficient cause, not only of the existence of things [rerum], but also of their essence. 


Dem.: If you deny this, then God is not the cause of the essence of things; and so (by A4) the 
essence of things can be conceived without God. But (by P15) this is absurd. Therefore, God is 
also the cause of the essence of things, q.e.d. 


122 


SPINOZA ON CAUSA SUI 


Now, let us ask: what is the scope of ‘rerum’ in E1p25? Is God the efficient cause of his own 
essence? If we follow the argument of Elp25d, God must be the efficient cause of his own 
essence. For otherwise, God’s essence could be conceived without God which would flatly 
contradict Elp15. 

The five texts we have discussed so far establish, I believe, that Spinoza was happy to 
affirm that God is the efficient cause of itself. Still, how would he respond to the powerful 
arguments against the intelligibility of this notion? 


3. Defending Causa (efficiens) sui 


Let us begin by considering two arguments which appear explicitly in the exchanges bet- 
ween Descartes, Caterus, and Arnauld. Then we will consider two additional arguments 
against the intelligibility of efficient self-causation. 

(1) Must efficient causation be spread out in time? — Just like Descartes, Spinoza allows 
for efficient causation which is unmistakably not spread in time. Of such a kind is the 
causation of essences (E1p25), the causation of infinite modes (Elpp21-23; cf. 
Melamed 2013, pp. 122-126), the flow of natura naturata from natura naturans (see 
E1p29s: natura naturata is caused by, but is not after, natura naturans), as well as the flow 
of duration from eternity (Ep. 12. 1V/57/17). In short, immanent causation is not spread 
in time (Melamed 2013, p. 111). If an efficient cause need not be temporally prior to its 
effect, then one major obstacle to the possibility of self-causation (and reciprocal causa- 
tion) is removed. 

(2) Is it proper for God to be an effect of itself? — In his response to Arnauld, Descartes 
admits that he hesitates to call God ‘cause of itself’ in order “not to imply that he has any of 
the indignity of being an effect” (AT VII 242 | CSM II 168-169). Spinoza, however, should 
not be moved much by such considerations as he openly speaks of “God insofar as it is mod- 
ified by a modification which is finite” (Elp28d), and thus, as a recipient of an action. 
Moreover, in Elp15s, Spinoza notes that even if extension were divisible, he would still 
assert that extension is one of God’s attributes since there is nothing “unworthy [indignam 
esse|” in God being acted on by itself (II/60/13-15). 

(3) Is it Contradictory to be both the Cause and Effect of Itself? — In his Summa Contra 
Gentiles, Aquinas — echoing Aristotle — presents the following argument against the 
view of God as causing, or moving, itself: “The same thing cannot be at once in act 
and in potency with respect to the same thing. But everything that is moved is, as 
such, in potency, .. .[while] that which moves is, as such, in act” (Aquinas 1975, 
p. 88; Summa contra gentiles, I 13 iv. Descartes might be alluding to this argument in 
AT VII 240| CSM II 168). For the Aristotelians, causation is a movement from poten- 
tiality to actuality. From this perspective, causa sui seems to be a state in which a thing 
is and is not actual, at the same time, and in the same respect (Lee 2006, p. 98). This 
argument too seems to be ineffective against Spinoza’s notion of causa sui for two rea- 
sons. First, as we have seen before, Spinoza would deny that efficient causation 
requires time. But since movement and change presuppose time, efficient causation 
need not involve either change or movement. Second, Spinoza dispenses with the 
Aristotelian notion of potentiality (see Elp17s| II/62/19-20), and thereby also 
rejects the Aristotelian view of causation as movement from potentiality to 
actuality. 


123 


YITZHAK Y. MELAMED 


(4) Can God be less Perfect than Itself? — In the course of his discussion of teleology in 
Elapp, Spinoza presents the following claim regarding the infinite modes (discussed in 
Elpp2 1-23): “that effect is most perfect which is produced immediately by God, and the 
more something requires intermediate causes to produce it, the more imperfect it is” 
(Elapp| II/80/16-18). In other words, infinite modes which inhere immediately in God are 
more perfect (whatever perfection here means) than infinite modes which inhere in God 
through the mediation of other infinite modes (see El p22; cf. Melamed 2013, pp. 12-1). 
Now, this might give one the impression that Spinoza is committed to the view that an 
effect of an immanent cause must be less real than its cause. But if God is the immanent 
efficient cause of itself, we would have to conclude that God is less real than itself, which is 
absurd. 

The fallacy in the last argument lies in the assumption that an effect of an immanent 
cause is always less real than its cause. For Spinoza, a mode is less perfect, or less real, than 
its substance precisely because it is in-another, and depends on another for its being. 
Substance which is only in-itself and is immanently caused only by itself is maximally real 
since it is maximally independent. In other words, it is only inherence in another (but not 
inherence it itself) that creates the gap of perfection or reality. This point is confirmed by 
the very sentence by which we begun the current discussion: “and the more something 
requires intermediate causes to produce it, the more imperfect it is.” In the limit case, 
where there are no intermediaries and the effect is not at all distinct from the cause, there 
is no difference in perfection. 


4. Conclusion 


In this chapter we have studied Spinoza’s extraordinary notion of causa sui and the 
Cartesian background of this discussion. I have argued that, unlike Descartes, Spinoza was 
unapologetic in his willingness to defend the notion of God being the efficient cause of 
itself. The introduction of causa immanens and the view of the causation of essences as 
belonging to efficient causation created the conceptual space required for sustaining the 
notion of causa efficiens sui. We have also discussed four powerful objections to the intelligi- 
bility of causa sui—three by Spinoza’s predecessors and one internal to his system. For all I 
can tell, none of these objections is conclusive and most do not create a major dent in 
Spinoza’s defense. 

This of course does not mean that the notion of causa sui is immune from problems or 
even free from inconsistency. Rigid proofs of consistency of philosophical concepts are 
extremely difficult (and extremely rare in philosophy) and I have not even tried the first 
steps on this path. One may perhaps suggest that reflexive efficient causation is just intui- 
tively wrong. But the weight of such an argument would depend much on one’s valuation 
of intuitions. On my side, I can only note that for the medieval and early modern philoso- 
phers it was absolutely intuitively clear that parthood is an irreflexive relation (“the whole 
is great than its part” has been used as stock example of an eternal truth). Alas, contem- 
porary mereology allows for reflexive parthood. Thus, my intuition about the reflexivity, or 
irreflexivity, of a specific relation, may indicate nothing over and above uncritical habit of 
thinking. 


124 


SPINOZA ON CAUSA SUI 


There may well be strong and cogent arguments against efficient self-causation, but it is 
now time for them to be stated explicitly and scrutinized. To use the words of Yonah 
Wallach (1944-1985), an exceptional Israeli woman poet: 


We are told that there is another kind of sex 

It’s good that someone knows about it 

If there is another kind of sex — bring it out unto us 
And let us know it. 


Acknowledgments 


I am greatly indebted to Denis Kambouchner, Warren Zev Harvey, Zach Gartenberg, 
Michael Della Rocca, Rosemary Morlin, Stephan Schmid, Jack Stetter, Jason Yonover, and 
the participants at the January 2020 Spinoza workshop at Hamburg University and a 
September 2020 session of the Princeton-Bucharest Virtual Seminar in Early Modern 
Philosophy for their penetrating and generous criticism of earlier drafts of this chapter. 


References 


Anselm of Canterbury (1998). The Major Works (ed. B. Davies and G. Evans). Oxford: Oxford 
University Press. 

Aquinas, T. (1964), Summa Theologiae (ed. Blackfriars). New York: McGraw-Hill. 

Aquinas, T. (1975). Summa contra gentiles. Book One: God (trans. A. C. Pegis). Notre Dame, IN: Notre 
Dame University Press. 

Carraud, V. (2002). Causa sive Ratio. La Raison de la cause, de Suarez a Leibniz. Paris: PUF. 

Kambouchner, D. (2021). Spinoza and Descartes. In: Blackwell Companion to Spinoza (ed. Y.Y. 
Melamed), 56-67. Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell. 

Lee, R.A. (2006). The scholastic resources for Descartes’s concept of God as causa sui. Oxford Studies 
in Early Modern Philosophy 3: 91-118. 

Marion, J.-L. (1991). Sur la théologie blanche de Descartes. Paris: PUF/Quadrige. 

Melamed, Y.Y. (2013). Spinoza’s Metaphysics: Substance and Thought. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Melamed, Y.Y. (2019). The earliest draft of Spinoza’s Ethics. In: Spinoza in 21st-Century French and 
American Philosophy. Metaphysics, Philosophy of Mind, Moral and Political Philosophy (ed. C. Ramond 
and J. Stetter), 93-112. London: Bloomsbury. 

Melamed, Y.Y. and Lin, M. (2018). Principle of sufficient reason. The Stanford Encyclopedia of 
Philosophy https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2018/entries/sufficient-reason/ (accessed 23 
October 2020). 

Schmaltz, T. (2011). God as causa sui and created truth in Descartes. In: The Ultimate Why Question: 
Why Is There Anything at All Rather than Nothing Whatsoever (J. Wippel). Washington, DC: The 
Catholic University of America Press. 

Schmid, S. (2015). Efficient causality: the metaphysics of production. In: J (ed.), Suarez on Aristotelian 
Causality (ed. L. Fink), 85-121. Leiden: Brill. 


125 


12 


Spinoza’s Physical Picture 


JOHN CARRIERO 


A reader of Spinoza’s Ethics is confronted early on with the peculiar claim that we are 
“modes” of the universe’s one Substance. Considerable attention has been given to whether 
Spinoza has a successful argument for the thesis that there cannot be more than one sub- 
stance, which would imply that everything else must be modes. But less attention has been 
given to what the thesis that you and I are modes of the one Substance might mean in the first 
place, let alone what is at stake here: why I should care whether I am a “mode” or a “sub- 
stance”? (For discussion of the meaning of the thesis, see Curley 1969, ch. 1; Bennett 1984, 
§23; and Carriero 1995.) Often the meaning of the thesis is left largely as a contextual matter. 

I think one can do better than that. I think much of the content of the thesis comes from 
a substantive picture of the physical world that Spinoza is drawing on, one that differs in 
striking ways from a prevalent Aristotelian picture of the natural order. Spinoza’s picture 
of the physical world (and the corresponding rejection of Aristotelian natural philosophy) 
must be in place in order for us to make sense of many of his key theses and, in particular, 
to give content to the curious claim that you and I - or at least our bodies — are modes of 
the universe’s single Substance. 

And, as we shall see, Spinoza does not so much argue for this physical picture as presup- 
pose it. He is assuming that his reader is already familiar with it. For that matter, as we 
shall also see, he does not so much argue against rival Aristotelian conceptions of natural 
philosophy as simply dismiss them. To be sure, Spinoza does provide some salient details of 
his physical picture in the “physical digression” in Part 2; but what is presented there is 
more asserted than argued, and, besides, one already needs the physical picture in place to 
make sense of Part 1. The basic physical picture is part of Spinoza’s Chapter 0, something 
that a knowledgeable reader should already be familiar with before picking up his text. 
And this means that important work in terms of giving content to Spinoza’s theory of the 
human being and its place in the universe happens offstage. 

One point of clarification: my focus here will be on the human body and how it falls out 
of Spinoza’s physical picture in a natural way that it is a modification of something more 
fundamental. Spinoza’s further view that the human mind is Substance’s understanding 
of the universe when restricted to the human body implies that the mind, too, is a modifi- 
cation of something more basic, namely, Substance’s thought. From this it follows that the 
human being is either a mode or a combination of two modes. I won’t pursue the larger 


A Companion to Spinoza, First Edition. Edited by Yitzhak Y. Melamed. 
© 2021 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2021 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd. 


126 


SPINOZA'S PHYSICAL PICTURE 


story here; it will be enough to understand what Spinoza has in mind when he claims that 
our bodies are modes. 


Spinoza sent an early sketch of the opening propositions of the Ethics to Henry Oldenburg, 
which contained the surprising proposition that there cannot be two or more substances 
of the same attribute. Oldenburg apparently takes this (correctly, I believe) to mean that 
there cannot be two substances of the same essence, and finds himself puzzled: aren’t two 
human beings two substances, and since both are “capable of reasoning,” don’t they have 
the same essence or attribute (Ep. 3)? Spinoza responds: 


... Il beg you, my friend, to consider that men are not created, but only begotten, and that their 
bodies already existed, but in a different form. However, the conclusion is this, as I am quite 
willing to admit, that if one part of matter were to be annihilated, the whole of Extension 
would also vanish at the same time. (Ep. 4) 


While the details of the response are perhaps obscure, its general import is clear. Oldenburg 
has not produced a counterexample to Spinoza’s claim, because human beings are not 
substances. The human body, in particular, is not a basic thing, but rather is derivative 
from something more fundamental (what Spinoza calls “the whole of Extension”). We can 
see this, Spinoza suggests, by reflecting on how a human body comes into being. 

To fill in some detail, the appearance of a human body in Spinoza’s plenum is merely the 
emergence of a new pattern of motion and rest within Extension. In many respects, its 
arrival on the scene resembles the appearance of the jet stream in the atmosphere over 
North America. And whatever one makes of the ontological status of the jet stream, no 
one would think that it is a fundamental entity, a substance. There is, to be sure, an impor- 
tant way in which the atmosphere makes for an imperfect analogy with Spinoza’s plenum. 
As his second comment indicates, the parts of his plenum are more tightly metaphysically 
bound together than the parts of the atmosphere. But we are getting ahead of ourselves. 

Spinoza’s response to Oldenburg shows that he is taking for granted a certain picture of the 
physical world. This picture is assumed before the argument for the central metaphysical claims 
of Part 1 of the Ethics begins. That is, the general picture of the physical world is already in 
place before Spinoza argues that a substance contains within itself the ground of its existence, 
that there can be no other substance besides God, and that God necessarily produces the order 
of modes that is maximal in reality, so that the world in which we find ourselves is uncondition- 
ally necessary, down to its very last detail (see Carriero 2019, 107 and 116n24),. 

Spinoza’s picture of the physical world contrasts markedly with the one found in 
Aristotelian natural philosophy (what we would think of as physical science), according to 
which a human being, for example, is a substance, whose essence is to be a rational animal. 
(Oldenburg may have been gesturing in the direction of the traditional account when he 
remarked that two human beings have the same “attribute” because both are “capable of 
reasoning.”) The Aristotelian thesis that the real definition of a human being is rational 
animal may sound to us too “logical” or “formal” to count as a piece of natural philosophy, 
a piece of natural science. But for them it was a scientific achievement, comparable to how 
we think of the discovery that the fundamental structure of water is H,O. Notice that when 
it is unpacked along the lines of the so-called Tree of Porphyry, the definition designates 
the fundamental powers of a human being — namely, rationality and those connected with 
animality: sensation, locomotion, nutrition, and reproduction. It thus provides the basic 
template for the further investigation of the nature of a human being. 


127 


JOHN CARRIERO 


Spinoza does not think a serious understanding of a human being follows the Tree of 
Porphyry. And his response to Oldenburg implies that he thinks naive natural philos- 
ophy stands in the way of correct metaphysics. Spinoza is more explicit about the point 
in the Ethics itself. In Elp8s2, he remarks that a basic failure to understand what the 
causes of natural things look like makes it difficult for people to see that a substance 
cannot be externally produced but rather must contain within itself the grounds of its 
existence (i.e. E1p7): 


I do not doubt that the demonstration of Elp7 will be difficult to conceive for all who judge 
things confusedly, and have not been accustomed to know things through their first causes — 
because they do not distinguish between the modifications of substances and the substances 
themselves, nor do they know how things are produced. 


In other words, Oldenburg, although a friend of the new science, has lost sight of how 
things are produced. Spinoza goes on: 


So it happens that they fictitiously ascribe to substances the beginning which they see that 
natural things have; for those who do not know the true causes of things confuse every- 
thing and without any conflict of mind feign that both trees and men speak, imagine that 
men are formed both from stones and from seed, and that any form is changed into any 
other. 


If this is intended as a criticism of Aristotelian natural philosophy as opposed to a criticism of 
the views of ordinary people, Spinoza’s comments are unfairly polemical. Even so, there is a 
serious point he is making here: if people were generally aware of how things like a human 
body or a tree or a stone come into being (that is, how they emerge within the plenum), they 
would not be tempted to think those things could be substances; a substance — for the 
moment, think of the plenum itself as a plausible candidate for being a substance — could not 
have had that sort of beginning. 

There is another place in the Ethics where Spinoza connects misgivings about 
Aristotelian natural philosophy with their failure in metaphysics. In Part 2 of the Ethics, 
Spinoza suggests that medieval Aristotelian philosophers lacked a consistent answer to the 
question of whether God should be included in an account of the essence of a finite thing, 
that is, whether the real definition of a finite thing should make reference to God. Spinoza 
traces this problem to the Aristotelian attempt to do natural philosophy before philosophical 
theology, and then to build a philosophical theology on the basis of that natural 
philosophy: 


The cause of [many people holding confused views concerning whether or not God pertains to 
the essence of a finite thing], I believe, was that they did not observe the [proper] order of phi- 
losophizing. For they believed that the divine nature, which they should have contemplated 
before all else (because it is prior in knowledge and in nature) is last in the order of knowledge, 
and that the things which are called the objects of the senses are prior to all. That is why, when 
they contemplated natural things, they thought of nothing less than they did of the divine 
nature; and when afterwards they directed their minds to contemplating the divine nature, 
they could think of nothing less than of their first fictions, on which they had built the 
knowledge of natural things, because these could not assist knowledge of the divine nature. 
(E2p10cs: first interpolation mine; second interpolation found in Curley, based a manuscript 
variant) 


128 


SPINOZA'S PHYSICAL PICTURE 


According to Spinoza, natural philosophy must begin with a consideration of God or 
substance. The thought that one must do philosophical theology (that is, the theory of 
God, or as I will sometimes put it, the theory of the universe’s First Principle) before one 
does natural philosophy might strike us as odd. But Spinoza thinks that God or substance 
is the source of the universe’s geometric and kinetic invariances. One could no more 
understand the human body apart from divine nature and its invariances in Spinoza’s 
world than we could understand the human body apart from the basic laws of physics in 
ours. Understanding in his world follows a definite path from basic laws and principles to 
more determinate ones that provide the theoretical structure that is used to understand 
individual things. 

Aristotelians tried to work in the opposite direction. They began with trying to under- 
stand finite natural things and their principles first, and then hoped to use what they 
learned there as a basis to develop a theory of the First Principle of the universe, God. 
Spinoza regards this project as doomed from the start. There is no hope of understanding 
finite things without understanding the infinite being whose invariances lend structure to 
everything. If we try to start with the finite things in a way that ignores this fundamental 
structure, we will find ourselves merely working with ill-understood surface characteris- 
tics of things — features like “equinity” or “bipedality” or “animality.” 

There is at least one other place where Spinoza’s attitude toward Aristotelian natural 
philosophy surfaces in the Ethics. This comes after Spinoza presents his account of univer- 
sals as a form of cognition involving blurred images. Universals include the superficial fea- 
tures just mentioned, like equinity or bipedality or animality. Spinoza writes: 


But it should be noted that these notions are not formed by all [NS: men] in the same way, but 
vary from one to another, in accordance with what the body has more often been affected by, 
and what the mind imagines or recollects more easily. For example, those who have more often 
regarded men’s stature with wonder will understand by the word man an animal of erect 
stature. But those who have been accustomed to consider something else, will form another 
common image of men —e.g., that man is an animal capable of laughter, or a featherless biped, 
or arational animal. (E2p40s1) 


These are fighting words vis-a-vis the Aristotelian tradition. As noted above, Aristotelians 
took rational animal to be a real definition of a human being — that is, a characterization of 
the essence of a human being. Spinoza is implying that the Aristotelian account of man as 
rational animal is really no better than risible animal or featherless biped. But in the Aristotelian 
tradition, risible animal and featherless biped, unlike rational animal, were supposed to be 
relatively trivial characterizations. While they might perhaps indicate important propria 
(that is, necessary concomitants) of man, they do not reveal the essence of man. At best, 
they provide a nominal definition of man (which explains the application of the word 
“man”), not a real definition (which explains the essence of a thing). Spinoza, of course, is 
well aware of the distinction. In TIE §95, he warns against using mere propria in a definition 
that is supposed to give the essence of a thing. He is implying in E2p40s1 that the Aristotelian 
definition of man as rational animal makes just this mistake. Why does he think this? 
According to Spinoza, universals correspond to the way in which the physical marks 
that one’s sundry sensory encounters with the world leave on one’s body cluster (e.g., in 
horse-like ways, dog-like ways, and so on). Universals are our ideas of such cluster images. 
In his view, this cognition is relatively superficial; it does not provide a suitable basis for an 
understanding of the natural world. A serious account of a human being, for example, 


129 


JOHN CARRIERO 


requires considering how the human body arises from the universe’s fundamental physical 
(and, let’s add, chemical and biological) structure and how the human mind arises from 
the universe’s basic cognitive structure. 

The larger point here is that, for Spinoza, basic theory is not the result of abstraction 
from experience. Basic theory must be drawn in terms of the universe’s invariant struc- 
ture. (Spinoza thinks this invariant structure pervades our bodies, since they participate in 
that structure. Moreover, he thinks our minds — as God’s understanding of our bodies — 
inherit access to this structure. We don’t acquire it from reflecting on ideas of blurry cluster 
images.) This is why, in his view, the Aristotelian definition of man as rational animal is no 
better than featherless biped. Because Aristotelian natural philosophy was built on cogni- 
tion of cluster images, without an eye toward the invariances that afford physical things 
their essential structure, it is no wonder, Spinoza goes on to say, that these philosophers 
made so little progress in natural philosophy over the centuries: 


Therefore, it is not surprising that so many controversies have arisen among philosophers who 
have sought to explain natural phenomena through merely the images of these phenomena. 
(E2p40s1) 


A corollary of Spinoza’s view about the superficiality of cognition involving universals 
concerns the sort of agreement we can and cannot expect surrounding universals. This is 
the point that Spinoza is making in the passage I cited from E2p40s1 earlier. While there is 
a fair amount of overlap in how our experiences cluster — otherwise it would be impossible 
for common nouns to come into currency as they do-there are also differences. The things 
I most prominently associate with the universal man or horse may not be the things you 
most prominently associate with those universals. So we should expect a certain amount 
of disagreement over man and horse. Notice that Spinoza’s point depends here on his claim 
that the cognition of cluster images does not track the essences of things. If it did, at some 
point the essences would make themselves felt, and agreement would be secured. 

These discussions show that, as mentioned earlier, Spinoza is assuming a certain pic- 
ture of the physical world at the outset. And as Oldenburg learned, it is sometimes 
necessary to be aware of these things in order to understand Spinoza. Let me attempt, 
then, a brief sketch of the physical order as Spinoza saw it. Because he saw physics and 
metaphysics (including philosophical theology) as intimately connected, sketching his pic- 
ture of the physical order also requires saying something about his metaphysics. 

Spinoza thought that the universe was the work of a single fundamental principle, 
which he identified with the unique substance or God. He also identifies this fundamental 
principle with Nature, in its active or productive guise, namely, natura naturans. Although 
this First Principle has many aspects (an extended aspect, a thinking aspect, other aspects 
of which we have no specific ideas), let’s focus on its physical aspect, extension, in order to 
keep things simple. Let’s call the First Principle, qua extended, Extended Being. 

Finite physical things — bodies and systems of bodies — are understood through, and 
have their being in, Extended Being. Extended Being has a space-like structure: it is a nec- 
essarily connected fabric, so that no finite region can exist unless the infinite being, of 
which the finite being is a determination, exists. As Spinoza says to Oldenburg, “if one part 
of matter were to be annihilated, the whole of Extension would also vanish at the same 
time.” Extended Being exhibits basic Euclidean invariances. For example, in Extended 
Being, the path from point A to point C is always and everywhere shorter or equal to the 
sum of the paths from A to B and B to C. 


130 


SPINOZA'S PHYSICAL PICTURE 


But there is more to Extended Being than space, which is, after all, something of an 
abstraction. Extended Being is active. The primary activity of Extended Being is motion. 
Moreover, this activity of Extended Being is not diffuse but determinate. We may distin- 
guish several different important aspects of the determination of Extended Being’s activity. 
First, this determination involves further invariances, corresponding to what we would 
think of as the laws of motion. Like Euclidean structure, this motion and rest structure is 
the same everywhere throughout Extension (so that, for example, a simple body’s motion 
is always and everywhere such that it will continue unless something impedes). This 
further motion and rest structure, however, is not Extended Being itself, but an infinite 
(immediate) modification of Extended Being: it is not an artifact of what Extended Being is, 
but rather follows from how Extended Being acts. 

Next, Extended Being adds further determination to the geometric and kinematic invari- 
ances by producing a global determinate ratio or pattern of motion and rest throughout 
Extension. Spinoza calls this overarching ratio or pattern “the face of the whole universe” 
(Ep. 64). The face of the whole universe involves an overall stability — so that it is a single 
individual — under which there is infinite variation in its parts (see the scholium at the end 
of the physical digression). Spinoza thinks of the face of the whole universe as in some 
sense maximal. Extended Being acts so as to produce the order of motion and rest that has 
as much reality as possible. The face of the whole universe is a further infinite modification 
of Extended Being. It is sometimes called by Spinoza’s readers a “mediate” infinite modifi- 
cation, in that it is mediated by a prior, “immediate” modification, the kinetic invariances 
that come with motion and rest. Unlike the motion and rest, the face of the whole universe 
is not the same everywhere and everywhen, but involves variety. 

Within the all-encompassing face of the whole universe are found various stable sub- 
patterns. These also have a certain local stability and integrity; each contributes its own 
reality to the overarching system. In particular, these finite beings are active. For example, 
consider one of the simplest bodies — call it A. A's motion involves more than mere transla- 
tion through space: that is, As motion is not exhausted by the fact of A’s being in position 
X,,Y,,Z,, at time t,, and x,, y,, z,, at time t,, and x,, y,, z,, at time t,, and so forth. Rather, 
motion involves A’s real tendency to act in a certain way; it involves activity on A’s part. Now, 
these simplest bodies combine to form progressively more complex bodies — progressively 
more complex rationes of motion and rest — which are able to engage in progressively more 
complex activities, e.g. web building by spiders (see E3p2s). These complex systems, which 
include the human being, have a stability and integrity that allows them to count as real- 
ities or beings, contributing to the perfection found in Extension. 

What we should notice here is that all of the activity — from the rather modest continuing 
of A’s motion in a straight path until deflected, to the spider building its web, to human 
beings building a temple — is ultimately the activity of the underlying Extended Being, the 
First Principle or substance. (The thought that all activity is ultimately the activity of the 
substance to which the activity belongs is part and parcel of the traditional idea of sub- 
stance.) So, when we say that the human body is a certain ratio or pattern of motion and 
rest, we shouldn’t think of this ratio as something taking place on its own, apart from the 
underlying substance. Rather, a ratio is Extended Being’s activity, insofar as that activity is 
structured in a particular determinate way (E3p6dem; also Elp25c and E1p34). This 
determinate activity, like all Extended Being’s activity, is rooted in the basic geometric and 
kinetic invariances that pervade Extension. 

One might conclude from this that finite bodies, for Spinoza, are not real beings or 
agents after all, but rather merely fictional things: beings of reason or mental constructs or 


131 


JOHN CARRIERO 


something of the sort. Here the comparison with the jet stream with which we began is 
helpful. Let’s think of the jet stream naively, as a stable structure that arises within the 
plenum of the atmosphere. It is a dependent being. As a modification of the atmosphere, 
everything that it does depends on the basic laws of meteorology, thermodynamics, and so 
on. Its agency is, so to speak, borrowed. But for all of that, it is still an agent. For example, 
it speeds up airplanes moving from the West Coast to the East Coast of North America and 
slows down planes traveling in the opposite direction. It often establishes the boundary for 
tropical heat waves across North America. Similarly, for Spinoza, the fact that the human 
body’s agency is not fundamental, but borrowed, does not mean that the human body is 
not an agent or a real being: it has exactly the sort of agency (and being) that one would 
expect for a being that is a modification of a more fundamental order. 

Spinoza’s view that finite things depend on the invariant structure of some more basic 
order — whether this more basic order is God or substance or, more simply, the universe — 
brings his natural philosophy much closer to ours than to Aristotelian natural philosophy. 
According to the latter, natural philosophical explanation bottoms out at things like you or 
me or cats or trees. They are ultimate loci of activity and intelligibility. This is because, for 
Aristotelians, you and I and cats and trees are substances, and, as such, the fundamental 
things in the natural world. Natural philosophical understanding is a matter of tracing 
back the goings on of the world to the natures or essences of its substances. Once we have 
done this, we’ve gone as far as natural philosophy can take us. (This is so even though in 
high scholastic Aristotelianism certain adjustments are made on account of the 
dependence of the created things on their Creator, so that e.g. no substance can operate 
without the concurrence of God, and so that e.g. each finite essence is seen as a way of 
limiting the infinite essence of God, the ens realissimum. Again, if we stick to natural phi- 
losophy, being and intelligibility bottom out at the universe’s diverse substances and their 
essences or natures.) Spinoza, for his part, agrees that natural philosophy or science bot- 
toms out at the essence of substance. He disagrees, however, with the Aristotelians over 
which things are substances: they believe that finite things can be substances, and Spinoza 
thinks that only the universe’s First Principle can be a substance. 

Accordingly, Spinoza’s picture of us, or at least of our bodies, is close in important 
respects to a contemporary picture. We do, after all, think our bodies profoundly depend on 
certain pervasive constancies in the universe, which we call the laws of nature. Our bodies 
cannot be understood except through these basic laws of nature and cannot exist or act 
without them. Here it is important to keep in mind that your body is not some inert collec- 
tion of stuff, but rather is a structure that is essentially in motion, which motion depends 
on certain of the universe's “invariances.” Think what would happen to your body if the 
laws of electricity and magnetism were suspended. Impulses would no longer be sent from 
your brain to your heart, and soon your body would become a heap or a pile. Of course, 
such a suspension is a fairy tale, a nonsense. But the same could be said of your body 
without the physical laws: such an abstraction is incoherent. Your body’s continuance in 
existence and everything it does happen through these laws. 

Spinoza thinks that this dependence on a more fundamental order is something we are 
apt to lose sight of, especially in our everyday practical life. We often find it easier to think 
of ourselves as ultimate actors than to think of ourselves as determinate ways in which 
God or substance (or, as we might be more comfortable putting it, the universe) acts. We 
find ourselves drawn to a picture of ourselves as actors that makes us out to be quasi- 
Aristotelian substances rather than modifications or modes. Having a realistic sense of our 
own agency is one reason — perhaps the main reason — that Spinoza thinks it is crucial to 


132 


SPINOZA'S PHYSICAL PICTURE 


get our basic ontological category right. We are modes, not the substances that we flatter 
ourselves as being. 

Spinoza does not directly argue for the bankruptcy of Aristotelian natural philosophy in 
the Ethics. He thinks this has become obvious by the middle of the seventeenth century. He 
also takes for granted, as his response to Oldenburg indicates, what a reasonable theory of 
the physical world looks like. Spinoza’s reliance on a certain physical picture is something 
that gave his contemporary readers (besides Oldenburg) difficulty. For example, Spinoza 
mentions certain infinite modes of substance in E1p21 (the so-called immediate ones) and 
El1p22 (the so-called mediate ones). But we know what these modes look like — i.e. that 
motion and rest is an immediate infinite modification of extension and that the face of the 
whole universe is a mediate infinite modification (Ep. 64) — only because a correspondent 
happened to ask him (Ep. 63). 

Some may find Spinoza’s assumption of the bankruptcy of Aristotelian natural philos- 
ophy and his assumptions about the general shape of a reasonable natural philosophy dis- 
appointing. They might have hoped that the Ethics would demonstrate the falsity of the 
former and the truth of the latter (or at least attempt to do so). Spinoza’s employment of 
the more geometrico may have helped to foster such an impression. For this reason, it will be 
helpful to conclude with some comments about the purpose of his employment of the more 
geometrico. 

The point of the geometrical method is not to provide a deductive system of the world in 
the sense of a modern logical system. That is, its purpose is not to present a purely formal 
(a priori) theory, as opposed to an (empirically) interpreted one. (Indeed, the distinction bet- 
ween a priori and empirical that I have in mind is not clearly articulated until Kant.) Rather, 
we should think of the more geometrico along the lines of Euclid’s Elements. That work is not 
an abstract or uninterpreted logical calculus. It has a particular subject matter, namely, 
space. Unless the reader is familiar with the subject matter — has some sense of it — she will 
be unable to make heads or tails of the work. The demonstrations will not make sense to 
her. The point of the more geometrico in the Elements is to shape up its subject matter and 
present it in a rigorous way, starting with what is relatively obvious and working to more 
difficult and less obvious conclusions; the point is not to produce some formal model of its 
subject matter. 

Something similar is going on with the Ethics. We cannot make heads or tails of it 
without having a feel for its subject matter, which includes Extended Being. The hard part 
in reading the Ethics today is recovering its subject matter, which includes topics like being 
(Part 1), then cognitive being (Part 2), then activity and passivity, and through this, the 
affects (Part 3). (That is, the hard part for us is to interpret the work.) The goal of the 
employment of the method is to display this subject matter in a particularly rigorous and 
systematic way. As we go about this, we are permitted to use — indeed, must use — what we 
know about the world. We must, for example, appeal to the fact that the human body is a 
pattern of motion and rest, dependent on the universe’s invariances, to see why it cannot 
be a substance. And this, as Oldenburg learned, takes certain apparent counterexamples 
off the table that might be relevant if we were proceeding more formally or abstractly. 
Spinoza’s attitude is that we should not allow ourselves to become distracted by other 
models of the universe, generated from superficial accounts of natural things based on 
cluster cognition (for example, models in which a human being is taken to be a substance, 
whose essence is allegedly given by the real definition rational animal). We are free to employ 
axioms like “Man thinks” (E2a2) or “We feel a certain body [NS: our body] is affected in 
many ways” (E2a3) simply because they are obviously true, not because they have some 


133 


JOHN CARRIERO 


otherwise privileged epistemic status. In a similar vein, many of Spinoza’s definitions (for 
example, his definition of God) look to be offered in the spirit of real definitions, and thus 
subject to substantive evaluation in a way that a more legislative or stipulative use of defi- 
nitions is not (see Ep. 9). 

Spinoza’s employment of the more geometrico is not an indication that he intends to be 
providing an abstract conceptual argument that will lead us to the truth of, inter alia, his 
physical picture. Rather, it is better to think of the method as an attempt to provide a rig- 
orous metaphysical interpretation of a worldview that assumes that picture. In particular, 
the thesis that your body or my body is a mode is the result of his attempt to think through 
how a distinction between substance and its modifications plays out in the context of sev- 
enteenth-century plenum physics. In such a world, finite bodies would appear to be modes 
(or modifications) of something more basic, in the way that the jet stream, for us, is a mode 
(or modification) of the atmosphere. There is something extremely natural about Spinoza’s 
position: what else, ontologically, could a system (or ratio) of motion and rest be? To be 
sure, other answers are possible. Leibniz, for example, will find a way to restore to us our 
status as substances, but this will come at the cost of phenomenalizing the physical order, 
and, whatever its ultimate philosophical merits are, does not seem to me to be the most 
straightforward way of applying a substance-mode distinction to a plenum physics. In any 
event, if we keep in view Spinoza’s physical picture — what I am calling his Chapter O — we 
can begin to make concrete the abstract and arid thesis that you and I are modes of a 
substance. 


References 


Bennett, J. (1984). A Study of Spinoza’s Ethics. Indianapolis, IN: Hackett. 

Carriero, J. (1995). On the relation between mode and substance in Spinoza. Journal of the History of 
Philosophy 33: 245-273. 

Carriero, J. (2019). Spinoza’s three kinds of cognition: imagination, understanding, and definition 
and essence. In: Mind, Body, and Morality: New Perspectives on Descartes and Spinoza (ed. M. Reuter 
and F. Svensson). New York: Routledge. 

Curley, E.M. (1969). Spinoza’s Metaphysics: An Essay in Interpretation. Cambridge, MA: Harvard. 


134 


i 


Spinoza’s Mereology 


TAD M. SCHMALTZ 


There is an apparent antinomy at the heart of Spinoza’s ontology. On the one hand, there 
is the thesis — central to his monism — that God, the one substance of which everything else 
is a mode, is absolutely indivisible, and so completely devoid of parts. On the other hand, 
Spinoza himself suggests that he endorses the antithesis that finite modes are “parts” of 
Nature as an infinite whole. In contemporary terms, Spinoza seems to argue both that 
“God or Nature” (Deus sive Natura), as indivisible, is mereologically simple, and that this 
being is mereologically complex insofar as it is composed of parts. 

In this chapter I propose on Spinoza’s behalf a resolution of this antinomy. This resolu- 
tion focuses on Spinoza’s mereology of the material world. The reason for this focus is not 
that Spinoza himself restricts mereology to the material world. Indeed, it is an implication 
of his so-called (though not by him) “parallelism doctrine” that the same “order and con- 
nection” that holds for bodily modifications of the attribute of extension holds for the ideas 
of these modifications in the attribute of thought (E2p7 | G II 89/20—22); this includes 
mereological relations as well. Nonetheless, Spinoza’s most explicit account of the “parts” 
that compose infinite nature concerns specifically material nature. 

My discussion of Spinoza’s mereology of the material world begins in §1 with his dis- 
tinction between two different kinds of “real” parts, namely, substantial and modal. 
Spinoza’s own argument for the indivisibility of the attributes requires that extended sub- 
stance be composed of neither sort of part. Nevertheless, I take him to be committed to the 
view that the modifications of this substance are composed of modal parts. 

In §2, I confront the suggestion in Spinoza that quantity can be conceived as divisible 
into spatial parts only when it is inadequately conceived by the imagination. Such a sug- 
gestion has been taken to reveal that Spinoza cannot allow for any genuinely divisible 
spatial extension. In response, I argue that though Spinoza cannot allow that substantial 
extension is composed of spatial parts, he himself indicates that the modes of this extension 
have a mereological structure that requires spatial differentiability. 

But what kind of structure, exactly? This is the question I consider in §3. Here I empha- 
size an important passage from a letter to Oldenburg in which Spinoza explicitly considers 
the sense in which a finite body can be conceived to be a part of a whole. There is some 
question whether the mereological account in this passage is fully consistent with Spinoza’s 


A Companion to Spinoza, First Edition. Edited by Yitzhak Y. Melamed. 
© 2021 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2021 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd. 


135 


TAD M. SCHMALTZ 


monism. Indeed, one commentator has recently insisted that Spinoza’s talk of parts of an 
infinite whole must be a mere facon de parler that is not meant to reflect mereological divi- 
sions in reality. However, I offer an alternative interpretation according to which Spinoza 
adheres — and can adhere — both to the indivisibility of extended substance and to the 
reality of the finite modal parts that compose an infinite modal whole. 


1. Modal Parts and Substantial Indivisibility 


In the Cogitata metaphysica, an appendix to his 1663 summary of portions of Descartes’s 
Principia philosophie, Spinoza offers a conception of composition in terms of a division in 
Descartes’s text that yields three kinds of distinction, namely, real, modal and “of reason.” 
A real distinction distinguishes different substances, a modal distinction distinguishes 
either modes from the substances they modify or different modes of the same substance, 
whereas a distinction of reason distinguishes substances from the attributes that are insep- 
arable from them. Spinoza continues: 


From these three [kinds of distinction] all composition arises. The first sort of composition is 
that which comes from two or more substances that have the same attribute (e.g. all compo- 
sition that arises from two or more bodies) or that have different attributes (e.g. man). The 
second comes from the union of different modes. The third, finally, does not occur, but is 
only conceived by reason as if it occurred, so that the thing may be more easily understood. 
(CMI.5 | GI258/5-11) 


Although Spinoza does not make explicit use in this passage of the mereological notions of 
part and whole, I believe the passage itself suggests a distinction among three different 
kinds of parts. The first derives from the combination of different substances either of the 
same attribute (as in the case of bodies) or of different attributes (as in the case of the 
union of the human mind with a body) to form a single composite substance. Let us call 
the substances that compose a composite substance the substantial parts of that substance. 
Then there is the composite that derives from the union of different modes that constitutes 
a complex modal whole. Let us call the modes that compose a composite mode the modal 
parts of that mode. Finally, in the case of the distinction of reason we have a distinguishing 
of parts in thought that are not distinct in reality. Let us call these parts the merely conceptual 
parts of something that is not in fact divisible into such parts (cf. the discussion of the 
three-fold distinction in Guigon 2012, pp. 190-193). 

One cannot simply assume that the views that Spinoza offers in the Cogitata metaphysica 
are his own. After all, Spinoza’s editor Lodewijk Meyer warns the reader in the preface to 
the summary of the Principia that though the author allows that some of the doctrines in 
the text are true, nonetheless “there are many that he rejects as false, and concerning 
which he holds a quite different opinion” (G I 131/30—-32). Meyer explicitly takes this 
warning to cover not only the portions explicitly devoted to the Principia, but also the 
appended Cogitata metaphysica. Indeed, we will discover that the suggestion in the pre- 
ceding passage that a single composite substance can be composed of different substantial 
parts is one that Spinoza himself is committed to rejecting. Nonetheless, I hope to show 
that the distinction between substantial and modal parts that he offers in this passage can 
help us to understand his apparently conflicting remarks in the Ethics concerning the 
divisibility of the material world. 


136 


SPINOZA’S MEREOLOGY 


The admission of any sort of part in nature seems initially to conflict with the result in 
the Ethics that “no attribute of substance can be truly conceived from which it follows that 
the substance can be divided” (Elp12 | G II 55/23). The demonstration of this position 
proceeds by way of dilemma: the parts into which the attribute allows us to conceive the 
substance as divisible either “retain the nature of substance” or not. If they do retain this 
nature, then the parts must be themselves substances. However, these must have different 
attributes given the earlier result in the Ethics that different substances cannot share an 
attribute (Elp5 | G II 48/4—5). So also, then, in order to be itself a substance, the whole 
composed of parts with different attributes would have to have its own attribute, distinct 
from those of its parts. But since attributes in general can be conceived through themselves 
alone (E1p10 | GII 51/28—29), it would have to be the case that the attribute of the whole 
could be conceived entirely apart from the attributes of its substantial parts. And since any 
substance is a causa sui, and so exists through itself alone (Elp7 | GI 49/2), the substan- 
tial whole could exist only through itself, and not through its parts. Thus we have the 
absurd result that the whole “could both be and be conceived without its parts” (E1p12d | 
GIL55/6-11). 

This is the first horn of the dilemma. The second involves the claim that the parts into 
which a substantial whole can be divided do not retain the nature of substance. Here the 
argument is terse and requires imaginative reconstruction. Spinoza tells us that “since 
the whole substance would be divided into equal parts, it would lose the nature of sub- 
stance, and would cease to be,” which is ruled out by the earlier proposition that the 
essence of substance necessarily involves existence” (Elp12d | G II 55/15-18; citing 
Elp7 | GI 49/2). An initial puzzle concerns the assumption that division would be into 
equal parts. Why would division produce equal parts, and what sort of equality is in play 
here? One suggestion is that the parts are equal in the sense that they equally fail to retain 
the nature of substance. But Spinoza indicates that division into such parts would destroy 
the whole, since “to destroy a thing is to resolve it into such parts that none of them 
express the nature of the whole” (Ep XXXVI | GIV 184/27-29). Division would leave us 
only with parts that are not themselves substantial, and so with nothing substantial that 
remains. 

Though Spinoza does not explicitly invoke it here, we can understand the argument 
in terms of the mereology of the Cogitata metaphysica. Given the implication of this 
account that real parts are either substantial or modal, parts that do not share in the 
nature of substance could be only modal parts. In this way, such parts could be said to be 
equal in the sense of being equally modal. But then reduction to parts by means of divi- 
sion would leave us only with modal parts, which could constitute only a modal and not 
a substantial whole. The nature of substance is thereby lost, an impossibility given its 
necessary existence. 

In a corollory to the subsequent proposition that “a substance that is absolutely infi- 
nite is indivisible,” Spinoza indicates that the result here is only that “no substance, and 
consequently no corporeal substance, insofar as it is substance, is divisible” (Elp13c | G II 
55/29-30; my emphasis). Likewise, in the passage from Ethics Ip15s, the claim is only 
that water “insofar as it is corporeal substance” cannot be divided (G II 60/2). But this 
latter passage, in particular, indicates that water can be divided into separated parts 
“insofar as it is water” (G II 60/3). We are to read this claim in terms of the view in the 
Korte Verhandeling that “division never occurs in the substance, but always and only in the 
modes of the substance. So if I want to divide water, I divide only the mode of the sub- 
stance, not the substance itself” (KV I 2 | G I 26/10-11). Thus to say that water is 


137 


TAD M. SCHMALTZ 


divisible as water is to say that it is divisible as a mode of corporeal substance. In terms of 
the Cogitata metaphysica, the parts into which water is divisible could not be substantial 
since they constitute water only as mode, and not as substance. But given that these parts 
are real rather than merely in reason, the only option is for them to be modal parts that 
compose water as a modal whole. 

However, there is another portion of the passage from Ethics Ip15s that I have not cited, 
but that may be thought to bring into question the reality even of modal parts. This is the 
claim in the scholium that quantity can be said to be divisible into parts only “as it is in the 
imagination” and not “as it is in the intellect” (G I 59/23-25). This claim can be — and has 
been — understood to indicate that divisible quantity is not real, and thus that corporeal 
substance cannot possess any sort of spatially distinguishable parts. In order to defend the 
conclusion that the divisibility of the modes of corporeal substance into modal parts is 
consistent with the indivisibility of that substance, I will need to confront this under- 
standing of Spinoza’s conception of the divisibility of spatial quantity. 


2. Spatial Quantity and Divisibility 


Recently Alison Peterman has offered the provocative thesis that “Spinoza does not think 
that modes [of corporeal substance] are extended in space” insofar as he denies that 
“modes are adequately conceived when they are conceived abstractly, superficially, and 
through the imagination” (Peterman 2015, p. 16). The language here is drawn from 
Spinoza’s remarks in a letter that he sent to his friend Meyer in 1663, now widely known 
as the “Letter on the Infinite.” In this letter, Spinoza distinguishes two ways of conceiving 
of quantity: 


either abstractly, or superficially, as we have it in the imagination with the aid of the senses; or 
as substance, which is done by the intellect alone. So if we attend to quantity as it is in the imag- 
ination, which is what we do most often and most easily, we find it to be divisible, finite, com- 
posed of parts, and one of many. But if we attend to it as it is in the intellect, and perceive the 
thing as it is in itself, which is very difficult, then we find it to be infinite, indivisible and unique, 
as I have already demonstrated sufficiently to you before now. (Ep. 12 | GIV 56/7-15) 


This passage obviously provides the basis for the previously cited claim concerning quantity 
in the scholium to Ethics Ip15. But from these remarks to Meyer, there seems to be an easy 
route to Peterman’s conclusion that Spinoza’s corporeal substance cannot be adequately 
conceived to have a divisible extension in space. After all, Spinoza himself indicates in the 
Ethics that imagination (and sensation) can yield only a kind of cognition that is “inade- 
quate and confused” and so a “cause of falsity” (E2p41d | G Il 123/2-4). But if corporeal 
substance can be conceived to have a divisible quantity only by means of imagination, 
then this conception must be false. Insofar as the possession of spatial extension requires 
the possession of divisible quantity, one cannot truly conceive that either this substance or 
its modes are spatially extended. 

Nevertheless, there are indications both in the Letter on the Infinite and in the scholium 
to Ethics Ip15 that when Spinoza is speaking of the inadequate conception of quantity by 
the imagination, he has in mind the conception of this quantity as divisible into substantial 
parts. Consider first the Letter on the Infinite. Just prior to distinguishing the two concep- 
tions of quantity, Spinoza notes in this text that 


138 


SPINOZA’S MEREOLOGY 


they talk of utter nonsense, not to say madness, who hold that Extended Substance is put 
together of parts, or [sive] bodies, really distinct from one another. This is just the same as if 
someone should try, merely by adding and accumulating many circles, to put together a 
square or triangle or something completely different in its essence. (G IV 55/11-16) 


It is clear that the parts into which extended substance is falsely conceived to be divisible 
are substantial parts, “bodies really distinct from one another.” It is even clearer in the 
scholium to Ethics Ip15 that it is only divisibility into substantial parts that it being rejected, 
and not divisibility into modal parts. For Spinoza claims in that text “that matter is every- 
where the same, and that parts are distinguished in it only insofar as we conceive matter to 
be affected in different ways, so that its parts are distinguished only modally, but not really” 
(G II 59/32-35). As an illustration, Spinoza notes that though water “insofar as it is sub- 
stance ...is neither separated nor divided,” we can conceive that water “is divided and its 
parts separated from one another” insofar as it is water, that is, insofar as it is matter as 
modified in a particular way (G II 60/1-3). 

This last example seems to me to conflict with Peterman’s thesis that Spinoza denies that 
modes are extended in space. The divisibility of water considered as a mode consists in having 
parts that can be divided and separated from each other. But surely the sort of separation 
Spinoza has in mind here is spatial separation through motion. If so, then it cannot be the 
case, as Peterman claims, that for Spinoza “finite bodies, or modes of the ‘extended’ substance, 
are... not properly understood as possessing dimensionality” (Peterman 2015, pp. 1b—2a). 

Peterman is assuming here that Spinoza recognizes only two kinds of quantity, namely 
(to use her labels), quantity,, that is, quantity conceived by the imagination as divisible into 
parts, and quantity,, that is, quantity conceived by the intellect as identical to indivisible 
extended substance (Peterman 2015, pp. 4b—5a). My suggestion is that quantity, is quantity 
conceived as divisible into substantial parts, and that we need to add a third kind of quantity, 
namely, quantity,, which is quantity conceived as a modal whole that is divisible into modal 
parts. There is no indication in the texts that this sort of quantity is merely imaginary. 

Peterman insists that for Spinoza “substance cannot be divided into two or more modes, 
because it is not composed of two or more modes. ... Complex modes are modally divisible, 
but we cannot make sense of the idea that substance is modally divisible” (Peterman 2015, 
p. 11a). As we have seen, Spinoza’s argument for the indivisibility of substance in fact rules 
out the possibility that substance is divisible into modal parts. But this does not prevent the 
complex modes themselves from being so divisible, as Peterman herself seems to concede 
in the passage just quoted (“complex modes are modally divisible”). Thus the indivisibility 
of extended substance seems to be compatible with the divisibility of the modes of this 
substance. 

Admittedly, the description of modal parts that we can draw from Spinoza’s water 
example is rather minimal: such parts can be divided and separated (and thus must have 
spatial dimensions). Yet it turns out that Spinoza has more than this to say about the 
nature of material modal parts. In particular, there is his 1665 letter to the Secretary of 
the Royal Society, Henry Oldenburg, in which Spinoza responds to the request to address 
“that difficult question concerning our knowledge of how each part of Nature agrees with 
its whole and in what way it coheres with other things” (Ep. 31 | GIV 167/11-13). In 
addressing this question in that letter (hereafter, the “Oldenburg Letter”), Spinoza offers 
perhaps his most explicit account of the sense in which a particular body is a modal part of 
a whole. An immediate puzzle here is whether the implication that nature is a whole 
composed of parts is entirely consistent with Spinoza’s monistic conception of the material 


139 


TAD M. SCHMALTZ 


world. One commentator has suggested that there in fact would be a conflict here had 
Spinoza intended his response to Oldenburg to be understood in a straightforward way. 
However, I will argue that there is a more literal interpretation of this response that does 
not compromise Spinoza’s monism. 


3. Mereology in the Oldenburg Letter 


In the Oldenburg Letter, Spinoza claims that “concerning whole and parts, I consider 
things as parts of some whole to the extent that the nature of the one so adapts itself to the 
nature of the other so that they agree with one another as far as possible” (Ep. 32 | GIV 
170/14—17). He derives from this mereological conception the result that “every body, in 
so far as it exists modified in a definite way, must be considered as a part of the whole uni- 
verse, must agree with [convenire] its whole and must cohere with [coherere] the remaining 
bodies” (G IV 173/2—5). Spinoza then offers a memorable illustration of the way in which 
material parts relate to the whole they compose. He has us imagine a parasitic worm living 
in blood that discerns various particles of lymph, chyle, and so on. Insofar as this worm 
does not consider these particles to be regulated by the nature of the blood, it considers 
them “as a whole, not as a part.” But when it considers that the particles are constrained 
to communicate their motions in a way that maintains the existence of the blood, the 
worm conceives of the blood “as a whole and not as a part.” And when it recognizes that 
variations in the blood derive not only from relations among its parts but also from “the 
relation of the motion of the blood and of its external causes to one another,” the worm 
conceives the blood to have “the nature of a part and not of a whole” (GIV 172/8-14). 

Spinoza applies the worm-in-the-blood example to the case of the universe as a whole, 
claiming that since “all bodies are surrounded by others, and are determined by one 
another to existing and producing an effect in a fixed and determinate way, the same ratio 
of motion to rest [eadem rationem motus ad quietam] always being preserved in all of them 
at once,” it follows that “every body, insofar as it exists modified in a definite way, must be 
considered as a part of the whole universe, must agree with its whole and must cohere 
with the remaining bodies” (G IV 172/15-—73/5). 

The suggestion in the Oldenburg Letter is that the material universe is a complex whole 
composed of finite bodies as parts. But there is a challenge to the view that Spinoza takes 
this sort of mereological composition to reflect reality. In particular, Ghislain Guigon has 
insisted that Spinoza’s monism requires that Nature is “mereologically simple” 
(Guigon 2012, p. 189), thus conflicting with the claim that it is composed of parts. Guigon 
suggests that the “Nature” to which Spinoza is referring in the Oldenburg Letter is the 
“exactly one basic concrete thing . . . which is mereologically simple” (Guigon 2012, 
p. 189), that is, with respect to the material world, extended substance itself (cf. the 
discussion of the Oldenburg Letter in Sachsteder 1977 and Grey 2014). 

There remains Spinoza’s clear indication to Oldenburg that this Nature is in fact mereo- 
logically complex. However, Guigon claims that Spinoza’s talk of bodies as parts of an infi- 
nite universe “is a mere figure of speech” that does not commit him to the conclusion that 
this universe is in fact composed of parts. Rather, according to Guigon, Spinoza was only 
following Oldenburg’s lead in speaking as if Nature is a whole is composed of parts, even 
though he knew that “strictly speaking, bodies are modes, not parts, of Nature since there 
is only one substance and since modes of a substance are not parts of a substance” 
(Guigon 2012, pp. 200-201). 


140 


SPINOZA’S MEREOLOGY 


An initial problem with Guigon’s position is that even if it is granted that this talk is only 
a facon de parler, it cannot be something that involves mere acquiescence to Oldenburg. For 
Spinoza himself speaks in the Ethics of Nature as composed of parts. Perhaps most striking 
is his claim in Ethics 4p4 that “it is impossible that aman should not be a part of Nature, and 
that he should be able undergo no changes except those which can be understood through 
his own nature alone, and of which he is the adequate cause” (G II 212/28—30). The 
argument for this claim, which involves the notions of adequate and inadequate causation, 
need not detain us. What is important for our purposes is only that Spinoza is following no 
one’s lead here in speaking of “a man,” including the human body, as a part of Nature. 

But this point seems to undermine only a subsidiary feature of Guigon’s argument. We 
still need to grapple with his central claim that Spinoza’s monism commits him to the view 
that there are no genuine parts in Nature. In support of this claim, Guigon cites a passage 
from an early work, the Korte Verhandeling, in which Spinoza insists that “part and whole 
are not true or actual beings, but only beings of reason; consequently, in Nature! there can 
be neither whole nor parts” (KV I 2 | GI 24/19-21). Guigon understands this claim in 
terms of the three-fold distinction from the Cogitata metaphysica that we considered in §1. 
Recall that this distinction yields composition that is substantial, modal, or merely of 
reason. Guigon contends that the division of Nature into whole and parts that we find in 
the Oldenburg Letter — as well as, it seems he must add, in the Ethics itself — can be for 
Spinoza merely a composition made by reason (Guigon 2012, pp. 190-193). Only by 
holding that the composition of Nature is a composition of reason can Spinoza uphold his 
monist conception of the material world. 

Nonetheless, a closer consideration of the context of the passage from the Korte 
Verhandeling reveals that the view there is more restricted than Guigon allows. In particular, 
the indication is that only substantial parts are denied of Nature. For one thing, the passage 
itself includes a footnote that indicates that by “Nature” Spinoza means in particular “sub- 
stantial nature” (G I 24/37-25/20). For another, he claims immediately following this 
passage that though “division never occurs in the substance,” it does occur “always and 
only in the modes of substance.” We have seen this view in the scholium to Ethics 1p15, 
and in his earlier text Spinoza further anticipates the discussion in this scholium when he 
cites as an example the fact that “if I want to divide water, I divide only the mode of the 
substance, and not the substance itself” (G I 26/10-11). Just as in the case of the scho- 
lium, so the discussion in this earlier text explicitly allows for the view that modes of 
extended substance, such as water, are themselves divisible into further modal parts. 

At times Guigon seems to suggest that Spinoza can allow for the division of finite 
modes of extended substance into modal parts, as when he claims that Spinoza “believes 
that modal composition occurs” when such composition is limited to finite modes 
(Guigon 2012, p. 196). However, Guigon also emphasizes that in the case of something 
that is infinite, such composition “only captures composition of reason” (Guigon 2012, 
p. 198). Thus when Spinoza applies mereological notions to the infinite universe as a 
whole, as he does in the Oldenburg Letter, the parts must be what I have called merely 
conceptual parts. 

Guigon’s argument seems to assume that if material parts compose an infinite whole, 
then extended substance itself must be composite, contrary to Spinoza’s monism. I sus- 
pect that a similar assumption underlies Peterson’s argument against the reality in 


There is an important footnote at just this point in Spinoza’s text, to which I will return presently. 


141 


TAD M. SCHMALTZ 


Spinoza of divisible spatial quantity. Yet an overlooked possibility here is that the infi- 
nite whole that the parts compose is a modal whole, and not substantial extension itself. 
Moreover, the move from the claim that extended substance is modified by an infinite 
modal whole composed of finite modal parts to the conclusion that this substance itself 
is composed of such parts could be blocked by the restriction of the composition rela- 
tion to parts and wholes that are of the same type. According to such a restriction, sub- 
stantial wholes could be composed only of substantial parts, and modal wholes only of 
modal parts. 

One feature of Guigon’s discussion that I have not addressed to this point is his claim 
that Spinoza is committed to the mereological principle “that parts are or must be prior to 
the whole they compose” (Guigon 2012, p. 189). But surely infinite material Nature, as 
Spinoza conceives it, must be prior to particular finite bodies. Thus, Guigon understand- 
ably infers, this Nature cannot be a whole composed of these bodies as its parts. 

It must be granted that there are texts in which Spinoza seems to endorse the sort of 
general mereological principle that Guigon cites. In the Cogitata metaphysica, for instance, 
we find the claim that “it is clear in itself that component parts are prior in nature at least 
to the thing composed” (CMI 5 | GI 258/15-17). Of course, we know that Spinoza him- 
self did not accept every view he offers in this text. But we seem to have evidence that he in 
fact embraced the principle enunciated there, since he writes in a 1666 letter — speaking on 
his own behalf — that “component parts must be prior in nature and knowledge to what is 
composed of them” (Ep. 35 | GIV 181/24-26). 

Nevertheless, in both of these texts Spinoza is concerned with the specific issue of God’s 
substantial simplicity. In the Cogitata metaphysica, the mereological principle is applied spe- 
cifically to any substantial parts that could compose the divine substance. The possibility 
that God could be composed of modal parts is rejected by an appeal not to this principle, but 
rather to the fact that (as Descartes holds) God has no modifications (G I/258/30-33; cf. 
PP156 | AT VIIA 26/25-27). Moreover, in the 1666 letter Spinoza invokes the principle 
of the priority of parts only to argue for the simplicity of a being “that includes necessary 
existence.” The suggestion is that any parts of this being would have to prior in nature to 
what they compose. 

In any event, the Oldenburg Letter provides particularly strong reason for us to take 
seriously these restrictions on the mereological principle of the priority of parts to wholes. 
For the clear indication in this letter is that parts, insofar as they compose a whole, must be 
conceived in terms of the nature of that whole, and so in this sense must be posterior to it. 
Thus with respect to the example of the blood, Spinoza tells Oldenburg that “all the parts 
are controlled [moderantur] by the universal nature of the blood and compelled [coguntur| 
to mutual accommodation as the universal nature of the blood requires, so as to agree 
with one another in a definite way [certa ratione]” (G IV 171/15-18). Here the parts (qua- 
tenus parts, as Spinoza would add) must be conceived in terms of the “universal nature of 
the whole,” and therefore must be ontologically posterior to the latter. 

My suggestion, then, is that when Spinoza refers in the Oldenburg Letter to “the whole 
universe” that comprises all finite bodies, he has in mind not extended substance, but 
rather an infinite modal whole. In fact, there is evidence for this suggestion in the letter 
itself. For immediately following his discussion there of part and whole in material nature, 
Spinoza adds the comment that “in relation to substance I conceive each part to have a 
closer union with its whole” (G IV 173/8-9). The clear indication is that the relation 
of substance to the parts of nature is much closer than, and so differs from, the relation of 
those parts to any whole they compose. 


142 


SPINOZA’S MEREOLOGY 


References 


Grey, J. (2014). Spinoza on composition, causation, and the mind’s eternity. British Journal of the 
History of Philosophy 22: 446-467. 

Guigon, G. (2012). Spinoza on composition and priority. In: Spinoza on Monism (ed. P. Goff), 183-205. 
New York: Palgrave Macmillan. 

Peterman, A. (2015). Spinoza on extension. Philosophers’ Imprint 15: 1-23. 

Sacksteder, W. (1977). Spinoza on part and whole: the worm’s eye view. Southwestern Journal of 
Philosophy 8: 139-159. 


143 


14 


Spinoza’s Metaphysics of Time 


RAPHAEL KRUT-LANDAU 


Kojéve wrote that “the Ethics explains everything, except the possibility for a man living in 
time to write it” (1980, p. 120). But Spinoza has much to say about the metaphysics of 
time, the topic of this chapter. In Sections 1—4, I will consider eternity (aeternitas), duration 
(duratio), time (tempus), and their interrelations. In Sections 5-8, I will resolve a paradox in 
Spinoza’s theory of the mind’s eternity. To do so, I will introduce a simple framework that 
we can use to think about perspectives in the Ethics. Let us begin by opening to the first 
page of the book, where Spinoza defines eternity. 


1. Eternity 


Spinoza defines eternity as “existence itself, insofar as it is conceived to follow necessarily 
from the definition alone of the eternal thing” (E1d8, Curley’s translation). This is often 
taken to mean that, for all X, “X is eternal if and only if the existence of X follows from the 
essence or definition of X” (Parchment 2000, p. 363). It is widely agreed that Spinoza’s 
phrases “follows from” and “is caused by” refer to a single relation (cf. Newlands 2009). 
Many scholars conclude that eternity is self-causation (e.g. Gueroult 1968, pp. 78-79; 
Bennett 1984, p. 204; Savan 1994, p. 5; Parchment, loc. cit.; Waller 2012, p. 55; Melamed 
2016b, p. 218; and Lin 2019, p. 22). 

This common view is subject to two objections. First, some eternal things do not cause 
themselves to exist: the infinite modes, which Spinoza describes as eternal in E1p21 and 
E5p40s. These modes must be eternal, in the sense defined at E1d8. For when Spinoza dis- 
cusses the eternity of one group of infinite modes, namely the essences of bodies, he 
explains the meaning of ‘eternal’ by citing El1d8 (E5p29d). The second objection is that 
Spinoza divides the genus of necessary existence into two species: self-necessitated 
existence and existence necessitated by another. He says: “A thing is called necessary either 
by reason of its essence or by reason of its cause. For a thing’s existence follows necessarily 
either from its essence and definition or from a given efficient cause” (E1p33s1). At one 
point, when Spinoza mentions “necessity of existence,” he adds: “or (what is the same, by 
E1d8) eternity” (E1p23d, cf. Elp10s). So eternity is the genus — necessary existence — not 


A Companion to Spinoza, First Edition. Edited by Yitzhak Y. Melamed. 
© 2021 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2021 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd. 


144 


SPINOZA’S METAPHYSICS OF TIME 


the first of its two species, self-necessitated existence (i.e. self-causation). We have reason 
to wonder if we can find another way of interpreting Spinoza’s definition of eternity. 

We can by retranslating it. Curley translates rei aeternae as “of the eternal thing.” But 
since definite and indefinite articles are very rare in seventeenth-century Latin, Curley 
rightly warns that “whenever the translation of a Latin passage has either a definite or an 
indefinite article, the reader should be aware that this involves an element of interpreta- 
tion on the part of the translator” (1985, xv). So E1d8 could be translated as follows: 


By eternity I understand existence itself, insofar as it is conceived to follow necessarily from the 
definition alone of an eternal thing. (E1d8, emphasis added) 


So translated, E1d8 is a circular definition. The hypothesis that E1d8 is circular is not new. 
In his blistering 1685 commentary, Smashing the Foundations of Atheism: A Sampling of 
Spinozian Absurdity (Fundamenta atheismi eversa, sive specimen absurditatis Spinozianae), 
Pierre Poiret calls E1d8 “the most absurd tautology [absurdissimam tautologiam]” (p. 755). 
He chides Spinoza: “Yo, buddy! Hasten slowly. Say first what an eternal thing is. What’s an 
eternal thing? [Sed, heus tu! oxedéde Ppadéa@s. Dic prius quid sit res aeterna. Quid est res 
aeterna?|” Poiret imagines Spinoza’s pathetic reply: “It’s something endowed with eternity. 
[Est res praedita aeternitate.|” 

Since our alternative translation exposes Spinoza to this sort of mockery, it may appear 
uncharitable. However, as mentioned, the standard translation leads to serious problems. 
A neglected possibility is that Spinoza is asking us to reconsider whether it is always sinful 
to offer a circular definition. While most philosophers would not be caught dead doing 
such a thing, it is quite possible that Spinoza thinks differently. After all, a circular defini- 
tion is a circular explanation, and Spinoza openly believes that explanations can be 
circular. The first sentence of the Ethics defines self-causation, i.e. self-explanation (E1d1). 
A substance is “the cause of itself” (E1p7, cf. E5p35) —it explains itself. 

If Eld8 were deliberately circular, then God would be eternal for circular reasons: God 
would be eternal because God follows from the definition of an eternal thing, namely God. 
Intriguingly, this is exactly what Spinoza would say. God exists for circular reasons. But what 
sort of existence does God have? Eternal existence. So God has eternal existence for circular 
reasons. That is, God is eternal for circular reasons. So Poiret’s reading of E1d8 fits surpris- 
ingly well. Melamed (201 6a, p. 156) also proposes a circular reading. On this reading, to be 
eternal is to be caused by something eternal. Given that God is eternal, eternity also passes to 
all of God’s immediate causal children, from them to their children, and so on. 

It may be objected that Spinoza’s proof of God’s eternity in E1p19d does not circularly 
use its own conclusion as a premise. But Spinoza’s proofs don’t always take the shortest 
deductive path. For example, God exists by definition, but none of Spinoza’s proofs that God 
exists (Elp11d1-d3) deduce this fact directly from God’s definition (E1d6). Analogously, 
the fact that God is eternal might follow from itself, even though Spinoza’s proof of this fact 
is more roundabout. 

It would be an overstatement to say that the circular reading is forced on us. We can 
accept the standard reading, but to do so, we would need to square it with Elp21, E5p29d, 
and E5p40s. For these, together, seem to imply that infinite modes are genuinely eternal, in 
the sense defined in E1d8. 

Spinoza speaks of “the mind, insofar as it is eternal” (E5p13d). Each mode x has an 
eternal aspect, ‘x insofar as it is eternal’. This follows, presumably, from the fact that 
eternity is “existence insofar as it is conceived...”. You and I and all other modes appear to 


145 


RAPHAEL KRUT-LANDAU 


be eternal from a certain point of view, the perspective of eternity. But this is not the per- 
spective we usually take. We do not usually think of ourselves as eternal, permanently safe, 
beings. We see ourselves as vulnerable creatures who persevere in the face of threats — as 
creatures that endure. 


2. Duration 


The word duratio in the Ethics is normally translated ‘duration’. But this misleadingly sug- 
gests that a duratio is a period of time. Duratio instead primarily refers to an activity: 
enduring (equivalently, lasting, persevering, abiding, remaining). Suarez says that duratio 
means “the act of lasting or persevering in being [actum durandi vel perseverandi in esse]” 
(Metaphysical Disputations 50.2.15). He notes that “a thing that perseveres in its existence 
is said to endure, so duratio is the same as persisting in being [Dicitur...durare res quae in sua 
existentia perseverat; unde duratio idem esse censetur quod permanentia in esse)” (ibid., 50.1.1). 
Burgersdijk defines duratio as “the remaining of a thing in its existence [re in existentia per- 
mansio]” (Collegium physicum, ix.3). Following these philosophers, Spinoza takes duratio to 
mean “persevering in existing” (E1p24c). 

Spinoza defines duratio as “indefinite continuation of existing [indefinita existendi continu- 
atio|”, continuatio being the activity of continuing. Unlike Descartes (Principles of Philosophy 
i.26-27), Spinoza uses ‘indefinite’ and ‘infinite’ interchangeably (compare E4p3 with 
E4p15d, and see IV/60). So, to endure is, by definition, to prolong one’s existence without 
limit. This does not mean that everything that is presently enduring will last forever. We can 
see this from the following analogy. The Titanic passengers were crossing the ocean when 
calamity struck. Their activity, crossing the ocean, is defined in terms of the end they strove 
to achieve, even though this activity was interrupted (cf. Dowty 1977). Likewise we are pres- 
ently enduring (lasting forever), even though calamity will strike, and we will fail. Our activity, 
enduring, is defined in terms of the end we strive to achieve, which is to last forever (E3p8). 

Spinoza also characterizes duratio as a “magnitude [quantitas|” (E2p45s). In Elp15s, 
Spinoza distinguishes two kinds of magnitudes: divisible and indivisible. He is making the 
traditional distinction between extensive magnitudes, like length and volume, and intensive 
magnitudes, like the saturation of a color. The difference is that intensive magnitudes are 
not divisible into parts. I can divide a big glass of red wine into two glasses half as big, but I 
cannot divide it into two glasses half as red. The saturation of a color does not consist of 
parts. (When a face becomes more red, the additional amount of redness does not constitute 
a part or individual unto itself.) The extensive/intensive distinction can be found in many 
authors, including Augustine, Aquinas, Suarez, Leibniz, Kant, Bergson, Russell, Carnap, 
Deleuze, and Geach. Many agree that the class of intensive magnitudes includes heat, min- 
eral hardness, the pitch of a sound, pleasure, pain, perfection, virtue, and courage. 

Spinoza says that duratio is “conceived as being greater or lesser, and as composed of 
parts” (1/244). That is, is conceived as an extensive magnitude. But this is not the only way 
to conceive it. Spinoza says that “when we conceive magnitude abstracted from substance, 
and separate from the way it flows from eternal things, we can determine them [i.e. mag- 
nitude and duratio| as we please” (IV/56-57, translation modified). We conceive duratio as 
divisible only when we fail to conceive it as flowing from eternal things. So duratio can also 
be conceived as an indivisible, intensive magnitude. There are then two ways of enduring 
more. We can endure to a greater extent, i.e. more extensively — for more hours, days, years, 
etc. And we can endure to a greater degree, i.e. with greater intensity. Perhaps Spinoza is 


146 


SPINOZA’S METAPHYSICS OF TIME 


thinking of the qualitative features associated with the word steadfastness and resilience 
(in modern parlance: grit). To endure more intensely is, perhaps, to endure more stead- 
fastly. This intensive kind of duratio flows from an eternal thing, namely, a certain “force of 
perseverance” (E2p45s). Where Spinoza is using duratio to refer to extensive duration, I 
will sometimes translate it as ’duration’. We labor to “persevere in our being.” In this 
phrase, ‘being’ does not refer to eternal being. For our eternal being is safe; we need not 
labor to preserve it. Instead it refers to durational being, the activity of persevering in our 
being. Enduring is an activity, the activity of persevering in that selfsame activity. So 
enduring is explained circularly. If eternity is too, as suggested above, then enduring 
mirrors eternity. Our perseverantia imitates God’s perseitas. 

Spinoza has another word for extensive duration: time. 


3. Time 


Spinoza addresses time (tempus) and its relation to duratio in the Metaphysical Thoughts. He 
writes: 


[D]uratio is an attribute under which we conceive the existence of created things insofar as 
they persevere in their actuality. From this it clearly follows that duratio is only distinguished 
by reason from the whole existence of a thing. For as you take duratio away from the thing, you 
take away just as much of its existence. But to determine this duratio, we compare it with the 
duratio of other things which have a certain and determinate motion. This comparison is called 
time [tempus]. A time, therefore, is not an affection of things, but only...a being of reason. 


Spinoza accepts Suarez’s view that “duratio and existence are only rationally distinct” 
(Metaphysical Disputations 50.1.5; cf. Descartes, Principles of Philosophy i.55—57). To for- 
mulate the idea of a period of time (extensive duration), we conceive of one duration in 
relation to another, such as the duration of the movement of a clock or celestial body. 
Spinoza’s term comparatio does not refer to a mental act of comparing, or to a relation of 
similarity or dissimilarity between two durations, but to a duration conceived in relation to 
another duration (see Penner 2012, p. 40, and Schmidt 1966, p. 136; cf. 1/245). A time is 
an extrinsic, finite duration, such as an hour or a year. It is a being of reason, i.e. a figment 
of the imagination. Like the square root of -1, it is a nonexistent yet helpful posit (an ens 
rationis ratiocinatae; cf. Doyle 2012, pp. 133-134). 

Spinoza holds, with some of the Scholastic philosophers (cf. Doyle 1984, p. 134), that 
extrinsic denominations are mind-made. Finitude or determination is an extrinsic denom- 
ination. So finitude is mind-made, as Spinoza often points out. He stresses that determining 
is something that we do: “to determine [a] duratio, we compare it with the duratio of other 
things.” Magnitudes are finite in the imagination, infinite in the intellect (E1p15s). “[W] 
e...attribute something to [individuals] that involves negation, like a limit, an end, a lack of 
power” (II/207-08). A limit is among the “notions we are accustomed to feign because we 
compare individuals...” (loc. cit.). Finite durations aren't finite before we make them so 
through our comparisons. The same goes for finite bodies and finite thoughts. Our compar- 
isons make them finite. As Spinoza writes: 


[A] body is called finite because we always conceive another that is greater. Thus a thought is 
limited by another thought. (E1d2) 


147 


RAPHAEL KRUT-LANDAU 


What makes something finite? The relation that we imagine that it has to other things. 
These other things must also be finite. A regress arises (E1 p28). 

Spinoza’s metaphysics of time includes an endless series of virtuous (if vertiginous) 
regresses. For Spinoza, if something x is determinate, this truth is grounded in two further 
truths: 


(1) xis determined by some y. 
(2) yis determinate. 


(1) is made true by a mental act, a comparison. This act is itself a determinate imagining. 
It must itself be made determinate through another comparison, whence another regress. 
(2) is grounded in two truths: 


(1) yis determined by some z. 
(2) zis determinate. 


(3) is made true by a determinate imagining, which is determinate in virtue of another, 
and so on, endlessly. (4) rests on two further claims, and so on, endlessly. A finite duration 
is imaginary, but the imagining too is imaginary, and so on, endlessly. As Joachim (1901, 
p. 113) noted, “the world of things in time and place” is “the illusory apprehension of a 
mind, so far as that itself is a member of the illusory world which it constructs.” In other 
words, the imagination exists only from the imagination’s point of view. This is another 
circularity. Below we will describe it more precisely. 

We now turn to considering some underappreciated features of the relationship bet- 
ween eternity and time. We begin with Spinoza’s puzzling doctrine of ‘intellectual love’. 


4. Eternity and geometrical construction 


4.1. Amor Dei intellectualis 


According to Spinoza, to love someone is to know that he or she is making you more per- 
fect. So only flawed, perfectible, mutable creatures can love (E3p13s). But Spinoza insists 
that the intellect and God — two eternal, immutable beings — have an “intellectual love” for 
one another (E5p36c). Is Spinoza blurring the line between eternal and temporal things? 
Some scholars see a deliberate contradiction here (Taylor 1937, p. 137; Savan 1958, pp. 
216-18; Jobani 2016, p. 165). Melamed (2019, p. 222) argues that Spinoza “tweaks” his 
definition of love. I believe Spinoza is giving the word ‘love’ a metaphorical meaning. For 
he explains that “God does not love anyone, proprie loquendo” (E5p17, my translation). 
Since improprie and metaphorice are synonyms at I/246—47, loquendo means “literally 
speaking.” (Proprie can mean ‘metaphorically’, as Ashworth 2007 explains.) At I/264, 
Spinoza compares “God loves” to a Biblical expression that anthropomorphizes Nature 
(“the land will spew you out if you defile it,” Leviticus 18:28). The phrase “intellectual 
love” is therefore an example of what early modern theologians called anthropopatheia, the 
metaphorical ascription of human affects to God (cf. Patrides 1963, p. 61, fn. 13). 
‘Intellectual love’ is like ‘spiritual wealth’; the adjective makes the noun metaphorical. 
Metaphors can seem unmathematical. Yovel even says that the geometrical method is 
“the antithesis of metaphorical discourse” (1989, p. 140). But I will argue that Spinoza’s 


148 


SPINOZA'S METAPHYSICS OF TIME 


use of the metaphor of ‘intellectual love’ is part of his geometrical method. For the meta- 
phor provides something like a geometrical construction of the mind. Spinoza is represent- 
ing something eternal as if it were arising over time, as we do when constructing a figure 
by drawing it, bit by bit, on a piece of paper. Spinoza alludes to geometrical construction 
just before mentioning intellectual love. He says: 


[F]or an easier explanation and better understanding of the things we wish to show, we shall 
consider [the eternal mind] as if it were now beginning to be.... (E5p31s) 


Compare the following sentence in Aristotle’s De caelo: 


[Some Platonists] say that in their statements about [the ‘generation’ of the eternal universe] they 
are doing what geometricians do when they construct their figures, not implying that the uni- 
verse really had a beginning, but for didactic reasons facilitating understanding by exhibiting the object, 
like the figure, as in the course of formation. (279b—280a, my emphasis, Aristotle, 1984, i.464) 


According to Aristotle, these Platonists think Plato’s Timaeus portrays the eternal cosmos as 
if it were created in time (see Baltes et al. 1987-1997, v. 84-180). They liken this creation 
story to a geometrical construction, which they say exhibits an eternal figure as if it were 
arising. Spinoza says very similarly that “for an easier explanation and better understanding 
of the things we wish to show, we shall consider [the eternal mind] as if it were now 
beginning to be...” (E5p31s). Spinoza may have discovered this view of geometrical con- 
structions by reading the De caelo. Or he may have found it in Proclus’ popular commentary 
on Euclid. Proclus says that, according to certain Platonists, when we construct figures, we 
are “taking eternal things as if they were in the process of coming to be” (1992, p. 64; my 
emphasis). I am grateful to Benjamin Morison for pointing out this passage to me. 

Spinoza says that “the mind has had, eternally, the same perfections that we are pretending 
are now being added to it” (E5p33s, my translation). The notion of geometrical construction 
sheds light on this peculiar use of pretense. Consider the following example. When we con- 
struct an equilateral triangle from overlapping circles, we make the triangle appear to emerge 
from the circles. The circles are, as it were, the source of the triangle’s perfections, namely, the 
three sides that appear, one by one, as we complete the construction. Likewise, Spinoza por- 
trays the intellect as emerging from God — as receiving its perfections from God, one by one. To 
love is to know that one is perfected by another over time. So, according to Spinoza’s depiction, 
the intellect loves God. Spinoza is constructing the intellect, to help readers understand it. 


4.2. Actuality 


Spinoza also uses geometrical construction as a model for thinking about the relationship 
between eternity and time. This becomes clear in E2p8s. There, Spinoza discusses Euclid’s 
method of constructing, from a circle, two equal-area rectangles. Spinoza says that the 
rectangles are “contained in” the circle before we construct them. Once they have been 
constructed, they exist in a new way. These two ways that they can exist, as contained and 
as constructed, illustrate two kinds of existence: eternity and finite duration. Spinoza later 
explains that eternity and finite duration are two kinds of actuality: 


We conceive things as actual [actuales] in two ways, either insofar as we conceive them to exist 
in relation to a certain time and place, or insofar as we conceive them to be contained in God.... 


149 


RAPHAEL KRUT-LANDAU 


But the things we conceive in this second way as true, or real, we conceive under the aspect of 
eternity.... (E5p29s) 


Spinoza is presumably giving expression to Aristotle’s view that actuality comes in two 
kinds (“actuality is said in two ways,” De anima 412a). Aristotle distinguishes ‘first actu- 
ality’ (partial actuality) and ‘second actuality’ (complete actuality). For example, in the 
mind of someone who is intrinsically capable of gaining a certain piece of knowledge, but 
has not yet done so, that knowledge exists as a ‘first potentiality’. When the knowledge has 
been acquired, but is not being used, it exists in the mind as a first actuality (a.k.a. ‘second 
potentiality’). When being used, it exists as a second actuality. 

Aristotle applies this theory of actuality to geometrical constructions (Metaphysics ix, 1048a 
and 1051a29-—a33). Katz explains that, for Aristotle, when a geometer makes a construction, 
“she actualizes more lines and figures that were initially only potentially in the diagram” (2019, 
p. 486). So Aristotle, on one natural reading, agrees with Spinoza about the rectangles. While 
the rectangles exist as first potentialities in blank paper, they exist as first actualities in the circle. 
When drawn, they exist as second actualities. Thus, for Spinoza, the rectangles are “contained” 
in the circle as first actualities (cf. Primus 2017, pp. 174-175). Since Spinoza says that this 
containment “illustrate[s]” eternal existence (E2p8s), we may infer that eternal things are 
“contained” in God in the same way, i.e. as first actualities (cf Garrett 2009, p. 290). 


5. The Mind-Eternity Paradox 


We now turn to considering the following paradox. Spinoza seems, prima facie, to think 
that the mind cannot ever be eternal, but also can become eternal, and moreover already 
is eternal. Let us consider the passages that create this impression. 

According to Spinoza, eternal things are infinite. But Spinoza says it would be “absurd” 
to suggest that the human mind is infinite (E4p4d). So the human mind is necessarily non- 
eternal. We’re finite, and permanently so (E1p27). As finite, vulnerable beings, we are 
“necessarily always subject to passions” (E4p4c). So, prima facie, Spinoza seems to think: 


t: Necessarily, the mind is finitely temporal (=non-eternal) and subject to passions. 
Spinoza also thinks that passions can be “destroyed” (E5p4s) through reflection: 


An affect which is a passion ceases to be a passion as we form a clear and distinct idea of it. 
(E5p3, translation modified) 


By destroying its passions, the mind can become more eternal (E5p39d). No passion is 
immune (E5p4c). Moreover, E5p3d indicates that any confused idea could be destroyed in 
the same way. So the mind can, in principle, make all its ideas clear and become pure 
reason. It can “make itself eternal,” as the young Spinoza wrote (KV 2pref|I/53). Prima 
facie, then, Spinoza seems to accept proposition 5 (small delta): 


6: The mind can become eternal, destroying all its passions. 


However, true ideas represent things as eternal (E2p44c2). There is a true idea of each 
thing (E2p3). So everything is eternal. All ideas are in God (E1p15), whose ideas are neces- 


150 


SPINOZA'S METAPHYSICS OF TIME 


sarily true (E2p32d). So no false ideas can exist. Passions are false ideas (E3d4). An 
apparent passion, seen truly, is no passion at all (E5p18s). So, prima facie, Spinoza appears 
to accept: 


e: Every mind (indeed, every idea) is necessarily eternal and passionless. 


Spinoza seems to accept t, 5, and e, a flagrantly inconsistent triad. That is the paradox. 


6. Three Perspectives 


To resolve this paradox, we must appreciate the role of aspects in Spinoza’s philosophy. 
Aspects have received much attention in the Spinoza literature; see e.g. Deleuze (1992, pp. 
62-67), Schmidt (2009), Schnepf (2011), Laerke (2012), Klein (2005, 2014), Grey 
(2014), Douglas (2018), Melamed (2018), and Shein (2018). 

Aspects are common in various Aristotelian ontologies. Aristotle gives the following 
example (Metaphysics 1061a27—-b11): a body considered as a geometrical object (a body qua 
geometrical) differs from the same body considered as an object of natural science, capable of 
motion (a body qua movable). Properly speaking, motion belongs to a body qua movable, not 
to a body qua geometrical. Spinoza makes the same point (I/236): “when I say that the tri- 
angle is moved, the motion is not a mode of the triangle, but of the body which is moved.” 

Aspects such as the body qua movable are typically taken to be mind-independent entities. 
Suarez (1947, p. 57) insists that a distinction between aspects (a “distinction of reasoned 
reason [distinctio rationis ratiocinatae]”) has a “basis in the thing [fundamentum in re].” 
When picking out an aspect, it often helps to describe it in terms of thoughts or perspectives 
(sets of thoughts). For example, we can speak of ‘a molecule thought of as movable’ or ‘a 
molecule from a geometer’s point of view’. But the mental language can be removed; we 
can speak of ‘a molecule qua movable’ and ‘a molecule qua geometrical’. So, though 
Spinoza posits many aspects, and often describes them with phrases like ‘x insofar as it is 
conceived as F’, we should not infer from this that he takes aspects to be mind-dependent. 

That said, he clearly posits some aspects that are mind-dependent. For example, when 
discussing the relationship between motion in a body and that body qua triangle, he distin- 
guishes between motion qua in-the-body, which is a mode, and motion qua in-the-triangle, 
which is a mind-dependent “being of reason” (I/236). He also mentions ‘the flat surface 
insofar as it is white’ - another mind-dependent aspect, presumably, since the surface is 
“called white in relation to a man looking” (IV/45). 

As we've seen, each mode x has these aspects, among others: 


x as an eternal thing 
x as a singular (finitely enduring) thing 


Each mode is similar to the motion of the triangle. The triangle’s motion is a real being, 
insofar as it is in a body, and is a being of reason, insofar as it is in a triangle. Similarly, each 
mode is a real being, insofar as it is in God, and is a being of reason, insofar as it is in time 
and space. 

Each aspect corresponds to a perspective. First, there is the Perspective of Time — T, for 
short. When we use perspective T, we conceive modes as finitely enduring. Then there is the 
Perspective of Eternity — E, for short. When we use perspective E, we conceive modes as 


151 


RAPHAEL KRUT-LANDAU 


eternal. (Each mode can also be conceived, from the Perspective of Duration, as an inten- 
sively enduring thing. We can set this perspective aside.) 

There is a further, neglected perspective. In Part 5, Spinoza asks us to think of the mind 
as if it were shifting to perspective E. He writes: 


[W]e shall consider [the eternal mind] as if it were now beginning to be, and were now 
beginning to understand things under the aspect of eternity. (E5p13s) 


As the mind shifts to perspective E, it has a shifting viewpoint, like the view from a hot air 
balloon. Let’s call this viewpoint the Perspective of Eternalization — A, for short. From per- 
spective A (big delta), everything seems to be growing more eternal. 

From perspective A, the mind seems to be increasing in perfection (E5p3 3s). So perspec- 
tive A is that of someone shifting from perspective T, which sees things as imperfect, to 
perspective E, which sees things as perfect. A is the construction-like pretense within which 
Spinoza says that the eternal mind is joyful and loving (E5p31—p33s). 

Spinoza does not merely describe these perspectives. He takes up one, then another. 
Consider the axiom of Part 4, which says that singular things can be destroyed. In E5p37s, 
Spinoza says: “The axiom of Part 4 concerns singular things insofar as they are considered 
in relation to a certain time and place.” That is, an insofar-as qualifier was left implicit in 
the axiom. To put it another way, the axiom implicitly describes how things appear to per- 
spective T. (I gloss over ‘place.’) Prima facie, the axiom seemed to express the proposition 
that singular things can be destroyed. Call this proposition p. In fact, the axiom expresses 
that p is true for perspective T. 

As we saw, Spinoza seems (prima facie) to think: 


t: Necessarily, the mind is finitely temporal (=non-eternal) and subject to passions. 


This claim seems to flow from E4p4 and E4p4c. However, those claims rest on the axiom of 
Part 4. So they must be, like that axiom, relative to T. Spinoza thinks: 


tis true for T. 
For short, I will write this as ‘tT’. Spinoza also seems (prima facie) to think: 
6: The mind can become eternal, destroying all its passions. 


This claim seems to follow from E5p3: “An affect which is a passion ceases to be a passion as 
we form a clear and distinct idea of it.” However, the passions do not belong to the mind itself, 
but to the mind qua finite. Spinoza explains, “the passions are not related to the mind except 
insofar as it has something which involves a negation...” (E3p3s, compare E4p2). The pas- 
sions exist for T, not for E. As we shift from T to E, they vanish. That is, according to A, they 
disappear. Just as blurry things, seen through a camera, stop being blurry as we focus the 


camera, passions stop being passions as we form clear ideas of them. So Spinoza thinks: 
6 is true for A. 


For short, I'll notate this as ‘6A’. Just as Spinoza can say, within A, that the intellect ‘arises’ 
and ‘loves’, he can say within A that the passions ‘perish’ and are ‘destroyed’. The transfor- 


152 


SPINOZA'S METAPHYSICS OF TIME 


mation of passions into actions is an apparent change due to a change of perspective. It is 
like the way God seemed to Dante to change: “by my sight gaining strength as I looked, the 
one sole appearance, I myself changing, was, for me, transformed” (Dante 1961, iii.484). 
I believe this assuages Bennett’s well-known concern (1984, p. 336) that Spinozan pas- 
sion-destruction requires altering the past. 

Our mission is to avoid saddling Spinoza with the inconsistent triad t, 5, and e. Here is a 
provisional solution. The passages that initially appear to express those claims instead 
express the following triad: 


Triad (first pass): tT, 5A, and e. 


This solution must be revised, however, since this triad is also inconsistent. Let us see why. 


7. The Time-Eternity Barrier 


To see why tT, 6A, and e are inconsistent, consider what a perspective must be for Spinoza. 
To take a perspective is to represent reality in a certain way. A perspective must then be a 
set of mental representations (ideas). Eis a set of true ideas. These ideas represent things as 
eternal (E2p44c2). What’s more, the ideas in E are themselves eternal: “the mind is eternal, 
insofar as it conceives things under the aspect of eternity” (E5p31s, translation modified). 
So E is like what it sees: it is eternal. E represents all eternal things, including itself. But E 
represents nothing else, nothing that is not eternal. Furthermore, only E can represent 
eternal things: “The mind conceives nothing under the aspect of eternity...except insofar 
as it is eternal” (E5p314d). 

T, however, represents nothing as eternal. If any ideas in T were eternal, they would 
represent things as eternal. But no ideas in T do that. So T is like what it sees: it is not 
eternal. Instead, it is made entirely of inadequate, incomplete, singular ideas. As Caird 
(1888, p. 189) noticed, “the idea of the finite is itself finite, limited and determined by 
other finites....” 

T cannot conceive anything eternal. But Eis eternal. So T cannot conceive that E exists, 
nor that any claim is true for E. Similarly, Eis blind to T. For E conceives nothing but eternal 
things. So E cannot conceive that T exists. Nor can E conceive that any claim is true for T. 
Spinoza accepts a claim that I will call 


the time-eternity barrier: No truths have the form ‘pTE’ or ‘pET.’ 


That is, no truths with form ‘pT’ are true for E. And no truths with form ‘pE’ are true for T. 

“Spinoza,” it will be objected, “says that we ‘experience that we are eternal’ (E5p23s), 
which means that sense experience (part of T) can represent eternity.” I reply that ‘experi- 
ence’ here is a metaphor, derived from the metaphor that demonstrations are the mind’s 
eyes (cf. Savan 1994, p. 28). Like eyes, demonstrations show (demonstrare) things, namely, 
the truth of their conclusions. Metaphorically speaking, by proving that we are eternal, we 
‘see’ that we are eternal, and, extending the metaphor, we ‘perceive’, we ‘experience’, that 
we are eternal. We cannot literally experience eternity, just as God cannot literally experi- 
ence love. Throughout the Ethics, various temporal, earthly terms (‘love’, ‘enjoy’, ‘experi- 
ence’, ‘glory’, ‘possess’, and ‘acquiescence’ ) are each given a metaphorical, eternity-related 
sense — what the Middle Ages called an ‘anagogical sense.’ 


153 


RAPHAEL KRUT-LANDAU 


Let us now return to the triad tT, 6A, and e. They are an inconsistent triad. For suppose 
e were true. Then, all ideas would be eternal. But T and A necessarily consist of non-eternal 
ideas. So then these perspectives would not exist. No proposition would be true or false for 
either. Joachim 1901, pp. 111-113, makes a similar point.) To remedy the inconsistency, 
we must modify the triad. 


8. Nested Perspectives 


The key to remedying the inconsistency is to note that perspectives can iterate. That is, a 
claim of the form ‘pA’ could be true for a perspective B, in which case pAB. The best way 
into this issue is to consider a question that has divided commentators: does the perspective 
of eternity represent what Spinoza takes to be true simpliciter? 

There are some reasons to think so. E is the viewpoint of the intellect. The intellect sees 
each thing “as it is in itself” (IV/56; cf. IV/28). Some of Spinoza’s other names for eter- 
nity — “existence itself” (El def8) and “the very nature of existence” (E2p45s) — suggest that 
in seeing existence as eternal, we see what it is intrinsically like. So Spinoza probably accepts: 


For all propositions p, p is true (simpliciter) iff pE. 


But we must be wary of anachronism. Where we might expect to find a contrast between 
mind-dependent and mind-independent reality, Spinoza gives us a contrast between a thing 
“as it is for the imagination [prout in imaginatione est]” and a thing “as it is for the intellect 
[prout in intellectu est]” (E1p15s). The terms we might use to refer to mind-independent, 
aperspectival reality — ‘absolute reality’, ‘things as they are in themselves’, ‘being’ as opposed 
to ‘appearance’ — are usually characterized by Spinoza in terms of thoughts or perspectives. 
For Spinoza, to be “absolutely infinite” is to be infinite in infinitely many aspects, i.e. infinite 
according to infinitely many perspectives (E1d6). “Things as they are in themselves” are 
conceived through God — but God here is understood in infinitely many ways (E2p7s). 
‘Being’ is defined in terms of perception (I/233). We can only conceive aspects, not their 
bearers (E1p10s). According to some scholars, Spinoza embraces a form of relativism about 
truth. Newlands (2018, p. 55) argues that, since in the Ethics “some metaphysical features 
of things are sensitive how those things are conceived,” Spinoza endorses “metaphysical 
relativism” about many issues. Sharp (2011, p. 22) writes that, for Spinoza, “the geomet- 
rical perspective,” which “examines things in terms of their definitions, or self-relations” 
(the perspective I called ‘E’ above), is not “the sole measure of reality, the key that unlocks 
the mysteries of the universe,” but instead “a distinctive standard of truth,” one among 
others. Even though the balance of evidence does not decisively favor a relativist interpreta- 
tion of Spinoza, we can learn something useful by exploring this interpretation. 
How should we define ‘relativism’? As a first stab, we might define it as follows: 


r: There are no objective truths. 
It has often been argued that r entails its own falsehood. But relativists can avoid contra- 
diction by construing their view as the following infinitary proposition (Baghramian 
2004, pp. 100ff.; MacFarlane 2014, pp. 30-34). Let R be the relativists’ perspective. 


Relativism: rRRRR..... 


154 


SPINOZA’S METAPHYSICS OF TIME 


We can state this more concisely. Let * mean “repeat the preceding symbol ad infinitum.” 
Relativism: rR*. 


Whatever its drawbacks, rR* doesn’t refute itself. So it doesn’t entail that any claim is objec- 
tively true. We can generalize this fact as: 


the star rule: A proposition with form ‘pQ*’ does not entail that any claim is objectively true 
simpliciter. 


Equipped with this rule, we can now see what Spinoza would say about e, tT, and 5A. Since 
Spinoza holds e, he holds eE, eEE, and at the limit, eE*. E* follows from what Spinoza says at 
E2p21s: 


For as soon as someone knows something [i.e. knows it through reason, through E], he thereby 
knows that he knows it, and at the same time knows that he knows that he knows, and so on, 
to infinity. 


tT entails tTE. But tTE breaks the time-eternity barrier (‘no truths have the form pTE or 
pET’). So Spinoza rejects tT. For the same reason, he rejects tTT, tT TT, tl TTT.... However, 
since he accepts eE*, he might accept the parallel claim tT*. In fact, in section 2, we saw 
that he does. For him, time exists from a certain standpoint, but the standpoint itself only 
exists from that standpoint. By the star rule, tT* does not entail tT*E, and so does not break 
the time-eternity barrier. 

We can apply the same solution to 6A. Spinoza cannot accept 6A. For it entails SAE. 
Spinoza cannot accept any claim with the form ‘pAE’. For E cannot represent anything 
non-eternal, such as the ideas in A. Those ideas are eternalizing, not eternal. Spinoza also 
cannot accept 5AA, since it entails 5AAE. And so on. However, he can accept 5A”. By the 
star rule, 5A* does not entail 5A*E. 

Therefore, the passages in the Ethics that first seemed to express t, 5, and e instead express: 


Triad: tT*, 5A*,e. 


T exists only according to itself, but does not exist simpliciter. The same goes for A. So we 
can answer Kojéve’s concern that Spinoza’s Ethics cannot explain “the possibility of a man 
living in time to write it.” Spinoza grounds the possibility of temporal facts, but he grounds 
them circularly, in further temporal facts. On the other hand, if Spinoza is a relativist, he 
cannot accept e, but he can accept eE*. So a relativist interpretation could ascribe to 
Spinoza the triad tI*, 5A*, and eE*. On this view, even the perspective of reason is circu- 
larly grounded, and the Ethics is — like one of Spinoza’s early works (I/28—30) — a dialogue 
between reason and alternative points of view. 


Acknowledgments 


I would like to express my gratitude to Marie Barnett, Zach Gartenberg, Domenica 
Romagni, Zach Agoff, Colin Chamberlain, Nabeel Hamid, Justin Humphreys, Ben Morison, 
André Rocha, and audiences at the Quebec Seminar in Early Modern Philosophy 
(September 2019) and the Western E-vent in Early Modern Philosophy (June 2020). 


155 


RAPHAEL KRUT-LANDAU 


References 


Aristotle. (1984). The Complete Works of Aristotle: The Revised Oxford Translation (ed. J. Barnes). 
Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press. 

Ashworth, EJ. (2007). Metaphor and the logicians from Aristotle to Cajetan. Vivarium 
45:311-327. 

Baghramian, M. (2004). Relativism. London: Routledge. 

Baltes, M., Dorrie, H., and Mann, F. (eds.) 1987-1997. Der Platonismus in der Antike: Grundlagen, 
System, Entwicklung. Stuttgart-Bad Cannstatt: Fromann-Holzboog. 

Bennett, J. (1984). A Study of Spinoza’s Ethics’. Indianapolis: Hackett. 

Caird, J. (1888). Spinoza. Edinburgh: Blackwood. 

Curley, E. (1985). The Collected Works of Spinoza, volume 1. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University 
Press. 

Dante. (1961). The Divine Comedy (trans. J. Sinclair). Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Deleuze, G. (1992). Expressionism in Philosophy: Spinoza (trans. M. Joughin). New York: Zone Books. 

Douglas, A. (2018). Quatenus and Spinoza’s monism. Journal of the History of Philosophy 56: 
261-280. 

Dowty, D. (1977). Toward a semantic analysis of verb aspect and the English ‘imperfective’ progres- 
sive. Linguistics and Philosophy 1:45—77. 

Doyle, J. (1984). Prolegomena to a study of extrinsic denomination in the work of Francis Suarez, 
SJ.. Vivarium 22:121-160. 

Doyle, J. (2012). On the Borders of Being and Knowing: Some Late Scholastic Thoughts on 
Supertranscendental Being (ed. V. Salas). Leuven: Leuven University Press. 

Garrett, D. (2009). Spinoza on the essence of the human body and the part of the mind that is 
eternal. In: The Cambridge Companion to Spinoza’s ‘Ethics’ (ed. O. Koistinen), 284-302. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 

Gueroult, M. (1968). Spinoza I: Dieu, Ethique I. Paris: Aubier-Montaigne. 

Joachim, H. 1901. A Study of the Ethics of Spinoza: Ethica Ordine Geometrico Demonstrata. Oxford: 
Clarendon Press. 

Jobani, Y. (2016). The Role of Contradictions in Spinoza’s Philosophy: The God-Intoxicated Heretic (trans. 
A. Ben-Or). London: Routledge. 

Katz, E. (2019). Geometrical objects as properties of sensibles: Aristotle’s philosophy of geometry. 
Phronesis 64: 465-513. 

Klein, J. (2005). Aristotle and Descartes in Spinoza’s approach to matter and body. Graduate Faculty 
Philosophy Journal 26:157-176. 

Klein, J. (2014). “Something of it remains”: Spinoza and Gersonides on intellectual eternity. In:, 
Spinoza and Medieval Jewish Philosophy (ed. S. Nadler). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Kojéve, A. (1980). Introduction to the Reading of Hegel (ed. A. Bloom, trans. J.H. Nichols). Ithaca, NY: 
Cornell University Press. 

Laerke, M. (2012). Deus quatenus: Sur l'emploi des particules reduplicatives dans |’Ethique. In: 
Lectures contemporaines de Spinoza (ed. P.-F. Moreau, C. Cohen-Boulakia, and M. Delbracio), 261- 
275. Paris: Presses Universitaires de Paris-Sorbonne. 

Lin, M. (2019). Being and Reason: An Essay on Spinoza’s Metaphysics. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

MacFarlane, J. (2014). Assessment Sensitivity: Relative Truth and its Applications. Oxford: Oxford 

University Press. 

Melamed, Y.Y. (2016a). Eternity in early modern philosophy. In: Eternity: A History (ed. Y.Y. 

Melamed), 129-167. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Melamed, Y.Y. (2016b). Hegel, Spinoza, and McTaggart on the reality of time. International Yearbook 

of German Idealism 14: 211-234. 

Melamed, Y.Y. (2018). The building blocks of Spinoza’s metaphysics. In: The Oxford Handbook of 

Spinoza (ed. M. Della Rocca). Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Melamed, Y.Y. (2019). The enigma of Spinoza’s Amor Dei Intellectualis. In: Freedom, Action and 


156 


SPINOZA'S METAPHYSICS OF TIME 


Motivation in Spinoza’s “Ethics” (ed. N. Naaman-Zaudrer), 222—238. New York: Routledge. 

Newlands, S. (2009). Another kind of Spinozistic monism. Notis 3:469-502. 

Newlands, S. (2018). Reconceiving Spinoza. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Patrides, C.A. (1963). Paradise Lost and the theory of accommodation. Texas Studies in Literature and 
Language 5:58-63. 

Penner, S. (2012). Rodrigo de Arriaga on relations. The Modern Schoolman 89:25-46. 

Poiret, P. (1685). Cogitationum rationalium de Deo, anima, et malo. Amsterdam. 

Primus, K. (2017). Scientia Intuitiva in the Ethics. In Spinoza’s “Ethics”: A Critical Guide (ed. Y.Y. 
Melamed), 169-186. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Proclus. (1992). A Commentary on the First Book of Euclid’s “Elements” (trans. G. Morrow). Princeton, 
NJ: Princeton University Press. 

Savan, D. (1958). Spinoza and language. Philosophical Review 67:212-225. 

Savan, D. (1994). Spinoza on duration, time and eternity. In: Spinoza: The Enduring Questions (ed. G. 
Hunter), 3-30. Toronto: University of Toronto Press. 

Schmidt, A. (2009). Substance monism and identity theory in Spinoza.” In Olli Koistinen, ed., The 
Cambridge Companion to Spinoza’s ‘Ethics’ (ed. O. Koistinen), 79-98. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 

Schmidt, R. (1966). The Domain of Logic According to Saint Thomas Aquinas. The Hague: Martinus 
Nijhoff. 

Schnepf, R. (2011). “The one substance and finite things.” In: Spinoza’s Ethics: A Collective 
Commentary (ed. M. Hampe, U. Renz, and R. Schnepf), 37—56. Leiden: Brill. 

Sharp, H. (2011). Spinoza and the Politics of Renaturalization. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 

Taylor, A.E. (1937). Some Incoherencies in Spinozism (II.). Mind 46:28 1-301. 

Waller, J. (2012). Persistence through Time in Spinoza. Lexington Books. 

Yovel, Y. (1989). Spinoza and Other Heretics. Volume 1, The Marrano of Reason. Princeton, N.J.: 
Princeton University Press. 


157 


i> 


Spinoza’s Infinities 


LUCE peLIRE’ 


1. Introduction 


Given the abundance and prominence of infinities in Spinoza’s edifice, the limited amount 
of literature on the topic might surprise. Spinoza defines God as “absolutely infinite being 
[ens absolute infinitum], that is: substance going along with infinitely many attributes, of 
which each expresses eternal and infinite essence” (E1d6; E1p10s; see also Ep.2, 1V/7/12- 
IV/8/4; Ep. 4, IV/14/8-12; Ep. 9, IV/44/13-IV/45/3 as well as Ep. 36) and duration as 
“indefinite continuation of existing” (E2d5). He also calls each attribute “infinite in its kind 
[in suo genere|” (E1d6ex), proves the infinity of substance right after proving the necessity of 
its existence (Elp8) and claims the puzzling existence of infinite modes (E1p21—23). He 
talks of infinities of perfection (E1p11s (II/54/23), El App (II/80/16-17 and II/83/24), 
referenced implicitly E4pref (II/207/15- I/208/6)), reality (Elpl1s, Elp16d), power 
(Elpl1d3, E4a1, E4p3), motion and rest (E2p13L3), attributes (E1d6, also Elp9) and 
causes (E1p28, E5p6d, Ep. 40, IV/198b/1-IV/199b/7). Hence, virtually every term of 
importance in Spinoza’s philosophy has some crucial relation to infinity. Furthermore, in 
his earlier writings, eternity is defined as “infinite enjoyment of existence” (Ep.12, 1V/55/2- 
3) or “infinite actual existence” (CM I/252/12-13 and implicitly Ep. 35, IV/181/11-13), 
claiming that eternity was a kind of infinity. The Conatus, striving or actual essence of things 
involves “indefinite time” (E3p8; see also El p8s2; Ep.12, IV/55/4—7; Ep.34, IV/180/1-16; 
Ep.83, IV/332/1-7; and E2d5). And last but not least, he breaks with the Aristotelian par- 
adigm, partly shared by Descartes, which holds that only possible infinity existed, like a day 
that does not exist at once but hour by hour. To Spinoza, on the contrary, the “true nature 
of things, |. . .] [entails] an actual Infinite” (Ep. 12, IV/59/1-3). 

Furthermore, the historical importance of Spinoza’s take on infinity can hardly be 
overstated. Leibniz was an avid reader of Spinoza and owned a copy of letter 12 (the 
letter on the infinite, see Nachtomy 2011 and Vidinsky 2017 for the Leibniz/Spinoza 


' Tf not otherwise noted, translations into English from Latin and French are mine. 


A Companion to Spinoza, First Edition. Edited by Yitzhak Y. Melamed. 
© 2021 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2021 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd. 


158 


SPINOZA'S INFINITIES 


connection). Hegel developed his philosophy partially as anti-Spinozism (Bowman 2013, 
pp. 35-42, 72-75, 237-243). Georg Cantor — nineteenth-century inventor of set theory 
and mathematizer of infinity —- counted himself among the admirers of Spinoza’s work 
on infinity (for details about the Cantor/Spinoza connection, see Newstead 2008; 
Stauffer 1993). Gilles Deleuze modeled the body without organs (Deleuze and 
Guattari 1972, p. 394) on his reading of Spinoza’s infinity (Deleuze 1968, p. 30). Clearly, 
there is more. 

We should hence expect a decent amount of literature dedicated to the topic. But in 
fact, commentators have restricted themselves mostly to scattered remarks and partial 
analyses (the most extensive treatment is Gueroult 1968, pp.500—528). In this chapter, 
I will review the most prominent existing views on infinity. By disproving them, I will 
argue that (absolute) infinity must be understood as a simple, fully determined 
quantity, with a complicated relation to perfection (a term that I will elaborate on 
later), embodying total creative ontological priority. I will close with some pressing 
question. 

More concretely, I will show that Spinoza’s infinity cannot mean (1) perfection (I will 
explain what I mean by this term later on), (2) a negative quality, (3) a positive quality nor 
(4) universal quantification. 

These claims may sound unclear but will hopefully become transparent throughout the 
following pages. 


2. Infinity as Perfection 


Infinitum I means “perfect without limitation”; [. . .] 
(Kline and Mawr 1977, p. 342) 


Spinoza takes the definition of God in terms of infinity to be superior to definitions in terms 
of perfection. In this section, I will demonstrate that the identification of perfection with 
infinity leaves God underdetermined. I will then investigage the reasons for Spinoza’s 
preference for infinity over perfection. 


2.1. Perfection of Nature and Perfection in Nature 


[W]hen I define God as being supremely perfect Being [esse Ens summe perfectum] |. . .] | won't 
be able to derive all of God’s properties from it; but when I define God to be Being [esse Ens] etc., 
see E1d6, [I can derive all of God’s properties from it]. 

(Ep. 60, IV/271/2-5) 


Why is perfection less apt to define God than Ens absolute infinitum? In Ep. 36 (1V/185/14—27) 
and Ep. 21 (IV/128/2-IV/129/5), Spinoza distinguishes privation from negation, a distinc- 
tion inherited from the Aristotelian tradition (see for example Averroes 2010, p. 96; 
Maimonides 2002, pp. 81-83, and Aquinas 1965, §92): 


Privation is nothing but denying something of a thing which we judge to pertain to its nature, 
and Negation nothing but denying something of a thing because it does not pertain to its 
nature. (Ep. 21, I[V/129/3-—5; see also E5p6s) 


159 


LUCE beLIRE 


Under privation, some things may obtain in some regard but currently do not (for use in 
this sense, see E2p35s, E2p49s, Ep.19, IV/91/2-IV/92/9). Under negation, things cannot 
possibly obtain in that regard. For example, I did not see the red light, but could have (if we 
abstract from the real order of causes), while I could not possibly have seen the ultraviolet 
light. Only in the former case, says Spinoza, can we talk of imperfection — privation of (an 
imagined) possible occurrence. In the case of me missing the ultraviolet light, however, to 
Spinoza, lack as negation is not an imperfection. For while I was missing the ultraviolet 
light, my eyes were working perfectly fine. That is because my eyes cannot by their essence 
perceive UV light. There is nothing imperfect about them in not doing so. “Perfection, 
[however,] . . . extends, in each thing, as far as the thing’s essence does. For essence is 
nothing other [than perfection]” (Ep. 19, 1V/89/1-3). ‘Imperfection’ means that something 
is falling short of its essence by privation. A negation states that the essence of something, 
though perfect, is not the essence of something else. Negation, then, is discerned intellectu- 
ally and expresses essences negatively (E4intro, II/207/20-II/208/6; Ep. 19, IV/90/3- 
IV/92/2). Privation, however, is a “being of reason” (Ep. 21, [V/128/12) — it exists only in 
the intellect, not outside of it. Its instantiations rely on flawed apprehension. For factually, 
“T...] [all] things have been produced by God with the [same] highest perfection, since they 
have followed necessarily from a given most perfect nature” (E1p33s2, II/74/15-16, see 
also E4pref (II/207/20-I/208/6), E5p1 7d (II/291/7-9), E5p33s, Ep. 21 (IV/131/3-11)). 

Divine attributes, however, are perfect in that there is negation, but no privation. 
Everything that can apply to them does apply. Their essence is fully instantiated and com- 
prehended as such. Everything that does not apply to them could not possibly apply — it is 
not of their nature. Let us call this ‘perfection of nature.’ Something similar applies to God, 
with a twist. Besides absence of privation, there is no negation either (in the sense just 
defined): “[I]f something is absolutely infinite, whatever expresses essence and involves no 
negation pertains to its essence” (E1d6 | II/46/2-4). Effectively, we may call this kind of 
perfection ‘perfection in nature’: despite the full realization of essence (no privation), 
nothing can be negated of that essence either (no negation). 

Just how important that distinction is can be discerned by the following quote from 
Newlands: “Why can’t any attribute be denied of God? Because to do that would be to 
ascribe to God imperfection [emphasis LdL], [. . .]” (Newlands 2019, p. 37). This must be 
false. For lacking an attribute that does not belong to the nature of a thing cannot be 
understood as imperfection, because imperfections are due to privations, but not due to 
negations. Hence, we need to understand why Spinoza wants to ascribe infinitely many 
attributes to God’s essence under the heading ‘ens absolute infinitum’ independently of divine 
perfection. 

For absolute infinity’s conjunction of infinitely many attributes to count as perfection 
and differ in some sense from the perfection of nature in single attributes, ‘absolute infinity’ 
would have to be defined as a perfection of perfections. We would then say that all perfec- 
tions of nature combined would make up perfection in nature. In other words: The 
combination of all essences without imperfection would itself form another kind of perfec- 
tion altogether — a perfection of perfections. 

But if ‘infinity’ was to mean perfection of perfections in this sense, it would be defined 
through non-existence (non-negation, non-privation). A perfection of perfections would 
be exactly the absence of negations and privations. It would thus become a being of reason 
(ens rationis, see Ep. 10, 1V/4.7/10-15 and CM 1, IV/235/8-22), defined through negativity. 


160 


SPINOZA'S INFINITIES 


Beings of reason exist only in the intellect. Yet Spinoza thinks ‘infinity’ to mean something 
positive and independent of the intellect (see CM 2.3, I/253/23-24, Elp8s1 and E2p49s, 
II/131/9-12, where positivity is distinguished from non-privation). Thus, (absolute) 
infinity cannot be a perfection of perfections. 

More importantly, though, perfection of nature and perfection in nature do not differ in 
the relevant sense. An attribute cannot become more perfect than it is (Ep. 36, IV/184/ 
25-30) — perfect is perfect. Absolute infinity is not more perfect than in suo genere infinity 
(the infinity of the attributes). Both in suo genere infinity and absolute infinity are equally 
perfect. If, then, infinity was nothing but perfection, there could be no reason for the dis- 
tinction into in suo genere infinity and absolute infinity. If unexplained, though, the distinc- 
tion interferes with the Principle of Sufficient Reason (PSR), according to which everything 
requires a sufficient cause (E1a3) through which it is also to be explained (E1 a4) (see Della 
Rocca 2008, p. 1ff. and Gueroult 1968, p. 9). Unexplainable differences have no place in 
Spinoza’s philosophy. And because the explanation of infinity in terms of perfection cannot 
make sense of the distinction between in suo genere infinity and absolute infinity, that 
explanation must be false. 

Summing up, then, from our analysis of the relation between perfection and limitation 
as privation and negation, we can state that infinity is not perfection. 


2.2. Ens Absolute Infinitum vs. Supremely Perfect Being 


Why does Spinoza not use the term ’perfection’ in the definition of God, but “ens absolute 
infinitum” (E1d6)? Ep. 60 clarifies that, other than ‘perfection,’ ‘ens absolute infinitum’ 
refers to the efficient cause of God and thus allows to derive all her properties. Take the 
Theodicy as an example: in terms of perfection, the relation of the imperfect to a perfect 
and omnipotent God is problematic. In other words, how can an omnipotent (perfect) 
God allow for or even cause evil (imperfection)? However, in terms of infinity, finitude is 
merely partial apprehension of infinity. Thus, God understood in terms of infinity avoids 
a problem that occurs if she is understood in terms of perfection. I will now explain this 
in more detail. 

In Spinoza’s exchange with Blijenbergh, one question is whether evil or imperfection 
follow from divine perfection (Ep. 19, IV/88/1—13; Ep. 23, IV/147/1-12 and IV/150/6- 
12). This would cause a problem insofar as God qua perfection would negate herself in 
imperfection. Spinoza responds as above: imperfection is privation that emerges from 
comparison of things which are in themselves perfect. Imperfection does not follow from 
divine perfection and is not opposed to it. E4Pref repeats this point (II/207/20 — I/208/6) 
and applies it to “good” and “evil” (II/208/7-14). 

This problem, however, of whether negativity (here: imperfection) results from posi- 
tivity (here: perfection) cannot occur in the case of infinity. For the finite and the infinite 
cannot oppose one another, as that would make them mutually exclusive: 1, 2, 5 and 432, 
for example, are elements of the infinite set of natural numbers and do not oppose that set. 
Rather, the finite must exist within infinity. If thought along these lines, imperfection can 
be derived from perfection. But, as demonstrated above, perfection requires negative terms 
(‘negation,’ ‘privation’) and hence relies on beings of reason. That way, real comprehension 
of extra mental reality cannot be achieved. Infinity, however, comes hard wired with 
features to solve the Theodicy: there is no real negativity between infinity and finitude. 


161 


LUCE beLIRE 


And in that sense, God defined in terms of infinity allows us to derive all properties 
(including those apparently opposed to divine nature), while God defined in terms of per- 
fection causes trouble with imperfection. 


3. Infinity as Negative Quality 
God is utterly indeterminate, [. . .]. (Dea 2011, p. 614; see also Newstead 2008, p. 10) 


[T]he term infinite stands in Spinoza for such terms as ‘unique,’ ‘incomparable,’ ‘homony- 
mous,’ ‘indeterminate,’ ‘incomprehensible,’ ‘ineffable,’ ‘indefinable,’ ‘unknowable,’ and many 
other similar terms. ‘Unknowable‘ and ‘indefinable,’ however, will be found its most conve- 
nient equivalents. It is in accordance with Aristotle’s dictum that the infinite so far as infinite 
is unknown. (Wolfson 1934, p.138; see also Wolfson 1923, p. 163 and its critique in 
Ratner 1926, p. 127) 


This is a traditional view on infinity: God (who is infinite) is entirely subject to negation 
(see above). 

To Spinoza, however, absolute infinity causes itself (El1p11d1). Now, if no determined 
cause is given, no effect can follow (E1a3). Consequentially, if absolute infinity was inde- 
termined, it could not bear an effect, thus not cause itself. Hence, absolute infinity cannot 
mean indeterminedness, nor indeterminability. Contra Gueroult (Gueroult 1968, p. 175), 
the same counts for attributes, which cause infinite modes (E1p21), which in turn cause 
more infinite modes (Elp. 22/23). Consequentially, neither ens absolute infinitum (God) nor 
in suo genere infinity (attributes) nor infinite modes can be indetermined. 

Now, insofar as indefinability is the indeterminability of definition, unknowability the 
indeterminability of knowledge etc., the above quoted list by Wolfson falls prey to the same 
argument. For indeterminability expresses negation as such, while the other terms express 
negations of particular capacities. Here, then, similar arguments apply. Consequentially, 
infinity is not a negative quality and must be determined. 


4. Infinity as Positive Quality 


4.1. Gueroult’s Complexity 


Based on El p8s1, Gueroult believes that “[. . .] infinity, [is] absolute affirmation [. . .] of the 
existence of some nature [or essence]” (Gueroult 1968, p. 72, also 469). He also famously 
claims that “[...] God [ens absolute infinitum, LdL] [. . .] is a complex thing, constituted by 
diverse attributes” (Gueroult 1968, p. 175), while “the element which allows to construct 
God is the substance with only one attribute [. . .].” (Gueroult 1968, p. 37; my emphasis). 

Let us look at E1p8s1 first. Here, Spinoza qualifies the affirmation at play in infinity to 
refer to “the existence of some nature” — “absoluta affirmatio existentiae alicujus naturae” 
(E1p8s1, my emphasis). E1d6ex, however, specifies infinity (absolute and in its kind or in suo 
genere) with reference to essences (namely essences that do or do not involve negation, see 
also 1.1 above). Thus, the term ‘infinity’ is not hard wired, as Gueroult claims, to existence. 
Rather, it may also apply to essences. Therefore, E1p8s1 cannot count as a proper or at least 
not as the only definition of infinity. 


162 


SPINOZA'S INFINITIES 


Let us now turn to Gueroult’s infinity as a complex notion. This claim has three sources: 


(a) Gueroult argues that for Spinoza, philosophy should construct complex things from 
simple things (Gueroult 1968, p. 170; based on TIE §39, H/24/18-31). This is true 
but does not by itself prove the complexity of infinity. 

(b) Consequentially, Gueroult analogizes the conceptual construction of a sphere from 
simple elements (TIE § 71-72, II/27/1-19) with the “construction” of God from infi- 
nitely many attributes (Gueroult 1968, p. 170 et passim). We understand the concept 
of God by way of synthesizing infinitely many attributes as its elements into a com- 
plex, constructed, or composed unity (especially Gueroult 1968, p. 174). Gueroult 
clarifies his claim using mostly the early TIE but fails to include later writings. 
Furthermore, he does not provide any textual evidence for this analogy to actually be 
what Spinoza had in mind, nor does he disprove possible alternatives (especially 
Gueroult 1968, p. 173). 

(c) Textual evidence for infinity as complexity is hidden in two footnotes (Gueroult 1968, 
p. 37, ft. 71 and Gueroult 1968, p. 108, ft 8.), where Gueroult reads Ep. 83 as claiming 
that real things (including God, hence ens absolute infinitum) are complex and con- 
structed from simple things. This reading, however, is inaccurate. Here is the passage: 


What you add though, that from the definition of each thing, considered in itself, you are to 
deduce [deducere valere — both imperatives] only one property, perhaps [forsan] this has a place 
in most simple things [rebus simplicissimis], or [vel] beings of reason [entibus rationis] [. . .| but 
not in real things. For from this alone, that I define God as being Being [esse Ens] to whose 
essence existence pertains, I infer many [. . .| properties; [. . .]. (Ep. 83, IV/335/1-6) 


Here, Spinoza responds to Tschirnhaus, who states that from the definition of each thing, 
only one property follows. Gueroult seems to read “vel” in “rebus simplicissimis, vel entibus 
rationis” (“most simple things, or beings of reason”) as a sort of equation. Spinoza, how- 
ever, uses ‘vel’ in various meanings. Sometimes he specifies his usage, which makes ‘vel’ 
easier to decipher. For example, he indicates exclusive disjunctions using ‘vel... vel’ as in 
“things are said to be necessary either [vel] because of their essence or [vel] because of their 
cause” (E1p33s1, II/74/4—5). He also indicates explications, using ‘vel potius’ (meaning or 
rather) as in “necessary or rather [vel potius] coerced” (E1d7, II/46/7). 

The simple ‘vel,’ however, is harder to place. Both cases just described may be indicated 
by a simple ‘vel.’ Take for example “good or [vel] bad, sane or [vel] putrid” (E1 App, 
II/82/17) —aclear case of exclusive disjunction, expressed by a single ‘vel’; and “necessary 
or [vel] coerced” (E1p32d, II/72/24) as direct restatement of E1d7 — “necessary or rather 
[vel potius] coerced” (E1d7, II/46/7) — is a clear case of explication, expressed by a single 
‘vel’. There are, however, other cases, such as this one: 


If therefore things could have been of another nature, or [vel] could have been determined to 
produce an effect in another way, [. . .] two or [vel] more Gods could have been given, which is 
absurd (by Elp14c1). (E1p33d, II/73/18-21) 


In this passage, both uses of ‘vel’ indicate non-exclusive alternatives rather than mere 


explications. Here, ‘vel’ is an inclusive disjunction (true if either one or both of its elements 
are true). For both, alternative natures of things as well as their determination to alternative 


163 


LUCE beLIRE 


effects lead into the namely conclusion. And the existence of both “two or more Gods” is, by 
El1p14c1, impossible. Spinoza thus uses ‘vel’ in at least three ways: to indicate inclusive 
disjunctions, exclusive disjunctions and explications. 

How, then, are we to interpret ‘vel’ in Ep. 83, 1V/335/1—6? As demonstrated, there is 
no single way in which Spinoza uses ‘vel’. Furthermore, “forsan” indicates that the 
situation is presently unclear. Thus, Gueroult’s reading is questionable. Spinoza says 
that it may be that from most simple things or beings of reason only one property 
follows — or not. In fact, then, whether any element of that sentence is true does not seem 
to matter much. 

What does matter is the example of God. But whether God is simple or complex or nei- 
ther is not stated. What is stated is that in real things, many properties follow from a defi- 
nition. The crucial distinction is between things that allow to derive only one property and 
things that allow to derive many properties. There is thus no textual evidence for Gueroult’s 
claim that ens absolute infinitum in particular is a complex notion. 

Are there reasons to read ens absolute infinitum as simple and not complex? Yes. E2p40s1 
states that “Ens” (being) is among the terms that are “to the highest degree confused” 
(E2p40s1, H/121/10). If we were to read ‘ens absolute infinitum’ (E1d6) as a complex 
notion, we would have to assume ‘ens’ to be a confused element of that complex notion. 
That would be unfortunate — and Spinoza a mystic at best. 

The reason for the confusion concerning “ens” (being) in E2p40s1 is that it is complex 
and undifferentiated. In ‘ens,’ things become indistinguishable due to the mass of elements 
conjoined. E1d3, however, says that substance is understood through itself, hence clear no 
matter what. Consequentially, ens absolute infinitum, being “substance” (E1d6), must be as 
clear in itself as can be. It cannot contain a confused element, such as ‘ens’. 

Furthermore, as Gueroult rightly argues, by TIE § 71—72, II/27/1-19, true definitions, 
to Spinoza, are constructed from simple elements (Gueroult 1968, p. 170). In order for 
that to apply to the definition of God, ens absolute infinitum (E1d6) may either be composed 
of simple elements (as Gueroult has it) or it can be simple by itself. But if it was composed of 
simple elements, then ens would be one of these elements. Now, by E2p40s1, ‘ens’ is itself 
a complex notion and not a simple element. Ens absolute infinitum thus cannot be composed 
of simple elements, containing ens. Thus, for reasons of the simplicity and inherent clarity of 
substance, ens absolute infinitum cannot contain an element ‘ens.’ 

In order to maintain the inherent clarity Spinoza supposes and avoid the problem out- 
lined, ‘ens absolute infinitum’ must be taken to be a simple notion. To Spinoza, then, being 
(ens) cannot be qualified as absolutely infinite but must be absolute infinity. Absolute 
infinity’ turns the confused ‘being’ (‘ens’) into a term that is inevitably simple and in itself 
clear. In short: being is absolutely infinite, absolute infinity is simply being itself. 


4.2. Deleuze’s Multiplicity 


“The identification of an attribute with an infinitely perfect substance [ens absolute infinitum, 
LdL] |. . .] should be interpreted positively from the point of view of quality.” (Deleuze 1968, 
p. 30) To Deleuze, absolute infinity is a “purely qualitative multiplicity.” 


(Ibid.) 
[When |. . .| Spinoza say[s] that the divine substance is infinite, in most contexts it is to be 


understood in non-numerical and non-quantitative terms. 
(Nachtomy 2011, p. 938) 


164 


SPINOZA'S INFINITIES 


Spinoza, however, is explicit about the quantitative nature of substance and its attributes: 


So if we attend to quantity as it is in the imagination, which is done by us often and easily, it 
will be found [to be] finite, divisible and composed of parts; but if we attend to it [quantity] 
itself [ad ipsam], as it is in the intellect, and conceive it insofar as it is substance [quatenus sub- 
stantia est], which is done with great difficulty, then (as we have already sufficiently demon- 
strated) it will be found [to be] infinite, one and indivisible. 

(Elp15s, II/59/20-24; the passage is almost verbatim the same as Ep. 12, IV/56/6—11) 


The passage appears in two important texts: in the Ethics (E1p15s) and in Ep. 12, which 
Spinoza circulates from 1663 until shortly before his death. Hence, it seems as though 
Spinoza conceived the passage not just early, but considered it important enough to copy it 
into his main work. Furthermore, it remained relevant beyond completion of the manuscript 
of the Ethics. Thus, something fundamental to Spinoza’s thought seems articulated here. 

The wording of the passage is remarkable: Spinoza states that quantity “itself” (“ad ipsam,” 
Elp15s, II/59/22; “ut in se est percipiatur,” Ep. 12 IV/56/10) is infinite, if conceived by the 
intellect and “insofar as” (“quatenus,” E1p15s, II/59/22) it is substance (“ut substantia, quod a 
solo intellectu fit,” Ep. 12, 1V/56/7 and E1p15s, I/59/19-20). Now, “what is contained objec- 
tively in the intellect must be given in nature necessarily.” (E1p30d, II/64/8-9, see also E2p 18s, 
I/107/10-11, E2p29s, 11/114/18-20)and E2p43, I/124/4 — II/125/3). Consequentially, 
the infinite quantity we are talking about here is perceived adequately or truly. 

The quantity at stake is quantity ad ipsam or in se, quantity in itself, without external 
factors. It should not to be confused with numerical quantity (as does Nachtomy 2011, 
pp. 949, 952). The latter measures things external to quantity. Spinoza indeed thinks such 
measuring to be merely auxiliary to the imagination and hence inadequate to substance 
(Ep. 12, 1V/58/1-11 as above). However, quantity ad ipsam is said to be substance, qualified 
in Elp15s by ‘quatenus,’ ‘insofar as.’ This latter notion is an addition in the Ethics over 
against Ep. 12 and plays a crucial role in Spinoza’s mature terminology. This passage, how- 
ever, is the only one (that I know of) where Spinoza speaks of something to be substance or 
God insofar as it is in itself — all other occasions of ‘quatenus’ either entail further qualifica- 
tions, such as an affected mode (E3p1, II/140/14—16), a relation to an attribute (E2p45d, 
II/127/6), some determined essence (E3p1, II/140/6—9, E4p4d, E5p36) etc., or refer to 
God “insofar as he is infinite” (E3p1, II/140/12, see also E4p4d, E4p68d, II/261/15-16, 
E5p36 etc.). InElp15s, II/59/22 and Ep. 12, 1V/56/7, however, quantity itself—ad ipsam — 
is substance if considered intellectually, thus adequately or truly (E1p30d). In other words, 
quantity really is substance and as substance, it really is infinite. 

The parenthesis in the passage claims that the inverse is also true: everything proven of 
substance is true of substance as quantity. Substance, then, is quantity (see also Elp15s, 
II/58/22-24). Given Elp15s in general, it may seem as though substance was quantity 
insofar as it is extended. The passage itself, however, gives no such indication but talks about 
quantity in general instead. Furthermore, E1p15s, II/58/22—24 talks of substance itself as an 
infinite quantity. Thus, substance itself must be understood as an infinite quantity. 

Now, there is no substance besides ens absolute infinitum (E1p14, E1d6). Hence, ens abso- 
lute infinitum is quantity. Furthermore, by E1d4, what the intellect perceives of substance 
is an attribute. Now, the intellect perceives quantity as substance and, as just argued, of 
substance as quantity. Consequentially, the attributes are quantities as well. Insofar as 
attributes are in suo genere infinite, they are in suo genere infinite quantities. This is the only 
actual description of how substance or ens absolute infinitum is to be conceived that I know 


165 


LUCE peLIRE 


of. I thus agree with Melamed when he says that “[. . .] the definition of infinity [and abso- 
lute infinity in particular] in Spinoza is definitely quantitative [. . .]” (Melamed 2017b, 
01:19-01:23) 

Further evidence comes from Spinoza’s reasoning about attributes — in suo genere infin- 
ities. Ep. 56, 1V/261/9-12 has “all of them,” “most of them,” and “some,” and El p9 knows 
“more attributes.” Elp10s speaks of “two” (II/52/1), “each” (II/52/4), “all” (II/52/5), 
“one” (II/52/5), “many” (II/52/7) and “more” (II/52/9) attributes. All of these arguably 
designate quantities of attributes. Finally, from the fact that, by E1p9, more attributes 
coincide with more reality, Spinoza concludes that ens absolute infinitum must be defined as 
“going along with” (constat) “infinite attributes” (II/52/10—-13). The reasoning here is 
quantitative: from the amount of attributes, Spinoza derives their infinity. The latter hence 
cannot mean anything but an infinite quantity of attributes (for an extensive analysis of 
this point, see Melamed 2018). 

To sum this up: quantity is substance and vice versa, substance is ens absolute infinitum, 
ens absolute infinitum is quantity, the attributes are infinite quantities and last but not 
least, there is an infinite quantity of in suo genere infinite quantities also known as 
attributes. 


5. Infinity as Universal Quantification 


By infinite Spinoza means complete or all. 
(Wolf 1926/27, p. 190; for similar claims, see Joachim 1901, p. 23; 
Kline and Mawr 1977, p. 342; Bennett 1984, pp. 75—79; Della Rocca 2008, p. 51) 


On the face of it, ‘infinite’ cannot mean universal quantification and vice versa, because 
there clearly are cases of the latter without the former. ‘All my lipsticks’ comprises some 
number, but not infinitely many. In order for ‘infinite’ to be read as universal quantifica- 
tion, then, the reference must go only one way. 

Thus for ‘infinite’ to mean ‘all,’ ‘all’ must be read in an emphatic sense like ‘all there is 
in the world.’ However, this restriction installs a negation (1.1) within the infinite, exluding 
restricted versions of universal quantification, such as ‘all my lipsticks’. By Eld6ex, how- 
ever, this is incompatible with ens absolute infinitum at least. Consequentially, infinite = all 
cannot capture all uses of ‘infinite.’ 

On another level, Spinoza’s ‘infinity’ cannot mean universal quantification because the 
relevant infinities precede the objects of quantification rather than being made up of them. 
The set of natural numbers, for example, consists of infinitely many natural numbers, 
‘1,2,...n....’ This, however, does not count for Spinoza’s infinities. Absolute infinity’ 
cannot refer to ‘all attributes’ because substance ontologically precedes the attributes (that 
is the inherence part of E1d3). Likewise, in suo genere infinity precedes the perfections or 
realities of modes that it allegedly quantifies over, as in E1p21 and 22, the attributes cause 
the modes. Surely, partial affections (such as particular minds) are “parts” of infinite 
modes (for example E2p1 1c). This partiality, however, is not the one where “component 
parts must be prior in nature and knowledge to what is composed of them” (Ep. 35, 
IV/181/14-—16). Rather, this partiality is God also known as ens absolute infinitum, “insofar 
as” [quatenus| she relates to herself in specific ways (E2p11c). Hence, infinity is prior to its 
objects and cannot consist in quantification of those objects. 


166 


SPINOZA'S INFINITIES 


There are passages that look as though they did identify ‘infinity’ and ‘all,’ such as 
“God or all of God’s attributes” (E1p19), which refers to “infinitely many attributes” 
(E1d6). Other passages are less clear, such as “Infinitely many [. . .], that is: all [. . .]” 
(Elp17s, II/62/13-16; also E1p16). Here, the identification infinite = all works — if we 
know what ‘all’ means. The passage, however, is about creation in particular and E1p17 
about divine action in general. Here, Spinoza suggests an active, ongoing model of 
creation, where things depend on continuous divine action (E1p25, E1p26). This is stated 
explicitly in the Cogitata: “[. ..]| [W]hen God has first created a thing [. . .] [she] will con- 
tinue that same action of creating it.” (CM, I/252/1-—3) Consequentially, the quote in 
question continues: “[. . .] flows out of or always follows |. . .] from and in eternity.” 
(Elp17s, I/62/14—16) Hence, “infinitely many [...], thatis: all[...]” (Elp17s, I/62/13- 
16 and Elp16) must be read not as quantifying over pre-established objects, but as active 
and continuous creation. 

This counts for divine infinity just the same: ordinary quantification is external to the 
objects quantified over and descriptive of them; divine infinity, however, produces the 
objects it is allegedly referring to. ‘All my shoes’ refers to 16 pairs, ‘all infinite numbers’ 
refers to a determined infinity of infinite numbers. But “infinitely many [. . .], that is: all 
[...]” (Elp17s, II/62/14—16 and E1p16) is not a relation between descriptive quantifica- 
tion and objects external to it. It references an internal relation between creator and 
creation, God and modes, ens absolute infinitum and its infinitely many affections. While 
universal quantification is descriptive, Spinoza’s infinity, even in Elp16, Elp17s, and 
E1p19, is creative (in the sense of divine creation). This, I think, is the reason for the 
ontological priority of infinities, as demonstrated earlier. This creative feature is not cap- 
tured by universal quantification, nor the colloquial ‘all.’ Hence, the identification of ‘all’ 
and ‘infinite’ is misleading. 


6. Summary and Open Questions 


We have found that absolute infinity is a simple (3.1), determined (2) quantity (3.2), 
which allows to derive all properties whatsoever better than perfection (1.2). In short: 
being is absolutely infinite, absolute infinity is simply being itself, being is infinite determined 
quantity. The same counts for attributes qua in suo genere infinities. Furthermore, 
infinity has creative ontological priority (4). Lastly, ‘infinity’ may apply to ‘existence’ 
(Elp8s1) or to ‘essence’ (E1d6) (3.1). Clearly, there are many pressing questions left. 
Here are some of them: 


Should we not tackle infinities according to their different metaphysical manifestations first, 
hence begin with the infinities of substance, attributes and modes? 


No. Spinoza applies the same reasoning regarding infinities to causes (E1p28), motion and 
rest (E2p13L3), power (Elp11d3, E4a1, E4p3), degrees of reality (Elp11s, Elp16d) and 
perfection (Elp11s (II/54/23), El App (II/80/16-17 and II/83/24), referenced implicitly 
E4pref (II/207/15 — I/208/6)). He designates God as “omnipotent” (El1p17s), “most per- 
fect” (especially Elp33s2, ElApp), most real (implicitly in Elp16d) etc., meaning some 
sort of infinity in each case. The same relation applies between the infinity of the attributes 
(Elp9) and ens absolute infinitum (El1d6), especially in Elp10s (see also DPP1p4s, 
1/153/17-I/153/3). In all these cases, Spinoza uses a relation between an infinite sequence 


167 


LUCE beLIRE 


(degrees of perfection, degrees of reality, causes, motion and rest, attributes) and an infi- 
nite value (supremely perfect, most real, causa sui, extension, ens absolute infinitum). This 
indicates that there is a general theory of infinity underlying Spinoza’s ontological frame- 
work and that in order to understand the latter, we ought to investigate the former. 


In what sense is (absolute) infinity a quantity? 


Traditionally, quantity is understood as some sort of measurement (see Franklin 2017, 
p. 356). Spinoza, however, states that “infinite quantity is not measurable” (E1p15s, 
II/58/19-—23). What, then, does Spinoza mean by quantity if perceived by the intellect? 


Why is absolute infinity defined as “substance going along with [constantem] an infinity of 
attributes” (E1d6)? 


We have seen that Spinoza’s infinity cannot remain indetermined (2). However, ens abso- 
lute infinitum is determined, namely by in suo genere infinities (attributes). It remains to be 
shown how Spinoza demonstrates this and how it relates to the reality of E1d6. Gueroult 
(1968, p. 163) and Deleuze (1968, p. 64) work in this direction (and oppose Leibniz’s criti- 
cism that Spinoza’s definition of God lacks reality). The rhetoric of substance and attrib- 
utes, for example, is basically superfluous for the proofs of the necessary existence of God 
(Elp11). 
These, however, are other stories and they may be told on other occasions. 


Acknowledgments 


I would like to thank Stephan Schmid, Yitzhak Melamed, Hannah Corogil, and Kyla 
Greenhalgh for their invaluable help in writing this chapter, as well as Dominik Perler, José 
Maria Sanchez de Léon Serrano and Mark M. Gondelman for their contributions during a 
workshop on “Spinoza’s Anti-Skeptical System” in Hamburg, January 2020. 


References 


Averroes (2010). On Aristotle’s ‘Metaphysics’ — An Annotated Translation of the So-called ‘Epitome (ed. 
R. Arnzen). Berlin: de Gruyter. 

Aquinas, T. (1965). De ente et essentia (trans. J. Kenny). https://dhspriory.org/thomas/english/ 
DeEnte&Essentia.htm. 

Bennett, J.(1984). A Study of Spinoza’s Ethics. Indianapolis: Hackett Publishing Company. 

Bowman, B. (2013). Hegel and the Metaphysics of Absolute Negativity. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 

Dea, S. (2011). The infinite and the indeterminate in Spinoza. Dialogue 50: 603-621. 

Deleuze, G. (1968). Spinoza et le probléme de l’expression. Paris: Minuit. 

Deleuze, G. and Guattari, F. (1972). L’Anti Oedipe — Capitalisme et schizophrénie. Paris: Minuit, Paris. 

Della Rocca, M. (2008). Spinoza. Routledge, London: Routledge. 

Gueroult, M. (1968). Spinoza I: Dieu. Paris: Aubier. 

Joachim, H.H. (1901). A Study of the Ethics of Spinoza. Oxford: Clarendon Press. 

Kline, G.L. and Mawr, B. (1977). On the infinity of Spinoza’s attributes. Speculum Spinozanum, 167 7— 
1977 (ed. S. Hessing, preface H. Smith), 333-352. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul. 


168 


SPINOZA'S INFINITIES 


Maimonides, M. (2002). The Guide for the Perplexed, (ed. and trans. M. Friedlander). Illinois: Varda 

Books. Second edition 1904. Reprinted by Varda Books 2002. 

Melamed, Y.Y. (2014). Hasdai Crescas and Spinoza on actual infinity and the infinity of God’s attrib- 

utes. In: Spinoza and Jewish Philosophy (ed. S. Nadler), 204-215. Cambridge: Cambridge University 

Press. 

Melamed, Y.Y. (2017a). The road not taken: why was Spinoza not a sceptic? https://lecture2 go.uni- 

hamburg.de/l2go/-/get/v/21712 (accessed 30 October 2020). 

Melamed, Y.Y. (2017b). On the fish’s knowledge of god’s essence, or why Spinoza was not a skeptic. 

In: Studies NS Texts in Scepticism (ed. G. Vetri and S. Schmid et al.). Video recording: https://lec- 

ture2go.uni-hamburg.de/12 go/-/get/l/48 64 (accessed 30 October 2020). 

Melamed, Y. Y. (2018), “A Substance Consisting of an Infinity of Attributes”: Spinoza on the 

Infinity of Attributes. In: Infinity in Early Modern Philosophy (ed. O. Nachtomy, R. Winegar), 63-74. 

Berlin: Springer. 

Moder, G. (2017). Hegel and Spinoza: Substance and Negativity. Evanston, IL: Northwestern University 

Press. 

Nachtomy, O. (2011). A tale of two thinkers, one meeting and three degrees f infinity: Leibniz and 

Spinoza (1675-8). British Journal for the History of Philosophy 19 (5): 935-961. 

Newlands, S. (2017). Spinoza and the metaphysics of perfection. In: Spinoza’s Ethics: A Critical Guide 

(ed. Y.Y. Melamed), 266-284. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Newstead, A. (2008). Intertwining metaphysics and mathematics: the development of Georg 
Cantor’s set theory 1871-1887. Review of Contemporary Philosophy 7: 35-55. 

Ratner, J. (1926). In defense of Spinoza. Journal of Philosophy 23 (5): 121-133. 

Spinoza, B. de (1985). The Collected Works of Spinoza, vol. I (ed. and trans. E.M. Curley). Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press. 

Spinoza, B. de (2016). The Collected Works of Spinoza, vol. II (ed. and trans. E.M. Curley). Princeton, 
NJ: Princeton University Press. 

Stauffer, L. (1993). Spinoza, Cantor, and infinity. Southern Philosophical Studies 15: 74-81. 

Vidinsky, V. (2017). Possible worlds in the precipice: why Leibniz met Spinoza? Philosophy, Sociology, 
Psychology and History 16 (3): 213-223. 

Wolf, A. (1926-1927). Spinoza’s conception of the attributes of substance. Proceedings of the 
Aristotelian Society, New Series 27: 177-192. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Wolfson, H.A. (1923). Spinoza on the simplicity of substance Chronicon Spinozanum, IT (ed. Societas 
Spinozana), 142-178. The Hague: Curis Societatis Spinozanae 

Wolfson, H.A. (1934). The Philosophy of Spinoza. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 


Further Reading 


Brandau, J. (2015). Degrees of essence and perfection in Spinoza. In: The Young Spinoza — A 
Metaphysician in the Making (ed. Y.Y. Melamed), 300-318. New York: Oxford University Press. 

Laerke, M. (2011). Leibniz’s cosmological argument for the existence of God. Archiv f Gesch. d. 
Philosophie 93 (S): 58-84. 

Laerke, M. (2013). Spinoza and the cosmological argument according to Letter 12. British Journal for 
the History of Philosophy 21 (1): 57-77. 


169 


16 


Spinoza on Diachronic Identity 


DOMINIK PERLER 


1. The Leibnizian Challenge 


It seems natural to suppose that the world is populated with trees, horses, human beings, 
and many other things, and that they remain the same things over time despite all the 
changes they undergo. But why do they remain the same? From an Aristotelian point of 
view, there is a simple answer: they are all substances. Consequently, they all have stable 
existence and serve as the persisting bearers of accidents, which come and go. 

Spinoza rejected this widely shared answer by denying that there is a multitude of sub- 
stances. On his view, all the things that Aristotelians took to be substances are nothing but 
modes of a single, all-embracing substance. Thus, when we talk about a tree or a human 
being we are simply referring to a mode (or a bundle of modes), and therefore to something 
that is not an independent thing; rather, it is something that exists in the substance and is 
immanently caused by it (Eldef5, E1p18). But why should such a dependent thing have 
stable existence over time? After all, a mode is just a “way of being” of the substance, and 
it seems to have no stability by itself. The all-embracing substance could change it any 
time, just as an Aristotelian substance could change each of its accidents any time. What 
appears to be a tree or a human being that exists over time could be a series of constantly 
changing modes. 

Leibniz was one of the first critics to point out this problem. If there are only modes and 
no individual substances, there are no entities that could guarantee stable existence over 
time. “Hence,” Leibniz remarks in his Comments on Spinoza’s Philosophy (probably written 
in 1707), “we shouldn’t be surprised if he takes creatures for vanishing modifications” 
(Leibniz 1989, p. 277). The only persisting thing is the all-embracing substance. All the 
modes inside that substance could come and go all the time. “Therefore,” Leibniz con- 
cludes, “Spinoza’s soul is so transitory that it does not exist even for a moment, since the 
body also does not remain the same” (ibid., p. 279). The existence of persisting things in 
the universe, be they mental or material, could be a mere illusion. 

Leibniz puts his finger on a crucial problem. How can Spinoza give up substance plu- 
ralism and still maintain that individual things remain the same over time? Is he not forced 
to admit that they are just “vanishing modifications”? And does he not therefore have to 


A Companion to Spinoza, First Edition. Edited by Yitzhak Y. Melamed. 
© 2021 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2021 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd. 


170 


SPINOZA ON DIACHRONIC IDENTITY 


concede that there is, strictly speaking, no identity over time? For if there is just a flux of 
modes, it seems that no thing is numerically the same thing at different moments: new 
modes, and hence new things, seem to emerge at every moment. In the following, I want 
to examine how Spinoza deals with this identity problem by looking at his account of 
material and mental things. To be sure, material and mental things are not really distinct. 
They are the very same modes and hence the very same things “expressed in two ways” 
(E2p7s). Nevertheless, it is important to look at them insofar as they fall under different 
attributes, for each attribute creates an intensional context, and all things need to be exam- 
ined in a given context (Della Rocca 1996, pp. 118-140). There can be no context-free 
analysis. 


2. Material Things and Their Identity 


To understand how material things can remain the same over time, we need to take a 
closer look at the “Physical Digression” where Spinoza explains the constitution of bodies. 
He opens the Digression with a fundamental claim: “Bodies are distinguished from one 
another by reason of motion and rest, speed and slowness, and not by reason of substance” 
(E2p13lem1). This is first and foremost a thesis about the synchronic identity of bodies. 
What constitutes each of them at a given moment is not an underlying substance or sub- 
strate, but a certain arrangement of kinetic properties. To put it more precisely, they are 
distinguished from one another “by a ratio (ratione) of motion and rest” (see also E2p24d 
and E4p39d). This means that they are composed of many parts, some of them in motion 
and others at rest, and that each body has its own ratio of motion and rest. What are the 
parts that are relevant here? At first sight, Spinoza’s answer looks evasive. He does not indi- 
cate specific parts (say, corpuscles), nor does he mention atoms as ultimate parts. He simply 
speaks of “parts composing an individual” (E2p13lem5) and refers to different levels of 
composition. On his view, we should not look at some special parts or even at ultimate 
parts, but at the structure of a given composition of parts. It is the structure that makes a 
body the very body it is, and we can detect different structures if we look at different levels. 

Let me spell out this point with the example of the human body. It is clear that a body 
consists of many parts; it is equally clear that we can refer to different types of part, depend- 
ing on our focus. For instance, we can look at it as a body composed of a heart, lungs, kid- 
neys, etc. What results from the composition of these organs is a thing with a distinctive 
structure. We can try to describe this structure by indicating the way all the organs are 
related to each other as dynamic parts that together form an organic system. However, we 
need not confine ourselves to this system, for we can focus on a single organ (say, the heart) 
and describe it as a thing that has its own parts, among them muscles and vessels, which 
are also dynamic parts that together form a cardiac system. But we need not stop here, for 
we can look at the blood that is pumped by the heart and describe it as having its own parts 
(say, red and white blood cells), which are also dynamic parts that together form a cell 
system. From there we can go even further down and look at an individual cell that has its 
own parts and its own structure (say, a molecular structure). The important point is that 
there are no ultimate parts. Depending on our interest, we can identify different parts in 
different systems. 

If we understand Spinoza along these lines, it becomes clear why he insists on identi- 
fying different bodies at different levels. On his view, it would be misleading to think that 
there is just one level of bodies. Starting with complete human bodies or other organic 


171 


DOMINIK PERLER 


unities that we usually take to be bodies, we can always, as it were, zoom in and identify 
other bodies at lower levels. There are no substances at these levels, but only compositions 
of parts. And each composition has its own structure, which is dynamic and therefore 
describable in kinetic terms. Each of them can be spelled out as a ratio of motion and rest. 
Admittedly, Spinoza does not speak about structure, but he repeatedly uses the word ‘form’ 
(E2p13lem4—6, E2p24d), thus making clear that a body is not just a loose assemblage of 
parts, but a well-formed (or well-structured) unity of parts. To be sure, he does not simply 
reintroduce an Aristotelian form (Moreau 1994), for he does not talk about something 
that actualizes matter. He takes a form to be nothing but the structure that is manifest in 
the special arrangement of material parts, which all have actual existence. 

This way of approaching bodies enables Spinoza to explain not just their synchronic 
identity, but also their diachronic identity. For once we have seen that it is the structure that 
is responsible for a body’s identity at a given moment, we realize that a body remains the 
same over time if it retains the same structure. This conclusion is explicitly drawn by 
Spinoza: “If, of a body, or of an individual, which is composed of a number of bodies, some 
are removed, and at the same time as many others of the same nature take their place, the 
individual will retain its nature, as before, without any change of its form” (E2p13lem4). 
Thus, we can always exchange parts of a body and replace them with other parts, but as 
long as the new parts play the same role as the old parts, the overall structure of the body 
remains the same, and consequently the body remains the same. 

This account shows that Spinoza conceives of bodies as structural unities and that he 
appeals to a structural criterion when explaining their diachronic identity. There is no need 
to preserve numerically the same parts over time, nor is there something like a core element 
or an indispensable part that needs to persist. All that needs to be in place is the overall 
structure, and as long as this structure remains the same the body remains the same. In 
fact, it remains really the same: there is real identity, and not simply imagined or con- 
structed identity. When we talk about different structures at different levels, we are not 
speaking of something we make up. Structures are discovered, not invented. And they 
have no separate existence as abstract entities: they always exist in particular bodies and 
are therefore concrete structures. Spinoza clearly rejects abstract entities that exist apart 
from particular things (Melamed 2013, pp. 57-58; Newlands 2017). 

By using the structural criterion, Spinoza can solve a number of problems concerning 
identity and change. First of all, he can explain why a human body remains the same over 
time even if its size or shape is modified. Processes like growing and aging do not radically 
change it as long as its overall structure remains the same. Second, he can answer ques- 
tions concerning the exchange of parts. Does a human body remain the same when some 
of its parts are exchanged? It all depends on what contribution the new parts make to the 
overall structure. If the new parts (e.g. hair or finger nails) simply replace old ones while 
the structure is preserved, the exchange poses no problem. If, however, the new parts com- 
pletely destroy a given structure and create a new one, a human body will cease to exist 
and a new one will eventually emerge. In that case the human body “takes on another 
form” and becomes a different one (E4p39s). Finally, the structural criterion also makes it 
possible to talk about identity and non-identity at different levels. Suppose, for example, 
that someone loses a leg after an accident and that she later receives a prosthetic leg. Will 
she have the same body? Yes and no. At the level of the entire body there will be identity, 
since the prosthetic leg makes the same contribution to the overall structure of the body as 
the natural leg did. But at the level of the leg there will be no identity, since the leg made of 
artificial material clearly has a structure different from that of the leg made of natural 


172 


SPINOZA ON DIACHRONIC IDENTITY 


tissue. The application of the structural criterion at different levels leads to different results. 

At this point one might object that diachronic identity has been explained only in terms 
of the structure that is present in the composition of parts. But is Spinoza not using an 
essentialist criterion when he talks about identity? After all, he assigns an essence to every- 
thing, and he does not hesitate to say what the essence consists in. In a famous proposition 
he states: “The striving by which each thing strives to persevere in its being is nothing but 
the actual essence of the thing” (E3p7). Would it not therefore be more appropriate to say 
that a body remains the same over time if it preserves the same striving and hence the 
same actual essence? Indeed, this essentialist criterion should be applied, but it is not an 
additional criterion, nor does it stand in opposition to the structural criterion. It is nothing 
but the structural criterion phrased in a different way. As has already been pointed out, the 
structure of a body is not to be understood as a mere arrangement of geometrical prop- 
erties. Since this structure is a ratio of motion and rest, it is a proportion of kinetic prop- 
erties and hence something dynamic; it always involves activity. This is why it would be 
inappropriate to see a difference or even a gap between the structure of a body and its 
striving. Given the dynamic character of its structure, every body has an inner striving or 
force. In fact, this striving is simply the structure at work, for a body manifests its specific 
structure by striving to persevere in existence and by acting upon other bodies. And since 
every body has its own structure, it also has its own distinctive striving. This means, of 
course, that every body has its own individual essence. In any case, there is no tension bet- 
ween the structural and the essentialist criterion and no development or doctrinal change 
from the Physical Digression in the second part of the Ethics to the discussion of conatus in 
the third part. Spinoza consistently holds that it is its dynamic structure and hence its 
inner striving that makes a body the very thing it is, both synchronically and diachroni- 
cally. It is therefore important to interpret the essentialist criterion against the background 
of a “power metaphysics” (Viljanen 2011, 83-104; Morrison 2017). 

Now, it looks as if it is just the structure that is responsible for the identity of a body at a 
given level. However, it would be too simple to ascribe this thesis to Spinoza. With respect 
to individual bodies (or individuals, for short), he does indeed subscribe to this thesis. But 
he draws a subtle distinction between individuals and singular things, defining singular 
things as follows: “By singular things I understand things that are finite and have a deter- 
minate existence. And if a number of individuals so concur in one action that together 
they are all the cause of one effect I consider them all, to that extent, as one singular thing” 
(E2def7). No common structure is mentioned here. Many individuals can work together 
even if they do not have the same structure. All that is required for there to be a singular 
thing is causal cooperation, no matter what the structure of each cooperating individual 
is. This is why one can call a singular thing a causal unity and thereby distinguish it from 
an individual, which is a structural unity. Of course, everything that exists has an effect and 
must therefore be a cause (E1 p36); hence even a structural unity must be (at least to some 
degree) a causal unity. Nevertheless, it is important to distinguish these two types of unity. 
Otherwise one could not explain the fact that even a thing that lacks a uniform structure 
can be a cause. 

Let me spell out this point with an example. Suppose that a person is sitting in a boat 
and rowing. Clearly, her body has a very specific structure and is therefore a structural 
unity. Now suppose that other people join this person and that they start rowing together. 
In that case they together produce an effect, but each person has her own body with its 
own structure. Hence the people rowing together do not form a structural unity. But since 
they move the boat together, they all contribute to a single action and together form a 


173 


DOMINIK PERLER 


causal unity. To put it in Spinoza’s language, this means that each rower is an individual 
whereas the rowing team as a whole is a singular thing. 

I hope this example makes clear why there can be a singular thing without there being 
a unified, all-encompassing structure. It should also help us to see that there are different 
identity conditions for an individual and a singular thing. Each person in the boat remains 
the same individual over time as long as her bodily structure remains the same, no matter 
how many cells or organs are replaced. By contrast, the rowing team remains the same 
singular thing over time as long as the joint action of all the team members, and hence 
their joint effect, remains the same, no matter how many members are exchanged. The 
new team members may have very different bodily structures from those of the old mem- 
bers, but this is of no importance as long as they make the same contribution to the joint 
action. 

This way of understanding Spinoza’s distinction between individuals and singular things 
helps to see that it is much more than a terminological issue that is at stake here, as some 
commentators have assumed (Garrett 1994, p. 100). But of course, this distinction gives 
rise to some questions. Why should a human body be an individual and not simply a singular 
thing? Does not every organ have its own structure? And do all the organs together not form 
a causal unity? Presumably, Spinoza would respond that a human body can be considered 
an individual or a singular thing, depending on what we are looking at (on the use of 
‘individual’, see Barbone 2002). If we focus on the overall structure (in modern terms, the 
DNA structure), the body is an individual because it has a distinctive, all-encompassing 
structure, and it remains the same over time as long as this structure is preserved. If, how- 
ever, we focus on the effect that all the bodily parts produce together, even though each of 
them has its own anatomical or physiological structure, the body is a singular thing, and it 
remains the same over time as long as the same effect is produced. Different ways of looking 
at a human body lead to the identification of different types of unity. 


3. Mental Things and Their Identity 


According to Spinoza’s famous parallelism, we can look at all things not only insofar as 
they fall under the attribute of extension, but also insofar as they fall under the attribute of 
thought. Looked at in this second way, they are mental things. The most obvious examples 
of such things are human minds. Of course, human minds are not the only mental things: 
since every thing — a tree or a horse as much as a human being — can be looked at under 
the attribute of thought, there are as many mental things as there are material things 
(Della Rocca 2008, pp. 108-118; Perler 2014). But human minds are presumably the 
least controversial cases of mental things, and they are certainly the cases that Spinoza 
discusses the most extensively. Thus, it is by examining his account of human minds that 
we can see how he explains the diachronic identity of mental things. 

Spinoza addresses this problem by presenting an example: “I have heard stories, for 
example, of a Spanish poet who suffered an illness; though he recovered, he was left so 
oblivious to his past life that he did not believe the tales and tragedies he had written were 
his own. He could surely have been taken for a grown-up infant if he had also forgotten his 
native language” (E4p39s). At first sight, one could get the impression that Spinoza uses a 
memory criterion to decide whether or not a human mind remains the same over time. He 
seems to be saying that the poor poet no longer has the same mind as in the past because 
he can no longer remember the tales and tragedies he once wrote. There is, as it were, no 


174 


SPINOZA ON DIACHRONIC IDENTITY 


mental bridge between his past experiences and his present ones. It is only with such a 
bridge that his mind could remain the same over time. Or to put it in more sober terms: 
memory is what makes diachronic identity possible. 

If Spinoza were arguing along this line, he would be quite close to Locke, for it is precisely 
to memory that Locke seems to appeal in order to spell out the identity conditions in his 
famous discussion of personal identity (Thiel 2011, pp. 121-189). Some commentators 
have understood Spinoza as pursuing this same line, and have therefore seen a similarity bet- 
ween him and Locke (Matson 1977, p. 405; for critical discussion Lin 2005, pp. 260-262, 
and Melamed and Schechter, forthcoming). However, it is important to take a closer look at 
the example of the Spanish poet. Spinoza introduces it immediately after spelling out the 
structural criterion for a human body. He emphasizes that a body can become a different one 
if its structure is deeply changed: “For I dare not deny that — even though the circulation of 
the blood is maintained, as well as the other [signs] on account of which the body is thought 
to be alive — the human body can nevertheless be changed into another entirely different 
from its own” (E4p39s). Thus, even while remaining alive, a body can become a different 
one. Suppose, for example, that a person has a car accident and is severely injured. Her 
brain is so dramatically damaged that she loses many vital functions. She is completely par- 
alyzed, can no longer eat or drink, and cannot even speak. In this case there is still a body, 
but it has become a different one: its basic structure has changed, and consequently its basic 
dispositions and abilities have changed as well. Spinoza would say that there is no identity 
between the body before and after the accident because the proportion between its moving 
and non-moving parts — the ratio of motion and rest — is no longer the same. 

Now, the important point is that a radical change of the body always comes along with 
a radical change of the mind; there is a perfect parallelism between material and mental 
things (E2p7, E3p2s). Thus, if the body is no longer the same after the accident, the mind 
cannot be the same either. Given a new structure in the body, there must also be a new 
structure in the mind, and hence a new mind. It is exactly this point that Spinoza intends 
to illustrate when presenting the example of the Spanish poet. As we have seen, he intro- 
duces it by saying that the poet suffered from an illness. This means that there was a deep 
change in his body. Given this change, there must also have been a change in his mind, and 
it was so dramatic that it affected his mind’s basic structure. Consequently, the poet no 
longer had the same mental dispositions as before the illness. For instance, he could no 
longer write tales and tragedies. He was not even able to imagine that he was ever able to 
do that — his imaginative and creative talent had completely disappeared. He now had a 
different mind with a different structure. 

If we understand the example in this way — namely, as an illustration of a structural 
change — we can see that Spinoza applies to minds the same structural criterion that he also 
applies to bodies: a mind remains the same over time only if it retains the same basic struc- 
ture. As soon as its structure undergoes a radical change, a new mind comes into existence. 
But what exactly is the relevant structure here? It must be the mental equivalent to the 
ratio of motion and rest in a body. Unfortunately, Spinoza does not spell out this structure, 
but we can elucidate it if we look at his general conception of the human mind. For him, a 
mind is nothing but a well-ordered bundle of ideas, and ideas are concepts (E2def3), that 
is, representations. Having a mind therefore amounts to having various representations 
which are so closely interconnected that they form a unity. It is precisely this unity that has 
a distinctive structure, which could be called the “representational structure.” 

Let me explain this point by fleshing out the example of the Spanish poet. Suppose that 
before his tragic illness the poet had sophisticated representations of all the various aspects 


175 


DOMINIK PERLER 


of nature. He was able to describe nature in detail: the life of plants and animals, the beauty 
of mountains, the variety of seas and lakes, etc. His representations were so perfect that he 
was able not only to characterize many individual items, but also to point out how all of 
them were related to each other. In fact, he had something like a mental map of nature. It 
was precisely this map that made him a creative poet, for it enabled him to come up with 
fascinating stories about nature. It was also this map that made him a person with a very 
special mind — a mind that differed from other people’s minds. The crucial point is that his 
mind was much more than an assemblage of isolated representations. His representations 
of plants and animals, mountains and seas, etc., were related to each other so that he was 
able to understand how all these things fit together. That is, his mind had a detailed repre- 
sentational structure, which remained in place until he became seriously ill. 

I hope this example makes clear what it means to have a representational structure that 
is the mental equivalent to the structure of material parts. The human mind is, as it were, 
a rich map representing the world. Since every mind represents the world in its own way 
(mostly in an inadequate way, Spinoza would add), every mind has its own representa- 
tional structure. As long as this structure remains the same, the mind remains the same. I 
hope it has also become clear how a new mind can come into existence. This happens if the 
representational structure is radically changed, in most cases due to a damaging influence. 
In the case of the Spanish poet, this influence was a serious illness that affected his mind as 
well as his body. As a consequence, he lost a substantial part of his representations; for in- 
stance, he was no longer able to imagine mountains covered with snow or wild animals, 
nor was he able to make connections between these items. He had a mind with an 
impoverished representational structure; in fact, it was so impoverished that it had almost 
nothing in common with the mind as it had existed before the illness. It was a new mind 
with a new representational structure. The case of the Spanish poet is therefore to be dis- 
tinguished from the case of the child that becomes an adult. In the case of the child there 
is “continuous change,” as Spinoza emphasizes (E5p39s). By contrast, in the case of the 
poet there is discontinuous change: due to the illness, the fundamental structure is sud- 
denly replaced with a new one (for a different interpretation, see Monaco 2019). 

We can now see that Spinoza argues in the same way for bodies and minds: it is their 
structure that makes them the very things they are, both at a given moment and over time. 
It is therefore the structure that is responsible for both synchronic and diachronic identity. 
Of course, this does not mean that a mind needs to preserve all of its representations to 
remain the same over time. Here again, there is a parallel between bodies and minds. A 
body can lose and gain some parts and still remain the same as long as the ratio of motion 
and rest remains the same. Similarly, a mind can lose and gain some representations and 
still remain the same as long as the connections among basic representations remain the 
same. This means in the case of the poet that before his illness he was constantly acquiring 
new representations, but since they all fit into the overall structure that was in place, his 
mind remained the same mind. The new representations made this structure richer and 
more fine-grained but did not radically alter it. This changed after the illness. At that point 
many of his representations were gone; moreover, he lost the capacity to make connections 
among those that were still present. This led to a radical change of the basic representa- 
tional structure and hence to a change of his mind. 

If we understand Spinoza in this way — that is, as using the structural criterion for both 
minds and bodies — we can see that his famous parallelism is of crucial relevance for the 
identity problem: when a new body comes into existence, a new mind emerges as well. To 
be sure, a new body is not necessarily a completely new organism; an organism may 


176 


SPINOZA ON DIACHRONIC IDENTITY 


continue to exist while a new body emerges. Spinoza is explicit on this point: “No reason 
compels me to maintain that the body does not die unless it is changed into a corpse” 
(E4p39s). No doubt, the change into a corpse is the most radical structural change, but 
there can be other changes (e.g. due to a serious illness or an accident) that also result in a 
new body. As soon as this happens, there will also be a new mind. For Spinoza, therefore, it 
would hardly make sense to argue in a Lockean way that the same mind or same person 
can be transferred from one body to another: different bodies go along with different minds. 

In adopting this line of argument, Spinoza evades a problem that inevitably arises if one 
appeals to memory to explain the diachronic identity of a mind: how can a mind ever 
remain the same, given that it is never able to fully remember the past? It seems impossible 
to build a complete bridge between the past and the present, and without such a bridge 
there can be no identity. For Spinoza, this problem does not arise because it does not matter 
whether there is full memory; all that matters is whether or not the fundamental represen- 
tational structure remains the same. Thus, even if there are lacunae in a person’s memory, 
her mind remains the same as long as its fundamental structure is preserved. Memory 
plays no decisive role, and can therefore be disregarded in the account of diachronic 
identity. 


4. Conclusion 


Where does this leave us? It seemed at first that the rejection of substance pluralism made 
it impossible for Spinoza to give an account of the simple fact that many things remain the 
same over time. Instead of stable Aristotelian substances, there seemed to be nothing but 
changing modes and hence “vanishing modifications,” as Leibniz put it. This impression 
can now be corrected. Just as there are for Aristotelians, there are stable things for Spinoza 
too, both material and mental ones. They remain the same over time as long as they pre- 
serve a distinctive structure. It is their structure, not the persistence of parts or elements, 
that makes diachronic identity possible. 

Does this mean that there are no “vanishing modifications”? Not at all. The modes that 
together make a body or a mind come and go all the time, but as long as they are arranged 
in the same way and display the same structure, the same thing remains in place. This is 
especially true for the human body: no matter how many cells are constantly renewed, it 
remains the same over time as long as it preserves the same structure. In short, there can 
be both constant change and stability. 

At first sight, this result may not seem very exciting — at least not for those who are wil- 
ling to accept that minds as well as bodies cease to exist as soon as their structure radically 
changes. Of course, it is exciting (or perhaps disturbing) for all those who think that there 
can be immortal minds that continue to exist even if their structure radically changes and 
even if the body that goes along with them is destroyed. Spinoza clearly rejects this kind of 
immortality, linking immortality instead to the power of a given mind and body (E5p39). 
But what is innovative about his appeal to the structure or form of a thing? After all, 
Aristotelians who maintain that it is form, not matter, that guarantees diachronic identity 
would also point out that it is the form that plays a decisive role. 

Spinoza goes far beyond the Aristotelian conception by spelling out the form in kinetic 
terms for material things, and in representational terms for mental things. He thus com- 
pletely abandons the hylomorphic framework. Moreover, he insists that the persistence of 
a plurality of forms or structures does not require a plurality of substances. There can very 


177 


DOMINIK PERLER 


well be many different structures inside a single substance. Consequently, there can be 
many persisting things within that substance: diachronic identity does not require sub- 
stance pluralism. Spinoza also makes it clear that there are various levels of structure in a 
given thing. It is therefore important not only to identify different things, but also to indi- 
cate at what level some things remain the same while others change. Identity and change 
are to be spelled out with respect to various levels of individuals inside a single substance. 
In defending this non-Aristotelian thesis, Spinoza presents a new account of diachronic 
identity. 


References 


Barbone, S. (2002). What counts as an individual for Spinoza? In: Spinoza: Metaphysical Themes 
(ed. O. Koistinen and J.I. Biro), 89-112. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Della Rocca, M. (1996). Representation and the Mind-Body Problem in Spinoza. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press. 

Della Rocca, M. (2008). Spinoza. London: Routledge. 

Garrett, D. (1994). Spinoza’s theory of metaphysical individuation. In: Individuation and Identity in 
Early Modern Philosophy (ed. K.F. Barber and J.J.E. Gracia), 73-101. Albany: State University of 
New York Press. 

Leibniz, G.W. (1989). Comments on Spinoza’s Philosophy. In: Philosophical Essays (trans. R. Ariew and 
D. Garber), 272—281. Indianopolis: Hackett. 

Lin, M. (2005). Memory and personal identity in Spinoza. Canadian Journal of Philosophy 35: 
243-268. 

Matson, W. (1977). Death and destruction in Spinoza’s Ethics. Inquiry 20: 403-417. 

Melamed, Y.Y. (2013). Spinoza’s Metaphysics: Substance and Thought. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Melamed, Y.Y. and O. Schechter (forthcoming). Spinoza on death, temporality and the imagination. 

Monaco, D. (2019). Individuation and death in Spinoza’s Ethics: the Spanish poet case reconsidered. 

British Journal for the History of Philosophy 27: 941-958. 

Moreau, P.-F. (1994). The metaphysics of substance and the metaphysics of forms. In: Spinoza on 

Knowledge and the Human Mind (ed. Y. Yovel), 27—35. Leiden: Brill. 

Morrison, J. (2017). Two puzzles about thought and identity in Spinoza. In: Spinoza’s Ethics 

(ed. Y.Y. Melamed), 56-81. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Newlands, S. (2017). Spinoza on universals. In: The Problem of Universals in Early Modern Philosophy 
(ed. S. Di Bella and T.M. Schmaltz), 62-87. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Perler, D. (2014). Spinoza tiber Tiere. Archiv ftir Geschichte der Philosophie 96: 232-261. 

Spinoza, B. de (1985 and 2016). The Collected Works (trans. E.M. Curley). Princeton. NJ: Princeton 
University Press. 

Thiel, U. (2011). The Early Modern Subject: Self-Consciousness and Personal Identity from Descartes to 
Hume. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Viljanen, V. (2011). Spinoza’s Geometry of Power, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 


178 


27 


Spinoza on Relations 


ZACHARY GARTENBERG 


1. Introduction 


Unlike many of his medieval scholastic predecessors, and unlike his younger contempo- 
rary, Leibniz, Spinoza had little explicitly to say about relations — their logic, epistemology, 
and ontology. This might seem surprising, as many recent commentators have profitably 
explored “Spinozistic” relations — relations, such as ‘conception,’ ‘causation,’ and ‘inher- 
ence,’ that Spinoza invokes in a characteristic way — in elucidating features of his thought 
(see, e.g. Della Rocca 2008; Melamed 2012, and Newlands 2010). Yet we should not 
ignore the significance that Spinoza assigned to relations as such in his metaphysical 
system. This significance is most visible in connection with Spinoza’s discussion in his 
early works of relations as ‘beings of reason’ (entia rationis). In this chapter, I investigate 
Spinoza’s understanding of relations in this domain. Relations, as beings of reason, 
function as mental heuristics for ordering and “explaining” existence but have no extra- 
mental existence and do not independently determine or structure the properties of things 
in the world. Relations thus occupy a shadowy place in Spinoza’s metaphysics while they 
play a distinguished role in our mental lives and possess a complex epistemological status 
at the interface between being and its representation in the mind. 

For early modern as well as present-day philosophers, the concept of relation is closely 
associated with the concept of universal. The early moderns viewed the connection bet- 
ween relations and universals as arising from the way relations were implicated in the 
formation of universals, namely, through the comparison of singulars. Because this sort of 
comparison was regarded as resembling the way in which comparison induced relations 
like taller than, the metaphysical characteristics of relations and universals were thought 
to be akin (see Carriero 2015, p. 163 n. 6). In striking contrast to this picture, I shall argue, 
Spinoza viewed relations and universals as substantially different in multiple respects. 
These differences, I shall argue, are rooted in the special way in which Spinoza regards 
relations — not universals — as embodying the characteristics of beings of reason as he con- 
ceives them. To expound this noteworthy point of view, I will attempt to disentangle 
Spinoza’s concept of relations from his concept of universals. My objective is not directly to 
rule out universals as entia rationis, though I will suggest that there are grounds for 


A Companion to Spinoza, First Edition. Edited by Yitzhak Y. Melamed. 
© 2021 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2021 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd. 


179 


ZACHARY GARTENBERG 


regarding universals as a separate type of “metaphysical being.” Rather, my chief aim is to 
bring out how relations are more central to the nature of beings of reason than universals 
appear to be. 

My focus shall be on two of Spinoza’s early works, the Short Treatise (KV) and the 
Metaphysical Thoughts (CM). In Section 2, I flesh out the profile of relations as beings of 
reason, specifically as suggested in these works. In Section 3, I compare Spinoza’s concep- 
tion of universals and his conception of relations as articulated in this early period. I end 
in Section 4 with some brief concluding remarks, gesturing toward Spinoza’s mature con- 
ception of relations in the Ethics. 


2. Relations as Beings of Reason 


Reflecting what was standardly the case in medieval discussions of relations (see Brower 2018, 
§2.1), Spinoza’s talk of relations is not confined to any one piece of Latin terminology (leaving 
aside expressions in Dutch). Significantly, the term ‘relatio’ and its variants show up sparingly 
in Spinoza’s talk about relations; associated notions like ‘order’ (ordo), ‘respect’ (respectus), and 
‘comparison’ (comparatio) appear to occur more frequently. This datum is important to keep in 
mind in what follows, since it might be erroneously assumed that where translated passages 
do not contain the word ‘relation,’ Spinoza is not speaking about relations. In the discussion 
that follows, by contrast, I construe talk of ‘order,’ ‘respect,’ and ‘comparison’ as talk about 
relation. Since, as we are about to see, these terms are integral to Spinoza’s characterizations 
of the nature of beings of reason, it is natural and informative to posit an intimate connection 
between relations and beings of reason — or so I shall presently argue. 

Before proceeding with this argument, let me foreground two crucial features of 
Spinoza’s concept of a ‘being of reason.’ The first concerns the kinds of notions which 
Spinoza takes to qualify as such. Spinoza does not allude to such examples all in one place, 
but examining different passages in the CM reveals that the following notions are among 
those that count: blindness, extremity or limit, term, darkness (see G I/234/25-28), opposi- 
tion, order, agreement, difference, subject, adjunct, etc. (see G I/245/1). The list contains 
notions “which the mind uses for negating” (G I/234/27), such as extremity and limit; 
notions denoting privation, such as blindness and darkness; and notions indicating rela- 
tions, such as opposition, order, agreement, difference, etc. In dividing beings of reason into 
negations, privations, and relations Spinoza is channeling a standard conception of beings 
of reason found in scholastic philosophy, as witnessed, for example, in the work of Francisco 
Suarez (Disputatio Metaphysica 54, §3). The division is instructive for our purposes, for it 
clearly exhibits that, aside from conceptions of negation and privation, relations are con- 
stitutive of the notion of beings of reason. If it turns out that none of the above notions 
qualify as universals, this might be taken as evidence that relations have a role in Spinoza’s 
metaphysics prima facie distinct from the role assigned to universals. This is the central 
prospect on which I hope to shed some light. 

A second, profound, feature that Spinoza ascribes to entia rationis is their essential role 
in determining, not how objects are constituted in extramental reality, but rather how, or 
by what modes of thinking, we are apt to conceive such objects. Thus, Spinoza warns: 


[W]e should carefully be on guard in the investigation of things, lest we confound real beings 
with beings of reason. For it is one thing to inquire into the nature of things, and another to 
inquire into the modes by which things are perceived by us. (CMI 1 | G I/235/30-37) 


180 


SPINOZA ON RELATIONS 


For Spinoza (in the early works we will be looking at), all characterizations of the nature of 
relations must advert to this basic premise about the proper, epistemically reflexive role of 
beings of reason. As the continuation of this passage implies, failure to appreciate this role 
threatens to undermine our understanding of, precisely, “the ways in which we apprehend 
nature” as well as “nature itself.” This indicates that the “modes by which things are per- 
ceived by us” are construed by Spinoza as the modes by which, through the representation 
of relations, we rationally perceive things. This admonition, then, would seem to relate dis- 
tinctly to beings of reason. To anticipate, the chief lesson I shall draw from this sort of pre- 
supposition is that relations are markedly distinct from universals—confused representations 
— in what the former reveal about the rational bearing of human cognition on the world. 
With these basic observations in place, let us see how Spinoza’s (early) account of relations 
unfolds. 

Spinoza subsumes relations under the category of ‘beings of reason’ in multiple early 
texts. A concise and revealing passage on the character of relations as beings of reason 
occurs in KVI 10: 


Some things [dingen] are in our intellect and not in Nature [in ons verstand. .. niet in de Natuur], 
so that these are only our own work, and they help us to understand things distinctly [onders- 
cheidelijk . . . verstaan|. Among these we include all relations [betrekkingen], which have refer- 
ence to different things. These we call beings of reason [Entia Rationis]. (KV 110 | GI/49/5-8) 


According to Spinoza in the KV, there can be no relations without an activity of the mind 
that helps us “to understand things distinctly [onderscheidelijk . . . verstaan].” Although 
Spinoza doesn’t spell out this notion of “understanding,” it is plausibly interpreted as the 
ability not only to represent the notions of, say, left and right, but to identify which thing(s) 
are to the left or to the right of something else (cf. Geach 1957, p. 33, for an informative 
discussion of this view). As Spinoza intimates in KV I 10, attributions of relative goodness 
and evil cannot be made unless there is something that is perceived to instantiate either 
goodness or evil so that it can be compared with other things in this respect, which “respect” 
Spinoza defines as its perceived utility or desirability relative to something else — an intrinsic 
property of neither thing. However, although it may, for Spinoza, be a necessary condition 
on grasping the concept of a relation that one have the capacity to recognize when 
particular things satisfy it, such recognition does not include the representation of the 
essence of any particular thing, because it doesn’t necessarily involve being able to tell 
anything further definitive about each of the things related. In other words, the content of 
thoughts about relations derives from some observable respect in which the relevant 
objects, independently of their natures, can be brought into comparison (G 
1/235/30-I/236/5). On this account, then, relations, considered in their own right, never 
uncover the essences of things they relate, and thus never constitute the idea of a particular 
object, whether possible or necessary (see CMI 1 | G I/234/30). 

This cardinal feature of Spinoza’s conception of relations illuminates his frequent 
appeal to the relevant distinction between ‘extrinsic’ vs. ‘intrinsic’ denominations. Spinoza 
customarily associates relations with the notion of ‘extrinsic denominations’ (see, espe- 
cially, TIE §101 | G II/36/32; see also CM II 2 | G I/252/29; E2d4, E3DeffAff48 | G 
II/203/22-24; Ep. 54 | GIV/252/30-32). As the scholastics understood the concept — an 
understanding appropriated by Descartes (see AT VII 84ff. | CSM II 58) — an ‘extrinsic 
denomination’ is a name given to a thing in virtue of its perceived relation(s) to something 
outside it (cf. Thomas Aquinas, Summa Contra Gentiles II, ch. 13, and Manning 2016, 


181 


ZACHARY GARTENBERG 


p. 276). An example of an extrinsic denomination would be that of the predicate that 
occurs in the sentence ‘Joe Biden is Vice President.’ Vice President is a name or designation 
that does not pertain to Biden’s nature but applies to him in virtue of his perceived rela- 
tions to other things, e.g. other people who occupy different positions in the governmental 
hierarchy. 

The significance of the contrast between extrinsic and intrinsic denominations is that it 
allows Spinoza to express relationality — and its definitive detachment from ideas that rep- 
resent the natures of particular things — in semantic terms. Spinoza’s denial that relations 
have the status of ideas of the natures of existing objects can be viewed in light of the puta- 
tive purchase of language on metaphysical reality. People, Spinoza says, confuse relations 
with ideas of real beings. He diagnoses this error as consisting in people’s giving names to 
relations that are confusedly attributed to things, as if the relations existed outside the 
intellect. Because a thing’s extrinsic denominations apply to it in virtue of the relations it 
stands to other things, those relations themselves are mistakenly regarded as ideas of that 
thing (as when we take Vice President and the manifold relations this notion implicates to 
form part of the idea of Joe Biden). In short, people “judge the things from the words,” i.e. 
from extrinsic denominations, “ not the words from the things” (G I/235/8—9) Thus, 
Spinoza can be seen to rely on the character of extrinsic denominations to express the cru- 
cial point that relations are not ideas of the natures of particular things. 

Just as notable as this tenet of Spinoza’s account of relations is Spinoza’s distinctive 
view of relations as purely heuristic representations that govern the mind’s comprehension 
of empirical reality. As beings of reason, relations enable us to “more easily retain, explain, 
and imagine the things we have understood [ad res intellectas facilitis retinendas, explican- 
das, atque imaginandas]” about the features of empirical existence we represent 
(GI/233/3 1-32; emphasis in original). The notion of a mode of thought that does not rep- 
resent the natures of objects, but embodies or expresses the way we comprehend the 
respects in which objects cohere with one another, may seem paradoxical, as far as 
the project of explanation is concerned. It need not seem so strange, however, if one takes 
a being of reason to consist in the activity of retaining, imagining, and explaining, as well 
as whatever representation results from the immediate output of such activity. This defini- 
tion is suggested quite vividly in Spinoza’s explanation of ‘time’ in CMI 4: 


What time is 

But to determine this duration, we compare it with the duration of other things which have 
a certain and determinate motion. This comparison is called time [|haecque comparatio tempus 
vocatur]. Time, therefore, is not an affection of things, but only a mere mode of thinking, or, as 
we have already said, a being of reason. For it is a mode of thinking that serves to explain dura- 
tion. (G I/244/2 3-32; emphasis in original) 


Spinoza is careful here to avoid saying that a being of reason is properly speaking a mental 
representation of an object. Rather, the (or a) defining feature of a being of reason is that it 
“serves to explain” some feature of existence, in this case by comparing, or bringing into 
relation, the “certain and determinate motion” of one thing with that of other things 
“which have a certain and determinate motion.” The result is a heuristic representation 
that gives us purchase on the way we grasp (empirical) existence, telling us — for example — 
that, in relation to our perspective, one plant takes three times as long to bloom as another. 
The being of reason here is not the idea of either plant — nor the idea of planthood — but 
‘time,’ the measure — not the idea —we apply to both. Such comparison falls short of 


182 


SPINOZA ON RELATIONS 


illuminating the essences of the things compared, but it is useful and edifying in other 
ways, informing, for instance, our horticultural practices. In the case of Spinoza’s elucida- 
tion of the notion of time, then — which he appears to suggest as illustrative of the concep- 
tion of ‘being of reason’ generally — a being of reason is an act of comparison along with 
what emerges from such comparison as a kind of rational tool, a notion devoted to defining 
our representational bearings in the (empirical) world. Despite its being guided by reason 
in this way, however, the representation of a relation is tied to no one object and cannot be 
true or false (G I/235/18). 

We can make more vivid and precise Spinoza’s notion of the characteristics of relations 
as beings of reason by holding that notion up against Kripke’s famous example of the stan- 
dard meter and the metaphysical and epistemological lessons Kripke draws from it. For 
Spinoza (as we have just seen), a good illustration of the nature of beings of reason is 
provided by spatiotemporal measurement, or the constructing of spatiotemporal relations. 
As all will agree, such measurement must be fixed in a manner that is not wholly fortu- 
itous (or self-contradictory); yet, as many will also recognize, any system of measurement 
— standard or not — will in a fundamental way be arbitrary relative to the reality it mea- 
sures. Thus, suppose that I arbitrarily single out a portion of my physical environment, a 
stick say, and declare, 

(K) ‘The length of stick S at time t, is one meter.’ 

As Kripke (1980, pp. 56—57) tells us, (K) is not a necessary truth (even if it is supposed 
to be a definition), for ‘the length of S at time t,’ does not give the meaning of ‘meter’ but 
rather “fixes the reference” of the latter term. Though the reference of ‘meter’ is fixed by 
the notion of ‘the length of stick S at time t,,’ the relation between S and the designation of 
one meter is arbitrary. For this reason, (K) expresses what Kripke famously called the ‘con- 
tingent a priori’: I know ‘a priori’ — automatically, without further investigation — that S is 
one meter long insofar as it was I who stipulated (‘designated’) that it is such; and yet the 
fact that S is one meter long is contingent because, even holding fixed the meter as a stan- 
dard of measurement, it could have happened that S had a different length, even at t). 

Beings of reason are like meter sticks, for Spinoza. The relations we posit in explaining 
spatiotemporal existence — the way we order or oppose things, for instance — furnish us 
with knowledge of certain features of that existence insofar as we have used such relations 
to “fix” those features. Nevertheless, this practice has no bearing on the nature of the fea- 
tures it delineates, because nothing about the way the relevant features of existence have 
been fixed dictates why they should be fixed that way. 

So, for Spinoza (in the KV and the CM), there is an element of arbitrariness in represen- 
tations of relations; indeed, such arbitrariness is intrinsic to the way in which relations 
“explain” features of existence, as we saw in the case of duration. At this point, however, 
one might allege that such arbitrariness threatens or even undermines the aptness of such 
explanations: in what way can such representations of the world be perspicuous if they do 
not represent “the inmost essence of things”? 

Spinoza could respond to this worry by saying that the perspicuity of such representa- 
tions rests on the clarity that representations of relations possess in virtue of being thought 
of as tied to our perception of a given circumstance. Spinoza highlights the association bet- 
ween relations and circumstance in an important passage from the Treatise on the 
Emendation of the Intellect, where he contrasts proper knowledge of the essence of singular 
things with the understanding of things drawn from the relations in which they stand, a 
contrast we observed at the outset: “The essences of singular, changeable things are not to 
be drawn from their series, or order of existing, since it offers us nothing but extrinsic 


183 


ZACHARY GARTENBERG 


denominations, relations, or at most, circumstances, all of which are far from the inmost 
essence of things” (TIE §101 | G II/36/30-35; for a later statement of the connection of 
relation to circumstance, see E5p29s). Now it might be said that, insofar as representations 
of relations are attached to specific circumstances, their content is determined by the way 
the world is. Thus, when we think (non-fictitiously) of two objects as related, we inevitably 
think of them as related in a real-world context. This context provides the setting of the 
mind’s comparison between two things and helps render the representation of the relation 
between those things clear, even though the ideas of the relata as independent beings 
remain obscure or imperfect. 

To illustrate, consider the relation defined by the concepts of laying an egg and an egg 
hatching (the example is from Locke, Essay concerning Human Understanding II, xxv, 8). My 
representation of this relation will be clearer if it is couched as a relation between a female 
bird parent and her chick — these are objects which may be identified as satisfying or instan- 
tiating the former, more abstract relation. Further, the representation may be rendered still 
more lucid and precise if it is tied to the representation of the mother’s laying the egg and 
the egg hatching in a certain setting, say in a nest in a tree in the North End of Central Park. 
It could be said that the more precisely a relation is imagined as holding between objects in 
a certain circumstance, the more valuable and effective is its heuristic function, revealing 
how and to what extent features of existence may be organized and elucidated by us. 
Crucially, however — and this is a concession to the present worry about the perspicuity of 
representations of relation — Spinoza would point out (in the same spirit we’ve witnessed 
all along) that no matter how acute is our perception of the relation between the mother 
bird and her chick, as well as of the circumstance to which that relation is tied, such a rela- 
tion is— and must be — compatible with having an obscure and imperfect idea of the natures 
of the birds themselves. 

Considering the representational role of relations adumbrated above, what do we make 
of their ontological status? Does their relegation to the intellect as mere representations 
make them “a mere nothing” overall, as Spinoza puts it (G I/235/13)? Spinoza’s definitive 
response to this question holds true not only of relations but of universals (and in principle 
any form of abstracta): representations of relations (universals, etc.) are not entirely bereft 
of ontological status, insofar as they are modes of thought, something the mind can be 
“employed about,” to use Locke’s expression. Spinoza puts the point succinctly: “[I]f 
anyone looks outside the intellect for what is signified by those words | ‘being of reason’], he 
will find it to be a mere nothing. But if he means the modes of thinking themselves, they 
are indeed real beings” (CMI 1 | GI/235/13-16). By Spinoza’s lights, a non-veridical rep- 
resentation is still a mode of thought, a mental entity, and in this precise sense it is not a 
mere nothing. 

Before I conclude this section, let me raise, without resolving, a further worry concerning 
the role of arbitrariness in Spinoza’s account of relations. In the KV and the CM, Spinoza 
seems adamant that relations do not exist independently of the intellect. Insofar as they 
are the workmanship of the intellect, relations apply arbitrarily — though guided by reason 
(G I/236/13) — to real objects. Although Spinoza builds a careful case for this view, one 
might simply ask why he feels obliged or entitled to hold it in the first place. My earlier 
comparison between Spinoza’s account of relations and Kripke’s contingent a priori was 
intended to bring out how the relations we posit (when we measure things, for example) 
have no bearing on the natures of objects as they exist outside of thought. However, 
although Spinoza holds that there is an element of arbitrariness in representaitons of rela- 
tions, it does not seem as if there is any such arbitrariness in the fact that one thing is, say, 


184 


SPINOZA ON RELATIONS 


longer or taller than another. It does not just happen to be the case that Theaetetus is taller 
than Socrates in the way that it just happens to be the case that we use a certain stick as the 
standard for one meter. The worry here is that, although (e.g.) which particular system of 
measurement we adopt is arbitrary, not all relational truths are arbitrary. 

This objection is interesting and on point, but I think that its force would not be recog- 
nized by Spinoza in this context. For the question of the arbitrariness of relational truths is 
not the chief concern of Spinoza’s account of relations in the KV and CM; rather, the con- 
cern in these texts is to treat relations in a way that convinces us not to reify them. Relations 
are supposed to contribute no being to reality beyond whatever form of reality is possessed 
by our cognitive relation to the world. Spinoza repeats this point numerous times in both 
the KV and the CM, and indeed this scruple would appear to be the principal take-away 
message of Spinoza’s early account of relations as beings of reason. 

To summarize, then, we have seen that, for Spinoza in his early writings, (1) relations 
cannot be ideas of the natures of objects; (2) relations have a rational basis insofar as they 
provide a cognitive foundation for the explanation (or retention or imaginative appropria- 
tion) of empirical objects; and, finally, (3) relations, as beings of reason, are connected 
with, and distinguished by, some circumstance or context. As we are now about to see, 
these features are important in discerning the differences between relations and univer- 
sals, a distinct kind of “metaphysical being” (E2p48s) — or so, in my view, the following 
discussion should imply. 


3. Relations vs. Universals 


It seems standard practice among commentators giving an account of Spinoza’s views 
about ‘beings of reason’ to posit similarities, rather than to probe differences, between rela- 
tions and universals (see, e.g. Carriero 2015 and Newlands 2017). While there is some 
textual justification for positing such similarity, I think there is stronger and more abun- 
dant evidence that Spinoza kept universals and relations apart, and that it was the latter 
which he regarded as constitutive of his conception of beings of reason. In this section I 
present a limited assortment of textual evidence for the view that Spinoza regarded rela- 
tions as a distinguished sort of mental being. 

Ethics 2p40s offers what is perhaps Spinoza’s most representative characterization of 
the nature and origin of universals. (E2p40s is consistent with Spinoza’s early character- 
ization of universals: see KV I 2 | G I/32/33-I/33/4 and the bit of text immediately pre- 
ceding. Notably, this passage from the KV contrasts the notion of a universal with the 
notion of a ‘whole,’ described as a being of reason; the passage is complex and worth 
exploring, but I do not have space to do so here.) I quote E2p40s at length: 


[1] Those notions they call Universal, like Man, Horse, Dog, etc., have arisen . . . because so 
many images (e.g. of men) are formed at one time in the human Body that they [2] surpass the 
power of imagining — not entirely, of course, but still to the point where the Mind can imagine 
neither slight differences of the singular [men] (such as the color and size of each one, etc.) 
nor their determinate number, and [3] imagines distinctly only what they all agree in, insofar 
as they affect the body. For the body has been affected most [NS: forcefully] by [what is 
common], since each singular has affected it [by this property]. And [NS: the mind] expresses 
this by the word man, and [4] predicates it of infinitely many singulars. For as we have said, it 
cannot imagine a determinate number of singulars. 


185 


ZACHARY GARTENBERG 


But it should be noted [5] that these notions are not formed by all [NS: men] in the same 
way ... For example, those who have more often regarded men’s stature with wonder will 
understand by the word man an animal of erect stature. But those who have been accustomed 
to consider something else, will form another common image of men — e.g. that man is an 
animal capable of laughter, or a featherless biped, or a rational animal. (G II/121/12-32) 


I shall outline some differences between Spinoza’s conception of universals and his con- 
ception of relations as beings of reason by attending to the individual points in this passage 
marked by the bracketed numbers I have inserted above. Let us start with [1] (in conjunction 
with [4]). 

[1, 4] Universals are representations, or predications, of (infinitely many) particulars; 
the objects of universals are ultimately the ideas of singular things — modes— that can or 
(necessarily) do exist. Relations, by contrast, “have no object that exists necessarily, or can 
exist” and hence are not ideas of things (G I/234/3 1-32). 

[2] Universals surpass the power of imagining; beings of reason are formed as aids to 
the imagination (CMI 1 | GI/233/32, GI/234/17-28; CMI5 | GI/245/1-16). 

[3] Universals represent things without distinction; relations, as beings of reason, 
involve the representation of things as distinct (although both universals and beings of 
reason arise from the mind’s being affected in some way) (KV I5 | GI/49/5-6). 

[5] Universals are not formed by individuals in the same way — the representations that 
constitute universals are rooted in the idiosyncratic experience of each individual. 
Controversies involving appeal to universals arise from differences in “the disposition of 
[one’s] brain” (El App | G II/82/33). By contrast, misrepresentation of (with) beings of 
reason has less to do with individual idiosyncrasy and more to do with improperly distin- 
guishing the beings of reason from real beings (see, e.g. Ep. 12 | GIV/58). 

Two points of elucidation concerning [1] are in order. 

First, it is worth noting the clear contrast in the types of notions Spinoza labels as uni- 
versals from the list he gives of beings of reason in CM, as I hinted at in the beginning. In 
E2p40s, paradigmatic examples of universals include “Man, Horse, Dog, etc.” In the CM, 
as we saw, examples of beings of reason include the relational notions of opposition, order, 
agreement, difference, subject, adjunct, etc. (see G I/245/1). Names like ‘man,’ ‘dog,’ and 
‘horse’ (as well as, e.g. ‘perfection’ and ‘imperfection’ (E4pref | G II/207/19)) are formed 
by a process of abstraction from a con-fusion of representations, to which we apply a kind 
of taxonomical term. However, such a term — as the list of features of universals just adum- 
brated implies — expresses only how our cognition relates confusedly to the world, failing to 
represent features of the world that we distinctly represent. By contrast, the notions listed 
as beings of reason in the CM pick out different ways in which existing things are kept dis- 
tinct — not conflated — through comparison. 

As I suggested above, this might be the precise basis for categorizing relations as beings 
of reason, to the exclusion of universals which are subject not to the guidance of reason 
but to the capricious workings of the imagination. In short, relations, as beings of reason, 
embody how our representations relate rationally to the world, whereas universals, I 
submit, form a distinct kind of “metaphysical being” born of the adventitious effects of 
objects on the imagination, the result of such impingement being the warped and indeter- 
minate representation of empirical reality by the mind (E2p40s). It might be said that, 
crucially, though Spinoza is interested in uncovering how the mind apprehends empirical 
reality both confusedly and perspicuously (as evidenced by, for example, his discussion of 
the three types of knowledge in E2p40s2, directly following his account of the nature and 


186 


SPINOZA ON RELATIONS 


origin of universals), insofar as he is concerned with the investigation of nature, he is dis- 
tinctly concerned with the nature of relations and what they reveal about the character of 
the mind’s relation to the world. 

Second, I should mention one passage (discussed at length by Carriero 2015) which 
might seem to run counter to my thesis that Spinoza regards relations, as beings of reason, 
as importantly distinct from universals. In the Short Treatise, Spinoza uses the term “Being 
of Reason” to gloss the notion of the “the Will” as “only an Idea of this or that volition” (KV 
I. 16 | G I/83/3-5). This might seem like evidence that Spinoza regards universals as 
beings of reason, and this might be taken as indirect evidence that relations too may 
involve having ideas of (the nature of) particular things (e.g. “this or that volition”). 

However, I think any appearance of inconsistency with my account can be explained 
away. To begin with, Spinoza in the same passage also calls the idea of the will a “fiction” 
(G I/83/6). However, in the Metaphysical Thoughts (a work written later than the KV) 
Spinoza distinguishes beings of reason from both universals (see G I/234/30-I/23 5/2) and 
fictions (see G I/236/6—21). This suggests that the KV passage may simply be an expres- 
sion of a view that Spinoza later abandoned. Second, having an “idea” of “this or that 
volition” seems to be a way of putting things that is compatible with Spinoza’s view that 
bringing things into relation involves identifying a respect in which two things — whose 
natures do not thereby form the content of the mind’s representation — stand in relation. 
This could involve discerning how a thing x displays or expresses a volition or action, v, 
that differs in respect of how a thing y does not express v or does so to a lesser extent. This 
need not involve having an idea of the nature of either x or y, nor does it involve reifying v 
and subsuming it under the abstract idea of the will, such subsumption being characteristic 
of the formation of a universal. 


4. Concluding Remarks 


By way of concluding, let me briefly remark on the relevance of a further domain of 
Spinoza’s thought about relations. In the Ethics, Spinoza argues that finite beings (modes) 
that fall under an attribute of substance are conceptually related because their natures are 
conceived through the same attribute (see El p10&s, E2p6d). Modes that have an attribute 
in common can therefore stand in determinate relations with each other. By contrast, 
modes that have “nothing in common” with one another due to their belonging to differ- 
ent attributes (see El1a5, Elp3) cannot enter into such relations because their natures are 
not (conceptually) related (as is the case between, e.g. mental and physical modes), and 
hence cannot be understood (intelligi) through one another (1a5). 

In this context, if I am right, relations are not describable as beings of reason. This is 
because such relations are formed based on the (shared) natures of modes insofar as they 
fall under a certain attribute. Yet (ideas of) the natures of things are irrelevant, as we saw, 
to the way relations figure as beings of reason. We have witnessed one sense of what “to 
explain” (explicare) means in the context of Spinoza’s discussion of beings of reason in the 
early works. Perhaps one thing this discussion indicates is that Spinoza’s notion of “expla- 
nation” differs as between these early works and the Ethics, where the notion of explana- 
tion is tied to truth and essence (see, e.g. Elp4d, E2p5). Moreover, it is an interesting 
question whether Spinoza’s characteristically explanatory relations posited in the Ethics, 
principally causation, conception, and inherence, would count as relations judging by the 


187 


ZACHARY GARTENBERG 


view of the KV and the CM. If these considerations are apt, then there is perhaps no one 
concept of relation that can encompass all the characterizations Spinoza gives across his 
works of relations and all he says or implies about their place in his ontology. Evidently, 
what Spinoza explicitly says about relations as connected with their status as beings of 
reason is not all there is to his take on relations. 


Acknowledgments 


Iam indebted to Michael Della Rocca and Raffi Krut-Landau for their helpful comments on 
an earlier draft of this chapter. Also for his comments, and for his invitation to write this 
chapter, I am thankful to Yitzhak Melamed, to whom the chapter is dedicated. 


References 


Brower, J. (2018). Medieval theories of relations. In: Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (ed. E 
Zalta). https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/win2018/entries/relationsmedieval (accessed 12 
October 2020). 

Carriero, J. (2015). Spinoza, the will, and the ontology of power. In: The Young Spinoza (ed. Y. 
Melamed), 160-182. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Della Rocca, M. (2008). Spinoza. New York: Routledge. 

Geach, P. (1957). Mental Acts. Routledge & Kegan Paul. 

Kripke, S. (1980). Naming and Necessity. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 

Manning, G. (2016). Extrinsic denomination. In: The Cambridge Descartes Lexicon (ed. L. Nolan), 
276-178. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Melamed, Y.Y. (2012). Spinoza on inherence, causation, and conception. Journal of the History of 
Philosophy 50 (3): 395-386. 

Newlands, S. (2017). Spinoza on universals. In: The Problem of Universals in Early Modern Philosophy 
(ed. S. Di Bella and T. Schmaltz), 62-86. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Newlands, S. (2010). Another kind of Spinozistic monism. Notis, 44 (3): 469-502. 


188 


18 


Spinoza on Numerical Identity and Time 


JOHN MORRISON 


1. Introduction 


Spinoza claims that a person’s body can be numerically identical over time, despite changes 
in its size, shape, and speed. He also claims that a person’s mind can be numerically iden- 
tical over time, despite changes in its thoughts, emotions, and volitions. But these claims 
seem to conflict with the Indiscernibility of Identicals, the principle that numerical identity 
implies indiscernibility. How would Spinoza resolve the conflict? 

I will argue that he would reject the Indiscernibility of Identicals. This might surprise 
contemporary metaphysicians, because they typically regard the Indiscernibility of 
Identicals as obviously true, if not definitionally true (e.g. Tarski 1994, p. 50; Sider 2001, 
p. 4). In their minds, rejecting the Indiscernibility of Identicals would be like rejecting the 
principle that a thing is identical to itself. 

This might also surprise historians of philosophy, because they sometimes attribute the 
Indiscernibility of Identicals to their subjects without any direct evidence. Della Rocca is 
admirably forthright about why he attributes it to Spinoza: “Spinoza does not explicitly dis- 
cuss this principle, but, given its triviality, it seem legitimate to attribute this principle to 
him. We could not, I think, coherently see Spinoza as denying this principle” (Della 
Rocca 1996, p. 132). 

This interpretation might also clarify key doctrines. For example, according to Spinoza’s 
conatus doctrine, it is essential to a body that it strives to increase its power (E3p6, 
3p12d). This presupposes that a body is identical over time, despite increases in its power. 
Similarly, according to Spinoza’s monism doctrine, every change, including every change 
in a body’s size, shape, and motion, is a change in God’s properties (E1p16d). This presup- 
poses that God remains identical over time despite instantiating contrary properties at dif- 
ferent times. As we will see, the Indiscernibility of Identicals is often taken to have profound 
implications for one’s view of change. We should thus try to reconstruct whether Spinoza 
would take the Indiscernibility of Identicals to have any of those implications for his view 
of change and thus for these key doctrines. As far as | am aware, Waller (2012) was the 
first to ask this question, and we will be the second. 


A Companion to Spinoza, First Edition. Edited by Yitzhak Y. Melamed. 
© 2021 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2021 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd. 


189 


JOHN MORRISON 


This interpretation might also help us understand some of Spinoza’s other claims. In 
particular, he seems committed to four other claims that conflict with the Indiscernibility 
of Identicals. First, that a mind is numerically identical to its body, even though the 
mind thinks and does not move, and the body moves and does not think (E2p7s; 
Morrison forthcoming a, sect. 3). Second, that a mind is identical to the idea of that 
mind, even though the mind thinks about bodies and not ideas, and the idea of the 
mind thinks about ideas and not bodies (E2p21s; Morrison 2017, sect. 3). Third, that a 
mind is identical to the idea of a thing belonging to another attribute, even though the 
mind thinks about bodies and not things belonging to that other attribute, and the 
other idea thinks about things belonging to that other attribute and not bodies (Ep66; 
Morrison 2017, sect. 4). Fourth, that the thinking substance is numerically identical to 
the extended substance, even though the thinking substance is modified by ways of 
thinking and not ways of moving, and the extended substance is modified by ways of 
moving and not ways of thinking (E2p6, E2p7s). If Spinoza would reject the 
Indiscernibility of Identicals to accommodate variation across time, perhaps he would 
also reject it to accommodate these other kinds of variation (see Morrison 2017, forth- 
coming a). 


2. A Puzzle 


Let’s use a puzzle to sharpen the conflict between Spinoza’s claims about change and the 
Indiscernibility of Identicals. For concreteness, let’s focus on Peter, a character familiar 
from both the medieval and early modern literatures. Let’s specifically focus on his body. 
Suppose that Peter had an uneventful day: he woke up in the morning, walked until night- 
time, and then fell asleep. Let Morning Peter be the body which moved in the morning, and 
let Night Peter be the body which rested at night. The following three claims seem mutually 
inconsistent: 


(a) Morning Peter instantiated motion in the morning, and Night Peter instantiated a 
contrary property at night (namely: rest). 

(b) Morning Peter and Night Peter are numerically identical. 

(c) If x and y are numerically identical, and x instantiated a property at a time, there is 
no time at which y instantiated a contrary property. 


The puzzle is to say which claims, if any, we should reject. 

The last of these claims, (c), is the Indiscernibility of Identicals. There are two 
notions at the core of this principle: property and instantiation. These notions are 
sometimes understood narrowly, so that denying that properties exist outside of space 
and time (as universals) is enough to deny that there are properties, and denying that 
properties can be instantiated by more than one object is enough to deny that prop- 
erties are instantiated. But let’s understand these notions as broadly as possible, to 
give ourselves a framework general enough to accommodate other views, including 
views that imply that motions, shapes, colors, etc., exist only at some times and loca- 
tions, and are each instantiated by at most one object (as tropes). For example, let’s 
accommodate the view that Peter’s motion exists only at Peter’s location, and only 
while Peter is moving. 


190 


SPINOZA ON NUMERICAL IDENTITY AND TIME 


This isn’t the canonical formulation of the Indiscernibility of Identicals. The canonical 
formulation is: 


If x and y are numerically identical, x instantiates a property if and only if y instantiates that 
property. 


We're modifying this formulation in two ways. First, our reformulation is about contrary 
properties. This simplifies the puzzle, because it makes the inconsistency between Morning 
Peter’s moving and Night Peter’s resting immediate. It also tightens the link to earlier dis- 
cussions by Aristotle and the medieval Aristotelians, among others, because they endorse 
a principle that is explicitly about contrary properties (more on that principle later). 
Modifying the canonical formulation in just this first way yields: 


If x and y are numerically identical, and x instantiated a property, y didn’t instantiate a con- 
trary property. 


Examples of contrary properties include motion and rest, red and green, and weighing less 
than 10 kilograms and weighing more than 10 kilograms. While the notion of a contrary 
property is open to further analysis, for our purposes it is enough that motion and rest are 
paradigmatic examples. 

Why should this count as a reformulation of the Indiscernibility of Identicals? If y 
instantiates a contrary property (e.g. rest), it doesn’t also instantiate x’s property (e.g. 
motion). That’s just what it is for motion and rest to be contrary properties. Thus, it is 
entailed by the canonical formulation. Establishing the converse, that the canonical for- 
mulation entails it, would take more work. So let’s just note that, even if it does not, that 
would merely establish that this formulation is weaker, and thus harder to reject. 

Second, our reformulation removes the ambiguity about when the contrary properties 
are instantiated. Disambiguated in one way, our first pass is equivalent to a principle that 
doesn’t give rise to a puzzle: 


If x and y are numerically identical, and x instantiated a property at a time, then y didn’t 
instantiate a contrary property at that time. 


This just implies that Night Peter didn’t instantiate rest at the same time that Morning Peter 
was walking. It is thus consistent with the identity and discernibility of Morning Peter and 
Night Peter, i.e. (a) and (b), and does not give rise to a puzzle. 

I don’t think it’s worth arguing about how to disambiguate the Indiscernibility of 
Identicals. We are interested in a principle that gives rise to a puzzle about change, and thus in 
a principle equivalent to, or at least sufficient for, (c). For our purposes, then, it’s better to just 
stipulate that this is the principle we have in mind, and to use ‘Indiscernibility of Identicals’ as 
a label for it. Let’s therefore continue using ‘Indiscernibility of Identicals’ as a label for (c). 

We're not alone in using ‘Indiscernibility of Identicals’ in this way. Contemporary meta- 
physicians also use it as a label for a principle that is at least sufficient for (c), and thus gives 
rise to a puzzle about change. Moreover, as noted in the introduction, almost all of them 
accept it. They regard it as an obvious truth, like the principle that each thing is identical 
to itself (for surveys, see Haslanger 2003; Wasserman 2006; Kurtz 2006; and Sider 2008). 
In fact, lam only aware of five who would reject it (Myro 1986; Baxter 1999; Hansson 2007; 
Rychter 2009; and Hofweber 2009). 


191 


JOHN MORRISON 


To understand why almost all contemporary philosophers regard the Indiscernibility of 
Identicals as an obvious truth, let’s consider eternalism, a popular view about time. 
According to eternalists, times are like locations. Just as minerals exist below us in the 
ground and clouds exist above us in the sky, eternalists claim that our ancestors exist before 
us in the seventeenth century and our descendants exist after us in the twenty-second 
century. Eternalists describe reality as four-dimensional, with things distributed across all 
four dimensions, including the fourth, temporal dimension. If you ask an eternalist what 
exists in the most expansive sense of ‘exists,’ they will list objects that exist in the past, pre- 
sent, and future. According to them, terms like ‘past,’ ‘present,’ and ‘future’ indicate when 
something exists in relation to when we exist, just as terms like ‘here’ and ‘there’ indicate 
where something exists in relation to where we exist. These terms don’t indicate which 
objects exist and which objects don’t exist. 

For an eternalist, the puzzle of identity over time is that our reasons for thinking that 
objects at different locations are non-identical also seem like reasons for thinking that 
objects at different times are non-identical. Let Downstairs Peter be a person who is cur- 
rently on a treadmill downstairs, and let Upstairs Peter be a person who is simultaneously 
resting upstairs. One reason for thinking that Downstairs Peter isn’t identical to Upstairs 
Peter is that Downstairs Peter instantiates motion and Upstairs Peter instantiates rest. This 
might not be the only reason for thinking that Downstairs Peter isn’t identical to Upstairs 
Peter. But it seems like a sufficient reason. From an eternalist perspective, the puzzle of 
identity over time is that we seem to have just as good a reason to think that Morning Peter 
isn’t identical to Night Peter, namely that Morning Peter instantiated motion and Night 
Peter instantiated rest. This seems like just as good a reason because, from an eternalist 
perspective, variation across reality’s three spatial dimensions is relevantly like variation 
across its fourth, temporal dimension. For the eternalist, if the mere fact that Downstairs 
Peter and Upstairs Peter are moving at different speeds is enough to establish that they are 
distinct bodies, the mere fact that Morning Peter and Night Peter were moving at different 
speeds is enough to establish that they are distinct bodies. Likewise, if the mere fact that 
Downstairs Peter and Upstairs Peter are in different locations is enough to establish that 
they are distinct bodies, the mere fact that Morning Peter and Night Peter are at different 
times is enough to establish that they are distinct bodies. Thus, from an eternalist perspec- 
tive, the Indiscernibility of Identicals might seem obviously true. 

Like these philosophers, Spinoza accepts eternalism (Waller 2012, ch. 2, esp. p. 23 and 
n 37). It might therefore seem as though he too should accept the Indiscernibility of 
Identicals and reject the identity or discernibility of Morning Peter and Night Peter, i.e. (a) 
or (b). In the next section I'll explain why he wouldn't respond in either of these ways. In 
the penultimate section Ill explain why, unlike most contemporary philosophers, Spinoza 
is able to reject the Indiscernibility of Identicals while still accepting eternalism. 


3. Identity and Discernibility 


The most important passage is Spinoza’s definition of ‘one body’ in the so-called physical 
digression following E2p13: 


When a number of bodies, whether of the same or different size, are so contained by other 
bodies that they lie upon one another, or if they so move, whether with the same degree or 


different degrees of speed, that they communicate their motions to each other in a certain 


192 


SPINOZA ON NUMERICAL IDENTITY AND TIME 


fixed pattern [ratio], we shall say that those bodies are united with one another and that they 
all together compose one body, or individual, which is distinguished from the others by this 
union of bodies. (E2P13sPhysDigD1; see also KV App. I 14; I am here following 
Garrett 1994, pp. 86-87 in translating ratio as ‘pattern’.) 


Spinoza infers from this that, if a body’s pattern of motion is disrupted, the body is destroyed 
(E2P13sPhysDigD1, E4p39s; see Perler 2021 for background and elaboration). Spinoza 
also infers that, as long as that pattern is preserved, the body remains numerically the 
same, as when its parts merely grow in size (E2P13sPhysDigL5) or when there’s merely a 
change in the direction or speed of its overall motion (E2P13sPhysDigL6, L7). Thus, as 
long as that pattern is preserved, the body remains numerically the same, despite having a 
different size and motion. Spinoza thereby seems committed to the identity and discern- 
ibility of a body over time, and thus to (a) and (b) so long as Peter’s pattern of motion was 
preserved. 

As a way of better understanding his commitments to (a) and (b), let’s consider the 
textual and systematic evidence that he would not accept any of our present-day proposals 
for rejecting these commitments. 

Relationists would deny the discernibility of Morning Peter and Night Peter (see 
Mellor 1998, ch. 8). They would first insist that motion and rest are relations to times. In 
that case, to say that someone instantiated motion is to say that he stood in the motion rela- 
tion to a time. They would then insist that Morning Peter and Night Peter stood in the same 
relations to the same times. In particular, when Morning Peter was walking, he stood in 
the motionrelation to the morning and in the rest relation to the night. Likewise, when Night 
Peter was resting, he stood in the motion relation to the morning and in the rest relation to 
the night. It might help to make a list: 


Morning Peter stood in the motion relation to the morning. 
Morning Peter stood in the rest relation to the night. 

Night Peter stood in the motion relation to the morning. 
Night Peter stood in the rest relation to the night. 


Relationists would conclude that while Morning Peter was walking he instantiated all the 
same properties as Night Peter while he was resting. They would also conclude that none 
of these properties are contraries. Just as standing in the taller than relation to one person 
is compatible with standing in the shorter than relation to another person, standing in the 
motion relation to the morning is compatible with standing in the rest relation to the night. 
This understanding of change is therefore consistent with the Indiscernibility of Identicals. 

There are several reasons why Spinoza would reject relationism. First, according to 
Spinoza a body’s properties, including its motion, size, and shape, are just ways in which 
the body exists. Like Descartes and Aquinas, he calls them modes (E1p25c, E2d1; 
Carriero 1995). As a result, once a thing stops moving, there is no sense in which its 
previous motion is still a mode of it. Instead, it has a new property, because it exists in a 
new way. Thus, given his understanding of change and properties, Spinoza would reject 
any proposal, including relationism, which implies that a body changes without gaining or 
losing properties. 

Second, Spinoza seems to deny the existence of relations involving more than one 
object, i.e. polyadic relations. He classifies them as “beings of reason,” which implies that 
they depend on the mind (CM I 4 | GI 244/23-32). There’s an interesting puzzle about 
how to reconcile this with his claims about causation and inherence, given how central 


193 


JOHN MORRISON 


these relations are to his metaphysics (see Gartenberg, this volume, pp. 187-188). But, 
regardless of how that puzzle is resolved, it seems unlikely he’d countenance the existence 
of the relations that are at the core of the relationist proposal. He does, however, counte- 
nance modes. In fact, he says that modes and substances are the only things that exist 
(E1p4d). It might help to keep in mind that, for Spinoza, candles, diamonds, tulips, butter- 
flies, and human bodies are all modes. 

Third, Spinoza also seems to deny the existence of times, because he similarly classifies 
them as “beings of reason” (KV I 10 | GI 49/5-8; Gartenberg 2021). For Spinoza, finite 
physical reality is nothing but a causal ordering of all bodies; there are no mind-independent 
“times” above and beyond that causal ordering. Thus, if properties are relations to times, 
they must be relations either to mind-dependent abstractions from that causal ordering, or 
to bodies within that causal ordering. But if times are mind-dependent abstractions, and 
properties are relations to times, then properties too must be mind-dependent. However, 
for Spinoza, sizes, shapes, and speeds can’t be mind-dependent, because they belong to the 
attribute of extension rather than the attribute of thought, and the attributes are supposed 
to be independent of each other (E1p10). Spinoza also can’t say that a body’s properties 
are relations to other bodies within the causal ordering. For example, suppose that Peter’s 
motion is a relation between Peter and the position of the sun. That would lead to an end- 
less march, because the sun’s position is itself a property and therefore would need to be a 
relation to the properties of still other bodies, and so on, without end. 

Adverbialists would also deny the discernibility of Morning Peter and Night Peter (see 
Johnston 1987). They would first insist that, for every time, there is a different way of 
instantiating motion. They would then insist that Morning Peter and Night Peter instanti- 
ated the same properties in the same ways. In particular, while Morning Peter was walking, 
he instantiated the property motion in a morning-ly way, and he instantiated the property 
rest in a night-ly way. Likewise, while Night Peter was resting, he instantiated the property 
motion in a morning-ly way, and he instantiated the property rest in a night-ly. It might 
help to again make a list: 


Morning Peter instantiated motion in a morning-ly way. 
Morning Peter instantiated rest in a night-ly way. 

Night Peter instantiated motion in a morning-ly way. 
Night Peter instantiated rest in a night-ly way. 


Adverbialists would conclude that while Morning Peter was walking he instantiated all the 
same properties in the same ways as Night Peter while he was resting. They would also 
conclude that none of these properties are contraries. Just as greeting one person in a 
friendly way is compatible with greeting another person in an unfriendly way, instantiat- 
ing motion in a morning-ly way is compatible with instantiating rest in a night-ly way. This 
understanding of change is therefore consistent with the Indiscernibility of Identicals. 

There are at least two reasons why Spinoza would reject adverbialism. First, as noted 
above, he seems to think a body changes by gaining or losing properties. In that case, he 
would reject any proposal that implies that things always instantiate the same properties 
in the same ways. 

Second, as Spinoza understand modes, they exist at some times but not at other times. 
For example, candles, diamonds, tulips, butterflies, and human bodies are modes, and they 
exist at some times, but not at other times. Spinoza also thinks that the modes of these 
modes are created and destroyed, and thus exist at some times but not at other times. For 


194 


SPINOZA ON NUMERICAL IDENTITY AND TIME 


example, emotions are properties of our minds, and he repeatedly says that they’re 
destroyed (E3p43, E3p38, E4p7, E5p2, E5p20s). There are some modes that always exist, 
the so-called infinite modes (E1p2 1-23). But bodies and their modes are finite, and are thus 
created at some time and destroyed at a later time. For this reason, if Night Peter instanti- 
ates motion in some sense, that motion must exist at some time. When? Presumably in the 
morning, and only in the morning, because that’s the only time at which Peter was moving. 
But this has a bizarre consequence. 

As Spinoza understands instantiation, whenever a property is instantiated by an object, 
it metaphysically depends on that object (E1d5; Carriero 1995). For example, while Peter 
instantiates motion in the morning, that motion metaphysically depends on him. Thus, if 
Peter still instantiates the same motion at night, that motion must still depend on him. As 
a result, something that exists at an earlier time, and only at an earlier time (namely: 
Peter’s motion) would metaphysically depend on something at a later time (namely: Peter 
at night). More generally, things in the past would metaphysically depend on things in the 
future. Michael Della Rocca has been rightly criticized for interpreting Spinoza so that 
things in the future metaphysically depend on things in the past (see Melamed 2012, 2013, 
98f.). Reversing the order of dependence would only enhance the strangeness. 

There is another bizarre consequence. As Spinoza understands instantiation, the 
existence of a property causally depends on whatever instantiates it (Elpl6cl, 
E2P13sPhysDigA1”). Thus, if Spinoza were an adverbialist, he’d be committed to saying 
that things in the past causally depend on things in the future, a case of backwards causa- 
tion. For example, Peter’s motion would causally depend on Peter even at night, when he’s 
no longer moving. Causation would run in both directions, and perhaps in circles, even 
though it seems like a paradigmatic example of an exclusively forward relation. 

Exdurantists would deny that Morning Peter and Night Peter are identical. They claim 
that a person’s body exists only for an instant, at which point it is replaced by a new body 
(see Hawley 2001, ch. 2; Chisholm 1976, ch. 3; Parfit 1984, ch. 12; Varzi 2003a, 2003b; 
Sider 1996). The new body is often, but not always, nearly indiscernible from the old body. 
For example, Morning Peter was replaced by a body that was nearly indiscernible, except 
that it was moving slightly faster, and perhaps also had a slightly different shape, because 
its knee was slightly higher. It was then replaced by another body, and so on. According to 
exdurantists, there was no body that was moving in the morning and then resting at night. 
There was just a series of different bodies, some moving, others resting, some with bent 
knees, others with straight knees. Morning Peter and Night Peter are supposed to be bodies 
in that series. Because objects would change only by coming into and going out of existence, 
and not by instantiating different properties at different times, exdurantism is consistent 
with the Indiscernibility of Identicals. 

However, Spinoza repeatedly says that a person’s body is identical over time. For 
example, he says that “one and the same man” can respond differently to the same stim- 
ulus at different times (E3p51&s; see also E4p33). An insult might infuriate a man when 
heis young, but havenoeffect after his intellect is sufficiently strengthened (E4p44s). Spinoza 
says that the mind, and therefore the body (by E2p7), can “undergo great changes, and 
pass now to a greater, now to a lesser perfection” (E3p11s; see also E4p27, E4pref | G II 
208/24—-30). A human body can survive transitions from sadness to joy (E3DefAffect), 
from sickness to health (E5p39s), and, more generally, from childhood to old age (see E5p6s 
and E5p39s; Htibner 2017, pp. 43-44). A human body can therefore survive the relatively 
minor transition from walking to resting. Indeed, he seems to think that all bodies can sur- 
vive similar changes, and treats it as axiomatic that “each body moves now more slowly, 


195 


JOHN MORRISON 


now more quickly”(E2P13sPhysDigA1). There is a systematic reason why all bodies must 
be capable of change. If a body existed for only an instant, its power couldn’t increase. But 
Spinoza says that it is essential to all bodies to strive to increase their power (E3p6 in light 
of E3p12d). 

Waller (2012, ch. 8) suggests reinterpretations of these claims. According to Waller, 
Spinoza is merely saying, for example, that each body can be replaced by a similar body that 
is moving more slowly or more quickly, and, likewise, that a body strives to be replaced by 
a similar body with more power. But there’s no textual evidence that Spinoza is speaking 
loosely. It would be better to preserve the literal meaning of what he says. 

Finally, perdurantists would deny either the discernibility or the identity of Morning 
Peter and Night Peter, depending on how these names are disambiguated. Like exduran- 
tists, perdurantists claim that there was a series of different bodies, some moving, others 
resting, some with bent knees, others with straight knees. Unlike exdurantists, perduran- 
tists claim that there were also longer-lived bodies composed of those shorter-lived bodies 
(see Quine 1950; Lewis 1986, ch. 4). Peter is one of those longer-lived objects. He exists 
“partly” whenever one of his short-lived parts exists. Thus, according to perdurantists, 
there were many things that were moving in the morning: to start, there were all the short- 
lived bodies, perhaps as many as one for each instant in the morning. In addition, there 
was Peter, and all the other longer-lived bodies composed of at least one of those short- 
lived bodies. As a result, the names ‘Morning Peter’ and ‘Night Peter’ are ambiguous, 
because I let Morning Peter be the body that was moving in the morning, and I let Night 
Peter be the body that was resting at night, when in fact more than one body satisfies those 
descriptions. To start, there were all the short-lived bodies that were moving. In addition, 
there were all the longer-lived bodies composed of at least one of those short-lived bodies. As 
perdurantism is developed by Lewis and others, there were so many other composite bodies 
that it is indeterminate which of them is Peter (see especially Lewis 1993). In any case, if 
we disambiguate these names so that they refer to the same long-lived body, and that body 
is composed of at least one short-lived body that was moving in the morning and at least 
one short-lived body that was resting at night, then perdurantists would deny their dis- 
cernibility. After all, just because a person has parts that instantiate contrary properties 
(e.g. the elliptical shape of their leg and the disk shape of their ear), it doesn’t follow that 
the person as a whole instantiates contrary properties. Alternatively, if we disambiguate 
these names so that they refer to anything else that satisfies the relevant descriptions, per- 
durantists would deny their identity, because composites are identical only if they share all 
the same parts. In either case, perdurantism is consistent with the Indiscernibility of 
Identicals, because there is no object that instantiates contrary properties. 

Spinoza can’t use perdurantism to solve the puzzle. As noted above, Spinoza is commit- 
ted to saying that all bodies are capable of change, even the shortest-lived. It follows that, 
if Peter is composed of short-lived bodies, he is composed of bodies that are capable of 
change. The puzzle would therefore merely be relocated to these bodies. Perdurantism is a 
solution to the puzzle of change only if the shortest-lived bodies don’t change, and for 
Spinoza they must. 

There’s another reason why Spinoza can’t accept perdurantism, at least as it is stan- 
dardly developed. Most perdurantists claim that the shortest-lived bodies are instanta- 
neous, precisely because that implies that they are incapable of change. However, like 
Descartes, Spinoza rejects the view that motion and other processes can be decomposed 
into instantaneous stages (Ep12 | G IV 58/12-15; DPP2p6s | G I 193/25-194/2, 
195/23-27; for a contrary interpretation of these passages, see Waller 2012, pp. 91-93). 


196 


SPINOZA ON NUMERICAL IDENTITY AND TIME 


He thus can’t countenance instantaneous bodies. 

It’s also worth mentioning that he never talks about instantaneous bodies, or even 
short-lived bodies. He also never describes longer-lived bodies as composed of bodies that 
exist at different times. He instead describes longer-lived bodies as existing at each instant 
because their patterns of motion are preserved at each instant, rather than because they 
have a part at each instant (see E2P13sPhysDigD1 above). Indeed, whenever he talks 
about the parts of bodies, he only mentions their spatial parts (E1p15s, E2P13sPhysDigL5; 
Waller 2012, p. 86). He seems to accept the traditional view that bodies exist “wholly,” 
rather than “partly,” at each instant. 

There are two passages that might seem to suggest perdurantism, but on closer exami- 
nation don’t. Here’s the first passage: 


We live in continuous change, and that as we change for the better or worse, we are called 
happy or unhappy. . . . In this life, then, we strive especially that the infant’s body may change 
(as much as its nature allows and assists) into another, capable of a great many things and 
related to a mind very much conscious of itself, of God, and of things. (E5p39s) 


Spinoza says that an infant’s body may change into an adult's body. According to the perdu- 
rantist, this happens when the infant’s body (as an early temporal part) is destroyed and 
replaced by a series of bodies culminating in the adult’s body (as a later temporal part). 
This passage doesn’t rule out the possibility that people persist in this way. But it also 
doesn’t commit Spinoza to anything so specific. It just says that the same body can belong 
to different kinds at different times, e.g. as an infant at one time, as an adult at another; as 
a moving thing at one time, as a resting thing at another. And that’s true on almost all 
accounts of persistence. 
Here’s the second passage: 


The human body, to be preserved, requires a great many other bodies, by which it is, as it were, 
continually regenerated. (E2P13sPhysDigP4) 


Spinoza says that a person’s body is, as it were, continually regenerated. Perdurantism gives 
a natural account of the sense in which a person might be continually regenerated. But I 
take the phrase ‘as it were’ in this passage to indicate that this is not really a case of regen- 
eration. In support of this interpretation, consider that he omits the entire phrase ‘by 
which it is, as it were, continually regenerated’ when he restates this postulate in E4p3 9d. 

There’s a final mark against perdurantism. Even if Spinoza could be a perdurantist 
about bodies, there would still be a puzzle, because he can’t be a perdurantist about the 
extended substance, God. Why not? Spinoza denies that God has parts (E1p13; 
Schmaltz 2021). While his argument is explicitly about spatial parts, it equally estab- 
lishes that God doesn’t have temporal parts. Here is his argument: suppose that God’s 
parts are themselves substances with infinitely many attributes. In that case, we can’t 
distinguish them by their attributes, because all of them would have all of the same 
attributes. But that contradicts Spinoza’s claim that substances can’t share attributes 
(E1p5). If the parts are temporal, there’s another reason why he has to reject this possi- 
bility. Temporal parts exist at some times but not at other times, and thus substances with 
infinitely many attributes would have to exist at some times but not at other times. 
But that contradicts Spinoza’s claim that substances with infinitely many attributes 
exist necessarily, and thus at all times (E1lp11, El1d8). Alternatively, suppose that God’s 


197 


JOHN MORRISON 


parts are either substances with fewer attributes or modes of a substance. In either case, 
they could all be destroyed, and thus God could be destroyed (E1 p12). But that would con- 
tradict Spinoza’s claim that God necessarily exists (E1p11). Thus, for the same reason he 
denies that God has spatial parts, he must deny that God has temporal parts. Perdurantism 
therefore doesn’t offer a general solution to the puzzle. There would still be a puzzle about 
how God can instantiate contrary properties at different times. 


4. Indiscernibility of Identicals 
Here, again, is the puzzle: 


(a) Morning Peter instantiated motion in the morning, and Night Peter instantiated a 
contrary property at night (namely: rest). 

(b) Morning Peter and Night Peter are numerically identical. 

(c) If x and y are numerically identical, and x instantiated a property at a time, there is 
no time at which y instantiated a contrary property. 


Almost all contemporary philosophers reject either the identity or the discernibility of a 
person over time, i.e. (a) or (b). This is not a coincidence. Contemporary philosophers 
believe that, if we want to be coherent, these are our only options. But there is a third 
option: reject the Indiscernibility of Identicals, perhaps in favor of the principle restricted 
to a time. 

I believe that Spinoza would respond in this third way. The argument is straightforward: 
He is committed to (a) and (b), and these commitments are jointly inconsistent with (c). 

Of course, philosophers sometimes have inconsistent commitments. But if Spinoza 
were committed to (a)-(c), he would have noticed the inconsistency. After all, it is com- 
pletely straightforward. Spinoza was also deeply interested in identity, especially its 
necessary conditions. For example, in response to Descartes, he claims that the thinking 
substance and the extended substance are identical even though each can be conceived 
without the other (E1p10s). It thus seems especially unlikely that Spinoza of all people 
would fail to notice the inconsistency. It would also be completely out of character for him 
to notice the inconsistency and dishonestly choose to ignore it. 

There are three additional considerations in favor of this interpretation. The first is that 
Spinoza nowhere relies on the Indiscernibility of Identicals, as opposed to the restricted 
principle: 


If x and y are numerically identical, and x instantiated a property at a time, then y didn’t 
instantiate a contrary property at that time. 


For example, he argues that a body isn’t an extended substance, because the body has 
parts while an extended substance doesn’t (E1p13c, E2p10s). This argument presupposes 
a link between identity and indiscernibility, but doesn’t require the Indiscernibility of 
Identicals, because the extended substance lacks parts at the same time that the human 
body has parts. Of course, this is just one of his arguments involving identity and indis- 
cernibility. But I can’t find any arguments that require the Indiscernibility of Identicals 
rather than this more restricted principle. 


198 


SPINOZA ON NUMERICAL IDENTITY AND TIME 


Spinoza might still accept the converse principle, called the Identity of Indiscer- 
nibles. According to this principle: 


If for every property of x there is no time at which y instantiated a contrary property, then x 
and y are numerically identical. 


While Spinoza never explicitly commits himself to this principle, he does assume that 
numerically distinct substances must be discriminable (see Elp4). As Lin (2017, p. 139) 
points out, it is debatable whether this commits Spinoza to the Identity of Indiscernibles, 
because it is unclear whether Spinoza thinks that numerically distinct modes must be dis- 
criminable. But, even if his arguments don’t require the Identity of Indiscernibles, he 
might still accept it. 

In fact, Spinoza might accept this principle for the very reason he would reject the 
Indiscernibility of Identicals. Spinoza seems to think that sharing the same essence is 
necessary and sufficient for numerical identity. He writes: 


I say that to the essence of any thing belongs that which, being given, the thing is necessarily 
posited and which, being taken away, the thing is necessarily taken away . . .(E2d2) 


I take Spinoza to be saying that the essence of a thing is sufficient for that thing (“the thing 
is necessarily posited”) and necessary for that thing (“the thing is necessarily taken 
away”). In that case, x and y are identical if and only if they share the same essence. This 
might give him a reason to accept the Identity of Indiscernibles. In particular, indiscernible 
things must share the same essence, in virtue of being indiscernible. Thus, if sharing the 
same essence is sufficient for identity, being indiscernible is sufficient for identity. This might 
also give him a reason to reject the Indiscernibility of Identicals. In particular, discernible 
things could still be identical, because discernible things could share the same essence. They 
could be discernible merely in their inessential properties, such as any properties that result 
from chance encounters. Thus, being indiscernible might not be sufficient for identity. 

The second consideration is that, even though Spinoza is an eternalist, he has the 
resources to resist the argument for the Indiscernibility of Identicals that I mentioned ear- 
lier. Recall that eternalists are committed to treating times like locations. Thus, if an eter- 
nalist believes that Downstairs Peter is not identical to Upstairs Peter merely because they 
instantiate conflicting properties, an eternalist is committed to believing that Morning 
Peter is not identical to Night Peter if they instantiate conflicting properties. Generalizing, 
if an eternalist believes that objects at different locations aren’t identical merely because 
they instantiate conflicting properties, she is committed to believing that objects at differ- 
ent times aren’t identical if they instantiate conflicting properties, i.e. the Indiscernibility 
of Identicals. Thus, from an eternalist perspective, it might seem that anyone who thinks 
that identity precludes conflicting properties at a time must also think that identity pre- 
cludes conflicting properties at different times. 

But Spinoza has the resources to resist this argument. In particular, Spinoza can deny that 
the non-identity of Downstairs Peter and Upstairs Peter is due to their conflicting properties. 
He can instead attribute their non-identity to the attribute of extension. Crucially, he can then 
say that, even though the attribute of extension prevents a body from have conflicting prop- 
erties at the same time, it allows a body to have conflicting properties at different times. 

Let’s build up to this conclusion. According to Spinoza, the essence of a human body 
imposes a number of restrictions on what states it can have. For example, a human body’s 


199 


JOHN MORRISON 


heart rate cannot exceed 1000 beats per minute, and its internal temperature cannot 
exceed 200° C. Under these extreme conditions, a human body is unable to sustain the 
fixed patternsof motionbetweenitsparts, andisdestroyed(seeagainE2P 13sPhysDigD1).The 
essences of candles, diamonds, tulips, and butterflies don’t impose these same restric- 
tions. Diamonds, for example, don’t have heart rates, and remain intact up to 700°C. But 
there are some restrictions imposed by all bodily essences. For example, all bodily essences 
require a body to have a size, shape, and motion. If something lacks a size, shape, or motion, 
it cannot be a body, and thus cannot be a pig, tulip, diamond, human body, etc. 

What is the origin of this restriction? Given that it is shared by all bodies, it plausibly 
originates in the attribute of extension, because all bodily essences are contained in the 
attribute of extension (E2p8). Another restriction that might follow from the attribute of 
extension is that a body cannot have contrary properties at the same time, so that, for 
example, a body cannot be wholly moving and wholly resting at the same time, or wholly 
white and wholly brown at the same time. Plausibly, just as something that doesn’t move 
cannot be a body, so also something that is both moving and resting cannot be a body. In 
that case, due to the attribute of extension: if x and y are numerically identical bodies, and 
x instantiated a property, then y didn’t instantiate a conflicting property at the same time. 
Spinoza might say that Downstairs Peter and Upstairs Peter cannot be identical because 
the essences of these bodies don’t allow them to simultaneously move and rest, and that 
this restriction originates in the attribute of extension. 

If this is Spinoza’s reason for thinking that identity precludes conflicting properties at a 
time, must he also think that identity precludes conflicting properties at different times? No. 
The essence of a human body allows it to have conflicting properties at different times, 
because the essence of a human body allows for change; it allows a human body to move 
in the morning and to rest at night. Thus, even though the essence of a human body does 
not allow Downstairs Peter and Upstairs Peter to be identical, because of their conflicting 
motions at the same time, it allows Morning Peter and Night Peter to be identical, despite 
their conflicting motions at different times. More generally, even though there is no bodily 
essence that allows a body to have conflicting properties at the same time, all bodily 
essences allow a body to have conflicting properties at different times. This is because, 
whereas the attribute of extension does not allow a body to have conflicting properties at a 
time, it allows a body to have conflicting properties at different times. 

In this way, Spinoza can coherently reject the Indiscernibility of Identicals while accept- 
ing eternalism and the weaker principle. The key is that Spinoza can deny that Downstairs 
Peter is not identical to Upstairs Peter because of the mere fact that they instantiate 
conflicting properties. Instead, they are not identical because of a restriction imposed by 
their essences, a restriction that ultimately originates in the attribute of extension, and 
thus from the nature of body in general. 

It is worth briefly mentioning a possible further refinement: perhaps the relevant 
restriction doesn’t originate in each individual attribute, so that the restriction about 
bodies originates in the attribute of extension, the restriction about ideas originates in the 
attribute of thought, and so on. Perhaps all these restrictions originate from God’s essence 
as a whole. Or perhaps they originate from the nature of being. Of course, a lot would depend 
on how the italicized phrase are understood. But, for present purposes, I just want to point 
out that the restrictions might have a deeper origin than each individual attribute. 

The third consideration is that it is highly probable that Spinoza was exposed to a 
philosophical tradition in which philosophers would reject the Indiscernibility of Identicals. 
Aristotle says that the most certain of all principles is that “the same attribute cannot at the 


200 


SPINOZA ON NUMERICAL IDENTITY AND TIME 


same time belong and not belong to the same subject in the same respect” and that this 
implies that “it is impossible that contrary attributes should belong at the same time to the 
same subject” (Metaphysics Gamma, ch. 4, 1005b19-—20 and 26-27, Trans. Ross in p. 46, 
1984, emphasis added). He thus accepts the restricted principle. In other work, I argue 
that four of the most influential medieval Aristotelians — Aquinas, Scotus, Ockham and 
Buridan — would reject the Indiscernibility of Identicals in favor of this principle (Morrison, 
manuscript). While I do not know whether Spinoza read these authors, he might have 
absorbed their tradition through a number of intermediaries, such as the Jewish authors 
he read in yeshiva, or the scholastic authors he read at the University of Leiden 
(Nadler 1999, ch. 4; Costa 2021, this volume; Krop 2021). It was in the air. 

There is also evidence that he interpreted Descartes in this way. He attributes to 
Descartes the view, “Even though the hardness, weight, and the rest of the sensible qual- 
ities are separated from a body, the nature of the body will still remain whole”(DPP2p1). 
Spinoza also attributes to Descartes the axiom, “If something can be removed from a 
thing, while the thing remains intact [integra], it does not constitute the thing’s essence...” 
(DPP2a2). It follows that a body remains “intact” even as it changes its sensible qualities. 
Thus, Spinoza might have absorbed this tradition through Descartes (and see Morrison, 
forthcoming b). 

In any case, if Spinoza were working in this tradition, the Indiscernibility of Identicals 
wouldn’t have seemed like a principle that needed to be given up; it wouldn’t have seemed 
true. In contrast, he wasn’t exposed to a tradition in which philosophers endorsed relation- 
ism or adverbialism. While he might have been exposed to a tradition in which philoso- 
phers endorsed exdurantism (through the Stoics), his claims seem to explicitly rule it out. 
And while he might also have been exposed to a tradition in which philosophers endorse 
perdurantism about some things (e.g. times, rivers; see Pasnau 2011, ch. 18), it is less 
likely, and there is also no suggestion that he’s extending this tradition to human bodies or 
minds. Because exdurantism and perdurantism would have been marginal views, we also 
wouldn’t expect Spinoza to take them for granted. We would expect him to more explicitly 
acknowledge them, and perhaps even defend them. 


5. Conclusion 


In the introduction I listed four other claims that seem to conflict with the Indiscernibility 
of Identicals. As a way of demonstrating the fruitfulness of our interpretation, let’s con- 
sider one of them: the claim that a person’s body is numerically identical to their mind, 
even though their body moves and does not think, and their mind thinks and does not 
move (E2p7s). This claim generates a parallel puzzle. For concreteness, let’s again focus on 
Peter, in particular on his body and mind while he is moving in the morning. Unlike before, 
let’s use the canonical formulation of the Indiscernibility of Identicals, because it is easier 
to establish that Peter’s mind is not moving than to establish that thinking and moving are 
contrary properties. Here’s the puzzle: 


(a’) Peter’s body instantiated motion, whereas Peter’s mind did not instantiate motion. 

(b’) Peter’s body and Peter’s mind are numerically identical. 

(c’) If x and y are numerically identical, x instantiated a property if and only if y instanti- 
ated that property. 


201 


JOHN MORRISON 


These claims seem jointly inconsistent. Which claim would Spinoza reject? According 
to most commentators, he would reject (a’) or (b’). But, as I argue in other work, there 
is an abundance of evidence that he’s really committed to them (Morrison, forth- 
coming a). 

Another option is that Spinoza would reject (c’), at least when understood so that it is 
inconsistent with (a’) and (b’) (Garrett 2017; Morrison 2017, forthcoming a; Bledin and 
Melamed manuscript). As I think this proposal is best developed, attributes are time-like, so 
that, just as Peter is numerically identical over time despite instantiating different prop- 
erties at different times (e.g. motion in the morning and rest at night), Peter is numerically 
identical across attributes despite instantiating different properties in different attributes 
(e.g. motion in the attribute of extension and thought in the attribute of thought). So 
developed, the proposal is that Peter’s identity across both times and attributes is due to his 
essence. There’s a lot to say about this interpretation, especially its implications for Peter’s 
essence. But I hope this is enough to illustrate how our interpretation might generalize to 
some of Spinoza’s other puzzling claims about identity. Our interpretation thereby opens 
the door to a systematic understanding of many different corners of Spinoza’s 
metaphysics. 


References 


Baxter, D.L.M. (1999). The discernibility of identicals. Journal of Philosophical Research 24: 37-55. 

Bledin, J. and Melamed, Y.Y. (manuscript). Ethica more logico demonstrata. 

Carriero, J.P. (1995). On the relationship between mode and substance in Spinoza’s metaphysics. 
Journal of the History of Philosophy 33 (2): 245-273. 

Chisholm, R.M. (1976). Person and Object: A Metaphysical Study. Chicago: Open Court. 

Costa, E. (2021). Spinoza and scholastic philosophy. In: A Companion to Spinoza (ed, Y.Y. Melamed), 
47-55. Oxford: Wiley Blackwell. 

Della Rocca, M. (1996). Representation and the Mind-Body Problem in Spinoza. New York: Oxford 
University Press. 

Garrett, D. (1994). Spinoza’s theory of metaphysical individuation. In: Individuation and Identity in 
Early Modern Philosophy: Descartes to Kant (ed. J.J.E. Gracia and K.F. Barber), 73-101. Albany: 
State University of New York Press. 

Garrett, D. (2017). The indiscernibility of identicals and the transitivity of identity in Spinoza’s logic 
of the attribute. In: Cambridge Critical Guide to Spinoza’s Ethics: A Critical Guide (ed, Y.Y. Melamed), 
12-42. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Gartenberg, Z. (2021). Spinoza on relations. In: A Companion to Spinoza (ed, Y.Y. Melamed), 
187-188. Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell. 

Hansson, T. (2007). The problem(s) of change revisited. Dialectica 61 (2): 265-274. 

Haslanger, S. (2003). Persistence through time. In: The Oxford Handbook of Metaphysics (ed. M.J. Loux 
and D.W. Zimmerman), 315-354. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Hawley, K. (2001). How Things Persist. New York: Oxford University Press. 

Hofweber, T. (2009). The meta-problem of change. Notis 43 (2): 286-314. 

Htibner, K. (2017). The trouble with feelings, or Spinoza on the identity of power and essence. Journal 
of the History of Philosophy 55 (1): 35-53. 

Johnston, M. (1987). Is there a problem about persistence? Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 61: 
107-135. 

Krop, H. (2021). The Dutch philosophical background of Spinoza. In: A Companion to Spinoza (ed. 
Y.Y, Melamed), 68-80. Oxford: Wiley Blackwell. 


202 


SPINOZA ON NUMERICAL IDENTITY AND TIME 


Kurtz, R.M. (2006). Introduction to Persistence: What's the problem? In: Persistence: Contemporary 
Readings (ed. S. Haslinger and R.M. Kurtz), 1-26. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 

Lewis, D. (1986). On the Plurality of Worlds. Oxford: Blackwell. 

Lewis, D. (1993). Many, but almost one. In: Ontology, Causality and Mind: Essays in Honour of D.M. 
Armstrong (ed. K. Campbell, J. Bacon, and L. Reinhardt), 23-38. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press. 

Lin, M. (2017). The principle of sufficient reason in Spinoza. In: The Oxford Handbook of Spinoza (ed. 
M. Della Rocca). New York: Oxford University Press. 

Melamed, Y.Y. (2012). Spinoza on inherence, causation, and conception. Journal of the History of 

Philosophy 50 (3): 365-386. 

Melamed, Y.Y. (2013). Spinoza’s Metaphysics: Substance and Thought. New York: Oxford University 

Press. 

Mellor, D.H. (1998). Real Time II. London: Routledge. 

Morrison, J. (2017). Two puzzles about thought and identity in Spinoza. In: Spinoza’s Ethics: A Critical 

Guide (ed. Y.Y. Melamed), 56-81. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Morrison, J. (manuscript). Three medieval Aristotelians on numerical identity and time. 

Morrison, J. (forthcoming a). Spinoza on mind, body, and numerical identity. Oxford Studies in 

Philosophy of Mind. 

Morrison, J. (forthcoming b). Descartes on numerical identity and time. Australasian Journal of 

Philosophy. 

Myro, G. (1986). Identity and time. In: Philosophical Grounds of Rationality: Intentions, Categories, 

Ends (ed. R.E. Granduy and R. Warner), 383-410. New York: Oxford University Press. 

Nadler, S. (1999). Spinoza: A Life. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Parfit, D. (1984). Reasons and Persons. New York: Oxford University Press. 

Pasnau, R. (2011). Metaphysical Themes 1274-1671. New York: Oxford University Press. 

Perler, D. (2021). Spinoza on diachonic identity. In: A Companion to Spinoza (ed. Y.Y. Melamed), 
170-178. Oxford: Wiley Blackwell. 

Quine, W.V. (1950). Identity, ostension, and hypostasis. The Journal of Philosophy 47 (22): 
621-633. 

Ross, W.D. (1984). The Complete Works of Aristotle: The Revised Oxford Translation. Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press. 

Rychter, P. (2009). There is no puzzle about change. Dialectica 63 (1): 7-22. 

Schmaltz, T. (2021). Spinoza’s mereology. In: A Companion to Spinoza (ed. Y.Y. Melamed), 135-143. 
Oxford: Wiley Blackwell. 

Sider, T. (1996). All the world’s a stage. Australasian Journal of Philosophy 74 (3): 433-453. 

Sider, T. (2001). Four Dimensionalism: An Ontology of Persistence and Time. New York: Oxford University 
Press. 

Sider, T. (2008). Temporal parts. In: Contemporary Debates in Metaphysics (ed. T. Sider, J. Hawthorne, 
and D.W. Zimmerman), 241—262. Malden, MA: Blackwell. 

Tarski, A. (1994). Introduction to Logic and to the Methodology of the Deductive Sciences. New York: 
Oxford University Press. First published in 1941. 

Varzi, A.C. (2003a). Entia successiva. Rivista di Estetica 43 (1): 139-158. 

Varzi, A.C. (2003b). Naming the stages. Dialectica 57 (4): 387-412. 

Waller, J. (2012). Persistence Through Time in Spinoza. Lanham, MD: Lexington Books. 

Wasserman, R. (2006). The problem of change. Philosophy Compass 1 (1): 48-57. 


203 


aly, 


Spinoza on Universals 


KAROLINA HUBNER 


The problem of universals— of what can be instantiated in many things —is one of the oldest 
problems in philosophy. By virtue of what are all (say) red things red? Is there something — 
for example, some universal redness — that they all have in common? The range of possible 
responses to this question is vast, but, prominently, includes the following three options: 
what we could call (1) Platonism (there is something like a common redness prior to, and 
independent of, all red particulars); (2) (non-platonic) Realism (there is indeed a universal 
redness common to all red particulars, but this redness is not independent of particulars; 
rather, it is immanent to, and constitutive of, them); (3) Nominalism (or conceptualism): 
redness is a mind-dependent category under which we group similar particulars. 

One of the oddities of Spinoza’s view of universals is that he endorses both Realism and 
Nominalism. That is, on the issue of the ontological status of universals, Spinoza’s bottom- 
line commitment is to an anti-Platonism: whenever we are dealing with bona fide univer- 
sality, the universal in question cannot be prior, ontologically (or explanatorily), to the 
particulars. 

This fundamental anti-Platonism reflects Spinoza’s conviction that the only things that 
genuinely exist are particulars, i.e. things incapable of being instantiated in many things: 
“only the particulars have a cause, not the universals because they are nothing. God. . .is a 
cause of, and provider for, only particular things” (KV 1.6 | G I/43). In Spinoza’s view, 
there are no universal natures, such as redness or humanity, capable of existing indepen- 
dently both of minds and of particulars. From Spinoza’s perspective, the real philosophical 
challenge is to correctly adjudicate which cases of purported universality require a Realist 
account, which a Nominalist one, and which, finally, must be dismissed as not genuine 
instances of universality. 

From an interpreter’s perspective, the challenge is that, to articulate Spinoza’s position, 
we have to cobble together scattered remarks, and, in places, fill in gaps with educated 
speculation. The interpretative task is further complicated by the fact that Spinoza’s 
assessment of the epistemic value of universals — the extent to which ideas of universals can 
be adequate — remains one of the most misunderstood aspects of his thought. But we’ll start 
with the ontological problem. 


A Companion to Spinoza, First Edition. Edited by Yitzhak Y. Melamed. 
© 2021 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2021 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd. 


204 


SPINOZA ON UNIVERSALS 


1. Spinoza’s Realism 


1d; 


Spinoza’s ontology is a mixed bag: he is a (non-platonic) Realist in the sense defined above about 
some universals and a Nominalist about others. More precisely, he is a Realist about fundamental 
qualitative kinds, or fundamental ways of having being, such as being physical (“extended”) or 
mental (“thinking”). That is, in his view there is indeed something intrinsically and constitu- 
tively common to (for example) all bodies, mind-independently so. Ontologically, all Spinozistic 
bodies are modifications of an extended divine substance. Consequently, every body is in part 
constituted by — consists or is composed of — extension determined in a particular way (as this 
tree, or that rock, etc.), where “extension” is an essential, qualitative, and determinable sub- 
stantial nature. Derivatively, every body is also constituted in part by a capacity for “motion and 
rest”: “all bodies agree. . .in that they can move now more slowly, now more quickly, and that 
now they move, now they are at rest” (E2Ld | G II/98). An analogous Realist account can be 
given for all thinking things: all ideas (and so also all the minds and intellects that these ideas 
compose), really do have something in common, intrinsically, constitutively, and mind-inde- 
pendently: namely, thought as a determinable, qualitative, essential substantial nature. 

In short, on Spinoza’s view, certain properties are common to all things of a certain kind 
(to all modifications of one substantial “attribute”). These properties are universals in a 
Realist sense, insofar as they are intrinsically and mind-independently instantiated by many 
things —by all particulars under each attribute. Such properties (extension, thought, motion- 
or-rest, etc.) are not just “common to all things” but “equally in the part and in the whole” 
(E2p37): wholly and without distinction present in each particular. Extension is extension is 
extension, whether it constitutes a tree or a mosquito. The same concrete divine nature, dif- 
ferently determined, constitutes both. Such common properties most deserve the traditional 
label “universal” in Spinoza’s eyes, which the scholastics had misidentified with genera: 


although these fixed and eternal things are singular, nevertheless, because of their presence 
everywhere, and most extensive power, they will be to us like universals, or genera of the defi- 
nitions of singular, changeable things. (TIE §101) 


A complete list of common properties would include all ubiquitous or pervasive effects of 
substantial essence. Causal power is one plausible candidate for that list, since the cause of 
any thing existing and having effects is ultimately the same, more-or-less mediated, divine 
power. But there are many other general concepts in Spinoza’s ontology (for example, attri- 
bute, mode, essence) whose objects do not seem to be common properties. Consider for in- 
stance the concept of an “attribute.” It is true that every Spinozistic thing exists and is 
knowable under some attribute. But this is not in the Realist sense that something like 
“attributeness” constitutes every thing. (Rather, extension or thought —a specific substan- 
tial nature — does). So to account for the apparent universality of “attribute”, a non-Realist 
account is needed. 


1,2. 


Before we turn to this issue, it’s worth noting one more thing about common properties. 
Ideas of common properties, i.e. “common notions” (E2p38c), have the following curious 
epistemic property. According to Spinoza, it is impossible for them to be inadequate. To see 


205 


KAROLINA HUBNER 


why, consider what it takes to form an idea of, say, any body simply qua extended. According 
to Spinoza, my ideas of external bodies are “confused” if they present such bodies without 
distinguishing them from my own body (E2p28). (This happens, for example, when the 
idea I take to be of the sun itself in fact represents how the sun affects my sense organs.) 
But common properties are “equally in the part and in the whole”: wholly and without 
distinction in each thing. So, for the adequacy of my idea of a body as extended it does not 
matter if I am representing extension as it is in the sun, or as it is in my body, or as it is in 
an amalgam of the two. Extension is extension is extension. 

Because common notions are insulated against error in this way, and because no idea 
inferable from an adequate idea can itself be inadequate (E2p40), these notions can form 
the “foundation of our reasoning” (E2p40s1 | GI/120/16). They are our chance to escape 
the confusions occasioned by sense experience. Moreover, the reasons that assure the ade- 
quacy of our ideas of what is common to all things also assure the adequacy of our ideas 
of anything common “to the human Body and certain external bodies by which the human 
Body is usually affected,” even if this property is not ubiquitous in nature but instead 
“particular” to this subset of bodies, as long as it “is equally in the part and in the whole” 
of each body in question (E2p39). Such relative or circumscribed common properties will 
also count as universals in the Realist sense insofar as they are “equally” in many things. 
Spinoza’s accounts of the nature of the human mind and of human emotions both can be 
read as accounts of such relative common properties (E3p56s | G II/186). As a consequence, 
the more we have in common with things around us — and, in part, this means, the more 
diverse we ourselves are (Sharp 2011, pp. 98-99) —the broader the epistemic “foundation” 
on which we can rely in adequately “reasoning.” 

This does not mean that we cannot put common notions, of either kind, to bad use: 
although we cannot fail to have an adequate idea of extension for example, we can still 
“join” it to others of more dubious value, producing more complex inadequate representa- 
tions (cf. E2p47s | GII/128). 


2. Spinoza’s Nominalism 


2d, 


Let us return to the question with which we began: in virtue of what are all red things red? 
Or, for that matter, in virtue of what are Fido and Spot both dogs? It is difficult to see how 
either redness or canine nature could be something that is “equally in the part in the 
whole,” even for some circumscribed subset of particulars. So, in contrast to fundamental 
kinds like thought and extension, neither redness nor caninity will deserve a Realist 
account by Spinoza’s lights: there is nothing like a universal canine nature that mind-inde- 
pendently and intrinsically constitutes the relevant tail-wagging individuals; mutatis mu- 
tandis for red things. 

Spinoza offers a Nominalist account of the many properties and kinds to which we refer 
by general terms (such as “red” or “dog”), but which do not meet the common property crite- 
rion of being “equally in the part and in the whole.” Such Nominalist universals are the 
products of our own mental activity, and more specifically of acts of abstraction and 
comparison. On this account, thinking about particulars in general terms over and above 
common notions is possible because we recognize that certain among these particulars 
(for example, Fido and Spot) resemble one another in certain respects. (That resemblance 


206 


SPINOZA ON UNIVERSALS 


sometimes obtains seems to be just a fact for Spinoza.) But to compare the properties of partic- 
ulars, we must be able to consider the properties in question abstractly: that is, to attend selec- 
tively to one property while ignoring others (cf. TIE §57). (For example, we must be able to 
attend only to four-leggedness, while ignoring size and color.) On the basis of perceived 
similarities, we can then construct general ideas, such as “dog,” capable of representing in 
one fell swoop many similar particulars. Universals represented by general ideas of this sort 
can thus be understood as respects in which particular things recognizably resemble one 
another. (Being four-legged is one such respect; being red another.) In contrast, what has “no 
likeness” to other things cannot be “conceived abstractly, or [sive] universally” (TIE §76). 

Ideas of universals formed in this way represent nothing over and above the compared 
particulars, and refer distributively only to those particulars: “From the fact that we com- 
pare things with one another certain notions arise which nevertheless are nothing outside 
the things themselves but modes of thinking” (CM 1.5 | G 1/245). Ideas of such universals 
do not represent something real in things themselves, but mind-dependent “beings of 
reason” and “imagination.” So although the surface grammar of “Fido is a dog” and “Fido 
is an extended thing” is the same, the ontological grounding of these two propositions is 
very different. 

Spinoza’s most detailed case study of a mind-dependent universal whose idea is con- 
structed through abstraction and comparison can be found in his account of the will. 
Spinoza is well known for denying the existence of a free will, but he also rejects the idea of 
a “faculty” of will over and above particular affirmations intrinsic to individual ideas 
(E2p49d). And just as he offers a genealogical account of our mistaken belief that we are 
free (undetermined) in our actions (Elapp | GII/78), he also offers a genealogical account 
of our belief in the existence of a general faculty of will, one that would be present in each 
thinker, and operative in each mental act. In his view, such a will can only be a mind- 
dependent universal, signifying affirmation in general, and formed by abstracting from the 
diverse contents affirmed by each idea and essential to them as distinct particulars: 


will is something universal, which is predicated of all ideas, and which signifies only what is 
common to all ideas, viz. the affirmation, whose adequate essence, therefore, insofar as it is 
thus conceived abstractly, must be in each idea, and in this way only must be the same in all, 
but not insofar as it is considered to constitute the idea’s essence; for in that regard the singular 
affirmations differ. (E2p49s[IIB(iii)] | G 11/135) 


However, Spinoza’s relative reticence about mind-dependent universals may be at least 
partially explained by the fact that, by and large, his position is simply not that original. 
Both the idea of grounding of general ideas in perceived similarity and the distributive 
understanding of their referents are found in his two most influential predecessors, 
Descartes and Hobbes. (Descartes holds, for instance, that “universals arise solely from the 
fact that we use one and the same idea for thinking of all individual things which are sim- 
ilar to each other” (Principles of Philosophy 1.59), and Hobbes that “one universal name is 
imposed on many things, for their similitude in some quality, or other accident” (Leviathan 
4.7); “a common name, being the name of many things severally taken, but not collec- 
tively of all together (as man is not the name of all mankind, but of every one, as of Peter, 
John, and the rest severally) is therefore called an universal name” (De corpore 2.9).) 

But why, we may wonder, do we construct universal ideas at all, on Spinoza’s account? 
The answer seems to lie in our finitude, in two senses. First, as finite knowers, we are simply 
unable to distinctly represent all the infinite variety of particulars that the world contains. 


207 


KAROLINA HUBNER 


Their similarities offer us a way of thinking them that does not require us to first grasp 
each thing distinctly. We can instead “reduce” them “to certain classes” (CM 1.1 | G 
1/234). There is, in short, a usefulness to general ideas: they empower us by allowing us to 
“retain or imagine things themselves more easily” (CM 1.5 | G 1/245). General ideas allow 
us to do more things in thought: once we have grouped particulars into classes, we can 
make further, this time normative, comparisons — for example, by judging particulars to be 
more or less “perfect” instances of their kinds (E4Pref | G II/207-8). And the possibility of 
making such normative judgments is arguably crucial for the possibility of our ethical 
progress towards greater perfection. 

There is a second way in which our finitude plays a role in explaining our tendency to 
think in general terms, beyond what is warranted by the existence of common properties. 
Spinoza thinks that our bodily finitude inevitably leads to the formation of general ideas. 
Encounters with other bodies leave impressions, or “images,” on our own bodies; given the 
finitude of the latter, these images get overlaid and confused. Ideas formed by thinking the 
resulting composite images — largely confused ideas that we can then “predicat[e]” “of infi- 
nitely many singulars” — represent “distinctly” only what the bodies we have come across 
“all agree in, insofar as they affect the body” (that is, only genuinely common properties) 
(E2p40s1 | GII/120-1). 

This account suggests that we simply cannot avoid thinking in general terms: our bodily 
finitude consigns our ideas to generality. But it also makes clear that general ideas formed 
in this way, through sense experience alone, are highly inadequate: they are arbitrary 
(since they depend on what bodies I happen to encounter, and on the condition of my own 
body at the time); they are also merely relative (since they reflect not what an external body 
is essentially, but only how it affects me); they represent only similarities discoverable by 
the senses (and, among those, only the kinds of sensible similarities that become apparent 
relative to what my own body is like); finally, they are formed passively, according to the 
“common order” of external causes in nature, and not under the guidance and discipline 
of the intellect. In this case, the “abstraction” that is part of the formation of ideas of mind- 
dependent universals for Spinoza is not something I do actively, but rather something that 
happens to me: I notice only some of the properties of the things impinging on me, in 
proportion to their frequency, in reflection of my own bodily state. (I might, for example, 
conclude that redness is an essential feature of all apples.) 

This account makes it difficult to see how Spinoza could nonetheless hold that, outside 
the sphere of common notions, general ideas are empowering and epistemically useful, 
and even help us genuinely “understand things distinctly” (KV 1.10 | GI/49). It is to this 
problem that we now turn. 


3. Good and Bad Universals 


31. 


In large part because of passages like E2p40s1, just cited, there is an overwhelming con- 
sensus among commentators that Spinoza is no friend either of general ideas or univer- 
sals. Some argue that for Spinoza all the general ideas we get through abstraction are 
necessarily inadequate (e.g. Newlands 2015, p. 257; Peterman 2014, p. 216). Some go 
even further, concluding that, for Spinoza, all general ideas are confused (e.g. Curley 1973, 
p. 357; Savan 1958). On such interpretations, confusion is an ineliminable downside of all 


208 


SPINOZA ON UNIVERSALS 


conceptual generality, such that, as far as Spinoza is concerned, no adequate philosophical 
account should rely on general ideas. 

Both of these ways of reading of Spinoza seem to me to be misreadings. On his view, 
there is nothing about universals (even abstract universals) as such that disqualifies them 
from being part of an adequate philosophical account. Indeed, I think that Spinoza’s own 
epistemology and philosophical method in the Ethics both depend on the possibility of fully 
rational, and indeed true, abstract general notions. But let me first explain where the 
opposing view gets its steam. 

Spinoza certainly holds that generality brings with it a danger of confusion. He worries 
about two kinds of confusion in particular. First, once we start thinking in general terms, 
we can overlook the differences among particulars: “since there are many things in nature 
whose difference is so slight that it almost escapes the intellect, it can easily happen, if they 
are conceived abstractly, that they are confused” (TIE §76 | GII/29/7-11). Second, we can 
mistake what is mind-dependent for what is real: ideas of beings of reason “arise from the 
ideas of real beings so immediately that they are quite easily confused with them by those 
who do not pay very close attention” (CM 1.11 | G I/234). Hence, “so long as we are 
dealing with Investigation of things, we must never infer anything from abstractions, 
and. . .mix up [things] that are only in the intellect with those that are in things” (TIE §93). 
(Here too, compare Descartes: “the only thing which causes difficulty in this area is the fact 
that we do not sufficiently distinguish between things existing outside our thought and the 
ideas of things, which are in our thought” (AT IV 350).) 

Spinoza also often implies that ideas of universals and abstractions have a lower epi- 
stemic value than thought that deals with particulars alone. For example, he insists that the 
“best conclusion will have to be drawn from some particular affirmative essence” (TIE §93); 
the highest kind of knowledge available to a human mind, scientia intuitiva, proceeds from 
one unique essence to another without mediation by ideas of any shared “properties” 
(E2p40s2). Likewise, God as a knower has no need for generalities (KV 1.6 | GI/43). Spinoza 
also explicitly devalues ideas of genera and species as nothing more than mnemonic devices 
(CM 1.1 | G 1/234) and goes so far as to declare that “transcendental. . .terms like Being, 
Thing and something” reflect merely what we are “accustomed” to “call” things (E4pref | 
GII/207), and “signify ideas confused in the highest degree” (E2p40s1 | GII/120-1). 


3.2; 


Given such declarations, one can certainly understand the draw of readings on which 
Spinoza simply wants nothing to do with universals, nor with the general ideas that repre- 
sent them. Yet such readings simply cannot be correct, for several reasons. 

First, and most obviously, Spinoza clearly cannot reject all ideas of universals as inade- 
quate. This is because, as we saw above, he is committed to the necessary adequacy of 
common notions, and of all ideas that can be inferred from them. So if we were to endorse 
the conclusion that Spinoza condemns all ideas of universals, as Curley and Savan pro- 
pose, then we would have to see Spinoza’s epistemological commitments as inconsistent. 
But, far from being inadequate, common notions represent, as we have seen, the “founda- 
tions” of our reasoning for Spinoza. 

Should we then conclude, with Peterman and Newlands, that although Spinoza does 
not renounce all general ideas, he does view all general ideas formed through abstraction as 
inadequate? Even this weaker conclusion is not supported by Spinoza’s text. We need to be 
more precise about the exact objects of his criticisms. 


209 


KAROLINA HUBNER 


It is certainly true that Spinoza often warns about the potential pitfalls of thinking with 
universals: both about the possibility of confusing particulars considered only generally 
with one another, and of confusing the real and the ideal (i.e. what is mind-dependent). 
But such warnings do not amount to a simple rejection of conceptual generality tout 
court. Instead, they simply urge us to handle it with care. 

Spinoza does also say that general notions such as “being” reflect merely what we “call” 
things, but this only underscores the mind-dependent nature of what such ideas represent. 
It is indeed the case that, in Spinoza’s view, only particulars have mind-independent reality. 
But we cannot confuse mind-dependence with illusion or error. Many moderns (not least 
Leibniz, Berkeley, and Kant) took great care to distinguish the two. So we cannot infer 
simply from the ideality of a universal to its necessary inadequacy. The mind-dependence of 
a given universal does not yet render the general idea representing that universal 
inadequate. 

Likewise, knowledge through particular essences might be the “best” and highest kind 
of knowledge available to us, it may be less prone to errors, and worthy of God himself; but, 
again, this does not show that knowledge that builds on general ideas of properties of 
things does not merely fall short of the epistemic holy grail, but is wholly inadequate. 

Finally, ideas of genera and species may be no more than handy mnemonic devices, but 
this Scholastic and Porphyrian version of conceptual generality (where this generality is 
structured by genera-species relations) is not its only possible version — just as Spinoza’s 
rejection of the Scholastic practice of definition through genera and species does not mean 
that he rejects the practice of offering philosophical definitions simpliciter. Spinoza’s oft- 
cited criticisms of “universal notions” in E2p40s1 are likewise aimed only at the Scholastic 
version of conceptual generality, not at general notions as such. The appearance of the 
Scholastic term “transcendental” in that scholium is a conspicuous clue as to the true 
nature of Spinoza’s target there. That target is the Scholastic principle that we can acquire 
true knowledge of the essences of things through sense experience. For Spinoza this is 
simply never the case. Even when sense experience suffices for acquiring true ideas of real 
things, as in the case of common notions, such notions do not represent the essence of any 
real particular (since the essences of such particulars are unique to them) (E2p37, E2def2). 
Given the finitude of our bodies, what sense experience delivers is not the essences of things, 
as the Scholastics had hoped, but instead, as we have seen, arbitrary and largely (but, again, 
not entirely) confused general ideas of kinds. It is only such experience-based universal 
notions, not ideas of universals generally, that are the object of Spinoza’s opprobrium in 
E2p40s1. So also this scholium does not show that Spinoza rejects all universal notions. 


3.3. 


Here is a better way to understand Spinoza’s position on the epistemic value of mind- 
dependent universals (that is, of universals that do not genuinely constitute things as 
common properties do). Simply put, according to Spinoza there are better and worse ways 
to form general ideas; better and worse ways to understand the ontological status of the 
universals represented by them; and, finally, better and worse ways to relate universals to 
particulars. For Spinoza the true epistemic danger lies not in universals per se, nor even in 
abstract universals, but rather in poorly formed ideas of universals, and in a poor under- 
standing of the nature of universals. 

Consider once again the idea of a will in general. On Spinoza’s account, the rational 
permissibility of our talk of such a will arguably depends on what we are taking ourselves 


210 


SPINOZA ON UNIVERSALS 


to be doing. To be correctly understood, the idea of such a will must be traced back to how we 
think about the similarities of particular ideas, and the fact that our recognition of such 
similarities leads us to ascribe to the ideas in question a shared abstract nature (an affirma- 
tion in general). Will so understood refers to nothing over and above particular ideas. In 
contrast, we will be trafficking in pure “fictions” if instead we take our idea of a will in general 
to refer to a mind-independent universal faculty intrinsically at work in each mental act: 


these and similar faculties are either complete fictions or nothing but Metaphysical beings, or 
universals, which we are used to forming from particulars. So intellect and will are to this or 
that idea, or to this or that volition as “stone-ness” is to this or that stone, or man to Peter or 
Paul... [T]hese faculties are universal notions which are not distinguished from the singulars 
from which we form them. (E2p48s | G II/129-30) 


” 66 


Similarly, when it comes to abstract general notions such as “opposition,” “order,” 
“agreement,” “difference,” and “subject,” which, like the idea of a faculty of will, “arise” 
“If}rom the fact that we compare things with one another,” “[w]e perceive them clearly 
enough I say insofar as we conceive them not as something different from the essences of 
the things opposed, ordered, etc.” (CM 1.5; G 1/245). 

Most importantly perhaps, the epistemic value of general ideas is what distinguishes 
Spinoza’s “first” and “second” kinds of knowledge: the fallible “imagination” from neces- 
sarily adequate “reason.” Spinoza explicitly introduces both of these kinds of knowledge as 
ways of thinking about “many” things and of “form[ing] universal notions”: 


it is clear that we perceive many things and form universal notions: I. from singular things which 
have been represented to us through the senses. . . II. from signs. .. These two ways of regarding 
things I shall henceforth call knowledge of the first kind, opinion or imagination. III. Finally, 
from the fact [Denique ex eo] that we have common notions and adequate ideas of the prop- 
erties of things . . . This I shall call reason and the second kind of knowledge. (E2p40s2 | 
G II/122; emphases added) 


In contrast to scientia intuitiva, both reason and imagination are instances of general 
knowledge, rather than knowledge of particulars qua particulars. The universal notions 
that belong to imagination are the empirically-formed ideas capable of representing dis- 
tinctly only the relative properties of arbitrary collections of things that Spinoza denounces 
in the immediately preceding scholium. In contrast, to exercise reason is to “form universal 
notions” on the basis of necessarily adequate common notions and of “adequate ideas of 
the properties of things.” Imaginative general ideas represent “beings of the imagination”; 
rational general ideas, “beings of reason.” (Thus, for example, “all the notions by which 
ordinary people are accustomed to explain nature are only modes of imagining, and do not 
indicate the nature of anything”; this is a reason to “call them beings not of reason, but of 
imagination” (Elapp | GII/83).) 

Spinoza’s account of kinds of knowledge in E2p40s2 shows that, for him, reasoning is 
not merely grounded in adequate ideas of universals (insofar as it is grounded in common 
notions); reasoning also consists in actively “forming” further “universal notions” on that 
basis. And since ideas of reason, unlike those of the imagination, are “necessarily true” 
(E2p41), Spinoza’s own account of the nature of reason as a matter of “form[ing] universal 
notions” “from the fact that we have common notions and adequate ideas of the properties 
of things” in E2p40s2 makes it clear that his epistemology does allow for true general ideas 
beyond the range of common notions. 


211 


KAROLINA HUBNER 


Presumably one way to “form” these further rational and true universal notions is pre- 
cisely through abstraction, that is, by attending selectively to certain properties, comparing 
them, discerning similarities, and, on that basis, constructing general ideas that will repre- 
sent mind-dependent universals. Spinoza gives several examples of ideas that are both true 
and abstract. For instance, the “abstract” idea of a candle burning in a vacuum involves 
“no fiction, but true and sheer assertions” (TIE §57). Even our knowledge of good and evil 
in the Ethics is a true abstraction (the “true knowledge we have of good and evil” is 
“abstract, or universal” [E4p62s | G II/257/28]). Likewise, the “adequate ideas of prop- 
erties” that, alongside common notions, form the basis of reasoning (E2p40s2) may cer- 
tainly include adequate ideas of particular properties (for example, an adequate idea of the 
redness of this apple). But they may very well also include adequate abstract ideas of prop- 
erties understood as universals (such as the adequate idea of redness in general). 

In short, sense experience on its own produces inadequate abstractions; such empirically- 
based abstract ideas are indeed merely something we are “accustomed” to think (E4pref), 
and can be “confused in the highest degree” (E2p40s1). But this is not the only way to 
think abstractly according to Spinoza. 

Now, we may wonder: in what sense can abstract ideas be true if Spinoza takes truth to 
be an idea’s “agreement” with its “object” (Ela6)? Here is my suggestion: a common 
notion, although general in nature, can be true in the requisite sense because in each case 
it corresponds to the relevant property of a particular. For example, my idea of extension 
“agrees” with extension as it is in my eye and as it is in the sun and in every other body. In 
the case of abstract general notions, agreement with the object has to be understood some- 
what differently presumably: an abstract notion might instead “agree” to a high degree, 
though not perfectly, with the relevant real particulars considered distributively. (Compare 
Spinoza’s talk of different degrees of agreement among human beings in E4p35.) 


3.4, 


If the above account is correct, for Spinoza, general ideas of universals can have very high 
epistemic value after all. They can be not only useful but well-founded, distinct, rational, 
and true. And if we grant that Spinoza’s epistemology has room for rational universal 
notions, his doctrine of common notions no longer appears as an ad hoc concession in the 
course of giving up on universal notions. Rather, common notions can now be seen as only 
one element within a more comprehensive rehabilitation of general ideas. 

I will end by suggesting that the notion of a constructed but rational general idea, a true 
idea of a mind-dependent universal, also allows us to make better sense of Spinoza’s own 
definitions in the Ethics. 

According to Spinoza, good definitions capture the essences of things (Elp8s2 | 
G II/50). Spinoza also appears to regard his own definitions as “real” (and not merely 
“nominal”) and as true (Ep.9 | GI/42-3). From the perspective of these two commitments, 
some of the definitions in the Ethics present no interpretative difficulty. (For example, the 
definition of God is very plausibly read as intended as a true statement of the essence of 
some real particular.) But with certain other of Spinoza’s definitions, it is not always clear 
what the relevant essence is supposed to be. Consider for example the definitions of “attri- 
bute,” “adequate idea,” “adequate cause,” and “affect.” In each case, the definition is pre- 
sumably true, in Spinoza’s eyes at least; but the definiendum is not a unique essence of 
some real particular. What is it then? It cannot be a common property since, as we already 
know, these cannot constitute the essence of anything. 


212 


SPINOZA ON UNIVERSALS 


I want to suggest that the formulation of at least some of these definitions requires 
abstraction, and that their definienda — the essences being defined — should be viewed as 
mind-dependent universals. That is, I think that many of Spinoza’s definitions belong to 
the further “universal notions” formed in reasoning. To return to a problem raised earlier, 
consider for example the definition of “attribute.” How do we form a true idea of the 
essence of an attribute simpliciter, not the essence of thought or of extension? Presumably, 
we start from the common notions of extension and thought, and then abstract from them 
whatever is specific to thought and to extension, attending only to the ways in which they 
resemble one another, in order to articulate what we take them to have in common. 
(According to Spinoza, this is the fact that they are both “perceived” by an “intellect” to 
“constitute” substantial essence (Eldef4).) In this way we arrive at a true “universal 
notion” of the essence of an attribute, understood as a rational representation of a mind- 
dependent, abstract universal, a representation that refers distributively to thought and 
extension as concrete substantial natures, and is true insofar as it “agrees” to a high degree 
with these natures. Or, to put it in terms of E2p40s2: the idea of an “attribute” is a true 
“universal notion” “formed” on the basis of the “common notions” (“extension,” 
“thought”) and of “adequate ideas” of constructed general “properties” (“constitution,” 
“intellectual perception”). 


Acknowledgment 


Thanks to Justin Steinberg for comments on an earlier draft. 


References 


Curley, E.M. (1973). Spinoza’s moral philosophy. In: Spinoza: A Collection of Critical Essays (ed. M. 
Grene), 354-376. New York: Doubleday/Anchor. 

Newlands, S. (2015). Spinoza’s early anti-abstractionism. In: The Young Spinoza (ed. Y.Y. Melamed), 
255-271. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Peterman, A. (2014). Spinoza on physical science. Philosophy Compass 9 (3): 214-223. 

Savan, D. (1958). Spinoza and language, The Philosophical Review 67 (2): 212-225. 

Sharp, H. (2011). Spinoza and the Politics of Renaturalization. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 


213 


20 


Spinoza’s Ontology of Power 


JUAN MANUEL LEDESMA VITERI 


The aim of this chapter is to offer some insight into Spinoza’s understanding of the concept 
of potentia. As is well known amongst scholars, the concept of potentia is fundamental for 
Spinoza. One only needs to look at the second chapter of the Political Treatise (TP) to grasp 
its importance: “The power of natural things (rerum naturaliam potentiam), by which they 
exist, and so the power by which they operate (qua existunt, et consequenter qua operantur), 
cannot be anything but the eternal power of God itself (nullam aliam esse posse quam ipsam 
Dei aeternam potentiam)” (TP, II, 2 (slightly modified)). What does this mean? First of all, for 
Spinoza, God is to be understood, in its essence, as nothing but an absolutely infinite power 
to exist and to act (see E1 p34 and E4p4). This means, in turn, that natural things or natural 
individuals cannot be anything but a part (E4p4, TP, II, 5, TTP, III, 9) of this very power to 
exist and to act that God, sive Nature, is itself. In other words, the very power to exist and to 
act of every single thing in Nature is God’s power itself. This profound unity in potentia 
means that there is no distance or divorce between God and natural things (modes) for 
Spinoza: everything that exists expresses in its existence and its actions the same potentia, 
i.e. the power of God-Nature to exist and to act (TP, Il, 3). The ontological importance of 
the concept of potentia in Spinoza’s philosophy is thus revealed: understood as the power to 
exist and to act, it explains the fundamental relation of immanent causation between God 
(or Nature) as an absolute and the infinite individuals that exist and act in nature. For 
Spinoza, this potentia is the same power that every existing thing expresses when it perse- 
veres in existence as a conatus, i.e. as a power or striving (potentia sive conatus) to persevere 
in its being (E3p7d). Finally, the concept of power serves not only as the ontological ground 
for the concept of conatus (for existence conceived as dynamic striving), but it allows 
Spinoza to directly attribute a political function to the power to strive and persevere insofar 
as it is equivalent to natural right. As Spinoza writes in the TP: “by the Right of nature (jus 
naturae), then, I understand the laws of nature themselves, or the rules according to which 
all things happen, i.e. the very power of nature (ipsam naturae potentiam). So the natural 
Right of the whole of nature, and as a result, of each individual, extends as far as its power 
does” (TP, II, 4). 

From ontology, to ethics and politics, the concept of potentia seems to embody the unity 
of Spinoza’s thought. And while this importance has been recognized by scholarship, 


A Companion to Spinoza, First Edition. Edited by Yitzhak Y. Melamed. 
© 2021 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2021 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd. 


214 


SPINOZA’S ONTOLOGY OF POWER 


mainly in France (see Melamed’s account 2012, p. 20, and the works of Gueroult 1968, 
Deleuze 1969, Negri 2006, Matheron 1969, 2011, Lazzeri 1999, and Leerke 2009), little 
has been done about the origins or the genesis of this concept in Spinoza’s philosophy. Thus, 
in this chapter, I will try to demonstrate (1) that this radical ontology of potentia can be 
accurately traced to the first part of the Ethics, namely to the propositions preparing the 
proofs of God’s necessary existence (El p9—10); and (2) that the progressive construction 
of an ontology of potentia in the first part of the Ethics allowed Spinoza to resolve some 
fundamental issues in his philosophy that can otherwise be hardly explained, such as the 
meaning of the expression “more reality or being” (E1p9) or the expressive relation bet- 
ween attributes and substance (E1P10). I will argue along the way that what Spinoza 
means by the expression “more reality or being” is primarily causal power, and that this 
potentia is expressed and is intelligible by the infinite causation of attributes in the sub- 
stance conceived as causa sui. As the scope of this chapter is limited, I will focus mainly on 
these two propositions. Yet, in conclusion, I will consider one of the arguments for God’s 
existence Spinoza develops in Elp11s in order to show that it is intelligible only if we 
understand the concept of potentia as the causal power to exist and to act. 


1. Elp9: “The More Reality or Being Each Thing Has, 
The More Attributes Belong to It” 


To any reader and interpreter of the Ethics, E1p9 presents itself as a challenge. The first 
eight propositions, one can say, follow a straightforward logic. They develop the logical and 
ontological consequences of the definitions that precede them, namely the definitions of 
substance, attribute, and mode (E1d3-—5). E1p9, on the other hand, introduces elements in 
the logical development of the Ethics that have no prior definition or explanation. What is 
the reality (realitatis) or being (esse) of a thing? How does one define it? And most impor- 
tant of all, how does one quantify it? For Spinoza not only claims that a thing (res) has 
something that is its esse or its realitatis, but he claims as well that a thing can have more 
reality or being than another, and that this quantity is somehow related to the quantity of 
attributes it has: the more reality or being, the more attributes it has. 

The demonstration that follows the proposition is only somewhat helpful to the reader, 
since Spinoza merely states that “this is evident” from the definition of the attribute. This 
definition reads: “By attribute I understand what the intellect perceives of a substance, as 
constituting its essence” (E1d4). But what does it tell us? Three points can be drawn from 
this definition. (1) When Spinoza refers to the reality or being of “each thing” (unaqueeque 
res) in E1p9, he is actually thinking about substance. Why? Because, as E1d4 implies, only 
substances have attributes. Thus, if something can be thought as having more attributes 
because it has more realitatis or esse, that something has to be a substance, regardless of 
what realitatis or esse means. (2) The intellect Spinoza refers to in E1d4 is not our intellect, 
or the human intellect, but the objective intelligibility of natural things or, as Spinoza 
writes in Elp17s, “Gods intellect” (Dei intellectus). The attribute, thus, is nothing but 
the intelligibility of the essence of the substance (see Gueroult 1968, pp. 47—50). (3) If the 
attribute is what the intellect perceives as constituting the essence of a substance — it is 
the intelligibility of its essence — and if the more reality or being a substance has, the more 
attributes it has, then there has to be a relation for Spinoza between the quantity of reality 
or being of asubstance and its essence that is intelligible and quantifiable by the attribute(s). 


215 


JUAN MANUEL LEDESMA VITERI 


And that is precisely the point of E1p9: to stress the fact that the attribute(s) express the 
intelligibility of the substance’s essence, and thus that they express, in their quantity, the 
intelligibility of its reality or being. In consequence, we can conclude that the reality or 
being of the substance that E1P9 refers to is the reality or being of its essence, insofar as it 
is intelligible by the attribute(s). Yet the question still remains: what is the reality or being 
of the substance’s essence for Spinoza, and how is it intelligible by the attribute? 


2. Elp10: “Every Attribute of a Substance Must be Conceived 
Through Itself” 


If we look at Elp10, we can immediately realize that Spinoza is focusing his attention on 
the same issue as in E1 p9: the intelligibility of the substance through the attribute. Though 
here, unlike El p9, Spinoza focuses on the independence or in the per se nature of the intelli- 
gibility of each attribute. The demonstration of the proposition recalls both the definition 
of the attribute (E1d4 — as E1p9 did) and the definition of substance (E1d3) as explana- 
tions. This double reference makes sense: if the attribute is the intelligibility of the sub- 
stance’s essence, then it has to express the very nature of the substance, of which it is the 
intelligibility. Thus, the attribute of a substance has to be conceived per se, as the substance 
of which it is the attribute. But the attribute cannot be understood as being in se, i.e. as 
existing independently of the substance of which it is the attribute. In other words, even 
though two or more attributes have to be each considered as independent regarding their 
intelligibility, they are still attributes of the substance. That is Spinoza’s first point in the 
scholium of E1p10s: “from these propositions it is evident that although two attributes 
may be conceived to be really distinct (i.e. one may be conceived without the aid of the 
other), we still can not infer from that that they constitute two beings, or two different sub- 
stances.” And, in consequence, if a substance has more than one attribute, each and every 
one must be conceived per se as different attributes of the same substance. But Spinoza not 
only states in this proposition that each attribute must be conceived per se; he also states in 
the scholium that everything that exists must be conceived through an attribute: 


So it is far from absurd to attribute many attributes to one substance. Indeed, nothing in 
nature is clearer than that each being must be conceived under some attribute (sub aliquo 
attributo debeat concipi), and the more reality, or being it has, the more it has attributes which 
express (exprimunt) necessity, or eternity, and infinity. And consequently there is also nothing 
clearer than that a being absolutely infinite must be defined (as we taught in D6) as a being 
that consists of infinite attributes, each of which expresses a certain eternal and infinite 
essence. (E1p10s) 


The attribute is not just the measure of the intelligibility of the substance; it is the measure 
of the intelligibility of everything that exists. Of course, everything that exists is not intel- 
ligible for Spinoza in the same manner. Modes are conceived under an attribute, as modes 
of the attribute (E2p6). The substance, on the other hand, is intelligible through the attri- 
bute, insofar as it constitutes and expresses its essence (E1d4,6). The important lesson here 
is that Spinoza states that everything that is, is intelligible (see Melamed 2013; Della 
Rocca 2003, 2010, and Garber 2015). Though this issue is fundamental, let us just focus 
in this chapter on the relation of intelligibility between the attribute and the substance. 
Spinoza states here a sort of double relation between the attribute and the substance: 


216 


SPINOZA’S ONTOLOGY OF POWER 


(1) Having more attributes, and thus having more reality or being actually means being 
conceived by more attributes. Therefore, we can infer that, for Spinoza, having more reality 
or being means essentially being more intelligible, i.e. having more reasons or causes that 
explain the nature of the thing (here, the substance). This, of course, can be traced back to 
the axioms that frame the Prima Pars, namely the first four axioms. In short, they state a 
fundamental relation between causality and intelligibility, in which the cause of an effect 
is always also its source of intelligibility. A cause not only produces an effect; it also pro- 
duces its intelligibility. Causality and intelligibility, for Spinoza, are two sides of the same 
reality: nothing can exist in a causal relation without being intelligible and nothing can be 
intelligible and not be traceable to a causal relation — this is the core of what Matheron 
(2011, p. 567), along with Gueroult (1968, pp. 9-14, 401-412), call the “integral intelli- 
gibility of the real” thesis (see also Curley (1969, p. 157)). This means that the attribute 
has not only a role in the intelligibility of reality (here, the substance), but also in its cau- 
sality. In other words, the existence of an attribute is the existence of a simultaneous rela- 
tion of intelligibility and causality in the substance itself. Let us explain this further. Since 
the definitions of causa sui (E1d1), the substance (E1d3) and God (E1d6) imply that God, 
conceived as an infinite substance constituted by an infinity of attributes, must necessarily 
be the cause of itself, (i.e. it exists necessarily), then we must consider the attributes that 
constitute and express the essence of God as the expressions of the fundamental causal- 
intelligible relation that is God’s existence as self-causation. Thus, the more attributes a 
substance has (i.e. the more reality it has), the more it is constituted by causal and intelli- 
gible relations. In other words, the more a substance has attributes the more there are 
causes and (intelligible) reasons for it to exist, i.e. the more its existence is necessary (see 
Ep. 9 (G/4/45)). This is why Spinoza states in the scholium that the more attributes a sub- 
stance has (the more reality or being it has) the more they express necessity or eternity and 
infinity, that is, because the attributes, in their infinity, express the infinity of causes and 
reasons for the substance to exist. 

(2) The attributes not only constitute the essence of the substance (as E1d4 states), but 
they express its necessity, eternity, and infinity. This relation of expression is already hinted 
at in Eld6, when Spinoza defines God as an absolutely infinite substance consisting (con- 
stantem) of (i.e. constituted by) an infinity of attributes that express (exprimit), each one, 
the essence of the substance. Here, in E1p10s, this relation is confirmed, as it will be once 
again confirmed in E1p19d, where Spinoza writes: “by God’s attributes are to be under- 
stood what (by D4) expresses the essence of the Divine substance, i.e. what pertains to 
substance. The attributes themselves, I say, must involve it itself.” Spinoza means that the 
attribute, in its causal-intelligible role, performs a double function: it constitutes the essence 
of the substance, and it simultaneously expresses it (on expression, see Deleuze 1969, or 
Gartenberg 2017 for a different view). Can we not thus interpret this double function of 
the attribute (constitution-expression) as being equivalent to the simultaneous and 
fundamental relation of production (causation-intelligibility) that is the existence of the 
substance as the result of its self-causation? If the attributes of the substance, in their 
infinity (as the scholium states in the end, as it will become necessary in El p11), constitute 
the essence of the substance and they simultaneously express it, is it not because they are 
both the causal dynamics of its actual existence and the intelligibility of this infinite and 
necessary existence insofar as it is the cause of itself? 

Let us gather now what we have understood from both E1p9 and E1p10. When Spinoza 
states, in E1p9, that the more a substance has reality or being, the more it has attributes, he 
essentially means that the substance is constituted and expressed by more causal/intelligible 


217 


JUAN MANUEL LEDESMA VITERI 


relations. This can be deduced from the fact that the attribute, as we saw earlier, is the measure 
not only of the intelligibility of the essence of the substance, but also of its sel/-causation or its 
causality. And this is the essential point Spinoza is trying to make: by constituting and express- 
ing the essence of the substance, the attribute explains the dynamics of involvement (involvit) 
that binds the essence and the existence of the substance, insofar as it is the essence of the sub- 
stance to be the cause of itself (as El p7 proves). Thus, we can begin to understand that when 
Spinoza writes that the essence of the substance (or God) involves existence — or that it per- 
tains to its nature to exist, or that is exists necessarily — he does not understand the relation of 
involvement to be a static relation of inherence (in which God’s existence is contained in its 
essence), but a dynamic relation of causal production in which the existence of the substance 
is produced, a relation that is intelligible through the infinity of the attributes. This, of course, 
does not mean that the substance precedes its existence. In other words, this does not mean 
that there is a time t in which the substance’s existence is produced, and thus a time t-1 in 
which the substance does not exist. The substance is infinite and eternal (as E1p10s reminds 
us, and as E1d8 states), but this eternal and infinite existence of the substance is nevertheless 
infinitely caused by itself. The substance is always causing itself, i.e. it is always and all the time 
the cause of everything that is in the same manner as it is the cause of itself (El p25s). 

With that in mind, let us now ask: what does it mean for an existing substance to have 
more reality or being, and not only more reality or being, but infinitely more reality or being 
at it must necessarily have (see Elp10s and Elp11)? Of course, it means having, or rather 
being constituted by an infinity of attributes. We know now that this means that the sub- 
stance is absolutely the efficient cause of itself and, simultaneously, the absolute principle of 
its own intelligibility. Therefore, if the substance is constituted and expressed by an infinity of 
attributes it means that its existence is the necessary result of an infinite causal power, i.e. the 
potentia to cause itself. And what does this mean, if not that the essence of the substance, in 
its efficient causation of existence (in its involvement), is nothing but an infinite causal power 
that is intelligible through the infinity of attributes in the same way as an effect is intelligible 
through its cause? This is the fundamental point towards which Spinoza is leading us: God’s 
essence is nothing but its causal power to exist (for a valuable discussion on this matter, see 
Melamed (2012, p. 97) and Brandau (2015, p. 314)). And it is precisely what Spinoza sets 
out to prove in E1p11, when he profoundly modifies the Cartesian and scholastic arguments 
for God’s existence. However, as we cannot analyze this extensive and complex proposition, 
we will only focus on its scholium, where the argument of potentia is clearly stated. 


3. Elp11s: Existence as the Power to Cause, or Produce Effects 


Once we understand what Elp9-10 implicitly states through the consideration of the 
infinity of attributes that necessarily constitute and express the essence and reality of the 
substance, the final argument for God’s existence of Elp11 becomes much clearer. After 
providing three different arguments as proofs of God’s existence, Spinoza adds a scholium 
where he develops a new version of the a priori proof. It goes as follows: 


For since being able to exist is power (posse existere potentia sit), it follows that the more reality 
belongs to the nature of a thing (quo plus realitatis alicujus rei nature competit), the more powers 
it has, of itself, to exist (e6 plus virium a se habere, ut existat). Therefore, an absolutely infinite 
Being, or God (sive Deum), has, of himself, an absolutely infinite power of existing (infinitam 
absolute potentiam existendi a se habere). For that reason, he exists absolutely. (E1p11s) 


218 


SPINOZA’S ONTOLOGY OF POWER 


Having more reality, Spinoza states, means having more powers or strength (virium), i.e. 
more potentia to exist. But, as we also know, having more reality or being means, for a sub- 
stance, having more attributes. Therefore, we may conclude that having more potentia to 
exist (having more reality) means, for Spinoza, having more attributes, i.e. having more 
reasons and causes for it to exist. And thus, the reasoning of the scholium becomes clear. 
If something is able to exist (if it can exist), Spinoza states, its existence necessarily involves 
some positive power: posse existere potentia sit. What kind of power? Our answer, as we 
hinted before, is simple: the causal power that is the essence. Let us follow Spinoza’s reasoning 
in the scholium. If being able to exist is the expression of the causal power of the essence, 
then the more reality or being a thing has, i.e. the more causal power it has to exist, the 
more it will affirm itself in existence by producing effects. And how does a substance affirm 
itself in existence, how does it express the causal power that is its essence if not through the 
self-causing process that produces the infinity of attributes that constitutes it — and by 
doing so, simultaneously causing everything that is and is intelligible? To our minds, this is 
the key to understanding the dynamics of the essence of the substance as causa sui: an 
absolutely infinite causal power that actually and efficiently causes itself, while simulta- 
neously being the source of its absolute intelligibility. 

We can therefore conclude that the profound bind between God’s essence and God’s 
existence, the bind of involvement, is intelligible only through the concept of potentia, 
understood as causal power. What seems essential is the fact that for Spinoza, in the early 
propositions of the first part of the Ethics (Elp9-11), “to exist,” in God’s case, means 
already to cause or to produce an infinity of effects, since it is nothing, in its essence, but 
causal power. Even if this fundamental relation becomes clear later, when Spinoza states in 
El1p34 that God’s potentia is “its essence itself (Dei potentia est ipsa ipsius essentia),” the 
ontological foundations of the identity are laid beforehand in the preparation of the argu- 
ments for God’s existence in E1p11. Existence, whether it be God’s existence or any mode’s 
existence, is always the actual expression of the potentia to produce effects. God’s existence 
is nothing but the absolutely infinite and actual causation of itself, and thus of Nature — 
simultaneous with its intelligibility (its power to cause is equivalent to its power to under- 
stand, or, as E2p7c states, “God’s power of thinking is equal to his actual power of acting”). 
For Spinoza, “God’s power is nothing except God’s active essence” (E2p3). This means that 
potentia, as Spinoza understands it, is necessarily always active and efficient; it is always the 
act of causing and producing an effect. In other words, power, for Spinoza, is never the 
Aristotelian dunamis that can or cannot be realized. It is always the actual and efficient 
power that necessarily produces effects. In other words, for Spinoza, a cause is not a cause 
if it does not actually produce an effect. As he writes in the final proposition of Part 1 of the 
Ethics: “Nothing exists from whose nature some effect does not follow” (E1p36). To exist 
means to produce a certain quantity of effects. By stating this, Spinoza merges existence 
and action as expressions of the same power: the active and efficient power to cause, or, the 
causation itself. 


4. Conclusion 
In this chapter, I tried to show that Spinoza’s radical ontology of power, such as we can find 
in his late philosophy, emerges in the propositions preparing the consideration of God’s 
necessary existence, namely E1p9-10. The attribute, in its double role towards the sub- 


stance (constitution-expression), is used by Spinoza as a means to quantify and render 


219 


JUAN MANUEL LEDESMA VITERI 


intelligible the infinite reality of the substance’s essence, understood as an actual power to 
cause effects. The attributes are, in a manner of speaking, the effects the substance produces 
in its self-causation: the more attributes it has, the more it is the cause of itself and, simul- 
taneously, the more it is self-intelligible. Thus, the reality or being of the substance turned 
out to be nothing more than its causal power to produce effects, i.e. to exist. This conclusion, 
I have argued, is the ontological foundation of what is clearly later in Spinoza’s philosophy 
an ontology of actual power. Yet, one important question remains. If the “reality or being” 
of the essence is for Spinoza nothing but causal power, why did he not directly state it in 
E1p9-10? Why does it emerge explicitly only after the proofs of God’s existence? Since I 
cannot adequately answer this important question here, I will briefly submit what I think is 
the most reasonable hypothesis. As we know, there are many drafts of the first part of the 
Ethics (to my knowledge, at least five — see Mignini 1987 and Matheron 2011, p. 618). 
Spinoza wrote and rewrote multiple times the definitions, axioms, and the first propositions 
of Part 1 of the Ethics, mainly thanks to the feedback of his many friends and correspon- 
dents. In this process, he detached himself from the Cartesian background of his formation, 
and slowly built his own distinct metaphysics. The idea of “degrees of being or reality,” pre- 
sent in Elp9, like many other concepts in Spinoza’s philosophy, is without any doubt of 
Cartesian origin (see, for example, Descartes, AT IX, 128: “sunt diversi gradus realitatis, sive 
entitatis”). To my mind, the ontology of power is what slowly arises out of the amendment 
of the Cartesian concept of “degree of reality or being” and thus of the arguments for God’s 
existence that rely on it. Evidence of this amendment can be found in the very long DPP1p7, 
where Spinoza profoundly modifies Descartes’ arguments for God’s existence in a way that 
mirrors the problems we encountered in Elp9-10. Furthermore, not only the Renati des 
Cartes Principiorum Philosophiae may have been written around the same time as the first 
propositions of Part One of the Ethics (Ep. 13 (G/4/63)), but it is also worth pointing out that 
Spinoza arrives at very similar conclusions at the end of the long DPP1p7, for instance 
when he writes in a footnote: “Note that the power by which the substance preserves itself 
is nothing but its essence, and differs from it only in name.” Yet, the question still remains. 
If Spinoza’s amendment of Descartes’ arguments for God’s existence did indeed lead him 
towards an ontology of power in the Ethics, then why did he not integrate this ontology 
directly in the propositions we analyzed here? As we know, Spinoza died without having 
published the Ethics. Thus, we do not know if the book that was posthumously published 
was, to Spinoza’s mind, the ‘final’ version of his lifelong work. It is possible that, upon 
further revising the draft, Spinoza could have directly integrated the results of the amend- 
ment of the Cartesian concept of “degrees of reality or being” (i.e. the ontology of power) in 
earlier parts of the Ethics (for a stimulating and recent discussion on this problem, see 
Garrett 2018, pp. 53-61). Of course, we cannot adequately respond to this possibility, since 
no documents can support it. It is still, to my mind, worth conceiving. 


References 


Brandau, J. (2015). Degrees of essence and perfection in Spinoza. In: The Young Spinoza: A 
Metaphysician in the Making (ed. Y.Y. Melamed), 300-318. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Curley, E. (1969). Spinoza’s Metaphysics: An Essay in Interpretation. Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press. 

Della Rocca, M. (2003). A rationalist manifesto: Spinoza and the principle of sufficient reason. 
Philosophical Topics 31 (1/2): 75-93. 


220 


SPINOZA’S ONTOLOGY OF POWER 


Della Roca, M. (2010). PSR. Philosophers’ Imprint 10 (7): 1-13. 

Deleuze, G. (1969). Spinoza et le probléme de l’expression. Paris: Editions de Minuit. 

Garber, D. (2015). Superheroes in the history of philosophy: Spinoza, super-rationalist. Journal of the 
History of Philosophy 53 (3): 507-521. 

Garrett, D. (2018). Nature and Necessity in Spinoza’s Philosophy. New York: Oxford University Press. 

Gartenberg, Z. (2017). Spinozistic expression. Philosophers’ Imprint 17 (9): 1-32. 

Gueroult, M. (1968). Spinoza: Ethique I: Dieu. Paris: Aubier. 

Leerke, M. (2009). IMMANENCE ET EXTERIORITE ABSOLUE. Sur la théorie de la causalité et 
l’ontologie de la puissance de Spinoza. Revue philosophique de la France et de I’étranger 134 (2): 
169-190. 

Lazzeri, C. (1999). Spinoza: puissance et impuissance de la raison. Paris: Presses Universitaires de France. 

Matheron, A. (1969). Individu et communauté chez Spinoza. Paris: Editions de Minuit. 

Matheron, A. (2011). Essence, existence et puissance dans le livre I de I’Ethique: les fondements de la 

proposition 16. In: Etudes sur Spinoza et les philosophies de l’age classique (ed. A. Matheron), 567-577. 

Lyon: ENS Editions. 

Melamed, Y.Y. (2012). Spinoza’s deification of existence. In: Oxford Studies in Early Modern Philosophy, 

Vol. 6 (ed. D. Garber and D. Rutherford), 75-104. New York: Oxford University Press. 

Melamed, Y.Y. (2013). The sirens of Elea: rationalism, monism and idealism in Spinoza. In: Debates in 

Early Modern Philosophy (ed. A. Lolordo and D. Stewart, D.), 78-89. New York, Routledge. 

Mignini, F. (1987). DONNEES ET PROBLEMES DE LA CHRONOLOGIE SPINOZIENNE ENTRE 1656 

ET 1665. Revue des Sciences philosophiques et théologiques 71 (1): 9-21. 

Negri, A. (2006). L’anomalie sauvage: puissance et pouvoir chez Spinoza. Paris: Editions Amsterdam. 

Spinoza, B. de (1985 and 2016). The Collected Works (trans. E.M. Curley). Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press. 


221 


21 


Spinoza’s Modal Theory 
OLLI KOISTINEN 


I should here like to explain briefly in what way I maintain the fatalistic necessity of all things 
and actions. In no way do I subject God to fate, but I conceive that all things follow with inevi- 
table necessity from God’s nature in the same way that everyone conceives that it follows from 
God’s nature that God understands himself. Surely no one denies that this follows necessarily 
from God’s nature, and yet no one conceives that God is forced by some fate to understand 
himself; it is conceived that God understands himself altogether freely, though necessarily. 
(Spinoza to Oldenburg. December 1675. Ep. 75) 


Spinoza was concerned about modal matters and his thinking on this subject was sophis- 
ticated. However, what he was saying has been understood badly. There has been a lot of 
talking whether he was a necessitarianist who believed in the necessity of all truths or only 
a causal determinist. Causal determinism does not imply necessitarianism because causal 
determinism does not by itself tell why these causal catenae and not some other exist. 

So suppose we have a causal series ->a>bc. . . which is infinite in both ends. Let us 
call this series S. When a member of S is given, then S is given. If b is posited then in Spinoza 
it has to be caused by a and b has to cause c. But nothing, so those allowing contingency to 
Spinoza claim, in his metaphysics requires that S itself is necessary. It could have failed 
to exist. Those who allow contingency believe either that Spinoza deliberately left room for 
contingency or that he did not himself understand that causal determinism does not imply 
necessitarianism. 

Spinoza is a necessitarianist — there is no doubt about that, I would like to say. Did he 
falsely infer necessitarianism from (finite) determinism? No he didn’t. 

Perhaps, one is tempted to ask: what is it that has to be added to causal determinism to 
get necessitarianism? So we have: 


Q1 Causal determinism +X = Necessitarianism 
Find X! 


But another line of investigation would be: 


Q2 If X exists then necessitarianism and causal determinism. 


A Companion to Spinoza, First Edition. Edited by Yitzhak Y. Melamed. 
© 2021 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2021 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd. 


222 


SPINOZA'S MODAL THEORY 


Show that such an X exists! 


I argue that Spinoza’s proceeds to solve Q2 and his X is God. Let us first consider 
(1) God’s existence; and (2) why God’s existence is enough for necessitarianism. 

Let us first think about God’s existence which is necessary existence. God for Spinoza is 
a substance; i.e. a thing that is in itself and is conceived through itself. In Spinoza, if 
something exists, a substance has to exist because in its being in itself substance is 
independent and for Spinoza not everything can be dependent and only substances are 
independent — besides substances and modes there is nothing, and modes for Spinoza are 
dependent. 

Substance does not only exist but it exists necessarily or it pertains to its nature to exist, 
says Spinoza in Elp7. Unfortunately, his argument for the necessary existence of sub- 
stance is not very informative. He tells that because a substance cannot be caused by 
anything external, substance is its own cause which is to say that existence pertains to its 
nature. 

Proof goes like this: 

(1) substance cannot be produced by anything else. 

Therefore, 

(2) substance is its own cause. 

Le. 

(3) essence of substance necessarily involves existence. 
(4) existence pertains to its nature. 

Important for (4) is E2d2 where Spinoza says that “to the essence of any thing pertains 
that which, being given, the thing is posited and which, being taken away the thing is nec- 
essarily taken away; or that without which the thing can neither be nor be conceived, and 
which can neither be nor be conceived without the thing.” (I have changed Curley’s 
“belongs” to pertains as the translation of “pertinere.” In Elp7 Curley uses “pertains” as 
the translation of “pertinet.”) 

Reading nature and essence as meaning the same, Elp7 purports to say that when 
existence is given, substance is given and when substance is given existence is given; and 
that substance cannot be conceived without existence and existence without substance. 
That A cannot be conceived without B and B without A is used by Spinoza as the criterion 
of identity of A and B (see E2p49d). So if we take this as our guide, then substance is 
existence. But here it should be noted that existence for Spinoza is never pure existence as 
such but it always is attribute-permeated; e.g. physico-spatial existence and mental 
existence. 

As we have seen, Elp7d does not contain a very tractable argument for its conclusion. 
However, Spinoza considers El1p7 again in the second scholium to Elp8. What Spinoza 
claims there is that substance cannot be conceived not to exist, and therefore it exists nec- 
essarily: “This is how we can have true ideas of modifications which do not exist, for though 
they do not actually exist outside the intellect, nevertheless their essences are compre- 
hended in another in such a way that they can be conceived through it. But the truth of 
substances is not outside the intellect unless it is in themselves, because they are conceived 
through themselves” (G H/50/8-13). 

This argument bears resemblance both to those of Malebranche and Kant and it goes 
like this (see Almog and Koistinen 2019). To think of something as non-existent is to think 
of something else that could be modified in the way required for the existence of the thing. 
To think of a non-existent house is to think the space modified in the way required for its 


223 


OLLI KOISTINEN 


existence. Thus, a (typical) house can be thought irrespective of whether it exists or not. 
But, as I understand Spinoza, one cannot think spatial existence, as such, away. There is 
nothing more basic or fundamental than spatial existence: we cannot think of spatial 
existence as being a modification of something else. So, Spinoza’s point is not that sub- 
stance necessarily exists because the sentence “substance does not exist” is somehow a 
contradiction; rather it is the inconceivability of substance’s non-existence that licenses 
the attribution of necessary existence to substance. As a fundamentum, substance cannot 
be thought away. 


1. God-substance 


For Spinoza substances are of certain kinds. Spinoza captures this with the help of attrib- 
utes. For example, thought and extension are infinite attributes of God-substance. What 
does this talk of attributes mean or what is the ontology of attributes? Spinoza does not 
think that there is some storage of forms which a substance has to exemplify in order to be 
of acertain kind. A substance in its very basic being cannot be truly thought of as consist- 
ing of two elements, say, form and matter or substratum and essence as a property or 
whatever. 

For Spinoza the essence of substance is its existence and existence is power. To call a 
substance extended or to say that substance is extended is to say that the extended physical 
universe is an expression of this power. For example, to call a substance thinking, where 
thought is an attribute, is to say that mental reality, or mental system of modes, is one of 
the expressions of the power of substance. Attributes themselves do not have any reality of 
their own — they are only relational names of the substance. 

Such a power (as essence and existence) is also an individuator. Two things, or sub- 
stances, cannot have the same power because the “worlds” realized through these powers 
would be indiscernible, which Spinoza would consider impossible. 

An important albeit difficult thing in Spinoza’s conception of essence is that an expres- 
sion of an essence, such as the physical reality or the mental reality, is always a full expres- 
sion of the essence or power. When this is coupled with the rather radical view that one 
and the same essence may be realized by different attributes or mode systems, the upshot 
is that two substances cannot share an attribute. 

Perhaps, this no shared attribute thesis needs some explaining. Let us suppose that E is an 
attribute of s and E and T are attributes of w. Now, one might think that this is possible 
because why could there not be an essence whose only realization is E and another essence 
which is realized in addition to E also by T. To this Spinoza would reply, I believe, by saying 
that the whole essence is needed for any realization of an attribute and, therefore, the 
essence that realizes T and E in w cannot realize only E in s but has to realize also T in s. 

Very soon after arguing that substances cannot share an attribute, Spinoza proves in 
E1p8 that any substance must be infinite. This means that the essence of any substance 
must have an infinite expression. In its shortness, the proof (E1p8d) is a bit perplexing. 
Suppose, Spinoza begins the proof, that there is a substance s with attribute T. This sub- 
stance is either finite or infinite. If it is finite, it should (because of how Spinoza conceives 
the nature of finitude), be possibly limited by another substance of the same attribute. 
However, this substance which possibly limits the given substance, should, because it per- 
tains to the nature of substance to exist, also exist and thus there would be two substances 
of the same nature or attribute, which, as we have seen, is impossible. 


224 


SPINOZA'S MODAL THEORY 


Perhaps, looking at the first scholium of E1p8 sheds more light on what Spinoza wants 
to say in requiring infinity from substances. In this scholium, Spinoza writes: “Since being 
finite is really, in part, a negation, and being infinite is an absolute affirmation of existence 
of some nature, it follows from P7 alone that every substance must be infinite.” 

What E1p7 says, as we remember, is that existence pertains to the nature of substance. 
This does not only mean that any possible substance necessarily exists but also that 
anything conceivable in terms of the nature or attribute of a substance flows from that 
substance. To take an example, anything conceivable in terms of extension will be realized. 
It is existence, not non-existence, that the essence of substance is responsible for. This is 
Spinoza’s principle of plenitude. Officially, in Elp8d the demonstration of the principle of 
plenitude goes like this: suppose a substance s of attribute A lacks something that is pos- 
sible in terms of A. Thus, another A-substance is possible, i.e. the one that has what s lacks, 
and this substance should also necessarily exist. So there would be two substances with an 
identical attribute which is impossible. This principle of plenitude is the core of Spinoza’s 
necessitarianism. The principle entails that anything that does not actualize is impossible; 
thus no truth could have failed to be true which means that all truths are necessary and this is 
necessitarianism. 

The infinity of the attributes of substances and their necessary existence are steps 
towards deifying substance. When these two features are joined to Spinoza’s thought that 
only an all-attribute substance, i.e. substance having all possible, i.e. an infinity of, attrib- 
utes, God being the only possible and thus the only actual substance, is the consequence. 

Even though Spinoza can be seen to reach necessitarianism already in El p8 — any pos- 
sible substance necessarily exists; any substance is “full” (infinity) with respect to its modes; 
nothing but substances and modes exist — it is worthwhile to take a look at the demonstra- 
tion of monism. There are several reasons for this: with his monism Spinoza gives a meta- 
physical conception of the universe, which helps in understanding how things are 
connected to each other, Spinoza speaks of modality after the proof of monism, and the 
demonstration of the existence of God is in itself a modal argument. 

Spinoza shared with Descartes a well-known tenet according to which thinking of the 
finite is posterior to thinking of the infinite. Infinite is prior to finite. I am not certain 
whether the immense importance of this has been well enough realized, even though 
there are some exceptions (see Melamed 2015.) 

The locus classicus of this line of thinking is in Descartes Med3: 


I clearly understand that there is more reality in an infinite substance than in a finite one, and 
hence that my perception of the infinite, that is God, is in some way prior to my perception of 
the finite, that is myself. (CSM II, 31; AT VII, 45) 


What seems to me evident is that this infinite before finite theme was crucial in Spinoza’s 
argument for monism. For him attributes, or basic ways of being, are conceptually 
independent from each other. Thought and extension, the two attributes known by us 
humans, are both expressions of one and the same essence but they are independent from 
each other so that acts of thought can be conceived without extension and extension is 
conceivable without thought. Because of this self-conceivability of attributes, they con- 
ceptually neither require nor reject each other. This seems to entail that there is no crite- 
rion how these attributes are distributed to substances. However, Spinoza claims that a 
substance consisting of an infinity of attributes, God, is possible. This is a rather strong 
claim because it makes all other distributions of attributes impossible: if it supposed that 


225 


OLLI KOISTINEN 


n-attribute (here n is a positive integer) substance is possible, then this substance should 
exist because of the necessary existence of all possible substances. But because God has 
an infinity of attributes this n-attribute substance should share its attributes with God 
and this is impossible. But why? Why could we not as well say that the n-attribute sub- 
stance is possible and in so doing deprive possibility from the all-attribute substance? 

A way to think about a substance could be called relational, or piecemeal in Descartes’s 
language (see second replies CSM II 98; AT VII 134). In such thinking, we start from the 
attribute and go back to essence. For example, from the fact that we think, we infer that 
underlying our thinking there is a substance whose essence is expressed by the fact that we 
think. However, when our thought of a substance is relational we do not look directly into 
the essence of the substance; we do not know what other attributes, beside the one/those 
under which we are thinking of it, a substance might have. 

But Descartes thought that he also was able to think of God’s essence as such — to go 
beyond the attributes, and there is no doubt that Spinoza had a very deep conviction, intu- 
ition, or whatever one wants to call it, that he was in direct contact with an infinite, all- 
encompassing, uncreated being. Much of the Ethics Part 1 can be read as an attempt to 
give a definition of such a thing. The possibility of the infinite thing was not a problem at all— 
for Spinoza its actuality was a condition even of his own existence. Here Spinoza’s train of 
thought is ab esse ad posse. 

In the Short Treatise (KV I 2/G I/28—31), Spinoza has a short dialogue between Intellect, 
Reason, Lust, and Love. Here Intellect takes it for granted, without any argument, that 
nature is in its totality infinite and supremely perfect; and, then, Spinoza lets Reason to give 
avery short argument for the intuition of the understanding. Even though this dialogue is 
just a rough sketch, it reveals a lot of Spinoza’s thinking. There is in us something. Here in 
KV it is intellect, that places us in contact with the infinite and perfect nature. This is the 
starting point. This kind of contact-placing is non-conceptual and direct, and the task of 
transforming such direct intuitive epistemic contact shareable and argumentative belongs 
to Reason. There is an infinite and perfect being is what Spinoza accepts and such a being 
cannot, so tells reason in the Ethics, be nothing but one consisting of an infinity of attrib- 
utes. Such a substance cannot be thought under any of its attributes as non-existent, and 
so in Spinoza’s modal theory its existence is necessary. To see that that the interpretation 
given here is textually well-founded a look at E1p10s is sufficient: 


Indeed, nothing in Nature is clearer than that each entity must be conceived under some attri- 
bute, and the more reality or being it has, the more are its attributes which express necessity, 
or eternity, and infinity. Consequently, nothing can be clearer than this, too, that an absolutely 
infinite entity must necessarily be defined (Def. 6) as an entity consisting of infinite attributes, each 
of which expresses a definite essence, eternal and infinite. (Italics added) 


After having shown that he has given a correct definition of God, Spinoza proves its 
necessary existence. The proof is rather interesting, not least for the reason that Spinoza 
offers three demonstrations of this proposition. However, the first (“official”) demonstra- 
tion is enough for us. Roughly put, it says that God exists necessarily because God is a pos- 
sible substance and (by Elp7) a possible substance exists by necessity. Thus, with Elp11, 
Spinoza concludes his proof of necessitarianism. God is the only possible substance and it 
is necessary that God exists. God is infinite in all its ways of being which means that God is 
“full” in all his attributes; i.e. that anything conceivable through an attribute is realized; 
and so if something is not realized, it is impossible — and this is necessitarianism. 


226 


SPINOZA'S MODAL THEORY 


2. Intelligible Necessity 


I started this chapter with a citation where Spinoza denies that God is subject to fate. If 
everything happened by necessity but in a manner that would be unintelligible even to 
God, that would be to subject God to fate; and necessitarianism, which Spinoza reaches in 
Elp11, would be consistent with leaving God at the mercy of fate. Thus, Spinoza has to 
show that necessitarianism is realized in an intelligible way. 

Spinoza brings the intellect to the front in Elp16 which proposition, according to 
Tschirnhaus (Ep. 82), is almost the most important in the Ethics Part 1: 


From the necessity of the divine nature there must follow infinitely many things in infinitely 
many modes (i.e. everything which can fall under an infinite intellect). [Ex necessitate divinae 
naturae infinita infinitis modis (hoc est, omnia, quae sub intellectum infinitum cadere possunt) sequi 
debent.| 


Here intellect enters into the picture. What follows from God’s essence, is what an infinite 
intellect can comprehend; and in the demonstration of E1p16 the intelligibility of the rela- 
tion between God and everything else is assumed. God understands himself completely 
and because outside God there is nothing else, God understands everything. Moreover, in 
the demonstration, it is assumed that such understanding is (close to) inference; and that 
this inference is from cause to effects comes clear from the first corollary of Elp16 where 
God is told to be the efficient cause of everything. (Deum omnium rerum, quae sub intellectum 
infinitum cadere possunt, esse causam efficientem.) 

It is rather surprising that Spinoza throws infinite intellect to the picture here in E1p16. 
It is not until the very first proposition of the second part of the Ethics where Spinoza 
proves that thought is an attribute of God. However, there is nothing in the argumentative 
structure of El that would have precluded him to assign intellect to God already after 
E1p8 where the infinity of the attributes is proved: Spinoza proves that thought is an attri- 
bute of God by claiming that we can conceive an infinite being by attending to thought 
alone. However, Spinoza wanted to stay in the first part of the Ethics at a very abstract level 
which complicates understanding it. 

So, what Elp11 and E1p16 taken together tell is that everything is necessary and this 
necessity is understandable in causal language. In principle, it is possible to separate the 
necessity proof of the causal proof. Elp11 would be enough for necessitarianism whereas 
there being an intellect in God, which comprehends everything and which proceeds from 
causes to effects, should be needed to show that this necessity is understandable in causal 
terms. 

I will give here a rough sketch of how Spinoza tries to shape the universe in causal form, 
and I will do this in the attribute of extension, i.e. in the modal system of extended things. 
The first mode that follows from the essence of God in extension is the infinite space. 
Spinoza calls this motion-and-rest (see Ep. 64) because space for him is not inert but has a 
principle of motion in it and motion for him requires a space that is at rest. Such a physical 
space generates a variety in it and the result is the face of the whole universe “which, although 
varying in infinite ways, yet remains always the same.” 

Motion-and-rest and face of the whole universe are what Spinoza calls infinite modes. 
They follow eternally from the essence of God; motion-and-rest directly and the face of the 
whole universe indirectly via motion-and-rest. The face of the whole has different (facial) 
expressions and is in constant change like the faces of living people. So, there is within the 


227 


OLLI KOISTINEN 


face-of-universe eternal change. This change being causal change is intelligible. Perhaps, 
because it is in accordance with laws or perhaps because it is like the change in geometrical 
solid revolution. 

Some Spinoza scholars think the change within the face of the universe is mysterious 
and has inexplicable features in it; and perhaps would subject God to fate. This problem is 
generated by a kind of thinking that could be called localist. First, a finite thing or event is 
referred to and, then, it is said that it cannot follow solely from God’s essence because in 
that case it should be eternal and infinite. So, perhaps it follows from God’s essence together 
with the contribution of other finite things. But why are there finite things at all? Or why 
are there just these finite things and not others? 

It is not the case that there is the infinite mode (say space or motion-and-rest in the case 
of bodies) and then the finite modes in it. The being of finite modes cannot be separated 
from the being of the infinite mode. For example, once the infinite mode of motion-and- 
rest (=physical space) is given, it is given with an infinity of finite modes. (Think again of 
an ocean with its waves.) But, and this is important, the space is not given only as it were 
full of diversity now but it also is given with its finite-mode history and its finite-mode future. 
I would, a bit hesitantly, say that when God is given the whole infinite four-dimensional 
history of the world is given. Thus, there have to be finite things. 

Could this world history be different from what it is? Causal series do not happen in a 
void and that is what Spinoza deeply understood. The so-called finite modes are not distinct 
entities with some kind of ontological or metaphysical limits. They are not monads or any 
kind of atoms or conglomerations of atoms. Rather, we could say that Spinoza’s God is like 
an infinite dough that kneads itself. In such a dough there is diversity without limits. 
Everything fuses seamlessly into everything else. Limit for Spinoza is a non-thing and basi- 
cally finite things are beings of reason: they are not fictions but do not have limits; they are 
like waves which are not things that are added to the ocean but are modifications of it. So, 
the question about the possibility of a different world history should not be posed in terms 
of finite things but in terms of the extended universe as a continuous whole. Does such a 
universe in an infinite time and in constant change exist modified in all the ways possible 
for it? I would answer in the affirmative. 


3. Textual Evidence for a Non-necessitarianist Reading 
Sometimes Spinoza is thought to commit himself to contingency in E2a1: 


The essence of man does not involve necessary existence, that is, from the order of Nature it 
can happen equally that this or that man does exist, or that he does not exist. [Hominis essentia 
non involvit necessariam existentiam, hoc est, ex naturae ordine tam fieri potest, ut hic et ille homo 
existat, quam ut non existat.| 


So it may happen, from the order of nature, that this or that human being does not exist. 
On the other hand, in Elp11 first alternative d (G I/53/7-10), Spinoza tells about the 
existence of triangles the following: 


But the reason why a circle or triangle exists, or why it does not exist, does not follow from the 


nature of these things, but from the order of the whole corporeal Nature. For from this [order] 
it must follow either that the triangle exists now or that it is impossible for it to exist now. 


228 


SPINOZA'S MODAL THEORY 


[At ratio, cur circulus vel triangulus existit, vel cur non existit, ex eorum natura non sequitur, sed ex 
ordine universae naturae corporeae. Ex eo enim sequi debet, vel iam triangulum necessario existere, 
vel impossibile esse ut iam existat.] 


So is there some inconsistency between these passages? Were the first to say that men are 
not necessary existents and the second that actual triangles are, there would be a problem. 
Not only triangles, but all finite modes including human beings, are determined to exist by 
the common order of nature; and no finite mode has an essence that involves existence. 

The apparent inconsistency between these two passages is only apparent. In the latter 
passage, there is a temporal specification (now/iam) which is lacking from the first. What 
the former (E2a1) says is just that finite modes in following from the order of nature are 
not eternal existents i.e. things whose essence involves existence; nor that they necessarily 
follow from God whose essence involves existence. they follow from the common order of 
nature. It is possible that they do not exist and in fact for every finite thing such a possibility 
is actualized. The latter just says that a finite mode exists necessarily when it exists and this 
is just what necessitarianism requires from the finite modes. 


4. Necessity of Reflective Acts 


There is an odd duality in Spinoza. On the one hand, the picture he paints of being is that 
somehow we are completely under the mercy of nature. In KV, Spinoza claimed that we are 
like clay in the hands of God. On the other hand, in the Ethics, Spinoza tries to leave room 
for some kind of liberation from passivity. We are able to change the perspective from passive 
perception to active thinking; and it is active thinking that is contributive to our happiness 
and finally to some kind of blessedness. In active thinking, we no longer are determined by 
external things; we are not reacting but acting. In these acts the thinker is free. 

Spinoza, as far as I understand, never considers how such free acts of thought or ade- 
quate ideas, are consistent with his necessitarianism. One possible line of explanation is 
that reason and intuition which are sources of adequate ideas do not operate in time 
whereas the realm where events are linked to each through causality is the temporal one. 
In forming adequate ideas, the mind, i.e. the subject, is able to consider the temporal world 
as well as the eternal aspects outside the world of destruction and becoming. 


References 


Almog, J. and Koistinen, O. (2020). Thinking-the-world. In: (eds.) Metametaphysics and the Sciences (ed. 
FE. Kjosavik and C. Serck-Hanssen), 101-119. Abingdon: Routledge. 
Melamed, Y. (2015). Spinoza’s Metaphysics: Substance and Thought. New York: Oxford University Press. 


Further Reading 


Spinoza’s modal theory has been studied intensively. Quite often the studies are attempts to make 
sense of Spinoza both accepting and denying necessitarianism. The following short list represents 
well-known different positions: 

Carriero, J. (1991). Spinoza’s views on necessity in historical perspective. Philosophical Topics 19: 
47-96. This article informatively considers the historical evolution of Spinoza’s monism. 


229 


OLLI KOISTINEN 


Curley, E.M. (1969). Spinoza’s Metaphysics: An Essay in Interpretation. Cambridge, MA: Harvard. Here 
Curley argues for the influential view that Spinoza thought that finite modes are necessary only 
relative to their causes and this allows absolute contingency. 

Garrett, D. (1991). Spinoza’s necessitarianism. In: God and Nature in Spinoza’s Metaphysics 
(ed. Y. Yovel), 191-218. Leiden: Brill. Garrett reads Spinoza as a necessitarian. His argument for 
necessitarianism is based on a principle of perfection. Of the alternative internally consistent 
system of possibilities, the most perfect will be realized. 

Huenemann, C. (2017). But why was Spinoza a necessitarian? In: Oxford Handbook of Spinoza 
(ed. M. Della Rocca). New York: Oxford University Press. This article places Spinoza’s necessitari- 
anism into a wider context. 

Newlands, S. (2010). The harmony of Spinoza and Leibniz. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 
81: 64-104. In this article, a curious and interesting view, that modality in Spinoza depends on 
how the world is conceived, is defended. 


230 


22 


Spinoza on Determination 


NOA SHEIN 


1. Introduction 


Like many other staple metaphysical concepts, “determination” acquires its own special 
flavor when translated into the Spinozistic framework. This process is even more pro- 
nounced when applied to finite modes. In this chapter, I will explain what the necessary 
conditions are for finite modes to be determined, and furthermore in what this determina- 
tion consists. My concluding remarks will circle back and say something about what deter- 
mination can mean when applied not to modes, but instead to substance. We often think 
there is a conceptual dichotomy between things that are determining and those which are 
determined. Furthermore, it seems, prima facie at least, that we can conceive of things as 
determined by others but not determining anything else. Not so for Spinoza. As far as finite 
modes are concerned, it turns out, perhaps quite surprisingly, that finite modes can neither 
be nor be conceived as determined without implicitly being and being conceived as 
determining as well.! Determination, as we shall come to appreciate, has to necessarily be 
a co- or rather an inter-determination. This fact has far-reaching implications, and forces 
a consideration anew of the related concepts of necessity and freedom, passivity and 
activity, cause and effect, thereby aiding in the amelioration of the tensions associated 
with these pairs of concepts. The fundamental problem with all of these pairs is that it 
seems, on the one hand, that finite modes are required to be both, and, on the other, it is far 
from clear how this is possible. In what follows, I begin by looking at a couple of key texts 
where Spinoza discusses determination and highlight what might initially seem puzzling. 
Subsequently I consider what it would, per impossibile, be for something finite not to be 
determined. This consideration proves to be a crucial step in analyzing in what determina- 
tion consists. I conclude by highlighting the connection between determination and 
activity and the metaphysical consequences of this connection. 


1 Spinoza holds that existence and conceivability are at least co-extensive, 1 A4 is key in establishing this point. 
Some, such as Michael Della Rocca have argued even further claiming that existence reduces to conceivability. 
See for example Della Rocca (2015). For our purposes admitting the co-extensiveness suffices. 


A Companion to Spinoza, First Edition. Edited by Yitzhak Y. Melamed. 
© 2021 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2021 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd. 


231 


NOA SHEIN 


2. Determination 
In the Ethics, the earliest mention of determination is in 1D7: 


That thing is called free which exists from the necessity of its nature alone and is determined 
to act by itself alone. But a thing is called necessary, or rather compelled, which is determined 
by another to exist and produce an effect in a certain and determinate manner. 


Both the definition of “free” as well as “necessary/compelled” might strike us as some- 
what odd. As to “freedom” what might seem unexpected is that Spinoza defines freedom 
as a special species of necessity. I will return to this point later. For now I would like to 
draw our attention to the second definition embedded in 1D7, namely that of a 
“necessary” or “compelled thing.” The first part is what one might expect: “determined 
by another.” This clearly brings out the passivity involved in being compelled by 
something else. Furthermore, this would seem the symmetrical counterpart to the defi- 
nition of a free thing, namely, “what exists from its nature alone, and is determined to act 
by itself alone.” That is, we would have on the one side activity and being independent 
from other things, and on the other passivity and dependence. However, Spinoza goes on 
to say in the definition of a compelled thing that it “is determined by another to exist and 
to produce an effect in a certain and determinate manner.” What are we to make of this? It 
seems to break the symmetry between freedom and necessity as active vs. passive. When 
a thing is compelled it is not only determined by another to exist, but it is determined by 
another to act, to produce an effect. A compelled thing, it seems, is supposed to be 
passively active, or passively productive and it is far from immediately clear how this 
might be possible. 

Interestingly this coupling of “determined to exist by another” and “produce an effect” 
occurs in other key passages such as 1P28: 


Every singular thing, or any thing which is finite and has a determinate existence, can neither 
exist nor be determined to produce an effect unless it is determined to exist and produce an 
effect by another cause, which is also finite and has a determinate existence; and again, this 
cause also can neither exist nor be determined to produce an effect unless it is determined to 
exist and produce an effect by another, which is also finite and has a determinate existence, 
and so on, to infinity. 


Here again the determined thing is described as having a determinate and passively productive 
existence. A fruitful avenue for getting a grip on what it means for something to be passively 
productive proves to be inspecting bodies. Although 1D7 and 1P28 are phrased quite generally, 
discussing “things,” they must also hold for things considered under the attribute of Extension, 
namely individual bodies.’ I suggest therefore re-formulating our question to ask: what is it for 
a particular body to be determined? Given the 2P7 doctrine, whatever we understand to be 
structurally true of finite bodies will be true of finite modes in general. Turning first to bodies to 


? Sangiacomo (2015) has offered a tracing of Spinoza’s notion of determination to Descartes’ physical determi- 
nation (as specifying the direction of motion). Although in agreement about some of his main conclusions, most 
notably Sangiacomo’s insistence that the determination of a body is due to surrounding bodies, we disagree 
about the nature of finite modes. In particular, while Sangiacomo holds that finite mode can have their own 
particular essence regardless of other finite modes, I reject and hold that the essence of a finite mode, insofar as it 
is finite, involves all the other finite modes. See Noa Shein (2018b). 


232 


SPINOZA ON DETERMINATION 


investigate something about the structure of modes in general is not foreign to Spinoza. On the 
contrary, Spinoza himself uses this very strategy at the end of the scholium to 2P13.? 

Before analyzing what determination consists in with respect to bodies, we can begin 
by noting that a finite body must be determined (to exist as finite) by other finite bodies. 
This requirement is made explicit in 1P28 which we have just considered, but also 
partially implied by the definition of a finite thing: “That thing is said to be finite in its own 
kind that can be limited (terminare) by another of the same nature” (1D2). Although 
Spinoza’s exact language is often glossed over, it is important to note that both “determin- 
are” and “terminare” in the Latin have as their primary meaning to set boundaries. While 
1D2 makes explicit that a finite thing must be limited by another of the same nature, i.e. 
share an attribute, 1P28 makes it clear that this “other” must also be finite and further- 
more, that this “other” in turn must also be determined by another finite thing, and so on 
ad infinitum.* 

One way to understand what the determination consists in is to first consider what the 
given body would do were it not determined.’ That is, consider what it would do were there, 
per impossible, no other bodies. This kind of counterfactual might seem anathema to 
Spinoza’s metaphysics, but on closer look we can see that Spinoza himself uses this strategy. 
In 3P6, for example when he invites us to consider something quantum in se est. In this 
case, we are invited to consider something insofar as it is a thing or has being —i.e. insofar 
as it is active. This is in no conflict with the fact that in re no finite thing can be perfectly 
active. Similarly, in the TdIE, he specifically discusses a case where we suppose a body, a 
burning candle, while supposing there are no other bodies:° 


It remains now to note also those things that are supposed in Problems. This sometimes hap- 
pens even concerning impossible things. E.g.; when we say “Let us suppose that this burning 
candle is not now burning, or let us suppose that it is burning in some imaginary space, or 
where there are no bodies.” Things like this are sometimes supposed, although this last is 
clearly understood to be impossible. But when this happens, nothing at all is feigned. . . 

In the second case, nothing is done except to abstract the thoughts from the surrounding 
bodies so that the mind directs itself toward the sole contemplation of the candle, considered 
in itself alone, so that afterwards it infers that the candle has no cause for its destruction. So if 
there were no surrounding bodies, this candle, and its flame, would remain immutable, or the 
like. Here, then, there is no fiction, but true and sheer assertions. 


Spinoza’s point here is that although we are supposing something that is impossible, the 
making use of a supposition does not imply that we are thereby thinking confusedly. On 
the contrary, we arrive at a “true and sheer assertion.” Even though in re there cannot be a 
candle without surrounding bodies, supposing one will reveal something true, presumably, 
because it draws our attention solely to the candle and we disregard its relation to other 
bodies. Notice that Spinoza does not say that we imagine an empty space and then situate 


> Peterman (2014) also makes the case that the Physical Interlude, in light of the 2P7 doctrine, tells us something 
about the structure of modes in general. 

* T have argued for the stronger claim that any finite mode must ultimately be determined by the totality of 
bodies. See Shein (2015). 

> T take Della Rocca (2013) to share my intuition here that to understand what the essence of a body is, what is 
required is kind of conditional: what would the body do if unimpeded by external bodies? Michael Della Rocca, 
“Striving, Oomph, and Intelligibility in Spinoza,” in Judgement and the Epistemic Foundation of Logic, ed. Maria 
Van der Schaar (Springer, 2013). 

° Tam grateful to Allison Peterman for impressing on me the importance of this passage. 


233 


NOA SHEIN 


a single candle in it — thinking this way would indeed result in confusion because, in such 
acase, we would be positing something false rather than discovering something true about 
its nature. To situate the candle thus, it turns out, would be to presuppose that the candle 
can be the cause of its own destruction. 

It is not immediately clear why this is so, but I will preemptively say that to posit the 
candle in this manner entails positing its boundaries. As will become evident, we cannot 
posit boundaries without at the same time positing the causes of those boundaries, and 
those causes are surrounding bodies. Looking again at the correct way to suppose the 
candle in order to discover something true about its nature we begin by conceiving the 
body along with the surrounding bodies and then, as it were, subtract the surrounding 
bodies. Or as Spinoza puts it, we abstract the thought of the other bodies. Notice however, 
that our attention is not turned to what we abstracted, but rather to what we abstracted 
from, namely whatever is left when disregarding the surrounding bodies. This Spinoza 
says, is to consider the candle as it is in itself. When regarding the candle in this way, we 
can come to appreciate a number of things. Among these is that the candle itself, without 
relation to surrounding bodies is immutable, and, as he will also claim later in the Ethics 
(3p4), cannot be the cause of its own destruction. Spinoza is keenly aware that denying 
that something can be the cause of its own destruction is a radical position which is why 
he chooses the particular example he does. At first glance, a burning candle presents a par- 
adigmatic example of something that is the cause of its own destruction. As we under- 
stand why the candle cannot be the cause of its own destruction, we will get an insight as 
to what a body would do were it not determined by other bodies. This insight, in turn, will 
be crucial for our understanding of what determination consists in. 

In the TdIE Spinoza does not fully spell out how the inference proceeds. He just says that 
from this inspection we can infer that the candle and its flame are not the cause of its own 
destruction and are immutable “or the like.” This last throw-away caveat signals that his 
focus is on methodology, or as the title indicates, “the emendation of the intellect.” Therefore 
Spinoza’s main point here is to show how a supposition, although diverging from how things 
exist in re, can be useful for philosophy. For our purposes, Spinoza’s inference that a thing 
cannot be the cause of its own destruction is of greatest interest. Since he reiterates it in the 
Ethics, reconstructing it in the terms of this Ethics is very useful. We can begin by noting that 
for Spinoza, as for Descartes, there is no vacuum or atoms, and therefore the material world 
is a contiguous plenum. One consequence of this view is that bodies share their surface with 
their surrounding bodies.’ Another consequence of adhering to a plenum physics for both 
Spinoza and Descartes is that all motion is relative, and consequently, the proportion of 
motion and rest of a given body involves the proportion of motion and rest of surrounding 
bodies.’ Although Spinoza insists upon motion and rest being the identifying feature of 
bodies, it is important to note that he says this primarily by way of rejecting a substantial dis- 
tinction among them. Furthermore, in the Interlude the third Lemma states the following: 


A body which moves or is at rest must be determined to motion or rest by another body, which has 
also been determined to motion or rest by another, and that again by another, and so on, to infinity. 


This makes apparent that the identifying criterion of a singular body — its proportion of 
motion and rest — necessarily involves alluding to other bodies, especially recalling 


” This point is elaborated clearly in Alan Nelson and Kurt Smith (2010). 
8 A more detailed account of this can be found in Shein (2018a). 


234 


SPINOZA ON DETERMINATION 


1A4 which claims that “knowledge of an effect depends on, and involves, knowledge of the 
cause.”” It is also worth noting that the proportion of motion and rest of a given body 
cannot be just some number. The reason for this is that then there would be no principled 
reason why two bodies might not have the same proportion of motion and rest. However, 
given Spinoza’s adherence to some version of a principle of indiscernibles, no two bodies 
could have as their identifying feature the same proportion of motion and rest.'° So 
although Spinoza alludes to the proportion of motion and rest as an identifying criterion 
of a singular body, it is vital to keep in mind that its particular proportion of motion and 
rest is due immediately to its surrounding bodies, which in turn owe their proportion of 
motion and rest to their surrounding bodies, and so on. Therefore the proportion of motion 
and rest of a given body is due immediately to its surrounding bodies, and mediately via the 
bodies surrounding the surrounding bodies. This is of paramount importance when we 
are trying to suppose a body without other bodies. Given that both the given body’s surface 
and proportion of motion and rest are due in part to other bodies, to conceive it while dis- 
regarding the other bodies entails regarding it with neither a surface nor a given proportion 
of motion and rest." 

When conceiving a body in such a way what remains of the body, or what the body is “in 
itself” as Spinoza says, is that it is extended.!? “Extended to where?” one might ask. Although 
this seems like a natural question to ask, it is crucial to note that this question makes sense 
only when trying to conceive where the surface extends or is located. However, our suppos- 
ing does away precisely with these surfaces. Upon careful consideration, therefore, we come 
to recognize that without a surface, we cannot conceive a limit to the extension of a particular 
body.'? For a similar reason, in the absence of other bodies we cannot determine what the 
proportion of motion and rest of a given body might be — or better yet, in the absence of other 
bodies, the given body would have no particular proportion of motion and rest. 

Purporting to conceive a perfectly isolated body in itself can only amount to a concep- 
tion of limitless extension.'+ Although this might sound surprising at first, on second 
thought this should be no surprise, since a body, insofar as it is an extended thing, is after 
all, extension. In his exchange with Tchirnhaus (Ep. 80-83), Spinoza is adamant that, 
contra Descartes, he considers extension to be essentially active, not inert. The upshot 


° An articulation of the relativity of the proportion of motion and rest of bodies can also be found in Daniel 
Garber (1994). 

10 Spinoza’s demonstration of 1P5 rests on accepting some version of the principle of indiscernibles. 

1 Tn the corollary to Lemma 3, Spinoza states that “a body in motion moves until it is determined by another to 
rest” and vice versa. To show that this is the case Spinoza says he will suppose a body either at rest or in motion 
while not attending to any other body. This might strike some as going counter to my argument that the proportion 
of motion and rest of a body depends ontologically and conceptually on other bodies. Note however first that this 
a corollary to the lemma which claims that a body in motion or rest is determined to be thus by another body (ad 
infinitum). The main point Spinoza is making here is that both the state of the body (motion or rest) and a change 
in that state (to rest or motion) is caused by another body. That is, to conceive of the state of the body or its change 
necessitates conceiving its cause, namely another body, and therefore, not in conflict with my main line of 
argument. 

! For this reason, and others laid out with further elaboration in Shein (201 8a), I disagree with views which hold 
that particular modes have completely internal identifying features. Cf. for example Valtteri Viljanen (2011, ch. 1). 
13 Spinoza makes this point explicitly in Ep.50; GIV/240/6-15. 

4 Peterman (2015) has argued quite interestingly that for Spinoza extension is non-dimensional, and that this 
is true both when conceiving extended substance and as well as extended modes. For reasons laid out more care- 
fully in Shein (2018a), I take 2A4: “We sense are bodies affected by many modes” to anchor the dimensionality 
of modes. That is, we sense our bodies, as dimensional. 


235 


NOA SHEIN 


here, then, is that the essence of any body, considered disregarding surrounding bodies, is 
infinite active Extension.'° 

Once this perhaps surprising yet vital point is properly appreciated, we can note the fol- 
lowing; since the body considered on its own extends ad infinitum what is determined by the 
other bodies, as required by 1D2 and 1P28, is precisely this active extending.’ Recalling the 
definition of a finite thing as what is limited by another of the same kind, we can now give a 
better analysis of what this limitation is. When conceiving the body along with other bodies, 
i.e. conceiving it as it is in re, what is limited by the other bodies is this striving to actively 
extend ad infinitum. Considered sub specie aeternitatis, this limitation expresses itself as the 
surface determination of the body. However, considered within temporal bounds, this 
expresses itself as the proportion of motion and rest. The crucial point to note here is that 
neither the surface determination nor the proportion of motion and rest of a particular body 
is due to its nature alone, but rather, are due in part to the other bodies. Body X is the 
particular body it is because its extension (i.e. its striving to extend ad infinitum) is determined 
by the surrounding bodies. Each of these in turn is determined by its surrounding bodies. 
And so, the cause of the being of any finite body, qua finite, is immediately the surrounding 
bodies and mediately the distal ones. Another way to put it is to say that any body is deter- 
mined by the totality of bodies. I take 1P28, which we considered above, to be describing this 
circumstance partially. I say partially, because what we have just seen makes sense of only 
that part of 1P28 where Spinoza claims that every finite thing (i.e. something with a deter- 
minate existence) is caused to exist as such by something else that has a determinate existence 
and so on ad infinitum. 


We still need to understand the last and perplexing bit of Spinoza’s locution that a finite 
thing “can neither exist nor be determined to produce an effect.” We initially found this 
puzzling since, on the one hand to say that something is determined seems, prima facie, to be 
pointing to the given thing’s passivity or better yet inactivity. On the other hand, Spinoza’s 
definition of passivity entails that what is passive is partially active (3D2). Thus to say of 
something that it is determined to produce an effect seems like a contradiction since that 
seems to be saying that something is inactively active. With the help of our earlier exercise in 


'S This in part helps understand also the difference between Descartes’ “principle of conservation” and Spinoza's 
conatus. On this issue see for example, André Lecrivain (1986), David R. Lachterman (1977), and Viljanen (2011, 
pp. 105-112). 

'6 Understood thusly, Spinoza’s association of determination and negation (Ep. 50) can be given a very straight 
forward analysis. What is being negated is the active extension ad infinitum. For the relation between the 
association of determination and negation in Spinoza and later thinkers see Yitzhak Melamed (2012). 


236 


SPINOZA ON DETERMINATION 


considering a particular body disregarding its surrounding bodies, we can now properly 
address this puzzle. 

Appreciating that what is being determined or limited, in the case of bodies, is a striv- 
ing to extend ad infinitum, we can see that a prerequisite for something being determined, 
is that it be active, i.e. extending. That is, for something to be determined, its activity 
must be curtailed. Crucially, the determination can only curtail an already given activity; 
it cannot entirely eradicate activity. If the activity of a given body were completely anni- 
hilated, the given body would be annihilated as well, and then quite literally there would 
be no thing that would be determined. There is of course no temporal priority here, but 
an ontological one. This helps explain Spinoza’s assumption that bodies actively resist 
one another. Not only are bodies contiguous, but also actively strive to extend into their 
surrounding bodies, which in turn resist this extending.'’ They do so precisely by 
striving to extended ad infinitum. Conversely, to resist the activity of other bodies is, in 
other words, to act since, in effect, what the given body is doing is striving to extend 
ad infinitum. We call this striving resistence when considered along with other bodies. 
Determination then, arises when bodies are striving to extend one into the other, so to 
speak. And so, for a body to be determined, it must also actively determine. Therefore, 
determination, must always be a co- or rather, an inter-determination. When viewed 
thusly, Spinoza’s insistence on saying that something “is determined to exist, and cause 
an effect” is made clear. 

Simply put, only because something is active to begin with can it be determined. And 
therefore it is not a contradiction to say that something is at once passive and active. For 
body X to exist as finite, that is, have a determinate existence, it must both have its extension 
hindered (or determined) by surrounding bodies, and it must simultaneously resist this 
determination. It resists this determination by actively extending, as far as it can, into the 
other bodies. Or rather, it counter-determines the extension of the surrounding bodies 
immediately, and mediately the distal ones. 

Another way to appreciate the resolution of the initial puzzle we considered is the 
following. The puzzle arises only under the assumption that there are two exclusive 
states: being determined and determining. However, as we saw, one necessitates the 
other. In re there is an inter-determination. Which body is to be considered determining 
and which determined is a matter of perspective.'* If what is being explained, or given 
an account of, is the finitude of body X, then our attention is drawn to the manner in 
which, and the fact that, its extension is bounded by other bodies. That is, we note the 
way in which it is acted on. On the other hand, if what we are interested in explaining 
is why the contiguous to body X, body Y is the way it is, we note the way body X acts on 
it by extending into Y and thus forestalling body Y’s extending. One very important 
point to make here, is that neither being determined nor determining something else 
can be, or be conceived, one to the exclusion of the other. To conceive of something as 
determined, it is necessary to implicitly conceive it also as determining. Another way of 
putting it is to say that there is only a distinction of reason between conceiving a body 
as determined or determining. Or better yet, that there is a shift in focus. In re there is an 


17 For a different way of arriving at this conclusion, see Sangiacomo (2015, p. 527). 
18 Julie Klein in other contexts has also been stressing a perspectival reading of Spinoza. See for example Klein 
(forthcoming). 


237 


NOA SHEIN 


inter-determination among all finite modes — which is that in which their existence qua 
finite consists. 

Being determined by another then, presupposes inherent activity, but not vice versa. 
That is, although being acted on necessitates being active, being active does not necessi- 
tate being acted on. The important cases here of course are substance itself and infinite 
modes. We can return now to 1D7, and understand Spinoza’s claim that freedom is 
being determined by one’s own nature, to mean, being determined by no other thing. 
That is, not acted on by anything else, but nonetheless active. In a sense being deter- 
mined by one’s own nature, means not being determined at all, but acting with no limi- 
tation. The asymmetry here parallels the priority of the substance to its modes and is not 
coincidental. 

Although we have focused on physical determination, we can now note several 
structural points about determination that obtain under any attribute. First, determi- 
nation is the curtailment or limitation of activity or power. The substance itself is essen- 
tially active, and this is expressed under any attribute. No matter, then, under which 
attribute we conceive, when we conceive something determinate we are conceiving a 
curtailment of activity or power under that attribute. Second, this activity is presup- 
posed by its local hindrance, and makes determination possible. Third, being deter- 
mined by another, presupposes an inter-determination of all finite modes. Finally, there 
is no dichotomy between being determined and being determining. Considering a finite 
mode like this or that is merely a shift of focus, since in re whatever is determined also 
determines. 


3. Conclusion 


The analysis of determination presented here makes other familiar interpretive diffi- 
culties tractable. One such worry has been the status of finite modes and their relation to 
the infinite substance. There has been, in large part following Hegel, an inclination to 
doubt the reality of finite modes. Part of this worry arises precisely because of their 
nature as determined, or passive.'? It seems that qua acted on and determined, they 
cannot exist in the infinite (active) substance.”? However, noting that conceiving of 
something as acted on entails conceiving only part of a more complex reality (i.e. an 
abstraction), ameliorates the Hegelian-type worry. Insofar as this conception is an 
abtraction it indeed has no real being. Nonetheless, the complex reality — namely that 
each finite mode is active, and striving as much or as far as it can to be fully active — from 
which we abstracted, is nonetheless real.*! There is no inherent contradiction there. This 
signals a path for rejecting the claim that Spinoza is unwillingly committed to the non- 
reality of finite modes. 


19 Hegel’s other major objection regards the inherent asymmetry between substance and its modes. For a fuller 
elaboration on the distinction between these two worries see José Maria Sanchez de Leon and Noa Shein (2020). 
0 Della Rocca has made this type of claim in several articles. See for example Della Rocca (2012). Karolina 
Htibner (2015) has offered to solve this tension by holding that finite modes qua passive and negations are ideal 
yet non-illusory. 

21 For an elaboration of this type of response to the charge of idealism see Noa Shein, (2020, pp. 323-336). 


238 


SPINOZA ON DETERMINATION 


References 


Della Rocca, M. (2012). Rationalism, idealism, monism, and beyond. In: Spinoza and German Idealism 
(ed. E. Forster and Y.Y. Melamed), 7-26. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2012. 

Della Rocca, M. (2013). Striving, oomph, and intelligibility in Spinoza. In: Judgement and the Epistemic 
Foundation of Logic (ed. Maria Van der Schaar). 49-65. New York: Springer. 

Della Rocca, M. (2015). Interpreting Spinoza: the real Is the rational. Journal of the History of 
Philosophy 53 (3): 523-535. 

Garber, D. (1994). Descartes and Spinoza on persistance and conatus. Studia Spinozana 10: 43-68. 

Htibner, K. (2015). Spinoza on negation, mind-dependence and the reality of the finite. In: The Young 
Spinoza: A Metaphysician in the Making (ed. Y.Y. Melamed), 221—237. New York: Oxford University 
Press. 

Klein, J.R. (forthcoming). Spinozan meditations on life and death. In: Life and Death in Early Modern 
Philosophy (ed. S. James). Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Lachterman, D.R. (1977). The physics of Spinoza’s Ethics. Southwest Journal of Philosophy 8 (3): 
71-111. 

Lecrivain, A. (1986). Spinoza and Cartesian mechanics. In: Spinoza and the Sciences (ed M. and D. 
Nails Grene), 15—60. Dordrecht: D. Reidel Publishing Company. 

Melamed, Y.Y. (2012a). “Omnis determinatio est negatio”: determination, negation, and self-nega- 
tion in Spinoza, Kant, and Hegel. In: Spinoza and German Idealism (ed. Y.Y. Melamed and E. Forster), 
pp. 175-196. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Melamed, Y.Y. (2012b) Why is Spinoza not an eleatic monist (or why diversity exists)? In: Spinoza on 
Monism (ed. P. Goff), 206-222. London: Palgrave. 

Nadler, S. (2012). Spinoza’s monism and the reality of the finite. In: Spinoza on Monism (ed. P. Goff), 
223-243. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan. 

Nelson, A. and Smith, K. (2010). The divisibility of Cartesian extension. In: Oxford Studies in Early 
Modern Philosophy (ed. D. Garber and S. Nadler), 1-24. New York: Oxford University Press. 

Peterman, A. (2015). Spinoza on extension. Philosopher’s Imprint 15 (14): 1-23. 

Peterman, A. Spinoza on physical science. Philosophy Compass 9 (3): 214-223. 

Sanchez de Leon, J.M. and Shein, N. (2020). The coincidence of the finite and the infinite in Spinoza 
and Hegel. Idealistic Studies 49 (1). 

Sangiacomo, A. (2015). The ontology of determination: from Descartes to Spinoza. Science in Context 
28 (4): 515-543. 

Shein, N. (2015). Causation and determinate existence of finite modes in Spinoza." Archiv fiir 
Geschichte der Philosophie 97 (3): 334-357. 

Shein, N. (2018a). Not wholly finite: the dual aspect of finite modes in Spinoza. Philosophia 46: 
433-451. 

Shein, N. (2018b). The road to finite modes in Spinoza’s Ethics. In: Infinity in Early Modern Philosophy 
(ed. O. Nachtomy and R. Winegar: New York: Springer. 

Shein, N. (2020). Spinning strands into aspects: realism, idealism, and finite modes in Spinoza. 
European Journal of Philosophy 28 (2): 323-336. 

Viljanen, V. (2011). Spinoza’s Geometry of Power. New York: Cambridge University Press. 


239 


23 


Spinoza’s Physics 


ALISON PETERMAN 


1. Introduction 


Two years before Spinoza’s death, Tschirnhaus asks him for his thoughts on physics. 
‘Physics’ [physica] was understood broadly by Spinoza’s contemporaries as the science of 
all natural things, but Tschirnhaus has a narrower acceptation in mind when he refers to 
the “the lemmas added to the second part of [Spinoza’s] Ethics” (Ep. 59). Those lemmas are 
concerned specifically with bodies and their motions, and Tschirnhaus flatters Spinoza 
that by them “many difficulties in physics are easily solved.” But Spinoza himself didn’t 
consider this section a physics, writing there that it was “not [his] intention to deal expressly 
with body” (E2p13sPhysDigL7s). And it does not solve any difficulties in physics, easily or 
at all. 

In fact, as Spinoza’s near-total omission from the history of physics reflects (Gabbey 
(1995), p. 142), Spinoza never produced a physics in this narrow sense: a careful and 
systematic investigation of bodies, forces, and their motions of the kind found in Descartes, 
Regius, or Huygens. This isn’t so surprising. Sometimes Spinoza makes it sound like such 
knowledge is very important, either because it provides a step-stool to more valuable 
intuitive knowledge or because it helps free us from the passions (Ep. 27). But Spinoza’s 
epistemology is pessimistic about our ability to discover anything like causal laws that 
describe physical systems in any detail (Peterman 2014; Schliesser 2017). 

Spinoza did, of course, have things to say about extension, motion, and the causal inter- 
actions of bodies. He discussed physical theory and experiment in letters (Gabbey details 
these conversations in 1995, pp. 149-153), and had a significant interest in practical and 
theoretical optics. But most of what Spinoza writes about physics comes in discussions of 
Descartes, especially if you count Part II of the Principles of Cartesian Philosophy, Spinoza’s 
attempt to put Descartes’s Principles in geometrical order for a pupil to whom he “did not 
wish to teach his own opinions openly” (Ep. 13). 

So, understanding Spinoza’s physics requires reckoning with his responses to Descartes. 
But these can be difficult to interpret. As Lodewijk Meyer warns in his preface to the DPP, 
Spinoza does not take himself to be teaching his own opinions there. But he does make 
substantive modifications to Descartes’s words, especially to his demonstrations of 


A Companion to Spinoza, First Edition. Edited by Yitzhak Y. Melamed. 
© 2021 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2021 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd. 


240 


SPINOZA'S PHYSICS 


important propositions (DPP Preface/G 131). It is often difficult to know if any given 
departure is an attempt to clarify, improve, or challenge. But when read carefully against 
the background of Spinoza’s other work, Part 2 of the DPP can give us a glimpse into the 
way that Spinoza thought about physics. 


2. Extended Substance 


Like Descartes, Spinoza thinks that all and only bodies share an attribute, the attribute of 
Extension. But while the two agree that attributes are of substances, Cartesian bodies are 
substances while Spinozan bodies are modes of the one divine substance (2d1). Spinoza 
writes that because of his failure to realize that Extension is an “attribute that expresses 
eternal and infinite essence” (Ep. 63), “Descartes’s principles of natural things are of no 
service, not to say quite wrong” (Ep. 81). 

The first definition of Spinoza’s DPP defines extension on Descartes’s behalf as “what 
consists of three dimensions; but by extension we do not understand the act of extending, 
or anything distinct from quantity.” While Descartes does not define “extension” in the 
Principles, Spinoza’s definition reflects the definition that Descartes gives in the Rules: 
extension is “whatever has length, breadth, and depth” (AT X 422/CSM 158). But the two 
specifications following the definition are Spinoza’s own, and they point to two problems 
that he sees with Descartes’s failure to appreciate that Extension modifies an eternal 
substance. 

Spinoza’s specification that extension is “nothing distinct from quantity” reflects 
Descartes’s discussion in Pr II 8 and 9 of the relationship between extension, “continuous 
quantity,” and corporeal substance. Descartes does seem there to assimilate extension and 
continuous quantity. Spinoza does not think that Extension can be identified with contin- 
uous quantity. Extension is an attribute, or a way that substance, a “real being,” expresses 
its essence. In contrast, our conception of continuous quantity results from applying imag- 
ination to Extended substance, abstracting one feature of the result, and attempting to 
understand Extended substance in terms of it (Ep. 12/G56—58/C202). 

Descartes argues that we clearly and distinctly understand that the essence of matter is 
extension in three dimensions (CSM II 223/Pr II 1), so it is not an illegitimate abstraction. 
Though matter cannot be conceived without extension or continuous quantity (CSM II 
226-7/Pr II 9) extension or continuous quantity can be conceived apart from substance 
(CSM II 226/Pr II 8). So we are justified in treating bodies entirely as three-dimensional 
volumes. According to Spinoza, though, 


if the Modes of Substance themselves are confused with Beings of reason of this kind, or aids 
of the imagination, they too can never be rightly understood. For when we do this, we separate 
them from Substance, and from the way they flow from eternity, without which, however, they 
cannot be rightly understood. (Ep. 12/G 57/C I 203) 


In this letter — along with Elp15s, which also concerns the relationship between sub- 
stance, the attribute of Extension, (divisible) continuous quantity, and measurement — 
Spinoza wants us to rethink the relationship between Extension and substance. There is 
scholarly disagreement about whether, according to Spinoza, we can do that and still 
retain Descartes’s sense of Extension as extension in three dimensions. Spinoza himself 
never defines the attribute of Extension. This omission, along with the omission of any 


241 


ALISON PETERMAN 


discussion of magnitude, figure, position, or other modes of spatial extension, is 
conspicuous, especially given that he carefully defined it on Descartes’s behalf in the DPP 
(Peterman 2014). It is open to us to read “Extension” as simply “The Essence of Body” 
without committing Spinoza to Descartes’s view that the essence of body is spatial 
(Peterman 2015). 

The second caveat Spinoza offers after his definition of Cartesian extension — that it is 
not “the act of extension” — does not reflect anything that Descartes says in the Principles. 
But it does reflect comments Spinoza makes elsewhere to the effect that Extension must 
express God’s power. I will talk about that in Section 3. 


3. Causation and Attribute-Neutrality 


For Spinoza as for Descartes, it is in virtue of the attribute of Extension that something is a 
body, and the other properties of it follow from its attribute. Modes of Extension have 
“nothing in common” with modes of any other attribute, and Spinoza is in some ways 
more insistent on this point than Descartes, arguing that as a result there can be no causa- 
tion across attributes (E3p2 and E3p2d). 

However, Extension and the other attributes (I'll focus on Thought) all modify the same 
substance. Spinoza draws as a consequence of this that each mode of Extension has a 
mode of Thought with which it is identical, even though they have “nothing in common.” 
Furthermore: 


. ..whether we conceive Nature under the attribute of extension, or under the attribute of 
thought, or under any other attribute we shall find one and the same order, or one and the 
same connection of causes. (2p7s) 


This is one version of Spinoza’s so-called parallelism: there is an isomorphism or iden- 
tity of the “order” or “connection of causes” between the finite modes of any two attrib- 
utes, so that for two parallel modes C and C’ and E and FE’, body C causes body E if and only 
if mind C’ causes mind EF’. It seems E and E’ do share something in common: their place in a 
causal order. 

Spinoza’s commitment to the “attribute-neutrality” of some causal facts is reflected in 
his physics. For example, Spinoza admits that his goal in the physical interlude is not to 
treat bodies, but to show “how a composite individual can be affected in many ways, and 
still preserve its nature” (E2p13s). But the interlude does purport to “premise a few things 
concerning bodies.” How can Spinoza do physics while his real interest is in affective psy- 
chology? Well, when you look closely, you find that nearly every reference to attribute- 
specific features like Extension or motion are placeholders from the perspective of 
demonstration and use (Peterman 2017). 

Perhaps we can render the interlude’s claims attribute-specific by substituting in for 
those placeholders the Spinozistic definitions of “Extension” and “motion”? Alas, there are 
none. Just as Spinoza never defines Extension, he never defines motion. This isn’t nitpicking. 
Descartes, Hobbes, Boyle, and other Cartesians all take pains to define motion, and 
Spinoza’s correspondents (Ep. 30) and early readers complained about Spinoza’s failure to 
do so (Gabbey 1994; Schliesser 2017). And it is not really possible to reconstruct one based 
on the way he uses it. At one point in the early Short Treatise, Spinoza even admits that 


242 


SPINOZA'S PHYSICS 


when he uses motion as an explanation, it is “not said seriously. For the author still intends 
to discover its cause .. . But it can stand as it is here, because nothing is built on it, or 
depends on it.” I don’t believe Spinoza ever stopped using “motion” as a placeholder. 

Attribute-neutrality can also make sense of some changes in the DPP. In a letter to 
Clerselier, Descartes claims that his collision rules “depend on only a single principle, 
which is that when two bodies collide, and have in them incompatible modes, there must 
undoubtedly occur some mutation of these modes to make them compatible, but this 
mutation is always the least possible.” But this principle never appears in any proof of a 
collision rule, either in the Principles or the Rules. Spinoza, however, includes a version of it 
as DPP 2p23: “When the modes of a body are forced to undergo variation, that variation 
will always be the least that can be.” He goes on to use it to prove Descartes’s Rule 3 and 
Rule 5 (DPP 2p29), which Descartes had proved using instead the principle of the 
conservation of quantity of motion. 

Why does Spinoza replace the conservation law with the Principle of Least Modal 
Mutation (as dubbed by Gabbey 1995, see also Manning 2012)? Although the PLMM cites 
body, its force is attribute-neutral: any intuitive appeal that it has depends not at all on any 
features specific to bodies. There is another example: Axiom 19 of the DPP is that “when 
two bodies which have opposite modes come into contact with one another, either both are 
constrained to suffer some variation, or else at least one of them is.” We might call this the 
Principle of Noncontrariety, and like the PLMM, it does not depend on attributing to 
“bodies” anything specifically physical. It’s not unreasonable to think that Spinoza replaces 
the conservation of quantity of motion with these two because he prefers to ground 
physics in attribute-neutral structural features of modes. 

Why does Spinoza think that the causal order is the same across attributes? One 
argument he suggests for E2p7s is that E and E’ have the same cause because they are the 
same mode (E2p7s). But despite being identical, E and E’ have nothing in common, and so 
it is not clear what licenses me to conclude this or anything else from their identity. In fact, 
while E and E’ can be said to have the same cause, because C and C’ are identical, E’ cannot 
be said to be caused by C. This means that not all causal facts are attribute-neutral (Della 
Rocca 1993, p. 129). So does the connection that Spinoza makes between a thing’s cause 
and its essence, since essences are attribute-specific. If the causal dispositions of things are 
attribute-specific, what ensures the isomorphism of causal structure across attributes? 

A second argument that Spinoza gives for E2p7s sheds some light on this. It proceeds 
not from the identity of Eand E’ but from the identity of the substance they modify. Because 
they both modify the divine substance, “God’s [NS: actual] power” operates the same way 
in each attribute. It is still not completely clear why this should manifest specifically in the 
structural facts being the same, but it does seem to be an acknowledgment that the isomor- 
phism has to do with the structure of nature as a whole rather than simply mode identity. 

Physics investigates the nature and properties of bodies, so for Spinoza as for Descartes, 
it will involve an analysis of the attribute of Extension. But physics also concerns facts about 
causal structure, and for Spinoza those are attribute-neutral. So it will also involve investi- 
gating the attribute-neutral structure of things. Spinoza’s separation of these two is, I think, 
a unique and interesting lens through which to view physical theories. How essential is the 
connection between the properties that a thing has in virtue of being a physical thing, and 
the causal relations it has with other things? It is one surprising version of a question that 
many philosophers have asked but that is most closely associated with Hume: what’s the 
relationship between a body’s intrinsic properties and its causal relations? 


243 


ALISON PETERMAN 


4. The Power of God and the Power of Bodies 


It is clear from what has gone before that Spinoza sees an important explanatory role 
for God’s power in accounting for the behavior of bodies. This might seem to be a unique 
feature of Spinoza’s physics, but Spinoza is by no means unique in holding that physical 
causation is only understood if we properly understand God’s operation in nature — 
think of the role of divine permanence and concurrence in Descartes’s physics, or of 
God’s occasional causation in Malebranche’s. These provide insight into the nature of 
physical causation only to the extent that they identify precisely how God operates in 
nature and how, as a result, we should think about the behavior and interactions of 
bodies. 

Spinoza’s own account of divine causation is easily described — “God’s power is his 
essence itself” (E1p34)—but not so easily understood. Two points, however, are important. 
First, the identity of God’s power and essence reflects the fact that according to Spinoza, 
everything is caused by God by following from God’s essence. But second: what happens to 
bodies can still be attributed to their activity, because bodies are not only effects but also 
modes of God, and so have their own share of God’s causal powers. 

The essence of a body is connected with its causal dispositions by Spinoza’s identification 
at E3p7 of the “given, or actual essence” of a thing with “the striving [conatus] by which 
[it] strives to persevere in its being.” The demonstration shows that a thing’s “striving” or 
“conatus” is just the following of effects from its essence, much like God’s power is the fol- 
lowing of effects from God’s essence. 

That everything strives in this way is entailed by the fact that everything “expresses the 
nature, or essence of God in a certain and determinate way” (E1P36). Spinoza suggests 
two independent arguments for this: one relies on the claim that everything is caused by 
God, and one on the claim that everything inheres in God. Causation and inherence are, of 
course, connected for Spinoza, but these suggest two different ways of thinking about the 
relationship between the essences of finite things and their existence and corresponding 
ability to produce effects. 

One story suggests a formal-causal cascade of effects from individual essences, starting 
with God’s (Htibner 2015; Viljanen 2011). The problem with this picture is that Spinoza 
frequently implies that the existence of a certain essence, even if it follows from God, is not 
sufficient to produce effects. God causes the essences of things, on the one hand, and their 
existence and causal powers, on the other, in two different ways — a distinction that is 
important because unlike God, finite essences are not the causes of their own existence. 
The existence and causal powers of a thing depend on many circumstances: 


The reason why a circle or triangle exists, or why it does not exist, does not follow from the 
nature of these things, but from the order of the whole of corporeal nature. (1p11d2) 
The “order of the nature,” “series, or order, of existing,” or “series of singular changeable 
things” refers to a temporal following of actual events rather than an ordering of essences. 
Embedded in this order, what a thing strives to do is an infinitely partial explainer of its 
actual causes, effects, and properties (e.g. E4p3, E4p4); as a result of that, “experience does 
not teach us any essences of things” (Ep.10/G 47/C I 196). So while Spinoza says that a 
thing’s essence indicates its causes and effects (Ep. 60/C II 433/G IV 271), TIE 96), these 
are by no means its actual causes and effects. They are the causes and effects that it would 
have were it not determined by anything else. 


244 


SPINOZA'S PHYSICS 


5. Quantum In Se Est 


What, in general, would a body do in that case? One answer is suggested by Spinoza’s 
description of a burning candle in isolation. We 


abstract the thoughts from the surrounding bodies so that the mind directs itself toward the 
sole contemplation of the candle, considered in itself alone, so that afterwards it infers that the 
candle has no cause of its destruction. So if there were no surrounding bodies, this candle, and 
its flame, would remain immutable, or the like. (TIE 57) 


But in Part 4 of the Ethics, Spinoza considers the counterpossible scenario that “man 
should not be a part of Nature, and... should be able to undergo no changes except those 
which can be understood through his own nature alone” (E4p4): 


this [fact] would have to follow from God’s infinite power; and consequently the order of the 
whole of Nature... would have to be deduced from the necessity of the divine nature, insofar 
as it is considered to be affected with the idea of some man. And so (by Ip21) it would follow 
that the man would be infinite. 


Why does the isolated candle freeze in its determined state while the isolated man 
becomes infinite? 

Notice that Spinoza explains what the man would do by God’s power, and what the 
candle would do by the absence of external limitation. The best interpretation of this, is 
that the candle does not itself partake in God’s power, because it does not instantiate an 
essence. It is what we might calla “state,” which results from the mutually-limiting powers 
of jockeying essences. An isolated state is an abstraction while an isolated man, while an 
impossibility, would be a “real and physical being.” The distinction between a state and a 
real being is suggested by E2p45s’s distinction between “duration, i.e. existence insofar as 
it is conceived abstractly, and as a certain species of quantity” and “the very nature of 
existence, which is attributed to singular things because infinitely many things follow 
from the eternal necessity of God’s nature in infinitely many modes (see 1p16).” Spinoza 
contrasts modes as they follow from God per Elp16 with a “force by which each one 
perseveres in existing” with modes as they are “determined by another singular thing to 
exist in a certain way” per E1p28. 

I believe that when Spinoza does “physics” in the physical interlude and the DPP, he is 
concerned with states, not Spinozistic strivers. The best way to see this is by looking at the 
analogs in each of Descartes’s first law of motion, which tells us that “any object, insofar 
as it is in itself [quantum in se est], always perseveres in the same state; and thus what is 
moved once always continues to be moved” (CSM 1 241-242 | AT VIIA 62). Descartes’s 
argument for this in the Principles is that if a part of matter, insofar as it is “simple and 
undivided,” has any property, it will retain that property unless “something should come 
from elsewhere” to change it. Motion and rest are not special (this is true of the version in 
Le Monde, too (CSM 1 93 | AT XI 38)). This is a problem, because it doesn’t apply to just any 
property; part of the point of the law is that it doesn’t apply to position. It may be an indi- 
cation that Descartes realizes this that he writes at the end of the proof that “rest is con- 
trary to motion, and nothing can be moved to its contrary, or to its own destruction, by its 
own nature.” Perhaps the argument only applies to natural contraries, then. Hobbes’s 
argument for a similar principle appeals to directionality, a special feature of motion in 


245 


ALISON PETERMAN 


three dimensions (De corpore 8.19). (For a more detailed comparison among these demon- 
strations, see Peterman 2019). 
Spinoza’s version in the physical interlude reads: 


From [Lemma 3] it follows that a body in motion moves until it is determined by another body 
to rest; and that a body at rest also remains at rest until it is determined to motion by another. 
(E2p13sPhysDigL3c) 


Lemma 3 is essentially a restatement of 1p28 in attribute-specific terms. As I suggested 
earlier, E1P28 is concerned with states, and there is no mention of individuals with 
essences or a conatus. Indeed, the entire physical interlude precedes Spinoza’s introduc- 
tion of the conatus, which should surprise anyone who thinks that Spinoza is doing 
fundamental physics here. Spinoza also provides a second proof: 


For when I suppose that body A, say, is at rest, and do not attend to any other body in motion, I 
can say nothing about body A except that it is at rest. If afterwards it happens that body A moves, 
that of course could not have come about from the fact that it was at rest. For from that nothing 
else could follow but that body A would be at rest [my italics]. 


The italicized language is the language that Spinoza used to describe abstractions like the 
candle, not real things. Of course you cannot say anything about an abstraction other than 
what you posit of it. We can say plenty more about a real thing. Spinoza also inserts this 
language into his reconstruction of Descartes’s proof at DPP 2p14d: “if we attend to no 
external, i.e. particular causes, but consider the thing by itself, we shall have to affirm that 
insofar as it can it always perseveres in the state in which it is, q.e.d.” 

DPP 2p15-17 is Spinoza’s version of Descartes’s discussion, at Pr II 39 and 56-69, of 
the motion of a stone swung in a sling. Descartes argues that by the first law, the stone has 
a tendency to move in a straight line tangent to the orbit, while the sling prevents it from 
actually moving that way. In his version, however, Spinoza writes that the stone is “deter- 
mined by an external cause [namely, the impulse of the sling] to move along a tangent.” 
Spinoza seems to think that Descartes is not entitled to attribute to the stone any contribu- 
tion to its own motion, even an inertial force. Gabbey (1994) argues that the change 
wasn’t intentional, but Spinoza’s two demonstrations, which are not found in any form in 
Descartes’ text, prove the modified version of the principle. 

There are many other ways of understanding the relationship between a body’s essence, 
determination, and activity than the one I have proposed here (e.g. Hiibner 2017; 
Sangiacomo 2015; Shein 2018). An important family of alternatives denies that there is 
such a large gulf between what follows from a thing’s essence and its actual states, so that 
motion or other modes of three-dimensional extension to in fact carve out bodily essences. 
The next section briefly considers these. 


6. Essences 


Spinoza does not tell us straight out what the essences of bodies are. He does gesture at a 
few candidates. 

First, Spinoza’s claim in the physical interlude that a complex individual persists as long as 
its “ratio of motion and rest” is maintained has led many to identify this as the essence of a 


246 


SPINOZA'S PHYSICS 


body. However, remember that Spinoza’s interest in the interlude is in the nature of a complex 
individual of any attribute, not any individual of the attribute of Extension. This is reflected in 
his demonstration and use of the ratio, his admission that his concern is not with bodies, and 
the fact that it does not apply to simple bodies. He never defines this “ratio” any more than he 
defines “motion.” For an overview of interpretations of the ratio, see Manning (2012). 

A second proposal is that a body is a region of space, perhaps marked out by relative 
motion. The first lemma of Spinoza’s physical interlude is: 


Bodies are distinguished from one another by reason of motion and rest, speed and slowness, 
and not by reason of substance. 


He cites 1p15s there, where he argues against the real divisibility of Extended substance, 
so it sounds like he might be offering a criterion of bodily individuation (e.g. Curley 1969). 
Many have thought that when Descartes defines “one body” as “whatever is transferred at 
a given time” (CSM 1 233 / AT VIIIA 53), he reduces bodies to modes of one material sub- 
stance (e.g. Bayle, Gueroult), and it is natural to see Spinoza as one of these (e.g. 
Buyse 2012). This picture seems confirmed by Spinoza’s comment to Tschirnhaus that 
Descartes cannot explain numerical variety because his matter is an unmoving mass 
[molem scilicet quiescentem] (Ep. 81, GIV 332). 

The evidence that Spinoza identifies bodies as regions of space is quite thin. He does 
seem to think that motion is involved in generating structure in matter, but he does not tell 
us how it does that. Were he to identify a body with its state of motion, he would run into 
all the problems that Descartes did when he tried to make bodies carved out by motion 
alone into the subject matter of physical laws (Brading 2012, Slowik 2017). In fact, 
Spinoza’s (entirely original) diagnosis of Zeno’s paradoxes in the DPP seems to be that it 
arises from the failure to distinguish between a body and its state of motion. 

Finally, many scholars have appreciated that a body defined simply in terms of its state 
of motion cannot be the Spinozistic striver described in the last section. Inspired by 
Spinoza’s identification of essence and power, they have argued that bodies are “portions” 
of God’s power; for example, Viljanen has it that a body is a “region of intensity in a unified 
field of power” (Viljanen 2011, see also Bennett 1984; Matheron 1969; Schmaltz 2019). 
These are ambitious and interesting attempts to articulate a Spinozistic account of bodily 
essences, but I don’t think they are supported by Spinoza’s words, and I wonder how useful 
anachronisms like “fields” and “quanta of power” are for understanding Spinoza’s mind 
(or indeed for understanding physics). Moreover, field views still see bodies as spatial 
regions, which I doubt they fundamentally are. And some of these views identify motion 
and rest with power or energy, while a ratio is a relation among the parts of a composite 
object, not a single quantity. 

What are the essences of bodies, then? 

I have no idea. Personally, I like this result, because we don’t know what the essences of 
bodies in general are. And there is some, admittedly limited, textual evidence that Spinoza 
saw that: his tentativeness about his own physics and Descartes’s, his refusal to define 
Extension and motion, his claim that we “do not yet know what the body can do from its 
nature alone,” his refusal to define Extension and motion. It also squares, partially, with 
the fact that Spinoza denies that the empirical and mathematical methods that most of us 
think are most appropriate for finding out what the essences of bodies are will never get us 
there: it doesn’t matter how finely matter is sliced by accelerators or how sophisticated is 
the mathematics we apply to spacetime. 


247 


ALISON PETERMAN 


I say “partially” because Spinoza does suggest other methods for discovering these 
essences. One involves the common notions — adequate ideas that Spinoza claims we have 
of bodies in virtue of their commonality. The common notions seem to provide a way out 
of empirical ignorance because they are formed in part through our interactions with 
other bodies. Setting aside questions about their formation and adequacy, we can ask: 
what knowledge do we get by the common notions? The answer that Spinoza implies is that 
we get adequate ideas of the nature of Extension and motion. But do we have these? Why 
don’t we have a definition of them? If the knowledge of them is not knowledge of a defini- 
tion, what kind of knowledge is it? Can we actually use this knowledge to derive collision 
laws? Spinoza leaves these details blurry. 

Our other option is to “deduce” the essences of bodies from the nature of their attri- 
bute, Extension. This works only if we know what the nature of the attribute of 
Extension is. It is one reason to favor interpreting Spinozistic Extension as Cartesian 
three-dimensional extension: not only do we know what it is, but we have some idea of 
what it means to derive geometrical essences. It also represents a more general interpre- 
tive possibility. I have focused on the nature of particular bodily essences, but Spinoza 
freely admits that we cannot adequately represent the essences of particular singular 
things. He contrasts that with the knowledge we can have of the “fixed and eternal 
things, and at the same time the laws inscribed in these things as in their true codes, 
according to which all singular things come to be, and are ordered” (TIE 100-101). The 
final section considers that. 


7. Universality 


The knowledge physics seeks is ideally comprehensive. Descartes was one of the first 
natural philosophers to cast this comprehensiveness in terms of laws. This idiom is now 
almost inescapable, so it’s understandable that people interpret Spinoza’s “fixed and 
eternal things” as laws (e.g. Miller 2003). However, when Spinoza does mention nature’s 
laws he seems to be referencing the “fixed and determinate course of nature” (e.g. 
TTP 4.2.1), not a system of explanatory regularities. Law explanations arguably run afoul 
of Spinoza’s anti-abstractionism. And Spinoza excises all talk of laws from the DPP, making 
Descartes’s three laws of motion into just so many propositions. 

Still, as his exhortation to seek the “fixed and eternal things” suggests, Spinoza is inter- 
ested in universality — just not a universality of laws, under which finite things are sub- 
sumed. It comes closer to a universality of a whole, and finite bodies are parts of an infinite 
individual that “always remains the same” (Ep. 35). It seems that Spinoza identifies the 
source of structure in the whole with the so-called infinite modes, which, Spinoza argues, 
are caused mediately by God, who only causes finite things mediately, through the infinite 
modes (E1p21—22). Spinoza identifies the infinite mode of Extension with “motion and 
rest,” which generates the “face of the whole universe” — a further suggestion that “motion 
and rest” is responsible for the structure of nature. (It’s important to note that the idea that 
nature is a single individual in this sense does not follow simply from Spinoza’s substance 
monism.) Perhaps the essences of individual bodies can only be understood through the 
whole, and are partial, provisional, or co-constituted. 

This is suggested by a well-known passage in a letter, where Spinoza considers how 
“each part of Nature agrees with the whole . .. and coheres with the other parts.” Using 
some blood as his example system, he writes: 


248 


SPINOZA'S PHYSICS 


If we imagine that there are no causes external to the blood . . . it is beyond doubt that the 
blood would remain indefinitely in its present state and that its particles would undergo no 
changes other than those which can be conceived as resulting from the existing relation bet- 
ween the motion of the blood and of the lymph. Thus the blood would always have to be 
regarded as a whole, not a part. But since there are many other causes which do in a definite 
way modify the laws of the nature of the blood . . . it follows that there occur in the blood other 
motions... From this perspective the blood is accounted as a part, not a whole. (Ep. 32) 


Spinoza says of the blood what he says of the candle. This passage can certainly be read as 
suggesting that individual essences are provisional and partial. But it may also be that 
Spinoza is telling us that the blood is an abstraction. That would square with comments 
Spinoza makes elsewhere that “part and whole are not true or actual beings, but only 
beings of reason” (KV II XIX). 


8. Conclusion 


I’ve argued that to make sense of Spinoza’s comments on matter, extension, motion, and 
dynamics of bodies, we must distinguish between the level of essences, which, when 
instantiated, causally generate natural phenomena, and the level of states, which are the 
subject matter of empirical physics and the topic of most of Spinoza’s comments on 
physics. This paints a very different picture of Spinoza’s physics than do most reconstruc- 
tions of it, according to which three-dimensional extension and local motion constitute 
Spinozistic bodies according to their essence, with the addition, of course, of God’s power. 
There are reasons to support both readings: while mine takes very seriously Spinoza’s dis- 
tinction between real beings and abstractions, the alternative gives us a clearer story about 
what the essences of bodies are. I’ve tried to show how mine is possibly reflected in the 
physical interlude and Spinoza’s version of Descartes’s physics, but these are by no means 
decisive. Spinoza never drew out the detailed physical implications of his metaphysics of 
bodies. Some think that is because he thought that those implications were fairly obvious 
and more-or-less Cartesian. I think that is because he recognized our ignorance of the 
fundamental nature of bodies and of the forces governing them. 


References 


Bennett, J. (1984). A Study of Spinoza’s Ethics. Indianapolis: Hackett Publishing. 

Brading, K. (2012). Newton’s law-constitutive approach to bodies: a response to Descartes. In 
Interpreting Newton: critical essays (ed. A. Janiak & E. Schliesser), Cambridge University Press. 

Buyse, FE. (2012). Le “démasquement” de Descartes par Spinoza dans Les Principia Philosophiae 
Cartesianae. Teoria 2: 15-43. 

Curley, E. M. (1969). Spinoza’s Metaphysics: An Essay in Interpretation. Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press. 

Della Rocca, M. (1993). Spinoza’s argument for the identity theory. The Philosophical Review, 102 (2): 
183-213. 

Gabbey, A. (1995). Spinoza’s natural science and methodology. In The Cambridge Companion to 
Spinoza (ed. D. Garrett), 142-191. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Htibner, K. (2015). On the significance of formal Causes in Spinoza’s metaphysics. Archiv fiir 
Geschichte der Philosophie 97(2): 196-233. 


249 


ALISON PETERMAN 


Htibner, K. (2017). The trouble with feelings, or Spinoza on the identity of power and essence. Journal 
of the History of Philosophy 55 (1): 35-53. 

Manning, R. “Spinoza’s Physical Theory.” The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. https://plato. 
stanford.edu/entries/spinoza-physics/ (accessed 13 October 2020). 

Matheron, A. (1969). Individu et communauté chez Spinoza. Paris: Minuit. 

Miller, J. (2003). Spinoza and the concept of a law of nature. History of Philosophy Quarterly 20: 
257-276. 

Peterman, A. (2015). Spinoza on extension and space. Philosophers’ Imprint 15(14): 1-23. 

Peterman, A. (2017). “The ‘physical’ interlude.” In Cambridge Critical Guide to Spinoza's Ethics (ed. 
Y.Y. Melamed), 102—120. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Sangiacomo, A. (2015). Spinoza: teleology and agreement in nature.” Spinoza: Basic Concepts, 59-70. 
Exeter: Imprint Academic. 

Schliesser, Eric. (2017). Spinoza and the philosophy of science: mathematics, motion, and being. The 
Oxford Handbook of Spinoza (ed. M. Della Rocca), 155-189. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Schmaltz, T. (2019). The Metaphysics of the Material World. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Shein, N. (2018). Not wholly finite: the dual aspect of finite modes in Spinoza. Philosophia 46: 
433-451. 

Slowik, E. (2017). “Descartes’ Physics.” Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. https://plato.stanford. 
edu/entries/descartes-physics/ (accessed 8 March 2021). 

Viljanen, V. (2011). Spinoza’s Geometry of Power. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Von Duuglas-Itu, Spinoza’s Foci. “Articles on Spinoza’s Optics and and lens grinding.” Blog. 
https://kvond.wordpress.com/spinozas-foci-articles-spinoza-optics-lens-grinding/ (accessed 8 
March 2021). 


250 


Part Il 


Epistemology, Philosophy of Mind, 
and Psychology 


24 


Spinoza on Human and Divine Knowledge 


URSULA RENZ AND BARNABY R. HUTCHINS 


1. Introduction: The Status of Human Knowledge 


Here’s a seemingly compelling (albeit simplified) story about Spinoza’s epistemology: sub- 
stance, or God, is the ultimate subject of everything, with the physical world being God’s 
“body,” and the world of thoughts being God’s “mind.” On this understanding, God’s 
“mind” contains all true thoughts or all genuine knowledge, just as God’s “body” con- 
tains all real physical objects. In which case, when it comes to epistemology, the human 
difference — indeed, the difference of any finite perspective — consists wholly in error, of 
some kind. Where our knowledge is fully adequate, there is no difference between human 
and divine knowledge, as human knowledge is simply a part of God’s knowledge that 
we've managed to grab onto properly and hold within our own minds. But where our 
thought differs from God’s, it differs only in being confused and incomplete. Seen in this 
way, then, human knowledge is nothing but an impoverished version of God’s knowledge. 
The human perspective differs in no positive respect; its difference consists wholly in 
negation — it adds only lack and limitation. In other words, it adds nothing at all. If the 
human perspective adds nothing, then, it must be fully reducible to God’s knowledge 
without loss, given that there is literally nothing to be lost. 

In contrast to this story, we argue in this chapter that the human perspective is not 
fully reducible —i.e. that something would indeed be lost in the absence of the human per- 
spective (or, minimally, some finite perspective — when we talk of a specifically human 
perspective in this chapter, it is generally, if vaguely, interchangeable with “finite perspec- 
tive”; like Spinoza himself, we don’t use a thick notion of “human” here). This means that 
the human epistemological difference consists in more than nothing — that what is lost is 
more than just lack and limitation, that what is specific to the human perspective is not 
just error. It means that what is ineliminable in human epistemology is or entails 
something positive in itself. 

In §2, we argue that human epistemic subjectivity itself cannot be reduced to the divine 
without genuine loss. We go on, in §3, to discuss how, against this background, the 
difference between Spinoza’s three kinds of knowledge has to be comprehended. In §4, we 
conclude by looking at how this reading affects our understanding of Spinoza’s apparent 


A Companion to Spinoza, First Edition. Edited by Yitzhak Y. Melamed. 
© 2021 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2021 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd. 


253 


URSULA RENZ AND BARNABY R. HUTCHINS 


notion of God’s intellect: we argue that Spinoza’s use of the notion plays a functional role 
as a limiting concept in the explication of human knowledge; it thus serves as a condition 
of possibility for human knowledge — but this notion holds only these functional and 
explanatory roles and should not be taken to imply the existence of a divine mind, or any 
entity called “God’s intellect.” 


2. Epistemic Subjectivity and the Human Standpoint 


The central point of this chapter is that epistemic subjectivity itself is an irreducible, ine- 
liminable feature of the human standpoint. It is fundamental to the human standpoint, 
and, in principle, to other finite standpoints, but it is unavailable to God: it is a feature of 
the human mind, but not of the infinite intellect. Traditionally, subjectivity goes along 
with substantiality, and to be an epistemic subject is to be a substance with a mind. This 
cannot be the case for Spinoza, though, for whom there is only one substance. In order to 
understand what our own epistemic subjectivity consists in, we will need a more elabo- 
rated definition. By “epistemic subjectivity,” we mean specifically the property of being 
some subject that has ideas, such that you are an epistemic subject insofar as you have at 
least one idea. This much seems straightforward enough. The tricky part is to establish 
what the having of ideas consists in. To be an epistemic subject is to have at least one idea — 
but what, exactly, is it to have an idea in the first place? 


2.1. The Constitutional Feature of the Mind and the Thin Notion of Having Ideas 


In E2d3, Spinoza defines “idea” as “a concept of the Mind [mentis conceptum] that the Mind 
forms because it is a thinking thing.” Epistemic subjectivity, then, is already built into the 
definition of “idea”: to be an idea is to be a concept of a mind (conceptum is a subjective 
genitive here — it’s a concept in some sort of relation of belonging to the mind; it’s not a 
concept with the mind as its object). In which case, the having of an idea consists in the 
of-ness of a concept of the mind. This, however, just defers the issue: what exactly is it to be 
aconcept ofa mind? Now, the only model of mind that Spinoza provides in the Ethics is that 
of the human mind: “[t]he first thing which constitutes the actual being of a human 
Mind,” he writes, “is nothing but an idea of some [alicuius] singular thing that actually 
exists” (E2p11; translation adjusted). Here, then, we have another account of the relation 
between mind and ideas; Spinoza’s “of” here, though, is not the of-ness between concept 
and mind — rather, it is the about-ness (here, it’s an objective genitive) between an idea and 
some actually existing singular thing. The next question, of course, is what that actually 
existing singular thing is. 

On a frequent reading, what Spinoza has in mind here is the human body (see, e.g. 
Bennett 1984, p. 155; Levy 2000, p. 93; and, by implication, Gueroult 1974, p. 116, and 
Nadler 2006, p. 135; an alternative reading is provided in Macherey 1992, p. 103f.). On 
our reading, while it is true that Spinoza later equates “the object of the idea constituting 
the human Mind” with “the Body” (E2p13), this is not yet what’s going on in E2p11. If 
that were the case, either E2p11 or E2p13 would be redundant. Furthermore, note that 
the Latin reads “idea rei alicuius singularis actu existentis” (G II, 94). Curley’s translation 
renders this as “the idea of a singular thing that actually exists,” making a couple of inter- 
pretative moves that are not compelled by the original. The first is the choice of the definite 


254 


SPINOZA ON HUMAN AND DIVINE KNOWLEDGE 


article for “idea” (articles are almost never specified in Latin). The second is to elide the 
“alicuius,” which we have translated above as “some” — “alicuius” here gives the sense of 
its being some, any, it-matters-not-what singular thing that’s at stake. 

Given this, the function of E2p11 is not to determine the specific object of the idea con- 
stituting the human mind, but to establish, and characterize, the actual being of the 
human mind. To which end, Spinoza points to the actual existence of some singular thing. 
This is set out explicitly in the first part of E2p11d, where Spinoza specifies that, while an 
idea is primarily what “constitutes the being of the human mind [quod humanae mentis esse 
constituit],” it cannot be an idea of something that doesn’t exist, because then the idea 
itself wouldn’t exist, and thus the mind wouldn’t exist. In other words, what constitutes 
the actuality of the being of the human mind lies in the actuality of its (constitutive) 
idea(s) of particular things that actually exist in the world. 

Taking this seriously, for Spinoza, what is constitutive of a mind is, in the first place, an 
idea of a particular thing that actually exists as actually existing: the mind must, so to 
speak, be confronted with some bit of reality, to the effect that this bit of reality is repre- 
sented as an actually existing singular thing. 

This process is not just something that may happen to the human mind; it is a constitu- 
tional feature for there to actually be a mind at all. Thus, Spinoza doesn’t just assume that 
a mind is an epistemic subject that has ideas of particulars — that it is some independent 
thing for which establishing contact with reality is secondary to its being. His point is that 
any mind exists only in virtue of having ideas of things that actually exist: contact with 
reality is a constitutional feature of what it is to be a mind. In this way, Spinoza subverts the 
traditional, substantival conception of mind, according to which it is primary to a mind to 
exist and to have ideas, and secondary to connect those ideas to the world. For Spinoza, the 
being of a mind and its connection to the world coincide fundamentally and entirely, with 
neither taking priority over the other. 

What resources does this give us for talking about epistemic subjectivity? As noted 
above, the relation introduced explicitly in E2p11 is between idea and singular thing. But, 
per E2d3, an idea is necessarily an idea of a mind, so that of-ness must also be implicated 
in E2p11. This is enough to give us a thin notion of epistemic subjectivity: to be an epi- 
stemic subject is to have at least one idea; ideas are had by minds insofar as they are of 
minds (in a subjective-genitive sense), and the actual being of a mind is primarily consti- 
tuted by an idea of some singular thing that actually exists. Given all this, a mind is an 
epistemic subject by virtue of its very being — and the “by virtue of” here should not be 
taken to suggest that the being is somehow prior to the epistemic subjectivity: rather, a 
mind is an epistemic subject in its very being, and it is in its epistemic subjectivity. The being 
and epistemic subjectivity of a mind coincide, at least with respect to this thin sense of epi- 
stemic subjectivity. 

This already provides a point of human difference. Given E2p11, the human mind has 
ideas and is an epistemic subject, in the thin sense. But in what way is this a privilege pecu- 
liar to the human or finite mind? Let’s suppose, for the sake of argument, that God does 
have a mind. Since God is everything, God would necessarily “have” all ideas; there would 
be no idea that God didn’t “have.” But, in that case, what semantic difference is there in 
saying that God “has” these ideas as opposed to saying that these ideas exist? There is no 
difference in terms of extension, intension, or pragmatics; there is nothing but a now vac- 
uous lexical difference. By contrast, when we say that a finite mind has an idea, it makes a 
difference: it says something more than “an idea exists.” (The rationale of this point can be 


255 


URSULA RENZ AND BARNABY R. HUTCHINS 


made explicit in analogy with a Wittgensteinian move: in talking of the grammar of 
concepts, Wittgenstein made the point that concepts are only comprehensible when they 
are used in light of some sort of informative semantic contrast — e.g. “I know I am in pain” 
says nothing more than “I am in pain.”) Having an idea, then, is conditioned on the possi- 
bility of not having it. This is the thin sense of human epistemic difference: it is meaningful 
to say that we have ideas; it is not meaningful to say the same of God. 

What this provides is an inclusion/exclusion principle for epistemic subjectivity. On 
the inclusion side, you are an epistemic subject if you have ideas of actually existing 
singular things, where that having is conditioned on the possibility of not having ideas 
of those specific things. On the exclusion side, if something does not have such ideas, it 
is not an epistemic subject. 

Humans are obviously on the inclusion side of this principle. But isn’t this an entirely 
negative description? Doesn’t it define the human mind, or epistemic subjectivity, by the 
lack of divine omniscience? At first glance, it might seem so — it might seem as though the 
difference consists only in our not having all the ideas, and thus in our limitation. But note 
that the notion of not having all the ideas is meaningful only in relation to a finite stand- 
point: only a finite standpoint affords the possibility of not having this or that idea. That is, 
a finite standpoint is a condition of possibility for being able to talk of “not having all the 
ideas” in the first place — consequently, being able to talk of this as a limitation already pre- 
supposes a human or finite difference. In other words, although it results from a limitation, 
having ideas, even in this thin sense, is something positive in itself. It is a positive feature of 
a finite standpoint that cannot be reduced to the divine. 


2.2. Affectivity and the Thick Notion of Having Ideas 


By itself, E2p11 tells us about having ideas, and about epistemic subjectivity in the context 
of the constitution of the actual being of the mind. It does not tell us about how we have 
ideas — how we come to know things and what knowing them involves. In the following, 
we set out Spinoza’s account of having ideas in this thick sense. 

In E2p13, Spinoza identifies the mind’s object with the body, thereby specifying where 
the multiplicity of epistemic subjects comes from — how, that is, individual epistemic sub- 
jects are identified and differentiated. It comes from the fact that each human being is 
related objectively, i.e. in their thought, with their body. To be this particular mind is to be 
identified with this particular body, as opposed to some other particular body. A mind reg- 
isters all the affections that the body it is identified with undergoes (see Renz 2011 for a 
more detailed exposition of Spinoza’s argument). Now, each body is going to be affected by 
external things in a variety of ways (E2poslII): we bump into objects, we see them, hear 
them, eat them, etc. And this is what our having ideas of external things, in the thick sense, 
consists in: we have them as ideas of the ways in which our body is affected by external 
things. This doesn’t mean that your ideas of external things depend solely on the idea of 
your body, though: the ways in which the body is affected vary with the things affecting 
them (E2p16). 

Consequently, you can have ideas that are genuinely of external things, but only insofar 
as they are, or are derived from, ideas of your own body as affected by those external things 
(E2p16c1), since “all the modes in which a body is affected follow from the nature of the 
affected body, and at the same time from the nature of the affecting body” (E2p16d). 
Indeed, Spinoza specifies that “the ideas which we have of external bodies indicate the 
condition of our own body more than the nature of the external bodies” (E2p16c2). The 


256 


SPINOZA ON HUMAN AND DIVINE KNOWLEDGE 


flipside of this is that any idea of some affection entails the notion of some actually existing 
external thing, the thing by which the body is affected (Renz 2018, pp. 192-198). In this 
way, the connection to reality is maintained. 

So, the thick notion of “epistemic subjectivity,” or “having ideas,” has its origin in the 
affection of our body through external bodies: for you to have an idea in this sense, your 
body must be affected, or have been affected at least once, by external objects. This is why 
affections provide us with a sense of reality, in a manner that entails some irreducible truth 
indicating that there is something out there. In this respect too, epistemic subjectivity is 
not a negative notion; on the contrary, it marks where our notion of reality comes from. 
This isn’t to preclude that, in elaborating on our ideas of affections, different sorts of epi- 
stemic defects develop. But our having ideas, in the thick, affective sense, provides us with 
an irreducible sense of reality, and does so in the most concrete, immediately felt way. 

This, then, is another ineliminable feature of the human, or finite, epistemic standpoint: 
it is only from this perspective that this sense of reality is generated. Whatever does not 
have ideas in this way cannot have this sense of reality (of course, there may be other ideas 
of reality, but they don’t, as such, provide this immediately felt experience). And, as we set 
out later, in §4, God cannot have ideas in this way, and so this sense of reality cannot be 
reduced to a divine standpoint — it is a positive human difference. 


3. Human Cognition at Work 


The previous section discussed only the having of ideas of actually existing singular things. 
These are not the only ideas possible for Spinoza. In E2p40s2, he sets out three kinds of 
knowledge, involving other kinds of ideas, and variations on ways of having them: imagi- 
native knowledge; reason, or knowledge from common notions; and intuitive knowledge. 
In the following, we look at how the three kinds of knowledge relate to the notions of epi- 
stemic subjectivity covered above. 


3.1. Imaginative Knowledge 


In E2p40S82, Spinoza subsumes all perceptions of singular things stemming from both 
“random experience” and signs (e.g. words) under the heading of “knowledge of the first 
kind, opinion or imagination,” which he also refers to as “imagining” (imaginari in Latin; 
see also Renz (2019) for an analysis of Spinoza’s concept of the imagination). The most 
straightforward case of imaginative knowledge coincides with our characterization of the 
thick notion of having ideas discussed above: ideas of actually existing, present (or once- 
present) singular things “which have been represented to us through the senses” (E2p40s2); 
they involve affections of the body by, and represented as, external objects. 

A more complicated case is that of our having imaginative ideas of things that are not, 
and have never been, present to us. When you imagine something that falls outside the 
scope of your ordinary experience — let’s say you imagine an unobserved meteorite hitting 
the dark side of the moon — no external body is affecting your body, but, for Spinoza, the 
process is fundamentally the same as covered above. He treats the brain (Spinoza refers to 
the “softer parts” of the body here) as a plastic organ that gets deformed in the process of 
sensation; this deformation affects the flow of nervous fluid, which in turn affects other 
parts of the body (E2p17CD). This same deformation and change of flow occurs in the 
absence of the external object, when we remember, or when we imagine something that 


257 


URSULA RENZ AND BARNABY R. HUTCHINS 


isn’t present. When you imagine a meteorite, all it requires is for your brain etc. to deform 
in the right way, and then your body is, or its component parts are, affected meteorite-wise. 
The mental equivalent of this is for your mind to be affected meteorite-wise — it is in pre- 
cisely this way that you have an idea of the meteorite. Knowledge through signs is another 
complicated case of imaginative knowledge. For the purposes of this chapter, it suffices to 
note that the having component of knowledge through signs follows the model given here 
(on Spinoza’s account of signs, see Vinciguerra 2005). 

Imaginative knowledge, then, works straightforwardly on the model of having ideas in 
the thick sense. This goes both for ideas of present actually existing singular things and 
ideas of non-present singular things. 


3.2. Knowledge of Common Notions 


Common notions, in the first case, are notions of those “things which are common to all, 
and which are equally in the part and in the whole” (E2p38). Spinoza is somewhat coy 
about the concrete content of these notions, but he does, elsewhere, mention motion and 
rest (TTP 7.27), which will serve well enough as an example. Every extended body, and 
every part thereof, is always in motion or at rest — so “motion and rest” pertains equally to 
every bodily thing. Motion and rest, then, is common to external bodies, but also to our 
own body; thus, the commonality at stake here isn’t just between external bodies, but bet- 
ween external bodies and our own. This has its mental parallel: since the idea of your 
body is constitutive of your mind, your mind has the common notion. This is the sense in 
which we have common notions: for you to have a common notion, the commonality in 
question must be shared by you. Therefore, even in this case, where the idea at hand is, by 
definition, not of a particular, the idea must be indexed to the individual you are in order 
for you to have it. 

In E2p39, Spinoza sets out a slightly different case of commonality: things that are 
common to the human body and certain external things, but not to all. Here, he makes 
clear that it is not sufficient for there to simply be a commonality between your body and 
external things: if you never experienced those external bodies, you would never have a 
notion of the commonality in question. In order to have the common notion, you need an 
affection. The first part of E2p39d establishes a commonality (“A’) between the human 
body and the members of some set of external bodies. Spinoza points out that there is “an 
adequate idea of A in God,” both with respect to the human body and with respect to the 
external bodies in question — but, at this point, the human mind has no idea of A. As 
becomes clear in the second half of E2p39d, you have the idea of A only once your body is 
affected by an external body in terms of A. 

Crucially, if the mind is the idea of the body, and if A is intrinsic to the body, then the 
idea of A must always be subsistent in the mind, in some sense. But, even with the idea 
already subsisting, you, as an epistemic subject, have the idea of A only once your body is 
affected by an external body in terms of A. Just as in the case of having ideas of particulars, 
even if an adequate idea of some A already exists, and even if it already subsists in your 
own mind, your having a common notion of A requires an affection of your body. 

One might wonder why being affected by some external thing is needed in order to have 
acommon notion, given that any commonality we can know has to be something that per- 
tains to us already. Part of the trouble is that we know ourselves only through such affec- 
tions (E2p19, E2p23). This being so, even if A pertains to your body, you will never come 
to have the common notion of A unless your body is also affected A-wise. 


258 


SPINOZA ON HUMAN AND DIVINE KNOWLEDGE 


Reading E2p39 alongside E2p38 brings out an issue. In E2p38c, Spinoza states simply 
that “there are certain ideas, or notions, common to all men. For (by L2) all bodies agree in 
certain things, which (by P38) must be perceived adequately [. . .] by all.” In contrast to 
E2p39, there is no mention of the affection of the body here; from the discussion in E2p38, 
it sounds as though we get notions of things common to all for free, without the involve- 
ment of an affection. But, if that were so, what makes the acquisition of notions of things 
common to all different from the acquisition of notions of things common to your own 
body and some set of external things? The difference is that, in the latter case, you might 
well have not yet been affected in terms of A, whereas, when all things share a certain fea- 
ture, which we’ll call A’, every thing that affects you does so in terms of A’. Given the 
mind’s necessary connection to reality (see §2.1), you'll always already have been affected 
by some external thing, and so you'll always already have been affected by some thing in 
terms of A’. In just this way, you'll always already have the common notion of A’. 

This is why the sense of reality ($2.2) is always, necessarily, veridical, as reality is an 
A’-term itself. As for the common notions, we can conclude that affection is involved, 
indeed presupposed, in E2p38, and that the affective model for having common notions 
given in E2p39 applies equally to both cases. That is, your having a common notion always 
necessarily involves the affection of your body, which is why common notions are not, 
strictly speaking, innate ideas. This is so even if they are about features shared by all 
entities. We have them necessarily, but nevertheless adventitiously (we disagree here with 
Marshall 2013, p. 52). 


3.3. Intuitive Knowledge 


Exactly what intuitive knowledge is has long been a problem in Spinoza scholarship. 
Spinoza says relatively little about it, and what he does say tends toward the more opaque 
side of his style. He defines intuitive knowledge, in E2p40s2, thus: “this kind of knowing 
proceeds from an adequate idea of the formal essence of certain attributes of God to the 
adequate knowledge of the essence of things.” Intuitive knowledge undoubtedly differs 
from knowledge of common notions on the level of process: the former proceeds from an 
adequate idea of the essence of the attributes, while the latter, as established above, pro- 
ceeds from ideas of singular things, in terms of their commonalities. It is largely agreed that 
there is also a difference in content; on this understanding, while common notions are 
concerned with what is common to many things, intuitive knowledge is concerned with the 
essences of singular things (e.g. Curley 1973; Allison 1987; Wilson 1996; Soyarslan 2016; 
Renz 2019). 

It isn’t necessary to settle on a particular interpretation of intuitive knowledge here, 
since our interest is in its relation to epistemic subjectivity. With respect to the process of 
intuitive knowing, it is worth looking at E5p31, where Spinoza specifies that “[t]he third 
kind of knowledge depends on the mind, as on a formal cause, insofar as the mind itself is 
eternal.” What this dependency on the mind involves is clarified in the demonstration: 


The mind conceives nothing under a species of eternity except insofar as it conceives its body’s 
essence under a species of eternity (by P29), that is, (by P21 and P23), except insofar as it is 
eternal. So (by P30) insofar as it is eternal, it has knowledge of God, knowledge which is nec- 
essarily adequate (by I[P46). And therefore, the mind, insofar as it is eternal, is capable of 
knowing all those things which can follow from this given knowledge of God (by IIP40), that 
is, of knowing things by the third kind of knowledge. 


259 


URSULA RENZ AND BARNABY R. HUTCHINS 


In other words, the knowledge of the attributes of God that’s the starting point for intu- 
itive knowledge depends on knowledge of the body — your intuitive knowledge cannot 
get off the ground without your body. This is similar to the requirement for a common- 
ality to be common to one’s own body in the case of common notions, with the exception 
that, here, we aren’t dealing with something common to you and to external things; 
rather, we’re dealing with the knowledge of God that comes from conceiving of what’s 
eternal about one’s own body. As with common notions, then, your having of intuitive 
knowledge is necessarily indexed to your body — and, since the body is only known 
through its affections (see Section 3.2), your having intuitive knowledge requires the 
affection of your body. 

Let’s now consider the content interpretation. If intuitive knowledge deals with the 
essences of singular things, it must deal with them insofar as they follow from the attrib- 
utes. What would this mean outside the context of a finite mind? In other words, is this 
intuitive knowledge available to God? If divine “intuitive knowledge” is anything, it’s 
simply the infinitely many ideas that follow from the attribute of thought (E1p16), ice. it’s 
just the entire modal world under that attribute. But now we face a similar difficulty as in 
the case of God’s having ideas in the thin sense (§2.1). In the context of a finite mind, intu- 
itive knowledge is knowledge of the essences of things as they follow from the attributes. 
But, outside that context, there is nothing but the modal world as it follows from the attri- 
bute of thought, i.e. there is no semantic difference distinguishing “intuitive knowledge” 
from the ideal modal world. Thus, on this interpretation, only finite minds can have intui- 
tive knowledge in any meaningful sense. The divine equivalent would just be the world 
itself under the attribute of thought. This means that there is something positive in the 
having of intuitive knowledge that is not reducible to the divine. 


4. God’s Intellect 


Our reading establishes that epistemic subjectivity not only applies to the human mind but 
is fundamental to its very constitution. At the same time, it denies epistemic subjectivity to 
God, or any infinite entity. This poses an exegetical problem: Spinoza doesn’t talk only of 
human minds, or finite intellects; he also talks of an infinite intellect, which talk is often 
interpreted as referring to a divine mind. In the rest of the chapter, we therefore look at the 
implications of our reading for this. In §4.1, we go over the reasons for denying epistemic 
subjectivity to God — that is, for rejecting the existence of any such thing as a divine mind. 
In §4.2, we argue that the notion of God’s intellect has a purely functional role in explain- 
ing our epistemic subjectivity. We conclude, in §4.3, by proposing that the notion of God’s 
intellect denotes a condition of possibility for human knowledge (§4.3). Thus, Spinoza’s 
use of the notion indicates a transcendental-philosophical dimension of his epistemology 
and should by no means be applied to the metaphysics of substance. 


4.1. Epistemic Subjectivity and God 


At first glance, there seems to be clear evidence in favor of there being some kind of divine 
epistemic subject in the Ethics. Not only is there the concept of the infinite intellect, but 
Spinoza also makes occasional references to God’s “having” ideas (e.g. in E2p11c), along 
with more frequent references to ideas’ “being in” God. Now, the problem is that Spinoza’s 
model of epistemic subjectivity is inapplicable to God; consequently, Spinoza cannot be 


260 


SPINOZA ON HUMAN AND DIVINE KNOWLEDGE 


ascribing epistemic subjectivity to God here. As established above, the possibility of not 
having ideas is a necessary condition for being an epistemic subject, and that is not a pos- 
sibility open to God. In addition, the model requires there to be a determinate singular 
thing with which the subject is identified, in opposition to other singular things that it may 
represent to itself but with which it is not identified. These requirements are satisfied by 
any living human being, but not by God: whatever God’s intellection might be, it is infinite 
and thereby neither focused in terms of content (it can never have this idea as opposed 
to that idea), nor localizable and singular — it can never be identified with this as opposed 
to that thing. 

This isn’t to preclude that there are ideas in God, but the appropriate model for under- 
standing their existence is not that of epistemic subjectivity but that of the subsistence of 
ideas, in the sense discussed above (p. 7). Before a human epistemic subject has the 
common notion of some commonality A, the idea of A is already subsistent “in” their 
mind. That is, it exists but isn’t involved in an affection of the body, and is thereby not an 
idea had by an epistemic subject. Likewise, ideas may subsist in God. But, insofar as they 
are “in” God, as opposed to being had by an epistemic subject, they are not involved in the 
affection of any embodied thing (ideas had by epistemic subjects are also in God, insofar as 
epistemic subjects are in God, but these are covered by the epistemic subjectivity of finite 
minds, whereas our concern here is with how ideas are “in” God). Consequently, “divine 
ideas” merely exist as what we have called “subsistent ideas.” 

Given E2d3, an idea requires a mind in order to exist; since God cannot have a mind, the 
“ideas” that are “in” God thus can’t be the same kinds of things as the ideas we have (see 
Renz 2018, pp. 100-105). Perhaps we capture this distinction sufficiently by calling them 
“subsistent ideas”; perhaps, since they are all adequate and true, it would be better, and less 
misleading, to simply call them “truths” instead (see also Sprigge 2001, p. 256, n. 6). 
Consequently, E2d3 cannot apply to the ideas “in” God, and the epistemic subjectivity built 
into E2d3 thus cannot in any way be taken to imply a divine epistemic subjectivity. 
Furthermore, since the way in which ideas are “in” God bears no relation whatsoever to the 
way in which we have ideas, we cannot reduce human epistemic subjectivity to the way in 
which ideas are “in” God. Any attempt to do so means losing the entirety of what epistemic 
subjectivity is. This, indeed, makes epistemic subjectivity itself a genuine human difference. 


4.2. The Notion of God's Intellect as an Explanatory Term 


On Spinoza’s account, then, God’s intellect cannot be an epistemic subject, and there is no 
divine mind. So, what, exactly, is going on when Spinoza talks about (or appears to talk 
about) God’s intellect? In the rest of this chapter, we suggest making sense of this in terms 
of its explanatory function in Spinoza’s theory of human knowledge — i.e. Spinoza uses 
the notion of God’s intellect not to talk about God, but to talk about the epistemology of 
finite minds. 

Now, our arguments for both the thick and thin notions of epistemic subjectivity depend 
heavily on E2p11, but its corollary appears to contain two claims that, on the face of it, 
seem substantially deleterious to our interpretation. Those claims are (1) “the human 
Mind is a part of the infinite intellect of God” (E2pl1c), and (2) “when we say that the 
human Mind perceives this or that, we are saying nothing but that God [. . .] has this or 
that idea” (E2p1 1c). 

What (1) seems to imply is that, since the human mind is part of God’s intellect, it must 
be reducible to it —if God’s intellect includes it, the human mind cannot be adding anything 


261 


URSULA RENZ AND BARNABY R. HUTCHINS 


that is not in God’s intellect, and the former must therefore be losslessly reducible to the 

latter. In which case, there just is no human difference. What (2) seems to imply is that God 

does indeed have ideas, and that he has them in the same way as humans do: when a 

human has an idea, it is nothing but God’s having an idea — if this is so, your having an 

idea literally adds nothing extra on top of God’s having an idea, and so the former must be 

losslessly reducible to the latter. In which case, again, there is no human difference here. 
The clause we elided in (2) above is, however, significant. The claim in full is this: 


when we say that the human Mind perceives this or that, we are saying nothing but that God, 
not insofar as he is infinite, but insofar as he is explained through the nature of the human Mind, or 
[sive] insofar as he constitutes the essence of the human Mind, has this or that idea. (E2p11c; our 
emphasis) 


This qualificatory clause makes it clear that the claim here is not that God himself “has” 
ideas; Spinoza is not dealing with God qua infinite here. Rather, he is concerned with God 
“as explained through the nature of” or “as he constitutes the essence of” the human 
mind — i.e. he is concerned with the epistemology of the human mind, and not the meta- 
physics of some alleged divine intellect (see also Renz 2018, p. 151). 

We can read the qualification of (2) in two ways, one more deflationary than the other. 
On a strong reading, what is at stake is simply God qua the constitution of a human mind. 
In which case, God qua human mind is God qua the specificities of the human mind —- and, 
so, we are still dealing specifically with human epistemic subjectivity. On a deflationary 
reading, what’s at stake is simply God qua mode of thought. In that case, Spinoza’s refer- 
ence to God’s having this or that idea would come down to nothing more than this or that 
idea’s being a modification of the attribute of thought. Either way, Spinoza’s position here 
is not that our having an idea reduces to God’s having an idea, nor does he imply that God 
qua God “has” ideas on the model of human epistemic subjectivity. 

A similar qualification is at stake, albeit indirectly, in (1) as well. Spinoza’s full claim here 
is: “[f{]rom this it follows that the human Mindisa part of the infinite intellect of God” (E2p1 1c). 
The “this” refers to the conclusion of E2p11d, which explicitly relies on E2p10c’s claim that 
“the essence of man is constituted by certain modifications of God’s attributes” —i.e. that we 
are neither substances nor like substances. On this basis, we can read (1) in a deflationary 
manner: Spinoza is not saying that the human mind is fully reducible to the infinite intellect; 
he is merely pointing out that, insofar as the human mind is constituted by the ideas it has of 
actually existing things, it is constituted by modes of thought. 

This, then, is the way in which Spinoza uses the notion of God’s intellect — to talk about 
the human mind. Consequently, this notion is also restricted to the context of the human 
mind; it cannot be taken to tell us anything about the infinite intellect in itself, metaphysi- 
cally, or qua infinite. 


4,3. The Notion of God's Intellect as a Condition of Possibility for Knowledge 


Unlike Descartes’s, Spinoza’s epistemology is not concerned with refuting skepticism as its 
starting point. It doesn’t need to be, because Spinoza’s metaphysics gets to rule out this 
kind of skepticism for free. If minds were independent epistemic substances — independent, 
that is, of the world they seek to know — and if ideas were therefore locked away in the sov- 
ereign domain of each individual mind, then their connection with the world would be in 
question. There would always be the issue of how reliable that connection is. In other 


262 


SPINOZA ON HUMAN AND DIVINE KNOWLEDGE 


words, how mind and world are correlated would be a problem. But, for Spinoza, given the 
identity between the orders of connection of ideas and of things, ideas and world come 
pre-correlated. Since, furthermore, the having of ideas always depends on affection 
through some external body, all our ideas have a veridical sense of reality built in. Thus, 
the option that we are entirely wrong about everything is ruled out by the basic framework 
of Spinoza’s metaphysics and epistemology. 

The identity between world and ideas means that everything in Spinoza’s world is know- 
able: for every (non-ideal) thing that exists, there is a corresponding subsistent idea that 
can be had by some epistemic subject. A notion of God’s intellect is in play here, then, as a 
condition of possibility for our knowledge of the world, and, indeed, for knowledge as such. 
We can have ideas about the world just because all ideas are inherently about the world. 
Note that this notion of God’s intellect is distinct from the notion required to explain 
human epistemic subjectivity. This is not God’s intellect qua human mind; rather, this is 
God’s intellect qua realm of subsistent ideas. This notion of God’s intellect, which Spinoza 
invokes when he talks of ideas being “in” God, serves to render the world as knowable: as 
Renz puts it, “when Spinoza says that there is an idea of a certain thing in God, what he 
really means is that this thing can be known” (20181, p. 70). Once the world is established 
as knowable, this is where human epistemic subjectivity can come in: without an epistemic 
subject, the world is knowable, but there is no knowing and no knowledge — the knowable 
thing is known only when an epistemic subject has the idea of it. 

There is another notion of God’s intellect in play as a condition of possibility here. Since 
the modal physical world as a whole is a non-ideal thing that exists, there is a corresponding 
subsistent idea of it. But, what epistemic subject could have such an idea, if, by E2p1 1c, the 
human mind is itself part of the world? This is where a notion of God’s intellect as an 
apparent epistemic subject comes in, as an ideal term — as an ideal of a mind that could get 
the world as a whole in view. In this way, it operates as a necessary condition for the notion 
of the full knowability of the world. 

This may seem to put us, or Spinoza, into a difficult position. On the one hand, epistemic 
subjectivity is unavailable to God. On the other, full knowability of the world relies on the 
notion of some divine epistemic subject that is apt to get the world as a whole in view. 
Doesn't this mean that Spinoza’s epistemology depends on the notion of a divine epistemic 
subject, which is itself precluded by the very notion of epistemic subjectivity? It does not: 
Spinoza requires this notion only as an ideal; he does not and need not claim that the ideal 
is ever actualized. Or, to frame it in another terminology, all we need is some notion of 
God’s intellect as a limiting term. It suffices if the ideal itself is intelligible — or conceivable 
from the perspective of human subjects. As a matter of fact, as finite subjects restricted to 
a human standpoint, we never come up against the problem that we actually are to know 
the world as a whole. For us, all that matters is that any bit of reality we are confronted by 
is, in principle, fully intelligible. The notion of God’s intellect does nothing more than, as a 
limiting term, provide this in-principle intelligibility. 


References 


Allison, H.E. (1987). Benedict De Spinoza: An Introduction. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press. 

Bennett, J. (1984). A Study of Spinoza’s Ethics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Curley, E. (1973). Experience in Spinoza’s theory of knowledge. In: Spinoza: A Collection of Critical 
Essays (ed. M. Grene), 25—59. Garden City, NY: Doubleday. 


263 


URSULA RENZ AND BARNABY R. HUTCHINS 


Gueroult, M. (1974). Spinoza II. L’'Ame. Paris: Aubier-Montaigne. 

Levy, L. (2000). L’Automate spirituel: la subjectivité moderne d’aprés I’Ethique de Spinoza. Assen: Van 
Gorcum. 

Macherey, P. (1992). Avec Spinoza: études sur la doctrine et l'histoire du spinozisme. Paris: Presses uni- 
versitaires de France. 

Marshall, E. (2013). The Spiritual Automaton: Spinoza’s Science of the Mind. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press. 

Nadler, S. (2006). Spinoza’s Ethics: An Introduction. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Renz, U. (2011). The definition of the human mind and the numerical difference between subjects. 
In: Spinoza’s Ethics: A Collective Commentary (ed. M. Hampe, U. Renz, and R. Schnepf), 99-118. 
Leiden: Brill. 

Renz, U. (2018). The Explainability of Experience: Realism and Subjectivity in Spinoza’s Theory of the 
Human Mind. New York: Oxford University Press. 

Renz, U. (2019). Spinozistic cognitive psychology: Spinoza’s concept of the imagination. In Konzepte 
der Einbildungskraft in der Philosophie den Wissenschaften und den Kiinsten des 18. Jahrhunderts. Udo 
Thiel zum 65. Geburtstag. Berlin: De Gruyter. 

Soyarslan, S. (2016). The distinction between reason and intuitive knowledge in Spinoza’s Ethics. 
European Journal Of Philosophy 24 (1): 27-54. 

Sprigge, T.L.S. (2001). The mind of Spinoza’s God. Iyyun: The Jerusalem Philosophical Quarterly 
50: 253-272. 

Vinciguerra, L. (2005). Spinoza et le signe: la logique de l’imagination. Paris: J. Vrin. 

Wilson, M. (1996). Spinoza’s theory of knowledge. In: The Cambridge Companion to Spinoza 
(ed. D. Garrett), 89-141. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 


264 


25 


Reflective Knowledge 


KRISTIN PRIMUS 


1. Introduction 


In this chapter, I first revisit Spinoza’s obscure “ideas of ideas” doctrine and his claim that 
“as soon as one knows something, one knows that one knows it, and simultaneously 
knows that one knows that one knows, and so on, to infinity” (E2p21s). In my view, 
Spinoza, like Descartes, holds that a given idea can be conceived either in terms of what it 
represents or as a formally real act of thinking: as I read the propositions, E2p7 (in which 
Spinoza presents his doctrine of the “parallelism” of minds and bodies) primarily concerns 
the former way of conceiving of an idea while E2p21 primarily concerns the latter. I pro- 
pose that in E2p21, Spinoza makes a few crucial points about an adequate idea conceived as 
the “idea of the idea,” or as the activity of thinking: when one has an adequate represen- 
tation of p, one automatically knows that one is thinking that adequate representation, 
and this reflective knowledge cannot be improved. 

I then turn to E2p43, “he who has a true idea at the same time knows that he has a true 
idea and cannot doubt the truth of the thing.” Descartes had held that an atheist geometer 
has clear and distinct ideas that are, in fact, true. However, because the atheist does not 
know that a non-deceiving God exists and created his nature, his otherwise faultless ideas 
can be rendered doubtful; the geometer’s cognition is thus not perfect knowledge deserving 
the title ‘scientia’ (AT VII 141). In E2p43, Spinoza seems to say that Descartes’s atheist 
geometer’s clear and distinct (adequate) ideas are not actually dubitable: the reasoning 
geometer has a true idea and so “cannot doubt the truth of the thing.” For Spinoza, both 
reason and the best kind of cognition, ‘scientia intuitiva,’ concern adequate ideas (E2p40s2) 
that are necessarily true (E2p41). Both “teach us to distinguish the true from the false” 
(E2p42). It seems that, despite the connotations of its label, Spinoza’s scientia intuitiva is 
not special because it insulates a thinker from doubt in a way reason cannot. 

I do not think this common take on E2p43 (or scientia intuitiva) is quite right. I will make 
three points. First, I suggest E2p21 and E2p43 rule out the most hyperbolic doubts (cf. the 
Third Meditation (AT VII 36)), so thinkers need no additional validation for the “adequate 
ideas of properties of things” and “common notions” employed in reasoning. However, 
reasoners can nevertheless be troubled by doubt about the existence of the extra-mental 


A Companion to Spinoza, First Edition. Edited by Yitzhak Y. Melamed. 
© 2021 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2021 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd. 


265 


KRISTIN PRIMUS 


world. Second, despite their differences, Spinoza follows Descartes at least this far: once 
one comes to adequate ideas of God and God’s relation to things, one’s ideas cannot be ren- 
dered doubtful. I concede that because one can reason to these adequate ideas, scientia intu- 
itiva is not the only way to remove doubt. I conclude by briefly making a third point: there 
may still be something special about the way scientia intuitiva removes doubt. 


2. What Is an Idea of an Idea? 


Spinoza holds that one and the same thing can be considered under different attributes: “a 
circle existing in nature and the idea of the existing circle, which is also in God, are one and 
the same thing, which is explicated through different attributes” (E2p7s. Cf. AT VII 102- 
3). This is controversial, but I understand the “one and the sameness” here to be the “one 
and the sameness” of (1) an adequate representation in thought of some circle and (2) that 
circle enjoying extra-mental extended reality (cf. Htibner 2019). To use the terminology of 
the time, an idea represents something S when S is objectively real in thought. Spinoza’s 
point is that when it comes to an adequate idea of a body, what is in thought, the objectively 
real body, perfectly corresponds to the formally real body in extension: the “order and con- 
nection of ideas is the same as the order and connection of things” (E2p7). One and the 
same essence, or ratio of motion and rest (E2p13s), can be conceived either as enjoying 
objective reality in thought or as enjoying formal reality in extension. 

Spinoza holds that the human mind is a representation of the body: the “objectum of the 
idea constituting the human mind” is the human body (E2p13). The objectively real body in 
thought (call this M) and the formally real body in extension (call this B) are one and the 
same essence conceived under different attributes (the human mind represents other 
bodies besides B by representing affections of B. See Della Rocca 1996; D. Garrett 2017). 
But there is also “in God an idea, or cognition, of the human mind” (E2p20). This brings us 
to the “idea of ideas” doctrine. Spinoza begins by saying that the “union” of the “idea of 
the mind” (call this idea I) and “the mind itself” (i.e. M) is to be understood “in the same 
way” as M is united to B (E2p21d). Spinoza elaborates: 


the idea of the mind and the mind itself are one and the same thing, which is conceived under 
one and the same attribute, namely, thought. The idea of the mind, I say, and the mind itself 
follow in God from the same power of thinking and by the same necessity. For the idea of the 
mind, or the idea of the idea, is nothing but the form of the idea [forma ideae] insofar as this is 
considered as a mode of thinking without relation to the object [objectum]. (E2p21s) 


“The idea constituting the human mind,” M, is the objectively-real body. Now, the “idea of 
the mind,” I, is united to M because I represents M. Again, an idea represents something S 
when S is objectively real in thought; that Irepresents M is explained by the fact that M itself 
is objectively real. If M is the objectively-real body, then objectively-real M is the objectively- 
real [objectively-real body]. In other words, where M represents the body as something 
enjoying extended formal reality, I represents the body as an objectively-real body. 

I think it is likely that Spinoza is recasting the Cartesian view that an idea can be con- 
ceived in terms of what it represents or in terms of what it has in common with all other 
ideas (see AT VII 8, 40-41). Mis an idea conceived in terms of what it represents, its object, 
which is what distinguishes it from other ideas: my mind represents one particular ratio of 
motion and rest in extension; your mind represents another. I is the idea conceived in terms 


266 


REFLECTIVE KNOWLEDGE 


of what is distinctive about the formal reality of all ideas: I is “nothing but the form of the 
idea, insofar as this is considered as a mode of thought considered without relation to the 
objectum.” What is essential to ideas, regardless of their objecta? If the idea conceived as M 
represents a body as a formally real body, and the idea conceived as I represents the body as 
an objectively-real body, then it seems we can say this: necessarily, ideas represent other 
things as well as represent their representational contents (whatever they may be) as in 
thought (cf. AT VII 160). 

If the “idea of the mind” and the “mind itself” are one and the same thing conceived in 
different ways within the attribute of thought, and if the idea of the mind represents the 
mind itself, then we may read Spinoza as in broad agreement with some Cartesians like de 
la Forge and Arnauld (and, according to Simmons 2012, Descartes himself) on another 
point: namely, that an idea, by nature, does not just represent something else — a body or 
bodily affection (or another idea) — it also represents itself, where we can understand this 
reflexive representation as the idea’s immediate self-awareness, or what Simmons calls 
“brute consciousness” (2012; cf. Nadler 2008, pp. 582-583). 


3. Knowing that One Knows 


Suppose ideas are essentially self-reflexive, and that this reflexive awareness, the “idea of 
the idea,” makes the objectively-real representational content present to mind. According 
to Ela6, a true idea’s representational content agrees with its ideatum. The idea of an idea 
is thus true: there is no mismatch between the content present to mind and the content. 

We may be tempted to think that an idea’s veridical reflexive awareness need not come 
with any reflective awareness, even when it comes to adequate ideas. It is one thing for the 
adequate idea a triangle’s interior angles sum to 180 degrees to be something I am aware of, 
as something present to my mind (where this representation is adequate because it can be 
fully explained by other (also non-imagistic) ideas of geometrical objects, e.g. line, plane, 
point, and Euclidean axioms, within my mind). It is another thing to also be thinking that 
I am thinking this idea, and perhaps yet another thing to be aware of the adequacy of the 
idea (whether or not I am in a position to describe the representation as ‘adequate’). 

I could have a true reflective idea that I am thinking some adequate idea when I am 
thinking it, but it seems this is not an idea that is formed automatically. I think the penulti- 
mate sentence of E2p21s contests this tempting thought. “As soon as one knows [scit] 
something, one thereby [eo ipso] knows [scit] that one knows [scire] it .. .” As soon as one 
has an adequate idea of a circle, one cognizes the circle adequately (i.e. “one knows”). But 
that adequate content is not merely present to mind — one also knows that the content is 
adequate and that one is thinking that content (i.e. “one knows that one knows”). 
Importantly, we need not understand this knowledge of one’s knowledge in terms of a 
higher-order idea (an idea of the idea of the idea). In E2p21s, the statement about knowing 
that one knows comes immediately after Spinoza’s discussion of the idea of the idea, the 
“form” of the idea. This suggests that here Spinoza is emphasizing something about that 
very form, not making an additional point that there is, in addition to an idea of the idea, 
some other idea of the idea of the idea (and so on). 

Read as a contestation of the tempting thought mentioned above, Spinoza’s view 
diverges from Descartes’s in a way we could have expected. Descartes thought that having 
an idea puts a person in a position to have reflective knowledge, to know, for example, that 
one is thinking some idea (Broughton 2008; Alanen 2016). However, for Descartes, the 


267 


KRISTIN PRIMUS 


mere presence to mind of a clear and distinct idea is not enough for even a belief about that 
idea: in order to have belief, there must also be an affirmation, an additional act of the will; 
if knowledge presupposes belief, then there will also be an act of will involved in reflective 
knowledge of a clear and distinct idea (Radner 1988; Simmons 2012). Spinoza, however, 
does not think an additional thought, a separate act of will, is needed: all ideas are affirma- 
tions (E2p49; see Della Rocca 2003). We can, I think, understand Spinoza’s view as follows. 
Take the adequate idea that a triangle’s interior angles sum to 180 degrees. Conceived in 
terms of its representational content, the idea is an affirmation of properties of a triangle 
(here the triangle is conceived sub specie aeternitatis, or as what a Cartesian would call a 
“true and immutable nature” (cf. E2p44, E5p29s, AT VII 64)). Conceived in terms of what 
is present to mind, the veridical idea of the idea, the affirmation is that one is thinking the 
adequate idea. At least when it comes to adequate ideas, reflexive awareness is also reflec- 
tive awareness. 

Yet Spinoza does not just say, “as soon as one knows something, one thereby knows that 
one knows it” — he also says that one “simultaneously knows that one knows that one knows 
[scit se scire quod scit], and so on, in infinitum.” Hobbes thought Descartes had committed 
himself to the supposedly absurd position that every thought comes with a thought of that 
thought, and a thought of that thought, and so on, ad infinitum (AT VII 173). It looks like 
Spinoza avows this position (Curley 1969, pp. 144-150 and 1988, p. 64; Bolton 1985, 
p. 389; Melamed 2013, p. 154; Morrison 2017, pp. 66-68). 

I think we can read the passage with a different emphasis: in saying that as soon as one 
knows something, one simultaneously has knowledge of that knowledge (and so on), 
Spinoza is underscoring that the reflective knowledge is perfect or complete. In order to 
know that one knows (and what one knows), one does not need some further, higher-order 
idea (an idea of the idea of the idea). There is not more one could do, or anything else that 
could happen, that would improve the reflective knowledge one automatically has as soon 
as one has an adequate idea. In knowing that one knows something, one already has all 
possible reflective knowledge. 

But if this reflective knowledge is knowledge, which kind of veridical cognition is it? It 
does not seem to be reason: one has knowledge of one’s own adequate ideas not because 
one has grasped why some conclusion follows from adequate ideas of properties and 
common notions (E2p40s2). It does not seem to be scientia intuitiva either. That cognition 
proceeds “from an adequate idea of the formal essence of certain attributes of God to the 
adequate cognition of the [NS: formal] essence of things” (E2p40s2). Scientia intuitiva 
hinges on having an adequate idea of the “formal essence of certain attributes of God”; the 
reflective knowledge under discussion here is of any adequate idea. 

It does seem to be intuitive, however. It happens in a flash: as soon as one has an ade- 
quate idea, one knows that one has that adequate idea. Furthermore, if the Cartesian 
cogito is intuitive, then Spinoza’s reflective knowledge is intuitive too. For Descartes, a 
thinker can reflect on an idea and immediately know that he thinks and exists insofar as he 
is thinking (AT VII 140). Some hold that the cogito has an inferential structure but is nev- 
ertheless intuitive (Kenny 1968; Wilson 1978; Curley 1978). Spinoza’s reflective 
knowledge, as I have described it, does not have this much structure, and so seems even 
more apt to be called intuitive. Again, the reflective knowledge that one is thinking an ade- 
quate idea is the “idea of the idea” which necessarily accompanies an adequate idea: they 
follow “in God from the same power of thinking and by the same necessity,” and are indeed 
just one and the same mode conceived in different ways within thought (E2p2 1s). Although 
an adequate idea might represent an inference, and so the idea of this idea would be reflec- 


268 


REFLECTIVE KNOWLEDGE 


tive knowledge of an inference, one does not infer an idea of the idea from an idea. As soon 
as one has an adequate idea, the knowledge that one has an adequate idea comes immedi- 
ately, for free. 

I have suggested that Spinoza holds that adequate ideas come, by nature, with reflective 
knowledge. But this is not to say that he thinks effortful introspection and reflection — or 
higher-order ideas — are impossible. Indeed, such activity is arguably integral to a lot of 
thought: for example, the discernment of properties that are “equally in the part and the 
whole” of one’s representations of perceived bodies (see E2p37—39) plausibly requires 
reflection on the bodies as presented in imaginative and perceptual ideas. Yet these repre- 
sentations are confused to some degree (see E2p24—31). I read Spinoza as simply saying 
that as soon as one does come to have an adequate representation of, say, a property of a 
triangle, one knows that one is thinking that adequate idea, that there is no further intro- 
spection needed to determine what exactly one thinks about the triangle, and that what 
one does think cannot be made clearer or more distinct. To have an adequate idea is to 
understand (E2p43s); Spinoza’s point, I take it, is that one is not really understanding p 
unless one also knows, or understands, that one is understanding p (cf. Carriero 2020). 


4. Knowing That One Knows 


There are two kinds of cognition that concern adequate, true ideas, reason and scientia 
intuitiva (E2p40s2, E2p41—E2p42), and in E2p43, Spinoza says that whoever has an ade- 
quate, true idea “knows that one has a true idea and cannot doubt the truth of the thing” 
(E2p43). This is clearly rejection of skepticism, but we must be careful: as I explain, despite 
reasoners having true ideas they know are true, they may nevertheless wonder whether 
their adequate ideas of bodies agree with anything formally real outside the mind. 

Reason is presented thus: “it is clear that we perceive many things and form universal 
notions... from the fact that we have common notions and adequate ideas of properties of 
things” (E2p40s2). One reasons when one understands why some property necessarily 
follows from another: when one reasons through, say, a geometric proof, one sees why, 
given some axioms and a property that is “equally in the part and the whole” of extension, 
extension (or some body) must also necessarily have some other property. It is, Spinoza 
adds, the “nature of reason to contemplate things as necessary” (E2p44) and sub specie 
aeternitatis, or conceived without relation to time (E2p44c2d); when one reasons about the 
properties of a triangle, one’s ideas are representations of the properties triangles must 
have whenever and wherever. 

An adequate representation of a triangle conceived sub specie aeternitatis is an objec- 
tively-real eternally real triangle (cf. AT VII 64; Primus 2019). On the view I offered in 
Section 2, once one has an idea that, conceived as a representation, is adequate, that idea, 
conceived as an act of thinking (the “idea of the idea”), is an act of reflective knowledge. 
Yet when one has an adequate idea of a property of a triangle, one does not just know (and 
know that one knows) what all triangles must be like if they are; one also knows that there 
is a triangle that is — the objectively-real eternally real triangle that is present to mind in 
one’s thought. One knows that the adequate idea of the necessary property of the triangle 
is true of that triangle (cf. TIE §69, G II/26). Once one has the adequate idea, “one knows 
[scit] one has a true idea and cannot doubt the truth of the thing” (E2p43); one knows that 
one has “an idea which agrees with its object [ideato]” because one has an idea which does 
so agree (E2p43s). 


269 


KRISTIN PRIMUS 


In the First Meditation, the Meditator says that arithmetic and geometry “contain 
something certain and indubitable,” regardless of whether the things studied “really exist 
in nature or not.” Indeed, “it seems impossible that such transparent truths should incur 
any suspicion of being false” (AT VII 20). I think Spinoza agrees: a geometer does have true 
ideas that are known to be true. In the Third Meditation, the Meditator allows that even 
those “transparent truths” that seem like they could not be false could indeed be false: 
unless the Meditator knows that a non-deceiving God created his nature, he cannot be 
certain of even 2+ 3=5 (AT VII 35-36). Readers of the Meditations have debated the scope 
and power of such doubt for centuries, as the questions it raises are central. Most famously, 
there is a worry about circularity: is Descartes saying that one cannot be certain of an 
argument’s premises until one has proven God’s existence? But then how can one demon- 
strate God’s existence? 

I think Spinoza denies the possibility of hyperbolic doubts: when one has an adequate 
representation of a property of a triangle, one knows that such a “transparent truth” is 
true — at least of the triangle present in one’s thought. But is one thereby certain that those 
ideas are true of extra-mental reality? We might take Spinoza to answer in the affirmative: 
in reasoning about bodies, one is automatically certain that one’s adequate ideas are true 
of bodies that are formally real in extension. One could hold that a commitment to the PSR 
leads Spinoza to reject an inexplicable bifurcation of the representational character of an 
idea (its clarity and distinctness, or adequacy) and its epistemic status (its truth or falsity) 
(Della Rocca 2007). As Perler (2017) puts it, 


Whenever someone has an idea, he or she can be certain about the existence of his or her own 
body. It simply makes no sense to conceive of an idea as something detachable from a bodily 
state. Doing so would amount to introducing an inexplicable gap between two different realms. 
(pp. 229-230) 


I would agree that one sort of detachment does not make sense. One cannot “detach” the 
awareness of one’s body (the “idea of the idea”) from the representation of one’s body (the 
idea, or the objectively-real body). An “affect itself,” an idea considered as a representation 
of a bodily affection (i.e. the objectively real bodily affection) cannot be coherently con- 
ceived apart from the idea of this idea, the “affect itself, insofar as we are conscious of it” 
(E4p8, cf. E5p3). I take Spinoza’s position to be relatively simple: whether ideas are ade- 
quate or inadequate, when there is thinking, there is always something that is thought. 
One may conceive a mode of thought either as objectively real, as a representation, or as 
the activity of thinking, but neither way of conceiving suffices, by itself, to characterize the 
mode understood under the attribute of thought. 

However, I think the claim that it makes no sense to conceive of an idea as something 
detachable from a bodily state needs qualification. Suppose one has an adequate idea of a 
property of one’s body (cf. E5p4). Whether this idea is conceived as representational 
content or as an act of thinking, the idea can be fully explained by other ideas within one’s 
mind: the content — an adequate idea of a bodily property — is explained by other ideas’ 
contents (e.g. common notions and other adequate ideas of properties of bodies); the act of 
understanding is explained by other acts of understanding (i.e. the acts of understanding 
those common notions and other adequate ideas of properties). When one has an ade- 
quate idea, one can completely account for the idea by appealing only to what is in thought. 

In this case as I have described it, I think one can conceive of the idea of the body as 
“detachable” from the formally real body in extension. If one realizes that one’s idea is 


270 


REFLECTIVE KNOWLEDGE 


explained completely within thought, without any appeal to the existence of bodies in 
extension, then one can legitimately wonder (especially if one sees that the essence of 
any body does not include existence) whether an extra-mental world of bodies exists. 
One may be certain that one’s body is objectively real in thought but nevertheless unsure 
of whether there is any formally real body in extension. The question of whether one’s 
ideas of bodies agree with anything extra-mental is, for all I have said so far, a question 
one can entertain. 

It is only given other adequate ideas, beyond adequate ideas of properties of bodies, that 
one is certain of the existence of one’s body in extension (and that one’s adequate ideas of 
properties are true of that extra-mental formal reality). Given an adequate idea of sub- 
stance under the attribute of extension, one will see that extended (extra-mental) sub- 
stance is necessarily formally real. Given an adequate idea that all things are modes that 
can be conceived under different attributes, one will see that a necessary property of 
extension and one’s adequate representation of that property of extension are one and the 
same thing conceived under different attributes. 

If Spinoza holds, as I think he does, that one can have adequate ideas of necessary prop- 
erties of things without having adequate ideas of what, in all metaphysical rigor, those 
things are (i.e. necessary modes of the one and only necessarily-existing substance), then 
he can allow that one can have adequate cognitions that are not immune from all possible 
doubts. That is, Spinoza can agree with Descartes that the “atheist geometer” is doing 
something right — reasoning — but is nevertheless not in an epistemically optimal situation. 
Spinoza can also agree with Descartes that it is only once that geometer is certain that God 
is, what God is, what bodies and minds are, and how God is the cause of things, that his 
ideas will be immune from all doubt — Spinoza would insist that Descartes’s ideas on such 
foundational metaphysical matters simply were not adequate (cf. Ep. 2, GIV/8). 


5. Reasoning to Metaphysical Foundations 


Reasoning through the Ethics is one way to come to the adequate ideas that silence doubts 
about the veridicality of one’s adequate ideas of bodies. By reasoning through the Ethics, 
one comes to know that there is just the one substance and its necessarily-caused modes 
and that substance and modes can be considered under different attributes. One comes to 
know that one and the same essence (or one and the same necessary property) can be consid- 
ered either as objectively real in thought or as formally real outside of thought (E2p7), and 
either as eternal or as something existing “in relation to a certain time and place” (E5p29s). 
From this knowledge, one can infer that if one has an adequate idea of a necessary prop- 
erty of a cube in thought, then one can be sure that any extra-mental cube must have that 
property. One can also infer that if one has an adequate idea of a true and immutable cube, 
then one can be sure that actual, enduring extension also has that property, insofar as that 
extended reality is cubical. (For readings according to which Spinoza denies that we can 
have such mathematical knowledge of nature, see Melamed 2000; Peterman 2018; 
Schliesser 2018). 

Before one has reasoned to adequate ideas of what God and things are, one cannot 
remove all doubts: one cannot be sure that adequate ideas of bodies are true of extra- 
mental bodies. But one can still be certain of the premises in the demonstrations of what 
God and things are: the premises are known to be true in thought — and thought is an attri- 
bute of God. From reflection on one’s own thinking, one can recognize the truth of axioms 


271 


KRISTIN PRIMUS 


and demonstrations. By reasoning, one can come to have adequate ideas of very basic 
truths: e.g. that a substance is prior in nature to its affections (E1p1), or that two or more 
distinct things are distinguished either by a difference in attribute or a difference in mode 
(Elp4). On the basis of these adequate ideas, one can deduce adequate ideas of other 
truths, like that there cannot be two or more substances of the same nature or attribute 
(Elp5), that there is just one necessarily-existing, infinite substance, God (Elp7, Elp11, 
E1p14), that in nature there is nothing contingent (E1p29), and that an idea of a body and 
a body are one and the same mode conceived under different attributes (E2p7). 

Again, in order to be sure that one’s adequate idea Z of anecessary property of extension 
is true of formally real extension, one must also have the adequate idea A that one and the 
same necessarily-existing mode of the one and only necessarily-existing substance can be 
conceived under either the attribute of thought or under the attribute of extension. But 
reasoning to the adequate idea A has its drawbacks. 

If one reasons to A, one cognizes it as produced by adequate ideas of axioms and ade- 
quate ideas of many other intermediate conclusions or propositions. One is certain of the 
conclusion when one is “seeing the force” of those demonstrations (cf. the first reply 
Spinoza gives to the Cartesian Circle objection in the DPP (GI 146—147)). But it is not easy 
for a human mind to cognize A as caused by this long, complex series of demonstrations. 
One cannot insulate oneself from the impingements of nature and only think adequately 
(E4p4), so there will always be distractions and diversions. It is likely that one will rely on 
memory, both to keep track of premises when one reasons and to retain the conclusion 
once one’s attention is drawn to other things. But memory is fallible (E2p40s2). Even if one 
had the certainty that one’s adequate idea Z is true of extra-mental reality when one cog- 
nizes A as necessitated by other adequate ideas within one’s mind, retrospective doubt is 
possible (cf. Della Rocca’s 2005 reading of Descartes). If one only manages to remember 
the conclusion A but not exactly why A must follow from axioms and other propositions, 
then one may doubt A, which in turn may prompt one to doubt whether one’s adequate 
idea Z is true of anything outside of thought. 


6. Intuiting Metaphysical Foundations 


Reasoning’s shortcomings do not lie with reasoning itself, but rather with finitude. As 
finite things, human beings have limited ability to control what they think about: even if 
they sometimes reason impeccably, they cannot — as Spinoza makes clear in Ethics Parts 3 
and 4 — always reason. Human minds thus often rely on memory, but memory can fail; if 
one relies on memory, it is possible to lose sight of (or perhaps just lose) the ideas that 
secure the greatest certainty. 

We can begin to see why a temporally immediate apprehension of these adequate ideas 
would be preferable. I develop the details elsewhere, but I think scientia intuitiva— cognition 
which proceeds from “an adequate idea of the formal essence of certain attributes of God 
to the adequate cognition of the [NS: formal] essence of things” (E2p40s2) — is such an 
apprehension (Primus 2017 and forthcoming). For other views, see A. Garrett (2003), D. 
Garrett (2009), Alanen (2011), Soyarslan (2016), LeBuffe (2017), and Carriero (2019). 

The “human mind has an adequate cognition of God’s eternal and infinite essence” 
(E2p47). What is “equally in the part and whole” can only be conceived adequately 
(E2p38), and thought is equally in the part and whole of any idea (mutatis mutandis for 
extension): every human mind has adequate ideas of the attributes of extension and 


272 


REFLECTIVE KNOWLEDGE 


thought. Furthermore, every human mind has reflective knowledge of these attributes. 
This is not as absurd as it sounds. However confused the representational contents of my 
ideas may be (and however I might label them), I invariably know that I am thinking about 
extension when I am thinking about extension. I also know that my idea of extension is 
adequate (although I may not label it as such). I might not know much about properties of 
extension, but I know that more investigation and introspection will not improve the 
fundamental idea of extension I already have. Even as a toddler, I just knew what makes all 
bodies bodies, even if that knowledge was not something I could articulate. Same goes for 
my idea of thought: I just knew what makes all my feelings, sensations, and ideas thoughts 
(cf. Melamed forthcoming). 

This is delicate, but I think this common reflective knowledge of the attributes is com- 
patible with not every human mind appreciating what it has. Not everyone has realized 
that their adequate ideas of extension and thought are two ways of conceiving God, the one 
and only infinite, eternal substance in which all things inhere as modes. But everyone has the 
right starting materials: we can deduce from the common reflective knowledge of thinking 
and extension “a great many things which we can know adequately” (E2p47), like the 
foundational monist thesis that the one and only necessarily-existing substance — God — 
can be conceived under either the attribute of extension and thought (or an infinity of 
other attributes). We can, Spinoza continues in E2p47, “form the third kind of cognition,” 
or scientia intuitiva (E2p47). 

Cognition of the third kind begins with the adequate idea I just called the “foundational 
monist thesis,” which is an adequate idea of God as the one and only necessarily-existing 
substance that can be conceived as a formally real thinking substance or a formally real 
extended substance. Importantly, this is not an adequate idea that must be cognized as the 
conclusion of a series of demonstrations, even if we may have initially relied on demon- 
strations to absorb our common reflective knowledge of thinking and extension into our 
conception of a necessarily-existing, infinite, eternal God. Once one has the correct con- 
ception of God, one can see, without working through any demonstration, that such a God 
must exist. Furthermore, if one is attending to this adequate idea, it seems one can see, in 
uno intuitu, that things are modes necessarily caused by and inhering in the necessarily- 
existing substance, and which can, like substance, be conceived under different attributes. 
In apprehending God as the one and only substance, one immediately sees that everything 
that is not substance must be necessary modes of substance. 

We can understand scientia intuitiva as a confluence of several necessarily veridical intu- 
itions. Like Descartes’s Fifth Meditation ontological proof, it is an intuition of the necessary 
existence of God (cf. AT VII 66-67). Yet it is not just an intuition of God’s necessary existence; 
given what Spinoza’s God is — a necessarily-existing substance that necessarily causes its 
own modes - it is also an intuition of the necessitated existence of all modes, as well as an 
intuition that all things, including one’s own mind and body, are modes (see Primus forth- 
coming). It is also intuitive in the sense described in Section 3. As soon as one understands 
what God and things really are, one knows that one understands this. Given this immediate 
apprehension of what God and things are, one can know that one’s adequate idea Z of a 
property of a body is an adequate idea of a mode necessarily caused by the necessarily-exist- 
ing God, considered under the attribute of extension. One knows that Z must be true — not 
just of what is real in thought, but of extra-mental extended formal reality (cf. the second 
reply to the Cartesian Circle in the DPP (GI 148. Cf. TIE §79)). One is also certain that one’s 
adequate ideas of properties of things are not just true of properties of reality sub specie ae- 
ternitatis, but are also true of properties of reality sub specie durationis. 


273 


KRISTIN PRIMUS 


We can see one important difference between reason and scientia intuitiva. As I sug- 
gested in Section 5, reason can remove the possibility of doubt, but reasoning is only guar- 
anteed to remove doubt if one can retreat from other concerns to adequately cognize 
demonstrations; whether one succeeds in removing doubt depends on whether one has 
power over other finite things (i.e. over distractions). In contrast, scientia intuitiva does not 
presuppose the same control over the world: provided one attends to the right conception 
of God (which may, admittedly, be exceedingly hard to do), one can remove doubt in a 
flash, anytime and anywhere. 


Acknowledgments 


For their helpful comments, I would like to thank Lilli Alanen, John Carriero, Michael Della 
Rocca, Colin Garretson, John Grey, Karolina Htibner, Yitzhak Melamed, Daniel Moerner, 
Stephan Schmid, and Justin Steinberg. 


References 


Alanen, L. (2011). Spinoza on the human mind. Midwest Studies in Philosophy 35: 4-35. 

Alanen, L. (2016). Self-awareness and cognitive agency in Descartes’s Meditations. Philosophical 
Topics 44 (1): 3-26. 

Bolton, M. (1985). Spinoza on Cartesian doubt. Nous 19 (3): 379-395. 

Broughton, J. (2008). Self-Knowledge. In: A Companion to Descartes (ed. J. Broughton and J. Carriero), 
179-195. Oxford: Blackwell. 

Carriero, J. (2019). Spinoza’s three kinds of cognition. In Mind, Body, and Morality (ed. M. Reuter and 
F. Svensson), 96-118. New York: Routledge. 

Carriero, J. (2020). Descartes (and Spinoza) on intellectual experience and skepticism. Roczniki 
Filozoficzne 48: 21-42. 

Curley, E. (1969). Spinoza’s Metaphysics: An Essay in Interpretation. Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press. 

Curley, E. (1978). Descartes Against the Sceptics. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 

Curley, E. (1988). Behind the Geometrical Method. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 

Della Rocca, M. (1996). Representation and the Mind-Body Problem in Spinoza. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press. 

Della Rocca, M. (2003). The power of an idea: Spinoza’s critique of pure will. Nous 37 (2): 200-231. 

Della Rocca, M. (2005). Descartes, the Cartesian circle, and epistemology without God.” Philosophy 
and Phenomenological Research 70 (1): 1-33. 

Della Rocca, M. (2007). Spinoza and the metaphysics of skepticism. Mind 116 (464): 851-874. 

Garrett, A. (2003). Meaning in Spinoza’s method. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Garrett, D. (2009). Spinoza’s theory of scientia intuitiva. In: Scientia in Early Modern Philosophy (ed. T. 
Sorrell, G.A.J. Rogers, and J. Kraye), 99-116. Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands. 

Garrett, D. (2017). Representation, misrepresentation, and error in Spinoza’s philosophy of mind. 
In: The Oxford Handbook of Spinoza (ed. M. Della Rocca, 190-203). Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Htibner, K. (2019). Spinoza on intentionality, materialism, and mind-Body relations. Philosophers’ 
Imprint 19 (43): 1-23. 

Kenny, A. (1968). Descartes: A Study of His Philosophy. New York: Random House. 

LeBuffe, M. (2017). Spinoza on Reason. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Melamed, Y. (2000). On the exact science of nonbeings. Spinoza’s view of Mathematics. Iyyun 49: 
3-22. 


274 


REFLECTIVE KNOWLEDGE 


Melamed, Y. (2013). Spinoza’s Metaphysics: Substance and Thought. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Melamed, Y. (forthcoming). On the Fish’s knowledge of God’s essence, or why Spinoza was not a 
skeptic. In: Studies and Texts in Scepticism (ed. G. Vetri, Stephan Schmid et al). 

Morrison, J. (2017). Two puzzles about thought and identity in Spinoza. In: The Cambridge Critical 
Guide to Spinoza’s Ethics (ed. Y.Y. Melamed), 56-81. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Nadler, S. (2008). Spinoza and consciousness. Mind 117: 575-601. 

Perler, D. (2017). Spinoza on skepticism. In: The Oxford Handbook of Spinoza (ed. M. Della Rocca), 
220-239. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Peterman, A. (2018). Spinoza on skepticism. In: Skepticism: From Antiquity to the Present (ed. B. Reed 
and D. Machuca), 342—354, London: Bloomsbury. 

Primus, K. (2017). Scientia intuitiva in the Ethics. In: The Cambridge Critical Guide to Spinoza’s Ethics 
(ed. Y.Y. Melamed), 169-186, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Primus, K. (2019). Spinoza’s “infinite modes” reconsidered. Journal of Modern Philosophy 1(1): 11: 
1-29. 

Primus, K. (forthcoming). Finding oneself in God: Scientia Intuitiva as a metaphysically self-locating 
thought. In: The Ethics and the Tractatus Theologico-Politicus (ed. D. Garber, M. Laerke, P.-E. Moreau, 
and P. Totaro). Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Radner, D. (1988). Thought and consciousness in Descartes. Journal of the History of Philosophy 26: 
439-452. 

Schliesser, E. (2018). Spinoza and the philosophy of science. Mathematics, motion, and being. In The 
Oxford Handbook of Spinoza (ed. M. Della Rocca), 155-189. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Simmons, A. (2012). Cartesian consciousness reconsidered. Philosophers’ Imprint 12 (2): 1-21. 

Soyarslan, S. (2016). The distinction between reason and intuitive knowledge in Spinoza’s Ethics. 
European Journal of Philosophy 24: 27-54 

Wilson, M. (1978). Descartes. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul. 


275 


26 


Spinoza Against the Skeptics 
STEPHAN SCHMID 


Unlike many other early modern philosophers, Spinoza was not particularly troubled by 
skepticism. In the very few passages, where he explicitly addresses skepticism, he is utterly 
dismissive of it. In his Short Treatise he cites skeptics as examples of self-deprecating charac- 
ters (KV VIIL9 | GI 70/3—7 | CWI 112) and in the Theological-Political Treatise, he describes 
“the skeptics, who deny the certainty of reason” as “completely mistaken” (TTP XV 1, 2 | G 
Il 180/20f. | CW II 272). In his Treatise on the Emendation of the Intellect, Spinoza even 
goes so far as to describe the skeptic as someone who either “speak[s] contrary to his own 
consciousness” or is “completely blinded” (TIE 47 | G IL 18/10f. | CWI 22) and thereby 
disqualifies as a member of rational discourse. “In the end,” Spinoza states, skeptics “must 
be speechless, lest by chance they assume something that might smell of truth” (G II 
18/16-18). 

Spinoza’s disdain for skeptics is backed up by remarkable epistemic confidence. This 
confidence is particularly evident from a letter to Albert de Burgh, who asked Spinoza 
about his certainty about his own philosophy. In response, Spinoza wrote: 


Ido not presume that I have found the best philosophy, but I know that what I understand is 
the true one. If you ask me how I know this, I reply that I know it in the same way that you 
know that the three angles of a triangle are equal to two right angles. [. . .] For the truth is 
the index of itself and of what is false. (Ep. 76 | GIV 320a/3-9 | CW II 475, translation 
modified) 


The epistemic confidence expressed in this letter echoes a central epistemological tenet 
defended in the Ethics, according to which “truth is the standard both of itself and of the 
false” (E2p43s | GI 124/16 | CW1479), which Spinoza infers from proposition E2p43, 
according to which “[h]e who has a true idea at the same time knows that he has a true 
idea, and cannot doubt the truth of the thing.” I will refer to this view as the doctrine of the 
self-validating character of true ideas. 

What justifies Spinoza’s disdain for skeptics and what grounds his epistemic confidence 
as expressed in his doctrine of the self-validating character of true ideas? Commentators 
who address Spinoza’s dismissive attitude towards skepticism are mostly concerned with 
explaining his disregard for it, though they disagree about how it is best explained. Some 


A Companion to Spinoza, First Edition. Edited by Yitzhak Y. Melamed. 
© 2021 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2021 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd. 


276 


SPINOZA AGAINST THE SKEPTICS 


hold that it is due to a misunderstanding of or a lack of interest in the skeptical problem 
(Bennett 1984, p. 176; Petermann 2018, p. 348; and Curley 1988, pp. 65-67), while 
others argue that it rests on a powerful metaphysical response to skepticism (Della 
Rocca 2007; Perler 2018). Both camps of commentators, however, tend to overlook that 
Spinoza was concerned with at least three kinds of skeptics, with respect to whom he artic- 
ulated different responses, as I will argue in the first section of this chapter. As I will point 
out in the second section, however, all three of Spinoza’s responses to the skeptics ulti- 
mately rely on his doctrine of the self-validating character of true ideas, which stands at 
the heart of his epistemic confidence. In the third section, I will then sketch Spinoza’s ratio- 
nale for endorsing this striking doctrine, and finally take up a concern raised by more 
recent commentators. These readers argue that despite Spinoza’s declared anti-skeptical 
aspirations, his theory of knowledge has the skeptical consequence that finite beings fail to 
have any true ideas according to his standards, and also that Spinoza is a skeptic with 
respect to domains that others have taken to be epistemically unproblematic (Sanchez de 
Leon Serrano 2018, 2019; Petermann 2018; Schliesser 2018). 


1. The Kinds of Skeptics Envisaged by Spinoza 


As mentioned, Spinoza only addresses skepticism on a few occasions, and when he does so, 
he is dismissive of it. It is important to note, however, that in different passages Spinoza 
addresses different kinds of skeptics, of which there are at least three: 

First, in his introduction to Descartes’ Principles of Philosophy, Spinoza is concerned with 
methodological skepticism as famously employed in Descartes’s Meditation. A methodolog- 
ical skeptic (like Descartes) is not a genuine skeptic who argues against our possibility to 
know. Rather, the methodological skeptic makes use of skepticism in order to reveal some 
indubitable propositions which can then serve as a foundation for arriving at true 
knowledge. As Spinoza explains to his readers, Descartes “sought to call all things into 
doubt, not as a Skeptic would, who has no other end than doubting, but to free his mind 
from all prejudices, so that in the end he might discover firm and unshakable foundations 
of the sciences” (DPP | GI 141/25-30 | CWI 231). 

Still, there is a fine line between methodological skepticism and genuine skepticism. If the 
doubt invoked by the methodological skeptic cannot be overcome, then we are stuck with 
genuine skepticism: the acknowledgment that we cannot really know anything about a 
particular domain (such as the external world). In fact, many early modern thinkers 
thought that this was indeed the case for Descartes (see Popkin 2003, pp. 158-173). They 
were convinced by Arnauld’s famous circularity objection to Descartes’s strategy for 
refuting the skeptical hypothesis that all of my thoughts may be due to some malicious 
demon of the utmost power and cunning with a proof of the existence of a veracious God, 
who grants that all our clear and distinct ideas are true (see Fourth Objections, AT VII 214 | 
CSM II 150). Spinoza was well aware of this circularity problem and besides citing 
Descartes’s own answer to it, he developed an alternative line of rejoinder, which he was to 
adopt as his own response to skepticism in his Treatise on the Emendation of the Intellect. We 
will have a proper look at this response in the next section. 

Second, Spinoza was also aware of self-declared skeptics, who quite unlike methodo- 
logical skeptics, indeed have no other end but to doubt our capacity to know anything. In 
a letter, Spinoza mentions “Sextus Empiricus and other skeptics” who concluded from the 
“fact that the divine and human sciences are full of disputes and controversies [. . .] that 


277 


STEPHAN SCHMID 


everything treated in them is uncertain” (Ep. 56 | GIV 260/23-28 | CW II 422); and in his 
Treatise on the Emendation of the Intellect, he speaks of those who “say that they know 
nothing, and that they do not even know that they know nothing. And even this they do not 
say absolutely” (TIE §47 | GIL 18/14f. | CWI 22). This kind of skepticism, which results in 
a pervasive suspension of judgment or a refusal to assent to any objective matter, is indeed 
the kind of skepticism cultivated by Pyrrhonists, who, according to Sextus Empiricus’s 
famous exposition, “utter their own phrases in such a way that they are implicitly cancelled 
by themselves” because “in uttering these phrases they say what is apparent to themselves 
and report their own feelings without holding opinions, affirming nothing about external 
objects” (Sextus Empiricus, Outlines of Skepticism 1.15, 6f.). Spinoza makes no secret of his 
disapproval of such skeptics. Repeating the well-known apraxia objection, he takes their 
position to be practically incoherent, since “as far as the needs of life and society are 
concerned, necessity forces them to suppose that they exist, and to seek their own advantage, 
and in taking oaths, to affirm and deny many things.” Moreover, he even contends that, due 
to their refusal to form beliefs on the basis of rational evidence, “they must be regarded as 
automata, completely lacking a mind” (TIE §48 | GIL 18/24f. | CWI22). 

Finally, in his Theological-Political Treatise Spinoza addresses a third kind of skeptic who 
“den[ies] the certainty of reason [and] defend[s] the accommodation of reason to 
Scripture” (TTP XV 1 | GIIL180/19f. | CW Il 272). Spinoza explicitly ascribes this position 
to Judah Alfakhar, a leader of the Jewish community in Toledo in the early thirteenth 
century who opposed Maimonides’s use of Greek philosophy to interpret scripture in an 
attempt to accommodate scripture to reason (see Adler 1996, p. 141f.). However, the ten- 
dency to pit the authority of scripture, revelation, or faith against reason due to skeptical 
concerns about the possibility of reason to establish certainty was also widespread among 
early modern Christian thinkers known as fideists, who played a crucial role in the history 
of early modern skepticism (cf. Popkin 2003, pp. 3-16). Moreover, Spinoza’s general cri- 
tique of Alfakhar is equally valid against fideists more generally, who hold that we should 
give epistemic priority to faith, revelation or scripture over reason. In Spinoza’s view, the 
defense of such a position is hopeless. Giving epistemic priority to scripture over reason is 
either a dictate of reason or it is not. If it is, then “we embrace Scripture only by the 
command of reason” and “[w]le would not, therefore, embrace it if it were contrary to 
reason”; thus, a fideist should give priority to reason over scripture after all. If it is not, then 
“we're acting foolishly and without judgment” (TTP XV 9 | G III 182/6f. | CW II 275). 
Either way, the fideist’s position of adopting skepticism with respect to reason and simply 
sticking to scripture or even accommodating reason to scripture is unwarranted. 


2. The Common Core of Spinoza’s Responses to the Skeptics 


Spinoza is thus concerned with at least three kinds of skeptics: with (1) the methodological 
skeptic, who is no genuine skeptic because her goal is not to doubt, but rather to free the 
human mind from prejudices; with (2) the philosophical skeptic or Pyrrhonian who ulti- 
mately refuses to assent to anything; and with (3) the fideist who gives epistemic priority to 
scripture or revelation over reason. 

Spinoza opposes all three kinds of skeptics, and although his first and direct objections 
to them differ, their force ultimately derives from his epistemic confidence as expressed by 
his doctrine of the self-validating character of true ideas. Or so I will argue in this section, 
before turning to Spinoza’s vindication of this doctrine. 


278 


SPINOZA AGAINST THE SKEPTICS 


In order to see how Spinoza’s rejections of all three kinds of skepticism identified above 
rest on his epistemic confidence regarding reason, we can begin with a potential rejoinder 
from the the third kind of the skeptic, the fideist. Recall that Spinoza’s first pass against this 
position was that the defense of fideism is either foolish or incoherent. Against this objec- 
tion, a fideist could reply that Spinoza’s argument ignores our deplorable epistemic 
condition. It is not that we give epistemic priority to scripture or revelation over reason 
against the backdrop of a conflict between scripture on the one hand and indubitable 
reason on the other. Rather, we side with revelation or faith because we have to acknowl- 
edge that reason does not yield certainty. Instead of providing conclusive evidence for one 
view, reason allows us to find equally good arguments for almost every view and its nega- 
tion. In fact, this is precisely the kind of situation in which the second kind of skeptic, the 
Pyrrhonist, finds herself. The reason for her suspension of judgment is that in light of the 
conflicting evidence provided by reason she lacks sufficient clarity to give her assent to 
anything. Pyrrhonists, Sextus explains, “do not hold beliefs in the sense in which some say 
that belief is assent to some unclear object of investigation in the sciences; for Pyrrhonists 
do not assent to anything unclear” (Sextus Empiricus, Outline of Scepticism 1.13, 6). So, 
both the fideist’s leap into faith and the Pyrrhonist’s pervasive suspension of judgment are 
founded in a disappointment concerning reason: the experience that rational thought is 
aporetic and becomes entangled in irresolvable conflicts. 

Now, a dialectically promising way to convince fideists and Pyrrhonists to abandon 
their skeptical positions is to show that reason does yield certainty after all. This is precisely 
the aim of the first kind of skeptic, the methodological one, who intends to show that there 
are at least some truths that can be known with certainty even if we engage in the most 
extensive and radical doubts. Spinoza, however, has both metaphysical and epistemolog- 
ical objections to this strategy. 

On the metaphysical front, Spinoza holds that the skeptic’s project of withholding one’s 
assent from everything that is not completely certain and indubitable relies on a metaphys- 
ically distorted picture of ourselves. This is because in recommending a suspension of 
judgment about uncertain ideas, the methodological (as well as the Pyrrhonist) skeptic 
presupposes that it is up to us to affirm or deny a given idea, or to refrain from judging alto- 
gether. However, this presupposition relies on a false metaphysical view regarding the 
nature of our ideas and that of the thinking subjects who are said to have or entertain 
these ideas, according to Spinoza. With respect to our ideas, Spinoza argues that these two 
kinds of skeptics misconstrue them as mere representations (or “mute pictures on a 
panel”), which require the thinking subject to take an assertoric stance towards them. In 
doing so, these skeptics miss the fact that “an idea, insofar as it is an idea, involves an affir- 
mation or negation” (E2p49s | GIT 132/11f. | CW1486). For Spinoza, this misconception 
of the nature of our ideas is closely connected with a further mistaken view regarding the 
metaphysics of the thinking subject: the view that thinking subjects are substances who 
relate to their ideas as their modes and can thereby adopt several stances or attitudes 
towards them. Owing to Spinoza’s substance monism, God is the only substance (E1p14), 
and so instead of being another substance, our mind is merely a bundle or collection of 
ideas (E2pp11-—15). Yet, being such a bundle, our mind is not the sort of thing that could 
relate to its ideas by adopting various assertoric stances towards them. Hence, the skeptic’s 
recommendation to suspend one’s judgment relies on a flawed metaphysical view of the 
thinking subject and its ideas. 

Spinoza also has epistemological concerns about methodological skepticism. The first 
consists in the objection that the indubitable ideas which the methodological skeptic is after 


279 


STEPHAN SCHMID 


are not necessarily the kinds of ideas we are looking for as epistemologists who are inter- 
ested in warranted or justified ideas. Thus, if methodological skepticism is of any value, we 
need an argument that shows that the ideas that we are psychologically unable to doubt 
are objectively certain or true. For indubitability is not just the same as (objective) certainty 
— or, as Spinoza’s puts it: “By certainty we understand something positive [. . .], not the pri- 
vation of doubt” (E2p49s | GIT 131/20-22 | CWI 485). 

Spinoza’s second epistemological objection to methodological skepticism consists in his 
allegation that this method is not self-sufficient. In Spinoza’s view, methodological skepti- 
cism can only vindicate our claim of knowledge about the nature and existence of the 
universe if it is corroborated by further considerations that establish the truth of indubi- 
table ideas. However, the most natural considerations that do so render methodological 
skepticism superfluous, since they are already sufficient to establish reason’s capacity to 
yield certainty by themselves. Let me explain. 

Descartes’s strategy of employing methodological skepticism in order to convince his 
readers of the existence of certain truths is risky. It poses the danger of establishing the 
cogito as the only certain truth, thereby leaving us with too few (or the wrong) certain 
truths to prevent the fideist’s leap into faith or the Pyrrhonist’s suspension of judgment 
about the nature of the universe. In fact, this is Descartes’s situation before his proof of the 
existence of God, who grants the truth of everything that is clearly and distinctly per- 
ceived. As we have seen, some commentators even took Descartes to be trapped in this 
situation of epistemic solipsism as they judged his attempt to evade it circular. How can we 
know that God exists if we can only know that what we perceive clearly and distinctly is 
true because we know that God exists and that he is benevolent or veracious and so would 
never allow us to be deceived by clear and distinct perceptions? In Spinoza’s view, the 
correct response to this objection is to deny that we can only know what we perceive clearly 
and distinctly because we know that God exists and is veracious. As he explains, “we can 
make the idea of God clear to ourselves and put it before our eyes, even though we still 
doubt whether the author of our nature deceives us in all things. And provided we have it, 
[.. .] it will suffice to remove all doubt” (DPP | GI 148/29-33 | CW1238; see also TIE §79 
| GII 30/10-19 | CWI 35). In responding thus, Spinoza points out that the circularity 
objection relies on a false presupposition: the presupposition that we have to infer the truth 
of an idea from perceiving this idea clearly and distinctly and that this inference needs to 
be justified by appealing to the existence of a veracious God. As Spinoza explains, “for the 
certainty of the truth, no other sign is needed than having a true idea. For as we have 
shown, in order for me to know, it is not necessary to know that I know” (TIE §35 | GII 
15/9-11 | CWI 18). Spinoza’s thought is this: if the truth of an idea has to be inferred 
from a sign of this idea (such as clarity and distinctness), then in order to know whether an 
idea iis true, we would need to know whether it is true that iis clear and distinct. But again, 
we cannot know this unless we can infer it from a sign of the idea of i’s clarity and distinct- 
ness, which requires us to know another truth that has to be inferred, and so on, ad infi- 
nitum. Thus, far from providing a feasible theory about how we can in fact know the truth 
of an idea, the assumption that true ideas have a sign (such as clarity and distinctness) 
from which we can infer their truth actually undermines the possibility of having any 
knowledge at all. 

In order to avoid the circularity problem of Descartes’s attempt to overcome the doubts 
induced by his methodological skepticism, we should thus reject the assumption that we 
can know the truth of an idea only inferentially and concede that we can grasp it directly — 
that is, through and by the very idea itself. But given this concession, a different method of 


280 


SPINOZA AGAINST THE SKEPTICS 


seeking truth suggests itself. “The true method,” Spinoza concludes, “is not to seek a sign 
of truth after the acquisition of ideas,” as Descartes’s methodological skepticism does by 
subjecting all (already acquired) ideas to radical doubt. Rather, “the true method is [. . .] 
understanding what a true idea is by distinguishing it from the rest of the perceptions; by 
investigating its nature, so that from that we may come to know our power of under- 
standing and so restrain the mind that it understands, according to that standard, every- 
thing that is to be understood” (TIE §§36-37 | GIL 15/15-28 | CWI18f.). 

This is aremarkable conclusion on Spinoza’s part, which invokes many intriguing ques- 
tions. How are we supposed to understand or even identify true ideas, and how will inves- 
tigating a true idea enable us to know the power of our understanding and the rules for 
successfully employing it? Unfortunately, these questions cannot be pursued in this chapter 
(though in the next section we will have a glimpse of Spinoza’s answer to the first; cf. 
Garrett 2003). Let us simply note that Spinoza takes Descartes’s methodological skepti- 
cism to be misguided in that it only succeeds in responding to the genuine skeptic once one 
concedes that truth has no sign and hence can be known directly or non-inferentially. Yet 
in light of this concession, an alternative method of discerning true ideas suggests itself; a 
method that does not consist in radically doubting all our ideas in order to see which of 
them prove indubitable. 


3. Spinoza’s Epistemic Confidence 


As seen in the previous section, Spinoza holds that truth has no sign and can accordingly 
be known directly or non-inferentially. This view is also a part of Spinoza’s epistemic 
confidence, which is apparent in his letter to Albert de Burgh (Ep. 76) and in his Ethics 
(2p43 and 2p43s), when he writes that “truth is the index of itself and of what is false” 
such that “[h]e who has a true idea at the same time knows that he has a true idea, and 
cannot doubt the truth of the thing,” as cited in the introduction of this chapter. However, 
Spinoza’s epistemic confidence — especially in the guise of his doctrine of the self-validating 
character of true ideas — is deeply puzzling in at least two respects: first of all, it seems 
utterly implausible. “The number of stars is odd,” “the number of stars is even” — one of 
these two thoughts seems to be true, but neither of them appears to be more certain than 
the other. So, how could anyone “who has a true idea at the same time [know] that he [or 
she] has a true idea, and [not] doubt the truth of the thing”? Second, when arguing with 
the skeptic, Spinoza’s appeal to his doctrine of the self-validating character of true ideas 
seems to be question-begging. It is the very point of skepticism that we cannot know 
anything (in a certain domain), so insisting that we could not know anything, if truth 
cannot be discerned directly, is only grist to her mill. How then could Spinoza convince the 
skeptic (or anyone else) of his doctrine of the self-validating character of true ideas? 
Much of the plausibility of this startling doctrine hinges on Spinoza’s notion of a (true) 
idea. An idea, Spinoza explains, is “a concept of the mind that the mind forms because it is 
a thinking thing,” and he adds that he deliberatively uses “concept [conceptus] rather than 
perception [perceptio], because the word |. . .] ‘concept’ seems to express an action of the 
mind” (E2d3exp). Later, we learn that for Spinoza, “actions of the mind arise from ade- 
quate ideas alone” (E3p3), which leaves us with the view that ideas (in the strict sense of 
the term) arise from or are caused by adequate ideas. At first sight, this view seems even 
more puzzling, as it seems to preclude the possibility of having any ideas in the first place. 
For if the possession of an idea requires the possession of another (adequate) idea, we 


281 


STEPHAN SCHMID 


never seem to be in the position of acquiring an idea at all. This concern can be dispelled, 
however, by noting that Spinoza holds that “the human mind has an adequate knowledge 
of God’s eternal and infinite essence” (E2p47) and that God is — qua substance — a cause of 
itself or causa sui (E1p7d). Given Spinoza’s parallelism (as stated in E2p7), the idea of God 
must also be caused by or arise from itself. This entails that our idea of God is adequate and 
that it is caused by an adequate idea (namely itself), so that we can indeed have an idea of 
God in Spinoza’s strict sense of the term. Since Spinoza additionally holds that “[w]hatever 
is, is in God, and nothing can be or be conceived without God” (E1p15), we can also be sure 
that everything else that we can have an idea of must be conceived through God or through 
the (adequate) idea of God. So, whatever all these startling views amount to in detail, they 
guarantee that Spinoza’s demanding conception of an idea is not empty. Insofar as every- 
thing is to be conceived through God, of whom we cannot help having an adequate idea, 
we have everything it takes to have Spinozan ideas of everything. 

But how does Spinoza’s peculiar notion of an idea shed light on his doctrine of the self- 
validating character of true ideas? A key to this is Spinoza’s E2p40, which states that 
“whatever ideas follow in the mind from ideas that are adequate in the mind are also ade- 
quate.” In conjunction with Spinoza’s demanding notion of an idea this entails that every 
idea in the strict sense of the term is adequate because it arises and follows from an adequate 
idea. If we add Spinoza’s E2p34, according to which “every idea that in us is absolute, or 
adequate and perfect, is true,” we arrive at the even stronger doctrine that every idea in the 
strict sense of the term is true. This doctrine is at once illuminating and problematic. It is 
illuminating to the extent that it makes Spinoza’s doctrine of the self-validating character 
of true ideas intelligible and reveals two senses in which true ideas are “true” for Spinoza. 
The first of these is that Spinoza conceives of true ideas as being true in the ontological 
sense of the term. In this sense a true idea is a genuine idea, or an idea in the strict sense of 
the term. Such an idea, we have seen, is adequate and thereby constitutes an act of under- 
standing. That is, by having a genuine or “ontologically true” idea i of x, we conceive of x 
through its causes and thereby understand why x exists or obtains rather than not. In this 
vein, the possession of such a true idea also warrants that this idea is “semantically true” 
or “agree[s] with its object” (as Spinoza explains in Ela6). For insofar as a true or genuine 
idea constitutes an act of understanding of x, which reveals why x exists (rather than not), 
this idea i cannot obtain unless x exists. Accordingly, a genuine idea i of x will agree with 
its object x and will thereby turn out to be semantically true as well. 

At the same time, the view that all genuine ideas (or ideas in the strict sense of the term) 
are adequate seems to stand in tension with Spinoza’s frequent talk of inadequate ideas. If 
only adequate ideas are ideas in the strict sense of the term, then it seems that inadequate 
ideas are as much (or little) ideas as decoy ducks are ducks. This concern can be dispelled, 
however, by noting (1) that adequacy comes in degrees and (2) that Spinoza does not con- 
sider any idea to be completely inadequate (Della Rocca 2008, pp. 260-263, dispels this 
concern by arguing that inadequate ideas (somehow) do not exist). Given that for Spinoza 
clear and distinct understanding is a function of adequate ideas (see E2p28), the former 
(1) is evident from E2p13s, where Spinoza holds that “in proportion as the actions of a 
body depend more on itself alone [. . .], so its mind is more capable of understanding dis- 
tinctly” (G I197/10-13 | CW1458). The latter (2) in turn follows from Spinoza’s above- 
cited explication of his definition of an idea as expressing an “action of the mind” (E2d3exp) 
and his analysis of actions in terms of their arising from an adequate cause (E3d2). This 
suggests that no inadequate idea is fully inadequate for Spinoza, but that all ideas contain 
at least one adequate element. In light of what we have seen about Spinoza’s conception of 


282 


SPINOZA AGAINST THE SKEPTICS 


things and their ideas, this makes perfect sense. All the things we can conceive of are God 
or modes of God — and the latter are to be conceived through God, of whom, according to 
Spinoza, we have an adequate idea. Therefore, we can have no idea of anything which is 
not at least partially adequate. 


4. Conclusion: The Anti-/Skeptical Character of Spinoza’s Philosophy 


Spinoza’s dismissal of the skeptics is bolstered by a demanding notion of (adequate) ideas 
as acts of understanding, which presuppose and explain the existence of their objects. This 
notion provides him with a strong argument for his doctrine of the self-validating character 
of ideas: once we have a true idea of x, we thereby know that and why x exists. 

But does this really cut any ice with the skeptic? What about the purported counterex- 
ample above? It still seems that neither of the following two thoughts “the number of stars 
is odd” or “the number of stars is even” has any more claim to be true than the other. 
Interestingly, Spinoza would agree that neither of the these two thoughts appears truer 
than the other. In his view, however, this is due to the fact that both of them are equally 
inadequate as they both contain an inadequate idea: the mathematical idea of number. 
Perhaps surprisingly, Spinoza taught that mathematical notions (such as “measure” and 
“number”) are mere modes of imagination (cf. Ep. 12 | GIV 57/6 | CWI 203 andE1p15s 
| GIL59/20-35 | CW1423f.) which should not be applied to real phenomena as they do 
not reflect the order of nature (cf. Melamed 2000 and Schliesser 2018, pp. 171-179). He 
taught the same regarding common moral notions of (absolute) good and evil or aesthetic 
notions of beauty and ugliness (cf. Elapp | G II 82/16—-24 | CW1445). 

Since, according to Spinoza, infallible knowledge consists in adequate ideas alone, his 
denial of adequate ideas of mathematical physics, (common-sense) ethics, and aesthetics 
might lead us to concede that he was indeed a skeptic about all these domains (Petermann 
2018, pp. 349-351, and Schliesser 2018, pp. 165-175). Furthermore, given the 
demanding nature of Spinoza’s adequate ideas, one might worry that finite beings will 
never be able to have such ideas. And if so, we would have to concede that finite beings 
cannot really know anything according to Spinoza’s own standards. But if this is right, 
then Spinoza is an utterly radical skeptic who denies that finite beings can have any 
knowledge (Sanchez de Leon Serrano 2018, 2019). Thus, Spinoza’s intriguing anti-skep- 
tical strategy runs the risk of turning into its opposite. How then should we judge Spinoza’s 
own skeptical tendencies? Whatever our final verdict on this question may be, we can avoid 
ascribing any inconsistency to Spinoza (on this score) by emphasizing the following two 
points. 

First, quite contrary to some commentators’ concerns, Spinoza himself was convinced 
that finite beings do have adequate ideas — namely ideas of God and common notions 
(which refer to features that belong to all modes under a certain attribute). Against this 
backdrop, exegetical difficulties in seeing how finite beings can have adequate ideas in 
Spinoza’s opinion need not be seen as evidence for the skeptical character of Spinoza’s phi- 
losophy. They might also be evidence for the inadequacy of the proposed interpretation. 

Second, it is important to be clear about the precise character of the skepticism that 
Spinoza has in mind. The skeptic attacked by Spinoza is not any herald of ignorance 
(concerning some domain). The skeptic of whom Spinoza is dismissive is someone who 
insists on our ignorance (concerning some domain) due to our alleged inability to attain 
certainty (in this domain) so that we can never be sure that what we take ourselves to 


283 


STEPHAN SCHMID 


know (about this domain) is in fact something we do know. And Spinoza refutes this skeptic 
by developing a theory of adequate ideas that explains why and how we can reach cer- 
tainty. If it turns out that there are some domains of human thought (such as mathematical 
physics, common-sense ethics, and aesthetics), in which there are no adequate ideas, then, 
according to Spinoza, there cannot be any genuine knowledge either. However, given that 
we can know with certainty that there is no knowledge in these domains, our concession 
of ignorance in these domains does not turn us into skeptics in the sense envisaged by 
Spinoza. The power and scope of Spinoza’s anti-skepticism is determined by his doctrine of 
the self-validating character of true ideas: for those things of which we have a true idea, we 
thereby know that we have a true idea of them. 


Acknowledgments 


This chapter has profited a lot from suggestions by and discussions with Clare Carlisle, 
Daniel Dragicevic, Luce DeLire, René Holthus, Yitzhak Melamed, Dominik Perler, José Maria 
Sanchez de Leon Serrano, Jason Yonover, and the audience of a talk I gave in Leipzig — most 
notably I am indebted to comments by Jim Conant. I am also grateful to very helpful edito- 
rial suggestions by Katharine Handel. I would like to thank them for their help and empha- 
size that any remaining shortcomings are due to me alone. Work on this chapter has been 
generously supported by the Maimonides Centre for Advanced Studies, DFG-FOR 2311. 


References 


Adler, J. (1996). Letters of Judah Alfakhar and David Kimhi. Studia Spinozana 12: 141-168. 

Bennett, J. (1984). A Study of Spinoza’s Ethics. Indianapolis: Hackett. 

Curley, E. (1988). Behind the Geometrical Method. A Reading of Spinoza’s Ethics. Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press. 

Della Rocca, M. (2007). Spinoza and the Metaphysics of Scepticism. Mind 116: 851-874. 

Della Rocca, M. (2008). Spinoza. London: Routledge. 

Garrett, A. (2003). Meaning in Spinoza’s Method. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Melamed, Y.Y. (2000). On the exact science of nonbeings. Spinoza’s view of mathematics Iyyun 49: 
3-22. 

Perler, D. (2018). Spinoza on skepticism. In: The Oxford Handbook of Spinoza (ed. M. Della Rocca), 
220-239. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Peterman, A. (2018). Spinoza on skepticism. In: Skepticism: From Antiquity to the Present (ed. B. Reed 
and D. Machuca), 342—354. London: Bloomsbury. 

Popkin, R. (2003). The History of Scepticism: From Savonarola to Bayle. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press. 

Sanchez de Leon Serrano, J.M. (2018). The place of skepticism in Spinoza’s thought. History of 
Philosophy Quarterly 35 (1): 1-19. 

Sanchez de Leon Serrano, J.M. (2019). Spinoza on global doubt. In: Sceptical Paths (ed. G. Veltri et al.), 
147-164. Berlin: De Gruyter. 

Schliesser, E. (2018). Spinoza and the philosophy of science. Mathematics, motion, and being. In: 
The Oxford Handbook of Spinoza (ed. M. Della Rocca), 155-189. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Sextus Empiricus (1994). Outlines of Scepticism (trans. J. Annas and J. Barnes). Cambridge: Cambridge 

University Press. 
Spinoza, B. (1985 and 2016). The Collected Works of Spinoza (ed. and trans. E. Curley, 2 vols.). 
Princeton, Princeton University Press. Cited by CW I (= vol.1) and CW II (= vol.2). 


284 


SPINOZA AGAINST THE SKEPTICS 


Further Reading 


Bolton, M.B. (1985). Spinoza on Cartesian doubt. Notis 19 (3): 379-395. 

Doney, W. (1971). Spinoza on philosophical skepticism. The Monist 55 (4): 617-635. 

Marshall, E. (2013). The Spiritual Automaton: Spinoza’s Science of the Mind. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press. 

Perler, D. (2007). Spinozas Antiskeptizismus. Zeitschrift ftir philosophische Forschung 61: 1-26. 

Schechter, O. (2019). Spinoza’s miracles: scepticism, dogmatism, and critical hermeneutics. In: 
Yearbook of the Maimonides Centre for Advanced Studies (ed. Bill Rebiger), 89-108. Berlin: De Gruyter, 

Steinberg, D. (2009). Knowledge in Spinoza’s Ethics. In: The Cambridge Companion to Spinoza’s Ethics 
(ed. O. Koistinen), 140-166. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 


285 


2] 


Spinoza on Ideas of Affections 


LIA LEVY 


Introduction 


One might expect to find in Spinoza’s works a robust account of the role of experience in 
the generation of human knowledge. In all of his writings, including the Ethics, frequently 
in practical or political contexts, Spinoza refers to what we learn in experience. Moreover, 
he clearly recognized the need for an account of the role of experience in natural philos- 
ophy. Although Spinoza was not as deeply involved as some other prominent early modern 
philosophers in the development of physics, he was nevertheless deeply engaged in the 
scientific debates of his time. He regularly followed and commented upon ongoing discus- 
sions and experiments. His epistemology, therefore, should include accounts of how expe- 
rience leads to knowledge of the world and ourselves. 

In Spinoza’s early works, there are versions of such accounts. The TIE and KV, in 
particular, include explicit thesis about the role of sensation in the production of human 
knowledge. In the Ethics, however, Spinoza’s terminology is different, and one might think 
that an account of the contribution of experience to knowledge there is different or absent. 
The fundamental categories of cognition in the Ethics are imagination, reason, and intui- 
tion. Sensation is not among them. When readers have tried to understand where sensa- 
tion belongs among these categories, they have tended to associate sensation with 
imagination, but this association leads to further puzzles. Imagination, on the account of 
the Ethics, is the source of confusion and error, not knowledge. If imagination replaces 
sensation in the Ethics, then it might seem as though Spinoza suggests that sensation 
cannot have a substantial role in the production of knowledge after all. 

Such an impression would be misleading. In this chapter, I argue that, perhaps despite 
initial appearances, the Ethics includes versions of the views about sensation and its role in the 
production of knowledge that are present in the TIE and the KV. In the Ethics, notably at 
E2p16, there is a terminological shift. ‘Idea of an affection’ (idea affectionis) replaces the earlier 
terms for sensation (sensatio, sensus, goevel, gewaarwording). Ideas of affections, however, con- 
tribute, as sensations do in the earlier works, to each of the three kinds of cognition and not 
only to imagination. We can find in accounts in the Ethics of the place of ideas of affections in 
reason and intuition mature versions of his earlier thesis about sensation and knowledge. 


A Companion to Spinoza, First Edition. Edited by Yitzhak Y. Melamed. 
© 2021 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2021 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd. 


286 


SPINOZA ON IDEAS OF AFFECTIONS 
1. Sensation in TIE, KV, and CM 


I follow Fillipo Mignini (1996) in taking Spinoza to have a generally consistent account of 
sensation in his early works. On this view, a sensation is a modification of the mind closely 
associated with a modification of body and explained — details vary across these works — in 
terms of the mind-body relation. Whereas imagination is a source of confusion, sensation 
in these works is a principal source of human knowledge. Although there are some occur- 
rences of the relevant terms (sentire and sensus) in his mature work, this technical use of 
the term does not occur in the Ethics or the TP. 


1.1. TIE 


At the beginning of the TIE (§21 | GII/11), Spinoza cites our inference from the fact of 
sensation to the conclusion that mind is united to the body as an example of the third way 
to perceive, that is, of reason and not imagination. Although Spinoza emphasizes the limits 
of this knowledge, and the danger of mixing it with imagination (notes g and h), he never- 
theless characterizes it as right and true. Note, en passant, that Spinoza takes the mind- 
body union to cause sensation in some indeterminate sense; he does not take action of the 
body on the mind to cause sensation. 

This line of reasoning is similar to that of the second part of DDP Ip21d | GI/180, and 
to the Cartesian proof (Principles I/ art. 2 | AT IX—2/42). As §21 and its notes show, Spinoza 
agrees with Descartes that sensations are a reliable source to know that mind and body are 
united, but not to know the nature of their union. This agreement may suggest that Spinoza 
is still strongly influenced by Descartes in this work, and that the recognition of an episte- 
mological role for sensation will disappear as this influence vanishes. But how Cartesian is 
Spinoza in the TIE? There is no passage in the text implying that Spinoza accepts the 
Cartesian view that the mind-body union involves some kind of interaction between them; 
a Cartesian thesis that he flirts with in the KV and explicitly refuses in the Preface of E5. 

In the second half of the TIE, the epistemological role that Spinoza gives to sensation is 
more significant and remains distinct from that of imagination and seemingly divergent 
from that of Cartesian conception. In imagination, sensations are experentia vaga (the sec- 
ond sort of cognition introduced at §19 | GII/9): they are ordered according to the random 
sequence of external causes on our bodies and are, in this sense, disconnected (§84 | 
GII/32). Not all sensation is imagination, however. Spinoza argues (§§ 102-103 | GII/37) 
that in experiments we can order our sensations according to the nature of our senses and 
so arrive at knowledge of [the nature of] external things. Although imagination and 
memory are varieties of sensation in the TIE, it should not be identified with them because 
sensations may also be ideas of reason and may be ordered by the intellect. That is, they 
can be knowledge and can lead to further knowledge. 


1.2. KV 


In the KV, Spinoza continues to treat sensation as the immediate perception of corporeal 
modification and continues to take the inference from sensation to the union of mind and 
body as a valid one. However, the work goes further and provides a more detailed account 
of the nature of this union, its relationship with sensation (Mignini 1996), and of the lat- 
ter’s epistemological purpose. Three of the passages where gevoel (or gewaarwording) occurs 
are especially informative: KV II Preface, note | GI/ 52-53; KV II, 20, §3, note | GI/97; 
and KV App II | GI/ 117-121. 


287 


LIA LEVY 


In a long note to the Preface of the second part, Spinoza proposes a 15-point succinct 
theory of the human mind, the human body and their union, which is very close to the Ethics 
one (E2p1—E2p16). He introduces the thesis, preserved in the Ethics, that the human mind is 
the idea (that is, the objective essence) of the human body (point 5; idem). Accordingly, he 
defines sensation (goevel) as a modification of our mind that “arises from the fact that other 
bodies act on ours” and claims that such a corporeal modification “cannot occur without the 
soul’s becoming aware of it” (point 13 | G I/53). Sensation is the objective essence of the 
modification of our body caused by their actions (points 10-12; idem). The second appendix 
(§15 | GI/120-121) provides an explanation of the sensation of heat and cold in exactly the 
same line. Cold associates with a decrease of motion and increase of rest in our body and heat 
with the opposite: “Hence when one of these modes (motion or rest) changes, . . . the Idea 
also changes correspondingly.” Sensation, then, is the mind’s immediate apprehension of 
modifications of motion and rest in its object, that is, the body (G I/120). 

Some of the passages in KV II, Chapters 19-20, seem to indicate that Spinoza holds the 
Cartesian view that mind and body interact causally (see Garber 2015); a view that he 
explicitly disapproves later in the Ethics. Spinoza claims in those chapters that the mind is 
the cause of the voluntary movements and that the body is the cause of the perception the 
mind has of it, and thereby “of other bodies also” (G I/93). He goes so far as to say that: 
“There is no difficulty here as to how this one mode, which differs infinitely from the other, 
acts on the other” (KV II/XX/note c | G I/96; my emphasis). The reasoning underpinning 
his point in grounded in the conception of the mind-body union as a kind of whole. Indeed, 
this view is not present in later works. Spinoza is flirting with some form of causal interac- 
tion between mind and body at this point. But he does not forsake the idea-object model, as 
he says in the same note, later: “Between the idea and the object there must necessarily be 
a union, because one cannot exist without the other” (idem G I/97). So, whatever interpre- 
tation we give to this causal interaction, it cannot be the same as the Cartesian one. Spinoza 
pretends that in his account no third thing is necessary here which would produce the 
union of soul and body” (Ibid.), a clear reference to Descartes’s view. 

The KV is the earliest source, then, of Spinoza’s view that the idea-object model accounts 
for the mind-body relation. It explains why one cannot exist without the other, why one 
cannot change without the other changing, and therefore why we can correctly infer their 
union from sensation (TRE §21| G II/11). In this work, however, he believes that this 
model enables him to explain sensation and voluntary motion in terms of causal interac- 
tion between mind and body, but only as long as it is seen as a relationship between two 
parts of the same whole, even though those parts are different in nature. Eventually, he 
will no longer advocate this causal interaction position, nor the conception of mind-body 
union as a whole. In the Ethics, he presents a new ontological conception of the idea-object 
model, which explains those phenomena differently. 

But we cannot say that the adoption of this causal interaction view is a sufficient evi- 
dence of Spinoza’s acceptance of Cartesian conception of the nature of mind-body union. 
For he takes that this part-whole view explains why one cannot exist without the other and 
why one cannot change without the other changing, “so that no third thing is necessary 
here which would produce the union of soul and body” (KV II 20/§3 note | GI/97). In this 
passage, Spinoza clearly refers to, and rejects, the Cartesian thesis that the union of mind 
and body can only be produced by God. 

Also, sensation in the KV, now under the idea-object model, cannot be identified with 
confused perception or opinion. To the contrary, Spinoza asserts that sensation is the origin 
of all of our knowledge: “because we have now explained what [sensation (gevoel)] is we 


288 


SPINOZA ON IDEAS OF AFFECTIONS 


can easily see how from this there arises . . . knowledge of oneself, experience, and 
reasoning” (KV/Appendix II/§17 | GI/121; see also KV II/20/note c | GI/97). 

Elements of Spinoza’s position in the TIE, which converge with part of the Cartesian 
conception of mind-body union — in particular, the correct inference from the fact of sen- 
sation to union itself — are still compatible with KV’s new theory of mind-body union. For 
the definition of sensation as a change in the soul that arises when there is interaction 
between the human body and the bodies that affect it and where the mind is aware of this 
interaction (KV I/ Preface/entries 10-13 |G I/53) allows the conclusion that mind is 
united to a body. This account is consistent with what is said about sensation in the TIE and 
can be seen in continuity with it and as an improvement. Moreover, Spinoza retains in the 
KV the TIE account of the importance of sensation to knowledge, and he makes it stronger 
and more precise by asserting that, because the human mind is always passive, sensation 
is the sole source of human knowledge. 

The clearest statement of this commitment may be found in the third of a series of prin- 
ciples that Spinoza introduces in the course of discussing God’s existence: “a finite intellect 
can understand nothing through itself unless it is determined by something external” 
(G1/17). Following this claim, Spinoza emphasizes the limitations of our finite intellects: 
we cannot perceive everything at once, and we cannot determine ourselves to perceive one 
thing before or after another. These limitations call, once again, for experimentation. 
Because we cannot understand everything at once, we need a principled way of deter- 
mining what our mind thinks and in what order. 


1.5. CM 


The only occurrence of sensatio in the CM might seem to tell against an account of sensa- 
tion as something different from imagination. In the opening chapter, in the course of 
describing the ways in which we imagine, Spinoza offers a definition of imagination that 
identifies it with sensation: 


. . .as imagining is nothing but being aware of [sentire| the traces found in the brain from the 
motion of the spirits aroused in the senses [sensus] by objects, such an awareness [sensatio] can 
only be a confused affirmation. (GI, 234) 


Although the CM can be rightly understood as presenting some of Spinoza’s own thesis, it 
is written in the context of his account of Descartes’ doctrine, the DDP. This passage reflects 
Spinoza’s engagement with Descartes and Cartesian terminology. As Curley notes in his 
translation, Descartes’s view that imagination is an awareness of traces made in the brain by 
animal spirits is clearly expressed in the Treatise of Man (AT XI/174—177). There, Descartes 
explains the brain mechanisms of feeling, remembering, imagining, and voluntary move- 
ments. His account points out that it is the same type of brain modification (the figures traced 
on the surface of gland h) that gives occasion to the first two of these modes of thinking: 


That is to say, only these should be taken as the forms or images which, when united to this 
machine, the rational soul will consider directly when it imagines some object or senses it. And 
note I say ‘imagine’ or ‘sense’. For I wish to apply the term ‘idea’ generally to all the impres- 
sions which the spirits are able to receive as they issue from gland H. And when these depend 
on the presence of objects they can all be attributed to the common sense; but they may also 
proceed from other causes, as I shall explain later, and they should then be attributed to the 
imagination. (AT XI, 177; my emphasis) 


289 


LIA LEVY 


Imagination has two senses in that passage, both strictly corporeal. First, it refers either to 
the set of images drawn in the brain by animal spirits and caused by the presence of objects 
(and, in this sense, imagination is associated with common sense or, for Descartes, feeling). 
Second, it refers to any such images regardless of their cause. 

To return, then, to the CM, the second half of Spinoza’s sentence, his assertion that 
imagination is a confused affirmation, certainly captures his own position and not 
Descartes’s. The first half, however, reiterates Descartes’ account of the corporeal aspect of 
imagination and sensation, as stated in the Treatise of Man. The identification of these two 
modes of perception does not represent a shift in Spinoza’s own account. 


1.4. Taking Stock: The Early Works and the Ethics 


I hope to have shown to this point that in his early works Spinoza first asserts and then makes 
more precise and deepens the distinction between sensation and imagination. The distinc- 
tion is psychological: some but not all sensations are ideas of imagination. It is also epistemo- 
logical: ideas of imagination are confused, but sensations are the source of all knowledge. 
There is no trend in his work suggesting that he might abandon these views in the Ethics. 

Spinoza does, however, clearly change his terminology in the Ethics. Mignini (1996) 
suggests that Spinoza avoided the use of sensatio there in order to avoid giving readers the 
impression that he endorsed a view on which there is causal interaction between mind and 
body. This suggestion is plausible, although I tried to show that Spinoza did not endorse 
that view in the KV, nor in the TIE. For, a contemporary of Spinoza, who did not know his 
unpublished works, would know only the PPC and the CM, and both would use the term in 
the Cartesian context. 

With respect to the TIE claim that we can use sensation in experimentation to advance 
our knowledge both of nature and the senses themselves, Mignini suggests that this claim 
was not abandoned but also that Spinoza did not achieve to offer a more detailed account 
of “the nature of our senses” (TIE § 102 | GII/37) because he was not yet capable, in 
1676, to explain “how a variety of things can be demonstrated a priori from the concept of 
Extension alone” (Letter 83 | GIV/34). On Mignini’s view, Spinoza took such an account 
to depend upon a more sophisticated knowledge of physics than that presented in the 
physical digression following E3p1. Here, I disagree with Mignini, because, as I shall try to 
show, the development of the idea-object model applied to the account of psychophysical 
phenomena will allow Spinoza to leave aside any detailed knowledge of the functioning of 
our sense organs to explain how we can rely on them to have true and adequate ideas (for 
amore developed view on this issue, see Andrault 2014). 

The thesis of the TIE and the KV, on which all of knowledge has its origin in sensation 
presents more of a puzzle. In the Ethics, Spinoza continues to take thought to consist in 
ideas or perceptions (E2a3). Therefore, if there is a theory of sensation in the Ethics, 
Spinoza must take sensation — like any idea — to be representational (for a different posi- 
tion, see Shapiro 2012). That is a feature of the theory that we need to explain. Another 
puzzling feature of the Ethics is that Spinoza continues to use the verb sentire to mark any 
act of mind and so to contribute to all forms of cognition (see Mignini 1996, p. 283), 
including even knowledge of the third kind (E5p23s). Last but not least, there is a passage 
in the El App in which Spinoza refers to sensible properties (heat and cold) as “ways of 
imagination” and “fictions” (GI, 82). 

In the Ethics, Spinoza retains the TIE and KV thesis that the human mind changes each 
time the body changes (E2pp13-15) and, conversely, that corporeal affections change 


290 


SPINOZA ON IDEAS OF AFFECTIONS 


each time mental affections change (E3p3, 5p1, 5p3, and 5p4). The Ethics also retains the 
idea-object conception of the mind-body relation that is introduced in the KV and offers 
the most detailed account of that relation at E2p7 and its corollary and scholium (see 
Garber 2015). 

As scholars have noted, Spinoza continues in the Ethics, at E2a3, 2a4, and 2p13d, to 
recognize that human minds come to have knowledge by means of sensation (sentire) 
(Moreau 1994; Gilead 1994; Klever 1995; Levy 2000; Renz 2018). On the other hand, 
Spinoza also continues to take the first kind of cognition to be, because of its inadequacy, 
the only cause of error. Although Spinoza recognizes that this error can be corrected by 
reason (E4p1 ands), such correction does not make the original imaginative idea adequate 
(see Gleizer 2013, 2017). 

Pressing questions remain, however. As scholars have noted, the importance of E2p16 
to Spinoza’s accounts of ideas and knowledge at 2pp17—31 and, especially, E2p39 and 
2p47 shows that Spinoza continues to take a mind’s immediate perception of changes in 
its object to be a source of each of the three kinds of cognition. (For detailed accounts, see 
Marshall 2013; Viljanen 2014; LeBuffe 2017; Renz 2018; Sangiacomo 2019). Until the 
relationship of sensation and imagination in the Ethics is understood, however, it is also 
difficult to understand the relationship of the doctrine of the Ethics to that of the KV. In 
particular, as we have seen, it is the finitude the human intellect and the intellect’s result- 
ing passivity that in the KV grounds Spinoza’s thesis that sensation is the source of all of 
our knowledge. In reformulating his account of the human intellect in the Ethics and 
allowing that human minds can in some of their ideas be wholly active, does Spinoza also 
recast this view about sensation? Does he, in his mature work, reduce sensation to imagi- 
nation after all? 


2. Ideas of Affections: Sensation or Imagination? 


Undeniably, accounts of reason and imagination in the Ethics considerably advance 
Spinoza’s theory of knowledge. Notably, they provide the basis for Spinoza’s accounts of 
our ethical and political lives in the Ethics, TTP, and TP and for the hermeneutics of the 
TTP. Nevertheless, if Spinoza were to maintain that imagination just is or just replaces sen- 
sation, this would greatly detract from his theory of mind and epistemology. It would sug- 
gest improbably that, phenomenologically, experience of the external world (this is feeling 
in the Cartesian account) and imagination would be indiscernible (see Alquié 1998, 
pp. 197-211). Moreover, because it would limit the account of these ideas to their phe- 
nomenal content, it would make it difficult for Spinoza to produce any account of 
knowledge of the external world. 

It is true, as we have seen, that on the Cartesian account, the bodily processes that 
explain imagination and those that explain sensation are the same so long as we disregard 
the causal origins of those processes. As Spinoza’s discussions of the view (KV II, §20, note 

| G1/96-97 and E5 Pref. | G II/278-279) suggest, this raises a problem for Descartes: we 

depend perilously upon divine benevolence in order to know that those perceptions which 
seem to be of external things are of external things. Nevertheless, Spinoza like Descartes, 
must explain how it is that through sensible perception the external world imposes itself 
upon us and shows itself to us. 

If Spinoza were in the Ethics to reduce sensation to imagination in the technical sense of 
the first kind of cognition, his theory of mind would depart radically from any intuitively 


291 


LIA LEVY 


appealing theory and also from traditional (as well as contemporary) treatments of sensa- 
tion. It would also depart from Spinoza’s own treatments of sensation in his earlier works. 
There would be no phenomenological or epistemic difference between ideas of external 
things in sensation and ideas of fiction or memories. We would be stuck with the dreamers 
and the madmen of Descartes’s first Meditation. 

Spinoza does, like Descartes, closely associate these two sorts of ideas, but he also, again 
like Descartes, preserves the distinction between them, calling “madness” the incapacity to 
distinguish them (TIE §64 note B | G II 25; E3p44s | GIL; 243). This is also evident in his 
use of the phrase “dreams, open eyes” (idem; TIE §66 | G II/25; E3p2s | GI] 3p26 | G 
II/159; for discussion see Klein 2003). The comparisons of mistakes in experience to 
dreams suggests that Spinoza maintains a systematic distinction between sensation and 
imagination. Spinoza’s use of the phrase in his mature as well as his early works suggests, 
moreover, that his conception of that distinction remains largely consistent: sensation is 
different from mere imagination. 


2.1. Activity in the Human Intellect 


A note that Spinoza adds to his definition of idea (E2d3) might seem to present a problem 
for the interpretation that I have defended up to this point: 


I say [that an idea is a] concept rather than a perception, because the word ‘perception’ seems 
to indicate that the Mind is acted on by the object. But ‘concept’ seems to express an action of 
the Mind. 


The note seems to refer directly to my view that Spinoza fundamentally maintains the 
account of the KV in the Ethics and to warn against it: I have changed my mind about the pas- 
sivity of the human intellect! It is, recall, the passivity of the human intellect that grounds 
the conclusion that sensation is the source of all knowledge. If the mind is active, however, 
this ground is lost. 

Spinoza presents his account of the mind’s activity in Ethics 3, the account that seems 
to contradict the view of the KV (for further discussion, see Renz 2015). Per E3d2, we act 
when we are an adequate cause of a change within or outside ourselves. Moreover, we are 
an adequate cause of the effects that may be clearly known through our mind. Partial and 
inadequate causes, on the other hand, are, taken by themselves, insufficient for knowledge 
of their effects (E3d3). Taken together, these views seem to suggest that being an adequate 
cause of an effect, or being active, is being a sufficient cause and explanation of the effect. 

The fact of our finitude that Spinoza emphasizes in the KV, however, still presses in the 
Ethics. It makes it difficult to understand how we could be active. We are, after all, deter- 
mined to exist and to act through an infinite series of causes (E1p28, E2p9, L3, E2p48, 
E5p6). Whatever limitations finite modes possess, we and our intellect also possess. So, it 
remains the case that we cannot perceive everything at once and we cannot determine 
ourselves to perceive one thing before or after another (see (G1/17). Spinoza’s claims about 
the mind’s activity in Ethics 3 must accommodate this, our ineluctable finitude. 

The propositions concerning the mind’s activity at E3pp1—3 must be understood in 
such a way, then, that the mind can be active even as it is finite. Two part-whole relations, 
that between the divine intellect and our intellect (see E2p11c) and that between a human 
mind and the ideas that compose it while it exists (see E3p1d) must be understood in such 
a way that they permit Spinoza to address this puzzle. It is difficult — and this restates the 


292 


SPINOZA ON IDEAS OF AFFECTIONS 


problem that Spinoza introduces in Chapter 1 of the KV — to understand how adequate 
ideas in a human mind can begin to be active when their durational existence depends 
upon an infinite number of preceding finite causes. 

One might argue that E2p34 and its demonstration offer the resources understanding 
these relations and building a response to the problem. On this proposition every idea that 
is adequate in us is an adequate idea in God insofar as God constitutes the essence of our 
mind. Such ideas, being God’s ideas, express God’s eternal constitutive activity. Such a view 
would seem to suggest that, insofar as such ideas are God’s, God is active in possessing them. 
Spinoza refers to similar notions in the argument of 3p1d. It is not clear, however, that this 
is what Spinoza needs at E3p1, which is that a finite intellect — insofar as it is finite - is active 
in having these ideas. 

Spinoza’s response to the problem must be one that recognizes the finitude of the human 
intellect and shows how our limitations restrict the sorts of ideas that may be adequate in 
us. The basis for such an answer may be found in the account of what is common to all finite 
things at E2p38: “Those things which are common to all, and which are equally in the part 
and the whole, can only be conceived adequately.” This notion is used in Spinoza’s accounts 
of the foundation of the second (E2p39) and also the third kind of cognition (E2p47), that 
is, of all of our adequate ideas. These points show that, in the Ethics just as in his earlier 
works, Spinoza maintains that experience is the source of all human knowledge (see 
Renz 2018 and her chapter, written with B. Hutchin, in this volume, and Toth 2017). 

2P38 allows Spinoza to deal with the difficulty to sustain that all finite intellect is passive 
but also that it can be active under certain conditions (see Viljanen 2014 and 
Sangiacomo 2019). To demonstrate that what “are common to all, and which are equally 
in the part and in the whole, can only be conceived adequately,” Spinoza argues that in 
experience (E2P 16) we know the common properties in other bodies. This argument is dif- 
ficult to interpret, but perhaps it can be understood in a way that is consistent with the 
opening definitions and propositions of Ethics 3. On this interpretation, we are passive, in 
a sense, in such knowledge because we experience external bodies in virtue of our bodies’ 
causal interaction with them. The human body and the external body are each partial 
causes of the corporeal image, or affection, that is the object of the human mind’s imagi- 
nation. We are also active in experience, however, in that some elements of that corporeal 
image may be understood through an understanding of our body alone. These elements 
include the common properties in the external body. 

Ethics 3d1 accommodates this sense of activity by making adequate causes not explic- 
itly the only causes of their effects but, rather, causes whose effects may be clearly and dis- 
tinctly perceived through them. The external body and the human body, then, may both be 
causes of an affection of the human body and the human body can be, at the same time, 
the adequate cause of that affection. When it is, the ideas of such affections are adequate 
in the human mind. Common notions are such ideas. God, by contrast, is a total cause and 
an active cause of any ideas, and adequate ideas in God’s mind thus have a causal character 
that differs from that of adequate ideas in human minds. 

While Spinoza does make the human mind active in a sense in the Ethics, then, this sort 
of activity is not opposed to the constitutive passivity that the mind has in virtue of its fini- 
tude. However, it is finally understood, that human activity builds upon what is common 
among interacting bodies in order to arrive at accounts of adequacy, activity, joy, beati- 
tude, and peace (see Sangiacomo 2019). This activity starts, as does Spinoza’s account of 
knowledge in the KV, with ideas of affection in which we know other bodies, that is, with 
sensations. 


293 


LIA LEVY 


3. Conclusion 


I have argued that in the Ethics, Spinoza builds upon a conception of the epistemic impor- 
tance of sensation that may be found in his early works and that likewise, in his psychology, 
he continues to distinguish in the Ethics between those elements of sensation that con- 
tribute to knowledge and the inadequate ideas of imagination. These commitments are 
consistent with the theory of cognition in the Ethics and are accommodated, primarily, at 
E2p16 and its corollaries. 

Spinoza’s psychology does change across his works. Most important, his conception of 
the mind-body relation in terms of the idea-object relation in the KV distinguishes him 
from Descartes and his early Cartesianism, and his assertion that the human mind is in 
some respects active in the Ethics distinguishes his mature doctrine from that of the KV. 

His terminology also changes. The use of terms related to sensation becomes less fre- 
quent, particularly in important contexts, in the Ethics. There, the three types of cognition, 
adequacy and inadequacy, and activity and passivity are central notions. 

These changes complicate the story, but they do not reflect changes to Spinoza’s basic 
commitments. The view that knowledge starts with experience, in the Ethics, is reproduced 
at E2p38 and the doctrines that follow from it. Finite minds know their own and other 
bodies insofar as their bodies share properties with other bodies. It is those properties that 
are represented adequately in the mind’s ideas of the body’s affections. This is the origin of 
human knowledge. 


Acknowledgment 


Iam grateful to Michael LeBuffe and Joao Marques Carvalho, who translated this chapter 
and discussed its main points with me. Their contribution made this chapter much clearer 
and with fewer philosophical mistakes. The remaining ones are mine. 


References 


Alquié, F. (1998). Le Rationalisme de Spinoza. Paris: Presses Universitaires de France. 

Andrault, R. (2014). Comment le corps propre nos appartient-t-il? In: La Vie selon la raison. Physiologie 
et métaphysique chez Spinoza et Leibniz, 251-294. Paris: Honoré Champion. 

Garber, D. (2015). Spinoza’s Cartesian dualism in the Korte Verhandeling. In: The Young Spinoza, 
121-132. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Gilead, A. (1994). The indispensability of the first kind of knowledge. In: Spinoza by 2000. Vol 2: Spinoza 
on Knowledge and the Human Mind (ed. Y. Yovel and G. Segal), 209-221. Leiden: Brill. 

Gleizer, M.A. (2013). Primeiras consideracoes sobre 0 problema do erro em Espinosa: imaginacao, 
inadequacao e falsidade. Analytica, 17 (2): 149-180. 

Gleizer, M.A. (2017). Vérité et certitude chez Spinoza. Paris: Classiques Garnier. 

Klein, J.R. (2003). Dreaming with open eyes. Idealistic Studies, 33 (2): 141-159. 

Klever, W.N.A. (1995). Slocke, alias Locke in Spinozistic profile. In: Disguised and Overt Spinozism 
around 1700 (ed. W. Bunge and W.N.A. Klever), 235-260. Brill Academic Publishers. 

LeBuffe, M. (2017). Spinoza on Reason. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Levy, L. (2000). L’Automate spirituel. La Naissance de la subjectivité moderne d’apres l’Ethique de Spinoza. 
Assen: Van Gorcum. 

Marshall, E. (2013). The Spiritual Automaton. Spinoza’s Science of the Mind. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 


294 


SPINOZA ON IDEAS OF AFFECTIONS 


Mignini, F (1996). Sensus/Sentatio in Spinoza. In: Sensus. Sensatio. VIII Coloquio Internazionale 
(ed. M.L. Bianchi), 267-296. Florence: Leo S. Olschki Editore. 

Moreau, P.-F. (1994). Spinoza: L’Expérience et l’éternité. Paris: PUF. 

Renz, U. (2015). From the passive to the active intellect. In The Young Spinoza: A Metaphysician in the 
Making (ed. Y.Y. Melamed), 287-299. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Renz, U. (2018). The Explainability of Experience. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Sangiacomo, A. (2019). Spinoza on Reason, Passions, and the Supreme Good. Oxford; Oxford University 
Press. 

Shapiro, L. (2012). Spinoza on imagination and the affects. In: Emotional Minds. The Passions and the 
Limits of Pure Inquiry in Early Modern Philosophy, 89-104. Berlin: De Gruyter. 

Toth, O.I. (2017). A fresh look at the role of the second kind of knowledge in Spinoza’s Ethics. 
Hungarian Philosophical Review, 61 (2): 37-56. 

Viljanen, V. (2014). Spinoza on activity in sense perception. In: Active Perception in the History of 
Philosophy (ed. M. Yrjonsuuri), 241-254). Springer. 


295 


28 


The Mind-Body Union 
CHANTAL JAQUET 


Human beings consist of a mind and a body, according to E3p13c, but it does mean that 
they are constituted by two distinct entities. For Spinoza, “the Mind and the Body are one 
and the same Individual, which is conceived now under the attribute of thought, now 
under the attribute of Extension” (E2p21s; CWSI, 467-468). The union of the mind and 
body, thus, is rather a unity, and has nothing to do with the conjunction of two extended 
and thinking substances, like in Descartes. The author of the Ethics rules out the dualism 
while establishing the possibility of a twofold mental and physical approach to human 
reality. Spinoza’s monism therefore is not a reductionism because the individual can be 
conceived now under the attribute of thought, now under the attribute of extension. The 
unity includes plurality or at least duality of expressions. 

But if the mind and body constitute one and the same being expressed in two ways, it 
remains to be seen how these two modes of conception interrelate and come together in 
order to understand the nature of man clearly and distinctly. 


1. The Nature of Mind and Body Union 


Spinoza breaks with Descartes’ conception of the psychophysical union and deeply 
changes the ontological statute of men. He considers no longer that human beings in 
Nature are a dominion within a dominion and share with God the privilege of being sub- 
stances. For Descartes, as everybody knows, human beings are constituted by two sub- 
stances — the soul or the thinking substance, and the body or the extended substance. In 
E2p10, Spinoza states that human beings cannot be substances for two main reasons. 
First, they do not exist necessarily, contrary to the nature of the substance whose essence 
involves existence. Second, according to E1p5, there are not two substances of the same 
nature. Since a number of men can exist, the being of substance cannot pertain to their 
essence. Therefore, the essence of man is constituted by certain modifications of God’s 
attributes, namely modes of thinking and modes of extension. 

Of all the modes of thinking, the idea is prior in nature. According to E2a3, “There are 
no modes of thinking, such as love, desire or whatever is designated by the word affects of 


A Companion to Spinoza, First Edition. Edited by Yitzhak Y. Melamed. 
© 2021 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2021 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd. 


296 


THE MIND-BODY UNION 


the mind, unless there is in the same individual the idea of the thing loved, desired, and 
the like. But there can be an idea, even though there is no other mode of thinking.” 
Therefore the first thing which constitutes the being of the human mind is an idea (see 
E2p11d); but not the idea of something which actually does not exist, for in this case the 
idea could not be said to exist. The mind is the idea of a singular thing which actually 
exists. This singular thing is a body and nothing else, because “we feel that a certain body 
is affected in many ways” (E2a4) and except bodies and modes of thinking, we neither 
perceive anything (E2a5). 

The mind (mens), according to Spinoza, is neither a substance, nor a receptacle, nor a 
faculty. It is the idea of the body, that is to say a determinate mode of extension, whose form 
is defined by a ratio of movement and rest (E2p13).Therefore, the term mens designates 
nothing other than the perception, or more precisely, the conception that man makes of 
his own body — and by extension of the external world—through the various states affecting 
him. An idea is defined as a concept the mind forms because it is a thinking thing (E2def2). 
By preferring the term “conception” to “perception,” Spinoza emphasizes the active and 
dynamic nature of the power of thought operating in the production of ideas. Consequently, 
the mind is a way of conceptualizing the body, or forming an idea of it that is adequate or 
inadequate, depending on whether the affections modifying it are of a clear or confused 
nature. Its power of thinking is correlated with the body’s power of acting. “In proportion 
as a body is more capable than others of doing many things at once, or being acted on in 
many ways at once, so its mind is more capable than others of perceiving many things at 
once. And in proportion as the actions of the body depend more on itself alone, and as 
other bodies concur with it less in acting, so its mind is more capable of understanding dis- 
tinctly” (E2p13s; CWS I, 457-458). 

The mind is not preeminent over the body; its perfection increases with the body’s one. 
To determine how the human mind differs from the others and surpasses them, it is 
necessary to know what the body can do and to increase its power of acting in many 
ways. It is the reason why in E4p45c2s Spinoza says: “It is the part of a wise man [.. .| to 
refresh and restore himself in moderation with pleasant food and drink, with scents, with 
the beauty of green plants, with decoration, music, sports, the theater, and other things 
of this kind, which anyone can use without injury to another.” The culture of varied plea- 
sures is part of the philosophical life and the condition sine qua non for understanding 
many things at once. “For, [Spinoza adds in this scholium] the human body is composed 
of a great many parts of different natures, which constantly require new and varied 
nourishment, so that the whole body may be equally capable of the things which can 
follow from its nature, and hence, so that the mind also may be equally capable of under- 
standing many things at once.” 

The mind, then, is not a simple idea; it is an idea composed of great many ideas. Spinoza 
divides it in two parts, the Imagination, which is constituted of inadequate ideas, and the 
Intellect (intellectus), which is constituted of adequate ideas. The human Intellect, insofar 
it is constituted of adequate ideas is a part of the divine Intellect. It is eternal, like the divine 
Intellect, because true ideas remain and never perish. Imagination and Memory, on the 
contrary, are destroyed with the body. When the body dies, the mind ceases to be the idea 
of its actual existence but still expresses its essence under a species of eternity (E5p2 3s). 

However, the correlation between the mind’s power of thinking and the body’s power of 
acting cannot be understood as a form of reciprocal causality. Since mind and body are one 
and the same thing that is explained in two ways, they do not interact with each other, 
rather they act and are acted on in concert. For Spinoza, “the Body cannot determine the 


297 


CHANTAL JAQUET 


Mind to thinking, and the Mind cannot determine the Body to motion, to rest, or to 
anything else (if there is anything else)” (E3p2; CWS I, 494). The author of the Ethics 
breaks with Descartes. The French philosopher “who has so often censured Scholastics for 
wishing to explain obscure things by occult qualities” (ESpref; CWS I, 596) does not under- 
stand the union of mind and body and he “assume[s] a hypothesis more occult than any 
occult quality” (Ibid.). 

In Descartes, the union of an immaterial or non-extended substance and a material or 
extended substance remains beyond understanding, since the problem of whether they are 
able to interact arises. How can a material substance produce effects on an immaterial sub- 
stance and vice-versa? This is the famous question Princess Elizabeth asks Descartes in a 
letter dated 6 May 1647: “Sol ask you please to tell me how the soul of a human being (it 
being only a thinking substance) can determine the bodily spirits, in order to bring about 
voluntary actions” (Shapiro 2007; AT III, p. 661). All determination of movement implies 
physical contact or a modification in extension and can hardly be explained by the action 
of an immaterial and non-extended substance. For Descartes soul and body interact via 
the pineal gland that is suspended in the middle of the brain. 

In E5pref, Spinoza rejects this mysterious interaction and censures Descartes’ errors on 
several points. First, he criticizes the Cartesian fiction of the psychophysical union and the 
location of the seat of the soul in the pineal gland. The soul as a thinking substance cannot 
be joined to a small part of matter. Second, he criticizes the fiction of the interaction bet- 
ween the forces of the soul and the body’s movements, which, by virtue of their heteroge- 
neous nature, are not commensurate. He rejects finally the fiction of the pineal gland 
which is contrary to anatomical observations. “To this, we may add that this gland is not 
found to be so placed in the middle of the brain that it can be driven so easily and in so 
many ways” (E5pref ; CWS I, 597). Psychophysical dualism and interaction has led to a 
dead end. That is why it is necessary to resort to other paradigms. 


2. The Equality between Body and Mind 


By identifying the mind to the idea of the body, the author of the Ethics provides guidance 
on how to conceptualize their relationship. He invites us to think of their union according 
to the model of the idea and its object. What does it mean exactly? 

To illustrate the nature of this relationship, Spinoza uses the geometrical example of a 
circle. “A circle existing in nature and the idea of the existing circle, which is also in God, 
are one and the same thing, which is explained through different attributes” (E2p7s; CWS 
I, 451-452). The circle is a mode of extension that is made by rotating a line segment with 
one end point fixed in space and the other mobile, and which has the property of having 
equal radii. The idea of a circle is a mode of thought, which is formed on the basis of the 
idea of a line segment, and which includes the idea of equal radii. The circle and the idea 
of a circle are not, however, two different beings. It is the same individual that is conceived 
now as a mode of extension, i.e. the circle, and now as a mode of thought, i.e. the idea of a 
circle. The same applies to all bodies in nature and their ideas. The ideas of the circle or the 
human body objectively contain all that the circle or the human body contain formally. 
Borrowed from scholastic terminology, the term “objectively,” designates the fact that a 
thing is taken as the object of thought and refers to the representation or the conception 
the mind makes of it. It is distinguished from “formally” which means “really” or “in 
actuality.” For Spinoza, all things have a formal essence that expresses their reality and 


298 


THE MIND-BODY UNION 


an objective essence that is the idea of this reality. The objective essence, therefore, is 
nothing other than the idea of that thing, and is different from the formal essence, which 
applies to the thing in its material reality or its form. The mind, as an idea, is therefore the 
objective essence of the body. That is, as an object of thought it comprises everything that 
the essence of the body comprises formally or in reality, according to the same order and 
the same connection. The idea and its ideate are therefore identical and indivisible. 

This identity, however, does not exclude alterity. Although they express one and the 
same thing, conceived now under the attribute of extension, and now under the attribute 
of thought, the circle and the idea of a circle cannot necessarily be reduced to one another. 
The circle is a mode of extension, determined solely by modes of extension. The idea of a 
circle is a mode of thought, determined solely by modes of thought. Since it is distinct from 
its object, it has its own formal essence and can in turn become the object of an idea. This 
is what Treatise on the Emendation of the Intellect highlights. “For a circle is one thing and 
the idea of a circle another — the idea of a circle is not something which has a circumfer- 
ence and a center, as a circle does. Nor is an idea of a body that body itself.” (TIE §33 | G 
II/14/14—16) Just like the circle and the idea of a circle, the mind and body are two expres- 
sions of one and the same thing, but these two expressions are not strictly reducible to one 
another. An idea expresses the properties of its object, without necessarily having the same 
properties. The idea of dog does not bark! 

Under these circumstances, the crux of the problem is to determine the essence of this 
psychophysical union, which implies both the identity and the difference between mind and 
body. Observing that “the order and connection of ideas is the same (idem est) as the order 
and connection of things” (E2p7; CWSI, 451), many commentators have come to consider 
the Spinozian psychophysical union tantamount to a form of parallelism between the 
sequence of ideas and the sequence of bodily affections and to conceptualize the correlation 
between physical and mental states on the basis of this model. Yet, whereas the term 
“parallelism” is convenient to use, insofar asit effectively conveys the idea of acorrespondence 
between modes and attributes excluding any interaction or reciprocal causality, it is inevi- 
tably accompanied by unwelcome representations that hinder the comprehension of the 
unity of attributes and the union of mind and body in Spinoza. 

This doctrine is well known as Leibniz’s brainchild and it expresses his own thinking: “I 
have established a perfect parallelism between what happens in the soul and what takes 
place in matter. I have shown that the soul with its functions is something altogether dis- 
tinct from matter, but that it nevertheless is always accompanied by material organs and 
also that the soul’s functions are always accompanied by organic functions which must 
correspond to them, and that this relation is reciprocal and always will be” (Reflections on 
the doctrine of a single universal spirit 1989, p. 556).Parallelism is often presented as express- 
ing Spinoza’s thinking, although it was imported retrospectively into his system, where, 
technically, it does not appear. In E2p7, Spinoza only says that “the order and the connec- 
tion of ideas is the same as the order and the connection of things,” but never uses the 
word “parallelism.” Equating the identity between the order of ideas and the order of 
things, between mind and body, with a system of parallel lines leads to conceptualizing 
reality based on a model of a series of similar, matching lines that, by definition, do not 
intersect. This representation of the order of reality reduces Nature to a plane in which a 
plurality, or even an infinite number, of non-secant lines are juxtaposed. Yet, there is a 
single order, as is highlighted in the E2p7sc: “whether we conceive nature under the attri- 
bute of Extension, or under the attribute of Thought, or under any other attribute, we shall 
find the same order, or one and the same connection of causes, i.e. that the same things follow 


299 


CHANTAL JAQUET 


one another” (CWS I, p. 451-452, emphasis added).The doctrine of parallelism does not 
recreate the idea of unity present in Spinoza’s system, because it introduces a form of irre- 
ducible dualism and plurality. It applies perfectly to Leibniz’s system in which the soul with 
its functions remains something distinct from matter, but it is not appropriate to explain 
the union as it is meant by the author of the Ethics. Mind and body are not distinct and 
superimposed in humans as parallel lines, but are one and the same thing expressed in two 
ways. It is true that parallel lines are supposed to join in infinity, and therefore do not 
exclude a unifying point. But it must be recognized, however, that the representation of a 
linear series hardly recreates the unity of the individual and its constitution. 

The psychophysical parallelism fails to explain both identity and differences in Spinoza. 
It presupposes homologies and one-to-one correspondences between ideas and things, 
mind and body, and leads to conceptualizing the various modal expressions according to a 
linearly identical model. Except for their position in space, parallel lines are similar and 
interchangeable. It is as if Nature were condemned to a perpetual repetition of the same in 
every attribute. This doctrine leads to conceptualizing unity as uniformity. Yet if the order 
and connection of ideas is the same as the order and connection of things, this does not 
necessarily mean that the modes of expression of ideas and things are strictly identical and 
always assume the same importance. The image of the parallel system evokes the idea of a 
monolithic correspondence and leads to systematically looking for equivalences between 
bodily movements and thoughts, to putting them on the same plane. Physical states are 
thus matched to mental states in the same way as a point on a line is connected to another 
point according to a strictly one-to-one model. Yet, not only is such an association not 
always of interest, but it also does not take into account the fact that certain events are 
better or more strongly expressed in one register than another. Without hesitation, Spinoza 
privileges body or mind in certain cases. He gives primacy to the body for instance when he 
examines the nature of pleasure, pain, cheerfulness, or melancholy. These affects are chiefly 
related to the body (see E3, definitions of the affects 3). On the contrary, Spinoza focuses on 
the mental aspect when he defines the satisfaction of mind (acquiescientia mentis) or the 
intellectual love of God that arise from the third king of knowledge and are related to the 
mind without relating to the present existence of the body (see E5p27 and E5p32). 

Moreover the parallelism doctrine is based on a presupposition, according to which the 
various expressions of the same thing in each attribute go in the same direction and cannot 
diverge. Yet, this is not always true. 

The case of “most errors,” as it is analyzed E2p47s is quite striking in this regard, because 
it appears to be a counterexample that reveals the failures of the parallelism doctrine and 
largely invalidates it. Indeed, one and the same error does not express itself in the same way 
in the mind and body, and demonstrates a radical divergence between what happens in the 
mode of thought and what happens in the mode of extension. “Most errors,” Spinoza tells 
us, “consist only in our not rightly applying names to things. For when someone says that 
the lines which are drawn from the center of a circle to its circumference are unequal, he 
surely understands (then at least) by a circle something different from what Mathematicians 
understand. Similarly, when men err in calculating, they have certain numbers in their 
mind, and different ones on the paper. So if you consider what they have in Mind, they really 
do not err, though they seem to err because we think they have in their mind the numbers 
which are on the paper. If this were not so, we would not believe that they were erring, just 
as I did not believe that he was erring whom I recently heard cry out that his courtyard had 
flown into his neighbor’s hen [NS: although his words were absurd], because what he had 
in mind was sufficiently clear to me” (E2p47s; CWS I, 482-483). 


300 


THE MIND-BODY UNION 


In all of the examples mentioned in this scholium, the error expresses a distortion bet- 
ween ideas and words, that is to say, between a mode of thought and a mode of extension. 
Ideas are mental phenomena, while words, whether they are uttered or put on paper, are 
corporeal phenomena. “The essence of words and of images is constituted only by corpo- 
real motions, which do not at all involve the concept of thought” (E2p49s; CWS I, 485). 
Far from functioning in parallel, the mind and body of a mistaken person diverge pro- 
foundly. From the perspective of the mind, the error is really truth. “If you consider what 
they have in Mind, they really do not err,” says Spinoza. From the perspective of the body, 
the error is an incorrect application of names to things. The mind believes truly, but the 
body through its mouth or its hand expresses something else. The letter does not follow 
the spirit and it is this disparity that leads to the belief that people are mistaken. In reality, 
no one ever makes mistakes. We only conjecture that the other is mistaken, because we 
take his words literally and attribute them to his mind. Yet, this approach is illegitimate 
because we transform a bodily movement into a mode of thought. In sum, we confuse a 
signifier with a signified. The error is only an illusion attributable to the fact that our ears 
do not hear sensibly what the other person’s mind means intelligibly, but what his body 
does not transcribe identically. Spinoza concludes: “most controversies have arisen from 
this, that men do not rightly explain their own mind, or interpret the mind of the other 
man badly” (E2p47s; CWSI, 483). 

In this respect, the case of the slip of tongue of the man who exclaimed that “his court- 
yard had flown into his neighbor’s hen” is particularly revealing because the body says 
exactly the opposite of the mind by reversing the order of things. The gap between the body 
and mind is greatest here, hence their unity has nothing to do with a strict, “twin” identity. 
The thought, however, is clear, and no one would have trouble understanding that the 
man wanted to say that the hen had flown into his neighbor’s courtyard. 

While talking, the body is not mistaken, inasmuch as truth or falseness are modalities 
of the idea and therefore fall under thought, and not extension. It expresses the same thing 
as the mind, but in a different register. The inversion of words relative to ideas results from 
a bodily movement that physically manifests agitation, surprise, or confusion in the face of 
a heavy bird taking flight or its escape to the neighbor’s. It corresponds to a state of mind 
and is one with it, so that the divergence in expression does not contradict psychophysical 
unity, but reveals its full scope and complexity. 

Although it seems more appropriate for expressing the correspondence between the 
order of adequate ideas and that of the body’s affections, the parallelism doctrine remains 
extremely reductive and prone to misunderstandings. It can be illuminating in that it 
makes it possible to conceptualize a correspondence between mind and body without 
interactions or reciprocal causality, but it is not really pertinent to explain Spinoza’s con- 
ception of the psychophysical union because it masks unity as well as difference, and even 
the divergence between the modes of expression of thought and of extension. Under these 
conditions, all discourse on the psychophysical union comes down to the juxtaposition of 
two monologues that echo one other word for word, without there ever being a key phrase 
in one register without a matching counterpart in the other. 

Consequently, we must get rid of the “parallelism” that does not appear in Spinoza’s 
system (see Jaquet 2018, pp. 12-19). It is not necessary to import this word, because the 
author of Ethics provided a precise concept to express his argument. This concept is 
equality. This is the exact word Spinoza uses in E2p7c to express the fact that God’s power 
of thinking goes hand-in-hand with his power of acting: “God’s [NS: actual] power of 
thinking is equal (aequalis) to his actual power of acting.” The presence of the adjective 


301 


CHANTAL JAQUET 


“aequalis” is no accident, because the author uses the same word when he compares the 
mind’s power of thinking and the body’s power of acting. “But the Mind’s striving, or 
power of thinking, is equal to, and at one in nature with (aequalis et simul natura) the 
Body’s striving, or power of acting” (E3p28dem; CWS I, 510). When Spinoza wants to 
explain that the order of ideas and affections in the mind goes hand-in-hand with that of 
affections of the body and is one and the same thing, he uses either the adjective aequalis 
or the adverb simul or both at once.(See for instance E3p2s; CWS I, 494: “the mind and 
the body are one and the same thing, which is conceived now under the attribute of 
thought, now under the attribute of extension. The result is that the order, or connection, 
of things is one, whether nature is conceived under this attribute or that; hence the order 
of actions or passions of our body is, by nature, at one (simul sit natura) with the order of 
actions and passions of the mind.”) 

Equality cannot be confused with uniformity; it expresses all of the diversity contained in 
mind and body. The most interesting case is that of love a human being, who understands 
himself clearly and distinctly, feels toward God. The name and the nature of this love change 
depending on whether it is related to the mind or to the body. This love is called “love toward 
God” (amor erga Deum) when it is related to the mind in connection with the body, and the 
“intellectual love of God” when it is related to the mind alone. The vocabulary, while demon- 
strating the equality between the mind’s power of thinking and the body’s power of acting, 
stops us from conceiving it as uniform and undifferentiated, since it introduces nuances in 
the expression of this love that is one and the same, depending on which of the two different 
attributes it is considered under. This variation in formulation, according to whether the rela- 
tionship is with the mind or body, is based on an extrinsic designation, like all of the names 
given to the affects, but it nevertheless reflects an intrinsic difference, since the nature of this 
love changes according to the angle it is considered from. Amor erga Deum and amor intellec- 
tualis admittedly have in common the fact that they both are kinds of love, but the first is 
related to God “insofar as we imagine him as present” (E5p32c; CWSI, 611) while the second 
affects the mind “insofar as we understand God to be eternal” (Ibid.).The first varies according 
to how the presence of God is imagined, while the other is based on an adequate conception 
of his eternity. This difference regarding the mode of representation of the cause is not irrel- 
evant, since it reflects on the essence of this love, depending on whether it is related to the 
mind or body. This is what Spinoza highlights when he maintains that the love toward God 
“is the most constant of all the affects, and insofar as it is related to the Body, cannot be 
destroyed, unless it is destroyed with the Body itself. What the nature of this Love is insofar as 
it is related only to the Mind, we shall see later” (E5p20s; CWSI, 605). He later explains this 
nature in E5p33 where he shows that the intellectual love of God is eternal, and that it is the 
only love to boast of this property. The affect of the intellectual love of God therefore does not 
have the same nature, depending on whether it is related to the body or mind. When related 
to the body, it is characterized by its constancy; when related to the mind, by its eternity. 
“Love toward God” is temporal and temporary. It dies with the body. “Intellectual love” is 
atemporal and eternal; it remains with the mind. The discourse on the love of God therefore 
accepts variation, according to whether it is related to the mind or body. 

The union of mind and body and the equality between the power of thinking and the 
power of acting include both unity and diversity. Their synchrony has nothing to do with an 
identical replication and cannot be assimilated to a system of parallels. It expresses the rich- 
ness and the variety of their powers within each attribute. The more the body is capable of 
acting, the more the mind is capable of thinking. The psychophysical union in Spinoza 
sounds like a duet that puts an end to duality without reducing it to a mechanical identity. 


302 


THE MIND-BODY UNION 


References 


Descartes, R. (1996).Oeuvres de Descartes, III, (1996) Correspondance janvier 1640-juin 1643 
(ed. C. Adam and P. Tannery). Paris: Vrin. 

Jaquet, C. (2018).Affects, Actions and Passions in Spinoza, The Unity of Body and Mind (trans T. 
Reznichenko). Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press. 

Leibniz, G.W. [1702] (1989). Reflections on the doctrine of a single universal spirit.In: Philosophical 
Papers and Letters(ed. and trans L.E. Loemker), 2nd edn. Dordrecht: Kluwer. 

Shapiro, L. (ed. and trans.). (2007). The Correspondence Between Princess Elizabeth of Bohemia and 
René Descartes. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 

Spinoza, B.[1925] (1972). Spinoza Opera (ed. C. Gebhardt), 4 vols, Heidelberg: Carl Winter Verlag. 

Spinoza, B. (1985). Treatise on the Emendation of the Intellect, Collected Works of Spinoza, vol.I (ed. and 
trans. E.M. Curley). Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 

Spinoza, B. (1985). Ethics, Collected Works of Spinoza, vol.I (ed and trans. E.M. Curley). Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press. 


303 


Bi, 


Spinoza’s Non-Theory of Non-Consciousness 


DANIEL GARBER 


For Descartes, philosophy begins with the self. The Discours de la méthode begins with the 
young Descartes, reflecting on his youth, his education, and the decision that he took to 
reject his teachers and begin philosophy anew. This is echoed in the Meditations, where, 
after rejecting everything he formerly believed through the skeptical arguments of 
Meditation I, the meditator discovers not mind in general, but himself in the cogito of 
Meditation II, and begins the construction of a new world and a new philosophy. In this 
context, the conscious subject seems primary. But the project of Spinoza’s Ethics is very 
different. The Ethics begins in Part 1 not with the self, but with substance/God, infinite and 
eternal, and the world of modes, both infinite and finite, eternal and temporal that follows 
with necessity from the divine nature.(E1 p16). The mind-— not my mind, or the mind of the 
author of the Ethics, but the human mind in full generality — only appears in Part II, as the 
idea of the body (E2p13). As such, it is a mode of thought, but it is complex, “composed of 
a great many ideas” (E2p15), and it is not obvious how it can function as a subject of expe- 
rience in the way in which the Cartesian “I” does. 

Because of this, it was not altogether surprising when Steven Nadler wrote the follow- 
ing in the opening to his now classic article, “Spinoza and Consciousness:” 


Most discussions of Spinoza and consciousness — and there are not many — conclude either 
that he does not have an account of consciousness, or that he does have one but that it is at 
best confused, at worst hopeless.? 


The situation has changed greatly since Nadler wrote those words. There is now an exten- 
sive literature about consciousness in Spinoza, in good part stimulated by Nadler’s article 
and a discussion of consciousness in an article by Don Garrett that came out at almost the 


' Nadler (2008, pp. 575-601, p. 575). 


A Companion to Spinoza, First Edition. Edited by Yitzhak Y. Melamed. 
© 2021 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2021 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd. 


304 


SPINOZA'S NON-THEORY OF NON-CONSCIOUSNESS 


same time as Nadler’s.” Furthermore, there is a growing consensus that the notion of con- 
sciousness is, indeed, important to Spinoza and that he had a coherent and interesting 
conception of the notion. 

In this chapter I would like to reexamine the question of consciousness in Spinoza. I 
shall begin by surveying the relatively few places in the Ethics where Spinoza explicitly uses 
the language of consciousness. After examining some of the principal accounts of 
Spinoza’s conception of consciousness that these passages have given rise to among recent 
commentators, I will return to those texts and examine the extent to which they support 
the accounts proposed and, indeed, the extent to which they support the idea that Spinoza 
had a serious account of the notion of conscious. I shall argue, counter to what now seems 
to be the prevailing view, that Spinoza didn’t have a well worked out notion of conscious- 
ness, nor did he need one. 


1. “Conscious” and “Consciousness” in the Ethics 


Let us begin with an account of the uses of the term “conscious (conscius)” and “con- 
sciousness (conscientia)” in the Ethics.’ I shall argue that there are three distinctly different 
uses of these terms in the text. 


1.1. Sensory Consciousness 


To begin, let us consider two propositions from part 3, E3p9, along with its demonstration, 
and E3p30 and its demonstration: 


E3p9: Both insofar as the Mind has clear and distinct ideas, and insofar as it has confused ideas, it 
strives, for an indefinite duration, to persevere in its being and it is conscious of this striving it has. 
Dem.: The essence of the Mind is constituted by adequate and by inadequate ideas (as we have 
shown in p3). So (by p7) it strives to persevere in its being both insofar as it has inadequate 
ideas and insofar as it has adequate ideas; and it does this (by p8) for an indefinite duration. 
But since the Mind (by E2p23) is necessarily conscious of itself through ideas of the Body’s 
affections, the Mind (by p7) is conscious of its striving, q.e.d. 


E3p30: If someone has done something which he imagines affects others with Joy, he will be affected 
with Joy accompanied by the idea of himself as cause, or he will regard himself with Joy. If, on the 
other hand, he has done something which he imagines affects others with Sadness, he will regard him- 
self with Sadness. 

Dem.: He who imagines that he affects others with Joy or Sadness will thereby (by p27) be 
affected with Joy or Sadness. But since man (by E2p19 and E2p23) is conscious of himself 
through the affections by which he is determined to act, then he who has done something 
which he imagines affects others with Joy will be affected with Joy, together with a conscious- 
ness of himself as the cause, or, he will regard himself with Joy, and the converse, q.e.d. 


? Garrett (2008, pp. 4-25), reprinted with a new postscript in Garrett (2018, pp. 393-423). I cite the article 
below in the later edition. I don’t want to deny that there were discussions that precede these important essays, 
nor that there are important discussions that follow. We shall discuss some of them later in this chapter. 


>A very useful list of all of the occurrences of “conscius” and “conscientia” in the Ethics can be found in Levy 
(2000, pp. 322-324). 


305 


DANIEL GARBER 


We will come back to the propositions themselves below, but for the moment I want to 
call attention to a feature of the demonstrations that Spinoza offers. In E3p9d, Spinoza 
writes that “... the Mind (by E2p23) is necessarily conscious of itself through ideas of the 
Body’s affections.” Similarly, in E3p30d he writes that “man (by E2p19 and E2p23) is con- 
scious of himself through the affections by which he is determined to act.” When we go 
back to the propositions from E2 which Spinoza cites here, it is interesting that the word 
“conscious” appears in neither: 


E2p19: The human Mind does not know [cognoscit] the human Body itself, nor does it know [scit] 
that it exists, except through ideas of affections by which the Body is affected. 


E2p23: The Mind does not know [cognoscit] itself, except insofar as it perceives the ideas of the affec- 
tions of the Body.* 


However, the later references back to these two propositions in E3 suggest that Spinoza 
thought of them as telling us something about conscious knowledge of the body and of 
the mind. 

Let me summarize how I read E2p19 and E2p23.° These propositions are both grounded 
in E2p16: 


E2p16: The idea of any modes [modi] in which the human Body is affected by external bodies must 
involve the nature of the human Body and at the same time the nature of the external body...° 


The human body is affected by external bodies when, for example, light rays impinge on 
the sense organs, producing motions in the eye and the brain. These are the “affections” at 
issue here. When this happens, the state of the human body so affected is a joint result of 
the nature of the external body that is causing the affection, and the nature of the human 
body being affected. This is clarified by two corollaries: 


E2p16c1: From this it follows, first, that the human Mind perceives the nature of a great many 
bodies together with the nature of its own body. 


E2p16c2: It follows, second, that the ideas which we have of external bodies indicate the 
condition of our own body more than the nature of the external bodies. 


+ There is something of an ambiguity in this proposition. When Spinoza says that the mind only knows itself 
“insofar as it perceives the ideas of the affections of the Body,” Curley reads this as saying that the mind only 
knows itself insofar as it has an idea of the idea of the affections of the body. See Curley (1969, p. 128). Margaret 
Wilson and Andrea Sangiacomo follow him in this reading. See Wilson (1999, pp. 126-140, p. 135); Sangiacomo 
(2011, pp. 77-104, p. 81). But when Spinoza paraphrases the proposition later, in E3p9d, he writes: “...since the 
Mind (by E2p23) is necessarily conscious of itself through ideas of the Body’s affections...” This suggests that 
when in E2p23 Spinoza talks of the mind perceiving the ideas of the affections of the Body, he means not that the 
mind has an idea of an idea of the affections of the Body, but simply that the Mind has an idea of the affections of 
the body. 

> For amore detailed account of this reading, see Garber (2020, pp. 194-211). 

© Ttisn’t clear here whether “modes” here refers to modes as defined in E1d5, or whether it is being used in a non- 
technical sense to designate the ways in which bodies are affected, etc. Curley seems to choose the more technical 
meaning, but in Spinoza (2020), Moreau chooses the latter (facon). 


306 


SPINOZA'S NON-THEORY OF NON-CONSCIOUSNESS 


Spinoza further claims is that we can only know our own bodies insofar as they are affected 
by an external impingement — a sensory stimulation (E2p19). That is, we only know the 
nature of our own bodies by way of the state we are in when affected by an external body, 
a state jointly determined by our own nature and the nature of an external impinging 
body. That is to say, we only know our body insofar as its nature comes to our knowledge 
intermixed with the nature of the external body causing the impingement. And this is also 
true for our knowledge of our minds, the ideas of our bodies, since we only know the nature 
of our minds through the ideas we have of the human body in a state of being impinged on 
by an external body (E2p23). When Spinoza refers back to these propositions in E3, he 
characterizes the knowledge in question, both of the nature of our own bodies and the 
nature of our own minds as conscious. 

So, it appears, Spinoza asserts that we only have conscious awareness of (the nature of) 
our bodies when they are being impinged upon by external things, that is, when the body 
is having a sense perception. And we only have conscious awareness of (the nature of) our 
minds under the same circumstances, that is, when the body is being impinged upon by 
external things. This is what we might call sensory consciousness. It is interesting to note 
that even though Spinoza asserts that we have such conscious awareness, he doesn’t 
explain how this happens: only that it happens. The “how” remains a mystery. Furthermore, 
this seems to entail that there are other things going on in the mind, other ideas we have 
there, of which we are not conscious. We will come back to these points later. 

Sensory consciousness is what is at issue in these propositions from E2 where Spinoza 
talks about knowledge of external things and the mind. But it is also what is at issue in 
propositions E3p9 and E3p30. 

Consider first E3p9. The proposition asserts that both insofar as the Mind has clear and 
distinct and insofar as it has confused ideas, it strives to persist in its being, and it is con- 
scious of doing so. In the demonstration, the consciousness of the striving is established as 
follows: “But since the Mind (by E2p23) is necessarily conscious of itself through ideas of 
the Body’s affections, the Mind (by p7) is conscious of its striving...” As I noted earlier, in 
the demonstration, Spinoza interprets the knowledge of the Mind one has by virtue of the 
ideas of the affects of the body in E2p23 as conscious. The relevant part of the demonstra- 
tion of E2p23 is as follows: 


..the ideas of the affections by which the Body is affected involve the nature of the human 
Body itself (by P16), i.e. (by P13), agree with the nature of the Mind. So knowledge of these 
ideas will necessarily involve knowledge of the Mind. But (by P22) knowledge of these ideas is 
in the human Mind itself. Therefore, the human Mind, to that extent only, knows itself... 
(E2p23d) 


This seems to be Spinoza’s reasoning. Suppose that a human body B is impinged on by an 
external object O. By E2p16, the state that B so affected is in involves both the nature of B 
and the nature of O. Since by E2p13, the human mind is the idea of the body, the idea of 
this state in B involves the idea of the nature of the human body and the idea of the 
nature of the impinging body. Furthermore, by E2p22, that idea will be in the mind. If we 
can assume here that that the nature of the human mind is the idea of the nature of the 
human body, then it will follow that insofar as the mind has ideas of the affections by 
which the Body is affected, it will have an idea of (it will know) the nature of the mind. 
Since the knowledge in question is assumed to be conscious knowledge (in E3p9d), it 
follows that the mind will be conscious of the nature of the mind. Furthermore, the 


307 


DANIEL GARBER 


consciousness in question will be what we called sensory consciousness, the kind of 
consciousness that we have from sense experience as Spinoza understands it.” But one 
more step is needed to establish Spinoza’s claim that we are conscious of the conatus for 
self-preservation. In this last step of the demonstration, Spinoza appeals to the following 
proposition: 


E3p7: The striving by which each thing strives to persevere in its being is nothing but the actual 
essence of the thing. 


So far in E3p9d we have established that we are conscious of the nature of the mind. But 
if we assume that by “actual essence” Spinoza means “nature,” then we can infer that 
we are conscious of the striving or conatus by which things strive to persevere in their 
being. 

Spinoza continues in the scholium: 


E3p9s: When this striving is related only to the Mind, it is called Will; but when it is related to 
the Mind and Body together, it is called Appetite. This Appetite, therefore, is nothing but the 
very essence of man, from whose nature there necessarily follow those things that promote his 
preservation. And so man is determined to do those things. 

Between appetite and desire there is no difference, except that desire is generally related to 
men insofar as they are conscious of their appetite. So desire can be defined as appetite together 
with consciousness of the appetite. 


Consciousness comes up again here, as what differentiates mere appetite and desire: desire 
is appetite, considered together with the consciousness of the appetite. But the conscious- 
ness in question is just the same consciousness at issue in the E3p9, that is, sensory 
consciousness. 

In the appendix to E3, the “Definitions of the Affects,” the first affect Spinoza discusses 
is desire. There Spinoza returns to the account of desire and its relation to appetite that he 
gave in E3p9s, and reflects further on its consciousness, referring again to E2p23. It is clear 
that the notion of consciousness at issue here is the same one that was at issue in E3p9s, 
that is the sensory conception of consciousness. In this connection, Spinoza writes simi- 
larly in El app, though without argument, that “all [men] want to seek their own advantage, 
and are conscious of this appetite” (Elapp, G II 78/C 1 440). 

One can make similar claims about the appeal to consciousness in E3p30d. Spinoza 
writes: “... man (by E2p19 and E2p23) is conscious of himself through the affections by 
which he is determined to act ...” The appeal here to E2p23, as well as E2p19, with which 
it is closely related, shows that the kind of consciousness at issue here is what I have called 
sensory consciousness. The only difference between this passage and the earlier ones is the 
way Spinoza talks about affections: “... man ... is conscious of himself through the affections 
by which he is determined to act.” Here Spinoza is emphasizing that the external impinge- 
ments on a body can determine it to act in one way or another. The light rays that impinge 


’ This has a very interesting consequence for Spinoza’s account of the knowledge of mind. In E2p23, Spinoza is 
rejecting the Cartesian cogito: the claim is that we are aware of ourselves not by direct intuition, but only through 
sense experience. For a fuller development of the details of this view and the implications for understanding 
Spinoza’s position and his relation to Descartes, see Garber (2020). 


308 


SPINOZA'S NON-THEORY OF NON-CONSCIOUSNESS 


on my retina, for example, can determine me to act in such a way as to reach out and grasp 
the ice-cream cone.® 

The same notion of consciousness is at issue in another group of texts, perhaps the 
most visible mentions of consciousness in the Ethics. In Elapp. Spinoza writes: 


... men think themselves free, because they are conscious of their volitions and their appetite, 
and do not think, even in their dreams, of the causes by which they are disposed to wanting 
and willing, because they are ignorant of them. (Elapp, G II 78/C 1 440) 


This account of the illusion of free will is repeated often: a total of four times in the Ethics, 
and once in a letter.’ Here it is quite clear that Spinoza is appealing to the consciousness of 
the will/desire that we have been discussing in connection with E3p9s, again, what I have 
called sensory consciousness. 


1.2. Reflexive Consciousness 


A different kind of consciousness is suggested in the following proposition. Since the 
details of the proof are important to understanding what Spinoza has in mind here, I will 
quote it in full: 


E4p8: The knowledge [cognitio] of good and evil is nothing but an affect of Joy or Sadness, insofar as 
we are conscious of it. 
Dem.: We call good, or evil, what is useful to, or harmful to, preserving our being (by D1 and 
D2), ie. (by E3p7), what increases or diminishes, aids or restrains, our power of acting. 
Therefore (by the Definitions of Joy and Sadness in E3p1 1s), insofar as we perceive that a thing 
affects us with Joy or Sadness, we call it good or evil. And so knowledge [cognitio] of good and 
evil is nothing but an idea of Joy or Sadness which follows necessarily from the affect of Joy or 
Sadness itself (by E2p22). 

But this idea is united to the affect in the same way as the Mind is united to the Body (by 
E2p21), ie. (as I have shown in E2p21s), this idea is not really distinguished from the affect 
itself, or (by the general Definition of the Affects) from the idea of the Body’s affection; it is only 


8 T would argue that Spinoza has in mind here a Hobbesian conception of will and voluntary motion. Hobbes 
holds that “the Imagination is the first internall beginning of all Voluntary motion.” (Leviathan I.6, Malcolm 
2012, p. 78.) (Imagination here includes sense perception.) On Hobbes’s view, all cognition begins with the 
external stimulation of the sense organs, causing motions in the brain. This is imagination. Imagination then 
transmits the motions eventually to the heart, where they meet resistance and cause a “phantasme,” of which 
we are aware. Now, the motion in question either helps or hinders the vital motions of the body (circulation of 
the blood, breathing, digestion, etc.). Motions in the heart that aid the vital motions lead (perhaps after a series 
of alternating appetites or aversions, what Hobbes calls “deliberation”) to a motion of the body, either seeking 
that which was the first cause of the series of motions, it promotes the vital motions (e.g. reaching for an ice 
cream cone) or avoiding it, if it hinders the vital motions (e.g. fleeing an attacking lion). The final appetite or 
aversion which results in the motion of the body is volition: “In Deliberation, the last Appetite, or Aversion, 
immediately adhaering to the action, or to the omission thereof, is that wee call the wit; the Act, (not the fac- 
ulty,) of Willing” (Leviathan 1.6, Malcolm 2012, p. 92; see also De corpore IV.25). For more on the connection 
between what I have called sensory consciousness in Spinoza and Hobbes’s account of sensory cognition, see 
Garber (2020). 

° In addition to the passage just quoted, see E2p35s, E3p2s (G II 143/C 1 496), and E4pref (G Il 207/C I 545). 
See also Spinoza Ep. 58 to Schuller, Oct. 1674, GIV 266—-267/C II 428-429. 


309 


DANIEL GARBER 


conceptually distinguished from it. Therefore, this knowledge of good and evil is nothing but 
the affect itself, insofar as we are conscious of it, q.e.d.1° 


Let us look at Spinoza’s reasoning here. In the demonstration, Spinoza begins by charac- 
terizing good and evil. Appealing to E4d1 and E4d2, what we call good and evil, that is, 
what is good and evil to us are that which is useful or harmful to us. (Behind here is 
Spinoza’s view that “good and evil ... indicate nothing positive in things,” but are relative 
to persons.)'! Appealing (somewhat mysteriously) to E3p7, Spinoza interprets good and 
evil as that which “increases or diminishes, aids or restrains, our power of acting.” Now, in 
E3p1 1s, Spinoza defined joy as “that passion by which the Mind passes to a greater perfec- 
tion” and sadness as “that passion by which it passes to a lesser perfection.” !? If we assume 
that passing to a greater perfection means becoming more active, and passing to a lesser 
perfection means becoming more passive, we call good that which brings about joy and 
bad that which brings about sadness.!? And so Spinoza concludes, the knowledge [cognitio] 
of good and bad “... is nothing but an idea of Joy or Sadness...” That is to say, when we have 
an idea of something good, it is nothing but the idea of the joy it brings about in the mind, 
and when we have an idea of something evil, it is nothing but the idea of the sadness it 
brings about in the mind. (In this way, it seems, to have knowledge [cognitio] of something 
is to have an idea of it in the mind.) But insofar as joy and sadness are in the mind, they are 
ideas. So by E2p22, the knowledge [cognitio] of those affects are ideas of ideas, which follow 
directly from the ideas themselves. Furthermore, by E2p21, these ideas of joy and sadness 
are related to the joy and sadness themselves in the same way that the mind is related to the 
body. From this Spinoza infers directly that “... this knowledge of good and evil is nothing 
but the affect itself, insofar as we are conscious of it...” That is, knowledge [cognitio] of good 
and evil are just ideas of joy and sadness themselves, insofar as we are conscious of them. 

What does Spinoza mean here when he says that we are conscious of an affect of joy or 
sadness? It seems that this could only mean that we have ideas of the ideas of joy and sad- 
ness. This suggests that in this particular case, at least, for an idea to be conscious for a 
mind is for that mind to contain, in addition to the idea itself, an idea of that idea. This is 
what we might call reflexive consciousness. 


1.3. Intuitive Consciousness 
Finally, we come to a third conception of consciousness. Here are some striking uses of the 


term “conscius” in E5: 


E5p31: The third kind of knowledge depends on the Mind, as on a formal cause, insofar as the Mind 
itself is eternal. 


10 There are two later references to this proposition which mention the consciousness of the knowledge of good 
and evil, E4p19d and E4p64d. But since these references don’t add anything substantial to the conception of 
consciousness in E4p8, I won't discuss them independently. 

M E4pref, G Il 208/C1 545. 

12 See also Chapters II and III of the “Definitions of the Affects,” the appendix to E3. 

13 Spinoza’s inference here from perfection in the definitions of joy and sadness to becoming more or less active 
is somewhat abbreviated. Strictly speaking, it should go by the “model [exemplar] of human nature” that Spinoza 
appeals to in E4pref., G Il 208/C I 545. If perfection and imperfection are determined by what approaches or 
departs from the “model of human nature,” and if this model is the perfectly rational free man introduced later in 
E4p67, then the argument works. 


310 


SPINOZA'S NON-THEORY OF NON-CONSCIOUSNESS 


Scholium: Therefore, the more each of us is able to achieve in this kind of knowledge, the more 
he is conscious |conscius| of himself and of God, i.e. the more perfect and blessed he is. 


E5p39: He who has a Body capable of a great many things has a Mind whose greatest part is eternal. 
Scholium: Because human Bodies are capable of a great many things, there is no doubt but 
what they can be of such a nature that they are related to Minds which have a great knowledge 
[cognitio| of themselves and of God, and of which the greatest, or chief, part is eternal. So they 
hardly fear death. 

But for a clearer understanding of these things, we must note here that we live in contin- 
uous change, and that as we change for the better or worse, we are called happy or unhappy. 
For he who has passed from being an infant or child to being a corpse is called unhappy. On the 
other hand, if we pass the whole length of our life with a sound Mind in a sound Body, that is 
considered happiness. And really, he who, like an infant or child, has a Body capable of very 
few things, and very heavily dependent on external causes, has a Mind which considered 
solely in itself is conscious [conscia] of almost nothing of itself, or of God, or of things. On the 
other hand, he who has a Body capable of a great many things, has a Mind which considered 
only in itself is very much conscious [conscia] of itself, and of God, and of things. 

In this life, then, we strive especially that the infant’s Body may change (as much as its 
nature allows and assists) into another, capable of a great many things and related to a 
Mind very much conscious [conscia] of itself, of God, and of things. We strive, that is, that 
whatever is related to its memory or imagination is of hardly any moment in relation to the 
intellect... 


E5p42s: From what has been shown, it is clear how much the Wise man is capable of, and how 
much more powerful he is than one who is ignorant and is driven only by lust. For not only is 
the ignorant man troubled in many ways by external causes, and unable ever to possess true 
peace of mind, but he also lives as if he knew neither himself, nor God, nor things [sui et Dei et 
rerum quasi inscius]; and as soon as he ceases to be acted on, he ceases to be. On the other hand, 
the wise man, insofar as he is considered as such, is hardly troubled in spirit, but being, by a 
certain eternal necessity, conscious of himself, and of God, and of things [sui et Dei et rerum... 
conscius|, he never ceases to be, but always possesses true peace of mind. 


These three passages are all from E5, the final part of the Ethics, the culmination of the 
argument. In this part of the text, Spinoza is attempting to show the consequences of 
attaining the highest kind of knowledge that he recognizes, knowledge of the third kind. 
The doctrine of the three kinds of knowledge is set out in E2p40s2. The first kind of 
knowledge (cognitio primi generis), what he calls opinion or imagination, includes all 
knowledge that we acquire through sense experience and through “signs,” that is, 
knowledge by testimony, including scripture and prophesy. Knowledge of the second kind 
(secondi generis cognitio) comes “from the fact that we have common notions and adequate 
ideas of the properties of things.” This is what he calls reason. Finally: 


In addition to these two kinds of knowledge, there is (as I shall show in what follows) another, 
third kind, which we shall call intuitive knowledge. And this kind of knowing proceeds from 
an adequate idea of the formal essence of certain attributes of God to the adequate knowledge 
of the essence of things. 


Later, in E5p36s, Spinoza contrasts knowledge of the second kind as “universal” with 
knowledge of the third kind, “the knowledge of singular things.” Knowledge of the second 
kind, or reason seems to deal with general truths, such as one acquires by learning the the- 
orems of Euclidean geometry, the example of this knowledge that Spinoza uses in E2p40s2. 


311 


DANIEL GARBER 


But knowledge of the third kind is supposed to give us knowledge of particulars, as they 
follow from God. 

Beginning after the introduction of mind in the beginning of E2, one can read much of 
the Ethics as a kind of intellectual and spiritual journey, not unlike Descartes’ Meditations, 
taking the reader from knowledge of the first kind, the discussion of the imagination and 
its inadequacies in E2, through knowledge of the second kind, to an understanding of 
knowledge of the third kind in E5.'4 In E5 Spinoza shows how “the greatest striving of the 
Mind, and its greatest virtue is understanding things by the third kind of knowledge” 
(E5p25), and that “the greatest satisfaction of Mind there can be arises from this third kind 
of knowledge” (E5p27). From this kind of knowledge “there necessarily rises an intellec- 
tual Love of God” (E5p32s), which is eternal (E5p34c). When we attain this state, he 
claims, we will have attained our true salvation and blessedness (E5p36s). We will also 
attain a kind of eternity and overcome the fear of death: “...death is les harmful to us, the 
greater the Mind’s clear and distinct knowledge, and hence, the more the Mind loves God” 
(E5p38s). 

But most interestingly of all, from our perspective, intuitive knowledge, knowledge of 
the third kind is supposed to give us a kind of consciousness that we cannot gain from any 
of the other kinds of knowledge. This is one of the final lessons of the Ethics, put forward 
in the scholium on the final proposition of the work (E5p42s). There Spinoza contrasts the 
wise man (sapiens) and the ignorant (ignarus). The ignorant man “... lives as if he knew 
neither himself, nor God, nor things ... [sui et Dei et rerum quasi inscius].” The wise man, on 
the other hand, is “... by a certain eternal necessity, conscious of himself, and of God, and 
of things ... [sui et Dei et rerum ... conscius].” Given that what seems to define the wise man 
is the fact that he has attained the third kind of knowledge, intuitive knowledge, we can 
call the kind of consciousness that comes with it intuitive consciousness. 

While the discussion of the wise man in E5p42s suggests that this kind of conscious- 
ness is connected with knowledge of the third kind, E5p3 1s makes that connection explicit. 
E5p31 itself is explicitly about knowledge of the third kind. In the scholium that follows, 
Spinoza writes that “... the more each of us is able to achieve in this kind of knowledge, the 
more he is conscious [conscius| of himself and of God ...” But in E5p39s, consciousness is 
also associated with the complexity of the body and its ability to do “a great many things.” 
The significance of the complexity of the human body goes back to the discussion of the 
human body and the human mind immediately after the account of the mind as the idea 
of the body in E2p13 and its scholium. In the scholium, Spinoza notes that the conception 
of the mind as the idea of the body is completely general, and that since there is an idea 
corresponding to every body, every body, is in a sense, animate. But yet, human beings are 
different because their bodies are different from other bodies. In that scholium, Spinoza 
writes: 


[I]n proportion as a Body is more capable than others of doing many things at once, or being 
acted on in many ways at once, so its Mind is more capable than others of perceiving many 
things at once. And in proportion as the actions of a body depend more on itself alone, and as 
other bodies concur with it less in acting, so its mind is more capable of understanding dis- 
tinctly. (E2p13s) 


™ Knowledge of the first kind is also one of the central themes of Spinoza’s Tractatus Theologico-Politicus, where 
the questions of Scripture and Prophesy and what we can learn from them are under discussion. 


312 


SPINOZA'S NON-THEORY OF NON-CONSCIOUSNESS 


After giving a brief exposition of physics in a series of axioms and lemmas, Spinoza puts 
forward a series of postulates about the human body. The last of these postulates states: 
“The human Body can move and dispose external bodies in a great many ways” (G II 103/C 
1 462). This is followed by the first proposition in the series that begins Spinoza’s explora- 
tion of sensation and imagination: 


E2p14: The human Mind is capable of perceiving a great many things, and is the more capable, the 
more its body can be disposed in a great many ways. 


In E5p39, Spinoza seems to relate the complexity of the body to its consciousness of itself, 
of God, and of things. At the beginning of the scholium, Spinoza just says that by virtue of 
the complexity of its body, humans have minds “which have a great knowledge [magnam... 
cognitionem] of themselves and of God.” But later in the scholium, Spinoza introduces the 
term “conscius” to characterize the epistemic state. In this connection, he contrasts the 
state of the infant with that of an adult. The infant (or the person who is like an infant) 
who “has a Body capable of very few things, and very heavily dependent on external 
causes, has a Mind which considered solely in itself is conscious [conscia] of almost nothing 
of itself, or of God, or of things...” This is contrasted with “he who has a Body capable of a 
great many things, [who] has a Mind which considered only in itself is very much con- 
scious [conscia] of itself, and of God, and of things.” What we should hope for is that our 
bodies grow and become “capable of a great many things,” which would enable them to 
attain this level of consciousness. 


1.4. Some Further Passages 


I have just presented what seem to be the three principal uses of the terms conscius and 
conscientia in the Ethics: sensory consciousness, reflexive consciousness, and intuitive con- 
sciousness. There are, in addition, two more passages in the Ethics in which Spinoza uses 
these Latin terms which should be mentioned.'° 

In E4app32, Spinoza talks about our lack of power in an overwhelming world and how 
the necessity of things can be a comfort for us. He writes: 


But human power is very limited and infinitely surpassed by the power of external causes. So 
we do not have an absolute power to adapt things outside us to our use. Nevertheless, we shall 
bear calmly those things which happen to us contrary to what the principle of our advantage 
demands, if we are conscious that we have done our duty, that the power we have could not 
have extended itself to the point where we could have avoided those things, and that we are a 
part of the whole of nature, whose order we follow. (G II 276/C 1 593-594) 


It is not clear that being conscious that we have done our duty fits neatly into the other 
usages that discussed above. Insofar as doing our duty may involve an act of will, it might 


15 Tam setting aside Spinoza’s use of the term “conscientiae morsus,” which is usually translated as “remorse.” See 
E3p18s2, E3def.aff. ch. XVI, E4p47s. The term literally means “pain of conscience,” and in this context, “consci- 
entia” is used not in the sense of consciousness but in the sense of conscience, which was its principal sense before 
the seventeenth century. On the history of the term “conscientia” and its moral meaning significance, as well as 
its transformation in the early modern period, see Davies (1990); and Balibar (1992, pp. 37-53). 


313 


DANIEL GARBER 


be included among the examples of sensory consciousness. Or maybe not. Perhaps Spinoza 
just means to say that we are aware that we have done our duty, and nothing more. 
The second remaining text is concerns eternity: 


E5p34s: If we attend to the common opinion of men, we shall see that they are indeed con- 
scious of the eternity of their Mind [eos suae mentis aeternitatis esse quidem conscios], but that 
they confuse it with duration, and attribute it to the imagination, or memory, which they 
believe remains after death. 


Here, again, we have a use of the term that doesn’t fit neatly into the other uses in the 
Ethics. It isn’t clear at all to me what Spinoza means here by using the term “conscius.” 
Again, it might simply mean “aware of” in this context. 

We have surveyed all of the uses of the relevant terms in the Ethics. There are a very few 
uses outside of the Ethics. Consciousness comes up in Spinoza’s commentary on Descartes, 
his Renati Des Cartes Principiorum Philosophiae Pars I & II, where he gives Descartes’ defini- 
tions of thought: 


D1: Under the word thought I include everything which is in us and of which we are immedi- 
ately conscious. ... 

D2: By the term idea I understand that form of each thought through the immediate percep- 
tion of which I am conscious of the thought itself. [G I 149/C 1238] 


But these, of course, are intended to characterize Descartes’ position, not Spinoza’s. Indeed, 
they are taken almost word for word from the geometrical appendix to Descartes’ Second 
Replies (AT VII 160). As such, they can tell us nothing about what Spinoza himself may 
have thought about consciousness. 

And finally, there is a curious passage in a letter addressed to G.H. Schuller, October 
1674, but intended for Tschirnhaus.'° At issue is human freedom. Spinoza repeats the 
view discussed above, that we have the illusion of free will because “men are conscious of 
their appetite and ignorant of the causes by which they are determined.” He illustrates this 
with the thought experiment of a stone set into motion by the impulse of an external 
cause, and continuing in uniform rectilinear motion. Spinoza writes: 


Next, conceive now, if you will, that while the stone continues to move, it thinks, and knows 
that as far as it can, it strives to continue moving. Of course, since the stone is conscious [con- 
scius| only of its striving, and not at all indifferent, it will believe that it is very free, and that it 
perseveres in motion for no other cause than because it wills to.!” 


This is a lovely conceit, but it is impossible to say how seriously Spinoza took the attribution 


of consciousness to the stone, or what he thought it might have meant. 


2. Consciousness Examined: Theories of Consciousness in Spinoza 


Now it is time to move on to a discussion of some of the main proposals that have been made 
in the literature about how to understand the terms that appear to relate to consciousness, 
and investigate the extent to which Spinoza had a coherent conception of the notion. 


16 See Curley’s note on that, CII 357n. 1. 
1” Ep. 58 to Schuller, Oct. 1674, GIV 266/C II 429. 


314 


SPINOZA’S NON-THEORY OF NON-CONSCIOUSNESS 
2.1. Consciousness as The Idea of an Idea 


Not every commentator has thought that behind Spinoza’s use of the language of con- 
sciousness, there is a coherent conception of that notion. Jonathan Bennett writes that 
Spinoza “...urgently needs a theory of awareness, and unfortunately the Ethics does not 
contain one.”'* Similarly, Margaret Wilson argued that “Spinoza’s system provides no 
plausible, clear or reasoned view” on the “distinctions between conscious and non- 
conscious entities, or between conscious and non-conscious states of a particular 
individual.”!? More recently, Jon Miller argued that “Spinoza did not have well-developed 
views on consciousness and its place in the mind ... even though the coherency or at least 
the plausibility of his system demanded it.””° 

Bennett and Wilson were reacting against the idea that consciousness in Spinoza could 
be accounted for through his conception of the idea of an idea, as developed, for example, 
by E.M. Curley.*! The idea of an idea is introduced first in E2p20: 


E2p20: There is also in God an idea, or knowledge |cognitio], of the human Mind, which follows in 
God in the same way and is related to God in the same way as the idea, or knowledge, of the human 
Body. 


Since the mind is the idea of the body, the idea of the human mind is an idea of an 
idea. Furthermore, by E2p7s, “the idea of the Mind and the Mind itself are one and 
the same thing, which is conceived under one and the same attribute, viz. Thought” 
(E2p21s). Though the argument here only explicitly mentions the human mind, later 
in E2p43d Spinoza notes that the “demonstration is universal,” that is, it applies to 
all ideas. 

It is quite natural to see in Spinoza’s remarks on the idea of an idea a theory of con- 
sciousness: an idea is conscious for a mind insofar as that mind contains the idea of that 
idea. And there is, indeed, textual support that Spinoza himself advanced such a view. As 
I argued earlier, in E4p8, Spinoza suggests that the knowledge of good and evil are 
conscious for a mind insofar as it has ideas of joy and sadness, themselves ideas. This is 
what I called reflexive consciousness. 

But there is an obvious flaw with this conception of conscious, or, at least, a complica- 
tion. Since for every idea, there is an idea of that idea (and an idea of the idea of the idea, 
ad infinitum), this conception of consciousness cannot be used to distinguish conscious 
ideas from ideas of which a mind is not conscious: on this conception of consciousness, all 
ideas are conscious, and, presumably, all minds are conscious.’ Now, one might just bite 


18 Bennett (1984, p. 189). Bennett does not distinguish between awareness and consciousness; see p. 188. 

1) Wilson (1999, p. 133). 

20 Miller (2007, pp. 203-220, p. 203). 

I See Bennett (1984, pp. 188-191); Wilson (1999, pp. 133-138); Curley (1969), pp. 126-128. It should be 
noted that Curley’s case depends, at least in part, on what I take to be an incorrect reading of E2p23. 
See above, note 4. Other defenders of this view include Rice (1990, pp. 201-211); and Martin, (2007, 
pp. 269-287). 

?2 Curley rejected this criticism. He argues that by E2p20, “the existence of ideas of ideas is proven only for 
human minds” and thus he claims that Spinoza “is not prepared to say that anything except a human being is 
conscious.” [p. 128] While it may be true that in that proposition, Spinoza mentions only human minds, he 
recognized that the argument holds more generally, as noted earlier. 


315 


DANIEL GARBER 


the bullet and accept that all ideas and minds are conscious. But it seems quite plausible 
that Spinoza would want to resist that.?? 


2.2. Consciousness as Complexity, Consciousness as Power 


While Steven Nadler agrees that the prospects for a “full-blown account of conscious in 
Spinoza are not very good,” he does think that there is hope. Indeed, he argues, in focusing 
on the idea of an idea as the key to consciousness, commentators have missed “the path 
that Spinoza opens to a true science of conscious.”4 

Nadler begins his account by recalling some important passages from the Ethics, pas- 
sages discussed earlier in this chapter. He reminds us that for Spinoza, the complexity of 
the human body is reflected in the complexity of the human mind: that is what sets us 
apart from other minds connected with other bodies: “[I]n proportion as a Body is more 
capable than others of doing many things at once, or being acted on in many ways at once, 
so its Mind is more capable than others of perceiving many things at once” (E2p13s). 
Furthermore, “the human Mind is capable of perceiving a great many things, and is the 
more capable, the more its body can be disposed in a great many ways” (E2p14). As we 
discussed earlier, this is connected directly with the conception of consciousness in E5: “... 
he who has a Body capable of a great many things, has a Mind which considered only in 
itself is very much conscious [conscia] of itself, and of God, and of things” (E5p39s).*> This 
leads Nadler to the following proposal: 


[H]uman or higher consciousness for Spinoza is nothing but the mental correlate of the super- 
lative complexity of the human body. ... Consciousness, on this view, just is that rich tangle of 
idea-relationships found within the human mind and within any particular idea in the mind, 
a mental reflection of the rich tangle of material relationships found in the human body... Just 
to be clear on what I am claiming: the greater complexity of the human body does not causally 
explain consciousness in the mind ... rather, what I am claiming is that for Spinoza, human 
consciousness just is the greater complexity of the human body as this is manifested under the attri- 
bute of Thought.?° 


This is what we might call consciousness as complexity. This theory of consciousness 
seems motivated by what I called intuitive consciousness above, the kind of conscious- 
ness that is directly connected with the mind having knowledge of the third kind, 
or intuition. 

Nadler’s is not the only theory of consciousness that is based on those texts. Using 
many of the same texts that Nadler uses, particularly E2p13s and related texts about 
the complexity of the human body and mind in E2 and E5p39s, which directly relates 
the complexity of the body with conscious thought, Don Garret suggests that we 
understand consciousness in Spinoza “by identifying degrees of consciousness with 
degrees of power of thinking.”*’ Now, each body strives for self-preservation by E3p6. 


?3 For a thorough discussion of this conception of consciousness in Spinoza, and why it should be rejected, see 
Nadler (2008, pp. 581-585). 

24 Tbid., p. 586. 

25 These are quoted in Ibid., pp. 586-87. 

26 Tbid., pp. 587, 589, 591. 

27 Garrett (2008, p. 408). 


316 


SPINOZA'S NON-THEORY OF NON-CONSCIOUSNESS 


This conatus for self-preservation can be more or less effective to the extent that it is 
more or less successful in actually bringing about self-preservation of a body. This 
power, as understood under the attribute of thought, is what Garrett understands as 
the power of thought: 


The more power an idea has to determine how the singular thing whose idea it is does or does 
not exercise its power or conatus at a given time, the greater will be the power of thinking of 
that idea in that particular mind at that particular time...?* 


Insofar as it is reasonable to suppose that the ability of a thing to preserve itself increases 
with the complexity of its organization, it is reasonable to suppose that increased com- 
plexity leads to the increased power of both the body and the thought, and with it, on 
Garrett’s account of Spinoza on consciousness, increased consciousness. Garrett claims 
that this can explain a variety of things: “why some minds enjoy a higher degree of con- 
sciousness than others, and why a given mind can increase or decrease in consciousness.” 
It can explain “... why some ideas are more conscious than others in a given mind, and why 
the degree of consciousness of an idea in a given mind can increase or decrease ... because 
some ideas can exert more power on the determination of an individual’s self-preservatory 
activity than others...” And finally, “it can explain why higher degrees of consciousness 
are correlated with the development of the intellect.”?° 

These two accounts are closely connected: insofar as the complexity of body/idea is an 
important factor in determining the effectiveness a body/idea has in its self-preservation, 
one can say that the difference between Nadler’s view and Garrett’s is whether one focuses 
on the cause of increased efficacy of self-preservation (what Garrett interprets as the power 
of a body/idea) or the increased efficacy itself. Nadler complains that while there is a cor- 
relation between the power of an idea as Garrett understands and its consciousness, 
Garrett makes a logical leap in identifying the two.*° Garrett returns the favor by claiming 
that “Nadler is equally making a ‘leap’ in inferring an identity between complexity and 
consciousness from their supposed correlation.”*! From my perspective, it isn’t obvious 
how either complexity or power explain consciousness. Furthermore, even if one or the 
other accounts was a satisfactory account of consciousness in E5, that is, the kind of con- 
sciousness that is associated with knowledge of the third kind, it isn’t at all obvious how to 
extend that notion of conscious to the many other places where Spinoza uses the vocabu- 
lary of consciousness. 


3. Returning to The Texts 


There is a great deal more to be said about the proposals that have just been put on the 
table. In particular, both Nadler’s and Garrett’s proposals have generated a considerable 


28 Thid., p. 402. 

2° Tbid.,p. 409. 

30 Nadler (2008, p. 594). For Nadler’s critique of Garrett, see Ibid., pp. 591-95. 

3! Garrett (2008 p. 420). This passage is from “Consciousness Revisited,” a postscript to the original essay that 
Garrett added when he republished the original article. 


317 


DANIEL GARBER 


response, with a number of detailed examinations and elaborations.*? But rather than 
going more deeply into the details of the discussion in the literature, I would like to return 
to the texts on which the whole discussion is based, the texts in the Ethics discussed above 
in Section 1 where Spinoza uses the terms “conscius” and “conscientia.” I will begin by 
turning to the texts connected with what I called the reflexive and the intuitive conceptions 
of consciousness. When we look more closely at those texts, we will discover, I think, that 
even though they appear to use the philosophical vocabulary of consciousness, conscious- 
ness as we understand it is not really what is at issue. That is to say, I claim, the central texts 
recent commentators have used to illuminate Spinoza’s supposed account of conscious- 
ness are largely irrelevant to the question. Then IJ shall turn to the texts relating to what I 
called the sensory conception of consciousness. I will argue that while these texts do 
involve a relatively weak notion of consciousness, there is little there from which a theory 
of consciousness can be built. 


3.1. Reflexive Consciousness Revisited 


In the discussion of what I called reflective consciousness above in Section 1.2 above, the 
central passage was E4p8: “The knowledge [cognitio] of good and evil is nothing but an affect 
of Joy or Sadness, insofar as we are conscious of it.” Here the proposition is established by 
showing basically that knowledge of good is the idea of the affect of Joy, itself an idea, and 
the knowledge of evil is the idea of the affect of Sadness. That is, the knowledge of good 
and evil are the ideas of ideas. This leads Spinoza to the conclusion that good is only con- 
ceptually distinct from joy [non distinguitur nisi solo conceptu| and evil only conceptually 
distinct from sadness. Thus the knowledge of good and evil are just the affects of joy and 
sadness insofar as we are conscious of them. The consciousness of joy and sadness seems 
to be nothing different from the mind’s knowledge [cognitio] of the two affects: both seem 
simply to consist in the fact that the mind has ideas of the affects. And since joy and sad- 
ness are themselves ideas, being conscious of an idea seems to mean having an idea of 
that idea. 

This naturally appears to lead to the reflexive conception of consciousness, that to be 
conscious of an idea is to have an idea of that idea. While that is a natural generalization 
of Spinoza’s argument here, it isn’t obvious to me that in E4p8, Spinoza meant to convey 
anything at all about consciousness, or that he thought that the use of the term “conscius” 
was of any particular philosophical significance here. 

To see this, let us look at the way E4p8 is used in later propositions. Consider, for 
example E4p19: 


E4p19: From the laws of his own nature, everyone necessarily wants, or is repelled by, what he 
judges to be good or evil. 


2 Most notable here is LeBuffe (2010, pp. 531-563). LeBuffe presents his view as a revision of Garrett’s view 
(Ibid., pp. 556-561). See also Marshall (2013, pp. 11 7-129), who also presents his view as a version of Garrett’s 
view, though he also discusses the views of Nadler and LeBuffe. Though her work precedes that of Garrett and 
Nadler, Malinowski-Charles suggests a link between consciousness and power of an idea. See Malinowski-Charles 
(2004, ch. 5). However, as I will note below, her main interest is in subjectivity rather than consciousness as such. 
Sangiacomo follows Nadler on complexity as the mark of consciousness, but thinks that we need to add 
considerations relating to adequate ideas; see (2011, pp. 79, 87-94). 


318 


SPINOZA'S NON-THEORY OF NON-CONSCIOUSNESS 


Dem.: Knowledge of good and evil (by E4p8) is itself an affect of Joy or Sadness, insofar as we 
are conscious of it. And therefore (by E3p28), everyone necessarily wants what he judges to be 
good, and conversely, is repelled by what he judges to be evil. But this appetite is nothing but the 
very essence, or nature, of man (by the Definition of Appetite; see E3p9s and E3app 1). Therefore, 
everyone, from the laws of his own nature, necessarily, wants or is repelled by, etc., q.e.d. 


I would like to concentrate on how Spinoza establishes that everyone wants or is repelled 
by good and evil, and set aside the last part of the demonstration (“But this appetite ...”) 
where Spinoza establishes that it is from “the laws of his own nature” that this is true of 
everyone. The demonstration of this part of the proposition begins by repeating E4p8. 
Spinoza then introduces E3p28, a crucial premise: 


E3p28: We strive to further the occurrence of whatever we imagine will lead to Joy, and to avert or 
destroy what we imagine is contrary to it, or will lead to Sadness. 


With this the relevance of E4p8 to the argument is clear. In E4p8d, Spinoza argues that the 
idea of the good is the same as the idea which is the affect of joy, and that the idea of evil is 
the same as the idea which is the affect of sadness. This allows him to move from a propo- 
sition about seeking joy and avoiding sadness (E3p28) to a proposition about seeing the 
good and avoiding evil (E4p19). 

This, I claim, is the way Spinoza uses E4p8 in all of its later uses in other propositions, to 
provide a way of passing back and forth between joy and sadness on the one hand, and good 
and evil on the other.*? This strategy is captured in the paraphrase Spinoza offers of E4p8 in 
the demonstration of a later proposition, “we call good or evil what is the cause of Joy or 
Sadness ...” (E4p29d). In all of these the propositions where E4p8 is actually used, the notion 
of consciousness plays no real substantive role; indeed, when referring to E4p8 in the later 
propositions, consciousness is only mentioned in two out of a total of seven occurrences.** 
That is to say, what is important about E4p8 for Spinoza is not the consciousness, but the fact 
that there is only a conceptual distinction between joy and sadness, and good and evil. 

Here I think we are misled by our own philosophical preoccupations: the word “con- 
scious” is a philosophically important word in our philosophical vocabulary, one that we 
don’t use lightly. I think that we assume that Spinoza’s position is like ours. And so when 
we see it in Spinoza’s text, we assume that it has a certain weight and significance. In this 
case, I think we are misled. E4p8 is a very important proposition in the Ethics, and the 
identification of good and evil with joy and sadness very significant. But the use of the 
term “conscius” in this connection is not. 


3.2. Intuitive Consciousness Revisited 


I think that a similar case can be made for the use of terminology suggesting consciousness 
in the case of what I called intuitive consciousness. In a number of passages from E5, 
Spinoza links intuition or knowledge of the third kind, the complexity of the mind/body, 
and, it appears, consciousness: 


E5p31s: Therefore, the more each of us is able to achieve in this [third] kind of knowledge, the 
more he is conscious [conscius| of himself and of God, i.e. the more perfect and blessed he is. 


3 Jn addition to E4p19d, see E4p14d, E4p1 5d, E4p29d, E4p30d, E4p43c, and E4p64d. 
#4 See E4p19d and E4p64d. 


319 


DANIEL GARBER 


E5p39s: [H]e who has a Body capable of a great many things, has a Mind which considered 
only in itself is very much conscious [conscia] of itself, and of God, and of things. 


E5p42s: [T]he wise man, insofar as he is considered as such, is hardly troubled in spirit, but 
being, by a certain eternal necessity, conscious of himself, and of God, and of things [sui et Dei 
et rerum ... conscius], he never ceases to be, but always possesses true peace of mind. 


Now, it is pretty clear why a body of greater complexity might allow a person to be 
capable of more and more knowledge. To the extent to which the complexity of the mind 
mirrors the complexity of the body, the greater complexity would allow for richer relations 
among the ideas that make up the mind.* But it isn’t at all clear why this should lead to 
greater consciousness in any significant sense of the word. This suggests to me that we may 
be overreading the Latin here and giving the term “conscius” a more significance than it 
has for Spinoza in this context. 

The use of the term in E5p42s is particularly illuminating, I think. There the term “con- 
scius” is applied to the wise man, who is said to be conscius of himself, God and “things” 
[rerum]. The context here is a comparison between the wise man, the sapiens, and the igno- 
rant man, ignarus, who is said to be “inscius.” Now, earlier in the Ethics, when Spinoza used 
the term “inscius,” it simply meant to indicate something that was not known: 


... itis clear that we are driven about in many ways by external causes, and that, like waves on 
the sea, driven by contrary winds, we toss about, not knowing our outcome and fate [nostri 
eventus atque fati inscios]. (E3p59s, G II 189/C I 530) 


This seems to be the way to understand the term “inscius” when Spinoza uses it in connec- 
tion with the infant earlier in E5: 


... n0 one pities infants because of their inability to speak, to walk, or to reason, or because 
they live so many years, as it were, ignorant of themselves [quasi sui inscius vivat]... (E5p6s)°*° 


It seems to me that in the passages where Spinoza writes that the wise man is “conscius” of 
himself, of God and of things, he means simply to contrast the fact that the wise man, the 
person who has knowledge of the third kind, has real knowledge of these things that the 
infant or the ignorant person lack.?” 


35 Cf. here Spinoza’s reflections in E3p2s. 

6 Reading the passage from E5p42s back into this passage, I suspect, Curley translates this passage as “as it were, 
unconscious of themselves” (CI 600). In his recent translation of the Ethics in Spinoza (2020), Moreau translates 
it similarly, “inconscient de Iui-méme” (p. 461). 

37 LeBuffe a very different and extremely interesting reading of comparison between the “infant” and the wise 
man in E5. LeBuffe recognizes two different kinds of consciousness in Spinoza. The first corresponds roughly to 
what I called sensory consciousness (2010, pp. 536-538), though he includes E4p8 in this category, incorrectly 
in my view. The second corresponds to what I called intuitive conscious in E5 (Ibid., pp. 538-539). As I under- 
stand him, he thinks that infants and others who have what he calls “weak minds” are in principle capable of 
having the kind of conscious knowledge of God, themselves and things that Spinoza attributes to the wise man in 
E5p42s. However, their weak minds are overwhelmed by their sensory experience and imagination (sensory con- 
sciousness) which interferes with their ability to have the kind of higher consciousness that the wise man has. See 
Ibid., pp. 542—552. Ingenious as this reading is, I think that LeBuffe misses the point of the comparison between 
the wise and the ignorant/infant. 


320 


SPINOZA'S NON-THEORY OF NON-CONSCIOUSNESS 


The contrast between the knowledge that the wise man has and the lack of knowledge 
that the infant or the ignorant man has can be understood when we remember what 
unlike the infant or the ignorant man, the wise man has knowledge of the third kind, 
and when we remember what knowledge of the third kind is. Knowledge of the third 
kind is originally defined as follows: “this kind of knowing |i.e., knowledge of the third 
kind] proceeds from an adequate idea of the formal essence of certain attributes of God 
to the adequate knowledge of the essence of things” (E2p40s2). This is somewhat mys- 
terious, particularly regarding the appeal to “the formal essence of certain attributes of 
God.” But Spinoza appeals to a less formal paraphrase of this definition when talking 
about it in E5: 


E5p36s: I thought this worth the trouble of noting here ... how much the knowledge of 
singular things I have called intuitive, or knowledge of the third kind (see ITP40S2), can 
accomplish, and how much more powerful it is than the universal knowledge I have called 
knowledge of the second kind. For although I have shown generally in Part I that all things 
(and consequently the human Mind also) depend on God both for their essence and their 
existence, nevertheless, that demonstration, though legitimate and put beyond all chance of 
doubt, still does not affect our Mind as much as when this is inferred from the very essence of 
any singular thing which we say depends on God. 


Knowledge of the third kind is the knowledge of singular things, insofar as we understand 
them as deriving from God. Among those singular things are, of course, our own minds. 
And so the wise man, the person who has attained this third kind of knowledge, will have 
a knowledge of God, and of himself and other singular things as they derive from God. 
That is to say, the wise man will have a knowledge of God, himself, and singular things that 
the infant and the ignorant person lack. 

This, I think, is the contrast that Spinoza is attempting to make in E5. The ignorant 
man who lacks knowledge of the third kind simply does not have the knowledge that the 
wise man has of God, himself and things: he is “inscius,” as opposed to the wise man, 
who is “conscius.”. Why might Spinoza have chosen that word? “Conscius” is closely 
related to “scius,” which is the adjective, “knowing,” or “having knowledge,” related to 
the verb “scire,” “to know.” Adding the prefix “con” normally gives it the meaning “know- 
ing something in the company of others.” Perhaps what Spinoza means to indicate when 
he says that the wise man is conscius of himself, God, and things, is that he shares 
knowledge of them with God: in having knowledge of the third kind, he has the same 
knowledge of them that God has. “Conscius” is also connected with the noun “conscien- 
tia,” which throughout the early modern period retained the meaning “conscience.” 
Indeed, its use to indicate consciousness in the modern sense doesn’t really strongly 
emerge until somewhat later, with Locke and Cudworth.** In using the term in this con- 
text, as applied to the wise man, perhaps Spinoza wanted to choose a term that could 
indicate a certain moral status, as well as an epistemic status. But in applying it to the 
wise man, I doubt that Spinoza meant to attribute him consciousness in the sense we 
usually understand it now. 


38 Davies (1990) and Balibar (1992, pp. 45-46) see the moral and psychological/epistemological notions as both 
present in Spinoza’s view. 


321 


DANIEL GARBER 
3.3. Sensory Consciousness Revisited 


Interestingly enough, what I have called sensory consciousness has gotten relatively less 
attention in the literature than reflexive and intuitive consciousness have.*’ This is some- 
what ironic because, it seems to me, this is the notion that comes closest to the notion of 
consciousness that we are looking for in Spinoza. 

To review briefly, reading the language of consciousness back into E2p19 and E2p23 
from the later references in E3p9d and E3p30d, these propositions tell us that we only 
know — are conscious of — our minds and our bodies through ideas of the affections of the 
body, that is, through the states that the body is in when we are affected by external things: 
“\ the Mind (by E2p23) is necessarily conscious of itself through ideas of the Body’s affec- 
tions...” (E3p9d); “...man (by E2p19 and E2p23) is conscious of himself through the affec- 
tions by which he is determined to act...” (E3p30d). Here, I think we do have instances of 
the kind of consciousness we are looking for: what Spinoza is telling us in these proposi- 
tions is that we are aware (conscious) of ourselves only through the “ideas of the affections 
by which the Body is affected” (E2p19), that is, though the ideas of the state that the body 
is in when it is affected by some external object. In the other contexts in which Spinoza 
used what we might think of as consciousness language — the reflexive and the intuitive 
conceptions of consciousness — it is what is known rather than consciousness itself that is 
at issue. In E4p8, for example, the important point is that knowledge of good and evil is, in 
a sense, reducible to knowledge of joy and sadness: consciousness as such is not really at 
issue. Similarly, in E5p42 the important point is that the wise man has knowledge that the 
infant or ignorant person lacks; again, Spinoza seems not to be concerned with his con- 
sciousness as such. But the texts relating to what I have called sensory consciousness seem 
different. In E2p19 and E2p23 what is at issue that we are aware (conscious) of the nature 
and existence of our bodies, and of the nature of the mind. What Spinoza is telling us is 
that we are aware of the self only in the situation in which our bodies are being impinged 
upon by external things. More interesting still is what Spinoza does with these observa- 
tions. Spinoza wants to extend this sensory awareness beyond our knowledge of body and 
mind to the knowledge we have of our striving for self-preservation, and from that to appe- 
tite, will and desire. In E3p9, it is important that we are aware (conscious) of the striving for 
self-preservation that manifests itself as will, appetite, and desire. In this context we get a 
discussion of the distinction between what we are conscious of and what we are not. It is 
this distinction that gives us the distinction between appetite and desire: 


Between appetite and desire there is no difference, except that desire is generally related to men 
insofar as they are conscious of their appetites. So desire can be defined as appetite together with 
consciousness of the appetite. (E3p9s) 


The distinction between what we are conscious of and what we are not is even more impor- 
tant in the case of the illusion of free will: 


© One clear exception here is LeBuffe (2010, pp. 542-552), who does recognize the consciousness of sense expe- 
rience and imagination. Even so, he seems to subordinate this kind of consciousness to what he calls “weak 
minds.” See above note 37. Balibar (2010, p. 49) also endorses a Conscientia,, which belongs to knowledge of the 
first kind, in distinction with Conscientia,, which belongs to knowledge of the third kind, though he doesn’t really 
develop either in detail. 


322 


SPINOZA'S NON-THEORY OF NON-CONSCIOUSNESS 


... men think themselves free, because they are conscious [conscii] of their volitions and their 
appetite, and do not think, even in their dreams, of the causes by which they are disposed to 
wanting and willing, because they are ignorant of them [earum sunt ignari]. (Elapp, G II 78/C 
1440)*° 


Here Spinoza quite clearly wants to emphasize that each of us is conscious, that is to say, 
aware of our own volitions and appetites, but we are not aware (conscious) of the infinite 
series of causes that condition them. Now, some of the external causes that determine voli- 
tion will be outside of the body (and mind) of the individual in question. But many of them 
won't: they will be states of the brain (and, by E2p7s, the mind) that are among the causal 
determinants of the volition. Here consciousness itself is what it is at issue. 

However, the notion of consciousness in question here is very thin: it is goes no deeper 
than awareness. It would be anachronistic to compare Spinoza’s very thin conception of 
consciousness here with the vast modern philosophical and psychological literature on 
consciousness and the varieties of consciousness that contemporary philosophers con- 
sider. But it is certainly fair to compare Spinoza with conceptions of consciousness that 
were emerging among his own rough contemporaries. Ralph Cudworth is credited with 
introducing the term “consciousness” into the English language. In his True Intellectual 
System and other writings he developed an elaborate account of consciousness. For 
Cudworth, there is a kind of 


... Duplication, that is included in the Nature of synaisthesis, Con-sense and Consciousness, 
which makes a Being to be Present with it self, Attentive to its own Actions, or Animadversive 
of them, to perceive it self to Do or Suffer, and to have Fruition or Enjoyment of it self.*? 


This only hints at the richness and complexity of Cudworth’s conception of conscious- 
ness.” For John Locke as well a rich notion of consciousness was very important. For 
Locke, consciousness is definitive of the very identity of a person: 


[S]ince consciousness always accompanies thinking, and ’tis that, that makes every one to be, 
what he calls self; and thereby distinguishes himself from all other thinking things, in this 
alone consists personal Identity.” 


Just as “same life” defines the identity of a tree or an animal, “same consciousness” defines 
the identity of a person for Locke: the consciousness that is supposed to define the person 


4° Tt is very interesting here that Spinoza uses the term “ignarus” when he contrasts what we are conscious of 
from what we don’t know, as opposed to the term “inscius,” which he uses in E5p42s, discussed above. It is, I 
think, significant that in all of the other texts in which Spinoza explains the illusion of free will in this way, he 
consistently uses “ignarus” rather than “inscius.” See the texts cited above in note 9. 

4! Cudworth (1678, p. 159). Cudworth borrows the term “synaisthesis,” from Plotinus, which literally means 
“sensed with” or “with sensation,” and which he translates as “con-sense” or “consciousness.” see Hedley (2019, 
pp. 146-59, at p. 149). 

#2 On Cudworth’s complicated views on consciousness, see Thiel (1991, pp. 79-99); Lahteenmaki, “ (2010, pp. 
9-34); Pécharman (2014, pp. 28 7-314). 

* Locke, Essay Concerning Human Understanding I1.27.9. On Locke’s notion of consciousness, see Weinberg 
(2016) and Balibar and Sandford (2013). (The Balibar volume includes a reprint of “A Note” with some later 
thoughts.) 


323 


DANIEL GARBER 


is a particular something that persists in the person, in just the way that the life is supposed 
to be a particular something that persists in the plant or animal body.** In comparison with 
the notions of consciousness found in Cudworth and Locke, just to take two examples from 
the period, the notion of consciousness in the propositions of the Ethics that we have been 
examining seems rather slight. 

Furthermore, in these passages Spinoza isn’t really interested in giving any sort of 
account of what this awareness consists in: it is the bare fact of awareness that is of interest 
to him. In these propositions, Spinoza tells the reader what he thinks we are aware of, but 
says nothing about why he thinks we are aware of what we are aware of or about what that 
awareness consists in. 

In these passages, there is reason to think that Spinoza takes some interest in something 
like consciousness. But there isn’t much on which to base an account of what he thinks 
consciousness consists in, and what it is that distinguishes that of which we are conscious 
from that of which we are not. 


4. Concluding Remarks 


The search for a theory of consciousness in Spinoza seems to end in disappointment. When 
we look through the catalogue of texts where Spinoza uses the term “conscius” and “consci- 
entia,” we discover that in many of these texts — the usages I associated with what I called 
reflective and intuitive consciousness — the kind of consciousness we are looking for in 
Spinoza is simply not at issue. And while it is at issue in some of the texts where he uses the 
language of consciousness — the usages I associated with what I called sensory conscious- 
ness — the notion is extremely thin, basically equivalent to simple awareness and without 
significant philosophical development. Finally, though Spinoza is not completely 
uninterested in the notion of consciousness, there isn’t much to go on in constructing an 
account of the notion as he understands it. 

But I’m not so sure that Spinoza really needs a full-blown theory of consciousness. 
There was a strong motivation for developing a theory of consciousness in the Cartesian 
tradition, for example. Descartes’ philosophy begins with the cogito, the discovery of the 
self, and from that builds the world. In this kind of philosophy, the subjectivity seems 
central. While Descartes himself didn’t have much to say about consciousness, many of 
his followers did.*> For those who read Spinoza as belonging to this Cartesian tradition, 
there is a strong motivation to find in him something on which they can build a Spinozist 
account of subjectivity. In connection with this project, there are a number of commenta- 
tors who argue that an account of consciousness is, indeed, important for Spinoza’s 
philosophy.*° 


++ The oak “continues to be the same Plant, as long as it partakes of the same Life” (Essay II.27.4) and the identity 
of the man (i.e. the living body as opposed to the person) “consists ... in nothing but a participation in the same 
continued Life ...” (Essay 1.27.6). 

+5 Davies emphasizes the role played by the later Cartesians, particularly La Forge and Malebranche in devel- 
oping the vocabulary and concept of consciousness. See Davies (1990, ch. 1). 

46 See, for example, Levy (2000); Malinowski-Charles (2004); Renz (2018). All three are interested in conscious- 
ness but largely as it contributes to an account of the subject and subjectivity in Spinoza. 


324 


SPINOZA'S NON-THEORY OF NON-CONSCIOUSNESS 


In my view, this is the wrong way to read Spinoza. As I noted at the very beginning of 
this chapter, Spinoza begins not with the cogito or anything like it, but with God. This is one 
of the lessons of the “worm in the blood” example in Letter 32. Spinoza writes: 


Let us feign now, if you please, that there is a little worm living in the blood which is capable of 
distinguishing by sight the particles of the blood, of lymph, etc. ... Indeed, it would live in this 
blood as we do in this part of the universe, and would consider each particle of the blood as a 
whole, not as a part. It could not know how all the parts of the blood are regulated by the 
universal nature of the blood, and compelled to adapt themselves to one another, as the 
universal nature of the blood requires, so that they agree with one another in a definite way.*” 


But, Spinoza observes: 


Now all bodies in nature can and must be conceived as we have here conceived the blood, for 
all bodies are surrounded by others, and are determined by one another to existing and pro- 
ducing an effect in a fixed and determinate way ...** 


Ina way, Descartes’ meditator is like the worm in the blood, who conceiving the world from his 
subjective stance, infers what the entirety of the universe must be like, and in doing so, gets it 
fundamentally wrong.*? The whole strategy of Spinoza’s philosophy is, I think, precisely 
intended to offer an alternative to a philosophy that begins with the cogito, a philosophy that 
is grounded in an immediate apprehension of the self.*° One might argue that subjectivity and 
consciousness need not play a very a central role in such a philosophical project.*! 

Spinoza’s use of the vocabulary of consciousness may have misled commentators into 
thinking that there is more of consciousness in Spinoza’s philosophy than there is. If Spinoza 
used the words, one might suppose, he must have had the concepts. It seems like a legitimate 
question to ask how he understood what consciousness is and what it is to be conscious. But 
one cannot assume that the seventeenth-century Latin words ‘conscius’ and ‘conscientia’ neatly 
correspond to their modern English cognates. It is important to remember that the primary 
meaning of the original Latin word ‘conscientia’ was moral, something close to conscience, a 
meaning that it retained through the early modern period. The development of a notion of con- 
sciousness and a philosophical vocabulary to express it was very, very complicated, and was 
one of the important philosophical accomplishments of the period, a project that was not 
achieved until well after Spinoza’s death.** Even though Spinoza used words that seem familiar 
enough to us, we cannot naively assume that he was using them in the same way that we do. 


47 Ep. 32, Spinoza to Oldenburg, November 1665, GIV 171a/CIL 19. 

48 Tbid., GIV 172a/C11 19. 

#9 This is just one of the lessons of the worm in the blood, I think. The other is the interconnectedness of every- 
thing in nature, and the idea that strictly speaking, nature as a whole is a genuine individual in the sense of the 
definition of the individual in the short physical treatise following E2p13s, which always maintains a constant 
ratio motus et quietis. (G II 99-102/C I 460-462) 

°° Aspects of this reading are developed in Garber (2020). In general, I think that Hobbes’s Elementa philosophiae 
is more the model for Spinoza’s philosophical project than Descartes’ is, but that’s a longer story. 

51 See here Balibar’s reflections on the anti-subjective tradition of Spinoza interpretation in French philosophy 
(1992, p. 37). 

>2 On this see especially Davies (1990) and Thiel (2011). Again, Balibar (1992, p. 45) emphasizes the persisting 
importance of the moral notion of conscientia in Spinoza’s thought. More generally, his chapter is an explicit 
attempt to read Spinoza in the context of this period of important linguistic and conceptual change with respect 
to the notion of conscientia (see Ibid., pp. 37-40). 


325 


DANIEL GARBER 


References 


Balibar, E. (1992). A Note on “Consciousness/Conscience” in the Ethics. Studia Spinozana 8 
37-53. 

Balibar, EB and Sandford, S. (2013). Identity and Difference: John Locke and the Invention of Consciousness. 
London: Verso Books. 

Bennett, J. (1984). A Study of Spinoza’s Ethics. Indianapolis: Hackett. 

Cudworth, R. (1678). True Intellectual System of the Universe. London: Richard Royston. 

Curley, E.M. (1969). Spinoza’s Metaphysics: An Essay in Interpretation. Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press. 

Davies, C.G. (1990). Conscience as Consciousness: The Idea of Self-awareness in French Philosophical 
Writing from Descartes to Diderot. Oxford: Voltaire Foundation. 

Garber, D. (2020). Knowing mind through knowing body: Spinoza on causal knowledge of the self 
and the external world. In: Causation and Cognition in Early Modern Philosophy (ed. D. Perler and 
S. Bender), 194-211. New York and London, Routledge. 

Garrett, D. (2008). Representation and consciousness in Spinoza’s naturalistic theory of the imagi- 
nation. In: Interpreting Spinoza: Critical Essays (ed. Charlie Huenemann), 4-25. Cambridge, 
Cambridge University Press. 

Garrett, D. (2018). Nature and Necessity in Spinoza’s Philosophy. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Hedley, D. (2019). Ralph Cudworth as interpreter of Plotinus. In: Plotinus’ Legacy: The Transformation 
of Platonism from the Renaissance to the Modern Era (ed. S. Gersh), 146-159. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 

Hobbes, T. (2012). Leviathan (ed. N. Malcolm), 3 vols. Oxford, Oxford University Press. 

Lahteenmaki, V. (2010). Cudworth on types of consciousness. British Journal for the History of 
Philosophy 18: 9-34. 

LeBuffe, M. (2010). Theories about consciousness in Spinoza’s ‘Ethics.’ Philosophical Review 119: 
531-563. 

Levy, L. (2000). L’automate spirituel: la subjectivé moderne d’aprés I’Ethique de Spinoza. Assen: Van 
Gorcum. 

Locke, J. (1975). An Essay Concerning Human Understanding (ed. P.H. Nidditch). Oxford: Oxford 
University Press. 

Malinowski-Charles, S. (2004). Affects et conscience chez Spinoza: l’automatisme dans le progrés éthique. 

Hildesheim: Olms. 

Marshall, E. (2013). The Spiritual Automaton: Spinoza’s Science of Mind. Oxford: Oxford University 

Press. 

Martin, C. (2007). Consciousness in Spinoza’s philosophy of mind. Southern Journal of Philosophy 45: 

269-287. 

Miller, J. (2007). The status of consciousness in Spinoza’s concept of mind. In: Consciousness: From 

Perception to Reflection in the History of Philosophy (ed. S. Heinaémaa, V. Lahteenmaki, and P. Remes), 

203-220. Dordrecht: Springer. 

Nadler, S. (2008). Spinoza and consciousness. Mind 117: 575-601. 

Pécharman, M. (2014). Cudworth on self-consciousness and the I myself. Vivarium 52: 
287-314. 

Renz, U. (2018). The Explainability of Experience: Realism and Subjectivity in Spinoza’s Theory of the 
Human Mind, Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Rice, L. (1990). Reflexive ideas in Spinoza. Journal of the History of Philosophy 28: 201-211. 

Sangiacomo, A. (2011). Adequate knowledge and bodily complexity in Spinoza’s account of con- 
sciousness. Methodus 6: 77-104. 

Spinoza, B. (2020). Ethica (ed. F Akkerman and P. Steenbakkers; trans. P.-F. Moreau). Paris: Presses 
Universitaires de France. 


326 


SPINOZA'S NON-THEORY OF NON-CONSCIOUSNESS 


Thiel, U. (1991). Cudworth and seventeenth-century theories of consciousness. In: The Uses of 
Antiquity: The Scientific Revolution and the Classical Tradition (ed. S. Gaukroger), 79-99. Dordrecht: 
Kluwer. 

Thiel, U. (2011). The Early Modern Subject: Self-consciousness and Personal Identity from Descartes to 
Hume. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Weinberg, S. (2016). Consciousness in Locke. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Wilson, M.D. (1999). Objects, ideas, and "minds": comments on Spinoza’s theory of mind. In: Ideas 
and Mechanism: Essays on Early Modern Philosophy. (ed. M.D. Wilson), 126-140. Princeton, 
Princeton University Press. 


327 


30 


Spinoza on the Passions and the Self 


ANDREA SANGIACOMO 


mamety aham iti ksine bahirdhadhyatmam eva ca |nirudhyata upadanam tatksayaj 
janmanah ksayah. | | 
Once the sense of ‘I’ and ‘mine’, both internal and external, are extinguished, | 
attachment ceases, and when this happens birth is destroyed. | | 
(Nagarjuna, Milamadhyamakakarika, 18.4) 


1. Deconstructing the Self 


In the third part of the Ethics, Spinoza provides a naturalistic picture of human psychology. 
Individuals exist in a complex network of causes. Insofar as the individual and the external 
causes agree in nature and cooperate to bring about mutually compatible effects, the indi- 
vidual’s own conatus is enhanced by the external causes and the individual’s power of act- 
ing is increased (producing affects of joy) — otherwise it decreases (producing affects of 
sadness). According to Spinoza, the complexity of human emotional life can be reduced to 
different (and increasingly more complex) combinations and permutations of these three 
fundamental affects: joy, sadness, and desire. Spinoza’s account distinguishes between 
active and passive affects. For the purposes of this discussion, only passive affects are consid- 
ered (concerning this distinction see James 1997; Sangiacomo 2019; for a general account 
of Spinoza’s theory of affects, see Macherey 1995; Jaquet 2004). 

This chapter discusses how Spinoza’s theory of affects demonstrates that the self 
with which human individuals identify in daily life is the result of a complex and con- 
stantly on-going imaginative construction shaped by desires and causal interactions 
with other individuals and external causes. Recent scholarship emphasizes the socially 
constructed nature of the self in Spinoza’s moral psychology (see, e.g. Armstrong 2009; 
Kisner 2011, and essays in Armstrong, Green, and Sangiacomo 2019). Given the 
space constraints, the chapter does not investigate further ramifications that this 
thesis has for Spinoza’s metaphysics and ethics (e.g. whether there can also be an ade- 
quate idea of a ‘self’). 


A Companion to Spinoza, First Edition. Edited by Yitzhak Y. Melamed. 
© 2021 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2021 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd. 


328 


SPINOZA ON THE PASSIONS AND THE SELF 


There are two salient features of the self that individuals commonly experience in 
daily life: (1) the self appears to have some persistence over time, and (2) the self is a 
center of control that allows an individual to coordinate and direct her own actions. 
Both these features are necessary to make sense of the way in which selfhood is expe- 
rienced in common daily life. If a self had absolutely no persistence over time (vs. 1), 
it could not have any control of any actions (vs. 2), since it would literally not be able 
to be present and attend to different actions over time. If a self had absolutely no con- 
trol of any actions (vs. 2), it would be impossible to identify with it in the first place. 

From the point of view of Spinoza’s moral psychology, both of these features of the self 
are aresult of the desiderative and imaginative nature of the mind. The sense of diachronic 
continuity (1) arises at the very core of the structure of desire, while the sense of being ‘in 
control’ (2) is expressed by the imagination of being ‘free,’ which arises from the mind’s 
striving to imagine what can improve its power or avoid any decrease of it. In between 
these two features of the self, Spinoza’s theory also reveals how the mind creates both the 
sense of the self and the sense of being in interactions with ‘others.’ The self and the others 
are both imaginative constructions that emerge in the affective field created by the desider- 
ative nature of the mind. 


2. The Affective Field 


In Spinoza’s account, affects are not isolated discrete events. In Spinoza’s terminology, 
‘affects’ are variations of power (see E3, general AD; note that ‘affections’ instead are 
modifications of the individual, see Ax2” after E2p13s). Affects constitute a thick net- 
work of causal interactions and reactions, which in turn shape the way in which 
human individuals operate and transform throughout their existence. In order to illus- 
trate how this network is structured, it may be helpful to compare it with a gravitational 
system, in which one can distinguish three crucial elements: the core, the field, and 
the orbits. At the center of the affective field there is a core, constituted by the 
fundamental affect of desire, which is necessarily oriented towards increasing joy and 
avoiding sadness. This affective core extends its influence over all causal events that 
occur within the individual horizon. The space covered by this influence can be called 
the affective field of the individual. Every external cause that somehow impacts the 
individual’s operations in the affective field triggers an affective response from the 
core. In turn, this encounter sparks a cascade of reactions and affective engagements 
that make the external cause a part of the affective field and design its particular orbit 
around the core. 


2.1. The Core of The Affective Field: Desiderative Imagination 


The core of the affective field is occupied by desire, which is the expression of the individu- 
al’s conatus to persevere in its own existence (E3p7). The relevant feature of desire is its 
asymmetrical behavior with respect to causal interactions. From the point of view of desire, 
not all causal interactions are equal or demand the same response. Desire is intrinsically 
determined to seek what can increase the individual’s power of acting or prevent a decrease 
of power. This entails that if some joy arises, the individual is necessarily determined 
to pursue, cherish, and cultivate it. If some sadness arises, the individual is necessarily 


329 


ANDREA SANGIACOMO 


determined to resist, oppose, and avoid it. Spinoza stresses that this desiderative attitude 
does not necessarily require an external trigger: 


The mind as far as it can, strives to imagine those things that increase or aid the body’s power 
of acting. (E3p12) 

When the mind imagines those things that diminish or restrain the body’s power of acting, 
it strives, as far as it can, to recollect things which exclude their existence. (E3p13) 


Imagination is the mind’s power to conceive of the ideas of certain affections of the body 
as if they were present. These affections can actually be present or they can just be mem- 
ories. Imagination, by itself, is not able to tell the difference between an object that is actu- 
ally present or one merely recollected. In order to tell this difference, the mind needs to be 
equipped with other ideas that concern whether the object imagined is actually present or 
not. This is why imagination can be the cause of inadequate ideas. The power of imagina- 
tion consists precisely in forming ideas of affections as if they were real, and thus lead the 
mind to experience these ideas as present (E3p18 and E3p28dem; on imagination see 
Gatens and Lloyd 1999; Vinciguerra 2005). Imagination works in close connection with 
memory (E2p18). The mind’s ability to imagine any object as if it were present is possible 
only insofar as the human body is currently affected or has been affected by that object in 
the past. 

The power of imagination is shaped by the mind’s desiderative nature. Insofar as the 
mind is not prevented by some other ideas or causes, it will strive to imagine what is con- 
ducive to increase its power or avoid any diminishment of power. When a new object x 
affects the individual at moment t, the mind will develop a desiderative response to x by 
imagining what can lead to enhance or remove the image or affection created by x. This 
desiderative response is based on what the mind can imagine will be conducive to react to x 
in a way that the mind’s overall power of acting will be increased or not overly damaged. 
However, the mind can imagine how to react to a newly experienced object x only based on 
the affections that the mind can recollect from its past experience. Imagining is recollect- 
ing affections. While the mind is affected by a newly experienced object, any reaction to 
that object is mostly based on previous experiences. In turn, this reaction will impress in 
the mind a memory of how a certain way of dealing with x has impacted the mind’s power 
of acting, and thus will create a new memory that can be mobilized in future interactions 
(either for repeating the same reaction or for trying something else). Since the power of 
imagination is based on past affections, it can be often mistaken in judging what is actually 
conducive to increase the mind’s power or prevent a decrease of power. Experience based 
on trials and errors is the way in which the mind learns how to shape its desiderative 
reactions. This experience is always shaped by past or previous experiences, which neces- 
sarily condition and determine the mind’s present way of reacting to different stimuli. 

The temporal nature of imagination further resonates with the indefinite duration of 
the individual’s conatus (E3p8). This entails that the mind necessarily tends to imagine 
itself as an enduring and unchanging entity across time (see also Perler’s chapter in this 
Companion). Consider a mind at moment t, and at moment t,. If the mind at t, is radically 
different from the mind at t,, then it could be said that the mind at t, is destroyed at t,. 
However, the mind, as far as possible, strives to imagine those things that exclude or pre- 
vent any diminishment of power. Since destruction is an extreme diminishment of power, 
the mind strives as far as possible to avoid thinking about its own destruction. Spinoza 
demonstrates that the mind cannot have an adequate idea of its own duration (E2p30). 


330 


SPINOZA ON THE PASSIONS AND THE SELF 


Hence, the mind cannot have an adequate idea that would tell it whether the mind at t, is 
still enduring at t,. It follows that the mind necessarily strives to imagine itself as an 
enduring entity across time and it cannot be prevented from doing so by any adequate idea 
of its own duration. The mind is bound to imagine itself as a constantly present and 
enduring entity. Since imagination is conditioned by past experience, the mind imagines 
itself as present as it was in the past. 

The ‘present’ moment created by imagination is an imaginative rehearsal of the past. 
Although the past can more or less subtly change and be reshaped by new experiences, 
from the point of view of the mind’s imagination of itself, any moment now looks always 
like it looked before. This imaginative conditioning underpins not only the sense of dia- 
chronic identity within the mind but also the way in which the mind’s desire approaches 
any new experience, namely, by trying to reproduce reactive patterns established in the 
past. To fully understand this last point, it is helpful to consider the broader affective field 
that originates from the core of desire. 


2.2. The Scope of The Affective Field: Imagining The Others 


According to Spinoza, all external causes and causal interactions can generate affects, 
either by directly impacting the individual’s power or by accident, namely, in virtue of being 
randomly associated with something that generates an affect (E3p15). As soon as external 
causes are associated with affects of joy or sadness, these affects become love or hatred 
(E3p13s). As soon as the individual experiences love or hatred, she experiences some 
increase or decrease of power of acting, and when this happens desire is also activated. 
Hence, the individual will desire to foster the object of love, protect it, love by accident what- 
ever is associated with it and wish to be loved in return (when this is possible). On the con- 
trary, the individual will desire the destruction of what damages the object of love, and 
desire the removal of any impediment or hindrance to her love. The fact that the individual 
is affected by love or hatred leads, in turn, to further desiderative reactions to these very 
affects and, by projection, to the external objects or conditions associated with them. 

For instance, since love itself expresses an increase of power, it produces a second-order 
joy caused by the fact of feeling love, and thus triggers the mind’s desire to imagine what- 
ever can support the fact of ‘being in love’ with some object. If one experiences hatred, this 
entails some sadness and thus the desire to get rid of that sadness. An individual is not only 
affected by the external causes that trigger the initial affects, but also by the affects them- 
selves generated by those external causes. Affects are thus generated and magnified as 
waves that cross the affective field and constantly interact and affect each other in turn. 

The affective field expands from the desiderative core so to include everything that falls 
within the causal horizon of the individual. All events, objects, and external causes that 
enter directly or by accident in any causal relation with the individual become parts of 
her affective field. Most of this affective field, however, is an expression of the affective core 
itself, which constantly reacts to the trigger of the external causes based on its own previous 
states and established patterns. This establishes a self-sustaining mechanism in which 
external stimuli provide fuel for the mind’s rehearsal of established behavioral patterns 
based on past experience. Interactions in the affective field take the overall shape of a 
vortex or a spiral: everything falls, quickly or slowly, towards the center of the field, in 
which desire — consolidated around past experiences — attracts everything within its own 
core. In this scenario, the ‘others’ themselves are an imaginative and desiderative 
construction. 


331 


ANDREA SANGIACOMO 


The imitation of other’s affects is the key instance in which ‘otherness’ can be appreciated 
as a desiderative projection of the mind’s own desires. Spinoza demonstrates that “if we 
imagine a thing like us, towards which we have no affect, to be affected with some affect, 
we are thereby affected with a like affect” (E3p27). The key point here concerns the 
likelihood that the mind imagines between its own body and the external cause: “if the 
nature of the external body is like the nature of our body, then the idea of the external 
body we imagine will involve an affection of our body like the affection of the external 
body” (E3p27dem). This is an instance of affects produced accidentally by imaginative 
association. Since the mind imagines the external causes affected by a certain affect and it 
imagines that the external body is similar to its own body (and thus the mind imagines the 
two bodies at the same time), the body of which the mind is an idea will also be affected (per 
accidens) by the same affect imagined in the external body. 

One may interpret the imitation of affects as a form of empathy in which a certain 
neutral subject resonates with the affects experienced by others. However, the key role 
played by imagination in shaping the affective field entails that this empathy is itself con- 
structed from the point of view of the desiderative core of the affective field. Imagining an 
external body as similar, insofar as possible, is a way of strengthening the body’s power of 
acting, and thus it is an intrinsic tendency of the mind. Moreover, recognizing other's 
affects as expressions of joy, sadness, or anything else is again a complex interpretation of 
external perceived behaviors, which is performed and filtered by imagination. Hence, the 
affects perceived in others are already categorized according to the desiderative condition- 
ings of the mind itself, then attributed to others and reflected back to the individual mind 
again. 

This is the reason why others’ affects, rather than introducing any novelty in the 
affective fields, are just ways in which the desiderative core exercises its force on anything 
that enters within its scope and binds it to certain orbits or patterns. Spinoza makes clear 
this point by discussing a series of affects (and combinations thereof) that explicitly relies 
on the mind’s imagination of what others will praise (i.e. react with joy) or blame (i.e. react 
with sadness) in one’s own operations. As he writes: “we shall strive to do also whatever we 
imagine men to look on with joy, and on the other hand, we shall be averse to doing what 
we imagine men are averse to” (E3p29). Praise and blame are experienced insofar as the 
mind imagines what others will say about certain actions. This is a complex imagination in 
which both future reactions and ‘the others’ themselves are imaginatively constructed 
based on the mind’s past experiences and conditionings. Since imagination is constantly 
driven by desire, this imagination is not just a neutral counterfactual picture of what 
would happen in a certain theoretical scenario, but it is already shaped by the desiderative 
tendency of the mind to imagine what is conducive to increase its own power or prevent 
any diminishment of it. 


2.3. Centripetal Forces and Instable Orbits 


The whole social world (of each individual) arises as a product of the imaginative desire of 
the mind (of that individual). Of course, there are external causes acting on the individual. 
However, the way in which the mind perceives these interactions is entirely filtered through 
the lenses of its imaginative desire. For instance, Spinoza demonstrates that “we shall strive 
to do also whatever we imagine men to look on with joy, and on the other hand, we shall be 
averse to doing what we imagine men are averse to” (E3p29). In cultivating this striving, 
the mind is actually cultivating ambition and blame (E3p29s). However, since “everyone 


332 


SPINOZA ON THE PASSIONS AND THE SELF 


strives to imagine concerning himself whatever he imagines affects himself with joy, it can 
easily happen that one who exults at being esteemed is proud and imagines himself to be 
pleasing to all, when he is burdensome to all” (E3p30s). There is no ‘impartial spectator’ 
that neutrally upholds a dispassionate point of view in order to assess what is morally 
acceptable or unacceptable. Every individual imaginatively fancies what ‘others’ are, how 
they will think, and how they will react to the individual’s own behaviors — and every 
individual does so, as far as possible, in order to satisfy her own desire for imagining always 
what is supportive of her joy and capable of preventing any sadness. 
Spinoza insists that this attitude fosters ambition and thus conflict: 


This striving to bring it about that everyone should approve his love and hate is really ambition 
(see P29S). And so we see that each of us, by his nature, wants the others to live according to 
his temperament; when all alike want this, they are alike an obstacle to one another, and when 
all wish to be praised, or loved, by all, they hate one another. (E3p31s) 


Any object that enters the individual's affective field takes the orbit dictated by the indi- 
vidual’s desire that dominates the core of the field. Since every individual has different 
conditionings and past experiences, Spinoza stresses that, insofar as individuals are domi- 
nated by their affects, they can often disagree in nature and end up in conflict (E3p55s; 
E4p32-—33). Right now, the point is not to investigate how affects can contribute to build 
some form of agreement (on this point, see Sangiacomo 2019), but rather to fully appre- 
ciate how the desiderative core of the affective field fully shapes the way in which an 
individual experiences the ‘others’ and relates to them. In a sense, interactions with others 
shape the individual because they trigger cascades of affective responses. However, these 
‘others’ are never experienced by the individual as they genuinely are in themselves. Every 
individual experience is filtered by desiderative imagination, and thus the others as well are 
an imaginative fiction (based on something actually happening but understood through 
inadequate ideas). 

This attitude extends even beyond relationships with other individuals including moral 
values and whole classes of people or things. For instance, Spinoza demonstrates that 
moral judgments about ‘good’ and ‘evil’ are again a projection of imaginative desires: 


[E]ach one, from his own affect, judges, or evaluates, what is good and what is bad, what is 
better and what is worse, and finally, what is best and what is worst. So the greedy man judges 
an abundance of money best, and poverty worst. (E3p39s) 


Not only are moral judgments subjective in the sense of being indexed to the particular 
individual that produces them, but what exactly counts as good or evil for a particular 
individual depends on her specific desiderative conditioning (see also Nadler’s chapter in 
this Companion). Someone (the ‘greedy’) who established the fixed imaginative pattern of 
envisaging money as what will foster her power of acting cannot but judge abundance of 
money the best possible situation for her (the ‘good’) and thus judge everything and every- 
body from that point of view. In this scenario, the ‘others’ are players in the individual 
striving to imagine what can increase richness and avoid poverty. The dance of moral judg- 
ments about what is good and evil is a second-order cascade effect of the underlying desid- 
erative striving of each individual. The problem is that none of these moral judgments 
relies on any adequate ideas. The ‘greedy’ will try to manipulate everybody in order to 
foster her ambition for money, genuinely (but mistakenly) thinking that that is ‘good’. 


333 


ANDREA SANGIACOMO 


Other individuals, conditioned by different imaginative strivings, will react against the 
greedy and judge her as ‘evil’. Since everybody is run by different conditionings, most often 
one experiences ‘the others’ as not complying with one’s own (desiderative) expectations 
and moral values, and thus enters into conflict with them. Unlike most gravitational fields, 
the affective field is highly unstable and constantly animated by a struggle between the pull 
of the desiderative core to attract everything towards its own thriving and the incompati- 
bility or resistance of the objects that enter the affective field. 

This resistance, however, is not an obstacle for the individual desire to extend its scope 
and try to incorporate any kind of object: 


[I]f someone has been affected with joy or sadness by someone of a class, or nation, different 
from his own, and this joy or sadness is accompanied by the idea of that person as its cause, 
under the universal name of the class or nation, he will love or hate, not only that person, but 
everyone of the same class or nation. (E3p46) 


Desiderative imagination not only constructs individual ‘others’ as interlocutors of the 
individual’s own desires, but it quickly extends this model to whole classes of individuals or 
nations. Here, the ‘other’ becomes a collective group, but its imaginative fictional nature 
remains the same. One can imagine what a certain class of individuals belonging to a 
certain nation can or cannot do to satisfy its own desires. Based on this imagination, a 
whole new cascade of (now political) affects can be triggered and aimed towards this group 
of ‘others’ (for discussion of Spinoza’s political psychology see Steinberg 2018). 

The pinnacle in this picture is provided by the tendency to imagine the others and one- 
self as free. Spinoza demonstrates that, “given an equal cause of love, love toward a thing 
will be greater if we imagine the thing to be free than if we imagine it to be necessary. And 
similarly for hate” (E3p49). The intuition is that imagining someone as free entails imag- 
ining that individual as the sole and only cause of a given affect. As a consequence, the 
individual affective response is fully concentrated on just that one individual who is imag- 
ined as responsible for that action. On the contrary, if one imagines a certain affect as pro- 
duced by a net of necessary causes, one cannot isolate any of these causes as the sole cause 
responsible for the affect. As a result, the affective response will be more diffused and will 
not concentrate on any particular (partial) cause of the triggering affect. 

It is well known that Spinoza believes that “men think themselves free, because they are 
conscious of their volitions and their appetite, and do not think, even in their dreams, of 
the causes by which they are disposed to wanting and willing, because they are ignorant” 
(El App). The idea that free will is an inadequate idea arising from the ignorance of the 
causal determinations of an individual's operation is a trope across Spinoza’s whole corpus 
(for a fuller discussion see Kisner 2011 and Lenz 2017). For present purposes, however, it 
is important to appreciate why the imagination of free will is a systemic and necessary com- 
ponent of the desiderative core of the affective field. Free will concerns not only ‘others,’ 
but first of all oneself: it is the individual who is the first to think about herself as a ‘free 
agent.’ As mentioned earlier, the individual always desires to imagine what can be condu- 
cive to increase her own power or avoid any decrease of power (E3p12—13). Imagining 
oneself as free has two crucial advantages: (1) it allows the individual to imagine herself as 
the cause of her own increase of power; and (2) it allows the individual to imagine herself 
as ‘in full control’ of her own reactions and thus capable of coping with both positive and 
negative situations. 


334 


SPINOZA ON THE PASSIONS AND THE SELF 


Consider the first point. If an individual interacts with some object and, in the reaction, 
an increase of power follows, then by imagining herself as free, the individual can imagine 
that her own reaction is the main reason for her own increase of power. This directs desid- 
erative power back to the individual itself and fosters her self-esteem, creating a joyful 
imaginative loop about how good the individual is. If, on the contrary, the individual would 
think the whole process as causally determined and necessitated, she could not imagine 
any of its components as the sole and main cause of the resulting joy. Hence, there would 
be no particular reason to think of the individual herself as the main cause of the joy she 
experiences. Yet, insofar as possible, the individual will strive to be able to imagine what 
increases her power, and imagining herself as the sole cause of her own joy is surely a way 
of satisfying this desire. Hence, insofar as possible, the individual will strive to imagine her- 
self as free rather than as a necessitated agent. 

Consider now the second point. If an individual interacts with some object and, in the 
reaction, a diminishment of power follows, then by imagining herself as free, the individual 
can imagine that she can somehow ‘pull herself out’ of the situation or do something to 
counter or even eliminate the diminishment of power. Sadness triggers aversion and by 
imagining herself as free, the individual can imagine her ability to remove herself from the 
situation that generates sadness. From an imaginative point of view, imagining any sad- 
ness as necessary leads to imagining it as inescapable, and thus it is contrary to the desire 
for imagining the removal of its cause. By imagining oneself as free, the individual imag- 
ines that the causal network in which she operates can be escaped or altered at her 
convenience, or at least that she can try to do so. This leads to a sense of ‘being in control’ 
of one’s own reactions, which in turn satisfies the desire for thinking what might improve 
one’s power. 

Of course, none of this imagining works as it claims to. As Spinoza demonstrates in Part 5 
of the Ethics, it is by adequately understanding how all things operate in a necessary way that 
one is actually more capable of dealing with affects of joy without developing ambition and 
love for esteem, and that one can much more effectively cope with affects of sadness without 
cultivating hatred, frustration, and scorn. For present purposes, however, the crucial point is 
that the belief in freedom is just another crucial piece of the affective field and originates from 
the same desiderative core at the center of it. It is not only by ignorance and chance that indi- 
viduals imagine themselves as free. Freedom is a general imaginative assumption that satisfies 
the key desire for imagining what can bring about more joy and remove as much sadness as 
possible (see also Kisner 2011 and Gatens’s chapter in this Companion). 


3. Beyond Self and Other 


The sense of being a self experienced in daily life is built around two key components: dia- 
chronic identity and control. Spinoza’s account of the affects shows how both of these 
ideas originate from the complex interplay of affective conditionings and external causes, 
structured and shaped in the affective field produced by each individual’s desiderative 
imagination. This entails that the key components of the daily sense of being a self are pro- 
duced by imagination and thus epistemically inadequate. However, Spinoza’s account has 
further implications. 

Not only is the sense of the self an imaginative fiction, but also the sense of ‘others’ who 
interact with the self. The image of others is itself heavily determined by the imaginative 


335 


ANDREA SANGIACOMO 


conditionings of the mind and stirred by its desiderative patterns. This does not mean that 
the others do not exist, but rather that what an individual imagines as ‘the others’ is just 
an imagination, which is more telling about the individual’s own desires than about how 
things really are. Today’s philosophy often stresses the relational nature of the self and 
how it is constituted in its relationship with others. Spinoza’s philosophy develops this 
point with a peculiar twist: both the self and the others are, ultimately, imaginative con- 
structions and they are both co-constituted within the same affective field. If the self is an 
imaginative construction, the others are too. If the self is an inadequate idea, the others 
are too. 

In Spinoza’s philosophy, however, imagination and affects are not the whole story. While 
the mind is often dominated by imagination, it never completely loses its power of thinking 
adequately. If one understands thinking adequately as understanding the agreement in 
nature between things and how they all express the same substance, one can infer that 
adequate knowledge goes beyond the dualism necessarily implied by the imagination of a 
‘self’ and ‘the others.’ Thinking adequately would then amount to experiencing reality in 
a way that acknowledges the continuity of what exists beyond any divisive boundaries — 
and in this sense would be ‘blind’ to real distinctions. In fact, the whole point of Spinoza’s 
monism is to show that what exists is the infinite and only substance (God or nature) and 
its infinite manifold of modifications. None of these modifications is really distinct from 
any of the others, since it could not exist independently or without them (E1p15s, E1p28). 
Modes are different from one another, without being ontologically ‘other’ from one another. 
Modes can be individuals without being ontologically ‘self.’ 

Even if, within the affective field, imagining reality as shaped by the sense of being a self in 
front of others can be a device to fancy one’s greater power of acting, this imagination is nec- 
essarily going to be frustrated and countered by the reality of things. As Spinoza demon- 
strates, by pretending that everybody will live according to one’s own desires, everybody ends 
up being an enemy and a hindrance to one’s own happiness. Nonetheless, reality is still there, 
andthe mind has always the power of adequately understanding it (see also Sangiacomo 2019 
and James’s chapter in this Companion). As Spinoza demonstrates, “so long as we are not torn 
by affects contrary to our nature, we have the power of ordering and connecting the affec- 
tions of the body according to the order of the intellect” (E5p10). When there is enough 
peace and tranquility, when external conditions are favorable for allowing the mind to relax 
its constant desiderative struggle, adequate knowledge can blossom. Living in the affective 
field has perhaps some gratifications, but it has many dangers. Spinoza acknowledges one 
possible escape: cultivate adequate knowledge and go beyond the fancy of self and others by 
understanding the continuous and infinitely unfolding nature of reality. 


References 


Armstrong, A. (2009). Autonomy and the relational individual: Spinoza and feminism. In: Rereading 
the Canon: Feminist Interpretations of Benedict de Spinoza (ed. M. Gatens), 43-64. University Park, 
PA: Pennsylvania State University Press. 

Armstrong, A., Green, K., and Sangiacomo, A. (eds.) (2019). Spinoza and Relational Autonomy: Being 
with Others. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press. 

Gatens, M. and Lloyd, G. (1999). Collective Imaginings. Spinoza, Past and Present. London and 
New York: Routledge. 


336 


SPINOZA ON THE PASSIONS AND THE SELF 


James, S. (1997). Passion and Action. The Emotions in Seventeenth-Century Philosophy. Oxford: 
Clarendon Press. 

Jaquet, C. (2004). L’Unité du corps et de l’esprit. Affects, actions et passions chez Spinoza. Paris: PUF. 

Kisner, M. (2011). Spinoza on Human Freedom. Reason, Autonomy and the Good Life. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 

Lenz, M. (2017). Whose freedom? The idea of appropriation in Spinoza’s compatibilism. Zeitschrift 
fiir philosophische Forschung 71 (3): 343-357. 

Macherey, P. (1995). Introduction a l’Ethique de Spinoza: la troisiéme partie, la vie affective. Paris: PUF. 

Sangiacomo, A. (2019). Spinoza on Reason, Passions and the Supreme Good. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press. 

Steinberg, J. (2018). Spinoza’s Political Psychology. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Vinciguerra, L. (2005). Spinoza et le signe. La Genése de l’imagination. Paris: Vrin. 


337 


od 


The Serpent and the Dove: Spinoza’s Two Paths 
to Enlightenment 


MICHAH GOTTLIEB 


Genesis 3:1—5; 8:10—-14 


Whether Spinoza should be regarded as a medieval or modern thinker has been much 
debated. In 1921, Harry Wolfson informed readers that he would be publishing a new 
book titled Spinoza the Last of the Mediaevals (Wolfson 1921, p. 101). By contrast, in 1985 
Emilia Giancotti presented Spinoza as a forerunner of “modern materialism” noting that 
“beneath his ‘faded theological finery’ is a theoretical kernel contributing to progress” 
(Giancotti 1997, pp. 48, 61). Antonio Damasio has recently described Spinoza as antici- 
pating key insights in contemporary neurobiology (Damasio 2003). 

In his 1965 preface to the English translation of Die Religionskritik Spinoza, Leo Strauss 
presented Spinoza as putting a medieval worldview on a modern basis. He noted that “at first 
glance” Spinoza appeared to be more medieval than Descartes, Bacon, and Hobbes. What 
marked these philosophers as modern was their new conception of reason’s relation to hap- 
piness. While classical and medieval philosophers regarded theoretical contemplation as the 
highest expression of reason that yielded the greatest joy, modern philosophers saw the prac- 
tical conquest of nature as the pinnacle of reason and the best means to happiness. Strauss 
asserted that Spinoza “restored the dignity of speculation,” but did so “on the basis of modern 
philosophy or science” making him “the first great thinker who attempted a synthesis of 
pre-modern (classical-medieval) and modern philosophy” (Strauss 1965, pp. 15-16). 

For a long time, Anglo-American scholars have treated Spinoza’s Ethics primarily as a 
work of metaphysics or epistemology. In doing so, they failed to take seriously the title that 
Spinoza chose for his book (see Deleuze 1988, pp. 17-29). In naming his book Ethics, Spinoza 
was recalling Aristotle’s Nicomachean Ethics and had the same goal as Aristotle — to identify 
the highest good and teach one how to live it. 

In this chapter, I will argue that in the Ethics Spinoza seeks to guide the reader to enlighten- 
ment. I use “enlightenment” not in the technical sense as referring to the eighteenth-century 
movement, but in the sense of a liberating inner transformation impacting intellect, affect, and 
action in which one’s existential sense of self is reshaped. I will begin by exploring how Spinoza 
decided to begin his quest for enlightenment before turning to two paths to enlightenment 
he presents in the Ethics, which I call the Serpent and the Dove. I will only be able to sketch 
an outline of these two paths here, but I hope to fill them out in a more extended work. 


A Companion to Spinoza, First Edition. Edited by Yitzhak Y. Melamed. 
© 2021 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2021 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd. 


338 


SPINOZA’S TWO PATHS TO ENLIGHTENMENT 


1. Beginning the Path 


The decision to seek enlightenment is the crucial first step. Spinoza describes the process 
that moved him to this decision in the preface to his unfinished Treatise on the Emendation 
of the Intellect: 

After experience had taught me that all the things which regularly occur in ordinary life 
are empty and futile, and I saw that all the things which were the cause or object of my fear 
had nothing of good or bad in themselves, except insofar as [my] mind was moved by them, 
[resolved at last to try to find out whether there was anything which would be the true good 
(verum bonum), capable of communicating itself, and which alone would affect the mind, 
all others being rejected — whether there was something which, once found and acquired, 
would continuously give me the greatest joy, to eternity (TIE §1 | GII/5). 

Spinoza contrasts the “things which regularly occur in ordinary life” with the “true 
good” (verum bonum). While the former are “empty and futile,” “the true good” is sufficient 
to reliably give the greatest joy without end. In recounting what moved him to seek this “true 
good,” Spinoza singles out a single afflictive emotion, “fear.” We can understand why by 
considering his early biography. 

Born in Amsterdam in 1632 to Hannah Deborah and Miguel, Spinoza was the fourth of 
five children. He had two older sisters, Miriam and Rebecca, an older brother Isaac, and a 
younger brother Abraham. At age six, Spinoza lost his mother and his father married 
Esther Fernand. When he was 17 Spinoza’s brother Isaac died. A year later his sister 
Miriam passed away. Two and half years after that his father Miguel and stepmother Esther 
died. His father’s estate was in arrears and Spinoza inherited the debt (Nadler 1999, 
pp. 42-47, 61-65, 85-89; Nadler 2003, p. 187). 

Spinoza’s family was a pillar of the Amsterdam Jewish community and he received a 
traditional Sephardic Jewish education. But he developed severe religious doubts and at 
age 24 was excommunicated. No Jew was permitted to do business or even talk to him. He 
left the Jewish community latinizing his name to Benedict. Despite his bravado (he report- 
edly compared his leaving the Jewish community to the Israelites’ exodus from Egypt), it is 
not surprising that Spinoza was beset by fear (Nadler 1999, pp. 116-154). 

He turned to philosophy for consolation, coming to realize that “all the things which 
were the cause or object of my fear had nothing of good or bad in themselves, except 
insofar as [my] mind was moved by them.” In other words, while Spinoza had assumed 
that certain things were good or bad in themselves, he came to understand that their 
goodness or badness lay solely in his judgments about them. This was a critical discovery. 
Experience had taught Spinoza that external events lay largely outside his control. If fear 
was his inevitable response to these events, he was doomed to a life of anxiety. But if his 
own mind was the source of his fear, then he wondered whether it would be possible to 
bring fear under control. Was it possible to replace the waves of anxiety buffeting him 
with the unperturbable joy that pre-modern philosophers had spoken of when describing 
the “true good”? 

In Spinoza’s day, contemporary philosophers such as Hobbes rejected the pre-modern 
philosophical ideal. Hobbes gave this striking expression in his 1651 Leviathan: 


.. the felicity of this life consisteth not in the repose of a mind satisfied. For there is no such 
finis ultimus (utmost aim) nor summum bonum (greatest good) as is spoken of in the books of 
the old moral philosophers. Nor can a man any more live whose desires are at an end than he 
whose senses and imaginations are at a stand. Felicity is a continual progress of the desire 


339 


MICHAH GOTLIEB 


from one object to another, the attaining of the former being still but the way to the latter. The 
cause whereof is that the object of man’s desire is not to enjoy once only, and for one instant 
of time, but to assure forever the way of his future desire. (Hobbes 1994, 1:11, p. 57) 


This is one of the clearest articulations of the shift from the pre-modern to the modern 
philosophical ideal. Hobbes dismisses the idea of a summum bonum consisting of a con- 
tented, tranquil mind as belonging to the “books of the old moral philosophers.” He does 
not necessarily deny that such as state would be a great good were it possible. But he sees it 
as a chimera. For Hobbes, a fully contented, tranquil mind presupposes extinguishing 
desire. Since we can never live without desire, a contented, tranquil mind is impossible. 

Hobbes turns necessity into virtue. We can achieve happiness not by extinguishing 
desire but by maximally satisfying it. Turning the pre-modern idea of the summum bonum 
on its head, Hobbes defines “felicity” as “a continual progress of the desire from one object 
to another.” The highest exercise of reason is not contemplative and theoretical, but produc- 
tive and practical where one discovers how to create conditions to maximize one’s ability to 
satisfy desire. Hobbes concludes that since our emotions are determined by external events 
which we can never fully control, we must accept afflictive emotions such as fear as an 
inevitable part of life. Indeed fear of violent death is our greatest fear because it means the 
cessation of desire and so of all happiness. As Hobbes put it in his 1642 De Cive: “[it is an] 
absolutely certain postulate of human nature. . . [that] each man strives to avoid violent 
death as the supreme evil in nature” (Hobbes 1998, p. 6). 

Spinoza is aware of modern skepticism that a path to mental tranquility and reliable 
joy can be found. He candidly recounts his own doubts at even starting to search for the 
“true good”: 


Isay that I resolved at last —for at first glance it seemed ill-advised to be willing to lose something 
certain for something then uncertain. I saw, of course, the advantages that honor and wealth 
bring, and that I would be forced to abstain from seeking them, if I wished to devote myself 
seriously to something new and different; and if by chance the greatest happiness lay in them, 
I saw that I should have to do without it. But if it did not lie in them, and I devoted my energies 
only to acquiring them, then I would equally go without it. (TIE §2 | GII/5) 


Like Aristotle, Spinoza contrasts the “true good” with three main conventional goods: 
wealth, honor, and sense pleasures (see Aristotle 1980, I.5, 6-7). He recounts his belief 
that devoting himself to seeking the “true good” would require sacrificing conventional 
goods. Spinoza had no illusions about the downsides of conventional goods. We have 
already seen his description of the fear that attachment to these goods induced in him. He 
also mentions specific drawbacks of each. 

With sense pleasures, Spinoza speaks of the sadness and disappointment caused by their 
transience. Recalling the saying attributed to Galen “post coitum omne animal triste est” 
(after sex every animal is sad), Spinoza observes that “after the enjoyment of sensual plea- 
sure is past, the greatest sadness follows.” As the exultation from sense pleasure recedes, 
we often feel emptiness and regret (see TIE §4 | G II/6). Spinoza observes that wealth and 
honor do not share this drawback as “the more each of these is possessed, the more joy is 
increased.” Nevertheless, they often bring suffering because of their unreliability. We could 
devote our lives to attaining wealth and honor and never succeed or succeed and then lose 
these goods. With the pursuit honor, Spinoza identifies an additional downside namely 
that it often puts us in bondage. To gain the approval of others, we must often forgo being 
true to ourselves (Ibid). 


340 


SPINOZA'’S TWO PATHS TO ENLIGHTENMENT 


Still, these drawbacks were not sufficient to convince Spinoza to abandon conventional 
goods. For experience had taught him that conventional goods could bring a measure of happi- 
ness. He thus faced a dilemma. If the best one could hope for in life was wealth, honor, and sense 
pleasures, then giving them up to seek a phantom “true good” would be foolish. But if the “true 
good” could be achieved and one left it aside to pursue the unsatisfactory conventional goods 
one would be giving up the possibility of living a fulfilled, joyful life (TIE §6 | GII/6). 

Spinoza tells us that he initially tried not to choose. He would continue to live like other 
people pursuing conventional goods, while privately seeking the “true good.” But he tells 
us that this failed because pursuing conventional goods demanded all his attention. He 
was again back at a crossroads (TIE §3 | G II/5-6). 

At this point, Spinoza’s thinking about conventional goods began to shift. Previously, he 
had regarded the transience, unreliability, and threat to freedom of conventional goods as 
their chief drawbacks. Now he came to see the direct dangers they posed to his physical and 
mental health. Spinoza recalled people who had risked their lives in the single-minded drive 
for money, honor, and sense pleasure. He thought of those who had achieved these goods 
only to suffer through overindulgence or being brought down by others’ jealousy. He 
thought of the relationships broken because of disputes over money and competition for 
prestige. Viewed this way, the sacrifices he would be making to seek the “true good” did not 
seem as considerable (TIE §7-10 | G II/6—7). 

And yet he continued to vacillate: “For though I perceived this evil so clearly in my 
mind, I still could not, on that account, put aside all greed, desire for sensual pleasure, and 
love of esteem” (TIE §10 | GII/7). Spinoza was convinced that Hobbes was right that a life 
without desire was impossible. He therefore did not see how he could devote himself single- 
mindedly to the “true good.” 

Spinoza finally broke through this impasse when he had two realizations. First, he 
began to taste the joy and freedom that came from achieving the “true good.” While these 
experiences were at first “rare” and “short” they helped assure him that he was not embark- 
ing on a fool’s errand. Second, Spinoza came to realize that Hobbes was wrong in claiming 
that seeking the “true good” required extinguishing all desire. Instead, he returned to the 
classical idea that what was needed was that desire be in balance. This meant seeking con- 
ventional goods as a means rather than as an end. Spinoza had assumed that the pursuit of 
conventional goods must be all-consuming. But this was only true if one regarded these 
goods as the highest. If, however, one pursued wealth, esteem, and sense pleasure as means 
to secure the leisure, mental balance, and health needed to pursue the “true good,” the 
time and effort one needed to devote to them was quite limited (TIE §11 | GII/7-8). 

Towards the end of his autobiographical preface, Spinoza provides a rough picture of 
what the “true good” looks like. It involves four intertwined transformations. The first trans- 
formation is epistemological. A person comes to conceive that there is a “nature much 
stronger and more enduring than his own” and that this nature involves “the knowledge of 
the union that the mind has with the whole of Nature.” The second transformation is 
ontological. This new understanding displaces one’s lived sense of self as one “acquires” this 
stronger, more enduring nature. The third transformation is affective as reliable, continuous 
joy accompanies this new sense of self. The final transformation is moral as one understands 
that one’s delight in knowing the “true good” is enhanced by others also enjoying it, which 
leads one to “take pains” to help others attain it. Spinoza calls enjoying the “true good” 
together with others the “highest good” (Summum Bonum) (TIE §12-14 | GII/8-9). 

While in his autobiographical preface Spinoza merely sketches the end of the path, in 
the Ethics he teaches one how to reach it. 


341 


MICHAH GOTLIEB 


2. Follow the Yellow Brick Road 


In E2p40s2 Spinoza lays out his famous account of three kinds of cognition. He informs us 
that the first kind of cognition, which he calls “opinion or imagination” comes either from 
“random experience” or from what he calls “signs” namely things we have heard, read, or 
remembered. Spinoza tells us that since this type of cognition has not been organized by 
the intellect, it is “inadequate and confused” (see E2p41). 

Cognition of the second kind comes from having “common notions and adequate ideas 
of the properties of things” and Spinoza calls this type of cognition “reason” (ratio). He 
describes the third kind of cognition as “proceeding from an adequate idea of the formal 
essence of certain attributes of God to the adequate knowledge of the essence of things” 
and calls it “intuitive knowledge” (scientia intuitiva) (E2p40s2). As only the second and 
third kinds of cognition produce ideas that are “necessarily true,” they alone constitute 
knowledge (E2p41). 

An apparent contradiction in Spinoza’s writings helps illuminate these two kinds of 
knowledge. 

Near the beginning of the Ethics, Spinoza defines God: “By God I understand a being 
absolutely infinite, that is a substance consisting of an infinity of attributes of which each 
expresses an eternal and infinite essence” (E1d7). Is this God universally known or does 
knowing God requires special knowledge? Spinoza seems to affirm the latter in Chapter 6 
of the TTP when he writes that “God’s existence is not known through itself” (TTP 6 | 
G II/84). But he seems to make the opposite claim in E2p47s when he writes that “God’s 
infinite essence and eternity are known to all.” 

Let us explore this contradiction more carefully. In a note to the passage cited from the 
TTP, Spinoza explains that “when the idea we have of God himself is not clear and distinct, 
but confused, we doubt God’s existence . . . for one who conceives the divine nature con- 
fusedly does not see that it pertains to God’s nature to exist.” Spinoza then explains that we 
can attain a “clear and distinct” idea of God by attending to “certain very simple notions, 
called common notions” and “connecting them with those pertaining to the divine 
nature.” Spinoza then refers the reader to the preface to his 1663 book on Descartes’ 
Principles of Philosophy (see TTP 6, Adn 6). In that preface, Lodewijk Meyer explains the 
geometrical “synthetic method” that Spinoza uses to present Descartes’ ideas. This method 
involves constructing truths from self-evident “definitions” and “postulates and axioms” 
that Meyer calls “common notions” (DPP, Prae | G I/127-129). So Spinoza is claiming 
that we can know that God exists when we logically connect an adequate definition of God 
to certain self-evident axioms. This is the method of the second kind of cognition. 

Turning to E2p47, Spinoza demonstrates that “the human mind has an adequate 
knowledge of God’s eternal and infinite essence” by combining two main claims. The first 
is that “the human mind has ideas from which it perceives itself, its own body, and external 
bodies as actually existing,” while the second is that we can only know the existence of 
singular things insofar as they are modes of God’s infinite attributes, which are God’s 
“eternal and infinite essence.” Spinoza tells us that by combining these two claims we can 
logically conclude that knowing that a particular thing exists presupposes that we have 
adequate knowledge of God’s eternal and infinite essence. This seems to reflect the third 
kind of cognition and in the scholium Spinoza explicitly connects E2p47 with this kind of 
cognition. 

I have treated the second and third kinds of cognition very briefly as I discuss their 
meaning only insofar as it illuminates Spinoza’s two paths to enlightenment that I call the 


342 


SPINOZA'’S TWO PATHS TO ENLIGHTENMENT 


Serpent and the Dove. The Serpent slithers up from below using the second kind of cogni- 
tion, while the Dove swoops down from above using the third kind of cognition. I will show 
how these two different paths correlate to distinct expressions of the epistemological, 
ontological, affective, and moral transformations that Spinoza describes as occurring when 
one attains the “true good” (see Schechter 2015, p. 253; Carlisle 2017, pp. 218-234). 


3. The Serpent 


Many byways converge in Spinoza’s path to the “true good,” and it is beyond the bounds of 
this chapter to survey them all. But I will focus on an important one. In Meyer’s preface to 
Spinoza’s book on Descartes, he makes clear that Spinoza does not agree with all the 
Cartesian doctrines he presents. Meyer cites free will as an example. He informs the reader 
that while Spinoza presents the doctrine as “seeming to be proved with sufficient diligence,” 
in fact, Spinoza does not agree with Descartes that the will is free (DPP, Prae | G I/132). 
Meyer also tells us that Spinoza rejects Descartes’ claim that the human mind is an individual 
substance. Spinoza agrees with Descartes that “there is a thinking substance in nature,” 
but he denies that the thinking substance “constitutes the essence of the human mind” 
instead positing that “just as Extension is determined by no limits, so also is Thought deter- 
mined by no limits” (DPP, Prae | G I/132). Substance involves infinite extension and infi- 
nite thought. 

For Spinoza, the ideas of free will and individual mental substance are “confused.” In the 
Ethics, he uses the synthetic method to bring clarity to these ideas, which he sees as 
interconnected. Spinoza presents his denial of free will in E2p48: “In the mind there is no 
absolute, or free will, but the mind is determined to will this or that by a cause which is 
also determined by another and this again by another, and so to infinity.” Spinoza’s dem- 
onstration of this proposition is quite simple. The key proposition he relies on is 
E2p11 which Spinoza summarizes as asserting that “the mind is a certain and determi- 
nate mode of thinking.” According to Spinoza, it is impossible to find a substantial mind 
— all one can find are individual thoughts. The notion of an individual mind is simply an 
idea added to a collection of ideas (see Ibid.), and these ideas are parts of God’s infinite 
intellect (see E2p11c). Free will assumes an independent faculty of mind where various 
possibilities are weighed before being chosen by a will. It is as if there is a little wizard 
sitting inside us freely deciding which strings to pull. But if there is no individual mind, 
there cannot be free choice. Spinoza explains that what is commonly described as an act 
of free willis in fact an idea necessarily determined by previous ideas. He cites El p28 which 
proves that “every singular thing. . .can neither exist nor be determined to produce an 
effect unless it is determined to exist and produce an effect by another cause which is also 
finite. . .and so on, to infinity.” For Spinoza, all finite things exist in a necessary causal 
chain. This is clear in the case of extension understood mechanistically. A billiard ball’s 
movement is determined by the causes of its movement. Once one knows the initial con- 
ditions (the force striking the billiard ball, the material of the cue, the resistance of the 
surface, the mass of the ball, etc.), one can discover with certainty where it will end up, as 
this is completely determined by physical forces. Spinoza teaches that thoughts are no 
different. Individual thoughts are simply finite modes necessarily determined by their 
relation to other thoughts. He explains that the idea of free will arises from the fact that 
a mind is conscious of its appetites and volitions while being ignorant of the causes of 
these appetites and volitions (Spinoza, Elapp | G II/78; see Melamed 2017, pp. 127-134). 


343 


MICHAH GOTLIEB 


Just as there is no faculty of mind, so there is no faculty of will (see E2p48c). What we call 
a “volition” is simply an affirmation or negation of an idea that is “one and the same” as 
the idea itself (see E2p49). 

For Spinoza, understanding the illusion of a substantial, finite, free self precipitates an 
epistemological and ontological transformation. The self that had been taken to be a free 
individual is revealed to be a constellation of ideas that have been determined within a 
larger causal order. One might think that this understanding would cause one to become 
agitated and fearful and erode one’s sense of moral responsibility. But Spinoza argues just 
the opposite. These realizations bring “complete peace of mind” as one learns to be “content 
with one’s own things.” They produce resilience as one learns to “bear calmly both good 
fortune and bad.” And they bring true joy as one learns to see that one’s “greatest happi- 
ness” consists only in “knowledge of God.” These realizations also motivate us “to do only 
those things which love and morality advise,” to be “helpful to one’s neighbor,” and to 
learn to “hate no one, to disesteem no one, to mock no one; to be angry at no one; to envy 
no one” (see E2p49s4 | GII/135-137). 

How does the Serpent effect these transformations? I begin with the affective ones. In 
E3p6—7 Spinoza presents his famous doctrine of conatus. In E3p6 he writes that, “Each 
thing, as far as it can, by its own power, strives to persevere in its own being.” In other 
words, every singular thing (i.e. finite mode) seeks to preserve itself (see E3p6d). In the 
next proposition, Spinoza tells us that this striving (conatus) to persevere constitutes the 
essence of every thing. 

Conatus provides the key to Spinoza’s theory of affects. The foundation of his conception 
of affect is his definition of appetite and desire. Spinoza defines “appetite” (appetitus) as the 
striving to persevere in our being when related to mind and body together, while “desire” 
(cupiditas) is “appetite together with consciousness of appetite.” Given that conatus consti- 
tutes our essence, Spinoza logically concludes that “appetite is, therefore, nothing but the 
very essence of man, from whose nature follow those things that promote his preserva- 
tion” (E3p9s). Spinoza accepts Hobbes’ claim that desire is fundamental to our nature. 

For Spinoza, it is hardwired into us that power is the key to preserving ourselves. As 
such, our conatus is directed to increasing our power (see E3p12). Spinoza tells us that our 
emotions come from perceptions of fluctuations in our power (see E3p11). For Spinoza, we 
have two fundamental emotions: joy and sadness. Joy involves the idea of an increase in our 
power of acting, while sadness involves the idea of a decrease in our power of acting (E3p11s). 

Spinoza makes clear that from three primary affects — desire, joy, and sadness — all the 
others follow (E3p11s). For our purposes, I would like to focus on three derivative affects: 
love, hate, and fear. Given our drive to self-preservation, Spinoza asserts that we naturally 
“strive to imagine those things that increase or aid the body’s power of acting” (E3p12). 
Put differently, we seek to have present to us things that we imagine will increase our 
power. The emotion we experience for things we seek to have present to us is love. It is there- 
fore not surprising that Spinoza defines love as “joy with the accompanying idea of an 
external cause” (E3p13s). We love those things we imagine bring us joy, that is increase 
our power. We hate things that we see as decreasing our power and so seek to “remove and 
destroy” them (E3p13s; see E3p20; E3p23, E3p26). 

Spinoza’s account of fear begins with the claim that we can be “affected with the same 
affect of joy or sadness from the image of a past or future thing as from the image of a 
present thing” (E3p18). In other words, just as the idea of a present decrease in our power 
makes us sad, so anticipating a future decrease in our power or contemplating a past 
decrease in it brings sadness. Spinoza defines fear as “inconstant sadness which has 


344 


SPINOZA'’S TWO PATHS TO ENLIGHTENMENT 


arisen from the image of doubtful thing” (E3p18s2; E3da13). We feel fear when we have 
the idea of a future or past decrease in our power, but are uncertain whether it will or 
has happened. 

We saw that in his autobiographical preface, Spinoza describes being plagued by fear 
and seeking the “true good” to liberate him from it. In light of his denial of free will and of 
a substantial individual mind, we can better understand how this happens. Fear involves a 
sense that we lack the power to prevent our suffering. For Spinoza, what motivates fear is 
not simply lack of control, but the desire to have control. One way to free ourselves from fear 
is by understanding what we can and cannot control. Spinoza advises us to exercise our 
power to the greatest extent possible, but accept that much lies outside it. As he puts it: 
“Human power is very limited and infinitely surpassed by the power of external things. So 
we do not have an absolute power to adapt things outside us to our use. Nevertheless we 
shall bear calmly those things which happen to us contrary to what the principle of our 
advantage demands, if we are conscious that we have done our duty, that the power we 
have could not have extended itself to the point we could have avoided those things and 
that we are a part of a whole of nature whose order we follow” (E4app32). The sense 
that we have done our best and must accept that there is much we cannot control helps 
calm fear. 

Spinoza observes that by focusing on uncertainty, fear highlights our lack of knowledge 
and power. This is reflected in what he calls the “inconstant” nature of fear. As the future is 
uncertain, we are disposed to seek signs that things will either turn out well or badly for us. 
In other words, we let ourselves be guided by the “random experience,” that characterizes 
the first kind of cognition. When we observe a sign that we interpret to mean that the 
future will turn out badly, we feel fear, while in the opposite case, we feel hope (see TTP Praef 
| G III/5—6). As hope and fear are two sides of the same coin, Spinoza tells us “there is nei- 
ther hope without fear, nor fear without hope” and people vacillate between the two 
(E3dal3exp). Since knowledge is an expression of our mental power, fear, which is 
grounded in ignorance, involves sadness (E4p47; E4p63). For Spinoza, there are two ways 
of gaining control over fear. First, when we attain a “clear and distinct idea” of the causes 
of fear and why it is necessarily arising in us, it ceases to be something that we passively suf- 
fer and we gain some power over it. As he puts it: “The more an affect is known to us, the 
more it is in our power, and the less the mind is acted upon by it” (E5p3c). Second, fear is fed 
by our focusing on uncertainty. If instead of following fear’s tendency to project us into 
unknown possibilities we instead accept the rational truth that there is no possibility but 
that everything that happens is necessarily determined to occur exactly as it does, our wild 
swings between hope and fear will lessen and we will attain equanimity (E4app32). 

Spinoza also describes how the Serpent effects a moral transformation. When we are 
under the sway of the imagination (the first type of cognition), we see ourselves as separate 
individuals and we lust for the selfish goods that are glorified by society, namely wealth, 
honor, and sense pleasure. But as we follow the Serpent we gain more autonomy as we 
come to realize that pursuing these selfish, limited goods causes us deep unhappiness by 
putting us into competition and conflict with others which leads to hate, envy, fear, and 
blame (E3p24S, E3p32, E3p39, E3p55s, E4p34). Seeking to indulge our lusts also deeply 
unsettles us and erodes our mental balance since passions are by their nature unstable and 
we are naturally tossed between them (E3p51, E4p33). 

As we come to understand that everything is determined by necessary causes and that 
there is no free will or substantial individual, our hatred and blame for others lessens. For 
hatred and blame are strengthened by seeing others as agents who freely choose to harm 


345 


MICHAH GOTLIEB 


us (Elapp | GII 81; E3p29s; E3p49s). When we understand others’ actions as determined 
by along chain of causes extending outside of them, our hatred and blame diminishes and 
we attain greater equanimity (E3p48—49). 

Understanding that universal laws of nature govern all reality also leads us to appre- 
ciate that pursuing moral virtue and knowledge of God are much better means of attain- 
ing joy than pursuing money, honor, and sense pleasures. Knowledge of God is an 
expression of the greatest mental power so Spinoza calls it “the mind’s greatest good” 
(E4p28). Moral virtue and knowledge of God are unlimited goods that do not breed compe- 
tition and conflict since they “can be enjoyed equally by all” (E4p32). Not only does another 
person seeking moral virtue not detract from my own ability to attain moral virtue, it 
advances it since through cooperation I can more easily provide for my own needs. Similarly, 
another person seeking “knowledge of God” does not threaten my knowledge of God, but 
can advance it as I can learn from and be inspired by them (E4p35s). Since I benefit from 
others attaining the “true good,” I am happy when they seek it (E4p35—37). As such, my 
envy, fear, hate, and blame of others dissolves. Cultivating moral virtue and knowledge of 
God also yields greater mental balance since instead of my aims being dictated by volatile 
passions, I focus on a stable goal prescribed by reason (E4p37s1; Carlisle, 2017, p. 232). 


4. The Dove 


In the Serpent, which corresponded to the second type of cognition, we saw how Spinoza 
guided the reader with confused ideas up the tree of knowledge by ordering confused ideas 
and discerning “common” truths that govern all of nature. This yielded a clear and distinct 
idea of the “true good,” that resulted in an epistemological, ontological, affective, and moral 
transformation. In Part 5 of the Ethics, Spinoza describes another path to the “true good” 
that begins with adequate knowledge of God and swoops down connecting it with finite 
individuals that results in transformations that have a similar, but different coloration 
than those found in the Serpent. I call this path, that corresponds to the third kind of cog- 
nition, the Dove. 

For Spinoza, God’s infinite attributes are expressed through the finite modes. As such, 
“the more we understand singular things, the more we understand God” (E5p24). While 
with the Serpent one attains truth through a gradual step-by-step process, with Dove truth is 
known immediately through intellectual intuition. As a non-discursive path grounded in 
immediate intuition, Spinoza has difficulty describing the Dove which is why Part 5 of the 
Ethics appears fragmentary, filled with “intervals and leaps, hiatuses, and contractions” 
(see Deleuze 1997, p. 30). 

The epistemological transformation in the Dove occurs as “the union that the mind has 
with the whole of Nature” is understood not as an abstract, discursively cognized idea, but as 
a concrete, intuitively grasped truth. My mind is understood to be nothing but finite ideas 
expressing God’s infinite attribute of thought. This epistemological transformation involves 
an ontological transformation as my sense of self is displaced. 

These epistemological and ontological transformations result in an affective transforma- 
tion. As long as the self is identified with a constellation of finite ideas, the power of the self 
is limited and it is in bondage since all finite ideas are determined by their place in an infi- 
nite causal chain. But when finite ideas are understood as expressions of God’s infinite 
attribute of thought the boundaries of the self expand and with it its power. Since joy 


346 


SPINOZA'’S TWO PATHS TO ENLIGHTENMENT 


results from a sense that one’s power has been increased, this new conception of self yields 
intense joy. And since love results from the sense that another has increased one’s power, 
one is suffused with love of God, whose expression I am. 

The Dove alone brings true freedom. In E1d7 Spinoza defines freedom as follows: “That 
thing is called free which exists from the necessity of is nature alone and it determined to 
act by itself alone.” Since God is the only substance (E1p14), God is the only being that is 
not dependent on external causes for its existence (E1d1) and is the only being that acts 
solely from the necessity of its own nature (E1p17). As such God alone is truly free. So it is 
only by experiencing oneself as an expression of God’s infinite essence that true freedom 
can be realized. 

In the Dove, past, future, and even present fall away as the world is experienced as 
an atemporal, infinitely rich plenitude expressing God’s attributes “under a species of 
eternity” (sub specie aeternitatis) (E5p29). With no more future, past, or present, all fear 
naturally dissolves including the greatest fear that Hobbes had described, fear of death. 
Absent temporality, death is but a mode of God’s infinite attribute of thought and it is 
understood that everything that has or will live exists eternally in the plenitude of God’s 
infinite essence. As a result, unshakeable “true peace of mind” is attained (E5p42s; 
Carlisle 2017, p. 232). 

Finally, a moral transformation occurs. Unlike in the Serpent where one controls one’s 
lust by reasoning that following selfish desires is not the best means to increase one’s power, 
in the Dove lust is naturally restrained. For lust comes from a desire to increase one’s power, but 
one is now suffused with a sense of infinite power (E5p42d). Love for all beings is naturally 
felt, since the existence of others expresses one’s power (see E5p36), and as things are 
known outside of time, this love can never be taken away (see E5p37). 

In his 1841 essay “Self-Reliance,” Ralph Waldo Emerson poetically describes the state 
of the Dove: 


And now at last the highest truth on this subject remains unsaid; probably cannot be said; for 
all that we say is the far-off remembering of the intuition. That thought, by what I can now 
nearest approach to say it, is this. When good is near you, when you have life in yourself, it is 
not by any known or accustomed way; you shall not discern the foot-prints of any other; you 
shall not see the face of man; you shall not hear any name; — the way, the thought, the good, 
shall be wholly strange and new. It shall exclude example and experience. You take the way 
from man, not to man. All persons that ever existed are its forgotten ministers. Fear and hope 
are alike beneath it. There is somewhat low even in hope. In the hour of vision, there is nothing 
that can be called gratitude, nor properly joy. The soul raised over passion beholds identity and 
eternal causation, perceives the self-existence of Truth and Right, and calms itself with know- 
ing that all things go well. Vast spaces of nature, the Atlantic Ocean, the South Sea, — long 
intervals of time, years, centuries, — are of no account. This which I think and feel underlay 
every former state of life and circumstances, as it does underlie my present, and what is called 
life, and what is called death. (Emerson 2008, p. 64) 


In conclusion, Spinoza’s two kinds of knowledge provide two paths to enlightenment 
that yield distinctive epistemological, ontological, affective and moral transformations. The 
Serpent uses reason to attain an understanding of “the union that the mind has with the 
whole of Nature” grounded in knowledge that all finite things are determined through 
their place in a necessary, infinite, causal order. This leads to controlling lust, committing 
oneself to moral virtue and knowledge of God, and equanimity. By contrast, the Dove uses 


347 


MICHAH GOTLIEB 


intuitive knowledge of finite things as expressions of God’s infinite essence to attain 
consciousness of “the union that the mind has with the whole of Nature” that results in 
the natural dissolving of lust, perpetual love of others, and unshakeable peace of mind. 

My analysis confirms that Strauss is correct in seeing Spinoza as seeking to provide a 
modern, scientific foundation for the medieval contemplative ideal of tranquility of mind. 
The recent rise of Positive Psychology which studies how equanimity and reliable joy can 
be actively cultivated are natural extensions of Spinoza’s project. But this is a topic for 
another paper. 


References 


Aristotle (2009). The Nicomachean Ethics (trans. D. Ross and L. Brown). Oxford: Oxford University 
Press. 

Carlisle, C. (2017). Spinoza’s Acquiescentia. Journal of the History of Philosophy 55 (2): 209-236. 

Damasio, A. (2003). Looking for Spinoza: Joy, Sorrow, and the Feeling Brain. New York; Harcourt. 

Deleuze, G. (1988). Spinoza: Practical Philosophy (trans. R. Hurley). San Francisco: City Lights. 

Deleuze, G. (1997). Spinoza and the three “ethics.” In: The New Spinoza (ed. W. Montag and T. Stolze, 
trans. D. Smith and M. Greco), 21—33. Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press. 

Emerson, R.W. (2008). Self-reliance. In: Emerson: Political Writings (ed. K. Sacks), 53—74. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 

Giancotti, E. (1997). The birth of modern materialism in Hobbes and Spinoza. In: The New Spinoza 
(ed. W. Montag and T. Stolze, trans T. Stolze), 49-64. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. 

Hobbes, T. (1994). Leviathan (ed. E. Curley). Indianapolis: Hackett Publishing. 

Hobbes, T. (1998). On the Citizen (ed. R. Tuck and M. Silverthorne). Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press. 

Melamed, Y. (2017). The causes of our belief in free will: Spinoza on necessary, “innate,” yet false 
cognition. In: Spinoza’s Ethics: A Critical Guide (ed. Y.Y. Melamed), 121—141. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 

Nadler, S. (1999). Spinoza: A Life. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Nadler, S. (2003). Rembrandt’s Jews. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 

Schechter, O. (2015). Temporalities and kinds of cognition in the treatise on the emendation of the 
intellect, the short treatise, and the ethics. In: The Young Spinoza (ed. Y.Y. Melamed), 238-254. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Strauss, L. (1965). Spinoza’s Critique of Religion (trans. E.M. Sinclair). Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press. 

Wolfson, H. (1921). Spinoza’s definition of substance and mode. Chronicum Spinozanum 1 
(101-112). 


348 


Part IV 


Ethics, Politics, and Religion 


By? 


Spinoza’s Moral Philosophy 
STEVEN NADLER 


For a long time, Spinoza’s moral philosophy was neglected in favor of his views in meta- 
physics and epistemology. The emphasis in scholarship and teaching was on Parts 1 and 2 
of the Ethics, typically to find a convenient niche for him between Descartes and Leibniz 
in the canon of so-called “rationalist” philosophers. However, it is not without reason 
that the work bears the title it does. Spinoza’s overall objective in the Ethics is to present 
an account of the human condition and the path to virtue, freedom and, well-being. (For 
studies of Spinoza’s moral philosophy, see Curley 1973; Frankena 1975; Mattern 1978; 
Garber 2004; Garrett 1996; Jarrett 2002, 2014; Kisner 2010a, 2010b, 2011; Kisner 
and Youpa 2014; LeBuffe 2007, 2010; Matheron 1971; Miller 2005; Nadler 2020a and 
2020b; Rutherford 2008; Scribano 2012; Steinberg 1984; and Youpa 2009, 2010a, 
and 2010b). Moreover, beyond individual eudaimonia and the means to achieve it, he 
also has something to say about how the virtuous person will treat others and help move 
them toward lives of rational virtue and flourishing. 


1. Good and Bad 


For Spinoza, terms such as ‘good’ and ‘bad’ do not refer to absolute and intrinsic features 
of things, properties that they have independently of a relationship to anything else, espe- 
cially human agents. Nothing in nature is, taken by itself and without relation to 
something, good or bad or perfect or imperfect, least of all when these words are under- 
stood in a normative sense. Whatever is just is, period. To put it another way, everything 
that exists is, if considered on its own, perfect to some degree, where ‘perfection’ is an 
ontological term to be understood simply as reality, or as the power to persevere in existence. 
There is no evaluative element involved in saying that something has perfection in this 
descriptive sense. “[Things] are all equal in this regard,” Spinoza says at the end of the 
Preface of Part 4 of the Ethics. This does not imply that every thing has the same degree of 
reality/power, but simply that every thing is simply some positive degree of reality/power. 

What ‘good’ and ‘bad’ (and ‘perfect’ and ‘imperfect’) in the normative sense do refer to, 
if not intrinsic non-relational features of things, is an evaluative measure of the degree to 


A Companion to Spinoza, First Edition. Edited by Yitzhak Y. Melamed. 
© 2021 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2021 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd. 


351 


STEVEN NADLER 


which a thing corresponds to some stipulated standard or model. The most obvious case in 
which this is so is the evaluation of an artifact. A building, for example, is deemed more or 
less perfect depending upon the extent to which it matches the architect’s original concep- 
tion, which serves as a standard to which the finished product is compared. “If someone 
has decided to make something, and has finished it, then he will call his thing perfect — and 
so will anyone who rightly knows, or thinks he knows, the mind and purpose of the author 
of the work” (E4preface | G II/205 | CI/543). By contrast, if one has no idea of what the 
artificer intended to create, one will have no way of assessing how “perfect” the artifact is. 
Without such a model to compare the product to, the term is meaningless. 

This evaluative practice gets extended to natural objects when human beings form 
universal ideas of kinds of things in nature. For example, from experience we conceive 
some ideal model of what a horse or a tree is. We then call some particular horse or tree 
“perfect” or “imperfect” depending upon how well it matches with that randomly created 
model. “When they see something happen in nature which does not agree with the model 
they have conceived of this kind of thing, they believe that Nature itself has failed or 
sinned, and left the thing imperfect” (E4preface | G II/206 | CI/544). 

The same analysis applies to the terms ‘good [bonum]’ and ‘bad [malum].’ These evalu- 
ative labels are, likewise, always to be understood in the context of a thing’s relationship to 
a standard or model or goal. Something is “good” if it is an effective means to a desired end. 
More particularly, something is “good” if it promotes what appears to that individual to be 
her well-being and helps move her closer to a stipulated ideal condition; and something is 
“bad” if it is detrimental to what is perceived to be her well-being. The result is that ‘good’ 
and ‘evil’, like ‘perfect’ and ‘imperfect’, are totally relative terms (relative, that is, to the 
conception of some individual's interest), and in many cases what is good for one person 
may not be good for another person. 


As far as good and bad are concerned, they also indicate nothing positive in things, considered 
in themselves, nor are they anything other than modes of thinking, or notions we form 
because we compare things to one another. For one and the same thing can, at the same time, 
be good and bad, and also indifferent. For example, music is good for one who is melancholy, 
bad for one who is mourning, and neither good nor bad to one who is deaf. (E4preface | G II/ 
208 | CI/545) 


It may seem as if Spinoza here goes beyond an analysis of ‘good’ and ‘bad’ that he offers 
earlier in the Ethics. In Part 3, he says that one judges that something is good because one 
desires it (and one desires it because it brings about an increase in one’s power of acting): 
“We neither strive for, nor will, neither want, nor desire anything because we judge it to be 
good; on the contrary, we judge something to be good because we strive for it, will it, want 
it, and desire it” (E3p9s). Thus, the claim ‘x is good’ might be taken to mean ‘T desire x.’ 
Such judgments would therefore seem to be not only relativized, but subjectivized. 

In the Preface to Part 4, however, while ‘good’ and ‘bad’ are still relativized, it now 
appears to be an objective matter of fact as to whether or not an individual matches up 
with some ideal model and whether or not some thing or action is conducive to what is 
taken to be some individual's interest. On the other hand, the standards or models them- 
selves that are ordinarily used for determining how perfect an individual is or whether 
some thing is good for an individual seem to remain highly subjective. One person’s con- 
ception of what constitutes an ideal tree or an ideal human being will differ from another 
person’s conception, given the differences in their experiences and thus in the particulars 


352 


SPINOZA’S MORAL PHILOSOPHY 


from which they abstract their general notion, as well as in the features they focus on in 
creating that notion. For this reason it is appropriate to refer to what is “perceived to be” or 
“appears to be” in someone’s interest, and it will be the case that something will be good if, 
given what one believes about an ideal life and an individual’s interests, it is an effective 
means to that ideal. But there is no guarantee that one’s beliefs about these things are true, 
nor even that they will be shared by others. Indeed, the framing of standards and models is 
strongly dependent on an individual’s very particular experiences and desires, and thus so 
will be judgments about what is good and perfect. 

If this was all Spinoza had to say about ‘good’ and ‘bad’, then he would indeed be left 
with a subjectivist analysis of those important moral terms. (For subjectivist readings, see 
Frankena 1975; Harvey 1981; Rutherford 2008; Melamed 2011, and Jarrett 2014; for 
non-subjectivist readings, see Mattern 1978; Youpa 2010a; Bennett 1984, p. 293; 
Garrett 1996; Miller 2005; Kisner 2010a, 2011, and LeBuffe 2010.) 

However, Spinoza’s discussion in the Ethics suggests that while ‘good’ and ‘bad’ do not 
refer to real intrinsic features of things, nevertheless they can bear an objectivist burden. 
Spinoza believes that there is, in fact, a specific ideal that can serve as an objective standard 
according to which things can be judged as truly good or bad for a human being. There is 
a particular kind of person and life that represents, truly and non-subjectively, a perfection 
of human nature. 


Because we desire to form an idea of man, as a model of human nature which we may look to, 
it will be useful to us to retain these same words with the meaning I have indicated. In what 
follows, therefore, I shall understand by good what we know certainly is a means by which we 
may approach nearer and nearer to the model of human nature that we set before ourselves. 
By bad, what we certainly know prevents us from becoming like that model. Next, we shall say 
that men are more perfect or imperfect, insofar as they approach more or less near to this 
model. (E4preface | G II/208 | C1I/545) 


There is much disagreement among scholars as to what this “model of human nature 
[exemplar humanae naturae]|” is and how it is supposed to function in Spinoza’s ethical 
system (cf. Bennett 1984; Youpa 2009, p. 250 n. 13; see also Temkine 1994; Youpa 201 0b; 
Kisner 2010b; Jarrett 2014, and Htibner 2014). It seems, however, that what Spinoza has 
in mind is an individual of maximal power of persevering (as a human being), an individual 
of supreme human activity and freedom. Because each thing “as far as it can by its own 
power, strives to persevere in its being” (E3p6) and even to improve its condition, the exem- 
plar or model toward which every human being naturally and necessarily (if not con- 
sciously) strives is a kind of ideal human individual whose conatus or power to persevere is 
at its peak, a supremely free and active individual — what Spinoza calls “the free man [homo 
liber].” Something is thus good — objectively good for human beings — if it contributes to an 
individual moving closer to such a metaphysically grounded ideal condition. 

This does not mean that ‘good’ and ‘bad’ are not relative terms. It is still the case that 
nothing, taken in and of itself and without comparison with or utility for some standard or 
model or goal, is good or bad. Being good is, in all cases, a completely relational feature of a 
thing; it is a function of the causal relationship it bears to something else. If something 
does not aid or increase the conatus of some individual, then it is not good but either bad or 
“indifferent” (E4p3 1d). However, the apparent subjectivism that lurks in the Part 3 account 
of good and bad, and that is carried through in the preface to Part 4 when ‘good’ and ‘bad’ 
are relativized to only haphazardly formed conceptions that serve as models for various 


353 


STEVEN NADLER 


kinds of things (including human beings), is now replaced by a more objectivist account. 
‘Good’ no longer means simply what one desires. Nor does it mean only being useful for 
making something approach what one may happen to believe to be a perfected specimen 
of its kind. Rather, it now means useful for making a human being closer to what is, in 
metaphysical truth, a more perfected specimen of humanity. 

This is why Spinoza defines ‘good’ in Part 4 as “what we certainly know to be useful to 
us” (E4def1), and ‘bad’ as “what we certainly know prevents us from being masters of 
some good” (E4def2). It is also what he has in mind when, as of E4p14, he begins speaking 
of “the true knowledge of good and evil,” as opposed to merely “a knowledge of good and 
evil” (see, for example, E4p8). The latter refers to the experience of joy that consists in one’s 
conscious awareness of something as bringing about a minor and short-lived increase in 
one’s conatus, an improvement in some partial aspect of one’s capacities. For example, one 
may judge a fifth glass of wine to be “good” because (for a short time and with respect to 
only a part of one’s power) it causes a nice buzz and a pleasant state of consciousness. This 
judgment is grounded only in the passions, however, and thus based on inadequate 
knowledge of the thing and of oneself. By contrast, the “true knowledge of good and evil” 
is one’s rational perception — derived from adequate ideas and not just random experience, 
based on understanding and not (in a short-sighted way) simply on the positive way 
something happens to affect one’s body and mind — of what benefits one and increases 
one’s power in a more complete and essential manner. The difference is summed up by 
Spinoza in the demonstration of E4p35: “What we judge to be good or evil when we follow 
the dictate of reason must be good or evil.” 

There is, of course, a highest good, or summum bonum, namely, that which constitutes 
the perfected human nature itself. And there is nothing better for a rational being than 
understanding. “We know nothing to be certainly good or bad except what is really condu- 
cive to understanding or what can hinder understanding” (E4p27). More specifically, what 
the human ideal consists in is a person endowed with the intellectual cognitions that com- 
prise the second and especially third kinds of knowledge. These represent the epistemic 
condition in which one knows through reason (ratio) and intuition (intuitus) how the 
essences of things follow from the essence of God. “Knowledge of God is the Mind’s greatest 
good; its greatest virtue is to know God” (E4p28). It is the condition in which we experience 
our highest degree of power, freedom, and activity. 


2. Motivation 


According to Spinoza, then, something is good if it aids a human being in approximating 
what is a more perfected specimen of humanity, if it truly contributes in a holistic and last- 
ing way to an increase in his conatus, activity, and freedom. Looked at from another per- 
spective, something is (objectively) good if it is the object of desire of someone who not only 
has beliefs about what is in his interest but true knowledge of what will actually augment 
his overall power or striving. The notion of conatus thus lies at the heart of Spinoza’s moral 
psychology and theory of motivation. 

The changes or transitions in conatus from a lesser to a greater power of striving or vice 
versa — defined by Spinoza as joy (laetitia)/pleasure (titilatio) and sadness (tristitia)/pain 
(dolor), respectively — form the motivational basis for whatever human beings do. Our pur- 
suits and avoidances of things, our choices of action and our judgments about what is 
good and bad are moved by joy/pleasure and sadness/pain, and especially their correlates 


354 


SPINOZA’S MORAL PHILOSOPHY 


love (directed at the cause of joy) and hate (directed at the cause of sadness). We pursue 
the things we do because we love them, and we love them because we are conscious of the 
way in which they are a cause of joy and bring about an increase in our capacities. 
Similarly, we avoid the things we do because we hate them, and we hate them because we 
are conscious of the way in which they are a cause of sadness and bring about a diminu- 
tion in our capacities. “We strive to further the occurrence of whatever we imagine will 
lead to joy, and to avert or destroy what we imagine is contrary to it, or will lead to sadness” 
(E3p28). Conatus as the striving to persevere and increase one’s power is thus the motiva- 
tional force that lies at the root of all a person’s endeavors. We always and necessarily 
strive after those things that we believe to be good and promote our well-being. 

In Spinoza’s view, then, human beings are thoroughly egoistic (or — since what we 
pursue is joy — hedonistic (see LeBuffe 2010, pp. 130-135)) agents. A person is moved to 
pursue or avoid this or that solely by the positive or negative effects that a thing is perceived 
to have on his condition, on his beliefs regarding the contributions that that thing makes 
to his project of self-preservation. The striving for perseverance is paramount. It consti- 
tutes “the very essence of man, from whose nature there necessarily follow those things 
that promote his preservation.” Thus, he says, “man is determined to do those things [that 
promote his preservation]” (E3p9s). 

So far, however, Spinoza is offering only a psychological egoism: every agent always and 
necessarily does that which he believes to be in his own best interest, which he thinks 
would best lead to an increase in his power of acting. Things get more interesting, from an 
ethical point of view, when we turn to Spinoza’s definition of ‘virtue.’ 


3. Virtue 


An agent’s power or striving may be directed either by random sense experience and the 
imagination (that is, inadequate ideas) or by knowledge (adequate ideas). When a person’s 
conatus is guided by the senses and the imagination, he pursues those things that he believes, 
on a deficient basis, to be good for him. When conatus is guided by knowledge, on the other 
hand, he will regularly and reliably do those things that really do increase his power of act- 
ing and move him closer to the model of human nature. This is what virtue consists in. 

Spinoza initially defines virtue simply as power. “By virtue and power I understand the 
same thing, i.e. (by E3p7), virtue, insofar as it is related to man, is the very essence, or 
nature, of man, insofar as he has the power of bringing about certain things, which can be 
understood through the laws of his nature alone” (E4d8). There is a lot packed into this 
definition, and it is important to separate the various elements that constitute living 
according to virtue for Spinoza. In E4p18s, Spinoza — in a statement that strongly recalls 
the ancient Stoic doctrine of virtue as acting in accordance with nature — offers a more 
condensed version of the definition: “virtue . . . is nothing but acting from the laws of one’s 
own nature.” But the nature of any thing is just its conatus, or striving to persevere in 
existence. Thus, the laws of any thing’s nature prescribe that the thing strive to preserve its 
being. Therefore, as Spinoza concludes, “the foundation of virtue is this very striving to 
preserve one’s own being.” More precisely, the virtuous person is the person who properly 
follows the laws of his own nature and acts so as to preserve his own being. Virtue, in other 
words, is not simply the exercise of power, but the successful striving for preservation. “The 
more each one strives, and is able, to preserve his being, the more he is endowed with 
virtue” (E4p20d). 


355 


STEVEN NADLER 


Spinoza has so far provided a rather formal account of virtue, one that does not yet have 
any real content. No substantive information on what kind of person best strives for self- 
preservation or on how to act in such a way that one is following the laws of one’s own nature 
is contained in the claim that “the more each one strives, and is able, to seek his own advantage, 
i.e. to preserve his own being, the more he is endowed with virtue” (E4p20). We need to know 
just what the vague notions of “following the laws of one’s own nature” and “striving to seek 
one’s own advantage” imply and how a person can put them to work in his life. 

This is where Spinoza’s rationalism comes into play, not so much as a metaphysical or 
epistemological principle, but as a moral one. Spinoza identifies living according to one’s 
own nature with living according to the guidance of reason. This is because a human 
being lives according to his own nature when the things he does have their adequate cause 
in that nature alone and not in the ways external things affect him; that is, he lives 
according to his own nature when he is active, not passive. And a human being is active 
when what he does follows from his own adequate ideas, from his rational knowledge of 
things, and not from inadequate ideas or the passions. 

Reason’s guidance comes embodied in what Spinoza calls (in E4p18) the “dictates of reason 
[dictamina rationis].” These rational dictates are grounded in the individual's conatus and repre- 
sent a kind of enlightened propositional expression of that natural striving. They demand 


that everyone love himself, seek his own advantage, what is really useful to him, want what 
will really lead man to a greater perfection, and absolutely, that everyone should strive to pre- 
serve his own being as far as he can. (E4p18s) 


More important, reason also provides reliable guidance on how to achieve these ends. As 
we have seen, “what we judge to be good or evil when we follow the dictate of reason must 
be good or evil” (E4p35). Reason offers its guidance universally and objectively, without 
regard to a person’s particularities and idiosyncratic inclinations. Like Kantian moral 
imperatives, the dictates of reason transcend personal differences and make universal 
demands on human behavior. 

Among the first things that reason demands is that “we ought to want virtue for its own 
sake, and that there is not anything preferable to it, or more useful to us.” But because we are 
necessarily always a part of Nature and unable ever to bring it about “that we require nothing 
outside ourselves to preserve our being, nor that we live without having dealings with things 
outside us,” reason also prescribes that we should strive to possess the “many things outside us 
which are useful to us” (E4p18s). Spinoza’s virtue, in other words, does not lead to an ascetic 
withdrawal from the world, but rather a more knowledgeable and successful navigation within 
the world and a more efficient and joyful use of things in it. The virtuous person is able to deter- 
mine what is truly conducive to his well-being and what is not and thus actively desires that 
which will best serve his own power of persevering. “Acting absolutely from virtue is nothing 
else in us but acting, living, and preserving our being (these three signify the same thing) by the 
guidance of reason, from the foundation of seeking one’s own advantage” (E4p24). 


4. Happiness 
It is one thing to talk in general terms of knowledge, virtue, power, and activity replacing 
the passivity and “bondage” that characterizes a life guided by the senses and imagination. 


Somehow the adequate understanding of things that allows one to be more active and 


356 


SPINOZA’S MORAL PHILOSOPHY 


powerful and approximate the model of human nature gives one greater control over the 
emotions and, consequently, brings happiness (beatitudo). But what exactly does the person 
with knowledge and adequate ideas see that the uninformed person does not? And what 
does it do for her? 

In E5p6, Spinoza reminds the reader of something that he established in Parts 1 and 2, 
namely, that what adequate knowledge provides is an understanding of the necessity of 
things, of the fact that any bodily or mental event is “determined by an infinite connection 
of causes to exist and produce effects.” He then claims that “insofar as the mind under- 
stands all things as necessary, it has a greater power over the affects, or is less acted upon 
by them.” This is because when a person sees the necessity of something, he is less moved 
or troubled by it. His desire or anxiety, his hope or fear, are diminished by the perception 
that the attainment or loss of that thing is not subject to his will but necessitated by an 
infinite number of causal factors. 

Spinoza has shown that all of the human emotions, in so far as they are passions, are 
constantly directed outward, towards things and their tendencies to affect us one way or 
another. And aroused by our passions and desires, we seek or flee those things that we 
believe cause joy or sadness. Such is the life of bondage. It is a troubled existence. He says 
that it is a kind of disease to suffer too much love for a thing that is mutable and never fully 
under our power, even when we do, for a time, have it within our possession. 


Sickness of the mind and misfortunes take their origin especially from too much love toward 
a thing which is liable to many variations and which we can never fully possess. For no one 
is disturbed or anxious concerning anything unless he loves it, nor do wrongs, suspicions 
and enmities arise except from love for a thing which no one can really fully possess. 
(E5p20s) 


When a person sees the necessity of all things, however, and especially the fact that the 
objects that he values are, in their comings and goings, not under his control, that person is 
less likely to be overwhelmed with emotions at their arrival and passing away. He sees that 
all bodies and their states and relationships — including the condition of his own body — 
follow necessarily from the essence of matter and the universal laws of physics; and he sees 
that all ideas, including all the states of minds, follow necessarily from the essence of 
thought and its universal laws. When he comes to this level of understanding, he realizes 
that he cannot control what nature brings his way or takes from him. Moreover, he sees 
that, in comparison with a true good like knowledge, such things do not in fact have the 
value that he previously conferred upon them. Consequently he is no longer anxious over 
what may come to pass and is no longer obsessed with or despondent over the loss of his 
possessions. 


The more this knowledge that things are necessary is concerned with singular things, which 
we imagine more distinctly and vividly, the greater is this power of the Mind over the affects, 
as experience itself also testifies. For we see that sadness over some good which has perished is 
lessened as soon as the man who has lost it realizes that this good could not, in any way, have 
been kept. Similarly, we see that [because we regard infancy as a natural and necessary thing], 
no one pities infants because of their inability to speak, to walk, or to reason, or because they 
live so many years, as it were, unconscious of themselves. (E5p6s) 


A person who sees the necessity of things regards them with equanimity. He is not inordi- 
nately and irrationally affected in different ways by past, present, or future events. He will 


357 


STEVEN NADLER 


bear the slings and arrows of outrageous fortune with self-control and a calm mind. The 
resulting life is more tranquil and not given to sudden disturbances of the passions. With 
this scholium, Spinoza makes good on a promissory note that he had introduced at the end 
of Part 2, where he insists that his doctrine 


teaches us how we must bear ourselves concerning matters of fortune, or things which are 
not in our power, i.e., concerning things which do not follow from our nature — that we must 
expect and bear calmly both good fortune and bad. For all things follow from God’s eternal 
decree with the same necessity as from the essence of a triangle it follows that its three angles 
are equal to two right angles. (G II/136 | CI/490) 


Spinoza’s proposed solution to the power of the emotions and the predicament to 
which they give rise is an ancient one: focus on what is within. Since we cannot control 
the external objects that we tend to value and that we allow to influence our well-being, 
we ought instead to try to control our evaluations and responses themselves and thereby 
minimize the sway that objects and the passions have over us. We do this through 
replacing our inadequate ideas with adequate ideas and thereby acquiring a vision of 
how all things depend on God or Nature. We can never eliminate the passive affects 
entirely. But we can, ultimately, counteract, weaken, and control them — by under- 
standing them — and thereby achieve a certain degree of relief from their turmoil. 
Despite Spinoza’s critique of the Stoics for their belief that the wise person can com- 
pletely master the passions, his own account recalls the doctrines of thinkers such as 
Seneca and Epictetus: 


Human power is very limited and infinitely surpassed by the power of external causes. So we do 
not have an absolute power to adapt things outside us to our use. Nevertheless, we shall bear 
calmly those things which happen to us contrary to what the principle of our advantage 
demands, if we are conscious that we have done our duty, that the power we have could not have 
extended itself to the point where we could have avoided those things, and that we are a part of 
the whole of nature, whose order we follow. If we understand this clearly and distinctly, that part 
of us which is defined by understanding, i.e. the better part of us, will be entirely satisfied with 
this, and will strive to persevere in that satisfaction. (E4 Appendix, G II/276 | CI/593 -4) 


Again, Spinoza adopts that common Stoic ethical notion — that the wise person lives 
“according to nature” — when he insists that for the person who has achieved the proper 
level of understanding, recognizes the necessity of things and accordingly modifies his 
desires, “the striving of [his] better part agrees with the order of the whole of nature.” 

A clear and distinct perception of one’s own place in nature and of the determinism 
that governs all natural things will lead not to some kind of fatalistic resignation, but to a 
satisfaction with one’s cognitive achievement as being what is truly in one’s own best 
interest. One experiences a release from the anxieties to which outwardly directed desires 
that are based on a false belief in the freedom and contingency of things give rise. In other 
words, knowledge and understanding, which, as we have seen, Spinoza identifies with 
virtue, lead to tranquility and self-control. The virtuous person, the individual who follows 
“the order of nature,” will experience “true peace of mind” (E5p42s); by contrast, the 
ignorant person is “troubled in many ways by external causes.” Necessarily, the more vir- 
tuous a person is, the more knowledge he has, the more free, active and powerful he is, and 
the more he has achieved of human perfection. 


358 


SPINOZA’S MORAL PHILOSOPHY 


5. Doing Unto Others 


Spinoza’s account of benevolent actions represents, in a sense, the ethics of the Ethics. 
Spinoza’s egoism — like any egoism — can certainly allow for activity that is directed at the 
welfare of other people, with no conscious thought of how such activity redounds to one’s 
own benefit. As one scholar notes, Spinoza “need not deny the phenomenon of altruism”; 
rather, he is committed only to the idea that “the causal origins of these phenomena always 
lie in a singular psychological force, which is the individual’s own endeavor for his or her 
own self-preservation” (Garrett 1996, pp. 302 —303). As a matter of fact, Spinoza does 
claim that the virtuous person, properly motivated through conatus to pursue his own self- 
interest, will nonetheless, guided by reason, act towards others in the benevolent ways 
which we would ordinarily regard as ethical and virtuous. 

There is a cheap and easy way in which a moral philosophy based on egoism might 
ground treating other human beings in ways that, intuitively and pre-theoretically, pass 
ethical muster. It is captured essentially by the Golden Rule: “Do unto others as you would 
have others do unto you.” That is, one might argue that an egoistically motivated agent 
will still be moved to act benevolently toward others because that makes it more likely that 
they will act benevolently toward him in return. 

However, virtuous person of the Ethics is not going to rely on merely generating good 
will from others by means of his own considerate actions and their feelings of gratitude. 
This person, guided by reason, is out not simply to modify the actions of those with whom 
he must interact in society. Rather, he wants to transform those individuals themselves, to 
modify their character and change their lives. Spinoza’s virtuous person’s quest is to try to 
improve those among whom he must live. He wants to make them more like himself. 

Spinoza begins his Part 4 discussion of rational or active benevolence — which he labels 
pietas (“the desire to do good generated in us by our living according to the guidance of 
reason” (E4p37s1)) and generositas (“the desire by which each one strives, solely from the 
dictate of reason, to aid other men and join them to him in friendship” (E3p59s)), and 
which needs to be distinguished from the passion-based benevolence (benevolentia) that he 
calls “the will, or appetite to do good, born of our pity for for the thing on which we wish to 
confer a benefit” (E3p27c3s) — with a claim that properly belongs to his metaphysics of the 
individual and to the striving that characterizes any thing in nature. He says in E4p3 1 that 
“insofar as a thing agrees with our nature, it is necessarily good.” A thing that agrees with 
my nature is good for me because such a thing will necessarily aid the preservation of that 
nature. A thing that shares my nature must, like anything, strive to preserve its own 
nature; and because its own nature is like my nature, it is therefore necessarily striving to 
preserve my nature. The corollary to this proposition adds that “the more a thing agrees 
with our nature, the more useful or better it is for us.” Spinoza’s point is essentially that 
things that agree in nature are good for each other and necessarily contribute to each 
other’s flourishing. 

Spinoza concludes that there is “[nothing] more excellent than those [things] that agree 
entirely with our nature,” and nothing is better for preserving one’s own being than unit- 
ing oneself with something that shares one’s nature — that is, another human being who 
is very much like oneself. The person who is acting rationally — acting out of virtue and 
according to the dictates of reason — knows all this, and so he will behave in such a way 
that he promotes the virtue and rationality of other human beings in order that that their 
natures will be more like his own. That is, he will treat others in such a way that their own 


359 


STEVEN NADLER 


conatus or powers of acting are increased (which is what virtue is) and that their lives are 
thereby improved. And he will do so because he, egoistically motivated as he is, recognizes 
through reason alone that it is to his own benefit to do so. 

So far, this is all still very general. One would like a little more detail as to how one stands 
to gain by improving the lives of others. How exactly is my own welfare promoted by 
helping other people improve themselves and move toward lives of virtue and reason? Why 
do I, as a virtuous person living according to reason, benefit by striving to increase the 
powers of others and making them more like me? 

One answer seems to be a rather straightforward quantitative one: basically, two heads 
are better than one, especially if they are in agreement on such important matters as what 
is good and what is bad for a human being. 


For if, for example, two individuals of entirely the same nature unite with one another, they 
compose an individual twice as powerful as each one. To man, then, there is nothing more 
useful than man. Man, I say, can wish for nothing more helpful to the preservation of his being 
than that all should so agree in all things that the minds and bodies of all would compose, as 
it were, one mind and one body; that all should strive together, as far as they can, to preserve 
their being; and that all, together, should seek for themselves the common advantage of all. 
(E4p18s) 


Although much is left unsaid by Spinoza in this passage, he seems to be arguing that two 
human beings of the same nature represent a strengthening (by doubling) of one and 
the same power, just as two people pushing a car provide more power toward one and the 
same project than one person. This seems to be suggested by his claim that “our power of 
acting .. . can be determined, and hence aided or restrained, by the power of another 
singular thing which has something in common with us” (E4p29d). Two things of the 
same nature, thus two things striving on behalf of the preservation of that nature, will 
increase the power working on behalf of that goal and thus the likelihood of its success- 
ful achievement. 

Of course, human beings are also useful to each other insofar as they are not like each 
other. A community made up only of carpenters will function much less efficiently than a 
community made up of people with a variety of talents and skills who complement each 
other. But Spinoza’s deeper point here is that human beings are good for and useful to each 
other only to the extent that they agree with one another in their fundamental nature and 
thus share a common life project and a common vision of things. It is our differences and 
particularities, not our commonalities, that divide us and set us against each other. And 
nothing contributes more to our mutual differences than the passions. Our greatest con- 
flicts and disagreements arise from the ways in which we perceive and feel about things. 
“Men can disagree in nature insofar as they are torn by affects which are passions; and to 
that extent also one and the same man is changeable and inconstant” (E4p33). Human 
discord is based on our passionate desires for things, along with a basic fact about the 
things that, through our inadequate ideas, we ordinarily value: namely, not everyone can 
equally share in their possession. Passionate desires tend to be directed at finite, mutable 
goods that, very often, only one or a few people can obtain. Thus, they (and, consequently, 
their subjects) frequently come into conflict. Therefore, men, insofar as they are torn by 
affects which are passions, can be contrary to one another. (E4p34d) 

On the other hand, virtuous human beings who live according to reason “agree in 
nature” (E4p35). This should be understood both in a negative sense and a positive sense. 


360 


SPINOZA’S MORAL PHILOSOPHY 


In the negative sense, they agree in nature because those factors that, above and beyond 
what is common in human beings, lead to differences — i.e. the passions — are diminished. 

More important, in a positive sense, individuals who live according to reason value the 
same things and pursue the same goods. Unlike the case of the rivals motivated by passion, 
however, the good that virtuous rational people value and pursue is not a finite commodity 
but something that is eternal, imperishable, and capable of being shared equally by all: 
knowledge. “The greatest good of those who seek virtue is common to all, and can be 
enjoyed by all equally” (E4p36). 

To the extent that I am rationally virtuous, then, I will strive to make others rationally 
virtuous as well. This is because another person who is guided by reason will do only what 
is truly good for his nature, that is, for human nature. But this nature is exactly what he 
has in common with all other human beings. Thus, what the rational person strives for is 
what is good not only for himself but for me, too, as well as for all human beings. The 
rational other person strives properly for the improvement of his own nature; but his 
nature is my nature, too; so the rational other strives ultimately for my improvement, or so 
Spinoza argues. 

A rational person pursues true goods that are good for everyone and acts in such a way 
that he aids the human striving for perseverance. This is why Spinoza concludes that 
“there is no singular thing in nature that is more useful to man than a man who lives 
according to the guidance of reason” (E4p35c1), and that “men will be most useful to one 
another when each one most seeks his own advantage [according to the guidance of 
reason|” (E4p35c2). The virtuous person knows that he is better off surrounded by other 
rationally virtuous individuals, all of whom are striving for the same thing: the maximiza- 
tion of the true human good — knowledge and understanding — and thus the perfection of 
their common nature. He will therefore undertake, through his actions, to help others 
reach this condition of rational virtue. That is, he will act toward other human beings with 
benevolence, nobility, justice, and charity. And he will do so even toward — perhaps espe- 
cially toward — those who are most under the sway of harmful passions. “He who lives 
according to the guidance of reason strives, as far as he can, to repay the other’s Hate, 
Anger, and Disdain toward him, with Love, or Nobility” (E4p46). 

This appears to be the upshot of Spinoza’s main argument for an egoistic grounding 
of the rational virtue of benevolence toward others and working to improve their lives. 
But the utility to me of another virtuous person goes beyond the general metaphysical 
fact that the things he pursues are what are good for human nature, hence good for 
everyone, hence good for me. There are in Spinoza’s account additional connections bet- 
ween the virtue and flourishing of others and my own well-being such that I should, for 
my own sake, promote their flourishing. 

First, a person guided by reason will be directly useful to me in my own rational striving 
for perseverance because he will be free of such divisive and even harmful passions as jeal- 
ously, envy, and hate —just those affects that would make him oppose me in my endeavors. 
Indeed, because a person guided by reason is striving for the same non-perishable goods as 
myself (knowledge and well-being), he is likely to be of positive assistance to me in this 
project since he will clearly see that the more rational I become, the more free I will be of 
the divisive passions and thus the more useful I will be to him. So there is, in fact, a sense in 
which I aim to aid him in leading a better life for the sake of the aid he will actively provide 
me in return — not, however, because of reciprocated good will, but because of mutual 
enlightened self-interest. That is, it is in my best interest to make him into the kind of 
person who will see that helping me increase my power of acting is in his own best interest. 


361 


STEVEN NADLER 


Second, Spinoza also believes that if Iam rationally virtuous, I will know that surround- 
ing myself with rational and virtuous individuals will do much to positively reinforce my 
own desire to live according to reason and my own pursuit of perfection, and that this is 
thus a good thing. Spinoza says, in his analysis of the affects, that “if we imagine that 
someone loves, desires, or hates something we ourselves love, desire or hate, we shall 
thereby love, desire or hate it with greater constancy” (E3p31). Seeing someone else who 
loves virtue and desires knowledge will make me love and desire virtue and knowledge all 
the more. Thus, it is, once again, useful to me and in my interest to have others love virtue 
and desire knowledge. 


The good which man wants for himself and loves, he will love more constantly if he sees that 
others love it (by E3p31). So (by E3p3 1c), he will strive to have the others love the same thing. 
And because this good is common to all (by E4p36), and all can enjoy it, he will therefore (by 
the same reason) strive that all may enjoy it. (E4p37d2; on this argument, see Della 
Rocca 2004) 


Finally, seeing an improvement in a being similar to oneself — that is, seeing another 
human being experience the true joy (or increase in the power of acting) that comes 
through virtue — causes one to feel a sympathetic joy and undergo a similar increase in 
one’s power. “If we imagine a thing like us, toward which we have had no affect, be affected 
with some affect, we are thereby affected with a like affect” (E3p27). Thus, again, it is to my 
own good that there are other virtuous people. 

Spinoza’s claims are rather paradoxical. What they mean is that a person is most useful 
and beneficial to other people when he is rationally pursuing his own self-interest. “When 
each man most seeks his own advantage for himself, then men are most useful to one 
another” (E4p35c2). Enlightened egoism, in other words, leads to maximal mutual utility. 
Spinoza insists that this conclusion is not only deductively certain, but is also in fact “con- 
firmed by daily experience” and obvious to everyone. We all know, he suggests, that “man 
is a god to man” (E4p35s). 

The upshot of all this is that a person guided by reason, who sees what is truly in his 
own best interest, will strive to bring other people to the same level of rational perfection as 
himself. That is, the benevolence toward others exhibited by the rational person does not 
consist merely in considerate and tolerant behavior in his interactions with them. Virtuous 
or rational benevolence is not merely a passive attitude of forbearance toward the foibles of 
one’s fellow human beings. Nor is benevolence in the virtuous person motivated merely by 
pity, which is a passion. Rather, the virtuous person, motivated by reason, will be actively 
engaged in insuring that other people are also guided by reason and pursue the true good, 
knowledge. For this is what will maximize their utility to him as he strives for his own per- 
fection. “The good which everyone who seeks virtue wants for himself, he also desires for 
other men” (E4p37). In other words, a rational and virtuous person will act so that other 
people also become rational and virtuous. He will behave toward them in such ways as will 
help them achieve the life of reason. But because it is also in their best interest to be rational 
and virtuous, all this is just to say that the person guided by reason will strive to further the 
interests of others, to act in ways that truly benefit them, albeit from a motivation that is 
ultimately selfish and not altruistic. 

This is how Spinoza’s egoism or hedonism leads to what we would ordinarily consider 
ethical behavior. A desire to do good for others and help them in their striving for perfection 
is generated by one’s own living according to reason. The person who is virtuous in 


362 


SPINOZA’S MORAL PHILOSOPHY 


Spinoza’s idiosyncratic sense will also exhibit those traits of character and modes of 
behavior that are traditionally regarded as virtues — ethical and social virtues — all of which 
follow naturally from his rational pursuit of self-interest. “A man who is guided by reason” 
will have “strength of character.” He will “always act honestly” (E4p72), “hates no one, is 
angry with no one, envies no one, is indignant with no one, scorns no one, and is not at all 
proud”; he will avoid “whatever he thinks is troublesome and evil, and moreover, whatever 
seems immoral, dreadful, unjust and dishonorable” (E4p73s). 

Spinoza’s view, in short, is that rational egoism leads in fact not to the rampant disre- 
gard of the well-being of others but to the highest ethical behavior. As he insists, “I have 
done this to win, if possible, the attention of those who believe that this principle — that 
everyone is bound to seek his own advantage — is the foundation, not of virtue and morality, 
but of immorality” (E4p18s). Spinoza’s virtuous person is not just engaged in kind, consid- 
erate behavior toward others; he is not simply responding to them with love or treating 
them in fine ways out of pity, sympathy, or hope for reciprocal consideration. As Spinoza 
puts it, his “doctrine contributes to social life insofar as it teaches . . . [that each person] 
should be helpful to his neighbor, not from unmanly compassion, partiality, or supersti- 
tion, but from the guidance of reason, as the time and occasion demand” (E2p39s). 
Through his actions, the virtuous person wants to improve others, to make them more 
virtuous, and thus more happy. 


References 


Bennett, J. (1984). A Study of Spinoza’s Ethics. Indianapolis: Hackett Publishing. 

Curley, E.M. (1973). Spinoza’s moral philosophy. In: Spinoza: A Collection of Critical Essays (ed. 
Marjorie Grene), 354 —376. Notre Dame, IN: University of Notre Dame Press. 

Della Rocca, M. (2004) Egoism and the imitation of the affects in Spinoza. In: Spinoza on Reason and 
the Free Man (ed. Y. Yovel and G. Rosen), 123-148. New York: Little Room Press. 

Frankena, W.K. (1975). Spinoza’s “new morality”: Notes on Book IV. In: Spinoza: Essays in 
Interpretation (ed. E. Freedman), 85-100. La Salle, IL: Open Court. 

Garber, D. (2004). Dr. Fischelson’s dilemma: Spinoza on freedom and sociability. In: Spinoza on Reason 
and the Free Man (ed. Y. Yovel and G. Segal), 183-208. New York: Little Room Press. 

Garrett, D. (1996). Spinoza’s ethical theory. In: The Cambridge Companion to Spinoza (ed. D. Garrett), 
267-314. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Harvey, W.Z. (1981). A portrait of Spinoza as a Maimonidean. Journal of the History of Philosophy 19: 
151-172. 

Htibner, K. (2014). Spinoza on being human and human perfection. In: Essays on Spinoza’s Ethical 
Theory (ed. M.J. Kisner and A. Youpa), 124-142. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Jarrett, C. (2002). Spinoza on the relativity of good and evil. In: Spinoza: Metaphysical Themes (ed. 
O. Koistinen and J. Biro), 159-181. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Jarrett, C. (2014). Spinozistic constructivism. In Essays on Spinoza’s Ethical Theory (ed. M.J. Kisner 
and A. Youpa), 57—84. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Kisner, M.J. (2010a). Perfection and desire: Spinoza on the good. Pacific Philosophical Quarterly 91: 
97-117. 

Kisner, M.J. (2010b). Spinoza’s model of human nature: rethinking the free man. Oxford Studies in 
Early Modern Philosophy 5: 91 —114. 

Kisner, M.J. (2011). Spinoza on Human Freedom: Reason, Autonomy and the Good Life. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 

Kisner, M.J. and Youpa, A. (eds.) (2014). Essays on Spinoza’s Ethical Theory. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press. 


363 


STEVEN NADLER 


Koistinen, O. (ed.) (2009). The Cambridge Companion to Spinoza’s Ethics. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 

LeBuffe, M. (2007). Spinoza’s normative ethics. Canadian Journal of Philosophy 37: 371-392. 

LeBuffe, M. (2010). From Bondage to Freedom: Spinoza on Human Excellence. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press. 

Matheron, A. (1971). Individu et communauté chez Spinoza. Paris: Editions de Minuit. 

Mattern, R. (1978). Spinoza and ethical subjectivism. Canadian Journal of Philosophy 8, supplement 1: 

Rationalism and empiricism, 59-82. 

Melamed, Y. (2011). Spinoza’s anti-humanism: an outline. In: The Rationalists: Between Tradition and 

Innovation (ed. C. Fraenkel, D. Perinetti, and J.E.H. Smith), 147-165. Dordrecht: Springer. 

Miller, J. (2005). Spinoza’s axiology. Oxford Studies in Early Modern Philosophy 2: 149-172. 

Nadler, S. (2020a). Think Least of Death: Spinoza on How to Live and How to Die. Princeton, NJ: 

Princeton University Press. 

Nadler, S. (2020b). Spinoza’s values: joy, desire and good in the Ethics. In: Passion and Action in Spinoza 
(ed. N. Naaman and T. Vinci), 174-197. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Rutherford, D. (2008) Spinoza and the dictates of reason. Inquiry 51: 485-511. 

Scribano, E. (2012). La Connaissance du bien et du mal. Du Court Traité al’ Ethique. In: Spinoza trans- 
alpin (ed. C. Jacquet and P.-F. Moreau), 59-78. Paris: Publications de la Sorbonne. 

Steinberg, D. (1984). Spinoza’s ethical doctrine and the unity of human nature. Journal of the History 
of Philosophy 22: 303-324. 

Temkine, P. (1994). Le Modéle de I’homme libre. Revue de Métaphysique et de Morale 99: 437-448. 

Youpa, A. (2009). Spinoza’s theory of the good. In The Cambridge Companion to Spinoza’s Ethics 
(ed. O. Koistinen), 242-257. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Youpa, A. (2010a). Spinoza’s theories of value. British Journal for the History of Philosophy 18: 
209-229. 

Youpa, A. (2010b). Spinoza’s model of human nature. Journal of the History of Philosophy 48: 
61-76. 


364 


53 


Spinoza on the Constitution of Animal Species 


SUSAN JAMES 


Nature, as Spinoza conceives of it, contains individual things or finite modes, each with its 
own essence. “God’s true perfection,” he explains, “is that he gives all things their essence, 
from the least to the greatest” (ST VI.7). Moreover, although we humans classify individuals 
into kinds, Spinoza is adamant that the resulting types or species “are nothing” (ST VI.7). As 
the unreliable fruits of our imaginative attempts to make sense of the world, they have no 
independent ontological status. For many of Spinoza’s contemporaries this was a troubling 
and unsatisfactory view, particularly in relation to animal species. Not content to categorize 
animals on the basis of mere experience, they wanted to know what essential features qualify 
lions as lions, or distinguish lions from tortoises (Smith 2011, p. 239). For Spinoza, too, these 
are pressing questions. Despite his nominalism, his mature works posit differences between 
animal kinds that are discoverable by reasoning and available to philosophical understanding. 
Implicitly, at least, he enters into an ongoing debate about the nature of natural species. 

At present there is no scientific consensus on this topic, and here the seventeenth 
century is no different from our own day (Richards 2010, p. 5). Aided by an expanding 
body of observations, and following out their metaphysical convictions, early modern phi- 
losopher-scientists defended many interpretations of what makes a species. But Spinoza’s 
contribution to this controversy has not been widely discussed. What, in his view, consti- 
tutes the species difference between lions and human beings? How is the boundary bet- 
ween humans and other animals to be understood? Spinoza, I shall suggest, takes the 
unusual view that species are distinguished not so much by their bodily characteristics as 
by their capacity to respond to one another’s affects. Rather than following the trend set by 
his contemporaries and defining species in biological terms, he argues that the social rela- 
tionships between members of a species are what unite them into a single kind. 


1. The Limits of Individual Natures 


According to the Ethics, each individual strives to persevere in its being (EIIIp6), and since 
this striving “is nothing but the actual essence of the thing” (EIIIp7), it continues to strive as 
long as it exists. However, the power with which it does so fluctuates as it interacts with the 


A Companion to Spinoza, First Edition. Edited by Yitzhak Y. Melamed. 
© 2021 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2021 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd. 


365 


SUSAN JAMES 


world around it; some of its encounters with external things increase its power, while others 
diminish it. This process appears to be open-ended. If there were some fixed telos towards 
which an individual strives, we could perhaps posit a final moment of fulfillment when all 
strivings cease; but Spinoza crisply rejects any such possibility. “Not many words will be 
needed,” he claims, “to show that Nature has no end set before it, and that all final causes are 
nothing but fictions” (EI App [II]). We seem, then, to be contemplating a world imbued with 
two kinds of fluidity. Spinoza’s world is fluid in the sense that the powers of individuals are in 
flux, changing as they interact with one another. But it is also fluid in the sense that there 
appears to be no limit to an individual's striving, and thus no limit to the powers a particular 
individual can acquire or lose. Perhaps, then, it is a world where the power with which an 
individual strives to persevere in its being can alter so dramatically that it becomes an 
individual of another kind. Perhaps the boundaries between kinds are so permeable that a 
horse can become a man or a woman a bird. So far, nothing seems to rule this out. 

Unlike some of his contemporaries, who were deeply attracted by the idea of metamor- 
phosis, Spinoza firmly dismisses it. “The less men know Nature, the more they can feign many 
things, such as that ... men are changed in amoment into stones or springs, .. . that even gods 
are changed into beasts and into men, and many other things of that kind” (TIE 58). People 
who imagine that metamorphoses occur in nature fail to grasp the implications of the fact 
that the nature of a thing is its striving to persevere in its being or endure as the thing it is. To 
acquire a different nature, as metamorphosis demands, an individual would have to negate its 
own essence or stop persevering in its being. In other words, it would have to bring it about 
that it ceases to exist. But this it cannot do: “no thing has anything in itself by which it can be 
destroyed, or which takes its existence away” (EIIIp6). So although individuals change, they 
cannot change their form. “When a thing passes to a greater or lesser level of perfection or 
power,” Spinoza tells us, “it is not changed from one essence or form into another” (EIV Pref.). 
For example, “a horse is destroyed as much if it is changed into a man as if it is changed into 
an insect” (EIV Pref.). Either a thing maintains its nature while increasing or decreasing in 
power, or it undergoes such radical change that its nature is destroyed. 

The fluidity of nature, as Spinoza envisages it, is therefore limited. Although the essence 
or power of an individual can alter in certain ways and to a certain extent, there are also 
boundaries to the changes it can undergo, and when those boundaries are crossed the 
individual is destroyed. It may seem surprising that Spinoza should assert this view so 
unequivocally. After all, as he is keen to remind us, no one has yet determined what human 
bodies can do (EIIIp2s). Why, then, should they not surprise us by developing unexpected 
powers that amount to a change of nature? However, the argument we have just traced 
rules this possibility out. Any alteration in an individual’s powers, however astonishing or 
untoward, must follow from its nature and cannot transgress the limits of its power to per- 
severe in its being. 

Describing these limits in physical terms, Spinoza characterizes them as the limits of a 
proportion [ratio] of motion and rest. A body, he tells us, is constituted by this proportion 
among its parts, and continues to exist for as long as the proportion is maintained. We find 
this view in the early Short Treatise, where Spinoza explains that as long as a body preserves 
its proportion — say of 1 to 3 —it survives, “but if other bodies act on ours with such force 
that its proportion of motion and rest cannot remain 1-3, that is death...” (ST II, Pref. 
11-14). We also find the same doctrine in the Ethics: “if the parts composing an individual 
become greater or less, but in such a proportion that they keep the same ratio of motion 
and rest to each other as before, then the individual will likewise retain its nature, as before, 
without any change of form” (EIT L5 after P13). 


366 


SPINOZA ON THE CONSTITUTION OF ANIMAL SPECIES 


Spinoza intends this model to explain “how a composite individual can be affected in 
many ways and still preserve its nature” (EII L7s after P13), but one may question how fully 
it achieves its purpose. By positing a proportion of motion and rest that remains more or 
less stable throughout an individual’s existence, the model explains what it is for an 
individual nature to endure; but precisely because the proportion does not change signifi- 
cantly, the model is less forthcoming about the increases and decreases of power that occur 
along the way. By representing all internal changes as fluctuations or oscillations within a 
ratio of motion and rest, Spinoza’s account marginalizes and to some extent obscures the 
difference between, say, the vast transformation of power involved in the passage from 
human infancy to maturity, and the temporary dip in power that accompanies a common 
cold. Both are simply fluctuations in an individual’s proportion of motion and rest; but 
while it is relatively easy to construe a cold in these terms, the model is less enlightening 
when applied to a baby’s passage to adulthood. By hypothesis, the baby’s proportion of 
motion and rest does not alter significantly as it grows up, but its power to persevere in its 
being nevertheless undergoes radical change. How, then, does its nature both enable and 
limit this pattern of development? 

In a famously perplexing passage, Spinoza hints at a way to make the question less 
daunting by suggesting that what we ordinarily take to be the continuous existence of a 
single nature may in fact contain a sequence of natures. Perhaps, he implies, the dramatic 
changes of power that we usually take living individuals to undergo are less extreme than 
we assume. At some point in the history of what we regard as one human being, a childish 
nature may be destroyed and a mature nature may come into existence. At some point in 
the history of a now aged Spanish poet, the nature he once had as a successful playwright 
may have been superseded by his current nature as a sadly confused old man (EIVp39s). 
Here the unquiet ghost of metamorphosis hovers around the edges of the story. But the 
acknowledgment that we may sometimes be mistaken about the point at which an 
individual nature is destroyed does not help us much. Spinoza’s examples still suggest that 
the enduring nature of a living individual can accommodate radical but not unlimited 
changes in the way it strives to persevere in its being. So to return to our question, can we 
say more about the features of an individual that allow it to alter and yet prevent it from 
becoming something else? 

In Spinoza’s view, changes in an individual’s power are typically the effects of its inter- 
actions with external things. In some cases they enable the individual to maintain powers 
it is already exercising, as when a comforting snack enables a child to keep on walking; 
but interactions can also transform the manner in which individuals persevere in their 
being by increasing or decreasing their repertoire of responses to the situations in which 
they find themselves. For example, when a child learns to talk as a result of being talked 
to, she acquires a range of new powers. To do justice to alterations of this kind, it is helpful 
to envisage an individual’s essence or nature as a structurally complex power that unfolds 
over the course of its existence. As the child learns to speak, her interactions with other 
speakers serve as triggers that activate or unfold powers that follow from her nature and 
give her new ways of persevering in her being. An individual's essence therefore incorpo- 
rates the potential to acquire and exercise new powers, which in turn create the condi- 
tions for acquiring and exercising yet further powers, and so on. Although the essence of 
an existing individual endures until it is destroyed, the way this essence unfolds as the 
individual interacts with external things, and thus the way the individual becomes able to 
express its nature or strive to persevere in its being, can involve great changes in its 
powers. Through their interactions, some individuals radically alter one another, each 


367 


SUSAN JAMES 


enhancing or diminishing the other’s power; and yet this process has fixed boundaries. As 
well as allowing for change, an individual’s nature imposes limits on the powers it can 
acquire or lose. 

When Spinoza affirms the general claim that members of one species cannot meta- 
morphose into members of another, he relies on our tendency to classify individuals into 
kinds by forming confused ideas such as ‘man,’ ‘horse,’ or ‘dog’ (EIIp40s1). Being inade- 
quate, these ideas are not entirely reliable, but nor are they completely misleading. 
Spinoza seems to take it for granted that our ideas of animal species capture enough of 
the natural differences between, say, lions and humans to guide our understanding (EIV 
Pref.). By focusing on our shared ideas of animal kinds, we can help ourselves to identify 
the powers that distinguish one species from another and stand in the way of metamor- 
phosis. Adopting this approach, Spinoza articulates the boundaries between species in 
two related arguments. The first, discussed in Section 2, rests on the claim that there is 
more agreement between the natures of individual members of a single species than bet- 
ween the natures of members of two different species. The second, discussed in Section 3, 
focuses on the natural right of all animals, regardless of species. Both arguments, I aim to 
show, tend to the surprising conclusion that what unites individuals into a species is their 
mutual sociability. 


2. A First Argument: Commonality and Agreement 


Echoing a familiar Cartesian claim, Spinoza rests his account of the relationships bet- 
ween individuals on the assumption that two things can only interact if they have 
something in common. To take a foundational example, it is because all bodies are 
extended and are in this respect like one another that they can interact as they do (EI L2 
after p13). The nature of an individual body cannot, however, be constituted by its extend- 
edness alone. It must also possess powers that distinguish it from other bodies (EIIp37), 
and these differences will in turn limit the interactions of which it is capable. Equipped 
with a specific set of powers, it will be better placed to interact with some things than with 
others, and particularly well placed to interact with those with which it has most in 
common. Turning to the problem of discriminating animal species, Spinoza therefore 
examines the similarities and differences between them. But whereas many of his con- 
temporaries focused on the bodily characteristics of different kinds of animals, and on the 
related claim that animals produce progeny with bodies like their own, his account of 
what constitutes a species is organized around the affective commonalities that enable 
animals to interact with others of their kind. 

This argument is set out in the Ethics, where Spinoza discusses the role of the affects in 
determining the way humans strive to persevere in their being. One of the manifestations 
of our human nature is our power not only to experience affects such as joy or sadness, but 
to respond to the affects of individuals like ourselves. When we encounter other people, we 
not only recognize their joy or sadness, but feel an answering joy or sadness of our own. 
“From the fact that we imagine a thing like us to be affected with an affect, we are affected 
with a like affect” (EII[p27). Our responsiveness to one another in turn gives rise to rich 
sequences of affective exchange, and corresponding alterations in the ways we strive to 
persevere in our being. The feeling of pity, for example, prompts us to relieve other people’s 
suffering (ElIIp27s); our sensitivity to what pleases others underpins our efforts to win 
their admiration (EIIp28); our disposition to love and hate what others love or hate can be 


368 


SPINOZA ON THE CONSTITUTION OF ANIMAL SPECIES 


the basis of solidarity or aggression (EII[p29); and the regret that we feel when we let other 
people down may lead us to apologise to them (EIIp30). Regardless of whether our affective 
interactions are empowering or disempowering, they are manifestations of our responsive- 
ness to individuals who are like us in the sense that their repertoire of affective powers is 
much like our own. 

These similarities lay the foundation not only for imitation (seeing that you love x sensi- 
tises me to x’s lovability and prompts me to love x myself), but for a range of mutual inter- 
actions from which new powers unfold. To take a single example, Spinoza argues that 
“when we love a thing like ourselves [i.e. another person], we strive as far as we can, to 
bring it about that it loves us in return” (EIIp33). In propitious circumstances, our striving 
for mutual love is a prelude to sustained amicitia or friendship and initiates the unfolding of 
new ways of persevering in our being. When friends or lovers empower one another by 
coordinating their desires, they become more like one another; and as their increased com- 
monality extends their power to interact, it creates conditions for further mutually sup- 
portive powers to unfold. Without destroying one another, each increases the other’s 
power, as they together develop ways of persevering in their being that neither could pos- 
sess alone. 

Spinoza contrasts these affective dynamics between human natures with a lack of 
affective commonality between humans and other kinds of animals. There is no doubt, he 
says, that animals are able to feel (sentire) (EII[p57s). But just as the similarity between 
human natures is manifested in our responsiveness to one another’s affects, the differences 
between human and animal natures block affective exchange. For example, whereas our 
affective sensitivity to other people may lead us to envy their achievements, (particularly 
when we regard them as equal or most similar to ourselves), we “do not envy lions their 
strength or trees their height” (EIIIp55cs). The fact that lions “do not agree with us in 
nature, and their affects are different in nature from human affects” (E[Vp37s1) makes us 
incapable of entering into their affective world, and constitutes the boundary between the 
two species. 

We now have a fuller picture of the powers that simultaneously unite the members of a 
species and differentiate one species from another. But one may still wonder why Spinoza 
makes the possibility of affective exchange so central to his analysis. Perhaps part of the 
explanation derives from a cultural pressure to take a stand on the question of whether a 
species is defined by the fact that its members reproduce their own kind (Richards 2010, 
p. 56; Mayr 1982, p. 257; Smith 2011, pp. 246-247). Opponents of this view often rested 
their case on counterexamples; Locke, for instance, claims to have seen “a creature that 
was the issue of a cat and a rat” (Locke, 1975, III.vi.23). But a deeper challenge arose from 
the many authorities who held that lower forms of life including insects, lizards, and 
worms do not reproduce by sexual means. Instead, they arise by spontaneous generation — 
the random interactions that occur within decaying materials such as cheese, flesh, or 
dung (Smith 2007, pp. 210-218; Ogilvie 2014). 

While Spinoza does not explicitly address the role of procreation in the definition of 
species, it nevertheless has a place in his analysis. Human love, as he presents it, clearly 
encompasses sexual love or lust, “a desire for and love of joining one body to another,” 
along with its affective consequences (EIT App. xliii). For example, the Ethics claims, aman 
who comes to believe that his friendship with the woman he loves is less close that her 
friendship with his rival will experience the sexual envy that arises “when a man imagines 
that a woman he loves prostitutes herself to another” (EII[p35s). Sexual desire, and the 
relationships in which it is expressed, are therefore another manifestation of our power to 


369 


SUSAN JAMES 


respond affectively to things like ourselves, and are matched by a corresponding lack of 
power to desire members of different species. By their nature, Spinoza implies, humans are 
for the most part sexually attracted to other humans, and strive to persevere in their being 
by reproducing with them; and as we would by now expect, the same goes for other kinds 
of animals. “Both the horse and the man are driven by lust to procreate; but the one is 
driven by equine lust, the other by human lust. So also the lusts and appetites of insects 
and fish and birds must vary” (EIIIp57s). One of the limits embodied in an animal’s affective 
nature is therefore that its sexual desire and pattern of reproduction are in general con- 
fined to members of its own species. 

Implicitly, then, Spinoza endorses the view that animals reproduce their own kind; but 
it is striking that he does not address the counterevidence supplied by defenders of 
spontaneous generation. What makes him sure, for instance, that rotting dung cannot 
produce flies, and why does he not discuss this hypothesis? His decision not to enter into 
the debate surrounding it may have been influenced by the research of the Dutch entomol- 
ogist Johannes Swammerdam, who argued on the basis of meticulous microscopic obser- 
vation that there is no spontaneous generation in nature, and that lower species such as 
insects and amphibians develop like other animals from a female egg. Moreover, what looks 
like metamorphosis in butterflies and other insects does not involve a change of form, but 
is simply a process of growth (Jorink 2014, p. 219; Ogilvie 2014, pp. 227-229). Nature, 
Swammerdam concludes, is governed by uniform and exceptionless divine laws, and all 
species reproduce in the same way (Jorink 2014, 228-29). These claims were published in 
1669 in Swammerdam’s Historia Generalis Insectorum, but Spinoza may have been aware 
of them earlier. Both men were members of an intellectual circle to which two of Spinoza’s 
correspondents also belonged — Nicolaus Steno, the anatomist who later urged him to 
embrace Roman Catholicism, and Johannes Hudde, the mathematician and manufacturer 
of microscopes (Jorink 2003). If sexual procreation is universal, as Swammerdam claimed, 
it is reasonable to dismiss spontaneous generation in favor of the view that all creatures 
lust after their own kind. 

By aligning species difference with the boundaries of the capacity for affective respon- 
siveness, Spinoza is literally echoing a commonplace of his culture. In an immensely 
popular emblem book compiled by the Dutch poet and diplomat Jacob Cats and published 
in 1618, there is an engraving of a lion lying on a rock next to a tortoise or turtle, each 
animal ignoring the other (Cats 1618, p. 95). According to the adage at the top of the 
page, “Dissidet, quod impar est” — he disagrees or sets himself apart, because he is unequal 
or unalike. The anecdotes and poems below the image warn against the danger of loving 
people who are in one way or another unlike you — we learn, for example, that a Danish 
princess who married a commoner bitterly regretted it. But the image suggests that the 
adage also applies to non-human animals, whose inability to care about or respond to one 
another is plain to see. Spinoza, I have suggested, gives this commonplace a philosophical 
interpretation by using it to elucidate the differences that distinguish the nature of one 
species from another, and limit what the members of a given species can become. To have 
a human or a leonine nature is to possess the power to enter into community with mem- 
bers of one’s own kind and partake in the sociability that constitutes a species. At the 
same time, it is to lack the power to enter into community with other kinds of animals. 
However fond one may be of a dog or a horse, one cannot share with them the affective 
mutuality that characterizes human relationships. In this crucial respect, one cannot 
cross the species boundary and metamorphose into an animal of a different kind. 


370 


SPINOZA ON THE CONSTITUTION OF ANIMAL SPECIES 


3. ASecond Argument: The Right of Nature 


In his political works Spinoza translates his account of natures or essences into juridical 
terms. As we have seen, the essence of an individual is its striving to persevere in its being, 
and it is in the nature of an individual to exercise this power. But the point can also be 
expressed another way. “Each natural thing,” Spinoza claims in the Political Treatise, “has 
as much right by nature as it has power to exist and have effects” (TP II.3). In exercising its 
essence or power to exist, an individual exercises its natural right. Taken one by one, indi- 
viduals therefore have the natural right to persevere in their being in any way their nature 
dictates or, as Spinoza puts it, the natural right to do anything in their power. If big fish 
have the power to eat little fish they do so by natural right; and “whether a man is led by 
reason or only by desire, he does nothing except according to the laws and rules of nature, 
i.e. in accordance with the right of nature” (TP II.5). 

Since the enduring power that constitutes an individual’s nature is structurally com- 
plex and unfolds as it interacts with other things, the character and extent of an individu- 
al’s natural right will vary with time and place. A man consumed by fear may exercise his 
right to do anything in his power by attacking anyone who comes near him; but his 
affective interactions with other people may also unfold his power or right to live with them 
harmoniously, so that he becomes more powerful than before. In making the transition 
from aggressive isolation to a co-operative way of life he does not cease to exercise his 
natural right; he strives throughout the process to persevere in his being as his nature dic- 
tates. But the manner in which he exercises his right alters as his power unfolds — as the 
affective bonds he forms with others modify his capacities and desires. In short, the way 
human beings exercise the right of nature or persevere in their being changes radically as 
their affective responsiveness to one another enables them to exercise their right in circum- 
stances of agreement, trust, and friendship. 

Something similar applies to animals of other kinds. To some degree, the members of 
other species express the similarity of their natures by forming co-operative ways of life 
grounded on their responsiveness to one another’s affects. To some degree, they too modify 
the way they exercise their right of nature as their powers to co-operate unfold. However, 
just as Spinoza is adamant that mutual affective responsiveness does not extend across 
species, so he insists that each species exercises its natural right on its own terms. Animals 
exercise their power or right over humans as their natures dictate, and humans are per- 
mitted to “use animals at [their] pleasure and treat them as is most convenient” (EIVp37s1). 
Spinoza does not soften or qualify this claim. There is no trace, for example, of Calvin’s 
contention that, although God created animals for our use, he “will not have us abuse the 
beasts beyond measure” and demands that we “handle them gently” (Calvin 1583, quoted 
in Thomas 1983, 154; More 1662, p. 63; Muratori 2012, pp. 220-221). Instead, Spinoza’s 
position echoes that of Hobbes who, in De Cive, locates man’s dominion over animals in the 
right of nature and holds that “humans gain rights over animals as they gain rights over 
slaves, by natural strength and powers.” As Hobbes goes on, “since it is by natural right 
that an animal kills a man, it will be by the same right that a man slaughters an animal” 
(Hobbes 1998, VIII.10). In Hobbes’s case, this outlook arguably owes something to the 
Stoic view that animals can have no part in human society because they cannot make con- 
tracts with human beings. Spinoza does not mention the Stoic argument; but he neverthe- 
less agrees that, in our relations with animals, we live in a state of nature and have the 
right to use them in any way we can. 


371 


SUSAN JAMES 


It is worth noting that, while the right of nature permits us to use animals as we choose, 
it does not enjoin us to use them badly. Since we have the right to treat them as our nature 
dictates, it allows us to use them in any way that sustains or enhances our power to perse- 
vere in our being. For example, vegetarians who refrain from eating flesh because they 
think this is good for their health exercise their right to use animals as they see fit, just as 
we can rightfully protect declining species out of our human interest in maintaining a 
thriving eco-system. Spinoza does not debar us from taking account of animal natures and 
adapting our ways of life to their needs, as long as we do this for our own good. But he 
rejects any suggestion that we should enter into community with animals by awarding 
them as much or more consideration than ourselves. To do so, he argues, is to become, or 
try to become, more like these animals in nature, and to abdicate the pursuit of our distinc- 
tively human powers. It is thus to disempower ourselves, as we can see from the archetyp- 
ical example of Adam, who, “after he believed the lower animals to be like himself, 
immediately began to imitate their affects and to lose his freedom” (EIVp68s). By trying to 
cross the species boundary we risk our humanity and become bestial. 

On the basis of the argument we have so far reconstructed, we might expect Spinoza to 
conclude that attempts to engage with animals as our equals rest on a misunderstanding 
of the difference between human and other species. In fact, however, he expresses himself 
much more vehemently. Attempts to restrict the ways we use animals, he announces, are 
“based more on empty superstition and womanish compassion (muliebri misericordia) than 
on sound reason” (EIVp37s, translation adapted). As often with Spinoza, it is hard to say 
what drives this sudden outburst of gendered animosity, but it is not the only time he yokes 
superstition with womanish compassion and contrasts both with rationality. One of the 
benefits of his philosophy, he claims elsewhere, is that it teaches us “how to be content with 
our own things and helpful to our neighbors, on the basis of reason rather than womanish 
compassion, partiality or superstition” [muliebri misericordia, partialitate, neque superstiti- 
one] (EHp49s[IV][C]). In the Ethics, compassion or misericordia is defined as the disposition 
to be glad at someone else’s good fortune or sad at their bad fortune, and is construed as a 
failure to stand up for oneself (EIII App. XXIV). Instead of being guided by what one’s own 
nature requires, one allows oneself to be guided (as women are presumably thought to be) 
by the benefits of others (EIVp37s2). In relation to laws against killing animals, to be com- 
passionate is therefore to subordinate one’s own nature to those of the animals concerned, 
and in doing so become not only bestial, but also feminized. 

Finally, why should abstaining from killing animals qualify as superstitious? In the 
Theological-Political Treatise, Spinoza echoes a widespread conception of superstition as an 
attempt to overcome fear by imagining the existence of beings who are capable of securing 
us from danger, and appealing to them for protection. (A superstitious community, for 
example, may try to placate their imagined gods by performing sacrifices.) It is not imme- 
diately obvious how a tenderness towards animals fits into this analysis, or how refrain- 
ing from killing them qualifies as a superstitious practice, but it may be relevant that 
among the very few groups who refrained from eating meat in early modern Europe were 
certain sects whose members strove to imitate a prelapsarian way of life. Before the Fall, 
they believed, Adam and Eve did not eat animals; indeed, God only permitted humans to 
consume flesh after the Flood (Thomas 1983, p. 289; Fudge 2017, p. 43). Abstaining 
from eating meat was therefore part of an attempt to distance themselves from the mores 
of fallen humanity in the hope of achieving salvation. Spinoza would certainly have 
regarded this outlook as superstitious, and it is possible that, when he attacked laws 
against killing animals, he had it in mind. But whether or not this speculation rings true, 


372 


SPINOZA ON THE CONSTITUTION OF ANIMAL SPECIES 


there is a consonance between superstition and compassion as Spinoza understands 
them. Both are forms of debilitating affective attachment that block one’s ability to live as 
one’s own nature dictates; and this is the fate of anyone who tries to cross the boundary 
around the human species by entering into the affects of other animal kinds. 


4. Conclusion 


The claim that mutual sociability is what makes an animal kind is of a piece with the rest 
of Spinoza’s philosophy. If, as he holds, the nature of a thing is determined by its power to 
persevere in its being and thus by what it can do, it makes sense to differentiate species by 
considering how animals can and cannot interact. The inability of humans to enter into 
affective exchange with lions, for example, marks one of the limits of human nature and 
human natural right. While our human power to persevere in our being can unfold in 
many ways, it stops short of the power to form mutual social bonds with other kinds of 
animals. Lacking this power, we cannot become what they are. To put it another way, our 
species cannot blend with theirs. 

At the same time, one may wonder whether Spinoza is altogether entitled to this view. A 
first worry is that he may underestimate the extent of affective interaction between different 
kinds of animals. Perhaps, at least in some cases, the natures of different species are not as 
limited as he thinks, and can unfold in such a way that they become capable of responding to 
one another’s affects. But Spinoza has the means to concede this point. His aim, after all, is 
not to show exactly where the boundaries between particular species lie, but to indicate what 
constitutes a species in the first place. If, for example, his analysis turned out to license the 
conclusion that humans and chimpanzees, or humans and cyborgs, form a single species, we 
would have to revise our conception of the limits of human nature. But this would not pose 
a metaphysical problem; insofar as we construct our ideas of species on the basis of our 
limited experience, we should expect to alter them when our understanding demands it. 

There nevertheless remains a further worry: that the viewpoint we have been tracing is 
excessively anthropocentric (Melamed 2020, p. 225). One of the hallmarks of Spinoza’s 
philosophy is his insistence that many of our deepest philosophical misunderstandings 
stem from a tendency to take our experience as a good guide to reality, as when we take our 
sense that we can determine our own actions as evidence of free will, or imagine God as a 
more powerful version of ourselves. In the case at hand, Spinoza largely extrapolates from 
human experience. His argument revolves around our inability to interact with animals 
on our own affective terms. As in the other instances of anthropomorphism he cites, this is 
indeed the way we experience the world, but as in the cases he criticizes, we might wonder 
whether it is the whole story. Rather than simply accepting the limits he identifies, his own 
philosophy suggests that we should keep an open mind. 


References 


Calvin, J. (1583). The Sermons of M. Jean Calvin upon the fifth book of Moses called Deuteronomie (trans. 
Arthur Golding). London: George Bishop. 

Cats, J. (1618). Silenus Alcibiadis sive Proteus. Middelburg: Hans vander Hellen. 

Digital version, 2014. www.dbnl.org/tekst/catsOO1sile01_01/colofon.php. 

Fudge, E. (2017). You are what you eat. History Today 67 (2): 41-46. 


373 


SUSAN JAMES 


Hobbes, T. (1998). On the Citizen (ed. Richard Tuck). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Jorink E. (2003). “Outside God, there is nothing.” Swammerdam, Spinoza and the Janus-face of the 
early Dutch Enlightenment. In: The Early Enlightenment in the Dutch Republic, 1650-1750. Selected 
papers of a conference held at the Herzog August Bibliothek, Wolfenbtittel, 22-23 March 2001 (ed. W. 
van Bunge). Leiden: Brill. 

Jorink, E. (2014). Snakes, fungi and insects. Otto Marseus van Schrieck, Johannes Swammerdam 
and the theory of spontaneous generation. In: Zoology in Early Modern Culture: Intersections of 
Science, Theology, Philology, and Political and Religious Education (ed. K.A.E Enenkel and PJ. Smith). 
Leiden: Brill. 

Locke, J. (1975). An Essay concerning Human Understanding (ed. P. Nidditch). Oxford: Oxford University 
Press. 

Mayr, E. (1982). The Growth of Biological Thought. Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press. 

Melamed, Y. (2020). The enigma of Spinoza’s Amor Dei Intellectualis. In: Freedom, Action and 
Motivation in Spinoza’s Ethics (ed. Noa Naaman-Zaudrer), 222-238. London: Routledge. 

More, H. (1662). An antidote against atheism: or, an appeal to the natural faculties of the mind of 
man, whether there be not a God. In: A Collection of Several Philosophical Writings. London: William 
Morden. 

Muratori, C. (2012). Henry More on human passions and animal souls. In: Emotional Minds (ed. 
Sabrina Ebbersmeyer). Berlin: de Gruyter. 

Ogilvie, B.W. (2014). Order of insects: insect species and metamorphosis between Renaissance and 
Enlightenment. In: The Life Sciences in Early Modern Philosophy (ed. O. Nachtomy and J.E. Smith). 
Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Richards, R.A. (2010). The Species Problem. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Smith, J.E. (2011). Divine Machines. Leibniz and the Sciences of Life. Princeton: Princeton University 
Press. 

Swammerdam, J. (1669). Historia generalis insectorum ofte Algemeene verhandeling van de bloedeloose 
dierkens. Utrecht: Meindardus van Dreunen. 

Thomas, K. (1983). Man and the Natural World. A History of Modern Sensibility. New York: Pantheon 
Books. 


374 


34 


Essence, Virtue and the State 


ERIN ISLO 


Spinoza’s philosophical project has caused confusion, frustration, and controversy among 
scholars, from his seventeenth-century correspondents and critics to the twenty-first 
century academics who remain captivated and perplexed by his thought. Much tension 
stems from his seemingly irreconcilable metaphysical commitments. In this chapter, I dis- 
cuss one way to understand one of Spinoza’s most vital, controversial concepts — essence — 
and attempt to show how this interpretation of essence illuminates and animates the basic 
precepts of his political theory. 

Spinoza’s metaphysics, most thoroughly detailed in the Ethics, begins with what exists 
and how those things relate to each other. According to Spinoza, only two things exist: 
substance and modes (El p4d). There is a single, eternal, infinite, indivisible substance 
(El1p14), and there are infinitely many modes (Elp16). I point out this fundamental 
element of Spinoza’s ontology because it is the seed from which his robust philosophical 
project blooms. Moreover, it highlights a distinction that will come up repeatedly 
throughout this chapter. This distinction is critical to my understanding of essence: eter- 
nity, the monism of substance; and finite, determinate, and durational modes, i.e. the plen- 
itude of affections connected in an infinite network of causes. Importantly, I understand 
that distinction to exist, at least in part, as a matter of intelligibility, as the difference bet- 
ween ideas in a finite, as opposed to the infinite, intellect; I find Robert Matyasi’s recent 
work on perspectivalism instructive, though I disagree with his anti-realist conclusions 
(Matyasi 2020). Spinoza’s mereology is only one of many controversial topics in the schol- 
arship that this chapter will run up against. 

There are a number of important underlying interpretations and commitments upon which 
I rely in the discussion presented in this chapter. Some are matters of furious debate among 
Spinoza scholars. I do my best to lay my reading of these points bare, making every attempt to 
present my own interpretation of them as clearly as possible so that where my readers disagree, 
they may take note but temporarily suspend their disagreement to hear me through to the end. 
However, my arguments for these points are developed in much greater detail elsewhere. Here, 
I attempt to show that the radical metaphysics of the Ethics are the beating heart of Spinoza’s 
ethical and political prescriptions. And at the core of Spinoza’s philosophical system is a con- 
cept that is at once rigorously complex and extraordinarily elegant: essence. 


A Companion to Spinoza, First Edition. Edited by Yitzhak Y. Melamed. 
© 2021 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2021 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd. 


375 


ERIN ISLO 


On my reading, Spinoza meaningfully distinguishes between the concept of formal 
essence and actual essence. It is a distinction that tracks the one I noted above, between 
substance, which is eternal, and modes, which are not. This also closely aligns with the 
divide between adequate and inadequate ideas, and in my view it is critical to under- 
standing Spinoza’s metaphysics, epistemology, psychology, and, of course, his ethics and 
politics. Below, I suggest an outline for the role that essences play in our understanding of 
the world and things in it. This understanding of essences is, I argue, the foundation from 
which Spinoza’s political theory grows. 

I move on to consider how the knowledge of essences of singular things, scientia intu- 
itiva, is the key to the method by which an individual achieves freedom, virtue, and beati- 
tudo. But of course man does not live in a world of only himself; freedom follows from the 
knowledge not just of oneself but of others (E5p25). Indeed, man cannot but be a part of 
Nature (E4p4), and we cannot conceive of ourselves without others (E4p2). While the 
Ethics, on its face, is often read to provide a guide for how an individual can achieve virtue, 
and thus freedom, Spinoza’s political project, as developed in the Tractatus Politicus, sug- 
gests that, at the foundation of a stable, secure state is absolute sovereignty. This would 
seem, at first blush, incompatible with an individual’s pursuit of freedom. But there is a 
convincing case to be made that Spinoza’s political absolutism is really about the efficacy 
of governance, which is to say, ‘harmonious functioning’ (Steinberg 2018, p. 188). And 
this harmony is achieved most comprehensively when men have adequate ideas and thus 
act by the dictates of reason, such that they agree in nature. (E4p35). The virtue of the 
individual can be identified with the virtue of the state, and that virtue is seated in unity. 

The upshot of my interpretation of the concept of essence, and the significance of my 
discussion of its role in Spinoza’s political theory, is that Spinoza does not think that man 
can pursue virtue in solitude. The ethical dimensions of Spinoza’s undertaking in the 
Ethics are a part of the same project as his political theorizing in the TP. In fact, the two 
cannot be meaningfully distinguished: the importance of our fellow man to our own pur- 
suit of virtue is made explicit in the Ethics (E4p35 et seq). What I attempt to show in this 
chapter is that obtaining knowledge of the essences of singular things — i.e. scientia intu- 
itiva, or the third kind of knowledge (E2p40s2 | G II/122/15-19) — is the greatest good 
any individual can pursue (E5p25), and that what is good for the individual is good for all 
men (E4p35c1). Essences are at the center of this endeavor: of our striving to understand 
singular things by the third kind of knowledge, of our pursuit of beatitudo, and ultimately, 
as an organizing principle of Spinoza’s political theory. 

Unlike some other contemporary commentators, my goal is not to provide Spinoza’s 
political theory with an explanatory remediation grounded in his metaphysics. I see no 
need to weave continuity into Spinoza’s thought retroactively. The project of the Ethics and 
his political writings were never conceptually isolated, and read together they serve to 
clarify Spinoza’s robust philosophical project. I am not immediately concerned, for 
example, with providing a prognostic account of the ontology of the state or the body pol- 
itic (see, e.g. Garrett 2012). It is, I think, misguided to read the Ethics, the TTP, and the TP 
as discrete projects, partitioned by domain or historical developments, interpreted only 
through the imposition of one text upon the other. The political commitments and pre- 
scriptions of Spinoza’s writings arise organically, if not necessarily, from the metaphysical 
project of the Ethics. Spinoza himself thought that the arguments of the TP followed from 
the illation of the Ethics (TP 1/4—5). In this chapter, then, I attempt to provide an exegesis 
of the indispensable role played by the knowledge of the essences of singular things in the 
fundamental and animating principles of Spinoza’s political thought. 


376 


ESSENCE, VIRTUE AND THE STATE 


1. Essence and Knowledge 


For Spinoza, nature is conceived as both a world of bodies and as metaphysically one. 
Spinoza is committed to a picture of radically distinct and individual modes while also 
being committed to substance monism. It makes sense, then, that there is a way in which 
things have essences that correspond to each of these metaphysical pictures. What I try to 
show here is that the conception of a singular thing in a world of distinct and individuated 
modes is its actual essence, and the conception of a thing in God’s idea is its formal essence. 
In many occurrences of the term essentia throughout the Ethics, in particular with respect 
to singular things, I believe Spinoza intends us to refer to both of these conceptions of 
essence simultaneously. By my reading, an idea that involves the unity of the formal and 
actual essence of a thing in the finite intellect is the object of the third kind of knowledge. 

Throughout this chapter I use ‘individual’ and ‘singular thing’ synonymously, (E2d1) and 
as Spinoza uses ‘singular thing’ and ‘mode’ interchangeably, I follow suit. The formal essence 
of a singular thing is the idea of that thing in God, or the idea of it sub specie aeternitatis 
(Elp27s). The actual essence of a singular thing is its ratio of motion and rest, its striving to 
persevere in its being (E3p7). Spinoza’s theory of essence is hotly contested; some readers take 
a ‘Platonizing’ approach, in which essence and existence occupy two separate realms. These 
accounts of what I call ‘ontological stratification’ rely upon a dichotomy between actual and 
formal essence (see, e.g. Garrett 2009). Mogens Laerke is among the most prominent critics of 
this approach, and he has argued for a ‘one-level ontology’ wherein there are no unactualized 
formal essences (Laerke 2016, 2017). I take my own account to maintain the crucial distinc- 
tion between actual and formal essences without thereby ‘Platonizing’ Spinoza’s theory of 
essence; formal essence and actual essence are different ways of conceiving the same thing, 
just as substance and the plenitude of modes are one and the same thing conceived in different 
ways. I reject any suggestion that one conception has a different degree of reality or existence 
than the other (see, e.g. E2p36; Islo 2020). I do not believe that Spinoza ever intended to der- 
ogate the reality of the totality of modes as compared to the reality of substance. Any given 
mode does not have the perfection of God, to be sure, but every mode follows from God’s 
nature. It would warp Spinoza’s careful and laborious discussions of psychology, religion, 
society, and politics to deny his concern for the actual existence and condition of men, or to 
deny how that concern motivates his larger philosophical project. 

Although Spinoza defines what pertains to the essence of thing, he does not define 
‘essence’ itself. He writes in Part 2 of the Ethics: 


I say that to the essence of any thing belongs that which, being given, the thing is [NS: also] 
necessarily posited and which, being taken away, the thing is necessarily [NS: also] taken 
away; or that without which the thing can neither be nor be conceived, and which can neither 
be nor be conceived without the thing. (E2d2) 


Essences, I argue, are a way of conceiving of a thing — for the essence is that without which 
a thing cannot be conceived, and the essence itself cannot be conceived without the thing 
of which it is the essence. I understand the essences of individuals to have two dimensions: 
conceivability, that without which a thing cannot be conceived; and existence, or ‘posit- 
ability,’ that without which a thing cannot exist. For the purposes of this chapter, I am 
concerned primarily with the conceivability dimension of essences. 

While God has an idea of this or that body (E2p20), my idea of those very same bodies 
will be very different. In God is an idea that expresses the essence of this or that body 


377 


ERIN ISLO 


sub specie aeternitatis (E5p22); the idea of the body in God is what I understand to be the 
formal essence of that body. “Each idea of each body, or of each singular thing which actu- 
ally exists, necessarily involves [the] eternal and infinite essence of God” (E2p45). My idea 
of this or that body, on the other hand, is limited by my finite intellect; my idea of bodies 
includes inadequate ideas (E2p29c). This idea of a body, I argue, is my idea of its actual 
essence. What I believe Spinoza calls for us to do in striving to understand things by the 
third kind of knowledge (E5p25) is to attend, so far as possible, to both the formal and 
actual essence in our ideas of singular things. 

By my reading, then, the formal essence of x, where x is any singular thing or mode, is 
the idea of x in God. God’s idea of x does not involve the affections of x, as such ideas would 
be inadequate, and so God’s idea of x is nothing but God’s idea of x in eternity, cf. God’s idea 
of eternity. The actual essence of a singular thing is the idea of that thing in nature, or the 
thing insofar as it exists in a world of infinitely many modes. That idea must attend to the 
thing’s ratio of motion and rest. This refers to, in the case of finite modes, their spacio- 
temporal status, that is, their duration and their causal relations with other modes. Insofar 
as a thing strives, it interacts with other things, or modes, and this striving serves to indi- 
viduate things. The striving of a rock, for example, must be different from the striving of a 
man; but moreover, the striving of this person and that person will also be different, for 
each is constituted by a different ratio of motion and rest under the attribute of extension 
and each has a mind that consists of a unique configuration of adequate and inadequate 
ideas that constitute the expression of striving to persevere in its being. 

Thus, the formal essence of a singular thing is the idea of the mode sub specie aeterni- 
tatis. We know that God has an idea that expresses the essence of a human body, sub specie 
aeternitatis (E5p22). The actual essence of a singular thing — the expression of the power 
of a singular thing, which is to say the striving by which a singular thing strives to perse- 
vere in its being — is part of the cause of the existence of modes in duration (E2p9). The 
particulars of the existence of a mode are determined by its relation to other modes that it 
affects and by which it is affected; this is the chain of causation that constitutes a mode’s 
duration. The actual existence of any finite mode follows from another finite mode, and so 
on to infinity, because each finite mode is caused by another finite mode, and so on (E1 p28). 

The ontology of formal essences and the metaphysical puzzles concerning how the idea 
of a formal essence can exist in our minds is a topic of rich debate in Spinoza scholarship, 
in no small part because it implicates the doctrine of the eternity of the mind (see, e.g. 
Laerke 2016, p. 282; Schmaltz 2015, p. 218; Garrett 2009b, Garber 2005, p. 108; Nadler 
2002, p. 262; Curley 1988, p. 143; Bennett 1984, p. 374). It is outside the scope of this 
chapter for me to wade too deeply into this controversy. What is most important for my 
purposes is establishing that we — finite modes — can conceive of others ‘under a species of 
eternity.’ Because we, as finite intellects, always understand things under this or that attri- 
bute as bodies or modes of thinking (E2a5), that suggests we attend to the aspect of 
singular things in eternity through this or that attribute (see Garber 1990, p. 80). This, I 
think, means conceiving of singular things insofar as they exist in the unity of existence 
itself, i.e. insofar as they inhere in substance. 

In the expression of the conatus principle we uncover an aspect of singular things that 
suggests each has a unique essence, and moreover, that there is an aspect of individuation 
in a singular thing’s essence. The principle of conatus itself is universal to singular things — 
they all strive — but it is the manner of their striving that differentiates them. The manner of 
the striving is sourced from the actual existence of the individual: the ratio of motion and 
rest, as a body, and the amalgam of adequate and inadequate ideas, as a mind. It is the act 


378 


ESSENCE, VIRTUE AND THE STATE 


of striving itself, the expression of conatus, that distinguishes individuals. Moreover, as this 
striving under the attribute of extension is the ratio of motion and rest of a body, it individ- 
uates it: “Bodies are distinguished from one another by reason of motion and rest, speed and 
slowness, and not by reason of substance” (G II/97/25; see also E3p6, E3p6d, and 
Nadler 2006, p. 195). I do not understand Spinoza’s ratio of motion and rest to imply a kind 
of mathematical proportion, but rather a constant ratio within a body’s constituents that 
remains stable. Put another way, I understand it as the constant relation of parts to each 
other that make up an individual or body. To the finite intellect, an idea of its body depends 
upon the ideas of other bodies (E2p19). It should be noted that should the principle of cona- 
tus and its expression apply to a mode under the attribute of thought, in the mind, by E2p7 
they must have a correlate under the attribute of extension, in the body. 

This theory of differentiation between finite modes can be expressed in another way, for 
the “essence of the Mind is constituted by adequate and by inadequate ideas” (E3p9d). 
Insofar as minds contain adequate ideas and therefore act by the dictates of reason, they 
are of the same nature; insofar as they are constituted by passions, i.e. inadequate ideas, 
they are different, and therefore distinct (E4p32). “Both insofar as the Mind has clear and 
distinct ideas, and insofar as it has confused ideas, it strives, for an indefinite duration, to 
persevere in its being and it is conscious of this striving it has” (E3p9). The manner or 
expression of striving follows from that which constitutes the mind, which is to say ade- 
quate and inadequate ideas. If part of what constitutes the mind is variant, i.e. inadequate 
ideas, it is this part that can be understood to distinguish individuals (see, too, Elp4). So 
while this understanding of conatus suggests an aspect of individuation between modes, it 
also presents an aspect of unity, for insofar as men act by the dictates of reason, they are of 
the same nature and their striving is harmonious. 

With this conception of essences before us, I turn to the highest virtue of the mind, cf., 
striving to know things by the third kind of knowledge. The third kind of knowledge, i.e. intu- 
itive knowledge, has as its object the essences of singular things (E2p40s2 | G II/122/15- 
19): “Atque hoc cognoscendi genus procedit ab adaequata idea essentiae formalis quorundam Dei 
attributorum ad adaequatam cognitionem essentiae rerum.” Intuitive knowledge, scientia intu- 
itiva, proceeds from an adequate idea of formal essence of attributes of God to adequate 
knowledge of the essence of things. But this definition is ‘frustratingly spare’ on details, and 
scholars have arrived at no general consensus as to its meaning (Nadler 2006, p. 178; see 
Melamed 2013; Garrett 2003). 

A finite mind cannot have an idea identical to the idea God has of a singular thing. The 
three types of knowledge that Spinoza discusses in Part II of the Ethics are kinds of 
knowledge that finite minds have, not knowledge that God has. I understand there to be 
two ‘moments’ in the third kind of knowledge. The first moment is an adequate idea of the 
formal essence of certain attributes. It seems right to say that no human mind can have a 
truly adequate idea of these attributes; to do so would be, in a way, to have an idea of one 
rendering of eternity or Nature itself. But perhaps it is enough, in order to have an ade- 
quate idea of the formal essence of an attribute, to attend to the fact of its eternity and 
infinity. I take this to be the first moment of the third kind of knowledge. From this ade- 
quate idea — that is, knowledge that attends to an attribute’s infinite nature — the finite 
mind must proceed to the second moment of the third kind of knowledge: adequate 
knowledge of the essence of things. “Since all things are in God and are conceived through 
God, it follows that we can deduce from this knowledge a great many things which we 
know adequately, and so can form that third kind of knowledge of which we spoke in 
E2p40s2 and of whose excellence and utility we shall speak in Part V” (E2p47s). 


379 


ERIN ISLO 


I have spent the majority of this chapter so far outlining what I take the essence of 
things to be: it is the conception of a thing insofar as it exists in God (formal essence), as 
well as the conception of a thing insofar as it exists as a mode of God in nature (actual 
essence). Spinoza tells us: 


We conceive things as actual in two ways: either insofar as we conceive them to exist in rela- 
tion to a certain time and place or insofar as we conceive them to be contained in God and to 
follow from the necessity of the divine nature. But the things we conceive in this second way 
as true, or real, we conceive under a gaze of eternity, and to that extent they involve the eternal 
and infinite essence of God. (E5p29s) 


As Spinoza lays out in Part V of the Ethics, the more we understand singular things, the 
more we understand God (E5p24); and the greatest virtue of the mind is understanding 
things by the third kind of knowledge (E5p25). As knowledge of God is the mind’s greatest 
virtue (E4p28), so must we pursue it by the best method available to finite intellects: by the 
striving to understand the essences of singular things. The third kind of knowledge is the 
highest form of knowledge the human mind can achieve, affecting our mind even more 
than the demonstration of our dependence on God for both our essence and existence 
(E5p36s); it is understanding the place of modes both in the durational and causal nexus 
of nature, which attends to individuation, and simultaneously understanding the place of 
each mode in eternity, which is the idea of the mode in God. In pursuing this knowledge, 
we aim to act on the dictates of reason. Man is free when he is led by reason (E4p68d), and 
so the consequence of virtue is freedom. Immediately after telling us this, Spinoza reveal- 
ingly reminds us that man has always been a God to man (E4p68s, E4p35s | II/234/3). 


2. Freedom and Unity 


After directing us toward the pursuit of the highest virtue of the mind, Spinoza points us, 
over and over, to our fellow men. Equipped with an understanding of essences and their 
role in the third kind of knowledge, I turn now to the successful pursuit of that knowledge 
and its implications and import for Spinoza’s political theory. I hope to show that Spinoza’s 
metaphysics are, in fact, deeply political, and that the concept of essence provides a 
foundation from which Spinoza’s anthropology can be clarified and, to the extent that it 
remains unfinished, continue to be cultivated. 

According to Spinoza, the fundamental goal of the state is the peace and security of life, 
where men live harmoniously (TP 5/2). By peace Spinoza means “a virtue which comes 
from strength of mind” (TP 5/4) or a “union or harmony of minds” (TP 6/4). The best 
state is one where men live in the harmony that results from reason and virtue (TP 5/5). 
So the best state is that state which maximizes the rationality individuals are able to 
achieve, and the state that does this most effectively is superior to others (Sangiacomo 2019, 
p. 194). As the individual strives to maximize his power, so too must the state (TTP 16/184). 
But how can the state go about promoting virtue and reason among its citizens? 

As discussed above, the virtue of the mind results in its harmony with other minds to 
the extent that they are virtuous, i.e. acting according to the dictates of reason. Unity, for 
Spinoza, is a critical theme underlying his metaphysics, his epistemology, and as we see 
here, his politics. It would be natural to wonder how the state could ever achieve this kind 
of unity or harmony, given that the virtue of the mind is based on reason; Spinoza seems 


380 


ESSENCE, VIRTUE AND THE STATE 


to harbor serious skepticism about the extent of human capacity for rationality, especially 
among the ‘multitude’ (TP 1/5; 2/5; 6/1; Steinberg 2009). Many scholars, in fact, believe 
Spinoza’s rational free man is an impossibility or incoherent concept. Some, however, have 
argued that Spinoza does not treat the free man as an unattainable ideal but instead as an 
individual who consistently but imperfectly lives by the dictates of reason (Nadler 2015). 
But we can set aside that debate for now. For if citizens fail to achieve rationality, they can 
still establish unity and harmony in the state. They simply must live by the common 
decision of the state, in agreement with their fellow men. 

In fact, living by the common decision of the state is not just for men who struggle to live 
by the dictates of reason. Even a “man who is guided by reason is more free in a state, 
where he lives according to a common decision, than in solitude, where he obeys only him- 
self” (E4p73). Consequently, man “desires to live according to the common decision of the 
state. .. a man who is guided by reason desires, in order to live more freely, to keep the 
common laws of the state” (E4p7 3d). 


In order, therefore, that men may be able to live harmoniously and be of assistance to one 
another, it is necessary for them to give up their natural right and to make one another confi- 
dent that they will do nothing which could harm others. . . by this law, therefore, Society can 
be maintained. (E4p37s2) 


There is, in fact, no conflict between the interests of men who seek their own advantage; 
these men are the most useful to each other (E4p35c2). For the more a man strives to pre- 
serve himself, the more he is endowed with virtue. “There is no singular thing in Nature 
that is more useful to man than a man who lives according to the guidance of reason” 
(E4p35c1). Indeed, Spinoza’s statements on the harmony and usefulness of men to each 
other borders on the effusive: “man is a God to man” (E4p35s); “[m]Jen still find from expe- 
rience that by helping one another they can provide themselves much more easily with the 
things they require, and that only by joining forces can they avoid the dangers that threaten 
on all sides” (E4p35s); “the good which everyone who seeks virtue wants for himself, he 
desires for other men; and this Desire is greater as his knowledge of God is greater” (E4p34); 
“If}]rom this it follows that the more a thing agrees with our nature, the more useful, or 
better, it is for us, and conversely, the more a thing is useful to us, the more it agrees with 
our nature” (E4p3 1c). 

A well-organized state will promote the common good, not only by facilitating the virtue 
of its citizens through reason but by accounting for the contingencies of the affects — the 
passions — of men. No state can exist as a perfect rational unity, but Spinoza’s political 
theory instructs that the best state will have mechanisms for unity and harmony, and thus 
peace, even with citizens who do not act by the guidance of reason. A state so structured 
will have the effect of increasing the degree to which men’s natures are in agreement, and 
thus increase harmony among citizens (Steinberg 2009). Indeed, “it is not by accident that 
man’s greatest good is common to all; rather, it arises from the very nature of reason, 
because it is deduced from the very essence of man, insofar as [that essence] is defined by 
reason” (E4p36s). 

The connection here between man and his fellow man is manifold. First, to acquire the 
knowledge necessary to live by the dictates of reason, he must have knowledge of the 
essences of other things. For Spinoza, no wise man is an island (see, e.g., Garber 2004). 
Second, there is nothing more useful to a man than a fellow man who lives by the dictates 
of reason. The rationality of one can be used to promote the rationality of others. Third, 


381 


ERIN ISLO 


insofar as men act by the guidance of reason, they agree in nature and exist in harmony. 
Finally, the virtue of men in a state impute their virtue on the state (TP 5/3). Spinoza 
shows us in the Ethics that we cannot conceive of ourselves without each other, as we only 
have knowledge of ourselves through our affections (E2p19). Similarly, in the TP, Spinoza 
makes clear that the virtue of one is connected to the virtue of the many, and ultimately to 
the virtue of the state. These principles of unity and harmony, of the relation between the 
one and many, underlie Spinoza’s thought from the metaphysics through his political 
theory. Far from providing us with a system that centers around the primacy of the 
individual, Spinoza presents us with philosophical project that concludes our own salva- 
tion depends on our knowledge of, and relation to, others. This beneficent Spinoza, I 
believe, always intended his readers to treat his work as a coherent whole. Starting from 
the concept of essence, in this chapter I have attempted to do so. 


3. Conclusion 


I have tried to show here that the rational man and the most virtuous state depend upon 
the same things and ultimately, cannot be realized without the other. The free man, for 
Spinoza, is not a solitary man. The tie to our fellow man arises in the very first principles of 
Spinoza’s metaphysics, for it is his concept of essence that leads us to the third kind of 
knowledge, cf, knowledge of the essences of singular things. The striving to understand 
things by the third kind of knowledge, as the highest good and virtue of the mind, is also 
the key to freedom. For Spinoza, man can only achieve wisdom hand-in-hand with free- 
dom, that is, hand-in-hand with his fellow man. 


References 


Bennett, J. (1984). A Study of Spinoza’s Ethics. Indianapolis: Hackett Publishing Company. 

Curley, E.M. (1988). Behind the Geometrical Method: A Reading of Spinoza’s Ethics. Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press. 

Garber, D. (1990). Spinoza’s worlds: reflections on Balibar on Spinoza. Spinoza: Issues and Directions: 
The Proceedings of the Chicago Spinoza Conference (1986) (ed. E. Curley and P.-E. Moreau). Leiden: Brill. 

Garber, D. (2004). Dr. Fischelson’s dilemma: Spinoza on freedom and Sociability. In: Spinoza on Reason 
and the Free Man (ed. Yovel and Segal), 183-207. New York: Little Room Press. 

Garber, D. (2005). “A free man thinks of nothing less than of death”: Spinoza on the eternity of the 
mind. In: Early Modern Philosophy: Mind, Matter, and Metaphysics (ed. C. Mercer and E. O'Neill), 
103-117. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Garrett, A. (2003). Meaning in Spinoza’s Method. New York: Cambridge University Press. 

Garrett, A. (2012). Knowing the essence of the state in Spinoza’s Tractatus Theologico-Politicus. 
European Journal of Philosophy 20 (1): 50-73. 

Garrett, D. (2009). Spinoza on the essence of the human body and the part of the mind that is 
eternal. In: The Cambridge Companion to Spinoza’s Ethics (ed. O. Koistinen), 243—262. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 

Islo, E. (2020). Understanding Essence in the Ethics (in preparation, copy on file with the author). 

Laerke, M. (2016). Spinoza on the eternity of the mind. Dialogue: Canadian Philosophical Review, 55 
(2): 265-286. 

Laerke, M. (2017). Aspects of Spinoza’s theory of essence. The Actual and the Possible: Modality and 
Metaphysics in Modern Philosophy, (11-44). Oxford: Oxford University Press. 


382 


ESSENCE, VIRTUE AND THE STATE 


Matyasi, R. (2020). Spinoza on composition, monism, and beings of reason. Journal of Modern 
Philosophy 2 (1): 1-16. 

Melamed, Y.Y. (2013). Scientia intuitiva Spinoza’s third kind of cognition. Ubergédnge — diskursiv oder 
intuitiv? Essays zu Eckart Forster die 25 Jahre der Philosophie (ed. J. Haag), 99-116. Frankfurt am 
Main: Klostermann. 

Nadler, S. (2006). Spinoza’s Ethics: An Introduction. New York: Cambridge University Press. 

Nadler, S. (2015). Spinoza’s “Free Man.” Journal of the American Philosophical Association 1 (1). 

Sangiacomo, A. (2019) Spinoza on reasons, passions, and the supreme good. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press 

Schmaltz, T. (2015). Spinoza on eternity and duration. In: The Young Spinoza: A Metaphysician in the 
Making (ed. Y.Y. Melamed), 205-220. New York: Oxford University Press. 

Steinberg, J. (2009). Spinoza on civil liberation. Journal of the History of Philosophy 47 (1): 35-58. 

Steinberg, J. (2018). Spinoza and political absolutism. Spinoza’s Political Treatise: A Critical Guide 
(ed. Y.Y. Melamed and H. Sharp), 175-189. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 


383 


op 


Law and Dissolution of Law in Spinoza 


PINA TOTARO 


The most incomprehensible thing about the world 
is that it is comprehensible 
(Albert Einstein) 


In arecent article about Spinoza’s conception of law, Donald Rutherford! proposed a distinc- 
tion in Spinoza between two fundamental kinds of laws: the “type-I laws” collect all the 
laws that express a natural necessity or necessarily follow the true nature or definition of 
one thing, while the “type-II laws” depend exclusively on human decisions (ab homine 
placito). The laws of nature do not have a normative content, but rather, they are descrip- 
tive propositions that establish how things act and necessarily follow each one’s nature. 
The laws of the second type, however, dictate practical behaviors, prescribe actions, and 
may more properly be called decrees. In this sense, the laws of nature, which Spinoza 
mentions from the first paragraphs of his Treatise of the emendation of the intellect, can be 
traced to the type-I laws of Rutherford. Apart from this apparent distinction, the American 
scholar’s analysis proposes a unique interpretation of the concept of law because the con- 
cept of substance in Spinoza is unique. I would like to turn my chapter to the language of 
law and to the different occurrences of the lexical family of lex as part of a very complex 
terminology which refers to a more complex range of different types and variants. 

A constellation of terms revolves around the term lex in the works of Spinoza, and 
defines at the same time its persistent role and strong centrality: jus, ratio, norma, regula, 
praeceptum, institutum, dictamen, dogma. The notion of law has a predominant philosophical 
significance that expands and follows with varying needs and different keys of interpreta- 
tion according to the different subjects treated. The plurality of meanings and different 
occurrences is, however, attributable to two fundamental concepts in Spinoza’s work: one 
determined by the laws of nature as constitutive principles of physics, geometry, and also 
metaphysics, the other marked by the relevance of religion, politics, and ethics. 

An important laboratory for a first analysis of the concept of law as essential bond of 
nature is present in the early writings of the philosopher. In the unfinished Treatise of the 


' Rutherford (2010, pp. 143-167). 


A Companion to Spinoza, First Edition. Edited by Yitzhak Y. Melamed. 
© 2021 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2021 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd. 


384 


LAW AND DISSOLUTION OF LAW IN SPINOZA 


emendation of the intellect Spinoza seeks to establish, with intense autobiographical ele- 
ments, a new rule of life (novum institutum) and a concept of true good (verum bonum) and 
the highest good (summum bonum), which eliminate the uncertainty of the ordinary 
meaning of good and evil and of perfect and imperfect, attributable only in a relative sense, 
nisi respective: 


For nothing, considered in its own nature, will be called perfect or imperfect, especially after 
we have recognized that everything that happens [fiunt] happens [fieri] according to the 
eternal order, and according to certain laws of Nature.” 


We can see here a first, decisive break with what ‘is said’ — perfect and imperfect — and 
what is the basis of true knowledge; a break with language, regarded as a dimension of 
confused perceptions, and the intellect, able to capture eternal order. The leges Naturae 
oversee everything that ‘is made’ (fiunt) according to this order, making each being neutral 
from the qualitative point of view, equal to any other and therefore only judgable improp- 
erly nisi respective. 

There is no purpose in this eternal fieri. Time and duration are cancelled in an absolute 
present, where everything takes place without corruption or change according to certain 
laws. Defined in these terms, the law does not ask to be obeyed or transgressed: it is embodied 
in the beings in the sense that it is the cause of their own production. Although human 
weakness cannot get to fully understand this order, man can however reach “the knowledge 
of the union that the mind has with the whole of Nature.” He can amend, heal the mind 
and purify it for this purpose, first of all assuming some indispensable regulae vivendi. 

The adoption of practices and correct behavior makes possible, or at least facilitates, the 
understanding of the natural order. In this sense, “the more things the mind knows, the 
better it understands both its forces and the order of nature” and it can direct itself in an 
easier way. “This is the sum total of method,” as Spinoza concludes with a Cartesian 
expression. Spinoza’s ‘treaty of method’ thus outlines a horizon in which mutual relations 
and relations of mutual dependency between entities are a guarantee of intelligibility and 
knowledge. Laws do not establish, but they describe and note the relationships of all things 
with each other. This reciprocity of the relationship in this universal warping is intelligible 
as “if there were something in Nature that did not interact [nihil commercii| with other 
things,” “we could not infer anything about it.”* 

The growth of knowledge is nothing but intuition of the order between things to be 
pursued with a certain method: “And conversely, those things that do interact [quae habent 
commercium] with other things (as everything that exists in Nature does) will be under- 
stood, and their objective essences will also have the same interaction [commercium], i.e. 
other ideas will be deduced from them, and these again will interact [commercium] with 
others ideas.”* The notion of commercium refers here to “all things that exist in nature.” It 
is evoked here to emphasize the correspondence or the relation of exchange and therefore 
of reciprocity and communication that governs the workings of nature in the sense of 
functional interdependence between parts of a mechanism. In nature, that is, everything 
is done for mutual relationships and the commercium between things is nothing other than 


” 66 


? TIE, §12; GIL, 8, 4-17; ed. Curley, I, p. 10. 

3 TIE, §13; GII, 8, 25-26; ed. Curley, I, p. 11. 

+ TIE, §41; GIL, 16, 27-30; ed. Curley, I, p. 20. 

5 TIE, §41; GH, 16-17, 32-1; ed. Curley, I, p. 20. 


385 


PINA TOTARO 


a chain of production, in the sense that “to interact with other things is to produce, or be 
produced by other things [Commercium habere cum aliis rebus est produci ab aliis, aut alia 
producere].”° Man can finally capture the origin and source of the whole of nature (origo et 
fons totius Naturae) and reproduce the pattern or capture the faithful image (the exemplar) 
of nature itself as long as he understands this network of causal links. 

This kind of inquisitio naturae which is able to dissolve the complexity of causal nodes, 
actually requires very simple tools to ensure: (1) the distinction between truth and error; 
(2) the production of adequate rules to advance knowledge and (3) the ability to establish 
an order for not getting lost in fruitless research. 

The methodus that drives the knowledge of leges, regulae, and normae of the ordo naturae 
is therefore proposed in terms of geometry, preparing the system of Ethica, ordine geometrico 
demonstrata. Geometry, in fact, provides both the epistemological and conceptual model of 
the human intellect and that of the structure of the universe. Not surprisingly, Euclid’s 
Elements will be among the most cited works in detail by Spinoza in these passages of 
Treatise of the Emendation of the Intellect: 


Mathematicians know — you read for example in §24 — by the force of the demonstration of 
Proposition 19 in Book VII of Euclid, which numbers are proportional to one another, from 
the nature of proportion, and its property, viz. that the product of the first and fourth numbers 
is equal to the product of the second and third. Nevertheless, they do not see the adequate pro- 
portionality of the given numbers. Andif they do, they see it not by the force of that Proposition, 
but intuitively, without going through any procedure.’ 


It is the geometry, with its representative rigor, which presides over the operation and 
production of nature: so in fact, as exemplified in Spinoza, the ellipse is reconstructed by 
infinite points having a defined relationship between them. The geometry is presented as a 
system of necessary relationships that regulates an infinite nature composed of bodies 
brought back to the geometric form, as the scenario of configurations regulated by laws 
that do not ‘express’ but ‘are’ connections, relationships, functions. 

The geometry operates on various levels returning the model of a not such empirical 
knowledge, as intuitive. The same causal relations that govern the unfolding of natural 
events also oversee the activities of the mens, which act “according to certain laws, like a 
spiritual automaton [secundum certas leges .. . & quasi aliquod automa spirituale],”* following 
and triggering in turn, as in a clock, the almost automatic behavior, due to the necessity 
and eternal nexus that binds things together. The laws of nature are also laws of the intel- 
lect and the intellect knows instantly that nature, which is the most perfect being, “is a 
unique and infinite being, beyond which there is no being.”’ Relationships and nexus of 
causality can be captured by an ‘amended’ intellect in their intima essentia as real entities, 
such as relationships between fixed and eternal things (res fixae, & aeternae) and at the 
same time (simul) as “laws inscribed in these things, as in their true codes, according to 
which all singular things come to be, and are ordered.”!° 


® TIE, §41; GII, 16, 35; ed. Curley, I, p. 20. I cannot tell if the verb ‘to interact’ effectively translates the expressive 
force of the Latin phrase “commercium habere,” here insistently repeated by Spinoza. 

7 TIE, §24; GIL, 12, 7-14; ed. Curley, I, p. 15. 

8 TIE, §85; GIL, 32, 25-26; ed. Curley, I, p. 37. 

° “Est nimirum hoc ens, unicum, infinitum, hoc est, est omne esse, & praeter quod nullum datur esse”: TIE, §76; 
GI, 29, 17-18; ed. Curley, I, p. 34. 

10 TIE, §101; GIL, 36-37, 35-3; ed. Curley, I, p. 41. 


386 


LAW AND DISSOLUTION OF LAW IN SPINOZA 


Spinoza’s Tractatus thus reveals a confidence in the ability to grasp the infinite unity and 
necessity of nature with an intuitive act, to distinguish the ideas from other ideas and con- 
nect them, with an immediate vision, to reach that kind of knowledge that only allows 
omnia simul concipere (to conceive all things at the same time). 

Looking for a proper definition of the concept of lex, in his Short Treatise on God, man and 
his well-being Spinoza presents a preliminary list of some examples of “natural laws,” 
defined here for the first time as “God’s laws.” The connotation of these laws (wet, wetten) 
consists in the relationship of necessity established in a given structure so that the term 
‘law’ appears inadequate to express its nature: 


From this it follows also that God does not give man laws in order to reward him when he ful- 
fills them. To put it more clearly, God’s laws are not of such a nature that they could ever be 
transgressed. For the rules that God has established in Nature, according to which all things 
come to be and endure — if we want to call them laws — are such that they can never be trans- 
gressed. E.g. that the weakest must yield to the strongest, that no cause can produce more than it has 
in itself, etc., are of such a kind that they never change, never begin, but that everything is 
disposed and ordered under them."! 


The concept of relationship involved in the notion of lex expressed in the Treatise of the 
emendation of the intellect (Tractatus de intellectus emendatione) includes a reflection on the 
inexorable character of the laws of nature, which are not subject to obedience or disobedi- 
ence, being as they are subject to an inescapable necessity. 

Being identified with divine necessity, the notion of lex is understood as a modality of 
the order of nature in Spinoza’s comment on the Principia philosophiae of Descartes. 
According to the system established by the “celeberrimus Cartesius,” Spinoza here does 
not prove the laws, but looks at what man can do to know and conform himself to the 
natural order. He writes in the Appendix of Cogitata metaphysica: 


A Philosopher does not ask what God can do by his supreme power, but judges the nature of 
things from the laws that God has placed in them. So he judges to be fixed and settled what is 
inferred from those laws to be fixed and settled, though he does not deny that God can change 
those laws and everything else. Hence we also do not ask, when we speak of the soul, what God 
can do, but only what follows from the laws of nature.” 


Since it is impossible for man to grasp the infinite divine power, he can then investigate 
how the leges naturae act, which in their simplicity, have a variety of consequences. Fluire, 
profluire, fieri, sequi, are some verbs used more frequently here to express their action in the 
world. However, behind the plurality of words it is possible to grasp a unique conceptual 
coherence. Acquirable only with “the method of mathematicians,” knowledge of the laws 
of nature derives from the simple fundamentals delivered by the interweaving of defini- 
tions, postulates, and axioms, according to an order of reason which is the same order of 
language. In the Preface “To the Honest Reader,” to Principia Philosophiae Cartesianae more 
geometrico demonstratae, Ludowijk Meyer discusses the role of mathematics in Spinoza: 


Definitions are nothing but the clearest explanations of the words and terms by which the 
things to be discussed are designated; and Postulates and Axioms, or common Notions of the 


1 KV IL, 24, 4; GI, 104, 20-30; ed. Curley, I, p. 142. 
2 CMII, 12; GI, 276, 12-19; ed. Curley, I, pp. 341-342. 


387 


PINA TOTARO 


mind, are Propositions so clear and evident that no one can deny his assent to them provided 
only that he has rightly understood the terms themselves.’ 


Only mathematics can identify and translate the relationships between things through 
“definitions and logical divisions interlinked in a chain,” which are therefore not “conclu- 
sive reasoning” or enunciations a priori, but arguments that depend merely on likelihood 
and probability, such as to ultimately lead the mind to “the haven of knowledge for which 
it yearned” (“optato cognitionis portu”). The geometric order translated from the Elements of 
Euclid proceeds along this route until the recomposition of causal links, to the definition of 
a continuum in which individual episodes are evoked simultaneously, until the ability to 
“see with one look” like a painting, tanquam in pictura, all omnia of nature (“haec omnia, 
quae uno obtutu, tanquam in pictura, videri debent”), even if the human intellect has only 
partial knowledge of their laws. 

It is the same paradigm that would be proposed in Ethics and in Theological-Political 
Treatise. In the latter work, in particular, the law, absolute considerata, depends on and nec- 
essarily follows from the nature of things, or from their essence. In this way, “for example, 
it is a universal law of all bodies, and a natural necessity, that bodies in motion impinging 
on other bodies lose as much of their proper motion as they communicate to these”: 


The word law, taken without qualification, means that according to which each individual, or all 
or some members of the same species, act in one and the same fixed and determinate way. This 
depends either on a necessity of nature or on human decision. A law which depends on a necessity 
of nature is one which follows necessarily from the very nature or definition of a thing. One which 
depends on human decision, and which is more properly called legislation [Jus], is one which men 
prescribe for themselves and others, for the sake of living more safely and conveniently, or for 
some other causes. For example, it is a universal law of all bodies, which follows from a necessity 
of nature, that a body which strikes against another lesser body loses as much of its motion as it 
communicates to the other body. Similarly, it is a law which necessarily follows from human 
nature that when a man recalls one thing, he immediately recalls another like it, or one he had 
perceived together with the first thing. But [the law] that men should yield, or be compelled to 
yield, the right they have from nature, and bind themselves to a fixed way of living, depends on a 
human decision. Thought I grant, without reservation, that everything is determined by the 
universal laws of nature to exist and produce effects in a fixed and determinate way.!* 


Spinoza shares with Descartes the mandatory character of the mechanical laws of 
nature, but Spinoza emphasizes strongly, unlike Descartes, that the laws that govern physics 
and mechanics are the same that govern the nature of man and his perceptive abilities, 
which operate also according to the dynamics of relationship and reciprocity. An example 
in this sense is provided by the operation of the memory. As stated in the sentence quoted 
above, “it is a law which follows necessarily from the constitution of human nature, that in 
recollecting some particular thing we bring to mind another similar thing, or something of 
which we were cognizant at the same time with the former.” 

The term ‘law’ is proposed here in a context in which there is also another term, necessity, 
which applies to both nature and man, articulated in the different forms of the lexical family, 
necessitas, necessario, necessarius. This term refers to the concept of lex naturae and distin- 
guishes it from that of jus. 


13 PPC (L. Meijer, Candido Lectori); G1, 127, 17-21; ed. Curley, I, p. 225. 
14 TTP IV, §§1-2; GIL, 57-58, 23-26; ed. Curley, II, pp. 125-126. 


388 


LAW AND DISSOLUTION OF LAW IN SPINOZA 


Spinoza insists on this fundamental distinction between human law and divine law in 
chapter IV of Theological-Political Treatise. Human law defines the “rule of life whose sole 
objective is the protection of life and the commonwealth,” while the lex defined as “divine 
natural” can “be understood by mere capacity for judgment,” since it is common to every 
man and attainable from absolutely clear and simple elements that are “common notions, 
in themselves certain and known.” Unlike human law, natural divine law is expressed in a 
search that has no other purpose than knowledge itself, or reward other than the unveiling 
of the law itself. The natural divine law does not enunciate requirements, but incorporates 
them ab aeterno as eternal truths, so to say that God willed and established from eternity 
that the three corners of the triangle are equal to two right angles is the same as to say that 
the nature of the triangle is necessarily contained in divine nature, which owns it and 
‘intends.’ 

In these passages Spinoza marks his distance from the ‘personal God’ of traditional reli- 
gions. An anthropomorphic religion is forcing man to error, causing him to identify the 
divine laws with moral precepts, or with some form of devotional duties. The true concept 
of ‘laws of God’ resides instead in common and truthful notions to all notes, immediately 
and intuitively understandable, since God guides and directs all things for the necessity 
and perfection of his nature; and his decrees and his volitions are eternal truths, always 
involve necessity, and always follow the same and identical order, as we can read in the 
Theological-Political Treatise, in the Edwin Curley’s translation: 


Nothing, therefore, happens in nature which is contrary to its universal laws. Nor does 
anything happen which does not agree with those laws or does not follow from them. For 
whatever happens, happens by God’s will and eternal decree, i.e., as we have now shown, 
whatever happens, happens according to laws and rules which involve [involvunt] eternal 
necessity and truth. So nature always observes laws and rules which involve eternal necessity 
and truth — though they are not all known to us — and so it also observes a fixed and immutable 
order.!° 


The frequent use of the verb involvere, with its meaning of reeling, unreeling, rolling up, 
that is quoted especially in the five parts of Ethics, can also hide an allusion to the ‘roll’ par 
excellence of the Torah. The Torah thus appears to be understood here by Spinoza not as a 
normative system encoded in a pervasive practice to set up a real “empire of the law,” but 
as the nature in the plurality of its expressions. The Torah therefore cannot be considered 
as a juridical legalism, but as an ‘ethic’ of the law that is expressed in the refusal of a 
moralistic obedience to the law. In this sense, the Torah is not the law expressed in human 
language, but the one inscribed in “the fleshly tables of the heart” and in the rational order 
of things. 

Not surprisingly, the term lex with its implicit allusion to the meaning of obligation and 
command, eventually becomes scarcer until it almost disappears in the works of Spinoza. 
In his philosophical reflection on the concept of causa sui presented in Ethics, the law is the 
same activity as the causa sui. The cause of self acts and makes act according to a codified 
praxis, according to the necessity of the action itself. The law is a geometry that provides 
degrees and next steps, from one thing to another, from one cause to another, according to 
a process that translates the implicit into the explicit, evolutio in revelatio, the end returning 
to the beginning, to God, to that God with whom the first part of Ethics started. In his dem- 


15 PTP VI, §10: G HL, 83, 9-24; ed. Curley, I, pp. 154-155. 


389 


PINA TOTARO 


onstratio ordine geometrico Spinoza expresses this network of relations, a network made not 
of contents but of connections between things. The lex applied to ethics, implicit in geom- 
etry, here becomes metaphysics. 

Being absolutely infinite, the essence of which implies the existence, and that is in se and 
is conceived per se, does not order laws, but manifests its substance, its infinity of attrib- 
utes, in nature, where each attribute expresses an eternal and infinite essence. Ordo & con- 
nexio rerum et idearum then is this endless place of production and regeneration: a space 
without emptiness, without creating or finality, without freedom of the will. 

The axiom of geometry according to which two things equal to another thing are all 
equal to each other, reveals the same identity in Substance. In Substance every element 
reflects God as causa sui: the causa sui consists of effects according to a regularity that is no 
longer the law, but is an internal logical principle, caused by the same substantia. The law 
is, in effect, a perfect mechanism for self-representation. 

With its network of definitions, axioms, and propositions, the Ethics displays its universal 
content following the progressive trend of arithmetic consequentiality, from simple to 
complex. Its principles are simple maxims that produce things through a flow of causes. 
God does not dictate a law but the law is a matter of fact, a consequence of the essence of 
God himself. The causa sui is an action that creates the multiplicity of things without enun- 
ciating anything. It is what it is manifesting, evolving, and involving. It coincides with 
geometry in its necessary internal operation. Like geometry, the causa sui is a principle 
which dictates such a sequence of causes and this sequence is not enunciated, but hap- 
pens, is done. In the first part of Ethics we can therefore read: 


from God’s supreme power, or infinite nature, infinitely many things in infinitely many modes, 
ie., all things, have necessarily flowed [effluxisse], or always follow [sequi], by the same 
necessity and in the same way as from the nature of a triangle it follows, from eternity and to 
eternity, that its three angles are equal to two right angles.'° 


The law is embodied in its infinite modes of existence, in the relations of production bet- 
ween what is in itself and is conceived through itself (substantia), and what it is in another, 
and it is its modifications. “Everything — writes Spinoza — is in God,” and all omnia, which 
become facts, quae fiunt, ‘are made’ through the only laws of the infinite nature of God and 
following from the necessity of his essence. Everything, therefore, is a result of the data 
taken in the law and declined in the structure of propositions, demonstrations, and corol- 
laries and notes. Everything moves along a continuous chain according to an almost infi- 
nite series of connections, in which the individual elements are summed in a real way, as 
the consecutio of a mathematical series. Not surprisingly, in the reconstruction of the bonds 
between things, the verb sequi is a term so frequent as to become an almost obsessive 
presence in Spinoza, as much as that of the term necessitas: “omnia [.. .] ex absoluta natura 
alicujus attributi Dei sequuntur,” and “quicquid [. . .| sequitur, debet [. . .] necessario, & 
infinitum existere,” and “hinc sequitur” that God is causa essendi and then “clarissime 
sequitur” that is infinite and eternal, and still, from one modification to another, since this 
cause or this modification must in its turn be conditioned by another cause, and has a 
conditioned existence, and, again, this last by another (for the same reason); and so on 
(for the same reason) to infinity.'? Things could not have been produced by God in any 


16 H1P17S; GIL, 62, 14-19: ed. Curley, I, p. 426. 
17 B1P28D; GIL, 69, 16-30: ed. Curley, I, p. 432. 


390 


LAW AND DISSOLUTION OF LAW IN SPINOZA 


other way or in any other order, since God does not exist before his decrees, nor can be 
without those decrees in which He manifests himself (He reveals himself): God is his decreta 
and “ex necessitate divinae naturae sequitur [. . .] ut Deus infinita infinitis modis agat”: 


Nothing happens in nature which can be attributed to any defect in it, for nature is always the 
same, and its virtue and power of acting are everywhere one and the same, i.e., the laws and 
rules of nature, according to which all things happen, and change from one form to another, 
are always and everywhere the same. So the way of understanding the nature of anything, or 
whatever kind, must also be the same, viz. through the universal laws and rules of nature.!* 


From this infinite and eternal necessity, there follow in ordine geometrico the nature and 
the origin of mind, affections and actions of men, the power of the intellect and human 
freedom, as if they were “lines, surfaces and bodies.” The laws of nature concern in fact the 
common order of nature of which man is part, and in this sense human affections and 
their properties have the same nature as other natural things (EIVP5 7S). Only the intellect 
that has abandoned an uncertain and confused knowledge will be able to really perceive by 
intuition that “all things follow from the necessity of the divine nature, and come to pass 
in accordance with the eternal laws and rules of nature” and then it will be pushed almost 
naturally “to act well [...] and to live with joy.” (EIVP50S) This process takes place with 
the same need for which, in the nature of the triangle, its three angles are equal to two 
right angles. 

When the mind has finally acquired the intuitive knowledge, the lex loses its apparent 
character of external obligation, interiorizing itself on a philosophical level. The third kind 
of knowledge — which is the subject of the fifth and final part of Ethics dedicated to the 
“Power of the Intellect” — is no longer a matter of law, no longer imposing any obligation, 
external or internal, but is an action practiced, acted, and not suffered, almost an ontological 
transformation, which implies a shift from a “sub lege” condition to a state without law. 
A state intended as a form of secular redemption, as an undocking of obedience from its 
meaning of obligation and constraint, becomes love, towards God and towards men. These 
two dogmas, in fact, love for God and love for one’s neighbor, sum up and put into practice 
the ‘universal religion’ of Spinoza, wherever recommended in the Scriptures. The amor Dei 
intellectualis is the definitive goal of the whole teaching of Ethics, presented as the ultimate, 
the last shape of a Lex that dissolves in the overcoming of the law itself, but in this transfor- 
mation is accomplished the highest and most authentic self-affirmation of the law. 

The concept of Iex is transformed from a global conception and searching of the infinite 
spaces of the substantia-God to a reflection on the human condition, to a passage from 
universal to particular, from the eternal to the everyday. 

The theoretical process marking the introduction of the geometrical order into the 
human sphere involves the transformation of the law from a system of universal relation- 
ships into personal and collective experience according to a path of interior requalification. 
This process of interiorization that results from the transposition of the axioms of mathe- 
matics in rules of conduct and practice working in society, translates the immutable warp- 
ing of the cosmos within a religion common to all men. The knowledge of the relationship 
mechanism of the lex thus becomes the decisive laboratory not only for speculation on the 
order of the causes, but also for the understanding of everyday life which is the soul guide 
and strict law of co-existence. 


18 E3Pref.; GI, 138, 11-18; ed. Curley, I, p. 492. 


391 


PINA TOTARO 


With the gradual abandonment of the term Jex and the definition of a rational and intu- 
itive knowledge, the system of metaphysics and science proposed by Spinoza is given to 
ethical life. Concerning this we can conclude with Pascal. In one of his most famous Pensées 
Blaise Pascal argued that “the heart has its reasons that reason does not know.” Spinoza 
shows, beyond Pascal, that since the intellect is capable of uno intuitu videre (seeing at a 
glance), it can also understand the reasons of the heart. 

I would like to conclude with a brief look at the history of the fortune of the concept of 
law as it is interpreted by Spinoza. 

The particular conception of Spinoza’s law would cross the boundary between philos- 
ophy and science, for more than a century. It is expressed in the geometric construction of 
Ethics, in the grammar of relationships established from propositions and axioms, and 
applies to physics, religion, and ethics. 

A clearer explanation of this particular concept of lex would be present, especially in 
The Spirit of the Laws of Montesquieu. I would like here to hint only at the first few lines of 
the work, in the first chapter of the first book, in which Montesquieu begins: “Laws, in 
their most general significance, are the necessary relations arising from the nature of 
things”;'? and even “laws are the relations subsisting between different beings, and the 
relations of these to one another,” according to an established and constant relationship. 

Later, David Hume would underline the metaphysical character of this conception of 
Montesquieu. In his work Enquiry Concerning the Principles of morals of 1751, Hume attrib- 
utes to Malebranche the origin of this conception of law as a ‘relationship’: “For all I know 
— writes Hume — the father Malebranche was the first to formulate this abstract theory of 
morals, which later—he adds — was adopted by Dr. Clarke and other thinkers.” The Anglican 
preacher Samuel Clarke had actually argued in his Discourse Concerning the unchangeable 
obligations of natural religion of 1705, immutable and necessary relationships bind beings 
like those between mathematical magnitudes. Regarding Malebranche, we do not know 
what work in particular Hume was referring to, but I found a reference to the concept of 
the law understood as “rapports necessaires & immuables, qui sont entre tous ses [of God] 
propres attributs” in a passage of his Reflexions sur la premotion physique published in Paris 
in 1715: 

“Relationships (I repeat so that the reader can think about it seriously), which are the 
eternal Laws, the foundation of religion & morals, and of all reasonable Laws; relation- 
ships, I say, which are the eternal Laws, for the same reason that the relationships between 
ideas, that God contains in His essence, are the eternal truths & unchangeable, from which 
all sciences depend.”?° 


1° C, de Secondat, Baron de Montesquieu, The Spirit of Laws, I, 1 (1751): “Laws, in their most general significa- 
tion, are the necessary relations arising from the nature of things. In this sense all beings have their laws: the 
Deity. His laws, the material world its laws, the intelligences superior to man their laws, the beasts their laws, man 
his laws. They who assert that a blind fatality produced the various effects we behold in this world talk very 
absurdly; for can anything be more unreasonable than to pretend that a blind fatality could be productive of intel- 
ligent beings? There is, then, a prime reason; and laws are the relations subsisting between it and different beings, 
and the relations of these to one another.” 

20 “Rapports, (je le répéte afin que le lecteur y pense serieusement,) qui sont les Loix éternelles, le fondement de 
la religion & de la morale, & de toutes les Loix raisonnables; rapports, dis-je, qui sont les Lois éternelles, par la 
méme raison que les rapports qui sont entre les idées, que Dieu renferme dans son essence, sont les veritez 
éternelles & immuables, dont dépendent toutes les sciences” (N. Malebranche 1974, p. 83). 


392 


LAW AND DISSOLUTION OF LAW IN SPINOZA 


And finally I would like to point out here that in fact, even before Clarke and Malebranche, 
the first formulation of the concept of law as a network of relationships, as embodiment of 
the succession of links postulated by the causa sui is found in Spinoza. In this fundamental 
concept lies the comprehension of the universe and the key to subsequent advances in phi- 
losophy and science. 


References 


Malebranche, N. (1974). Réflexions sur la prémotion physique. In: Huvres completes (ed. A. Robinet), 
t. XVI, 83. Paris, Vrin. 

Melamed, Y.Y. and Rosenthal, M.A. (eds.) (2010). Spinoza’s Theological-Political Treatise. A Critical 
Guide, 143-167. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Montesquieu, M. de Secondat, Baron de (1751). The Spirit of Laws. Dublin: printed for G. and 
A. Ewing [. . .] and G. Faulkner [. . ., I, 1. https://archive.org/details/spiritoflawsO 1 montuoft 
(open access). 

Rutherford, D. (2010). Spinoza’s conception of law: metaphysics and ethics. In: Spinoza’s Theological- 
Political Treatise. A Critical Guide (ed. by Y.Y. Melamed and M.A. Rosenthal), 143-167. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 

Spinoza, B. (1985). The Collected Works, vol. I (ed. E. Curley). Princeton, NJ: Princeton University 
Press. 

Spinoza, B. (2016). The Collected Works, vol. II (ed. E. Curley). Princeton, NJ: Princeton University 
Press. 


393 


36 


Spinoza’s Notion of Freedom 


MOIRA GATENS 


In an oddly self-reflexive exchange of letters from 1674, Spinoza and Tschirnhaus disagree 
about whether the fact of their correspondence may be explained by the exercise of free 
will. With the air of one who is stating the obvious, Spinoza’s correspondent asserts that so 
long as one is “living in a healthy body” then “when the will determines the motions of our 
body in a certain way” we can say that we have power over those motions. Tschirnhaus 
concedes that there is a gap between the determination of an action (e.g. forming the 
intention to write a letter) and the execution of that action (e.g. actually writing a letter). 
As he suggests, the unexpected arrival of friends at my door will determine me to put down 
my pen, thus thwarting my original intention. However, such external contingencies do 
not diminish my free will. No one would deny, he concludes “without contradicting his own 
consciousness, that I can think, in my thoughts, either that I want to write, or that I want 
not to write. And as far as the action is concerned, because the external causes permit this” 
(e.g. friends do not arrive and disrupt my plans) “I indeed have the ability both to write and not 
to write” (Ep. 58 | GIV/263/20-33, emphasis added). 

Although Spinoza is aware that his own views on free will are deeply counter-intuitive, 
he nevertheless is uncompromising in his response: “I deny that I can think, by any abso- 
lute power of thinking, that I will to write and do not will to write” (Ep. 58 | GIV/267/15-16). 
Spinoza finds Tschirnhaus’s confidence in the power he has over his own thoughts 
misguided, and insists that the feeling of conscious willing to which he refers is itself an 
illusion. Common across all of Spinoza’s works is the repeated insistence that free will is an 
illusion intrinsic to human consciousness that arises because we confuse the order of 
causes and effects (e.g. ELApp | G II/78/18-23; E2p28d | G II/113/17-21; TP, II(5) | 
G Il/227/18—24). It is a peculiarity of human consciousness that an effect is experienced 
as a cause because we are predisposed to locate ourselves as the agents of the desires that, 
in fact, govern us. Letter 58 illustrates this point with an especially fanciful tale of a 
thinking stone that is hurtling through the air. Its motion is caused by an external force, 
say, by a child’s catapult. But this exceptional stone, although ignorant of the cause of its 
motion, nevertheless enjoys the awareness of its own movement. The stone is deluded 
insofar as it identifies with this awareness and imagines itself as the free cause of its motion. 
This, says Spinoza, is no different from that feeling of human freedom about which the 


A Companion to Spinoza, First Edition. Edited by Yitzhak Y. Melamed. 
© 2021 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2021 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd. 


394 


SPINOZA'S NOTION OF FREEDOM 


ignorant constantly brag. Using almost identical words to those found in E3p2s, he rebuts 
Tschirnhaus’s common sense view concerning our feelings of free will: “the infant believes 
that he freely wants the milk; the angry boy that he wants vengeance; and the timid, flight. 
[...] the madman, the chatterbox, and a great many people of this kind believe that they 
act from a free decision of the mind, and not that they are set in motion by an impulse” 
(Ep. 58 | GIV/266/10-25). The correct understanding of freedom (which should not be 
conflated with the illusion of free will) is: “a thing is free if it exists and acts solely from the 
necessity of its own nature, and compelled if it is determined by something else to exist and 
produce effects in a fixed and determinate way” (Ep. 58 | GIV/265/22-25; see also E1d7). 
Hence, the only truly free cause is God because he both exists and acts from the necessity 
of his own nature (El p17c1 and 2) and cannot be affected by any external cause. 

Our everyday notion of freedom is an innate prejudice (Ep. 58 | G IV/266/26). It is 
based on our inadequate knowledge of the causes of things and on our tendency to accord 
too much credence to the way things appear, that is, to the way that things outside our- 
selves affect us. The truth of the matter is stranger than thinking stones or any other chi- 
merical wonders produced by the imagination, namely, that freedom is not opposed to 
necessity but depends upon it. To be absolutely free is to be self-caused and this is uniquely 
a description of God. All else, including human beings, can be only relatively free. Human 
freedom is always a matter of degree. We depend upon God absolutely but may be viewed 
as free insofar as we act from, or are determined by, our own essential nature. Given that 
the human essence is to think (E2A2) then we are free just to the extent that we act from 
reason: “I call him free who is led by reason alone” (E4p68d). However, Spinoza’s concep- 
tion of human ontology rules out the attainment of perfect human freedom. On his view 
we are mere ‘particles’ or ‘specks’ of wider Nature and so can never entirely evade the con- 
sequences of being acted on by other bodies and minds (E4p4 | GI/212-13). Human 
beings exist on a passive-active spectrum where no one is entirely passive, nor entirely 
active, and wherever one is located on this spectrum at any point in time, one cannot 
remain there for long. The more active, powerful, rational, and joyful we are, the more free 
we become; and the more passive, impotent, passionate, and sad we are, the more we are 
bound to reactive modes of being in the world. As mere specks in Nature we are vulnerable 
to all else and our power to survive and thrive, our conatus, will often be overwhelmed by 
superior forces and, eventually, we will be defeated by these forces and die. Spinoza’s defini- 
tions of joy and sadness amount to the awareness that we have of these transitions bet- 
ween the passive-sad and the active-joyful polarities as we experience the passage from 
more to less, and, less to more power (E3DefAffects | G II/191/1-7). 

Our conatus determines us to pursue that which we think will enhance our power to 
persevere in our existence, and such thinking may take the form of imagination, reason, or 
intuition, the forms of thought that comprise Spinoza’s three kinds of knowledge 
(E2p40s2). Reason, or adequate ideas about the world, will be more effective in preserving 
our power than are mere imaginings about what we are and what our situation is; and the 
more we understand God (or Nature) through intuition, or the third and most powerful 
form of knowledge, the more we understand that of which we are a part and such under- 
standing assists us to avoid harm and pursue what is good for us. The illusion of free will is 
not only false it is also damaging because it prevents us from understanding the necessity 
that governs nature and so diverts us from the path to true freedom laid out in the Ethics. 
The idea that God possesses an “absolute will” is not only erroneous but also “a great 
obstacle to science” (E1p33s2 | G II/75/1-2). The apparent paradox here is that all free- 
dom depends upon necessity — this is true even of God, who acts from free necessity 


395 


MOIRA GATENS 


(El1p16—17). The more we understand Nature (and can distinguish causes and effects) the 
more we are able to act from our own nature, or what amounts to the same thing, become 
more self-determined. For Spinoza, the ultimate aim of human endeavor is to achieve the 
third kind of knowledge, to love God, to unite with him insofar as that is possible, and to 
achieve blessedness (see E5p32—42). There is no doubt that Spinoza’s philosophy values 
the exercise of reason (ratio) and the pursuit of intuitive knowledge (scientia intuitiva) over 
all other endeavors (e.g. wealth, fame, or sensual pleasures). However, the remainder of 
this chapter will focus on the relatively neglected, and sometimes maligned, first kind of 
knowledge (imaginatio) and explore its practical role in the human endeavor to become 
more free. 


1. Imagination as a Power 


Imagination, the lowest kind of knowledge, is the source of falsity and error, and it lies at 
the origin of human bondage to affect. From this account of the imagination some critics 
have assumed that Spinoza’s rationalist philosophy counsels that we must avoid, expunge, 
or at the very least, discount this form of knowledge. I adopt a contrary view and offer two 
points in its defense: first, Spinoza does name imagination as a kind of knowledge (and not 
as error, simpliciter), and second, Spinoza sometimes recommends the deployment of the 
imagination in order to cultivate conditions that will maximize our capacities to achieve 
greater power, or freedom. 

Concerning the first point imaginative knowledge is indispensable to our everyday prac- 
tices. As Spinoza explains, we cannot always follow the strictures of reason and sometimes 
must take the pragmatic path else we “would die of hunger and thirst” if we were unwilling 
to eat or drink until we had “a perfect proof” that the food and drink in front of us was 
sound (Ep. 56 | GIV/260/15-19). The imagination provides us with probable, if not infal- 
lible, information needed to survive in our environments. So long as we are aware of the 
limitations of the imagination, and its difference from ratio, it can enhance our lives. In 
E2p17s, Spinoza asserts that provided one understands the way that the mind functions, 
imaginative ideas need not lead us into error: 


.. the imaginations of the mind, considered in themselves contain no error, or that the mind 
does not err from the fact that it imagines, but only insofar as it is considered to lack an idea 
which excludes the existence of those things which it imagines to be present to it. For if the 
mind, while it imagined nonexistent things as present to it, at the same time knew that those things 
did not exist, it would, of course, attribute this power of imagining to a virtue of its nature, not toa 
vice — especially if this faculty of imagining depended only on its own nature, that is (byID7), 
if the mind’s faculty of imagining were free. (G II/106/12-—20, emphasis added) 


The most common errors occur when we affirm of our affections that they capture the way 
the world is rather than indicating the way my body interacts with the world. Now, not only 
does Spinoza grasp that imaginative ideas do not disappear once we acquire adequate ideas 
about the world, he also sees how this feature of human experience plays into our extraordi- 
nary ability to simultaneously entertain utterly dissonant experiences. For example, on a 
clear day I may perceive that the sun is in the lake, and at the same time, I can know that the 
sun is not really in the water but rather merely reflected on its surface. We often experience 
things in ways that misrepresent the way the world exists independently of our relation to it. 


396 


SPINOZA'S NOTION OF FREEDOM 


With reference to these perceptions, Spinoza notes that “they are not contrary to the true, 
and do not disappear on its presence” (E4p1s | G II/211-—212) This fact about us is intimately 
related to our form of embodiment and it has significant implications for Spinoza’s theory of 
freedom. Yitzhak Melamed has shown that, for Spinoza, “it is a universal human condition that 
we are born as beings who are striving (i.e. having volition), conscious of our striving, and 
ignorant of the causes of our striving. In other words, we are born into a condition that nec- 
essarily excites the mechanism generating the belief in free will” (2017, p. 133, emphasis 
original). Nevertheless, because all is governed by necessity, our experiences, passions, and 
beliefs are engendered by “definite causes,” through which they can be understood (TP, I[4] | 
G III/274/30-38). We can actively reflect on the feeling of free will and know both that it is 
a common experience and that it is an illusion. Just like the reflection of the sun in the lake, 
such experiences may be explained and understood through gaining knowledge of nature 
(the physics of light, the nature of human desire, and so on). Put differently, the imaginations 
of the mind need not be expunged (indeed, they cannot be) but rather the mechanisms that 
govern our disposition to imagine need to be understood. After all, such imaginings can be 
grasped as knowledge about the way my body, mind, and senses interact with things in the 
world. Once it is understood how the imaginations of the mind are produced, the imagina- 
tion may even be appropriated in our striving to exist and flourish, that is, it may be actively 
deployed rather than passively experienced (see LeBuffe 2010, ch. 2). 

The second point, concerning the active deployment of the imagination, may be subdi- 
vided into two: (1) the imagination may be recruited as an aid in a ‘body-mind training’ 
regime that aims at the formation of “a firm and constant disposition” (Ep. 58 | 
G IV/267/35); and, (2) the imagination may be viewed as a resource in the practice of 
emulating a worthy exemplary figure. Given the indifference of nature to human well-being, 
the changeability of human affairs, and our relative incapacity to control these external 
factors, the power to determine our conditions of life will vary across time. As noted above, 
human freedom is necessarily a matter of degree and we have very little power over the rest 
of nature. The best we can do to guard against the vicissitudes of nature is to cultivate our 
internal power, or what Spinoza sometimes refers to as the virtue of fortitudo, or strength of 
character. This is an active-joyful affect and as such it involves the powers of the human 
mind. Spinoza states that “All actions that follow from affects related to the mind insofar as it 
understands I relate to strength of character” and strength of character has two aspects: first, 
tenacity or courage (animositas), which involves those virtues related to the care of one’s self; 
and second, generosity or nobility (generositas), which involves virtues related to the care of 
others (E3p59s | GII/188/21-28). Those who possess strength of character know that this 
virtue necessarily involves a double aspect because those who possess fortitudo “want nothing 
for themselves that they do not desire for other men. Hence, they are just, honest, and 
honorable” (E4p1 8s(iii) | G II/223/15-19). So, properly conceived, the exercise of the vir- 
tues of animositas and generositas, care for self and others, should not pull against one 
another, such that when I attend to my needs then I must neglect yours. On the contrary, and 
in line with interpretations of Spinoza that ascribe to him a relational theory of freedom, the 
care of self and other are mutually reinforcing (see Armstrong et al. 2019). 

A fundamental feature of this virtue involves training oneself to react reasonably, firmly, 
and consistently to events outside of one’s control. From his earliest writings, Spinoza relates 
the essence of human freedom to the ability to acquire “a firm existence” (e.g. KV Chap XXVI 
[9] GI/112/6-8). But how does imagination figure in the acquisition of the right kind of 
character or disposition? Consider what he says in the context of describing the passion of 
despondency (and its apparent opposite, pride). Spinoza’s general point is that whereas pride 


397 


MOIRA GATENS 


can be thought of as the tendency to think more highly of oneself than is justified, the pas- 
sion of despondency is more difficult to conceive. Can a person think less highly of himself 
than is justified given that to be despondent just is to be weak? Spinoza asserts: 


Indeed, no one thinks less highly of himself than is just, insofar as he imagines that he cannot 
do this or that. For whatever man imagines he cannot do, he necessarily imagines; and he is so dis- 
posed by this imagination that he really cannot do what he imagines he cannot do. For so long as he 
imagines that he cannot do this or that, he is not determined to do it, and consequently it is 
impossible for him to do it. (E3DefAffectsXXVIII | GIII/198/1—8, emphasis added) 


On Spinoza’s account the despondent person can no more “will” himself to imagine that 
he is worthy than the letter writer can will himself to write. Does this view imply that once 
one experiences a transition from a more to a less powerful state, that is, experiences a sad 
passion, (e.g. despondency) then one will spiral further and further into impotence and 
sadness? Not necessarily. External factors may cause a change in one’s self-conception or 
general mood. But more importantly, and as I argued above in relation to E3p17s, provided 
we possess some understanding of the workings of “the imaginations of the mind” then 
the imagination may be enlisted as a resource in defeating sad passions and in the pursuit 
of joy and freedom. In the present context, E3DefAffectsXXVIII is interesting not so much 
for what it implies about the passions of pride and despondency but more for what it sug- 
gests about the power of the imagination to deliberately cultivate a certain disposition, 
namely, a strong character. There are probably natural differences with respect to strong 
and weak character types. But it is clear that Spinoza believed that the virtues necessary 
for freedom could be acquired through a good education, a body-mind training regime, 
empowering networks of friendship, and the right kind of socio-political structures and 
institutions (see James 2009). In E4AppXX and E5p39s he refers to the importance of edu- 
cating children wisely and with reference to the free man, he judged political society to be 
essential to the attainment of human freedom (E4p73). As part of Nature human being is 
determined to act and react in certain ways. Understanding this necessity and how it 
functions is the first step in transitioning human experience from passivity to activity, that 
is, understanding necessity puts us on the path to freedom. 

Although certain ideas are more likely to be linked with certain thoughts and behav- 
iors (e.g. hatred leads to vengeance, love to the desire to unite with the loved object, and 
so on) other ideas become associated simply through happenstance and repetition. For 
example, there is no essential connection between the word pomum and the fruit that 
English speakers call an apple but bodily traces, the imagination, habit and context, will 
associate things that are repeatedly conjoined, such as the word pomum and the fruit (see 
E2p18s | GII/107/16-18). Unlike the adequate ideas of reason — whose interconnections 
are universal and necessary — the connections between the inadequate ideas of the imag- 
ination have little in common except contiguity and past repeated conjunction. 
Understanding the vicissitudes of the imagination can free us from its hold. For example, 
if a person cannot imagine himself as capable of becoming free then he is not determined 
to become free and therefore will be “so disposed by this imagination that he really cannot do 
what he imagines he cannot do” (E3DefAffectsXXVIII). But, conversely, having the power to 
imagine acting, or reacting, in a certain way can dispose one to act in that way. 
Contemporary neuroscience endorses this view of the mind and its capacity to simulate 
action. When one imagines oneself acting in a certain way, the brain experiences the 
action, whether it is a real or imagined event. Spinoza understood the power of the 


398 


SPINOZA'S NOTION OF FREEDOM 


imagination with respect to body-mind training. Damasio (2003) has written an engaging 
book about this aspect of Spinoza’s theory of mind. Farmers are unconsciously habit- 
uated to associate hoofprints in the sand with the plow horse and harvest whereas 
soldiers associate those same marks in the sand with a horseman and battle (E2p18s | 
G II/107/23-29). However, rational beings can consciously set out to undo these pas- 
sively acquired associations that have been imprinted on their bodies-minds in order to 
actively create new associations which they judge it wise to acquire. 

The acquisition of new associations or habits assumes a relatively calm context. It would 
make little sense to attempt imagining a rational response to the experience of a strong 
affective cause in the heat of the moment. The transformation of our passions through the 
formation of new habits assumes a calm and reflective demeanor. But the acquisition of 
new associations cannot be credited to the power of rational reflection alone. They also 
depend upon the deployment of the imagination: the active exercise of the power to make 
present an association between two things that previously were absent or non-existent. For 
example, we can memorize and frequently reflect upon rationally endorsed “sure maxims of 
life” such as “hate is to be conquered by love, or nobility, not by repaying it with hate in 
return” (E5p10s | G II/287/30-32). This reformation of body-mind associations involves 
deliberately and repetitively joining images — in this case, images of a wrong with the imagi- 
nation of the maxim concerning nobility until the association is so strongly inscribed that it 
can defeat a future real impulse to express reactive anger. Rather than identifying with the 
effect (anger) of an external cause (someone’s wrong doing) we can become an active cause 
by responding with nobility. In other words, she who repays wrong doing with nobility is 
free in the sense that her understanding of the necessity governing all things has enabled 
her to cultivate a character that remains strong, and her affects self-caused, in the face of 
external offense or ingratitude. Later in the same scholium Spinoza writes that fear is best 
countered by tenacity: “we must recount and frequently imagine the common dangers of 
life, and how they can be best avoided and overcome by presence of mind and strength of 
character” (G H/288/17-19). The proposition to this scholium reads: “So long as we are 
not torn by affects contrary to our nature, we have the power of ordering and connecting the 
affections of the body according to the order of the intellect” (E5p10 G II/287/3-5, emphasis 
added). This “power of ordering” amounts to the cultivation of a “firm disposition,” or the 
acquisition of the virtue of “strength of character.” E5p10 brings together the elements 
essential to the endeavor to become more free, namely, a body-mind training technique of 
repetitive juxtapositions of desired responses to certain external causes that commonly 
render us passive, sad, and despondent. Over time, the constant practice of this technique 
will result in the attainment of a “firm and constant disposition” or, the attainment of the 
virtue of fortitudo. It makes sense that Spinoza places a high value on this cluster of virtues 
—firmness, constancy, tenacity, and nobility — because they are precisely the virtues essential 
to the attainment of freedom. They are also the virtues of the free man described in the final 
propositions of Part 4 of the Ethics. 


2. Imagination, Emulation, and the Free Man 


The previous section argued that the imagination is not always on the side of falsity nor inev- 
itably in bondage to the passions. On the contrary, its active deployment in unmaking and 
remaking habituated connections and associations can move us further along the difficult 
path to freedom described in the Ethics. This is not to downplay the centrality of reason and 


399 


MOIRA GATENS 


intuition in Spinoza’s account of freedom but rather to attend to another, quite practical 
aspect of his view that concerns modifying the body through the rational reordering of the 
traces of its past encounters. The imagination can be deployed in the service of attaining a 
relatively freer existence through imagining ourselves as acting like the free man held up by 
Spinoza in E4Pref as a model (or exemplar) of human nature. The free man embodies the sure 
maxims of life to a perfect degree. Our capacity to imitate others is tied up with the second 
way in which the deployment of the imagination can act as a resource in the quest for free- 
dom. In E3p27 Spinoza states: “If we imagine a thing like us, toward which we have had no 
affect, to be affected with some affect, we are thereby affected with a like affect.” The theory 
of the imitation of the affects, like other imaginative phenomena, can involve both bad and 
good elements. Spinoza cautions, for example, that we should take care with whom we 
associate because it is difficult to maintain one’s values and dispositions when one mixes 
with those whose values and habits of life are completely different (E4AppVII). In other 
words, we tend to become similar to those with whom we closely or frequently associate. On 
the other hand, as well as unconsciously imitating bad models we can also consciously imi- 
tate good models. Although imitation and emulation share a common etiology — the theory 
of the contagion of affect — Spinoza nevertheless draws a distinction: “we call emulous only 
him who imitates what we judge to be honorable, useful, or pleasant” (E3DefAffectsXXXII). 

There is some disagreement over whether the model of human nature, referred to in 
E4Pref is the same as the figure of the free man explicitly presented in E4p67—73. Whilst 
conceding that the dominant reading is that the free man does indeed spell out in more detail 
the model of human nature proposed in E4Pref, Matthew Kisner argues at length against 
this reading (2011, ch. 8). The model of human nature Spinoza presents cannot be equivalent 
to the free man, he says, the very idea that the free man might act “as an imaginative aid for 
fostering rationality” is implausible because the “content [of the Ethics] is derived entirely 
from reason, without relying on the imagination” (2011, pp. 167—168). Although I cannot 
engage with Kisner in the detail I would like, his view is clearly at odds with my reading of the 
Ethics which maintains that Spinoza recommends, on occasion, the active engagement of 
imaginative forms of knowledge in the pursuit of freedom. Kisner is right to insist that 
Spinoza denies we can ever be perfectly free, indeed, Spinoza notes that if we were born free 
and formed only adequate ideas then we would be incapable of forming any conception of 
good and evil (E4p68). But we are not born free or rational and these valuable dispositions to 
reflect and form adequate ideas are only slowly and always imperfectly realized by human 
beings. All this was already made clear in E4Pref where Spinoza explained that although 
perfection, imperfection, good, and evil, are modes of thought, not real existences, they are 
nevertheless exceptionally useful modes of thought, just as models are useful guides to 
human endeavor and accomplishments (GII/207—208, GII/206). It is clear that Spinoza is 
advising the virtuous reader, following the path to freedom through the Ethics, to see both 
that good and evil have no existence independently of the human mind and that they are vital 
to the pursuit of freedom and virtue. Even though perfection, imperfection, good, and evil, 
lack any positive reality “still we must retain these words” (E4Pref | GII/208/15). Referring 
to the propositions that comprise Part 4 of the Ethics, Spinoza writes: 


In what follows, therefore, I shall understand by good what we know certainly is a means by 
which we may approach nearer and nearer to the model of human nature that we set before our- 
selves. By evil, what we certainly know prevents us from becoming like that model. Next, we 
shall say that men are more perfect or imperfect, insofar as they approach more or less near to 
this model. (G II/208/18—24, emphasis added) 


400 


SPINOZA'S NOTION OF FREEDOM 


I take this passage to mean that we can never actually reach or realize the exemplar of 
human nature, nor attain perfect freedom, but this is not Spinoza’s notion of a model. The 
model provides us with an aspirational horizon that, like all horizons, will recede as we 
approach it. (A more detailed argument concerning the role of the exemplar may be found 
in Gatens 2009.) Just as joy and sadness are limit cases (or opposite poles on a spectrum) 
so the figures of the free man and the slave are ideal limits that form a spectrum of disposi- 
tions with respect to reason and freedom. As we transition from less to more power so we 
experience joy and as we transition from inadequate ideas to more adequate knowledge so 
we become more free, but we can never be wholly joyful nor perfectly free. 

On Kisner’s interpretation, a realistic aspirational model for human nature would be 
the person who attains the virtue of fortitudo (or strength of character). The free man of 
E4, he suggests, should be viewed as a “thought experiment” and not as a practical guide 
to conduct (2011, ch. 10). However, my account of the model of human nature can con- 
cede that it is a thought experiment (which, after all, involves modeling), and identified 
with the free man in E4, and the free man, in turn, can be viewed as exemplifying the com- 
plex set of virtues covered by the concept of fortitudo. On my reading, the elements of 
Spinoza’s view that Kisner presents as incompatible can be rendered compatible. Spinoza 
provides us with a sketch of what is the “temperament and manner of living” of the free 
man: he will repay hate, anger, and disdain, with love (E4p46), he will pity no one, he will 
not think about death but joyfully affirm life (E4p67), he desires to maintain and obey the 
state (E4p73), he will act honestly (E4p72), he will not act indirectly in order to avoid pun- 
ishment or obtain reward but will act directly, through understanding, and, finally, he will 
be conscious of himself, and of God or Nature (E5p41—42). But most tellingly of all for the 
purposes of this chapter, Spinoza explicitly says that the free man is noble and tenacious, 
that is, he possesses the active affects described under the virtue of strength of character 
(E4p69d | G II/262/17-19). Approaching nearer to the model of human nature, the 
model that sets out what is good, joyful, and virtuous, is a task that requires the recruit- 
ment of all the forms of knowledge we possess: imaginative, rational, and intuitive. There 
is a hierarchy of the kinds of knowledge, to be sure, but Spinoza does not disdain the utility 
of each in the attainment of the salvation, or freedom, to which he refers in the final prop- 
ositions of the Ethics. 


References 


Armstrong, A., Green, K., and Sangiacomo, A. (2019). Spinoza and Relational Autonomy. Being with 
Others. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press. 

Damasio, A. (2003). Looking for Spinoza: Joy, Sorrow and the Feeling Brain. London: Heinemann. 

Gatens, M. (2009). Spinoza’s disturbing thesis: power, norms and fiction in the Tractatus Theologico- 
Politicus. History of Political Thought XXX (3): 454-468. 

James, S. (2009). Freedom, slavery, and the passions. In: The Cambridge Companion to Spinoza’s Ethics 
(ed. O. Koistinen), 223-241. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Kisner, M. (2011). Spinoza on Human Freedom: Reason, Autonomy and the Good Life. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 

LeBuffe, M. (2010). From Bondage to Freedom: Spinoza on Human Excellence. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press. 

Melamed, Y.Y. (2017). The causes of our belief in free will: Spinoza on necessary, “innate,” yet false 
cognition. In: Spinoza’s Ethics (ed. Y.Y. Melamed), 121-141. A Critical Guide. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 


401 


a7 


Spinoza’s “Republican Idea of Freedom” 


MICHAEL A. ROSENTHAL 


1. Introduction 


There are two ideas of freedom in Spinoza’s work, one stoic, the other republican. The stoic 
idea is expressed in the themes of individual self-mastery through knowledge of one’s 
place in the natural order. It is expressed in the definition of freedom at the beginning of 
the Ethics, in which Spinoza writes, “That thing is called free which exists from the necessity 
of its nature alone, and is determined to act by itself alone” (E1d7). God is the only being 
that fits this definition, but humans can approach self-determination the more they under- 
stand nature and their place within it as finite modes of substance. The stoic ideal is 
depicted in the life of the free man described at the end of Ethics, Part 14, and techniques 
toward achieving self-mastery are outlined in Part 5. Insofar as we follow this ideal, we 
become citizens of the world, without particular political allegiances. However, as finite 
beings, we are inevitably subject to external forces, which we experience internally as well, 
such as the imagination and the passions, which are not fully rational. The republican idea 
of freedom expresses the necessity and nobility of political engagement in a state that is not 
fully rational. It is found throughout Spinoza’s political works and, as I shall show, in Part 
4 of the Ethics as well. A fair amount has been written on the first kind of freedom, less on 
the second (Kristeller 1984; James 1993; Steinberg 2008, 2018, pp. 172-179). The 
purpose of this chapter is to demonstrate that Spinoza presents a robust version of repub- 
lican freedom, which is distinct from, though instrumental to the stoic idea. 

We find the first hint of the political dimension of freedom in Part 4 of the Ethics. 
Spinoza is quite clear that, “[a] man who is guided by reason is more free in a state, where 
he lives according to a common decision, than in solitude, where he obeys only himself” 
(E4p73). Although this tells us that life in a state is preferable to life alone, it still does not 
explain what kind of engagement the rational individual has with the state. One phrase of 
E4p73, however, does give us a significant clue: an individual is not free in any state, but 
only in one in which he lives “according to a common decision [ex communi decreto].” What 
exactly does this imply? If we look to the proof of the proposition, we get some further 
explanation. In the first part of the proof, Spinoza points out that a rational person does 
not desire to obey through fear but “insofar as he strives to preserve his being from the 


A Companion to Spinoza, First Edition. Edited by Yitzhak Y. Melamed. 
© 2021 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2021 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd. 


402 


SPINOZA'S “REPUBLICAN IDEAS OF FREEDOM” 


dictate of reason.” And when he goes on to explain what he means in this context by acting 
in accordance with “the dictate of reason,” he says that the individual “desires to maintain 
the principle of common life and common advantage.” After this Spinoza refers to E4p37s2, 
where he has argued that in order to maintain “common advantage” it is necessary for 
individuals to give up their natural right to a sovereign authority, the state. So, to live by 
common decision is not necessarily anything more than “to keep the common laws of the 
state” (E4p73dem). But this is still vague; we want to know more precisely what it means 
to live by a common decision. In what follows I will address this question and argue not 
only that the virtuous person must obey the laws of the state but that he or she has an obli- 
gation to participate in the governing of the state. 


2. Spinoza’s Republican Critique of Hobbesian Sovereignty 


Spinoza’s own theory of republican sovereignty was inspired by Machiavelli (see TP, V.7) 
and other contemporary Dutch republican thinkers (Haitsma Mulier 1980; Israel 2001). 
Philosophically speaking, though, it originates as a critique of the Hobbesian social 
contract theory. Hobbes thinks that an individual must give up (i.e. alienate) his or her 
natural right to the sovereign in order to create a stable state. Hobbes explains that a natural 
right (jus naturale) is “the Liberty each man hath, to use his own power, as he will himselfe, 
for the preservation of his own Nature; that is to say, of his own Life” (L14.198.4-8) 
(Hobbes 2012). Hobbes clearly distinguishes between the liberty based on the juridical 
right that an individual has to preserve himself or herself and the actual power that an 
individual has to accomplish that task. In the state of nature, before the institution of a 
sovereign authority, although an individual has the absolute juridical right to do whatever 
he sees fit for his self-preservation, he may not have the power to carry out his plans. Thus, 
in order to preserve himself, the individual must give up the liberty to which he has a 
natural right and establish a sovereign. 

Spinoza, on the other hand, argues that the basis of a sovereign’s right to rule is not the 
alienation of the subject’s rights but the conditional transfer of the power on which that 
right is based. Spinoza does not sharply distinguish between an individual’s natural right 
and his or her power; rather he stipulates that they are coextensive: “... each natural thing 
has as much right by nature as it has power to exist and have effects” (TP, II.3; see also TTP, 
xvi.3, GHI/189). To transfer one’s right must be at the same time to transfer one’s power. 
In asense, Spinoza takes certain Hobbesian principles to their logical conclusion. Although 
Hobbes does say that “Covenants, without the Sword, are but Words, and of no strength to 
secure aman at all” (L17.254.18-—19), he nonetheless has recourse to the idea of contract 
as a binding promise. Why else would he insist that a promise extracted under duress is 
valid (L14.212.15-20)? Spinoza, in contrast, is far more consistent in his view that the law 
is not the basis of power but an expression of it. He still uses juridical language, but he 
undermines the sense of the terms he uses and subverts them to his own purposes 
(Curley 1996). The sovereign’s right depends upon the transfer of the subjects’ rights. But 
because that sovereign right is nothing but the power the state can wield, it will only be 
effective as long as it has more power than any other group (or groups) that might defy it. 
It will only have this power as long as enough of its members are willing to contribute their 
power to the sovereign, either actively as enforcers of the law or more passively through 
acts of obedience. And the subjects will only contribute their power to the sovereign 


403 


MICHAEL A. ROSENTHAL 


(i.e. transfer their rights to it) as long as they think that their desire for self-preservation 
will have a good chance of being satisfied. Spinoza will not let any abstract theory of rights 
obscure the more concrete calculus of power that is the basis of any sovereign state. 

Both Hobbes and Spinoza agree that if an individual is to preserve him or herself then 
he or she must live in a stable state. They also agree that if a state is to be stable it must 
exercise absolute sovereign power over its subjects. But although both use the juridical lan- 
guage of the social contract, they disagree over how this absolute sovereignty is to be 
achieved. Hobbes argues that individuals must alienate their natural rights, that is, give 
them up unconditionally to the sovereign. Spinoza, on the other hand, argues that individ- 
uals only conditionally transfer their rights to the sovereign (Ep 50 | G IV/239b/20). 
Hobbes’ solution fails, as Jean Hampton has persuasively argued, on the grounds that it is 
self-defeating: the reason why individuals agree to form a state in the first place is their 
desire for self-preservation, but a state can only become stable if its subjects uncondition- 
ally alienate their rights and obey all its commands, including those (such as punishment 
commands) that might in fact jeopardize their self-preservation (Hampton 1986, pp. 189- 
207). Thus, only a social contract theory based on the conditional transfer of natural right 
can serve both ends at once: the desire of the individual for self-preservation, and the 
state’s need for stability if it is to fulfill its most basic function. A state will be stable only to 
the extent that it is able to satisfy its subjects’ desire to preserve themselves. It is this 
conditional theory of sovereignty that is at the heart of Spinoza’s republicanism. The 
problem now is to explain how Spinoza uses his conditional theory of sovereignty to 
account for the stability of the state. 

Spinoza argues that participation is the key to a state’s stability, both in regard to 
external and internal threats. The correlation between stability and participation follows 
quite directly upon Spinoza’s conditional theory of sovereignty. For Spinoza, the state is 
not built on the alienation of an abstract, juridical right, but on the conditional support of 
real men and women. The individual must not only give his or her tacit or passive consent 
to the sovereign authority but also actively give his or her power to it when needed. The 
more actively an individual participates in the state, the more powerful its sovereign 
authority and thus the more stable it is. Spinoza argues that, it is less likely that a state will 
be destroyed by external threats or by its own subjects, if its subjects participate in the 
defense and governing of the state. 

Of course, a stable state need not be a free state. A stable state is defined as a free state 
to the extent that it is governed through the active participation of its citizens. The purpose 
of the state is to grant peace and security to its subjects. But this end can be realized in 
different ways and to different degrees. Spinoza distinguishes between two sets of circum- 
stances under which the conditional transfer of power takes place. On the one hand, there 
is a commonwealth whose sovereign power depends on inspiring fear in its citizens. 
Spinoza thinks, though, that “a Commonwealth whose subjects, terrified by fear, don’t 
take up arms should be said to be without war, but not at peace” (TP, V.4). On the other 
hand, as we can infer from this last quotation, there is a commonwealth in which individ- 
uals enjoy “a human life, one defined not merely by the circulation of the blood, and other 
things common to all animals, but mostly by reason, the true virtue and life of the Mind” 
(TP, V.5; cf. Hobbes, L6.78.4—21). In the first case, the peace of commonwealth “depends 
on its subjects’ lack of spirit — so that they’re led like sheep, and know only how to be 
slaves”; in the second case, peace is achieved through the virtuous subjects’ “constant 
willtodo what must be donein accordance with the common decree of the Commonwealth” 


404. 


SPINOZA'S “REPUBLICAN IDEAS OF FREEDOM” 


(TP, V.4). Of course, an actual state might rely on some combination of incentives (a mea- 
sure of both fear and hope, apathy and activity) among its citizens. But the general point 
is that the conditions under which sovereignty is achieved — the motivations of the sub- 
jects and the structure of the state itself -do make a difference, both to the stability of the 
government and to the quality of life of its subjects. 

If an individual desires to be free, then he or she will desire to live in a free state. As we 
have seen, there is a reverse correlation between tyranny and stability: because the tyrant 
relies upon relatively few people to maintain power, he or she must use violence or the 
threat of it to instill a passive obedience at best among the subjects. It is also the case, as the 
argument above as well as common sense suggests, that there is a similar relationship bet- 
ween tyranny and individual freedom. The tyrant may not have the active cooperation of 
many subjects but that does not mean the subjects are free to do what they desire. On the 
contrary, the tyrant’s methods to subdue the masses into passive obedience make it impos- 
sible for them to live as they choose, let alone pursue the kind of life that Spinoza thinks 
contributes to real flourishing, a life based on reason and cooperation. Indeed, one of the 
two lessons that Spinoza attributes to Machiavelli’s The Prince is that “a free multitude 
should beware of entrusting its well-being absolutely to one person” precisely because they 
will find a prince who is “forced to look out for himself, and to set traps for the multitude, 
rather than look out for their interests” (TP, V.7). If a sovereign is not to fear his or her sub- 
jects, and vice versa, then power must be diffused among those who constitute society. This 
lesson holds not only for tyrannies but for less repressive forms of government as well. The 
more diffuse power is, the more stable the government, and the less the subjects have to 
fear from it. A tyrant may provide short-term stability but only at the cost of ruthless sup- 
pression of dissent and potential opposition. Such a state, Spinoza writes, perhaps with the 
absolute monarch of Hobbes in mind, “would be more properly called a wasteland [soli- 
tude| than a Commonwealth [civitas]” (TP, V.4). Such fear is hardly different from the fear 
experienced in the state of nature. Only a state that involves its citizens in its defense and 
government — a free state, in other words — can provide the conditions under which an 
individual can live freely, without fear. 

It follows that since a free state requires the participation of its citizens in its defense and 
government, an individual who desires to preserve him or herself, and who understands the 
connection between stability and freedom, will participate in the defense and government 
of the state. From the point of view of where the argument began — that is, from the 
individual in the state of nature who desires security and peace of life — this may seem a 
paradoxical result. For why should the individual put his or her life at risk in defending the 
state, if the whole point in joining the state in the first place was to live more securely than 
the state of nature would allow? As Spinoza argues in Chapter V of the TTP, because human 
individuals are finite creates who depend upon external things (i.e. upon fortune) for their 
continued existence, and yet cannot control their external circumstances entirely, they 
cannot be self-sustaining, and so need other individuals to aid them (TTP, V.18—20). But 
because other individuals can be as harmful as they are helpful it is necessary to regulate 
these relations through the institution of the state which is granted the coercive power to 
restrain conflict between individuals as well as to defend itself from external threats. 

A rational individual will participate in the defense of the state and the enforcement of 
its internal rules because he or she can adequately weigh the relative benefits of this kind 
of risk versus the risk in the state of nature, which would result if the state were to collapse 
through lack of participation. A less rational individual will find it beneficial to obey the 


405 


MICHAEL A. ROSENTHAL 


state either because the laws provide a concrete incentive — fear of punishment — that 
channels his or her desire for self-preservation into the service of the common order or 
because some collective ideology inspires a more active obedience through some other set 
of emotions, such as patriotism. Because it may still be narrowly rational for an individual 
to free-ride, Spinoza thinks that the state must have an institutional structure, such as a 
state religion, that discourages such behavior (Rosenthal 1998). Nonetheless, to the extent 
that an individual understands that the purpose of the state is the preservation of its citi- 
zens and realizes that a state can only fulfill this function through the active participation 
of its citizens, then he or she will desire to participate in the state. 

Moreover, because an individual only has a finite capacity to overcome the obstacles to 
his or her self-preservation and flourishing, Spinoza claims that one can only gain power 
over these obstacles through cooperation with others. Therefore, an individual enjoys 
greater power to do what he or she desires when he or she cooperates with others. Since we 
have seen that a state is the necessary apparatus to regulate cooperation between all people, 
not only rational but irrational ones as well, an individual will cooperate with others 
through the mechanism of the state in order to gain power and become freer. Because a 
state based on the participation of its subjects is more stable and therefore more powerful 
than one based on the subjugation of them, it will provide its subjects more power to fulfill 
their own desires than solitary life in the state of nature. No doubt the individual must give 
up some measure of freedom found in the state of nature to the sovereign state, but such 
deprivation is compensated many times over by the expansion of the range of possible activ- 
ities that can be enjoyed. Thus, when an individual participates in such a state, he or she is 
not trading away an illusory juridical freedom for a greater chance at self-preservation but 
gaining actual freedom, expressed in security of life and power to achieve one’s desires. 

Still, it must be emphasized that when a person participates in the political life of a free 
state, he or she is not perfecting his or her individual freedom but only fulfilling its basic 
precondition: the preservation of his or her own existence. Although Spinoza thinks that 
freedom of the state and freedom of the individual are interrelated, he never confuses 
them, for they are two distinct virtues. In the Political Treatise, he sharply distinguishes bet- 
ween the virtue of the state, which is security [securitas], and private virtue, which is “free- 
dom of mind or strength of character [fortitudo]” (TP, 1.6). No one can reasonably expect to 
attain inner freedom without living in a stable state that can moderate the adverse effects 
of fortune, but action to that end is not enough in and of itself to become truly free. Spinoza 
argues in Part 5 of the Ethics that the highest expression of virtue — which he calls “bless- 
edness” (beatitudo) — is the knowledge of one’s own essence from God’s point of view 
(E5p42). To attain that inner freedom, one must detach oneself from the apparent 
contingency of ordinary affairs and assume a philosophical point of view, that is, see one- 
self under the aspect of eternity (sub specie aeternitatis). Yet, the virtues are related because, 
as Spinoza argues in E4p22c, self-preservation is the foundation of virtue, the precondi- 
tion of the development of any other virtue. An individual does not become free in the 
fullest sense through an other-worldly liberation from the concerns of bodily existence but 
through the development of his or her own potential, which is physical at the same time as 
it is mental, what Jonathan Bennett in his reading of E4p38 calls the theme of “bodily ver- 
satility” (Bennett 1984, p. 310ff.). Consequently, the individual must do whatever is 
required to secure his or her own life — which, as we have seen, involves participation in the 
state — before he or she can flourish in any deeper sense requiring philosophical detach- 
ment. So, although political virtue is the condition for private virtue, it is only a necessary 
not a sufficient condition. 


406 


SPINOZA'S “REPUBLICAN IDEAS OF FREEDOM” 


3. Criticisms of the Republican Idea of Freedom 


However, Hobbes does not accept the conclusion that a republic in which the citizens par- 
ticipate in its government is the most stable and the freest state. In the chapter on “the 
Liberty of Subjects” in the Leviathan, Hobbes, explicitly challenges classical republican doc- 
trine (L21.332.1—24). In Hobbes’ view, then, what the republicans call freedom is freedom 
of the state, not freedom of the individual (Skinner 1990, pp. 140-141, 2008). Moreover, 
he disparages this apparent freedom of the state as being nothing more than the freedom 
of the individual in the state of nature. Like “masterless men,” the classical city-states were 
in aconstant state of war with one another, free only in regard to their absolute freedom of 
action, not in any deeper substantive sense, as Spinoza would have it. Granting this ambiv- 
alent kind of freedom to the ancient city-states, Hobbes returns to the central point, which 
is that individual citizens of these states had no more freedom than citizens of a tyranny. 
For him, individual freedom consists simply in the “liberty to resist” the state, and it is a 
brutal irony that even in cities, such as the Italian city of Lucca, where the word LIBERTAS 
is inscribed on its gates, “no man can thence inferre, that a particular man has more 
Libertie, or Immunitie from the service of the COmmonwealth there, than in Constantinople” 
(L21.332.21-23). Only in those cases in which a subject can, “without Injustice,” refuse 
to do what the sovereign has commanded, is the person truly free (L21.336.1-3). To 
describe participation in the state as a kind of freedom is a cruel deception: if an individual 
does not know enough to distinguish private from public liberty, then either, if he lives in a 
self-declared republic, he will think himself free when he is not, or, if he lives in some other 
kind of state, he will be tempted by sedition, falsely believing that changing the form of the 
state will lead to greater individual freedom when in fact it leads to more tumult in political 
life, another kind of wretchedness (L21.334.22—28). In short, since a republic is con- 
stantly faced with the threat of war and since it demands a high degree of obedience from 
its citizens, Hobbes thinks that its citizens enjoy neither stability nor much political free- 
dom, certainly no more than other kinds of regimes (L29.506.26ff.). 


4, Spinoza’s Response to His Critics 


First, although Spinoza does not accept the critique of positive freedom offered by Hobbes, he 
does make a clear distinction between individual freedom and the freedom of the state. Hobbes 
claims that the liberty praised by the ancient historians and their modern admirers “is not 
the Libertie of Particular men; but the Libertie of the Common-wealth” (L21.332.4—5). 
While such a charge may be valid in the case of those who identify the highest form of 
individual freedom (or virtue) with participation in the state, it cannot stick to Spinoza’s 
argument as described above. Spinoza does not ever assert that participation in the state 
marks the apex of individual freedom. As we have seen, he thinks that an individual cannot 
be considered free unless certain social and political conditions obtain, conditions that can 
only be secured by the apparatus of a state and the subject’s participation in it. During this 
process, an individual does not give up his or her freedom but rather gains the power to 
become free. But it is not participation in the state as such that makes the individual free; it 
is just a necessary condition for other forms of peaceful association and individual moral 
development. No longer overwhelmingly preoccupied with preserving physical existence, 
an individual can develop other capacities in concert with others. The virtuous individual 
knows that if he or she is to preserve him or herself then he or she must cooperate with 


407 


MICHAEL A. ROSENTHAL 


others in the form of a state. But though that person knows that the chances for self- 
preservation are increased in a free and stable state, he or she will not simply identify its 
freedom with his or her own. A free state is not an end in itself for the virtuous individual, 
but a means to individual freedom. 

Second, Spinoza thinks that the more a state is based upon republican principles of partici- 
pation the more freedom its citizens will have. Obviously, this flies in the face of Hobbes’ nega- 
tive definition of freedom as the “absence of externall Impediments” (L14.198.10). Hobbes 
thinks that the kind of freedom enjoyed in each state, whether tyrannical or popular, is the 
same: it is freedom from government obligation of any kind. But this definition of freedom may 
produce quite paradoxical results. For instance, in Hobbes’ view, it may turn out that a person 
will enjoy a greater degree of freedom in a tyranny than in a republic. But in Spinoza’s view, a 
tyranny cannot rely on its subjects for much in the way of cooperation; in fact, it must con- 
stantly fear them (and constantly provoke fear in them). Naturally any form of government 
that cannot trust its own citizens will prefer not to use them for its own defense, but hire merce- 
naries instead, who, as Machiavelli emphasizes and Spinoza echoes, are likely to produce fear 
and instability (TP, VIL.17). Moreover, Hobbes sometimes speaks as if liberty, strictly defined, is 
liberty from physical coercion alone. In that case, when a subject is made to do some action 
through the fear of prison or other punishment, he or she is said to act freely (L21.326.1-8). So 
although a subject in a tyranny may bitterly resent his or her sovereign, and scared to death at 
every turn, that person may be less restricted by duties to the government than a subject of a 
republic, and hence deemed freer. Because Hobbes thinks that individual freedom is distinct 
from, or even at odds with, the purpose of the state (which is to preserve the peace and security 
of the individual), he is not troubled by such results. Spinoza, however, thinks that the possi- 
bility of individual freedom depends on the satisfaction of certain basic conditions — most 
prominent among them, self-preservation and freedom from fear — which allow the full flour- 
ishing of individual capacities. Since it is precisely the state’s purpose to satisfy these conditions, 
the better the state is able to do so, the better chance an individual will have to be free. 

It is precisely because the authority of a republic flows from its citizens’ participation in its 
defense and government that it can foster freedom internally as well. Spinoza certainly agrees 
with Hobbes that “where the publique and private interest are most closely united, there is 
the publique most advanced” (L19.288.11—13), but he does not come to same conclusion as 
to which form of government best embodies that unity of interest. In fact, he comes to the 
exact reverse view of the relative stability of a monarchy in comparison to a republic. While 
Hobbes ridicules a popular government for being accountable to no one, inefficient, and 
liable to corruption (see L18.268.2—16;L19.288.1—21; and L25.412.1—20), Spinoza argues 
that the diffusion of authority (in an assembly or other mechanisms) leads to stability and a 
greater degree of fusion between public and private interest. Unlike Hobbes, who tends to 
minimize the potential abuses of absolute state power (L18.282.1—25), Spinoza realizes that 
the state itself can pose a greater threat to its subjects than external enemies. Thus, he thinks 
that the more the subjects are involved in the state — that is, the more the governors are at the 
same time the governed — the less likely such overt repression is to occur. 


5. Conclusion 
At the core of a virtuous individual’s relation to the state is the idea of participation, an 
idea that reflects the fundamental premises of Spinoza’s theory of sovereignty. A virtuous 


person understands that he or she must be part of that “common decision” central to a free 


408 


SPINOZA'S “REPUBLICAN IDEAS OF FREEDOM” 


state, and that the “desire” to “maintain the principle of common life” necessarily involves 
action to that end. Of course, there may be circumstances in which engagement with 
others is futile and “timely flight” is a more prudent course than fighting vainly (E4p69). 
A tyranny, based on coercion and usurpation, is not likely to afford the chance of a 
“common decision” to its subjects at all. But then such a state will be less stable than one 
based on broad participation of its subjects and certainly less amenable to their flourish- 
ing. Knowing this, a virtuous person works as best as he or she can for the establishment 
of open political institutions that ultimately foster stability and freedom. Although Spinoza 
is well aware that historical circumstances might favor the establishment of a state with a 
narrow base of support, like a monarchy, he nonetheless thinks that the principle of par- 
ticipation is the key to any state’s stability, and a necessary step towards the realization of 
a person’s freedom. 

Spinoza takes the central thesis of classical republicanism that an individual ought not 
to entrust his or her own welfare to others and reformulates in his own terms. Although he 
does not think that politics is an end in itself, as some other republican theorists apparently 
did, nonetheless he does think that an individual must cultivate the civic virtues of political 
participation as a necessary condition of his or her own individual freedom. Spinoza thinks 
that self-government is necessary if the virtuous individual is to master fortune — that is, 
adverse contingent circumstances — and become truly free. It is the double relationship of 
the freedom of the individual with the freedom of the state focused on the necessity of 
participation that profoundly marks Spinoza as a republican thinker. 


References 


Bennett, J. (1984). A Study of Spinoza’s Ethics. Indianapolis: Hackett. 

Curley, E.M. (1996). Kissinger, Spinoza, and Genghis Khan. In: The Cambridge Companion to Spinoza 
(ed. D. Garrett), 315-342. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Haitsma Mulier, E. (1980). The Myth of Venice and Dutch Republican Thought in the 17th Century. 
Assen: Van Gorcum. 

Hampton, J. (1986). Hobbes and the Social Contract Tradition. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Hobbes, T. (2012). Leviathan: The English and Latin Texts (i). Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Israel, J.I. (2001). Radical Enlightenment: Philosophy and the Making of Modernity, 1650-1750 Oxford: 
Oxford University Press. 

James, S.. (1993). Spinoza the Stoic. In: The Rise of Modern Philosophy (ed. T. Sorrell), 289-316. 
Oxford: Clarendon Press. 

Kristeller, P.O. (1984). Stoic and Neoplatonic sources of Spinoza’s ethics. History of European Ideas 5: 
1-15. 

Rosenthal, M.A. (1998). Two collective action problems in Spinoza’s social contract theory. History 
of Philosophy Quarterly 15: 389-409. 

Skinner, Q. (1990). Thomas Hobbes on the proper signification of liberty. Transactions of the Royal 
Historical Society 40: 140-141. 

Skinner, Q. (2008). Hobbes and Republican Liberty. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Steinberg, J. (2008). On being sui iuris: Spinoza and the republican idea of liberty. History of European 
Ideas 34: 239-249. 

Steinberg, J. (2018). Spinoza’s Political Psychology: The Taming of Fortune and Fear. Cambridge; 
Cambridge University Press. 


409 


38 


Spinoza and Economics 


ERIC SCHLIESSER 


1. Introduction 


Spinoza did not write a treatise on money, trade, mercantile empire, or the stock-market. 
Nor did he pen an essay on economic management of the state or the household — the lat- 
ter being the traditional topic for works on ofxovoyixd. Spinoza’s views on these matters 
must be inferred, often obliquely, from his texts (Noordman 2016; Wagener 1994a). 

Spinoza was born in a merchant family, which can be glimpsed at E2p40S2. But his 
letters show remarkably little interest in commercial activities. In fact, Ep. 50, 2 June 1674, 
to Jarig Jelles (a former merchant) closes with a dismissive account of the misleading sales 
practices of shopkeepers (iv/241). 

As his correspondence with Boyle, mediated by Oldenburgh shows, Spinoza’s interest 
and expertise in chymistry and alchemy is well attested. Even in the seventeenth century 
this generally involved interest in the transmutation of metals from base ones into gold 
(Newman 2006). A letter to Jelles (Ep. 40, 25 March 1667) and to Schuller (Ep. 72, 
18 November 1675) show familiarity over the then contemporary debates and experi- 
ments in transmutation. Spinoza attended some of these experiments, but his ultimate 
stance is quite skeptical (Nierenstein 1932). 

None of this is surprising from an author, who in his self-presentation, rejects the pur- 
suit of recognition and wealth [honore ac divitiis| (TIE 1.2; V6). The latter is rejected, in 
part, because it is uncertain and risky (TIE 1.8; V10; Vergaray 2019) and, in part, because 
it is never fulfilling. Pain is always lurking around the corner. 

Spinoza’s more fundamental criticism — and this puts him at odds with many of the 
other early moderns (Wootton 2018) —is that the open-ended pursuit of wealth is a species 
of madness (E4p44S). This is so even though the many do not treat such pursuit as dis- 
eased. In the Ethics, he calls such open-ended, immoderate acquisitiveness of riches, ava- 
rice (E3, definition of the affects, 47; E3p39S; E4p70S. E4p70S shows Spinoza is aware 
that conventional morality also treats avarice as something suspicious. This is echoed at 
5p10S, where even the impoverished avaricious unceasingly declaim against the pursuit 
of riches.) Even so, despite the Stoic and ascetic features to his life and thought, as is well 
known, Spinoza did not reject moderate desire for the conveniences of life (E4p45c2s). 


A Companion to Spinoza, First Edition. Edited by Yitzhak Y. Melamed. 
© 2021 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2021 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd. 


410 


SPINOZA AND ECONOMICS 


With that in mind, I focus on Spinoza’s intervention in the debate over luxury — a topic 
central to early modern debates over the new economy. Spinoza’s position has received 
scant scholarly attention. I argue that Spinoza’s diagnosis of the problem of luxury and 
corruption is important to his political philosophy. And that his attempt to resolve it antic- 
ipates key features to the strains of economics known as constitutional political economy 
and public choice theory. In particular in institutional design one should not just be alert 
to the incentive structure of the institutions in shaping behavior, but also in the ways these 
incentives attract people one ought to keep out (or wish to attract). 


2. Spinoza and the Political Problem of Luxury 


Since the ancient world, Roman authors -— canonically Sallust, Cicero, and Livy — described 
the fall of the Roman Republic in terms of corruption of character in terms of ‘ambitio, 
avaritia, luxuria, and libido’ (Levick 1982, p. 52; Berry 1989: 599). In the early modern 
period, the debate over the political dangers of luxury was re-opened (Berry 1994; Pocock 
1975). The eighteenth-century debate over the role of luxury in modern political economy 
(Hont 2005), which drew in all the major thinkers of the century, was centered on the 
opposing views articulated by Fénelon in the Adventures of Telemachus (first published in 
1699; Hanley 2020) and Mandeville in the Fable of the Bees (1714); Spinoza’s influence 
on Mandeville has been explored in Den Uyl 1987; Wagener 1994a, 1994b). 

Unsurprisingly, this debate also raged earlier in commercial republics of Venice and 
Holland. So, for example, in 1632, a famous Dutch intellectual, steeped in humanist 
learning, Barlaeus invented the idea of a ‘wise merchant’ [Mercator sapiens] at the 
founding of the ‘Athenaeum Illustre’ (the predecessor of the University of Amsterdam). 
He characterized such a merchant as follows: “that those, who have so far followed 
Mercury, will by now be called candidates for Wisdom; plain but with elegance; striving 
for money but without detriment for a better motivation, which is science and virtue” 
(Weststeijn 2011, p. 185) Barlaeus clearly rejects the pursuit of “immoderate riches” 
(Weststeijn 2011, p. 186). 

In fact, while anticipating Adam Smith’s and Mill’s harm principle (Schliesser 2017, 
p. 175), Barlaeus claims, “Wisdom does not contemn the wealthy but embraces them, 
under one condition: that they are rich without harm to others, magnificent without 
luxury, liberal without ostentation, weighty without pedantry, religious without supersti- 
tion” (Weststeijn 2011, p. 186; on Spinoza’s harm principle, see TTP ch. XVI (iii/191)). We 
find a similar, albeit more proto-Weberian, stance in the De La Courts, who embrace the 
pursuit of wealth (and national greatness), but from “thrift and frugality” not love of 
luxury or ambition (Weststeijn 2011, pp. 192-193). Spinoza’s views echo Barlaeus and 
the De La Courts. 

Spinoza addresses the question of luxury and corruption throughout his works. So, for 
example, Christ’s teachings in the gospels are apt for those living in a corrupt republic, 
where the rule of law is neglected [qui vivebant in republica corrupta & ubi Justitia prorsus 
negligebatur (TTP ch. VII, iii103)]. Another key passage is from TTP, Chapter V: 


Scripture itself also establishes that ceremonies contribute nothing to blessedness, but only 
concern the temporal prosperity of the state [imperii temporaneam foelicitatem]. For it prom- 
ises nothing in return for ceremonies except the comforts of the body and its promised 
delights [corporis commoda, et delicias promittit], and promises blessedness only in return for 


411 


ERIC SCHLIESSER 


following the universal divine law. For in the five books commonly attributed to Moses 
nothing else is promised (as we have said above) than this temporal prosperity [foelicitas], 
i.e. honors or reputation, victories, wealth [divitiae], delights and health (TTP V.6; (iii/70); 
throughout, I have used Curley’s translations of Spinoza 1985 and Spinoza 2016 with 
modest changes). 


Lurking in the quoted passage is the controversy over the identity of the author of the 
Hebrew Bible. But here I focus on Spinoza’s analysis. Not unlike Al-Farabi, Spinoza treats 
religion in what we would call ‘sociological,’ that is, functional terms. In particular, he 
ascribes a this-worldly-end to the elaborate rituals of the Hebrew Bible. In particular, reli- 
gion supports the prosperity, to use Hobbes’ phrase, the ‘commodious living’ within the 
state (Baier 1987). As Spinoza puts it a few lines below: “the whole law of Moses, was 
concerned with nothing but the Hebrew state, and consequently, with nothing but corpo- 
real advantages" (TTP V.3 1; this is repeated throughout Chapter V). 

Of course, part of Spinoza’s point is a critical one: the rituals contribute nothing to 
blessedness, which is the only authentic or true form of happiness. And while the Old 
Testament does teach true religion, it is not located in the Hebraic ceremonies, which, and 
here Spinoza is explicitly siding with the New Testament (TTP V.14), are dispensable once 
the Jewish state collapses: “there is no doubt that after their state was dissolved the Jews 
were no more bound by the law of Moses” (TTP V.15). 

Spinoza’s account is sociological in another sense. For Spinoza inserts his account into 
what we may call a stadial theory of history. Such stadial accounts were popular due to the 
works of Grotius and Pufendorf (Buckle 1991). For Spinoza contextualizes even histori- 
cizes (III74) the period in which the Jews accept the Covenant with God and receive their 
ceremonies as follows: “they were quite incapable of establishing legislation wisely and 
keeping the sovereignty in their own hands, as a body. Almost all of them were coursened 
in their dispositions [rudis fere ingenii]| and weakened by wretched bondage” (TTP V.27; 
(iii/75); this recalls Thomas More’s analysis of Moses’ penal law in Part I of Utopia). The 
underlying idea is that after a period of slavery, the Jews were mentally incapable of wise 
self-government. 

From a political perspective, the significance of this passage is (and this looks forward to 
Montesquieu) that Spinoza thinks a constitution must fit the material and social circum- 
stances of a people. Rituals are, in part, a means toward cultivating better dispositions in 
order to secure the survival even the flourishing of the polity. Let us grant Spinoza this 
reading of the Hebrew Bible. 

Here I am interested in the connection between the Hebraic religion and their economic 
prosperity. Spinoza explains this connection in a celebrated passage that has, naturally, 
attracted attention from those with an interest in egalitarianism and debt jubilees 
(Lord 2016; Topolski 2016): 


There was something else very unyielding in this state, which must have been the most impor- 
tant factor to prevent its citizens from thinking of defection or wanting to desert their country: 
the principle of advantage [or interest; ratio utilitatis], the mainstay and life of all human 
actions. That force was exceptionally strong in this state. Nowhere did the citizens possess 
their property with a greater right than did the subjects of this state, who, with the leader, had 
an equal share of the lands and fields. Each one was the eternal lord of his own share [suae 
partis aeternus dominus erat]. If poverty compelled anyone to sell his estate or field, it had to be 
restored to him once again when the jubilee year came. They instituted other similar practices, 
so that no one could be alienated from his real property. (TTP XVII.84—85 (iii/215-216)) 


412 


SPINOZA AND ECONOMICS 


Spinoza introduces the claim in this passage as a contrast to opinion [opinione], and the 
implication is that the mechanism he is describing is a part of solid [solidissimum] knowledge. 
And the reason for this is that it is ground in an enduring feature of human nature that 
exerts a powerful pull over us, our pursuit of interest [ratio utilitatis]. Spinoza’s phrase here 
is striking because reason of public utility [ratio Publicae Utilitatis] was supposed to govern 
the state’s dealing (this went back to the middle ages, Post 1961; Foucault et al. 2008, lec- 
ture 1). This notion of public utility, as public interest, was re-interpreted in the eighteenth 
century (e.g. in Hume, Beccarria, and Adam Smith). But here Spinoza ascribes a notion of 
interest to the individuals as the most powerful human motive (Buchanan 1962; 
Kliemt 2005), and, when properly constrained, thereby, secure a public flourishing. 

In TTP XVII.84—85 he describes an approach to secure property rights, where land 
remained inalienably within a family, that is, something akin to a system of entails. And 
these lots, in turn, are equal, just as the division of tribes had been equal. Such a system is 
understood to be unstable. For in addition to the jubilee, multiple (unnamed) other institu- 
tions are required to prevent property from accumulating permanently in some and to 
prevent others from losing their family possessions. This presupposes excellent and durable 
record keeping. Lurking just below the surface of Spinoza’s account of the original set up 
of the Hebrew state, are claims about the role of debt, the effects of bad harvests, and pru- 
dent/imprudent and lucky/unlucky behavior in human affairs. 

This setup created a fundamental equality centered on perpetual land ownership. 
Obviously, the fact that a jubilee was necessary meant that one could go through life 
without enjoying its fruits. But one could live in hope that one, or one’s offspring, would 
return to it. And because the religion preaches charity to the poor, “nowhere could poverty 
be more bearable” (XVII.87). 

Another key feature is that such a system would promote long-term investment in one’s 
family land because one could assume that one’s family or descendants would reap the 
rewards. This created an attachment to land and fatherland, which prospered. Presumably, 
this prosperity was also due to impartial rule of law (see, e.g. TTP ch. XVIii191 and iii196). 
Spinoza makes clear that credit markets rely on judgments of character and impartial rule 
of law (uncorrupted by religious sectarianism) (TTP ch. XX iii/246). 

This naturally raises the question why this the original constitution, the best form of 
theocracy (TTP ch. XVII; iii206 and iii208), was not enduring. Lord (2016) suggests that 
Spinoza thinks the system was undermined when inequality was allowed to enter in, first 
by the institution of the Levites, a parasitic elite class living off taxes and donation, and 
then, ultimately, by the institution of a king (see also Melamed 2013, pp. 186-188). But 
this is not the whole story. (Spinoza is explicit that the Levites could have been accommo- 
dated in this order (TTP XVII.102).) 

In particular, Spinoza suggests that luxury is if not the source of corruption (see also 
TTP IX; iii/13 7), then a hallmark of its impending arrival: 


And that’s what happened, as everyone knows. That’s why there were great changes, and a 
great license to do anything, and luxury, and negligence [magnaque ad omnia licentia, luxus et 
socordia], with everything going from bad to worse, until, having often been subjugated, they 
completely broke away from the divine law, and wanted a mortal king. (TTP XVII.106 (iii/219)) 


It’s true that Spinoza does not mention luxury [Iuxus| very much in the context of the 
first Hebrew state. But he also attributes the decline of the Canaanites (TTP II.49 
(iii/55)) and Tartars (TTP III.56 (iii/57)) to the embrace of luxury. And Spinoza presents 


413 


ERIC SCHLIESSER 


it as the general source of decline (TTP XVII.14 (iii/203)). In the latter context it is clear 
he has the Roman Republic in mind (see especially iii/204), and so we are very much in 
the ambit of the republican concern with the corrupting effects of luxury. 

In fact, the significance of corruption had been introduced in the preface of the TTP. 


I've often wondered that men who boast that they profess the Christian religion — i.e. love, 
gladness, peace, restraint, and good faith toward all — would contend so unfairly against one 
another, and indulge daily in the bitterest hatred toward one another, so that each man’s faith 
is known more easily from his hatred and contentiousness than from his love, gladness, 
etc. .. . What’s the cause of this evil? Doubtless that religion has commonly consisted in 
regarding the ministries of the Church as positions conferring status, its offices as sources of 
income, and its clergy as deserving the highest honor. For as soon as this abuse began in the 
Church, the worst men immediately acquired a great desire to administer the sacred offices; 
the love of propagating divine religion degenerated into sordid greed and ambition; and the 
temple itself became a Theater, where one hears, not learned ecclesiastics, but orators, each 
possessed by a longing, not to teach the people, but to carry them away with admiration for 
himself, to censure publicly those who disagree, and to teach only those new and unfamiliar 
doctrines which the common people most wonder at. This had to lead to great dissension, 
envy, and hatred, whose violence no passage of time could lessen. (TTP, preface 14—15) 


The quoted passage is the start of a curious aside within the preface of the TTP. The main 
point of the aside is the conclusion that the existing church has lost its way; nothing [nihI] 
remains of the religion; it is an empty shell with some adornment [externum cultum] 
(Praefatio, iii8). 

My present interest is in Spinoza’s diagnosis and explanation of a church that has 
become an empty shell. For, this is not just a story of decline. It is a story of corruption from 
within, with a potentially good resource wasted [abusus], with a clear institutional cause. 
Spinoza is explicit on the first cause: that (for the common people [vulgo religioni]) church 
office has highest status [suwmmo honore] and is a source of material benefits [beneficial]. 

As an aside, Spinoza’s conceptual point is clear, but Spinoza’s wording is ambiguous 
between two historical possibilities: (1) allowing an uncorrupted early church that got cor- 
rupted by a norm/institutional change (which I describe below) or (2) that the people’s 
church has always been corrupt, once institutionalized, because their shepherds always 
gain status and other benefits. 

Spinoza’s argument assumes that once incentives shift toward status and income, dif- 
ferent kinds of people will want to become church leaders. For there is a clear shift from 
people motivated by love of preaching the gospel [amor divinae religionis propagandae| to 
sordid people who are vain (eager for attention), avaricious, and demagogues [sordidam 
avaritiam, et ambitionem] (that ambitio is coupled with demagoguery is most clear from 
E3p29S.) So, when the incentive structure changes, the labor pool for pastoral care jobs is 
changed, and the kinds of people that rise to the top within the church is utterly trans- 
formed if not corrupted. 

It is important that Spinoza does not think that the pastors are corrupted by and in their 
jobs. (This is clearly Adam Smith’s view later.) He thinks, rather, that people with excessive 
longings [ingens libido] will become attracted to careers in the church. I do not want to put 
too much emphasis on Spinoza’s use of ‘libido’ (which, as we have seen, is commonly 
treated with suspicion in republican concerns over luxury), but it is clear he thinks that 
once such people enter the church a species of love is displaced and it becomes infused with 
a fetishized energy where spectacle and sensuality reign. 


414 


SPINOZA AND ECONOMICS 


Now, at this stage I backtrack to Spinoza’s fascinating claim that in his time all lead the 
same kind of life [vita eadem omnibus est]. Long before Sombart and Marcuse (Foucault 
et al. 2008, pp. 113 and 117), Spinoza diagnoses a flattening of human kind such that 
within modernity the differences among people become very narrow and track shallow 
exterior features, opinions, and religious practices. Spinoza’s polemical point, anticipating 
Swift, is that people kill each other over trivial differences egged on by bad people that 
exploit religion to malicious self-interested ends. 

Because in Chapter III of the TTP, Spinoza explicitly rejects the possibility of a diversity 
of human origins and such (at the level of physical anthropology) as a dream or fantasy, I 
infer that for him ancient human diversity was due to radically different practices (at, say, 
the level of cultural anthropology). Either way, there is a common but rather thin human 
nature (James 2010). 

Yet, more than, say, Hobbes or Adam Smith, Spinoza is willing to distinguish among 
human kind. So, he clearly thinks there is a rather steep cognitive hierarchy among men 
(with about 3 percent of folk being outstanding in leadership qualities) (TP 8.2; “hardly 
three [in a hundred] are found that excel in skill and counsel.” and he notoriously thinks 
women are subordinate to men even in potential (TP 11.4; James 2010). And, here, in the 
preface to the TTP, Spinoza clearly distinguishes between humans oriented toward love of 
spreading the gospel and the more vicious kind of humans with excessive libido. 

To be sure, in each case, it is possible to construct a Spinozistic narrative that looks at 
social causes, at nurture, to explain revealed human differences. But it is notable Spinoza 
does not do so himself. So, while Spinoza clearly rejects Aristotle’s claim that there are 
natural slaves, the natural reading of Spinoza is that while there is a thin, rather passion- 
ate human nature that is governed by unchanging laws, within that nature human diver- 
sity reigns. The political legislator must keep this in mind. 

For Spinoza the mechanism of corruption of the church is a shift in incentives that 
attract the wrong sort of people motivated by status and possessiveness of material goods; 
once such people are in charge, they displace those motivated by love and gift-giving, and 
the very institution is transformed into one in which office holding takes on a complex 
transactional character where the church becomes a source of material benefit. It has lost 
its original mission and can easily destabilize society. 

This diagnosis also suggests a solution: to ensure that remuneration and benefits of 
church offices are controlled. To do so, and to prevent other dangers, the church should be 
put under state control (TTP ch. XIX; Spinoza does not explore the possibility of leaving 
church remuneration and retention of its own leaders to the church itself). When in Wealth 
of Nations, Adam Smith goes over the same material, he rejects the Hobbesian-Spinozist- 
Humean solution and calls attention to the Presbyterians of Switzerland and Scotland on 
this very point (Schliesser 2017: 191-192). Of course, Spinoza’s solution pushes the 
problem back one level: how to prevent the corruption of state authorities, or a corrupted 
republic | Republica. . .corrupta] (TTP ch. XX (iii/242ff)). Somewhat surprising, this question 
is not addressed in the TTP. 

For now, what I have shown is that according to Spinoza, in institutional design one 
should not just be alert to the incentive structure of the institutions in shaping behavior, but 
also in the ways these incentives attract people one ought to keep out (or wish to attract). 

So, to sum up: once one pays attention to it, in Spinoza there is a traditional republican 
suspicion of luxury as a source of political corruption and decay. In addition to the anti- 
clerical argument, Spinoza argues that the property arrangements of the Hebrew State 
were fundamentally unstable not just because people could be (temporarily) indebted, 


415 


ERIC SCHLIESSER 


impoverished, and enslaved, but also, and more importantly, because it created the condi- 
tions of accumulation and the sort of prosperity that leads to ruin. So, while much of the 
TTP is naturally read as an attack on the pretensions of theology and dangerous fanati- 
cism, there is a clear warning to the merchants of Holland (cf. Melamed 2013, p. 189); too 
much luxury will be corrupting. 

At the end of the TTP, Spinoza seems to suggest that it is pointless to use the law to pre- 
vent the effects of inter alia, evils like avarice and luxury (ch. XX (iii/243)). Spinoza here 
anticipates his criticism of sumptuary laws (TP 10.5). These evils are tolerated by the mag- 
istrate because they cannot be prevented. (Mandeville makes this point by referring to the 
Amsterdam practice of tolerating prostitution (Nacol 2015, p. 68). But that leaves the 
reader wondering if anything can, if not prevent, at least mitigate political decline once 
luxury has developed. Spinoza takes up that question in the Political Treatise, which pres- 
ents the best kind of constitutions of three kinds of states (monarchy, aristocracy, and 
democracy) in order to make these durable. Spinoza would not expect to make any state 
eternal (E2p31 and E2p31c). 


3. Spinoza’s Mechanism Design 


In this section, I illustrate Spinoza’s interest in mechanism design. And then I show how 
this sheds light on how he tackles the problem of corruption. 

At the end of TTP (ch. XX), Spinoza leaves the reader with the possibility of a republic 
being corrupted, and with it also the arts and faith [bonae deinde artes, & fides corrumpuntur] 
(iii247). In the previous section I had noted that Spinoza does not really tackle the under- 
lying problem in the TTP. In the context of describing aristocracies in PT, Spinoza asserts that 


Academies supported at the expense of the State are instituted not so much to develop talents 
[ingenia colenda] as to constrain them [ad eadem coercenda instituuntur]. But in a free Republic 
both the arts and the sciences will flourish best [optime excolentur], if permission to teach pub- 
licly is granted to anyone seeking it, at the risk of his own resources and reputation. (Political 
Treatise (Vb188), Ch. 8.49 (III/346)) 


Spinoza assumes that a true cultivation of dispositions will generate excellence in the sciences 
and technology (or technical arts [scientiae et artes|); see also TTP ch. XV (iii1 87). He denies 
that publicly funded universities produce such excellence. Because regardless of what their 
purported aims are, the true aim of public universities is to mold talents into the assumed or 
perceived needs of public authority. Anticipating Mill’s concerns, Spinoza worries public edu- 
cation generates a species of conformity, and is incompatible with true excellence. 

A key hidden assumption is that diverse talents must be cultivated in a variety of ways 
such that sciences and crafts/technology can flourish. (Spinoza is elitist about the intellec- 
tually gifted) (PT 8.2 (IH/324) (Vb136)). As he puts it in the TTP ch.XI, true teachers have 
their own way of teaching [singularem docendi methodum habent] (ii/157). And through 
direct and indirect censorship (i.e. a curriculum, etc.) public universities prevent this variety 
from being developed. It is, perhaps, no surprise Spinoza rejected a chair at Heidelberg. Even 
in free Holland, universities were controlled by local governments (Van Bunge 2009). 

Given the diversity of human character and given the diversity of excellence in the sci- 
ences and technology, what is needed according to Spinoza is unlimited freedom to would- 
be educators to teach what they wish constrained by their budgets and reputation. 


416 


SPINOZA AND ECONOMICS 


Spinoza does not consider an option to reform higher education: the creation and 
advocacy of something like academic freedom. While the term is a bit anachronistic, it is 
not much a stretch for the advocate of freedom of philosophizing/scientific thought (which 
is the explicit thesis of the Theological Political Treatise — a text he refers back to regularly in 
the Political Treatise); there is no doubt that the nature and extent of academic freedom was 
debated in various controversies at Leiden University in his lifetime (some of them having 
to do with the status of Cartesianism). But given everything else he says about the way 
incentives and human nature interact to generate conditions of corruption in the Political 
Treatise, he must have thought this decidedly unpromising (perhaps especially in an aris- 
tocracy (since the paragraph is tucked away in a chapter on the best aristocracy)). 

Another option would be for universities independent of government (and religious) 
control in the manner of some ancient academies and future private universities. But it is 
crucial, I think, that Spinoza does not advocate for the establishment of a single private 
university to create such freedom. Rather his emphasis is on educators and many would-be 
educators (“each” unicuique). We are invited to think of Plato and Aristotle and their acad- 
emies with fee-paying students attracted by their reputation. And it is quite clear that 
Spinoza thinks that in a heterogeneous population of fee-paying students, it is the interac- 
tion of payment and reputation of teachers that will produce the excellence in the sciences 
and technologies conducive to the flourishing of a free republic. 

Let me turn to the central argument of Political Treatise. And this argument, which can 
be traced back to Isaiah 32:17, relies on the thought that political disorder is evidence of 
political corruption and injustice (TP Ch 5.2 (III/295) (Vb62])). And so an enduring and 
stable state is the consequence of works. One way such state remains stable is through the 
design of mechanisms that either make corruption unrewarding or raise its costs or make 
it likely that there is an interest in uncovering it. 

So, for example, in an ideal monarchy, the king is advised by a great rotating council of 
elders (TP 6.15-16; the rotation itself is shortened to two years to prevent corruption 
(TP 7.13)), which, in addition to its other duties, oversees the law-courts and focuses on 
procedural impartiality. As Spinoza puts it, “For administering justice another Council must 
be formed, composed entirely of Jurists. Their duty is to decide lawsuits and punish crimi- 
nals, but to do this in such a way that all their decisions are approved by the deputies of the 
great Council, who must decide whether due process has been observed and the decision 
made without favoritism” (TP 6.26; III/304). That Spinoza is worried about bribery is made 
clear by the next sentence: “if a losing party is able to show that one of the judges was cor- 
rupted by a gift from his opponent, or has any other common reason for friendship toward 
his opponent (or for hatred toward the complainant). . .” (TP 626; III/304). 

Obviously, this makes it necessary for the great Council to be, as it were, bribe-proof itself. 
Spinoza has three mechanisms to ensure this: first, the great Council is very large and, second, 
rotating (so that bribery becomes expensive), and third, it requires minimum thresholds to 
come to any decision. Spinoza himself makes the connection with preventing bribery at TP 7.9: 


No doubt no one will ever consider trying to corrupt this Council with gifts. For if he drew one 
or two Counselors to his side, from such a large number of men, that would not do him any 
good. As we've said, an opinion which does not receive at least a hundred votes is null and 
void. (III/311) 


Spinoza is not relying on the goodness of human nature here. What he has done is to raise 
the cost of bribery. This is also the intention behind increasing the number of judges 


417 


ERIC SCHLIESSER 


(TP 7.21 (If/316)). This mechanism can only work if the very rich are not so rich as to 
afford effortlessly such bribery. And, in fact, Spinoza explicitly embraces such qualified 
limitarianism in his ideal monarchy: 


The fields, and all the land, and if possible, the houses too, should be public property [publici 
iuris sint], i.e. subject to the control of the one who has the Right of the Commonwealth [ius 
civitatis habet]. He should lease them for an annual rent [annuo pretio] to the citizens, or to the 
city residents and farmers. In time of peace everyone should be free, or exempt, from any tax- 
ation [exactione]. One part of the rent the King receives should be dedicated to the fortification 
of the Commonwealth; the other, to his personal use. For in time of peace it’s necessary to 
fortify cities as if for war, and in addition, to have ships and other instruments of war prepared. 
(TP 6.12 (III/300) (Vb76)) 


There is no private property in land and real estate in a well ordered monarchy. Instead citi- 
zens lease it annually from the government. Before I discuss the effects of this on income and 
wealth (and war and peace), it is worth noting the significance of the tax. This is, simulta- 
neously, the main source of income for the government which pays, thereby, for public works, 
especially public defense and spying, and the king’s expenses. This suggests that the king has 
no royal estates either (Noordman 2016, p. 17). In addition, this also entails that the 
government does not raise any tolls, excise taxes, or tariffs (all familiar to Spinoza’s readers). 

The predictable effect and its function are clear: the governors’ interests are aligned 
with the people’s interest. For, income from taxes can grow only in two ways: first, by 
population growth. Spinoza is explicit that “means should be devised for more easily 
increasing the number of citizens, and producing a large confluence of men” (6.32; 
Spinoza anticipates here Locke’s “art of government,” and he echoes ideas by the de la 
Court brothers; (Wagener 1994b, p. 413)). In addition to the fact that a growing citizenry 
can pay more tax (at least on homes), in times of war it is useful to have a larger army and 
to have a class of non-citizens who pay a fee “for their exemption from service” or are 
required to perform “some forced labor.” 

Second, taxes can grow if land-values and property values grow. I am assuming that 
the annual renewal of the leases means that there are regular re-evaluations of the 
assessment. This requires, a professional class of land surveyors which had grown in sig- 
nificance in early modern England and the Dutch provinces. 

A predictable side-effect of annual leases is that too much long-term investment in the 
productive capacity of land is prevented which required the longer leases pioneered in 
fifteenth- and sixteenth-century England (Wood 2002). This is not a bug in Spinoza’s design, 
but a feature. For, in explicitly referring back to the quoted passage, Spinoza suggests that 
“everyone would have to work at a trade, or lend money to their fellow citizens. So they would 
have to engage in business dealings which are either entangled with one another nor require 
the same means to succeed. Thus the majority of this council will generally be of one and the 
same mind concerning their common affairs and the arts of peace. As we said in §4, everyone 
defends the cause of another just so far as he believes that in this way he makes his own 
situation more stable” (TP 7.8; (III/311) Vb103). Because Spinoza assumes that citizens are 
self-interested (and have relatively few opportunities to gain glory/renown), and, in virtue of 
lack of property in land and real estate, citizens will be encouraged to become part of a 
trading nation domestically and (due to the lack of tariffs) internationally. 

This nudging toward the trades and commerce is reinforced by the fact that banking is 
limited to domestic banking. That is to say, excess capital accumulation can neither be 


418 


SPINOZA AND ECONOMICS 


invested in land and property nor be loaned out abroad, so this leaves it to be used as capital 
for domestic investment in trades, commerce, and manufacture. So, while there is some 
room for accumulation in gold and silver (and jewelry/plate), major landholdings are pre- 
vented. And the way Spinoza conceives of trade, this involves mutual gain (even mutual 
assistance) 2.15; 3:12; 7.8 (see also, especially, TTP 5.18 (iii/73)). 

The intended political effect is clear (and explicit): to prevent the rise of a powerful nobility, 
and to maintain significant wealth equality so that there will be a near equal “risk in war” 
[par propemodum periculum est] (7.8; (II/311); this, and other remarks (TP 3.15-16) clearly 
anticipates Kant’s treatment in Perpetual Peace). With a lack of property in land and real 
estate, this will not just maintain rough equality, but people’s interests and their representa- 
tives in the council of state will be pretty much identical (7.8; II/311). While thrifty people 
still can grow somewhat wealthy, they will be doing so in virtue of providing each other with 
their needs. As the population will keep growing, it is clear that this is supposed to engender 
a virtuous cycle of moderate and egalitarian growth. So, when theorizing the best form of 
monarchy, Spinoza is clearly a qualified limitarian (Kramm and Robeyns 2020). 

That thriftiness is a virtue is also clear from Spinoza’s (Machiavellian) argument against 
mercenaries. This involves the dangers emanating from the sociological effect of gener- 
ating a class of men who lack a proper work ethic and need not be thrifty: “these will be 
men who know only the arts of war, men who in peace are corrupted by extravagant living, 
because they have too much leisure” (TP 7.22; III/317). 

In Spinoza’s monarchy, where the citizens live by trade, and have no landed property 
and real estate to fall back on, and are not paid for soldiering, they will lack war- 
spiritedness [animus gerendi bellum]. In fact, “war will always cause them fear of losing 
their possessions and liberty, it is to be added, that war requires fresh expenditure, which 
they must meet, and also that their own children and relatives, though intent on their 
domestic cares, will be forced to turn their attention to war and go a-soldiering, whence 
they will never bring back anything but unpaid-for scars” (7.7; IM/310-311). 

What we may call the laboring class [quotidiano opere vitam] gets stipends for wartime sol- 
diering, but, by implication, the capitalists (and domestic bankers) or entrepreneurs do not 
(6.31; If/305). This suggests that Spinoza thinks that ultimately a monarchic state will be 
divided modestly, by those who live on wages and those who live by credit, trade, or enterprise. 

Similar mechanisms to combat corruption are prevalent in his proposed aristocracies 
(8.24; 8.35; 8.38; 9.9-10; 10.4.) What all these mechanism have in common is the attempt 
not to reform human nature, or to turn people into the wise, but rather to make human nature 
serve the common good: “I conclude, then, that those common vices of peace which we’re 
speaking about here should never be prohibited directly, but only indirectly, by laying down 
foundations of the state which will result, not in most people being eager to live wisely — 
that’s impossible — but in their being guided by affects more advantageous to the Republic.” 
(TP 10.6; IlI/355-356; Vb212). So, greed will end up serving that what is honorable, 
which, if the institutions are properly designed, will serve the common good. 


4. Conclusion 


Spinoza’s arguments were not wholly original, explicitly drawing on Machiavelli and the 
De La Courts, but they are not without enduring interest. The kind of institutional design, 
based on a sober picture of passionate human nature, that Spinoza practices to “remedy” 
corruption is more familiar from the writings of Hume and Madison. (On the connection 


419 


ERIC SCHLIESSER 


between Machiavelli, Hume and Spinoza, see Hirschman 1977, pp. 23-24, who calls 
attention to Bacon as an anticipation of Spinoza. See also Kant’s use of the device of a 
“nation of devils” in Perpetual Peace.) To what degree these historical figures would have 
been familiar with the argument of the Political Treatise is best left for another occasion. 

The analysis I have given here of Spinoza is not wholly original. In the first appendix to 
The Calculus of Consent, James Buchanan, who won the Nobel prize for Economics in 1986, 
calls admiring attention to Spinoza’s Political Treatise as an anticipation of his own work 
with Gordon Tullock (Buchanan 1962; see also Kliemt 2005, but Kliemt draws on the TTP 
primarily). This work is now known as constitutional political economy and public choice 
theory. In the appendix, Buchanan denies being directly influenced by Spinoza. 

Buchanan does repeatedly credit the great Swedish economist, Knut Wicksell, with 
decisive influence on him. As it happens, in a (1917) review of the revised, second Swedish 
translation of Mill’s On Liberty, Wicksell shows familiarity with Spinoza’s political works 
(Wicksell 1999, p. 238). So, it cannot be ruled out altogether that Spinoza influenced these 
developments more directly. 


Acknowledgments 


I thank René Brouwer, Wiep Van Bunge, Alex Douglas, Daniel Schneider, Hartmut Kliemt, 
Jo Van Cauter, and Yitzhak Melamed for helpful comments on an earlier draft. The usual 
caveats apply. 


References 


Baier, A.C. (1987). Commodious living. Synthese: 157-185. 

Berry, Christopher J. (1989). Luxury and the Politics of Need and Desire: The Roman Case. History of 
political Thought 10.4: 597-613. 

Berry, C.J. (1994). The Idea of Luxury: A Conceptual and Historical Investigation 30. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 

Buchanan, J.M. (1962). Marginal notes on reading political philosophy. Appendix 1. In: The Calculus of 
Consent, vol. 3 (ed. J.M. Buchanan and G. Tullock), 291—309. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press. 

Buckle, S. (1991). Natural Law and The Theory of Property: Grotius to Hume. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press. 

Den Uyl, DJ. (1987). Passion, state, and progress: Spinoza and Mandeville on the nature of human 
association. Journal of the History of Philosophy 25 (3): 369-395. 

Foucault, M., Davidson, A.I., and Burchell, G. (2008). The Birth of Biopolitics: Lectures at the Collége de 
France, 1978-1979. Palgrave. 

Hanley, R.P. (2020). The Political Philosophy of Fénelon. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Hirschman, A.O. (1977). The Passions and The Interests: Political Arguments For Capitalism Before Its 
Triumph. Princeton NJ: Princeton University Press. 

Hont, I. (2005). Jealousy of Trade: International Competition and The Nation-state in Historical Perspective. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 

James, S. (2010). Politically-mediated affects: envy in Spinoza’s Tractatus Politicus. In: A Critical 
Guide to Spinoza’s Tractatus Politicus: A Critical Guide (ed. Y.Y. Melemed), 250-267. Cambridge 
Critical Guides. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Kliemt, H. (2005). Public choice and political philosophy: Reflections on the works of Gordon 
Spinoza and David Immanuel Buchanan. Public Choice 125 (1-2): 203-213. 


420 


SPINOZA AND ECONOMICS 


Kramm, M. and Robeyns, I. (2020). Limits to wealth in the history of Western philosophy. European 
Journal of Philosophy. https://doi.org/10.1111/ejop.12535 

Levick, B. (1982). Morals, politics, and the fall of the Roman republic. Greece & Rome 29 (1): 
53-62. 

Lord, B. (2016). The concept of equality in Spinoza’s theological-political treatise. Epoche: A Journal 
for the History of Philosophy 20 (2): 367-386. 

Melamed, Y.Y. (2013). Spinoza’s respublica divina. In: Baruch de Spinozas Tractatus theologico-politicus 

(ed. Otfried Hoffe), 177-192. Berlin: Akademie Verlag. 

Nacol, E.C. (2015). The beehive and the stew: prostitution and the politics of risk in Bernard 

Mandeville’s political thought. Polity 47 (1): 61-83. 

Newman, WR. (2006). From alchemy to “chymistry”. The Cambridge History of Science 3: 

497-517. 

Nierenstein, M. (1932). Helvetius, Spinoza, and transmutation. Isis 17 (2): 408-411. 

Noordman, D. (2016). Spinoza as an economist. Mededelingen Vanwege Het Spinozahuis 98. Voorschoten: 
Uitgeverij Spinozahuis. 

Pocock, J.G.A. (2016) [1975]. The Machiavellian Moment: Florentine Political Thought and the Atlantic 
Republican Tradition, vol. 93. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 

Post, G. (1961). "Ratio publicae utilitatis, ratio status" und “Staatsrdson,” 1100-1300. Stuttgart: W. 
Kohlhammer. 

Schliesser, E. (2017). Adam Smith: Systematic Philosopher and Public Thinker. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press. 

Spinoza, B. de. (2016). The Collected works of Spinoza, vol. 2. Princeton University Press. 

Spinoza, B. and de Spinoza, Benedictus. (1985). The Collected Works of Spinoza, vol. 1. Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press. 

Topolski, Anya. “Tzedakah: the true religion of Spinoza’s Tractatus?.” History of Political Thought 
37.1 (2016): 78-106. 

Van Bunge, W. (2009). Censorship of philosophy in the seventeenth-century Dutch republic. The use 
of censorship in the Enlightenment, 95-117. Leiden: Brill. 

Vergaray, A.R. (2019). Thinking with Spinoza about uncertainty today. In Circolo. Rivista di filosofia e 
culture 9: 118-127. 

Wagener, H.-J. (1994a). Cupiditate et potentia: the political economy of Spinoza. The European Journal 
of the History of Economic Thought 1 (3): 475-493. 

Wagener, H.-J. (1994b). Free seas, free trade, free people: early Dutch institutionalism. History of 
Political Economy 26 (3): 395-422. 

Weststeijn, A. (2011). Commercial Republicanism in the Dutch Golden Age: The Political Thought of Johan 
& Pieter de la Court. Leiden: Brill. 

Wicksell, K. (2013) [1999]. Knut Wicksell: Selected Essays in Economics, vol. 2. (ed. B. Sandelin). 
London: Routledge. 

Wood, E.M. (2002). The Origin of Capitalism: A Longer View. London: Verso. 

Wootton, D. (2018). Power, Pleasure, and Profit: Insatiable Appetites from Machiavelli to Madison. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 


421 


59 


Spinoza and Feminism 


HASANA SHARP 


Spinoza was generally silent on the topic of women. When he was not silent, feminists 
wish he had been. Nevertheless, despite Spinoza’s sometimes noxious remarks on women, 
several feminist theorists have found resources and inspiration in his philosophy. What 
accounts for this unlikely companionship between Spinoza and (twentieth- and twenty- 
first-century) feminism? Why, despite Spinoza’s anti-feminist position on the question of 
women’s civic participation, for example, do several feminists find it useful and even 
empowering to think with him? The aim of this chapter is to propose an answer to these 
questions. 

First, a few words about Spinoza’s remarks on women. Throughout his magnum opus, 
the Ethics, Spinoza generally uses the generic term ‘homo,’ which means human and can 
refer to woman (femina or mulier) or man (vir). Translators have generally rendered homo 
as ‘man’ rather than humanity, acknowledging the likely semantic context for which 
‘homo’ — and especially ‘homo liber’ — refers to a (European, propertied) male person. When 
Spinoza refers to women in the Ethics (usually indirectly), his remarks are not exclusively 
negative. As several feminist commentators have noted, in his retelling of the story of 
creation, and in contrast to most of his fellow non-feminist contemporaries, he treats Eve 
as the perfect equal to Adam (E4p68s) (Gatens 1996; Gullan-Wuhr 2008; Lloyd 1994; 
Lord 2011; Sharp 2012). Likewise, Spinoza maintains that marriage can agree perfectly 
with the life of reason and such a partnership can be an expression of freedom for both 
husband and wife (E4appXX). Heterosexual romantic partnership, according to Spinoza, 
can be egalitarian, proper to a virtuous life, empowering and liberating. Elsewhere in the 
Ethics, however, he refers to compassion toward non-human animals as ‘womanly’ (muli- 
eri), invoking a commonplace but demeaning association of women with weakness and 
passion rather than strength and reason (E4p37s). He also invokes femininized stereo- 
types, such as the ‘gossip’ (garrula) (E3p2s) and the faithless mistress who “prostitutes her- 
self to another” (E3p35s), which reinforces a disassociation of women from the idea of 
human virtue. In the Ethics, then, one could say that women are theoretically equal to 
men, but Spinoza’s exemplars of freedom and virtue appear male and some of his remarks 
reflect cultural stereotypes unfavorable to women. 


A Companion to Spinoza, First Edition. Edited by Yitzhak Y. Melamed. 
© 2021 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2021 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd. 


422 


SPINOZA AND FEMINISM 


In the Political Treatise, his views on women appear less ambivalent. He counsels, 
without offering an explanation, that daughters of kings should never be permitted to 
assume the throne (TP, 6.37). In several countries in seventeenth-century Europe women 
had inherited the throne, such as Christina of Sweden and Elizabeth I of England, and thus 
Spinoza’s view implicitly criticizes a (controversial) practice of his time that recognized the 
ability of women to rule. In the case of democracies as well, Spinoza insists that women, 
like servants or criminals, should not be able to share power with men, and should be 
excluded from civic participation in government (TP, 11.3—4). Although some feminists 
have understood his argument to maintain that social conditioning of women or the 
shared imaginary horizon of the seventeenth-century explains Spinoza’s exclusion of 
women from democratic participation, Spinoza’s reasoning is both more conservative and 
more unequivocal than these explanations suggest (Lloyd 1994; Lord 2011). He is less wil- 
ling to entertain the political capabilities of women than several of his contemporaries, 
including Thomas Hobbes and René Descartes to whose work his philosophy expressly 
responds. Likewise, his reasoning in the Political Treatise, however at odds with his own 
principles, maintains women’s enduring inferiority and thus their perpetual inappropri- 
ateness for democratic rule (Gullan-Wuhr 2008; Sharp 2012). 

Nevertheless, we need not excuse or explain away Spinoza’s views on women in order to 
find materials in his philosophy for feminism today. Even if Spinoza the man did not appear 
to regard women as equal companions in the co-constitution of freedom, his portrait of 
human existence is replete with conceptual resources for feminism. Thus, while this 
chapter is in no way an apologia for Spinoza’s views on women, it shows how feminist 
thinkers have made something of his philosophy that he could neither have anticipated 
nor (most likely) endorsed. The promising features feminist theorists have thus far identi- 
fied in Spinoza’s philosophy can be placed into three major categories: (1) anti-individu- 
alism; (2) the conatus doctrine; (3) anti-dualism. I will discuss each of them briefly and I 
have little doubt that there is still more to be revealed by feminist research. 


1. Spinoza’s Anti-Individualism 


It must be noted that feminist thought is quite diverse. Although there are many feminist 
theories and widely diverging feminist politics, it would nevertheless be fair to say that 
twentieth- and twenty-first-century feminisms share an emphasis upon “structures” of 
domination or oppression. Feminist theory and practice in the 1960s and 1970s, for 
example, could be described as an effort to reframe the idiosyncratic experience of individ- 
uals in terms of the structural conditions that gave rise to that experience. At the level of 
practice, this involved a technique of “consciousness raising” (Rowbotham 1969). Women 
would come together in groups and describe their feelings and experiences in detail. In 
these groups, women found that perfect strangers had similar descriptions of their strug- 
gles: feelings of inferiority; discontent with a life of domesticity; regular exposure to sexual 
violence; and finding it impossible to satisfy the conflicting demands of femininity, demands 
which varied depending on factors such as class, ethnicity, religion, and race. As Catherine 
MacKinnon put it, “what may have begun as a working assumption becomes a working 
discovery: women are a group” (MacKinnon 1989, p. 86). Consciousness raising aims to 
reveal that what feel like personal defects can be explained by larger patterns and struc- 
tures. What feels like an anomaly — “what’s wrong with me?” — is better understood as the 
product of a pattern, as the predictable outcome of a rigged system (Frye 1983, p. 34). The 


423 


HASANA SHARP 


history of feminist theory and politics involves significant dispute over the generality of 
patterns that have been identified, and the extent to which they vary for women in different 
times and places, and with different relationships to other forms of social stratification. 
Likewise, feminists disagree about the appropriate political responses to patterns of domi- 
nation based on sex and gender, in part because the response ought to vary depending on 
how they intersect with disadvantage based upon race, class, ability, sexuality, and so on 
(Crenshaw 1991; Nash 2008). Nevertheless, if one could identify a shared theoretical- 
methodological premise of feminism, it would reside in its grasp of individual gendered 
experience in terms of larger webs of meaning as well as institutional, cultural, and 
political structures. 

Spinoza’s philosophy might be understood as a unique and comprehensive form of 
structural analysis. His view of reality is such that we are connected by a web of causal 
relationships governed by natural laws from which we cannot escape. What seems to be a 
property of my personal experience can only be explained by impersonal laws and my 
particular history of determinations. As will be familiar to many, Spinoza maintains that 
all of reality is expressed by a single substance, called God or Nature. Although beings 
appear to us as individual substances, they are in fact modes, or finite determinations, of 
one infinite substance. There is one infinite, extended power (or attribute) with infinitely 
many finite “expressions,” or modifications: octopus, book, blade of grass, baby, sensation 
of light, quickening of a heartbeat, pulse of electricity. A thought, like a body, may appear 
to be numerically individual, but it is, for Spinoza, a variable expression of a single natural 
power, whose ‘existence and action’ depends upon those of the infinitely many other 
thoughts to which it is invariably connected. In short, all ideas, like all bodies, are involved 
in a community of cause and effect (E1p28). Natural things (finite modes) cannot be 
explained in isolation. It may be obvious that the ‘existence and action’ of an organic body 
can only be explained by its relationship with other bodies. I breathe by virtue of the pecu- 
liar powers of my body but also due to my immersion in an elaborate carbon cycle affecting 
countless life forms in the biosphere. The powers of my body, of course, are partly owed to 
those of my biological parents, my many caregivers, and the social system of cooperation 
into which I was born. An exhaustive account of how a single human body persists would 
clearly be an interminable task. Ideas are likewise interdependent and rich with connec- 
tions and determinations. 

Even if it is impossible to know the complete order and connection of causes explaining 
any single phenomenon, the anti-isolationist perspective on reality entails, according to 
Spinoza, a kind of liberation of our perception. Ceasing to explain things, especially 
human actions, by some sort of original spontaneity proper to individuals “contributes to 
social life, insofar as it teaches us to hate no one, to disesteem no one, to mock no one, to 
be angry at no one, to envy no one” (E2p49s). This shares something with the feminist 
argument that the grasp of individual experience as part of a causal pattern liberates the 
oppressed from self-hatred and self-punishment (theorists of other sorts of oppression, 
like colonialism, make similar claims). In addition to freeing up destructive energy, new 
explanations reveal new sites of intervention and new practices of transformative 
resistance. 

According to Etienne Balibar, Spinoza’s “originality appears from the outset in the fact 
that for him ‘the mass’ is the principal object of investigation, reflection, and historical 
analysis” (Balibar 1989, p. 106). If minds and bodies exist and act within and by virtue of 
the “mass” of which they are a part, each of us knows and feels by virtue of, and not in 
spite of, that mass. Importantly, for Balibar, this is not holism, but a view of diverse masses 


424 


SPINOZA AND FEMINISM 


with distinctive powers and laws (“complexions” or ingenia) (see also Moreau 1994, 
pp. 396-397). Spinoza’s neither individualist nor holist perspective (arguably) coheres 
with feminist insight and is not widely emphasized in the history of Western philosophy. 
One of the implications is that, if we want to fight domination, we cannot change our- 
selves independent of changing the character of the mass to which we belong. We need to 
act on what acts on us, in order to feel and live differently. 

As Spinoza observes, “it is necessary to know both our nature’s power and its lack of 
power” in order to determine what we can do to become more powerful (E4p17s). This 
‘nature’ of which he writes is not a universal, trans-historical human nature, or ‘nature’ 
conceived as an essence such as ‘man’ or ‘woman,’ but the nature of singular things such 
as you or me. This nature is embedded in a causal network, affected by infinitely many 
others singular natures, and affecting them in turn. But just as we do not exist except in a 
‘mass,’ in a larger network of powers and counter-powers, there is no singular nature 
without some unique power of determination, some striving and freedom to be what one 
is. This singular striving that defines each and every being, which Spinoza calls the conatus, 
is another feature of Spinoza’s metaphysics that a number of feminists embrace. 


2. The Conatus Doctrine 


Many feminist thinkers aim not only to understand the external factors constitutive of 
domination, for example, how laws, systematic discrimination, and institutions prevent 
women from enjoying equality with men. Feminists are also keenly interested in how dom- 
ination is interiorized, how it comes to form the first-person experience of individuals and/ 
or the psychology of groups. Thus, in addition to analyzing how power operates in the 
form of structural impediments or unevenly distributed advantages, feminists seek to 
examine how social and political forces constrain, animate, and direct the desires of agents. 
Feminists want to understand how gendered subjects desire with and against a patriarchal 
system. How do we desire in ways that reinforce or challenge dominant norms of gender, 
sexuality, ability, and race? Because of a widespread interest in what Judith Butler names 
“the psychic life of power” (Butler 1997), feminists draw upon thinkers attentive to the 
interplay between desire and social life. 

Some feminist theorists declare that Spinoza is at the foundation of their own feminist 
theories owed to his conception of desire. Spinoza maintains that “the essence of anything 
whatsoever” is its conatus, its striving to persevere in being (Ep6). In the case of humans, we 
apprehend an appetite, or desire, to live and to enhance our being to whatever extent we can 
(Ep9s). So, although each of us is ineluctably bound to others, part of a system of cause and 
effect that we can never hope to transcend, we are not reducible to the causes acting upon 
us. Each of us is also a cause, a ‘certain and determinate’ way in which nature exists and 
acts, which is not reducible to anything outside of us (E1p36). For Rosi Braidotti, this implies 
that each being is, at its base, a power of ‘self-affirmation,’ such that, as long as we live, we 
cannot be reduced to those powers that shape us, for better or for worse (Braidotti 2002, ch. 
1). When considering people who have suffered profound domination, this metaphysical 
presupposition prompts the theorist to be suspicious of any analysis that would reduce 
them to the forces of their subjugation. Although any feminist account will be concerned 
with structures and institutions that produce domination, a desire-centered approach will 
seek to discern also how we animate, reinforce, and resist those structures. If an account of 


425 


HASANA SHARP 


the servitude endured by a group or an individual apprehends only the seamless agency of 
the oppressors, it fails to appreciate how we are never mere effects of forces external to us. 

Each of us is also, by natural necessity, an expression of some irreducible power of 
nature, however precarious or threatened by opposing forces. For Braidotti, feminists, with 
Spinoza, ought to presuppose a yearning to live a joyful and self-affirming life. We ought to 
seek out not only how we are complicit in our own oppression, or how we undermine our 
own flourishing through the internalization of oppressive norms. We ought also to inter- 
pret social and political life as a pursuit of self-affirmative powers and possibilities, animated 
by joy and desire. Spinoza, she suggests, supplies the metaphysical basis for a joyful mili- 
tancy that always exceeds its oppressive determinations. She opposes this to a tendency in 
feminist critical theory toward a ‘mournful’ account of gender as the nearly inescapable 
and mortifying internalization of oppression. 

Judith Butler also declares that the Spinozan conatus has always been ‘at the core’ of her 
work (Butler 2002, p. 31). Butler’s well-known and highly influential feminist theory richly 
details how social norms regulate gender through excitation as well censure. Her work illus- 
trates how we are compelled to animate norms of gender and heterosexuality through our 
gestures, habits, and ‘styles’ of being (Butler 1993). In her analysis of how social regulation 
can be quite coercive and oppressive, she nevertheless presupposes some internal attraction 
to those norms. She insists that self-conscious, social beings such as ourselves, by desiring to 
live, cannot but desire to become socially intelligible and esteemed (Butler 2002, ch. 6). Thus, 
from the Spinozan desire to persevere in being necessarily follows, for Butler, a kind of 
Hegelian desire for recognition, a desire to be nourished and validated by the social body of 
which one is a part. In desiring life, which requires the care and cooperation of other living 
beings like us, she argues that we cannot escape negotiation with the demands to conform to 
the terms of membership proper to the social order in which we find ourselves. Some may not 
experience the idiom of gender recognition imposed upon us to be especially constraining, 
but perhaps most people struggle more or less with the rules specific to their race, ethnicity, 
class, religion, and social group, exhorting each of us to be this or that kind of man or 
woman. Much of childhood consists in learning and negotiating the rules about how we are 
supposed to appear, comport ourselves, and whom we are supposed to desire. For some, these 
demands are felt as unbearable, and the cost of conformity is so great that they abandon their 
natal ties and seek alternative forms of kinship or community. When none of the available 
options are tolerable, some would rather die than persist in a world so hostile to their desired 
modes of living and loving. 

According to Butler and the Hegelian tradition upon which she draws, the desire for 
recognition is something that every social order presupposes, acts upon, and seeks to sat- 
isfy. Yet, the forms of recognition available liberate and satisfy some while inevitably 
excluding others. Butler interprets Spinoza’s conatus as a prefiguration of the desire for 
recognition, and thus places him in a tradition of post-Hegelian critical theory that has 
been important for many feminist theorists. In his Political Treatise, Spinoza remarks that 
“all those things I have demonstrated follow from the most essential feature of human 
nature in whatever way it may be considered, namely, from the universal striving of all 
men to preserve themselves” (TP 3.18). Spinoza can be understood to deduce his political 
principles from a consideration of what necessarily follows from a universal striving for 
self-preservation. This striving is interpreted by Braidotti as self-affirmation and by Butler 
as a desire for recognition. For Butler (whose theory is at least as well supported by Hobbes), 
beings that are born fragile and dependent, but can only be preserved if others esteem 
them as worthy of life. 


426 


SPINOZA AND FEMINISM 


Traditional history of political philosophy emphasizes how, for Spinoza (and Hobbes), 
the state must be careful to appear to contribute to the protection of life, limb, and estate. 
For feminist theorists drawing on Spinoza, such as Butler, the universal striving for self- 
preservation serves also as a kind of natural pressure upon the State to satisfy the psychic 
needs of its constituents to belong, to be recognized as worthy of esteem, and thereby to find 
life livable. One might understand some remarks of Spinoza’s in a similar vein. For example, 
his analysis in the Political Treatise suggests that the better a state can satisfy the desires of 
each not only to live but to enjoy their characteristically human powers and pleasures, the 
more stable and powerful that state is (TP 5.4). For his feminist readers, conatus-driven 
politics are inevitably characterized by a struggle among subjects over the terms of social 
belonging and the modes of self-affirmation that a particular social order makes available. 

Several feminist thinkers are drawn to Spinoza’s assertion that “desire is the essence of 
man,” since he examines social and political relationships without presupposing the motive 
of reason (e.g. Gatens and Lloyd 1999, and Sharp 2011). Spinoza repeats throughout his 
political writings that he aims to provide an account that is valid regardless of the rational 
content of anyone’s motives, rulers or ruled. To be useful, he maintains any political theory 
ought to assume that we are moved by passion most of the time. Spinoza’s is not, first and 
foremost, a theory of the principles according to which a government would be just, but an 
analysis of the composition of passions and actions that makes it more or less stable, more or 
less powerful. Such an analysis is only possible when one apprehends both the structural 
forms of determination and the striving proper to individuals and groups to live in a way that 
allows them to express their powers and enjoy their lives. In short, Spinoza’s is a political 
theory that reckons with subjection to external causes as proper to the human condition, but 
without losing sight of the desires that destabilize and transform our common conditions 
constantly. For some feminist political theorists thinking in the wake of Spinoza, he reminds 
us that, just as we are constrained by the political body of which we are necessarily but parts, 
the desires of subjects enable and constrain that body. Therefore, the conatus points to an 
irrepressible striving for freedom at the heart of each of us. 


3. Anti-dualism 


The feature of Spinoza’s philosophy that has unquestionably received the most attention 
from feminists is his rejection of dualism. Whereas Cartesianism has long been seen as 
objectionable (justifiably or not) by those feminists who seek to valorize the body as a site 
of knowledge and activity, Spinozism allows feminists to conceptualize bodies as insepa- 
rable from minds (Lloyd 1994), to recognize the passionate dimensions of reasoning 
(James 2012), and to understand culture not as an imposition upon inert nature but as 
something that nature does (Gatens 1996). The dualistic thinking that subordinates body 
to mind, passion to reason, and nature to culture, while coding one side of the duality as 
feminine and passive and the other as masculine and active is alien to Spinoza’s monism. 
Against a dualistic cosmology that contrasts matter to spirit, is to ought, and immanence 
to transcendence, Spinoza offers an alternative metaphysical framework. 

Spinoza maintains that the mind is the idea of its body (E2p13). The mind and body are 
one and the same thing, one certain and determinate way in which nature exists, but con- 
ceivable alternately as a mode of thought or as a mode of extension Jaquet 2013). Without 
going into the details of his complex theory of mind and body, we can observe at least two 
consequences of this view that are important to feminist thinkers. First, in contrast to 


427 


HASANA SHARP 


Descartes, the mind and body are active, and thus free, in precisely the same measure. 
Freedom is not the rule of the mind over its body. As Genevieve Lloyd maintains, in a symbolic 
order that associates femininity with corporeality and masculinity with thought, the model 
of freedom as the subordination of the body to the mind reinforces a view of women as inca- 
pable of self-determination (Lloyd 1984). Women are seen as creatures of passion whose 
bodily necessity somehow defines them to a greater extent than it does men. Even if anumber 
of women thinkers in the seventeenth-century embraced Cartesian dualism insofar as it 
implies the autonomy of the mind from the body (Harth 1992), three hundred years later 
many feminists reject views that locate freedom in the mind and servitude in the body. 

Second, in contrast to dualism, according to which the laws of cause and effect govern 
the realm of matter but not the realm of thought, an individual’s mind and body are 
equally (and identically) constituted by its relationships. The mind no less than the body 
must be understood as ‘relational,’ as something we only come to know in and through 
our encounters with others. Although the Spinozistic mind is never free of external deter- 
mination, it is also never alone. As Gatens remarks, “there is no possibility for solipsism” in 
Spinoza (Lloyd and Gatens, 2000, p. 47). If we are free, we are free together: we are free by 
virtue of the ability of our mind-bodies to combine and thereby produce enabling effects. 
If we are servile, it is not because of defects unique to each of us, but due to a disabling 
constellation of relationships within which we live, feel, act, and think. As Gatens empha- 
sizes in her use of Spinoza to develop what she calls “a feminist theory of the body,” the 
power of the mind-body is never given in advance. Because it is highly variable and respon- 
sive to its context, it is not self-identical over time. The body is “productive and creative,” 
limited by others but also connected to them (Gatens 1996, p. 57). 

Those feminists who have brought the most attention to Spinoza work in the tradition 
of “sexual difference” feminism. This tradition of feminism does not argue for women’s 
mental or moral equality with men. Egalitarian feminism draws on the liberal feminist tra- 
dition, according to which there are no morally relevant differences between men and 
women. We are equal with respect to our humanity, which is typically grounded in a 
universal capacity to reason or exercise moral agency. One easily recognizes the Cartesian 
and Kantian resonance of this kind of argument, which has (understandably) had its fem- 
inist advocates throughout history. The tradition of sexual difference feminism, however, 
does not argue from either the fact or the desirability of human sameness. They argue for 
a feminist theory that appreciates and reveals rather than subtracts differences. It sees 
more potential in an ethics and politics that highlights, explores, interrogates, and culti- 
vates differences. Thus, rather than basing our ethics on some universally shared property 
in virtue of which each is owed equal respect, the ethics of sexual difference seeks an open- 
ness and responsiveness to how we are irreducible to one another. It is an ethics and politics 
that rejects the notion that we are fungible as ethical and political agents (see also 
Stone 2016). Instead, the only adequate ethics and politics is one that resists the assimila- 
tion of each individual to a single, hegemonic identity or value, such as personhood. 

Sexual difference feminism is often misunderstood to assert an essential difference 
between women and men, to assert the importance of recognizing one axis of difference, 
the sexual difference between male and female. But those in this tradition who draw on 
Spinoza are attracted precisely to his presentation of differences as local and changeable. 
Differences between bodies and groups emerge through historical processes, in response to 
specific relationships and institutions, and will undergo constant transformation, such 
that they are, in the words or Gatens, “never decided a priori but recognized in the unfolding 
of shared (or conflicting) aims of groups or bodies” (Gatens 1996, p. 56). Lloyd notes 


428 


SPINOZA AND FEMINISM 


appreciatively that, for Spinoza, it is not the case that the body is sexed while the mind is 
neutral. Rather, sexual difference “reaches into” the mind (Lloyd 1994, p. 161). If a body’s 
powers and affects are shaped in a context that varies significantly according to one’s 
socially determined sex, its mind will likewise be empowered or limited by those same 
determinations. Nevertheless, the powers and affects that differ by virtue of sex are not 
determined a priori by biology, even if the material specificity of bodies remains a focus of 
sexual difference feminism. Elizabeth Grosz, drawing indirectly on Spinoza’s rejection of 
the nature-culture binary and his insistence on the unique proportions of motion and rest 
that define each body, elaborates an ethics of sexual difference that asserts “a thousand 
tiny sexes” (Grosz 1993). From this point of view, sexual difference is real and irreducible 
but this does not mean that it is fixed, binary, or predictable. Spinoza’s conception of the 
body whose “openness is the condition of its life,” as Gatens puts it, serves a feminist ethics 
of sexual difference that envisions new modes of cultivating and responding to a prolifera- 
tion of bodily and psychic differences. 


4. Conclusion 


It may seem strange that feminists single out both Spinoza’s monism and his embrace of 
local and myriad differences. But his denial of substantial individuality, it might be argued, 
forces us to say more rather than less about what makes each mode what it is. An individual 
in nature (it is, admittedly, not clear what all counts as such) is constituted by its diverse 
and changing relationships with others, impersonal laws governing its existence, its 
particular striving to persevere in being, and the various and changing sources of (and 
threats to) its power. This perspective lends support to thinking about macro-patterns of 
domination as any feminist theory must do. At the same time, the understanding of bodies 
and minds that are richly differentiated and variable lends itself to a non-reductive, non- 
binary, and creative feminist theory according to which, as the mantra goes, “nobody 
knows what a body can do” (a paraphrase of E2ps, made famous by Deleuze 1990, p. 226). 

In this chapter, I have emphasized the features of Spinoza’s metaphysics that align with 
feminism and which have been embraced by particular feminists. Feminist interpretations of 
Spinoza are in some ways surprising and at odds with non-feminist ones. In particular, 
whereas feminists find in Spinoza the possibility of an ethics sensitive to differences, desire, 
and passions, interpretations of Spinoza in the Anglo-American traditions often emphasize 
Spinoza’s universalism and rationalism. Spinoza’s philosophy contains a tension that is per- 
haps impossible to resolve between, to use his language, the common and the singular. It is 
perhaps the feminist motive interest in politics and the practices of collective transformation 
that places their accent on differences and particularities. The feminist perspective provides a 
useful corrective to the focus on the perfectionist and intellectualist aspects of Spinoza’s eth- 
ical program and the formal character of his rationalism. Thus, while feminists have drawn 
a great deal upon Spinoza, feminist interpretation also brings a great deal to Spinozism. 


References 
Balibar, E. (1989). Spinoza, the anti-Orwell: the fear of the masses, Rethinking Marxism 2(3): 


104-139. 
Braidotti, R. (2002). Metamorphoses: Towards a Materialist Theory of Becoming. Cambridge: Polity. 


429 


HASANA SHARP 


Butler, J. (1993). Imitation and gender insubordination. In: Lesbian and Gay Studies Reader (ed. 
H. Abelove, M.S. Barale, and D. Halperin). New York: Routledge. 

Butler, J. (1997). The Psychic Life of Power: Theories in Subjection. Stanford, CA: Stanford University 
Press. 

Butler, J. (2004). Undoing Gender. London: Routledge. 

Crenshaw, K. (1991). Mapping the margins: intersectionality, identity politics, and violence against 
women of color. Stanford Law Review 43 (6): 1241-1299. 

Deleuze, G. (1990). Expressionism in Philosophy: Spinoza. New York: Zone Books. 

Frye, M. (1983). The Politics of Reality: Essays in Feminist Theory. Trumansburg, NY: The Crossing 
Press. 

Gatens, M. (1996). Imaginary Bodies: Ethics, Power, Corporeality. London: Routledge. 

Gatens, M. and Lloyd, G. (1999). Collective Imaginings: Spinoza, Past and Present. London: Routledge. 

Grosz, E. (1993). A thousand tiny Sexes: Feminism and rhizomatics. Topoi 12: 167-179. 

Gullan-Wuhr, M. (2008). Spinoza and the equality of women. Theoria 68: 91-111. 

Harth, E. (1992). Cartesian Women: Versions and Subversions of Rational Discourse in the Old Regime. 
Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press. 

Jaquet, C. (2013). Affects, Actions and Passions in Spinoza: The Unity of Body and Mind. Edinburgh: 
Edinburgh University Press. 

Lloyd, G. (1984). The Man of Reason: “Male” and “Female” in Western Philosophy. London: Routledge. 

Lloyd, G. (1994). Part of Nature: Self-Knowledge in Spinoza’s Ethics. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University 
Press. 

Lloyd, G. and Gatens, M. (2000). The power of Spinoza: feminist conjunctions: Susan James inter- 
views. Hypatia 15(2): 40-58. 

Lord, B. (2011). “Disempowered by nature”: Spinoza on the political capabilities of women. British 
Journal for the History of Philosophy 19 (6): 1085-1106. 

MacKinnon, C. (1989). Toward a Feminist Theory of the State. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press. 

Moreau, P.-F. (1994). Spinoza: L’expérience et l’éternité. Paris: Presses Universitaires de France. 

Nash, J.C. (2008). Re-thinking intersectionality. Feminist Review 89 (1): 1-15. 

Rowbotham, S. (1969). Woman's Consciousness, Man’s World. New York: Pelican Press. 

Sharp, H. (2011). Spinoza and the Politics of Renaturalization. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 

Sharp, H. (2012). Eve’s perfection: Spinoza on sexual (in)equality. Journal of the History of 
Philosophy 50 (4): 559-580. 

Stone, A. (2016). Sexual difference. In: The Oxford Handbook of Feminist Theory (ed. L. Disch and 
M. Hawkesworth). Oxford: Oxford University Press. 


430 


40 


Spinoza and International Law 


MOA DE LUCIA DAHLBECK 


1. Introduction 


The purpose of legal theory seems to be a perpetually debated issue among legal scholars. 
The main question in this debate concerns whether theory should help shape legal prac- 
tices through posing ideals (idealism) or merely guide the actors of these practices in accor- 
dance with whatever ideal their political conditions reveal (realism) (cf. Steinberg 2019, 
pp. 1-2; Shaw 2003, p. 48). This divide between what can be denominated an idealist and 
arealist understanding of law seems to be especially accentuated in the history of interna- 
tional law, as shown in the seminal work on international legal theory by Martti 
Koskenniemi: From Apology to Utopia (2005).! Koskenniemi argues that the history of 
international legal theory is conditioned by a dialectical movement between a position jus- 
tifying any given positive law based on the power of states, and a position arguing for a 
theory of the state where laws are justified only in accordance with certain substantial 
(ideal) conditions (Koskenniemi 2005, p. 565). Drawing on Koskenniemi, then, interna- 
tional law seems to actually carry the problem of the purpose of law (the object of much 
legal theoretical debate) within its core. 

Whereas Koskenniemi connects the general problem of legal theory to the very core of 
international law, other scholars have regarded the adequacy of explanations of interna- 
tional law as entirely dependent on which of the two attitudes towards (legal) theory one 
adopts. Before even the consolidation of international law as a coherent body of law (with 
its conceptual center in the administrative powers of the United Nations), Sir Herscht 
Lauterpacht emphasized that 


the relation between political theory and international law is of a more pervading character 
than is commonly assumed. It is the ultimate results of the theory of the state which are resorted 
to by international lawyers as the foundation of their systems. (Lauterpacht1927, p. 91) 


' Koskenniemi introduces his investigation by stating that when one accepts the premises of the debate on “inter- 
national legality which international lawyers undertake, then one is bound to accept an international legal liber- 
alism” and that the basic concepts of international law — self-determination, the Rule of Law, independence, 
consent — all give away assumptions about material principles that reveal a liberal political theory which carry 


A Companion to Spinoza, First Edition. Edited by Yitzhak Y. Melamed. 
© 2021 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2021 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd. 


431 


MOA DE LUCIA DAHLBECK 


This claim introduces an analysis of Benedict Spinoza’s political philosophy in relation to 
international law. After classifying Spinoza as pertaining to the realist camp, Lauterpacht 
establishes that 


political doctrine based on the omnipotence and glorification of the state as an end in itself will 
naturally result, and has usually resulted, in the negation of the law of nations as a body of rules 
which, both in its binding force and in its creation, is independent of the will of the state. The present, 
still rudimentary, stage of international law is not in a small degree due to the prevalence of 
this type of doctrine. (Ibid., emphasis added) 


As evident from this passage, Lauterpacht argues that international law must be derived 
from something more than the will of state in order to be valid, and, he rejects Spinoza’s 
explanation of (the nature of) the state on the basis that it fails to provide a transcendental 
ground for validating law (Ibid.).? Taking my cue from Koskenniemi’s diagnosis of interna- 
tional law as carrying within its core the idealist/realist problem of legal theory, this 
chapter is dedicated to both Lauterpacht’s reading of Spinoza’s political theory, as well as 
that theory on its own merits. The aim of this endeavor is to investigate whether Lauterpacht 
is correct in rejecting Spinoza as too much of a realist in his approach to international 
law,* or, whether Spinoza, through his “embarrassing” utterances on international law 
(Lauterpacht 1927, p. 90), in fact manages to suggest a cure to what Koskenniemi later 
diagnoses as a locked position between idealism and realism installed right at the heart of 
international legal theory. 

The reason for my interest in Lauterpacht’s rejection of Spinoza’s political theory as a 
robust basis of international law and that theory in itself lies in a general discomfort with 
receptions of Spinoza’s political philosophy that either entirely separates it from, or subor- 
dinates it to, his metaphysical and ethical philosophy. In lines with recent suggestions, 
I believe that the undisputedly different styles and rhetoric of Spinoza’s works should be 
taken — not as indicators of inconsistency or separate scopes — but as consequences of 
them being aimed at explaining different aspects of one and the same greater ethical 
project (cf. Melamed and Rosenthal 2010, pp. 2—3; Steinberg 2018, pp. 9-10, 2009, p. 35; 
LeBuffe 2017, p. 7). 

In what follows I will therefore first give a brief review of Lauterpacht’s analysis of the 
passages from The Political-Theological Treatise (TTP, 1670) and the Political Treatise (TP, 


the unsolved problem of idealism/realism (2005, pp. 5—6). Koskenniemi mentions Hans Kelsen as the principal 
and most influential proponent of an idealistic explanation of law and to the opposing realist theory, he refers Alf 
Ross and Karl Olivecrona who are commonly understood as the doctrinal pillars of the twentieth-century 
Scandinavian legal realist school (Ibid., 26-28). 

? In Letter 50, Spinoza establishes that his idea of the nature of the state is that of an individual within the state 
of nature. Large part of this chapter is dedicated to discussing the more specific meaning of this definition. When 
quoting from Spinoza’s works, I follow the translation of Curley (1985 and 2016) and employ its method of refer- 
ring to the parts of the text. References to the Ethics are abbreviated according to the method outlined on p. 00, 
but note the following: explanation (exp). Example: E2p7s = Ethics, part 2, proposition 7, scholium. References to 
the non-geometrically ordered passages from the Ethics, as well as references to the Theological Political Treatise 
(Tractatus Theologico-Politicus (TTP)), the Political Treatise (Tractatus Politicus (TP)), and the EP are sometimes 
supplemented by references to Gebhardt’s edition Spinoza Opera, according to the following form: G II/208/25-30 
= Gebhardt, Vol. 2, page 208, lines 25-30. 

> The truth is that among those analyses of Spinoza’s view on international law that have been conducted after 
Lauterpacht’s essay, none has really questioned the conclusion that Spinoza’s political philosophy provides a very 
weak explanation of the structure and nature of international law. For a recent comment to this historical 
development and a new, more positive, analysis of Spinoza’s accounts of international law see Gtineysu (2017, 
pp. 174-180). 


432 


SPINOZA AND INTERNATIONAL LAW 


1677) which he refers to as proof of Spinoza’s poor understanding of the nature of inter- 
national law. Then, I will suggest a reading of Spinoza’s philosophy that turns these pas- 
sages into necessary components of a political theory that does not underestimate the 
power of law but takes care not to overlook the ontological limitations of human nature 
when determining what is the best method for realizing the highest human good. Finally, I 
will comment on how this suggested reading enables an understanding of Spinoza’s 
political philosophy as a robust basis for a practical theory of international law without 
being either idealistic or realistic. 


2. Lauterpacht’s Arguments Against Spinoza’s Political Theory 
as a Robust Basis of International Law 


According to Lauterpacht there is very little support in Spinoza’s political philosophy for a 
“separate and independent theory of international law” (Lauterpacht, p. 92; see also 
Walther 2003, p. 663). The following passages — which arguably constitute the core of 
Spinoza’s admittedly very few statements explicitly dealing with international relations — 
are especially highlighted in the argumentation to illustrate this point: 


[N]o law binds the supreme power. Everyone must obey it in everything. (TTP 16 [26] | 
GIII/193/28-29) 

Allies are men of two states, which, to avoid the danger of war, or to gain some other 
advantage, contract with one another not to harm one another, but to come to one another’s 
aid when in need, though each retains its own sovereignty. This contract will be valid just as 
long as its foundation, the principle of danger, or of advantage, is present. For no one makes a 
contract or is bound to stand by a contract, except out of hope for some good, or anxiety 
about some evil. If this foundation should be removed, the contract is removed of itself. 
(TTP 16 [43-44] | GIII/196/23-29, emphasis in original) 

For since (by 3 ii) the Right of the supreme power is nothing more than the Right itself of 
nature, it follows that two states are related to one another as two men are in the state of 
nature, with one exception. A Commonwealth can take precautions against being overpow- 
ered by another Commonwealth. But a man in the state of nature —a man burdened with daily 
sleep, often with illness or grief, and in the end with old age — that man can’t provide security 
for himself against being overpowered by another man. Moreover, he is liable to other disad- 
vantages from which the Commonwealth can make itself secure. (TP 3 [11], G 
Il/289/19-24) 

So, if one Commonwealth wants to make war on another, and will stop at nothing to bring 
it under its control, it has the Right to try this. (TP 3 [13], G III/290/3-5) 


Let me discuss these passages in turn. The first and the third passages are clearly related to 
each other. The first explicitly places the state outside of the realm of human-made law 
and describes a human-state relationship based on power following from this externaliza- 
tion. The third passage explains inter-state relationships as states of nature in which, 
again, power determines the respective right of the individuals. Lauterpacht takes these 
passages to mean that Spinoza exempts the state from the metaphysical principles govern- 
ing individual interactions generally. States differ, according to Lauterpacht’s reading of 
Spinoza, from humans in that their interactions will remain governed by nature whereas 
humans are metaphysically inclined towards leaving the state of nature for a formalization 
of their relationships (Lauterpacht 1927, p. 97). 


433 


MOA DE LUCIA DAHLBECK 


In order to disentangle this reading, we must turn to Spinoza’s discussion of human- 
made laws. As indicated by Lauterpacht, Spinoza indeed states in Chapter 4 of the TTP that 
human-made laws are products of a natural movement. It is a natural inclination of the 
human individual to turn away from the state of nature where rights equal power, and, 
towards a formalized civil state where rights are conferred to each subject according to a 
common agreement to give up their respective natural power to defend their rights. The 
attainment of civil rights is not for Spinoza — as suggested by Hobbes — a question of tran- 
scending, but rather continuing, the state of nature (Ep 50 | G IV/239b/20-24; see also 
Melamed 2014, p. 179). However, the way by which Spinoza details the movement from 
natural to civil rights reveals an interesting qualification (the consequences of which I will 
come back to later) of what he considers to be the basis of civil rights. Human-made laws 
are, he writes, merely conceptual effects of (1) human nature’s incapacity to fully under- 
stand causal mechanisms and (2) the fact that no individual can escape being subjected to 
the power of other individuals (TTP 4[3-4] | GIII/58/7—30; see also E4p37s2 | GI/237/27-32; 
TTP 16[20] | GII/192/31-193).4 

Perhaps it is the account in TTP 4 that Lauterpacht (1927, p. 93) has in mind when 
stating that Spinoza treats the state inconsistently in relation to his general description of 
law-creating mechanisms. I will come back to this accusation but let me here just point to 
that what Lauterpacht questions is whether Spinoza, who is committed to philosophical 
naturalism (i.e. everything’s explainability according to the same principles), respects that 
commitment when it comes to the state’s law-boundness and the creation of international 
law (Ibid.). According to Lauterpacht’s understanding of the first and third passages, they 
show that Spinoza does not explain international law on the same premises as he explains 
human-made law in general. What is more, these are the premises that for Lauterpacht 
demonstrate that Spinoza’s political philosophy indeed contain signs of accepting devia- 
tions from his own metaphysics’ unforgiving equation of right with power. All this will be 
discussed more carefully in my concluding remarks. 

The fourth passage on Lauterpacht’s list appears as a variation of the two just discussed. 
Lauterpacht points to it as describing one of the effects of grounding international law 
merely on power. On Lauterpacht’s reading of this statement, the reference to an absolute 
right to wage war constitutes a direct identification of international law with realpolitik 
(Ibid., p. 94). So, TP 3 [13] is taken to prove that Spinoza attributes omnipotent power to 
the will of the state. 

Lauterpacht suggests that the second passage fully confirms Spinoza’s failure to provide 
a robust theory of international law (cf. 1927, pp. 92, 94, 98). Again, what is lacking, 
according to Lauterpacht, is an explanation of the basis of international law that links 
international rights and obligations to a force beyond will power; to a higher order ratio- 
nality. In the second passage Lauterpacht finds in Spinoza the affirmation of a purely con- 
tingent condition of advantage as the only basis for the legal character of promises and 
contracts among states. As mentioned in relation to the first and third passages, 
Lauterpacht argues that this condition is inconsistent with the abstract rationality that he 
does find articulated as the basis of human-made law in general within Spinoza’s discussion 
of law in TTP 4 (Lauterpacht 1927, p. 97). 


* For an account of the necessary affective nature of human interaction see Tucker (2015, pp. 24-25), and, for 
an insightful account of the first condition: the metaphysical causes of human beings’ necessary yet false beliefs 
see Melamed (2017, pp. 121-141). 


434 


SPINOZA AND INTERNATIONAL LAW 


To judge by their wording, each of these passages indeed seems to confirm Lauterpacht’s 
conclusion about Spinoza’s political theory. It does not seem to hold the conceptual tools 
necessary for an objective evaluation of right and wrong (or law’s validity) beyond an 
analysis of realpolitik. However, as noted by for instance by Steven Nadler (2006), there are 
many aspects of Spinoza’s philosophy that indicate that his moral and political theory 
should not be read in isolation from his ethics’ objective standard for evaluations of human 
actions and deeds; the standard of the ‘free man,’ or, the perfectly rational human being 
(pp. 218-220). In the next section, I will therefore try to contextualize the passages pointed 
to by Lauterpacht in order to investigate whether such an endeavor may produce an under- 
standing of Spinoza’s political philosophy that makes it apt to function as a basis for a prac- 
tical theory of international law. 


3. Spinoza’s Statements on International Relations 
in Light of the Ethical Project 


Spinoza opens the TP with a description of an epistemological gap between philosophy and 
practice; a gap he ascribes to a poor philosophical understanding of human nature. 
According to Spinoza, philosophers’ misconception of human nature is what leads to an at 
best inefficient and at worst harmful normative practice (TP 1 [1]). Philosophers, he writes, 


conceive the affects by which we’re torn as vices, which men fall into by their own fault. 
That’s why they usually laugh at them, weep over them, censure them, or (if they want to 
seem particularly holy) curse them. They believe they perform a godly act and reach the pin- 
nacle of wisdom when they’ve learned how to praise in many ways a human nature which 
doesn’t exist anywhere, and how to bewail the way men really are. They conceive of men not 
as they are, but as they want them to be. That’s why for the most part they’ve written Satire 
instead of Ethics, and why they’ve never conceived of a Politics which could be put to any 
practical application, but only one which would be thought a Fantasy, possible only in 
Utopia, or in the golden age of the Poets, where there’d be absolutely no need for it. (TP 1[1] | 
G IM/273/4-15). 


There are two things in this passage that I wish to highlight for the purpose of under- 
standing Spinoza’s take on international law. First, it stands clear that Spinoza shares 
Lauterpacht’s view that a forceful political practice is entirely dependent upon a robust 
philosophical basis. For Spinoza, satirical accounts of the ethical components of human 
nature — i.e. of what things make humans thrive; what things are good for us; and, what 
activities we take pleasure in doing, etc. — constitute poor foundations for political theories 
about human activity. The second noteworthy thing is that Spinoza identifies these satiric 
(i.e. inadequate) understandings of human nature with idealism. For a political theory to 
stimulate a practice that actually can enable a collective to move closer to its best state of 
being, it must not idealize the human being and her capacities. In other words, a normative 
theory that guides us by the ideal towards which it is set to move us (for instance by pre- 
scribing rules that are modeled upon the idea of a perfect person instead of one with flaws 
and defects) ought to make us suspicious in terms of its utility. 

Following this warning against relying on idealist conceptions of humanity, Spinoza 
goes on to describe his own method for developing a functioning political theory by means 
of taking, 


435 


MOA DE LUCIA DAHLBECK 


great pains not to laugh at human actions, or mourn them, or curse them, but only to understand 
them. So, I’ve contemplated human affects — like love, hate, anger, envy, love of esteem, compas- 
sion, and the other emotions — not as vices of human nature, but as properties which pertain to 
it in the same way heat, cold, storms, thunder, etc., pertain to the nature of the air. Though these 
things are inconvenient, they’re still necessary and have definite causes, through which we 
strive to understand their nature. The mind rejoices in contemplating them truly just as much as it 
does knowing things pleasing to the senses. (TP 1 [4] | G IlI/274/27-275, emphasis added) 


We see in this passage how political organization for Spinoza is a means rather than an end in 
the sense that political strategies, for him, are meant to make the state function as a spring- 
board for the ethical work of the individual (TP 1[6]). The first part of the passage echoes the 
elaborated version of philosophical naturalism which Spinoza gives in the preface to Part 3 of 
the Ethics. I suggest that this echo, together with the TP’s initial warning against hinging a 
political guide upon an idealized image of the human being, indeed confirms a realist core of 
Spinoza’s normative thought (cf. Steinberg 2018, p. 3). However, this realist core should not 
be confused with an explanation of international law in terms of realpolitik. 

As mentioned, Lauterpacht’s critique of Spinoza’s statements on international law 
hinges on the argument that they deviate from his general explanation of the mechanisms 
of law-making. Referring to the passage that establishes advantage as the glue of interna- 
tional contracts — TTP 16[44]— Lauterpacht indicates that Spinoza conserves the state of 
nature as a governing condition only with respect to the state. The human being, in con- 
trast, begins in the state of nature but is naturally inclined towards formalizing its context 
in a civil state of affairs. This inclination, then, is a substantial difference between the 
human individual and the state according to Lauterpacht’s reading of Spinoza’s meta- 
physics (1927, p. 94). Lauterpacht cites Spinoza to indicate how this substantial difference 
makes for an exception with respect to the otherwise equal treatment of individuals within 
Spinoza’s metaphysical philosophy: 


For as in the state of nature the right of the individual is co-extensive with his power, so also is 
that of the civil government thus established. In fact it could not be otherwise considering that 
what really has taken place is that from the numerous individual units of the state of nature 
one huge unit of the state of nature has been created. “The right of the supreme government is 
nothing else than the right of nature, which is determined not by the power of each individual, 
but by that of the multitude, guided, as it were, by one mind; that is as each individual in the state 
of nature, so likewise the body and mind of the commonwealth have just so much right as they 
have power.” States are now typical specimens of units living in the state of nature. Here, how- 
ever, the analogy stops. (Ibid., p. 93, quotation marks in original, emphasis added) 


Lauterpacht thus confirms that for Spinoza states are just bigger composite units of the 
same metaphysical character that the units constituting individual human beings in the 
state of nature. Recognizing the identical definition of individual human beings and states 
in Spinoza’s metaphysical account, Lauterpacht must therefore conclude that the analogy 
between them comes to an end with the formation of the civil state. As mentioned above, 
the state remains within the state of nature whereas the human being moves away from it 
into a civil order. 

At first sight, Lauterpacht’s conclusion seems sound. It appears to lie within Spinoza’s 
concept of the civil state that human beings have made conscious use of a natural power to 
do what they want precisely in order to give up that very power for the benefit of a common 
power and will. To acknowledge this process in the case of human beings, and not in the 


436 


SPINOZA AND INTERNATIONAL LAW 


case of the state, seems to be nothing but a contradiction of Spinoza’s own metaphysical 
terms. In the light of his commitment to philosophical naturalism, which requires that all 
identical things be treated equal, it makes for a contradiction to not attribute the same power 
to states as attributed to human beings (to leave the state of nature) once it has been con- 
cluded that in the state of nature the two units are identically defined. The question, then, is 
whether Spinoza indeed goes from a an identical definition of the state and the human 
individual to an equivocal explanation of their respective powers when it comes to law. 

In acentral section of his review on Spinoza’s philosophy in relation to international law, 
Lauterpacht points to Spinoza’s account of the “law of reason” as a founding (virtue) theory 
of laws directed towards human wellbeing (Lauterpacht 1927, p. 97). For Lauterpacht, 
Spinoza gives an account of a non-perspectival rationality by which to measure the quality of 
human-made norms and the quality of the state. This account proves, according to 
Lauterpacht, the special metaphysical treatment awarded to the human individual by Spinoza. 
It also allegedly demonstrates how Spinoza missed the opportunity to deduce a conceptual 
foundation of international law from his own metaphysics. Lauterpacht elaborates: 


in dealing with the individual man he [Spinoza] was not content to limit himself to his concep- 
tion of natural right as identical with potentia. There is another law, the law of reason, the 
rational principle of human welfare, which is altogether different from and frequently opposed to 
the right of nature. (Ibid., p. 97 emphasis added) 


Lauterpacht adds force to this argument by stating that “it is this law of reason which is 
the dynamic and truly creative element of Spinoza’s political theory” (Ibid.) and that “all 
this is thrown to the winds when he comes to deal with relations between states” (Ibid.). In 
Spinoza’s treatment of international relations, Lauterpacht sees “jus naturae assert[ing] 
itself unfettered and undisturbed” and “a fatalistic determinism [taking] the place of his 
reliance upon the power of reason” (Ibid.). 

On my understanding, however, what Lauterpacht’s understands as Spinoza’s account 
of the law of reason is far from the authoritative normative virtue theory that he assumes 
it to be, although it indubitably forms part of the Ethics’ objective standard for evaluations 
of human activities and deeds, upon which (as I argued above with reference to Nadler) we 
indeed should hinge our understanding of Spinoza’s political philosophy. The statement, 
however, that “[t]here is another law, the law of reason, the rational principle of human 
welfare, which is altogether different from and frequently opposed to the right of nature” can 
at best be seen as an extreme simplification of the normative impact of the Ethics’ account 
in E4p63-—73 of a perfectly rational human (the free man). Spinoza’s discussion about 
human-made laws in TTP 4 does not at all amount to a recognition of these propositions 
as proof of the existence of two simultaneous, non-identical and possibly opposing, 
definitions of the metaphysical status the concept of law. It is not in terms of substance 
that TTP 4 points to human-made laws as special with respect to the laws of nature. The 
former kind only dictates human actions in so far as human beings hold the mistaken view 
that their causal power can disrupt and alter the power of nature. As already mentioned, 
it is a human incapability to perceive the true nature of nature’s laws that makes us sus- 
tain the illusion that we can dictate our own conduct (TTP 4[3-—4] |G III/58/7). Now, 
would we do so in lines with what Spinoza, in Part 4 of the Ethics, stipulates are the pre- 
scripts for closing in on a way of living that is objectively best for us — to live as the perfectly 
free and rational being — this would imply an objectively good but no less illusionary use of 
the term law. As such, Spinoza’s account of the free man (his virtue ethics) may perhaps, 


437 


MOA DE LUCIA DAHLBECK 


as has been suggested by some commentators, serve as a tool for evaluating how well laws 
manage to guide their subjects toward their highest good, but it does not alter these laws’ 
metaphysical quality and it is far from a transcendental measurement of their legality (cf. 
Dahlbeck 2017, p. 20; Kisner 2011; Steinberg 2014, p. 182). 

Apart from saving Spinoza’s normative theory from a devastating inconsistency, the 
reading I suggest has another radical effect: it explains the state from a natural and a con- 
structivist perspective simultaneously. It is our human naturally erroneous self-perception 
that allows us to represent our individual powers in the state of nature as rights which we 
can hand over to a new entity: the civil state (see TTP 4[5—6]). This casts an entirely new 
light on the concept of the state: Spinoza’s civil state is a natural entity in so far as it resides 
within the single order of nature, and, it is a contractual construction in so far as its 
existence depends on the human conviction of a special causal power — the free will — to 
give up our natural rights/powers to someone else. 


4. Concluding Remarks: Towards a Spinozistic Foundation 
of International Law 


Almost as if anticipating Lauterpacht’s skepticism against his political philosophy as a 
source of international law, Spinoza rhetorically asks in TP 4: “is the supreme power bound 
by laws? and so can it sin?” (4 [4]). He answers his own question as follows: 


[s]ince the words “law” and “sin” customarily apply, not only to the Laws of the Commonwealth, 
but also to the common rules of all natural things, and especially to the common rules of 
reason, we can’t say, without qualification, that the Commonwealth isn’t bound by any laws, 
or can’t sin. For if a Commonwealth weren't bound by any laws or rules, without which the 
Commonwealth would not be a Commonwealth, then we’d have to think of it, not as a natural 
thing, but as a fantasy. (Ibid., G I/292/25—293, last emphasis added) 


To my mind, the last sentence of this passage reveals not only the key for understanding 
Spinoza’s conception of international law, but also the complexity with which Spinoza man- 
ages to combine normative thought — with its necessary portion of teleology — and a strict 
commitment to philosophical naturalism — denying any kind of teleological direction in the 
world. Spinoza indicates in this passage that the idea of the state as a metaphysically natural 
individual depends upon a conception of international law qua human-made law, notwith- 
standing the inadequacy of such a conception. The reason for the importance of maintain- 
ing this conceptual structure can be found, I believe, in Spinoza’s account of human nature. 
Human beings need the concept of the state as a natural continuation of their own individ- 
uality in order to be able to formulate adequate ideas about their own natures. 

As I understand it, Spinoza’s political philosophy is dedicated to explaining the different 
variables of the conceptual framework that is necessary for upholding and motivating the 
concept of the state as a natural individual. This is evidenced by for instance TP 4[15] which 
stipulates that the human natural right to do what one can, is conceivable only once it is no 
longer realizable; that is, once its external condition (the order of nature) is nullified and 
replaced by the idea of a civil state. In the state of nature, the human natural right “consists 
more in opinion than in fact” (TP 4[5]). In fact, this right cannot be conceived “except where 
men have common rights and are jointly able to claim for themselves lands that they can 
inhabit and cultivate, are able to protect themselves, fend off any force and live according to 


438 


SPINOZA AND INTERNATIONAL LAW 


the common opinion of all” (G III/12-18). In other words, would we not think of ourselves as 
giving up our natural rights to the state — turning from natural individuals into legal subjects — 
then, those natural rights would never transcend the level of personal, and metaphysically 
insignificant, opinion. This is why the state is essential, according to Spinoza, for a successful 
ethical striving. In order for us to maintain the idea of the state that we depend upon in order 
to conceive adequately of our own nature, then, we must also regard the state as taking over 
our natural rights to be governed by nature’s stipulations of our advantages, fears, and neces- 
sities. To this end Spinoza’s account of international relations appears to be perfectly consis- 
tent both with his political and ethical philosophy. What is more, on this reading, Spinoza’s 
account of international relations becomes a necessary component for understanding the 
integrated relationship between his philosophy’s metaphysical, ethical, and political aspects. 


References 


Curley, E.M. (1985 and 2016). The Collected Works of Spinoza, vols I and II. Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press. 

Dahlbeck, J. (2017). Spinoza and Education: Freedom, Understanding and Empowerment. Abingdon: 
Routledge. 

Gtineysu, G. (2017). Spinoza and international law: bleak take on self-help or a strong belief in 
humanity? Kaygi: Uludag University Faculty of Arts and Sciences Journal of Philosophy 28: 
174-180. 

Kisner, M.J. (2011). Spinoza on Human Freedom: Reason, Autonomy and the Good Life. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 

Koskenniemi, M. (2005). From Apology to Utopia: The Structure of International Legal Argument. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Lauterpacht, H. (1927). Spinoza and international law. British Yearbook of International Law 8 (89): 
89-107. 

LeBuffe, M. (2017). Spinoza on Reason. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Melamed, Y.Y. (2014). Spinoza’s respublica divina: the rise and fall, virtues and vices of the Hebrew 

republic (chapters 17-18). In: Spinoza: Theologish-Politischer Traktat (ed. O. Hoffe), 195-210. 

Berlin: De Gruyter. 

Melamed, Y.Y. (2017). The causes of our belief in free will: Spinoza on necessary, “innate,” yet false 

cognition. In: Spinoza’s Ethics: A Critical Guide (ed. Y.Y. Melamed), 121-141. Cambridge: Cambridge 

University Press. 

Melamed, Y.Y. and Rosenthal M.A. (eds.) (2010). Spinoza’s “Theological-Political Treatise”: A Critical 

Guide. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Nadler, S. (2006). Spinoza’s Ethics: An Introduction. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Shaw, M.N. (2003). International Law (5th edn). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Steinberg, J. (2008). Spinoza on being sui iuris and the republican concept of liberty. History of 
European Ideas 34: 239-249. 

Steinberg, J. (2009). Spinoza on civil liberation. Journal of the History of Philosophy 47 (1): 35-58. 

Steinberg, J. (2014). Following a recta ratio vivendi: the practical utility of Spinoza’s dictates of reason. 
In: Essays on Spinoza’s Ethical Theory (ed. M.J. Kisner and A. Youpa), 178-196. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press. 

Steinberg, J. (2018). Spinoza’s Political Psychology: The Taming of Fortune and Fear. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 

Tucker, E. (2015). Spinoza’s social sage: emotion and the power of reason in Spinoza’s social theory. 
Revista Conatus 9 (17): 23-41. 

Walther, M. (2003). Natural law, civil law, and international law in Spinoza. Cardozo Law Review 25: 
657-665. 


439 


41 


The Intellectual Love of God 
CLARE CARLISLE 


In Chapter 4 of the Theologico-Political Treatise, titled ‘On Divine Law,’ Spinoza asserts that 
the highest human good is “to know God and to love him.” Attaining this good is, he 
explains, our “true liberty”: 


A man is more perfect in proportion to the nature and perfection of the thing which he loves 
before all others. Therefore, the man who is necessarily the most perfect and who participates 
more in supreme blessedness is the one who loves above all else the intellectual knowledge of 
God, the most perfect being, and takes the greatest pleasure in this knowledge. Our supreme 
good, then, and our blessedness come back to this: the knowledge and love of God. 

... Since, then, the love of God is man’s highest happiness and blessedness, and the ultimate 
end [finis ultimus| and object of all human actions, the only one who follows the divine law is 
the one who devotes himself to loving God [qui Deum amare curat], not from fear of punishment, 
nor from love of another thing, such as pleasures or reputation, etc., but only because he knows 
[that] the knowledge and love of God is the highest good. .. This good consists only in contem- 
plation and in a pure mind [in sola speculation et pura mente consistit]. (CW II, 128-9 / II 60-61) 


In the Ethics Spinoza offers a fuller and more philosophical account of this religious ideal, 
bringing to full maturity a view he had expressed in his earliest works. The short passages 
on Amor Dei intellectualis (the intellectual love of God) late in Part 5 mark the culmination 
of Spinoza’s contemplation of the “highest good” — and condensed within these passages 
are several elements of the philosophy elucidated elsewhere in the Ethics. 

Spinoza’s doctrine of divine love is summarized by the claim that “our salvation, or 
blessedness, or freedom, consists . . . in a constant and eternal love of God, or [sive] in God’s 
love for men” (E5p36s: CW I 612 / II 303). His phrasing here indicates that Amor Dei intel- 
lectualis involves both our love for God, and God’s love for us. This suggestion of reciprocity 
could be misleading, had he not already taken pains to correct an anthropomorphic image 
of divine love. “Strictly speaking God loves no one and hates no one,” he insisted a few 
propositions earlier (E5p17c: CW I 604 / II 291). Love and hate are species of, respectively, 
joy and sadness, defined as transitions to greater or lesser perfection — and God, being 
immutable, is “without passions, and is not affected by any affect of Joy or Sadness” 


A Companion to Spinoza, First Edition. Edited by Yitzhak Y. Melamed. 
© 2021 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2021 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd. 


440 


THE INTELLECTUAL LOVE OF GOD 


(E5p17: CW I 604 / II 291). Therefore, “he who loves God cannot strive that God should 
love him in return” (E5p19: CWI 604 / II 292). 

Spinoza offers these remarks just before the turning-point of Part 5, where he declares 
that “I have completed everything that concerns this present life” (E5p20s: CW I 606 / II 
294). This transition signals a shift in perspective, and his account of Amor Dei intellectualis 
begins on the far side of this shift. The scholium to E5p36 suggests that it is appropriate to 
speak of a mutual love-relationship between God and men only if this is conceived not in 
terms of reciprocity, but as a kind of sharing. Properly understood, Amor Deiis the affective, 
experiential expression of the fullest participation in God’s nature, which involves a share 
in God’s eternity. In linking our love for God to God’s love for us with the word sive, the 
inclusive Latin ‘or,’ Spinoza indicates that this is one love, conceived in two different ways: 
“a constant and eternal love of God, or [sive] ... God’s love for men.” 

Spinoza held this distinctive view of divine love at least since the early 1660s, when he 
wrote his Short Treatise on God, Man and His Well-Being. In that first, unfinished attempt to 
elaborate the philosophy he would develop more fully in the Ethics, he argued that if God 
loved us in return for our devotion, this would “produce a great mutability in God. Where 
previously God had neither loved nor hated, he would now begin to love and to hate, and 
would be caused to do this by something that would be outside him” (CW I 142 /1 104). 
And in the Cogitata Metaphysica appended to his 1663 guide to Descartes’s Principles of 
Philosophy, Spinoza contended that “God is improperly said to hate [some] things, and 
love others. . . God does not love things in the way in which ordinary people persuade 
themselves he does” (CW 1 330 /1 264). This remark suggests that while God does not love 
anthropomorphically, there may be a way or a sense in which God does “love things.” While 
Spinoza thought it incoherent to expect God to love in familiar human ways — as if God 
were, like us, mutable and subject to external causes — he did not understand God to be 
remote and abstract. On the contrary, the Short Treatise invokes the ontological principle of 
being-in-God (Carlisle 2021) to explain that the intimacy between God and human beings 
is too close to admit a conventional notion of love: 


When we say, however, that God does not love man, that must not be understood as if he left 
man, as it were, to proceed on his own; rather, that because man, together with all there is, is so 
in God, and God so consists of all of these, there cannot be in him any real love toward something 
else, since everything consists in one unique thing which is God himself. (CW I 142 /1 104) 


In the Ethics Spinoza develops these ideas, not only repeating his critique of anthropomor- 
phic images of divine love, but also offering a positive account of Amor Dei intellectualis that 
encompasses, in a single affect, both our love for God and God’s love for us. This love, he 
argues, belongs to “the greatest human perfection”; it is “the greatest joy” (E5p27d: CW I 
609 / II 297) and “the greatest satisfaction of mind [Mentis acquiescentia] there can be” 
(E5p32d: CWI 611 /IL 300). 

By the time Spinoza introduces Amor Dei intellectualis in Ethics Part 5, he has already 
explicated its three components: God, knowledge (for ‘intellectualis’ signifies a certain kind of 
knowing or understanding), and love. We must consider each of these components in order 
to understand the nature of divine love, and how human beings may come to share in it. 

Part 1 of the Ethics argues that God is neither an anthropomorphic, personal deity, nor 
a remote abstraction. God is the eternal, self-causing, unique substance; God is absolutely 
infinite, expressing infinite power in infinitely many ways (i.e. through infinite attributes); 
God is reducible to nothing else, not even the whole universe. This is the God in which all 


44] 


CLARE CARLISLE 


things exist, the source of all beings — “not only the cause of things’ beginning to exist, but 
also of their persevering in existing .. . God is the cause of the being of things” (El p24c: 
CW1431/II 67). From Part 2 onward, Spinoza’s focus narrows to human beings, and to 
the two divine attributes — thinking and extension — through which we exist and know 
everything we conceive and encounter, including ourselves. Although our being-in-God is 
an ontological fact which we share with all things, “participation in the divine nature” 
becomes a normative ethical principle within human life: “the greater the joy with which 
we are affected, the greater the perfection to which we pass, that is, the more we participate 
in [the] divine nature [de natura divina participare]” (E4p45s: CW I 572 / II 244; see 
Carlisle 2021). In Part 5, Spinoza asserts that human freedom, or blessedness, consists in 
living according to the panentheist principle of being-in-God. This means expressing the 
truth of our ontological constitution, as individual beings-in-God, by actively knowing it 
and resting at peace in it. 

We may clarify the nature of this knowing — the second component of Amor Dei intel- 
lectualis — by attending to Spinoza’s distinction, in Part 2 of the Ethics, between three kinds 
of cognition. The first is cognition arising from “opinion or imagination”; the second is 
reason (ratio); and the third is intuitive knowing (scientia intuitiva). The first kind of cogni- 
tion is inadequate, or false, and the second and third kinds are adequate, or true. Reason, 
the second kind of cognition, grasps the common properties of things, tracing logical con- 
nections between ideas and causal connections between bodies. Intuition, the third kind of 
cognition, involves insight into being-in-God: it conceives things truly “under a species of 
eternity,” for it is a direct, immediate comprehension of the way singular things are 
“contained in God and .. . follow from the necessity of the divine nature” (E5p29s: CW I 
610/II 298-9). Through scientia intuitiva, we know singular things — including ourselves, 
and other human beings — in their being-in-God. “Insofar as our mind knows itself and the 
body under a species of eternity,” explains Spinoza, “it necessarily has knowledge of God 
and knows that it is in God” (E5p30: CW I 610 / II 299; see Yovel 1990; Melamed 201 3b; 
Renz 2018, pp. 249-255). 

Love, the third component of Amor Dei intellectualis, is defined in Part 3 of the Ethics as 
joy, accompanied by the idea of the cause of that joy. Joy is pure affect, since it is simply the 
feeling of an increase in power, but love always has a cognitive element since it involves the 
idea of a cause. Because Spinoza understands love to be an inherently cognitive affect, his 
threefold account of cognition generates a threefold taxonomy of love. A feeling of joy may 
be incorrectly attributed to a cause that is merely imagined (either because the object itself 
is imaginary, or because its causal link to the affect is imaginary); it may be correctly attrib- 
uted to a cause that is rationally understood; or it may be correctly attributed to a cause 
that is intuitively known. Amor Dei intellectualis belongs to this third category: it arises from 
scientia intuitiva, and it consists in “Joy, accompanied by the idea of God as its cause” 
(E5p32c: CWI 611/IL 300). 

Spinoza’s definition of love admits a further important distinction: between external and 
internal objects of love. We love things, or animals, or people, when we know (or imagine) 
them to cause our joy, and we love ourselves when we know (or imagine) our own power 
and actions to be the cause of our joy. Amor Dei intellectualis is a love of God considered less 
as an external cause than as an internal or immanent cause (see KV II 26: CW1148/1110; 
Elp18d: CWI 428 / II 64; Melamed 201 3a, pp. 61-66). Like the Theologico-Political Treatise, 
the Ethics advances a robust critique of the doctrine of divine love that imagines God as a 
heteronomous cause outside the world, external to and indeed far beyond each individual. 
According to this anthropomorphic theology, the relational dynamic between ourselves 


442 


THE INTELLECTUAL LOVE OF GOD 


and God is often imagined to be like that between an uncomprehending child, who is anx- 
ious for approval and fearful of punishment, and her remote, forbidding, inscrutable father. 
In place of this superstitious doctrine, which Spinoza consigns to the imagination — the 
“first kind” of cognition that yields error and confusion — he outlines an account of true 
blessedness in which love for God entails the recognition that we are in God, and that God’s 
power is inseparable from our own power of acting and existing. Just as Spinoza’s God does 
not intervene in nature, so God does not compete with or disrupt human agency (see 
Carlisle 2021). On the contrary, God facilitates all our activity: when we express ourselves, 
we express something divine — and when we understand this and do not try to resist it, our 
power is enhanced. This means recognizing our ontological dependence, which involves 
overcoming misguided views of ourselves as substances, and as possessing free will. 

As a form of love related to an internal cause, Spinoza’s conception of Amor Dei intel- 
lectualis emerges from his account of self-love, defined as “joy arising from considering 
ourselves” (E3p55s: CW1525 /II 182-3), or “joy accompanied by the idea of an internal 
cause” (E3p30s: CW 511 / TI 163). Self-love is a species of Amor, yet named as a distinct 
affect, “philautia or acquiescentia in se ipso” (E3p55s: CWI 525/11 182-183). Acquiescentia 
in se ipso, a term borrowed from Henri Desmarets’s Latin translation of Descartes’s Passions 
of the Soul, has been translated into English as “self-esteem,” “self-love,” “self-satisfaction,” 
or “self-contentment”; while none of these translations are entirely adequate, George 
Eliot’s “self-contentment” at least suggests the quality of peace and rest denoted by the 
Latin quies, which forms the root of acquiescentia (see Rutherford 1999, pp. 451-452; 
Carlisle 2017, pp. 210-211). 

Like any kind of love (or hate), acquiescentia in se ipso is an inherently cognitive affect, 
since it involves the idea of its cause, and thus it admits Spinoza’s distinction between three 
kinds of cognition. Acquiescentia in se ipso always rests on a certain kind of self-under- 
standing: either a flawed, deluded, inadequate self-image based on imagination or opinion 
(or some combination of these two), or adequate self-understanding based on reason, or 
adequate self-understanding arising from intuitive knowledge (see Carlisle 2017). 

These three varieties of acquiescentia in se ipso differ considerably in their phenomeno- 
logical manifestations, their feeling-quality. Spinoza’s general account of the affects in 
Part 3 of the Ethics emphasizes their instability and fluctuation, which we experience as an 
anxiety that inhabits joy as well as sadness, love as well as hate, hope as well as fear. By 
contrast, the acquiescentia in se ipso that arises from an adequate, rational self-under- 
standing is a stable, calm, and contented joy. Unlike the ‘vain’ acquiescentia based on the 
confusions of imagination and opinion, true acquiescentia arising from adequate knowledge 
has the experiential quality of stillness implied by the Latin quies. However, the acquiescen- 
tia belonging to scientia intuitiva brings a deeper peace. 

Spinoza introduces his concept of Amor Dei intellectualis in the corollary to a proposition 
concerning this “third kind” of acquiescentia: 


9 66 


E5p32: Whatever we understand by the third kind of knowledge we take pleasure in [eo delec- 
tamur], and our pleasure is accompanied by the idea of God as cause. 

Dem.: From this kind of knowledge there arises the greatest satisfaction of Mind [Mentis 
acquiescentia] there can be (by P27), that is (by Def. Aff. XXV [i.e. Spinoza’s definition of acqui- 
escentia in se ipso]), Joy; this Joy is accompanied by the idea of oneself, and consequently (by 
P30) it is also accompanied by the idea of God, as its cause, q.e.d. 

Cor.: From the third kind of knowledge there necessarily arises an intellectual love of God. 
For from this kind of knowledge there arises (by P32) joy, accompanied by the idea of God as 
its cause, that is (by Def. Aff. VI [i.e. Spinoza’s definition of love]), love of God, not insofar as we 


443 


CLARE CARLISLE 


imagine him as present (by P29), but insofar as we understand God to be eternal. And this is 
what I call intellectual love of God. (CWI 611 /TII 300) 


As Spinoza indicates here, the crucial link in his reasoning from scientia intuitiva to Amor 
Dei intellectualis is E5p30. This proposition states that “insofar as our mind knows itself 
and the body under a species of eternity, it necessarily has knowledge of God, and knows 
that it is in God” (CW 1 610 / II 299). This form of knowing not only understands, in a 
rational way, the principle of being-in-God — the general fact that “whatever is, is in 
God” — but also has an immediate insight into singular things as “contained in God” 
(E5p29s: CWI 610/ II 298). More precisely, in scientia intuitiva a person knows herself 
to be in God: she has an intuitive grasp of her own being-in-God. The highest kind of 
self-knowledge includes an intimate knowledge of God, and the highest kind of self- 
love includes love of God. 

Spinoza thus introduces his concept of Amor Dei intellectualis by suggesting that, in the 
third kind of knowing, acquiescentia in se ipso becomes indistinguishable from love of God. In 
Part 3, where the affects are considered primarily as they arise from the first kind of cogni- 
tion, as confused and mutable passions, acquiescentia and amor are distinguishable insofar 
as acquiescentia in se ipso is a joy accompanied by the idea of an internal cause (i.e. the idea 
of oneself), while amor is a joy accompanied by the idea of an external cause (i.e. the idea of 
another). However, the demonstration of E5p32 suggests that in scientia intuitiva this dis- 
tinction between internal and external causes slips away. In place of two distinct ideas — an 
idea of oneself, and an idea of God — intuitive knowing offers a single insight into oneself as 
“in” God. To put it another way, one knows God’s nature as containing and expressing this 
singular existing being. This insight is an immediate awareness of being-in-God. 

So although the intellectual love of God can be distinguished conceptually from acquies- 
centia of the third kind, phenomenologically they are inseparable. Both are a joy arising 
from the idea of one’s being-in-God, or, in other words, a joyful awareness of being-in-God. 
And Spinoza’s text enacts the ethical movement it describes: the affects of acquiescentia and 
love that are clearly distinct in Part 3 converge to a single point in Part 5, when they are 
related to the third kind of cognition. Here the idea of external causation becomes absorbed 
or dissolved into the singular truth of being-in-God, so that acquiescentia of the third kind 
and Amor Dei intellectualis are disclosed as two aspects of the same affect. 

As he continues his discussion of Amor Dei, Spinoza pushes this point further, first by 
attributing the affect of self-love to God, and then by assimilating this divine self-love to 
human self-love. He asserts that “God loves himself with an infinite intellectual love” 
(E5p35: CWI 612/II 302), before arguing that “The mind’s intellectual love of God is the 
very love of God by which God loves himself... From this it follows that insofar as God loves 
himself, he loves men, and consequently that God’s love of men and the mind’s intellectual 
love of God are one and the same” (E5p36: CW I 612 / II 302). Reaching for a way to 
express this equivalence, Spinoza describes Amor Dei intellectualis as “an action by which 
the mind contemplates itself, with the accompanying idea of God as its cause, that is, an 
action by which God, insofar as he can be explained through the human mind, contem- 
plates himself” (E5p36d: CW I 612 / II 302). He concludes that “Whether this love is 
related to God or to the mind, it can rightly be called satisfaction of mind [animi acquiescen- 
tia]” (E5p36s: CW 1612 / ID 303). 

In this proposition, which marks the culmination of his discussion of Amor Dei intellec- 
tualis, Spinoza invokes the spiritual possibility of sharing in God’s being and nature, which 
is implicit within any participatory theology. However, at the same time he is careful to 


444 


THE INTELLECTUAL LOVE OF GOD 


preserve the asymmetry between God and finite individuals, which follows from the fact 
that God is transcendent as well as immanent, ontologically different from all finite things 
as well as intimately present to them (see Carlisle 2021). God’s self-love is identical to the 
individual’s intellectual love of God “not insofar as [God] is infinite, but insofar as God can 
be explained by the human mind’s essence, considered under a species of eternity; that is, 
the mind’s intellectual love of God is part of the infinite love by which God loves himself” 
(E5p36: CWI 612 /TI 302). In the scholium to this proposition Spinoza moves from assert- 
ing the equivalence of our love for God and God’s love for us, to emphasizing the dependence 
of human beings on God. Again, this dependence indicates the ontological asymmetry at 
the heart of Spinoza’s theology. “Because the essence of our mind consists only in 
knowledge, of which God is the beginning and foundation” — and here Spinoza makes his 
eighteenth and final reference to E1p15, “Whatever is, is in God” — “it is clear to us how our 
mind, with respect both to essence and existence, follows from the divine nature, and con- 
tinually depends on God” (E5p36s: CW I 612-13 / II 303). 


* 


In the Ethics Spinoza defines religion as “whatever we desire and do of which we are the 
cause insofar as. ..we know God” (E4p37s1: CWI 565 /II 236). He could have added affec- 
tivity to this definition — “whatever we desire and do and feel insofar as we know God” — 
since the affects are central to his discussion of religion. Spinoza thought that both the 
Dutch Reformed Church and the Roman Catholic Church promoted a superstitious popular 
religion characterized by passive affects, many of them species of sadness (the feeling of 
diminishing power), bound up with confused ideas about God and human beings. To these 
superstitious feelings he opposes the active affects of joy and peace arising from a true 
understanding of our participation in God’s nature. He shows how our affects vary depend- 
ing on the kind of cognition, and particularly the kind of self-understanding, in which 
they are grounded. His account of acquiescentia in se ipso, for example, identifies a single 
affect of self-love that encompasses the worst vices and the highest virtues, from grotesque, 
destructive pride to beatific divine love (see Carlisle 2017). 

This is why knowledge of God — which is excluded from the first kind of cognition, and 
belongs only to ratio and scientia intuitiva— provides the criterion for distinguishing true reli- 
gion from superstition. Yet Spinoza criticized superstitious religion not simply because it 
was grounded on ignorance, but also for the practical reasons that it diminished the power 
of those who believed and practiced it, disrupted order, and prevented peace. He witnessed 
directly how the seventeenth-century churches fueled anxiety, conflict, and violence. 
Affects based on a confused understanding perpetuate instability; the opinions of “the mul- 
titude” are always “fickle and inconstant” (E4p58s: CW I 578 / II 253). In a specifically 
religious context, the passions of hope and fear — which were encouraged by Christian doc- 
trines of the afterlife, and particularly by the Calvinist teaching that the inscrutable will of 
God predestines each person to either eternal happiness or eternal damnation — are inher- 
ently “inconstant” and destabilizing. These fluctuating affects, including the self-love that is 
based on a confused self-image, make people aggressively competitive and “very trouble- 
some to one another” (E3p55s: CWI 525 /II 183). Spinoza perceived that self-aggrandize- 
ment and self-diminishment were two manifestations of the same underlying condition. 

Love has a particularly important place within Spinoza’s account of the affects, and also, 
therefore, within his religion. Augustine taught that misdirected love — which pursues finite 
things instead of God — is the deepest human error, and likewise Spinoza argued that loving 
the wrong things, or loving things in the wrong way, is a particularly damaging affective state. 


445 


CLARE CARLISLE 


Conversely, a love that is constant and grounded in truth secures eternal happiness, peace, 
liberation. Before he turns to consider eternal life in the final 22 propositions of the Ethics, 
Spinoza concludes his analysis of “everything that concerns this present life” by noting that 


sickness of the mind and misfortunes take their origin especially from too much love toward a 
thing that is liable to many variations and which we can never fully possess. For no one is dis- 
turbed or anxious concerning anything unless he loves it, nor do wrongs, suspicions, and 
enmities arise except from love for a thing which no one can really fully possess. (E5p20s: CW 
1606 / II 293-294) 


By contrast, “clear and distinct knowledge — and especially that third kind of knowledge, 
whose foundation is the knowledge of God itself” transforms the mind by producing “a 
love toward a thing immutable and eternal” (E5p20s: CW I 606 / II 294). Here Spinoza 
references propositions indicating that this love is a fusion of love of God and acquiescentia 
in se ipso — and he goes on to define this fusion as Amor Dei intellectualis. 

The enlightened love in which, through the third kind of knowledge, human self-love 
becomes inseparable from divine self-love, is nothing like the vacillating, egotistical passion 
that Spinoza criticizes so forcefully in the Ethics. Someone who attains scientia intuitiva 
knows that her own power is not in competition with the power of others, nor with the 
power of God: she understands herself and others as beings-in-God, and thus as channels 
for the expression of divine power. Indeed, this understanding gives rise to a certain kind of 
humility. Spinoza urges his readers to a recognition of finitude and dependence very differ- 
ent from the species of sadness that he identifies as humilitas, since it is, in fact, empower- 
ing: “if we suppose that [a] man conceives his lack of power because he understands 
something more powerful than himself, by the knowledge of which he determines his own 
power of acting, then we conceive nothing but that the man understands himself distinctly 
or [sive] that his power of acting is aided” (E4p53d: CWI 575-6 / II 249). 

Spinoza accentuates the empowering character of true religion within his discussion of 
Amor Dei intellectualis. Having argued that this divine love constitutes our “salvation, or bless- 
edness, or freedom,” and having emphasized that the mind, like all things, depends on God, he 
explains that “I thought this worth the trouble of noting here, in order to show how much the 
knowledge of singular things I have called intuitive, or knowledge of the third kind, can 
accomplish, and how much more powerful it is than the universal knowledge I have called 
knowledge of the second kind” (E5p36s: CW I 613 / II 303). This reflection on the difference 
between ratio and scientia intuitiva is important in understanding Spinozistic religion, not least 
because it indicates that it really is a religion — a way of life involving ethical conduct, inward 
virtue, and the cultivation of transformative affects — and not simply a philosophical theory. 

Though true understanding and active, joyful affects may arise from ratio, the joy and 
peace belonging to scientia intuitiva are deeper and longer-lasting, even eternal. The “wise 
person [Sapiens],” who grasps the being-in-God of all things, “is hardly troubled in spirit; 
but being, by a certain eternal necessity, conscious of himself, and of God, and of things, he 
never ceases to be, but always possesses true peace of mind [vera animi acquiescentia]” 
(E5p42s: CW I 617 / II 308). It is clear, writes Spinoza, “how much [this] wise person is 
capable of, and how much more powerful he is than one who is ignorant” (E5p42s: CW I 
616/11 308). He also indicates that this Sapiens is more empowered than the merely rational 
person. Though in Part 1 of the Ethics he demonstrated “legitimately and beyond all chance 
of doubt” that “all things (and consequently the human mind also) depend on God both for 
their essence and their existence,” he admits that this rational demonstration “still does not 


446 


THE INTELLECTUAL LOVE OF GOD 


affect the mind as much as when this is inferred from the very essence of any singular thing 
[i.e. known by intuition] which we say depends on God” (E5p36s: CW I 613 / II 303). The 
“power” of the third kind of knowledge consists in the way it produces affects — and these 
particular affects are themselves especially empowering. 

Scientia intuitiva “begets a Love toward a thing immutable and eternal, which we really 
fully possess, and which therefore cannot be tainted by any of the vices which are in ordi- 
nary Love, but can always be greater and greater, and occupy the greatest part of the Mind, 
and affect it extensively” (E5p20s: CW I 606 / II 294; see Matheron 1969, pp. 583-602). 
Here Spinoza refers the reader back to E2p45 for an explanation of how we “really fully 
possess” the eternal and immutable “thing” that becomes the object of our love. This prop- 
osition concerns the dependence of singular things on God, and their being-in-God: 


E2p45: Each idea of each body, or of each singular thing which actually exists, necessarily 
involves an eternal and infinite essence of God. 

Schol. By existence I do not here understand duration, i.e. existence insofar as it is con- 
ceived abstractly, and as a certain species of quantity. For I am speaking of the very nature of 
existence, which is attributed to singular things because infinitely many things follow from the 
eternal necessity of God’s nature in infinitely many modes. I am speaking, I say, of the very 
existence of singular things insofar as they are in God. (E2p45: CWI 481-2 / II 127) 


The idea of any singular thing “must involve an eternal and infinite essence of God” 
(E2p45d: CW1482/II 127). The distinction drawn in E5p20s between love of God and the 
“ordinary love” of transient things, which causes “anxiety” and “injury,” does not imply 
that religious love excludes love for finite beings. On the contrary: we love others most 
purely, actively and productively when we understand and respect them in their eternal 
aspect, “insofar as they are in God.” 

Since Amor Dei intellectualis is a species of self-love — the merging of human and divine 
self-love — it might seem to be a solitary experience of mystical union that excludes other 
people. Yet here again Spinoza’s philosophy, while it refutes some of the dichotomies of 
post-Reformation theology, has affinities with an older Christian tradition. His account 
of religious love has a deeply communal dimension, and he reiterates Thomas Aquinas’s 
view that self-love is the basis of love for other people, just as it can provide a starting- 
point for love of God (see Gallagher 1999). The acquiescentia in se ipso arising from true 
knowledge of the self’s being-in-God not only overcomes the antagonistic, competitive, 
anti-social tendencies of affects based on the first kind of cognition, but also, more posi- 
tively, opens up a new way of relating to others in their being-in-God. As Spinoza asserts 
in Elp15, being-in-God is something we share with all beings; and, as he suggests in the 
scholium to E4p45, we share it most fully with human beings whose understanding 
and ethical conduct align with and express (or, in other words, obey) their ontological 
constitution. The more truly we understand ourselves and others, the less competitive and 
the more cooperative we become. “The greatest good of those who seek virtue is common 
to all, and can be enjoyed by all equally,” explains Spinoza (E4p36: CW I 564 / II 234). 
Moreover “the good which everyone who seeks virtue wants for himself, he also desires 
for other men; and this desire is greater as his knowledge of God is greater” (E4p37: CW 
1564-5 /II 235). 

Amplifying this moral generosity further — and echoing Jesus’ exhortation to “Love your 
enemies, do good to those who hate you” (Luke 6:27) — Spinoza argues that “He who lives 
according to the guidance of reason strives as far as he can to compensate the hatred, anger, 


447 


CLARE CARLISLE 


contempt, etc. of others towards him with love or generosity” (E4p46: CW 1572 /II 245). 
These ethical teachings culminate in the last proposition of Part 4, and its scholium: 


E4p73. A man who is guided by reason is more free in a society, where he lives according to a 
common decree, than in solitude, where he complies only with himself. 


Schol. These and similar things which we have shown concerning the true freedom of man 
are related to strength of character [ad fortitudinem], i.e. (by E3p59s) to tenacity and gener- 
osity [ad animositatem, et generositatem]. I do not consider it worthwhile to demonstrate sepa- 
rately here all the properties of strength of character, much less to show that a man strong in 
character [vir fortis] hates no one, is angry with no one, envies no one, is indignant with no 
one, scorns no one, and is not at all proud. For these and all things which relate to true life and 
religion, are easily proven from E4p37 and p46, viz. that hatred is to be conquered by return- 
ing love, and that everyone who is led by reason desires for others also the good which he 
wants for himself. (CW 1587 / II 265) 


When this communitarian ethic is understood in light of Spinoza’s principle of being-in- 
God, it suggests a religious ethic of loving both oneself and others as “in God.” On this 
point Spinoza agreed with Augustine, who taught that joyful communion with others is 
“the supreme reward — that we may thoroughly enjoy [God] and that all of us who enjoy 
him may enjoy one another in him” (Augustine 1995, p. 45). 


References 


Augustine (1995). De Doctrina Christiana. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Carlisle, C. (2017). Spinoza’s Acquiescentia. Journal of the History of Philosophy 55 (2): 209-236. 

Carlisle, C. (2021). Spinoza’s Religion. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 

Gallagher, D.M. (1999). Thomas Aquinas on self-love as the basis for love of others. Acta Philosophica 
8: 23-44. 

Matheron, A. (1969). Individualité et relations interhumaines chez Spinoza. Paris: Editions de Minuit. 

Melamed, Y.Y. (2013a). Spinoza’s Metaphysics: Substance and Thought. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press. 

Melamed, Y.Y. (2013b). Mapping the Labyrinth of Spinoza’s Scientia Intuitiva. In: Ubergdnge— diskursiv 
oder intuitiv? Essays zu Eckart Forsters “Die 25 Jahre der Philosophie” (ed. J. Haag and M. Wilds), 
99-116. Frankfurt: Klostermann. 

Melamed, Y.Y. (2019). The enigma of Spinoza’s Amor Dei Intellectualis. In: Freedom, Action and 
Motivation in Spinoza’s Ethics (ed. N. Naaman-Zaudrer and N. Naaman), 222-238. London: 
Routledge. 

Renz, U. (2018). The Explainability of Experience. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Rutherford, D. (1999). Salvation as a state of mind: the place of acquiescentia in Spinoza’s Ethics. 
British Journal for the History of Philosophy 7 (3): 447-473. 

Spinoza, B. (1925). Spinoza Opera (vols I-IV) (ed. C. Gebhardt). Heidelberg: Carl Winters Universiteets. 

Spinoza, B. (1980). The Collected Works of Spinoza, vol. I (ed. E.M. Curley). Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press. 

Spinoza, B. (2016). The Collected Works of Spinoza, vol. II (ed. E.M. Curley). Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press. 

Yovel, Y. (1990). The third kind of knowledge as alternative salvation. In: Spinoza: Issues and 
Directions. The Proceedings of the Chicago Spinoza Conference (ed. E. Curley and P.-F. Moreau), 
157-175. Leiden: Brill. 


448 


42 


Spinoza and Scripture 


DAN ARBIB 


1. The Paradox of a Work Saturated with Scriptural References 


References to Scripture are not lacking in Spinoza’s work, from the Short Treatise on God, Man, 
and His Well-Being (I, 3, 1/36; I, 6, 1/43; II, 24, I/106), his Cogitata metaphysica (I, 6, 1/247; I, 
4/1 256: IL, 6, 1/260; I, 8, 1/264—265; II, 9, 1/266), up to Ethics (IV, prop. 17sc., 1/221; IV, 
prop. 68; sc., 1/261; probably also V, prop. 36, sc., I[/303) and the Political Treatise (VIL, 
III/307), via his Correspondence (letter 75 to Oldenburg, letters 19 and 21 to Blijenberg, 
letters 76 to Burgh). Obviously, this very keen interest culminates in the Theological-Political 
Treatise (TTP) whose biblical citations dot the text, at least in Chapters I-XV. 

Spinoza’s personal library, too, points to this profound interest in the Bible. As we know, 
Spinoza was an eclectic reader, and along with works of Latin literature and medical trea- 
tises, the Bible and commentary works featured prominently on his bookshelf. Spinoza 
owned five copies of the Bible, including two Bibles in Latin (that of Tremellius and Junius, 
which in the sixteenth century had provided a Latin version of Scripture to Calvinist coun- 
tries and that of Pagnin); two Bibles in Hebrew (in addition to a Venetian edition dating 
from 1639, one finds the Biblia Sacra Hebraica of Buxtorf (1618), which provides the 
comments of Rashi and Ibn Ezra alongside the Masoretic text, and which reproduces the 
translation of the preface to the Bomberg Bible, which the TTP cites twice); finally, since 
Spinoza read the Bible not only in Hebrew, but often also in Spanish, like most of the mem- 
bers of the Talmud Torah congregation in Amsterdam, he also owned a Spanish transla- 
tion published in Amsterdam in 1646. As author of a compendium on Hebrew grammar, 
Spinoza was skilled enough to translate Hebrew himself; for the New Testament on the 
other hand, he had recourse to Tremellius, which contains four columns, the Greek, 
the Syriac, and their respective translations. But Spinoza, as we will see, does not stick to 
the Bible; he also mentions Talmudic commentaries, which he probably did not read 
directly, but which he accessed via Rashi or the Tiberias of Buxtorf. He also read Flavius 
Josephus, in Latin translation and by a forgery attributed to Philo of Alexandria. He knew 
Calvin well, whose Institution he read in the Spanish translation of Cipriano de Valera; he 
knew Azariya di Rossi, and the controversy between Cappel and Buxtorf; he owned the 
works of Hobbes (the Leviathan in particular), of La Peyrére and of L. Meyer. Finally, it 


A Companion to Spinoza, First Edition. Edited by Yitzhak Y. Melamed. 
© 2021 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2021 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd. 


449 


DAN ARBIB 


should be noted (as it is of no small importance) that Spinoza did not possess the works of 
any Catholic translators of Scripture, neither from the Church Fathers, nor published by 
contemporary scholars, except Pagnin and Pereira. Therefore, what Spinoza knew about 
Christianity, he knew through Protestantism. 

The extent of this material data nevertheless raises a paradox, or rather a question: why 
would the philosopher who promised, in Ethics, a strictly philosophical bliss, pay such 
great attention to the Bible and to its different commentaries? Why did he make it the sub- 
ject of an entire book, the TTP? 


2. Why Interpret the Bible? 


Answering this question invites us to turn our attention to the TTP, published in Amsterdam 
by Jan Rieuwertsz (the future publisher of the Opera Posthuma). In this treatise, Spinoza 
expounds on the reasons, conditions and results of a rigorous reading of the Bible, thereby 
following the three orders of considerations he set out in Letter 30 to Oldenburg (1619- 
1677), first secretary of the Royal Society. Spinoza explains in this letter that he is pre- 
paring a “treatise on my opinion” ([V/166/5) on the meaning of Scripture for three 
reasons: (1) to combat the prejudices of theologians, which aim to prevent men from 
applying their souls to philosophy; (2) to defend himself against the accusation of atheism; 
(3) to defend the freedom to philosophize and to express one’s opinion. Thus, the reading 
of the Bible by Spinoza will serve these three purposes. 

As regards the general ambition of philosophy, a new reading of the Bible could help 
undermine the prejudices of theologians, particularly the idea that the use of reason is 
impious. The ultimate religious prejudice, and the main obstacle to the freedom to philoso- 
phize, consists of giving up on reason in order to submit oneself to faith, ordinary devotion 
implying a form of irrationalism. Theology is inherently misology; however, reading the 
Bible afresh as Spinoza intends will show that it doesn’t necessarily lead to misology, nor to 
any distrust of reason — in short, that it in no way contends with the philosophical project 
of salvation through reason. In doing so, Spinoza reclaims the Bible and snatches it from 
the misologists who confiscated it. 

On a personal level, it was for Spinoza a matter of defending himself from the accusation 
of atheism: Spinoza’s reading the Bible shows that the authentic word of God says nothing 
that goes against the Spinozist doctrine. In fact, at the time when Spinoza began the TTP 
(around 1665, if we rely on Letter 30), he had only published the Principia philosophiae car- 
tesianae (1663, in Dutch in 1664), but this publication had already provoked several charges 
against him. In addition, his life and his associations fed rumors (in the newspaper of the 
Dane Ole Borch, 1661-1662, Spinoza appeared as a “Cartesian atheist,” see W. Klever, 
Studia Spinozana 1985, 5, pp. 311-325). This accusation of atheism, emanating from Jews, 
Catholics and Calvinists, was recurrent throughout his lifetime: the Calvinist Bayle called 
him a “system atheist”; his community excluded him with the famous ‘herem (ban) of 1656; 
he was suspected of refuting the immortality of the soul and of espousing the theses of Uriel 
da Costa, whose flogging was witnessed by Spinoza. This accusation pursued him, as 
evidenced by the conversation with the Calvinist grain merchant Willem van Blijenbergh 
(1632-1696). In 1658, he was denounced as an atheist hostile to all religions and as an 
individual harmful to the republic. Reinterpreting the Bible was, therefore, also an attempt 
by Spinoza at personal apologetics, since it allowed him to maintain that the Bible never 
contradicts his philosophical positions — precisely because the Bible does not support any 


450 


SPINOZA AND SCRIPTURE 


philosophical position. Moreover, it could be him, Spinoza, who is in fact in agreement with 
the authentic biblical message, more so than any of his detractors. 

Finally, it was a question of defending the “freedom of philosophizing and saying what 
one thinks” ([V/166) against the overbearing restrictions of church and State. If the TTP 
grants specific treatment to the question of the compatibility between freedom of thought 
and expression and the maintenance of a viable State (Chapters XVI-XX), the fact remains 
that it is the whole of the politico-religious nexus (the religious interpretation of politics 
and the political interpretation of religion) which seems to be more widely targeted. The 
very situation of the Netherlands invited this: if the Eighty Years’ War (1568-1648) freed 
them from Spanish oppression and made it an independent country, the country was nev- 
ertheless prey to the violent controversies between the different tendencies resulting from 
the reform, struggles which led to the first victory of Calvinist orthodoxy, then to a coexis- 
tence of different Churches and sects, a situation unique in Europe. The power struggles 
between the Orange family and the states, the invasion of Holland by France, England and 
certain German states (1672), and the assassination of Johan and Cornelis de Witt who 
had the support of Spinoza, did not prevent the Netherlands from becoming one of the 
main centers of the Republic of Letters. Yet this tolerance was under threat, as was the 
form of the State that defended it. The Calvinists, allied with the Orangeists, endeavored to 
compromise the regime of the regents. The seizure of power by William III of Orange after 
the assassination of the Witt brothers and the abolition of the republican regime further 
increased the religious stranglehold on the political authorities. In this context, rereading 
the Bible was necessary to fight against the political prerogatives that clerics granted them- 
selves in the very name of the Bible: because it was seen as a gift of God more precious than 
reason itself, those who invoked the Bible considered its authority to be beyond dispute. 
Criticism of the politico-religious nexus based on the Bible shows the close link between 
political ambitions and the instrumentalization of biblical hermeneutics. 

But then, a first element of response follows: Spinoza’s interest in the Bible does not aim to 
develop a hermeneutic for its own sake, nor to identify certainties capable of nourishing his 
faith, nor even to join in with the vast contemporary theological movement of biblical criticism, 
but aims rather to undertake a large-scale philosophical project, with traits that are personal, 
conjunctural and universal, directed more by a love of truth than even by the notion of toler- 
ance, which is absent from this treatise: “unumquemque ex suo ingenio vivere sino [. . .] dummodo 
mihi pro vero vivere liceat” [I permit each to live according to his own mentality [. . .| so long as I 
am allowed to live for the truth] (letter 30 to Oldenburg, IV/2.66, translation amended). 


3. The Method and Its Results 


The interpretation of the Bible is thus the matter of a strategy of great subtlety. Spinoza 
seems to lend credence to the idea that the Bible actually expresses the word of God, but 
only in order to show that, read truthfully, God has none of the pompous prestige the theo- 
logians attribute to him: in short, it is a question of taking the Bible at face value in order 
to show that it says quite the opposite of what that the theologians say it does. “Conviction 
or prudence?” wondered S. Zac.! The fact remains that this strategy requires the imple- 
mentation of a precise methodology, which Spinoza explains in Chapter VII of the TTP: the 


1 § Zac (1962, p. 18). 


451 


DAN ARBIB 


main emphasis is on only using one’s natural reason, and in only reading the Scriptures 
themselves; since the method of scriptura sola is not based on any supernatural revelation, 
every person is free to interpret the Scriptures. The Spinozist approach is then enacted in 
two phases: the first step consists in naturalizing the Bible, that is to say in interpreting 
Scripture the same way one interprets all natural phenomena; the second step consists in 
identifying the universal ethics underpinned by the Bible. 

First, the general principle: “methodum interpretandi Scripturam haud differre a methodo 
interpretandi naturam, sed cum ea prorsus convenire — the method of interpretation of 
Scripture does not differ at all from the method of interpreting nature, but agrees with it 
completely” (TTP, VII, III/98). Because Scripture is not a sui generis phenomenon, it is part 
of all phenomena of nature; since nothing is excepted from nature, the sacred texts must 
be considered as natural phenomena. But what is the method of interpreting nature? It 
begins with experience — not a vague and fortuitous experience, but a systematic and 
orderly investigation (historia) - and then develops into a science capable of reaching the 
definitions and essences of things. The method of interpreting Scripture is based on the 
same principles: (1) It requires a historical investigation of Scripture; (2) It requires a 
conclusion regarding the authors’ thinking, based on data from the historical investiga- 
tion. Thus, Scripture is seen as belonging to a history, analogous to the historia naturalis of 
the natural sciences. To conduct this investigation, the basis must be the text itself, follow- 
ing the reformed principle of scriptura sola. This method does not isolate Scripture from 
other facts of nature, but, instead, reinstates it as a part of nature, devoid of the elements 
of faith, tradition, and authority that ecclesiastical power conferred on it over the cen- 
turies: Scripture is no more a sacred and unitary gift impervious to history, than man is an 
“imperium in imperio” (Ethics III, preface). This first step is based on three precepts: (1) One 
must rely on philology (though Spinoza does not use this word specifically) and knowledge 
of the language of the texts to set up a coherent and rigorous interpretation. It is necessary 
to identify all the potential meanings of each sentence, just as in the investigation of nature 
it is necessary to identify all the facts. (2) Then, the interpretation must gather all the affir- 
mations on a given subject and be based on thematic research, making a distinction bet- 
ween clear assertions and those which are more ambiguous. We must therefore discern 
the meaning of statements by leaving aside the question of their truth: the interpretation 
of Scripture aims to extract a meaning and not a truth. (3) Finally, to be able to interpret 
each book you have to understand the story of its author. The historical survey, in addition 
to its philological concern, must also take into account the concerns, prejudices, ambitions 
and mores of the author of the texts, as well as those of their recipients, since these differ- 
ent parameters are likely to influence the drafting and the composition of the texts. Thus, 
these three precepts imply that Scripture is open to all the human sciences (linguistics, 
history, sociology, etc.). 

Second, on the basis of this historical setting, it is then a matter of bringing out the 
intention of the prophets. Hence the second decision: as in the interpretation of nature, 
the method for interpreting Scripture goes from the most general to the least general. This 
allows for a general and eternal doctrine of Scripture, which starts from what the Scriptures 
teach everywhere and then examines the more specific points which follow. This approach 
calls for three comments: (1) first, it works as if the exegete had to seek in the texts the 
equivalent of the universal laws of nature: this quest for universality makes it possible to 
refuse any subjectivist interpretation bringing into play a special revelation to the inter- 
preter or some divine favor, etc. (2) The concern for the universal makes it possible to iso- 
late the invariable heart of Scripture. Behind the differences between the texts, attributable 


452 


SPINOZA AND SCRIPTURE 


to the differences in social, political contexts, etc., the Bible underpins an “ethical-religious 
universal”? — that is to say an invariant nucleus pertaining to the universal: the command 
to obey God, i.e. to practice justice and charity. (3) Thus, everything works as if Spinoza’s 
scientific exegesis detected in the ethical element of religion the analog of the scientific 
universal. As S. Breton writes: “Only the scientific spirit has made it possible to extract, by 
his concern for the universal, the true essence of the scriptural religious. [.. .]| The religious 
spirit, which we believed to be dominated by the regime of the first kind of knowledge, is 
also likely to arise up to the universal and thus to mimic, without however being confused 
with it, the order of knowledge.’ 

However, this method is not without posing real difficulties. First, the philological 
inquiry raises a first obstacle: perfect knowledge of the languages of the Scriptures is 
anything but simple. Indeed, the language of the Bible is a dead language and the ancient 
Hebrews left no dictionary, grammar or rhetoric to posterity. We are therefore not sure 
that we have exhausted all the meanings of the text since we do not know all the poly- 
semies it carries. The second difficulty, inherent in the nature of understanding the 
Hebrew language, is its own idiomatic constitution, which maintains such ambiguities 
that it is impossible to teach with certainty the meaning of all the sentences of Scripture: 
certain letters can be confused (guttural letters), as can certain conjunctions and adverbs. 
A third ambiguity is linked to the deeply flawed verbal system. Finally, the Hebrew lan- 
guage does not contain vowels or marked punctuation between sentences. The second 
obstacle is that interpretation requires historical knowledge of the circumstances under 
which the books were written. However, in most cases, we are unaware of these circum- 
stances, and even of the identity of the authors (as in the case of the Book of Ruth). For 
example, should we give religious character to prescriptions of a hygienic nature or not? 
It is difficult to answer without knowledge concerning the context of writing and compo- 
sition of the texts. Finally, the third obstacle is that some books have not reached us in 
their original language, for example, the Gospel according to St. Matthew. How, then, can 
one interpret them reliably? 

Faced with these multiple difficulties, Spinoza recognized the need to set aside those 
questions to which we cannot reply with any certainty. A rigorous interpretation could be 
satisfied with conjecture on certain points and silence on others; it will ultimately respect 
a certain principle of economy: the main thing is to identify the universal teaching that is 
always corroborated by the texts despite their diversity, without worrying about obscure 
passages concerning obscure subjects. The impossibility of an exhaustive interpretation of 
Scripture does not therefore entail any pessimism; it is always possible to extract the 
meaning of Scripture in a reasonable fashion solely by means of natural examination. 

What are the results of this method? Let us distinguish the results ad extra — relating to 
the nature of the Bible as a text restored to its “naturalness” — and the results ad intra — 
relating to the doctrine it carries. 

Ad extra, the effects of Spinoza’s approach are at least twofold. First, it rebuts the status 
of Moses as the undisputed author of the Pentateuch; yet this was one of the most stub- 
born prejudices (Chapter VIII) and certainly the most dangerous, because it allowed the 
interference of pastors in public affairs claiming the authority of Moses. In fact, the dis- 
parity of the books, and especially the last verses of the Pentateuch, make it impossible for 


? §. Breton (1977, p. 39). 
> Tbid., p. 41. 


453 


DAN ARBIB 


the latter to have been written by Moses. It is certainly possible to assign a Mosaic nucleus 
(the Book of the Wars of God, the Book of the Covenant and the Book of the Law of God), but 
this nucleus cannot be identified with the Pentateuch, even if the real author of the 
Pentateuch inserted the book of the law into it. As for the book of Joshua, it was written 
several centuries after Joshua’s death, as were Judges, Samuel, Kings, etc.: all the books are 
apocryphal. Who is the author of the Bible? No doubt a later historian who put disparate 
texts in order with the aim of “dicta and edicta Mosis docere, eaque per rerum eventus demon- 
strare” [to teach the statements and edicts of Moses, and to demonstrate them through the 
outcomes of things] (TTP VIII, IfI/126). We cannot be certain of the identity of this 
historian, but it is probably Ezra, though he died before he could finish his work. As a result, 
the selection of certain writings and the rejection of other texts was undertaken later, 
probably by the Pharisees, who acted for political reasons (notably the controversy with 
the Sadducees), devoid of any proper spiritual concern. The finished text is therefore repet- 
itive (thus we find two accounts of creation), incomplete, and sometimes incoherent (I 
Samuel 7 and I Samuel 13, on the position of the Philistines); there are unlikely chronol- 
ogies (on the date of the construction of the temple after I Kings, VI), language errors, and 
obvious mistakes in transcription of the original manuscript. The writing of the Bible and 
the constitution of the biblical canon are purely human and political processes. But this 
conclusion itself must be extended, and this is the second result, undoubtedly the most 
important: it is the unity of the Bible which falls apart under scrutiny. The Bible can no 
longer be considered as one unit, but must be seen as a compilation of different texts dating 
from different eras, referring to several authors, and mobilizing epistemological fields of 
different natures. 

Yet, ad intra, this very fragmentation reveals what, at the heart of the Bible, remains its 
central core, which the work of critical purification paradoxically brings to light. It is pos- 
sible to highlight five major theses constituting the pars construens of the analysis of the 
Bible. 

First, the Bible in no way aims to give us knowledge about the nature of God or about 
His relationship with the world. The prophets were men of imagination who shared the 
prejudices of their time and who expressed themselves ad captum vulgi. It is therefore impos- 
sible to draw from their teachings any thesis relating to the nature of God or the nature of 
the world. These are subjects that fall to the philosopher, not the theologian. 

Second, the biblical message, beyond the contingent variety of styles and prejudices of 
the prophets, consists of the prescription of justice and charity. Of course, these are also 
dictated by philosophy, but the Bible takes other paths, and is addressed above all to those 
who cannot comply with the prescriptions of reason, or who cannot even grasp them. So 
there is indeed a common ground between philosophy and the Bible — justice and charity — 
but this still requires a distinction to be made between philosophy (which deals with God 
and nature, and is addressed only to philosophers) and the Bible (which addresses the 
vulgus, and which goes beyond the ethical-moral core, exposing narratives and prejudices 
which must be contextualized). If obeying the word of God means practicing justice and 
charity, it is possible to distinguish, in the Bible itself, between dogmas essential for the obe- 
dience to God (articles of universal faith) and secondary dogmas (which belong to their 
particular epoch). The true standard of faith determined from the purpose of Scripture, 
then, is to teach obedience. Faith indeed is “de Deo talia sentire, quibus ignoratis tollitur erga 
Deum obedientia, et hac obedientia posita, necessario ponuntur” [thinking such things about 
God that if you had no knowledge of them, obedience to God would be destroyed, whereas 
if you are obedient to God, you necessarily have these thoughts] (TTP VIII, III/175). Hence 


454 


SPINOZA AND SCRIPTURE 


the possibility of determining a minimal creed in seven dogmas arises: (1) the existence of 
a supreme being, (2) its uniqueness, (3) its omnipresence, (4) its absolute right over all 
things, (5) the definition of its worship as a practice of justice and charity, that is to say as 
love for one’s neighbor, (6) the promise of salvation to those who practice its worship and, 
finally, (7) the forgiveness of sins to those who repent. We must emphasize the great power 
of this analysis and the reversal of the relationship between dogma and obedience that 
follows from it. Indeed, while we usually think of obedience as a consequence of dogmas, 
Spinoza defines dogmas on the basis of obedience: these dogmas are presupposed by the 
practice of justice and charity as their condition of possibility. It will therefore be empha- 
sized that these dogmas are not strictly speaking truths: they are propositions that morality 
and practical conduct (to speak like Kant) require as conditions. These dogmas are not true 
but pious because they allow for obedience: their piety strictly means their ability to require 
compliance from the faithful. Should we go so far as to say, as with Kant, that morality is 
given a “veritative dimension” (P. Ricoeur), as if it widened the domain of knowledge 
without it ever being a question of actual knowledge? The fact remains that, in certain 
respects, the believer can access a form of truth, or universality, not theoretical, but which 
supposes propositions all the same, as well as a certain relation to a God. Thus we can iden- 
tify, in what constitutes the first kind of knowledge (Ethics II, prop. 37-40), an analog of 
knowledge — but an analog only, because the question of the truth of dogma is here an 
irrelevant question: only obedience matters. 

Third, man redeems himself through his works of justice and charity, regardless of his 
representations of divinity. Faith does not require truth but piety, and is pious and salutary 
only because of the obedience to which it leads; as for the representations of the deity, each 
one will be able to adapt the fundamental dogmas to his own prejudices. 

Fourth, consequently, this doctrine promotes peace and harmony, definitively ruining 
the concepts of religious heresy and religious warfare, since apart from the practice of jus- 
tice and charity, everyone should be able to think what he wishes. It is therefore the Bible 
itself which founds freedom of thought, since, beyond the ethical-moral core which alone 
matters, personal convictions and prejudices remain variable and contingent: the differ- 
ences between religions are here minimized. 

Fifth, from there follows the separation between theology and philosophy. (1) Their goals 
differ, because philosophy aims at truth and has no law other than that of reason, while the 
goal of faith, however, is not truth, but obedience. Faith, therefore, should not be concerned 
with demonstrating the essence of God because then it would fail to fulfill its true purpose; 
only those capable of understanding the demonstration would be faithful. Philosophy and 
religion do not have the same goals, they do not operate on the same ground, and therefore 
cannot contradict each other: de jure, they do not interfere. (2) They are not established on 
the same bases either: philosophy is based on common notions and its truth is drawn from 
nature alone (natura sola); faith is based on history, philology, and sacred narratives (scrip- 
tura sola). One proceeds by rational deduction, the other works through revelations and the 
historical accounts transmitted by the prophets. This separation has direct consequences: 
(1) theology does not have to consider philosophy as its servant (contrary to the traditional 
subalternation, expressed since Pierre Damien by philosophia ancilla theologiae) because phi- 
losophy eludes its jurisdiction. Conversely, philosophy does not have to subject Scripture to 
its rational norms, to seek the truth of Scripture and to consider that theology must be 
absorbed in it (contra Maimonides and L. Meyer). (2) Faith recognizes that everyone has the 
greatest freedom to philosophize, and at the same time, the theological authorities are in no 
way justified in legislating matters of philosophy. 


455 


DAN ARBIB 


But these five theses have as correlate a pars destruens related to the content of the 
Scriptures, as explained in Chapters III-VI of TTP. First, the election of the Hebrews should 
be understood only in a temporal sense: if the Hebrews were chosen by God, it is only from 
the point of view of their political society and as a result of nature (divine government) 
having allowed them to survive and perpetuate. Analysis of the Scriptures shows that the 
concept of chosenness is always linked to the promised land (that is to say, to political and 
social benefits), but never to the increase of knowledge or to the attainment of bliss. 
Second, the divine law is no longer the sole possession of a given people, specifically, the 
Jewish people; the divine law is the bliss that lies in knowledge of God’s true nature. This 
law is deduced from the very structure of the mind, namely from the nobility of the under- 
standing. Third, likewise for ceremonies, that is, all the rites and forms of worship that 
govern the lives of the faithful: are they useful for the fulfillment of divine law and the quest 
for sovereign good? Are they necessary for bliss and virtue? In truth, the Old Testament 
ceremonies were instituted only for the Hebrews and the preservation of their State; they 
are divine laws because they are revealed, but their meaning is only historical. Ceremonies 
are therefore of no help for salvation: no one is required to fulfill these ceremonies in order 
to obtain bliss. Finally, since miracles go against nature, they also go against God himself 
and amount to denying his sovereignty; believing in miracles is therefore a profession of 
atheism (see Ethics I, 28). 


4. Evaluation 


Now that we have brought to light both the method and its results, there is no doubt that 
Spinoza’s hermeneutic, as controversial as it is, is of great ethical and political power. Its 
successes and failures should therefore be assessed based on a twofold evaluation, both 
internal and external. 

Ad intra, first, the strength of Spinozist analysis comes from the fact that it brings to 
the fore the heart that lies at the basis of all religion, but which each particular religion 
conceals — as if religions were ignorant of their own core and basis. The ‘soul’ of religion 
is universal religion; certainly, religion is not easily compatible with universality, though 
Christianity is on this point decisive and problematic (since it distinguishes the religio 
universalis (.. .) sive catholica, TTP, XII, 7, I1/162, and the vana religio that Christianity 
became under the influence of the clerics). But at the very least, it should be noted that 
Spinoza perfectly succeeds in taking seriously the positivity of the religion without ever 
confusing it with philosophy. Nevertheless, clerics in fact continue, both in their actions 
and in their sermons, to contradict, and therefore to conceal, this universal religion at 
the root of all particular religions. Spinoza therefore goes back to the most essential 
foundation of religion, showing its fundamental positivity and showing that established 
and historical religions have constantly betrayed their foundation. The religious sphere 
is therefore more complex than a cursory analysis of Spinozism would suggest, which 
would limit it to the first kind of knowledge. Second, the Spinozist method of interpreta- 
tion seems to manage to avoid three contradictory and threatening pitfalls. First, it 
avoids appealing to a philosophical norm external to Scripture: refuting both L. Meyer 
and Maimonides, Spinoza refuses to allow the Bible to be interpreted according to strictly 
philosophical exogenous criteria. But, he also managed to avoid the use of divine enlight- 
enment as theorized by Calvin ("the interpretation of the Holy Spirit"), which allowed 


456 


SPINOZA AND SCRIPTURE 


only authorized theologians to retain their monopoly on the interpretation of Scripture. 
But Spinozism still eliminates the risk of a third attitude, opposed to the first two (inter- 
pretation of the Bible according to philosophy versus according to divine enlighten- 
ment), namely the individualist approach of interpretation by interior light, as advanced 
by the dissident reformed sects, Quakers and their colleagues, among whom Spinoza had 
many friends. To the former, Spinoza opposed the fact that the Bible has no philosophical 
significance; to the latter, that natural reason is sufficient to interpret the Bible; finally, 
in the third case, that there is an objective method for interpreting the Scriptures and 
that the interpretation cannot give rise to any subjectivism. However, it may be that 
Spinoza does not always stick to the method he himself recommends, as the TTP some- 
times suffers from possible internal inconsistencies. This raises the suspicion that, in 
spite of the apparently non-metaphysical character of the work, the Spinozist reading of 
the Bible is actually permeated by his Ethics, so that, just as his adversaries do, Spinoza 
interprets the Scripture philosophically. At the very least, we must recognize that bet- 
ween several theses it always gives preference to that which agrees most closely with 
Ethics: is the virtue attributed to Solomon, in Chapter II of the TTP (II/41), not the very 
same virtue which the Ethics champions? Is this not also the case concerning the idea of 
justice, on which St. Paul and Solomon agree, in Chapter IV (III/59)? Better still, he 
sometimes utilizes allegorical interpretations which he forbids to others, as if the 
Scriptures had at first only an allegorical meaning revealed by philosophy: thus he 
advances without proof (like Maimonides himself, in the Guide of the Lost, I, 30) that the 
sin of Adam and Eve constitutes a parable (TTP IV, III/66), just like the resurrection of 
Christ (Letter to Oldenburg 79). Other affirmations presuppose the theses of Ethics 
without any justification: Chapter VI begins by denying the possibility of miracles on the 
basis of a properly philosophical analysis of the concept of nature, though the difference 
he formulates between prophecy and miracles, at the end of the chapter, is not perfectly 
convincing. In short, the magnitude of Spinoza’s global project does not prevent local 
aporias, which invite us to consider the consequences of certain theses as themselves 
quite fragile: for example, what of the discredit cast upon miracles once admitted that 
this discredit is based, not on Scripture, but on a properly philosophical thesis? Under 
these conditions, Spinoza’s project may nevertheless be esteemed for its controversial 
scope, regardless of its theoretical weaknesses. 

Evaluating the scope of the philosophical consideration of the Bible also means 
measuring it ad extra, in comparison with the other major trends in hermeneutics of the 
time, and consequently situating it in relation to four major movements: (1) the context of 
the philological revolution since the Renaissance, (2) the internal controversies of the 
Reformation, (3) the controversies opened by Cartesianism on the relationship between 
faith and philosophy, and (4) the longue durée of Jewish hermeneutics. 

First, indeed the TTP is obviously in line with the philology developed at the end of the 
sixteenth century. Lorenzo Valla (1407-1457) and Erasmus (1466(69)?—1536), for 
example, were already in favor of comparing the Bible to other texts of Hebrew literature; 
their continuators, Joseph Juste Scaliger (1540-1609), Hugo Grotius (1583-1645), 
Johannes Clericus (1657-1736) and Richard Simon (1638-1722), carried out a large 
work of scholarly criticism that aimed at restoring a purer text, free of its shortcomings. 
Likewise, Andreas Masius (1514-1573), in his commentary on Joshua, Josuae imperatoris 
historia illustrata atque explicata (Antwerp 1574) already explained that the texts of Moses 
and Joshua were collected and organized by Ezra, perhaps helped by other members of the 


457 


DAN ARBIB 


Grand Assembly, anticipating Spinoza’s thesis. Likewise, Spinoza was not unaware of the 
works of Hobbes, whose Leviathan (III, xxxii, 21) expresses the same doubts about the 
Mosaic paternity of the Pentateuch. Spinoza is therefore part of a broader movement that 
began a century before him, one which his contemporaries would have called critica sacra 
or philologia sacra, and which broadly embraces theology, philosophy, history and linguis- 
tics, considered as hermeneutical or polemical tools.* 

Second, Spinoza’s work is also part of the internal controversies of the Reformation.° 
We know that reformed hermeneutics gradually turned away from the anti-Catholic con- 
troversy and became more polarized around the struggles against the Arminians and the 
Socinians. However, if the scriptura sola (and therefore the rejection of the authority of the 
Pope and of tradition), the analogy of faith and the use of reason in interpretation, 
remained shared by all, reformed hermeneutics were very diverse, and split the reformed 
camp itself into several tendencies, more or less hostile to each other. (1) Counter-remon- 
strating orthodoxy (for example, André Rivet, Isagoge sive Introductio generalis ad Scripturam 
Sacram, 1627) sets up a “very detailed treatment of the different meanings of Scripture 
and the use of reason”: without submitting faith to the authority of philosophers, it is pos- 
sible to have recourse to reason in order to draw out the implicit consequences of the 
sacred text. Thus the Socinians can be refuted, since the truths explicitly taught in the Bible 
are considered bona fide as well as the consequences deduced in a syllogistic way. (2) 
Remonstrants (for example Simon Episcopius, Confessio, 1622) on the other hand propose 
amethod “both more rationalist and more respectful of the biblical text”. Like the Socinians, 
they use the principle of scriptura sola to condemn “the use that Gomarists make of confes- 
sions and catechisms as constitutive elements of the analogy of faith; therefore, the 
meaning of a passage from Scripture can only be determined by Scripture and there is 
never a need to abandon the literal meaning, since all the truths necessary for salvation 
are expressed explicitly in the Bible”. The way in which Spinoza could have borrowed from 
this method is quite clear; but for the Remonstrants, the Bible cannot oppose reason, so 
that everything that shocks reason in interpretation must be abandoned (as, moreover, the 
Gomarists, and all the reformers, recognized about transubstantiation). This rationalism 
nevertheless admits the existence of revealed truths which we must believe even though 
they are beyond our understanding (the Trinity and the Incarnation of Christ). On the 
other hand, (3) the Socinians, accused of making an outrageous use of reason, reply that 
they scrupulously apply the scriptura sola and criticize their opponents for “their lack of 
consistency: they use the principle of non-contradiction to exclude metaphorical interpre- 
tations of the passage which found the dogma of transubstantiation, but abandon it with 
regard to the Trinity and the Incarnation”. How can one fail to see that Spinoza was fully 
involved in these controversies? Moreover, it is even in the name of the fight against 
Socinianism that the TTP was banned, and it is because of its chronological proximity to 
TTP that the Histoire critique (1680) was firmly fought. 

Third, to these internal struggles in the reformed camp, we must add the more recent 
controversies concerning the relationships between philosophy and theology, born of 
questions about the possibility of a Copernican reading of the Bible, and gradually extended 
to the more general problem of the relationship between (Cartesian) philosophy and 


* Steenbakkers (2010, n. 16), quotes the Philologia sacra by Salomon Galssius (5 vols., 1623-1636) and the 
Sciagraphia philologiae sacrae: difficiliores quaestiones plerasque, & linguarum orientalium usum genuinum delineans 
de Christophorus Cellarius (2nd enlarged ed., 1678). 

> For the following lines, see A. del Prete (2018). The quotations in this paragraph are taken from this article. I translate. 


458 


SPINOZA AND SCRIPTURE 


Scriptures. Two authors in this regard particularly weighed on Spinozist thought, Isaac de 
la Peyrére (1596-1676) and Lodewijk Meyer (1629-1681). The first is the author of 
Preadamitae (Amsterdam, 1655), whose central thesis (that Adam was not the first man) is 
accompanied by another considerable thesis, namely that the biblical text was not written 
by Moses, but was put together (incidentally, in a rather clumsy manner) from a collection 
of older texts: the Bible is a “stack of copies upon copies.” More importantly, L. Meyer pub- 
lished in 1666 Philosophia S. Scripturae Interpres, Philosophy interpreter of Holy Scripture 
(Dutch translation in 1667). Between Spinoza and Meyer, in addition to their friendship 
and a certain intellectual connivance (Meyer wrote the preface of the Principia of 1663), 
the theoretical relationship is both close and ambiguous. For both of them, truth is a 
matter of philosophy; but disagreement rises on this common basis. For Meyer, only philos- 
ophy can discover the contents of the Bible capable of indicating the way to salvation, so 
that between reason and faith must reign an agreement; Spinoza, as we have seen, distin- 
guishes philosophy and theology and refuses to submit the Bible to philosophy. Next, 
Meyer’s distinction between meaning and truth, designed so as not to apply in the case of 
the Bible, constitutes a fundamental point of Spinoza’s method; indeed, while the first said: 
“All the truths of any passage which present themselves or may present themselves to the 
mind of the reader are also true meanings” (Philosophia S. Scripturae Interpres, IV), the sec- 
ond states: “Ne verum sensum cum rerum veritate confundamus” [not to confuse the true 
meaning and the truth of things] (TTP VII, IIM/100). Spinoza, finally, counts on a distinc- 
tion proposed by Meyer between reason as a body of doctrine on the basis of which the 
content of Scripture can be assessed (Ibid., V, 1-2) and reason as an instrument of inter- 
pretation (Ibid., XVI). But whereas Meyer favored the first, which serves as his “norm and 
rule for interpreting and judging [the Scriptures]” (Ibid., V. 1), Spinoza favors the second: 
interpretive reason is operational, comparative, and purely instrumental (at least de jure, 
since, in actual fact, this is not always the case, as in the example of miracles). On the basis 
of Meyer’s distinction, Spinoza replaces reason as a body of doctrine with reason as an 
instrument of discovery, available to every man. He therefore borrows from Meyer his con- 
cepts, but turns them against his theses, in a complex game of influences and criticisms, 
since Meyer’s ideas themselves came first of all from Cogitata metaphysica, 1/265, where 
Spinoza, against his subsequent positions, made reason the norm of the true meaning of 
Scripture. The fate of their two works was, for that matter, perfectly similar: the Interpres, 
published anonymously, was condemned in 1666 by the classis of the Reformed Church of 
Haarlem and by the rector of the University of Leiden in 1676. In 1674, Spinoza’s TTP and 
Meyer’s Interpres were published in a single volume, such that, until Meyer’s death (1681), 
Spinoza was credited with the authorship of their two works. 

Finally, we must situate Spinoza in relation to long-term Jewish exegetical debates, 
which have neither the naivety nor the bad faith that Spinoza himself sometimes attrib- 
utes to them. (1) Spinoza manages to refuse both the position supported by Maimonides 
(1135-1204) in the Guide for the lost, and that of his adversary, Rabbi Jehouda Alphakar, 
whose letter, written in around 1230 to David Kimchi and annexed to letters attributed to 
Maimonides, was known to Spinoza. Regarding Maimonides, whom Spinoza reproaches 
“to be insane with the Greeks” (cum Graecis insanire, TTP, Praefatio, II/9), his allegorical 
method implies that the prophets had philosophical knowledge, that the Bible is made 
inaccessible to ordinary people and that the philosophers themselves are infallible, consti- 
tuting a kind of new priestly caste: it is therefore “noxiam, inutilem, at absurdam” [not only 
useless, but harmful and absurd] (TTP VII, III/116). But his adversary, Jehouda Alphakar, 
proposing to interpret Scripture only through Scripture itself is criticized by Spinoza for his 


459 


DAN ARBIB 


“fanaticism of the letter”; ignoring the requirements of an elementary philology and 
showing a madly fanatic faith, he refuses to question the possible contradictions of the 
text. Spinoza then takes the narrow path between Maimonides (rationalist) and Alphakar 
(irrationalist), accepting the need to evoke an allegorical sense of Scripture and to distin- 
guish between the philosopher and the vulgus, but denying what they construe as an ille- 
gitimate foray of philosophy into theological grounds. (2) But, more fundamentally, 
comparisons with Jewish exegetical debates do not only concern Maimonides and 
Alphakar; they also involve a continuity going back at least, via the medieval tradition of 
Jewish hermeneutics, to the time of the writing of the Talmud, and it is unlikely that 
Spinoza was unaware of this ancient tradition. Regarding, for example, the questioning of 
the Pentateuch, Spinoza is not only indebted to the humanist tradition, but also to a very 
ancient Jewish tradition. The sages of the Babylonian Talmud (Baba Batra, 14b) already 
recognized that the last eight verses of the Pentateuch could not have been written by 
Joshua, as would, later on, Abraham Ibn Ezra (1093-1163; see Perushei ha-Torah, on 
Genesis 12, 6 and Deut. 1, 1); and if Spinoza lends Ibn Ezra (TTP VIII, II/118) remarks 
which he does not explicitly make: “it is not Moses who wrote the Pentateuch, but a very 
later writer,” he nevertheless in so doing makes tribute to him. It is therefore necessary, if 
not to attenuate, then at least to appreciate with the greatest subtlety, Spinoza’s supposed 
rupture with Jewish exegesis. Not only is Spinoza familiar with it, but he is even partially 
indebted to it, and his very criticism of it supposes a close dialogue between them. 

Generally speaking, contextualizing Spinoza’s work in relation to a dense network of 
historical exchanges and over a long period of time makes it possible to precisely assess 
the originality of his reading of the Bible, by placing it in the different scales where this 
originality can be measured with relevance — neither fraudulently amplified nor underes- 
timated. The originality of Spinoza lies in the complexity of his strategy, which is at the 
same time hermeneutic, metaphysical, and political. As we have shown, only knowledge 
of his predecessors, his contemporaries, and the wider historical context makes it possible 
to understand and appraise the complexity, and therefore the originality, of this strategy. 

Finally, measuring the effects of the TTP implies briefly indicating its critical reception. 
We know that Spinoza probably intended to make an enriched edition (hence the notes of 
his personal copy), and that his demise prevented him from completing it. But the work 
was quickly translated into French, under the title La Clef du Sanctuaire, no doubt by Gabriel 
de Saint-Glain; then an English translation and two Dutch translations were published 
before the end of the century. The polemical reception was very intense, and multiple 
synods demanded its ban: the religious consistories (Protestants and Jews) pushed William 
II to ban the publication of the TTP (at the same time as the Leviathan, the Interpres of 
Meyer, and a collection of Socinian writings, the Bibliotheca Fratrum Polonorum) in 1674 
and had the Opera posthuma banned in 1678; the refutations multiplied, under the pen of 
Jacob Thomasius, Régnier de Mansveld, Blijenbergh, Kortholt, etc., and still do today, with 
authors like H. Cohen, L. Strauss, or E. Levinas. 

With the TTP, Spinoza intended to work on his rehabilitation. On this point, it must be 
recognized that he failed; but by combining the call for greater freedom with the 
construction of a rigorously elaborated hermeneutics, he didn’t so much initiate biblical 
criticism as he made reading the Bible one of the most crucial issues of modernity.° 


° Thanks to my students Clement Raymond for his re-reading of the French version of this paper, and Bryn 
Merrill for his re-reading and correction of the English. 


460 


SPINOZA AND SCRIPTURE 
Bibliography 


Breton, S. (1977) Spinoza. Théologie et politique. Paris: Desclée. 

Curley, E.M. (1994). Notes on a neglected masterpiece: Spinoza and the science of hermeneutics. In: 
Spinoza: The Enduring Questions (ed. G. Hunter). Toronto: Toronto, University Press. 

Del Prete, A. (2018). Ecriture sainte (interprétation de I’). In: Dictionnaire des Pays-Bas au Siécle d’Or. 
(ed. C. Secretan and W. Frijhoff), 216-218. Paris: CNRS éditions. 

Israel, J. (2001). Radical Enlightenment: Philosophy and the Making of Modernity, 1650-1750. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press. 

Lagrée, J. and Moreau, P.-F. (1989). In: Le grand siécle et la Bible (ed. J.-R. Armogathe), 97-115. Paris, 
Beauchesne. 

Levene, N.K. (2004). Spinoza’s Revelation: Religion, Democracy, and Reason. Cambridge: Cambridge, 
University Press. 

Melamed, Y.Y. and Rosenthal, M.A. (eds.) (2010) Spinoza’s Theological-Political Treatise. A Critical 

Guide. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Nadler, S. (1986). Some new light on the roots of Spinoza’s science of Bible study. In: Spinoza and the 

Sciences (ed. M. Greene and D. Nails). Dordrecht: Reidel. 

Nadler, S. (2007). The Bible hermeneutics of Baruch de Spinoza. In: Hebrew Bible, Old Testament. The 

History of Its Interpretation, vol. II, From the Renaissance to the Enlightenment (ed. M. Seebo), 826- 

836. Gottingen, Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht. 

Nadler, S. (2011). “A Book Forged in Hell”: Spinoza’s Scandalous Treatise. Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press. 

Popkin, R.H. (1995). Spinoza and Bible scholarship. In: The Cambridge Companion to Spinoza 
(ed. D. Garrett), 383-407. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Preus, J.S. (1996). Spinoza and the Irrelevance of Biblical Authority. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press. 

Rudavsky, T.M. (2014). The science of Scripture: Abraham Ibn Ezra and Spinoza on biblical herme- 
neutics. In: Spinoza and Medieval Jewish Philosophy (ed. S. Nadler), 59-78. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 

Stennbakkers, P. (2010). Spinoza in the history of biblical scholarship. In: The Making of the 
Humanities, vol. I, Early Modern Europe (ed. R. Bod, J. Maat, and T. Weststeijn), 315-325. 
Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press. 

Zac, S. (1962). Les avatars de l’interprétation de |’écriture chez Spinoza. Revue d’histoire de philosophie 
religieuse 42 (1). 

Zac, S. (1965). Spinoza et l’interprétation de l’écriture. Paris: PUF. 


461 


Part V 


Aesthetics and Language 


43 


Spinoza’s Aesthetics 


DOMENICA G. ROMAGNI 


1. Introduction 


In the Appendix to Part I of the Ethics, Spinoza writes that he will show how “prejudices 
have arisen concerning good and evil, merit and sin, praise and blame, order and confusion, 
beauty and ugliness, and other things of this kind” (Elapp/G II 78/10). He goes on to say 
that we are misled in our use of these concepts due to our assumption of divine teleology. 
Once properly disabused of this notion, we will see that these concepts are “only modes of 
imagining, and do not indicate the nature of anything, only the constitution of the imagi- 
nation” (Ibid.). As imagination is the source of inadequate ideas for Spinoza, we can take 
him to be indicating here that our use of these concepts arises from the inadequate ideas 
that we have of things and that, consequently, we are mistaken in application of these con- 
cepts to the world around us. In other words, Spinoza seems to be saying that we cannot be 
realists with regard to value, at least while retaining our conventional understanding of 
these terms. In this chapter, I will be primarily concerned with Spinoza’s understanding 
of aesthetic value, but will also touch on his views regarding morality and value theory 
more broadly. 

There is a relatively persistent interpretation of Spinoza on which he has no aesthetics 
that goes back to Leibniz. In the Discourse on Metaphysics (Leibniz 1991), he tells us that all 
God’s works must bear the mark of divine perfection and that “the contrary opinion seems 
to me extremely dangerous and very near to the opinion of the recent innovators who hold 
that the beauty of the universe and the goodness that we attribute to the works of God are 
but the chimeras of those who conceive of God in terms of themselves” (Leibniz, DM:2). 
Leibniz seems to be referring to the passage from El app cited above. He takes Spinoza to be 
saying there that beauty, harmony, and perfection are not to be found in the universe, but 
are merely confused ideas in the mind. Others have interpreted Spinoza as having no 
objective or realist aesthetic theory, but maintaining a relativist account of aesthetic value. 
In this chapter, I will consider some of the various interpretations that have been offered of 
Spinoza’s views on aesthetics. Following this, I will examine the possibility that Spinoza 
might be amenable to some kind of realist account of aesthetic value and argue that he 
would, provided we are careful about the kind of metric we use for determining ‘aesthetic 


A Companion to Spinoza, First Edition. Edited by Yitzhak Y. Melamed. 
© 2021 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2021 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd. 


465 


DOMENICA G. ROMAGNI 


value.’ I have largely confined my discussion here to aesthetic perception and Spinoza’s 
remarks in the Ethics, for reasons of space (for an interesting recent discussion of Spinoza’s 
views on aesthetic creation and his discussion of the prophets in the TTP, see Gatens 2015). 


2. Anti-Realist Interpretations 


2.1. Error Theory 


The strongest anti-realist interpretation that can be offered on Spinoza’s behalf is a kind of 
error theory. According to this interpretation, Spinoza thinks that all of our assertions that 
attribute aesthetic properties to objects in the world (e.g. ‘Bach’s Mass in B Minor is stun- 
ning’ or ‘Your sister’s vase is hideous’) are systematically untrue and, further, that there is 
nothing that can make them true. This is because properties like ‘being stunning’ or ‘being 
hideous’ are not properly instantiated in these objects. Rather, these statements capture 
imaginative beliefs that do not track anything in the world. 

To flesh this out a bit more, on this view Spinoza is claiming that aesthetic terms have 
no referent. Rather, we mistakenly attribute aesthetic properties to objects on the basis of 
our feeling that we are affected in a certain way by them. For example, I attribute the prop- 
erty of ‘being stunning’ to Bach’s B Minor Mass. This claim is false because ‘being stun- 
ning’ is not a property of anything in the world. What motivates us to make this false claim 
is our perception of the object as being conducive to our health or well-being. It is impor- 
tant at this point to note that the error-theoretic interpretation does not merely posit that 
we mis-identify the object of our aesthetic judgment (i.e. we assert an aesthetic property to 
be true of an object but we mean that we are perceiving it in a certain way relative to our- 
selves). Rather, on this interpretation, Spinoza holds that our aesthetic beliefs really cannot 
be true of anything, but they are motivated by a certain effect some object has on us. This 
is important because it distinguishes an error theoretic interpretation from the other anti- 
realist interpretation I will consider below. 

There are relatively few people that think that Spinoza was a strict error theorist with 
regard to aesthetic value, for a couple of reasons (for someone who can be interpreted as hav- 
ing an error-theoretic reading of Spinoza’s views on aesthetics, see Morrison 1989). First, 
his explanation of error in general seems to give us reason to doubt it. This is because Spinoza 
tells us that, “there is nothing positive in ideas, which causes them to be called false” (E2p3 3) 
and, more specifically, “falsity consists in the privation of knowledge” (E2p35). This means 
that, for Spinoza, the falsity of ideas is not due some property they have that would need to be 
removed in order for them to become true. Rather, falsity is a privation of an idea — it arises 
when ideas are incomplete. Given this understanding of falsity, it seems unlikely that Spinoza 
could be a true error theorist because error theory involves an individual entertaining an 
idea that has no true content whatsoever. As we have seen, Spinoza thinks that all ideas have 
at least some true content, even if they are woefully incomplete (i.e. inadequate). 

The other reason we might hesitate to attribute an aesthetic error theory to Spinoza is 
that the passages that support this kind of reading, like the one taken from Elapp above, do 
not just deal with aesthetic value, but with value more generally. When Spinoza condemns 
our use of concepts like ‘beautiful’ and ‘ugly’ in this particular passage, he also condemns 
the use of concepts like ‘good’ and ‘evil.’ However, while Spinoza does not dedicate much 
more discussion to aesthetic values, he does have a lot more to say about moral values. In 
Part IV, which is dedicated to an account of human bondage to the passions, Spinoza 


466 


SPINOZA'’S AESTHETICS 


defines ‘good’ as ‘what we certainly know to be useful to us’ and ‘evil’ as ‘what we know 
prevents us from being masters of our own good’ (E4d1—2). We should pay special attention 
to Spinoza’s use of ‘certainly’ in E4d1. This indicates that he thinks that there is something 
that our evaluative judgments track. In other words, this definition seems to indicate that 
our evaluative judgments are truth-evaluable (see Steinberg 2016 and Youpa 2010). So, 
while this discussion of evaluative concepts like good and evil remains consistent with the 
anti-realist flavor of his earlier remarks in Elapp, Spinoza no longer seems to be asserting 
that all judgments regarding good and evil, in virtue of being morally evaluative, are 
completely misguided. Rather, he seems to be asserting that what is good for an individual 
at a given time, understood as what is useful according to this definition, is a matter of fact. 
Accordingly, our judgments about what is ‘good’ or ‘bad’ can be true or false depending on 
whether they are directed toward objects that genuinely fit this description or not. 

If Spinoza thinks this is true of concepts like ‘good’ and ‘evil,’ then it seems like we have 
reason to think that it might be true of concepts like ‘beautiful’ or ‘ugly.’ This is because, as 
you will remember from above, the attribution of an aesthetic error theory to Spinoza was 
based on passages like the one in Elapp that discuss both morally and aesthetically evalu- 
ative concepts. If Spinoza’s comments elsewhere indicate that he is not an error theorist 
about moral value, then this gives us at least some reason not to attribute such an extreme 
stance to him when it comes to aesthetic value. Instead, we might think that he is still an 
anti-realist about aesthetic value, but that he holds something like a relativist stance, 
which I will discuss in the following section. 


2.2. Relativism 


Amore popular interpretation of Spinoza’s discussion of aesthetic evaluation is one that 
understands him as a relativist (see Davidson 2017). This interpretation states that 
Spinozistic aesthetic judgments capture how one is affected by objects in one’s environ- 
ment. Proponents of this view often focus, again, on passages in Elapp and, in particular, 
the passage where Spinoza writes, “for example, if the motion the nerves receive from 
objects presented through the eyes is conducive to health, the objects by which it is 
caused are called beautiful; those which cause a contrary motion are called ugly. . . all 
this goes to show that everyone’s judgment is a function of the disposition of his brain; 
or rather, has accepted affectations of the imagination as things” (Elapp/GII 82). This 
passage is taken to indicate that, while Spinoza thinks that there is something that our 
aesthetic judgments track, the thing that underlies them is something that is specific to 
the mind of each individual. This is what makes this an anti-realist stance as opposed to 
an objectivist relativism. The anti-realist holds that aesthetic evaluations are mind- 
dependent. An objectivist relativist would hold that the property underlying our evalu- 
ative judgments is relative, but mind-independent. For instance, ‘tallness’ is an objective 
property that is nevertheless relative to individuals. On this view, then, Spinoza holds 
that aesthetic value is relative to how the subject imaginatively perceives the world inter- 
acting with her. 

There are a number of reasons to favor this interpretation. First, it seems to be sup- 
ported by the textual evidence. Second, it seems capable, at least in principle, of avoiding 
the pitfalls of interpreting Spinoza as an aesthetic error theorist. It fits with Spinoza’s gen- 
eral account of falsity in that it attributes to aesthetic judgments some true content, despite 
this content being incomplete or confused. In keeping with this, it also allows for aesthetic 
judgments to be truth-evaluable in that it can be true or false whether something is being 


467 


DOMENICA G. ROMAGNI 


perceived as good or bad with regard to the subject. Finally, it aligns with at least a number 
of interpretations of Spinoza’s views on moral evaluation (for instance, Curley 1988; 
Kisner 2010; and Nadler 2006). As discussed in Section 2.1 above, given that Spinoza’s 
discussions of aesthetic value are often performed alongside discussions of moral value, it 
seems like it would be good for our interpretation of his aesthetic theory to have something 
in common with his moral theory. 

However, there are some reasons that we might want to oppose the anti-realist relativist 
interpretation. The most notable of these again has to do with our interpretation of 
Spinoza’s theory of moral evaluation. While there are many commentators who take 
Spinoza to hold an anti-realist view with regard to moral values, this is not uncontested 
(for instance, see Youpa 2010). There is some textual evidence that might suggest that we 
should think that Spinoza holds a species of realism regarding moral value, for instance 
when he introduces the ‘ideal’ of human nature in the Preface to Part 4. If there is supposed 
to be some ethical ideal of perfection that we can approach, then this seems to make room 
for a realist interpretation of moral evaluation. If this is so, then we might also think that 
there is room for a realist interpretation of aesthetic evaluation. I turn to this question in 
the next section. 


3. Realist Interpretations 


3.1. An Aesthetic Exemplar 


As mentioned above, one way of giving a realist interpretation of Spinoza’s theory of 
moral value is to think of our moral evaluations as relative not ultimately to us but to some 
moral exemplar, most often identified with Spinoza’s ‘free man’ (cf. Garrett 1995 
Nadler 2015, and Soyarslan 2019). One passage that is taken to support this reading of 
Spinoza’s moral philosophy comes from the Preface to Part 4: 


For because we desire to form an idea of man, as a model of human nature which we may 
look to, it will be useful to us to retain these same words with the meaning I have indi- 
cated. In what follows, therefore, I shall understand by good what we know certainly is a 
means by which we may approach nearer and nearer to the model of human nature we 
set before ourselves. By evil, what we certainly know prevents us from becoming like that 
model. (E4Pref/GI 208) 


This passage seems to indicate that we can interpret Spinoza’s definitions of good and evil 
as “what we certainly know to be useful to us” and “what we know prevents us from being 
masters of our own good,” respectively (E4d1—2), and apply these to how something will 
aid us in approaching some ideal of human perfection. 

Now, how would we apply this to the case of aesthetic value? Rice notes that moral 
evaluations deal with the power of reason, while aesthetic ones presumably would deal 
with imagination, sensation being the traditional sphere of aesthetics (Rice 1996, 
pp. 483). So we would have to come up with a Spinozistic exemplar that would serve in 
this aesthetic capacity. Since Spinoza links his moral exemplar to an individual that 
expresses the highest manifestation of power of action (assuming his moral exemplar to 
be the ‘free man’), we might think that our aesthetic exemplar is one who is sensitized to 
their action upon and power over their environment (Rice 1996, pp. 484-485). I under- 


468 


SPINOZA’S AESTHETICS 


stand this view to be saying that this individual enjoys a sensory awareness of the way 
that her interaction with people and objects around her is a manifestation of activity and 
an increase in her power. 

There is some textual support for this view, at least as regards Spinoza’s view of the pas- 
sions and our representations of our interaction with our environment. We have already 
seen some of his remarks on beauty and how it amounts to the perception of how some 
object is conducive to our well-being. In addition, he tells us that “the affect of joy which is 
related to the mind and body at once I call pleasure or cheerfulness, and that of sadness, 
pain or melancholy” (E3p11s). He also tells us later: 


It is the part of a wise man, I say, to refresh and restore himself in moderation with pleasant 
food and drink, with scents, with the beauty of green plants, with decoration, music, sports, 
the theater, and other things of this kind. . . For the human body is composed of a great many 
parts which constantly require new and varied nourishment, so that the whole body may be 
equally capable of all the things which can follow from its nature, and hence, so that the mind 
also may be equally capable of understanding many things at once. (E4p45c2s) 


These passages indicate that Spinoza not only holds that the imagination represents an 
increase in our power or activity of our mind and body together as pleasure but, in addition, 
that it is appropriate or wise to indulge in these pleasures in moderation. So we might think 
that the aesthetic exemplar is an individual who always avoids those things that would in 
fact cause harm or a decrease in power and seeks out and enjoys those things (in the proper 
amount) that cause strength or an increase in power. 

There are a few problems with this view, however. First, while we have passages like those 
cited above where Spinoza acknowledges that sensory pleasures can be good, there is no indi- 
cation that he thinks there is a separate ‘aesthetic exemplar’ that complements his moral 
exemplar. In addition, we should be wary of any kind of ‘exemplar’ that would guide us to 
power and activity through the imagination. This is because, without the guidance of reason, 
the faculty of the imagination is apt to mislead as often as not. So, for instance, while the 
imagination represents an increase in power and activity as pleasure, Spinoza also tells us 
that, “it should be noted [NS: here] that pleasure and pain are ascribed to a man when one 
part of him is affected more than the rest” (E3p11s). Later on, he warns of these kinds of 
passions, “pleasure can be excessive and evil, whereas pain can be good insofar as the plea- 
sure, or joy, is evil” (E4p43). This is because sometimes one part of an individual can be 
excessively active, which will be represented as pleasure, but will not in fact be good for us. 

The central problem here is this. If what distinguishes the aesthetic exemplar from 
the moral one is that it is primarily concerned with imagination or sensation, then it 
seems like it will not be able to guide us toward real aesthetic good solely on the basis of 
this faculty. However, if we stipulate that it must be led to aesthetic good through reason, 
then it seems like our aesthetic exemplar is not really distinct from the moral exemplar. 
One way to avoid this is to accept that there are not in fact two separate exemplars, but 
just the moral one that is guided by reason. This moral exemplar might always follow the 
dictates of reason but, if we agree with some interpretations, might nevertheless experi- 
ence passions (cf. Nadler 2015 and Soyarslan 2019). If this is the case, then our exem- 
plar might have an aesthetic dimension, enjoying imaginative or sensory pleasures in 
moderation and in a way guided by reason. While this seems to be plausible (at least if we 
accept the plausibility of an impassioned ‘free man’), there is one final interpretation I 
would like to consider. 


469 


DOMENICA G. ROMAGNI 
3.2. A Rationalist Aesthetics 


One thing that many of the interpretations offered above have in common is that they 
assume that an aesthetic theory must have to do with sensory perception and, more spe- 
cifically, the sensory perception of beauty or pleasure (Davidson 2017; Gatens 2015; 
Mignini 1981; Morrison 1989; and Rice 1996). However, this is a very specific concep- 
tion of ‘aesthetics’ that is tied in a particular way to the history of the term. It should be 
acknowledged that asking if Spinoza had an ‘aesthetic’ theory is somewhat anachronistic 
in that the theorist credited with establishing aesthetics as a discipline, Alexander Gottlieb 
Baumgarten, lived after Spinoza’s lifetime. This is not necessarily a problem unless we 
assume that Spinoza’s views on ‘aesthetic’ value characterize this kind of value in the 
post-Baumgartian way. In particular, the problem only arises if we assume that Spinoza’s 
aesthetics will be primarily concerned with beauty or pleasure in relation to sensory 
perception. However, while most interpreters discussing Spinoza’s aesthetics acknowl- 
edge this, their accounts remain tied very closely to the idea of aesthetic experience as a 
sensory one. 

Of course, we do talk about pre-Baumgartian theorists having aesthetic theories. There 
is plenty of discussion of the aesthetic views of philosophers like Plato, Aristotle, Boethius, 
Augustine, and others. However, it is usually acknowledged that these authors might not 
have a conception of ‘aesthetic value’ that aligns exactly with our contemporary senses of 
the term — often, this is what makes their views so interesting. My suggestion, then, is to 
take a similar approach to Spinoza. I think it is appropriate for the historical reasons I have 
already outlined that apply to pre-Baumgartian theorists generally, but I also think it is 
especially appropriate in Spinoza’s case, since one of the hallmarks of his system is the call 
to reinterpret and clarify our commonsense use of concepts. As I have indicated, this is 
definitely the case with his use of moral concepts, and it is arguably true of many of his 
metaphysical concepts (e.g. ‘substance,’ ‘attribute,’ etc.). In this final section, I will suggest 
that we might think of Spinoza as having a rationalist aesthetics centered on a (properly 
Spinozistic) notion of perfection, under which we can understand the concepts like ‘clarity’ 
and ‘distinctness’ as aesthetic as well as epistemic. 

Let us begin with Spinoza’s remarks on ‘perfection.’ As we saw in the Appendix to Part 
1 of the Ethics, Spinoza thinks that at least our general or commonsense usage of this term 
is confused. He stresses this again in the Preface to Part 4, writing, “perfection and imper- 
fection, therefore, are only modes of thinking” (E4pref/GII 207). Immediately following 
this, though, he adds that, “by reality and perfection I understand the same thing” and 
then, a bit later, “by perfection in general I shall, as I have said, understand reality, i.e. the 
essence of each thing insofar as it exists and produces an effect, having no regard to its 
duration” (E4pref/GI 207, 209). So possessing a greater or lesser degree of perfection, for 
Spinoza, amounts to possessing more or less reality, which, as he discusses later in the 
passage, corresponds also to possessing more or less power (E4pref/GII 207). Of course, in 
Spinoza’s system the being with the most power, reality, or perfection is God. God is the 
only thing whose essence involves existence (E1p11), who is the cause of infinitely many 
things in infinitely many modes (E1p16), and whose power of being and acting is his 
essence (E1p34). From these it follows that, in Spinoza’s conception of the world, God is 
the most perfect, powerful, and real being. 

If we stipulate, then, that ‘perfection’ is a better central aesthetic concept for Spinoza’s 
system than sensory beauty, or pleasure, the proper object of aesthetic contemplation and 
satisfaction will be the most perfect being, i.e. God. That we derive some kind of satisfaction 


470 


SPINOZA'’S AESTHETICS 


from the contemplation of God is clear from the text. For instance, Spinoza tells us that we 
can have love for God through reason by our acquisition of adequate ideas of the affections 
of our bodies’ relationship to God (E5p1 3-14). This is a kind of love because it is an increase 
in our power or activity (i.e. joy) accompanied by the idea of God as its cause (D5p15s). In 
addition to this, Spinoza tells us that the intellectual love of God is “the greatest satisfaction 
of the mind” (E5p27, E5p32c). Given that aesthetic objects are meant to give rise to a 
particularly refined or special kind of satisfaction (as opposed to, say, something merely 
agreeable or nice), we can look for nothing in Spinoza’s system that would generate a more 
special or refined satisfaction than the proper contemplation of God. 

I would like to suggest here that, insofar as Spinoza thinks that contemplation and 
understanding of God generates a special kind of satisfaction that is distinguished from 
mere sensory pleasure, this model of an aesthetics focused on perfection is not as strange 
as we might think. I will offer a couple more reasons we might favor this view. First, while 
it is not something all theorists agree on, the view that beauty can be analyzed as a kind of 
perfection has had number of supporters historically. For instance, Aquinas (1912-1936) 
writes that “there are three requirements for beauty . . . first, integrity or perfection” 
(Summa Theologica, 1.39.8). Leibniz also seems to locate a significant connection between 
beauty and perfection, if we attend to the passage from the Discourse discussed in Section 1. 
Of course, often this was understood as perfection of physical form. However, as I mention 
above, it is not unusual for Spinoza to require us to reformulate our understanding of 
certain key concepts. A second, further point of support comes from noting that there is 
also a long tradition of identifying God as the proper object of aesthetic contemplation and 
satisfaction, of which Spinoza was likely aware. We see this most notably with St. Augustine 
(1949). In Book VI of De Musica, he contrasts sensual aesthetic pleasure with that derived 
from contemplation of God: “If we with firm steps draw back from every lascivious thought, 
in which there must always be a reduction of the soul’s full existence, our delight in the 
Rhythm of Reason is restored, and our whole life is turned to God. . .” (Augustine, De 
Musica 6.33). We also see expressed in this quote another somewhat Spinozistic thought 
that, in attending only to the imagination or sensory perception, we are relatively passive 
and our power or activity is diminished. 

Of course, as with Spinoza’s conception of ‘perfection,’ his understanding of God is very 
different from this traditional sense of God at play in Augustine. Rather than being a tran- 
scendent creator of the universe, Spinoza’s God is the immanent cause of all things 
(E1p18), all of which are in God and conceived through God (E1p15). For Spinoza, then, 
contemplation of God involves acquiring true or adequate ideas about the world around 
us. This is because, in understanding these things adequately, we are literally under- 
standing God. So, while I have suggested that God is the proper object of aesthetic satisfac- 
tion, this satisfaction can be generated by properly regarding anything in the world around 
us, ourselves included. One of the ways that adequate ideas are characterized in our per- 
ception is via their clarity and distinctness, so these characteristics will also have some 
aesthetic significance in addition to their epistemic role. Clarity and distinctness not only 
characterize an idea qua being true, but can also be understood as aesthetic properties of 
our idea of God when properly viewed. This is not to mention that ‘clarity’ and ‘distinct- 
ness’ have a similar aesthetic ring to them as other aesthetic properties like ‘gracefulness’ 
or ‘delicacy.’ 

Now one might just think that what I have sketched here is a bit of bait-and-switch. After 
all, other philosophers from this period (e.g. Descartes) rely heavily on an epistemic sense of 
clarity and distinctness, but we probably would not want to attribute to them the kind of 


471 


DOMENICA G. ROMAGNI 


rationalist aesthetic I have discussed. While I acknowledge this is true about Descartes, it is 
precisely the other features that distinguish Spinoza’s philosophy from Descartes’ that 
makes me believe it is appropriate in this case. First, Descartes does not think that we gain 
the same kind of satisfaction from contemplating God that Spinoza does. Since I have indi- 
cated this satisfaction is part of what makes God convincing as the appropriate object of 
aesthetic contemplation, this is one feature of Spinoza’s philosophy that makes a rationalist 
aesthetic appropriate in his case. Second, Descartes does not share Spinoza’s view that God 
is the immanent cause of all things, which means that even if Descartes thought that God 
was somehow the proper object of aesthetic regard, the clear and distinct ideas we would 
have of things around us would not arise from the contemplation of this proper object of 
aesthetic regard. From these contrasts we can begin to see that, rather than precluding him 
from having an aesthetic theory as Leibniz believed, Spinoza’s metaphysics is what enables 
him to have the kind of aesthetic theory I have suggested in this section that he has. 


4. Conclusion 


In this chapter, I have given an overview of some of the ways that theorists have inter- 
preted Spinoza’s aesthetic views. The most popular view historically has been to think of 
Spinoza as having no aesthetic theory, or at least holding a kind of anti-realist position 
where aesthetic properties are not real properties of objects, but merely imaginative rep- 
resentations of their effects on us. Those who hold this interpretive stance are supported 
by Spinoza’s numerous remarks that beauty and ugliness, like good and evil or perfection 
and imperfection, are nothing but imaginative ideas. However, other interpreters have 
argued that Spinoza can be understood as having a more robust aesthetic theory based on 
the idea that our imaginative representations of how objects affect us can report on what 
objects in our vicinity will be good or bad for us. On this view, we can construct an 
‘aesthetic ideal’ whose refined sensibilities will guide her always toward those things that 
are good for her and allow her to avoid those things that are not. One modification of this 
view that I suggested would be to think of Spinoza’s ‘ethical ideal’ as having an aesthetic 
side, where the individual who is led by reason will also take aesthetic pleasure in her 
encounters with the world. 

Following this overview, I have suggested that all of these readings are somewhat 
anachronistic in that they assume a model of aesthetics that was not available to 
Spinoza. While I do not think that this is inherently a problem for these views, I believe 
that we are able to extract an aesthetic theory that is more properly in the spirit of 
Spinoza’s project, in addition to being more historically appropriate. On this view, our 
aesthetic focus should be ‘perfection’ rather than ‘beauty’ and our aesthetic apprecia- 
tion need not be a matter of imagination or the senses. Since Spinoza understands per- 
fection as power, the proper object of aesthetic satisfaction in a Spinozistic aesthetic is 
God. When properly attended to, this object generates a unique and particularly refined 
sort of satisfaction. Aesthetic contemplation of God is something that is achieved by 
acquiring adequate ideas about the world around us, which are characterized by their 
clarity and distinctness. On this view, these properties acquire an aesthetic dimension 
that complements their epistemic role. While I do not have space to fully defend this 
view, I aim to have presented an alternative that is attractive both in virtue of its 
Spinozistic spirit and historical fittingness. 


472 


SPINOZA'’S AESTHETICS 


References 


Aquinas, T. (1912-1936). Summa Theologicae (trans the English Dominican Fathers). London: 
Burns, Oates, and Washburne. 

Augustine. (1949). St Augustine’s De Musica (trans. W. F. Jackson Knight), 185-206. London: The 
Orthological Institute. Budapest: Dean of the Faculty of Humanities of Eétvés Lorand University. 

Curley, E.M. (1988). Behind the Geometrical Method: A Reading of Spinoza’s Ethics. Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press. 

Davidson, C. (2017). A Spinozist aesthetics of affect and its political implications. In: The Concept of 
Affectivity in Early Modern Philosophy (ed. G. Boros, J. Szalai, and O.I. Toth). 

Garrett, D. (1995). Spinoza’s ethical theory. In: The Cambridge Companion to Spinoza (ed. D. Garrett), 
267-314. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Kisner, M.J. (2010). Perfection and desire: Spinoza on the good. Pacific Philosophical Quarterly 91: 
97-117. 

LeBuffe, M. (2005). Spinoza’s summum bonum. Pacific Philosophical Quarterly 86: 243-266. 

Leibniz, G.W. (1991). Discourse on Metaphysics and Other Essays (trans. D. Garber and R. Ariew). 
Indianapolis, IN: Hackett Publishing. 

Gatens, M. (2015). Spinoza on goodness and beauty and the prophet and the artist. European Journal 
of Philosophy 23 (1): 1-16. 

Mignini, F. (1981). Ars Imaginandi. Naples: Edizioni Scientifiche Italiane. 

Morrison, J.C. (1989). Why Spinoza had no aesthetics. Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism 47: 
359-365. 

Nadler, S. (2006). Spinoza’s Ethics: An Introduction. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Nadler, S. (2015). On Spinoza’s “free man.” Journal of the American Philosophical Association 1 (1): 
103-120. 

Rice, L.C. (1996). Spinoza’s relativistic aesthetics. Tijdschrift Voor Filosofie 58 (3): 476-489. 

Soyarslan, S. (2019). Two ethical ideals in Spinoza’s Ethics: the free man and the wise man. Journal 
of the American Philosophical Association 5 (3): 357-370. 

Steinberg, J. (2016). Affect, desire, and judgment in Spinoza’s account of motivation. British Journal 
for the History of Philosophy 24 (1): 67-87. 

Uhlmann, A. (2011). Spinoza, ratiocination, and art. In: Spinoza Now (ed. D. Vardoulakis). 
Minneapolis: University Minnesota Press. 

Youpa, A. (2010). Spinoza’s theories of value. British Journal for the History of Philosophy 18 (2): 
209-229. 


473 


44 


Following Traces in the Sand: Spinoza 
on Semiotics 


LORENZO VINCIGUERRA 


It is never we who affirm or deny something of the thing; 
it is the thing itself that affirms or denies something of itself in us. 
(Spinoza, Short Treatise II 16 5) 


Just as we say that a body is in motion, and not that motion is in a body 
we ought to say that we are in thought and not that thoughts are in us. 
(Peirce, Collected Papers 5.289n) 


Talking about semiotics in Spinoza is unusual. Introduced by Locke, the term does not 
appear in any of Spinoza’s works. On the use of signs, however, Port-Royal and Hobbes had 
already left important considerations, which were later taken up again by Locke, Berkeley, 
Condillac, and Vico. Yet, in Spinoza, a semiotic reflection is far from peripheral. The distinc- 
tion between philosophical and prophetic revelation, the separation between philosophy 
and theology (TTP ch. I), the theory of truth and certainty (TIE §35), and the passages of 
the KV dedicated to divine revelation all depend on signs (KV II 24, 10). This leads directly 
to the heart of Ethics, where the imaginatio is renamed cognitio ex signis. If, therefore, the 
importance of Spinoza’s meditation on the nature of the signs no longer needs to be dem- 
onstrated, its logic remains to be understood in order to make the necessary historical and 
philosophical evaluations. A semiotics of Spinoza should be read in this sense. 

Reading a text in this sense is ancient indeed, and refers in some ways to the very origin 
of philosophy. The nature of sign has always carried the problem of meaning and interpre- 
tation, essence and destiny of man in his relationship with the gods and nature. The Platonic 
etymology that combines sema and soma links the philosophical destiny of the sign to that 
of the body, providing the fundamental opening to the long history of dualism between 
body and soul. Aristotelian logic gave it its first and lasting systematization with the theory 
of syllogism, the doctrine of substance and accidents, to which the Stoics opposed a logic of 
the event starting from inferences based on signs. These traditions were never abandoned 
from antiquity up to the modern age, going through the middle ages and then gradually to 
its deep rethinking in the logic of the relative and in the semiotics of Peirce. 

This is a minor history, perhaps, at least compared to the more noble field of 
metaphysics. Spinoza remained for a long time on the margins of both, removed from the 


A Companion to Spinoza, First Edition. Edited by Yitzhak Y. Melamed. 
© 2021 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2021 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd. 


474 


FOLLOWING TRACES IN THE SAND 


latter, almost forgotten by the former. He was too ‘Cartesian’ to seriously evaluate his 
contribution to the history of representation; too ‘oriental,’ as Bayle and Hegel thought, to 
be assimilated without damage by the theological tradition. It is thus oblivion that makes 
Spinoza’s semiotics an anomaly. The aim of this chapter is to sketch an outline of how the 
theory of modal affection gives birth to a particular way of understanding signs and 
meaning, leading to a semiotic comprehension of imagination (for a larger and detailed 
study, cf. Vinciguerra 2018). 


1. Ontological Premises 


Spinoza stresses the importance of distinguishing between imagination and intellection. 
However, this distinction often suffers from an unconscious bias in interpreters. Far from 
being equivalent to a theory of faculties, the three kinds of knowledge do not overlap with 
a tripartition of the soul, much less a somatic tripartition. Neither can they be considered 
‘internal’ to man, but rather they are different powers of thought of which the corpus-mens 
union is capable. Man is not a substance. Thought is not one of his attributes. He is only a 
mode of it, an idea of a particular body (idea corporis). It is not thought that is in him, but 
he who is in thought, more subject to thoughts, than thoughts are subject to him. Just as 
we say that a body is in motion and not that motion is in a body, we ought to say that we 
are in thought and not that thoughts are in us. As such, the human mind resembles a 
stream of perceptions that are part of the general ordo et connexio idearum of nature (E2p7 
| GII/89/21-22). In nature, all minds are nothing but ideas of bodies and bodily affections 
(E2p13s | GII/96/28-32). 

This very peculiar epistemology follows from the doctrine of attributes according to 
which neither a body can cause a mind to think, nor can a mind cause a body to move 
(E3p2 | G II/141/6—8); and just as the thoughts and ideas of things are ordered and 
chained in the mind, so the affections of the body, or images of things, are very intention- 
ally ordered and chained in the body (E5p1 | GII/281/10-12). Logically and ontologically 
speaking, this means that there are no minds before the chains of ideas of which they are 
the product. The idea of subjectum does not pre-exist the ideas that designate it as such. The 
existence itself of an idea of a thinking subject is the product of chains (concatenationes) of 
ideas mostly ignored. Its idea does not precede it, but proceeds from it. Hence, there are not 
first things (res) and subsequently their ideas with their bodily affections; rather things 
exist to the extent that their ideas and affections are asserted. This is indeed the real 
Copernican revolution taking place at the heart of our nascent modernity against its sub- 
jectivism, transcendentalism, individualism, and anthropocentrism. We are therefore 
called to a radical inversion of perspective. Man’s mind and body are part of nature. The 
human body is not an individual in its own right, but constantly relies on others; the 
human mind is not the origin of ideas, but itself an idea, which has its cause in another. 
Not thought, but desire, unlimited and endless, constitutes the essence of man. 

“From the necessity of the of divine nature must follow infinitely many things in infi- 
nitely many modes (i.e. everything which can fall under an infinite intellect)” (E1p16 | G 
II/60/1 7-19). This is indeed one of the most important propositions of Ethics. By virtue of 
the doctrine of attributes, from the thinking nature must follow infinite ideas in infinite 
ways (i.e. all ideas that can fall under an infinite mind). The same must also be said of the 
nature of the extension attribute, from which must follow infinite bodies in infinite ways 
(ie. all the bodies that movement/rest can distinguish and modify). Among these, obviously, 


475 


LORENZO VINCIGUERRA 


is the human body as well. Therefore to think of Spinoza’s epistemology means to insert 
correctly the infinite bodies (including human bodies) modified in infinite ways into this 
ontological and cosmological framework. To follow this perspective seriously, neither the 
intellect (equal in all men) nor the imagination (particular in each) can be considered 
exclusive faculties of man. What we understand adequately and truly, writes Spinoza, we 
understand because the human mind is part of God’s infinite intellect (E2pllc | G 
11/94—95/30-6). 

Now, there is no well-founded reason, if not yet a reiterated prejudice, that this cosmic 
perspective should not be valid also for the imagination: what men imagine, they imagine 
according to the common order of the infinite extension within which they are moved, 
that is, according to general laws to which bodies respond as part of that infinitely modified 
individual that is the whole universe. Just as man cannot be called the subject of thought, 
but rather a modification of thought, neither can he be considered the author of imagina- 
tion. It is better to think instead that he is an actor or, as Spinoza will say more properly, an 
interpres (TTPI | GIII/15/10). To affirm, therefore, that rather than having thought in us, 
it is we who are in thought, implies at the same time to affirm that the extension extends 
itself to moving in us and determining all our bodily affections. 


2. The Semiosis of Imagination 


Spinoza characterizes imaginatio as cognitio ex signis (E2p40s2 | GII/122/6). According to 
Ethics, the mind imagines when it considers bodies through their images. What are these 
imagines rerum? They are “the affections of the human Body whose ideas [re]present 
external bodies as present to us [. . .], even if they do not reproduce the figures of things” 
(E2p17s | GII/106/7—9). Tools are provided for a genetic and physical definition. Images 
are rooted in marks (vestigia): “When a fluid part of the human Body is determined by an 
external body so that it frequently thrusts against a soft part [of the Body], it changes its 
surface and, as it were, impresses on [the soft part] certain traces (vestigia) of the external 
body striking against [the fluid part]” (E2p13sPhysDigpost5 | G II/102—103/32-3). 

This claim becomes clear if we take account of two of Spinoza’s key doctrines. First, 
pananimism: “For the things that we have shown so far are completely general, and do not 
pertain more to man than to other Individuals, all of which, though in different degrees, 
are nevertheless animate” (E2p13s | GII/96/26—28). Second, the definition of Individuum: 
“When a number of bodies, whether of the same or different size, are so constrained by 
other bodies that they lie upon one another, or if they so move, whether with the same or 
different degrees of speed, that they communicate their motion to one another in a certain 
fixed manner, we shall say that those bodies are united to each other and that they all 
together compose one body or Individual, which is distinguished from the others by this 
union of bodies” (E2p13sPhysDigd | G II/99-100/27-5). 

It is noteworthy here that no anthropocentric perspective is assumed. Instead, the defi- 
nition of body has a wide cosmological sense, in which all bodies — at least, all bodies 
capable of impressing marks (vestigia) and of being marked themselves — that are able to 
affect and be affected by other bodies are in principle included. Of course, according to its 
complexity, the human body has an exceptionally rich manner of tracing and being traced, 
and therefore, of imagining. But there are no reasons to deny that other bodies possess the 
power of imagining according to their own complexity. As long as the physical conditions 
required by Postulate V are satisfied, the power to be marked and to mark should be recognized 


476 


FOLLOWING TRACES IN THE SAND 


as a power of all corporeal modes, regardless of what we usually consider animate. The 
notion of vestigia has to be considered as the minimum datum of a corporal modification. 
But also, just as the affirmation of an idea is the result of an inference, so too the vestigium 
is none other than the physical aspect of that result under a certain interpretation. If ideas 
are representative and have meaning from the standpoint of the attribute of thought, 
images, supported by vestigia, carry meaning from the point of view of the attribute of 
extension. This implies something simple, but of considerable philosophical weight: 
meaning does not originate in humans. Rather than creating meaning, they modify it. The 
power of the human mind to signify is not an empire in an empire, but is always inscribed 
in the attribute of thought, as much as their modified and modifying bodies are inscribed 
in the attribute of extension. To say it with Spinoza’s words: “It is never we who affirm or 
deny something of the thing; it is the thing itself that affirms or denies something of itself 
in us” (KV 1116 5 | GI/83/15-17). 

In addition, we can allow that human nature tends to mistakenly project final causes 
onto things and events, thus generating a distorted understanding of the causal order. But 
this does not imply that things themselves have no meaning, as advocates of a modern and 
nihilistic vision tend to claim. If our imagination needs marks and signs, that is to say, 
some affections coming from the outside world, it follows that we are neither the origin nor 
the authors of their meanings. We are rather their interpreters. But rather than being a 
distinctively homan phenomenon, the knowledge that arises from imagination pertains in 
different degrees to all individuals, as long as they respond to the definitions of individuum 
and its vestigia. We therefore need to depart from an anthropocentric point of view and 
adopt a new perspective, in which human imagination is considered a particular kind of 
interpretation of physical affections in a general regime of meaning. Marks become signs 
as soon as they get interpreted. But this must also be true for other beings. It should not be 
shocking, then, to speak about the imagination of an ant or of a sunflower. Under these 
conditions, men, as well as other beings, can be considered ‘semiotic automata’ moved and 
moving through the actions of marks. Such an extensive capacity to mark and be marked 
gives a semiotic and cosmological dimension to imagination, as derived from signs. 

We imagine because we are affected bodies. This is not a mere materialistic approach to 
imagination. Rather, it is a semiotic expression of an infinite causality of nature. As much 
as other bodies, finite modes of the extension, we participate in the general semiosis of 
nature, modifying and being modified by other bodies. It is noteworthy that the notion of a 
vestigium is built out of the common notions that are used to characterize extension (motus, 
individuum), in such a way that the vestigia can be considered a secondary common notion. 
Spinoza’s definition of images lies in the physical essence of the mark. While, for Descartes, 
the vestigia were simple pores of the brain, Spinoza awards them a much more important 
role and considers them as the fundamenta rationis. They physically contribute to shaping 
the existence of particular individuals and determining their imaginative power. The 
marks, and consequently the images, are corporeal affections, effects of motion. As such, 
they belong to the attribute of extension. Instead, the representations, or meanings of 
things, are made up of ideas of images, and not of the images themselves. Strictly speaking, 
the power of imagining, as a power of making sense, is a virtue of the mind, even if this 
power is matched by the virtue of the body. 

Now, how does the imagination work? What does imagining entail? E2p17s answers 
this question quite clearly: to imagine is to produce chains of images that follow the order 
of the affections of the body. This order and the particular chains of images that occur in 
any specific body will, of course, differ from one individual to another: “for example, from 


477 


LORENZO VINCIGUERRA 


the thought of the word pomum a Roman will immediately pass to the thought of the fruit, 
which has no similarity to the articulate sound and nothing in common with it, except 
that the Body of the same man has often been affected by these two, i.e. that the man often 
heard the word pomum while he saw the fruit. And in this way each of us will pass from one 
thought to another, as each one’s association (consuetudo) has ordered the images of things 
in the body. For example, a soldier, having seen traces (vestigia) of a horse in the sand, will 
immediately pass from the thought of a horse to the thought of a horseman, and from that 
to the thought of war, etc. But a Farmer will pass from the thought of a horse to the thought 
of a plow, and then to that of a field, etc. And so each one, according as he has been accus- 
tomed to join and connect (jungere & concatenare) the images of things in this or that way, 
will pass from one thought to another” (E2p18s | GII/107/16-28). 

There are several remarkable features of this passage. 

First, no distinction is drawn between linguistic signs and natural signs; considered 
from the point of view of their meaning, a mark in the sand and the sound of a voice work 
in the same way, allowing for a very broad theory of meaning, potentially applicable to 
images of all kinds. 

Second, the meaning of an image is not given with one isolated image, but only by a 
concatenation of images. As a result, the sonus articulatus or the pomum is meaningless until 
it is connected to another image. To grant meaning is therefore to connect images. 
Moreover, all chains refer to a particular interpreter. The articulated sound pomum makes 
sense to a Roman who understands Latin; but for a Chinese person it would arrest a 
chain of meaning and produce a distractio, that Spinoza calls admiratio, which is a 
sudden interruption of a chain of images, suspending the sense of ideas (E3,DefAff4exp | 
GII/191-192/26-25). 

Third, there can be no imagination without interpreter. Pomum means nothing if it is 
not interpreted by a Roman. In itself, a trace in the sand has no meaning as long as there is 
no interpreter on which it has some particular effect. In principle, this must be true not 
only of human interpreters such as a soldier, a farmer or a prophet, but also for other indi- 
viduals (humans, animals, plants, minerals. . .) capable of playing the role of interpretant, 
as may be the case of an ant climbing the track left in the sand by a horse (the philosophical 
problem is whether or not we can limit the chain of interpreters). To the ant, the mark 
would mean something different, perhaps just the effort that it takes its body to overcome 
the obstacle. Thus, more generally, imagination is based on a cosmic interpretation of 
signs. 

Fourth, since chains of images are always specific to particular interpreters, the laws of 
their concatenatio must be found in the habit (consuetudo) of the interpreter. The complexion 
of an individual’s habits is what Spinoza calls constitutio, dispositio, ingenium. Every image, 
as soon as it makes sense, is the product of an interpretation that takes place in the body of 
the interpreter, that is, in his or her way of connecting images, the ideas of which represent 
external bodies as if they were present to him or her (cf. Messeri 1990, p. 195; Jaquet 2018, 
pp. 52-64). 

Fifth, Spinoza seems to leave the chain of images open. As he puts it, “a soldier, having 
seen traces of a horse in the sand, will immediately pass from the thought of a horse to the 
thought of a horseman, and from that to the thought of war, etc.” In a way, there is no end 
to the chain of images. Semiosis is infinite. As we saw, however, this does not imply that the 
connections between images are not law governed. Upon hearing the sound pomum, a 
Roman will think of a fruit, and will keep proceeding from one thought to another. If he is 
hungry, the fruit will mean something to eat; if he is a fruit seller, it will mean money; if he 


478 


FOLLOWING TRACES IN THE SAND 


is a Christian it will mean sin, etc. Similar considerations apply to the soldier, the 
countryman, the prophet, and so on for all individuals involved in the semiotic process of 
nature. 

Sixth, we can conclude that the end for which the chain of meanings works is appetite 
itself, from the nature of which there necessarily follow those things that contribute to the 
preservation of the individual: “By the end for the sake of which we do something I under- 
stand appetite” (E4d7 | G II/210/17-18). The habitus of the appetite is the pragmatic goal 
of meaning. An image, then, works as a sign, whose final meaning is an action, a habit, a 
way of living, a form of life — to say it with Wittgenstein. Peirce’s pragmatism seemed to be 
very close to Spinoza on this point when he defines the sign as something which represents 
something to somebody, in view of something in some respect or capacity (cf. Nesher 1994, 
pp. 546-575; Vinciguerra 2001, pp. 249-267; Fabbrichesi 2019, pp. 103-118; Henri 
Atlan refers to James, cf. Atlan 2018, pp. 296-299). 

Spinoza develops this line of thought in his theory of the communes imagines. Here 
again, a genetic definition is provided of what the philosophical tradition has called 
Universals: “So many images (e.g. of men) are formed at one time in the human body that 
they surpass the power of imagining — not entirely, of course, but still to the point where 
the Mind can imagine neither slight differences of the singular men (such as the color and 
size of each one, etc.) nor their determinate number, and imagines distinctly only what 
they all agree in, insofar as they affect the body. For the body has been affected most by 
[what is common], since each singular has affected it [by this property]. And the mind 
expresses this by the word man, and predicates it of infinitely many singulars” (E2p40s1 | 
GIl/121/13-22). 

It should be noted that the communes imagines and the ideas that correspond to them are 
not formed by everyone in the same way. They vary from individual to individual, depend- 
ing on the particular things that have affected a body, how often the body has been affected, 
and thus which things the mind imagines or recollects more easily: “For example, those 
who have more often regarded with men’s stature with wonder will understand by the 
name man an animal of erect stature. But those who have been accustomed to consider 
something else, will form another common image of men — e.g. that man is an animal 
capable of laughter, or a featherless biped, or a rational animal. And similarly concerning 
the others — each will form universal images of thing according to the disposition of his 
body” (E2p40s1 | GII/121/27-33). 

These universal images are signs, indicating the existence of a law governing the way 
images are recollected. On the one hand, they remain particular because they are different 
for everyone; on the other hand, they serve as universals, extending all the way to 
transcendental terms. As before, however, these signs respond to the same genetic laws: a 
sign is made out of images, images are made out of traces, and traces presuppose what we 
could call a certain degree of ‘traceability’ of the bodies. 


3. Facies Totius Universi 


The body is a modal individual. As such, it includes all its kinetic modifications, constituted 
by its ways of affecting and being affected by other bodies. This passivity/activity consti- 
tutes its traceability. The traceability of the body, that is, all the ways it is able to trace and 
to be traced, ordered, and interconnected must therefore correspond to its memory. It thus 
becomes a kind of scriptura, so to say, to view the body as a field of inscribing and writing 


479 


LORENZO VINCIGUERRA 


practices made up of signs left by other bodies and their interpretations. The memory 
penetrates so deeply into the essence of the body that it becomes part of its individual iden- 
tity. And if, as we said, the body is nothing more than the extension of its corporal prac- 
tices, it now seems that these practices are the very exercise of memory. In this regard, it is 
interesting to note that, in order to define the limits of individual identity, Spinoza takes the 
example of a certain Spanish poet who has forgotten his own fabulas & tragedias (E4p39s | 
GII/240/22-28). It is surely significant that Spinoza illustrates his conception of the living 
individual body with the practice of language and writing. By doing so, he is able to effec- 
tively demonstrate how the nature of an individual is not fundamentally different from its 
living practice, which serves to individualize its existence and define its particular essence. 
In this sense, the memory can be seen as the power of the living body to inscribe itself into, 
and to be inscribed by, the world. Since, as we have seen, it is not only human bodies that 
carry traces of their affections, traceability is a feature of all individuals in nature, under 
this precise condition: that they are constituted by a ratio of softness and fluidity, which 
makes it possible for them to receive the marks of other bodies. For this reason, a theory of 
traceability, in principle, possesses a cosmological dimension. 

We would here suggest the following hypothesis. The infinite mediate mode of extension 
— what Spinoza calls in a letter facies totius universi, an expression we find in Ep. 64 (G 
IV/278/26) that is never really clarified — coincides with the infinite traceability that is 
necessary to individuate an infinity of bodies. The infinite mediate mode of the universe 
embraces the infinity of the modified modifications of any body in such a way that “we 
shall easily conceive that the whole of Nature is one individual, whose parts, i.e. all bodies, 
vary in infinite ways without any change of the whole individual” (E2p13sPhysDigl7s | G 
II/102/10-13). If this is right, the notion of traceability serves to clarify the cosmological 
aspect of Spinoza’s ontology. The inner traceability of the body, on which its power of 
imagining rests, and the infinite traceability of the universe as the results of its physical 
laws, constitute the two cornerstones of Spinoza’s physics and cosmology, the alpha and 
the omega of corporeal affections. Traceability can be regarded as a ‘natural scripture,’ a 
kind of cosmic writing freed from all the theological prejudices, a writing that is totally 
natural, immanent in all things, and which has no end, no beginning, no author and no 
subject. The traditional paradigm of the two books — the book of Nature and the book of 
the Bible — that still exerted a strong influence on Galileo, thus reaches a point of fulfillment 
and comes to an end with Spinoza. After Spinoza, nature can no longer be conceived as a 
book or a text, since both of these assume an author external to nature. Instead, Spinoza’s 
scripture is perfectly naturalized in its infinite traces, figures and signs. It has no subject 
other than the eternal world itself, understood as an infinite space of inscription. No longer 
the work of a great architect, nor the infinite manuscript of an author who is the sole 
owner of its meaning, the world becomes the immanent aspect of every sign and meaning. 

The extended substance is therefore modally distinguished in infinite bodies deter- 
mining them in every minimal part tracing each other. Two are, in fact, as we know, the 
infinite modes of extension: the one immediately infinite, the movement/rest, the other 
averagely infinite, that is, the infinite body of the whole universe infinitely modified in 
every part. We shall call it its infinite traceability. Although Spinoza does not reserve any 
name for the infinite mediate mode of thought, it must correspond to something like an 
infinite and eternal Mens that affirms the infinite traceability of the infinite body that is the 
universe. If, then, man is by nature an interpreter of signs, he is not so by virtue of a 
supposed transcendental faculty of his soul, but as a body that expresses the essence of 
God, considered as extended, modified by other bodies that trace him, and which he in turn 


480 


FOLLOWING TRACES IN THE SAND 


traces. An imaginative individual, man knows by signs because his body responds to 
general semiophysical laws that he shares in nature with other individuals. Imagination 
therefore pertains not only to human power, but to all those individuals who, though in 
different measures, are capable of exercising memory. Often the Spinozian pantheism has 
been recognized as a panpsychism, establishing a comparison with Leibniz. Less often, it 
was seen that his panpsychism implied a kind of pansemiotism. Hence, it is possible to 
complete Spinoza’s ontology, particularly his cosmology, as shown in the table below. 

In this light it is possible to return to the famous seventh proposition of the second part 
of the Ethics, and to its so-called ‘parallelism’ (we owe to the imagination of Leibniz, not to 
Spinoza), in order to explore its cosmological perspective more deeply, while attempting to 
maintain its original meaning: the order and connection of images is the same as the order 
and connection of ideas. We can add that the order and connection of inadequate ideas is 
the same as the order and connection of images. It is also possible to give a renewed 
meaning to the first theorem of the last part of the Ethics: “In the same way that the 
thoughts and ideas of things are ordered and connected in the mind, so the affections of 
the body or images of things, are ordered and connected in the body” (G II/281/10-12). In 
fact, “inadequate and confused ideas follow with the same necessity as adequate or clear 
and distinct, ideas” (E2p36 | G I/117/32-33). In the idea of God, they both express the 
same order and necessity. 

The medieval definition of the sign aliquid quod stat pro aliquo is close to the definition of 
mode, id, quod in alio est, per quod etiam concipitur (E1d5 | G II/45/20-21). It is not a 
question of claiming that the mode is a sign. Spinoza never says that. Rather, this being for 
something else, its way to refer, makes the mode a sign for all intents and purposes. 
Spinoza’s semiotics will then appear perhaps less anomalous than it could have seemed at 
a first sight, even if, for this reason, no less original. It refers to traditions of thought and 
thinkers to which he was in part already approached, such as Stoicism, Bruno, later Vico, 
and the American pragmatists James and in particular Peirce, for whom where there is a 
sign, there is also a mind. 


Attributa Modi infiniti Modi infiniti Modi finiti Affectiones 
immediati mediati 
Extensio Motus/quies Facies totius universi Corpora Vestigia 
(Infinite Imagines Signa 
traceability) 
Cogitatio Intellectus Ordo & connexio Mentes Imaginatio 
(idea Dei) idearum (ideae) (ideae 
(Mens universi) inadaequatae) 
References 


Atlan, H. (2018). Cours de philosophie biologique et cognitiviste. Spinoza et la biologie actuelle. Paris: O. 
Jacob. 

Curley, E. (ed. and trans.) (2016). The Collected Works of Spinoza, 2 vols. Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press. 

Fabbrichesi, R. (2019). Spinoza, Emerson, and Peirce: re-thinking the genealogy of pragmatism. 
Transactions of the Charles S. Peirce Society 55 (2). 


481 


LORENZO VINCIGUERRA 


Jaquet, C. (2018). Spinoza a l’ceuvre, Paris: Editions de la Sorbonne. 

Messeri, M. (1990). L’epistemologia di Spinoza. Saggio sui corpi e le menti. Milan: Il Saggiatore. 

Nesher, D. (1994). Spinoza’s theories of truth. In: Spinoza: The Enduring Questions (ed. G. Hunter). 
Toronto: University of Toronto Press. 

Vinciguerra, L. (2001). Image et signe entre Spinoza et Peirce. Pour une lecture pragmatiste du spi- 
nozisme. In: Quel avenir pour Spinoza? Enquéte sur les spinozismes a venir (ed. L. Vinciguerra). Paris: 
Kimé. 

Vinciguerra, L. (2018). Spinoza et le signe. La logique de l’imagination. Paris: Vrin. 


482 


45 


Spinoza and the Grammar of the Hebrew 
Language 


GUADALUPE GONZALEZ DIEGUEZ 


The Compendium of Grammar of the Hebrew Language (CGH) is arguably Spinoza’s least 
known work. As it has reached us, it is an unfinished text of 33 chapters included in the 
Latin edition of Spinoza’s Opera Posthuma published in 1677 by Jarig Jelles, but absent from 
the Dutch version, which appeared in the same year, under the title of Nagelate Schriften. 
The CGH was included in the edition of Spinoza’s works by C. Gebhardt (1925), in a 
reproduction of the editio princeps, but its translations were rather scant until the end of 
the twentieth century: Rubin (1905); Bloom, (1962); Askénazi and Askénazi-Gerson 
(1968). Studies were also scant: Bernays (1850) and Porges (1924-1926) stand out 
among the oldest. In recent years, a wave of versions in modern languages and of studies 
have brought about a new interest in this work by Spinoza, mostly in Europe: Klijnsmit 
(1986 1988a 1988b), Levy (1987), Proietti (1989), Cassuto (1999), Harvey (2002); 
Gonzalez Diéguez (2005), Totaro and Gargiulo (2013), Vrtilka (2015), Nadler (2018), and 
the collective volume edited by Baumgarten et al. (2019). The new bilingual (Latin-French) 
edition of Spinoza’s complete works currently in progress by the Groupe de Recherches 
Spinozistes, under the general direction of Pierre-Francois Moreau published by Presses 
Universitaires de France in the collection Epimethée, has announced a forthcoming volume 
containing the CGH, with the text edited by O. Proietti, and the translation by J.-P. Osier. 

The CGH was found unfinished among Spinoza’s papers, and its title was most prob- 
ably decided by the friends of Spinoza who acted as editors of the writings that he left 
behind, namely, Lodewijk Meijer, Jarig Jelles, Georg Herman Schuller, Pieter van Gent, Jan 
Rieuwertsz, Jan Hendriksz Glazemaker, and Johannes Bowmeester (Nadler 2018, p. 156). 
The decision to include it in the Opera Posthuma seems to have been a bit of an after- 
thought. In fact, the CGH appears as an annex at the very end of the first volume, and 
with an independent pagination from the rest of the volume. Unfortunately, the text also 
seems to have been little revised, and it is marred by numerous typos and mistakes 
(Licata 2019, p. 52). 

The general Preface to Opera Posthuma offers some other interesting remarks about how 
the editors perceived this work. They tell us that Spinoza had planned to divide it into two 
parts; a first part, dedicated to ‘etymology,’ that is, in the Latinate-inflected lingo of seven- 
teenth-century grammatical studies, the different parts of discourse and their morphology, 


A Companion to Spinoza, First Edition. Edited by Yitzhak Y. Melamed. 
© 2021 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2021 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd. 


483 


GUADALUPE GONZALEZ DIEGUEZ 


and a second one, dedicated to ‘syntax,’ which he did not manage to begin. The Preface also 
mentions that Spinoza intended to offer a grammar of Hebrew “more geometrico demonstrata,” 
a problematic claim that certainly does not fit the description of the text we currently have. 

The Admonitio ad lectorem that opens the CGH tells us that Spinoza composed this work “at 
the request of certain of his friends who were diligently studying the Sacred Tongue, inasmuch 
as they recognized him rightly as one who had been steeped in it from his earliest youth, was 
diligently devoted to it for many years afterward, and had achieved a complete understanding 
of the innermost essence of the language.” According to this, Spinoza would not so much have 
composed CGH motu proprio, but rather at the request of his friends, heterodox Christians 
for the most part, who wanted to access the Old Testament in its original Hebrew version. 

The Admonitio also tells us that “like many of his other works, it is unfinished because of 
the untimely death of the author (intempestiva auctoris morte).” According to this, the CGH 
would have been among the latest productions of Spinoza. Harvey (2002, p. 107) and 
Nadler agree with this assessment: “This work would have coincided with his writing of 
the PT, which was left unfinished at his death in 1677, and, very likely, his continued work 
on the manuscript of the Ethics.” He was also at the time putting together post-publication 
adnotationes meant to clarify various passages in the TTP, which had been published in 
1670 (Nadler 2018, p. 156). Proietti (1989) has argued, on the other hand, that it is more 
likely that the CGH was undertaken a few years earlier, closer in time to the composition of 
the TTP, and was subsequently abandoned, as Spinoza moved on to issues that seemed 
more urgent, namely, the composition of the TP. Gebhardt included it in the first volume of 
his edition, dedicated to the works of youth, because independently of its actual date of 
composition, he considered it the product of Spinoza’s studies during his youth, as he 
explains in his Textgestaltung (G 1925, volume I, p. 626). 

In any case, it is reasonable to suppose that the composition of a Hebrew grammar was 
part and parcel of the more general project of literary criticism of Scripture undertaken by 
Spinoza in the TTP, and, if it ever existed, the translation of the Pentateuch into a yet unde- 
termined language that is mentioned by some of his early biographers: Sebastian Kortholt, 
in his preface to his father, Christian Kortholt’s De tribus impostoribus (Kortholt 1700, n.p.), 
refers to a Latin translation, and Johannes Colerus, in The Life of Benedict de Spinosa 
(Colerus 1706, pp. 74-75) says that it was a Dutch translation. Indeed, in TTP Spinoza 
establishes that knowledge of Hebrew is the first step in his proposed method for interpret- 
ing Scripture: “since all the writers of both the Old and the New Testaments were Hebrews, 
a study of the Hebrew language must undoubtedly be a prime requisite not only for an 
understanding of the books of the Old Testament, which were written in that language, 
but also for the New Testament” (TTP VII G III/100). 

The friends of Spinoza who acted as editors considered that it was not worth the while 
to include this grammatical treatise in the Dutch version of Spinoza’s works, since, as Jelles 
says in the Preface to the Nagelate Schriften, anyone who is going to study Hebrew would 
already master Latin (Spinoza 167 7a, §75). 


1. Sources 


Spinoza expresses twice in CGH (G I/24, GI/72) the need to write a grammar of the Hebrew 
language, and not of the language of Scripture, as presumably all earlier grammarians of 
Hebrew had done. His explicit aim is the study of Hebrew as a natural language spoken by 
a specific people. However, Spinoza is well aware of the difficulties presented by the task of 


484 


SPINOZA AND THE GRAMMAR OF THE HEBREW LANGUAGE 


reconstructing a half-lost language, only partially preserved in the biblical books, particu- 
larly on account of the difficult historical circumstances suffered by the people of Israel 
(TTP G III/106). Implicit in this aim is also a polemical intent regarding the previous gram- 
marians of Hebrew, which he often lumps together in an indiscriminate mix: Pharisees, 
grammarians, and “lazy Masoretes” (TTP GIII/136). It is difficult not to see in these remarks 
a veiled criticism of his own teachers of Hebrew at the Ets Hayyim school of the Hispanic- 
Portuguese Jewish community in Amsterdam, which he attended in his youth, probably 
between the years of 1637-1647 (Vaz Dias 1982, p. 148). His first teacher of grammar was 
probably Menasseh ben Israel (1604—1657), a very prominent personality in the Sephardic 
intellectual life of the period, and author, among many other works, of a Hebrew grammar, 
Libro yntitulado sapha berura, hoc est Labia clara de grammatica hebrea, that circulated in man- 
uscript form among his students (Offenberg 2003, p. 102). Perhaps Spinoza had access to 
this, and other similar manuscript grammars, or perhaps he kept class notes that he might 
later have used when he composed his CGH, as suggested by Porges (1924-1926, p. 129). 

Whereas some Hebrew grammars and biblical commentaries including grammatical 
explanations composed by Jewish authors were available to him, and are found in the 
inventory of his private library (Vulliaud), the most salient sources of CGH are Hebrew 
grammars composed by Christian authors, in particular the Thesaurus grammaticus linguae 
sanctae by Johannes Buxtorf (1564-1629), which is extensively used, and criticized by 
Spinoza as shown by Proietti (2009-2010, p. 34). In the Latinate milieu, the spread of 
Protestantism in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, with its emphasis on the study 
of the Bible in its original languages, led to the publication of many works of Hebrew 
grammar composed in Latin, and indeed, as Irene Zwiep has remarked, by the 1670s there 
was in Holland an “embarrassment of riches” regarding manuals of Hebrew grammar 
composed by Christian authors (Zwiep 2019, p. 159). Spinoza only cites explicitly two 
Jewish grammarians, David Qimhi and Abraham of Balmes, and it has been recently 
argued that in both cases Spinoza second-handedly took the references from Buxtorf’s 
work (Kogel 2019, p. 97; Campanini 2019, p. 115). The strong reliance on Christian 
grammarians and their categories, its context of composition, and its addressees have led 
scholars to ponder whether CGH should be considered as a Hebrew or a Christian grammar 
of Hebrew: “The cultural horizon in which this work must be replaced for a correct inter- 
pretation are the Protestant philological and grammatical studies devoted to biblical 
Hebrew in the seventeenth century” (Campanini 2019, p. 119). 


2. Structure and Contents of the Work 


According to Jelles, the CGH comprised two parts: one on “etymology,” which was almost 
finished, and one on syntax, which has not come down to us. In the preserved text, we find 
an initial group of chapters dedicated to the presentation of the Hebrew letters and their 
pronunciation, that is, orthography (Chapters 1—3). This is followed by one chapter dedi- 
cated to chanting and cantillation, i.e. prosody (Chapter 4), and a very long, unfinished 
section dedicated to etymology proper, that is, the different types of words and their mor- 
phology (Chapters 5—33). The projected part on the combination of the words to form sen- 
tences, i.e. syntax, either has not been preserved, or, more likely, was never written. It 
seems, however, that Spinoza did intend to write it, from his own references in the text 
(CGH G I/77). He also refers to a list of irregular words to be included at the end of the 
work, which is also not extant (CGH GI/19). 


485 


GUADALUPE GONZALEZ DIEGUEZ 


Spinoza defines letters (i.e. consonants) and vowels in Hebrew as follows: “A letter is a 
sign of a sound made by the movement of the mouth that causes a certain sound to be 
heard. [. . .] A vowel is a sign indicating a certain and determined sound. From which we 
learn that vowels among the Hebrews are not letters; and therefore among the Hebrews 
vowels are called souls of letters, and letters without vowels are bodies without souls. 
Indeed, to make the difference between letters and vowels more clearly intelligible, it is pos- 
sible to explain it suitably by the example of a flute touched by fingers for playing. The 
vowels are the musical sound of the flute, the letters are the openings touched by the fin- 
gers” (CGH GI/1). 

The comparison of consonants to the body, and of vowels to the soul, is found in kab- 
balistic sources, such as the Bahir (Scholem 1970, p. 85) and the Zohar (Zohar I, 15b; Zohar 
Hadash 7 3b), as well as in other much more mainstream Jewish sources, such as Abraham 
ibn Ezra’s biblical commentaries, included in the rabbinical Bibles (see Ibn Ezra on Gen. 
20:1 and Deut. 5:5, for instance). This metaphor is also not exclusive to Jewish culture, as 
it is found in Latin texts (Campanini 2019, pp. 123-125). It has been argued, based on this 
metaphor, that Spinoza “appeals to Jewish linguistic cosmology to explain the relation bet- 
ween the letters and their sounds” (Baumgarten 2019, p. 134). While it is very likely that 
Spinoza was familiar with kabbalistic doctrines, and critically engaged with some of them 
(for anuanced approach to this question, see Melamed (forthcoming); see also Harvey 2007; 
Idel 2000), the claim that his conception of Hebrew language is based on esoteric Jewish 
cosmological doctrines, furtively hinted at by his use of this metaphor, is an outstretch, to 
say the least. 

The classification of the Hebrew consonants in five groups presented in CGH depending 
on the organ of their articulation, is taken from Sefer Yetsirah, a Jewish work of letter mys- 
ticism of the late Hellenistic period, which was the object of study and commentary by the 
kabbalists. The fact that we find these two elements in Spinoza’s description of the letters 
of Hebrew does not entail, in my opinion, any endorsement of kabbalistic doctrines 
regarding the Hebrew language on the part of Spinoza, as they became common topoi fre- 
quently evoked in Jewish texts. 

In the section on orthography, there is also the discussion of the different dialects found 
in the Bible, based mainly on the famous passage from the book of Judges about the inability 
of the Ephraimites to properly pronounce the word “shibbolet” that cost them their lives at 
the hands of the Gileadites (Judges 12:4—6): “Letters of the same organ of speech are often 
substituted one for the other in the Scriptures, and an aleph for an ayin, a samekh for a zayin, 
beth for peh, tet for taw, etc. The reason for this, I think, is that the Scriptures were written 
by men of various dialects, and that now the dialects are not recognizable, namely from 
which tribe this or that dialect originated. That this language had this in common with the 
others is substantiated by Scripture itself. For the Ephraimites everywhere substituted 
a samekh for a sin, letters which really are from the same organ of speech. Nevertheless, 
although in Sacred Scripture occasionally one letter is changed for another of the same 
organ, one may not now follow this example. For if it were otherwise, then the dialects 
would confuse the language” (CGH G I/4; cfr. TTP G III/107). 

Spinoza concludes that although the Bible confuses letters articulated by the same organs, 
we must avoid doing the same, because that leads to confusion of dialects. Interestingly, 
Klijnsmit notes that Spinoza is guilty precisely of confusing “dialects” in the explanations he 
offers in the second and third chapters of the CGH about the pronunciation of consonants 
and vowels, since he mixes Sephardic and Ashkenazi usage, offering the Sephardic 
pronunciation for consonants and the Ashkenazi for vowels (Klijnsmit 1986, p. 5). 


486 


SPINOZA AND THE GRAMMAR OF THE HEBREW LANGUAGE 


Spinoza discusses the Masoretic system of signs that indicates the vocalization, intona- 
tion, punctuation, and cantillation of the biblical text. He dismisses cantillation, because 
his book aims to instruct those who wish “to speak Hebrew, and not sing it” (CGH G I/14). 
Most relevant are the observations introduced at the beginning of the chapter: “The rules 
which are usually transmitted concerning the accents are more of a hindrance than an aid 
to students of the Hebrew language. They should be tolerated only if they facilitate a proper 
understanding of the pronunciation of the language. But if you should consult the experts, 
they would all be forced to admit that they do not know the reason for so great a number 
of accents. [...] At first I was strongly of the opinion that their inventor introduced them 
not only for the raising and the lowering of the voice and to adorn speech but also to indi- 
cate animated expression, which is usually produced by a change of voice, by the expres- 
sion of the face, the movement of the body, the spreading of the hands, the winking of the 
eyes, the stamping of the feet, a curve of the mouth, a motion of the eyelids, spreading of 
the lips, and the various other gestures which aid a speaker to make clear his thoughts to 
his hearers [. . .]. Nevertheless the originators of the letters in all languages failed to indi- 
cate these expressions in the written forms of speech. [. . .] I suspected that the originator 
of the accents in the Hebrew language wanted to correct this fault. But when I examined 
the matter further I was unable to find this to be true. [. . .] Therefore I now believe that 
their introduction [of the accents] came after the Pharisees introduced the custom of 
reading the Bible in public assemblies every Sabbath in order that it should not be read too 
rapidly (as is usually done in the repetition of prayers). And for this reason I shall leave the 
minute regulations about them to the Pharisees and idle Masoretes, and I will only point 
out what has any use” (CGH G I/8-9). 

In dealing with the accentual system, Spinoza contradicts the principle, expressed in 
various places of the CGH, that he wants to write a grammar of the Hebrew language, and 
not of Scripture, as the only Hebrew text that is accentuated is the Bible. Spinoza states 
that there are three functions that it would be reasonable to attribute to the accents: to 
contribute to the written expression of the emotions we express through changes of into- 
nation or gestures in the oral discourse, to periodize the discourse and to indicate the tonic 
syllables. After careful examination, he ironically concludes that the work of the 
Massoretes, failing to fulfill any of these tasks, is simply aimed to prevent a rushed reading 
of Scripture on liturgical services at the synagogue. 

When presenting etymology, that is, the part of grammar that deals with the different 
types of words, Spinoza makes the claim that scholars have found most worthy of interest 
in the CGH: all Hebrew words are basically nouns (a claim that, paradoxically, invalidates 
the main premise of etymology, which is the distinction between the different parts of 
discourse). The first grammarians of Hebrew, working under the influence of Arabic 
grammar, had considered that in Hebrew there are either two or three types of words 
(namely, verb and what is not a verb; or noun, verb, and particle). The latter tripartite divi- 
sion, of Aristotelian inspiration, or at least very adaptable to Aristotelian logic, ended up 
prevailing in Hebrew grammars. Latin grammars, on the other hand, tend to offer a 
classification in eight types of words, four variable (noun, adjective, pronoun, verb) and 
four invariable (adverb, preposition, conjunction, interjection). 

Spinoza is aware of Latin etymology, and contrasts it with his thesis that all words of the 
Hebrew language are basically nouns: “Among the Latins speech is divided in eight parts, 
but it is debatable that it is divided into the same parts according to the Hebrews, since all 
the Hebrew words, with the exception of interjections and conjunctions, and some other 
particles, have the value and properties of the name. Because the grammarians did not 


487 


GUADALUPE GONZALEZ DIEGUEZ 


notice, they believed that many things were irregular, when in fact they were perfectly reg- 
ular according to the use of the language, and ignored many things that are necessary to 
know and speak the language” (CGH G 17, 34, 35-36). 

Spinoza defines “noun” as “a word by which we mean or indicate anything that falls 
under the understanding. Since what falls under the understanding are either things, or 
attributes of things, or relationships, or actions, or modes of actions and relationships, we 
easily see what are the genres of nouns” (CGH G 17). 

The seemingly radical thesis that all Hebrew words are nouns does not have any practical 
consequences subsequently in the structure of the CGH. In fact, after this preliminary obser- 
vation, Spinoza follows the organization of Buxtorf’s Thesaurus rather closely: nouns that 
indicate things are substantive nouns; those that indicate attributes are adjectives; those that 
indicate relationships are prepositions; those that indicate actions are verbs; those that indi- 
cate modes of actions and relationships are adverbs, neatly reintroducing the usual Latin 
typology under the general umbrella of noun (of the eight types, one, pronouns, is easily sub- 
sumed under substantive nouns, and the other, interjections, is hardly a grammatical entity). 


3. Philosophical Import of the CGH 


The main question that scholars have pondered regarding CGH is, not surprisingly, its rela- 
tion to Spinoza’s philosophy. Two issues stand out in this regard: Spinoza’s self-professed 
“linguistic monism,” and his defense of linguistic regularity or analogy (as opposed to 
irregularity or anomaly). 

The affirmation that all Hebrew words are basically nouns has led some scholars to 
posit a relationship between Spinoza’s monistic ontology and his self-professed noun-based 
grammar of Hebrew. Attitudes of scholars range between Harvey’s description of Spinoza 
as a “noun-intoxicated grammarian” (Harvey 2002, p. 110), to more sobering approaches 
to the question, such as that professed by Nadler: “I have to confess that I am somewhat 
skeptical of these attempts to find the metaphysics of the Ethics reflected in Spinoza’s 
account of Hebrew grammar. As suggestive as they are, they seem rather thin and con- 
trived. But I will also allow that the jury is still out on that question” (Nadler 2018, p. 164). 

The relation between Spinoza’s ontological and grammatical monism has been mostly 
presented in two opposite ways: as a projection onto Hebrew language of his monistic 
ontology, and, perhaps more farfetchedly, as a resurfacing of his Hebrew linguistic 
background in his monistic ontology. It is easy to see that the alignment of scholars in 
these two camps falls along ideological lines. 

Representing the first position, Harvey states that “there are striking parallels between 
what Spinoza writes in his Compendium about Hebrew and what he writes in his Ethics 
about God or Nature. [.. .] The noun in the Compendium plays a role similar to that of God 
or Nature in the Ethics. [.. .] In the Ethics, there is God as substance, God’s attributes, and 
God’s modes; in the Compendium there are substantive nouns, nouns naming attributes, 
and nouns naming modes” (Harvey 2002, p. 110). Melamed similarly notes how “bet- 
ween the lines of this text [CGH] one can easily find some of Spinoza’s most crucial meta- 
physical doctrines,” and cites the correspondence between metaphysical concepts and 
parts of speech (substance and noun; attribute and adjective; mode and participle); the 
distinction between adjective and participle, for example, can shed light on how to under- 
stand the difference between attribute and mode (Melamed 2009, p. 46). 


488 


SPINOZA AND THE GRAMMAR OF THE HEBREW LANGUAGE 


In the second position, we find those who hold that by establishing a parallel between 
the monism of being and the supposed monism of the Hebrew language, Spinoza would 
be making an argument (consciously or not) for the superiority of Hebrew over other 
languages, on account of its better adequation to the structure of reality. This would 
bring Spinoza close to the notion of Hebrew as a sacred, Adamic language, with all its 
mystical and kabbalistic resonances evoked supra. Along these lines, Brykman muses 
whether Hebrew would not be the “langue par excellence” for Spinoza, the one that 
most corresponds to the world and is most fit to express true ideas (Brykman 2000, 
p. 123). It seems to me quite a stretch to interpret Spinoza in this manner, taking into 
account that he explicitly says that words, Hebrew or otherwise, “gain their meaning 
solely from their usage” (TTP G III/160), that is, the association between signifier and 
signified is conventional, shortcircuiting essentialistic or ethnocentric conceptions of 
language. 

Despite possible slippages into a “romantic” or “idealized” notion of Hebrew, Spinoza 
intends to offer a description of biblical Hebrew as a natural language, the language spoken 
by a historical community in a specific time and in a specific place. As such, this language, 
constituted of signs, would be in the thick of the first grade of knowledge, the confusion of 
imagination. Sign and imagination are a necessary springboard to jump into conceptual 
knowledge, but they must be reworked, ideally, in a formal language, such as the one 
Spinoza employs in the Ethics. This applies to the imaginary thickness and opacity of any 
natural language (Hebrew included, one must surmise). More aptly, and making more jus- 
tice to the tension inherent in Spinoza’s conception of Hebrew, Lemler has recently 
described Spinoza’s “nominalization” of the Hebrew language as a paradoxical operation 
that is at the core of both the sacralization and the secularization of Hebrew (Lemler 2019, 
p. 207). 

Regarding the question of regularity or analogy, Spinoza breaks new ground by 
treating Hebrew as a living, productive language; I would say that this is the import of 
his statement “Many have written a grammar of the Scriptures, but no one has so far 
written a grammar of the Hebrew language” (CGH I/24; I/72). Spinoza, as many others 
before him, is very much aware that a great part of the Hebrew language has been lost 
over the vicissitudes of history, and much of the old Hebrew lexicon is been irreparably 
gone, as “nearly all the words for fruits, birds, fishes have perished with the passage of 
time, together with numerous other words” (TTP VII G HI/106). However, and against 
the long-standing rhetoric of the “grammarians of the Scriptures,” he holds that 
Hebrew can be turned into a productive (and not merely reproductive) language 
through analogy, by making combinations of grammatical patterns (mishqalim) and 
roots that are unattested in the Bible according to the rules that can be derived from 
biblical use. 

The rhetoric of Hebrew literati (sometimes in tension with their actual practice) had 
been that the limits of Hebrew were set by the terms that occur in the Bible, as we read 
in Book of Discussion and Remembrance, the first theoretical treatise on Hebrew litera- 
ture, by Moshe ibn Ezra (ca. 1055-—after 1135): “Everything you find in it [the Bible], 
use it, but do not apply analogy to that which you do not find in it. Wherever the lan- 
guage goes, go there, and wherever it stops, stop. Be an emulator, not a creator; a fol- 
lower, not an inventor. . .” (Moshe ibn Ezra 1975, p. 107b). Manifestly, Spinoza went 
against this prescription, in a way preconizing the renewal of Hebrew as a living, 
creative language. 


489 


GUADALUPE GONZALEZ DIEGUEZ 


References 


Baumgarten, J. (2019). De quelques possibles sources juives du Compendium de Spinoza. In: Spinoza 
Philosophe Grammarien (ed. J. Baumgarten, I. Rosier Catach, and P. Totaro), 127-158. Paris: CNRS 
Editions. 

Baumgarten, J., Rosier Catach, I, and Totaro, P. (eds.) (2019). Spinoza Philosophe Grammarien. Paris: 
CNRS Editions. 

Bernays, J. (1850). Uber Spinoza’s hebraische Grammatik. In: Des Cartes und Spinoza, urkundliche 
Darstellung der Philosophie beider (ed. C. Schaarschmidt), 195-203. Bonn, Marcus. 

Brykman, G. (2000). La Judéité de Spinoza. Paris: Vrin. 

Campanini, S. (2019). Le peculium Abrae d’Abraham de Balmes et la question des sources du 
Compendium. In: Spinoza Philosophe Grammarien (ed. J. Baumgarten, I. Rosier Catach, and P. 
Totaro), 105-126. Paris: CNRS Editions. 

Cassuto, P. (1999). Spinoza hébraisant. L’hébreu dans le TT-P et le Compendium grammatices linguae 
hebraeae. Leuven: Peeters. 

Colerus, J. (1706). The Life of Benedict de Spinosa. London: D.L. 

Ezra, M. ibn (1975). Kitab al-muhadara wa’ |-mudakara (ed. A.S. Halkin). Jerusalem: Mekize Nirdamim. 

Harvey, W.Z. (2002). Spinoza’s metaphysical Hebraism. In Jewish Themes in Spinoza’s Philosophy (ed. 
H.M. Ravven and L.E. Goodman), 107-114. Albany: SUNY Press. 

Harvey, W.Z. (2007). Idel on Spinoza. Journal for the Study of Religions and Ideologies 6 (18): 88-94. 

Idel, M. (2000). Deus sive natura: the metamorphosis of a dictum from Maimonides to Spinoza. In: 
Maimonides and the Sciences (ed. R.S. Cohen and H. Levine), 87-110. Dordrecht. 

Klijnsmit, A.J. (1986). Spinoza and grammatical tradition. Mededelingen XLIX. Leiden: vanwege het 
Spinozahuis, 

Klijnsmit, A.J. (1988a). Amsterdam Sephardim and Hebrew grammar in the seventeenth century. 
Studia Rosenthaliana XXII (2): 144-164. 

Klijnsmit, A.J. (1988b). The problem of normativity solved or Spinoza’s stand in the analogy- 
anomaly controversy. Studia Spinozana 4: 305-314. 

Kogel, J. (2019). Spinoza, lecteur de Qimhi? In: Spinoza Philosophe Grammarien (ed. J. Baumgarten, I. 
Rosier Catach, and P. Totaro), 91-104. Paris: CNRS Editions. 

Kortholt, C. (1 700).De tribus impostoribus. Hamburg: Joachim Reumann. 

Lemler, D. (2019). L’abrégé de grammaire de Spinoza ou le paradoxe de la “langue du nom.” In: 
Spinoza Philosophe Grammarien (ed. J. Baumgarten, I. Rosier Catach, and P. Totaro), 207-222. 
Paris: CNRS Editions. 

Levy, Z. (1987). The problem of normativity in Spinoza’s Hebrew grammar. Studia Spinozana 3: 
351-390. 

Licata, G. (2019). La Nature de la langue hébraique chez Spinoza. In: Spinoza Philosophe Grammarien 
(ed. J. Baumgarten, I. Rosier Catach, and P. Totaro), 47-62. CNRS Editions. 

Melamed, Y.Y. (2009). Spinoza’s metaphysics of substance: the substance-mode relation as a rela- 
tion of inherence and predication. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research LXXVIII: 17-82. 

Melamed, Y.Y. (forthcoming). From the gate of heaven to the field of holy apples: Spinoza and the 
Kabbalah. In: Early Modern Philosophy and the Kabbalah (ed. C. Cisiu). 

Nadler, S. (2018). Aliquid remanet: what are we to do with Spinoza’s Compendium of Hebrew 
grammar? Journal of the History of Philosophy 56: 155-167. 

Offenberg, A. A Mid-Seventeenth-Century Manuscript of the (Unpublished) Hebrew Grammars of 
Menasseh ben Israel and Isaac Aboab da Fonseca Recovered.” Zutot: Perspectives on Jewish Culture 
3 (2003): 98-107. 

Porges, N. (1924-1926). Spinozas Compendium der hebraische Grammatik. Chronicon Spinozanum 
IV: 123-159. 

Proietti, O. (1989). Il Satyricon di Petronio e la datazione della Gramatica Hebraica spinoziana. Studia 
Spinozana 5: 253-272. 


490 


SPINOZA AND THE GRAMMAR OF THE HEBREW LANGUAGE 


Proietti, O. (2009-2010). Johannes Buxtorf, Spinoza e la sintassi dell’ebraico. Annali della Facolta di 
Lettere e Filosofia dell’Universita di Macerata 42-43: 33-55. 

Scholem, G. (1970). Das Buch Bahir. Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft. 

Spinoza, B. (1677a). De Nagelate Schriften van B.D.S. Amsterdam: Jan Rieuwertsz. 

Spinoza, B. (1677b). Opera Posthuma. Amsterdam: Jan Rieuwertsz. 

Spinoza, B. (1905). Compendium grammatices Linguae Hebraeae (trans. S. Rubin). Krakow. In Hebrew. 

Spinoza, B. (1925). Spinoza Opera (ed. C. Gebhardt), 4 vols. Heidelberg: Carl Winters. 

Spinoza, B. (1962). Hebrew Grammar (trans. M. Bloom). New York: Philosophical Library. 

Spinoza, B. (1968). Abrégé de grammaire hébraique (trans. J. Askénazi and J. Askénazi-Gerson). Paris: 
J. Vrin. 

Spinoza, B. (1985 and 2016). The Collected Works of Spinoza (ed. and trans. E.M. Curley), vols 1 and 
2. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 

Spinoza, B. (2005). Compendio de gramatica de la lengua hebrea (trans. Guadalupe Gonzalez Diéguez). 
Madrid: Trotta. 

Spinoza, B. (2013). Compendio di grammatica della lingua ebraica (ed. and trans. Pina Totaro and M. 
Gargiulo). Florence: Leo S. Olschi. 

Spinoza, B. (2015). Kompendium gramatiky hebrejského jazyka (trans. P. Vrtilka). Prague: Academia. 
In Czech. 

Vaz, D. and van der Tak, W.G. (1982). Spinoza merchant and autodidact. Studia Rosenthaliana XVI 
(1): 103-171. 

Zwiep, I. (2019). Ceci n’est pas une grammaire: Le Compendium grammatices linguae hebraeae de 
Spinoza. In: Spinoza Philosophe Grammarien (ed. J. Baumgarten, I. Rosier Catach, and P. Totaro), 
159-181. Paris: CNRS Editions. 


491 


Part VI 


Spinoza’s Reception 


46 


Leibniz and Spinoza on Plenitude and Necessity 


JEAN-PASCAL ANFRAY 


1. Introduction 


The history of the relations between Leibniz and Spinoza is a matter of philosophical and 
scholarly controversy. Leibniz’s ambivalent attitude toward the Dutch philosopher is partly 
responsible for this. In November 1676, while he was on his way back from London to 
Hanover, where he had waited since Spring after his appointment as a private counselor to 
the Duke of Johann Friedrich Hanover, Leibniz did not hesitate to make a detour and visit 
the “famous Jew” (Theodicy §375). This meeting and the several conversations that fol- 
lowed illustrate the fascination exerted on him by Spinoza. However this initial fascination 
was soon to be replaced by Leibniz’s negative reaction to the publication of the Opera 
Posthuma, which he carefully read in 1678. Writing to Henri de Justel in February 1678, 
he remarks: 


I have found [in the Ethics] many beautiful thoughts that conform with mine [. . .]. But there 
are also paradoxes, which I find neither true nor even likely. Such as for instance that there is 
only a unique substance, i.e. God; that creatures are modes or accidents of God; that our mind 
does not perceive any more after this life; that even though God himself thinks, he neither 
understands nor wills; that everything happens by a fatal necessity; that God does not act for 
an end, but by some necessity of nature. This amounts to maintain only verbally, but to destroy 
in reality providence and immortality. (A II.1.592, translation mine) 


In spite of Spinoza’s ‘beauties,’ Leibniz now rejects his central metaphysical theses, among 
which monism, necessitarianism, and naturalism, including the view of God as an imper- 
sonal cause and the rejection of final causes. But Leibniz’s attitude is more complex than 
this simple refusal of Spinoza’s metaphysics. Thus, in the New Essays on Human 
Understanding, Theophilus, the character who serves as Leibniz’s spokesman, describes his 
intellectual itinerary and declares: “I once strayed a little too far in another direction, and 
began to incline to the Spinozist view which allows God infinite power only, [. . .] which 
[. ..] explains everything through brute necessity” (A VI.6.73). A natural question to ask 
is whether Leibniz himself ever did “incline to the Spinozist view.” Initiated in the early 
eighteenth century, this historical debate ran through the era of German Idealism and the 


A Companion to Spinoza, First Edition. Edited by Yitzhak Y. Melamed. 
© 2021 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2021 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd. 


495 


JEAN-PASCAL ANFRAY 


nineteenth century up to the twentieth century. Most German and French scholars main- 
tained that Leibniz had always opposed Spinoza. In contrast, Ludwig Stein, in his book 
Leibniz und Spinoza, endorsed the view that Leibniz had a “Spinoza-friendly” period from 
1676 to the early 1680s (Stein 1890). Often distorted, Stein’s thesis was much criticized 
(e.g. Friedmann 1962; for an historical overview, see Goldenbaum 2011). Within 
Anglophone scholarship, Russell’s judgment proved influential. According to him, 
Spinozism was the logical outcome of Leibniz’s philosophy had he pushed its systematic 
tendency down to their consequences (Russell 1937, p. vii). The question of Spinoza’s 
influence on Leibniz took on a new life in the last decades of the twentieth century. The 
discussion essentially focused on a series of metaphysical pieces known as De Summa 
Rerum, written in 1675-1676, during the last year of Leibniz’s stay in Paris (see A 
VI.3.461—590; DSR). Many passages are strikingly similar to some of Spinoza’s metaphys- 
ical theses, in particular his monism and his account of the relation of God to finite things. 
In spite of these similarities, some commentators maintain that such passages do not 
betray Spinoza’s influence, a claim based on the fact that Leibniz’s core metaphysical theses 
in the De Summa Rerum were already in place in the early 1670s, before Leibniz had any 
knowledge of Spinoza (Parkinson 1978; Mercer 1999, 2001). By contrast, other com- 
mentators emphasize the presence of Spinozist elements within the 1676 metaphysical 
fragments and hold that during a short, but decisive period, Leibniz was not only actively 
engaged with Spinoza’s metaphysics, but that some of his own metaphysical theses grew 
out of this discussion (Adams 1994, pp. 123-134; Kulstad 1994, 1999, 2002, 2005; 
Laerke 2008, pp. 439-556, Laerke 2017). 

I think that the available textual evidence favors the latter camp. But while this debate 
has focused mainly on the issue of monism, I will instead attend to the topic of necessitar- 
ianism or the view that all truths are necessary truths. This is a natural topic to discuss 
Leibniz’s relation to Spinoza, in view of their shared commitment to rationalism and to 
some version of the PSR and because there is an argument that PSR entails necessitari- 
anism (for the argument, see Bennett 1984, p. 115; for a comparative approach to the 
modal consequences of rationalism, see Lin 2012). Approaching necessitarianism through 
PSR is interesting from a broad perspective. Here I will address the issue from a closer per- 
spective, looking at how Leibniz actually reacted to Spinoza’s modal views. 

Throughout his career, Leibniz endorsed a conception of God as a personal agent acting 
for ends, that is for the sake of goodness, where goodness is an objective value independent 
from God. In his early writings, he held this view to be consistent with the claim that the 
world’s existence necessarily follows from the harmony of things as represented in God’s 
ideas (letter to Wedderkopf, May 1671, AII.1.117/CP 5). Retrospectively, he admitted that 
he once “was very close to the view of those who think that everything is absolutely 
necessary. [.. .] But the consideration of possibles, which are not, were not, and will not be, 
brought [him] back from this precipice” (A VI.4.1653/AG 94). Rejecting the plentitude of 
possibilities, he now thought necessitarianism to be incompatible with the idea that the 
world exists as a result of a choice made by a rational God. In an earlier paper, he saw 
Spinoza’s philosophy as belonging to one of the “two sects of naturalists,” one “reviving 
the opinions [. . .] of Stoics” (AG 281), because he holds everything to be ruled by a “blind 
necessity” (AG 282). It was his reading of Spinoza that made Leibniz realize that necessi- 
tarianism entails naturalism. 

To be more precise, there are two distinct ways of characterizing necessitarianism: 
either as the thesis according to which everything actual is metaphysically necessary or as 
the thesis that everything metaphysically possible is actual — alternatively that actuality 


496 


PLENITUDE AND NECESSITY 


embraces the Plenitude of Possibilities (see Griffin 2013, p. 58). For convenience, I will 
refer to the first thesis as the Necessity of Actuality and to the second thesis as the Plenitude 
of Possibilities. I will examine how Leibniz’s stance with respect to these two theses, and 
more generally his views on modality, grew out as a response to Spinoza’s views. 


2. From Spinoza’s Attributes to Leibnizian Possible Worlds 


In November 1675, the German nobleman Walter Ehrenfried von Tschirnhaus arrived in 
Paris and, through Oldenburg’s intermediary, he met Leibniz who had lived there since 
1672. Tschirnhaus had known Spinoza in The Hague in the preceding winter and had 
since become a correspondent of the Dutch philosopher. At that time, Leibniz had read the 
TTP. Tschirnhaus gave him access to the letters from Spinoza to himself and to Schuller, on 
which Leibniz wrote some observations (A VI.3.276—282). He also owned a copy of the 
Ethics, but when he asked, through Schuller’s intermediacy, permission to show Leibniz 
this manuscript, Spinoza refused, out of prudential concern (Ep.70 G IV/303/7-12; Ep. 72 
GIV/305/1 8-24). Leibniz nevertheless learned about the Ethics through his conversations 
with Tschirnhaus, of which he left written reports (A VI.3.384—5/L 41-43). This three- 
cornered relation between Spinoza, Tschirnhaus, and Leibniz has been illuminatingly 
studied by Kulstad (1999, 2002), who has established how Spinoza’s metaphysics, filtered 
through Tschirnaus’s lenses, triggered Leibniz’s reflection on multiple worlds, and eventu- 
ally led him to his theory of a plurality of possible worlds. 

A surprising aspect of this story is that it finds its origin in a thesis which seems at first 
sight foreign to modality: Spinoza’s claim that God’s essence is expressed by an infinity of 
attributes. In a letter of 25 July 1675 (Ep. 63) passed on to Spinoza by Schuller, Tschirnhaus 
asks about the reason why we have no knowledge of these other attributes and goes on 
with the following question: 


Furthermore, does it follow from this that, in contrast to us, creatures consisting of those other 
attributes cannot conceive extension. In this way it would seem that there must be as many 
worlds established as there are attributes of God? (Ep. 63 GIV/275/1-6) 


Tschirnhaus understands the “other attributes” as other worlds. He is the first to link the 
infinity of attributes to the claim that there is a plurality of existing worlds, that is of 
universal systems of things that are isolated from each other. However, given Spinoza’s 
thesis of the identity of modes under distinct attributes (E2p7s), Tschirnhaus suggests that 
he should rather accept a single, all-encompassing reality, rather than a plurality of worlds. 
In his reply, Spinoza explains that ideas referring to other attributes do not have any con- 
nection with the ideas referring to extension (Ep. 66 G IV/280). The core idea seems to be 
that, within the attribute of thought, there are infinitely many minds that are parallel to 
each other, but cannot communicate with one another. This answer leaves untouched the 
suggestion about the many worlds. But Spinoza’s silence about this can be understood as a 
tacit approval of Tschirnhaus’s interpretation, hence as a denial that each attribute corre- 
sponds to a distinct world. 

This exchange provides the immediate background to Leibniz’s own elaborations. In a 
report from his conversations with Tschirnhaus, he remarks that Spinoza accepts an 
infinity of attributes besides thought and extension. He emphasizes the special status of 
thought, which expresses every other attribute and notes that the other attributes are 


497 


JEAN-PASCAL ANFRAY 


epistemically isolated from us. Finally, he claims that each attribute is infinite just as our 
space is infinite (A VI.3.385; Melamed 2013, pp. 167-168). With each attribute, he thus 
associates a kind of extension and its expression in thought. In a next step, Leibniz explic- 
itly connects Spinoza’s attributes with the concept of a world: 


Perception and situation are simple forms. [. . .| It is easily understood that simple forms are 
infinitely many. |. . .] It seems that perception and situation are everywhere, but matter is dif- 
ferent in various things, and so various laws arise. For example, if it is a law in our world that 
the same quantity of motion is always preserved, there can be another universe in which there 
are also other laws. But it is necessary that the latter space differs from the former; there will 
be position of some kind, and multitude, but it will not be necessary that there should be 
length, breadth, and depth. [. . .| It seems that perception, pleasure, and happiness are everywhere; 
for it is the wonderful nature of this that it duplicates — indeed, it multiplies to infinity — the 
variety of things. But it seems that variety can come about in other ways, which do not come 
within the reach of our mind. (A VI.3.522—523/DSR 83) 


Although the connection with Spinoza is not straightforward, simple forms and perception 
correspond to attributes in general and thought in particular respectively. They are indeed 
the basic entities out of which the variety of things or modifications arises. Situation is 
more general than the attribute of extension, which corresponds to ordinary space. Each 
situation is associated with various laws, like the law of conservation of the quantity of 
motion. This law holds for bodies in the actual space, i.e. in our world, but there are other 
situations with different laws. Each world is thus a rerum genus, endowed with perception 
and its own space. Further, no world can be reached from any other world. This epistemic 
barrier reflects their spatial isolation, since space is defined as what makes different percep- 
tions belong to the same world (A VI.3.511—2/DSR 65-67). Finally, every world actually 
exists. Leibniz here entertains the hypothesis of reality encompassing a plurality of actual 
worlds, which seems to achieve the Plenitude of Possibility: 


Things are not produced by the mere combination of forms in God, but along with a subject 
also. The subject itself, or God, together with his ubiquity, gives the immeasurable, and this 
immeasurable combined with other subjects brings it about that all possible modes, or things, 
follow in it. (A VI.3.523/DSR 85) 


The various combinations of forms constituting God’s essence make up the many possible 
things. Here Leibniz claims, in accordance with Spinoza (E1p16) that all possible things or 
modes result from God. This text is extremely tentative and does not represent Leibniz’s 
considered position. But he concedes that the admission of a plurality of actual worlds 
entails the Plenitude of Possibilities. Now this is incompatible with God’s justice, because 
every conceivable evil would be bound to exist (A VI.3.581/DSR 105). Moreover, mere 
possibility would entail actuality and no further reason for their existence would be 
required, making the recourse to God’s choice and wisdom otiose (A VI.3.582/DSR 105). 

These (to Leibniz’s mind) unacceptable consequences required the refutation of the 
many-worlds hypothesis, a task undertaken in papers from December 1676 where he pres- 
ents an argument against the plurality of actual worlds: 


There is no need for the multitude of things to be increased by a plurality of worlds; for there 
is no number of things which is not in this one world, and indeed in any part of it. To introduce 


another genus of existing things, and as it were another world which is also infinite, is to abuse 


498 


PLENITUDE AND NECESSITY 


the name of existence; for it cannot be said whether those things exist now or not. But 
existence, as it is conceived by us, involves a certain determinate time; or, we say that that 
thing exists of which it can be said at some certain moment of time, “That thing now exists.” 
(A VI.3.581/DSR 103-105) 


There is just one space and a single, actual world. Spatially isolated worlds are ruled out in 
virtue of our inability to tell whether they are simultaneous with us or not. In another 
fragment, Leibniz develops his argument and attempts to derive the temporal connected- 
ness requirement from the principle of non-contradiction and a tensed conception of 
existence according to which the present is absolute and necessarily includes ourselves. If 
we suppose that something exists in another time series, then it would be neither present 
nor past and future and it would thus both exist and not exist. Therefore reality cannot 
encompass a plurality of isolated worlds (A VI.3.584/DSR 107). 

The principle of plenitude is accordingly qualified: “whatever can exist and is compat- 
ible with others exists” (Ibid.). If everything were compatible with everything else, this 
would lead to Spinoza’s thesis that there are no unactualized possibles. Earlier in the 
same year, Leibniz had already rejected the Plenitude of Possibility by assuming that not 
all possibles are compossible. The reason why some among these possibles exist, consists 
in their greatest perfection or degree of essence: “the greatest amount of essence that 
can exist, does exist” (A VI.3.472/DSR 21). While the incompossibility of some possible 
things remained an unargued assumption, the rejection of the many-worlds hypothesis 
offered a rationale: the actualization of all possibles is prevented because they would not 
belong to a common spatiotemporal framework, so that things that are not represented 
as spatiotemporally related to us are not actual, but belong to other merely possible 
worlds. 

The intimate connection between the rejection of the many-world hypothesis and the 
assumption of unactualized possibles is maintained in later writings. In the Theodicy, he 
writes “I do not think that a Spinozist will say that all the romances one can imagine exist 
actually now, or have existed, or will, still exist in some place in the universe” (Theod. §173; 
see also “On Freedom” A VI.4.1651/AG 94). Fictional characters within consistent stories 
denote possible beings. Now, Leibniz assumes as an obvious fact that such fictional charac- 
ters are spatiotemporally unrelated to us. Therefore, they are not part of the actual world, 
hence there are unactualized possibles and unactualized possible worlds. Conversely, 
things that are spatiotemporally related belong to the same world: 


Icall ‘World’ the whole succession and the whole agglomeration of all existent things, lest it be 
said that several worlds could have existed in different times and different places. For they must 
needs be reckoned all together as one world or, if you will, as one Universe. (Theodicy §8) 


Being part of a single spatiotemporal order seems to be a sufficient condition for two things 
to belong to the same world. This provides support to what is commonly called the “cosmo- 
logical” interpretation of the relation of compossibility, according to which compossibility 
is neither a relation of logical compatibility, nor a relation of nomological compatibility, 
whereby compossible things can subsumed under the same laws (Messina and 
Rutherford 2009). According to the cosmological interpretation, the notion of world is 
prior to the notion of compossibility and two things are “worldmates” if and only if they 
can be referred to a common spatiotemporal framework. Things are compossible provided 
they belong to a common spatiotemporal order. 


499 


JEAN-PASCAL ANFRAY 


However, Leibniz’s earlier speculations of April 1676 about disconnected spaces do not 
completely disappear but remain sotto voce, in connection with another key thesis of his 
metaphysics, namely that “each substance is like a world apart, independent of all other 
things, except for God; thus all our phenomena, that is, all the things that can ever happen 
to us, are only consequences of our being” (Discourse of Metaphysics, §14, AG 47). Radical 
world-apart is primarily a claim about the causal independence of created substances: any 
substance is the unique cause of each of its states, including its perceptive states, so the 
phenomena it represents are not caused by other created substances. But world-apart is 
also a claim of ontological independence. Indeed, each substance could be created by God 
on its own, that is, could exist independently from any other created substance (G II.496/ 
LR 337-39). Moreover, Leibniz holds that God could create non-harmonious substances, 
i.e. such that their respective expressions of the universe are not congruent, in which case 
He would create a plurality of “unconnected worlds”: 


God could have given each substance its own phenomena, independent of all others; but in so 
doing he would have made as many unconnected worlds, so to speak, as there are substances — 
rather as we say that when dreaming one is in a world of one’s own, and one enters the 
common world on awakening. (GIV.519/WE 81) 


Since a minimal condition for harmony is for the phenomena of these substances to be 
correlated in a common spatiotemporal framework, this means that God could create a 
plurality of such spatiotemporal systems or worlds, even though these isolated systems 
would not count as a single world. This is a revival of the many-world hypothesis of April 
1676. But once one accepts a disconnected plurality of worlds, one might wonder what 
prevents God from creating more than a single possible world, or else what prevents God’s 
creation from including all possibilities (for an overview of the discussions about compos- 
sibility, see the papers in Brown and Chiek 2016; the objection is discussed inter alia in 
McDonough 2010). 

A tentative answer can be extracted using the idea that maximization of essence 
requires harmony. Harmony is not a separate goal, potentially conflicting with the maxi- 
mization goal: “[harmony] is the degree of essence, if essence is calculated from harmo- 
nizing properties, which give essence weight and momentum, so to speak” (AG 234). 
Harmony is thus an ingredient of the perfection and reality of essences. Overall, the 
creation of the entire collection of possible worlds would thus bring about less perfection, 
because it would be less harmonious, than the creation of a single world (Bender 2016, 
pp. 86-87). 


3. Leibniz’s Reply to Necessitarianism: per se Possibility and Essence 


As most commentators, Leibniz reads Spinoza as a necessitarian, which is a natural inter- 
pretation (see Elp16, Elp29, and Elp33; Garrett 1991; Della Rocca 2008, pp. 69-78; 
Griffin 2013, pp. 68—79; contrary, opposed, accounts are defended in Curley 1969; Curley 
and Walski 1999 and in Newlands 2010 and 2018). Although a necessitarian, Spinoza 
distinguishes two ways for something to be necessary: “a thing is called necessary either by 
reason of its essence or by reason of its cause” (E1p33s1). This distinction between external 
and internal necessity is compatible with necessitarianism provided one understands it as 
a distinction between two sources of necessity, and not between two kinds or degrees 


500 


PLENITUDE AND NECESSITY 


(Garrett 1991, p. 199; Griffin 2013, p. 65). Only God and its attributes are necessary in 
virtue of its essence only, i.e. because only God’s essence is such that it involves existence. 
The existence of modes, say a particular human being, is contingent with respect to their 
essence alone, because modes’ essences do not involve existence (E1 p24; E2a1; E4d3). But 
when a mode is related to the whole order of nature, its existence is causally necessitated 
and this causal necessity is as strong as the internal necessity of God’s existence. 

Leibniz also distinguishes two kinds of impossibility and the way he frames this distinction 
echoes Spinoza’s own distinction: 


“Impossible” is a two-fold concept: that which does not have essence, and that which does not 
have existence, i.e. that which neither was, is, nor will be because it is incompatible with God, 
or, with the existence or reason which brings it about that things exist rather than do not exist. 
[. ..] The origin of impossibility is two-fold: one from essence, the other from existence or, 
positing as actual. (A VI.3.463—64/DSR 7) 


Things may be impossible either because they lack an essence and are self-contradictory, 
or, although they have an essence and are internally possible, because their existence is 
somehow incompatible with God’s existence. 

Leibniz also claims that that which is impossible not in virtue of its essence, but because 
its existence is incompatible with God, is nevertheless per se possible. A state of affairs is per 
se possible if it is not internally inconsistent (A VI.4.1447/AG 20-21). As an example, he 
mentions the damnation of an innocent. Such a state of affairs is not self-contradictory, 
but it is incompatible with God’s absolute justice and goodness. Since the latter are essential 
attributes of God, this state of affairs cannot be actualized (A VI.4.1453, see also A 
VI.4.1378/CP 119). Although this might seem an extreme example, every unactualized 
possible thing or state of affairs, as for instance the fact that Spinoza died in The Hague 
rather than in Leiden, is per se possible and hypothetically impossible, i.e. incompatible 
with God’s essential perfection, which entails that He necessarily chooses the best. Thus 
when something is considered narrowly, excluding its relations to other things and to God, 
it is per se possible. But if one takes into account these relations, especially if one considers 
God’s perfect nature and decree to create the best possible world, then it is impossible 
(Adams 1994, pp. 14-15). 

What makes Leibniz’s position difficult to interpret is that it is controversial whether 
these per se possibilities correspond to genuine metaphysical possibilities, i.e. whether a 
‘narrow’ conceiving picks out a genuine metaphysical possibility. Commenting on 
E1p33s1, Leibniz writes: “on the hypothesis of the divine will choosing the best, or 
operating most perfectly, certainly nothing but these things could have been produced; but 
according to the very nature of things considered in itself (per se), things could have been 
produced otherwise” (A VI.4.1776/L 204). The trouble with a passage like this is that it 
could be read either as an assertion that it is really, metaphysically, possible that things that 
are not part of the best possible world should exist or as merely claiming that such unactu- 
alized possible are abstractly possible when conceived in themselves but impossible when 
conceived in a broader perspective. 

Some commentators opt for the latter reading and judge that the views of Leibniz and 
Spinoza do not differ with respect to the necessity of actual things, so that Spinoza’s 
internal necessity and Leibnizian per se necessity are equivalent and that per se possibilities 
are metaphysically impossible (Carriero 1991, p. 83; Sleigh 2005, pp. xxvi-—xxvii; 
Newlands 2010; Griffin 2013, p. 81). Leibniz’s comments on Elp33 can be read as 


501 


JEAN-PASCAL ANFRAY 


supporting the conclusion that Leibniz points to a distinction in the source of impossibility: 
“the author rightly recognizes that something may be rendered impossible for two different 
reasons — either because it implies a contradiction or because there is no external cause apt 
to produce it” (A VI.4.1776/L 204). Indeed, the recognition of different reasons for impos- 
sibility does not imply that causal impossibility is weaker than logical or metaphysical 
impossibility. Neither does it imply that what is causally impossible is a genuine metaphysi- 
cal possibility (Griffin 2013, p. 81). The difference between Leibniz’s and Spinoza’s views 
would then reside in their conceptions of God and of the mechanism whereby the actual 
world comes to exist. Leibniz insists on the fact that God is a personal agent acting for the 
sake of ends. This presupposes that God selects the actual world out of a plurality of worlds 
that are per se possible (Adams 1994, p. 21). But this explanatory role need not require 
that they correspond to metaphysical possibilities. Even Spinoza can acknowledge a plu- 
rality of possible worlds conceived along Leibnizian lines as excluding information about 
God, God’s attributes and God’s infinite modes (E2p8 and E2p8s). What differentiates him 
from Leibniz is that these unactualized possibles play no work, whereas they are a require- 
ment of God’s wisdom and benevolence for Leibniz (Griffin 2013, pp. 67, 82; Carriero 1991, 
p. 82; Garrett 2018, p. 142). 

No doubt, Spinoza and Leibniz differ with respect to their conception of God. But as I see 
things, Leibniz realized that necessitarianism was indeed incompatible with rational the- 
ism. Hence, defending the latter requires that per se possibility correspond to ordinary, 
metaphysical possibility (see here Laerke 2008, pp. 817-843; Lin 2012). The debate turns 
around whether or not such per se possibilities coincide with genuine metaphysical possi- 
bility. Answering this requires us to analyze further the connection between essence, 
modality and our activity of conceiving. 

Leibniz’s comments on El1p24 contain an important remark in connection with 
this issue. According to Elp24, “The essence of things produced by God does not 
involve existence” because only things that are self-caused are such that their essence 
involves existence. Leibniz dismisses Spinoza’s proof as question-begging, but in a 
marginal note he remarks that it contains a definition of what is non-necessary: “that 
is not necessary, the essence of which does not involve existence” (A VI.4.1773/L 
206n9, translation altered). A little later, he uses this to define contingency: “I use 
the term contingent, as do others, for that whose essence does not involve existence” 
(A VI.4.1775/L 203). This “essentialist” definition of contingency is contrasted with 
a causal definition, according to which something is contingent if it can either exist 
or not when all its requisites are given, i.e. such that there is no sufficient reason why 
it exists rather than not. This corresponds to a scholastic conception of natural 
contingency as opposed to causal determinism, which is incompatible with the prin- 
ciple of sufficient reason. Leibniz agrees with Spinoza that nothing is contingent in 
this sense, but he accuses him of having confused this causal conception of 
contingency with metaphysical contingency proper. This essentialist account of 
necessity and contingency fits nicely with per se modalities: that, the essence of which 
involves existence, is per se necessary (A VI.3.583/DSR 107); that, the essence of 
which does not involve existence, is per se contingent. 

It might be argued that the disagreement with Spinoza is not substantial and turns on 
amore or less restricted definition of necessity. Something might be non-necessary in the 
essential sense, and its contrary count as per se possible, even if, taking into account the 
order of nature and the nature of God it is necessary. Recall that according to per se 


502 


PLENITUDE AND NECESSITY 


modality, some information about a thing has to be excluded for it to count as possible: an 
eternally tortured innocent person is not internally inconsistent, but it becomes (exter- 
nally) inconsistent once God’s benevolence is taken into account. That Spinoza could have 
died in Leiden is not internally inconsistent, but it is incompatible with the rest of the uni- 
verse and the laws of nature. Spinoza also entertains such exclusion of information (about 
God, or about the universe). Thus, by merely conceiving the essence of a particular man, 
one does not exclude its non-existence (see E2a1). But his non-existence is incompatible 
with the whole order of nature, and hence impossible. 

Yet, in spite of their structural similarity, the two accounts offered by Spinoza and 
Leibniz substantially differ with respect to the modal status of finite things and the 
universe. First, Leibniz maintains that essence is the ground of modality: “for the 
essence of a thing is the same as a special ground for possibility, i.e., from the concep- 
tion of which it is conceived distinctly or a priori that the thing is possible” (A VI.3.583/ 
DSR 105-7, trans. modified; A II.1.387-8/AG 1-2; VI.4.1447/AG 21). Second, 
conceiving an essence does not require a complete knowledge of the thing, but only of 
the internal consistency of its constituents. The conjunction of these two theses 
implies that if something can be consistently conceived, it picks out an essence and 
grounds a metaphysical possibility: 


In a word, when one speaks of the possibility of a thing, it is not a question of the causes that 
can bring about or prevent its actual existence; otherwise one would change the nature of the 
terms and render useless the distinction between the possible and the actual, as Abelard did. 
(Theodicy, §235) 


For something to count as possible, no cause is required, at least no actual cause, even 
though sometimes Leibniz requires at least a possible cause (G II.51 and 225; Theodicy 
§171; cf. E4d4). Leibniz’s conception of the relation of an essence to its requisites was elab- 
orated at approximately the same time he was reading Spinoza’s Ethics. In his comments, 
he distinguishes two meanings of possible: (1) that which can be conceived; (2) that for 
which a possible cause can be conceived (A VI.4.1769/L 199). Something may be possible 
according to (1) but not according to (2). Furthermore, commenting on E1p25, Leibniz 
criticizes Spinoza for his confusing causal with conceptual relations in general. He also 
criticizes him for his failing to distinguish between two relations — x’s involving y and x’s 
being inconceivable without y (A VI.4.1774/L 203; see also G II.225—226/LDV 207-209). 
Although every finite thing involves God as their first cause, they are perfectly conceivable 
without God: “Essences can, in some sense, be conceived without God, but existences 
involve God” (AG 273). Leibniz does not wish to deny that the reality of essences is 
grounded in God, and thus requires God, but he emphasizes that these essences can be 
conceived independently from God (G III.572/L 661). This leads to the conclusion that, to 
be possible just is to have a consistent essence. Leibniz’s disagreement with Spinoza is sub- 
stantial, because he has a principled account of metaphysical possibility as grounded in 
essences. Whereas Spinoza separates essence and modality, Leibniz defends their connec- 
tion in a more traditional manner. What makes his position difficult to understand for a 
contemporary reader is that, contrary to modern accounts of de re modality, he does not 
explain essence through necessity. Rather, the other way round, he grounds modality on 
facts about essences, which hold independently of whether these essences can be actual- 
ized (Lin 2012, p. 444). 


503 


JEAN-PASCAL ANFRAY 


4. Conclusion 


Leibniz’s first engagement with Spinoza’s philosophy during the last year of his séjour in 
Paris thus left two important contributions to his mature conceptions. On the one hand, a 
speculation about what Spinoza’s other attributes amount to lead him to characterize 
worlds as collections of spatially connected things, which remained an important feature 
of his mature conception of possible worlds. On the other hand, he realized that he needed 
a reason to exclude that a plurality of worlds is actual, because this opens the way to the 
Plenitude of Possibility. However, the radical world-apart thesis which is part of his mature 
doctrines entails that he did not give up the hypothesis that God could actualize a plurality 
of worlds, which reintroduces the threat of necessitarianism. 

The discussion of the Necessity of Actuality has led to the result that whereas Spinoza 
holds that there are metaphysically necessary states of affairs about something that are 
not involved in the thing’s essence, Leibniz grounds all possibility talk in essences, so that 
if a state of affairs is not involved by a thing’s essence, then it is not metaphysically 
necessary. This difference is reflected in a difference about what an adequate conceiving of 
something is. According to Spinoza, metaphysical possibility corresponds to an adequate 
conception of something, which requires a conception of its cause. By contrast, according 
to Leibniz, knowledge that something is metaphysically possible does not require that we 
conceive its cause, but only that its internal constituents are compatible. 


References 


Adams, R.M. (1994). Leibniz: Determinist, Theist, Idealist. New York: Oxford University Press. 

Bender, S. (2016). On worlds, laws and tiles: Leibniz and the problem of compossibility. In: Leibniz on 
Compossibility and Possible Worlds (ed. Y. and G.), 65—90. New York: Springer. 

Bennett, J. (1984). A Study of Spinoza’s Ethics. Indianapolis: Hackett. 

Brown, G. and Chiek, Y. (eds.) (2016). Leibniz on Compossibility and Possible Worlds. New York: 
Springer. 

Carriero, J. (1991). Spinoza’s views on necessity in historical perspective. Philosophical Topics 19 (1): 
47-96. 

Curley, E.M. and Walski, G. (1999). Necessitarianism revisited. In: New Essays on the Rationalists 
(ed. R.J. Gennaro and C. Huenemann), 241-262. New York: Oxford University Press. 

Della Rocca, M. (2008). Spinoza. London: Routledge. 

Friedmann, G. (1962). Leibniz et Spinoza. Paris: Gallimard. 

Garrett, D. (1991). Spinoza’s necessitarianism. In: God and Nature: Spinoza’s Metaphysics 
(ed. Y. Yovel), 191-218. Leiden: Brill. Reprinted in D. Garrett, Nature and Necessity in Spinoza’s 
Philosophy, 98-124. New York: Oxford University Press. 

Garrett, D. (2018). Nature and Necessity in Spinoza’s Philosophy. New York: Oxford University Press. 

Goldenbaum, U. (2011). Leibniz and Spinoza. In: The Continuum Companion to Leibniz (ed. B.C. Look), 
51-67. London: Continuum. 

Griffin, M. (2013). Leibniz, God and Necessity. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Kulstad, M. (1994), Did Leibniz incline towards monistic pantheism in 1676? In: Leibniz und Europa, 
VI. Internationaler Leibniz-Kongress, 424-428. Hanover. 

Kulstad, M. (1999). Leibniz, Spinoza and Tschirnhaus: multiple worlds, possible worlds. In: The Young 
Leibniz and his Philosophy (ed. S. Brown), 245-262. Dordrecht: Kluwer. 

Kulstad, M. (2002). Leibniz, Spinoza, and Tschirnhaus. Metaphysics a trois, 1675-1676. In: Spinoza: 
Metaphysical Themes (ed. J. Biro and O. Koistinen), 182—209. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press. 


504 


PLENITUDE AND NECESSITY 


Kulstad, M. (2005). The one and the many and kinds of distinctness: the possibility of monism or 
pantheism in the young Leibniz. In: Leibniz: Nature and Freedom (ed. J.A. Cover and D. Rutherford), 
20-43. Oxford: Oxford University Press 

Laerke, M. (2008). Leibniz lecteur de Spinoza: la genése d’une opposition complexe. Paris: Champion. 

Laerke, M. (2017). Leibniz’s encounter with Spinoza’s monism, October 1675 to February 1678. The 
Oxford Handbook of Spinoza (ed. M. Della Rocca), 434-461. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Leibniz, G.W. (1875-90). Die Philosophischen Schriften von G. W. Leibniz (ed. C.J. Gerhardt), 7 vols. 
Berlin: Weidemann. Reprint Hildesheim: G. Olms, 1960 [G]. 

Leibniz, G.W. (1923-). Sdmtliche Schriften und Briefe. Darmstadt, Leipzig, and Berlin: Akademie der 
Wissenschaften [A]. Cited by series, volume, and page number. 

Leibniz, G.W. (1952). Theodicy. (trans. E.M. Huggard). New Haven, CT: Yale University Press. 

Leibniz, G.W. (1969). Philosophical Papers and Letters (ed. and trans. L.E. Loemker). Dordrecht: Reidel [L]. 

Leibniz, G.W. (1989). Philosophical Essays (ed. and trans. R. Ariew and D. Garber). Indianapolis: 
Hackett [AG]. 

Leibniz, G.W. (1992). De Summa Rerum. Metaphysical Papers 1675-1676 (trans. G.H.R. Parkinson). 
New Haven, CT: Yale University Press [DSR]. 

Leibniz, G.W. (1996). New Essays on the Human Understanding (trans. J. Bennett and P. Remnant). 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Cited by page number in A VI.6. 

Leibniz, G.W. (1997). Leibniz’s “New System” and Associated Contemporary Texts (ed. and trans. R.S. 
Woolhouse and R. Francks). Oxford: Oxford University Press [WF]. 

Leibniz, G.W. (2005). Confessio Philosophi. Papers Concerning the Problem of Evil, 1671-1678 (ed. and 
trans. R.C. Sleigh, Jr.). New Haven, CT: Yale University Press [CP]. 

Leibniz, G.W. (2007). The Leibniz-Des Bosses Correspondence (ed. and trans. B. Look and D. Rutherford). 
New Haven, CT: Yale University Press [LR]. 

Leibniz, G.W. (2013). The Leibniz—De Volder Correspondence: With Selections from the Correspondence bet- 
ween Leibniz and Johann Bernoulli (ed and trans. P. Lodge). New Haven, CT: Yale University Press [LDV]. 

Lin, M. (2012). Rationalism and necessitarianism. Notis 46 (3): 418-448. 

McDonough, J. (2010). Leibniz and the puzzle of incompossibility: the packing strategy. Philosophical 

Review 119 (2): 135-163. 

Melamed, Y. (2013). Spinoza’s Metaphysics. New York: Oxford University Press. 

Mercer, C. (1999). Leibniz and Spinoza on substance and mode. In: ed., The Rationalists: Critical 

Essays on Descartes, Spinoza, and Leibniz (ed. D. Pereboom), 273-300. 

Mercer, C. (2001). Leibniz’s Metaphysics: Its Origins and Development. Cambridge: Cambridge 

University Press. 

Messina, J. and Rutherford, D. (2009). Leibniz on compossibility. Philosophy Compass 4 (6): 

962-977. 

Newlands, S. (2010). The harmony of Spinoza and Leibniz. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 

81 (1): 64-104. 

Newlands, S. (2018). Reconceiving Spinoza. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Parkinson, G.H.R. (1978). Leibniz’s Paris writings in relation to Spinoza. In: Leibniz a Paris (1672- 
76), 73-90. Studia Leibnitiana Supplementa 18, Wiesbaden: Felix Steiner Verlag. 

Russell, B. (1937). A Critical Exposition of the Philosophy of Leibniz, 2nd edn. London: Allen and 
Unwin. 

Sleigh, R.C. Jr. (2005). Introduction. In: Leibniz, Confessio Philosophy, xix—xli. New Haven, CT: Yale 
University Press, 

Stein, L. (1890). Leibniz und Spinoza. Ein Beitrag sur Entwicklungsgeschichte der Leibnizischen Philosophie, 
Berlin: Georg Reimer Verlag. 


505 


47 


Spinoza in France, ca. 1670-1970 
MOGENS LA:RKE 


1. Introduction 


This chapter proposes a very condensed overview of some three centuries of Spinoza 
reception in France, from around 1670 to 1970. It is not the best-known part of Spinoza’s 
reception. That prize goes to Germany. Yet, Spinoza’s presence in the history of French phi- 
losophy is pervasive, deep, and varied. Moreover, from the first reactions to Tractatus 
theologico-politicus by French biblical scholars in the late 1670s to Martial Gueroult’s mon- 
umental 1968-1974 commentary on Parts 1 and 2 of the Ethics, this presence gives a 
fascinating lesson in the way that the reception of particular philosophers both shapes and 
reflects the more general history of philosophy developing in parallel to it. This chapter 
presents some of the most important figures and stages in that inextricable double history 
of both Spinozism from the viewpoint of French philosophy and French philosophy from 
the viewpoint of Spinozism. Before delving into this complex story, however, three prelim- 
inary remarks are in order. 

First, I readily admit that the separation of sections strictly according to centuries I have 
adopted below is artificial and that the periodizations it suggests should be considered flex- 
ible at best. Nonetheless, each century presents us with a relatively determined set of inter- 
pretative controversies around which Spinoza commentaries tend to cluster. These 
controversies emerge and recede from history as a result of a multitude of factors relating 
to both intellectual context and historical circumstances. Here, I shall mainly focus on the 
intellectual context, that is to say, on the ways in which the reception of Spinoza was 
shaped by other philosophers and by their engagement with Spinoza’s philosophy in their 
writings. It is important to realize, however, that these intellectual contexts did not exist in 
a vacuum but were constantly affected and shaped by the political, institutional, societal, 
and cultural circumstances of their construction. 

Second, I shall not engage in writing book history, but it is important to realize that the 
reception of Spinoza’s philosophy — as is the case for any past philosopher — is inseparable 
from the concrete history of his publications. The reception is importantly shaped by the 
availability of the original texts and the existence (or absence) of translations. The Tractatus 
theologico-politicus was quickly translated into French by Gabriel de Saint-Glain and 


A Companion to Spinoza, First Edition. Edited by Yitzhak Y. Melamed. 
© 2021 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2021 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd. 


506 


SPINOZA IN FRANCE, ca. 1670-1970 


circulated more or less clandestinely from 1678 onward under various titles, such as for 
example Traité des cérémonies superstitieuses des Juifs, tant anciens que modernes. The first 
known translation of Spinoza’s Ethics into French was done by Henri de Boulainvilliers, a 
French nobleman and libertine, around 1712. The translation, careful and insightful, is a 
testimony to the depth with which the French libertine tradition of the late seventeenth 
and early eighteenth century sometimes appropriated Spinoza’s philosophy for its own 
subversive purposes. Boulainvilliers’s translation was, however, made for private use and 
was only discovered and published in 1907. The first published French translation of the 
Ethics appeared much later in Emile Saisset’s edition of the works from 1842 (2nd ed. 
Spinoza 1861). It is also worth noting that, until quite late, the reception almost entirely 
focused on the Tractatus theologico-politicus and the Ethics. The Tractatus de intellectus emen- 
datione only joined the canon of essential Spinoza texts in the nineteenth-century recep- 
tion, where it was perceived as a kind of methodological preface to the Ethics. The Tractatus 
politicus was largely ignored until the second half of the twentieth century. As for the Korte 
Verhandeling, it was not discovered and published until 1862 in Van Vloten’s Latin transla- 
tion of the Dutch manuscripts; a French version appeared in 1878, in a translation by Paul 
Janet (Spinoza 1878). 

Third, and finally, from a reflexive point of view, the French reception of Spinoza has 
itself been the object of a growing literature over the last half century. I have drawn heavily 
on this literature while writing this chapter. But, even though I will not engage with it on 
any deeper level, it is worth noting that the second-order history of how the French Spinoza 
reception has been studied over the last century or so is interesting in its own right and 
reflects general philosophical conjunctures in French thought as much as does the first- 
order history of that reception itself. So let me mention just a few highlights in the 
development of the historiography of Spinoza’s French reception. Most importantly, in 
1954, Paul Verniére—a literary scholar later best known for his work on Diderot — published 
a monograph of some 900 pages on the first hundred years of French reception of Spinoza, 
up to the French Revolution. Spinoza et la pensée francaise avant la Révolution is an enormous 
piece of original research that remains entirely unsurpassed. Still, a valuable addition on 
the eighteenth-century reception, prolonging the heritage from Verniére, is Yves Citton’s 
L’Envers de la liberté of 2006. The first hundred years’ reception of Spinoza in France has 
also received more attention recently from historians of philosophy in the wake of Jonathan 
Israel’s 2001 Radical Enlightenment (French translation in 2005). Indeed, in the French 
context, Israel’s work has been an important catalyst for a wealth of sophisticated studies 
on early Enlightenment figures, currents, and texts, and has prompted renewed interest in 
authors such as Boulainvilliers, Nicholas-Antoine Boulanger, and many other reputedly 
minor figures (see e.g. Secretan, Dagron, and Bove 2007). As for the later reception, three 
relatively recent edited volumes, dedicated to the general reception of Spinoza, including 
French, in the eighteenth, nineteenth, and twentieth centuries, provide some very helpful 
but somewhat eclectic guidance to the complex story of French Spinozism in the longue 
durée — a story which however remains to be written in a more unified form 
(Bloch 1990, 1993; Tosel, Moreau, and Salem 2008). For the twentieth century, Warren 
Montag and Ted Stolze’s volume of English translations of various pieces by French Spinoza 
scholars in their 1997 The New Spinoza have made essential parts of recent French Spinoza 
scholarship available to an Anglophone audience, but has unfortunately also contributed 
— somewhat inadvertently — to the common misconception that twentieth-century French 
Spinozism must principally be understood in a structuralist or poststructuralist setting. 
Recently, the reception of Spinoza in twentieth-century France has been scrutinized from 


507 


MOGENS L/ERKE 


a somewhat different perspective in an excellent book by Knox Peden, which studies a 
lineage of anti-phenomenological Spinozists from Cavaillés to Deleuze, via Desanti, 
Gueroult, and Althusser (Peden 2014). 


2. The Seventeenth Century 


The publication of the Tractatus theologico-politicus in 1670 reverberated far beyond the 
borders of the United Provinces. Spinoza’s ideas about the Bible and its interpretation 
were hard to ignore but even harder not to ignore. As the French intellectual Henri Justel 
wrote about the proliferation of mediocre refutations, “it is pointless to undertake the 
apology of the Christian religion which must be strongly defended or not defended at all” 
(Leibniz 1923-, I, pp. ii, 247). The task required, as Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz noted, “a 
man equal to Spinoza in terms of erudition but superior to him in his respect for 
Christianity” (Leibniz 1923-, II, I, pp. 208). Such men were hard to come by, but a couple 
of serious candidates emerged from the French context. 

One way of coming to grips with Spinoza’s biblical scholarship was to drown his 
argument in a deluge of superior erudition. This was the strategy of Pierre-Daniel Huet, 
tutor to the Dauphin and later Bishop of Avranches, a prodigiously learned former student 
of the humanist Samuel Bochart. Possibly on the suggestion of Leibniz, Huet’s voluminous 
defense of the Christian religion, the Demonstratio evangelica, was presented as a refutation 
of the anonymous author of the libertas philosophandi (Leerke 2006; Shelford 2002). Spinoza 
himself heard of Huet’s work from Tschirnhaus in 1676 (Ep. 80 | G IV/331/20-25). 
He was curious and asked for a copy (Ep. 83 | GIV/335/9-13). Huet’s treatise was already 
complete at that time, but its publication was delayed by unforeseen trouble with the Royal 
Censorship, so Spinoza died before having the opportunity to read it (Shelford 2006). It was 
published in 1679. The Demonstratio was presented as a geometrical demonstration of the 
divinity of Scripture. On the basis of a few definitions and axioms concerned with terms 
such as “authenticity,” “history,” “prophecy,” and “true religion,” Huet showed in 
excruciating detail the prophetic agreement between the Old and the New Testament. He 
moreover attempted to show how most of the main pagan deities were in fact 
pre-figurations of Moses. In the reception, unfortunately, this pan-Mosaic argument some- 
what eclipsed his geometrical demonstration of Christianity and was often met with deri- 
sion (Leerke 2014, 107-203). 

Another way to approach the Tractatus critically was to acknowledge the merits of 
Spinoza’s historical analysis of the Bible, but attempt to use his insights in favor of the 
Christian religion rather than the contrary. The most prominent example was the Oratorian 
Richard Simon’s Histoire critique du Vieux Testament. It did not go well: when completed in 
1678, the book was immediately banned, seized, and burned by the French royal censors. 
Anew edition was not published until 1685, in Holland (Simon 1685). And yet Simon was 
not writing in favor of Spinoza. In the Tractatus, Spinoza showed how the Old Testament 
was a text collated from multiple sources and written long after the events it recounts. 
Simon, for his part, attempted to save the authenticity of the Holy Scripture by appealing 
to a theory of “inspired scribes,” thus maintaining the original doctrine of divine inspira- 
tion (Simon 1685; Gibert 2010). 

After the publication of Spinoza’s Opera posthuma early 1678, the Ethics quickly eclipsed 
the Tractatus as the center of attention. The public commentary was, as elsewhere, domi- 
nated by a relentless stream of refutations. The first were written by exiled philosophers 


508 


SPINOZA IN FRANCE, ca. 1670-1970 


based in Holland, such as Noel Aubert de Versé, a religiously volatile intellectual whose 
L'Impie convaincu appeared in Amsterdam in 1685 (Hubert 1994). Another, very different, 
example is Pierre Poiret, a Cartesian and non-conformist Protestant, follower of the mystic 
Antoinette Bourignon. His refutation, entitled Fundamenta atheismi eversa, was appended 
to the second edition of his Cogitationes rationales de Deo, anima et malo, also published in 
Amsterdam in 1685.The most popular strategy was to attack the basis of Spinoza’s philos- 
ophy in order to make the whole edifice crumble. This is why the majority of refutations 
focused on the first book of the Ethics and on Spinoza’s metaphysics of substance, attrib- 
utes, and modes. Francois Lamy, for example, argued in Le Nouvel athéisme renversé on 
Cartesian grounds that the conceptual independence of the attributes asserted by Spinoza 
was incompatible with the affirmation of a single substance (Lamy 1696; Stetter 2019). 

The best-known among Spinoza’s first francophone refutations, however, was and 
remains Pierre Bayle’s long article in the Dictionnaire historique et critique of 1697, sub- 
stantially expanded in the 1702 edition. According to Bayle, any reader of Spinoza’s meta- 
physics of substance and mode was confronted with a stark choice: either Spinoza 
understood by the foundational relation between “substance” and “modes” what the 
previous Aristotelian and Cartesian tradition understood by it, namely something 
comparable to a relation between a “subject” and its “predicates” or “properties,” in which 
case Spinozism got entangled in irresolvable self-contradiction; or Spinoza understood by it 
some other kind of relation, not explained within his philosophy, in which case Spinozism 
should be rejected as unintelligible and meaningless (Bayle 1820: XII, pp. 416-468). 

As the turn of the century approached, the reception of Spinoza became more and 
more caught up in local French debates, mostly about the status of a declining Cartesianism 
which was further threatened by the possible association with Spinoza. A very public 
attempt at making that association involved Leibniz. Already from 1679 onward, in 
correspondence and personal notes, the German philosopher often suggested that 
“Descartes’s deepest convictions are not too far from Spinoza’s opinions” (Leibniz 1923-, 
VI, pp. iv, 1478). It was not until 1697, however, that he expressed this opinion both in 
public and in French, instigating a brief but intense philosophical brawl with the “Prince 
of the Cartesians,” Pierre-Sylvain Regis. The controversy took off when the Journal des 
Scavants published a letter to Father Claude Nicaise where Leibniz claimed that “Spinoza 
did nothing but cultivate certain seeds in Mr. Descartes’s philosophy” (Leibniz 1875-1990, 
II, p. 563; Leerke 2015, pp. 285-333; 2018). Leibniz’s main concern was with what he 
saw as the necessitarian implications of a marginal passage in Descartes’s Principia philoso- 
phiae (Il, art. 47) according to which “matter must successively assume all the forms of 
which it is capable” (AT VII 103 / CSM1I 257-258). 

The danger of being associated with Spinozism however also, and particularly, extended 
to the occasionalist branch of Cartesianism, incidentally something which was not lost on 
Leibniz either (Leibniz 1875-1890, II, p. 545: IV, 515, 530; VI, p. 545; Leerke 2013). As 
early as 1684, Aubert de Versé already put considerable energy into showing that the doc- 
trine of the “visionary” Nicholas Malebranche led to Spinozism (Aubert de Versé 1685, 
pp. 142-143, 240). Another philosophically more interesting, and today better known, 
example is the correspondence between Jean-Jacques Dortous de Mairan and Malebranche 
from 1713-1714, where Dortous de Mairan pointed out the similitudes between Spinoza’s 
understanding of the attribute of extension and Malebranche’s notion of “intelligible 
extension,” first developed in one of the “clarifications” added to the fourth edition of La 
Recherche de la vérité, published in 1678, and subsequently a key component in the Oratorian’s 
epistemology of “vision in God” (Malebranche 1678, pp. 534-543; Rodis-Lewis 1988; 


509 


MOGENS L/ERKE 


Grene and Watson 1995; Moreau 2018). Dortous de Mairan’s reading did, however, not 
have any contemporary impact: the correspondence was not discovered and published until 
the mid-eighteenth century (Malebranche 1841). In any case, these are just a few examples 
of how Spinoza and Malebranche were very often associated in the early French reception 
(Verniére 1954, p. 268; Carbone 2018). 


3. The Eighteenth Century 


The early eighteenth century produced a substantial atheist literature, often circulated sous 
le manteau. Spinoza’s presence in these texts takes many forms but, as a general rule, they 
tended to accentuate the anticlerical aspects of his thinking. The most famous example is 
the Traité des trois imposteurs, also entitled L’Esprit de Spinoza, a text perhaps written by one 
of Spinoza’s first biographers, Jean Maximillian Lucas. The treatise circulated in manu- 
script as early as 1678 but was first printed in 1719 (Charles-Daubert 1999). It takes up 
the old argument, stemming from the Middle Ages, that the three main figures of the three 
monotheist religions — Moses, Jesus, and Mohammed — were in fact mere impostors who 
posed as prophets in order to gain or consolidate political power (Moreau and Mothu 2016). 
The printed version of 1719 defended the thesis by means of arguments drawn from 
modern authors including Gabriel Naudé, Thomas Hobbes, and Spinoza. 

Other sympathetic expositions of Spinoza from the period were disguised as refutations. 
A good example is Boulainvilliers’s Essay de métaphysique dans les principes de Benoit Spinoza. 
It already circulated in manuscript from the time it was written around 1712, but was first 
published in 1731, ostensibly as a Réfutation de Spinoza along with the more sincere refuta- 
tions by Lamy and Fénelon (Boulainvilliers 1731). Boulainvilliers knew Spinoza well for 
having studied Tractatus theologico-politicus extensively and having produced a full French 
translation of the Ethics for his own use (Spinoza 1907). His own exposition, he claimed, 
aimed at making Spinozism accessible by “stripping it of this mathematical dryness that 
makes it impossible to read, so that the system, now rendered in a common language and 
reduced to ordinary expressions, can be stated in way that will stir up indignation similar 
to my own and procure, by these means, true enemies of such pernicious principles” 
(Boulainvilliers 1731, p. 155). The Essay was widely used as an authoritative presentation 
of Spinoza’s thinking throughout the Enlightenment. 

The image of Spinoza in the later Enlightenment was deeply ambiguous. On the negative 
side, the mathematical paradigm of scientific knowledge adopted by Spinoza declined along 
with Cartesianism while the empiricist program defined by John Locke and Isaac Newton 
began to take center stage. In his Traité des systeémes of 1847, Etienne Bonnot de Condillac 
presented Spinoza’s geometrical method as the prime example of a vain and outdated “spirit 
of systems” that had to be replaced by a more empirically oriented “systematic spirit,” 
claiming that the demonstrations of the Ethics “contain nothing that may lead to the 
knowledge of things” (Condillac 1798, p. 321). On the positive side, the materialist Spinoza 
inherited from the seventeenth century was more favorably received, but also profoundly 
transformed. One very characteristic feature of the French reception was the way that this 
materialist Spinozism was associated with the burgeoning life sciences, opening up the pos- 
sibility of rethinking it within a vitalist framework (Verniére 1954, pp. 555-611; 
Citton 2006). 

The most important example of this development was Denis Diderot’s conception of a 
“modern” Spinozism. In his entry on “Spinosa” in volume XV of the Encyclopédie, 


510 


SPINOZA IN FRANCE, ca. 1670-1970 


published in 1765, Diderot presented him in traditional manner as “the first who has 
reduced atheism to a system [. . .] following the method of the geometers,” a “ridiculous” 
and “incomprehensible” doctrine that Bayle had “ruined from one end to the other” 
(Diderot et d’Alembert 1751-1772: XV, pp. 563-574). His exposition was for the main 
part modeled on the standard commentaries of Bayle, already referenced above, and on 
the section on Spinoza in Johann Jacob Brucker’s Historia critica philosophiae (Brucker 
1742-1744, VI.2, 682-706). In a second article entitled “Spinosiste,” however, Diderot 
distinguished between the original Spinozism and a new “modern” Spinozism according to 
which “matter is sensible” and in which the material world “turns into a big, sentient and 
living body in a great space” (Diderot et d’Alembert 1751-1772, XV, p. 474). Diderot 
further elaborated this neo-Spinozism during the 1760s, arguing in the Entretien entre 
d'Alembert et Diderot that “there is not more than one substance in the universe, in man, in 
animals” and in Le Réve de d’Alembert that “there is only one individual; it is the totality” 
(Diderot 1875-1877: IL, pp. 117, 139). 


4. The Nineteenth Century 


The first French translation of Spinoza’s works (excepting the Tractatus politicus, the 
Hebrew Grammar, and, of course, the Korte Verhandeling, not yet discovered) was published 
by Emile Saisset in 1842 (2 volumes; revised edition in 3 volumes, 1861). Saisset, however, 
was no Spinozist. He was a so-called spiritualist eclectic out of the school of Victor Cousin, 
the all-powerful chair in the history of modern philosophy at the Sorbonne, director of the 
Ecole Normale Supérieure, member of the French Academy, director of the Academy of 
Moral and Political Sciences, minister of public instruction, and president of the agrégation. 
Towering over the philosophical institution of nineteenth-century France, Cousin was try- 
ing to steer a politically difficult course between, on the one hand, republicanism and bur- 
geoning socialism on the left and, on the other hand, conservative, clerical philosophy on 
the right. Text edition played an essential role in this effort because contemporary 
philosophical positions and the relations between them were articulated via competing 
commentaries on past philosophy. Cousin’s established Descartes as the founder of a new 
French spiritualism focusing on the cogito, depicting him principally as psychologist 
exploring consciousness. For that reason, he had begun his philosophical crusade to 
reform the French philosophical landscape by publishing a new, complete edition of 
Descartes’s works already in the 1820s (Descartes 1824-1926; Antoine-Mahut 2020). 
Spinoza’s philosophy, by contrast, was universally condemned as fatalist and pantheist. 
But the way in which it was rejected, the exact reasons why, and the consequences it had 
for other philosophical doctrines, were all questions about which there was intense dis- 
agreement among the philosophical factions of the day. Saisset’s translation must be 
understood against this background: the project was undertaken not to promote Spinoza, 
but to appropriate him and strategically refute him so as to simultaneously promote the 
philosophical agenda of spiritualist eclecticism and allow the Cousinian school to neu- 
tralize accusations of Spinozism coming from the right. This meant, first of all, refuting the 
claim that “rationalism necessarily leads to pantheism” (Saisset 1860, I, p. 2; 
Moreau 1980, 2008). For, according to the anti-Cousinians among the clergy, Spinoza’s 
pantheism was not only the high point of atheism, materialism, and fatalism, but the 
logical outcome of all rationalism, including Descartes’s. Cousin’s own principal strategy 
for anticipating this argument was to dissociate Spinoza from his Cartesian heritage and 


511 


MOGENS L/ERKE 


depict him as an “essentially Jewish” philosopher, an oriental thinker and not a Cartesian 
one, “an indian muni, a persan sufi, an enthusiast monk.” Adopting a perspective on 
Spinozism not too far removed from that of the German Idealists but more negative, 
Spinoza’s philosophy was for Cousin not true rationalism, which had to be grounded in the 
self-evidence of the cogito, but rather a “mystical hymn” that “erased personhood from 
existence.” Spinoza, “far from being atheist, as he is accused of, [had] the sense of God to 
such a degree that he loses the sense of man” (Cousin 1838, II, pp. 163-166). This reading 
allowed Cousin to dissociate Spinoza from Descartes and argue that the philosophy of the 
cogito constituted the most efficient antidote to Spinozism (Moreau 2014; Vermeren 1990; 
Cotten 2014). 

Views dissenting from Cousin’s did, however, also emerge from within the school of spir- 
itualist eclecticism. In particular, when the important Leibniz editor Count Louis Alexandre 
Foucher de Careil in 1854 published Leibniz’s annotations to Johann Georg Wachter’s 
curious 1706 kabbalistico-Spinozist treatise Elucidarius cabalisticus under the decidedly 
misleading title Réfutation inédite de Spinoza, and later, in 1862, issued a second edition 
which also included Leibniz’s 1678 annotations on the Ethics, his aim was not only to 
demonstrate, against the philosophers of the clergy, that Leibniz’s rationalism did not lead 
to Spinozism, but also, in disagreement with Cousin, to demonstrate that Leibniz’s brand 
of rationalism offered a more efficient antidote to Spinozism than Descartes’s (Foucher de 
Careil 1854, 1862; Moreau 1988, 2004; Leerke 2008, pp. 63-65). 


5. The Twentieth Century 


In 1893, Victor Delbos, later professor at the Sorbonne from 1896 until a premature death 
in 1916, published a large volume entitled Le Probléme du mal dans la philosophie de Spinoza, 
dedicated to Spinoza’s moral philosophy and its later reception in European philosophy, 
mainly German. Delbos was criticized for not denouncing Spinoza’s pantheism and 
fatalism in sufficiently strong terms, as his spiritualist predecessors had done it. And yet, 
Delbos was no Spinozist, but a devoted Catholic. It was, however, a central part of Delbos’s 
historiographical project to give “neutral” accounts as Etienne Gilson later put it 
(Gilson 1960, p. 42). Delbos, a neo-Kantian indebted to the German historiographical 
tradition, thus attempted to make a clean break with the philosophically engaged 
historiography of the spiritualist tradition and make room for a more disinterested or 
“scientific” approach to past philosophy. 

The most prominent heir of Delbos was Martial Gueroult, although the latter only 
adopted the systematic part of Delbos’s program while putting to one side the historical 
part which was rather taken up by Paul Verniére (Leerke 2020a). Gueroult’s two vol- 
umes on Spinoza, published in 1968 and 1974, dedicated to the first two books of the 
Ethics, presented a painstakingly detailed reconstruction of the argumentative struc- 
ture of Spinoza’s work, following the method of “structural analysis” that Gueroult had 
conceived in the 1920s and already applied to numerous other philosophers, including 
Maimon, Fichte, Malebranche and, most famously, Descartes. Gueroult’s reading of 
Spinoza was partly caught up in his protracted controversy with Ferdinand Alquié 
about the aims and methods of the history of philosophy, ongoing since Gueroult’s 
grumpy denunciation of Alquié’s 1950 doctoral thesis on Descartes as “novelistic” 
(Anon. [Dussort] 1950). Whereas Alquié, a historian of philosophy close to existen- 
tialist and surrealist milieus, favored a hermeneutics seeking out the fundamental 


512 


SPINOZA IN FRANCE, ca. 1670-1970 


“gesture” of the philosophers, Gueroult preferred a more text-based approach 
(Macherey 2014, pp. 13—32; Peden 2014, pp 65-94; Leerke 2020b). Gueroult’s “struc- 
tural analysis” converged with, but should not be confused with, the “structuralism” 
associated with figures such as Claude Lévi-Strauss, Roland Barthes, and Louis 
Althusser. If anything, it is rather Alexandre Matheron’s Individu et communauté chez 
Spinoza of 1969 that represents the closest one will get to an application of the struc- 
turalist method to the history of philosophy (Matheron 1969; see also Matheron 2011). 
As Sylvain Zac put it, Matheron had “done for Spinoza what Lévi-Strauss did for kinship 
systems” (Bove and Moreau 2000, p. 180). 

Gueroult exerted outsize influence on the way that history of philosophy was practiced 
as a discipline in France in the second half of the twentieth century. The resurgence of 
Spinoza studies during that same period was, however, also importantly influenced by 
Althusser. Althusser’s writings on Spinoza are notoriously scarce, essentially a list of scat- 
tered remarks including a few pages in the auto-biographical L’Avenir dure longtemps, and 
—as the most important source — the first part of a text entitled “L’Unique tradition mate- 
rialiste,” first published in 1993 (Althusser 1992, pp. 208-211, 1993, pp. 75-97; 
Moreau 1997). This gave Althusser’s followers and students considerable latitude to inter- 
pret his claim to have “taken the detour through Spinoza in order to understand Marx” 
(Althusser 1992, p. 352), something which partly explains the richness of his legacy, 
mediated through former students and future prominent French Spinozists such as Pierre 
Macherey, Etienne Balibar, André Tosel, and Pierre-Francois Moreau (see 
Balibar 1985, 2018; Macherey 1979, 1992, 1994-1998; Moreau 1994, etc.). We should 
be wary of admitting — as happens only too often — Gilles Deleuze to this group. Deleuze’s 
influential thesis on Spinoza et le probléme de l’expression, published in 1968, came out of a 
different context. Deleuze followed Gueroult’s lectures at the College de France and appre- 
ciated the latter’s work on Spinoza when it was published (Deleuze 1969). But his own 
book predated the publication of Gueroult’s, was written under the supervision of Alquié 
and adopted an approach not too far from Alquié’s focus on the philosophers’ fundamental 
“gestures” — in Deleuze’s reading of Spinoza captured in a governing, but diffuse concep- 
tion of “expression.” 


6. Conclusion 


As it should be evident, the brief narrative outlined above is highly selective and perhaps a 
little idiosyncratic: it picks out what I see as highlights or representative examples of 
Spinoza’s French reception but is nowhere near exhaustive. I can only hope that these few 
remarks will prompt others to undertake more detailed study of the topic, still largely 
unexplored in the English-language literature. In his 1893 thesis on Spinoza, Delbos 
observed that 


if the internal force of a doctrine is measured by the degree of organization it implies, one 
could also say, conversely, that its historical influence is measured by the degree of disor- 
ganization it can sustain without becoming fundamentally denaturalized [. . .]. No single 
life absorbs or retains everything within it, but seeds of life move away and spread out as 
best they can, deploying, in a variety of meanings, their secret energy. This is the fate of 
all the great doctrines; it has in particular been the fate of Spinoza’s doctrine. (Delbos 1893. 
pp. vi-—vii) 


513 


MOGENS L/ERKE 


It was a passage that Verniére enthusiastically cited in his 1954 volume on the eighteenth- 
century reception, even adding that “maybe the life and efficacy of a doctrine requires 
incomprehension, alteration, amalgamation. Orthodoxy in philosophy is a seed of death” 
(Verniére 1954, pp. 3, 701). It is also a perspective that, more recently, Moreau has appro- 
priated to describe his own approach to Spinoza and Spinozism (Leerke and Moreau 2004, 
p. 70). As I have argued in some detail elsewhere, it is not, I think, a coincidence that it has 
been among French Spinoza scholars that such principles, stressing the productivity proper 
to the reception of a past philosophy, have taken root in France (Laerke 2020a). Just like its 
more famous German counterpart, the French reception of Spinoza displays an aston- 
ishing variety of interpretation within which, however, the features of the Dutch Jew 
never, or seldom, disappear from view, testifying to the remarkably plastic nature of his 
doctrine. 


References 


Althusser, L. (1992). L’Avenir dure longtemps, suivi de Les faits, Paris: Stock/IMEC. 

Althusser, L. (1993). L'Unique tradition matérialiste. Lignes 8: 72-119. 

Anon. [Henri Dussort] (1950). Soutenances de théses [summary of Ferdinand Alquié’s thesis 
defense]. Revue de métaphysique et de morale 55 (4): 434-436. 

Antoine-Mahut, D. (2020). Philosophizing with a historiographical figure. Descartes in Degérando’s 
Histoire comparée des systémes de philosophie (1804 and 1847). British Journal for the History of 
Philosophy (special issue: Historiography of philosophy, 1800-1950; ed. L. Catana and M. Leerke). 
28(3): 533-552. 

Aubert de Versé, N. (1865). L’impie convaincu ou dissertation contre Spinosa. Amsterdam: Jean Crelle. 

Balibar, E. (1985). Spinoza et la politique. Paris: PUF. 

Balibar, E. (2018). Spinoza politique. Le Transindividuel. Paris: PUE. 

Bayle, P. (1820). Dictionnaire historique et critique (ed. A.-J.-Q. Beuchot), 16 vols. Paris: Desoer. 

Bloch, O. (ed.) (1990). Spinoza au XVIIF siécle. Paris: Méridiens-Klincksieck. 

Bloch, O. (ed.) (1993). Spinoza au XX° siécle. Paris: PUF. 

Boulainvilliers, H. de. (1731). Réfutation de Spinoza. In: Refutation des erreurs de Benoit de Spinoza (ed. 
F. de Salignac de La Mothe Fénélon, F. Lamy, H. de Boulainvilliers), 151-320. Bruxelles: Francois 
Coppens. 

Bove, L. and Moreau, P.-E. (2000). A Propos de Spinoza. Entretien avec Alexandre Matheron. 
Multitudes 3 (3): 169-200. 

Brucker, J.J. (2018). Historia critica philosophiae, 4 vols, 1742-1744. Leipzig: Breitkopf,. 

Carbone, R. (ed.) (2018). Spinoza-Malebranche: A la croisée des interpretations. Lyon: ENS Editions. 

Charles-Daubert, F. (ed.) (1999). Le “Traité des trois imposteurs” et “L’Esprit de Spinoza.” Philosophie 
clandestine entre 1678 et 1768. Oxford: Voltaire Foundation. 

Citton, Y. (2006). L’Envers de la liberté. L’invention d’un imaginaire spinoziste dans la France des Lumieres. 
Paris: Editions Amsterdam. 

Condillac, E.B., abbé de. (1798). Traité des systémes ott l’on en déméle les inconveniens et les avantages. 
The Hague: Néaulme. 

Cotten, J.-P. (2014). “Spinoza et Victor Cousin.” In Spinoza au XTX° siécle (ed. A. Tosel, P.-F. Moreau, 
and J. Salem), 231-242. Paris: Publications de la Sorbonne. 

Cousin, V. (1838). Spinoza et la synagogue des juifs portugais. Fragments philosophiques, vol. II, 163-166. 
Paris: Ladrange. 

Delbos, V. (1893). Le Probléme moral dans la philosophie de Spinoza et dans l'histoire du spinozisme. Paris: 
Félix Alcan. 

Deleuze, G. (1968). Spinoza et le probleme de l’expression. Paris: Minuit. 


514 


SPINOZA IN FRANCE, ca. 1670-1970 


Deleuze, G. (1969). Spinoza et la méthode générale de M. Gueroult. Revue de métaphysique et de morale 
74: 426-437. 

Diderot, D. (1875-1877). Euvres completes, (ed. J. Assézat and M. Tourneux), 20 vols. Paris: Garnier. 

Diderot, D. and Rond d’Alembert, J. le (eds.) (1751-1772). Encyclopédie ou dictionnaire raisonné des 
sciences, des arts et des métiers, 17 vols. Paris: Briasson, David, Le Breton, Durand. 

Descartes, R. (1824-1826). Oeuvres completes (ed. V. Cousin), 11 vols. Paris: Pichon et Didier, 

Foucher de Careil, L.A. (1854). Réfutation inedite de Spinoza par Leibniz. Paris: E. Briére. 

Foucher de Careil, L.A. (1862). Leibniz, Descartes et Spinoza. Paris: Librairie Philosophique de 
Ladrange. 

Gibert, P. (2010). L’Invention critique de la Bible XV°--XVIIE siecle. Paris: Gallimard. 

Gilson, E. (1960). Le Philosophe et la théologie. Paris: Fayard. 

Grene, M. and Watson, R. (eds.) (1995). Malebranche’s First and Last Critics: Simon Foucher and Dortous 
de Mairan. Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press. 

Gueroult, M. (1968). Spinoza I. Dieu. Paris: Aubier. 

Gueroult, M. (1974). Spinoza II. L’dme. Paris: Aubier. 

Hubert, C. (1994). Les premiéres réfutations de Spinoza. Paris: Presses universitaires de 
Paris-Sorbonne. 

Huet, P.-D. (1679). Demonstratio evangelica. Paris: Stephanum Michallet. 

Israel, J.I. (2001). Radical Enlightenment: Philosophy and the Making of Modernity, 1650-1750. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Israel, J.I. (2007). Lumieéres radicales. La Philosophie, Spinoza et la naissance de la modernité (1650-1750). 
Paris: Editions Amsterdam. 

Leerke, M. (2006), A la recherche d’un homme égal a Spinoza. G.W. Leibniz et la Demonstratio evan- 
gelica de Pierre-Daniel Huet. XVIe siécle 232: 388-410. 

Lerke, M. (2008). Leibniz lecteur de Spinoza. La Genése d’une opposition complexe. Paris: Honoré 
Champion. 

Leerke, M. (2013). Le nouveau cartésianisme et le dernier novateur: Leibniz sur les rapports entre 
occasionnalisme et spinozisme. In: Qu’est-ce qu’étre cartésien? (ed. D. Kolesnik-Antoine), 281-297. 
Lyon: ENS Editions. 

Leerke, M. (2015). Les Lumiéres de Leibniz. Controverses avec Huet, Bayle, Regis et More. Paris: Classiques 
Garnier. 

Leerke, M. (2018). All the forms of matter. Leibniz, Regis and the world’s infinity. In: Infinity in Early 
Modern Philosophy (ed. O. Nachtomy and R. Winegar), 115-129. Dordrecht: Springer. 

Leerke, M. (2020a). French historiographical Spinozism, 1893-2018. Delbos, Gueroult, Verniére, 
Moreau. British Journal for the History of Philosophy (special issue: Historiography of Philosophy, 
1800-1950; ed. L. Catana and M. Lezerke) 28 (3): 653-672. 

Leerke, M. (2020b). Structural analysis and dianoematics. The history of (the history of) philosophy 
according to Martial Gueroult. Journal of the History of Philosophy 58 (3): 581-607. 

Leerke, M. and Moreau, P.-F. (2004). Interview med Pierre-Francois Moreau. Slagmark 39: 69-79. 

Lamy, F. (1696). Le Nouvel athéisme renversé ou Réfutation du sistéme de Spinoza. Paris: Roulland. 

Leibniz, G.W. (1875-1890). Die philosophischen Schriften von G.W. Leibniz (ed. C.I. Gerhardt). Berlin: 
Weidmannsche Buchhandlung. 

Leibniz, G.W. (1923-). Samtliche Schriften und Briefe. Berlin: Akademie-Verlag. 

Macherey, P. (1979). Hegel ou Spinoza. Paris: Maspero. 

Macherey, P. (1992). Avec Spinoza. Paris: Presses universitaires de Paris. 

Macherey, P. (1994-1998). Introduction a l'Ethique de Spinoza, 5 vols. Paris: PUE. 

Macherey, P. (2014). Querelles cartésiennes. Lille: Septentrion. 

Malebranche, N. (1678). De la recherche de la vérité. Quatriéme édition reveue, & augmentée de plusieurs 
Eclaircissements. Paris: André Pralard. 

Malebranche, N. (1841). Méditation métaphysiques et correspondence de N. Malebranche, prétre de 
l’Oratoire, avec J.J. Dortous de Mairan, sur des sujets de métaphysique; publiées pour la premiere fois sur 
les manuscrits originaux. Paris: H. Delloye. 


515 


MOGENS LAERKE 


Matheron, A. (1969). Individu et communauté chez Spinoza. Paris: Minuit. 

Matheron, A. (2011). Etudes sur Spinoza et les philosophies de I’age classique. Lyon: ENS Editions. 

Montag, W. and Stolze, T. (ed.) (1997). The New Spinoza. Minnesota: University of Minnesota Press. 

Moreau, P.-F. (1980). Saisset, lecteur de Spinoza. Recherches sur le XVIle siécle 4: 85-97. 

Moreau, P.-E. (1988). Les enjeux de la publication en France des papiers de Leibniz sur Spinoza. Revue 

de métaphysique et de morale 2: 215-222. 

Moreau, P.-F. (1994). Spinoza. L’expérience et l’éternité. Paris: Presses universitaires de France. 

Moreau, P.-E. (1997). Althusser et Spinoza. In: Althusser Philosophe (ed. Pierre Raymond), 75-86. 

Paris: PUF. 

Moreau, P.-F. (2008). Traduire Spinoza: l’exemple d’Emile Saisset. In: Spinoza au XIX® siécle (ed. A. 

Tosel, P.-E. Moreau and J. Salem), 22 1—230. Paris: Publications de la Sorbonne. 

Moreau, P.-F. (2014). In Naturalismo: Leibniz, Spinoza, et les spiritualistes francais. In: Spinoza/Leibniz. 

Rencontres, controverses, réceptions (ed. R. Andrault, M. Leerke, and P.-E. Moreau), 325-344. Paris: 

Presses Universitaires de Paris-Sorbonne. 

Moreau, P.-E. (2018). Le Bord du précipice. Dortous de Mairan entre Malebranche et Spinoza. In: 

Spinoza-Malebranche: a la croisée des interpretations (ed. R. Carbone), sect. 1-18. Lyon: ENS Editions. 

Open Edition. URL: https://books.openedition.org/enseditions/8618?lang=en 

Moreau, P.-F. and Mothu, A. (eds.) (2016). Le Traité des trois imposteurs, special issue of La Lettre clan- 
destine 24. 

Peden, K. (2014). Spinoza Contra Phenomenology. French Rationalism from Cavaillés to Deleuze. Stanford: 
Stanford University Press. 

Poiret, P. (1685). Fundamenta atheismi eversa. In: Cogitationes rationales de Deo, anima et malo, 720-808. 
Amstelodami: Ex Typographia Blaviana. 

Regis, P-S. (1704). L’Usage de la foy et de la riason ou l'accord de la raison et de la foy. Réfutation de 
l’opinion de Spinoza touchant l’existence et la nature de Dieu. Paris: Cusson. 

Rodis-Lewis, G. (1988). Dortous de Mairan fut-il spinoziste? Revue de Métaphysique et de Morale 93 
(2): 165-172. 

Saisset, E. (1860). Introduction critique aux oeuvres de Spinoza. Paris: Charpentier. 

Secretan, C., Dagron, T., and Bove, L. (eds.). (2007). Qu’est-ce que les Lumiéres “radicales”? Paris: 
Editions Amsterdam. 

Shelford, A. (2002). Thinking geometrically in Pierre-Daniel Huet’s Demonstratio Evangelica. Journal 
of the History of Ideas 63 (4): 599-617. 

Shelford, A. (2006). Of scepters and censors. Biblical interpretation and censorship in seventeenth- 
century France. French History 20 (2): 161-181. 

Spinoza, B. (1678). Traité des cérémonies superstitieuses des Juifs, tant anciens que modernes (trans. G. de 
Saint-Glain). Amsterdam: Jacob Smith. 

Simon, R. (1685). Histoire critique du Vieux Testament. Rotterdam: Reinier Leers. 

Spinoza, B. (1861). Oeuvres (trans. E. Saisset), 3 vols. Paris: Charpentier. 

Spinoza, B. (1878). Court traité sur Dieu, l'homme, et la béatitude (trans. P. Janet). Paris: G. Bailliére. 

Spinoza, B. (1907). Ethique (ed. E. Colonna d'Istria, trans. Henri de Boulainvilliers). Paris: A. Colin. 

Stetter, J. (2019). Francis Lamy’s Cartesian refutation of Spinoza’s Ethics. Journal of Modern 
Philosophy 11 (7): 1-18. URL: doi:https://doi.org/10.32881/jomp.44. 

Tosel, A., P-F. Moreau and J. Salem (eds.) (2008). Spinoza au XIXe siécle. Paris: Publications de la 
Sorbonne. 

Vermeren, P. (1990). La Philosophie au présent: le juif Spinoza (l’institution philosophique et la 
doctrine maudite du juif Spinoza). Lignes 10: 167-180. 

Verniére, P. (1954). Spinoza et la pensée francaise avant la Révolution. Paris: PUF. 


516 


48 


Kant and Spinoza 


COLIN MARSHALL 


Kant makes a striking reference to Spinoza in the 1788 Critique of Practical Reason. If, Kant 
claims, his own idealism about space and time “is not adopted, nothing remains but Spinozism, 
in which space and time are essential determinations of the original being itself, while the 
things dependent upon it (ourselves, therefore, included) are not substances but merely acci- 
dents inhering in it” (2nd Critique 5:102; Kant 1996, p. 221). That is, Kant states that the best 
alternative to his own metaphysical system is Spinoza’s radical substance monism. 

This passage motivates two questions: (1) how deeply did Kant engage with Spinoza’s 
philosophy and (2) how close are their philosophical views? I believe that the answer to 
(1) is, disappointingly: “not much.” Despite that, I believe that the answer to (2) is: “on 
some points, surprisingly close.” Spinoza and Kant were proudly independent thinkers, so 
any points of near-convergence between them deserve philosophical attention. 

I begin by investigating whether Kant directly concerned himself with Spinoza, focusing 
on Omri Boehm’s recent affirmative argument (the most extensive such argument in the 
literature). I argue that Boehm’s case is not convincing, even taking into account the 1788 
passage. I then turn to identifying two philosophically interesting points on which Spinoza’s 
and Kant’s views come surprisingly close: (1) their arguments for the limitations of our 
sensory knowledge and (2) their arguments for the timelessness of the mind. 

My discussion has a limited scope in two respects. First, I focus on metaphysical issues, 
since most of Kant’s references to Spinoza concern metaphysics (though see, e.g. Opus 
Postumum 22:54—55). I do not discuss Kant’s references to Spinoza in the third Critique 
(e.g. 5:393-394), since these obviously betray Kant’s ignorance of Spinoza’s actual views 
on teleology (cf. El App.). For comparative discussions concerning their ethics, metaethics, 
and political philosophy, see Cooney (n.d.), Marshall (2017), and Israel (2011). 

Second, in 1785, Friedrich Heinrich Jacobi ignited the Spinoza-focused Pantheism 
Controversy, with an eye towards Kant (see Beiser 1987; Franks 2005, and Lord 2011). 
After 1785, Kant could not avoid discussion of Spinozism. My concern here is with Kant’s 
relation to Spinoza’s actual philosophy, however, not the broadly Spinozist themes of the 
Pantheism Controversy. Moreover, Kant established the main tenets of his theoretical and 
practical philosophy before 1785. Aside from the second Critique passage, I therefore 
bracket Kant’s post-1785 references to Spinozism. 


A Companion to Spinoza, First Edition. Edited by Yitzhak Y. Melamed. 
© 2021 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2021 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd. 


517 


COLIN MARSHALL 


1. Was Kant Engaged with Spinoza’s Philosophy? 


In a recent book, Omri Boehm has proposed that Kant closely engaged with Spinoza’s 
claims and arguments (see Boehm 2014, pp. 1-2, though cf. Boehm 2014, p. 147). Boehm 
focuses on Kant’s first Critique, specifically, the Transcendental Dialectic, in which Kant 
criticizes traditional, ‘dogmatic’ metaphysics. Kant’s scattered references Spinoza justify 
this textual focus. When Kant discusses Spinoza up through 1785, he is almost always 
concerned with Spinoza’s substance monism. So if Kant were genuinely engaged with 
Spinoza’s philosophy, it would probably be in his criticisms of dogmatic metaphysics. The 
first Critique (first published in 1781) is Kant’s main presentation of those criticisms. 

The Dialectic offers both a general account of dogmatic metaphysics and discussions of 
specific metaphysical issues: the soul (the ‘Paralogisms’), the ‘world whole’ (the 
‘Antinomies’), and God (the ‘Ideal’). Boehm’s most compelling arguments concern Kant’s 
general account of dogmatic metaphysics and the Ideal (on the Antinomies, see 
Boehm 2014, pp. 81, 91, 131, cf. A411/B438, A465—72/B49 3-500). In this section, I 
discuss each of those, before returning to the striking passage from the second Critique. 


1.1. Fundamental Principles of Metaphysics 


Boehm claims that “Kant’s critique of reason [is] a critique of the Principle of Sufficient 
Reason; specifically, of the Spinozist (rather than Leibnizian) application and the Spinozist 
consequences of that principle” (Boehm 2014, pp. 6—7). The Principle of Sufficient Reason 
(PSR), on Spinoza’s best-known formulation, states that “[flor each thing there must be 
assigned a cause, or reason, both for its existence and for its nonexistence” (E1p11d). This 
strong principle is central to Spinoza’s metaphysics (see Della Rocca 2008). Therefore, if 
Kant were engaged with Spinoza’s philosophy, we would expect that his general character- 
ization of metaphysics would focus on the PSR. 

Dogmatic metaphysics, Kant holds, arises from an illusion in which we confuse a legiti- 
mate subjective demand of reason with an objective principle, thereby wrongly taking our- 
selves to have a priori metaphysical insight. The subjective demand is “to find the 
unconditioned for conditioned cognitions of the understanding” (A307/B364). This is a 
demand to discover all the explanatory conditions for the objects we experience, such as 
the causes of events and the substrata of properties. The demand is ontologically neutral 
— as an imperative, it does not entail that any conditions exist. However, Kant claims that 
the demand acquires psychological force only when we assume “that when the conditioned 
is given [i.e. exists], then so is the whole series of conditions . . . which is itself uncondi- 
tioned, also given” (A307—8/B364). Dogmatic metaphysics arises then, on Kant’s view, 
because we confuse a rational need for complete explanations with an a priori insight into 
there being such explanations. 

Boehm claims that the subjective demand and the objective principle are “nothing but 
formulations of the PSR” (Boehm 2014, p. 51). Kant suggests that connection elsewhere 
(“On a discovery” (8:193-198)) and writes that “Spinozism is the true consequence of 
dogmatic metaphysics” (R6050, 18:436). So, Boehm suggests, there are strong textual 
reasons for thinking that Kant was specifically concerned with Spinoza in the Dialectic’s 
general account of dogmatic metaphysics. 

However, Kant’s objective principle, the supposed source of dogmatic metaphysics, is 
much weaker than Spinoza’s PSR. Consider again Spinoza’s statement of the PSR in 
Elp11d: “[flor each thing there must be assigned a cause, or reason, both for its existence 


518 


KANT AND SPINOZA 


and for its nonexistence.” Spinoza’s principle applies to all things, whereas Kant’s objective 
principle claims only that conditioned (dependent) things have explanatory bases. Kant’s 
principle seems undeniable: surely, if something dependent exists, then so does everything 
on which it depends. That apparent undeniability is why Kant claims that metaphysical 
illusion “cannot be avoided at all” (A297/B354). By contrast, Spinoza’s PSR would be 
denied by anyone who thinks there are brute existential facts. 

Kant thinks the objective principle yields radical metaphysical conclusions only in 
conjunction with further claims about specific conditioning relations. These further claims 
concern the representation “I think” (see A341/B399), the parts of space and time (see 
A412/B439), causation (see A414/B441-—2), and contingency and necessity (see A415/ 
B442, cf. A571—6/B599-605). For example, Kant holds that we are drawn towards the 
metaphysical conclusion that past time is infinite by the objective principle together with 
the claim that every time depends on a preceding time. On Kant’s account, therefore, tra- 
ditional metaphysics does not hinge on a strong PSR, but instead on a relatively weak prin- 
ciple about conditions and quite strong principles about particular dependence relations. 
The picture of dogmatic metaphysics that Kant offers is therefore un-Spinozistic. This is 
evidence that Kant was not seriously engaged with Spinoza’s views — even though he 
surely took his general characterization of rationalist metaphysical tendencies to apply to 
Spinoza. A further piece of evidence for non-engagement is the fact that God appears late 
in Kant’s account of dogmatic metaphysics (after, e.g. immortality), whereas God is central 
to Spinoza’s metaphysics. This brings us to our next topic. 


1.2. Kant’s Transcendental Ideal 


In the Ideal of Reason chapter, Kant claims that one inevitable idea of reason is that of a 
most real being (God), which “contains as it were the entire storehouse of material from 
which all possible predicates of things can be taken” (A575/B603). Such a being thereby 
“grounds every thing as the condition of its thoroughgoing determination” (A573/B601), 
that is, of everything’s being such that “of every two contradictorily opposed predicates 
only one can apply to it” (A571/B599). The rough idea is that, for every property P, any 
real thing is either P or not-P, and that this principle seems meaningful only if some entity 
generates or supports a non-empty set of properties. In the Critique, Kant denies we can 
prove this being’s existence, though he gives the idea of it an important regulative role in 
our thought (this is a retreat from Kant’s 1763 Only Possible Argument in Support of the 
Existence of a God, where he took similar considerations to demonstrate God’s existence). 
The Critique, then, holds up the idea of an ultimate ground of possibility as rationally 
valuable. This idea is at least broadly Spinozistic, since Spinoza makes God the explanatory 
ground of everything. Boehm claims that the mature Kant therefore endorses a “regula- 
tive Spinozism” (Boehm 2014, p. 58), and others besides Boehm have also seen some sim- 
ilarity to Spinoza here (see Boehm 2014, p. 1.; Chignell 2014; Hoffer 2016). 

My current concern, though, is whether this similarity indicates that Kant meaning- 
fully engaged with Spinoza’s philosophy (cf. Kant’s superficial engagement with Plato on 
Ideas at A313-—27/B3 70-374). There are at least three reasons to think that Kant’s 
engagement with Spinoza on this point was at most superficial. 

First: Kant focuses on how one arrives at the idea of God from the given possibility of 
finite things. In 1763, he saw this as a proof for God’s existence, whereas in 1781 he saw 
it instead as the course of reason under the influence of metaphysical illusion. Spinoza, 
however, does not define God in terms of possibilities, and his proofs for God’s existence 


519 


COLIN MARSHALL 


make no appeal to the given possibility of finite things (see E1d6 and E1p11d). While Kant 
took himself to be identifying the source for earlier rationalists’ ideas of God, his account 
does not seem sensitive to Spinoza’s actual views (Kant mentions Spinoza in the Only 
Possible Argument (2:74), but only in an off-hand example). 

Second: Kant’s interest in the source of possibility depends on his view that finite 
things are contingent. He shows no interest in necessitarian views like Spinoza’s, 
according to which nothing is contingent (E1p29). Yet Spinoza’s necessitarianism is the 
most conspicuous feature of his modal metaphysics. If Kant were seriously engaged with 
Spinoza on this point, we would expect him to have engaged with necessitarianism. 

Third: Almost all of Kant’s early explicit references to Spinoza concern substance monism. 
So if the Ideal were concerned with Spinoza, one would expect a significant discussion of 
monism. Taking God to be the ground of possibility does not imply substance monism. 
Consider, for example, Descartes’ view, on which God makes space possible and creates gen- 
uine spatial substances. If Kant were seriously engaging with Spinoza on this point, then he 
should contrast substance monism with views like Descartes’. But he does not. 


1.3. Why is Spinozism the Alternative to Kant’s Idealism? 


Why, then, does Kant claim that if the “ideality of space time is not adopted, nothing remains 
but Spinozism”? After all, Kant does not always speak favorably of Spinoza (see Lectures on 
Religion, 28:1052). Though this discussion occurs three years after the start of the 
Pantheism Controversy and talks of Spinozism generally, a closer examination could reveal 
some genuine engagement with Spinoza. Kant makes the remark while arguing that only 
his idealism about space and time makes it “possible to affirm freedom without compro- 
mising the natural mechanism of actions” (2nd Critique 5:102). So why does Kant think 
that Spinozism is the best alternative to his idealism? Earlier commentators have focused on 
the issue of freedom (see Watkins 2012; Massimi 2017, and Messina n.d.), but I suggest 
that something other than freedom is Kant’s main reason for privileging Spinozism. The 
main non-ideal alternative to Spinozism that Kant mentions is Moses Mendelssohn’s view 
that space and time are “conditions necessarily belonging only to the existence of finite and 
derived beings but not to that of the original being” (2nd Critique 5:101). Mendelssohn 
clearly takes some finite beings to be substances. Hence, Kant is focused on two claims: 


(a) God is spatiotemporal. 
(b) Some finite beings are substances. 


As Kant understands them, Mendelssohn denies (a) but affirms (b), while the Spinozist 
denies (b) affirms (a) but — something probably not true of the real Spinoza, who states that 
God’s existence “cannot be explained by duration or time” (E1d8). Regardless, Kant seems 
to think are the two best realist views (on why Kant passes over views that accept both (a) 
and (b), see Brewer and Watkins 2012, pp. 168-169, 185 and Massimi 2017, p. 77). 

Kant provides two reasons for preferring Spinozism over Mendelssohnianism. The first 
is that “I do not see how [the Mendelssohnians] would justify themselves in making such a 
distinction” (2nd Critique 5:101), that is, in limiting spatiotemporality to finite things in 
themselves. Kant does not elaborate on why this distinction or limitation would be problematic. 
Why could God’s infinitude and perfection not provide some reason for his differing from 
finite, imperfect creatures in spatiotemporality? One possibility is that Kant assumes some 


520 


KANT AND SPINOZA 


general metaphysical continuity principle here, such as Spinoza’s claim that “the laws and 
rules of Nature, accord to which all things happen . . . are always and everywhere the 
same” (E3Preface, cf. A657—8/B685-—686). Another possibility is suggested by Kant’s 
discussion of space and time in the 1787 edition of the first Critique. Kant asks “with what 
right” a realist can deny that space and time condition God’s existence, given that space 
and time “as conditions of all existence in general . .. would also have to be conditions of 
the existence of God” (B71). Perhaps Kant’s underlying thought is that if one thing in itself 
is spatiotemporal, they all must be, because space and time are inherently general. This is an 
interesting principle, but not one Spinoza endorses. 

Kant’s second reason for preferring Spinoza’s view is that Mendelssohn’s view “is con- 
tradictory to the concept of [God’s] infinity and independence” (2nd Critique 5:101). On 
Mendelssohn’s view, God “cannot be the cause of time (or space) itself,” because “this must 
be presupposed as a necessary a priori condition of the existence of things” (2nd Critique 
5:101). Hence, Kant thinks, God’s causality would be conditioned by space and time, on 
Mendelssohn’s view, contradicting his independence. 

Why could a Mendelssohnian not respond that God created space and time prior to (in 
some non-temporal sense) creating finite things, and so was not conditioned by them in a 
way that threatened his independence? Kant’s talk of a priori conditions in the preceding 
quote might suggest that he believes that Mendelssohnians could not account for our a 
priori cognition of space and time. However, Kant holds that only his idealist view can 
secure that cognition (see, e.g. Prolegomena 4:28 3-284), so Spinozist realism would do no 
better than Mendelssohnian realism here. The first Critique again provides a helpful hint. 
There, Kant claims that it would be absurd to posit “two infinite things that are neither 
substances nor anything really inhering in substances” (B70-1, see also A39/B56). Kant 
does not explain why this would be absurd — he does not bring in epistemological consider- 
ations, nor does he appeal to the PSR (contra Boehm 2014, pp. 80-84). Crucially, however, 
this presumed absurdity would only be found in Mendelssohn’s view (for one under- 
standing of this alleged absurdity, see Brewer and Watkins 2012, p. 171, though cf. 
Marshall 2018). For on Spinoza’s view, space (or, at least, extension) is an attribute of God, 
and time (duration) arises in God’s modes (see E1d6, Elp15s, E2d5). This reading fits with 
a passage from Kant’s lectures, where he states that “If I assume space to be a being in 
itself, then Spinozism is irrefutable, i.e. the parts of the world are parts of the divinity. Space 
is the divinity; it is united, all-present; nothing can be thought outside of it; everything is 
in it” (Metaphysics L2 28:567; cf. Elp12—-13, Elp15s). 

On most points, this argument is far from Spinoza’s views, not least since Spinoza treats 
space (extension) and time quite differently. Moreover, Spinoza does not obviously have a 
notion that aligns with Kant’s notion of space: physical bodies, for Spinoza, are mere 
modes of extension, whereas Kant would deny that physical bodies are modes of space 
(see, e.g. Metaphysical Foundations 4:497). Yet Kant and Spinoza do converge on one point: 
that nothing could exist without being a substance or inhering in a substance. The first 
axiom of the Ethics is that “Whatever is, is either in itself or in another” (Elal), implying 
(in conjunction with E1d3) that all things are substances or inhere in substances. Spinoza 
is not the only philosopher who accepts this view, however — it is widespread in the 
Aristotelian and rationalist traditions. 

Hence, Kant’s privileging of Spinozism among realist views seems generally detached 
from Spinoza’s actual thought. His discussion of Spinozism in the second Critique likely 
rests on broad (and misleading) characterizations of Spinoza’s philosophy by Jacobi and 
others. 


521 


COLIN MARSHALL 


2. Points of Convergence 


My next topic is with points of convergence or near-convergence between Kant and 
Spinoza. We have already discussed one such point: both think that substance monism is 
more plausible than other traditional metaphysical views. I now consider two further 
striking but under-explored points, one about the limits of sensory knowledge, and one 
about the timelessness of the mind. 


2.1. Short Arguments to Humility about Sensory Knowledge 


Kant claims that we have cognition (Erkenntnis) only of appearances, not of things in 
themselves. Call this claim ‘Humility.’ Humility is not a claim about knowledge (see, e.g. 
Watkins and Willaschek 2017). Cognitions, for Kant, are conceptually-determined repre- 
sentations of objects that are given to us in intuition (roughly: conceptualized 
perceptions). 

There is ongoing debate about why Kant accepts Humility. His best-known arguments 
for it appeal to epistemological considerations about space and time (e.g. Prolegomena 
4:281-282). Roughly, Kant argues that the only explanation for our a priori cognition of 
space and time is that they are mere forms of our sensory representations. Hence, since all 
our sensory experience is spatiotemporal, we are never directly presented with features of 
things in themselves. There is no obvious analogue of this argument in Spinoza. 

Elsewhere, however, Kant states Humility without appealing to a priori cognition of 
space and time. Some of these passages appear to involve what Karl Ameriks has (pejora- 
tively) called “short arguments to idealism” (Ameriks 2003, p. 135; cf. Langton 1998). For 
example, in the Prolegomena Kant writes that: 


if we view the objects of the senses as mere appearances, as is fitting, then we thereby admit. .. 
that a thing in itself underlies them, although we are not acquainted with this thing as it may 
be constituted in itself, but only with its appearance, i.e. with the way in which our senses are 
affected by this unknown something. (Prolegomena 4:314-315, see also Groundwork 
4:450-451) 


In passages like this, Kant seems to infer Humility from passivity, that is, the fact that our 
sensory representations result from our being affected. This inference is not obviously valid. 
Why could not God, for instance, create some accurate representation of a thing in itself in us? 

Bracketing questions of validity for now, these short arguments to Humility resemble a 
central argument from Part 2 of Spinoza’s Ethics. At E2p16 (drawing on Al” after E2p13), 
Spinoza claims that “[t]he idea of any mode in which the human body is affected by 
external bodies must involve the nature of the human body and at the same time the 
nature of the external body.” From this, he infers that “the ideas which we have of external 
bodies indicate the condition of our own body more than the nature of external bodies” 
(E2p16c2) and that “[t]he idea of any affection of the human body does not involve 
adequate knowledge of an external body” (E2p25). 

On Spinoza’s view, then, representations that result from our being affected must 
involve both our own nature and the nature of an external thing. This is arguably based on 
Spinoza’s view that inherence (being ‘in us’) involves explanatory dependence (being ‘con- 
ceived through’ — see E1d5). Hence, no representation in us can purely reflects the nature 
of external things. This may help address the worry about the validity of Kant’s short 


522 


KANT AND SPINOZA 


arguments: the nature of inherence itself makes it metaphysically impossible for a repre- 
sentation to be in us that does not involve our own nature. Yet even though this would not 
fully answer the objection. Kant works with a sharp vehicle/content distinction, so our 
nature might be involved only in the vehicle of the representation, not its content. Spinoza 
arguably rejects a sharp a vehicle/content distinction (see E2p49s and §2.2 below), and so 
may be on stronger ground here. 

Surprisingly, Kant seems to say exactly this in his early metaphysics lectures: 


Each subject in which an accident inheres must itself contain a ground of its inherence. For if, 
e.g. God could produce a thought in a soul merely by himself: then God, but not a soul, would 
have the thought... Thus for the inherence of an accident in A its own power is required. 
(Metaphysics Herder, 28:52) 


There is, therefore, a surprising convergence between Spinoza on Kant in their short argu- 
ments for why sensory representations do not present us with unfiltered views of external 
things. 

One might expect Spinoza’s and Kant’s epistemological similarities to stop here. Spinoza 
thinks we have adequate ideas of God’s essence (2p46), while Kant denies that we have 
theoretical insight into the nature of any thing in itself. They would also count quite differ- 
ent things as being ‘external’ to us. Surprisingly, however, both seem drawn to a positive 
line of argument about the timelessness of the mind. 


2.2. Representational Content and the Timelessness of the Mind 


Shortly after arguing for Humility in the Groundwork, Kant claims that “a human being 
really finds in himself a capacity by which he distinguishes himself from all other things. . . 
reason,” and that he “must regard himself as intelligence (hence not from the side of his 
lower powers) as belonging not to the world of sense” (Groundwork 4:452). Since Kant 
holds that time exists only in the world of sense (see A3 3—5/B49-—5 1), his claims imply that 
part of our mind is timeless, making room for some form of immortality (2nd Critique 
5:122). Spinoza reaches a similar conclusion in the Ethics, claiming that “[t]he human 
Mind cannot be absolutely destroyed with the Body, but something of it remains which is 
eternal” (E5p23). Eternity, for Spinoza, “cannot be explained by duration or time, even if 
the duration is conceived to be without beginning or end” (E1d8). Hence both Spinoza and 
Kant argue that one part or aspect of the mind is timeless. 

What is most striking, however, is that both Spinoza and Kant argue for this claim based 
on the content of our intellectual representations (see also Plato’s Phaedo and 2.12 and 3.4 
of Aristotle’s De Anima). The details of their arguments reveal subtle and important aspects 
of their respective views. 

Kant claims that reason cannot belong to the temporal, sensory realm because reason, 
“as pure self-activity ... shows in what we call ‘ideas’ a spontaneity so pure that it thereby 
goes far beyond anything that sensibility can ever afford it” (Groundwork 4:45 2). Ideas, for 
Kant, are “concepts of pure reason” that “consider all experiential cognition through an 
absolute totality of conditions” (A327/B38 3-4). Ideas thus represent absolute totalities, 
which are too ‘big’ for sensibility to represent, since sensory representation “gives us no 
true universality” (Al). Kant makes a similar argument in the third Critique, focusing on 
infinity: “even to be able to think the given infinite without contradiction requires a faculty 
in the human mind that is itself supersensible” (3rd Critique 2:254—255). Only a truly 


523 


COLIN MARSHALL 


self-active or spontaneous faculty could entertain such content, Kant holds. Yet the 
temporal world, on his view, is causally determined, leaving no room for spontaneity (see, 
e.g. A534/B562). Hence, some aspect of the mind is timeless. 

Spinoza’s official argument for the timelessness of the mind (E5p23d) appeals to his 
doctrines of the body’s eternal essence, the parallel between bodies and ideas, and the iden- 
tity of the human mind with God’s idea of the human body. The latter two doctrines are far 
removed from Kant’s views. However, in a scholium, Spinoza appears to offer a second 
argument: 


we feel and know by experience that we are eternal. For the mind feels those things that it con- 
ceives in understanding no less than those it has in the memory. For the eyes of the mind, by 
which it sees and observes things, are the demonstrations themselves. (E5p23s) 


This passage raises two questions. First, in what sense do we ‘feel’ or ‘see’ in demonstra- 
tions? Second, why should seeing things in demonstrations provide knowledge of the eter- 
nity of our mind? 

Unlike Kant, Spinoza does not deny that sensory representations can have ‘big’ con- 
tents; he holds that every idea involves adequate knowledge of God’s infinite essence 
(E2p45-46). In addition, while Kant appeals merely to ideas of totalities and infinities, 
Spinoza appeals to demonstrations. A demonstration may involve ideas (in Kant’s sense), 
but it also would seem to require truth, that is, that the ideas correspond to reality. These 
points are connected, for Spinoza holds that, unlike sensory knowledge, demonstrations 
teach us “to distinguish the true from the false” (E2p42). 

Demonstrations, for Spinoza, concern eternal truths. In E5p23s, he implies that all 
demonstrations let us experience our eternality. Yet how, as Spinoza says, is there an expe- 
rience of our eternality in our apprehension of a demonstration? Why should a representa- 
tion of eternal truths come with an experience of oneself being eternal? A principle from 
Spinoza’s early work, the Short Treatise, may be in play here. There, Spinoza claims that 
“whatever we find in ourselves has more power over us than anything which comes from 
outside” (KV II, 21; cf. 4p9, 4p29 — see Marshall 2015). The underlying assumption, then, 
may be that in demonstrations, eternal truths have a certain sort of psychological power 
over us, a power whereby they teach us how to distinguish truth from falsity. For demon- 
strations to have that power, though, the objects of the representations (the eternal truths) 
must be in us. Yet, in line with the principle about inherence mentioned in §2.1, it seems 
that something eternal can be in us (in the relevant sense) only if some part or aspect of 
ourselves is eternal. 

This line of thought differs from Kant’s. However, Kant also seems to think that psy- 
chologically powerful representations must have metaphysically proximate objects. For 
example, in the first Critique, one of his arguments for space and time being in us (as 
forms of our sensibility) appeals to their power as representations, e.g. “[o]ne can never 
represent that there is no space” (A24/B38). In the second Critique, Kant talks of how the 
moral law “forces itself upon us,” and arguably infers from this that the source of the 
moral law is in us, as our faculty of reason: “[p]ure reason. . . gives (to the human being) 
a universal law that is the moral law” (2nd Critique 5:31). Perhaps the basic thought here 
is that, if you cannot shake the representation of some object, then the object must 
somehow be in you, forcing you to represent it. Kant and Spinoza seem to agree on this 
point, though perhaps only Spinoza applies it to content-based arguments for the time- 
lessness of the mind. 


524 


KANT AND SPINOZA 


Acknowledgments 


This chapter has benefited from discussions with Martijn Buijs, Aaron Garrett, John Grey, 
Henk-Jan Hoekjen, Charlie Huenemann, Noam Hoffer, Jim Kreines, James Messina, Sam 
Newlands, Kristin Primus, Michael Rosenthal, Don Rutherford, Lisa Shapiro, Hasana 
Sharp, and Melanie Tate. 


Note on Kant References 


References to the first Critique use the standard A/B format. References to other works use 
volume and page number of the Academy edition (Kant 1900), with abbreviated titles. 
Translations are from the Cambridge edition of Kant’s works. 


References 


Ameriks, K. (2003). Interpreting Kant’s Critiques. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Beiser, F. (1987). The Fate of Reason: German Philosophy from Kant to Fichte. Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press. 

Boehm, O. (2014). Kant’s Critique of Spinoza. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Brewer, K. and Watkins, E. (2012). A difficulty still awaits: Kant, Spinoza, and the threat of theological 
determinism. Kant-Studien 103: 163-187. 

Chignell, A. (2014). Kant and the “monstrous” ground of possibility. Kantian Review 19 (1): 53-69. 

Cooney, H. (n.d.). Spinoza on the morality of deception. Unpublished 

Della Rocca, M. (2008). Spinoza. New York: Routledge. 

Franks, P. (2005). All or Nothing: Systematicity, Transcendental Arguments, and Skepticism in German 
Idealism. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 

Hoffer, N. (2016). The relation between God and the world in the pre-Critical Kant: was Kant a 
Spinozist?” Kantian Review 21 (2): 185-210. 

Israel, J.I. (2011). Democratic Enlightenment: Philosophy, Revolution, and Human Rights 1750-1790. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Kant, I. (1900-). Kants Gesammelte Schriften (ed. The German Academy of Sciences). Berlin: De Gruyter. 

Kant, I. (1992). Theoretical Philosophy 1755-1770 (ed. and trans. D. Walford and R. Meerbote). 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Kant, I. (1996). Practical Philosophy (ed. and trans. by M. Gregor). Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press. 

Kant, I. (1997). Critique of Pure Reason (ed. and trans. P. Guyer and A. Wood). Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 

Kant, I. (1997). Lectures on Metaphysics (ed. and trans. K. Ameriks and S. Naragon). Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 

Kant, I. (2000). Critique of the Power of Judgment (ed. and trans. P. Guyer and E. Matthews). Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 

Kant, I. (2002). Theoretical Philosophy after 1781 (ed. H. Allison and P. Heath). Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 

Kant, I. (2005). Notes and Fragments (ed. and trans. C. Bowman, P. Guyer, and F. Rauscher). 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Langton, R. (1998). Kantian Humility. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Lord, B. (2011). Kant and Spinozism: Transcendental Idealism and Immanence from Jacobi to Deleuze. 
New York: Palgrave Macmillan. 


525 


COLIN MARSHALL 


Marshall, C. (2015). Reason in the Short Treatise. The Young Spinoza (ed. Y.Y. Melamed), 133-143. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Marshall, C. (2017). Moral realism in Spinoza’s Ethics. In: The Cambridge Critical Guide to Spinoza’s 
Ethics (ed. Y.Y. Melamed), 248-265. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Marshall, C. (2018). “Never mind the intuitive intellect.” Applying Kant’s categories to noumena. 
Kantian Review 23 (1): 27-40. 

Massimi, M. (2017). Kant on the ideality of space and the argument from Spinozism. In: Kant’s 
Critique of Pure Reason: A Critical Guide (ed. J. O’Shea), 64-82. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press. 

Messina, J. (n.d.) Kant’s Spinozism Charge. Unpublished. 

Watkins, E. and Willaschek, M. (2017). Kant’s account of cognition. Journal of the History of 
Philosophy 55 (1): 83-112. 


526 


49 


Nietzsche and Spinoza 


JASON M. YONOVER 


1. Introduction 


“Recluse! Is that you [hab ich dich erkannt]?” (NF-1884,28[49]; see the note immediately 
following this chapter on citation method). This last stanza of Nietzsche’s poem “To 
Spinoza” might lead us to imagine a scene where Nietzsche runs into Spinoza on the street, 
at a crosswalk — with perfectly warranted surprise, given that Spinoza died more than 
150 years before Nietzsche was born. Adding to this scene, let’s imagine further that, 
despite arriving at the same intersection, Nietzsche has nonetheless approached from the 
opposite direction. I suggest we keep this image in mind; it will help us in this chapter, as 
Nietzsche and Spinoza are otherwise not the most obvious philosophers to consider 
alongside one another, and we must be wary to avoid a danger that Nietzsche himself 
points to: “The one who wants to mediate between two resolute thinkers shows that they 
are mediocre,” as “making things the same is the sign of weak eyes” (GS 228). 

To be sure, a number of readers understand Spinoza to be the arch-rationalist, who 
accordingly takes the Principle of Sufficient Reason more seriously than any other figure 
in the history of philosophy, and in a manner that is decisive for his robust metaphysics 
(Della Rocca 2008, though see Garber 2015 for criticism). Meanwhile, Nietzsche barely 
ever references this principle, and makes critical remarks about first philosophy from early 
on (BVN-1868, p. 568); in fact, Nietzsche is sometimes even interpreted as a kind of anti- 
philosopher who denies there can be any truth of the matter (de Man 1979, but see 
Clark 1990). Presumably, it’s at least in part for these reasons that detailed treatments of 
Nietzsche and Spinoza remain relatively uncommon — with only a single widely-cited 
monograph-length treatment (Wurzer 1975) -—and that anumber of other discussions are 
suggestive but somewhat loose concerning both philosophical and philological issues, for 
instance Yovel (2018). While one might expect more work within the Francophone con- 
text, given the strong interest in Nietzsche and in Spinoza individually, there are to date no 
major French-language studies of the two, although, for instance, literature on Spinoza 
like Deleuze (1988, ch. 2) at least hints at several affinities with Nietzsche. 

Whichever lines of interpretation one favors, there are major differences between 
Nietzsche and Spinoza, some of which I shall return to below. But we must not forget: 


A Companion to Spinoza, First Edition. Edited by Yitzhak Y. Melamed. 
© 2021 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2021 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd. 


527 


JASON M. YONOVER 


Nietzsche himself writes in an effusive postcard to Franz Overbeck that “these [differences] 
are largely the result of differences in era, culture, and science” (BVN-1881, p. 135). 
According to Nietzsche, in other words, there is some fundamental kinship between his 
thinking and that of Spinoza, and we shouldn’t allow various disparities, which he claims 
are, for the most part, just a result of their having lived at distinct times in distinct places, 
to distract us from this fact. Nietzsche goes even further still in the postcard, exclaiming 
that Spinoza is his “only precursor”: “my loneliness [Einsamkeit], which has all too often 
taken my breath away and made my blood rush as if I were high in the mountains, is at 
least now a twogetherness [Zweisamkeit]” (Ibid.). Such enthusiasm forces the following 
pair of questions: What leads Nietzsche to make these claims of kinship? — And are they 
accurate? 

One straightforward answer to the former question would be philological in nature. 
Yovel (2018, p. 541) claims it is “probably after reading Kuno Fischer’s book on Spinoza” 
that Nietzsche composes this crucial note to his friend Franz Overbeck of 30 July 1881; but 
this assertion is, at best, imprecise. Fischer did publish a book on Spinoza, namely Baruch 
Spinoza’s Life and Character (Fischer 1865a), and yet there is to date no evidence that 
Nietzsche reads this rather slim text, which is based on a single lecture. Nietzsche requests 
from Overbeck “the volume of Fischer’s, on Spinoza” in an earlier letter of 8 July 1881 
(BVN-1881, p. 123). Scandella (2012) convincingly shows that Nietzsche then engages 
with the second part of the first volume, in its second edition in particular, of Fischer’s 
wide-ranging History of Modern Philosophy (Fischer 1865b). This extensive work treats 
Spinoza over hundreds of pages. Although, as Brobjer (2008, pp. 77-82) shows, we can 
pinpoint other sources for Nietzsche’s knowledge of Spinoza, both prior to and following 
Nietzsche’s first study of Fischer — and although we know that Nietzsche attended lectures 
on Spinoza by Karl Schaarschmidt already in 1865 (Rotter 2019, Appendix I) — we have no 
reason to think that Nietzsche ever reads Spinoza directly. And we have many reasons to 
think that Nietzsche’s key note to Overbeck follows his encounter with Fischer (1865b). 
Passages from Spinoza transcribed by Nietzsche at this time, both in German translation 
and in the Latin original, can be traced directly to that work, which Nietzsche would also 
consult again several years later. 

Nevertheless, while vital, this historically-informed answer to the first of the two ques- 
tions posed above isn’t fully satisfying, as it leaves open what excited Nietzsche so thor- 
oughly about Spinoza’s ideas. Additionally, the answer doesn’t give us any clues when it 
comes to our second question, regarding whether Nietzsche’s eager claims of kinship were 
warranted. Throughout the rest of this chapter, then, my aim is to point to some of the 
most pressing parallels and tensions between Nietzsche and Spinoza while providing an 
outline of much of the literature on the two along the way. 

As I will stress again in Section 5, there are many issues worth considering when it 
comes to Nietzsche and Spinoza. Yovel (2018, p. 541) goes so far as to say that “Nietzsche 
makes innumerable direct references to Spinoza.” According to the ekGWB, these explicit 
references number exactly 81, and sol can only discuss some of them in this chapter. First, 
in Sections 2 and 3, I consider Nietzsche’s and Spinoza’s views on freedom — a theme of 
central interest to both thinkers. In Section 2, I draw from Yonover (forthcoming) in order 
to provide an outline of their rejections of one conception of freedom: freedom of the will. 
In Section 3, I then consider their positive visions of a very different kind of freedom, which 
rather consists in self-determination. Next, in Section 4, I begin by pointing to a further 
parallel, concerning Nietzsche’s and Spinoza’s critiques of teleological thinking. This, 
however, allows me to also note at least one major sense in which Nietzsche departs from 


528 


NIETZSCHE AND SPINOZA 


Spinoza, namely concerning the lawfulness of nature. Finally, in Section 5, I stress that 
further work on Nietzsche and Spinoza is needed, regarding both the topics discussed in 
this chapter and others that must go unmentioned. In particular, I point to a metaphilo- 
sophical affinity that has been overlooked. 


2. Against Freedom of the Will 


In his letter to Overbeck praising Spinoza, Nietzsche notes that “[t]his most abnormal and 
lonely thinker is closest to me on precisely these matters: he denies freedom of the will, 
ends, the ethical world order, the unegoistic, and evil” (BVN-1881, p. 135). The aim of this 
section is to consider the first in this list: Nietzsche’s and Spinoza’s rejections of the idea 
that we can produce decisions in an originary manner. Although we can distinguish with 
Forster (2019, p. 375) other standard features of freedom of the will that must be consid- 
ered in any broader treatment of the notion, this capacity may be considered its essential 
characteristic here. 

We can understand Spinoza as rejecting the idea that we may produce decisions in an 
originary manner on the basis of his naturalism, i.e. his view that everything plays by the 
same rules. And his thoroughgoing naturalism can in turn be understood as a consequence 
of his rationalism (Sleigh et al. 1998). Spinoza formulates his version of the Principle of 
Sufficient Reason as follows: “For each thing there must be assigned a cause, or reason, 
both for its existence and for its nonexistence” (Elp11d2; cf. also Elaa2—3). Spinoza’s 
adherence to this principle leads him not only to determinism (E1p16c1), here the view 
that everything has its efficient cause, but indeed necessitarianism (E1p33), the view that 
everything happens necessarily. Only God is the cause of itself (on which see Melamed’s 
chapter in this volume), and mere possibility is ruled out. Hence the following uncompro- 
mising result: “In the mind there is no absolute, or free, will, but the mind is determined to 
will this or that by a cause which is also determined by another, and this again by another, 
and so on to infinity” (E2p48; cited in Fischer 1865b, p. 480 and transcribed from here by 
Nietzsche in NF-1881,11[193]). One might think that nature proceeds as such — every 
natural thing is, indeed necessarily, caused by some other natural thing that is necessarily 
caused by yet another, and infinitely so — but then also suppose that human beings have the 
capacity to step out of such a series. Yet Spinoza considers this kind of thinking to posit a 
“dominion within a dominion” (E3Pref | I[/137), which he contends we ought to reject as 
incoherent and anthropocentric fantasy. In other words, Spinoza thinks that nature pro- 
ceeds infinitely, or that there is nothing but nature — and so we may not boast of freedom 
of the will. 

Nietzsche’s naturalism surely plays a major role in his rejection of freedom of the will, 
too. Although debate concerning the precise character of Nietzsche’s naturalism is 
ongoing (Janaway 2007, ch. 3 and Leiter 2013), it’s known that he is a critic of the idea 
that there is a transcendent world, and instead calls for us to “translate humanity back 
into nature” (BGE 230). I must return in Section 4 to questions concerning what exactly 
“nature” may mean for Nietzsche; but meanwhile, he clearly thinks that we should rule 
out the kind of causation and modality which would be needed were human beings in the 
position to produce decisions in an originary manner. Any “person is necessary, a person 
is a piece of fate, a person belongs to the whole, a person only is in the context of the 
whole” (TI, “Errors,” 8; and compare the earlier HAH I 106). Nietzsche’s understanding of 
his contemporaries’ natural scientific findings likely plays a role here; as Emden 2014 


529 


JASON M. YONOVER 


shows, Nietzsche took especial interest in the life sciences. But his intensely negative ver- 
dict on what the concept of freedom of the will does for us is even more crucial in his 
rejection of it. Among other things, this poisonous notion assists in assigning guilt (GM II 
4, also TI, “Errors,” 7) and helps in acquitting God (NF-1887, 10[150] speculates about 
Kant’s “scandalous logic” that would get the “ens perfectum” off the hook). Most generally, 
the idea of freedom of the will allows many to construe “weakness itself [...] as an accom- 
plishment” (GM I 13). This and more leads Nietzsche to state with characteristic noncha- 
lance that “the will does not do anything anymore, and so it does not explain anything 
anymore either — it just accompanies processes, but it can be absent as well” (TI, “Errors,” 
3). In this passage, Nietzsche seems to leave open whether the will determines, but in an 
unimportant sense since it is itself determined, or is simply causally inert and even absent. 
This only stresses how confident he is that there’s no such thing as freedom of the will. Yet 
we do have plenty of evidence that Nietzsche favors the latter view just described, which is 
epiphenomenalist in character, e.g. A 14 (Leiter 2007). 

Nietzsche doesn’t come to his naturalism and his practical commitments via the 
Principle of Sufficient Reason. It’s clear that he doesn’t arrive at his views by restricting 
self-causation to God either. Nietzsche rejects as wholly absurd the notion of a causa sui, 
less an idea than a “piece of nonsense” with which “humanity’s excessive pride has got 
itself profoundly and horribly entangled,” and “with a courage greater than [that of 
Baron] Miinchhausen,” i.e. the fictional hero who claimed to pull both himself and his 
horse out of a swamp by his own hair (BGE, “Prejudices,” 21). Yet, despite taking an 
alternative route, Nietzsche ends up at the same street corner as Spinoza, emphatically 
rejecting freedom of the will. 


3. For Freedom as Self-Determination 


Nietzsche and Spinoza can then rightly be called incompatibilists concerning freedom of 
the will: a faculty that would enable us to produce decisions in an originary manner can’t 
be reconciled with the rules of the game as we should understand them. According to 
both, we are subject to strong determination and necessity that excludes what Nietzsche 
once calls “‘freedom of the will’ in the superlative metaphysical sense” (Ibid.). Additionally, 
freedom of the will seems to Nietzsche thoroughly suspect on practical grounds, which can 
also give us reason to reject something (BGE, “Prejudices,” 4). Yet, despite all of this, it’s 
evident that Nietzsche and Spinoza each have a pressing interest in some kind of freedom 
nonetheless. 

Spinoza is highly critical of freedom of the will, but already the seventh definition of his 
Ethics pins down what it really is for a thing to be free (it “exists from the necessity of its 
nature alone,” E1d7); and to then turn to the end of that work: its fifth, final part is explic- 
itly dedicated to nothing less than “Human Freedom” (II/277). Still more complicated, 
Nietzsche clarifies his hope that, if “someone sees through the boorish naiveté of this 
famous concept of ‘free will,’” they will then “carry their ‘enlightenment’ a step further 
and |...] rid their mind of the reversal of this misconceived concept of ‘free will’: I mean 
the ‘un-free will’” (BGE, “Prejudices,” 21; see also A 15). Among other things, in the 
background of this elusive passage is Nietzsche’s wish that we not wallow and resign just 
because we can’t produce decisions in an originary manner. This wish is equally evident 
in Nietzsche’s writing “for free spirits” (as the subtitle of HAH already indicates); his 
praising the “sovereign individual,” that “ripest fruit” who is a “master of the free will” 


530 


NIETZSCHE AND SPINOZA 


(GM II 2); and so on. Where the case of Spinoza is more straightforward, insofar as he 
maintains a distinction that I have followed between freedom of the will or libera voluntas 
and freedom more broadly or libertas, things are more complicated with Nietzsche — and 
perhaps particularly interesting for that reason. Since Nietzsche doesn’t stick to any such 
terminological break, commentators have proposed various ways to clarify what we can 
now see are merely apparent tensions between passages in which Nietzsche speaks of 
“freedom of the will” dismissively, or then gushingly. Gemes (2006, p. 326) introduces a 
distinction between “deserts free will” and then “agency free will,” and notes Nietzsche’s 
“deliberately confusing caginess” in this context (though this is indeed not the stronger, 
questionable proposal by Williams 1994, p. 238, according to which Nietzsche’s works are 
“booby-trapped” for interpreters). Similarly, one might consider speaking of ‘freedom of 
the will in the higher sense,’ in contradistinction to what we could then call ‘freedom of the 
will in the pejorative sense,’ echoing a clarificatory move concerning morality made by 
Leiter (2002, p. 58f). I propose, however, that it’s best to simply leave the terminology of 
freedom of the will with the associations we have given it thus far, having understood it 
namely as a faculty that would produce decisions in an originary manner. We ought to 
instead then speak of ‘freedom’ in a way that can refer to something else. Yet what does this 
‘something else’ look like, for Nietzsche and for Spinoza? 

As Della Rocca (2008, p. 187) puts it, for Spinoza “freedom is simply the absence of 
external determination together with [...] the presence of internal determination.” Given 
Spinoza’s commitment to the Principle of Sufficient Reason, determination abounds. But, 
we might say, not all determination is created equal. One is free and active when one is nec- 
essarily determined, though clearly not by one’s free will, in some manner that can be con- 
sidered in line with one’s nature; and one is compelled and passive when determined in any 
other manner. Some interpreters of Nietzsche draw a comparable distinction between the 
active and the reactive (Deleuze 1983, p. 61 and Richardson 1996, pp. 39-44). 
Commentators also emphasize the importance of maintaining a proper hierarchy of drives 
(Gemes 2006) and of creating values Janaway 2006). Although Nietzsche likely departs 
from Spinoza concerning the latter — since for Spinoza the goal must be to express our 
natures, which seem given — there is thus significant harmony on several other issues, 
which allows Rutherford (2011) to successfully develop a detailed account of Nietzsche's 
positive vision of freedom as a “philosophical ideal” that stands in a tradition prominently 
featuring Spinoza as well as Stoics like Epitectus. Rutherford identifies three primary ele- 
ments of the kind of freedom that these figures are interested in. 

The first primary element is consciousness of the power that one has in cases of active 
determination (Ibid., pp. 525-529). But in what manner might one accomplish this con- 
sciousness, let alone achieve this kind of determination? We may rightly wonder how to 
get things up and running here, and whether Nietzsche’s suggested approach can be rec- 
onciled with Spinoza’s. The ideal of freedom discussed in the Ethics is thoroughly intellec- 
tualist, involving even particularly a cognitive relationship to God (on which see Carlisle’s 
chapter in this volume); meanwhile, Nietzsche is known for his disparaging claims about 
reason, and denies any role for God, rejecting also Spinoza’s pan(en)theistic account of the 
divine. Still, despite epistemological differences, both think in any case that we must know 
things about ourselves as well as the world in order to realize freedom, and knowledge thus 
constitutes a second major element of Nietzsche’s and Spinoza’s positive visions of free- 
dom (Rutherford 2011, pp. 529-532). Finally, given a world characterized by necessity, a 
third distinct element is an emphasis on affirmation and fate (Ibid., 532-535). I have 
already mentioned that for Spinoza a thing is free when it “exists and acts from the necessity 


531 


JASON M. YONOVER 


of its own nature”; Nietzsche meanwhile cites the example of artists, who know “only too 
well that precisely when they no longer do anything ‘voluntarily’ but do everything of 
necessity, their feeling of freedom, subtlety, full power, of creative placing, disposing, and 
forming reaches its peak” (Ep. 58 and BGE 213, respectively; emphases mine). 

In short, Nietzsche and Spinoza praise a comparable kind of freedom characterized 
especially by the three primary elements outlined above — a kind of freedom that is thus 
quite different from freedom of the will, which, as we have seen in Section 2, each rejects. 
Thus far, it seems that we can answer our second question posed in the introduction, 
concerning whether Nietzsche was right to consider himself a kind of Spinozist, affirma- 
tively: Nietzsche was correct that he has tendencies comparable to Spinoza’s, even if he 
justifies these tendencies differently or departs from Spinoza in various ways regarding 
these matters (loan 2017), and even if he of course wholly denies Spinoza’s views on other 
issues, one of which I shall discuss in some detail within the next section. 


4. Teleology and “Chaos sive Natura” 


Across the two prior sections, it has become clear that Nietzsche and Spinoza develop 
particular accounts of the world that may be said to have a theoretical character in order 
to motivate their views on what we might consider to be a practical matter: freedom. And 
although Nietzsche and Spinoza might understand the status of their more theoretical 
claims differently (and Nietzsche also thinks that the practical perspective is itself of great 
justificatory significance), it’s clear that both intend for their primarily theoretical accounts 
of things to play a role when it comes to how we think about practical matters. We must 
now consider aspects of these largely theoretical accounts concerning nature and the 
world in greater detail. 

Asisevident from the text cited at the beginning of Section 2 (andalso NF-1884,26[432]), 
Nietzsche is well aware of an affinity with Spinoza in criticizing teleology, i.e. thinking 
according to which things are ‘for’ something. Nietzsche reads and excerpts from Fischer 
(1865b, pp. 233-237), which discusses Spinoza’s account of explanation from divine 
providence as taking refuge in the “asylum of ignorance [asylum ignorantiae],” a locution 
that Nietzsche references twice in notes dealing with Spinoza (NF-1881,11[194] and 
NF-1886,7[4]). Scholars debate how far Spinoza’s critique of teleology extends beyond his 
critique of divine providence (Bennett 1984, ch. 9 claims a comprehensive denial of tele- 
ology, and commentators like Schmid 2011, ch. 4 propose a more measured critique); but 
it seems implausible that Spinoza wants to or even could go as far as Nietzsche. 

Spinoza writes in the first appendix of the Ethics that at least one portion of the foremost 
“prejudice” to undermine is the idea that God “directs all things to some certain end” (II/78). 
Interestingly, as far as the text itself is concerned, this is one of three passages in the first 
appendix marked in the only extant volumes of Spinoza’s works that were held by Goethe 
(Yonover 2018, p. 287, n. 33). Nietzsche was attracted to Goethe’s natural-philosophical 
writings from early on (Gardner 2019). Nietzsche also conceived of Goethe as a model of 
freedom, for instance in TI, “Skirmishes,” 49, often mentioning him alongside Spinoza, as 
in HAH II 408. Further work on the three thinkers is needed; but in any case, the idea that 
Spinoza develops in the above passage from his first appendix — concerning the misguided 
belief that God “directs things to some certain end” — is that we must rule out divine provi- 
dence insofar as we have ruled out in Part I of the Ethics any anthropocentric conception of 
God. According to such conceptions, God orders the world with humans in mind. 


532 


NIETZSCHE AND SPINOZA 


Yet according to Spinoza, this kind of thinking “turns nature completely upside down,” 
“Iflor what is really a cause, it considers an effect, and conversely” (II/80) —ideas, and even 
locutions, which Nietzsche will later echo when he criticizes “confusing cause and effect” 
as “the genuine destruction of reason” and worse (TI, “Four Great Errors,” 1). Spinoza 
thinks that mathematics, “which is concerned not with ends, but only with the essences 
and properties of figures,” gave us a different standard of truth (likewise marked in Goethe’s 
copy of Spinoza’s works, and noted by Nietzsche in NF-1886,7[4]). 

While there can therefore be no doubt that Spinoza rejects divine providence, Nietzsche 
is more radical, once arguing that “[t]he total character of the world [...] is for all eternity 
chaos, not in the sense of a lack of necessity but of a lack of order, organization, form, 
beauty, wisdom, and whatever else our aesthetic anthropomorphisms are called” (GS 109). 
Instead of some direction, we are left with “chance, chance, chance,” even when it comes 
to human action in the case of this passage (NF-1880,1[63]). Nietzsche mocks Moses 
Mendelssohn, “this archangel of precocity,” for trying to interpret Spinoza ‘charitably’ on 
matters of teleology (NF-1881,11[137] following Fischer 1865b, p. 562). This seems to 
indicate Nietzsche’s thinking that Spinoza ventures further than many in carrying out a 
critique of teleology. Nevertheless, Nietzsche ultimately still holds that Spinoza doesn’t go 
far enough, such that residues of orthodoxy remain. In brief, “the old God still lives” 
(NF-1885,36[15]). Nietzsche’s dual naturalistic challenge is that we not only “naturalize 
humanity” but also “completely de-deify nature” (GS 109; emphasis removed). Arguably, 
it’s here that Nietzsche most markedly diverges from Spinoza — albeit armed with Spinoza’s 
own critique of anthropocentricism. According to Spinoza’s anti-humanist naturalism, all 
things are “natural things, which follow the common laws of nature” (E3Pref | II/137). 
Curiously, Nietzsche once writes in the context of a discussion of his positive vision of free- 
dom, perhaps a bit too eagerly, that in order to “become who we are [...] we must become 
the best learners and discoverers of everything that is lawful and necessary in the world: 
we must become physicists in order to be able to be creators in this sense” (GS 335; emphasis 
removed). This may line up with our stress in the prior section on the importance of a kind 
of consciousness and knowledge in attaining freedom. But the invocation of the “lawful- 
ness” of the world is in tension with a number of other passages wherein Nietzsche points 
to nature as something much more dynamic. Thus, Nietzsche warns more characteristi- 
cally: “Let us beware of saying that there are laws in nature. There are only necessities” 
(GS 109). 

Nietzsche clarifies this position on the unlawfulness of nature with reference to Spinoza 
specifically, for instance under the splendid motto “Chaos sive Natura” that must be read as 
revising Spinoza’s “Deus sive Natura” (NF-1882,21[3] or NF-1881,11[197] and E4p4d, 
respectively). Given such allusions, it’s plausible that Nietzsche even works out his position 
on the nature of the world in dialogue with Spinoza. Nietzsche similarly claims in a later 
notebook entry that “the belief in causae falls with the belief in téAn [ends] (contra Spinoza 
and his causalism)” (NF-1885,2[83]). Again, Nietzsche’s idea here is that Spinoza’s cri- 
tique of teleology is on the right track, and yet we must advance it. For Nietzsche in these 
far-reaching passages, not only does teleological thinking erroneously inject human 
rumor into nature, but so does thinking in terms of the law that everything has its cause, 
efficient or otherwise. Nietzsche seems to attribute to himself the challenging position that 
everything “follows a ‘necessary’ and ‘calculable’ course, although not because laws are 
dominant in it, but rather because laws are totally absent” (BGE, “Prejudices,” 22). While 
Nietzsche may or may not have known that Spinoza prefigures this view insofar as he 
issues strong criticism of any notion of God or nature anthromorphized as a “prince” that 


533 


JASON M. YONOVER 


issues commands (e.g. TTP IV 27), Nietzsche could in any case want to object that Spinoza 
remains committed to at least one revered prince nonetheless: the ’Principle’ of Sufficient 
Reason, if not also laws of nature more broadly. 

Of course, in departing from Spinoza here, Nietzsche departs from an aspect of Spinoza’s 
positive vision of freedom discussed in the previous section, too. Thus, although it’s not 
possible to discuss these details at present, Nietzsche seems to position himself differently, 
albeit on the same spectrum as Spinoza in the following appeal: “No more joy in certainty, 
but rather in uncertainty [/] no more ‘cause and effect’ but rather the continually creative” 
(NF-1884,26[284]). In short, while Nietzsche can, like Spinoza, be said to have a crucial 
practical interest in understanding, what’s understood is of another ‘nature.’ 


5. Conclusion 


There are plenty of additional and equally fascinating topics one might consider in the con- 
text of Nietzsche and Spinoza, including their coinciding accounts of the categories of good 
and evil, as well as morality per se (Wollenberg 2013) and the passions. Significant work 
remains to be done on Nietzsche’s and Spinoza’s commitments to political realism. Nietzsche's 
indication that he has plans for a “Tractatus politicus” has been neglected, perhaps because 
references to this Latin are left out of some English translations of relevant text; but it directly 
echoes Spinoza’s work known under the same name, which likewise went unfinished (see 
NF-1887,11[54] for Nietzsche’s “Preface”). Ample magnificently vicious remarks in which 
Nietzsche criticizes aspects of Spinoza’s thought — and person — have also gone unnoted in 
this chapter. One may explore, for instance, Nietzsche’s account of the geometrical order of 
Spinoza’s Ethics, i.e. the “hocus pocus of a mathematical form used by Spinoza to arm and 
outfit his philosophy [...] and thus, from the very start, to strike terror into the heart of the 
attacker who would dare to cast a glance at the unconquerable maiden and Pallas Athena” 
(BGE, “Prejudices,” 5; though compare the earlier NF-1872,19[47]). 

One less obvious and rather urgent point deserving of further investigation is that 
Nietzsche and Spinoza both dedicate a great deal of diagnostic attention to perspectives they 
consider misguided. Presumably, the most important reason this has been overlooked is that 
Nietzsche never explicitly writes about his metaphilosophical affinities with Spinoza here. 
But it’s quite notable that Spinoza is not subject to one of Nietzsche’s major criticisms of 
much of philosophy. As Huddleston (2019, p. 145) puts this criticism, Nietzsche is troubled 
by what he sees to be a “single-minded concern with the timeless truths about what really is 
the case” regarding some allegedly fundamental matters, as such dogmatic thinking “repu- 
diates, as unworthy of truly philosophical inquiry, this whole other range of interesting 
truths about why people come to believe what they do on these issues.” Nietzsche takes a 
strong interest in mistaken ways of thinking, but so does Spinoza, indeed starting already in 
his first works, and continuing into his later writings, including of course the political works 
(e.g. CM II 2; Ep. 58; and TTP I 30, TP I 4, respectively). As emphasized above, we have no 
reason to think that Nietzsche ever directly read Spinoza’s texts just cited. But as I have 
discussed elsewhere in analyzing Nietzsche’s and Spinoza’s etiologies of belief in free will 
specifically (Yonover forthcoming), we do know both that Nietzsche’s key secondary source 
discussed Spinoza’s relevant tendencies (Fischer 1865b, pp. 453 and 458) andthat Nietzsche 
was familiar with Spinoza’s account of the origins of our erroneous belief in freedom of the 
will as developed in Ep. 58. The latter was mentioned by a source familiar to Nietzsche, who 
even annotated the page in question (Brobjer 2008, p. 159, n. 105). 


534 


NIETZSCHE AND SPINOZA 


Nietzsche often notes in a Spinozistic spirit that we aren’t just “mired in error” but are 
“drawn necessarily into” it. He even comparably, if coincidentally, references the example 
of “the movement of the sun, where our eye is a constant advocate for error” (TI, “Reason,” 
5; for Spinoza on our misleading sense of sight and the sun, see e.g. E2p35s). Although 
Nietzsche is sometimes understood to be offering debunking arguments that would show 
some perspective to be impoverished on the basis of its origins — which Spinoza certainly 
doesn’t attempt, and which many philosophers are wary of — Queloz and Cueni 2019 
argue powerfully that this is a misconception, and thus also make further room for 
consideration of Nietzsche alongside Spinoza here. As above, Nietzsche might well come to 
etiology for reasons that are not Spinoza’s, but Nietzsche might also end up close to Spinoza 
insofar as he likewise tries to account for how we have gone wrong, rather than just show 
that we are wrong — let alone that we are wrong because our views have some unflattering 
origin. 

This is all to say: there are strong historical and philosophical reasons to work out the 
relationship between Nietzsche and Spinoza as regards etiology and a number of other 
matters — even if they come to their ultimately comparable views, or the imaginary street 
corner with which we began, in unique ways. Furthermore, we can pursue such work 
without “making [different] things the same,” heeding Nietzsche’s warning to avoid the 
trap that I mentioned initially, and thereby learning more about Nietzsche and Spinoza 
individually as well. 


Note on Citation, Acknowledgments 


I cite Spinoza according to volume conventions, in Curley’s translation, though I have con- 
sulted Gebhardt’s edition of the original. I reference sections of Nietzsche’s works according 
to standard English abbreviations clarified in the bibliography, and in these cases make use 
of recent Cambridge translations. When citing from the Nachlass, I translate from the 
eKGWB=Digital Critical Edition by D’lorio, which is based on and improves upon the earlier 
edition of the original by Colliand Montinari. BVN=Briefe von Nietzsche; NF=Nachgelassene 
Fragmente. I am deeply grateful to Keith Ansell-Pearson, Andrew Huddleston, Stephan 
Schmid, Jack Stetter, David Wollenberg, and participants in a workshop at the Maimonides 
Centre for Advanced Studies in Hamburg for detailed comments on this chapter. 


References 


CM, Ep., E, TTP, TP=Metaphysical Thoughts, Epistles, Ethics, Theological-Political Treatise, and 
Political Treatise in The Collected Works of Spinoza (ed. and trans. E.M. Curley). Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press, 1985-2016. 

G= Spinoza Opera (ed. C. Gebhardt). Heidelberg: Carl Winter Verlag, 1972 [1925]. 

A=The Anti-Christ in The Anti-Christ, Ecce Homo, Twilight of the Idols and Other Writings (ed. A. Ridley 
and J. Norman, trans. J. Norman). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2005. 

BGE=Beyond Good & Evil (ed. R.-P. Horstmann and J. Norman, trans. J. Norman). Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 2002. 

eKGWB=Posthumous Fragments in the Digital Critical Edition of the Complete Works and Letters 
(ed. P. D’Iorio) <www.nietzschesource.org>. Improving on the Kritische Gesamtausgabe (ed. G. Colli 
and M. Montinari). Berlin: De Gruyter, 1967ff. 


535 


JASON M. YONOVER 


GM=On the Genealogy of Morals (ed. K. Ansell-Pearson, trans. C. Diethe). Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 2006. 

GS=Gay Science (ed. B. Williams, trans. J. Nauckhoff and A. Del Caro). Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 2001. 

HAH=Human, All too Human: A Book for Free Spirits (trans. R.J. Hollingdale, intr. R. Schacht). 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996. 

TI=Twilight of the Idols, in The Anti-Christ, Ecce Homo, Twilight of the Idols and Other Writings 
(ed. A. Ridley and J. Norman, trans. J. Norman). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2005. 

Bennett, J. (1984). A Study of Spinoza’s Ethics. Indianapolis: Hackett. 

Brobjer, T.H. (2008). Nietzsche’s Philosophical Context. Champaign: University of Illinois Press. 

Carlisle, C. (2021). Amor dei intellectualis. In: A Companion to Spinoza (ed. Y.Y. Melamed). Oxford: 
Wiley-Blackwell. 

Clark, M. (1990). Nietzsche on Truth and Philosophy. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

de Man, P. (1979). Allegories of Reading: Figural Language in Rousseau, Nietzsche, Rilke, and Proust. 
New Haven, CT: Yale University Press. 

Della Rocca, M. (2008). Spinoza. New York: Routledge. 

Deleuze, G. (1983). Nietzsche and Philosophy (trans. H. Tomlinson). London: Athlone Press. 

Deleuze, G. (1988). Spinoza: Practical Philosophy (trans. R. Hurley). San Francisco: City Light Books. 

Emden, C. J. (2014). Nietzsche’s Naturalism: Philosophy and the Life Sciences in the Nineteenth Century. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Fischer, K. (1865a). Baruch Spinoza’s Leben und Charakter. Mannheim: Bassermann. 

Fischer, K. (1865b). Geschichte der neueren Philosophie, Bd. I, zweiter Theil, zweite vollig umgearbe- 
itete Auflage. Heidelberg: Bassermann. 

Forster, M. (2019). Nietzsche on free will. In: New Cambridge Companion to Nietzsche (ed. T. Stern), 
374-396. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Garber, D. (2015). Superheroes in the history of philosophy: Spinoza, super-rationalist. Journal of the 
History of Philosophy 53 (3): 507-521. 

Gardner, S. (2019). Nietzsche and Kant on teleology in 1868: “‘life’ is something entirely dark...” 
Inquiry 62 (1): 23-48. 

Gemes, K. (2006). Nietzsche on free will, autonomy and the sovereign individual: I. Proceedings of the 
Aristotelian Society 80 (1): 321-338. 

Huddleston, A. (2019). Nietzsche on the Decadence and Flourishing of Culture. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press. 

Ioan, R. (2017). Spinoza and Nietzsche on freedom, empowerment, and affirmation. European 
Journal of Philosophy 25 (4): 1864-1883. 

Janaway, C. (2006). Nietzsche on free will, autonomy and the sovereign individual: II. Proceedings of 
the Aristotelian Society 80 (1): 339-357. 

Janaway, C. (2007). Beyond Selflessness: Reading Nietzsche's Genealogy. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press. 

Leiter, B. (2002). Nietzsche on Morality. London: Routledge. 

Leiter, B. (2007). Nietzsche’s theory of the will. Philosophers’ Imprint 7 (7): 1-15. 

Leiter, B. (2013). Nietzsche’s naturalism reconsidered. In: Oxford Handbook of Nietzsche (ed. K. Gemes 
and J. Richardson), 576-598. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Melamed, Y.Y. (2021). Causa sui. In: A Companion to Spinoza (ed. Y.Y. Melamed). Oxford: 
Wiley-Blackwell. 

Queloz, M. and Cueni, D. (2019). Nietzsche as a critic of genealogical debunking: making room for 
naturalism without subversion. The Monist 102 (3): 277-297. 

Richardson, J. (1996). Nietzsche’s System. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Rotter, M. (2019). Selbsterhaltung und Wille zur Macht: Nietzsches Spinoza-Rezeption. Berlin: De Gruyter. 

Rutherford, D. (2011). Freedom as a philosophical ideal: Nietzsche and his antecedents. Inquiry 54 
(5): 512-540. 


536 


NIETZSCHE AND SPINOZA 


Scandella, M. (2012). Did Nietzsche read Spinoza? Some Preliminary Notes on the Nietzsche-Spinoza 
Problem, Kuno Fischer and Other Sources. Nietzsche-Studien 41 (1): 156-184. 

Schmid, S. (2011). Finalursachen in der friithen Neuzeit: eine Untersuchung der Transformation teleologischer 
Erkldérungen. Berlin: De Gruyter. 

Sleigh, R. Jr., Chappell, V., and Della Rocca, M. (1998). Determinism and human freedom. In: 
Cambridge History of Seventeenth-Century Philosophy (ed. D. Garber and M. Ayers), 1193-1278. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Williams, B. (1994). Nietzsche’s minimalist moral psychology. In: Nietzsche, Genealogy, Morality 
(ed. R. Schacht), 65-76. Berkeley: University of California Press. 

Wollenberg, D. (2013). Nietzsche, Spinoza, and the moral affects. Journal of the History of Philosophy 
51 (4): 617-649. 

Wurzer, W. (1975). Nietzsche und Spinoza. Meisenheim: Hain. 

Yonover, J.M. (2018). Goethe, Maimon, and Spinoza’s third kind of cognition. Goethe Yearbook 25: 
267-287. 

Yonover, J.M. (forthcoming). Nietzsche, Spinoza, and etiology (on the example of free will). European 
Journal of Philosophy. 

Yovel, Y. (2018). Nietzsche and Spinoza: enemy-brothers. In: Oxford Handbook of Spinoza (ed. M. Della 
Rocca), 540-570. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 


537 


50 


Schelling with Spinoza on Freedom 


DANIEL DRAGICEVIC 


Published in 1809, the Philosophical Investigations into the Essence of Human Freedom and 
Matters Connected Therewith (a title I will shorten to the Freedom Essay) represents a defining 
turning point within Schelling’s philosophy, for two distinct reasons. On the one hand, the 
work can be regarded as the culmination of Schelling’s 1 5-year-long philosophical journey, 
begun in 1794 and having spanned various phases of his thinking. On the other hand, 
with the Freedom Essay Schelling’s intimate relationship with Baruch Spinoza also comes 
to arather abrupt end, even after Spinoza had consistently been a faithful and, above all, a 
helpful companion in Schelling’s intellectual development. 

Both issues must be considered in the light of one and the same problem, which, as the 
title of the Freedom Essay suggests, proves to be that of the essence of human freedom. One 
of Schelling’s fundamental premises is that any theory that concerns human freedom 
must first deal with the territory in which the very event of freedom takes place. This is 
expressed in the search for the reason or the ‘ground’ of freedom and articulates itself in 
the question: “How must the world be constituted for a moral [i.e. free] being?” (The ‘Oldest 
System-Programme’ of German Idealism. See Forster 1995, p. 199). Schelling’s admira- 
tion for Spinoza is explained by his finding in him an ally who shared exactly this same 
point of departure. The program Spinoza pursued in the Ethics, which begins with a spec- 
ulation about substance as the ground of the all-encompassing totality, confirmed 
Schelling’s assumption that any theory of freedom first must clarify its very conditions of 
implementation. As a consequence, Spinoza’s greatness was manifested in his insight that 
our question about “freedom is surely connected in some way with the world as a whole” 
(Schelling 2006, p. 9), which implies that we are not able to formulate the proper concept 
of freedom without establishing a connection between it and “the whole of a scientific 
worldview” (Ibid.). 

The program of the Freedom Essay is therefore to bring this connection between freedom 
and the world as a whole back to the center of philosophy. In the preface Schelling trans- 
lates this connection alongside the following announcement: “It is time that the |. . .] gen- 
uine opposition emerge, that of necessity and freedom, with which the innermost 
centerpoint of philosophy first comes into consideration” (Schelling 2006, p. 4). The fol- 
lowing chapter will proceed in four steps: first, I will examine the nature of the relationship 


A Companion to Spinoza, First Edition. Edited by Yitzhak Y. Melamed. 
© 2021 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2021 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd. 


538 


SCHELLING WITH SPINOZA ON FREEDOM 


between freedom and necessity by discussing the so-called Pantheism Controversy and 
setting out the coordinates of the main thesis established by this controversy, namely that 
any philosophy that aims towards systematic unity ends up with the denial of freedom. 
A second section will deal with the arguments Schelling cites that contradict this thesis, 
which result in an unique apology of Spinoza’s philosophical system qua pantheism. 
A third section intends to explain that, according to Schelling, the error should be located 
not in the idea of pantheism but, rather, in the traditional notion of freedom, that is, its 
libertarian account. The concluding part of this chapter, however, is dedicated to Schelling’s 
critique of Spinoza and demonstrates the extent to which his thesis can be upheld 
that at the end of the day he “most decisively turns away from Spinoza’s path” 
(Schelling 2006, p. 27). 


1. Pantheism Controversy 


As I mentioned, the starting point that Schelling shares with Spinoza is the assumption 
that the very question about the reason or the embedded character of human freedom 
inevitably leads us to the notion of an all-encompassing totality. This inevitability expresses 
the underlying conviction that we only can grasp the concept of something if we are able 
to show its relationship to all other concepts and, therefore, its place within a coherent 
whole. In the late eighteenth century, such a coherent whole was given the name system. 
The idea of a system stemmed from Immanuel Kant’s ideal of philosophy as science, to 
bring a “unity of manifold cognitions under one idea” (Kant 1998, A832/B860). 
Philosophers following Kant took this idea to heart and therefore aspired to bring every- 
thing into a holistic system, an aspiration expressed by the demand of reason to establish a 
highest possible unity within the greatest possible multiplicity. 

Along this line of thought Schelling’s opposition of freedom and necessity, quoted 
earlier, can now be understood as the antithesis of freedom and a philosophy that aims 
to bring everything into a unified and complete system. With this opposition the 
conceptual foundations are laid for the controversy history textbooks now term the 
Pantheismusstreit, a dispute over the compatibility of freedom and system. Schelling 
summarizes the core statement of this debate, in which he actively intervenes with the 
Freedom Essay, as follows: “According to an old but in no way forgotten legend, the con- 
cept of freedom is in fact said to be completely incompatible with system and every phi- 
losophy making claim to unity and wholeness should end up with the denial of freedom” 
(Schelling 2006, p. 9). These lines are dedicated, though only implicitly, to Friedrich 
Heinrich Jacobi, the initiator of the Pantheismusstreit. In his On the Teachings of Spinoza 
in Letters to Moses Mendelssohn (first edition published in 1785) Jacobi submitted the 
thesis that any philosophy aiming towards systematicity is essentially incompatible 
with freedom. Schelling reflects Jacobi’s position as follows: “The only possible system 
of reason is pantheism and this is inevitably fatalism” (Schelling 2006, p. 11 and also 
Jacobi 2000, p. 122). According to Jacobi, Spinoza’s philosophy presents the epitome of 
such a complete worldview qua pantheism, which under the guidance of the principle 
of sufficient reason tries to bring everything into one coherent system. Jacobi’s utter 
disapproval of Spinoza though is motivated by one characteristic within Spinoza’s 
metaphysics above all others, namely, the notion of necessitarianism, the underlying 
premises of which I will briefly sketch here. 


539 


DANIEL DRAGICEVIC 


Spinoza’s philosophy is one of the main exponents of what is known as monism. In 
the first half of Part 1 of the Ethics he strives to prove the uniqueness of substance (cf. 
E1p14corl | CW1420 | GIL 56/16. On the individual argumentative steps that autho- 
rize Spinoza to establish his monism in E 1p14 see Della Rocca 2002, 2008, p. 46ff.). 
This course of evidence culminates in the thesis, that “[w]hatever is, is in God, and 
nothing can be or be conceived without God” (E 1p15 | CWI 420 | GII 56/25), a thesis 
that will be referred to as the ‘pantheism-thesis’ and that, in my view, represents the 
main proposition and ultimate foundation of his entire philosophy. The following half 
of Part 1 (starting from E 1p16 | CW1 424 | GI 60/17ff.) primarily deals with the 
question of the relationship of this “whatever” to God. From the pantheism-thesis, 
Spinoza concludes “that God alone is a free cause” (E 1p17cor2 | CW1425 | GII 
61/21), for the opposite of this thesis would imply that we would have to assume the 
possibility of an Outside of God “by which he is determined or compelled to act” (E 
1p17d | CW1425 | GII 61/13f.), an exterior [being], however, that is inconceivable 
with regard to God. On the contrary, all other things are therefore determined in their 
action by something else, a ‘something’ that is, of course, none other than God: “A 
thing which has determined to act in a particular way has necessarily been determined 
so by God; and a thing which has not been determined by God cannot determine itself 
to act” (E 1p26 | Spinoza 2003, 232 | GII68/15f.). Since all things depend on God (cf. 
E1p25 | CW1431 | GIL 67/27ff.) and are necessarily determined in the way they are 
— and since God, who “acts only from the laws of his own nature alone” (E 1p17 | CW 
1425 | GIL 61/5), is by definition free — we can conclude that “[t]hings could have been 
produced by God in no other way, and in no other order than they have been produced” 
(E 1p33 | CW1 436 | GIL 73/19f.). Because on the contrary if things would have been 
produced or determined by God in a different way (from as they are), then we would 
have to explain why things are as they are and not different from what they de facto are. 
According to Spinoza, however, such a reason can neither be found in nor outside God 
and therefore cannot be assumed without contradicting the very concept of God itself 
(cf. E 1p33s2 | CW1436f. | GIL 74/25ff.). 

This brief illustration of necessitarianism I believe gives us a sense of what caused Jacobi’s 
unease with Spinoza’s philosophy. His pantheistic system, which tries to connect every- 
thing to each other under one principle (that is, God) implies a complete and enclosed 
totality (= series of conditions) that could not have been produced in any way other than 
how it actually is. And since all things are immanent in God, we must assume that no thing 
has the freedom to be other than the way it is determined by and conceived through God. 
For Jacobi, this can only lead to a fatalism (for all things depending on God) or, to put it in 
Schelling’s words, “[a]bsolute causality in One being leaves only unconditional passivity to 
all others” (Schelling 2006, p. 11). 

In the course of the Freedom Essay, Schelling agrees with Jacobi that Spinoza’s philos- 
ophy is the true epitome of the only complete system and that “if pantheism denotes 
nothing more than the doctrine of the immanence of things in God, every rational view- 
point in some sense must be drawn to this doctrine” (Ibid.). He denies, however, that the 
pantheism-thesis is utterly incompatible with freedom. Schelling’s reply to Jacobi’s objec- 
tion consists in flipping this position into its opposite by raising the possibility that perhaps 
the idea of immanence does not negate freedom but, rather, that freedom can only be saved 
through placing it in God (cf. Schelling 2006, p. 12). Schelling’s subsequent strategy will 
therefore be to provide evidence that there is nothing wrong with pantheism that it pres- 
ents no challenge to freedom and that the alleged incompatibility of freedom and pantheism 


540 


SCHELLING WITH SPINOZA ON FREEDOM 


is not only based on a total misinterpretation of what the latter actually means but also that 
it does no justice to what Spinoza has in mind. 


2. Schelling’s defense of (Spinoza’s) Pantheism 


Schelling discusses several misinterpretations regarding pantheism, only the two most 
essential of which will be presented here. The first is that “pantheism [. . .] consists in a 
complete identification of God with things” (Schelling 2006, p. 12), which sometimes even 
goes so far as to say, “that in Spinoza even the individual thing is equivalent to God” 
(Schelling 2006, p. 13). What Schelling is summarizing here is a common understanding 
of pantheism as the idea of a complete equation of God with things — ‘All things are God’ 
— which is perhaps the most widespread account of pantheism and, as Schelling intends to 
show, has very little to do with Spinoza: 


However, a more total differentiation of things from God than that found in Spinoza, the pre- 
sumed classic for this doctrine, is hardly conceivable. God is what is in itself and is understood 
only from itself; what is finite, however, is necessarily in another and can only be understood 
from this other. (Schelling 2006, p. 12) 


As Schelling rightly indicates, the classical image of pantheism (God = things) has nothing 
to do with Spinoza’s stance on this subject To make this clear, Schelling cites verbatim two 
central definitions found in the very beginning of the Ethics: the definition of substance on 
the one hand (E 1def3 | CW1408 | GIl45/14ff.) and the definition of modes on the other 
(E 1ldef5 | CWI 409 | GI 45/20f.). For Spinoza a substance is distinguished by the predi- 
cates of “being in itself” and of “being conceived through itself,” while a mode, on the 
contrary, is in something else, on whose being it depends and through which it has to be 
conceived. A mode, therefore, remains totally insufficient considered in and of itself. On 
the basis of these two definitions Spinoza claims an ontological priority of substance with 
regards to its modifications, expressing that “a substance is prior in nature to its affections” 
(E1p1 | CW1410 | GIL 47/6). Taking this ontological priority seriously, it should be evi- 
dent that substance and modes — God and things — are entirely heterogeneous and, as 
regards their essence as well as their existence, totally differentiated (cf. E 1p17s | CWI 
427 | GII 63/24-30), for, as Schelling goes on to remark, “things are not different from 
God simply in degree [. . .] but toto genere” (Schelling 2006, p. 12 (italics original)) and mix- 
ing them together is only possible due to a complete disregard for this crucial difference 
within Spinoza’s ontology. 

The second main misunderstanding which Schelling finds commonly related to the idea 
of pantheism reflects the exact opposite of the first one. It consists not in the claim “that 
God is everything, but rather [. . .] that things are nothing, that this system abolishes all 
individuality” (Schelling 2006, p. 15). With this proposition Schelling refers to the claim 
—issued most prominently by Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel — that Spinoza’s philosophy is 
a sophisticated form of acosmism (and even literal nihilism), in which God is everything 
and the things are ultimately nothing, = 0. 

Schelling’s attempt to deal with this position is two-pronged. First, by employing a 
reductio (Ibid.) he contrasts this position with the first misunderstanding given earlier: for, 
if God is everything and things are nothing, then one can ask how God can be identified or 
be mingled with nothing. Furthermore, the statement ‘God is everything’ is pretty trivial 


541 


DANIEL DRAGICEVIC 


and literally lacking in content, since if nothing exists besides God, it would imply that God 
is the ground of no thing, a “pure unblemished divinity” (Ibid.). Since this seems not be the 
strongest argument which one can raise against the claim of acosmism (and nihilism) — 
and perhaps even Schelling recognized this — he opens up a second line of argumentation 
conceding that for Spinoza things (= modes) are mere affections of the substance. This 
distinction, however, “serves only to determine the relationship of things to God but not 
what they may be, considered for themselves” (Schelling 2006, p. 16), which is the reason 
for which “it cannot be concluded that things contain nothing positive whatsoever” (Ibid.). 
To better elucidate this point, he invites readers to conceive of the relationship between 
substance and mode as “that of ground to consequence” (Ibid.), a distinction which he 
applies to a rather mathematically seeming example: We are asked to suppose that sub- 
stance = A and that its affections or consequences can be determined as Ala, A|b, A|c, 
A|dand so on. From this we cannot conclude that A/a = A or, in other words, that the sub- 
stance and its mode (or the ground and one of its consequences) are one and the same — 
since the positive in Af is, as Schelling emphasizes, by all means A. Despite this, he 
maintains that any consequence or mode of God is not nothing but still must be conceived 
as something determined, that is, as a positive determination or affirmation of God as 
substance. 

This line of thought, Schelling admits, “is of course not set out in Spinoza [. . .] but the 
question is only whether the view presented is inconsistent with Spinozism itself” (Ibid.). 
Nonetheless, I believe we can still make sense of such a consistency with Spinoza by linking 
it to an idea presented in Part 3 of the Ethics that is generally associated with the so-called 
conatus-doctrine: 


Each thing, as far as it can by its own power, strives to persevere in its being. Demonstratio: 
For singular things are modes by which God’s attributes are expressed in a certain and 
determinate way, i.e. things that express, in a certain and determinate way, God’s power, by 
which God is and acts. (E 3p6 | CW1498f. | GIL 146/6-14) 


We can see that, although modes for Spinoza are entirely dependent upon God in their 
existence as well as in their essence, they still are not nothing but, rather, a certain and 
determinate expression of the absolute power of God, which manifests itself in the striving 
of all things to persevere in their being. For this reason the objection that Spinoza abolishes 
all positivity of finite individuality into a mere acosmic nothingness emerges as with the 
first misinterpretation again only out of a certain ignorance regarding central theorems of 
his philosophy (cf. Melamed 2010). 

After defending Spinoza’s philosophy and dismissing the two main misinterpretations 
of pantheism, Schelling now switches into attack mode. Since the objection that pan- 
theism implies a denial of our freedom is untenable, Schelling argues that we must actu- 
ally adopt the opposite view, that is, that the immanence of all things in God does not only 
stand in the way of our freedom but must instead be thought of its conditio sine qua non: 
“So little does immanence in God contradict freedom that precisely only what is free is in 
God to the extent it is free, and what is not free is necessarily outside of God to the extent 
that it is not free” (Schelling 2006, p. 18f.). The thought underlying this statement can be 
illuminated as follows: since the capacity of freedom necessarily implies some element of 
absoluteness in the sense of an autonomous self-determination to which there can nei- 
ther be anything internal nor external to impede it, and, furthermore, since God by defi- 
nition cannot be conceived as anything other than absolute power or omnipotence 


542 


SCHELLING WITH SPINOZA ON FREEDOM 


(cf. E 1p34d | CWI 439 | GIL 77/1-5), there is no other way to preserve the absoluteness 
of human freedom than to be posited into that of God. To assume the opposite would yield 
an absolute that is beside and beyond God, which must be ruled out since the existence of 
two absolutes is impossible (cf. FE 1p5 | CWI 411 | GI148/4f. and E 1p14| CW1420 |G 
II 56/4—15). Thus, Freedom can persist solely through its being-posited into the essence 
of God or, negatively formulated; it is impossible for man to be free outside of God (cf. TP 
Ch. 2/§6| CW IL 509 | GI 277/31ff. and E 3prae| CW1491 | GI 137/10-15, where 
Spinoza denies the idea that humans act against the laws of nature, that is the possibility, 
that we constitute “a dominion within a dominion”). 


3. Critique of libertarian freedom 


Since there seems to be nothing wrong with pantheism (in the sense that it represents no 
justified threat to our freedom), the source of error in the equation, pantheism = denial of 
freedom, must be located not in the former but, rather, in the concept of freedom under- 
lying this equation, which people like Jacobi sought to defend. Schelling describes this as 
the “common concept of freedom, according to which freedom is posited as a wholly unde- 
termined capacity to will one or the other of two contradictory opposites, without deter- 
mining reasons” (Schelling 2006, p. 48). The understanding of freedom Schelling 
references here is that of freedom of will or of choice and can be generally subsumed under 
the idea of a libertarian account of freedom. 

The critique by Schelling and Spinoza contains the reproach that this account offers 
a kind of ‘floating’ freedom, one that implies the moment of indeterminacy. This 
reproach is further expressed by the fact that the libertarian conceptualization of free- 
dom places the source of our freedom in the capacity of the will to act or not to act. Both 
philosophers, however, not only deny that the essence of freedom can be adequately 
grasped with such a concept but even go so far as to mock it by associating it with the 
famous example of Buridan’s Ass. As Schelling writes: “To be able to decide for A or 
Non-A without any compelling reasons would be [. . .] to act entirely irrationally and 
would not distinguish man in exactly the best way from the well-known animal of 
Buridan” (Schelling 2006, p. 48 and E 2p49s | CW1490 | GII135/28f.). The defenders 
of the libertarian freedom recur to this example in order to establish human freedom. 
For in a given situation in which someone stands in the indecisiveness of a choice bet- 
ween two totally equal alternatives (= aequilibrium arbitrii), he or she would still act, 
unlike the ass, because humans are attributed the peculiar ability to choose one 
alternative over the other with no compelling reason. 

At this point, their critique consists in the argument that such a freedom is based on a 
total lack of reason and, therefore, utter ignorance, that is, a freedom based on mere arbi- 
trariness. Arbitrariness and ignorance, however, run contrary to reason and therefore also 
to knowledge, since knowledge, for its part, relies on knowing something that cannot be 
otherwise. This means that knowledge consequently implies a moment of necessity or, in 
Schelling’s words: 


The main issue is that this [libertarian] concept introduces a complete contingency [. . .]. But 
contingency is impossible; it contests reason as well as the necessary unity of the whole; and, 
if freedom is to be saved by nothing other than the complete contingency of actions, then it is 
not to be saved at all. (Schelling 2006, p. 48f.) 


543 


DANIEL DRAGICEVIC 


A freedom based essentially on contingency or arbitrariness, that is, on the very absence 
of determining reasons, however, must really be denoted as animalistic (not to say as child- 
ish) and thus incapable of presenting an adequate concept of our and also of God’s free- 
dom (cf. E 1p33s2 | CWI 437 | GI 74/30ff.). For this we would require a notion of 
freedom compatible with rational grounds and, ultimately, with necessity. Such a concept 
can be found in Spinoza, described best in a letter to G.H. Schuller: 


I say that a thing is free if it exists and acts from the necessity of its own nature alone and 
compelled if it is determined by something else to exist [. . .]. For example, even though God 
exists necessarily, still he exists freely, because he exists from the necessity of his own nature 
alone [. . .]. You see, then, that I place freedom not in a free decision, but in free necessity. 
(Ep. 58 | CWI 427 | GIV 265/22-30) 


As we can see, with the term ‘freedom’ Spinoza (and with him Schelling) do not understand 
a capacity to decide arbitrarily without determining reasons nor the ability to do whatever 
one likes (cf. Schelling 1856ff., vol. 6, p. 551). This is why an adequate concept of freedom 
should not be one which is dissociated from any necessity but, rather, be based on the inner 
necessity of one’s own nature (see E 1def7 | CW1409 | GIL 46/7f,; also TP Ch. 2/§7 | CW 
11510 | GI 279/5ff. and Schelling 2006, p. 50). Because for Spinoza, individuals act freely 
when they realize that they are the adequate cause of their action, “i.e. when something in 
us or outside of us follows from our nature, which can be clearly and distinctly understood 
through it alone” (E 3def2 | CW1493 | GI 139/7ff). From this, it follows that we are still 
compelled or determined by a cause or reason but that this compulsion or determination 
originates not from anything external but out of our own necessity and can be therefore 
rationally conceived through our own nature or essence alone. And since our essence 
cannot be understood as anything other than an embedded part of the all-encompassing 
totality, which is of course God, it follows that our implementation of freedom cannot occur 
outside of him but, rather must be posited into God’s essence itself. 


4. Schelling’s Departure from Spinoza 


The standpoint that human freedom is real only insofar as it is thought to be in harmony 
with God and divine necessity, is a position that Schelling shares with Spinoza and one that 
he still defended vigorously within the framework of his philosophy of identity (see 
Schelling 1856ff., vol. 6, p. 538ff.). With the Freedom Essay, however, he surpasses this 
position and thus goes also beyond Spinoza. He goes on to criticize Spinoza, here, writing 
that “[t]he error of his system [does not lie with]in his placing things in God but in the fact 
that they are things” (Schelling 2006, p. 20 (italics original)). Spinoza’s fatalism does not 
arise from his demand for the immanence of all things in God but, as Schelling suggests, 
from the fact that his system is too static or rigid and, that it lacks movement and becoming: 
“Hence the lifelessness of his system” (Ibid.). Such a lack of liveliness can be illustrated by 
his ultimate goal, by the highest ethical point of Spinoza’s philosophy, the Amor Dei intel- 
lectualis (E 5p36s | CW1612 | GIL 303/1-5), with which he conceptualizes the idea of 
man’s (rational) acceptance of God’s given order and which Schelling interprets as the 
suspension of our own autonomy and life in that of God. We are here not granted a genuine 
agency but are instead demoted to the role of a background actor, a vanishing mediator in 
the play of God’s self-reference. 


544 


SCHELLING WITH SPINOZA ON FREEDOM 


Spinoza’s inability to integrate the moment of an autonomous life of finite beings into 
his system must be rooted in his very concept of God. Schelling criticizes Spinoza for the 
fact that he conceptualizes him as a “merely logical abstraction” (Schelling 2006, p. 58): a 
God with whom things can only go in one direction, since he is understood as the “abso- 
lutely first [efficient] cause” (E 1p16cor3 | CW1425 | GII 61/4). Here, everything follows 
with logical-geometrical necessity — thus, the mechanical monotony of his system, in 
which there is no life, in Schelling’s sense of the word, because nothing — not even God 
himself — is granted the ability to change the course of history (on that note: for Spinoza 
there is no history at all, this is to say, ‘there is nothing new under the sun’). Against such 
a rigid idea of God Schelling pleads for a dynamic or living God (cf. Snow 2000, p. 319), 
because 


God is not a god of the dead but of the living. It is incomprehensible how the most perfect being 
could find pleasure even in the most perfect machine possible. [. . .| The procession of things 
from God is a self-revelation of God. But God can only reveal himself to himself in what is like 
him, in free beings acting on their own. (Schelling 2006, p. 18) 


As is evident here, Schelling uses the idea of the imago Dei to argue against Spinoza. If God 
is the being which must be called free in an absolute sense, then the question arises as to 
the explanation for his finding pleasure in a creature in which his being is not represented 
at all. That is, how could he create something that is not free in the same way as himself? 
Schelling’s difficulty with such a relationship between God and his creation is articulated 
in the question: how can we be granted an autonomous freedom, independent of God, 
without at the same time having to give up the idea of the immanence of all things in God? 
Or, more simply, how can we be free from God and yet still be grounded in him? For Schelling 
this question is the “most difficult” (Schelling 1856ff., vol. 7, p. 458) and forces him to 
completely rethink the concept of the Absolute, an Absolute that sets out the conditions of 
possibility of freedom and independence - that is, of difference (from God), without giving 
up the demand for unity and wholeness. 

Schelling initiates this task by radically reinterpreting one of Spinoza’s key concepts, 
that of “causa sui” (E 1defl | CW1408 | GII45/5f.). For this purpose, he introduces “the 
distinction between being in so far as it exists and being in so far as it is merely the ground of 
existence” (Schelling 2006, p. 27). This ontological distinction of Being as existence and 
Being as the ground (or the basis) of existence is most important, since it enables him to 
induce, as mentioned earlier, the required dynamic into the concept of God. As Schelling 
further notes, “[s]ince nothing is prior to, or outside of God,” Spinoza is quite correct in his 
assumption, to “ground [God’s] existence in himself,” but his error lies in “speak[ing] of 
this ground as of a mere concept without making it into something real and actual” (Ibid.). 
Yes, God is causa sui, Schelling agrees, but we must still take this ‘causa’ qua ground as 
something actual, as a real basis and, therefore, distinguish it from his existence qua ‘sui.’ 
Spinoza lets them both coincide, whereas Schelling conceptualizes this “ground of [God's] 
existence [as the] nature — in God, a being indeed inseparable, yet still distinct, from him” 
(Ibid.). 

From this distinction of ground and existence we should not conclude that two separate 
entities are being set in God. Instead, we must think of the relationship as analogous to 
that between gravity and light. In the same sense as gravity “precedes light as its ever dark 
ground” (Ibid.), we have to understand this nature in God as the ever preceding dark ground 
of his existence. This thought can be illuminated with the idea of God’s Unconsciousness 


545 


DANIEL DRAGICEVIC 


or, more accurately, his Pre-Consciousness: something, that is not (yet) God in an absolute 
sense, but that, when regarded in itself, is nothing unless considered in its relation to the 
actual existing consciousness of God. 

The contrast Schelling effects here is crucial for the task of explaining the possibility of 
human freedom in regards to God, since we can extrapolate from the idea of such a crack or 
“split” (Zizek 1996, p. 61) immanent to God’s being to then conceptualize the emergence of 
difference out of God without effecting or violating his unity but letting his character of 
being remain an all-encompassing totality. As Schelling further explains, to be free, humans 
“must have a root independent of God” (Schelling 2006, p. 24 and ibid. 1856ff., vol. 7, 
p. 458) and since “nothing indeed can be outside of God, this contradiction can only be 
resolved by things having their ground in that which in God himself is not He Himself, that 
is, in that which is the ground of his existence” (Schelling 2006, p. 28 [italics original]). 
Having differentiated between ground (=which in God himself is not He Himself) and 
existence (=which is God in an absolute sense) we can now establish a dynamic relationship 
between God and his creation, a relationship by which the immanence in God and human 
freedom can be reconciled without thereby abolishing the independence of the latter. 

Arriving at this elaboration, we have finally reached the point at which the realiza- 
tion of Schelling’s demand to make “freedom the one and all of philosophy” 
(Schelling 2006, p. 22) seems fulfilled: freedom for both — God and human, granting us 
an independent and, therefore, free life but still placing us in the very center of God’s 
being. But this path — winding through the substantiating evidence of this demand that 
man is free like God and yet grounded in him — is one Schelling could ultimately walk 
with Spinoza no longer but is one that, most importantly, he would not have been able 
to walk this far without him. 


Acknowledgments 


I am indebted to Clare Carlisle, Luce de Lire, Yitzhak Melamed, Dominik Perler, José Maria 
Sanchez de Léon Serrano, Stephan Schmid and Jason Yonover for the very fruitful 
discussion of this chapter. Additionally, I would like to thank Troy Tower for his invaluable 
help in editing it. 


References 


Della Rocca, M. (2002). Spinoza’s Substance monism. In: Spinoza: Metaphysical Themes 
(ed. O. Koistinen and J.I. Biro), 11-34. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Della Rocca, M. (2008). Spinoza. London: Routledge. 

Forster, E. (1995). “To lend wings to physics once again”: Holderlin and the “Oldest system- 
programme of German idealism.” European Journal of Philosophy 3 (2): 174-200. 

Jacobi, EH. (2000). Uber die Lehre des Spinoza in Briefen an den Herrn Moses Mendelssohn. Hamburg: 
Meiner. 

Kant, I. (1998). Critique of Pure Reason (ed. and trans. P. Guyer and A. Wood). Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 

Melamed, Y.Y. (2010). Acosmism or weak individuals? Hegel, Spinoza, and the reality of the finite. 
Journal of the History of Philosophy 48 (1): 77-92. 

Schelling, RWJ. (1856ff.). Sdmmtliche Werke (ed. K.E.A. Schelling), 14 vols. Stuttgart-Augsburg: 
J.G. Cotta’scher Verlag. 


546 


SCHELLING WITH SPINOZA ON FREEDOM 


Schelling, E WJ. (2006). Philosophical Investigations into the Essence of Human Freedom (ed. and trans. 
J. Love and J. Schmidt). Albany, NY: SUNY Press. 

Snow, D.E. (2000). The Evolution of Schelling’s Concept of Freedom. In: Schelling zwischen Fichte und 
Hegel (ed. C. Asmuth, A. Denker, and M. Vater), 317-332. Amsterdam: B.R. Grtiner. 

Spinoza, B. (2003). Complete Works (ed. M.L. Morgan trans. S. Shirley). Indianapolis: Hackett. 

Zizek, S. (1996). The Indivisible Remainder. On Schelling and Related Matters. London: Verso. 


547 


51 


Hegel on Spinozism and the Beginning 
of Philosophy 


JOSE MARIA SANCHEZ DE LEON SERRANO 


Hegel’s main criticisms of Spinoza are well-known both among Spinoza and Hegel scholars. 
Among other things, Hegel famously criticizes Spinoza for dissolving all finite beings in an 
undifferentiated oneness, for not providing a proper deduction of central notions such as 
attribute and mode, and in general for the rigidity and lack of dynamism of his monism. 
The scholarly reactions to these charges range from acclaim (Fleischmann 1964) to out- 
right rejection (Gueroult 1968; Maxwell 2012), including moderate criticism 
(Parkinson 1977; Macherey 1979, 1991; Harris 1995; Melamed 2012) and qualified 
sympathy (Shmueli 1970; Lucas 1974; Diising 1991). Today there is general agreement 
that Hegel misconstrues Spinoza’s thought in many respects, but also that his critique is a 
powerful one and deserves careful attention. As of recently, a renewed interest in Hegel’s 
critical reading of Spinoza is taking place in the English-speaking world, partly due to a 
revival of the idealistic interpretation of Spinoza’s monism (Newlands 2011; Della 
Rocca 2012). 

Characteristic of Hegel’s critique of Spinoza is also the significant recognition that 
accompanies it, and this will be the focus of this chapter. For Hegel, “thinking, or the spirit, 
has to have placed itself at the standpoint of Spinozism” (V 9, 104). At first glance, and in 
view of Hegel’s general conception of the history of philosophy, there is nothing surprising 
about this appreciation. For Hegel, the latest philosophical system contains all the previous 
ones, just as an adult person contains the former stages of her development (childhood, 
youth, etc.). Therefore, no significant philosophy can be rejected as absolutely false, insofar 
as it constitutes a necessary stage in the formation of the fully-developed philosophy 
(which, presumably, is Hegelianism itself). In like manner, no significant philosophy can be 
considered absolutely true, insofar as it merely constitutes a particular link among others 
in the entire chain of philosophical thought, which alone is absolutely true. Considered as 
one particular standpoint among others, Spinozism partakes of the whole truth, just as 
Platonism and Kantianism do, and hence Hegel’s recognition. 

Upon closer examination, however, the role of Spinozism in Hegel’s conception of phi- 
losophy turns out to be significantly more crucial than the rest of philosophies. According 
to Hegel, Spinoza’s philosophical view constitutes “the foundation (Grundlage) of every 
true view” (V 9, p. 105). Spinoza’s substance is, furthermore, “the absolute foundation 


A Companion to Spinoza, First Edition. Edited by Yitzhak Y. Melamed. 
© 2021 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2021 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd. 


548 


HEGEL ON SPINOZISM 


of spirit” (V 9, p. 105). In Michelet’s reconstruction of Hegel’s lectures on the history of 
philosophy, we find that “the standpoint of Spinozism [. . .| is the essential beginning of 
all philosophizing” as well as “the liberation of the spirit” (TWA 20, p. 165). Despite their 
vagueness, these statements distinctly indicate that Spinozism constitutes for Hegel the 
very entry point to philosophy and the “condition of possibility” (Vaysse 1994) of its 
exercise. In what follows, I intend to spell out the foundational role that Spinozism plays 
in Hegel’s conception of philosophy. In particular, I argue that Spinoza’s acosmism — i.e. 
the negation of the world understood as the aggregate of finite things — constitutes for 
Hegel the necessary condition for the rise and development of philosophy, and hence for 
the realization of human freedom, insofar as philosophy is the highest form of human 
freedom (Section 1). Against this backdrop, I will contend that the main target of Hegel’s 
criticism of Spinoza is not acosmism — which he praises — but rather the deficient con- 
nection between the one infinite substance and its finite modes (Section 2). I will sub- 
stantiate this claim by drawing upon Hegel’s Science of Logic and the “refutation” of 
Spinozism that he carries out at the end of the Doctrine of Essence (Section 3). 


1. Hegel’s Conception of Philosophy and its Development 


Let us start by outlining the general conception of philosophy behind Hegel’s statement that 
Spinozism constitutes “the essential beginning of all philosophizing.” For this purpose, I rely on 
Hegel’s introduction to his Encyclopedia (GW 20), as well as on the various introductions to his 
Lectures on the History of Philosophy (V 6) and on his Lectures on the Philosophy of Religion (V 3). 

Broadly speaking, philosophy for Hegel can be properly described as a “thinking 
consideration of objects” (GW 20, §2). This characterization is of course extremely vague, 
the reason for it being that philosophy, in contrast to the rest of disciplines, does not have a 
specific given object or area of inquiry. Philosophy is not concerned with a pre-determined 
realm of reality, but with the absolute truth or the truth of everything. The proper subject 
matter of philosophy is, thus, nothing but God, understood as the ultimate truth of 
everything (GW 20, §1), or the source “from which everything comes out and to which 
everything returns” (V 3, p. 267). The point of this preliminary characterization is not to 
convey a specific notion of the divine, but rather the idea that philosophy is primarily 
concerned with making sense of reality as a whole and rendering it transparent to the mind. 

Insofar as the goal of philosophy is to make reality as a whole (not a specific domain) 
transparent to the mind, the philosophical inquiry seeks above all to remove from thinking 
all that is obscure, opaque, mysterious, in a word, foreign to thinking itself. Philosophy trans- 
lates the given reality into thoughts and concepts, and, by doing that, it appropriates reality 
and eliminates its otherness with respect to the human mind (GW 20, §11 and §12; V 6, 
pp. 87-88). The absolute telos of philosophy is, thus, to take full possession of reality, to 
such an extent that the human mind is — by the end of the process of appropriation — no 
longer determined or conditioned by something foreign to the mind itself. In this respect, 
the ultimate goal of philosophy is nothing but freedom, understood as the lack of external 
constraints (V 6, pp. 87-88). Hegel sometimes designates this lack of external limitation 
with the expression “Beisichsein” (being at home with oneself). Accordingly, the human 
mind attains in philosophy its proper selfhood; it finds its own self, as it were. For this reason, 
Hegel also equates philosophy with self-knowledge (V 6, p. 30). We can therefore say that 
knowledge of God (or the absolute truth), knowledge of the whole of reality and self- 
knowledge ultimately coincide in Hegel’s conception of philosophy. 


549 


JOSE MARIA SANCHEZ DE LEON SERRANO 


Yet the philosophical demand of removing all otherness poses a serious problem 
regarding the starting point of philosophy. If philosophy has to translate the given reality 
into thoughts and thus make it intelligible, then it cannot admit anything as true without a 
proof that renders it intelligible. To prove something means to show how it derives or results 
from something else (V 3, p. 265). Now, a starting point is by definition that which does not 
result from something else and, hence, does not admit a proof. The question of the beginning 
poses a serious challenge for philosophy because philosophy, insofar as it is not concerned 
with a pre-given object, cannot rest upon something not generated or produced by thinking 
itself. Otherwise, philosophical thinking could never reach its goal of full self-determination, 
for its very basis would be externally determined. Hegel admits that philosophy begins with 
experience, but the role of experience can only be that of a stimulus to thought rather than 
that of a foundation proper (GW 20, §12). In order for philosophy to translate reality into 
thought successfully, it has to reject as a foundation everything that is pre-given or external 
to our thinking. The task of intellectually appropriating reality is then the task of recon- 
structing the universe in thoughts taking as a basis the mental itself. Philosophy re-creates 
the universe ex nihilo, where ex nihilo stands for “out of thinking itself” (GW 20, §17, §12). 

By “thinking” Hegel does not mean a specific concept or idea, for that would presuppose 
a pre-given mental configuration not validated by the mind. He also does not mean “the 
soul” or “the self,” insofar as such notions already have a specific content distinct from 
others. Thinking is not this or that thought, but thinking simply, absolutely, without any 
qualification or condition. Taken in this sense, thinking has no particular content whatso- 
ever: it is complete indeterminacy. Why should we call it “thinking” then? Why not the One, 
nothingness, or pure Being? The name for Hegel is not the issue. Rather, his point is that 
only by virtue of our thinking can we detach ourselves from given things, negate them and 
attain the sort of emptiness that characterizes an absolute beginning (V 3, pp. 270-271; 
GW 20, §12). This indeterminacy exists only in and for thinking, for only thinking can 
question the totality of given things (GW 20, §12; V 6, p. 92). 

Insofar as thinking taken in itself has no particular content, we can fittingly describe it 
as pure universality. Thinking in the just described sense is beyond all particularity and fini- 
tude; as Hegel puts it, it is “the abolition of all barriers” (V 3, p. 271). This is why the 
philosophical task of appropriating reality must necessarily begin with this indeterminate 
universality, for only such universality can encompass reality as a whole. In order to be phil- 
osophically “valid” or “proven,” all particular concepts and notions must logically derive 
from this primordial universality. How exactly this “derivation” or “genesis” of particular 
contents from pure thinking takes place according to Hegel is not our concern here. What 
I want to emphasize is that the philosophical grasp of reality must for Hegel necessarily 
originate from this primordial indeterminacy, for otherwise — as already observed — 
thinking would be externally determined and dependent on something else (V 6, p. 89). 

Yet just as it is necessary for philosophy to begin with pure thinking (i.e. universality), it is 
equally necessary for philosophical thinking not to remain in its own indeterminate sphere 
and to move towards the grasp of particular contents. Otherwise, the world and its diversity 
would remain foreign to thinking and philosophy would fail to effectively appropriate reality. 
Hegel vigorously rejects the view of philosophy as an escape from reality that takes refuge in 
the ether of pure speculation. Again, the details of the transition from pure thinking to par- 
ticularity and diversity need not to concern us here. The important thing is that this transition 
cannot feature any arbitrary leaps or gaps and that the diversity of contents must derive with 
logical necessity from pure thinking. The outcome of this process — which Hegel fittingly 
describes as Entwicklung or development (GW 20, §12; V 6, p. 145)—is the perfect unification 


550 


HEGEL ON SPINOZISM 


of the universality and simplicity of pure thinking with the variety and richness of reality 
(which is the variety and richness of thinking itself). For this reason, Hegel constantly stresses 
that philosophical thinking is by no means abstract, but utterly concrete. 

We can thus give a more specific meaning to the aforementioned “freedom” that 
constitutes the telos of philosophy. Recall that freedom means for Hegel lack of external 
determinations, so that, once all externality and otherness vanish, the mind only relates to 
itself. Yet we have also seen that, in order to achieve such a goal, philosophical thinking 
must necessarily abandon its sphere of pure simplicity and delve into particular contents. 
The failure to do so would condemn thought to remain externally determined. Actual 
freedom does not consist in being at home with oneself separated from the rest of things, 
but in being at home with oneself in otherness. True freedom is attained when the other of 
pure thinking — i.e. particularity, difference, finitude — ceases to be external to thinking and 
becomes integrated with it. In this respect, we can say that the freedom that constitutes the 
telos of philosophy consists in a coincidence of opposites (V 6, p. 151), namely: the coinci- 
dence of the universal and the particular, the unlimited and the limited, identity and 
difference. I will return to this idea in the final section. 


2. Spinoza’s Acosmism as the Basis of Philosophy 


It is against the just outlined background that I would like to situate Hegel’s engagement 
with Spinoza’s thought. As already observed, Hegel’s well-known criticisms of Spinoza go 
hand in hand with a significant recognition: Spinozism constitutes for Hegel “the essential 
beginning of all philosophizing” and “the liberation of the Spirit and its absolute 
foundation.” We are now in a position to make full sense of these statements. 

Spinoza’s basic insight is, according to Hegel, a very simple one: it consists in affirming the 
existence of one infinite substance and in denying finite things any ontological self-sufficiency 
outside of this one substance, which Spinoza identifies with God. Insofar as Spinoza de- 
substantializes finite things in favor of God, the charge of atheism usually voiced against his 
philosophy is misguided. Atheism is exactly the opposite of Spinoza’s position: it affirms the 
irreducibility of finite things to something more fundamental, whereas Spinoza affirms their 
reducibility to a primordial oneness. In this respect, as Hegel observes, it is more appropriate to 
describe Spinozism as an acosmism or negation of the world, understanding “world” as “finite 
reality” (V 9, p. 111). It must be noted that the reading of Spinozism as an acosmism is not 
original of Hegel. Before him, Salomon Maimon (who presumably coined the term “acos- 
mism”), Ernst Platner, and, to a certain extent, Christian Wolff, already held that Spinoza 
denies the existence of the world in favor of the sole existence of God (Turr6 2015, pp. 159- 
162). The originality of Hegel’s reading consists rather, as 1am about to show, in the way it 
incorporates Spinoza’s acosmism into his own philosophy. 

In Hegel’s view, the greatness of Spinozism lies precisely in the radical de-substantializa- 
tion of finite things that it carries out, i.e. in its acosmism. In his Lectures on the History of 
Philosophy, Hegel affirms: “the great merit of the Spinozist way of thinking in philosophy is 
its renunciation of everything determinate and particular, and its orientation solely to the 
One — heeding and honoring only the One, acknowledging it alone. This view must be the 
foundation of every true view” (V 9, p. 105). Moreover, Hegel declares that “Spinoza’s sub- 
stance is the universal,” which in turn is “the absolute foundation of spirit” (V 9, p. 104). 
Let us connect these statements with our reflections in the previous section. Recall that the 
starting point of philosophy is for Hegel nothing but pure thinking. Recall, furthermore, 


551 


JOSE MARIA SANCHEZ DE LEON SERRANO 


that pure thinking is tantamount to an indeterminate universality, in which all particu- 
larity dissolves and thinking is alone with itself. If Hegel identifies this universality with 
thinking simpliciter, it is because thinking alone can detach us from finite things and elevate 
us to this sphere of pure identity and homogeneity, which exists only in and for thinking (V 
3, p. 271). Now, the acosmism that Hegel — rightly or not — attributes to Spinozism desig- 
nates precisely the dissolution of finite things that constitutes for him the basis and starting 
point of philosophy. With his acosmism, Spinoza has liberated the mind from its attachment 
to finite things and elevated it to its proper element (i.e. pure universality), from which alone 
it can carry out the intellectual appropriation of reality. This is the sense of Hegel’s state- 
ment, according to which Spinozism constitutes “the liberation of the Spirit and its absolute 
foundation.” Spinoza’s acosmism, thus, clears the ground for the free exercise and unfold- 
ing of philosophical thinking. Consequently, and in virtue of Hegel’s identification of phi- 
losophy and freedom, acosmism is the actual basis or substrate of freedom. True freedom 
pre-supposes and demands the dissolution of the world. In order for the mind to become 
fully autonomous and self-determined, the world must perish. 

The just described account raises the following question: if acosmism is the very prereq- 
uisite for the exercise of philosophy, why did its proper formulation take place so late in the 
history of philosophy? Should it not have been the first philosophical doctrine of all? 
Actually, Hegel construes Spinoza’s acosmism as the late reappearance of an “Oriental 
intuition” (TWA 20, p. 163; GW 11, p. 378). In the daybreak of philosophical thought, 
Indian philosophy had already declared all finite things null and perishable, as Eleatism 
will do it later on (V 6, p. 396). Yet Indian philosophy envisions this general dissolution of 
the world as a goal to be attained, as an aspiration rather than as a starting point, and here 
lies its limitation (V 6, p. 397). Regarding Spinoza, the fact that his main insight goes back 
to times immemorial does not prevent him from being genuinely “Modern” (Vaysse 1994, 
pp. 243-244). If Hegel represents — in his own view — the fulfillment of Western philos- 
ophy, Spinoza is perhaps the closest to this culmination (Fleischmann 1964, p. 3). This 
explains why — as I will show in the next section — the effective “overcoming” of Spinozism 
already results for Hegel in the attainment of the telos of philosophy, i.e. freedom. 

Let us now examine the main flaw of Spinozism according to Hegel. Hegel’s criticisms of 
Spinoza are numerous and not easily subsumable under one heading. However, the just 
described notion of acosmism as the basis of philosophy provides a valuable clue about 
Hegel’s actual target. As already observed, the negation of the world and the mind’s 
ascension to pure universality are for Hegel necessary conditions for the development of 
philosophy and for the attainment of its telos, ie. freedom. At the same time, it is equally 
necessary for the philosophical inquiry not to remain in this world-negation and to embrace 
the other of pure universality, i.e. particularity, finitude, difference, etc. Now, for Hegel, the 
main shortcoming of Spinozism consists precisely in the failure to accomplish this second 
task. Although Spinoza has fittingly formulated the starting point of philosophy (i.e. pure 
universality), he has not managed to articulate the unity of universality with its other. In 
other words, he has not managed to carry out the coincidence of opposites that constitutes 
the telos of philosophy. To make this clear, consider the following passage from Hegel’s 
Science of Logic, where Hegel construes Spinozism as a sort of emanationism: 


In a similar manner, the absolute is in the oriental representation of emanation the self-illumi- 
nating light. Yet it does not just illuminate itself; it also pours out. Its outpourings 
(Ausstrémungen) are distancings (Entfernungen) from its unclouded clarity; the subsequent 
outgrowths are less perfect than the preceding ones, from which they arise. The outpouring 


552 


HEGEL ON SPINOZISM 


(das Ausstrémen) is taken only as a happening, becoming only as a progressive loss. Being thus 
becomes more and more obscured, and the night, the negative, is the final term of the line, 
which does not revert back to the original light. (GW 11, p. 378) 


Observe that Hegel does not criticize Spinoza here for reducing everything to an undifferenti- 
ated oneness, i.e. for his acosmism. On the contrary, it is characteristic of “the self-illuminating 
light” — which here stands for Spinoza’s one substance — that it “also pours out” or emanates, 
i.e. it generates its other, the opposite of pure light (in the case of Spinoza, finite modes). The 
actual problem with this conception is rather that the other “does not revert back to the 
original light,” so that the two extremes of the emanative procession ultimately remain apart 
(see Sanchez de Leon and Shein 2019, pp. 26-27). Using Spinoza’s terminology, we can say 
that, although everything is contained in the divine substance (E1p15, G II/56), the gap bet- 
ween substance and modes remains unbridged, insofar as the former is conceivable without 
the later (E1p5d, G II/48). Put differently: even if Spinoza envisions the one substance and its 
finite modes as constituting an indissoluble unity, he fails to articulate this unity, and therefore 
he remains caught in an unresolved dualism. This might not be a problem for Spinoza (or a 
Spinozist), but it is a problem for Hegel, given his conception of the goal of philosophy as a 
coincidence of opposites. Recall that the outcome of philosophy is for Hegel a consummate 
totality, in which pure thinking is at home with itself in its other, and hence free. The hiatus in 
Spinoza between natura naturans and natura naturata — reflected in the fact that the former is 
conceivable without the latter — indicates for Hegel that philosophy in Spinozism has not 
attained its goal yet. This last point will become clearer in the next section. 

The claim that Spinozism is for Hegel caught in an unresolved duality finds a further and 
decisive confirmation in Hegel’s Science of Logic, where Hegel critically examines the main cat- 
egories of traditional metaphysics (see Moyar 2012; Hindrichs 201 2; Sanchez de Leon 2013). 
Hegel carries out his own “refutation” of Spinozism towards the end of the first part (Objective 
Logic), in the transition from the Doctrine of Essence to the Doctrine of Concept. The defining 
feature of the set of concepts that Hegel examines in the Doctrine of Essence is that they all are 
pairs of opposites, in which one member of the pair produces, generates, or grounds the other. 
Examples of such pairs include, among others, essence-appearance, force-externalization, 
substance-accident, cause-effect, and the like. Spinoza’s distinction between substance and 
modes also belongs to this group. All these conceptual pairs feature the same defect that Hegel 
observes in Spinozism, namely: although they all express an essential (i.e. not accidental) con- 
nection between opposites, the opposites remain nonetheless distinct, and therefore they fail 
to constitute a true unity. For this reason, the “overcoming” for Hegel of this way of thinking — 
i.e. in terms of “badly” unified opposites — is tantamount to “overcoming” Spinozism alto- 
gether. At the same time, the “overcoming” of Spinozism results in the attainment of the telos 
of philosophy — i.e. freedom. I show this in more detail in the next and final section. 


3. Hegel’s “Refutation” of Spinozism: The Transition 
from Necessity to Freedom 


It is generally admitted (Fleischmann 1964; Lucas 1974; Moyar 2012) that Spinozism 
constitutes the main target of Hegel’s critical analysis in the third section of his Doctrine of 
Essence (Actuality; GW 11, pp. 369-409). As already observed, Spinozism remains for 
Hegel imprisoned in an unresolved dualism, the same kind of dualism that characterizes 
the conceptual pairs examined in the Doctrine of Essence. At the same time, Spinozism 


553 


JOSE MARIA SANCHEZ DE LEON SERRANO 


represents for Hegel the most accomplished effort (before Hegel himself) to surpass all dual- 
isms and to conceive reality in terms of an all-encompassing unity (Fleischmann 1964, 
p. 6). This explains why the “overcoming” of Spinozism that Hegel carries out in the end of 
the Doctrine of Essence immediately results in the attainment of the telos of philosophy, ie. 
freedom. In this last section, I intend to elucidate how exactly this “overcoming” of 
Spinozism comes about and leads to the idea of freedom. 

Insofar as the goal of philosophy is to attain a perfect coincidentia oppositorum, the main 
problem posed by the conceptual pairs examined in the Doctrine of Essence (and, by extension, 
by Spinozism) is this: although they all express a necessary connection between opposite deter- 
minations, the opposites remain apart (and hence unrelated). In this respect, these conceptual 
pairs do not fulfill the perfect oneness for which philosophy strives. In Spinoza’s terms we can 
say: even if the infinite substance and its finite modes constitute a unitary whole, they are still 
spheres apart, for substance is prior to its modes and can be conceived independently of them 
(Elp5d, G II/48). The independence of substance with respect to modes is incompatible with 
their being necessarily linked. Hegel construes this gap as an indicator that the conceptual pairs 
of the Doctrine of Essence (and, by extension, Spinozism itself) still contain something opaque, 
obscure, external to thinking (GW 12, p. 16). If Spinoza had thought the relationship between 
substance and modes through to the end, he would not have admitted their irreducible duality. 
For a philosophy that intends to penetrate the whole of reality and render it transparent — as 
Hegel’s philosophy does -, there can be no gaps or irreducible dualities. 

The crux of the matter lies, for Hegel, in the very notion of necessity (GW 12, p. 15). 
Necessity expresses an essential connection between two contents (as opposed to an acci- 
dental or contingent one), which nevertheless remain distinct. Such is the connection bet- 
ween substance and modes in Spinoza. Insofar as they remain distinct (and hence external 
to one another), their connection is deficient. Put differently: if they were truly connected, 
they would not be external to one another, and therefore they would coincide. Since the 
coincidence of opposites is for Hegel the necessary outcome of a thinking that penetrates 
everything, the deficiency intrinsic to the notion of necessity can only be surmounted by 
subjecting this notion to a careful scrutiny, i.e. by thinking it. For this reason, Hegel insists 
that his own refutation of Spinozism is the only possible one, insofar as at consists in 
thinking Spinozism through and bringing it to its logical completion (GW 12, pp. 14-15). 

The concept that enables Hegel to penetrate the notion of necessity (and thus to over- 
come it), is that of Wechselwirkung or reciprocal action. Wechselwirkung expresses a connec- 
tion between opposite determinations (cause and effect), in which the opposites exchange 
their roles: the cause is at the same time effect and the effect is cause. In contrast to the 
previous conceptual pairs of the Doctrine of Essence, there is no priority here of one member 
of the relationship over the other, the link of dependence is mutual and symmetrical. The 
concept of reciprocal action, thus, sets the ground for the elimination of the otherness and 
externality that affects the categories of the Doctrine of Essence. Now, in order to eliminate 
this rest of otherness effectively, we must suppress the assumption that the reciprocal 
action takes place between things or substances independent of one another (GW 12, 
pp. 13-14). A mutual interaction between self-sufficient things that are independent of 
one another is no true interaction. The result of the removal of this reifying assumption is 
the idea of a nexus universalis, i.e. of a systematic totality where everything is dependent on 
everything else and nothing has priority over the rest. In this pervasive interconnected- 
ness, there are no gaps, no bifurcations, no externalities; everything is transparent, pre- 
cisely because everything is interrelated. Hegel calls this systematic totality, with good 
reason, “concept” (Begriff), for, once all otherness and opacity have disappeared, thinking 


554 


HEGEL ON SPINOZISM 


is finally at home with itself (GW 12, pp. 15-16). We can understand now why Hegel’s 
“overcoming” of Spinozism — through the “overcoming” of the notion of necessity — 
immediately results in the attainment of the telos of philosophy, i.e. freedom (although the 
Doctrine of Concept contains further conceptual developments). Freedom thus turns out to 
be, not the rigid antithesis of necessity, but — as Hegel puts it — the “unveiling” (Enthiillung) 
of necessity (GW 20, §157; GW pp. 11, 409; see Arndt 2012 regarding this notion). 

At this point, one could justifiably ask what is the actual difference between the indeter- 
minate universality that constitutes the starting point of philosophy — i.e. acosmism — and 
the all-encompassing unity that constitutes its goal—i.e. the concept. Hegel would presum- 
ably answer that the concept is not above or beyond the finite and particular, but identical 
with it. In contrast to the indeterminate universality of the beginning, the concept is omni- 
modo determinatus, i.e. simultaneously universal and singular. Hegel sees in this coinci- 
dence of opposites the defining feature of what philosophy traditionally calls the “subject” 
or the “I.” A subject is a finite being with the capacity to transcend its own limitation and 
contemplate things from a universal standpoint, without thereby disappearing as a finite 
being (GW 12, p. 17; V 6, p. 93 ff.). This capacity of transcending the world while remain- 
ing in it implies that the infinite and the finite are no longer separate, by contrast to 
Spinozism. Thus, we can probably summarize Hegel’s attempt to “overcome” Spinozism as 
the attempt to equate Spinoza’s one infinite substance with the finite human mind. 


References 


Arndt, A. (2012). “Enthtillung der Substanz.” Hegels Begriff und Spinozas dritte Erkenntnisart. In: 
Affektenlehre und amor Die intellectualis (ed. V.L. Waibel), 23 1-242. Hamburg: Felix Meiner. 

Della Rocca, M. (2012). Rationalism, idealism, monism, and beyond. In: Spinoza and German Idealism 
(ed. E. Forster and Y.Y. Melamed), 7-26 Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Diising, K. (1991). Von der Substanz zum Subjekt: Hegels spekulative Spinoza-Deutung. In: Spinoza 
und der deutsche Idealismus (ed. M. Walther), 163—180. Wiirzburg: K6nigshausen und Neumann. 

Fleischmann, E. (1964). Die Wirklichkeit in Hegels Logik: Ideengeschichtliche Beziehungen zu 
Spinoza. Zeitschrift ftir philosophische Forschung 18: 3-29. 

Gueroult, M. (1968). Spinoza — Dieu (Ethique I). Paris: Aubier. 

Harris, E.E. (1995). The concept of substance in Spinoza and Hegel. In: The Substance of Spinoza, 
200-214. Atlantic Highlands, NJ: The Humanities Press. 

Hegel, G.W.F. (1978). Wissenschaft der Logik. Erster Band. Die objektive Logik (1812/13) (ed. 
F. Hogemann and W. Jaeschke). In: Gesammelte Werke, vol. 11. [GW 11] 

Hegel, G.W.E. (1981). Wissenschaft der Logik. Zweiter Band. Die subjektive Logik (1816) (ed. 
FE. Hogemann and W. Jaeschke). In: Gesammelte Werke, vol. 12. [GW 12] 

Hegel, G.W.E. (1968-2014). Gesammelte Werke (ed. Academy of Sciences of Nordrhein-Westfalen, in 
cooperation with the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft). Hamburg: Felix Meiner. [GW] 

Hegel, G.W.E. (1969-71). Werke in zwanzig Banden (ed. E. Moldenhauer and K.M. Michel on the basis 
of the 1832-1845 edition). Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp. [TWA] 

Hegel, G.W.E. (1983-). Vorlesungen. Ausgewdhlte Nachschriften und Manuskripte. Hamburg: Felix 
Meiner. [V] 

Hegel, G.W.E. (1983). Vorlesungen tiber die Philosophie der Religion I: Einleitung in die Philosophie der 
Religion. Der Begriff der Religion (ed. W. Jaeschke). Hamburg: Felix Meiner. [V 3] 

Hegel, G.W.F. (1986a). Vorlesungen tiber die Geschichte der Philosophie IV: Philosophie des Mittelalters 
und der neueren Zeit (ed. P. Garniron and W. Jaeschke). Hamburg: Felix Meiner. [V 9] 

Hegel, G.W.E. (1986b). Vorlesungen tiber die Geschichte der Philosophie II. In: Werke in zwanzig 
Banden, vol. 20 [TWA 20] 


555 


JOSE MARIA SANCHEZ DE LEON SERRANO 


Hegel, G.W.F. (1994). Vorlesungen tiber die Geschichte der Philosophie I: Einleitung in die Geschichte der 
Philosophie. Orientalische Philosophie (ed. P. Garniron and W. Jaeschke). Hamburg: Felix Meiner. 
[V 6] 

Hegel, G.W.E. (1992). Enzyklopadie der philosophischen Wissenschaften im Grundrisse (1830) (ed. 
W. Bonsiepen and H.C. Lucas). In: Gesammelte Werke, vol. 20. [GW 20] 

Hindrichs, G. (2012). Two models of metaphysical inferentialism: Spinoza and Hegel. In: Spinoza and 
German Idealism (in E. Forster and Y.Y. Melamed), 214-232. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Lucas, H.-C. (1974). Wirklichkeit und Methode in der Philosophie Hegels. Untersuchungen zur Logik. 
Der Einfluf$ Spinozas. Dissertation. University of Cologne. 

Macherey, P. (1979). Hegel ou Spinoza. Paris: Maspero. Second edition 1990 Paris: La Découverte. 

Macherey, P. (1991). Le Spinoza idéaliste de Hegel. In: Spinoza und der deutsche Idealismus (ed. 

M. Walther), 145-161. Wiirzburg: K6nigshausen und Neumann. 

Maxwell, V. (2012). Hegel’s treatment of Spinoza: its scope and its limits. In: Between Hegel and 

Spinoza: A Volume of Critical Essays (ed. H. Sharp and J. Smith), 98-117. New York: Continuum. 

Melamed, Y.Y. (2012). “Omnis determinatio est negatio”: determination, negation, and self-negation 

in Spinoza, Kant, and Hegel. In: Spinoza and German Idealism (ed. E. Forster and Y.Y. Melmed), 175- 

196. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Moyar, D. (2012). Thought and metaphysics: Hegel’s critical reception of Spinoza. In: Spinoza and 

German Idealism (ed. E. Forster and Y.Y. Melamed), 197-213. Cambridge: Cambridge University 

Press. 

Newlands, S. (2011). Hegel’s idealist reading of Spinoza. Philosophy Compass 6 (2): 100-108. 

Parkinson, G.R.H. (1977). Hegel, Pantheism, and Spinoza. Journal of the History of Ideas 38: 
449-459. 

Sanchez de Leon Serrano, J.M. (2013). Zeichen und Subjekt im logischen Diskurs Hegels, Hegel-Studien, 
Beiheft 60. Hamburg: Felix Meiner. 

Sanchez de Leon Serrano, J.M. and Shein, N. (2019). The coincidence of the finite and the infinite in 
Spinoza and Hegel. Idealistic Studies 49 (1): 23-44. 

Shmueli, E. (1970). Hegel’s interpretation of Spinoza’s concept of substance. International Journal for 
Philosophy of Religion 1: 176-191. 

Turrd, S. (2015). ¢Qué tipo de entidades son necesarias para hacer del mundo un mundo? 
(A proposito de Enciclopedia § 50). Studia Hegeliana 1: 155-181. 

Vaysse, J.-M. (1994). Totalité et subjectivité. Spinoza dans l’idéalisme allemande. Paris: Vrin. 


Further Reading 


Bowman, B. (2018). Autonomy, negativity, and the challenge of Spinozism in Hegel’s Science of 
Logic. Journal of the History of Philosophy 56 (1): 101-126. 

Cramer, K. (1977). Kritische Betrachtungen tiber einige Formen der Spinoza-Interpretation. 
Zeitschrift ftir philosophische Forschung 31: 527-544. 

Cramer, K. (1978). Eine kritische Bemerkung zu Hegels Spinoza-Interpretation. In: Lo Spinozismo ieri 
e oggi. Archivio di Filosofia (ed. M. M. Olivetti), 259-265. Padova: Cedam. 

Diising, K. (1983). Hegel und die Geschichte der Philosophie: Ontologie und Dialektik in Antike und Neuzeit. 
Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft. 

Lucas, H.-C. (1982). Spinoza in Hegels Logik. Leiden: Brill. 

Sandkaulen, B. (2007). Die Ontologie der Substanz, der Begriff der Subjektivitaét und die Faktizitat 
des Einzelnen: Hegels reflexionslogische “Widerlegung” der Spinozanischen Metaphysik. 
Internationales Jahrbuch des deutschen Idealismus 5: 235-275. 

Shmueli, E. (1972). Some similarities between Spinoza and Hegel on substance. The Thomist 36: 
645-657. 

Yovel, Y. (1989). Spinoza and Hegel: substance or spirit? In: Spinoza and Other Heretics (Vol. II, ch. 2), 
27-50. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 


556 


52 


Schopenhauer’s Critique of Spinoza’s 
Pantheism, Optimism, and Egoism 


MOR SEGEV 


Schopenhauer, by his own admission, shares with Spinoza the basic idea that “the world 
exists [...] by its own inner power and through itself” (Schopenhauer 1969 vol. 2, p. 644; 
WWR ILL). However, Schopenhauer also criticizes Spinoza’s way of developing this basic 
thought, as follows. By positing a pantheistic God, which “fill[s] the entire possibility of all 
being,” Spinoza’s system inevitably leads to optimism (Ibid.). This view is doubly problem- 
atic, as Judaism is, in Schopenhauer’s view. First, since the world is evidently full of 
suffering, optimism faces the problem of evil, and cannot successfully respond to it. Second, 
by promoting the adherence to individual life as an ideal, optimism leads to egoism, which 
in turn promotes cruelty. 


1. Pantheistic and Monotheistic Optimism 


In the very last chapter of The World as Will and Representation (II.L), titled “Epiphilosophy,” 
Schopenhauer presents an overview of the significance of his philosophical project, as well 
as its limitations. He states that philosophy, be it his or anyone else’s, cannot achieve “a 
perfect understanding of the existence, inner nature, and origin of the world” 
(Schopenhauer 1969 vol. 2, p. 642; WWR ILL). Instead, philosophy, practiced properly, 
“sticks to the actual facts of outward and inward experience as they are accessible to 
everyone, and shows their true and deepest connexion, yet without really going beyond 
them to any extramundane things, and the relations of these to the world” 
(Schopenhauer 1969 vol. 2, p. 640; WWRII.L). Though we may not gain perfect knowledge 
of the inner nature of the world, we nevertheless may learn quite a lot, in Schopenhauer’s 
view. By analyzing phenomena available for one to experience, and especially oneself (as 
the phenomenon most readily available for one to experience and examine), one may gain 
a “key to the inner nature of the world,” and come to understand the way in which all phe- 
nomena relate to this inner nature, namely, as manifestations or representations of it 
(Schopenhauer 1969 vol. 2, p. 642; WWR ILI.L). Schopenhauer takes himself to be the first 
to have adequately identified this metaphysical substratum underlying all objects of expe- 
rience. He acknowledges, however, that others before him have already attended to the 


A Companion to Spinoza, First Edition. Edited by Yitzhak Y. Melamed. 
© 2021 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2021 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd. 


557 


MOR SEGEV 


more basic, and crucial, idea that “the inner essence in all things is absolutely one and the 
same” (Ibid.). Schopenhauer attributes the recognition of this truth to such thinkers as 
Parmenides, John Scotus Eriugena, Giordano Bruno, and Spinoza, who “had taught it in 
detail” by Schopenhauer’s time, in his estimation (Ibid.). 

Schopenhauer, then, credits Spinoza with recognizing and developing a fundamental 
philosophical truth. Spinoza’s system, Schopenhauer maintains, elaborately captures the 
observation, at the core of both pantheism and Schopenhauer’s own theory, that all experi- 
enced phenomena share a single metaphysical substratum, and that in this sense every- 
thing is one (Schopenhauer 1969 vol. 2, p. 643; WWR ILL). Indeed, the positive influence 
on Schopenhauer of Spinoza’s philosophy, as well as of his life, has been the subject of 
extensive discussion (Rappaport 1899, pp. 117-142; Brann 1972; Moreau 1995, pp. 423- 
425). However, Schopenhauer also thinks that Spinoza, like previous pantheists, makes a 
crucial error by identifying the true nature of the world with the Deity, and concluding that 
everything is God (Schopenhauer 1969 vol. 2, p. 643; WWR ILL). This move, Schopenhauer 
thinks, leads directly to “optimism,” i.e. to the view that the world, in all its parts and details, 
is perfect (Schopenhauer 1969 vol. 2, p. 644; WWR IL.L). As we shall see in the next sec- 
tions, Schopenhauer believes that systems of thought leading to this “optimism” are signif- 
icantly challenged by certain unfavorable theoretical and ethical consequences that follow 
from it. It is important at the outset, though, to see what Schopenhauer thinks Spinoza’s 
“optimism” amounts to, and in what way he takes his own view to deviate from it. 

Schopenhauer, both in WWR ILL and consistently throughout his writings, compares 
Spinoza’s optimistic worldview to that of Judaism, and that comparison sheds light on his 
overall interpretation of Spinoza. Schopenhauer regards Judaism as “the only purely 
monotheistic religion” teaching “a God creator as the origin of all things” 
(Schopenhauer 2001 vol. 1, p. 127; FHP §13). He contrasts this tradition with both 
Buddhism, which is entirely atheistic, and Brahmanism, as well as Phoenician, Greek, 
Roman, and North American religions, which posit divinities but no Creator God (Ibid.). 
For Schopenhauer, the word God necessarily indicates a “world-cause that is not only dif- 
ferent from the world, but is intelligent, that is to say, knows and wills, and so is personal 
and consequently also individual” (Ibid., p. 115). The God of Judaism, Schopenhauer 
thinks, certainly meets these criteria. Not only has He intentionally and intelligently cre- 
ated the world, but He also assesses His own creation as a good one, as is exemplified by the 
recurring statement in Genesis 1, following His deeds of creation: “And God saw that [it 
was] good” (orig: 210 °D OY N11). This “optimistic history of creation,” as Schopenhauer 
calls it (Schopenhauer 1969 vol. 2, p. 620; WWR IL.XLVIII), sets the tone for the rest of 
Jewish religion and culture as he sees it. Interestingly, he finds the most distinct pronounce- 
ment of this approach in Clement of Alexandria — a Church Father. In Stromata IIL3, 
Schopenhauer notes, Clement opposes the Marcionites for “having found fault with the 
creation” (Ibid., p. 621). For Clement, he continues, upon accepting the fact that God cre- 
ated the world “it is a priori certain that it is excellent, no matter what it looks like” (Ibid., 
p. 622). This attitude, Schopenhauer concludes, makes Clement “more of a Jew than a 
Christian” (Ibid.). Judaism, for Schopenhauer, is essentially optimistic. It is founded on the 
belief in a God responsible for the creation of an absolutely flawless world. 

Like Jewish monotheism, Schopenhauer thinks, “[p]antheism is essentially and neces- 
sarily optimism” (Schopenhauer 2001 vol. 1, p. 73; FHP §12). Spinoza’s God is different 
from that of Judaism, to be sure. In fact, Schopenhauer notes, it would have been prudent 
of Spinoza not to even call his substance God (or, Deus) (Ibid., p. 72). As indicated above, 
Schopenhauer thinks God is by definition a personal being. He also says expressly that 


558 


SCHOPENHAUER’S CRITIQUE 


personality is precisely what Spinoza denies his God (Schopenhauer 1969 vol. 2, p. 644; 
WWR ILL). In fact, Schopenhauer thinks Spinoza shares his own basic view, in that both 
maintain that the world exists, not due to a Creator God, but rather “by its own inner 
power and through itself” (Ibid.). Nevertheless, Schopenhauer deviates from Spinoza on 
the characterization of the “inner nature of the world” (Spinoza’s Deus), which he thinks 
leads in Spinoza’s case directly to optimism reminiscent of Judaism (Ibid.). Spinoza’s God is 
a being whose “essence excludes all imperfection and involves absolute perfection” 
(Elplls: eius essentia omnem imperfectionem secludit absolutamque perfectionem involvit). 
Thus, Schopenhauer’s association between Spinoza’s Deus and the monotheistic God (in 
WWR ILL) is compatible with his recognition (e.g. in FHP §12) of the substantial dissimi- 
larities between the two (contra Rappaport 1899, pp. 55-58). The association seems to 
work, for Schopenhauer, as long as both deities are assumed to be perfect by both systems. 
And of course, in Spinoza’s system, God is the only substance conceivable (E1p14), and 
“Whatever has being, has its being in God” (E1p15: Quicquid est, in Deo est). The inevitable 
consequence of deriving one’s explanations of the natural world from such a starting 
point, for Schopenhauer, is the rejection of the possibility of anything less than a perfect 
state of the world a priori. The pantheistic world, as Schopenhauer puts it, exhausts the 
“entire possibility of all being,” and it is for this reason that he thinks pantheism, like 
Judaism, is “essentially optimism” (Schopenhauer 1969 vol. 2, p. 644; WWR ILL). 

The optimistic worldview underlying both Judaism and Spinozism is a crucial common 
denominator between them, and a crucial difference between them and other religions or 
systems of thought, in Schopenhauer’s view. As he puts it (Schopenhauer 1969 vol. 2, 
p. 170; ILXVID: 


I cannot, as is generally done, put the fundamental difference of all religions in the question 
whether they are monotheistic, polytheistic, pantheistic, or atheistic, but only in the question 
whether they are optimistic or pessimistic, in other words, whether they present the existence 
of this world as justified by itself, and consequently praise and commend it, or consider it as 
something which can be conceived only as the consequence of our guilt, and thus really ought 
not to be, in that they recognize that pain and death cannot lie in the eternal, original, and 
immutable order of things, that which in every respect ought to be. 


On the most crucial issue, then, Judaism and Spinozism are grouped together, and are con- 
trasted with both Christianity and Schopenhauer’s philosophy. Significant though the 
difference might be between a personal benevolent Creator God and God understood as an 
infinite and eternal substance functioning as the inner nature of the world, Schopenhauer 
believes both principles consistently lead to importantly similar results. In particular, as we 
shall see, he thinks that by excluding the possibility of considering the world anything less 
than perfect, both systems lead to identical views on the problem of evil, the possibility of 
an afterlife, and certain ethical issues. Indeed, Schopenhauer criticizes both systems, occa- 
sionally simultaneously, specifically for upholding these views. 


2. The “Problem of Evil” 


Any view or system of thought upholding optimism must confront the challenge of 
accounting for those features of the world that appear to be less than optimal. 
Schopenhauer thus takes Spinoza’s theory to be faced with that challenge as well. He 


559 


MOR SEGEV 


thinks that it ultimately fails to meet the challenge. Since here, again, he links the 
failure with the connection between Spinoza’s pantheism and Jewish monotheism, it is 
helpful to discuss, first, the reasons why Judaism cannot successfully accomplish that 
task, in his view. 

For Schopenhauer, Judaism is committed to the goodness of the world given its creation 
by a personal God. Unlike Christianity, which introduces an evil force to account for the 
world’s ills, and even regards “the devil” as “ruler” over “the world,” Judaism seems to 
simply accept this world as entirely good (Schopenhauer 1969 vol. 2, p. 624; WWR 
II. XLVIII). It is perhaps this feature that leads Schopenhauer to declare Judaism “the only 
purely monotheistic religion” (Schopenhauer 2001 vol. 1, p. 127; FHP §13), which he 
indeed says is a distinction (Ruhm), by contrast to other features for which it ought to be 
criticized (more on these below) (Ibid., p. 126). Surely, it is not its “monotheism” per se 
that Schopenhauer commends Judaism for, since he thinks (as does Spinoza) that a 
personal Creator God cannot exist. Rather, Schopenhauer applauds the “purity” of 
Judaism’s monotheism. Judaism begins with postulating a perfectly good, omnipotent 
God, and consistently attributes to Him all of creation, without introducing additional 
agents or factors. 

But, given such acommitment on the part of Judaism, it must according to Schopenhauer 
face up to the following fact (Ibid., pp. 120-121): 


... the melancholy constitution of a world whose living beings subsist by devouring one 
another, the consequent distress and death of all that lives, the multitude and colossal magni- 
tude of evils, the variety and inevitability of sufferings often swelling to the dreadful, the 
burden of life itself hurrying forward to the bitterness of death, all this cannot honestly be 
reconciled with the idea that the world is supposed to be the work of a united infinite goodness, 
wisdom, and power. 


Alluding to the classical problem of evil, Schopenhauer says here that God cannot be per- 
fectly good and omnipotent while still allowing for the imperfections and evils we know the 
world to contain. Theism, Schopenhauer notes, often responds to this problem by invoking 
“all kinds of shifts, evasions, and theodicies” (Schopenhauer 1969 vol. 2, p. 591; WWR 
ILXLVI). Such shifts might include, for instance, introducing the devil as a counterforce to 
God’s goodness. Even such moves, Schopenhauer thinks, “succumbed irretrievably to the 
arguments of Hume and Voltaire” — both presenting versions of the classical problem of evil 
(Ibid.). But Judaism does not even have such means at its disposal. It must content itself with 
God’s own assessment concerning His creation — that it is “good” — in the face of even our 
most direct experience. 

A similar problem arises for pantheism, or so Schopenhauer charges. In fact, after dis- 
cussing the problem of evil and its consequences for theism, he continues: “[b]ut pan- 
theism is wholly untenable in face of [the] evil side of the world” (Ibid., p. 591). Of course, 
the problem of evil confronting pantheism results from the inconsistency between the 
existence of evil in the world and the existence of the pantheistic, not the theistic, God. The 
basic problem with the pantheistic God, for Schopenhauer, is that it is supposed to provide 
an explanation of all of reality, without itself being known or explained by any means, and 
a fortiori not by means of experience (Ibid., p. 643; WWR ILL). If everything in existence 
has its being in and as a direct consequence of a perfect God, then anything, regardless of 
the way we experience it, must itself be divine and faultless. As Schopenhauer puts it, on 
the assumptions of pantheism “the world would be a theophany” (Ibid., p. 349; WWR 


560 


SCHOPENHAUER’S CRITIQUE 


IL XXVIII). But this optimism is untenable, Schopenhauer suggests, since it goes against 
the observable fact that “pain as such is inevitable and essential to life” (Schopenhauer 1969 
vol. 1, p. 315; WWRI, §57). We have, as Schopenhauer often reminds us, direct knowledge 
and experience of the “preponderance of want, suffering, and misery, of dissension, wick- 
edness, infamy, and absurdity” (Schopenhauer 1969 vol. 2, p. 591; WWR ILXLVII). Such 
“terrible and ghastly phenomena,” as Schopenhauer sarcastically puts it in response to 
John Scotus Eriugena’s pantheistic view, would make “fine theophanies!” (Ibid., p. 643; 
WWRILL). 

Though Schopenhauer does mention “palliatives and quack remedies” used by pan- 
theists to combat charges such as his (Ibid.), it is not clear specifically what these devices 
are and, since they are mentioned in the context of discussing pantheism in general, it 
is not clear that Schopenhauer thinks they have been adopted by Spinoza himself. It is 
possible, however, that one of those pantheistic “quack remedies” for the problem of 
evil which Schopenhauer appeals to is Spinoza’s own oft-discussed doctrine, stated in 
the preface to Ethics 4, that “good and bad” (bonum et malum) are “no positive [property] 
in things considered by themselves” (nihil etiam positivum in rebus, in se scilicet considera- 
tis), but rather merely indicate “modes of thought or notions” (cogitandi modos seu notio- 
nes) resulting from our comparisons between objects. As it seems, had Spinoza embraced 
that doctrine in its entirety, it would have provided him with a possible solution to the 
problem of evil as it pertains to his philosophy, since there would be nothing objectively 
evil to generate such a problem to begin with. However, as has been pointed out by 
Steven Nadler, Spinoza in fact does not have this solution at his disposal. For, as it turns 
out, Spinoza does maintain that some things, like gaining knowledge of God, are 
objectively good (E4p28), implying that good and bad (or evil) are not entirely 
subjective, human-made categories (Nadler 2001a, pp. 69-70). Spinoza, then, could 
not defend his optimism against Schopenhauer’s charge by appealing to the subjectivity 
of good and evil. 

It has also been argued, in the context of comparing Spinoza to Schopenhauer, that (1) 
for Spinoza, thinking that evil is prevalent in the world is an error, resulting from failure 
to recognize the necessity of all events and the absolute perfection of God (Rappaport 1899, 
p. 42, citing E5p6s, E5p15 and E5p33), and (2) despite Schopenhauer’s criticisms (cf. 
WWR ILXLVII; WWR ILXVII), for Spinoza one’s astonishment at the suffering in the 
world is resolved with true knowledge, similarly to the way that for Schopenhauer him- 
self recognizing the will as the essence of all things explains suffering (Rappaport 1899, 
pp. 49-51). However, as far as Schopenhauer is concerned, (1) explaining away the prev- 
alence of evil in the world is necessarily one-sided, restricting one to evaluating the world 
exclusively “from the outside,” or “from the physical side” (Schopenhauer 1969 vol. 2, 
p. 591; WWRILXLVI). Looking at things also “from within,” or from “the subjective and 
the moral side,” Schopenhauer argues, one comes to realize that the prevalence of evil 
and suffering is ultimately ineliminable and that, consequently, the characterization of 
the world as a deity is wholly inappropriate (Ibid.). And, (2) quite distinctly from the prev- 
alence of evils, pantheism is incapable of accounting for the fact that we tend to be aston- 
ished by the very existence of the world and “the evil and wickedness” within it, which 
would be felt, and would demand an explanation, even if evils were “far outweighed by 
the good” (Ibid., pp. 170-172; WWR IL.XVII). Such astonishment, Schopenhauer thinks, 
leads to the true conclusion that the world’s nonexistence “is preferable to its existence” 
(Ibid., p. 171; cf. Ibid., p. 576; WWR IL.XLVI) — a conclusion that Spinoza’s optimism 
cannot accommodate. 


561 


MOR SEGEV 


3. Denial of Personal Immortality 


One standard way out of the problem of evil is of course via the idea of reward in an after- 
life. While Schopenhauer criticizes Spinoza for not supporting either this or an analogous 
feature, he also thinks that he would have been inconsistent in doing so. No internally con- 
sistent optimistic theory can allow for the possibility that any features of either human life 
or the world at large leave anything to be desired. And so, it is to Spinoza’s credit that he 
does not compromise the consistency of his theory by resorting to an idea promising 
improvement in a life to come. 

Here, too, Schopenhauer interprets Judaism as closely akin to, and as substantially inform- 
ing, Spinoza’s theory. For Schopenhauer, Judaism “has absolutely no doctrine of immor- 
tality” (Schopenhauer 2001 vol. 1, p. 125; FHP §13). He is often accused of being ignorant 
on the subject (Zohn 1977,p. 359; Brann 1975, pp. 12-13), and he has been more generally 
called a “metaphysical anti-Semite” who “abhorred Judaism, of which he knew very little” 
(Brann 1972, p. 195). More recently, it has been shown that at least Schopenhauer’s early 
comments on Judaism were either neutral or even positive (Wicks 2017). In any case, 
Schopenhauer is aware of discussions of metempsychosis in testimonies regarding Jews (e.g. 
in Tertullian and Justin) (Schopenhauer 1969 vol. 2, p. 506; WWR II.XLI). He also reads a 
part of the Talmud (Sota 12a) as referring to the transmigration of soul between Abel, Seth, 
and Moses (Ibid.; see Brann 1975, p. 13), though it should be noted that the Talmudic text 
only implicitly draws a connection between these three figures, which is then developed as an 
account of metempsychosis (gilgul) in Lurianic Kabbalah (Magid 2008, pp. 68, 256 n. 193). 
But these ideas, in Schopenhauer’s estimation, deviate from “the real religion of the Jews,” i.e. 
from the texts of the Hebrew Bible (Schopenhauer 2001 vol. 1, p. 125; FHP §13). These 
texts, he says, directly exclude the possibility of an afterlife, in several places (Ibid., 
pp. 125-126; cf. Chronicles 34:28; Exodus 34:7; Numbers 14:8; Tobias 3:6: Deuteronomy 
5:16, 33; Ecclesiastes 3:19), and when such ideas are presented, e.g. in Daniel 12:2, they are 
due to external (Babylonian) influences, mentioned explicitly in Daniel 1:4, 6 (Ibid.). 

For Schopenhauer, the absence of personal immortality from Judaism in its original 
form should not surprise us. First, since only eternal, and hence uncreated, things can be 
imperishable (Schopenhauer 2001 vol. 1, p. 124; FHP §13), Judaism, which is committed 
to the creation of humans “out of nothing” (Schopenhauer 1969 vol. 2, p. 506; WWR 
II.XLI), cannot consistently promise the lingering of human souls after death. “[N]o doc- 
trine of immortality is appropriate to a creation out of nothing” (Ibid., p. 488), and 
Judaism, unlike Christianity and Islam, thus exhibits “perfect consistency” on this issue 
(Schopenhauer 2001 vol. 1, p. 125; FHP §13) (see Wicks 2017, p. 341). The second 
reason why Schopenhauer thinks Judaism should not advocate personal immortality, if it 
is to remain consistent, is that its belief in a Creator God implies optimism, as we have seen. 
If everything created by God “turned out excellently,” Schopenhauer says, again echoing 
the opening chapter of Genesis, then one should “just enjoy his life as long as it lasts” 
(Schopenhauer 1969 vol. 2, p. 644; WWR II.L). Indeed, he finds a conclusion to just this 
effect in Ecclesiastes 9:7—10, in which Qoheleth recommends joyfully eating one’s bread 
and drinking one’s wine, wearing white clothing, letting one’s head lack no oil, and living 
one’s life with a beloved wife throughout one’s “vain days” under the sun, for “there is no 
deed, calculation, knowledge or wisdom in the grave [orig.: 21Nw] to which you are headed.” 
At the same time, Schopenhauer also recognizes as pessimistic “the Fall” in Genesis, as well 
as Ecclesiastes 7:3, stating that “sorrow is better than laughter” (Brann 1975, pp. 14-18; 
cf. WWR ILXLVIN-XLIX; FHP §12). Indeed, Schopenhauer says of Ecclesiastes 7:3 that it 


562 


SCHOPENHAUER’S CRITIQUE 


is a text Spinoza should have attended to (Schopenhauer 2001 vol. 1, pp. 72-73; FHP 
§12). And it has been argued that there is more in the Bible that is congenial to 
Schopenhauer’s view, and that Ecclesiastes’ optimism, which is built “on pessimistic foun- 
dations,” is echoed by Schopenhauer’s philosophy, particularly in the Aphorisms on the 
Wisdom of Life (Brann 1975, pp. 14-18). 

Schopenhauer thinks that the second consideration against immortality above — that opti- 
mism makes the idea of an afterlife gratuitous — applies to Spinozism as well as to Judaism, and 
his discussion of it in WWR II.Lin fact occurs within the context of discussing Spinoza’s opti- 
mism. Schopenhauer’s point is precisely that since Spinoza’s Deus leads to optimism, exactly 
as the Jewish God does, his system, just like Judaism, alleviates the need for anything like judg- 
ment in an afterlife. Human beings, on that view, should seek nothing exceeding the scope of 
their natural life, a point that, as Schopenhauer notes, Spinoza himself puts in words clearly 
reminiscent of Ecclesiastes (Ibid.; cf. E4p67d). Indeed, it has been suggested that 
Schopenhauer’s own idea of the “pure subject of knowledge” was originally influenced by 
Schleiermacher’s interpretation of Spinoza as denying personal immortality while affirming 
the eternity of the soul in God (Rappaport 1899, pp. 125-126). Schopenhauer’s interpreta- 
tion of Spinoza as denying personal immortality seems plausible. Steven Nadler, for example, 
suggests that Spinoza, while arguing that the mind “remains” after death inasmuch as it 
acquires knowledge of the order of reality (specifically, intuitive knowledge, or knowledge of 
the “third kind”) (E5p38), cannot countenance anything like personal immortality, e.g. 
because knowledge, especially when unlinked to continuous memory, is not sufficient to pre- 
serve personal identity (Nadler 2001a, pp. 76-78). Nadler (Ibid., p. 78) further argues that 
Spinoza’s arguments for the eternity of knowledge reveal his attitude toward organized reli- 
gions, with their empty promise of personal immortality, which even such figures as 
Gersonides felt the need to support even though the conclusions of their theories are closer to 
Spinoza’s own. Schopenhauer would agree with Nadler’s assessment, with one caveat. For 
him, one organized religion in particular, namely Judaism, at least in its original form, in fact 
does not promise an afterlife, and is for this reason (and others) closely akin to Spinoza’s world- 
view. In fact, Nadler himself concurs with Schopenhauer’s interpretation of the Hebrew Bible 
as excluding any reference to the immortality of the soul, as do other prominent scholars 
(Nadler 20015, p. 49, citing Raphael 1994, p. 42; cf. Wicks 2017, pp. 340-341). 

It has been suggested that Schopenhauer ought not to criticize the rejection of personal 
immortality, since he himself thinks individual lives are perishable (Brann 1975, p. 17). It 
is of course true that Schopenhauer countenances no doctrine of personal immortality. 
But, first, his criticism of the denial of immortality by Judaism and Spinoza’s philosophy is 
directed at the inability of these optimistic systems to avoid or dismantle the problem of 
evil. Schopenhauer, precisely because he is not an optimist, acknowledges the existence of 
an abundance of evils and suffering in the world and finds no need to explain them away. 
Second, Schopenhauer’s philosophy in fact does provide a substitute for immortality, in the 
form of the negation of the will-to-live and the abnegation of one’s phenomenal existence 
— the subject matter, to a large extent, of the entire fourth book of WWR I. 


4. Ethical Consequences 
Apart from the theoretical problems that Schopenhauer locates in maintaining optimism, 
he also takes issue with its practical implications. As he puts it, “optimism is not only a false 


but also a pernicious doctrine, for it presents life as a desirable state and man’s happiness 


563 


MOR SEGEV 


as its aim and object” (Schopenhauer 1969 vol. 2, p. 584; WWR IIL. XLVI). Optimism sees 
nothing suboptimal about the world as we know and experience it, and hence offers 
nothing in terms of an alternative to it. A fortiori, then, optimism sees no reason to supply 
an alternative to the life of individual human beings, with their various goals and aims. It 
also provides no motivation to look beyond individual phenomena, toward the unified 
essence that they might all share. But viewing the world exclusively through this individu- 
ation between phenomena in general, and in particular between our own self and all other 
living things, is conducive to egoism. In fact, Schopenhauer insists that “egoism has its 
continuance and being [. . .] in the fact that the objectification of the will has for its form 
the principium individuationis” (Schopenhauer 1969 vol. 1, p. 332; WWRI, §61). 

Now, it is true that pantheism maintains that all phenomena are essentially one. As we have 
seen, Schopenhauer commends Spinoza for developing that very idea. But merely recognizing 
that shared essence is not enough to escape egoism. For Schopenhauer, it is necessary that one 
recognize that “the in-itself of [one’s] own phenomenon is also that of others, namely that 
will-to-live which constitutes the inner nature of everything, and lives in all” (Ibid., p. 372; 
WWRI, §65). This more specific recognition is crucial in developing empathy for the suffering 
of other people and creatures, because it is precisely the fact that the will-to-live constitutes the 
inner nature of all living things that guarantees their continuous suffering, as Schopenhauer 
painstakingly explains in WWR I, §56—59. Far from recognizing the shared essence of all 
things as a source of profound and inescapable suffering, pantheism detracts from the pros- 
pects of empathy. On the one hand, it offers as the shared essence of all things something 
entirely unknowable (in Schopenhauer’s terms, the pantheistic God “is an x, an unknown 
quantity”), which therefore is not conducive to recognizing, let alone understanding, the 
suffering in another person or creature as related to one’s own (Schopenhauer 1969 vol. 2, 
p. 643; WWRILL). And, on the other hand, pantheism explains away suffering, and assures us 
that the world, qua God, though unknown, is “what is best” (Ibid., pp. 643-644). 

It has been argued that the fact that Schopenhauer’s “will” is ultimately unknowable 
compromises his critique of the unknowability of the pantheistic God (Rappaport 1899, 
pp. 47-48). Nevertheless, Schopenhauer’s proposed way out of egoism is rooted precisely 
in the idea that the inner nature of all individuated phenomena, unlike the God of pan- 
theism, not only is one and the same, but is discoverable (if not capable of being perfectly 
understood, see Section 1), and is useful both for appreciating the source of suffering in 
oneself and for empathizing with other beings who suffer similarly as a result of being, 
along with oneself and every other phenomenon, manifestations of a single “will.” Insofar 
as this applies to non-human living things as well, Schopenhauer thinks a person recog- 
nizing this truth would “not cause suffering even to an animal” (Schopenhauer 1969 vol. 
1, p. 372; WWR I, §65). By contrast, “from [the] standpoint of egoism [. . .] the sight or 
description of another’s sufferings affords us satisfaction and pleasure” (Ibid., p. 320; 
WWRIL, §57). Happiness, in Schopenhauer’s view, is essentially negative, in the sense that 
it only amounts to the avoidance of suffering, which alone is “positive” and “proclaims 
itself immediately” (Ibid., pp. 319-320). For this reason, he thinks, we (operating as indi- 
viduated phenomena oblivious of our true nature) actually enjoy remembering sufferings 
we no longer have to endure, as well as, similarly and for the same reason, witnessing 
others’ suffering (Ibid., p. 320; cf. Lucretius, De rerum natura II.1). Though the manifest 
reason for this latter enjoyment is being reminded that we ourselves are spared the suffering 
we witness in others, rather than the fact that these others are indeed suffering, 
Schopenhauer notes that this type of pleasure “lies very near the source of real, positive 
wickedness” (Ibid.). 


564 


SCHOPENHAUER’S CRITIQUE 


For Schopenhauer, as it turns out, maintaining that this world is impeccable, as both 
Spinoza and original Judaism do, leads directly to moral depravity, specifically to taking 
enjoyment in inflicting pain. And again, Schopenhauer finds both Spinoza and Judaism 
consistent with their ground principles on this point. Thus, he criticizes Spinoza for his 
“contempt for animals,” which, apart from being “absurd and abominable,” 
Schopenhauer also regards as “thoroughly Jewish” (Schopenhauer 1969 vol. 2, p. 645; 
WWRILL). It has been argued that Schopenhauer’s identification of cruelty toward ani- 
mals in the Hebrew Bible is wrongheaded (Wicks 2017, pp. 339-340, citing, e.g. 
Proverbs 12:10). Schopenhauer, for his part, finds it in Genesis, in which the creation of 
human beings brings with it their dominion over all living things (1:26-30), as does 
God’s pact with Noah (9:2—3). He compares these texts to Spinoza’s E4app cap. 26 and 
E4p37s, and he criticizes TTP 16 as being “the true compendium of the immorality of 
Spinoza’s philosophy” (Schopenhauer 2001 vol. 1, p. 73; FHP §12; Schopenhauer 1969 
vol. 2, p. 645; WWR ILL, n. 7). At E4app cap. 26, Spinoza says that, since we can only 
take pleasure in and form friendships with other human beings, the consideration for 
our benefit (nostrae utilitatis ratio) dictates making use of other living things for our sake, 
rather than preserving them. 

Schopenhauer also mentions an anecdote, told by Colerus, about Spinoza’s practice of 
torturing spiders and flies, which Schopenhauer says “corresponds only too closely” to his 
(Spinoza’s) theory (Schopenhauer 2001 vol. 1, p. 73; FHP §12). It has been argued that 
Schopenhauer thinks Spinoza, in theorizing and behaving in this way, failed to draw the 
correct conclusions from his pantheistic theory, because “a pantheist should not make 
such a rigid distinction between men and animals since, after all, they, like everything else, 
are modes of God or Nature” (Berman 1982, p. 204). This interpretation rests on 
Schopenhauer’s comment, referring to Spinoza’s attitude toward animals, that Spinoza 
“occasionally loses sight of the conclusion where it would have led to correct views” 
(Schopenhauer 2001 vol. 1, p. 73; FHP §12). Schopenhauer does not specify which type 
of “conclusion” he has in mind. Berman assumes that the reference is to the conclusions 
of pantheism, which Schopenhauer allegedly thinks should lead away from cruelty to ani- 
mals, and that Schopenhauer explains Spinoza’s oversight as being due to his Jewish 
background (Berman 1982, pp. 204-205). However, since, as we have seen, Schopenhauer 
has independent reasons to think that pantheism does lead to egoism, wickedness, and the 
infliction of suffering, particularly on non-human living things, we may do well to con- 
sider a different possibility. In speaking in FHP §1 2 of the “conclusion” which Spinoza does 
not follow, Schopenhauer may well have in mind, not the conclusions of pantheism in 
general, but specifically that conclusion which pantheism shares with Schopenhauer’s 
own theory, namely that “the world exists |. . .] by its own inner power and through itself” 
(Schopenhauer 1969 vol. 2, p. 644; WWR ILL). This view, when correctly followed, 
Schopenhauer thinks, indeed leads to the renunciation of cruelty toward animals, as well 
as to the rest of the features of Schopenhauer’s philosophical system. But when this basic 
view is used to establish pantheism — when it is supposed, as it is with Spinoza, that the 
inner nature of the world is God, and hence perfect — the idealization of individuation, and 
with it egoism and anthropocentrism, follow (see Rappaport 1899, pp. 102-103; cf. Ibid., 
pp. 97-99). Though there is room for a comparison between Spinoza’s resulting view and 
Judaism, and though Schopenhauer draws this comparison himself, he also shows how it 
is that each system independently yields the conclusions he finds problematic. His analysis 
and arguments may of course be criticized, but they should not, it seems, be reduced to 
anti-Semitic rambling. 


565 


MOR SEGEV 


5. Conclusion 


Schopenhauer rejects Spinoza’s pantheism for several features which it shares in common 
with Judaism, and which follow from the basic assumptions of both systems. Both systems 
posit a God whose nature necessarily entails optimism. Consequently, both systems must 
explain away the presence of evil in the world. But doing so, Schopenhauer contends, flies 
in the face of our most basic experience. Again, given their adherence to optimism, neither 
system, if it is to be consistent, can resolve the problem of evil by positing personal immor- 
tality. Finally, their optimistic approach forces both systems into anthropocentrism and 
egoism, with grave moral consequences. It is sometimes assumed that Schopenhauer 
criticizes Judaism, not so much for its recommendation to enjoy life (as in Ecclesiastes 
2:23-24), but rather for introducing God as a source of hope or stability amid vexations 
and fleeting phenomena (Ibid.) (Brann 1975, p. 17). Two things may be said in response to 
that assessment, based on the analyses presented thus far. First, Schopenhauer rejects both 
Judaism and Spinozism first and foremost for their optimistic outlook, which he takes to be 
the feature most fundamentally distinguishing them from other systems of thought 
(Schopenhauer 1969 vol. 2, p. 170; WWR ILXVII). And so, as long as these systems retain 
their optimistic conclusions and worldview, Schopenhauer would object to them in prin- 
ciple, and regardless of their conception of divinity. Second, as it happens, Schopenhauer 
thinks and argues that in both Judaism and Spinozism it is precisely the conception of God 
which leads directly to the optimistic conclusions he abhors. For Schopenhauer, neither 
Judaism nor pantheism offer their deity as a deus ex machina, intended to furnish hope in 
the face of a preexisting pessimistic assessment of reality. Rather, in his opinion, both sys- 
tems proceed from the postulation of their particular version of God, which shapes, and 
serves as the indispensable theoretical basis for, their entire optimistic (and consistent) 
worldview. 


Acknowledgments 


A predecessor of this chapter was presented at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem in 
2016. I am thankful to my audience there for the useful discussion. I am also grateful to 
Yitzhak Melamed for his helpful feedback. 


References 


Berman, D. (1982). Spinoza’s spiders, Schopenhauer’s dogs. Philosophical Studies 29: 202-209. 

Brann, H.W. (1972). Schopenhauer and Spinoza. Journal of the History of Philosophy 10 (2): 
181-196. 

Brann, H.W. (1975). Schopenhauer und das Judentum. Bonn: Bouvier. 

Magid, S. (2008). From Metaphysics to Midrash: Myth, History and the Interpretation of Scripture in 
Lurianic Kabbala. Bloomington: Indiana University Press. 

Moreau, PF. (1995). Spinoza’s reception and influence. In: The Cambridge Companion to Spinoza (ed. 
D. Garrett), 408-43 3. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Nadler, S. (2001a). Spinoza in the garden of good and evil. In: The Problem of Evil in Early Modern 
Philosophy (ed. E.J. Kremer and M.J. Latzer), 66—80. Toronto: University of Toronto Press. 

Nadler, S. (2001b). Spinoza’s Heresy: Immortality and the Jewish Mind. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 


566 


SCHOPENHAUER’S CRITIQUE 


Raphael, S.P. (1994). Jewish Views of the Afterlife. Northvale, NJ: Jason Aronson. 

Rappaport, S. (1899). Spinoza und Schopenhauer. Halle a/S. 

Schopenhauer, A. (1969). The World as Will and Representation (trans. E.FJ. Payne). New York. 
Abbreviated as WWR. 

Schopenhauer, A. (2001). Parerga and Paralipomena (trans. E.F.J. Payne). Oxford: Oxford University 
Press. FHP — Fragments for the History of Philosophy, in Parerga and Paralipomena. 

Wicks, R. (2017). Schopenhauer and Judaism. In: The Palgrave Schopenhauer Handbook (ed. S. Shapshay), 
325-349. Cham: Palgrave Macmillan. 

Zohn, H. (1977). Review of Schopenhauer und das Judentum by H.W. Brann. International Philosophical 
Quarterly 17 (3): 359-360. 


567 


a3 


Spinoza and Popular Philosophy 
JACK STETTER 


1. Introduction 


The study of highly imagistic representations of Spinoza’s philosophy found in popular, 
extra-academic literature is essential for building a rational view on Spinoza’s philosophy. 
In fact, we can attempt a Spinozist argument for this. The mind, Spinoza argues in Part 2 
of the Ethics, is the idea of the body. There is no idea the mind forms that is not an idea of 
a bodily affection. Now the mind can form ideas of bodily affections in a variety of ways, 
one of which is to attend to properties that the body proper and external bodies have in 
common. However, even when the mind is thus forming ideas of bodily affections in what 
Spinoza calls ratio, it remains the case that insofar as the mind is conceived durationally, as 
existing in a place and time, it must also conceive the external causes of bodily affections 
as present, even if they are not present. That is, the mind forms corporeal images of the 
bodily affections for as long as it exists durationally. The mind cannot eliminate that 
embodied condition; what it strives to do, however, is re-organize for the intellect the way 
that its bodily affections present themselves. In short, the imagination is an eliminable 
condition of the mind, one that sustains its rational endeavors. The same line of reasoning 
should be brought to bear on the relation of academic to popular, extra-academic litera- 
ture on Spinoza. Such literature has always nourished the academic literature on Spinoza. 
In fact, popular literature on Spinoza is an ineliminable condition of academic literature 
on Spinoza. Perhaps a disembodied fantasy of Spinoza literature sees the academic as 
capable of being perfectly cleaved from the popular, but this is a mere fantasy. 

There is a second, methodological principle that should be kept in mind when attending 
to popular renditions of Spinoza’s thought. In the Tractatus Theologico-Politicus, Spinoza 
shows that theology, which is written ad captum vulgi, does not conflict with philosophy. 
The philosopher achieves salvation through the understanding, whereas Scripture pro- 
vides the non-philosopher with truths necessary for salvation that they do not intellectu- 
alize but which they integrate as meaningful dogmata to structure their lives. That is to say 
that it is necessarily the case, Spinoza thinks, that Scripture has a mostly unintelligible 
content; its very efficacy requires that it be distinct from the kind of material open to 
philosophical and rational inquiry. We must take Spinoza’s cue here. Popular literature on 


A Companion to Spinoza, First Edition. Edited by Yitzhak Y. Melamed. 
© 2021 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2021 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd. 


568 


SPINOZA AND POPULAR PHILOSOPHY 


Spinoza simply does not aspire to achieve the same goals as academic literature on Spinoza, 
even if, fundamentally, the outcome is the same, that is a deepening of the role of Spinozism 
in our reflections and enterprises. 

More perplexing than the fact that we may learn something about Spinoza’s philosophy 
from what are commonly viewed as non-philosophical works is the fact that Spinoza gar- 
nered such popular attention in the first place. Spinoza employed a decidedly technical and 
at times belabored Latin vocabulary, his mature masterpiece is presented in an intimi- 
dating geometrical form, and his work is, to be sure, very difficult. None of this impeded his 
rise to popularity. Of course, any presentation of Spinoza as a popular philosopher is highly 
selective. I believe that the works I focus on here can help us understand the history and 
character of Spinoza’s role as a popular philosopher, but they are by no means the only 
works that can do this work. I use the term ‘popular philosophy’ rather loosely and take it 
to denote any representation of Spinoza’s thinking in extra-academic settings or works. 
Additionally, a part of my analysis in this chapter turns on an ambiguity in the notion of 
‘popular’ as also suggesting whatever relates to ‘the people’ and/or their efforts and under- 
takings, as a non-negligible element of Spinoza’s popular reception involves what are mil- 
itant public-oriented applications of Spinoza’s political views. 

Yet a caveat is already in order. Because the nature and extent of Spinoza’s popularity 
varies from (linguistic or national) context to context, my exclusion of some contexts to 
the benefit of others means my exposition is far from exhaustive. What makes Spinoza 
resonate in one part of the world might be very dissimilar from what makes him resonate 
in another part of the world. For my part, Iam interested in Anglophone and Francophone 
works. First, I view the respective contexts as attention worthy in that an important 
amount of academic and non-academic work on Spinoza has appeared and continues to 
appear in these contexts. Second, my relevant insider knowledge is restricted to the 
Anglophone and Francophone contexts and insider knowledge is essential to grasp what 
makes Spinoza popular in context. Neither of my reasons is meant to suggest that these 
are the most or only contexts where we can profitably analyze Spinoza and popular 
philosophy. 

Naturally, the cementing of Spinoza’s popularity belongs to a larger history of Spinoza’s 
reception. Spinoza’s role in shaping the broader course of Western philosophy was very 
significant, such as in the context of the radical Enlightenment as well as in the context of 
the development of late-eighteenth century and early-nineteenth century Germanophone 
philosophy (Israel 2001; Forster and Melamed 2012; Stetter and Ramond 2019). We 
simply cannot know whether Spinoza would have become so unusually popular without 
having already been highly regarded by his philosopher peers. 

I organize the literature I examine chronologically. In the second section, I examine two 
late-nineteenth and early-twentieth century works on Spinoza. It was not until the mid-to- 
late nineteenth-century that the history of philosophy became a specialized field of 
research; similarly, it is only at this point that Spinoza becomes widely available in transla- 
tion, in Elwes’ translation in the Anglophone world, for instance, and in Saisset’s transla- 
tion in France (Laerke, in this volume). The works I look to here belong to this period when 
the work of amateur expositors of Spinoza was not so distantly removed from professional 
historians. The works in question, by Jules Prat (Spinoza 1860, 2015, and 2016) and 
Romain Rolland (1931), touch on two important themes in Spinoza’s subsequent popular- 
ization. Prat’s work involves an issue alluded to above, namely the militant application of 
Spinoza’s political philosophy. Rolland’s autobiographical work, on the other hand, stands 
out as an early figuration of Spinoza in the genre of self-help literature. 


569 


JACK STETTER 


In the third section, I examine the fiction of Isaac Bashevis Singer (Singer 1961) and 
Bernard Malamud (Malamud 1966). Both are highly acclaimed mid-century authors for 
whom Jewish culture and religion, in the Old World and the New, is a defining feature of 
their fictional worlds. The analysis of their respective works, Singer’s short story “The 
Spinoza of Market Street” and Malamud’s novel The Fixer, sheds light on two prominent 
commonplaces in Spinoza’s popular reception: the representation of Spinoza as a hermetic 
thinker who stands above the common condition, and the view of Spinoza as a political 
and religious rebel. 

In the fourth section, where I conclude this short survey of popular literature and its 
trends, I turn to a work which appeared within the last decade: Irvin D. Yalom’s The Spinoza 
Problem (Yalom 2012). I show that this work suggests an interesting second-order issue 
raised by Spinoza’s role as a popular philosopher, viz., the problem of Spinoza’s ideal or 
intended audience. 


2. Jules Prat and Romain Rolland 


Jules Prat’s (1823-1895) idiosyncratic blend of Spinozism and left-wing French 
Republicanism stands out as a historically and philosophically rich approach to Spinoza 
that has hardly been studied thus far. It is noteworthy that at no point over the course of a 
lifetime translating Spinoza and publishing Spinoza’s works (at his own personal expense, 
no less), did Prat occupy a university chair of philosophy. Prat was a lawyer by training and 
a city administrator (director, under Baron Haussmann’s supervision, of the Service des 
promenades et des plantations de Paris) by profession. As his recent biographer and posthu- 
mous editor Bernard Pautrat notes, Prat is singularly motivated by the belief that “Spinoza’s 
doctrine, taken seriously and treated as Spinoza himself treated it, should be a tool for the 
transformation of man and society to achieve the greatest possible freedom” (Spinoza 2015, 
pp. 381-382). Here I will briefly present Prat’s exposition of Spinoza as a militant thinker 
whose supreme intention was to transform the political structures involving the broader 
public. 

Prat’s attempts to propagate Spinozism are decidedly informed by the worrisomely weak 
state of French Republicanism in the mid-to-late nineteenth-century. He undertakes the 
enterprise following the collapse of the Second Republic and the rise to power of Napoleon 
II in 1852 as a faithful “member of the generation of 1848” (Spinoza 2015, p. 375). 
Representative of this period in his career is the publication of his translation (the first in 
French) of Spinoza’s Tractatus Politicus (or “TP”) in 1860 (Spinoza 1860). In the same year, 
Prat also publishes a translation of the appendix to Ethics Part 4 (Spinoza 2016), meant to 
serve as a vade mecum of Spinozist living for the casual reader. 

Of special note in Prat’s translation of Spinoza’s TP is the detailed and lengthy preface, 
where Prat fills in the blanks on Spinoza’s behalf of what an ideal democratic constitution 
looks like. By systematically substituting the word “elector” for “patrician” as it appears in 
Spinoza’s model of the decentralized aristocratic government, we can, on Prat’s view, 
reconstruct Spinoza’s ideal democratic government. Prat argues that Spinoza’s ideal is, in 
fact, “a regime where the Patricians of intelligence and honorability, elected in every class of 
society and from any condition, by the mass of citizens, alone have the right, by the law, to 
administer affairs of state and the occupy the charges of the empire,” and hence, that 
Spinoza intended to design a bona fide “Aristocratic Democracy” or a “government where 
there is no other nobility besides that of virtue and intelligence” (Spinoza 1860, p. 33). 


570 


SPINOZA AND POPULAR PHILOSOPHY 


Hence, Prat maintains that the democratic state’s institutions must be designed so that 
children born into any family have equal access to education and other intelligence or 
virtue promoting goods. 

What follows is an elaboration of the model democracy’s institutions cast in the mold of 
populist French Republican politics; Spinoza’s ideal constitution for the people and the 
times, as it were. In a pull-out pamphlet attached to the end of his translation, Prat divulges 
a kind of rubric for what the state should look like with regards to specific administrative 
matters, like taxation, nationalized banking, public instruction, agriculture, affairs of reli- 
gion, and commerce. To give one specific example, Prat reasons that in the model democ- 
racy all schools must be free of charge, and because, according to Spinoza, “the nature of 
children, such as that of adults, is to be composed of one single substance, both body and 
mind, public instruction must include physical education, such that the Republic must join 
to all schools a public gymnasium” (Spinoza 1860, p. 339). As Pautrat notes: “From rubric 
to rubric, we witness a rare spectacle: Spinoza, via Prat, giving birth to a Republican 
program and an awareness of the struggles that the Third Republic will live out” 
(Spinoza 2015, p. 389). 

Prat’s militant Spinozist Republicanism remained regrettably devoid of disciples. 
However, his belief that Spinoza speaks to the wider popular and their very real struggles 
for political emancipation prefigures contemporary understandings of Spinoza’s political 
agenda and its applicability largely endorsed in the so-called Continental philosophical 
milieu. Consider, for instance, the popular work of Hardt and Negri (2001), for whom the 
concept of multitudo is called on to make sense of the state of the global proletariat; or 
again, the work of Lordon (2015), for whom the concept of imperium can congenially con- 
tribute to contemporary discussions of the purpose and value of sovereign powers. What 
distinguishes Prat is that he saw fit to attend to the minutiae of Spinoza’s political texts and 
to the institution building paradigms that Spinoza himself endorsed. 

In contrast to Prat, for whom Spinoza serves as a springboard for politics, we find the 
Nobel-prize winning author Romain Rolland (1866-1944), for whom Spinoza serves as a 
touchstone of self-help. I do not mean to suggest that Rolland’s elegant writing on Spinoza 
suffers from the sort of stultifying vulgarity and triviality frequently exhibited by self-help 
literature. Nonetheless, it does have the common trait of professing to find in Spinoza a 
kind of guru whose philosophy helps the author attain inner peace at a time when life is, 
he finds, extremely hard. 

In his L’éclair de Spinoza (Rolland 1931), Rolland tells us that, like so many still, he dis- 
covered Spinoza in the high-school classroom, at Louis-le-Grand, though Spinoza was not 
on the national philosophy curriculum. Rather, like Spinoza himself, Rolland states, 
Descartes was the immediate impetus to discovering a way out of the “majestic walled 
garden” to “unlimited perspectives” Rolland 1930, p. 114). He had found Saisset’s edition 
of Spinoza’s works “under the galleries of Odéon”; this became his “elixir of eternal life,” 
and although Rolland professes to have now later in life “freed himself from the strict ratio- 
nalism of the master Benoit” [. . .] the work “remains sacred, equal to the Holy Books for 
him who believes; and I do not touch these three volumes but with a pious love. I will never 
forget that in the cyclone of my adolescence, I found my refuge in the profound nest of the 
Ethics” (Rolland 1931, pp. 115-116. 

Rolland’s tale is meant to convey the way that Spinoza can help us to free ourselves, 
even, he says quoting a letter from a Bengalese political prisoner who read L’éclair de Spinoza 
in translation, when conditions are most restrictive (Rolland 1930, pp. 107-108). What 
was then it about Spinoza that spoke so compellingly to Rolland and that provided him the 


571 


JACK STETTER 


means to liberate himself? It was, he writes, “the words of fire,” the image of “the surging 
of the white sun of Substance” leaping through the windows of his cold and damp bedroom 
in winter, yielding “metal in fusion, which fills the depths of my eyes, pouring into my own 
being that it consumes, and my being, like a fountain, gushing back into the vat” 
(Rolland 1931, pp. 119-120). 

Reflection on his own mystic or irrationalist interpretation, according to which any 
reader can brought into a state of fusion with Spinoza’s God, gives way in Rolland to a 
second-order observation about the value of Spinoza’s philosophical style, the more geo- 
metrico. He writes: “I do not pretend that this virtuous miracle is inherent in some 
magic words, nor that I had then rightly seized the true thought of Spinoza. [.. .] In the 
traced inscriptions at the entry to the Ethics, in these Definitions in flamboyant letters, 
I decrypted, not that which he had said, but that which I wanted to say, the words of 
my own childish thought, in its inarticulate tongue, struggling to emerge. One never 
reads a book. One reads through books, either to discover oneself, or to control one- 
self” (Rolland 1931, pp. 120-121). It is thus not the “master of the geometrical order” 
or the “rationalist” who won him over, though these “magnificent games of reason 
provide deep aesthetic joy,” but the “realist,” and Rolland finds it regrettable that this 
aspect of Spinoza’s thought has been covered over to the point of being invisible thanks 
to the “heavy intellectual verbalism of professional philosophers” (Rolland 1931, 
pp. 123-124). 

For Rolland, reading Spinoza provided him with the occasion to free him from his meta- 
phorical state of mental imprisonment (Rolland 1931, pp. 124-125). In short, to attain 
this freedom one must approach Spinoza “not with the cold eyes of intelligence” but with 
“the passion of the heart and the ardor of the senses” (Rolland 1931, p. 129). 

Rolland’s discussion of the meaningfulness of Spinoza for his personal development is 
intended to draw the reader’s attention to the power provided by Spinoza for self-liberation. 
If more recent variants on this popular approach to Spinoza have tended to water down 
what Rolland maximizes in intensity in favor of highlighting a less bold, self-positive atti- 
tude that Spinoza would ostensibly help us cultivate, the guiding intuition — that Spinoza 
did not seek the truth merely to have intellectual dissertations written about him, but to 
help guide each of us in our own very personal endeavors — does not seem any less present 
(Guay de Bellissen 2019; Lenoir 2017;Thomass 2008). As a matter of fact, Spinoza invites 
such an approach in his earliest extant work, the Tractatus de Intellectus Emendatione. With 
its opening paragraphs tinged in autobiography, Spinoza seems to exhort us to draw on our 
own experiences and reflect on past mistakes when setting out on our personal path to 
enlightenment. 


3. Isaac Bashevis Singer and Bernard Malamud 


I will now look to two mid-century fictional stories that, imagine, many of my readers will 
have already encountered. The first of these is The Spinoza of Market Street by Isaac Bashevis 
Singer, a work which has already received attention from historians of philosophy 
(Garber 1994, Goldstein 2018). Dr. Fischelson, the story’s protagonist, is an avid Spinozist. 
He takes Spinoza, whom he would emulate, to admonish the emotional tumult and socia- 
bility of common folk. The twist of Singer’s story resides in showing that this is no good 
way to live and that common folk have it at least partly right in embracing the emotions 
and social relations. 


572 


SPINOZA AND POPULAR PHILOSOPHY 


Dr. Fischelson is a feeble older scholar whose lifetime goal was “to be as independent as 
Spinoza himself” (Singer 1961, p. 9). As a result, he “had isolated himself completely and 
had become a forgotten man” (Singer 1961, pp. 10-11). His one companion is Spinoza, 
whom he has studied for the 30 years. Dr. Fischelson’s scorn for the rabble, “immersed in 
the vainest of passions, drunk with emotions,” finds a theoretical footing in the alleged 
Spinozist teaching that emotion is never good (Singer 1961, p. 9). In stark contrast to the 
rabble’s debased pursuit of pleasure, Dr. Fischelson cultivates a hobby of his own: star- 
gazing. In contemplating the Milky Way, Dr. Fischelson becomes “aware of that infinite 
extension which is, according to Spinoza, one of God’s attributes.” It comforts him to think 
that although he is “only a weak, puny man, a changing mode of the absolutely infinite 
Substance,” he is also “a part of the cosmos, made of the same matter as the celestial 
bodies.” To that extent, he is “a part of the Godhead” and he knows that “he cannot be 
destroyed” (Singer 1961, pp. 6-7). These moments of vertiginous euphoria, the experi- 
ence of amor dei intellectualis, can do nothing, however, to repair his failing health. 

Dr. Fischelson cannot live up to the superhuman expectations set on him by Spinoza. 
One day his poor health catches up with him. Market Street’s desolation mirrors his own 
despair. Poland is engulfed in war as Imperial German troops make their way to Tsarist 
Russia. Dr. Fischelson believes his time has come. His neighbor, the spinster Black Dobbe, 
finds him near death, prostate on his bed, and yet succeeds in nurturing him back to life. 
As much a loner and outcast as he, Dobbe and Dr. Fischelson converse about the injustices 
they have suffered and ultimately recognize that what has blossomed between them is love. 
To the surprise of the community, who took both Dr. Fischelson and Dobbe to be lost causes, 
they come before the rabbi and are married. Dr. Fischelson has found health and happi- 
ness. He thus must ask forgiveness from Spinoza for having become a fool. 

The story is a parable. Dr. Fischelson’s redemption is meant to instruct us in the inherent 
value of our this-worldly condition, along with the wisdom of surrendering to chance, 
folly, and interpersonal love. Hard rationalism coupled with a reclusive, Ebenezer Scrooge- 
esque lifestyle might yield intoxicating glimpses into Nature’s eternal laws, but these are 
no substitutes for the kind of care that can only be provided by a fellow human being, and 
that any fellow human being, even Dobbe in her declined state, can provide. Spinoza is seen 
as a proponent of an anti-social attitude and ascetic virtues like poverty and chastity, hav- 
ing fully embraced the life of the mind and turned his back on merely mundane matters. 
That this is shown to be a poor way of life is one thing, but what is more, Dr. Fischelson’s 
failure to live by Spinoza’s teachings comes to symbolize the impracticability of philosophy 
itself. As if anticipating Deleuze’s remark that Spinoza teaches philosophers to become 
non-philosophers (Deleuze 1981), Singer’s story illustrates the view that no one, not even 
the most devoted scholar, can attain the rational quietus that the philosopher argues is the 
highest goal in life, though in practicing that philosophy we might still find a way out. 

A telling counter example is provided by the Spinoza of Yakov Bov, the protagonist of 
Malamud’s novel The Fixer. Malamud’s tale, like Singer’s, concerns the fall and eventual 
redemption of a Jewish man who scorns the shtetl and the petty ways of the community. 
Leaving his town to make a life for himself in Kiev, Yakov finds himself imprisoned and set 
to be tried in an instance of the anti-Semitic blood libel. Yakov turns to Spinoza for succor. 
But Yakov’s Spinoza turns out to be a revolutionary. 

This is the novel’s very conclusion. Yakov is about to stand trial and he is daydreaming 
that he meets the Tsar, discusses Russia’s regime of hate and violence, and assassinates 
him. He thinks to himself: “One thing I’ve learned [. . .| there’s no such thing as an unpoliti- 
cal man, especially a Jew. You can’t be one without the other, that’s clear enough. You 


573 


JACK STETTER 


can’t sit still and see yourself destroyed. [. . .] Where there’s no fight for it there’s no free- 
dom. What is it Spinoza says? If the state acts in ways that are abhorrent to human nature 
it’s the lesser evil to destroy it. Death to the anti-Semites! Long live revolution! Long live 
Liberty!” (Malamud 1966, p. 335). 

This call to arms contrasts with the mid-point of the novel when the reader first dis- 
covers Yakov’s affinity for Spinoza. Yakov, imprisoned in Kiev, is met by the investigating 
magistrate. The magistrate notes that Yakov kept a copy of Spinoza’s works and a dialogue 
ensues. The theme of freedom is gradually brought to center stage. Yakov maintains that 
Spinoza teaches us that “Necessity binds us down,” though we can at least know our free- 
dom if we know we are in God (Malamud 1966, pp. 75-76). The political implications of 
Spinoza’s understanding of freedom are not noticed by Yakov. 

In fact, it is the magistrate who draws Yakov’s attention to the political aspect of 
Spinoza’s thinking. He asks whether Yakov believes one can be free without being politically 
free. Yakov recognizes that he is in tricky waters and remains silent. The magistrate then 
reveals what he thinks of Spinoza: “One might say there is more than one conception of 
freedom in Spinoza’s mind — in Necessity, philosophically speaking; and practically, in the 
state, that is to say within the realm of politics and political action.” The magistrate further 
suggests that, for Spinoza, “the purpose of the state — the government — was the security 
and comparative freedom of rational man” (Malamud 1966, pp. 77-78). It is as if the 
remainder of the novel shows how the Spinozist seed, planted by chance and then nour- 
ished by a conversation in jail, finally blossoms at the story’s conclusion. Thus, we see that, 
for Malamud, Spinoza’s philosophy appears in its full glory only when its reader, radical- 
ized by extreme conditions, takes it to license revolutionary political action. 

One common feature to Singer and Malamud is the way that they root their Spinozists 
in a Jewish world. In this, they are forerunners of the ongoing popular preoccupation with 
Spinoza’s own relation to Judaism (Goldstein 2006; Yalom 2012). That biographical 
material should prove the focal point for influential popular literature on Spinoza is unsur- 
prising. They diverge, however, in seeing what kind of stance Spinoza’s philosophy moti- 
vates with regards to our interactions with our fellow human beings. Though perhaps 
some will dispute Malamud’s suggestion that there are two conceptions of freedom in 
Spinoza, I believe we should side with Malamud against Singer in emphasizing that Spinoza 
does not truly conceive freedom individualistically, and that social active affects, like gener- 
osity, play a crucial role for the “free man” (Sharp 2019). That is, though Spinoza main- 
tains unequivocally that the “free man” strives to cultivate their own intellect, Spinoza also 
maintains in the Ethics and especially in the political works that possessing intellectual 
virtue is not enough on its own for lasting freedom. Rather, as the intellect instructs us, 
freedom requires the continuous support of mutually empowering social relations and 
political devices, like institutions, laws, and the like. Without the latter, we cannot achieve 
the basic security necessary for any life, much less a enriching and liberating one. Dr. 
Fischelson fails to see that in scorning his fellow man, he is at bottom only injuring himself, 
and that turning to Dobbe is no turn away from Spinoza. We are, Spinoza thinks, mutually 
dependent creatures. After all, though Spinoza himself did not himself marry or settle in 
romantic partnership, he does suggest in Chapter 20 to the Appendix of Ethics Part 4 that 
it need not be seen as contrary to reason. There is a clear and important place for love in 
Spinoza, and his understanding of erotic and sexual relations is more sophisticated that 
widely believed (Pautrat 2011). What makes sexual partnership so difficult to support, on 
Spinoza’s account, is that we are prone to “jealousy” and other sad passions insofar as we 
imagine the thing we love to be incapable of being shared with others (Ethics Part 3 


574 


SPINOZA AND POPULAR PHILOSOPHY 


Proposition 35 Scholium). God, on the other hand, is especially loveable since the joy that 
love consists in can be communicated to all and shared by all (Ethics Part 4 Proposition 
36). In a sense, Dr. Fischelson’s true difficulties as an aspiring Spinozist have only just 
begun, then, as he must now learn to cultivate a love with Dobbe that will be guided by 
reason and not fraught with jealousy and tyrannical possessiveness. 


4. Irvin D. Yalom 


To conclude my survey of prominent trends in popular literature on Spinoza, I now briefly 
turn now to a recent (and very commercially successful) book of historical semi-fiction: 
Irvin D. Yalom’s The Spinoza Problem. Yalom presents the work as a “novel of ideas” and a 
way to celebrate Spinoza’s contributions — namely, that “ideas, thoughts, and feelings are 
caused by previous experiences, that passions may be studied dispassionately, that under- 
standing leads to transcendence” — to psychiatry and psychotherapy (Yalom 2012, 
pp. 7-8). Yalom’s novel contains two stories in one: the story of Spinoza’s “inner life” from 
the cherem of 1656 until 1666, and the story of Alfred Rosenberg, Nazi ideologue, and his 
own personal interest in Spinoza. According to Yalom, the events contained in the novel 
“could have happened”; to facilitate an access to the psyche of the protagonists (Spinoza 
and Rosenberg), two fictional figures are introduced: Franco Benitez and Friedrich Pfister. 

There is not much to say about Yalom’s representation of Spinoza’s philosophy, which is 
evoked as a sort of Jewish Enlightenment-era humanism. Let us grant that the Spinoza of 
Yalom’s novel overlaps at least in part with Spinoza the philosopher. What is rather more 
interesting is the way that Yalom’s Spinoza poses an intriguing “problem” for the would-be 
reader of Spinoza. In turn, this problem-posing feature of Spinoza’s thought gives way to 
an important second-order issue involved in the study of Spinoza as a popular thinker, viz., 
the question of ascertaining Spinoza’s ideal audience. To be clear, it seems to be that there 
are at least three Spinoza problems. The first is the problem that Spinoza himself ostensibly 
posed to the Jewish community of Amsterdam. The second is the problem that Spinoza 
represented to the eyes of an avowed anti-Semite who, despite himself, continued to return 
to Spinoza’s thinking. The last, and most interesting, is the broader problem of Spinoza’s 
ideal or intended readership. 

It might be thought, this appears to be Yalom’s intuition, that Spinoza’s Ethics, with its 
alleged psychotherapeutic remedies, is most congenially read by a person who suffers the 
ailments that Spinoza hopes to remedy. But herein lies the problem. If the reader is deeply 
mired in the passions and inadequate ideas, how can they be reasonably expected to get 
themselves out of that mire of passions, even with Spinoza’s help? Take the case of 
Rosenberg, as Yalom relays it. Through his studies of Goethe, Rosenberg recognizes that he 
may find in Spinoza something of genuine value for remedying his own inner turmoil and 
outward-directed rage. The Nazi recognizes that it is “this view of an orderly universe with 
predictable, mathematically derived laws, a world with an infinite explanatory power, that 
offered Goethe a sense of calmness.” Out of impatience and intolerance, however, 
Rosenberg cannot stand to read the first few pages of the Ethics. Rosenberg “wants what 
Goethe got out of Spinoza” but “feels only dread in this natural orderliness” (Yalom 2012, 
pp. 268-269). In Spinoza’s terms, we have here a case of the fluctuatio animi (Ethics Part 3 
Proposition 17 Scholium). Yalom’s story thus serves to suggest that the reader in theory 
who Spinoza would be in a position to do the most for — the reader who is the most encum- 
bered by the passions and least guided by reason — is the very reader who is least within the 


575 


JACK STETTER 


grasp of the Spinozist psychotherapeutic project, whereas the reader already guided by 
reason and thus able to practice Spinozism is the reader who needs Spinoza the least. 

It is fitting, I believe, to conclude this discussion of the ever-growing popular literature 
on Spinoza on an open-ended note. My survey of several popular representations, applica- 
tions, and appreciations of Spinoza may well indicate that the public for whom Spinoza 
writes is very elusive indeed, though not so much because of its having too many inade- 
quate ideas, but rather because the public has yet to settle on which Spinoza it is they 
prefer. Or perhaps, as Deleuze long ago said, it is that we philosophers have not yet learned 
all there is to learn about Spinoza from the non-philosophers, the genuine Spinozists 
(Deleuze 1981, pp. 164-175). Spinoza, after all, did not write philosophy as a mere liveli- 
hood. Spinoza was neither a “professional philosopher” nor an academic. His income was 
very modest, but he prided himself on being freed from the constraints of a university posi- 
tion and declined the offer when it presented itself (Letter 48). The value of the freedom to 
philosophize, as he conceived it, was priceless. He did philosophy because he thought that 
what was at stake in philosophy was human blessedness itself. I cannot imagine he would 
think his works the privilege of any one community of readers whether artists, novelists, 
poets, or philosophers. 


References 


Deleuze, G. (1981). Spinoza: philosophie pratique. Paris: Editions de Minuit. 

Forster, E. and Melamed, Y.Y. (eds.) (2012). Spinoza and German Idealism. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 

Garber, D. (1994). Dr. Fischelson’s dilemma: Spinoza on freedom and socialibility”. In: Spinoza 
on Reason and the “Free Man” (ed. Y. Yovel and G. Segal), 183-207. New York: Little Room 
Press. 

Goldstein, R.N. (2006). Betraying Spinoza: The Renegade Jew Who Gave Us Modernity. New York: 
Schocken Books. 

Goldstein, R. N. (2018). “Literary Spinoza”. In: The Oxford Handbook of Spinoza (ed. M. Della Rocca), 
627-666. Oxford: Oxford University Press 

Guay de Bellissen, H. (2019). Spinoza antistress. Paris: Opportun. 

Hardt, M. and Negri, A. (2001). Empire. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 

Israel, J. (2001). Radical Enlightenment: Philosophy and the Making of Modernity, 1650-1750. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press. 

Leerke, M. (forthcoming). Spinoza in France, c. 1670-1970. In The Blackwell Companion to Spinoza 
(ed. Y.Y. Melamed). Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell. 

Lenoir, FE. (2017). Le Miracle Spinoza: une philosophie pour éclairer notre vie. Paris: Fayard. 

Lordon, F. (2015). Imperium: structures et affects des corps politiques. Paris: La Fabrique. 

Malamud, B. (1966). The Fixer. New York: Farrar, Straus, and Giroux. 

Pautrat, B. (2011). Ethica sexualis: Spinoza et l'amour. Paris: Payot 

Rolland, R. (1931). Empédocle d’Agrigente, suivi de l’éclair de Spinoza. Paris: Albin Michel. 

Sharp, H. (2019). Generosity as freedom in Spinoza’s Ethics. In: Spinoza in Twenty-First Century 
American and French Philosophy (ed. J. Stetter and C. Ramond), 277-288. London: Bloomsbury 
Academic. 

Singer, I. Bashevis (1961). The Spinoza of Market Street. New York: Farrar, Straus, and Cudahy. 

Spinoza, B. (1860). Traité politique [1872] (ed. and trans. J. Prat). Paris: Hachette. 

Spinoza, B. (2015). Traité théologico-politique (ed. B. Pautrat, trans. J. Prat). Paris: Allia. 

Spinoza, B. (2016). De la droite maniére de vivre [1860] (ed. B. Pautrat, trans. J. Prat). Paris: 
Allia. 


576 


SPINOZA AND POPULAR PHILOSOPHY 


Spinoza, B. (2019). The Ethics, translated by George Eliot (ed. C. Carlisle). Princeton: Princeton 
University Press. 

Stetter, J. and Ramond, C. (eds.) (2019). Spinoza in Twenty-First Century American and French 
Philosophy. London: Bloomsbury. 

Thomass, B. (2008). Etre heureux avec Spinoza. Paris: Eyrolles. 

Yalom, I.D. (2012). The Spinoza Problem: A Novel. New York: Basic Books. 


577 


Index 


acosmism, 541-2, 549-55 

acquiescentia, 64, 441-6, 471-2 

affects, 62-3, 86-91, 113, 296-302, 
305-10, 318, 328-36, 344, 358-61, 
368-72, 381, 399-41, 429, 435-6, 
444-7, 574 

Althusser, Louis, 508, 513 

Alphakhar, Yehuda, 278, 459-60 

Alquié, Ferdinand, 291, 512-13 

Amsterdam, 3-11, 16-19, 22, 76, 339, 416, 
449,485,575 

anthropocentrism, 373, 475-7, 529, 533, 
565-6 

anthropomorphism, 149, 373, 407, 440-2, 
532-3 

Arnauld, Antoine, 118-19, 123, 266, 277 


Aristotle, 30, 48, 69, 123, 149-50, 158, 191, 


200, 338,415, 470 
Aquinas, Thomas, 31, 35, 48-53, 68-9, 120, 
123, 160, 193, 201, 447, 471 


Attributes, 33, 37, 58-62, 95-107, 123, 127, 


135-7, 154, 158-69, 174, 187, 189, 
203, 205, 213, 215-21, 224-7, 233, 
241-8, 259-60, 266-73, 296-303, 
314-21, 342-6, 379, 390, 441, 475-7, 
488, 497-504, 548, 573 

Augustine, 445, 448, 470-1 

Averroes (Ibn-Rushd), 31, 160 

Avicenna (Ibn-Sina), 30-40, 48, 53 


Bacon, Francis, 56, 59, 75, 338, 420 

Bayle, Pierre, 6, 247, 450, 475, 509, 511 

beatitude, 293, 357, 376, 406 

Bennett, Jonathan, 126, 144, 148, 152, 166, 
247, 254, 277, 315, 353, 378, 406, 
496, 532 


Bible, 8, 71-7, 412, 449-61, 485-9, 508, 
562-5 

body, 60-3, 74, 82-91, 97, 102-6, 114, 
126-41, 171-7, 189-202, 233-49, 
256-63, 287-94, 296-303, 305-24, 
330-6, 342, 366-9, 378-9, 427-9, 
475-9 

Boyle, Robert, 57, 242, 410 

Burgersdijk, Franco, 48-53, 69-71 


Calvinism, 69 
Carriero, John, 30, 35, 179, 185, 193, 269, 
272, 501-2 
Caterus, Johannes, 117-18, 123 
cause 
adequate, 84, 89, 141, 282, 292-3, 356, 544 
causa sui, 116—25, 137, 168, 215-19, 282, 
389-90, 530, 545 
efficient, 35, 53-4, 116-25, 218, 227, 529 
formal, 119-21, 259 
immanent, 121, 124, 442, 471-2 
transient, 121 
Chalmers, David, 105 
Christ, 411, 457-8 
Christianity, 9, 64, 76, 109, 445, 456, 508, 
559-62 
Clarke, Samuel, 392 
Clauberg, Johannes, 75 
cognition 
involving cause, 99-103 
three kinds of, 211, 253, 257, 269, 286, 
311-12, 342, 347, 379, 395, 442-3,475 
Colerus, Johannes, 6, 9-11, 484, 565 
conatus, 36, 62, 82-6, 158, 189, 214, 244-6, 
317, 328-30, 344, 353-60, 378-9, 
423-7, 542 


A Companion to Spinoza, First Edition. Edited by Yitzhak Y. Melamed. 
© 2021 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2021 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd. 


579 


INDEX 


conception, 99, 138, 179-88, 297-8, 398 

consciousness, 74, 106, 304-27, 348, 394, 
423, 533 

Cousin, Victor, 511-12 

Crescas, Hasdai, 31, 38 

Curley, Edwin M., 26, 50, 102, 126, 209, 259, 
268, 315, 378, 403, 500 


death, 90, 144, 148, 165, 366, 560, 562-3 
Delbos, Victor, 512-13 
Deleuze, Gilles, 159, 164, 168, 215, 508, 513, 
527,573,576 
Della Rocca, Michael, 37, 104—5, 154, 161, 
171, 179, 189, 216, 238, 243, 266, 277, 
282, 362, 500, 518, 527, 540, 548 
democracy, 10, 70, 416, 570-1 
Descartes, René 
Meditations, 81, 117, 270, 304, 312 
Objections and replies, 57, 81, 117, 277 
Principles of Philosophy, 57-9, 65, 207, 
241-5, 287 
determinism, 8, 222, 358, 437, 509, 529 


egoism, 355, 359, 362-3, 564-6 

error, 51, 56, 61, 75, 182, 206, 210, 291, 301, 
386, 396, 445, 466-7, 530, 533, 543-5 

essence 

definition of, 31, 33, 37, 199, 223, 377 
formal, 37, 54, 102, 110, 259, 268, 298-9, 

311, 321, 342, 376-80 

eternity, 37, 48-53, 108-15, 144-56, 158, 
259, 302, 314, 347, 378-80, 406, 441-5, 
523-4 

existence, 30-40, 43, 49-54, 60, 97-104, 
110-24, 137, 144-57, 162-78, 215-20, 
223-9, 245, 273, 342, 366-7, 397, 
445-7, 501-3, 518-21, 545-7 

Euclid, 7, 130-3, 149-50, 267, 311, 386, 388 

expression, 101, 217-19, 224-7, 299-302, 
346-8, 378-9, 446, 513, 542 

Extension, 96-7, 102, 103, 105, 106, 127, 
130, 131, 144, 155, 205-6, 232, 236, 
241-3, 247-8, 290, 296, 343 


freedom, 45, 54, 59, 73, 91, 232, 314, 335, 
347, 380-2, 394-409, 422-3, 499, 520, 
529-32, 538-47 


Garber, Daniel, 62, 216, 288, 351, 378, 527, 572 

Garrett, Don J., 37, 82, 174, 193, 202, 220, 
266, 272, 281, 304, 317, 351, 353, 359, 
376-9, 468, 500-2 


580 


Gersonides, 563 

Glazemaker, Jan Hendriksz, 5-6, 12, 18-20, 
25,483 

God, 33-8, 41-6, 48-54, 58-65, 70-8, 
95-107, 110-25, 128-34, 142, 146, 
159-68, 197-8, 209-12, 214-21, 
224-7, 244-9, 260-3, 293, 342-6, 
377-80, 389-91, 440-8, 454-6, 471-2, 
519-23, 540-3, 558-60 

good and evil, 44-5, 88-9, 161, 212, 283, 309-10, 
351-63, 385, 400, 465-8, 534, 561 

Gueroult, Martial, 159-64, 168, 215, 217, 
247, 254, 506, 508, 512-13, 548 


The Hague, 3, 7-9, 11, 18-19, 22, 497, 501 

Harvey, Warren Zev, 41, 353, 483-6, 488 

Heereboord, Adriaan, 48-51, 58, 68-72 

Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich, 21, 158, 475, 
541, 548-56 

herem(ban), 4-5, 450, 575 

Hobbes, Thomas, 62, 77, 81-91, 110, 207, 
242, 268, 338-41, 347, 371, 403-9, 
412,415, 423, 434, 449, 458, 474, 510 

homo liber, 310, 353, 381-2, 398-402, 422, 
435, 468-9, 574 

Hubner, Karolina, 38, 83, 195, 244, 266, 353 

Hume, David, 104, 243, 392, 413, 419-20, 560 


Ibn Ezra, Avraham, 449, 460, 486 
Ibn Ezra, Moshe, 489 
idea 
adequate, 59, 84, 151, 153, 206, 211-13, 
229, 248, 258-9, 265-74, 281-4, 293-4, 
301, 311, 321, 330-6, 342, 354-60, 
378-9, 438, 465, 471, 481, 523, 575-6 
innate, 259 
order of, 299, 302 
true, 59-60, 109, 210-13, 265, 269-70, 
276-84, 297,489 
imagination, 32, 42, 45, 46, 113-14, 135, 
138-9, 147, 165, 186, 207, 211, 241, 
257, 283, 286-7, 289-95, 297, 311-14, 
329-36, 339, 342, 345, 355-6, 395-401, 
442-3, 454, 465, 467-9, 471-2, 475-9, 
481, 489, 568 
individuation, 247, 378-80, 564-5 
infinity, 50, 60, 111, 158-69, 217-19, 225-7, 
497-8, 523 
intellect, 38,41, 43-4, 46, 50-54, 74-5, 96, 
122, 139, 148, 165, 182, 208-9, 215, 
227, 260-3, 289-93, 343, 375, 385-6, 
392,476, 574 


Jacobi, Friedrich Heinrich, 17,517, 521, 
539-40, 543 

James, Susan, 328, 336, 398, 415, 
419-20, 427 

Jews, 3, 5,412, 450, 460, 562 


Kabbalah, 486, 489, 512, 562 
Kant, Immanuel, 133, 210, 223, 517-26, 
530, 539 


Laerke, Mogens, 145, 215, 377, 496, 502, 569 
Language 
Hebrew, 21, 453, 483-91 
laws 
international, 431-9 
of nature, 62, 88, 103, 111, 114, 132, 214, 
346, 384-6, 437, 452, 503, 534, 543 
LeBuffe, Michael, 272, 291, 318-22, 351, 355, 
397,432 
Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm, 10-11, 60, 134, 
170, 177, 179, 299-300, 351, 465, 
471-2, 481, 495-504, 508-9, 512 
Limn, Martin, 144, 199 
love 
divine intellectual, 43-5, 144, 149, 300, 
440-48, 471 


Machiavelli, Niccolo, 78, 403, 405, 408, 419 
Maimonides, Moses, 31, 35, 41-6, 51, 160, 
278, 455-60 
Mathematics, 44, 75-6, 387-8, 391, 533 
Matheron, Alexandré, 215, 217, 220, 247, 
351, 447, 513 
McDaniel, Kris, 105 
Meinong, Alexis, 105 
Melamed, Yitzhak Y., 31, 33, 35, 41, 50, 96, 
98, 144-6, 166, 172, 175,179,195, 
202, 215-16, 218, 268, 271, 273, 283, 
343, 353, 373, 379, 397, 413, 416, 432, 
434, 442, 486, 488, 498, 529, 548, 569 
Mendelssohn, Moses, 17, 520-1, 533, 539 
mereology, 134-43 
Meyer, Lodewijk, 6-8, 11-12, 17-19, 57-8, 
61, 68, 75-7, 136, 138, 240, 342-3, 387, 
449, 455, 459-60 
mind 
human, 56-7, 60-2, 84, 103, 113-14, 126, 
130, 136, 151, 174-6, 209, 254-63, 
266, 272-4, 288-94, 304, 312-16, 321, 
379-81, 400, 444-6, 475-7, 523-4, 549 
union with the body, 60, 62, 136, 287-9, 
296-303, 475-6 


INDEX 


modes 
infinite, 33, 37, 1OO—2, 123-4, 133, 145, 

148, 158, 166, 195, 227-8, 238, 248, 
390, 480, 502 

monism, 49, 95-107, 135, 140-1, 189, 225, 
248, 296, 336, 375, 429, 488-9, 495-6, 
517-20, 540, 548 

Moses, 87, 412, 453-4, 457, 459-60, 508, 
510, 562 

motion and rest, 102-3, 105, 127, 131, 133, 
158, 167-8, 171, 175-6, 191, 193, 205, 
227, 234-5, 245-7, 258, 266, 288, 
366-7, 377-9 


Nadler, Steven, 30, 41, 56, 201, 254, 267, 
304-5, 316-17, 333, 339, 378-9, 381, 
435, 437, 468-9, 483-4, 488, 561, 563 
Narboni, Moses, 3 1—2 

necessitarianism, 105, 222-9, 495-6, 500-4, 
520, 529, 539-40 

Newlands, Samuel, 33, 154, 160, 172, 179, 
185, 208, 500-1 

Nietzsche, Friedrich, 154, 527-37 
nominalism, 204-13, 365 


Oldenburg, Henry, 7-8, 10, 56-7, 127-30, 
133, 135, 140-2, 325, 410, 449-51, 497 
orientalism, 475, 510, 512, 552 


panpsychism, 105-6, 481 

pantheism, 35, 481, 511-12, 517, 520, 
539-43, 558-61, 564-6 

Pascal, Blaise, 58, 362, 392 

Peirce, Charles, 474, 479, 481 

persistence, 177, 197, 329 

physics, 45, 56, 58, 62, 68-72, 102-3, 
126-34, 234, 240-50, 283-4, 290, 313, 
384, 388 

power, 33-4, 51-3, 56, 59, 62, 86-90, 100-3, 
112-13, 118, 167, 173, 177, 196, 205, 
214-21, 297, 301, 423-5, 433, 532 

principle of sufficient reason, 101, 105, 161, 
192, 502, 518, 527-34 

propria, 32-3, 96, 129 


Rashi (R. ShlomoYitzhaki), 449 

realpolitik, 434-6 

Regius, Henricus, 71, 240 

relations, 32, 48, 88, 101, 104, 135, 140, 
179-88, 193-4, 210, 217, 243, 292, 
378, 386, 435-7, 519, 545 

Rieuwertsz, Jan, 5-6, 11-12, 17, 19, 450, 483 


581 


INDEX 


right 
natural, 81, 214, 368, 371, 381, 403-4, 438 
Rijnsburg, 5-7, 12, 18 


Schelling, F. W. J., 538-47 
Schopenhauer, Arthur, 557-67 
scientia intuitiva, 41, 45, 209, 211, 265-74, 
352, 376, 396, 442-8 
Scripture see Bible 
Senior, Hana Deborah, 4, 339 
Skepticism, 72, 262, 269, 276-85, 340, 381, 
438 
Smith, Adam, 411, 413-15 
Solomon, King, 44—5, 457 
Spinoza, Benedict de 
Ep. 12, 123, 138, 158, 165, 186, 241, 283 
Ep. 32, 57, 140, 249, 325 
Opera posthuma, 10, 12, 17, 20, 23-4, 76, 
450, 460, 483, 495, 508 
De nagelate schriften, 6, 8, 12, 17, 20, 23, 
483-4 
Spinoza, Michael de, 4 


582 


state 

ancient Hebrew, 412-13, 415 

goal of the, 380 
Suarez, Francisco, 48-51, 53, 69, 180 
summum bonum, 43-4, 89, 339-41, 354, 385 
superstition, 86, 372-3, 411, 445 


teleology, 124, 438, 465, 517, 532-3 

Totaro, Pina, 20, 21, 25-6, 483 

Tschirnhaus, E. W., 10-11, 20, 25, 56, 163, 
227, 240, 247, 314, 394-5, 497, 508 


Voetius, Gijsbert, 64, 69, 71-2, 77 
Voorburg, 7-9, 18 
vulgus, 454, 460 


will 
free, 8, 56-7, 61, 63, 207, 309, 314, 322, 
334, 343, 394-7, 438, 529-31 
Wilson, Margaret, 259, 268, 306, 315 
Wolfson, Harry Austryn, 30-1, 36, 41, 162, 338 
women, xvii, 372, 415, 422-30 


