Sri Ramakrishna & Cross-Cultural 
Philosophy of Religion 





AYON-VWEAHARAJ 


INFINITE PATHS TO INFINITE REALITY 


INFINITE PATHS 
TO INFINITE REALITY 


Sri Ramakrishna and Cross-Cultural 


Philosophy of Religion 


Ayon Maharaj 


UNIVERSITY PRESS 


OXFORD 


UNIVERSITY PRESS 


Oxford University Press is a department of the University of Oxford. It furthers 
the University’s objective of excellence in research, scholarship, and education 
by publishing worldwide. Oxford is a registered trade mark of Oxford University 


Press in the UK and certain other countries. 


Published in the United States of America by Oxford University Press 
198 Madison Avenue, New York, NY 10016, United States of America. 


© Oxford University Press 2018 


All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in 

a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, without the 
prior permission in writing of Oxford University Press, or as expressly permitted 
by law, by license, or under terms agreed with the appropriate reproduction 
rights organization. Inquiries concerning reproduction outside the scope of the 
above should be sent to the Rights Department, Oxford University Press, at the 
address above. 


You must not circulate this work in any other form 
and you must impose this same condition on any acquirer. 


CIP data is on file at the Library of Congress 
ISBN 978-—0-19-086823-9 


987654321 
Printed by Sheridan Books, Inc., United States of America 


fofl Gt | ANG Sey | 
— ae 


God is infinite, and the paths to God are infinite. 
—Sri Ramakrishna 


CONTENTS 


Acknowledgments 


A Note on Sanskrit and Bengali Transliteration 


Abbreviations of Texts 


Introduction 


PART ONE: The Infinitude of God 


1. Sri Ramakrishna’s Harmonizing Philosophy of Vijfiana Vedanta 


le 


AI, 


III. 
IV. 


The Spiritual Basis of Sri Ramakrishna’s Philosophical Outlook: 
His Upbringing, Religious Practices, and Mystical Experiences 
Five Interpretive Principles for Reconstructing Sri Ramakrishna’s 
Philosophical Views from the Kathamrta 

The Central Tenets of Sri Ramakrishna’s Vijiana Vedanta 
Beyond “Neo-Vedanta”: Implications of Sri Ramakrishna’s 
Philosophy of Vijiana for Discourse on Modern Vedanta 


2. A Cross-Cultural Inquiry into Divine Infinitude: Sri Ramakrishna, 


Paraconsistency, and the Overcoming of Conceptual Idolatry 


I. 


II. 


III. 


IV. 


Satyam jhanam anantam brahma: Sti Ramakrishna in Dialogue 
with Sankara, Ramanuja, and Visvanatha Cakravartin 

Scotus and Cusa: Two Medieval Christian Paradigms for 
Understanding Divine Infinitude 

The Paraconsistent God: Sri Ramakrishna and 

Benedikt Paul Gocke 


Idol versus Icon: Sri Ramakrishna and Jean-Luc Marion 


xiii 


XV 


13 


17 


p 
oe 


45 


51 


a3 


63 


67 
eps 


viii » Contents 


PART TWO: Religious Pluralism 


3. “All Faiths Are Paths”: A Reconstruction and Defense 
of Sri Ramakrishna’s Vijiana-Based Model of Religious Pluralism 


I. A Reconstruction of Sri Ramakrishna’s Model 
of Religious Pluralism 
II. Sri Ramakrishna’s Response to the Problem of Conflicting 
Religious Truth-Claims 
III. Addressing Major Objections to Sri Ramakrishna’s Religious 


Pluralism 


4, John Hick’s Vedantic Road Not Taken? Hick’s Evolving Views on 
Religious Pluralism in the Light of Sri Ramakrishna 
I. Sri Ramakrishna’s Legacy: Sri Aurobindo’s “Logic of the Infinite” 
in the Context of Nonsectarian Vedanta 
Il. The Early Hick’s Aurobindonian Model of Religious Pluralism 
III. The Ontological Underpinnings of the Later Hick’s 
Quasi-Kantian Model of Religious Pluralism 
IV. A Ramakrishnan Critique of Hick’s Quasi-Kantian 
Pluralist Model 
V. Adequacy Criteria for Assessing Theories of Religious Pluralism 


PART THREE: Mystical Experience 


5. Beyond Perennialism and Constructivism: Sri Ramakrishna’s 
Manifestationist Model of Mystical Experience 
I. Perennialist Models 
II. Constructivist Models 
III. Sri Ramakrishna’s Experiential Method 
IV. A Reconstruction of Sri Ramakrishna’s Manifestationist 
Model of Mystical Experience 
V. Anticipating a Possible Objection 


6. A Cross-Cultural Defense of the Epistemic Value of Mystical 
Experience: Sri Ramakrishna, Self-Authentication, and the Argument 
from Experience 


I. Sri Ramakrishna’s Critique of Theological Reason 
I. Sri Ramakrishna and the Question of Self-Authenticating 


Mystical Experience 


85 


88 


101 


109 


117 


119 
124 


133 


138 
147 


153 
156 
162 
169 


183 


193 


196 


198 


201 


Contents « ix 


III. The Argument from Experience in the Light 


of Sri Ramakrishna 211 
IV. The Cross-Checkability Objection 219 
V. The Conflicting Claims Objection 231 


PART FOUR: The Problem of Evil 


7. Sri Ramakrishna’s Multidimensional Response to the Problem of 
Evil: Skeptical Theism, Saint-Making Theodicy, and the Panentheistic 
Standpoint of Vijiana 241 
I. Karma and Lila in the Classical Vedantic Theodicies of Sankara 
and Ramanuja 245 
I. Sri Ramakrishna’s Skeptical Theist Refutation of Evidential 


Arguments from Evil 249 
III. Sri Ramakrishna’s Saint-Making Theodicy 255 
IV. Reconciling Sri Ramakrishna’s Saint-Making Theodicy with 
His Hard Theological Determinism 264 
V. Sri Ramakrishna’s Theodical Endgame: The Panentheistic 
Standpoint of Vijiana 268 
VI. Anticipating Possible Objections 273 
8. A Cross-Cultural Approach to the Problem of Evil: Sri Ramakrishna, 
the Rowe-Alston Debate, and Hick’s Soul-Making Theodicy 281 
I. Skeptical Theist Positions in Dialogue: 
Sri Ramakrishna and Alston 282 
II. Soul-Making Theodicies in Dialogue: 
Sri Ramakrishna and Hick 292 


III. A Ramakrishnan Critique of Hick’s Soul-Making Theodicy 297 
IV. Toward a Metatheodicy: Adequacy Criteria 


for Assessing Theodicies 305 
Methodological Postlude 311 
Bibliography 315 


Index 335 


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 


I have many people to thank for the final shape this book has taken. Revered 
Swami Atmapriyanandaji, the Vice Chancellor of Ramakrishna Mission 
Vivekananda Educational and Research Institute, supported this project from the 
beginning and helped me appreciate the philosophical originality and depth of 
Sri Ramakrishna’s teachings. I have also benefited from conversations with the 
following monks of the Ramakrishna Order: Revered Swamis Bhajananandaji, 
Atmavidanandaji, Nityasthanandaji, Atmarupanandaji, Sarvapriyanandaji, 
Mahayoganandaji, Krishnasakhanandaji, and Brahmacharins Nitin and Vikas. 
The following people provided helpful feedback on individual chapters of the 
book: Bradley Cochran, Jerome Gellman, Palash Ghorai, Janardan Ghosh, 
Benedikt Paul Goécke, Monika Kirloskar-Steinbach, Wendy Lochner, Paul 
Lodge, Jeffery D. Long, Joseph Milillo, Arpita Mitra, Andrew Nicholson, Perry 
Schmidt-Leukel, and Matt Seidel. I am also grateful to an anonymous referee 
for the Journal of Religion, whose incisive comments on the article on which 
chapter 3 is based led me to make major revisions to my argument. 

Jonathan Edelmann wrote a helpful reply to my query about Gaudiya Vaisnava 
views on divine infinitude, which proved to be indispensable for my discussion 
of Visvanatha Cakravartin in chapter 2. Justin McBrayer’s insightful response to 
my query about the relationship between skeptical theism and theodicy helped 
me considerably in reconstructing, in chapter 7, Sri Ramakrishna’s response to 
the problem of evil. Ryan Sakoda, Joseph Milillo, and my parents Raj and Illa 
Roy went out of their way to track down and send me numerous articles and 
book chapters that were unavailable here in India. The two referees for Oxford 
University Press—one of whom later identified himselfas Ankur Barua—deserve 
special thanks. Their incisive feedback led me to improve and nuance the argu- 
ments of my book in numerous ways. I am very grateful to Lucy Randall, the 
philosophy editor at Oxford University Press, who believed in my book from 
the beginning and shepherded it ably to publication. I would also like to thank 
Hannah Doyle at OUP for her assistance in the production of this book. 


xii « Acknowledgments 


Some chapters of this book were presented at conferences and seminars in 
India, Japan, and the United States. In January 2016, I presented an early ver- 
sion of chapter 4 at the International and Interdisciplinary Conference on 
Knowledge, Morality, and Spirituality in Kolkata. I presented an abbreviated 
version of chapter 3 both at the International Conference on the Sociology of 
Religion in a Pluralistic Society at Jadavpur University (Kolkata) in April 2016 
and at an invited talk at the American Consulate in Kolkata in March 2017. In 
June 2016, I gave a talk on the main argument of chapter 7 at the AAS-in-Asia 
Conference at Doshisha University in Kyoto, Japan. In April 2017, I discussed 
chapter 1 with Professor Rita Sherma’s PhD students at the Graduate Theological 
Union in Berkeley, California. In February 2018, I presented a shorter version of 
chapter | ata National Seminar on “Sri Ramakrishna’s Kathamrta” in New Delhi 
organized by the Indian Council of Philosophical Research. I would like to thank 
the participants at all of these events for their questions and comments. 

In April 2017, Iconducted research for my book at the libraries of UC Berkeley 
and the Graduate Theological Union. I am grateful to the staff at both librar- 
ies for their help and hospitality. My research visit to Berkeley was supported by 
grants from the American Philosophical Society and the Dharma Civilization 
Foundation. 

The following publishers are acknowledged with gratitude for permitting me 
to reprint two of my articles, in modified form, as chapters 1 and 3 of my book 
respectively: 

“Sri Ramakrsna’s Philosophy of Vijitana Vedanta? International Journal 
of Hindu Studies 21.1 (2017): 25-54. Copyright © 2017 by Springer Science + 
Business Media Dordrecht. Reprinted with permission of Springer. 

““God Is Infinite, and the Paths to God Are Infinite’: A Reconstruction and 
Defense of Sri Ramakrishna’s Vijiana-Based Model of Religious Pluralism,” 
Journal of Religion 97.2 (2017): 181-213. Copyright © 2017 by The University of 
Chicago. Reprinted with permission of The University of Chicago. 

Finally, I offer this book, with all its imperfections, to Sri Ramakrishna: 


GS aRildaqugert a 
fd Blaret a ATA ATT | 


A NOTE ON SANSKRIT AND BENGALI 
TRANSLITERATION 


Throughout the book, I transliterate Sanskrit words using the standard 
International Alphabet of Sanskrit Transliteration scheme. I often add hyphens 
between individual words within a compound word (samasa), in order to facili- 
tate comprehension and to indicate how I interpret occasionally ambiguous com- 
pound words. For instance, I render anekavisesanavisista as aneka-visesana-visista. 

There is no standard transliteration scheme for Bengali, so I have adopted 
the scheme that I think will be most helpful to my expected readers. Whenever 
possible, I transliterate Sanskritic Bengali words in such a way that the Sanskrit 
root words are easily identifiable by those who have some knowledge of Sanskrit 
but little or no knowledge of Bengali. For instance, I render the Bengali word 
bijian—which was frequently used by Sri Ramakrishna—as vijiana, and I render 
bidya as vidya. By contrast, I phonetically transliterate other Bengali words such 
as ekhankar and bujhechi. 

Throughout the book, Ido not use diacritics when referring to Sri Ramakrishna, 
since this spelling of his name is already familiar. Moreover, I cite the names of 
Indian authors in exactly the way the authors themselves wrote their names. For 
instance, I refer to “Swami Tapasyananda” instead of “Svami Tapasyananda,’ since 
Swami Tapasyananda printed his name in his books without diacritics. However, 
I always use diacritics when citing the names of authors of texts in an Indian lan- 
guage such as Bengali or Sanskrit. For instance, I refer to “Svami Dhiresananda” 
as the author of several Bengali articles. 


ABBREVIATIONS OF TEXTS 


Throughout this book, whenever I cite a passage from Mahendranath Gupta’s 
Srisriramakrsnakathamrta, 1 use parenthetical citations in the body of the text, 
first citing the page number of the Bengali text (abbreviated as K) and then cit- 
ing the page number of Swami Nikhilananda’s English translation, The Gospel of 
Sri Ramakrishna (abbreviated as G). I sometimes modify Swami Nikhilananda’s 
translation. 

Whenever I cite a passage from Svami Saradananda’s biography of Sri 
Ramakrishna, Srisrinamakrsnalilaprasanga, | also use parenthetical citations in 
the body of the text, first citing the volume number, fascicle number, and page 
number of the Bengali text (abbreviated as LP) and then citing the page number 
of Swami Chetanananda’s single-volume English translation (abbreviated as DP). 
I sometimes modify Swami Chetanananda’s translation. 


K  Mahendranath Gupta, Svisririmakrsnakathamrta: Srima-kathita. 1 vol. 
Kolkata: Udbodhan, [1902-32] 2010. 


G  Mahendranath Gupta, The Gospel of Sri Ramakrishna. Translated by Swami 
Nikhilananda. New York: Ramakrishna-Vedanta Center, [1942] 1992. 


LP Svami Saradananda, Svisriramakrsnalilaprasanga. 2 vols. Kolkata: 
Udbodhan, [1909-19] 2009. Volume 1 contains three separately paginated 
fascicles, and Volume 2 contains two separately paginated fascicles. 


DP Swami Saradananda, Sri Ramakrishna and His Divine Play. Translated by 
Swami Chetanananda. St. Louis: Vedanta Society of St. Louis, 2003. 


INFINITE PATHS TO INFINITE REALITY 


INTRODUCTION 


One can write shelves of philosophical books based on any one of 
Sri Ramakrishna’s teachings. 


—SWAMI VIVEKANANDA! 


What can contemporary philosophers and theologians learn from 
a nineteenth-century Indian mystic? This book proposes that Sri 
Ramakrishna (1836-1886), an unlettered Bengali sage, has much to 
teach us. He is best known for having affirmed the harmony of all reli- 
gions on the basis of his own richly varied mystical experiences and 
eclectic religious practices, both Hindu and non-Hindu. His spiritual 
journey culminated in the exalted state of “vij#ana,; his term for the 
“intimate knowledge” of God as the Infinite Reality that is both per- 
sonal and impersonal, with and without form, immanent in the uni- 
verse and beyond it. Sri Ramakrishna’s expansive spiritual standpoint 
of vijnana, | argue, opens up a new paradigm for addressing central 
issues in the philosophy of religion. 

Although Sri Ramakrishna never presented a systematic philos- 
ophy, his recorded oral teachings in Bengali address a wide range of 
philosophical issues and draw on numerous Indian philosophical tra- 
ditions. To date, however, surprisingly few books have been devoted 
to Sri Ramakrishna’s philosophy. In Bengali, the only sustained ex- 
amination of Sri Ramakrishna’s philosophy is Svami Prajfanananda’s 
eight-volume study.’ In English, there are a number of book-length his- 
torical and psychobiographical studies of Sri Ramakrishna, but there is 





1. LP Liiil / DP 387. 


2. Svami Prajianananda, Vani o Vicar: Sri Ramakrsna Kathamrter Vyakhya 
Vislesan, 8 vols. (Kolkata: Sri Ramakrishna Vedanta Math, 1974-95). In chapter 1, 
I argue that Prajfanananda’s study, while important, has major limitations—the 
most serious one being his overeagerness to fit all of Sri Ramakrishna’s philosoph- 
ical teachings into the sectarian framework of Advaita Vedanta. 


2 ¢ INFINITE PATHS TO INFINITE REALITY 


not a single academic book on Sri Ramakrishna’s philosophical views.* However, 
several scholars—including Satis Chandra Chatterjee, Swami Tapasyananda, and 
Jeffery D. Long—have written insightful articles and book chapters on different 
aspects of Sri Ramakrishna’s philosophy.‘ Building on their work, I have ventured 
to write the first scholarly book in English on Sri Ramakrishna’s philosophy. 
There are three primary reasons why Sri Ramakrishna’s philosophy deserves 
a book-length treatment. First, his philosophical views, as original as they are 
sophisticated, constitute a significant—if neglected—chapter in the history 
of Indian philosophical thought. Second, Sri Ramakrishna’s teachings influ- 
enced some of the most important figures in modern Indian thought, including 
Swami Vivekananda, Sri Aurobindo, Rabindranath Tagore, Mahatma Gandhi, 
and Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan.’ Thus, a careful study of Sri Ramakrishna’s 





3. Historical studies of Sri Ramakrishna include Amiya P. Sen’s two books, Ramakrishna 
Paramahamsa: The Sadhaka of Dakshineswar (New Delhi: Penguin, 2010), and Three Essays on Sri 
Ramakrishna and His Times (Shimla: Indian Institute of Advanced Study,2001). Psychobiographical 
studies of Sri Ramakrishna include Carl Olson, The Mysterious Play of Kali: An Interpretive Study 
of Ramakrishna (Atlanta, GA: Scholars Press, 1990); Narasingha Sil, Ramakrsna Paramahamsa: A 
Psychological Profile (Leiden: Brill, 1991); Narasingha Sil, Ramakrishna Revisited: A New Biography 
(Lanham, MD: University Press of America, 1998); Jeffrey Kripal, Kalis Child: The Mystical and 
the Erotic in the Life and Teachings of Sri Ramakrishna (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 
2004). Such psychobiographical studies of Sri Ramakrishna are based on highly controversial, 
and culturally specific, psychoanalytic assumptions that tend to distort, rather than illuminate, Sri 
Ramakrishna’ life and teachings. For an incisive critique of psychobiographical approaches to Sri 
Ramakrishna, see Swami Tyagananda and Pravrajika Vrajaprana, Interpreting Ramakrishna: Kalis 
Child Revisited (New Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 2010). 


4. See, for instance, Walter Neevel, “The Transformation of Sri Ramakrishna? in Hinduism: New 
Essays in the History of Religions, ed. B. L. Smith (Leiden: Brill, 1976), 53-97; Freda Matchett, 
“The Teaching of Ramakrishna in Relation to the Hindu Tradition and as Interpreted 
by Vivekananda,’ Religion 11 (1981), 171-84; Satis Chandra Chatterjee, Classical Indian 
Philosophies: Their Synthesis in the Philosophy of Sri Ramakrishna, 2nd ed. (Calcutta: University 
of Calcutta, [1963] 1985), 104-52; Swami Tapasyananda, Sri Ramakrishna’s Thoughts in a 
Vedantic Perspective (Mylapore, India: Sri Ramakrishna Math, 1993); Arindam Chakrabarti, 
“The Dark Mother Flying Kites: Sri Ramakrishna’s Metaphysic of Morals,” Sophia 33.3 (1994), 
14-29; Swami Bhajanananda, “Philosophy of Sri Ramakrishna. University of Calcutta Journal 
of the Department of Philosophy 9 (2010), 1-56; Jeffery D. Long, “Advaita and Dyaita: Bridging 
the Gap—the Ramakrishna Tradition’s both/and Approach to the Dvaita/Advaita Debate,’ 
Journal of Vaishnava Studies 16.2 (Spring 2008), 49-70. 


5. For a discussion of the influence of Sri Ramakrishna on Sri Aurobindo, see Ayon Maharaj, 
“Toward a New Hermeneutics of the Bhagavad Gita: Sri Ramakrishna, Sri Aurobindo, and 
the Secret of Vijiana; Philosophy East and West 65.4 (October 2015), 1214-17. Tagore offers a 
paean to Sri Ramakrishna in his 1936 speech, “Address at the Parliament of Religions,” in The 
English Writings of Rabindranath Tagore, vol. 4, ed. Sisir Kumar Das and Nityapriya Ghosh 
(Kolkata: Sahitya Akademi, 2008), 957-65. Gandhi remarks on Sri Ramakrishna in the fore- 
word to Swami Nikhilananda, Life of Sri Ramakrishna (Kolkata: Advaita Ashrama, [1928] 
2008), ix. Radhakrishnan was influenced by Sri Ramakrishna primarily through his encounter 
with Swami Vivekananda’s work. Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan, “Swami Vivekananda and Young 


India? Prabuddha Bharata 68.5 (May 1963), 183-84. 


Introduction + 3 


philosophy enriches our understanding of modern India’s complex intellec- 
tual landscape. Third, Sri Ramakrishna’s philosophical positions resonate 
strongly with cutting-edge work in Western philosophy of religion, thereby in- 
viting cross-cultural philosophical inquiry. On the one hand, considering Sri 
Ramakrishna in the light of recent Western philosophy helps bring out the rigor 
and force of his views. On the other, Sri Ramakrishna’s remarkably expansive con- 
ception of God as the impersonal-personal Infinite Reality provides a powerful 
alternative to the more narrowly theistic paradigm of many Western philoso- 
phers and theologians. Therefore, contemporary scholars stand to learn a great 
deal from Sri Ramakrishna’s fresh and capacious perspective on a variety of phil- 
osophical problems. 

Methodologically, this book combines detailed exegesis with cross-cultural 
philosophical investigation. My exegetical aim is to provide accurate and chari- 
table reconstructions of Sri Ramakrishna’s philosophical views on the basis of his 
recorded oral teachings. Throughout this book, I rely primarily on two Bengali 
source-texts for information on Sri Ramakrishna’s life and teachings. Without 
a doubt, Mahendranath Gupta’s Srisririmakrsnakathamrta (1902-32; here- 
after Kathamrta)—which was later translated into English as The Gospel of Sri 
Ramakrishna—is the most reliableand comprehensive source of Sri Ramakrishna’s 
teachings.® Gupta, who frequently visited Sri Ramakrishna between 1882 and 
1886, recorded with almost stenographic accuracy Sri Ramakrishna’s conversa- 
tions with his numerous visitors.” Indeed, many of Sri Ramakrishna’s intimate 
disciples, including his wife Sarada Devi and Swami Vivekananda, attested to 
the faithfulness and precision of Gupta’s work.* Of course, reconstructing Sri 
Ramakrishna’s views on the basis of his oral teachings is far from straightforward. 





6. The literal meaning of Svisriramakrsnakathamrta is “The Nectar of Sri Ramakrishna’s 
Words.” There are, of course, other collections of Sri Ramakrishna’s teachings compiled 
by some of his other disciples, including Svimi Brahmananda’s Svisriramakrsna Upadesa 
(Kolkata: Udbodhan, 1961) and Surescandra Datta’s Srisrinimakrsnadever Upadesa 
(Kolkata: Haramohan Publishing, 1968). I rely on Gupta’s Kathamrta for three main rea- 
sons. First, it is the most accurate and extensive source of Sri Ramakrishna’s teachings. Second, 
only the Kathamrta provides crucial information about the context of Sri Ramakrishna’s 
teachings—such as whom he was addressing, where and when he spoke, and so on. Third, as 
far as | am aware, there are no substantial discrepancies in Sri Ramakrishna’s recorded philo- 
sophical teachings across the various compilations. Therefore, for the purposes of this book, it 
has not been necessary for me to consult other compilations. 


7. Gupta actually published his work in five volumes (in 1902, 1904, 1908, 1910, and 1932), 
each of which begins with entries from 1882 and ends with entries from 1886. See Srisriramak- 
rsnakathamrta: Srima-Kathita, 5 vols. (Kolkata: Kathamrta Bhavan, 1902-32). The publisher 
Udbodhan later combined these five volumes into a single volume arranged in chronological 
order. Throughout this book, I refer to the single-volume Udbodhan edition of the Kathamrta. 


8. See K v—vi for Swami Vivekananda’s and Sarada Devi’s laudatory remarks about the accuracy 
of the Kathamrta. 


4 ¢ INFINITE PATHS TO INFINITE REALITY 


Hence, in section II of chapter 1, I explain my hermeneutic procedure for recon- 
structing Sri Ramakrishna’s philosophical positions from the Kathamrta as accu- 
rately as possible. 

I will also refer frequently to the Srisriramakrsnalilaprasanga (1909-19; here- 
after Lilaprasanga), a detailed biography of Sri Ramakrishna written by his dis- 
ciple Svami Saradananda.? The Lilaprasanga is an invaluable source-text, as it 
contains detailed and reliable accounts of Sri Ramakrishna’s spiritual practices 
and mystical experiences not found in other texts, including the Kathamrta. At 
certain places in his biography, Svami Saradananda also offers his own interpre- 
tations of Sri Ramakrishna’s spiritual practices, mystical experiences, and philo- 
sophical ideas. For the sake of historical accuracy, I will rely as much as possible 
on noninterpretive passages from the Lilaprasanga—in particular, accounts of 
incidents in Sri Ramakrishna’s life and reports of his teachings and mystical expe- 
riences that are either in Sri Ramakrishna’s own words or in the words of someone 
who was present with him at the time of the event in question.” 

Throughout my book, the task of philosophical exegesis goes hand in hand with 
a broader cross-cultural project: bringing Sri Ramakrishna into dialogue with re- 
cent Western philosophers. Asa contribution to the nascent field of cross-cultural 
philosophy of religion, this book participates in the recent movement away from 
comparative philosophy and toward more creative and flexible paradigms for 
engaging in philosophical inquiry across cultures." These new methodolog- 
ical paradigms go by a variety of names, including “cross-cultural philosophy,’” 





9. The literal meaning of Srisriramakrsnalilaprasanga is “The Divine Play of Sri Ramakrishna.” 


10. Some scholars, such as Neevel (“The Transformation of Sri Ramakrishna” 67), claim that 
Saradananda had a bias toward Advaita Vedanta, which sometimes colored his account of Sri 
Ramakrishna’s life and spiritual practices. However, Neevel still accepts the reliability of much 
of Saradananda’s biography. Even if Neevel’s objection is true, it would not vitiate my philosoph- 
ical reconstructions, which are based on noninterpretive passages from Saradananda’s work. 


ll. See Jonardon Ganeri’s recent manifesto, “Why Philosophy Must Go Global? com- 
prising his two articles, “Manifesto for a Re:emergent Philosophy; Confluence 4 (2016), 
134-41, and “Reflections on Re:emergent Philosophy, Confluence 4 (2016), 164-86; M. 
Kirloskar-Steinbach, Geeta Ramana, and J. Maffie, “Introducing Confluence: A Thematic 
Essay, Confluence 1 (2014), 7-63; Ethan Mills, “From Comparative to Cross-Cultural 
Philosophy,’ in Comparative Philosophy Today and Tomorrow, ed. Sarah Mattice, Geoff 
Ashton, and Joshua Kimber (New Castle upon Tyne, UK: Cambridge Scholars Publishing, 
2009), 120-28; Arindam Chakrabarti and Ralph Weber, eds., Comparative Philosophy without 
Borders (London: Bloomsbury, 2016), 1-33; Andrew Tuck, Comparative Philosophy and the 
Philosophy of Scholarship: On the Western Interpretation of Nagarjuna (New York: Oxford 
University Press, 1990). 


12. Jay Garfield, Empty Words: Buddhist Philosophy and Cross-Cultural Interpretation 
(New York: Oxford University Press, 2002), esp. viii; Mills, “From Comparative to 
Cross-Cultural Philosophy”; Thomas Dean, ed., Religious Pluralism and Truth: Essays on 
Cross-Cultural Philosophy of Religion (Albany: SUNY Press, 1995). 


Introduction + 5 


913 « 


“global philosophy,’ “fusion philosophy,’ “re:emergent philosophy,’ and “bor- 
derless philosophy.” While these postcomparativist paradigms differ in subtle 
ways, they all share a fundamental commitment to drawing on the conceptual 
resources of numerous philosophical traditions in order to address philosophical 
problems.” As Jay Garfield admirably puts it, the goal of cross-cultural philos- 
ophy is “not so much to juxtapose texts from distinct traditions to notice similari- 
ties and differences as it is to do philosophy, with lots of texts, lots of perspectives, 
and lots of hermeneutical traditions—to make the resources of diverse traditions 
and their scholars available to one another and to create new dialogues.”® 

My aim, then, is not to compare Sri Ramakrishna with Western philosophers 
but to shed new light on central problems in cross-cultural philosophy of religion 
by bringing Sri Ramakrishna into creative dialogue with recent Western think- 
ers. Along the way, I often draw comparisons between Sri Ramakrishna and nu- 
merous Western philosophers, but such comparisons are always in the service of 
cross-cultural philosophizing. 

For reasons of space, this book engages primarily the work of recent analytic 
philosophers of religion, with the exception of a discussion of the Continental 
philosopher Jean-Luc Marion in chapter 2. Since Continental philosophy of re- 
ligion is a rich and vast field in its own right, it would take an entirely different 
book to explore how Sri Ramakrishna could be brought into conversation with 
such Continental thinkers as Soren Kierkegaard, Martin Heidegger, Emmanuel 
Levinas, Jacques Derrida, and Merold Westphal.” Moreover, since I aim for depth 
rather than comprehensive coverage, I focus on four topics in the philosophy of 
religion: the infinitude of God (chapters 1 and 2), religious pluralism (chapters 3 





13. Thom Brooks, “Philosophy Unbound: The Idea of Global Philosophy; Metaphilosophy 
44.3 (April 2013), 254-66. 


14. Mark Siderits, Personal Identity and Buddhist Philosophy: Empty Persons (Burlington, 
VT: Ashgate, 2003), xi. 


15. Ganeri, “Manifesto for a Re:emergent Philosophy.” 
16. Chakrabarti and Weber, Comparative Philosophy without Borders, 22. 


17. As Michael Levine points out, some self-identified “comparative philosophers’—such 
as Eliot Deutsch and Levine himself—do engage in the kind of cross-cultural philosophical 
problem-solving that philosophers like Siderits consider to be postcomparativist. Levine, “Does 
Comparative Philosophy Have a Fusion Future?,’ Confluence 4 (2016), 208-15. While I agree 
with Levine that comparative philosophy has often encompassed creative cross-cultural work, 
the label “comparative philosophy” is still misleading, since it foregrounds the narrow aim of 
comparison. 


18. Garfield, Empty Words, viii. 


19. An important book in Continental philosophy of religion is Merold Westphal’s Overcoming 
Onto-Theology: Toward a Postmodern Christian Faith (New York: Fordham University 
Press, 2001). 


6 © INFINITE PATHS TO INFINITE REALITY 


and 4), the nature and epistemology of mystical experience (chapters 5 and 6), 
and the problem of evil (chapters 7 and 8). 

Chapter 1 sets the stage by reconstructing Sri Ramakrishna’s overall philo- 
sophical framework. Militating against narrow sectarian interpretations of Sri 
Ramakrishna’s philosophical teachings, I argue that his philosophy is best charac- 
terized as “Vijfiana Vedanta,” a resolutely nonsectarian worldview—rooted in his 
own mystical experience of vij#iana—that harmonizes apparently conflicting reli- 
gious faiths, sectarian philosophies, and spiritual disciplines. I first delineate five 
interpretive principles that I employ throughout the book in order to reconstruct 
Sri Ramakrishna’s philosophical views on the basis of the Kathamrta. I then elab- 
orate the six main tenets of Sri Ramakrishna’s philosophy of Vijfiana Vedanta. 
On the mystical basis of vijana, Sti Ramakrishna affirms that both the imper- 
sonal nondual Brahman of Advaitins and the loving personal God of theists are 
equally real aspects of one and the same Infinite Reality. The remaining seven 
chapters of this book explore the far-reaching philosophical implications of Sri 
Ramakrishna’s unique standpoint of vijzana. 

Chapter 2 investigates the nature of divine infinitude from a cross-cultural 
perspective by bringing Sri Ramakrishna into conversation with classical Indian 
philosophers as well as Western philosophers and theologians. Sri Ramakrishna 
claims that God is “infinite” (azanta) in the sense that God’s nature is an inex- 
haustible plenitude that exceeds the grasp of the finite human intellect. I identify 
what is distinctive in Sri Ramakrishna’s conception of divine infinitude within 
the Indian philosophical context by comparing it with the Vedantic views of 
the Advaitin Sankara, the Visistadvaitin Ramanuja, and the Gaudiya Vaisnava 
Visvanatha Cakravartin. 

The remainder of the second chapter ventures into cross-cultural terri- 
tory. First, I briefly identify some striking affinities between Sri Ramakrishna’ 
vijnana-based conception of the Infinite God and the medieval Christian theo- 
logian Nicholas of Cusa’s doctrine of God as the coincidentia oppositorum (“co- 
incidence of opposites”). I then bring Sri Ramakrishna into dialogue with the 
contemporary analytic theologian Benedikt Paul Gocke. According to Gécke, 
God is infinite in the radical sense that God is not subject to the law of contra- 
diction and, therefore, should be analyzed in terms of “paraconsistent logic.””° 
I contend that while Gécke’s argument helps clarify the paraconsistent underpin- 
nings of Sri Ramakrishna’s own conception of the Infinite God, Sri Ramakrishna 
pursues the paraconsistent logic of divine infinitude more fully and consistently 
than does Gécke. Finally, I triangulate Sri Ramakrishna and Gécke with the 





20. Benedikt Paul Gécke, “The Paraconsistent God,” in Rethinking the Concept of a Personal 
God, ed. Thomas Schartl, Christian Tapp, and Veronika Wegener (Miinster: Aschendorff, 
2016), 177. 


Introduction » 7 


contemporary Continental philosopher Jean-Luc Marion. Marion’s trenchant 
critique of various forms of “conceptual idolatry” and his positive account of God 
as agape resonate with Sri Ramakrishna’s views on divine infinitude. At the same 
time, however, Sri Ramakrishna helps us see how both Gécke and Marion lapse 
into different forms of conceptual idolatry in their own right. 

While it is well known that Sri Ramakrishna taught the harmony of all reli- 
gions, scholars have interpreted his views on religious diversity in a number of 
conflicting ways. Chapter 3 argues that Sri Ramakrishna’s spiritual standpoint 
of vijaana holds the key to understanding his nuanced position on religious di- 
versity. In particular, I reconstruct from his teachings a unique, and philosophi- 
cally sophisticated, model of religious pluralism. According to Sri Ramakrishna, 
since God is the impersonal-personal Infinite Reality, there are correspondingly 
infinite ways of approaching and realizing God. Therefore, all religions and spir- 
itual philosophies—both theistic and nontheistic—are salvifically effective paths 
to one common goal: God-realization, or the direct spiritual experience of God 
in any of His innumerable forms or aspects. I then examine Sri Ramakrishna’ 
response to the thorny problem of conflicting religious truth-claims. He recon- 
ciles religious claims about the nature of the ultimate reality on the basis of his 
capacious ontology of God. Every religion, he claims, captures a uniquely real 
aspect of the Infinite Reality. Regarding other types of religious truth-claims, he 
maintains that while every religion errs on some points of doctrine, these errors 
do not substantially diminish the salvific efficacy of religions. Finally, I defend Sri 
Ramakrishna’s religious pluralism against numerous objections leveled by schol- 
ars such as R. W. Neufeldt and Ninian Smart. 

Building on the third chapter, chapter 4 explores the British philosopher John 
Hick’s early and late views on religious pluralism in the light of Sri Ramakrishna. 
Between 1970 and 1974, the early Hick espoused a Vedantic theory of religious 
pluralism—based explicitly on Sri Aurobindo’s “logic of the infinite’—that 
comes remarkably close to Sri Ramakrishna’s vij#ana-based pluralist model. 
According to the early Hick, the Infinite Divine Reality is both personal and 
impersonal, even though our finite minds are unable to grasp how this is pos- 
sible. The early Hick derived a robust model of religious pluralism from this 
Aurobindonian premise of unfathomable divine infinitude: since each religion 
captures at least one true aspect of the Infinite Reality, the various conceptions of 
the Divine Reality taught by the major world religions are complementary rather 
than conflicting. 

By 1976, however, Hick abandoned this Aurobindonian line of thought in 
favor of his now well-known quasi-Kantian theory of religious pluralism, accord- 
ing to which the personal and nonpersonal ultimates of the various world reli- 
gions are different phenomenal forms of the same unknowable “Real an sich? 
As numerous critics have pointed out, Hick’s quasi-Kantian pluralist model fails 


8 © INFINITE PATHS TO INFINITE REALITY 


to honor the self-understanding of most religious practitioners, who take their 
respective ultimates to be literally, and not merely phenomenally, true. On this 
basis, I argue that Sri Ramakrishna’s vijiana-based model of religious pluralism, 
which grants full ontological reality to the personal and nonpersonal ultimates 
of the various religions, is more robust and philosophically viable than Hick’s. 

Chapter 5 draws upon Sri Ramakrishna’s teachings and mystical testimony 
in order to develop a new conceptual framework for understanding the nature 
of mystical experience. In recent analytic philosophy of religion, two conflicting 
approaches to mystical experience have been especially influential: perennial- 
ism and constructivism. While perennialists such as Walter Stace and Evelyn 
Underhill maintain that mystical experiences are the same across cultures, con- 
structivists such as Steven Katz and Hick claim that a mystic’s cultural condi- 
tioning plays a major role in shaping his or her mystical experiences. 

After identifying the strengths and limitations of these two positions, I argue 
that Sri Ramakrishna champions what I calla “manifestationist” approach to mys- 
tical experience that provides a compelling dialectical alternative to both peren- 
nialism and constructivism. In Sri Ramakrishna’s view, “God manifests Himself 
in the form which His devotee loves most” (K 101 / G 149-50). From the stand- 
point of vij#ana, Sri Ramakrishna asserts that mystics in various traditions ex- 
perience different real manifestations of the same impersonal-personal Infinite 
Reality. Accordingly, while Sri Ramakrishna agrees with the constructivist view 
that a mystic’s background beliefs are reflected in his or her mystical experiences, 
he rejects the epistemic subjectivism of constructivists like Katz and Hick. At the 
same time, Sri Ramakrishna takes the Infinite Reality to be the common onto- 
logical object of all mystical experience, but he rejects the reductive perennialist 
view that all mystical experiences are phenomenologically identical. Thus, I con- 
tend that Sri Ramakrishna’s manifestationist paradigm provides a more accurate 
and nuanced account of mystical experience than those offered by many recent 
philosophers of religion. 

Chapter 6 explores how Sri Ramakrishna’s mystical testimony and teachings 
enrich contemporary philosophical debates about the epistemic value of mystical 
experience. These debates center on a key question: are we rationally justified in 
taking mystical experiences—either our own or those of others—to be veridical? 
After briefly outlining Sri Ramakrishna’s views on the scope of theological reason, 
I consider whether he accepts the possibility of self-authenticating experiences of 
God—that is, experiences of God that guarantee their own veridicality to their 
epistemic subjects. Sri Ramakrishna’s mystical testimony, I argue, lends strong 
support to the philosopher Robert Oakes’s position that self-authenticating expe- 
riences of God are, indeed, logically possible. 

The remainder of chapter 6 focuses on the argument from experience, which 
has been widely discussed by contemporary philosophers of religion—the 


Introduction » 9 


argument that it is reasonable to believe that God exists on the basis of the testi- 
mony of people claiming to have experienced Him. As we will see, Sri Ramakrishna 
defended a simple version of the argument from experience, and his teachings 
and mystical reports also support the fundamental premises of the more sophis- 
ticated versions defended by recent philosophers such as Richard Swinburne and 
Jerome Gellman. Moreover, I argue that Sri Ramakrishna’s distinctive approach 
helps defuse two of the most serious objections to the argument from experi- 
ence: first, that mystical experiences, unlike sensory experiences, cannot be ade- 
quately cross-checked; and second, that different mystics often make conflicting 
claims about the nature of the ultimate reality they allegedly experience. 

Chapter 7 reconstructs Sri Ramakrishna’s multifaceted response to the 
problem of evil. Several of Sri Ramakrishna’s visitors argued that instances of 
apparently pointless evil—such as Genghis Khan’s act of mass slaughter—make 
it reasonable to believe either that God does not exist or that God is omnipo- 
tent and omniscient but not perfectly good. Sri Ramakrishna answers that the 
ways of an omniscient and omnipotent God are inscrutable to the finite human 
intellect—a response, I argue, that is best understood as a skeptical theist po- 
sition: in light of our cognitive limitations, we are never rationally justified in 
believing that God has no morally sufficient reason for permitting a given in- 
stance of evil. 

Sri Ramakrishna’s skeptical theism dovetails with a full-blown theodicy—a 
positive account of why God permits evil and suffering. By situating Sri 
Ramakrishna’s theodicy in the context of the classical Vedantic theodicies of 
Sankara and Ramanuja, I set its distinctive aspects into relief: According to Sri 
Ramakrishna, God permits evil “in order to create saints” (K 37 / G 98). On the 
basis of such teachings, I reconstruct what I call Sri Ramakrishna’s “saint-making” 
theodicy: since God has created this world as an environment for saint-making, 
evil is as necessary as good. Through the experience of good and evil in the course 
of many lives, we gradually learn to combat our own evil tendencies and cultivate 
ethical and spiritual virtues that bring us closer to the goal of eternal salvation 
that awaits us all. 

Finally, I discuss the crucial mystical dimension of Sri Ramakrishna’s the- 
odicy. His theodicy culminates in an appeal to his own panentheistic experience 
of vijnana, which reveals to him that God has become everything in the universe. 
From this mystical standpoint, Sri Ramakrishna is able to resolve lingering prob- 
lems raised by his saint-making theodicy: since God Himself sports in the guise 
of both evildoers and their victims, the problem of evil—which presupposes a 
difference between God and His suffering creatures—loses its urgency. 

Chapter 8 adopts a cross-cultural approach to the problem of evil by bring- 
ing Sri Ramakrishna into conversation with recent philosophers. I begin by com- 
paring Sri Ramakrishna’s skeptical theism with William Alston’s skeptical theist 


10 © INFINITE PATHS TO INFINITE REALITY 


refutation of William Rowe’s argument from evil against God’s existence. On the 
one hand, I draw upon Alston’s skeptical theist response to Rowe as a means of 
developing and defending Sri Ramakrishna’s own skeptical theist position. On 
the other, I argue that Alston’s failure to consider Indian karma-based theodicies 
significantly weakens his argument. 

I then bring Sri Ramakrishna’s saint-making theodicy into dialogue with 
Hick’s “soul-making” theodicy. Hick provides convincing arguments for the 
necessity of evil in a soul-making environment, which equally support Sri 
Ramakrishna’s saint-making theodicy. Furthermore, Hick’s “use of eschatology 
to complete theodicy”—his argument that a successful theodicy must accept the 
view that everyone will be saved—helps to clarify the importance of the doc- 
trine of universal salvation in Sri Ramakrishna’s own theodicy.” I argue, however, 
that Hick’s soul-making theodicy also has major weaknesses, which stem from 
his Christian assumption of a one-life-only paradigm and his neglect of mys- 
tical experience. On this basis, I make the case that Sri Ramakrishna’s mystically 
grounded saint-making theodicy, which presupposes rebirth, has significant phil- 
osophical advantages over Hick’s theodicy. 

Hopefully, this book will inspire scholars to explore further how Sri 
Ramakrishna’s unique mystico-philosophical perspective can enrich contem- 
porary discussions of a wide range of philosophical and theological issues. 
The book’s broader polemical aim is to challenge the methodological paro- 
chialism of philosophy as it is often practiced in the Western world.” To 
remain vital, we must adopt a broader, and more rigorous, cross-cultural 
methodology that draws on the resources of both Western and non-Western 
philosophical traditions. Cross-cultural philosophizing, as I understand it, 
should be seen less as a niche activity of a tiny minority of philosophers than 
as a methodological imperative for a// philosophers. The time has come for 
philosophers to go global. 





21. John Hick, Evil and the God of Love (London: Palgrave Macmillan, [1966] 2010), 351. 


22. For a spirited critique of the parochialism of contemporary Anglophone academic phi- 
losophy, see Bryan W. Van Norden’s recent book, Taking Back Philosophy: A Multicultural 
Manifesto (New York: Columbia University Press, 2017). 


THE INFINITUDE OF GOD 


SRI RAMAKRISHNA’S HARMONIZING 
PHILOSOPHY OF VIJNANA VEDANTA 


Sri Ramakrishna’s philosophical teachings—carefully recorded by 
Mahendranath Gupta in the Srisriramakrsnakathamrta (hereafter 
Kathamrta)—have been a source of lively dialogue and debate among 
devotees and scholars throughout the world. His teachings on God 
and the universe, the meaning and purpose of human existence, and 
the various kinds of spiritual experience resonate with numerous 
Indian philosophical traditions, including Tantra, Advaita Vedanta, 
Visistadvaita Vedanta, Dvaita Vedanta, and Bengal Vaisnavism. Not 
surprisingly, it has proven extraordinarily difficult to determine Sri 
Ramakrishna’s overall philosophical outlook. 

Commentators from the late nineteenth century up to the present 
have adopted three main interpretive approaches to Sri Ramakrishna’s 
philosophy. Many have interpreted Sri Ramakrishna’s philosophical 
views in terms of a particular philosophical sect.’ For instance, com- 
mentators such as Svami Omkarananda, Svami Dhiresananda, and 
Dineé Bhattacarya argue that Advaita Vedanta was Sri Ramakrishna’s 
ultimate standpoint.’ By contrast, Mahendranath Gupta claims that Sri 
Ramakrishna’s philosophy comes closest to Ramanuja’s Visistadvaita 





1. Throughout this chapter, I use the words “sect” and “sectarian” in a strictly 
non-normative sense. The words “sect” and “sectarian” correspond roughly to the 
Sanskrit words sampradaya and sampradayika respectively. 


2. See Svami Omkarananda, “Brahma o Sakti abhed? Udbodhan 665 (1964), 
227-32; Svami Omkarananda, “Nitya 0 Lila? Udbodhan 66.6 (1964), 287-96; 
Svami Dhiresananda, “Svami Vivekananda o Advaitavada; Udbodhan 65.2 
(1962), 73-80 and 65.3 (1962), 80-81, 138-44; Svaimi Dhiresananda, “Nana 
Drstite Sriramakrsna? Udbodhan 82.5 (1980), 220-26; Dines Bhattacarya, 
“Darsan Cintai Sankara-Ramanuja-Madhva-Sriramakra;? in Visvacetanai 
Sriramakrsna, ed. Svami Prameyananda et al. (Kolkata: Udbodhan, 1987), 
594-609; Svami Prajianananda, Vani o Vicar: Srisriramakrsnakathamrter 
Vyakhya o Vislesan, 5 vols. (Kolkata: Ramakrishna Vedanta Math, 1976-82). 


14 ¢ THE INFINITUDE OF GOD 


(K 698).> Meanwhile, scholars such as Heinrich Zimmer and Walter Neevel have 
suggested that Tantrika philosophy provides the master framework for making 
sense of Sri Ramakrishna’s philosophical teachings.‘ 

Rejecting all such efforts to classify Sri Ramakrishna as the “flag bearer” 
of a particular sectarian school, Narasingha Sil argues that Sri Ramakrishna’s 
philosophical views are unsystematic and even inconsistent, so the very 
attempt to derive any coherent philosophical position from his teachings is 
doomed to fail.> As Sil puts it, there is no “consistency in Ramakrishna’s devo- 
tionalism or spirituality because he was so enchantingly freewheeling in his 
god-consciousness.”® 

Sil, in my opinion, too hastily assumes that there is no consistency or coherence 
in Sri Ramakrishna’s philosophical views. On the other hand, sectarian attempts 
to pigeonhole Sri Ramakrishna’s teachings into one particular philosophical 
school have tended to be Procrustean. Indeed, Sri Ramakrishna consciously 





3. For helpful discussions of the extent to which Sri Ramakrishna could be considered a 
Visgistadvaitin, see Svami Prabhananda, “Kathamrte Sriramakrsner Mat ki Visistadvaitavada?” 
in Svami Vivekananda Smarak (Kolkata: Bidhannagar Vivekananda Smarak Samity, 2012), 
1-7, and Arvind Sharma, Ramakrishna and Vivekananda: New Perspectives (Bangalore: Sterling 
Publishers, 1989), 46-51. 


4, Heinrich Zimmer, Philosophies of India (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1951), 
560-602; Walter Neevel, “The Transformation of Sri Ramakrishna” in Hinduism: New 
Essays in the History of Religions, ed. B. L. Smith (Leiden: Brill, 1976), 53-97. Freda Matchett 
agrees with Neevel that Sri Ramakrishna’s philosophy “can be understood much more ap- 
propriately in Tantric terms than in Sankara’s” but she departs from Neevel in claiming 
that Sri Ramakrishna’s philosophy represents a combination of Saktism, Vaisnavism, and 
Vedanta. Matchett, “The Teaching of Ramakrishna in Relation to the Hindu Tradition and as 
Interpreted by Vivekananda,’ Religion 11 (1981), 176. Dhiresananda argues that Saradananda’s 
biography of Sri Ramakrishna, Lilaprasanga, champions a “Saktadvaitic” interpretation of Sri 
Ramakrishna’s life and teachings (“Nana Drstite Sriramakrsna? 221-22). By contrast, both 
Neevel and Matchett claim that Saradananda’s Lilaprasanga endorses an Advaitic interpreta- 
tion of Sri Ramakrishna’s life and teachings. It is beyond the scope of this chapter to adjudicate 
this scholarly controversy concerning how best to understand Saradananda’s philosophical in- 
terpretation of Sri Ramakrishna. 


5. Narasingha Sil, “Is Ramakrishna a Vedantin, a Tantrika or a Vaishnava? An Examination,” 
Asian Studies Review 21.2 (Nov. 1997), 212. Similarly, Amiya P. Sen claims that Sri Ramakrishna 
“borrowed ideas across Vedantic schools without being sensitive to the problems of their recon- 
ciliation.” “Universality and Sri Ramakrishna: An Historical and Philosophical Reappraisal? 
Studies in Humanities and Social Sciences 6.1 (1999), 91. 


6. Sil, “Is Ramakrishna a Vedantin, a Tantrika or a Vaishnava?” 212. Also see Narasingha Sil, 
“Kali’s Child and Krishna's Lover: An Anatomy of Ramakrishna’s Caritas Divina; Religion 
29.3 (Sept. 2009), 289-98. Sil’s views on this issue are based largely on his earlier psycho- 
biographical studies of Sri Ramakrishna, especially his book Ramakrsna Paramahamsa: A 
Psychological Profile (New York: E,J. Brill, 1991). In this chapter, I focus on Sri Ramakrishna’s 
recorded philosophical teachings, which can—and should—be studied apart from dubious 
psychoanalytic speculations about Sri Ramakrishna. 


Sri Ramakrishna’s Harmonizing Philosophy of Vijfiana Vedanta - 15 


drew upon ideas from a variety of philosophical sects and often warned against 
sectarian bigotry and fanaticism, so it is highly unlikely that he himself would 
have belonged exclusively to a particular sect. 

In light of Sri Ramakrishna’s catholic attitude and his unique syncretic 
method, a number of commentators—beginning with Sri Ramakrishna’s di- 
rect disciples, Swami Vivekananda and Svami Turiyananda, as well as Sri 
Aurobindo—have adopted a third approach to Sri Ramakrishna’s philosophy 
that avoids the pitfalls of the other two interpretive approaches. At the end of 
the nineteenth century, Vivekananda suggested that the nonsectarian and har- 
monizing spirit of Sri Ramakrishna’s philosophical teachings is best captured 
not by any particular philosophical school but by the original nonsectarian 
Vedanta of the Upanisads and the Bhagavad Gita, which sought to harmonize 
a variety of apparently conflicting philosophical views.’ In a remarkable Bengali 
letter written in 1919, Svami Turiyananda pointed out deep affinities between 
Sri Ramakrishna’s philosophy and the nonsectarian Vedanta of the Gita and 
claimed that Sri Ramakrishna accepted the validity of all spiritual philosophies 
and religious doctrines. In a similar vein, Sri Aurobindo declared in 1910 that 
the “teachings of Sri Ramakrisha and Vivekananda” provide the basis for a “more 
perfect synthesis” of the Upanisads than Sankara’s world-denying philosophy of 
Advaita Vedanta.’ 

Following their lead, a number of more recent commentators—including 
Satis Chandra Chatterjee, Swami Tapasyananda, and Jeffery D. Long—have 
interpreted Sri Ramakrishna’s philosophy as a harmonizing, nonsectarian form of 
Vedanta, which they characterize variously as “Samanvayi Vedanta,’ “Samanvayi 





7. See, for instance, The Complete Works of Swami Vivekananda: Mayavati Memorial 
Edition, vol. 3 (Mayavati: Advaita Ashrama, 2007), 233. For a detailed discussion of Swami 
Vivekananda’s understanding of nonsectarian Vedanta vis-a-vis Sri Ramakrishna, see sections 
Land II of my article “Asminnasya ca tadyogam Sasti: Swami Vivekananda’s Interpretation of 
Brahmasitra 1.1.19 as a Hermeneutic Basis for Samanvayi Vedanta,’ in The Life, Legacy, and 
Contemporary Relevance of Swami Vivekananda: New Reflections, ed. Rita Sherma and James 
McHugh (Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield, forthcoming). 


8. Svami Turiyanander Patra (Kolkata: Udbodhan, 2005), 254-55. For an English translation 
of the letter, see Spiritual Treasures: Letters of Swami Turiyananda, trans. Swami Chetananda 
(Kolkata: Advaita Ashrama, 2000), 195-98. 


9. Sri Aurobindo, The Complete Works of Sri Aurobindo, vol. 13: Essays in Philosophy and Yoga, 
Shorter Works, 1910-1950 (Pondicherry: Sri Aurobindo Ashram, 1998), 10-11. 


10. Satis Chandra Chatterjee, Classical Indian Philosophies: Their Synthesis in the Philosophy 
of Sri Ramakrishna, 2nd ed. (Calcutta: University of Calcutta, [1963] 1985), 104-52. Swami 
Mumukshananda also uses the term “Samanvayi Vedanta” in his article “Vedanta: Concepts 
and Application through Sri Ramakrishna’s Life” in Vedanta: Concepts and Application 
(Kolkata: Ramakrishna Mission Institute of Culture, 2000), 292-316. 


16 * THE INFINITUDE OF GOD 


Advaita," “Neo-Advaita?” “Neo-Vedanta,”® and “Integral Vedanta.” Joining 
forces with these scholars, I will make the case in this chapter that a nonsectarian 
Vedantic framework best accounts for the catholicity, sophistication, and overall 
consistency and coherence of Sri Ramakrishna’s philosophical teachings. 

In particular, I characterize Sri Ramakrishna’s philosophy as “Vijfana 
Vedanta,” a nonsectarian philosophy—rooted in the mystical experience of what 
he calls vijtana—that accommodates and harmonizes various apparently con- 
flicting religious faiths, sectarian philosophies, and spiritual disciplines.” In the 
Kathamrta, Sti Ramakrishna repeatedly contrasts two types of spiritual experi- 
ence: j#ana (“Knowledge”), the Advaitic realization of the impersonal Atman, 
and vijnana (“Intimate Knowledge”), a vaster, richer, and more intimate reali- 
zation of God as the Infinite Reality that is both personal and impersonal, with 
and without form, immanent in the universe and beyond it. I contend that Sri 
Ramakrishna’s unique perspective of vij#dna holds the key to appreciating the 
unity and coherence of his philosophical teachings. 

Crucially, Sti Ramakrishna’s philosophical views were based not on intel- 
lectual speculation but on his own spiritual experiences. Section I discusses 
briefly how his upbringing, eclectic religious practices, and numerous spiritual 
experiences all contributed to his mature philosophical outlook. Section I then 
addresses the important hermeneutic question of how to reconstruct accurately 
Sri Ramakrishna’s philosophical views on the basis of the Kathamrta, which 
contains dialogues in Bengali between Sri Ramakrishna and his visitors. I delin- 
eate five basic interpretive principles that will govern my reconstructions of Sri 
Ramakrishna’s philosophical positions throughout this book. With this herme- 
neutic groundwork in place, section II] provides a detailed reconstruction of the 
six main tenets of Sri Ramakrishna’s nonsectarian philosophy of Vijfana Vedanta. 
I hope to demonstrate that the concept of vijfadna provides the unifying frame- 
work for interpreting and synthesizing Sri Ramakrishna’s philosophical views on 
the scope of reason, the nature of God, the relationship between Brahman and 





ll. Svami Sraddhananda, Bandi Tomai: Ramakrsna-Vivekananda Bhabanjali (Kolkata: 
Udbodhan, 1994), 128-41. 


12. Chatterjee, Classical Indian Philosophies, 149-52. 


13. Swami Tapasyananda, Bhakti Schools of Vedanta (Madras: Sti Ramakrishna Math, 1990), 
9-33, esp. 23-33; Jeffery D. Long, “Advaita and Dvaita: Bridging the Gap—the Ramakrishna 
Tradition’s both/and Approach to the Dvaita/Advaita Debate,” Journal of Vaishnava Studies 
16.2 (Spring 2008), 49-70. 


14. Swami Bhajanananda, “Philosophy of Sri Ramakrishna. University of Calcutta Journal of 
the Department of Philosophy 9 (2010), 1-56, esp. 27-28. 


15. I coined the term “Vijfana Vedanta” myself, but I later discovered that Sharma used a sim- 
ilar term, “Vijnanadvaita; to describe Sri Ramakrishna’s philosophy. See Sharma, Ramakrishna 
and Vivekananda, 42. 


Sri Ramakrishna’s Harmonizing Philosophy of Vijfiana Vedanta + 17 


Sakti, the ontological status of the universe, the different stages in spiritual expe- 
rience, and the harmony of various religious and spiritual paths. I will also indi- 
cate briefly the scriptural basis of Sri Ramakrishna’s Vijfiana Vedanta by tracing 
each of its six tenets to passages from the Upanisads and the Giza. Finally, section 
IV argues that his philosophy of Vijfana Vedanta helps bring to light some of 
the major weaknesses of Paul Hacker’s “Neo-Vedantic” paradigm for interpreting 
modern Vedantins such as Vivekananda and Sri Aurobindo. 


|. The Spiritual Basis of Sri Ramakrishna’s Philosophical 
Outlook: His Upbringing, Religious Practices, 
and Mystical Experiences 


Sri Ramakrishna’s upbringing and environment, his various religious practices 
and spiritual experiences, and his spiritual and philosophical training under nu- 
merous gurus all played an important role in shaping his mature philosophical 
outlook." Sri Ramakrishna was raised in a Vaisnava household, which performed 
daily worship not only of the family Deity Raghuvir (an epithet of Ramacandra, 
an avatara of Visnu) but also of Siva. In 1855, he became the priest of the Kali 
Temple at Dakshineswar, a village near Kolkata. Rani Rasmani, the unusually 
broad-minded founder of the Kali Temple, was a Sakta whose “ista-devata” 
(“Chosen Ideal”) was Kali, but she designed the Kali Temple with the explicit in- 
tention of personifying the harmony of the Hindu sects of Saktism, Vaisnavism, 
and Saivism. Accordingly, she installed next to the Kali Temple a row of twelve 
temples dedicated to Siva as well as another temple dedicated to Radhakanta 
(an epithet for Krsna). The liberal religious outlook of his parents and of Rani 
Rasmani was a formative influence on Sri Ramakrishna, who would later teach 
the harmony of all religious and spiritual paths. 

From 1855 to 1874, Sri Ramakrishna practiced numerous spiritual disciplines 
in a variety of traditions, including Tantra, Vaisnavism, Advaita Vedanta, Islam, 
and Christianity.'” He claimed to have attained God-realization for the first time 
in 1856, by worshipping, and praying intensely to, the Divine Mother in the 
form of Kali.’* Sri Ramakrishna then went on to practice, and to attain perfec- 
tion in, numerous other bhavas (“attitudes toward God”), including dasyabhava 





16. For the biographical details in this section, I rely primarily on LP. 
17. For a detailed account of Sri Ramakrishna’s sadhana period, see LP 1/ DP 144-364. 


18. To avoid cumbersome locutions, when I refer to the mystical experiences Sri Ramakrishna 
claimed to have had, I often leave out qualifying phrases such as “claimed to have” or “report- 
edly.” However, it should be kept in mind throughout this book that these qualifying phrases 
are always implied. I am not dogmatically asserting the veridicality of Sri Ramakrishna’s re- 
ported mystical experiences. 


18 *© THE INFINITUDE OF GOD 


(“attitude of a servant”), vatsalyabhava (“attitude of a parent”), sakhibhava (“atti- 
tude of a friend”), and madhuryabhava (“attitude of a lover”). From 1861 to 1863, 
he was instructed in Tantrika disciplines by his first guru, Bhairavi Brahmani, a 
female brahmin monk who was an adept in both Tantrika and Vaisnava practices. 
The learned Bhairavi Brahmani also had a deep knowledge of the scriptures as 
well as Vaisnava and Tantrika philosophy, so Sri Ramakrishna likely learned a 
great deal from her about the philosophical tenets of Vaisnavism and Tantra. 

In 1864, Sri Ramakrishna engaged in Advaitic discipline under the guid- 
ance of the itinerant Advaitin monk Totapuri, and he quickly attained the high- 
est knowledge of nondual Brahman in nirvikalpa samadhi, a state in which all 
consciousness of duality is transcended. As Sri Ramakrishna himself mentioned, 
Totapuri was well versed in Advaitic philosophy and taught him the key phil- 
osophical doctrines of Advaita Vedanta.” In 1866, after Totapuri’s departure, 
Sri Ramakrishna remained in nirvikalpa samadhi for six months until he fi- 
nally received a command from the Divine Mother to remain in “bhavamukha; 
a threshold state of consciousness between the relative and the Absolute (LP 
Lii.159-78 / DP 303-21). Accordingly, instead of leaving his body in nirvikalpa 
samadhi, he remained in the state of bhavamukha, reveling in both the personal 
and impersonal aspects of God and thereby realizing the equal validity of the 
paths of bhakti (devotion) and jrana (knowledge).”° (As we will see in section III, 
Sri Ramakrishna, in his later teachings, would refer to this unique spiritual state 
of bhavamukha as “vijnana.’) In the same year as his Advaitic practice, he also 
practiced Islamic sadhana under the guidance of a Muslim guru named Govinda 
Ray—who was likely a Sufi—and realized God after three days.”’ Toward the 
end of 1874, Sri Ramakrishna was instructed in the Bible and soon had an over- 
whelming vision of Jesus, who approached him and finally merged into him.” 


19. See, for instance, K 279-80 and 991 / G 297 and 915. 


20. See Swami Tapasyananda’s excellent discussions of Sri Ramakrishna’s state of bhavamukha in 
Bhakti Schools of Vedanta, 359-64 and Sri Ramakrishna: Life and Teachings (An Interpretative 
Study) (Madras: Sri Ramakrishna Math, 2008), 60-74. 


21. During Sri Ramakrishna’s Islamic practice, passages from the Bengali translation of the 
Quran were read out to him. He also practiced the disciplines prescribed in the Qu7an and 
stopped worshipping Hindu deities during his Islamic practice. See LP Lii.175-77 / DP 318-20. 
For an extensive account of Sri Ramakrishna’s Islamic sadhana, see Swami Prabhananda, More 


about Ramakrishna (Kolkata: Advaita Ashrama, 1993), 80-109. 


22. For an account of Sri Ramakrishna’s Christian sadhana, see LP 1.ii.210-12 / DP 356-58. Sri 
Ramakrishna revered Jesus as an incarnation of God and he owned a copy of the Bible, which 
was read out to him on occasion—especially the teachings of Jesus contained in the synoptic 
gospels. In general, it can be said that the form of Christianity practiced by Sri Ramakrishna 
was based more on the spiritual and ethical teachings of Jesus than on theological dogmas. For 
more details about Sri Ramakrishna’s Christian practices, see Swami Prabhananda, More about 
Ramakrishna, 110-48. 


Sri Ramakrishna’s Harmonizing Philosophy of Vijfiana Vedanta - 19 


Sri Ramakrishna himself later acknowledged the importance of his eclectic 
religious practices and his various spiritual experiences in shaping his broad spir- 
itual and philosophical outlook. As he put it, “I had to practice each religion 
for a time—Hinduism, Islam, Christianity. Furthermore, I followed the paths of 
the Saktas, Vaisnavas, and [Advaita] Vedantins. I realized that there is only one 
God toward whom all are travelling; but the paths are different” (K 77 / G 129). 
Throughout this book, it is essential to bear in mind that Sri Ramakrishna’s phil- 
osophical views were based not on intellectual reasoning but on his own religious 
practices and spiritual experiences. 


Il. Five Interpretive Principles for Reconstructing 
Sri Ramakrishna’s Philosophical Views from 
the Kathamrta 


While scholars have interpreted Sri Ramakrishna’s philosophy in a variety of 
ways, they have rarely articulated the hermeneutic assumptions underlying their 
respective interpretations. As a result, commentators have tended to take Sri 
Ramakrishna’s teachings out of the context in which they occur in the Kathamrta, 
without reflecting on the numerous interpretive challenges involved in gleaning 
Sri Ramakrishna’s philosophical views from conversations held in Bengali be- 
tween himself and his numerous visitors and devotees. Before attempting to re- 
construct Sri Ramakrishna’s philosophy, it is essential to establish higher-order 
interpretive principles that will allow us both to determine accurately what he in- 
tended to convey through a particular teaching and to distinguish his own views 
from views to which he refers but to which he does not necessarily subscribe. 
Accordingly, I will now delineate five fundamental interpretive principles—IP 1 
through IP5—that will help us to determine Sri Ramakrishna’s philosophical 
views on the basis of the Kathamrta. Throughout the book, I will rely on these 
interpretive principles in order to reconstruct Sri Ramakrishna’s positions on a 
variety of philosophical topics. 


Interpretive Principle I (IP1): Instead of appealing to external philosophical 
doctrines or frameworks, we should strive to understand Sri Ramakrishna’s 
philosophical teachings on their own terms. 


In accordance with the principle of interpretive charity, we should at 
least provisionally assume that Sri Ramakrishna’s philosophical teachings are 
selfcontained—that is, that they contain all the concepts necessary to understand 
them. Hence, in order to avoid eisegesis, we should—whenever possible—refrain 
from invoking philosophical doctrines or concepts to which Sri Ramakrishna 


20 © THE INFINITUDE OF GOD 


himself did not appeal. If a commentator does appeal to external doctrines or 
frameworks to explain Sri Ramakrishna’s philosophical views, then the burden 
is on the commentator to justify the use of these external concepts and to prove 
that these external concepts actually capture Sri Ramakrishna’s own intentions. 

Admittedly, virtually all commentators on Sri Ramakrishna’s teachings claim 
to interpret his teachings on their own terms, so it might seem as if IP1 need not 
be explicitly stated. Unfortunately, however, many commentators have routinely 
violated IP1 by lapsing into the eisegetic practice of reading their own assump- 
tions and conceptual frameworks into Sri Ramakrishna’s philosophical teachings. 
‘The eisegetic tendency of some Advaitic commentators has been especially egre- 
gious. Commentators such as Svami Omkarananda, Svami Prajfanananda, and 
Dines Bhattacarya repeatedly invoke Advaitic concepts and analogies—like the 
rope-snake analogy and the distinction between vyavaharika and paramarthika 
levels of reality—in order to explain Sri Ramakrishna’s philosophical teachings, 
even though Sri Ramakrishna himself never employed these Advaitic concepts.” 

It is worth noting that IP 1 does not prohibit us from engaging in the compar- 
ative project of finding parallels between Sri Ramakrishna’s philosophical views 
and any number of existing philosophies, both Eastern and Western. For in- 
stance, Debabrata Sen Sarma and Swami Tadananda have fruitfully compared Sri 
Ramakrishna’s philosophical teachings with the philosophy of Kasmiri Saivism,2* 
while Long has demonstrated affinities between Sri Ramakrishna’s philosophy 
and both the Jaina anekanta doctrine and Alfred North Whitehead’s process phi- 
losophy.” IP 1 entails only that Sri Ramakrishna’s philosophical teachings should 
be understood on their own terms before they are compared with other philoso- 
phies. In accordance with IP1, I strive throughout the book first to reconstruct 
Sri Ramakrishna’s philosophical views on the basis of his own teachings and then 
to analyze them from a cross-cultural perspective. 





23. See, for instance, Omkarananda, “Brahma o Sakti abhed? 229-31; Prajfanananda, Vani 
0 Vicar, vol. 1, 159-69, vol. 3, 244-60, vol. 4, 225-48; and Bhattacarya, “Darsan Cintai 
Sankara-Ramanuja-Madhva-Sriramakrsna; 605. 


24, Debabrata Sen Sarma, “The Spiritual Life of Ramakrishna and His Gospel in the Light 
of Kashmir Shaivism? in Sri Ramakrishna: Myriad Facets (Kolkata: Ramakrishna Mission 
Institute of Culture, 2011), 394-412; Swami Tadananda, “Kashmir Shaivism in the Light of 
Sri Ramakrishna’s Teachings,’ in Approaching Ramakrishna (Kolkata: Advaita Ashrama, 2011), 
195-206. 


25. See, for instance, Long, “Advaita and Dvaita”; Jeffery D. Long, “(Tentatively) Putting 
the Pieces Together: Comparative Theology in the Tradition of Sri Ramakrishna, in The 
New Comparative Theology, ed. Francis Clooney (London: Continuum, 2010), 151-70; and 
Jeffery D. Long, “Anekanta Vedanta: Toward a Deep Hindu Religious Pluralism. in Deep 
Religious Pluralism: Whitehead’s Philosophy and Religious Diversity, ed. David Ray Griffin 
(Louisville: John Knox Westminster Press, 2005), 130-57. 


Sri Ramakrishna’s Harmonizing Philosophy of Vijfiana Vedanta +» 21 


Interpretive Principle 2 (IP2): The context of Sri Ramakrishna’s philosophical 
teachings often provides crucial insight into their meaning and status. 


Many commentators have tended to strip Sri Ramakrishna’ philosophical teach- 
ings of their context, ignoring the unique dialogic situation in which they were 
imparted. Three aspects of the context ofhis philosophical teachings are especially im- 
portant. First, it is often helpful to know the viewpoint of the interlocutor to whom Sri 
Ramakrishna gives a particular teaching. In the next section, I will point to instances 
in the Kathamrta where a particular teaching becomes clearer when one understands 
the standpoint of the person with whom Sri Ramakrishna is speaking —whether, for 
instance, he is an Advaitin, a Vaisnava Gosvami, or a follower of the Brahmo Samaj. 

Second, it is important to determine whether something the interlocutor said 
orasked prompted Sri Ramakrishna to give the teaching. For instance, in the entry 
from 21 September 1884, Sri Ramakrishna points out that after Pratap Hajra once 
dismissed Sakti as a lower reality than Brahman, Sri Ramakrishna responded that 
“Brahman and Sakti are inseparable,’ thus strongly suggesting that the primary 
thrust of this teaching is to assert the reality of Sakti (K'568 / G 550). 

Third, the verbal cues Sri Ramakrishna uses to frame many of his teach- 
ings help us to determine whether the teaching represents his own view or the 
view of another person or sect which he may or may not accept. For instance, 
Sri Ramakrishna almost invariably prefaces his teachings on Advaita Vedanta by 
adding a verbal cue such as “Vedantavadis say...” or “Janis say...” thereby 
indicating that these teachings do not necessarily represent his own view. In fact, 
the verbal cues used in certain contexts sometimes indicate that he contrasts the 
Advyaitic standpoint with his own standpoint. In the entry from 26 October 
1884, Sri Ramakrishna states, “In the light of Vedantic reasoning, the world is 
illusory, unreal as a dream. The Supreme Soul is the Witness—the witness of the 
three states of waking, dream, and deep sleep” (K 691 / G 651). Shortly thereafter, 
he asserts, “But for my part I accept everything: Turiya and also the three states 
of waking, dream, and deep sleep. I accept all three states. I accept all—Brahman 
and also maya, the universe, and its living beings” (K 691 / G 652). Notice that 
the thrice-repeated verbal cue “I accept” clearly indicates that this teaching—and 
not the Advaitic view he previously stated—represents the view he actually holds. 

Verbal cues such as this one—which appear frequently in the Kathamrta—are 
extremely important in helping us to determine Sri Ramakrishna’s own philo- 
sophical views. Ifa verbal cue such as “But for my part...” (K 691 / G 652), “This 
is my final and most mature opinion” (eti paka mat) (K 228 / G 257), “the teach- 
ings of this place” (ekhankar mat) (K 568 / G 550), “Do you know my attitude?” 
(K 577 / G 559), or “I have come to the final realization that ...” (ses ei bujhechi) 
(K 594 / G 638) frames a particular teaching, then we can be certain that the 
teaching represents Sri Ramakrishna’s own view. 


22 * THE INFINITUDE OF GOD 


Interpretive Principle 3 (IP3): Any adequate interpretation of Sri Ramakrishna’s 
philosophical teachings must take into account Sri Ramakrishna’s avowed 
nonsectarianism, his catholic acceptance of all sectarian views and religious 
faiths as effective spiritual paths. 


At various places in the Kathamrta, Sti Ramakrishna expresses his acceptance 
of all sects and spiritual paths. For instance, he declares: 


I have practised all the disciplines; I accept all paths. I respect the Saktas, 
the Vaisnavas, and also the Vedantins. Therefore people of all sects come 
here. And every one of them thinks that I belong to his school. I also re- 
spect the modern Brahmajnanis. (K 552 / G 538) 


Here, Sri Ramakrishna explicitly indicates his acceptance of “all paths,’ including 
the Saktas who worship Kali, the Vaisnavas who worship Krsna, the “modern 
Brahmajfianis”—by which he means the followers of the Brahmo Samaj—who 
accept the personal but formless God, and the Advaita Vedantins, who accept 
only the impersonal Brahman.” Indeed, Sri Ramakrishna cannily anticipates later 
attempts by various commentators to pigeonhole him into a particular sect: as he 
puts it, every follower ofa sect who visits him “thinks that I belong to his school.” 
It is precisely because Sri Ramakrishna did not affiliate himself exclusively with 
any particular sect that he was able to accept al/ sects and make everyone feel as if 
he belonged to their sect alone. 

Accordingly, IP3 rules out any attempt to pigeonhole Sri Ramakrishna into 
a particular exclusivistic sect—be it Advaita Vedanta, Visistadvaita, Vaisnavism, 
or Tantra—since any such sectarian interpretation would fail to account for Sri 
Ramakrishna’s uncompromisingly nonsectarian attitude. As Sri Ramakrishna 
puts it, “A person who has harmonized everything is indeed a real man. Most 
people are one-sided. But I find that all opinions point to the One. All views—the 
Sakta, the Vaisnava, the Vedanta—have that One for their center. He who is 
formless is also with form, and it is He who appears in different forms” (K 494 / 
G 490). Similarly, he declares on another occasion that “Sankara’s Advaitic expla- 
nation of Vedanta is true, and so is the Visistadvaitic interpretation of Ramanuja” 
(K 778 / G 733). It is clear from such statements that an essential aspect of Sri 
Ramakrishna’s philosophical outlook is his conscious harmonization of various 
sectarian views on the basis of a maximally capacious understanding of God as 
both personal and impersonal, both with and without form. In light of this fact, 





26. It should be noted that when Sri Ramakrishna refers to “Vedantins” in the Kathamrta, he 
means the followers of Advaita Vedanta, who take the universe to be unreal. 


Sri Ramakrishna’s Harmonizing Philosophy of Vijfiana Vedanta + 23 


any interpretation of Sri Ramakrishna’s philosophical teachings that fails to take 
into account his nonsectarian outlook is seriously deficient. 


Interpretive Principle 4 (IP4): Sri Ramakrishna’s nonsectarian attitude allows 
him to accept the spiritual core of various philosophical sects without sub- 
scribing to all the doctrines of any sect in particular. 


One of the greatest challenges in determining Sri Ramakrishna’s overall philo- 
sophical framework is his eclectic method of employing concepts and terms from 
a wide variety of philosophical sects, including Advaita, Visistadvaita, Vaisnavism, 
Tantra, and Saktism. For instance, when explaining his teaching that the universe is 
areal manifestation of God, Sri Ramakrishna often explicitly appeals to Ramanuja’s 
Visistadvaitic position that “Brahman, or the Absolute, is qualified by the uni- 
verse and its living beings” (K 778 / G 733). Gupta, the author of the Kathamrta, 
infers from such statements that Sri Ramakrishna was a Visistadvaitin: “Thakur 
[Sri Ramakrishna] does not say that this universe is unreal like a dream. He says, ‘If 
we say so, then the weight of the bel-fruit will fall short? His view is not the doc- 
trine of maya [of Advaita Vedanta] but the doctrine of Visistadvaita” (K 698).”” 
Noticing certain fundamental differences between Sri Ramakrishna’s views and 
those of Sankara, Gupta concludes that Sri Ramakrishna was a Visistadvaitin. 

By contrast, some commentators have claimed that Sri Ramakrishna was an 
Advaitin, partly on the basis of his teachings on nirvikalpa samadhi. For instance, 
Sri Ramakrishna states, “On attaining the Knowledge of Brahman in nirvikalpa 
samadhi, one realizes Brahman, the Infinite, without form or shape and beyond 
mind and words” (K 181 / G 218). According to Svami Omkarananda, since “Sakti 
does not exist” in the state of xirvikalpa samadhi, Sti Ramakrishna’ acceptance of 
the state of nirvikalpa samadhi implies his acceptance of the Advaitic view that 
Sakti is unreal from the ultimate standpoint.”* Meanwhile, Neevel emphasizes Sri 
Ramakrishna’s teachings on the inseparability of Brahman and Sakti and the reality 
of the universe as a manifestation of God, on the basis of which he concludes that 
Sri Ramakrishna accepted a “basically tantric framework of concepts and values.”” 

However, all such sectarian interpretations of Sri Ramakrishna’s philosophical 
views are based on the simplistic hermeneutic assumption that Sri Ramakrishna’s 
approving reference to a doctrine or spiritual experience of a particular philo- 
sophical school makes him a card-carrying member of that school. If this assump- 
tion were true, Sri Ramakrishna would be guilty of flagrant contradiction, since 





27. Nikhilananda omits this passage from his translation of the Kathamrta. 
28. Omkarinanda, “Brahma o Sakti abhed? 230. 
29. Neevel, “The Transformation of Sri Ramakrishna,’ 78. 


24 * THE INFINITUDE OF GOD 


he refers approvingly to numerous conflicting sects. For instance, Advaita Vedanta 
accepts the reality of xirguna Brahman, while Visistadvaita Vedanta does not. If 
Sri Ramakrishna’s approving references to both these sects meant that he was at 
once an Adyaitin and a Visistadvaitin, he would be committed to the outright 
contradiction that #irguna Brahman both exists and does not exist. 

In fact, Sri Ramakrishna’s stance toward various philosophical sects is much 
more nuanced and dialectical than sectarian interpreters assume: he accepts what 
he takes to be the spiritual core of each philosophical sect without necessarily 
accepting all the specific doctrines of that sect.*° Hence, while Sri Ramakrishna 
recognizes that different philosophical sects are often mutually exclusive at the 
level of doctrine, he strives to harmonize these sects at the level of spiritual experi- 
ence.” From Sri Ramakrishna’s nonsectarian perspective, each philosophical sect 
is based on a unique spiritual truth, so the core spiritual truths of all these schools 
are complementary rather than conflicting. 

Following Tantra and Saktism, Sri Ramakrishna affirms that the impersonal 
Brahman and the dynamic Sakti are complementary aspects of one and the same 
Divine Reality (K 861 / G 802).** However, in contrast to sectarian Tantrikas 
who conceive the ultimate reality as Siva, Sri Ramakrishna maintains that one 
and the same “Saccidananda” (“Truth-Consciousness-Bliss”)—the well-known 
Vedantic epithet for the Supreme Reality—is called by various names such as 





30. For a rigorous and detailed defense of this argument, see the final two chapters of 


Chatterjee’s Classical Indian Philosophies (77-152). 


31. Sri Ramakrishna gained knowledge of a wide variety of Indian scriptures and traditional 
Indian philosophies through numerous oral sources, including the spiritual and philosoph- 
ical instructions he received from his gurus, the philosophical discourses of learned pandits 
who visited him in Dakshineswar, and scriptural and philosophical texts that were read 
aloud to him. One of the few books Sri Ramakrishna himself owned and recommended to 
others—and which was read out to him on numerous occasions—was Bipin Bihari Ghosal’s 
Mukti 0 tahar Sadhan (Liberation and Spiritual Practice) (Kolkata: Udbodhan, [1881] 1987), 
an eclectic Bengali compilation of passages from various Indian philosophical texts. Ghosal 
provides excerpts from a wide range of Indian scriptures and philosophical texts, including 
three Upanisads (Katha, Pragna, and Mundaka), the Bhagavad Gita, two major texts from the 
Vaisnava tradition (the Bhagavata Purana and Ripa Gosvami's Bhaktirasamrtasindhu), four 
texts from the Tantrika tradition (Mahbanirvana Tantra, Kularnava Tantra, Jhanasahkalini 
Tantra, and Sivasambita), and many texts from the Advaitic tradition, including Astavakra 
Samhita (a copy of which Sri Ramakrishna owned), Pavicadasi, Yogavasistha, and Atmabodha. 


32. Sri Ramakrishna’s knowledge of Tantra and Saktism derived primarily from his own varied 
spiritual experiences, especially his realization of vij#ana, which revealed to him that Brahman 
and Sakti are inseparable and that the universe is a real manifestation of Sakti. However, he 
also learned Tantrika principles from his Vaisnava Tantrika guru, the Bhairavi Brahmani, and 
from a book he owned, Ghosial’s Mukti 0 tahar Sadhan, which includes numerous passages 
from Tantrika texts. 


Sri Ramakrishna’s Harmonizing Philosophy of Vijfiana Vedanta + 25 


“Siva.” “Kali? and “Krsna” (K 422 / G 423).* Following Advaita Vedanta, Sri 
Ramakrishna conceives the “eternal” (zitya) aspect of the Infinite Reality as the 
Advaitic nirguna Brahman, which is realized in the state of nirvikalpa samadhi.™ 
However, he rejects the Advaitic doctrine that the universe, living beings, and 
the personal God are not ultimately real. Following Visistadvaita, he accepts 
the reality of God’s “/ila? God’s sportive manifestation as the individual soul 
and the universe. However, while Ramanuja conceives the Supreme Reality as 
only personal (saguna), Sri Ramakrishna teaches that the Supreme Reality is both 





33. Although the early Upanisads do not refer to the full term saccidananda, they do frequently 
refer to Brahman separately as sat, cit, and ananda. See, for instance, Taittirtya Upanisad ILi.1 
and Chandogya Upanisad VLiil. The Tejobindu Upanisad III.1-II1.12 contains one of the 


earliest references to saccidananda. 


34, Sri Ramakrishna’s understanding of Advaita Vedanta comes closer to Gaudapada’s Advaita 
and the post-Sankaran Yoga-oriented Advaita tradition than to Sankara’s Advaita. While 
Sankara grants empirical (vyavahdrika) reality to the universe, Gaudapada frequently claims 
that the universe is as unreal as a dream, as in Mandikya Karika 11.31 and IL29. When 
explaining Advaitic doctrine, Sri Ramakrishna follows Gaudapada in likening the universe to a 
dream (K 691 / G 651-52), and he conspicuously refrains from invoking Sankara’s distinction 
between vyavaharika and paramarthika levels of reality. Moreover, Sri Ramakrishna repeatedly 
insists that xirvikalpa samadhi is necessary for—indeed, virtually equivalent to—brahmajnana 
(see, for instance, K 83 / G 133). Sri Ramakrishna’s close alignment of brahmajiana with nir- 
vikalpa samadhi is in line with prominent post-Sankaran Advaitic texts such as Partcadasi and 
Vedantasara, both of which stress the importance of nirvikalpa samadhi. There were at least 
five sources for Sri Ramakrishna’s distinctive understanding of Advaita. First, and most im- 
portantly, his teachings on Advaita derived from his own Advaitic practices and his repeated 
experience of nirvikalpa samadhi. Second, his Advaita guru Totapuri taught Sri Ramakrishna 
an Adyaitic doctrine—closer to Gaudapada’s than to Sankara’s—that emphasizes the dream- 
like nature of the world, the need for constant meditation on the Atman, and the importance 
of nirvikalpa samadhi for the attainment of brahmajnana (see, for instance, K 279-80 / G 
297 and K 991 / G915). Third, Sri Ramakrishna owned a copy of the Advaitic book Astavakra 
Samhita, which strongly emphasizes the path of vicara (“intellectual reasoning”) and the il- 
lusoriness of the world. Fourth, Sri Ramakrishna also might have been influenced by various 
Adyaitic texts quoted in Ghosal’s Mukti 0 tahar Sadhan, such as Pattcadasi (which stresses nir- 
vikalpa samadhi) and the Yogavasistha (which repeatedly likens the world to a dream). Fifth, 
Sri Ramakrishna’s knowledge of Advaita was likely enriched by his conversations with the nu- 
merous Adyaita pandits he encountered in Dakshineswar over the course of several decades. 


35. Some scholars argue against a non-realist interpretation of Sankara’s Advaita Vedanta. See, 
for instance, Bradley Malkovsky, The Role of Divine Grace in the Soteriology of Samkaracarya 
(Leiden: Brill, 2001), 45-67. According to Malkovsky, “one can find passages in Samkara’s 
writings that may be used in support of either a realist or illusionistic interpretation of his 
ontology” (The Role of Divine Grace, 50). Unfortunately, I do not have the space here to re- 
fute Malkovsky’s interpretation of Sankara, but see note 53, where I argue that Sankara’s in- 
terpretation of Brahmasitra 1.1.12 strongly indicates a non-realist understanding of saguna 
Brahman. Numerous scholars also support my position that Sankara consistently held that 
the personal God and the universe are unreal from the absolute (paramarthika) standpoint. 
See, for instance, Satischandra Chatterjee and Dhirendramohan Datta, An Introduction to 
Indian Philosophy (Calcutta: University of Calcutta Press, 1939), 365-412, and M. Hiriyanna, 
Outlines of Indian Philosophy (Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, [1932] 1993), 336-82. 


26 * THE INFINITUDE OF GOD 


personal (saguna) and impersonal (zirguna). Following Gaudiya Vaisnavism, 
Sri Ramakrishna teaches the equal validity of various attitudes toward God, 
including the attitudes of servant (dasya), friend (sakhya), parent (vatsalya), 
and lover (mdadhurya). However, Gaudiya Vaisnavas take the Supreme Reality 
to be the personal God Krsna, and they maintain that the #irguna Brahman is 
only Krsna’s “peripheral brilliance” (tanubha). Sri Ramakrishna, in contrast to 
Gaudiya Vaisnavas, maintains that the Supreme Reality is equally zirguna and 
saguna and refrains from subordinating the impersonal aspect of the Supreme 
Reality to the personal aspect, or vice versa. 

A pattern has clearly emerged: while Sri Ramakrishna embraces the spiritual 
core of numerous sectarian philosophies, he does not accept all the doctrines of 
any of these sects. Therefore, instead of trying to pigeonhole Sri Ramakrishna’s 
views into a particular sectarian framework, we should strive to honor his unique 
nonsectarian method of harmonizing the complementary spiritual truths embod- 
ied in various sects. 


Interpretive Principle 5 (IPS): Sri Ramakrishna’s various philosophical teach- 
ings should be synthesized on the basis of a foundational concept or frame- 
work taught and accepted by Sri Ramakrishna himself. 


Many commentators have attempted to establish the consistency of Sri 
Ramakrishna’s philosophical views by invoking an external philosophical frame- 
work, be it Tantrika, Advaitic, Visistadvaitic, or Vaisnava.*° However, this 
eisegetic interpretive method clearly violates IP1, which prohibits any unjusti- 
fied appeal to an external framework in order to explain Sri Ramakrishna’s phil- 
osophical teachings. A more promising and noneisegetic means of establishing 
the consistency and coherence of Sri Ramakrishna’s philosophical views is to 
find a foundational concept or framework internal to his teachings that lends 
philosophical coherence to all of his apparently disparate teachings. In accord- 
ance with IPS, I will argue in the next section that Sri Ramakrishna’s teachings 
on vijidna provide precisely such an immanent framework for establishing the 
coherence and interconnectedness of his various philosophical teachings. In the 
course of this book, I will show that Sri Ramakrishna’s philosophical framework 
of vijiana holds the key to understanding his views on God, religious diversity, 
mystical experience, and the problem of evil. 





36. See references in notes 2—4. 


Sri Ramakrishna’s Harmonizing Philosophy of Vijfiana Vedanta » 27 


Ill. The Central Tenets of Sri Ramakrishna’s Vijfiana 
Vedanta 


Sri Ramakrishna’s realization of God through various religious paths and his 
unique spiritual state of bhavamukha formed the experiential basis for his later 
teachings, which we find in the Kathamrta. Although he almost never refers to 
“bhavamukha” in the Kathamrta, he refers repeatedly to the spiritual state of 
“vijnana, which—as we will see shortly—is a synonym for bhavamukha. Tellingly, 
Sri Ramakrishna indicates that his notion of vijfana can be found in scriptures such 
as the Upanisads, the Gita, the Bhagavata Purana, and the Adhyatma Ramayana.” 
Pursuing Sri Ramakrishna’s hint, I will argue that his vij#ana-based philosophy is 
best understood in terms of the nonsectarian Vedanta of the Upanisads and the 
Gita. Accordingly, in the course of this section, I will not only outline the six fun- 
damental tenets of Sri Ramakrishna’s philosophy of Vijfiana Vedanta but also indi- 
cate briefly their scriptural basis in the Upanisads and the Giza. 


Vijnana Vedanta I (VV1): After attaining brahmajnana in nirvikalpasamadhi, 
ordinary people leave their body within twenty-one days, but certain divinely 
commissioned people known as isvarakotis are able to return from the state 
of nirvikalpa samadhi and attain vijiana—a spiritual state even greater than 
brahmajiana—in which perfect j#ana and perfect bhakti are combined. 


At numerous points in the Kathamrta, Sri Ramakrishna distinguishes two 
categories of people: while “jivakotis” are “ordinary people” (sadharan lok), 
“jsvarakotis’ belong to a spiritual elite consisting only in “Incarnations of God 
and those born as a part of one of these Incarnations” (avatar va avatarer amsa) 
(K 800 / G749). According to Sri Ramakrishna, isvarakotis are capable of a much 
greater spiritual attainment than jivakotis: 


When the kundalini rises to the sahasrara and the mind goes into samadhi, 
the aspirant loses all consciousness of the outer world. He can no longer 
retain his body. If milk is poured into his mouth, it runs out again. In that 
state, death occurs within twenty-one days. ... But the #svarakotis, such as 
the Incarnations of God, can come down from this state of samadhi. They 
can descend from this exalted state because they like to live in the com- 
pany of devotees and enjoy the love of God. God retains in them the “ego 





37. At K 985 / G 910, Sri Ramakrishna remarks that the spiritual standpoint of vij#ana is 
taught in the Gita, the Bhagavata Purana, and “Vedanta” (by which he presumably means the 
Upanisads). At K 390 / G 393 and in many other places in the Kathamrta, he points out that 
the idea of vij#ana is also found in the Adhyatma Ramayana. 


28 © THE INFINITUDE OF GOD 


of Knowledge” [vidyar ami] or the “ego of Devotion” [bhakter ami] so 
that they may teach people. Their minds move between the sixth and the 
seventh planes. They run a boat-race back and forth, as it were, between 


these two planes. (K 505 / G 500) 


While ordinary jivas leave their body within twenty-one days of attaining 
brahmajnana in nirvikalpa samadhi, isvarakotis are able to “come down” from 
the state of samadhi in order to help others, shuttling back and forth between the 
empirical and absolute planes of consciousness.** Sri Ramakrishna’s teachings on 
the unique spiritual state of the #varakotis are clearly based on his own experience 
of remaining in xirvikalpa samadhi for six months and then returning to the em- 
pirical plane after receiving the divine command to “remain in bhavamukha.” In 
the Kathamrta, Sri Ramakrishna refers to the isvarakoti’s state of bhavamukha as 
“vijhana, a stage “beyond even brahmajnana” (K 266 / G 287).” 

Sri Ramakrishna frequently explains the difference between jana and vijiana 
by means of the metaphor of the staircase and the roof: 


The j#ani gives up his identification with worldly things, discriminating, 
“Not this, not this.” Only then can he realize Brahman. It is like reach- 
ing the roof of a house by leaving the steps behind, one by one. But the 
vijnani, who is more intimately acquainted with Brahman, realizes some- 
thing more [kintu vijhani jini visesrupe tahar sange alap karen tini aro kichu 
darsan karen). He realizes that the steps are made of the same materials as 
the roof: bricks, lime, and brick-dust. That which is realized as Brahman 
through the eliminating process of “Not this, not this” is then found to 
have become the universe and all its living beings. The vij#ani sees that the 
Reality which is zirguna is also saguna. A man cannot live on the roof fora 
long time. He comes down again. Those who realize Brahman in samadhi 





38. Sri Ramakrishna’s claim that ordinary souls leave their body in samadhi within twenty-one 
days seems to be based on his own six-month immersion in zirvikalpa samadhi, during which 
time his body was kept alive by a sédhu who occasionally forced milk down his throat. He also 
indicates, however, that he learned a similar teaching from a brabmacarin (celibate spiritual 
aspirant): “A brabmacarin once said to me, ‘One who goes beyond Kedar cannot keep his body 
alive? Likewise, a man cannot preserve his body after attaining brahmajnana. The body drops 
off in twenty-one days” (K 346 / G 354). Sri Ramakrishna’s conception of the #varakoti is not 
so easy to trace historically. As far as Iam aware, the term #%varakoti is not found in any of the 
major Indian scriptures or philosophical schools. Saradananda suggests that Sri Ramakrishna’s 
concept of the isvarakoti resembles the Samkhyan concept of the prakrtilina purusa and the 
Vedantic concept of the adhikarika. See LP 11.1.71-73 / DP 617-19. 


39. See Tapasyananda’s helpful discussion of the connection between vijiana and bhavamukha 


in Bhakti Schools of Vedanta, 359-64. 


Sri Ramakrishna’s Harmonizing Philosophy of Vijfiana Vedanta - 29 


come down also and find that it is Brahman that has become the universe 
and its living beings... . This is known as vijitana. (K 50-51 / G 103-4) 


Sri Ramakrishna describes the j#dni in Advaitic terms as one who attains 
brahmajnana by reasoning that Brahman alone is real and the universe is un- 
real. The vijiani, however, goes beyond even brahmajnana by attaining the 
more expansive realization that Brahman “has become the universe and its living 
beings.”*° As Sri Ramakrishna puts it elsewhere, while the j#ani dismisses the uni- 
verse as a “framework of illusion” (dhokar tati), the vijzani embraces the universe 
as a “mansion of mirth” (ajar kuti) (K 479 / G 478). The Advaitic jaan realizes 
that #irguna Brahman alone is real, while the vij#ani attains the greater realiza- 
tion that the “Reality which is zirguna is also saguna.” 

That Sri Ramakrishna considers the vij#ani to be superior to the j#ani is clear 
from the fact that he repeatedly contrasts the spiritual selfishness of j#anis with 
the spiritual compassion of vijianis. Sti Ramakrishna likens j#anis, who seek only 
their own salvation, to “a hollow piece of drift-wood” that “sinks if even a bird 
sits on it” (K 482 / G 479). By contrast, vijidanis like Narada, who strive to help 
others achieve spiritual enlightenment, “are like a huge log that not only can float 
across to the other shore but can carry many animals and other creatures as well” 
(K 482 / G 479)." Tellingly, Sri Ramakrishna explicitly declares himself to be a 
vijnani: “T do not have the nature of a jaani.... The Divine Mother has kept me 
in the state of a bhakia, a vijnani” (K 391 / G 393). 

Sri Ramakrishna explains that the “superior devotee” (uttam bhakta)—another 
name for the vij”ani—‘“sees that God alone has become everything,’ and he then 
immediately adds, “Read the Gita, the Bhagavata, and the Vedanta, and you will 





40. In conversation, Swami Krishnasakhananda pointed out to me that Sri Ramakrishna 
describes the vij#ani as “coming down’ from the state of nirvikalpa samadhi, which seems to 
imply that vij#ana is a lower state than brahmajnana. Throughout this chapter, I have been 
careful not to claim that vij#ana is a “higher” state than brabmajnana, since Sri Ramakrishna 
never made such a claim. However, Sri Ramakrishna did explicitly claim that vijiana is 
“beyond even” brahmajhana (K 266 / G 287), and he repeatedly affirmed that vijiana is a 
much rarer, more intimate, and more comprehensive realization of the Divine Reality than 
brahmajnana. Perhaps, then, we can say that Sri Ramakrishna took Advaitic brahmajnana to 
be the highest spiritual experience but took vijiana to be a greater—that is, fuller and more 
intimate—state than brahmajnana. This seems to be Sharma’s view: “[T]hough Ramakrishna 
is one with Advaita Vedanta in accepting the realization of nirguna Brahman as the summit of 
religious experience, he does not regard it as the final religious experience. For him the religious 
experience of coming back to the world to realize the identity of saguna and nirguna Brahman 
is a desirable next step” (Ramakrishna and Vivekananda, 40). 


41. | agree with Sharma that “Ramakrishna thinks more highly of the vijnani than the jnani” 
(Ramakrishna and Vivekananda, 40). 


30 © THE INFINITUDE OF GOD 


understand all this” (K 985 / G 910). Here, Sri Ramakrishna himself hints that his 
teachings on vijfidna can be found in the Vedantic scriptures. Indeed, Sri Aurobindo 
has made a convincing case that the Gita employs the term vijfana in a manner that 
comes remarkably close to Sri Ramakrishna’s use of the term.** For instance, in his 
discussion of Gita 7.2—which begins, “I will speak to you of jana and vijnana” —Sri 
Aurobindo interprets jana as the “essential” knowledge of the impersonal Atman, 
“the one immutable Self and silent Spirit;’4 while he interprets vijaana as the “com- 
prehensive” or “integral” realization that “the Divine Being is all.”® 

In the remainder of this section, I will attempt to demonstrate that Sri 
Ramakrishna’s concept of vij#ana, when understood in all its ramifications, pro- 
vides the master framework within which all of his major philosophical teachings 
should be understood. In particular, I will argue that the five remaining tenets of 
Sri Ramakrishna’s spiritual philosophy—VV2 through VV6—all derive from the 
unique standpoint of vij#ana embodied in VV1. 


Vijnana Vedanta 2 (VV2): Since the rational intellect is inherently limited, 
spiritual experience is the only reliable basis for arriving at supersensuous spir- 
itual truths. On the suprarational basis of vij#ana, we can affirm truths about 
God that appear to be contradictory or illogical to the rational intellect. 


Sri Ramakrishna repeatedly teaches that the rational intellect can never grasp 
the supersensuous truths of the spiritual domain. He has two favorite analogies 
to illustrate this teaching. At several places in the Kathamrta, he highlights our 
inability to “comprehend the nature of God” (K 341 / G 351) or to “understand 
God’s ways” by means of the rhetorical question, “Can a one-seer pot hold ten 
seers of milk?” (K 229 / G 257). By likening the finite mind to a “one-seer pot,’ 
Sri Ramakrishna points to the fundamental limitations of the rational intellect 
and its inherent incapacity to grasp spiritual realities. 

Similarly, Sri Ramakrishna often teaches: “You have come to the orchard to 
eat mangoes; what need is there of knowing how many thousands of branches and 
millions of leaves there are in the orchard?” (K 907 / G 841). It is significant that 





42. Sri Ramakrishna uses the terms isvarakoti, vijnani, and uttam bhakta interchangeably 
throughout the Kathamrta. That these three terms are synonymous is clear from the fact that 
he employs the same staircase-roof analogy to explain the spiritual state of all three. 


43, See Ayon Maharaj, “Toward a New Hermeneutics of the Bhagavad Gita: Sri Ramakrishna, 
Sri Aurobindo, and the Secret of Vijwana;? Philosophy East and West 65.4 (October 2015), 
1209-33. 


44, Sri Aurobindo, The Complete Works of Sri Aurobindo, vol. 19: Essays on the Gita 
(Pondicherry: Sri Aurobindo Ashram, 1997), 264. 


45. Sri Aurobindo, Essays on the Gita, 266. 


Sri Ramakrishna’s Harmonizing Philosophy of Vijfiana Vedanta +» 31 


this teaching was almost invariably given as a rebuke to visitors who asked partic- 
ular questions about supersensuous matters, such as “Sir, isa man born again?” (K 
907 / G 841), “Sir, what do you think of Theosophy and Spiritualism? Are these 
true?” (K 879 / G 819), and “Sir, if God alone does everything, how is it that a 
person is punished for his sins?” (K 976 / G 901). In the entry from 3 July 1884, 
Sri Ramakrishna clarifies that his mango-orchard analogy is meant to encourage 
us to strive to realize God through spiritual practice instead of engaging in “futile 
reasoning” about rationally insoluble metaphysical questions (K 501 / G 496). 
In fact, Sri Ramakrishna explicitly approves of two spiritually beneficial forms of 
reasoning. First, he strongly encourages people to practice what he calls sadasadvicara, 
reasoning “about the true and the false, about what is permanent and what is transi- 
tory” (K501 / G 496). Second, in a fascinating exchange with Narendra (who would 
go on to become Swami Vivekananda), Sri Ramakrishna enthusiastically embraces a 
form of philosophical reasoning that acknowledges its own constitutive limitations: 


Narendra said to M. [Gupta] that he had been reading a book by 
Hamilton, who wrote: “A learned ignorance is the end of philosophy and 
the beginning of religion.” 


MASTER [SRI RAMAKRISHNA] (TO M.): “What does that mean?” 


Narendra explained the sentence in Bengali. The Master beamed with joy 
and said in English, “Thank you! Thank you!” (K 255 / G 278) 


Narendra, a student of Western philosophy at Scottish Church College, para- 
phrases the Scottish philosopher William Hamilton’s statement in Lectures on 
Metaphysics and Logic (1859), “A learned ignorance is thus the end of philosophy, 
as it is the beginning of theology.’** According to Hamilton, philosophical rea- 
soning should terminate in epistemic humility, an acknowledgment of the in- 
herent limitations of reason. Interestingly, several sentences before making this 
statement, Hamilton remarks that philosophy has two main tasks: first, to admit 
“the weakness of our discursive intellect,’ and second, to demonstrate “that the 
limits of thought are not to be assumed as the limits of possibility.””” 

Sri Ramakrishna’s enthusiastic approval of Hamilton’s statement about 
“learned ignorance” and his own frequent teachings on the limitations of the ra- 
tional intellect suggest that he shares Hamilton’s metaphilosophical pessimism 





46. William Hamilton, Lectures on Metaphysics and Logic, vol. 1 (Boston: Gould & Lincoln, 
1859), 25. 


47. Hamilton, Lectures on Metaphysics and Logic, 25. 


32 * THE INFINITUDE OF GOD 


about reason. Indeed, it is precisely the point of Sri Ramakrishna’s “one-seer pot” 


« 


analogy to illustrate what Hamilton calls the “weakness of our discursive intel- 
lect.” Moreover, in an entry from 22 October 1885, Sri Ramakrishna gently chides 
Dr. Sarkar for assuming—contrary to Hamilton—that the limits of thought are 
the limits of possibility: “It is not mentioned in his [Dr. Sarkar’s] ‘science’ that 
God can take human form; so how can he believe it?” (K 934 / G 864). In a 
Hamiltonian vein, Sri Ramakrishna points out that our inability to understand 
how God can incarnate as a human being, far from casting doubt on the possi- 
bility of avatara-hood, only attests to the limitations of thought itself. 

As his explicit approval of Hamilton’s statement indicates, Sri Ramakrishna 
believes that intellectual reasoning can be spiritually beneficial if it humbly 
acknowledges its own limitations and thereby opens itself to faith in spiritual 
realities that lie beyond the reach of the intellect: 


It is very difficult to understand that God can be a finite human being and 
at the same time the all-pervading Soul of the universe. The /@/a belongs 
to the same Reality to which the witya belongs [jari nitya, tahari lila). 
How can we say emphatically with our small intelligence that God can- 
not assume a human form? Can we ever understand all these ideas with 
our little intellect? Can a one-seer pot hold four seers of milk? Therefore 
one should trust in the words of holy men and great souls, those who have 


realized God. (K 934 / G 864) 


According to Sri Ramakrishna, since we cannot rationally comprehend how God 
can be both wirguna and saguna or how the nitya and the /ia can be complemen- 
tary aspects of the same Reality, we should have faith in the testimony of “great 
souls” who have directly confirmed these spiritual truths through suprarational re- 
alization. In other words, Sri Ramakrishna’s Hamiltonian pessimism about reason 
goes hand in hand with VV 1: Sri Ramakrishna—unlike Hamilton—bases his pos- 
itive assertions about the nature of God and spiritual experience on his own expe- 
rience of vijiana. In light of Sri Ramakrishna’s principled pessimism about reason, 
it would be beside the point to object that Sri Ramakrishna’s teachings about God 
and spiritual experience are illogical or contradictory. For Sri Ramakrishna, spir- 
itual truths that might seem contradictory or illogical to the rational intellect are 
validated on the experiential basis of vijiana. As we will see in chapter 2, this as- 
pect of Sri Ramakrishna’s thought bears striking affinities with the views of the 
contemporary theologian Benedikt Paul Gécke, who claims that God can possess 
various attributes and aspects that appear contradictory to the finite human mind. 

Sri Ramakrishna’ insistence on the inability of the intellect to grasp spiritual 
truths finds scriptural support in many of the Upanisads. For instance, Taittirlya 
Upanisad 2.9.1 declares that Brahman is “that from which speech, along with 


Sri Ramakrishna’s Harmonizing Philosophy of Vijfiana Vedanta + 33 


mind, turn back, having failed to reach it.”*8 Just as Sri Ramakrishna teaches that 
supersensuous truths can be understood only through direct spiritual experience 
and not through intellectual reasoning, Katha Upanisad 1.2.23 declares: “This 
Atman cannot be known through much study, nor through the intellect, nor 
through much hearing. It can be known through the Atman alone to which the 
aspirant prays; the Atman of that seeker reveals Its true nature.”*? Moreover, the 
Upanisads, when characterizing the nature of Brahman, often revel in the lan- 
guage of paradox. The fifth mantra of the Isa Upanisad, for instance, makes a 
number of paradoxical assertions about the Atman which defy rational explana- 
tion: “That moves, That does not move; That is far off, That is very near; That is 
inside all this, and That is also outside all this.”*° 

All the remaining tenets of Vijfana Vedanta—namely, VV3 through 
VV6—should be understood from the spiritual standpoint of vijiana and not 
from the limited standpoint of the rational intellect. 


Vijnana Vedanta 3 (VV3): The Infinite Divine Reality is both personal and 
impersonal, both with and without form, both immanent in the universe and 
beyond it, and much more besides. 


At the foundation of Sri Ramakrishna’s spiritual philosophy is a startlingly 
expansive conception of God as the “Infinite Reality” (“azanta”) whose inex- 
haustible plenitude is beyond our comprehension (K 181 / G 218). Since God 
is infinite and illimitable, we should never limit God to what our finite intel- 
lects can grasp of Him. Sri Ramakrishna elaborates the infinitude of God as fol- 
lows: “That Reality which is the witya is also the /ila. ... [Everything is possible 
for God. He is formless, and again He assumes forms. He is the individual and He 
is the universe. He is Brahman, and He is Sakti. There is no limit to God. Nothing 
is impossible for Him” (jahari nitya tahari lila... . tahate sab sambhabe. sei tini 
nivakar sakar. tini svarat virat. tini brahma, tini Sakti) (KK 997 / G 920). To the 
rational intellect, such contradictory attributes as personality and impersonality, 
form and formlessness cannot possibly belong to God at the same time. However, 
it is crucial to bear in mind that VV3 follows from VV2: since God’s infinite na- 
ture cannot be confined within the narrow walls of our rational understanding, 
we should humbly accept that “everything is possible for God.” 





48. Sankaracarya, Eight Upanisads with the Commentary of Sankaracarya, vol. 1, trans. Swami 
Gambhirananda (Kolkata: Advaita Ashrama, 1989), 387. 


49. Sankaracarya, Eight Upanisads, vol. 1, 157. 
50. Sattkaracarya, Eight Upanisads, vol. 1, 12. 


34 ¢ THE INFINITUDE OF GOD 


Sri Ramakrishna explicitly teaches the infinitude and illimitability of God 
from the standpoint of vijiana: “The vijiani sees that the Reality which is 
nirguna is also saguna.... The vijiani sees that the Reality which is Brahman is 
also Bhagavan; That which is beyond the three gunas is also Bhagavan endowed 
with the six divine attributes” (Vijiani dekhe, jini nirgun, tini sagun. .. . 
Vijnani dekhe, jini brahma tini bhagavan; jini gundatit, tini sadaisvaryapurna 
bhagavan) (K 51 / G 104). While the ordinary jiva is usually only capable of 
realizing God in a single limited aspect, the vij#ani realizes God in multiple 
aspects or forms, so a vijfani alone—like Sri Ramakrishna himself—can au- 
thoritatively declare, on the basis of direct spiritual experience, that God is 
both personal and impersonal,” both with and without form, both immanent 
and transcendent. 

Hence, it is from the standpoint of vij#dna that we have to understand Sri 
Ramakrishna’s numerous teachings on the infinite and illimitable nature of God. 
Interestingly, one of the most frequent ways he conveys God’s infinitude is to 
employ relative-correlative grammatical clauses—which the Bengali language 
inherited from Sanskrit—such as “jini sagun, tini nirgun” (“That which is saguna 
is also nirguna”) (K 246 / G 271), “jini brahma, tini bhagavan” (“That which is 
Brahman is also Bhagavan”) (K51 / G 104), “jini brahma, tini Sakti” (“That which 
is Brahman is also Sakti”) (K 379 / G 382), “jini nirakar, tini sakar” (“That which 
is with form is also without form”) (K 364 / G 370), “jari riip, tini arup” (“That 
which has form is also without form”) (K 246 / G 271), and “jari nitya, tahari 
lila” (“The lila belongs to That to which the zitya belongs”) (K 380 / G 382). I be- 
lieve there are two main reasons why Sri Ramakrishna so frequently employs this 
relative-correlative grammatical structure. First, the relative-correlative grammat- 
ical structure helps convey the infinitude of God by ascribing certain attributes 
to the grammatical subject without explicitly naming or rigidly defining it. For 
instance, the grammar of the statement “jimi sagun, tini nirgun” implies a gram- 
matical subject to which the attributes of sagunatva and nirgunatva apply but 





51. To avoid any misunderstanding, I define here how I use the terms “personal” and “imper- 
sonal” throughout this book. The personal God (saguna Brahman) is the omniscient, om- 
nipotent, and perfectly loving God of theism who creates and governs the universe, who is 
responsive to our prayers, and with whom we are capable of having a loving relationship. As 
Sri Ramakrishna puts it, “It is enough to feel that God [#vara] is a Person [vyakti] who listens 
to our prayers, who creates, preserves, and destroys the universe, and who is endowed with 
infinite power” (K 100 / G 149). The impersonal Reality (zi-guna Brahman) is the nondual 
Brahman without any attributes—including even the omni-attributes of the theistic God. It 
should be obvious that “impersonal” does not imply “swbpersonal.” The impersonal Brahman, 
far from being insentient like a stone, is the Supreme Reality beyond even divine personality. 
We cannot enter into a loving relationship with the impersonal nondual Brahman, since any 
such relationship would imply subject-object duality; rather, we can only realize our identity 
with the impersonal Brahman. 


Sri Ramakrishna’s Harmonizing Philosophy of Vijfiana Vedanta + 35 


which is not exhausted by these attributes, thereby indicating that God is both 
saguna and nirguna and yet remains beyond both sagunatva and nirgunatva. 
Accordingly, at various points in the Kathamrta, Sri Ramakrishna declares that 
“God is with form, without form, and much more besides” (tini sakar, nirakar, 
Abar kato ki) (K 602 / G577). 

Second, the open-endededness of the relative-correlative construction allows 
Sri Ramakrishna to ascribe various attributes to God without committing himself 
to any natrow or sectarian doctrine about the nature of God. As VV2 indicates, 
while we can never rationally comprehend how God can be, say, both personal 
and impersonal or both with and without form, the vij#ani attains a direct supra- 
rational experience of the truth of these various aspects or attributes of God. By 
employing relative-correlative clauses to describe God, Sri Ramakrishna is able 
to affirm the reality of numerous aspects and attributes of God without attempt- 
ing the impossible task of providing a rational explanation of how God can have 
these seemingly contradictory aspects and attributes. 

Sri Ramakrishna frequently conveys the infinitude of God by comparing God 
to an infinite ocean that freezes into ice at certain places: 


The bhaktas—the vijianis—accept both the impersonal and the per- 
sonal God [ninakar-sakar|, both God without form and God with form 
[artip-rup]. In a shoreless ocean—an infinite expanse of water—visible 
blocks of ice are formed here and there by intense cold. Similarly, under 
the cooling influence of bhakti, as it were, the Infinite appears before the 
worshipper as God with form. Again, with the rising of the sun of knowl- 
edge [jian-sirya], those blocks of ice melt and only the infinite ocean 
remains. (K 861 / G 802) 


Superficially, this analogy might seem to support the Advaitic view that saguna 
Brahman is ontologically inferior to zirguna Brahman. Omkarananda, for in- 
stance, argues that since the ice “melts” with the rising of the “sun of knowledge,” 
Sri Ramakrishna’s analogy indicates that saguna Brahman has only “relative 
or vyavaharika reality.’ However, Omkarananda overlooks the fact that Sri 
Ramakrishna explicitly frames this analogy not from the Advaitic standpoint of 
the j#adni but from the vaster standpoint of the vij#ani, who realizes that God 
is both personal and impersonal, both with and without form. By means of this 
analogy of the infinite ocean, Sri Ramakrishna teaches that the personal God of 
the bhaktas and the impersonal Brahman of the j#anis are equally real, since they 





52. Omkarananda, “Nitya 0 Lila? 293. 


36 * THE INFINITUDE OF GOD 


are complementary aspects of one and the same impersonal-personal Infinite 
Reality.® 

In his explanation of this analogy of the ocean on 27 December 1883, Sri 
Ramakrishna makes absolutely clear that saguna Brahman and nirguna Brahman 
are on an ontological par: “One who follows the path of knowledge [j#ana]—the 
path of discrimination—does not see the form of God anymore. To him, every- 
thing is formless. With the rising of the sun of knowledge, the ice form melts into 
the formless ocean. But mark this, form and formlessness belong to one and the 
same Reality |jari ninakar, tari sakar\? (K 364 / G 370). For Sri Ramakrishna, 
the infinite ocean corresponds to the irguna aspect of the Infinite Reality real- 
ized by janis in the state of nirvikalpa samadhi, while the ice formations cor- 
respond to the saguna and sakara aspects of the same Infinite Reality, realized 
by bhaktas. Omkarananda clearly lapses into eisegesis by reading the Advaitic 
vyavaharika-paramarthika framework into Sri Ramakrishna’s analogy, since the 
very point of Sri Ramakrishna’s analogy is to teach, on the contrary, that saguna 
Brahman and zirguna Brahman are equally real. 

Sri Ramakrishna also indicates the ontological parity of the personal God of 
bhaktas and the impersonal Absolute of j#anis by means of his favorite teach- 
ing, “Brahman and Sakti are inseparable” (brabma o Sakti abhed). At numerous 
places in the Kathamrta, Sri Ramakrishna explicitly identifies the doctrine that 
“Brahman and Sakti are inseparable” as his own view—‘“the teaching of this 





53. In Ramakrishna and Vivekananda (38-45), Sharma notes this key difference between Sri 
Ramakrishna’s philosophy and Advaita Vedanta. Ankur Barua has suggested to me in con- 
versation that I might be misrepresenting Advaita by ascribing to it the position that saguna 
Brahman is ontologically inferior to zirguna Brahman. As Barua puts it, “an Advaitin could 
respond to Ramakrishna that what Ramakrishna seeks to indicate through vijaana is already 
encapsulated in the pointer of the transpersonal Brahman of Advaita—the Brahman which 
cannot be conceptualised or named or encompassed somehow incorporates in its metaphys- 
ical plenitude the personalist dimensions of the divine.” While I have no objection to Barua’s 
preference for the term “transpersonal Brahman” to “impersonal Brahman,’ I believe Barua 
overlooks a key ontological difference between the positions of Advaita Vedanta and Sri 
Ramakrishna. For the Advaitin, the transpersonal nondual Brahman alone is ontologically 
real, while the personal God of theism is empirically real but ontologically unreal. Sankara, for 
instance, clearly adopts this position in his commentary on Brahmasitra 1.1.12, where he dis- 
tinguishes the “zpasya” Brahman, the personal God who is worshipped and contemplated, 
from the “j#eya” Brahman, the impersonal nondual Reality which can only be known. See 
Sankaracarya, Brahmasitram: Sankarabhasyopetam (Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 2007), 
35; Sankaracarya, Brahma-Sitra-Bhasya of Sri Sankavacarya, trans. Swami Gambhirananda 
(Kolkata: Advaita Ashrama, 2006), 64. Crucially, Sankara claims that the upasya Brahman 
is associated with unreal “upadhis” (limiting adjuncts), while the j#eya Brahman is entirely 
devoid of upadhis. Accordingly, the Advaitin takes the personal God of theism to be ontologi- 
cally unreal. By contrast, Sri Ramakrishna takes the personal God and the impersonal nondual 
Reality to be equally real aspects of one and the same Infinite Reality. 


Sri Ramakrishna’s Harmonizing Philosophy of Vijfiana Vedanta - 37 


place’—and contrasts it with the Advaitic position that Sakti is unreal. For in- 
stance, Sri Ramakrishna remarks: 


Once, while listening to the various incidents of the life of Caitanya, 
Hajra said that these were manifestations of Sakti, and that Brahman, the 
All-pervasive Spirit [Vibha], had nothing to do with them. But can there be 
Sakti without Brahman? Hajra wants to nullify the teaching of this place 
[ekhankar mat). 1 have realized that Brahman and Sakti are inseparable, like 
water and its wetness, like fire and its power to burn. Brahman dwells in all 
beings as the Vibhi, the all-pervasive Consciousness. (K 568 / G 550) 


Three features of this passage are worth noting. First, Sri Ramakrishna ascribes 
to Hajra the position that Sakti is a lower reality than the pure all-pervasive 
Consciousness. Second, he explicitly contrasts Hajra’s position with his own 
view— “the teaching of this place”—that “Brahman and Sakti are inseparable.” 
Third, Sri Ramakrishna indicates that his insight into the inseparability of 
Brahman and Sakti is based on his own experience of vij#ana, his direct realiza- 
tion that “Brahman dwells in all beings.” 

Similarly, in the entry from 27 October 1882, Sri Ramakrishna contrasts the 
Advyaitic “jzani's” view that “Sakti is unreal, like a dream” with his own view that 
“Brahman and Sakti are inseparable” (K 84 / G 134). Therefore, the main point 
of his teaching that Brahman and Sakti are “inseparable” is to grant equal on- 
tological status to both Brahman and Sakti. From Sri Ramakrishna’s standpoint 
of vijiana, “That which is Brahman is also Sakti” (jini brahma, tini sakti): in 
other words, the static Brahman and the dynamic Sakti are equally real aspects 
of one and the same Divine Reality (K 379 / G 382). As he puts it, “When God 
is actionless [ziskriya], I call God ‘Brahman’; when God creates, preserves, and 
destroys, I call God ‘Sakti’” (K 861 / G 802). 

Tellingly, all of the analogies Sri Ramakrishna employs to illustrate the in- 
separability of Brahman and Sakti also indicate their ontological parity. For in- 
stance, he compares the inseparability of Brahman and Sakti to fire and its power 
to burn (K 55 / G 108), milk and its whiteness (K 84 / G 134), the sun and its 
rays (K 84 / G 134), a gem and its brightness (K 254 / G 277), water and its wet- 
ness (K 269 / G 290), a snake and its wriggling motion (K 269 / G 290), and still 
water and agitated water (K 254 / G 277). In his explanation of these analogies, 
Sri Ramakrishna repeatedly emphasizes their bidirectionality. For instance, he 
explains his favorite analogy of fire and its power to burn as follows: “Brahman 
and Sakti are inseparable, like fire and its power to burn. When we talk of fire, we 
automatically mean also its power to burn. Again, the fire’s power to burn implies 
the fire itself. If you accept the one, you must accept the other” (K 55 / G 108). 
Notice that he insists here on the analogy’s bidirectionality: the concept of fire 


38 © THE INFINITUDE OF GOD 


entails its power to burn, and the fire’s power to burn entails the concept of fire. 
Like fire and its power to burn, Brahman and Sakti mutually entail each other. 

The bidirectionality of all these analogies clearly rules out an Advaitic in- 
terpretation of Sri Ramakrishna’s doctrine of the inseparability of Brahman 
and Sakti. According to Advaita, Sakti is ontologically dependent on ninguna 
Brahman, but wirguna Brahman is not ontologically dependent on Sakti, since 
Sakti is ultimately unreal. Sri Ramakrishna, by contrast, teaches the mutual onto- 
logical dependence of Brahman and Sakti.>4 As he puts it, “one cannot think of 
Brahman without Sakti, or of Sakti without Brahman. One cannot think of the 
nitya without the /id, or of the /ila without the nitya” (K 85 / G 134). 

Sri Ramakrishna points out that his teachings on the infinitude of God are 
corroborated by the Vedas: “The Vedas teach that God is both with and without 
form, both personal and impersonal” (K 152 / G 191). Pursuing Sri Ramakrishna’s 
hint, both Vivekananda and Sri Aurobindo have shown that many of the 
Upanisads—such as Isa, Kena, and Chandogya—teach that God is at once per- 
sonal and impersonal.” Similarly, George Thibaut argues that the Upanisads treat 
nirguna Brahman and saguna Brahman as equally real and hence do not support 
Sankara’s thesis that saguna Brahman is a “lower” reality.** More recently, Jaideva 
Singh has argued that the Upanisads accept the reality of both zirguna Brahman, 
“about which we can speak only in negative terms,” and saguna Brahman, “the 
dynamic, creative Brahman known as Sachchidananda?*” According to Sri 
Aurobindo, the Gita also teaches that God is the infinite “Purusottama” who is 
both personal and impersonal, both immanent in the universe and beyond it. 


Vijnana Vedanta 4 (VV4): There are two levels of Advaitic realization: while 
the j#ani realizes the acosmic nondual reality of zirguna Brahman in nirvi- 
kalpa samadhi, the vijiani returns from the state of nirvikalpa samadhi and 





54. A major problem with Omkarananda’s Advaitic interpretation of Sri Ramakrishna’s teach- 
ing that “Brahman and Sakti are inseparable” is that he fails to acknowledge the mutual onto- 
logical dependence of Brahman and Sakti. See Omkarananda, “Brahma o Sakti abhed} 230-31. 


55. For Vivekananda’s lectures on the Iga and Chandogya Upanisads, see The Complete Works of 
Swami Vivekananda, vol. 2, 144-54 and 309-27. See also Sri Aurobindo, The Complete Works 
of Sri Aurobindo, vol. 17: Isha Upanishad (Pondicherry: Sri Aurobindo Ashram, 2003) and 
‘The Complete Works of Sri Aurobindo, vol. 18: Kena and Other Upanishads (Pondicherry: Sri 
Aurobindo Ashram, 2001). 


56. Sankaracarya, Vedanta-Siitras with the Commentary by Sankaracarya: Part I, wans. and ed. 
George Thibaut (Oxford: Clarendon, 1890), cii-cxvi. 


57. Jaideva Singh, Vedanta and Advaita Shaivagama of Kashmir: A Comparative Study 
(Kolkata: Ramakrishna Mission Institute of Culture, 1985). 


58. See Sri Aurobindo’s interpretation of the term Purusottama in chapter 15 of the Gita in his 


Essays on the Gita, 435-49. 


Sri Ramakrishna’s Harmonizing Philosophy of Vijfiana Vedanta - 39 


attains the richer, world-affirming nondual realization that God has become 
everything. 


According to Sri Ramakrishna, the aim of the jani is to attain brabmajnana in 
nirvikalpa samadhi. Like a “salt doll” melting into the ocean, the “I” of the jaan in 
the state of nirvikalpa samadhi merges completely into nondual Brahman (K 50 / G 
103). Hence, from the j#ani’s standpoint, “Brahman alone is the reality, and all else is 
unreal” (K 84/ G 133). The j#ani’s realization of nondual Brahman is clearly acosmic, 
since jiva, jagat, and isvara (or saguna Brahman)—all of which imply subject-object 
duality—are not perceived. This jini, in other words, is a Sankara Advaitin. 

The vijzani, however, returns to the empirical plane after the attainment of 
brahmajiana and sees the universe anew as a “mansion of mirth”: 


Who is the best devotee of God [uttam bhakta]? It is he who sees, after the 
realization of Brahman, that God alone has become all living beings, the 
universe, and the twenty-four cosmic principles. One must reason at first, 
saying “Not this, not this,” and reach the roof. After that, one realizes that the 
steps are made of the same materials as the roof—namely, brick, lime, and 
brick-dust. The bhakta realizes that it is Brahman alone that has become all 
these: the living beings, the universe, and so on. Mere dry reasoning—I spit 
onit! I have nouse for it! [Sri Ramakrishna spits on the ground.] Why should 
I make myself dry through mere reasoning? . . . Caitanya [Consciousness] 
is awakened after advaitajnana | knowledge of Advaita]. Then one perceives 
that God alone exists in all beings as Consciousness. After this realization 
comes Ananda [Bliss]. Advaita, Caitanya, Nityananda. (K 247 / G 271-72) 


Whereas the jiani attains “advaitajnana” in nirvikalpa samadhi, the vijinani—the 
“uttam bhakta” —goes on to attain the even greater realization that Consciousness 
(“caitanya”) pervades the entire universe, which in turn results in “nityananda, a 
state of divine bliss in which one sees and experiences nothing but God. 
Interestingly, Sri Ramakrishna elsewhere clarifies that the vijf#ani's realiza- 
tion of God in everything is a distinct form of Advaitic realization: “The bhakta 
also has a realization of oneness [ekakar jin); he sees that there is nothing but 
God. Instead of saying that the world is unreal like a dream, he says that God has 
become everything” (K740 / G700). After attaining brahmajnana in nirvikalpa 
samadhi, the vijani returns to the relative plane and realizes that God is not 
only zirguna but also saguna and that God, as Sakti, has become jiva, jagat, and 
the twenty-four cosmic principles.” At one point, Sri Ramakrishna’s invokes the 





59. Accordingly, Sharma aptly characterizes Sri Ramakrishna’s philosophy as “Vijnanadvaita” 
(Ramakrishna and Vivekananda, 42). 


40 © THE INFINITUDE OF GOD 


analogy of wax to explain his own vision of the universe from the standpoint of 
vijhana: “Do you know what I see right now? I see that it is God Himself who 
has become all this... . I had a similar vision once before, when I saw houses, 
gardens, roads, men, cattle—all made of One Substance; it was as if they were 
all made of wax [sab momer]” (K 1022 / G 941-92). The analogy of wax aptly 
captures the fact that the vij#ani realizes not only that Brahman is immanent 
in all creation but also that all names and forms are themselves nothing but the 
same Brahman. 

It is also evident from Sri Ramakrishna’s question, “Why should I make myself 
dry through mere reasoning?” that he prefers the vij#ani's richer, world-affirming 
Advyaitic realization to the “dry” j#dni’s world-negating Advaitic realization. 
According to Sri Ramakrishna, the world-denying outlook of Advaita Vedanta is 
based on a valid but intermediate stage of spiritual realization, which is surpassed 
by the vij#ani’s realization that God alone exists and that everything in the uni- 
verse is God sporting in various forms. 

Sri Ramakrishna’s Vijfiana Vedanta, then, is a world-affirming Advaitic philos- 
ophy that contrasts sharply with Sankara’s world-denying Advaita Vedanta. For 
Sankara, the sole reality is the impersonal nondual Brahman, so jiva, jagat, and 
isvara are all ultimately unreal. For Sri Ramakrishna, by contrast, the sole reality 
is the Infinite Divine Reality, which is equally the impersonal Brahman and the 
personal Sakti. Unlike Sankara, Sri Ramakrishna maintains that both jiva and 
jagat are real manifestations of Sakti, which is itself an ontologically real aspect 
of the Infinite Reality. 

As numerous commentators have noted, there are many passages in the 
Upanisads that lend strong support to Sri Ramakrishna’s teachings on the 
world-afirming Advaitic realization of the vij#dni. For instance, both Svami 
Sraddhananda and Chatterjee have pointed out that “sarvam khalvidam brahma” 
(“All this is indeed Brahman”), the well-known statement from Chandogya 
Upanisad 3.14.1, is much more convincingly interpreted from Sri Ramakrishna’s 
standpoint of vijiana than from Sankara’s world-negating Advaitic standpoint. 
As Chatterjee points out, Advaitins deny the reality of the universe, so they have 
to maintain that “there is no all but only Brahman,’ thereby distorting the nat- 
ural meaning of the Upanisadic statement.” By contrast, from Sri Ramakrishna’s 
perspective, “sarvam khalvidam brahma” means that everything in the universe 
actually is “Brahman in different forms.” 





60. See Chatterjee, Classical Indian Philosophies, 12-13 and Sraddhananda, 135-41. 


61. Chatterjee, Classical Indian Philosophies, 112. See also Sankara’s interpretation of “sarvam 
khalvidam brahma’ in his commentary on Brahmasitra 1.3.1. 


62. Chatterjee, Classical Indian Philosophies, 112. 


Sri Ramakrishna’s Harmonizing Philosophy of Vijfiana Vedanta + 41 


Similarly, Sri Aurobindo argues that the Gita, far from dismissing the world 
as unreal, in fact teaches “real Adwaita,’ the “utmost undividing Monism” which 
“sees the one as the one even in the multiplicities of Nature,”® as in 7.19, which 
declares that “Vasudeva is everything” (vasudevah sarvam). Sti Aurobindo’s con- 
ception of the “real Adwaita” of the Giza bears obvious affinities with—and, in- 
deed, is partly indebted to—Sri Ramakrishna’s teachings on the world-affirming 


Advaitic realization of the vijaani.™ 


Vijnana Vedanta 5 (VVS): The vijaani, who accepts the reality of both the 
nitya and the /ilé, is able to adopt various attitudes toward—and attain var- 
ious forms of union with—God on different planes of consciousness, all of 
which are true. 


According to Sri Ramakrishna, the Advaitic j#dni only accepts the reality of 
the “zitya”—that is, nirguna Brahman—and therefore dismisses the “/ila,” God's 
sportive manifestation as jiva (“soul”) and jagat (“universe”), as unreal. Janis, as 
he puts it, “arrive at the zitya, the Indivisible Saccidananda, through the process 
of ‘neti, neti? They reason in this manner: ‘Brahman is not the jivas, nor the jagat, 
nor the twenty-four cosmic principles” (K 479 / G 476). By contrast, vijianis, 
“after attaining the zitya, realize that Brahman has become all this—the jivas, the 
jagat, and the twenty-four cosmic principles” (K 479 / G 477). Sri Ramakrishna 
describes the unique state of the vij#ani as follows: “The vij/ani always sees 
God. ... He sees God even with his eyes open. Sometimes he comes down to the 
lila from the nitya, and sometimes he goes up to the witya from the lila” (K 479 / 
G 477). While the j#ani realizes the nitya only in the state of nirvikalpa samadhi, 
the vij#ani has the more comprehensive realization that both the witya and the da 
are real aspects of God, so the vij#ani comes down from the plane of nirvikalpa 
samadhi and sees that it is God alone who sports in the form of jiva and jagat. 

Shortly thereafter, Sri Ramakrishna makes clear that he prefers the vijiani’s 
many-sided and all-embracing attitude to the j#ani’s one-sided acceptance of the 
nitya alone: “A mere j#ani trembles with fear... . A mere jaani is one-sided and 
monotonous [ekgheye]. He always reasons, ‘It is not this, not this. The world is 
like a dream, But I have raised both my hands. Therefore, I accept everything. ... 
Tam not afraid of anything. I accept both the witya and the /ila” (K 482 / G 479). 
Explicitly adopting the standpoint of the vij#dni, Sti Ramakrishna accepts the 
reality of both the zitya and the /ia and is hence able to move fearlessly from 
the zitya to the /ila as well as from the /ia to the nitya. Elsewhere, he declares 


63. Sri Aurobindo, Essays on the Gita, 448. 
64. See Maharaj, “Toward a New Hermeneutics of the Bhagavad Gita.” 


42 * THE INFINITUDE OF GOD 


unequivocally that “the /i/a is real” and that “it is good to remain on the plane 
of the /ila after reaching the nitya” (K 205 / G 238). Employing the analogy 
of a flute, Sri Ramakrishna states that while the j#ani produces “only a mono- 
tone on his flute,” the vijiani creates “waves of melodies in different ragas and 
raginis.” He then explains that the vij#ani is able to enjoy various relationships 
with God: “Why should I produce only a monotone when I have an instrument 
with seven holes? Why should I say nothing but, ‘I am He, I am He’? I want to 
play various melodies on my instrument with seven holes. Why should I say only, 
‘Brahman! Brahman!’? I want to call on God through all the moods—through 
santa, dasya, sakhya, vatsalya, and madhura. 1 want to make merry with God. 
I want to sport with God” (K 1098-99 / G 1009-10). 

From the subjective standpoint, Sri Ramakrishna explains that the vij#ani or 
isvarakoti, in contrast to the ordinary jiva, is able to commune with God on var- 
ious planes of consciousness: 


The gross, the subtle, the causal, and the Great Cause [sthila, stiksma, 
karana, mahakarana). Entering the mahakarana, one becomes silent; one 
cannot utter a word. But an isvarakoti, after attaining the mahakarana, 
can return again. Incarnations of God, and others like them, belong to 
the class of the #varakotis. They climb up, and they can also come down. 
(K 581-82 / G 562) 


The mahdakarana plane of consciousness corresponds to the state of nirvikalpa 
samadhi, from which the ordinary jiva is unable to return to the relative plane. 
By contrast, the #varakoti can descend from the mahakarana plane to the sthila, 
stiksma, and karana planes, thereby communing with God on all planes of con- 
sciousness. The j#ani accepts the mahdakarana plane alone as real and dismisses 
the sthila, siksma, and kavana planes as unreal. The vij#ani or isvarakoti, how- 
ever, accepts all four planes of consciousness as true, since the sthila, siksma, and 
kavana planes belong to the realm of God's //a, which is also real. 

Sri Ramakrishna frequently mentioned that Hanuman was a vij#ani who rev- 
eled in adopting multiple attitudes toward his chosen deity, Rama: 


God keeps in many people the “ego of a jnani” or the “ego of a bhakta” 
even after they have attained brahmajnana. Hanuman, after realizing God 
in both His personal and His impersonal aspects, cherished toward God 
the attitude of a servant, a devotee. He said to Rama: “O Rama, some- 
times I think that You are the whole and I am a part of You. Sometimes 
I think that You are the Master and Iam Your servant. And sometimes, 
Rama, when I contemplate the Absolute, I see that Iam You and You are 
1” (K 483 / G 480) 


Sri Ramakrishna’s Harmonizing Philosophy of Vijfiana Vedanta + 43 


Sri Ramakrishna paraphrases here a well-known Sanskrit verse: “When I iden- 
tify with the body, I say, ‘Iam Your Servant? When I identify with the jivatman, 
I say, ‘Iam a part of You’ And when I identify with the Supreme Atman, I say, 
‘Lam You” (dehabuddhya dasoham, jivabuddhya tvadamsakah; atmabuddhya 
tvamevaham iti me niscita matih). It might be tempting to interpret this verse 
in terms of Sankara Advaita: while the attitudes of the bhakta are valid from the 
vyavaharika standpoint—so long as one ignorantly identifies with the body or 
jivatman—only the jrani's attitude of absolute identity with God is true from 
the paramarthika standpoint, since it is based on the knowledge of one’s true 
nature as the nondual Atman. However, the contexts in which Sri Ramakrishna 
invokes Hanuman’s statement to Rama rule out this Advaitic interpretation. 
Crucially, Sri Ramakrishna refers to Hanuman repeatedly as an “isvarakoti” who 
has reached the state of vij#ana after attaining Advaitic brahmajnana.© Hence, 
from Sri Ramakrishna’s perspective, Hanuman’s remark to Rama embodies not 
the one-sided attitude of the j#ani but the all-embracing attitude of the vijnani, 
who is able to descend from the zitya to the //4 and ascend from the //é to the 
nitya at will. Indeed, Sri Ramakrishna declares, on the basis of his own spiritual 
experience, that the vij#ani’s ability to enjoy and commune with God in various 
ways is the summit of spiritual realization: “I have come to the final realization 
that God is the Whole and Iam a part of Him, that God is the Master and I am 
His servant. Furthermore, I think every now and then that He is and Iam He” 
(K 594 / G 638). 

Sri Ramakrishna’s acceptance of various relationships with God as equally 
true finds support in the Upanisads, which express the relation between the jiva 
and Brahman in numerous ways, without favoring one particular relationship as 
the only ultimately true one. For instance, while Svetasvatara Upanisad 2.5 char- 
acterizes jivas as “children of Immortality” (amrtasya putrah),°° Brhadaranyaka 
Upanisad 3.7.15 describes Brahman as the “antaryami” (Inner Controller) inhab- 
iting “all beings,’ who constitute the “body” (sariram) of Brahman.*’ Mundaka 
Upanisad employs two striking analogies to explain the relationship between 
the jivas and Brahman: according to 2.1.1, jivas emerge from Aksara Brahman 
like “sparks” (visphulingah) from a fire,® while in 3.1.1, the jiva and Brahman are 


65. See Sri Ramakrishna’s references to Hanuman as an “isvarakoti” or a “vijnani” in the 
Kathamrta entries from 3 Aug. 1884, 14 Dec. 1884, 1 Mar. 1885, 12 Apr. 1885, 24 Apr. 1885, 
15 Jul. 1885, 18 Oct. 1885. 


66. Sankaracarya, Isadi nau upanisad: Sankarabhasyartha (Gorakhpur: Gita Press, 2011), 1199. 


67. Sankaracarya, The Brhadaranyaka Upanisad with the Commentary of Sankaracarya, trans. 
Swami Madhavananda (Kolkata: Advaita Ashrama, 2009), 352. 


68. Sankaracarya, Eight Upanisads with the Commentary of Sankaracarya, vol. 2, 107. 


44 ¢ THE INFINITUDE OF GOD 


likened to “two birds that are intimately akin” (dvd suparnda sayuja sakhaya).° By 
contrast, the well-known mahdavakyas from Chandogya Upanisad 6.8.7 (tat tuam 
asi)” and Brhadaranyaka Upanisad 1.4.10 (aham brahmasmi) seem to express the 
absolute identity of the jiva and Brahman.” 

Sri Aurobindo argues that the Gita also teaches numerous modes of uniting 
with Brahman, all of which are true and salvific. For Sri Aurobindo, “The liber- 
ation of the Gita. . . is all kinds of union at once” — including sdyujya, salokya, 
sadrsya, and samipya—since we can achieve absolute Advaitic identity with the 
nirguna aspect of God, but we can also attain various forms of union with God's 
other aspects, saguna and otherwise.” As Sri Aurobindo puts it, “the Gita envel- 
ops” all these forms of union with God “in its catholic integrality and fuses them 
all into one greatest and richest divine freedom and perfection.” 


Vijnana Vedanta 6 (VV6): Various religious faiths and spiritual philosophies 
are salvifically efficacious paths to realizing God. 


As I will demonstrate at length in chapter 3, Sri Ramakrishna’s spiritual stand- 
point of vij#ana furnishes the basis for a robust religious pluralism. He makes this 
clear in the following remark: “The vij#ani sees that the Reality which is nirguna 
is also saguna.... The jiani’s path leads to Truth, as does the path that combines 
jnana and bhakti. The bhakta’s path, too, leads to Truth. Jzanayoga is true, and 
bhaktiyoga is true. God can be realized through all paths” (K 51 / G 103-4). From 
the vijzani’s standpoint, the personal (saguna) and impersonal (zirguna) aspects 
of the Infinite Reality are equally real, so both theistic and nontheistic spiritual 
paths have equal salvific efficacy. 

In other words, VV6 follows directly from VV3: since God is 
infinite—both personal and impersonal, with and without form, immanent and 
transcendent—there must be correspondingly infinite ways of approaching and 
ultimately realizing God. As Sri Ramakrishna succinctly puts it, “God is infinite, 
and the paths to God are infinite” (tini ananta, patho ananta) (K 511 / G506). 
For Sri Ramakrishna, the infinite impersonal-personal God is conceived and 
worshipped in different ways by people of varying temperaments, preferences, 
and worldviews. Hence, a sincere practitioner of any religion can realize God in 





69. Sankaracarya, Eight Upanisads, vol. 2, p. 137. 


70. Sankaracarya, Chandogya Upanisad with the Commentary of Sankaracarya, trans. Swami 
Gambhirananda (Kolkata: Advaita Ashrama, 2006), 468. 


71. Sankaracarya, The Brhadaranyaka Upanisad, 100. 
72. Sri Aurobindo, Essays on the Gita, 398. 
73. Sti Aurobindo, Essays on the Gita, 398. 


Sri Ramakrishna’s Harmonizing Philosophy of Vijfiana Vedanta +» 45 


the particular form he or she prefers. Nontheistic spiritual practitioners, such as 
Advyaitins and most Buddhists, can realize the impersonal aspect of the Infinite 
Reality. Sri Ramakrishna adds, however, that bhaktas who believe in the personal 
God—whether Hindu, Christian, Muslim, or otherwise—can realize the same 
Infinite Reality as “eternally endowed with form and personality” (witya sakar) 
(K 152 / G 191).” From Sri Ramakrishna’ standpoint of vij#ana, both theistic and 
nontheistic spiritual practitioners attain the goal of God-realization, even though 
they end up realizing different aspects or forms of one and the same Infinite Reality. 

There are numerous scriptural sources for Sri Ramakrishna’s teachings on 
religious pluralism. Sri Ramakrishna’s idea that all religions and spiritual phi- 
losophies concern one and the same God, but in different forms and called by 
different names, can be traced as far back to the well-known statement from 
Rg Veda 1.64.46, “ekam sad vipra bahudha vadanti” (“The Reality is one; sages 
speak of It variously”). Moreover, Sri Ramakrishna’s teaching that numerous spir- 
itual doctrines and paths are equally valid means of realizing God finds support 
in verses of the Gita such as 13.24, “Some realize the Atman within themselves 
through dhyanayoga; others through samkhyayoga, and still others through kar- 
mayoga. What is perhaps unprecedented is Sri Ramakrishna’s own practice of 
Hindu, Christian, and Islamic faiths, on the experiential basis of which he pro- 
claimed the harmony of all the world religions. 


IV. Beyond “Neo-Vedanta”: Implications of Sri Ramakrishna’s 
Philosophy of Vijfidna for Discourse on Modern Vedanta 


The remaining seven chapters of this book will explore the far-reaching implica- 
tions of Sri Ramakrishna’s unique standpoint of vijfdna for cross-cultural phi- 
losophy of religion. However, Sri Ramakrishna’s Vijfana Vedanta also has major 
implications for a number of other fields, including religious studies, Hindu stud- 
ies, and Indology. While it is beyond the scope of this book to elaborate these 
implications in detail, I will indicate briefly in this section how Sri Ramakrishna’s 
philosophy of Vijfiana Vedanta helps challenge one of the dominant hermeneutic 
paradigms for understanding modern Vedantic thought. 

Many scholars apply the label “Neo-Vedanta” to the Vedantic philosophies of 
modern Indian figures such as Sri Ramakrishna, Swami Vivekananda, Sarvepalli 
Radhakrishnan, and Sri Aurobindo.” I would argue, however, that the category 


74. It is worth noting that Sri Ramakrishna’s statement about a bhakta’s realization of the “nitya 
sakar” form of God suggests that Advaitic nirvikalpa samadhi is not necessary for spiritual 
salvation. 


75. Paul Hacker was the first to apply the label “Neo-Vedanta” to the views of Swami 
Vivekananda, Radhakrishnan, and Sri Aurobindo. Significantly, however, Hacker did not 


46 © THE INFINITUDE OF GOD 


of “Neo-Vedanta” is misleading and unhelpful for three main reasons. First, 
a vague umbrella term such as “Neo-Vedanta” fails to capture the nuances of 
the specific Vedantic views of different modern figures. For instance, the term 
occludes the important philosophical differences between Sri Ramakrishna’s 
Vijfiana Vedanta, Sri Aurobindo’s Integral Vedanta, and Radhakrishnan’s ethi- 
cally oriented Vedantic philosophy. We can better honor the distinctiveness and 
specificity of different modern Vedantic views by resisting the impulse to lump 
them all into a single catch-all category. 

Second, the term “Neo-Vedanta” misleadingly implies novelty. Indeed, some 
scholars even imbue the prefix “Neo” in “Neo-Vedanta” with a normative valence 
by implying that modern Vedantic philosophies represent a deviation or break 
from traditional Vedanta.”* However, as I have shown in this chapter, the aim of 
at least some modern Vedantins—including Sri Ramakrishna, Vivekananda, and 
Sri Aurobindo—was not to promulgate a zew Vedantic philosophy but to recover 
and revive the original Vedanta embodied in traditional Indian scriptures such as 
the Upanisads and the Bhagavad Gita.’”’ Of course, one might question the suc- 
cess of these interpretive efforts and even try to show how these modern think- 
ers sometimes imposed their own views onto the scriptures. However, it would 
be both unrigorous and uncharitable to presuppose from the outset that the 





consider Sri Ramakrishna to be a Neo-Vedantin. See Paul Hacker, “Aspects of Neo-Hinduism 
as Contrasted with Surviving Traditional Hinduism, in Philology and Confrontation: Paul 
Hacker on Traditional and Modern Vedanta, ed. Wilhelm Halbfass (Albany: SUNY Press, 1995), 
229-56. More recent scholars who continue to use the framework of “Neo-Vedanta” include 
Wilhelm Halbfass and Andrew Fort. See Wilhelm Halbfass, “Introduction, an Uncommon 
Orientalist: Paul Hacker’s Passage to India,’ in Philology and Confrontation, ed. Halbfass, 8-9, 
and Wilhelm Halbfass, “Research and Reflection: Responses to my Respondents, II: Issues of 
Comparative Philosophy,’ in Beyond Orientalism: The Work of Wilhelm Halbfass and Its Impact 
on Indian and Cross-Cultural Studies, ed. Eli Franco and Karin Preisendanz (Delhi: Motilal 
Banarsidass, 2007), 307. See also Andrew Fort, “Jivanmukti and Social Service in Advaita and 
Neo-Vedanta,’ in Beyond Orientalism, ed. Franco and Preisendanz, 489-504. As indicated in 
note 13 above, both Swami Tapasyananda and Jeffery Long refer to Sri Ramakrishna’s philos- 
ophy as “Neo-Vedanta,’ although neither of them uses the term in Hacker’s sense. Satis Chandra 
Chatterjee also refers to the philosophies of Sri Ramakrishna and Swami Vivekananda as 
“Neo-Vedantism” in his article “Vivekananda’s Neo-Vedantism and Its Practical Application, 


in Vivekananda: The Great Spiritual Teacher (Kolkata: Advaita Ashrama, 1995), 255-80. 


76. See, for instance, Fort’s argument about Neo-Vedanta in “Jivanmukti and Social Service in 
Advaita and Neo-Vedanta.” 


77. See Maharaj, “Toward a New Hermeneutics of the Bhagavad Gita? which exam- 
ines Sri Aurobindo’s interpretation of the Gita, and Maharaj, “Asminnasya ca tadyogam 
Sasti; which discusses Swami Vivekananda’s interpretation of the prasthanatrayi. See also 
Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan’s interpretation of the prasthanatrayi in works such as the follow- 
ing: “The Philosophy of the Upanisads,’ in Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan, Indian Philosophy, 
vol. 1 (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1923), 106-220; The Bhagavadgita (New 
Delhi: HarperCollins, [1928] 2010); and The Brahma Sitra: The Philosophy of Spiritual Life 
(London: George Allen & Unwin, 1960). 


Sri Ramakrishna’s Harmonizing Philosophy of Vijfiana Vedanta + 47 


Vedantic philosophies propounded by modern Indian thinkers are not, in fact, 
continuous with traditional Vedanta. Therefore, the “Neo” in “Neo-Vedanta” is 
presumptuous at best. 

Third, and most problematically, the term “Neo-Vedanta’ is indelibly colored 
by the German indologist Paul Hacker’s polemical use of the term. According 
to Hacker, Neo-Vedanta is an outgrowth of what he calls “Neo-Hinduism, 
an ideology espoused by modern Indian figures as diverse as Vivekananda, Sri 
Aurobindo, Radhakrishnan, and Mahatma Gandhi. Neo-Hinduism, Hacker 
argues, is not an authentically Indian tradition but an ideology tacitly shaped 
by Western values.” In Hacker’s view, Neo-Hindus mistakenly clothe what are 
essentially Western values and ideals in superficially Indian garb in order to pro- 
mote Indian nationalism.”?7 While Hacker does not consider Sri Ramakrishna 
to be a Neo-Hindu,® he contends that figures such as Vivekananda and Sri 
Aurobindo did have a Neo-Hindu agenda." Hacker claims, for instance, that 
Sri Aurobindo’s Essays on the Gita has many tacitly Western elements which he 
may have borrowed from the Neo-Hindu Bankimcandra Cattopadhyay, whose 
ideas were themselves shaped by Western values.* Similarly, Hacker argues that 
Vivekananda’ derivation of a humanitarian ethics from the Upanisadic teaching 
“tat tvam asi” was inspired by Paul Deussen’s interpretation of Schopenhauer’s 
philosophy. 

This is not the place for a detailed critical assessment of Hacker’s highly 
controversial theses about Neo-Hinduism and Neo-Vedanta. Moreover, sev- 
eral scholars have already identified major problems with Hacker’s conception 
of Neo-Hinduism, many of which can be traced to his own Christian agenda. 





78. Hacker, “Aspects of Neo-Hinduism,” 251. 
79. Hacker, “Aspects of Neo-Hinduism,” 251. 
80. See Hacker’s brief discussion of Sri Ramakrishna in “Aspects of Neo-Hinduism,’ 234-35. 


81. Hacker, “Aspects of Neo-Hinduism, and Hacker, “Schopenhauer and Hindu Ethics,’ in 
Philology and Confrontation, ed. Halbfass, 273-318. 


82. See Hacker’s discussion of Sri Aurobindo in “Aspects of Neo-Hinduism,’ 238-39. 


83. See Hacker’s Neo-Vedantic interpretation of Swami Vivekananda in “Aspects of 
Neo-Hinduism,’ 239-41 and in “Schopenhauer and Hindu Ethics.” 


84. Criticisms of certain aspects of Hacker’s theory of Neo-Hinduism can be found in 
Halbfass, “Introduction,” 8-9, and Andrew Nicholson, Unifying Hinduism: Philosophy 
and Identity in Indian Intellectual History (New York: Columbia University Press, 2010), 
187-88. See also the following recent critiques of Hacker’s Neo-Vedantic interpretation of 
Swami Vivekananda: Andrew Nicholson, “Vivekananda’s Non-Dual Ethics in the History 
of Vedanta,’ in The Life, Legacy, and Contemporary Relevance of Swami Vivekananda: New 
Reflections, ed. Rita Sherma and James McHugh (Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield, forth- 
coming), and James Madaio, “Rethinking Neo-Vedanta: Swami Vivekananda and the Selective 
Historiography of Advaita Vedanta,’ Religions 8 (2017), 1-12. 


48 °© THE INFINITUDE OF GOD 


I will only indicate briefly how Sri Ramakrishna’s Vedantic perspective problema- 
tizes Hacker’s understanding of Neo-Hinduism and Neo-Vedanta, key aspects of 
which continue to be defended by a number of scholars.® 

Hacker’s telling concession that Sri Ramakrishna was not a Neo-Hindu, 
I contend, undermines his own thesis about Neo-Hinduism in general. If we 
can establish that key philosophical doctrines of some of the modern Indian 
figures Hacker considers to be Neo-Hindu were significantly influenced by Sri 
Ramakrishna, then Hacker’s sweeping argument about the Western provenance 
of Neo-Vedanta collapses. Hacker’s Neo-Hindu thesis is especially shaky in the 
case of Vivekananda and Sri Aurobindo, whose views were strongly shaped by Sri 
Ramakrishna. 

Since Hacker presents absolutely no evidence of Bankimcandra’s influence 
on Sri Aurobindo’s Essays on the Gita, Hacker’s Neo-Hindu interpretation of 
Sri Aurobindo rests on little more than baseless speculation. By contrast, there 
is abundant evidence that Sri Ramakrishna strongly influenced both the life and 
thought of Sri Aurobindo.** More specifically, I have argued in a recent article 
that Sri Aurobindo’s basic hermeneutic framework for interpreting the Bhagavad 
Gita derives from Sri Ramakrishna’s teachings on vijiana.*’ Contrary to Hacker, 
then, there is substantial evidence that Sri Aurobindo’s Essays on the Gita was 
influenced much more by Sri Ramakrishna than by Bankimcandra. 

In a recent article, Andrew Nicholson has challenged Hacker’s Neo-Hindu 
interpretation of Vivekananda on similar grounds. Nicholson makes a con- 
vincing case that the chief source of Vivekananda’s Vedantic ethics was not 
Deussen’s Schopenhauer, as Hacker alleges, but Vivekananda’s “beloved 
teacher Ramakrishna.”** According to Nicholson, Sri Ramakrishna taught a 
“world-affirming Advaita” that has much greater affinities with medieval Indian 
bhakti-oriented Advaitic traditions such as Saiva and Sakta Tantra than with 
Saftkara’s world-denying Advaita Vedanta.” As Nicholson puts it, it was the 





85. Halbfass, for instance, seems to accept the descriptive aspect of Hacker’s theory of 
Neo-Hinduism and Neo-Vedanta, while rejecting Hacker’s normative claims about the “inau- 
thenticity” of Neo-Vedantins. See Halbfass, “Introduction,” 8-9, and Halbfass, “Research and 
Reflection, 307. Fort also employs the framework of “Neo-Vedanta” in a manner similar to 
Hacker in “Jivanmukti and Social Service in Advaita and Neo-Vedanta.” 


86. For details on Sri Ramakrishna’s influence on Sri Aurobindo, see section I of chapter 4 and 
Maharaj, “Toward a New Hermeneutics of the Bhagavad Gita? 1211-14. 


87. Maharaj, “Toward a New Hermeneutics of the Bhagavad Gita. 
88. Nicholson, “Vivekananda’s Non-Dual Ethics in the History of Vedanta,’ 5. 
89. Nicholson, “Vivekananda’s Non-Dual Ethics in the History of Vedanta,’ 6. 


Sri Ramakrishna’s Harmonizing Philosophy of Vijfiana Vedanta - 49 


“second millenium understanding of Advaita, combined with non-dual tantric 
traditions, that together shaped both Ramakrishna and Vivekananda’s thought.” 

Nicholson has gone a long way toward refuting Hacker’s Neo-Hindu in- 
terpretation of Vivekananda’s Vedantic philosophy. However, we can make 
Nicholson’s case for Sri Ramakrishna’s influence on Vivekananda’s Vedantic eth- 
ics even stronger by taking into account Sri Ramakrishna’s teachings on vijf#ana. 
I have contended in this chapter that Sri Ramakrishna’s world-affirming Advaitic 
philosophy was shaped primarily by his own diverse religious practices and spir- 
itual experiences, particularly his unique experience of vijiana. 

Tellingly, on one occasion in 1884, Sri Ramakrishna was explaining to 
his visitors—including Narendra, who later went on to become Swami 
Vivekananda—that one of the main religious practices of Vaisnavas is “showing 
compassion to all beings” (sarva jive daya) (LP ILii.131 / DP 852). Suddenly, just 
after uttering this phrase, Sri Ramakrishna went into a deep state of samadhi. 
After a while, he came down to a semiecstatic state and said: “How foolish to 
speak of compassion! Human beings are as insignificant as worms crawling on the 
earth—and they are to show compassion to others? That’s absurd. It must not be 
compassion, but service to all. Serve them, knowing that they are all manifesta- 
tions of God [sivajidne jiver seva]” (LP 1Li.131 / DP 852). From the standpoint 
of vijnana, God actually manifests in the form of human beings, so one serves 
God by serving others. Sri Ramakrishna’s teaching affected the young Narendra 
so deeply that he took his friends aside shortly thereafter and explained its pro- 
found ethical significance to them: 


What Thakur [Sri Ramakrishna] said today in his ecstatic mood is 
clear: One can bring Vedanta from the forest to the home and practice it 
in daily life. Let people continue with whatever they are doing; there’s no 
harm in this. People must first fully believe and be convinced that God 
has manifested Himself before them as the world and its creatures [ivari 
jiva o jagat ripe tabar sammukhe prakasita rohiyachen). .. . lf people con- 
sider everyone to be God, how can they consider themselves to be superior 
to others and harbor attachment, hatred, arrogance—or even compassion 
[daya|—toward them? Their minds will become pure as they serve all 
beings as God, and soon they will experience themselves as parts of the 
blissful God. They will realize that their true nature is pure, illumined, and 
free. (LP ILii.131 / DP 852) 





90. Nicholson, “Vivekananda’s Non-Dual Ethics in the History of Vedanta,’ 8. 


50 © THE INFINITUDE OF GOD 


Here we have strong evidence that Vivekananda’s Vedantic ethics of serving God 
in human beings was directly inspired by Sri Ramakrishna’s vijiana-based ethical 
teaching. Moreover, the fact that Narendra arrived at this ethical insight in 1884 
definitively rules out Hacker’s thesis that Vivekananda developed his Vedantic 
ethics only after he met Deussen in 1896. 

In this brief section, I have begun to show how Sri Ramakrishna’s framework 
of Vijfana Vedanta can help motivate a more nuanced and hermeneutically so- 
phisticated paradigm for interpreting modern Vedantic thought than Hacker’s 
reductive paradigm of Neo-Vedanta. In the remainder of this book, I will explore 
how Sri Ramakrishna’s spiritual standpoint of vij#ana makes available compel- 
ling new approaches to central issues in cross-cultural philosophy of religion. 


A CROSS-CULTURAL INQUIRY INTO DIVINE 
INFINITUDE 


SRI RAMAKRISHNA, PARACONSISTENCY, AND 
THE OVERCOMING OF CONCEPTUAL IDOLATRY 


The infinitude of God has been a prominent topic in both Indian 
and Western philosophical and theological discourse. Numerous 
Indian scriptures—including the Upanisads, the Bhagavad Gita, and 
the Bhagavata Purana—tefer to the Supreme Reality as “infinite” 
(ananta). Taittiriya Upanisad 2.1.1 famously describes Brahman as 
“satyam jhanam anantam” (“Reality, Consciousness, Infinite”).' In 
Chapter 11 of the Gita, Arjuna describes Krishna as “The Infinite” 
(ananta)* and as “The One of Infinite Forms” (anantarapa)? Later 
Indian philosophers such as Sankara and Ramanuja interpreted scrip- 
tural references to divine infinitude in a variety of ways, depending on 
their respective conceptual frameworks. 

In contrast to the Indian scriptures, the Bible never refers to God 
as infinite.* Nonetheless, numerous Christian theologians—including 
Gregory of Nyssa, Thomas Aquinas, John Duns Scotus, and Nicholas 
of Cusa—argued that the biblical conception of God implies God’s 
infinitude.> However, these Christian theologians, like their Indian 





1. Sankaracarya, Eight Upanisads with the Commentary of Sankaracarya, vol. 1, 
trans. Swami Gambhirananda (Kolkata: Advaita Ashrama, 1989), 303. 


2. Bhagavad Gita 11.37. Srimadbhagavadgita Sankarabhasya Hindi-anuvadasahita 
(Gorakhpur: Gita Press, 2012), 275. 


3. Bhagavad Gita 11.38. Sankaracarya, Srimadbhagavadgita, 276. For other refer- 
ences to divine infinitude in the Giza, see 11.11, 11.19, and 11.40. 


4, As Wolfhart Pannenberg observes, “Infinity is not a biblical term for God. It 
is implied, however, in many biblical descriptions of God, and especially clearly 
in the attributes of eternity, omnipotence, and omnipresence that are ascribed 
to him.’ Systematic Theology: vol. 1, trans. Geoffrey Bromiley (London: T & T 
Clark, [1994] 2004), 397, 


5. See Albert-Kees Geljon, “Divine Infinity in Gregory of Nyssa and Philo of 
Alexandria, Vigiliae Christianae 59.2 (May 2005), 152-77; Salvatore Lilla, “The 


52 * THE INFINITUDE OF GOD 


counterparts, interpreted divine infinitude in numerous ways. More recently, 
analytic philosophers of religion such as Richard Swinburne, Brian Leftow, and 
Graham Oppy have continued to discuss the nature and philosophical implica- 
tions of divine infinitude.® 

Although Western and Indian inquiries into divine infinitude have run par- 
allel to each other for almost two millennia, virtually no cross-cultural work has 
been done to bring these two traditions into dialogue. This chapter initiates this 
important cross-cultural project by exploring how Sri Ramakrishna’s approach to 
God can serve as a conceptual bridge between Indian and Western discourse on 
divine infinitude. 

Section I brings Sri Ramakrishna into conversation with three Vedantic phi- 
losophers: the Advaitin Sankara, the Visistadvaitin Ramanuja, and the Gaudiya 
Vaisnava Visvanatha Cakravartin. While Sankara takes the anantata of Brahman 
to indicate its impersonal and nondual nature, Ramanuja interprets anantata as 
an attribute of the personal God. Visvanatha’s broader conception of divine in- 
finitude reconciles, to a certain extent, Sankara’s impersonalism and Ramanuja’s 
personalism. I argue, however, that Sri Ramakrishna goes even further than 
Visvanatha by harmonizing Sankara’s impersonalism and Ramanuja’s personalism 
from the nonsectarian standpoint of Vijfiana Vedanta. While Visvanatha subor- 
dinates the impersonal Brahman to the personal God Krsna, Sri Ramakrishna 
accords equal ontological status to the impersonal and personal aspects of the 
Infinite Divine Reality. 

Section II outlines the views on divine infinitude of the medieval Christian 
theologians John Duns Scotus and Nicholas of Cusa. According to Scotus, God 
is infinite in the sense that He has infinite being and possesses attributes such as 
omniscience and omnipotence to an infinite degree. Cusa, however, interprets 
God’s infinitude in a much more radical manner. For Cusa, God is infinite in the 
sense that He is the coincidentia oppositorum (“coincidence of opposites”), which 
exceeds the grasp of the finite human intellect. While recent analytic philoso- 
phers of religion have tended to adopt the Scotistic approach to divine infinitude, 
Sri Ramakrishna conceives God's infinitude in a manner that brings him much 
closer to Cusa than to Scotus. I contend, from a Ramakrishnan perspective, that 





Notion of Infinitude in Ps.-Dionysius Areopagita) Journal of Theological Studies 31.1 (April 
1980), 93-103; Dermot Moran, “Nicholas of Cusa and Modern Philosophy; in The Cambridge 
Companion to Renaissance Philosophy, ed. James Hankins (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 2007), 173-92; Christian Tapp, “Infinity in Aquinas’ Doctrine of God,’ in Analytically 
Oriented Thomism, ed. Miroslaw Szatkowski (Neunkirchen-Seelscheid, Germany: Editiones 
Scholasticae, 2016), 93-115. 


6. For references, see notes 47—50 below. 


A Cross-Cultural Inquiry into Divine Infinitude + 53 


analytic philosophers can deepen and radicalize their understanding of divine in- 
finitude by exploring a Cusaean approach. 

Section III develops this argument further by bringing Sri Ramakrishna into 
dialogue with the contemporary analytic theologian Benedikt Paul Gécke. In 
several recent articles, Gécke has challenged the mainstream analytic approach to 
divine infinitude by developing Cusa’s radical doctrine of God as the coincidentia 
oppositorum. According to Gécke, God is infinite in the sense that He is paracon- 
sistent and, therefore, not subject to the law of contradiction. Gocke’s argument, 
I suggest, helps illuminate the paraconsistent underpinnings of Sri Ramakrishna’s 
own conception of the Infinite God. At the same time, we can pinpoint certain 
weaknesses in Gocke’s argument by examining it in the light of Sri Ramakrishna. 

Section IV then triangulates Sri Ramakrishna and Gécke with the contempo- 
rary Continental philosopher Jean-Luc Marion. Marion’s trenchant critique of 
various forms of “conceptual idolatry” and his positive account of God as agape 
resonate strongly with Sri Ramakrishna’s views on divine infinitude. However, Sri 
Ramakrishna also helps us see how both Gocke and Marion lapse into different 
forms of conceptual idolatry in their own right. 


|. Satyam jridnam anantam brahma: Sri Ramakrishna 
in Dialogue with Sankara, Ramanuja, and Visvanatha 
Cakravartin 


Since a comprehensive discussion of Indian views on divine infinitude is beyond 
the scope of this chapter, I will focus on three prominent interpretations of the 
word anantam in “satyam jhanam anantam brahma; the classic definition of 
Brahman in Taittiriya Upanisad 2.1.1. In particular, I will examine the interpreta- 
tions of Sankara, Ramanuja, and Visvanatha Cakravartin and then identify points 
of afhinity and divergence between their views and the views of Sri Ramakrishna. 

Not surprisingly, Sankara (c. 788-820) interprets “satyam jidnam anantam 
brahma” in accordance with his Advaitic philosophy. He interprets “brabma” as 
the impersonal nondual Atman, which is “free from all distinctions created by 
limiting adjuncts” (vidhiita-sarvopadhi-visesa).’ According to Sankara, Taittirtya 
Upanisad 2.1.1 is a grammatical instance of samdanadhikaranyam (“correlative 
predication”), the rule that the words denoting the attributes (visesana-s) of an 
entity should be in the same case as the word denoting the entity (visesya).* In 





7. Sankaracarya, Taittiriyopanisad Sanuvada Sankarabhasyasahita (Gorakhpur: Gita Press, 
2008), 82. 


8. Sankaracarya, Taittiriyopanisad, 87. 


54 ¢ THE INFINITUDE OF GOD 


this case, “satyam jnanam anantam” constitutes a syntactically correct definition 
of “brahmay, since the three adjectives have the same nominative case-ending as 
the noun “brahma. 

Saftkara is well aware, however, that if “satyam; “jianam, and “anantam” 
are taken as three different attributes of Brahman, then Brahman would be dif- 
ferentiated rather than nondual. Hence, Sankara argues that each of the three 
terms should be understood primarily in a negative manner. Brahman is “satyam” 
(“real”) in the sense that Brahman is not “mutable,” since all mutable things 
are unreal.’ Brahman is “j#anam” in the sense that It is not an “insentient en- 
tity like earth” (smrdvad acit). Does “jianam” imply, then, that Brahman is a 
conscious “Knower” (j#anakartr) who is different from both knowledge itself 
and the objects of knowledge?” Sankara emphatically denies this interpretation 
of “jianam, since it entails subject-object duality, which would undermine his 
Adyaitic position. 

According to Sankara, the words “satyam” and “anantam” both rule out 
the possibility that Brahman is a knower.” Since any knower is changeful and 
Brahman is “satyam” in the sense of not being subject to change, Brahman 
cannot be a knower. The word “anantam, Sankara argues, also rules out the 
possibility that Brahman is a knower: “That, indeed, is infinite which is not 
separated from anything [yaddhi na kutascit pravibhajyate tad anantam]. If it 
be the knower, It becomes delimited by the knowable and the knowledge, and 
hence there cannot be infinitude ... .”’° Taking the word “anantam” to sig- 
nify nonduality, Sankara argues that Brahman therefore cannot be the knower, 
since the very distinction between knower and known implies subject-object 
duality. For Sankara, then, Brahman is infinite in the sense of being impersonal 
nondual Consciousness.“ 

In his final interpretive move, Sankara reiterates that Brahman is the non- 
dual Reality “devoid of all distinctions,’ so all three terms should be understood 


9. Sankaracarya, Taittiriyopanisad, 89. For the English translation, see Sankaracarya, Eight 
Upanisads, vol. 1, 308-9. 

10. Santkaracarya, Taittiriyopanisad, 90; Saftkaracarya, Eight Upanisads, vol. 1, 309. 

ul Sankaracarya, Taittiriyopanisad, 90; Sankaracarya, Eight Upanisads, vol. 1, 309. 

12. Sankaracarya, Taittiriyopanisad, 90; Sankaracarya, Eight Upanisads, vol. 1, 309. 

13. Sankaracarya, Taittiriyopanisad, 90; Sankaracarya, Eight Upanisads, vol. 1, 309. 

14. See Sankaracarya, Taittiriyopanisad, 92; Sankaracarya, Eight Upanisads, vol. 1, 310-11. 
Shortly thereafter, Sankara claims that the word anantam is a denial of “finitude” (“antavat- 
tva”). Later Advaitins specify that the word anantam denies the limitations of space (desa), 
time (kala), and object (vastw). See, for instance, Vidyaranya’s Paricadasi 3.35. Vidyaranya, 


Pancadasi of Sri Vidyaranya Swami, wans. Swami Swahananda (Chennai: Sri Ramakrishna 
Math, 2001), 91. 


A Cross-Cultural Inquiry into Divine Infinitude + 55 


apophatically as indirect pointers to the nondual Reality which is beyond 
speech.'© Brahman, Sankara argues, is “indirectly indicated” (Jaksyate) by the 
terms “satyam; “jnanam; and “anantam, but It is not “directly expressed” (ucy- 
ate) by any of them." That is, Sankara ultimately claims that Taittirlya Upanisad’s 
definition of Brahman as “satyam jianam anantam” is an instance of “laksana” 
(“indirect predication”), since each of the three terms indirectly indicates the 
strictly ineffable zirguna Brahman.” 

Ramanuja (c. 1017-1137) agrees with Sankara that “satyam jnanam anantam 
brahma” is an instance of sémandadhikaranyam, but he departs radically from 
Sankara in his understanding of the ontological implications of this grammatical 
rule. Ramanuja defines samdndadhikaranyam as follows: “The referring to one 
and the same object by two or more words which have different grounds for their 
occurrence” (bhinna-pravrtti-nimittanam sabdanam ekasminnarthe vrttis saman- 
adhikaranyam).” For Ramanuja, the grammatical structure of a definition reflects 
the ontological structure of what is being defined. Since Taittiriya Upanisad 2.1.1 
instantiates samanadhikaranyam, Ramanuja argues that the words “satyam,” 
“inanam; and “anantam” must refer to different real attributes of Brahman it- 
self? Therefore, according to Ramanuja, Brahman is not the attributeless 





15. Sankaracarya, Taittiriyopanisad, 97; Sankaracarya, Eight Upanisads, vol. 1, 315. 
16. Sankaracarya, Taittiriyopanisad, 97; Sankaracarya, Eight Upanisads, vol. 1, 315. 


17. Scholars have debated precisely how to interpret Saftkara’s reading of “satyam jnanam anan- 
tam.’ According to Julius Lipner, Sankara takes the definition as an instance of “proximate 
laksana.” Lipner, “Sankara on Satyam Jianam Anantam Brahma? in Relativism, Suffering and 
Beyond: Essays in Memory of Bimal K. Matilal, ed. Purushottama Bilimoria and J. N. Mohanty 
(Delhi: Oxford University Press, 1997), 301-18. In contrast to Lipner, both Christopher Bartley 
and J. G. Suthren Hirst argue that Sankara does not appeal to daksand at all. See Bartley, The 
Theology of Ramanuja: Realism and Religion (London: Routledge, 2002), 111-23, and Suthren 
Hirst, Samkara’s Advaita Vedanta: A Way of Teaching (London: RoutledgeCurzon, 2005), 
145-51. Meanwhile, Madeleine Biardeau argues that there is a tension between Sankara’s literal 
interpretation of 2.1.1 and his appeal to /aksand. Biardeau, “La définition dans la penseé indi- 
enne,’ Journal Asiatique 245 (1957), 371-84. Lam inclined to side with Lipner against Bartley 
and Suthren Hirst that Sankara does appeal to some form of /aksand, but defending this inter- 
pretation is well beyond the scope of this chapter. For my purposes, what is most important in 
Sankara’s interpretation of Taittiriya Upanisad 2.1.1 is that he interprets the three terms neg- 
atively and that he takes “azantam” to indicate the nondual, impersonal nature of Brahman. 


18. My summary of Ramanuja’s interpretation of “satyam jnanam anantam” draws heavily 
on Julius Lipner’s excellent account in his book, The Face of Truth (London: Macmillan, 


1986), 29-36. 


19. Ramanuja, Vedarthasangraha, trans. S. S. Raghavachar (Kolkata: Advaita Ashrama, 
2002), 24 [paragraph 24]. See Lipner’s illuminating discussion of Ramanuja’s definition of 
samanadhikaranyam in The Face of Truth, 29-30. 


20. Ramanyja, Sribhasyam, vol. 1, ed. Lalitakrishna Goswami (Delhi: Chaukhamba, 2000), 
107. For an English translation, see Ramanuja, The Vedanta-Sitras with the Commentary by 
Ramanuja: Part II, trans. George Thibaut (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1904), 79. 


56 * THE INFINITUDE OF GOD 


(nirvisesa) nondual Reality—as Sankara would have it—but in fact the personal 
God “endowed with various auspicious attributes” (aneka-visesana-visista).” 

On the basis of this ontological understanding of samanadhikaranyam, 
Ramanuja provides a kataphatic interpretation of the three terms in Taittirlya 
Upanisad 2.1.1 that contrasts sharply with Sanikara’s apophatic Advaitic inter- 
pretation. According to Ramanuja, “satyam” means “unconditioned existence” 
(nirupadhikasatta), which distinguishes Brahman from both insentient entities 
and embodied beings.” “Jianam” means “eternal and uncontracted knowledge” 
(nitya-asamkucita-jnana), which distinguishes Brahman from liberated beings 
whose knowledge was previously contracted.” Finally, “anantam” means “not 
limited by space, time, or object” (desa-kala-vastu-pariccheda-rahita), which 
distinguishes Brahman from zityasiris, divine beings who were never trapped 
in the samsaric state and who are always in communion with God. Ramanuja 
then sums up his interpretation of Brahman’s infinitude: “Since Brahman’s es- 
sential nature possesses attributes, Brahman has infinitude with respect to both 
His essential nature and His attributes” (sagunatvdt svaritpasya svartipena gunais 
canantyam).?> For Satikara, as we have seen, “anantam” implies the impersonality 
and nonduality of Brahman. For Ramanuja, by contrast, Brahman is infinite in 
the sense of being the personal (saguna) God who is not limited by space, time, 
or object and who has infinitely many auspicious attributes. 

The Gaudiya Vaisnava philosopher Visvanatha Cakravartin (c. 1676-1708) 
reconciles, to a certain extent, the positions of Sankara and Ramanuja. Following 
the Acintyabhedabheda school of Vedanta, Visvanatha maintains that the 
Supreme Reality is the personal God Krsna whose “peripheral effulgence” 
(prabha or tanubha) is the impersonal Brahman.” Vigvanatha’s understanding of 





21. Ramanuja, Sribhasyam, vol. 1, 107; Ramanuja, The Vedanta-Sitras,79. 

22, Ramanuja, Sribhasyam, vol. 1, 233; Ramanuja, The Vedanta-Sitras, 159. 
23. Raminuja, Sribhasyam, vol. 1, 233; Ramanuja, The Vedanta-Sitras, 159. 
24, Ramanuja, Sribhasyam, vol. 1, 234; Ramanuja, The Vedanta-Sitras, 160. 
25, Ramanuja, Sribhasyam, vol. 1,234; Ramanuja, The Vedanta-Sitras, 160. 


26. Krsnasankarasastri, ed., Srimadbhagavatamahapuranam (Anekavyakhyasamalankrtam): 
Dasamaskandhab (Ahmedabad: Shri Bhagavata Vidyapeetha, 1965), 1134. For an English 
translation, see Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura, Savartha Darsini: Tenth Canto Commentaries, 
Srimad Bhagavatam, trans. Bhanu Swami (New Delhi: Mahanidhi Swami, 2004), 289. Gaudiya 
Vaisnavas view Caitanya Caritamrta 1.3 as the foundational statement on the relationship be- 
tween Bhagavan Krsna and the impersonal nondual Brahman: “yad advaitam brahmopanisadi 
tad apyasya tanubha” (“That nondual Brahman in the Upanisads is the mere peripheral bril- 
liance of Krishna”). Krsnadas Kaviraj, Srisricaitanyacaritimryta (Gorakhpur: Gita Press, 
2008), 2. 


A Cross-Cultural Inquiry into Divine Infinitude +» 57 


divine infinitude is brought out clearly in his commentary on verses 15-16 of 
Bhagavata Purana 10.28, which run as follows: 


[Lord Krsna revealed to the cowherd boys] the eternal spiritual effulgence 
of Brahman—Reality, Consciousness, Infinite—which the sages, shaking 
off the hold of the gunas, experience in samadhi. 

Krsna led them [the cowherd boys] to the Lake of Brahman, sub- 
merged them in it, and then lifted them up and revealed to them the tran- 
scendent realm of Vaikuntha, which was revealed to Akrira earlier. 

[satyam jnanam anantam yad brahmajyotih sanatanam 

yaddhi pasyanti munayo gunapaye samahitah. 

te tu brabmahradam nita magnah krsnena coddhrtah 

dadrsur brahmano lokam yatrakriro dhyagat pura.\”’ 

The first verse echoes Taittirtya Upanisad 2.1.1 in characterizing Brahman as 
“satyam jhanam anantam.” Visvanatha, interpreting “anantam” as “unlimited” 
(aparicchinnam) and “sanatanam” as “eternally perfect; claims that this first 
verse refers to the impersonal nondual Brahman realized by Advaitic “jianis.”** 
However, in stark contrast to Sankara, Visvanatha claims that the impersonal 
Brahman is nothing but the “effulgence” (prabha) of the personal God Krsna.” 
According to Visvanatha, the infinitude of the impersonal Brahman pales in 
comparison to the “incomprehensibly infinite Sakti” (atarkya-ananta-sakti) 
of Bhagavan Krsna Himself, by means of which Krsna first vouchsafed to the 
cowherd boys a realization of the impersonal Brahman—figured as the “Lake 
of Brahman” (brahmahrada)—and then revealed to them His own infinitely 
greater Supreme Personality in the spiritual realm of Gokula.*® As Visvanatha 
puts it, “the bliss of Krsna’s love in Gokula far exceeds the paltry loveless hap- 
piness in Brahman” (premarahitad brahmasukha-anubhavat premasahito 
vaikunthasukha-anubhavah sresthah).\ For Visvanatha, then, the infinite im- 
personal Brahman is only a minor—and rather bland—aspect of the Infinite 





27. For both the Sanskrit original and the English translation, see Srimad Bhagavata: The Holy 
Book of God, vol. 3, trans. Swami Tapasyananda (Madras: Sri Ramakrishna Math, 2004), 155. 


28. Krsnasankarasastri, ed., Srimadbhagavatamahapurinam: Dasamaskandhah, 143; 
Cakravarti Thakura, Sarartha Darsini: Tenth Canto Commentaries, 290. 


29. Krsnagankarasastri, ed. Srimadbhagavatamahapuranam: Dasamaskandhab, 134; 
Cakravarti Thakura, Sarartha Darsini: Tenth Canto Commentaries, 289. 


30. Krsnasankarasastri, ed., Srimadbhagavatamahapurinam: Dasamaskandhah, 143; 
Cakravarti Thakura, Sarartha Darsini: Tenth Canto Commentaries, 290. 


31. Krsnasankarasastri, ed., Srimadbhagavatamahapuranam: Dasamaskandhab, 143; 
Cakravarti Thakura, Sarartha Darsini: Tenth Canto Commentaries, 290. 


58 © THE INFINITUDE OF GOD 


Personality of Krsna. Visvanatha, in effect, reconciles Sankara’s impersonalism 
and Ramanuja’s personalism by maintaining that the Supreme Person Krsna, by 
means of His unthinkably infinite Sakti, reveals His peripheral impersonal efful- 
gence to Advaitic jaanis. 

Visvanatha’s commentary on Bhagavata Purana 1.2.11 sheds further light on 
his understanding of divine infinitude. The verse 1.2.11 runs as follows: 


That which the knowers of Reality say is Reality is Non-dual Knowledge. 
It is called Brahman, Paramatma, and Bhagavan. 

[vadanti tat tattvavidas tattvam yajjnanam advayam. 

brahmeti paramatmeti bhagavan iti Sabdyate.|*” 

In his commentary on this verse, Visvanatha claims that the nondual Krsna 
is experienced in different ways—and called by different names—by spir- 
itual aspirants of varying calibers. Strikingly, Visvanatha reverses Sankara’s 
scheme by claiming that Advaitic j#anis belong to the lowest order of “quali- 
fied aspirants” (adhikarini), since they experience the Divine Reality—which 
they call “Brahman’—as “formless and devoid of the distinction between 
knower, the known, etc.” and only as “consciousness in general” (xirakaram 
jnatr-jneyadi-vibhaga-sinyam cit simanyam):* Yogis, according to Visvanatha, 
are superior to Advaitic j#anis, because yogis experience two or three “qualities” 
(dharma-s) of the Divine Reality—which they call “Paramatma’—such as the 
quality of being the “Inner Controller” (antaryami) of all beings. 

According to Vigvanatha, bhaktas belong to the highest rung of spiritual aspi- 
rants, since they enjoy the fullest and richest knowledge of the Divine Reality, whom 
they call “Bhagavan.” As Visvanatha puts it, bhaktas alone have the “capacity to 
grasp that Bhagavan is the One who has unlimited qualities like form, beauty, and 
playfulness, and an essence [svaripa] that is incomprehensibly infinite and com- 
posed of consciousness and bliss” (acintya-ananta-cid-anandamaya-svariipa-riipa- 
guna-lilady-anekadharmavat tvasya grahana-yogyatayam).** From Visvanatha’s 





32. Srimad Bhagavata: The Holy Book of God, vol. 1, trans. Swami Tapasyananda (Madras: Sri 
Ramakrishna Math, 2003), 7. 


33. The translations of passages from Visvanatha’s commentary on Bhagavata Purana 1.2.11 are 
my own, though I have consulted Jonathan Edelmann’s unpublished translation, “Bhagavata 
Purana 1.2.11 with Commentaries.” 


34. Krsnasankarasastri, ed., Srimadbhagavatamahapuranam (Anekavyakhyasamalankrtam): 


Prathamab Skandhab (Ahmedabad: Shri Bhagavata Vidyapeetha, 1965), 133. 
35. Krsnagankarasastri, ed., Srimadbhagavatamahapuranam: Prathamah Skandhab, 133-34. 


36. Krsnasankarasastri, ed., Srimadbhagavatamahapuranam: Prathamab Skandbab, 134. 


A Cross-Cultural Inquiry into Divine Infinitude + 59 


standpoint, since God is “incomprehensibly infinite” (acintya-ananta), He 
can be experienced in different ways by spiritual aspirants of varying calibers. 
Indeed, Gaudiya Vaisnava philosophers maintain that the Lord, by virtue of His 
acintya-sakti, is capable even of resolving what appear to be contradictions to the 
finite human intellect. Accordingly, Baladeva Vidyabhisana defines acintya-sakti 
as the “resolver of contradictions” (virodha-bhanjika).*’ For Gaudiya Vaisnavas, 
while personal and impersonal conceptions of God seem to contradict each 
other, God is capable of being both personal (saguna) and impersonal (nirguna), 
even though the human intellect is unable to grasp how this is possible.** It is 
clear, however, that Gaudiya Vaisnavas do not grant equal ontological status to 
the personal and impersonal aspects of the Supreme Reality: since the impersonal 
Brahman is the mere peripheral effulgence of the personal God Krsna, bhaktas of 
Krsna are far superior to Advaitic jranis.” 

We are now in a position to consider Sri Ramakrishna’s views on divine in- 
finitude and compare them with those of Sankara, Ramanuja, and Visvanatha. 
Sri Ramakrishna would often refer to God as “infinite” (azanta). He asks, for in- 
stance, “Who can fully know the Infinite Lord [ananta isvar]?” (K 101 / G 150). 
On another occasion, he asks, “Who can describe the Infinite [azanta]?” (K 181 
/ G 218). He also frequently mentions God's “infinite power” (ananta-sakti) (K 
100 / G 149), His “infinite glories” (ananta aisvarya) (K 104 / G 152), and His 
“infinite sportive play” (ananta lila) (K 228 / G 257). In my discussion of VV3 in 
section III of the previous chapter, I began to show how Sri Ramakrishna’s stand- 
point of vijfana holds the key to appreciating what is most radical and original in 
his conception of divine infinitude. As a vij#ani, Sri Ramakrishna maintains that 
God is infinite in the sense that His inexhaustible plenitude exceeds the grasp of 
the finite human intellect. 





37. Baladeva Vidyabhisana, Prameyaratnavali (Vrindavan: Agrawal Press, 1941), 19. 


38. As O. B. L. Kapoor puts it, the Gaudiya Vaisnava doctrine of acintyata implies that God 
“transcends even the law of contradiction” and, hence, is both “savisesa [with attributes] and 
nirvisesa [without attributes].” Kapoor, The Philosophy and Religion of Sri Caitanya (New 
Delhi: Munshiram Manoharlal, 2008), 85-87. For a similar interpretation of acintyata, see 
Surendranath Dasgupta, 4 History of Indian Philosophy, vol. 4 (Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 


[1922] 2000), 18. Jonathan Edelmann also made a similar point in correspondence. 


39. In fact, Swami Tapasyananda convincingly argues that the hierarchical interpretation of 
Bhagavata 1.2.11 endorsed by Gaudiya Vaisnavas is eisegetic, since neither 1.2.11 nor any other 
verse in the Bhagavata suggests a “hierarchical order of Bhagavan, Paramatman and Brahman.” 
Srimad Bhagavata: The Holy Book of God, vol. 4, trans. Swami Tapasyananda (Madras: Sri 
Ramakrishna Math, 2003), 232-33. Arguably, then, Sri Ramakrishna’s nonhierarchical teach- 
ing that the same Infinite Reality is called “Brahman,” “Atman,’ and “Bhagavan” by different 
types of spiritual aspirants—which I discuss later in the section—better captures the purport 
of Bhagavata 1.2.11 than Visvanatha’s hierarchical interpretation. 


60 © THE INFINITUDE OF GOD 


For Sri Ramakrishna, God’s infinitude has both epistemological and onto- 
logical dimensions. One of his favorite teachings succinctly captures the episte- 
mological dimension of God's infinitude: “No one can place a limit to God by 
saying, ‘God is this, and no more’ [sahar iti kara jai na)” (K 152 / G 192). The 
particle i¢i, in both Bengali and Sanskrit, functions as a quotation mark denoting 
the end of a statement or idea. According to Sri Ramakrishna, we should not try 
to put an iti to God by limiting the Infinite Reality to what our paltry intellects 
can grasp of Him. As he puts it, “It is not good to say that what we ourselves think 
of God is the only truth and what others think is false; that because we think of 
God as formless [xirakar], therefore He is formless and cannot have form; that 
because we think of God as having form [sakar], therefore He has form and can- 
not be formless. Can anyone place a limit to God’s nature? [manus ki tar iti korte 
pare?” (K 422 / G 422-23). The finite human intellect tends to think in terms 
of an either-or paradigm: either God has form or God lacks form, either God is 
personal or God is impersonal, either God is immanent or God is transcendent. 
Sri Ramakrishna insists, however, that it would be a mistake to confine God’s na- 
ture to what we can grasp of Him. 

Asa mystic, Sri Ramakrishna breaks outside the confines of the finite intellect 
by ascending to the level of suprarational spiritual experience. From the stand- 
point of vijiana, he maintains that God’s infinite nature is best understood in 
terms of a both-and paradigm rather than an either-or paradigm. As he puts it, 
“That Reality which is the witya is also the /ila. . .. [E]verything is possible for 
God. He is formless, and again He assumes forms. He is the individual and He 
is the universe. He is Brahman, and He is Sakti. There is no limit—no end—to 
God [tahar iti nai,—ses nai]. Nothing is impossible for Him” (K 997 / G 920). 
Sri Ramakrishna’s gloss of the word iti as ses (“end”) reflects the ontological di- 
mension of God’s infinitude: God has no i#i in the sense that God’s nature has no 
limit or end. Hence, the Infinite Divine Reality is both personal and impersonal, 
both with and without form, bot) immanent and transcendent. By exploiting 
both the objective and subjective connotations of the word i#i, Sri Ramakrishna 
conveys the inseparability of the ontological and epistemological dimensions of 





40. Adrian Moore distinguishes two major strands in the history of Western thinking on in- 
finitude. Mathematical conceptions of the infinite emphasize “boundlessness; endlessness; un- 
limitedness; immeasurability; eternity; that which is such that, given any determinate part of 
it, there is always more to come; that which is greater than any assignable quantity.” Moore, The 
Infinite, 2nd ed. (London: Routledge, 2001), 1. Metaphysical conceptions of the infinite, by 
contrast, emphasize “completeness; wholeness; unity; universality; absoluteness; perfection; 
self-sufficiency; autonomy” (Moore, The Infinite, 1-2). Sri Ramakrishna’s conception of divine 
infinitude, I suggest, combines both mathematical and metaphysical strands: God’s illimita- 
bility, for Sri Ramakrishna, attests to—and is inseparable from—His perfection, freedom, and 
incomprehensibility. 


A Cross-Cultural Inquiry into Divine Infinitude +» 61 


God’s infinitude: since the limits of human thought do not dictate the limits of di- 
vine possibility, God can have numerous aspects, attributes, forms, and powers that 
may appear contradictory to the finite intellect. 

Sri Ramakrishna’s understanding of divine infinitude brings him closer to 
Visvanatha than to Sankara or Ramanuja. Sri Ramakrishna’s teaching that “noth- 
ing is impossible” for God accords well with Visvanatha’s Gaudiya Vaisnava doc- 
trine of acintya-sakti, God's incomprehensible capacity to assume multiple forms 
and aspects that seem contradictory to the rational intellect. Sri Ramakrishna also 
follows Visvanatha in striving to harmonize personalist and impersonalist concep- 
tions of the Supreme Reality. Following Sankara, Sri Ramakrishna refers to the 
Supreme Reality realized in nirvikalpa samadhi as “The Infinite, the formless and 
impersonal Brahman beyond speech and thought” (ananta, vakya-maner atit, arp 
nirakar brahma) (K 181 / G 218). Following Ramanuja, Sri Ramakrishna refers 
to the “Infinite Lord” (ananta isvar) (K 101 / G 150) and His “infinite power” 
(ananta-sakti) (K 100 / G 149) and “infinite glories” (ananta aisvarya) (K 104 / G 
152). Sri Ramakrishna reconciles Sankara’s impersonalism and Ramanuja’s person- 
alism by adopting a broad view of God's infinitude rooted in the spiritual experience 
of vijiana. Asa vijnani, Sti Ramakrishna realized that one and the same Infinite God 
reveals His impersonal aspect to j#anis and His personal aspect to bhaktas. For Sri 
Ramakrishna, then, God is infinite not only in His utterly ineffable transcendence 
but also in His capacity to manifest in infinite ways—for instance, as various forms 
of the personal God, as incarnations, and as the entire universe. As Sri Ramakrishna 
puts it, the Infinite Saccidananda “assumes forms for the sake of His bhaktas” (K 181 
/ G217). Indeed, he emphasizes that the divine forms worshipped by bhaktas are real 
manifestations of the Infinite Divine Consciousness: “Bhaktas acquire a ‘love-body’ 
[bhagavati-tanu], and with its help they see the Spirit-form [cinmay rap] of the 
Supreme Reality” (K 181 / G 217). For both Sri Ramakrishna and Visvanatha, then, 
the unthinkably infinite God appears to Advaitic j#anis as the impersonal Absolute 
and to bhakias as the personal God. 

However, Sri Ramakrishna differs from Visvanatha at the level of ontology. 
While Visvanatha subordinates the impersonal Brahman to the Supreme 
Person Krsna, Sri Ramakrishna grants equal ontological status to the imper- 
sonal and personal aspects of the Infinite Reality.*! This crucial philosophical 





41. An important precedent for Sri Ramakrishna’s position is the philosophy of Tantra, which 
also grants equal ontological status to both the impersonal Absolute (Siva) and the dynamic 
Sakti. Indeed, as I pointed out in Chapter 1, Sri Ramakrishna’s ontological doctrine of the 
inseparability of Brahman and Sakti may derive, in part, from Tantrika philosophy. There 
are striking affinities between Sri Ramakrishna’s philosophy and the Tantrika philosophy 
of Kasmiri Saivism in particular. The central Kasmiri Saiva doctrine of svdtantrya (“divine 
freedom”) could be seen as an early precursor to the Gaudiya Vaisnava doctrine of acintya-sakti. 
B. N. Pandit, a prominent scholar of Kasmiri Saivism, defines svatantrya as Paramasiva’s 


62 © THE INFINITUDE OF GOD 


difference between Sri Ramakrishna and Visvanatha is made clear in one of Sri 
Ramakrishna’s favorite teachings, which bears a striking resemblance to Bhagavata 
Purana 1.2.11: “The Divine Reality who is called Brahman by the janis is known 
as Atman by the yogis and as Bhagavan by the bhaktas” (K 83 / G 133). Since 
Sri Ramakrishna was quite familiar with the Bhagavata, this teaching may very 
well have been inspired by Bhagavata 1.2.11. Significantly, he clarifies this teach- 
ing from the standpoint of vijiana: while Advaitic janis dismiss the universe 
as unreal and insist that God cannot be “a Person” (vyakti), bhaktas “accept the 
waking state as real” and see the universe as a real manifestation of “God’s glory” 
(K 83 / G 133). He adds that the greatest type of devotee, the “utam bhakta; sees 
that “God Himself has become the twenty-four cosmic principles—both the in- 
dividual souls and the universe” (K 83 / G 133). As I pointed out in the previous 
chapter, this uttam bhakta is none other than the vijaani, who realizes that the 
Infinite Reality is not only the impersonal Brahman but also the personal Sakti 
pervading the entire universe. As Sri Ramakrishna puts it, “When God is action- 
less [niskriya], I call God ‘Brahman’; when God creates, preserves, and destroys, 
I call God ‘Sakti’” (K 861 / G 802). 

Visvanatha, we should recall, espouses the hierarchical view that bhaktas 
are superior to both j#danis and yogis, since bhaktas alone realize the personal 
Bhagavan in His infinite fullness, while janis and yogis realize Brahman and 
Paramatman respectively, which are only minor aspects of Bhagavan. By con- 
trast, Sri Ramakrishna maintains that the impersonal Brahman-Atman and the 
personal Sakti are complementary aspects of one and the same Infinite Reality. 
Accordingly, Sri Ramakrishna holds that jranis, yogis, and bhaktas all realize one 
and the same Infinite Reality in different forms and aspects, none of which can 
be said to be superior to any of the others. At the same time, he distinguishes 
two classes of bhaktas. Ordinary bhaktas, according to Sri Ramakrishna, realize 
the personal God. By contrast, vijiani bhaktas (or uttam bhaktas), after having 
realized both the personal and impersonal aspects of the Infinite Reality, see that 
God—in His Sakti aspect—has become the entire universe. Therefore, while Sri 
Ramakrishna places ordinary bhaktas on the same footing as j”dnis and yogis, 





“capacity to do that which seems impossible” (“aghataniya-ghatana-samarthyam”). The Mirror 
of Self-Supremacy or Svatantrya-Darpana (New Delhi: Munshiram Manoharlal, 1993), 50. 
One could argue, from the perspective of Kasmiri Saivism, that Paramasiva’s svatantrya enables 
Him to be personal and impersonal at the same time. However, I do not focus on Kasmiri 
Saivism in this chapter, since Kasmiri Saivites, as far as I am aware, do not theorize divine infin- 
itude in terms of the doctrine of svdtantrya. The Kasmiri Saivite Abhinavagupta, for instance, 
claims that the Divine Reality is “replete with infinite saktis” (ananta-sakti-paripirnam), but 
he does not connect divine infinitude to svatantrya. Abhinavagupta, An Introduction to Tantric 
Philosophy: The Paramarthasara of Abhinavagupta with the Commentary of Yogaraja, trans. Lyne 
Bansat-Boudon and Kamaleshadatta Tripathi (London: Routledge, 2011), 363. 


A Cross-Cultural Inquiry into Divine Infinitude +» 63 


he maintains that vijfdnis have a broader and deeper knowledge of the Infinite 
Reality than janis, yogis, and ordinary bhaktas do. 

Interestingly, then, while both Sri Ramakrishna and Visvanatha adopt a hier- 
archical view that privileges a certain class of bhaktas over other types of spiritual 
aspirants, they part ways in their understanding of what these highest bhaktas 
realize. For Vigvanatha, the highest bhakta realizes the ultimately personal God 
Krsna, whose minor aspect is the impersonal Brahman. For Sri Ramakrishna, by 
contrast, the highest vij#ani bhakta realizes God as the Infinite Reality which is 
equally personal and impersonal but which is also beyond both personality and 
impersonality. On the basis of vij#ana, then, Sri Ramakrishna is able to harmo- 
nize Sankara’s impersonalism and Ramanuja’s personalism in a less hierarchical 
manner than Visvanatha. 


Il. Scotus and Cusa: Two Medieval Christian Paradigms 
for Understanding Divine Infinitude 


Now that we have situated Sri Ramakrishna’s views on divine infinitude within 
the Indian philosophical context, we can bring him into dialogue with some im- 
portant Christian philosophers and theologians. While Christian theologians 
have interpreted divine infinitude in numerous ways, this section focuses on the 
medieval theologians Scotus (1266-1308) and Cusa (1401-1464), whose views 
are especially relevant to the cross-cultural philosophical issues Iam exploring in 
this chapter. According to Scotus, God is “intensively infinite” in the sense that 
He has all perfections—such as goodness, power, and knowledge—to an infinite 
degree.* In particular, God has “infinite being,” from which Scotus derives all the 
other infinite perfections of God. As Scotus puts it, “As ‘being’ virtually includes 
the ‘good’ and the ‘true; so ‘infinite being’ includes the ‘infinitely good; ‘the infi- 
nitely true; and all pure perfections under the aspect of infinity.’#4 Richard Cross 
spells out an important consequence of Scotus'’s view of divine infinitude: “The 
difference between God and creatures, at least with regard to God’s possession of 





42. For a more comprehensive survey of medieval Christian views on divine infinity, see Leo 


Sweeney, Divine Infinity in Greek and Medieval Thought (New York: Peter Lang, 1992). 


43. See Antonie Vos, The Philosophy of John Duns Scotus (Edinburgh: Edinburgh University 
Press, 2006), 257; Richard Cross, Duns Scotus (New York: Oxford University Press, 1999), 41; 
R. T. Mullins, “The Difficulty with Demarcating Pantheism,’ Sophia 55 (2016), 330-31. As 
Anne Davenport points out, the notion of intensive infinity can be traced to Saint Augustine’s 


concept of quantitas virtutis sive perfectionis (“quantity of perfection”). Measure of a Different 
Greatness: The Intensive Infinite, 1250-1650 (Leiden: Brill, 1999), xi. 


44, John Duns Scotus, Philosophical Writings: A Selection, trans. Allan Wolter 
(Indianapolis: Hackett, 1987), 27. For the original Latin, see Scotus, Ordinatio 1, d. 3, pars 1, 
qq. 1-2, n. 58. 


64 * THE INFINITUDE OF GOD 


the pure perfections, is ultimately one of degree. Specifically, the perfections exist 
in an infinite degree in God, and in a finite degree in creatures.’ For Scotus, 
then, while human beings may be good, knowledgeable, and powerful to a finite 
degree, only God is infinitely good, infinitely knowledgeable, infinitely powerful, 
and so on.*6 

Many recent analytic philosophers of religion adopt a broadly Scotistic 
approach to divine infinitude. Swinburne claims, for instance, that God is infinite 
in the sense that He possesses divine attributes to an “infinite degree.’*” Jerome 
Gellman interprets the claim that “God is infinite” as shorthand for the thesis 
that “God is omnipotent, omniscient, perfectly good, and eternal”—indicating 
that he follows Swinburne in maintaining that God has power, knowledge, good- 
ness, and other divine attributes to an infinite degree.** Likewise, Eric Steinhart 
proposes a “mathematical model of divine infinity,’ which shows how “for any 
divine perfection P, the degree to which God has P is absolutely infinite.” 
Numerous other contemporary philosophers have made similar claims about the 
nature of divine infinitude.” 

Contemporary analytic philosophers, I suggest, would do well to consider 
the views of Cusa, a medieval Christian theologian who adopted a far more rad- 
ical approach to divine infinitude than Scotus. Cusa claimed that during a sea 
voyage in late 1437, he had mystical experiences which led him to adopt an at- 
titude of “learned ignorance” (docta ignorantia), the humble recognition that fi- 
nite human reason can never understand the Infinite God.*! From this epistemic 





45. Cross, Duns Scotus, 39. 


46. I am not claiming that Scotus was the first Christian theologian to have such an under- 
standing of divine infinitude. As Graham Oppy points out, Philo’s statements about God 
seem to imply a similar view. Oppy, Describing Gods: An Investigation into Divine Attributes 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2014), 34. Nonetheless, Scotus provided an espe- 


cially clear and detailed elaboration of this conception of divine infinitude. 


47. Richard Swinburne, The Existence of God, 2nd ed. (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 2004), 
150-51. He also makes the same claim on p. 111 of the same book. 


48. Jerome Gellman, “Experiencing God’s Infinity,’ American Philosophical Quarterly 31.1 
(January 1994), 53. 


49. Eric Steinhart, “A Mathematical Model of Divine Infinity, Theology and Science 7.3 
(2009), 261. 


50. See, for instance, Alvin Plantinga, Warranted Christian Belief (New York: Oxford University 
Press, 2004), 54-55; Brian Leftow, “Concepts of God,’ in Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy, 
ed. Edward Craig (New York: Routledge, 1998), 93-102; Oppy, Describing Gods, 49-54. 


51. Nicholas of Cusa, On Learned Ignorance: A Translation and an Appraisal of De Docta 
Ignorantia, 2nd ed., ed. and trans. Jasper Hopkins (Minneapolis: AJ. Banning Press, 1985), 
158. For discussions of Cusa’s mystical experiences, see Moran, “Nicholas of Cusa and Modern 
Philosophy,’ 184 and Hillary Webb, “Coincidentia Oppositorum, in Encyclopedia of Psychology 
and Religion, ed. David A. Leeming (Boston: Springer, 2014), 158. 


A Cross-Cultural Inquiry into Divine Infinitude + 65 


standpoint of learned ignorance, Cusa boldly declares that the Infinite God is 
“that Simplicity wherein contradictories coincide [ubi contradictoria coincid- 
unt|.’ God is “infinite” in the sense that He possesses various attributes—such 
as form and formlessness, being and nonbeing—that appear contradictory to the 
human intellect. As Cusa puts it, “reason cannot leap beyond contradictories.”™ 
In De Pace Fidei (1453), Cusa calls for religious harmony on the basis of his doc- 
trine of God as the coincidentia oppositorum.® According to Cusa, different reli- 
gious communities—he specifically has in mind followers of different Christian 
sects and Muslims—worship one and the same infinite personal God through 
“different rites” and call Him by “different names.” 

If recent analytic philosophers have tended to adopt a Scotistic approach 
to divine infinitude, Sri Ramakrishna can be seen as embedding the Scotistic 
approach within a more radical Cusaean paradigm. Sri Ramakrishna clearly 
agrees with Scotus that God possesses divine attributes to an infinite degree. Sri 
Ramakrishna claims, for instance, that God has “infinite power” (ananta-sakti) 
(K 100 / G 149) and “infinite glories” (ananta aisvarya) (K 104 / G 152). For 
Sri Ramakrishna, however, Scotus’s doctrine of intensive infinity by no means 
exhausts the nature of divine infinitude. In fact, Sri Ramakrishna’s overall views 
on God’s infinitude bring him much closer to Cusa than to Scotus. 

Just as Cusa champions a “learned ignorance,’ Sri Ramakrishna—as we saw in 
the previous chapter—enthusiastically endorses William Hamilton’s statement 
that “a learned ignorance is the end of philosophy and the beginning of religion” 
(K 255 / G 278). Echoing Cusa’s thesis that “reason cannot leap beyond con- 
tradictories,”’ Sri Ramakrishna repeatedly emphasizes that we can never under- 
stand the nature of the Infinite God with “our little intellect” (K 934 / G 864). 
Sri Ramakrishna also shares Cusa’s mystical bent: their respective conceptions 
of divine infinitude are based not on intellectual speculation but on their own 
suprarational mystical experiences. Finally, since Sri Ramakrishna maintains that 
God has apparently contradictory attributes and aspects—such as personality 
and impersonality, and form and formlessness—I think he would have embraced 





52. Nicholas of Cusa, On Learned Ignorance, 7. 
53. Nicholas of Cusa, On Learned Ignorance, 9-10. 


54. Nicholas of Cusa, On Learned Ignorance, 40-41. See also the helpful discussions in Andrew 
Weeks, German Mysticism from Hildegard of Bingen to Ludwig Wittgenstein (Albany: SUNY 
Press, 1993), 99-116, and Moran, “Nicholas of Cusa and Modern Philosophy,’ 184-85. 


55. As Hopkins points out, Cusa never uses the exact phrase coincidentia oppositorum, but he 
does imply the idea at numerous places in his work (Nicholas of Cusa, On Learned Ignorance,7). 


56. Nicholas of Cusa, De Pace Fidei and Cribratio Alkorani: Translation and Analysis, 2nd ed., 
trans. Jasper Hopkins (Minneapolis: AJ. Banning Press, 1994), 635. 


66 © THE INFINITUDE OF GOD 


Cusa’s thesis that God’s unfathomable and paradoxical nature is a coincidentia 
oppositorum. 

However, from Sri Ramakrishna’ standpoint, Cusa’s understanding of divine 
infinitude is insufficiently radical, since Cusa fails to subject divine personality 
itself to the inexorable logic of the coincidentia oppositorum. For Cusa, God is al- 
ways and only the loving personal God who is “the giver of life and existence.” 
Cusa’s personal God corresponds to what Sri Ramakrishna calls “Sakti” or Zvara, 
the loving and omnipotent Lord who creates and preserves the universe. For 
Sri Ramakrishna, however, the Infinite God is equally the impersonal nondual 
Reality which he calls “Brahman.” His unique mystical experience of viji#ana 
enabled him, in effect, to push the doctrine of God as the coincidentia opposito- 
rum much further than Cusa himself had envisioned. From Sri Ramakrishna’s 
perspective, if God is truly the coincidentia oppositorum, then God can be both the 
dynamic personal Sakti and the transcendent impersonal Brahman—even if the 
finite human intellect cannot grasp how this is possible. 

Since Sri Ramakrishna’s conception of God as the coincidentia oppositorum 
is, in certain respects, more thoroughgoing than Cusa’s, Sri Ramakrishna’s vision 
of religious harmony also proves to be more inclusive and robust than Cusa’s. As 
I will show at length in the next chapter, Sri Ramakrishna harmonizes theistic 
and nontheistic religious paths on the basis of his vij#ana-based ontology of God 
as the impersonal-personal Infinite Reality. According to Sri Ramakrishna, while 
Christianity, Islam, and theistic schools of Hinduism capture the personal aspect 
of the Infinite Reality, nontheistic spiritual philosophies such as Advaita Vedanta 
and Buddhism capture the impersonal aspect of the same Infinite Reality. In 
stark contrast to Sri Ramakrishna, Cusa only envisions a harmony of theistic re- 
ligious faiths, since he never admits the possibility that God could be more, or 
other, than personal. Indeed, Cusa’s position is actually more inclusivist than plu- 
ralist, since he claims that “there is one religion and worship, which is presup- 
posed in all the diversity of rites.”*® For Cusa, this “one religion” is an ideal form 
of Christianity which the various mundane religions approximate to varying 
degrees.” Sri Ramakrishna, by contrast, was a full-blown religious pluralist who 
did not privilege his own Hindu religion over non-Hindu religions. 





57. Nicholas of Cusa, De Pace Fidei, 635 (translation slightly modified). 
58. Nicholas of Cusa, De Pace Fidei, 640. Scott Aikin and Jason Aleksander argue that Cusa was 


a “meta-exclusivist.” See their article “Nicholas of Cusa’s De Pace Fidei and the Meta-exclusivism 
of Religious Pluralism,” International Journal for the Philosophy of Religion 74.2 (2013), 219-35. 
While I agree with Aikin and Aleksander that Cusa was not a religious pluralist, I think Cusa’s 
position is better understood as a religious inclusivism rather than as a meta-exclusivism. 


59. Cusa, De Pace Fidei, 636. 


A Cross-Cultural Inquiry into Divine Infinitude +» 67 


In spite of its limitations, Cusa’s radical approach to divine infinitude—which 
bears striking affinities with Sri Ramakrishna’s approach—provides a valuable 
corrective to the ontologically tamer Scotistic paradigm favored by many con- 
temporary analytic philosophers. The next section brings Sri Ramakrishna into 
conversation with Gécke, who challenges the mainstream analytic understanding 
of divine infinitude by developing Cusa’s doctrine of the coincidentia oppositorum. 


Ill. The Paraconsistent God: Sri Ramakrishna 
and Benedikt Paul Gécke 


In “The Paraconsistent God” (2016), Gécke defends a radical paraconsistent con- 
ception of God’s infinitude.® According to Gécke, the most fundamental differ- 
ence between a finite and an infinite entity is that the former but not the latter is 
subject to the law of contradiction. As Gécke puts it, “an entity x is qualitatively 
finite... if and only if for every property F, either x exemplifies this property, or 
not.” By contrast, an entity is qualitatively infinite “if and only if there is at least 
one property F such that it is both F and not F’? Gocke adds that an entity is 
maximally qualitatively infinite if “for all properties F, it is both F and not F” 
Gocke claims that the Infinite God is a “paraconsistent entity” that is not 
subject to the law of contradiction.“ Further, he makes the even stronger claim 
that God is not only qualitatively infinite but maximally qualitatively infinite. He 
provides both a historical and a philosophical argument in favor of his concep- 
tion of God as a maximally infinite entity.© Historically, he claims that numerous 
Christian theologians—including Pseudo-Dionysius, Thomas Aquinas, and 
Nicholas of Cusa—held that God is a maximally infinite entity.°° Philosophically, 
he argues that the widely held theistic definition of God as the “ultimate ground 





60. Benedikt Paul Gécke, “The Paraconsistent God,’ in Rethinking the Concept of a Personal 
God, ed. Thomas Schartl, Christian Tapp, and Veronika Wegener (Miinster: Aschendorff, 
2016), 177-99. Although I focus on this article, I also sometimes refer to Gécke’s related ar- 
ticle, “Eine Analyse der Unendlichkeit Gottes? Freiburger Zeitschrift fiir Philosophie und 
Theologie 62 (2015), 142-60. 


61. Gocke, “The Paraconsistent God,’ 177. 


62. Gocke, “The Paraconsistent God,” 180. It should be noted that Gécke considers “negatively 
infinite entities” as well, but I consider in this section only positively infinite entities. 


63. Gocke, “The Paraconsistent God,” 180. 
64. Gocke, “The Paraconsistent God,” 177. 


65. For the sake of brevity, I will sometimes use the phrase “maximally infinite” as an abbrevia- 
tion for “maximally qualitatively infinite.” 


66. Gocke, “The Paraconsistent God,’ 189-93. See also Gécke, “Eine Analyse der Unendlichkeit 
Gottes,” 153-55. 


68 © THE INFINITUDE OF GOD 


of empirical reality” logically entails that God is a maximally infinite entity.°” 
Gocke’s reasoning, in brief, is as follows: since all empirical entities are finite, they 
either have or do not have a particular property, so the ontological ground of the 
possibility of all finite empirical entities must be a maximally infinite entity that 
has every property and its denial. God, in other words, must zot be subject to the 
law of contradiction, since He is the ultimate ground of all entities which ave sub- 
ject to the law of contradiction. 

On the basis of these arguments, Gécke provocatively claims that the “vast 
majority”’® of analytic philosophers of religion take God to be a finite entity, 
since they assume that “the principle of contradiction is a fundamental log- 
ical and ontological truth concerning the very nature of each and every entity 
whatsoever.” That is, even though philosophers such as Swinburne and Leftow 
explicitly affirm that God is infinite, they nonetheless analyze God’s nature in 
accordance with the law of contradiction, thereby implicitly turning God into a 
finite entity.”” Gocke also helps isolate a key ontological difference between the 
Scotistic and Cusaean approaches to divine infinitude discussed in the previous 
section. In contrast to the Cusaean approach, the Scotistic approach—favored by 
many analytic philosophers—tacitly presupposes that God is subject to the law 
of contradiction. 

Gocke, I suggest, can be brought into fruitful dialogue with Sri Ramakrishna. 
According to Sri Ramakrishna, the Infinite God cannot be confined within the 
narrow bounds of the finite human intellect, which tends to think in terms of 
mutually exclusive alternatives: God is either personal or impersonal, either with 
or without form, either immanent or transcendent. Gécke’s argument helps bring 
out Sri Ramakrishna’s underlying presupposition that the Infinite God is not 
subject to the law of contradiction. Although Sri Ramakrishna never explicitly 
articulates this presupposition, he strongly implies it in many of his teachings. 
In my discussion of VV2 in the previous chapter, I cited a passage in which Sri 
Ramakrishna affirms the impossibility of understanding “with our small intel- 
lect” that God is at once a “finite human being” (svarat) and the “all-pervading 
Soul of the universe” (virat), at once the nitya and the lila (K 933-34 / G 864). 





67. Gocke, “The Paraconsistent God,’ 197-98. See also Gécke, “Eine Analyse der Unendlichkeit 
Gottes,” 155-59. 


68. Gécke, “The Paraconsistent God,” 189. 
69. Gocke, “The Paraconsistent God,’ 187. 


70. Of course, many philosophers would insist that zo entity—including God—can be exempt 
from the law of contradiction. However, as Graham Priest has shown, this is a highly contro- 
versial assumption that requires justification. In fact, Priest points out that there are virtually 
no good arguments in favor of the universal validity of the law of contradiction. See Priest, 


Beyond the Limits of Thought (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1995). 


A Cross-Cultural Inquiry into Divine Infinitude + 69 


He then asks, “Can we ever understand all these ideas with our little intellect? 
Cana one-seer pot hold four seers of milk?” (K 934 / G 864). Gocke’s standpoint 
sheds light on Sri Ramakrishna’s teaching: one basic sense in which the finite in- 
tellect is like a “one-seer pot” is that it is bound to the law of contradiction. The 
Infinite God, by contrast, is like “ten seers of milk” precisely because God is not 
subject to the law of contradiction. According to Sri Ramakrishna, “everything 
is possible for God” (K 997 / G'920), so God can even possess aspects and attri- 
butes that appear contradictory to the rational intellect. For Sri Ramakrishna as 
for Gécke, God is a paraconsistent entity whose infinite nature is best understood 
in terms of a both-and paradigm rather than an either-or paradigm. 

If Gécke helps clarify the paraconsistent underpinnings of Sri Ramakrishna’s 
views on God, Sri Ramakrishna’s vij#ana-based conception of divine infinitude 
sets into relief four major weaknesses in Gocke’s argument. First, Gécke’s con- 
ception of God as a maximally infinite entity has bizarre consequences that un- 
dermine its plausibility. According to Gocke, a maximally infinite entity is “such 
that, for every property F, it is both true and false that it is F.”! The theological 
strangeness of this conception is brought out by a footnote in which he points 
out that “if the predicate ‘being evil’ refers to a possible determination of an 
entity ... then my account entails that God is both evil and not evil.’”? Does 
Gocke’s evil-and-not-evil God correspond to the God of any of the major world 
religions? It seems not. Indeed, Gocke’s maximally infinite God hardly seems 
worthy of worship.” Gécke would likely respond that since God is paraconsis- 
tent, it is not surprising that we, with our finite intellects, find the notion of an 
evil-and-not-evil God incoherent or unappealing. Nonetheless, the sheer strange- 
ness of his account of the paraconsistent God makes it an unattractive alternative 
to traditional theism. 

Interestingly, Goécke himself briefly considers a different paraconsistent 
conception of God that is arguably much more plausible than his own concep- 
tion of a maximally qualitatively infinite God. According to Gécke, an entity 
is qualitatively, but not maximally, infinite “if and only if there is at least one 
property F such that it is both F and not F?” From a Ramakrishnan perspective, 





71. Gécke, “The Paraconsistent God,’ 197. 
72. Gocke, “The Paraconsistent God,” 197 fn. 47. 


73. Ina different article, Gocke himself insists that “[a]ny concept of God has to be a concept 
of that which is worthy of worship” and that the “single ultimate ground of reality is worthy 
of worship if and only if it is absolutely holy.” Benedikt Paul Gécke, “Concepts of God and 
Models of the God-World Relation? Philosophy Compass 12.2 (February 2017), 2. I would 
argue that Gécke violates his own criterion by claiming that God is both evil and not evil. 


74. Gocke, “The Paraconsistent God,’ 180. 


70 *© THE INFINITUDE OF GOD 


Gocke is premature in ruling out this possibility. In Gocke’s terms, we can say that 
Sri Ramakrishna takes God to be qualitatively infinite but not maximally qualita- 
tively infinite. While Gécke claims that God has every property and its negation, 
Sri Ramakrishna claims—on the experiential basis of vijfiana—that God has some 
properties and their negations: for instance, God is both personal and imper- 
sonal, both with and without form, both immanent and transcendent. Hence, Sri 
Ramakrishna’s paraconsistent conception of God does not commit him to Gécke’s 
implausible view that God is both evil and not evil, and so on. 

Second, Gécke’s two main arguments in favor of his conception of a maximally 
infinite God are unconvincing. His sweeping historical claim that Pseudo-Dionysius, 
Aquinas, and Cusa all adopted the view that God is maximally infinite is highly 
questionable. For instance, Gécke cites the following statement of Aquinas: “Since 
therefore God is the first effective cause of things, the perfections of all things must 
pre-exist in God in a more eminent way.” Gocke eisegetically interprets “perfec- 
tions” as “properties” in order to make Aquinas’s statement seem to support his 
own view that God is maximally infinite.” However, Aquinas’ thesis that the “per- 
fections of all things” preexist in God far more plausibly supports the view that 
God is qualitatively, but ot maximally, infinite. Shortly after the passage cited by 
Gocke, Aquinas claims that since “life” and “wisdom” are perfections, “God’s exist- 
ence includes life and wisdom.””” However, since evil is obviously not a perfection, 
Aquinas would reject Gocke’s view that God is both evil and not evil. 

Moreover, Gécke’s philosophical argument in support of God’s maximal in- 
finitude is weak. According to Gécke, God is maximally infinite “precisely because 
God is the ultimate ground of empirical reality.’”* He continues: “The crucial 
intuition behind this, of course, is that the ultimate ground of qualitatively finite 
empirical reality has to have every property and its denial. .. or else it could not 
be the ultimate ground of empirical reality.’”? Gocke clearly does not take this 
“crucial intuition” to be self-evident, since he admits that “many analytic phi- 
losophers do not have this intuition concerning the ultimate ground of empir- 
ical reality.’®° Unfortunately, however, Gécke fails to provide any justification for 


75. Gécke, “The Paraconsistent God,’ 191. 
76. Gocke, “The Paraconsistent God,’ 191. On p. 190 of the same article, Gdcke does admit that 


his reading of Aquinas is “unconventional.” The question, however, is whether this unconven- 
tional interpretation is justified. I argue that it is not. 


77. Thomas Aquinas, Summa Theologica, 2nd ed., trans. Fathers of the English Dominican 
Province (London: Burns, Oates, and Washbourne, 1920), 1a, 4, 2. 


78. Gécke, “The Paraconsistent God,’ 198. 
79. Gocke, “The Paraconsistent God,” 198. 
80. Gocke, “The Paraconsistent God?’ 198. 


A Cross-Cultural Inquiry into Divine Infinitude + 71 


this intuition. Whether “ultimate ground” is understood as the cause of empirical 
reality or as its ontological condition of possibility, it is by no means obvious 
that the ultimate ground has to have all the properties, and their corresponding 
negations, of all empirical objects. Since Gécke does not adequately justify his 
view of a maximally qualitatively infinite God, the alternative view that God is 
qualitatively—but ot maximally—infinite remains a live possibility. 

Third, there is a tension between Gocke’s advocacy of a paraconsistent un- 
derstanding of God’s infinitude and his own definition of God as the “ulti- 
mate ground of empirical reality.” From Sri Ramakrishna’s perspective, Gécke 
limits—or finitizes—the Infinite God by defining Him only as the ontological 
ground of the universe. Sri Ramakrishna, I would argue, adopts a more fully para- 
consistent approach to God than Gécke: if God is truly paraconsistent, then He 
must be both the ultimate ground of the universe avd the transcendent nondual 
Brahman beyond the universe. As Sri Ramakrishna puts it, “Prakrti or Sakti is 
the cause [karan] of everything in the universe. Brahman, the Pure Atman, is the 
Cause of the cause [karaner karan]. This Pure Atman is our true nature” (K 608 
/ G582). In Sri Ramakrishna’s terms, Gocke mistakenly takes the Sakti aspect of 
the Infinite God to exhaust God’s nature. Sri Ramakrishna, by contrast, adopts 
the more thoroughgoingly paraconsistent view that the Infinite God is not only 
the dynamic Sakti but also the transcendent and impersonal Brahman-Atman. 

Fourth, instead of exploring the intimate connection between a paraconsis- 
tent approach to God and suprarational mystical experience, Gécke attempts, 
rather awkwardly, to justify a paraconsistent conception of God on the basis 
of a ratiocinative method which is itself bound to the law of contradiction.®! 
As Gécke was well aware, two of the three Christian theologians to whom he 
refers—namely, Pseudo-Dionysius and Cusa—were well-known mystics who ex- 
plicitly taught God’s infinitude on the basis of their own mystical experiences.” 
Similarly, the Upanisadic seers frequently emphasized that their many paradox- 
ical teachings about God’s nature stem from spiritual experience rather than 





81. In his feedback on an earlier draft of this chapter, Gécke responds to my objection as fol- 
lows: “I perceive the limits and the advantage of this [my] method to be a bit like Wittgenstein’s 
ladder: You can use rational methods, didactically, to lead oneself to the insight into the nature 
of God.” While I agree with Gécke that rational methods are sometimes helpful in leading 
us to truths that transcend reason, I would argue that a paraconsistent conception of God is 
better justified on the basis of suprarational mystical testimony rather than a priori deductive 
argument. 


82. See Pseudo-Dionysius, The Mystical Theology, in Dionysius the Areopagite: On the Divine 
Names and the Mystical Theology, trans. C. E. Rolt (London: Society for Promoting Christian 
Knowledge, 1920), 191-201; Jasper Hopkins, Nicholas of Cusa’s Dialectical Mysticism: Text, 
Translation, and Interpretive Study of De Visione Dei, 3rd ed. (Minneapolis: A.J. Banning 
Press, 1996). 


72 ¢ THE INFINITUDE OF GOD 


ratiocination.® Sri Ramakrishna agrees with such mystics that a paraconsistent 
approach to God—which, by definition, transcends discursive thought—has to 
be grounded in spiritual experience rather than discursive reasoning. Asa vijiani, 
Sri Ramakrishna claimed to have direct insight into God’s paraconsistent nature 
as the impersonal-personal Infinite Reality. In light of the fact that God’s para- 
consistent nature eludes rational comprehension, Sri Ramakrishna’s mystically 
grounded conception of God’s infinitude arguably has greater prima facie plausi- 
bility than Gocke’s intellectual hypothesis of a maximally infinite God. 

In short, while Gocke has made a compelling case that God’s infinite nature 
should be understood in paraconsistent terms, his own theory of a maximally 
qualitatively infinite God suffers from a number of weaknesses that under- 
mine its plausibility. Sri Ramakrishna, I have argued, offers a more plausible 
account of God’s paraconsistent nature on the experiential basis of vij#ana: the 
impersonal-personal Divine Reality is paraconsistent in the sense of being quali- 
tatively, but ot maximally, infinite. 


IV. Idol versus Icon: Sri Ramakrishna 
and Jean-Luc Marion 


Marion, a contemporary French Catholic philosopher influenced heavily by 
Martin Heidegger and Jacques Derrida, presents a provocative and original 
account of God’s infinitude in his book Dieu sans létre (God without Being; 
1982).* In this section, I will bring Marion into dialogue with both Gécke and 
Sri Ramakrishna. According to Marion, the challenge for philosophers and theo- 
logians is to “think God without any conditions” by resisting the temptation to 
reduce God to their own measure.® Marion strives to meet this challenge by dis- 
tinguishing two opposing paradigms for apprehending God: those of the idol 
and the icon. We make an idol out of God, Marion argues, whenever we limit 
God to what our “gaze can bear.”** The idol thereby functions as an “invisible 
mirror,’ which reflects back to us nothing but our own epistemic expectations 
and limitations.*” 





83. See, for instance, Isa Upanisad 4-5, Taittiriya Upanisad 2.9.1, and Katha Upanisad 1.2.23. 


84. Jean-Luc Marion, Dieu sans létre: Hors-texte (Paris: Librairie Arthéme Fayard, 1982). 
Throughout this section, I cite this English translation: Jean-Luc Marion, God without Being, 
trans. Thomas Carlson (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2012). 


85. Marion, God without Being, 45. 
86. Marion, God without Being, 14. 
87. Marion, God without Being, 12. 


A Cross-Cultural Inquiry into Divine Infinitude + 73 


For us moderns, the most common—and dangerous—form of idolatry is not 
the material depiction of God in wood or stone but the conceptual representation 
of God, the tendency to “fix the divine in a specific concept.”** As Marion puts it, 
“When a philosophical thought expresses a concept of what it then names ‘God; 
this concept functions exactly as an idol.” Marion draws on Heidegger in order 
to clarify the dynamics of conceptual idolatry. According to Heidegger, philoso- 
phers since Descartes have defined God reductively as the causa sui (“self-cause”), 
the foundation of all that exists: “Man can neither pray nor sacrifice to this God. 
Before the causa sui, man can neither fall to his knees in awe nor can he play 
music and dance before this God.””° Building on Heidegger’s argument, Marion 
claims that the dominant philosophical conception of God as the causa sui is 
a paradigmatic instance of conceptual idolatry. “The causa sui; Marion argues, 
“says so little about the ‘divine God’ that to assimilate it with the latter, even with 
the apologetic intention of furnishing a supposed proof, amounts to speaking 
crudely, even in blasphemy.’” 

Invoking Saint Paul’s richly suggestive description of Christ as the “icon [eikon] 
of the invisible God,””* Marion claims that while the idol confines God blasphe- 
mously to a limited physical or conceptual representation, the icon engulfs us in 
an “infinite depth””’ that summons us to reach beyond the visible to the invisible: 


The icon... attempts to render visible the invisible as such, hence to allow 
that the visible not cease to refer to an other than itself, without, however, 
that other ever being reproduced in the visible. .. . It teaches the gaze, thus 
does not cease to correct it in order that it go back from visible to visible 
as far as the end of infinity, to find in infinity something new. The icon 
summons the gaze to surpass itself by never freezing on a visible, since the 
visible only presents itself here in view of the invisible. The gaze can never 
rest or settle if it looks at an icon; it always must rebound upon the visible, 
in order to go back in it up the infinite stream of the invisible. In this sense, 


the icon makes visible only by giving rise to an infinite gaze.”4 





88. Marion, God without Being, 16. 

89. Marion, God without Being, 16. 

90. Cited in Marion, God without Being, 35. 

91. Marion, God without Being, 35. 

92. Colossians 1:15. Cited in Marion, God without Being, 17. 
93. Marion, God without Being, 20. 

94. Marion, God without Being, 18. 


74 ¢ THE INFINITUDE OF GOD 


If the idol reduces the invisible God to the measure of our own gaze, the icon 
refuses to allow our gaze to settle on the visible, compelling it instead to “find in 
infinity something new.’ The icon, Marion suggests, lets the invisible God appear, 
precisely by refraining from attempting to reproduce the invisible in the visible. 

If the philosophical definition of God as the causa sui is the modern concep- 
tual idol par excellence, are there other concepts that can serve as icons rather 
than as idols? Marion answers in the affirmative: “Valid as icon is the concept or 
group of concepts that reinforces the distinction of the visible and the invisible 
as well as their union, hence that increases the one all the more that it highlights 
the other”? Marion’s notion of the conceptual icon is dialectical: precisely by 
highlighting the inability of the visible to convey the invisible God, the concep- 
tual icon affirms the “union” of the visible and the invisible. According to Marion, 
Descartes at least hinted at one such conceptual icon by elaborating the “idea of 
God?” in terms of the “idea of the infinite” (idea infiniti).?° On the other hand, 
Descartes also helped inaugurate the distinctly modern idolatry of conceiving 
God as the causa sui.’ Hence, Marion strives to recover the radicality of the 
Cartesian notion of divine infinitude by prising it apart from Descartes’ idola- 
trous definition of God as the causa sui. Infinitude is a conceptual icon, Marion 
argues, precisely because it refuses to allow us to rest satisfied with any finite con- 
ception of God. 

For Marion, however, the most potent and profound conceptual icon is agape 
(“love”).?8 Marion claims that “as love, God can at once transgress idolatrous con- 
straints.””? All conceptual idols specify conditions of possibility for God—for in- 
stance, the condition that God must be the causa sui or that God must be in the 
first place. By contrast, the conceptual icon of divine agape imposes no conditions 
on God: God “loves without condition,’ and in return, we need only accept God’s 
love—“or, more modestly, not to steal away from it.”!°° In later chapters, Marion 
explores both the negative and the positive ways that God gives Himself to us as 
love. Negatively, the experiences of boredom and melancholy register the vanity 
of a life unresponsive to—or unaware of—God’s love. Positively, the Christian 





95. Marion, God without Being, 23. 

96. Marion, God without Being, 23. 

97. Marion, God without Being, 35. 

98. Marion, God without Being, 46-47. 
99. Marion, God without Being, 47. 

100. Marion, God without Being, 47. 

101. Marion, God without Being, 108-38. 


A Cross-Cultural Inquiry into Divine Infinitude +» 75 


Eucharist and the confession of faith are unanalyzable “gifts” that embody, and 
transmit to us, God’s love.' 

We can now bring Marion into conversation with Gocke and Sri Ramakrishna. 
Notice, first, that Gocke’s argument about the paraconsistent God exhibits a tension 
similar to the one Marion detects in Descartes. According to Marion, Descartes's 
conception of God as the causa sui undermines his own thesis that God is the idea 
infiniti. Similarly, Gocke’s radical paraconsistent interpretation of divine infinitude 
stands in tension with his narrow definition of God as the “ultimate ground of em- 
pirical reality.” Gocke, it is worth noting, contrasts his own account of God with 
the “anthropomorphic and idolatrous conceptions of the divine” favored by many 
analytic philosophers, “according to which God is very much like a human person 
except lacking a body and enjoying considerably more power.” Ironically, how- 
ever, Gocke himself is guilty of the very conceptual idolatry he finds in recent ana- 
lytic philosophy: by defining God rigidly as the ultimate ground, Gocke robs God 
of His infinite majesty, love, and sovereignty. Marion might rightly complain, in a 
Heideggerian vein, that we can neither pray nor sacrifice to Gocke’s God. 

Marion’s account of conceptual idolatry also helps clarify Sri Ramakrishna’s 
teaching that one can never put an iti (“end” or “limit”) to God. Epistemologically, 
putting an 7#i to God consists in limiting God to what we, with our finite intel- 
lects, can understand of Him. For instance, if believers in the formless God insist 
that God cannot have form, they put an i#i to God by turning divine formless- 
ness into a conceptual idol. Conversely, if worshippers of God with form insist 
that God cannot be formless, they put an iti to God by turning divine form into 
a conceptual idol. Sri Ramakrishna, in effect, shows how such conceptual idols 
function as “invisible mirrors” in Marion’s sense, reflecting back to worshippers 
their own limited understanding of God and their inability to fathom God’s infi- 
nite nature. Accordingly, Sri Ramakrishna would always encourage his visitors to 
adopt an attitude of epistemic humility before God: instead of committing the 
idolatry of reducing God to our own measure, we should humbly acknowledge 
that God’s infinite nature cannot be grasped by our limited intellects. 

Some of Sri Ramakrishna’s most frequent visitors were followers of the Brahmo 
Samaj, a religious movement that accepted only the formless personal God and, 
hence, rejected all forms and manifestations of God, including physical idols, various 
forms of deities, and divine incarnations such as Rama and Krsna. With Marion's 
help, we can see how Sri Ramakrishna deftly turns the tables on the Brahmos: in 
spite of their vociferous repudiation of idolatry, the Brahmos’ own dogmatic 
assumption that God cannot have form is itself a tacit form of conceptual idolatry. 


102. Marion, God without Being, 161-82. 
103. Gocke, “The Paraconsistent God,” 194. 


76 ¢ THE INFINITUDE OF GOD 


On one occasion, Giriscandra Ghos relates to Sri Ramakrishna the view of the 
young Narendra, who was then a staunch adherent of Brahmo ideology: “Narendra 
says that God is infinite; we cannot even so much as say that the things or persons 
we perceive are parts of God. How can Infinity have parts? It cannot” (K 769 / G 
725). Sri Ramakrishna immediately recognizes that Narendra’s Brahmo view entails 
that God cannot incarnate in human form. In response to Giri, Sri Ramakrishna 
observes, “However great and infinite God may be, His Essence can and does mani- 
fest itself in human form by His mere will” (K'769 / G725). Asa Brahmo, Narendra 
assumes that God’s infinitude entails formlessness, since any form or manifestation 
of God would be finite and thereby contradict God’s infinitude. Sri Ramakrishna 
counters Narendra’s assumption with a more expansive conception of God’s infini- 
tude: if God is truly infinite, then we must accept the possibility that God is capable 
of manifesting in various forms, even if we are unable to understand ow the Infinite 
can reveal Himself in the finite. In Marion’s terms, we can say that Sri Ramakrishna 
wields the conceptual icon of divine infinitude in order to combat the conceptual 
idolatry of those who insist that God can only be formless. 

While Marion focuses on the conceptual icons of infinitude and agape, Sri 
Ramakrishna adds a new dimension to Marion’s account by invoking what might 
be called “aesthetic icons.” Since Sri Ramakrishna was keenly aware of the limi- 
tations of conceptual discourse, he often preferred to teach and explain spiritual 
truths by employing literary devices such as metaphor, analogy, and parable. In Sri 
Ramakrishna’s hands, such literary devices prove to be potent Marionian icons that 
evoke God's infinitude and challenge various forms of conceptual idolatry. For in- 
stance, Sri Ramakrishna uses a striking analogy to illustrate how the Infinite God 
can manifest as an avatara: “We see God Himself if we but see His Incarnation. 
Suppose a person goes to the Ganges and touches its water. He will then say, “Yes, 
I have seen and touched the Ganges. To say this, it is not necessary for him to touch 
the whole length of the river from Haridwar to Gangasagar” (K 769 / G 726). Sri 
Ramakrishna would clearly agree with Saint Paul and Marion that the avatara is 
an “icon of the invisible? a real manifestation of the Infinite God. We touch the 
Ganges River itself when we touch the rushing Ganges water at any place in the 
river, but we also know that the small quantity of water we touch is only a tiny frac- 
tion of the river as a whole. Similarly, we actually perceive God Himself through a 
Divine Incarnation, who serves as a channel through which the Infinite God reveals 
Himself to us. At the same time, we commit the idolatry of limiting God whenever 
we confine Him to one particular form, manifestation, or incarnation. 

Another analogy employed by Sri Ramakrishna to convey the mystery of the 
Divine Incarnation is that of a hole in a wall: 


The “I” of avataras and other isvarakotis is a “thin ‘T’”: through it we are 
always able to see God. Take the case of a man who stands by a wall on 


A Cross-Cultural Inquiry into Divine Infinitude + 77 


both sides of which there are meadows stretching to infinity. If there is a 
hole in the wall, through it he can see everything on the other side. If the 
hole is a big one, he can even pass through it. The “I” of avataras and other 
isvarakotis is like the wall with a hole. (K 811 / G760) 


I suspect that Marion would be delighted by Sri Ramakrishna’s analogy. Marion, 
we should recall, claims that the icon “teaches the gaze” to “go back from vis- 
ible to visible as far as the end of infinity.” Sri Ramakrishna’s analogy is an icon 
in precisely this sense: just as we can see the infinite expanse on the other side 
of a wall by peeping through a hole, we can catch a glimpse of the Infinite God 
through an Incarnation. Notably, however, Sri Ramakrishna adopts the Hindu 
view that there are numerous Divine Incarnations. Marion, by contrast, mentions 
only Christ as an Incarnation and gives no indication anywhere in his book that 
there might be Incarnations other than Christ. However, from a Ramakrishnan 
standpoint, the logic of the Marionian icon necessitates the possibility of mul- 
tiple Incarnations: if God is truly infinite, then God must be capable of manifest- 
ing in an infinite variety of ways. The traditional Christian dogma that Christ is 
the sole Incarnation of God—which Marion seems to accept—turns out to be 
another form of conceptual idolatry, since it limits the Infinite God to a single 
human manifestation. !°4 

Sri Ramakrishna’s sophisticated strategy for countering conceptual idolatry is 
brought out in the following dialogue: 


A BRAHMO DEVOTEE: “Is God with or without form?” 

MASTER: “No one can put an iti to God; He is formless, yet He also has forms. 
For the bhakta, God assumes forms. But God is formless for the j#ani, who 
looks on the world as a mere dream. .. . Do you know what I mean? Think of 
the Divine Saccidananda as an infinite ocean. Through the cooling influence, 
as it were, of the bhakta’s love, the water freezes at places into ice formations. 
In other words, God now and then assumes various forms for His bhaktas 
and reveals Himself to them as a Person. But with the rising of the sun of 
Knowledge, the formations of ice melt. Then one doesn’t feel any more that 
God is a Person, nor does one see God's forms.” (K 99 / G 148) 





104. For an illuminating comparison of Hindu and Christian models of understanding di- 
vine incarnation, see Francis X. Clooney, Hindu God, Christian God: How Reason Helps Break 
Down the Boundaries between Religions (New York: Oxford University Press, 2001), 94-128. 
Clooney makes a convincing case that Christian theologians should take more seriously Hindu 
arguments for the possibility of multiple Incarnations of God. 


78 ¢© THE INFINITUDE OF GOD 


Sri Ramakrishna begins by pointing out that the Brahmo’s question about God is 
based on the false assumption that God either has form or does not have form. By 
insisting that no one can put an iti to God, Sri Ramakrishna rejects the very terms 
of the Brahmo’s question. The Brahmo’ underlying assumption that God cannot 
be both with and without form reflects the limitations of the finite human intel- 
lect, which tends to think in terms of mutually exclusive alternatives. Hence, Sri 
Ramakrishna cautions the Brahmo against committing the idolatry of projecting his 
own epistemic limitations onto God. For Sri Ramakrishna, we can avoid idolatry by 
acknowledging that “everything is possible for God” (K 997 / G 920). Accordingly, 
Sri Ramakrishna declares that God is “formless, yet He also has forms.” From the 
standpoint of vijiana, Sri Ramakrishna likens God to an infinite ocean—an aes- 
thetic icon that nicely dramatizes the dynamic interplay of the finite and the infinite 
(or what Marion calls the “visible” and the “invisible”). Just as blocks of ice are noth- 
ing but the infinite ocean itself in another form, the formless Absolute and the var- 
ious forms of the personal God are different aspects or statuses of one and the same 
Infinite Reality. The “sun of Knowledge” in Sri Ramakrishna’s analogy serves as yet 
another aesthetic icon: by melting the ice-like forms of God, the sun of Knowledge 
prevents us from committing the idolatry of limiting God to any form in particular. 

Significantly, Sri Ramakrishna invoked this ocean analogy in conversation not 
only with Brahmos but also with religious practitioners of other persuasions. On one 
occasion, he used this analogy to teach the Advaita Vedantin Haribabu—who only 
accepted the reality of the impersonal nondual Absolute—that the personal God 
as well as God's various forms are also real (K 861 / G 802). On another occasion, 
Sri Ramakrishna appealed to the same ocean analogy in order to teach a Vaisnava 
Goswami, who worshipped the personal God Krsna, that the formless, impersonal 
Absolute is as real as the forms of God (K 152 / G 191). Sri Ramakrishna employed 
this analogy of the ocean, then, as a powerful and versatile aesthetic icon to combat 
various forms of conceptual idolatry. 

Our philosophical triangulation of Marion with Sri Ramakrishna and Gécke 
has already yielded substantial fruits. With the help of Marion, we have seen how 
Sri Ramakrishna employs an array of conceptual and aesthetic icons to encourage 
his interlocutors not to reduce the Infinite God to their limited human measure. 
Moreover, Marion’s Heideggerian critique of philosophical accounts of God as the 
causa sui has aided us in pinpointing a tension in Gocke’s argument between his 
paraconsistent theory of divine infinitude and his definition of God as the ultimate 
ground of empirical reality. 

We can now subject Marion’s own position to critical scrutiny by examining his 
account of God in the light of Sri Ramakrishna and Gécke. According to Marion, 
agape is the conceptual icon which best honors God’s “unthinkable” infinitude." 





105. Marion, God without Being, 46. 


A Cross-Cultural Inquiry into Divine Infinitude + 79 


However, Gécke and Sri Ramakrishna make a compelling case that a truly infinite 
God is paraconsistent, in that He possesses attributes and aspects which appear con- 
tradictory to the finite human intellect. Arguably, then, Marion’s understanding of 
God’s unthinkable infinitude is insufficiently radical, since it still presupposes the 
law of contradiction. Marion simply replaces the dominant philosophical under- 
standing of God as the causa sui with his own Christian understanding of God as 
agape. From Sri Ramakrishna’s standpoint, what remains unthought by Marion is the 
possibility that God is the paraconsistent Infinite Reality that is both the personal 
God of Love and the impersonal Absolute beyond subject-object duality. Ironically, 
while Marion strives to “think God without any conditions,”"* he nonetheless lapses 
into conceptual idolatry by imposing the condition of divine personality onto God. 
Marion’s concept of agape ultimately fails to serve as a true icon, since it confines 
God within the bounds of personality. 

Sri Ramakrishna’s spiritual paradigm of vijf#ana enables us to think God 
“without any conditions” in a more radical and thoroughgoing manner than 
Marion’s narrowly theistic paradigm. For Sri Ramakrishna, since “everything is 
possible for God,” God is free from a// limiting conditions, including even the 
law of contradiction. The first step in conceiving God without any conditions 
is to abandon the either-or paradigm of the rational intellect in favor of the 
both-and paradigm of vijiana: the Infinite Reality is both personal and imper- 
sonal, both with and without form, both immanent and transcendent. While Sri 
Ramakrishna would agree with Marion that God is agape, he would also insist 
that the Infinite God cannot be limited to agape, since He is equally the imper- 
sonal nondual Absolute. 

Sri Ramakrishna’s perspective also highlights a serious lacuna in Marion’s 
account of God as agape—namely, his total neglect of mystical experience. 
According to Marion, we are “sinners,” so God’s love remains “essentially inac- 
cessible to us.”!°” Hence, we can only experience God’s love negatively through 
the existential states of boredom and melancholy, which drive home to us the 
sheer vanity of a life devoid of agape. Strangely, Marion ignores altogether the 
testimony of mystics in his own Catholic tradition—such as Saint Francis and 
Saint Teresa of Avila—who claimed to have directly experienced God as agape. 
For instance, in her Autobiography, Saint Teresa describes her own rapturous ex- 
perience of God’s love in the third person: “It clearly sees that this love has come 
to it through no action of its own, but that out of the very great love that the 


Lord has for it a spark seems suddenly to have fallen on it and set it all on fire.”!°8 





106. Marion, God without Being, 45. 
107. Marion, God without Being, 3. 


108. Teresa of Avila, The Life of Saint Teresa of Avila by Herself, wans. J. M. Cohen 
(Harmondsworth, UK: Penguin, 1958), 423. 


80 © THE INFINITUDE OF GOD 


While Marion assumes dogmatically that God’s agape is inaccessible to us, Sri 
Ramakrishna adopts a more nuanced position that honors the mystical strain in 
most theistic traditions: while sinfulness does ordinarily debar us from experienc- 
ing God’s Love, we can nonetheless have a positive experience of God as agape by 
overcoming our sinful nature through sincere spiritual practice and God’s grace. 

Sri Ramakrishna claimed to have realized this possibility in his own life by 
attaining perfection in various loving attitudes toward God, including those of a 
lover, parent, friend, child, and servant.’ On the basis of his own spiritual expe- 
riences, Sri Ramakrishna declared that the highest form of bhakti is “prema, the 
ecstatic love of God: “But prema is an extremely rare thing. Caitanya had that 
love. When one has prema one forgets all outer things. One forgets the world. 
One even forgets one’s own body, which is so dear to man” (K 301 / G 315). In 
fact, he would frequently affirm that the goal of human life is to experience the 
bliss of God’s Love: 


The whole thing is to love God and taste His sweetness [7adhurya]. God is 
sweetness [7asa] and the bhakta is its enjoyer [vasik]. The bhakta drinks the 
sweet Bliss of God. Further, God is the lotus and the bhakta the bee. The 
bhakta sips the honey of the lotus. As a bhakta cannot live without God, 
so also God cannot live without His bhakta. Then the bhakta becomes the 
sweetness, and God its enjoyer. The bhakta becomes the lotus, and God 
the bee. It is the Godhead that has become these two in order to enjoy Its 
own Bliss [tini nijer madhurya asvadan karbar jonno duti hoyechen\. That 
is the significance of the episode of Radha and Krsna. (K 288 / G 305) 


Here, Sri Ramakrishna goes much further than Marion in thinking through the 
logic of God as agape: since God is Love, He naturally makes His Love acces- 
sible to His beloved creatures. As Sri Ramakrishna puts it, Krsna becomes His 
Lover Radha in order to enjoy His own bliss. Hence, from Sri Ramakrishna’s mys- 
tical perspective, Marion mistakenly generalizes his own inability to experience 
God’s Love to humanity as a whole, adopting the unduly pessimistic position 
that we can only become aware of God’s Love negatively through boredom and 
melancholy. 

We might even say, then, that Sri Ramakrishna out-Marions Marion by think- 
ing through the logic of the icon more fully than Marion himself does. While 
Marion seems to presuppose the law of contradiction, Sri Ramakrishna adopts 
the paraconsistent view that God is both the personal God of agape and the im- 
personal nondual Absolute. Sri Ramakrishna also goes further than Marion in 





109. For details, see section I of Chapter 1. 


A Cross-Cultural Inquiry into Divine Infinitude +» 81 


pursuing the radical implications of divine infinitude: while Marion takes Christ 
to be the sole incarnation of God, Sri Ramakrishna affirms that the Infinite God 
is capable of incarnating and manifesting in infinite ways. Finally, while Marion 
overhastily assumes that God’s Love is inaccessible to us, Sri Ramakrishna 
teaches—on the basis of his own ecstatic experiences of divine prema—that God 
can, and does, graciously reveal Himself to mystics as agape. 

This chapter has shown how Sri Ramakrishna’s unique vijidna-based con- 
ception of the Infinite God helps bridge Western and non-Western views on 
divine infinitude. In the Indian philosophical context, Sri Ramakrishna goes 
even further than the Gaudiya Vaisnava Visvanatha Cakravartin in harmoniz- 
ing the personalist and impersonalist conceptions of divine infinitude defended 
by Ramanuja and Sankara respectively. In the context of medieval Christian 
theology, Sri Ramakrishna’s paraconsistent conception of God proves to bear 
striking affinities with Cusa’s doctrine of the coincidentia oppositorum, but Sri 
Ramakrishna departs from Cusa in championing a full-blown religious pluralism 
and in acknowledging both the impersonal and personal aspects of the Infinite 
Reality. Finally, I argued that Sri Ramakrishna’s radical approach to divine in- 
finitude resonates strongly with two contemporary Christian views—namely, 
Gocke’s paraconsistent conception of God and Marion’s theorization of divine 
infinitude in terms of the logic of the icon. However, Sri Ramakrishna helps us 
see that Gocke and Marion remain committed to a narrowly theistic paradigm, 
which leads them to limit and finitize God in certain respects. 


RELIGIOUS PLURALISM 


“ALL FAITHS ARE PATHS” 


A RECONSTRUCTION AND DEFENSE OF 
SRI RAMAKRISHNA’S VIJNANA-BASED 
MODEL OF RELIGIOUS PLURALISM 


Contemporary philosophers and theologians have discussed a 
wide range of theories of religious pluralism, including John Hick’s 
well-known quasi-Kantian theory, David Ray Griffin’s Whiteheadian 
theory, Paul Knitter’s soteriocentric theory, and Mark Heim’s “mul- 
tiple salvations” theory.’ Unfortunately, Sri Ramakrishna’s pioneering 
teachings on religious pluralism have been largely ignored. On the 
basis of his own spiritual experiences and eclectic religious practices, 
Sri Ramakrishna taught the harmony of all religions: “With sincerity 
and earnestness one can realize God through all religions” (K 151 / G 
191). However, there is a great deal of scholarly controversy regarding 
precisely how Sri Ramakrishna harmonized the various religions and 
spiritual philosophies. Three interpretations of his views on religious 
diversity are especially prevalent. 

Frank Morales and Stephen Prothero, among others, have attrib- 
uted to Sri Ramakrishna the view that all religions are essentially the 
same and that their differences are negligible.” As Morales puts it, Sri 





1. John Hick, An Interpretation of Religion (London: Macmillan, 1989), 233-97; 
David Ray Griffin, “Religious Pluralism: Generic, Identist, and Deep,’ in Deep 
Religious Pluralism: Whitehead’s Philosophy and Religious Diversity, ed. David 
Ray Griffin (Louisville: Westminster John Knox Press, 2005), 3-38; David 
Ray Griffin, “John Cobb’s Whiteheadian Complementary Pluralism, in Deep 
Religious Pluralism, ed. Griffin, 39-66; Paul Knitter, “Dialogue and Liberation,” 
Drew Gateway 58.1 (1987), 1-53; S. Mark Heim, Salvations: Truth and Difference 
in Religion (Maryknoll, NY: Orbis Books, 1995). 


2. See Frank Morales, Radical Universalism: Does Hinduism Teach That All 
Religions Are the Same? (New Delhi: Voice of India, 2008) and Stephen 
Prothero, God Is Not One (New York: HarperOne, 2010), 99 and 194. Similarly, 
Christopher Bartley refers to Sri Ramakrishna’s “belief in the essential sameness 
of all religions.” “Modern Vedanta,’ in Brill’s Encyclopedia of Hinduism, vol. 3, ed. 
Knut Jacobsen et al. (Leiden: Brill, 2011), 738. 


86 © RELIGIOUS PLURALISM 


Ramakrishna subscribed to a “radical universalism, the view that “all religions are 
the same, with the same purpose, goal, experientially tangible salvific state, and 
object of ultimate devotion.” 

By contrast, numerous scholars have claimed that Sri Ramakrishna har- 
monized the world religions from the standpoint of a particular philosoph- 
ical or religious sect. Svami Dhires4nanda, Swami Ghanananda, and Swami 
Ashokananda have argued that Sri Ramakrishna harmonized the world religions 
on the philosophical basis of Advaita Vedanta, which holds that the sole reality 
is irguna Brahman, the attributeless nondual Absolute.‘ For instance, according 
to Svami Dhiresananda, Sri Ramakrishna maintained that the common goal of 
all religions is the “direct spiritual experience of Vedantic nirguna Brahman.”* 
Meanwhile, Jeffrey Kripal claims that Sri Ramakrishna’s ultimate standpoint was 
Sakta rather than Advaitic. According to Kripal, Sri Ramakrishna, like the Sakta 
poet Ramprasad, took the Goddess Kali to be “the actress behind the world’s re- 
ligious masks.”® 

A third group of scholars—including Satis Chandra Chatterjee, Swami 
Tapasyananda, and Jeffery Long—argue that Sri Ramakrishna’s religious plu- 
ralism derives from his capacious, nonsectarian Vedantic conception of God 
as the impersonal-personal Infinite Reality.” According to these scholars, Sri 





3. Morales, “Radical Universalism,” 3. 


4, Swami Ghanananda, Sri Ramakrishna and His Unique Message (Kolkata: Advaita Ashrama, 
1969), 107-33; Swami Ashokananda, A Call to the Eternal (Kolkata: Advaita Ashrama, 1995), 
125-51; Svami Omkarananda, “Brahma o Sakti abhed? Udbodhan 66.5 (1964), 227-32; Svami 
Omkarananda, “Nitya 0 Lila? Udbodhan 66.6 (1964), 287-96; Svami Dhiresananda, “Svami 
Vivekananda 0 Advaitavada; Udbodhan 65.2 (1962), 73-80 and 65.3 (1962), 80-81, 138-44; 
Svami Dhiresananda, “Nand Drstite Sririmakrsna? Udbodhan 82.5 (1980), 220-26. 


5. Svami Dhiresananda, “Svami Vivekananda 0 Advaitavada; 144. 


6. Jeffrey Kripal, The Serpent’ Gift: Gnostic Reflections on the Study of Religion 
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2007), 102-3. 


7. Swami Tapasyananda, Sri Ramakrishna’s Thoughts in a Vedantic Perspective (Mylapore, 
India: Sri Ramakrishna Math, 1993), 135-50; Satis Chandra Chatterjee, “Vivekananda’s 
Neo-Vedantism and Its Practical Application? in Vivekananda: The Great Spiritual Teacher 
(Kolkata: Advaita Ashrama, 1995), 255-80; Satis Chandra Chatterjee, “Sri Ramakrishna: A 
Life of Manifold Spiritual Realization? in Sri Ramakrishna: The Great Prophet of Harmony 
(Kolkata: Advaita Ashrama, 1986), 340-47; Swami Bhajanananda, Harmony of Religions from 
the Standpoint of Sri Ramakrishna and Swami Vivekananda (Kolkata: Ramakrishna Mission 
Institute of Culture, 2008); Jeffery D. Long, “Advaita and Dvaita: Bridging the Gap—the 
Ramakrishna Tradition’s Both/And Approach to the Dvaita/Advaita Debate? Journal of 
Vaishnava Studies 16.2 (Spring 2008), 49-70; Jeffery D. Long, “(Tentatively) Putting the 
Pieces Together: Comparative Theology in the Tradition of Sri Ramakrishna,’ in The New 
Comparative Theology, ed. Francis X. Clooney (London: Continuum, 2010), 151-70; Jeffery D. 
Long, A Vision for Hinduism (New York: LB. Tauris, 2007); Ayon Maharaj, “Sri Ramakrsna’s 
Philosophy of Vijhiana Vedanta,’ International Journal of Hindu Studies 21.1 (2017), 25-54. 


“All Faiths Are Paths” + 87 


Ramakrishna maintains that the various religions are different paths to the realiza- 
tion of God in any of His innumerable aspects or forms. As Swami Tapasyananda 
puts it, Sri Ramakrishna taught that all religions lead to “the same Infinite 
Personal-Impersonal being, in spite of the different versions they give of it and 
the differing paths they prescribe to their aspirants.”® 

In this chapter, I will defend this third interpretive approach and argue that 
it is much more plausible and nuanced than the other two approaches. Sectarian 
interpretations of Sri Ramakrishna’s views tend to be Procrustean, since they fail 
to account for his nonsectarian acceptance of all religious and spiritual paths.? 
Hence, it is implausible to interpret Sri Ramakrishna’s views on religious plu- 
ralism from a narrow sectarian standpoint, be it Advaitic, Sakta, or otherwise. It 
is equally implausible to interpret Sri Ramakrishna as a “radical universalist” in 
Morales’s sense, since he taught not that all religions are the “same” but that all 
religions are different paths to the common goal of God-realization. Moreover, 
according to Sri Ramakrishna, every religious practitioner can realize God in the 
particular aspect he or she prefers. For instance, while the Advaitin aims to realize 
the impersonal (érguna) aspect of the Infinite Reality, bhaksas strive to realize 
various personal (saguna) aspects and forms of the same Infinite Reality. 

Section I provides a detailed reconstruction of Sri Ramakrishna’s model of 
religious pluralism on the basis of his teachings in the Kathamria. Building on 
chapter 1, I argue that Sri Ramakrishna’s views on the harmony of religions are 
based on his own mystical experience of vij#ana, the “Intimate Knowledge” of 
God as the impersonal-personal Infinite Reality. As a vijiani, Sri Ramakrishna 
champions the religious pluralist doctrine that there are infinite paths to the 
Infinite Reality. Drawing on the recent work of Perry Schmidt-Leukel, I clarify 
the precise sense in which Sri Ramakrishna was a religious pluralist. According 
to Sri Ramakrishna, every religion is an effective means of attaining the common 
salvific goal of God-realization, the direct spiritual experience of God in any of 
His innumerable aspects or forms. 

As Hick and many others have pointed out, any viable theory of religious 
pluralism has to confront head-on the thorny problem of conflicting religious 
truth-claims. How are we to reconcile the apparently conflicting claims made by 
the world religions regarding such matters as human destiny, eschatology, and the 
nature of the ultimate reality? Section II reconstructs Sri Ramakrishna’s sophisti- 
cated and multifaceted answer to this very difficult question. He reconciles reli- 
gious claims about the nature of the ultimate reality on the basis of his distinctive 





8. Swami Tapasyananda, S7i Ramakrishna’s Thoughts in a Vedantic Perspective, 147. 


9. See chapter 1 for a detailed defense of a nonsectarian interpretation of Sri Ramakrishna’s 


philosophy. 


88 © RELIGIOUS PLURALISM 


vijnana-based ontology of God: every religion captures a uniquely real aspect of the 
impersonal-personal Infinite Reality. Regarding other types of religious truth-claims, 
he claims that every religion errs on some points of doctrine but that these errors do 
not substantially diminish the salvific efficacy of religions. 

Section IIladdresses some of the major criticisms leveled against Sri Ramakrishna’s 
religious pluralism. While some scholars have accused him of subscribing to a “rad- 
ical universalism” that fails to honor the very real differences among religions, others 
have argued—on the contrary—that his model of religious pluralism privileges cer- 
tain worldviews and spiritual paths over others and is therefore more inclusivist than 
pluralist. Drawing on my reconstruction of Sri Ramakrishna’s religious pluralism in 
sections I and II, I argue that such criticisms stem from a misunderstanding and over- 
simplification of his views. 


|. A Reconstruction of Sri Ramakrishna’s Model 
of Religious Pluralism 


Crucially, Sri Ramakrishna’s teachings on the harmony of religions were based on his 
own numerous spiritual experiences and religious practices. As I described in detail 
in section I of chapter I, he practiced not only a variety of Hindu disciplines— in- 
cluding the theistic practices of Vaisnavism and Saktism and the nontheistic prac- 
tice of Advaita Vedanta—but also Islamic and Christian religious methods. After 
following each of these spiritual paths, he claimed to have realized different forms 
and aspects of one and the same Divine Reality. Sri Ramakrishna’s spiritual journey 
culminated in the unique experience of vij#ana, the “Intimate Knowledge” that the 
Infinite God is at once the impersonal (zrguna) Brahman and the personal (saguna) 
Lord who both rules and pervades the universe." Instead of remaining merged in the 
impersonal Absolute, a vij/ani such as Sri Ramakrishna revels in various manifesta- 
tions and aspects of God, both personal and impersonal. 

On the basis of his experience of vij#ana, Sri Ramakrishna affirmed that 
“[t]here is no limit to God” (K 997 / G 920): the Infinite God is both personal 
and impersonal, both with and without form, both immanent in the universe and 
beyond it. Accordingly, he made the radical claim that the personal and imper- 
sonal aspects of the Infinite Reality are equally real. As he frequently remarked, 
“Brahman and Sakti are inseparable” (K 568 / G 550), which means that the im- 
personal Brahman and the personal Sakti have equal ontological reality."' From 





10. For an in-depth discussion of Sri Ramakrishna’s experience of vij#ana and its philosophical 
implications, see section III of chapter 1. 


11. I provide a detailed interpretation of this key teaching in my discussion of VV3 in section 
III of chapter 1. 


“All Faiths Are Paths” + 89 


this expansive standpoint of vij#iana, Sri Ramakrishna taught that various the- 
istic and nontheistic spiritual philosophies are equally effective paths to real- 
izing God: “The vijfani sees that the Reality which is impersonal [wirguna] is 
also personal [saguna].... The j#ani’s path leads to Truth, as does the path that 
combines jana and bhakti. The bhakta’s path, too, leads to Truth. Jzanayoga 
[the nontheistic Path of Knowledge] is true, and bhaktiyoga [the theistic Path of 
Devotion] is true. God can be realized through all paths” (K 51 / G 103-4). The 
vijnani, who has realized the truth of both the personal and impersonal aspects 
of God, affirms the equal salvific efficacy of bhaktiyoga and jianayoga. For Sri 
Ramakrishna, j#anayoga encompasses nontheistic spiritual philosophies such 
as Advaita Vedanta and Buddhism,” while bhaktiyoga encompasses theistic reli- 
gions such as Christianity, Islam, and the Brahmo Samaj, as well as theistic Hindu 
sects like Vaisnavism and Saktism.% 

Sri Ramakrishna’s religious pluralism, then, derives directly from his 
vijnana-based conception of God as the impersonal-personal Infinite Reality. 
Since God is infinite, there must be correspondingly infinite ways of approaching 
and ultimately realizing God. As he succinctly puts it, “God is infinite, and the 
paths to God are infinite” (tini ananta, patho ananta) (K 511 / G 506). From Sri 
Ramakrishna’s standpoint, God is conceived and worshipped in different ways by 
people of varying temperaments, preferences, and worldviews. Hence, a sincere 
practitioner of any religion can realize God in the particular form or aspect he 
or she prefers. 

Indeed, Sri Ramakrishna goes even further by providing a divine rationale for 
the differences in the various world religions: 


Hindus, Muslims, Christians, Saktas, Saivas, Vaisnavas, the Brahmajianis 
of the time of the rishis, and you, the Brahmajfianis of modern times 
[members of the Brahmo Samaj], all seek the same object. A mother pre- 
pares dishes to suit the stomachs of her children. Suppose a mother has 
five children and a fish is bought for the family. She doesn’t cook pilau 
or Kalia for all of them. All have not the same power of digestion; so she 
prepares a simple stew for some. But she loves all her children equally. . .. 
Do you know what the truth is? God has made different religions to suit 
different aspirants, times, and countries. All faiths are paths; but a doc- 
trine or faith is by no means God Himself. [des-kal-patra bhede isvar nana 
dharma korechen. kintu sab mati path, mat kichu isvar noy.| Indeed, one 





12. Section III of this chapter addresses in detail Sri Ramakrishna’s Vedantic interpretation of 
Buddhism. 


13. See K 151 / G 191. 


90 © RELIGIOUS PLURALISM 


can reach God if one follows any of the paths with wholehearted devo- 
tion. (K 577 / G559) 


Just as a mother prepares fish in different ways for her five children, God 
Himself—in His infinite wisdom—has made different religions to suit people 
of differing temperaments, cultural preferences, and spiritual capacities. Just as 
all five children eat the same fish in a variety of forms, practitioners of various 
religions worship one and the same God in numerous forms and call Him by var- 
ious names. Moreover, just as it would be foolish to claim that one particular fish 
preparation is objectively better than all the others, it is foolish to claim that one 
religion is objectively superior to all others. Each child’s hunger is fully appeased 
by eating the particular fish preparation she prefers. Similarly, all religions are 
effective paths to the common goal of realizing God in the particular form or 
aspect each person prefers. 

Sri Ramakrishna sums up his teachings on religious pluralism in the strik- 
ing statement: “All faiths are paths; but a doctrine or faith is by no means God 
Himself” He suggests here that one of the main sources of religious conflict 
and fanaticism is the tendency to confuse means and end. Instead of practic- 
ing a particular religion as a means to the end of spiritual fulfillment, religious 
dogmatists tend to absolutize religious doctrine itself, thereby losing sight of the 
Divine Reality that is the goal of all religions. From Sri Ramakrishna’s mystical 
standpoint, since all religious doctrines are expressed in human language, they 
can never be fully adequate to the Divine Reality that lies beyond words and 
thought, but they can nonetheless serve as effective “paths” to the direct spir- 
itual experience of the Divine Reality. He sears this message into the minds of his 
visitors by means of an ingenious wordplay, repeatedly conjoining the rhyming 
Bengali monosyllables zat (“doctrine” or “faith”) and path (“path”). As he puts 
it on several occasions, “mat path” (“Every doctrine is a path”) and “ananto path 
ananto mat” (“Infinite are the paths and infinite the doctrines”) (K 11] / G 158). 

Sri Ramakrishna would often recite his favorite parable of the chameleon in 
order to convey the harmony of religions from the standpoint of vijiana: 


Once a man entered a forest and saw a small animal on a tree. He came 
back and told another man that he had seen a creature of a beautiful red 
color on a certain tree. The second man replied: “When I went into the 
forest, I also saw that animal. But why do you call it red? It is green.” 
Another man who was present contradicted them both and insisted that 
it was yellow. Presently others arrived and contended that it was grey, vi- 
olet, blue, and so forth and so on. At last they started quarrelling among 
themselves. To settle the dispute, they all went to the tree. They saw a man 
sitting under it. On being asked, he replied: “Yes, I live under this tree and 


“All Faiths Are Paths” +» 91 


I know the animal very well. All your descriptions are true. Sometimes it 
appears red, sometimes yellow, and at other times blue, violet, grey, and so 
forth. It is a chameleon. And sometimes it has no color at all. Now it has a 
color, and now it has none.” 

In like manner, one who constantly thinks of God can know God’s 
real nature; he alone knows that God reveals Himself to seekers in var- 
ious forms and aspects. God is personal [saguna] as well as impersonal 
[wirguna]. Only the man who lives under the tree knows that the chame- 
leon can appear in various colors, and he knows, further, that the animal at 
times has no color at all. It is the others who suffer from the agony of futile 
argument. (K 101 / G 149-50) 


Like the chameleon which appears in various colors and sometimes has no color 
at all, God assumes various forms for different types of spiritual aspirants.'* While 
most people make the mistake of thinking that the chameleon only has the color 
which they see it as having, the man always sitting under the tree sees that the 
chameleon has various colors and, hence, that everyone is partially correct. The 
colorless chameleon corresponds to xirguna Brahman, while the chameleon with 
various colors corresponds to saguna Sakti, and it is clear that Sri Ramakrishna 
does not privilege irguna Brahman in any way. As we saw earlier in this sec- 
tion, Sri Ramakrishna consistently maintains that the impersonal Brahman and 
the personal Sakti have equal ontological reality. The man sitting under the tree 
represents the vij#ani—such as Sri Ramakrishna himself—who has realized both 
the saguna and nirguna aspects of God and hence affirms on the basis of his own 
spiritual experience that all religions are salvifically effective paths.” 

Sri Ramakrishna’s chameleon parable also helps clarify the common goal of 
God-realization to which all spiritual paths lead. While the Sankara Advaitin 
hegemonically imposes the goal of realizing zirguna Brahman onto all the world 
religions, the chameleon parable implies a very broad and nonhegemonic sote- 
riological outlook: people of varying temperaments can realize the Infinite God 
in any of His innumerable forms and aspects, all of which are real. Although 


14. The limitation of this parable is that the chameleon can only be one color at a given time, 
while God can assume various forms and aspects simultaneously. Sri Ramakrishna’s parable of 
the blind men and the elephant, which I will discuss below, makes clear that just as the various 
blind men touch different parts of the elephant at the same time, God assumes different forms 
simultaneously. 


15. See Swami Tapasyananda’s helpful discussion of Sri Ramakrishna’s chameleon parable 
from the standpoint of vij#ana in Bhakti Schools of Vedanta (Madras: Sri Ramakrishna Math, 
1990), 29-30. 


92 * RELIGIOUS PLURALISM 


different people see the chameleon in different colors, they all see one and the 
same chameleon. 

Sri Ramakrishna’s nonhegemonic outlook is also captured by the well-known 
parable of the blind men and the elephant, which he was fond of reciting: 


One can rightly speak of God only after one has seen Him. He who has 
seen God knows really and truly that God has form and that He is form- 
less as well. He has many other aspects that cannot be described. Once 
some blind men chanced to come near an elephant. A person explained to 
them, “This animal is an elephant.” They were asked what the elephant was 
like. The blind men began to feel its body. One of them said the elephant 
was like a pillar; he had touched only its leg. Another said it was like a 
winnowing-fan; he had touched only its ear. In this way the others, having 
touched its tail or belly, gave their different versions of the elephant. Just 
so, a man who has seen only one aspect of God limits God to that alone. It 
is his conviction that God cannot be anything else. (K 151 / G 191) 


From Sri Ramakrishna’s perspective, religious exclusivism and fanaticism stem 
from limiting God dogmatically to what one has understood or experienced of 
Him.” Since “[t]here is no limit to God, we should humbly acknowledge that 
God may have various aspects and forms of which we cannot conceive (K 997 / G 
920). Moreover, just as the person with sight can see the elephant as a whole, the 
vijnanisees that all religions are salvifically effective, since all of them—represented 
by the blind men—make contact with a real aspect of God, though none of them 
encompasses the whole of God, who is infinite and illimitable. 

Since both the sighted person in the elephant parable and the man living 
under the tree in the chameleon parable represent Sri Ramakrishna’s vijiani, one 
might be led to assume that the vij#ani realizes God in all His aspects. However, 
Sri Ramakrishna insists that zo one—not even the vijiani—can have complete 
knowledge of God in His infinite fullness: 


People often think they have understood Brahman fully. Once an ant 
went to a hill of sugar. One grain filled its stomach. Taking another grain 
in its mouth it started homeward. On its way it thought, “Next time I will 
carry home the whole hill.” That is the way shallow minds think. They 
don’t know that Brahman is beyond words and thought. However great a 
man may be, how much can he know of Brahman? Sukadeva and sages like 





16. It is clear from Sri Ramakrishna’s own explanation of the elephant parable and his other 
teachings about God that the elephant parable should not be taken to imply that God is di- 


vided into parts. 


“All Faiths Are Paths” + 93 


him may have been big ants; but even they could carry at the utmost eight 
or ten grains of sugar! (K 49 / G 102) 


Sri Ramakrishna makes clear that the difference between an ordinary soul and 
a vijnani is like the difference between a small ant and a big ant. While the or- 
dinary soul is able, at best, to realize God in one particular aspect, the vijiani 
realizes multiple aspects of God—both impersonal and personal—and so is in 
a unique position to affirm the equal salvific efficacy of theistic and nontheistic 
religions. Even a big ant, however, cannot carry the “whole hill of sugar.” That is, 
since God is infinite, even the vij#ani cannot realize the whole of God. According 
to Sri Ramakrishna, sincere practitioners of all religious faiths can attain the goal 
of God-realization, even though they may end up realizing different forms or 
aspects of one and the same Infinite Reality. 

Some important questions arise at this point. What counts as a “religion” in 
the first place for Sri Ramakrishna? When he teaches that “all religions” are paths 
to God, what religions does he have in mind? Does he affirm the equal salvific 
efficacy of all religions or does he claim that some religions have greater salvific 
efficacy than others? We can begin to address these questions by considering a 
relevant passage from the Kathamrta: 


With sincerity and earnestness one can realize God through all religions 
[antarik hole sab dharmer bhitor diyai isvarke pawa jai]. The Vaisnavas 
will realize God, and so will the Saktas, the [Advaita] Vedantins, and 
the Brahmos [who worship the formless personal God]. Muslims and 
Christians will realize Him, too. All will certainly realize God if they are 
earnest and sincere. (K 151 / G 191) 


It is highly significant that Sri Ramakrishna grants the status of “religion” 
(dharma) not only to major world religions such as Christianity and Islam but 
also to the modern religious movement of the Brahmo Sam§j. Evidently, his con- 
ception of religion is sufficiently dynamic and flexible to accommodate new re- 
ligious movements and spiritual philosophies. This flexible attitude is entirely in 
keeping with his teaching that the “paths to God are infinite” (K 511 / G 506), 
which indicates that he has in mind not only the finite set of existing religious 
paths but also the innumerable religious paths that are to come. 

Sri Ramakrishna typically uses the Bengali terms dharma and mat to refer to 
religious and spiritual views. Although he does not provide an explicit definition 
of religion anywhere in the Kathamrta, he does provide hints at various places 
that any religious or spiritual path must fulfill two conditions: first, it must have 
at its center some aspect or form of the Divine Reality, whether personal or im- 
personal; second, it must prescribe ethical and spiritual practices that bring us 


94 ¢ RELIGIOUS PLURALISM 


into contact with that Divine Reality. He explicitly specifies this first condition 
of religion in numerous passages, such as this one: “But I find that all views point 
to the One. All views [mat]—the Sakta, the Vaisnava, the Advaitic—have that 
One [sei ek] for their center. He who is impersonal is also personal, and it is He 
again who assumes various forms” (K 494 / G 490). It is clear from this passage 
that his broad conception of religion encompasses not only theistic faiths such 
as Hinduism, Islam, and Christianity but also nontheistic spiritual philosophies 
such as Advaita Vedanta. For Sri Ramakrishna, every religion has one and the 
same God at its center, whether God is conceived as personal or impersonal. It is 
worth noting, then, that he would not consider secular humanism or Marxism to 
be “religions,” since they do not meet this first condition. 

As for the second condition, Sri Ramakrishna believed that while the specific 
ethical and spiritual practices prescribed by various religions differ, all these reli- 
gious practices have the common aim of diminishing egoism and selfishness in 
order to bring us closer to the Divine Reality. Accordingly, he frequently empha- 
sizes the need to eliminate the selfish attitude of “‘T’ and ‘mine’” (K 292 / G 
308) and to cultivate ethical virtues such as compassion and forbearance, which 
purify the mind.” Exploiting the etymological affinity between dharma in the 
sense of “religion” and dharma in the sense of ethical action, he defines adharma 
as “unrighteous actions” (asat karma) and dharma as “pious actions prescribed by 
religion” (vaidhi karma), such as “charity to the poor, feeding the Brahmins, and 
so on” (K 669 / G 635). Clearly, then, any self-styled “religion” that prescribes un- 
ethical practices—such as violence, hatred, or excessive sense-indulgence—would 
not count as a “religion” (dharma) in Sri Ramakrishna’s sense.'* Accordingly, he 
condemns the immoral behavior ofa monk who tries to give an Advaitic justifica- 
tion for breaking his monastic vow of celibacy: 


Once a monk came to the Panchavati. He used to talk much about 
[Advaita] Vedanta before others. Later I came to know that he was hay- 
ing an illicit love affair with a certain woman. After that, when I went 
to the Panchavati, I found him sitting there. I said to him, “You talk so 
glibly of Vedanta—now, what is this?” “What of that?, he replied, “I shall 
show you that there is no harm in it. If the whole world is unreal at all 
times, how can my fall alone be real?” I said in utter disgust, “I spit on 


17. See, for instance, K 47 / G 101. 


18. A referee asks whether Sri Ramakrishna would have accepted the modern religiously in- 
spired terrorist groups such as ISIS and Aum Shinrikyo as genuine “religions.” I believe Sri 
Ramakrishna would not have accepted them as “religions” (dharma), since they prescribe un- 
ethical practices that violate the second condition that any religion must meet. 


“All Faiths Are Paths” + 95 


such knowledge of Vedanta.” That knowledge is no knowledge at all; it 
is a mere sham, falsely professed by worldly people with attachments to 
sense-pleasures. (LP Liii.38 / DP 428) 


Sri Ramakrishna does not consider the pseudo-Vedanta practiced by this fallen 
monk to be a genuine religious path, since it sanctions unethical behavior that 
strengthens rather than diminishes egoism and selfishness. 

Therefore, when Sri Ramakrishna declares that “one can realize God through 
all religions” he does zot mean that all self-styled religions are salvifically effi- 
cacious paths to God. Rather, he means that all genuine religions—a “genuine” 
religion defined as any religious path that meets the two conditions specified 
above—are paths to God. In numerous passages concerning the harmony of reli- 
gions, he specifically mentions Christianity, Islam, the theistic Hindu sects of 
Saktism and Vaisnavism, the nontheistic Hindu philosophy of Advaita Vedanta, 
and the Brahmo Samaj.” Although he does not mention Buddhism in the 
context of the harmony of religions, he mentions on numerous occasions that 
Buddhism is a form of nontheistic jzanayoga akin to Advaita Vedanta.”° Hence, 
by dint of mentioning Advaita Vedanta in the passages concerning the harmony 
of religions, he thereby implies that Buddhism is also a salvifically efficacious 
religious path. 

The various analogies invoked by Sri Ramakrishna strongly suggest that he 
grants maximal salvific efficacy to all of these religious paths. For instance, in the 
passage cited above, he likens the world religions to different preparations of fish, 
which suit different tastes and digestive capacities. Elsewhere, he likens the var- 
ious religions to different, but equally effective, means of climbing to the roof of 
a house: “God can be realized through all paths. All religions are true. The im- 
portant thing is to reach the roof. You can reach it by stone stairs or by wooden 
stairs or by bamboo steps or by a rope. You can also climb up by a bamboo pole” 
(K 59-60 / G 111). He also frequently invokes the analogy of a lake called by 


various names: 


It is not good to feel that one’s own religion alone is true and all others are 
false. God is one only, and not two. Different people call on Him by dif- 
ferent names: some as Allah, some as God, and others as Krsna, Siva, and 
Brahman. It is like the water in a lake. Some drink it at one place and call 
it “jal? others at another place and call it “pani, and still others at a third 





19. See, for instance, K 151 / G 191 and K 577 / G559. 


20. See, for instance, K 1028 / G 947-48. I discuss Sri Ramakrishna’s Advaitic interpretation 
of Buddhism in section III. 


96 * RELIGIOUS PLURALISM 


place and call it “water.” The Hindus call it “jal? the Christians “water, 
and the Muslims “pani.” But it is one and the same thing. Views are but 
paths. Each religion is only a path leading to God, as rivers come from 
different directions and ultimately become one in the one ocean. (K 239 


/ G264-65) 


The main point of all these analogies is to illustrate the equal salvific efficacy of 
the world religions. From Sri Ramakrishna’s standpoint, claiming that one’s own 
religion is superior to other religions is as absurd as claiming that the fish prepa- 
ration one prefers is somehow objectively superior to other fish preparations or 
that a bamboo pole is superior to a staircase as a means of reaching the roof. As 
we have seen, Sri Ramakrishna’s experience of vijfana provided direct confirma- 
tion of this religious pluralist viewpoint: since both the personal and impersonal 
aspects of the Divine Reality are equally real, both theistic and nontheistic reli- 
gious paths have equal salvific efficacy. 

In short, Sri Ramakrishna grants maximal salvific efficacy to Christianity, 
Islam, Hinduism (which includes both theistic Hindu traditions and Advaita 
Vedanta), the Brahmo Samaj, and Buddhism. It is also worth noting that he men- 
tions these religions by way of example, so his failure to mention other religions 
such as Judaism, Taoism, and Confucianism does not imply that he takes these 
religions to be less salvifically effective than the religions he does mention. On 
the other hand, he does explicitly claim that certain religious paths are less sal- 
vifically effective than other religious paths. For instance, while he admits that 
vamacara—the path of “left-handed” Tantra, which involves sexual intercourse 
as part of its spiritual practice—is a genuine path to realizing God, he insists 
that vamacara is inferior to other religious paths. In response to Narendranath’s 
question about the vamdacara practices of certain sects such as Ghospara and 
Pafcanami, Sri Ramakrishna tells him: 


You need not listen to these things. The bhairavas and the bhairavis of 
the Tantrika sect also follow this kind of discipline. ... Let me tell you 
this. I regard woman as my mother; I regard myself as her son. This is 
avery pure attitude. There is no danger in it... . But to assume the at- 
titude of a “hero” [viva], to look on woman as one’s mistress, is a very 
difficult discipline. Tarak’s father performed spiritual practice with this 
attitude. In this form of sadhana one cannot always maintain the right 
attitude. 

There are various paths to reach God. Each view is a path. It is like 
reaching the Kali temple by different roads. But it must be said that 
some paths are clean and some dirty. It is good to travel on a clean path. 
(K 594 / G571-72) 


“All Faiths Are Paths” + 97 


While Sri Ramakrishna admits that there are sincere practitioners of 
vamacara—such as Tarak’s father—who may be able to realize God through that 
path, he insists that vamacara is nonetheless a “dirty” path, since it involves sexual 
practices that can easily lead the spiritual aspirant to ruin. 

Sri Ramakrishna’s stance toward hathayoga, a practice based on physical exer- 
cises, is similar to his stance toward vamdacara: while he accepts hathayoga as a 
path to God-realization, he claims that it is inferior to the path of rajayoga, a 
practice based on meditation and devotion to God. He states: 


There are two kinds of Yoga: hathayoga and rajayoga. The hathayogi prac- 
tises physical exercises. His goal is to acquire supernatural powers: lon- 
gevity and the eight psychic powers. These are his aims. But the aim of 
rajayoga is the attainment of devotion, ecstatic love, knowledge, and dis- 
passion. Of these two, rajayoga is the better. (K 214 / G 244-45) 


Elsewhere, he points out that one of the main problems with hathayoga is that 
it strengthens identification with the body, which is a serious hindrance to 
God-realization.”! 

For Sri Ramakrishna, then, while Christianity, Islam, Hinduism, the Brahmo 
Samaj, and Buddhism have equal and maximal salvific efficacy, certain religious 
paths such as vamacara and hathayoga are less salvifically effective than other reli- 
gious paths. He judges the degree of salvific efficacy of various religious paths on 
the basis of a largely implicit criterion: the religious paths he deems to have max- 
imal salvific efficacy are those that inculcate ethical and spiritual practices that 
diminish egoism, selfishness, and body-consciousness, thereby bringing us closer 
to God. Conversely, religious paths that prescribe practices that run the risk of 
strengthening egoism and body-consciousness are less salvifically effective paths. 

We can further clarify Sri Ramakrishna’s views on religious diversity by relat- 
ing them to the now well-known threefold typology of exclusivism, inclusivism, 
and pluralism, first developed by the Christian theologian Alan Race in 1983.” 
Ina recent article, Schmidt-Leukel provides very precise and rigorous definitions 
of these three positions: 


(1) Exclusivism: Salvific knowledge of a transcendent reality is mediated by 
only one religion (which naturally will be one’s own). 





21. See K 604 / G 579. 


22. Alan Race, Christians and Religious Pluralism: Patterns in the Christian Theology of 
Religions (London: SCM Press, 1983). 


98 © RELIGIOUS PLURALISM 


(2) Inclusivism: Salvific knowledge of a transcendent reality is mediated by 
more than one religion (not necessarily by all of them), but only one of 
these mediates it in a uniquely superior way (which again will naturally be 
one’s own). 

(3) Pluralism: Salvific knowledge of a transcendent reality is mediated by more 
than one religion (not necessarily by all of them), and there is none among 
them whose mediation of that knowledge is superior to all the rest.” 


Sri Ramakrishna is a religious pluralist in Schmidt-Leukel’s sense because he 
grants maximal salvific efficacy to multiple religious paths, including Christianity, 
Islam, Hinduism, and Buddhism. As Schmidt-Leukel emphasizes, one need 
not affirm the equal salvific efficacy of a// religions in order to be a religious plu- 
ralist.2> Hence, the fact that Sri Ramakrishna deems vamdacara and hathayoga to 
be inferior religious paths is perfectly consistent with his pluralist position, which 
only affirms that more than one religion has maximal salvific efficacy.”* Moreover, 


23. Perry Schmidt-Leukel, “Exclusivism, Inclusivism, Pluralism: The  Tripolar 
Typology—Clarified and Reaffirmed, in The Myth of Religious Superiority, ed. Paul Knitter 
(Maryknoll, NY: Orbis Books, 2005), 20. 


24. Schmidt-Leukel’s definition of religious exclusivism helps defend Sri Ramakrishna and 
other religious pluralists against the familiar charge that religious pluralism has the same log- 
ical structure as exclusivism. Merold Westphal, for instance, argues that religious pluralism 
is logically exclusivist because it presents itself “as the truth about religious differences and 
theo-logical exclusivism as a false account of them.’ “The Politics of Religious Pluralism, 
Proceedings of the Twentieth World Congress of Philosophy 4 (1999), 4. For a similar objection, 
see Gavin D’Costa, “The Impossibility of a Pluralist View of Religions,” Religious Studies 32 
(1996), 225-26. However, from Schmidt-Leukel’s standpoint, this charge of logical exclu- 
sivism has no force, since the religious pluralist rejects only salvific exclusivism and not /og- 
ical exclusivism. Therefore, while religious pluralism is logically exclusivist, this fact in no way 
impugns the philosophical coherence of the religious pluralist position, at least as understood 


by Schmidt-Leukel and Sri Ramakrishna. 


25. In fact, Schmidt-Leukel points out that Hick is a quintessential religious pluralist even 
though he denies salvific efficacy to violent religious sects (“Exclusivism, Inclusivism, 
Pluralism,” 20 n. 31). 


26. A referee questions my general project of interpreting Sri Ramakrishna’s thought in terms 
of the standard threefold typology and asks, “Why not stay faithful to the native categories 
used by Ramakrishna, instead of imposing Western categories upon him?” In response to this 
query, I would make three points. First, I believe that bringing the threefold typology to bear 
on Sri Ramakrishna’s teachings is not mutually exclusive with trying to stay faithful to Sri 
Ramakrishna’s “native categories.” That is, throughout section I, I do try to stay as faithful as 
possible to Sri Ramakrishna’s “native categories” in my reconstruction of his views. However, 
Talso argue that the threefold typology—particularly as formulated by Schmidt-Leukel—helps 
clarify Sri Ramakrishna’s subtle position on religious diversity. My aim in using the threefold 
typology vis-a-vis Sri Ramakrishna is in the service of exegesis rather than eisegesis. Second, 
the threefold typology is quite helpful in distinguishing various competing perspectives on 
religious diversity. Although I do not have the space here to defend the cogency of the three- 
fold typology, I would refer the reader to Schmidt-Leukel’s article, “Exclusivism, Inclusivism, 


“All Faiths Are Paths” + 99 


since Sri Ramakrishna nowhere indicates that Hinduism’s mediation of salvific 
knowledge of God is superior in any way to that of non-Hindu religions, he is 
clearly not a religious inclusivist in Schmidt-Leukel’s sense. Sri Ramakrishna’s 
model of religious pluralism, I suggest, is best understood not as a “Hindu” model 
but as a higher-order metatheory that affirms the salvific efficacy of all first-order 
religions. While Sri Ramakrishna was certainly a Hindu who held many tradi- 
tional Hindu beliefs such as reincarnation, his teachings on religious pluralism 
are rooted not in a narrowly Hindu worldview but in the vast experiential stand- 
point of vijfiana, which encompasses all the world religions without being reduc- 
ible to any one of them. 

One of the distinguishing features of Sri Ramakrishna’s religious pluralism is 
that it provides an ontological rationale for the complementarity of various reli- 
gious conceptions of the Divine Reality. From Sri Ramakrishna’s standpoint of 
vijnana, each religion captures a real aspect of the infinite and illimitable God, 
so each religion makes a uniquely valuable contribution to our understanding of 
God and spiritual life. His point is not just that we should tolerate all religions 
and spiritual paths because they are all effective paths to realizing God. Rather, 
he is making the much more radical claim that we can—and should—actively 
learn from religions and philosophical worldviews other than our own, because 
they can give us insights into God and spiritual life that can enrich and broaden 
our own religious outlook and practice.”” Accordingly, Sri Ramakrishna would 
frequently remind worshippers of the personal God that the impersonal aspect of 
God is also true.?* Conversely, he would teach Advaitins that Sakti, the personal 
aspect of God, is as real as the impersonal Brahman.” From Sri Ramakrishna’s 
perspective, the best way to overcome religious fanaticism and to enrich our un- 
derstanding of God is to expose ourselves to religious standpoints other than 
our own. 

Sri Ramakrishna illustrates the complementarity of different religious stand- 
points in his intriguing parable of the washerman: 





Pluralism,” which not only makes a convincing case that the threefold typology is not funda- 
mentally flawed but also defends the typology against numerous criticisms. Third, identifying 
Sri Ramakrishna’s position as a form of religious pluralism facilitates cross-cultural dialogue 
by helping to locate his position vis-a-vis Western views on religious diversity. One of the rea- 
sons Sri Ramakrishna’s religious pluralism has such profound contemporary relevance is that it 
belongs to the same family, as it were, as numerous Western theories of religious pluralism and 
hence can be brought into fruitful philosophical dialogue with these Western theories. 


27. For a thorough discussion of this robustly pluralistic dimension of Sri Ramakrishna’s views, 
see Long, “(Tentatively) Putting the Pieces Together.” 


28. See, for instance, Sri Ramakrishna’s instruction to a Vaisnava Goswami at K 152 / G 191. 


29. See Sri Ramakrishna’s response to Hazra at K 568 / G 550. 


100 * RELIGIOUS PLURALISM 


God assumes different forms and reveals Himself in different ways for the 
sake of His devotees. A man kept a solution of dye in a tub. Many people 
came to him to have their clothes dyed. He would ask a customer, “What 
color would you like to have your cloth dyed?” If the customer wanted 
red, then the man would dip the cloth in the tub and say, “Here is your 
cloth dyed red.” If another customer wanted his cloth dyed yellow, the 
man would dip his cloth in the same tub and say, “Here is your cloth dyed 
yellow.’ If a customer wanted his cloth dyed blue, the man would dip it in 
the same tub and say, “Here is your cloth dyed blue.” Thus he would dye 
the clothes of his customers different colors, dipping them all in the same 
solution. One of the customers watched all this with amazement. The man 
asked him, “Well? What color do you want for your cloth?” The customer 
said, “Brother, dye my cloth the color of the dye in your tub.” (K 928 / G 
858-59) 


Like the parables of the chameleon and the blind men and the elephant, this par- 
able teaches that God “assumes different forms and reveals Himself in different 
ways for the sake of His devotees.” What is unique about the washerman parable 
is its emphasis on the value of learning from numerous religious standpoints. 
While most customers ask the washerman to dye their cloth in the color they 
prefer, one customer watches these other customers “with amazement,’ notic- 
ing that the tub contains an apparently magical universal dye that is all colors 
at once. Strikingly, instead of echoing other customers in asking for his cloth to 
be dyed in a particular color, this unusual customer asks for his cloth to be dyed 
in the universal color of the tub dye itself. At one level, of course, this unusual 
customer represents the vij#ani who revels in numerous forms and aspects of 
the Infinite God. At another level, however, this unique customer represents 
the ideally broad-minded spiritual aspirant who deepens and enriches her own 
conception of God by actively learning from a variety of religious standpoints. 
Instead of limiting God only to one particular aspect or form, this rare spiritual 
aspirant thinks of God as the Infinite Divine Reality that has innumerable forms 
and aspects. 

Insum, SriRamakrishna’s expansive ontologyofGodastheimpersonal-personal 
Infinite Reality provides the foundation for a highly robust model of religious 
pluralism. On the basis of his own experience of vijfdna, he taught that every 
genuine religion captures some real aspect of the Infinite Reality and, hence, is an 
effective path to the goal of God-realization. Instead of stopping there, however, 
Sri Ramakrishna further affirmed the harmony of all religions: since the various 
religious conceptions of the ultimate reality are complementary rather than con- 
flicting, all religious practitioners can enrich and broaden their understanding of 
God by learning about other religions. 


“All Faiths Are Paths” +» 101 


Il. Sri Ramakrishna’s Response to the Problem 
of Conflicting Religious Truth-Claims 


As Hick and others have pointed out, the greatest challenge to any theory of re- 
ligious pluralism is the fact that the truth-claims of different religions often con- 
flict with one another. For instance, Christianity maintains that Christ died on 
the cross, while Islam denies this. Hinduism and Buddhism accept the doctrine of 
reincarnation, while Abrahamic religions—at least in their orthodox forms—do 
not. Hinduism accepts multiple divine incarnations such as Rama and Krsna, 
while Christianity accepts Christ as the sole incarnation of God and Islam denies 
the very possibility of a divine incarnation. 

Regarding such historical and metaphysical issues, some religions are surely 
right while other religions are surely wrong. If Christ did in fact die on the cross, 
then Christianity is right on this issue, while Islam is wrong. If souls do rein- 
carnate, then Hinduism and Buddhism are right, while orthodox Semitic reli- 
gions are wrong. In light of the mutual incompatibility of numerous religious 
truth-claims, is religious pluralism even a coherent possibility? Clearly, any theory 
of religious pluralism that straightforwardly affirms the truth of all the historical 
and metaphysical doctrines of the various religions would be incoherent, since it 
would be committed to the contradictory assertions that Christ did and did not 
die on the cross, that reincarnation is and is not true, and so on. 

Sri Ramakrishna, I will argue, is not committed to such an incoherent posi- 
tion, since his model of religious pluralism affirms the salvific efficacy of all reli- 
gions without maintaining that all the doctrines of the various religions are true.*° 
In order to reconstruct Sri Ramakrishna’s nuanced response to the problem of 
conflicting religious truth-claims, I will employ Hick’s helpful classification of 
three fundamental types of conflicting religious truth-claims.* First, there are 
disagreements about past historical events “that are in principle accessible to 
human observation.’ Second, there are disagreements about “transhistorical” 
matters—such as reincarnation and the possibility of God incarnating as a human 
being—which cannot be verified “by historical or other empirical evidence.”® 


30. Both Paul Griffiths and Robert McKim make a similar distinction between a religious plu- 
ralism defined in terms of “truth” and a religious pluralism defined in terms of “salvation.” 
See Paul J. Griffiths, Problems of Religious Diversity (Malden, MA: Blackwell, 2001), xiv, and 
Robert McKim, On Religious Diversity (New York: Oxford University Press, 2012), 7-8. 


31. Hick, An Interpretation of Religion, 362-63. For a helpful discussion of three different 
ways that religious truth-claims can come into conflict, see Griffiths, Problems of Religious 
Diversity, 32-35. 


32. Hick, An Interpretation of Religion, 363. 


33. Hick, An Interpretation of Religion, 365. A bit later, Hick clarifies that while he is aware that 
numerous people in Asia have claimed that there is a good deal of empirical evidence in favor of 


102 * RELIGIOUS PLURALISM 


Third, there are disagreements about “ultimate questions,’ such as the nature of 
the ultimate reality.*4 

We can reconstruct Sri Ramakrishna’s stance on these different types of con- 
flicting truth-claims by examining his relevant teachings and his responses to 
questions posed by visitors.*° A prominent example of the first type of conflicting 
truth-claim is the disagreement among different Hindu sects about whether the 
divine play (4a) between Krsna and the gopis—his group of female consorts 
headed by Radha—was an actual historical event. While the Vaisnava sect takes 
Krsna’s gopi-lila to be a true historical event, other Hindu sects take the gopi-lila 
to be mythical rather than historical. 

During Sri Ramakrishna’s time, the Brahmo Samaj held that God is personal 
but formless (zirakara) and, hence, that God cannot incarnate as a human being 
such as Krsna. Sri Ramakrishna was well aware of the Brahmo Samaj’s skepticism 
toward Krsna and his gopi-/ila. While on a boat with followers of the Brahmo 
Samaj, Sri Ramakrishna—with tears in his eyes—sang an ecstatic devotional song 
conveying Radha’s love for her beloved Krsna and then told them: “Whether or 
not you accept the Radha-Krsna /i/é, you should accept their attraction [taz] 
for each other. Try to create that same yearning in your heart for God. God can 
be realized when this yearning [vyakulata] is present” (K 90 / G 140). This re- 
mark about Krsna’s gopi-lila exemplifies Sri Ramakrishna’s subtle stance on con- 
flicting religious truth-claims about historical events in general. Instead of urging 
the Brahmo followers to accept the historical reality of Krsna’s gopi-lila, Sri 
Ramakrishna encourages them to try to emulate Radha’s extraordinary yearning 
(vyakulata) for God, even if they do not take Radha or Krsna to be real historical 
personages. While acknowledging that Brahmos and Vaisnavas hold conflicting 
views on the historical reality of Krsna’s gopi-lila, Sri Ramakrishna insists that 





reincarnation, he does not believe that any such empirical evidence is sufficiently strong at this 
point in time to convince a skeptic about reincarnation. As Hick puts it, “We shall always hope 
for new evidence or new arguments which will make the truth plain to all; but in the meantime 
we should regard the matter as one about which it would be unwise to be unyieldingly dog- 
matic” (An Interpretation of Religion, 369). 


34. Hick, An Interpretation of Religion, 363. 


35. Freda Matchett and Nalini Devdas claim that Sri Ramakrishna never intended his teach- 
ings on religious pluralism to be taken as a means of resolving conflicting religious truth-claims. 
As Matchett puts it, “It is... unlikely that Ramakrishna ever intended ‘Jata mat tato path |“As 
many faiths, so many paths”] to be taken as a solemn pronouncement about the truth-claims 
of the world’s great religions.” “The Teaching of Ramakrishna in Relation to the Hindu 
Tradition and as Interpreted by Vivekananda,’ Religion 11 (1981), 179. For a similar claim, 
see Nalini Devdas, Sri Ramakrishna (Bangalore: Christian Institute for the Study of Science 
and Religion, 1966), 107. In contrast to Matchett and Devdas, I argue in section I that Sri 
Ramakrishna explicitly addresses the problem of conflicting religious truth-claims at various 
points in the Kathamrta. 


“All Faiths Are Paths” +» 103 


the Brahmos can nonetheless learn a valuable spiritual lesson from the Vaisnava 
doctrine. 

Evidently, Sri Ramakrishna felt that belief in the historical reality of Krsna’s 
gopi-lila is not soteriologically vital. Hence, even if the gopi-lila did take place in 
the historical past and the followers of the Brahmo Samaj would then be mis- 
taken in their rejection of the historical reality of the gopi-/ila, Sri Ramakrishna 
insists that this mistake would not diminish the salvific efficacy of the path 
adopted by the Brahmos. Conversely, even if Vaisnavas are mistaken in taking 
the gopi-lila to be an actual historical reality, the Vaisnava devotional faith and 
practice would not thereby be invalidated, since the Vaisnavas would still be able 
to realize God by trying to cultivate the yearning for God exemplified in Radha’s 
love for Krsna. 

Sri Ramakrishna seems to hold a similar stance on conflicting truth-claims 
about transhistorical matters. Although he himself believes in the traditional 
Hindu doctrine of reincarnation, he maintains that belief in reincarnation is 
not soteriologically vital. When asked whether he believes in reincarnation, he 
replies: “Yes, they say there is something like that. How can we understand the 
ways of God through our small intellects? Many people have spoken about rein- 
carnation; therefore I cannot disbelieve it” (K 105 / G 153). In fact, at numerous 
points in the Kathamrta, Sri Ramakrishna appeals to the doctrine of reincarna- 
tion to explain spiritual truths and to resolve doubts in the minds of some of his 
visitors.°° For instance, he remarks, “As long as you do not feel that God is the 
Master, you must come back to the world, you must be born again and again. 
There will be no rebirth when you can truly say, ‘O God, Thou art the Master’” 
(K 291 / G 308)” 

The following exchange between Sri Ramakrishna and a Vaisnava devotee 
reveals Sri Ramakrishna’s subtle stance on reincarnation: 


VAISNAVA: “Sir, isa man born again?” 

MASTER: “It is said in the Gita that a man is reborn with those tendencies that are 
in his mind at the time of his death. King Bharata thought of his deer at the 
time of death and was reborn as a deer.” 

VAISNAVA: “I could believe in rebirth only if an eye-witness told me about it.” 





36. See, for instance, Sri Ramakrishna’s appeal to the doctrine of reincarnation in his remark 
about the devotee Pina in the entry from 15 July 1885 (K 871 / G 812-13) and in his re- 
mark about Ajamila from the Bhagavata Purana in the entry from 11 March 1883 (K 150-51 
/G 190). 


37. See also Sri Ramakrishna’s references to reincarnation in the entries from 19 September 


1884, 11 March 1886, and 14 December 1882. 


104 * RELIGIOUS PLURALISM 


MASTER: “I don’t know about that, my dear sir. I cannot cure my own illness, and 
you ask me to tell you what happens after death! What you are talking about 
only shows your petty mind. Try to cultivate love of God. You are born as a 
human being only to attain divine love. You have come to the orchard to eat 
mangoes; what need is there of knowing how many thousands of branches 
and millions of leaves there are in the orchard? To bother about what happens 
after death! How silly!” (K 907 / G 841) 


Knowing that his visitor is a Vaisnava, Sri Ramakrishna responds to his query 
about reincarnation by appealing to the Bhagavad Gita, a scripture typically 
revered by Vaisnavas. However, the Vaisnava visitor is not satisfied with Sri 
Ramakrishna’s appeal to scriptural authority and demands empirical proof of 
reincarnation. Noticing his visitor’s skeptical attitude, Sri Ramakrishna quickly 
changes tack and tells him to “cultivate love of God” instead of indulging in fruit- 
less speculation about “what happens after death.” Sri Ramakrishna responds to 
his householder disciple Mahendranath Gupta’s query in a similar manner: 


M. [GUPTA]: “I haven’t much faith in rebirth and inherited tendencies. Will that 
in any way injure my devotion to God?” 

MASTER: “It is enough to believe that all is possible in God’s creation. Never 
allow the thought to cross your mind that your ideas are the only true ones, 
and that those of others are false. Then God will explain everything.” (K 232 
/ G259) 


Sri Ramakrishna reassures Gupta that his skepticism about reincarnation will not 
injure his devotion to God, but he also warns him against becoming fanatical 
about his own “ideas.” Sri Ramakrishna’s overall position seems to be that while 
he personally believes in reincarnation and frequently appeals to the doctrine of 
reincarnation in his teachings on spiritual life, he never tries to compel skeptics 
to accept reincarnation and even reassures them that their lack of belief in rein- 
carnation will not hinder their spiritual progress so long as they are sincere and 
humble. 

Sri Ramakrishna adopts a similar stance on the transhistorical question of 
whether it is possible for God to incarnate as a human being. It is clear that he 
unambiguously accepts the avatara doctrine. He remarks, for instance: 


God has different forms, and He sports in different ways. He sports as 
isvara [Lord], deva [minor deity], man, and the universe. In every age He 
descends to earth in human form as an Incarnation, to teach people love 
and devotion. There is the instance of Caitanya. One can taste devotion 
and love of God only through His Incarnations. Infinite are the ways of 


“All Faiths Are Paths” + 105 


God’s play, but what I need is love and devotion. I want only the milk. The 
milk comes through the udder of the cow. The Incarnation is the udder. 
(K 228 / G257) 


Evidently, he upholds the traditional Hindu view—adumbrated in 4.7 of the 
Gita—that God incarnates as a human being in every age.** According to Sri 
Ramakrishna, ordinary people can learn to cultivate bhakti by witnessing the 
ideal bhakti of avataras (“Incarnations”) such as Caitanya. Sri Ramakrishna also 
teaches that devotion toward an avatara is sufficient for spiritual liberation. As 
Sri Ramakrishna puts it, the avatara holds “in His hand the key to others’ lib- 
eration” (K 204 / G 237). At another point in the Kathamrta, Sri Ramakrishna 
remarks: “To love an avatara—that is enough. Ah, what ecstatic love the gopis 
had for Krsna!” (K 347 / G 356). 

On the other hand, Sri Ramakrishna points out that there are many spiritual 
aspirants who do not accept the avatara doctrine, such as Advaita Vedantins and 
those like Kabir and followers of the Brahmo Samaj: “[Advaita] Vedanta does not 
recognize the Incarnation of God. According to it, Caitanyadeva is only a bubble 
of the non-dual Brahman. ... The Incarnation of God is accepted by those who 
follow the path of bhakti” (K 292 / G 308). Are Advaitins and Brahmos soterio- 
logically handicapped because they reject the avatara doctrine? Sri Ramakrishna 
answers with an emphatic “No”: 


The sum and substance of the whole matter is that a man must love God, 
must be restless [vyakul] for Him. It doesn’t matter whether you believe in 
God with form or in God without form. You may or may not believe that 
God incarnates as a human being. But you will realize God ifyou have that 
yearning [anurag]. Then God Himself will let you know what He is like. 
(K 450 / G 449) 


Evidently, Sri Ramakrishna places much greater emphasis on vydkulata, in- 
tense restlessness for God, than on doctrinal religious beliefs, such as belief in the 
avatara doctrine. From Sri Ramakrishna’s standpoint, while religions frequently 
conflict on points of doctrine, they all agree on the importance of vyakulata. 
In theistic religions, this vyakulata amounts to an intense love of God and an 


38. As Angelika Malinar points out, while the word avatara is not used either in 4.7 or any- 
where else in the Gita, 4.7 can nonetheless be “seen as foreshadowing fully elaborated avatara 
doctrines.” The Bhagavadgita: Doctrines and Contexts (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 2007), 99. 


39. See also Sri Ramakrishna’s reference to Kabir’s disparagement of Krsna at K 345 / G 354. 


106 * RELIGIOUS PLURALISM 


all-consuming desire to realize God directly. In Advaita Vedanta, vyakulata 
takes the form of mumuksutva, the intense longing for spiritual liberation. 
In Buddhism, vydkulata appears in the form of samma sankappa (“right 
resolve”) and samma vayama (“right effort”)—the second and sixth com- 
ponents of the Noble Eightfold Path—which amount to an intense desire 
to achieve liberation from suffering through the attainment of zibbana. In 
sum, although Sri Ramakrishna himself clearly accepted the avatara doctrine 
and recognized that belief in an avatara is soteriologically vital in certain 
devotional traditions such as Vaisnavism and Christianity, he nonetheless 
insisted that belief in the avatara doctrine is not universally necessary for 
God-realization. 

We are now in a position to summarize Sri Ramakrishna’s general stance on 
conflicting religious truth-claims about historical and transhistorical matters. 
According to Sri Ramakrishna, religions make conflicting claims about both 
historical and transhistorical matters, and some religions are correct about such 
matters while others are mistaken. However, he emphasizes that none of these 
historical and transhistorical matters are soteriologically vital, so even if some 
religions hold erroneous views on these matters, these errors do not substan- 
tially handicap these religions as effective paths to God-realization. Moreover, 
he points out that every religion has errors, so it is foolhardy to claim that one 
religion is superior to all the others: 


Ah, that restlessness [vyakulata] is the whole thing. Whatever path you 
follow—whether you are a Hindu, a Muslim, a Christian, a Sakta, a 
Vaisnava, or a Brahmo—the vital point is restlessness. God is our Inner 
Guide [Antaryami]. It doesn’t matter if you take a wrong path—only 
you must be restless for Him. God Himself will put you on the right 
path. Besides, there are errors in all paths. Everyone thinks his watch is 
right; but as a matter of fact no watch is absolutely right. But that doesn’t 
hamper one’s work. If a man is restless for God he gains the company of 
sadhus and as far as possible corrects his own watch with the sadhu’s help. 
(K 1123 / G673) 


Sri Ramakrishna likens religious fanatics to people who think that their watch 
alone tells the correct time. According to Sri Ramakrishna, however, “no watch 
is absolutely right.” That is, all religions have errors, but these errors do not di- 
minish the soteriological efficacy of these religions as paths to God-realization. 
The essential attitude needed to make spiritual progress in any religion is “rest- 
lessness” for God (vydkulata). If a religious practitioner has this vydkulata, then 
even if he or she makes a mistake, God Himself will put the religious practitioner 
“on the right path.” 


“All Faiths Are Paths” + 107 


Sri Ramakrishna illustrates this rather novel idea by means of an analogy: 


All doctrines are only so many paths; but a path is by no means God 
Himself. Indeed, one can reach God if one follows any of the paths with 
wholehearted devotion. Suppose there are errors in the religion that one 
has accepted; if one is sincere and earnest, then God Himself will cor- 
rect those errors. Suppose a man has set out with a sincere desire to visit 
Jagannath at Puri and by mistake has gone north instead of south; then 
certainly someone meeting him on the way will tell him: “My good fellow, 
don’t go that way. Go to the south.” And the man will reach Jagannath 
sooner or later. If there are errors in other religions, that is none of our 
business. God, to whom the world belongs, takes care of that. Our duty is 
somehow to visit Jagannath. (K 577 / G'559) 


A man going on a pilgrimage to visit the Jagannath Temple in Puri might start 
out in the wrong direction, but he will eventually be guided in the right direction 
by a more experienced traveler. Similarly, if one sincerely aspires to realize God 
through a particular religion, the errors in that religion will not hinder one’s spir- 
itual progress. Indeed, one may eventually recognize them to be errors and modify 
one’s religious beliefs and practices accordingly. Moreover, Sri Ramakrishna adds 
that we should devote our full energy to practicing our own religion sincerely and 
wholeheartedly rather than wasting our time pointing out “errors in other reli- 
gions.” In short, regarding religious disagreements about historical and transhis- 
torical matters, Sri Ramakrishna maintains that some religions are correct while 
others are incorrect, but he hastens to add that all religions have errors and that 
these errors do not detract from their salvific efficacy. 

Regarding apparently conflicting truth-claims about the nature of the ulti- 
mate reality, Sri Ramakrishna’s approach is quite different. As we have seen in 
section I, his unique experience of vij#dna revealed to him that all religious 
conceptions of God are true, since they all capture real aspects of one and the 
same impersonal-personal Infinite Reality. While different religious conceptions 
of the ultimate reality seem to conflict, they are in fact complementary. Theistic 
religions refer to the personal aspect of God under different names and forms, 
while nontheistic religions like Buddhism and Advaita Vedanta refer to the im- 
personal aspect of God as “nibbana” or “Brahman.” While Islam and Judaism 
emphasize the formless aspect of God, Christians and Hindu Vaisnavas empha- 
size God's capacity to incarnate as a human being. Since Sri Ramakrishna’s con- 
ception of the Infinite God is based on his direct spiritual experience of vijzana 
rather than on logical reasoning, it would be beside the point to fault him for 
failing to provide a rational explanation of how God can have apparently contra- 
dictory attributes—such as personality and impersonality—at the same time. For 


108 © RELIGIOUS PLURALISM 


Sri Ramakrishna, what might appear to be contradictions to the rational intellect 
are reconciled on the lofty heights of suprarational spiritual experience. 
Therefore, Sri Ramakrishna maintains that all religious conceptions of the 
ultimate reality are true, even though none of them captures the whole of the 
Infinite Reality. Moreover, even if a particular religious conception of God is 
partial or one-sided, it can nonetheless serve as a salvifically effective path to 
God-realization. It is worth noting that Sri Ramakrishna’s position on this issue 
does not commit him to religious relativism, since he explicitly acknowledges that 


some religions might have more sophisticated conceptions of God than others: 


It is enough to have yearning for God. It is enough to love Him and feel 
attracted to Him: Don’t you know that God is the Inner Guide? He sees 
the longing of our heart and the yearning of our soul. Suppose a man has 
several sons. The older boys address him distinctly as “Baba” or “Papa.” but 
the babies can at best call him “Ba” or “Pa.” Now, will the father be angry 
with those who address him in this indistinct way? The father knows that 
they too are calling him, only they cannot pronounce his name well. All 
children are the same to the father. Likewise, the devotees call on God 
alone, though by different names. They call on one Person only. God is 
one, but His names are many. (K 60 / G 112) 


Taken out of context, Sri Ramakrishna’s final statement that “God is one, but His 
names are many” could be taken to mean that religions differ only in the various 
“names” they ascribe to God. However, the context of this statement makes clear 
that his position is more nuanced. Just as babies refer to their father as “Ba” or 
“Pa” while the older boys refer to him as “Baba” or “Papa,” some religions may 
have less sophisticated conceptions of God than other religions. Significantly, 
however, Sri Ramakrishna warns against wasting our time trying to determine 
which religion is the most sophisticated in this regard. Rather, he insists that just 
as the father loves all his children equally, God loves equally the practitioners of 
all religions, in spite of their varying degrees of sophistication. Moreover, a given 
religion’s doctrinal sophistication does not track its salvific efficacy. Hence, reli- 
gions that are less sophisticated than others at the level of doctrine may nonethe- 
less be as salvifically effective as more doctrinally sophisticated religions. 

From Sri Ramakrishna’s perspective, the sheer diversity of religious 
truth-claims about historical and transhistorical matters as well as about the ul- 
timate reality, far from undermining the possibility of religious pluralism, pro- 
vides the basis for a robust religious pluralism. As he puts it, “God has made 





40. Fora detailed elaboration of this claim, see my discussion of VV2 in section III of chapter 1. 


“All Faiths Are Paths” + 109 


different religions to suit different aspirants, times, and countries” (K 577 / G 
559). In other words, various religions—with their differing, and often con- 
flicting, truth-claims—appeal to people of varying temperaments and cultures, 
but all religions are effective paths to the common goal of God-realization. If one 
finds the truth-claims of a particular religion especially convincing or appealing, 
then one can realize God by practicing that religion, but one should never assume 
that other religions are not salvifically effective paths because their truth-claims 
differ from the truth-claims of one’s own religion. 


Ill. Addressing Major Objections to Sri Ramakrishna’s 
Religious Pluralism 


We are now in a position to consider some of the most serious objections to 
Sri Ramakrishna’s model of religious pluralism. Scholars such as Morales and 
Prothero question Sri Ramakrishna’s assumption that all religions are paths to 


the same goal. 


Morales argues, for instance, that the various religious concep- 
tions of the Absolute are mutually exclusive, so the respective goals of all religions 


must also be mutually exclusive: 


There are several radically distinct, and wholly irreconcilable, religiously 
inspired ideas about what constitutes the Absolute. Consequently, rather 
than attempting to artificially claim that there is only one mountain top 
toward which all religions aspire, it would be more truthful, and more 
in keeping with what the various religious traditions themselves actually 
say, to state that there are several different mountains—each represent- 
ing a radically different idea of what is the Absolute. There is a Nirvana 
mountain, a Brahman mountain, an Allah mountain, a Jain mountain. 
Some mountains are monotheistic, some are polytheistic, henotheistic, 
pantheistic or panentheistic. Moreover, it is incumbent upon us all in- 
dividually to choose for ourselves which of these many possibly correct 
Absolute-mountains we wish to scale. Only one of these mutually exclu- 
sive philosophical mountains, however, can be the correct one.” 


41. See Morales, “Radical Universalism, 28-29; Prothero, God Is Not One, 99 and 194. For a 
similar criticism, see J. N. Mohanty, “Yato Mat Tato Path, in Sri Ramakrishna’ Ideas and Our 
Times: A Retrospect on His 175th Birth Anniversary (Kolkata: Ramakrishna Mission Institute 
of Culture, 2013), 121-26. 


42. Morales, “Radical Universalism, 28. 


110 * RELIGIOUS PLURALISM 


According to Morales, different religious conceptions of the Absolute are “wholly 
irreconcilable,’ so it is simply false to claim that all religions aspire toward “only 
one mountain top.” Moreover, Morales insists that only one of these “mutually 
exclusive” conceptions of the Absolute “can be the correct one.’ In other words, 
Morales defends the exclusivist view that only one religion among all the world 
religions is true and, therefore, salvifically effective. First of all, it is worth noting 
that Sri Ramakrishna himself anticipated Morales’s objection in his parables of 
the chameleon and of the blind men and the elephant. From Sri Ramakrishna’s 
standpoint, religious exclusivists are like people quarreling foolishly over the 
color of the chameleon or like blind men insisting that the part of the elephant 
they are touching is the whole of the elephant. Sri Ramakrishna was not so naive 
or idealistic as to deny that many religious practitioners hold exclusivist beliefs. 
Rather, on the basis of the spiritual experience of vij#ana and his own practice of 
Hindu and non-Hindu faiths, he taught that the various religious conceptions of 
the ultimate reality are not, in fact, mutually exclusive since they correspond to 
different aspects of one and the same Infinite Reality. 

Tellingly, Morales nowhere addresses Sri Ramakrishna’s teachings on vijzana 
or his parables illustrating religious pluralism, which convey a very broad un- 
derstanding of God as the impersonal-personal Infinite Reality. As a result, 
Morales overlooks the nuances of Sri Ramakrishna’s religious pluralism, which 
is far less hegemonic than Morales alleges. While Sri Ramakrishna maintains 
that all religions share the common goal of God-realization, his conception of 
God-realization is extraordinarily capacious. Indeed, his parables of the chame- 
leon and the elephant suggest a very broad soteriological outlook: people of var- 
ious temperaments can realize God in a variety of ways, since the Infinite God 
has numerous forms and aspects, all of which are real. Although different people 
see the chameleon in different colors, they all see one and the same chameleon. 
Likewise, all the blind men touch different parts of one and the same elephant. 
According to Sri Ramakrishna, the goal of the Advaitic j#anayogi is to realize 
nirguna Brahman, “the Infinite, without form or shape and beyond mind and 
words” (K 181 / G 218). Sri Ramakrishna insists, however, that the bhakta who 
worships the personal God can realize the same Infinite Reality as “eternally 
endowed with form and personality” (sitya sakara) (K 152 / G 191).* Elsewhere, 
Sri Ramakrishna points out that for bhaktas, God-realization amounts to the 
jiva’s realization of its eternal relationship with the eternal personal God: “It 
can't be said that bhaktas need nirvana. According to some schools there is an 
eternal Krsna and there are also His eternal devotees. Krsna is Spirit embodied, 





43, It is worth noting that Sri Ramakrishna’s statement about the bhakta’s realization of the 
“nitya sakara” form of God suggests that Advaitic zirvikalpa samadhi is not necessary for spir- 
itual salvation. 


“All Faiths Are Paths” +» 111 


and His Abode also is Spirit embodied. Krsna is eternal and the devotees also are 
eternal” (K 834 / G779). From Sri Ramakrishna’s standpoint of vijzana, both the 
Advaitin and the bhakta attain the goal of God-realization, even though they end 
up realizing different aspects or forms of one and the same Infinite Reality. Since 
Morales ignores entirely the ontological framework of vij#ana within which Sri 
Ramakrishna’s teachings on religious pluralism are embedded, he makes sweep- 
ing generalizations about Sri Ramakrishna’s views on the world religions that fail 
to do justice to their subtlety and sophistication. 

Some scholars, including Ninian Smart and R. W. Neufeldt, claim that 
Buddhism in particular poses a serious problem for a Vedantic model of reli- 
gious pluralism such as Sri Ramakrishna’s.*4 Although Smart lodges this objec- 
tion against Swami Vivekananda’s “Neo-Advaitic” harmonizing of religions, his 
objection is broad enough to apply to Sri Ramakrishna’s religious pluralism as 
well. According to Smart, “the ultimate reality is presented in a substantialist 
way in Neo-Advaita: this does not seem to square with Theravadin nirvana 
or with Mahayana sanyata (though the latter sometimes functions a bit like a 
ghost-substance).’* Smart rightly notes that a Vedantic model of religious plu- 
ralism such as Sri Ramakrishna’s presupposes a “substantialist” understanding of 
the ultimate reality as a positive entity or reality, whether that positive reality 
is conceived as a personal God (by theists) or as the impersonal Brahman (by 
Advaita Vedantins).** According to Smart, however, since the Theravada and 
Mahayana strains of Buddhism do not subscribe to a substantialist view of the 
ultimate reality, these Buddhistic schools cannot easily be accommodated within 
a Vedantic model of religious pluralism. 

The best way to begin to address Smart’s objection is to consider Sri 
Ramakrishna’s own statements about the Buddha. Regarding the Buddha, Sri 
Ramakrishna observes: 


He was not an atheist. He simply could not express the Reality in words. 
Do you know what “Buddha” means? By meditating on one’s own bodha 
svaruipa [one’s true nature as Pure Consciousness], one becomes that bodha 





44, See R. W. Neufeldt, “The Response of the Ramakrishna Mission? in Modern Indian 
Responses to Religious Pluralism, ed. Harold Coward (Albany: SUNY Press, 1987), 73; Ninian 
Smart, “Models for Understanding the Relations between Religions, in Ninian Smart on 
World Religions, vol. 2, ed. John J. Shepherd (Surrey: Ashgate, 2009), 268; Ninian Smart, “A 
Contemplation of Absolutes,’ in Ninian Smart on World Religions, vol. 2, ed. Shepherd, 257. 


45. Smart, “Models for Understanding the Relations between Religions,’ 268. 


46. In his use of the term “substantialist; Smart does not mean to imply that the ultimate 
y 

reality is conceived as a substance. I take it that Smart uses the term “substantialist” in a very 

broad sense to denote any conception of the ultimate reality as a positive entity or reality. 


112, * RELIGIOUS PLURALISM 


svariipa. ... Why should Buddha be called an atheist? When one real- 
izes one’s svaruipa [the true nature of one’s Self], one attains a state that is 
something between asti [is] and ndsti [is-not].(K 1028 / G 947-48) 


Sri Ramakrishna explains the Buddha’s enlightenment in Advaitic terms as the 
realization of his own true Self; which is of the nature of Pure Consciousness 
(bodha). Of course, Sri Ramakrishna was aware that the Buddha himself did not 
explain his enlightenment experience as the realization of the Supreme Atman. 
Nonetheless, Sri Ramakrishna implies that what the Buddha called “nibbana’” isa 
negative term denoting the realization of the ineffable Atman.” 

From Smart’s perspective, Sri Ramakrishna unjustifiably Vedantizes 
Buddhism by interpreting the Buddha's enlightenment experience in substan- 
tialist terms as the realization of his “svariipa.” According to Smart, the Theravada 
and Mahayana schools of Buddhism deny such a substantialist understanding 
of the Buddha’s enlightenment. Hence, it seems as if Sri Ramakrishna is only 
able to accommodate Buddhism within his religious pluralist framework by 
assimilating Buddhism to Advaita Vedanta. While Smart is correct that most 
Theravadins do take the Buddha to have denied the reality of the Vedantic 
Atman, there is lively scholarly controversy regarding whether the Buddha him- 
self denied the reality of the Vedantic Atman. Numerous scholars have argued 
that the Buddha's teaching of anatta (“nonself”; Sanskrit, andtman) was meant 
to deny the reality of the empirical-personal self rather than of the impersonal 
Vedantic Atman.** As Kamaleswar Bhattacharya puts it, “the Buddha does not 
deny the Upanisadic dtman; on the contrary, he indirectly affirms it, in deny- 
ing that which is falsely believed to be the atman:” These scholars find support 





47. See Sri Ramakrishna’s similar remark about the Buddha at K 430 / G 430. 


48. See C. A. F. Rhys Davids, Outlines of Buddhism (London: Methuen, 1934); Ananda 
Coomaraswamy, Buddha and the Gospel of Buddhism (New York: Harper & Row, 1964), 
199-221; Kamaleswar Bhattacharya, Latman-brahman dans le bouddhisme ancien 
(Paris: Ecole francaise d’Extréme-Orient, 1973); Georg Grimm, The Doctrine of the Buddha 
(Berlin: Akademie-Verlag, 1958); Hajime Nakamura, Indian Buddhism (Delhi: Motilal 
Banarsidass, 1987), 64; J. G. Jennings, The Vedantic Buddhism of the Buddha (London: Oxford 
University Press, 1948); David and Nancy Reigle, “Atman/Anatman in Buddhism and Its 
Implication for the Wisdom Tradition, in David and Nancy Reigle, Studies in the Wisdom 
Tradition (Eastern School Press, 2015), 1-28; Edward Conze, Buddhist Thought in India 
(London: George Allen & Unwin, 1962), 129-34; Miri Albahari, “Against No-Atman Theories 
of Anatta; Asian Philosophy 12.1 (2002), 5-20; David Reigle, “The Atman-Brahman in 
Ancient Buddhism, in Kamaleswar Bhattacharya, The Atman-Brahman in Ancient Buddhism 
(Cotopaxi, CO: Canon Publications, 2015), ix-xviii; Perry Schmidt-Leukel, Understanding 
Buddhism (Delhi: Pentagon Press, 2007); Rose Drew, Buddhist and Christian? An Exploration 
of Dual Belonging (New York: Routledge, 2011), 57-61. 


49. Bhattacharya, Latman-brahman dans le bouddhisme ancien, |. 


“All Faiths Are Paths” +» 113 


for their interpretation of the Buddha's teachings in numerous passages from 
the Pali Tipitaka.” For instance, in the Samyutta Nikaya, Vacchagotta asks the 
Buddha, “Is there a self?” and the Buddha remains silent, and Vacchagotta then 
asks the Buddha, “Then is there no self?” and the Buddha remains silent again.” 
The Buddha’s telling silence on the question of whether a self exists could easily 
be taken to support Sri Ramakrishna’s position that the Buddha realized his 
true essence as Pure Consciousness but “could not express the Reality in words.” 
Moreover, in a well-known passage from the Khuddaka Nikdya, the Buddha 
seems to describe mibbana as an ineffable transempirical Reality: “Monks, there 
is a not-born, a not-become, a not-made, a not-compounded. Monks, if that 
unborn, not-become, not-made, not-compounded were not, there would be 
apparent no escape from this here that is born, become, made, compounded.’” 
According to Schmidt-Leukel, “[t]his passage does not only emphasise that 
‘there is’ a transcendent reality. It also underlines its genuine transcendence in 
the most explicit way by distinguishing it ontologically from the major features 
of the samsaric world.”® Such passages from the Tipitaka arguably lend support 
to Sri Ramakrishna’s substantialist interpretation of the Buddha's enlightenment 
experience. 

Moreover, Smart’s assumption that Mahayana Buddhism interprets the 
Buddha's avatta doctrine in nonsubstantialist terms is also a highly tendentious 
one, since there are numerous interpretations of the Mahayana school, some 
of which are substantialist and others which are nonsubstantialist. In his clas- 
sic study, The Central Philosophy of Buddhism (1955), T. R. V. Murti argues that 
Nagarjuna’s saimyata denotes a positive ineffable Reality that can neither be said 
to exist nor not to exist. In support of his interpretation, Murti cites a striking 
passage from the Mahayana text, Ratna-Kita-Sitra: “‘that atman is is one end; 
‘that 4tman is not’ is another; but the middle between the atma and nairatmya 


views is the Inexpressible. . . . It is the reflective review of things.”» This passage 


50. While we should reject the facile assumption that the teachings contained in the Tipitaka 
coincide exactly with the historical Buddha’s teachings, I believe that the Tipitaka is nonethe- 
less a valuable—though fallible—textual source that gives at least some insight into what the 


historical Buddha might have taught. 


51. The Connected Discourses of the Buddha: A Translation of the Samyutta Nikaya, trans. 
Bhikkhu Bodhi (Boston: Wisdom Publications, 2000), 1393-94. 


52. The Minor Anthologies of the Pali Canon, trans. Frank Woodward (London: Oxford 
University Press, 1948), 97-98. 


53. Schmidt-Leukel, Understanding Buddhism, 72. 


54. T. R. V. Murti, The Central Philosophy of Buddhism: A Study of the Madhyamika System 
(London: George Allen & Unwin, 1955), 329-31. 


55. Cited in Murti, The Central Philosophy of Buddhism, 27-28. 


114 *¢ RELIGIOUS PLURALISM 


could easily be taken to support Sri Ramakrishna’s view that the Buddha realized 
the ineffable Reality that is “between asti and nasti.” More recently, David Reigle 
has argued that major Mahayana thinkers such as Nagarjuna, Vasubandhu, and 
Candrakirti “thought that the Buddha's anatman teaching was directed against a 
permanent personal atman” rather than against the Upanisadic Atman.* Reigle 
further suggests that the “Buddha Nature” (buddha-dhatu) mentioned in the 
Mahayana Tathagatagarbhasitras bears a strong resemblance to the Vedantic 
Atman.” 

Obviously, this is not the place to defend a Vedantic or quasi-Vedantic inter- 
pretation of Buddhism. For present purposes, I hope to have established that the 
Vedantic interpretation of the Buddha's teachings favored by Sri Ramakrishna 
continues to be supported by a number of scholars and is, hence, not wildly im- 
plausible or flagrantly eisegetic. Therefore, while Smart is correct that a Vedantic 
model of religious pluralism such as Sri Ramakrishna’s cannot accommodate the 
nonsubstantialist understanding of the azatta doctrine championed by certain 
Buddhist schools such as Theravada, this fact does not have the damaging con- 
sequences that Smart seems to think it does. Sri Ramakrishna does not so much 
“Vedantize” Buddhism as endorse a substantialist interpretation of Buddhism 
that arguably finds support in numerous passages from the Pali Tzpitaka and cer- 
tain Mahayana texts. Since both substantialist and nonsubstantialist interpreta- 
tions of Buddhism are controversial, Sri Ramakrishna is perfectly entitled to take 
a stand on this issue and interpret Buddhism in substantialist terms. 

In an interesting essay on religious pluralism in the teachings of Sri 
Ramakrishna and the Swamis of the Ramakrishna Mission, R. W. Neufeldt 
argues that Sri Ramakrishna’s views on the world religions are more inclusivist 
than pluralist because they presuppose vij#ana as the highest truth. According to 
Neufeldt, Sri Ramakrishna insists that all religions must accept the standpoint of 
vijnana, the “belief-cum-experience that all is God.”*® All religions, as Neufeldt 
puts it, “must be informed by the belief that God is all, or all is God and must end 
in the direct vision or experience of this belief” 

However, Neufeldt misunderstands how the standpoint of vijidna informs 
Sri Ramakrishna’s teachings on religious pluralism. As a vij#ani, Sri Ramakrishna 
realized that God is both nirguna and saguna and hence that all genuine reli- 
gions and spiritual philosophies capture different aspects of one and the same 





56. Reigle, “The Atman-Brahman in Ancient Buddhism? ix. 
57. Reigle, “The Atman-Brahman in Ancient Buddhism? xvi-xvii. 
58. Neufeldt, “The Response of the Ramakrishna Mission,’ 73. 


59. Neufeldt, “The Response of the Ramakrishna Mission,’ 72. For a similar claim, see Devdas, 
Sri Ramakrishna, 113-14. 


“All Faiths Are Paths” +» 115 


Infinite Reality. The spiritual standpoint of vijiana provided Sri Ramakrishna 
with a capacious philosophical framework for explaining how all religions are 
effective paths to the common goal of God-realization. Instead of taking vijzana 
as the philosophical framework underlying Sri Ramakrishna’s religious pluralism, 
Neufeldt makes the unjustified assumption that Sri Ramakrishna injects the 
“belief-cum-experience” of vijfdna into the doctrinal content of all religions. 

Asa result, Neufeldt’s interpretation of Sri Ramakrishna suffers from three 
major flaws. First of all, no passages in the Kathamrta support Neufeldt’s view 
that Sri Ramakrishna imposed the vij#dna doctrine that “God is all” on all the 
world religions. In fact, Sri Ramakrishna taught that various religions hold dif 
ferent views on the nature of God, since God Himself is infinite and illimit- 
able. Second, Neufeldt is mistaken in assuming that Sri Ramakrishna takes the 
spiritual experience of vijfana to be the salvific goal of all religions. As I have 
argued in section I, Sri Ramakrishna’s understanding of the common goal of 
God-realization is maximally capacious: far from claiming that all religions 
must lead to the experience of vij#ana, Sti Ramakrishna claims that God can be 
realized in numerous ways and in any of His innumerable aspects. For instance, 
while the Advaitin realizes the nirguna aspect of God in nirvikalpa samadhi, 
bhaktas realize various forms of the saguna aspect of God. Third, Neufeldt over- 
looks the many passages in the Kathamrta where Sri Ramakrishna indicates that 
the vast majority of people cannot attain the realization of vijidna, since this 
rarefied experience is reserved only for “fsvarakotis, a spiritual elite consisting 
of avataras and their inner circle. Hence, it would be wrong to attribute to Sri 
Ramakrishna the view that such a rarefied state of vij#dna is the salvific goal of 
all religions. Contrary to Neufeldt, then, the standpoint of vij#ana allows Sri 
Ramakrishna to leave intact the respective doctrinal beliefs and salvific goals of 
the various religions. 

Finally, I wish to consider the possible objection that there is a performative 
contradiction between Sri Ramakrishna’s religious pluralism and his attempt to 
impose his pluralist views on others. This objection misses the mark because Sri 
Ramakrishna never tried to compel anyone to accept his own doctrine of reli- 
gious pluralism. Addressing religious exclusivists, he remarks: 


What I mean is that dogmatism is not good. It is not good to feel that my 
religion alone is true and other religions are false. The correct attitude is 
this: My religion is right, but I do not know whether other religions are 
right or wrong, true or false. (K 576-77 / G 558) 


Since Sri Ramakrishna recognizes that exclusivistically inclined religious practi- 
tioners would likely be unsympathetic to a pluralist standpoint, he takes a differ- 
ent tack by providing an internal critique of the exclusivist standpoint itself: he 


116 * RELIGIOUS PLURALISM 


argues that it is unreasonable for exclusivists to assume that all religions other 
than their own are not salvifically efficacious. One can only be in a position to 
judge the salvific efficacy of a religion after understanding it thoroughly and sin- 
cerely practicing it. Hence, the exclusivist’s a priori rejection of the salvific efficacy 
of all other religions amounts to sheer “dogmatism.” Sri Ramakrishna encourages 
exclusivists to repudiate their dogmatism and to adopt instead the “correct atti- 
tude” of humility and agnosticism by suspending judgment about whether other 
religions are salvifically efficacious. 

As we have seen, however, Sri Ramakrishna himself did practice religions 
other than his own—including Christianity and Islam—and found them to be 
as salvifically efficacious as Hinduism. As he puts it, “I had to practice every re- 
ligion [sab dharma] for a time—Hinduism, Islam, Christianity, as well as the 
paths of Saktism, Vaisnavism, and [Advaita] Vedanta. I realized that there is only 
one God [ek isvar] toward whom all are travelling; but the paths are different” 
(K 77 / G 129). On the basis of his own direct spiritual experience of the “one 
God” through the practice of Hindu, Christian, and Islamic religious paths, Sri 
Ramakrishna felt justified in going beyond a position of mere agnosticism about 
other religions to the full-blown pluralist view that all genuine religions are dif- 
ferent salvifically efficacious paths to God. Crucially, however, instead of trying to 
impose his own pluralist view on those who are inclined to religious exclusivism, 
Sri Ramakrishna urges exclusivists to be agnostic about whether other religions 
are as salvifically effective as their own. 

Sri Ramakrishna’s teachings on the harmony of religions remain as timely as 
ever. Almost daily, we hear of atrocities committed in the name of religion in 
various parts of the world. In such a contemporary climate, it is imperative that 
we work collectively toward developing a strong philosophical foundation for 
interreligious dialogue and understanding. While the recent burgeoning of in- 
terest in religious pluralism among theologians and philosophers of religion is 
undoubtedly a promising development, the vast majority of pluralist theories re- 
main rooted in Christian theological paradigms. What is urgently needed now 
is a broader cross-cultural approach to religious pluralism that takes seriously the 
pluralist views developed in both Western and non-Western religious traditions. 
The next chapter contributes to this global endeavor by bringing Sri Ramakrishna 
into conversation with Hick, one of the most prominent and influential Western 
theorists of religious pluralism. 


JOHN HICK’S VEDANTIC ROAD NOT TAKEN? 


HICK’S EVOLVING VIEWS ON RELIGIOUS 
PLURALISM IN THE LIGHT 
OF SRI RAMAKRISHNA 


The renowned British philosopher John Hick (1922-2012) was a pi- 
oneer in his efforts to develop a rigorous and plausible theory of reli- 
gious pluralism. Hick’s pluralist theory is based on the conviction that 
all the major world religions are salvifically efficacious, since they are 
all equally capable of effecting the “transformation of human existence 
from self-centeredness to Reality-centredness.”! Hick also acknowl- 
edges, however, that the conceptions of the ultimate reality found in 
the various world religions are often mutually contradictory. Hick’s 
innovative quasi-Kantian strategy for addressing this problem is well 
known: he posits an unknowable “Real an sich” and distinguishes it 
from the “Real as humanly-thought-and-experienced.”* According to 
Hick, the conceptions of the ultimate reality found in all the great 
world religions are different culturally conditioned ways of conceiving 
one and the same noumenal Real.’ 

Hick first presented this quasi-Kantian theory of religious plu- 
ralism in a 1976 conference paper and elaborated it in numerous sub- 
sequent works.‘ It is not widely known that between 1970 and 1974, 
the early Hick championed a substantially different theory of religious 
pluralism based not on Kant but on the twentieth-century Indian 
mystic Sri Aurobindo (1872-1950), who was himself profoundly 





1. John Hick, An Interpretation of Religion: Human Responses to the Transcendent 
(London: Macmillan, 1989), 14. 


2. Hick, An Interpretation of Religion, 239-40. 
3. See Hick, An Interpretation of Religion, 246 and passim. 


4. Hick’s conference paper “Mystical Experience as Cognition” (1976) was 
later published in Understanding Mysticism, ed. Richard Woods (Garden 
City: Doubleday, 1980), 415-21. 


118 © RELIGIOUS PLURALISM 


influenced by Sri Ramakrishna. In several early works, Hick refers approvingly to 
Sri Aurobindo’s “logic of the infinite,’ according to which the Infinite Reality has 
numerous attributes and aspects—such as personality and impersonality, form 
and formlessness, immanence and transcendence—which appear contradictory 
to the finite human intellect. The early Hick derived a theory of religious plu- 
ralism from this Aurobindonian premise: since each religion captures at least one 
real “aspect” of the Infinite Reality, the various conceptions of the Divine taught 
by the great world religions are complementary rather than conflicting.’ 

Building on the previous chapter, I will argue that we can gain fresh insight 
into Hick’s early and late views on religious pluralism by examining them in the 
light of Sri Ramakrishna. Section I provides the background necessary to un- 
derstand the somewhat veiled Vedantic underpinnings of Hick’s early theory of 
religious pluralism. Sri Aurobindo’s subtle account of the “logic of the infinite” in 
The Life Divine (1940), I suggest, has to be understood within the broader con- 
text of his lifelong effort to reinterpret the “original Vedanta” of the Upanisads 
and the Bhagavad Gita in the nonsectarian spirit of Sri Ramakrishna and Swami 
Vivekananda.® As we will see, Sri Aurobindo’s Vedantic logic of the infinite is 
heavily indebted to Sri Ramakrishna’s teachings on divine infinitude. Following 
Sri Ramakrishna, Sri Aurobindo appeals to the suprarational logic of the infinite 
in order to harmonize various apparently conflicting conceptions of the Infinite 
Reality. 

Section II then examines Hick’s early theory of religious pluralism, clarifying 
both its ontological basis in Sri Aurobindo’s logic of the infinite and its broader 
affinities with the modern tradition of nonsectarian Vedanta inaugurated by Sri 
Ramakrishna. Hick indicates that his understanding of Sri Aurobindo’s logic 
of the infinite derives primarily from Jehangir Chubb’s article “Presuppositions 
of Religious Dialogue” (1972), which critically examines different models 
for reconciling personal and nonpersonal conceptions of the Divine Reality. 
Interestingly, Chubb contrasts Sri Aurobindo’s logic of the infinite—the model 
Chubb favors—with a Kantian pluralist model that conceives the ultimate re- 
ality as the ineffable “thing-in-itself”” Hick, in this early phase of his thinking, 
followed Chubb in favoring Sri Aurobindo’s logic of the infinite to a Kantian 
pluralist model. 

By 1976, however, Hick abandoned the Vedantic logic of the infinite in 
favor of a quasi-Kantian pluralist model remarkably akin to—and perhaps even 





5. John Hick, God and the Universe of Faiths (Oxford: One World, 1973), 139. 


6. Sti Aurobindo, The Complete Works of Sri Aurobindo, vols. 21-22: The Life Divine 
(Pondicherry: Sri Aurobindo Ashram, [1940] 2005), 16. 


7. J. N. Chubb, “Presuppositions of Religious Dialogue,’ Religious Studies 8 (1972), 295. 


John Hick’s Vedantic Road Not Taken? + 119 


inspired by—the Kantian model sketched in Chubb’ article. Section III out- 
lines the main features of Hick’s quasi-Kantian theory of religious pluralism and 
highlights some of its fundamental differences from his earlier Aurobindonian 
theory. At an ontological level, while the early Hick subscribes to the nonsec- 
tarian Vedantic view that the Infinite Reality is both personal and nonpersonal, 
the later Hick adopts the quasi-Kantian position that the ineffable Real an sich 
is neither personal nor impersonal. Not surprisingly, the theory of religious plu- 
ralism Hick derives from this quasi-Kantian ontology differs substantially from 
his earlier Aurobindonian theory. According to the later Hick, the “divine per- 
sonae and impersonae” of all the world religions are phenomenally true but nou- 
menally false, and the religious practices based on these phenomenal conceptions 
of the Real are all equally capable of leading to salvific transformation.’ By con- 
trast, the early Hick maintains that all the world religions capture different onto- 
logically real aspects of one and the same Infinite Reality. The early Hick thereby 
accounts for the salvific efficacy of all religions without appealing to a Kantian 
noumenal-phenomenal ontology. 

Section IV critically examines the later Hick’s quasi-Kantian pluralist model 
in the light of Sri Ramakrishna. Drawing on chapter 3, I argue that while there 
are numerous similarities between Sri Ramakrishna’s vijidna-based religious 
pluralism and Hick’s quasi-Kantian pluralism, there are also substantial differ- 
ences at the level of ontology. Numerous scholars have complained that Hick’s 
quasi-Kantian model is insufficiently pluralistic, since it fails to take at face 
value many of the central truth-claims of the world religions. Sri Ramakrishna’s 
pluralist model, I contend, is not only immune to many of the most serious 
objections critics have leveled against Hick’s quasi-Kantian model but also has 
numerous philosophical advantages of its own. On this basis, I make the case 
that Sri Ramakrishna’s vijizana-based religious pluralism is more robust and phil- 
osophically cogent than Hick’s quasi-Kantian pluralism and, hence, deserves 
a prominent place in contemporary philosophical and theological discourse. 
Finally, section V lays some of the groundwork for future cross-cultural work on 
religious pluralism by outlining four criteria for assessing the relative adequacy of 
different pluralist theories. 


I. Sri Ramakrishna’s Legacy: Sri Aurobindo’s “Logic 
of the Infinite” in the Context of Nonsectarian Vedanta 


In chapter 1, I argued that Sri Ramakrishna’s philosophy of Vijfana Vedanta 
bears much stronger affinities with the nonsectarian Vedantic philosophy of 





8. See Hick, An Interpretation of Religion, 246 and passim. 


120 * RELIGIOUS PLURALISM 


the Upanisads and the Bhagavad Gita than with the narrower sectarian views of 
later Vedantic philosophers such as Sankara and Ramanuja. Swami Vivekananda 
(1863-1902), inspired by his guru Sri Ramakrishna, interpreted Vedanta as a non- 
sectarian philosophy that harmonizes various apparently conflicting religious faiths, 
sectarian philosophies, and spiritual practices. Just as Sri Ramakrishna claimed that 
the “Vedas teach that God is both with and without form, both personal and im- 
personal” (K 152 / G 191), Vivekananda declared that “our religion preaches an 
Impersonal Personal God.” Vivekananda also echoed Sri Ramakrishna in affirming 
the harmony of all religious and spiritual paths from the standpoint of Vedanta: 


The grandest idea in the religion of the Vedanta is that we may reach the same 
goal by different paths; and these paths I have generalised into four, viz those 
of work, love, psychology, and knowledge. ... We have found that, in the end, 
all these four paths converge and become one. All religions and all methods 
of work and worship lead us to one and the same goal.” 


Indeed, Vivekananda was one of the first to emphasize the pluralistic implica- 
tions of scriptural passages such as Rg Veda 1.164 (“That which exists is One; 
sages call it by various names”)" and Bhagavad Gita 4.11 (“Whosoever wants to 
reach me through whatsoever ways, I reach him through that”). 

Sri Aurobindo, in turn, was strongly influenced by the life and teachings 
of both Sri Ramakrishna and Vivekananda.” Sri Aurobindo claimed that be- 
tween 1908 and 1912, he received three messages on a mystical plane from Sri 
Ramakrishna, who had of course passed away decades earlier. Sri Ramakrishna’s 
profound influence on Sri Aurobindo’s spiritual development is evident from the 
latter’s statement to a disciple: “Remember also that we derive from Ramakrishna. 
For myself it was Ramakrishna who personally came and first turned me to this 
Yoga.” In May 1908, Sri Aurobindo was incarcerated for a year in Kolkata’s 





9. The Complete Works of Swami Vivekananda, vol. 3, 249. 

10. The Complete Works of Swami Vivekananda, vol. 1, 108. 
ll. The Complete Works of Swami Vivekananda, vol. 1, 349. 
12. The Complete Works of Swami Vivekananda, vol. 1, 475. 


13. For details, see Ayon Maharaj, “Toward a New Hermeneutics of the Bhagavad Gita: Sri 
Ramakrishna, Sri Aurobindo, and the Secret of Vijnzana? Philosophy East and West 65.4 
(2015), 1214. 


14. Sri Aurobindo, The Complete Works of Sri Aurobindo, vols. 10-11: Record of Yoga 
(Pondicherry: Sri Aurobindo Ashram Trust, 2001), 128. 


15. Sri Aurobindo, The Complete Works of Sri Aurobindo, vol. 36: Autobiographical Notes and 
Other Writings of Historical Interest (Pondicherry: Sti Aurobindo Ashram Trust, 2006), 179 
(letter dated 1913). 


John Hick’s Vedantic Road Not Taken? + 121 


Alipore jail for his political activities, and he claimed that Vivekananda, who had 
of course passed away in 1902, mystically communicated to him various instruc- 
tions in meditation during that time: “Vivekananda in the Alipore jail gave me 
the foundations of that knowledge which is the basis of our Sadhana [spiritual 
practice].”!° 

Sri Aurobindo spent the rest of his life engaging in intense spiritual practice 
and writing dense treatises on spiritual philosophy and the Indian scriptures. He 
wrote full-scale commentaries on the Vedas, the Isa and Kena Upanisads, and the 
Bhagavad Gita in the nonsectarian spirit of Sri Ramakrishna and Vivekananda.” 
For instance, in his commentary on the [sa Upanisad, Sri Aurobindo echoes Sri 
Ramakrishna’s teaching on the inseparability of the static Brahman and the dy- 
namic Sakti: “The Inactive and the Active Brahman are simply two aspects of the 
one Self, the one Brahman, who is the Lord.”® Similarly, in his commentary on 
the Gita, Sri Aurobindo follows Sri Ramakrishna in interpreting the term vijzana 
in numerous verses of the Gita as the “integral” knowledge that God is the “su- 
preme Soul that is at once impersonality and divine Person and much more than 
either.” 

In The Life Divine (1940), Sri Aurobindo repeatedly contrasts Advaita 
Vedanta—which maintains that the ultimate reality is only impersonal—with 
the “ancient Vedanta” of the Upanisads, which holds that the Infinite Divine 
Reality is both personal and impersonal.” In book II, Chapter 2 of The Life 
Divine—a chapter cited by the early Hick—Sri Aurobindo clarifies the onto- 
logical foundation of Upanisadic Vedanta in terms of what he calls the “logic of 
the infinite.” Sri Ramakrishna’s influence on Sri Aurobindo is especially prom- 
inent in this chapter of The Life Divine. Sri Aurobindo not only draws heavily 
on Sri Ramakrishna’s teachings on divine infinitude but also alludes to several of 
Sri Ramakrishna’s favorite parables and analogies.” In an almost verbatim echo 





16. Aurobindo, Autobiographical Notes, 179. 


17. See Sri Aurobindo’s books, The Complete Works of Sri Aurobindo, vol. 15: The Secret of the 
Veda (Pondicherry: Sri Aurobindo Ashram Trust, [1920] 1998); The Complete Works of Sri 
Aurobindo, vol. 19: Essays on the Gita (Pondicherry: Sri Aurobindo Ashram, [1920] 1997); The 
Complete Works of Sri Aurobindo, vol. 17: The Upanishads—I: Isha Upanisad (Pondicherry: Sri 
Aurobindo Ashram, [1915] 2003), 3-94; The Complete Works of Sri Aurobindo, vol. 18: The 
Upanishads—t: Kena and Other Upanisads (Pondicherry: Sti Aurobindo Ashram, 2001). 


18. Aurobindo, Isha Upanisad, 88. 


19. Aurobindo, Essays on the Gita, 399. For a detailed discussion of Sri Aurobindo’s interpreta- 
tion of the Gifa in the context of Sri Ramakrishna’s doctrine of vij#ana, see Maharaj, “Toward 
a New Hermeneutics of the Bhagavad Gita.” 


20. Aurobindo, The Life Divine, 63. 


21. See, for instance, Sri Aurobindo’s references to the parable of the blind men and the ele- 


phant and the parable of the elephant-driver in The Life Divine (345-46). 


122 *¢ RELIGIOUS PLURALISM 


of Sri Ramakrishna’s teaching that “no one can place a limit to God by saying, 
‘God is this, and no more’” (K 99 / G 148), Sri Aurobindo observes that since 
the “supreme Reality” is “absolute and infinite,” “we cannot limit it by saying it 
is not this, it is not that.”** Moreover, Sri Aurobindo illustrates the “logic of the 
Infinite””’ by appealing to the parable of the blind men and elephant—a favorite 
of Sri Ramakrishna’s—and draws the conclusion that “[i]t will not do to apply 
our limited and limiting conclusions to That which is illimitable.”** Developing 
Sri Ramakrishna’s teaching that “everything is possible for God” (K 997 / G920), 
Sri Aurobindo claims that the “Infinite is illimitably free, free to determine itself 
infinitely, free from all restraining effect of its own creations.’” 

According to Sri Aurobindo, the finite “mental reason” cannot help but see 
a contradiction between immanence and transcendence, form and formlessness, 
personality and impersonality, stasis and dynamism.”* However, according to 
the suprarational logic of the infinite, what appear to be contradictions to the 
finite rational mind prove to be complementary aspects of one and the same 
Infinite Reality. As we saw in chapter 1, Sri Ramakrishna frequently taught that 
“Brahman and Sakti are inseparable, like fire and its power to burn” (K'55 / G 108). 
Similarly, Sri Aurobindo declares that “the silence of the Spirit and the dynamis 
of the Spirit are complementary truths and inseparable.””” Sri Aurobindo even 
borrows Sri Ramakrishna’s favorite analogy to illustrate this spiritual truth: “As 
we cannot separate Fire and the power of Fire, it has been said, so we cannot 
separate the Divine Reality and its Consciousness-Force, Chit-Shakti.””* Further, 
just as Sri Ramakrishna taught that God is both “with and without form” (K 997 
/ G 920), Sri Aurobindo maintains that the Divine Being “is at once Form and 
the Formless.’” Echoing Sri Ramakrishna’s teaching that God is both saguna and 
nirguna (K 246 / G 271), Sri Aurobindo asserts that “the Saguna Brahman active 
and possessed of qualities” and “the Nirguna immobile and without qualities” are 
dual aspects of “the one Ishwara.”*° 





22. Aurobindo, The Life Divine, 336. 

23. Aurobindo, The Life Divine, 343. 

24. Aurobindo, The Life Divine, 345. 

25. Aurobindo, The Life Divine, 348. 

26. Aurobindo, The Life Divine, 350-51. 
27. Aurobindo, The Life Divine, 351. 

28. Aurobindo, The Life Divine, 361-62. 
29. Aurobindo, The Life Divine, 352. 

30. Aurobindo, The Life Divine, 367. 


John Hick’s Vedantic Road Not Taken? + 123 


For Sri Aurobindo, the most fundamental difference between the nonsec- 
tarian Vedanta of the Upanisads and the sectarian philosophy of Advaita Vedanta 
is that the former, but not the latter, is based on the logic of the infinite. Advaitic 
philosophy, in accordance with the dichotomizing tendency of the finite mind, 
accepts the reality only of the impersonal (#érguna) Brahman and denies the ul- 
timate reality of the personal (saguna) God and the universe.*! By contrast, the 
nonsectarian Vedanta of the Upanisads holds that the Infinite Reality is at once 
personal and impersonal, static and dynamic, with and without form, immanent 
and transcendent. Following Sri Ramakrishna and Vivekananda, Sri Aurobindo 
affirms the harmony of all religions precisely on the basis of this nonsectarian 
Vedantic worldview. All religions, Sri Aurobindo claims, “express one Truth in 
various ways and move by various paths to one goal.” 

Tellingly, Sri Aurobindo credits both Sri Ramakrishna and Vivekananda with 


inaugurating the nonsectarian interpretation of Vedanta he champions: 


[T]he word Vedanta is usually identified with the strict Monism and the 
peculiar theory of Maya established by the lofty and ascetic intellect of 
Shankara. But it is the Upanishads themselves and not Shankara’s writ- 
ings, the text and not the commentary, that are the authoritative Scripture 
of the Vedantin. Shankara’s, great and temporarily satisfying as it was, is 
still only one synthesis and interpretation of the Upanishads. There have 
been others in the past which have powerfully influenced the national 
mind and there is no reason why there should not be a yet more perfect 
synthesis in the future. It is such a synthesis, embracing all life and action 
in its scope, that the teachings of Sri Ramakrishna and Vivekananda have 
been preparing.* 


Sri Aurobindo helpfully distinguishes three different meanings of the term 
“Vedanta.” First, “Vedanta,” in its original meaning, refers to the Upanisads or, 
more broadly, to the prasthanatraya (the “three pillars of Vedanta”)—namely, 
the Upanisads, the Bhagavad Gita, and the Brahmasitra. Second, “Vedanta” 
refers to the school of Indian philosophy which is based on the teachings of 
the Upanisads. It is not widely known that there are over thirty subschools of 
Vedantic philosophy, including not only Sankara’s Advaita but also Ramanuja’s 
Visistadvaita, Madhva’s Dvaita as well as a variety of less well-known subschools 





31. Aurobindo, The Life Divine, 242. 
32. Aurobindo, Isha Upanisad, 43. 


33. Sri Aurobindo, The Complete Works of Sri Aurobindo, vol. 13: Essays in Philosophy and 
Yoga: Shorter Works, 1910-1950 (Pondicherry: Sri Aurobindo Ashram Trust, 1998), 10-11. 


124 * RELIGIOUS PLURALISM 


such as Bhedabheda, Acintyabhedabheda, and Suddhadvaita. Third, “Vedanta” 
may refer to a nonsectarian spiritual philosophy—rooted in the Upanisads and 
the Gita—which harmonizes various spiritual paths and religious views. As we 
have seen, Vivekananda and Sri Aurobindo, inspired by Sri Ramakrishna, often 
used the term “Vedanta” in this third sense. 

In the remainder of this chapter, it is essential to bear in mind these three dif- 
ferent senses of the term “Vedanta.” Sri Aurobindo specifically cautions against 
conflating Vedanta with Sankara’s Advaita Vedanta—a mistake, as we will see, 
made both by the early Hick and by some of his critics. It is equally important 
to distinguish Advaita Vedanta from the nonsectarian Vedantic worldview of Sri 
Ramakrishna, Vivekananda, and Sri Aurobindo. 


Il. The Early Hick’s Aurobindonian Model of Religious 
Pluralism 


Hick indicates in his autobiography that he was aware of Sri Ramakrishna as 
early as 1970. During his first stay in India in 1970, Hick delivered a lecture at 
the Ramakrishna Mission Institute of Culture (Kolkata) in which he referred to 
the “poverty and simplicity of Ramakrishna.”*4 Moreover, in several of his books, 
Hick mentions that many Hindus consider Sri Ramakrishna to be an incarna- 
tion of God.* Surprisingly, however, Hick—as far as I am aware—never refers 
to Sri Ramakrishna’s teachings on the harmony of religions or his eclectic re- 
ligious practices. Hick also does not refer to Vivekananda in any of his works, 
although it is possible that Hick was aware of some of Vivekananda’s ideas.*° 
Hick’s knowledge of Sri Aurobindo was comparatively richer than his knowledge 
of Sri Ramakrishna and Vivekananda. In his autobiography, Hick notes that he 
studied Sri Aurobindo’s work in the late 1960s and early 1970s.*” He also vis- 
ited the Aurobindo Ashram in Pondicherry and had extended conversations with 





34. John Hick, An Autobiography (Oxford: One World, 2002), 200. 


35. John Hick, God Has Many Names (Philadelphia: Westminster Press, 1980), 121; John 
Hick, 4 Christian Theology of Religions: The Rainbow of Faiths (Louisville: Westminster John 
Knox Press, 1995), 89. 


36. Ankur Barua notes that Hick “often quoted Radhakrishnan’s translations from the Hindu 
scriptures in support of his own claims about divine ineffability, transformative experience and 
religious pluralism.” “Hick and Radhakrishnan on Religious Diversity: Back to the Kantian 
Noumenon,’ Sophia 54.2 (June 2015), 181. Some of the similarities I note in this section be- 
tween the views of Hick and Vivekananda may be due to the fact that Hick read the work of 


Radhakrishnan, who was heavily influenced by Vivekananda’s ideas. 
37. Hick, An Autobiography, 193. 


John Hick’s Vedantic Road Not Taken? + 125 


numerous scholars of Sri Aurobindo, including Jehangir Chubb and Santosh 
Sengupta.°8 

The early Hick, then, was definitely influenced by Sri Aurobindo’s concept 
of the “logic of the infinite” and also had cursory knowledge of the saintly life 
of Sri Ramakrishna. Significantly, however, nothing Hick wrote at the time 
indicates any awareness of the broader nonsectarian Vedantic philosophy of Sri 
Ramakrishna, Vivekananda, and Sri Aurobindo or their teachings on religious 
pluralism, which were based on that philosophy. Nonetheless, I will argue that in 
work published between 1970 and 1974, Hick championed a theory of religious 
pluralism that bears striking affinities with the pluralist doctrine of nonsectarian 
Vedanta.” 

In the final chapter of Arguments for the Existence of God (1971), Hick raises 
the problem of “conflicting religious beliefs,” especially the problem of con- 
flicting experiences of—and claims about—the nature of the ultimate reality. As 
Hick puts it, “By no means all religious experience is theistic; ultimate reality is 
apprehended as non-personal and as multi-personal as well as unipersonal.”*° In 
a few tantalizing sentences at the end of the chapter, Hick hints at a theory of re- 
ligious pluralism that could resolve this problem of conflicting claims about the 
ultimate reality: 


[T]he different forms of religious experience, giving rise to the different 
religions of the world, are properly to be understood as experiences of dif- 
ferent aspects of one immensely complex and rich divine reality. If this is 
so, the beliefs of the different religions will be related to a larger truth as 
the experiences which gave rise to those beliefs are related to a larger re- 
ality. ... [W]e are led to postulate a divine reality of which the different 
religions of the world represent different partial experiences and partial 





38. Hick, An Autobiography, 193 and 197-98. 


39. Hick presents his early theory of religious pluralism primarily in the following four 
works: Arguments for the Existence of God (London: Macmillan, 1970), 117-20; God and 
the Universe of Faiths, 120-47; Philosophy of Religion, 2nd ed. (Englewood Cliffs: Prentice 
Hall, 1973), 119-29; “The Outcome: Dialogue into Truth, in Truth and Dialogue in World 
Religions, ed. John Hick (Philadelphia: Westminster Press, 1974), 140-55. Understandably, 
Hick’s early pluralist theory has not received nearly as much attention as his later quasi-Kantian 
theory. As far as I am aware, Paul Eddy is the only scholar who discusses in detail Hick’s 
early views on religious pluralism. See Eddy’s book John Hick’s Pluralist Philosophy of World 
Religions (London: Ashgate, 2002), 61-90. While Eddy briefly acknowledges the influence of 
Sri Aurobindo’s logic of the infinite on Hick’s early thought (John Hick’s Pluralist Philosophy, 
80-81), I think Eddy overlooks the substantial ontological differences between the early Hick’s 
Aurobindonian pluralist model and the later Hick’s quasi-Kantian model. 


40. Hick, Arguments for the Existence of God, 117. 


126 * RELIGIOUS PLURALISM 


knowledge. This latter possibility remains, however, to be adequately de- 
veloped and examined.“ 


Although Hick does not refer to Vedantic thinkers anywhere in the book, his 
early sketch of a pluralist theory resonates strongly with nonsectarian Vedanta. 
As we saw in the previous chapter, Sri Ramakrishna claims that all religions cap- 
ture different real aspects of one and the same Infinite Divine Reality. Similarly, 
Hick claims that the various world religions are based on “experiences of different 
aspects of one immensely complex and rich divine reality.” Moreover, just as Sri 
Ramakrishna likens different religions to blind men touching different parts of 
the same elephant, Hick claims that all religions “represent different partial expe- 
riences and partial knowledge” of the same divine reality. 

Hick further developed this early model of religious pluralism in the ninth 
chapter of the second edition of Philosophy of Religion (1973) and in his essay 
“The Outcome: Dialogue into Truth” (1974). In both of these works, Hick claims 
that Sri Aurobindo’s “logic of the infinite” provides a promising philosophical 
basis for reconciling personal and nonpersonal conceptions of the ultimate re- 
ality. In Philosophy of Religion, Hick appeals to Sri Aurobindo in order to justify 
his claim that apparently conflicting religious conceptions of the Divine Reality 
are actually complementary: 


For if, as every profound form of theism has affirmed, God is infinite and 
therefore exceeds the scope of our finite human categories, he may be 
both personal Lord and non-personal Ground of Being; both judge and 
father, source alike of justice and of love. At any rate, there is a program for 
thought in the exploration of what Aurobindo called “the logic of the in- 
finite” and the question of the extent to which predicates that are incom- 
patible when attributed to a finite reality may no longer be incompatible 
when referred to infinite reality. 


The early Hick’s philosophical strategy for reconciling conflicting religious 
truth-claims is explicitly Aurobindonian: the “infinite reality” can be both 
“personal Lord” and “non-personal Ground of Being,’ even though the finite 
mind cannot grasp how this is possible. In The Life Divine, we should recall, Sri 
Aurobindo derives this “logic of the infinite” from the “ancient Vedanta” of the 
Upanisads and contrasts it with the sectarian philosophy of Advaita Vedanta, 
which maintains that the ultimate reality is only impersonal (#irguna). While the 


41. Hick, Arguments for the Existence of God, 119-20. 
42. Hick, Philosophy of Religion, 2nd ed., 128. 


John Hick’s Vedantic Road Not Taken? + 127 


early Hick may have read parts of The Life Divine, he did not seem to have a clear 
understanding of the nonsectarian Vedantic context of Sri Aurobindo’s “logic 
of the infinite” which I outlined in the previous section. This fact helps explain 
Hick’s somewhat puzzling remark that “there is a program for thought in the ex- 
ploration of what Aurobindo called ‘the logic of the infinite’” Apparently unbe- 
knownst to Hick, the nonsectarian Vedantins Sri Ramakrishna, Vivekananda, 
and Sri Aurobindo had already explored in detail the far-reaching implications of 
the logic of the infinite for religious pluralism. 

One year later, in “The Outcome: Dialogue into Truth,” Hick repeats al- 
most verbatim his earlier Aurobindonian argument from Philosophy of Religion 
and then adds: “This possibility is discussed by Jehangir Chubb in his paper, 
‘Presuppositions of Inter-Faith [sic] Dialogue? in which he speaks of Sri 
Aurobindo’s ‘logic of the Infinite; in which different phenomenological char- 
acteristics are not mutually exclusive.” This statement suggests that Hick’s un- 
derstanding of Sri Aurobindo’s logic of the infinite likely derived not from The 
Life Divine but from Chubb’s article, which discusses Sri Aurobindo’s logic of 
the infinite in isolation from its nonsectarian Vedantic context. In his autobi- 
ography, Hick notes that he had extended discussions with Chubb—a retired 
philosophy professor at Bombay University who specialized in the thought of Sri 
Aurobindo—in both London and India in 1970. 

Chubb’s “Presuppositions of Religious Dialogue” (1972), which Hick read 
carefully, is a sophisticated article that critically evaluates various models for 
reconciling personal and nonpersonal conceptions of the Divine Reality. It is 
worth examining Chubb’s article in some detail, since it sheds valuable light on 
Hick’s early theory of religious pluralism and its relation to his later quasi-Kantian 
theory. The first model Chubb considers is the Advaitic “doctrine of the two 
truths,” according to which the nontheistic conception of zirguna Brahman 
“gives the full truth,” while theistic conceptions of saguna Brahman are “the lesser 
truth.”46 Chubb rejects this “two truths” model as “only a half-hearted attempt at 
reconciliation,” since it relegates theistic religions to an inferior position.” 

Chubb next considers the view “that the Ultimate is ineffable and hence can- 
not be described but only somehow indicated.’# Interestingly, Chubb argues that 


43. Hick, “The Outcome: Dialogue into Truth,’ 153. 

44, Hick, An Autobiography, 193. 

45. Chubb, “Presuppositions of Religious Dialogue,’ 289-310. 
46. Chubb, “Presuppositions of Religious Dialogue,’ 295. 

47. Chubb, “Presuppositions of Religious Dialogue,’ 295. 

48. Chubb, “Presuppositions of Religious Dialogue,’ 295. 


128 © RELIGIOUS PLURALISM 


this view, rather than the “two truths” view which is often thought to be Advaitic, 
is Sankara’s “real position.”4? However, Chubb rejects this model as well, since it 
“does not affirm the equal truth of seemingly incompatible doctrines but treats all 
positive affirmations not as containing descriptions but as constituting sign posts 
pointing to the indescribable.”*° Strikingly, Chubb likens this view of the radical 
ineffability of the Ultimate to “Kant’s concept of the thing-in-itself?*! According 
to Chubb, this Sankaran view also suffers from the same philosophical problems 
as the Kantian theory, which fixes a “great gulf... between reality and concepts.’ 
As Chubb puts it, “it is difficult to see in what sense a concept is more or less ad- 
equate or more or less true if its truth is not in some clear sense reafirmed at the 
absolute level.” In other words, it is impossible to affirm the full-blown truth of 
various religious conceptions of the Ultimate, since there is no way to determine 
whether they correspond to any aspects of the ineffable Ultimate itself. 

Chubb’s fascinating discussion of this Kantian-Sankaran view of the inef- 
fable Ultimate is significant for at least two reasons. First of all, this view bears a 
suspicious resemblance to the later Hick’s quasi-Kantian model of religious plu- 
ralism.™ It is even possible that Chubb’s 1972 article first alerted Hick to the pos- 
sibility of developing a model of religious pluralism along Kantian lines. Second, 
Chubb anticipated one of the major objections repeatedly leveled against Hick’s 
later quasi-Kantian model of religious pluralism. Just as Chubb complains that 
this Kantian-Sankaran model fixes a “great gulf” between “reality and con- 
cepts,’ many critics have objected—as we will see in section [V—that Hick’s 
quasi-Kantian model sets up an ontological gulf between the strictly unknowable 
Real an sich and phenomenal conceptions of the Real az sich, thereby denying on- 
tological reality to the personal and nonpersonal ultimates of the various world 
religions. 

Chubb goes on to argue that Sri Aurobindo’s “logic of the infinite” provides 
the best “method of reconciling apparently opposite predicates affirmed of God 
or the ultimate.”® According to Chubb, the “logic of exclusive affirmation,” which 





49. Chubb, “Presuppositions of Religious Dialogue,’ 295. I think Chubb is mistaken in ascrib- 
ing this view to Sankara. I outline my own interpretation of Sankara’s Advaitic position in note 


53 of chapter 1. 

50. Chubb, “Presuppositions of Religious Dialogue, 295. 
51. Chubb, “Presuppositions of Religious Dialogue,’ 295. 
52. Chubb, “Presuppositions of Religious Dialogue,’ 295. 
53. Chubb, “Presuppositions of Religious Dialogue,’ 295. 


54. Eddy also notes, in passing, the similarity between Chubb’s Kantian model and Hick’s later 
Kantian model of religious pluralism (John Hick’ Pluralist Philosophy, 93). 


55. Chubb, “Presuppositions of Religious Dialogue,’ 296. 


John Hick’s Vedantic Road Not Taken? + 129 


is appropriate to “finite existence,’ does not apply to the Infinite Divine Reality. 
Hence, it would be inappropriate to impose the limitations of thought onto the 
Infinite Reality: “The capacity to accommodate a predicate only through the ex- 
clusion of another predicate belonging to the same universe of discourse is the 
mark of finite existence. The finite lives by exclusion. The infinite, however, suf- 
fers from no such limitation. ... Thus there is no contradiction in saying that God 


is both personal and impersonal.’”” 


From Chubb’s Aurobindonian standpoint, 
since the finite intellect cannot help but think in terms of the law of contradic- 
tion, it inevitably finds the divine attributes of personality and impersonality to 
be contradictory. However, according to the “logic of the infinite? apparently 
contradictory attributes can coexist in the Infinite Divine Reality, which is not 
bound by the law of contradiction. 

The early Hick’s approving reference to Chubb’s article in his 1974 essay sug- 
gests that he considered the various models discussed by Chubb and consciously 
rejected the Kantian-Sankaran model of harmonizing religious truth-claims in 
favor of Chubb’s Aurobindonian “logic of the infinite.” This is a highly significant 
fact, since it suggests that Hick’s early position on religious pluralism should be 
viewed not as a half-articulate groping toward his later quasi-Kantian theory but 
as a carefully considered position in its own right that was based on the principled 
rejection of the very quasi-Kantian theory he would later adopt. 

God and the Universe of Faiths (1973) contains the early Hick’s fullest elabo- 
ration of a theory of religious pluralism on the basis of an Aurobindonian logic 
of the infinite. In this book, Hick calls for a “Copernican revolution” in theology 
and argues that past efforts to harmonize the world religions have usually been 
“Ptolemaic,” since they place a particular religion at the theological center.** Hick 
argues that both Karl Rahner’s doctrine of anonymous Christianity and Hans 
Kiing’s distinction between “ordinary” and “extraordinary” ways of salvation re- 
main trapped in a Ptolemaic Christian framework.” Hick also adds that “con- 
temporary philosophical Hinduism”—by which he means Advaita Vedanta—is 
equally Ptolemaic, since it “holds that the ultimate reality, Brahman, is beyond 
all qualities, including personality, and that personal deities .. . are partial images 
of the Absolute created for the benefit of that majority of mankind who can- 
not rise above anthropomorphic thinking to the pure Absolute.’® Even at this 
early stage, Hick correctly recognizes that Advaita Vedanta is Ptolemaic in that 





56. Chubb, “Presuppositions of Religious Dialogue,’ 296. 
57. Chubb, “Presuppositions of Religious Dialogue,’ 296. 
58. Hick, God and the Universe of Faiths, 131. 

59. Hick, God and the Universe of Faiths, 127-28. 

60. Hick, God and the Universe of Faiths, 131. 


130 * RELIGIOUS PLURALISM 


it grants ultimate reality only to irguna Brahman, while granting merely provi- 
sional or empirical reality to saguna Brahman (“personal deities”). 

Tellingly, however, the early Hick mistakenly calls this Ptolemaic view 
“vedantic,” even though Advaita Vedanta is only one subschool of Vedanta.“ The 
early Hick’s mistaken conflation of “contemporary philosophical Hinduism” 
with Advaita Vedanta is extremely puzzling for three reasons. First, Hick claimed 
to have studied some of Sri Aurobindo’s work and even cited a chapter from Sri 
Aurobindo’s Life Divine, but he did not seem to be aware that Sri Aurobindo 
repeatedly contrasts his own nonsectarian Vedantic philosophy—rooted in the 
Upanisads—with the sectarian philosophy of Advaita Vedanta. Second, Hick 
had carefully read Chubb’s article, which explicitly contrasts Sankara’s model of 
the ultimate reality with Sri Aurobindo’s logic of the infinite. Third, Hick organ- 
ized a conference on the philosophy of religion at the University of Birmingham 
in April 1970, where Santosh Sengupta presented a paper with the striking title 
“The Misunderstanding of Hinduism.” Since Hick himself edited the volume 
Truth and Dialogue (1974) containing the papers presented at this confer- 
ence, Hick had almost certainly read Sengupta’s paper. Ironically, the target of 
Sengupta’s vigorous polemic is precisely the misunderstanding of both Hinduism 
and Vedanta exhibited by Hick himself. Sengupta attacks the “standard western 
description of Hinduism, which “interpret[s] the whole of Hindu thought in 
the light” of one particular system—namely, “Advaita-Vedanta (pure monism) as 
expounded by Sa[f]kara.”® Sengupta not only points out that there are numerous 
theistic schools of Vedanta that differ substantially from Advaita Vedanta but also 
explicitly mentions that Sri Aurobindo, in The Life Divine, rejects the Advaitic 
doctrine of “Mayavada”—the doctrine of the unreality of the universe—in favor 
of the Upanisadic view that the world is “an expression or manifestation of the 
supreme reality.” 

Mysteriously, in spite of the early Hick’s professed familiarity with Sri 
Aurobindo’s work and his knowledge of the articles of Chubb and Sengupta, he 
made the mistake of conflating both Vedanta in general and “contemporary phil- 
osophical Hinduism” with Advaita Vedanta.® Hick’s equation of Vedanta with 





61. Hick, God and the Universe of Faiths, 131. 


62. See, for instance, Sri Aurobindo’s remarks in The Life Divine (661-64) and in Essays on the 
Gita (447-49). 


63. Santosh Chandra Sengupta, “The Misunderstanding of Hinduism, in Truth and Dialogue 
in World Religions, ed. Hick, 97. 


64. Sengupta, “The Misunderstanding of Hinduism,’ 103. 


65. In An Interpretation of Religion (253), Hick notes that Vedanta encompasses not only 
Advaita but also Visistadvaita and Dvaita. However, even in this later phase of his thinking, 


John Hick’s Vedantic Road Not Taken? + 131 


Advaita Vedanta had serious consequences, since it prevented him from recog- 
nizing the nonsectarian Vedantic underpinnings of his own “Copernican” theory 
of religious pluralism, which he presented in the tenth chapter of God and the 
Universe of Faiths. The key premise of the early Hick’s pluralist theory is the pos- 
itive infinitude of God: 


Let us begin with the recognition, which is made in all the main religious 
traditions, that the ultimate divine reality is infinite and as such tran- 
scends the grasp of the human mind. God, to use our christian term, is 
infinite. ... We cannot draw boundaries round his nature and say that he is 
this and no more. If we could fully define God, describing his inner being 
and his outer limits, this would not be God. 

From this it follows that the different encounters with the tran- 
scendent within the different religious traditions may all be encounters 
with the one infinite reality, though with partially different and overlap- 
ping aspects of that reality. ... May it not be that the different concepts 
of God, as Jahweh, Allah, Krishna, Param Atma, Holy Trinity, and so 
on...are all images of the divine, each expressing some aspect or range of 
aspects and yet none by itself fully and exhaustively corresponding to the 
infinite nature of the ultimate reality? 


Although Hick does not explicitly mention Sri Aurobindo in this passage, he 
is clearly indebted to Sri Aurobindo’s “logic of the infinite, which was fresh in 
his mind and to which he explicitly referred in other texts written at the time. 
Following Sri Aurobindo, the early Hick claims that the Divine Reality is “infi- 
nite” in two related senses: first, it cannot be grasped by the human mind, and 
second, its nature has no definable limits, so we can never “say that he is this and 
no more.” 

The early Hick derives his theory of religious pluralism from this 
Aurobindonian premise of God’s infinitude and illimitability: each world reli- 
gion captures some real “aspect or range of aspects” of the Infinite Reality, but no 
religion captures the whole of the Infinite Reality. Like Sri Ramakrishna and Sri 
Aurobindo, Hick invokes the parable of the “blind men and the elephant” and 
draws the moral that each religion refers “only to one aspect of the total reality.’® 





Hick does not refer to the modern nonsectarian Vedanta of Sri Ramakrishna, Vivekananda, 


and Sri Aurobindo. 
66. Hick, God and the Universe of Faiths, 139-40. 


67. Hick, God and the Universe of Faiths, 140. Hick claims that this parable is traditionally 
attributed to the Buddha. 


132 *¢ RELIGIOUS PLURALISM 


Hick also cites in support of his theory of religious pluralism Rg Veda 1.164 and 4.11 
of the Bhagavad Gita.® Although Hick does not refer to Vivekananda anywhere in 
his book, Hick may very well have known that Vivekananda was the first to popu- 
larize these Hindu scriptural passages and to draw out their implications for religious 
pluralism. 

Later in the chapter, Hick suggests that this pluralist model resolves the problem 
of conflicting religious truth-claims by conceiving the ultimate reality as personal in 
one aspect and nonpersonal in another aspect: 


Speaking very tentatively, I think it és possible that the sense of the divine as 
non-personal may indeed reflect an aspect of the same infinite reality that 
is encountered as personal in theistic religious experience. . .. Theologically, 
the Hindu distinction between Nirguna Brahman and Saguna Brahman is 
important and should be adopted into western religious thought. Detaching 
this distinction, then, from its Hindu context we may say that Nirguna God 
is the eternal self-existent divine reality, beyond the scope of all human cat- 
egories, including personality; and Saguna God is God in relation to his 
creation and with the attributes which express this relationship, such as per- 
sonality, omnipotence, goodness, love and omniscience. Thus the one ulti- 
mate reality is both Nirguna and non-personal, and Saguna and personal, in 
a duality which is in principle acceptable to human understanding. 


Like Sri Ramakrishna and Sri Aurobindo, the early Hick maintains that per- 
sonal and nonpersonal conceptions of the ultimate reality correspond to differ- 
ent real “aspects” of “the same infinite reality.’ It is equally revealing that Hick 
clarifies his theory of religious pluralism by invoking the “Hindu distinction 
between Nirguna and Saguna Brahman.” As we have already seen, Hick identi- 
fies “contemporary philosophical Hinduism” with Advaita Vedanta, which—in 
Ptolemaic fashion—considers nirguna Brahman alone to be real and, accord- 
ingly, demotes the personal God (saguna Brahman) to the level of unreality. 
Interestingly, Hick appropriates this zirguna-saguna distinction but detaches it 
from its “Hindu’—which, for Hick, means Advaitic—context. In opposition to 
the Ptolemaic Advaitic paradigm, Hick claims that the “one ultimate reality is 
both Nirguna...and Saguna.” In other words, the early Hick places nirguna and 
saguna Brahman on an ontological par by conceiving them as complementary 
aspects of one and the same Infinite Reality.” 





68. Hick, God and the Universe of Faiths, 140. 
69. Hick, God and the Universe of Faiths, 144. 


70. Hence, I think Duncan Forrester is mistaken in accusing the early Hick of being a 
crypto-Adyaitin. See Forrester, “Professor Hick and the Universe of Faiths. Scottish Journal 


John Hick’s Vedantic Road Not Taken? + 133 


However, since the early Hick wrongly conflated both modern philosophical 
Hinduism and Vedanta with Advaita Vedanta in particular, he failed to recognize 
that his own non-Ptolemaic view of the ontological parity of the impersonal and 
personal aspects of the Infinite God is a central tenet of the nonsectarian Vedanta 
of Sri Ramakrishna, Vivekananda, and Sri Aurobindo—which is itse/f'a major 
thought-current within modern philosophical Hinduism. Hick claims that the 
“one ultimate reality” is, in one aspect, the “Nirguna God” which is “beyond the 
scope of all human categories,’ and in another aspect, the “Saguna God,” who is 
“God in relation to his creation.” Notice how closely Hick echoes Sri Aurobindo 
and Sri Ramakrishna. According to Sri Ramakrishna, “[w]hen God is action- 
less [niskriya], I call God ‘Brahman’; when God creates, preserves, and destroys, 
I call God ‘Sakti’” (K 861 / G 802). Similarly, Sri Aurobindo claims that “the 
Saguna Brahman active and possessed of qualities” and “the Nirguna immobile 
and without qualities” are dual aspects of “the one Ishwara.”” 

Evidently, while the early Hick explicitly appealed to Sri Aurobindo’s logic 
of the infinite, he did not have a clear understanding of the broader nonsec- 
tarian Vedantic framework within which Sri Aurobindo’s logic of the infinite was 
embedded. As a result, the early Hick failed to recognize the deep philosoph- 
ical affinities between his own theory of religious pluralism and nonsectarian 
Vedanta. Indeed, as we will see, Hick’s impoverished understanding of Vedanta 
may even help explain why he soon went on to abandon his early pluralist doc- 
trine in favor of his now well-known quasi-Kantian theory of religious pluralism. 


Ill. The Ontological Underpinnings of the Later Hick’s 
Quasi-Kantian Model of Religious Pluralism 
Hick’s conference paper “Mystical Experience as Cognition” (1976) signaled his 


tacit, but momentous, abandonment of his early Aurobindonian religious plu- 
ralism in favor ofa quasi-Kantian pluralist model.” Hick subsequently developed 





of Theology 1 (1976), 65-72. Forrester overlooks the fact that Hick explicitly rejects Advaitic 
inclusivism in the ninth chapter of God and the Universe of Faiths. 


71. Aurobindo, The Life Divine, 367. 


72. In his response to an earlier draft of this chapter, Bradley Cochran questions my use of 
the language of “abandonment.” I concede to Cochran that Hick himself nowhere suggests 
that his quasi-Kantian theory represents an abandonment of his earlier theory of religious plu- 
ralism. Nonetheless, I make the case throughout this chapter that the ontological foundations 
of Hick’s early and late theories of religious pluralism are so fundamentally opposed that the 
language of abandonment is justified. I also suspect that Hick may have been more inclined 
to recognize the dramatic evolution of his own views on religious pluralism if he had a deeper 
understanding of the nonsectarian Vedantic tradition of Sri Ramakrishna, Vivekananda, and 
Sri Aurobindo. 


134 * RELIGIOUS PLURALISM 


his quasi-Kantian theory of religious pluralism in numerous works published in 
the 1980s and 1990s. Hick’s An Interpretation of Religion (1989) contains his 
most detailed and careful presentation of his quasi-Kantian pluralist theory, 
while A Christian Theology of Religions: The Rainbow of Faiths (1995) further 
elaborates the theory and defends it against numerous objections. In my ensu- 
ing discussion of Hick’s quasi-Kantian theory, I will rely primarily on these two 
works, although I will also sometimes refer to his other post-1976 works as well. 
In his early thinking, Hick explicitly favored Sri Aurobindo’s strategy for 
reconciling personal and nonpersonal conceptions of the ultimate reality: what 
appear to the finite human mind to be contradictory attributes—such as per- 
sonality and impersonality—can, in fact, coexist in the Infinite Divine Reality. 
Accordingly, the early Hick conspicuously refrained from downgrading the on- 
tological status of the personal and nonpersonal ultimates of the various world 
religions. By 1976, however, Hick repudiated this Aurobindonian strategy in 
favor of a quasi-Kantian strategy.”? Instead of claiming that each religion captures 
a real “aspect” of the Infinite Divine Reality, Hick now maintains that the nou- 
menal “Real” is strictly unknowable and that the personal Gods and nonpersonal 
Absolutes of the various world religions are different culturally conditioned—and, 
therefore, phenomenal—conceptions of one and the same noumenal Real.” That 
is, Hick claims that the unknowable Real az sich enjoys a different ontological 
status from the ultimates of all the world religions: while he grants empirical re- 
ality to the various religious ultimates, he accords full-blown ontological reality 
only to the Real az sich.” By contrast, the early Hick followed Sri Ramakrishna 





73. I call the later Hick’s view “quasi-Kantian” rather than simply “Kantian” because his views 
differ from Kant’s in important respects and because Kant himself did not endorse a religious 
pluralist position. Hick differs from Kant most fundamentally in his understanding of the 
categories. While Kant held that there were only twelve categories, Hick seems to hold that 
people’s culturally conditioned conceptions of God also function as categories (or, at least, 
category-analogues) that shape how people experience God. For a helpful discussion of this 
issue, see J. William Forgie, “Hyper-Kantianism in Recent Discussions of Mystical Experience,’ 
Religious Studies 21.2 (June 1985), 208-14. The question of Hick’s precise use of Kant is a con- 
troversial one in the scholarly literature. For the purposes of this chapter, however, I need not 
enter into this interpretive controversy. If Hick took nothing else from Kant, he certainly ac- 
cepted Kant’s ontological distinction between noumenon and phenomenon (see, for instance, 
Hick, An Interpretation of Religion, 349). My criticisms of Hick’s quasi-Kantian theory in sec- 
tion IV target precisely the noumenal-phenomenal ontology at its basis. 


74. See Hick, “Mystical Experience as Cognition,’ 428-30. 


75. There is a complication here. In An Interpretation of Religion (269-75), Hick actually con- 
siders two different models for understanding the ontological status of the divine personae 
of the world’s theistic religions. On one model, the divine personae are human projections, 
while on the other model, the divine personae are ontologically real entities. Interestingly, Hick 
claims that his quasi-Kantian pluralist theory “could accommodate either of these models” 
(An Interpretation of Religion, 275). However, as William Hasker has shown, only the human 
projection model of divine personae is actually compatible with Hick’s quasi-Kantian theory. 


John Hick’s Vedantic Road Not Taken? + 135 


and Sri Aurobindo in maintaining that personal and nonpersonal conceptions 
of the ultimate reality capture different otologically real “aspects” of “the same 
infinite reality.’”° 

The later Hick also radically reconceives the nature of divine infinitude. While 
the early Hick understood divine infinitude as a positive, inexhaustible plenitude 
that exceeds rational comprehension, the later Hick conceives the infinitude of 
the Real az sich in strictly negative terms: 


This distinction between the Real as it is in itself and as it is thought and 
experienced through our human religious concepts entails ... that we can- 
not apply to the Real az sich the characteristics encountered in its per- 
sonae and impersonae. Thus it cannot be said to be one or many, person or 
thing, conscious or unconscious, purposive or non-purposive, substance 
or process, good or evil, loving or hating. None of the descriptive terms 
that apply within the realm of human experience can apply literally to the 
unexperienceable reality that underlies that realm.” 


While the early Hick adopted the nonsectarian Vedantic position that the 
Infinite Reality is both personal and nonpersonal in different aspects, the later 
Hick maintains that the noumenal Real is zeither personal nor nonpersonal. As 
the later Hick puts it, the Real az sich “is unlimited and therefore may not be 
equated without remainder with anything that can be humanly experienced and 
defined. Unlimitedness, or infinity, is a negative concept, the denial of limita- 
tion.””’ By conceiving divine infinity as a “negative concept,’ the later Hick sets 
up an ontological gulf between the Real az sich and the various human expe- 
riences of the Real. Ironically, even though the early Hick followed Chubb in 
rejecting this Kantian ontology in favor of Sri Aurobindo’s logic of the infinite, 
the later Hick does an about-face, preferring the quasi-Kantian model ofa strictly 





See Hasker, “The Many Gods of Hick and Mavrodes,’ in Evidence and Religious Belief, eds. 
Kelly James Clark and Raymond J. Van Arragon (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2011), 
186-99. In his response to Hasker in the same collection, Hick concedes that he was wrong 
in claiming earlier that both models were equally compatible with his quasi-Kantian theory. 
See Hick, “Response to Hasker; in Evidence and Religious Belief, eds. Clark and Arragon, 
199-201. Hick’s final considered position—which is the relevant one for my discussion—is 
that the divine personae are definitely xot ontologically real entities but only human projections 
(“Response to Hasker,’ 200-1). 


76. Hick, God and the Universe of Faiths, 144. 
77. Hick, An Interpretation of Religion, 350. 
78. Hick, An Interpretation of Religion, 237. 


136 * RELIGIOUS PLURALISM 


unknowable Real az sich to the Aurobindonian model of an impersonal-personal 
Infinite Reality. 

Indeed, Hick now sees this Kantian gulf between noumenon and phenom- 
enon as a philosophical virtue, since it provides a rational explanation of how the 
various personal and nonpersonal conceptions of the Divine Reality can all be 
true (albeit only phenomenally true). In-4 Christian Theology of Religions, Hick 
points out that the most serious problem facing any pluralist view is the fact that 
divine attributes “such as being personal and being non-personal, being a creator 
and not being a creator” are “mutually contradictory.” For the later Hick, the 
only way to avoid a “morass of impossibilities” is to “acknowledge that all these 
attributes are components of our human conceptual repertoire.”*° That is, Hick’s 
primary justification for his quasi-Kantian pluralist model seems to be that it 
avoids ascribing contradictory attributes to the Divine Reality. 

This position is puzzling, however, since Hick himself had earlier championed 
an entirely different strategy for reconciling the various apparently contradictory 
qualities ascribed to God. In his early thinking, Hick favored Sri Aurobindo’s 
logic of the infinite, according to which what might appear to be a “morass of 
impossibilities” to the finite human intellect is not impossible for the Infinite 
God, who is unconstrained by the limits of human thought. For Sri Aurobindo 
as for the early Hick, our inability to comprehend rationally how God can be at 
once personal and nonpersonal is neither surprising nor problematic, since God’s 
infinite nature necessarily exceeds the grasp of the finite intellect. According to 
Sri Aurobindo, then, attributes such as personality and impersonality—which 
appear contradictory to the finite intellect—in fact coexist in the Infinite Reality. 

Interestingly, the later Hick never explicitly refutes this Aurobindonian 
approach to the problem of conflicting religious truth-claims.®! Moreover, he 
no longer even acknowledges that Sri Aurobindo’s logic of the infinite—which 
he himself had earlier endorsed—provides an entirely different solution to the 
problem. Accordingly, the later Hick wrongly assumes that the only way to avoid 
a “morass of impossibilities” is to adopt the quasi-Kantian view that various ap- 
parently contradictory attributes belong not to God but to our own “human con- 
ceptual repertoire.” 





79. Hick, A Christian Theology of Religions, 64. Hick frequently repeats this point. See, for 
instance, An Interpretation of Religion (234), where he claims that the “reported ultimates, per- 
sonal and non-personal,’ of the various world religions are “mutually exclusive.” 


80. Hick, 4A Christian Theology of Religions, 62. 
81. Indeed, even in the fourth edition of Philosophy of Religion (1990), Hick opted not to re- 


move his statement from the 1973 edition that “there is a program for thought in the explora- 
tion of what Aurobindo called ‘the logic of the infinite’ ” John Hick, Philosophy of Religion, 4th 
ed. (Englewood Cliffs: Prentice Hall, 1990), 115. 


John Hick’s Vedantic Road Not Taken? + 137 


As I suggested in the previous section, one possible reason for the later Hick’s 
tacit repudiation of Sri Aurobindo’s logic of the infinite was his limited under- 
standing of Hinduism, particularly of the nonsectarian Vedantic tradition within 
modern Hindu thought. Tellingly, in 4 Christian Theology of Religions, Hick 
claims that all religions—including Hinduism—are equally absolutistic: 


[E]ach [religion], left to itself, affirms its own uniquely full salvific access 
to the Real, and this affirmation has developed into a structure of belief 
which can only accommodate other traditions by subordinating them to 
itself, whether as total errors or as partial truths. And so a global interpre- 
tation which starts from the rough salvific parity of the great traditions 
will not be identical with the belief-system of any one of them. This is 
why we have either to seek a more comprehensive view, or else each return 
to the absolutism of our own tradition, with Christians, Jews, Muslims, 
Hindus, Buddhists and so on each affirming the unique superiority of 
their own path.” 


Hick claims that all the world religions are inclusivist at best and exclusivist at 
worst. As we have seen, Hick was aware early on of the inclusivist/Ptolemaic par- 
adigm of Advaita Vedanta within Hinduism, according to which personal con- 
ceptions of the ultimate reality are relegated to an inferior position. However, 
Hick was evidently zot aware of the more robustly pluralistic paradigm of non- 
sectarian Vedanta within the Hindu tradition. Hence, Hick is led to posit a false 
either/or between the “absolutism” of all existing religious traditions and a “more 
comprehensive” metatheory of religious pluralism that “will not be identical 
with the belief-system of any one of them.” The nonsectarian Vedantic model 
of religious pluralism championed by Sri Ramakrishna, Vivekananda, and Sri 
Aurobindo flies in the face of Hick’s assumption, since it represents a compre- 
hensive metatheory within the Hindu tradition itself. Since Hick lacked a clear 
understanding of this nonsectarian Vedantic tradition, he not only failed to rec- 
ognize the Vedantic underpinnings of his own early Aurobindonian theory of 
religious pluralism but also adopted a reductive view of modern Hinduism that 
overlooks its pluralist strain. 





82. Hick, 4 Christian Theology of Religions, 48. 


138 © RELIGIOUS PLURALISM 


IV. A Ramakrishnan Critique of Hick’s 
Quasi-Kantian Pluralist Model 


We are now in a position to initiate a dialogue between Sri Ramakrishna and 
the later Hick. It is important to note, first, that the pluralist doctrines of Sri 
Ramakrishna and the later Hick have certain key features in common. Both Sri 
Ramakrishna and Hick not only affirm the equal salvific efficacy of the major 
world religions but also make the ontological claim that all religions center on 
one and the same Divine Reality. Both of them also adopt a similar strategy for 
addressing the problem of conflicting religious truth-claims. According to Hick, 
neither historical truth-claims (such as the claim that Christ died on the Cross) 
nor transhistorical truth-claims (such as the claim that reincarnation is true) are 
“soteriologically vital* From Hick’s perspective, even if Hinduism is wrong, say, 
in claiming that souls reincarnate or Christianity is wrong in claiming that Christ 
died on the Cross, the falsity of these truth-claims would not diminish the sal- 
vific efficacy of these religions. As Hick puts it, “Whilst holding any or none of 
these theories we may still participate in the transformation of human existence 
from self-centredness to Reality-centredness.”** Hick does not deny that certain 
religious practitioners may take particular historical and transhistorical doctrines 
to be essential to their faith, but he insists that it would be a mistake for them to 
universalize this assumption.® Even if certain historical and transhistorical doc- 
trines are soteriologically vital for certain people, they are not soteriologically 
vital for everyone. 

As I argued in section II of the previous chapter, Sri Ramakrishna’s stance 
on historical and transhistorical religious truth-claims is remarkably similar to 
Hick’s. While Vaisnavas take Krsna’s gopi-lila to be a real historical event and 
followers of the Brahmo Samaj do not, Sri Ramakrishna insists that such histor- 
ical doctrines are not soteriologically vital. Sri Ramakrishna also adopts a similar 
stance on transhistorical truth-claims such as the Hindu doctrines of reincar- 
nation and avatara-hood. While Sri Ramakrishna himself personally believes 
in reincarnation and avatara-hood, he claims that belief in these transhistor- 
ical doctrines is not essential for God-realization. Like Hick, Sri Ramakrishna 
maintains that even if a particular religion is wrong about certain historical or 
transhistorical matters, the falsity of such truth-claims does not detract from that 
religion’s salvific efficacy. Hick would also likely endorse Sri Ramakrishna’s claim 





83. Hick, An Interpretation of Religion, 367. 
84. Hick, An Interpretation of Religion, 367. 
85. Hick, An Interpretation of Religion, 369. 


John Hick’s Vedantic Road Not Taken? + 139 


that since all religions have some mistakes, the claim—made by exclusivists and 
some inclusivists—that one religion is more correct than all others is untenable. 

However, Sri Ramakrishna and the later Hick part ways in their respective 
strategies for resolving apparently conflicting claims about the ultimate reality. 
According to the later Hick, the personal and nonpersonal ultimates taught by 
the world religions are all different phenomenal manifestations of the same un- 
knowable Real az sich. Since the various religious conceptions of the ultimate re- 
ality have only phenomenal status, they do not pick out any real feature or aspect 
of the noumenal Real itself. Sri Ramakrishna, in stark contrast to Hick, maintains 
that personal and nonpersonal conceptions of the Divine Reality capture differ- 
ent ontologically real aspects of one and the same Infinite Reality. Hence, while 
the later Hick maintains that the Real an sich is neither personal nor impersonal, 
Sri Ramakrishna maintains that the Infinite Reality is both personal (saguna) and 
impersonal (zirguna), and much more besides.** Sri Ramakrishna, then, would re- 
ject the later Hick’s quasi-Kantian view in favor of the early Hick’s Aurobindonian 
view that the Infinite God is “both personal Lord and non-personal Ground of 
Being.’*” While the later Hick’s quasi-Kantian pluralist doctrine fixes an onto- 
logical gulf between the Real am sich and the different phenomenal conceptions 
of the Real, the nonsectarian Vedantic models of Sri Ramakrishna and the early 
Hick grant full-blown ontological reality to the ultimates of the various religions. 

Indeed, I will argue that the Achilles heel of the later Hick’s theory of religious 
pluralism is precisely the Kantian noumenal-phenomenal ontology at its basis. In 
particular, there are four major weaknesses in the later Hick’s quasi-Kantian plu- 
ralist model which make it much less philosophically attractive than the Vedantic 
pluralist models of Sri Ramakrishna and the early Hick. 

First, the later Hick’s quasi-Kantian religious pluralism fails to take at face 
value many of the central truth-claims of the world religions.** By downgrading 
the personal and nonpersonal ultimates of the various religions to phenomenal 
status, Hick does violence to the self-understanding of most religious practitio- 
ners, who believe in the literal reality of their respective ultimates. As George 
Mavrodes puts it, “Hick’s view suggests that almost all of the world’s religious 
believers are wildly mistaken about the objects of their worship and adoration.’” 





86. For references, see my discussion of VV1 and VV3 in section III of chapter 1. 
87. Hick, Philosophy of Religion, 2nd ed., 128. 


88. Numerous philosophers have criticized Hick on this score. See, for instance, George 
Mavrodes’s objections to Hick in Dialogues in the Philosophy of Religion, ed. John Hick 
(London: Palgrave, 2001), 62-69, and Harold Netland, “Professor Hick on Religious 
Pluralism,’ Religious Studies 22 (1986), 255-66. 


89. Hick, ed., Dialogues in the Philosophy of Religion, 69 n. 6. For a similar criticism of Hick, see 
S. Mark Heim, Salvations: Truth and Difference in Religion (Maryknoll, NY: Orbis, 1995), 34. 


140 * RELIGIOUS PLURALISM 


Anticipating this objection, Hick insists that “these divine personae and met- 
aphysical impersonae .. . are not illusory but are empirically, that is experientially, 
real as authentic manifestations of the Real.”?? Mavrodes’s point, however, is that 
most religious believers take their respective ultimates to be not only “empirically” 
real but also ontologically real, while Hick takes all such religious ultimates to be 
ontologically false. 

Hick tries to downplay the ontological falsity of religious ultimates by strategi- 
cally using the language of “manifestation.” As Hick puts it, “the different objects 
of worship and foci of contemplation are different manifestations of the ineffable 
Real-in-itself””! Hick’s language of manifestation implies an ontological conti- 
nuity between the noumenal Real and its various phenomenal “manifestations, 
thereby lending a veneer of objective reality to the religious ultimates. However, his 
quasi-Kantian framework emphatically denies any ontological continuity between 
the noumenal and the phenomenal.” According to Hick, the various attributes 
ascribed by religions to the ultimate reality, far from corresponding to objective 
aspects of the noumenal Real, are nothing but subjective category-analogues con- 
tributed by the human mind. Hence, Hick’s repeated assertion that the divine 
personae and impersonae are “manifestations” of the Real az sich is misleading and 
unjustified, since his quasi-Kantian ontology precludes the very possibility of divine 
manifestation. 

In stark contrast to Hick’s quasi-Kantian model, Sri Ramakrishna’s vijana-based 
religious pluralism accommodates the possibility of full-blooded divine manifesta- 
tion. As Sri Ramakrishna puts it, “God manifests Himself to seekers in various forms 
and aspects” (K 101 / G 150).” For Sri Ramakrishna, the personal and nonpersonal 
ultimates of the various world religions are ontologically real manifestations of one and 
the same Infinite Reality. By contrast, the later Hick takes these religious ultimates to 
be empirically real but ontologically false. Moreover, while Hick notoriously claims 
that the Christian doctrine of Christ as a divine incarnation is only “mythologically” 
but not literally true, Sri Ramakrishna accepts the literal reality of numerous divine 
incarnations, including Buddha, Christ, Rama, Krsna, and Caitanya.”4 





90. Hick, An Interpretation of Religion, 242. 


91. Hick, A Christian Theology of Religions, 68. See also Hick’s use of the language of “manifes- 
tation” in An Interpretation of Religion, 242-43. 


92. This point is persuasively made by Netland (“Professor Hick on Religious Pluralism, 
261), Mavrodes (Hick, ed., Dialogues in the Philosophy of Religion, 67), and Barua (“Hick and 
Radhakrishnan on Religious Diversity,” 185-88). 


93. For a detailed account of Sri Ramakrishna’s views on divine manifestation, see chapter 5. 


94. See Hick, A Christian Theology of Religions, 86-103 and John Hick, “The Non-absoluteness 
of Christianity, in The Myth of Christian Uniqueness, ed. John Hick and Paul Knitter 
(Maryknoll, NY: Orbis, 1987), 16-36. 


John Hick’s Vedantic Road Not Taken? + 141 


As I will discuss in greater detail in the next chapter, Hick’s quasi-Kantian on- 
tology also leads him to adopt a highly controversial constructivist approach to 
mystical experience, which conflicts with the self-understanding of most mystics 
in different religious traditions.”» Appealing to Steven Katz’s classic defense of 
mystical constructivism, Hick defends the “hypothesis that even in the profound- 
est unitive mysticism the mind operates with culturally specific concepts and that 
what is experienced is accordingly a manifestation of the Real rather than the pos- 
tulated Real an sich.’?° Hick frankly admits that this constructivist understanding 
of mystical experience contradicts the “claims of Zen and of advaitic and theistic 
unitive mysticism.””” According to Hick, what mystics experience is only a men- 
tally conditioned phenomenal form of the ultimate reality rather than the ulti- 
mate reality itself. Hick’s constructivism is especially ironic since he relies heavily 
on the testimony of numerous mystics for his own key distinction between the 
Real an sich and phenomenal conceptions of the Real.”* 

By contrast, Sri Ramakrishna’s pluralist model fully accepts the 
self-understanding of mystics in various religious traditions, who claim to enjoy 
direct, unmediated experience of the ultimate reality. An accomplished mystic 
in his own right, Sri Ramakrishna claims to have had mystical experiences of 
both the personal and the nonpersonal aspects of the Infinite Reality. From Sri 
Ramakrishna’s perspective, Hick’s constructivist assumption that mystical experi- 
ences are always mediated by “culturally specific concepts” betrays a gross mis- 
understanding of the epistemically sui generis character of mystical experiences, 
which often transcend the mind altogether”? According to Sri Ramakrishna, 
“reasoning stops altogether” in the Advaitic state of nirvikalpa samadhi (K 
49-50 / G 103). Sri Ramakrishna is equally emphatic that the highest theistic 
mystical experiences are also direct and unmediated: “God reveals Himself to the 
bhakta as a Person” (K 99 / G 148). Theistic mystics, he claims, have the unme- 
diated experience of ontologically real forms of the personal God. On the basis 
of his own diverse spiritual experiences, Sri Ramakrishna champions what I call 
a “manifestationist” approach to mystical experience, according to which the 
Infinite Reality actually manifests Himself to different mystics in different forms 





95. See section I of Chapter 5. 


96. Hick, An Interpretation of Religion, 295-96. For a more detailed critical examination of 
Katz’s constructivist view, see section II of the next chapter. 


97. Hick, An Interpretation of Religion, 294. 


98. Hick, An Interpretation of Religion, 236-39. Hick seems to me to lapse into eisegesis when 
he reads the Kantian noumenal-phenomenal ontology into the testimony of mystics. 


99. The next chapter provides more in-depth criticisms of constructivism and reconstructs in 
'P 
detail Sri Ramakrishna’s alternative “manifestationist” paradigm of mystical experience. 


142 * RELIGIOUS PLURALISM 


and aspects. In the next chapter, I will argue that Sri Ramakrishna’s manifesta- 
tionist paradigm of mystical experience has numerous philosophical advantages 
over the constructivist paradigm favored by Hick and others. 

Hick responds to the charge that he fails to take religions at face value by 
insisting that “no hypothesis about the relation between the different world 
religions—unless it simply affirms the truth of one and the falsity of the rest—is 
going to be congruent with the belief-system of one of them to the exclusion of 
the others.’!° While Hick is surely right that any metatheory of religious plu- 
ralism must come into conflict with certain elements of the belief-systems of 
most of the world religions, I suspect that critics are complaining that Hick’s 
quasi-Kantian theory is excessively revisionary. If one criterion for the plausibility 
of a theory of religious pluralism is the extent to which it honors the cherished 
beliefs of religious practitioners, Sri Ramakrishna’s vij#ana-based religious plu- 
ralism has much greater plausibility than Hick’s quasi-Kantian theory.’ Hick 
not only denies ontological reality to the personal and nonpersonal ultimates of 
the various religions but also denies the self-understanding of mystics who claim 
to enjoy direct, unmediated experience of the ultimate reality. 

Of course, Sri Ramakrishna’s pluralist model—like all pluralist models—also 
denies certain aspects of the self-understanding of some religious practitioners. In 
particular, Sri Ramakrishna encourages religious practitioners not to limit God 
to what they understand of Him. For instance, Sri Ramakrishna would agree with 
Christians that Christ is the Son of God, but he would also maintain—in con- 
trast to most Christians—that the Infinite God incarnates in other forms as well 
and that the impersonal aspect of God is as real as His personal aspect. On the 
other hand, Sri Ramakrishna would agree with Advaitins that one can attain lib- 
eration by realizing the impersonal nondual Brahman, but he would also caution 
Advaitins against Limiting God to the impersonal Brahman, since the personal 
Sakti is an equally real aspect of the Infinite Reality. Nonetheless, I would argue 
that Sri Ramakrishna honors the self-understanding of religious practitioners to 
a much greater extent than Hick does.’ Unlike Hick, Sri Ramakrishna not only 
accepts the ontological reality of the personal and nonpersonal aspects of the 
Infinite Reality but also maintains that mystical experiences of God are direct 
and unmediated. For Sri Ramakrishna, while every religion captures at least some 
real aspect of God, no religion captures the whole of the Infinite God. For Hick, 





100. Hick, A Christian Theology of Religions, 48. 
101. In the next section of this chapter, I outline adequacy criteria for theories of religious plu- 
ralism, including the criterion of plausibility. 


102. I am grateful to Ankur Barua for pressing me to clarify my position on the precise ex- 
tent to which Sri Ramakrishna’s religious pluralism honors the self-understanding of religious 
practitioners. 


John Hick’s Vedantic Road Not Taken? + 143 


by contrast, zone of the religious conceptions of the ultimate reality capture any 
ontologically real features of the unknowable Real az sich. 

Second, Hick’s postulation of a rather mysterious “Real a sich” is insufficiently 
motivated.' Hick admits that his quasi-Kantian conception of an ineffable Real 
an sich is only a tentative “hypothesis,” which he postulates in order to account for 
the salvific efficacy of the major world religions.’ From Sri Ramakrishna’s stand- 
point, the merely hypothetical status of Hick’s quasi-Kantian theory of religious 
pluralism stems from the fact that Hick arrived at his theory through intellectual 
reasoning rather than through direct mystical experience. 

This fundamental difference between Hick’s and Sri Ramakrishna’s pluralist 
models is neatly captured in their respective interpretations of the parable of the 
blind men and the elephant. Hick admits that the parable usefully illustrates cer- 
tain aspects of his quasi-Kantian theory, but he warns against pushing the parable 
too far: 


Are we not proposing a picture reminiscent of the ancient allegory of the 
blind men and the elephant, in which each runs his hands over a different 
part of the animal, and identifies it differently, a leg as a tree, the trunk 
as a snake, the tail as a rope, and so on? Clearly, in the story the situation 
is being described from the point of view of someone who can observe 
both elephant and blind men. But where is the vantage-point from which 
one can observe both the divine Reality and the different limited human 
standpoints from which that Reality is being variously perceived? The ad- 
vocate of the pluralist understanding cannot pretend to any such cosmic 
vision. How then does he profess to know that the situation is indeed as 
he depicts it? The answer is that he does not profess to know this, if by 
knowledge we mean infallible cognition. ... The pluralist hypothesis is 


arrived at inductively.’ 


Hick insists that no one can occupy the standpoint of the person “who can ob- 
serve both elephant and blind men.” According to Hick, the advocate of religious 
pluralism does not enjoy any such “cosmic vision” by means of which he can per- 
ceive the Real am sich and the various phenomenal forms of the Real taught by 
the world religions. Hence, instead of claiming that his quasi-Kantian theory is 
based on “knowledge” or “infallible cognition,” Hick claims more modestly that 





103. Mavrodes makes a similar criticism in Hick, ed., Dialogues in the Philosophy of Religion 
(64-67). 


104. Hick, Dialogues in the Philosophy of Religion, 16. 
105. Hick makes a similar point in.4 Christian Theology of Religions, 49. 


144 ¢ RELIGIOUS PLURALISM 


he arrived at his theory “inductively”—that is, by recognizing the salvific efficacy of 
all the major world religions and then proposing a hypothesis that best accounts for 
this fact. °° 

However, as I have shown at length in chapter 3, Sri Ramakrishna affirms pre- 
cisely what Hick denies, since he advocates the harmony of all religions not as an 
intellectual hypothesis but as an insight grounded in his own experiential knowl- 
edge of God. Sri Ramakrishna actually practiced multiple religious and spir- 
itual paths—including Advaita Vedanta, numerous theistic Hindu disciplines, 
Christianity, and Islam—and claimed to have realized different forms and aspects 
of one and the same Infinite Reality by means of these diverse paths. To use Hick’s 
language, Sri Ramakrishna champions a pluralist position precisely on the basis of 
his “cosmic vision” of vij#ana, the spiritual realization of the impersonal-personal 
Infinite Reality. Accordingly, in Sri Ramakrishna’s rendering of the parable of the 
blind men and the elephant, the person who sees that each of the blind men is touch- 
ing a different part of the same elephant represents the vij/ani, who has experienced 
multiple aspects and forms of the Infinite Reality.'"” At the same time, however, Sri 
Ramakrishna acknowledges an important disanalogy between the standpoint of the 
sighted person in the parable and the standpoint of the vij#ani. While the man in 
the parable sees the entire elephant, Sri Ramakrishna insists that no one—not even 
the vijani—can experience the whole of the Infinite God.'* Nonetheless, a vijnani 
such as Sri Ramakrishna, who has experienced multiple aspects of God, occupies a 
unique epistemic vantage point from which he is able to harmonize conflicting reli- 
gious truth-claims about the nature of the ultimate reality. 

We are now in a position to appreciate the fundamental difference between 
Hick’s inductive method and Sri Ramakrishna’s method of what might be called 
“mystico-empirical” induction. Hick’s starting point is the abundant empirical ev- 
idence he finds for the roughly equal salvific efficacy of all the world religions. Hick 
then hypothesizes that the postulation of an unknowable Real an sich—which nei- 
ther he nor anyone else has experienced or ever can experience—is the best way to 
account for this empirical data. Sri Ramakrishna’s inductive method, unlike Hick’s, 
is based on a more direct mystical empiricism: Sri Ramakrishna took as his primary 
empirical data the supersensuous facts and realities disclosed to him by his own 
mystical experiences.’ Sri Ramakrishna’s mystico-empirical method, he believed, 





106. Hick elaborates this inductive method in 4 Christian Theology of Religions, 50-51. 


107. See my discussion of Sri Ramakrishna’s blind men and the elephant parable in section I of 


chapter 3. 


108. For an elaboration of this aspect of Sri Ramakrishna’s pluralist view, see my discussion of 
his parable of the ant and sugar hill in section I of the previous chapter. 


109. Stephen Phillips helpfully characterizes Sri Aurobindo’s philosophical method as a “mystic 
empiricism.” Aurobindo’ Philosophy of Brahman (London: EJ. Brill, 1986), 64-67. I use the 


term “mystical empiricism” in a similar sense. 


John Hick’s Vedantic Road Not Taken? + 145 


enabled him to perceive directly the supersensuous ultimates of multiple religions 
and to develop a pluralist ontology on the basis of his mystical experiences. Of 
course, there is no way to prove that Sri Ramakrishna’s alleged mystical experiences 
of God were, in fact, veridical. However, I will argue in chapter 6 that it is reason- 
able for us to believe that the putative mystical experiences of credible subjects have 
some degree of evidential value. Hence, if we grant even a little evidential value to 
Sri Ramakrishna’s mystical experiences, then other things being equal, his mystically 
grounded religious pluralism has greater justificatory support than Hick’s specula- 
tive quasi-Kantian hypothesis, which he arrived at through an indirect method of 
empirical induction.”° 

Third, the later Hick does not justify adequately his assumption that the ulti- 
mate reality cannot be both personal and nonpersonal at the same time. For the 
later Hick, the most plausible way to account for the mutually exclusive attributes 
ascribed to the ultimate reality is to treat them as subjective contributions of the 
human mind rather than as objective attributes of the ultimate reality. Hence, 
he conceives the Real az sich in strictly negative terms as the noumenal reality 
to which zone of these attributes apply: it is neither personal nor nonpersonal, 
and so on. However, as William Alston and Jerome Gellman have convincingly 
argued, Hick is too quick to assume that the ultimate reality cannot be personal 
and nonpersonal simultaneously.” In opposition to Hick, Gellman conceives di- 
vine infinitude as an “inexhaustible plenitude” that accommodates both person- 
ality and impersonality: 


The idea is not that God actually possesses contradictory attributes. 
Rather, the idea is that out of God’s inexhaustible plenitude He has the 
innate power to appear as either personal or as impersonal. Or to put it 
differently, God has an “aspect” which is personal and an “aspect” which is 
impersonal. Out of the plenitude can emerge either of these aspects in the 
absence of the other... . Unlike Hick, therefore, we are prepared to enter- 
tain the thought that God Himselfis experienced both as a personal being 
and as an impersonal being.'” 





110. Indeed, Daniel Howard-Snyder has recently argued that the Real an sich, as understood by 
Hick, not only is impossible but also lacks explanatory power. See his article, “Who or What is 


God, According to John Hick?? Topoi 36 (2017), 571-86. 


111. See William Alston’s criticism of Hick in Hick, ed., Dialogues in the Philosophy of Religion, 
47. See also Jerome Gellman, Experience of God and the Rationality of Theistic Belief (Ithaca, 
NY: Cornell University Press, 1997), 90-121. 


112. Gellman, Experience of God and the Rationality of Theistic Belief; 119. 


146 * RELIGIOUS PLURALISM 


Gellman’s position comes remarkably close to the nonsectarian Vedanta of Sri 
Ramakrishna and Sri Aurobindo, even though Gellman does not refer to Vedantic 
texts or to the early Hick’s Aurobindonian theory of religious pluralism. Just as 
Sri Ramakrishna maintains that “the Reality which is zirguna is also saguna” (K 
50-51 / G 103-4), Gellman claims that God “has the innate power to appear as 
either personal or as impersonal.” Like the early Hick, Gellman maintains that 
theistic and nontheistic religions capture different “aspects” of one and the same 
Infinite Reality, which “is both ... non-personal . .. and personal." Translating 
Gellman’s criticism of Hick into the terms of the argument developed in this 
chapter, we can say that the early Hick’s “logic of the infinite” comes back to 
haunt the later Hick. For the early Hick, the limits of human thought do not dic- 
tate the limits of divine possibility, so the Infinite Reality can be simultaneously 
personal and nonpersonal, even though the finite intellect cannot grasp how this 
is possible. Since the later Hick never refutes this Aurobindonian logic of the in- 
finite which he himself had once endorsed, it remains a live option. 

Fourth, while Hick’s quasi-Kantian pluralist theory upholds the equal salvific 
efficacy of all the major world religions, it does not accommodate the possibility 
of actively learning from religious traditions other than one’s own. For the later 
Hick, none of the various religious ultimates correspond to ontologically real 
aspects of the Real az sich, so the world religions are not complementary in any 
meaningful sense.“ Hence, by encountering other religious traditions, we can 
learn, at best, about the background cultural assumptions informing different re- 
ligious conceptions of the ultimate reality, but we cannot learn anything about 
the ultimate reality itself.'° 

By contrast, Sri Ramakrishna’s vij#ana-based pluralist model furnishes a strong 
ontological rationale for the complementarity of all the world religions. For Sri 
Ramakrishna, the various theistic and nontheistic conceptions of the ultimate 
reality complement one another, since they correspond to different ontologically 
real aspects of one and the same Infinite Reality.""® Accordingly, religious practi- 
tioners can gain deeper and more comprehensive insight into the inexhaustible 


113. Hick, God and the Universe of Faiths, 144. 


114. It is worth noting, however, that the later Hick nonetheless appeals repeatedly to the lan- 
guage of “complementarity.” See, for instance, Hick’s appeal to the “principle of complemen- 
tarity” in An Interpretation of Religion, 374-75. However, since Hick’s quasi-Kantian ontology 
excludes the possibility of ontological complementarity, his use of the language of “comple- 
mentarity’—like his use of the language of “manifestation” —is unjustified and misleading. 


115. For similar criticisms of Hick, see Jeffery D. Long, “(Tentatively) Putting the Pieces 
Together: Comparative Theology in the Tradition of Sri Ramakrishna,’ in The New Comparative 
Theology, ed. Francis Clooney (London: Continuum, 2010), 151-61; Heim, Salvations, 7. 


116. See my discussion of this issue at the end of section I of chapter 3. 


John Hick’s Vedantic Road Not Taken? + 147 


nature of the Infinite Reality by learning from religious faiths other than their own. 
Therefore, Sri Ramakrishna’s pluralist model provides much greater scope for fruit- 
ful interreligious dialogue and mutual enrichment than Hick’s quasi-Kantian model. 

Hick, who was exceptionally responsive to his critics, observed that his 
critics have not worked hard enough to “work out a viable alternative” to his 
quasi-Kantian theory of religious pluralism: 


As I’ve always insisted, the hypothesis is offered as the “best explanation,’ 
i.e. the most comprehensive and economical explanation, from a religious 
point of view, of the facts of the history of religions. A proffered “best 
explanation” is not a proof, because it is always open to someone else to 
come forward and offer what they believe is a better explanation. And 
so the right response of someone who does not like my proposed expla- 
nation is not to complain that it is not proved but to work out a viable 


alternative.” 


Chapters 3 and 4 of this book have ventured to meet Hick’s formidable challenge 
by making a cumulative case that Sri Ramakrishna’s vij#ana-based pluralist model 
provides a better explanation of the “facts of the history of religions” than Hick’s 
quasi-Kantian theory. 

Interestingly, as I have argued in the course of this chapter, Hick’s own early 
Aurobindonian theory of religious pluralism contained the rudiments of a more 
plausible and more robustly pluralistic account of religious diversity than his 
later quasi-Kantian theory. Had Hick developed his promising early theory along 
nonsectarian Vedantic lines, he might have ended up with a more viable model of 
religious pluralism than the problematic quasi-Kantian one for which he is now 
famous. Perhaps the Vedantic road not taken by Hick is the road he should have 
taken—or, at the very least, more fully explored. 


V. Adequacy Criteria for Assessing Theories of Religious 
Pluralism 
In the wake of Hick’s pioneering work on religious pluralism, numerous scholars 


have developed alternative pluralist theories of their own, which they claim can 
avoid the philosophical problems plaguing Hick’s quasi-Kantian theory."* Some 





117. Hick, A Christian Theology of Religions, 51. 


118. For a helpful survey of some recent post-Hickean theories of religious pluralism, see 
Samuel Ruhmkorff, “The Incompatibility Problem and Religious Pluralism beyond Hick, 
Philosophy Compass 8.5 (2013), 510-22. 


148 © RELIGIOUS PLURALISM 


of the most prominent of these pluralist theories include Judson Trapnell’s ex- 
periential pluralism, Raimundo Panikkar’s “cosmotheandric” pluralism, $. Mark 
Heim’s “multiple salvations” pluralism, and David Ray Griffin’s Whiteheadian 
complementary pluralism." While it is beyond the scope of this book to eval- 
uate these pluralist theories, I will begin to lay some of the groundwork for future 
cross-cultural work on religious pluralism by addressing an important metaques- 
tion: in the face of so many competing pluralist theories, what criteria should we 
employ to adjudicate among these theories and to determine their relative ade- 
quacy? I will outline briefly what I take to be the four most important adequacy 
criteria for assessing theories of religious pluralism: ACI, internal consistency; 
AC2, robustness; AC3, fruitfulness; and AC4, plausibility.'”° 

According to ACI, a theory of religious pluralism must be internally con- 
sistent. To assess a given pluralist theory on the basis of this criterion, we would 
need to ask whether there are any features or implications of the theory that work 
against the pluralist viewpoint. Clearly, theories of religious pluralism that have 
inclusivist elements or implications would not fare well on this criterion. Heim, 
for instance, paradoxically advocates a “pluralistic inclusivism,” which maintains 
that each religious practitioner is rationally justified in taking the salvation taught 
by her own religion to be ultimate and the salvations taught in other religions 
to be merely penultimate.” As several critics have pointed out, there is a deep 
tension—if not an outright contradiction—between the pluralist and inclusiv- 
ist strands in Heim’s theory.’”* Since the pluralist theories of both Hick and Sri 
Ramakrishna consistently maintain that multiple religions have equal salvific ef- 
ficacy, they fare significantly better on AC1 than Heim’s pluralist-cum-inclusivist 
theory. 

Turning now to AC2, we can say that the robustness of a theory of religious 
pluralism depends on the extent to which it honors the particularity of each re- 
ligion and leaves intact the cherished beliefs of religious practitioners. As Hick 


119. See Judson Trapnell, “Indian Sources on the Possibility of a Pluralist View of Religions, 

Journal of Ecumenical Studies 35.2 (Spring 1998), 210-35; Heim, Salvations; Raimundo 
Panikkar, “The Invisible Harmony: A Universal Theory of Religion or a Cosmic Confidence 
in Reality?? in Toward a Universal Theology of Religion, ed. Leonard Swidler (Maryknoll, 
NY: Orbis Books, 1987), 118-53; David Ray Griffin, “John Cobb’s Whiteheadian 
Complementary Pluralism,’ in Deep Religious Pluralism: Whitehead’s Philosophy and Religious 
Diversity, ed. David Ray Griffin (Louisville: Westminster John Knox Press, 2005), 39-66. 


120. Iam grateful to Ankur Barua for suggesting that I add a section on adequacy criteria. 
121. Heim, Salvations, 131. 


122. For convincing criticisms of Heim’s pluralist theory, see Andrew Schwartz, “Epistemic 
Justification and Religious Truth Claims: Heim’s More Pluralistic Hypothesis, Claremont 
Journal of Religion 1.1 (January 2012), 54-69, and Ruhmkorff, “The Incompatibility Problem, 
516-17. 


John Hick’s Vedantic Road Not Taken? + 149 


rightly points out,’ 


no theory of religious pluralism can be maximally robust in 
this sense, since any coherent pluralist theory must deny at least some aspects of 
the self-understanding of certain religious practitioners. Nonetheless, different 
pluralist theories exhibit varying degrees of robustness. For instance, while Hick 
downgrades the ultimates of the world religions to merely phenomenal status, Sri 
Ramakrishna grants full-blown ontological reality to the various religious ulti- 
mates. In this respect, then, Sri Ramakrishna’s religious pluralism is considerably 
more robust than Hick’s quasi-Kantian model. 

As for AC3, we can measure the fruitfulness of a given pluralist theory in a va- 
riety of ways. However, two measures of fruitfulness are especially important: the 
extent to which a pluralist theory can (1) reduce religious conflict and (2) foster 
interreligious dialogue. In the previous section, I argued that the subjectivist epis- 
temology at the basis of Hick’s quasi-Kantian theory precludes the possibility of 
learning from religions other than one’s own. For Hick, by exposing ourselves 
to other religions, we do not so much gain insight into the nature of ultimate 
reality as we learn about the differing cultural assumptions of various religious 
practitioners. For Sri Ramakrishna, by contrast, our encounter with other reli- 
gions can teach us about genuine aspects or forms of the Infinite Reality that are 
not emphasized or even accepted by our own religion. Since Sri Ramakrishna’ 
vijnana-based conception of the impersonal-personal Infinite Reality furnishes 
a strong ontological basis for interreligious dialogue, his model of religious plu- 
ralism fares better on AC3 than Hick’s quasi-Kantian model. 

AC4, the plausibility criterion, requires us to ask: do we have good reason 
to believe that a given theory of religious pluralism is true? Of course, it is very 
likely impossible to prove, in a conclusive manner, that any theory of religious 
diversity—be it pluralist, inclusivist, or exclusivist—is true. Nonetheless, one 
could still argue, on various grounds, that a particular theory of religious plu- 
ralism is more likely to be true than other theories. For instance, some pluralist 
theories can be shown to have greater evidential support than others. As we saw 
in the previous section, while Hick presents his quasi-Kantian theory as an in- 
tellectual “hypothesis,”’° Sri Ramakrishna affirms the harmony of all religions 
as a spiritual conviction grounded in his own diverse mystical experiences of 
God. Therefore, if we grant at least some evidential value to Sri Ramakrishna’s 
putative mystical experiences—as I argue in chapter 6 that we should—then his 





123. Hick, A Christian Theology of Religions, 48 (quoted in the previous section). 


124. For an in-depth elaboration and defense of this claim, see the first of my four criticisms of 
Hick’s quasi-Kantian pluralist theory in the previous section of this chapter. 


125. Hick, A Christian Theology of Religions, 51. 


150 © RELIGIOUS PLURALISM 


vijnana-based religious pluralism has greater evidential support, other things 
being equal, than any pluralist theory not based on the direct mystical experience 
of God. 

The way forward, then, is to expand and deepen philosophical discourse on 
religious pluralism along two dimensions. First, both Western and non-Western 
theories of religious pluralism should be given equal airtime and brought into 
fruitful dialogue. Second, in order to compare and evaluate these competing plu- 
ralist theories, we need to develop and justify—in much greater depth and detail 
than I have done in this section—the main criteria for assessing the adequacy of 
different pluralist theories and to determine the relative weight of each criterion. 
Sri Ramakrishna, I hope to have shown, has much to contribute to this collective, 
and immensely important, endeavor. 


MYSTICAL EXPERIENCE 


BEYOND PERENNIALISM AND 
CONSTRUCTIVISM 


SRI RAMAKRISHNA’S MANIFESTATIONIST 
MODEL OF MYSTICAL EXPERIENCE 


Mystics of various world religions have often left behind rich and fas- 
cinating descriptions of their mystical experiences.’ By analyzing and 
comparing the testimony of these mystics, many recent philosophers 
have attempted to develop a general theory of the nature of mystical 
experience. Any such general theory has to account for the fact that 
mystics have described their experiences in a variety of ways. Jewish 
mystics, for instance, tend to describe the ultimate mystical experi- 
ence as devekuth, an experience of “clinging” to God in which there 
remains a fundamental difference between the individual and God.” 
Theistic mystics in Hindu, Christian, and Islamic traditions often 
describe their experiences in terms of a loving union with God. For 
instance, the Catholic mystic Heinrich von Seuse described this 
loving union as an experience in which the mystic “is quite dead to 
himself, and is entirely lost in God, has passed into Him, and has be- 
come one spirit with Him in all respects, just as a little drop of water 





1. For the purposes of chapters 5 and 6, I define “mystical experience” as an ex- 
perience which the subject takes to be an experience of ultimate reality. Three 
features of this definition are worth highlighting. First, the definition does not 
presuppose the veridicality of the mystical experience, since the subject can be 
mistaken in taking his or her experience to be an experience of ultimate reality. 
Second, I use the term “ultimate reality” rather than “God” in order to accommo- 
date both theistic and nontheistic mystical experiences. Third, according to this 
definition, mystical visions of various divine forms also count as mystical experi- 
ences. Section III of this chapter argues that Sri Ramakrishna’s reports of his own 
numerous visions of God lend strong support to the view that divine visions count 
as mystical experiences. 


2. Steven Katz discusses devekuth in his article “Language, Epistemology, 
and Mysticism, in Mysticism and Philosophical Analysis, ed. Steven Katz 
(New York: Oxford University Press, 1978), 33-36. 


154 * MYSTICAL EXPERIENCE 


that is poured into a large quantity of wine.’? However, Seuse was quick to add 
that the mystic’s union with God should not be understood as absolute iden- 
tity, since the mystic’s “being remains, though in a different form, in a different 
glory, and in a different power.”4 Hindu mystics in the nontheistic tradition of 
Advaita Vedanta have gone even further than Seuse by claiming to have direct 
knowledge of their absolute identity with the impersonal nondual Brahman.’ 
Occasionally, the Christian mystic Meister Eckhart and the Sufi mystic Mansur 
al-Hallaj also described their mystical experiences in language that suggests, or at 
least verges on, absolute identity with God.° Many Buddhist mystics, meanwhile, 
have described the ultimate state of zibbana in negative terms as the total extinc- 
tion of suffering or as the realization that there is no permanent self or soul. 

The philosophical challenge is to develop a theory of mystical experience that 
adequately accounts for the sheer diversity of mystical testimony both within, 
and across, religious traditions. In recent analytic philosophy of religion, two 
competing theories of mystical experience have been especially influential: peren- 
nialism and constructivism.’ Perennialists such as Walter Stace and Ninian Smart 
maintain that there is a small number of common types of mystical experience 
across different religious traditions.’ Distinguishing experience from interpre- 
tation, perennialists argue that mystics in different traditions interpreted the 
same mystical experience in various ways due to factors such as differing cultural 
and theological backgrounds and the pressures of religious orthodoxy. By con- 
trast, constructivists such as Steven Katz and John Hick argue that a mystic’s 
pre-experiential beliefs and concepts play a key role in shaping or constructing 





3. Cited in R. C. Zaehner, Mysticism Sacred and Profane (New York: Oxford University Press, 
1957), 21. 


4. Cited in Zaehner, Mysticism Sacred and Profane, 21. 


5. See, for instance, Talks with Ramana Maharshi, trans. Munagala Venkatramaiah 
(Tiruvannamalai: Sri Ramanasramam, 1963) and I Am That: Conversations with Sri 
Nisargadatta Maharaj, trans. Maurice Frydman (Bombay: Chetana, 1978). Sri Ramakrishna 
frequently likens the experience of Advaitic nirvikalpa samadhi to a salt doll melting into the 
ocean. See, for instance, K 121 / G 170. 


6. For instance, Eckhart declared: “God and I, we are one in pure knowledge.” Cited in C. F. 
Kelley, Meister Eckhart on Divine Knowledge (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1977), 26. 
Al-Hallaj made the famous statement: “I am the Absolute” (“ava al-Haqq’). Cited in The New 
Encyclopedia of Islam, ed. Cyril Glassé and Huston Smith (Walnut Creek, CA: AltaMira Press, 
2001), 166. 


7.1 follow Jerome Gellman’s use of the terms “perennialism” and “constructivism” in his article 


“Mysticism,” Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, 2014 edition (http://plato.stanford.edu). 


8. W. T. Stace, Mysticism and Philosophy (London: Macmillan, 1961); Ninian Smart, 
“Interpretation and Mystical Experience,’ Religious Studies 1 (1965), 75-87. 


Beyond Perennialism and Constructivism + 155 


the mystical experience itself? According to constructivists, various mystics have 
fundamentally different mystical experiences because the concepts and beliefs 
they bring to their experiences differ. 

After decades of fierce debate, perennialists and constructivists seem to have 
reached a stalemate. We can move the discussion forward, I suggest, by consid- 
ering Sri Ramakrishna’s mystical testimony and teachings. Western philosophers 
have largely ignored Sri Ramakrishna, in spite of his direct relevance to philo- 
sophical discussions of mysticism. Moreover, the few philosophers who do refer 
to Sri Ramakrishna tend to take his statements out of context and attempt to 
fit him into their own preconceived conceptual frameworks. Stace, for instance, 
cites Sri Ramakrishna’s description of his experience of nirvikalpa samadhi but 
fails to recognize that it was the culmination of his practice of Advaita Vedanta. 
As a result, Stace wrongly dismisses Sri Ramakrishna’s Advaitic experience as a 
subjective “trance” that does not even count as a genuine mystical experience.” 
Meanwhile, R. C. Zaehner—unaware of Sri Ramakrishna’s philosophical frame- 
work of Vijfana Vedanta—mistakenly assumes that Sri Ramakrishna was “torn” 
between Advaita Vedanta and devotion to a personal God." On the basis of this 
misinterpretation, Zaehner appeals to Sri Ramakrishna’s theistic experiences as 
evidence to support his own highly controversial Christian argument for the su- 
periority of theistic experience to monistic experience.” 

Such piecemeal and biased discussions of Sri Ramakrishna not only distort his 
nuanced views on mystical experience but also overlook their far-reaching phil- 
osophical significance. Chapters 5 and 6 of this book attempt to provide a more 
charitable and comprehensive examination of Sri Ramakrishna’s mystical testi- 
mony and teachings. This chapter argues that Sri Ramakrishna’s unique approach 
to mysticism considerably enriches our understanding of the nature and phenom- 
enology of mystical experience. The next chapter draws upon Sri Ramakrishna’ 
mystical testimony in order to strengthen contemporary philosophical defenses 
of the epistemic value of mystical experience. 

Sections I and II of this chapter provide the background needed to appre- 
ciate the sophistication and contemporary relevance of Sri Ramakrishna’s views 
on mystical experience. Section I critically examines major perennialist mod- 
els of mystical experience, focusing especially on the influential views of Stace. 
Section II then examines the constructivist models of Katz and Hick. Section 





9. Katz, “Language, Epistemology, and Mysticism’; John Hick, An Interpretation of Religion 
(London: Palgrave Macmillan, 1989), 165-71 and 292-96. 


10. Stace, Mysticism and Philosophy, 52. 
ll. Zaehner, Mysticism Sacred and Profane, 131-32. 
12. Zaehner, Mysticism Sacred and Profane, 130-34. 


156 * MYSTICAL EXPERIENCE 


III demonstrates that perennialists and constructivists, in spite of their many dif- 
ferences, tend to adopt a shared methodology based on indirect textual inter- 
pretation rather than direct experience. Drawing on the work of Smart and Frits 
Staal, I contend that mystics themselves are in a far better epistemic position than 
nonmystic philosophers to determine accurately the phenomenology of mystical 
experience. Unlike most philosophers, Sri Ramakrishna arrived at a general phil- 
osophical account of mystical experience through the direct experiential method. 
Many features of Sri Ramakrishna’s rich mystical testimony, I argue, cannot be 
explained adequately in terms of either perennialism or constructivism. 

Section IV reconstructs Sri Ramakrishna’s new conceptual paradigm for un- 
derstanding mystical experience, according to which one and the same Infinite 
Reality manifests itself to different mystics in various forms and aspects. Sri 
Ramakrishna’s “manifestationist” paradigm of mystical experience, I contend, 
shares many of the advantages of both perennialism and constructivism but avoids 
their limitations and weaknesses. Finally, section V defends Sri Ramakrishna 
against the potential objection that his manifestationist paradigm is based on a 
philosophia perennis that fails to account for the diversity of mystical experiences 
and worldviews. 


|. Perennialist Models 


Numerous philosophers have defended the perennialist or “common core” thesis 
that at least certain types of mystical experience are the same in all cultures and 
religious traditions. Perennialists appeal to a key distinction between experience 
and interpretation in order to explain how one and the same mystical experience 
can be interpreted and described in different ways. It is important to note that 
perennialism is sometimes associated with, but does not necessarily entail, a “per- 
ennial philosophy”—that is, a universal philosophy or theology that explains the 
common ontological basis of mystical experiences across cultures.” 

We can distinguish three different versions of perennialism. Early 
twentieth-century philosophers such as Evelyn Underhill and Sarvepalli 
Radhakrishnan maintained that all mystical experiences are the same but that 
interpretations of them vary across cultures and traditions. As a Christian theist, 
Underhill characterizes the universal mystical experience as the ecstatic experience 





13. As Smart observes, “The fact that mysticism is substantially the same in different cultures 
and religions does not... entail that there is a ‘perennial philosophy’ common to mystics” 
8g y y 
: ; : ee ; eK cas 
“Interpretation and Mystical Experience,’ 75). Stace’s perennialist position, in contrast to 
xP y P « »” 
Smart’s, does seem to be based on a perennial philosophy he calls “pantheism.” See Stace, 
pny 
Mysticism and Philosophy, 207-50. 


Beyond Perennialism and Constructivism + 157 


of union with the personal God." Accordingly, she argues that mystics in Eastern 
traditions who claim to have experienced absolute identity with an impersonal 
Absolute have misinterpreted what is in fact a theistic unitive experience in which 
“personality is not lost but made more real.”” In stark contrast, Radhakrishnan, 
a proponent of Advaita Vedanta, characterizes the universal mystical experience 
as the nondual “realization of the universal self in us.”!® For Radhakrishnan, the 
“theological preconceptions” of theistic mystics lead them to misinterpret their 
nontheistic Advaitic experiences in theistic terms.'!7 However, numerous scholars 
have challenged the perennialist views of both Underhill and Radhakrishnan on 
the grounds that mystical experience is too diverse a phenomenon to be reduced 
to a single common denominator." 

Mote recent philosophers have developed more nuanced perennialist posi- 
tions that are not committed to the implausible thesis that a// mystical experi- 
ence is the same. Robert Forman, Gary Kessler, and numerous others make the 
more delimited perennialist argument that there is one particular type of mystical 
experience—namely, the experience of wakeful contentless consciousness which 
Forman calls a “pure consciousness event” (PCE)—that is phenomenologically 
identical across traditions but interpreted in a variety of ways.” According to 
Forman, Meister Eckhart’s experience of Vergezzenlicheit (“forgetfulness”), the 
anonymous Christian mystic’s experience of the “cloud of unknowing,’ and the 
Zen Buddhist Rosen Takashina’s experience of being “without thoughts” are all 
instances of the same PCE interpreted in accordance with their respective philo- 
sophical frameworks.”° 

Meanwhile, philosophers such as Stace, Smart, and Caroline Franks Davis 
claim that all mystical experience can be divided into a small class of types which 





14. Evelyn Underhill, Mysticism (London: Methuen, [1911] 1945), 420. See also Evelyn 
Underhill, The Essentials of Mysticism and Other Essays (Oxford: Oneworld, [1920] 2007), 10. 


15. Underhill, Mysticism, 420. 


16. Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan, An Idealist View of Life (New Delhi: HarperCollins, [1932] 
2001), 91. 


17. Radhakrishnan, Ax Idealist View of Life, 90. 
18. See, for instance, Katz, “Language, Epistemology, and Mysticism,” 23-25. 


19. See Robert Forman, ed., The Problem of Pure Consciousness: Mysticism and Philosophy 
(New York: Oxford University Press, 1990), especially Forman’s two contributions, 
“Introduction: Mysticism, Constructivism, and Forgetting” (3-49) and “Eckhart, Geziicken, 
and the Ground of the Soul” (98-120), and Norman Prigge and Gary Kessler’s article, “Is 
Mystical Experience Everywhere the Same?” (269-87). 


20. Forman, The Problem of Pure Consciousness, 31-34 and 98-120. 


158 © MYSTICAL EXPERIENCE 


cut across cultural boundaries.” Stace’s perennialist position deserves special 
attention, both because his view has been especially influential and because he 
refers repeatedly to Sri Ramakrishna in the course of his discussion. In his clas- 
sic study Mysticism and Philosophy (1960), Stace claims that there are only two 
types of mystical experience found in all cultures and religions: an “extrovertive” 
experience of Oneness in the apparent multiplicity of the world and a deeper 
and more complete “introvertive” experience of “pure consciousness” or “undif- 
ferentiated unity,’ which transcends both space-time and subject-object duality.”* 
Strangely, Stace mentions Sri Ramakrishna’s six-month immersion in nirvikalpa 
samadhi as an example of a “trance” state—enjoyed only by the “more emotional 
or hysterical mystics’—that does not belong to the “universal core” of mystical 
experience.”? Stace’s egregious misinterpretation stems from his lack of under- 
standing of the biographical and philosophical context of Sri Ramakrishna’s mys- 
tical experiences. In fact, as I will discuss in detail in section II, Sri Ramakrishna 
described his absorption in xirvikalpa samadhi as the Advaitic experience of the 
nondual Atman, which Stace himself considers to be a paradigmatic case of intro- 
vertive mystical experience.” 

If, as Stace claims, the universal core of all introvertive mystical experience is 
the experience of an “undifferentiated unity,’ how does he account for theistic 
descriptions of mystical experience? Distinguishing experience from interpre- 
tation, Stace argues that theistic mystics wrongly interpreted in theistic terms 
what was in fact a nontheistic introvertive experience of pure consciousness.” 
Addressing Saint Teresa of Avila’s numerous reports of mystical experiences of 
union with a loving God, Stace condescendingly claims that her intellectual lim- 
itations prevented her from distinguishing experience from interpretation.”° 
Meanwhile, in order to explain passages where Seuse and Eckhart state that 
the soul still remains separate from God even in the highest unitive experience, 
Stace claims that they were pressured by ecclesiastical authority to describe their 





21. This is a paraphrase of Katz’s definition of the “most sophisticated form” of perennialism 
in “Language, Epistemology, and Mysticism” (24). For a defense of this perennialist view, see 
Stace, Mysticism and Philosophy; Smaxt, “Interpretation and Mystical Experience”; Caroline 
Franks Davis, The Evidential Force of Religious Experience (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1989), 
166-92. 


22. Stace, Mysticism and Philosophy, 86 and 132. 
23. Stace, Mysticism and Philosophy, 52. 

24, Stace, Mysticism and Philosophy, 90. 

25. Stace, Mysticism and Philosophy, 103-4. 


26. Stace, Mysticism and Philosophy, 103-4. He also refers to Teresa’s “lack of critical 
ability” (26). 


Beyond Perennialism and Constructivism + 159 


mystical experience of complete undifferentiated unity in terms of orthodox 
Christian theism.”’ 

Stace further argues that the Advaita Vedantin’s experience of absolute iden- 
tity with Brahman, the Buddha’s experience of nirvana, and the Mahayana 
Buddhist’s experience of séinyata are all the same introvertive experience of undif- 
ferentiated unity interpreted in slightly different ways.”* Jewish mysticism poses a 
serious problem for Stace, since—as he rightly points out—the “Jewish tradition 
has always frowned on the kind of mysticism in which identity, or even union, 
with God is claimed.’” Nonetheless, on the basis of a single Hasidic mystic’s 
description of an experience in which his “gaze” was “fixed on Nothing,’ Stace 
makes the sweeping generalization that the Hasidic experience of the “undiffer- 
entiated void” is the same “introvertive experience more fully described in other 
traditions.”*° He concludes that there is a “clear unanimity of evidence” that mys- 
tics in all religious traditions have interpreted one and the same introvertive ex- 
perience of undifferentiated unity in various ways.! 

Later in his book, Stace significantly complicates his argument by claiming 
that introvertive mystics of all traditions experience the Universal Self as a par- 
adoxical “vacuum-plenum.’** The plenum dimension of the Universal Self cap- 
tures its three “positive” aspects: the Universal Self has qualities, is personal, and 
is dynamic, creative, and active. Stace explicitly aligns the plenum dimension 
with “the God of theistic religions.’ The vacuum dimension of the Universal 
Self captures its three corresponding “negative” aspects: the Universal Self has 
no qualities, is impersonal, and is totally inactive, static, and motionless.** Stace 
aligns the vacuum dimension with the Advaitic impersonal (zirguna) Brahman 
and Eckhart’s “Godhead.” The introvertive mystic, he argues, experiences both 
the vacuum and plenum dimensions of the Universal Self simultaneously, 
even though these two dimensions appear contradictory to the “logical under- 
standing.’*® Accordingly, Stace rejects the philosophical strategies of Eckhart and 
Sankara, both of whom attempt to dissolve this logical contradiction by granting 





27. Stace, Mysticism and Philosophy, 14-15. 

28. See Stace, Mysticism and Philosophy, 107-10 and 123-27. 
29. Stace, Mysticism and Philosophy, 106. 

30. Stace, Mysticism and Philosophy, 107. 

31. Stace, Mysticism and Philosophy, 110. 

32. Stace, Mysticism and Philosophy, 161-78. 

33. Stace, Mysticism and Philosophy, 165. 

34, Stace, Mysticism and Philosophy, 163. 

35. Stace, Mysticism and Philosophy, 175. 


160 © MYSTICAL EXPERIENCE 


higher ontological status to the vacuum dimension (Eckhart’s “Godhead” and 
Saftkara’s nirguna Brahman) and lower ontological status to the plenum dimen- 
sion (Eckhart’s “God” and Sankara’s saguna Brahman). 

Careful readers of my book will be struck by the parallels between Stace’s 
conception of the vacuum-plenum and Sri Ramakrishna’s conception of the 
impersonal-personal Infinite Reality. In fact, Stace himself cites in support of 
his vacuum-plenum theory Sri Ramakrishna’s teaching on the inseparability of 
the impersonal Brahman and the dynamic Sakti: “When I think of the Supreme 
Being as inactive—neither creating nor preserving nor destroying—I call [H]im 
Brahman ... the Impersonal God. When I think of Him as active—creative, pre- 
serving, destroying—I call him Sakti, or Maya, or Prakriti, the Personal God.”** 
Like Sri Ramakrishna, Stace maintains that the ultimate reality is both personal 
and impersonal and both dynamic and static, even though the rational intellect is 
unable to grasp how this is possible. 

Nonetheless, Stace is mistaken in claiming that Sri Ramakrishna’s teach- 
ing supports Stace’s own perennialist argument that all introvertive mystics ex- 
perience the Reality as a paradoxical vacuum-plenum. Stace was evidently not 
aware of the broader philosophical framework of Vijfiana Vedanta within which 
Sri Ramakrishna’s teachings on God are embedded. As we saw in chapter 1, Sri 
Ramakrishna’s teaching about the inseparability of Brahman and Sakti was based 
on his own mystical experience of vijiana, the dual awareness of the impersonal 
(nirguna) and personal (saguna) aspects of the Infinite Reality. Sri Ramakrishna 
emphasizes that only #varakotis—divine incarnations and their associates—are 
capable of attaining the exalted spiritual state of vijwana. Jivakotis (“ordinary 
souls”), by contrast, are typically only capable of realizing either the personal 
or the impersonal aspect of the Infinite Reality but not both at the same time. 
For Sri Ramakrishna, then, the expansive realization of the Divine Reality as a 
vacuum-plenum is a rarefied form of mystical experience that differs markedly 
from the experiences of most mystics, which tend to be either exclusively the- 
istic or exclusively nontheistic. Hence, while Stace implausibly maintains that a// 
introvertive mystics experience the Reality as a vacuum-plenum, Sri Ramakrishna 
asserts that only a small minority of mystics enjoy this experience. 

Sri Ramakrishna’s standpoint of vij#ana also problematizes Stace’s thesis 
that extrovertive mystical experience is an incomplete form of introvertive 
mystical experience. According to Sri Ramakrishna, the experience of vij#ana 
has both introvertive and extrovertive dimensions, since the vijidni is not only 
introvertively aware of his union with the impersonal-personal God but also 





36. Cited in Stace, Mysticism and Philosophy, 166. 


Beyond Perennialism and Constructivism + 161 


extrovertively aware that God has become the entire universe.*” Ironically, then, 
Sri Ramakrishna’s vij#ana-based teaching about the inseparability of Brahman 
and Sakti—which Stace cites in support of his own perennialist model of mys- 
tical experience—actually undermines Stace’s position. 

Indeed, Stace’s misappropriation of Sri Ramakrishna’s teaching on Brahman 
and Sakti is symptomatic of a much deeper philosophical tension between the 
two main strands of his perennialist argument. In the second chapter of his book, 
Stace argues that all introvertive mystics have the nontheistic experience of an 
undifferentiated unity but that theistic mystics misinterpret this nontheistic ex- 
perience as an experience of union with the personal God. In the third chapter, 
by contrast, Stace claims that introvertive mystics experience Reality as a para- 
doxical vacuum-plenum, the plenum dimension of which is the personal creator 
God. Ina thoroughly Ramakrishnan vein, Stace—as we saw above—even rejects 
Sankara’s and Eckhart’s philosophical strategy of granting higher ontological 
status to the vacuum dimension of Reality and lower ontological status to the 
plenum dimension. Sankara and Eckhart, Stace argues, fail to take at face value 
the inescapable paradox that the vacuum and plenum dimensions of Reality are 
both equally present in the introvertive mystical experience.** In other words, 
Stace provides two contradictory accounts of the phenomenology of introvertive 
mystical experience. On the one hand, he maintains that introvertive mystics ex- 
perience the plenum dimension of the vacuum-plenum as the theistic God. On 
the other hand, he claims that introvertive theistic mystics experience a nonthe- 
istic undifferentiated unity which they retroactively misinterpret as loving union 
with the personal God.” 

Apart from this blatant contradiction between the two major strands of 
Stace’s argument, there are two serious problems with his approach to mystical 
experience more generally. First, while Stace’s distinction between experience 
and interpretation is a potentially valuable one, he does not provide sufficiently 
reliable hermeneutic criteria for distinguishing between the experiential and in- 
terpretive elements in a mystic’s testimony.*° Indeed, it often seems as if Stace’s 


37. For a detailed discussion of vijana, see section III of chapter 1 and the end of section II 


of this chapter. 


38. For instance, Stace notes in Mysticism and Philosophy (168) that the vacuum-plenum par- 
adox “is a real part of the mystic’s experience.” For a convincing critique of this aspect of Stace’s 
argument, see Philip Almond, Mystical Experience and Religious Doctrine (Berlin: Mouton, 
1982), 78-86. 


39. Almond discusses this contradiction in Stace’s argument in great detail (Mystical Experience 
and Religious Doctrine, 69-91). 


40. Stace acknowledges this difficulty with his experience-interpretation distinction in 
Mysticism and Philosophy (21). He also contrasts “low-level” and “high-level” interpretations of 


162 * MYSTICAL EXPERIENCE 


preconceived bias against theism leads him to dismiss as retrospective interpreta- 
tion any element in a mystic’s testimony that has theistic connotations.“! 

Second, numerous scholars have argued that the single greatest challenge to 
virtually a// perennialist theories—including Stace’s—is that mystical experiences 
in various traditions seem to differ at the phenomenological level.” It is highly 
likely, for instance, that Teresa considered union with the loving God to be an 
integral part of her mystical experience rather than a post facto interpretation of 
her experience. It is, therefore, presumptuous in the extreme for a nonmystic phi- 
losopher like Stace or Smart to assume that he has a better understanding of the 
first-person phenomenology of Teresa’s mystical experiences than Teresa herself. 
On the other hand, the more delimited perennialist argument that a certain type 
of mystical experience is phenomenologically identical across cultures—such as 
Forman’s argument about PCEs—does not attempt to fit all mystical experi- 
ences into a single mold, so it may have greater plausibility than the more sweep- 
ing perennialist claims of philosophers like Stace, Smart, Radhakrishnan, and 
Underhill. 


Il. Constructivist Models 


Katz, in his influential article “Language, Epistemology, and Mysticism” (1978), 
pointed out many of the fundamental weaknesses of the perennialist approach 
to mysticism and argued that a constructivist approach is far better equipped 
to account for the irreducible diversity of mystical experiences in various reli- 
gious traditions. Since the publication of Katz’s article, numerous philosophers 
have defended different forms of constructivism.” All constructivists maintain 
that mystical experience is constructed or shaped, at least in part, by the mystic’s 
cultural and theological beliefs. Constructivists differ, however, in their explana- 
tion of precisely how, and the extent to which, a mystic’s conceptual background 
shapes his or her mystical experiences. 





mystical experience, but he fails to provide sufficiently rigorous criteria for distinguishing these 


levels (Mysticism and Philosophy, 37). 


41. For the charge that Stace is biased against theism, see Davis, The Evidential Force of Religious 
Experience, 173, and Almond, Mystical Experience and Religious Doctrine, 78. 


42. See, for instance, Katz’s powerful critique of perennialism in “Language, Epistemology, 
and Mysticism.” 


43, See, for instance, Hick, An Interpretation of Religion, 165-71 and 292-96; Ralph Gimello, 
“Mysticism and Meditation,’ in Mysticism and Philosophical Analysis, ed. Katz, 170-99; Wayne 
Proudfoot, Religious Experience (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1985); Jure Kristo, 
“The Interpretation of Religious Experience: What Do Mystics Intend When They Talk about 
Their Experiences?; Journal of Religion 62.1 (January 1952), 21-38. 


Beyond Perennialism and Constructivism + 163 


According to Katz, the perennialist typologies of Stace and Zaehner are 
highly reductive, since they force “multifarious and extremely variegated forms 
of mystical experience into improper interpretative categories.”“4 He describes his 
own essay as a “plea for the recognition of differences,’ since it provides a con- 
ceptual framework that strives to honor the very real phenomenological differ- 
ences among various mystical experiences. For instance, the radical difference 
between Buddhist and Jewish reports of mystical experience strongly suggests 
that “what the Buddhist experiences as nirvana is different from what the Jew 
experiences as devekuth.”*° 

Crucially, Katz adds that a “single epistemological assumption” lies at the 
basis of his approach to mystical experience: “There are No pure (i.e. unmediated) 
experiences. Neither mystical experience nor more ordinary forms of experience 
give any indication, or any grounds for believing, that they are unmediated.”*” 
Katz clearly denies that mystical experience is epistemically sui generis, since he 
assumes that mental concepts operate in mystical experience exactly as they do 
in ordinary experience. On the basis of this highly controversial epistemological 
assumption, Katz advocates the constructivist view that “there is a clear causal 
connection between the religious and social structure one brings to experience 
and the nature of one’s actual religious experience.” That is, a Jewish mystic’s 
notion of a personal God who is ontologically different from His creatures leads 
him to experience God as “Other rather than Self” By contrast, an Advaita 
Vedantin’s belief in the sole reality of nondual Brahman and the unreality of the 
universe leads him to experience his absolute identity with Brahman. According 
to Katz, constructivism best explains both the sheer diversity of mystical expe- 
riences and the fact that mystical experiences often reflect the mystic’s own 
pre-experiential beliefs. 

Katz recognizes that most mystics take the object of their mystical experiences 
to be real and not just a product of their own mind. Hence, he is careful not to 
claim that mystical experiences are wholly a product of the mystic’s conceptual 
scheme. Instead, Katz maintains that mystical experiences are “at least partially” 


44, Katz, “Language, Epistemology, and Mysticism,” 25. 


45. Katz, “Language, Epistemology, and Mysticism,’ 25. Katz further develops and justifies his 
constructivist thesis in his later essay “The ‘Conservative’ Character of Mysticism,’ in Mysticism 
and Religious Traditions, ed. Steven Katz (New York: Oxford University Press, 1983), 3-60. In 


this section, I focus on his more philosophically substantial and influential 1978 article. 
46. Katz, “Language, Epistemology, and Mysticism,” 38. See also 66. 

47. Katz, “Language, Epistemology, and Mysticism,’ 26. 

48. Katz, “Language, Epistemology, and Mysticism,’ 40. 

49. Katz, “Language, Epistemology, and Mysticism,” 35. 


164 * MYSTICAL EXPERIENCE 


preformed by the mystic’s pre-experiential beliefs.*° This phrasing leaves open the 
possibility that a transcendent reality may play a role in some mystical experi- 
ences. Katz elaborates his epistemology of mystical experience as follows: 


‘Smith experiences God’ entails ... both (a) ‘Smith consciously constitutes 
“God” ’ as wellas (5) ‘“God” makes himself known to Smith’ —recognizing 
that here too, ‘God’ has also been, at least partially, conditioned for Smith. 
For Smith, as for all of us, only knows things as they ‘appear’ to him.” 


Katz’s scare quotes around “God?” are telling: while he admits the possibility that a 
transcendent reality may play a role in Smith’s mystical experience, he insists that 
this transcendent reality can never directly impinge on Smith’s consciousness, 
since that reality itself, as soon as it enters Smith’s consciousness, is at least partly 
constituted by his pre-experiential concepts. For Katz, God Himself (i.e. God as 
He is apart from Smith’s mental concepts) ay have been the transcendent cause 
of Smith’s mystical experience of “God” (i.e. God as He appears to Smith). In the 
end, Katz remains resolutely agnostic about whether a transcendent reality plays 
a role in at least some mystical experiences. 

However, many later constructivists take a stronger stand than Katz on this 
issue. On the one hand, philosophers such as Jure Kristo and Wayne Proudfoot 
defend atheistic forms of constructivism.” For instance, Proudfoot argues that 
religious experience, far from being an inner perception of a transcendent reality, 
is nothing but a physiological sensation which the mystic interprets as a “reli- 
gious” feeling.* On the other hand, Hick develops Katz’s agnostic constructivist 
position into a full-blown religious constructivism.™ I will focus here on Hick’s 
constructivist view, which is especially relevant to this chapter. 

As we saw in section IV of the previous chapter, Hick’s constructivist posi- 
tion is rooted in his quasi-Kantian theory of religious pluralism. He admits that 
many mystics claim that their mystical experiences are unmediated and entirely 
free from concepts.” Hick argues, however, that we cannot take these mystics 
at face value, since mystics in different religious traditions have experienced 





50. Katz, “Language, Epistemology, and Mysticism,’ 26. See also 62. 
51. Katz, “Language, Epistemology, and Mysticism,’ 64. 


52. See Proudfoot, Religious Experience, 75-118, and Kristo, “The Interpretation of Religious 
Experience.” 


53. Proudfoot, Religious Experience, 98-102. 
54. Hick, An Interpretation of Religion, 166-67. 
55. Hick, An Interpretation of Religion, 292-93. 


Beyond Perennialism and Constructivism + 165 


a variety of ontological ultimates that conflict with one another. For instance, 
while an Advaitic mystic claims to have experienced nondual Brahman, a Zen 
mystic claims to have experienced sa#myata, and a Christian mystic claims to have 
experienced a loving personal God.*® Moreover, Hick follows Katz in pointing 
to a strong correlation between a mystic’s pre-experiential conditioning and the 
precise nature of his or her mystical experience. It is no coincidence, he suggests, 
that the Advaitin who spends years studying the Upanisads and meditating on 
the Atman ends up realizing the nondual Atman, while the Christian who stud- 
ies the Bible and engages in devotional practices ends up experiencing the loving 
personal God.” According to Hick, the best way to account for these facts is to 
adopt the constructivist view that mystical experiences are, in fact, mediated by 
the mystic’s conceptual framework. 

Although Hick explicitly endorses Katz’s constructivist argument, his own 
constructivist position differs in subtle ways from that of Katz.°* Most fundamen- 
tally, Hick goes much further than Katz in claiming that a transcendent reality as 
well as the mystic’s conceptual set jointly determine the nature of the mystic’s ex- 
perience. He sketches a subtle constructivist epistemology of mystical experience 
on the basis of his quasi-Kantian ontology: the “impact” of the Real an sich “is 
directly prehended at some deep level of the mystic’s psyche and then expressed 
in forms supplied by his or her mind.’® In other words, there are two phases 
in Hick’s epistemology of mystical experience. First, the Real an sich directly 
impinges on the mystic’s psyche at a pre- or subconscious level.® Second, this 
impact of the Real am sich generates “information that is transformed into a con- 
scious mode which the mystic and the mystic’s community can assimilate.’ This 
constructivist epistemology allows Hick to affirm the religious pluralist position 
that the mystical experiences of all traditions are equally veridical and salvific, 
since they are all based on the direct impact of the Real az sich on the mystic’s 
consciousness. At the same time, however, Hick is able to honor the diversity of 
mystical experiences across traditions: since a mystic’s experience is constructed 
by the “distinctive ideas” of his or her own tradition, each mystic experiences dif- 
ferent phenomenal forms of one and the same Real an sich.” 





56. Hick, An Interpretation of Religion, 293-94. 

57. Hick, An Interpretation of Religion, 294-95. See also 166. 

58. Hick refers approvingly to Katz in An Interpretation of Religion, 170 n. 17. 
59. Hick, An Interpretation of Religion, 165-66. 


60. In An Interpretation of Religion, Hick makes this clear on 165-66 (“directly affecting the 
human psyche”) and 166-67 (“impact of the presence of the Real upon the mystic”). 


61. Hick, An Interpretation of Religion, 166-67. 
62. Hick, An Interpretation of Religion, 166. 


166 © MYSTICAL EXPERIENCE 


On the basis of this constructivist epistemology, Hick provides a some- 
what paradoxical account of the ontological status of the phenomenal forms 
of the Real experienced by mystics. He suggests that mystical visions of di- 
vine forms—such as “Sri Ramakrishna’s vision of Kali” and “Isaiah’s vision of 
Yahweh”®—are best understood as veridical hallucinations. As he puts it, “The 
apparition [of the mystic|—whose content is derived from the percipient’s 
memory and imagination—is hallucinatory in that there is no physical body pre- 
sent where she sees one; but the hallucination is nevertheless veridical, embodying 
true information.” Mystical visions are hallucinatory in that they are subjective 
projections derived from the mystic’s “memory and imagination.”® Nonetheless, 
these mystical visions are veridical hallucinations, since they are caused by the ac- 
tual impact of the Real on the mystic’s psyche. By appealing to this constructivist 
epistemology, Hick is able to affirm the veridicality of mystical experiences in 
all traditions without falling into the contradiction of asserting the ontological 
reality of all the mutually exclusive ultimates mystics claim to have experienced. 

One of the primary advantages of constructivism over perennialism is its 
ability to account for the diversity of mystical experiences both within and across 
religious traditions. However, constructivist positions also have three major 
weaknesses. First, while constructivists such as Katz and Hick rightly identify a 
strong correlation between a mystic’s pre-experiential beliefs and the nature of her 
mystical experience, they are overhasty in interpreting this correlation as strong 
evidence for a causal connection. According to Katz, for instance, the fact that 
the Jewish mystic’s experience of God as Other is consistent with his prior theo- 
logical training provides “very strong evidence that pre-experiential conditioning 
affects the nature of the experience one actually has.”® In order to prove that 
correlation implies causation, constructivists would have to provide a convincing 
explanation of apparent counterexamples and also rule out possible noncausal 
explanations of such a correlation. However, as far as Iam aware, constructivists 
have done neither.” 

Against constructivists, Forman and many others have pointed to nu- 
merous counterexamples of novel or surprising mystical experiences that elude 





63. Hick, An Interpretation of Religion, 166. 
64. Hick, An Interpretation of Religion, 167. 


65. Hick, An Interpretation of Religion, 167. On the same page, he similarly claims that in the 
case of mystical visions, “illusion is the vehicle of truth.” 


66. Katz, “Language, Epistemology, and Mysticism,” 35. Hick makes a similar claim in An 
Interpretation of Religion, 294-95. 


67. For a convincing criticism of the constructivist inference of a causal connection from the 
fact of correlation, see Sallie B. King, “Two Epistemological Models for the Interpretation of 
Mysticism, Journal of the American Academy of Religion 56.2 (Summer 1988), 263-64. 


Beyond Perennialism and Constructivism + 167 


constructivist explanation.® For instance, Sri Aurobindo claimed that he 
attained the Advaitic state of nirvikalpa samadhi in 1908 in spite of the fact that 
his guru Lele “was against Adwaita Vedanta” and that the Advaitic doctrine of 
the unreality of the universe was “quite contrary” to Sri Aurobindo’s own ideas at 
the time.” Clearly, Sri Aurobindo’s non-Advaitic ideas could zor have shaped his 
subsequent Advaitic experience. Such instances of mystical novelty and surprise 
provide strong counterevidence against the constructivist position. Moreover, as 
I will argue in section IV, Sri Ramakrishna’s manifestationist paradigm provides 
an alternative zoncausal explanation of the frequently observed correlation be- 
tween a mystic’s pre-experiential conditioning and the nature of her mystical ex- 
perience. According to Sri Ramakrishna, God often chooses to manifest Himself 
to the mystic in the particular form or aspect the mystic prefers. Constructivists 
would need to rule out this noncausal explanation of the mystic’s experience be- 
fore they can infer causation from correlation. 

Second, constructivists deny a key element in the self-understanding of most 
mystics: namely, the conviction that their mystical experiences are epistemically 
sui generis in character.”” As Anthony Perovich has convincingly shown, nu- 
merous mystics have insisted that mystical experience is a nondiscursive form of 
immediate knowledge that differs radically from ordinary, conceptually medi- 
ated cognition. Pseudo-Dionysius, for instance, remarks that the mystic “knows 
beyond the mind by knowing nothing.”” Forman argues that the existence of 
PCEs poses an especially acute problem for constructivists, since those who 
claim to have experienced PCEs— including Forman himself—invariably insist 
that PCEs, by their very nature, are entirely free from conceptual mediation. 
Constructivists are unable to take such mystical testimony at face value, since 


68. See, for instance, Forman, “Introduction,” 20-21; King, “Iwo Epistemological Models 
for the Interpretation of Mysticism, 267; Michael Stoeber, Theo-Monistic Mysticism: A 
Hindu-Christian Comparison (London: Macmillan, 1994), 8-13. 


69. Sri Aurobindo, The Complete Works of Sri Aurobindo, vol. 35: Letters on Himself and the 
Ashram (Pondicherry: Sri Aurobindo Ashram, 2011), 239. See also the extended account of 
Sri Aurobindo’s unexpected Advaitic experience in Peter Heehs, The Lives of Sri Aurobindo 
(New York: Columbia University Press, 2008), 142-45. 


70. For persuasive criticisms of this aspect of the constructivist position, see Anthony Perovich, 

“Does the Philosophy of Mysticism Rest on a Mistake?? in The Problem of Pure Consciousness, 

ed. Forman, 244-50; Philip Almond, “Mysticism and Its Contexts,’ Sophia 27.1 (1988), 216; 

William Wainwright, Mysticism: A Study of its Nature, Cognitive Value and Moral Implications 

(Brighton, UK: Harvester Press, 1981), 20; King, “Two Epistemological Models,’ 263; Richard 

H. Jones, Philosophy of Mysticism: Raids on the Ineffable (Albany: SUNY Press, 2016), 67; and 

William B. Parsons, The Enigma of the Oceanic Feeling: Revisioning the Psychoanalytic Theory of 
Mysticism (New York: Oxford University Press, 1999), 120-22. 


71. Cited in Perovich, “Does the Philosophy of Mysticism Rest on a Mistake?, 246. 


168 © MYSTICAL EXPERIENCE 


they maintain that there is no essential difference between ordinary experience 
and mystical experience. As Katz puts it, the “synthetic operations of the mind 
are in fact the fundamental conditions under which, and under which alone, mys- 
tical experience, as all experience, takes place.’”” However, Katz does not provide 
a sound argument in favor of this extremely controversial epistemological claim.” 
Hick’s stance on this issue is more sophisticated than that of Katz, since Hick ex- 
plicitly acknowledges that some mystics do emphasize the unmediated nature of 
their experiences. Nonetheless, Hick argues that we have to deny these mystical 
claims in order to save the pluralist hypothesis that all the major religions have 
equal salvific efficacy. While Hick is correct that his own quasi-Kantian model of 
religious pluralism does entail constructivism, I argued in chapters 3 and 4 that 
Sri Ramakrishna’s vijiana-based religious pluralism does not. In fact, as we will 
see in section IV, Sri Ramakrishna champions a manifestationist model of mys- 
tical experience that fully accommodates mystics’ claims about the epistemically 
sui generis character of their experiences. Ironically, constructivists, in spite of 
their concern for recognizing differences, deny the fundamental epistemic differ- 
ence between mystical experience and ordinary experience. 

Third, the subjectivist element in all constructivist epistemologies results in 
an ontologically deflationary account of the divine object of mystical experience. 
Mystics typically believe that what they experience has fully objective reality. For 
instance, the Advaitic mystic who experiences total identity with the nondual 
Atman takes the Atman to be objectively real, while the Christian mystic who 
experiences ecstatic union with the loving personal God takes God to be a fully 
objective reality. Constructivists, however, do not grant full ontological reality 
to the divine objects of mystical experience, since they maintain that the mystic’s 
conceptual framework at least partly shapes what the mystic experiences. For in- 
stance, when analyzing the hypothetical Smith’s statement “I experience x,’ Katz 
claims that “the mind is active in constructing x as experienced.” Similarly, Hick 
claims that the divine object of mystical experience is a “hallucination,” since 
what the mystic directly perceives is a product of her own memory and imagina- 
tion.” Although Hick insists that these mystical hallucinations have a real basis in 
the Real az sich, he maintains that what the mystics directly experience is nothing 
more than a subjective hallucination. However, neither Katz nor Hick provides 





72. Katz, “Language, Epistemology, and Mysticism,’ 62—63. Similarly, Hick claims that “even 
in the profoundest unitive mysticism the mind operates with culturally specific concepts” (Az 


Interpretation of Religion, 294-95). 

73. See, for instance, Forman’s critique of Katz’s argument in “Introduction,” 15-16. 
74. Katz, “Language, Epistemology, and Mysticism, 64. 

75. Hick, An Interpretation of Religion, 167-68. 


Beyond Perennialism and Constructivism + 169 


any evidence that mystics themselves take the divine objects they experience to 
be partially constructed by their own concepts. Therefore, even a nonnaturalistic 
constructivist epistemology such as Hick’s has to deny the self-understanding of 
most mystics, who claim that what they experience has fully objective reality. 


Ill. Sri Ramakrishna’s Experiential Method 


‘The first step in cutting across debates about the nature of mystical experience is to 
recognize that both perennialists and constructivists make sweeping claims about 
the first-person phenomenology of mystical experience. Perennialists maintain 
that there is a small number of basic types of mystical experience that are phe- 
nomenologically identical across traditions and cultures. Constructivists, by con- 
trast, claim that mystical experiences differ at the phenomenological level since 
they are at least partly shaped by the mystics’ respective conceptual frameworks. 
Strikingly, in spite of their many philosophical differences, perennialists and con- 
structivists share a fundamental methodological assumption: the fact that most 
mystics did not reflect philosophically on their own mystical experiences leaves 
room for philosophers to step in and provide a second-order theoretical account 
of the phenomenology of mystical experience that best explains the first-order 
testimony of mystics in various traditions.” 

The problem, however, is that the vast majority of philosophers are nonmys- 
tics who do not have first-person access to mystical experience. They are, there- 
fore, in a poor epistemic position to determine accurately the phenomenology 
of mystical experiences.”” Indeed, Smart forcefully argues that we cannot have a 
fully adequate “theoretical understanding” of mystical experience without first 
having at least some degree of “existential understanding” —that is, a first-person 
understanding of what a particular mystical experience is like.”* Accordingly, 
Smart even encourages “the philosophical evaluator of mystical experience to go 
in for spiritual practices himself”? Similarly, Staal makes a strong case that phi- 
losophers should study mystical experience “directly and from within”:*° 





76. See Stace’s articulation of this assumption in Mysticism and Philosophy (74-75). 


77. For good defenses of this claim, see Frits Staal, Exploring Mysticism: A Methodological Essay 
(Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, [1975] 2013), 124-25; Ninian Smart, “Understanding Religious 
Experience” in Mysticism and Philosophical Analysis, ed. Katz, 10-21; Jones, Philosophy 
of Mysticism, xiv; C. D. Broad, “The Appeal to Religious Experience,” in Philosophy of 
Religion: Selected Readings, ed. William Rowe and William Wainwright (New York: Harcourt 
Brace Jovanovich, 1973), 309. 


78. Smart, “Understanding Religious Experience,” 10. 
79. Smart, “Understanding Religious Experience,” 16. 
80. Staal, Exploring Mysticism, 123. 


170 © MYSTICAL EXPERIENCE 


Mysticism can at least in part be regarded as something affecting the 
human mind, and it is therefore quite unreasonable to expect that it could 
be fruitfully explored by confining oneself to literature about or contrib- 
uted by mystics, or to the behavior and physiological characteristics of 
mystics and their bodies. No one would willingly impose upon himself 
such artificial constraints when exploring other phenomena affecting or 
pertaining to the mind; he would not study perception only by analyzing 
reports of those who describe what they perceive, or by looking at what 
happens to people and their bodies when they are engaged in perceiving. 
What one would do when studying perception, in addition, if not first of 
all, is to observe and analyze one’s own perceptions.” 


Staal’s observation helps pinpoint a major weakness in the methodology of both 
perennialists and constructivists: they tend to make generalizations about the 
phenomenology of mystical experience almost exclusively on the basis of textual 
interpretation. Just as the philosopher of perception can enrich her understanding 
of the nature of perception by drawing on her own perceptual experiences, the 
philosopher of mysticism can enrich her understanding of the nature of mystical 
experience by drawing not only on the recorded testimony of mystics but also on 
her own firsthand mystical experiences. 

Recognizing the profound limitations of a merely indirect approach to mys- 
ticism, some recent philosophers have drawn on their own spiritual practices and 
experiences as valuable data for arriving at a general theory of mystical experi- 
ence. Forman, for instance, argues that “there is substantial evidence for PCEs” 
by appealing not only to the reports of other mystics but also to his own “auto- 
biographical report” of his fleeting PCE in 1972. Similarly, Jerome Gellman 
candidly admits that his conviction that God can be “known in experience” came 
about in part because of his own “mystic-like experiences.’ 

Sri Ramakrishna deserves to be recognized as a pioneer of this experiential 
method in the philosophical study of mysticism. He was a unique mystic in two 
key respects. First, he enjoyed an unusually wide range of mystical experiences, 
since he consciously set out to experience God in numerous forms and aspects 
through the practice of spiritual disciplines in both Hindu and non-Hindu 





81. Staal, Exploring Mysticism, 123-24. 


82. Forman, “Introduction,” 28. See also Robert Forman, “Pure Consciousness Events and 


Mysticism,’ Sophia 25.1 (1986), 49-58. 


83. Jerome Gellman, Experience of God and the Rationality of Theistic Belief (Ithaca, NY: Cornell 
University Press, 1997), ix. 


Beyond Perennialism and Constructivism + 171 


religious traditions. Second, Sri Ramakrishna belongs to a small minority of mys- 
tics who reflected philosophically on their own mystical experiences. 

In this section, I will explore some of the far-reaching philosophical implica- 
tions of Sri Ramakrishna’s richly detailed accounts of his own mystical experi- 
ences of God.* In particular, I argue that his mystical testimony provides strong 
evidence that (1) divine visions count as genuine mystical experiences, (2) theistic 
experiences are phenomenologically distinct from Advaitic experiences, (3) some 
mystical experiences have both theistic and Advaitic elements, and (4) theistic 
and Advaitic mystical experiences have equal salvific value. In the course of my 
discussion, I will also show that neither perennialists nor constructivists are able 
to explain adequately some of the key features of Sri Ramakrishna’s mystical expe- 
riences. In fact, as we will see in the next section, Sri Ramakrishna’s unique and 
varied mystical experiences led him to propose a new conceptual paradigm for 
understanding the nature of mystical experience. 

Just after being appointed priest of the Kali Temple at Dakshineswar in 1855, 
Sri Ramakrishna received a Sakti mantra from Kenaram Bhattacarya and engaged 
in intensive spiritual practice with the aim of attaining the mystical realization 
of the Divine Mother Kali (LP 1.ii58 / DP 205). Sri Ramakrishna conducted 
daily ritualistic worship of Kali, sang devotional songs which would often send 
him into ecstasy, and spent many nights meditating on Kali in a nearby jungle. 
At some point in 1856, he felt such intense despair about not yet having realized 
God that he reached for a sword in order to end his life. At that moment, he 
claimed he had a “marvelous vision of the Divine Mother” (mar adbhit darsan) 
after which he lost external consciousness (LP Lii.65 / DP 212). Upon regaining 
external consciousness, he felt a “steady flow of undiluted bliss” within him and 
“experienced the direct presence of the Divine Mother” (mar saksat prakas upal- 
abdhi koriyachilam) (LP Lii.65 / DP 212). He later described his overwhelming 


experience as follows: 


It was as if the room, doors, temple, and everything else vanished alto- 
gether; as if there were nothing anywhere! And I saw a boundless, infi- 
nite Conscious ocean of light [ar dekhitechi ki, ek asim ananta cetan 
jyotib-samudra\. However far and in whatever direction I looked, I saw 
shining waves [ujjval irmimala], one after another, coming towards me to 





84. Sri Ramakrishna referred to the direct realization of God using a variety of Bengali words 
such as upalabdhi (“direct realization”) (LP 1ii.65 / DP 212), isvar-labh (“attainment of God”) 
(K 63 / G 114), isvar-darsan (“vision of God”) (K 63 / G 114), saksatkar (“direct realization”) 
(K 92./ G 142), and pratyaksa-darsan (“direct vision”) (K 102 / G 151). These terms, all of 
which convey the directness and immediacy of the experience of God, justify my use of the 
English term “mystical” to describe Sri Ramakrishna’s experiences of God. 


172 * MYSTICAL EXPERIENCE 


swallow me up. They were madly rushing towards me from all sides, with 
a terrific noise. Very soon they were upon me, and they pushed me down 
into unknown depths. I panted and struggled and fell unconscious. (LP 
Lii.65 / DP 212) 


Notice the striking discrepancy between Sri Ramakrishna’s pre-experiential re- 
ligious practices and his mystical experience itself. By all indications, his reli- 
gious practices prior to his first mystical experience of God consisted in the 
worship and contemplation of Kali as the four-armed, dark-complexioned 
Divine Mother. However, to his surprise, he experienced the Divine Mother not 
as the four-armed Kali but as an infinite ocean of Consciousness which finally 
engulfed him. Hence, Sri Ramakrishna’s first mystical experience calls into ques- 
tion the constructivist view that a mystic’s experiences are always conditioned 
by his or her pre-experiential concepts. Constructivists cannot account for sur- 
prising or novel mystical experiences, such as Sri Ramakrishna’s first realization 
of the Divine Mother or Sri Aurobindo’s unexpected Advaitic experience of the 
impersonal Atman. 

Significantly, Sri Ramakrishna’s description of his first divine vision has both 
theistic and nontheistic elements. On the one hand, he referred to his experience 
as a vision of his “Mother” Kali and he also uttered “Mother, Mother!” upon 
regaining external consciousness after his first vision (LP 1.ii66 / DP 212). On 
the other hand, he saw in his vision not a form of the personal God but an in- 
finite ocean of Consciousness. Moreover, the fact that the waves of the infinite 
ocean engulfed him and he lost external consciousness suggests that his mystical 
experience was a unitive one in which his identity merged with the all-pervasive 
Divine Consciousness. Sti Ramakrishna’ vision highlights, therefore, the limita- 
tions of philosophical attempts to categorize mystical experiences as either the- 
istic or nontheistic. 

Reflecting later on his unique state of mind after his first mystical realization 
of God, Sri Ramakrishna explained how that experience provided the impetus for 
all his subsequent religious practices and spiritual experiences: 


One who lives near the sea sometimes has a desire to find out how many 
pearls are hidden in the ocean depths. Similarly, after realizing the Divine 
Mother and being constantly near Her, I wanted to experience the various 
aspects and forms of the Divine Mother, who has infinite aspects and infi- 
nite forms [anantabhavamayi anantaripini tahake nanabhave o nandariipe 
dekhibo|. If I had a desire to see Her in a particular way, I would impor- 
tune Her with a longing heart. Then the gracious Mother would supply 
whatever was necessary to experience that form or aspect, make me prac- 
tise that sadhana, and reveal Herself to me accordingly [sei bhave dekha 


Beyond Perennialism and Constructivism + 173 


diten]. Thus, I practised sadhanas belonging to various paths. (LP Lii.160 
/ DP 304) 


Significantly, Sri Ramakrishna’s first experience of the Divine Mother as an in- 
finite ocean of Consciousness revealed to him that She has “infinite aspects and 
infinite forms” (anantabhavamayi anantaripini). After this first extraordinary 
experience, he was seized with an insatiable desire to experience the Infinite God 
in various forms and aspects by practicing the disciplines of different religious 
and spiritual paths. In other words, Sri Ramakrishna’s first mystical experience 
of God left him with two incipient convictions. First, he became convinced that 
the conceptions of ultimate reality taught by the different religions, far from con- 
flicting, actually correspond to complementary forms and aspects of one and the 
same Infinite Reality. This is none other than Sri Ramakrishna’s doctrine of reli- 
gious pluralism discussed at length in chapters 3 and 4. Second, he was convinced 
that the One Infinite God reveals Herself in various forms and aspects to mystics 
of different traditions and temperaments. This is Sri Ramakrishna’s manifesta- 
tionist model of mystical experience, which I will elaborate in the next section. 

What is crucial to recognize is the stark difference between Sri Ramakrishna’s 
direct experiential method and the indirect hermeneutic method of perennialists 
and constructivists, who arrive at their respective models of mystical experience 
by analyzing and comparing the testimony of mystics in different traditions. Sri 
Ramakrishna’s initial conviction of the truth of manifestationism and religious 
pluralism was not an intellectual hypothesis based on textual analysis but a spir- 
itual conviction based on his own direct experience of God. However, instead of 
remaining satisfied with this initial conviction, he proceeded to test and verify 
this conviction experientially by practicing the disciplines of different religious 
paths. On the cumulative basis of his many subsequent mystical experiences, he 
finally felt justified in accepting, and teaching to others, the view that the Infinite 
God manifests Herself to different mystics in various forms and aspects. 

Shortly after realizing the Divine Mother as an infinite ocean of 
Consciousness, Sri Ramakrishna had an intense longing for a vision of the per- 
sonal form of his beloved Kali. He described this phase of his spiritual practice 
as follows: “Sometimes I would lose external consciousness from that unbearable 
agony [of longing for the Divine Mother]. Immediately after that I would see the 
Mother’s Consciousness-laden form [cinmayi mirti] as the Divine Bestower of 
Boons and Fearlessness! I used to see Her smiling, talking, consoling or teach- 
ing me in various ways!” (LP Lii.66 / DP 213). It is highly significant that he 
describes Kali’s form as Her “cinmayi marti’ The Bengali word cinmayi derives 
from the Sanskrit word cit, meaning Consciousness. Recall that he used the cog- 
nate adjective cetan to describe the infinite “ocean of light” he experienced in his 
first experience of God. In other words, he realized that the personal God Kali 


174 © MYSTICAL EXPERIENCE 


who was smiling and talking to him was a congealed form of the same infinite 
ocean of Saccidananda he experienced in his first vision. His blissful visions of 
Kali’s personal form confirmed for him that the formless Infinite God actually 
manifests in various forms for Her devotees. 

For the remainder of his life, Sri Ramakrishna enjoyed countless visions of di- 
vine forms. He reported having had two different types of divine visions: visions 
of divine forms with his eyes open and visions of divine forms in “bhavasamadhi; 
a superconscious state of absorption in which he experienced loving union with 
the personal God.® An example of the first type was his vision of Caitanya’s com- 
panions: “Once I saw the companions of Caitanya, not in a trance but with these 
very eyes. Formerly I was in such an exalted state of mind that I could see all 
these things with my naked eyes; but now I see them in samadhi. I saw the com- 
panions of Caitanya with these naked eyes” (K 319 / G 332). He also saw with 
his physical eyes numerous other divine forms, including Kali “standing on the 
veranda ... with Her hair blowing in the breeze” (LP Lii.69 / DP 216), the lu- 
minous form of Sita (LP Lii.82-83 / DP 228), and the naughty Ramlala playing 
pranks with him (LP ILi.29-31 / DP 574-76). 

Sri Ramakrishna also remarked that he had innumerable “visions of divine 
forms” (rip-darsan) in bhavasamadhi (K 471 / G 468). For instance, he describes 
an incident when he was taken to the zoo: “I went into samadhi at the sight of 
the lion, for the carrier of the Goddess [Durga] awakened in my mind the con- 
sciousness of the Goddess Herself” (K 389 / G 391). In fact, various external 
sights, sounds, and even smells would often transport him into ecstatic states 
of bhavasamadhi. Recalling the period of his Tantra sadhana, Sri Ramakrishna 
remarked: “Whenever I heard the word ‘kavana’ [which means both “wine” and 
“cause” or smelled wine, I would realize the Cause of the universe, God, and lose 
external consciousness” (LP Lii17 / DP 264). He recounts a similar incident 
when he took a trip to the Maidan in Kolkata: “I noticed a young English boy 
leaning against a tree, with his body bent in three places. It at once brought before 
me the vision of Krsna and I went into samadhi” (K 564 / G 546-47). 

Sri Ramakrishna’s divine visions during the course of his Islamic and Christian 
practices deserve special mention. In 1866, after suddenly being seized with the 
desire to practice Islamic sadhana, he took spiritual initiation from the Muslim 
Govinda Ray. For three days, Sri Ramakrishna ate, dressed, and prayed in accord- 
ance with Islamic practice, repeated the name of Allah, and even stopped wor- 
shipping Hindu deities (LP Lii176 / DP 319). He remarked, “After three days 
of practice, I attained the spiritual goal of Islamic sadhana” (LP 1.ii176 / DP 
319). After first having a “divine vision of a radiant Being who looked grave and 





85. See Sri Ramakrishna’s descriptions of “bhavasamadhi” at K 471 / G 468 and K 871 / G 812. 


Beyond Perennialism and Constructivism +» 175 


had a long beard?’ he realized the “cosmic saguna Brahman and then his mind 
finally merged into the absolute zirguna Brahman” (LP Lii.176 / DP 319). Sri 
Ramakrishna’s Islamic practice provided firsthand experiential confirmation of 
his conviction that the “infinitely sportive Divine Mother [anantalilimayi ma| 
has revealed Herself to many people through the path of Islam’ (LP Lii.176 / 
DP 319). 

In 1874, he became interested in the path of Christianity. The devotee Sambhu 
Caran Mallik would read to him from the Bible, which acquainted him with the 
holy life and teachings of Jesus. On one occasion, Sri Ramakrishna had a remark- 
able vision in the parlor of Jadulal Mallik’s garden house while gazing intently at 
a picture of the child Jesus on his mother’s lap: 


Just then he saw the picture become animate and luminous. Rays of light 
emanated from the bodies of Mother Mary and child Jesus, entering the 
Master’s heart and revolutionizing his mental attitudes. When he observed 
that his inborn Hindu impressions were vanishing from his mind and that 
different ones were arising, he tried to control himself by resisting them 
in various ways. He entreated the Divine Mother, saying, “Mother, what 
are You doing to me?,’ but the onslaught continued. The waves of those 
impressions rose forcefully and completely submerged the Hindu bent of 
his mind. The Master’s love and devotion for Hindu gods and goddesses 
disappeared and his heart was filled with faith in and reverence for Jesus 
and his religion. He then had a vision of Christian clergymen offering in- 
cense and lights in front of the image of Jesus in a church, expressing their 
inner longing through prayer. (LP Lii.211 / DP 356) 


The fact that Sri Ramakrishna actively resisted the sudden Christian recondition- 
ing of his Hindu mindset militates against the constructivist thesis that a mys- 
tic’s cultural and theological beliefs always shape his mystical experiences. In this 
case, the Christian mental reconditioning brought about by this divine vision was 
not only unexpected but unwanted. Nonetheless, this vision resulted in a radical 
transformation of his mind: his innate love for Hindu deities gave way, for a time, 
to an all-consuming devotion to Jesus. 

After this remarkable experience, Sri Ramakrishna became so deeply ab- 
sorbed in the thought of Jesus that he forgot to visit the Divine Mother in the 
Dakshineswar temple. He then had another divine vision after three days: 


When the Master was walking in the Panchavati at the end of the third 
day [of his Christian mood], he saw a beautiful but unfamiliar God-man 
with a fair complexion advancing towards him, gazing at him steadily. 


176 * MYSTICAL EXPERIENCE 


The Master immediately realized that he was a foreigner, and that he 
belonged to a different race. He saw that his eyes were large and beautiful, 
and though his nose was a little flat at the tip, it in no way marred the 
handsomeness of his face. The Master was charmed by the unique divine 
expression on his serene face and wondered who he could be. Very soon 
after that the figure drew near, and a voice from within told him, “This 
is Jesus Christ, the great yogi, the loving Son of God who is one with his 
Father, who shed his heart’s blood and suffered torture for the salvation 
of humanity.” Then the God-man Jesus embraced the Master and merged 
into him. In ecstasy, the Master lost external consciousness and his mind 
remained united with saguna Brahman for some time. With this vision, 
the Master became convinced that Jesus was truly a divine incarnation. 


(LP 1L.ii.211-12 / DP 357-58) 


What began as a vision of Jesus with his eyes open culminated in a unitive ex- 
perience in which Jesus merged into his body, resulting in bhavasamadhi. Two 
features of Sri Ramakrishna’s vision of Jesus pose a serious problem for construc- 
tivists. First, it is remarkable that he failed to recognize the handsome foreign 
person walking toward him. Although he had seen pictures of the adult Jesus 
many times in the past, the person he saw in his vision looked sufficiently different 
from those pictures that he could not even recognize the person as Jesus—until a 
“voice from within” informed him that it was, indeed, Jesus. Second, he saw Jesus 
with a flat nose, even though no picture of Jesus he had ever seen depicted him 
with a flat nose. Both these details rule out the possibility that Sri Ramakrishna’s 
vision of Jesus was shaped by his pre-experiential assumptions about Jesus’s 
appearance. More generally, the very fact that the Hindu Sri Ramakrishna had 
visions of Jesus challenges the widely held assumption that divine visions are cul- 
turally conditioned.*® 

It is also important to note that Sri Ramakrishna repeatedly emphasized the 
epistemically sui generis character of all his divine visions. Regarding his nu- 
merous visions of God with his eyes open, he explained: “God cannot be seen 
with these physical eyes. God gives one divine eyes [divyacaksu], and only then 
can one behold Him” (K 141 / G 183). Although he often said that he had visions 
of God “with these very eyes,” what he presumably meant is that the divine eyes 
granted to him by God enabled him to see God in the external world through 
his physical eyes. He reported that his visions of God in bhavasamadhi were 





86. Hick claims, for instance, that “it is invariably a Catholic Christian who sees a vision of the 
Blessed Virgin Mary and a Vaishnavite Hindu who sees a vision of Krishna, but not vice versa” 
(An Interpretation of Religion, 166). See also William Wainwright, Philosophy of Religion, 2nd 
ed. (Belmont, CA: Wadsworth Publishing, 1999), 123. 


Beyond Perennialism and Constructivism +» 177 


also epistemically extraordinary: “In samadhi 1 lose external consciousness com- 
pletely; but God generally keeps a little trace of the ‘T in me for the enjoyment 
of divine communion” (K 159 / G 196). These statements support Perovich’s 
objection to Katz’s constructivist thesis, which was mentioned in the previous 
section: Katz is mistaken in claiming that the ordinary discursive mind always 
operates in mystical experience, since many mystics themselves—including Sri 
Ramakrishna—insist that they experience God by means of a nondiscursive spir- 
itual mode of knowledge that differs radically from ordinary cognition. 

It is equally significant that Sri Ramakrishna consistently teaches that the 
Infinite Saccidananda assumes various objectively real spiritual forms—what he 
calls “cinmay rap” (K 181 / G 217) or “cinmayi mirti? (LP Lii.66 / DP 213)— 
for the sake of His bhaktas. Sri Ramakrishna’s insistence on the fully objective 
reality of the objects of divine visions militates against both perennialism and 
constructivism. Stace, for instance, does not count divine visions as “genuine 
mystical experiences,” because visions involve “sensuous imagery,’ while intro- 
vertive experience—which he considers to be the “most important type of mys- 
tical experience”—is strictly nonsensuous.*” However, Stace’s dismissal of divine 
visions is both arbitrary and circular: since Stace narrowly defines mystical ex- 
perience as the nonsensuous experience of undifferentiated unity, he dismisses 
visions of God as nonmystical. In stark contrast to perennialists such as Stace, 
Sri Ramakrishna conceives mystical experience as a much broader category that 
encompasses a wide variety of phenomenologically distinct experiences of God, 
including visions of divine forms. 

If perennialists tend to dismiss divine visions as nonmystical, constructivists 
tend to view divine visions as subjective projections of the mystic’s own psyche. 
Hick, for instance, claims that “[t]he specific material out of which the vision is 
composed—the figure of an angel, or Christ, or Krishna, or Kali, or of a throne, 
a heart, a cloud—is supplied by the imagination and memory of the mystic.”* 
In contrast to constructivists, Sri Ramakrishna affirms that the objects of divine 
visions are ontologically real manifestations of God which mystics perceive by 
means of a nondiscursive spiritual faculty of knowledge. 

Although Sri Ramakrishna had a strongly devotional temperament, he none- 
theless had the desire to practice the nontheistic path of Advaita Vedanta in 1866. 
The itinerant Advaitin monk Totapuri initiated Sri Ramakrishna into sannydsa 
and taught him Advyaitic philosophy and meditative techniques. After three days 
of practice, Sri Ramakrishna attained the realization of nondual Brahman in 
nirvikalpa samadhi. As Sri Ramakrishna put it, “all ideas and concepts [vikalpa] 


87. Stace, Mysticism and Philosophy, 47-49. 
88. Hick, An Interpretation of Religion, 168. 


178 © MYSTICAL EXPERIENCE 


disappeared from my mind, and it swiftly soared beyond the realm of name and 
form. I lost myself in samadhi” (LP 1.ii.168 / DP 312). Toward the end of his 
three-day immersion in xirvikalpa samadhi, Totapuri checked Sri Ramakrishna’s 
vital signs and found that his body was “like a piece of dead wood” and that there 
was no heartbeat “or even the slightest trace of respiration” (LP 1.ii.168 / DP 
312). After Totapuri left Dakshineswar, Sri Ramakrishna remained immersed in 
nirvikalpa samadhi for six months at a stretch, during which time his body was 
kept alive by a monk who would occasionally force a few morsels of food down 
his throat: 


For six months at a stretch, I remained in that state [of zirvikalpa samadhi 
from which ordinary men can never return; generally the body falls off, 
after three weeks, like a sere leaf. I was not conscious of day and night. 
Flies would enter my mouth and nostrils just as they do a dead body’s, but 
I did not feel them. My hair became matted with dust. (LP Liii.31 / DP 
419-20) 


Later in his life, on the basis of his Advaitic experiences, Sri Ramakrishna fre- 
quently emphasized that the mind entirely ceases to operate in the Advaitic 
state of nirvikalpa samadhi: “the mind first becomes steady, then it disappears 
altogether [son sthir hoy, moner loy hoy] and the aspirant goes into [nirvikalpa] 
samadhi and attains brahmajnana” (K 83 / G 133). He invoked the metaphor of 
a salt doll to illustrate the transcendence of subject-object duality in nirvikalpa 
samadhi: “Once a salt doll went to measure the depth of the ocean. No sooner 
did it enter the water that it melted. Now who could tell how deep the ocean was? 
That which could have told about its depth had melted. Reaching the seventh 
plane, the mind is annihilated [moner nas hoy] and one attains samadhi” (K 121 / 
G 170). Sri Ramakrishna’s descriptions of the Advaitic state of nirvikalpa samadhi 
strongly support Forman’s argument that constructivists cannot explain the exist- 
ence of Pure Consciousness Events, which do not involve conceptual mediation 
of any sort. For Sri Ramakrishna, since there is no subject-object duality and no 
mental activity whatsoever in the PCE state of nirvikalpa samadhi, there is no 
possibility of conceptual mediation. Constructivists such as Katz and Hick have 
to deny the self-understanding of numerous mystics, such as Sri Ramakrishna and 
Ramana Maharshi (1879-1950), who claim to have attained a nondual state be- 
yond the reach of concepts. 

Sri Ramakrishna not only enjoyed firsthand experience of both Advaitic 
nirvikalpa samadhi and theistic bhavasamadhi but also reflected philosophi- 
cally on both types of experience and explained precisely how they differ at the 
phenomenological level: 


Beyond Perennialism and Constructivism + 179 


What is samadhi? It is the state in which the mind disappears entirely 
[jekhane moner loy hoy]. The jadni experiences jada samadhi, in which no 
trace of “I” is left. The samadhi attained through the path of bhakti is called 
“cetan-samadhi.’ In this samadhi there remains the consciousness of “I”—the 
“T’ of the servant-and-Master relationship, of the lover-and-Beloved relation- 
ship, of the enjoyer-and-Food relationship. God is the Master; the devotee 
is the servant. God is the Beloved; the devotee is the lover. God is the Food, 
and the devotee is the enjoyer. “I don’t want to be sugar; I love to eat sugar.” 
(K 481 / G478) 


Sri Ramakrishna explains very clearly how Advaitic mystical experience differs from 
theistic mystical experience. In the case of Advaitic nirvikalpa samadhi—or, what 
he calls “jada samadhi” —there is no trace of “I” whatsoever since subject-object du- 
ality is transcended. By contrast, in the case of theistic cetan-samadhi—or, what he 
elsewhere calls “bhavasamadhi”®” —the mystic’s non-egoistic “I” remains in order 
to enjoy loving communion with the personal God. Sri Ramakrishna’s precise de- 
scription of the phenomenological difference between Advaitic and theistic mys- 
tical experience contradicts the view of perennialists such as Stace and Smart, who 
deny that theistic experience is a phenomenologically distinct type of mystical expe- 
rience.”” Both Zaehner and William Wainwright support Sri Ramakrishna’s posi- 
tion on this issue: mystical reports of theistic and monistic experiences, they claim, 
strongly suggest that these two types of unitive experience differ at the phenomeno- 
logical level.” Indeed, Wainwright points out that the “most impressive evidence” 
for this position is that “several Eastern and Western theistic mystics (Ruysbroeck, 
Ramanuja, and possibly Richard of St Victor and al-Junayd) create the impression 
that they have shemselves experienced two types of introvertive consciousness, that 
they know what monistic experiences are like because they have had them, but that 
there is a clearly distinct introvertive experience which is theistic in character which 
they have also experienced and which is not to be confused with them.’ While 
I agree with Wainwright’s basic position, his examples of mystics who had both the- 
istic and monistic experiences are questionable. Ramanuja, for instance, outright 
denied the reality of Advaitic zirguna Brahman, so he did not accept the possibility 





89. See note 85. 


90. See Stace, Mysticism and Philosophy, 66 and 74-75, and Smart, “Interpretation and Mystical 
Experience,’ 84-86. 


91. Zaehner, Mysticism Sacred and Profane, and Wainwright, Mysticism, 11-33. 
92. Wainwright, Mysticism, 16. 


180 © MYSTICAL EXPERIENCE 


of monistic experience.”? Wainwright would have made a more convincing case if he 
had appealed instead to Sri Ramakrishna, who not only experienced both Advaitic 
nirvikalpa samadhi and theistic bhavasamadhi but also explicitly affirmed that they 
are phenomenologically distinct types of mystical experience.” 

After his six-month immersion in the Advaitic state of nirvikalpa samadhi, 
Sri Ramakrishna received a command from the Divine Mother: “Remain in 
bhavamukha\! Remain in bhavamukha for the sake of humanity!” (LP Liii.31 
/ DP 420). Bhavamukha is a unique threshold state of consciousness in which 
one is aware simultaneously of the impersonal (zirguna) and personal (saguna) 
aspects of the Infinite Divine Reality.” In his later teachings, Sri Ramakrishna 
referred to this state of bhavamukha as “vijnana. As 1 discussed at length in 
chapter 1, the vij#dni is a unique mystic who returns to the empirical plane after 
the attainment of nirvikalpa samadhi: “The vijiani sees that the Reality which is 
impersonal [zirguna] is also personal [saguna]. ... Those who realize Brahman 
in samadhi come down also and find that it is Brahman that has become the uni- 
verse and its living beings” (K 50-51 / G 103-4). According to Sri Ramakrishna, 
vijhana is a rarefied state of post-Advaitic bhakti in which one perceives every- 
thing in the universe as God and enjoys various forms of loving communion with 
Her. Upon receiving the divine command to remain in bhavamukha in 1866, 
Sri Ramakrishna remained continuously in the spiritual state of bhavamukha / 
vijnana until the end of his life. As he put it, “The Divine Mother has kept me in 
the state of a bhakta, a vijnani” (K 391 / G 393). He described his panentheistic 
experience of vijf#dna as follows: “God is not only inside us, but is both inside 
and outside! The Divine Mother showed me in the Kali temple that everything 
is the Embodiment of Consciousness [cizmay]; that it is She who has become all 
this—the divine image [pratima], myself, the utensils of worship, the door-sill, 
the marble floor” (K 532 / G521). 

He clarified his own state of vijiana by appealing to the Vedic saptabhiimi 
(“seven-plane”) paradigm: “On reaching the seventh plane of consciousness, the 
mind goes into [irvikalpa] samadhi. ... But I don’t want to become sugar; I love 
to eat sugar. I never feel like saying, ‘Iam Brahman, I say, “Thou art my Lord and 





93. See Swami Tapasyananda’s summary of Ramanuja’s doctrine of Visistadvaita in Bhakti 
Schools of Vedanta (Chennai: Sri Ramakrishna Math, 1990), 31-84. For Ramanuja, atmajhana 
is the realization not of nondual Brahman but of the individual soul (the jivatman). 


94. Wainwright could also have appealed to mystics in the traditions of Kasmiri Saivism, 
Tantra, and Saktism, all of which accept both the impersonal and personal aspects of the 
Supreme Reality. 


95. Both Svami Saradananda and Swami Tapasyananda have provided helpful discussions of 
Sri Ramakrishna’s state of bhavamukha. See LP V.iii.56 / DP 447 and Swami Tapasyananda, Sri 
Ramakrishna: Life and Teachings, 60-74. 


Beyond Perennialism and Constructivism + 181 


Iam Thy servant. It is good to make the mind go up and down between the fifth 
and sixth planes, like a boat racing between two points. I don’t want to go beyond 
the sixth plane and keep my mind a long time in the seventh. My desire is to sing 
the name and glories of God” (K 123 / G 172). As a vijfani, Sri Ramakrishna 
would move back and forth between the fifth plane, in which he would talk of the 
glories of God, and the sixth plane, in which he would lose external consciousness 
completely and experience various forms of the personal God in bhavasamadhi. 
Moreover, he would also sometimes ascend to the seventh plane of Advaitic nir- 
vikalpa samadhi, but he would not remain in that nondual state for long. 

Sri Ramakrishna’s unique state of vij#ana has extremely important impli- 
cations for philosophical discourse on mysticism. Philosophers such as Stace, 
Smart, Zaehner, and Wainwright have proposed a variety of typologies of mys- 
tical experience. Both Stace and Smart maintain that there are only two basic 
types of mystical experience: the extrovertive experience of unity in nature and 
the deeper introvertive experience of pure undifferentiated unity. Hence, for 
Stace and Smart, theistic descriptions of mystical experience are, in fact, mistaken 
theistic interpretations of the nontheistic experience of undifferentiated unity. 
Zaehner, by contrast, proposes a broader typology of three distinct types of mys- 
tical experience: panenhenic experience (which corresponds roughly to Stace’s 
extrovertive experience), monistic experience (which corresponds to Stace’s 
introvertive experience), and theistic experience, “in which the soul feels itself to 
be united with God by love.”** Zaehner, from an avowedly Christian standpoint, 
argues that the “sacred” theistic experience of loving union with God is vastly 
superior to the “profane” monistic experience, which is nothing but a quietistic 
“state of complete tranquillity in emptiness.””” Zaehner goes so far as to assert 
that “it is actually impossible to hold monistic and theistic opinions as both being 
absolutely true at one and the same time.””® 

Sri Ramakrishna’s spiritual standpoint of vijzana, however, directly challenges 
Zaehner’s overhasty assumption. The vijiani, who has enjoyed both the monistic 
experience of nirvikalpa samadhi and the theistic experience of loving com- 
munion with the personal God, realizes that the Infinite Reality has both personal 
and impersonal aspects that are equally real. Hence, while Sri Ramakrishna fol- 
lows Zaehner in maintaining that monistic and theistic experiences are radically 
different types of mystical experience, he rejects Zaehner’s normative assumption 
of the superiority of theistic to monistic experience. Moreover, Sri Ramakrishna 
characterizes vijiana as a unique mystical state that involves both an introvertive 





96. Zaechner, Mysticism Sacred and Profane, 29. 
97. Zaehner, Mysticism Sacred and Profane, 106. 
98. Zaechner, Mysticism Sacred and Profane, xv. 


182 * MYSTICAL EXPERIENCE 


awareness of the impersonal-personal Infinite Reality and an extrovertive realiza- 
tion that God has become everything in the universe. Hence, while philosophers 
such as Stace and Zaehner claim that extrovertive mystical experience is inferior 
to introvertive experience, Sri Ramakrishna maintains that the mystical experi- 
ence of vijnana has both introvertive and extrovertive elements as well as theistic 
and monistic elements. 

Recently, Michael Stoeber has made a compelling case that an adequate mys- 
tical typology must accommodate not only theistic and monistic experiences but 
also “theo-monistic” experiences, which he defines as “realizations of a theistic 
nature that arise from transformative monistic unity.’? According to Stoeber, 
mystics in different traditions—including Eckhart, Ruysbroeck, Ramanuja, 
and Sri Aurobindo—have had such theo-monistic experiences.'° He explains 
theo-monistic experiences in terms of a Christian ontology according to which 
“there are various spiritual realities and different facets and forms of a personal 
Divine.”!" Explicitly endorsing Zaehner’s thesis of the superiority of theistic to 
monistic experience, Stoeber claims that monistic mystics unknowingly experi- 
ence the impersonal aspect of an ultimately personal God.’ 

From Sri Ramakrishna’s standpoint, while Stoeber rightly acknowledges a 
phenomenologically distinctive “theo-monistic” type of mystical experience, he 
narrowly interprets all theo-monistic experience in terms of a theistic ontology 
that takes God to be ultimately personal, thereby according greater salvific value 
to theistic experience than to monistic experience. In contrast to Stoeber, Sri 
Ramakrishna derives from his own theo-monistic experience of vijidana a much 
more expansive Vedantic philosophy according to which the Infinite Reality 
is equally personal and impersonal. Therefore, unlike Stoeber and Zaehner, Sri 
Ramakrishna grants equal salvific value to the monistic experience of nondual 
Brahman and the theistic experience of loving communion with a personal God. 





99. Stoeber, Theo-Monistic Mysticism, 23. 


100. Stoeber does not provide strong evidence that mystics like Ramanuja, Eckhart, and 
Ruysbroeck actually enjoyed theo-monistic experiences. In Theo-Monistic Mysticism (68), 
Stoeber refers briefly to Sri Ramakrishna’s teaching on the inseparability of Brahman and 
Sakti but overlooks its philosophical significance, perhaps because he fails to contextualize Sri 
Ramakrishna’s teachings within the philosophical framework of vijzana. 


101. Stoeber, Theo-Monistic Mysticism, lll. 


102. Stoeber, Theo-Monistic Mysticism, 98. Stoeber’s position is similar to the Gaudiya Vaisnava 
conception of the Supreme Reality discussed in section I of chapter 2. 


Beyond Perennialism and Constructivism + 183 


IV. A Reconstruction of Sri Ramakrishna’s 
Manifestationist Model of Mystical Experience 


Why have the world’s mystics described the ultimate reality in so many different 
ways? Sri Ramakrishna, unlike most philosophers, arrived at a highly original an- 
swer to this question on the basis of his own spiritual experiences. After realizing 
both the impersonal nondual Brahman as well as numerous forms of the personal 
God, Sri Ramakrishna attained the expansive state of vij#ana, the realization that 
the Infinite Reality is at once personal and impersonal, with and without form, 
immanent in the universe and beyond it. As a vij#ani, Sri Ramakrishna champi- 
oned a manifestationist theory of mystical experience: one and the same Infinite 
Reality manifests in innumerable forms and aspects to mystics of varying temper- 
aments, preferences, and backgrounds. In this section, I will reconstruct the main 
tenets of Sri Ramakrishna’s manifestationist account of mystical experience and 
argue that it has major advantages over both perennialism and constructivism. 

We can begin to gain a deeper understanding of Sri Ramakrishna’s manifesta- 
tionist model of mystical experience by reminding ourselves of his favorite par- 
able of the chameleon, which was already discussed in chapter 3 in the context of 
religious pluralism: 


[O]ne who constantly thinks of God can know God’s real nature; he alone 
knows that God manifests Himself to seekers in various forms and aspects 
[tini nanaripe dekha den, nanabhave dekha den]. God is saguna as well 
as nirguna. Only the man who lives under the tree knows that the cha- 
meleon can appear in various colors, and he knows, further, that the an- 
imal at times has no color at all. It is the others who suffer from the agony 
of futile argument. Kabir used to say, “The formless Absolute [zirakar] 
is my Father, and God with form [sakar] is my Mother.” God manifests 
Himself to the devotee in the form the devotee loves most; God’s love for 
the devotee knows no bounds [bhakta je ripti bhalobase, seiriipe tini dekha 
den—tini je bhakta-vatsal]. It is written in the Purana that God assumed 
the form of Rama for His heroic devotee, Hanuman. (K 101 / G 149-50) 


This parable, I would suggest, not only illustrates the harmony of all religions 
but also dramatizes Sri Ramakrishna’s manifestationist model of mystical expe- 
rience. Like the man sitting under the tree who sees that the chameleon appears 
in various colors and sometimes has no color at all, the vij#ani realizes that the 
impersonal-personal Infinite God “manifests Himself to seekers in various forms 
and aspects.” Sri Ramakrishna also explains why God manifests in different ways 
to different mystics: since God is a “bhakta-vatsal’ who has boundless love for 
His devotee, He “manifests Himself to the devotee in the form the devotee loves 


184 * MYSTICAL EXPERIENCE 


most.”! This key principle of God as bhakta-vatsal explains why there is so often 
a close correlation between a mystic’s pre-experiential beliefs about God and the 
nature of the mystic’s subsequent experience of God. Constructivists, as we have 
seen, argue that this correlation implies causation: the mystic’s pre-experiential 
concepts shape the mystic’s experience. Sri Ramakrishna, by contrast, explains this 
correlation from the side of God rather than from the side of the mystic: God 
reveals Himself to each mystic in the form or aspect the mystic loves most. For 
Sri Ramakrishna, then, the cause of a given mystic’s particular experience of the 
ultimate reality is God Himself rather than the mystic’s subjective conceptual 
framework. 

Sri Ramakrishna’s bhakta-vatsal principle has a wide range of applicability, 
since it explains many theistic and nontheistic mystical experiences in a variety 
of religious traditions. The Infinite God manifests to different theistic mystics 
in the particular personal forms they love and worship. For instance, when Sri 
Ramakrishna had an intense desire for a vision of his beloved four-armed Kali, 
God manifested Herself to him in that very form (LP Lii.66 / DP 213). When he 
later adopted the attitude of Krsna’s consort Radha, God appeared to him in the 
forms of both Radha and Krsna (LP L.ii.155-57 / DP 300-301). Likewise, when 
he adopted the servant attitude of Rama’s great devotee Hanuman, God mani- 
fested to him in the form of Rama’s beloved wife Sita (LP Lii.82 / DP 228-29). 
The bhakta-vatsal principle also readily explains the divine visions of other theistic 
mystics in various traditions. For example, since Saint Teresa worshipped Jesus 
and Mary, God often revealed Himself to her in the forms of Jesus and Mary. 
When Swami Vivekananda was deeply absorbed in the contemplation of Siva 
during his pilgrimage to the Amarnath Temple, God revealed Himself to him in 
the form of Siva.!> Since many Jewish mystics in the tradition of Kabbalah de- 
vote themselves to loving contemplation of the Sefiroth (“Divine Emanations’), 
God often reveals Himself to them in the form of some aspect of the Sefiroth.'°° 

Sri Ramakrishna’s bhakta-vatsal principle accounts not only for mystical 
visions of divine forms but also for ecstatic experiences of loving communion 
with the formless personal God. Eckhart describes a mystical experience in which 


103. Sri Ramakrishna refers to God as “bhakta-vatsal” at numerous places in the Kathamrta, 


including K 109 / G 157 and K 471 / G 468. 


104. Teresa of Avila, The Life of Saint Teresa of Avila by Herself, wans. J. M. Cohen 
(Harmondsworth, UK: Penguin, 1958). 


105. Swami Vivekananda, The Complete Works of Swami Vivekananda: Mayavati Memorial 
Edition, vol. 7 (Mayavati: Advaita Ashrama, 2005), 129. 


106. Katz, “Language, Epistemology, and Mysticism,’ 34. 


Beyond Perennialism and Constructivism + 185 


the soul “loses itself” in God, “like a drop of water poured into a tub of wine.”!”” 


Similarly, the Sufi mystic al-Ghazali describes how the mystic “becomes naugh- 
ted to himself” in the ecstatic experience of “union” with God.'’ The devotional 
hymns of the Sikh mystic Guru Nanak also frequently attest to his experiences of 
God as “alakh” (“formless”).'°° From Sri Ramakrishna’s perspective, the Infinite 
God grants the experience of union with His formless personal aspect to those 
theistic mystics who seek such a mystical union. 

His bhakta-vatsal principle can also explain various nontheistic mystical expe- 
riences across religious traditions. Sri Ramakrishna explicitly invokes this prin- 
ciple when accounting for Advaitic mystical experiences: “[I]fa person seeks the 
Knowledge of Brahman, he can attain It even if he follows the path of bhakti. 
God, the bhakta-vatsal, can grant to the seeker the Knowledge of Brahman if 
He so chooses” (K 471 / G 468). From Sri Ramakrishna’s manifestationist stand- 
point, since Advaitic j#anayogis constantly reason that the impersonal (irguna) 
nondual Brahman alone is real, the impersonal-personal Infinite Reality accord- 
ingly reveals His nirguna aspect to Advaitic jianayogis in the state of nirvikalpa 
samadhi. Interestingly, he also adds that since God is a bhakta-vatsal, He can 
grant nondual realization even to non-Adyaitic bhaktas who desire it. 

Significantly, Sri Ramakrishna describes both positive and negative forms of 
Advaitic jzanayoga. The positive form of jianayoga involves constant reflection 
on the philosophical doctrines of Advaita Vedanta—particularly the doctrine 
that “Brahman alone is real and this world of names and forms illusory” (K 101 / 
G 149-50). Under the guidance of his Advaitic guru Totapuri, Sri Ramakrishna 
himself frequently practiced this positive form of jianayoga. However, he also 
often described a negative form of jidnayoga that involves inquiring into the na- 
ture of one’s own self: 


If one analyses oneself, one doesn’t find any such thing as “I” Take an 
onion, for instance. First of all you peel off the red outer skin; then you 
find thick white skins. Peel these off one after the other, and you won't 
find anything inside. In that state a man no longer finds the existence of 
his ego. And who is there left to seek it? Who can describe how he feels 
in that state—in his own Pure Consciousness—about the real nature of 


Brahman? (K 99 / G 148) 





107. Cited in Richard Kieckhefer, “Meister Eckhart’s Conception of Union with God? 
Harvard Theological Review 71.3—4 (July—October 1978), 215. 


108. Cited in Zaehner, Mysticism Sacred and Profane, 158. 


109. See, for instance, Guru Nanak’s description of God as “formless [a/akh], infinite, unap- 


proachable, imperceptible” in Ang 594, verse 4 of the Guru Granth Sahib. 


186 * MYSTICAL EXPERIENCE 


The negative form of j#anayoga involves a process of self-inquiry in which we 
find that we are neither the body, nor the mind, nor the ego. The process is nega- 
tive in the sense that it does not involve a prior acceptance of any positive philo- 
sophical doctrines about the true nature of the self, including even the Vedantic 
doctrine of the nondual Atman. Sri Ramakrishna’s account of the negative form 
of j#anayoga helps explain why he considered the Buddha to be a jaanayogi. 
As I discussed in section III of chapter 3, Sri Ramakrishna believed that the 
Buddha's nibbana experience was actually the Advaitic experience of his true na- 
ture as “Pure Consciousness” (K 1028 / G 947-48). Some scholars claim that the 
Buddha could not have been a Vedantin since he subscribed to the doctrine of 
anatta (“nonself”)."° However, from Sri Ramakrishna’s perspective, the Buddha’s 
doctrine of anatta can be seen as rooted in the negative form of j#anayoga, a prac- 
tice of critical self inquiry that does not require belief in Upanisadic doctrines 
such as Atman or Brahman. 

If we understand the Buddha’s spiritual practice in these terms, then it should 
hardly be surprising that the Buddha’s description of zibbana was also negative. 
As Sri Ramakrishna remarked, “Why should the Buddha be called an atheist? 
When one realizes one’s svariipa [the true nature of one’s Self], one attains a state 
that is something between asti [is] and nasti [is-not]” (K 1028 / G 947-48). Sri 
Ramakrishna makes the subtle point that the same ineffable Advaitic experi- 
ence can be described and interpreted in either a positive or a negative manner. 
Advaitic mystics have tended to describe the highest experience in positive terms 
as “brahmajnana” ox “atmajnana.’ According to Sri Ramakrishna, however, the 
Buddha was equally justified in describing the same mystical experience in neg- 
ative terms, since Pure Consciousness neither “is” nor “is not.’ As I discussed in 
chapter 3, numerous recent scholars have followed Sri Ramakrishna in defend- 
ing a Vedantic interpretation of the Buddha's nibbana experience." Although Sri 
Ramakrishna only refers to the Buddha’s own experience of nibbana, he likely 
would have claimed that later Buddhist mystics who attained nibbana also ex- 
perienced the same nondual Reality but sometimes interpreted their experi- 
ence in a nonsubstantialist manner. In support of this Ramakrishnan position, 
some contemporary scholars like David Loy and Leesa Davis have argued that 
Buddhist mystics in various traditions—including Madhyamaka, Yogacara, and 





110. See, for instance, Katz, “Language, Epistemology, and Mysticism,’ 38-39. 


111. For references, see note 48 of chapter 3. See also my discussion of the Buddha's anatta doc- 
trine in section II] of chapter 3. 


Beyond Perennialism and Constructivism + 187 


Zen—experienced the same nondual Reality as Advaitic mystics but developed 
subtly different ontologies on the basis of their nondual experience.'” 

In fact, there is strong evidence that Sri Ramakrishna considered the experi- 
ences of nonduality in a// religious traditions to be phenomenologically identical. 
His use of the analogy of a salt doll to convey the state of nondual experience has 
precisely this implication. Just as a salt doll melts into the ocean when it attempts 
to measure its depth, the mystic who experiences nondual Brahman in nirvikalpa 
samadhi transcends the mind and subject-object duality. Hence, nondual expe- 
rience, by its very nature, leaves no scope for variation in its phenomenological 
content. According to Svami Saradananda, Sri Ramakrishna would sometimes 
convey the phenomenological identity of all nondualistic experience by means of 
a striking metaphor: “In that ultimate state, all jackals howl in the same way” (LP 
IL.ii.24 / DP 742). From Sri Ramakrishna’s perspective, a Christian mystic’s expe- 
rience of nonduality is phenomenologically identical to the nondual experience 
of a Buddhist mystic, an Advaitic mystic, a Sufi mystic, and so on. Therefore, his 
manifestationist principle of God as bhakta-vatsal is able to account for the non- 
dual experiences of mystics in various traditions. According to Sri Ramakrishna, 
the Infinite God manifests His nondual impersonal nature to nontheistic mys- 
tics who practice either the positive or the negative form of j#anayoga. He also 
notes, however, that the same ineffable nondual experience can be interpreted 
and described in a variety of ways. 

Sri Ramakrishna’s bhakta-vatsal principle also accounts for other types of non- 
theistic mystical experience, including the realization of the spiritual jivatman."° 
In the context of the saptabhimi paradigm, he remarks, “When the mind ascends 
to the fourth plane . .. it sees the jivatman |the individual soul] as a flame, and it 
sees light. The spiritual aspirant then cries: ‘Ah! What is this? Ah! What is this?’” 
(K 214 / G 245). On the basis of his own mystical experience, Sri Ramakrishna 
observes that when the mind reaches the fourth plane of consciousness at the 
heart center, one realizes one’s true essence as the spiritual jivatman apart from 
the body-mind complex.'* Clearly, then, the realization of the jivatman dif- 
fers at the phenomenological level from the realization of nondual Brahman 
in nirvikalpa samadhi, which occurs on the seventh plane of consciousness. Sri 
Ramakrishna thereby accommodates the nontheistic philosophies of Jainism and 





112. David Loy, Nonduality: A Study in Comparative Philosophy (New Haven: Yale University 
Press, 1988), 192-201; Leesa Davis, Advaita Vedanta and Zen Buddhism (London: Continuum, 
2010), 7-8; Forman, “Introduction, 39. 


113. Of course, the realization of the jivatman also plays an important role in some theistic 
philosophies, including Ramanuja’s Visistadvaita. 


114. Sri Ramakrishna describes his own experiences of the kundalini rising through the susumna 
channel at LP Lii.57 / DP 204 and LP L.ii.120 / DP 267. 


188 © MYSTICAL EXPERIENCE 


Samkhya, both of which conceive salvation as the state of “kaivalya” (literally, 
“isolation”) in which one realizes oneself as an individual spiritual entity—called 
the “purusa” in Samkhya and the “jiva” in Jainism—that is separate from the psy- 
chophysical organism." From Sri Ramakrishna’s perspective, the Infinite Divine 
Reality manifests to Jaina and Samkhya mystics in the form of their own spiritual 
jiwatman. 

In sum, Sri Ramakrishna’s manifestationist principle of God as bhakta-vatsal 
has a good deal of explanatory power, since it readily accounts for numerous 
kinds of mystical experience in both theistic and nontheistic religious traditions. 
The bhakta-vatsal principle explains, for instance, why the same Infinite God 
manifests to an Advaitic mystic as the impersonal nondual Brahman, to a Jaina 
mystic as her own jiva, to a Christian mystic as Jesus, and to a Saivite mystic as 
Siva. However, the bhakta-vatsal principle does not seem to be able to account 
for surprising or novel mystical experiences. For instance, as I mentioned earlier 
in the chapter, Sri Aurobindo had the Advaitic experience of nirvikalpa samadhi 
in spite of the fact that his pre-experiential spiritual practice and beliefs were res- 
olutely on-Advaitic. Sti Ramakrishna himself first experienced God as an infi- 
nite ocean of Consciousness, even though he had been devoted to the personal 
God Kali at the time. Likewise, the contemporary American mystic Bernadette 
Roberts was “surprised and bewildered” by her sudden nontheistic experience of 
“no-self? because she was deeply committed to the Christian view that the self is 
a “being centred in God.’"® Examples of such unexpected mystical experiences 
can easily be multiplied.” 

Sri Ramakrishna accounts for such surprising and novel mystical experiences 
by appealing to another manifestationist principle—namely, the principle of 
God as “icchamayi” (“the One who does everything at His pleasure”)—which 
complements his bhakta-vatsal principle. For instance, he invokes the principle 
of God as icchamayi in order to explain why the Infinite God sometimes grants 
the realization of the impersonal nondual Brahman even to theistic bhaktas who 
have no desire to lose their individuality in Brahman: 





115. See Jeffery D. Long, Jainism: An Introduction (London: LB. Tauris, 2009) and Gerald 
James Larson, Classical Simkhya: An Interpretation of its History and Meaning (Delhi: Motilal 
Banarsidass, 1979). 


116. Bernadette Roberts, The Experience of No-Self (Albany: SUNY Press, 1993), 10. Forman 
mentions Roberts's mystical experience in The Problem of Pure Consciousness (20). 


117. For instance, Jones mentions the case of Simone Weil, who was an “agnostic Marxist from 
a Jewish family who resisted the mystical experiences she was having but ended up converting 


to Christianity” (Philosophy of Mysticism, 64). 


Beyond Perennialism and Constructivism + 189 


The bhakta wants to realize the Personal God endowed with form and talk 
to Him. He seldom seeks the Knowledge of Brahman. But God, who does 
everything at His pleasure [icchamayi], can make His devotee the heir to 
His infinite glories if it pleases Him. He gives His devotee both the Love 
of God and the Knowledge of Brahman. (K 471 / G 468) 


Since God is icchamayi, He sometimes chooses to manifest Himself in a form 
or aspect that the mystic neither expects nor perhaps even wishes to realize." 
This explains why God sometimes grants the Advaitic knowledge of Brahman 
to bhaktas—such as Sri Aurobindo—who do not seek such knowledge. Sri 
Ramakrishna also mentions the example of the gopis, the cowherd girls who were 
intoxicated with love for the personal God Krsna: “The gopis of Vrindavan, too, 
attained the Knowledge of Brahman; but they were not seeking It. They wanted 
to enjoy God, looking on themselves as His mother, His friend, His handmaid, 
or His lover” (K 505 / G501). 

In another passage, Sri Ramakrishna further elaborates the principle of God 
as icchamayi in the context of some of his own surprising mystical experiences: 


The Divine Mother has taught me everything. Oh, how many things She 
has shown me! One day She showed me Siva and Sakti everywhere. ... Siva 
and Sakti existing in all living things—people, animals, trees, plants... . 
Another day I was shown heaps of human heads, mountain high. Nothing 
else existed, and I was seated alone in their midst. Still another day She 
showed me an ocean. Taking the form ofa salt doll, I was going to measure 
its depth. While doing this, through the grace of the guru I was turned to 
stone. Then I saw a ship and at once got into it. The helmsman was the 
guru. ... These are all deep mysteries. ... You will realize everything when 
God Herself teaches you. Then you will not lack any knowledge. (K 373 
/ G376-77) 


Notice that Sri Ramakrishna did not seek or expect any of the experiences he 
describes here. According to Sri Ramakrishna, God as icchamayi is the Divine 
Teacher who sometimes chooses to reveal aspects or forms of Herself that will 
most benefit the seeker spiritually. This principle of God as icchamayi explains 
the unexpected mystical experiences not only of Sri Ramakrishna himself but 
also of numerous mystics in both theistic and nontheistic religious traditions. In 
the case of Roberts and Sri Aurobindo, for instance, the icchamayi God chose to 





118. Sri Ramakrishna refers to God as “icchamayi” or “icchamayi” at numerous places in the 


Kathamrta, including K 316 / G 329, K 501 / G'501, and K 378 / G 381. 


190 © MYSTICAL EXPERIENCE 


grant them nontheistic mystical experiences for their own spiritual benefit, even 
though both of them had strongly theistic leanings. Likewise, the icchamayi God 
granted to R. M. Bucke the experience of “cosmic consciousness,” even though he 
was not seeking any kind of religious or mystical experience at the time.'” 

I would argue that Sri Ramakrishna’s manifestationist paradigm—based on the 
complementary principles of God as bhakta-vasal and God as icchamayi—shares 
the main advantages of both perennialism and constructivism but lacks their 
respective limitations and weaknesses. His manifestationist paradigm honors 
the core perennialist intuition that there is a common core to all mystical ex- 
perience. Unlike perennialists, however, Sri Ramakrishna locates this mystical 
common core at the ontological, rather than the phenomenological, level. All 
mystical experiences, Sri Ramakrishna maintains, have as their object one and 
the same impersonal-personal Infinite Reality. Since he affirms that the Infinite 
Reality manifests to different mystics in different forms and aspects, he emphati- 
cally rejects the thesis of a phenomenological common core held by perennialists 
such as Stace and Smart. The primary weakness of perennialism is its inability to 
account for the fact that the experiences of mystics in various traditions—and 
even within a particular tradition—often differ quite dramatically. The noto- 
rious perennialist strategy of ascribing most of the differences in mystical reports 
to differences in interpretations of the same underlying experience seems both 
unjustified and ad hoc. As Katz, Zaehner, and others have convincingly shown, 
there is overwhelming evidence, for instance, that theistic mystical experience 
differs at the phenomenological level from the nontheistic experience of nondual 
Brahman.” Sri Ramakrishna’s manifestationist paradigm is able to honor the 
very real phenomenological differences among various types of mystical experi- 
ence while at the same time affirming an ontological common core of all mystical 
experience, 

As we have seen, however, Sri Ramakrishna does hold that all nondual 
mystical experiences are phenomenologically identical. Recently, Forman has 
defended a very similar view. According to Forman, since a PCE is devoid of 
all concepts and images, “a formless trance in Buddhism may be experientially 
indistinguishable from one in Hinduism or Christianity.”’! Sri Ramakrishna 
appeals to something very much like the perennialist distinction between experi- 
ence and interpretation in order to assimilate the Buddha's experience of nibbana 





119. R. M. Bucke, Cosmic Consciousness: A Study in the Evolution of the Human Mind 
(Philadelphia: Innes & Sons, 1901), 6-8. See also Forman’s discussion of Bucke’s unexpected 
experience of cosmic consciousness in “Introduction,” 20. 


120. See Zaehner, Mysticism Sacred and Profane, and Katz, “Language, Epistemology, and 
Mysticism.” 


121. Forman, “Introduction,” 39. 


Beyond Perennialism and Constructivism + 191 


to Advaitic experience. The Buddha’s experience of nibbana, Sri Ramakrishna 
claims, was an experience of nondual Pure Consciousness which the Buddha did 
not interpret as such. Crucially, however, Sri Ramakrishna, like Forman, only 
appeals to the experience-interpretation distinction in order to account for the 
phenomenological identity of specifically zondual mystical experiences across re- 
ligious traditions. By contrast, perennialists such as Stace and Smart appeal to the 
experience-interpretation distinction in a much more sweeping manner in order 
to explain away all or most of the apparent differences among mystical experi- 
ences in general. 

Like constructivists, Sri Ramakrishna maintains that there is a wide variety of 
mystical experiences that differ at the phenomenological level. Constructivists, 
however, account for this diversity of mystical experiences by claiming that 
the mystic’s pre-experiential concepts shape her mystical experiences. Sri 
Ramakrishna, by contrast, maintains that mystical experiences vary because the 
Infinite God manifests Himself in different aspects and forms to mystics of vary- 
ing backgrounds and temperaments. Sri Ramakrishna’s manifestationist paradigm 
has two major advantages over constructivism. First, Sri Ramakrishna is not com- 
mitted to the problematic constructivist assumption that the best way to account 
for the frequently observed correlation between a mystic’s pre-experiential con- 
cepts and the nature of her subsequent mystical experiences is to assume a causal 
connection between them. Constructivists, I have argued, are unable to account 
for two significant types of mystical experience found in multiple religious tradi- 
tions: namely, PCEs and surprising or novel mystical experiences. By contrast, Sri 
Ramakrishna’s manifestationist paradigm accounts for both these types of mys- 
tical experience on the basis of a zoncausal explanation of the correlation between 
a mystic’s pre-experiential concepts and her mystical experiences. Therefore, his 
manifestationist paradigm has greater explanatory power than the causal account 
favored by constructivists. Second, constructivists, as we have seen, adopt a sub- 
jectivist epistemology that results in an ontologically deflationary account of the 
divine object of mystical experience. For constructivists such as Katz and Hick, 
the divine reality a mystic claims to have experienced is at least partly a product 
of the mystic’s own mind. For Sri Ramakrishna, by contrast, mystics experience 
objectively real manifestations of one and the same Infinite Reality. 

Sri Ramakrishna’s manifestationist paradigm also has methodological and 
hermeneutic advantages over both perennialism and constructivism. As we saw 
in the previous section, perennialists and constructivists tend to rely on an indi- 
rect interpretive method of comparing the testimony of mystics in different tra- 
ditions. However, I have argued that philosophers who have themselves enjoyed 
mystical experiences are in a far better epistemic position than nonmystic philoso- 
phers to determine the nature and phenomenology of mystical experience. Since 
Sri Ramakrishna had direct first-person access to a variety of mystical experiences, 


192 * MYSTICAL EXPERIENCE 


he was in an optimal epistemic position to make philosophical claims about mys- 
tical experience. Therefore, at the methodological level, Sri Ramakrishna’s mani- 
festationist paradigm has a considerable advantage over both perennialism and 
constructivism. 

From a hermeneutic standpoint, the most plausible philosophical theory of 
mystical experience is one that provides the most convincing and comprehen- 
sive explanation of why mystics in different traditions describe their experiences 
in such a wide variety of ways. Taken collectively, the reports of mystics in var- 
ious traditions strongly suggest that (1) mystical experiences frequently differ at 
the phenomenological level, (2) most mystics take their experiences to be epi- 
stemically sui generis in character, and (3) most mystics take the divine objects 
of their experience to have fully objective reality.’ Perennialists deny (1), since 
they maintain that mystics’ interpretations of their experiences often differ but 
that the experiences themselves do not. Constructivists, on the other hand, deny 
both (2) and (3). Against (2), constructivists maintain that mystical experiences 
are always mediated by concepts in precisely the same way that ordinary cognitive 
experiences are. Against (3), constructivists claim that the divine realities alleg- 
edly experienced by mystics do not have fully objective reality, since they are at 
least partly a product of the mystics’ own conceptual frameworks. 

Therefore, although both perennialists and constructivists claim to be max- 
imally faithful to mystical testimony, they nonetheless deny key elements in the 
self-understanding of most mystics. Sri Ramakrishna, by contrast, fully accepts 
(1), (2), and (3). In accordance with (1), he maintains that the experiences of 
mystics vary significantly at the phenomenological level because the Infinite 
Reality manifests in different forms and aspects to different mystics. In accord- 
ance with (2), he claims that mystical experience involves a special faculty of 





122. Katz provides compelling and extensive evidence for (1) in “Language, Epistemology, and 
Mysticism” and in his edited volume, Comparative Mysticism: An Anthology of Original Sources 
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2013). A strong case for (2) is made in Perovich, “Does the 
Philosophy of Mysticism Rest on a Mistake? 244-50. William James was one of the first phi- 
losophers to defend (3). See his important discussion of the “noetic” quality of mystical experi- 
ence in The Varieties of Religious Experience (New York: Penguin, [1902] 1985), 380-81. More 
recent philosophers who have defended (3) include Richard Swinburne, William Alston, and 
Gellman, among many others. See Swinburne, The Existence of God, 2nd ed. (Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 2004), 293-327; Alston, Perceiving God: The Epistemology of Religious 
Experience (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1994); Gellman, Experience of God and the 
Rationality of Theistic Belief. 


123. Katz rather presumptuously claims that his constructivist account does not overlook 
“any evidence” (“Language, Epistemology, and Mysticism,’ 66). In fact, I have argued that his 
account overlooks the overwhelming evidence in mystical reports that mystical experiences are 
epistemically sui generis and that mystics usually take the divine objects of their experiences to 
have full ontological reality. 


Beyond Perennialism and Constructivism + 193 


nondiscursive spiritual knowledge which differs radically from ordinary cogni- 
tion. In accordance with (3), he maintains that all the various manifestations of 
the Infinite Reality experienced by mystics have full ontological reality. Since Sri 
Ramakrishna honors all three key features of mystical testimony across religious 
traditions, his manifestationist paradigm has a significant hermeneutic advantage 
over both perennialism and constructivism. 


V. Anticipating a Possible Objection 


Philosophers such as Katz and John Fenton have criticized approaches to mys- 
tical experience based on a philosophia perennis, such as the approaches of Aldous 
Huxley and Frithjof Schuon.'4 According to Fenton, attempts to interpret the 
experiences of mystics in terms of a philosophia perennis suffer from two serious 
drawbacks: first, they fail to honor the diversity of mystical experiences across 
traditions, and second, they overlook the fact that mystics often derive conflicting 
theologies and philosophies on the basis of their respective mystical experi- 
ences.’ As Fenton puts it, “The attempt to bypass metaphysical and theolog- 
ical differences among the mystical traditions by treating mystical experiences as 
subconceptual feeling, emotion, or aesthetics—or as transconceptual intuitions 
of the ‘same’ ultimate reality—is both initially and ultimately to be false to the 
data.””° Could it not be argued that Sri Ramakrishna’s manifestationist model 
of mystical experience is vulnerable to Fenton’s objection, since it is based on the 
philosophia perennis of Vijhana Vedanta? 

Sri Ramakrishna, I would suggest, is immune to this objection because of 
certain unique features of his approach to mystical experience. It is important 
to note, first of all, that not all perennial philosophies are the same, so Fenton's 
objection may apply to certain forms of perennial philosophy but not to oth- 
ers.’”” For instance, Radhakrishnan champions a neo-Advaitic perennial philos- 
ophy, according to which all mystics have the same experience of the impersonal 





124. Some defenses of a perennial philosophy include Aldous Huxley, The Perennial Philosophy 
(London: Chatto & Windus, 1947), Frithjof Schuon, The Transcendent Unity of Religions 
(Wheaton, IL: Quest Books, 1984), and Huston Smith, Forgotten Truth: The Common Vision 
of the World's Religions (New York: HarperCollins, 1976). For criticisms of appeals to a per- 
ennial philosophy, see Katz, “Language, Epistemology, and Mysticism,’ 24 and John Fenton, 
“Mystical Experience as a Bridge for Cross-Cultural Philosophy of Religion: A Critique? 
Journal of the American Academy of Religion 49.1 (March 1981), 51-76. 


125. Fenton, “Mystical Experience as a Bridge,’ 67. 
126. Fenton, “Mystical Experience as a Bridge,’ 67. 


127. Fenton mistakenly assumes that all perennialist philosophies take all mystical experiences 
to be the same. See Fenton, “Mystical Experience as a Bridge? 67 n. 1. 


194 * MYSTICAL EXPERIENCE 


nondual Atman but interpret their experience in different ways. Underhill, by 
contrast, adopts a theistic perennial philosophy that conceives the universal 
mystical experience as loving communion with a personal God. Stace, mean- 
while, champions a “pantheistic” perennial philosophy that leads him to argue 
that all introvertive mystical experience is an experience of pure undifferentiated 
unity that some mystics wrongly interpret in theistic terms. Therefore, Fenton’s 
objection does seem to apply to the perennial philosophies of Radhakrishnan, 
Underhill, and Stace, all of whom hold that mystical experiences are more or less 
the same across traditions. 

However, I would argue that Fenton’s objection does not apply to Sri 
Ramakrishna’s unique perennial philosophy of Vijfiana Vedanta, which explic- 
itly accommodates a diversity of mystical experiences and metaphysical outlooks. 
According to Sri Ramakrishna, while no one can experience the whole of the 
Infinite God, different people can experience different real forms or aspects of 
God.* As we saw in chapter 3, his parables of the chameleon and of the blind 
men and the elephant illustrate how different religions and spiritual philoso- 
phies capture different aspects and forms of one and the same Infinite Reality. 
Crucially, however, Sri Ramakrishna also takes these parables to illustrate the 
complementarity of different mystical experiences of God. For instance, when 
someone asked him, “Why are there so many conflicting views on the nature 
of God?” he replied: “Each devotee forms his view of God on the basis of how 
he experiences, or prefers to think of, God [je bhakta jeritp dekhe, se seirtip mone 
kore]. In reality, however, different views of God do not conflict” (K 100 / G 149). 
Immediately after saying this, Sri Ramakrishna proceeded to recite the chame- 
leon parable, which shows that the Infinite God “manifests Himself in various 
forms and aspects” to mystics of differing temperaments and backgrounds (K 101 
/ G150). 

Sri Ramakrishna’s statement clearly indicates that various mystics have differ- 
ent experiences of one and the same Infinite Reality. Since some mystics wrongly 
assume that what they have experienced of the ultimate reality exhausts its nature, 
they end up espousing conflicting views of the ultimate reality on the basis of 
their limited mystical experiences. For instance, an Advaitic mystic who experi- 
ences nondual Brahman in xirvikalpa samadhi may be led to assume that the 
ultimate reality is only impersonal. By contrast, a theistic mystic who experiences 
loving communion with a personal God may assume that God is only personal. 
According to Sri Ramakrishna, only the vij#ani—who has experienced God as 
both personal and impersonal, both with and without form—realizes that dif- 
ferent mystics experience complementary aspects of the same Infinite Reality. 





128. Section I of chapter 3 discusses this idea in detail. 


Beyond Perennialism and Constructivism + 195 


Therefore, Sri Ramakrishna’s vijiana-based manifestationist paradigm, which ex- 
plicitly denies that all mystical experiences are phenomenologically identical, is 
not vulnerable to Fenton’s sweeping critique of perennial philosophies in general. 

A great virtue of Sri Ramakrishna’s manifestationist paradigm is that it is both 
dynamic and expandable. As he puts it, “No one can puta limit [#7] to the experi- 
ence of God. If you refer to one experience, there is another beyond that, and still 
another, and so on” (isvariya avasthar iti kara jai na. tare bada tare bada ache) (K 
658 / G 624). Sri Ramakrisha’s use of “itz” here should remind us of his frequent 
teaching—discussed in chapter 2—that no one can put an i#i (“limit” or “end”) 
to the Infinite God.” His use of the same word fi in the context of mystical 
experiences of God is telling: since God is infinite, there are potentially infinite 
experiences of God as well. 

In a recent edited tome, Katz has attempted to show that the testimony of 
mystics from seven major religious traditions supports his own constructivist 
view.° To refute Katz, we would have to engage in a similarly full-scale examina- 
tion of the world’s diverse mystical literature and show that it lends greater sup- 
port to Sri Ramakrishna’s manifestationist paradigm than to Katz’s constructivist 
paradigm. While such an ambitious research project is well beyond the scope 
of this chapter, I hope philosophers will explore further how Sri Ramakrishna’ 
unique approach to mystical experience can help us move beyond the familiar 
alternatives of perennialism and constructivism. 


129. See, for instance, K 152 / G 192 and K 422 / G 422-23. 
130. Katz, ed., Comparative Mysticism. 


A CROSS-CULTURAL DEFENSE OF THE 
EPISTEMIC VALUE OF MYSTICAL 
EXPERIENCE 


SRI RAMAKRISHNA, SELF-AUTHENTICATION, 
AND THE ARGUMENT FROM EXPERIENCE 


The previous chapter argued that Sri Ramakrishna’s manifestationist par- 
adigm provides a more nuanced and methodologically rigorous account 
of the nature of mystical experience than the familiar paradigms of peren- 
nialism and constructivism. This chapter focuses on the epistemology of 
mystical experience, which concerns questions about the veridicality of 
putative mystical experiences. Is a mystic rationally justified in believing 
that she has had a veridical experience of God? And are we nonmystics 
rationally justified in believing that a mystic’s putative experience of God 
is veridical?! 

The stakes of these epistemic questions are high. If we are ration- 
ally warranted in thinking that mystics’ putative experiences of God are 
veridical, then these experiences would count as substantial evidence 
in favor of the existence of God. Numerous recent philosophers of 
religion—including Richard Swinburne, Jerome Gellman, and William 
Alston—have defended the epistemic and evidential value of experi- 
ences of God.’ On the other hand, philosophers such as Evan Fales and 





1. For the remainder of this chapter, whenever I refer to “mystical experience” or a 
mystic’s “experience of God,’ I mean a putative mystical experience, though I will 
often omit the word “putative” in order to avoid repetition. Therefore, the phrases 
c é : . z : 7 : 

mystical experience” and “experience of God, as I employ them, do not entail the 
veridicality of the experience. 


2. Richard Swinburne, The Existence of God, 2nd ed. (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 
1991), 293-327; William Alston, Perceiving God: The Epistemology of Religious 
Experience (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1991); Jerome Gellman, 
Experience of God and the Rationality of Theistic Belief (Ithaca, NY: Cornell 
University Press, 1997); Gary Gutting, Religious Belief and Religious Skepticism 
(Notre Dame: University of Notre Dame Press, 1983); Keith Yandell, The 
Epistemology of Religious Experience (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 1993). 


A Cross-Cultural Defense of the Epistemic Value of Mystical Experience + 197 


Richard Gale have questioned the epistemic credentials of mystical experience on 
various grounds.> This chapter explores how Sri Ramakrishna’s mystical testimony 
and teachings can enrich contemporary debates about the epistemic value of mys- 
tical experience. 

Section I of this chapter briefly sketches Sri Ramakrishna’s views on the scope 
of theological reason. While he maintains that no rational proofs or disproofs of 
God’s existence could ever be decisive, he suggests that certain arguments in favor 
of God’s existence have some degree of rational force. Section II reconstructs Sri 
Ramakrishna’s stance on the question of whether self-authenticating experiences 
of God—that is, experiences of God that guarantee their own veridicality to their 
epistemic subjects—are possible. Sri Ramakrishna’s mystical testimony, I suggest, 
lends strong support to Robert Oakes’s position that self-authenticating experi- 
ences of God are logically possible and that many mystics claimed to have had 
such self-authenticating experiences. According to Sri Ramakrishna, the highest 
theistic and Advaitic experiences are self-authenticating, while other experiences 
of God may or may not be self-authenticating. 

Many contemporary philosophers have discussed the so-called argument from 
experience, the argument for God’s existence based on the fact that some people 
claim to have experienced God. Sections III through V of this chapter examine 
different facets of the argument from experience in the light of Sri Ramakrishna. 
In section III, I argue that Sri Ramakrishna defended a simple form of the argu- 
ment from experience and that his teachings and mystical testimony support the 
key premises of the more sophisticated argument from experience defended by 
contemporary philosophers. Sections IV and V address, respectively, two of the 
most serious objections to the argument from experience. Section IV addresses 
the common objection that mystical experiences, unlike sensory experiences, can- 
not be adequately cross-checked. Drawing on Alston’s sophisticated response to 
this objection, I defend the epistemic force of many of the cross-checking proce- 
dures employed by Sri Ramakrishna and other mystics to determine the veridi- 
cality of their mystical experiences. Finally, section V addresses the objection that 
mystical experiences are epistemically suspect since different mystics have made 
conflicting claims about the nature of the ultimate reality on the basis of their 
experiences. While Gellman and William Wainwright offer promising responses 
to the conflicting claims objection, I argue that their positions can be consid- 
erably strengthened by appealing to Sri Ramakrishna’s mystical experiences and 
teachings. 





3. For references, see note 48 below. 


198 © MYSTICAL EXPERIENCE 


|. Sri Ramakrishna’s Critique of Theological Reason 


There are a wide range of views on the relationship between faith and reason. 
At one extreme lies evidentialism, the view that faith in God’s existence is rea- 
sonable only if there is sufficient evidence to support it.4 Richard Swinburne, for 
instance, makes the case that the cumulative evidence for God's existence—as 
established by various rational arguments—makes it more probable than not that 
God exists.° At the other extreme lies irrationalist fideism, the view that faith 
in God’s existence contradicts reason. Tertullian and Soren Kierkegaard, for in- 
stance, have sometimes been interpreted as claiming that we should have faith in 
certain religious truths which appear absurd to human reason.° 

Between these extremes of evidentialism and irrationalist fideism lies what 
C. Stephen Evans calls “responsible fideism.”” According to the responsible fi- 
deist, reason is inherently limited, so it can neither prove nor disprove God’s ex- 
istence in a conclusive manner. Nonetheless, the responsible fideist maintains that 
religious faith can be aided by a “self-critical” reason that recognizes its own lim- 
itations.® Evans highlights three main uses of such a self-critical reason. First, we 
can employ reason in order to show that “it is reasonable to recognise the limits 
of reason.”? Second, we can bolster our faith by providing rational refutations of 
arguments against God's existence."° Third, while arguments in support of God’s 
existence are not likely to convince a religious skeptic, such rational arguments 





4. Evidentialists include W. K. Clifford, Bertrand Russell, Antony Flew, and Richard 
Swinburne. See W. K. Clifford, “The Ethics of Belief? in W. K. Clifford, Lectures and Essays, 
vol. 2 (London: Macmillan, 1879), 177-211; Bertrand Russell, “Why I Am Not a Christian, in 
Bertrand Russell, Why 1.4m Not a Christian (London: Routledge, 2004), 1-19; Antony Flew, 
The Presumption of Atheism (London: Pemberton, 1976), 22ff.; Richard Swinburne, Faith 
and Reason, 2nd ed. (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2005), 15-24; Richard Swinburne, 
“Evidentialism,’ ind Companion to Philosophy of Religion, 2nd ed., ed. Charles Taliaferro, Paul 
Draper, and Philip L. Quinn (Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell, 2010), 681-88. 


5. Swinburne, The Existence of God. 


6. See the helpful discussion of Tertullian and Kierkegaard in C. Stephen Evans, Faith Beyond 
Reason: A Kierkegaardian Account (Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans Publishing, 1998), 10-14. 


7. Evans, Fuith Beyond Reason, 114-25. There are, of course, many other intermediate positions 
between evidentialism and irrationalist fideism besides responsible fideism, including Alvin 
Plantinga’s reformed epistemology and Duncan Pritchard’s “quasi-fideism.” See Plantinga, 
“Reason and Belief in God, in Faith and Rationality: Reason and Belief in God, ed. Alvin 
Plantinga and Nicholas Wolterstorff (Notre Dame: University of Notre Dame Press, 1983), 
16-93, and Pritchard, “Faith and Reason,’ Royal Institute of Philosophy Supplement 81 (2017), 
101-18. 


8. Evans, Faith Beyond Reason, 14. 
9. Evans, Faith Beyond Reason, 14. 
10. Evans, Faith Beyond Reason, 127. 


A Cross-Cultural Defense of the Epistemic Value of Mystical Experience +» 199 


can nonetheless strengthen a religious believer’s faith in God. As Evans puts it, 
“There may be evidence that can only be seen as evidence by the eyes of faith, but 
such evidence might still be important for those who have those eyes of faith.”" 

Sri Ramakrishna, I suggest, is best understood as a responsible fideist. As 
we saw in the discussion of VV2 in section III of chapter 1, Sri Ramakrishna 
never tired of emphasizing the fundamental limitations of the rational intellect. 
He would frequently ask the rhetorical question, “Can a one-seer pot hold four 
seers of milk?” (K 934 / G 864). Moreover, he enthusiastically endorsed William 
Hamilton’s fideistic statement that “a learned ignorance is the end of philosophy 
and the beginning of religion” (K 255 / G 278). For Sri Ramakrishna, reason can 
play a valuable role in helping us arrive at a state of “learned ignorance,’ a humble 
acknowledgment of the limitations of reason, which would clear a space for supr- 
arational faith in God’s existence. Sri Ramakrishna’s endorsement of a learned 
ignorance brings him close to Kant, who famously sought to “deny knowledge in 
order to make room for faith.””” (Indeed, Hamilton was profoundly influenced 
by the fideistic strain in Kant’s thought.) 

Asa responsible fideist, Sri Ramakrishna frequently employed reason in order 
to refute arguments against God’s existence. For instance, as we will see in the 
next chapter, he refuted arguments from evil by combining a skeptical theist po- 
sition with a sophisticated theodicy. Moreover, while Sri Ramakrishna was clearly 
skeptical of the pretensions of natural theology, he nonetheless believed that ra- 
tional arguments for God’s existence can strengthen one’s religious faith. Take, for 
instance, the following dialogue between Sri Ramakrishna and the devotee Sris: 


SRis: “Sir, I feel that there is an All-knowing Person. We get an indication of His 
Knowledge by looking at His creation. Let me give an illustration. God has 
made devices to keep fish and other aquatic animals alive in cold regions. As 
water grows colder, it gradually shrinks. But the amazing thing is that, just 
before turning into ice, the water becomes light and expands. In the freez- 
ing cold, fish can easily live in the water of a lake: the surface of the lake may 
be frozen, but the water below is all liquid. If a very cool breeze blows, it is 
obstructed by the ice. The water below remains warm.” 

SRI RAMAKRISHNA: “ That God exists may be known by looking at the universe. 
But it is one thing to hear of God, another thing to see God, and still another 





11. Evans, Faith Beyond Reason, 111. 


12. Immanuel Kant, Critique of Pure Reason, trans. Paul Guyer and Allen Wood 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998), 117. 


13. See, for instance, Hamilton’s frequent references to Kant in his book Lectures on Metaphysics 
and Logic, vol. 1 (Boston: Gould & Lincoln, 1859). 


200 * MYSTICAL EXPERIENCE 


thing to talk to God. Some have heard of milk, some have seen it, and some, 
again, have tasted it. You feel happy when you see milk; you are nourished 
and strengthened when you drink it. You will get peace of mind only when 


you have seen God. You will enjoy bliss and gain strength only when you have 
talked to Him.” (K 362 / G 368) 


Sris sketches a teleological argument for God’s existence: certain features of the 
natural world—such as the existence of natural mechanisms to keep fish alive in 
cold areas—strongly suggest that the world was created by an omniscient and 
omnipotent God. In response to Srig’s argument, Sri Ramakrishna acknowledges 
that one endowed with the eyes of faith may indeed see God’s handiwork “by 
looking at the universe.” However, he also points out that no such rational argu- 
ments are ever conclusive, so the only way to attain unshakable certainty of God’s 
existence is to experience God directly.“ I suspect that Sri Ramakrishna would 
have endorsed John Hick’s view that the universe is “religiously ambiguous” in 
that there is more or less equal evidence to support both religious and naturalistic 
interpretations of the universe.” Like Evans, Sri Ramakrishna maintains that the 
teleological argument can strengthen a religious believer’s faith in God, even if 
the argument is not likely to convince a religious skeptic. 

Interestingly, Sri Ramakrishna himself frequently appealed to one argument 
for God’s existence in particular—namely, the argument from experience. As he 
puts it, “He who seeks God with a longing heart can see Him, talk to Him as Iam 
talking to you. I am telling you the truth: God can be seen. But ah! To whom am 
I saying these words? Who will believe me?” (K 659 / G 625). According to Sri 
Ramakrishna, the strongest evidence for God’s existence is that mystics in various 
traditions, including himself, claim to have experienced God directly. Since I pro- 
vide a detailed reconstruction of Sri Ramakrishna’s argument from experience in 
section III, I will only point out here that his stance on the argument from expe- 
rience is similar to his stance on the teleological argument. Sri Ramakrishna’s tell- 
ing final question—“Who will believe me?” —suggests that while the argument 
from experience can play a valuable role in strengthening the faith of religious 





14. Placed in an Indian philosophical context, Sri Ramakrishna’s position on the limitations 
of rational arguments for God’s existence is in line with Vedanta rather than with Nyaya. As 
Francis X. Clooney observes, Naiyayikas attempt to prove God’s existence through rational 
arguments, but Vedantins argue that “scripture alone is the source of knowledge of Brahman 
while reason, which cannot proceed on its own, is still usefully supportive of claims about 
Brahman.” Hindu God, Christian God: How Reason Helps Break Down the Boundaries between 
Religions (New York: Oxford University Press, 2001), 54. 


15. See John Hick, An Interpretation of Religion: Human Responses to the Transcendent 
(London: Macmillan, 1989), 122-24. 


A Cross-Cultural Defense of the Epistemic Value of Mystical Experience + 201 


believers, it may not be rationally compelling for those who are skeptical of God’s 
existence.'¢ For the remainder of the chapter, it is important to keep in mind that 
Sri Ramakrishna defends the argument from experience from the standpoint not 
ofa natural theologian but of a responsible fideist. 


Il. Sri Ramakrishna and the Question 
of Self-Authenticating Mystical Experience 


Philosophers concerned with the epistemology of mystical experience often 
discuss an important question: is it possible for an experience of God to be 
selfauthenticating? A self-authenticating experience is an experience that 
guarantees—all by itself—its own veridicality to its epistemic subject.” Hence, 
anyone who enjoys a self-authenticating experience of God (hereafter SAGE) 
would be rationally justified in taking the experience itself as infallible justifica- 
tion for believing that the experience is veridical and that God, therefore, exists. 
Of course, a SAGE would only have maximal evidential value for the person who 
had the SAGE and not for anyone else. 

There are two key questions regarding SAGEs, the first epistemological and 
the second historical: (Q1) Is a SAGE logically possible? and (Q2) Have main- 
stream mystics in any religious tradition ever claimed to have had a SAGE? Some 
early twentieth-century philosophers, including John Baillie and H. H. Farmer, 
answered both Q1]1 and Q2 in the affirmative." Farmer, for instance, asserts that 
“the Christian experience of God... must be self-authenticating and able to shine 
in its own light independently of the abstract reflections of philosophy, for if it 
were not, it could hardly be a living experience of God as personal.”” In con- 
trast, the philosophers C. B. Martin and Antony Flew answered Q]1 in the neg- 
ative and Q2 in the affirmative.”® According to Martin and Flew, even though 
many mystics have claimed that their mystical experiences are self-authenticating, 
these mystics are not rationally justified in making this claim, since a SAGE is 





16. Gwen Griffth-Dickson seems to share Sri Ramakrishna’s view that the argument from 
experience is not rationally compelling for everyone. See her book Human and Divine: An 
Introduction to the Philosophy of Religious Experience (London: Duckworth, 2000), 122-23. 


17. This is a slightly modified version of Robert Oakes’s definition of self-authenticating ex- 
perience in his article “Mysticism, Veridicality, and Modality; Faith and Philosophy 2.3 (July 
1985), 218. 


18. John Baillie, The Sense of the Presence of God (London: Oxford University Press, 1963) and 
H. H. Farmer, The World and God (London: Nisbet, 1935), 158. 


19. Farmer, The World and God, 158. 


20. C. B. Martin, Religious Belief (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1959), 64-94, and 
Antony Flew, God and Philosophy (New York: Prometheus Books, [1966] 2005), 131-44. 


202 * MYSTICAL EXPERIENCE 


logically impossible. Meanwhile, the vast majority of more recent philosophers 
of religion—including Alston, Gary Gutting, and Keith Yandell—have answered 
both Q1 and Q2 in the negative.” According to the now prevalent view, a SAGE 
is logically impossible, and the vast majority of mystics do not even claim that 
their experiences of God are self-authenticating. 

As far as I am aware, Robert Oakes is the only contemporary philosopher 
who has challenged this prevailing orthodoxy about SAGEs. In a series of arti- 
cles published between 1976 and 2005, Oakes has defended an affirmative an- 
swer to Q1: a SAGE, he argues, is logically possible.” He also begins to provide 
an affirmative answer to Q2 by showing that well-known mystics such as Saint 
Teresa of Avila and Thomas Merton claimed to have enjoyed SAGEs.” In this 
section, I will argue that Sri Ramakrishna’s mystical testimony and teachings bol- 
ster Oakes’s promising defense of affirmative answers to Q1 and Q2. 

It is clear from Sri Ramakrishna’s mystical testimony that he considered some, 
but not all, of his experiences of God to have been self-authenticating. In section 
IV, I will discuss in detail some of his visions of God which he initially doubted 
but which he subsequently confirmed by means of checking procedures. Clearly, 
these visions of God could not have been self-authenticating, since the experi- 
ences themselves were not sufficient to guarantee their veridicality. However, Sri 
Ramakrishna also frequently taught, on the basis of his own mystical experiences, 
that the highest salvific experience of God is self-authenticating. He makes this 
clear in the following parable: 


After having the vision of God man is overwhelmed with bliss [take darsan 
hole manus anande bibval hoye jai]. He becomes silent. Who will speak? 





21. Gary Gutting, Religious Belief and Religious Skepticism (Notre Dame: University of 
Notre Dame Press, 1983), 145-46; Keith Yandell, The Epistemology of Religious Experience 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993), 163-75; Michael Levine, “Can There Be 
Self-Authenticating Experiences of God?,’ Religious Studies 19 (1983), 229-34; William Alston, 
Perceiving God: The Epistemology of Religious Experience (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 
1991), 80-81; Jerome Gellman, Experience of God and the Rationality of Theistic Belief (Ithaca, 
NY: Cornell University Press, 1997), 47; Gregory Dawes, Religion, Philosophy, and Knowledge 
(Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2016), 87-91; Griffith-Dickson, Human and Divine, 142. 


22. See the following articles by Robert Oakes: “Religious Experience and Rational Certainty,’ 
Religious Studies 12 (1976), 311-18; “Religious Experience, Self-Authentication, and Modality 
De Re: A Prolegomenon,’ American Philosophical Quarterly 16.3 (July 1979), 217-24; “Religious 
Experience and Epistemological Miracles: A Moderate Defense of Theistic Mysticism,’ 
International Journal for Philosophy of Religion 12 (1981), 97-110; “Mysticism, Veridicality, and 
Modality,’ 217-35; “Transparent Veridicality and Phenomenological Imposters: The Telling 
Issue,’ Faith and Philosophy 22.4 (October 2005), 413-25. 


23. Oakes, “Religious Experience and Epistemological Miracles,” 109 n. 1; Oakes, “Transparent 
Veridicality and Phenomenological Imposters,’ 413; and Oakes, “Mysticism, Veridicality, and 
Modality,’ 217. 


A Cross-Cultural Defense of the Epistemic Value of Mystical Experience + 203 


Who will explain? The king lives beyond seven gates. At each gate sits a 
man endowed with great power and glory. At each gate the visitor asks, 
“Ts this the king?” The gate-keeper answers, “No. Not this, not this.” The 
visitor passes through the seventh gate and becomes overpowered with 
joy. He is speechless. This time he doesn’t have to ask, “Is this the king?” 
The mere sight of him removes all doubts [dekhei sab samsay cole jai]. (K 
182 / G218) 


For Sri Ramakrishna, cross-checking procedures are appropriate for any mys- 
tical experience that falls short of the highest self-authenticating experience of 
God. Accordingly, the visitor repeatedly asks the gatekeeper whether the man 
he sees at each of the seven gates is the king. By contrast, the highest realization 
of God—which Sri Ramakrishna likens to seeing the king beyond the seventh 
gate—does not require cross-checking, since the experience itself “removes all 
doubts.” Sri Ramakrishna, then, considers the highest salvific realization of God 
to be self-authenticating in that it guarantees its own veridicality to its epistemic 
subject. 

As I discussed at length in earlier chapters, Sri Ramakrishna’s expansive 
conception of God as the impersonal-personal Infinite Reality entails that the 
highest salvific experience of God can take different forms, depending on the par- 
ticular makeup of the mystic. For a theistic mystic, the highest salvific experience 
usually consists in the experience of loving union with the personal God. For an 
Adyaitin, by contrast, the highest salvific realization consists in the experience of 
dissolving one’s individuality in the impersonal nondual Brahman. 

As a vijnani, Sti Ramakrishna enjoyed both types of salvific experience, and 
his teachings in the Kathamrta make clear that he took each type of salvific ex- 
perience to be self-authenticating. Take, for instance, his teaching about the 
self-authenticating nature of the highest theistic realization of God: “Better than 
reading is hearing, and better than hearing is seeing. One understands the scrip- 
tures better by hearing them from the lips of the guru or of a holy man... . But 
seeing [dekha] is far better than hearing. At the sight of God, all doubts disap- 
pear [dekhle sab sandeha cole jai). \t is true that many things are recorded in the 
scriptures; but all these are useless without the direct realization of God [isvarer 
saksatkar], without devotion to His Lotus Feet, without purity of heart” (K 478 
/ G 476). According to Sri Ramakrishna, while we may have strong faith in God 
after hearing about God from saints, our doubts about God’s existence cannot be 
entirely dispelled until we have the direct experience of God. He makes clear that 
the bhakta’s salvific realization of the personal God is self-authenticating, since 
the very experience of God is sufficient and infallible guarantee of its own veridi- 
cality: “At the sight of God, all doubts disappear.” Sri Ramakrishnaalso affirms that 
the Advaitic realization of the nondual Atman is self-authenticating: “Without 


204 ¢ MYSTICAL EXPERIENCE 


God’s grace, one’s doubts will not disappear. Without the realization of the 
Atman, doubts do not disappear [dtmar saksatkar na hole sandeha bhanjan hoy 
na\” (K 64 / G 116).”4 He emphasizes that it is only through God’s grace that one 
attains the self-authenticating Advaitic realization of the impersonal Atman. He 
likewise declares, on the basis of his own mystical experiences, that the panenthe- 
istic experience of vij#ana is self-authenticating: 


All doubts disappear when one sees God [take kintu darsan korle sab 
samsay cole jai). It is one thing to hear of God, but quite a different thing 
to see Him. One cannot have one hundred percent conviction [solo ana 
visvas| through mere hearing. After realizing God, one has complete and 
infallible conviction [saksatkar hole ar visvaser kichu baki thake na\. 

Formal worship drops away after the vision of God [#vardarsan]. It 
was thus that my worship in the temple came to an end. I used to wor- 
ship the Deity in the Kali temple. It was suddenly revealed to me that 
everything is suffused with Consciousness [cizmay]. The utensils of wor- 
ship, the altar, the doorframe—all Pure Consciousness. Men, animals, and 
other living beings—all Pure Consciousness. Then like a madman I began 
to shower flowers in all directions. Whatever I saw I worshipped. (K 394 / 
G 396) 


For Sri Ramakrishna, God-realization is self-authenticating, since it generates 
an “infallible conviction” that makes it impossible to doubt God’s existence 
any longer. He then specifically refers to his own ecstatic self-authenticating 
experience of vijfana, the realization that everything is “Pure Consciousness.” 
Crucially, Sri Ramakrishna does not merely maintain that one who realizes God 
has a subjective feeling of complete certainty that his experience is veridical. 
Rather, he is making the much stronger claim that the God-realized mystic’s feel- 
ing of complete certainty is an infallible one that guarantees the veridicality of his 
experience, 

It is worth noting that Sri Ramakrishna’s claim that the highest experience 
of God is self-authenticating, far from being anomalous, is entirely in keep- 
ing with the mainstream Vedantic tradition. For instance, Mundaka Upanisad 
2.2.9 states: “When the Supreme is seen, the knot of the heart-strings is rent, 
all doubts are cut asunder, and one’s karma is entirely exhausted.” Similarly, 


24, For other references to the self-authenticating nature of atmajnana, see K 221 / G252 and 


K922/G 853. 


25. My translation is a modified version of Sri Aurobindo’s rendering in The Complete Works 
of Sri Aurobindo, vol. 18: The Upanishads—L: Kena and Other Upanishads (Pondicherry: Sri 
Aurobindo Ashram, 2001), 141. 


A Cross-Cultural Defense of the Epistemic Value of Mystical Experience + 205 


the Bhagavad Gita repeatedly declares that the highest spiritual knowledge 
is self-authenticating. In 4.41 of the Gita, for instance, the Lord Krsna refers 
to the Knower of Brahman as “one whose doubt has been totally destroyed by 
Knowledge” (jzana-samchinna-samsayam). These scriptural verses affirm that the 
highest mystical knowledge of the Supreme Reality is self-authenticating, since 
it is sufficient, by itself, to dispel all doubts about its veridicality. The Advaita 
Vedantin Sankara, in his Upadesasahasri, likewise declares that the experience of 
the nondual Atman is “self-validating” (suapramanakah).”° 

Indeed, I believe it would not be difficult to furnish evidence that numerous 
mystics in zov-Indian spiritual traditions also considered at least some of their 
experiences of God to be self-authenticating. Although a full justification of this 
claim is beyond the scope of this chapter, I will begin to substantiate this claim by 
citing some salient passages from two great Christian mystics. Take this striking 
passage from the mystical testimony of Angela of Foligno: 


At times God comes into the soul without being called; and He instills 
into her fire, love, and sometimes sweetness; and the soul believes this 
comes from God, and delights therein. But she does not yet know, or see, 
that He dwells in her; she perceives His grace, in which she delights. And 
again God comes to the soul, and speaks to her words full of sweetness, 
in which she has much joy, and she feels Him. This feeling of God gives 
her the greatest delight; but even here a certain doubt remains; for the 
soul has not the certitude that God is in her.... And beyond this the soul 
receives the gift of seeing God. God says to her, “Behold Me!” and the soul 
sees Him dwelling within her. She sees Him more clearly than one man 
sees another. For the eyes of the soul behold a plenitude of which I cannot 
speak: a plenitude which is not bodily but spiritual, of which I can say 
nothing. And the soul rejoices in that sight with an ineffable joy; and this 
is the manifest and certain sign that God indeed dwells in her.”” 


There are three striking parallels between Angela’s testimony and Sri 
Ramakrishna’s parable of the king and seven gates. First, both Sri Ramakrishna 
and Angela contrast the highest self-authenticating experience of God with lesser 
mystical experiences that are open to doubt. Second, both mystics maintain that 
the indescribable bliss of the highest God-realization itself attests infallibly to the 





26. Sankaracirya, Upadesa Sahasri, trans. Swami Jagadananda (Mylapore, India: Sri 
Ramakrishna Math, 1941), 278 (18.203 of the metrical portion). 


27. Angela of Foligno, The Book of Divine Consolations of the Blessed Angela of Foligno, trans. M. 
Steegmann (London: New Medieval Library, 1908), 24. Cited in Alston, Perceiving God, 13. 


206 * MYSTICAL EXPERIENCE 


veridicality of the experience. As Angela puts it, the “ineffable joy” of her vision 
of God is the “manifest and certain sign” of its veridicality. Third, according to 
both Angela and Sri Ramakrishna, one can attain the highest self-authenticating 
experience of God only through God’s grace. 

Teresa of Avila also unambiguously affirms that the highest theistic experience 
of union with God is self-authenticating: 


Thus does God, when he raises a soul to union with himself, suspend the 
natural action of all her faculties. She neither sees, hears, nor understands, 
so long as she is united with God. But this time is always short, and it 
seems even shorter than it is. God establishes himself in the interior of this 
soul in such a way, that when she returns to herself, it is wholly impossible 
for her to doubt that she has been in God, and God in her. This truth re- 
mains so strongly impressed on her that, even though many years should 
pass without the condition returning, she can neither forget the favor she 
received, nor doubt of its reality. If you, nevertheless, ask how it is pos- 
sible that the soul can see and understand that she has been in God, since 
during the union she has neither sight nor understanding, I reply that she 
does not see it then, but that she sees it clearly later, after she has returned 
to herself, not by any vision, but by a certitude which abides with her and 
which God alone can give her. 

But how, you will repeat, cam one have such certainty in respect to 
what one does not see? This question, I am powerless to answer. These are 
secrets of God’s omnipotence which it does not appertain to me to pene- 
trate. All that I know is that I tell the truth; and I shall never believe that 


any soul who does not possess this certainty has ever been really united 
to God.”8 


According to Teresa, the mystical experience of loving union with God is so 
overwhelmingly vivid and ecstatic that it is “wholly impossible” for the mystic 
to doubt the veridicality of her experience. Of course, a skeptic might object that 
the mystic’s complete subjective certainty of the veridicality of her experience of 
God is compatible with the experience being nonveridical. Anticipating this ob- 
jection, Teresa insists that the experience itself involves an epistemically unique 
feeling of “certitude”—granted to the mystic by God Himself—which guaran- 
tees the veridicality of her experience. From Teresa’s perspective, since the mystic’s 
certitude is part of the phenomenological content of the experience itself, the 
mystic is rationally justified in taking her experience to be a self-authenticating 





28. Cited in James, The Varieties of Religious Experience, 409-10. 


A Cross-Cultural Defense of the Epistemic Value of Mystical Experience + 207 


experience of union with God. Teresa then anticipates another objection: how 
is it even possible for someone to have such an infallible certitude of union with 
God? Tellingly, she responds to this objection by appealing to God’s unfathom- 
able omnipotence. Although she admits that she cannot provide a rational expla- 
nation of how this certitude is possible, she insists that the omnipotent God does 
grant this infallible certitude to certain blessed souls. 

Such passages from the mystical testimony of Sri Ramakrishna, Angela of 
Foligno, and Teresa of Avila provide strong preliminary evidence for an affirm- 
ative answer to Q2: prominent mystics in multiple religious traditions claimed 
to have SAGEs.” However, as I already pointed out, an affirmative answer to Q2 
does not entail an affirmative answer to QI. After all, if a SAGE is logically im- 
possible, then even if certain mystics claimed to have had a SAGE, these mystics 
would not be rationally justified in making this claim. Indeed, a number of re- 
cent philosophers have argued for a negative answer to Q1.*° According to these 
philosophers, a SAGE is logically impossible, because it is always conceivable 
that a zonveridical experience of (some mind-independent) X is phenomenolog- 
ically identical to a veridical experience of X. As Alston puts it, “Delusory experi- 
ences can be phenomenally indistinguishable from veridical ones, in the mystical 
realm as well as the sensory. Nothing in the experience itself suffices to distin- 
guish one from the other.’* Oakes has aptly dubbed this the “Phenomenological 
Indiscernibility Postulate” (PIP).*” 

Some philosophers, such as Alston and Gutting, take PIP to be self-evidently 
true, so they do not feel the need to justify it.*> Others, such as Yandell and C. B. 
Martin, attempt to provide justification for PIP.** Their justification of PIP can be 
summarized as follows. The only experiences that may be self-authenticating are 
experiences of one’s own existence or the experience of one’s own current mental 





29. See also the following passages from the testimony of a variety of other non-Indian mys- 
tics who claim to have had SAGEs: Richard Bucke (cited in William James, The Varieties of 
Religious Experience [New York: Penguin, (1902) 1985, 399]), Thomas Merton (cited in 
Oakes, “Transparent Veridicality and Phenomenological Imposters,’ 413), the Sufi mystic 
Gulshan-Raz (cited in James, The Varieties of Religious Experience, 420), and an anonymous 
Christian clergyman (cited in James, The Varieties of Religious Experience, 66-67). 


30. For references, see notes 20 and 21. 
31. Alston, Perceiving God, 81. 
32. Oakes, “Transparent Veridicality and Phenomenological Imposters,’ 415-16. 


33. Alston, Perceiving God, 80-81, and Gutting, Religious Belief and Religious Skepticism, 
145-46. 


34, Yandell, The Epistemology of Religious Experience, 163-82; C. B. Martin, Religious Belief, 
64-94; Dawes, Religion, Philosophy, and Knowledge, 89. 


208 © MYSTICAL EXPERIENCE 


states, such as the experience of pain. The subjective experience of being in pain, 
for instance, may be self-authenticating precisely because its intentional object 
is (arguably) not a mind-independent reality. Hence, it is conceivable that PIP 
does not apply to certain pain-experiences. For instance, if I say, “I feel pain,” and 
someone were to say, “How do you know that you're really feeling pain?” I can 
plausibly respond that my experience of pain is self-authenticating, since the very 
fact that I fee/ pain suffices to make it a veridical experience. Conversely, any expe- 
rience the intentional object of which is a mind-independent reality—such as a 
spatiotemporal object or God—cannot be self-authenticating, since no phenom- 
enological feature of the experience itself suffices to ensure its veridicality. Since 
PIP necessarily applies to all putative experiences of a mind-independent reality, 
it is always conceivable that an experience of God is nonveridical. Therefore, a 
SAGE is logically impossible.** 

How convincing is this argument for the logical impossibility of a SAGE? 
I would argue that it is not convincing. Notice that the claim that PIP applies to 
all putative experiences of a mind-independent reality is justified inductively on 
the basis of experiences that are familiar to us: namely, subjective experiences of 
pain and experiences of spatiotemporal objects. Since PIP applies to both these 
familiar types of experience, philosophers such as Yandell, Alston, and Martin 
infer that PIP necessarily applies to all experiences of God as well. The problem, 
however, is that they do not provide adequate justification of this inductive in- 
ference. When pressed, they might claim that we have no good reason to believe 
that PIP does not apply to experiences of God. However, this claim—even if it 
were true—would not establish that PIP zecessarily applies to all perceptual expe- 
riences, including all (stipulatively) veridical experiences of God. Therefore, in 
order to establish the logical possibility of a SAGE, it suffices to show that it is 
conceivable that a certain type of veridical experience of God has a radically dif- 
ferent epistemic structure from sensory experience (to which PIP always applies), 
such that the very having of the mystical experience guarantees its veridicality. 

Fortunately, Oakes provides precisely such an argument for the conceiva- 
bility of a SAGE.*” According to Oakes, the logical possibility of the existence 
of a theistic God suffices to establish the logical possibility of a SAGE.*® His 


35. See Oakes, “Religious Experience and Epistemological Miracles; 102 and Yandell, The 
Epistemology of Religious Experience, 166-67. 


36. C. B. Martin, Religious Belief, 90-94. 


37. In fact, Oakes provides several arguments in favor of the logical possibility of SAGEs in 
different articles. I focus here on Oakes’s argument in his article “Religious Experience and 
Epistemological Miracles, which I find especially promising. 


38. Oakes, “Religious Experience and Epistemological Miracles,’ 106-7. 


A Cross-Cultural Defense of the Epistemic Value of Mystical Experience + 209 


argument runs as follows. The theistic God, by virtue of His omnipotence, 
would not be bound by any logically contingent connections—such as the laws 
of nature—and would, therefore, have the ability to breach such contingently 
lawful connections. Therefore, God would be able to perform various miracles, 
such as the parting of the Red Sea and the resurrection of Christ, since these 
miracles are nothing but breaches of natural law. Oakes formulates the rest of 
his argument as follows: 


[S]ince it is clear that any being worthy of the title “God” would have the 
power to bring about “miraculous events,’ ie., the power to violate natural, 
“causal? or de facto connections at will, such power would clearly extend to 
any connections of that sort which are epistemological in character. In short, 
it seems unimpeachable that any being worthy of the title “God” would have 
the power to effect “epistemic miracles” as well as those of the traditionally 
cited ontological variety. This being so, we are now positioned to establish 
that it is perfectly conceivable for God to bring about self-authenticating 
experiences of Himself; for the occurrence of any such experience can 
readily be seen to constitute an “epistemic miracle,’ and, consequently, an 
epistemological event which God would have the power to bring about.” 


It is likely that even an omnipotent God would not be able to bring about any 
state of affairs. For instance, since it isa necessary truth that 2 + 2 = 4, God would 
not be able to make 2 + 2 equal to 5. However, as I argued in the previous para- 
graph, it is wot a necessary truth that PIP applies to all perceptual experiences.” 
Hence, I believe Oakes is justified in claiming that an omnipotent God would 
be able to perform the epistemic miracle of bringing about self-authenticating 
experiences of Himself by suspending the de facto applicability of PIP to these 
experiences. Therefore, Oakes’s argument justifies an affirmative answer to QI: a 
SAGE is a logical possibility, since it is conceivable that God would be able to 
bring about mystical experiences to which PIP does not apply. 

In a rebuttal to Oakes’s defense of the logical possibility of a SAGE, 
Michael Levine argues that Oakes “needs to elucidate and defend a noncri- 
terial account of knowledge and certainty that extends beyond first person 
statements about one’s own current mental states to statements about religious 
experiences of a certain type.”“! What Levine seems to demand is a precise 





39. Oakes, “Religious Experience and Epistemological Miracles,” 106-7. 
40. Or, at least no one to date has convincingly argued that PIP is a necessary truth. 


41. Levine, “Self- Authenticating Experiences of God: A Reply to Professor Oakes,’ International 
Journal for Philosophy of Religion 16 (1984), 162. 


210 * MYSTICAL EXPERIENCE 


explanation of how one can be certain of the veridicality of a particular reli- 
gious experience on the basis of the experience alone. The testimony of mystics 
such as Teresa and Sri Ramakrishna can help show why Levine’s demand is 
unreasonable. As we have seen, Teresa explicitly raises the question of how a 
SAGE is possible, and she responds that “these are secrets of God’s omnipo- 
tence which it does not appertain to me to penetrate.” From Teresa’s perspec- 
tive, our inability to explain the precise epistemic structure of a SAGE, far 
from indicating the logical impossibility of a SAGE, reflects the limitations of 
human thought and language. It is hardly surprising that the omnipotent God 
can bring about self-authenticating experiences of Himself that we cannot ex- 
plain with our finite intellects. 

Like Teresa, Sri Ramakrishna explains how SAGEs are possible by appealing 


to God’s omnipotence: 


I have observed that a man acquires one kind of knowledge about God 
through reasoning and another kind through meditation; but he acquires 
a third kind of Knowledge about God when God reveals Himself [tini 
jakhan dekhiye den| to His devotee. .. . Do you know what it is like? 
Suppose a man is in a dark room. He goes on rubbing a match against a 
match-box and all of a sudden light comes. Likewise, if God gives us this 
flash of divine light, all our doubts are destroyed [seirakam dap kore alo 
jadi tini den, tahole sab sandeha mite jai]. Can one ever know God by mere 
reasoning? (K 779 / G'734) 


According to Sri Ramakrishna, we can have a self-authenticating experience of 
God only when God Himself gives us an instantaneous “flash of divine light.” 
This flash of divine light, which is part of the phenomenology of the experience 
itself, suffices to guarantee the veridicality of the experience. However, through 
“mere reasoning,” we can never understand how such a “flash of divine light” can 
be self-authenticating. Of course, critics such as Yandell and Levine could per- 
sist in maintaining that this “flash of divine light” is nothing more than a strong 
subjective feeling of certainty that cannot possibly guarantee the veridicality of 
the experience. I would argue that these critics unjustifiably assume that the ex- 
perience of God necessarily has the same epistemic structure as ordinary percep- 
tual experience. As Sri Ramakrishna makes clear, a SAGE consists precisely in 
the epistemic miracle of experiencing God in such a manner that the mystic has 
infallible certainty—that is, not merely subjective certainty—of the veridicality 
of the experience solely on the basis of the experience itself. Therefore, to assume 
without argument that PIP necessarily applies to all experiences of putatively 
mind-independent realities—as Yandell, Levine, and other critics do—is to beg 
the question. 


A Cross-Cultural Defense of the Epistemic Value of Mystical Experience + 211 


Contrary to the prevailing view among contemporary philosophers, I have 
argued that there are good reasons to answer both Q]1 and Q2 in the affirma- 
tive. Oakes has made a convincing case that it is logically possible for an omnipo- 
tent God to bring about the epistemic miracle of a self-authenticating experience 
of Himself. Moreover, the testimony of mystics as diverse as Sri Ramakrishna, 
Teresa of Avila, and Angela of Foligno provides strong preliminary evidence that 
at least some prominent mystics reported having had SAGEs. Since we cannot 
rule out the logical possibility of SAGEs, such mystics were rationally justified in 
taking their experiences of God to be self-authenticating. 


Ill. The Argument from Experience in the Light 
of Sri Ramakrishna 


We can now investigate other important epistemological questions concerning 
mystical experience. Is a mystic who has had a putative experience of God that is 
not self-authenticating rationally justified in taking it to be veridical? And are we 
nonmystics rationally justified in believing that a given mystic’s putative experi- 
ence of God is veridical?# A number of recent philosophers such as Swinburne, 
Gellman, and Wainwright have answered both of these questions in the affirm- 
ative by defending versions of what has come to be known as the “argument 
from religious experience” or, more simply, as the “argument from experience.” 
According to these philosophers, the fact that mystics in various traditions claim 
to have experienced God counts as substantial evidence for God’s existence. The 
remainder of this chapter explores how Sri Ramakrishna’s mystical testimony and 
teachings can bolster the argument from experience in various ways. 

During the early phase of his spiritual practice, Sri Ramakrishna’s strong 
faith in God seems to have been based, in part, on a simple form of the argu- 
ment from experience. Asa spiritual aspirant, he would often think: “Ramprasad 
and other devotees had the vision of the Divine Mother. One can definitely 
see Her. Why can’t 1?” (LP Lii.64 / DP 211). He would also pray to the Divine 
Mother: “Mother, You showed Yourself to Ramprasad. Why won’t you show 
Yourself to me? I don’t want wealth, friends and family, or objects of enjoyment. 
Please reveal Yourself to me” (LP Lii.64 / DP 211). The testimony of mystics such 





42. I adapt these questions from section 8 of Jerome Gellman’s article “Mysticism, Stanford 


Encyclopedia of Philosophy, 2014 edition (http://plato.stanford.edu). 


43. See Swinburne, The Existence of God, 293-327; Caroline Franks Davis, The Evidential 
Force of Religious Experience (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1989); Gellman, Experience of God; 
William Wainwright, Mysticism: A Study of its Nature, Cognitive Value and Moral Implications 
(Brighton, UK: Harvester Press, 1981); Yandell, The Epistemology of Religious Experience. 


212 * MYSTICAL EXPERIENCE 


as Ramprasad who claimed to have realized God convinced Sri Ramakrishna not 
only that God exists but also that it is possible for anyone to realize God through 
God’s grace and the practice of spiritual disciplines. On the basis of this faith in 
God, Sri Ramakrishna engaged in intense spiritual practice and ultimately vali- 
dated his faith by experiencing God himself. 

Later in his life, Sri Ramakrishna often encouraged his visitors to have faith in 
the testimony of saints who have realized God. On one occasion, when the ho- 
meopathic doctor Mahendralal Sarkar expressed doubt about the possibility of 
God incarnating as a human being, Sri Ramakrishna told him: “How can we say 
emphatically with our small intelligence that God cannot assume a human form? 
Can we ever understand all these ideas with our little intellect? Can a one-seer 
pot hold four seers of milk? Therefore, one should trust in the words of holy men 
and great souls, those who have realized God. They constantly think of God, as a 
lawyer of his lawsuits” (K 933-34 / G 864). According to Sri Ramakrishna, just 
as it is reasonable for us to trust the advice of lawyers with respect to legal matters, 
it is reasonable for us to trust the teachings of God-intoxicated saints with respect 
to spiritual matters. 

On another occasion, a visitor asked Sri Ramakrishna, “Sir, what is the proof 
[praman] that the Atman is separate from the body?” and Sri Ramakrishna 
responded: “Proof? God can be seen; by practising austerities one sees God, 
through His grace. The ancient sages directly realized the Atman” (praman? 
isvarke dekha jai. tapasya korle tar krpai isvardarsan hoy. rsira atmar saksatkar 
korechilen) (K 429 / G 429). According to Sri Ramakrishna, the only conclusive 
proof of the reality of the Atman is experiential rather than rational: by realiz- 
ing the Atman directly, one attains infallible certainty of its reality. However, for 
those who have not realized the Atman, the best evidence for its existence is the 
fact that sages in the past declared that they “directly realized the Atman.” In 
other words, Sri Ramakrishna presents a version of the argument from experi- 
ence: it is reasonable for us to believe that God exists on the basis of the testimony 
of saints who claim to have experienced God. For Sri Ramakrishna, the argument 
from experience lends rational support to the belief not only that God exists but 
also that God can be experienced directly. Endowed with this faith, one should 
engage in spiritual disciplines with the aim of realizing God “through His grace,” 
thereby attaining conclusive proof of God's existence. 

Numerous recent philosophers have defended sophisticated forms of the ar- 
gument from experience.** Although the argument has been formulated in a va- 
riety of ways, it usually takes the following basic form: 





44. For references, see note 43. 


A Cross-Cultural Defense of the Epistemic Value of Mystical Experience + 213 


1. Experiences occur which their subjects take to be experiences of God. 

2. Such putative experiences of God are perceptual in nature, since they are 
closely analogous to sense-perceptual experiences. 

3. When subjects have a perceptual experience which they take to be of x, it is 
rational to conclude that they really do experience x unless we have some pos- 
itive reasons to think their experiences are delusive. 

4, There are no good, positive reasons for thinking that all or most experiences 
which their subjects take to be of God are delusive. 

5. Agreement about putative experiences of God in diverse circumstances 
enhances the evidence in favor of their veridicality. 


Therefore, 


6. It is rational to believe that at least some putative experiences of God are 
veridical. 
7. Itis rational to believe that God exists.” 


Premise 1 is uncontroversially true, since it only states that some people believe 
that they have experienced God, which leaves open the possibility that they are 
mistaken. Premises 2 through 5, however, are quite controversial. Indeed, entire 
books have been written defending or refuting these premises of the argument 
from experience. Since a comprehensive discussion of the argument from experi- 
ence is beyond the scope of this chapter, I will only briefly mention some of the 
main arguments both for and against the controversial premises of the argument 
from experience. Sri Ramakrishna’s mystical testimony and teachings, I argue, not 
only support these premises but also suggest new ways to defuse some of the most 
serious objections to the argument from experience. 

Recent proponents of the argument from experience defend premise 2 by 
identifying key similarities between experiences of God and sense-perceptual 
experiences.“ Three such similarities are frequently emphasized. First, experi- 
ences of God, like sense-perceptual experiences, often have a subject-object struc- 
ture. Second, subjects tend to make truth-claims on the basis of their experiences 
of God. That is, just as we are often moved to claim that a given sense object exists 
because we experience it, mystics are often moved to claim that God exists because 





45. My formulation of the argument from experience draws heavily from William Rowe, 
“Religious Experience and the Principle of Credulity, International Journal for Philosophy of 
Religion 13 (1982), 87. | adapt premise 5 from Gellman’s formulation of the argument from 
experience in “Mysticism.” 


46. See, for instance, Gellman, Experience of God, 50-52; Wainwright, Mysticism, 82-101; 
Davis, The Evidential Force of Religious Experience, 67-76. 


214 * MYSTICAL EXPERIENCE 


they experience God. Third, just as there are numerous ways of cross-checking 
the veridicality of sense-perceptual experiences, there are numerous ways of 
cross-checking the veridicality of experiences of God. For instance, one way for 
us to verify a mystic’s claims would be to engage in appropriate spiritual practices, 
which would help put us in a position to experience God for ourselves. 

In his teachings, Sri Ramakrishna identifies all three of these similarities 
between theistic experiences of God and sensory experiences. Tellingly, in the 
statement cited earlier, he describes the experience of God using the language 
of sensory experience: “God can be seen,’ “one sees God, through His grace.” 
Obviously, Sri Ramakrishna does not mean to imply that God is a sense object 
that can be seen with physical eyes; rather, he emphasizes that the experience of 
God is closely analogous to the experience of sense objects in its perceptual quality 
and immediacy.” In fact, he repeatedly highlights the analogy between sensory 
experience and the experience of God. When his disciple Narendra asked him, 
“Sir, have you seen God?” Sri Ramakrishna replied, “Yes, I have seen God. I have 
seen Him more tangibly than I see you. I have talked to Him more intimately 
than I am talking to you” (G 57). Similarly, he told his visitors on another occa- 
sion: “He who seeks God with a longing heart can see Him, talk to Him as I am 
talking to you [#svarke vyakul hoye khijle take darsan hoy, tar sange alap hoy, katha 
hoy; jemon, ami tomader sange katha kocchi]. 1 am telling you the truth: God can 
be seen” (K 659 / G 625). Sri Ramakrishna’s striking assertion that one can con- 
verse with God just as one converses with another person supports the thesis that 
theistic experiences of God have a subject-object structure akin to that of sensory 
experiences. He also points out that others can verify a mystic’s claims about God 
by seeking God “with a longing heart” and experiencing God for themselves. 

One might point out, however, that the Advaitic experience of becoming 
one with Brahman clearly does not have a subject-object structure. That Sri 
Ramakrishna was aware of this is indicated by his use of the analogy of a salt 
doll to describe Advaitic experience: one merges with Brahman in the way that a 
salt doll merges with the ocean (K 121 / G 170). According to Sri Ramakrishna, 
while Advaitic experience does not have a subject-object structure, it is nonethe- 
less analogous to sensory experience in at least three important respects. First, 
the term he frequently uses to describe the realization of the Atman—namely, 
saksatkar, which means direct spiritual perception—indicates that the experience 
of the Atman, like sensory experience, has the quality of immediacy and direct- 
ness. Second, Sri Ramakrishna maintains that both theistic and Advaitic mystics 





47. According to Wainwright, the fact that “[mlystical experience is often said to be a kind of 
‘seeing’ or ‘tasting’ or ‘touching’” suggests an analogy between mystical experience and sensory 
experience. See William Wainwright, “Mysticism and Sense Perception,’ Religious Studies 9.3 
(September 1973), 258. Sri Ramakrishna’s teachings support Wainwright’s claim. 


A Cross-Cultural Defense of the Epistemic Value of Mystical Experience + 215 


are equally moved to make truth-claims on the basis of their mystical experiences. 
Accordingly, in the passage cited earlier, Sri Ramakrishna remarks that the an- 
cient sages affirmed the reality of the Atman on the basis of their own direct ex- 
perience of the Atman (K 429 / G 429). Third, he maintains that both Advaitic 
and theistic experiences, like sensory experiences, are amenable to verification by 
others. When he was asked for “proof” of the reality of the Atman, he replied 
that “by practising austerities one sees God, through His grace” (K 429 / G 429). 
For Sri Ramakrishna, then, premise 2 of the argument from experience applies to 
experiences of the personal God as well as to nondual experiences of the Atman. 

Some critics of the argument from experience, including Evan Fales and 
Richard Gale, challenge premise 2 by arguing that there are fundamental disanal- 
ogies between experiences of God and sensory experiences.** One major disanal- 
ogy, according to these critics, is that claims based on sensory experiences can be 
adequately cross-checked, while claims based on experiences of God cannot.” 
In section IV, I will argue that Sri Ramakrishna’s mystical testimony provides re- 
sources for defending premise 2 against this important objection. 

Swinburne dubs premise 3 of the argument from experience the “principle of 
credulity” (hereafter PC) and argues that it is a fundamental principle of ration- 
ality, which we must accept in order to avoid landing in a “sceptical bog.”*° That 
is, in our everyday dealings, we take our seeming experience of a particular sense 
object as prima facie evidence for the existence of that object, unless we have a 
good reason to doubt the veridicality of our experience. That I seem to see, say, 
an orange in front of me is prima facie evidence that there actually is an orange 
in front of me. Some philosophers argue that PC requires further qualification 
in order to be plausible.*' Other critics, however, accept PC as it stands while 
rejecting premise 2: PC does not apply to experiences of God, since they are not 


48. Evan Fales, “Mystical Experience as Evidence, International Journal for Philosophy of 
Religion 40.1 (August 1996), 19-46; Richard Gale, On the Nature and Existence of God 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1991), 285-343; Ralph W. Clark, “The Evidential 
Value of Religious Experiences,’ International Journal for Philosophy of Religion 16.3 (1984), 
189-202. 


49. See note 67 below. 


50. Swinburne, The Existence of God, 304 n. 10. It should be noted that Swinburne formulates 
PC in such a way that it applies only to the mystic who has a putative experience of God. 
Swinburne then supplements PC with the “principle of testimony” to justify the prima facie ac- 
ceptance of a mystic’s testimony by nonmystics (322-24). Gellman reformulates PC as “BEE” 
(“Best Explanation of Experience”), which incorporates Swinburne’s principle of testimony as 
well (Experience of God, 46-48). My formulation of premise 3, like Gellman’s BEE, combines 
PC with Swinburne’s principle of testimony. 


51. See, for instance, Rowe, “Religious Experience and the Principle of Credulity”; Gutting, 
Religious Belief and Religious Skepticism, 147-50; and Henry Samuel Levinson and Jonathan 
Malino, “Who's Afraid of a BEE STING?) yun: The Jerusalem Philosophical Quarterly 48 


216 * MYSTICAL EXPERIENCE 


sufficiently similar to sensory experiences to count as perceptual experiences in 
the first place.” 

Although Sri Ramakrishna never explicitly affirms PC, his repeated emphasis 
on the close analogies between sensory experience and the experience of God 
strongly implies PC. After telling his visitors that one can “see” and “talk to” 
God just as he is talking to them, Sri Ramakrishna says, “I am telling you the 
truth: God can be seen” (K 659 / G 625). Here, Sri Ramakrishna encourages his 
visitors to believe that God exists and can be experienced on the basis of his own 
testimony that he has directly experienced God. His reasoning seems to presup- 
pose PC: since experiences of God are closely analogous to sensory experiences, 
and it is reasonable for us to take the testimony of a reliable person who claims to 
have experienced a sense object as evidence for the existence of that object, then it 
is also reasonable for us to take the testimony of a trustworthy mystic who claims 
to have experienced God as evidence for the existence of God. 

Premise 4 of the argument from experience has been vigorously debated. 
Critics have adopted two strategies for denying premise 4, one from the side of 
the object (ie. God) and one from the side of the subject (ie. the mystic who 
claims to have experienced God). From the object side, critics argue that since 
there are independent grounds for believing that God does not exist, we have 
good reason to believe that experiences of God are never veridical. These crit- 
ics tend to appeal to arguments against God’s existence, such as those based on 
God’s hiddenness and on the existence of apparently gratuitous evil.* From the 
subject side, critics argue that there are grounds for thinking that experiences 
of God occur under circumstances that often result in delusive experiences. 
Bertrand Russell, for instance, argues that mystics’ experiences of God are likely 
delusive since religious practices such as fasting cause these mystics to be in an 
abnormal psychological state.*# Other critics claim that a naturalistic explana- 
tion of experiences of God—such as a Freudian, Marxian, or sociological one—is 
more plausible than a theistic explanation.” Still other philosophers have leveled 
the “conflicting claims” objection to premise 4: the fact that mystics have made 





(July 1999), 304-5. Gutting defends a version of the argument from experience based on a 
modified form of PC (Religious Belief and Religious Skepticism, 141-77). 


52. See Michael Martin, “The Principle of Credulity and Religious Experience,” Religious 
Studies 22.1 (March 1986), 79-93. 


53. See, for instance, Gale, On the Nature and Existence of God, 15-200. For defenses of the 
argument from experience against some of the standard arguments for believing that God does 
not exist, see Gellman, Experience of God, 122-201; Davis, The Evidential Force of Religious 
Experience, 115-42. 


54. Bertrand Russell, Religion and Science (London: Oxford University Press, 1935), 188. 


55. Evan Fales argues for a sociological explanation of mystical experience based on the work 
of I. M. Lewis. See Fales’s articles “Scientific Explanations of Mystical Experiences, Part I: The 


A Cross-Cultural Defense of the Epistemic Value of Mystical Experience + 217 


conflicting claims about the nature of the ultimate reality they experienced makes 
it likely that a// such putative experiences of an ultimate reality are unreliable at 
best and delusive at worst.*° 

Sri Ramakrishna’s teachings contain several lines of response to these criticisms 
of premise 4.*” From the object side, Sri Ramakrishna adopts the responsible fi- 
deist position that rational attempts to disprove God’s existence are unsuccessful. 
For instance, as I will argue at length in the next chapter, Sri Ramakrishna pro- 
vides a sophisticated refutation of evidential arguments from evil against God’s 
existence. 

From the subject side, Sri Ramakrishna explicitly addresses the charge of crit- 
ics such as Russell, who claim that the psychological abnormality of mystics makes 
their testimony unreliable. Against such arguments, Sri Ramakrishna maintains 
that mystics and saints who constantly think of God are, in general, perfectly 
sane: “One doesn’t lose consciousness by thinking of Him who is all Spirit, all 
Consciousness. Sivanath once remarked that too much thinking about God con- 
founds the brain. Thereupon I said to him, ‘How can one become unconscious 
by thinking of Consciousness?” (K 64 / G 115-16). From Sri Ramakrishna’s per- 
spective, mystics are generally sane and mentally balanced, so there is no reason 
to suspect that they would be prone to hallucinations. As Gutting points out, 
the burden is on critics such as Russell to prove that all or most mystics have 
suffered from psychological disorders.** Moreover, in section V of this chapter, 
I attempt to defuse the conflicting claims objection to premise 4 by appealing 
to Sri Ramakrishna’s unique standpoint of vijiana: if different mystics experi- 
ence different forms and aspects of one and the same impersonal-personal Infinite 
Reality, then their apparently conflicting claims about the ultimate reality can be 
shown to be complementary. 

C. D. Broad and Gellman, among others, have defended premise 5 of the ar- 


gument from experience.” Broad argues as follows: 





Case of St Teresa,’ Religious Studies 32.2 (1996), 143-63, and “Scientific Explanations of 
Mystical Experiences, II: The Challenge to Theism,’ Religious Studies 32.3 (1996), 297-313. 


56. See note 95 below. 


57. For a sustained defense of premise 4 of the argument from experience against var- 
ious objections, see Jerome Gellman, Mystical Experience of God: A Philosophical Inquiry 
(Aldershot: Ashgate, 2001), 39-102. 


58. Gutting, Religious Belief and Religious Skepticism, 160-61. 


59. C. D. Broad, “The Appeal to Religious Experience, in Philosophy of Religion: Selected 
Readings, ed. William Rowe and William Wainwright (New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 
1973), 310-14; Galen Pletcher, “Agreement among Mystics,’ Sophia 11.2 (July 1972), 5-15; 
Gellman, Experience of God and the Rationality of Theistic Belief, 52-56. 


218 © MYSTICAL EXPERIENCE 


When there is a nucleus of agreement between the experiences of men in 
different places, times, and traditions, and when they all tend to put much 
the same kind of interpretation on the cognitive content of these experi- 
ences, it is reasonable to ascribe this agreement to their all being in con- 
tact with a certain objective aspect of reality uvless there be some positive 
reason to think otherwise. 


Broad formulates a principle of agreement that he takes to be uncontroversially 
true: the evidence in favor of the veridicality of any experience is enhanced to 
the extent that people in diverse circumstances claim to have the same experi- 
ence. For instance, if I claim to see a plane in the sky, the evidence in favor of the 
veridicality of my experience is enhanced if people from neighboring towns also 
claim to see a plane at the same time and in the same location in the sky. Broad 
argues that since this principle of agreement applies to all experiences, it applies 
to experiences of God as well. Therefore, if numerous people in diverse circum- 
stances claim to experience God, then the evidence in favor of the veridicality of 
experiences of God is enhanced. 

Many of Sri Ramakrishna’s remarks and teachings support premise 5 of the 
argument from experience. The fact that “Ramprasad and other devotees had the 
vision of the Divine Mother” convinced Sri Ramakrishna, at an early stage in 
his spiritual practice, that he could realize Her as well (LP Lii.64 / DP 211). He 
would also frequently teach that in the ultimate nondual state, “all jackals howl in 
the same way” (LP ILii.24 / DP 742). That is, mystics of all traditions who have 
attained the nondual state largely agree in their claims about what they experi- 
ence. Moreover, Sri Ramakrishna emphasized that “people have realized God in 
various ways” (K 742 / G 702). For Sri Ramakrishna, the fact that so many spir- 
itual seekers in vastly different traditions claim to have realized God in various 
forms and aspects provides strong evidence not only that God exists but that God 
can be experienced directly. 

Philosophers such as Flew argue that the conflicting claims objection to 
premise 4 also undermines premise 5, since it shows that mystics frequently do 
not agree on what they claim to experience.“ For instance, Advaitic mystics claim 
to experience the nondual Atman, Buddhist mystics claim to experience nibbana, 
while Christian and theistic Hindu mystics claim to experience the loving per- 
sonal God. In section V, I will develop a response to this conflicting claims objec- 
tion from the standpoint of Sri Ramakrishna. 


60. Broad, “The Appeal to Religious Experience,’ 313. 
61. See note 95 below. 


A Cross-Cultural Defense of the Epistemic Value of Mystical Experience +» 219 


In sum, then, Sri Ramakrishna not only endorses a simple version of the ar- 
gument from experience but also supports the premises of the more elaborate 
argument from experience discussed by recent philosophers. However, we should 
recall from section I that Sri Ramakrishna was a responsible fideist who believed 
that reason is too weak an instrument to provide a conclusive argument either 
for or against God’s existence. His specific stance on the rational force of the ar- 
gument from experience accords with his general position of responsible fideism. 
Accordingly, he remarks, “People don’t trust a man when he speaks about God. 
Even if a great soul affirms that he has seen God, still the average person will not 
accept his words” (K 175 / G 211). As this statement suggests, Sri Ramakrishna 
believed that while the argument from experience is not rationally compelling for 
everyone, it can nonetheless strengthen the rational grounds for belief in God's 
existence of those who are religiously or spiritually inclined. 


IV. The Cross-Checkability Objection 


One of the most important objections to premise 2 of the argument from expe- 
rience is the cross-checkability objection. C. B. Martin provides an early formu- 
lation of this objection: “It is only when one comes to such a case as knowing 
God that the society of tests and checkup procedures, which surround other 
instances of knowing, completely vanishes. What is put in the place of these 
tests and checking procedures is an immediacy of knowledge that is supposed to 
carry its own guarantee.” According to Martin, sensory experiences are a valid 
source of beliefs about things in the external world because these beliefs can be 
cross-checked in various ways—by determining “what other people see,” and so 
on.® By contrast, experiences of God are vor a valid source of beliefs about God 
precisely because these experiences cannot be cross-checked. Indeed, Martin 
claims that mystics dogmatically—but wrongly—insist that their experiences 
of God are “self-authenticating” and hence do not require cross-checking of any 
sort.&4 

It is fairly easy to rebut Martin’s objection. First, Martin is simply wrong in 
making the sweeping assertion that all mystics take their experiences of God to 
be self-authenticating. As I pointed out in the previous section, mystics such 
as Sri Ramakrishna and Teresa claimed to have had different types of mystical 
experiences, some of which were self-authenticating and others which were not. 
Moreover, as Oakes has shown, there is nothing logically incoherent in the idea 





62. C. B. Martin, Religious Belief, 70. 
63. C. B. Martin, Religious Belief; 72. 
64. C. B. Martin, Religious Belief, 83. 


220 * MYSTICAL EXPERIENCE 


of a self-authenticating experience of God. Second, Martin is also mistaken in 
claiming that mystics never employ cross-checking procedures.® As we will see, 
mystics have in fact employed an array of checking procedures to verify the verid- 
icality of their (non-self-authenticating)® experiences of God. 

Mote recently, a number of philosophers such as Fales, Gale, and Anthony 
O’Hear have refined the cross-checkability objection to avoid the obvious prob- 
lems in Martin’s formulation of the objection.®” According to Fales, for instance, 
mystics such as Teresa do often employ cross-checking procedures, but these 
cross-checking procedures are inadequate because they have no “epistemic bite.” 
On this basis, Fales argues that experiences of God do not stand on an epistemic 
footing even remotely comparable to sensory experiences, for which there are 
“[mlJore direct and independent cross-checks.”® 

O’Hear singles out two such direct and independent cross-checks for sensory 


experiences that do not apply to experiences of God: 


The likelihood of an objective reality being causally related to certain 
experiences will be very much increased if (i) we are able to predict accu- 
rately further experiences of our own or others due to our assuming the 
existence of the reality, (ii) some of these future experiences of our own 
are experiences of senses other than the original sense involved, and (iii) 
other people can corroborate what we are perceiving. .. . The religious in- 
terpretation of religious experience, however, comes off quite badly under 
all three conditions.” 


Let us call condition (iii) the “other observers” test and conditions (i) and (ii), 
taken together, the “predictive efficacy” test.” According to O’ Hear, the fact that 





65. Wainwright makes this point against C. B. Martin in Mysticism (85). 


66. I add the qualification “non-self-authenticating,” since self-authenticating experiences of 
God, by definition, do not require cross-checking. 


67. Fales, “Mystical Experience as Evidence”; Gale, On the Nature and Existence of God, 302-43; 
Anthony O’Hear, Experience, Explanation and Faith: An Introduction to the Philosophy of 
Religion (London: Routledge, 1984), 25-55. 


68. Fales, “Mystical Experience as Evidence,’ 34. 
69. Fales, “Mystical Experience as Evidence,’ 34. 
70. O’Hear, Experience, Explanation and Faith, 45-46. 


71. I borrow the term “other-observers test” from William Alston, “Religious Experience 
Justifies Religious Belief? in Contemporary Debates in Philosophy of Religion, ed. Michael 
Peterson and Raymond VanArragon (Oxford: Blackwell, 2004), 144. For other formulations 
of the other-observers test, see Fales, “Mystical Experience as Evidence”; Gale, On the Nature 
and Existence of God, 302; and O’ Hear, Experience, Explanation and Faith, 45-46. For appeals 


A Cross-Cultural Defense of the Epistemic Value of Mystical Experience + 221 


both tests apply to sensory experiences while xeither test applies to experiences of 
God suggests a fundamental disanalogy between sensory experiences and experi- 
ences of God.” For instance, if I claim to see a blue pen, my claim can be subjected 
to the other-observers test: another person can cross-check my claim by standing 
near me and checking to see whether there is in fact a blue pen where I claim to see 
it. Moreover, both I myself and others can subject my claim to a variety of predictive 
efficacy tests. For instance, I can check whether I can write a sentence on a piece of 
paper using the blue pen I claim to see. I can also test whether someone feels pain 
when I poke his forearm with the same perceived pen. According to O’Hear and 
others, since experiences of God cannot be subjected to tests such as these, premise 2 
of the argument from experience is unjustified. 

Alston provides a sophisticated response to this seemingly plausible 
cross-checkability objection. According to Alston, critics such as Fales, Gale, and 
O’Hear make two fundamental mistakes. First, they are guilty of “epistemic impe- 
rialism,’ since they make the unwarranted assumption that claims based on expe- 
riences of God must be subject to the same kind of cross-checks used for sensory 
experiences.” As Alston puts it, “there is no reason to suppose it appropriate to 
require the same checks and tests for them [reports of perception of God] as for 
sense-perceptual reports, and every (or at least sufficient) reason to suppose it in- 
appropriate.” Most fundamentally, since God cannot be perceived by the physical 
senses, it is unreasonable to suppose that reports of experiences of God should be 
subject to cross-checks meant to verify reports of sensory experiences.” Second, 
Alston contends that critics employ a “double standard” when they fault mystics for 
employing cross-checks that are epistemically circular, because they overlook the fact 
that the cross-checks employed in sense-perceptual practice are equally epistemically 
circular.” Let us return to the example of my claiming to see a blue pen. Suppose that 
another person standing near me also claims to see a blue pen in the precise location 
where I claim to see it. Clearly, this other-observers test is epistemically circular, since 
my very perception of the other person is also a sensory experience, which cannot be 
cross-checked independently of sense-perceptual practice itself” 





to the predictive efficacy test, see Fales, “Mystical Experience as Evidence,’ 27, and O’Hear, 
Experience, Explanation and Faith, 45-46. 


72. There are, of course, many other cross-checking procedures besides these two. See the list of 
eleven tests for sensory experiences in Gale, Ox the Nature and Existence of God, 302. 


73. Alston, Perceiving God, 216. 

74. Alston, Perceiving God, 216. 

75. For a good discussion of this point, see Gellman, Mystical Experience of God, 26-27. 

76. Alston, Perceiving God, 249-50. For a similar argument, see Wainwright, Mysticism, 105. 
77. See Alston, Perceiving God, 211. 


222 *¢ MYSTICAL EXPERIENCE 


Alston goes a long way toward defending the epistemic force of mystical 
checking procedures. I will argue that we can fortify Alston’s line of response to 
the cross-checkability objection by considering carefully the array of checking 
procedures employed by Sri Ramakrishna to verify his (non-self-authenticating ) 
experiences of God. Let us begin by considering Fales’s pungent formulation of 
the cross-checkability objection: “When St. Teresa is receiving an inner locu- 
tion, we can’t call on St. John of the Cross to contemplate and independently 
confirm the message Teresa says God is sending. St. John of the Cross-checks 
he’s not.’ Alston’s charge of epistemic imperialism is surely apt here: since the 
other-observers test is generally appropriate only for sense-perceptual practice, 
Fales is unjustified in assuming that the inapplicability of the other-observers test 
to experiences of God impugns their epistemic credentials. 

I would also argue, however, that Fales is overhasty in assuming that zo expe- 
riences of God can be subjected to the other-observers test. In fact, at least one 
of Sri Ramakrishna’s mystical experiences was cross-checked directly by another 
mystic. In 1864, a monk named Jatadhari, who worshipped Ramlala (the infant 
form of Rama), stayed with Sri Ramakrishna in Dakshineswar. Remarkably, 
both Sri Ramakrishna and Jatadhari simultaneously saw the Divine Ramlala eat- 
ing, playing, and engaging in mischief, just like a human baby. Sri Ramakrishna 
recounted his time with Jatadhari as follows: 


As the days passed, I felt that Ramlala loved me more and more. As long 
as I remained with Babaji [Jatadhari], Ramlala was happy and playful. But 
whenever I left and went to my own room, he followed me there at once. 
He wouldn’t remain with Jatadhari, even though I ordered him not to 
come with me. I thought at first that this must be an illusion. For how 
could the Deity whom Jatadhari had worshipped for so long with such de- 
votion love me more than him? But it was not my imagination. I actually 
saw Ramlala as I see you—now dancing ahead of me, and now following 


me. (LP IL.i.28 / DP 574) 


Although Sri Ramakrishna initially doubted his mystical vision of Ramlala play- 
ing in front of him, the vision was so powerful and so prolonged that he felt com- 
pelled to take it as veridical. Moreover, Sri Ramakrishna points out that Jatadhari 
himself saw Ramlala behave and move exactly as Sri Ramakrishna saw him do so: 


On some days Jatadhari would cook food to offer Ramlala, but couldn’t 
find him. Then he would come running in distress to my room, and 





78. Fales, “Mystical Experience as Evidence,” 34. 


A Cross-Cultural Defense of the Epistemic Value of Mystical Experience + 223 


there would be Ramlala playing on the floor. Jatadhari’s feelings were 
terribly hurt... . Then one day Jatadhari came to me, crying with joy, 
and said: “Ramlala has revealed himself to me in a way that I have never 
known before but have always longed for. Now the desire of my life is ful- 
filled. Ramlala says he won't go away from here; he doesn’t want to leave 
you. But I’m not sad about it anymore. He lives happily with you and plays 
joyfully, and I am full of bliss when I see him this way.’ (LP I1.i.33-34 / 
DP 579) 


Jatadhari, to use Fales’s phrase, was Sri Ramakrishna’s “St. John of the 
Cross-checks.” Since Jatadhari himself attested to seeing Ramlala playing with 
Sri Ramakrishna, Sri Ramakrishna’s mystical vision of Ramlala meets even Fales’s 
stringent standard for an other-observers test. In this case, two mystics mutually 
verified each other’s experience of God. 

On another occasion, Sri Ramakrishna’s mystical vision of the Divine 
Goddess Durga was partially cross-checked by several zonmystics. In the autumn 
of 1885, the devotee Surendra Mitra received Sri Ramakrishna’s approval to per- 
form Durga Puja in Surendra’s own house. Since Sri Ramakrishna was very ill at 
the time, he was unable to attend Surendra’s Pija in person. Sri Ramakrishna was 
speaking to devotees and listening to devotional music in the Shyampukur house 
when suddenly, at the exact moment of the sandhi piija (7:30 p.m. on astami, the 
second day of the worship of Durga), he stood up and went into deep samadhi 
for about half an hour. Immediately thereafter, Sri Ramakrishna told the devotees 
present what he saw in samadhi: 


A luminous path opened from this place to Surendra’s house. I saw the 
presence of the Divine Mother in the image; She had been evoked by 
Surendra’s devotion. A ray of light beamed forth from Her third eye! Rows 
of lamps were lit before the goddess in the worship hall. In the courtyard 
Surendra was crying piteously “Mother, Mother!” All of you, go to his 
house right now. When he sees you he will regain his peace of mind. (LP 
Lii96 / DP 240)? 


This is a very interesting case of a divine vision that also involved an element of 
telesthesia (remote viewing )—seeing distant things and events which could not 
possibly be seen with the physical eyes. Sri Ramakrishna claimed that during his 
samadhi, he not only saw the actual Goddess Durga manifested in the image 
worshipped by Surendra but also saw some of the people and physical objects 





79. Sti Ramakrishna provides a similar account of the incident at K 916 / G 849. 


224 ¢ MYSTICAL EXPERIENCE 


near the divine image. Hence, in principle, other people could cross-check Sri 
Ramakrishna’s claims about at least some of the things and events he saw in 
samadhi. This is precisely what happened when Sri Ramakrishna’s devotees went 
to Surendra’s house: 


Narendra and some others bowed down to the Master, then left for 
Surendra’s house. When they asked Surendra, they learned that rows of 
lamps had in fact been lit in the worship hall as described by the Master. 
And when the Master had been in samadhi, Surendra was indeed seated 
in the courtyard facing the image, loudly crying “Mother, Mother,’ like a 
boy, for about an hour. The amazed devotees were thrilled with joy when 
they found that the Master’s vision during samadhi was consistent with 
external events. (LP L.ii.96 / DP 241) 


In this case, the empirically verifiable elements of Sri Ramakrishna’s vision of 
Durga—particularly Surendra’s behavior during the sandhi pija and the light- 
ing arrangement in the worship hall—were successfully cross-checked by other 
people. The fact that certain aspects of Sri Ramakrishna’s mystical vision met the 
stringent other-observers test insisted on by critics such as O’Hear counts as sig- 
nificant evidence in favor of its veridicality. 

Of course, the nature and circumstances of both Sri Ramakrishna’s vision 
of Durga in Surendra’s house and his and Jatadhari’s shared mystical vision of 
Ramlala were highly unusual, which is why they could be cross-checked by oth- 
ers. It would be unreasonable in the extreme to expect that all or even most 
experiences of God could be subjected to such a direct other-observers test. 
Nonetheless, the fact that some of Sri Ramakrishna’s experiences of God which 
could be cross-checked by others were successfully cross-checked strengthens the 
evidential case for the veridicality of his many other experiences of God, which 
could not, even in principle, be cross-checked by others in such a direct manner. 

Interestingly, Sri Ramakrishna himself would frequently encourage people to 
employ an indirect checking procedure to verify whether a given mystic’s expe- 
rience of God is veridical. He claims that anyone can verify a mystic’s claims by 
engaging in intensive spiritual practice and experiencing God for oneself through 
God’s grace: 


People don’t trust a man when he speaks about God. Even if a great soul 
affirms that he has seen God, still the average person will not accept his 
words. He says to himself, “If this man has really seen God, then let him 
show Him to me.” But can a man learn to feel a person’s pulse in one day? 
He must go about with a physician for many days; only then can he distin- 
guish the different pulses. He must be in the company of those with whom 


A Cross-Cultural Defense of the Epistemic Value of Mystical Experience + 225 


the examination of the pulse has become a regular profession. Can anyone 
and everyone pick out a yarn of a particular count? If you are in that trade, 
you can distinguish in a moment a forty-count thread from a forty-one. 


(K 175 / G211) 


Sri Ramakrishna recognizes that many people will not believe that a mystic has really 
experienced God unless the mystic is able to provide direct verification of his expe- 
rience. However, this expectation is unreasonable, since God is not a physical object 
that can be seen by anyone at any time. Rather, Sri Ramakrishna maintains that God 
is a supersensuous Being who typically reveals Himself only to those who have puri- 
fied themselves through intense austerity and spiritual practice.*° Just as the ability to 
distinguish a forty-count thread from a forty-one count thread requires expertise in 
yarn, the ability and willingness to purify oneselfand make oneself fit to realize God 
require a spiritual aptitude that can only be acquired gradually through rigorous eth- 
ical and spiritual training. 

Ofcourse, this rather arduous checking procedure differs quite significantly from 
the more direct other-observers test for sensory experiences. If I see a blue pen at 
time ¢, then anyone with sight should also be able to see the same blue pen at ¢. In 
contrast, as Alston points out, “there is no set of conditions such that if God is pre- 
sent to me at time ¢, then any other person satisfying those conditions would also 
perceive God at #8! No doubt mystics have specified that certain qualities such as 
humility, compassion, and love for God are conducive to realizing God, but most 
mystics—including Sri Ramakrishna—also insist that God-realization is only pos- 
sible through God’s grace. A critic such as Fales might object that this very element 
of contingency in the mystical checking procedure makes it much less reliable than 
the other-observers test for sensory experiences. However, as Alston has shown, it 
would be a form of epistemic imperialism to judge the validity of this mystical check- 
ing procedure using the standards of sense-perceptual practice. Hence, the mere 
fact that mystical checking procedures differ considerably from sensory checking 


procedures does not impugn the epistemic reliability of the former. 





80. See also K 429 / G 429. 
81. Alston, “Religious Experience Justifies Religious Belief? 144. 


82. Sri Ramakrishna would frequently make remarks such as the following: “Through selfless 
work, love of God grows in the heart. Then, through God’s grace, one realizes God in course 


of time” (K 56 / G 109). 


83. Alston, “Religious Experience Justifies Religious Belief? 144. See also Gellman, Mystical 
Experience of God, 30-32. 


84, It is important to note that Alston does not claim that a//doxastic practices—no matter how 
izarre or implausible—enjoy prima facie rationality and, hence, that their respective checkin 
b lausibl joy fi tionality and, h that th tive checking 
procedures are epistemically reliable. According to Alston, a doxastic practice loses its claim 


226 * MYSTICAL EXPERIENCE 


Sri Ramakrishna also frequently mentions another test for the veridicality 
of experiences of God that is analogous to the predictive efficacy test for sen- 
sory experiences. According to Sri Ramakrishna, those who have realized God 
are likely to exhibit an abundance of saintly qualities, such as purity, selfless- 
ness, and compassion. Let us call this the saintly fruits test. Sri Ramakrishna 
observes: “Those whose spiritual consciousness has been awakened never make a 
false step. They do not have to reason in order to shun evil. They are so full of love 
of God that whatever action they undertake is a good action. They are fully con- 
scious that they are not the doers of their actions, but mere servants of God” (K 
163 / G 201). Sri Ramakrishna specifically points out that the realization of God 
results in the total eradication of selfish passions such as lust and anger. Take, for 
instance, this dialogue between him and the devotee Vijay: 


vyay: “Well, sir, what becomes of the lust, anger, and other passions of one who 
keeps the ‘servant [’?” 

MASTER: “If a man truly feels like that, then he has only the semblance [akar 
matra| of lust, anger, and the like. If, after attaining God, he looks on himself 
as the servant or the devotee of God, then he cannot injure anyone. By touch- 
ing the philosopher’s stone a sword is turned into gold. It keeps the appear- 
ance of a sword but cannot injure.” (K 122 / G 171) 


Sri Ramakrishna’s view on this issue is quite nuanced: while a saint who has real- 
ized God may sometimes seem to exhibit anger or desire, such anger or desire is a 
mere “semblance.” Clearly, Sri Ramakrishna would reject any simplistic external 
“test” of saintliness: since saintliness is an internal state, it is not easy to judge 


to prima facie rationality, for instance, if it comes into conflict with another more established 
doxastic practice (such as sense-perceptual practice). For instance, he claims that the outmoded 
practice of predicting the future by inspecting animal entrails has “fallen by the wayside” be- 
cause most of its predictions have been empirically disconfirmed by means of sense-perceptual 
practice (Alston, Perceiving God, 172). Alston argues, however, that it is rational to engage in 
any doxastic practice “that is socially established, that yields outputs that are free from massive 
internal and external contradiction, and that demonstrates a significant degree of self-support” 
(Alston, Perceiving God, 184). According to Alston, the Christian mystical doxastic practice 
enjoys prima facie rationality, because it meets all of these conditions. He also leaves open the 
possibility that non-Christian mystical doxastic practices may meet these conditions as well 
(Alston, Perceiving God, 274-75). Throughout this chapter, I presuppose that the Hindu mys- 
tical doxastic practice enjoys at least as much prima facie rationality as the Christian mystical 
doxastic principle, but it is obviously beyond the scope of this chapter to justify this presuppo- 
sition. For a sustained attempt to justify the prima facie rationality of the Theravada Buddhist 
mystical doxastic practice, see Mark Webb, 4 Comparative Doxastic-Practice Epistemology of 
Religious Experience (Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2015). 


85. See, for instance, K 931 / G 862. 


A Cross-Cultural Defense of the Epistemic Value of Mystical Experience + 227 


another’s moral and spiritual condition from the outside. Just as some people 
may feign saintly qualities in order to deceive others, other people may in fact be 
saintly but behave in such a way as to lead people to believe that they are far from 
saintly. Nonetheless, Sri Ramakrishna maintains that anyone who has truly real- 
ized God would never engage in grossly unethical or selfish conduct. This is clear 
from the fact that he rejected a monk’s claim to have realized Brahman on the 
grounds that the monk was having an affair with a woman (LP 1.i.38 / DP 428). 

Conversely, if someone who claims to have experienced God exhibits saintly 
qualities such as purity and selflessness, and we have no good reason to think that 
the person is trying to deceive us, then the evidential case for the veridicality of 
that person’s experience of God is strengthened. According to Sri Ramakrishna, 
“He who has realized God does not look upon woman with the eye of lust. ... 
He perceives clearly that women are but so many aspects of the Divine Mother” 
(K 118 / G 168). Sri Ramakrishna’s own saintliness in this regard is illustrated 
by a striking incident in which some prostitutes attempted to seduce him: “The 
Master told us that when he saw those women he saw only the Divine Mother; 
saying, ‘Mother, Mother; he lost external consciousness. ... They [the prostitutes] 
felt guilty for attempting to break his continence and with tearful eyes begged his 
forgiveness” (LP Lii.96 / DP 241). 

Fales, however, questions the epistemic force of the saintly fruits test: 


[W Je must ask whether a theist has the right to help himself to the pre- 
sumption that God would be likely to grant the observed gifts to His 
mystics. Even setting aside the uncertainties produced by God’s freedom 
to do as He wills, the answer is that the theist does not. The evils we ob- 
serve in this world force him to remain deeply agnostic with respect to 
our understanding of what God's purposes require. So this probability is 
unknown: theists can’t claim such knowledge here, but disavow it when 


faced with the problem of evil.*° 


According to Fales, ifa theist appeals to the inscrutability of God’s purposes when 
confronted with the problem of evil, the theist cannot claim to know that God 
would grant saintly fruits to those who have experienced Him. However, I would 
argue that there are at least two good reasons for believing that the experience of 
God is likely to yield saintly fruits, neither of which requires any knowledge of 
God’s purposes. 

First, qualities such as humility, selflessness, and saintliness are precisely what 
one would expect to result from a mystical experience that shifts one’s center of 





86. Fales, “Mystical Experience as Evidence,’ 32. 


228 *© MYSTICAL EXPERIENCE 


attention and devotion away from the egoistic self to God.*” As Sri Ramakrishna 
puts it, those who have realized God “never make a false step,” because they are 
“fully conscious that they are not the doers of their actions, but mere servants of 
God” (K 163 / G 201). Similarly, Gellman plausibly claims that “when one expe- 
riences God typically one experiences the decentering of one’s self, to some de- 
gree or other, so that God can be one’s value center.’** Since the line of reasoning 
adopted by Sri Ramakrishna and Gellman does not involve speculation about 
God’s purposes, it is not vulnerable to Fales’s objection. 

Second, Gutting has convincingly argued that if God “is indeed an extraordi- 
narily good, wise, and powerful being, there is reason to think that intimate con- 
tact with it [God] will be of great help in our efforts to lead good lives.”® In other 
words, if we are truly in contact with God, then God’s goodness should rub off 
on us. Sri Ramakrishna strengthens Gutting’s argument by providing a psycho- 
logical explanation of why a mystic who has directly experienced God and thinks 
of God constantly tends to exhibit divine qualities such as love and compassion. 
According to Sri Ramakrishna, “One acquires the nature of whatever one thinks 
about intensely. If one thinks of God day and night, one will acquire the nature 
of God” (K 700 / G 657). Here again, the line of argument defended by Gutting 
and Sri Ramakrishna sidesteps Fales’s objection, since it is based on an empirical 
claim that makes no assumptions about God’s purposes. 

Sri Ramakrishna also occasionally employed a unique checking procedure 
that is rarely found in the world’s mystical literature. In order to resolve his doubts 
about the veridicality of a particular experience he took to be of God, he would 
sometimes appeal directly to God and immediately have another mystical experi- 
ence in which God Herself confirmed the veridicality of his earlier mystical expe- 
rience. Take Sri Ramakrishna’s description of one such occasion: 


At Jadu Mallik’s garden house Narendra said to me, “The forms of God 
that you see are a fiction of your mind.” I was amazed and said to him, “But 
they speak too!” Narendra answered, “Yes, one may think so.” I went to the 
temple and wept before the Mother. “O Mother, I said, “what is this? Then 
is this all false? How could Narendra say that?” Instantly I had a revelation. 
I saw Consciousness—Indivisible Consciousness—and a divine being 
formed of that Consciousness [takhan dekhiye dile—caitanya—akhanda 
caitanya—caitanyamay rip]. The divine form said to me, “If your words 
are untrue, how is it that they tally with the facts?” Thereupon I said to 





87. Fora helpful discussion of this issue, see Gellman, Mystical Experience of God, 32-33. 
88. Gellman, Experience of God, 75. 
89. Gutting, Religious Belief and Religious Skepticism, 152. 


A Cross-Cultural Defense of the Epistemic Value of Mystical Experience + 229 


Narendra: “You rogue! You created unbelief in my mind. Don’t come here 


any more.” (K 826 / G'772) 


When Narendra raised a doubt in Sri Ramakrishna’ mind that the divine forms 
he saw were hallucinations, Sri Ramakrishna prayed to the Divine Mother and 
had a confirmatory mystical experience in which the Divine Mother Herself re- 
vealed to him that the various forms of God are real manifestations of the Divine 
Consciousness.” Indeed, one such divine form even spoke to Sri Ramakrishna and 
explicitly confirmed the veridicality of his earlier divine visions. 

On another occasion, Sri Ramakrishna employed yet another checking proce- 
dure to determine whether the voice he heard was actually God’s: 


There is no outsider here. The other day, when [the devotee] Haris was with 
me, I saw Saccidananda come out of this body. It said, “I incarnate Myself in 
every age.” I thought that I myself was saying these words out of mere fancy. 
I kept quiet and watched. Again Saccidananda Itself spoke, saying, “Caitanya 
[the avatara], too, worshipped Sakti.”. . . I saw that it is the fullest manifesta- 
tion of Saccidananda; but this time the Divine Power is manifested through 
the glory of sattua. (K’762 / G720) 


When Sri Ramakrishna first had a mystical vision of the Divine Saccidananda speak- 
ing to him, he wondered whether he might have hallucinated what he heard. In 
order to determine whether the words he heard were actually God’s, he “kept quiet 
and watched” and found that Saccidananda spoke again of its own accord. He then 
became convinced that what he heard was not a product of his own mind. 

Sri Ramakrishna’s checking procedure in this case is strikingly similar to one 
that was often employed by Saint Teresa. According to Teresa, the phenomeno- 
logical difference between a veridical and a nonveridical divine locution is as stark 
as the difference between listening and speaking: 


There seems to me to be the same difference as between speaking and lis- 
tening, neither more nor less. For ... when I am speaking, my intellect 
goes on arranging what I am saying; but if I am spoken to, I do no more 
than effortlessly listen. The false locution is like something that we cannot 
clearly make out; it is as ifwe were asleep; but when God speaks, the voice 
is so clear that nota syllable of what He says is lost.” 





90. For a similar incident when Haladhari doubts the veridicality of Sri Ramakrishna’s visions, 


see K 131 / G 175 and LP Lii.88 / DP 233. 


91. Teresa of Avila, The Life of Saint Teresa of Avila by Herself, trans. J. M. Cohen 
(Harmondsworth, UK: Penguin, 1958), 351. 


230 * MYSTICAL EXPERIENCE 


The seasoned mystic, Teresa claims, can easily distinguish a nonveridical divine 
locution from a veridical one by employing two checking procedures. First, the 
mystic should check whether the intellect is actively “arranging” the words. 
Second, the mystic should check the clarity of the locution. If the mystic hears a 
very clear divine voice simply through effortless listening, then the mystic can be 
sure that the locution is veridical. Teresa’s method of effortless listening should 
remind us of Sri Ramakrishna’s method of keeping the mind quiet and receptive 
in order to check the veridicality of a putatively divine locution. The fact that 
Sri Ramakrishna and Teresa—mystics belonging to different religious traditions 
and ages—employed the same kind of checking procedure strengthens its epi- 
stemic reliability. One might object that such a checking procedure is unreliable 
because it leaves too much room for self-deception and error. However, there is 
no reason to assume that a checking procedure must be infallible in order for it to 
be valuable. Indeed, as Alston rightly points out, “[t]ests of the accuracy of sense 
perceptions don’t always settle the matter definitively either.””* In order to avoid 
employing a double standard, we have to grant that checking procedures for both 
sensory experiences and experiences of God may have some value in spite of being 
fallible. 

Finally, Sri Ramakrishna would sometimes confirm the veridicality of his 
mystical experiences by checking whether they agreed with religious scriptures 
or by consulting his spiritual preceptor. When Sri Ramakrishna met his first 
guru, Bhairavi Brahmani, he told her all about his spiritual experiences, including 
the accompanying physical symptoms such as sleeplessness and a burning sensa- 
tion in his body. Doubting the veridicality of his spiritual experiences, he asked 
her: “Mother, what are these things that keep happening to me? Am I mad, re- 
ally? Have I truly developed this terrible disease by wholeheartedly calling on the 
Divine Mother?” She responded as follows: 


Who calls you mad, my son? This is not insanity. You have achieved 
mahabhava | ecstatic love of God], and that is why you are having all these 
experiences. .. . Sri Radha experienced this state and so did Sri Caitanya. 
All this is recorded in the bhakti scriptures. I have all these books with 
me. I will read them to you and prove that whoever has sincerely yearned 
for God has experienced these states, and everyone doing so must pass 
through them. (LP Lii.107-8 / DP 253-54) 


In response to Sri Ramakrishna’s questions, Bhairavi Brahmani reassured him that 
his experiences of God were veridical and that they were in perfect accordance 





92. Alston, “Religious Experience Justifies Religious Belief? 143. 


A Cross-Cultural Defense of the Epistemic Value of Mystical Experience + 231 


with Hindu devotional scriptures such as the Bhagavata Purana.” This is a checking 
procedure frequently employed by mystics of different traditions, including Teresa.™4 
Of course, a critic might object that such a checking procedure lacks epistemic force, 
since it presupposes without justification that the mystic’s spiritual preceptor and 
his or her tradition’s scriptures are themselves reliable. However, Alston’s argument 
applies here: since sense-perceptual cross-checks are also epistemically circular, critics 
would be guilty of applying a double standard if they dismiss mystical cross-checks, 
but o¢ sense-perceptual cross-checks, for exhibiting the vice of epistemic circularity. 

In this section, I have argued that Sri Ramakrishna’s mystical testimony lends 
considerable support to premise 2 of the argument from experience. Critics such 
as Fales and O’Hear, as we have seen, attempt to refute premise 2 on the grounds 
that there are adequate cross-checks for sensory experiences but not for experi- 
ences of God. I have tried to defuse this objection by drawing on Alston’s argu- 
ments and Sri Ramakrishna’s detailed reports of his mystical experiences. Alston 
makes a convincing case that it is unreasonable to expect most experiences of God 
to be subject to the same kinds of cross-checks employed in sense-perceptual prac- 
tice. Hence, the fact that the array of checking procedures employed by mystics 
such as Sri Ramakrishna usually differ significantly from the checking procedures 
for sensory experiences does not diminish the epistemic reliability of the former. 
However, Sri Ramakrishna’s mystical testimony also shows that some (admittedly 
rare) experiences of God cam, in principle, be cross-checked in a direct and in- 
dependent manner by others. For instance, as we have seen, Sri Ramakrishna’ 
vision of Ramlala was confirmed by the mystic Jatadhari, while Sri Ramakrishna’s 
vision of the Goddess Durga was partly confirmed by a group of nonmystics who 
found that the physical entities he saw in his vision were, in fact, present where 
and when he claimed to see them. Both these unique instances of cross-checking 
arguably meet even the stringent standards for an other-observers test demanded 
by many critics of the argument from experience. 


V. The Conflicting Claims Objection 


Numerous philosophers have challenged premises 4 and 5 of the argument from 
experience on the grounds that mystics have made conflicting claims about the 
nature of ultimate reality on the basis of their mystical experiences.”> Although 





93. See a similar incident at LP L.ii.92—93 / DP 237-38, when the Bhairavi Brahmani confirms 
Sri Ramakrishna’s vision of Caitanya and Nityananda by appealing to the Caitanya Bhagavata. 


94. See The Life of Saint Teresa of Avila by Herself, 239. 


95. See Flew, God and Philosophy, 126-27; Michael Martin, “The Principle of Credulity and 
Religious Experience; 87-88; Fales, “Scientific Explanations of Mystical Experiences, Part 


I? 143. 


232 ¢ MYSTICAL EXPERIENCE 


all theistic mystics agree that the ultimate reality which they experience is a lov- 
ing personal God, some of these theistic mystics claim to have experienced God 
as Christ, others as Allah, and still others as Krsna, Kali, or Siva. In stark contrast 
to all of these theistic mystics, Advaitic mystics claim to have experienced their 
absolute identity with the impersonal nondual Brahman. Many Buddhist mys- 
tics, meanwhile, claim to have realized sényata or nibbana. According to the con- 
flicting claims objection, since such claims about the nature of ultimate reality are 
mutually exclusive, the mystical experiences on which these claims are based are 
unreliable at best and delusive at worst. 

It is important, first, to determine how damaging the conflicting claims ob- 
jection would be if it were successful. Even if mystical claims about the ultimate 
reality do turn out to conflict, it would be unreasonable to conclude that all expe- 
riences of the ultimate reality are delusive. Take the following example. At exactly 
the same time, three people claim to see a flying object at the same location in the 
sky, but one of them claims that it is a bird, another claims that it is a plane, and 
the third person claims that it is a kite.° The fact that the reports of these three 
people conflict with each other does not support the conclusion that all of their 
experiences are delusive or that there és no flying object at all.?” Rather, it would 
be far more plausible to conclude that there is very likely a fying object which all 
three people report having seen but that their respective claims about the object’s 
precise nature are unreliable. Similarly, if the conflicting claims objection is suc- 
cessful, it would not establish that these mystics probably failed to experience any 
ultimate reality at all. Rather, the objection would only impugn the reliability of 
the specific claims mystics have made about the precise nature of ultimate reality. 

Philosophers have suggested a variety of responses to the conflicting claims 
objection. In this section, I will critically examine the responses of Caroline 
Franks Davis, Hick, Gellman, and Wainwright, and I will then defend a novel 
strategy for rebutting the conflicting claims objection along Ramakrishnan 
lines—a strategy that can be seen as combining elements from the arguments of 
Gellman and Wainwright. 

Davis attempts to defuse the conflicting claims objection by identifying a 
broadly theistic “common core” of all experiences of God across religious tra- 
ditions.”* All these diverse mystical experiences, in spite of their significant 





96. My example is very similar to the examples found in Kai-Man Kwan, “Can Religious 
Experience Provide Justification for the Belief in God? The Debate in Contemporary Analytic 
Philosophy, Philosophy Compass 1.6 (2006), 655, and in Swinburne, The Existence of God, 317. 


97. This point is well made in Gellman’s Experience of God (111-12) and Kwan’s “Can Religious 
Experience Provide Justification for the Belief in God?” (654-55). 


98. Davis, The Evidential Force of Religious Experience, 166-92. For similar arguments in favor 
of a theistic “common core,’ see Kwan, “Can Religious Experience Provide Justification for the 


Belief in God?” 655-56 and Swinburne, The Existence of God, 266. 


A Cross-Cultural Defense of the Epistemic Value of Mystical Experience + 233 


differences, consist in a “union or harmonious relation” with a “holy power,” 
which she takes to be the personal God.” According to Davis, then, while the 
claims of some mystics may conflict, this conflict is largely superficial because 
their experiences generally do not conflict. However, Davis's thesis of broad the- 
ism denies the self-understanding of nontheistic mystics such as Advaitins and 
Buddhists, who would not describe their mystical experiences of ultimate reality 
in theistic terms.°° Davis betrays her theistic bias when she favors Ramanuja’s 
theistic interpretation of “Tat tvam asi” to Sankara’s Advaitic interpretation.'”! 

Hick, as we saw in chapter 4, reconciles apparently conflicting mystical experi- 
ences of ultimate reality by appealing to a quasi-Kantian “common core” frame- 
work. According to Hick, all mystics experience different phenomenal forms of 
one and the same unknowable Real an sich. Since different mystics perceive the 
Real an sich in various ways depending on their respective cultural and theolog- 
ical backgrounds, their claims about the nature of ultimate reality often differ at 
the phenomenal level. Nonetheless, these mystical claims do not conflict with 
one another, since they stem from differences in the subjective makeup of the 
mystics themselves. While Hick’s quasi-Kantian ontology provides an elegant so- 
lution to the conflicting claims problem, the solution comes at a very steep cost, 
since it downgrades the ontological status of the ultimates of the various world 
religions to phenomenal status.'” The vast majority of mystics claim to have ex- 
perienced God as a fully objective reality, not as a merely phenomenal “mask” of 
an unexperienceable noumenon. 

Gellman’s strategy for responding to the conflicting claims objection seems to 
me to be much more promising than the strategies of Davis and Hick. Gellman 
defends the possibility that different mystics experience different real aspects 
of God but that God is at the same time an “inexhaustible plenitude” that is 
“beyond—infinitely beyond—what is disclosed in any experience of Him.”!% 
Gellman formulates his hypothesis as follows: 


[O]Jut of God’s inexhaustible plenitude He has the innate power to appear 
as either personal or as impersonal. Or to put it differently, God has an 
“aspect” which is personal and an “aspect” which is impersonal. Out of the 
plenitude can emerge either of these aspects in the absence of the other.... 





99. Davis, The Evidential Force of Religious Experience, 191. 
100. For an elaboration of this criticism of Davis, see Jones, Philosophy of Mysticism, 69. 
101. Davis, The Evidential Force of Religious Experience, 181-82. 


102. See Gellman’s criticism of Hick in Experience of God (115) as well as my first criticism of 
Hick’s quasi-Kantian theory in section IV of chapter 4. 


103. Gellman, Experience of God, 116. 


234 ¢ MYSTICAL EXPERIENCE 


Unlike Hick, therefore, we are prepared to entertain the thought that 
God Himself is experienced both as a personal being and as an impersonal 
being, 


From Gellman’s perspective, mystics sometimes make conflicting claims about 
the nature of God because God reveals different aspects of Himself to different 
mystics. At the same time, many mystics also get an intimation that God is an 
“inexhaustible plenitude” beyond whatever particular aspect of God is disclosed 
to them. According to Gellman, when mystics claim that their experience of God 
is “ineffable,” they are “responding to that aspect of their perception of God in 
which God is known to be an inexhaustible plenitude, a plenitude only intimated 
but not open to view.’ Gellman points out that his theory of God as an “inex- 
haustible plenitude” is only a “plausible possibility,’ which awaits further substan- 
tiation and potential revision.'° 

Gellman’s response to the conflicting claims objection has a number of attrac- 
tive features. Unlike Davis, Gellman does not reduce all mystical experiences to a 
theistic common core, since he maintains that God reveals His impersonal aspect 
to nontheistic mystics. Moreover, unlike Hick, Gellman grants robust ontolog- 
ical reality to the various ultimates experienced by the world’s mystics. The pri- 
mary weakness of Gellman’s theory is that it is a speculative hypothesis that is not 
sufficiently grounded in the reports of mystics themselves. In particular, Gellman 
fails to provide any evidence from the testimony of mystics to support his contro- 
versial claim that when mystics refer to their experiences as “ineffable” they mean 
to signal God’s “inexhaustible plenitude.” Contrary to Gellman, I would argue 
that when mystics such as Teresa or Sri Ramakrishna claim that their experience 
of God is ineffable, what they usually mean is that there are certain features of 
their experience of God—such as a feeling of bliss or an overwhelming conviction 
of God’s reality or presence—which cannot be adequately conveyed in words.'”” 
Hence, while I believe that Gellman’s appeal to God’s inexhaustible plenitude is 
the best way to respond to the conflicting claims objection, his attempt to justify 
his theory by relying on the ineffability claim of mystics is unconvincing. The fact 
is that most mystics have ot described the ultimate reality as an “inexhaustible 
plenitude” with both personal and impersonal aspects. 





104. Gellman, Experience of God, 119. 
105. Gellman, Experience of God, 117. 
106. Gellman, Experience of God, 119. 


107. It is in this sense that Teresa describes her mystical experience as “indescribable” (The Life 
of Saint Teresa of Avila by Herself, 139). See also James's discussion of the ineffability of mystical 
experiences in The Varieties of Religious Experience (380). 


A Cross-Cultural Defense of the Epistemic Value of Mystical Experience + 235 


This is precisely where Sri Ramakrishna comes in. Sri Ramakrishna’s mystical 
testimony and teachings, I would suggest, significantly strengthen Gellman’s line 
of response to the conflicting claims objection. Sri Ramakrishna’s experience of 
“various aspects and forms” of the Infinite Reality (LP Lii160 / DP 304) pro- 
vides direct experiential confirmation of Gellman’s hypothesis of God’s inex- 
haustible plenitude.'* As we have seen in the previous chapters of this book, 
Sri Ramakrishna enjoyed numerous theistic experiences, including mystical 
union with the loving personal God as well as visions of Kali, Rama, Krsna, Sita, 
Caitanya, Siva, and Christ. He also had the Advaitic experience of the impersonal 
Brahman in the exalted state of nirvikalpa samadhi. Unlike Advaita Vedantins, 
however, Sri Ramakrishna did not infer from his Advaitic experience that his ear- 
lier theistic experiences were illusory or lower experiences. Moreover, he also had 
the unique theo-monistic experience of vij#ana, the spiritual realization that the 
Infinite Reality is at once the static impersonal Brahman and the dynamic Sakti 
which has become the entire universe. 

On the basis of his numerous mystical experiences, Sri Ramakrishna taught 
that the Infinite God is both personal and impersonal, both with and without 
form, and “much more besides” (abar kato ki) (K 602 / G577). Sri Ramakrishna’s 
phrase “much more besides” corresponds closely to Gellman’s notion of God’s 
“inexhaustible plenitude”: since God is infinite, no one can ever experience the 
whole of God, but we can experience certain real aspects of the Infinite God. As we 
saw in the previous chapter, Sri Ramakrishna taught that God is a “bhakta-vatsal” 
who reveals Himself to mystics in the form or aspect they love most (K 101 / G 
149-50). From Sri Ramakrishna’s perspective, then, mystics’ diverse claims about 
the nature of ultimate reality are complementary rather than conflicting: the 
Infinite God reveals His impersonal aspect to Advaitic and Buddhist mystics 
while He reveals His personal aspect to theistic mystics. 

Unlike Gellman, however, Sri Ramakrishna does ot claim that all or even most 
mystics experience God as an inexhaustible plenitude. Rather, Sri Ramakrishna 
claims that only a spiritual elite of “ivarakotis” are able to attain the expansive real- 
ization of vij#ana, the experience of the Infinite God as simultaneously the imper- 
sonal Brahman, the personal Sakti, amd an inexhaustible plenitude beyond both 
personality and impersonality.’” In fact, he points out that many ordinary mystics 
adopt narrow, and often conflicting, views about the ultimate reality on the basis 


108. Stephen Phillips hints at this Ramakrishnan response to the conflicting claims objection 
when he suggests, in the context of Sri Aurobindo’s philosophy, that “diverse experiences might 
be viewed in good faith as veridical of the same object.’ Aurobindo’s Philosophy of Brahman 
(Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1986), 40. 


109. Fora detailed elaboration of this point, see my discussion of VV] in section III of chapter 1. 


236 * MYSTICAL EXPERIENCE 


of their limited mystical experiences: “Each devotee forms his view of God on 
the basis of his own particular experience of God. In reality, however, different 
views of God do not conflict” (K 100 / G 149). Many Advaitic mystics, who have 
experienced the ultimate reality as the impersonal Brahman, claim that the ulti- 
mate reality is oly impersonal. By contrast, many theistic mystics, who have expe- 
rienced the ultimate reality as the personal God, claim that the ultimate reality is 
only personal. From Sri Ramakrishna’s broader standpoint of vij#ana, the mistake 
that these mystics make is to limit God to what they have experienced of Him. 

In order to pursue further the philosophical implications of Sri Ramakrishna’s 
perspective on this issue, I will draw on an insightful suggestion made by 
Wainwright. Addressing the conflicting claims objection, Wainwright 
observes: “We must remember that the only relevant conflicts are conflicts be- 
tween claims which are immediately supported by religious experience. Many of 
the conflicting claims which people try to support by appealing to mystical or 
numinous experience are not immediately supported by it.” Wainwright draws a 
very helpful distinction between mystical claims about the ultimate reality which 
are “immediately” supported by mystical experience and those which are not. 
Wainwright’s distinction helps clarify Sri Ramakrishna’s strategy for reconciling 
mystical claims about the nature of ultimate reality. 

According to Sri Ramakrishna, theistic mystics are justified in claiming that 
the ultimate reality is personal and Advaitic mystics are also justified in claiming 
that the ultimate reality is impersonal, since both these claims are immediately 
supported by their respective mystical experiences of ultimate reality. However, 
from Sri Ramakrishna’s perspective of vij#ana, these claims do not conflict, since 
the ultimate reality is an inexhaustible plenitude with both personal and imper- 
sonal aspects. In contrast, the dogmatic Advaitic claim that the ultimate reality is 
only impersonal does conflict with the dogmatic theistic claim that the ultimate 
reality is only personal. However, Sri Ramakrishna would maintain that neither 
of these dogmatic claims is immediately supported by the experience of ultimate 
reality. Since no one can experience the whole of the Infinite God, no mystic is 
ever justified in limiting God to what they have experienced of Him. Just as the 
blind men in Sri Ramakrishna’s parable are blind to the fact that the elephant 
is more than the small part of the elephant they are touching, many mystics are 
blind to the fact that God is infinitely more than the particular form or aspect of 
God they have experienced. 





110. Wainwright, Mysticism, 109-10. Wainwright asserts, without justification, that the claims 
“the Atman-Brahman is the ground of being” and “Nibbana is real” are not “immediately 
warranted by the religious experiences upon which they are (partly) based” (Mysticism, 110). 
I think Sri Ramakrishna, by contrast, would take these claims to be immediately supported by 
mystical experience. 


A Cross-Cultural Defense of the Epistemic Value of Mystical Experience + 237 


Sri Ramakrishna’s response to the conflicting claims objection, then, can 
be seen as combining Gellman’s thesis of God’s inexhaustible plenitude with 
Wainwright’s distinction between claims that are immediately supported by mys- 
tical experience and those that are not. Sri Ramakrishna’s numerous mystical expe- 
riences strongly support Gellman’s hypothesis that God, out of His inexhaustible 
plenitude, reveals His personal aspect to theistic mystics and His impersonal as- 
pect to nontheistic mystics. Unlike Gellman, however, Sri Ramakrishna main- 
tains that this expansive realization of God as the impersonal-personal Infinite 
Reality is available only to vij#ani mystics such as Sri Ramakrishna himself. In 
contrast to such vij#ani-s, most mystics have tended to experience the ultimate 
reality either as personal or as impersonal, but rarely as both simultaneously. 

Sri Ramakrishna also holds, in the spirit of Wainwright, that any truly con- 
flicting claims about the nature of ultimate reality—such as a theistic mystic’s 
claim that the ultimate reality is oly personal or an Advaitic mystic’s claim that 
the ultimate reality is ov/y impersonal—are not immediately supported by mys- 
tical experiences of the ultimate reality. Theistic experiences of God justify only 
the more modest claim that the ultimate reality has a real personal aspect, while 
Advaitic experiences of Brahman justify only the more modest claim that the ul- 
timate reality has a real impersonal aspect. From Sri Ramakrishna’s standpoint of 
vijnana, these more modest claims are complementary rather than conflicting, 
since they capture different aspects of the same impersonal-personal Infinite 
Reality. Contemporary philosophers would do well to explore this promising 
Ramakrishnan strategy for defending premises 4 and 5 of the argument from ex- 
perience against the conflicting claims objection. 

The philosophical literature on the epistemology of mystical experience is vast, 
and this chapter has only begun to explore how Sri Ramakrishna’s unique mystical 
perspective can contribute to recent discussions and debates. My defense of the pos- 
sibility of self-authenticating experiences of God in section II can be further devel- 
oped and fortified by drawing on the testimony of a wider range of mystics who 
claim to have had such experiences. Moreover, there are numerous objections to the 
argument from experience that were not addressed in this chapter, such as the ob- 
jection that experiences of God can best be explained in terms of naturalistic causes 
such as infantile regression or the desire for sociopolitical power." Chapters 5 and 
6 have shown, at the very least, that Sri Ramakrishna’s extensive mystical testimony 
and teachings are an invaluable—and still largely untapped—resource for philoso- 
phers investigating the nature and epistemology of mystical experience. 





lll. See Fales’s naturalistic objection to the argument from experience in his two articles 
“Scientific Explanations of Mystical Experiences, Part I” and “Scientific Explanations of 
Mystical Experiences, II.” Gellman (Experience of God, 122-49, and Mystical Experience of 
God, 75-102) and Davis (The Evidential Force of Religious Experience, 193-238) provide strong 


refutations of naturalistic objections. 


IV THE PROBLEM OF EVIL 


SRI RAMAKRISHNA’S MULTIDIMENSIONAL 
RESPONSE TO THE PROBLEM OF EVIL 


SKEPTICAL THEISM, SAINT-MAKING THEODICY, 
AND THE PANENTHEISTIC STANDPOINT 
OF VIJNANA 


The problem of evil has been a topic of perennial concern for theologians 
and philosophers of religion: if God is omnipotent, omniscient, and 
perfectly good, why is there so much evil in the world? Many religious 
believers view the problem of evil as a practical challenge to preserve and 
deepen their faith in a loving God in the face of often horrific evil and 
suffering. Others, by contrast, formulate the problem of evil as an argu- 
ment against the very existence of God.' 

Recent analytic philosophers have made a helpful distinction be- 
tween logical and evidential arguments from evil against God’s exist- 
ence.” J. L. Mackie, for instance, argues that the very existence of evil in 
the world is logically incompatible with the existence of an omnipotent 
and perfectly good God.’ By contrast, philosophers such as William 
Rowe have defended different forms of the evidential argument from 
evil: the fact that there are certain kinds of evil in the world—such as 
apparently pointless evil—constitutes evidence that an omnipotent and 
perfectly good God does not exist.* Recent philosophers tend to agree 





1. I draw here on Daniel Howard-Snyder’s helpful distinction between “theoret- 
ical’ and “practical” problems of evil in his article, “God, Evil, and Suffering? in 
Reason for the Hope Within, ed. Michael J. Murray (Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans, 
1999), 217-37. 


2. See, for instance, Daniel Howard-Snyder, ed., The Evidential Argument from 
Evil (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1996), xi-xx. 


3.J. L. Mackie, “Evil and Omnipotence,’ Mind 64 (April 1955), 200-212. For other 
formulations of the logical problem of evil, see Antony Flew, God and Philosophy 
(New York: Prometheus Books, [1966] 2005), 48 and H. J. McCloskey, “The 
Problem of Evil? Journal of Bible and Religion 30 (1962), 187. 


4. See William Rowe’s two articles “The Problem of Evil and Some Varieties of 
Atheism, in The Evidential Argument from Evil, ed. Howard-Snyder, 1-11, and 


242 ¢ THE PROBLEM OF EVIL 


that the evidential argument from evil poses a greater threat to theism than the log- 
ical argument from evil, which is widely taken to have been refuted.’ 

Theistic responses to arguments from evil usually take one of two forms: refu- 
tation or theodicy. A refutation attempts to show that a given formulation of the 
argument from evil fails. In the recent analytic literature, one of the most popular 
and sophisticated strategies for refuting arguments from evil has been skeptical 
theism, a position defended by philosophers such as William Alston and Stephen 
Wykstra.° The skeptical theist targets a key premise of the argument from 
evil—namely, the premise that an omnipotent and perfectly good God would 
have prevented certain instances of evil that we see in the world. The skeptical 
theist refutes this premise by appealing to human cognitive limitations: since we 
are not always capable of understanding the ways and motives of an omnipotent 
and omniscient being, we are not rationally justified in believing that God had no 
morally sufficient reason for permitting a particular instance of evil. 

In contrast to refutation, a theodicy provides a positive explanation of why 
God permits evil and suffering.’ It is important to note, however, that refutation 





“The Evidential Argument from Evil: A Second Look,” in The Evidential Argument from Evil, 
ed. Howard-Snyder, 262-85. 


5. See, for instance, William Alston, “The Inductive Argument from Evil and the Human 
Cognitive Condition, in The Evidential Argument from Evil, ed. Howard-Snyder, 97-125; 
Michael Tooley, “The Problem of Evil? Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, 2015 edition 
(hetp://plato.stanford.edu). Justin McBrayer provides a succinct explanation of why the log- 
ical problem of evil fails: “It is widely conceded that there is no logical problem of evil for 
the following reason: if there is a God, he would allow any particular instance of evil that is 
necessary either to avoid some evil equally bad or worse or to secure some compensating (or 
justifying) good. For instance, the experience of pain is an intrinsic evil. However, the fact 
that a human father allows his child to experience the pain of an inoculation does not thereby 
show that the father is not perfectly good. That is because, although evil in itself} the pain was 
necessary to secure a compensating good, namely being immune to a painful or deadly disease.” 
“Skeptical Theism,’ Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy (http://www.iep.utm.edu) (accessed 9 
January 2018). 


6. See, for instance, Alston, “The Inductive Argument from Evil”; Stephen Wykstra, “The 
Humean Obstacle to Evidential Arguments from Suffering: On Avoiding the Evils of 
Appearance,’ International Journal for the Philosophy of Religion 16.2 (1984), 73-93; Daniel 
Howard-Snyder, “Epistemic Humility, Arguments from Evil, and Moral Skepticism? Oxford 
Studies in Philosophy of Religion 2 (2009), 17-57; Trent Dougherty and Justin McBrayer, eds., 
Skeptical Theism: New Essays (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2014); and Justin McBrayer, 
“Skeptical Theism, Philosophy Compass 5.7 (2010), 611-23. 


7. Michael Peterson et al. similarly contrast theodicy with “defense, which corresponds to 
what I call “refutation”: “Defense aims at establishing that a given formulation of the argument 
from evil fails; heodicy offers an account or explanation of why God allows suffering and evil.” 
Michael Peterson et al., eds., Reason and Religious Belief, 4th ed. (New York: Oxford University 
Press, 2009), 155. 


Sri Ramakrishna’s Multidimensional Response to the Problem of Evil + 243 


and theodicy are not necessarily mutually exclusive.* Christian philosophers and 
theologians since Saint Augustine have proposed a variety of theodicies that 
strive to explain, within a Christian theological framework, how God’s love and 
omnipotence are compatible with all the evil we see in the world. 

Max Weber was one of the first Western scholars to recognize the importance 
of Indian contributions to theodicy—particularly the doctrines of karma and re- 
birth, which explain how one’s present suffering is the result of one’s own past 
deeds, either in this life or in a previous life.’ Taking Weber’s lead, numerous re- 
cent scholars have examined a variety of Indian theodicies, especially the classical 
Vedantic theodicies of the Advaitin Sankara and the Visistadvaitin Ramanuja."° 

However, scholars have almost entirely ignored Sri Ramakrishna’s sophisti- 
cated and original response to the problem of evil." Through a careful examina- 
tion of relevant passages from the Kathamrta, I will reconstruct the three basic 
dimensions of Sri Ramakrishna’s response: first, a skeptical theist refutation of 
evidential arguments from evil; second, what I call a “saint-making” theodicy; 





8. Alston, for instance, argues for the compatibility of skeptical theism and theodicy in “The 
Inductive Argument from Evil, 99. In the beginning of section III of this chapter, I argue that 
Sri Ramakrishna’s skeptical theism is compatible with his theodicy. 


9. Max Weber, The Religion of India: The Sociology of Hinduism and Buddhism, trans. Hans 
Gerth and Don Martindale (Glencoe, IL: Free Press, 1958), 121. For the original German 
book first published in 1916, see Max Weber, Die Wirtschafisethik der Weltreligionen, vol. 
2: Hinduismus und Buddhismus: 1916-1920 (Tiibingen: J.C.B. Mohr, 1996), 1-378. See sec- 
tion II of this chapter for a brief discussion of Weber’s understanding of Indian karma-based 
theodicies. 


10. Arthur Herman, The Problem of Evil and Indian Thought (Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 
1976); Roy Perrett, “Karma and the Problem of Suffering,’ Sophia 24.1 (1985), 4-10; Francis 
X. Clooney, “Evil, Divine Omnipotence, and Human Freedom: Vedanta’s Theology of 
Karma, Journal of Religion 69.4 (October 1989), 530-48; B. K. Matilal, “A Note on Samkara’s 
Theodicy; Journal of Indian Philosophy 20 (1992), 363-76; Bruce Reichenbach, The Law of 
Karma: A Philosophical Study (London: Macmillan, 1990); Purushottama Bilimoria, “Toward 
an Indian Theodicy,’ in_-4 Companion to the Problem of Evil, ed. Justin McBrayer and Daniel 
Howard-Snyder (Hoboken: Wiley, 2013), 302-17. 


ll. As far as I am aware, the only scholars who have discussed Sri Ramakrishna’s response 
to the problem of evil are Satis Chandra Chatterjee and Jeffery D. Long. See Satis Chandra 
Chatterjee, Classical Indian Philosophies: Their Synthesis in the Philosophy of Sri Ramakrishna 
(Calcutta: University of Calcutta Press, 1985), 126-29, and Jeffery D. Long, “Like a Dog’s Curly 
Tail: A Hindu Theodicy in the Tradition of Sri Ramakrishna,’ in Comparing Faithfully: Insights 
for Systematic Theological Reflection, ed. Michelle Voss Roberts (New York: Fordham University 
Press, 2016), 107-25. Long rightly finds affinities between Sri Ramakrishna’s theodicy and 
John Hick’s soul-making theodicy—affinities I will discuss at length in section III of chapter 8. 
Chatterjee emphasizes the importance of the doctrines of karma and Jila and of the panenthe- 
istic standpoint of vij#ana in Sri Ramakrishna’s theodicy. In this chapter, I will discuss these 
aspects of Sri Ramakrishna’s theodicy in much greater detail than Chatterjee does, and I will 
also reconstruct Sri Ramakrishna’s skeptical theist position and his saint-making theodicy, 
which are not discussed by Chatterjee. 


244 * THE PROBLEM OF EVIL 


third, a mystical theodicy based on the panentheistic standpoint of vijiana. 
Section I sets the stage for my reconstruction by outlining briefly the classical 
Vedantic theodicies of Sankara and Ramanuja. At the heart of Sankara’s theodicy 
is an appeal to the law of karma: since God places His creatures in favorable and 
unfavorable circumstances in strict accordance with the law of karma, creatures 
themselves are responsible for the evil and suffering in the world. Ramanuja’s the- 
odicy appeals not only to the law of karma but also to the concept of /ila, God’s 
“sportive play.” At various points in the chapter, I indicate affinities and diver- 
gences between Sri Ramakrishna’s theodicy and the theodicies of Sankara and 
Ramanuja. 

Section II reconstructs the skeptical theist dimension of Sri Ramakrishna’s 
response to the problem of evil. Several of Sri Ramakrishna’s visitors presented 
him with evidential arguments from evil: the existence of instances of apparently 
pointless evil—such as Genghis Khan’s slaughter of nearly a hundred thousand 
innocent people—makes it reasonable to believe that an omnipotent, omnis- 
cient, and perfectly good God does not exist. In response, Sri Ramakrishna 
points out that it is unreasonable to expect that the ways and motives of an 
omniscient and omnipotent God—particularly God’s motives for permitting 
particular instances of evil—will always be transparent to finite human intel- 
lects. I argue that Sri Ramakrishna’s response is best understood as a skeptical 
theist refutation of the inference at the heart of the evidential argument from 
evil—the inference from “I cannot think of any morally sufficient reason for 
God to have permitted evil E” to “There és no morally sufficient reason for God 
to have permitted evil E.” 

Sri Ramakrishna’s skeptical theism dovetails with a full-blown theodicy, which 
I reconstruct in sections III through V. Section III delineates his saint-making 
theodicy: God permits evil in the universe, according to Sri Ramakrishna, “in 
order to create saints” (K 37 / G97). Since God has created this world as an envi- 
ronment for saint-making, evil is as necessary to the world as good. Through the 
experience of good and evil, we gradually learn to combat our own evil tendencies 
and cultivate ethical and spiritual virtues that bring us closer to God. I explain 
how Sri Ramakrishna’s doctrines of karma, rebirth, and universal salvation all 
play a crucial role in his saint-making theodicy. 

Section IV addresses an apparent problem for Sri Ramakrishna’s saint-making 
theodicy that stems from his denial of free will. As a theological determinist, Sri 
Ramakrishna maintains that God is the sole Doer and that ignorant people mis- 
takenly think of themselves as doers. It might seem, however, that the saint-making 
journey emphasized in Sri Ramakrishna’s theodicy would be pointless without 
free will. I argue that the key to reconciling Sri Ramakrishna’s theological deter- 
minism with his saint-making theodicy lies in his thesis that ignorant people are 
under the #/usion that they are free. Their illusion of free will leads them to feel 


Sri Ramakrishna’s Multidimensional Response to the Problem of Evil » 245 


morally responsible for their actions, and this feeling of moral responsibility is 
sufficient to ensure the meaningfulness of the saint-making process. 

Sri Ramakrishna’ response to the problem of evil culminates in a mystical 
theodicy of vij#ana, which is outlined in section V. The panentheistic experience 
of vijiana revealed to him that God has become everything in the universe. As 
a vijnani, Sti Ramakrishna affirms that God Himself sports in the form of both 
evildoers and their victims, so the problem of evil—which generally presupposes 
a difference between God and His suffering creatures—does not even arise. I also 
clarify how his mystical theodicy of vijiana complements both his skeptical the- 
ism and his saint-making theodicy. Finally, section VI addresses three potential 
objections to Sri Ramakrishna’s approach to the problem of evil. 


|. Karma and Lila in the Classical Vedantic Theodicies 
of Sankara and Ramanuja 


This section will outline briefly the theodicies of the Advaita Vedantin Sankaraand 
the Visistadvaita Vedantin Ramanuja in order to contextualize Sri Ramakrishna’s 
theodicy and set into relief its most distinctive features. In his commentary on 
Brahmasitra 2.1.34, Sankara considers the following objection to the Vedantic 
view that God is the cause of the universe: If God were the cause of the universe, 
then He would be guilty of partiality and cruelty, since “He creates an unjust 
world by making some, e.g. gods and others, experience happiness, some e.g. an- 
imals etc., experience extreme misery and some, e.g. human beings, experience 
moderate happiness and sorrow.’” Sitra 2.1.34, which Sankara interprets as a 
response to this objection, runs as follows: “vaisamyanairghrnye na sapeksatvat 
tatha hi darsayati” (“No partiality and cruelty [can be charged against God] be- 
cause of [His] taking other factors into consideration. For so the Vedas show”). 
Saftkara admits that God would be open to the charge of partiality and cru- 
elty if He created this “erratic world by Himself, irrespective of other factors.’ 
However, according to Sankara, God makes this “unequal creation” in accord- 
ance with the law of karma: 


No fault attaches to God, since this unequal creation is brought about 
in conformity with the virtues and vices of the creatures that are about 





12; Sankaracarya, Brahmasitram: Sankarabhasyopetam (Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 2007), 
217; Sankaracarya, Brahma-Sitra-Bhasya of Sri Sankaracarya, wans. Swami Gambhirananda 
(Kolkata: Advaita Ashrama, 2006), 362. 


13. Sankaracarya, Brahmasitram, 217; Sankaracarya, Brahma-Sitra-Bhasya, 363. 
14. Sankaracarya, Brahmasiitram, 217; Sankaracarya, Brabma-Sitra-Bhasya, 363. 


246 * THE PROBLEM OF EVIL 


to be born. Rather, God is to be compared to rain. Just as rainfall is a 
general cause for the growth of paddy, barley, etc., the special reasons for 
the differences of paddy, barley, etc., being the individual potentiality 
of the respective seeds, similarly God is the general cause [sadharanam 
karanam| for the birth of gods, men, and others, while the individual 
fruits of works associated with the individual creatures are the specific 
causes [asadharanani karandni\ for the creation of the differences among 
the gods, men, and others. Thus God is not open to the defects of parti- 


ality and cruelty, since He takes other facts into consideration.” 


This passage represents the core of Santkara’s theodicy: since God creates and rules 
the universe in accordance with the law of karma, creatures themselves—rather 
than God—are responsible for the evil and suffering in the world.!* Invoking the 
analogy of rain, Sankara argues that God is only the “general cause” of the uni- 
verse, while the virtues and vices of creatures are responsible for the “differences 
among the gods, men, and others.” 

However, several recent scholars have pointed out a serious problem in 
Sartkara’s theodical appeal to the law of karma. According to B. K. Matilal, “the 
sapeksatva ‘dependence’ thesis which BS 2.1.34 underlines and which Samkara 
amplifies as God’s dependence upon the Karma of the creatures, seriously delim- 
its, ie., restricts God’s omnipotence, which will not be shared by any of the 
Biblical religions, Judaism, Christianity, or Islam.”” In other words, Sankara’s 
karma-based theodicy saves the perfect goodness of God at the expense of His 
perfect omnipotence.’* Developing Matilal’s objection to Sankara a bit further, 
we can articulate a more general dilemma facing all karma-based theodicies, 
Sankara’s or otherwise. On the one hand, if God is constrained by the karma of 
creatures, then His omnipotence would seem to be curtailed. On the other hand, 
if God can sometimes suspend or violate the law of karma, then the problem of 
evil re-emerges. That is, if God could have prevented certain cases of evil and suf- 
fering from occurring by suspending the law of karma in those cases, why didn’t 
He? If the answer, say, is that God suspends or modifies the karmic consequences 


15. Sankaracarya, Brabmasiitram, 217; Sankaracarya, Brahma-Sitra-Bhasya, 363. 
16. For an elaboration, see Matilal, “A Note on Samkara’s Theodicy.” 


17. Matilal, “A Note on Samkara’s Theodicy,’ 368-69. For a similar argument, see Bilimoria, 
“Toward an Indian Theodicy,’ 310. 


18. A similar problem arises in Western theodicies. See, for instance, John Stuart Mills crit- 
icism of Leibniz’s theodicy in Three Essays on Religion, 4th ed. (London: Longmans, Green, 
Reader, & Dyer, 1875), 40 n. 


Sri Ramakrishna’s Multidimensional Response to the Problem of Evil + 247 


of the actions of only those creatures whom He favors or who have earned His 
grace, then God is once again open to the charge of partiality. 

Interestingly, Ramanuja’s theodicy begins not with Brahmasitra 2.1.34—as 
Sattkara’s does—but with 2.1.32, “na prayojanavattvat” (“[Brahman is] not the 
cause [of the universe], owing to the need of some motive [for creation]”). This 
siitra, Ramanuja claims, represents a piarvapaksin (prima facie) position against 
the Vedantic view that Brahman is the cause of the universe. According to this 
pirvapaksin, Brahman cannot be the cause of the universe, because the cre- 
ator of the universe requires a motive to create, and Brahman—being perfectly 
contented—does not possess any motives. Ramanuja clarifies this paérvapaksin 
position by specifying that Brahman could have only one of two motives: the 
motive of benefiting Himself or the motive of benefiting His creatures. Brahman 
could not have created the universe with the motive of benefiting Himself, since 
“all His wishes are eternally fulfilled.” Significantly, Ramanuja broaches the 
problem of evil in the context of articulating the reason why Brahman could not 
have created the universe with the motive of benefiting His creatures either: 


No merciful divinity would create a world so full, as ours is, of evils of all 
kind—birth, old age, death, hell, and so on. If it created at all, pity would 
move it to create a world altogether happy. Brahman thus having no pos- 
sible motive cannot be the cause of the world.”° 


We can express Ramanuja’s formulation of the problem of evil in the following 
syllogism: 


1. If a merciful God were the creator of the universe, He would have created a 
world devoid of evil, since such a world would be maximally beneficial to His 
creatures. 

2. The universe is full of evils of various kinds. 

3. Therefore, a merciful God is not the creator of the universe. 


According to Ramanuja, sétra 2.1.33—“lokavattu lila kaivalyam” (“But [crea- 
tion, for Brahman, is] mere sport, like what is seen in the world”—refutes the 
purvapaksin position of 2.1.32. The Vedantic position embodied in 2.1.33, which 


19. Ramanuja, Sribhasyam, vol. 2, ed. Lalitakrishna Goswami (Delhi: Chaukhamba, 2000), 
736. For the English translation, see Ramanuja, The Vedanta-Sitras with the Commentary 
by Ramanuja: Part LIT, wans. and ed. George Thibaut (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
1904), 477. 


20. Ramanuja, Sribhasyam, vol. 2, 736; Ramanuja, The Vedanta-Sitras, 477. 


248 © THE PROBLEM OF EVIL 


Raméanuja endorses, is that Brahman creates the universe with the sole motive of 


sportive play (/ila): 


We see in ordinary life how some great king, ruling this earth with its 
seven dvipas [continents], and possessing perfect strength, valor, and so 
on, has a game at balls, or the like, from no other motive than to amuse 
himself; hence, there is no objection to the view that sportive play [//4] 
alone is the motive prompting Brahman to the creation, sustenance, and 
destruction of this world which is easily fashioned by His mere will.”! 


Ramanuja claims that God created this universe in order to amuse Himself, not 
in order to benefit either Himself or others. Hence, the specific problem of evil 
that arose in the context of elaborating the pirvapaksin position of 2.1.32 is 
refuted: the undeniable fact that the universe is full of evil does not contradict 
the creatorship of Brahman, since Brahman created the universe not with any 
specific motive but in a spirit of playfulness. As Ramanuja recognizes, however, 
the appeal to God’s /ila in siitra 2.1.33 raises another problem of evil, which is 
both raised and refuted in the subsequent sitra 2.1.34 (already cited in the dis- 
cussion of Sankara above). This new problem of evil can be stated as follows: If 
God created a universe full of evil solely to amuse Himself, He would be guilty 
of both cruelty and partiality. God would be cruel, since He could have created 
a universe with much less evil, and God would be partial, since He permits some 
of His creatures to suffer far more than others. Like Sankara, Ramanuja refutes 
this new problem of evil by appealing to the law of karma: God is not responsible 
for the suffering endured by His creatures, since this suffering is the karmic con- 
sequence of their own previous actions.” 

One might object, however, that Ramanuja’s theodical appeal to the doctrines 
of lila and karma is not an adequate response to the problem of evil. Why did 
God build the law of karma into His /da in the first place if He knew that this 
law would entail so much suffering for His creatures? If God were perfectly good, 
He would have devised a better /#a with little or no suffering. As Arthur Herman 
puts it, “It is therefore legitimate to ask, “When Brahman, through /a, expressed 
His joy, why didn’t He do it better? If He is perfect He could, and if He’s good, 
He would want to—so why didn’t He? We are back again with T.P.E. [the 
problem of evil].” If Sankara’s karma-based theodicy is vulnerable to the charge 





21. Ramanuja, Sribhasyam, vol. 2, 736; Ramanuja, The Vedanta-Sitras, 477. 


22. Ramanuja, Sribhasyam, vol.2, 740-43; Ramanuja, The Vedanta-Siitras with the Commentary 
by Ramdanuja, 477-79. 


23. Herman, The Problem of Evil and Indian Thought, 270. 


Sri Ramakrishna’s Multidimensional Response to the Problem of Evil » 249 


that it restricts God’s omnipotence, Ramanuja’s /i/a- and karma-based theodicy 
invites the charge that God could have devised a much better /#/a without the law 
of karma, which entails untold suffering for God’s creatures (albeit a suffering 
“earned,” in some sense, by the creatures themselves). 

Saftkara’s and Ramanuja’s influential theodicies set the stage for subsequent 
Indian responses to the problem of evil up to the present. As we will see, Sri 
Ramakrishna’s theodicy—like the theodicies of Saikara and Ramanuja—appeals 
to the doctrines of karma and /ila, but the precise role these doctrines play in 
his theodicy is distinctive. Sri Ramakrishna’s response to the problem of evil also 
contains unique features that are entirely absent from the theodicies of Sankara 
and Ramanuja. 


Il. Sri Ramakrishna’s Skeptical Theist Refutation 
of Evidential Arguments from Evil 


On two occasions, Sri Ramakrishna explicitly responded to evidential arguments 
from evil against God’s existence. On 14 December 1882, Mahendranath Gupta 
related to Sri Ramakrishna the argument from evil posed by the famous Bengali 
scholar Isvarcandra Vidyasagar (1820-1891): 


MAHENDRANATH: “Once Vidyasagar said in a mood of pique: “What is the 
use of calling on God? Just think of this incident: At one time Genghis 
Khan plundered a country and imprisoned many people. The number of 
prisoners rose to about a hundred thousand. The commander of his army 
said to him: “Your Majesty, who will feed them? It is risky to keep them 
with us. It will be equally dangerous to release them. What shall I do?” 
Genghis Khan said: “That’s true. What can be done? Well, have them 
killed.” The order was accordingly given to cut them to pieces. Now, God 
saw this slaughter, didn’t He? But He didn’t stop it in any way. Therefore 
I don’t need God, whether He exists or not. I don’t derive any good from 
Him. ” 

SRI RAMAKRISHNA: “Is it possible to understand God’s actions and Her motives 
for acting? [#varer karya ki bojha jai, tini ki uddesye ki karen?] She creates, 
She preserves, and She destroys. Can we ever understand why She destroys? 
I say to the Divine Mother: “O Mother, I do not need to understand. Please 
give me love for Thy Lotus Feet. The aim of human life is to attain bhakti. 
As for other things, the Mother knows best. I have come to the garden to eat 
mangoes. What is the use of my calculating the number of trees, branches, and 
leaves? I only eat the mangoes; I don’t need to know the number of trees and 


leaves.” (K 127 / G 160-61) 


250 * THE PROBLEM OF EVIL 


According to Vidyasagar, there are numerous instances of horrendous evil in this 
world—such as Genghis Khan’s mass slaughter—that an omniscient, omnipo- 
tent, and perfectly good being would have prevented. Hence, even if an omnis- 
cient and omnipotent God exists, He is not perfectly good. 

Put in logical form, Vidyasagar’s argument runs as follows: 


(1) There exist instances of horrendous moral evil, such as Genghis Khan’s mass 
slaughter. 

(2) An omnipotent, omniscient, perfectly good being would prevent the occur- 
rence of any horrendous moral evil. 

(3) There does not exist an omnipotent, omniscient, perfectly good being.” 


Vidyasagar explicitly states (1), and his assertion that God “saw” Khan’s slaughter 
but “didn’t stop it in any way” implies (2): a perfectly good and omnipotent God 
would have prevented Khan’s mass slaughter. (3) follows logically from (1) and 
(2) by modus tollens. Vidyasagar implies (3) in his statement: “Therefore I don’t 
need God, whether He exists or not. I don’t derive any good from Him.” While 
Vidyasagar admits that a divine being may exist, he believes his argument has es- 
tablished that such a divine being cannot be perfectly good. 

Sri Ramakrishna’s response to Vidyasagar’s argument from evil is succinct but 
powerful: “Is it possible to understand God’s actions and Her motives for acting? 
She creates, She preserves, and She destroys. Can we ever understand why She 
destroys?” According to Sri Ramakrishna, God’s ways and motives—especially 
Her motives for permitting the evil and suffering we observe in the world—are 
inscrutable to our finite intellects. Indeed, it should hardly be a surprise that 
God’s motives are often inscrutable to us, since the cognitive gulf between our fi- 
nite minds and the omniscient mind of God is immense. As I already pointed out 
in chapter 1, Sri Ramakrishna frequently illustrates this cognitive gulf by means 
of an analogy: “Can a one-seer pot hold ten seers of milk?” (K 229 / G 257). In 
a similar vein, Sri Ramakrishna asks, “How can we understand the ways of God 
through our small intellects?” (K 105 / G 153). 

Using contemporary analytic terminology, I would argue that Sri 
Ramakrishna’s response to Vidyasagar’s argument from evil is best understood 


24. Rowe’s influential formulation of the argument from evil helped me reconstruct the log- 
ical form of Vidyasagar’s argument. See Rowe, “The Problem of Evil and Some Varieties of 
Atheism.” For a discussion of Rowe’s argument, see section I of chapter 8. 


25. A propositional rendering of the argument form would be: (1) E, (2) G > 7£, 


Sri Ramakrishna’s Multidimensional Response to the Problem of Evil + 251 


as a form of skeptical theism. Justin McBrayer provides an excellent summary of 
skeptical theism: 


Skeptical theism is the view that God exists but that we should be skep- 
tical of our ability to discern God’s reasons for acting or refraining from 
acting in any particular instance. In particular, says the skeptical theist, 
we should not grant that our inability to think of a good reason for doing 
or allowing something is indicative of whether or not God might have a 
good reason for doing or allowing something. If there is a God, he knows 
much more than we do about the relevant facts, and thus it would not be 
surprising at all if he has reasons for doing or allowing something that we 
cannot fathom.?° 


The skeptical theist maintains that in light of the vast gulf between the omnis- 
cient mind of God and our finite human intellects, our inability to think of a 
morally sufficient reason for God to have permitted a given instance of evil in 
no way justifies the assumption that God had no morally sufficient reason for 
permitting that evil. 

Sri Ramakrishna adopts precisely such a skeptical theist position in his re- 
sponse to Vidyasagar. In particular, Sri Ramakrishna targets Vidyasagar’s (2): in 
light of human cognitive limitations, Vidyasagar is unjustified in believing that 
a perfectly good God would prevent any occurrence of horrendous evil, such as 
Genghis Khan’s act of slaughter. From Sri Ramakrishna’s skeptical theist perspec- 
tive, Vidyasagar’s mistake is to infer from Ais inability to think of a morally suf- 
ficient reason for a loving God to permit horrendous evil to the conclusion that 
God has no morally sufficient reason to permit horrendous evil. Vidyasagar’s in- 
ference is unjustified because it is based on an unwarranted confidence in the 
ability of the finite human mind to comprehend the ways of an omniscient and 
omnipotent God. Therefore, we have no good reason to believe (2), since an om- 
niscient, omnipotent being may very well have morally sufficient reasons for act- 
ing that lie beyond the ken of our finite intellects. 

Sri Ramakrishna emphasizes the inscrutability of God’s ways at numerous 
points in the Kathamrta. He was especially fond of reciting a parable about the 
warrior Bhisma from the epic Mahabharata: 


The ways of God are inscrutable indeed. Bhisma lay on his bed of arrows. 
The Pandava brothers visited him in Krsna’s company. Presently Bhisma 
burst into tears. The Pandavas said to Krsna: “Krsna, how amazing this 





26. McBrayer, “Skeptical Theism,” Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy. 


252 ¢* THE PROBLEM OF EVIL 


is! Our grandsire Bhisma is one of the eight Vasus. Another man as wise 
as he is not to be found. Yet even he is bewildered by maya and weeps at 
death.” “But,” said Krsna, “Bhisma isn’t weeping on that account. You may 
ask him about it.” When asked, Bhisma said: “O Krsna, I am unable to 
understand anything of the ways of God; God Himself is the constant 
companion of the Pandavas, and still they have no end of trouble. That is 
why I weep. When I reflect on this, I realize that one cannot understand 
anything of God’s ways.” (K 396 / G 397-98) 


Notice that this parable specifically concerns the mysteriousness of evil and 
suffering in God’s creation: Bhisma weeps in bewilderment at the fact that the 
Pandavas, despite having Krsna—God Himself—as their “constant companion,” 
undergo no end of suffering and hardship. Although Bhisma fails to under- 
stand why God permits the Pandavas to suffer so much, he does not arrive at 
Vidyasagar’s conclusion that a perfectly good God does not exist. Rather, as a 
pious believer in God, Bhisma continues to trust in the perfectly loving nature 
of God and takes his failure to understand the Pandavas’ suffering as a reflec- 
tion of his own cognitive limitations and the inscrutability of God’s ways. As 
a skeptical theist, Sri Ramakrishna encourages people like Vidyasagar to adopt 
Bhisma’s pious attitude of humble faith and trust in God. Our inability to under- 
stand why God permits certain instances of evil casts doubt not on God's perfect 
goodness but on our ability to fathom the ways and motives of an omnipotent, 
omniscient God. 

On a different occasion, Sri Ramakrishna addressed a slightly different evi- 
dential argument from evil against God’s existence: 


The husband of Mani Mallik’s granddaughter was here. He read in 
a book that God could not be said to be quite wise and omniscient 
[jaani sarvajna]; otherwise, why should there be so much misery in 
the world? As regards death, it would be much better to kill a man all 
at once, instead of putting him through slow torture. Further, the au- 
thor writes that if he himself were the Creator, he would have created 
a better world.... 

Can we ever understand God’s ways? I too think of God sometimes as 
good and sometimes as bad. She has kept us deluded by Her Mahamaya. 
Sometimes She wakes us up and sometimes She keeps us unconscious. .. . 

One is aware of pleasure and pain, birth and death, disease and grief, as 
long as one is identified with the body. All these belong to the body alone, 
and not to the Atman. After the death of the body, perhaps God carries 
one to a better place. It is like the birth of a child after the pain of delivery. 
Attaining Knowledge of the Atman, one looks on pleasure and pain, birth 


Sri Ramakrishna’s Multidimensional Response to the Problem of Evil - 253 


and death, as a dream. How little we understand! Can a one-seer pot hold 
ten seers of milk? (K 229 / G 257) 


Gupta, the author of the Kathamrta, specifies in a footnote (K 229 n. 1 / G 
257 n. 3) that the book to which Sri Ramakrishna refers is John Stuart Mill’s 
Autobiography (1873), where Mill mentions his father’s inability to “believe that a 
world so full of evil was made by a being of perfect goodness.’” In his book Three 
Essays on Religion (1874), Mill echoes his father in arguing that God cannot be 
both omnipotent and perfectly good: “Not even on the most distorted and con- 
tracted theory of good which ever was framed by religious or philosophical fanat- 
icism, can the government of Nature be made to resemble the work of a being at 
once good and omnipotent.””® Mill claims that if God were both perfectly good 
and omnipotent, He would not have permitted the various natural evils we see in 
the world. Mill reconciles God’s goodness with the existence of so much natural 
evil by denying God’s omnipotence.” 

Notice the structural similarity between Vidyasagar’s and Mill’s respective 
arguments from evil. Both Vidyasagar and Mill argue that the sheer magnitude 
of evil in the world—moral evil for Vidyasagar and natural evil for Mill—counts 
as evidence that God cannot be both omnipotent and perfectly good. However, 
while Vidyasagar accepts God’s omnipotence while rejecting God’s perfect good- 
ness, Mill accepts God’s perfect goodness but denies God’s omnipotence. Sri 
Ramakrishna’s first-line response to Mill’s argument from evil is identical to his re- 
sponse to Vidyasagar’s argument: “Can we ever understand God’s ways? ... How 
little we understand!” In other words, Sri Ramakrishna refutes both Vidyasagar’s 
and Mill’s respective arguments from evil by adopting a skeptical theist posi- 
tion. According to Sri Ramakrishna, Mill—like Vidyasagar—makes the mistake 
of overlooking human cognitive limitations. As a result, Mill mistakenly infers 
from his inability to think of a morally sufficient reason for an omnipotent and 
perfectly good God to permit so much natural evil to the conclusion that God 
cannot be both omnipotent and perfectly good. Sri Ramakrishna attacks the 
tacit assumption at the basis of Mill’s inference: namely, the assumption that the 
human intellect can always grasp the ways and motives of an omniscient Being. 
From Sri Ramakrishna’s perspective, it would be more reasonable for Mill to 
adopt the skeptical theist position that while we are sometimes unable to think 
of a morally sufficient reason for God to permit certain instances of evil, we are 





27. John Stuart Mill, The Collected Works of John Stuart Mill: vol. 1, Autobiography and Literary 
Essays, ed. John M. Robson and Jack Stillinger (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1981), 43. 


28. Mill, Three Essays on Religion, 38. 
29. Mill, Three Essays on Religion, 40. 


254 ¢ THE PROBLEM OF EVIL 


not justified in concluding that God has no morally sufficient reason to permit 
these evils. 

Interestingly, Sri Ramakrishna also suggests why the evil in the world drives so 
many people—such as Mill and Vidyasigar—to be skeptical about God's exist- 
ence: “I too think of God sometimes as good and sometimes as bad. She has kept 
us deluded by Her Mahamaya. Sometimes She wakes us up and sometimes She 
keeps us unconscious.” It is important not to take his first statement too literally. 
Sri Ramakrishna does not actually doubt God’s goodness so much as he empha- 
sizes the sheer delusive power of God’s Mahamaya. So long as we are “deluded, 
we cannot help but question God’s existence or goodness on occasion. Moreover, 
Sri Ramakrishna’s Bhisma parable points the way out of this delusion: by adopting 
a humble attitude of faith and trust in God, we can gradually overcome our de- 
lusion and attain the direct spiritual realization of God’s perfectly loving nature. 

Significantly, however, Sri Ramakrishna’s refutation of Mill’s argument from 
evil does not end with his appeal to skeptical theism. Immediately after making 
this point about Mahamaya, Sri Ramakrishna points out that Mill overlooks 
some possible reasons for God to permit the evils we see in the world. In other 
words, Sri Ramakrishna hints at the possibility of a specific kind of theodicy. 
First, he points out that we suffer only so long as we identify with the superficial 
body-mind complex. In reality, we are not the body-mind complex but the Atman, 
the eternal spiritual Self beyond suffering and death. Second, Sri Ramakrishna 
appeals to the doctrine of rebirth: “After the death of the body, perhaps God car- 
ries one to a better place.” After enduring great suffering in this ephemeral life, 
the transmigrating soul may go to a higher realm and experience a heavenly bliss 
that compensates it for its previous earthly miseries. Sri Ramakrishna encourages 
us to take the long view and to see life on earth—with all its joys and sorrows—as 
but a brief sojourn in the soul’s journey toward God. Third, he indicates that the 
infinite good of spiritual salvation—the “Knowledge of the Atman”—outweighs 
all the finite suffering of this life. As he puts it, “It is like the birth of the child after 
the pain of delivery.” Sri Ramakrishna here hints at the doctrine of universal sal- 
vation which he explicitly endorses at numerous places in the Kathamrta: since 
every one of us will eventually attain the salvific knowledge of the Atman, we can 
take solace in the fact that the ephemeral suffering of this life pales in comparison 
to the infinite good of salvation that awaits us all. 

In sum, Sri Ramakrishna provides a two-pronged refutation of evidential 
arguments from evil against God’s existence. First, he defends the skeptical theist 
position that in light of human cognitive limitations, even if we cannot think of 
a good reason for God to have permitted certain evils we see in the world, we are 
not justified in inferring that God had no good reason for permitting these evils. 
Second, Sri Ramakrishna argues that proponents of the evidential argument 
from evil are also unjustified in ruling out the possibility of a theodicy, which does 


Sri Ramakrishna’s Multidimensional Response to the Problem of Evil + 255 


provide a morally sufficient reason for God to have permitted these evils. In order to 
refute evidential arguments from evil, Sri Ramakrishna only needs to demonstrate 
that a theodicy is possible, not that it is true. Moreover, even if we can rule out the 
possibility of this theodicy, Sri Ramakrishna could still fall back on his skeptical the- 
ist argument, which—if successful—would be sufficient on its own to refute eviden- 
tial arguments from evil. 

However, Sri Ramakrishna also frequently makes the stronger claim that his 
saint-making theodicy—adumbrated in his response to Mill and elaborated in 
much greater detail in other passages in the Kathamrta—is not just possible but 
true. What is important to recognize is that his appeal to the truth, as opposed to the 
mere possibility, of this saint-making theodicy plays no role in his refutation of evi- 
dential arguments from evil. Obviously, appealing to the truth of a theodicy would 
not be an effective means of refuting the evidential argument of evil, since the pro- 
ponent of the argument from evil can rightly point out that we have no good reason 
to believe that the theodicy is true. As we will see, however, Sri Ramakrishna appeals 
to the truth of his saint-making theodicy in conversation not with those who are 
skeptical of God's existence—such as Vidyasagar—but with religious believers who 
seek to strengthen their faith in God by understanding how God’s goodness can be 
compatible with the existence of evil. In the ensuing discussion of Sri Ramakrishna's 
saint-making theodicy, it is important to keep in mind the two distinct roles of the- 
odicy in Sri Ramakrishna’s overall response to the problem of evil.*” In his response 
to the evidential argument from evil, he claims that a theodicy is possible, while in 
his conversations with religious believers, he claims that his saint-making theodicy 
1s true. 


Il. Sri Ramakrishna’s Saint-Making Theodicy 


Before examining Sri Ramakrishna’s positive theodicy, we first have to determine 
more precisely how his theodicy relates to his skeptical theism. Indeed, it may seem 
as if his skeptical theism works at cross-purposes with his theodicy. If the skep- 
tical theist maintains that God’s motives for permitting evil are sometimes inscru- 
table to us, doesn’t the theodicist contradict the skeptical theist by specifying what 
God’s motives are?*! I would suggest, however, that this tension between skeptical 





30. The two uses of theodicy I describe here correspond to what Eleonore Stump calls “de- 
fense” and “theodicy” respectively. See her book Wandering in Darkness: Narrative and the 
Problem of Suffering (New York: Oxford University Press, 2010), 19-20. 


31. Stump, for instance, claims that skeptical theism militates against “the possibility of the- 
odicy in general” (Wandering in Darkness, 14). For a similar view, see Scott Coley, “Skeptical 
Theism Is Incompatible with Theodicy; International Journal for the Philosophy of Religion 


256 * THE PROBLEM OF EVIL 


theism and theodicy is only apparent, at least in the case of Sri Ramakrishna. Sri 
Ramakrishna’s skeptical theist position is not a global skepticism about our ability 
to understand God’s motives for acting in general. Rather, his skeptical theism is a 
purely dialectical refutation of the inference at the heart of evidential arguments 
from evil against God’s existence—namely, the inference from (A) “I can’t think 
of a morally sufficient reason for God to have permitted evil E” to (B) “There is 
no morally sufficient reason for God to have permitted evil E” According to Sri 
Ramakrishna, the inference from (A) to (B) is unjustified because we have no good 
reason to believe that we should always be able to discern the ways and motives of an 
omniscient, omnipotent God. 

As a skeptical theist, then, Sri Ramakrishna maintains that we have no good 
reason to believe (B). As a theodicist, Sri Ramakrishna argues that we also have 
good reasons to deny (B). Notice that these two positions are perfectly compat- 
ible: often we have little reason to believe a certain proposition and also some 
reason to deny that proposition.” Therefore, Sri Ramakrishna’s skeptical theism 
and his theodicy should be seen as complementary rather than conflicting. 

We can now proceed to examine the details of Sri Ramakrishna’s theodicy 
itself. His first-line theodical response to the question of why God permits 
evil consists invariably in an appeal to God’s “/ila.” This dialogue between Sri 
Ramakrishna and a member of the Brahmo Samij is typical: 


BRAHMO: “If ignorance [avidya] is the cause of spiritual unconsciousness 
[ajnana], then why has God created ignorance [avidya]?” 

SRI RAMAKRISHNA: “That is God's /ila. The glory of light cannot be appreci- 
ated without darkness. Happiness cannot be understood without misery. 
Knowledge of good is possible because of knowledge of evil. Further, the 
mango grows and ripens on account of the covering skin. You throw away the 
skin when the mango is fully ripe and ready to be eaten. It is possible for one 
to attain gradually to the Knowledge of Brahman because of the covering skin 
of maya. Vidya-maya and avidya-maya are like the skin of the mango. Both 
are necessary.” (K 180 / G 216) 


In his response to the question of why God created avidya, Sti Ramakrishna states 
that the universe—which contains both knowledge and ignorance, good and evil, 
happiness and suffering—is God's /i/a. Like Ramanuja, Sri Ramakrishna insists 





77 (2015), 53-63. Against Stump and Coley, I would argue that while some forms of skep- 
tical theism are incompatible with theodicy, others—such as Sri Ramakrishna’s skeptical 
theism—are not. 


32. Lam grateful to Justin McBrayer for making this point clear to me in conversation. 


Sri Ramakrishna’s Multidimensional Response to the Problem of Evil - 257 


that God created this universe out of sheer sport. Elsewhere in the Kathamrta, Sri 
Ramakrishna likens God's /i/a to a game: 


HARI: “Why is there so much suffering in the world?” 

SRI RAMAKRISHNA: “ This world is the /#a of God. It is like a game. In this game 
there are joy and sorrow, virtue and vice, knowledge and ignorance, good and 
evil. The game cannot continue if sin and suffering are altogether eliminated 
from the creation. In the game of hide-and-seek one must touch the ‘granny’ 
in order to be free. But the ‘granny’ is never pleased if she is touched at the 
very outset. It is God’s wish that the play should continue for some time.” (K 


437 | G 436) 


According to Sri Ramakrishna, God’s /i/a is like a game that needs to be played 
for a while before somebody wins. Just as a game is not particularly fun if victory 
is achieved from the outset, God’s /i/a would be short-lived and not all that fun if 
evil and suffering were absent from the world: since everyone would be innately 
drawn toward God, they would have achieved liberation right away. By including 
evil, suffering, vice, and ignorance in Her world-/ila, God prolongs the fun of Her 
sportive play. 

Sri Ramakrishna recognizes, however, that this theodical appeal to /i/d is in- 
sufficient on its own, since it does not so much resolve the problem of evil as push 
it back one level. As we have already seen in the context of Ramanuja’s theodicy, 
the problem of evil re-emerges in another form: even if God created this universe 
out of sport, why didn’t God devise a better /#/a that contains little or no suffer- 
ing? Indeed, the appeal to //4, taken by itself, seems even to undermine theodicy 
by portraying God as a kind of deranged and sadistic child who takes delight in 
the suffering of his playthings. 

Anticipating this objection, Sri Ramakrishna claims that God’s world-/7z is, in 
fact, teleologically oriented: both good and evil are necessary in an environment 
conducive to the ethico-spiritual endeavor to eradicate egoism and to attain the 
ultimate goal of the Knowledge of Brahman. Just as a “mango grows and ripens 
on account of the covering skin, a person gradually attains spiritual perfection 
by experiencing both good and evil and learning from her experiences. According 
to Sri Ramakrishna, God created the world as a spiritual gymnasium in which we 
have to practice “hard spiritual discipline” in order to overcome our evil tenden- 
cies and finally attain liberation (K 437 / G 436). Sri Ramakrishna parts ways with 
Ramanuja on this issue. Ramanuja, we should recall from section I, claims that 
God could not possibly have created this world with the motive of benefiting His 
creatures, since this world is so full of suffering. In stark contrast to Ramanuja, Sri 
Ramakrishna maintains that God has included evil and suffering in Her world-/da 


258 © THE PROBLEM OF EVIL 


precisely iz order to benefit Her creatures spiritually. From Sri Ramakrishna’s per- 
spective, we would not have been able to develop spiritually if this world were de- 
void of evil. Unlike Ramanuja, then, Sri Ramakrishna does not take God’s motive 
of sportive play to be incompatible with Her motive of benefiting Her creatures. 
In these passages, Sri Ramakrishna hints at what I call a “saint-making” 
theodicy, which he elaborates more fully in other places in the Kathamrta. Sri 
Ramakrishna’s most detailed account of his saint-making theodicy is contained in 
the following dialogue with his neighbor, which deserves to be quoted at length: 


A NEIGHBOR: “ Why does a man have sinful tendencies [papabuddhi]?” 

SRI RAMAKRISHNA: ‘In God's creation there are all sorts of things. She has cre- 
ated bad men as well as good men. It is She who gives us good tendencies, and 
it is She again who gives us evil tendencies.” 

NEIGHBOR: “In that case we aren't responsible for our sinful actions, are we?” 

SRI RAMAKRISHNA: “God has ordained that if one commits sin, one has to reap 
the fruits of that sin. Won't you burn your tongue if you chew a chilli? In his 
youth Mathur led a rather fast life; so he suffered from various diseases before 
his death. . ..” 

NEIGHBOR: “Why has God created wicked people?” 

SRI RAMAKRISHNA: “That is Her will, Her play [ahar iccha, tahar lila\. In Her 
maya there exists avidya as well as vidya. Darkness is needed too. It reveals 
all the more the glory of light. There is no doubt that anger, lust, and greed 
are evils. Why, then, has God created them? In order to create saints [mahat 
lok toyer korben bole|. One becomes a saint by conquering the senses. Is there 
anything impossible for one who has subdued his passions? He can even re- 
alize God, through Her grace. Again, see how Her whole play of creation is 
perpetuated through lust.” 

“Wicked people are needed too... . God has created all kinds of things. 
She has created good trees, and poisonous plants and weeds as well. Among 
the animals there are good, bad, and all kinds of creatures—tigers, lions, 
snakes, and so on.” 


NEIGHBOR: “ Then householders, too, will have the vision of God, won’t they?” 

SRI RAMAKRISHNA: “Everybody will surely be liberated. But one should follow 
the instructions of the guru; if one follows a devious path, one will suffer in 
trying to retrace one’s steps. It takes a long time to achieve liberation. A man 
may fail to obtain it in this life. Perhaps he will realize God only after many 
births” (K 36-37 / G 97-98) 


Sri Ramakrishna’s response to his neighbor’s question, “Why has God cre- 
ated wicked people?” encompasses both the first and second dimensions of his 


Sri Ramakrishna’s Multidimensional Response to the Problem of Evil - 259 


theodicy. Sri Ramakrishna begins by asserting that God has chosen to include 
wicked people in Her /i/a, but he then immediately goes on to explain why 
God’s /ila contains so much evil: God has created wicked people “[i]n order to 
create saints.” Just as a game is played with certain fixed rules, God’s world-/ila 
has, as it were, certain rules built into it, which have profound theodical impli- 
cations. In particular, since God has created this world as an environment for 
saint-making, evil is as necessary as good. As Sri Ramakrishna puts it, darkness 
“reveals all the more the glory of light.” In other words, it is through the expe- 
rience of good and evil, both in the world and in ourselves, that we gradually 
learn to combat our own evil tendencies—such as “anger, lust, and greed”— 
and to cultivate ethical and spiritual virtues that are necessary to realize God. 
Good and saintly people serve as role models who inspire us to emulate them 
by exercising self-control and engaging in ethical behavior and spiritual prac- 
tice. On the other hand, the evil we encounter in the world serves as a kind of 
mirror that reflects the evil tendencies lurking within our own hearts. The evil 
and unethical actions of others lead us to recognize the horrific consequences 
of evil and motivate us to try to eliminate our own selfish and evil tendencies. 
In a world without evil, this “game” of saint-making would not even get off 
the ground, since everyone would be saintly from the outset and, hence, there 
would be no evil tendencies to overcome. 

It is worth pursuing this game analogy a bit further. Since we are all partici- 
pants in God’s “game” of saint-making, we all have to abide by the rules of the 
game. In the passage cited above, Sri Ramakrishna mentions three “rules” in 
particular—the law of karma, the doctrine of rebirth, and the doctrine of uni- 
versal salvation—each of which plays an important role in his saint-making the- 
odicy.*? After Sri Ramakrishna remarks that God has given people both good and 
evil tendencies, his neighbor asks, “In that case we aren’t responsible for our sinful 
actions, are we?” Sri Ramakrishna’s neighbor reasons that if God has given us evil 
tendencies, then the moral responsibility for evil lies with God rather than with 
us. In response to his neighbor’s doubt, Sri Ramakrishna appeals to the law of 
karma: “God has ordained that if one commits sin, one has to reap the fruits of 
that sin. Won't you burn your tongue if you chew a chilli?” If God were to give 
us good or evil tendencies or place us in fortunate or unfortunate circumstances 
arbitrarily or whimsically, then God would seem to be morally responsible for 
evil. However, like Sankara and Ramanuja, Sri Ramakrishna maintains that God 
generally acts in accordance with the law of karma. That is, God gives us what we 





33. Chatterjee also acknowledges the importance of the law of karma in Sri Ramakrishna’ 
theodicy (Classical Indian Philosophies, 128-29). Unlike Chatterjee, however, I argue that Sri 
Ramakrishna embeds the doctrine of karma in a broader saint-making theodicy. 


260 * THE PROBLEM OF EVIL 


deserve. Sri Ramakrishna would agree with Sankara, therefore, that God is akin 
to the rainfall that causes the growth of paddy, barley, and other crops but is not 
responsible for the differences among these various crops. Similarly, while God 
does endow us with good or evil tendencies and places us in favorable or unfavor- 
able circumstances, She does so in accordance with our own karma—the merit or 
demerit we have accrued through our own past behavior and action. 

Sri Ramakrishna also follows Sankara and Ramanuja in taking the law of 
karma to go hand in hand with the doctrine of rebirth. Sri Ramakrishna refers in 
passing to rebirth at the end of the passage cited above, where he remarks that if 
a person does not attain liberation in this life, he may still attain liberation “after 
many births.” Indeed, Sri Ramakrishna not only affirms the doctrine of rebirth 
but also explicitly links it to the law of karma, as in the following remark: “There 
is such a thing as inborn tendencies [samskara]. When a man has performed many 
good actions in his previous births, in the final birth he becomes guileless” (K 840 
/ G783). In accordance with traditional Hindu doctrine, Sri Ramakrishna main- 
tains that the actions one performs in this life will certainly bear fruit, if not in 
this birth then in a future birth. 

Sri Ramakrishna’s appeal to the doctrines of karma and rebirth has two im- 
portant theodical implications. First, the law of karma shifts moral responsibility 
for evil from God to Her creatures: we are responsible for bringing evil into the 
world through our own evil thoughts and actions. Second, the doctrines of karma 
and rebirth jointly explain, in principle, all instances of evil and suffering in the 
world. Recent Western philosophers have often emphasized instances of “gratu- 
itous, “pointless,” or “dysteleological” evil—that is, instances of evil, such as the 
Nazi Holocaust, that cannot be explained or justified in terms of any known the- 
odicy. As Herman points out, however, on the assumption of the Indian theory 
of karma, there is no strictly gratuitous evil, since all cases of evil can be explained 
as the karmic consequences of one’s past deeds, either in this life or in a previous 
life.*4 

Michael Stoeber makes a helpful distinction between “retributive” and “tele- 
ological” theories of karma, which clarifies the precise role of the law of karma in 
Sri Ramakrishna’s saint-making theodicy.* According to the retributive theory 
of karma, whatever suffering we undergo is retribution for our past evil deeds. 
Stoeber argues that Sankara’s karma-based theodicy presupposes such a retribu- 
tive conception of karma.** By contrast, the teleological theory of karma, while 





34, Herman, The Problem of Evil and Indian Thought, 287-89. 


35. Michael Stoeber, Eviland the Mystics God: Towards a Mystical Theodicy (London: Macmillan, 
1992), 172-87, 


36. Stoeber, Evil and the Mystics’ God, 179. 


Sri Ramakrishna’s Multidimensional Response to the Problem of Evil + 261 


accepting retribution as a key aspect of the workings of karma, nonetheless sub- 
ordinates retribution to teleology. On this view, as Stoeber puts it, the twin doc- 
trines of karma and rebirth are a “vehicle of moral education rather than that of 
a mechanical punishing device.’*”” Stoeber rightly refers to Sri Aurobindo as one 
of the foremost champions of this teleological approach to karma, citing the fol- 
lowing passage from his The Problem of Rebirth (1921): 


And what of suffering and happiness, misfortune and prosperity? These 
are experiences of the soul in its training, helps, props, means, disciplines, 
tests, ordeals,—and prosperity often a worse ordeal than suffering. Indeed, 
adversity, suffering may often be regarded rather as a reward to virtue than 
as a punishment for sin, since it turns out to be the greatest help and puri- 
fier of the soul struggling to unfold itself. To regard it merely as the stern 
award of a Judge, the anger of an irritated Ruler or even the mechanical 
recoil of result of evil upon cause of evil is to take the most superficial 
view possible of God's dealings with the soul and the law of the world’s 
evolution.*® 


As Sri Aurobindo points out, a strictly retributive theory of karma is highly ques- 
tionable from the standpoint of theodicy, since it makes God out to be a stern 
“Judge” or an “irritated Ruler.” While suffering may very well be the result of past 
misdeeds, the experience of suffering—by testing, challenging, and purifying the 
soul—nonetheless plays an indispensable teleological role in the soul's spiritual 
journey toward God. 

I would suggest that Sri Ramakrishna was an important forerunner to Sri 
Aurobindo in adopting a teleological, rather than a more narrowly retribu- 
tive, view of karma. Indeed, since Sri Aurobindo was strongly influenced by Sri 
Ramakrishna and carefully read the Kathamrta, Sri Aurobindo’s views on karma 
and rebirth were likely shaped, in part, by Sri Ramakrishna’s teachings on these 
matters. Anticipating Sri Aurobindo, Sri Ramakrishna embeds the doctrines of 
karma and rebirth in a broader saint-making teleological framework. Therefore, 
for Sri Ramakrishna, suffering and evil play a positive teleological role in the 
saint-making process by motivating us to overcome our egoistic and evil tenden- 
cies and to try to come closer to God. 





37. Stoeber, Evil and the Mystics’ God, 180. 


38. Cited in Stoeber, Evil and the Mystics’ God, 180. For the original passage, see The Complete 
Works of Sri Aurobindo, vol. 13: Essays in Philosophy and Yoga: Shorter Works, 1910-1950 
(Pondicherry: Sri Aurobindo Ashram Press, 1998), 267-68. 


262 * THE PROBLEM OF EVIL 


Some Western scholars have argued that the Indian doctrine of karma pro- 
vides the sole basis for a successful theodicy. As early as 1916, Weber effused that 
the “Karma doctrine .. . represents the most consistent theodicy ever produced 
by history.’ Similarly, Herman, in his provocative and groundbreaking book The 
Problem of Evil and Indian Thought (1971), argues that all Western theodicies 
have failed and that the Indian “doctrine of rebirth” alone “solves the problem 
of evil.”4° By contrast, Whitley Kaufman claims that “the doctrine of karma and 
rebirth, taken as a systematic rational account of human suffering by which all 
individual suffering is explained as a result of that individual’s wrongdoing, is un- 
successful as a theodicy.”"! 

Scholars on both sides of this debate have tended to assume that the doctrines 
of karma and rebirth comprise a complete, stand-alone theodicy. However, as 
Monima Chadha and Nick Trakakis have pointed out, “the karma theory is not 
usually put forward by its proponents as a complete and systematic explanation 
of human suffering.” Sri Ramakrishna, as well as Sri Aurobindo after him, can be 
seen as straddling both sides of this debate about the theodical implications of the 
karma doctrine. On the one hand, Sri Ramakrishna would agree with Herman 
and Weber that the law of karma has significant theodical force, since it shifts, to 
a certain extent, the moral responsibility for evil from God to God’s creatures. 
On the other hand, Sri Ramakrishna would likely agree with Kaufman that the 
karma doctrine fails as a stand-alone theodicy. Accordingly, Sri Ramakrishna 
inscribes the doctrines of karma and rebirth within a broader saint-making the- 
odicy that provides a teleological account of the ultimate spiritual purpose and 
significance of evil and suffering. 

There is a subtle difference between Sri Ramakrishna’s and Sankara’s respec- 
tive theodical appeals to the doctrine of karma. As we have seen in section I, 
Sarikara’s theodicy arguably restricts God’s omnipotence by making God entirely 
dependent on the law of karma. In contrast to Sankara, Sri Ramakrishna points 





39. Weber, The Religion of India, 121. Weber makes a similar remark in the Sociology of 
Religion: “The most complete formal solution of the problem of theodicy is the special achieve- 
ment of the Indian doctrine of karma, the so-called belief in the transmigration of souls.” 


Sociology of Religion, trans. Ephraim Fischoff (Boston: Beacon Press, 1963), 145. 
40. Herman, The Problem of Evil and Indian Thought, 287. 


41. Whitley Kaufman, “Karma, Rebirth, and the Problem of Evil? Philosophy East and West 
55.1 (January 2005), 28. For a similar critique of karma-based theodicy, see Matilal’s “A Note 
on Samkara’s Theodicy.” 


42. Monima Chadha and Nick Trakakis, “Karma and the Problem of Evil: A Response to 
Kaufman,’ Philosophy East and West 57.4 (October 2007), 534. For a similar argument, see 
Perrett, “Karma and the Problem of Suffering, 9 and Reichenbach, The Law of Karma, 77. 


Sri Ramakrishna’s Multidimensional Response to the Problem of Evil - 263 


out that God created the law of karma, so She can also violate or suspend the law 
of karma whenever She chooses: 


PASUPATI (SMILING): “Well, things will go on as long as She keeps them going.” 

SRI RAMAKRISHNA: “That is true. But one should think of God. It is not good 
to forget Her.” 

NANDA: “But how little we think of God 

SRI RAMAKRISHNA: “One thinks of God through Her grace [tahar krpa].” 


1” 


NANDA: “But how can we obtain God’s grace? Has She really the power to be- 
stow grace?” 

SRI RAMAKRISHNA (SMILING): “I see. You think as the intellectuals do: one 
reaps the results of one’s actions. Give up these ideas. The effect of karma 
wears away if one takes refuge in God [fsvarer sarandgata hole karma ksay 
hoy]... 

NANDA: “Can God violate law [din tini chadate paren]?” 

SRI RAMAKRISHNA: © What do you mean? She is the Lord. She can do every- 
thing. She who has made the law can also change it [jini ain korechen, tini ain 
badlate paren), (K 877-78 / G 817) 


In response to Sri Ramakrishna’s appeal to God’s grace, Nanda questions whether 
God really has “the power to bestow grace.” Sri Ramakrishna immediately rec- 
ognizes the philosophical dilemma behind Nanda’s query: if God always acts in 
accordance with the law of karma, then there is no scope for God to bestow grace 
on His creatures, since any such bestowal of grace would violate the law of karma. 
Somewhat startlingly, Sri Ramakrishna tells Nanda to “[g]ive up” the idea that 
“one reaps the results of one’s actions” and to accept instead the fact that the 
“effect of karma wears away if one takes refuge in God. It would be a mistake 
to interpret this statement as an outright rejection of the law of karma. Rather, 
Sri Ramakrishna accepts the general validity of the law of karma but insists that 
the karmic consequences of one’s past actions can nonetheless be mitigated or 
even nullified through God’s grace. Since God created the law of karma as one of 
the “rules” of Her /a—the cosmic “game” She has chosen to play—She can also 
break the “rule” of karma whenever She chooses.” 

Another key feature of Sri Ramakrishna’s saint-making theodicy is the doctrine 
of universal salvation. In the long passage cited earlier, Sri Ramakrishna remarks 
that “[e]verybody will surely be liberated” sooner or later, either in this birth or 





43. On this issue, I disagree with Long, who claims that Sri Ramakrishna conceives “Ishvara” 
along the lines of the “process God,” who “cannot interfere with our choices and is even limited 
by the constraints of karma” (“Like a Dog’s Curly Tail? 123). In my view, it is Sankara, rather 
than Sri Ramakrishna, who thinks that isvara is entirely constrained by the law of karma. 


264 ¢ THE PROBLEM OF EVIL 


in a future birth (K 37 / G 98). Indeed, he repeatedly affirms the doctrine of uni- 
versal salvation, frequently in the context of theodicy. For instance, in response 
to Nanda’s doubts about God’s goodness in the face of evil, Sri Ramakrishna 
states: “All will surely realize God. All will be liberated. It may be that some get 
their meal in the morning, some at noon, and some in the evening: but none 
will go without food. All, without any exception, will certainly know their real 
Self” (K 879 / G 818). If some people are ultimately deprived of spiritual salva- 
tion, then God could still be accused of partiality and cruelty. However, a striking 
feature of God’s “game” of saint-making is that everybody wins eventually. The 
doctrine of universal salvation, therefore, plays a crucial role in Sri Ramakrishna’s 
theodicy: the infinite good of spiritual salvation that awaits a// of us outweighs 
the various finite evils of this life. In fact, as we will see in section III of the next 
chapter, some recent philosophers such as John Hick have argued that any the- 
odicy that does not accept universal salvation is doomed to fail. 

In sum, Sri Ramakrishna’s saint-making theodicy has a number of unique 
features that mitigate the severity of the problem of evil. First, he makes a strong 
case for the necessity of evil in a saint-making environment meant to foster our 
ethical and spiritual development. Second, God’s /i/a is governed by the law of 
karma, which—at least to a certain extent—shifts the moral responsibility for 
evil from God to God’s creatures. Indeed, as Weber and Herman have argued, 
Indian theodicies have a decisive advantage over Judeo-Christian theodicies pre- 
cisely because the former are based on the doctrines of karma and rebirth. Third, 
Sri Ramakrishna’s doctrine of universal salvation further defuses the problem 
of evil, since the various finite evils afflicting God’s creatures are outweighed 
by the eternal salvation God has in store for us all, either in this birth or in a 
future birth. 


IV. Reconciling Sri Ramakrishna’s Saint-Making 
Theodicy with His Hard Theological Determinism 


An important objection may be raised at this point.“4 Sri Ramakrishna’s 
saint-making theodicy seems to presuppose the reality of free will, for at least two 
reasons. First, if God determines all our actions, then God—rather than human 
beings—would be ultimately responsible for all the evil that humans commit, 
in spite of the law of karma. Second, the entire process of saint-making presup- 
poses that people take moral responsibility for their behavior. For instance, when 
I commit an evil act, it is precisely because I feel morally responsible for my action 





44, I am grateful to an anonymous reviewer for suggesting that I address Sri Ramakrishna’s 
views on free will in the context of his theodicy. 


Sri Ramakrishna’s Multidimensional Response to the Problem of Evil - 265 


that I subsequently feel pangs of conscience and remorse, which then motivate 
me to avoid engaging in evil acts in the future. Moral responsibility, in turn, seems 
to require free will, since it is intuitively plausible to believe that we are morally 
responsible only for those actions that we had the freedom vo¢ to have performed. 
However, as we will see shortly, Sri Ramakrishna demies the reality of free will and 
thereby seems to preclude the very possibility of moral responsibility. Therefore, 
Sri Ramakrishna’s denial of free will arguably undermines his own saint-making 
theodicy. 

A full response to this objection requires a detailed reconstruction and anal- 
ysis of Sri Ramakrishna’s complex views on free will and determinism, which 
I have provided in a separate article. For present purposes, I will summarize 
briefly Sri Ramakrishna’s views on this issue, and then explain how they are com- 
patible with his saint-making theodicy.** He clarifies his stance on free will in the 
following passage: 


It is God alone who does everything. You may say that in that case man 
may commit sin. But that is not true. If a man is firmly convinced that 
God alone is the Doer and that he himself is nothing, then he will never 
make a false step. 

It is God alone who has planted in man’s mind what the “Englishmen” 
call free will [svadhin iccha]. People who have not realized God would 
become engaged in more and more sinful actions if God had not planted 
in them the notion of free will. Sin would have increased if God had not 
made the sinner feel that he alone was responsible for his sin. 

Those who have realized God are aware that free will is a false appear- 
ance |jara take labh koreche, tara jane dekhtei “svadhin iccha’). In reality 
man is the machine and God its Operator [vastutah tini yantri, ami 
yantra|, man is the carriage and God its Driver. (K 376 / G 379-80) 


Sri Ramakrishna makes absolutely clear that he is a theological determinist: “It is 
God alone who does everything.” More specifically, he is a hard theological de- 
terminist, since he maintains that theological determinism is incompatible with 


45. Ayon Maharaj, “Hard Theological Determinism and the Illusion of Free Will: Sri 
Ramakrishna Meets Lord Kames, Saul Smilansky, and Derk Pereboom, Journal of World 
Philosophies (forthcoming in December 2018). This article provides a detailed reconstruction 
of Sri Ramakrishna’s views on free will and determinism and brings him into conversation with 


Western philosophers. 


46. For a brief but helpful discussion of Sri Ramakrishna’s views on free will and determinism, 
see Arindam Chakrabarti, “The Dark Mother Flying Kites: Sri Ramakrishna’s Metaphysic of 
Morals,’ Sophia 33.3 (1994), 21-26. 


266 * THE PROBLEM OF EVIL 


free will.” Free will, according to Sri Ramakrishna, is actually a “false appear- 
ance.” Indeed, the fact that Sri Ramakrishna ascribes the doctrine of free will to 
“Englishmen” suggests that he takes the very notion of free will to be a Western 
import that is foreign to the Hindu sensibility. 

For Sri Ramakrishna, hard theological determinism was not an intellectual 
hypothesis arrived at through reasoning but a deep conviction rooted in his own 
mystical experience of God as the Doer. As he puts it, “There is Someone within 
me who does all these things through me... . 1am the machine and God is the 
Operator. I act as She makes me act. I speak as She makes me speak” (K 132 / 
G 176). Indeed, he would frequently teach that only the jivanmukta, one who 
has achieved liberation while living, realizes that God alone is the Doer: “A man 
becomes a jivanmukta when he knows that God is the Doer of all things. .. . 
Where is man’s free will? All are under the Will of God” (K 126 / G 159). 

However, Sri Ramakrishna was also aware that such a mystical justification 
of theological determinism is unlikely to convince those with a more rational or 
skeptical temperament. Therefore, he also provided a rational argument for the 
nonexistence of free will on the basis of the law of psychophysical causation (K 
966 / G 892). Since I discuss Sri Ramakrishna’s rational argument in detail in my 
article, I will only summarize the argument here.” According to Sri Ramakrishna, 
belief and desire are the motivating forces behind all our actions. We engage in 
a particular action only when we believe that there is something desirable to be 
gained from so acting. Further, Sri Ramakrishna holds that our desires were not 
ultimately chosen by us. Therefore, even though we usually think we act freely, 
our actions are, in fact, completely determined by desires which we did not freely 
choose to have. As a hard theological determinist, Sri Ramakrishna maintains 
that God is the ultimate causal source of all our beliefs and desires. 

Sri Ramakrishna also anticipates a natural objection to his hard theological 
determinist position: a person who feels that God does everything could engage 
in sinful actions and justify them by saying that it is God who makes him sin. Sri 
Ramakrishna raises and responds to this objection in the following passage: 


It is God alone who does everything. You may say that in that case people 
may commit sin. But that is not true. If one truly realizes, “God alone is 





47. For a helpful discussion of soft and hard forms of theological determinism, see section 
3 of Leigh Vicens, “Theological Determinism,” Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy (http:// 
www.iep.utm.edu) (accessed 9 January 2018). For a detailed defense of my interpretation of Sri 
Ramakrishna as a hard theological determinist, see Maharaj, “Hard Theological Determinism 


and the Illusion of Free Will.” 


48. Sri Ramakrishna adopts a hard theological determinist stance at numerous other places in 


the Kathamrta, including K 175 / G 211. 
49. See section I of Maharaj, “Hard Theological Determinism and the Illusion of Free Will.” 


Sri Ramakrishna’s Multidimensional Response to the Problem of Evil - 267 


the Doer, and I am the non-doer’ then he will never make a false step. (K 
376 / G 379-80) 


According to Sri Ramakrishna, only people who have realized God internalize 
fully the truth of hard theological determinism, and these jivanmuktas are inca- 
pable of committing sin, since they are conscious instruments of God. Therefore, 
although the jivanmukta knows that he has no free will or moral responsibility, 
he “will never make a false step.” 

One might argue, however, that Sri Ramakrishna’s response to this objection 
is inadequate as it stands. After all, even if enlightened jivanmuktas are inca- 
pable of committing sin, ordinary unenlightened people can still engage in sinful 
actions and readily excuse themselves by claiming that God causes them to sin.* 
Sri Ramakrishna’s response to this objection is contained in the passage cited ear- 
lier in this section: “It is God alone who has planted in man’s mind what the 
‘Englishmen’ call free will. ... Sin would have increased if God had not made the 
sinner feel that he alone was responsible for his sin” (K 376 / G 379-80). This 
is perhaps the most strikingly original feature of Sri Ramakrishna’s position on 
free will and determinism. According to Sri Ramakrishna, God Himself, in His 
infinite wisdom, has endowed ordinary unenlightened people with the illusion of 
free will; otherwise, they would have engaged in “more and more sinful actions.” 
He also explains why the widespread belief in theological determinism among 
ordinary people would have had such morally disastrous consequences. The sense 
of free will, Sri Ramakrishna points out, is a necessary condition for the feeling 
of moral responsibility. Therefore, if ordinary people did not feel that they were 
free, they would not have taken moral responsibility for their actions—which 
would have resulted in a massive increase in immoral behavior. 

Sri Ramakrishna’ crucial distinction between the standpoint of the igno- 
rant person and the standpoint of the enlightened saint holds the key to under- 
standing how his denial of free will is compatible with his saint-making theodicy. 
According to Sri Ramakrishna, those who have not yet realized God believe that 
they are free and, therefore, feel morally responsible for their actions, and this 
feeling of moral responsibility is all that is necessary for the saint-making process 
to be meaningful. For Sri Ramakrishna, then, the moral responsibility felt by or- 
dinary people who have not yet realized God depends not on the reality of free 
will but on the feeling of free will. 

On the other hand, God-realized saints know that God alone has been 
the Doer all along, but this realization in no way diminishes the value of the 





50. For an in-depth discussion of Sri Ramakrishna’s response to this objection, see section I of 
Maharaj, “Hard Theological Determinism and the Illusion of Free Will.” 


268 *© THE PROBLEM OF EVIL 


saint-making journey they had undergone. While these saints no longer take 
moral responsibility for their actions, they are incapable of committing any evil 
action—as Sri Ramakrishna puts it, they “cannot take a false step’—because 
they are conscious instruments of God. From Sri Ramakrishna’s perspective, so 
long as we take care to distinguish the standpoint of ignorant people from the 
standpoint of enlightened saints, we will not find any conflict between hard 
theological determinism and the sense of moral responsibility required for his 
saint-making theodicy.* Recently, Derk Pereboom and Trakakis have defended 
the compatibility of hard theological determinism with soul-making theodicies.” 
As Pereboom argues, “the development from cowardice to courage, from immo- 
rality to morality, from ignorance to enlightenment, is valuable, even if these pro- 
cesses are wholly causally determined by God.”* Arguments such as this support 
Sri Ramakrishna’s position that a saint-making theodicy is compatible with hard 
theological determinism. 


V. Sri Ramakrishna’s Theodical Endgame: The 
Panentheistic Standpoint of Vijfidna 


On numerous occasions, when religious believers such as Nanda and Hari raised 
the problem of evil, Sri Ramakrishna appealed ultimately to the mystical stand- 
point of vijiana. In section III, for instance, I quoted the beginning of a dialogue 
in which Nanda asks Sri Ramakrishna whether God can sometimes suspend the 
law of karma and Sri Ramakrishna responds in the affirmative. In the continua- 
tion of this dialogue, Nanda raises two serious objections to Sri Ramakrishna’s 





51. In section I of “Hard Theological Determinism and the Illusion of Free Will? I address an 
important objection to Sri Ramakrishna’s view: what happens if the standpoints of the enlight- 
ened saint and the ignorant person collide? For instance, what if a God-realized saint were to 
tell an ignorant person that free will is an illusion and that God alone determines everything 
we do? Could this lead the ignorant person to abandon his belief in free will? And if it did, 
wouldn't the ignorant person’s premature belief in theological determinism have disastrous 
consequences? In the article, I defend Sri Ramakrishna against this objection by arguing that 
Sri Ramakrishna would reject what contemporary epistemologists call “doxastic volunta- 
rism’” —the view that we can adopt beliefs at will—with respect to beliefs about God’s existence 
and theological determinism. According to Sri Ramakrishna, even if an enlightened saint ells 
an ignorant person that God is the Doer, the ignorant person cannot truly believe that God is 
the Doer until and unless he realizes God himself. 


52. Derk Pereboom, “Libertarianism and Theological Determinism,’ in Free Will and 
Theism: Connections, Contingencies, and Concerns, ed. Kevin Timpe and Daniel Speak 
(New York: Oxford University Press, 2016), 112-31, esp. 124-27; Nick Trakakis, “Does Hard 
Determinism Render the Problem of Evil Even Harder?) Ars Disputandi 6 (2006), 239-64, 
esp. 247-49. 


53. Pereboom, “Libertarianism and Theological Determinism,” 125. 


Sri Ramakrishna’s Multidimensional Response to the Problem of Evil - 269 


theodicy that lead Sri Ramakrishna to appeal to the panentheistic standpoint of 
vijnana: 


NANDA: “But is God partial? [svar ki paksapati?| If things happen through God's 
grace, then I must say God is partial.” 

SRI RAMAKRISHNA: “But God Herself has become everything—the universe 
and its living beings. You will realize it when you have Perfect Knowledge 
[pirna jnana]. God Herself has become the twenty-four cosmic princi- 
ples: the mind, intellect, body, and so forth. Is there anyone but Herself to 
whom She can show partiality? [tini ar paksapat kar upar korben?)” 

NANDA: “Why has God assumed all these different forms? Why are some wise 
and some ignorant?” 

SRI RAMAKRISHNA: “It is God’s sweet will [tar khusi].... The Divine Mother 
is full of bliss and a spirit of playfulness [tini anandamayi]. She is blissfully 
engaged in the sportive play [/i/é] of creation, preservation, and destruction. 
Innumerable are the living beings. Only one or two among them obtain liber- 
ation. And that makes Her happy... .” 

NANDA: “It may be Her sweet will; but it is death to us!” [sahar khusi! amra je 
mori! | 

SRI RAMAKRISHNA: “But who are you? It is the Divine Mother who has become 
all this [tomra kothai? tini sab hoyechen|. It is only as long as you do not know 
Her that you say, ‘T? ‘T? 

All will surely realize God. All will be liberated. It may be that some get 
their meal in the morning, some at noon, and some in the evening: but none 
will go without food. All, without any exception, will certainly know their 
real Self” (K 878 / G 818) 


Nanda’ first objection to Sri Ramakrishna’ theodicy can be clarified in terms of 
the dilemma facing karma-based theodicies discussed in section I. While Sankara 
curtails God’s omnipotence by emphasizing God’s absolute dependence on the 
law of karma, Sri Ramakrishna adopts the view that God can suspend or miti- 
gate the karmic consequences of the actions of certain people through Her grace. 
As Nanda recognizes, however, Sri Ramakrishna’s accommodation of God’s grace 
saves God’s omnipotence at the cost of reintroducing the problem of evil: isn’t 
God “partial” if She chooses to suspend or mitigate the karmic consequences 
of the actions of certain people and not others, and only on certain occasions? 
So long as the law of karma is incontrovertible and universally applicable, the 
moral responsibility for evil and suffering can be said to lie with God’s creatures 
rather than with God. However, if God can sometimes violate or override the 
law of karma, then the moral responsibility for evil gets shifted back onto God's 
shoulders. 


270 © THE PROBLEM OF EVIL 


Tellingly, Sri Ramakrishna responds to Nanda’s charge of divine partiality by 
appealing to the panentheistic standpoint of vij#zana: God Herself has become 
everything and everyone in the universe, so there is no one besides God to whom 
God can be partial.** As he puts it, “Is there anyone but Herself to whom She 
can show partiality?” From the mystical standpoint of vij#ana, Sri Ramakrishna 
does not so much solve as dissolve the problem of evil. A vijiani such as Sri 
Ramakrishna realizes that both evildoers and victims of evil are different guises 
playfully assumed by God Herself in the course of Her cosmic /ila. Since God has 
become Her creatures, the traditional problem of evil—which presupposes a dis- 
tinction between God and Her suffering creatures—disappears. 

Nanda, who remains troubled by the problem of evil, proceeds to raise an 
even more fundamental objection to Sri Ramakrishna’s theodicy: God’s /i/a is 
“death to us.” In other words, why didn’t God create a better /#/4 with little or no 
suffering? Why did God choose to play shis particular cosmic “game” —involving 
the law of karma and the telos of saint-making—which entails so much suffering 
for Her creatures? Nanda’s objection to Sri Ramakrishna should remind us of 
Herman’s objection to Ramanuja’s //a-based theodicy, which was already quoted 
in section I: “When Brahman, through /i4, expressed His joy, why didn’t He do 
it better?” While Ramanuja fails to provide a satisfactory answer to this ques- 
tion, Sri Ramakrishna justifies God’s /i/a by appealing once again to the panen- 
theistic standpoint of vijiana: “But who are you? It is the Divine Mother who has 
become all this.”*° Nanda’s objection that God’s /i/d is “death to us” clearly pre- 
supposes a difference between God and Her creatures. Sri Ramakrishna refutes 
Nanda’s objection by denying precisely this presupposition. As a vij#ani, Sri 
Ramakrishna affirms that God Herself sports in the form of the various jivas, so 
all the suffering endured by jivas is actually God’s own playfully se/f-inflicted “suf- 
fering.” He makes this clear in the continuation of his dialogue with Hari cited in 
section III, in which Hari raises an objection to Sri Ramakrishna’s theodicy that 
echoes Nanda’s objection almost verbatim: 





54. The term “panentheism” has been used by philosophers in a variety of senses, so my use 
of the term requires some clarification. All panentheists agree that God is immanent as well 
as transcendent, but they differ on how they understand God’s immanence in the world. Sri 
Ramakrishna, I maintain, was a panentheist in a very strong sense. While some panentheists 
claim that God is iz all things, Sri Ramakrishna goes even further by affirming that God is all 
things and beings in the universe. For Sri Ramakrishna, God alone exists, so everything in this 
universe is an actual manifestation of God. For a detailed elaboration of Sri Ramakrishna’s pan- 
entheistic metaphysics, see section HI of chapter 1. 


55. Herman, The Problem of Evil and Indian Thought, 270. 


56. Interestingly, even though Ramanuja champions the panentheistic philosophy of 
Visistadvaita, panentheism plays no role in his theodicy. 


Sri Ramakrishna’s Multidimensional Response to the Problem of Evil + 271 

HARI: “But this play of God is our death [khelai je amader pran jai|.” 

SRI RAMAKRISHNA (SMILING): “Please tell me who you are. God alone has be- 
come all this—mm2ayai, jivas, the universe, and the twenty-four cosmic princi- 
ples. ‘As the snake I bite, and as the charmer I cure.’ It is God Herself who 
has become both vidya [knowledge] and avidya [ignorance]. She remains 
deluded by avidya-maya. Again, with the help of the guru, She is cured by 
vidya-maya. 

Ignorance, Knowledge, and Intimate Knowledge [ajrana, jnana, vijnanal. 
The j#ani sees that God alone exists and is the Doer, that She creates, pre- 
serves, and destroys. The vij#ani sees that it is God who has become all this.” 


(K 437 / G 436) 


Sri Ramakrishna’s ultimate theodical justification of God’s /ila is based on an 
appeal to the panentheistic experience of vijiana. God Herself, in the form of ig- 
norant jivas, undergoes suffering and delusion through “avidya-maya; and God 
Herself, in the form of spiritually inclined jivas, practices spiritual disciplines 
with the help of “vidya-maya, thereby transcending suffering and achieving spir- 
itual liberation. From Sri Ramakrishna’s standpoint, the problem of evil is only a 
problem for those who mistakenly think that they are different from God. 

A striking incident in Sri Ramakrishna’s life nicely captures the theodical sig- 
nificance of vijhana: 


One day the Master [Sri Ramakrishna] saw a butterfly flying towards him 
with a tiny stick in its tail. At first he was pained by the thought that some 
naughty boy had done this. But in the next moment he said in ecstasy, “O 
Rama, you have created your own distress!,” and then burst into laughter. 


(LP Lii.177-78 / DP 320) 


Sri Ramakrishna was confronted with an apparent case of moral evil in which 
a butterfly was suffering likely because a mischievous boy cruelly lodged a stick 
in its tail. Initially pained at the sight, Sri Ramakrishna suddenly ascended to 
the ecstatic mystical standpoint of vij#ana: God Himself, he realized, was sport- 
ing playfully in the form of both the wounded butterfly and the naughty boy 
who harmed the butterfly. From the panentheistic standpoint of vij#ana, then, 
the problem of evil does not even arise, since all the suffering creatures in God’s 
world-/ia are actually disguised forms of God Himself. 

At this point, however, one might reasonably ask: what good is Sri 
Ramakrishna’s theodical appeal to the panentheistic state of vijidna if this rar- 
efied mystical experience is not available to Nanda, Hari, or indeed, to the vast 
majority of ordinary mortals? So long as we feel that we are suffering creatures 


272 * THE PROBLEM OF EVIL 


who are different from God, we also feel the urgency of the problem of evil. The 
key to understanding how Sri Ramakrishna would respond to this query is to re- 
call the distinction between the two different kinds of people Sri Ramakrishna 
addresses: religious believers and religious skeptics. When a religious skeptic 
such as Vidyasagar presents an argument from evil against God’s existence, Sri 
Ramakrishna refutes the argument on two fronts. First, he makes the skeptical 
theist argument that in light of human cognitive limitations, proponents of ev- 
idential arguments from evil are not justified in inferring from their inability to 
think of a morally sufficient reason for God to have permitted a particular evil to 
the conclusion that God ad no morally sufficient reason for permitting that evil. 
Second, Sri Ramakrishna argues that they also cannot rule out the possibility of 
a saint-making theodicy, which does explain why God permits all the evil we see 
in the world. 

As we have seen, however, Sri Ramakrishna recognizes that his saint-making 
theodicy still leaves certain questions unanswered. In particular, it invites two se- 
rious objections, which have already been touched upon in this section. First, isn’t 
God guilty of partiality if She bestows Her grace only on some of Her creatures 
by mitigating the karmic consequences of their actions? Second, why didn’t God 
create a better /i/a with little or no suffering? From Sri Ramakrishna’s standpoint, 
these objections can only be satisfactorily refuted—or, better, dissolved—from 
the mystical standpoint of vijiana. Both objections presuppose a difference be- 
tween God and Her suffering creatures. However, on the basis of his experience 
of vijiana, Sti Ramakrishna denies this very presupposition by affirming that 
God has become everything in the universe. Crucially, for the purpose of refuting 
arguments from evil against God’s existence, Sri Ramakrishna need only estab- 
lish the possibility, rather than the ¢ruth, of his unique theodicy, which combines 
a saint-making teleological framework with the panentheistic metaphysics of 
vijnana. 

By contrast, Sri Ramakrishna appeals to the full-blown truth of his theodicy 
when conversing with religiously inclined people such as Nanda and Hari, who 
do not so much doubt God’s existence as seek to strengthen their faith in God by 
understanding why a loving God permits so much evil. Sri Ramakrishna attempts 
to fortify the religious faith of such people by explaining that God permits evil 
in the world “in order to create saints.’ Ultimately, however, Sri Ramakrishna 
appeals to the panentheistic standpoint of vij#dna in order to resolve, once and 
for all, any of their lingering doubts. As a vij#ani, Sti Ramakrishna assures them 
that in reality there is nothing but God and that God Herself sports in the form 
of both evildoers and the victims of evil. For religious believers engaged in the 
spiritual exercise of faith seeking understanding, Sri Ramakrishna’s theodical 
appeal to panentheism may provide some measure of consolation and insight in 
spite of their inability to share his lofty mystical standpoint. Since believers such 


Sri Ramakrishna’s Multidimensional Response to the Problem of Evil » 273 


as Nanda and Hari trust Sri Ramakrishna’s words and his spiritual experiences, 
they can take solace in the fact that there is an ultimate metaphysical resolution 
of their remaining doubts about God’s loving nature. 


VI. Anticipating Possible Objections 


This chapter has provided a detailed reconstruction of Sri Ramakrishna’s multi- 
dimensional response to the problem of evil. Of course, since each dimension of 
his response is controversial, a full-blown defense of his position is beyond the 
scope of this chapter. In lieu of such a comprehensive defense, I will conclude this 
chapter by addressing three potential objections to Sri Ramakrishna’s views. The 
first objection targets his skeptical theism, while the second and third objections 
target aspects of his theodicy. 

Contemporary philosophers such as Bruce Russell, Stephen Maitzen, and 
William Hasker argue that skeptical theism is untenable since it leads to moral 
paralysis.°” They formulate this objection to skeptical theism in subtly different 
ways, but their basic objection runs as follows. Take the case of the twelve-year 
old Ashley Jones, who was brutally raped and murdered by an escapee from a ju- 
venile detention center in 1997.°* Our common-sense moral intuition tells us that 
if a human onlooker was present at the time and could have prevented Ashley's 
suffering without causing any harm to himself, then the onlooker should have felt 
morally obliged to prevent Ashley’s suffering. However, if this hypothetical on- 
looker were a skeptical theist, he would believe that, for all he knows, God might 
have a morally sufficient reason to permit Ashley’s suffering that lies beyond his 
ken. Therefore, the onlooker’s skeptical theism would lead him to doubt whether 
he should intervene to prevent Ashley’s suffering. Since such moral paralysis is 
repugnant to common-sense morality, skeptical theism must be false. 

Skeptical theists have responded to the moral paralysis objection in a variety 
of ways.” I will focus here on Daniel Howard-Snyder’s especially promising 





57. See Bruce Russell, “Defenseless,” in The Evidential Argument from Evil, ed. Howard-Snyder, 
197-98; Stephen Maitzen, “Agnosticism, Skeptical Theism, and Moral Obligation,’ in Skeptical 
Theism, ed. Dougherty and McBrayer, 277-92; Stephen Law, “The Pandora’s Box Objection 
to Skeptical Theism, International Journal for Philosophy of Religion 78 (2015), 285-99; 
William Hasker, “All Too Skeptical Theism,’ International Journal for Philosophy of Religion 
68 (2010), 15-29. 


58. Howard-Snyder mentions this example in “Epistemic Humility,’ 18. 


59. For a good summary of five main strategies for responding to the moral paralysis ob- 
jection to skeptical theism, see McBrayer, “Skeptical Theism,’ 618-20. See also Alexander 
R. Pruss’s very recent defense of skeptical theism against the moral paralysis objection in his 
article “Sceptical Theism, the Butterfly Effect and Bracketing the Unknown,’ Royal Institute of 
Philosophy Supplement 81 (2017), 71-86. 


274 * THE PROBLEM OF EVIL 


response to the moral paralysis objection. Howard-Snyder readily agrees with 
his objectors that our common-sense moral intuition is correct: it is obviously 
true that an onlooker who could have prevented Ashley’s suffering without caus- 
ing harm to himself should have felt morally obligated to intervene in order to 
prevent her suffering. However, Howard-Snyder argues that the moral principle 
underlying this common-sense intuition does not, in fact, conflict with skeptical 
theism.® He formulates this underlying moral principle as follows: 


One is obligated to prevent someone’s undeserved suffering if and only 
if the total consequences for him [the sufferer] will be better if one inter- 
venes than if one doesn’t—unless one has a sufficiently good reason not to 
intervene and one permits it for that reason.“ 


According to Howard-Snyder, skeptical theism would conflict with common-sense 
morality if skeptical theism maintained that the onlooker should be in doubt 
about whether the foreseeable consequences of his intervening or not intervening 
reliably indicate “the total consequences for Ashley.’ However, skeptical theism 
actually maintains that the onlooker should be in doubt about whether the fore- 
seeable consequences of his intervening or not intervening reliably indicate “the 
total consequences for everyone until the end of time? ® Therefore, common-sense 
morality is perfectly compatible with skeptical theism: the onlooker should have 
felt obligated to intervene to prevent Ashley’s suffering, since he thought that the 
foreseeable consequences for Ashley reliably indicated the overall consequences 
for her and since he did not have “a sufficiently good reason” zor to intervene. 
Howard-Snyder’s line of reasoning helps us defend Sri Ramakrishna’s par- 
ticular brand of skeptical theism against the moral paralysis objection. From Sri 
Ramakrishna’s perspective, God may very well have had a good reason to permit 
Ashley’s suffering that lies partially or wholly beyond our ken. For instance, in 
light of the law of karma, her suffering might have been karmic expiation for the 
sins she committed in a previous life. Moreover, it is possible that her terrible suf- 
fering in that life could have been spiritually beneficial for her in the long run by 
contributing to her eternal soul’s journey toward saintliness in subsequent lives. 





60. It should be noted that Howard-Snyder prefers the term “Agnosticism” to “skeptical 
theism.” 


61. Daniel Howard-Snyder, “Agnosticism, the Moral Skepticism Objection, and Commonsense 
Morality? in Skeptical Theism, ed. Dougherty and McBrayer, 304. 


62. Howard-Snyder, “Agnosticism,” 305. 
63. Howard-Snyder, “Agnosticism,” 305. 
64. Howard-Snyder, “Agnosticism,” 304. 


Sri Ramakrishna’s Multidimensional Response to the Problem of Evil + 275 


Nonetheless, Sri Ramakrishna would maintain that our hypothetical onlooker 
would still have been morally obligated to try to prevent Ashley’s suffering, since 
the onlooker believed that the overall consequences for Ashley in that life would 
have been better for her if he had intervened than if he had not intervened. Sri 
Ramakrishna’s skeptical theism only recommends agnosticism about whether the 
foreseeable consequences of intervening or not intervening to prevent Ashley's 
suffering reliably indicate the total consequences for everyone until the end of 
time, including Ashley's soul in subsequent births. 

Of course, the debate between skeptical theists and proponents of the 
moral paralysis objection is quite complex and intricate, so a full defense of 
Howard-Snyder’s line of response to this objection is beyond the scope of this 
chapter. Minimally, I hope to have established that the question whether a skep- 
tical theist position such as Sri Ramakrishna’s leads to moral paralysis remains far 
from settled, since it seems possible to formulate our common-sense moral prin- 
ciple so as not to conflict with skeptical theism. 

Even if Sri Ramakrishna’s skeptical theism is philosophically and morally 
sound, one might still object to his saint-making theodicy. Stanley Kane has raised 
an objection to John Hick’s soul-making theodicy—which will be discussed in 
the next chapter—that arguably applies to Sri Ramakrishna’s saint-making the- 
odicy as well. According to Kane, Hick fails to prove that evil is logically neces- 
sary in a soul-making environment: 


Soul-making, Hick teaches, requires the development of such traits as for- 
titude, courage, compassion. This, we are told, justifies the existence of 
many evils, since—according to this theodicy—these evils are a logically 
necessary condition for the development of such traits. This last claim, 
however, can be challenged. We can imagine situations where these traits 
could be displayed even though there is no actual evil existing. Courage 
and fortitude, for instance, could manifest themselves as the persistence, 
steadfastness, and perseverance it takes to accomplish well any difficult or 
demanding long-range task—the writing of a doctoral dissertation, for ex- 
ample, or training for and competing in the Olympic Games.© 


It is easy enough to adapt Kane’s objection to Sri Ramakrishna’s saint-making 
theodicy. Kane might argue that Sri Ramakrishna’s saint-making theodicy fails to 
prove that evil is zecessary in a saint-making environment. Couldn’t a world with 
little or no evil serve as an environment for saint-making? Couldn’t ethical traits 





65. G. Stanley Kane, “The Failure of Soul-Making Theodicy; International Journal for 
Philosophy of Religion 6 (1975), 2. 


276 © THE PROBLEM OF EVIL 


such as compassion, courage, and fortitude be developed through activities such 
as intense long-term athletic training or the writing of a doctoral dissertation, 
which do not involve the existence of evil? 

We can defend Sri Ramakrishna’s saint-making theodicy against Kane’s ob- 
jection in two ways. First, Kane’s assumption that long-term activities such as 
Olympic training and dissertation writing do not involve evil is disputable. Surely, 
suffering is a paradigmatic instance of evil, and anyone who has written a doctoral 
dissertation or trained for the Olympic games can attest to the fact that these 
demanding activities typically do involve at least some suffering, either physical, 
mental, or both. Indeed, a case can be made that the cultivation of ethical qual- 
ities requires us to cope with, and learn from, the various forms of suffering we 
undergo in the course of these activities. Arguably, then, Kane’s examples of dis- 
sertation writing and Olympic training support Sri Ramakrishna’s saint-making 
theodicy, since they illustrate how some amount of suffering is logically necessary 
for the building of character. 

Second, even if Kane is right that ethical traits such as courage and com- 
passion can be cultivated in the absence of evil, Sri Ramakrishna’s saint-making 
theodicy emphasizes the telos not of ethical perfection but of spiritual saintli- 
ness, which goes far beyond any ethical ideal. From Sri Ramakrishna’s perspec- 
tive, an environment meant to foster the cultivation of saintly qualities—such as 
love of God, purity in thought and deed, and complete indifference to worldly 
pleasures—does require evil and suffering. It is worth recalling Sri Ramakrishna’s 
most explicit formulation of his saint-making theodicy: “There is no doubt that 
anger, lust, and greed are evils. Why, then, has God created them? In order to 
create saints. One becomes a saint by conquering the senses” (K 37 / G 97). 
According to Sri Ramakrishna, anger, lust, and greed are themselves “evils,” and 
one makes progress toward saintliness precisely by struggling with, and even- 
tually conquering, these evil passions. Since Sri Ramakrishna defines a saint as 
someone who has conquered evil passions such as lust and greed, the cultivation 
of saintliness logically requires the presence of evil. Therefore, while Kane’s objec- 
tion may arguably apply to Hick’s soul-making theodicy, it does not apply to Sri 
Ramakrishna’s saint-making theodicy, which holds that the persistent struggle to 
overcome one’s own evil passions is a necessary precondition for the attainment 
of saintliness. 

Even if one grants the internal coherence of Sri Ramakrishna’s theodicy, one 
might still object that his theodicy presupposes the truth of a host of highly 
controversial doctrines, such as karma, rebirth, universal salvation, and a panen- 
theistic metaphysics. Why should we believe that these doctrines are true? In re- 
sponse to this question, we should note, first of all, that even if Sri Ramakrishna’s 
theodicy presupposes the truth of certain controversial metaphysical doc- 
trines, it is no worse off than other theodicies—Hindu, Christian, Islamic, or 


Sri Ramakrishna’s Multidimensional Response to the Problem of Evil + 277 


otherwise—since every theodicy is based on a controversial theological world- 
view. Traditional Christian theodicies, for instance, presuppose the doctrines of 
Adam’s fall and original sin, which are dificult—if not impossible—to verify. 

Moreover, Sri Ramakrishna’s theodicy has the unique advantage that it is 
based on his own mystical experiences, which—as I argued in chapter 6—have at 
least some evidential value. As we have seen, Sri Ramakrishna’s ultimate theodi- 
cal appeal to a panentheistic worldview is rooted in his own spiritual experience 
of vijnana. He also had numerous other theodically significant mystical experi- 
ences, four of which are especially worth highlighting. First, Sri Ramakrishna had 
countless mystical experiences of God as the loving and compassionate Divine 
Mother who is ever eager to protect and help Her creatures.® Sri Ramakrishna 
often emphasized the Divine Mother's boundless love for Her children: “My 
Mother! Who is my Mother? Ah, She is the Mother of the Universe. It is She 
who creates and preserves the world, who always protects Her children, and 
who grants whatever they desire: dharma [righteousness], artha [wealth], kama 
[worldly pleasures], oksa [spiritual liberation]” (K 306 / G 321). Indeed, Sri 
Ramakrishna points out that the love and compassion of parents toward their 
children are but pale reflections of God’s infinite love and compassion: “The love 
that you see in parents is God’s love: She has given it to them to preserve Her cre- 
ation. The compassion that you see in the kind-hearted is God’s compassion: She 
has given it to them to protect the helpless” (K 1121 / G 671). Sri Ramakrishna’s 
mystical experience of the infinitely compassionate Divine Mother bolsters his 
theodical claim that God has created this world as a saint-making environment 
in which evil is inevitable. Just as a loving mother sometimes allows her children 
to suffer in order to inculcate in them certain ethical virtues, our perfectly loving 
Divine Mother permits us to experience evil and suffering in order to help us 
grow into spiritually mature children of God. 

Second, Sri Ramakrishna sometimes had mystical experiences that confirmed 
the necessity of evil in God’s creation. Take his striking report of an unusual mys- 
tical vision of the Divine Mother: 


Do you know what I saw just now? A divine form—a vision of the Divine 
Mother. She had a son in Her womb. She gave birth to it and the next 
instant began to swallow it; and as much of it as went into Her mouth 
became void [samya]. It was revealed to me that everything is void. The 
Divine Mother said to me, as it were: “Come confusion! Come delusion! 


Come! [Lag! Lig! Lag bhelki! Lag!|” (K 940 / G 870)” 


66. See, for instance, K 190 / G 225 and K 281-82 / G 299. 
67. For a description of a similar mystical experience, see LP Lii.121 / DP 268. 


278 © THE PROBLEM OF EVIL 


In this mystical vision, Sri Ramakrishna gained direct insight into the divine 
mystery that God is the destroyer as well as the creator. At many places in the 
Kathamrta, Sti Ramakrishna uses the expression “Lag! Lag! Lag bhelki! Lag!” to 
denote the bewildering words of a magician as he performs a trick for his audi- 
ence. He also often likens the magician’s magic to God’s world-bewitching maya, 
which deludes us into seeing things as they are not. Sri Ramakrishna’s vision of 
God as a mother giving birth to, and then swallowing, her baby reveals to him 
that evil and destruction are an integral part of the loving God’s cosmic /#/a, even 
if the finite human intellect is unable to grasp fully why this is the case. From Sri 
Ramakrishna’s standpoint, the destructive aspect of God’s creation appears re- 
pulsive or cruel to us because we are deluded by God’s maya, which prevents us 
from understanding God’s ways. On the basis of his own esoteric mystical experi- 
ences, Sri Ramakrishna affirms the theodical mystery that God is perfectly loving 
in spite of the fact that there is so much evil and suffering in the world. 

Third, Sri Ramakrishna did not appeal to the theodically crucial doctrines of 
karma and rebirth as intellectual hypotheses but as facts revealed to him directly 
through mystical experience. He frequently claimed that he gained knowledge of 
the previous births of many of his disciples through mystical visions. Moreover, 
he privately told a number of his intimate disciples that he himself was an avatara 
who came as Rama and Krsna in previous incarnations (LP Lii.93 / DP 238). 

Fourth, Sri Ramakrishna’s Advaitic experience of nondual Brahman in mirvi- 
kalpa samadhi has radical implications for theodicy. Recall that in his response to 
Mill’s argument from evil, he observes: “One is aware of pleasure and pain, birth 
and death, disease and grief, as long as one is identified with the body. All these 
belong to the body alone, and not to the Atman.... Attaining Knowledge of the 
Atman, one looks on pleasure and pain, birth and death, as a dream” (K 229 / G 
257). He suggests here that the problem of evil seems so urgent to us because of 
our mistaken identification with the body-mind complex. The moment we attain 
mystical knowledge of our true nature as the transcendental Atman, the problem 
of evil will lose its urgency, since the eternal and pure Atman is untouched by evil 
and suffering. Sri Ramakrishna’s theodical appeal to the Advaitic knowledge of 
the Atman is rooted in his own experiences of nirvikalpa samadhi, when his mind 
would merge into the nondual Atman just as a salt doll melts into the ocean. 
Sri Ramakrishna himself reported having been in the state of nirvikalpa samadhi 
continuously for six months (LP Liii31 / DP 419-20). He also frequently 
emphasized that one who experiences nirvikalpa samadhi is “overwhelmed with 
bliss” (K 182 / G 218). The theodical significance of Sri Ramakrishna’s appeal to 
the mystical knowledge of the Atman is evident: the supreme bliss of atmajiana 





68. See, for instance, K 894-95 / G 831 and K 1013 / G 934. 


Sri Ramakrishna’s Multidimensional Response to the Problem of Evil + 279 


will make us look upon our own past suffering as inconsequential and dream-like. 
Crucially, since Sri Ramakrishna accepts the doctrine of universal salvation, he 
also affirms that everyone without exception will eventually attain this salvific 
knowledge of the Atman. An essential part of Sri Ramakrishna’s theodicy, then, 
is his thesis that the salvific spiritual knowledge of the Atman awaiting us all is 
so infinitely rewarding and blissful that it will outweigh all the suffering we will 
endure in the course of our many embodiments. 

Stoeber’s interesting study, Evil and the Mystics’ God: Towards a Mystical 
Theodicy (1992), is quite relevant in this regard. Stoeber argues that we should 
take seriously the “mystical theodical evidence” found in the testimony of such 
well-known Western mystics as Meister Eckhart, Pseudo-Dionysius, Plotinus, and 
Jakob Bohme.® As Stoeber recognizes, however, perhaps the most serious chal- 
lenge facing any mystical theodicy is that of justifying the mystic’s authority: why 
should we zonmystics believe that a mystic’s experiences are veridical? In response 
to this challenge, Stoeber presents three arguments in support of the “theodi- 
cal authority” of mystics such as Eckhart.” First, the nonmystic might have had 
nonmystical experiences—such as emotional or aesthetic experiences—that are 
“somewhat analogous” to Eckhart’s mystical experiences.’ Second, Eckhart’s 
theodical authority is substantially strengthened by the fact that numerous other 
mystics have enjoyed mystical experiences very similar to Eckhart’s.” Third, as 
Stoeber puts it, “though the mystical experiences Eckhart describes are not veri- 
fiable by the nonmystic, they are, according to him and other mystics, verifiable 
by those who undergo the appropriate practices.””? In other words, just as we can 
verify the empirical claims of a scientist by performing the relevant experiment, 
we can verify the theodical claims of mystics by practicing the (admittedly ar- 
duous) spiritual disciplines performed by the mystics themselves. 

Stoeber admits that these arguments are incomplete as they stand, but we can 
strengthen Stoeber’s case by drawing on the arguments in the previous chapter of 
this book.” The evidential force we ascribe to mystical theodical claims depends 
on the extent to which we find the argument from experience convincing. In 
chapter 6, I began to defend the argument from experience and concluded that 
we have good reason to believe that mystical experiences have at least some eviden- 
tial value. Hence, ifwe grant even a little weight to the argument from experience, 


69. Stoeber, Evil and the Mystics’ God, 116. 
70. Stoeber, Evil and the Mystics’ God, 119. 
71. Stoeber, Evil and the Mystics’ God, 119. 
72. Stoeber, Evil and the Mystics’ God, 121. 
73. Stoeber, Evil and the Mystics’ God, 121. 
74. Stoeber, Evil and the Mystics’ God, 193. 


280 * THE PROBLEM OF EVIL 


then a mystical theodicy such as Sri Ramakrishna’s, other things being equal, has 
greater evidential support than nonmystical theodicies. 

My reconstruction and preliminary defense of Sri Ramakrishna’s sophisti- 
cated response to the problem of evil are now complete. The next chapter ven- 
tures into cross-cultural territory by comparing Sri Ramakrishna’s approach with 
both the skeptical theist position of William Alston and the soul-making the- 
odicy of Hick. 


A CROSS-CULTURAL APPROACH TO 
THE PROBLEM OF EVIL 


SRI RAMAKRISHNA, THE ROWE-ALSTON 
DEBATE, AND HICK’S SOUL-MAKING THEODICY 


Although the problem of evil is a perennial one that cuts across reli- 
gions and cultures, most Western discussions of the problem of evil 
have tended to be rooted in the Judeo-Christian tradition. What we 
need now is a broader cross-cultural approach to the problem of evil 
that draws on both Western and non-Western philosophical tradi- 
tions. Building on the previous chapter, I will make a modest contri- 
bution to this cross-cultural endeavor by bringing Sri Ramakrishna 
into dialogue with William Alston and John Hick, two of the most 
prominent recent philosophers to have responded to the problem 
of evil. 

Section I explores the philosophical resonances between Sri 
Ramakrishna’s skeptical theist position—reconstructed in section 
II of the previous chapter—with Alston's skeptical theist refutation 
of William Rowe’s influential argument from evil against God’s ex- 
istence. Alston refutes Rowe’s argument from evil by arguing that in 
light of our cognitive limitations, we are not rationally justified in 
believing that “God could have no sufficient reason for permitting 
some of the evils we find in the world.”! On the one hand, I draw on 
Alston’s sophisticated skeptical theist response to Rowe as a means of 
developing and defending Sri Ramakrishna’s own skeptical theist po- 
sition. On the other, I argue that Alston’s failure to consider Indian 
karma-based theodicies—such as Sri Ramakrishna’s saint-making 
theodicy—significantly weakens his response to the problem of evil. 





1. William Alston, “The Inductive Argument from Evil and the Human Cognitive 
Condition, in The Evidential Argument from Evil, ed. Daniel Howard-Snyder 
(Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1996), 102. Alston’s article was origi- 
nally published in Philosophical Perspectives 5 (1991), 29-67. 


282 * THE PROBLEM OF EVIL 


Sections II and HI compare Sri Ramakrishna’s saint-making theodicy with 
Hick’s widely discussed “soul-making” theodicy. According to Hick, God cre- 
ated this world not as a hedonistic paradise but as a soul-making environment in 
which we can grow into spiritually mature children of God by encountering both 
good and evil. In section I, I show that Hick’s arguments for the necessity of evil 
in a soul-making environment equally support Sri Ramakrishna’s saint-making 
theodicy. Moreover, Hick’s “use of eschatology to complete theodicy”—his argu- 
ment that any plausible theodicy must accept universal salvation—helps clarify 
and strengthen Sri Ramakrishna’s own theodical appeal to the doctrine of uni- 
versal salvation.” Section II then critically examines Hick’s soul-making theodicy 
from the standpoint of Sri Ramakrishna. I argue that Hick’s theodicy, in spite of 
its promise, suffers from major weaknesses, which stem from his assumption of 
a Christian one-life-only paradigm and his neglect of mystical experience. Since 
Sri Ramakrishna’s mystically grounded saint-making theodicy presupposes the 
doctrines of karma and rebirth, it has significant philosophical advantages over 
Hick’s theodicy. Finally, section IV ventures into “metatheodicy” by outlining 
briefly four criteria for comparing and assessing theodicies across cultures. 


|. Skeptical Theist Positions in Dialogue: 
Sri Ramakrishna and Alston 


In his influential article “The Problem of Evil and Some Varieties of Atheism” 
(1979), Rowe argues that the existence of instances of apparently pointless suf- 
fering makes it reasonable for us to believe that an omnipotent, omniscient, and 
perfectly good God does not exist. Rowe formulates his argument as follows: 


(1) There exist instances of intense suffering which an omnipotent, omniscient 
being could have prevented without thereby losing some greater good or 
permitting some evil equally bad or worse. 

(2) An omniscient, wholly good being would prevent the occurrence of any 
intense suffering it could, unless it could not do so without thereby losing 
some greater good or permitting some evil equally bad or worse. 

(3) There does not exist an omnipotent, omniscient, wholly good being.‘ 





2. John Hick, Evil and the God of Love (London: Palgrave Macmillan, [1966] 2010), 351. 


3. William Rowe, “The Problem of Evil and Some Varieties of Atheism, in The Evidential 
Argument from Evil, ed. Howard-Snyder, 1-11. The article was originally published in American 
Philosophy Quarterly 16.4 (1979), 335-41. 


4. Rowe, “The Problem of Evil,” 2. 


A Cross-Cultural Approach to the Problem of Evil + 283 


According to (1), certain instances of suffering in this world are gratuitous or 
pointless,’ in that God could have prevented them without losing a “greater 
good” or permitting an “equally bad or worse” evil. While Rowe admits that he 
cannot prove that (1) is true, he argues that we are rationally justified in believing 
(1) on the basis of our observation of instances of intense suffering in the world. 
Rowe provides the example of a fawn trapped in a forest fire who suffers from ter- 
rible agony for several days and then dies. According to Rowe, the fawn’s suffering 
appears to be pointless, since “there does not appear to be any greater good such 
that the prevention of the fawn’s suffering would require either the loss of that 
good or the occurrence of an evil equally bad or worse.”® 

In a crucial move, Rowe argues that the fact that the fawn’s suffering appears 
to be pointless makes it reasonable for us to believe that the fawn’s suffering is, 
in fact, pointless. There are numerous “instances of seemingly pointless human 
and animal suffering” —such as the fawn’s suffering—that make it reasonable for 
us to believe that (1) is true, even if we cannot be certain that (1) is true.” Rowe 
argues that since we are rationally justified in believing (1) and since (2) expresses 
a “basic belief common to many theists and nontheists” alike, it is reasonable for 
us to believe that an omnipotent, omniscient, and perfectly good God does not 
exist.8 

In “The Inductive Argument from Evil and the Human Cognitive Condition” 
(1991), Alston refutes Rowe’s argument from evil by attacking Rowe’s (1), which 
asserts that there are instances of pointless suffering.’ Alston denies (1) by reject- 
ing the inference Rowe uses to justify (1)—the inference from “so far as I can 
tell, p” to “p” or “probably, p.”"° As we have seen, Rowe infers from “There appear 
to be instances of pointless suffering” to “There ave instances of pointless suf- 
fering.” Alston argues that Rowe’s inference is unjustified because it presupposes 
“an unwarranted confidence in our ability to determine that God could have no 
sufficient reason for permitting some of the evils we find in the world.” In other 
words, Alston defends the skeptical theist position that in light of our cognitive 
limitations, we are not rationally justified in believing (1), which amounts to a 





5. Throughout this chapter, I take “gratuitous suffering” and “pointless suffering” to be 
synonyms. 


6. Rowe, “The Problem of Evil,” 4. 

7. Rowe, “The Problem of Evil? 5. 

8. Rowe, “The Problem of Evil?” 5. 

9. Alston uses the term “gratuitous,” which is synonymous with Rowe’s term “pointless.” 
10. Alston, “The Inductive Argument from Evil? 102. 

11. Alston, “The Inductive Argument from Evil? 102. 


284 ¢ THE PROBLEM OF EVIL 


“very ambitious negative existential claim, viz., that there is (can be) no sufficient 
divine reason for permitting a certain case of suffering, E.”” 

Alston’s strategy for justifying this skeptical theist position is to show that 
Rowe’s (1) unjustifiably rules out various “live possibilities’*—that is, possible 
divine reasons for permitting evil. Alston focuses on the two cases of appar- 
ently pointless evil mentioned by Rowe: the case of the fawn (whom Alston 
names “Bambi”) who dies in a forest fire and the case of Sue, a five-year-old girl 
who is raped and killed by her mother’s boyfriend. Alston concedes to Rowe 
that no known “sufferer-centered” theodicy—that is, a theodicy that shows 
the benefits of suffering for the sufferer—provides a morally sufficient reason 
for God to have permitted Bambi’s or Sue’s suffering."* As Alston puts it, no 
sufferer-centered theodicies—such as Hick’s soul-making theodicy or Eleonore 
Stump’s “will-fixing” theodicy—apply to the cases of Bambi and Sue, since the 
sufferer “has no chance to respond to the suffering in the desired way, except in 
an afterlife.” 

Nonetheless, Alston argues, in a skeptical theist vein, that we are still not ra- 
tionally justified in excluding the live possibility that God has a sufferer-centered 
reason for permitting the fawn’s or Sue’s suffering that has “never been dreamed of 
in our theodicies.”!® Alston then goes on to consider several on-sufferer-centered 
theodicies—that is, theodicies that show the benefits of a particular creature’s 
suffering for others or for God.” He mentions the free-will theodicy and Bruce 
Reichenbach’s natural law theodicy as examples of non-sufferer-centered theo- 
dicies. Alston points out that no non-sufferer-centered theodicy can provide a 
sufficient reason for God to permit evil, since a perfectly good God “would not 
wholly sacrifice the welfare of one of His intelligent creatures simply in order 
to achieve a good for others, or for Himself”'® However, Alston argues that 
non-sufferer-centered theodicies can still provide part of God’s reason for per- 
mitting the suffering of Bambi and Sue.” 

Insum, then, Alston (1991) argues that Rowe’s (1) is unjustified because human 
cognitive limitations prevent us from excluding two live possibilities—first, the 


12. Alston, “The Inductive Argument from Evil? 102. 
13. Alston, “The Inductive Argument from Evil? 102. 
14. Alston, “The Inductive Argument from Evil? 106. 
15. Alston, “The Inductive Argument from Evil? 106. 
16. Alston, “The Inductive Argument from Evil? 109. 
17. Alston, “The Inductive Argument from Evil? 111. 
18. Alston, “The Inductive Argument from Evil,” 111. 
19. Alston, “The Inductive Argument from Evil? 111. 


A Cross-Cultural Approach to the Problem of Evil + 285 


possibility that God has a sufferer-centered reason for permitting Bambi’s and 
Sue’s suffering that lies beyond our ken, and second, the possibility that part of 
God’s reason for permitting Bambi’s and Sue’s suffering has to do with benefits to 
those other than the sufferer. Alston (1991) also specifies some of the cognitive 
limitations that hinder our ability to determine God’s possible reasons for permit- 
ting a given case of suffering, including a dearth of data, the world’s unmanage- 
able complexity, and our ignorance of the full range of theodical possibilities.” 

In his 1996 response to Alston, Rowe rightly points out that “Alston’s final 
conclusion is that he must appeal to goods beyond our ken in order to argue that 
we cannot be justified in believing that God has no sufficient reason to permit El 
[the fawn case] or E2 [the Sue case].’”' According to Rowe, Alston concedes too 
much by admitting that “no good we know of justifies God in permitting El and 
E2.’ Rowe argues that Alston’s claim about the live possibility of “goods beyond 
our ken” is too weak on its own to refute Rowe’s (1), which is based on the plau- 
sible assumption—insufficiently challenged by Alston—that if no goods “within 
our intellectual grasp” are “justifying for God” with respect to El and E2, then 
we are justified in believing that God /as no sufficient reason for permitting El 
and E2. 

In “Some (Temporarily) Final Thoughts on Evidential Arguments from Evil” 
(1996), Alston responds to Rowe (1996) by considerably modifying his skeptical 
theist position. Alston now admits that his 1991 argument was not an effective 
refutation of Rowe’s argument from evil, since he spent too much time rehears- 
ing theodicies that did ot apply to the cases of the fawn’s and Sue’s suffering 
and he did not adequately defend his thesis that Rowe unjustifiably excludes the 
“live possibility of divine reasons unenvisaged by us.’* Alston’s new strategy is to 
“drop the rehearsal of theodicies” and to argue that his latter thesis about the live 
possibility of divine reasons beyond our ken is alone “sufficient to take up what- 
ever slack there is, including 100% if needed.”** While admitting that “we cannot 
discern any sufficient divine reason for permitting Bambi’s and Sue’s suffering,” 
Alston claims that we are not justified in concluding that there zs no sufficient 
divine reason for permitting these cases of horrendous suffering. According to 
Alston, the inference at the basis of Rowe’s (1)—namely, the inference from “I 





20. Alston, “The Inductive Argument from Evil? 119-20. 


21. William Rowe, “The Evidential Argument from Evil: A Second Look,’ in The Evidential 
Argument from Evil, ed. Howard-Snyder, 281. 


22. Rowe, “The Evidential Argument from Evil? 281. 


23. William Alston, “Some (Temporarily) Final Thoughts on Evidential Arguments from Evil, 
in The Evidential Argument from Evil, ed. Howard-Snyder, 312. 


24. Alston, “Some (Temporarily) Final Thoughts,” 312. 


286 * THE PROBLEM OF EVIL 


can't see any” to “There isn’t any” —is unjustified in light of “our cognitive pow- 
ers, vis-a-vis the reasons an omnipotent, omniscient, perfectly good being might 
have for His decisions and actions.’ 

Alston (1996) argues, by means of a series of intuitively plausible analogies, 
that it is unreasonable for us to think that our drastically limited knowledge of 
God’s possible reasons for acting exhausts the range of possibilities available to 
an omnipotent and omniscient being. For instance, he writes: “Having only the 
sketchiest grasp of chess, I fail to see any reason for Karpov [a chess master] to 
have made the move he did at a certain point in a game. Does that entitle me to 
conclude that he had no good reason for making that move?””* The answer is 
obviously “no.” Similarly, Alston argues that in light of the immeasurably vast 
cognitive gulf between our finite human minds and the omniscient mind of God, 
we are never justified in inferring from the fact that we cannot think of any mor- 
ally sufficient reason for God to have permitted the fawn’s or Sue’s suffering to 
the conclusion that God /ad no sufficient reason for permitting their suffering. 
Alston puts this point as follows: 


Surely an omniscient, omnipotent being is further removed from any of 
us in this respect than a brilliant physicist is from one innocent of phys- 
ics, or a Mozart is from one innocent of music, or Karpov is from a neo- 
phyte. Surely the extent to which God can envisage reasons for permitting 
a given state of affairs exceeds our ability to do so by at least as much as 
Einstein’s ability to discern the reason for a physical theory exceeds the 
ability of one ignorant of physics... . Given what we can know of our 
limitations . .. how can we suppose that we are in a position to estimate 
the extent to which the possibilities we can envisage for divine reasons for 
permitting evils even come close to exhausting the possibilities open to an 
omniscient being ?”” 


On the basis of such reasoning, Alston believes he has shown that the inference at 
the basis of Rowe’s (1)—the inference from “Certain instances of suffering seem 
pointless” to “Certain instances of suffering ave pointless”—is unjustified and, 
hence, that Rowe’s argument from evil fails. 

Sri Ramakrishna’s skeptical theist position is akin to, but not identical with, 
Alston’s position(s). As I discussed in section II of the previous chapter, Sri 
Ramakrishna refutes Vidyasagar’s and John Stuart Mill’s Rowe-like arguments 





25. Alston, “Some (Temporarily) Final Thoughts,” 316-17. 
26. Alston, “Some (Temporarily) Final Thoughts,” 317. 
27. Alston, “Some (Temporarily) Final Thoughts,” 318. 


A Cross-Cultural Approach to the Problem of Evil + 287 


from evil against God’s existence by claiming that in light of human cognitive 
limitations, they are not justified in inferring from sheir inability to think of a 
good reason for God to permit a certain instance of horrendous evil to the con- 
clusion that God had no good reason for doing so. Accordingly, Sri Ramakrishna 
remarks in an Alstonian vein, “How can we understand the ways of God through 
our small intellects [ksudrabuddhi|?” (K 105 / G 153). He would also frequently 
emphasize the vast gulf between our finite intellects and the omniscient mind of 
God by asking, “Can a one-seer pot hold ten seers of milk?” (K 229 / G 257). Sri 
Ramakrishna and Alston, then, adopt the same basic skeptical theist strategy for 
refuting evidential arguments from evil—though, as we will see, they differ on 
some points of detail. 

Moreover, many of Alston’s arguments for his thesis about our cognitive 
limitations vis-a-vis God’s reasons for acting lend support to Sri Ramakrishna’s 
skeptical theist position. I think Sri Ramakrishna would have embraced Alston 
(1996)’s chess master analogy, since it shows, in effect, how Sri Ramakrishna’s 
comparison of the finite human intellect to a “one-seer pot” applies to the 
problem of evil. Just as a neophyte in chess who fails to see why Karpov made the 
particular move he did would obviously not be justified in inferring that Karpov 
had no good reason for making that move, Vidyasagar may not be able to think of 
a good reason for God to have permitted Genghis Khan’s mass slaughter, but he 
is not rationally justified in inferring that God had no good reason for permitting 
Khan’s slaughter. 

Alston (1991)’s detailed specification of our cognitive limits also helps fill out 
and strengthen Sri Ramakrishna’s skeptical theist position. The first two of the six 
cognitive limits he mentions are especially relevant to our discussion: 


1. Lack of data. This includes, inter alia, the secrets of the human heart, the de- 
tailed constitution and structure of the universe, and the remote past and fu- 
ture, including the afterlife if any. 

2. Complexity greater than we can handle. Most notably there is the difficulty 
of holding enormous complexes of fact—different possible worlds or differ- 
ent systems of natural law—together in the mind sufficiently for comparative 
evaluation.”® 


Sri Ramakrishna, in the course of discussing the dizzyingly complex and myste- 
rious workings of the law of karma, mentions both these cognitive limits empha- 
sized by Alston: 





28. Alston, “The Inductive Argument from Evil? 120. 


288 © THE PROBLEM OF EVIL 


It is said in the scriptures that only those who have been charitable in 
their former births get money in this life. But to tell you the truth, this 
world is God’s maya. And there are many confusing things in this realm 
of maya. One cannot comprehend them. The ways of God are inscrutable 
indeed. ... There is much confusion in this world of His maya. One can by 
no means say that “this” will come after “that” or “this” will produce “that.” 
(K 196 / G 397-98) 


Sri Ramakrishna clearly rejects an overly simplistic view of karma, according to 
which a virtuous action will always yield material benefit while a vicious action 
will not. Just as Alston emphasizes that the complexity of God’s creation is 
“greater than we can handle,’ Sri Ramakrishna points out that the workings of 
karma ate simply too complex for us to make pat causal judgments about why one 
person suffers in this life while another person prospers. As I argued in section 
III of the previous chapter, one major reason for the complexity of the workings 
of karma is the fact that the law of karma, for Sri Ramakrishna, is not prima- 
rily retributive but teleologically oriented toward saint-making. Moreover, just 
as Alston emphasizes our lack of data about the afterlife and the “secrets of the 
human heart,’ Sri Ramakrishna emphasizes our lack of data vis-a-vis the past and 
future lives of ourselves and others—data which is obviously relevant to under- 
standing the karmic consequences of a creature’s actions. Asa result of this lack of 
data as well as the sheer complexity of the workings of karma, we are often not in 
a position to understand what role a given person’s suffering might play in his or 
her spiritual journey toward sainthood. 

While there are striking similarities between Sri Ramakrishna’s and Alston’s 
skeptical theist strategies, I would argue that Sri Ramakrishna’s skeptical theist 
position—when seen as part of his broader multidimensional response to the 
problem of evil—constitutes a more effective refutation of arguments from evil 
than either of Alston’s skeptical theist positions. Alston (1996), we should recall, 
simply concedes to Rowe that “we cannot discern any sufficient divine reason for 
permitting Bambi’s and Sue’s suffering.””” Accordingly, Alston’s 1996 strategy for 
refuting Rowe is to rely entirely on the argument that in light of our cognitive 
limitations, we can never rule out the live possibility that God had a sufficient 
reason for permitting Bambi’s and Sue’s suffering that lies beyond our ken, and 
hence, that we are not rationally justified in inferring from “I see no sufficient 
reason to permit E” to “There is no sufficient reason to permit E.” 





29. Alston, “Some (Temporarily) Final Thoughts,’ 316. 


A Cross-Cultural Approach to the Problem of Evil + 289 


However, this is a highly controversial argument that has been contested by 
numerous philosophers. Bruce Russell, for instance, seeks to show the intuitive 
implausibility of Alston’s skeptical theism by means of an analogy: 


[T]he view that there are reasons beyond our ken that would justify God, 
if he exists, in allowing all the suffering we see [is] like the view that there 
are blue crows beyond our powers of observation. Once we have con- 
ducted the relevant search for crows (looking all over the world in differ- 
ent seasons and at crows at different stages of maturity), we are justified in 
virtue of that search in believing there are no crows beyond our powers of 
observation which are relevantly different from the crows we've seen. ... 
Similarly, once we’ve conducted the relevant search for moral reasons to 
justify allowing the relevant suffering . .. we are justified in believing that 
there are no morally sufficient reasons for allowing that suffering.*° 


While Alston tries to disarm Russell’s objection by arguing for the inappropriate- 
ness of the blue crow analogy,” it is hard to deny that Rowe-like arguments from 
apparently pointless suffering derive a great deal of their intuitive plausibility 
from the fact that we do seem to be justified in inferring from “I see no divine 
reason to permit E” to “There is no divine reason to permit E.”* Since Alston’s 
1996 skeptical theist position depends entirely on an appeal to the live possibility 
of divine reasons beyond our ken, his refutation of Rowe’s argument from evil 
fails if belief in this live possibility is shown to be unreasonable. 

Sri Ramakrishna’s skeptical theism comes closer to Alston’s 1991 position 
than to his 1996 position. As we should recall, Alston (1991) argues not only for 
the live possibility of divine reasons beyond our ken but also for the live possi- 
bility that a non-sufferer-centered theodicy within our ken provides part of God’s 
reason for permitting a given instance of suffering. As Alston (1996) acknowl- 
edged, the primary weakness of his 1991 argument is that he had to concede that 
no sufferer-centered theodicy—such as Hick’s soul-making theodicy—was a live 
possibility in the case of Bambi’s and Sue’s suffering. From Sri Ramakrishna’s per- 
spective, however, Alston (1991) need not have made this major concession to 
Rowe if he had considered non-Western sufferer-centered theodicies, such as Sri 
Ramakrishna’s own saint-making theodicy. 





30. Bruce Russell, “Defenseless,’ in The Evidential Argument from Evil, ed. Howard-Snyder, 194. 
31. Alston, “Some (Temporarily) Final Thoughts,’ 319. 


32. Lam in agreement with Rowe on this point. See Rowe, “The Evidential Argument from 


Evil? 282. 


290 * THE PROBLEM OF EVIL 


As I will argue in section II, Hick’s soul-making theodicy is not a live possi- 
bility in the case of the suffering of Bambi, Sue, or Genghis Khan’s victims pre- 
cisely because Hick’s Christian theodicy presupposes a one-life-only paradigm 
that makes it impossible to explain how these instances of suffering could plau- 
sibly contribute to the soul-making process. By contrast, since Sri Ramakrishna’s 
saint-making theodicy presupposes the doctrines of karma and rebirth, it is a live 
possibility even in the cases of Bambi, Sue, and Khan’s victims. Sri Ramakrishna 
would view their suffering as the karmic consequence of their own past actions in 
that life or in a previous life. If Bambi, Sue, and Khan’s victims will all be reborn 
again on this earth until they attain spiritual salvation, it is a live possibility that 
the undeniably terrible suffering they endured in this life contributed in some 
way to their saint-making journey over the course of many lifetimes. 

Of course, Sri Ramakrishna would admit that there is still an element of in- 
scrutability and mysteriousness in the cases of the suffering of Bambi, Sue, and 
Khan’s victims, since it is difficult for us to discern precisely how their suffering 
served the purpose of saint-making. To illustrate the element of inscrutability in 
these cases of suffering, we can contrast these special cases of suffering with the 
hypothetical case of an extremely selfish person who undergoes a miraculous eth- 
ical and spiritual transformation as a result of the extreme suffering he endured as 
a cancer patient. In the case of this cancer patient, we can easily imagine how his 
cancer might have been the karmic consequence of his own earlier selfish deeds, 
and we can also directly see how this person’s suffering served the saint-making 
process, since he became a more loving and compassionate person before our eyes. 

However, not all cases of suffering can be so neatly explained in terms of a 
saint-making theodicy. Since the saint-making process extends through many 
lives and the precise mechanics of the law of karma are not known to us, it should 
come as no surprise that we will sometimes be unable to discern precisely how a 
particular instance of suffering contributes to the sufferer’s saint-making journey. 
Nonetheless, the element of inscrutability admitted by Sri Ramakrishna in the 
case of the suffering of creatures like Bambi, Sue, and Khan’s victims is significantly 
more restricted than the inscrutability admitted by Alston: while Alston (1996) 
concedes that we can discern vo divine reason for permitting these instances of 
suffering, Sri Ramakrishna maintains that we cannot rule out the live possibility 
that God permitted these instances of suffering to further the saint-making pro- 
cess of the sufferers. From Sri Ramakrishna’s standpoint, what remains inscru- 
table to us in the cases of Bambi, Sue, and Khan’s victims is the precise ro/e their 
suffering played in their respective saint-making journeys. 

Hence, I would suggest that Sri Ramakrishna’s skeptical theist position shares 
the argumentative strengths of Alston’s 1991 and 1996 positions while lacking 
their limitations, precisely because Sri Ramakrishna’s karma-based saint-making 
theodicy remains a live possibility even in the case of Bambi, Sue, and Khan’s 


A Cross-Cultural Approach to the Problem of Evil + 291 


victims. While Alston (1991) was only able to defend the live possibility that 
non-sufferer-centered theodicies provide part of God’s reason for permitting these 
instances of extreme suffering, Sri Ramakrishna defends the live possibility that his 
sufferer-centered saint-making theodicy provides a sufficient divine reason for per- 
mitting suffering. Moreover, whereas Alston (1996) relies entirely on an appeal to 
the live possibility of divine reasons beyond our ken, Sri Ramakrishna does not, as 
it were, put all his eggs in that one skeptical theist basket. Instead, Sri Ramakrishna 
argues that proponents of evidential arguments from evil—such as Vidyasagar, J.S. 
Mill, and Rowe—are not rationally justified in ruling out either of two live possibili- 
ties: first, the live possibility that a karma-based saint-making theodicy furnishes a 
morally sufficient reason for God to have permitted the suffering of Bambi, Sue, and 
Khan’s victims, and second, the live possibility that God had reasons for permitting 
these instances of suffering that lie beyond our ken. 

Alston (1991) clarifies that his skeptical theist argument only establishes that 
we should remain agnostic about the truth of Rowe’s (1), the claim that there are 
instances of pointless suffering, but does not establish that we are rationally justified 
in asserting the denial of (1)—that is, that there are zo instances of pointless suffer- 
ing. Since any “successful theodicy” would have to take this further step of showing 
that there are no instances of pointless suffering, Alston asks the important question 
whether his skeptical theism is compatible with the project of theodicy.** Alston 
answers in the affirmative: 


[M ]y position is that we could justifiably believe, or even know, the denial of 
[Rowe’s] 1, and that in one of two ways. We might have sufficient grounds 
for believing in the existence of God—whether from arguments of natural 
theology, religious experience, or whatever—including sufficient grounds 
for taking God to be omnipotent, omniscient, and perfectly good, and that 
could put us in a position to warrantedly deny 1. Or God might reveal to us 
that 1 is false, and we might be justified in accepting the message as coming 
from God. Indeed, revelation might provide not only justification for deny- 
ing 1 but also justification for beliefs about what God’s reasons are for per- 
mitting this or that case of suffering or type of suffering, thereby putting us in 
a position to construct a theodicy of a rather ambitious sort. 





33. Recently, Derk Pereboom has defended a skeptical theist position similar to Sri 
Ramakrishna’s—one that supplements skeptical theism with “partially filled-out” theodical 
possibilities. See Pereboom’s article, “Libertarianism and Theological Determinism,” in Free 
Will and Theism: Connections, Contingencies, and Concerns, ed. Kevin Timpe and Daniel 
Speak (New York: Oxford University Press, 2016), 120-27. 


34, Alston, “The Inductive Argument from Evil, 99. 
35. Alston, “The Inductive Argument from Evil? 99. 


292 * THE PROBLEM OF EVIL 


Although Alston himself does not provide a theodicy of any sort, he makes a 
compelling argument for the compatibility of his skeptical theist position 
with theodicy.** Interestingly, Alston specifically suggests that certain religious 
experiences—such as the direct experience of an omnipotent, omniscient, and 
perfectly good God—could provide “sufficient grounds” for denying Rowe’s (1). 
As Largued in sections V and VI of the previous chapter, Sri Ramakrishna had nu- 
merous mystical experiences that have important theodical implications—such as 
his panentheistic experience of vij#ana and his experience of the Divine Mother 
giving birth to, and then swallowing, Her baby. Hence, while Alston is content 
to establish the possibility that skeptical theism is compatible with theodicy, Sri 
Ramakrishna goes much further than Alston by combining his skeptical theist 
position with a full-blown theodicy based on a saint-making teleology and a pan- 
entheistic metaphysics. 

Of course, Alston is only one among many recent philosophers who have 
defended skeptical theist strategies for refuting evidential arguments from 
evil. In a recent edited collection, contemporary philosophers have discussed 
numerous types of skeptical theism, including Stephen Wykstra’s influential 
CORNEA-based skeptical theism, Todd Long’s “minimal skeptical theism,” and 
Andrew Cullison’s “two new versions of skeptical theism.” Philosophers can 
enrich and broaden their understanding of the range of skeptical theist argu- 
ments by considering skeptical theist positions in non-Western philosophical 
traditions, including the sophisticated form of skeptical theism defended by Sri 
Ramakrishna. 


Il. Soul-Making Theodicies in Dialogue: Sri Ramakrishna 
and Hick 


In sections III through V of the previous chapter, I reconstructed Sri Ramakrishna’s 
distinctive theodicy, which combines a saint-making teleological framework with 
hard theological determinism and a panentheistic metaphysics. In this and the 
next section, I will bring Sri Ramakrishna’s saint-making theodicy into dialogue 
with Hick’s soul-making theodicy, as presented in his groundbreaking book, Evil 
and the God of Love (1966). | argue that many of Hick’s arguments in defense of 
his soul-making theodicy clarify and support key aspects of Sri Ramakrishna’s 





36. See the beginning of section III of the previous chapter for a detailed explanation of how 
Sri Ramakrishna’s skeptical theism is compatible with his theodicy. 


37. Trent Dougherty and Justin McBrayer, eds., Skeptical Theism: New Essays (Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 2014). 


A Cross-Cultural Approach to the Problem of Evil + 293 


own saint-making theodicy. At the same time, I identify certain limitations and 
weaknesses in Hick’s theodicy by examining it from a Ramakrishnan standpoint. 

Hick develops a “soul-making” theodicy inspired by an idea found in the the- 
ology of Saint Irenaeus (c. 200 CE). According to Irenaeus, while we were all cre- 
ated in the “image” of God, we must grow into the “likeness” of God by becoming 
spiritually perfect. Building on Irenaeus’s view, Hick claims that God created us as 
spiritually immature creatures who will gradually develop into spiritually perfect 
children of God. Accordingly, God created this world not as a hedonistic para- 
dise but as a soul-making environment “whose primary and overriding purpose 
is not immediate pleasure but the realizing of the most valuable potentialities of 
human personality.’** Central to Hick’s theodicy is his thesis that evil is inevitable 
in such a soul-making environment, since spiritually immature creatures who do 
not feel the overwhelming presence of God tend to lead self-centered lives and 
try to maximize their own happiness at the expense of that of others.*? Hick also 
argues that his soul-making theodicy presupposes free will: “If man is to be a 
being capable of entering into personal relationship with his Maker, and not a 
mere puppet, he must be endowed with the uncontrollable gift of freedom.“ 

Hick is quick to point out that for the vast majority of people, the soul-making 
process is rarely brought to fruition in this life. Hence, Hick claims that es- 
chatology is needed to “complete” his soul-making theodicy: the process of 
soul-making begun in this life will continue in a purgatorial state in the afterlife 
until each of us evolves into a perfect child of God who is fit to dwell with God 
in Heaven.“! Moreover, as I will explain in greater detail later in this section, Hick 
rejects the traditional Christian doctrine of hell—which he believes is fatal to 
theodicy—in favor of an eschatology of universal salvation.” 

The affinities between the theodicies of Hick and Sri Ramakrishna are strik- 
ing. Both Sri Ramakrishna and Hick maintain that God created this world as a 
soul-making environment in which evil is inevitable. They both also agree that an 
eschatology of universal salvation is essential to theodicy. However, their theo- 
dicies differ in two key respects. While Hick appeals to a postmortem state of 
purgatory to explain how a person’s soul-making journey continues after this life, 
Sri Ramakrishna appeals to the Indian doctrines of karma and rebirth. Moreover, 
while Hick claims that free will is essential to his soul-making theodicy, Sri 
Ramakrishna denies that we are free but maintains that ordinary unenlightened 





38. Hick, Evil and the God of Love, 258. 

39. See Hick, Evil and the God of Love, 353 and 237. 
40. Hick, Evil and the God of Love, 266. 

41. Hick, Evil and the God of Love, 351. 

42. Hick, Evil and the God of Love, 341. 


294 ¢ THE PROBLEM OF EVIL 


people have the illusion of free will, which makes them feel morally responsible for 
their actions. According to Sri Ramakrishna, this feeling of moral responsibility and 
the telos of universal salvation are all that are necessary for the saint-making process 
to be valuable and significant, in spite of the fact that God determines everything 
we do. 

While a full discussion of Hick’s nuanced justification of the necessity of evil 
in a soul-making environment is beyond the scope of this chapter, I will focus here 
on two of Hick’s especially powerful arguments. According to Hick, the familiar 
Christian conception of God as the “heavenly Father” points to the profound truth 
that God’s attitude toward human beings is akin to “the attitude of human parents 
towards their children.” Hick makes a persuasive case that God’s parental attitude 
toward His creatures helps explain why He chose to create a world so full of chal- 
lenges and evils of all kinds: 


I think it is clear that a parent who loves his children, and wants them to 
become the best human beings that they are capable of becoming, does not 
treat pleasure as the sole and supreme value. Certainly we seek pleasure for 
our children, and take great delight in obtaining it for them; but we do not 
desire for them unalloyed pleasure at the expense of their growth in such even 
greater values as moral integrity, unselfishness, compassion, courage, humour, 
reverence for the truth, and perhaps above all the capacity for love.... A child 
brought up on the principle that the only or the supreme value is pleasure 
would not be likely to become an ethically mature adult or an attractive or 
happy personality. And to most parents it seems more important to try to 
foster quality and strength of character in their children than to fill their lives 
at all times with the utmost possible degree of pleasure. If then, there is any 
true analogy between God’s purpose for his human creatures, and the pur- 
pose of loving and wise parents for their children, we have to recognize that 
the presence of pleasure and the absence of pain cannot be the supreme and 
overriding end for which the world exists. Rather, this world must be a place 
of soul-making. And its value is to be judged, not primarily by the quantity of 
pleasure and pain occurring in it at any particular moment, but by its fitness 
for its primary purpose, the purpose of soul-making.* 





43, See section IV of chapter 7 for a more detailed account of how Sri Ramakrishna reconciles 
his hard theological determinism with his saint-making theodicy. As note 52 of the previous 
chapter indicates, contemporary philosophers such as Derk Pereboom and Nick Trakakis lend 
support to Sri Ramakrishna’s position by arguing, against Hick, that soul-making theodicies 
are perfectly compatible with hard theological determinism. 


44, Hick, Evil and the God of Love, 258. 
45. Hick, Evil and the God of Love, 258-59. 


A Cross-Cultural Approach to the Problem of Evil + 295 


According to Hick, loving parents sometimes withhold certain pleasures from 
their children and even allow them to suffer in order to foster in them impor- 
tant values including moral integrity, unselfishness, compassion, and rever- 
ence for truth. Similarly, God created a world full of challenges and evils of all 
kinds—rather than as a hedonistic paradise—in order to provide a soul-making 
environment that fosters our moral and spiritual growth. 

While Hick draws a persuasive “analogy” between God and a loving parent, 
Sri Ramakrishna went even further than Hick, since he literally looked upon, 
and experienced, God as his “Divine Mother” and frequently encouraged people 
to think of God as “our Father and Mother” (K 112 / G 159). Hick’s argument 
helps us see the relevance of this pervasive feature of Sri Ramakrishna’s life and 
teachings to his saint-making theodicy. From Sri Ramakrishna’s perspective, our 
infinitely loving and wise Divine Mother has provided us with an environment 
optimally suited for our moral and spiritual growth, and this saint-making en- 
vironment inevitably contains evils, challenges, and difficulties of various kinds. 

Hick also provides a strong counterfactual argument for the necessity of evil 
in a soul-making environment: 


Now we can imagine a paradise in which no one can ever come to any 
harm. ... Thus, for example, in such a miraculously pain-free world one 
who falls accidentally off a high building would presumably float un- 
harmed to the ground; bullets would become insubstantial when fired at 
a human body; poisons would cease to poison; water to drown, and so 
on....But...a world in which there can be no pain or suffering would 
also be one in which there can be no moral choices and hence no possi- 
bility of moral growth and development. For in a situation in which no 
one can ever suffer injury or be liable to pain or suffering there would be 
no distinction between right and wrong action. No action would be mor- 
ally wrong, because no action could have harmful consequences; and like- 
wise no action would be morally right in contrast to wrong. Whatever the 
values of such a world, it clearly could not serve a purpose of the develop- 
ment of its inhabitants from self-regarding animality to self-giving love.“ 


Hick plausibly claims that in a “miraculously pain-free world” in which bullets 
do not kill and water does not drown, the very distinction between morally right 





46. John Hick, “An Irenaean Theodicy, in C. Robert Mesle, John Hick’ Theodicy: A Process 
Humanist Critique (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 1991), xxvi-xxvii. The article was 
originally published in Excountering Evil: Live Options in Theodicy, ed. Stephen T. Davis 
(Atlanta: Westminster / John Knox Press, 1981), 39-68. Hick makes a very similar argument 
in Evil and the God of Love (324-25). 


296 * THE PROBLEM OF EVIL 


and wrong action would be obliterated, since “no action could have harmful con- 
sequences.” Hence, such a pain-free paradise could not foster the development 
of moral and spiritual values. By means of this counterfactual argument, Hick 
claims that pain and suffering are a necessary part of a soul-making environment 
meant to facilitate the cultivation of unselfishness and spiritual growth. 

Sri Ramakrishna, as we saw in the previous chapter, responds to the devotee 
Hari’s question about why there is so much suffering in the world by hinting at a 
counterfactual argument akin to Hick’s: “This world is the /i/a of God. It is like a 
game. In this game there are joy and sorrow, virtue and vice, knowledge and igno- 
rance, good and evil. The game cannot continue if sin and suffering are altogether 
eliminated from the creation” (K 437 / G 436). According to Sri Ramakrishna, 
if “sin and suffering” were absent from God’s creation, then the “game” of God’s 
cosmic //é would not be able to continue. By coupling this assertion with his 
central theodical claim that God has created this /#/a “in order to create saints” (K 
37 / G97), we can develop Sri Ramakrishna’s suggestive response to Hari along 
the lines of Hick’s counterfactual argument. That is, in a world devoid of evil and 
suffering, there would be no distinction between “virtue and vice” and “good and 
evil? since our actions would have no harmful consequences; hence, in such a 
pain-free world, God’s “game” of saint-making would not even get off the ground. 
Hick’s argument also clarifies and supports Sri Ramakrishna’s gnomic statement 
that “[k]nowledge of good is possible because of knowledge of evil” (K 180 / G 
216). Without encountering evil and suffering, we would not even be able to con- 
ceive of moral virtues or spiritual ideals toward which we could strive. 

Finally, Hick’s “use of eschatology to complete theodicy”® illuminates the 
crucial but somewhat understated eschatological dimension of Sri Ramakrishna’s 
own theodicy. According to Hick, the traditional Christian belief in hell—a 
place of eternal punishment for unredeemed souls—is fatal to theodicy: 


For the doctrine of hell has as its implied premise either that God does not 
desire to save all His human creatures, in which case He is only limitedly 
good, or that His purpose has finally failed in the case of some—and indeed, 
according to the theological tradition, most—of them, in which case He 
is only limitedly sovereign. I therefore believe that the needs of Christian 
theodicy compel us to repudiate the idea of eternal punishment. 


On the one hand, God is not perfectly good if He does not “desire to save all His 
human creatures”; on the other hand, God is not perfectly omnipotent if He does 


47. Hick, Evil and the God of Love, 351. 
48. Hick, Evil and the God of Love, 342. 


A Cross-Cultural Approach to the Problem of Evil + 297 


desire to save everyone but is unable to do so. Since the doctrine of hell implies 
one of these two premises, it undermines not only theodicy but theism in general. 
On these grounds, Hick rejects the doctrine of hell in favor of “universalism,” the 
doctrine that every soul will eventually be saved.*? For Hick, only the “infinite 
good” of salvation “would render worth while any finite suffering endured in the 
course of attaining it.”*° Hence, the doctrine of universal salvation is essential to 
theodicy: all the evil and suffering in the world are outweighed by the infinite 
good of salvation that awaits us all. 

As I argued in the previous chapter, Sri Ramakrishna not only shares Hick’s 
belief in universal salvation but also repeatedly appeals to the doctrine of uni- 
versal salvation in the specific context of theodicy. In the course of elaborating his 
saint-making theodicy, Sri Ramakrishna affirms that “[e]verybody will surely be 
liberated” (K 36-37 / G 97-98). Similarly, in his response to Nanda’s question 
about evil, Sri Ramakrishna appeals to the panentheistic standpoint of vij#ana 
and then immediately adds that “[a]ll will be liberated” (K 879 / G 818). Hick’s 
convincing argument for the theodical necessity of universalism lends strong sup- 
port to Sri Ramakrishna’s own appeal to universal salvation. The various finite 
evils of this world do not call into question God’s love, because these evils are a 
necessary part of the soul’s arduous journey toward the infinite good of libera- 
tion, which He has lovingly ordained for us all. For both Sri Ramakrishna and 
Hick, then, theodicy is ultimately forward-looking: we can all look forward to 
the infinite reward of eternal salvation, which will redeem all the suffering we 
have endured in our journey toward God. 


Ill. A Ramakrishnan Critique of Hick’s Soul-Making 
Theodicy 


In the previous section, I drew upon several of Hick’s theodical arguments in 
order to develop and strengthen the saint-making and eschatological dimen- 
sions of Sri Ramakrishna’s own theodicy. In this section, I turn the tables on 
Hick by critically examining his soul-making theodicy from the standpoint of 
Sri Ramakrishna. 

As we have seen in section III of the previous chapter, the doctrines of karma 
and rebirth play a crucial role in Sri Ramakrishna’s saint-making theodicy. Since 
we experience happiness and suffering in accordance with the law of karma, we 
should not blame God for the moral evil we observe in the world. According to 


49. Hick, Evil and the God of Love, 341-45. 
50. Hick, Evil and the God of Love, 341. 


298 © THE PROBLEM OF EVIL 


Sri Ramakrishna, through numerous experiences in the course of many lives, we 
gradually learn to overcome our selfish tendencies and to cultivate virtuous quali- 
ties such as compassion, dispassion toward sense-pleasures, and devotion to God, 
until finally—in our last birth—we realize God and achieve liberation. 

Hick, by contrast, presupposes a traditional Christian one-life-only par- 
adigm, so the doctrines of karma and rebirth are absent from his soul-making 
theodicy. However, numerous scholars have contended that Hick’s adoption of 
a one-life-only paradigm makes his soul-making theodicy vulnerable to serious 
objections.” Building on the work of these scholars, I will argue that there are 
four major weaknesses in Hick’s soul-making theodicy, which stem from his 
assumption of a one-life-only paradigm and his failure to consider the theodical 
implications of mystical experience. On this basis, I will make the case that Sri 
Ramakrishna’s mystically grounded saint-making theodicy is more plausible and 
consistent than Hick’s theodicy. 

First, the very fact that so many people do not seem to make any appreciable 
progress in their soul-making journey in this all too brief life calls into question 
the plausibility of Hick’s soul-making hypothesis. Indeed, Hick himself admits 
that “so far as we can see, the soul-making process does in fact fail in our own 
world at least as often as it succeeds.” If God created this world as a soul-making 
environment, why didn’t He do a better job? The soul-making process seems to 
be thwarted in the case of countless people, such as infants or children who die 
of incurable diseases, innocent victims of murder, and people who are killed in 
natural calamities such as earthquakes and floods. 

In response to this problem, Hick argues that the soul-making process con- 
tinues in the afterlife. Specifically, Hick hypothesizes that after death, we enter 
an “intermediate state” of purgatory in which our “self-centredness is gradually 
broken through by a ‘godly sorrow: ”* The extent and duration of this interme- 
diate state differ from person to person, depending on “the degree of sanctifica- 
tion” achieved at the time of death.* For instance, since the soul-making process 
is tragically cut short in the case of many children who die in infancy, these 





51. See, for instance, Arthur Herman, The Problem of Evil and Indian Thought (Delhi: Motilal 
Banarsidass, 1976), 287-88; Michael McDonald, “Towards a Contemporary Theodicy: Based 
on Critical Review of John Hick, David Griffin and Sri Aurobindo” (Ph.D. diss., University of 
Hawaii, 1995), 22-30; Michael Stoeber, Evil and the Mystics’ God: Towards a Mystical Theodicy 
(London: Macmillan, 1992), 167-87. 


52. Hick, Evil and the God of Love, 336. 
53. Hick, Evil and the God of Love, 346-47. 
54. Hick, Evil and the God of Love, 347. 


A Cross-Cultural Approach to the Problem of Evil + 299 


children would likely remain in the postmortem state of purgatory for a consid- 
erable amount of time in order to achieve complete sanctification. 

Hence, in order to save the plausibility and coherence of his soul-making hy- 
pothesis, Hick is compelled to place an enormous explanatory burden on the 
hypothesis of a postmortem state of purgatory. However, since the existence of 
such a postmortem state is highly questionable, Hick is open to the charge that 
one of the central aspects of his soul-making theodicy remains entirely specu- 
lative. How do we know that such an intermediate state really exists? Indeed, 
one might even argue that Hick’s appeal to a postmortem state of purgatory is an 
ad hoc strategy to account for the many instances of people whose soul-making 
process was cut short in this life. Moreover, even if there is a postmortem purga- 
torial state in which the soul-making process is completed, Hick still has to prove 
that God created zhis (pre-postmortem) world as an environment conducive to 
soul-making. 

From Sri Ramakrishna’s perspective, Hick’s assumption of a one-life-only par- 
adigm necessitates his appeal to an extended state of purgatory after death. Since 
Sri Ramakrishna accepts the doctrines of karma and rebirth, he is able to main- 
tain that the primary soul-making environment is this world rather than a hypo- 
thetical postmortem state of purgatory. In each life, we make a certain amount 
of progress in our spiritual journey toward saintliness, and we are reborn in this 
world again and again until the saint-making process is complete. Therefore, Sri 
Ramakrishna’s saint-making theodicy is far better equipped than Hick’s theodicy 
to handle difficult cases such as that of an infant who dies from a painful disease. 
Sri Ramakrishna could explain this case as follows: the infant’s suffering and 
death played an integral role in her soul’s spiritual journey by helping to exhaust 
her unwholesome karma from a previous birth, and the infant's soul will take on 
new bodies here on earth in order to continue the saint-making process until it 
achieves final liberation. 

Second, both Michael Stoeber and Michael McDonald have made a con- 
vincing case that Hick’s total neglect of mystical experience weakens the force 
of his soul-making theodicy. As McDonald puts it, “If Hick emphasized mys- 
tical experience more, he would avoid an implication that outrages many of his 
critics—the implication that one must wait for the post-death future situation 
to find out whether evil is ultimately justified, or whether the other things Hick 





55. One might point out that Sri Ramakrishna’s saint-making theodicy presupposes rebirth, 
which also does not admit of empirical verification. However, as I discussed in the final section 
of chapter 7, Sri Ramakrishna claimed to have mystical knowledge of the past lives of himself 
and others. Stoeber convincingly argues that this mystical confirmation of rebirth is one of the 
major advantages of mystical theodicies over Hick’s theodicy (Evil and the Mystics’ God, 184). 
See also my brief discussion of the question of the empirical verifiability of rebirth in section 


IV of this chapter. 


300 * THE PROBLEM OF EVIL 


says are true.’** That is, the truth of Hick’s soul-making theodicy can only be 
verified in a postmortem state, since nothing in our experience here on earth pro- 
vides sufficient evidence that evil and suffering serve the purpose of soul-making. 
However, Stoeber argues that some of the mystical experiences of saints such as 
Meister Eckhart and Pseudo-Dionysius do directly attest to God’s soul-making 
purposes and His loving nature and, hence, have considerable theodical force. 
As Stoeber puts it, “Hick can only point vaguely to a future eschatological expe- 
rience to justify his view. Mystical theodicies, on the other hand, claim possible 
verification here and now, a mystical experience of God’s purposes.” 

Stoeber’s argument equally supports Sri Ramakrishna’s mystically grounded 
theodicy. As we saw in sections V and VI of the previous chapter, Sri Ramakrishna 
enjoyed numerous theodically significant mystical experiences, including the 
knowledge of the past lives of himselfand others, the experience of God as the com- 
passionate Divine Mother, the Advaitic experience of the transcendental Atman 
untouched by evil and suffering, and the panentheistic experience of vij#ana. If 
we grant even a little evidential weight to these mystical experiences—as I argue 
in chapter 6 that we should—then Sri Ramakrishna’s saint-making theodicy, 
which is grounded in his own confirmatory mystical experiences, has a significant 
advantage over Hick’s nonmystical theodicy. 

Third, toward the end of his book, Hick acknowledges the limits of his 
soul-making theodicy when he admits that God has “ultimate responsibility for 
the existence of evil? since He chose to create the world as a soul-making environ- 
ment in which evil is inevitable.°* While conceding God’s “omni-responsibility”” 
for evil, Hick argues that his theodicy succeeds in showing that God is nonethe- 
less justified in creating this world, since it is only in such a world that “creatures 
made as personal in the ‘image’ of God may be brought through their own free 
responses towards the finite ‘likeness’ of God.”® This explanation, however, fails 
to provide a convincing answer to a fundamental question: why did God choose 
to create the world as a soul-making environment in the first place if He knew 
that such a world would contain so much evil and suffering? The best response 
Hick can give is that only such a soul-making environment would allow God’s 
creatures to come to Him freely. But is human freedom a sufficiently valuable 
intrinsic good to justify all the evil and suffering that it entails? Since Hick does 





56. McDonald, “Towards a Contemporary Theodicy,’ 45. Stoeber makes a similar criticism of 
Hick’s theodicy in Evil and the Mystics’ God, 4. 


57. Stoeber, Evil and the Mystics’ God, 4. 
58. Hick, Evil and the God of Love, 238. 
59. Hick, Evil and the God of Love, 236. 
60. Hick, Evil and the God of Love, 238. 


A Cross-Cultural Approach to the Problem of Evil + 301 


not justify adequately an affirmative answer to this question, his soul-making the- 
odicy remains incomplete. 

In contrast to Hick, Sri Ramakrishna maintains that God created the world as 
a saint-making environment in a spirit of sportive play (/i/a). However, as we saw 
in the previous chapter, Sri Ramakrishna’ theodical appeal to /i/a is vulnerable 
to a serious objection akin to the one raised by Hick’s theodicy: why didn’t God 
create a better /ia with less evil and suffering? Indeed, in the dialogue between 
Sri Ramakrishna and Hari quoted in the previous chapter, Hari raises precisely 
this objection: “But God’s /i/a is our death” (K 437 / G 436). Significantly, Sri 
Ramakrishna responds to Hari’s objection by appealing to the mystical stand- 
point of vij#dna: since God Himself has become everything and everyone in the 
universe, the underlying presupposition of the problem of evil—namely, that 
there is a difference between God and His creatures—is false. Accordingly, Sri 
Ramakrishna’s saint-making theodicy is completed by, and finds its ultimate justi- 
fication in, a mystically grounded panentheistic metaphysics, which dissolves the 
problem of evil by denying the very presupposition at its basis. In stark contrast to 
Sri Ramakrishna, Hick not only neglects mystical experience altogether but also 
presents his soul-making hypothesis as a stand-alone theodicy. Hence, Hick is 
unable to provide a fully satisfactory answer to the question of why God created 
the world as a soul-making environment in the first place. 

Fourth, scholars such as Arthur Herman have argued that the single most se- 
rious problem for Hick’s soul-making theodicy is its inability to account for what 
Hick calls “dysteleological” suffering—that is, suffering that does not serve the 
purpose of soul-making. Hick mentions numerous examples of dysteleological 
suffering, including mass famines from which millions perish and a child who 
dies of cerebral meningitis.“ Hick summarizes the problem of dysteleological 
suffering as follows: “The problem consists... in the fact that instead of serving 
a constructive purpose pain and misery seem to be distributed in random and 
meaningless ways, with the result that suffering is often undeserved and often falls 
upon men in amounts exceeding anything that could be rationally intended.” 
In response to this formidable problem of dysteleological suffering, Hick admits 
that the “only appeal left is to mystery.’® By appealing to mystery, Hick seems to 
concede that some suffering és in fact dysteleological and hence does not serve the 
purpose of soul-making. 





61. Hick, Evil and the God of Love, 330. 
62. Hick, Evil and the God of Love, 333. 
63. Hick, Evil and the God of Love, 333-34. 


302 ¢* THE PROBLEM OF EVIL 


Confusingly, however, Hick also attempts to justify his appeal to mystery by 
employing the “method of counter-factual hypothesis.’*4 Hick imagines a world 
in which no suffering is dysteleological since all cases of suffering are either “justly 
deserved punishments” or “serve a constructive purpose of moral training.’® 
In such a world, “virtuous action would be immediately rewarded with happi- 
ness, and wicked action with misery.’ According to Hick, there would be no 
possibility of compassion or “self-giving for others” in such a world, since the 
compassionate alleviation of others’ suffering presupposes “that the suffering is 
not deserved and that it is bad for the sufferer.’®” Moreover, Hick argues that in 
such an imagined world, there would be no possibility of doing the right action 
“simply because it is right and without any expectation of reward.” Hick reasons 
as follows: “For whilst the possibility of the good will by no means precludes that 
right action shall in fact eventually lead to happiness, and wrong action to misery, 
it does preclude this happening so certainly, instantly, and manifestly that virtue 
cannot be separated in experience and thought from its reward, or vice from its 
punishment.” Truly ethical action, Hick argues, requires that the reward for vir- 
tuous action and the punishment for vicious action are not immediately manifest 
to us. On the basis of this counterfactual argument, Hick concludes that “suffer- 
ing must fall upon mankind with something of the haphazardness and inequity 
that we now experience.””° 

However, there are some serious problems with Hick’s attempt to explain 
the “mystery” of dysteleological suffering by means of this counterfactual ar- 
gument. Most fundamentally, he commits a blatant contradiction. On the one 
hand, Hick claims that dysteleological suffering is a brute mystery that cannot 
be explained “in any rational or ethical way.’” That is, Hick admits that cer- 
tain instances of suffering really are dysteleological and hence do not admit of 
rational explanation. On the other hand, he provides a rational counterfactual 
argument that aims to show that even those instances of suffering that appear to 
be dysteleological are not actually dysteleological, since they contribute to God’s 
cosmic purpose of soul-making by eliciting in people “compassionate love” and 


64. Hick, Evil and the God of Love, 334. 
65. Hick, Evil and the God of Love, 334. 
66. Hick, Evil and the God of Love, 335. 
67. Hick, Evil and the God of Love, 334. 
68. Hick, Evil and the God of Love, 335. 
69. Hick, Evil and the God of Love, 335. 
70. Hick, Evil and the God of Love, 334. 
71. Hick, Evil and the God of Love, 333. 


A Cross-Cultural Approach to the Problem of Evil + 303 


“self-giving.””* Hence, Hick’s response to the problem of dysteleological suffering 
is contradictory. 

Moreover, Hick’s counterfactual argument itself is flawed because it pre- 
supposes that the only possible alternative to the world as it exists—in which 
suffering is often undeserved and randomly distributed—is a world in which “vir- 
tuous action” is “immediately rewarded with happiness” and “wicked action with 
misery.’ As a result of his Christian assumption of a one-life-only paradigm, 
Hick fails to consider a third possibility—namely, an Indian worldview based on 
the theory of karma and rebirth. According to the Indian theory, while all suf- 
fering is typically apportioned to individual desert, the fruits of virtuous and evil 
actions are often not immediate or apparent to others, both because the workings 
of the law of karma are mysterious to us and because the fruits of karma may only 
accrue much later in life or in a future life. Arguably, then, a worldview based on 
karma and rebirth accommodates the possibility of compassionate and charitable 
behavior toward others without requiring the existence of any dysteleological suf- 
fering. Since Hick overlooks the possibility of a worldview based on karma and 
rebirth, his counterfactual argument fails to establish that compassionate action 
would be impossible in a world devoid of dysteleological evil. 

One might argue, however, that Hick’s counterfactual argument could easily 
be modified to disprove the Indian theory of karma as well. Whitley Kaufman 
presents an argument along these lines: 


It [the karma theory] entails that there is no such thing as innocent suf- 
fering, that everyone gets just what he deserves. But then there can be no 
moral obligation to help others in distress, to protect, to rescue, perform 
acts of charity, or even to feel compassion for a sufferer. Most other theo- 
dicies begin with the acceptance that there is such a thing as innocent 
suffering, that as humans we do not have godlike control of our destiny, 
but are fragile, vulnerable beings, often in need of help from others. The 
implication is a deep moral obligation to help those in need, to feel com- 
passion and pity for those in pain. In contrast, karma elevates the “blame 
the victim” idea into a systematic principle.” 





72. Herman identifies a similar contradiction in Hick’s argument in The Problem of Evil and 
Indian Thought, 76. 


73. Hick, Evil and the God of Love, 335. 


74. Whitley Kaufman, “Karma, Rebirth, and the Problem of Evil: A Reply to Critics? 
Philosophy East and West 57.4 (October 2007), 559. 


304 ¢ THE PROBLEM OF EVIL 


According to Kaufman, in a world governed by the law of karma, people would 
refrain from performing acts of charity or feeling “compassion for a sufferer” be- 
cause they would assume that the sufferer’s pain is, after all, deserved. Hence, like 
Hick, Kaufman argues that compassionate action is only possible in a world in 
which there is “innocent” or undeserved suffering. 

However, Arvind Sharma rightly points out that Kaufman overlooks the fact 
that the doctrine of karma encompasses the dimensions of both fact and value. 
As he puts it, “the doctrine of karma and rebirth accepts the individual responsi- 
bility of the sufferer as a fact but promotes the value of helping those who suffer as 
part and parcel of the value system associated with the doctrine.’” Far from pro- 
moting a “blame the victim” mentality, the doctrine of karma maintains that we 
accrue good karma by engaging in compassionate action and accrue bad karma 
by ignoring the suffering of others and living a self-centered existence. Sharma 
provides an apt analogy to illustrate this point. Just as a doctor treats a lung cancer 
patient even though the doctor knows that the patient’s own lifelong habit of 
chain-smoking was the cause of his cancer, we have an ethical obligation to alle- 
viate the suffering of others, even if we know that all suffering is governed by the 
law of karma. Kaufman is wrong, then, to assume that “innocent suffering” alone 
elicits genuine “compassion and pity.” As Sharma puts it, “One need not be an in- 
nocent victim to be helped—it is enough for one to be a victim to qualify for help in 
terms of the doctrine of karma and rebirth.” 

It would take us too far afield to pursue any further this debate on the ethical 
implications of the doctrines of karma and rebirth.” However, I hope to have 
shown that Hick’s counterfactual argument for the necessity of dysteleological 
evil is seriously flawed because it fails to consider the possibility of a world gov- 
erned by the law of karma. Indeed, Herman argues that the greatest stumbling 
block for all Western theodicies is the problem of dysteleological or “extraordi- 
nary” evil. Rejecting Hick’s appeal to mystery as an unjustified move, Herman 
claims that the Indian doctrines of karma and rebirth provide the only satisfac- 
tory resolution of the problem of dysteleological evil. As Herman puts it, “Thus 
no matter how terrible and awe-inspiring the suffering may be, the rebirth theorist 





75. Arvind Sharma, “Karma, Rebirth, and the Problem of Evil: An Interjection in the Debate 
between Whitley Kaufman and Monima Chadha and Nick Trakakis, Philosophy East and 
West 58.4 (October 2008), 573. 


76. Sharma, “Karma, Rebirth, and the Problem of Evil; 573. 


77. Ankur Barua provides a helpful discussion of the metaphysical assumptions underlying the 
debate about karma and theodicy between Kaufman on the one hand and Monima Chadha, 
Nick Trakakis, and Sharma on the other. See Ankur Barua, “The Reality and the Verifiability 
of Reincarnation,’ Religions 8.9 (September 2017), 1-13. 


78. Herman, The Problem of Evil and Indian Thought, 287. 


A Cross-Cultural Approach to the Problem of Evil + 305 


can simply attribute the suffering to previous misdeeds done in previous lives, and 
the puzzle over extraordinary evil is solved with no harm done to the majesty and 
holiness of Deity.’”? On the Indian view, then, no suffering is truly dysteleologi- 
cal, since all suffering is governed by the law of karma. Herman further points out 
that Indian karma-based theodicies are even stronger when combined with the 
doctrine of universal salvation. As he puts it, “Evil emerges as purposive, designed 
by me, caused by me, and ultimately leading all out of samsara.”®° 

Herman’s arguments help pinpoint some of the key advantages of 
Sri Ramakrishna’s karma-based saint-making theodicy. According to Sri 
Ramakrishna, all suffering is not only governed by the law of karma but also 
serves God’s cosmic purpose of leading a// His creatures to the spiritual goal of 
liberation. Since Sri Ramakrishna subscribes to the doctrine of karma, dysteleo- 
logical evil does not pose a problem for his theodicy. For Sri Ramakrishna, there is 
no strictly dysteleological suffering, since even the most extreme cases of suffering 
are governed by karma and contribute to God’s cosmic purpose of saint-making. 
Hick, by contrast, is compelled to accept the existence of dysteleological evil but 
lands in philosophical difficulties when he tries to account for its existence within 
the parameters of his saint-making theodicy. 

In sum, then, Sri Ramakrishna’s saint-making theodicy shares many of the 
advantages of Hick’s soul-making theodicy but lacks some of its major weak- 
nesses, which stem from Hick’s assumption of a one-life-only paradigm and his 
neglect of mystical experience. Since Sri Ramakrishna accepts the doctrines of 
karma and rebirth and grounds his theodicy in his own varied mystical experi- 
ences, he is in a far better position than Hick not only to explain how this world 
serves as an optimal environment for saint-making but also to justify some of the 
central tenets of his theodicy. 


IV. Toward a Metatheodicy: Adequacy Criteria 
for Assessing Theodicies 


Numerous recent theologians and philosophers have called for a cross-cultural 
approach to theodicy. Mark S. M. Scott, for instance, affirms that “Christian the- 
odicy should invite dialogue with other religious traditions, for their mutual en- 
richment.”" Similarly, Francis X. Clooney has called for a “comparative theodicy, 
which he defines as “the construction of a broad, cross-cultural and cross-religious 





79. Herman, The Problem of Evil and Indian Thought, 287-88. 
80. Herman, The Problem of Evil and Indian Thought, 289. 


81. Mark S. M. Scott, Pathways in Theodicy: An Introduction to the Problem of Evil 
(Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 2015), 213-14. 


306 * THE PROBLEM OF EVIL 


set of theodicies that support and refine one another on the one hand, and, on 
the other, reveal and deconstruct unquestioned sets of presuppositions about evil 
and what counts in explanations of it.” While Clooney’s understanding of com- 
parative theodicy is nuanced and compelling, I think the term “comparative” is 
potentially misleading, since it might imply the mere comparison of static theo- 
dical structures. I would suggest that “cross-cultural theodicy” better captures 
the dynamic, and dialectical, interaction among theodicies Clooney envisions. 
Sections II and IT of this chapter have contributed to this nascent cross-cultural 
endeavor by bringing the theodicies of Hick and Sri Ramakrishna into dialectical 
confrontation. Their theodicies, as we have seen, not only mutually illuminate 
and enrich each other but also bring to light the metaphysical and theological 
presuppositions underlying Hick’s and Sri Ramakrishna’s respective approaches 
to the problem of evil. 

I will conclude this chapter by addressing in preliminary fashion an impor- 
tant methodological issue raised by the project of cross-cultural theodicy. In 
order to bring theodicies across cultures into fruitful dialogue, we have to ven- 
ture into what Nick Trakakis calls “meta-theodicy,’ the project of determining 
“adequacy conditions” for theodicies.* Establishing these adequacy conditions 
would provide a sound methodological foundation for cross-cultural discourse 
on theodicy. Since a full-blown metatheodicy is beyond the scope of this chapter, 
I will only lay some of the groundwork for future cross-cultural work by outlining 
what I take to be the four most important adequacy criteria for assessing theo- 
dicies: ACI, internal consistency; AC2, comprehensiveness; AC3, success; and 
AC4, plausibility. 

ACI requires us to ask: are the various tenets of a given theodicy consistent 
with one another?* In section III, I argued that there is a tension in Hick’s 
soul-making theodicy between his thesis that God created this world as an envi- 
ronment for soul-making and his hypothesis of a postmortem state of purgatory. 
In order to account for the fact that many people do not seem to make signifi- 
cant progress in their soul-making journey in this world, Hick claims that these 
people continue the soul-making process in a postmortem state. The problem is 
that Hick places such an enormous explanatory burden on this hypothesis of a 
postmortem purgatory that he undermines his own central theodical claim that 





82. Francis X. Clooney, “Evil, Divine Omnipotence, and Human Freedom: Vedanta’s Theology 
of Karma,’ Journal of Religion 69.4 (October 1989), 548. 


83. Nick Trakakis, The God beyond Belief: In Defence of William Rowe’s Evidential Argument 
from Evil (Dordrecht: Springer, 2007), 227-50. 


84. Both Trakakis and Eleonore Stump propose the criterion of internal consistency. See 
Trakakis, The God beyond Belief, 238, and Stump, Wandering in Darkness: Narrative and the 
Problem of Suffering (New York: Oxford University Press, 2010), 452. 


A Cross-Cultural Approach to the Problem of Evil + 307 


this world is the primary arena for soul-making. Arguably, then, Hick’s soul-making 
theodicy does not fare well on ACI, since the tension I have identified reflects an 
internal inconsistency in his theory. 

Assessing how well Sri Ramakrishna’s theodicy fares on AC1 is complicated by 
the fact that there are so many different elements in his response to the problem 
of evil. For instance, one can ask whether Sri Ramakrishna’s theodicy is consistent 
with his skeptical theist position. Anticipating this important question, I argued in 
section III of the previous chapter that Sri Ramakrishna’s skeptical theism and his 
saint-making theodicy are, in fact, complementary strategies for responding to the 
problem of evil. One might also ask whether Sri Ramakrishna’s saint-making the- 
odicy is consistent with his hard theological determinism. Doesn't Sri Ramakrishna’s 
denial of free will undermine his theodical claim that God permits evil in order to 
motivate us to cultivate saintly qualities that will bring us closer to God? In sec- 
tion IV of chapter 7, I contended that this inconsistency is only apparent, since Sri 
Ramakrishna maintains that people who have not yet realized God have the illusion 
of free will, which makes them feel morally responsible for their actions. This feel- 
ing of moral responsibility, together with the telos of universal salvation, make the 
saint-making process valuable in spite of the truth of hard theological determinism. 

Overall, then, assessing how well the theodicies of Sri Ramakrishna and Hick 
fare on AC] is acomplicated issue that depends on how we interpret their views. 
One might make the case that Hick’s acceptance of free will puts him in a bet- 
ter position than Sri Ramakrishna to develop an internally consistent theodicy. 
Conversely, one could argue, as I have done, that Sri Ramakrishna’s acceptance 
of the doctrines of karma and rebirth puts him in a better position than Hick to 
explain how this world serves as the primary environment for soul-making. 

AC2 asks whether a given theodicy is able to provide a comprehensive ex- 
planation of a// instances of natural and moral evil in the world. If my criticisms 
of Hick’s theodicy in the previous section are sound, then Sri Ramakrishna’ 
theodicy fares much better than Hick’s on AC2, since Sri Ramakrishna accepts 
the doctrines of karma and rebirth. Hick, as we have seen, is forced to concede 
that his soul-making theodicy is unable to explain certain cases of dysteleologi- 
cal suffering, such as a child who dies painfully of cerebral meningitis. For Sri 
Ramakrishna, by contrast, no suffering is dysteleological, since our suffering is 
always governed by the law of karma, and this suffering serves God’s cosmic pur- 
pose of leading us, in the course of many lives, to the goal of eternal salvation. 
Therefore, Sri Ramakrishna’s karma-based theodicy accounts for a greater range 
of evils than Hick’s theodicy. 

AC3 asks whether a given theodicy succeeds in showing that the goods 
obtained through a given instance of evil really outweigh that evil itself. The 





85. Trakakis and Dewey Hoitenga emphasize this criterion. See Trakakis, The God beyond Belief, 


308 © THE PROBLEM OF EVIL 


goods proposed by Sri Ramakrishna and Hick are similar: the cultivation of eth- 
ical and spiritual qualities, leading to the infinite good of eternal salvation that 
awaits us all. One might argue, against both Hick and Sri Ramakrishna, that the 
good of soul-making or saint-making does not, in fact, outweigh the evils neces- 
sary to bring about that good. However, it is important to recognize that their 
theodicies presuppose an eschatology of universal salvation. For Sri Ramakrishna 
and Hick, soul-making has infinitely great value precisely because it is necessary 
for attaining the infinite good of our eternal salvation. On AC3, then, the theodi- 
cies of Sri Ramakrishna and Hick seem to me to fare equally well. 

Finally, AC4 asks how plausible a given theodicy is. How likely is it that a 
theodicy is true? According to Stump, this criterion requires us to assess whether 
a theodicy is consistent with “uncontested empirical evidence.’®* Similarly, 
Trakakis argues that a theodicy must not conflict with “certain background 
information,’ such as evolutionary theory.*” Of course, everything depends on 
what evidence or information we take to be “uncontested.” Since there is over- 
whelming evidence for evolution, a theodicy that presupposes that God created 
the universe several thousand years ago would clearly be implausible. However, 
there are other theodical doctrines that are much trickier to assess. For instance, 
a scientific naturalist might claim that there is clear evidence that there is no af- 
terlife. As Stump points out, however, “no one has given even a remotely plau- 
sible argument, let alone a demonstration, to show the falsity of the claim that 
there is an afterlife in which some human beings are unendingly united to God.”* 
Stump seems to me to be right about this, although I cannot defend her view 
here. In any case, it is far from easy to show that theodicies that presuppose an 
afterlife—such as Sri Ramakrishna’s, Hick’s, and Stump’s own—conflict with un- 
disputed empirical data. 

It is equally difficult to demonstrate that the metaphysical doctrines presup- 
posed by Sri Ramakrishna—such as the doctrines of karma and rebirth—conflict 
with empirical evidence. Indeed, some researchers have claimed that there is 
strong empirical evidence in favor of rebirth.” For instance, according to Ian 





233-36, and Hoitenga, “Logic and the Problem of Evil? American Philosophical Quarterly 4.2 
(April 1967), 115. 


86. Stump, Wandering in Darkness, 452. 
87. Trakakis, The God beyond Belief, 243. 
88. Stump, Wandering in Darkness, 390. 


89. See, for instance, Jim Tucker, Return to Life: Extraordinary Cases of Children Who 
Remember Past Lives (New York: St. Martin’s Griffin, 2015), as well as Ian Stevenson’s major 
studies, Twenty Cases Suggestive of Reincarnation (Charlottesville: University of Virginia Press, 
1974), and Reincarnation and Biology: A Contribution to the Etiology of Birthmarks and Birth 
Defects (Westport: Praeger, 1997). 


A Cross-Cultural Approach to the Problem of Evil + 309 


Stevenson, there are numerous people who have made empirically verifiable 
claims about their past lives. It seems to me, however, that scientific research on 
reincarnation has not yet advanced to the point where such empirical evidence 
can be considered uncontestable.?” Nonetheless, it seems eminently reasonable 
to hold the more modest view that the doctrines of karma and rebirth are, at 
least, ot inconsistent with uncontested empirical data. Therefore, the fact that 
Sri Ramakrishna’s theodicy presupposes these doctrines does not make it any less 
plausible than Hick’s theodicy, which is, of course, committed to various con- 
troversial metaphysical doctrines in its own right, such as a postmortem state of 
purgatory. 

Moreover, as we have seen, Sri Ramakrishna’s theodicy is based on his own 
mystical experiences: the panentheistic experience of vijfana, the Advaitic ex- 
perience of the Atman, the mystical knowledge of his own past lives as well as 
those of others, and so on. If we grant some degree of evidential value to these 
mystical experiences, then other things being equal, Sri Ramakrishna’s mystically 
grounded theodicy has greater plausibility than Hick’s nonmystical theodicy. 

While a great deal more can be said about the various criteria for comparing 
and assessing theodicies, this section has laid some of the metatheodical ground- 
work for cross-cultural inquiry into the problem of evil. The time has come for 
theologians and philosophers to enrich their understanding of the range of theo- 
dical possibilities by considering approaches to the problem of evil in a variety of 
religious traditions. We need not fear that a cross-cultural approach to theodicy 
may undermine or weaken our commitment to our own religious tradition. In 
fact, I hope to have shown that we can strengthen and deepen our own religious 
commitments by bringing the theodicies of our particular faith tradition into 
creative, and mutually beneficial, dialogue with theodicies of other religions and 
cultures. 





90. On this point, I agree with Hick, who claims that the evidence for reincarnation is not yet 
conclusive. See Hick, An Interpretation of Religion (London: Macmillan, 1989), 369. Barua 
also discusses the question of the empirical verifiability of reincarnation in “The Reality and 
the Verifiability of Reincarnation” (9-12). Barua concludes, I think rightly, that “the belief in 
karma and reincarnation is densely intertwined with various psychological, metaphysical, and 
eschatological themes, so that different individuals, depending on whether or not they inhabit 
specific worldviews, will differ in their evaluations of the ‘evidence’ that is being presented for 


the belief” (12). 


METHODOLOGICAL POSTLUDE 


In a provocative editorial published in the New York Times in May 2016, Jay 
Garfield and Bryan Van Norden argued that philosophy departments which 
regularly offer courses only in Western philosophy have an intellectual and eth- 
ical obligation either to diversify their curriculum by including non-Western 
philosophical traditions or, less desirably, to rename themselves “Departments 
of European and American Philosophy.”! Not surprisingly, the article provoked 
heated debate, particularly on Brian Leiter’s popular philosophy blog.” Leiter 
made his own stance abundantly clear by accusing Garfield and Van Norden of 
playing the “diversity card.” According to Leiter, Anglo-American philosophy 
departments are dominated by an analytic “style of doing philosophy” that has 
resulted in the neglect not only of non-Western philosophies but also of nonana- 
lytic Western philosophy. In the ensuing thread to Leiter’s blog post, Jonardon 
Ganeri made a brief but devastating rebuttal to Leiter that got overlooked, un- 
fortunately, in the cacophony of shriller voices: “It has been well known for sev- 
eral decades that much philosophy written in Sanskrit is highly analytical in style 
(one need only consult B. K. Matilal’s The Doctrine of Negation in Navya-Nyaya 
to see this). So the argument from style itself favours a diversification of the cur- 
riculum and the canon.” Leiter’s mistake, Ganeri points out, is to assume that all 





1. Jay Garfield and Bryan W. Van Norden, “If Philosophy Won’t Diversify, Let’s Call It What 
It Really Is” New York Times, 11 May 2016. Van Norden has recently expanded this article into 
the book, Taking Back Philosophy: A Multicultural Manifesto (New York: Columbia University 
Press, 2017). 


2. Brian Leiter, “Anglophone Departments Aren’t ‘Departments of European and 
American Philosophy;” Leiter Reports (blog), 11 May 2016 (8:01 a.m.) (http://leiter- 
reports.typepad.com/blog/2016/05/anglophone-departments-arent-departments-of- 
european-and-american-philosophy.html). 


3. Leiter, “Anglophone Departments Aren't ‘Departments of European and American 


Philosophy. ” 


4, See Jonardon Ganeri’s comment #25 at 6:52 p.m. in response to Leiter’s blog post, 
“Anglophone Departments Aren’t ‘Departments of European and American Philosophy. ” 


312. + Methodological Postlude 


non-Western philosophies are nonanalytic in style and have little or nothing to 
contribute to analytic discussions. 

In the spirit of Ganeri’s observation, this book has demonstrated the rele- 
vance of Sri Ramakrishna’s philosophical positions and arguments to contem- 
porary debates in analytic philosophy of religion. However, as Amy Olberding 
has persuasively argued in a recent essay, it is not enough for cross-cultural phi- 
losophers to demonstrate how non-Western philosophies can benefit and enrich 
mainstream Western philosophical conversations. Indeed, Olberding astutely 
diagnoses, and interrogates, the “servile” attitude that often underlies such a 
“handmaiden” approach to non-Western philosophy: 


The phenomenon that [Eric] Schliesser describes as servility concerns 
how members of outlier intellectual territories may seek entry points 
into the “mainstream” or “core” by commending the utility of their work 
to those resident and working in the more prominent and prestigious 
areas. Inhabitants of deviant areas of philosophy may in effect promote 
responses such as [David] Chalmers; articulating for “mainstream” peers 
how deviant work can profit conversations happening within the “core.” 
That this is a servile posture is evidenced by the absence of mutuality and 
reciprocity: Such conversations about utility rarely extend into address- 
ing how the “mainstream” might assist the deviant. So the risk here is 
that outliers working in deviant areas are positioned—indeed position 
themselves—akin to “research assistants” aiding others in the “grand proj- 
ect” of philosophy, a project presumably well under way without them.’ 


Olberding should not be misunderstood. She is not claiming that the very proj- 
ect of demonstrating the relevance of non-Western philosophies to the analytic 
“grand project” is fundamentally servile and, therefore, should be rejected alto- 
gether. In fact, Olberding admits that her own work sometimes involves show- 
ing how Chinese philosophy serves as “occasional handmaiden in sorting out 
existing ‘mainstream’ problems.’$ I take Olberding’s point to be, rather, that we 
risk becoming servile when we conceive cross-cultural philosophy exclusively or 
primarily as the project of showing how non-Western philosophies can benefit 
mainstream analytic conversations. She also helpfully indicates two ways that 
cross-cultural philosophers can avoid this servile posture. First, she emphasizes 





5. Amy Olberding, “Reply to Schliesser? Philosophy East and West 674 (October 2017), 1045. 
As this passage indicates, Olberding develops the concept of “servility” first introduced by Eric 
Schliesser in a different context. 


6. Olberding, “Reply to Schliesser; 1045. 


Methodological Postlude + 313 


the need for “mutuality and reciprocity.”” That is, we should strive to show not 
only how non-Western philosophies can benefit mainstream philosophical dis- 
cussions but also how mainstream philosophy can enrich and deepen our under- 
standing of non-Western philosophies. Second, instead of allowing mainstream 
philosophy to dictate the terms and boundaries within which philosophical 
debates and problems are framed, we should explore how non-Western traditions 
introduce “myriad ‘new’ problems, perspectives, and priorities.” 

Throughout this book, I have adopted a flexible and reciprocal cross-cultural 
methodology that strives to avoid the danger of servility. To what extent I have 
succeeded in this endeavor is for readers to judge. In my view, the best way for 
cross-cultural philosophers to avoid servility is to adopt a problem-oriented 
approach that focuses on issues, problems, and debates raised in both Western and 
non-Western philosophical traditions. While I have shown how Sri Ramakrishna’s 
philosophical perspective sheds new light on debates in contemporary philos- 
ophy of religion, I have also drawn on the conceptual resources of mainstream 
analytic philosophy in order to illuminate and strengthen Sri Ramakrishna’s own 
views and arguments. More fundamentally, I have argued that Sri Ramakrishna’s 
unique mystico-philosophical perspective not only challenges some of the fun- 
damental presuppositions of recent Western philosophy of religion and theology 
but also provides entirely new strategies for addressing, and potentially resolving, 
cross-cultural philosophical problems. 

B. K. Matilal did more than anyone to debunk the stereotype that all Indian 
philosophy is “mystical,” dogmatic, or otherworldly by highlighting the sophis- 
ticated and rigorous arguments found in the Indian philosophical traditions 
of Nyaya and Navya-Nyaya. At the same time, however, Matilal did not ignore 
the mystical strands of Indian philosophy. Indeed, an important aspect of his 
cross-cultural project was to demonstrate that mystically inclined Indian philoso- 
phers such as Nagarjuna and Sri Harsa made extensive use of logical arguments 
to “illuminate the mystical instead of deepening its mystery.’ Some of the best 
contemporary scholars working on Indian philosophy have followed Matilal in 
analyzing the arguments of Nyaya and Navya-Nyaya and showing their relevance 
to contemporary analytic philosophy.” 





7. Olberding, “Reply to Schliesser; 1045. 
8. Olberding, “Reply to Schliesser; 1045. 


9. B. K. Matilal, “The Logical Illumination of Indian Mysticism,” in The Collected Essays of 
Bimal Krishna Matilal: Mind, Language and World, ed. Jonardon Ganeri (New Delhi: Oxford 
University Press, 2002), 53-54. See also Matilal’s four other essays concerning Indian mysti- 
cism in Part I of the same collection. 


10. See, for instance, Jonardon Ganeri, The Lost Age of Reason: Philosophy in Early Modern 
India, 1450-1700 (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2011); Stephen Phillips, Classical 


314. * Methodological Postlude 


My book can be seen as an attempt to revive the other, relatively neglected, 
strand of Matilal’s project, which aims to demonstrate the rigor and contempo- 
rary relevance of the work of India’s philosopher-mystics.” In the spirit of Matilal, 
I have militated against the facile assumption that mystical philosophies are more 
dogmatic than rational. Sri Ramakrishna, as we have seen, made subtle use of phil- 
osophical argumentation and logical reasoning to defend his mystically grounded 
worldview. At the same time, I have shown that his mystical orientation was the 
precondition for many of his most original and significant philosophical insights. 

Of course, this book is by no means the last word on Sri Ramakrishna’s phi- 
losophy. In each chapter of the book, I have indicated some of the ways that my 
arguments can be further developed or extended—for instance, by bringing Sri 
Ramakrishna into dialogue with Indian and Western philosophers not discussed 
here, or by considering further objections to Sri Ramakrishna’s philosophical 
positions that I could not address due to lack of space. My hope is that this book 
will inspire philosophers and theologians across the world to engage with Sri 
Ramakrishna as a valuable interlocutor who can offer fresh and insightful per- 
spectives on a variety of philosophical problems. 





Indian Metaphysics: Refutations of Realism and the Emergence of New Logic (Delhi: Motilal 
Banarsidass, 1997); Arindam Chakrabarti, ed., Epistemology, Meaning and Metaphysics after 
Matilal (Shimla: Indian Institute of Advanced Study, 1996). 


ll. Stephen Phillips, it should be noted, has done important work not only on Nyaya 
but also on Indian mystical traditions. See his books, Aurobindo’s Philosophy of Brahman 
(London: EJ. Brill, 1986), and Yoga, Karma, and Rebirth: A Brief History and Philosophy 
(New York: Columbia University Press, 2009). 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Abhinavagupta. An Introduction to Tantric Philosophy: The Paramarthasara of 
Abhinavagupta with the Commentary of Yogaraja. Translated by Lyne Bansat-Boudon 
and Kamaleshadatta ‘Tripathi. London: Routledge, 2011. 

Aikin, Scott and Jason Aleksander. “Nicholas of Cusa’s De Pace Fidei and the 
Meta-exclusivism of Religious Pluralism.” International Journal for the Philosophy 
of Religion 74.2 (2013): 219-35. 

Albahari, Miri. “Against No-Atman Theories of Anatta.” Asian Philosophy 12.1 
(2002): 5-20. 

Almond, Philip. Mystical Experience and Religious Doctrine. Berlin: Mouton, 1982. 

Almond, Philip. “Mysticism and its Contexts.” Sophia 27.1 (1988): 40-49. 

Alston, William. “The Inductive Argument from Evil and the Human Cognitive 
Condition” In The Evidential Argument from Evil, edited by Howard-Snyder, 
97-125. Originally published in Philosophical Perspectives 5 (1991): 29-67. 

Alston, William. Perceiving God: The Epistemology of Religious Experience. Ithaca, 
NY: Cornell University Press, 1994. 

Alston, William. “Religious Experience Justifies Religious Belief” In Contemporary 
Debates in Philosophy of Religion, edited by Michael Peterson and Raymond 
VanArragon, 135-44. Oxford: Blackwell, 2004. 

Alston, William. “Some (Temporarily) Final Thoughts on Evidential Arguments from 
Evil” In The Evidential Argument from Evil, edited by Howard-Snyder, 311-32. 
Angela of Foligno. The Book of Divine Consolations of the Blessed Angela of Foligno. 

Translated by M. Steegmann. London: New Medieval Library, 1908. 

Aquinas, Thomas. Summa Theologica. 2nd ed., 10 vols. Translated by Fathers of the 
English Dominican Province. London: Burns, Oates, and Washbourne, 1920. 

Ashokananda, Swami. 4 Call to the Eternal. Kolkata: Advaita Ashrama, 1995. 

Aurobindo, Sri. The Complete Works of Sri Aurobindo, vols. 10-11: Record of Yoga. 
Pondicherry: Sri Aurobindo Ashram, 2001. 


316 «+ Bibliography 


Aurobindo, Sri. The Complete Works of Sri Aurobindo, vol. 13: Essays in Philosophy and 
Yoga, Shorter Works, 1910-1950. Pondicherry: Sti Aurobindo Ashram, 1998. 

Aurobindo, Sri. The Complete Works of Sri Aurobindo, vol. 15: The Secret of the Veda. 
Pondicherry: Sri Aurobindo Ashram, [1920] 1998. 

Aurobindo, Sri. The Complete Works of Sri Aurobindo, vol. 17: Isha Upanishad. 
Pondicherry: Sri Aurobindo Ashram, [1915] 2003. 

Aurobindo, Sri. The Complete Works of Sri Aurobindo, vol. 18: Kena and Other 
Upanishads. Pondicherry: Sri Aurobindo Ashram, 2001. 

Aurobindo, Sri. The Complete Works of Sri Aurobindo, vol. 19: Essays on the Gita. 
Pondicherry: Sri Aurobindo Ashram, [1920] 1997. 

Aurobindo, Sri. The Complete Works of Sri Aurobindo, vols. 21-22: The Life Divine. 
Pondicherry: Sri Aurobindo Ashram, [1940] 2005. 

Aurobindo, Sri. The Complete Works of Sri Aurobindo, vol. 35: Letters on Himself and the 
Ashram. Pondicherry: Sri Aurobindo Ashram, 2011. 

Aurobindo, Sri. The Complete Works of Sri Aurobindo, vol. 36: Autobiographical 
Notes and Other Writings of Historical Interest. Pondicherry: Sri Aurobindo 
Ashram, 2006. 

Baillie, John. The Sense of the Presence of God. London: Oxford University Press, 1963. 

Bartley, Christopher. “Modern Vedanta.” In Brill’s Encyclopedia of Hinduism, vol. 3, ed- 
ited by Knut Jacobsen, Helene Basu, Angelika Malinar, and Vasudha Narayanan, 
735-44. Leiden: Brill, 2011. 

Bartley, Christopher. The Theology of Ramanuja: Realism and Religion. London: 
Routledge, 2002. 

Barua, Ankur. “Hick and Radhakrishnan on Religious Diversity: Back to the Kantian 
Noumenon.” Sophia 54.2 (June 2015): 181-200. 

Barua, Ankur. “The Reality and the Verifiability of Reincarnation.” Religions 8.9 
(September 2017): 1-13. 

Bhajanananda, Swami. Harmony of Religions from the Standpoint of Sri Ramakrishna 
and Swami Vivekananda. Kolkata: Ramakrishna Mission Institute of Culture, 2008. 

Bhajanananda, Swami. “Philosophy of Sri Ramakrishna.” University of Calcutta Journal 
of the Department of Philosophy 9 (2010): 1-56. 

Bhattacharya, Kamaleswar. Latman-brahman dans le bouddhisme ancien. Paris: Ecole 
francaise d’Extréme-Orient, 1973. 

Bhattacarya, Dines. “Darsan Cintai Sankara-Ramanuja-Madhva-Sriramakysna” 
In Visvacetanai Sriramakrsna, edited by Svami Prameyananda et al., 594-609. 
Kolkata: Udbodhan, 1987. 

Biardeau, Madeleine. “La définition dans la penseé indienne.’ Journal Asiatique 245 
(1957): 371-84. 

Bilimoria, Purushottama. “Toward an Indian Theodicy.” In 4 Companion to the 
Problem of Evil, edited by Justin McBrayer and Daniel Howard-Snyder, 302-17. 
Hoboken: Wiley, 2013. 

Brahmananda, Svami. Syisriramakrsna Upadesa. Kolkata: Udbodhan, 1961. 


Bibliography + 317 


Broad, C. D. “The Appeal to Religious Experience.” In Philosophy of Religion: Selected 
Readings, edited by William Rowe and William Wainwright, 307-16. 
New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1973. Originally published in C. D. 
Broad, Religion, Philosophy and Psychical Research. London: Routledge & Kegan 
Paul, 1953. 

Brooks, Thom. “Philosophy Unbound: The Idea of Global Philosophy.” Metaphilosophy 
44.3 (April 2013): 254-66. 

Bucke, R. M. Cosmic Consciousness: A Study in the Evolution of the Human Mind. 
Philadelphia: Innes & Sons, 1901. 

Cakravarti Thakura, Visvanatha. Savartha Darsini: Tenth Canto Commentaries, Srimad 
Bhagavatam. Translated by Bhanu Swami. New Delhi: Mahanidhi Swami, 2004. 

Chadha, Monima and Nick Trakakis. “Karma and the Problem of Evil: A Response to 
Kaufman.” Philosophy East and West 57.4 (October 2007): 533-56. 

Chakrabarti, Arindam. “The Dark Mother Flying Kites: Sri Ramakrishna’s Metaphysic 
of Morals.” Sophia 33.3 (1994): 14-29. 

Chakrabarti, Arindam, ed. Epistemology, Meaning and Metaphysics after Matilal. 
Shimla: Indian Institute of Advanced Study, 1996. 

Chakrabarti, Arindam and Ralph Weber. “Introduction.” In Comparative Philosophy 
without Borders, edited by Arindam Chakrabarti and Ralph Weber, 1-33. 
London: Bloomsbury, 2016. 

Chatterjee, Satis Chandra. Classical Indian Philosophies: Their Synthesis in the Philosophy 
of Sri Ramakrishna. 2nd ed. Calcutta: University of Calcutta, [1963] 1985. 

Chatterjee, Satis Chandra. “Sri Ramakrishna: A Life of Manifold Spiritual Realization.” 
In Sri Ramakrishna: The Great Prophet of Harmony, 340-47. Kolkata: Advaita 
Ashrama, 1986. 

Chatterjee, Satis Chandra. “Vivekananda’s Neo-Vedantism and Its Practical 
Application,” In Vivekananda: The Great Spiritual Teacher,255-80. Kolkata: Advaita 
Ashrama, 1995. 

Chatterjee, Satischandra and Dhirendramohan Datta. An Introduction to Indian 
Philosophy. Calcutta: University of Calcutta Press, 1939. 

Chubb, J. N. “Presuppositions of Religious Dialogue.” Religious Studies 8 
(1972): 289-310. 

Clark, Ralph W. “The Evidential Value of Religious Experiences.” International Journal 
for Philosophy of Religion 16.3 (1984): 189-202. 

Clifford, W. K. “The Ethics of Belief? In W. K. Clifford, Lectures and Essays, vol. 2, 
177-211. London: Macmillan, 1879. 

Clooney, Francis X. “Evil, Divine Omnipotence, and Human Freedom: Vedanta’s 
Theology of Karma.’ Journal of Religion 69.4 (October 1989): 530-48. 

Clooney, Francis X. Hindu God, Christian God: How Reason Helps Break Down the 
Boundaries between Religions. New York: Oxford University Press, 2001. 

Coley, Scott. “Skeptical Theism Is Incompatible with Theodicy.” International Journal 
for the Philosophy of Religion 77 (2015): 53-63. 


318 + Bibliography 


The Connected Discourses of the Buddha: A Translation of the Samyutta Nikdya. 
Translated by Bhikkhu Bodhi. Boston: Wisdom Publications, 2000. 

Conze, Edward. Buddhist Thought in India. London: George Allen & Unwin, 1962. 

Coomaraswamy, Ananda. Buddha and the Gospel of Buddhism. New York: Harper & 
Row, 1964. 

Cross, Richard. Duns Scotus. New York: Oxford University Press, 1999. 

Dasgupta, Surendranath. 4 History of Indian Philosophy, vol. 4. Delhi: Motilal 
Banarsidass, [1922] 2000. 

Datta, Surescandra. Srisriramakrsnadever Upadesa. Kolkata: Haramohan Publishing, 1968. 

Davenport, Anne. Measure of a Different Greatness: The Intensive Infinite, 1250-1650. 
Leiden: Brill, 1999. 

Davis, Caroline Franks. The Evidential Force of Religious Experience. Oxford: Clarendon 
Press, 1989. 

Davis, Leesa. Advaita Vedanta and Zen Buddhism. London: Continuum, 2010. 

Dawes, Gregory. Religion, Philosophy, and Knowledge. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 
2016. 

D’Costa, Gavin. “The Impossibility of a Pluralist View of Religions.” Religious Studies 
32.2 (June 1996): 223-32. 

Dean, Thomas, ed. Religious Pluralism and Truth: Essays on Cross-Cultural Philosophy 
of Religion. Albany: SUNY Press, 1995. 

Devdas, Nalini. Sri Ramakrishna. Bangalore: Christian Institute for the Study of 
Science and Religion, 1966. 

Dhiregananda, Svami. “Nand Drstite Sririmakrsna? Udbodhan 82.5 (1980): 220-26. 

Dhiresananda, Svami. “Svami Vivekananda o Advaitavada? Udbodhan 65.2 
(1962): 73-80 and 65.3 (1962): 80-81, 138-44. 

Dougherty, Trent and Justin McBrayer, eds. Skeptical Theism: New Essays. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2014. 

Drew, Rose. Buddhist and Christian? An Exploration of Dual Belonging. 
New York: Routledge, 2011. 

Duns Scotus, John. Philosophical Writings: A Selection. Translated by Allan Wolter. 
Indianapolis: Hackett, 1987. 

Eddy, Paul. John Hick’s Pluralist Philosophy of World Religions. London: Ashgate, 2002. 

Edelmann, Jonathan, trans. “Bhagavata Purana 1.2.11 with Commentaries.” 
Unpublished. 2017. 

Evans, C. Stephen. Faith Beyond Reason: A Kierkegaardian Account. Grand Rapids, 
MI: Eerdmans Publishing, 1998. 

Fales, Evan. “Mystical Experience as Evidence.” International Journal for Philosophy of 
Religion 40.1 (August 1996): 19-46. 

Fales, Evan. “Scientific Explanations of Mystical Experiences, Part I: The Case of St 
Teresa.” Religious Studies 32.2 (1996): 143-63. 

Fales, Evan. “Scientific Explanations of Mystical Experiences, II: The Challenge to 
Theism.” Religious Studies 32.3 (1996): 297-313. 


Bibliography +» 319 


Farmer, H. H. The World and God. London: Nisbet, 1935. 

Fenton, John. “Mystical Experience as a Bridge for Cross-Cultural Philosophy of 
Religion: A Critique.’ Journal of the American Academy of Religion 49.1 (March 
1981): 51-76. 

Flew, Antony. God and Philosophy. New York: Prometheus Books, [1966] 2005. 

Flew, Antony. The Presumption of Atheism. London: Pemberton, 1976. 

Forgie, J. William. “Hyper-Kantianism in Recent Discussions of Mystical Experience.” 
Religious Studies 21.2 (June 1985): 205-18. 

Forman, Robert. “Eckhart, Gezticken, and the Ground of the Soul.” In The Problem of 
Pure Consciousness, edited by Forman, 98-120. 

Forman, Robert. “Introduction: Mysticism, Constructivism, and Forgetting.” In The 
Problem of Pure Consciousness, edited by Forman, 3-49. 

Forman, Robert, ed. The Problem of Pure Consciousness: Mysticism and Philosophy. 
New York: Oxford University Press, 1990. 

Forman, Robert. “Pure Consciousness Events and Mysticism.” Sophia 25.1 
(1986): 49-58. 

Forrester, Duncan. “Professor Hick and the Universe of Faiths.” Scottish Journal of 
Theology \ (1976): 65-72. 

Fort, Andrew. “Jivanmukti and Social Service in Advaita and Neo-Vedanta.” In 
Beyond Orientalism: The Work of Wilhelm Halbfass and Its Impact on Indian and 
Cross-Cultural Studies, edited by Eli Franco and Karin Preisendanz, 489-504. 
Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 2007. 

Gale, Richard. On the Nature and Existence of God. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 1991. 

Gandhi, Mahatma. “Foreword.” In Swami Nikhilananda, Life of Sri Ramakrishna, ix. 
Kolkata: Advaita Ashrama, [1928] 2008. 

Ganeri, Jonardon. The Lost Age of Reason: Philosophy in Early Modern India, 1450-1700. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2011. 

Ganeri, Jonardon. “Manifesto for a Re:emergent Philosophy.” Confluence 4 
(2016): 134-41. 

Ganeri, Jonardon. “Reflections on Re:emergent Philosophy.” Confluence 4 
(2016): 164-86. 

Garfield, Jay. Empty Words: Buddhist Philosophy and Cross-Cultural Interpretation. 
New York: Oxford University Press, 2002. 

Garfield, Jay and Bryan W. Van Norden. “If Philosophy Won't Diversify, Let’s Call It 
What It Really Is.” New York Times, 11 May 2016. 

Geljon, Albert-Kees. “Divine Infinity in Gregory of Nyssa and Philo of Alexandria.” 
Vigiliae Christianae 59.2 (May 2005): 152-77. 

Gellman, Jerome. Experience of God and the Rationality of Theistic Belief: Ithaca, 
NY: Cornell University Press, 1997. 

Gellman, Jerome. “Experiencing God’s Infinity.” American Philosophical Quarterly 31.1 
(January 1994): 53-61. 


320 + Bibliography 


Gellman, Jerome. Mystical Experience of God: A Philosophical Inquiry. Aldershot: 
Ashgate, 2001. 

Gellman, Jerome. “Mysticism.” Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, 2014 edition. 
hetp://plato.stanford.edu (accessed 9 January 2018). 

Ghanananda, Swami. Sri Ramakrishna and His Unique Message. Kolkata: Advaita 
Ashrama, 1969. 

Ghosal, Bipin Bihari. Mukzi 0 tahar Sadhan. Kolkata: Udbodhan, [1881] 1987. 

Gimello, Ralph. “Mysticism and Meditation.” In Mysticism and Philosophical Analysis, 
edited by Katz, 170-99. 

Glassé, Cyril and Huston Smith, eds. The New Encyclopedia of Islam. Walnut Creek, 
CA: AltaMira Press, 2001. 

Gocke, Benedikt Paul. “Concepts of God and Models of the God-World Relation.” 
Philosophy Compass 12.2 (February 2017): 1-15. 

Gocke, Benedikt Paul. “Eine Analyse der Unendlichkeit Gottes.” Freiburger Zeitschrift 
fir Philosophie und Theologie 62 (2015): 142-60. 

Gocke, Benedikt Paul. “The Paraconsistent God” In Rethinking the Concept of a 
Personal God, edited by Thomas Schartl, Christian Tapp, and Veronika Wegener, 
177-99. Minster: Aschendorff, 2016. 

Griffin, David Ray, ed. Deep Religious Pluralism: Whitehead’s Philosophy and Religious 
Diversity. Louisville: Westminster John Knox Press, 2005. 

Griffin, David Ray. “John Cobb’s Whiteheadian Complementary Pluralism.” In Deep 
Religious Pluralism, edited by Griffin, 39-66. 

Griffin, David Ray. “Religious Pluralism: Generic, Identist, and Deep.’ In Deep Religious 
Pluralism, edited by Griffin, 3-38. 

Grifth-Dickson, Gwen. Human and Divine: An Introduction to the Philosophy of 
Religious Experience. London: Duckworth, 2000. 

Griffiths, Paul J. Problems of Religious Diversity. Malden, MA: Blackwell, 2001. 

Grimm, Georg. The Doctrine of the Buddha. Berlin: Akademie-Verlag, 1958. 

Gupta, Mahendranath. The Gospel of Sri Ramakrishna. Translated by Swami 
Nikhilananda. New York: Ramakrishna-Vedanta Center, [1942] 1992. 

Gupta, Mahendranath. Svisriramakrsnakathamrta: Srima-kathita. 1 vol. Kolkata: 
Udbodhan, [1902-32] 2010. 

Gupta, Mahendranath. Svisriramakrsnakathamrta: Srima-kathita. 5 vols. Kolkata: 
Kathamrta Bhavan, 1902-32. 

Gutting, Gary. Religious Belief and Religious Skepticism. Notre Dame: University of 
Notre Dame Press, 1983. 

Hacker, Paul. “Aspects of Neo-Hinduism as Contrasted with Surviving Traditional 
Hinduism.” In Philology and Confrontation: Paul Hacker on Traditional and Modern 
Vedanta, edited by Wilhelm Halbfass, 229-56. Albany: SUNY Press, 1995. 

Hacker, Paul. “Schopenhauer and Hindu Ethics.” In Philology and Confrontation: Paul 
Hacker on Traditional and Modern Vedanta, edited by Wilhelm Halbfass, 273-318. 
Albany: SUNY Press, 1995. 


Bibliography +» 321 


Halbfass, Wilhelm. “Introduction, an Uncommon Orientalist: Paul Hacker’s 
Passage to India.” In Philology and Confrontation: Paul Hacker on Traditional 
and Modern Vedanta, edited by Wilhelm Halbfass, 1-23. Albany: SUNY 
Press, 1995. 

Halbfass, Wilhelm. “Research and Reflection: Responses to My Respondents, III: Issues 
of Comparative Philosophy.” In Beyond Orientalism: The Work of Wilhelm Halbfass 
and Its Impact on Indian and Cross-Cultural Studies, edited by Eli Franco and Karin 
Preisendanz, 297-316. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 2007. 

Hamilton, William. Lectures on Metaphysics and Logic, vol. 1. Boston: Gould & 
Lincoln, 1859. 

Hasker, William. “All Too Skeptical Theism.” International Journal for Philosophy of 
Religion 68 (2010): 15-29. 

Hasker, William. “The Many Gods of Hick and Mavrodes.” In Evidence and Religious 
Belief, edited by Kelly James Clark and Raymond J. Van Arragon, 186-200. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2011. 

Heehs, Peter. The Lives of Sri Aurobindo. New York: Columbia University Press, 2008. 

Heim, S. Mark. Salvations: Truth and Difference in Religion. Maryknoll, NY: Orbis 
Books, 1995. 

Herman, Arthur. The Problem of Evil and Indian Thought. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 
1976. 

Hick, John. Arguments for the Existence of God. London: Macmillan, 1970. 

Hick, John. Ax Autobiography. Oxford: One World, 2002. 

Hick, John. 4 Christian Theology of Religions: The Rainbow of Faiths. Louisville: 
Westminster John Knox Press, 1995. 

Hick, John, ed. Dialogues in the Philosophy of Religion. London: Palgrave, 2001. 

Hick, John. Evil and the God of Love. London: Palgrave Macmillan, [1966] 2010. 

Hick, John. God and the Universe of Faiths. Oxford: One World, 1973. 

Hick, John. God Has Many Names. Philadelphia: Westminster Press, 1980. 

Hick, John. Ax Interpretation of Religion. London: Macmillan, 1989. 

Hick, John. “An Irenaean Theodicy.” In C. Robert Mesle, John Hick’s Theodicy: A Process 
Humanist Critique, xvi-xxxiii. New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 1991. Originally 
published in Encountering Evil: Live Options in Theodicy, edited by Stephen 
T. Davis. Atlanta: Westminster / John Knox Press, 1981, 39-68. 

Hick, John. “Mystical Experience as Cognition.” In Understanding Mysticism, edited by 
Richard Woods, 415-21. Garden City: Doubleday, 1980. 

Hick, John. “The Non-absoluteness of Christianity.” In The Myth of Christian Uniqueness, 
edited by John Hick and Paul Knitter, 16-36. Maryknoll, NY: Orbis, 1987. 

Hick, John. “The Outcome: Dialogue into Truth.” In Truth and Dialogue in 
World Religions, edited by John Hick, 140-55. Philadelphia: Westminster 
Press, 1974. 

Hick, John. Philosophy of Religion. 2nd ed. Englewood Cliffs: Prentice Hall, 1973. 

Hick, John. Philosophy of Religion. 4th ed. Englewood Cliffs: Prentice Hall, 1990. 


322 + Bibliography 


Hick, John. “Response to Hasker” In Evidence and Religious Belief; edited by Kelly 
James Clark and Raymond J. Van Arragon, 199-201. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 2011. 

Hiriyanna, M. Outlines of Indian Philosophy. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 
[1932] 1993. 

Hirst, J. G. Suthren. Samkara’ss Advaita Vedanta: A Way of Teaching. London: 
RoutledgeCurzon, 2005. 

Hoitenga, Dewey. “Logic and the Problem of Evil.” American Philosophical Quarterly 
4.2 (April 1967): 114-26. 

Hopkins, Jasper. Nicholas of Cusa’s Dialectical Mysticism: Text, Translation, and 
Interpretive Study of De Visione Dei. 3rd ed. Minneapolis: A.J. Banning Press, 1996. 

Howard-Snyder, Daniel. “Agnosticism, the Moral Skepticism Objection, and 
Commonsense Morality.” In Skeptical Theism: New Essays, edited by Dougherty 
and McBrayer, 294-307. 

Howard-Snyder, Daniel. “Epistemic Humility, Arguments from Evil, and Moral 
Skepticism.” Oxford Studies in Philosophy of Religion 2 (2009): 17-57. 

Howard-Snyder, Daniel, ed. The Evidential Argument from Evil. Bloomington: Indiana 
University Press, 1996, 

Howard-Snyder, Daniel. “God, Evil, and Suffering.” In Reason for the Hope Within, ed- 
ited by Michael J. Murray, 217-37. Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans, 1999. 

Howard-Snyder, Daniel. “Who or What is God, According to John Hick?” Topoi 36 
(2017): 571-86. 

Huxley, Aldous. The Perennial Philosophy. London: Chatto & Windus, 1947. 

James, William. The Varieties of Religious Experience. New York: Penguin, [1902] 1985. 

Jennings, J. G. The Vedantic Buddhism of the Buddha. London: Oxford University 
Press, 1948. 

Jones, Richard H. Philosophy of Mysticism: Raids on the Ineffable. Albany: SUNY 
Press, 2016. 

Kane, G. Stanley. “The Failure of Soul-Making Theodicy.” International Journal for 
Philosophy of Religion 6 (1975): 1-22. 

Kant, Immanuel. Critique of Pure Reason. Translated by Paul Guyer and Allen Wood. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998. 

Kapoor, O. B. L. The Philosophy and Religion of Sri Caitanya. New Delhi: Munshiram 
Manohazrlal, 2008. 

Katz, Steven, ed. Comparative Mysticism: An Anthology of Original Sources. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2013. 

Katz, Steven. “The ‘Conservative’ Character of Mysticism.” In Mysticism and Religious 
Traditions, edited by Steven Katz, 3-60. New York: Oxford University Press, 1983. 

Katz, Steven. “Language, Epistemology, and Mysticism.” In Mysticism and Philosophical 
Analysis, edited by Katz, 22-74. 

Katz, Steven, ed. Mysticism and Philosophical Analysis. New York: Oxford University 
Press, 1978. 


Bibliography + 323 


Kaufman, Whitley. “Karma, Rebirth, and the Problem of Evil” Philosophy East and 
West 55.1 (January 2005): 15-32. 

Kaufman, Whitley. “Karma, Rebirth, and the Problem of Evil: A Reply to Critics.” 
Philosophy East and West 574 (October 2007): 556-60. 

Kaviraj, Krsnadas. Srisricaitanyacaritamrta. Gorakhpur: Gita Press, 2008. 

Kelley, C. E Meister Eckhart on Divine Knowledge. New Haven: Yale University 
Press, 1977. 

Kieckhefer, Richard. “Meister Eckhart’s Conception of Union with God.’ Harvard 
Theological Review 71.3—4 (July—October 1978): 203-25. 

King, Sallie B. “Two Epistemological Models for the Interpretation of Mysticism.” 
Journal of the American Academy of Religion 56.2 (Summer 1988): 257-79. 

Kirloskar-Steinbach, M., Geeta Ramana and J. Mafhe. “Introducing Confluence: A 
Thematic Essay.’ Confluence | (2014): 7-63. 

Knitter, Paul. “Dialogue and Liberation.” Drew Gateway 58.1 (1987): 1-53. 

Kripal, Jeffrey. Kali’s Child: The Mystical and the Erotic in the Life and Teachings of Sri 
Ramakrishna. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2004. 

Kripal, Jeffrey. The Serpent’s Gift: Gnostic Reflections on the Study of Religion. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2007. 

Kristo, Jure. “The Interpretation of Religious Experience: What Do Mystics Intend 
When They Talk about Their Experiences?” Journal of Religion 62.1 (January 
1952): 21-38. 

Krsnasankarasastri, ed. Srimadbhagavatamahapuranam (Anekavyakhyasamalankrtam): 
Dasamaskandhah. Ahmedabad: Shri Bhagavata Vidyapeetha, 1965. 

Krsnasankarasastri, ed. Srimadbhagavatamahapuranam (Anekavyakhyasamalankrtam): 
Prathamah Skandhah. Ahmedabad: Shri Bhagavata Vidyapeetha, 1965. 

Kwan, Kai-Man. “Can Religious Experience Provide Justification for the Belief in 
God? The Debate in Contemporary Analytic Philosophy.’ Philosophy Compass 1.6 
(2006): 640-61. 

Larson, Gerald James. Classical Samkhya: An Interpretation of Its History and Meaning. 
Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1979. 

Law, Stephen. “The Pandora’s Box Objection to Skeptical Theism.” International 
Journal for Philosophy of Religion 78.3 (December 2015): 285-99. 

Leftow, Brian. “Concepts of God.” In Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy, edited by 
Edward Craig, 93-102. London: Routledge, 1998. 

Levine, Michael. “Can There Be Self-Authenticating Experiences of God?” Religious 
Studies 19.2 (June 1983): 229-34. 

Levine, Michael. “Does Comparative Philosophy Have a Fusion Future?” Confluence 4 
(2016): 208-37. 

Levine, Michael. “Self-Authenticating Experiences of God: A Reply to Professor 
Oakes.” International Journal for Philosophy of Religion 16.2 (1984): 161-63. 

Levinson, Henry Samuel and Jonathan Malino. “Who's Afraid of a BEE STING?” 
Iyyun: The Jerusalem Philosophical Quarterly 48 (July 1999): 293-326. 


324 + Bibliography 


Lilla, Salvatore. “The Notion of Infinitude in Ps.-Dionysius Areopagita.” Journal of 
Theological Studies 31.1 (April 1980): 93-103. 

Lipner, Julius. The Face of Truth: A Study of Meaning and Metaphysics in the Vedantic 
Theology of Ramanuja. London: Macmillan, 1986. 

Lipner, Julius. “Sankara on Satyam Jnanam Anantam Brahma’ In Relativism, Suffering 
and Beyond: Essays in Memory of Bimal K. Matilal, edited by Purushottama 
Bilimoria and J. N. Mohanty, 301-18. Delhi: Oxford University Press, 1997. 

Long, Jeffery D. “Advaita and Dvaita: Bridging the Gap—the Ramakrishna Tradition’s 
Both/And Approach to the Dvaita/Advaita Debate.” Journal of Vaishnava Studies 
16.2 (Spring 2008): 49-70. 

Long, Jeffery D. “Anekanta Vedanta: Toward a Deep Hindu Religious Pluralism.” In 
Deep Religious Pluralism, edited by Griffin, 130-57. 

Long, Jeffery D. Jainism: An Introduction. London: LB. Tauris, 2009. 

Long, Jeffery D. “Like a Dog’s Curly Tail: A Hindu Theodicy in the Tradition of 
Sri Ramakrishna.” In Comparing Faithfully: Insights for Systematic Theological 
Reflection, edited by Michelle Voss Roberts, 107-25. New York: Fordham University 
Press, 2016. 

Long, Jeffery D. “(Tentatively) Putting the Pieces Together: Comparative Theology in 
the Tradition of Sri Ramakrishna.” In The New Comparative Theology, edited by 
Francis X. Clooney, 151-70. London: Continuum, 2010. 

Long, Jeffery D.A Vision for Hinduism. New York: 1.B. Tauris, 2007. 

Loy, David. Nonduality: A Study in Comparative Philosophy. New Haven: Yale 
University Press, 1988. 

Mackie, J. L. “Evil and Omnipotence.” Mind 64 (April 1955): 200-212. 

Madaio, James. “Rethinking Neo-Vedanta: Swami Vivekananda and the Selective 
Historiography of Advaita Vedanta.” Religions 8 (2017): 1-12. 

Maharaj, Ayon. “Asminnasya ca tadyogam sasti: Swami Vivekananda’ Interpretation of 
Brahmasitra 1.1.19 as a Hermeneutic Basis for Samanvayi Vedanta.” In The Life, 
Legacy, and Contemporary Relevance of Swami Vivekananda: New Reflections, ed- 
ited by Rita Sherma and James McHugh. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield, 
forthcoming. 

Maharaj, Ayon. “God Is Infinite, and the Paths to God Are Infinite’: A Reconstruction 
and Defense of Sri Ramakrishna’s Vijiana-Based Model of Religious Pluralism.” 

Journal of Religion 97.2 (April 2017): 181-213. 

Maharaj, Ayon. “Hard Theological Determinism and the Illusion of Free Will: Sri 
Ramakrishna Meets Lord Kames, Saul Smilansky, and Derk Pereboom.” Journal of 
World Philosophies, forthcoming in December 2018. 

Maharaj, Ayon. “Sri Ramakrishna’s Philosophy of Vijfana Vedanta.” International 
Journal of Hindu Studies 21.1 (April 2017): 25-54. 

Maharaj, Ayon. “Toward a New Hermeneutics of the Bhagavad Gita: Sri Ramakrishna, 
Sri Aurobindo, and the Secret of Vijiana.” Philosophy East and West 65.4 (October 
2015): 1209-33. 


Bibliography + 325 


Maharaj, Nisargadatta. I Am That: Conversations with Sri Nisargadatta Maharaj. 
‘Translated by Maurice Frydman. Bombay: Chetana, 1978. 

Maharshi, Ramana. Talks with Ramana Maharshi. ‘Translated by Munagala 
Venkatramaiah. Tiruvannamalai: Sri Ramanasramam, 1963. 

Maitzen, Stephen. “Agnosticism, Skeptical Theism, and Moral Obligation.” In Skeptical 
Theism, edited by Dougherty and McBrayer, 277-92. 

Malinar, Angelika. The Bhagavadgita: Doctrines and Contexts. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 2007. 

Malkovsky, Bradley. The Role of Divine Grace in the Soteriology of Samkaracarya. 
Leiden: Brill, 2001. 

Marion, Jean-Luc. Dieu sans létre: Hors-texte. Paris: Librairie Arthéme Fayard, 1982. 

Marion, Jean-Luc. God without Being. ‘Translated by Thomas Carlson. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2012. 

Martin, C. B. Religious Belief. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1959. 

Martin, Michael. “The Principle of Credulity and Religious Experience.” Religious 
Studies 22.1 (March 1986): 79-93. 

Matchett, Freda. “The Teaching of Ramakrishna in Relation to the Hindu Tradition 
and as Interpreted by Vivekananda.” Religion 11 (1981): 171-84. 

Matilal, B. K. “The Logical Illumination of Indian Mysticism.” In The Collected Essays 
of Bimal Krishna Matilal: Mind, Language and World, edited by Jonardon Ganeri, 
38-64. New Delhi: Oxford University Press, 2002. 

Matilal, B. K. “A Note on Samkara’s Theodicy” Journal of Indian Philosophy 20.4 
(December 1992): 363-76. 

McBrayer, Justin. “Skeptical Theism.” Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy. http://www. 
iep.utm.edu (accessed 9 January 2018). 

McBrayer, Justin. “Skeptical Theism.” Philosophy Compass 5.7 (2010): 611-23. 

McCloskey, H. J. “The Problem of Evil.” Journal of Bible and Religion 30 (1962): 187-97. 

McDonald, Michael. “Towards a Contemporary Theodicy: Based on Critical Review 
of John Hick, David Griffin and Sri Aurobindo.” Ph.D. dissertation, University of 
Hawaii, 1995. 

McKim, Robert. Ox Religious Diversity. New York: Oxford University Press, 2012. 

Mill, John Stuart. The Collected Works of John Stuart Mill, vol. 1: Autobiography and 
Literary Essays. Edited by John M. Robson and Jack Stillinger. Toronto: University 
of Toronto Press, 1981. 

Mill, John Stuart. Three Essays on Religion. 4th ed. London: Longmans, Green, Reader, 
& Dyer, 1875. 

Mills, Ethan. “From Comparative to Cross-Cultural Philosophy.’ In Comparative 
Philosophy Today and Tomorrow, edited by Sarah Mattice, Geoff Ashton, and 
Joshua Kimber, 120-28. New Castle upon Tyne, UK: Cambridge Scholars 
Publishing, 2009. 

The Minor Anthologies of the Pali Canon. Translated by Frank Woodward. London: 
Oxford University Press, 1948. 


326 + Bibliography 


Mohanty, J. N. “Yato Mat Tato Path.” In Sri Ramakrishna’s Ideas and Our Times: A 
Retrospect on His 175th Birth Anniversary, 121-26. Kolkata: Ramakrishna Mission 
Institute of Culture, 2013. 

Moore, Adrian. The Infinite. 2nd ed. London: Routledge, 2001. 

Morales, Frank. Radical Universalism: Does Hinduism Teach That All Religions Are the 
Same? New Delhi: Voice of India, 2008. 

Moran, Dermot. “Nicholas of Cusa and Modern Philosophy.” In The Cambridge 
Companion to Renaissance Philosophy, edited by James Hankins, 173-92. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2007. 

Mullins, R. T. “The Difficulty with Demarcating Pantheism.” Sophia 55.3 (September 
2016): 325-46. 

Mumukshananda, Swami. “Vedanta: Concepts and Application through Sri 
Ramakrishna’s Life” In Vedanta: Concepts and Application, 292-316. Kolkata: 
Ramakrishna Mission Institute of Culture, 2000. 

Murti, T. R. V. The Central Philosophy of Buddhism: A Study of the Madhyamika System. 
London: George Allen & Unwin, 1955. 

Nakamura, Hajime. Indian Buddhism. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1987. 

Neevel, Walter. “The Transformation of Sri Ramakrishna.” In Hinduism: New Essays in 
the History of Religions, edited by B. L. Smith, 53-97. Leiden: Brill, 1976. 

Netland, Harold. “Professor Hick on Religious Pluralism.” Religious Studies 22 
(1986): 249-61. 

Neufeldt, R. W. “The Response of the Ramakrishna Mission.” In Modern Indian 
Responses to Religious Pluralism, edited by Harold Coward, 65-84. Albany, NY: 
SUNY Press, 1987. 

Nicholas of Cusa. De Pace Fidei and Cribratio Alkorani: Translation and Analysis. 2nd 
ed. Translated by Jasper Hopkins. Minneapolis: A.J. Banning Press, 1994. 

Nicholas of Cusa. On Learned Ignorance: A Translation and an Appraisal of De Docta 
Ignorantia. 2nd ed. Translated by Jasper Hopkins. Minneapolis: A.J. Banning Press, 1985. 

Nicholson, Andrew. “Vivekananda’s Non-dual Ethics in the History of Vedanta.” In The 
Life, Legacy, and Contemporary Relevance of Swami Vivekananda: New Reflections, 
edited by Rita Sherma and James McHugh. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield, 
forthcoming. 

Oakes, Robert. “Mysticism, Veridicality, and Modality.” Faith and Philosophy 2.3 (July 
1985): 217-35. 

Oakes, Robert. “Religious Experience and Epistemological Miracles: A Moderate 
Defense of Theistic Mysticism.” International Journal for Philosophy of Religion 12 
(1981): 97-110. 

Oakes, Robert. “Religious Experience and Rational Certainty.’ Religious Studies 12 
(1976): 311-18. 

Oakes, Robert. “Religious Experience, Self-Authentication, and Modality De Re: A 
Prolegomenon.” American Philosophical Quarterly 16.3 (July 1979): 217-24. 


Bibliography + 327 


Oakes, Robert. “Transparent Veridicality and Phenomenological Imposters: The 
Telling Issue.” Faith and Philosophy 22.4 (October 2005): 413-25. 

O’Hear, Anthony. Experience, Explanation and Faith: An Introduction to the Philosophy 
of Religion. London: Routledge, 1984. 

Olberding, Amy. “Reply to Schliesser.” Philosophy East and West 674 (October 
2017): 1044-48. 

Olson, Carl. The Mysterious Play of Kali: An Interpretive Study of Ramakrishna. 
Atlanta: Scholars Press, 1990. 

Omkarananda, Svami. “Brahma o Sakti abhed” Udbodhan 66.5 (1964): 227-32. 

Omkarananda, Svami. “Nitya 0 Lila.’ Udbodhan 66.6 (1964): 287-96. 

Oppy, Graham. Describing Gods: An Investigation into Divine Attributes. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2014. 

Pandit, B. N. The Mirror of Self-Supremacy or Svatantrya-Darpana. New Delhi: 
Munshiram Manoharlal, 1993. 

Panikkar, Raimundo. “The Invisible Harmony: A Universal Theory of Religion or a 
Cosmic Confidence in Reality?” In Toward a Universal Theology of Religion, edited 
by Leonard Swidler, 118-53. Maryknoll, NY: Orbis Books, 1987. 

Pannenberg, Wolfhart. Systematic Theology, vol. 1. Translated by Geoffrey Bromiley. 
London: T & T Clark, [1994] 2004. 

Parsons, William B. The Enigma of the Oceanic Feeling: Revisioning the Psychoanalytic 
Theory of Mysticism. New York: Oxford University Press, 1999. 

Pereboom, Derk. “Libertarianism and Theological Determinism.” In Free Will and 
Theism: Connections, Contingencies, and Concerns, edited by Kevin Timpe and 
Daniel Speak, 112-31. New York: Oxford University Press, 2016. 

Perovich, Anthony. “Does the Philosophy of Mysticism Rest on a Mistake?” In The 
Problem of Pure Consciousness, edited by Forman, 237-53. 

Perrett, Roy. “Karma and the Problem of Suffering.” Sophia 24.1 (April 1985): 4-10. 

Phillips, Stephen. Aurobindo’s Philosophy of Brahman. London: EJ. Brill, 1986. 

Phillips, Stephen. Classical Indian Metaphysics: Refutations of Realism and the Emergence 
of New Logic. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1997. 

Phillips, Stephen. Yoga, Karma, and Rebirth: A Brief History and Philosophy. 
New York: Columbia University Press, 2009. 

Peterson, Michael et al., eds. Reason and Religious Belief: 4th ed. New York: Oxford 
University Press, 2009. 

Plantinga, Alvin. “Reason and Belief in God.” In Faith and Rationality: Reason and 
Belief in God, edited by Alvin Plantinga and Nicholas Wolterstorff, 16-93. Notre 
Dame: University of Notre Dame Press, 1983. 

Plantinga, Alvin. Warranted Christian Belief’ New York: Oxford University 
Press, 2004. 

Pletcher, Galen. “Agreement among Mystics.” Sophia 11.2 (July 1972): 5-15. 

Prabhananda, Swami. More about Ramakrishna. Kolkata: Advaita Ashrama, 1993. 


328 + Bibliography 


Prabhananda, Svami. “Kathamrte Sriramakrsner Mat ki Visistadvaitavada?? In Svami 
Vivekananda Smarak, \-7. Kolkata: Bidhannagar Vivekananda Smarak Samity, 2012. 

Prajanananda, Svami. Vani o Vicar: Sriramakrsnakathamrter Vyakhya Vislesan. 8 vols. 
Kolkata: Sri Ramakrishna Vedanta Math, 1974-95. 

Priest, Graham. Beyond the Limits of Thought. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 1995. 

Prigge, Norman and Gary E. Kessler. “Is Mystical Experience Everywhere the Same?” In 
The Problem of Pure Consciousness, edited by Forman, 269-87. 

Pritchard, Duncan. “Faith and Reason.” Royal Institute of Philosophy Supplement 81 
(2017): 101-18. 

Prothero, Stephen. God Is Not One. New York: HarperOne, 2010. 

Proudfoot, ‘Wayne. Religious Experience. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1985. 

Pruss, Alexander R. “Sceptical Theism, the Butterfly Effect and Bracketing the 
Unknown.” Royal Institute of Philosophy Supplement 81 (2017): 71-86. 

Pseudo-Dionysius. The Mystical Theology. In Dionysius the Areopagite: On the Divine 
Names and the Mystical Theology, translated by C. E. Rolt, 191-201. London: Society 
for Promoting Christian Knowledge, 1920. 

Race, Alan. Christians and Religious Pluralism: Patterns in the Christian Theology of 
Religions. London: SCM Press, 1983. 

Radhakrishnan, Sarvepalli. The Bhagavadgita. New Delhi: HarperCollins, [1928] 2010. 

Radhakrishnan, Sarvepalli. The Brahma Sitra: The Philosophy of Spiritual Life. 
London: George Allen & Unwin, 1960. 

Radhakrishnan, Sarvepalli. Az Idealist View of Life. New Delhi: HarperCollins, 
[1932] 2001. 

Radhakrishnan, Sarvepalli. “The Philosophy of the Upanisads.” In Sarvepalli 
Radhakrishnan, Indian Philosophy, vol. 1, 106-220. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 1923. 

Radhakrishnan, Sarvepalli. “Swami Vivekananda and Young India.” Prabuddha Bharata 
68.5 (May 1963): 183-84. 

Ramanyja. Sribhasyam. 2 vols. Edited by Lalitakrishna Goswami. Delhi: Chaukhamba, 
2000. 

Ramanuja. The Vedanta-Sitras with the Commentary by Ramanuja: Part III. Translated 
and edited by George Thibaut. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1904. 

Ramanuja. Vedarthasangraha. Translated by S. S. Raghavachar. Kolkata: Advaita 
Ashrama, 2002. 

Reichenbach, Bruce. The Law of Karma: A Philosophical Study. London: Macmillan, 1990. 

Reigle, David. “The Atman-Brahman in Ancient Buddhism” In Kamaleswar 
Bhattacharya, The Atman-Brahman in Ancient Buddhism, ix-xviii. Cotopaxi, 
CO: Canon Publications, 2015. 

Reigle, David and Nancy Reigle. “Atman/Anatman in Buddhism and Its Implication 
for the Wisdom Tradition.” In David and Nancy Reigle, Studies in the Wisdom 
Tradition, 1-28. Eastern School Press, 2015. 


Bibliography + 329 


Roberts, Bernadette. The Experience of No-Self: Albany: SUNY Press, 1993. 

Rowe, William. “The Evidential Argument from Evil: A Second Look. In The 
Evidential Argument from Evil, edited by Howard-Snyder, 262-85. 

Rowe, William. “Evil and Theodicy.” Philosophical Topics 16 (1988): 119-32. 

Rowe, William. “The Problem of Evil and Some Varieties of Atheism.” In The Evidential 
Argument from Evil, edited by Howard-Snyder, 1-1. Originally published in 
American Philosophy Quarterly 16.4 (1979): 335-41. 

Rowe, William. “Religious Experience and the Principle of Credulity.” International 
Journal for Philosophy of Religion 13 (1982): 85-92. 

Ruhmkorff, Samuel. “The Incompatibility Problem and Religious Pluralism beyond 
Hick.” Philosophy Compass 8.5 (2013): 510-22. 

Russell, Bertrand. Religion and Science. London: Oxford University Press, 1935. 

Russell, Bertrand. “Why I Am Not a Christian.” In Bertrand Russell, Why Am Not a 
Christian, 1-19. London: Routledge, 2004. 

Russell, Bruce. “Defenseless.” In The Evidential Argument from Evil, edited by 
Howard-Snyder, 193-205. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1996. 

Rhys Davids, C. A. F. Outlines of Buddhism. London: Methuen, 1934. 

Saradananda, Swami. Svi Ramakrishna and His Divine Play. Translated by Swami 
Chetanananda. St. Louis: Vedanta Society of St. Louis, 2003. 

Saradananda, Svami. Svisriramakrsnalilaprasanga. 2 vols. Kolkata: Udbodhan, 
[1909-19] 2009. 

Sarma, Debabrata Sen. “The Spiritual Life of Ramakrishna and His Gospel in the 
Light of Kashmir Shaivism.” In Svi Ramakrishna: Myriad Facets, 394-412. 
Kolkata: Ramakrishna Mission Institute of Culture, 2011. 

Schmidt-Leukel, Perry. “Exclusivism, Inclusivism, Pluralism: The  Tripolar 
Typology—Clarified and Reaffirmed.” In The Myth of Religious Superiority, edited 
by Paul Knitter, 13-27. Maryknoll, NY: Orbis Books, 2005. 

Schmidt-Leukel, Perry. Understanding Buddhism. Delhi: Pentagon Press, 2007. 

Schuon, Frithjof. The Transcendent Unity of Religions. Wheaton, IL: Quest Books, 1984. 

Schwartz, Andrew. “Epistemic Justification and Religious Truth Claims: Heim’s More 
Pluralistic Hypothesis.” Claremont Journal of Religion 1.1 (January 2012): 54-69. 

Scott, Mark S. M. Pathways in Theodicy: An Introduction to the Problem of Evil. 
Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 2015. 

Sen, Amiya P. Ramakrishna Paramahamsa: The Sadhaka of Dakshineswar. New 
Delhi: Penguin, 2010. 

Sen, Amiya P. “Universality and Sri Ramakrishna: An Historical and Philosophical 
Reappraisal.” Studies in Humanities and Social Sciences 6.1 (1999): 79-100. 

Sen, Amiya Prosad. Three Essays on Sri Ramakrishna and His Times. Shimla: Indian 
Institute of Advanced Study, 2001. 

Sengupta, Santosh Chandra. “The Misunderstanding of Hinduism” In Truth and 
Dialogue in World Religions, edited by John Hick, 96-110. Philadelphia: Westminster 
Press, 1974. 


330 « Bibliography 


Sharma, Arvind. “Karma, Rebirth, and the Problem of Evil: An Interjection in the 
Debate between Whitley Kaufman and Monima Chadha and Nick Trakakis.” 
Philosophy East and West 58.4 (Oct. 2008): 572-75. 

Sharma, Arvind. Ramakrishna and Vivekananda: New Perspectives. Bangalore: Sterling 
Publishers, 1989. 

Siderits, Mark. Personal Identity and Buddhist Philosophy: Empty Persons. Burlington, 
VT: Ashgate, 2003. 

Sil, Narasingha. “Is Ramakrishna a Vedantin, a Tantrika or a Vaishnava? An 
Examination.’ Asian Studies Review 21.2 (Nov. 1997): 212-24. 

Sil, Narasingha. “Kali’s Child and Krishna’s Lover: An Anatomy of Ramakrishna’s 
Caritas Divina. Religion 29.3 (September 2009): 289-98. 

Sil, Narasingha. Ramakrishna Revisited: A New Biography. Lanham, MD: University 
Press of America, 1998. 

Sil, Narasingha. Ramakrsna Paramahamsa: A Psychological Profile. New York: EJ. 
Brill, 1991. 

Singh, Jaideva. Vedanta and Advaita Shaivagama of Kashmir: A Comparative Study. 
Kolkata: Ramakrishna Mission Institute of Culture, 1985. 

Smart, Ninian. “A Contemplation of Absolutes.” In Ninian Smart on World Religions, 
vol. 2, edited by John J. Shepherd, 255-67. Surrey: Ashgate, 2009. 

Smart, Ninian. “Interpretation and Mystical Experience.” Religious Studies 1 
(1965): 75-87, 

Smart, Ninian. “Models for Understanding the Relations between Religions.” In 
Ninian Smart on World Religions, vol. 2, edited by John J. Shepherd, 268-77. 
Surrey: Ashgate, 2009. 

Smart, Ninian. “Understanding Religious Experience.” In Mysticism and Philosophical 
Analysis, edited by Katz, 10-21. 

Smith, Huston. Forgotten Truth: The Common Vision of the World’s Religions. 
New York: HarperCollins, 1976. 

Srimad Bhagavata: The Holy Book of God, vol. 1. Translated by Swami Tapasyananda. 
Madras: Sri Ramakrishna Math, 2003. 

Srimad Bhagavata: The Holy Book of God, vol. 3. Translated by Swami Tapasyananda. 
Madras: Sri Ramakrishna Math, 2004. 

Srimad Bhagavata: The Holy Book of God, vol. 4. Translated by Swami Tapasyananda. 
Madras: Sri Ramakrishna Math, 2003. 

Staal, Frits. Exploring Mysticism: A Methodological Essay. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 
[1975], 2013. 

Stace, W. T. Mysticism and Philosophy. London: Macmillan, 1961. 

Steinhart, Eric. “A Mathematical Model of Divine Infinity.” Theology and Science 7.3 
(2009): 261-74. 

Stevenson, Ian. Reincarnation and Biology: A Contribution to the Etiology of Birthmarks 
and Birth Defects. Westport, CT: Praeger, 1997. 


Bibliography +» 331 


Stevenson, Ian. Twenty Cases Suggestive of Reincarnation. Charlottesville: University of 
Virginia Press, 1974. 

Stoeber, Michael. Evil and the Mystics’ God: Towards a Mystical Theodicy. London: 
Macmillan, 1992. 

Stoeber, Michael. Theo-Monistic Mysticism: A Hindu-Christian Comparison. London: 
Macmillan, 1994. 

Stump, Eleonore. Wandering in Darkness: Narrative and the Problem of Suffering. 
New York: Oxford University Press, 2010. 

Sweeney, Leo. Divine Infinity in Greek and Medieval Thought. New York: Peter 
Lang, 1992. 

Swinburne, Richard. “Evidentialism.” In.4 Companion to Philosophy of Religion, 2nd ed., 
edited by Charles Taliaferro, Paul Draper, and Philip L. Quinn, 681-88. Malden, 
MA: Wiley-Blackwell, 2010. 

Swinburne, Richard. The Existence of God. 2nd ed. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 2004. 

Swinburne, Richard. Faith and Reason. 2nd ed. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2005. 

Sankaracarya. Brahma-Sitra-Bhasya of Sri Sankaracarya. Translated by Swami 
Gambhirananda. Kolkata: Advaita Ashrama, 2006. 

Sankaracarya. Brabmasitram: Sankarabhasyopetam. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 2007. 

Sankaracarya. The Brhadaranyaka Upanisad with the Commentary of Sankaracarya. 
Translated by Swami Madhavananda. Kolkata: Advaita Ashrama, 2009. 

Sankaracarya. Chandogya Upanisad with the Commentary of Sankaracarya. Translated 
by Swami Gambhirananda. Kolkata: Advaita Ashrama, 2006. 

Sankaracarya. Eight Upanisads with the Commentary of Sankaracarya. 2 vols. Translated 
by Swami Gambhirananda. Kolkata: Advaita Ashrama, 1989. 

Sankaracarya. [adi nau upanisad: Sankarabhasyartha. Gorakhpur: Gita Press, 2011. 

Sankaracarya. Srimadbhagavadgita Sankarabhasya Hindi-anuvadasahita. Gorakhpur: 
Gita Press, 2010. 

Sankaracarya. Taittiriyopanisad Sanuvada Sankarabhasyasahita. Gorakhpur: Gita 
Press, 2008. 

Santkaracarya. Upadesa Sahasvi. Translated by Swami Jagadananda. Mylapore, India: Sri 
Ramakrishna Math, 1941. 

Sankaracarya. The Vedanta-Siitras with the Commentary by Sankaracarya: Part I. 
Translated and edited by George Thibaut. Oxford: Clarendon, 1890. 

Sraddhananda, Svami. Bandi Tomai: Ramakrsna-Vivekananda Bhabanjali. Kolkata: 
Udbodhan, 1994. 

‘Tadananda, Swami. “Kashmir Shaivism in the Light of Sri Ramakrishna’s Teachings.” In 
Approaching Ramakrishna, 195-206. Kolkata: Advaita Ashrama, 2011. 

‘Tagore, Rabindranath. “Address at the Parliament of Religions.” In The English Writings 
of Rabindranath Tagore, vol. 4, edited by Sisir Kumar Das and Nityapriya Ghosh, 
957-65. Kolkata: Sahitya Akademi, 2008. 

‘Tapasyananda, Swami. Bhakti Schools of Vedanta. Madras: Sri Ramakrishna Math, 1990. 


332 + Bibliography 


Tapasyananda, Swami. Sri Ramakrishna: Life and Teachings (An Interpretative Study). 
Madras: Sri Ramakrishna Math, 2008. 

‘Tapasyananda, Swami. Svi Ramakrishna’s Thoughts in a Vedantic Perspective. Mylapore, 
India: Sri Ramakrishna Math, 1993. 

Tapp, Christian. “Infinity in Aquinas’ Doctrine of God? In Analytically Oriented 
Thomism, edited by Miroslaw Szatkowski, 93-115. Neunkirchen-Seelscheid, 
Germany: Editiones Scholasticae, 2016. 

Teresa of Avila. The Life of Saint Teresa of Avila by Herself: Translated by J. M. Cohen. 
Harmondsworth, UK: Penguin, 1958. 

Tooley, Michael. “The Problem of Evil.” Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, 2015 edi- 
tion. http://plato.stanford.edu (accessed 9 January 2018). 

Trakakis, Nick. “Does Hard Determinism Render the Problem of Evil Even Harder?” 
Ars Disputandi 6.1 (2006): 239-64. 

Trakakis, Nick. The God beyond Belief: In Defence of William Rowe’s Evidential 
Argument from Evil. Dordrecht: Springer, 2007. 

‘Trapnell, Judson. “Indian Sources on the Possibility of a Pluralist View of Religions.” 
Journal of Ecumenical Studies 35.2 (Spring 1998): 210-35. 

Tuck, Andrew. Comparative Philosophy and the Philosophy of Scholarship: On the 
Western Interpretation of Nagarjuna. New York: Oxford University Press, 1990. 
Tucker, Jim. Return to Life: Extraordinary Cases of Children Who Remember Past Lives. 

New York: St. Martin’s Griffin, 2015. 

Turiyananda, Swami. Spiritual Treasures: Letters of Swami Turiyananda. Translated by 
Swami Chetananda. Kolkata: Advaita Ashrama, 2000. 

Turiyananda, Svami. Svdmi Turiyanander Patra. Kolkata: Udbodhan, 2005. 

Tyagananda, Swami and Pravrajika Vrajaprana. Interpreting Ramakrishna: Kalis Child 
Revisited. New Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 2010. 

Underhill, Evelyn. The Essentials of Mysticism and Other Essays. Oxford: Oneworld, 
[1920] 2007, 

Underhill, Evelyn. Mysticism. London: Methuen, [1911] 1945. 

Van Norden, Bryan W. Taking Back Philosophy: A Multicultural Manifesto. 
New York: Columbia University Press, 2017. 

Vicens, Leigh. “Theological Determinism.” Izternet Encyclopedia of Philosophy. http:// 
www.iep.utm.edu (accessed 9 January 2018). 

Vidyabhisana, Baladeva. Prameyaratnavali. Vrindavan: Agrawal Press, 1941. 

Vidyaranya. Pancadasi of Sri Vidyaranya Swami. Translated by Swami Swahananda. 
Chennai: Sri Ramakrishna Math, 2001. 

Vivekananda, Swami. The Complete Works of Swami Vivekananda: Mayavati Memorial 
Edition. 9 vols. Kolkata: Advaita Ashrama, [1957-97] 2006-7. 

Vos, Antonie. The Philosophy of John Duns Scotus. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University 
Press, 2006. 

Wainwright, William. Mysticism: A Study of Its Nature, Cognitive Value and Moral 
Implications. Brighton, UK: Harvester Press, 1981. 


Bibliography + 333 


Wainwright, William. “Mysticism and Sense Perception.” Religious Studies 9.3 
(September 1973): 257-78. 

Webb, Hillary. “Coincidentia Oppositorum.’ In Encyclopedia of Psychology and Religion, 
edited by David A. Leeming. Boston: Springer, 2014. 

Webb, Mark. 4 Comparative Doxastic-Practice Epistemology of Religious Experience. 
Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2015. 

Weber, Max. Die Wirtschaftsethik der Weltreligionen, vol. 2: Hinduismus und 
Buddhismus, 1916-1920. Tubingen: J.C.B. Mohr, 1996. 

Weber, Max. The Religion of India: The Sociology of Hinduism and Buddhism. Translated 
by Hans Gerth and Don Martindale. Glencoe, IL: Free Press, 1958. 

Weber, Max. Sociology of Religion. Translated by Ephraim Fischoff. Boston: Beacon 
Press, 1963. 

Weeks, Andrew. German Mysticism from Hildegard of Bingen to Ludwig Wittgenstein. 
Albany: SUNY Press, 1993. 

Westphal, Merold. Overcoming Onto-Theology: Toward a Postmodern Christian Faith. 
New York: Fordham University Press, 2001. 

Westphal, Merold. “The Politics of Religious Pluralism?” Proceedings of the Twentieth 
World Congress of Philosophy 4 (1999): 1-8. 

Wykstra, Stephen. “The Humean Obstacle to Evidential Arguments from Suffering: On 
Avoiding the Evils of Appearance.” International Journal for the Philosophy of 
Religion 16.2 (1984): 73-93. 

Yandell, Keith. The Epistemology of Religious Experience. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1993. 

Zaehner, R. C. Mysticism Sacred and Profane. New York: Oxford University Press, 1957. 

Zimmer, Heinrich. Philosophies of India. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1951. 


INDEX 


Acintyabhedabheda Vedanta, 56, 124 
acintya-sakti, 61 
adequacy criteria 
for theodicies, 305-9 
for theories of religious 
pluralism, 147-50 
Adhyatma Ramayana, 27 


Advaita Vedanta, 13, 15, 17, 18, 21, 22, 23, 


24, 25, 66 

Aurobindo on, 121, 123, 126 

Hick on, 129-31, 132-33, 137 

key difference in Ramakrishna’s 
philosophy from, 29, 36n53 

mystical experience and, 154, 155, 157, 
159, 163, 165, 171, 177-79, 188, 191, 


194, 197, 203, 214-15, 218, 232, 233, 


235, 236, 237 
religious pluralism and, 86, 87, 88, 89, 
94, 95, 105, 106, 107, 110-12, 115, 
116, 144 
two levels of realization, 38-41 
aesthetic icons, 76, 78 
agape, 7, 53, 74-75, 78-81 
Allah, 232 
Alston, William, 9-10, 145, 196, 197, 


202, 207, 208, 220n71, 221-22, 225, 


225-26n84, 230, 231, 242, 280 
“The Inductive Argument from 
Evil? 283-95 


on skeptical theism, 281, 283-92 
“Some (Temporarily) Final 
Thoughts,’ 285-86 
ananta, 33, 51 
anatta, 112-14, 186 
anekanta doctrine, 20 
Angela of Foligno, 205-6, 207, 211 
ant and the sugar hill parable, 92-93 
Aquinas, Thomas, 51, 67, 70 
argument from evil against God’s 
existence 
evidential, 241-42, 282-83, 285, 
287, 291 
logical, 241-42, 242n5 
Rowe’s, 10, 281, 282-86, 289, 291, 292 
argument from experience, 8-9, 
200-201, 211-37, 279 
conflicting claims objection to, 
216-18, 231-37 
cross-checkability objection to (see 
cross-checkability objection) 
defined, 197 
in light of Ramakrishna, 211-19 
premises of, 213 
Arguments for the Existence of God 
(Hick), 125-26 
Arjuna, 51 
Ashokananda, Swami, 86 


atmajnana, 186 


336 + Index 


Atman, 33, 43, 53 
mystical experience and, 158, 168, 
172, 186, 194, 203-4, 212, 214-15, 
218, 300 
the problem of evil and, 254, 278-79 
religious pluralism and, 112-14 
Augustine, Saint, 243 
Aum Shinrikyo, 94n 18 
Aurobindo, Sri, 2, 7, 15, 17, 30, 38, 41, 
44, 45, 46, 117-18, 119-33, 139, 
146, 147 
critique of Mayavada, 130 
Essays on the Gita, 47, 48 
Hick’s abandonment of strategy, 
133-34, 135-37 
Hick’s early model of pluralism 
and, 124-33 
incarceration of, 120-21 
The Life Divine, 118, 121-23, 
126-27, 130 
on logic of the infinite (see logic of the 
infinite) 
mystical experiences of, 167, 172, 182, 
188, 189-90 
on karma and rebirth, 261, 262 
The Problem of Rebirth, 261 
avataras, 104-6, 115, 138, 278 


Baillie, John, 201 
Barua, Ankur, 36n53, 124n36, 
304n77, 309n90 
Bhagavad Gita, 15, 48, 51, 105, 118 
Aurobindo on, 121, 123, 124 
Hick on, 132 
on reincarnation, 103-4 
on SAGE, 205 
Vijfiana Vedanta based on, 17, 27, 30, 
38, 41, 44, 45 
Vivekananda on, 120 
Bhagavan, 58 
Bhagavata Purana, 27, 51, 57,58, 
62, 231 


bhaktas, 36, 43, 45, 58-59, 61, 62-63, 87, 
110-11, 141, 185, 188-89 
bhakta-vatsal principle, 183-85, 187, 188, 
190, 235 
bhakti, 18, 27,79, 89, 105, 180, 185 
bhaktiyoga, 89 
Bhattacarya, Dines, 20 
Bhattacarya, Kenaram, 171 
Bhattacharya, Kamaleswar, 112 
bhavamukha, 18, 27, 28, 180. See also 
vijhana 
bhavasamadhi, Y74, ¥76-77, 178-79, 180, 181 
Bhedabheda Vedanta, 124 
Bhisma, 251-52, 254 
Bible, 18n22, 51 
blind man and the elephant parable, 
91n14, 92, 100, 110, 122, 126, 131, 
143, 144, 194, 236 
blue crow analogy, 289 
Bohme, Jakob, 279 
brahmajnana, 27-29, 39, 43, 186 
Brahman, 6. See also nirguna Brahman; 
saguna Brahman 
mystical experience and, 177, 188-89, 
194, 203, 214, 232, 236, 237 
the problem of evil and, 247-48 
Sakti compared with, 57 
Sakti’s inseparability from, 16-17, 21, 
23, 24, 36-38, 40, 66, 71, 88, 91, 99, 
122, 142, 160, 161, 235 
satyam jhanam anantam 
brahma, 53-63 
Brahmani, Bhairavi, 18, 230-31 
Brahmasitras, 123, 245-48 
Brahmo Samaj, 21, 22, 75-76, 78 
the problem of evil and, 256 
religious pluralism and, 89, 93, 95, 
102-3, 105, 138 
Brhadaranyaka Upanisad, 43, 44 
Broad, C. D., 217-18 
Bucke, R. M., 190 
Buddha, 111-14, 140, 159, 186, 190-91 


Buddhism, 66, 89, 95, 98, 101, 106, 

107, 111-14 

Madhyamaka, 186 

Mahayana, 111, 112, 113-14, 159 

mystical experience in, 157, 159, 163, 
165, 186-87, 218, 232, 235 

Theravada, 111, 112, 114 

Yogacara, 186 

Zen, 157, 165, 187 


Caitanya, 105, 140, 174, 235 
Cakravartin, Visvanatha, 6, 52, 53, 81 
Ramakrishna’s views compared 
with, 61-63 
on satyam jnhanam anantam 
brahma, 56-59 
Candrakirti, 114 
Cattopadhyay, Bankimcandra, 47, 48 
causa sui, 73, 74, 75,79 
Central Philosophy of Buddhism, The 
(Murti), 113-14 
Chadha, Monima, 262 
Chalmers, David, 312 
chameleon parable, 90-92, 100, 110, 
183, 194 
Chandogya Upanisad, 38, 40, 44 
Chatterjee, Satis Chandra, 2, 15, 
40, 86-87 
chess master analogy, 286, 287 
Christianity, 45 
on divine infinitude, 51-53, 63-67 
mystical experience in, 153, 157, 165, 
168, 174, 175-76, 187, 188, 205-7, 218 
the problem of evil in, 243, 246, 277 
Ramakrishna’s practice of, 17, 18n22, 
88, 116, 174, 175-76 
religious pluralism and, 89, 93, 94, 95, 
96, 98, 101, 106, 116, 140, 142, 144 
Christian Theology of Religions, A (Hick), 
134, 136, 137 
Chubb, Jehangir, 118-19, 125, 127-29, 
130, 135 


Index + 337 


classical Vedantic theodicies, 243, 
244, 245-49 
Clooney, Francis X., 200n14, 305-6 
Cochran, Bradley, 133n72 
coincidentia oppositorum, 6, 52,53, 65, 
66, 67, 81 
comparative theodicy, 305-6 
comprehensiveness (adequacy criterion 
for theodicies), 306, 307 
conceptual icons, 74-75, 76, 78-81 
conceptual idolatry, 7, 53, 73-74, 75, 
76, 77,79 
conflicting claims objection, 
216-18, 231-37 
conflicting religious truth-claims, 
101-109 
Confucianism, 96 
constructivist models of mystical 
experience, 8, 141, 142, 156, 162-69 
atheistic forms, 164 
central ideas in, 154-55 
experiential method compared with, 
169, 171, 172, 173, 175, 176, 178 
manifestationist model compared 
with, 183, 184, 190, 191-93, 195 
perennialist models compared with, 
162, 163, 166, 170 
weaknesses of, 166-69, 170 
Continental philosophy, 5, 7 
“Copernican revolution” in theology, 
129, 131 
CORNEA-based skeptical theism, 292 
cosmotheandric pluralism, 148 
counterfactual hypothesis, 302-5 
Cross, Richard, 63-64 
cross-checkability objection, 219-31 
epistemic imperialism of, 221, 222, 225 
formulation of, 219 
other-observers test, 220-22, 220n71, 
223-24, 225 
predictive efficacy test, 220-22, 226 
saintly fruits test, 226-28 


338 + Index 


cross-cultural inquiries 
into divine infinitude, 51-81 
into mystical experience, 196-237 
into the problem of evil, 281-309 
into religious pluralism, 119-50 
Cullison, Andrew, 292 
cultural beliefs and mystical experience. 
See constructivist models of 
mystical experience 
Cusa, Nicholas of, 6, 51, 52-53, 
63-67, 68, 70 
on coincidentia oppositorum, 6, 52, 53, 
65, 66, 67, 81 
De Pace Fidei, 65-66 


Davis, Caroline Franks, 157, 232-33, 234 
Davis, Leesa, 186 
defense (of theism against arguments 
from evil), 242n7, 255n30 
De Pace Fidei (Cusa), 65-66 
Derrida, Jacques, 5,72 
Descartes, René, 73, 74, 75 
determinism, 244-45, 264—68, 292, 307 
Deussen, Paul, 47, 48, 50 
devekuth, 153, 163 
Devi, Sarada, 3 
dharma, 93,94 
Dhiresananda, Svami, 13, 86 
Dieu sans létre (Marion), 72-75 
divine infinitude, 5, 6, 7, 13-81. See also 
Cakravartin, Visvanatha; Cusa, 
Nicholas of; Gocke, Benedikt Paul; 
Marion, Jean-Luc; Ramanuja; 
Sankara; Scotus, John Duns; 
Vijhana Vedanta 
cross-cultural inquiry into, 51-81 
Hick on, 131, 135 
logic of the infinite based on, 118, 131 
religious pluralism and, 89, 92-93 
Divine Mother, 17, 18, 29, 171-73, 175, 
180, 189, 211, 227, 277-78, 292, 
295, 300 


Doctrine of Negation in Navya-Nyaya, 
The (Matilal), 311 

doctrine of two truths, 127-28 

doxastic voluntarism, 268n51 

Durga, 223-24, 231 

Dvyaita Vedanta, 13, 123 

dysteleological suffering, 301-5, 307 


Eckhart, Meister, 154, 157, 158, 159-60, 
161, 182, 184-85, 279, 300 
epistemic imperialism, 221, 222, 225 
epistemology 
of divine infinitude, 60-61 
of mystical experience, 196-237 
Essays on the Gita (Aurobindo), 47, 48 
Evans, C. Stephen, 198, 200 
evidential arguments from evil, 241-42, 
285-86, 287, 291 
evidentialism, 198 
evil. See problem of evil 
Evil and the God of Love (Hick), 292-94 
Evil and the Mystics’ God: Towards a 
Mystical Theodicy (Stoeber), 279 
exclusivism, 92, 98n24, 110, 115-16 
defined, 97 
Hick on, 137, 139 
experiential method for understanding 
mystical experience, 156, 169-82 
constructivist models compared with, 
169, 171, 172, 173, 175, 176, 178 
perennialist models compared with, 
169, 170, 171, 173, 177, 179 
experiential pluralism, 148 
extrovertive mystical experience, 158, 


160-61, 182 


Fales, Evan, 196, 215, 220, 221, 222, 223, 
225, 227-28, 231 

fallen monk story, 94-95 

fanaticism, 15, 90, 92, 99, 104, 106 

Farmer, H. H., 201 

Fenton, John, 193, 194, 195 


fideism 
irrationalist, 198 
quasi-, 198n7 
responsible, 198-99, 201, 217, 219 
fire and its power to burn analogy, 
37-38, 122 
fish preparation parable, 90, 95, 96 
Flew, Antony, 201-2, 218 
flute analogy, 42 
Forman, Robert, 157, 162, 166-67, 170, 
178, 190-91 
Francis, Saint, 79 
free will, 284. See also determinism 
illusion of, 244-45, 267, 294, 307 
in Hick’s soul-making theodicy, 
293-94, 307 
fruitfulness (adequacy criterion for 
theories of religious pluralism), 


148, 149 


Gale, Richard, 197, 215, 220, 221 
Gandhi, Mahatma, 2, 47 
Ganeri, Jonardon, 311-12 
Ganges River analogy, 76 
Garfield, Jay, 4, 311 
Gaudiya Vaisnavism, 6, 26, 56, 59, 61, 81 
Gellman, Jerome, 9, 64, 145-46, 
170, 196, 197, 211, 217, 228, 232, 
233-35, 237 
gem and its brightness analogy, 37 
Ghanananda, Swami, 86 
Ghazali, al-, 185 
Ghos, Giriscandra, 76 
Ghosal, Bipin Bihari, 24n31, 24n32 
Ghospara, 96 
Gocke, Benedikt Paul, 6-7, 32, 53, 
67-72, 81 
Marion’s views compared with, 
75, 78-79 
“The Paraconsistent God,’ 67-70 
response to author’s objection, 71n81 
weaknesses in argument, 69-72 


Index « 339 


God and the Universe of Faiths 
(Hick), 129-32 
gopis, 102-3, 105, 138, 189 
Gospel of Sri Ramakrishna, The (Gupta), 
3, 21-25, 59, 60, 61, 62, 65, 68, 69, 
77, 78, 80, 122, 199-200. See also 
Kathamrta 
mystical experience, 141, 174, 176-81, 
185-87, 189, 194, 203-4, 210, 212, 
214-19, 225-26, 228-29, 235, 236 
the problem of evil, 244, 249-50, 
252-53, 256-58, 260, 263-64, 
265-67, 269, 276, 277-78, 287-88, 
295-97, 301 
religious pluralism, 85, 88-97, 100, 
102-9, 110-12, 115-16, 140 
Vijfiana Vedanta based on, 27-45 
grace, 80, 204, 206, 212, 214, 215, 224, 
225, 263, 272 
Gregory of Nyssa, 51 
Griffin, David Ray, 85, 148 
Gupta, Mahendranath, 3-4, 13, 23, 
104, 249, 253. See also Gospel of Sri 
Ramakrishna, ‘The; Kathamrta 
Gutting, Gary, 202, 207, 217, 228 


Hacker, Paul, 17, 47-50 

Hajra, Pratap, 21, 37 

Hallaj, Mansur al-, 154 

hallucinations vs. mystical experiences, 
166, 168, 217, 229 

Hamilton, William, 31-32, 65, 199 

“handmaiden” approach to non-Western 
philosophy, 312 

Hanuman, 42-43, 183, 184 

hard theological determinism. See 
determinism 

Hari, 257, 268, 270-71, 272, 273, 
296, 301 

Haribabu, 78 

Harsa, Sri, 313 

Hasidic Judaism, 159 


340 e Index 


Hasker, William, 273 
hathayoga, 97, 98 
Heidegger, Martin, 5, 72, 73,75, 78 
Heim, S. Mark, 85, 148 
hell, 293, 296-97 
Herman, Arthur, 248, 262, 264, 270, 
301, 304-5 
Hick, John, 7-8, 10, 85, 87, 101-2n33, 
117-50, 154, 155, 164-66, 168-69, 
177, 178, 191, 200, 232, 233, 234, 
264, 275, 276, 280, 281, 284, 290, 
292-305, 306-9 
abandonment of Aurobindonian 
strategy, 133-34, 135-37 
Arguments for the Existence of 
God, 125-26 
A Christian Theology of Religions, 134, 
136, 137 
early Aurobindonian model of 
pluralism, 124-33 
early awareness of Ramakrishna, 124 
Evil and the God of Love, 292-94 
God and the Universe of Faiths, 
129-32 
An Interpretation of Religion, 134 
“Mystical Experience as 
Cognition,” 133 
“The Outcome: Dialogue into Truth, 
126, 127 
Philosophy of Religion, 126, 127 
quasi-Kantian pluralist theory of 
(see quasi-Kantian theory) 
on conflicting religious 
truth-claims, 101 
soul-making theodicy of (see soul- 
making theodicy) 
Vedantic underpinnings of early 
pluralist theory, 119-24 
Hinduism, 45 
Hick on, 130, 132, 133, 137, 138 
mystical experience in, 153, 154, 218 
Neo-, 47-49 


religious pluralism and, 94, 95, 98, 99, 
101, 116, 144 
historical truth-claims, 101, 102-3, 
106-7, 108, 138-39 
hole in a wall analogy, 76-77 
Howard-Snyder, Daniel, 273-75 
Huxley, Aldous, 193 


icchamayi principle, 188-90 
icons, 73-81 
aesthetic, 76, 78 
conceptual, 74-75, 76, 78-81 
idolatry, 7, 53, 72-81 
impersonal Absolute (#irguna Brahman), 
36, 61, 78, 79, 88, 157. See 
impersonal-personal Infinite Reality 
impersonal-personal Infinite Reality, 3, 
8, 52, 235, 236-37. See also nirguna 
Brahman; saguna Brahman; vijiana 
Chubb on, 127-29 
Hick on, 119, 124-33 
Ramakrishna’s Vijhana Vedanta 
on, 33-38 
incarnations of God, 77, 81, 101, 104-6, 
140, 142, 212 
inclusivism, 88, 98, 114, 137, 139, 148 
“Inductive Argument from Evil and the 
Human Cognitive Condition, The” 
(Alston), 283-85 
inexhaustible plenitude hypothesis, 
233-35, 236, 237 
infinite ocean analogy, 35-36, 78, 
172-74, 188 
infinitude of God. See divine infinitude 
Integral Vedanta, 16, 46 
intellect, limitations of 
mystical experience and, 199 
the problem of evil and, 250, 251, 252, 
253, 254, 272, 278, 281, 284-85, 
286, 287-88 
religious pluralism and, 92-93 
Vijfana Vedanta on, 30-33 


intensive infinity, 63, 65 


internal consistency (adequacy criterion), 


148, 306-7 
Interpretation of Religion, An (Hick), 134 
introvertive mystical experience, 158, 
159-61, 177, 179, 182 
Irenaeus, Saint, 293 
irrationalist fideism, 198 
1a Upanisad, 33, 38, 121 
ISIS, 94n18 
Islam, 45, 66 
mystical experience in, 153, 174-75, 185 
the problem of evil in, 246 
Ramakrishna’ practice of, 17, 18, 
18n21, 88, 116, 174-75 
religious pluralism and, 89, 93, 94, 95, 
96, 98, 101, 107, 144 
isvara, 40, 66 
isvarakotis, 27-28, 30n42, 42, 43 
defined, 27 
mystical experience and, 160, 235 
religious pluralism and, 115 


iti, 60,75, 78, 195 


jackal howling metaphor, 187, 218 
Jagannath Temple, 107 
Jagat, 40, 41 
Jainism, 20, 187-88 
Jatadhari, 222-23, 224, 231 
Jesus Christ, 18, 18n22, 73, 77, 81, 101, 
138, 140, 142, 175-76, 184, 188, 
209, 232, 235 
jiva, 40, 41, 42, 43-44, 110, 188, 270, 271 
jivakotis, 27-28, 160 
jivanmukta, 266, 267 
jivatman, 187-88 
jnana, 16, 18, 27-30, 35 
jnanayoga, 89,95, 110, 185-86, 187 
jnanis, 36, 37, 58,59, 61, 62-63 
level of Advaitic realization in, 38-41 
lila dismissed by, 41-43 


religious pluralism and, 89 


Index +» 341 


Jones, Ashley, 273-75 
Judaism, 96, 107, 159, 163, 166, 184, 246 
Junayd, al-, 179 


Kabbalah, 184 
Kabir, 105 
kaivalya, 188 
Kali, 17, 22, 25, 86, 166, 171-74, 184, 188, 
232, 235 
Kali Temple, 17, 171 
Kane, Stanley, 275-76 
Kant, Immanuel, 199 
Kantian pluralist model, 118, 134n73. See 
also quasi-Kantian theory 
karana, 42 
karma, 10, 243, 244, 268-70, 274, 276, 
278, 287-88, 299, 303-5 
in classical Vedantic theodicies, 
245-47, 248-49 
retributive vs. teleological theories of, 
260-61, 288 
in saint-making theodicy, 259-63, 
264, 281, 282, 290, 291, 293, 
297-98, 307, 308-9 
Kasmiri Saivism, 20, 61n41 
Kathamrta (Gupta), 3, 6, 13, 14, 16, 59, 
60, G1, 62, 65, 68, 69, 77, 78, 80, 122 
importance as a source, 3n6 
mystical experience, 141, 174, 176-81, 
185-87, 189, 194, 199-200, 203-4, 
210, 212, 214-19, 225-26, 228-29, 
235, 236 
the problem of evil, 243, 244, 249-50, 
252-53, 254, 255, 256-58, 260, 
261, 263-64, 265-67, 269, 276, 
277-78, 287-88, 295-97, 301 
reconstructing Ramakrishna’s views 
from, 19-26 
religious pluralism, 85, 87, 88-97, 100, 
102-9, 110-12, 115-16, 140 
Vijfiana Vedanta based on, 27-45 
Katha Upanisad, 33 


342 e Index 


Katz, Steven, 8, 141, 154, 155, 162-66, 
168-69, 177, 178, 190, 191, 193, 195 

Kaufman, Whitley, 262, 303-4 

Kena Upanisad, 38, 121 

Kessler, Gary, 157 

Khan, Genghis, 9, 244, 249, 250, 
287, 290 

Khuddaka Nikaya, 113 

Kierkegaard, Soren, 5, 198 

king and seven gates parable, 203, 205 

Knitter, Paul, 85 

Kripal, Jeffrey, 86 

Kristo, Jure, 164 

Krsna, 17, 22, 25, 26, 51, 52, 56-58, 63, 
75, 80, 101, 102-3, 105, 110-11, 
138, 140, 184, 189, 205, 232, 235, 
251-52, 278 

Kiing, Hans, 129 


lake of various names analogy, 95-96 
“Language, Epistemology, and 
Mysticism” (Katz), 162-64 
learned ignorance, 31, 64-65, 199 
Lectures on Metaphysics and Logic 
(Hamilton), 31 
Leftow, Brian, 52, 68 
Leiter, Brian, 311-12 
Levinas, Emmanuel, 5 
Levine, Michael, 209-10 
Life Divine, The (Aurobindo), 18, 
121-23, 126-27, 130 
lila, 32, 38, 60, 68 
defined, 25 
with gopis, 102-3, 138 
the problem of evil and, 244, 247-49, 
256-59, 263, 264, 270, 271, 272, 
278, 296, 301 
vijhanis acceptance of, 41-44 
Lilaprasanga (Saradananda), 4 
mystical experience, 171-78, 184, 187, 
211, 218, 222-24, 227, 230, 235 
the problem of evil, 278 


religious pluralism, 95 
logical arguments from evil, 
241-42, 242n5 
logic of exclusive affirmation, 128-29 
logic of the infinite, 7, 18 
Aurobindo on, 121-24 
Chubb on, 128-29, 130 
Hick on, 125, 126-27, 131, 133, 
135-37, 146 
Long, Jeffery D., 2, 15, 86-87 
Long, Todd, 292 
Loy, David, 186 


Mackie, J. L., 241 
Madhya, 123 
Madhyamaka Buddhism, 186 
Mahabharata (epic), 251-52 
mahakarana, 42 
Maharshi, Ramana, 178 
Mahayana Buddhism, 111, 112, 
113-14, 159 
Maitzen, Stephen, 273 
Mallik, Sambhu Caran, 175 
mango-orchard analogy, 30-31, 257 
manifestationist model of mystical 
experience, 8, 141-42, 156, 167, 
168, 173, 196 
anticipating an objection to, 193-95 
bhakta-vatsal principle in, 183-85, 
187, 188, 190 
icchamayi principle in, 188-90 
reconstruction of, 183-95 
saptabhiimi paradigm in, 180-81, 187 
Marion, Jean-Luc, 5, 72-81 
Dieu sans létre, 72-75 
Gocke’s views compared with, 
75, 78-79 
Martin, C. B., 201-2, 207, 208, 219-20 
mathematical conceptions of the infinite, 
60n40, 64 
Matilal, B. K., 246, 311, 313-14 
Mavrodes, George, 139-40 


maximally qualitatively infinite 
God, 67-72 
maya, 23, 278 
McBrayer, Justin, 242n5, 251 
McDonald, Michael, 299 
Merton, Thomas, 202 
metaphysical conceptions of the 
infinite, 60n40 
metatheodicy, 282, 305-9 
milk and its whiteness analogy, 37 
Mill, John Stuart, 253-54, 255, 278, 
286, 291 
minimal skeptical theism, 292 
miracles, 209, 210, 211 
“Misunderstanding of Hinduism, The” 
(Sengupta), 130 
Mitra, Surendra, 223-24 
monistic practices and experiences, 155, 
179-80, 181-82 
Moore, Adrian, 60n40 
Morales, Frank, 85, 109-11 
moral paralysis, 273-75 
Mukti o Tahar Sadhan (Ghosial), 
24n31, 24n32 
multiple salvations theory, 85, 148 
mumuksutva, 106 
Mundaka Upanisad, 43, 204 
Murti, T. R. V., 113-14 
mystery, appeal to, 301-5 
mystical experience, 6, 149-50, 153-237 
argument from experience (see 
argument from experience) 
constructivist models (see 
constructivist models of mystical 
experience) 
cross-cultural defense of epistemic 
value, 196-237 
Cusa’s, 64-65 
defined, 153n1 
experiential method (see experiential 
method of mystical experience) 
extrovertive, 158, 160-61, 182 


Index +» 343 


Gécke on, 71-72 

Hick’s neglect of, 298-300 

introvertive, 158, 159-61, 177, 179, 182 

manifestationist model (see 
manifestationist model of mystical 
experience) 

Marion’s neglect of, 79-80 
perennialist models (sce perennialist 
models of mystical experience) 
Ramakrishna’s critique of reason, 

198-201 
self-authenticating (see self- 
authenticating experience of God) 
sui generis character of, 141, 163, 
167-68, 176, 192 
theo-monistic, 182, 235 
veridicality of, 8, 145, 165, 166, 196, 
197, 203, 204, 206, 207, 208, 
210, 211, 214, 216, 218, 220, 222, 
224, 229-30 
“Mystical Experience as Cognition” 
(Hick), 133 
Mysticism and Philosophy 
(Stace), 158-60 


Nagarjuna, 113, 114, 313 

Nanak, Guru, 185 

Nanda, 263, 264, 268-70, 271, 272, 
273, 297 

Narada, 29 

Narendra. See Vivekananda, Swami 

Navya-Nyaya, 313 

Neevel, Walter, 14, 23 

Neo-Adyvaita, 16, 111, 193 

Neo-Hinduism, 47-49 

Neo-Vedanta, 16, 17, 45-50 

Neufeldt, R. W., 7, 111, 114-15 

nibbana, 106, 107, 112, 113, 154, 186, 
190-91, 218, 232 

Nicholas of Cusa. See Cusa, Nicholas of 

Nicholson, Andrew, 48-49 

nirakara, 102 


344 « Index 


nirguna Brahman, 24, 29, 32, 34-39, 41, 
44, 55, 59. See impersonal Absolute 
Aurobindo on, 122, 123, 126 
Chubb on, 127 
defined, 34n51 
Hick on, 130, 132-33, 139 
mystical experience and, 159-60, 179, 
180, 185 
religious pluralism and, 86, 87, 88, 89, 
91, 110, 114, 115 
nirvana, 110, 159, 163 


nirvikalpa samadhi, 23, 25, 27, 38-39, 42, 


115, 141, 185, 187, 194 
Aurobindo’s experience of, 167, 188 
defined, 18 
Ramakrishna’s experience of, 28n38, 

155, 158, 177-79, 180, 181, 185, 

235, 278 

nitya, 32, 38, 41-44, 60, 68 
nityananda, 39 

Noble Eightfold Path, 106 
nonsectarianism, 15-16, 22-26, 86- 

87, 119-24. See also sects and 
sectarianism; Vijhana Vedanta 
non-sufferer-centered theodicy, 289, 291 
nontheistic beliefs and practices, 45, 66 

mystical experience and, 158, 160, 

161, 172, 184, 185, 187-88, 189-90, 

232, 237 
religious pluralism and, 88, 89, 96, 

107, 146 

Nyaya, 200n14, 313 


Oakes, Robert, 8, 197, 202, 207, 208-9, 
211, 219-20 

O’Hear, Anthony, 220-21, 231 

Olberding, Amy, 312-13 

Omkarananda, Svami, 13, 20, 23, 35, 36 

one-life-only paradigm, 282, 290, 298, 
299, 303 

one-seer pot analogy, 30, 32, 69, 199, 
212, 287 


ontology 
of divine infinitude, 60-61 
of Hick’s quasi-Kantian 
theory, 133-37 
Oppy, Graham, 52 
other-observers test, 220-22, 220n71, 
223-24, 225 
“Outcome, The: Dialogue into Truth” 
(Hick), 126, 127 


Paficanami, 96 
panentheistic standpoint of vijiana, 
268-73, 277, 292, 297, 300, 309 
Panikkar, Raimundo, 148 
paraconsistency. See paraconsistent logic 
“Paraconsistent God, The” 
(Gécke), 67-70 
paraconsistent logic, 6, 53, 67-72, 
79, 80, 81 
paramarthika, 43 
Paramatma, 58 
Pasupati, 263 
path analogy, 107 
Paul, Saint, 73, 76 
PC. See principle of credulity 
PCEs. See pure consciousness events 
Pereboom, Derk, 268, 291n33 
perennialist models of mystical 
experience, 8, 155, 156-62 
central ideas in, 154 
constructivist models compared with, 
162, 163, 166, 170 
experiential method compared with, 
169, 170, 171, 173, 177, 179 
manifestationist model compared 
with, 183, 190, 191-93, 195 
versions of, 156-58 
weaknesses of, 161-62, 170 
Perovich, Anthony, 167, 177 
personal God, 6, 25, 26, 34, 35, 36, 44, 
45, 52, 56, 57, 59, 61, 62, 63, 65, 66, 
67, 75, 78-80, 93, 99, 110, 111, 120, 


132, 134, 141, 155, 157, 160-161, 
163, 165, 168, 172-174, 179, 181-84, 
188, 189, 194, 203, 215, 218, 232, 
233, 235, 236. See impersonal- 
personal Infinite Reality and saguna 
Brahman 
Peterson, Michael, 242n7 
Phenomenological Indiscernibility 
Postulate (PIP), 207-9 
philosophia perennis, 156, 193-94 
Philosophy of Religion (Hick), 126, 127 
PIP. See Phenomenological 
Indiscernibility Postulate 
Plantinga, Alvin, 198n7 
plausibility (adequacy criterion), 148, 
149-50, 306, 308-9 
Plotinus, 279 
pluralism. See religious pluralism 
Prajfianananda, Svami, 1, 1n2, 20 
prasthanatraya, 123 
predictive efficacy test, 220-22, 226 
prema, 80 
“Presuppositions of Religious Dialogue” 
(Chubb), 118-19, 127-29 
Priest, Graham, 68n70 
principle of credulity (PC), 215-16 
Pritchard, Duncan, 198n7 
problem of evil, 6, 9, 227, 241-309 
cross-cultural approach to, 281-309 
Gocke on, 69 
refutation of, 242—43 
theodicies on (see theodicies) 
Problem of Evil and Indian Thought, The 
(Herman), 262 
“Problem of Evil and Some Varieties of 
Atheism, The” (Rowe), 282-83 
Problem of Rebirth, The (Aurobindo), 261 
process philosophy, 20 
Prothero, Stephen, 85, 109 
Proudfoot, Wayne, 164 
Pseudo-Dionysius, 67, 70, 71, 167, 
279, 300 


Index +» 345 


psychophysical causation, law of, 266 

Ptolemaic Christian theological 
framework, 129-32, 137 

Pure Consciousness, 111-12, 113, 158, 
185, 186, 204 

pure consciousness events (PCEs), 157, 
162, 167, 170, 178, 190-91 

purgatory, 293, 298-99, 306-7 

purusa, 188 


quasi-fideism, 198n7 
quasi-Kantian theory, 7-8, 85, 118-19, 
127-28, 129, 133-47, 164, 165, 
168, 233 
adequacy criteria applied to, 149 
differences from Kant’s theory, 134n73 
first presentation of, 117 
ontological underpinnings 
of, 133-37 
a Ramakrishnan critique of, 138-47 
Quran, 18n21 


Race, Alan, 97 
Radha, 80, 102-3, 184 
Radhakanta, 17 
Radhakrishnan, Sarvepalli, 2, 45, 47, 156, 
157, 162 
radical universalism, 86, 87, 88 
Raghuvir, 17 
Rahner, Karl, 129 
rain analogy, 246, 260 
rajayoga, Y7 
Rama, 42, 43, 75, 101, 140, 183, 184, 222, 
235, 278 
Ramacandra, 17 
Ramakrishna, Sri 
addressing major objections to 
pluralism of, 109-16 
argument from experience in light 
of, 211-19 
critique of theological reason, 


198-201 


346 e Index 


Ramakrishna, Sri (conzt.) 
experiential method of (see 
experiential method of mystical 
experience) 
manifestationist model of (see 
manifestationist model of mystical 
experience) 
reasons for book-length treatment of 
philosophy, 2-3 
reconstructing views of from 
Kathamrta, 19-26 
reconstruction of religious pluralism 
model, 88-100 
recorded oral teachings of, 1,3 
religion as defined by, 93-95 
response to conflicting religious 
truth-claims, 101-9 
saint-making theodicy of (see saint- 
making theodicy) 
skeptical theist refutation of (see 
skeptical theism) 
spiritual basis of philosophy, 17-19 
Ramakrishna and Vivekananda 
(Sharma), 36n53 
Ramakrishna Mission, 114 
Ramakrishna Mission Institute of 
Culture, 124 


Ramanyja, 9, 13, 22, 23, 51, 52, 53, 59, 81, 


120, 123, 179-80, 182, 233 
Ramakrishna’s views comp ared 
with, 61, 63 
on satyam jnanam anantam brahma, 
55-56, 58 
theodicy of, 243, 244, 245, 247-49, 
256, 257-58, 259-60, 270 
Ramlala, 222-23, 224, 231 
Ramprasad, 86, 211-12, 218 
Rasmani, Rani, 17 
Ratna-Kita-Sitra, 113 
Ray, Govinda, 18, 174 
reason, Ramakrishna’s critique of, 
198-201 


rebirth/reincarnation, 99, 101, 103-4 
empirical evidence in favor of, 
101-2n33, 308-9 
the problem of evil and, 243, 244, 
254, 259, 260-62, 276, 278, 282, 
290, 293, 297-98, 299, 303-5, 
307, 308-9 
reformed epistemology, 198n7 
refutation, 242-43. See also 
skeptical theism 
Reichenbach, Bruce, 284 
Reigle, David, 114 
reincarnation. See rebirth/reincarnation 
relative-correlative grammatical 
structure, 34-35 
religious pluralism, 5, 7-8, 85-150, 168, 173 
addressing major objections to 
Ramakrishna’s, 109-16 
adequacy criteria for theories 
of, 147-50 
complementarity in, 99-100, 146n114 
defined, 98 
Hick on, 117-50 (see also Hick, John) 
prevalent interpretations of 
Ramakrishna’s views on, 85-87 
quasi-Kantian theory (see quasi- 
Kantian theory) 
reconstruction of Ramakrishna’s 
model, 88-100 
Vijfana Vedanta on, 44-45 
religious truth-claims, 101-9. See 
also conflicting religious truth- 
claims; historical truth-claims; 
transhistorical truth-claims; 
ultimate questions 
responsible fideism, 198-99, 201, 217, 219 
retributive karma, 260-61, 288 
Richard of St Victor, 179 
Roberts, Bernadette, 188, 189-90 
robustness (adequacy criterion 
for theories of religious 


pluralism), 148-49 


Rowe, William, 10, 241, 282-86, 288, 
289, 291, 292 

Russell, Bertrand, 216, 217 

Russell, Bruce, 273, 289 

Ruysbroeck, 179, 182 


Saccidananda, 24, 229 
sadasadvicara, 31 
sadhana, 18, 18n22, 174 
SAGE. See self-authenticating 
experience of God 
saguna Brahman, 25, 29, 32, 34-38, 39, 
44, 59. See personal God 
Aurobindo on, 122, 123 
characteristics of, 34n51 
Chubb on, 127 
Hick on, 130, 132-33, 139 
mystical experience and, 160, 180 
religious pluralism and, 87, 88, 89, 91, 
114, 115 
saintly fruits test, 226-28 
saint-making theodicy, 9, 10, 
255-68, 270, 272, 281, 282, 288, 
289-91, 292-98 
adequacy criteria for assessing, 307-9 
anticipating possible objections 
to, 275-80 
determinism and, 244-45, 264-68, 
292, 307 
explained, 255-64 
skeptical theism and, 255-56 
soul-making theodicy in dialogue 
with, 292-97 
saksatkar, 214 
Sakta, 86 
Sakti, 58 
Brahman compared with, 57 
Brahman’s inseparability from, 16-17, 


21, 23, 24, 36-38, 40, 66, 71, 88, 91, 


99, 122, 142, 160, 161, 235 
Saktism, 22, 24, 88, 89, 95, 116 
salt doll analogy, 39, 178, 187, 214, 278 


Index « 347 


salvific efficacy, 7, 89, 95-99, 116 
conflicting religious truth-claims and, 
101, 107, 108 
Hick on, 119, 138, 144, 146, 148, 168 
inferior paths, 95, 96-97 
of mystical experience, 171, 182 
Vijfana Vedanta on, 44-45 
samadhi, 223-24 
samanadhikaranyam, 53 
Samanvayi Advaita, 15 
Samanvayi Vedanta, 15 
Samkhya, 188 
samma sankappa, 106 
samma vayama, 106 
Samyutta Nikaya, 113 
Sankara, 6, 9, 15, 22, 23, 39, 40, 43, 
48, 51, 52, 59, 81, 120, 123, 124, 
205, 233 
Chubb on, 128, 129, 130 
mystical experience and, 159-60, 161 
Ramakrishna’s views compared 
with, 61, 63 
religious pluralism and, 91 
on satyam jhanam anantam brahma, 
53-55, 56, 57,58 
theodicy of, 243, 244, 245-47, 
248-49, 259-60, 262-63, 269 
saptabhiimi paradigm, 180-81, 187 
Saradananda, Svami, 4, 187. See also 
Lilaprasanga; Sri Ramakrishna and 
His Divine Play 
Sarkar, Mahendralal, 32, 212 
Sarma, Debabrata Sen, 20 
satyam jhanam anantam brahma, 53-63 
Schmidt-Leukel, Perry, 87, 97-99, 113 
Schopenhauer, Arthur, 47, 48 
Schuon, Frithjof, 193 
Scott, Mark S. M., 305 
Scotus, John Duns, 51, 52, 63-64, 
65, 67, 68 
sects and sectarianism, 13, 13n1, 14-15, 


86, 87. See also nonsectarianism 


348 e Index 


Sefiroth, 184 
self-authenticating experience of God 
(SAGE), 8, 201-1, 237 
cross-checkability objection, 219-20 
flash of divine light in, 210 
as highest realization of God, 
197, 202-3 
key questions regarding, 201 
PIP on, 207-9 
Sengupta, Santosh, 125, 130 
sense-perceptual experiences, 213-16, 
219, 221, 222, 225, 230, 231 
Seuse, Heinrich von, 153-54, 158 
Sharma, Arvind, 36n53, 304 
Sil, Narasingha, 14 
Singh, Jaideva, 38 
Sita, 184, 235 
Siva, 17, 25, 184, 188, 232, 235 
Sivanath, 217 
skeptical theism, 9-10, 243, 244, 245, 
272, 307 
anticipating possible objections 
to, 273-75 
CORNEA-based, 292 
different theories compared, 282-92 
explained, 249-55 
minimal, 292 
saint-making theodicy and, 255-56 
summary of, 251 
two new versions of, 292 
Smart, Ninian, 7, 111-14, 154, 156, 157, 
162, 169, 179, 190, 191 
snake and its wriggling motion 
analogy, 37 
“Some (Temporarily) Final Thoughts on 
Evidential Arguments from Evil” 
(Alston), 285-86 
soteriocentric theory, 85 
soul-making theodicy, 10, 275, 280, 282, 
284, 289-90, 292-305 
adequacy criteria for assessing, 306-9 
central thesis of, 293 
a Ramakrishnan critique of, 297-305 


saint-making theodicy in dialogue 
with, 292-97 
Sraddhananda, Svami, 40 
Sri Ramakrishna and His Divine 
Play (Saradananda). See also 
Lilaprasanga 
mystical experience, 171-78, 184, 187, 
211, 218, 222-24, 227, 230, 235 
the problem of evil, 278 
religious pluralism, 95 
Sris, 199-200 
Srisriramakrsnakathamrta (Gupta), 3, 
3n6, 13. See also Kathamrta 
Srisriramakrsnalilaprasanga 
(Saradananda), 4. See also 
Lilaprasanga 
Staal, Frits, 156, 169-70 
Stace, Walter, 8, 154, 155, 157, 158-60, 
163, 177, 179, 182, 190, 191, 194 
staircase-roof analogy, 28-29, 


30n42, 95, 96 
Stevenson, Ian, 308-9 
sthiila, 42 


still water and agitated water analogy, 37 

Stoeber, Michael, 182, 260-61, 279, 
299, 300 

Stump, Eleonore, 255n30, 284, 308 

subject-object structure, 34n51, 39, 54, 
79, 178, 179, 213, 214 

substantialist view of ultimate reality, 
112-14, 112n46 

success (adequacy criterion for 
theodicies), 306, 307-8 

Suddhadyaita, 124 

sufferer-centered theodicy, 284, 289, 291 

sttksma, 42 

sun and its rays analogy, 37 

sun of Knowledge, 78 

Stinyata, 113, 159, 165, 232 

svartipa, 186 

Svetagvatara Upanisad, 43 

Swinburne, Richard, 9, 52, 64, 68, 196, 
198, 211, 215 


Tadananda, Swami, 20 
‘Tagore, Rabindranath, 2 
‘Taittirlya Upanisad, 51, 53, 55-56, 57 
Takashina, Rosen, 157 
Tantra, 13, 17,24, 96 
Tantrika, 14, 18 
Taoism, 96 
‘Tapasyananda, Swami, 2, 15, 86-87 
teleological argument, 200, 257, 
260-61, 288 
telesthesia, 223 
Teresa of Avila, Saint, 79, 158, 162, 184, 
202, 206-7, 210, 211, 219, 220, 222, 
229-30, 231, 234 
Tertullian, 198 
theistic beliefs and practices, 45, 66 
mystical experience and, 158, 160, 161, 
171, 172, 178-79, 182, 184, 188, 
189, 190, 194, 203, 214-15, 232-33, 
235, 237 
religious pluralism and, 88, 89, 96, 
107, 146 
skeptical (see skeptical theism) 
theodicies, 242-43 
adequacy criteria for assessing, 305-9 
classical Vedantic, 243, 244, 245-49 
comparative, 305-6 
meta-, 282, 305-9 
non-sufferer-centered, 289, 291 
saint-making (see saint-making theodicy) 
soul-making (see soul-making theodicy) 
sufferer-centered, 284, 289, 291 
will-fixing, 284 
theo-monistic experiences, 182, 235 
Theravada Buddhism, 111, 112, 114 
Thibaut, George, 38 
Three Essays on Religion (Mill), 253 
threefold typology, 97-98, 98-99n26 
Tipitaka, 113, 114 
Totapuri, 18, 177-78 
Trakakis, Nick, 262, 268, 306, 308 
transhistorical truth-claims, 101, 103-7, 
108, 138-39 


Index +» 349 


Trapnell, Judson, 148 
‘Turiyananda, Svami, 15 
two truths doctrine, 127-28 


ultimate questions, 102, 107-9, 139 
Underhill, Evelyn, 8, 156-57, 162, 194 
universal salvation doctrine, 244, 254, 
259, 263-64, 276, 279, 293, 294, 
297, 305, 308 
University of Birmingham, 130 
Upadesasahasri (Sankara), 205 
Upanisads, 15, 51, 118, 120 
Aurobindo and, 123-24, 130 
Brhadaranyaka, 43, 44 
Chandogya, 38, 40, 44 
Isa, 33, 38, 121 
Katha, 33 
Kena, 38, 121 
Mundaka, 43, 204 
Svetagvatara, 43 
Taittirlya, 51, 53, 55-56, 57 
Vijfiana Vedanta based on, 17, 27 
uttam bhakta, 29, 30n42, 39, 62 


Vacchagotta, 13 
vacuum-plenum, 159-60, 161 
Vaisnava Gosvami, 21, 78 
Vaisnavism, 13, 17, 22, 88, 89, 95, 102-3, 
106, 107, 116 
vamacara, 96-97, 98 
Van Norden, Bryan, 311 
Vasubandhu, 114 
Vedanta 
Acintyabhedabheda school of, 56, 124 
Advaita (see Advaita Vedanta) 
Aurobindo on three meanings 
of, 123-24 
Dyaita, 13, 123 
Hick influenced by, 119-24, 125, 126, 
130-31, 133, 135, 137 
implications of vijnana philosophy for 
modern, 45-50 
Integral, 16, 46 


350 + Index 


Vedanta (cont.) 
logic of the infinite in context 
of, 121-24 
Neo-, 16, 17, 45-50 
religious pluralism and, 111, 
119-24, 146 
Vijfana (see Vijhana Vedanta) 
Visistadvaita, 6, 13-14, 24, 25, 123 
Vedantic theodicies. See classical 
Vedantic theodicies 
Vergezzenlicheit, 157 
Vidyasagar, Iévarcandra, 249-51, 252, 
253, 254, 255, 272, 286, 287, 291 
Vijay, 226 


vijhana, 6, 7-8, 16-17, 18, 26, 27-45, 60, 


62-63, 66, 69, 72, 78, 79, 81. See 
also bhavamukha 

Aurobindo and, 121 

defined, 1, 88, 183 

jnana compared with, 28-29 

mystical experience and, 160-61, 
180-82, 183, 194-95, 204, 217, 
235, 236-37 

panentheistic standpoint of, 268-73, 
277, 292, 297, 300, 309 

the problem of evil and, 244, 245, 
268-73, 292, 297, 300, 301, 309 

Ramakrishna’s concept of 
explained, 27-30 

religious pluralism and, 44-45, 
87-100, 107, 110, 111, 114-15, 119, 
140-47, 149, 150, 168 

suprarational quality of, 30-33 

Vijhana Vedanta, 6, 13-50, 52, 19-20 

central tenets of, 27-45 

defined, 16 

implications for discourse on modern 
Vedanta, 45-50 

mystical experience and, 155, 160, 
193, 194 

vijnani 


defined, 29, 180 


level of Advaitic realization 
in, 38-41 
Ramakrishna as, 29, 61, 181, 183, 
203, 270 
synonyms for, 30n42 
various forms of union with God 
in, 41-44 
Visistadvaita Vedanta, 6, 13-14, 24, 
25, 123 
Visnu, 17 
Vivekananda, Swami (Narendra; 
Narendranath), 1, 2, 3, 14, 17, 31, 38, 
45, 46, 48-50, 76, 96, 118, 124, 127, 
133, 137 
Aurobindo influenced by, 
120-21, 123 
Hick’s lack of references to, 124 
mystical experience and, 184, 
214, 228-29 
Neo-Hinduism and, 47, 48-49 
vyakulata, 105-6 
vyavaharika, 43 


Wainwright, William, 179, 180, 197, 211, 
232, 236, 237 

washerman parable, 99-100 

watch analogy, 106 

water and its wetness analogy, 37 

wax analogy, 40 

Weber, Max, 243, 262, 264 

Westphal, Merold, 5 

Whitehead, Alfred North, 20, 85, 148 

will-fixing theodicy, 284 

Wykstra, Stephen, 242, 292 


Yandell, Keith, 202, 207, 208, 210 
Yogacara Buddhism, 186 
yogis, 62-63 


Zachner, R. C., 155, 163, 179, 182, 190 
Zen Buddhism, 157, 165, 187 
Zimmer, Heinrich, 14 


