
THEODOR 



05 




the Jargon 
of Authenticity 




THEODOR W. ADORNO 


the Jargon 
of Authenticity 

TRANSLATED BY 

Knut Tarnowski 
and Frederic Will 

NORTHWESTERN UNIVERSITY PRESS 


Evanston 1973 



Copyright © 1973 by Northwestern University Press 
Library of Congress' Catalog Card Number: 72-96701 

V'ISBN 0-8101-0407-5 
Printed in the United States of America 
All rights reserved 


The Jargon of Authenticity was originally published 
in German under the title Jargon der Eigentlichkeit: 
Zur deutschen Ideologie. © Suhrkamp Verlag, Frank- 
furt am Main, 1964 


Knut Tarnowski is an instructor in comparative litera- 
ture at the University of Massachusetts. 

Frederic Will is professor of comparative literature 
at the University of Massachusetts. 



CONTENTS 


vii Foreword, by Trent Schroyer 
xix Author’s Note 
3 The Jargon of Authenticity 




FOREWORD 


PHILOSOPHY WHICH ONCE 
SEEMED OUTMODED IS NOW 
ALIVE BECAUSE THE MOMENT 
OF ITS REALIZATION HAS BEEN 
MISSED. 

Theodor W. Adorno 

Existentialism has been de- 
scribed by Paul Tillich as “an over one hundred year 
old movement of rebellion against the dehumanization 
of man in industrial society.” 1 But this rebellion has 
been viewed as emerging because the solutions pro- 
posed by Hegel and Marx proved ineffective for over- 
coming the fact of alienation . 2 Thus Kierkegaard, in 
rejecting Hegel’s immanentism of Reason in history 
simply tried to restore the irreducibility of human sub- 
jectivity. For Kierkegaard the suffering of the individ- 
ual is not justified in a panlogism of history. 

The Jargon of Authenticity is Theodor W. Adorno’s 

1. Paul Tillich, “Existentialist Philosophy,” The Journal of 
the History of Ideas, V (Jan., 1944), 44 70. 

2. F. H. Heinemann, Existentialism and the Modem Pre- 
dicament (New York, 1958), p. 12. 



critique of the ideology of German existentialism. As a 
member of the Frankfurt school of critical theory , 3 
Adorno’s critique is a Hegelian-Marxist response to the 
existentialist rejection of critical reason. Although this 
analysis focuses upon twentieth-century German ex- 
istentialism, especially its post-World War II diffusion, 
the basic concern is its notion of subjectivity. That is, 
Adorno’s critique is itself an attempt to transcend and 
include in the perspective of critical reason the truth 
of the existentialist concern for the fundamentalness 
of human subjectivity. In this sense Adorno’s analysis 
parallels that of Jean-Paul Sartre, who in the introduc- 
tion to the Critique of Dialectical Reason argues that, 
correctly understood, existentialism is a moment of 
dialectical, or critical, reason . 4 

However, Adorno’s intent goes beyond a counter- 
critique of existentialism and aspires to be a critique of 
the ideology inherent in its German formulations. 
Adorno not only wants to salvage the notion of sub- 
jectivity from the idealistic tendency of existentialism, 
a concern he shares with Sartre, but he also wants to 
show that this theory has become a mystification of the 
actual processes of domination. In this way Adorno’s 
critique is within the tradition of critical theory’s cri- 
tique of ideology. The intent of critical theory is to re- 

3. The Frankfurt school is best known by its leading mem 
bers, among whom are Max Horkheimer, Walter Benjamin, 
Herbert Marcuse, and Jurgen Habermas. However, these are 
only the better-known members of a tradition of critical theory 
that has now spanned two generations. An excellent intellec 
tual history of this highly important and little understood com- 
munity of radical scholars has just been published by Martin 
Jay under the title of The Dialectical Imagination (Boston, 
1973 ). 

4. Jean Paul Sartre, Search for a Method (New York, 

1963)- 

viii 



construct the generation of historical forms of con- 
sciousness in order to demonstrate how they misrepre- 
sent actual social relations and thereby justify histori- 
cal forms of domination. In this way dialectical reason 
is actualized by critical theorists who, in their reflective 
critiques of the basic categories of historical con- 
sciousness, seek to reconcile men and women to the 
actuality of their historical possibilities. So conceived, 
critical theory is a theoretical moment of the “class 
struggle.” 

However, the later Frankfurt school no longer as- 
sumed that the categories of Marx’s critique of political 
economy were adequate for the critique of late in- 
dustrial society (i.e., both “capitalisms” and “social- 
isms”). It was precisely the failure of Marx’s historical 
agent of change, the proletariat, to become a class-for- 
itself that stimulated the Frankfurt school’s analyses 
of the ideological reifications that blocked human lib- 
eration. Their concern for the growth of false con- 
sciousness generated by the “culture industry” and the 
increased integration, and yet atomization, of persons 
in the industrial order resulted in a series of critical 
analyses of mass culture and ideological traditions, 
e.g., authoritarian social forms, the legacy of the En- 
lightenment’s notion of Reason, etc . 5 In the absence of 
a decisive agent of social change, and in the midst of 
what Marcuse termed a “one-dimensional society,” the 
basic interest of the Frankfurt school was to restore the 
actuality of critical rationality. Indeed, their refusal to 
affirm “mechanical Marxism” or utopian hopes for 

5. Some of these studies are now available in English, such 
as M. Horkheimer and Theodor W. Adorno, Dialectic of En- 
lightenment (New York, 1972); Max Horkheimer, Critical 
Theory (New York, 1972). 


ix 



liberation is perhaps evidence of their consistency in 
staying within the limits of negative critique. For them, 
only in the negation of pseudo-integrations and resolu- 
tions was emancipatory action clearly possible. Hence, 
the Frankfurt school became a tradition of revolution- 
ary theorists who, in the absence of the objective pos- 
sibilities for the transcendence of industrial domina- 
tion, attempted to uphold the ideals of critical reason 
that anticipated the emancipation of mankind from 
the unnecessary power constraints of nature and his- 
tory. In this way their work is basically a critique of 
the reifications that conceal the truth of critical reason. 
Since “reification” is for them “a forgetting,” 6 their 
work is essentially a remembrance, from the historical 
setting of the mid-twentieth century, of the notion of 
critical reason. 

Adorno’s The Jargon of Authenticity continues the 
critique of existentialism that had always been an issue 
for Frankfurt theorists. 7 The continuity of this critique 
can be shown by Adorno’s 1939 essay “On Kierke- 
gaard’s Doctrine of Love,” which anticipates and is 
assumed by this book. 8 Adorno shows that Kierke- 
gaard’s notion of love transcended human differences, 
happiness, and even historical morality itself. The 

6. Horkheimer and Adorno, Dialectic of Enlightenment. 

7. Perhaps the earliest statement of this concern is Adorno’s 
Habilitationsarbeit (1933), which was published as Kierke 
gaard: Konstruktion des Aesthetischen (Frankfurt, 1965). But 
the essay by Herbert Marcuse, “Existentialism : Remarks on 
Jean-Paul Sartre’s L'Etre et le neant ," Philosophy and Phe- 
nomonological Research VII, no. 3 (March, 1948), is one of 
the most important critiques of existentialism in the Frank- 
furt tradition. 

8. Z eitschrift fur Sozialforschung, VIII (1939), 413 29. 


x 



most remote neighbor was to be affirmed as much as 
the most intimate friend; “preference” was to be over- 
come, and love as agape was to be experienced in a 
radical inwardness that transcended the natural incli- 
nations of eros. Adorno argues that this love’s extreme 
inwardness conceived of itself as its own ground. 
Hence, while Kierkegaard’s doctrine of love aimed at 
overcoming the reifications of historical context, it 
actually became, Adorno claims, a reification that 
could not be actualized. In oppressing both natural 
drives and the right of the mind to question, radical in- 
wardness loses love’s power of reconciling the antag- 
onism between natural instincts and socially formed 
selves. In abstract inward love, both historical need 
and happiness are effectively denied. The real object 
of this love’s “desire” is redemption — which becomes 
the ultimate reality sought. 

Adorno shows that this radical Christian inward- 
ness evades the actuality of secular injustice and in- 
equality. Nonetheless, Kierkegaard is more deeply 
aware of the transformation of the person in the bour- 
geois epoch than his contemporaries or his later Ger- 
man existentialist followers. That is, he recognized 
the mechanisms of industrialization that force men 
into alienated social patterns and reified communica- 
tions. But this insight only confirmed Kierkegaard’s 
sense that the progress of civilization was the history 
of advancing decay and further inclined him to the 
hatred of “leveling” mechanisms and the rejection of 
the motives of the bourgeois epoch. Only in the radical 
inwardness of Christian love, in the leap of faith that 
suspends the ethical, is it possible to hope for eternality, 
for redemption. 

But Adorno’s central point is that Kierkegaard’s 



radical inwardness has lost the dialectical mediation of 
subject and object — which was the achievement of 
Hegel’s critical philosophy. That is, the constitutive 
presuppositions of human subjectivity must themselves 
be dialectically related to the historical context in 
which determinate subjects are formed. Failure to so 
relate the subject and object of historically situated 
knowledge results in the fallacy .of “obj 
the reduction of subjectivity to the in-it-selfness of 
facts (e.g., positivism) or the innate principles of mind 
( the idealistic philosophy of the identity of reason and 
mind). Both forms of objectivism are the loss of criti- 
cal (dialectical) reason. Only the tradition of reflec- 
tive critique conceived of human subjectivity in a way 
that did not reduce it to the determinateness of natural 
facts or absorb it into the spiritual principles of abso- 
lute idealism. Kierkegaard’s radical inwardness be- 
comes an idealistic objectivism by failing to compre- 
hend subjectivity as a historical category. 

Dialectically conceived “subjectivity” is historically 
formed and yet not reducible to historical determina- 
tions; historical subjectivity is reconstructed from the 
framework of reflective critique in that the limits of 
constitutive synthesis establish the range of possible 
experience. Only in such a reflective reconstruction of 
the genesis of subjectivity is it possible to distinguish 
between real possibilities and those modes of appear- 
ance that are but abstract illusions, e.g., existen- 
tialism’s transcendence of historical domination. So 
conceived, the dialectical notion of subjectivity is a 
fundamental category of critical reason. In reflective 
reconstructions of self-formation processes, it is pos- 
sible to show the pseudo-necessity of socially unneces- 
sary motives and to thereby promote a reversal of con- 

xii 



sciousness that can dissolve the causality of these 
objective illusions . 9 

In The Jargon of Authenticity. Adorno applies the 
method of immanent criticism to contemporary Ger- 
man existentialists (e.g^ Buber, Jaspers, Heide gg er, 
etc.). His basic thesis is that after World War II this 
philosophical perspective became an ideological mysti- 
fication of human domination — while pretending to be 
a critique of alienation. Use of existentialists terms 
became, Adorno argues, a jargon: a mode of magical 
expression which Walter Benjamin called an “aura.” 
In the aura of existentialism the historical need for 
meaning and liberation was expressed, but in a way 
that mystified the actual relation between language 
and its objective content. Adorno’s critique focuses on 
the jargon’s incapacity to express the relation between 
language and truth, in that it breaks the dialectic of 
language by making the intended object appear present 
by the idealization inherent in the word itself. The 
jargon, therefore, falls into an objectivism that con- 
ceals the difference between philosophical reflection 
and the in-itselfness of the object of reflection. Such 
objectivism loses the intent of reflection to maintain a 
self-consciousness of the mediation of fact through the 
thinking subject. Consequently, in the jargon objective 
consciousness is compressed into self -experience, and 
an idealism results. 


9. The methodological ideal of critical theory has been 
given a contemporary restatement in Jurgen Habermas, 
Knowledge and Human Interests (Boston, 1971), and Theory 
and Practice (Boston, 1973). The continuity of the tradition 
of critical theory has been argued by Trent Schroyer, The Criti- 
que of Domination (New York, 1973). 



But the societal result of this idealistic tendency is 
that the jargon shares with modem advertising the 
ideological circularity of pretending to make present, 
in pure expressivity, an idealized form that is devoid of 
content; or, alternatively, just as the mass media can 
create a presence whose aura makes the spectator seem 
to experience a nonexistent actuality, so the jargon pre- 
sents a gesture of autonomy without content. Adorno’s 
analysis here continues Marx’s analysis of the fetish- 
ism of commodities, in that the symbolisms of the 
jargon do not represent actual social relations but 
rather symbolize only the relations between abstract 
concepts. Lost in the fetishisms of the jargon is the 
actuality of the historical development of human con- 
sciousness. That the subject itself is formed, and de- 
formed, by the objective configuration of institutions 
is forgotten, and thus reified, in the jargon’s pathos of 
archaic primalness. Consequently, there is a loss of the 
objective context of human society and an idealistic 
compression of all historical consciousness into the 
sphere of self-experience. For example, Adorno cites 
Martin Buber’s I and Thou and Paul Tillich’s stress 
that religiosity is an end in itself, as instances of the 
shift to subjectivity as an in-it-selfness. In both cases 
the words are referred to the immediacy of life, to at- 
titudinal and qualitative aspects of self -experience. 
One needs only to be a believer; the objective content 
of belief has been eclipsed in the subjectivization of 
objective content. To be a Christian seems to be a 
personal question — independent from the historical 
divinity of Christ. Without necessarily intending to do 
so, this extreme subjectivity transforms existentialists 
language into a mystification of the objective con- 
straints that block the autonomy and spontaneity of 
the historical subject. 


xiv 



Hegel proclaimed philosophy a “homecoming” that 
critically reconciled objective discord and subjective 
consciousness. His intent was to maintain a meaning- 
ful totality by the reflective mediations of critical rea- 
son. Reflection had as its aim the critique of abstrac- 
tions, or in Marxian terms, of reifications. In this way 
Marx’s work attempted to demonstrate the nonequiva- 
lence of exchange in the capitalist economy — thereby 
restoring to human consciousness a critical mediation 
of economic exploitation. 

Adorno implies that contemporary German ex- 
istentialism began from a higher level of capitalist 
development, in which the sociocultural antagonisms 
are muc deepe r than economic expl o itation and ex- 
tend. into, the .subject ’s e go itse lf. Therefore, the haste 
with which the existentialists and their jargon attempt 
to achieve a reconciliation, irregardless of the objective 
processes of alienation which block meaning and 
autonomy, indicated only their awareness of the depth 
of the need. The resulting movement to a radical in- 
wardness and its expressions of authenticity, freedom, 
etc., is an attempt to actualize these ideals outside of 
the objective social context: to fulfill heroic cultural 
models independent of the society. Behind these empty 
claims for freedom the socioeconomic processes of ad- 
vanced capitalist integration continue, intensifying the 
dependence of all persons upon large organizational 
units for employment and welfare. The jargon’s “bless- 
ings” conceal this objective context of unfreedom, and 
in the name of critical reflection the jargon joins hands 
with modem advertising in celebrating the meaningful- 
ness of immediate experience. 

Hence for Adorno, German existentialism and re- 
lated genres, such as neoromantic lyric poetry (e.g., 
Rilke), come to a head in a mythic jargon that re- 


xv 



duces the dialectical relationship of reflective critique 
to the objective content and context of subjectivity. 
The result is an ideology of the simple in which the 
primal sense of pure words is elevated in a futile at- 
tempt to overcome the “alienation” that remains linked 
to the political-economic framework of society. 

Adorno’s reconstruction of Heidegger’s philosophy 
attempts to show that it becomes an ontology that re- 
treats behind, rather than overcomes, the tradition of 
transcendental philosophy. In the universalization of 
transcendental subjectivity into Dasein, the empirical 
is totally lost and, as Adorno claims, an essence-mythol- 
ogy of Being emerges. This is exemplified in the claim 
that the primacy of Dasein is a realm beyond fact 
and essence and yet one which maintains itself as 
an identity. Whereas critical reason was able to show 
that maintenance of identity of consciousness presup- 
posed a dialectic of subjective and objective reciprocity 
which was unified only in the constitutive activity of 
concrete subjectivity itself, Heidegger’s notion of 
Dasein as both ontic and ontological stops the dialec- 
ticity of conscious existence in an idealistic elevation 
of the absolute subject. To quote Adorno: 

whatever praises itself for reaching behind the con- 
cepts of reflection — subject and object — in order to 
grasp something substantial, does nothing but reify the 
irresolvability of the concepts of reflection. It reifies 
the impossibility of reducing one into the other; into 
the in-itself (italics added ). 10 

Adorno’s thesis is that Heidegger’s notion of self- 
ness remains a reified tributary of Husserl’s concept of 

io. The mature statement of the notion of critical reason 
has been recently translated as Negative Dialectik (New York, 
1973 )- 


xvi 



subject. This concept of subject, in attempting to over- 
come the pure possibility of the on tic, claims to be it- 
self concrete. Hence, Heidegger dogmatically proclaims 
his concept of existence as something in opposition to 
identity — while at the same time he “continues the 
tradition of the doctrine of identity with his implicit 
definition of the self through its own preservation.” 
Hence, Adorno examines the notions of “Dasein,” “au- 
thenticity,” “death,” “care,” etc., and shows that their 
use evades the issue of historical determinateness by 
means of a primary and absolute creative subject — 
which is, by definition, supposedly untouched by reifi- 
cation. 

Hence, the aura of authenticity in Heidegger is that 
it names “nothing”; the “I” remains formal and yet 
pretends that the word contains content in-itself. For 
Adorno, Heidegger’s existentialism is a new Platonism 
which implies that authenticity comes in the complete 
disposal of the person over himself — as if there were 
no determination emerging from the objectivity of his- 
tory. 


Trent Schroyer 

Graduate Faculty of the 

New School for Social Research 
February, 1973 




AUTHOR'S NOTE 


The author conceived the Jar- 
gon of Authenticity as part of the Negative Dialectic. 
However, he finally excluded that text from the latter 
work not only because its size grew disproportionate to 
the other parts, but also because the elements of lin- 
guistic physiognomy and sociology no longer fitted 
properly with the rest of the plan. The resistance 
against intellectual division of labor requires that this 
division of labor should be reflected on and not merely 
ignored. Certainly in intention and in theme the Jar- 
gon is philosophical. As long as philosophy was in line 
with its own nature, it also had content. However, in 
retreating to the ideal of its pure nature, philosophy 
cancels itself out. This thought was only developed 
in the book which was then still unfinished, while 



the Jargon proceeds according to this insight without, 
however, grounding it fully. Thus it was published 
earlier, as a kind of propaedeutic. 

Insofar as the author has paid homage to the di- 
vision of labor, he has at the same time all the more 
rudely challenged this division. He might be accused 
of philosophical, sociological, and aesthetic seduction 
without employing the traditional manner of keeping 
the categories separate — or maybe even of discussing 
them distinct from each other. Yet he would have to 
answer that a demand of this kind projects onto ob- 
jects the desire for order which marks a classifying 
science, and which then proclaims that it is elevated by 
objects. The author, however, feels more inclined to 
give himself over to objects than to schematize like a 
schoolmaster — for the sake of an external standard: 
a standard which, questionably, has been brought to 
bear on the subject matter from the outside. This atti- 
tude determines itself by precisely the fact that the 
subject-matter elements of philosophy are intertwined. 
The common methodological ideal would break up 
this intimate unity. By means of such a unity of the 
subject matter, the unity of the author’s own attempts 
should become all the more visible — for example, the 
unity of the author’s philosophical essays with the 
essay, “Criticism of the Musician” from the Disso- 
nances. What is aesthetically perceived in the bad 
form of language, and interpreted sociologically, is 
deduced from the untruth of the content which is 
posited with it : its implicit philosophy. 

This makes for bad blood. Passages from Jaspers 
and idea blocks from Heidegger are treated on the 
same levels, and with that same linguistic attitude, 
which schoolmasters would probably reject with indig- 
nation. The text of the Jargon, however, contains 
xx 



enough evidence, from a truly inexhaustible wealth, 
to show that those men write in the same manner 
which they despise in their lesser followers as a justi- 
fication of their own superiority. Their philosophemes 
show on what the jargon feeds, as well as its indirect 
suggestive force. The ambitious projects of German 
philosophy in the second half of the twenties concre- 
tized and articulated the direction into which the ob- 
jective spirit of the time was drawn. This spirit re- 
mained what it was and thus speaks in the jargon 
even today. Only the criticism of these philosophical 
projects can objectively determine the mendacity 
which echoes in the vulgar jargon. The physiognomy 
of the vulgar jargon leads into what discloses itself in 
Heidegger. 

It is nothing new to find that the sublime becomes 
the cover for something low. That is how potential 
victims are kept in line. But the ideology of the sub- 
lime no longer acknowledges itself without being dis- 
regarded. To show this fact might help to prevent 
criticism from stagnating in a vague and noncom- 
mittal suspicion of ideology, a suspicion which has 
itself fallen into ideology. Contemporary German 
ideology is careful not to pronounce definite doctrines, 
such as liberal or even elitist ones. Ideology has shifted 
into language. Social and anthropological changes 
have brought about this shift, though without breaking 
the veil. The fact that such language is actually ideol- 
ogy, i.e., societally necessary Schein, “appearance,” 
can be shown from within it. This becomes obvious in 
the contradiction between its “how” and its “what.” In 
its objective impossibility the jargon reacts toward the 
imminent impossibility of language. Language gives 
itself over either to the market, to balderdash, or to 
the predominating vulgarity. On the other hand lan- 


xxi 



guage shoves its way toward the judge’s bench, en- 
velopes itself in judicial garb, and in that way asserts 
its privilege. The jargon is the happy synthesis which 
makes it explode. 

Showing this has practical consequences. As irre- 
sistible as the jargon appears in present-day Germany, 
it is actually weak and sickly. The fact that the jargon 
has become an ideology unto itself destroys this ideol- 
ogy as soon as this fact is recognized. If the jargon 
were finally to become silent in Germany, part of that 
would have been accomplished for which skepticism, 
itself prejudiced, is praised — prematurely and without 
justification. The interested parties who use the jargon 
as a means of power, or depend on their public image 
for the jargon’s social-psychological effect, will never 
wean themselves from it. There are others who will be 
embarrassed by the jargon. Even followers who believe 
in authority will shy away from ridiculousness, as soon 
as they feel the fragile nature of that authority to 
which they look for support. The jargon is the histori- 
cally appropriate form of untruth in the Germany of 
the last years. For this reason one can discover a truth 
in the determinate negation of the jargon, a truth 
which refuses to be formulated in positive terms. Parts 
of the first sections were originally published in the 
third issue of the Neue Rundschau in 1963, and have 
been incorporated into the text. 


June, 1967 



the Jargon 
of Authenticity 




In the early twenties a number 
of people active in philosophy, sociology, and theology, 
planned a gathering. Most of them had shifted from 
one creed to another. Their common ground was an 
emphasis on a newly acquired religion, and not the 
religion itself. All of them were unsatisfied with the 
idealism which at that time still dominated the univer- 
sities. Philosophy swayed them to choose, through free- 
dom and autonomy, a positive theology such as had 
already appeared in Kierkegaard. However, they were 
less interested in the specific doctrine, the truth con- 
tent of revelation, than in conviction. To his slight 
annoyance, a friend, who was at that time attracted by 
this circle, was not invited. He was — they intimated — 
not authentic enough. For he hesitated before Kierke- 
gaard’s leap. He suspected that religion which is con- 
jured up out of autonomous thinking would subordi- 


3 



nate itself to the latter, and would negate itself as the 
absolute which, after all, in terms of its own conceptual 
nature, it wants to be. Those united together were anti- 
intellectual intellectuals. They confirmed their mutual 
understanding on a higher level by excluding one who 
did not pronounce the same credo they repeated to one 
another. What they fought for on a spiritual and in- 
tellectual plane they marked down as their ethos, as 
if it elevated the inner rank of a person to follow the 
teaching of higher ideals; as if there were nothing 
written in the New Testament against the Pharisees. 
Even forty years later, a pensioned bishop walked out 
on the conference of a Protestant academy because a 
guest lecturer expressed doubt about the contemporary 
possibility of sacred music. He too had been warned 
against, and dispensed from, having dealings with 
people who do not toe the line; as though critical 
thought had no objective foundation but was a sub- 
jective deviation. People of his nature combine the 
tendency that Borchardt called a putting-themselves- 
in-the-right with the fear of reflecting their reflections 
— as if they didn’t completely believe in themselves. 
Today, as then, they sense the danger of losing again 
what they call the concrete — of losing it to that ab- 
straction of which they are suspicious, an abstraction 
which cannot be eradicated from concepts. They con- 
sider concretion to be promised in sacrifice, and first 
of all in intellectual sacrifice. Heretics baptized this 
circle “The Authentic Ones.” 

This was long before the publication of Sein und 
Zeit. Throughout this work Heidegger employed “au- 
thenticity,” in the context of an existential ontology, 


4 



as a specifically philosophical term. Thus in philosophy 
he molded that which the authentics strive for less 
theoretically; and in that way he won over to his side 
all those who had some vague reaction to that philos- 
ophy. Through him, denominational demands became 
dispensable. His book acquired its aura by describing 
the directions of the dark drives of the intelligentsia 
before 1933 — directions which he described as full of 
insight, and which he revealed to be solidly coercive. 
Of course in Heidegger, as in all those who followed 
his language, a diminished, theolneical resonance can 
be heard to this very day. The theological addictions of 
these years have seeped into the language, far beyond 
the circle of those who at that time set themselves up 
as the elite. Nevertheless, the sacred quality of the 
authentics’ talk belongs to the cult of authenticity 
rather than to the Christian cult, even where — for 
temporary lack of any other available authority— its 
language resembles the Christian. Prior to any con- 
sideration of particular content, this language molds 
thought. As a consequence, that thought accommo- 
dates itself to the goal of subordination even where it 
aspires to resist that goal. The authority of the absolute 
is overthrown by absolutized authority. Fascism was 
not simply a conspiracy — although it was that — but it 
was something that came to life in the course of a 
powerful social development. Language provides it 
with a refuge. Within this refuge a smoldering evil ex- 
presses itself as though it were salvation. 

In Germany a jargon of authenticity is spoken — 
even more so, written. Its language is a trademark of 
societalized chosenness, noble and homey at once— 


5 



sub-language as superior language. The jargon extends 
from philosophy and theology — not only of Protestant 
academies — to pedagogy, evening schools, and youth 
organizations, even to the elevated diction of the rep- 
resentatives of business and administration. While the 
jargon overflows with the pretense of deep human 
emotion, it is just as standardized as the world that 
it officially negates; the reason for this lies partly in its 
mass success, partly in the fact that it posits its mes- 
sage automatically, through its mere nature. Thus the 
jargon bars the message from the experience which 
is to ensoul it. The jargon has at its disposal a modest 
number of words which are received as promptly as 
signals. “Authenticity” itself is not the most prominent 
of them. It is more an illumination of the ether in 
which the jargon flourishes, and the way of thinking 
which latently feeds it. For a beginning, terms like 
“existential,” “in the decision,” “commission,” “appeal,” 
“encounter,” “genuine dialogue,” “statement,” “con- 
cern,” will do for examples. Not a few nontermino- 
logical terms of similar cast could be added to this list. 
Some, like “concern,” a term still innocently used by 
Benjamin and verified in Grimm’s dictionary, have 
only taken on such changed coloring since getting into 
this “field of tension” — a term that is also an appro- 
priate example. 

Thus the important thing is not the planning of an 
Index Verborum Prohibitorum of current noble nouns, 
but rather the examination of their linguistic function 
in the jargon. Certainly not all its words are noble 
nouns. At times it even picks up banal ones, holds 
them high and bronzes them in the fascist manner 


6 



which wisely mixes plebeian with elitist elements. Neo- 
romantic poets who drank their fill of the precious, like 
George Hofmannsthal, by no means wrote their prose 
in the jargon. However, many of their intermediaries — 
like Gundolf — did so. The words become terms of the 
jargon only through the constellation that they negate, 
through each one’s gesture of uniqueness. The magic 
that the singular word has lost is procured for it by 
manipulations — of whatever kind. The transcendence 
of the single word is a secondary one, one that is de- 
livered ready from the factory, a transcendence which 
is a changeling said to be the lost original. Elements 
of empirical language are manipulated in their rigid- 
ity, as if they were elements of a true and revealed 
language. The empirical usability of the sacred cere- 
monial words makes both the speaker and listener 
believe in their corporeal presence. The ether is me- 
chanically sprayed, and atomistic words are dressed 
up without having been changed. Thus they become 
more important than the jargon’s so-called system. The 
jargon — objectively speaking, a system — uses disor- 
ganization as its principle of organization, the break- 
down of language into words in themselves. Many of 
them, in another linguistic constellation, can be used 
without a glance at the jargon: “statement,” where it 
is used in its fullest sense, in epistemology, to desig- 
nate the sense of predicative judgments; “authentic” 
— already to be used with caution — even in an adjec- 
tival sense, where the essential is distinguished from 
the accidental; “inauthentic,” where something broken 
is implied, an expression which is not immediately 
appropriate to what is expressed; “radio broadcasts of 


7 



traditional music, music conceived in the categories of 
live performance, are grounded by the feeling of as if, 
of the inauthentic.” 1 “Inauthentic” in that way be- 
comes a “critical” term, in definite negation of some- 
thing merely phenomenal. However, the jargon ex- 
tracts authenticity, or its opposite, from every such 
transparent context. Of course one would never criti- 
cize a firm for using the word Auftrag ( commission ), 
when it has been assigned a commission. But possi- 
bilities of that sort remain narrow and abstract. Who- 
ever overstrains them is paying tribute to a blank 
nominalistic theory of language, in which words are 
interchangeable counters, untouched by history. 

Yet history does intrude on every word and with- 
holds each word from the recovery of some alleged 
original meaning, that meaning which the jargon is 
always trying to track down. What is or is not the 
jargon is determined by whether the word is written 
in an intonation which places it transcendently in 
opposition to its own meaning; by whether the individ- 
ual words are loaded at the expense of the sentence, 
its propositional force, and the thought content. In that 
sense the character of the jargon would be quite for- 
mal: it sees to it that what it wants is on the whole felt 
and accepted through its mere delivery, without regard 
to the content of the words used. It takes under its 
own control the preconceptual, mimetic element in 
language — for the sake of effect connotations. “State- 
ment” thus wants to make believe that the existence of 
the speaker has communicated itself simultaneously 

i. Theodor W. Adorno, Der getreue Korrepitor (Frankfurt, 
1963) P- 218. 


8 



with his subject matter and has given the latter its 
dignity. The jargon makes it seem that without this 
surplus of the speaker the speech would already be in- 
authentic, that the pure attention of the expression to 
the subject matter would be a fall into sin. This formal 
element favors demagogic ends. Whoever is versed in 
the jargon does not have to say what he thinks, does 
not even have to think it properly. The jargon takes 
over this task and devaluates thought. That the whole 
man should speak is authentic, comes from the core. 
Thus something occurs which the jargon itself stylizes 
as “to occur .” 2 Communication clicks and puts forth 
as truth what should instead be suspect by virtue of 
the prompt collective agreement. The tone of the jar- 
gon has something in it of the seriousness of the 
augurs, arbitrarily independent from their context or 
conceptual content, conspiring with whatever is sacred. 

The fact that the words of the jargon sound as if 
they said something higher than what they mean sug- 
gests the term “aura.” It is hardly an accident that 
Benjamin introduced the term at the same moment 
when, according to his own theory, what he under- 
stood by “aura” became impossible to experience . 3 As 
words that are sacred without sacred content, as frozen 
emanations, the terms of the jargon of authenticity 

2. Later in the text Adorno refers to Heidegger’s term 
Ereignis, which has been rendered as “event” in the standard 
translation of Being and Time. “To occur” our rendering of 
sioh ereignen, has been chosen for lack of an English verb 
corresponding to the noun “event.” 

3. Cf. Walter Benjamin, Schriften I (Frankfurt, 1955), 
“Das Kunstwerk im Zeitalter seiner technischen Reproduzier- 
barkeit,” p. 374. [English translation by Harry Zohn, in Il- 
luminations (New York, 1968).] 


9 



are products of the disintegration of the aura. The 
latter pairs itself with an attitude of not being bound 
and thus becomes available in the midst of the de- 
mythified world; or, as it might be put in paramilitary 
modern German, it becomes einsatzbereit, mobi- 
lized. The perpetual charge against reification, a charge 
which the jargon represents, is itself reified. It falls 
under Richard Wagner’s definition of a theatrical effect 
as the result of an action without agent, a definition 
which was directed against bad art. Those who have 
run out of holy spirit speak with mechanical tongues. 
The secret which is suggested, and from the beginning 
is not there, is a public one. First one can subtract the 
misused Dostoevski from the expressionist formula 
“each man is selected,” which can be found in a play 
by Paul Kornfeld — who was murdered by the Nazis. 
Then the formula is good only for the ideological self- 
satisfaction of a lower middle class which is threatened 
and humbled by societal development. The jargon de- 
rives its own blessing, that of primalness, from the fact 
that it has developed as little in actuality as in spirit. 
Nietzsche did not live long enough to grow sick at his 
stomach over the jargon of authenticity: in the 
twentieth century he is the German resentment phe- 
nomenon par excellence. Nietzsche’s “something 
stinks” would find its first justification in the strange 
bathing ceremony of the hale life: 

Sunday really begins on Saturday evening. When 
the tradesman straightens his shop, when the housewife 
has put the whole house into clean and shining condi- 
tion, and has even swept the street in front of the house 
and freed it from all the dirt which it has collected dur- 



ing the week; when, finally, even the children are 
bathed; then the adults wash off the week’s dust, scrub 
themselves thoroughly; and go to the fresh clothes 
which are lying ready for them: when all of that is ar- 
ranged, with rural lengthiness and care, then a deep 
warm feeling of resting settles down over the people. 1 

Expressions and situations, drawn from a no longer 
existent daily life, are forever being blown up as if 
they were empowered and guaranteed by some abso- 
lute which is kept silent out of reverence. While those 
who know better hesitate to appeal to revelation, they 
arrange, in their addiction to authority, for the ascen- 
sion of the word beyond the realm of the actual, con- 
ditioned, and contestable; while these same people, 
even in private, express the word as though a blessing 
from above were directly composed into that word. 
That supreme state which has to be thought, but which 
also refuses being thought, is mutilated by the jargon. 
The latter acts as if it had possessed this state “from 
the beginning of time,” as it might run in the jargon. 
What philosophy aims at, the peculiar character of 
philosophy which makes representation essential to it, 
causes all its words to say more than each single one. 
This characteristic is exploited by the jargon. The 
transcendence of truth beyond the meanings of in- 
dividual words and propositional statements is attrib- 
uted to the words by the jargon, as their immutable 
possession, whereas this “more” is formed only by the 
mediation of the constellation. According to its ideal, 
philosophical language goes beyond what it says by 

4. Otto Friedrich Bollnow, Neue Geborgenheit (Stuttgart, 
1956), p. 205. 



means of what it says in the development of a train of 
thought. Philosophical language transcends dialec- 
tically in that the contradiction between truth and 
thought becomes self-conscious and thus overcomes 
itself. The jargon takes over this transcendence de- 
structively and consigns it to its own chatter. What- 
ever more of meaning there is in the words than what 
they say has been secured for them once and for all as 
expression. The dialectic is broken off: the dialectic 
between word and thing as well as the dialectic, within 
language, between the individual words and their re- 
lations. Without judgment, without having been 
thought, the word is to leave its meaning behind. This 
is to institute the reality of the “more.” It is to scoff, 
without reason, at that mystical language speculation 
which the jargon, proud of its simplicity, is careful 
not to remember. The jargon obliterates the difference 
between this “more” for which language gropes, and 
the in-itself of this more. Hypocrisy thus becomes an 
a priori, and everyday language is spoken here and 
now as if it were the sacred one. A profane language 
could only approach the sacred one by distancing itself 
from the sound of the holy, instead of by trying to 
imitate it. The jargon transgresses this rule blasphe- 
mously. When it dresses empirical words with aura, it 
exaggerates general concepts and ideas of philosophy 
— as for instance the concept of being — so grossly that 
their conceptual essence, the mediation through the 
thinking subject, disappears completely under the var- 
nish. Then these terms lure us on as if they were the 
most concrete terms. Transcendence and concretion 
scintillate. Ambiguity is the medium of an attitude 



toward language which is damned by its favorite phi- 
losophy . 5 

But the untruth indicts itself by becoming bom- 
bastic. After a long separation a certain person wrote 
that he was existentially secure; it took some reflection 
to realize that he meant he had been sufficiently taken 
care of in regard to his finances. A center intended for 
international discussions — whatever they may be good 
for — is called the House of Encounters; the visible 
house, “firmly grounded in the earth,” is turned into a 
sacred house through those gatherings — which are 
meant to be superior to discussions because they occur 
among existing and living individuals, although these 
individuals might just as well be engaged in discussion, 
for as long as they do not commit suicide they could 
hardly do anything other than exist. One’s relation to 
his fellow man should be important prior to all con- 
tent; for that purpose the jargon is satisfied with the 
shabby group-ethos of the youth movement, an indica- 
tion that nothing is reaching either beyond the nose of 
the speaker, or beyond the capacity of the person who 
has only lately begun to be called his “partner.” The 
jargon channels engagement into firm institutions and, 
furthermore, strengthens the most subaltern speakers 
in their self-esteem; they are already something be- 
cause someone speaks from within them, even when 
that someone is nothing at all. The resonant directive 


5. Cf. Martin Heidegger, Sein und Z eit, 3d ed. (Halle, 
1931), PP- 217 ff. [English translation by John Macquarrie and 
Edward Robinson, Being and Time (New York, 1962). Sub- 
sequent page references from Being and Time will be to this 
translation] 



of the jargon, that its thought should not be too strenu- 
ous, because otherwise it would offend the community, 
also becomes for these people the guarantee of a higher 
confirmation. This suppresses the fact that the lan- 
guage itself — through its generality and objectivity 
already negates the whole man, the particular speak- 
ing individual subject: the first price exacted by lan- 
guage is the essence of the individual. But through the 
appearance that the whole man, and not thought, 
speaks, the jargon pretends that, as a close-at-hand 
manner of communication, it is invulnerable to de- 
humanized mass communication — which is precisely 
what recommends it to everyone’s enthusiastic accept- 
ance. Whoever stands behind his words, in the way in 
which these words pretend, is safe from any suspicion 
about what he is at that very moment about to do: 
speak for others in order to palm something off on 
them. 

The word “statement” finally secures its alibi when 
“true” is connected to it. By means of its prestige it 
wants to endow the “for others” with the solidity of the 
in-itself. For glorified man, who himself not too long 
ago invented the term “death and glory squad,” is 
the ground of being for the jargon as well as the ad- 
dressee of the statement; and it has become impossible 
to distinguish between the two. The attribute “valid” 
often sticks to “statement.” The reason for this ob- 
viously lies in the fact that the emphatic experience, 
which the word claims insistently, is no longer experi- 
enced by those who favor this word for the claim it 
makes. A loudspeaker becomes necessary. “Statement” 
wants to announce that something which was said has 


i 4 



come from the depth of the speaking subject; it is 
removed from the curse of surface communication. 
But at the same time communicative disorder disguises 
itself in the statement. Someone speaks and, thanks 
to the elevated term “statement,” what he says is to be 
the sign of truth — as if men could not become caught 
up in untruth, as if they could not suffer martyrdom 
for plain nonsense. Prior to all content this shift in- 
dicts statement as soon as it wants to be such; it 
charges statement with being a lie. The listener is sup- 
posed to gain something from the statement because 
of its subjective reliability. This latter attribute, how- 
ever, is borrowed from the world of wares. It is the 
claim of the consumer that even the spiritual should 
direct itself according to his will, against its own con- 
ceptual nature. 

This admonition to the spirit silently dominates the 
whole climate of the jargon. The real and vain need for 
help is supposed to be satisfied by the pure spirit, 
merely by means of consolation and without action. 
The empty chatter about expression is the ideology 
complementary to that silencing which the status quo 
imposes on those who have no power over it, and whose 
claim is therefore hollow in advance. But whatever 
turns its back critically on the status quo has been dis- 
counted, by Germans in solid positions, as “without ex- 
pressive value.” Not least of all, statement is used as 
the club with which to assail the new art. That art’s 
recalcitrance against traditional communicable sense 
has been reproached — as though from a higher view- 
point — by those whose aesthetic consciousness is not 
up to it. If one adds to a statement that it is “valid,” 



then whatever at a given moment holds good, whatever 
is officially stamped, can be imputed to it as metaphysi- 
cally authorized. The formula spares people the trouble 
of thinking about the metaphysics which it has dragged 
with it, or about the content of what has been stated. 

The concept of statement appears in Heidegger as 
nothing less that the constituent of the Da, existence . 8 
Behind this jargon is a determining doctrine of the 
I-thou relationship as the locale of truth — a doctrine 
that defames the objectivity of truth as thingly, and 
secretly warms up irrationalism. As such a relation- 
ship, communication turns into that transpsycho- 
logical element which it can only be by virtue of the 
objectivity of what is communicated; in the end stu- 
pidity becomes the founder of metaphysics. Ever since 
Martin Buber split off Kierkegaard’s view of the existen- 
tial from Kierkegaard’s Christology, and dressed it up 
as a universal posture, there has been a dominant in- 
clination to conceive of metaphysical content as bound 
to the so-called relation of I and thou. This content is 
referred to the immediacy of life. Theology is tied to 
the determinations of immanence, which in turn want 
to claim a larger meaning, by means of their sugges- 
tion of theology: they are already virtually like the 
words of the jargon. In this process, nothing less is 
whisked away than the threshold between the natural 
and the supernatural. Lesser authentics raise their 
eyes reverently before death, but their spiritual atti- 
tude, infatuated with the living, disregards death. The 
thorn in theology, without which salvation is unthink- 

6. Ibid., p. 196. 


16 



able, is removed. According to the concept of theology, 
nothing natural has gone through death without meta- 
morphosis. In the man-to-man relationship there can 
be no eternity now and here, and certainly not in the 
relationship of man to God, a relationship that seems 
to pat Him on the shoulder. Buber’s style of existential- 
ism draws its transcendence, in a reversed analogia 
entis, out of the fact that spontaneous relationships 
among persons cannot be reduced to objective poles. 
This existentialism remains the Lebensyhiloso'phie out 
of which it came, in philosophical history, and which 
it abnegated: it overelevates the dynamism of mor- 
tality into the sphere of immortality. 

Thus in the jargon transcendence is finally brought 
closer to men: it is the Wurlitzer organ of the spirit. 
The sermon in Huxley’s Brave New World must have 
been written in the jargon. It was taped in order to be 
played when needed : to bring to reason the rebellious 
masses — by deep programmed emotion — in case they 
should once more band together. For advertising pur- 
poses the Wurlitzer organ humanizes the vibrato, once 
a carrier of subjective expression, by mechanically 
superimposing it on the mechanically produced sound. 
The jargon likewise supplies men with patterns for 
being human, patterns which have been driven out of 
them by unfree labor, if ever in fact traces of free labor 
did exist. Heidegger instituted authenticity against the 
they and against small talk, without deluding himself 
that there could be a complete leap between the two 
types of existentials that he deals with; for he knew 
that they merge into each other precisely because of 
their own dynamism. But he did not foresee that what 



he named authentic, once become word, would grow 
toward the same exchange-society anonymity against 
which Sein und Zeit rebelled. The jargon, which in 
Heidegger’s phenomenology of small talk earned an 
honored position, marks the adept, in their own opin- 
ion, as untrivial and of higher sensibility; while at the 
same time that jargon calms the constantly festering 
suspicion of uprootedness. 

In professional groups which, as they say, carry on 
intellectual work, but which are at the same time em- 
ployed, dependent, or economically weak, the jargon is 
a professional illness. Among such groups a specific 
function is added to a general social one. Their cul- 
ture and consciousness limp far behind that spirit 
which according to society’s division of labor is their 
realm of activity. Through their jargon they aspire to 
remove this distance, to put themselves forward as 
sharers in higher culture (to them old hats still sound 
modern) as well as individuals with an essence of their 
own; the more innocent among them may quite frankly 
still call all that a personal note — using an expression 
from the era of handicrafts, from which the jargon in 
question has borrowed a lot. The stereotypes of the jar- 
gon support and reassure subjective movement. They 
seem to guarantee that one is not doing what in fact 
he is doing — bleating with the crowd— simply by vir- 
tue of his using those stereotypes to guarantee that one 
has achieved it all himself, as an unmistakably free 
person. The formal gesture of autonomy replaces the 
content of autonomy. Bombastically, it is called com- 
mitment, but it is heteronomously borrowed. That 
which pseudo-individualizing attends to in the culture 



industry, the jargon attends to among those who have 
contempt for the culture industry. This is the German 
symptom of progressive half -culture. It seems to be in- 
vented for those who feel that they have been judged 
by history, or at least that they are falling, but who still 
strut in front of their peers as if they were an interior 
elite. 

The importance of this jargon is not to be under- 
estimated simply because a small group writes it. In- 
numerable real-life people speak it, from the student 
who in his exam lets himself go on about authentic 
encounter, to the bishop’s press secretary who asks: 
Do you believe that God addresses only our reason? 
Their unmediated language they receive from a dis- 
tributor. In the theological conversations of Dr. 
Faustus’ students, in Auerbach’s den of 1945, Thomas 
Mann intuited with precise irony most of the habits 
of modern German — though he no longer had much 
occasion 'to observe them. There certainly were appro- 
priate models before 1933, but only after the war, 
when National Socialist language became unwanted, 
did the jargon gain omnipresence. Since then the most 
intimate interchange has taken place between the writ- 
ten and the spoken word. Thus one will be able to read 
printed jargon which unmistakably imitates radio 
voices that have themselves drawn on written works of 
authenticity. Mediated and immediate elements are 
mediated through each other in frightful ways. And 
since they are synthetically prepared, that which is 
mediated has become the caricature of what is natural. 
The jargon no longer knows primary and secondary 
communities, and by the same token it knows no par- 



ties. This development has a real basis. The institu- 
tional and psychological superstructure, which in 1930 
Kracauer diagnosed as a culture of employees, deluded 
the celluloid-collar proletariat, who were then threat- 
ened by the immediacy of losing their jobs. It deluded 
them into believing that they were something special. 
Through this delusion the superstructure made them 
toe the bourgeois line, while in the meantime, thanks to 
a lasting market boom, that superstructure has become 
the universal ideology of a society which mistakes itself 
for a unified middle class. They let themselves be con- 
firmed in this attitude by a uniform mode of speech, 
which eagerly welcomes the jargon for purposes of col- 
lective narcissism. This applies not only to those who 
speak it but also to the objective spirit. The jargon af- 
firms the reliability of the universal by means of the 
distinction of having a bourgeois origin, a distinction 
which is itself authorized by the universal. Its tone of 
approved selectivity seems to come from the person 
himself. The greater advantage in all this is that of 
good references. It makes no difference what the voice 
that resonates in this way says; it is signing a social 
contract. Awe, in face of that existent which pretends 
to be more than it is, beats down all that is unruly. One 
is given to understand that that which occurs is so deep 
that language could not unhallow what has been said 
by saying it. Pure clean hands recoil from the thought 
of changing anything in the valid property-and- 
authority relationships; the very sound of it all makes 
that idea contemptible, as the merely ontic is to Heideg- 
ger. One can trust anyone who babbles this jargon; peo- 
ple wear it in their buttonholes, in place of the 


2 o 



currently disreputable party badge. The pure tone drips 
with positivity, without needing to stoop too far 
pleading for what is all too compromised; one escapes 
even the long-since-socialized suspicion of ideology. In 
the jargon that division between the destructive and the 
constructive, with which fascism had cut off critical 
thought, comfortably hibernates. Simply to be there 
becomes the merit of a thing. It is guaranteed in the 
protection of the double sense of the positive : as some- 
thing existent, given, and as something worthy of being 
affirmed. Positive and negative are reified prior to liv- 
ing experience, as though they were valid prior to all 
living experience of them; as though it was not thought 
that first of all determined what is positive or negative; 
and as though the course of such determination were 
not itself the course of negation. 

The jargon secularizes the German readiness to 
view men’s positive relation to religion as something 
immediately positive, even when the religion has dis- 
integrated and been exposed as something untrue. The 
undiminished irrationality of rational society encour- 
ages people to elevate religion into an end in itself, 
without regard to its content: to view religion as a 
mere attitude, as a quality of subjectivity. All this at 
the cost of religion itself. One needs only to be a be- 
liever — no matter what he believes in. Such irrational- 
ity has the same function as putty. The jargon of 
authenticity inherits it, in the childish manner of Latin 
primers which praise the love of the fatherland in- 
itself — which praise the viri patriae amantes, even 
when the fatherland in question covers up the most 
atrocious deeds. Sonnemann has described this phe- 



nomenon as not being able to get rid of a benevolent 
attitude which at all costs defends order, even an order 
in which all these things are not in order. What things? 
According to the logic of the sentence they ought only 
to be accidentals, but instead they are strikingly essen- 
tial: “poisonous exhaust emissions, pressing taboos, 
insincerity, resentments, hidden hysteria on all sides.” 
What remains then of the orderliness of the order? 
Obviously, it needs first to be created . 7 Benevolence is 
identical with being predecided. What is affirmative 
and wholesome doubles the curse of evil. Through mar- 
riage offers, the jargon guides the petit bourgeois to a 
positive attitude toward life. It fasddiously prolongs 
the innumerable events which are to make attractive 
to men a life by which they otherwise would be dis- 
gusted — and which they would soon come to consider 
unbearable. That religion has shifted into the subject, 
has become religiosity, follows the trend of history. 
Dead cells of religiosity in the midst of the secular, 
however, become poisonous. The ancient force, which 
according to Nietzsche’s insight nourishes everything, 
should enter completely into the profane; instead it 
preserves itself in an unreflected manner and elevates 
limitation, which abhors reflection, to the level of 
virtue. 

All experts in the jargon, from Jaspers on down, 
unite in praise of positivity. Only the careful Heidegger 
avoids a too open-hearted affirmation for its own sake, 
and indirectly pays his dues. He is eager and genuine 
about it. But Jaspers writes, unashamedly: “Actually 

7. Ulrich Sonnemann, Das Land der unbegrenzten Zumut 
barkeiten (Reinbek bei Hamburg, 1963), pp. 196 ff. 



only that man can remain in the world who lives out 
from something which in every case he possesses only 
through commitment.” 8 To which he adds : “Only the 
person who commits himself freely is proof against a 
disillusioned revolt against himself.” 9 It is true that 
his philosophy of existence has chosen, as its patron 
saint, Max Weber, who stood up proudly without illu- 
sions. Nevertheless, he is interested in religion, no 
matter of what kind. He is interested in it provided it is 
ready at hand, because it guarantees the required com- 
mitment; or simply because it exists, whether or not it 
fits with the notion of independent philosophy, which 
Jaspers reserves for himself as if it were a personal 
privilege : 

Whoever is true to transcendence in the form of such a 
belief should never be attacked, so long as he does not 
become intolerant. For in the believing person only 
destruction can take place; he can perhaps remain open 
to philosophizing, and risk the corresponding burden 
of a doubting, which is inseparable from human exist- 
ence; yet he has the positivity of an historical existence 
as his reference and measure, which bring him irre- 
placeably back to himself. About these possibilities we 
do not speak . 10 

When autonomous thought still had confidence in 
its humane realization, it behaved less humanely. In 

8. Karl Jaspers, Die geistige Situation der Zeit, 5th ed. 
(Berlin, 1947), pp. 169 ff. [English translation by Eden and 
Cedar Paul, Man in the Modern Age (New York, 1957). All 
quotations from this work are translated from the original 
German.] 

9. Ibid. 

10. Ibid., pp. 127 ff. 


23 



the meantime, the less philosophers are infected with 
philosophy the more innocently do they let the cat out 
of the bag; a bag which prominent ones weave like 
Norns. Sentences from O. F. Bollnow sound like this; 

Therefore it seems especially meaningful that in poetry, 
above all in the lyric of the last years, after all the ex- 
periences of dread, a new feeling, of affirmation of 
being, is beginning to make its appearance, a joyful and 
thankful harmony with the very existence of man, as 
it is; a harmony with the world as it confronts man. 
Two of these poets in particular should receive special 
attention here; Rilke and Bergengruen. Bergengruen’s 
last volume of poetry Die Heile Welt (Munich, 1950), 
p. 272, closes with the confession: “What came from 
pain was only transient. And my ear heard nothing but 
songs of praise.” In other words, it is a feeling of thank- 
ful agreement with existence. And Bergengruen cer- 
tainly is not a poet who could be criticized for a cheap 
optimism. In this feeling of deep thankfulness he comes 
close to Rilke, who also, at the close of his way, is able 
to state: “Everything breathes and returns thanks. Oh 
you troubles of the night, how you sank without a 
trace.” 11 

Bergengruen’s volume is only a few years closer to us 
than the time when Jews who had not been completely 
killed by the gas were thrown living into the fire, where 
they regained consciousness and screamed. The poet, 
who can certainly not be criticized for cheap optimism, 
and the philosophically minded pedagogue who eval- 
uates him, heard nothing but songs of praise. In a pre- 
liminary definition we call this inner state of man an 
attitude of trustful reliance. Thus the task is set: to 

1 1 . Bollnow, Geborgenheit, pp. 26 ff. 


24 



examine the nature of this state of the soul in order to 
find its possibilities . 12 Bollnow found the best of all 
possible names for this task, which in the face of hor- 
ror can no longer even appease us by virtue of its 
ridiculousness — he called it Seinsglaubigkeit, faith 
unto Being . 13 The fact that the term reminds us of 
Deutschgldubigkeit, faith unto German nationality, is 
certainly accidental. Once faith unto Being is achieved, 
there is no stopping before we reach a “positive relation 
to the world and life” 14 and “constructive work toward 
the overcoming of existentialism .” 15 What remains 
after the removal of existential bombast are religious 
customs cut off from their religious content. There is 
no recognition of the fact that cult forms, the subject 
matter of folklore, like empty shells, outlive their mys- 
tery. This state of affairs is in fact defended with the 
aid of the jargon. All of this is an insult not only to 
thought but also to religion, which was once man’s 
promise of eternal bliss, while now authenticity con- 
tents itself resignedly with an “ultimately hale world.” 16 
“In the following we can distinguish these two forms — 
for the sake of a convenient terminology — as hope 
which has a determined content and hope which has 
an undetermined content; or, briefly, as relative and 
absolute hope.” 17 This pitiful concept-splitting applies 
itself to the question of “existence welfare.” It makes 
no difference to a follower to what he attaches him- 

12. Ibid., p. 51. 

13. Ibid., p. 57. 

14. Ibid., p. 61. 

15. Ibid. 

16. Ibid., p. 63. 

17. Ibid., p. 100. 


25 



self at a given moment. He praises this as his capacity 
for enthusiasm. Whether such a man ranks himself as 
lowbrow, middlebrow, or highbrow, he can consider 
that “hale” refers to the haleness of the soul, or right 
living, or social enclaves not yet taken over by indus- 
trialism, or simply places where Nietzsche and the 
Enlightenment have not yet been heard of; or chaste 
conditions in which girls hold their maidenhood intact 
until they get married. We should not oppose to the 
catch-word of “shelteredness,” the equally worn-out idea 
of the dangerous life; who wouldn’t want to live with- 
out anxiety in this world of terrors? But shelteredness, 
as an existential value, turns from something longed 
for and denied into a presence which is now and here, 
and which is independent of what prevents it from 
being. It leaves its trace in the violation of the word: 
the reminiscence of what is hedged-in and safely bor- 
dered remains joined to that element of short-sighted 
particularity which out of itself renews the evil against 
which no one is sheltered. Home will only come to be 
when it has freed itself from such particularity, when 
home has negated itself as universal. The feeling of 
shelteredness makes itself at home with itself, and 
offers a holiday resort in place of life. A landscape be- 
comes uglier when an admirer disrupts it with the 
words “how beautiful.” The same happens to customs, 
habits, institutions which barter themselves away by 
stressing their own naivete instead of by changing it. 
All talk of shelteredness is indicted by Kogon’s report 
that the worst atrocities in the concentration camps 
were committed by the younger sons of farmers. The 


26 



general situation in the country, which is the model 
for the feeling of shelteredness, pushes disinherited 
sons into barbarousness. The logic of the jargon con- 
stantly smuggles in what is limited, finally even situa- 
tions of material want, under the guise of positivity; 
and presses for their being eternally instituted at just 
that moment when, thanks to the state of human 
achievements, such a limitation no longer needs in 
reality to exist. A spirit which makes this limitation 
its cause hires itself out as the lackey of what is evil. 

In the higher ranks of the hierarchy of authen- 
ticity, however, negativities are also served. Heidegger 
even requisitions the concept of destruction which is 
tabooed in the lower ranks, together with the blackness 
of fear, sorrow, and death. Jaspers occasionally blares 
out the opposite of Bollnow’s Geborgenheit, sheltered- 
ness: “Today philosophy is the only possibility for one 
who is consciously unsheltered.” 18 But the positive, like 
a tumbler doll, cannot be kept down. Danger, hazard, 
risking one’s life, and the whole characteristic shudder, 
are not taken all that seriously. One of the Ur-authentic 
ones in her time remarked that in the innermost core 
of Dostoyevsky’s hell the light of salvation shone again. 
She had to swallow the reply that hell was then an 
awfully short railroad tunnel. Some prominent authen- 
tic ones a little reluctantly — put it like the parish 
preacher; they say they would rather harvest on burned 
earth. They are no less clever than social psychology, 
which has observed that negative judgments, of no 


18. Jaspers, Die geistige Situation, p. 128. 


27 



matter what content, give a better chance of being 
'affirmed than do positive judgments . 19 Nihilism turns 
into farce, into mere method, as has already happened 
to Cartesian doubt. The question — a favorite prerequi- 
site of the jargon — must sound all the more radical the 
more loyally it directs itself to the kind of answer 
which can be everything except radical. Here is an 
elementary example from Jaspers: 


Existential philosophy would be lost immediately, if it 
once again believed that it knows what man is. It 
would again give us sketches of how to investigate hu- 
man and animal life in its typical forms; it would again 
become anthropology, psychology, sociology. Its mean- 
ing is only possible when it remains groundless in its 
concreteness. It awakens what it does not know; it 
lightens and moves, but it does not fix and hold. For 
the man who is underway, this philosophy is the ex- 
pression through which he maintains himself in his 
direction; the means toward preserving his highest 
moments — so that he can make them real through his 
life. . . . Insight into existence, because it remains 
without an object, leads to no conclusion . 20 


Exactly. A concerned tone is ominously struck up: 
no answer would be serious enough; every answer, no 
matter of what content, would be dismissed as a limit- 
ing concretization. But the effect of this remorseless 
intransigence is friendly; the man never pins himself 


19. Cf. Gruppenexperiment, Frankfurter Beitrage zur 
Soziologie (Frankfurt, 1955), II, 482 ff. 

20. Jaspers, Die geistige Situation, pp. 146 47. 


28 



down : the world is all too dynamic. The old Protestant 
theme of absurd belief, grounding itself in the subject, 
converted itself from Lessing to Kierkegaard into the 
pathos of existence. This pathos existed in opposition 
to its result, the reified world seen as coagulated and 
alien to the subject. That old theme allies itself stra- 
tegically with the critique of positive science — science 
from which, as Kierkegaard’s thesis ran, the subject 
has disappeared. At the cost of any possible answer, 
the radical question becomes what is substantial unto 
itself. Risk without hazard. Know-how and range of in- 
come are the only factors which determine whether 
one appears on the scene sheltered or has to start out 
without security. Even those who are not sheltered are 
safe as long as they join the chorus. This is what 
makes possible passages like the one from Heinz 
Schwitzke’s Three Fundamental Theses for Television: 

This is totally different in the sermon. Here a clerical 
speaker professed his credo for more than ten minutes, 
out of his own depths, in the existential manner; a 
single, never-changing close-up. Thanks to the noble 
humane power of conviction that radiated out from 
him, not only did his words, which were testified to by 
his pictorial presence, become completely credible, but 
the listener totally forgot the mediating apparatus. In 
front of the television screen, as if in the house of God, 
there formed itself a sort of parish among the accidental 
viewers, who felt as if they were being confronted with 
the immediate presence of the speaker, and through 
him felt committed to the subject matter of his sermon, 
God’s word. There is no other explanation for this sur- 
prising occurrence than the supreme importance of the 
speaking person, the person who has enough courage 
and ethos to place himself in the breach, and to serve 


29 



nothing but the subject matter which he stands for and 
the listeners to whom he knows he can relate . 21 

This is authenticity’s funky commercial. The “word” of 
the preacher, as if his and God’s were one without ques- 
tion, is testified to not by his “pictorial presence,” but 
at best by behavior whose trustworthiness supports the 
credibility of his statements. 

If, thanks to the appearance of the preacher, one 
forgets the mediating equipment, then the jargon of 
authenticity, which takes pleasure in this situation, is 
committing itself to the philosophy of As If: through 
stage-setting, the now and here of a cult action is simu- 
lated, an action which through its omnipresence is an- 
nulled on television. But, by the existential manner 
in which the preacher makes public profession of him- 
self, from out of himself, “in a never changing 
close-up,” we need only to understand the self-evident 
fact that the preacher, who after all had no other 
choice, was projected as an empirical person onto the 
screen and in this way, perhaps, had a sympathetic 
effect on many people. That he formed a community 
cannot be proven. The notion that he had to throw him- 
self into the breach, with his whole substance and 
existence, is imported from the sphere of risk. Still, 
for that preacher who details on television why the 
church is too narrow for him there is no risk at all: 
neither of contradiction from outside nor of inner ne- 
cessity. If in fact, hemmed in between microphone and 
floodlight, he had to suffer through moments of temp- 

21. Heinz Schwitzke, “Drei Grundthesen zum Fernsehen,” 
in Rundfunk und Fernsehen, II (1953), 11 ff. 


30 



tation, the jargon would have been right there waiting 
with additional praise for his existentiality. The benefit 
of the negative is transferred to the positive, as though 
by a single stroke of the pen: positive negativeness to 
warm the heart. These dark words are numinous, just 
like Bollnow’s whitewashed Sunday words — as close 
to rejoicing as the dreadful trumpet has always been. 
Just as the jargon uses the double sense of the word 
“positive,” it uses the ambiguity of the term “meta- 
physics,” according to whether at a given moment one 
prefers nothingness or being. On the one hand meta- 
physics means involvement with metaphysical themes, 
even if the metaphysical content is contested; on the 
other hand it means the affirmative doctrine of the 
transcendent world, in the Platonic model. In this 
shifting metaphysical need, that state of the spirit 
which long ago made itself known in Novalis’ On 
Christendom or Europe, or which the young Lukacs 
called transcendental homelessness, has come down to 
culturally defined knowledge. The theological freeing 
of the numinous from ossified dogma has, ever since 
Kierkegaard, involuntarily come to mean its partial 
secularization. In mystical heresy, the unsatisfiable 
purification of the divine from myth, which loves to 
tremble in the gesture of deeply involved questioning, 
hands the divine over to whoever relates to it in any 
way. Liberal theology is suddenly reborn, since con- 
tent is to be found only in a relation, the other pole of 
which removes itself from all definition as the “ab- 
solutely indifferent,” and marks all definition with the 
blemish of reification. Complete demythologization 
totally reduces transcendence to an abstraction, to a 



concept. Enlightenment, which the viri obscuri 22 ac- 
cuse, triumphs in their thought. In the same movement 
of the spirit, however, the positing power of the sub- 
ject, veiled unto itself, again conjures up the myth 
inherent in all dialectical theology. That subjective 
power’s highest value, as absolutely different, is blind. 
Under compulsion the viri obscuri praise commitments 
instead of jumping into speculation which alone could 
justify their own commitments to their radical ques- 
tioners. Their relationship to speculation is confused. 
One needs it because one wants to be deep, yet one 
shies away from it because of its intellectual nature. 
One would prefer to reserve it for the gurus. The others 
still confess their groundlessness, in order to give char- 
acter to the paths of offered salvation, which are re- 
puted to be successful in extreme even if imaginary 
danger. However, they find nothing but groundless 
thinking as soon as thinking refuses, through its atti- 
tude, to support from the outset those commitments 
which are as unavoidable in authenticity as is the 
happy ending in movies. If the happy ending is lacking, 
then among the existential authentics existentialism 
itself has nothing to laugh at. 

Only against this background does the whole greatness 
of the existential ethic reveal itself. It once again 
actualizes, on the ground of modern historical rela- 
tivism, a decidedly moral stance. But in precisely that 
sense a danger is given; that danger which comes to 
expression in the possibility of an existential adven- 

22. [Viri obscuri: obscurantists, enemies of enlightenment. 
Historical reference to Active humanist (fifteenth and six- 
teenth century) authors of letters against late forms of Scho- 
lasticism.] 


32 



turism. Having become fully unconditioned in regard to 
content, and without any of that constancy which re- 
sides in fidelity, the adventurer enjoys the risk of his 
engagement as a last and most sublime pleasure. Pre- 
cisely in the unconditioned state of any given momen- 
tary engagement, the existentialist is especially exposed 
to the temptation of inconstancy and of faithlessness . 23 

All of these words draw from language, from 
which they are stolen, the aroma of the bodily, 
unmetaphorical; but in the jargon they become quietly 
spiritualized. In that way they avoid the dangers of 
which they are constantly palavering. The more ear- 
nestly the jargon sanctifies its everyday world, as 
though in a mockery of Kierkegaard’s insistence on the 
unity of the sublime and the pedestrian, the more sadly 
does the jargon mix up the literal with the figurative: 

Heidegger’s final remark aims at this fundamental 
meaning of residing for all human existence, and in 
this remark he focuses on the “need for residences” as 
one of the great difficulties of our time : “The true need 
for residence,” he says here, “consists not first of all in 
the absence of residences,” although this need should 
by no means be taken lightly; but behind this need a 
deeper one is hidden, that man has lost his own nature 
and so cannot come to rest. “The true need for residence 
consists in the fact that mortals must first learn to re- 
side.” But to learn to reside means : to grasp this neces- 
sity, that, in the face of what is threatening, man should 
make for himself a sheltering space and should settle 
into it with a trustful reliance. But, then, inversely, the 
possibility of this settling down is again connected in 
a menacing way with the availability of residences . 24 

23. Bollnow, Geborgenheit, pp. 37 f. 

24. I bid., p. 170. 


33 



The Being of the sheltering space of shelteredness is 
simply derived from the necessity that man should 
“make for himself” such a space. The linguistic care- 
lessness, in the unresisting mechanism of the jargon, 
admittedly lays shelteredness bare, as if out of com- 
pulsion; lays it bare as something that is merely 
posited. However, that which announces itself, in the 
game about the need for residences, is more serious 
than the pose of existential seriousness. It is the fear 
of unemployment, lurking in all citizens of countries 
of high capitalism. This is a fear which is administra- 
tively fought off, and therefore nailed to the platonic 
firmament of stars, a fear that remains even in the 
glorious times of full employment. Everyone knows 
that he could become expendable as technology de- 
velops, as long as production is only carried on for 
production’s sake; so everyone senses that his job is a 
disguised unemployment. It is a support that has ar- 
bitrarily and revocably pinched off something from the 
total societal product, for the purpose of maintaining 
the status quo . 26 He who has not been given a life ticket 
could in principle be sent away tomorrow. That migra- 
tion of people could continue which the dictators al- 
ready once before set in motion and channeled into 
Auschwitz. Angst, busily distinguished from inner- 
worldly, empirical fear, need by no means be an ex- 
istential value. Since it is historical, it appears in fact 
that those who are yoked into a society which is socie- 
talized, but contradictory to the deepest core, con- 

25. Cf. Theodor W. Adorno, Eingriffe: Neun kritische 
Modelle (Frankfurt, 1963), p. 137. 


34 



stantly feel threatened by what sustains them. They 
feel threatened without ever being able in specific in- 
stances to concretize this threat from the whole of 
society. But in shelteredness the declassed person has 
his clumsy triumph — the declassed man who knows 
what he can get away with. On the one hand he has 
nothing to lose; on the other hand, the overadminis- 
trated world of today still respects the compromise 
structure of bourgeois society, to the extent that that 
society — in its own interest — stops short before the 
ultimate, the liquidation of its members, stops short 
because, in the massive plans of its industry, it has the 
means of delay at its disposal. So Jaspers’ “existence 
welfare” and social welfare — administrated grace — 
come into contact. On the social ground of the jargon’s 
reinterpretation of complete negativity into what is 
positive, we suspect the coercive self-confidence of the 
uneasy consciousness. Even our cheap suffering from 
the loss of meaning, a suffering long since automatized 
into a formula, is not simply that emptiness which has 
grown up through the whole movement of the Enlight- 
enment — as the more demanding viri obscuri willingly 
describe it. There are reports of taedium vitae even 
during periods of unchallenged state religion; it was as 
common among the Fathers of the Church as among 
those who carry over into the jargon Nietzsche’s judg- 
ment about modern nihilism, and who imagine that in 
that way they have gone beyond both Nietzsche and 
nihilism — Nietzsche’s concept of which they have sim- 
ply turned upside down. Socially, the feeling of mean- 
inglessness is a reaction to the wide-reaching freeing 
from work which takes place under conditions of con- 


35 



timiing social unfreedom. The free time of the subjects 
withholds from them the freedom which they secretly 
hope for; their free time chains them to the ever-same, 
the apparatus of production — even when this appa- 
ratus is giving them a vacation. With this situation they 
are forced to compare the obvious possibilities, and 
they grow the more confused the less the closed fagade 
of consciousness, which is modeled after that of so- 
ciety, lets through the conception of a possible freedom. 

At the same time, in the feeling of meaninglessness 
which is the high-bourgeois expression of real need, 
the permanent threat of destruction is assimilated by 
consciousness. What this consciousness dreads it turns 
in such a way that the threat seems to be an innate part 
of it, and thus it weakens that element of the threat 
which can no longer be grasped in human terms. The 
fact that on all sides meaning of every kind seems to 
be impotent against evil, that the latter yields no mean- 
ing at all, and that the assertion of meaning may even 
promote evil, is registered as a lack of metaphysical 
content, especially in regard to religious and social 
commitments. The falseness of this reinterpretation, 
using a mode of cultural criticism with which the 
stingy pathos of the authentics joins in, regularly be- 
comes visible in a particular fact: the fact that past 
ages — whichever one prefers — ranging from Bieder- 
meier to Pelasgic, appear as the ages of immanent 
meaning. Such reinterpretation follows an inclination 
to set back the clock politically and socially, to bring to 
an end the dynamism inherent in a society which still, 
through the administrative measures of the most pow- 
erful cliques, appears to be all too open. As its present 


36 



form can expect nothing good from such a dynamic, it 
stubbornly blinds itself to the recognition that the cure 
which society offers is itself the evil that it fears. This 
is brought to a head in Heidegger. Cleverly, he couples 
the appeal of unromantic, incorruptible purity with the 
prophecy of a saving element which, in consequence, 
can present itself as nothing other than this purity it- 
self. The hero of Mahagonny joined the wailing about a 
world in which there is nothing to hold on to. In 
Heidegger, as well as in the Brecht of the didactic plays, 
this is followed by the proclamation of compulsory 
order as salvation. The lack of something to hold on to 
is the mirror reflection of its opposite, of unfreedom. 
Only because mankind failed to define itself did it 
grope for determination through something else : some- 
thing that was safely out of the reach of the dialectical 
movement. The anthropological condition of so-called 
human emptiness, which for the sake of contrast the 
authentics are accustomed to daub out as an unhappy, 
but inevitable, consequence of the demystified world, 
could be changed. The longing for some completing 
factor could be fulfilled, as soon as it was no longer 
denied — but not fulfilled, of course, through the in- 
jection of a spiritual meaning or a merely verbal sub- 
stitution. The social constitution essentially trains 
mankind for the reproduction of itself, and the com- 
pulsion extends itself into society’s psychology, as soon 
as it loses its external power. Thanks to the factor of 
self-preservation, which has blown itself up into a to- 
tality, the following happens: what man is anyway 
once more becomes his goal. Perhaps with this nonsense 
the appearance of meaninglessness might also disap- 


37 



pear, the eagerly assured nothingness of the subject, a 
shadow of the state in which each person is literally 
his own neighbor. If it is the case that no metaphysical 
thought was ever created which has not been a constel- 
lation of elements of experience, then, in the present 
instance, the seminal experiences of metaphysics are 
simply diminished by a habit of thought which sub- 
limates them into metaphysical pain and splits them 
off from the real pain which gave rise to them. The 
jargon’s whole hatred is directed against this con- 
sciousness. No distinction is made between Marx and 
the superstition of race: 

Marxism, psychoanalysis, and racial theory are today 
the most widespread deceptions of mankind. The di- 
rectly brutal in hatred and praise, as it has come to 
dominance in human existence, finds its expression in 
these systems of thought; in Marxism, in the manner in 
which the mass postulates community; in psycho- 
analysis, in the way it seeks mere existence satisfaction; 
in racial theory, in the way it wants to be better than the 
other. . . . Without sociology no political strategy can 
be carried out. Without psychology no one becomes 
master of the reigning confusion, in his converse with 
himself and with the others. Without anthropology we 
would lose our consciousness of the dark causes of that 
in which we possess ourselves. ... No sociology can 
tell what fate I want, no psychology can clarify what I 
am, authentic being of man cannot be bred as race. 
Everywhere is the boundary of that which can be 
planned and made. For Marxism, psychoanalysis, and 
theory of race have characteristically destructive attri- 
butes. As Marxism thinks that it uncovers all spiritual 
being as Superstructure, psychoanalysis does the same 
in exposing spiritual being as sublimation of repressed 
drives. What, then, is still called culture is structured 


38 



like an obsessive neurosis. Theory of race causes a con- 
ception of history which is without hope. Negative 
selection of the best will soon bring about the ruin of 
authentic humanity; or, it is the nature of man to 
produce during this process the highest possibilities in 
a mixture of races, in order to leave behind ad infinitum 
the marrowless average existence of his remains, after 
the mixing has come to an end in the course of a few 
centuries. All three tendencies are apt to destroy what 
has seemed to be of value for men. They are especially 
the ruin of anything absolute, for, as knowledge, they 
make themselves a false absolute which recognizes 
everything else as conditioned. Not only has God to fall 
but also every form of philosophical belief. Both the 
highest and the lowest are labeled with the same termi- 
nology and, judged, step into nothingness . 20 

The practical usability of the enlightening disciplines 
is condescendingly granted in the beginning only to 
prevent more effectively any reflection on the truth 
content of criticism; by arousing our indignation at the 
desire to destroy. Passionate grief about obliviousness 
to being is given the appearance of the essential — to 
the point where one would rather like to forget all Be- 
ing. All of that is more ominously attended to in Der 
Grilne Heinrich: 

There is an old saying which maintains that one must 
not only tear down but must also know how to build up; 
a commonplace constantly employed by cheery and 
superficial people who are uncomfortably confronted 
with an activity which demands a decision from them. 
This way of speaking is in place where something is 
superficially settled or is denied out of stupid inclina- 
tion; otherwise, though, it is unintelligible. For one is 

26. Jaspers, Die geistige Situation, pp. 142 ff. 


39 



not always tearing down, in order to build again; on 
the contrary, one tears things down eagerly in order to 
win free space for light and air, which appear as it 
were by themselves, wherever some obstructing object 
is removed. When one looks matters right in the face 
and treats them in an upright manner, then nothing 
is negative, but all is positive — to use this old saw . 27 

Then the old warriors had an easier time of it: they 
had no need of old saws; they only needed to breathe 
sense into doubters with the cudgel of fate and Nordic 
manhood. But they already had the jargon at their dis- 
posal : 

An extreme intensification of all activity, and a sharp- 
ening of all creative powers, even the great political 
event as such, mark our time; and to the eyes of 
philosophy they have physically presented this phe- 
nomenon in its authenticity and unvarnished original- 
ity. Philosophy has grasped this phenomenon as a con- 
dition of the highest philosophical relevance, in order 
to let itself be led, through its content and problematic 
structure, to a full and pure understanding of man and 
the world. . . . Human existence is not meaningless: 
that is the categorical assertion with which this exist- 
ence itself confronts the philosophy of life, in order to 
assert itself in opposition to and over against that phi- 
losophy. ... To say yes to fate and to negate it in 
spite of that, to suffer it and yet to dominate it, i.e., to 
face it and to take one’s stand against it, that is the 
attitude of true humanity. This attitude corresponds to 
the ideal image of man because it represents nothing 

27. Gottfried Keller, Der Griine Heinrich, IV, 2, quoted in 
Friedrich Pollock, “Sombarts Widerlegung des Marxismus,” in 
Beihefte zum Archiv fiir die Geschichte des Sozialismus und 
der Arbeiterbewegung, ed. Carl Griinberg (Leipzig, 1926), 
III, 63. 


40 



but the essence of man, universally valid and removed 
from all ties to time. At the same time, and at one with 
it, this attitude defines the deep and genuine meaning 
of fate, that meaning which has nothing to do with 
fatalism, a meaning to which especially a German 
opens himself. For the man of Nordic blood, this mean- 
ing takes on a deeply religious content and grounds 
what for him means his bond with fate and his belief in 
fate . 28 

Language uses the word “meaning” for the harm- 
less epistemological intentional object of Husserl, as 
well as for the purpose of saying that something is 
justified as meaningful; as one would speak, for in- 
stance, of the meaning of history. It remains true that 
the factual particular has meaning to the extent that 
the whole, above all the system of society, appears in 
it; that the dispersed facts are always more than what 
they immediately seem, even if such meaning is mad- 
ness. The search for meaning as that which something 
is authentically, and as that which is hidden in it, 
pushes away, often unnoticed and therefore all the 
faster, the question as to the right of this something. 
Analysis of meaning becomes the norm in this de- 
mand, not only for the signs but also for that which 
they refer to. The sign system of language, by its 
mere existence, takes everything, to begin with, into 
something that is held in readiness by society; and it 
defends this society in its own form prior to all content. 
This is what reflection stands firm against. However, 
the jargon drifts with the current, and would be glad 

28. From Wilhelm Grebe, Der deutsche Mensch: Vnter- V 
suchungen zur Philosophic des Handelns (Berlin, 1937). 



to increase it, in union with the regressive formations 
of consciousness. 

In its semantic directions positivism has constantly 
noted the historical break between language and that 
which it expresses. Linguistic forms, as reified — and 
only through reification do they become forms — have 
outlived what they once referred to, together with the 
context of that reference. The completely demytholo- 
gized fact would withhold itself from language; 
through the mere act of intending the fact becomes 
an other — at least measured in terms of its idol of 
pure accessibility. That without language there is no 
fact remains, even so, the thorn in the flesh and the 
theme of positivism, since it is here that the stub- 
bornly mythical remainder of language is revealed. 
Mathematics is, for good reason, the primal model of 
positivistic thought — even in its funcdon as a lan- 
guageless system of signs. Looked at in reverse, the 
tenacious residuum of what is archaic in language be- 
comes fruitful only where language rubs itself critically 
against it; the same archaic turns into a fatal mirage 
when language spontaneously confirms and strength- 
ens it. The jargon shares with positivism a crude con- 
ception of the archaic in language; neither of them 
bothers about the dialectical moment in which lan- 
guage, as if it were something else, wins itself away 
from its magical origins, language being entangled in 
a progressing demythologization. That particular neg- 
lect authorizes the social using of linguistic anachro- 
nism. The jargon simply ennobles the antiquity of 
language, which the positivists just as simply long to 


42 



eradicate — along with all expression in language. The 
disproportion between language and the rationalized 
society drives the authentics to plunder language, 
rather than to drive it on, through greater sharpness, 
to its proper due. They don’t fail to notice that one 
cannot speak absolutely without speaking archaically; 
but what the positivists bewail as retrogressive the 
authentics eternalize as a blessing. 

For them that block which language piles up be- 
fore the expression of undiminished experience be- 
comes an altar. If it does not allow itself to be broken 
through, then it offers us simply the omnipotence and 
indissolubility of what was precipitated into language. 
But the archaic takes vengeance on the jargon, whose 
greed for the archaic violates the proper distance. The 
archaic is objectified for a second time. In its example 
is repeated that which in any case happened to lan- 
guage historically. The nimbus in which the words are 
being wrapped, like oranges in tissue paper, takes 
under its own direction the mythology of language, as 
if the radiant force of the words could not yet quite be 
trusted. Mixed with artificial coloring the words them- 
selves, released from the relation to what is thought, 
are to speak a relation which should change them and 
so always demythologizes them. Language mythology 
and reification become mixed with that element which 
identifies language as antimythological and rational. 
The jargon becomes practicable along the whole scale, 
reaching from sermon to advertisement. In the medium 
of the concept the jargon becomes surprisingly similar 
to the habitual practices of advertising. The words of 


43 



the jargon and those like Jagermeister, Alte Kloster- 
frau, Schdnke , 29 are all of a piece. They exploit the hap- 
piness promised by that which had to pass on to the 
shadows. Blood is drawn from that which has its ap- 
pearance of concreteness only after the fact, by virtue 
of its downfall. At least in terms of their function, the 
words, nailed into fixity and covered with a luminous 
layer of insulation, remind us of the positivistic count- 
ers. They are useful for arbitrary effect-connotations, 
without regard to the pathos of uniqueness which they 
usurp, and which itself has its orgin on the market, 
on that market for which what is rare has exchange 
value. 

With the assertion of meaning at all costs, the old 
antisophistic emotion seeps into the so-called mass 
society. Ever since the victory of Plato and Aristotle 
over the Socratic left, that emotion has dominated the 
official position of philosophy. Whatever refused sub- 
jection to it was pushed off into powerless undercur- 
rents. Only the more recent positivism has made so- 
phistic motives reputable by its alliance with science. 
The jargon struggles against this alliance. Without 
judgment it hands down the judgment of tradition. The 
shame of the sophists, opposed by Plato, was the fact 
that they did not fight against falsity in order to change 
the slave society, but rather raised doubts about truth 
in order to arm thought for whatever was. Their kind 
of destruction was indeed similar to the totalitarian 
concept of ideology. Plato could caricature the Gorgias 
sophists as clowns because thought, once it has been 

29. [ Klosterfrau , Jagermeister, Schdnke: established brand 
names of well known liqueurs and wines.] 


44 



freed from concrete knowledge and the nature of the 
object, reduces to farce that moment of play which is 
essential to thought — turns such a moment into a ghost 
of that mimesis which is combatted by every enlight- 
enment . 30 Nevertheless, the antisophistic movement 
misuses its insight into such misconstructions of free- 
wheeling thought — misuses them in order to discredit 
thought, through thought. This was the way Nietzsche 
criticized Kant, raising the charge of over-subtle think- 
ing in the same tone as that adopted magisterially by 
Hegel, when he spoke of “reasoning.” In the modish 
antisophistic movement there is a sad confluence: of 
a necessary critique of isolated instrumental reason 
with a grim defense of institutions against thought. 
The jargon, a waste product of the modern that it at- 
tacks, seeks to protect itself — along with literally de- 
structive institutions — against the suspicion of being 
destructive: by simultaneously accusing other, mostly 
anticonservative, groups of sinful intellectuality, of 
that sin which lies deep in the jargon’s own unnaive, 
reflective principle of existence. Demagogically it uses 
the double character of the antisophistic. That con- 
sciousness is false which, externally, and, as Hegel 
says, without being in the thing, places itself above 
this thing and manages it from above; but criticism 
becomes equally ideological at the moment when it 
lets it be known, self -righteously, that thought must 
have a ground. Hegel’s dialectic went beyond the doc- 
trine that thought, in order to be true, needs some 
absolute starting point, free of doubt. This doctrine be- 

30. Cf. Max Horkheimer and Theodor W. Adorno, Dia- 
lektik der Aufklarung (Amsterdam, 1947), pp. 20 ff. 



comes all the more terroristic in the jargon of authen- 
ticity, as it more autocratically locates its starting point 
outside of the texture of thought. Antisophistic atti- 
tudes, in the final stages of processed mythology, are 
hardened forms of causal thinking. The relapse of the 
risen metaphysics, behind dialectics, is chalked up by 
the jargon to a return to the mothers. 

When everything has been cut off, the root lies bared. 
The root is the origin out of which we grew and which 
we have forgotten in the creepers of opinions, habits, 
and schemata of comprehension . 31 

Even later in Vemunft und Existenz, Jaspers writes: 

Only in this way could the true strength of man be 
realized. The power of the absolute in him, proven in 
every possibility of struggle and questioning, would no 
longer need suggestion, hate, lust for cruelty in order 
to become active, no longer need the intoxication of 
big words and ununderstood dogmas in order to be- 
lieve in itself. Only that way would it actually become 
severe, hard and sober. Only in this way can all the 
self-deceptions disappear without destroying man in 
the process of destroying his life-lies. Only in this way 
will the true ground reveal itself unveiled from the 
depth . 32 

The authentic ones defame sophistry, but they drag its 
arbitrariness along in their programs, instead of prov- 

31. Karl Jaspers, Der philosophische Glav.be (Munich, 
1948), p. 125. [English translation by E. B. Ashton, Philosophi- 
cal Faith and Revelation (New York, 1967). The quotation is 
translated from the original German.] 

32. Karl Jaspers, Vemunft und Existenz (Munich, i960) 
pp. 98 £F. [English translation by W. Earle, Reason and Ex- 
istenz : Five Lectures (London, 1956). The quotation is trans- 
lated from the original German.] 



ing to be a match for it. But they agree with the 
Sophists in their favorite thesis, that man alone is im- 
portant — that sententia of Homo mensura warmed 
over again with unexpected fulsomeness. As once be- 
fore, the social model of their chosen scapegoat is ur- 
ban freedom, which, in the past, helped thought to 
emancipate itself. The only difference is the fact that 
in the strict rational order of bourgeois society the mo- 
bility of person and spirit are less threatening to 
groups, which in effect no longer exist in highly indus- 
trialized countries. But it constantly challenges the con- 
tinuing irrationality of the total system, which would 
like to prune away what is still vegetating on from the 
social modes of behavior developed under liberalism. 

Therefore the jargon must defend, so as not to be 
lost, transitory social forms which are incompatible 
with the contemporary state of the forces of produc- 
tion. If it wanted to mount the barricades itself, then 
it would have to engage itself not only for a position 
much scorned among its believers, but possibly also 
for that rationality which the exchange society both 
promises and denies, and through which that society 
could be transcended. The bourgeois form of rational- 
ity has always needed irrational supplements, in order 
to maintain itself as what it is, continuing injustice 
through justice. Such irrationality in the midst of the 
rational is the working atmosphere of authenticity. 
The latter can support itself on the fact that over a long 
period of time literal as well as figurative mobility, a 
main element in bourgeois equality, always turned into 
injustice for those who could not entirely keep up. 
They experienced the progress of society as a verdict: 



a pawned-off remembrance of their suffering, under 
that system, brings authenticity, along with its jargon, 
to a ferment. Its bubbles cause the true object of the 
suffering, the particular constitution of society, to 
disappear. For the selected victims of the feeling 
against mobility have themselves been condemned, 
ever since the sphere of circulation was fused into the 
sphere of production. The jargon strives to turn the 
bitterness of the indigenous, of the mute, into some- 
thing like a metaphysical-moral verdict of annhilation 
against the man who can speak out; and the jargon has 
had so much success only for this reason, because this 
verdict in question has already in effect been spoken, 
and has been carried out in Germany against innumer- 
able people — because the gesture of rooted genuine- 
ness is at one with that of the historical conquerors. 
That is the substantial element in authenticity, the 
holy fount of its strength. Taciturnity and silence are 
the best counterpoint to existential and existentialist 
babble. The order which this babble aims at is itself 
one that reaches for speechlessness of sign and com- 
mand. In happy agreement with its consumers, the 
jargon fills the breach created by the societally neces- 
sary disintegration of language. Petit bourgeois have 
few acquaintances; they feel uncomfortable as soon as 
they come together with people they don’t already 
know, and their duplicity turns this attitude into a vir- 
tue. Not lastly, the jargon bears some resemblance to 
the rough manners of a doorman, in an Alpine hotel, 
who hectors the guests as if they were intruders, and in 
this way wins their trust. In face of the social stasis 
that once again is darkening the horizon, a shimmer of 


48 



humanity is shed back onto the officiously persuasive 
word of the day before yesterday. If philosophy were to 
take back into society the experiences which were pre- 
cipitated in the jargon in the false forms of its dis- 
tilled essences — society being the place where they 
originated — and if the word “origin” had any meaning 
at all, then philosophy would be able to go beyond the 
opposition of mobility and fixity, of groundlessness and 
authenticity. It would then recognize these oppositions 
as elements of the same guilty whole, in which heroes 
and businessmen are of value to each other. The 
liberalism that hatched the culture industry produced 
forms of reflection that are encountered indignantly 
by the jargon of authenticity, although it is itself one of 
them. This liberalism was the ancestor of the fascism 
which destroyed both it and its later potential cus- 
tomers. But of course the blood guilt of that which 
echoes today, in the jargon, is incomparably greater 
than the deceptive maneuvers of mobility, whose prin- 
ciples are incompatible with those of immediate power. 

Heidegger is not the matador of such political strat- 
egies, and in fact he protects himself against their 
blunt directness. It is true that he does use the word 
“authenticity” centrally in Sein und Zeit , 33 and most of 
the familiar shorthand is spread around over his best- 
known text — spread with gestures, of incontestable 
authority, which the mass of the authentics then me- 
chanically imitate; there is unquestioned agreement 
about the undiscussed core of all this. In the same way 
Heidegger struggles to show reserve toward all the 


33. Heidegger, Being and Time, pp. 304 ff ., also pp. 68 69. 



current phrases which he, with ease, can put aside as 
vulgar misunderstanding. Nevertheless, as soon as he 
loosens his voluntary self -censorship, he falls into the 
jargon, with a provinciality which cannot be excused 
on the grounds that it becomes thematic of itself. He 
has published a little volume of gnomic thoughts en- 
titled Out of the Experience of Thinking. Its form keeps 
to the middle ground between poetry and pre-Socratic 
fragment. Yet the sibylline character of the pre-Socra- 
tic fragments really results, at least in many of them, 
from the accident of a discontinuous tradition, and not 
from secretiveness. Heidegger has praise for the 
“splendor of the simple.” 34 He brings back the thread- 
bare ideology of pure materials, from the realm of 
handicrafts to that of the mind — as if words were 
pure, and, as it were, roughened material. But textiles 
of that sort are mediated, today, through their calcu- 
lated opposition to mass production; and in just that 
way Heidegger wants, synthetically, to create a primal 
sense for pure words. 

Another specifically social element plays into the 
category of the simple : the elevation of the cheap, in 
accordance with the wishes of the proudly declining 
elite — an elevation related to youth music, which 
gladly goes along with the jargon and lets itself be ac- 
companied by it. Being behind the times historically is 
no less eagerly converted into the feeling of the fate- 
fully tragic, than into that of something higher; that 
too goes along with the silent identification of the 


34. Heidegger, Aus derErfahrung des D enkens (Pfullingen, 

1954), p. 13- 


50 



archaic with the genuine. But the triviality of the sim- 
ple is not, as Heidegger would like it to be, attributable 
to the value-blindness of thought that has lost being. 
Such triviality comes from thinking that is supposedly 
in tune with being and reveals itself as something 
supremely noble. Such triviality is the sign of that clas- 
sifying thought, even in the simplest word, from which 
Heidegger pretends that he has escaped: namely, ab- 
straction. Already in the first version of Geist der 
Uto'pie, Ernst Bloch says that symbol intentions, which 
arefor him the traces of messianic light in the darkened 
world, are in fact not expressed by the most simple 
basic relationships and basic words, like “the old man, 
the mother, and death.” But Heidegger, in his fastidious 
Humanism letter, lets us hear these words : 

Man is not the lord of existence. Man is the shepherd 
of being. In this “less” man loses nothing, but rather 
wins, by reaching the truth of Being. He wins the essen- 
tial poverty of the shepherd, whose worth consists in 
being called, by Being itself, into the trueness of its 
truth. This call comes as the throwing from which the 
thrownness of existence stems. In his being-historical, 
[ seinsgeschichtlich ] essence, man is the existent whose 
being as ek-sistence consists in his living in the neigh- 
borhood of Being. Man is the neighbor of Being . 35 

Philosophical banality is generated when that magical 
participation in the absolute is ascribed to the general 
concept — a participation which puts the lie to that con- 
cept’s conceivability. 

35. Heidegger, tiber den Humanismus (Frankfurt, 1949) 
p. 29. 


51 



Philosophizing, according to Heidegger, is a danger 
to thought . 36 But the authentic thinker, harsh toward 
anything so modernistic as philosophy, writes: “When 
in early summer isolated narcissi bloom hidden in 
the meadow, and the mountain rose glistens under the 
maple tree . . 37 or: “When from the slopes of the 

high valley, where the herds are slowly passing, the cow 
bells ring and ring . . 38 Or verses : 

The woods make camp 
the streams rush on 
the cliffs remain 
the rain runs. 

The meadows wait 
the fountains spring 
the winds dwell 
blessing takes thought . 39 

The renewing of thinking through outmoded language 
can be judged by these instances. The archaic is the 
expressive ideal of this language: “The oldest element 
of the old comes up behind us in our thinking and yet 
meets us head on.” 40 But Jungnickel knows how to 
put it: the revenge of the myth on the person who is 
curious about it, on the denouncer of thinking. “The 
poetic character of thinking is still concealed ,” 41 
Heidegger adds, in order to forestall criticism at all 
costs: “where it shows itself, it for a long time re- 

36. Heidegger, Aus der Erfahrung, p. 15. 

37. Ibid., p. 12. 

38. Ibid., p. 22. 

39. Ibid., p. 27. 

40. Ibid., p. 19. 

41. Ibid., p. 23. 


52 



sembles the utopia of a half -poetic intellect.” 42 Still 
the half-poetic intellect which babbles forth those 
pieces of wisdom bears less resemblance to this, or to 
any other unsuccessful utopia, than to the work of 
some trusty folk art, which after all is not used to 
speaking well about those things. During the Hitler 
period, and we can feel with him, Heidegger turned 
down an academic appointment in Berlin. He justifies 
that in an article, “Why Do We Remain in the 
Province?” With wily strategy he disarms the charge 
that he is provincial; he uses the term “provincialism” 
in a positive sense. His strategy takes this form : 
“When on a deep winter night a wild snowstorm rages 
around the cabin, and covers and conceals everything, 
then the time is ripe for philosophy. Its question must 
then become simple and essential.” 43 Whether ques- 
tions are essential can in any case only be judged by 
the answers given; there is no way of anticipating, and 
certainly not by the criterion of a simplicity based on 
meteorological events. That simplicity says as little 
about truth as about its opposite; Kant, Hegel were as 
complicated and as simple as their content forced 
them to be. But Heidegger insinuates a preestablished 
harmony between essential content and homey mur- 
muring. Therefore, the echoes of Jungnickel here are 
not just loveable lapses. They are there to deafen any 
suspicion that the philosopher might be an intellectual: 
“And philosophical work does not take place as the 


42. I bid. 

43. Quoted in Guido Schneeberger, Nachlese zu Heidegger, 
Dokumente zu seinem Leben und Denken (Bern, 1962), p. 
216. 


53 



spare-time activity of a crank. It belongs right in the 
midst of the labor of farmers .” 44 One would like at 
least to know the farmers’ opinion about that. Heideg- 
ger does not need their opinion. For “during the time 
of the evening work-pause, he sits, on the stove bench 
along with the farmers ... or at the table in the 
corner, under the crucifix, and then we usually don’t 
talk at all. We smoke our pipes in silence.” 45 “One’s 
own work’s inner belonging, to the Black Forest and 
its people, comes from a century-long Germanic- 
Swabian rootedness, which is irreplaceable.” 46 After 
all, Heidegger says it himself. Johann Peter Hebei, 
who comes from the same region, and to whom Heideg- 
ger would like to give the place of honor on the mantel- 
piece, hardly ever appealed to this rootedness; instead 
he passed on his greetings to the peddlers Scheitele 
and Nausel, in one of the most beautiful pieces of 
prose in defense of the Jews that was ever written in 
German . 47 Rootedness, however, puffs itself up; 

Recently I got a second invitation to the University of 
Berlin. On such an occasion I leave the city and go back 
to my cabin. I hear what the mountains and woods and 
farmyards say. On the way I drop in on my old friend, 
a seventy-five-year-old farmer. He has read in the news- 
paper about the Berlin invitation. What will he say? He 
slowly presses the sure glance of his clear eyes against 
mine, holds his mouth tightly closed, lays his faithful 
and cautious hand on my shoulder — and almost im- 


44. Ibid. 

45. Ibid., p. 217. 

46. Ibid. 

47. Cf. Johann Peter Hebei, Werke (Berlin, 1874) II, 254. 


54 



perceptibly shakes his head. That means: absolutely 

No! 48 

While the philosopher complains to other Blubo-friends 
about their advertising of the Blubo, 49 which would be 
detrimental to his monopoly, his reflected unreflective- 
ness degenerates into chummy chit-chat, for the sake 
of the rural setting with which he wants to stand on a 
confidential footing. The description of the old farmer 
reminds us of the most washed-out cliches in plough - 
and-furrow novels, from the region of a Frenssen; and 
it reminds us equally of the praise of being silent, 
which the philosopher authorizes not only for his 
farmers but also for himself. Here we find an ignorance 
of everything we have learned about rural people: for 
instance in French realism from Balzac’s late work 
to Maupassant; from a literature not attuned to the 
musty instincts of German petit-bourgeois kitsch; from 
a literature which would be available in translation 
even to a pre-Socratic. The small farmer owes his con- 
tinuing existence entirely to gracious gifts from that 
exchange society by which his very ground and foun- 
dation, even in appearance, have been removed; in the 
face of this exchange the farmers have nothing on 
their horizon except something worse — the immediate 
exploitation of the family without which they would 
be bankrupt: this hollowed-out state, the perpetual 
crisis of the small farmer’s business, has its echo in 
the hollowness of the jargon. The subsidies which are 

48. Schneeberger, Nachlese, p. 218. 

49. [Blubo: catchword of the Nazi movement, emphasizing 
the interdependence of one’s life with one’s native soil. A 
provincial version of pro patria mori.] 


55 



paid to the small farmers are the very ground of that 
which the primal words of the jargon add to that 
which in fact they mean. Like less prominent porte- 
paroles of authenticity, Heidegger is filled with the 
disdainful pride of inwardness, which he touches on 
philosophically, in his thought about Hegel’s critique 
of it. 50 Whoever is forced by the nature of his work 
to stay in one place, gladly makes a virtue out of ne- 
cessity. He tries to convince himself and others that 
his bound-ness is of a higher order. The financially 
threatened farmer’s bad experiences with middlemen 
substantiate this opinion. The socially clumsy person 
who may be partially excluded from society hates 
those middlemen as jacks of all trades. This hatred 
joins with resistance against all agents, from the cattle 
dealer to the journalist. In 1956 the stable professions, 
which are themselves a stage of social development, 
are still the norms for Heidegger. He praises them in 
the name of a false eternity of agrarian conditions: 
“Man tries in vain to bring the globe to order through 
planning, when he is not in tune with the consoling 
voice of the country lane.” 51 North America knows 
no country lanes, not even villages. Philosophy, which 
is ashamed of its name, needs the sixth-hand symbol 
of the farmer as a proof of its primalness, as a way of 
acquiring some otherwise unavailable distinctiveness. 
However, Lessing’s insight still applies, as it did in his 
time: the insight that the aesthetic critic does not need 
to do better himself than what he criticizes. That which 

50. Cf. Heidegger, Being and Time, pp. 248 ff. 

51. Heidegger, Der Feldweg (Frankfurt, T956) p. 4. 


56 



was right for the Hamburg Dramaturgy is also reason- 
able for philosophical theory: the self-awareness of its 
limitations does not obligate it to authentic poetic 
creation. But it must have the power to prevent think- 
ing people from producing mere aesthetic staples; 
otherwise, these argue against a philosophy which pre- 
tends to scorn arguments as confusing. Its noble 
philistinism grows into the jargon of authenticity. 

As in this jargon, and even in Heidegger, the evi- 
dence of language reveals the falsity of rootedness — 
at least as soon as rootedness descends to something 
that has a concrete content. Heidegger works with an 
antithesis between being alone and loneliness: 

City people are often surprised by the farmers’ long, mo- 
notonous state of being alone among the mountains. Yet 
it is not being alone, but rather loneliness. In big cities 
man can easily be alone as it is hardly possible to be 
elsewhere. But he can never be lonely there. For loneli- 
ness has that primal power not of isolating us, but of 
casting all existence free into the wide nearness of the 
essence of all things . 52 

However things may stand with this distinction, in 
terms of content, language, to which Heidegger is 
turning for testimony, does not know the present dis- 
tinction in the present form. The Electra monologue of 
Hofmannsthal, who certainly understood such nu- 
ances, begins: “Alone, all alone.” The human condition 
of the heroine is, if anything at all, that ultimate being- 
thrown-back-on-oneself in which Heidegger trusts, 
somewhat optimistically. He relies on the way that 

52. Quoted in Schneeberger, Nachlese, p. 217. 


57 



state leads "into the wide nearness of the essence of all 
things”; though in fact such situations are no less 
likely to force people into obsessive narrowness and 
impoverishment. Looked at the other way around — in 
opposition to Heidegger — language will rather suggest 
that people are lonely in big cities or on public holi- 
days, but that they cannot be alone on such occasions. 
In any case present usage is indecisive on this matter. 
Heidegger’s philosophy, which takes so much advan- 
tage of its ability to listen, renders itself deaf to words. 
The emphatic nature of this philosophy arouses the 
belief that it fits itself into the words, while it is only 
a cover for arbitrariness. Heidegger’s primal sounds 
ape — as such sounds usually do. Of course, even a 
more sensitive linguistic organ than his would hardly 
accomplish anything better in this matter in which he 
fails. Every such effort has its linguistically logical 
limit in the accidental element of even the most pre- 
cise word. Words’ own meanings weigh heavily in 
them. But these words do not use themselves up in 
their meanings : they themselves are caught up in their 
context. This fact is underestimated in the high praise 
given to science by every pure analysis of meaning, 
starting with Husserl’s; especially by that of Heidegger, 
which considers itself far above science. Only that 
person satisfies the demand of language who masters 
the relation of language to individual words in their 
configurations. Just as the fixing of the pure element 
of meaning threatens to pass over into the arbitrary, 
so the belief in the primacy of the configurative 
threatens to pass into the badly functional, the merely 
communicative — into scorn for the objective aspect of 


58 



words. In language that is worth something both of 
these elements are transmitted. 

Allegedly hale life is opposed to damaged life, on 
whose societalized consciousness, on whose “malaise,” 
the jargon speculates. Through the ingrained language 
form of the jargon, that hale life is equated with 
agrarian conditions, or at least with simple commodity 
economy, far from all social considerations. This life 
is in effect equated to something undivided, protec- 
tingly closed, which runs its course in a firm rhythm 
and unbroken continuity. The field of association here 
is a left-over of romanticism and is transplanted with- 
out second thought into the contemporary situation, 
to which it stands in harsher contradiction than ever 
before. In that situation the categories of the jargon 
are gladly brought forward, as though they were not 
abstracted from generated and transitory situations, 
but rather belonged to the essence of man, as inalien- 
able possibility. Man is the ideology of dehumaniza- 
tion. Conclusions are drawn from certain categories 
which remind us of somewhat primal social relation- 
ships, where the institutions of exchange do not yet 
have complete power over the relationships of men. 
From those categories it is concluded that their core, 
man, is immediately present among contemporary 
men, that he is there to realize his eidos. Past forms of 
socialization, prior to the division of labor, are sur- 
reptitiously adopted as if they were eternal. Their re- 
flection falls upon later conditions which have already 
been victimized by progressive rationalization, and in 
contrast to those the earlier states seem the more 
human. That which authentics of lesser rank call with 


59 



gusto the image of man, they locate in a zone in which 
it is no longer permitted to ask from where those con- 
ditions emerged; neither can one ask what was done 
to the subjugated at any particular time, with the tran- 
sition from nomadic life to settledness — nor what was 
done to those who can no longer move around; nor 
whether the undivided condition itself, both uncon- 
scious and compulsive, did not breed and earn its own 
downfall. The talk about man makes itself popular in 
the old-fashioned, half-timbered, gable-roof way. But 
it also wins friends in a more contemporary way, in 
the gesture of a radicalism which wants to dismantle 
whatever merely conceals, and which concerns itself 
with the naked essence that hides under all cultural 
disguises. However, as it is a question of Man and not, 
for the sake of men, of the conditions which are made 
by men and which harden into opposition against 
them, we are released from criticizing them, as though, 
temporally bound like its object, such a critique were all 
too shallow. This position fundamentally suppresses 
the motif of the Kantian “Idea toward a General His- 
tory from a Cosmopolitan Point of View”; the idea that 
states of affairs worthy of Man can only be produced 
through antagonism, from out of their own force, not 
from a pure idea. The talk about man is so worthless 
because it prepares for untruth that which is of high- 
est truth. There is great stress on the existential 
elements of man, in which slack and self-surfeited 
thought thinks it holds, in its hands, that concretion 
which it has lost through its transformation into 
method. Such maneuvers simply deflect us from 
seeing how little it is here a question of man, who has 


6 o 



been condemned to the status of an appendage. The 
expression of the word “man” has itself modified its 
form historically. In the expressionistic literature since 
the period of the First World War, the word “man” 
has had a historical value — thanks to the protest 
against that flagrant inhumanity which found human 
material for materiel slaughter. The honorable old 
reification of bourgeois society, which comes into its 
own in the great periods, and is called individual hu- 
man effort, in that way becomes graspable; and, in 
that way, antagonistically, also becomes its own 
counter-concept. The sentence “Man is good” was false, 
but at least it needed no metaphysical-anthropological 
sauce. It is already different with the expressionistic 
“O Man,” a manifesto directed against that which, 
done only by men, is a usurpatory positing. The ex- 
pressionistic “O Man” was already inclined to leave 
men’s violence out of consideration. The undisputed, 
childlike sense of universal humanity taints itself with 
that which it opposes — as could be shown in the writ- 
ings of Franz Werfel. The jargon’s image of man, 
meanwhile, is still the selling-out of that uninhibited 
“O Man,” and the negative truth concerning it. 

To characterize the change in function of the word 
“man,” we need only consider two titles which resem- 
ble one another. At the time of the German November 
Revolution, there appeared a book by the pacifist Lud- 
wig Rubiner, Man in the Middle ; in the fifties, a book 
called Man at the Center of the Business Operation. 
Thanks to its abstractness, the concept lets itself be 
squirted like grease into the same machinery it once 
wanted to assail. Its pathos, meanwhile evaporated, 



still echoes in the ideology which holds that business, 
which must be operated by men, exists for their sake. 
This means that the organization has to take care of 
its workers so that their productivity will climb. Like 
Elsie, the happy American advertisement-cow, that 
phrase about Man, whom the phrase enjoins us to care 
for, would not be so convincing if the phrase did not 
rely on a suspicion; the suspicion that, after all, the 
overpowering conditions of society really were made 
by men and can be undone by them. The overpowering 
strength of those relationships, like that of myth, has 
in it an element of fetishism and mere appearance. 
Just as the in-itself of the institution is mere appear- 
ance, a reflection of petrified human states of affairs, 
so in reality this appearance dominates men to the 
same degree. This is what debases the appeal to an in- 
alienable essence of Man which has long been alie- 
nated. It was not Man who created the institutions but 
particular men in a particular constellation with nature 
and with themselves. This constellation forced the in- 
stitutions on them in the same way that men erected 
those institutions, without consciousness. All that was 
formulated incisively during the Vormarz, particularly 
by Marx, against Feuerbach’s anthropology and the 
young Hegelians. Both appearance and necessity are 
elements of the world of wares. Cognition fails as soon 
as it isolates one of these elements. He who accepts 
the world of wares as the in-itself, which it pretends 
to be, is deceived by the mechanisms which Marx 
analyzed in the chapter on fetishes. He who neglects 
this in-itself, the value of exchange, as mere illusion, 
gives in to the ideology of universal humanity. He 


62 



clings to forms of an immediate togetherness, which 
are historically irretrievable if in fact they ever existed 
in any other form. Once capitalism has grown uneasy 
about theoretical self-assertion, its advocates prefer to 
use the categories of spontaneous life in order to 
present what is man-made. They present those cate- 
gories as if they were valid now and here. The jargon 
busily splashes beyond all this, perhaps even proud of 
its historical obliviousness — as if this obliviousness 
were already the humanly immediate. 

The angel’s voices with which the jargon registers 
the word “Man,” are derived by the jargon from the 
doctrine of man as the image of God. The word “Man” 
sounds all the more irrefutable and persuasive the 
more it seals itself off against its theological origin. 
Some element in it points back to a linguistic phe- 
nomenon drawn from the Jugendstil, an element 
which the jargon has prepared for mass consumption. 
The link in the history of philosophy between the 
Jugendstil and the jargon is probably the youth move- 
ment. For one of his plays Hauptmann chose the title 
Solitary Men. In a novel by Countess Reventlow, a 
professor is ridiculed who belonged to the costume- 
party boheme of Munich around 1910. He says, about 
every person whom he considers fit to enter the Schwa- 
bing circle, “What a wonderful man.” This is related to 
the mannerism of actors, from the early Reinhardt era, 
who would place their hands on their hearts, would 
open their eyes as wide as they could, and would in 
general dramatize themselves. Once the original theo- 
logical image has fallen, transcendence, which in the 
great religions is separated from the likeness by power- 


63 



ful taboos — thou shalt have no graven images of me — 
is shifted to the likeness. This image is then said to be 
full of wonder, since wonders no longer exist. Here 
all the concretion of authenticity has its mystery: the 
concreteness of whatever is as its own image. While 
there is nothing more to which wonderful man has to 
bow down, man who is said to be wonderful because he 
is nothing but man, the jargon acts as man should 
once have acted before the Godhead. The jargon aims 
at a humility which is unquestioned and without rela- 
tion. Such humility is presented as human virtue-in- 
itself. From the outset such humility has gone well 
with the insolence of the self-positing subject. The 
hiddenness of that which humility aims at, is in itself 
an invitation to be celebrated. This element has long 
been present in the concept of reverence, even in 
Goethe’s understanding of it. Jaspers expressly recom- 
mends reverence, independent of its object. He con- 
demns its absence and easily finds his way to the hero 
cult without being frightened by Carlyle’s example. 

In the vision of historical figures of human greatness, 
the strength of reverence holds fast the measure of 
man’s essence, and of his potential. Reverence does not 
allow the destruction of what it has seen. It remains 
true to what was effective as tradition in its own self- 
becoming. Reverence grasps the origin of its substance 
in those individual men in whose shadow reverence be- 
came conscious. In the form of unyielding piety it still 
maintains its preserving function. What no longer has 
reality in the world remains present in reverence as an 
absolute claim, by means of memory . 53 

53. Jaspers, Die geistige Situation, p. 170. 


64 



In the jargon, however, the word “Man” no longer re- 
lies on human dignity as idealism, in spite of the cult 
of historical figures and of greatness in itself. Instead, 
man is to have his powerlessness and nothingness as 
his substance; this becomes a theme in the philoso- 
phers in question. This powerlessness and nothingness 
of man is coming close to its realization in present 
society. Such a historical state of affairs is then trans- 
posed into the pure essence of Man. It becomes af- 
firmed and eternalized at the same time. In this way 
the jargon plunders the concept of Man, who is to be 
sublime because of his nothingness. It robs him of pre- 
cisely those traits which have, as their content, the 
criticism of states of affairs which preclude the divine 
rights of the soul. This criticism has been immanent in 
all enlightenment, as well as in early German idealism. 
The jargon goes hand in hand with a concept of Man 
from which all memory of natural law has been eradi- 
cated. Yet as an invariable, in the jargon man himself 
becomes something like a supernatural nature-cate- 
gory. Previously, the unbearable transience of a false 
and unsatisfied life was counteracted by theology, 
which gave hope of an eternal fife. This hope disap- 
pears in the praise of the transient as absolute, a praise 
which of course Hegel had already deigned to bestow. 
As it runs in the jargon: suffering, evil, and death are 
to be accepted, not to be changed. The public is being 
trained in this tour de force of maintaining a balance. 
They are learning to understand their nothingness as 
Being, to revere actual, avoidable, or at least corrigible 
need as the most humane element in the image of Man. 
They are learning to respect authority in itself because 


65 



of their innate human insufficiency. Although such 
authority now rarely calls itself god-sent, it still holds 
on to the regal insignia which once it borrowed from 
God the father. Insofar as this authority no longer has 
any legitimation, apart from merely being there, blind 
and obscure, it becomes radically evil. This is the rea- 
son why the universally human language-gesture is in 
good standing with the totalitarian state. In the view 
of absolute power subjects are indifferent to this lan- 
guage-gesture — in the double sense of indifferent. The 
Third Reich, which could present such considerable 
majorities that it was hardly necessary to forge the 
election returns, was once credited by Hjalmar Schacht 
as the true democracy. He is confirmed by the 
jargon’s view of Man, which was at times more inno- 
cent. According to the latter view, all men are equal in 
their powerlessness, in which they possess being. Hu- 
manity becomes the most general and empty form of 
privilege. It is strictly suited to a form of consciousness 
which no longer suffers any privileges yet which still 
finds itself under the spell of privilege. Such universal 
humanity, however, is ideology. It caricatures the 
equal rights of everything which bears a human face, 
since it hides from men the unalleviated discrimina- 
tions of societal power: the differences between hun- 
ger and overabundance, between spirit and docile 
idiocy. Chastely moved, man lets himself be addressed 
through Man: it doesn’t cost anyone anything. But 
whoever refuses this appeal gives himself over as 
non-human to the administrators of the jargon, and 
can be sacrificed by them, if such a sacrifice is needed. 
For he, the non-human, and not the institution of 


66 



power, is the one whose pride tramples human dignity 
into the dirt. In the mask of the jargon any self-inter- 
ested action can give itself the air of public interest, 
of service to Man. Thus, nothing is done in any serious 
fashion to alleviate men’s suffering and need. Self- 
righteous humanity, in the midst of a general inhu- 
manity, only intensifies the inhuman state of affairs. 
This is a state of affairs which necessarily remains hid- 
den to those who suffer here and now. The jargon only 
doubles the hiding cover. The compensation and con- 
solation offered by the jargon and its world are stand- 
ardized by their twisted desire for that which they are 
refused. 

The empty phrase, Man, distorts man’s relation to 
his society as well as the content of what is thought in 
the concept of Man. The phrase does not bother about 
the real division of the subject into separated functions 
that cannot be undone by the voice of mere spirit. The 
so-called Platonic psychology already expresses the 
internalization of the societal division of labor. Each 
function within the person, once firmly defined, ne- 
gates the person’s total principle. The person becomes 
simply the sum of his functions. In the face of this 
situation, however, the person becomes all the worse, 
since his own laboriously gained unity has remained 
fragile. Each individual function, created under the 
law of self-preservation, becomes so firmly congealed 
that none can exist by itself, that no life can be con- 
structed out of its functional pieces. The individual 
functions turn against the self which they are sup- 
posed to serve. Life, insofar as it still exists, indicts 
such separation as false — for example in the verbal 


67 



separation among thinking, feeling, and desiring. No 
thought is a thought — or more than a tautology — that 
does not also desire something. Without an element of 
cognition, no feeling and no will can be more than a 
fleeting motion. It is easy for the jargon to point its 
finger at the silliness of this division; for in the mean- 
time it has swallowed the current term “alienation.” 
The jargon, for example, was only too willing to 
grant depth to the young Marx, in order to be able to 
escape the critic of political economy. In this process 
the real force of the splitting of the individual subject 
is lost from view. The thought that testifies to this 
split suddenly finds itself vituperated. The unsatisfi- 
able triumph, won again over the mechanistic psy- 
chology of the nineteenth century, misuses the insight 
of Gestalt theory, which itself is no longer quite dewy 
fresh — misuses that insight as pretext for not having 
to touch on that which is felt to be the wound. The 
progress of science, which otherwise is not much ad- 
mired, and which did not take place in precisely this 
situation, is viewed as the reason not to consider the 
wound. The authentics shun Freud by exulting in the 
fact that they are more modern than Freud, but with- 
out any reason. Meanwhile, in a timely fashion, the 
fulsome talk about the whole man rooted in being is 
put into its place by psychoanalysis. No elevation of 
the concept of Man has any power in the face of his 
actual degradation into a bundle of functions. The 
only help lies in changing the conditions which brought 
the state of affairs to this point — conditions which un- 
interruptedly reproduce themselves on a larger scale. 
By means of the magic formula of existence, one dis- 


68 



regards society, and the psychology of real individuals 
which is dependent on that society. Thus one insists 
on the changing of Man, who in Hegel’s sense exists 
merely in the abstract. This results only in a tighten- 
ing of the reins — not in elevation but in the continuing 
of the old suppressing ideology. While the authentics 
attack psychoanalysis, they are really aiming at in- 
stinct. The degradation of instinct is taken over unre- 
flectedly into their ethics. Thus Jaspers says: 

The exclusiveness in the love of the sexes uncondi- 
tionally binds two people for the entire future. Without 
being able to be grounded, this love rests in the de- 
cision which tied the self to this loyalty, at the moment 
in which it came to itself authentically through the 
other. To renounce what is negative — polygamous 
erotic activity — is the consequence of a positive element. 
This positive element is only true, in the form of a 
present love, when it includes the whole life. The nega- 
tive element, the will not to throw oneself away, is the 
result of an absolute willingness for this loyalty; 
willingness exercised by means of the possibility of 
self-realization. There is no self-realization without 
strictness in eroticism. Eroticism becomes humanly 
meaningful only in the exclusiveness of unconditioned 
commitment . 54 

"Commitment” is the current word for the unrea- 
sonable demand of discipline. The term “commitment” 
unites Heidegger and Jaspers together with the lowest 
tractatus- writers. At first the term was designed to 
naturalize a loan word. Chewing their cuds, patriotic 
pedagogues would say that commitment was actually 
the name of religion. But it was not only the exaggera- 

54. Ibid., p. 171. 


69 



tion of German ways that allowed for the naturaliza- 
tion of “commitments.” The loan-word “religion” 
demanded subordination to something definite : Chris- 
tian revelation or the divine law of the Jews. This ele- 
ment is no longer felt in the newly coined “commit- 
ment.” The expression gives the appearance of reviving 
that sensual concretion which had become effaced in 
the loan word. But, in contrast to that sensuous color, 
the element to which the concretion adhered has be- 
come obscured. People now dress up the factual state 
of commitment. The concept preserves the authority 
whose source of origin is cut off right from the begin- 
ning. The thing that is understood under the term 
“commitment” is no better than the word. Commit- 
ments are offered not for their own truth but as a medi- 
cine against nihilism, in the same manner as the values 
which were current a generation before, and which 
surreptitiously circulate again today. Commitments 
are classed under mental hygiene and, for that reason, 
undermine the transcendence which they prescribe. 
The campaign that the jargon is launching records 
one Pyrrhic victory after another. The genuineness of 
need and belief, which is questionable anyway, has to 
turn itself into the criterion for what is desired and 
believed; and in this way it becomes no longer genuine. 
This is the reason why no one can say the word “gen- 
uineness” without becoming ideological. Nietzsche still 
used the term in an anti-ideological way. In the jargon, 
however, it stands out in the unending mumble of the 
liturgy of inwardness. Like a ragpicker, the jargon 
usurps the final protesting movements of a subject 
which in its downfall is thrown back on itself and 


70 



hucksters those movements off. The edge is removed 
from the living subject’s protest against being con- 
demned to play roles. The American theory of role- 
playing is so popular because it flattens out this pro- 
test into the structure of society. And the subject is 
told that the force from which he flees back into his 
cave has no power over him. Not lastly, the jargon is 
sacred as the language of an invisible kingdom, which 
exists only in the obsessive folly of the silent majority. 
So as not to scatter oneself — today, through the con- 
sumer market — it is removed from its social context 
and interpreted as something which is of essence. But 
in that way it only negotiates something negative. 
Petits-bourgeois watch over petits-bourgeois. Disper- 
sion, which is the consequence of the consumer habit, 
is viewed as original evil. Consciousness, however, 
has already been disowned in the sphere of produc- 
tion, which trains individuals to disperse themselves. 

Heidegger depicts the authentic state in contrast 
to the dispersed one : 

The Self of everyday Dasein is the they-self, which 
we distinguish from the authentic Self — that is, from 
the Self which has been taken hold of in its own way. 
... As they-self, the particular Dasein has been dis- 
persed into the “they,” and must first find itself. This 
dispersal characterizes the “subject” of that kind of 
Being which we know as concemful absorption in the 
world we encounter as closest to us . 55 

He does not think of the connection between the large 
urban center, of high capitalism and that dispersion 
which was noted by Georg Simmel and already felt by 

55. Heidegger, Being and Time, p. 167. 



Baudelaire. Whatever remains solely by itself, as one’s 
authentic existence, becomes no less impoverished 
than that which dissolves into situations. Both Hegel 
and Goethe experienced and criticized inwardness as 
a merely accidental element. They saw it as the condi- 
tion for right consciousness, and as an element which 
had to be negated because of its limitation. The mem- 
ory of this criticism has been sublimated, since non- 
mind has accomplished so much more thoroughly 
what the mind once demanded of the mind. 

The reconciliation between the inner and outer 
worlds, which Hegelian philosophy still hoped for, has 
been postponed ad infinitum. Thus it has become un- 
necessary to advocate alienation, since the latter is in 
power anyway, as the law of those who are happy ex- 
troverts. At the same time the consciousness of the 
rupture becomes more and more unbearable. For 
slowly this rupture changes self-consciousness into 
self-deception. Ideology can grasp onto the fact that 
the growing powerlessness of the subject, its seculari- 
zation, was at the same time a loss of world and con- 
creteness. With good reason, the first original philos- 
ophy after Hegel, that of Kierkegaard, has been called a 
philosophy of inwardness. But this very Kierkegaardian 
philosophy has rid itself of the notion of a real inner- 
worldly reconciliation. The reflection on inwardness, 
the positing of it together with an element of its be- 
coming, points to its real abolition. The jargon brought 
into circulation many of the categories of inwardness 
and thus contributed its part to the destruction of in- 
wardness by means of such a contradiction. After the 
failure of the bourgeois revolution in Germany, the 
history of inwardness became, from its first day on, 


72 



the history of its downfall. The less powerful the sub- 
ject becomes, the more the sphere, which once self- 
consciously confessed itself to be inwardness, shrinks 
to an abstract point; the greater becomes the tempta- 
tion for inwardness to proclaim itself and throw itself 
onto that same market by which it is terrified. Termi- 
nologically, inwardness becomes a value and a posses- 
sion behind which it entrenches itself; and it is 
surreptitiously overcome by reification. It becomes 
Kierkegaard’s nightmare of the “aesthetic world” of the 
mere onlooker, whose counterpart is to be the existen- 
tial inwardly man. Whatever wants to remain abso- 
lutely pure from the blemish of reification is pasted 
onto the subject as a firm attribute. Thus the subject 
becomes an object in the second degree, and finally the 
mass product of consolation: from that found in 
Rilke’s “Beggars can call you brother and still you can 
be a king” to the notorious poverty which is the great 
inward gleam of the spirit. 

Those philosophers like Hegel and Kierkegaard, 
who testified to the unhappy state of consciousness for 
itself, understood inwardness in line with Protestant 
tradition: essentially as negation of the subject, as 
repentance. The inheritors who, by sleight of hand, 
changed unhappy consciousness into a happy non- 
dialectic one, preserve only the limited self-righteous- 
ness which Hegel sensed a hundred years before 
fascism. They cleanse inwardness of that element 
which contains its truth, by eliminating self-reflection, 
in which the ego becomes transparent to itself as a 
piece of the world. Instead, the ego posits itself as 
higher than the world and becomes subjected to the 
world precisely because of this. The hardened inward- 


73 



ness of today idolizes its own purity, which has sup- 
posedly been blemished by ontic elements. At least in 
this regard the outset of contemporary ontology coin- 
cides with the cult of inwardness. The retreat of 
ontology from the course of the world is also a retreat 
from the empirical content of subjectivity. In a clas- 
sically enlightened attitude, Kant took an antagonistic 
stance toward the concept of the inward and sepa- 
rated out the empirical subject, which was dealt with 
by psychology, as one thing among others . 56 He dis- 
tinguished it from the transcendental subject, and sub- 
sumed it under the category of causality. With a re- 
verse stress this is followed by the pathos of the inward 
ones. They take pleasure in their scorn for psychology 
without, in the manner of Kant, sacrificing to trans- 
cendental universality its alleged footing within the 
individual person. They cash in on the profit of both, 
so to speak. The taboos of the inward ones, which re- 
sult from their animosity toward instinctual drives, 
become more rigid by virtue of the fact that the subject 
becomes an element of externality — by virtue of its 
psychological determination. 

These taboos especially rage in Jaspers’ books . 57 
But in the suppression of real satisfaction, in the 
transposition of satisfaction into a mere inner one, 
where the self satisfies the self, all of the authentics, 
even the early Heidegger, coincide. He too includes the 

56. Cf. Immanuel Kant, Kritik der reinen Verunft, B 332 f. 
(Die Amphibolie der Reflexionsbegriffe) . [English translation 
by N. K. Smith, Critique of Pure Reason (New York, 1965).] 

57. Cf. Jaspers, Psychologie der W eltanschauungen, 3d ed. 
(Berlin, 1925), pp. 132 ff. 



term “pleasure capacity” under the categories of in- 
authenticity , 58 and in Sein und Zeithe affirms Jaspers’ 
statement that a psychology of world-views is by no 
means a psychology . 59 The no-less-disgusting practice 
of psychoanalytic language, hammering “enjoyment 
capacity” into its patients without regard for what is 
to be enjoyed, is simply turned upside down, But if 
inwardness is neither an existent thing nor an aspect 
— no matter how general — of the subject, then it turns 
into an imaginary quantity. If every existent thing, 
even the psychic, is cut out from the subject, then the 
remainder is no less abstract than the transcendental 
subject in respect to which the individual’s inwardness, 
as existent, imagines itself so superior. In the classic 
texts of existentialism, as in that of the Kierkegaard- 
ian sickness unto death, existence becomes a relation- 
ship to itself, under which heading nothing further 
can be conceived. It becomes, as it were, an absolutized 
moment of mediation, without any regard for what is 
mediated; and it pronounces a verdict, from the very 
beginning, against any philosophy of inwardness. In 
the jargon, finally, there remains from inwardness 
only the most external aspect, that thinking oneself 
superior which marks people who elect themselves: 
the claim of people who consider themselves blessed 
simply by virtue of being what they are. Without any 
effort, this claim can turn into an elitist claim, or into 
a readiness to attach itself to elites which then quickly 
gives the ax to inwardness. A symptom of the transfor- 

58. Heidegger, Being and Time, p. 68. 

59. Ibid., p. 293. and especially pp. 348 ff. 


75 



mation of inwardness is the belief of innumerable peo- 
ple that they belong to an extraordinary family. The 
jargon of authenticity, which sells self-identity as 
something higher, projects the exchange formula onto 
that which imagines that it is not exchangeable; for as 
a biological individual each man resembles himself. 
That is what is left over after the removal of soul and 
immortality from the immortal soul. 

The over-all appearance of the immediate, which 
comes to a head in inwardness — now merely a speci- 
men — makes it unusually hard for those who are 
steadily exposed to the jargon to see through it. In its 
second-hand primalness they actually find something 
like contact, comparable to the feeling in the fraudu- 
lent National Socialist VoZfe-community which led peo- 
ple to believe that all kindred comrades are cared for 
and none is forgotten: permanent metaphysical sub- 
vention. The social basis for this is clear. Many in- 
stances of mediation in the market economy, which 
have strengthened the consciousness of alienation, are 
put aside in the transition to a planned economy; the 
routes between the whole and atomized individual 
subjects are shortened, as if the two extremes were 
near to one another. The technical progress of the 
means of communication runs parallel to this. These 
means — especially radio and television — reach the 
people at large in such a way that they notice none of 
the innumerable technical intermediations; the voice 
of the announcer resounds in the home, as though he 
were present and knew each individual. The an- 
nouncers’ technically and psychologically created arti- 
ficial language — the model of which is the repel- 


76 



lently confidential “ Til we meet again” — is of the same 
stripe as the jargon of authenticity. The catch-word 
for all this is “encounter”: “The book lying before us, 
which concerns itself with Jesus, is of a very unusual 
kind. It does not intend to be a biography, a ‘Life of 
Jesus,’ in the usual sense, but to lead us to an existen- 
tial encounter with Jesus . . .” 60 Gottfried Keller, the 
lyricist, on whom the apostles of harmony looked 
down condescendingly, wrote a poem called “En- 
counter,” a poem of wonderful clumsiness . 61 The poet 
unexpectedly meets, in the woods, her 

whom alone my heart longs for, 
wrapped whitely in scarf and hat, 
transformed by a golden shine. 

She was alone; yet I greeted her 
hardly made shy in passing on, 
because I had never seen her so 
noble, still, and beautiful. 

The misty light is that of sadness, and from it the 
word “encounter” receives its power. But this sadness 
gathers to itself the feeling of departure, which is 
powerful and incapable of unmediated expression; it 
designates nothing other than, quite literally, the fact 
that the two people met each other without any inten- 
tion. What the jargon has accomplished with the word 
“encounter,” and what can never again be repaired, 

60. Archiv fur Literaturwissenschaft, i960, on Rudolf Bult- 
mann, Jesus. 

61. Cf. Bruno Russ, Das Problem des Todes in der Lyrik 
Gottfried Kellers, Ph.D. diss. (Frankfurt a. M., 1959), pp. 
189 ff., 200 ff. 


77 



does more harm to Keller’s poem than a factory ever 
did to a landscape. “Encounter” is alienated from its 
literal content and is practically made usable through 
the idealizing of that content. There are scarcely en- 
counters like Keller’s any longer — at the most there 
are appointments made by telephone — in a society in 
which it is essentially accidental when men get to 
know one another; and in which what one once simply 
called ‘life” constantly melts away more and more, 
and, where it maintains itself at all, is considered 
something to be merely tolerated. But for precisely this 
reason encounter is praised, language has smeared 
organized contacts with luminous paint, because the 
light has gone out. The accompanying speech-gesture 
is that of eye-to-eye, as is the way with dictators. Who- 
ever looks deep into somebody’s eye is hoping to 
hypnotize him, to win power over him, and always 
with a threat: Are you really faithful to me? no be- 
trayer? no Judas? Psychological interpretation of the 
jargon should discover in this language-gesture an un- 
conscious homosexual transference, and should in 
that way also be able to explain the patriarch’s eager 
rejection of psychoanalysis. The manic eye-to-eye 
glance is related to racial insanity; it wants a con- 
spiratorial community, the feeling that we are of the 
same kind; it strengthens endogamy. The very desire 
to purify the word “encounter,” and to reinstate it 
through strict usage, would become, through unavoid- 
able tacit agreement, a basic element of the jargon, 
along with purity and primalness — an element of that 
jargon from which it would like to escape. What was 
done to “encounter” satisfies a specific need. Those en- 


78 



counters which counteract themselves because they 
are organized, those encounters to which good will, 
busy-body behavior and canny desire for power tire- 
lessly exhort us, are simply covers for spontaneous 
actions that have become impossible. People console 
themselves, or are being consoled, by thinking that 
something has already been done about what is op- 
pressing them when they talk about it. Conversation, 
after having been a means of becoming clear about 
something, becomes an end in itself and a substitute 
for that which,, in terms of its sense, should follow 
from it. The surplus in the word “encounter” — the sug- 
gestion that something essential is already occurring 
when those ordered to gather converse together — that 
surplus has the same deception at its center as the 
speculation on being helped in the word “concern.” 
Once that word meant a sickness. The jargon falls 
back on that: as though the individual’s interest were 
at the same time his trouble. It begs for caritas but at 
the same time, for the sake of its human essence, it 
exercises terror. Here one is expected to understand a 
transcendental power which requires that one, again 
according to the jargon, should “perceive” the concern. 
The archaic superstition, which is still exploited today 
by the epistolary formula “hoping not to have asked in 
vain” is taken on existential RPM’s by the jargon; 
readiness to help being, as it were, squeezed out of 
being. 

The counterpart to that — something over which 
the authentics have unquestioningly grown indignant 
— would be communicative usage as it is found in 
America. “Being cooperative” means, in that context. 



to offer one’s services to the other without remunera- 
tion, or at least to put one’s time at the other’s disposal 
in the expectation — no matter how vague — that all 
that will someday be repaid, since all men need all 
men. The German concern, however, evolved from the 
capitalist exchange principle at a stage in which this 
principle was still dominant, while the liberal norm of 
equivalence had been shattered. So dynamic is the 
linguistic character of the jargon as a whole: in it that 
becomes disgusting which was by no means always 
so . 62 In the encounters where the jargon prattles, and 
of which it prattles, it sides with that which it accuses 
by the word “encounter,” namely, the over-adminis- 
tered world. It accommodates itself to that world 
through a ritual of non-accommodation. Even the Hitler 
dictatorship wooed for consensus; it was here that it 
checked its mass basis. Finally, the self-employed ad- 
ministration wants at every moment, under the condi- 
tions of formal democracy, to prove that it exists for 
the sake of the administrated whole. Therefore she 
makes eyes at the jargon, and it at her, the already 
irrational, self-sufficient authority. 

The jargon proves itself as a piece of the negative 
spirit of the time; it institutes socially useful work 
within the tendency already observed by Max Weber; 
the tendency for administrations to expand out over 

62. The author’s own work taught him about the change in 
function. Nothing in the Philosophie der neuen Musik, which 
was written when he was still in America, warned him against 
“concern.” Only a German critique pointed out to him the 
bigotry of the word. Even he who detests the jargon cannot be 
safe from its contagion. For this reason one should fear it all 
the more. 


80 



what they consider as their cultural domain. There are 
countless occasions on which administrators, special- 
ists trained in law or in management, feel themselves 
obliged to speak, as it were, about the content of art, 
science, and philosophy. They are afraid of being bor- 
ing, of being dry, and they would like to show their 
alliance with a kindred specialized spirit, though with- 
out being involved too greatly with the other in their 
activity and experience. If an Oberstadtdirektor ad- 
dresses a congress of philosophers, whose own guiding 
principle is already as administration-oriented as the 
title Oberstadtdirektor, then he must use whatever 
cultural stuffing offers itself to him. And that is the 
jargon. This shelters him from the disagreeable task of 
expressing himself seriously on the matter at hand, 
about which he knows nothing. At the same time per- 
haps he can thus feign general acquaintance with the 
subject. The jargon is so appropriate for that because, 
by its very nature, it always unites the appearance of 
an absent concreteness with the ennobling of that 
concreteness. If there were no functional need for the 
jargon, which is hostile to function, it would hardly 
have become a second language — that of the language- 
less and those alien to language. The jargon, which is 
not responsible to any reason, urges people higher sim- 
ply through its simultaneously standardized tone; it 
reproduces on the level of mind the curse which bu- 
reaucracy exercises in reality. It could be described as 
an ideological replica of the paralyzing quality of 
official functions. Their horror is made present to us 
by Kafka’s dry language, which is itself a complete 
contrary to the jargon. Society’s regulatory violence 



becomes crassly tangible to the people when they are 
obliged to request something from the inaccessible 
mouthpieces of the administration. Like these mouth- 
pieces, the jargon speaks directly to them without 
letting them respond. In addition it talks them into 
thinking that the man behind the counter is really the 
man whom his name plate, recently introduced, pre- 
sents him as being. Latently, the salvation formulas of 
the jargon are those of power, borrowed from the ad- 
ministrative and legal hierarchy of authority. 

The bureaucratic language, seasoned with authen- 
ticity, is therefore no merely decadent form of the 
appropriate philosophical language, but is already pre- 
formed in the most notable texts of that philosophy. 
Heidegger’s favorite “first of all,” that has its roots as 
much in didactic procedure as in a Cartesian first-and- 
then, leads thoughts along on a leash, in the spirit of 
philosophical systematization; as if in a business 
agendum, one adjourns whatever is out of order, by 
the throttling schema, ‘Tut before we . . . further 
fundamental investigations have to be undertaken”: 

This chapter, in which we shall undertake the explica- 
tion of Being-in as such (that is to say of the Being of 
the “there”) breaks up into two parts: A. the existen- 
tial Constitution of the “there”; B. the everyday Being of 
the “there,” and the falling of Dasein . 63 

Such pedantry still propagandizes for an allegedly 
radical philosophical reflection, which it presents as a 
solid science. The pedantry, in addition, is repaid by a 


63. Heidegger, Being and Time, p. 171. 



side result: that it simply never arrives at what phi- 
losophy promises. That all goes back to Husserl, in the 
course of whose extensive preliminary considerations 
one easily forgets the main thing though critical re- 
flection would first come to grips with the very phi- 
losophemes that fastidiousness pushes along in front 
of it. But even the assertion that practical conse- 
quences are contemptible, which has its distinguished 
prehistory in German idealism, cannot do without the 
cleverness of strategy. The administrative offices, in 
Kafka’s world, similarly shirk decisions, which then, 
ungrounded, suddenly catch up with their victims. 
The reciprocity of the personal and apersonal in the 
jargon; the apparent humanization of the thingly; the 
actual turning of man into thing: all this is the lumi- 
nous copy of that administrative situation in which 
both abstract justice and objective procedural orders 
appear under the guise of face-to-face decisions. It is 
impossible to forget the image of those SA-men from 
the early period of Hitler’s rule. In them administra- 
tion and terror found themselves visibly joined; the 
folder of documents above, and below the high boots. 
The jargon of authenticity preserves something of 
this image in words like “commission.” In such words 
there is calculated uncertainty about the distinction 
between something administratively arranged, justly 
or unjustly, and something absolutely commanded — 
between authority and sentiment. 

The incorporation of the word “commission” into 
the jargon might have been inspired by the first of the 
Duino Elegies of Rilke, who was one of the founders 
of the jargon. For years every ambitious Privatdozent 


83 



viewed it as an obligatory exercise to analyze that first 
elegy: “All that was commission .” 64 The line expresses 
the vague feeling that an unsayable element of ex- 
perience wants something from the subject. This is 
similarly the case with the archaic torso of Apollo : 65 
“Many stars expected you to feel them.” 66 To that the 
poem adds the uncommittedness and vainness of such 
a feeling of command, especially when it expresses the 
poetic subject: “But did you manage it ?” 67 Rilke ab- 
solutizes the word “commission” under the shelter of 
aesthetic appearance and, as the poem advances, 
limits the claim that his pathos already announces. 
The jargon needs only to cross out this limitation, 
with a deft movement, and to take literally the word 
“commission,” which has been absolutized by ques- 
tionable poetastering. But the fact that the neo- 
romantic lyric sometimes behaves like the jargon, or 
at least timidly readies the way for it, should not lead 
us to look for the evil of the poetry simply in its form. 
It is not simply grounded, as a much too innocent 
view might maintain, in the mixture of poetry and 
prose. Both of them become unequally untrue from 
the same cause. The evil, in the neoromantic lyric, 
consists in the fitting out of the words with a theo- 
logical overtone, which is belied by the condition of 
the lonely and secular subject who is speaking there: 
religion as ornament. Where words and turns of this 

64. Rainer Maria Rilke, Duineser Elegien (New York, 
n.d.), p. 8. 

65. Cf. Rainer Maria Rilke, Der neuen Gedichte anderer 
Teil (Leipzig, 1919) p. 1. 

66. Rilke, Duineser Elegien, p. 7. 

67. Ibid., p. 8. 


84 



sort appear in Holderlin — the secret model for all this 
— they are not yet the tremulous expressions of the 
jargon, however uninhibitedly the administrators of 
the jargon reach out their hands toward that unpro- 
tected genius. In lyric poetry, as in philosophy, the 
jargon acquires its defining character by the way it 
imputes its truth. It does this by making an intended 
object present — as though this object were Being with- 
out any tension toward the subject. That makes it, 
prior to all discursive judgment, into untruth. The 
expression is sufficient unto itself. It discards as an 
annoyance the obligation to express a thing other than 
itself. Beyond its difference from that thing, which may 
already be nothing, and out of thanks, this nothing is 
made into that which is supreme. Rilke’s language 
still stands on the edge of all this, like much that is 
irrational from the era prior to fascism. It not only 
darkens, but it also takes note of, subconscious ma- 
terial, which, slipping away from thingly rationality, 
protests against it. The feeling of being touched, which 
the word “commission” is supposed to evoke in that 
elegy, is of such a nature. It at once becomes unbear- 
able as soon as it objectifies itself, as soon as it flaunts 
itself as something definite and unambiguous pre- 
cisely in its irrationality. It is unbearable in all its 
registers; from Heidegger’s obedient and comprehend- 
ing thought to all that summoning and invoking, with 
whose details the subaltern self-importance of the 
jargon surrounds itself. Simply because Rilke, in this 
poem, acknowledges the multiple significance of com- 
mission, that multiple significance expects to be ab- 
solved. On the other hand, though, commission with- 


85 



out committing agent is already used here, as in the 
jargon; and a conception of Being in general is evoked 
which fits this usage. That again accords with the 
handicraftish religiosity of the early Rilke, especially 
of the Book of Hours, which with theological phrasings 
subjects the psychological to a kind of refining process. 

Lyric poetry permits itself any metaphor, even the 
absolutely unmetaphorical, as a parable. It will not be 
disturbed by the question of the objectivity of those 
things that are allegedly suggested to the subject by 
its emotions. Nor will the lyric be disturbed by the 
question of whether the words, gathered from culture, 
at all cover the experiences whose objectification is 
the central idea of such lyric. Therefore, because it 
blunts itself against the truth and exactitude of its 
words — even the vaguest would have to be smuggled 
in as something vague, not as something definite — 
this lyric, as lyric, is already bad, despite its virtuos- 
ity. The problematic of that to which it claims to ele- 
vate itself, the problematic of its content, is also that 
of its form, which makes believe it could be capable 
of transcendence, and in that way becomes mere ap- 
pearance in a more fateful sense than that of the 
aesthetic. 

The evil truth behind that appearance, nonethe- 
less, is precisely the bond between commission and the 
administrative structure, a bond which denies that ap- 
pearance in the service of that structure. Its words 
are dossier numbers, or- stamps, or that In re of of- 
ficial office language, which it remains the commission 
of the jargon to gloss over. The fussy attention to in- 
dividual words, as they were lexically handled in the 


86 



days of the pre-Heideggerian idol-phenomenology, was 
already the harbinger of bureaucratic stocktaking. 
Whoever prepared meanings from all this, whoever 
acted as a midwife of today’s pure words, acted by 
force, without regard for the sanctuaries of the philos- 
ophy of Being. The method which prohibits a word 
from being involved with its neighbors was, objectively, 
of the same character as the small bureaucrat, who 
sees to it that everything remains strictly in its cate- 
gory, as he himself remains in his salary-class. Even 
death is handled by the book, in SS-orders and in exis- 
tential philosophies; red tape ridden as Pegasus, ridden 
in extremis as an apocalyptic steed. In the jargon the 
sun, which the jargon has in its heart, brings the dark 
secret of the method to the light of day, as the method 
of a procedure which eagerly takes the place of the 
intended object. In general, the jargon behaves in this 
way itself. Indifferent to the matter at hand, it is to be 
used for commanded purposes. Language, as once in 
major philosophy, no longer flows out of the necessity 
of the subject matter. Such language-procedural indif- 
ference has become a metaphysics of language: that 
which in terms of its form seems to fly above its cor- 
relative, thereby establishes itself as something higher. 
The less philosophical systematizing, which Nietzsche 
called dishonest, is theoretically possible, the more 
that which had its place only in the system transforms 
itself into mere assertion. In effect, linguistic non- 
sense is the heir of the disintegrated strictness of the 
system. In fact, like a worthless construction, it is for- 
ever falling off its stilts and stumbling around in non- 
sense. 


87 



The term “commission” sets itself up with unques- 
tioned authority in the vulgar jargon of authenticity. 
The fallibility of the term is hushed up by the absolute 
use of the word. By leaving out of consideration the 
organizations and people which give commissions, the 
term establishes itself as a linguistic eyrie of totalitar- 
ian orders. It does this without rational examination 
of the right of those who usurp for themselves the 
charisma of the leader. Shy theology allies itself with 
secular brazenness. There exist cross-connections be- 
tween the jargon of authenticity and old school-like 
phrases, like that which was once observed by Tuchol- 
sky: “That’s the way it’s done here.” The same holds 
true for the trick of military command, which dresses 
an imperative in the guise of a predicative sentence. 
By eliminating all linguistic traces of the will of the 
superior, that which is intended is given greater em- 
phasis. Thus the impression is created that it is neces- 
sary to obey, since what is demanded already occurs 
factually. “The participants on this trip, in memory of 
our heroes, assemble in Liineburg.” Heidegger, too, 
cracks the whip when he italicizes the auxiliary verb 
in the sentence, “Death is.” 68 The grammatical transla- 
tion of the imperative into a predication makes the 
imperative categorical. This imperative does not allow 
for refusal, since it no longer at all obliges like the 
Kantian imperative, but describes obedience as a com- 
pleted fact. Possible resistance is then eliminated 
simply in terms of logical form. The objection raised 

68. Heidegger, Being and Time, p. 303. 


88 



by reason is banned from the range of what is at all 
conceivable in society. Such irrationality, in an ele- 
ment which still, in times of pawned-off myths, insists 
on calling itself thinking, was, of course, the blemish 
of the Kantian enlightenment. The Kantian enlighten- 
ment asserts deceptively that it is not necessary to 
know the categorical imperative in order to act rightly. 
Meanwhile, the categorical imperative, if it is truly to 
be one with the principles of reason, trusts that each 
one who acts has reason, which if unimpaired would 
be philosophical reason. 

Christian Schiitze has published a satire called the 
“Stenciled Speech for Festive Occasions.” It throws 
light on the jargon with great comic force: 

Most honored Mr. President, ministers, secretaries 
of state, mayors, advisors, administrators, and assist- 
ants, highly esteemed men and women of our cultural 
life, representatives of science, of industry, and of the 
self-employed middle-class, honored public of this fes- 
tive gathering, ladies and gentlemen I 

It is not by chance that we are gathered here today 
for the purpose of celebrating this day. In a time like 
ours, in which the true human values have more than 
ever to be our innermost concern, a statement is ex- 
pected from us. I do not wish to present you with a 
patented solution, but I would merely like to bring up 
for discussion a series of hot potatoes which do after 
all face us. For we do not need ready-made opinions, 
which anyway do not touch us deeply, but what we need 
is rather the genuine dialogue which moves us in our 
humanity. What brought us together here is our knowl- 
edge of the power of encounter in the forming of the 
intrahuman sphere. The things which matter are set- 


89 



tied in this intrahuman sphere. I do not have to tell you 
what I mean by this. You will all understand me, for in 
a particular and extraordinary sense you all have to do 
with people. 

In a time like ours — I have mentioned it already — 
in which the perspective of things has everywhere 
begun to waver, everything depends more than ever on 
the individual who knows of the essence of things, of 
things as such, of things in their authenticity. We need 
openhearted people who are capable of this. Who are 
these people? — you will ask me — and I will answer you: 
You are they! By being gathered here you have proven 
more thoroughly than by words that you are prepared 
to put emphasis on your concern. That is what I would 
like to thank you for. But I would also like to thank you 
for energetically opposing, by your commitment to this 
good cause, the flood of materialism which threatens 
to drown everything around us. To say it in a nutshell 
from the start: you have come here to be given direc- 
tions; you have come to listen. From this encounter, on 
an intrahuman level, you expect a contribution to the 
reestablishment of the interhuman climate. You expect 
a restoration of that homey warmth which seems to be 
lacking, in our modern industrial society, to such a 
terrifying degree. ... 

But what does this mean for our concrete situation 
here and now? To pronounce the question means to 
pose it. But in fact it means much more than that. It 
means that we expose ourselves to it, that we surrender 
to it. That we must not forget. But in the rush and busy 
work of the day, modem man forgets it all too easily. 
But you who belong to the silent majority, you know of 
it. For our problems stem from a region which it is our 
vocation to preserve. The wholesome perplexity which 
comes from this situation opens perspectives which we 
should not simply block out by turning away in bore- 
dom. It is important to think with the heart and to tune 
in the human antenna to the same wave length. Today 


90 



no ones knows better than man that which is of im- 
portance in the end . 69 

Now, everything is assembled here: the innermost 
concern, the true dialogue, things in their authenticity, 
with a vague reminiscence of Heidegger, the encounter 
on an intrahuman level, the question for its own sake, 
even the slightly anachronistic reserve army of the 
silent majority. The long-winded address designates 
the participating notables in terms of their function 
and subordinates the whole speech from the beginning 
to an intangible administrative purpose. While what 
the speaker is aiming at remains unspecified, the jar- 
gon brings it to light. The concern is the working 
climate. By calling the listeners people “who in a par- 
ticular and extraordinary sense have to do with peo- 
ple,” it can be gathered that the subject matter is that 
kind of human leadership in which men are merely 
the pretext for leadership-in-itself. To this is accurately 
fitted the indestructible phrase about the “flood of ma- 
terialism” which full-blooded industrial leaders usu- 
ally vituperate in those who are dependent on them. 
That is the ground of being of the higher element in 
the jargon. In its slips of the tongue the jargon ac- 
knowledges that administration is its essence. The 
intrahuman level, which is supposed to contribute to 
the “reestablishment of the human climate,” places 
the word “level” beside “intrahuman,” together with 
the association of “I and thou,” which has a social- 
scientific as well as a homey character. The levels, how- 

69. Christian Schiitze, “Gestanzte Festansprache,” in 
Stuttgarter Zeitung, Dec. 2, 1962, quoted in Der Monat, Jan., 
1963, p. 63, n. 160. 


91 



ever — the level of counties, of the federation — desig- 
nate areas of judicial and administrative responsibility. 
The exhortation to think with the heart — Pascal’s 
formula que les grandes yensees yrcrviennent du coeur 
— has been admired by business men right from the 
beginning; it is pronounced with the same breath as 
“the human antenna is tuned in to the same wave 
length.” The total content, however, is flowering non- 
sense. This becomes obvious in phrases like “To pro- 
nounce the question is to pose it,” or, “No one knows 
better than man that which is of importance in the 
end.” Such nonsense also has its reasonable basis in 
the world. It hides the fact that both it and the goal 
at which it aims are manipulated. For this reason all 
content is “'bracketed,” as it goes in administrative 
German. At the same time the appearance of content 
must not be renounced; those who are addressed, again 
in the same German, must “toe the line.” The purpose, 
the intention, contracts itself into an intentionless 
underworldly language, truthful to the objective deter- 
mination of the jargon itself, which has no other con- 
tent than its wrapping. 

After the fact, the jargon adapts itself to the need 
for a philosophy which was current in about 1925. 
This was a philosophy that strove for the concretiza- 
tion of experience, thought, and behavior in the midst 
of a total state of affairs which oriented itself accord- 
ing to something abstract — according to exchange. 
For this reason the jargon is neither able nor willing 
to concretize the elements which condemn it to ab- 
stractness. The jargon turns in a circle. It wants to be 


92 



immediately concrete without sliding into mere fac- 
ticity. It is consequently forced into secret abstraction, 
which is the same formalism against which Heidegger’s 
own school, that of phenomenology, once strongly 
spoke out. This can be grasped in existential ontology’s 
theoretical criticism, especially in the paired concepts 
of authenticity and inauthenticity in Sein und Z eit. 
Already there the drive for concretion is coupled with 
a hands-off attitude. One speaks from a depth which 
would be profaned if it were called content. Yet this 
depth wants to be this content, which in turn wants to 
express itself. Heidegger’s defensive technique of with- 
drawing into eternity takes place at this “pure and dis- 
gusting height” of which Hegel spoke in his polemic 
against Reinhold.™ Like Reinhold, Heidegger cannot 
get enough of the ritual preliminaries for the “step 
into the temple,” 71 although hardly anyone nowadays 
dares to tie a warning bell around the cat’s neck. 
Heidegger is by no means incomprehensible, as one 
might gather from the marginalia of the positivists, 
but he lays around himself the taboo that any under- 
standing of him would simultaneously be falsification. 
The impossibility of saving what this thinking wants 
to save is cleverly turned into its own life element. This 
thinking refuses all content which would have to be 
argued against. Metaphysics is said to miss this ele- 
ment in the same manner as it is missed in translation 
into ontic statements, which, as parts of the individual 

70. G. W. F. Hegel, Werke, ed. H. Glockner (Stuttgart, 
1958) Vol. I: "Differenz des Fichteschen und Schellingschen 
Systems,” p. 43. 

71. Ibid. 


93 



scientific disciplines, are regarded with some favor . 72 
Even authenticity and inauthenticity are first of all 
treated cautiously. Heidegger shuns the reproach that 
he paints in black and white. He claims that he does 
not give a directive for philosophical judgment, but 
that he introduces descriptive and neutral terms in the 
manner of that which in earlier phenomenology was 
called investigation. In Weber’s interpretation of soci- 
ology, a discipline denounced by Heidegger, this was 
called neutrality of values: 

As modes of Being, authenticity and inauthenticity 
(these expressions have been chosen terminologically in 
a strict sense) are both grounded in the fact that any 
Dasein whatsoever is characterized by mineness. But 
the inauthenticity of Dasein does not signify any “less” 


72. Careless for one moment, Heidegger shows his hand in 
the tractatus on ldentitdt und Differenz: 

But let us assume for a moment that difference is an element 
added by our representation. Then the question rises : added 
to what? The answer is, to the existent. All right. But what 
does this mean — the existent? What else does it mean but 
such a thing as is? Thus we enter the supposed addition, the 
conception of difference under being. But “Being” says itself; 
being which is existent? Where we wanted to take difference 
as supposed addition we already always find what is existent 
and being in their difference. It is the same story as Grimm’s 
fairy tale about the hare and the hedgehog: “I’m here already.” 
(Heidegger, ldentitdt und Differenz [Pfiillingen, 1957], p. 60.) 

What is said here about so-called ontological difference by 
means of a rather primitive hypostasis of the copula, is said 
in order to shift the ontological primacy of difference into 
being itself. This is actually Heidegger’s method. This method 
protects itself by considering possible contradictions as ele 
ments that have already been considered in the particular 
thesis. These are false syllogisms which any logician could 
check. These false syllogisms are projected into, and thus 
justified by, the objective structure of that at which the thought 
aims. 


94 



Being or any “lower” degree of Being. Rather it is the 
case that even in its fullest concretion Dasein can be 
characterized by inauthenticity — when busy, when ex- 
cited, when interested, when ready for enjoyment . 73 

In a much later passage of Sein und Zeit, the category 
of “the They” is subsumed under inauthenticity. In this 
passage Heidegger says 

that interpretation is purely ontological in its aims, and 
is far removed from any moralizing critique of every- 
day Dasein, and from the aspirations of a “philosophy 
of culture.” . . . Even the expression “idle talk” is not 
to be used here in a “disparaging” signification . 74 

The quotation marks around “disparaging” are the kid 
gloves of a prudish metaphysics. Considerable advan- 
tages are connected with this kind of methodological 
performance. The affirmations of scientific purity in 
Husserl’s texts provide the model for all this. The 
philosophy of authenticity needs its proviso clauses 
so that it can on occasion make the excuse that it is 
not a philosophy. The reputation of scientific objec- 
tivity grows together with its authority and, at the same 
time, leaves the decision between authentic and in- 
authentic being up to an arbitrariness — one that has 
been absolved from the judgment of reason, in a fash- 
ion not much different from Max Weber’s “value.” 
The execution of the volte is so elegant because “the 
terminologically chosen” expressions are not exhausted 
by the uses of them that are chosen in subjective free- 
dom. Rather, and Heidegger the philosopher of lan- 
guage should be the first to concede this, they keep as 

73. Heidegger, Being and Time, p. 68. 

74. Ibid., p. 211. 


95 



their objective content those standards from which 
Heidegger distinguishes them. The nominalists saw 
that better than the latecomer of language mysticism. 
Following Bacon’s doctrine of idols, Hobbes already 
noted “that men usually express their affects simul- 
taneously with words so that the latter already include 
a certain judgment on the subject matter .” 75 The 
triviality of this observation does not free us from the 
responsibility of reminding people of it when they 
merely ignore it. As an impartial contemplative of 
essence, Heidegger allows for the fact that inauthen- 
ticity “can define existence in its fullest concretion.” 
Yet the accompanying words, which he attributes to 
this mode of being, are essentially vituperative. As 
officiousness and interestedness, they characterize such 
qualities as have given themselves up to the world of 
exchange and wares and resemble this world. Some- 
body is officious when he carries on business activity 
for his own sake and confuses means with ends. If a 
person is “interested,” it means that — all too openly 
according to the rules of the bourgeois game — he sees 
to his own interest, or disguises as his objective that 
which only serves himself. Pleasure capacity falls in 
the same line. According to the habit of the petit bour- 
geois, the deformations inflicted on men by the world 
of profit are explained by men’s greed, as if it was 
their fault that they were cheated out of their sub- 
jectivity. In the end, however, Heidegger’s philosophy 
does not want to have anything to do with the cultural 

75. Quoted in Rudolf Eucken, Geschichte der philosophi- 
schen Terminologie (Leipzig, 1879), p. 86, in reference to 
Thomas Hobbes, Leviathan, chaps. 4 and 5. 



philosophy in which such questions appear. And in- 
deed, the concept of cultural philosophy is just as 
ridiculous as that of social philosophy. The limitation 
of philosophy to one specific area is incompatible with 
the fact that it should reflect on institutional separa- 
tion. For philosophy should itself derive this separa- 
tion, and recognize that which is necessarily separated 
as something which then again is not separated. By 
virtue of its self-limitation, cultural philosophy accepts 
the division of phenomena into areas of subject matter 
and possibly even into those of hierarchy within areas. 
In the structure of alleged levels the place of culture 
is almost unavoidably a derived one. For this reason 
a philosophy which enjoys itself fastidiously in this 
sphere would be satisfied with that which officials 
patronize as essayism. By the same token it would 
avoid that which has been handed down under the 
name of constitutive problems, which, of course, could 
only be stubbornly ignored by such a philosophy. Hei- 
degger keeps that in mind. He is familiar, on the one 
hand, with Husserl’s schema of philosophical-eidetic 
disciplines, and, on the other, of disciplines which are 
directed toward objects — both of which disciplines he 
melted together with the idealistic criticism of reifica- 
tion. But an overtone of the word “cultural-philosophi- 
cal” cannot fail to be heard in Heidegger. He defames 
that which sticks like a parasite to what is secondary, 
to life which has already been produced. He acts 
peevish toward any form of mediation, even in the 
mind which is itself essentially mediation. The growth 
climate of this hostility to cultural philosophy is that 
academic climate in which they admonished the Jew 


97 



Georg Simmel, on the grounds that, at least in inten- 
tion, he absorbed himself in that concretion which the 
systems were forever only promising. Thus he trans- 
gressed a taboo of traditional philosophy which busies 
itself, if not with the fundamental themes of occidental 
metaphysics, at least with the question of their pos- 
sibility. Criticism of the limitations of cultural phi- 
losophy is vengefully limited. The chemically pure 
concept of philosophy, as the inquiry into an unruined 
essence, underneath that which has only been made 
and posited by men, is worth just as little as that 
limited cultural philosophy. The subject area of the 
pure has no advantage over culture, whether this pure 
essence be considered as a truthfully philosophical 
element, as something merely explanatory, or as a 
supporting element. It is, rather, like culture, a deter- 
mination of reflection. While specialistic cultural phi- 
losophy absolutizes the form of that which has be- 
come, against that on which it feeds, fundamental 
ontology embezzles its own cultural mediation, insofar 
as it shies away from a spirit which is concretized in 
objectivity. Whatever the possibilities of natural phi- 
losophy may be nowadays, primalness now has the 
same place in the philosophical atlas in which nature 
was once registered. This primalness is as much a 
part, as not, of that which fundamental ontology 
despises as culture. Culture includes even the material 
infrastructure of society, in which human work and 
thought are rooted, and the only means by which work 
becomes real societal work. This does not mean that 
the contrast to the suprastructure becomes any less 
sharp. Philosophical nature has to be regarded as his- 


98 





tory, and history as nature. The contrast between 
primal experiences and cultural experiences, which 
Gundolf invented ad hoc for George, was ideology in 
the midst of the suprastructure, devised for the pur- 
pose of obscuring the contrast between infrastructure 
and ideology. The categories which he popularized, 
and among which even the later, more successful, 
category of godlike being is present, were marketed 
as substantial ; 76 while precisely in neoromanticism 
cultural mediation stands out blatantly, in the form 
of the ]ugendstil. Bloch rightfully made fun of Gundolf 
for his belief in today’s primal experiences. These 
primal experiences were a warmed-over piece of ex- 
pressionism. They were later made into a permanent 
institution by Heidegger, under the benediction of 
public opinion. What he dislikes in dealing with cul- 
ture, to which, incidentally, his own philological di- 
vagations belong, is the business of starting with the 
experience of something derived. But this cannot be 
avoided and has to be taken into consciousness. In 
the universally mediated world everything experienced 
in primary terms is culturally preformed. Whoever 
wants the other has to start with the immanence of 
culture, in order to break out through it. But funda- 
mental ontology gladly spares itself that, by pretend- 
ing it has a starting point somewhere outside. In that 
way such ontology succumbs to cultural mediations 
all the more; they recur as social aspects of that on- 
tology’s own purity. Philosophy involves itself all the 

76. Cf. Friedrich Gundolf, George, 3d ed. (Berlin, 1930) 
p. 269. 


99 



more deeply in society as it more eagerly — reflecting 
upon itself — pushes off from society and its objective 
spirit. It claws itself firmly into its blindly social fate, 
which — in Heidegger’s terminology — has thrown one 
into this and no other place. That was according to the 
taste of fascism. With the downfall of market liberal- 
ism, relationships of domination stepped nakedly into 
the foreground. The baldness of their order, the au- 
thentic law of the “needy time,” easily permits itself to 
be taken for something primal. That is how people 
could jaw about blood and soil, without a smile, during 
the excessively accumulating industrial capitalism of 
the Third Reich. The jargon of authenticity continues 
all that, less tangibly — with impunity, because at that 
time social differences occasionally led to conflicts 
— such as those between the primary-school teacher 
appointed to ordinarius and the career professor, or 
between the official optimism of the deadly war ma- 
chine and the philosophical frowning of far too auto- 
cratic enthusiasts, who were deeply attracted to Being 
unto death. 

Heidegger’s complaints against cultural philosophy 
have fateful consequences in the ontology of authen- 
ticity: what this ontology at first bans into the sphere 
of cultural mediation it now shoves directly on into 
hell. To be sure, the world is similar enough to hell, 
dipped as the world is in a gloomy flood of nonsense, 
the fallen form of language. Karl Kraus compressed 
that fact into the thesis that today the phrase gives 
birth to reality — especially to that reality which arose, 
after the catastrophe, under the name of culture. To a 
great extent that reality is, as Valery defined politics, 


i oo 



only there to keep men away from what is of im- 
portance to them. In agreement with Kraus, whom he 
does not mention, Heidegger says in Seim und Zeit: 

Hearing and understanding have attached themselves 

beforehand to what is said-in-the-talk as such.” 77 

So the business of communication and its formulas 
cut in between the matter and the subject, and blind 
the subject against precisely that which all the chatter 
is about. “What is said-in-the-talk as such spreads in 
wider circles and takes on an authoritative character. 
Things are so because one says so.” 78 But Heidegger 
imposes the critical diagnosis of a negative ontological 
presence on the “everyday being of the Da, existence,” 
which in truth is historical in nature: the entangling 
of the mind with the sphere of circulation, at a stage 
in which the objective spirit is covered by the economic 
utilization process, as if by a fungus which stifles the 
quality of thought. This confusion has arisen and can 
be gotten rid of; we do not need to bemoan it and 
leave it in peace as if it were the essence of Dasein. 
Heidegger rightly perceives the abstractness of chatter 
“as such,” which has emptied itself of any relationship 
to its content; but from the aberrant abstractness of 
chatter he draws conclusions as to its metaphysical 
invariance, however questionable that may be. Chatter 
would already be in decline if, in a reasonable econ- 
omy, the expenditure of advertisements disappeared. 
Chatter is forced on men by a social structure which 

77. Heidegger, Being and Time, p. 212. 

78. Ibid. 


I O I 



negates them as subjects long before this is done by 
the newspaper companies. But Heidegger’s critique 
becomes ideological by grasping the emancipated 
spirit as that which becomes of it under supremely real 
engagements, and by doing so without making distinc- 
tions. He condemns idle chatter, but not brutality, the 
alliance with which is the true guilt of chatter, which 
is in itself far more innocent. As soon as Heidegger 
wants to silence chatter, his language clatters with 
weaponry : 

To be able to keep silent, Dasein must have something 
to say — that is, it must have at its disposal an authentic 
and rich disclosedness of itself. In that case one’s ret- 
icence . . . makes something manifest, and does away 
with “idle talk.” 79 

His language itself speaks forth, as seldom elsewhere, 
from the word “to strike down”; it is a language of 
power. But it has already been seen in the Hitlerian 
realm that the goal of this language is at one with the 
state of affairs which it indicts. Heidegger believes that 
under the domination of the They nobody needs to 
take responsibility for anything: 

The “they” is there alongside everywhere, . . . but 
in such a manner that it has always stolen away when- 
ever Dasein presses for a decision. Yet because the 
“they” presents every judgment and decision as its own, 
it deprives the particular Dasein of its answerability. 
The “they” can, as it were, manage to have “them” con- 
stantly invoking it. It can be answerable for everything 
most easily, because it is not someone who needs to 
vouch for anything. It “was” always the “they” who 

79. Ibid., p. 208. 


102 



did it, and yet it can be said that it has been “no one.” 
In Dasein’s everydayness the agency through which 
most things come about is one of which we must say 
that “it was no one .” 80 

That is precisely what came to pass under National 
Socialism, as the universal Befehlsnotstand , 81 that 
state of emergency which torturers later use as their 
excuse. Heidegger’s sketch of the They comes closest 
to what it is, the exchange relationship, when he is 
treating averageness: 

The “they” has its own ways in which to be. That 
tendency of Being-with which we have called “distan- 
tiality” is grounded in the fact that Being-with-one- 
another concerns itself as such with averageness, 
which is an existential characteristic of the “they.” The 
“they,” in its Being, essentially makes an issue of this. 
Thus the “they” maintains itself factically in the aver- 
ageness of that which belongs to it, of that which it re- 
gards as valid and that which it does not, and of that to 
which it grants success and that to which it denies it. In 
this averageness with which it prescribes what can and 
may be ventured, it keeps watch over everything excep- 
tional that thrusts itself to the fore. Every kind of pri- 
ority gets noiselessly suppressed. Overnight, everything 
that is primordial gets glossed over as something that 
has long been well known. Everything gained by a strug- 
gle becomes just something to be manipulated. Every 
secret loses its force. This care of averageness reveals in 
turn an essential tendency of Dasein which we call the 
“levelling” down ... of all possibilities of Being .” 82 

80. Ibid., p. 165. 

81. [ Befehlsnotstand : morally compelling situation for a 
soldier, who must carry out an order with which he cannot 
square his conscience.] 

82. Heidegger, Being and Time, pp. 164 65. 


I 03 



That leveling is described as violence, in the manner 
of elites which claim that “prerogative” for themselves. 
It is a leveling which they themselves want to employ, 
and is no other than the leveling which occasionally 
befalls the exchanger, through his inevitable reduction 
to the equivalence form; the critique of political econ- 
omy grasping exchange value in terms of the social 
work-time which on the average has to be spent. In its 
hostility to the negatively ontologized They, the opposi- 
tion to capitalist anonymity eagerly overlooks the law 
of value which is asserting itself — a suffering which 
will not have it said what it is suffering from. When 
that anonymity, whose social source is unmistakable, 
is analyzed as a possibility of being, then that society 
is exonerated which simultaneously both disqualifies 
and determines the relationships of its members. 

The mobility of words unquestionably continued 
their degradation from the beginning. In the functional 
word, deception is posited simultaneously with the 
exchange principle itself and grasps spirit; because 
this latter cannot be without the idea of truth, it ex- 
hibits flagrantly what has entrenched itself in material 
praxis behind the free and upright exchange of goods. 
But without mobility language would never have be- 
come capable of that relation to the matter at hand, 
by whose criterion Heidegger judges communicative 
language. Language philosophy, in the question of 
communicative language, would have to investigate 
the metamorphosis of quantity into the quality of mere 
chatter, or, better, the interinvolvement of both as- 
pects; and would not proceed in an authoritarian spirit 
to sort out the wheat from the chaff of language. No 


104 



thinking could unfold itself into the not-yet-thought 
without that shot of irresponsibility over which Hei- 
degger grows so excited; in that, the spoken distin- 
guishes itself from the authentically written word, and 
even in the latter positivists can easily criticize as ir- 
responsible that which goes beyond what is the case. 
Immaturity and timidity stand no higher than chatter. 
Even that linguistic objectivity which presupposes the 
utmost alertness toward the phrase also has as its pre- 
condition mobility of expression, no matter how 
broken: urbanity. Nobody can write without phrases, 
and who is true to the matter who is not also a literate 
person? The defense of this kind of person seems to 
be in place after the murder of the Jews. Kraus him- 
self despised the illiterate, if possible even more than 
the literate. On the other hand the summary judgment 
concerning idle talk, which insinuates it through a 
negative ontology, constantly permits the justification 
of the phrase as if it were fate. Once idle talk is a state 
of mind, one need not be greatly embarrassed when 
authenticity turns into idle talk. That is happening 
today to Heidegger’s own legend. We might pull some 
sentences out of a piece on The Idea of the German 
University and the Reform of the German Universities 
by Ernst Anrich: 

It is no encroachment [that is, on academic autonomy] 
when from this Hippocratic oath we make a certain de- 
mand, out of our clear knowledge that no specific phi- 
losophy can today be placed decisively at the center of 
the university, a demand that we shall keep alert our 
universality and our responsiveness in face of the whole 
of reality; it is no encroachment on this situation 
when we ask each scholar in this body to carry on his 


i o 5 



scholarship under the sign of the final question about 
the ground of Being and the whole of Being; and when 
we ask him to discuss and exchange these problems 
within the whole body, the dignity of which resides 
therein. If it is right to demand of the student that the 
essence of his study must be to drive forward, within his 
own specialty, to the view of Being, and to responsibility 
in face of the totality of Being; if that is right, then we 
must require of the professor that it be made clear, 
through his courses, how his own research is itself 
ultimately motivated by a struggle with these questions; 
and it may be expected that each of his courses should 
be an invoking and awakening force, in this sense . 83 

In an organizational, uncommonly ontic context such 
sentences use the jargon of authenticity in just the 
way in which Heidegger portrays it in Sein und Z eit: 
as a characteristic feature of idle talk. The authority 
to which in that way the jargon obliges itself is no 
other than the authority of the Heideggerian philoso- 
phy itself. That in the relevant chapter the author 
constantly and rhetorically repeats, “It is no encroach-, 
ment,” is meant to hide precisely such an encroach- 
ment; namely, the oath — Anrich himself uses the 
mythical word — on the so-called question of Being. 
Yet in the same breath the author concedes that no 
definite philosophy could today be placed at the center 
of the university. It is as though the ominous question 
of Being were beyond criticism. Whoever justly spurns 
the question of Being together with the chatter about 
it had best be sent away entirely. Anrich skillfully 

83. Ernst Anrich, Die Idee der deutschen Universitat und 
die Reform der deutschen Universitaten, (Darmstadt, i960), 
P- H 4 - 


106 



latches onto the fact that, in formulas like that of the 
question concerning the ground of Being, the innocent 
still hear the sound of resistance against the dispirited 
atmosphere in which the humanities are today carried 
on. A human right of students, their need for the es- 
sential, becomes blurred in the jargon, in the Hei- 
deggerian essence-mythology of Being. The spirit 
which they miss in the universities is silently converted 
into the monopoly of an instructional system which, 
for its part, cried heresy against the spirit when it 
appeared in the form of reason. 

As in the concept of idle chatter, so in that of readi- 
ness to hand, which is portrayed with sympathy, and 
which is the philosophical ancestress of shelteredness, 
suffering experience is interpreted into its opposite. 
At some historical stages of agriculture, and in simple 
wares-economy, production was not radically subordi- 
nated to exchange and was nearer to the workers and 
consumers; and their relationships to one another 
were not totally reified. The idea of something undis- 
figured, undeformed, an idea which has yet to be 
actualized, could hardly have been created without a 
memory trace of such earlier conditions; although over 
long periods they probably caused more immediate 
suffering to those exposed to such conditions than did 
capitalism. Nonetheless, identifying thought, schooled 
in exchange, brought the differentiated down to the 
identity of the concept, and chopped up this more in- 
nocent identity. What Hegel and Marx in their youth 
condemned as alienation and reification, and against 
which all are spontaneously united today, is what 
Heidegger interprets ontologically as well as unhis- 


i o 7 



torically, and, in its function as a being-form of Dasein, 
as something bodily. The ideology of readiness to hand, 
and its counterpart, strips itself bare in the practice 
of those devotees of the musical youth movement, who 
swear to it that a proper fiddle is one that a fiddler has 
rigged up for himself. Since the artisan forms of pro- 
duction have been overtaken by technology, and are 
superfluous, the intimacy which adhered to them has 
become as worthless as the do-it-yourself movement. 
The unfunctional self-being of things, their freedom 
from the compulsion of identity, which the dominating 
mind imposes, would be utopia. It presupposes the 
alteration of the whole. Nonetheless, in the midst of 
our all-embracing function context every ontological 
light on the remains of so-called readiness to hand 
gilds that context. For its sake the jargon of authen- 
ticity speaks as though it were the voice of men and 
things that are there for their own sake. Through this 
manoeuver, the jargon becomes all the more a for- 
others, something for planned and pedagogically deco- 
rated effect-contexts. Indeed, the Wagnerian “To be 
German means to do something for its own sake” 
accelerated, in slogan form, the export of the German 
spirit. That spirit competed successfully with the more 
advanced commodity-thinking of the West, through 
the slogan’s imprimatur, which declared that it was 
no commodity. That throws light on the artsy-craftsy 
element in the jargon. It provides a refuge for the stale 
notion that art should be brought back into life, and 
that there should be more than art but also more than 
mere usage. The jargon pursues artisanship under the 
shadow of industry, as carefully chosen as it is cheap; 


i o 8 



it gathers reproductions of kitschy life-reforming im- 
pulses that real life has buried under itself, and spares 
them the hopeless testing ground of actualization. 
Instead, language rolls up its sleeves and lets it be 
understood that right action, in the right place, is 
worth more than reflection. In that way a contempla- 
tive attitude, without any perception of the praxis 
which brings about changes, sympathizes all the more 
strikingly with the here and now, the servicing of 
obligations presented within the given. 

Heidegger sees himself forced, in the analysis of 
curiosity, to intimate something of the historical dy- 
namic that necessarily dissolves static relationships . 84 
On those relationships the theory of readiness to hand 
nourishes itself; he leaves it to the gang to call these 
hale. He sanctions, as an ontological possibility, that 
“dis-stancing” which is hallowed by its hyphen; that 
possibility that men might raise themselves above the 
mere immediacy of the reproduction of their own 
lives. Nevertheless, he slides into the defaming of 
consciousness, which has been released from im- 
prisonment : 

Care becomes concern with the possibilities of the see- 
ing the “world” merely as it looks while one tarries and 
takes a rest. Dasein seeks what is far away simply in 
order to bring it close to itself in the way it looks. 
Dasein lets itself be carried along . . . solely by the 
looks of the world; in this kind of Being, it concerns 
itself with becoming rid of itself as Being-in-the-world 
and rid of its Being alongside that which, in the closest 
everyday manner, is ready-to-hand. 

84. Heidegger, Being and Time, p. 216. 


109 



When curiosity has become free, however, it con- 
cerns itself with seeing, not in order to understand what 
is seen (that is, to come into a Being towards it) but 
just in order to see. It seeks novelty only in order to leap 
from it anew to another novelty. 85 

For Heidegger, the way to free consciousness is pre- 
established, inevitable; but it is as little charming to 
the man who is freed as are those who are narrowed 
by their circle of duties, those who distrust, as artful 
and shifty, the mind that is emancipated from praxis. 
He equates emancipated consciousness with curiosity. 
His hatred toward curiosity is allied to his hatred to- 
ward mobility; both are even hammered into the mind 
by the ripe old saying: stay in the country and earn 
your living honestly. Genetic psychoanalysis knows 
the castration threat against the child’s sexual investi- 
gation; the allegedly suprapsychological stance of the 
ontologist fits with the brutal “that’s none of your 
business,” invoked in the castration threat. In the ques- 
tion of curiosity the thinker abuses thinking; without 
curiosity the subject would remain imprisoned in a 
dull repetition-compulsion and would never open him- 
self up to experience. Of course such an enlightenment 
insight is not the whole story. It is equally untrue that, 
through Heidegger’s admonitions about “the They,” that 
social state of affairs whose symptoms he reprimands 
grows better. It is only that his objection to curiosity 
stems from yea-saying at any price: 

curiosity has nothing to do with observing entities and 
with marvelling at them — Oav^civ- To be amazed to 

85. Ibid. 


x x o 



the point of not understanding is something in which 
it has no interest. Rather it concerns itself with a kind 
of knowing, but just in order to have known . 86 

In his Differenz essay Hegel criticized curiosity much 
more searchingly; not as a state of mind but as the 
position of the reified consciousness with regard to 
the dead object: 

The living spirit which dwells in a philosophy requires, 
in order to be released, that it should be brought to birth 
by a related spirit. It passes by, as an alien phenomenon, 
any historical conduct which from some kind of in- 
terest marches forth to an understanding of opinions; 
and it does not reveal its interior. To the living spirit it 
can seem indifferent that it must serve to enlarge the 
remaining collection of mummies and the general heaps 
of accidentalia; for it itself has flowed away through the 
hands curious to collect new pieces of knowledge . 87 

The disagreeable aspect of curiosity, as of greedy na- 
ture as a whole, cannot be glossed over. But it is not 
a probing agitation; rather it is something that re- 
actively, under the pressure of early childhood denial, 
has emerged from that denial; and which distorts that 
which once wanted to get free from the always-same, 
the identical. Curious people are characters whose 
childish longing for the truth about the sexual was 
never satisfied; their longing is a shabby substitute. 
The person from whom that which concerns him was 

86. Ibid. 

87. G. W. F. Hegel, Werke, ed. H. Glockner (Stuttgart, 
1958), Vol. I: Aufsdtze aus dem Kritischen Journal der 
Philosophie und andere Aufsdtze aus der Jenenser Zeit (D if- 
ferenzschrift ), p. 40. 


J I I 



withheld mixes himself evilly into what does not con- 
cern him. He becomes enviously enraptured with in- 
formation over matters in which he himself should 
not play any part. That is the relation of all greediness 
to free desire. To Heidegger’s arrogance toward the 
merely ontic, the genesis of curiosity is indifferent. He 
chalks up mutilation to the fault of the mutilated, as a 
fault of existence in general. His existential security 
becomes a heteronomously conditioned activity that is 
untried by curiosity — idle knowledge. This is probably 
the original philosophical history of the cliche of com- 
mitment. By denouncing a purely ontological possi- 
bility according to his own teaching, Heidegger be- 
comes the advocate of the unfullfilment of life. Like 
the empty phrase of idealism, authenticity, in project- 
ing its existentialism right from the beginning, sides 
with want, over and against satisfaction and abun- 
dance. In spite of its eager neutrality and distance 
from society, authenticity thus stands on the side of 
the conditions of production, which, contrary to reason, 
perpetuate want. When Heidegger finally calls “home- 
lessness” the “third essential characteristic of this 
phenomenon,” 88 he conjures up the Ahasuerian ele- 
ment. He does this by means of the demagogically 
proven technique of allusion, which keeps quiet about 
that to which it expects secret consent. The pleasure 
of mobility becomes a curse for the homeless. The op- 
posite of “everyday Dasein,” which “is constantly up- 
rooting itself,” 89 is “observing entities and marvelling 


88. Heidegger, Being and Time, p. 217. 

89. Ibid. 


I I 2 



at them,” 90 though it is not yet, by any means the 
contemplation of Being. In philosophy 1927 the root- 
less intellectual carries the yellow mark of someone 
who undermines the established order. 

How deeply rooted are the societal elements in 
Heidegger's analysis of authenticity is involuntarily 
revealed by his use of language. As is well known, 
Heidegger supplants the traditional category of sub- 
jectivity by Dasein, whose essence is existence. Being, 
however, which “is an issue for this entity in its very 
Being, is in each case mine.” 91 This is meant to distin- 
guish subjectivity from all other existent being. It 
intends, furthermore, to prohibit existence from being 
“taken ontologically as an instance or special case of 
some genus of entities as things that are present-at- 
hand.” 92 This construction, which is inspired by Kierke- 
gaard’s doctrine of the “transparency” of the self, 93 
would like to make possible a starting out from some 
element of being. This latter is valued as the immediate 
givenness of the facts of consciousness in traditional 
epistemology; yet, at the same time, this element of 
being is supposed to be more than mere fact, in the 
same manner as the ego of speculative idealism once 
was. Behind the apersonal “is concerned,” nothing 
more is hidden than the fact that Dasein is conscious- 
ness. The entrance of this formula is Heidegger’s scene 

90. Ibid.., p. 216. 

91. Ibid., p. 67. 

92. Ibid. 

93. Cf, Spren Kierkegaard, Die Krankheit zum Tode (Dus- 
seldorf, 1954) p. 10. [English translation by W. Lowrie, Fear 
and Trembling, and The Sickness unto Death (Garden City, 
N. Y., i954)-l 


I I 3 



a faire. From an abstract concept Being turns into 
something absolute and primary, which is not merely 
posited. The reason for this lies in the fact that Hei- 
degger reveals an element of Being and calls it Dasein, 
which would be not just some element of Being, but 
the pure condition of Being — all this without losing 
any of the characteristics of individuation, fullness, 
bodiliness. This is the scheme that the jargon follows, 
intentionally or unintentionally, to the point of nausea. 
The jargon cures Dasein from the wound of meaning- 
lessness and summons salvation from the world of 
ideas into Dasein. Heidegger lays this down once and 
for all in the title deed, which declares that the person 
owns himself. The fact that Dasein belongs to itself, 
that it is “in each case mine,” is picked out from in- 
dividuation as the only general definition that is left 
over after the dismantling of the transcendental sub- 
ject and its metaphysics. The principium individua- 
tionis stands as a principle over and against any par- 
ticular individual element. At the same time it is that 
essence. In the case of the former element, the 
Hegelian dialectical unity of the general and the par- 
ticular is turned into a relation of possession. Then it 
is given the rank and rights of the philosophical 
apriori. “Because Dasein has in each case mineness 
. . . one must always use a personal pronoun when 
one addresses it.” 94 The distinction between authen- 
ticity and inauthenticity — the real Kierkegaardian one 
— depends on whether or not this element of being, 
Dasein, chooses itself, its mineness . 95 Until further 

94. Heidegger, Being and Time, p. 68. 

95. Cf. Ibid. 


i m 



notice, authenticity and inauthenticity have as their 
criterion the decision in which the individual subject 
chooses itself as its own possession. The subject, the 
concept of which was once created in contrast to rei- 
fication, thus becomes reified. Yet at the same time 
reification is scoffed at objectively in a form of lan- 
guage which simultaneously commits the same crime. 
The general concept of mineness, in which this lan- 
guage institutes subjectivity as a possession of itself, 
sounds like a variant of meanness in Berlin slang. 
Whatever formerly went under the name of existential 
and existentiell now insists on this new title deed of 
possession. By the fact that it is ontological, the alter- 
native of authenticity and inauthenticity directs itself 
according to whether someone decides for himself or 
not. It takes its directive, beyond real states of affairs, 
from the highly formal sense of belonging to oneself. 
Yet its consequences in reality are extremely grave. 
Once such an ontology of what is most ontic has been 
achieved, philosophy no longer has to bother about 
the societal and natural-historical origin of this title 
deed, which declares that the individual owns himself. 
Such a philosophy need no longer be concerned with 
how far society and psychology allow a man to be him- 
self or become himself, or whether in the concept of 
such selfness the old evil is concentrated one more 
time. The societal relation, which seals itself off in 
the identity of the subject, is de-societalized into an 
in-itself. The individual, who himself can no longer 
rely on any firm possession, holds on to himself in his 
extreme abstractness as the last, the supposedly un- 
usable possession. Metaphysics ends in a miserable 


i i 5 



consolation: after all, one still remains what one is. 
Since men do not remain what they are by any means, 
neither socially nor biologically, they gratify them- 
selves with the stale remainder of self-identity as 
something which gives distinction, both in regard to 
being and meaning. This unlosable element, which 
has no substratum but its own concept, the tautological 
selfness of the self, is to provide the ground, as Hei- 
degger calls it, which the authentics possess and the 
inauthentics lack. The essence of Dasein, i.e., what is 
more than its mere existence, is nothing but its self- 
ness : it is itself. The quarrel with Heidegger’s lan- 
guage is not the fact that it is permeated, like any 
philosophical language, with figures from an empirical 
reality which it would like to transcend, but that it 
transforms a bad empirical reality into transcendence. 

Heidegger is careful to have alibis against the 
charge of epistemological subjectivism. Mineness, or 
the self-sameness of the authentically existing self, 
is to be separated from the identity of the subject . 96 
Otherwise, these would break through the idealism 
of a thinking that claims to be a thinking of origins. 
But Heidegger’s Being, to which, after all, some con- 
siderable creative acts are attributed, becomes the Fich- 
tean absolute ego. It appears beheaded, as it were, in 
contrast to the traditional, merely posited ego. But the 
distinction from Fichte does not hold. If the distin- 
guishing element, the fact that mineness belongs to 
real persons, was not their abstractly preordained prin- 
ciple, their ontological primacy would be done for. 


96. Ibid., p. 168. 


I I 6 



Meanwhile, even the old-fashioned idealist identity 
depended on elements of fact as conditions of its own 
possibility, insofar as it was precisely the unity of the 
representations of a consciousness. Almost unrecog- 
nizably, all this rises again in Heidegger’s thought, in 
a reinterpretation that turns it into the hinge of his 
whole argument. Heidegger’s point of departure turns 
against possible criticism, in the same manner as 
Hegel’s once turned against the philosophy of reflec- 
tion. Criticism is said to miss a newly discovered or 
rediscovered structure, beyond the dualism of fact and 
essence, which was still taught by Husserl in tradi- 
tional fashion. Not only Heidegger’s philosophy, but 
also the whole jargon of authenticity that follows, de- 
pends on the staging of the elaboration of this struc- 
ture. It is pointed out at a very early stage in Sein und. 
Zeit, where Heidegger deals with the primacy of 
Dasein. Heidegger interprets subjectivity as a concept 
of indifference: essence and fact in one. The primacy 
of Dasein is said to be twofold. On the one hand it is 
to be ontic, namely, determined by existence. In other 
words, existence defines something in the nature of 
fact, something existent. On the other hand “Dasein 
is in itself ‘ontological,’ because existence is thus 
determinative for it .” 97 Thus something contradictory 
to subjectivity is immediately attributed to subjectivity: 
that it be itself fact and reality, and, in line with the 
demand of traditional philosophy, that as conscious- 
ness it make facticity possible. As the latter it becomes 
pure concept, in contrast to facticity; it becomes es- 

97. Ibid.., p. 34. 


1 1 7 



sence and finally Husserl’s eidos ego. Against the tradi- 
tional doctrine of the subject this double character, 
which is also an absolute unity before the fall into dif- 
ferentiation, claims the rank of an important discovery. 
For that reason Heidegger uses an archaizing, scho- 
lastic method. Both these characteristics of the sub- 
ject he ascribes to Dasein, as attributes, without 
considering that they conflict with the principle of 
contradiction when they are attached in this way. Ac- 
cording to Heidegger, Dasein “is” not merely ontic, 
which would be tautological in regard to what is 
grasped under the concept of Dasein, but it is also 
ontological. In this predication of the ontic and the 
ontological, from the standpoint of Dasein, the falsity 
of the regressive element can be recognized. The con- 
cept of the ontological cannot be attached to a sub- 
stratum, as if ontological were its predicate. To be a 
fact is no predicate which can attach itself to a con- 
cept; and, since Kant’s criticism of the ontological 
proof of the existence of God, any philosophy should 
be careful not to affirm this. The same holds true for 
the nonfacticity of concepts, their essentiality. This 
essentiality is localized in the relation of the concept 
to the facticity that is synthesized in it — and never 
belongs to it, as Heidegger suggests, as a quality of 
it itself. To say that Dasein “is ontic or ontological,” 
can, strictly speaking, not be judged at all, for what 
is meant by existence is a substratum. It is for this 
reason that the meaning of Dasein is nonconceptual. 
In contrast to this, “ontic” and “ontological” are ex- 
pressions for different forms of reflection, and are thus 
unable only in regard to the definitions of Dasein, or to 


i i 8 



the position of such definitions in theory — not im- 
mediately, however, in regard to the meant substratum 
itself. Their place is that of conceptual mediation. 
Heidegger declares this to be immediacy sui generis. 
Dasein thus suddenly becomes a third element, with- 
out regard to the fact that the dual character that Hei- 
degger bends together into this third can by no means 
be regarded independently from that which happens 
conceptually to the substratum. In Heidegger, the fact 
that there is nothing which maintains itself identically 
without the categorical unity, and the fact that this 
categorical unity does not maintain itself without that 
which it synthesizes — such facts take the form of the 
elements which are to be distinguished. These elements 
in turn take the form of derivatives. There is nothing 
between heaven and earth that is in itself ontic or 
ontological; rather, everything becomes what it is only 
by means of the constellation into which it is brought 
by philosophy. Language had a means for making this 
differentiation when it spoke of ontological theories, 
judgments, and proofs instead of something ontologi- 
cal sans fagon. By means of an objectification of this 
kind, such an element would of course already be 
turned into that ontic against which the literal mean- 
ing of “ontological” sharpens itself: the logos of some- 
thing ontic. After Sein und Zeit Heidegger tried to 
interpret the Critique of Pure Reason in terms of his 
project. Yet previously, he had done something very 
similar to what Kant criticized in the rationalistic form 
of ontology: an amphiboly of the concepts of reflec- 
tion. Heidegger may have missed the mistake, but it 
is to the advantage of his project. According to usual 


i i 9 



terminology, it is obvious that the concept that says 
what essentially belongs to something that is, is onto- 
logical. If, however, this becomes unnoticeably the 
ontological essence of the existent in itself, then the 
result is a concept of Being that is prior to the concepts 
of reflection. At first this occurs in Sein und Zeit 
through the hypostasis of an ontological sphere that is 
the nourishment for all of Heidegger’s philosophy. The 
amphiboly resides in the following: in the concept of 
the subject two elements flow together — the subject’s 
own definition as something existent, in which form 
it still remains fixed in the Kantian interlocking of the 
transcendental subject with the unity of consciousness 
per se, and, secondly, the definition of subject as con- 
stituent of everything existent. This togetherness is 
unavoidable in the concept of subject. It is an expres- 
sion of the dialectic between subject and object in the 
subject itself, and evidence of its own conceptuality. 
Without mediation subjectivity cannot be brought to 
either of its extremes, which belong to different genera. 
This aforementioned unavoidability becomes an imagi- 
nary thing by virtue of the deficiency of the concept: 
mediation toward the immediate identity of the medi- 
ating and mediated elements. Certainly one element is 
not without the other, but the two are by no means one, 
as Heidegger’s fundamental thesis alleges. In their 
identity, identity thinking would have swallowed up 
the nonidentical element, the existent, which the word 
Dasein intends. Thus Heidegger secretly reinstates 
the creator quality of the absolute subject, which was 
supposedly avoided, as it were, by starting with mine- 
ness in each case. The notion of the double character 


120 



of Dasein, as ontic and ontological, expels Dasein from 
itself. This is Heidegger’s disguised idealism. For the 
dialectic in the subject between the existent and the 
concept becomes being of a higher order; and the 
dialectic is brought to a halt. Whatever praises itself 
for reaching behind the concepts of reflection — sub- 
ject and object — in order to grasp something sub- 
stantial, does nothing but reify the irresolvability of 
the concepts of reflection. It reifies the impossibility 
of reducing one into the other, into the in-itself. This 
is the standard philosophical form of underhanded 
activity, which thereupon occurs constantly in the 
jargon. It vindicates without authority and without 
theology, maintaining that what is of essence is real, 
and, by the same token, that the existent is essential, 
meaningful, and justified. 

In spite of Heidegger’s assertion, mineness, and 
consequently authenticity, result in pure identity. How 
true this is can be shown e contrario. Whatever is in- 
authentic for him, all the categories of the They are 
those in which a subject is not itself, is unidentical 
with itself. Thus for example the category of Unver- 
weilen, as a giving oneself over to the world ; 98 the sub- 
ject gives itself up to something other, instead of re- 
maining with itself and “being knowingly in the 
truth .” 99 What was a necessary element in the ex- 
perience of consciousness, in Hegelian phenomenology, 
becomes anathema for Heidegger, since he compresses 
the experience of consciousness into self-experience. 
However, identity, the hollow kernel of such selfness, 

98. Ibid., p. 216. 

99 - Ibid. 


I 2 I 



thus takes the place of idea. Even the cult of selfness 
is reactionary. The concept of selfness is here being 
eternalized precisely at the moment in which it has 
already disintegrated. Late bourgeois thinking re-forms 
itself into naked self-preservation, into the early bour- 
geois principle of Spinoza: sese conservare. But who- 
ever stubbornly insists on his mere so-being, because 
everything else has been cut off from him, only turns 
his so-being into a fetish. Cut off and fixed selfness 
only becomes, all the more, something external. This 
is the ideological answer to the fact that the current 
state of affairs is everywhere producing an ego weak- 
ness which eradicates the concept of subject as in- 
dividuality. That weakness as well as its opposite 
march into Heidegger’s philosophy. Authenticity is 
supposed to calm the consciousness of weakness, but it 
also resembles it. By it the living subject is robbed of all 
definition, in the same way as it loses its attributes in 
reality. However, what is done to men by the world 
becomes the ontological possibility of the inauthentic- 
ity of men. From that point it is only a step to the 
usual criticism of culture, which self-righteously picks 
on shallowness, superficiality, and the growth of mass 
culture. 

The preterminological use of “authentic” under- 
lined what was essential to a thing, in contrast to what 
was accidental. Whoever is dissatisfied with silly ex- 
amples from textbooks needs to deliberate by himself; 
this will help more than a developed theory to assure 
him of what is essential. What is essential in phenom- 
ena, and what is accidental, hardly ever springs 
straightforwardly out of the phenomena. In order to 


12 2 



be determined in its objectivity, it has first to be re- 
flected on subjectively. Certainly, at first glance, it 
seems more essential to a worker that he has to sell his 
working power, that the means of production do not be- 
long to him, that he produces material goods, than that 
he is a member of a suburban gardening club; al- 
though the worker himself may think that the latter is 
more essential. However, as soon as the question di- 
rects itself to so central a concept as capitalism, Marx 
and the verbal definitions of Max Weber say something 
extremely different from each other. In many cases 
the distinction between essential and inessential, be- 
tween authentic and inauthentic, lies with the arbi- 
trariness of definition, without in the least implying 
the relativity of truth. The reason for this situation 
lies in language. Language uses the term “authentic” 
in a floating manner. The word also wavers according 
to its weightiness, in the same way as occasional ex- 
pressions. The interest in the authenticity of a concept 
enters into the judgment about this concept. Whatever 
is authentic in this concept also becomes so only under 
the perspective of something that is different from it. 
It is never pure in the concept itself. Otherwise the de- 
cision about it degenerates into hairsplitting. But at 
the same time, the essential element of a thing has its 
fundamentum in re. Over and against naive usage, 
nominalism is in the wrong to the degree that it re- 
mains blind toward the objective element of meaning 
in words, which enters into the configurations of 
language and which changes there. This element of 
objectivity carries on an unresolved struggle with those 
acts that merely subjectively give meaning. The con- 


i 23 



sciousness of this objective element in what is authen- 
tic was the impulse of Brentano’s whole school, es- 
pecially of Husserl, and also contributed to Heidegger’s 
doctrine of authenticity. The essence of a thing is not 
anything that is arbitrarily made by subjective thought, 
is not a distilled unity of characteristics. In Heidegger 
this becomes the aura of the authentic : an element of 
the concept becomes the absolute concept. The phe- 
nomenologists pinpoint the fundamentum in re as the 
particularization of essence. This particularization be- 
comes in itself thingly like a res, and can be called 
upon without regard to the subjective mediation of the 
concept. In his own argument Heidegger would like to 
escape Husserl’s dualism, as well as the whole dispute 
of nominalism. He remains a tributary of Husserl’s, 
however, in the short-circuited conclusion that imputes 
the authentic immediately to things, and thus turns the 
authentic into a special domain. Hence the substanti- 
vation of authenticity, its promotion to an existentiale, 
to a state of mind. By means of an alleged independ- 
ence from thinking, the objective moment of that 
which is essential raises itself to something higher. 
Finally it becomes an absolute, the summum bonum 
over and against the relativity of the subject, while 
simultaneously it is presented as purely descriptive 
diagnosis in the manner of Scheler. Language nerves, 
which may be suspect to the authentics as something 
decadent revolt against that substantivation which 
thus befalls the authentics’ favorite motto. “-Reit,” 
“-ness,” is the general concept for that which a thing 
is. It is always the substantivization of a characteris- 
tic. Thus industriousness is the substantivization of 


124 



those characteristics that apply to all industrious peo- 
ple, and which they have in common. By contrast, 
however, “authenticity” names no authentic thing as 
a specific characteristic but remains formal, relative 
to a content which is by-passed in the word, if not in- 
deed rejected in it — even when the word is used ad- 
jectivally. The word says nothing about what a thing is, 
but questions the extent to which the thing realizes 
what is posited by its concept. The thing stands in 
implicit opposition to what it merely seems to be. In 
any case the word would receive its meaning from the 
quality which it is a predicate of. But the suffix “-keit,” 
“-ness,” tempts one to believe that the word must al- 
ready contain that content in itself. The mere category 
of relationship is fished out and in its turn exhibited 
as something concrete. By this logic the supreme would 
be that which is altogether what it is. The newly 
created Plato is more Platonic than the authentic one, 
who at least in his middle period attached its proper 
idea to everything, even to the humblest thing, and in 
no way confused the Good with the pure agreement be- 
tween the thing and its idea. But in the name of con- 
temporary authenticity even a torturer could put in all 
sorts of claims for compensation, to the extent that 
he was simply a true torturer. 

The primacy of the concept over the thing is now, 
through the alliance of authenticity with mineness, 
pushed into mere detail. That detail is as artificial as 
was the haecceitas of Duns Scotus’ late Scholasticism, 
which made a universal out of the indissolubility of the 
Diesda ( haecceitas ), and out of its not-being-universal 
— made it a paradigm of an ontologizing of the ontic. 


125 



The taboo concerning subjective reflection is useful 
to subjectivism: authenticity, in the traditional lan- 
guage of philosophy, would be identical with subjec- 
tivity as such. But in that way, unnoticed, subjectivity 
also becomes the judge of authenticity. Since it is 
denied any objective determination, authenticity is de- 
termined by the arbitrariness of the subject, which is 
authentic to itself. The jurisdictional claim of reason, 
which Husserl still asserted, falls away. Traces of re- 
flection on such arbitrariness could still be found in 
Sein und Z eit in the concept of projection. That concept 
subsequently allowed the growth of all sorts of other 
ontological projections, most of them pleasantly wa- 
tered down. With clever strategy the later Heidegger 
remodeled the concept. In the projection of the philoso- 
phizing subject something of the freedom of thought 
was preserved. The provocative aspect of an openly 
makeshift theory is no more embarrassing to Heidegger 
than is the suspicion of hubris. The armored man was 
so conscious of his unprotected places that he pre- 
ferred to grasp at the most violent arrangement of 
arguments, rather than to call subjectivity by its name. 
He plays tactically with the subjective aspect of authen- 
ticity : for him, authenticity is no longer a logical ele- 
ment mediated by subjectivity but is something in the 
subject, in Dasein itself, something objectively dis- 
coverable. The observing subject prescribes whatever 
is authentic to the subject as observed: it prescribes 
the attitude toward death. This displacement robs the 
subject of its moment of freedom and spontaneity: it 
completely freezes, like the Heideggerian states of 


126 



mind, into something like an attribute of the substance 
“existence.” Hatred toward reifying psychology re- 
moves from the living that which would make them 
other than reified. Authenticity, which according to 
doctrine is absolutely unobjective, is made into an ob- 
ject. The reason for this is that authenticity is a man- 
ner of behavior that is ascribed to the being-a-subject 
of the subject, not to the subject as a relational factor. 
Thus it becomes a possibility that is prefixed to and 
foreordained for the subject, without the subject being 
able to do anything about it. Judgment is passed ac- 
cording to the logic of that joke about the coachman 
who is asked to explain why he beats his horse un- 
mercifully, and who answers that after all the animal 
has taken on itself to become a horse, and therefore 
has to run. The category of authenticity, which was at 
first introduced for a descriptive purpose, and which 
flowed from the relatively innocent question about 
what is authentic in something, now turns into a 
mythically imposed fate. For all that distance from 
nature which marks an ontological structure that will 
rise again on the far side of the existent, this destiny 
functions as something merely naturelike. Jews are 
punished for being this destiny, both ontologically and 
naturalistically at the same time. The findings of 
Heidegger’s existential analysis, according to which 
the subject is authentic insofar as it possesses itself, 
grant special praise to the person who is sovereignly 
at his own disposal; as though he were his own prop- 
erty: he has to have bearing, which is at the same time 
an internalization, and an apotheosis, of the principle 


127 



of domination over nature. “Man is he, who he is, 
precisely in testifying to his own Dasein .” 100 The testi- 
mony of his being-human, which constitutes “the ex- 
istence of man,” occurs “through the creation of a 
world and its ascent, as much as through the destruc- 
tion of it and its decline. The testifying to humanity, 
and thus its authentic completion, occurs through the 
freedom of decision. This grasps necessity and puts 
itself under the commitment of a supreme order.” 101 
That very statement is nobly meant, quite in the spirit 
of the jargon, as when a noncommissioned officer 
bawls out the “weakness of the flesh.” Outside of the 
tautology all we can see here is the imperative: pull 
yourself together. It is not for nothing that in Kierke- 
gaard, the grandfather of all existential philosophy, 
right living is defined entirely in terms of decision. All 
his camp followers are in agreement on that, even the 
dialectical theologians and the French existentialists. 
Subjectivity, Dasein itself, is sought in the absolute 
disposal of the individual over himself, without regard 
to the fact that he is caught up in a determining ob- 
jectivity. In Germany these determinations of objec- 
tivity are limited by the “sense of obligation to the 
command,” as in the word-fetish “soldierly.” This obli- 
gation is totally abstract and thus concretizes itself ac- 
cording to the power structure of the moment. In 
honor of all that, the existential ontologists and the 
philosophers of existence bury the hatchet of discord. 


100. Heidegger, Holderlin und das Wesen der Dichtung 
(Munich, 1937), p. 6. 

1 01. Ibid. 


12 8 



Action of the warrior. The strength to make decisions 
under the most extreme conditions — life or death — 
comes from firmness in decision; comes from such firm- 
ness in unique situations which never recur in abso- 
lutely identical form. The fundamental traits of this 
kind of action are readiness for risks, along with a sense 
for what is possible; as well as artfulness and presence 
of mind. Rules can be formulated for this kind of action, 
but in its essence no rules will cover it completely; nor 
can this action be derived from rules. In the most ex- 
treme situations there appears both what I am authen- 
tically, and my potential . 102 

The speakers for existence move toward a mythology, 
even when they don’t notice it. Self-possession, un- 
limited and narrowed by no heteronomy, easily con- 
verges with freedom. Men would be reconciled with 
their essential definition if the time came when their 
defining limitations were no longer imposed on them. 
This would mean a happy reversal of the domination 
over nature. However, nothing is more unwanted by the 
philosophy and the jargon of authenticity. Apart from 
the right to come into one’s own, self-control is hypos- 
tatized. No end to controls is sought; rather, the con- 
trols are carried over into the Being of Dasein. This is 
done according to the hoary custom of German Ideal- 
ism. By that custom one should not speak of freedom 
without adding that it is identical with duty. Once one 
extrapolates from the words of empirical language 
what authentically is, as those words’ authentic mean- 
ing, one sees that the merely existing world determines 

102,. Karl Jaspers, Von der Wahrheit, rev. ed. (Munich, 
1958), p. 340. [Our translation. This work has been translated 
into English by J. T. Wilde, W. Klubach, W. Kimmel, Truth 
and Symbol, from Von der Wahrheit (New York, 1959).] 


129 



what on any specific occasion applies to those words; 
that world becomes the highest court of judgment over 
what should and should not be. Today, nevertheless, 
a thing is essentially only that which it is in the midst 
of the dominant evil; essence is something negative. 

Paragraph 50 of Sein und Z eit, entitled: “Prelimi- 
nary Sketch of the Existential-onotological Structure 
of Death,” — without the print even blushing — con- 
tains the sentence: “However, there is much that can 
impend for Dasein as Being-in-the-world.” 103 Once 
somebody attributed to a local aphorist from Frank- 
furt the saying that “Whoever looks out of the window 
becomes aware of many things.” Heidegger sketches 
his conception of authenticity itself, as Being toward 
death, on just this level. Such Being should be more 
than mortality disvalued as something thingly-em- 
pirical. But he also takes great care, for the sake of 
ontology, to separate this being from subjective re- 
flection on death. Being oneself does not reside in an 
exceptional situation of the subject, freed from the 
They; it is no form of the subject’s consciousness. 104 
Authentic being toward death is no “thinking about 
death,” 105 an activity which is displeasing to the mo- 
nopolistic philosopher: “Needed, in our present world- 
crisis: less philosophy but more attention to thought; 
less literature, but more concern for the letter.” 106 The 
attitude which he disapproves of 

103. Heidegger, Being and Time, p. 294. 

104. Ibid., p. 168. 

105. Ibid., p. 305. 

106. Heidegger, tlber den Humanismus (Frankfurt a. M., 
1949), P- 47- 


130 



“thinks about death,” pondering over when and how 
this possibility may perhaps be actualized. Of course 
such brooding over death does not fully take away from 
it its character as a possibility. Indeed, it always gets 
brooded over as something that is coming; but in such 
brooding we weaken it by calculating how we are to 
have it at our disposal. As something possible, it is to 
show as little as possible of its possibility. On the other 
hand, if Being-towards-death has to disclose understand- 
ing^ the possibility which we have characterized, and 
if it is to disclose it as a possibility, then in such Being- 
towards-death this possibility must not be weakened: it 
must be understood ns a possibility, it must be culti- 
vated as a possibility, and we must put up with it as a 
possibility, in the way we comport ourselves towards 
it . 107 


Reflection about death is anti-intellectually disparaged 
in the name of something allegedly deeper, and is re- 
placed by “endurance,” likewise a gesture of internal 
silence. We should add that the officer learns to die 
according to the tradition of the cadet corps; and yet 
to that end it is better if he does not trouble himself 
about that which, in his profession, is the most im- 
portant thing — next to the killing of others. The fascist 
ideology had altogether to remove from consciousness 
that sacrifice which was proclaimed for the sake of 
German supremacy. The chance that such a sacrifice 
would reach the goal for which it was intended was 
from the outset too doubtful; it would never have been 
able to survive such a conscious inspection. In 1938 a 
National Socialist functionary wrote, in a polemical 

107. Heidegger, Being and Time, pp. 305 6. 


I 3 I 



variation on a Social Democratic phrase; “Sacrifice 
will make us free.” 108 Heidegger is at one with that. 
In the eighth printing of What is Metaphysics? , which 
appeared in i960, he still retains — without any op- 
portunistic mitigation — the following sentences: 

Sacrifice is the expenditure of human nature for the 
purpose of preserving the truth of Being for the existent. 
It is free from necessity because it rises from the abyss 
of freedom. In Sacrifice there arises the hidden thanks, 
which alone validates that grace— in the form of which 
Being has in thought turned itself over to the essence 
of man; that in his relation to Being he might take over 
the guarding of Being . 109 

Nevertheless, once authenticity can no longer be either 
the empirical condition of mortality nor the subjec- 
tive relating to it, then it turns into grace. It turns, as 
it were, into a racial quality of inwardness, which man 
either has or does not have — a quality about which 
nothing further can be stated than that, tautologically, 
there is mere participation in it. Consequently, in his 
additional discussions of death Heidegger is irresis- 
tably driven on to tautological manners of speaking: 
“It [death] is the possibility of the impossibility of 
every way of comporting oneself toward anything, of 
every way of existing,” 110 thus, perfectly simply, the 
possibility of no longer existing. One could well reply 

108. Cf. Herbert Marcuse’s critique in Z eitschrift fur 
Sozialforschung , III (1938), 408. 

109. Heidegger, Was ist Metaphysik ? 8th ed. (Frankfurt 
a. M., i960), p. 49. [Our translation. This work has been trans- 
lated into English by R. F. C. Hull and Alan Crick, What Is 
Metaphysics ? in Existence and Being, ed. Werner Brock (Chi- 
cago, 1949).] 

no. Heidegger, Being and Time, p. 307. 


I 32 



at once that thinking about the states of being, or of 
being, is always tautological, because these states of 
being would be nothing other than themselves. Then, 
however, the mere recitation of words, with disregard 
for any thinking predicate, would have to liquidate 
thinking itself. The strategist guarded himself against 
drawing that conclusion; the philosopher drew it, 
however, in the matter at hand. For the sake of its 
own dignity, authenticity once more transforms theo- 
retical lack, indeterminability, into the dictate of some- 
thing that must be accepted without question. But 
what ought to be more than mere Dasein sucks its 
blood out of the merely existent, out of just that weak- 
ness which cannot be reduced to its pure concept, but 
which rather cleaves to the nonconceptual substratum. 
The pure tautology, which propagates the concept while 
at the same time refusing to define that concept — and 
which instead mechanically repeats the concept — is 
intelligence in the form of violence. The concern of the 
jargon, which always insists on having a concern, is 
to equate essence — “authenticity” — with the most bru- 
tal fact of all. Nevertheless this repetition compulsion 
betrays a failure: the violent mind’s incapability of 
capturing what it should think about if it wanted 
to remain mind. 

Violence inheres in the nucleus of Heidegger’s 
philosophy, as it does in the form of his language. 
That violence lies in the constellation into which his 
philosophy moves self-preservation and death. The 
self-preserving principle threatens its subjects with 
death, as an ultima ratio, a final reason; and when this 
death is used as the very essence of that principle it 


133 



means the theodicy of death. By no means in a simply 
untrue way. As Hegel sees it, the ego of idealism, which 
posits itself absolutely, and insists entirely on itself, 
turns into its own negation and resembles death: 

Therefore the only work and task of general freedom is 
death. It is death which has no inner ambience and ful- 
fillment since it negates the unfulfilled center of the 
self, which is absolutely free. Thus it is the coldest and 
most platitudinous death, which has no more meaning 
than the cutting of a head of cabbage, or a drink of 
water . 111 

Hegel, disillusioned by the French Revolution, brought 
up against it all these things, as well as what touched 
on the violent essence of absolute selfness. For Hei- 
degger those themes become not a motive for criti- 
cism of selfness but something unavoidable, therefore 
something which is a commandment. Violence is com- 
plicity with death, and not only superficially. There has 
always been a natural alliance between the views 
that everything, even one’s self, should come to an end, 
and that on the other hand one should continue to 
follow his own limited interest, with a derogatory 
“What the hell!” Just as particularity, as a law of the 
whole, fulfills itself in its annihilation, so that blind- 
ness which is the subjective accompaniment of par- 
ticularity has something nihilistic about it, for all its 
addiction to life. Ever since Spinoza, philosophy has 
been conscious, in various degrees of clarity, of the 

in. Hegel, Werke, Vol. II: P hdnomenologie des Geistes, 
p. 454. [Our translation. This work has been translated into 
English by J. B. Baillie, The Phenomenology of Mind (London 
and New York, 1961 ).] 


134 



identity between self and self-preservation. What as- 
serts itself in self-preservation, the ego, is at the same 
time constituted by self-preservation; its identity con- 
stituted by its nonidentity. This still reverberates in the 
most extreme idealistic sublimation, the Kantian de- 
duction of the categories. There the moments in which 
the identity of consciousness presents itself, and the 
unity of the consciousness which puts itself together 
from those moments, reciprocally condition one an- 
other, in opposition to the deductive intention — inso- 
far as these and not other moments are absolutely 
given. The Kantian “I think” is the only abstract ref- 
erence point in a process of holding out, and not some- 
thing self-sufficient in relation to that process. To that 
extent it is already self as self-preservation. Of course 
Heidegger, in distinction from the abstract transcen- 
dental unity of Kant, forms his conception of selfness 
along lines related to Husserl’s subject — a subject that, 
though phenomenologically reduced, appears in the 
“bracketing”, of its empirical existence as a full sub- 
ject with all its experiences . 112 But the concrete self- 
ness meant by Heidegger is not to be had without the 
empirical, actual subject; it is no pure possibility of 
the ontic, but is itself always, at the same time, also 
ontic. Self is only intelligible in relation to this content, 
as it were. It is impossible to subtract the ontic and 
leave the ontological self as a remainder, or to preserve 
it as a structure of the ontic in general. It is senseless 
to assert, of something so thinned down, that it “exists 
authentically.” To do so, Heidegger dogmatically and 

1 1 2. Cf. Heidegger, Being and Time, pp. 168, 307. Also see 
above, pp. 1 16 ff. 


135 



vainly prolongs his conception of existence as some- 
thing in opposition to identity; while without a break 
he continues the tradition of the doctrine of identity, 
with his implicit definition of the self through its own 
preservation. Against his intention, certainly, he falls 
back into the prehistory of subjectivity, instead of on- 
tologically disclosing existence as a primal phenome- 
non; for it is no such thing. But he applies the most in- 
wardly tautological relation of self to self-preservation 
as if it were, in Kantian terms, a synthetic judgment. 
It is as though self-preservation and selfhood defined 
themselves qualitatively through their antithesis, 
death, which is intertwined with the meaning of self- 
preservation. 

As soon as Heidegger speaks out openly, his cate- 
gory of Dasein, as in the early period of bourgeois 
thought, is determined by its self-preserving principle, 
and through the existent’s asserting of itself. In his 
own words : “The primary item in care is the ‘ahead-of- 
itself,’ and this means that in every case Dasein exists 
for the sake of itself.” 113 He has no desire for this “for 
the sake of itself” to be understood naturalistically; 
yet the linguistic echo, as one aspect of the matter, can- 
not be erased; it cannot be eradicated from Heidegger’s 
category of care, which according to him “is that which 
forms the totality of Dasein’s structural whole.” 114 Ac- 
cording to his wish “the Being of the wholeness itself 
must be conceived as an existential phenomenon of a 
Dasein which is in each case one’s own,” 115 and ex- 

113. Heidegger, Being and Time, p. 279. 

1 14. Ibid. 

115. Ibid., p. 284. 


X36 



istential orientation must be won from the particular 
Dasein in question. Ail that gives the ontological key- 
position, in the so-called analysis of existence, to self- 
preservation. But thereby the same position is also 
accorded to death. As a limit it not only determines 
Heidegger’s conception of Dasein, but it coincides, in 
the course of the projecting of that conception, with 
the principle of abstract selfhood, which withdraws 
absolutely into itself, persevering in itself. “No one can 
take away another’s dying,” just as in Kantian idealism 
no ego can take away another’s experiences, his “repre- 
sentations.” The platitude gives mineness its excessive 
pathos. But death becomes the core of the self, as soon 
as it reduces itself completely to itself. Once self has 
emptied itself of all qualities, on the grounds that they 
are accidental-actual, then nothing is left but to pro- 
nounce that doubly pitiful truth, that the self has to 
die; for it is already dead. Hence the emphasis of that 
sentence, “Death is.” For the ontology of Sein und. 
Zeit, the irreplaceable quality of death turns into the 
essential character of subjectivity itself: this fact de- 
termines all the other determinations that lead up to 
the doctrine of authenticity, which has not only its 
norm but its ideal in ^eath. Death becomes the essen- 
tial element in Dasein . 116 Once thought recurs — as 
though to its ground — to the absolutely isolated in- 
dividuality, then there remains nothing tangible for 
it except mortality; everything else derives only from 
the world, which for Heidegger, as for the idealists, is 

116. Ibid. Cf. also Adolf Sternberger’s 1932 criticism of 
Being and Time, in his dissertation Der Verstandene Tod 
( Grafenhainichen, 1933). 


137 



secondary. “With death, Dasein stands before itself 
in its ownmost potentiality-for-Being .” 117 Death be- 
comes the representative of God, for whom the Hei- 
degger of Sein und Zeit felt himself to be too modern. 
Furthermore, it would seem to him too blasphemous to 
consider even the possibility of doing away with death; 
Being-unto-death, as an existentiale, is explicitly cut 
off from the possibility of any mere [sic] ontic doing 
away with it. Since death, as the existential horizon of 
Dasein, is considered absolute, it becomes the absolute 
in the form of an icon. There is here a regression to the 
cult of death; thus the jargon has from the beginning 
gotten along well with military matters. Now, as ear- 
lier, that answer is valid which Horkheimer gave to an 
enthusiastic female devotee of Heidegger’s. She said 
that Heidegger had finally, at least, once again placed 
men before death; Horkheimer replied that Ludendorff 
had taken care of that much better. Death and Dasein 
are identified; death becomes pure identity, as in an 
eixstent which can absolutely not happen to any per- 
son other than oneself. The analysis of existence glides 
quickly over the most immediate and trivial aspect of 
the relation between death and Dasein, their simple 
nonidentity; the fact that death destroys Dasein truly 
negates it. Yet for all that, the analysis of existence 
does not disengage itself from triviality: “Death is the 
possibility of the absolute impossibility of Dasein .” 118 
Secondary school teachers speak thus in Wedekind’s 
Spring's Awakening. The characteristica universalis of 


1 17. Heidegger, Being and Time, p. 294. 

1 18. Ibid., pp. 294 ff. 


138 



Dasein, as in the Dasein of a mortal, takes the place 
of what must die. Thus death is manoeuvered into the 
position of the authentic; Dasein is “distinctive” 119 
through the ontological, which it is anyway; and the 
analytical judgment becomes the precipitous philo s- 
opheme, the empty generality becomes the specific 
element in the concept — while to death, as “something 
distinctively impending,” 120 a medal of honor is given. 
Formerly, the cultural-historical experience of the ab- 
sence of ontological meaning inspired the movement 
of Heidegger’s philosophizing; but now such absence, 
the blindness of the inescapable, becomes exactly that 
which is lacking to Heidegger’s theory of death. In that 
way his thought brings out the hollowness which re- 
sounds from the jargon as soon as one knocks on it. 
Tautology and nihilism bind themselves into a holy 
alliance. Death is to be experienced only as something 
meaningless. That is alleged to be the meaning of the 
experience of death and, since death constitutes the 
essence of Dasein, such is also the meaning of Dasein. 
Hegel’s metaphysics, which cannot be brought back 
again, and which had its positive absolute in the 
totality of negations, is here interiorized to a dimen- 
sionless point. In such a construction it is reduced to 
the Hegelian “fury of disappearance,” 121 to the un- 
mediated theodicy of annihilation. 

Throughout history, identity thinking has been 
something deathly, something that devours everything. 
Identity is always virtually out for totality; the One as 


119. Cf. p. 294. 

120. Ibid.., p. 295. 

1 2 1. Hegel, Werke, II, 453. 


139 



the indeterminate point, and the All-One — equally in- 
determinate, because it has no determination outside 
of itself — are themselves one. In Heidegger, as in 
idealism, that which tolerates nothing beyond itself 
is understood to be the whole. The least trace which 
went beyond such identity would be as unbearable as 
anyone who insists on his own individuality is to the 
fascist — no matter in what remote corner of the world. 
Therefore, not after all does Heidegger’s ontology 
aspire to exclude every kind of facticity. Facticity 
would give the lie to the identity principle, would not 
be of the nature of the concept, which for the sake of 
its omnipotence would like precisely to gloss over the 
fact that it is a concept; dictators imprison those who 
call them dictators. Nevertheless, that identity, which 
strictly would be identical with nothing more than with 
itself, annihilates itself. If it no longer goes forth to an 
other, and if it is no longer an identity of something, 
then, as Hegel saw, it is nothing at all. Thus totality 
is also the moving principle of Heidegger’s observa- 
tions about death. They apply to wholeness, as that 
which is constitutively preestablished over its parts ; 122 
that wholeness which Heidegger’s predecessor Scheler 
had already transplanted into metaphysics from a 
Gestalt psychology which was at first rather unpre- 
tentious. In prefascist Germany, wholeness was the 
motto of all the zealots who were opposed to the nine- 
teenth century, which they looked on summarily as old- 
fashioned and done away with. The attack was par- 

122. Occasionally Heidegger refers condescendingly to 
the concept of totality in other writers, but does so only to 
prove the superiority of his own concept. 


140 



ticularly directed against psychoanalysis; it stood for 
enlightenment in general. In those years, around the 
time of the first publication of Sein und Zeit, the doc- 
trine of the precedence of the whole over its parts was 
the delight of all apologetic thinking — just as today it 
delights the adepts of the jargon. Heidegger directly 
and openly repeated that view of the then current hab- 
its of thought. That the task of philosophy is to sketch 
out the whole was for Heidegger as much an article of 
faith as the duty of system-making once was to the 
idealist; 

Thus arises the task of putting Dasein as a whole 
into our fore-having. This signifies, however, that we 
must first of all raise the question of this entity’s po- 
tentiality-for-Being-a-whole. As long as Dasein is, there 
is in every case something still outstanding, which 
Dasein can be and will be. But to that which is thus 
outstanding, the “end” itself belongs. The “end” of 
Being-in-the-world is death. This end, which belongs to 
the potentiality-for-Being — that is to say, to existence — 
limits and determines in every case whatever totality 
is possible for Dasein .’ 23 

The thought model for this was in particular the “good 
Gestalt” of Gestalt theory; a forerunner of that under- 
standing agreement between inner and outer that is to 
be destroyed by “consciousness as fate.” In its turn 
the conception bears with it the marks of the same 
scientific division of labor against which its own anti- 
mechanistic attitude polemicizes. In that attitude the 
inwardness of individuals remains intact, without re- 
gard to society. Whether a rounded unity exists be- 

123. Heidegger, Being and Time, p. 276. 


I 4 I 



tween subject and the surrounding world would be 
said to depend on the subject. It could only be whole- 
ness insofar as it sets itself in opposition to reality, 
nonreflectingly. Therefore, accommodation, social 
compliance, is the goal even of a category like that 
of wholeness, which appears to be so anthropological 
or existential. An a priori partisanship toward the 
subject as such is exercised by the jargon in the name 
of man. Through this partisanship, attention is re- 
moved from the question of whether reality, with 
which men must be unmediately at one in order even 
to become wholes themselves, of whether this reality 
deserves being at one with; of whether in the end this 
reality, as heteronomous, does not deny them whole- 
ness; of whether the wholeness ideal does not in fact 
contribute to their oppression and to the progressive 
atomization of those who are without power. As an ex- 
pression of the whole situation the atomization of man 
is also the truth; the point would be to change the truth 
along with this situation, and not, within this situation, 
to wrest the truth away, and to charge it up to the for- 
getfulness of being, to the forgetfulness of those who 
recognize the truth. Heidegger felt a slight discomfort 
about an optimism that was secretly proud of having 
proven God in the laboratory; proud of having done so 
by the discovery of the Gestalt which is structured prior 
to all thinking preparation. But Heidegger’s discom- 
fort hid itself away in the rhetorical, and involuntarily 
comic, question of whether in view of death we can 
speak of wholeness. The thesis about immediately pre- 
discovered, objective structuredness came just at the 
time when he needed it. With the help of a makeshift 


142 



thought construction, he brought together the obliga- 
tion toward wholeness — accepted without question — 
and the experience of our literally discontinuous life. 
This was an experience needed by the expression of in- 
corruptible earnestness. This is precisely the broken- 
ness of existence, he says — following a Hegelian 
schema which, alas, he stuck together almost mechan- 
ically. Presumably, death would make this brokenness 
into a whole. Finitude, the infirmity of existence, 
would enclose it as its very principle. Since negativity, 
for all the brow-wrinkling, is taboo, Heidegger thinks 
past his goal. If philosophy could define the structure 
of Dasein at all, it would become for her two things at 
once: broken and whole, identical with itself and not 
identical — and that would of course drive one on to a 
dialectic which broke through the projected ontology of 
Dasein. But in Heidegger, thanks to that doctrine, it 
becomes more evident than anywhere else that the 
negative, as the essence, simply and undialectically 
turns into the positive. He channeled into philosophy 
the scientifically and psychologically circumscribed 
doctrine of wholeness; the antithesis between the dis- 
persed existent and Eleatically harmonic being is si- 
lently totted up to the debit of mechanistic thinking — 
the primal scapegoat here being Aristotle. That this 
thought should be “overcome” — as one of the most sus- 
pect expressions tirelessly continues to proclaim — was 
not for a moment doubted even by Heidegger; such an 
attitude created, for him, the double halo of the modern 
and the supratemporal. The irrationalistic lackey- 
language of the twenties prattled on about “body-soul 
unity.” The connection of existent elements to their 


M3 



whole is supposed to be the meaning of people in real 
life — as it is in art; in the fashion of the Jugendstil, 
consolation is spread aesthetically over the harsh em- 
pirical world. To be sure, Heidegger’s analysis of death 
carefully contents itself with applying the wholeness 
category to that of Dasein, instead of to individuals. 
The borrowing from the psychological theory of whole- 
ness pays off after all. Its grammatical character is 
the renunciation of any causal argumentation, a re- 
nunciation which removes the alleged wholenesses 
from nature, and transfers them to the transcendence 
of Being. For this transcendence is really none at all; 
it does not, in the Kantian way, go beyond the pos- 
sibility of experience, but rather behaves as though ex- 
perience is itself unmediated, incontrovertible, aware 
of itself as if it were face to face with itself. A Active 
bodily contact with phenomena aids this anti-intel- 
lectualism. The pride in controlling phenomena in their 
undisfigured state bases itself in explicitly on a certain 
judgmental claim: that the world is divided up into 
thingly pieces through an unraveling thought-process, 
not through the structure of society. Still — in accord 
with the then reigning rules of the trade of philosophy 
— there is some talk of analysis; but this trade would 
already prefer to do no more analyzing. 

The central chapter of Sein und Zeit treats “Da- 
sein’s possibility of Being-a-whole, and Being-towards- 
Death.” 124 The question is raised — merely in a rhetor- 
ical fashion, as we can see at once — “whether this 
entity, as something existing, can ever become acces- 

124. Ibid., p. 278. 


144 



sible in its Being-a-whole.” 125 It is obvious that a “pos- 
sibility of this entity’s Being-a-whole” 126 could contra- 
dict the self-preservation which has been ontologized 
into “care.” Heidegger does not linger over the fact 
that, in his ontological determination of care as “that 
which forms the totality of Dasein’s structural 
whole,” 127 wholeness was already stipulated, through 
the transposition of the individual existent into Da- 
sein — a wholeness which he then fussily proceeds to 
uncover. We can anticipate, as immanent in Hei- 
degger, what he later announces with so much aplomb : 
that the fact of mortality does not a priori exclude the 
possibility that man’s life should round itself out to a 
whole, as in the Biblical and epic conception. Hei- 
degger may have been forced to the effort to ground 
existential wholeness by the undeniable fact that the 
life of individuals today does without wholeness . 128 
Wholeness is supposed to survive despite historical 
experience. For this purpose the whole-being of the 
eixstent, toward which Heidegger’s theory is heading 
— and out of which “concern” emerges in the jargon — 
the whole-being is distinguished, in the approved man- 
ner, from the merely cumulatively existent, “for which 
anything is still outstanding.” 129 The latter is said to 
have “the same kind of Being as those which are ready- 
to-hand ”; 130 to it is contrasted the totality raised into 


125. Ibid., p. 279. 

126. Ibid. 

127. Ibid. 

128. Cf. the introduction to Benjamin, Schriften I, p. xxii. 

129. Heidegger, Being and Time, p. 286. 

130. Ibid. 


145 



an existential wholeness apart from the empirically 
individual life. 


The togetherness of an entity of the kind which Dasein 
is “in running its course” until that “course” has been 
completed, is not constituted by a “continuing” piec- 
ing-on of entities which, somehow and somewhere, are 
ready-to-hand already in their own right. That Dasein 
should be together only when its “not-yet” has been 
filled up is so far from the case that it is precisely then 
that Dasein is no longer. Any Dasein always exists in 
just such a manner that its “not-yet” belongs to it. 131 

That only applies to the extent that mortality is 
already thought together with the concept of Dasein — 
to the extent, that is, that Heidegger’s philosophy is 
presupposed. For the ontologist, whole-being cannot be 
the unity of the whole content of real life but, qualita- 
tively, must be a third thing; and thus unity will not be 
sought in life as something harmonious, articulated, 
and continuous in itself, but will be sought at that 
point which delimits life and annihilates it, along with 
its wholeness. As a nonexistent, or at least as an ex- 
istent sui generis, outside life, this point is once again 
ontological. “But this lack-of-togethemess which be- 
longs to such a mode of togetherness — this being- 
missing as still-outstanding — cannot by any means de- 
fine ontologically that ‘not-yet’ which belongs to Dasein 
as its possible death. Dasein does not have all the kind 
of Being of something ready-to-hand-within-the 
world.” 132 Removed from facticity, death becomes the 
ontological foundation of totality. Thus it becomes a 

131. Ibid.., p. 287. 

132. Ibid., pp. 286 ff. 


146 



meaning-giving element in the midst of that frag- 
mentation which, according to ontological topography, 
characterizes the atomized consciousness of the late 
industrial age. This is done according to a habit of 
thinking, unquestioned by Heidegger, which imme- 
diately equates a structural whole with its own mean- 
ing — even if it were the negation of all meaning. Thus 
death, the negation of Dasein, is decisively fitted out 
with the characteristics of Being . 133 Insofar as death is 
the ontological constituent of Dasein, death alone can 
give existence the dignity of totality : “death as the end 
of Dasein, is Dasein’s ownmost possibility — non-rela- 
tional, certain and as such indefinite, not to be out- 
stripped.” 134 Thus Heidegger gives a negative answer 
to his own starting question; the question which is 
only posed in order to be refuted; 

So if one has given an ontologically inappropriate Inter- 
pretation of Dasein’s “not-yet” as something still out- 
standing, any formal inference from this to Dasein’s 
lack of totality will not be correct. The phenomenon of 
the “not-yet” has been taken over from the “ahead-of- 
itself”; no more than the care-structure in general, can 
it serve as a higher court which would rule against the 
possibility of an existent Being-a-whole; indeed this 
“ahead-of -itself” is what first of all makes such a Being - 
towards-the-end possible. The problem of the possible 
Being-a-whole of that entity which each of us is, is a 
correct one if care, as Dasein’s basic state, is “con- 
nected” with death — the uttermost possibility for that 
entity.” 135 

133. Cf. above pp. 14 2 ff. 

134. Heidegger, Being and Time, p. 303. 

135. Ibid. 


147 



Ontologically, existence becomes a totality by means of 
death, which disrupts Dasein ontically. Death, how- 
ever, is authentic because it is removed from the They, 
which in turn is justified by the fact that there cannot 
be a proxy in death. Heidegger criticizes all thinkable 
real attitudes toward death as manifestations of the 
They. For, according to his own verdict, only the They 
speak of “death as a regularly occurring state of af- 
fairs.” 136 Thus he singles out his authentic death as 
something that is extremely real and at the same time 
beyond all facticity. Since there cannot be a proxy in 
death it becomes as unconceptual as the pure Diesda 
(haecceitas) . Its concept would precede it and would 
become its representative, as is the case in the relation 
of any concept to that which is its content. In the same 
breath, however, Heidegger slanders facticity, which 
alone allows him to speak of the impossibility of hav- 
ing a proxy in death. The reason for this lies in the 
fact that death as a general concept designates the 
death of all and not of each individual one. Death as 
event, factual death indeed, is not to be the authentic 
death. Thus ontological death is not all that terrible. 

In the publicness with which we are with one an- 
other in our everyday manner, death is “known” as a 
mishap which is constantly occurring — a "case of 
death.” Someone or other “dies,” be he neighbour or 
stranger [Nachste oder Fernerstehende ]. People who 
are no acquaintances of ours are “dying” daily and 
hourly. “Death” is encountered as a well-known event 
occurring within-the-world. As such it remains in the in- 
conspicuousness characteristic of what is encountered 

136. Ibid., p. 297. 


148 



in an everyday fashion. The “they” has already stowed 
away ... an interpretation for this event. It talks of 
it . . . expressly or else in a way which is mostly in- 
hibited, as if to say, “One of these days one will die too, 
in the end; but right now it has nothing to do with 
us.” 137 

In his eagerness to distinguish between death as an 
event and death as something authentic, Heidegger 
does not turn his back on sophisms. 

The analysis of the phrase “one dies” reveals un- 
ambiguously the kind of Being which belongs to every- 
day Being-towards-death. In such a way of talking, 
death is understood as an indefinite something which, 
above all, must duly arrive from somewhere or other, 
but which is proximally not yet present-at-hand for one- 
self, and is therefore no threat. The expression “one 
dies” spreads abroad the opinion that what gets reached, 
as it were, by death, is the “they.” In Dasein’s public 
way of interpreting, it is said that “one dies,” because 
everyone else and oneself can talk himself into saying 
that “in no case is it I myself,” for this “one” is the 
“nobody.” 133 

To say that death affects the They already presup- 
poses, as it were, Heidegger’s hypostasis of the ex- 
istentiales, the dark side of which is always the They. 
Such an interpretation neglects and falsifies the truth 
in that talk, threadbare as it may be. This truth is the 
fact that death is a general determination which com- 
prehends the alter ego as well as one’s own. If some- 
one says, “one dies,” he includes himself euphemis- 

137. Ibid., pp. 296-97. 

138. Ibid., p. 297. 


149 



tically at best. However, the adjournment of death, 
criticized by Heidegger, takes place: the one who 
speaks is actually still allowed to live — otherwise he 
wouldn’t speak. Besides, such argumentation, set in 
motion by Heidegger, necessarily takes place in the 
sphere of nonsense; and in turn gives the lie to authen- 
ticity, which is to crystallize itself in this sphere as if it 
were the philosopher’s stone. If anything fits the They, 
then it is such a pro and contra. The “occurrence” 
which “belongs to nobody in particular” 139 and which 
is not highly valued by Heidegger, definitely belongs to 
someone, according to the usage of language. It be- 
longs to him who dies. Only a solipstistic philosophy 
could acknowledge an ontological priority to “my” 
death over and against any other. Even emotionally, 
someone else’s death is easier to experience than one’s 
own. The Schopenhauer of the fourth book of the 
World as Will and Idea did not miss this fact: 

In him, too, as in the unthinking animal, there prevails 
a sense of security as a permanent state, a security 
which springs from the innermost conscious-that man is 
nature, that he himself is the world. Because of this 
security no man is noticeably bothered by the thought 
of a certain and never distant death; but everyone con- 
tinues to live as if he were to live eternally. This goes so 
far, that one could say that no one actually has a living 
conviction about the certainty of his death. Otherwise 
there could not be such a great difference between his 
mood and that of the convicted criminal. Each man, 
however, recognizes this certainty theoretically and in 
abstracto but like any other truth, which is not usable in 


139 . Ibid. 


150 



practice, puts it aside without taking it into his living 
consciousness . 140 

For Heidegger the They becomes a cloudy mixture of 
elements which are merely ideological products of the 
exchange relationship. The mixture contains the idola 
fori of condolence speeches and obituaries, as well as 
that humanity which does not identify the other, but 
identifies itself with the other, breaks through the 
circle of abstract selfness and recognizes the latter in 
its mediation. The general condemnation of that 
sphere, which philosophy dubiously enough called in- 
tersubjectivity, hopes to overcome reified consciousness 
by means of a primary subject that is supposedly un- 
touched by reification. Yet in truth such a subject 
is as little something immediate and primary as is 
anything else. Heidegger’s key sentences run in the 
following manner: 

Death is Dasein’s ownmost possibility. Being towards 
this possibility discloses to Dasein its ownmost po- 
tentiality-for-Being, in which its very Being is the issue. 
Here it can become manifest to Dasein that, in this 
distinctive possibility of its own self it has been 
wrenched away from the “they.” This means that in 
anticipation any Dasein can have wrenched itself away 
from the “they” already . 141 

Death becomes the essence of the realm of mortality. 
This occurs in opposition to the immediate, which is 
characterized by the fact that it is there. Death thus 

140. Arthur Schopenhauer, Sdmtliche Werke in fiinf 
Banden, Grossherzog Wilhelm Ernst Ausgabe (Leipzig, n.d.), 
Vol. I: Die Welt als Wille und Vorstellung, p. 376. 

141. Heidegger, Being andTime, p. 307. 



becomes something that is artificially beyond the ex- 
istent. Saved from the They it becomes the latter’s 
sublime counterpart; it becomes the authentic. Au- 
thenticity is death. The loneliness of the individual in 
death, the fact that his “non-relatedness singles out 
Dasein unto itself,” 142 becomes the substratum of self- 
ness. This attitude of total self-sufficiency becomes 
the extreme confirmation of the self; it becomes an Ur- 
image of defiance in self-abnegation.As a matter of 
fact, abstract selfness in extremis is that grinding of 
the teeth which says nothing but I, I, I. Thus it is 
characterized by the same nothingness that the self 
becomes in death. But Heidegger’s language blows up 
this negative element into that which is substantial. 
This, then, is the content from which was taken the 
stenciled model for the formal procedure of the jargon. 
Involuntarily, Heidegger’s doctrine becomes an exege- 
sis of the futile joke : Only death is free and that costs 
your life. He is smitten with death as that which is 
supposed to be absolutely removed from the universal 
exchange relationship. Yet he does not realize that he 
remains caught up in the same fatal cycle as the ex- 
change relationship which he sublimates into the They. 
Insofar as death is absolutely alien to the subject, it is 
the model of all reification. Only ideology praises it as 
a cure for exchange. This ideology debases exchange 
into the more despairing form of eternity, instead of 
getting rid of proper exchange by letting it fulfil itself 
properly. For Heidegger, Dasein is not sufficiently able 
to justify itself, because of its shameful historical form. 

142 . I bid. 


I 52 



It redeems itself only in its destruction, which it itself 
is to be. The highest maxim of such an attitude results 
in saying that “it is so,” that one has to obey — or, in 
positivistic terms, that one has to adapt oneself. This is 
the pathetic commandment that he must obey that 
which is. It is not even really obeying, for in any case 
Dasein does not have a choice. Precisely for this rea- 
son death is so ontological in regard to Dasein. If one 
were to call nonideological a kind of thinking which re- 
duces ideology to the zero limit, then one would have 
to say that Heidegger’s thinking is nonideological. But 
his operation once again becomes ideology because of 
his claim that he recovers the meaning of Dasein. This 
happens after the fashion of today’s talk about the 
loss of ideology — talk which tramples down ideology 
but would like to trample down the truth. 

By saying “the ‘they’ does not permit us the courage 
in the face of death,” 143 Heidegger actually lays bare 
certain elements of ideology, such as the attempt to 
integrate death into just that societal immanence 
which has no power over death. A similar development 
can be seen in Evelyn Waugh’s parody The Loved One. 
Some of Heidegger’s formulas come very close to the 
mechanism of sublimating death. “But temptation, 
tranquillization, and alienation are distinguishing 
marks of the kind of Being called ‘falling.’ As falling, 
everyday Being-towards-death is a constant fleeing in 
the face of death.” 144 Alienation, however, designates 
a social relationship, even if it is the relationship to 
death. Man and the institutions of piety reproduce 

143. Ibid., p. 298. 

144. Ibid. 


1 53 



commercially the unconscious will to forget what one 
has to fear. Fundamental ontology and its nomencla- 
ture are not necessary for insights like the following: 

In this manner the “they” provides a constant tranquil- 
lization about death. At bottom, however, this is a tran- 
qu illiz ation not only for him who is “dying” but just as 
much for those who “console” him. And even in the case 
of a demise, the public is still not to have its own tran- 
quillity upset by such an event, or be disturbed in the 
carefreeness with which it concerns itself. Indeed the 
dying of Others is seen often enough as a social in- 
convenience, if not even a downright tactlessness, 
against which the public is to be guarded . 145 

In the same manner Ibsen’s assessor Brack already 
concluded, about Hedda Gabler’s suicide, “One doesn’t 
do that sort of thing.” Heidegger, who does not want 
to have anything to do with psychology, has seen 
through the reactionary nature of the integration of 
death. He has himself done this in a psychological 
fashion. The message is coded in Sein und Zeit: 

But in thus falling and fleeing in the face of death, 
Dasein’s everydayness attests that the very “they” itself 
already has the definite character of Being-towards- 
death, even when it is not explicitly engaged in “think- 
ing about death.” Even in average everydayness, this 
oummost potentiality-for-Being which is non-relational 
and not to be outstripped, is constantly an issue for 
Dasein. This is the case when its concern is merely in 
the mode of an untroubled indifference towards the 
uttermost possibility of existence . 1 * 6 


145. Ibid., pp. 298 ff. 

146. Ibid., pp. 298 99. 


154 



In spite of that, he does not go far enough. Heidegger 
cannot make us feel and respect the despair embodied 
in that cramped “Enjoy life” and in that stupid com- 
monplace, “One will die sometime, but not quite 
yet” 147 — a commonplace which he rightly despises. 
The commonplace represses our despair. The protesta- 
tion against the sublimating of death would have its 
place in a criticism of liberal ideology. That criticism 
would proceed to remind us of the naturalness which 
is denied by culture. For in domination culture itself 
propagates this naturalness. It does it by means of 
that which mistakes itself for the antithesis to nature. 
Instead of this, Heidegger does the same thing as 
fascism; he defends the more brutal form of Being, 
negative as it may be. It is possible to think of a social 
state in which men would no longer have to sublimate 
death and might be able to experience it in another 
form than fear. To experience death in fear is a mark 
of the crude natural state that Heidegger’s doctrine has 
eternalized in supranaturalistic terms. Death is sub- 
limated because of a blinded drive for self-preservation; 
its terror is part of the sublimation. In a life that is no 
longer disfigured, that no longer prohibits, in a life 
that would no longer cheat men out of their dues — in 
such a life men would probably no longer have to hope, 
in vain, that this life would after all give them what it 
had so far refused. For the same reason they would not 
have to fear so greatly that they would lose this life, 
no matter how deeply this fear had been ingrained in 
them. From the fact that men sublimate death, one 


147. Ibid ., p. 299. 


155 



cannot conclude that death is itself the authentic. 
Heidegger is least of all in a position to do this, as he 
is careful not to attribute authenticity to people who 
do not sublimate death. 

By means of a kind of philosophical Freudian slip, 
Heidegger himself defines the ontologizing of death 
insofar as death, in its certainty, is qualitatively su- 
perior to other phenomena. “We have already charac- 
terized the everyday state-of-mind which consists in 
an air of superiority with regard to the certain ‘fact’ of 
death — a superiority which is ‘anxiously’ concerned 
while seemingly free from anxiety. In this state-of- 
mind, everydayness acknowledges a ‘higher’ certainty 
than one which is only empirical.” 148 The “higher,” in 
spite of the quotation marks, has the proving force of 
a confession : theory sanctions death. The partisan of 
authenticity commits the same sin of which he accuses 
the minores gentes, the lesser people, of the They. By 
means of the authenticity of death as he flees from it. 
Whatever announces itself as “higher” than mere em- 
pirical certainty, in this attitude, falsely cleanses death 
from its misery and stench — from being an animalistic 
kicking of the bucket. This cleansing occurs in the 
same manner as a Wagnerian love- or salvation-death. 
All this is similar to the integration of death into 
hygiene, of which Heidegger accuses the inauthentic. 
By means of that which is kept silent in the high 
stylization of death, Heidegger becomes an accomplice 
of what is horrible in death. Even in the cynical ma- 
terialism of the dissection room, this horribleness is 

148. Ibid., p. 302. 


156 



recognized more honestly and denounced more strongly 
than in the tirades of ontology. The latter’s kernel is 
nothing but the supraempirical certainty that death is 
something that has been existentially preordained to 
Dasein. Purity untouched by experience plays over 
into that which it once was unmetaphorically: purity 
untouched by dirt. But by no understanding can death 
be said to be pure. Neither is it anything apodictic. 
Otherwise, all the salvation promises of religion would 
simply be forgetful of Being. However, they are by no 
means needed. Some lower organisms do not die in 
the same sense as the higher, individuated ones. Thus, 
in light of our potential, and growing, control over 
organic processes, we cannot do away a fortiori with 
the thought that death might be eliminated. Such an 
elimination of death may be highly improbable; yet 
it can be thought of, and according to existential ontol- 
ogy that should be impossible. The affirmation of the 
ontological dignity of death, however, is already re- 
duced to nothing by the possibility that something can 
change it ontically — according to Heidegger’s lan- 
guage. Insofar as Heidegger cuts off these hopes at 
what inquisitors probably call the root, the authentic 
one speaks for all — for all those who join, as soon as 
they hear of this possibility, in the refrain that nothing 
would be worse than the disappearance of death. It 
seems legitimate to assume that those are the adepts 
of the jargon. The eagerness toward the eternity of 
death prolongs the continuing use of death as a threat. 
On a political level death advertises the necessity of 
wars. Kant, who subsumed immortality under the 
Ideas, did not let himself fall to those depths in which 


157 



nothing else flourishes but the affirmation of what is 
all too familiar. If Heidegger had made the transition 
from the inorganic to the organic, the existential hori- 
zon of death would have been thoroughly changed. His 
philosophy, and everything that floats with it, down to 
the last sewers of German faith unto being, could no- 
where be more vulnerable than in this transition. That 
understanding with the existent which motivates the 
elevation of the existent to being thrives on the com- 
plicity with death. In the metaphysics of death there 
comes to a head all that evil to which bourgeois society 
has physically condemned itself, by means of its own 
process of development. 

The doctrine of anticipation, which is the authentic 
Being unto death, the “possibility of taking the whole 
of Dasein, in advance ... in an existentiell manner; 
that is to say, it includes the possibility of existing as 
a whole potentiality-for-Being,” 149 underhandedly be- 
comes a mode of behavior. Thus it becomes what 
Being-unto-death did not want to be and yet has to be 
if anything more than a tautology is thereby to be ut- 
tered. Although nothing is said about the difference of 
this mode of behavior from the fact that one has to 
die, this behavior is expected to acquire dignity by ac- 
cepting such a necessity speechlessly and without re- 
flection. 

Anticipation, however, unlike inauthentic Being-to- 
wards-death, does not evade the fact that death is not 
to be outstripped; instead, anticipation frees itself for 
accepting this. When, by anticipation, one becomes free 

149. Ibid., p. 309. 

158 



for one’s own death, one is liberated from one’s lostness 
in those possibilities which may accidentally thrust 
themselves upon one; and one is liberated in such a way 
that for the first time one can authentically understand 
and choose among the factical possibilities lying ahead 
of that possibility which is not to be outstripped. Antici- 
pation discloses to existence that its uttermost possibil- 
ity lies in giving itself up, and thus it shatters all one’s 
tenaciousness to whatever existence one has reached. 150 

Only rarely do Heidegger’s words contain as much 
truth as these last ones. Man’s thinking about himself 
as nature would simultaneously mean a critical re- 
flection on the principle of self-preservation: the true 
life would be one that does not insist on “tenaciousness 
to whatever existence one has reached.” In his doc- 
trine of death, however, Heidegger extrapolates such 
a mode of behavior from Dasein, as the positive mean- 
ing of Dasein. He affirms self-abnegation as an in- 
stance of the self, and he spoils the insight he has 
gained. Resignation becomes an obstinacy which turns 
the dissolution of the self into an inflexibly stoic posit- 
ing of the self. By means of relentless identification, 
of the dissolution of the self with the self, self becomes 
the absolute positing of the negative principle. All the 
categories that Heidegger then uses to explain Being 
unto death are linked with obstinacy: the possibility 
of death is supposed to be “put up with.” 151 That 
which should be different from domination and in- 
flexibility raises domination to its extreme. The sub- 
ject is never so authentic for Heidegger as in that 


150. Ibid. 

151. Ibid., p. 305. 


159 



holding out in which it endures an extreme of pain, 
following the example of the ego. Even the elements 
with which he contrasts the stiffening of the self carry 
linguistic traces of the domination of the self : he calls 
it a “breaking.” 152 In the same way that Dasein-subject 
is actually identified with death, Being-unto-death be- 
comes subject, pure will. Ontological decisiveness must 
not ask what it dies for. The last word is spoken by a 
selfness that remains unmoved. “This distinctive and 
authentic disclosedness, which is attested in Dasein 
itself by its conscience — this reticent self-projection 
upon one’s ownmost Being-guilty, in which one is 
ready for anxiety — we call ‘resoluteness.’ ” 153 The real 
ideological life would be this : the courage to be afraid 
only when this courage would no longer have to dis- 
sipate into all that which has to be feared. 

The jargon of authenticity is ideology as language, 
without any consideration of specific content. It asserts 
meaning with the gesture of that dignity by which 
Heidegger would like to dress up death. Dignity, too, 
is of an idealistic nature. There was a time when the 
subject thought itself a small divinity, as well as a 
lawgiving authority, sovereign in the consciousness of 
its own freedom. Such motifs have been extirpated 
from the dignity of the Heideggerian tone: 

In what other way, however, could a humanity ever 
find the way to the primal form of thanking, if the favor 
of Being did not grant man the nobility of poverty by 
means of the open possibility of relating to Being? For 
only that nobility of poverty conceals in it the freedom 

152. Ibid ., pp. 308-9. 

153. Ibid ., p. 343. 


160 



of sacrifice which is the treasure of its essence. Sacrifice 
means farewell from the existent on the way to the 
preservation of the favor of Being. Nevertheless, sacri- 
fice can be prepared in the working and effecting [Lei- 
sten] within the existent, yet such action can never ful- 
fill the sacrifice. The fulfillment of sacrifice stems from 
the urgency out of which the action of every historical 
man rises — essential thinking, too, is an action — by 
means of which he preserves the achieved Dasein for 
the preservation of the dignity of Being. This urgency is 
the equanimity which does not allow itself to be tempted, 
in its hidden readiness for the farewell nature of any 
sacrifice. Sacrifice is at home in the essence of the event. 
In the form of an event being claims man for the truth 
of Being. For this reason sacrifice does not allow for any 
calculation. Calculation always reduces sacrifice to a 
purpose or purposelessness, whether such purposes are 
set high or low. Such a calculation disfigures the nature 
of sacrifice. The desire for purposes distorts the clarity 
of the courage for sacrifice, which is marked by an awe 
which readily fears; and which has taken upon itself to 
live in the neighborhood of that which is indestruc- 
tible . 154 

In these sentences dignity certainly plays a role as the 
dignity of being, and not of men. Yet the solemnity of 
these sentences differs from the solemnity of secu- 
larized burials only through its enthusiasm for irra- 
tional sacrifice. Combat pilots may have spoken in 
exactly this way when they returned from a city just 
destroyed by bombs and drank champagne to the health 
of those who did not return. Dignity was never any- 
thing more than the attitude of self-preservation aspir- 
ing to be more than that. The creature mimes the cre- 

154. Heidegger, Was ist Metaphysik?, p. 45. 


i 6 i 



ator. In dignity a feudal category is mediated which 
bourgeois society presents posthumously for the legiti- 
mation of its hierarchy. Bourgeois society always has 
had the tendency to swindle — as is clearly shown by 
delegated officials on festive occasions, when they ap- 
pear in all the fastidiousness of prescribed demeanor. 
Heidegger’s dignity is once again the shadow of such a 
borrowed ideology. The subject who founds his dignity 
at least on the Pythagorean claim — questionable as it 
may be — that he is a good citizen of a good country, is 
replaced. His dignity gives way to that respect which 
the subject can claim by the mere fact that, like all 
others, he has to die. In this respect Heidegger in- 
voluntarily proves to be a democrat. Identification with 
that which is inevitable remains the only consolation 
of this philosophy of consolation: it is the last identity. 
The worn-out principle of the self -positing of the ego, 
which proudly holds out in preserving its life at the 
cost of the others, is given a higher value by means of 
the death which extinguishes it. What was once the 
portal to eternal life has been closed for Heideggerian 
philosophy. Instead, this philosophy pays homage to 
the power and dimension of the portal. That which is 
empty becomes an arcanum: the mystery of being 
permanently in ecstasy over some numinous thing 
which is preserved in silence. In the case of taciturn 
people, it is too often impossible to tell whether — as 
they would like one to believe — the depth of their in- 
wardness shudders at the sight of anything profane, 
or whether their coldness has as little to say to any- 
thing as anything has to say to it. The rest is piety, and 
in the more humane instance this rest is the helplessly 


162 



surging feeling of people who have lost someone they 
loved. In the worst instance it is the convention that 
sanctions death by means of the thought of divine will 
and divine grace — even after theology has pined away. 
That is what is being exploited by language, and what 
becomes the schema of the jargon of authenticity. Its 
dignified mannerism is a reactionary response toward 
the secularization of death. Language wants to grasp 
what is escaping, without believing it or naming it. 
Naked death becomes the meaning of such talk — a 
meaning that otherwise it would have only in some- 
thing transcendent. The falseness of giving meaning, 
nothingness as something, is what creates the linguistic 
mendacity. Thus the Jugendstil wanted to give mean- 
ing, out of itself, to a meaninglessly experienced life, 
by means of abstract negation. Its chimerical manifesto 
was engraved into Nietzsche’s new tablets. Nothing of 
the kind can any longer be voluntarily elicited from 
late bourgeois Dasein. That is why meaning is thrown 
into death. The dramas of the later Ibsen closed with 
the freely committed self-destruction of life that is 
caught up in the labyrinth of conventions. This self- 
destruction was a necessarily violent consequence of 
the action, as if it were its fulfillment. Yet it was al- 
ready close to the purifying death of agnostic crema- 
tion. But the dramatic form could not resolve the vain 
nature of such action. The subjectively consoling 
meaning of self-destruction remained objectively with- 
out consolation. The last word is spoken by tragic 
irony. The weaker the individual becomes, from a so- 
cietal perspective, the less can he become calmly aware 
of his own impotence. He has to puff himself up into 



self ness, in the way the futility of this self ness sets 
itself up as what is authentic, as Being. There is an 
involuntary parody of Heidegger, by an author who 
brought forth, one after another, books with titles like 
Encounter with Nothingness and Encounter with 
Being. But this author cannot be blamed for his 
parody. It has to be blamed on its model, which thinks 
itself superior to such depravities. Heidegger, too, only 
encounters nothingness with a higher propaedeutic of 
Being. The Heideggerian tone of voice is indeed proph- 
ecied in Schiller’s discussion of dignity. Schiller sees it 
as something secluding oneself within oneself, or as a 
kind of securing. 

If we have many occasions to observe the affected grace 
in the theatre and in the ballroom, there is also often 
occasion for studying the affected dignity in the cabinet 
of ministers and in the study-rooms of men of science 
(notably at universities). True dignity is content to 
prevent the domination of the affections, to keep the 
instinct within just limits, but there only where it pre- 
tends to be master in the involuntary movements; false 
dignity regulates with an iron sceptre even the voluntary 
movements, it oppresses the moral movements, which 
were sacred to true dignity, as well as the sensual move- 
ments, and destroys all the mimic play of the features 
by which the soul gleams forth upon the face. It arms 
itself not only against rebel nature, but against sub- 
missive nature, and ridiculously seeks its greatness in 
subjecting nature to its yoke, or, if this does not suc- 
ceed, in hiding it. As if it had vowed hatred to all that 
is called nature, it swathes the body in long, heavy- 
plaited garments, which hide the human structure; it 
paralyses the limbs in surcharging them with vain orna- 
ments, and goes even the length of cutting the hair to 
replace this gift of nature by an artificial production. 


164 



True dignity does not blush for nature, but only for 
brute nature; it always has an open and frank air; feel- 
ing gleams in its look; calm and serenity of mind is legi- 
ble upon the brow in eloquent traits. False gravity, on 
the contrary, places its dignity in the lines of its visage; 
it is close, mysterious, and guards its features with the 
care of an actor; all the muscles of the face are tor- 
mented, all natural and true expression disappears, and 
the entire man is like a sealed letter. 

But false dignity is not always wrong to keep the 
mimic play of its features under sharp discipline, be- 
cause it might betray more than would be desired, a 
precaution true dignity has not to consider. True dignity 
wishes only to rule, not to conceal nature; in false 
dignity, on the contrary, nature rules the more power- 
fully within because it is controlled outwardly . 155 

The Kantian, who believed in his master’s disjunction 
between price and dignity, could still see this as some- 
thing to be desired. Because of that, however, the great 
writer fell short of the full insight to which he came 
close. This is the insight that dignity contains the form 
of its decadence within itself. The fact can be observed 
when intellectuals become accomplices of that power 
which they don’t have and which they should resist. 
The Kantian dignity finally disintegrates into the jar- 
gon of authenticity. With it goes that humanity which 
has its basic nature not in self-reflection but in its dif- 
ference from a suppressed animality. 

155. Friedrich von Schiller, Samtliche Werke (Stuttgart, 
1818), “Uber Anmut und Wiirde,” Vol. VIII, pt. I, pp. 96 f. 
[English edition edited by N. H. Dole, The Works of Schiller 
(Boston, 1902), “On Grace and Dignity,” pp. 231 ff.] 


165 



