Cultural Memory in the Presen, 


MAX HORKHtIMHR & I 
I IlhODOR \V. ADORNO I 

DIALECTIC of 

enlightenment 

Philosophical Fragments 



Editedby GUNZELIN SCHMID NOERR 
Translated by EDMUND JEPHCOTT 






DIALECTIC OF ENLIGHTENMENT 



Cultural Memory 
in | 
the ■ -* 
^Present 


Mieke Bal and Hent de Vries, Editors 






DIALECTIC OF ENLIGHTENMENT 

Philosophical Fragments 


MAX HORKHEIMER and 
THEODOR W. ADORNO 


Edited by Gunzelin Schmid Noerr 
Translated by Edmund Jephcott 


STANFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS 
STANFORD, CALIFORNIA 


2002 



Dialectic of Enlightenment: Philosophical Fragments is translated from Volume 5 
of Max Horkheimer, Gesammelte Schriften: Dialektik der Aufklarung und 
Schriften 1940—1950 , edited by Gunzelin Schmid Noerr, ©1987 by S. Fishcher 
Verlag GmbH, Frankfurt am Main. 

Asterisks in the text and display material mark editorial notes created for the 
German edition. They include variant readings and other textual concerns. 

They are keyed in the reference matter section via the number of the page on 
which the asterisk appears and the preceding word. Numbered notes are those 
created by Horkheimer and Adorno themselves. 

English translation ©2002 by the Board of Trustees 
of the Leland Stanford Junior University 

Horkheimer, Max, 1895—1973 

[Philosophische Fragmente. English] 

Dialectic of enlightenment : philosophical fragments / Max Horkheimer and 
Theodor W. Adorno ; edited by Gunzelin Schmid Noerr ; translated by 
Edmund Jephcott. 

p. cm. — (Cultural memory in the present) 

Includes bibliographical references. 

isbn 0-8047-3632-4 (alk. paper) — isbn 0-8047-3633-2 (pbk: alk. paper) 

1. Philosophy. I. Adorno, Theodor W., 1903—1969. II. Schmid Noerr, 
Gunzelin. III. Title. IV. Series. 

B3279.H8473 P513 2002 

193—dc2i 2002000073 

Printed in the United States of America 
Original Printing 2002 

Last figure below indicates year of this printing: 

11 10 09 08 07 06 05 04 03 02 

Typeset at Stanford University Press in 11/13.5 Adobe Garamond 


For Friedrich Pollock* 



Contents 


Preface to the New Edition (1969) xi 

Preface to the Italian Edition (1962/1966) xiii 

Preface (1944 and 1949) xiv 

The Concept of Enlightenment 1 

Excursus I: Odysseus or Myth and Enlightenment 35 

Excursus II: Juliette or Enlightenment and Morality 63 

The Culture Industry: Enlightenment as Mass Deception 94 

Elements of Anti-Semitism: Limits of Enlightenment 137 

Notes and Sketches 173 

Editor’s Afterword 217 

The Disappearance of Class History in “Dialectic of 

Enlightenment”: A Commentary on theTextual Variants 

(1944 and 1947), by Willem van Reijen and Jan Bransen 248 

Notes 253 



Preface to the New Edition (1969) 


Dialectic of Enlightenment was published in 1947 by Querido in 
Amsterdam. The book, which found readers only gradually, has been out 
of print for some time. We have been induced to reissue it after more than 
twenty years not only by requests from many sides but by the notion that 
not a few of the ideas in it are timely now and have largely determined our 
later theoretical writings. No one who was not involved in the writing 
could easily understand to what extent we both feel responsible for every 
sentence. We dictated long stretches together; the Dialectic derives its vital 
energy from the tension between the two intellectual temperaments which 
came together in writing it. 

We do not stand by everything we said in the book in its original 
form. That would be incompatible with a theory which attributes a tem¬ 
poral core to truth instead of contrasting truth as something invariable to 
the movement of history. The book was written at a time when the end of 
the National Socialist terror was in sight. In not a few places, however, the 
formulation is no longer adequate to the reality of today. All the same, 
even at that time we did not underestimate the implications of the transi¬ 
tion to the administered world. 

In a period of political division into immense blocs driven by an 
objective tendency to collide, horror has been prolonged. The conflicts in 
the third world and the renewed growth of totalitarianism are not mere 
historical interludes any more than, according to the Dialectic, fascism was 
at that time. Critical thought, which does not call a halt before progress 
itself, requires us to take up the cause of the remnants of freedom, of ten¬ 
dencies toward real humanity, even though they seem powerless in face of 
the great historical trend. 

The development toward total integration identified in the book has 


xii Preface to the 1969 Edition 

been interrupted but not terminated; it threatens to be consummated by 
means of dictators and wars. Our prognosis regarding the associated lapse 
from enlightenment into positivism, into the myth of that which is the 
case, and finally of the identity of intelligence and hostility to mind, has 
been overwhelmingly confirmed. Our concept of history does not believe 
itself elevated above history, but it does not merely chase after information 
in the positivist manner. As a critique of philosophy it does not seek to 
abandon philosophy itself. 

From America, where the book was written, we returned to Ger¬ 
many with the conviction that, theoretically and practically, we would be 
able to achieve more there than elsewhere. Together with Friedrich 
Pollock, to whom the book is dedicated on his seventy-fifth birthday as it 
was then on his fiftieth, we built up the Institut fur Sozialforschung once 
again, with the idea of taking further the concepts formulated in Dialectic. 
In continuing to develop our theory, and in the common experiences con¬ 
nected with it, Gretel Adorno has given us the most valuable assistance, as 
she did with the first version. 

We have made changes far more sparingly than is usual with re-edi- 
tions of books dating back several decades. We did not want to retouch 
what we had written, not even the obviously inadequate passages. To bring 
the text fully up to date with the current situation would have amounted 
to nothing less than writing a new book. That what matters today is to 
preserve and disseminate freedom, rather than to accelerate, however indi¬ 
rectly, the advance toward the administered world, we have also argued in 
our later writings. We have confined ourselves here to correcting misprints 
and suchlike matters. This restraint has made the book a piece of docu¬ 
mentation; we hope that it is also more. 

Max Florkheimer Theodor W. Adorno 


Frankfurt am Main, April 1969 


Preface to the Italian Edition * (1962/1966) 


The German text of Dialectic of Enlightenment is a fragment. Begun 
as early as 1942, during the Second World War, it was supposed to form the 
introduction to the theory of society and history we had sketched during 
the period of National Socialist rule. It is self-evident that, with regard to 
terminology and the scope of the questions investigated, the book is 
shaped by the social conditions in which it was written. 

In keeping with its theme, our book demonstrates tendencies which 
turn cultural progress into its opposite. We attempted to do this on the 
basis of social phenomena of the 1930s and 1940s in America. However, to 
construct a systematic theory which would do justice to the present eco¬ 
nomic and political circumstances is a task which, for objective and sub¬ 
jective reasons, we are unable to perform today. We are therefore happy 
that the fragment is appearing in a series devoted predominantly to philo¬ 
sophical questions. 

M.H. and T.W.A. 

Frankfurt am Main, March 1966 


Preface (1944 and 1947) 


When* we began this work, the first samples of which we dedicate to 
Friedrich Pollock, we hoped to be able to present the whole book on his 
fiftieth birthday. But the further we proceeded with the task the more we 
became aware of the mismatch between it and our own capabilities. What 
we had set out to do was nothing less than to explain why humanity, 
instead of entering a truly human state, is sinking into a new kind of* bar¬ 
barism. We underestimated the difficulty of dealing with the subject 
because we still placed too much trust in contemporary consciousness. 
While we had noted for many years that, in the operations of modern sci¬ 
ence, the major discoveries are paid for with an increasing* decline of the¬ 
oretical education, we nevertheless believed that we could follow those 
operations to the extent of limiting our work primarily to a critique or a 
continuation of specialist theories. Our work was to adhere, at least the¬ 
matically, to the traditional disciplines: sociology, psychology, and episte¬ 
mology. 

The fragments we have collected here show, however, that we had to 
abandon that trust. While attentive cultivation and investigation of the 
scientific heritage—especially when positivist new brooms have swept it 
away as useless lumber—does represent one moment of knowledge, in the 
present collapse of bourgeois civilization not only the operations but the 
purpose of science have become dubious. The tireless self-destruction of 
enlightenment hypocritically celebrated by implacable fascists and imple¬ 
mented by pliable experts in humanity* compels thought to forbid itself 
its last remaining innocence regarding the habits and tendencies of the 
Zeitgeist. If public life has reached a state in which thought is being turned 
inescapably into a commodity and language into celebration of the com¬ 
modity, the attempt to trace the sources of this degradation must refuse 


Preface (1944 and 1947) 


xv 


obedience to the current linguistic and intellectual demands before it is 
rendered entirely futile by the consequence of those demands for world 
history. 

If the only obstacles were those arising from the oblivious instru- 
mentalization of science, thought about social questions could at least 
attach itself to tendencies opposed to official science. Those tendencies, 
too, however, are caught up in the general process of production. They 
have changed no less than the ideology they attacked. They suffer the fate 
which has always been reserved for triumphant thought. If it voluntarily 
leaves behind its critical element to become a mere means in the service of 
an existing order, it involuntarily tends to transform the positive cause it 
has espoused into something negative and destructive. The eighteenth- 
century philosophy which, defying the funeral pyres for books and peo¬ 
ple, put the fear of death into infamy, joined forces with it under Bona¬ 
parte. Finally, the apologetic school of Comte usurped the succession to 
the uncompromising encyclopedistes, extending the hand of friendship* to 
all those whom the latter had opposed. Such metamorphoses of critique 
into affirmation do not leave theoretical content untouched; its truth 
evaporates. Today, however, motorized history is rushing ahead of such 
intellectual developments, and the official spokesmen, who have other 
concerns, are liquidating the theory to which they owe their place in the 
sun* before it has time to prostitute itself completely.* 

In reflecting on its own guilt, therefore, thought finds itself deprived 
not only of the affirmative reference to science and everyday phenomena 
but also of the conceptual language of opposition. No terms are available 
which do not tend toward complicity with the prevailing intellectual 
trends, and what threadbare language cannot achieve on its own is pre¬ 
cisely made good by the social machinery. The censors voluntarily main¬ 
tained by the film factories to avoid greater costs have their counterparts 
in all other departments. The process to which a literary text is subjected, 
if not in the automatic foresight of its producer then through the battery 
of readers, publishers, adapters, and ghost writers inside and outside the 
editorial office, outdoes any censor in its thoroughness. To render their 
function entirely superfluous appears, despite all the benevolent reforms, 
to be the ambition of the educational system. In the belief that without 
strict limitation to the observation of facts and the calculation of proba¬ 
bilities the cognitive mind would be overreceptive to charlatanism and 


xvi Preface (1944 and 1947) 

superstition, that system is preparing arid ground for the greedy accep¬ 
tance of charlatanism and superstition. Just as prohibition has always 
ensured the admission of the poisonous product, the blocking of the the¬ 
oretical imagination has paved the way for political delusion. Even when 
people have not already succumbed to such delusion, they are deprived by 
the mechanisms of censorship, both the external ones and those implant¬ 
ed within them, of the means of resisting it. 

The aporia which faced us in our work thus proved to be the first 
matter we had to investigate: the self-destruction of enlightenment. We 
have no doubt—and herein lies our petitio principii —that freedom in 
society is inseparable from enlightenment thinking. We believe we have 
perceived with equal clarity, however, that the very concept of that think¬ 
ing, no less than the concrete historical forms, the institutions of society 
with which it is intertwined, already contains the germ of the regression* 
which is taking place everywhere today. If enlightenment does not assim¬ 
ilate reflection on this regressive moment, it seals its own fate. By leaving 
consideration of the destructive side of progress to its enemies, thought in 
its headlong* rush into pragmatism is forfeiting its sublating character, 
and therefore its relation to truth. In the mysterious willingness of the 
technologically educated masses to fall under the spell of any despotism, 
in its self-destructive affinity to nationalist paranoia, in all this uncompre¬ 
hended senselessness the weakness of contemporary theoretical under¬ 
standing is evident. 

We believe that in these fragments we have contributed to such 
understanding by showing that the cause of enlightenment’s relapse into 
mythology is to be sought not so much in the nationalist, pagan, or other 
modern mythologies concocted specifically to cause such a relapse as in 
the fear of truth which petrifies enlightenment itself. Both these terms, 
enlightenment and truth, are to be understood as pertaining not merely to 
intellectual history but also to current reality. Just as enlightenment ex¬ 
presses the real movement of bourgeois society as a whole from the per¬ 
spective of the idea embodied in its personalities and institutions, truth 
refers not merely to rational* consciousness but equally to the form it takes 
in reality. The loyal son of modern civilization’s fear of departing from the 
facts, which even in their perception are turned into cliches by the pre¬ 
vailing usages in science, business, and politics, is exactly the same as the 
fear of social deviation. Those usages also define the concept of clarity in 


Preface (1944 and 1947) xvii 

language and thought to which art, literature, and philosophy must con¬ 
form today. By tabooing any thought which sets out negatively from the 
facts and from the prevailing modes of thought as obscure, convoluted, 
and preferably foreign, that concept holds mind captive in ever deeper 
blindness. It is in the nature of the calamitous situation existing today that 
even the most honorable reformer who recommends renewal in threadbare 
language reinforces the existing order he seeks to break by taking over its 
worn-out categorial apparatus and the pernicious power-philosophy lying 
behind it. False clarity is only another name for myth. Myth was always 
obscure and luminous at once. It has always been distinguished by its 
familiarity and its exemption from the work of concepts. 

The enslavement to nature of people today cannot be separated from 
social progress. The increase in economic productivity which creates the 
conditions for a more just world also affords the technical apparatus and 
the social groups controlling it a disproportionate advantage over the rest 
of the population. The individual is entirely nullified in face of the eco¬ 
nomic powers. These powers are taking society’s domination over nature 
to unimagined heights. While individuals as such are vanishing before the 
apparatus they serve, they are provided for by that apparatus and better 
than ever before. In the unjust state of society the powerlessness and plia¬ 
bility of the masses increase* with the quantity of goods allocated to them. 
The materially considerable and socially paltry rise in the standard of liv¬ 
ing of the lower classes is reflected in the hypocritical propagation of intel¬ 
lect. Intellect’s true concern is a negation of reification. It must perish 
when it is solidified into a cultural asset and handed out for consumption 
purposes. The flood of precise information and brand-new amusements 
make people smarter and more stupid at once. 

What is at issue here is not culture as a value, as understood by crit¬ 
ics of civilization such as Huxley, Jaspers, and Ortega y Gasset, but the 
necessity for enlightenment to reflect on itself if humanity is not to be 
totally betrayed. What is at stake is not conservation of the past but the 
fulfillment of past hopes. Today, however,* the past is being continued as 
destruction of the past. If, up to the nineteenth century, respectable edu¬ 
cation was a privilege paid for by the increased sufferings* of the unedu¬ 
cated, in the twentieth the hygienic factory is bought with the melting 
down of all cultural entities in the gigantic crucible.* That might not even 
be so high a price as those defenders of culture believe if the bargain sale 


xviii Preface (1944 and 1947) 

of culture did not contribute to converting economic achievements into 
their opposite. 

Under the given circumstances the gifts of fortune themselves 
become elements of misfortune. If, in the absence of the social subject, the 
volume of goods took the form of so-called overproduction in domestic 
economic crises in the preceding period, today, thanks to the enthrone¬ 
ment of powerful groups as that social subject, it is producing the inter¬ 
national threat of fascism: progress is reverting to regression. That the 
hygienic factory and everything pertaining to it, Volkswagen* and the 
sports palace, are obtusely liquidating metaphysics does not matter in 
itself, but that these things are themselves becoming metaphysics, an ide¬ 
ological curtain,* within the social whole, behind which real doom is gath¬ 
ering, does matter. That is the basic premise of our fragments. 

The first essay, the theoretical basis of those which follow, seeks to 
gain greater understanding of the intertwinement of rationality and social 
reality, as well as of the intertwinement, inseparable from the former, of 
nature and the mastery of nature. The critique of enlightenment given in 
this section is intended to prepare a positive concept of enlightenment 
which liberates it from its entanglement in blind domination. 

The critical part of the first essay can be broadly summed up in two 
theses: Myth is already enlightenment, and enlightenment reverts to my¬ 
thology. These theses are worked out in relation to specific subjects in the 
two excurses. The first traces the dialectic of myth and enlightenment in 
the Odyssey, as one of the earliest representative documents of bourgeois 
Western civilization. It focuses primarily on the concepts of sacrifice and 
renunciation, through which both the difference between and the unity of 
mythical nature and enlightened mastery of nature become apparent. The 
second excursus is concerned with Kant, Sade, and Nietzsche, whose 
works represent the implacable consummation of enlightenment. This 
section shows how the subjugation of everything natural to the sovereign 
subject culminates in the domination of what is blindly objective and nat¬ 
ural. This tendency levels all the antitheses of bourgeois thought, espe¬ 
cially that between moral rigor and absolute amorality. 

The section “The Culture Industry” shows the regression of enlight¬ 
enment to ideology which is graphically expressed in film and radio. Here, 
enlightenment consists primarily in the calculation of effects and in the 
technology of production and dissemination; the specific content of the 


Preface (1944 and 1947) 


xix 


ideology is exhausted in the idolization of the existing order and of the 
power by which the technology is controlled. In the discussion of this con¬ 
tradiction the culture industry is taken more seriously than it might itself 
wish to be. But because its appeal to its own commercial character, its con¬ 
fession of its diminished truth, has long since become an excuse with 
which it evades responsibility for its lies, our analysis is directed at the 
claim objectively contained in its products to be aesthetic formations and 
thus representations of truth. It demonstrates* the dire state of society by 
the invalidity of that claim. Still more than the others, the section on the 
culture industry is fragmentary.* 

The discussion, in the form of theses, of “Elements of Anti- 
Semitism” deals with the reversion of enlightened civilization to barbarism 
in reality. The not merely theoretical but practical tendency toward self- 
destruction has been inherent in rationality from the first, not only in the 
present phase when it is emerging nakedly. For this reason a philosophical 
prehistory of anti-Semitism is sketched. Its “irrationalism” derives from 
the nature of the dominant reason and of the world corresponding to its 
image. The “elements” are directly related to empirical research by the 
Institute of Social Research,* the foundation set up and kept alive by Felix 
Weil, without which not only our studies but the good part of the theo¬ 
retical work of German emigrants carried forward despite Hitler would 
not have been possible. We wrote the first three theses jointly with Feo 
Fowenthal, with whom we have collaborated on many scholarly questions 
since the first years in Frankfurt. 

In the last section we publish notes and sketches which, in part, form 
part of the ideas in the preceding sections, without having found a place 
in them, and in part deal provisionally with problems of future work. 
Most of them relate to a dialectical anthropology.* 

Los Angeles, California, May 1944 

The book contains no essential changes to the text completed during the 
war. Only the last thesis of “Elements of Anti-Semitism” was added sub¬ 
sequently. 

Max Horkheimer Theodor W. Adorno 

June 1947 



The Concept* of Enlightenment 


Enlightenment, understood in the widest sense as the advance of 
thought, has always aimed at liberating human beings from fear and 
installing them as masters. Yet the wholly enlightened earth is radiant with 
triumphant calamity. Enlightenment’s program was the disenchantment 
of the world.* It wanted to dispel myths, to overthrow fantasy with knowl¬ 
edge. Bacon, “the father of experimental philosophy,” 1 brought these mo¬ 
tifs together. Ele despised the exponents of tradition, who substituted be¬ 
lief for knowledge and were as unwilling to doubt as they were reckless in 
supplying answers. All this, he said, stood in the way of “the happy match 
between the mind of man and the nature of things,” with the result that 
humanity was unable to use its knowledge for the betterment of its con¬ 
dition. Such inventions as had been made—Bacon cites printing, artillery, 
and the compass—had been arrived at more by chance than by systemat¬ 
ic enquiry into nature. Knowledge obtained through such enquiry would 
not only be exempt from the influence of wealth and power but would 
establish man as the master of nature: 

Therefore, no doubt, the sovereignty of man lieth hid in knowledge; wherein many 
things are reserved, which kings with their treasure cannot buy, nor with their force 
command; their spials and intelligencers can give no news of them, their seamen 
and discoverers cannot sail where they grow: now we govern nature in opinions, 
but we are thrall unto her in necessity: but if we would be led by her in invention, 
we should command her by action . 2 








2 The Concept of Enlightenment 


Although not a mathematician, Bacon well understood the scientific tem¬ 
per which was to come after him. The “happy match” between human 
understanding and the nature of things that he envisaged is a patriarchal 
one: the mind, conquering superstition, is to rule over disenchanted 
nature. Knowledge, which is power, knows no limits, either in its enslave¬ 
ment* of creation or in its deference to worldly masters. Just as it serves all 
the purposes of the bourgeois economy both in factories and on the bat¬ 
tlefield, it is at the disposal of entrepreneurs regardless of their origins. 
Kings control technology no more directly than do merchants: it is as 
democratic as the economic system* with which it evolved. Technology is 
the essence of this knowledge. It aims to produce neither concepts nor 
images, nor the joy of understanding, but method, exploitation of the 
labor of others,* capital. The “many things” which, according to Bacon, 
knowledge still held in store are themselves mere instruments: the radio as 
a sublimated printing press, the dive bomber as a more effective form of 
artillery, remote control as a more reliable compass. What human beings 
seek to learn from nature is how to use it to dominate wholly both it and 

human beings. Nothing else counts. Ruthless toward itself, the Enlighten¬ 
ment has eradicated the last remnant of its own self-awareness. Only 
thought which does violence to itself is hard enough to shatter myths. 
Faced by the present triumph of the factual mentality, Bacon’s nominalist 
credo would have smacked of metaphysics and would have been convict¬ 
ed of the same vanity for which he criticized scholasticism. Power and 
knowledge are synonymous. 3 For Bacon as for Futher, “knowledge that 
tendeth but to satisfaction, is but as a courtesan, which is for pleasure, and 
not for fruit or generation.” Its concern is not “satisfaction, which men call 
truth,” but “operation,” the effective procedure. The “true end, scope or 
office of knowledge” does not consist in “any plausible, delectable, rever¬ 
end or admired discourse, or any satisfactory arguments, but in effecting 
and working, and in discovery of particulars not revealed before, for the 
better endowment and help of man’s life.” 4 There shall be neither mystery 
nor any desire to reveal mystery. 

The disenchantment of the world means the extirpation of animism. 
Xenophanes mocked the multiplicity of gods because they resembled their 
creators, men, in all their idiosyncrasies and faults, and the latest logic 
denounces the words of language, which bear the stamp of impressions, as 
counterfeit coin that would be better replaced by neutral counters. The 






The Concept of Enlightenment 3 


world becomes chaos, and synthesis salvation. No difference is said to exist 
between the totemic animal, the dreams of the spirit-seer,* and the absolute 
Idea. On their way toward modern science human beings have discarded 
meaning. The concept is replaced by the formula, the cause by rules and 
probability. Causality was only the last philosophical concept on which sci¬ 
entific criticism tested its strength, because it alone of the old ideas still 
stood in the way of such criticism, the latest secular form of the creative 
principle. To define substance and quality, activity and suffering, being and 
existence in terms appropriate to the time has been a concern of philoso¬ 
phy since Bacon; but science could manage without such categories. They 
were left behind as idola theatri of the old metaphysics and even in their 
time were monuments to entities and powers from prehistory. In that dis¬ 
tant time life and death had been interpreted and interwoven in myths. 
The categories by which Western philosophy defined its timeless order of 
nature marked out the positions which had once been occupied by Ocnus 
and Persephone, Ariadne and Nereus. The moment of transition is record¬ 
ed in the pre-Socratic cosmologies. The moist, the undivided, the air and 
fire which they take to be the primal stuff of nature are early rationaliza¬ 
tions precipitated from the mythical vision. Just as the images of generation 
from water and earth, that had come to the Greeks from the Nile, were 
converted by these cosmologies into Hylozoic principles and elements, the 
whole ambiguous profusion of mythical demons was intellectualized to be¬ 
come the pure form of ontological entities. Even the patriarchal gods of 
Olympus were finally assimilated by the philosophical logos as the Platonic 
Forms. But the Enlightenment discerned the old powers in the Platonic 
and Aristotelian heritage of metaphysics and suppressed the universal cate¬ 
gories’ claims to truth as superstition. In the authority of universal concepts 
the Enlightenment detected a fear of the demons through whose effigies 
human beings had tried to influence nature in magic rituals. From now on 
matter was finally to be controlled without the illusion of immanent pow¬ 
ers or hidden properties. For enlightenment, anything which does not con¬ 
form to the standard of calculability and utility must be viewed with sus¬ 
picion. Once the movement is able to develop unhampered by external 
oppression, there is no holding it back. Its own ideas of human rights then 
fare no better than the older universals. Any intellectual resistance it en¬ 
counters merely increases its strength. 5 The reason is that enlightenment 
also recognizes itself in the old myths. No matter which myths are invoked 






4 The Concept of Enlightenment 


against it, by being used as arguments they are made to acknowledge the 
very principle of corrosive rationality of which enlightenment stands ac¬ 
cused. Enlightenment is totalitarian. 

Enlightenment has always regarded anthropomorphism, the projec¬ 
tion of subjective properties onto nature, as the basis of myth. 6 The super¬ 
natural, spirits and demons, are taken to be reflections of human beings 
who allow themselves to be frightened by natural phenomena. According 
to enlightened thinking, the multiplicity of mythical figures can be 
reduced to a single common denominator, the subject. Oedipus’s answer 
to the riddle of the Sphinx—“That being is man”—is repeated indiscrim¬ 
inately as enlightenment’s stereotyped message, whether in response to a 
piece of objective meaning, a schematic order, a fear of evil powers, or a 
hope of salvation. For the Enlightenment, only what can be encompassed 
by unity has the status of an existent or an event; its ideal is the system 
from which everything and anything follows. Its rationalist and empiricist 
versions do not differ on that point. Although the various schools may 
have interpreted its axioms differently, the structure of unitary science has 
always been the same. Despite the pluralism of the different fields of 
research, Bacon’s postulate of una scientia universalis 7 is as hostile to any¬ 
thing which cannot be connected as Leibniz’s mathesis universalis is to dis¬ 
continuity. The multiplicity of forms is reduced to position and arrange¬ 
ment, history to fact, things to matter. For Bacon, too, there was a clear 
logical connection, through degrees of generality, linking the highest prin¬ 
ciples to propositions based on observation. De Maistre mocks him for 
harboring this “idolized ladder.” 8 Formal logic was the high school of uni¬ 
fication. It offered Enlightenment thinkers a schema for making the world 
calculable. The mythologizing equation of Forms with numbers in Plato’s 
last writings expresses the longing of all demythologizing: number became 
enlightenment’s canon. The same equations govern bourgeois justice and 
commodity exchange. “Is not the rule, ‘Si inaequalibus aequalia addas, 
omnia erunt inaequalial [If you add like to unlike you will always end up 
with unlike] an axiom of justice as well as of mathematics? And is there 
not a true coincidence between commutative and distributive justice, and 
arithmetical and geometrical proportion?” 9 Bourgeois society is ruled by 
equivalence. It makes dissimilar things comparable by reducing them to 
abstract quantities. For the Enlightenment, anything which cannot be 
resolved into numbers, and ultimately into one, is illusion; modern posi- 


The Concept of Enlightenment 5 


tivism consigns it to poetry. Unity remains the watchword from Parmen¬ 
ides to Russell. All gods and qualities must be destroyed. 

But the myths which fell victim to the Enlightenment were them¬ 
selves its products. The scientific calculation of events annuls the account 
of them which thought had once given in myth. Myth sought to report, 
to name, to tell of origins—but therefore also to narrate, record, explain. 
This tendency was reinforced by the recording and collecting of myths. 
From a record, they soon became a teaching. Each ritual contains a repre¬ 
sentation of how things happen and of the specific process which is to be 
influenced by magic. In the earliest popular epics this theoretical element 
of ritual became autonomous. The myths which the tragic dramatists drew 
on were already marked by the discipline and power which Bacon cele¬ 
brated as the goal. The local spirits and demons had been replaced by 
heaven and its hierarchy, the incantatory practices of the magician by the 
carefully graduated sacrifice and the labor of enslaved men mediated by 
command. The Olympian deities are no longer directly identical with ele¬ 
ments, but signify them. In Elomer Zeus controls the daytime sky, Apollo 
guides the sun; Elelios and Eos are already passing over into allegory. The 
gods detach themselves from substances to become their quintessence. 
From now on, being is split between logos —which, with the advance of 
philosophy, contracts to a monad, a mere reference point—and the mass 
of things and creatures in the external world. The single distinction 
between man’s own existence and reality swallows up all others. Without 
regard for differences, the world is made subject to man. In this the Jewish 
story of creation and the Olympian religion are at one: “. . . and let them 
have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and 
over the cattle, and over all the earth, and over every creeping thing that 
creepeth upon the earth.” 10 “O Zeus, Father Zeus, yours is the dominion 
of the heavens; you oversee the works of men, both the wicked and the 
just, and the unruly animals, you who uphold righteousness.” 11 “It is so 
ordained that one atones at once, another later; but even should one 
escape the doom threatened by the gods, it will surely come to pass one 
day, and innocents shall expiate his deed, whether his children or a later 
generation.” 12 Only those who subject themselves utterly pass muster with 
the gods. The awakening of the subject is bought with the recognition of 
power as the principle of all relationships. In face of the unity of such rea¬ 
son the distinction between God and man is reduced to an irrelevance, as 


6 The Concept of Enlightenment 


reason has steadfastly indicated since the earliest critique of Homer. In 
their mastery of nature, the creative God and the ordering mind are alike. 
Man’s likeness to God consists in sovereignty over existence, in the lordly 
gaze, in the command. 

Myth becomes enlightenment and nature mere objectivity. Human 
beings purchase the increase in their power with estrangement from that 
over which it is exerted. Enlightenment stands in the same relationship to 
things as the dictator to human beings. He knows them to the extent that 
he can manipulate them. The man of science knows things to the extent 
that he can make them. Their “in-itself” becomes “for him.” In their 
transformation the essence of things is revealed as always the same, a sub¬ 
strate of domination. This identity constitutes the unity of nature. Neither 
it nor the unity of the subject was presupposed by magical incantation. 
The rites of the shaman were directed at the wind, the rain, the snake out¬ 
side or the demon inside the sick person, not at materials or specimens. 
The spirit which practiced magic was not single or identical; it changed 
with the cult masks which represented the multiplicity of spirits. Magic is 
bloody untruth, but in it domination is not yet disclaimed by transform¬ 
ing itself into a pure truth underlying the world which it enslaves. The 
magician imitates demons; to frighten or placate them he makes intimi¬ 
dating or appeasing gestures. Although his task was impersonation he did 
not claim to be made in the image of the invisible power, as does civilized 
man, whose modest hunting ground then shrinks to the unified cosmos, 
in which nothing exists but prey. Only when made in such an image does 
man attain the identity of the self which cannot be lost in identification 
with the other but takes possession of itself once and for all as an impen¬ 
etrable mask. It is the identity of mind and its correlative, the unity of 
nature, which subdues the abundance of qualities. Nature, stripped of 
qualities, becomes the chaotic stuff of mere classification, and the all-pow¬ 
erful self becomes a mere having, an abstract identity. Magic implies spe¬ 
cific representation. What is done to the spear, the hair, the name of the 
enemy, is also to befall his person; the sacrificial animal is slain in place of 
the god. The substitution which takes place in sacrifice marks a step 
toward discursive logic. Even though the hind which was offered up for 
the daughter, the lamb for the firstborn, necessarily still had qualities of its 
own, it already represented the genus. It manifested the arbitrariness of 
the specimen. But the sanctity of the hie et nunc , the uniqueness of the 


The Concept of Enlightenment 7 


chosen victim which coincides with its representative status, distinguishes 
it radically, makes it non-exchangeable even in the exchange. Science puts 
an end to this. In it there is no specific representation: something which is 
a sacrificial animal cannot be a god. Representation gives way to universal 
fungibility. An atom is smashed not as a representative but as a specimen 
of matter, and the rabbit suffering the torment of the laboratory is seen not 
as a representative but, mistakenly, as a mere exemplar. Because in func¬ 
tional science the differences are so fluid that everything is submerged in 
one and the same matter, the scientific object is petrified, whereas the rigid 
ritual of former times appears supple in its substitution of one thing for 
another. The world of magic still retained differences whose traces have 
vanished even in linguistic forms. 13 The manifold affinities between exist¬ 
ing things are supplanted by the single relationship between the subject 
who confers meaning and the meaningless object, between rational signif¬ 
icance and its accidental bearer. At the magical stage dream and image 
were not regarded as mere signs of things but were linked to them by 
resemblance or name. The relationship was not one of intention but of 
kinship. Magic like science is concerned with ends, but it pursues them 
through mimesis, not through an increasing distance from the object. It 
certainly is not founded on the “omnipotence of thought,” which the 
primitive is supposed to impute to himself like the neurotic; 14 there can be 
no “over-valuation of psychical acts” in relation to reality where thought 
and reality are not radically distinguished. The “unshakable confidence in 
the possibility of controlling the world” 15 which Freud anachronistically 
attributes to magic applies only to the more realistic form of world domi¬ 
nation achieved by the greater astuteness of science. The autonomy of 
thought in relation to objects, as manifested in the reality-adequacy of the 
Ego, was a prerequisite for the replacement of the localized practices of the 
medicine man by all-embracing industrial technology.* 

As a totality set out in language and laying claim to a truth which 
suppressed the older mythical faith of popular religion, the solar, patriar¬ 
chal myth was itself an enlightenment, fully comparable on that level to 
the philosophical one. But now it paid the price. Mythology itself set in 
motion the endless process of enlightenment by which, with ineluctable 
necessity, every definite theoretical view is subjected to the annihilating 
criticism that it is only a belief, until even the concepts of mind, truth, 
and, indeed, enlightenment itself have been reduced to animistic magic. 


8 The Concept of Enlightenment 


The principle of rhe fated necessity which caused the downfall of the 
mythical hero, and finally evolved as the logical conclusion from the orac¬ 
ular utterance, not only predominates, refined to the cogency of formal 
logic, in every rationalistic system of Western philosophy but also presides 
over the succession of systems which begins with the hierarchy of the gods 
and, in a permanent twilight of the idols, hands down a single identical 
content: wrath against those of insufficient righteousness.* Just as myths 
already entail enlightenment, with every step enlightenment entangles 
itself more deeply in mythology. Receiving all its subject matter from 
myths, in order to destroy them, it falls as judge under the spell of myth. 
It seeks to escape the trial of fate and retribution by itself exacting retri¬ 
bution on that trial. In myths, everything that happens must atone for the 
fact of having happened. It is no different in enlightenment: no sooner has 
a fact been established than it is rendered insignificant. The doctrine that 
action equals reaction continued to maintain the power of repetition over 
existence long after humankind had shed the illusion that, by repetition, 
it could identify itself with repeated existence and so escape its power. But 
the more the illusion of magic vanishes, the more implacably repetition, in 
the guise of regularity, imprisons human beings in the cycle now objecti¬ 
fied in the laws of nature, to which they believe they owe their security as 
free subjects. The principle of immanence, the explanation of every event 
as repetition, which enlightenment upholds against mythical imagination, 
is that of myth itself. The arid wisdom which acknowledges nothing new 
under the sun, because all the pieces in the meaningless game have been 
played out, all the great thoughts have been thought, all possible discov¬ 
eries can be construed in advance, and human beings are defined by self- 
preservation through adaptation—this barren wisdom merely reproduces 
the fantastic doctrine it rejects: the sanction of fate which, through retri¬ 
bution, incessantly reinstates what always was. Whatever might be differ¬ 
ent is made the same. That is the verdict which critically sets the bound¬ 
aries to possible experience. The identity of everything with everything is 
bought at the cost that nothing can at the same time be identical to itself. 
Enlightenment dissolves away the injustice of the old inequality of 
unmediated mastery, but at the same time perpetuates it in universal 

mediation, by relating every existing thing to every other. It brings about 
the situation for which Kierkegaard praised his Protestant ethic and which, 
in the legend-cycle of Hercules, constitutes one of the primal images of 









The Concept of Enlightenment 9 


mythical violence: it amputates the incommensurable. Not merely are 
qualities dissolved in thought, but human beings are forced into real con¬ 
formity. The blessing that the market does not ask about birth is paid for 
in the exchange society by the fact that the possibilities conferred by birth 
are molded to fit the production of goods that can be bought on the mar¬ 
ket. Each human being has been endowed with a self of his or her own, 
different from all others, so that it could all the more surely be made the 
same. But because that self never quite fitted the mold, enlightenment 
throughout the liberalistic period has always sympathized with social co¬ 
ercion. The unity of the manipulated collective consists in the negation of 
each individual and in the scorn poured on the type of society which could 
make people into individuals. The horde, a term which doubtless* is to be 
found in the Hitler Youth organization, is not a relapse into the old bar¬ 
barism but the triumph of repressive egalite, the degeneration of the equal¬ 
ity of rights into the wrong inflicted by equals; The fake myth of fascism 
reveals itself as the genuine myth of prehistory, in that the genuine myth 
beheld retribution while the false one wreaks it blindly on its victims. Any 
attempt to break the compulsion of nature by breaking nature only suc¬ 
cumbs more deeply to that compulsion. That has been the trajectory of 
European civilization. Abstraction, the instrument of enlightenment, 
stands in the same relationship to its objects as fate, whose concept it erad¬ 
icates: as liquidation. Under the leveling rule of abstraction, which makes 
everything in nature repeatable, and of industry, for which abstraction pre¬ 
pared the way, the liberated finally themselves become the “herd” ( Trupp ), 
which Hegel 16 identified as the outcome of enlightenment. 

The distance of subject from object, the presupposition of abstrac¬ 
tion, is founded on the distance from things which the ruler attains by 
means of the ruled. The songs of Homer and the hymns of the Rig Veda 
date from the time of territorial dominion and its strongholds, when a 
warlike race of overlords imposed itself on the defeated indigenous popu¬ 
lation. 17 The supreme god among gods came into being with this civil 
world in which the king, as leader of the arms-bearing nobility, tied the 
subjugated people* to the land while doctors, soothsayers, artisans, and 
traders took care of circulation. With the end of nomadism the social order 
is established on the basis of fixed property. Power and labor diverge. A 
property owner like Odysseus “controls from a distance a numerous, fine¬ 
ly graded personnel of ox herds, shepherds, swineherds, and servants. In 





io The Concept of Enlightenment 


the evening, having looked out from his castle to see the countryside lit up 
by a thousand fires, he can go to his rest in peace. He knows that his loyal 
servants are watching to keep away wild animals and to drive away thieves 
from the enclosures which they are there to protect.” 18 The generality of 
the ideas developed by discursive logic, power in the sphere of the concept, 
is built on the foundation of power in reality. The superseding of the old 
diffuse notions of the magical heritage by conceptual unity expresses a 
condition of life defined by the freeborn citizen and articulated by com¬ 
mand. The self which learned about order and subordination through the 
subjugation of the world soon equated truth in general with classifying 
thought, without whose fixed distinctions it cannot exist. Along with 
mimetic magic it tabooed the knowledge which really apprehends the 
object. Its hatred is directed at the image of the vanquished primeval world 
and its imaginary happiness. The dark, chthonic gods of the original 
inhabitants are banished to the hell into which the earth is transformed 
under the religions of Indra and Zeus, with their worship of sun and light. 

But heaven and hell were linked. The name Zeus was applied both 
to a god of the underworld and to a god of light in cults which did not 
exclude each other, 19 and the Olympian gods maintained all kinds of com¬ 
merce with the chthonic deities. In the same way, the good and evil pow¬ 
ers, the holy and the unholy, were not unambiguously distinguished. They 
were bound together like genesis and decline, life and death, summer and 
winter. The murky, undivided entity worshipped as the principle of mana 
at the earliest known stages of humanity lived on in the bright world of 
the Greek religion. Primal and undifferentiated, it is everything unknown 
and alien; it is that which transcends the bounds of experience, the part of 
things which is more than their immediately perceived existence. What 
the primitive experiences as supernatural is not a spiritual substance in 
contradistinction to the material world but the complex concatenation of 
nature in contrast to its individual link.* The cry of terror called forth by 
the unfamiliar becomes its name. It fixes the transcendence of the un¬ 
known in relation to the known, permanently linking horror to holiness. 
The doubling of nature into appearance and essence, effect and force, 
made possible by myth no less than by science, springs from human fear, 
the expression of which becomes its explanation. This does not mean that 
the soul is transposed into nature, as psychologism would have us believe; 
mana, the moving spirit, is not a projection but the echo of the real pre- 


The Concept of Enlightenment 


ii 


ponderance of nature in the weak psyches of primitive people. The split 
between animate and inanimate, the assigning of demons and deities to 
certain specific places, arises from this preanimism. Even the division of 
subject and object is prefigured in it. If the tree is addressed no longer as 
simply a tree but as evidence of something else, a location of mana, lan¬ 
guage expresses the contradiction that it is at the same time itself and 
something other than itself, identical and not identical. 20 Through the 
deity speech is transformed from tautology into language. The concept, 
usually defined as the unity of the features of what it subsumes, was rather, 
from the first, a product of dialectical thinking, in which each thing is 
what it is only by becoming what it is not. This was the primal form of the 
objectifying definition, in which concept and thing became separate, the 
same definition which was already far advanced in the Homeric epic and 
trips over its own excesses in modern positive science. But this dialectic 
remains powerless as long as it emerges from the cry of terror, which is the 
doubling, the mere tautology of terror itself. The gods cannot take away 
fear from human beings, the petrified cries of whom they bear as their 
names. Humans believe themselves free of fear when there is no longer 
anything unknown. This has determined the path of demythologization, 
of enlightenment, which equates the living with the nonliving as myth 
had equated the nonliving with the living. Enlightenment is mythical fear 
radicalized. The pure immanence of positivism, its ultimate product, is 
nothing other than a form of universal taboo. Nothing is allowed to re¬ 
main outside, since the mere idea of the “outside” is the real source of fear. 
If the revenge of primitive people for a murder committed on a member 
of their family could sometimes be assuaged by admitting the murderer 
into that family, 21 both the murder and its remedy mean the absorption of 
alien blood into one’s own, the establishment of immanence. The mythi¬ 
cal dualism does not lead outside the circle of existence. The world con¬ 
trolled by mana, and even the worlds of Indian and Greek myth, are issue¬ 
less and eternally the same. All birth is paid for with death, all fortune 
with misfortune. While men and gods may attempt in their short span to 
assess their fates by a measure other than blind destiny, existence triumphs 
over them in the end. Even their justice, wrested from calamity, bears its 
features; it corresponds to the way in which human beings, primitives no 
less than Greeks and barbarians, looked upon their world from within a 
society of oppression and poverty. Hence, for both mythical and enlight- 







12 The Concept of Enlightenment 


ened justice, guilt and atonement, happiness and misfortune, are seen as 
the two sides of an equation. Justice gives way to law. The shaman wards 
off a danger with its likeness. Equivalence is his instrument; and equiva¬ 
lence regulates punishment and reward within civilization. The imagery of 
myths, too, can be traced back without exception to natural conditions. 
Just as the constellation Gemini, like all the other symbols of duality, refers 
to the inescapable cycle of nature; just as this cycle itself has its primeval 
sign in the symbol of the egg from which those later symbols are sprung, 
the Scales (Libra) held by Zeus, which symbolize the justice of the entire 
patriarchal world, point back to mere nature. The step from chaos to civ¬ 
ilization, in which natural conditions exert their power no longer directly 
but through the consciousness of human beings, changed nothing in the 
principle of equivalence. Indeed, human beings atoned for this very step 
by worshipping that to which previously, like all other creatures, they had 
been merely subjected. Earlier, fetishes had been subject to the law of 
equivalence. Now equivalence itself becomes a fetish. The blindfold over 
the eyes of Justitia means not only that justice brooks no interference but 
that it does not originate in freedom. 

The teachings of the priests were symbolic in the sense that in them 
sign and image coincided. As the hieroglyphs attest, the word originally 
also had a pictorial function. This function was transferred to myths. They, 
like magic rites, refer to the repetitive cycle of nature. Nature as self-repe¬ 
tition is the core of the symbolic: an entity or a process which is conceived 
as eternal because it is reenacted again and again in the guise of the sym¬ 
bol. Inexhaustibility, endless renewal, and the permanence of what they 
signify are not only attributes of all symbols but their true content. 
Contrary to the Jewish Genesis, the representations of creation in which 
the world emerges from the primal mother, the cow or the egg, are sym¬ 
bolic. The scorn of the ancients for their all-too-human gods left their core 
untouched. The essence of the gods is not exhausted by individuality. 
They still had about them a quality of mana\ they embodied nature as a 
universal power. With their preanimistic traits they intrude into the 
enlightenment. Beneath the modest veil of the Olympian chronique scan- 
daleuse the doctrine of the commingling and colliding of elements had 
evolved; establishing itself at once as science, it turned the myths into fig¬ 
ments of fantasy. With the clean separation between science and poetry 


The Concept of Enlightenment 13 


the division of labor which science had helped to establish was extended 
to language. For science the word is first of all a sign; it is then distributed 
among the various arts as sound, image, or word proper, but its unity can 
never be restored by the addition of these arts, by synaesthesia or total art.* 
As sign, language must resign itself to being calculation and, to know 
nature, must renounce the claim to resemble it. As image it must resign 
itself to being a likeness and, to be entirely nature, must renounce the 
claim to know it. With advancing enlightenment, only authentic works of 
art have been able to avoid the mere imitation of what already is. The pre¬ 
vailing antithesis between art and science, which rends the two apart as 
areas of culture in order to make them jointly manageable as areas of cul¬ 
ture, finally causes them, through their internal tendencies as exact oppo¬ 
sites, to converge. Science, in its neopositivist interpretation, becomes aes¬ 
theticism, a system of isolated signs devoid of any intention transcending 
the system; it becomes the game which mathematicians have long since 
proudly declared their activity to be. Meanwhile, art as integral replication 
has pledged itself to positivist science, even in its specific techniques. It 
becomes, indeed, the world over again, an ideological doubling, a compli¬ 
ant reproduction. The separation of sign and image is inescapable. But if, 
with heedless complacency, it is hypostatized over again, then each of the 
isolated principles tends toward the destruction of truth. 

Philosophy has perceived the chasm opened by this separation as the 
relationship between intuition and concept and repeatedly but vainly has 
attempted to close it; indeed, philosophy is defined by that attempt. 
Usually, however, it has sided with the tendency to which it owes its name. 
Plato banished poetry with the same severity with which positivism dis¬ 
missed the doctrine of Forms. Homer, Plato argued, had procured neither 
public nor private reforms through his much-vaunted art, had neither won 
a war nor made an invention. We did not know, he said, of any numerous 
followers who had honored or loved him. Art had to demonstrate its use¬ 
fulness. 22 The making of images was proscribed by Plato as it was by the 
Jews. Both reason and religion outlaw the principle of magic. Even in its 
resigned detachment from existence, as art, it remains dishonorable; those 
who practice it become vagrants, latter-day nomads, who find no domicile 
among the settled. Nature is no longer to be influenced by likeness but 
mastered through work. Art has in common with magic the postulation of 
a special, self-contained sphere removed from the context of profane exis- 


14 The Concept of Enlightenment 


tence. Within it special laws prevail. Just as the sorcerer begins the cere¬ 
mony by marking out from all its surroundings the place in which the 
sacred forces are to come into play, each work of art is closed off from real¬ 
ity by its own circumference. The very renunciation of external effects by 
which art is distinguished from magical sympathy binds art only more 
deeply to the heritage of magic. This renunciation places the pure image 
in opposition to corporeal existence, the elements of which the image sub- 
lates within itself. It is in the nature of the work of art, of aesthetic illu¬ 
sion, to be what was experienced as a new and terrible event in the magic 
of primitives: the appearance of the whole in the particular. The work of 
art constantly reenacts the duplication by which the thing appeared as 
something spiritual, a manifestation of mana. That constitutes its aura. As 
an expression of totality art claims the dignity of the absolute. This has 
occasionally led philosophy to rank it higher than conceptual knowledge. 
According to Schelling, art begins where knowledge leaves humans in the 
lurch. For him art is “the model of science, and wherever art is, there sci¬ 
ence must go.” 23 According to his theory the separation of image and sign 
“is entirely abolished by each single representation of art.” 24 The bourgeois 
world was rarely amenable to such confidence in art. Where it restricted 
knowledge, it generally did so to make room for faith, not art. It was 
through faith that the militant religiosity of the modern age, of Tor- 
quemada, Luther, and Mohammed, sought to reconcile spirit and exis¬ 
tence. But faith is a privative concept: it is abolished as faith if it does not 
continuously assert either its opposition to knowledge or its agreement 
with it. In being dependent on the limits set to knowledge, it is itself lim¬ 
ited. The attempt made by faith under Protestantism to locate the princi¬ 
ple of truth, which transcends faith and without which faith cannot exist, 
directly in the word itself, as in primeval times, and to restore the symbolic 
power of the word, was paid for by obedience to the word, but not in its 
sacred form. Because faith is unavoidably tied to knowledge as its friend 
or its foe, faith perpetuates the split in the struggle to overcome knowl¬ 
edge: its fanaticism is the mark of its untruth, the objective admission that 
anyone who only believes for that reason no longer believes. Bad con¬ 
science is second nature to it. The secret awareness of this necessary, inher¬ 
ent flaw, the immanent contradiction that lies in making a profession of 
reconciliation, is the reason why honesty in believers has always been a 
sensitive and dangerous affair. The horrors of fire and sword, of counter- 


The Concept of Enlightenment 15 


Reformation and Reformation, were perpetrated not as an exaggeration 
but as a realization of the principle of faith. Faith repeatedly shows itself 
of the same stamp as the world history it would like to command; indeed, 
in the modern period it has become that history’s preferred means, its spe¬ 
cial ruse. Not only is the Enlightenment of the eighteenth century inex¬ 
orable, as Hegel confirmed; so, too, as none knew better than he, is the 
movement of thought itself. The lowest insight, like the highest, contains 
the knowledge of its distance from the truth, which makes the apologist a 
liar. The paradox of faith degenerates finally into fraud, the myth of the 
twentieth century* and faith’s irrationality into rational organization in the 
hands of the utterly enlightened as they steer society toward barbarism. 

When language first entered history its masters were already priests 
and sorcerers. Anyone who affronted the symbols fell prey in the name of 
the unearthly powers to the earthly ones, represented by these appointed 
organs of society. What preceded that stage is shrouded in darkness. 
Wherever it is found in ethnology, the terror from which mana was born 
was already sanctioned, at least by the tribal elders. Unidentical, fluid 
mana was solidified, violently materialized by men. Soon the sorcerers had 
populated every place with its emanations and coordinated the multiplic¬ 
ity of sacred realms with that of sacred rites. With the spirit-world and its 
peculiarities they extended their esoteric knowledge and their power. The 
sacred essence was transferred to the sorcerers who managed it. In the first 
stages of nomadism the members of the tribe still played an independent 
part in influencing the course of nature. The men tracked prey while the 
women performed tasks which did not require rigid commands. How 
much violence preceded the habituation to even so simple an order can¬ 
not be known. In that order the world was already divided into zones of 
power and of the profane. The course of natural events as an emanation of 
mana had already been elevated to a norm demanding submission. But if 
the nomadic savage, despite his subjection, could still participate in the 
magic which defined the limits of that world, and could disguise himself 
as his quarry in order to stalk it, in later periods the intercourse with spir¬ 
its and the subjection were assigned to different classes of humanity: 
power to one side, obedience to the other. The recurring, never-changing 
natural processes were drummed into the subjects, either by other tribes 
or by their own cliques, as the rhythm of work, to the beat of the club and 
the rod, which reechoed in every barbaric drum, in each monotonous rit- 


1 6 The Concept of Enlightenment 


ual. The symbols take on the expression of the fetish. The repetition of 
nature which they signify always manifests itself in later times as the per¬ 
manence of social compulsion, which the symbols represent. The dread 
objectified in the fixed image becomes a sign of the consolidated power of 
the privileged.* But general concepts continued to symbolize that power 
even when they had shed all pictorial traits. Even the deductive form of 
science mirrors hierarchy and compulsion. Just as the first categories rep¬ 
resented the organized tribe and its power over the individual, the entire 
logical order, with its chains of inference and dependence, the superordi¬ 
nation and coordination of concepts, is founded on the corresponding 
conditions in social reality, that is, on the division of labor. 25 Of course, 
this social character of intellectual forms is not, as Durkheim argues, an 
expression of social solidarity but evidence of the impenetrable unity of 
society and power. Power confers increased cohesion and strength on the 
social whole in which it is established. The division of labor, through 
which power manifests itself socially, serves the self-preservation of the 
dominated whole. But this necessarily turns the whole, as a whole, and the 
operation of its immanent reason, into a means of enforcing the particu¬ 
lar interest. Power confronts the individual as the universal, as the reason 
which informs reality. The power of all the members of society, to whom 
as individuals no other way is open, is constantly summated, through the 
division of labor imposed on them, in the realization of the whole, whose 
rationality is thereby multiplied over again. What is done to all by the few 
always takes the form of the subduing of individuals by the many: the 
oppression of society always bears the features of oppression by a collec¬ 
tive. It is this unity of collectivity and power, and not the immediate social 
universal, solidarity, which is precipitated in intellectual forms. Through 
their claim to universal validity, the philosophical concepts with which 
Plato and Aristotle represented the world elevated the conditions which 
those concepts justified to the status of true reality. They originated, as 
Vico put it, 26 in the marketplace of Athens; they reflected with the same 
fidelity the laws of physics, the equality of freeborn citizens, and the infe¬ 
riority of women, children, and slaves. Language itself endowed what it 
expressed, the conditions of domination, with the universality it had 
acquired as the means of intercourse in civil society. The metaphysical 
emphasis, the sanction by ideas and norms, was no more than a hyposta- 
tization of the rigidity and exclusivity which concepts have necessarily 


The Concept of Enlightenment 17 


taken on wherever language has consolidated the community of the rulers 
for the enforcement of commands. As a means of reinforcing the social 
power of language, ideas became more superfluous the more that power 
increased, and the language of science put an end to them altogether. 
Conscious justification lacked the suggestive power which springs from 
dread of the fetish. The unity of collectivity and power now revealed itself 
in the generality which faulty content necessarily takes on in language, 
whether metaphysical or scientific. The metaphysical apologia at least 
betrayed the injustice of the established order through the incongruence of 
concept and reality. The impartiality of scientific language deprived what 
was powerless of the strength to make itself heard and merely provided the 
existing order with a neutral sign for itself. Such neutrality is more meta¬ 
physical than metaphysics. Enlightenment finally devoured not only sym¬ 
bols but also their successors, universal concepts, and left nothing of meta¬ 
physics behind except the abstract fear of the collective from which it had 
sprung. Concepts in face of enlightenment are like those living on un¬ 
earned income in face of industrial trusts:* none can feel secure. If logical 
positivism still allowed some latitude for probability, ethnological posi¬ 
tivism already equates probability with essence. “Our vague ideas of 
chance and quintessence are pale relics of that far richer notion,” 27 that is, 
of the magical substance. 

Enlightenment as a nominalist tendency stops short before the 
nomen, the non-extensive, restricted concept, the proper name. Although 28 
it cannot be established with certainty whether proper names were origi¬ 
nally generic names, as some maintain, the former have not yet shared the 
fate of the latter. The substantial ego repudiated by Hume and Mach is not 
the same thing as the name. In the Jewish religion, in which the idea of 
the patriarchy is heightened to the point of annihilating myth, the link 
between name and essence is still acknowledged in the prohibition on 
uttering the name of God. The disenchanted world of Judaism propitiates 
magic by negating it in the idea of God. The Jewish religion brooks no 
word which might bring solace to the despair of all mortality. It places all 
hope in the prohibition on invoking falsity as God, the finite as the infi¬ 
nite, the lie as truth. The pledge of salvation lies in the rejection of any 
faith which claims to depict it, knowledge in the denunciation of illusion. 
Negation, however, is not abstract. The indiscriminate denial of anything 
positive, the stereotyped formula of nothingness as used by Buddhism, 


18 The Concept of Enlightenment 


ignores the ban on calling the absolute by its name no less than its oppo¬ 
site, pantheism, or the latter’s caricature, bourgeois skepticism. Explana¬ 
tions of the world as nothingness or as the entire cosmos are mythologies, 
and the guaranteed paths to redemption sublimated magical practices. 
The self-satisfaction of knowing in advance, and the transfiguration of 
negativity as redemption, are untrue forms of the resistance to deception. 
The right of the image is rescued in the faithful observance of its prohibi¬ 
tion. Such observance, “determinate negation,” 29 is not exempted from the 
enticements of intuition by the sovereignty of the abstract concept, as is 
skepticism, for which falsehood and truth are equally void. Unlike rig¬ 
orism, determinate negation does not simply reject imperfect representa¬ 
tions of the absolute, idols, by confronting them with the idea they are 
unable to match. Rather, dialectic discloses each image as script. It teach¬ 
es us to read from its features the admission of falseness which cancels its 
power and hands it over to truth. Language thereby becomes more than a 
mere system of signs. With the concept of determinate negation Hegel 
gave prominence to an element which distinguishes enlightenment from 
the positivist decay to which he consigned it. However, by finally postu¬ 
lating the known result of the whole process of negation, totality in the 
system and in history, as the absolute, he violated the prohibition and 
himself succumbed to mythology. 

That fate befell not only his philosophy, as the apotheosis of advanc¬ 
ing thought, but enlightenment itself, in the form of the sober matter-of- 
factness by which it purported to distinguish itself from Hegel and from 
metaphysics in general. For enlightenment is totalitarian as only a system 
can be. Its untruth does not lie in the analytical method, the reduction to 
elements, the decomposition through reflection, as its Romantic enemies 
had maintained from the first, but in its assumption that the trial is pre¬ 
judged. When in mathematics the unknown becomes the unknown quan¬ 
tity in an equation, it is made into something long familiar before any 
value* has been assigned. Nature, before and after quantum theory, is what 
can be registered mathematically; even what cannot be assimilated, the 
insoluble and irrational, is fenced in by mathematical theorems. In the 
preemptive identification of the thoroughly mathematized world with 
truth, enlightenment believes itself safe from the return of the mythical. It 
equates thought with mathematics. The latter is thereby cut loose, as it 
were, turned into an absolute authority. “An infinite world, in this case a 


The Concept of Enlightenment 19 


world of idealities, is conceived as one in which objects are not accessible 
individually to our cognition in an imperfect and accidental way but are 
attained by a rational, systematically unified method which finally ap¬ 
prehends each object—in an infinite progression—fully as its own in- 
itself. ... In Galileo’s mathematization of nature, nature itself is idealized 
on the model of the new mathematics. In modern terms, it becomes a 
mathematical manifold.” 30 Thought is reified as an autonomous, auto¬ 
matic process, aping the machine it has itself produced, so that it can final¬ 
ly be replaced by the machine. Enlightenment 31 pushed aside the classical 
demand to “think thinking”—Fichte’s philosophy is its radical fulfill¬ 
ment—because it distracted philosophers from the command to control 
praxis, which Fichte himself had wanted to enforce. Mathematical proce¬ 
dure became a kind of ritual of thought. Despite its axiomatic self-limita¬ 
tion, it installed itself as necessary and objective: mathematics made 
thought into a thing—a tool, to use its own term. Through this mimesis, 
however, in which thought makes the world resemble itself, the actual has 
become so much the only concern that even the denial of God falls under 
the same judgment as metaphysics. For positivism, which has assumed the 
judicial office of enlightened reason, to speculate about intelligible worlds 
is no longer merely forbidden but senseless prattle. Positivism—fortu¬ 
nately for it—does not need to be atheistic, since objectified thought can¬ 
not even pose the question of the existence of God. The positivist sensor 
turns a blind eye to official worship, as a special, knowledge-free zone of 
social activity, just as willingly as to art—but never to denial, even when 
it has a claim to be knowledge. For the scientific temper, any deviation of 
thought from the business of manipulating the actual, any stepping out¬ 
side the jurisdiction of existence, is no less senseless and self-destructive 
than it would be for the magician to step outside the magic circle drawn 
for his incantation; and in both cases violation of the taboo carries a heavy 
price for the offender. The mastery of nature draws the circle in which the 
critique of pure reason holds thought spellbound. Kant combined the 
doctrine of thought’s restlessly toilsome progress toward infinity with 
insistence on its insufficiency and eternal limitation. The wisdom he 
imparted is oracular: There is no being in the world that knowledge can¬ 
not penetrate, but what can be penetrated by knowledge is not being. 
Philosophical judgment, according to Kant, aims at the new yet recognizes 
nothing new, since it always merely repeats what reason has placed into 


20 The Concept of Enlightenment 


objects beforehand. However, this thought, protected within the depart¬ 
ments of science from the dreams of a spirit-seer,* has to pay the price: 
world domination over nature turns against the thinking subject itself; 
nothing is left of it except that ever-unchanging “I think,” which must 
accompany all my conceptions. Both subject and object are nullified. The 
abstract self, which alone confers the legal right to record and systematize, 
is confronted by nothing but abstract material, which has no other prop¬ 
erty than to be the substrate of that right. The equation of mind and world 
is finally resolved, but only in the sense that both sides cancel out. The 
reduction of thought to a mathematical apparatus condemns the world to 
be its own measure. What appears as the triumph of subjectivity, the sub¬ 
jection of all existing things to logical formalism, is bought with the obe¬ 
dient subordination of reason to what is immediately at hand. To grasp 
existing things as such, not merely to note their abstract spatial-temporal 
relationships, by which they can then be seized, but, on the contrary, to 
think of them as surface, as mediated conceptual moments which are only 
fulfilled by revealing their social, historical, and human meaning—this 
whole aspiration of knowledge is abandoned. Knowledge does not consist 
in mere perception, classification, and calculation but precisely in the 
determining negation of whatever is directly at hand. Instead of such 
negation, mathematical formalism, whose medium, number, is the most 
abstract form of the immediate, arrests thought at mere immediacy. The 
actual is validated, knowledge confines itself to repeating it, thought 
makes itself mere tautology. The more completely the machinery of 
thought subjugates existence, the more blindly it is satisfied with repro¬ 
ducing it. Enlightenment thereby regresses to the mythology it has never 
been able to escape. For mythology had reflected in its forms the essence 
of the existing order—cyclical motion, fate, domination of the world as 
truth—and had renounced hope. In the terseness of the mythical image, 
as in the clarity of the scientific formula, the eternity of the actual is con¬ 
firmed and mere existence is pronounced as the meaning it obstructs. The 
world as a gigantic analytical judgment, the only surviving dream of sci¬ 
ence, is of the same kind as the cosmic myth which linked the alternation 
of spring and autumn to the abduction of Persephone. The uniqueness of 
the mythical event, which was intended to legitimize the factual one, is a 
deception. Originally, the rape of the goddess was directly equated with 
the dying of nature. It was repeated each autumn, and even the repetition 


The Concept of Enlightenment 


21 


was not a succession of separate events, but the same one each time. With 
the consolidation of temporal consciousness the process was fixed as a 
unique event in the past, and ritual assuagement of the terror of death in 
each new cycle of seasons was sought in the recourse to the distant past. 
But such separation is powerless. The postulation of the single past event 
endows the cycle with a quality of inevitability, and the terror radiating 
from the ancient event spreads over the whole process as its mere repeti¬ 
tion. The subsumption of the actual, whether under mythical prehistory 
or under mathematical formalism, the symbolic relating of the present to 
the mythical event in the rite or to the abstract category in science, makes 
the new appear as something predetermined which therefore is really the 
old. It is not existence that is without hope, but knowledge which appro¬ 
priates and perpetuates existence as a schema in the pictorial or mathe¬ 
matical symbol. 

In the enlightened world, mythology has permeated the sphere of 
the profane. Existence, thoroughly cleansed of demons and their concep¬ 
tual descendants, takes on, in its gleaming naturalness, the numinous 
character which former ages attributed to demons. Justified in the guise of 
brutal facts as something eternally immune to intervention, the social 
injustice from which those facts arise is as sacrosanct today as the medicine 
man once was under the protection of his gods. Not only is domination 
paid for with the estrangement of human beings from the dominated 
objects, but the relationships of human beings, including the relationship 
of individuals to themselves, have themselves been bewitched by the 
objectification of mind. Individuals shrink to the nodal points of conven¬ 
tional reactions and the modes of operation objectively expected of them. 
Animism had endowed things with souls; industrialism makes souls into 
things.* On its own account, even in advance of total planning, the eco¬ 
nomic apparatus endows commodities with the values which decide the 
behavior of people. Since, with the ending of free exchange, commodities 
have forfeited all economic qualities except their fetish character, this char¬ 
acter has spread like a cataract across the life of society in all its aspects. 
The countless agencies of mass production and its culture* impress stan¬ 
dardized behavior on the individual as the only natural, decent, and ratio¬ 
nal one. Individuals define themselves now only as things, statistical ele¬ 
ments, successes or failures. Their criterion is self-preservation, successful 
or unsuccessful adaptation to the objectivity of their function and the 


22 The Concept of Enlightenment 


schemata assigned to it. Everything which is different, from the idea to 
criminality, is exposed to the force of the collective, which keeps watch 
from the classroom to the trade union. Yet even the threatening collective 
is merely a part of the deceptive surface, beneath which are concealed the 
powers which manipulate the collective as an agent of violence. Its brutal¬ 
ity, which keeps the individual up to the mark, no more represents the true 
quality of people than value* represents that of commodities. The demon¬ 
ically distorted form which things and human beings have taken on in the 
clear light of unprejudiced knowledge points back to domination, to the 
principle which already imparted the qualities of mana to spirits and 
deities and trapped the human gaze in the fakery of sorcerers and medi¬ 
cine men. The fatalism by which incomprehensible death was sanctioned 
in primeval times has now passed over into utterly comprehensible life. 
The noonday panic fear in which nature suddenly appeared to humans as 
an all-encompassing power has found its counterpart in the panic which 
is ready to break out at any moment today: human beings expect the 
world, which is without issue, to be set ablaze by a universal power which 
they themselves are and over which they are powerless. 

Enlightenment’s mythic terror springs from a horror of myth. It 
detects myth not only in semantically unclarified concepts and words, as 
linguistic criticism imagines, but in any human utterance which has no 
place in the functional context of self-preservation. Spinoza’s proposition: 
“the endeavor of preserving oneself is the first and only basis of virtue,” 32 
contains the true maxim of all Western civilization, in which the religious 
and philosophical differences of the bourgeoisie are laid to rest. The self 
which, after the methodical extirpation of all natural traces as mythologi¬ 
cal, was no longer supposed to be either a body or blood or a soul or even 
a natural ego but was sublimated into a transcendental or logical subject, 
formed the reference point of reason, the legislating authority of action. In 
the judgment of enlightenment as of Protestantism, those who entrust 
themselves directly to life, without any rational reference to self-preserva¬ 
tion, revert to the realm of prehistory. Impulse as such, according to this 
view, is as mythical as superstition, and worship of any God not postulat¬ 
ed by the self, as aberrant as drunkenness. For both—worship and self¬ 
immersion in immediate natural existence—progress holds the same fate 
in store. It has anathematized the self-forgetfulness both of thought and of 


The Concept of Enlightenment 23 


pleasure. In the bourgeois economy the social work of each individual is 
mediated by the principle of the self; for some this labor is supposed to 
yield increased capital, for others the strength for extra work. But the more 
heavily the process of self-preservation is based on the bourgeois division 
of labor, the more it enforces the self-alienation of individuals, who must 
mold themselves to the technical apparatus body and soul. Enlightened 
thinking has an answer for this, too: finally, the transcendental subject of 
knowledge, as the last reminder of subjectivity, is itself seemingly abol¬ 
ished and replaced by the operations of the automatic mechanisms of 
order, which therefore run all the more smoothly. Subjectivity has 
volatilized itself into the logic of supposedly optional rules, to gain more 
absolute control. Positivism, which finally did not shrink from laying 
hands on the idlest fancy of all, thought itself, eliminated the last inter¬ 
vening agency between individual action and the social norm. The tech¬ 
nical process, to which the subject has been reified after the eradication of 
that process from consciousness, is as free from the ambiguous meanings 
of mythical thought as from meaning altogether, since reason itself has 
become merely an aid to the all-encompassing economic apparatus.* 
Reason serves as a universal tool for the fabrication of all other tools, rigid¬ 
ly purpose-directed and as calamitous as the precisely calculated opera¬ 
tions of material production, the results of which for human beings escape 
all calculation. Reason’s old ambition to be purely an instrument of pur¬ 
poses has finally been fulfilled. The exclusivity of logical laws stems from 
this obdurate adherence to function and ultimately from the compulsive 
character of self-preservation. The latter is constantly magnified into the 
choice between survival and doom, a choice which is reflected even in the 
principle that, of two contradictory propositions, only one can be true and 
the other false. The formalism of this principle and the entire logic estab¬ 
lished around it stem from the opacity and entanglement of interests in a 
society in which the maintenance of forms and the preservation of indi¬ 
viduals only fortuitously coincide. The expulsion of thought from logic 
ratifies in the lecture hall the reification of human beings in factory and 
office. In this way the taboo encroaches on the power imposing it, enlight¬ 
enment on mind, which it itself is. But nature as true self-preservation is 
thereby unleashed, in the individual as in the collective fate of crisis and 
war, by the process which promised to extirpate it. If unitary knowledge* 
is the only norm which theory has left, praxis must be handed over to the 


24 The Concept of Enlightenment 


unfettered operations of world history. The self, entirely encompassed by 
civilization, is dissolved in an element composed of the very inhumanity 
which civilization has sought from the first to escape. The oldest fear, that 
of losing one’s own name, is being fulfilled. For civilization, purely natural 
existence, both animal and vegetative, was the absolute danger. Mimetic, 
mythical, and metaphysical forms of behavior were successively regarded 
as stages of world history which had been left behind, and the idea of 
reverting to them held the terror that the self would be changed back into 
the mere nature from which it had extricated itself with unspeakable exer¬ 
tions and which for that reason filled it with unspeakable dread. Over the 
millennia the living memory of prehistory, of its nomadic period and even 
more of the truly prepatriarchal stages, has been expunged from human 
consciousness with the most terrible punishments. The enlightened spirit 
replaced fire and the wheel by the stigma it attached to all irrationality, 
which led to perdition. Its hedonism was moderate, extremes being no less 
repugnant to enlightenment than to Aristotle. The bourgeois ideal of nat¬ 
uralness is based not on amorphous nature but on the virtue of the mid¬ 
dle way. For this ideal, promiscuity and asceticism, superfluity and hunger, 
although opposites, are directly identical as powers of disintegration. By 
subordinating life in its entirety to the requirements of its preservation, the 
controlling minority guarantees, with its own security, the continuation of 
the whole. From Flomer to modernity the ruling spirit has sought to steer 
between the Scylla of relapse into simple reproduction and the Charybdis 
of unfettered fulfillment; from the first it has mistrusted any guiding star 
other than the lesser evil. The German neopagans and administrators of 
war fever want to reinstate pleasure.* But since, under the work-pressure 
of the millennium now ending, pleasure has learned to hate itself, in its 
totalitarian emancipation it remains mean and mutilated through self¬ 
contempt.* It is still in the grip of the self-preservation inculcated in it by 
the reason which has now been deposed. At the turning points of Western 
civilization, whenever new peoples and classes have more heavily repressed 
myth, from the beginnings of the Olympian religion to the Renaissance, 
the Reformation, and bourgeois atheism, the fear of unsubdued, threaten¬ 
ing nature—a fear resulting from nature’s very materialization and objec¬ 
tification—has been belittled as animist superstition, and the control of 
internal and external nature has been made the absolute purpose of life. 
Now that self-preservation has been finally automated, reason is dismissed 


The Concept of Enlightenment 25 


by those who, as controllers of production, have taken over its inheritance 
and fear it in the disinherited. The essence of enlightenment is the choice 
between alternatives, and the inescapability of this choice is that of power. 
Human beings have always had to choose between their subjugation to 
nature and its subjugation to the self. With the spread of the bourgeois 
commodity economy the dark horizon of myth is illuminated by the sun 
of calculating reason, beneath whose icy rays the seeds of the new bar¬ 
barism are germinating. Under the compulsion of power, human labor has 
always led away from myth and, under power, has always fallen back 
under its spell. 

The intertwinement of myth, power, and labor is preserved in one 
of the tales of Homer. Book XII of the Odyssey tells how Odysseus sailed 
past the Sirens. Their allurement is that of losing oneself in the past. But 
the hero exposed to it has come of age in suffering. In the multitude of 
mortal dangers which he has had to endure, the unity of his own life, the 
identity of the person, have been hardened. The realms of time have been 
separated for him like water, earth, and air. The tide of what has been has 
receded from the rock of the present, and the future lies veiled in cloud on 
the horizon. What Odysseus has left behind him has passed into the world 
of shades: so close is the self to the primeval myth from whose embrace it 
has wrested itself that its own lived past becomes a mythical prehistory. It 
seeks to combat this by a fixed order of time. The tripartite division is 
intended to liberate the present moment from the power of the past by 
banishing the latter beyond the absolute boundary of the irrecoverable and 
placing it, as usable knowledge, in the service of the present. The urge to 
rescue the past as something living, instead of using it as the material of 
progress, has been satisfied only in art, in which even history, as a repre¬ 
sentation of past life, is included. As long as art does not insist on being 
treated as knowledge, and thus exclude itself from praxis, it is tolerated by 
social praxis in the same way as pleasure. But the Sirens’ song has not yet 
been deprived of power as art. They have knowledge “of all that has ever 
happened on this fruitful earth” 33 and especially of what has befallen 
Odysseus himself: “For we know all that the Argives and the Trojans suf¬ 
fered on the broad plain of Troy by the will of the gods.” 34 By directly 
invoking the recent past, and with the irresistible promise of pleasure 
which their song contains, the Sirens threaten the patriarchal order, which 
gives each person back their life only in exchange for their full measure of 


2 6 The Concept of Enlightenment 


time. When only unfailing presence of mind wrests survival from nature, 
anyone who follows the Sirens’ phantasmagoria is lost. If the Sirens know 
everything that has happened, they demand the future as its price, and 
their promise of a happy homecoming is the deception by which the past 
entraps a humanity filled with longing. Odysseus has been warned by 
Circe, the divinity of regression to animal form, whom he has withstood 
and who therefore gives him the strength to withstand other powers of dis¬ 
solution. But the lure of the Sirens remains overpowering. No one who 
hears their song can escape. Humanity had to inflict terrible injuries on 
itself before the self—the identical, purpose-directed, masculine character 
of human beings—was created, and something of this process is repeated 
in every childhood. The effort to hold itself together attends the ego at all 
its stages, and the temptation to be rid of the ego has always gone hand- 
in-hand with the blind determination to preserve it. Narcotic intoxication, 
in which the euphoric suspension of the self is expiated by deathlike sleep, 
is one of the oldest social transactions mediating between self-preservation 
and self-annihilation, an attempt by the self to survive itself. The fear of 
losing the self, and suspending with it the boundary between oneself and 
other life, the aversion to death and destruction, is twinned with a promise 
of joy which has threatened civilization at every moment. The way of civ¬ 
ilization has been that of obedience and work, over which fulfillment 
shines everlastingly as mere illusion, as beauty deprived of power. 
Odysseus’s idea, equally inimical to his death and to his happiness, shows 
awareness of this. He knows only two possibilities of escape. One he pre¬ 
scribes to his comrades. He plugs their ears with wax and orders them to 
row with all their might. Anyone who wishes to survive must not listen to 
the temptation of the irrecoverable, and is unable to listen only if he is 
unable to hear. Society has always made sure that this was the case. Work¬ 
ers must look ahead with alert concentration and ignore anything which 
lies to one side. The urge toward distraction must be grimly sublimated in 
redoubled exertions. Thus the workers are made practical. The other pos¬ 
sibility Odysseus chooses for himself, the landowner, who has others to 
work for him. He listens, but does so while bound helplessly to the mast, 
and the stronger the allurement grows the more tightly he has himself 
bound, just as later the bourgeois denied themselves happiness the closer 
it drew to them with the increase in their own power. What he hears has 
no consequences for him; he can signal to his men to untie him only by 



The Concept of Enlightenment 27 


movements of his head, but it is too late. His comrades, who themselves 
cannot hear, know only of the danger of the song, not of its beauty, and 
leave him tied to the mast to save both him and themselves. They repro¬ 
duce the life of the oppressor as a part of their own, while he cannot step 
outside his social role. The bonds by which he has irrevocably fettered 
himself to praxis at the same time keep the Sirens at a distance from prax¬ 
is: their lure is neutralized as a mere object of contemplation, as art. The 
fettered man listens to a concert, as immobilized as audiences later, and his 
enthusiastic call for liberation goes unheard as applause. In this way the 
enjoyment of art and manual work diverge as the primeval world is left 
behind. The epic already contains the correct theory. Between the cultur¬ 
al heritage and enforced work there is a precise correlation, and both are 
founded on the inescapable compulsion toward the social control of 
nature. 

Measures like those taken on Odysseus’s ship in face of the Sirens are 
a prescient allegory of the dialectic of enlightenment. Just as the capacity 
to be represented is the measure of power, the mightiest person being the 
one who can be represented in the most functions, so it is also the vehicle 
of both progress and regression. Under the given conditions, exclusion 
from work means mutilation, not only for the unemployed but also for 
people at the opposite social pole. Those at the top experience the exis¬ 
tence with which they no longer need to concern themselves as a mere 
substrate, and are wholly ossified as the self which issues commands. Prim¬ 
itive man experienced the natural thing only as the fugitive object of 
desire, “but the lord, who has interposed the bondsman between it and 
himself, takes to himself only the dependent aspect of the thing and has 
the pure enjoyment of it. The aspect of its independence he leaves to the 
bondsman, who works on it.” 35 Odysseus is represented in the sphere of 
work. Just as he cannot give way to the lure of self-abandonment, as owner 
he also forfeits participation in work and finally even control over it, while 
his companions, despite their closeness to things, cannot enjoy their work 
because it is performed under compulsion, in despair, with their senses 
forcibly stopped. The servant is subjugated in body and soul, the master 
regresses. No system of domination has so far been able to escape this 
price, and the circularity of history in its progress is explained in part by 
this debilitation, which is the concomitant of power. Humanity, whose 
skills and knowledge become differentiated with the division of labor, is 


28 The Concept of Enlightenment 


thereby forced back to more primitive anthropological stages, since, with 
the technical facilitation of existence, the continuance of domination de¬ 
mands the fixation of instincts by greater repression. Fantasy withers. The 
calamity is not that individuals have fallen behind society or its material 
production. Where the development of the machine has become that of 
the machinery of control, so that technical and social tendencies, always 
intertwined, converge in the total encompassing of human beings, those 
who have lagged behind represent not only untruth. Adaptation to the 
power of progress furthers the progress of power, constantly renewing the 
degenerations which prove successful progress, not failed progress, to be 
its own antithesis. The curse of irresistible progress is irresistible regres¬ 
sion. 

This regression is not confined to the experience of the sensuous 
world, an experience tied to physical proximity, but also affects the auto¬ 
cratic intellect, which detaches itself from sensuous experience in order to 
subjugate it. The standardization of the intellectual function through 
which the mastery of the senses is accomplished, the acquiescence of 
thought to the production of unanimity, implies an impoverishment of 
thought no less than of experience; the separation of the two realms leaves 
both damaged. A consequence of the restriction of thought to organiza¬ 
tion and administration, rehearsed by the those in charge from artful 
Odysseus to artless chairmen of the board, is the stupidity which afflicts 
the great as soon as they have to perform tasks other than the manipula¬ 
tion of the small. Mind becomes in reality the instrument of power and 
self-mastery for which bourgeois philosophy has always mistaken it. The 
deafness which has continued to afflict the submissive proletarians since 
the myth is matched by the immobility of those in command. The over¬ 
ripeness of society lives on the immaturity of the ruled. The more com¬ 
plex and sensitive the social, economic, and scientific mechanism, to the 
operation of which the system of production has long since attuned the 
body, the more impoverished are the experiences of which the body is 
capable. The elimination of qualities, their conversion into functions, is 
transferred by rationalized modes of work to the human capacity for expe¬ 
rience, which tends to revert to that of amphibians. The regression of the 
masses today lies in their inability to hear with their own ears what has not 
already been heard, to touch with their hands what has not previously 
been grasped; it is the new form of blindness which supersedes that of van- 


The Concept of Enlightenment 29 


quished myth. Through the mediation of the total society, which encom¬ 
passes all relationships and impulses, human beings are being turned back 
into precisely what the developmental law of society, the principle of the 
self, had opposed: mere examples of the species, identical to one another 
through isolation within the compulsively controlled collectivity. The 
rowers, unable to speak to one another, are all harnessed to the same 
rhythms, like modern workers in factories, cinemas, and the collective. It 
is the concrete conditions of work in society* which enforce conform¬ 
ism—not the conscious influences which additionally render the op¬ 
pressed stupid and deflect them from the truth. The powerlessness of the 
workers is not merely a ruse of the rulers but the logical consequence of 
industrial society, into which the efforts to escape it have finally trans¬ 
formed the ancient concept of fate. 

This logical necessity, however, is not conclusive. It remains tied to 
domination, as both its reflection and its tool. Its truth, therefore, is no less 
questionable than its evidence is inescapable. Thought, however, has 
always been equal to the task of concretely demonstrating its own equiv¬ 
ocal nature. It is the servant which the master cannot control at will. 
Domination, in becoming reified as law and organization, first when 
humans formed settlements and later in the commodity economy, has had 
to limit itself. The instrument is becoming autonomous: independently of 
the will of the rulers,* the mediating agency of mind moderates the imme¬ 
diacy of economic injustice.* The instruments of power—language, 
weapons, and finally machines—which are intended to hold everyone in 
their grasp, must in their turn be grasped by everyone. In this way, the 
moment of rationality in domination also asserts itself as something dif¬ 
ferent from it. The thing-like quality of the means, which makes the 
means universally available, its “objective validity” for everyone, itself 
implies a criticism of the domination from which thought has arisen as its 
means. On the way from mythology to logistics, thought has lost the ele¬ 
ment of reflection on itself, and machinery mutilates people today, even if 
it also feeds them. In the form of machines, however, alienated reason is 
moving toward a society which reconciles thought, in its solidification as 
an apparatus both material and intellectual, with a liberated living ele¬ 
ment, and relates it to society itself as its true subject. The particularist 
origin and the universal perspective of thought have always been insepa¬ 
rable. Today, with the transformation of the world into industry, the per- 


30 The Concept of Enlightenment 


spective of rhe universal, the social realization of thought, is so fully open 
to view that thought is repudiated by the rulers themselves as mere ideol¬ 
ogy. It is a telltale manifestation of the bad conscience of the cliques in 
whom economic necessity is finally embodied* that its revelations, from 
the “intuitions” of the Fuhrer to the “dynamic worldview,” no longer 
acknowledge their own atrocities as necessary consequences of logical reg¬ 
ularities, in resolute contrast to earlier bourgeois apologetics. The mytho¬ 
logical lies about “mission” and “fate”* which they use instead do not even 
express a complete untruth: it is no longer the objective laws of the mar¬ 
ket which govern the actions of industrialists and drive humanity toward 
catastrophe. Rather, the conscious decisions of the company chairmen* 
execute capitalism’s old law of value, and thus its fate, as resultants no less 
compulsive than the blindest price mechanisms. The rulers themselves do 
not believe in objective necessity, even if they sometimes call their machi¬ 
nations by that name. They posture as engineers of world history. Only 
their subjects accept the existing development, which renders them a 
degree more powerless with each prescribed increase in their standard of 
living, as inviolably necessary. Now that the livelihood of those still* need¬ 
ed to operate the machines can be provided with a minimal part of the 
working time which the masters of society have at their disposal, the 
superfluous remainder, the overwhelming mass of the population, are 
trained as additional guards of the system, so that they can be used today 
and tomorrow as material for its grand designs. They are kept alive as an 
army of unemployed. Their reduction to mere objects of administration, 
which preforms every department of modern life right down to language 
and perception, conjures up an illusion of objective necessity before which 
they believe themselves powerless. Poverty* as the antithesis between 
power and impotence is growing beyond measure, together with the 
capacity permanently to abolish poverty. From the commanding heights 
of the economy* to the latest professional rackets,* the tangled mass of 
cliques and institutions which ensures the indefinite continuation of the 
status quo is impenetrable to each individual. Even for a union boss, to say 
nothing of a manager, a proletarian is no more than a superfluous speci¬ 
men, should he catch his notice at all, while the union boss in turn must 
live in terror of his own liquidation. 

The absurdity of a state of affairs in which the power of the system 
over human beings increases with every step they take away from the 


The Concept of Enlightenment 31 


power of nature denounces the reason of the reasonable* society as obso¬ 
lete. That reason’s necessity is illusion, no less than the freedom of the 
industrialists, which reveals its ultimately compulsive nature in their 
inescapable struggles and pacts. This* illusion, in which utterly enlight¬ 
ened humanity is losing itself, cannot be dispelled by a thinking which, as 
an instrument of power, has to choose between command and obedience. 
Although unable to escape the entanglement in which it was trapped in 
prehistory, that thinking* is nevertheless capable of recognizing the logic 
of either/or, of consequence and antinomy, by means of which it emanci¬ 
pated itself radically from nature, as that same nature, unreconciled and 
self-estranged. Precisely by virtue of its irresistible logic, thought, in whose 
compulsive mechanism nature is reflected and perpetuated, also reflects 
itself as a nature oblivious of itself, as a mechanism of compulsion. Of 
course, mental representation is only an instrument. In thought, human 
beings distance themselves from nature in order to arrange it in such a way 
that it can be mastered. Like the material tool which, as a thing, is held 
fast as that thing in different situations and thereby separates the world, as 
something chaotic, multiple, and disparate, from that which is known, 
single, and identical, so the concept is the idea-tool which fits into things 
at the very point from which one can take hold of them. Thought thus 
becomes illusory whenever it seeks to deny its function of separating, dis¬ 
tancing, and objectifying. All mystical union remains a deception, the 
impotently inward trace of the forfeited revolution. But while enlighten¬ 
ment is right in opposing any hypostatization of utopia and in dispassion¬ 
ately denouncing power as division, the split between subject and object, 
which it will not allow to be bridged, becomes the index of the untruth 
both of itself and of truth.* The proscribing of superstition has always sig¬ 
nified not only the progress of domination but its exposure. Enlight¬ 
enment is more than enlightenment, it is nature made audible in its 
estrangement. In mind’s self-recognition as nature divided from itself, 
nature, as in prehistory, is calling to itself, but no longer directly by its sup¬ 
posed name, which, in the guise of mana, means omnipotence, but as 
something blind and mutilated. In the mastery of nature, without which 
mind does not exist, enslavement to nature persists. By modestly confess¬ 
ing itself to be power and thus being taken back into nature, mind rids 
itself of the very claim to mastery which had enslaved it to nature. 
Although humanity may be unable to interrupt its flight away from neces- 


32 The Concept of Enlightenment 


sity and into progress and civilization without forfeiting knowledge itself, 
at least it no longer mistakes the ramparts it has constructed against neces¬ 
sity, the institutions and practices of domination which have always 
rebounded against society from the subjugation of nature, for guarantors 
of the coming freedom. Each advance of civilization has renewed not only 
mastery but also the prospect of its alleviation. However, while real histo¬ 
ry is woven from real suffering, which certainly does not diminish in pro¬ 
portion to the increase in the means of abolishing it, the fulfillment of that 
prospect depends on the concept. For not only does the concept, as sci¬ 
ence, distance human beings from nature, but, as the self-reflection of 
thought—which, in the form of science, remains fettered to the blind eco¬ 
nomic tendency—it enables the distance which perpetuates injustice to be 
measured. Through this remembrance of nature within the subject, a 
remembrance which contains the unrecognized truth of all culture, 
enlightenment is opposed in principle to power, and even in the time of 
Yanini the call to hold back enlightenment was uttered less from fear of 
exact science than from hatred of licentious thought, which had escaped 
the spell of nature by confessing itself to be nature’s own dread of itself. 
The priests have always avenged mana on any exponent of enlightenment 
who propitiated mana by showing fear before the frightening entity which 
bore that name, and in their hubris the augurs of enlightenment were at 
one with the priests. Enlightenment in its bourgeois form had given itself 
up to its positivist moment long before Turgot and d’Alembert. It was 
never immune to confusing freedom with the business of self-preserva¬ 
tion. The suspension of the concept, whether done in the name of progress 
or of culture, which had both long since formed a secret alliance against 
truth, gave free rein to the lie. In a world which merely verified recorded 
evidence and preserved thought, debased to the achievement of great 
minds, as a kind of superannuated headline, the lie was no longer distin¬ 
guishable from a truth neutralized as cultural heritage. 

But to recognize power even within thought itself as unreconciled 
nature would be to relax the necessity which even socialism, in a conces¬ 
sion to reactionary common sense, prematurely confirmed as eternal.* In 
declaring necessity the sole basis of the future and banishing mind, in the 
best idealist fashion, to the far pinnacle of the superstructure, socialism 
clung all too desperately to the heritage of bourgeois philosophy. The rela¬ 
tionship of necessity to the realm of freedom was therefore treated as 


The Concept of Enlightenment 33 


merely quantitative, mechanical, while nature, posited as wholly alien, as 
in the earliest mythology, became totalitarian, absorbing socialism along 
with freedom. By sacrificing thought, which in its reified form as mathe¬ 
matics, machinery, organization, avenges itself on a humanity forgetful of 
it, enlightenment forfeited its own realization. By subjecting everything 
particular to its discipline, it left the uncomprehended whole free to re¬ 
bound as mastery over things against the life and consciousness of human 
beings. But a true praxis capable of overturning the status quo depends on 
theory’s refusal to yield to the oblivion in which society allows thought to 
ossify. It is not the material preconditions of fulfillment, unfettered tech¬ 
nology* as such, which make fulfillment uncertain. That is the argument 
of sociologists who are trying to devise yet another antidote, even a col¬ 
lectivist one, in order control that antidote. 36 The fault lies in a social con¬ 
text which induces blindness. The mythical scientific respect of peoples 
for the given reality, which they themselves constantly create, finally 
becomes itself a positive fact, a fortress before which even the revolution¬ 
ary imagination feels shamed as utopianism, and degenerates to a compli¬ 
ant trust in the objective tendency of history. As the instrument of this 
adaptation, as a mere assemblage of means, enlightenment is as destruc¬ 
tive as its Romantic enemies claim. It will only fulfill itself if it forswears 
its last complicity with them and dares to abolish the false absolute, the 
principle of blind power. The spirit of such unyielding theory would be 
able to turn back from its goal even the spirit of pitiless progress. Its her¬ 
ald, Bacon, dreamed of the many things “which kings with their treasure 
cannot buy, nor with their force command, [of which] their spials and 
intelligencers can give no news.”* Just as he wished, those things have been 
given to the bourgeois, the enlightened heirs of the kings. In multiplying 
violence through the mediation of the market, the bourgeois economy has 
also multiplied its things and its forces to the point where not merely kings 
or even the bourgeoisie are sufficient to administrate them: all human 
beings are needed. From the power of things they finally learn to forgo 
power. Enlightenment consummates and abolishes itself when the closest 
practical objectives reveal themselves to be the most distant goal already 
attained, and the lands of which “their spials and intelligencers can give no 
news”—that is, nature misunderstood by masterful science—are remem¬ 
bered as those of origin. Today, when Bacon’s utopia, in which “we should 
command nature in action,” has been fulfilled on a telluric scale, the 


34 The Concept of Enlightenment 


essence of the compulsion which he ascribed to unmastered nature is 
becoming apparent. It was power itself. Knowledge, in which, for Bacon, 
“the sovereignty of man” unquestionably lay hidden, can now devote itself 
to dissolving that power. But in face of this possibility enlightenment, in 
the service of the present, is turning itself into an outright deception of the 
masses. 


Excursus I: Odysseus or Myth and Enlightenment 


r 


Just as the story of the Sirens illustrates the intertwinement of myth 
and rational labor, the Odyssey as a whole bears witness to the dialectic of 
enlightenment. In its oldest stratum, especially, the epic shows dear links 
to myth: the adventures are drawn from popular tradition. But as the 
Homeric spirit takes over and “organizes” the myths, it comes into con¬ 
tradiction with them. The familiar equation of epic and myth, which in 
any case has been undermined by recent classical philology, proves whol¬ 
ly misleading when subjected to philosophical critique. The two concepts 
diverge. They mark two phases of an historical process, which are still vis¬ 
ible at the joints where editors have stitched the epic together. The 
Homeric discourse creates a universality of language, if it does not already 
presuppose it; it disintegrates the hierarchical order of society through the 
exoteric form of its depiction, even and especially when it glorifies that 
order. The celebration of the wrath of Achilles and the wanderings of 
Odysseus is already a nostalgic stylization of what can no longer be cel¬ 
ebrated; and the hero of the adventures turns out to be the prototype of 
the bourgeois individual, whose concept originates in the unwavering 
self-assertion of which the protagonist driven to wander the earth is the 
primeval model. Finally, the epic, which in terms of the philosophy of 
history is the counterpart of the novel, exhibits features reminiscent of 
that genre, and the venerable cosmos of the Homeric world, a world 
charged with meaning, reveals itself as an achievement of classifying rea- 




36 Excursus I 


son, which destroys myth by virtue of the same rational order which is 
used to reflect it. 

Understanding of the element of bourgeois enlightenment in 
Homer has been advanced by the German late-Romantic interpretation of 
antiquity based on the early writings of Nietzsche. Like few others since 
Hegel, Nietzsche recognized the dialectic of enlightenment. He formulat¬ 
ed the ambivalent relationship of enlightenment to power. Enlightenment 
must be “drummed into the people, so that the priests all turn into priests 
with a bad conscience—and likewise with the state. That is the task of 
enlightenment: to show up the pompous behavior of princes and states¬ 
men as a deliberate lie.” 1 However, enlightenment had always been a 
means employed by the “great artists of government (Confucius in China, 
the Roman Empire, Napoleon, the Papacy, when it was concerned with 
power and not just with the world) . . . The self-deception of the masses 
in this respect—for instance, in all democracies—is highly advantageous: 
making people small and governable is hailed as ‘progress’!” 2 As this 
twofold character of enlightenment emerged more clearly as a basic motif 
of history, its concept, that of advancing thought, was traced back to the 
beginning of recorded history. However, whereas Nietzsche’s attitude to 
enlightenment, and thus to Homer, remained ambivalent; whereas he per¬ 
ceived in enlightenment both the universal movement of sovereign mind, 
whose supreme exponent he believed himself to be, and a “nihilistic,” life- 
denying power, only the second moment was taken over by his pre-fascist 
followers and perverted into ideology. This ideology became a blind eulo¬ 
gy of blind life, which imposes a praxis by which everything living is sup¬ 
pressed. This is seen in the cultural fascists’ attitude to Homer. In the 
Homeric depiction of feudal conditions they detect a democratic element, 
brand the work a product of seafarers and traders, and condemn the 
Ionian epic for its of overly rational discourse and its communication of 
the commonplace. Nevertheless, the evil eye of these sympathizers with all 
seemingly immediate power, who reject mediation and “liberalism” of any 
degree, discerns an element of truth. Connections with reason, liberality, 
and middle-class qualities do indeed extend incomparably further back 
than is assumed by historians who date the concept of the burgher from 
the end of medieval feudalism. In identifying the burgher where earlier 
bourgeois humanism had imagined some pristine dawn of culture, which 
was taken to legitimize that humanism, the nco-Romantic reaction 



Odysseus or Myth and Enlightenment 37 


equates world history with enlightenment. The fashionable ideology, 
whose most urgent concern is to liquidate enlightenment, thus pays it 
involuntary homage. It is forced to acknowledge enlightened thinking 
even in the remotest past. For the bad conscience of present-day devotees 
of the archaic it is especially the earliest traces of enlightenment which 
threaten to unleash the process they seek to hold back, but which they 
themselves obliviously promote. 

But a recognition of Homer’s antimythological, enlightened charac¬ 
ter, his opposition to chthonic mythology, remains untrue because limit¬ 
ed. Rudolf Borchardt,* for example, the most prominent and therefore the 
most impotent of the esoteric apologists of German heavy industry, pre¬ 
maturely breaks off his analysis in the service of repressive ideology. He 
fails to perceive that the primal powers he extols themselves represent a 
stage of enlightenment. By indiscriminately denouncing the epic as a form 
of novel he overlooks what epic and myth actually have in common: 
power and exploitation. The ignoble qualities he condemns in the epic, 
mediation and circulation, are only a further development of the dubious 
nobility he idolizes in myth: naked force. The alleged authenticity of the 
archaic, with its principle of blood and sacrifice, is already tainted by the 
devious bad conscience of power characteristic of the “national regenera¬ 
tion” today, which uses primeval times for self-advertising. The original 
myth itself contains the moment of mendacity which triumphs in the 
fraudulent myth of fascism and which the latter imputes to enlighten¬ 
ment. But no work bears more eloquent witness to the intertwinement of 
enlightenment and myth than that of Homer, the basic text of European 
civilization. In Homer, epic and myth, form and subject matter do not 
simply diverge; they conduct an argument. The aesthetic dualism of the 
work gives evidence of the historical-philosophical tendency. “The 
Apollonian Homer is merely a continuation of the general human artistic 
process to which we owe individuation.” 3 

Myths are precipitated in the different strata of Homer’s subject mat¬ 
ter; but at the same time the reporting of them, the unity imposed on the 
diffuse legends, traces the path of the subject’s flight from the mythical 
powers. This is already true, in a profound sense, of the Iliad. The anger 
of the mythical son of a goddess against the rational* warrior king and 
organizer; the hero’s undisciplined inactivity; finally, the enlistment of the 
victorious, doomed hero in a cause which is national, Hellenic, and no 



38 Excursus I 


longer tribal, an allegiance mediated by mythic loyalty to his dead com¬ 
rade—all these reflect the intertwinement of history and prehistory. The 
same development is still more vividly present in the Odyssey , since it is 
closer in form to the picaresque novel. The contrast between the single sur¬ 
viving ego and the multiplicity of fate reflects the antithesis between 
enlightenment and myth. The hero’s peregrinations from Troy to Ithaca 
trace the path of the self through myths, a self infinitely weak in compar¬ 
ison to the force of nature and still in the process of formation as self-con¬ 
sciousness. The primeval world is secularized as the space he measures out; 
the old demons populate only the distant margins and islands of the civi¬ 
lized Mediterranean, retreating into the forms of rock and cave from 
which they had originally sprung in the face of primal dread. The adven¬ 
tures bestow names on each of these places, and the names give rise to a 
rational overview of space. The shipwrecked, tremulous navigator antici¬ 
pates the work of the compass. His powerlessness, leaving no part of the 
sea unknown, aims to undermine the ruling powers. But, in the eyes of 
the man who has thus come of age, the plain untruth of the myths, the 
fact that sea and earth are not actually populated by demons but are a 
magic delusion propagated by traditional popular religion, becomes some¬ 
thing merely “aberrant” in contrast to his unambiguous purpose of self- 
preservation, of returning to his homeland and fixed property. All the ad¬ 
ventures Odysseus survives are dangerous temptations deflecting the self 
from the path of its logic. Again and again he gives way to them, experi¬ 
menting like a novice incapable of learning—sometimes, indeed, out of 
foolish curiosity, like a mime insatiably trying out roles. “But where dan¬ 
ger threatens / That which saves from it also grows”:'* the knowledge which 
makes up his identity and enables him to survive has its substance in the 
experience of diversity, distraction, disintegration; the knowing survivor is 
also the man who exposes himself most daringly to the threat of death, 
thus gaining the hardness and the strength to live. That is the secret under¬ 
lying the conflict between epic and myth: the self does not exist simply in 
rigid antithesis to adventure but takes on its solidity only through this 
antithesis, and its unity through the very multiplicity which myth in its 
oneness denies.' 5 Odysseus, like the heroes of all true novels after him, 
throws himself away, so to speak, iii order to win himself; he achieves his 
estrangement from nature by abandoning himself to nature, trying his 
strength against it in all his adventures; ironically, it is implacable nature 



Odysseus or Myth and Enlightenment 39 


that he now commands, which triumphs on his return home as the im¬ 
placable judge, avenging the heritage of the very powers he has escaped. 
At the Homeric stage, the identity of the self is so much a function of the 
nonidentical, of dissociated, unarticulated myths, that it must derive itself 
from them. The element which shapes and organizes individuality inter¬ 
nally, time, is still so weak that the unity of the adventures remains an out¬ 
ward one, their sequence being formed by the spatial changes of scene, the 
succession of sites of local divinities on which the hero is flung by the 
storm. Whenever, at later historical stages, the self has again experienced 
such weakness, or narration has presupposed it in the reader, the manner 
of depicting life has slipped back into the form of successive adventures. 
Laboriously and revocably, in the image of the journey, historical time has 
detached itself frorp space, the irrevocable schema of all mythical time. 

The faculty by which the self survives adventures, throwing itself 
away in order to preserve itself, is cunning. The seafarer Odysseus outwits 
the natural deities as the civilized traveler was later to swindle savages, 
offering them colored beads for ivory. It is true that Odysseus is only occa¬ 
sionally seen bartering, when gifts of hospitality are given and received. In 
Homer the gift which accompanies hospitality falls midway between 
exchange and sacrifice. Like a sacrificial act it is intended to compensate 
for wrongfully spilled blood, whether of the stranger or of settlers defeat¬ 
ed by pirates, and represents an oath of truce. At the same time, however, 
the gift to the host anticipates the principle of equivalence: the host 
receives really or symbolically the equivalent value of the service he has 
performed, while the guest takes away provisions which, in principle, are 
intended to enable him to reach home. Even though the host receives no 
direct compensation for this, he can expect the same treatment to be given 
to him or his kinsmen one day: as a sacrifice to elemental deities the hos¬ 
pitality gift is at the same time a rudimentary insurance against them. The 
extensive but perilous nautical activities of the early Greeks were the prag¬ 
matic reason for the custom. Even Poseidon, Odysseus’s elemental foe, 
thinks in terms of equivalence, constantly complaining that the gifts 
received by Odysseus at the stations of his journey are worth more than his 
full share of the spoils of Troy would have been had he been allowed to 
carry it home without hindrance from Poseidon. And in Homer this kind 
of rationalization can be traced back to the sacrificial acts themselves. 
Hecatombs of a certain size are intended to secure the goodwill of partic- 



40 Excursus I 


ular deities. If exchange represents the secularization of sacrifice, the sacri¬ 
fice itself, like the magic schema of rational exchange, appears as a human 
contrivance intended to control the gods, who are overthrown precisely by 
the system created to honor them. 6 

The moment of fraud in sacrifice is the prototype of Odyssean cun¬ 
ning, just as many of Odysseus’s ruses are wrapped up, as it were, in an 
offering to natural deities. 7 The deities are duped not only by the hero but 
also by the solar gods. Odysseus’s Olympian friends take advantage of 
Poseidon’s sojourn among the Ethiopians, the backwoodsmen who still 
worship him and offer him bloody sacrifices, in order to escort Odysseus 
in safety. Even the sacrifice which Poseidon is glad to accept involves 
deception: the amorphous sea-god’s confinement to a certain locality, the 
sacred precinct, also restricts his power, and in exchange for sating himself 
on Ethiopian oxen he is denied the opportunity to cool his temper on 
Odysseus. All sacrificial acts, deliberately planned by humans, deceive the 
god for whom they are performed: by imposing on him the primacy of 
human purposes they dissolve away his power, and the fraud against him 
passes over seamlessly into that perpetrated by unbelieving priests against 
believing congregations. Cunning originates in the cult. Odysseus himself 
acts as both victim and priest. By calculating the risk he incurs as victim, 
he is able to negate the power to which the risk exposes him. By such bar¬ 
gaining he retrieves the life he has staked. However, deception, cunning, 
and rationality do not form a simple antithesis to the archaism of sacrifice. 
Only the moment of fraud in sacrifice, perhaps the innermost reason for 
the illusory character of myth, is raised to self-consciousness through 
Odysseus. The awareness that the symbolic communication with the deity 
through sacrifice was not real must have been age-old. The representative 
character of sacrifice, glorified by fashionable irrationalists, cannot be sep¬ 
arated from the deification of the sacrificial victim, from the fraudulent 
priestly rationalization of murder through the apotheosis of the chosen 
victim. Something of this fraud, which elevates the perishable person as 
bearer of the divine substance, has always been detectable in the ego, 
which owes its existence to the sacrifice of the present moment to the 
future. Its substance is as illusory as the immortality of the slaughtered vic¬ 
tim. Not without reason was Odysseus regarded by many as a deity.* 

1 -oV as long as individuals are sacrificed, for as long as the sacrifice 
comains the antithesis between collective and individuaj, deception is 



Odysseus or Myth and Enlightenment 41 


objectively implicit in it. If the belief in the representative character of sac¬ 
rifice springs from recollection of the nonoriginal quality of the self, from 
its emergence through the history of domination, at the same time, in rela¬ 
tion to the fully developed self, this belief becomes untruth: the self is pre¬ 
cisely the human being to whom the magic power of representation is no 
longer attributed. The formation of the self severs the fluctuating connec¬ 
tion with nature which the sacrifice of the self is supposed to establish. 
Each sacrifice is a restoration of the past, and is given the lie by the his¬ 
torical reality in which it is performed. The venerable belief in sacrifice is 
probably itself a behavior pattern drilled into the subjugated, by which 
they reenact against themselves the wrong done to them in order to be able 
to bear it. Sacrifice as representative restoration does not reinstate imme¬ 
diate communication, which had been merely interrupted, as present-day 
mythologies claim; rather, the institution of sacrifice is itself the mark of 
an historical catastrophe, an act of violence done equally to human beings 
and to nature. Cunning is nothing other than the subjective continuation 
of the objective untruth of sacrifice, which it supersedes. That untruth 
may not have been always only untruth. At one stage 8 of prehistory sacri¬ 
fices may have possessed a kind of bloody rationality, which even then, 
however, could hardly have been separated from the thirst for privilege. 
The theory of sacrifice prevalent today relates it to the idea of a collective 
body, the tribe, into which the spilled blood of the tribe’s sacrificed mem¬ 
ber is supposed to flow back. While totemism was an ideology even in its 
own time, it nevertheless marks a real state in which the dominant reason 
required sacrificial victims. It is a state of archaic shortage* in which 
human sacrifice can hardly be distinguished from cannibalism. At some 
times the numerically increased collective can keep itself alive only by con¬ 
suming human flesh; perhaps, in some ethnic and social groups, pleasure 
was linked in some way to cannibalism, a link to which only the aversion 
to human flesh now bears witness. Customs from later times, such as the 
ver sacrum, whereby a whole age-group ofyoung men was forced into exile 
with accompanying rites at times of hunger, bear clear traces of such bar¬ 
baric, idealized rationality. Long before the emergence of mythical popu¬ 
lar religions, that rationality must have revealed itself as illusory; as sys¬ 
tematic hunting provided the tribe with enough animals to make devour¬ 
ing its own members superfluous, it must have been the medicine men 
who deluded the shrewd hunters and trappers into believing that people 



42 Excursus I 


still needed to be consumed. 9 The magic, collective interpretation of sac¬ 
rifice, which entirely denies the rationality of sacrifice, is its rationaliza¬ 
tion; but the straightforward assumption of enlightened thinking that 
what today is ideology may once have been truth is too uncritical: 10 the 
newest ideologies are a mere reprise of the oldest, which long antedate 1 
those hitherto known, in the same way as the development of the class 
society refutes the previously sanctioned ideologies. The frequently cited 
irrationality of sacrifice is no more than an expression of the fact that the 
praxis of sacrifice outlasted its rational necessity, which was replaced by 
particular interests. This split between the rational and the irrational 
aspects of sacrifice gave cunning a point at which to take hold. 
Demythologization always takes the form of the irresistible revelation of 
the futility and the superfluity of sacrifices. 

If the principle of sacrifice was proved transient by its irrationality, 
at the same time it survives through its rationality. This rationality has 
transformed itself, not disappeared. The self wrests itself from dissolution 
in blind nature, whose claims are constantly reasserted by sacrifice. But it 
still remains trapped in the context of the natural, one living thing seek¬ 
ing to overcome another. Bargaining one’s way out of sacrifice by means 
of self-preserving rationality is a form of exchange no less than was sacri¬ 
fice itself. The identical, enduring self which springs from the conquest of 
sacrifice is itself the product of a hard, petrified sacrificial ritual in which 
the human being, by opposing its consciousness to its natural context, cel¬ 
ebrates itself. That much is true of the famous stoky in Nordic mythology 
according to which Odin was hung from a tree as a sacrifice to himself, 
and of Klages’s thesis that every sacrifice is a sacrifice of the god to the god, 
as is still apparent in Christology, the monotheistic disguise of myth. 11 The 
difference is that the stratum of mythology in which the self manifests 
itself as a sacrifice to itself expresses not so much the original conception 
of popular religions as the absorption of myth into civilization. In class 
society, the self’s hostility to sacrifice included a sacrifice of the self, since 
it was paid for by a denial of nature in the human being for the sake of 
mastery over extrahuman nature and over other human beings. This very 
denial, the core of all civilizing rationality, is the germ cell of proliferating 
mythical irrationality: with the denial of nature in human beings, not only 
the teios of the external mastery of nature but also the telos of one’s own 
lile becomes confused and opaque. At the moment when human beings 



Odysseus or Myth and Enlightenment 43 


cut themselves off from the consciousness of themselves as nature, all the 
purposes for which they keep themselves alive—social progress, the 
heightening of material and intellectual forces, indeed, consciousness 
itself—become void, and the enthronement of the means as the end, 
which in late capitalism is taking on the character of overt madness, is 
already detectable in the earliest history of subjectivity: The human being’s 
mastery of itself, on which the self is founded, practically always involves 
the annihilation of the subject in whose service that mastery is maintained, 
because the substance which is mastered, suppressed, and disintegrated by 
self-preservation is nothing other than the living entity, of which the 
achievements of self-preservation can only be defined as functions—in 
other words, self-preservation destroys the very thing which is to be pre¬ 
served. The antireason of totalitarian capitalism, whose technique of satis¬ 
fying needs, in their objectified form determined by domination, makes 
the satisfaction of needs impossible and tends toward the extermination of 
humanity—this antireason appears prototypically in the hero who escapes 
the sacrifice by sacrificing himself. The history of civilization is the histo¬ 
ry of the introversion of sacrifice—in other words, the history of renunci¬ 
ation. All who renounce give away more of their life than is given back to 
them, more than the life they preserve. This process unfolds within the 
framework of wrong society. In that society everyone is one too many, and 
is cheated. But society’s predicament* is that the person who escaped the 
universal, unequal, and unjust exchange, who did not renounce but 
immediately seized the undiminished whole, would thereby lose every¬ 
thing, even the meager residue of oneself granted by self-preservation. All 
the superfluous sacrifices are needed: against sacrifice. Even Odysseus is a 
sacrificial victim, the self which incessantly suppresses its impulses, 12 and 
thus he lets slip his own life, that he saves only to recall it as a path of error. 
Nevertheless, he is sacrificed, also, for the abolition of sacrifice. His lordly 
renunciation, as a struggle with myth, is representative of a society which 
no longer needs renunciation and domination—which masters itself not 
in order to do violence to itself and others but for the sake of reconcil¬ 
iation. 

The transformation of the sacrificial victim into subjectivity is done 
under the aegis of the same cunning which always had its share in sacri¬ 
fice. In the untruth of guile the deception inherent in sacrifice becomes an 
element of character; it becomes the mutilation of the cheat [Ver- 



^14 Excursus I 


schlngener ], whose shifty look still cowers from the blows [Schlage] self- 
preservation has brought down on him. This look expresses the relation of 
mind to physical strength. The bearer of mind, the one who issues com¬ 
mands—as Odysseus almost always appears—is in all cases physically 
weaker than the primeval powers with which he has to wrestle for his life, 
despite all the reports of his heroic deeds. The occasions when naked bod¬ 
ily strength is celebrated, the fistfight with the beggar Irus instigated by 
the Suitors and the drawing of the great bow, are sporting in nature. Self- 
preservation and physical strength have diverged: Odysseus’s athletic 
accomplishments are those of the gentleman who, free of practical cares, 
can train himself in lordly self-mastery. Precisely the strength which is 
detached from self-preservation benefits self-preservation: in the struggle 
with the feeble, gluttonous, undisciplined vagabond or with those who 
have basked in idleness, Odysseus inflicts on the stay-at-homes symboli¬ 
cally what organized landowning has long since done to them in reality, 
and legitimizes himself as a nobleman' But when he encounters primeval 
powers which are neither domesticated nor weakened by indolence, he 
laces a harder test. He can never engage the exotically persisting mythical 
powers in physical combat. He has to accept as a given reality the sacrifi¬ 
cial ceremony in which he is repeatedly caught up: he is unable to break 
it. Instead, he makes sacrifice the formal precondition of his own rational 
decision. This decision is always carried out within the terms of the 
primeval judgment on which the sacrificial situation is based. That the old 
sacrifice has meanwhile become irrational presents itself to the cleverness 
ol the weaker party as the stupidity of ritual. The ritual remains accepted, 
its letter is strictly observed. But its now senseless judgment refutes itself, 
since its terms constantly leave scope for evasion. The superiority of nature 
in the competitive struggle is repeatedly confirmed by the very mind 
which has mastered nature. All bourgeois enlightenment is agreed in its 
demand for sobriety, respect for facts, a correct appraisal of relative 
strength. Wishful thinking is banned. The reason, however, is that all 
power in class society is beset by the gnawing consciousness of its power¬ 
lessness in face of physical nature and its social successor, the many. Only 
deliberate adaptation to it brings nature under the power of the physical 1 
ly weaker. The reason that represses mimesis is not merely its opposite. It 
is itself minijesis: of death. The subjective mind which disintegrates the 
spiritualization of nature masters spiritless nature only by imitating jrs 



Odysseus or Myth and Enlightenment 45 


rigidity, disintegrating itself as animistic. Imitation enters the service of 
power when even the human being becomes an anthropomorphism for 
human beings. The pattern of Odysseus’s guile is mastery of nature by 
such adaptation. In the assessment of power relationships that admits 
defeat in advance and makes survival virtually dependent on death, the 
principle of bourgeois disillusionment, the external schema for the inter¬ 
nalization of sacrifice, is already latent. The nimble-witted man survives 
only at the cost of his own dream, which he forfeits by disintegrating his 
own magic along with that of the powers outside him. He can never have 
the whole, he must always be able to wait, to be patient, to renounce; he 
may not eat the lotus or the cattle of Hyperion, and when he steers 
through the narrows he must include in his calculation the loss of the 
companions snatched from the ship by Scylla. He wriggles through—that 
is his survival, and all the renown he gains in his own and others’ eyes 
merely confirms that the honor of heroism is won only by the humbling 
of the urge to attain entire, universal, undivided happiness. 

The formula for Odysseus’s cunning is that the detached, instru¬ 
mental mind, by submissively embracing nature, renders to nature what is 
hers and thereby cheats her. The mythical monsters under whose power he 
falls represent, as it were, petrified contracts and legal claims dating from 
primeval times. In the developed patriarchal era the earlier popular reli¬ 
gion manifests itself in these scattered relics: beneath the Olympian heav¬ 
en they have become figures of abstract fate, of a necessity remote from 
sensuous experience. The fact that it would be impossible to choose any 
route other than that between Scylla and Charybdis may be interpreted 
rationalistically as the mythical representation of the preponderant power 
of sea currents over the little ships of ancient times. But translated into the 
objectifying language of myth, it means that the natural relationship 
between strength and powerlessness has already taken on the character of 
a legal relationship. Scylla and Charybdis have a claim on whatever comes 
between their teeth, just as Circe has a right to metamorphose those who 
are not immune, or Polyphemus a right to the bodies of his guests. Every 
mythical figure is compelled to do the same thing over and over again. 
Each of them is constituted by repetition: its failure would mean their end. 
They all bear features of the fate which, in the myths of punishment in the 
underworld, is meted out by Olympian judgment to Tantalus, Sisyphus, 
and the Danaids. They are figures of compulsion: the horrors they com- 



46 Excursus I 


init are the curse which has fallen on them. Mythical inevitability is 
defined by the equivalence between the curse, the abominable act which 
expiates it, and the guilt arising from that act, which reproduces the curse. 
All law in history up to now bears the trace of this pattern. In myth each 
moment of the cycle pays off the preceding moment and thereby helps to 
establish the continuity of guilt as law. Against this Odysseus fights. The 
self represents rational universality against the inevitability of fate. But as 
it finds the universal and the inevitable already inextricably entwined, its 
rationality necessarily takes a restrictive form, that of an exception. It has 
to extricate itself from the legal terms encompassing and threatening it, 
terms which, in a sense, are inscribed in every mythical figure. Odysseus 
satisfies the legal statutes, but in such a way that by conceding their power 
he deprives them of it. It is impossible to hear the Sirens and not succumb 
to them: they cannot be defied. Defiance and beguilement are one and the 
same, and whoever defies them is lost to ^the very myth he challenges. 
Cunning, however, is defiance made rational. Odysseus does not try to 
steer a different course to the one past the Sirens’ island. Nor does he try 
to insist on the superiority of his knowledge and listen freely to the 
temptresses, believing his freedom protection enough. He cowers, the ship 
takes its preordained, fateful course, and he realizes that however he may 
consciously distance himself from nature, as a listener [ Horender] he re¬ 
mains under its spell. He complies with the contract of his bondage 
\Horigkeit] and, bound to the mast, struggles to throw himself into the 
arms of the seductresses. But he has found a loophole in the agreement, 
through which he eludes it while fulfilling its terms. The primeval contract 
did not specify whether the mariner sailing past should be bound or 
unbound while listening to the song. The use of bonds belongs to a later 
era, in which prisoners were not killed straightaway. Technically enlight¬ 
ened, Odysseus acknowledges the archaic supremacy of the song by hav¬ 
ing himself bound. By yielding to the song of pleasure he thwarts both it 
and death. The bound listener is drawn to the Sirens like any other. But 
he has taken the precaution not to succumb to them even while he suc¬ 
cumbs. Despite the power of his desire, which reflects the power of the 
dcinigoddesscs themselves, he cannot go to them, just as his companions 
at the pars, their ears stopped with wax, are deaf not only to the demigod- 
desses nut to the desperate cries of their commander. The Sirens have a life 
of their own, but in this bourgeois prehistory it has already been _peutral- 



Odysseus or Myth and En lighten ment 47 


ized as the yearning of those who pass it by. The epic does not say what 
happens to the singers once the ship has passed. But in a tragedy this 
would have been their last hour, as it was for the Sphinx when Oedipus 
solved the riddle, fulfilling her command and thereby causing her down¬ 
fall. For the law of the mythical figures, being that of the stronger, depends 
on the impossibility of fulfilling their statutes. If they are fulfilled, then the 
myths are finished, down to their most distant descendants. Since the hap¬ 
pily hapless meeting of Odysseus with the Sirens all songs have ailed; the 
whole of western music suffers from the absurdity of song in civilization, 
yet the motive force of all art-music is song. 

With the dissolution of the contract through its literal fulfilment a 
change occurs in the historical situation of language: it begins to pass over 
into designation. Mythical fate had been one with the spoken word. 
Within the sphere of ideas in which mythical figures executed the unal¬ 
terable edicts of fate, the distinction between word and object was 
unknown. The word was thought to have direct power over the thing, 
expression merged with intention. Cunning, however, consists in exploit¬ 
ing the difference. One clings to the word in order to change the thing. In 
this way consciousness arises out of intention: in his extremity Odysseus 
becomes aware of dualism, as he discovers that an identical word can mean 
different things. Since the name Udeis can mean either “hero” or “no¬ 
body,” the hero is able to break the spell of the name. Unchangeable words 
remain formulae for the implacable continuities of nature. In magic their 
fixity was intended to challenge that of fate, which it reflected. The op¬ 
position between the word and what it imitated was already implicit in 
this challenge. At the Homeric stage that opposition became decisive. 
Odysseus discovered in words what in fully developed bourgeois society is 
called formalism : their perennial ability to designate is bought at the cost 
of distancing themselves from any particular content which fulfills them, 
so that they refer from a distance to all possible contents, both to nobody 
and to Odysseus himself. From the formalism of mythical names and 
statutes, which, indifferent like nature, seek to rule over human beings 
and history, emerges nominalism, the prototype of bourgeois thinking. 
Self-preserving guile lives on the argument between word and thing. 
Odysseus’s two contradictory actions in his meeting with Polyphemus, his 
obedience to his name and his repudiation of it, are really the same thing. 
He declares allegiance to himself by disowning himself as Nobody; he 



48 Excursus I 


saves his life by making himself disappear. This adaptation to death 
through language contains the schema of modern mathematics. 

Cunning as a means of exchange, in which everything is done cor¬ 
rectly, the contract is fulfilled yet the other party is cheated, points back to 
a form of economic activity which is found, if not in mythical prehistory, 
at least in early antiquity: the ancient practice of “occasional exchange” 
between self-sufficient households. “Surpluses are occasionally exchanged, 
but provisions are predominantly produced by the consumers them¬ 
selves.” 13 The behavior of the adventurer Odysseus recalls that of the par¬ 
ties to the occasional exchange. Even in the pathetic guise of the beggar 
the feudal lord bears features of the oriental merchant 14 who returns home 
with untold wealth because he has once, against tradition, stepped outside 
the confines of the domestic economy and “put to sea.” The adventurous 
element in his undertaking is, in economic terms, nothing other than the 
irrational aspect his reason takes on in face of the prevailing traditional 
economic forms. This irrationality of reason has been precipitated in cun¬ 
ning, as the adaptation of bourgeois reason to any unreason which con¬ 
fronts it as a stronger power. The lone voyager armed with cunning is 
already homo oeconomicus, whom all reasonable people will one day resem¬ 
ble: for this reason the Odyssey is already a Robinsonade. Both these proto¬ 
typical shipwrecked sailors make their weakness—that of the individual 
who breaks away from the collective—their social strength. Abandoned to 
the vagaries of the waves, helplessly cut off, they are forced by their isola¬ 
tion into a ruthless pursuit of their atomistic interest. They embody the 
principle of the capitalist economy* even before they make use of any 
worker;* but the salvaged goods they bring with them to the new venture 
idealize the truth that the entrepreneur* has always entered the competi¬ 
tion armed with more than the industry of his hands. Their powerlessness 
in face of nature already functions as an ideology for their social predom¬ 
inance. Odysseus’s defenselessness against the foaming sea sounds like a 
legitimation of the enrichment of the voyager at the expense of indigenous 
inhabitants. Bourgeois economics later enshrined this principle in the con¬ 
cept of risk: the possibility of foundering is seen as a moral justification for 
profit.* From the standpoint of the developed exchange society and its 
individuals, the adventures of Odysseus are no more than a depiction of 
the risks which line the path to success. Odysseus lives according to the 
ancient principle which originally constituted bourgeois society. One had 



Odysseus or Myth and Enlightenment 49 


to choose between cheating and going under. Fraud was the stigma of rea¬ 
son, which betrayed its particular interest. The universal socialization for 
which the globetrotter Odysseus and the solo manufacturer Robinson 
Crusoe provide a preliminary sketch was attended from the first by the 
absolute loneliness which at the end of the bourgeois era is becoming 
overt. Radical socialization means radical alienation. Both Odysseus and 
Crusoe deal in totality: the former measures it out; the latter fabricates it. 
They can do so only in total isolation from all other human beings, who 
appear to both men only in estranged forms, as enemies or allies, but 
always as instruments, things. 

One of the first adventures in the nostos* proper does, admittedly, 
originate much further back, far beyond even the barbaric age of demon¬ 
ic masks and gods of magic. It is the story of the Lotus-eaters. Whoever 
tastes their food is as much in thrall as those who listen to the Sirens’ song 
or are touched by the wand of Circe. But no harm is done to those who 
succumb: “Now it never entered the heads of these natives to kill my 
friends.” 15 They are threatened only by forgetfulness and loss of will. The 
curse condemns them to nothing worse than a primal state exempt from 
labor and struggle in the “fertile land”: 15 “As soon as each had eaten the 
honeyed fruit of the plant, all thoughts of reporting to us or escaping were 
banished from his mind. All they now wished for was to stay where they 
were with the Lotus-eaters, to browse on the lotus, and to forget that they 
had a home to return to.” 17 Self-preserving reason cannot permit such an 
idyll—reminiscent of the bliss induced by narcotics, by which subordinate 
classes have been made capable of enduring the unendurable in ossified 
social orders—among its own people. And indeed, it is only an illusion of 
bliss, a dull aimless vegetating, as impoverished as the life of animals. At 
best, it would be an absence of the awareness of unhappiness. But happi¬ 
ness contains truth within itself. It is in essence a result. It unfolds from 
suffering removed. The enduring Odysseus is therefore right not to endure 
life among the Lotus-eaters. Against them he asserts their own cause, the 
realization of utopia through historical work, whereas simply abiding 
within an image of bliss deprives them of their strength. But in being 
exerted by rationality, by Odysseus, this right is inevitably drawn into the 
realm of wrong. His immediate action is one which reasserts domination. 
Self-preserving reason can no more tolerate this bliss “near the rim of the 
world” 18 than the more dangerous form it takes in later stages. The indo- 



50 Excursus 1 


lent defectors are fetched back to the galleys: “I had to use force to bring 
them back to the ships, and they wept on the way, but once on board I 
dragged them under the benches and left them in irons.” 19 Lotus is an ori¬ 
ental food. Its thin-cut slices still play a part in Chinese and Indian cook¬ 
ing. Perhaps the temptation ascribed to it is no other than that of regres¬ 
sion to the stage of gathering the fruits of the earth 20 and the sea, older 
than agriculture, cattle-rearing, or even hunting—older, in short, than 
any production. It is hardly an accident that the epic connects the idea of 
the life of idleness with the eating of flowers, whereas no such use is asso¬ 
ciated with them today. The eating of flowers, as is still customary during 
dessert in the East and is known to European children from baking with 
rosewater and from candied violets, bears the promise of a state in which 
the reproduction of life is independent of conscious self-preservation, the 
bliss of satiety uncoupled from the utility of planned nutrition. The mem¬ 
ory of the remote and ancient joy which flashes up before the sense of 
smell is still inseparable from the extreme proximity of ingestion. It points 
back to earliest prehistory. No matter how copious the torments endured 
by the people of that time, they cannot conceive of a happiness not nour¬ 
ished by the image of that primal age: “So we left that country and sailed 
on sick at heart.” 21 

The next figure on whose shore Odysseus is cast up [ verschlagen \— 
being cast up and being cunning [ verschlagen ] are equivalents in Homer— 
is the Cyclops Polyphemus, who wears his single wheel-sized eye as a trace 
of the same primal world: the singleness of the eye suggests the nose and 
mouth, more primitive than the symmetry of eyes and ears 22 without 
which, and the combining of their dual perceptions, no ideptification, 
depth, or objectivity is possible. But, compared to the Lotus-eaters, he rep¬ 
resents a later, truly barbaric age, one of hunters and shepherds. For 
Homer, the definition of barbarism coincides with that of a state in which 
no systematic agriculture, and therefore no systematic, time-managing 
organization of work and society, has yet been achieved. He calls the 
Cyclopes “fierce, uncivilized people” 23 because—and his words seem to 
contain a secret confession of the guilt of civilization itself—they “never 
lift a hand to plant or plough but put their trust in Providence. All the 
crops they require spring up unsown and untilled, wheat and barley and 
the' vines whose generous clusters give them wine when ripened for them 
by the timely rains.” 2,1 Abundance needs no law, and civilization’s accusa- 



Odysseus or Myth and Enlightenment 51 


tion of anarchy sounds almost like a denunciation of abundance: “The 
Cyclopes have no assemblies for the making of laws, nor any settled cus¬ 
toms, but live in hollow caverns in the mountain heights, where each man 
is lawgiver to his children and his wives, and nobody cares a jot for his 
neighbors.” 25 This is already a patriarchal society based on kinship and the 
suppression of the physically weaker, but it is not yet organized on the 
model of fixed property and its hierarchy; it is the lack of contact between 
the cave dwellers which is the true reason for the absence of objective laws 
and which calls forth Homer’s accusation of their mutual disregard and 
their state of savagery. In a later passage, however, the narrator’s pragmat¬ 
ic fidelity to his story contradicts his civilized judgment: despite their dis¬ 
regard for one another, the tribe gather round the blinded Polyphemus’s 
cave when they hear his anguished cry, and only Odysseus’s trick with his 
name prevents the simpletons from coming to his aid. 26 Stupidity and law¬ 
lessness share a common definition: when Homer calls the Cyclops a “law¬ 
less-minded monster” 27 he does not mean simply that the Cyclops does 
not respect the laws of morality but that his thinking itself is lawless, 
unsystematic, rhapsodic—as when he is unable to perform the straight¬ 
forward mental task of working out how his uninvited guests are able to 
leave his cave, by clinging underneath the sheep instead of riding on them; 
or to decipher the sophistic double meaning in Odysseus’s false name. 
Polyphemus, although he trusts in the power of the Immortals, is a canni¬ 
bal; accordingly, he refuses to show reverence for the gods despite his trust 
in them: “Stranger, you must be a fool, or must have come from very far 
afield”—in later times fools and strangers were less scrupulously distin¬ 
guished, and ignorance of custom, like all foreignness, was branded 
straight away as folly—“to preach to me of fear or reverence for the gods. 
We Cyclopes care not a jot for Zeus with his aegis, nor for the rest of the 
blessed gods, since we are much stronger than they.” 28 “We are stronger,” 
Odysseus mockingly reports; but what the giant really meant was: “We are 
older.” The power of the solar system is acknowledged, but much as a feu¬ 
dal lord might acknowledge that of bourgeois wealth, while tacidy regard¬ 
ing himself as more noble and failing to perceive that the wrong done to 
him is of the same kind as the wrong he himself represents. The nearby 
sea-god Poseidon, Polyphemus’s father and Odysseus’s enemy, is older than 
the universal Zeus in his remote heaven, and the feud between the ele¬ 
mental popular religion and the logocentric religion of laws is fought out, 



52 Excursus I 


so to speak, on the backs of the subjects. However, the lawless Polyphemus 
is not simply the villain he appears to be according to the taboos of civi¬ 
lization and as the giant Goliath appears in the fables of enlightened child¬ 
hood. In the meager domain in which his self-preservation has taken on 
orderly habits, he is not without redeeming traits. When he puts the young 
sheep and goats to their mothers’ udders, this practical action shows a con¬ 
cern for creaturely life itself, and the famous speech of the blinded 
Polyphemus in which he calls the leading ram his friend, asking whether 
it is the last to leave the cave because it is grieving for its master’s eye, has 
a power and poignancy equaled only at the highest point of the Odyssey, 
when the homecoming Odysseus is recognized by the old dog Argus— 
despite the appalling brutality with which the speech ends. The giant’s 
behavior has not yet been objectified as character. When Odysseus begs for 
hospitality he does not reply simply with an expression of savage hatred 
but only by refusing to respect a law which does not yet apply to him. He 
says merely that “it would not occur to him” 29 to spare Odysseus and his 
companions, and it is open to question whether his next question, about 
the whereabouts of Odysseus’s ship, is as devious as Odysseus reports it to 
be. Boastful and beguiled, the drunken Polyphemus promises Odysseus 
gifts of hospitality, 30 and it is only the notion of Odysseus as Nobody that 
gives him the malicious idea of showing his hospitality by eating the leader 
last—perhaps because he has called himself Nobody and thus may be con¬ 
sidered nonexistent in terms of the Cyclops’s, feeble wit. 31 The physical 
crudity of the overpowerful creature is the source of his gullible trust. In 
this way the observance of the mythical law, always an injustice to the 
judged, also becomes an injustice to the natural power which imposes that 
law. Polyphemus and the other monsters that Odysseus outwits are mod¬ 
els for the stupidly litigious devils of the Christian era, right down to Shy- 
lock and Mephistopheles. The giant’s stupidity, the basis of his barbaric 
brutality as long as his cause prospers, represents something better once it 
is overthrown by one who should know better. Odysseus insinuates him¬ 
self into Polyphemus’s trust and thus subverts the captor’s right to human 
flesh, according to the artful schema whereby the statute is breached in the 
observance: “Here, Cyclops, have sometvine to wash down that meal of 


human flesh, and find out-Tor yourself what kind of vintage was stored 
av\tay in our ship’s hold,” 32 the bearer of culture recommends. 


However, the adaptation of reason to its opposite, a spate of con- 



Odysseus or Myth and Enlightenment 53 


sciousness in which no firm identity has yet crystallized—represented by 
the bungling giant—culminates in the stratagem of the name. This is a 
widespread motif in folklore. In the Greek version it is a play on words; in 
a single word the name—Odysseus—and the intention—nobody—di¬ 
verge. To modern ears Odysseus and Udeis still sound similar, and it is con¬ 
ceivable that in one of the dialects in which the story of the return to 
Ithaca was handed down, the name of the islands king did indeed sound 
the same as “nobody.” The calculation that, once the deed was done, 
Polyphemus would answer “Nobody” when the tribe asked who was to 
blame, thus allowing the perpetrator to escape pursuit, is a thin rational¬ 
istic screen. In reality, Odysseus, the subject, denies his own identity, 
which makes him a subject, and preserves his life by mimicking the amor¬ 
phous realm. He calls himself nobody because Polyphemus is not a self, 
and confusion of the name with the thing prevents the duped barbarian 
from escaping the trap: his cry for retribution remains magically tied to 
the name of the one on whom he wants to avenge himself, and this name 
condemns the cry to impotence. For by inserting his own intention into 
the name, Odysseus has withdrawn it from the magical sphere. But his 
self-assertion, as in the entire epic, as in all civilization, is self-repudiation. 
Thereby the self is drawn back into the same compulsive circle of natural 
connections from which it sought through adaptation to escape. The man 
who, for the sake of his own self, calls himself Nobody and manipulates 
resemblance to the natural state as a means of controlling nature, gives 
way to hubris. The artful Odysseus cannot do otherwise: as he flees, while 
still within the sphere controlled by the rock-hurling giant, he not only 
mocks Polyphemus but reveals to him his true name and origin, as if the 
primeval world still had such power over Odysseus, who always escaped 
only by the skin of his teeth, that he would fear to become Nobody again 
if he did not reestablish his own identity by means of the magical word 
which rational identity had just superseded. His friends try to restrain him 
from the folly of proclaiming his cleverness but do not succeed, and he 
narrowly escapes the hurled rocks, while the mention of his name proba¬ 
bly brings down on him the hatred of Poseidon—who is hardly presented 
as omniscient. The cunning by which the clever man assumes the form of 
stupidity reverts to stupidity as soon as he discards that form. That is the 
dialectic of eloquence. From antiquity to fascism, Homer has been criti¬ 
cised for garrulousness—both in the hero and in the narrator. But the 



54 Excursus I 


Ionian has proved himself prophetically superior to Spartans old and new 
in his depiction of the doom which the fluency of the sly fox, the middle¬ 
man, brings down on the latter. The speech which gets the better of phys¬ 
ical strength is unable to curb itself. Its spate accompanies the stream of 
consciousness, thought itself, like a parody: thought’s unwavering autono¬ 
my takes on a moment of manic folly when it enters reality as speech, as 
il thought and reality were synonymous, whereas the former has power 
over the latter only through distance. Such distance, however, is also suf- 
lering. For this reason the astute hero is always tempted to ignore the 
proverbial wisdom that silence is golden. He is driven objectively by the 
fear that, if he does not constantly uphold the fragile advantage the word 
has over violence, this advantage will be withdrawn by violence. For the 
word Icnows itself to be weaker than the nature it has duped. By talking 
too much he gives away the principle of violence and injustice underlying 
discourse and provokes in the feared adversary the very action he fears. 
The mythical compulsion acting on language in prehistory is perpetuated 
in the calamity which enlightened language brings on itself. “Udeis,” who 
compulsively proclaims himself to be Odysseus, already bears features of 
the Jew who, in fear of death, continues to boast of a superiority which 
itself stems from the fear of death; revenge on the middleman stands not 
only at the end of bourgeois society but at its beginning, as the negative 
utopia toward which coercive violence tends in all its forms. 

Unlike the stories of the escape from myth as an escape from bar¬ 
baric cannibalism, the magical tale of Circe points back once more to the 
stage ol actual magic. Magic disintegrates the self which falls back into its 
power and thus into the form of an earlier biological species. The power 
which causes the self’s dissolution is, again, that of oblivion. With the 
fixed order of time, it gains control of the fixed will of the subject, which 
is based on that order. Circe seduces Odysseus’s men into abandoning 
themselves to instinct, with which the animal form assumed by the victims 
has always been associated, while Circe has become the prototype of the 
courtesan, probably on the strength of the words of Hermes, which take 
her erotic initiatives for granted: “She will shrink from you in terror and 
invite you to her bed. Nor must you hesitate to accept the goddess’ 
favors.” 1 ’ Circe’s signature is ambiguity, and in the story she appears by 
turns as|corruptcr and helper; ambiguity is expressed even in her lineage: 
she is the daughter of Helios and the granddaughter of Oceanus. 34 In her 




Odysseus or Myth and Enlightenment 5 5 


the elements of fire and water are not yet separated, and it is this indeter¬ 
minacy—in contrast to the primacy of a particular aspect of nature, 
whether matriarchal or patriarchal—which constitutes the essence of 
promiscuity and of the courtesan, reappearing as a watery lunar reflection 
even in the gaze of a nineteenth-century prostitute. 35 The.hetaera both 
bestows joy and destroys the autonomy of its recipient—that is her ambi¬ 
guity. But she does not necessarily destroy the recipient himself: she holds 
fast to an older form of life. 36 Like the Lotus-eaters, Circe does not cause 
lethal harm to her guests, and even those she has turned into wild beasts 
are peaceable: “Prowling about the place were mountain wolves and lions, 
actually the drugged victims of Circe’s magic, for they not only refrained 
from attacking my men but rose on their hind legs to caress them, with 
much wagging of their long tails, like dogs fawning on their master, as he 
comes from table, for the tasty bits they know he always brings.” 37 The 
bewitched humans behave in a similar way to the wild animals which lis¬ 
ten to the playing of Orpheus. The mythical command to which they have 
been subjected at the same time liberates the very nature which is sup¬ 
pressed in them. What is revoked by their relapse into myth is myth itself. 
The suppression of instinct which constitutes them as selves and separates 
them from beasts was the introverted form of the repression existing with¬ 
in the hopelessly closed cycle of nature, to which, according to an earlier 
theory, the name Circe alludes. But, as the idyll of the Lotus-eaters had 
done earlier, the violent magic which recalls them to an idealized prehis¬ 
tory not only makes them animals but brings about, in however delusive 
a form, a semblance of reconciliation. But because they were once men the 
civilizing epic cannot present their fate as anything other than a calami¬ 
tous lapse, and in Homer’s account there is hardly a trace of the pleasure 
which went with it. It is all the more emphatically expunged the more civ¬ 
ilized the victims themselves are. 38 Odysseus’s companions are not turned 
into sacred creatures of the wilderness, like earlier guests, but into squalid 
domestic animals, swine. The story of Circe may contain echoes of the 
chthonic cult of Demeter, for whom the pig was sacred. 39 But perhaps it 
is also the humanoid anatomy of the pig and its nakedness which explain 
this motif: as if the same taboo on mingling with the blood of similar 
species, which has survived among the Jews, already existed among the 
Ionians. Finally, one may think of the prohibition on cannibalism, since, 
as in Juvenal, the taste of human flesh has repeatedly been compared to 



56 Excursus I 


that of pigs. At any rate, later civilizations have always liked to apply the 
name of pig or swine to anyone whose impulses tended toward other 
pleasures than those sanctioned by society for its purposes. Magic and 
countermagic in the metamorphoses of Odysseus’s companions are linked 
to herbs and wine, as intoxication and waking are to the sense of smell, 
which is increasingly suppressed and repressed and is closest not only to 
sex but to the remembrance of prehistory. 40 In the image of the pig, how¬ 
ever, the joy of scent is distorted into the unfree snuffling 41 of someone 
who has his nose to the ground and has renounced the upright posture. It 
is as if, in the ritual to which she subjects the men, the sorceress-courtesan 
were reenacting the one to which she herself is repeatedly subjected by 
patriarchal society. Like her, women are predisposed, under the pressure of 
civilization, to adopt its judgment on women and to denigrate sex. In the 
conflict between enlightenment and myth, the traces of which axe pre¬ 
served in the epic, the powerful seductress is at the same time weak, obso¬ 
lete, and vulnerable and needs the enslaved beasts as her escort. 42 As a rep¬ 
resentative of nature, woman in bourgeois society has become an enigma 
of irresistibility 43 and powerlessness. Thus she reflects back the vain lie of 
power, which substitutes the mastery over nature for reconciliation with it. 

Marriage is society’s middle way in dealing with this question: wom¬ 
an remains powerless in that her power is mediated to her only through 
her husband. Something of this is reflected in the defeat of the courtesan- 
goddess of the Odyssey , while the fully evolved marriage with Penelope, 
more recent in literary terms, represents a later stage in the objective struc¬ 
ture of patriarchal arrangements. With the arrival of Odysseus on Aeaea,* 
the double meaning of the relationship of man to woman, of yearning to 
command, already takes on the form of an exchange underpinned by con¬ 
tracts. Odysseus resists Circe’s magic. And he therefore receives actually 
what her magic promises only deceptively to those who fail to resist. 
Odysseus sleeps with her. But beforehand he makes her swear a solemn 
oath by the blessed gods. The oath is intended to protect the male from 
the mutilation which avenges the ban on promiscuity and male domina¬ 
tion-—although that domination, as a permanent suppression of instinct, 
symbolically performs the self-mutilation of thy man in any case. Because 
of his resistance to metamorphosis, Circe accuses Odysseus of having “a 
heart in Jhis] breast which nothing enchants.” 44 But she is also willing to 
submit to the man who has resisted her, the master, the self: “I beg you 



Odysseus or Myth and Enlightenment 57 


now to put up your sword and come with me to my bed, so that in love 
and sleep we may learn to trust each other.” 45 The price she places on the 
pleasure she bestows is the condition that pleasure should first have been 
spurned; the last hetaera emerges as the first female character. In the tran¬ 
sition from legend to history she makes a decisive contribution to the 
bourgeois chill. Her behavior puts into effect the ban on love which later 
became all the more powerful the more love as ideology was obliged to dis¬ 
simulate the hatred between the competing partners. In the world of 
exchange the one who gives more is in the wrong; but the one who loves 
is always the one who loves more. While the lover’s sacrifice is glorified, 
the making of that sacrifice is jealously enforced. It is precisely in love itself 
that the lover is incriminated and punished. The inability to master him¬ 
self and others demonstrated by his love is reason enough to deny him ful¬ 
fillment. With society, loneliness reproduces itself on a wider scale. The 
mechanism operates even within the tenderest ramifications of feeling, 
until love itself, in order to have contact with another person at all, is 
forced to assume such coldness that it shatters at the moment of its real¬ 
ization. Circe’s power, which subjugates men as her slaves, gives way to her 
enslavement to the man who, through renunciation, has refused to sub¬ 
mit. The goddess Circe’s influence over nature, ascribed to her by the poet, 
is reduced to priestly soothsaying and even to clever foresight with regard 
to coming nautical difficulties. This lives on in the caricature of feminine 
wisdom. In the end, the prophecies of the disempowered sorceress regard¬ 
ing the Sirens, Scylla, and Charybdis merely serve the purposes of male 
self-preservation. 

How high a price was paid for the establishing of orderly arrange¬ 
ments for procreation is hinted at by the obscure passage on the behavior 
of Odysseus’s friends when Circe had transformed them back into men as 
required by her contractual lord. First we read that “they not only became 
men again but looked younger and much handsomer and taller than 
before.” 46 But those who are thus confirmed and strengthened in their 
manhood are not happy: “We were so moved that we all wept for happi¬ 
ness. It was a strange sound for those walls to echo.” 47 The earliest wed¬ 
ding song, the accompaniment of the feast celebrating the rudimentary 
marriage which lasts only a year, may have sounded like this. The actual 
marriage to Penelope has more in common with it than might be sup¬ 
posed. Harlot and wife are complementary forms of female self-alienation 



58 Excursus I 


in the patriarchal world: the wife betrays pleasure to the fixed order of 
life and property, while the harlot, as her secret accomplice, brings with¬ 
in the property relationship that which the wife’s property rights do not 
include—pleasure—by selling it. Circe and Calypso, the courtesans, are 
introduced as diligent weavers, thus resembling both mythical powers of 
fate and bourgeois housewives, 48 while Penelope, like a harlot, mistrust¬ 
fully scrutinizes the returning Odysseus to make sure he is not really just 
an old beggar or even a god trying his luck. The much-lauded recognition 
scene is a truly patrician encounter: “For a long while Penelope, over¬ 
whelmed by wonder, sat there without a word. But her eyes were busy, at 
one moment resting full on his face, and at the next falling on the ragged 
clothes that made him seem a stranger once again.” 49 There is no sponta¬ 
neous upsurge of feeling; she is determined to avoid a mistake, which she 
can hardly afford under the weight of the order bearing down on her. This 
annoys the young Telemachus, who has not yet fully adapted himself to 
his future position yet already feels man enough to admonish his mother. 
By reproaching her with obstinacy and hardness, he exactly repeats the 
accusation of Circe against Odysseus. If the hetaera makes the patriarchal 
world order her own, the monogamous wife is not satisfied even with this 
and cannot rest until she has made herself conform to the male character. 
In this way the spouses settle their differences. The test she sets Odysseus 
concerns the immovable position of the marriage bed which her husband, 
as a young man, had constructed around an olive tree, a symbol of the 
unity of sex and property. With touching artfulness she refers to this bed 
as if it could be moved from the spot, whereupon her husband, “flaring 
up” and “rounding on” his wife, proceeds to give a circumstantial account 
of his durable amateur handiwork: as a prototypical bourgeois he is srpart 
enough to have a hobby. It consists in a resumption of the craft work from 
which, within the framework of differentiated property relations, he has 
long since been exempted. He enjoys this occupation, as his freedom to 
perform superfluous tasks confirms his power over those who have to do 
such work in order to live. By this the ingenious Penelope recognizes him, 
flattering him with praise of his exceptional intelligence. But her flattery, 
which is not without a touch of mockery, is followed, in an abrupt caesura, 
by words which seek the reasonTor the suffering of all spouses in the gods’ 
envy (if the happiness guaranteed only by marriage, the “confirmation of 
the concept of permanence”:'" “All our unhappiness is ziue to fhe gods. 



Odysseus or Myth and Enlightenment 59 


who couldn’t bear to see us share the joys of youth and reach the thresh¬ 
old of old age together.” 51 Marriage represents not only the account-bal¬ 
ancing order of the living but also solidarity and steadfastness in face of 
death. In it reconciliation grows up around subjugation, just as in history 
up to now true humanity has flourished only in conjunction with the bar¬ 
baric element which is veiled by “humane values.” Even if the contract 
between the spouses sets aside the old hostility only with difficulty, never¬ 
theless the couple aging in peace merges into the image of Philemon and 
Baucis, as the smoke from the sacrificial altar is transmuted into that ris¬ 
ing beneficently from the hearth. Undoubtedly, marriage forms part of the 
primal rock of myth at the base of civilization. But its mythic solidity and 
permanence jut from myth, as the small island realm rises from the end¬ 
less sea. 

The farthest point reached on the odyssey proper is no such home¬ 
ly refuge. It is Hades. The images which appear to the adventurer in the 
first visit to the Underworld* are of matriarchal shades’ 2 who have been 
banished by the religion of light: his own mother, before whom Odysseus 
forces himself to maintain a purposive patriarchal hardness, 53 is followed 
by heroines from primeval times. The image of the mother, however, is 
powerless, blind, and speechless, 54 a phantom, like epic narrative at the 
moments when language gives way to images. Sacrificial blood is required 
as a pledge of living memory before the shades can speak, breaking free, 
however vainly and ephemerally, from mythic muteness. Only when sub¬ 
jectivity masters itself by recognizing the nullity of images does it begin to 
share the hope which images vainly promise. The Promispd Land for 
Odysseus is not the archaic realm of images. Finally, all the images reveal 
their true essence as shades in the world of the dead, as illusion. Having 
recognized them as dead he dismisses them with the lordly gesture of self- 
preservation, banishing them from the sacrifice which he reserves for those 
who grant him knowledge which benefits his life. In such knowledge the 
power of myth, transposed into mental forms, survives only as imagina¬ 
tion. The realm of the dead, where the disempowered myths gather, is far¬ 
thest from his homeland, with which it can communicate only from the 
remotest distance. If one follows Kirchhoff in supposing that Odysseus’s 
visit to the Underworld forms part of the oldest stratum of the epic, com¬ 
posed of actual legends, 55 then this oldest stratum also contains a tenden¬ 
cy which—as in the tradition of the journeys to the Underworld of 



6 o Excursus I 


Orpheus and Heracles—most decisively transcends myth. Indeed, the 
motif of forcing the gates of hell, of abolishing death, is the innermost cell 
of all antimythological thought. This antimythological element is con¬ 
tained in Teiresias’s prophecy of the possible placation of Poseidon. Odys¬ 
seus is to wander ever farther, carrying on his shoulder an oar, until he 
reaches a people “who know nothing of the sea and never use salt with 
their food.” 56 When he meets another traveler who refers to the oar on his 
shoulder as a “winnowing fan,” he will have reached the proper place to 
offer a sacrifice to Poseidon. The core of the prophecy is the mistaking of 
the oar for a winnowing fan. This must have struck the Ionian as com- 
pellingly comic. However, this comic effect, on which the reconciliation is 
made to depend, cannot have been directed at humans but at the wrath¬ 
ful Poseidon. 57 The misunderstanding is meant to amuse the fierce ele¬ 
mental god, in the hope that his anger might be dispersed in laughter. 
That would be analogous to themeighbor’s advice in Grimm, explaining 
how a mother can rid herself of a changeling: “She should carry the 
changeling into the kitchen, set it on the hearth, light the fire and boil 
water in two eggshtells. That would make the changeling laugh, and if he 
laughed then that would make an end of him.” 58 If laughter up to now* 
has been a sign of violence, an outbreak of blind, obdurate nature, it nev¬ 
ertheless contains the opposite element, in that through laughter blind 
nature becomes aware of itself as sucfi and thus abjures its destructive vio¬ 
lence. This ambiguity of laughter is closely related to that of name; per¬ 
haps names are nothing but petrified laughter, as nicknames still are—the 
only ones in which the original act of name-giving still persists. Laughter 
is in league with the guilt of subjectivity, but in the suspension of law 
which it announces it also points beyond that complicity. It promises a 
passage to the homeland. It is a yearning for the homeland which sets in 
motion the adventures by which subjectivity, the prehistory of which is 
narrated in the Odyssey, escapes the primeval world. The fact that— 
despite the fascist lies to the contrary—the concept of homeland is 
opposed to myth constitutes the innermost paradox of epic. Precipitated 
in the epic is the memory of an historical age in which nomadism gave way 
to settlement, the precondition of any homeland. If the fixed order of 
property implicit in settlement is the source of human alienation, in which 
all homesickness and longing spring from a lost primal state, at the same 
time it is toward settlement and fixed property, on which alone the con- 



Odysseus or Myth and Enlightenment 61 


cept of homeland is based, that all longing and homesickness are directed. 
Novalis’s definition according to which all philosophy is homesickness 
holds good only if this longing is not dissipated in the phantasm of a lost 
original state, but homeland, and nature itself, are pictured as something 
that have had first to be wrested from myth. Homeland is a state of hav¬ 
ing escaped. For this reason the criticism that the Homeric legends “with¬ 
draw from the earth” is a warranty of their truth. They “turn to men.” 59 
The'transposition of myths into the novel, as in the adventure story, does 
not falsify myth so much as drag it into the sphere of time, exposing the 
abyss which separates it from homeland and reconciliation. The vengeance 
wreaked by civilization on the primeval world has been terrible, and in this 
vengeance, the most horrifying document of which in Homer is to be 
found in the account of the mutilation of the goatherd Melanthios, civi¬ 
lization itself resembles the primeval world. It is not in the content of the 
deeds reported that civilization transcends that world. It is in the self- 
reflection which causes violence to pause at the moment of narrating such 
deeds. Speech itself, language as opposed to mythical song, the possibility 
of holding fast the past atrocity through memory, is the law of Homeric 
escape. Not without reason is the fleeing hero repeatedly introduced as 
narrator. The cold detachment of narrative, which describes even the hor¬ 
rible as if for entertainment, for the first time reveals in all their clarity the 
horrors which in song are solemnly confused with fate. But when speech 
pauses, the caesura allows the events narrated to be transformed into 
something long past, and causes to flash up a semblance of freedom that 
civilization has been unable wholly to extinguish ever since. Book XXII of 
the Odyssey describes the punishment meted out by the son of the island’s 
king to the faithless maidservants who have sunk into harlotry. With an 
unmoved composure comparable in its inhumanity only to the impassibi¬ 
lity of the greatest narrative writers of the nineteenth century, the fate of 
the hanged victims is described and expressionlessly compared to the 
death of birds in a trap; and, as of the numb pause surrounding the nar¬ 
ration at this point, it can truly be said that the rest of all speech is silence. 
This is followed by a statement reporting that “For a little while their feet 
kicked out, but not for very long.” 60 The exactitude of the description, 
which already exhibits the coldness of anatomy and vivisection, 61 keeps a 
record, as in a novel, of the twitching of the subjugated women, who, 
under the aegis of justice and law, are thrust down into the realm from 



62 Excursus I 


which Odysseus the judge has escaped. As a citizen reflecting on the exe¬ 
cution, Homer comforts himself and his listeners, who are really readers, 
with the certified observation that the kicking did not last long—a 
moment, and all was over. 62 But after the words “not for long” the inner 
flow of the narrative comes to rest. “Not for long?” the narrator asks by 
this device, giving the lie to his own composure. In being brought to a 
standstill, the report is prevented from forgetting the victims of the execu¬ 
tion and lays bare the unspeakably endless torment of the single second in 
which the maids fought against death. N o echo remains of the words “not 
for long” except Cicero s Quo usque tandem [“How much longer (will you 
try our patience)?”], which later rhetoricians unwittingly desecrated by 
claiming that patience for themselves. But in the report of the infamous 
deed, hope lies in the fact that it is long past. Over the raveled skein of 
prehistory, barbarism, and culture, Homer passes the soothing hand of 
remembrance, bringing the solace. of “once upon a time.” Only as the 
novel is the epic transmuted into fairy tale. 



Excursus II: Juliette or Enlightenment and Morality 


Enlightenment, in Kant’s words, is “the human being’s emergence 
from self-incurred minority. Minority is inability to make use of one’s own 
understanding without direction from another.” 1 “Understanding without 
direction from another” is understanding guided by reason. That amounts 
to saying that the mind combines its individual cognitions into a system 
in accordance with its own internal logic. “Reason has ... as its sole object 
the understanding and its effective application.” 2 It posits “a certain col¬ 
lective unity as the goal of the activities of the understanding,” 3 and this 
unity is the system. Reason’s rules are instructions for a hierarchical order¬ 
ing of concepts. For Kant, as for Leibniz and Descartes, rationality con¬ 
sists in “processes of ascending to the higher genera and of descending to 
the lower species [by which] we obtain the idea of systematic connection 
in its completeness.” 4 The “systematization” of knowledge lies in “the con¬ 
nection of its parts in conformity with a single principle.” 5 Thinking, as 
understood by the Enlightenment, is the process of establishing a unified, 
scientific order and of deriving factual knowledge from principles, 
whether these principles are interpreted as arbitrarily posited axioms, 
innate ideas, or the highest abstractions. The laws of logic establish the 
most universal relationships within the order and define them. Unity lies 
in self-consistency. The principle of contradiction is the system in nuce. 
Knowledge consists in subsumption under principles. It is one with judg¬ 
ment, by which perceptions are incorporated into the system. Any think- 



6 4 Excursus II 


ing not guided by the system is directionless or authoritarian. Reason con¬ 
tributes nothing but the idea of systematic unity, the formal elements of 
fixed conceptual relationships. Any substantial objective which might be 
put forward as a rational insight is, according to the Enlightenment in its 
strict sense, delusion, falsehood, “rationalization,” no matter what pains 
individual philosophers may take to steer us away from this conclusion 
and toward a reliance on philanthropic feeling. Reason is “a faculty of 
deducing the particular from the universal.” 6 According to Kant, the 
homogeneity of the general and the particular is guaranteed by the “sche¬ 
matism of pure understanding,” by which he means the unconscious ac¬ 
tivity of the intellectual mechanism which structures perception in accor¬ 
dance with the understanding. The intelligibility which subjective judg¬ 
ment discovers in any matter is imprinted on that matter by the intellect 
as an objective quality before it enters the ego. Without such a schema¬ 
tism—in short, without the intellectual element in perception—no 
impression would conform to the corresponding concept, no category to 
the particular example; thought, not to speak of the system toward which 
everything is directed, would be devoid of unity. To establish this unity is 
the conscious task of science. If “all empirical laws [are] only special deter¬ 
minations of the pure laws of understanding,” 7 research must always 
ensure that the principles are properly linked to the factual judgments. 
“This harmony of nature with our cognitive faculty is presupposed a pri¬ 
ori by the Judgment.” 8 It is the “guiding thread” 9 of organized experience. 

The system must be kept in harmony with nature; just as facts are 
predicted from the system, so they must confirm it. Facts, however, form 
part of praxis; they everywhere characterize the contact of-the individual 
subject with nature as social object; experience is always real action and 
suffering. In physics, to be sure, the perception by which a theory can be 
proved is usually reduced to the electrical spark appearing in the experi¬ 
mental apparatus. Its nonappearance is generally of no practical conse¬ 
quence; it merely destroys the theory or, at most, the career of the research 
assistant responsible for setting up the experiment. However, laboratory 
conditions are the exception. A thinking which fails to maintain agree¬ 
ment between system and perception does not merely violate isolated visu¬ 
al impressions; it conflicts with real praxis. Not only does the expected 
event fail to occur but the unexpected happens; the bridge collapses, the 
crop fails, the medicine causes illness. The spark which most conclusively 



Juliette or Enlightenment and Morality 65 


indicates a lack of systematic thinking, a violation of logic, is not a fleet¬ 
ing perception but sudden death. The system which enlightenment aims 
for is the form of knowledge which most ably deals with the facts, most 
effectively assists the subject in mastering nature. The system’s principles 
are those of self-preservation. Immaturity amounts to the inability to sur¬ 
vive. The bourgeois in the successive forms of the slave-owner, the free 
entrepreneur, and the administrator is the logical subject of enlighten¬ 
ment. 

The difficulties within this concept of reason, arising from the fact 
that its subjects, the bearers of one and the same reason, are in real oppo¬ 
sition to each other, are concealed in the Western Enlightenment behind 
the apparent clarity of its judgments. In the Critique of Pure Reason, how¬ 
ever, those difficulties make themselves apparent in the unclear relation¬ 
ship of the transcendental to the empirical ego and in the other irrecon¬ 
cilable contradictions. Kant’s concepts are ambiguous. Reason as the tran¬ 
scendental, supraindividual self contains the idea of a free coexistence in 
which human beings organize themselves to form the universal subject 
and resolve the conflict between pure and empirical reason in the con¬ 
scious solidarity of the whole. The whole represents the idea of true uni¬ 
versality, utopia. At the same time, however, reason is the agency of calcu¬ 
lating thought, which arranges the world for the purposes of self-preser¬ 
vation and recognizes no function other than that of working on the 
object as mere sense material in order to make it the material of subjuga¬ 
tion. The true nature of the schematism which externally coordinates the 
universal and the particular, the concept and the individual, case, finally 
turns out, in current science, to be the interest of industrial society. Being 
is apprehended in terms of manipulation and administration. Every¬ 
thing—including the individual human being, not to mention the ani¬ 
mal—becomes a repeatable, replaceable process, a mere example of the 
conceptual models of the system. Conflict between administrative, reify¬ 
ing science, between the public mind and the experience of the individual, 
is precluded by the prevailing circumstances. The senses are determined 
by the conceptual apparatus in advance of perception; the citizen sees the 
world as made a priori of the stuff from which he himself constructs it. 
Kant intuitively anticipated what Hollywood has consciously put into 
practice: images are precensored during production by the same standard 
of understanding which will later determine their reception by viewers. 



66 Excursus II 


The perception by which public judgment feels itself confirmed has been 
shaped by that judgment even before the perception takes place. Although 
the secret utopia harbored within the concept of reason may have 
glimpsed the repressed identical interest which lies beyond the diverse 
accidental interests of subjects, reason, operating under the pressure of 
purposes merely as systematic science, not only levels out the differences 
but standardizes the identical interest. It acknowledges no determination 
other than the classifications of the social operation. No one is different to 
the purpose for which he has been produced: a useful, successful, or failed 
member of professional and national groups. He is a single, random rep¬ 
resentative of his geographical, psychological, and sociological type. Logic 
is democratic: in this respect the great have no advantage over the most 
menial. The former are counted as prominent citizens while the latter are 
prospective objects of welfare relief. Science stands in the same relation¬ 
ship to nature and human beings'in general as insurance theory stands to 
life and death in particular. Who dies is unimportant; what matters is the 
ratio of incidences of death to the liabilities of the company. It is the law 
of large numbers, not the particular case, which recurs in the formula. Nor 
is the concordance of general and particular concealed any longer within 
an intellect which always perceives the particular as a case of the general 
and the general only as the aspect ..of the particular by which it can be 
grasped and manipulated. Science itself has no awareness of itself; it is 
merely a tool. Enlightenment, however, is the philosophy which equates 
truth with the scientific system. Kant’s attempt to justify this identity, 
which was still made with a philosophical intention, gave rise to concepts 
which have no meaning for science, since they are not simply instructions 
for performing manipulations according to certain rules. The notion of the 
self-understanding of science conflicts with the concept of science itself. 
Kant’s work transcends experience as mere operation, and for that rea¬ 
son—and in accordance with its own principles—is rejected as dogmatic 
by enlightenment today. In confirming the scientific system as the embod¬ 
iment of truth—the result arrived at by Kant—thought sets the seal on its 
own insignificance, because science is a technical operation, as far removed 
from reflection on its own objectives as' is any other form of labor under 
the pressure of the system.-v 1 

^ The moral teachings of the Enlightenment bear witness to the hope¬ 
lessness of attempting to replace enfeebled religion by an intellectual 



Juliette or Enlightenment and Morality 67 


motive for enduring within society when material interest no longer suf¬ 
fices. As solid citizens, philosophers ally themselves in practice with the 
powers they condemn in theory. The theories are logical and hard while 
the moral philosophies are propagandistic and sentimental, even when rig¬ 
orous in tone, or else the moral philosophies are acts of violence performed 
in the awareness that morality is nondeducible, like Kant’s recourse to 
treating moral forces as facts. His attempt to derive the duty of mutual 
respect from a law of reason, although more cautious than any other such 
undertaking in Western philosophy, has no support within the Critique. It 
is the usual endeavor of bourgeois thought to ground the respect without 
which civilization cannot exist on something other than material inter¬ 
est—an attempt more sublime and paradoxical than any that went before, 
but just as ephemeral. The citizen who renounced a profit out of the 
Kantian motive of respect for the mere form of the law would not be 
enlightened but superstitious—a fool. The root of Kantian optimism, 
according to which moral actions are reasonable even when base ones are 
likely to prosper, is a horror of relapsing into barbarism. If—Kant writes 
in response to Haller 10 —one of these great moral forces, reciprocal love 
and respect, were to collapse, “then nothingness (immorality) with gaping 
maw would drink the whole realm of (moral) beings like a drop of water.” 
But, according to Kant, from the standpoint of scientific reason moral 
forces are neutral drives and forms of behavior, no less than immoral ones, 
which they immediately become when no longer directed at that hidden 
possibility but at reconciliation with power. Enlightenment expels differ¬ 
ence from theory. It considers “human actions and desires'exactly as if I 
were dealing with lines, planes, and bodies.”" The totalitarian order has 
put this into effect in utter seriousness. Freed from supervision by one’s 
own class, which had obliged the nineteenth-century businessman to 
maintain Kantian respect and reciprocal love, fascism,* which by its iron 
discipline relieves its peoples of the burden of moral feelings, no longer 
needs to observe any discipline. Contrary to the categorical imperative, 
and all the more deeply in accord with pure reason, it treats human beings 
as things, centers of modes of behavior. The rulers sought to shield the 
bourgeois world from the flood of naked violence, which now has broken 
over Europe, only for as long as economic concentration was insufficient¬ 
ly advanced. Previously only the poor and savages had been exposed to the 
unrrammeled force of the capitalist elements. But the totalitarian order has 



68 Excursus II 


granted unlimited rights to calculating thought and puts its trust in sci¬ 
ence as such. Its canon is its own brutal efficiency.* From Kant’s Critique 
to Nietzsche’s Genealogy of Morals, the hand of philosophy had traced the 
writing on the wall; one individual put that writing into practice, in all its 
details. The work of the Marquis de Sade exhibits “understanding without 
direction from another”—that is to say, the bourgeois subject freed from 
all tutelage. 

Self-preservation is the constitutive principle of science, the soul of 
the table of categories, even if, as in Kant, it has to be deduced idealisti¬ 
cally. Even the ego, the synthetic unity of apperception, the agency which 
Kant calls the highest point, from which the whole of logic must be sus¬ 
pended, 12 is really both the product and the condition of material exis¬ 
tence. Individuals, in having to fend for themselves, develop the ego as the 
agency of reflective foresight and overview; over successive generations it 
expands and contracts with the individual’s prospects of economic auton¬ 
omy and productive ownership. Finally it passes from the expropriated cit¬ 
izens to the totalitarian trust-masters, whose science has become the quin¬ 
tessence of the methods by which the subjugated mass society reproduces 
itself. Sade erected an early monument to their planning skills. The con¬ 
spiracy of rulers against peoples, implemented by relentless organization, 
finds the Enlightenment spirit since Machiavelli and Flobbes no less com¬ 
pliant than the bourgeois republic. That spirit is hostile to authority only 
when authority lacks the strength to enforce obedience, and to violence 
only when violence is not an established fact. As long as one does not ask 
who is applying it, reason has no greater affinity with violence than with 
mediation; depending on the situation of individuals and groups, it pre¬ 
sents either peace or war, tolerance or repression, as the given state of 
affairs. Because it unmasks substantial goals as asserting the power of 
nature over mind and as curtailing its own self-legislation, reason, as a 
purely formal entity, is at the service of every natural interest. Becoming 
simply an organ, thinking reverts to nature. For the rulers, however, 
human beings become mere material,' as the whole of nature has become 
material for society. After the brief interlude of liberalism in which the 
bourgeois kept one another in check, power is revealing itself a^ archaic 
terror in a fascistically rationalized form.* “The religious chimeras,” says 
the I 1 rince of Francavilla at the court of King Ferdinand of Naples, “must 
be replaced by utmost terror. The people must be freed from the fear of a 



Juliette or Enlightenment and Morality 69 


future Hell. Once that is destroyed they will abandon themselves to any¬ 
thing. But that chimerical fear must be replaced by penal laws of enor¬ 
mous severity, which apply, of course, only to the people, since they alone 
cause unrest in the state. Malcontents are born only to the lower classes. 
What do the rich care for the idea of a leash they will never feel them¬ 
selves, if this empty semblance gives them the right to grind down those 
living under their yoke? You will find no one in that class who will not per¬ 
mit the darkest shadow of tyranny to fall on him, provided it really falls 
on others.” 13 Reason is the organ of calculation, of planning; it is neutral 
with regard to ends; its element is coordination. More than a century 
before the emergence of sport, Sade demonstrated empirically what Kant 
grounded transcendentally: the affinity between knowledge and planning 
which has set its stamp of inescapable functionality on a bourgeois exis¬ 
tence rationalized even in its breathing spaces. The precisely coordinated 
modern sporting squad, in which no member is in doubt over his role and 
a replacement is held ready for each, has its exact counterpart in the sexu¬ 
al teams of Juliette, in which no moment is unused, no body orifice 
neglected, no function left inactive. In sport, as in all branches of mass cul¬ 
ture, a tense, purposive bustle prevails, although none but the wholly ini¬ 
tiated observer could fathom the different combinations or the meaning 
of the game’s changing fortunes, governed by arbitrarily chosen rules. The 
special architectonic structure of the Kantian system, like the gymnasts’ 
pyramids in Sade’s orgies and the formalized principles of early bourgeois 
freemasonry—cynically reflected in the strict regime of the libertine soci¬ 
ety of the 120 Days of Sodom —prefigures the organization, devoid of any 
substantial goals, which was to encompass the whole of life. What seems 
to matter in such events, more than pleasure itself, is the busy pursuit of 
pleasure, its organization; just as in othpr demythologized epochs, imper¬ 
ial Rome, the Renaissance, and the Baroque, the schema of activity count¬ 
ed for more than its content. In the modern period enlightenment has 
released the ideas of harmony and perfection from their hypostatization in 
a religious Beyond and made them available as criteria for human endeav¬ 
or within the form of the system. Once the utopia which inspired the 
hopes of the French Revolution had been absorbed, potently and impo- 
tently, into German music and philosophy, the established bourgeois order 
entirely functionalized reason. It became a purposiveness without purpose, 
which for that very reason could be harnessed to any end. It is planning 



70 Excursus II 


considered as an end in itself. The totalitarian state manipulates nations. 
“Just so,” replies the Prince in Sade to the speaker just quoted, “the gov¬ 
ernment itself must control the population. It must possess the means to 
exterminate the people, should it fear them, or to increase their numbers, 
should it consider that necessary. And nothing should weigh in the bal¬ 
ance of its justice except its own interests or passions, together only with 
the passions and interests of those who, as we have said, have been grant¬ 
ed just enough power to multiply our own.” 14 The Prince points the path 
which imperialism, reason in its most terrible form, has always followed. 
“Take away its god from the people you wish to subjugate and you will 
demoralize it. As long as it has no other god than yours, you will always 
be its master . . . Grant it in return the widest, most criminal license. 
Never punish it, except when it turns against you.” 15 

As reason posits no substantial goals, all affects are equally remote to 
it. They are merely natural. The principle according to which reason is 
simply opposed to everything unreasonable underlies the true opposition 
between enlightenment and mythology. The latter recognizes spirit only 
as something immersed in nature, a natural power. For it, inward impuls¬ 
es, like outward forces, are living powers of divine or demonic origin. 
Enlightenment, by contrast, relocates contexty-meaning, and life entirely 
within a subjectivity which is actually constituted only by this relocation. 
For enlightenment, reason is the chemical agent which absorbs the real 
substance of things and volatilizes it into the mere autonomy of reason. In 
order to escape the superstitious fear of nature, enlightenment has pre¬ 
sented effective objective entities and forms without exception as mere 
veils of chaotic matter and condemned matters influence on the human 


agent as enslavement, until the subject, according to its own concept, had 
been turned into a single, unrestricted, empty authority. The whole force 
of nature became a mere undifferentiated resistance to the abstract power 
of the subject. The particular mythology which the Western Enlighten¬ 
ment, including Calvinism, had to do away with was the Catholic doc¬ 
trine of the ordo and the pagan popular religion which continued to flour¬ 
ish beneath it. To liberate human beings from such beliefs was the objec¬ 
tive of bourgeois philosophy. However, the liberation went further than its 


humane originators had intended. The market economy it unleashed.was 
at oince the prevailing form of reason and the power which ruined reason. 


The Romantic reactionaries only expressed what the bourgeois themselves 



Juliette or Enlightenment and Morality 71 


had realized: that freedom in their world tended toward organized anar¬ 
chy. The Catholic counterrevolution’s critique of the Enlightenment 
proved no less valid than the Enlightenment’s critique of Catholicism. The 
Enlightenment had pinned its colors to liberalism. If all affects are of equal 
value, then self-preservation, which dominates the form of the system in 
any case, seems to offer the most plausible maxims for action. It was to be 
given free rein in the free economy. The somber writers of the early bour¬ 
geois period, such as Machiavelli, Hobbes, and Mandeville, who spoke up 
for the egoism of the self, thereby recognized society as the destructive 
principle and denounced harmony before it was elevated to the official 
doctrine by the bearers of light, the classicists. The former writers exposed 
the totality of the bourgeois order as the horrifying entity which finally 
engulfed both, the general and the particular, society and the self. With the 
development of the economic system* in which the control of the eco¬ 
nomic apparatus by private groups creates a division between human 
beings, self-preservation, although treated by reason as identical, had be¬ 
come the reified drive of each individual citizen and proved to be a de¬ 
structive natural force no longer distinguishable from self-destruction. 
The two principles combined in a murky fusion. Pure reason became 
unreason, a procedure as immune to errors as it was devoid of content. 
However, with the revolutionary avant-garde, the utopia which pro¬ 
claimed the reconciliation between nature and the self emerged from its 
hiding place in German philosophy as something at once irrational and 
reasonable, as the idea of the community of frfee individuals*—and 
brought down on itself the full fury of reason. In society as if is, despite 
feeble moralistic attempts to propagate humanity as the most rational 
means, self-preservation remains unencumbered by a utopia denounced as 
myth. For those at the top, shrewd self-preservation means the fascist 
struggle for power, and for individuals it means adaptation to injustice at 
any price. Enlightened reason no more possesses the means of measuring 
one drive within itself against others than of ordering the universe into 
spheres. It rightly exposes the notion of hierarchy in nature as a reflection 
of medieval society, and later attempts to demonstrate a new order of val¬ 
ues bear the unmistakable taint of mendacity. The irrationalism which is 
evident in such futile reconstructions is far from opposing industrial rea¬ 
son.* Whereas great philosophy, in Leibniz and Hegel, had recognized a 
claim to truth even in subjective and objective forms of expression—feel- 



72 Excursus II 


ings, institutions, works of art—which do not amount to actual ideas, irra¬ 
tionalism, here as elsewhere showing its kinship to the last dregs of the 
Enlightenment, modern positivism, draws a strict line between feeling, in 
the form of religion and art, and anything deserving the name of knowl¬ 
edge. Although irrationalism restricts cold reason in favor of immediate 
life, it turns the latter into a principle merely hostile to thought. Under 
cover of this illusory enmity feeling, and finally all human expression, 
indeed culture itself, is stripped of any responsibility to thought and trans¬ 
formed into the neutralized element of the all-embracing rationality of an 
economic system* long since grown irrational. From the first, that reason 
has been unable to rely on its attractive power alone and has supplement¬ 
ed it with the cult of emotions. In appealing to this cult, it turns against 
its own medium, thought, which was always suspect to this self-estranged 
form of reason. The tender effusions of lovers in films already function as 
a blow against dispassionate theory, and that is taken further in the senti¬ 
mental argument against any thought which attacks injustice. This eleva¬ 
tion of feelings to an ideology does not abolish the contempt in which 
they are really held. The fact that, compared to the starry heights into 
which ideology transposes them, they appear all the more vulgar merely 
contributes to their ostracism.. The verdict on feelings was already implic¬ 
it in the formalization of reason. Even self-preservation, as a natural drive 
like other impulses, has a bad conscience; only bustling efficiency and the 
institutions created to serve it—mediation, apparatus, organization, sys¬ 
tematization as ends in themselves—enjoy the esteem, in practice as in 
theory, of being deemed reasonable; the emotions are incorporated into 
this spurious reason. 

The Enlightenment of the modern age has been marked from the 
first by radicalism: This fact distinguishes it from all earlier stages of 
demythologization. As a rule, whenever a new religion and a new mental¬ 
ity have won a place in world history, bringing a new mode of social exis¬ 
tence, the old gods have been cast into the dust together with the old class¬ 
es, tribes, and peoples. But especially ^vhen a people, such as the Jews, has 
taken on a new form of social life as a result of its own fate, its venerable 
customs, sacred actions, and objects of worship have been magically trans¬ 
formed into abominable misdeeds and terrifying specters. The phobias 
and idiosyncrasies of today, the character traits which are most despised 
and derided, can be deciphered as marks of a huge advance in human 



Juliette or Enlightenment and Morality 73 


development. From the disgust aroused by excrement and human flesh to 
the contempt for fanaticism, idleness, and poverty, both spiritual and 
material, a line connects behavioral forms which were once adequate and 
necessary to those which are abominated. This line is at once that of 
destruction and of civilization. Each step has been an advance, a stage of 
enlightenment. But whereas all the earlier changes, from preanimism to 
magic, from matriarchal to patriarchal culture, from the polytheism of the 
slave traders to the Catholic hierarchy, replaced the older mythologies 
with new albeit enlightened ones, the Great Mother with the God of 
Hosts, the totem with the veneration of the Lamb, in the glare of enlight¬ 
ened reason any devotion which believed itself objective, grounded in the 
matter at hand, was dispelled as mythological. All preexisting ties were 
tabooed by this verdict, not excluding those which were necessary to the 
existence of the bourgeois order itself. The instrument by means of which 
the bourgeoisie had come to power, the unfettering of forces, universal 
freedom, self-determination—in short, enlightenment—turned against 
the bourgeoisie as soon as that class, as a system of rule, was forced to sup¬ 
press those it ruled. By virtue of its principle, enlightenment does not stop 
short at the minimum of belief without which the bourgeois world could 
not exist. It does not render to power the reliable services which had 
always been performed for it by the old ideologies. Its antiauthoritarian 
tendency, which communicates, if only subterraneously, with the utopia 
contained in the concept of reason, finally made it as inimical to the estab¬ 
lished bourgeoisie as to the aristocracy, with which, indeed, it lost no' time 
in forming alliances. Ultimately, the antiauthoritarian principle necessari¬ 
ly becomes its own antithesis, the agency opposed to reason: its abolition 
of all absolute ties allows power to decree and manipulate any ties which 
suit its purposes. After civic virtue and charity, for which it never offered 
good reasons, philosophy proclaimed authority and hierarchy as virtues, 
when enlightenment had long since revealed them as lies. But against such 
perversion of itself enlightenment, too, had no arguments, since pristine 
truth has no advantage over distortion, or rationalization over reason, un¬ 
less it can demonstrate a practical one as well. With the formalization of 
reason, theory itself, if it seeks to be more than a cipher for neutral pro¬ 
cedures, becomes an incomprehensible concept, and thought is deemed 
meaningful only after the sacrifice of meaning. Once harnessed to the 
dominant mode of production, enlightenment, which strives to under- 



74 Excursus II 


mine any order which has become repressive, nullifies itself. This is 
expressed in the early attacks of the current form of enlightenment on the 
“all-crushing” Kant. Just as Kant’s moral philosophy set limits to his 
enlightened critique in order to rescue the possibility of reason, unreflect¬ 
ing enlightened thinking has always sought, for its own survival, to cancel 
itself with skepticism, in order to make room for the existing order. 

In contrast to such precautions, the work of Sade, like that of 
Nietzsche, is an intransigent critique of practical reason, beside which 
even that of Kant himself appears like a revocation of his own thought. It 
pushes the scientific principle to annihilating extremes. Kant, to be sure, 
had so purified the moral law within the self of any heteronymous belief 
that respect, despite his assurances, could be no more than a psychologi¬ 
cal fact of nature, as the starry sky above the self was a physical one. “A fact 
of reason,” he called it, 16 while Leibniz termed it “a general instinct of soci¬ 
ety.” 17 But-facts count for nothing where they do not exist. Sade does not 
deny their occurrence. Justine, the virtuous sister, is a martyr to the moral 
law. Juliette, however, draws the conclusion the bourgeoisie sought to 
avoid: she demonizes Catholicism as the latest mythology, and with it civ¬ 
ilization as a whole. The energies previously focused on the sacrament are 
now devoted, perversely, to sacrilege. This inversion is extended to com¬ 
munity in general. In all this Juliette does not proceed fanatically, as 
Catholicism had done with the Incas, but merely attends to the business 
of sacrilege in the efficient, enlightened way that Catholics, too, still had 
in their blood from archaic times. The primeval forms of behavior which 
had been tabooed by civilization, and had grown destructive under the 
stigma of bestiality, had led an underground life. Juliette revives them in 
their outlawed, not their natural form. She compensates the value judg¬ 
ment against them—which, like all value judgments, was unfounded—by 
its opposite. Thus, when she reenacts the primitive reactions they are no 
longer primitive but bestial. In psychological terms Juliette, not unlike 
Merteuil in Les Liaisons Dangereuses, 18 embodies neither unsublimated nor 
regressive libido but intellectual pleasure in regression, amor intellectuals 
diaboli , the joy of defeating civilization with its own weapons. She loves 
systems and logic. She wields the instrument of rational thought with con¬ 
summate skill. As far as self-mastery is concerned, her instructions'Some¬ 
times stand in the same relation to Kant’s as the special application does 
to the principle. “Virtue,” writes the latter, 19 “in so far as it is grounded on 



Juliette or Enlightenment and Morality 7 5 


inner freedom, also contains an affirmative imperative for men, namely to 
place all their capacities and inclinations under the power [of reason] and 
therefore under the authority over oneself, which imperative is added to 
the interdiction on allowing oneself to be commanded by one’s feelings 
and inclinations [the duty of apathy]. For unless reason takes the reins of 
government into its hands, those feelings and inclinations will play the 
master over men.” Juliette teaches as follows on the self-discipline of the 
criminal: “First, reflect on your plan for several days in advance. Consider 
all its consequences, paying attention to what can be useful to you . . . and 
what might possibly betray you. Weigh these things just as soberly as if 
you were sure to be discovered.” 20 The murderer’s face must show utmost 
calm. “Let your features show calm and indifference. Try to acquire the 
greatest possible callousness in this situation.... If you are unsure of being 
free of pangs of conscience—and you will gain such certainty only 
through the habit of crime—if you are unsure of this, I say, then you will 
labor in vain to master the play of your features.” 21 To be free of the stab 
of conscience is as essential to formalistic reason as to be free of love or 
hate. Remorse posits the past—which, contrary to popular ideology, has 
always meant nothing to the bourgeoisie—as something which exists; it is 
a relapse, to prevent which, for bourgeois praxis, would be remorse’s only 
justification. Spinoza, following the Stoics, states the matter as follows: 
“Repentance is not a virtue, or, in other words, it does not arise from rea¬ 
son, but he who repents of an action is twice as unhappy or as weak as 
before.” 22 But he goes on at once, quite in the spirit of Francavilla: “If the 
mob is not in fear, it threatens in its turn,” 23 thus maintaining, as a good 
student of Machiavelli, that modesty and remorse, like fear and hope, are 
undoubtedly useful, however contrary to reason. “Apathy (considered as a 
strength) is a necessary presupposition of virtue,” writes Kant, 24 distin¬ 
guishing, not unlike Sade, between this “moral apathy” and insensibility 
in the sense of indifference to sensory stimulation. Enthusiasm is bad. 
Calm and resolution constitute the strength of virtue. “That is the state of 
health in moral life, whereas the affect, even when it is excited by the idea 
of the good, is a momentarily lustrous phenomenon which leaves behind 
lassitude.” 25 Juliette’s friend Clairwil makes exactly the same observation 
with regard to vice. 26 “My soul is hardened, and I am far from preferring 
sensibility to the happy indifference I now enjoy. Oh Juliette . . . perhaps 
you are deceiving yourself about the dangerous sensibility prized by so 



76 Excursus II 


many fools.” Apathy arises at the turning points in bourgeois history, as in 
the history of antiquity, when the pauci beati become aware of their pow¬ 
erlessness in face of the overwhelming historical tendency. It marks the 
retreat of the individual’s spontaneity into the private sphere, which is thus 
established as the truly bourgeois form of existence. Stoicism—which is 
the bourgeois philosophy—makes it easier for the privileged to look what 
threatens them in the eye by dwelling on the suffering of others. It affirms 
the general by elevating private existence, as protection from it, to the sta¬ 
tus of a principle. The private sphere of the bourgeois* is an upper-class 
cultural asset which has come down in the world. 

Juliette’s credo is science. She abominates any veneration which can¬ 
not be shown to be rational: belief in God and his dead son, obedience to 
the Ten Commandments, preference of the good to the wicked, salvation 
to sin. She is attracted by those reactions which have been proscribed by 
the legends of civilization. She manipulates semantics and logical syntax 
like the most up-to-date positivist, but unlike that employee of the latest 
administration she does not direct her linguistic criticism primarily against 
thought and philosophy but, as a daughter of the militant Enlightenment, 
against religion. “A dead God!” she says of Christ. “Nothing is more com¬ 
ical than this nonsensical combination of words from the Catholic dictio¬ 
nary: God, which means eternal; death, which means not eternal. Idiotic 
Christians, what do you intend to do with your dead God?” 27 The con¬ 
version of what is condemned without scientific proof into something to 
be striven for, and of what is respected without proof into an object of 
revulsion, the transvaluation of values, the “courage to do the forbid¬ 
den,” 28 though without the telltale histrionics of Nietzsche’s “Wohlan!" 
[Onward!] and without his biological idealism, is her specific passion. “Are 
pretexts needed, to commit Crimes?” asks Princess Borghese, Juliette’s 
friend, quite in Nietzsche’s spirit. 29 Nietzsche proclaims the quintessence 
of her doctrine. 30 “Let the weaklings and failures go to ruin: the first prin¬ 
ciple of our philanthropy. And we should help them on their way. What 
is more damaging than any vice? The'pity of active people for the unsuc¬ 
cessful and the weak—Christianity.” 31 The latter, “with its curious inter¬ 
est in overthrowing tyrants and making them submit to principles of 
brotherhood . . . plays the game of the weak. It represents the weak, and 
has to speak like them. . .. We may be sure that such fraternal bonds were 
not on ^proposed but put in place by the weak, when.priestly power had 



Juliette or Enlightenment and Morality 77 


chanced to fall into their hands.” 32 This contribution to the genealogy of 
morals is made by Noirceuil, Juliette’s mentor. Nietzsche maliciously cele¬ 
brates the mighty and their cruelty when it is directed “outside their cir¬ 
cle,” that is, against everything alien to themselves. “Once abroad in the 
wilderness, they revel in the freedom from social constraint and compen¬ 
sate for their long confinement in the quietude of their own community. 
They revert to the innocence of wild animals: we can imagine them 
returning from an orgy of murder, arson, rape, and torture, jubilant and 
at peace with themselves as though they had committed a fraternity 
prank—convinced, moreover, that the poets for a long time to come will 
have something to sing about and praise. . . . This ‘boldness’ of noble 
races, so headstrong, absurd, incalculable, sudden, improbable, . . . their 
utter indifference to safety and comfort, their terrible pleasure in destruc¬ 
tion, their taste for cruelty,” 33 this boldness, stridently proclaimed by 
Nietzsche, has also taken hold of Juliette. “Live dangerously” is her mes¬ 
sage, too: “Dare henceforth to do anything without fear.” 34 There are the 
strong and the weak, there are classes, races, and nations which dominate 
and others which are subjected. “Where, I ask you,” cries Verneuil, “is the 
mortal stupid enough in face of all the evidence to claim that all men are 
born equal, in law and in fact? It was left to a misanthropist like Rousseau 
to put forward such a paradox, since, being extremely weak, he wanted to 
pull down those to whose level he was unable to raise himself. What 
effrontery did it take, I ask you, for this pygmy four feet two inches tall to 
compare himself to the model of stature and strength whom nature had 
endowed with the strength and figure of a Hercules? Is that not the same 
as comparing a fly to an elephant? Strength, beauty, stature, eloquence: 
those are the virtues which were decisive when authority passed to the 
rulers at the dawn of society.” 35 “To expect that strength will not manifest 
itself as strength,” Nietzsche goes on, 36 “as the desire to overcome, to ap¬ 
propriate, to have enemies, obstacles, and triumphs, is every bit as absurd 
as to expect that weakness will manifest itself as strength.”—“How do you 
really expect” says Verneuil, 37 “a man endowed by nature with the highest 
predisposition for crime, whether through his superior strength, the refine¬ 
ment of his senses or as a result of an education fitting to his class or his 
wealth—how, I ask, do you expect this individual to be judged by the 
same law as those whom everything constrains to act virtuously and mod¬ 
erately? Would the law be more just if it punished both in the same way? 



78 Excursus II 


Is it natural for someone whom everything invites to do evil to be treated 
like someone whom everything impels to behave with prudence?” 

Once the objective order of nature has been dismissed as prejudice 
and myth, nature is no more than a mass of material. For Nietzsche there 
is no law “which we not only recognize but recognize over us.” 3B To the 
extent that the understanding, which was formed against the standard of 
self-preservation, recognizes any law of life, it is that of the stronger. While 
reason, because of its formalism, is unable to yield any necessary model for 
humanity, it has the advantage of actuality, in contrast to mendacious ide¬ 
ology. It is the weak who are guilty, according to Nietzsche’s doctrine, 
since they use cunning to circumvent the natural law. “It is the diseased 
who imperil mankind, and not the ‘beasts of prey.’ It is the predestined 
failures and victims who undermine the social structure, who poison our 
faith in life and our fellow men.” 39 They have spread throughout the world 
the Christianity which Nietzsche hates and abominates no less than Sade. 
“It is not the reprisals of the weak against the strong which truly conform 
to nature. They exist in the mental realm, not the physical. To carry out 
such reprisals the weak man would need strength he has not been given. 
Fie would have to assume a character which is by no means his—in a cer¬ 
tain way he would do violence to nature. What is truthful in the laws of 
this wise mother is that the strong are allowed to injure the weak, since, to 
act in this way, they must only use the gifts they have received. The strong 
individual does not, like the weak, disguise himself with a character other 
than his own. He merely expresses in action what he has received from 
nature. Everything which follows from that is therefore natural: his 
oppression, his violence, his cruelties, his tyrannies, his injustices ... are 
pure, like the hand which has imprinted them on him. And if the strong 
person exercises all his rights to oppress and pillage the weak, he is only 
doing the most natural thing in the world. . . . We should never, therefore, 
have scruples over what we are able to take from the weak, since it is not 
we who are committing the crime. Rather, it is the defense or revenge of 
the weak which are characteristic of crime.” 40 If a weak person defends 
himself, he does wrong, “the wrong of stepping outside his own character 
ol weakness, which nature has impressed on him. She created him to be a 
slave, and poor. He refuses to subunit; that is his wrong.” 41 In such magis-" 
ierial speeches Dorval, the leader of a respectable Paris gang, expounds for 
Juliette the secret creed of all ruling classes, a creed to which Nietzsche, 



Juliette or Enlightenment and Morality 7 9 


proclaiming it to his own time, added the psychology of resentment. Like 
Juliette he admired “the beautiful terribleness of the deed,” 42 even though, 
as a German professor, he differed from Sade in rejecting criminality, be¬ 
cause its egoism “is restricted to such base goals. If its goals are lofty 
humanity has a different standard, judging ‘crime,’ even when committed 
with the most terrible means, not to be such.” 43 The enlightened Juliette 
is still free of such prejudice in favor of greatness, a prejudice which, 
indeed, is characteristic of the bourgeois world; for her the racketeer is not 
less admirable than the minister because his victims are fewer. For the 
German, however, beauty is a function of size, and amid the twilight of 
the idols he cannot shake off the idealistic habit of wanting to see the petty 
thief hanged while imperialist raids are transfigured into world-historical 
missions. By elevating the cult of strength to a world-historical doctrine, 
German fascism took it to its absurd conclusion. As a protest against civ¬ 
ilization the master morality perversely upheld the oppressed: hatred of 
stunted instincts objectively exposes the true nature of the slave masters, 
which reveals itself only in their victims. But, in the guise of a great power 
and a state religion, the master morality places itself entirely in the service 
of the civilizing powers that be, of the solid majority, of resentment and 
everything it once opposed. The realization of Nietzsche’s doctrines both 
refutes them and reveals their truth—a truth which, despite his yea-say¬ 
ing affirmation of life, was hostile to the spirit of reality. 

If remorse was contrary to reason, pity was outright sin. Anyone who 
yields to it “perverts the general law; whence it follows that pity, far from 
being a virtue, becomes truly a vice as soon as it induces us to interfere 
with the inequality required by the laws of nature.” 44 Sade and Nietzsche 
realized that once reason had been formalized pity was left behind as a 
kind of sensuous awareness of the identity of general and particular, as 
naturalized mediation. It then forms a highly compelling prejudice: “com¬ 
passion . . . does not appertain to the use of reason . . . although it seems 
to bear in it a sort of piety,” writes Spinoza, 45 and “he who is moved nei¬ 
ther by reason nor pity to help others is rightly called inhuman.” 46 
Commiseratio is humanity in its immediate form, but at the same time 
“bad and useless,” 47 since it is the opposite of the manly competence 
which, from Roman virtus through the Medici to efficiency under the 
Fords, has always been the true bourgeois virtue. Womanish and childish, 
Clairwil calls pity, vaunting her own “stoicism,” the “tranquility of the pas- 



80 Excursus II 


sions” which enables her “to accomplish and endure everything without 
agitation.’ M8 “Pity is anything but a virtue. It is a weakness, born of fear 
and misfortune, a weakness that must be overcome most of all if one is 
striving to conquer excessive nervous sensibility, which is irreconcilable 
with the maxims of philosophy.” 49 Women are the source of “outbursts of 
unrestrained compassion.” 50 Sade and Nietzsche knew that their doctrine 
of the sinfulness of pity was an old bourgeois heritage. The latter speaks 
of “strong times” and “aristocratic cultures,” while the former refers to 
Aristotle 51 and the Peripatetics. 52 Pity could not withstand the scrutiny of 
philosophy. Nor did Kant make an exception. Pity was, he said, “a certain 
soft-heartedness” and lacked “the dignity of virtue.” 53 He failed to notice, 
however, that the principle of “general benevolence toward the human 
race,” 54 by which, in contrast to Clairwil’s rationalism, he sought to replace 
pity, falls under the same curse of irrationality as “this well-meaning pas¬ 
sion” which can easily seduce a person into becoming “a tender-hearted 
idler.” Enlightenment cannot be duped; for it the general has no advan¬ 
tage over the particular fact, or an all-embracing love over a limited one. 
Pity stands in disrepute. Like Sade, Nietzsche cites the/In poetica in pass¬ 
ing judgment. “According to Aristotle, the Greeks often suffered an excess 
of pity: hence its necessary discharge through tragedy. We can see how sus¬ 
pect this inclination appeared to them. It endangers the state, takes away 
the necessary hardness and discipline, makes heroes howl like women.” 55 
Zarathustra preaches: “I see as much weakness as goodness. As much 
weakness as justice and pity.” 56 Pity has, in fact, a moment which conflicts 
with justice, although Nietzsche lumps the two together. It confirms the 
rule of inhumanity by the exception it makes. By limiting the abolition of 
injustice to fortuitous love of one’s neighbor, pity accepts as unalterable the 
law of universal estrangement which it would like to alleviate. It is true 
that the person who shows pity upholds as an individual the claim of the 
general, that is, the claim to life, against the general in the form of nature 
and society, which deny it. But the unity with the general as something 
inward, practiced by such an individual, is shown to be deceptive by his 
own weakness. It is not the softness but the restrictive nature of pity which 
makes it questionable—it is always too little. Just as the Stoic indifference 
on which bourgeois coldness,^the counterpart of pity, has modeled itself 
was diorc loyal, however wretchedly, to the universal it had rejected than 
the compassionate baseness which adapted itself to the world, so it was 



Juliette or Enlightenment and Morality 81 


those who unmasked pity who, however negatively, espoused the Rev¬ 
olution. The narcissistic deformations of pity, like the effusions of philan¬ 
thropists and the moral complacency of the social welfare worker, are still 
an internalized endorsement of the difference between rich and poor. Ad¬ 
mittedly, by imprudently confessing the joys of hardness, philosophy has 
put itself at the disposal of those who least forgive it the admission. The 
fascist masters* of the world translated the vilification of pity into that of 
political respect and the appeal to martial law, in which they were at one 
with Schopenhauer, the metaphysician of pity. For him the establishment 
of a humane order was the presumptuous delusion of someone who could 
hope only for misfortune. The enemies of pity were unwilling to equate 
humanity with misfortune. For them, the existence of misfortune was a 
scandal. With their impotent delicacy, they could not bear to see human¬ 
ity pitied. In desperation their powerlessness switched to the glorification 
of power, while disowning it in practice whenever it gave them leave. 

Kindness and good deeds become a sin, domination and suppression 
virtue. “All good things have at one time been considered evil; every orig¬ 
inal sin has, at some point, turned into an original virtue.” 57 In the new 
epoch Juliette applies this principle in earnest, for the first time con¬ 
sciously performing the transvaluation of all values. After the destruction 
of all ideologies she elevates as her own morality what Christianity, in its 
ideology if not always in its practice, held to be abominable. As a good 
philosopher she remains cool and reflective. All is done without illusions. 
To Clairwil’s proposal for a sacrilegious act she responds: “Now that we do 
not believe in God, my dear, . . . the desecrations you desire, are no more 
than useless childish games. ... I may be still firmer in my disbelief than 
you; my atheism is unshakable. So do not imagine that I need the child¬ 
ish pranks you propose to confirm it. I shall take part because it amuses 
you, but only for entertainment”—the American murderess Annie Hen¬ 
ry* would have said “just for fun”—“and never as something necessary, 
either to strengthen my way of thinking, or to convince others of it.” 58 
Though swayed by momentary kindness toward her accomplice, she still 
upholds her principles. Even injustice, hatred, and destruction become 
merely operations, now that the formalization of reason has stripped all 
goals of the character of necessity and objectivity, which is dismissed as 
illusion. Magic passes into mere activity, into the means—in short, into 
industry. The formalization of reason is merely the intellectual expression 



82 Excursus II 


of mechanized production. The means is fetishized: it absorbs pleasure. 
Just as the goals with which the old system of rule had veiled itself are ren¬ 
dered illusory by enlightenment in theory, the possibility of abundance 
removes their justification in practice. Domination survives as an end in 
itself, in the form of economic power. Pleasure itself shows traces of the 
outdated, the irrelevant, like the metaphysics which forbade it. Juliette 
speaks of the motives of crime. 59 She herself is no less ambitious and avari¬ 
cious than her friend Sbrigani, but she idolizes the forbidden. Sbrigani, a 
man devoted to the means and to duty, is more advanced. “To enrich our¬ 
selves—that is what matters. It would be the height of guilt if we failed to 
reach that goal. Only if one is truly on the way to becoming wealthy is one 
permitted to reap one’s pleasures: until then one must forget them.” For 
all her rational superiority, Juliette still clings to one superstition. While 
she recognizes the naivety of sacrilege, in the end it still gives her pleasure. 
But every pleasure betrays idolization: it is self-abandonment to an Other. 
Nature actually does not know pleasure: it does not go beyond the satis¬ 
faction of needs. All pleasure is social, in the unsublimated affects no less 
than in the sublimated. It springs from alienation. Even when enjoyment 
is ignorant of the prohibition it infringes, it owes its origin to civilization, 
to the fixed order from which it yearns to return to the very nature from 
which that order protects it. Only when dream absolves them of the com¬ 
pulsion of work, of the individual’s attachment to a particular social func¬ 
tion and finally to a self, leading back to a primal state free of domination 
and discipline, do human beings feel the magic of pleasure. It was the 
homesickness of those enmeshed in civilization, the “objective despair” of 
those who had to turn themselves into elements of the social order, which 
nourished the love of gods and demons; to them as transfigured nature this 
love turned in adoration. Thought arose in the course of liberation from 
terrible nature, which is finally subjugated utterly. Pleasure, so to speak, is 
nature’s revenge. In it human beings divest themselves of thought, escape 
from civilization. In earlier societies such homecoming was provided by 
communal festivals. Primitive orgies are the collective origin of pleasure. 
“The interlude of universal confusion represented by the festival,” writes 
Roger Caillois, “seems truly like the moment when the world’s order is sus¬ 
pended. All excesses are permitted. Rules must be broken, everything 
mtlst be turned upside down. In the mythic epoch the course of time was 
reversed: one was born aged, died as a child. ... All the precepts protect- 



Juliette or Enlightenment and Morality 8 3 


ing the good, natural, and social order are systematically violated.” 60 One 
abandons oneself to the transfigured powers of origin; but from the stand¬ 
point of the suspended interdiction these actions appear as dissipated and 
insane. 61 Only with increasing civilization and enlightenment do the 
strengthened self and the secure system of power reduce the festival to 
farce. The rulers introduce pleasure as a rational measure, a tribute paid to 
imperfectly subdued nature; they seek at once to detoxify it and to pre¬ 
serve it in higher culture; to administer it to their subjects in controlled 
doses where it cannot be entirely withdrawn. Pleasure becomes an object 
of manipulation, until it finally perishes in the administrative arrange¬ 
ments. This development extends from the primitive feast to the holiday. 
“The more dominant the complex social organism becomes, the less it tol¬ 
erates interruptions of the ordinary course of life. Today as yesterday, 
tomorrow as today, everything must follow the same course. The general 
overflowing is no longer possible. The period of turbulence has been indi¬ 
vidualized. Holidays have supplanted the feast.” 62 In fascism they are sup¬ 
plemented by the collective fake intoxication, concocted from radio, head¬ 
lines, and Benzedrine.* Sbrigani has a presentiment of this. He grants 
himself amusements “on the road to fortune,” as vacations. Juliette, by 
contrast, still emulates the ancien regime. She deifies sin. Her libertinism 
is in thrall to Catholicism as the nun’s ecstasy is to paganism. 

Nietzsche is aware of the still mythical nature of pleasure. In its 
abandonment to nature pleasure renounces the possible, just as pity 
renounces the transformation of the whole. Both contain a moment of res¬ 
ignation. Nietzsche tracks down pleasure in all its hiding places, as narcis¬ 
sism in solitude, as masochistic enjoyment in the depressions of the self- 
tormentor. “Against all who merely enjoy!” 63 Juliette tries to rescue plea¬ 
sure by rejecting love in its bourgeois form as devotion, which, as resis¬ 
tance to the bourgeoisie’s own shrewdness, is characteristic of that class in 
its last century. In love, pleasure was linked to the deification of the per¬ 
son who bestowed it and was the truly human passion. It is being finally 
revoked as a value judgment conditioned by sexuality. In the enraptured 
adoration of the lover, as in the boundless admiration shown in return by 
the beloved, the actual servitude of the woman was endlessly transfigured. 
Again and again, the sexes were reconciled on the basis of their recogni¬ 
tion of this servitude: the woman seemed freely to accept her defeat, the 
man to grant her victory. Under Christianity the hierarchy of the sexes, the 



84 Excursus II 


yoke placed on the feminine character by the masculine order of property, 
was idealized as the union of hearts in marriage, and the memory of sex¬ 
uality’s better, prepatriarchal past appeased. Under big industry* love is 
annulled. The decline of middle-class property, the downfall of the free 
economic subject, affects the family: it is no longer the celebrated cell of 
society it once was, since it no longer forms the basis of the citizen’s eco¬ 
nomic existence. For adolescents the family no longer marks out the hori¬ 
zon of their lives; the autonomy of the father is vanishing and with it resis¬ 
tance to his authority. Earlier, the girl’s servitude in the paternal home 
inflamed in her the passion which seemed to lead to freedom but was ful¬ 
filled neither in marriage nor anywhere outside. As the prospect of a job 
opens for the girl, that of love is closed. The more universally the system 
of modern industry* requires everyone to enter its service, the more all 
those who do not form part of the ocean of “white trash,”* which is 
absorbing the unqualified employed and unemployed, are turned into 
petty experts, into employees who must fend for themselves. In the form 
of skilled work the autonomy of the entrepreneur, which is over, is spread¬ 
ing to all those admitted as producers, including the “working” woman, 
and is becoming their character. Their self-respect grows in proportion to 
their fungibility. Defiance of the family is no more an act of daring than 
the leisure-time relationship with the boyfriend is the gateway to heaven. 
People are taking, on the rational, calculating attitude to their own sexual¬ 
ity long since proclaimed as ancient wisdom by Juliette’s enlightened cir¬ 
cle. Mind and body are being separated in reality, just as those indiscreet 
bourgeois libertines demanded: “It appears to me,” Noirceuil states ratio¬ 
nale tically, 64 “that love and pleasure are two very different things . . . 
because tender feelings correspond to relationships of caprice and deco¬ 
rum, but in no way spring from the beauty of a neck or the pretty curve 
of a hip. And these objects, which, in accordance with our taste, can keen¬ 
ly excite our physical affects, have, it seems to me, no rights over our men¬ 
tal affections. To complete my thought, Belize is ugly, is forty years old, 
entirely lacks grace of person, is without regular features or any physical 
charm. But Belize has intelligence, a precious character, a million things 
which attach my feelings and preferences. I shall never wish to sleep with 
Belize, but I shall love her to the point -of madness, whereas I shall lust 
aftH'r Araminthe but heartily detest her asj soon as the fever of desire is 
past." Here, the inevitable consequence implicit in the Cartesian division 



Juliette or Enlightenment and Morality 8 5 


of the human being into thinking and extensive substance is expressed 
with total clarity as the destruction of Romantic love. The latter is taken 
to be a mask, a rationalization of the physical drive, “a false and always 
dangerous metaphysics,” 65 as Count Belmor explains in his great speech 
on love. For all their libertinism, Juliette’s friends conceive of sexuality, as 
against tenderness, of earthly as against heavenly love, not just as a degree 
too powerful but also as oversimplified. The beauty of a neck or the curve 
of a hip acts on sexuality not as unhistorical, merely natural facts but as 
images in which the whole of social experience is contained; this experi¬ 
ence harbors an intention toward something different to nature, a love not 
restricted to sexuality. But even the most incorporeal tenderness is trans¬ 
formed sexuality; the hand stroking the hair, the kiss on the brow, which 
express the rapture of spiritual love, are in pacified form the beating and 
biting which accompany the sexual act among Australian aborigines. The 
distinction is abstract. Metaphysics, Belmor teaches, falsifies the factual 
situation, it prevents the beloved from being seen as he or she is; it stems 
from magic, it is a veil. “And I am not to snatch it from our eyes? That 
would be weakness ... cowardice. Let us analyze her when the pleasure is 
over, this goddess who has just blinded me.” 66 Love itself is an unscientif¬ 
ic concept: “False definitions are always leading us astray,” Dolmance 
declares in the memorable fifth dialogue of La Philosophie dans le Boudoir, 
“I don’t know what it is—the heart. I simply use that term for weakness 
of mind.” 67 “If we spend one moment in what Lucretius calls the ‘back¬ 
ground of life,”’—meaning, in cold analysis—“we find that neither the 
elevation of the beloved nor romantic feeling withstands analysis. ... It is 
the body alone that I love, and it is the body alone that I lament, although 
I can have it again at any time.” 68 What is true in all this is the insight into 
the dissociation of love, the work of progress. This dissociation, which 
mechanizes pleasure and distorts longing into a deception, attacks love at 
its core. By turning her praise of genital and perverted sexuality into con¬ 
demnation of what is unnatural, immaterial, illusory, the libertine Juliette 
has thrown in her lot with the normality which belittles and restricts not 
only the utopian exaltation of love but physical pleasure, not only the lofti¬ 
est joy but that which is nearest at hand. The cynical rou^ whose side she 
takes has metamorphosed, with the help of the sex educator, the psycho¬ 
analyst, and the hormone physiologist, into the open-minded practical 
man who extends his affirmation of sport and hygiene to include the sex 



86 Excursus II 


life. Juliette’s critique contains the same inner discord as the Enlighten¬ 
ment itself. In so far as the criminal violation of taboos, which once made 
common cause with the bourgeois revolution, has not been simply 
absorbed into the new matter-of-factness, it lives on, with sublime love, as 
fidelity to the utopia brought near by the availability of physical pleasure 
to all. 

“The ridiculous enthusiasm” which attached us to a particular indi¬ 
vidual as the only one, the elevation of woman in love, can be traced back 
beyond Christianity to matriarchal stages. “It is certain that our spirit of 
chivalrous courtship, which comically offers our homage to an object 
made only to satisfy our need—it is certain, I say, that this spirit stems 
from the reverence our ancestors once had for women because of their pro¬ 
fession as prophetesses in town and country. Through terror, aversion 
became worship, and chivalry was nurtured in the womb of superstition. 
But this reverence never existed in nature, and it would be a waste of time 
to seek it there. The inferiority of that sex to ours is too well founded ever 
to give us a sound motive to respect it, and the love which arises from that 
blind reverence is, like it, a prejudice.” 69 It is on power, however legalisti- 
cally veiled, that the social hierarchy ultimately rests. The mastery of 
nature is reproduced within humanity. Christian civilization, which used 
the idea of protecting the physically weak to justify exploitation of the 
strong bondsman, never entirely won the hearts of the convened peoples. 
The principle of love was too strongly disavowed by the sharp intellect and 
the still sharper weapons of the Christian masters, until Lutheranism abol¬ 
ished the antithesis between state and doctrine by making the sword and 
rod the Gospel’s quintessence. It directly equated spiritual freedom with 
the affirmation of actual oppression. But woman bears the stigma of weak¬ 
ness; her weakness places her in a minority even when she is numerically 
superior to men. As with the subjugated original inhabitants in early forms 
of state, the indigenous population of colonies, who lack the organization 
and weapons of their conquerors, as with the Jews among Aryans, her 
defenselessness legitimizes her oppression. Sade expresses as formulae the 
reflections of Strindberg. “Let us not doubt that there is a difference 
between man and woman no less certain and important than that between 
ijnan and the apes of the fdrest. We would have just as good reason to deny 
woman membership of our species as to refuse to acknowledge brother¬ 
hood-with the apes. Examine carefully a naked woman beside a man of 



Juliette or Enlightenment and Morality 87 


the same age, naked like her, and you will be readily convinced of the con¬ 
siderable difference (disregarding the sex) which exists between the two 
creatures and will clearly see that the woman is merely a lower degree of 
the man. The differences likewise exist within, and anatomical dissection 
of one and the other, if done with painstaking care, will bring this truth to 
light.” 70 Christianity’s attempt to compensate the suppression of sexuality 
ideologically by the veneration of woman, and thus to sublimate the mem¬ 
ory of the archaic instead of merely repressing it, is annulled by its rancor 
against the woman thus elevated and against theoretically emancipated 
pleasure. The affect which corresponds to the practice of oppression is 
contempt, not veneration, and lurking behind the love of one’s neighbor 
throughout the Christian centuries has been the forbidden, compulsive 
hatred of the object which continually brought to mind the futility of that 
exertion: woman. Women paid for the cult of the Madonna with the 
obsessive belief in witches, the revenge taken on the memory of the pre- 
Christian prophetess who secretly called into question the sanctified patri¬ 
archal system of power. The woman excites the savage rage of the half-con¬ 
verted man who is required to honor her, just as the weak in general can 
count on the mortal enmity of the superficially civilized strong who are 
supposed to spare them. Sade brings this hatred to consciousness. “I have 
never believed,” says Count Ghigi, the Roman chief of police, “that the 
union of two bodies could ever give rise to the union of two hearts. I see 
in this physical union strong reasons for contempt.... for revulsion, but 
not a single one for love.”' 1 And when a girl terrorized by Saint-Fonds, the 
royal minister, bursts into tears, he exclaims: “That is how I like women. 
. . . Why cannot I reduce them all to such a state with a single word?” 72 
Man as ruler refuses to do woman the honor of individualizing her. 
Socially, the individual woman is an example of the species, a representa¬ 
tive of her sex, and thus, wholly encompassed by male logic, she stands for 
nature, the substrate of never-ending subsumption on the plane of ideas 
and of never-ending subjection on that of reality. Woman as an allegedly 
natural being is a product of history, which denatures her. But the des¬ 
perate, destructive urge directed against everything which embodies the 
lure of nature, everything which is physiologically, biologically, nationally, 
or socially inferior, indicates that Christianity’s attempt has failed. “Q ue ne 
puis-je, d'ttn mot, les reduire toutes en cet hat! ” To eradicate utterly the 
hated but overwhelming temptation to lapse back into nature—that is the 



KH lixcursus II 


cruelly which stems Irom (ailed civilization; it is barbarism, the other side 
of culture. “ Them all!” For destruction tolerates no exceptions; the will to 
destroy is totalitarian, and totalitarianism springs from that will alone. “I 
have reached the point,” Juliette tells the Pope, “where I can say with 
Tiberius: if only the whole of mankind had only one head, so that I could 
have the pleasure of cutting it off with a single blow!” 73 The signs of pow¬ 
erlessness, hasty uncoordinated movements, animal fear, swarming mass¬ 
es, provoke the lust for murder. The explanation for the hatred of woman 
as the weaker in mental and physical power, who bears the mark of dom¬ 
ination on her brow, is the same as for the hatred of the Jews. Women and 
Jews show visible evidence of not having ruled for thousands of years. 
They live, although they could be eliminated, and their fear and weakness, 
the greater affinity to nature produced in them by perennial oppression, is 
the element in which they live. In the strong, who pay for their strength 
with their strained remoteness from nature and must forever forbid them¬ 
selves fear, this incites blind fury. They identify themselves with nature by 
calling forth from their victims, multiplied a thousandfold, the cry they 
may not utter themselves. “These senseless creatures!” writes President 
Blammont of women in Aline et Valcour, “How I love to see them strug¬ 
gling in my hands! They are like lambs in the jaws of the lion.” 74 And in 
the same letter: “It is the same as conquering a city. You must occupy the 
heights . . . establish yourself at all the commanding points and then 
launch your attack without any fear of resistance.” 75 A creature which has 
fallen attracts predators: humiliation of those already visited by misfortune 
brings the keenest pleasure. The less the danger to the one on top, the 
more unhampered the joy in the torments he can now inflict: only through 
the hopeless despair of the victim care power become pleasure and tri¬ 
umphantly revoke its own principle, discipline. Fear averted from the self 
bursts out in hearty laughter, the expression of a hardening within the 
individual which can only be fully lived out through the collective. 
Ringing laughter has always denounced civilization. “Of all the lava 
spewed forth from the crater of the human mouth, the most calamitous is 
merriment,” writes Victor Hugo in the chapter headed “Storms of men are 
worse than storms of oceans.” 76 “It is on misfortune,” Juliette teaches, 77 
“that the full weight of our malice must fall. The tears wrung from 
wretchedness have a keenness* which profoundly thrills our nervo_us sub¬ 
stance.” 78 Rather than with tenderness, pleasure makes its pact with cru- 



Iiilirllt' nr i iiliyjiinminii iiiul Mohility 


city, and sexual love becomes what according to Nietzscheit always was: 
"in its means, war; and at its basis the mortal hatred of the sexes." “With 
both the male and the female,” zoology teaches us, “‘love’, or sexual attrac¬ 
tion, is originally and preeminently ‘sadic’; it is positively gratified by the 
infliction of pain; it is as cruel as hunger.” 80 Thus, as its final result, civi¬ 
lization leads back to the terrors of nature. The lethal love on which Sade’s 
work is constantly focused, Nietzsche’s impudently solicitous magnanimi¬ 
ty in seeking to spare the victim humiliation at any price: cruelty and the 
idea of greatness deal no less harshly with human beings on the plane of 
play and imagination than German fascism* was to do on that of reality. 
However, whereas the unconscious colossus of real existence, subjectless 
capitalism, inflicts its destruction blindly, the deludedly rebellious subject 
is willing to see that destruction as its fulfillment, and, together with the 
biting cold it emits toward human beings misused as things, it also radi¬ 
ates the perverted love which, in the world of things, takes the place of 
love in its immediacy. Sickness becomes the symptom of recovery. In 
transfiguring the victims, delusion accepts their degradation. It makes 
itself resemble the monster of domination which it cannot physically over¬ 
come. Imagination seeks as horror to withstand horror. The Roman 
proverb that harshness is true pleasure expresses not merely the brutality 
of slave drivers but the indissoluble contradiction of order, which, when it 
sanctions happiness, turns it into self-parody and creates it only through 
proscribing it. While they perpetuated this contradiction, Sade and 
Nietzsche also contributed to its clarification. 

To reason, devotion to the adored creature appears as idol worship. 
The demise of idolatry follows necessarily from the ban on mythology 
pronounced by Jewish monotheism and enforced against the changing 
objects of adoration in the history of thought by that monotheism’s secu¬ 
larized form, enlightenment. The decay of economic reality, which has 
always been at the basis of superstition, released specific forces of negation. 
Christianity, however, propagated love: the pure adoration of Jesus. It 
sought to elevate the blind sexual drive by the hallowing of marriage, as it 
also tried to bring the crystalline radiance of law closer to earthly life by 
the idea of heavenly grace. The reconciliation of civilization with nature 
which it sought prematurely to purchase with the doctrine of the crucified 
God remained as alien to Judaism as to the rigorism of the Enlightenment. 
Neither Moses nor Kant proclaimed emotion; their icy law knew neither 



90 Excursus II 


love nor sacrificial pyres. Nietzsches attack on monotheism dealt a heav¬ 
ier blow to Christian than to Jewish doctrine. While he repudiated the 
Law he pledged himself to the “higher self,” 81 a self no longer natural but 
more-than-natural. He wanted to replace God by the “Overman” because 
monotheism, in its broken, Christian form, had transparently become 
mythology. But just as, in the service of this higher self, the old ascetic 
ideals are extolled by Nietzsche as self-overcoming in the interest of devel¬ 
oping “dominant power,” 82 so the higher self turns out to be a desperate 
attempt to rescue the God who was dead. In this, Nietzsche renews Kants 
endeavor to transform the divine law into an autonomous principle, to 
rescue European civilization from giving up the ghost in English skepti¬ 
cism. Kant’s principle: “that everything be done from the maxim of one’s 
will as a will that could at the same time have as its object itself as giving 
universal law,” 83 is also the secret of the Overman. His will is no less 
despotic than the categorical imperative. Both principles aim at indepen¬ 
dence from external powers, at the unconditional freedom from tutelage 
which defines the essence of enlightenment. However, as the fear of false¬ 
hood, a fear which even in his most “enlightened” moments Nietzsche 
decried as “a piece of Quixotism,” 84 replaced the Law with self-legislation, 
so that everything was made transparent as one great unmasked supersti¬ 
tion, enlightenment itself, indeed, truth in any form, became an idol, and 
we realize that “even we knowing ones of today, the godless and antimeta¬ 
physical, still take our fire from the conflagration kindled by a belief mil¬ 
lennia old, the Christian belief, which was also the belief of Plato, that 
God is truth, that the truth is divine.” 85 Science itself, therefore, is open to 
the same criticism as metaphysics. The denial of God contains an irre¬ 
solvable contradiction; it negates knowledge itself. Sade did not drive the 
idea of enlightenment to this point, where it turns against itself. The 
reflection of science on itself, the work of the Enlightenment’s conscience, 
was left to philosophy, meaning German philosophy. For Sade, enlighten¬ 
ment was not so much an intellectual as a social phenomenon. He carried 
forward the dissolution of bonds—which Nietzsche idealistically believed 
could be overcome by the higher self—and the critique of solidarity with 
society, office, family 86 to the point of proclaiming anarchy. His work lays 
bare the mythological nature> of the principles on which civilization'was 
based after the demise of religion: those of the Decalogue, of paternal 
authority, of property. It is the exact inversion of the social theory elabo- 



Juliette or Enlightenment and Morality 91 


rated by Le Play a hundred years later. 87 Each of the Ten Commandments 
is declared void before the tribunal of formal reason. They are revealed 
without exception as ideologies. At Juliette’s request the Pope himself 
pleads the case for murder. 88 He finds it easier to rationalize un-Christian 
acts in the light of natural reason than it had ever been to justify the 
Christian principles according to which those acts were devilish. The 
“mitered philosopher” has less need of sophistry in advocating murder 
than Maimonides and St Thomas Aquinas in condemning it. Roman rea¬ 
son is even more inclined than the god of the Prussians to side with the 
bigger battalions. The Law, however, has been dethroned, and the love 
which was supposed to humanize it is unmasked as a reversion to idolatry. 
It is not just romantic sexual love which has been condemned as meta¬ 
physics by science and industry but love of any kind, for no love can with¬ 
stand reason: neither that between wife and husband nor between lover 
and beloved, nor the love between parents and children. The Due de 
Blangis announces to his subjects that those related to the rulers, daugh¬ 
ters and wives, should be treated as harshly, indeed, still more harshly, than 
others, “in order to show you how deeply we despise the bonds by which 
you may think us fettered.” 89 Woman’s love is abolished like that of man. 
The rules of libertinage passed on by Saint-Fonds to Juliette are to apply 
to all women. 90 Dolmance voices the materialistic disenchantment of 
parental love. “These latter ties originate in the parents’ fear of being aban¬ 
doned in old age, and the self-interested concern they show for us in our 
childhood is intended to earn them the same consideration in old age.” 91 
Sade’s argument is as old as the bourgeoisie. Democritus already 
denounced parental love as economic. 92 Sade, however, applies the same 
disenchantment even to exogamy, the foundation of civilization. 
According to him, there are no rational grounds to oppose incest, 99 and 
the hygienic argument formerly used has now been invalidated by ad¬ 
vanced science, which ratifies Sade’s cold judgment. “It has by no means 
been proved that children born of incest have a greater tendency than oth¬ 
ers to suffer from cretinism, deaf-muteness, rickets, etc.” 94 The family, 
held together not by romantic sexual love but by maternal love, which 
forms the basis of all tenderness and social feelings, 95 conflicts with soci¬ 
ety itself. “Do not imagine you will make good republicans as long as you 
isolate children, who should belong only to the whole community, within 
your families. . . . Whereas there are great disadvantages in allowing chil- 



92 Excursus II 


dren to be absorbed into family interests which often diverge strongly 
from those of the nation, very great benefits lie in separating them from 
them.” 96 “Conjugal ties” must be destroyed for social reasons; children are 
to be “absolutely forbidden” knowledge of their fathers, since they are 
“uniquement les enfants de la patrie”; 97 the anarchy and individualism 
which Sade proclaimed in the struggle against laws 98 culminate in the 
absolute rule of the generality, the republic. Just as the deposed god returns 
as a more repressive idol, the old, undemanding bourgeois state reappears 
in the violence of the fascist collective. Sade thought through to the end 
the state socialism whose first steps brought the downfall of Saint-Just and 
Robespierre. If the bourgeoisie sent them, its most loyal politicians, to the 
guillotine, it banished its most outspoken writer to the hell of the Bib- 
liotheque Nationale. For the chronique scandaleuse of Justine and Juliette 
which, turned out as if on a production line, prefigured in the style of the 
eighteenth century the sensational literature of the nineteenth and the 
mass literature of the twentieth is the Homeric epic after it has discarded 
its last mythological veil: the story of thought as an instrument of power. 
In taking fright at the image in its own mirror, that thought opens to view 
what lies beyond it. It is not the harmonious social ideal, which even Sade 
glimpsed dimly in the future: “ gardez vos frontieres et restez chez vous it 
is not even the socialist utopia developed in the story of Zame: 100 it is the 
fact that Sade did not leave it to its enemies to be horrified by the 
Enlightenment which makes his work pivotal to its rescue. 

The dark writers of the bourgeoisie, unlike its apologists, did not 
seek to avert the consequences of the Enlightenment with harmonistic 
doctrines. They did not pretend that formalistic reason had a closer affin¬ 
ity to morality than to immorality. While the light-bringing writers pro¬ 
tected the indissoluble alliance of reason and atrocity, bourgeois society 
and power, by denying that alliance, the bearers of darker messages piti¬ 
lessly expressed the shocking truth. “Into hands stained by the murder of 
spouses and children, sodomy, killing, prostitution, and infamy, heaven 
has placed these riches to reward me for such abominations,” says Clairwil 
in her summary of her brothers life. 101 She exaggerates. The justice of bad 
domination is not quite so consistent as to reward only infamy. But only 
exaggeration is true. The essential character of prehistory* is the appear¬ 
ance of utmost horror in the individual detail. A statistical compilation of 
those slaughtered in a pogrom, which also includes mercy killings, con- 



Juliette or Enlightenment and Morality 9 3 


ceals its essence, which emerges only in an exact description of the excep¬ 
tion, the most hideous torture. A happy life in a world of horror is igno- 
miniously refuted by the mere existence of that world. The latter therefore 
becomes the essence, the former negligible. No doubt, the ruling group in 
the bourgeois era did not engage in killing their own children and spous¬ 
es, or in prostitution and sodomy, as frequently as their subjects, who took 
over the morals of the rulers of earlier times. However, when power was at 
stake, the rulers have piled up mountains of corpses even in recent cen¬ 
turies. Compared to the mentality and actions of the rulers under fascism, 
in which power has come fully into its own, the enthusiastic description 
of the life of Brisa-Testa—although those rulers are recognizable in it— 
pales to harmless banality. In Sade as in Mandeville, private vices are the 
anticipatory historiography of public virtues in the totalitarian era. It is 
because they did not hush up the impossibility of deriving from reason a 
fundamental argument against murder, but proclaimed it from the 
rooftops, that Sade and Nietzsche are still vilified, above all by progressive 
thinkers. In a different way to logical positivism, they both took science at 
its word. In pursuing the implications of reason still more resolutely than 
the positivists their secret purpose was to lay bare the utopia which is con¬ 
tained in every great philosophy, as it is in Kant’s concept of reason: the 
utopia of a humanity which, itself no longer distorted, no longer needs 
distortion. In proclaiming the identity of power and reason, their pitiless 
doctrines are more compassionate than those of the moral lackeys of the 
bourgeoisie. “Where are thy greatest dangers?,” Nietzsche once asked, 102 
“In pity.” With his denial he redeemed the unwavering trust in humanity 
which day by day is betrayed by consoling affirmation. 



The Culture Industry: 
Enlightenment as Mass Deception 


The sociological view that the loss of support from objective religion 
and the disintegration of the last precapitalist residues, in conjunction 
with technical and social differentiation and specialization, have given rise 
to cultural chaos is refuted by daily experience. Culture today is infecting 
everything with sameness. Film, radio, and magazines form a system. Each 
branch of culture is unanimous within itself and all are unanimous togeth¬ 
er. Even the aesthetic manifestations of political opposites proclaim the 
same inflexible rhythm. The* decorative administrative and exhibition 
buildings of industry differ little between authoritarian and other coun¬ 
tries. The bright monumental structures shooting up on all sides show off 
the systematic ingenuity of the state-spanning combines, toward which 
the unfettered entrepreneurial system, whose monuments are the dismal 
residential and commercial blocks in the surrounding areas of desolate 
cities, was already swiftly advancing. The older buildings around the con¬ 
crete centers already look like slums, and the new bungalows on the out¬ 
skirts, like the flimsy structures at international trade fairs, sing the prais¬ 
es of technical progress while inviting their users to throw them away after 
short use like tin cans. But the town-planning projects, which are sup¬ 
posed to perpetuate individuals as autonomous units in hygienic small 
apartments, subjugate them only more completely to their adversary, the 
total power of capital.* Just as the occupants of city centers are uniformly 
summoned there for purposes of work and leisure, as producers and con- 



Enlightenment as Mass Deception 95 


sumers, so the living cells crystallize into homogenous, well-organized 
complexes. The conspicuous unity of macrocosm and microcosm con¬ 
fronts human beings with a model of their culture: the false identity of 
universal and particular. All mass culture under monopoly is identical, and 
the contours of its skeleton, the conceptual armature fabricated by monop¬ 
oly, are beginning to stand out. Those in charge no longer take much trou¬ 
ble to conceal the structure, the power of which increases the more blunt¬ 
ly its existence is admitted. Films and radio no longer need to present 
themselves as art. The truth that they are nothing but business is used as an 
ideology to legitimize the trash they intentionally produce. They call them¬ 
selves industries, and the published figures for their directors’ incomes quell 
any doubts about the social necessity of their finished products. 

Interested parties like to explain the culture industry in technologi¬ 
cal terms. Its millions of participants, they argue, demand reproduction 
processes which inevitably lead to the use of standard products to meet the 
same needs at countless locations. The technical antithesis between few 
production centers and widely dispersed reception necessitates organiza¬ 
tion and planning by those in control. The standardized forms, it is 
claimed, were originally derived from the needs of the consumers: that is 
why they are accepted with so little resistance. In reality, a cycle of manip¬ 
ulation and retroactive need is unifying the system ever more tightly. What 
is not mentioned is that the basis on which technology is gaining power 
over society is the power of those whose economic position in society is 
strongest.* Technical rationality today is the rationality of domination. It 
is the compulsive character of a society alienated from itself. Automobiles, 
bombs, and films hold the totality together until their leveling element 
demonstrates its power against the very system of injustice it served. For 
the present the technology of the culture industry confines itself to stan¬ 
dardization and mass production and sacrifices what once distinguished 
the logic of the work from that of society. These adverse effects, however, 
should not be attributed to the internal laws of technology itself but to its 
function within the economy today.* Any need which might escape the 
central control is repressed by that of individual consciousness. The step 
from telephone to radio has clearly distinguished the roles. The former lib¬ 
erally permitted the participant to play the role of subject. The latter 
democratically makes everyone equally into listeners, in order to expose 
them in authoritarian fashion to the same programs put out by different 



c )6 The Culture Industry 


stations. No mechanism of reply has been developed, and private trans¬ 
missions are condemned to unfreedom. They confine themselves to the 
apocryphal sphere of “amateurs,” who, in any case, are organized from 
above. Any trace of spontaneity in the audience of the official radio is 
steered and absorbed into a selection of specializations by talent-spotters, 
performance competitions, and sponsored events of every kind. The tal¬ 
ents belong to the operation long before they are put on show; otherwise 
they would not conform so eagerly. The mentality of the public, which 
allegedly and actually favors the system of the culture industry, is a part of 
the system, not an excuse for it. If a branch of art follows the same recipe 
as one far removed from it in terms of its medium and subject matter; if 
the dramatic denouement in radio “soap operas”* is used as an instructive 
example of how to solve technical difficulties—which are mastered no less 
in “jam sessions” than at the highest levels of jazz—or if a movement from 
Beethoven is loosely “adapted” in the same way as a Tolstoy novel is adapt¬ 
ed for film, the pretext of meeting the public’s spontaneous wishes is mere 
hot air. An explanation in terms of the specific interests of the technical 
apparatus and its personnel would be closer to the truth, provided that 
apparatus were understood in all its details as a part of the economic 
mechanism of selection.* Added to this is the agreement, or at least the 
common determination, of the executive powers to produce or let pass 
nothing which does not conform to their tables, to their concept of the 
consumer, or, above all, to themselves. 

If the objective social tendency of this age is incarnated in the ob¬ 
scure subjective intentions of board chairmen, this is primarily the case in 
the most powerful sectors of industry: steel, petroleum, electricity, chemi¬ 
cals. Compared to them the culture monopolies are weak and dependent. 
They have to keep in with the true wielders of power, to ensure that their 
sphere of mass society, the specific product of which still has too much of 
cozy liberalism and Jewish intellectualism about it, is not subjected to a 
series of purges.* The dependence of the most powerful broadcasting 
company on the electrical industry, or of film on the banks, characterizes 
the whole sphere, the individual sectors of which are themselves econom¬ 
ically intertwined. Everything is so tightly clustered that the concentration 
of intellect reaches a level where it overflows the demarcations between 
company names and technical sectors. The relentless unity of the culture 
industry bears witness to the emergent unity of politics. Sharp distinctions 



Enlightenment as Mass Deception 97 


like those between A and B films, or between short stories published in 
magazines in different price segments, do not so much reflect real differ¬ 
ences as assist in the classification, organization, and identification of con¬ 
sumers. Something is provided for everyone so that no one can escape; dif¬ 
ferences are hammered home and propagated. The hierarchy of serial 
qualities purveyed to the public serves only to quantify it more complete¬ 
ly. Everyone is supposed to behave spontaneously according to a “level” 
determined by indices and to select the category of mass product manu¬ 
factured for their type. On the charts of research organizations, indistin¬ 
guishable from those of political propaganda, consumers are divided up as 
statistical material into red, green, and blue areas according to income 
group. 

The schematic nature of this procedure is evident from the fact that 
the mechanically differentiated products are ultimately all the same. That 
the difference between the models of Chrysler and General Motors is fun¬ 
damentally illusory is known by any child, who is fascinated by that very 
difference. The advantages and disadvantages debated by enthusiasts serve 
only to perpetuate the appearance of competition and choice. It is no dif¬ 
ferent with the offerings of Warner Brothers and Metro Goldwyn Mayer. 
But the differences, even between the more expensive and cheaper prod¬ 
ucts from the same firm, are shrinking—in cars to the different number 
of cylinders, engine capacity, and details of the gadgets, and in films to the 
different number of stars, the expense lavished on technology, labor and 
costumes, or the use of the latest psychological formulae. The unified stan¬ 
dard of value consists in the level of conspicuous production, the amount 
of investment put on show. The budgeted differences of value in the cul¬ 
ture industry have nothing to do with actual differences, with the mean¬ 
ing of the product itself. The technical media, too, are being engulfed by 
an insatiable uniformity. Television aims at a synthesis of radio and film, 
delayed only for as long as the interested parties cannot agree. Such a syn¬ 
thesis, with its unlimited possibilities, promises to intensify the impover¬ 
ishment of the aesthetic material so radically that the identity of all indus¬ 
trial cultural products, still scantily disguised today, will triumph openly 
tomorrow in a mocking fulfillment of Wagner’s dream of the total art 
work. The accord between word, image, and music is achieved so much 
more perfectly than in Tristan because the sensuous elements, which com¬ 
pliantly document only the surface of social reality, are produced in prin- 



98 The Culture Industry 


ciple within the same technical work process, the unity of which they 
express as their true content. This work process integrates all the elements 
of production, from the original concept of the novel, shaped by its side¬ 
long glance at film,* to the last sound effect. It is the triumph of invested 
capital. To impress the omnipotence of capital on the hearts of expropri¬ 
ated job candidates as the power of their true master is the purpose of all 
films, regardless of the plot selected by the production directors. 

Even during their leisure time, consumers must orient themselves 
according to the unity of production. The active contribution which 
Kantian schematism still expected of subjects—that they should, from the 
first, relate sensuous multiplicity to fundamental concepts—is denied to 
the subject by industry. It purveys schematism as its first service to the cus¬ 
tomer. According to Kantian schematism, a secret mechanism within the 
psyche preformed immediate data to fit them into the system of pure rea¬ 
son. That secret has now been unraveled. Although the operations of the 
mechanism appear to be planned by those who supply the data, the cul¬ 
ture industry, the planning is in fact imposed on the industry by the iner¬ 
tia of a society irrational despite all its rationalization, and this calamitous 
tendency, in passing through the agencies of business,* takes on the 
shrewd intentionality peculiar to them. For the consumer there is nothing 
left to classify, since the classification has already been preempted by the 
schematism of production. This dreamless art for the people fulfils the 
dreamy idealism which went too far for idealism in its critical form. Every¬ 
thing comes from consciousness—from that of God for Malebranche and 
Berkeley, and from earthly production management for mass art. Not only 
do hit songs, stars, and soap operas conform to types recurring cyclically 
as rigid invariants, but the specific content of productions, the seemingly 
variable element, is itself derived from those types. The details become 
interchangeable. The brief interval sequence which has proved catchy in a 
hit song, the hero’s temporary disgrace which he accepts as a “good sport,” 
the wholesome slaps the heroine receives from the strong hand of the male 
star, his plain-speaking abruptness toward the pampered heiress, are, like 
all the details, ready-made cliches, to be used here and there as desired and 
always completely defined by the purpose they serve within the schema. 
To confirm the schema by acting as its constituents is their sole raison 
d’etre. In a film, the outcome can invariably be predicted at the start—who 



Enlightenment as Mass Deception 99 


will be rewarded, punished, forgotten—and in light music the prepared 
ear can always guess the continuation after the first bars of a hit song and 
is gratified when it actually occurs. The average choice of words in a short 
story must not be tampered with. The gags and effects are no less calcu¬ 
lated than their framework. They are managed by special experts, and their 
slim variety is specifically tailored to the office pigeonhole. The culture 
industry has developed in conjunction with the predominance of the 
effect, the tangible performance, the technical detail, over the work, which 
once carried the idea and was liquidated with it. By emancipating itself, 
the detail had become refractory; from Romanticism to Expressionism it 
had rebelled as unbridled expression, as the agent of opposition, against 
organization. In music, the individual harmonic effect had obliterated 
awareness of the form as a whole; in painting the particular detail had 
obscured the overall composition; in the novel psychological penetration 
had blurred the architecture. Through totality, the culture industry is 
putting an end to all that. Although operating only with effects, it subdues 
their unruliness and subordinates them to the formula which supplants 
the work. It crushes equally the whole and the parts. The whole confronts 
the details in implacable detachment, somewhat like the career of a suc¬ 
cessful man, in which everything serves to illustrate and demonstrate a 
success which, in fact, it is no more than the sum of those idiotic events. 
The so-called leading idea is a filing compartment which creates order, not 
connections. Lacking both contrast and relatedness, the whole and the de¬ 
tail look alike. Their harmony, guaranteed in advance, mocks the painful¬ 
ly achieved harmony of the great bourgeois works of art. In Germany even 
the most carefree films of democracy were overhung already by the grave¬ 
yard stillness of dictatorship. 

The whole world is passed through the filter of the culture industry. 
The familiar experience of the moviegoer, who perceives the street outside 
as a continuation of the film he has just left, because the film seeks strict¬ 
ly to reproduce the world of everyday perception, has become the guide¬ 
line of production. The more densely and completely its techniques dupli¬ 
cate empirical objects, the more easily it creates the illusion that the world 
outside is a seamless extension of the one which has been revealed in the 
cinema. Since the abrupt introduction of the sound film, mechanical 
duplication has become entirely subservient to this objective. According to 
this tendency, life is to be made indistinguishable from the sound film. Far 



ioo The Culture Industry 


more strongly than the theatre of illusion, film denies its audience any 
dimension in which they might roam freely in imagination—contained 
by the film’s framework but unsupervised by its precise actualities—with¬ 
out losing the thread; thus it trains those exposed to it to identify film 
directly with reality. The withering of imagination and spontaneity in the 
consumer of culture today need not be traced back to psychological mech¬ 
anisms. The products themselves, especially the most characteristic, the 
sound film, cripple those faculties through their objective makeup. They 
are so constructed that their adequate comprehension requires a quick, ob¬ 
servant, knowledgeable cast of mind but positively debars the spectator 
from thinking, if he is not to miss the fleeting facts. This kind of alertness 
is so ingrained that it does not even need to be activated in particular 
cases, while still repressing the powers of imagination. Anyone who is so 
absorbed by the world of the film, by gesture, image, and word, that he or 
she is unable to supply that which would have made it a world in the first 
place, does not need to be entirely transfixed by the special operations of 
the machinery at the moment of the performance. The required qualities 
of attention have become so familiar from other films and other culture 
products already known to him or her that they appear automatically. The 
power of industrial society* is imprinted on people once and for all. The 
products of the culture industry are such that they can be alertly con¬ 
sumed even in a state of distraction. But each one is a model of the gigan¬ 
tic economic machinery,* which, from the first, keeps everyone on their 
toes, both at work and in the leisure time which resembles it. In any sound 
film or any radio broadcast something is discernible which cannot be 
attributed as a social effect to any one of them, but to all together. Each 
single manifestation of the culture industry inescapably reproduces 
human beings as what the whole has made them. And all its agents, from 
the producer to the womens organizations, are on the alert to ensure that 
the simple reproduction of mind does not lead on to the expansion of 
mind. 

The complaints of art historians and cultural attorneys over the 
exhaustion of the energy which created artistic style in the West are fright¬ 
eningly unfounded. The routine translation of everything, even of what 
has not yet been thought, into the schema of mechanical reproducibility 
goes beyond the rigor and scope of any true style—the concept with 
which culture lovers idealize the precapitalist past as an organic era. No 



IOI 


Enlightenment as Mass Deception 

Palestrina could have eliminated the unprepared or unresolved dissonance 
more puristically than the jazz arranger excludes any phrase which does 
not exactly fit the jargon. If he jazzes up Mozart, he changes the music not 
only where it is too difficult or serious but also where the melody is mere¬ 
ly harmonized differently, indeed, more simply, than is usual today. No 
medieval patron of architecture can have scrutinized the subjects of church 
windows and sculptures more suspiciously than the studio hierarchies 
examine a plot by Balzac or Victor Hugo before it receives the imprimatur 
of feasibility. No cathedral chapter could have assigned the grimaces and 
torments of the damned to their ,proper places in the order of divine love 
more scrupulously than production managers decide the position of the 
torture of the hero or the raised hem of the leading lady’s dress within the 
litany of the big film. The explicit and implicit, exoteric and esoteric cat¬ 
alog of what is forbidden and what is tolerated* is so extensive that it not 
only defines the area left free but wholly controls it. Even the most minor 
details are modeled according to this lexicon. Like its adversary, avant- 
garde art, the culture industry defines its own language positively, by 
means of prohibitions applied to its syntax and vocabulary. The perma¬ 
nent compulsion to produce new effects which yet remain bound to the 
old schema, becoming additional rules, merely increases the power of the 
tradition which the individual effect seeks to escape. Every phenomenon 
is by now so thoroughly imprinted by the schema that nothing can occur 
that does not bear in advance the trace of the jargon, that is not seen at 
first glance to be approved. But the true masters, as both producers and 
reproducers, are those who speak the jargon with the same free-and-easy 
relish as if it were the language it has long since silenced. Such is the indus¬ 
try’s ideal of naturalness. It asserts itself more imperiously the more the 
perfected technology reduces the tension between the culture product and 
everyday existence. The paradox of routine travestied as nature is detect¬ 
able in every utterance of the culture industry, and in many is quite bla¬ 
tant. A jazz musician who has to play a piece of serious music, Beethoven’s 
simplest minuet, involuntarily syncopates, and condescends to start on 
the beat only with a superior smile. Such “naturalness,” complicated by 
the ever more pervasive and exorbitant claims of the specific medium, con¬ 
stitutes the new style, “a system of nonculture to which one might even 
concede a certain unity of style’ if it made any sense to speak of a stylized 
barbarism.” 1 



102 The Culture Industry 


The general influence of this stylization may already be more bind¬ 
ing than the official rules and prohibitions; a hit song is treated more 
leniently today if it does not respect the thirty-two bars or the compass of 
the ninth than if it includes even the most elusive melodic or harmonic 
detail which falls outside the idiom. Orson Welles is forgiven all his 
offences against the usages of the craft because, as calculated rudeness, 
they confirm the validity of the system all the more zealously. The com¬ 
pulsion of the technically conditioned idiom which the stars and directors 
must produce as second nature, so that the nation may make it theirs, 
relates to nuances so fine as to be almost as subtle as the devices used in a 
work of the avant-garde, where, unlike those of the hit song, they serve 
truth. The rare ability to conform punctiliously to the obligations of the 
idiom of naturalness in all branches of the culture industry becomes the 
measure of expertise. As in logical positivism, what is said and how it is 
said must be verifiable against everyday speech. The producers are experts. 
The idiom demands the most prodigious productive powers, which it 
absorbs and squanders. Satanically, it has rendered cultural conservatism’s 
distinction between genuine and artificial style obsolete. A style might 
possibly be called artificial if it had been imposed from outside against the 
resistance of the intrinsic tendencies of form. But in the culture industry 
the subject matter itself, down to its smallest elements, springs from the 
same apparatus as the jargon into which it is absorbed. The deals struck 
between the art specialists and the sponsor and censor over some all-too- 
unbelievable lie tell us less about internal, aesthetic tensions than about a 
divergence of interests. The reputation of the specialist, in which a last 
residue of actual autonomy still occasionally finds refuge, collides with the 
business policy of the church or the industrial combine producing the cul¬ 
ture commodity. By its own nature, however, the matter has already been 
reified as negotiable even before the various agencies come into conflict. 
Even before Zanuck* acquired her, Saint Bernadette gleamed in the eye of 
her writer as an advert aimed at all the relevant consortia. To this the 
impulses of form have been reduced. As a result, the style of the culture 
industry, which has no resistant material to overcome, is at the same time 
the negation of style. The reconciliation of general and particular, of rules 
and the specific demands of the subject, through which alone style takes 
on substance, is nullified by the absence of tension between the poles: “the 
extremes which touch” have become a murky identity in which the gener¬ 
al can replace the particular and vice versa. 



Enlightenment as Mass Deception 103 


Nevertheless, this caricature of style reveals something about the 
genuine style of the past. The concept of a genuine style becomes trans¬ 
parent in the culture industry as the aesthetic equivalent of power. The 
notion of style as a merely aesthetic regularity is a retrospective fantasy of 
Romanticism. The unity of style not only of the Christian Middle Ages 
but of the Renaissance expresses the different structures of social coercion 
in those periods, not the obscure experience of the subjects, in which the 
universal was locked away. The great artists were never those whose works 
embodied style in its least fractured, most perfect form but those who 
adopted style as a rigor to set against the chaotic expression of suffering, 
as a negative truth. In the style of these works expression took on the 
strength without which existence is dissipated unheard. Even works which 
are called classical, like the music of Mozart, contain objective tendencies 
which resist the style they incarnate. Up to Schonberg and Picasso, great 
artists have been mistrustful of style, which at decisive points has guided 
them less than the logic of the subject matter. What the Expressionists and 
Dadaists attacked in their polemics, the untruth of style as such, triumphs 
today in the vocal jargon of the crooner, in the adept grace of the film star, 
and even in the mastery of the photographic shot of a farm laborers hovel. 
In every work of art, style is a promise. In being absorbed through style 
into the dominant form of universality, into the current musical, pictori¬ 
al, or verbal idiom, what is expressed seeks to be reconciled with the idea 
of the true universal. This promise of the work of art to create truth by 
impressing its unique contours on the socially transmitted forms is as nec¬ 
essary as it is hypocritical. By claiming to anticipate fulfillment through 
their aesthetic derivatives* it posits the real forms of the existing order as 
absolute. To this extent the claims of art are always also ideology. Yet it is 
only in its struggle with tradition, a struggle precipitated in style, that art 
can find expression for suffering. The moment in the work of art by which 
it transcends reality cannot, indeed, be severed from style; that moment, 
however, does not consist in achieved harmony, in the questionable unity 
of form and content, inner and outer, individual and society, but in those 
traits in which the discrepancy emerges, in the necessary failure of the pas¬ 
sionate striving for identity. Instead of exposing itself to this failure, in 
which the style of the great work of art has always negated itself, the infe¬ 
rior work has relied on its similarity to others, the surrogate of identity. 
The culture industry has finally posited this imitation as absolute. Being 
nothing other than style, it divulges style’s secret: obedience to the social 



104 The Culture Industry 


hierarchy. Aesthetic barbarism today is accomplishing what has threatened 
intellectual formations since they were brought together as culture and 
neutralized. To speak about culture always went against the grain of cul¬ 
ture. The general designation “culture” already contains, virtually, the 
process of identifying, cataloging, and classifying which imports culture 
into the realm of administration. Only what has been industrialized, rig¬ 
orously subsumed, is fully adequate to this concept of culture. Only by 
subordinating all branches of intellectual production equally to the single 
purpose of imposing on the senses of human beings, from the time they 
leave the factory in the evening to the time they clock on in the morning, 
the imprint of the work routine which they must sustain throughout the 
day, does this culture mockingly fulfill the notion of a unified culture 
which the philosophers of the individual personality held out against mass 
culture. 

The culture industry, the most inflexible style of all, thus proves to 
be the goal of the very liberalism which is criticized for its lack of style. 
Not only did its categories and contents originate in the liberal sphere, in 
domesticated naturalism no less than in the operetta and the revue, but 
the modern culture combines are the economic area in which a piece of 
the circulation sphere otherwise in the process of disintegration, together 
with the corresponding entrepreneurial types, still tenuously survives. In 
that area people can still make their way, provided they do not look too 
closely at their true purpose and are willing to be compliant. Anyone who 
resists can survive only by being incorporated. Once registered as diverg¬ 
ing from the culture industry, they belong to it as the land reformer does 
to capitalism. Realistic indignation is the trademark of those with a new 
idea to sell. Public authority in the present society* allows only those com¬ 
plaints to be heard in which the attentive ear can discern the prominent 
figure under whose protection the rebel is suing for peace. The more 
immeasurable the gulf between chorus and leaders, the more certainly is 
there a place among the latter for anyone who demonstrates superiority by 
well-organized dissidence. In this way liberalism’s tendency to give free 
rein to its ablest members survives in the culture industry. To open that 
industry to clever people is the function of the otherwise largely regulated 
market, in which, even in its heyday, freedom was the freedom of the stu¬ 
pid to starve, in art as elsewhere. Not for nothing did the system of the 



Enlightenment as Mass Deception 105 


culture industry originate in the liberal industrial countries, just as all its 
characteristic media, especially cinema, radio, jazz, and magazines, also 
triumph there. Its progress, however, stems from the general laws of capi¬ 
tal. Gaumont and Pathe,* Ullstein and Hugenberg* did not follow the 
international trend to their own disadvantage; Europe’s economic depen¬ 
dence on the USA after the war and the inflation also made its contribu¬ 
tion. The belief that the barbarism of the culture industry is a result of 
“cultural lag,” of the backwardness of American consciousness in relation 
to the state of technology, is quite illusory. Prefascist Europe was backward 
in relation to the monopoly of culture. But it was precisely to such back¬ 
wardness that intellectual activity owed a remnant of autonomy, its last 
exponents their livelihood, however meager. In Germany the incomplete 
permeation of life by democratic control had a paradoxical effect. Many 
areas were still exempt from the market mechanism which had been 
unleashed in Western countries. The German educational system, includ¬ 
ing the universities, the artistically influential theatres, the great orches¬ 
tras, and the museums were under patronage. The political powers, the 
state and the local authorities who inherited such institutions from abso¬ 
lutism, had left them a degree of independence from the power of the 
market as the princes and feudal lords had done up to the nineteenth cen¬ 
tury. This stiffened the backbone of art in its late phase against the verdict 
of supply and demand, heightening its resistance far beyond its actual 
degree of protection. In the market itself the homage paid to not yet mar¬ 
ketable artistic quality was converted into purchasing power, so that rep¬ 
utable literary and musical publishers could support authors who brought 
in little more than the respect of connoisseurs. Only the dire and incessant 
threat of incorporation into commercial life as aesthetic experts finally 
brought the artists to heel. In former times they signed their letters, like 
Kant and Hume, “Your most obedient servant,” while undermining the 
foundations of throne and altar. Today they call heads of government by 
their first names and are subject, in every artistic impulse, to the judgment 
of their illiterate principals. The analysis offered by de Tocqueville a hun¬ 
dred years ago has been fully borne out in the meantime. Under the pri¬ 
vate monopoly of culture tyranny does indeed “leave the body free and 
sets to work directly on the soul. The ruler no longer says: ‘Either you 
think as I do or you die.’ He says: ‘You are free not to think as I do; your 
life, your property—all that you shall keep. But from this day on you will 



io6 The Culture Industry 


be a stranger among us.’” 2 Anyone who does not conform is condemned 
to an economic impotence which is prolonged in the intellectual power¬ 
lessness of the eccentric loner. Disconnected from the mainstream, he is 
easily convicted of inadequacy. Whereas the mechanism of supply and 
demand is today disintegrating in material production, in the superstruc¬ 
ture it acts as a control on behalf of the rulers. The consumers are the 
workers and salaried employees, the farmers and petty bourgeois. 
Capitalist production hems them in so tightly, in body and soul, that they 
unresistingly succumb to whatever is proffered to them. However, just as 
the ruled have always taken the morality dispensed to them by the rulers 
more seriously than the rulers themselves, the defrauded masses today 
cling to the myth of success still more ardently than the successful. They, 
too, have their aspirations. They insist unwaveringly on the ideology by 
which they are enslaved. The pernicious love of the common people for 
the harm done to them outstrips even the cunning of the authorities. It 
surpasses the rigor of the Hays Office,* just as, in great epochs, it has 
inspired renewed zeal in greater agencies directed against it, the terror of 
the tribunals. It calls for Mickey Rooney* rather than the tragic Garbo, 
Donald Duck rather than Betty Boop. The industry bows to the vote it 
has itself rigged. The incidental costs to the firm which cannot turn a prof¬ 
it from its contract with a declining star are legitimate costs for the system 
as a whole. By artfully sanctioning the demand for trash, the system inau¬ 
gurates total harmony. Connoisseurship and expertise are proscribed as the 
arrogance of those who think themselves superior, whereas culture dis¬ 
tributes its privileges democratically to all. Under the ideological truce 
between them, the conformism of the consumers, like the shamelessness 
of the producers they sustain, can have a good conscience. Both content 
themselves with the reproduction of sameness. 

Unending sameness also governs the relationship to the past. What 
is new in the phase of mass culture compared to that of late liberalism is 
the exclusion of the new. The machine is rotating on the spot. While it 
already determines consumption, it rejects anything untried as a risk. In 
film, any manuscript which is not reassuringly based on a best-seller is 
viewed with mistrust. That is why there is incessant talk of ideas, novelty 
and surprises, of what is both totally familiar and has never existed before. 
Tempo and dynamism are paramount. Nothing is allowed to stay as it was, 
everything must be endlessly in motion. For only the universal victory of 



Enlightenment as Mass Deception 107 


the rhythm of mechanical production and reproduction promises that 
nothing will change, that nothing unsuitable will emerge. To add anything 
to the proven cultural inventory would be too speculative. The frozen gen¬ 
res—sketch, short story, problem film, hit song—represent the average of 
late liberal taste threateningly imposed as a norm. The most powerful of 
the culture agencies, who work harmoniously with others of their kind as 
only managers do, whether they come from the ready-to-wear trade or* 
college, have long since reorganized and rationalized the objective mind. 
It is as if some omnipresent agency* had reviewed the material and issued 
an authoritative catalog tersely listing the products available. The ideal 
forms are inscribed in the cultural heavens where they were already num¬ 
bered by Plato—indeed, were only numbers, incapable of increase or 
change. 

Amusement and all the other elements of the culture industry exist¬ 
ed long before the industry itself. Now they have been taken over from 
above and brought fully up to date. The culture industry can boast of hav¬ 
ing energetically accomplished and elevated to a principle the often inept 
transposition of art to the consumption sphere, of having stripped amuse¬ 
ment of its obtrusive naiveties and improved the quality of its commodi¬ 
ties. The more all-embracing the culture industry has become, the more 
pitilessly it has forced the outsider into either bankruptcy or a syndicate; 
at the same time it has become more refined and elevated, becoming final¬ 
ly a synthesis of Beethoven and the Casino de Paris.* Its victory is twofold: 
what is destroyed as truth outside its sphere can be reproduced indefinite¬ 
ly within it as lies. “Light” art as such, entertainment, is not a form of 
decadence. Those who deplore it as a betrayal of the ideal of pure expres¬ 
sion harbor illusions about society.* The purity of bourgeois art, hyposta- 
tized as a realm of freedom contrasting to material praxis, was bought 
from the outset with the exclusion of the lower class; and art keeps faith 
with the cause of that class, the true universal, precisely by freeing itself 
from the purposes of the false. Serious art has denied itself to those for 
whom the hardship and oppression of life make a mockery of seriousness 
and who must be glad to use the time not spent at the production line in 
being simply carried along. Light art has accompanied autonomous art as 
its shadow. It is the social bad conscience of serious art. The truth which 
the latter could not apprehend because of its social premises gives the for¬ 
mer an appearance of objective justification. The split between them is 



io8 The Culture Industry 


itself the truth: it expresses at least the negativity of the culture which is 
the sum of both spheres. The antithesis can be reconciled least of all by 
absorbing light art into serious or vice versa. That, however, is what the 
culture industry attempts. The eccentricity of the circus, the peep show, or 
the brothel in relation to society is as embarrassing to it as that of Schon- 
berg and Karl Kraus. The leading jazz musician Benny Goodman there¬ 
fore has to appear with the Budapest String Quartet, more pedantic rhyth¬ 
mically than any amateur clarinetist, while the quartet play with the sac¬ 
charine monotony of Guy Lombardo.* What is significant is not crude 
ignorance, stupidity or lack of polish. The culture industry has abolished 
the rubbish of former times by imposing its own perfection, by prohibit¬ 
ing and domesticating dilettantism, while itself incessantly committing 
the blunders without which the elevated style cannot be conceived. What 
is new, however, is that the irreconcilable elements of culture, art, and 
amusement have been subjected equally to the concept of purpose and 
thus brought under a single false denominator: the totality of the culture 
industry. Its element is repetition. The fact that its characteristic innova¬ 
tions are in all cases mere improvements to mass production is not extra¬ 
neous to the system. With good reason the interest of countless consumers 
is focused on the technology, not on the rigidly repeated, threadbare and 
half-abandoned content. The social power revered by the spectators man¬ 
ifests itself more effectively in the technically enforced ubiquity of stereo¬ 
types than in the stale ideologies which the ephemeral contents have to 
endorse. 

Nevertheless, the culture industry remains the entertainment busi¬ 
ness. Its control of consumers is mediated by entertainment, and its hold 
will not be broken by outright dictate but by the hostility inherent in the 
principle of entertainment to anything which is more than itself. Since the 
tendencies of the culture industry are turned into the flesh and blood of 
the public by the social process as a whole, those tendencies are reinforced 
by the survival of the market in the industry. Demand has not yet been 
replaced by simple obedience. The major reorganization of the film indus¬ 
try shortly before the First World War, the material precondition for its 
expansion, was a deliberate adaptation to needs of the public registered at 
the ticket office, which were hardly thought worthy of consideration in the 
pioneering days of the screen. That view is still held by the captains of the 
film industry, who accept only more or less phenomenal box-office success 



Enlightenment as Mass Deception 109 


as evidence and prudently ignore the counterevidence, truth. Their ideol¬ 
ogy is business. In this they are right to the extent that the power of the 
culture industry lies in its unity with fabricated need and not in simple 
antithesis to it—or even in the antithesis between omnipotence and pow¬ 
erlessness. Entertainment is the prolongation of work under late capital¬ 
ism. It is sought by those who want to escape the mechanized labor proc¬ 
ess so that they can cope with it again. At the same time, however, mech¬ 
anization has such power over leisure and its happiness, determines so 
thoroughly the fabrication of entertainment commodities, that the off- 
duty worker can experience nothing but after-images of the work process 
itself. The ostensible content is merely a faded foreground; what is im¬ 
printed is the automated sequence of standardized tasks. The only escape 
from the work process in factory and office is through adaptation to it in 
leisure time. This is the incurable sickness of all entertainment. Amuse¬ 
ment congeals into boredom, since, to be amusement, it must cost no 
effort and therefore moves strictly along the well-worn grooves of associa¬ 
tion. The spectator must need no thoughts of his own: the product pre¬ 
scribes each reaction, not through any actual coherence—which collapses 
once exposed to thought—but through signals. Any logical connection 
presupposing mental capacity is scrupulously avoided. Developments are 
to emerge from the directly preceding situation, not from the idea of the 
whole. There is no plot which could withstand the screenwriters’ eagerness 
to extract the maximum effect from the individual scene. Finally, even the 
schematic formula seems dangerous, since it provides some coherence of 
meaning, however meager, when only meaninglessness is acceptable. 
Often the plot is willfully denied the development called for by characters 
and theme under the old schema. Instead, the next step is determined by 
what the writers take to be their most effective idea. Obtusely ingenious 
surprises disrupt the plot. The product’s tendency to fall back pernicious¬ 
ly on the pure nonsense which, as buffoonery and clowning, was a legiti¬ 
mate part of popular art up to Chaplin and the Marx brothers, emerges 
most strikingly in the less sophisticated genres. Whereas the films of Greer 
Garson and Bette Davis can still derive some claim to a coherent plot from 
the unity of the socio-psychological case represented, the tendency to sub¬ 
vert meaning has taken over completely in the text of novelty songs,* sus¬ 
pense films, and cartoons. The idea itself, like objects in comic and horror 
films, is massacred and mutilated. Novelty songs have always lived on con- 



no The Culture Industry 


tempt for meaning, which, as both ancestors and descendants of psycho¬ 
analysis, they reduce to the monotony of sexual symbolism. In crime and 
adventure films the spectators are begrudged even the opportunity to wit¬ 
ness the resolution. Even in nonironic examples of the genre they must 
make do with the mere horror of situations connected in only the most 
perfunctory way. 

Cartoon and stunt films were once exponents of fantasy against 
rationalism. They allowed justice to be done to the animals and things 
electrified by their technology, by granting the mutilated beings a second 
life. Today they merely confirm the victory of technological reason over 
truth. A few years ago they had solid plots which were resolved only in the 
whirl of pursuit of the final minutes. In this their procedure resembled 
that of slapstick comedy. But now the temporal relations have shifted. The 
opening sequences state a plot motif so that destruction can work on it 
throughout the action: with the audience in gleeful pursuit the protago¬ 
nist is tossed about like a scrap of litter. The quantity of organized amuse¬ 
ment is converted into the quality of organized cruelty.* The self-elected 
censors of the film industry, its accomplices, monitor the duration of the* 
atrocity prolonged into a hunt. The jollity dispels the joy supposedly con¬ 
ferred by the sight of an embrace and postpones satisfaction until the day 
of the pogrom. To the extent that cartoons do more than accustom the 
senses to the new tempo, they hammer into every brain the old lesson that 
continuous attrition, the breaking of all individual resistance, is the con¬ 
dition of life in this society. Donald Duck in the cartoons and the unfor¬ 
tunate victim in real life receive their beatings so that the spectators can 
accustom themselves to theirs. 

The enjoyment of the violence done to the film character turns into 
violence against the spectator; distraction becomes exertion. No stimulant 
concocted by the experts may escape the weary eye; in face of the slick pre¬ 
sentation no one may appear stupid even for a moment; everyone has to 
keep up, emulating the smartness displayed and propagated by the pro¬ 
duction. This makes it doubtful whether the culture industry even still ful¬ 
fils its self-proclaimed function of distraction. If the majority of radio sta¬ 
tions and cinemas were shut down, consumers probably would not feel too 
much deprived. In stepping from the street into the cinema, they no 
longer enter the world of dream in any case, and once the use of these 
institutions was no longer made obligatory by their mere existence, the 



Enlightenment as Mass Deception 


hi 


urge to use them might not be so overwhelming.* Shutting them down in 
this way would not be reactionary machine-wrecking. Those who suffered 
would not be the film enthusiasts but those who always pay the penalty in 
any case, the ones who had lagged behind. For the housewife, despite the 
films which are supposed to integrate her still further, the dark of the cin¬ 
ema grants a refuge in which she can spend a few unsupervised hours, just 
as once, when there were still dwellings and evening repose, she could sit 
gazing out of the window. The unemployed of the great centers find fresh¬ 
ness in summer and warmth in winter in these places of regulated tem¬ 
perature. Apart from that, and even by the measure of the existing order, 
the bloated entertainment apparatus does not make life more worthy of 
human beings. The idea of “exploiting” the given technical possibilities,* 
of fully utilizing the capacities for aesthetic mass consumption, is part of 
an economic system which refuses to utilize capacities when it is a ques¬ 
tion of abolishing hunger. 

The culture industry endlessly cheats its consumers out of what it 
endlessly promises. The promissory note of pleasure issued by plot and 
packaging is indefinitely prolonged: the promise, which actually compris¬ 
es the entire show, disdainfully intimates that there is nothing more to 
come, that the diner must be satisfied with reading the menu. The desire 
inflamed by the glossy names and images is served up finally with a cele¬ 
bration of the daily round it sought to escape. Of course, genuine works 
of art were not sexual exhibitions either. But by presenting denial as neg¬ 
ative, they reversed, as it were, the debasement of the drive and rescued by 
mediation what had been denied. That is the secret of aesthetic sublima¬ 
tion: to present fulfillment in its brokenness. The culture industry* does 
not sublimate: it suppresses. By constantly exhibiting the object of desire, 
the breasts beneath the sweater, the naked torso of the sporting hero, it 
merely goads the unsublimated anticipation of pleasure, which through 
the habit of denial has long since been mutilated as masochism. There is 
no erotic situation in which innuendo and incitement are not accompa¬ 
nied by the clear notification that things will never go so far. The Hays 
Office* merely confirms the ritual which the culture industry has staged 
in any case: that of Tantalus. Works of art are ascetic and shameless; the 
culture industry is pornographic and prudish. It reduces love to romance. 
And, once reduced, much is permitted, even libertinage as a marketable 
specialty, purveyed by quota with the trade description “daring.” The mass 



ii2 The Culture Industry 


production of sexuality automatically brings about its repression. Because 
of his ubiquity, the film star with whom one is supposed to fall in love is, 
from the start, a copy of himself. Every tenor now sounds like a Caruso 
record, and the natural faces of Texas girls already resemble those of the 
established models by which they would be typecast in Hollywood. The 
mechanical reproduction of beauty—which, admittedly, is made only 
more inescapable by the reactionary culture zealots with their methodical 
idolization of individuality—no longer leaves any room for the uncon¬ 
scious idolatry with which the experience of beauty has always been 
linked. The triumph over beauty is completed by humor, the malicious 
pleasure elicited by any successful deprivation. There is laughter because 
there is nothing to laugh about. Laughter, whether reconciled or terrible, 
always accompanies the moment when a fear is ended.* It indicates a 
release, whether from physical danger or from the grip of logic. Reconciled 
laughter resounds with the echo of escape from power; wrong laughter 
copes with fear by defecting to the agencies which inspire it. It echoes the 
inescapability of power. Fun is a medicinal bath which the entertainment 
industry never ceases to prescribe. It makes laughter the instrument for 
cheating happiness. To moments of happiness laughter is foreign; only 
operettas, and now films, present sex amid peals of merriment. But 
Baudelaire is as humorless as Holderlin. In wrong society laughter is a 
sickness infecting happiness and drawing it into society’s worthless totali¬ 
ty- Laughter about something is always laughter at it, and the vital force 
which, according to Bergson, bursts through rigidity in laughter is, in 
truth, the irruption of barbarity, the self-assertion which, in convivial set¬ 
tings, dares to celebrate its liberation from scruple. The collective of those 
who laugh parodies humanity. They are monads, each abandoning him¬ 
self to the pleasure—at the expense of all others and with the majority in 
support—of being ready to shrink from nothing. Their harmony presents 
a caricature of solidarity. What is infernal about wrong laughter is that it 
compellingly parodies what is best, reconciliation. Joy, however, is austere: 
res severa verum gaudiumT The ideology of monasteries, that it is not 
asceticism but the sexual act which marks the renunciation of attainable 
bliss, is negatively confirmed by the gravity of the lover who presciently 
pins his whole life to the fleeting moment. The culture industry replaces 
pain, which is present in ecstasy no less than in asceticism, with jovial 
denial. Its supreme law is that its consumers shall at no price be given what 



Enlightenment as Mass Deception 113 


they desire: and in that very deprivation they must take their laughing sat¬ 
isfaction. In each performance of the culture industry the permanent 
denial imposed by civilization is once more inflicted on and unmistakably 
demonstrated to its victims. To offer them something and to withhold it 
is one and the same. That is what the erotic commotion achieves. Just 
because it can never take place, everything revolves around the coitus. In 
film, to allow an illicit relationship without due punishment of the culprits 
is even more strictly tabooed than it is for the future son-in-law of a mil¬ 
lionaire to be active in the workers’ movement. Unlike that of the liberal 
era, industrial no less than nationalist culture can permit itself to inveigh 
against capitalism, but not to renounce the threat of castration. This threat 
constitutes its essence.* It outlasts the organized relaxation of morals to¬ 
ward the wearers of uniforms, first in the jaunty films produced for them 
and then in reality. What is decisive today is no longer Puritanism, though 
it still asserts itself in the form of women’s organizations, but the necessi¬ 
ty, inherent in the system,* of never releasing its grip on the consumer, of 
not for a moment allowing him or her to suspect that resistance is possi¬ 
ble. This principle requires that while all needs should be presented to 
individuals as capable of fulfillment by the culture industry, they should 
be so set up in advance that individuals experience themselves through 
their needs only as eternal consumers, as the culture industry’s object. Not 
only does it persuade them that its fraud is satisfaction; it also gives them 
to understand that they must make do with what is offered, whatever it 
may be. The flight from the everyday world, promised by the culture 
industry in all its branches, is much like the abduction of the daughter in 
the American cartoon: the father is holding the ladder in the dark. The 
culture industry presents that same everyday world as paradise. Escape, 
like elopement, is destined from the first to lead back to its starting point. 
Entertainment fosters the resignation which seeks to forget itself in enter¬ 
tainment. 

Amusement, free of all restraint, would be not only the opposite of 
art but its complementary extreme. Absurdity in the manner of Mark 
Twain, with which the American culture industry flirts from time to time, 
could be a corrective to art. The more seriously art takes its opposition to 
existence, the more it resembles the seriousness of existence, its antithesis: 
the more it labors to develop strictly according to its own formal laws, the 
more labor it requires to be understood, whereas its goal had been pre- 



ii4 The Culture Industry 


cisely to negate the burden of labor. In some revue films, and especially in 
grotesque stories and “funnies,”* the possibility of this negation is 
momentarily glimpsed. Its realization, of course, cannot be allowed. Pure 
amusement indulged to the full, relaxed abandon to colorful associations 
and merry nonsense, is cut short by amusement in its marketable form: it 
is disrupted by the surrogate of a coherent meaning with which the cul¬ 
ture industry insists on endowing its products while at the same time slyly 
misusing them as pretexts for bringing on the stars. Biographies and other 
fables stitch together the scraps of nonsense into a feeble-minded plot. It 
is not the bells on the fools cap that jingle but the bunch of keys of capi¬ 
talist reason, which even in its images harnesses joy to the purpose of get¬ 
ting ahead. Every kiss in the revue film must contribute to the career of 
the boxer or hit-song expert whose success is being glorified. The decep¬ 
tion is not that the culture industry serves up amusement but that it spoils 
the fun by its business-minded attachment to the ideological cliches of the 
culture which is liquidating itself. Ethics and taste suppress unbridled 
amusement as “naive”—naivety being rated no more highly than intellec- 
tualism—and even restrict its technical possibilities. The culture industry 
is corrupt, not as a sink of iniquity but as the cathedral of higher gratifi¬ 
cation. At all its levels, from Hemingway to Emil Ludwig,* from Mrs. 
Miniver* to the Lone Ranger,* from Toscanini to Guy Lombardo,* intel¬ 
lectual products drawn ready-made from art and science are infected with 
untruth. Traces of something better persist in those features of the culture 
industry by which it resembles the circus—in the stubbornly purposeless 
expertise of riders, acrobats, and clowns, in the “defense and justification 
of physical as against intellectual art.” 3 But the hiding places of mindless 
artistry, which represents what is human against the social mechanism, are 
being relentlessly ferreted out by organizational reason, which forces 
everything to justify itself in terms of meaning and effect. It is causing 
meaninglessness to disappear at the lowest level of art just as radically as 
meaning is disappearing at the highest. 

The fusion of culture and entertainment is brought about today not 
only by the debasement of culture but equally by the compulsory intellec- 
tualization of amusement. This is already evident in the fact that amuse¬ 
ment is now experienced only in facsimile, in the form of cinema photog¬ 
raphy or the radio recording. In the age of liberal expansion amusement 
was sustained by an unbroken belief in the future: things would stay the 



Enlightenment as Mass Deception 115 


same yet get better. Today, that belief has itself been intellectualized, 
becoming so refined as to lose sight of all actual goals and to consist only 
in a golden shimmer projected beyond the real. It is composed of the extra 
touches of meaning—running exactly parallel to life itself—applied in the 
screen world to the good guy, the engineer, the decent girl, and also to the 
ruthlessness disguised as character, to the sporting interest, and finally to 
the cars and cigarettes, even where the entertainment does not directly 
serve the publicity needs of the manufacturer concerned but advertises the 
system as a whole. Amusement itself becomes an ideal, taking the place of 
the higher values it eradicates from the masses by repeating them in an 
even more stereotyped form than the advertising slogans paid for by 
private interests. Inwardness, the subjectively restricted form of truth, was 
always more beholden to the outward rulers than it imagined. The culture 
industry is perverting it into a barefaced lie. It appears now only as the 
high-minded prattle tolerated by consumers of religious bestsellers, psy¬ 
chological films, and womens serials* as an embarrassingly agreeable in¬ 
gredient, so that they can more reliably control their own human emo¬ 
tions. In this sense entertainment is purging the affects in the manner once 
attributed by Aristotle to tragedy and now by Mortimer Adler* to film. 
The culture industry reveals the truth not only about style but also about 
catharsis. 

The more strongly the culture industry entrenches itself, the more it 
can do as it chooses with the needs of consumers—producing, control¬ 
ling, disciplining them; even withdrawing amusement altogether: here, no 
limits are set to cultural progress. But the tendency is immanent in the 
principle of entertainment itself, as a principle of bourgeois enlighten¬ 
ment. If the need for entertainment was largely created by industry, which 
recommended the work to the masses through its subject matter, the oleo¬ 
graph through the delicate morsel it portrayed and, conversely, the pud¬ 
ding mix through the image of a pudding, entertainment has always borne 
the trace of commercial brashness, of sales talk, the voice of the fairground 
huckster. But the original affinity between business and entertainment 
reveals itself in the meaning of entertainment itself: as society’s apologia. 
To be entertained means to be in agreement. Entertainment makes itself 
possible only by insulating itself from the totality of the social process, 
making itself stupid and perversely renouncing from the first the in- 



ii 6 The Culture Industry 


escapable claim of any work, even the most trivial: in its restrictedness to 
reflect the whole. Amusement always means putting things out of mind, 
forgetting suffering, even when it is on display. At its root is powerlessness. 
It is indeed escape, but not, as it claims, escape from bad reality but from 
the last thought of resisting that reality. The liberation which amusement 
promises is from thinking as negation. The shamelessness of the rhetori¬ 
cal question “What do people want?” lies in the fact that it appeals to the 
very people as thinking subjects whose subjectivity it specifically seeks to 
annul. Even on those occasions when the public rebels against the pleasure 
industry it displays the feebleness systematically instilled in it by that 
industry. Nevertheless, it has become increasingly difficult to keep the 
public in submission. The advance of stupidity must not lag behind the 
simultaneous advance of intelligence. In the age of statistics the masses are 
too astute to identify with the millionaire on the screen and too obtuse to 
deviate even minutely from the law of large numbers. Ideology hides itself 
in probability calculations. Fortune will not smile on all—just on the one 
who draws the winning ticket or, rather, the one designated to do so by a 
higher power—usually the entertainment industry itself, which presents 
itself as ceaselessly in search of talent. Those discovered by the talent 
scouts and then built up by the studios are ideal types of the new, depen¬ 
dent middle classes. The female starlet is supposed to symbolize the secre¬ 
tary, though in a way which makes her seem predestined, unlike the real 
secretary, to wear the flowing evening gown. Thus she apprises the female 
spectator not only of the possibility that she, too, might appear on the 
screen but still more insistently of the distance between them. Only one 
can draw the winning lot, only one is prominent, and even though all have 
mathematically the same chance, it is so minimal for each individual that 
it is best to write it off at once and rejoice in the good fortune of someone 
else, who might just as well be oneself but never is. Where the culture 
industry still invites naive identification, it immediately denies it. It is no 
longer possible to lose oneself in others. Once, film spectators saw their 
own wedding in that of others. Now the happy couple on the screen are 
specimens of the same species as everyone in the audience, but the same¬ 
ness posits the insuperable separation of its human elements. The perfect¬ 
ed similarity is the absolute difference. The identity of the species pro¬ 
hibits that of the individual cases. The culture industry* has sardonically 
realized man’s species being. Everyone amounts only to those qualities by 



Enlightenment as Mass Deception 117 


which he or she can replace everyone else: all are fungible, mere specimens. 
As individuals they are absolutely replaceable, pure nothingness, and are 
made aware of this as soon as time deprives them of their sameness. This 
changes the inner composition of the religion of success, which they are 
sternly required to uphold. The path per aspera ad astra , which presup¬ 
poses need and effort, is increasingly replaced by the prize. The element of 
blindness in the routine decision as to which song is to be a hit, which 
extra a heroine, is celebrated by ideology. Films emphasize chance. By im¬ 
posing an essential sameness on their characters, with the exception of the 
villain, to the point of excluding any faces which do not conform—for 
example, those which, like Garbo’s, do not look as if they would welcome 
the greeting “Hello, sister”—the ideology does, it is true, make life ini¬ 
tially easier for the spectators. They are assured that they do not need to 
be in any way other than they are and that they can succeed just as well 
without having to perform tasks of which they know themselves inca¬ 
pable. But at the same time they are given the hint that effort would not 
help them in any case, because even bourgeois success no longer has any 
connection to the calculable effect of their own work. They take the hint. 
Fundamentally, everyone recognizes chance, by which someone is some¬ 
times lucky, as the other side of planning.* Just because society’s energies 
have developed so far on the side of rationality that anyone might become 
an engineer or a manager, the choice of who is to receive from society the 
investment and confidence to be trained for such functions becomes 
entirely irrational. Chance and planning become identical since, given the 
sameness of people, the fortune or misfortune of the individual,’right up 
to the top, loses all economic importance. Chance itself is planned; not in 
the sense that it will affect this or that particular individual but in that 
people believe in its control. For the planners it serves as an alibi, giving 
the impression that the web of transactions and measures into which life 
has been transformed* still leaves room for spontaneous, immediate rela¬ 
tionships between human beings. Such freedom is symbolized in the var¬ 
ious media of the culture industry by the arbitrary selection of average 
cases. In the detailed reports on the modestly luxurious pleasure trip orga¬ 
nized by the magazine for the lucky competition winner—preferably a 
shorthand typist who probably won through contacts with local powers- 
that-be—the powerlessness of everyone is reflected. So much are the 
masses mere material that those in control* can raise one of them up to 



ii8 The Culture Industry 


their heaven and cast him or her out again: let them go hang with their 
justice and their labor. Industry* is interested in human beings only as its 
customers and employees and has in fact reduced humanity as a whole, 
like each of its elements, to this exhaustive formula. Depending on which 
aspect happens to be paramount at the time, ideology stresses plan or 
chance, technology or life, civilization or nature. As employees people are 
reminded of the rational organization and must fit into it as common 
sense requires. As customers they are regaled, whether on the screen or in 
the press, with human interest stories demonstrating freedom of choice 
and the charm of not belonging to the system. In both cases they remain 
objects. 

The less the culture industry has to promise and the less it can offer 
a meaningful explanation of life, the emptier the ideology it disseminates 
necessarily becomes. Even the abstract ideals of the harmony and benevo¬ 
lence of society are too concrete in the age of the universal advertisement. 
Abstractions in particular are identified as publicity devices. Language 
which appeals to mere truth only arouses impatience to get down to the 
real business behind it. Words which are not a means seem meaningless, 
the others seem to be fiction, untruth. Value judgments are perceived 
either as advertisements or as mere chatter. The noncommittal vagueness 
of the resulting ideology does not make it more transparent, or weaker. Its 
very vagueness, the quasiscientific reluctance to be pinned down to any¬ 
thing which cannot be verified, functions as an instrument of control. 
Ideology becomes the emphatic and systematic proclamation of what is. 
Through its inherent tendency to adopt the tone of the factual report, the 
culture industry makes itself the irrefutable prophet of the existing order. 
With consummate skill it maneuvers between the crags of demonstrable 
misinformation and obvious truth by faithfully duplicating appearances, 
the density of which blocks insight.. Thus the omnipresent and impene¬ 
trable world of appearances is set up as the ideal. Ideology is split between 
the photographing of brute existence and the blatant lie about its mean¬ 
ing, a lie which is not articulated directly but drummed in by suggestion. 
The mere cynical reiteration of the real is enough to demonstrate its divin¬ 
ity. Suck photological prooP may not be stringent, but it is overwhelm¬ 
ing. Anyone who continues to doubt in face of the power of monotony is 
a fool. The culture industry sweeps aside objections to itself along with 
those to the world it ne trally duplicates. One has only the choice of con- 



Enlightenment as Mass Deception 119 


forming or being consigned to the backwoods: the provincials who oppose 
cinema and radio by falling back on eternal beauty and amateur theatri¬ 
cals have already reached the political stance toward which the members 
of mass culture are still being driven. This culture is hardened enough 
either to poke fun at the old wishful dreams, the paternal ideal no less than 
unconditional feeling, or to invoke them as ideology, as the occasion 
demands. The new ideology has the world as such as its subject. It exploits 
the cult of fact by describing bad existence with utmost exactitude in order 
to elevate it into the realm of facts. Through such elevation existence itself 
becomes a surrogate of meaning and justice. Beauty is whatever the cam¬ 
era reproduces. The disappointed hope that one might oneself be the 
employee who won the world trip is matched by the disappointing appear¬ 
ance of the exactly photographed regions through which the journey 
might have led. What is offered is not Italy but evidence that it exists. The 
film can permit itself to show the Paris in which the young American 
woman hopes to still her longing as a desolately barren place, in order to 
drive her all the more implacably into the arms of the smart American boy 
she might equally well have met at home. That life goes on at all, that the 
system, even in its most recent phase, reproduces the lives of those who 
constitute it instead of doing away with them straight away, is even cred¬ 
ited to the system as its meaning and value. The ability to keep going at 
all becomes the justification for the blind continuation of the system, 
indeed, for its immutability. What is repeated is healthy—the cycle in 
nature as in industry. The same babies grin endlessly from magazines, and 
endlessly the jazz machine pounds. Despite all the progress in the tech¬ 
niques of representation, all the rules and specialties, all the gesticulating 
bustle, the bread on which the culture industry feeds humanity, remains 
the stone of stereotype. It lives on the cyclical, on the admittedly well- 
founded amazement that, in spite of everything, mothers still give birth to 
children, that the wheels have not yet come completely to a halt. All this 
consolidates the immutability of the existing circumstances. The swaying 
cornfields at the end of Chaplins film on Hitler give the lie to the anti¬ 
fascist speech about freedom. They resemble the blond tresses of the 
German maidens whose outdoor life in the summer wind is photographed 
by Ufa. Nature, in being presented by society’s control mechanism as the 
healing antithesis of society, is itself absorbed into that incurable society 
and sold off. The solemn pictorial affirmation that the trees are green, the 



120 The Culture Industry 


sky is blue, and the clouds are sailing overhead already makes them cryp¬ 
tograms for factory chimneys and gasoline stations. Conversely, wheels 
and machine parts are made to gleam expressively, debased as receptacles 
of that leafy, cloudy soul. In this way both nature and technology are 
mobilized against the alleged stuffiness, the faked recollection of liberal 
society as a world in which people idled lasciviously in plush-lined rooms 
instead of taking wholesome open-air baths as they do today, or suffered 
breakdowns in antediluvian Benz models instead of traveling at rocket 
speed from where they are in any case to where it is no different. The tri¬ 
umph of the giant corporation* over entrepreneurial initiative is celebrat¬ 
ed by the culture industry as the perpetuity of entrepreneurial initiative. 
The fight is waged against an enemy who has already been defeated, the 
thinking subject.* The resurrection of Hans Sonnenstofler,* the enemy of 
bourgeois philistines, in Germany, and the smug coziness of Life with 
Father* have one and the same meaning. 

On one matter, however, this hollow ideology is utterly serious: 
everyone is provided for. “No one must be hungry or cold. Anyone failing 
to comply goes to a concentration camp:” The joke from Hitler’s Germany 
might well shine out as a maxim above all the portals of the culture indus¬ 
try. With naive shrewdness it anticipates the situation characteristic of the 
latest society:* that it knows how to identify its true supporters. Formal 
freedom is guaranteed for everyone. No one has to answer officially* for 
what he or she thinks. However, all find themselves enclosed from early 
on within a system of churches, clubs, professional associations, and other 
relationships which amount to the most sensitive instrument of social con¬ 
trol. Anyone who wants to avoid ruin must take care not to weigh too lit¬ 
tle in the scales of this apparatus. Otherwise he will fall behind in life and 
finally go under. The fact that in every career, and especially in the liberal 
professions, specialist knowledge as a rule goes hand in hand with a pre¬ 
scribed set of attitudes* easily gives the misleading impression that expert 
knowledge is all that counts. In reality, it is a feature of the irrationally sys¬ 
tematic nature of this society that it reproduces, passably, only the lives of 
its loyal members. The gradations in the standard of living correspond 
very precisely to the degree by which classes and individuals inwardly 
adhere to the system. Managers can be relied on; even the minor employ¬ 
ee Dagwood,* who lives in reality no less than in the jromic strip, is reli- 



121 


Enlightenment as Mass Deception 

able. But anyone who goes hungry and suffers from cold, especially if he 
once had good prospects, is a marked man. He is an outsider, and—with 
the occasional exception of the capital crime—to be an outsider is the 
gravest guilt. In films such a person is, at best, an eccentric, an object of 
maliciously indulgent humor; but mostly he is a villain and is identified as 
such on his very first appearance, long before the action requires it, to fore¬ 
stall even the momentary misapprehension that society turns against those 
of good will. In fact, a kind of welfare state on a higher level is being estab¬ 
lished* today. To assert their positions people keep in motion an economy 
in which the extreme development of technology has made the masses in 
principle superfluous as producers in their own country. According to the 
ideological illusion, the workers, the true providers, are fed by the leaders 
of industry,* whom they feed. Thus the position of the individual becomes 
precarious. Under liberalism the poor were regarded as lazy; today they are 
automatically suspect. Anyone who is not provided for outside the con¬ 
centration camp belongs inside it, or at any rate in the hell of the most 
demeaning labor and the slums. The culture industry, however, reflects 
society’s positive and negative provision* for those it administers as direct 
human solidarity in the world of honest folk. No one is forgotten, every¬ 
where are neighbors, social welfare officers, Dr Gillespies, and armchair 
philosophers with their hearts in the right place who, with their kindly 
man-to-man interventions, turn the socially perpetuated wretchedness 
into remediable individual cases, unless even that is ruled out by the per¬ 
sonal depravity of those concerned. The managed provision of friendly 
care, administered by every factory as a means of increasing production, 
brings the last private impulse under social control; by being given the 
appearance of immediacy, the relationships of people within production 
are returned to the private sphere. Such “winter aid”* casts its conciliato¬ 
ry shadow over the films and broadcasts of the culture industry long before 
such care is transferred in totalitarian style from the factory to society 
itself. The great helpers and benefactors of humanity, whose scholarly and 
scientific achievements have to be embellished by scriptwriters as simple 
acts of compassion to wring from them a fictitious human interest, func¬ 
tion as stand-ins for the leaders of nations, who ultimately decree the abo¬ 
lition of compassion and succeed in preventing all infections by extermi¬ 
nating the last of the sick. 

The emphasis on the heart of gold is society’s way of admitting the 



122 The Culture Industry 


suffering it creates: everyone knows that they are helpless within the sys¬ 
tem, and ideology must take account of this. Far from merely concealing 
the suffering under the cloak of improvised comradeship, the culture 
industry stakes its company pride on looking it manfully in the eye and 
acknowledging it with unflinching composure. This posture of steadfast 
endurance justifies the world which that posture makes necessary. Such is 
the world—so hard, yet therefore so wonderful, so healthy. The lie does 
not shrink back even from tragedy. Just as totalitarian society does not 
abolish the suffering of its members, but registers and plans it, mass cul¬ 
ture does the same with tragedy. Hence the persistent borrowings from art. 
Art supplies the tragic substance which pure entertainment cannot provide 
on its own yet which it needs if it is to adhere to its principle of meticu¬ 
lously duplicating appearance. Tragedy, included in society’s calculations 
and affirmed as a moment of the world, becomes a blessing. It deflects the 
charge that truth is glossed over, whereas in fact it is appropriated with 
cynical regret. It imparts an element of interest to the insipidity of cen¬ 
sored happiness and makes that interest manageable. To the consumer 
who has seen culturally better days it offers the surrogate of long-abolished 
depth, and to regular moviegoers the veneer of culture they need for pur¬ 
poses of prestige. To all it grants the solace that human fate in its strength 
and authenticity is possible even now* and its unflinching depiction in¬ 
escapable. The unbroken surface of existence, in the duplication of which 
ideology consists solely today, appears all the more splendid, glorious, and 
imposing the more it is imbued with necessary suffering. It takes on the 
aspect of fate. Tragedy is leveled down to the threat to destroy anyone who 
does not conform, whereas its paradoxical meaning once lay in hopeless 
resistance to mythical threat. Tragic fate becomes the just punishment into 
which bourgeois aesthetics has always longed to transform it. The morali¬ 
ty of mass culture has come down to it from yesterdays childrens books. 
In the first-class production the villain is dressed up as the hysteric who, 
in a study of ostensibly clinical exactitude, seeks to trick her more realistic 
rival out of her life’s happiness and who herself suffers a quite untheatrical 
death. To be sure, only at the top are things managed as scientifically as 
this. Further down, the resources are scarcer. There tragedy has its teeth 
drawn without social psychology. Just as any honest Hungarian-Viennese 
operetta must have its tragic finale in the second act, leaving nothing for 
the third but the righting of misunderstandings, mass culture gives 



Enlightenment as Mass Deception 123 


tragedy permanent employment as routine. The obvious existence of a for¬ 
mula is enough in itself to allay the concern that tragedy might still be 
untamed. The housewife’s description of the recipe for drama as “getting 
into trouble and out again” encompasses the whole of mass culture from 
the weak-minded womens serial* to its highest productions. Even the 
worst outcome, which once had better intentions, still confirms the estab¬ 
lished order and corrupts tragedy, whether because the irregular lover pays 
for her brief happiness with death or because the sad end in the picture 
makes the indestructibility of actual life shine all the more brightly. Tragic 
cinema is becoming truly a house of moral correction. The masses, demor¬ 
alized by existence under the pressure of the system* and manifesting civ¬ 
ilization only as compulsively rehearsed behavior in which rage and rebel¬ 
liousness everywhere show through, are to be kept in order by the specta¬ 
cle of implacable life and the exemplary conduct of those it crushes. 
Culture has always contributed to the subduing of revolutionary as well as 
of barbaric instincts. Industrial culture does something more. It inculcates 
the conditions on which implacable life is allowed to be lived at all. 
Individuals must use their general satiety as a motive for abandoning 
themselves to the collective power of which they are sated. The perma¬ 
nently hopeless situations which grind down filmgoers in daily life are 
transformed by their reproduction, in some unknown way, into a promise 
that they may continue to exist. One needs only to become aware of one’s 
nullity, to subscribe to one’s own defeat, and one is already a party to it. 
Society is made up of the desperate and thus falls prey to rackets. In a few 
of the most significant German novels of the prefascistic era, such as Berlin 
Alexanderplatz and Kleiner Mann , was nun?, this tendency was as vividly 
evident as in the mediocre film and in the procedures of jazz. Funda¬ 
mentally, they all present the self-mockery of man. The possibility of 
becoming an economic subject, an entrepreneur, a proprietor, is entirely 
liquidated. Right down to the small grocery, the independent firm on the 
running and inheriting of which the bourgeois family and the position of 
its head were founded, has fallen into hopeless dependence. All have 
become employees, and in the civilization of employees the dignity of the 
father, dubious in any case, ceases to be. The behavior of the individual 
toward the racket, whether commercial, professional, or political, both 
before and after admittance to it; the gestures of the leader before the 
masses, of the lover before the woman he woos, are taking on peculiarly 



124 The Culture Industry 


masochistic traits. The attitude all are forced to adopt in order to demon¬ 
strate ever again their moral fitness for this society is reminiscent of that 
of boys during admission to a tribe; circling under the blows of the priest, 
they wear stereotypical smiles. Existence in late capitalism is a permanent 
rite of initiation. Everyone must show that they identify wholeheartedly 
with the power which beats them. This is inherent in the principle of syn¬ 
copation in jazz, which mocks the act of stumbling while elevating it to 
the norm. The eunuch-like voice of the radio crooner, the handsome suit¬ 
or of the heiress, who falls into the swimming pool wearing his tuxedo, are 
models for those who want to make themselves into that to which the sys¬ 
tem* breaks them. Everyone can be like the omnipotent society, everyone 
can be happy if only they hand themselves over to it body and soul and 
relinquish their claim to happiness. In their weakness society recognizes its 
own strength and passes some of it back to them. Their lack of resistance 
certifies them as reliable customers. Thus is tragedy abolished. Once, the 
antithesis between individual and society made up its substance. Tragedy 
glorified “courage and freedom of feeling in face of a mighty foe, sublime 
adversity, a problem which awakened dread.” 4 Today tragedy has been dis¬ 
sipated in the void of the false identity of society and subject, the horror 
of which is still just fleetingly visible in the vacuous semblance of the trag¬ 
ic. But the miracle of integration, the permanent benevolence of those in 
command,* who admit the unresisting subject while he chokes down his 
unruliness—all this signifies fascism. Fascism lurks in the humaneness 
with which Doblin allows his protagonist Biberkopf to find refuge, no less 
than in films with a social slant. The ability to slip through, to survive 
one’s own ruin, which has superseded tragedy, is ingrained in the new gen¬ 
eration; its members are capable of any work, since the work process 
allows them to become attached to none. One is reminded of the sad pli¬ 
ability of the soldier returning home, unaffected by the war, of the casual 
laborer who finally joins the clandestine groups and the paramilitary orga¬ 
nizations. The liquidation of tragedy confirms the abolition of the indi¬ 
vidual. 

It is not only the standardized mode of production of the culture 
industry which makes the individual illusory in its products. Individuals 
are tolerated only as far as their wholehearted identity with the universal 
is beyond question. From the standardized improvisation in jazz to the 



Enlightenment as Mass Deception 125 


original film personality who must have a lock of hair straying over her 
eyes so that she can be recognized as such, pseudoindividuality reigns. The 
individual trait is reduced to the ability of the universal so completely to 
mold the accidental that it can be recognized as accidental. The sulky tac¬ 
iturnity or the elegant walk of the individual who happens to be on show 
is serially produced like the Yale locks which differ by fractions of a mil¬ 
limeter. The peculiarity of the self is a socially conditioned monopoly 
commodity misrepresented as natural. It is reduced to the moustache, the 
French accent, the deep voice of the prostitute, the “Lubitsch touch”—like 
a fingerprint on the otherwise uniform identity cards to which the lives 
and faces of all individuals, from the film star to the convict, have been 
reduced by the power of the universal. Pseudoindividuality is a precondi¬ 
tion for apprehending and detoxifying tragedy: only because individuals 
are none but mere intersections of universal tendencies is it possible to 
reabsorb them smoothly into the universal. Mass culture thereby reveals 
the fictitious quality which has characterized the individual throughout 
the bourgeois era and is wrong only in priding itself on this murky har¬ 
mony between universal and particular. The principle of individuality was 
contradictory from the outset. First, no individuation was ever really 
achieved. The class-determined form of self-preservation maintained 
everyone at the level of mere species being. Every bourgeois* character 
expressed the same thing, even and especially when deviating from it: the 
harshness of competitive society. The individual, on whom society was 
supported, itself bore society’s taint; in the individual’s apparent freedom 
he was the product of society’s economic and social apparatus. Power has 
always invoked the existing power relationships when seeking the approval 
of those subjected to power. At the same time, the advance of bourgeois 
society has promoted the development of the individual. Against the will 
of those controlling it, technology has changed human beings from chil¬ 
dren into persons. But all such progress of individuation has been at the 
expense of the individuality in whose name it took place, leaving behind 
nothing except individuals’ determination to pursue their own purposes 
alone. The citizens whose lives are split between business and private life, 
their private life between ostentation and intimacy, their intimacy between 
the sullen community of marriage and the bitter solace of being entirely 
alone, at odds with themselves and with everyone, are virtually already 
Nazis, who are at once enthusiastic and fed up, or the city dwellers of 



126 The Culture Industry 


today, who can imagine friendship only as “social contact” between the 
inwardly unconnected. The culture industry can only manipulate individ¬ 
uality so successfully because the fractured nature of society has always 
been reproduced within it. In the ready-made faces of film heroes and pri¬ 
vate persons fabricated according to magazine-cover stereotypes, a sem¬ 
blance of individuality—in which no one believes in any case—is fading, 
and the love for such hero-models is nourished by the secret satisfaction 
that the effort of individuation is at last being replaced by the admittedly 
more breathless one of imitation. The hope that the contradictory, disin¬ 
tegrating person could not survive for generations, that the psychological 
fracture within it must split the system itself, and that human beings 
might refuse to tolerate the mendacious substitution of the stereotype for 
the individual—that hope is vain. The unity of the personality has been 
recognized as illusory since Shakespeare’s Hamlet. In the synthetically 
manufactured physiognomies of today the fact that the concept of human 
life ever existed is already forgotten. For centuries society has prepared for 
Victor Mature and Mickey Rooney.* They come to fulfill the very indi¬ 
viduality they destroy. 

The heroizing of the average forms part of the cult of cheapness. The 
highest-paid stars resemble advertisements for unnamed merchandise. 
Not for nothing are they often chosen from the ranks of commercial mod¬ 
els. The dominant taste derives its ideal from the advertisement, from 
commodified beauty. Socrates’ dictum that beauty is the useful has at last 
been ironically fulfilled. The cinema publicizes the cultural conglomerate* 
as a totality, while the radio advertises individually the products for whose 
sake the cultural system exists. For a few coins you can see the film which 
cost millions, for even less you can buy the chewing gum behind which 
stand the entire riches of the world, and the sales of which increase those 
riches still further. Through universal suffrage the vast funding of armies 
is generally known and approved, if in absentia , while prostitution behind 
the lines is not permitted. The best orchestras in the world, which are 
none, are delivered free of charge to the home. All this mockingly re¬ 
sembles the land of milk and honey as the national community apes the 
human one. Something is served up for everyone.* A provincial visitor’s 
comment on the old Berlin Metropoltheater that “it is remarkable what 
can be done for the money” has long since been adopted by the culture 
industry and elevated to the substance of production itself. Not only is a 



Enlightenment as Mass Deception 127 


production always accompanied by triumphant celebration that it has 
been possible at all, but to a large extent it is that triumph itself. To put 
on a show means to show everyone what one has and can do. The show is 
still a fairground, but one incurably infected by culture. Just as people 
lured by the fairground crier overcame their disappointment inside the 
booths with a brave smile, since they expected it in any case, the movie¬ 
goer remains tolerantly loyal to the institution. But the cheapness of mass- 
produced luxury articles, and its complement, universal fraud, are chang¬ 
ing the commodity character of art itself That character is not new: it is 
the fact that art now dutifully admits to being a commodity, abjures its 
autonomy and proudly takes its place among consumer goods, that has the 
charm of novelty. Art was only ever able to exist as a separate sphere in its 
bourgeois form. Even its freedom, as negation of the social utility which is 
establishing itself through the market, is essentially conditioned by the 
commodity economy. Pure works of art, which negated the commodity 
character of society by simply following their own inherent laws, were at 
the same time always commodities. To the extent that, up to the eigh¬ 
teenth century, artists were protected from the market by patronage, they 
were subject to the patrons and their purposes instead. The purposeless¬ 
ness of the great modern work of art is sustained by the anonymity of the 
market. The latter’s demands are so diversely mediated that the artist is 
exempted from any particular claim, although only to a certain degree, 
since his autonomy, being merely tolerated, has been attended throughout 
bourgeois history by a moment of untruth, which has culminated now in 
the social liquidation of art. The mortally sick Beethoven, who flung away 
a novel by Walter Scott with the cry: “The fellow writes for money,” while 
himself proving an extremely experienced and tenacious businessman in 
commercializing the last quartets—works representing the most extreme 
repudiation of the market—offers the most grandiose example of the 
unity of the opposites of market and autonomy in bourgeois art. The 
artists who succumb to ideology are precisely those who conceal this con¬ 
tradiction instead of assimilating it into the consciousness of their own 
production, as Beethoven did: he improvised on “Rage over a Lost Penny” 
and derived the metaphysical injunction “It must be,” which seeks aes¬ 
thetically to annul the world’s compulsion by taking that burden onto 
itself, from his housekeeper’s demand for her monthly wages. The princi¬ 
ple of idealist aesthetics, purposiveness without purpose,* reverses the 



iz8 The Culture Industry 


schema socially adopted by bourgeois art: purposelessness for purposes 
dictated by the market. In the demand for entertainment and relaxation, 
purpose has finally consumed the realm of the purposeless. But as the 
demand for the marketability of art becomes total, a shift in the inner eco¬ 
nomic composition of cultural commodities* is becoming apparent. For 
the use which is made of the work of art in antagonistic society is largely 
that of confirming the very existence of the useless, which art’s total sub¬ 
sumption under usefulness has abolished. In adapting itself entirely to 
need, the work of art defrauds human beings in advance of the liberation 
from the principle of utility which it is supposed to bring about. What 
might be called use value in the reception of cultural assets is being 
replaced* by exchange value; enjoyment is giving way to being there and 
being in the know, connoisseurship by enhanced prestige. The consumer 
becomes the ideology of the amusement industry, whose institutions he or 
she cannot escape.* One has to have seen Mrs. Miniver,* just as one must 
subscribe to Life and Time. Everything is perceived only from the point of 
view that it can serve as something else, however vaguely that other thing 
might be envisaged. Everything has value only in so far as it can be ex¬ 
changed, not in so far as it is something in itself. For consumers the use 
value of art, its essence, is a fetish, and the fetish—the social valuation 
which they mistake for the merit of works of art—becomes its only use 
value, the only quality they enjoy. In this way the commodity character of 
art disintegrates just as it is fully realized. Art becomes a species of com¬ 
modity, worked up and adapted to industrial production, saleable and 
exchangeable; but art as the species of commodity which exists in order to 
be sold yet not for sale becomes something hypocritically unsaleable as 
soon as the business transaction is no longer merely its intention but its 
sole principle. The Toscanini performance on the radio is, in a sense, 
unsaleable. One listens to it for nothing, and each note of the symphony 
is accompanied, as it were, by the sublime advertisement that the sym¬ 
phony is not being interrupted by advertisements—“This concert is 
brought to you as a public service.” The deception* takes place indirectly 
via the profit of all the united automobile and soap manufacturers, on 
whose payments the stations survive, and, of course, via the increased sales 
of the electrical industry as the producer of the receiver sets. Radio, the 
progressive latecomer to mass culture, is drawing conclusions which films 
pseudomarket at present denies that industry. The technical structure of 



Enlightenment as Mass Deception 129 


the commercial radio system* makes it immune to liberal deviations of the 
kind the film industry can still permit itself in its own preserve. Film is a 
private enterprise which already represents the sovereign whole,* in which 
respect it has some advantages over the other individual combines.* 
Chesterfield is merely the nations cigarette, but the radio is its mouth¬ 
piece. In the total assimilation of culture products into the commodity 
sphere radio makes no attempt to purvey its products as commodities. In 
America it levies no duty from the public. It thereby takes on the decep¬ 
tive form of a disinterested, impartial authority, which fits fascism like a 
glove. In fascism radio becomes the universal mouthpiece of the Fiihrer\ 
in the loudspeakers on the street his voice merges with the howl of sirens 
proclaiming panic, from which modern propaganda is hard to distinguish 
in any case. The National Socialists knew that broadcasting gave their 
cause stature as the printing press did to the Reformation. The Fiihrers 
metaphysical charisma, invented by the sociology of religion,* turned out 
finally to be merely the omnipresence of his radio addresses, which 
demonically parodies that of the divine spirit. The gigantic fact that the 
speech penetrates everywhere replaces its content, as the benevolent act of 
the Toscanini broadcast supplants its content, the symphony. No listener 
can apprehend the symphony’s true coherence, while the Fiihrers address 
is in any case a lie. To posit the human word as absolute, the false com¬ 
mandment, is the immanent tendency of radio. Recommendation be¬ 
comes command. The promotion of identical commodities under differ¬ 
ent brand names, the scientifically endorsed praise of the laxative in the 
slick voice of the announcer between the overtures of La Traviata and 
Rienzi , has become untenable if only for its silliness. One day the Diktat 
of production, the specific advertisement, veiled by the semblance of 
choice, can finally become the Fiihrers overt command. In a society of 
large-scale fascistic rackets which agree among themselves on how much 
of the national product is to be allocated to providing for the needs of the 
people, to invite the people to use a particular soap powder would, in the 
end, seem anachronistic. In a more modern, less ceremonious style, the 
Fiihrer directly orders both the holocaust and the supply of trash. 

Today works of art, suitably packaged like political slogans, are 
pressed on a reluctant public at reduced prices by the culture industry; 
they are opened up for popular enjoyment like parks. However, the ero¬ 
sion of their genuine commodity character does not mean that they would 



130 The Culture Industry 


be abolished in the life of a free society but that the last barrier to their 
debasement as cultural assets has now been removed. The abolition of 
educational privilege by disposing of culture at bargain prices does not 
admit the masses to the preserves from which they were formerly exclud¬ 
ed but, under the existing social conditions, contributes to the decay of 
education and the progress of barbaric incoherence. Someone who in the 
nineteenth or early twentieth century spent money to attend a drama or a 
concert, paid the performance at least as much respect as the money spent. 
The citizen who wanted a return for his outlay might occasionally try to 
establish some connection to the work. The guidebooks to Wagners music 
dramas or the commentaries on Faust bear witness to this. They form a 
transition to the biographical glaze applied to works of art and the other 
practices to which works of art are subjected today. Even when the art 
business was in the bloom of youth, use value* was not dragged along as 
a mere appendage by exchange value but was developed as a precondition 
of the latter, to the social benefit of works of art. As long as it was expen¬ 
sive, art kept the citizen within some bounds. That is now over. Art’s un¬ 
bounded proximity to those exposed to it, no longer mediated by money, 
completes the alienation between work and consumer, which resemble 
each other in triumphant reification. In the culture industry respect is van¬ 
ishing along with criticism: the latter gives way to mechanical expertise, 
the former to the forgetful cult of celebrities. For consumers, nothing is 
expensive any more. Nevertheless, they are dimly aware that the less some¬ 
thing costs, the less it can be a gift to them. The twofold mistrust of tra¬ 
ditional culture as ideology mingles with that of industrialized culture as 
fraud. Reduced to mere adjuncts, the degraded works of art are secretly 
rejected by their happy recipients along with the junk the medium has 
made them resemble. The public should rejoice that there is so much to 
see and hear. And indeed, everything is to be had. The “screenos”* and 
cinema vaudevilles, the competitions in recognizing musical extracts, the 
free magazines, rewards, and gift articles handed out to the listeners of cer¬ 
tain radio programs are not mere accidents, but continue what is happen¬ 
ing to the culture products themselves. The symphony is becoming the 
prize for listening to the radio at all, and if the technology had its way the 
film would already be delivered to the apartment on the model of the 
radio.* It is moving towards the commercial system. Television points the 
way to a development which easily enough could push the Warner broth- 



Enlightenment as Mass Deception 131 


ers* into the doubtless unwelcome position of little theatre performers and 
cultural conservatives. However, the pursuit of prizes has already left its 
imprint on consumer behavior. Because culture presents itself as a bonus, 
with unquestioned private and social benefits, its reception has become a 
matter of taking ones chances. The public crowds forward for fear of miss¬ 
ing something. What that might be is unclear, but, at any rate, only those 
who join in have any chance. Fascism, however, hopes* to reorganize the 
gift-receivers trained by the culture industry into its enforced adherents. 

Culture is a paradoxical commodity. It is so completely subject to the 
law of exchange that it is no longer exchanged; it is so blindly equated with 
use that it can no longer be used. For this reason it merges with the adver¬ 
tisement. The more meaningless the latter appears under monopoly, the 
more omnipotent culture becomes. Its motives are economic enough. 
That life could continue without the whole culture industry is too certain; 
the satiation and apathy it generates among consumers are too great. It can 
do little to combat this from its own resources. Advertising is its elixir of 
life. But because its product ceaselessly reduces the pleasure it promises as 
a commodity to that mere promise, it finally coincides with the advertise¬ 
ment it needs on account of its own inability to please. In the competitive 
society advertising performed a social service in orienting the buyer in the 
market, facilitating choice and helping the more efficient but unknown 
supplier to find customers. It did not merely cost labor time, but saved it. 
Today, when the free market is coming to an end, those in control of the 
system are entrenching themselves in advertising.* It strengthens the bond 
which shackles consumers to the big combines. Only those who can keep 
paying the exorbitant fees charged by the advertising agencies, and most 
of all by radio itself, that is, those who are already part of the system or are 
co-opted into it by the decisions of banks and industrial capital, can enter 
the pseudomarket as sellers. The costs of advertising, which finally flow 
back into the pockets of the combines,* spare them the troublesome task 
of subduing unwanted outsiders; they guarantee that the wielders of influ¬ 
ence remain among their peers, not unlike the resolutions of economic 
councils* which control the establishment and continuation of businesses 
in the totalitarian state. Advertising today is a negative principle, a block¬ 
ing device: anything which does not bear its seal of approval is economi¬ 
cally suspect. All-pervasive advertising is certainly not needed to acquaint 



132 The Culture Industry 


people with the goods on offer, the varieties of which are limited in any 
case. It benefits the selling of goods only directly. The termination of a 
familiar advertising campaign by an individual firm represents a loss of 
prestige, and is indeed an offence against the discipline which the leading 
clique imposes on its members. In wartime, commodities which can no 
longer be supplied continue to be advertised merely as a display of indus¬ 
trial power. At such times the subsidizing of the ideological media is more 
important than the repetition of names.* Through their ubiquitous use 
under the pressure of the system, advertising techniques have invaded the 
idiom, the “style” of the culture industry. So complete is their triumph 
that in key positions it is no longer even explicit: the imposing buildings 
of the big companies,* floodlit advertisements in stone, are free of adver¬ 
tising, merely displaying the illuminated company initials on their pinna¬ 
cles, with no further need of self-congratulation. By contrast, the buildings 
surviving from the nineteenth century, the architecture of which still 
shamefully reveals their utility as consumer goods, their function as ac¬ 
commodation, are covered from basement to above roof level with hoard¬ 
ings and banners: the landscape becomes a mere background for sign¬ 
boards and symbols. Advertising becomes simply the art with which 
Goebbels presciently equated it, Tart pour Tart , advertising for advertis¬ 
ing’s sake, the pure representation of social power. In the influential 
American magazines Life and Fortune the images and texts of advertise¬ 
ments are, at a cursory glance, hardly distinguishable from the editorial 
section. The enthusiastic and unpaid picture story about the living habits 
and personal grooming of celebrities, which wins them new fans, is edito¬ 
rial, while the advertising pages rely on photographs and data so factual 
and lifelike that they represent the ideal of information to which the edi¬ 
torial section only aspires. Every film is a preview of the next, which 
promises yet again to unite the same heroic couple under the same exotic 
sun: anyone arriving late cannot tell whether he is watching the trailer or 
the real thing. The montage character of the culture industry, the synthet¬ 
ic, controlled manner in which its products are assembled—factory-like 
not only in the film studio but also, virtually, in the compilation of the 
cheap biographies, journalistic novels, and hit songs—predisposes it to 
advertising: the individual moment, in being detachable, replaceable, 
estranged even technically from any coherence of meaning, lends itself to 
purposes outside the work. The special effect, the trick, the isolated and 



Enlightenment as Mass Deception 133 


repeatable individual performance have always conspired with the exhibi¬ 
tion of commodities for advertising purposes, and today every close-up of 
a film actress is an advert for her name, every hit song a plug for its tune. 
Advertising and the culture industry are merging technically no less than 
economically. In both, the same thing appears in countless places, and the 
mechanical repetition of the same culture product is already that of the 
same propaganda slogan. In both, under the dictate of effectiveness, tech¬ 
nique is becoming psychotechnique, a procedure for manipulating human 
beings. In both, the norms of the striking yet familiar, the easy but catchy, 
the worldly wise but straightforward hold good; everything is directed at 
overpowering a customer conceived as distracted or resistant. 

Through the language they speak, the customers make their own 
contribution to culture as advertising. For the more completely language 
coincides with communication, the more words change from substantial 
carriers of meaning to signs devoid of qualities; the more purely and trans¬ 
parently they communicate what they designate, the more impenetrable 
they become. The demythologizing oflanguage, as an element of the total 
process of enlightenment, reverts to magic. In magic word and content 
were at once different from each other and indissolubly linked. Concepts 
like melancholy, history, indeed, life, were apprehended in the word which 
both set them apart and preserved them. Its particular form constituted 
and reflected them at the same time. The trenchant distinction which 
declares the word itself fortuitous and its allocation to its object arbitrary 
does away with the superstitious commingling of word and thing. Any¬ 
thing in a given sequence of letters which goes beyond the correlation to 
the event designated is banished as unclear and as verbal metaphysics. As 
a result, the word, which henceforth is allowed only to designate some¬ 
thing and not to mean it, becomes so fixated on the object that it hardens 
to a formula. This affects language and subject matter equally. Instead of 
raising a matter to the level of experience, the purified word exhibits it as 
a case of an abstract moment, and everything else, severed from now 
defunct expression by the demand for pitiless clarity, therefore withers in 
reality also. The outside-left in football, the blackshirt,* the Hitler Youth 
member, and others of their kind are no more than what they are called. 
If, before its rationalization, the word had set free not only longing but 
lies, in its rationalized form it has become a straightjacket more for long¬ 
ing than for lies. The blindness and muteness of the data to which posi- 



134 The Culture Industry 


tivism reduces the world passes over into language itself, which is limited 
to registering those data. Thus relationships themselves become impene¬ 
trable, taking on an impact, a power of adhesion and repulsion which 
makes them resemble their extreme antithesis, spells. They act once more 
like the practices of a kind of sorcery, whether the name of a diva is con¬ 
cocted in the studio on the basis of statistical data, or welfare government 
is averted by the use of taboo-laden words such as “bureaucracy” and “in¬ 
tellectuals,” or vileness exonerates itself by invoking the name of a home¬ 
land. The name, to which magic most readily attaches, is today under¬ 
going a chemical change. It is being transformed into arbitrary, manipula¬ 
te designations, the power of which, although calculable, is for that rea¬ 
son as willful as that of archaic names. First names, the archaic residues, 
have been brought up to date either by stylizing them into advertising 
brands—film stars’ surnames have become first names—or by standard¬ 
izing them collectively. By contrast, the bourgeois, family name which, 
instead of being a trademark, individualized its bearers by relating them to 
their own prehistory, sounds old-fashioned. In Americans it arouses a curi¬ 
ous unease. To conceal the uncomfortable distance existing between par¬ 
ticular people* they call themselves Bob and Harry, like replaceable mem¬ 
bers of teams. Such forms of interaction reduce human beings to the 
brotherhood of the sporting public, which protects them from true frater¬ 
nity. Signification, the only function of the word admitted by semantics, 
is consummated in the sign. Its character as sign is reinforced by the speed 
with which linguistic models are put into circulation from above. Whether 
folksongs are rightly or wrongly called upper-class culture which has come 
down in the world, their elements have at least taken on their popular 
form in a long, highly mediated process of experience. The dissemination 
of popular songs, by contrast, is practically instantaneous. The American 
term “fad” for fashions which catch on epidemically—inflamed by the 
action of highly concentrated economic powers—referred to this phe¬ 
nomenon long before totalitarian advertising bosses had laid down the 
general lines of culture in their countries. If the German fascists launch a 
word like “intolerable” [Untragbar] over the loudspeakers one day, the 
whole nation is saying “intolerable” the next. On the same pattern, the 
nations against which the German Blitzkrieg was directed have adopted it 
in their own jargon. The universal repetition of the term denoting such 
measures makes the measures, too, familiar, just as, at the time of the free 



Enlightenment as Mass Deception 135 


market, the brand name on everyone’s lips increased sales. The blind and 
rapidly spreading repetition of designated words links advertising to the 
totalitarian slogan. The layer of experience which made words human like 
those who spoke them has been stripped away, and in its prompt appro¬ 
priation language takes on the coldness which hitherto was peculiar to 
billboards and the advertising sections of newspapers. Countless people 
use words and expressions which they either have ceased to understand at 
all or use only according to their behavioral functions, just as trademarks 
adhere all the more compulsively to their objects the less their linguistic 
meaning is apprehended. The Minister of Public Education speaks igno¬ 
rantly of “dynamic forces,” and the hit songs sing endlessly of “reverie” 
and “rhapsody,” hitching their popularity to the magic of the incompre¬ 
hensible as if to some deep intimation of a higher life. Other stereotypes, 
such as “memory,” are still partly comprehended, but become detached 
from the experience which might fulfill them. They obtrude into the spo¬ 
ken language like enclaves. On the German radio of Flesch and Hitler 
they are discernible in the affected diction of the announcer, who pro¬ 
nounces phrases like “Goodnight, listeners,” or “This is the Hitler Youth 
speaking,” or even “the Fiihrer ” with an inflection which passes into the 
mother tongue of millions. In such turns of phrase the last bond between 
sedimented experience and language, which still exerted a reconciling in¬ 
fluence in dialect in the nineteenth century, is severed. By contrast, in the 
hands of the editor whose supple opinions have promoted him to the sta¬ 
tus of Schriftleiter ,* German words become petrified and alien. In any 
word one can distinguish how far it has been disfigured by the fascist 
“folk” community. By now, of course, such language* has become univer¬ 
sal, totalitarian. The violence done to words is no longer audible in them. 
The radio announcer does not need to talk in an affected voice; indeed, he 
would be impossible if his tone differed from that of his designated lis¬ 
teners. This means, however, that the language and gestures of listeners 
and spectators are more deeply permeated by the patterns of the culture 
industry than ever before, in nuances still beyond the reach of experimen¬ 
tal methods. Today the culture industry has taken over the civilizing inher¬ 
itance of the frontier and entrepreneurial democracy, whose receptivity to 
intellectual deviations was never too highly developed. All are free to 
dance and amuse themselves, just as, since the historical neutralization of 
religion, they have been free to join any of the countless sects. But free- 



136 The Culture Industry 


dom to choose an ideology, which always reflects economic coercion, 
everywhere proves to be freedom to be the same. The way in which the 
young girl accepts and performs the obligatory date, the tone of voice used 
on the telephone and in the most intimate situations, the choice of words 
in conversation, indeed, the whole inner life compartmentalized according 
to the categories of vulgarized depth psychology, bears witness to the at¬ 
tempt to turn oneself into an apparatus meeting the requirements of suc¬ 
cess, an apparatus which, even in its unconscious impulses, conforms to 
the model presented by the culture industry. The most intimate reactions 
of human beings have become so entirely reified, even to themselves, that 
the idea of anything peculiar to them survives only in extreme abstraction: 
personality means hardly more than dazzling white teeth and freedom 
from body odor and emotions. That is the triumph of advertising in the 
culture industry: the compulsive imitation by consumers of cultural com¬ 
modities which, at the same time, they recognize as false.* 



Elements of Anti-Semitism: 
Limits of Enlightenment 


i 

Anti-Semitism today is for some a question affecting human destiny 
and for others a mere pretext. For the fascists the Jews are not a minority 
but the antirace, the negative principle as such; on their extermination the 
world’s happiness depends. Diametrically opposed to this is the thesis that 
the Jews, free of national or racial features, form a group through religious 
belief and tradition and nothing else. Jewish traits relate to Eastern Jews, 
and only to those not yet assimilated. Both doctrines are true and false at 
the same time. 

The first is true in the sense that fascism has made it true. The Jews 
are today the group which, in practice and in theory, draws to itself the 
destructive urge which the wrong social order spontaneously produces. 
They are branded as absolute evil by absolute evil. In this sense they are 
indeed the chosen people. Now that power is no longer needed for eco¬ 
nomic reasons,* the Jews are designated as its absolute object, existing 
merely for the exercise of power. The workers,* who are the real target, are 
understandably not told as much to their faces; the blacks must be kept in 
their place, but the Jews are to be wiped from the face of the earth, and 
the call to exterminate them like vermin finds an echo among the prospec¬ 
tive fascists of all countries. In the image of the Jew which the racial 
nationalists hold up before the world they express their own essence. Their 
craving is for exclusive ownership, appropriation,* unlimited power, and 



138 Elements of Anti-Semitism 


at any price. The Jew, burdened with his tormentors’ guilt, mocked as their 
lord, they nail to the cross, endlessly repeating a sacrifice in whose power 
they are unable to believe. 

The other, liberal thesis is true as an idea. It contains an image of the 
society in which rage would no longer reproduce itself or seek qualities on 
which to be discharged.* But by assuming the unity of humanity to have 
been already realized in principle, the liberal thesis serves as an apology for 
the existing order. The attempt to avert the direst threat by minority poli¬ 
cies and other democratic measures is ambiguous as is the defensive strat¬ 
egy of the last liberal citizens. Their powerlessness attracts the enemy of 
powerlessness. The mode of life and appearance of the Jews compromise 
the existing universal by deficient adaptation. Their inflexible adherence to 
their own order of life has placed them in an insecure relationship to the 
prevailing one. They expected to be sustained by that order without sub¬ 
scribing to it. Their relationship to the dominant nations was one of greed 
and fear. Yet whenever they sacrificed their difference to the prevailing 
mode, the successfully adapted Jews took on in exchange the cold, stoical 
character which existing society* imposes on human beings. The dialecti¬ 
cal intertwinement of enlightenment and power, the dual relationship of 
progress to both cruelty and liberation, which has been brought home to 
the Jews no less by the great exponents of enlightenment than by democ¬ 
ratic popular movements, manifests itself in the makeup of the assimilat¬ 
ed Jews themselves. The enlightened self-control with which adapted Jews 
effaced within themselves the painful scars of domination by others, a 
kind of second circumcision, made them forsake their own dilapidated 
community and wholeheartedly embrace the life of the modern bour¬ 
geoisie, which was already advancing ineluctably toward a reversion to 
pure oppression and reorganization into an exclusively racial entity. Race 
is not, as the racial nationalists claim, an immediate, natural peculiarity. 
Rather, it is a regression to nature as mere violence, to the hidebound par¬ 
ticularism which, in the existing order,* constitutes precisely the universal. 
Race today is the self-assertion of the bourgeois individual, integrated into 
the barbaric collective. The harmonious society to which the liberal Jews 
declared,their allegiance has finally been granted to them in the form of 
the national community. They believed that only anti-Semitism disfigured 
this order, which in reality cannot exist without disfiguring human beings. 



Limits of Enlightenment 139 


The persecution of the Jews, like any persecution, cannot be separated 
from that order* Its essence, however it may hide itself at times, is the vio¬ 
lence which today is openly revealed. 

11 

Anti-Semitism as a popular movement has always been driven by the 
urge of which its instigators accuse the social democrats: to make everyone 
the same. Those without the power to command must fare no better than 
ordinary people. From the German civil servant to the Negroes in Har¬ 
lem, those avidly emulating their betters have always known that they 
would really gain nothing but the satisfaction of seeing others no better off 
than themselves. The Aryanization of Jewish property, which in any case 
primarily benefited those at the top, enriched the masses in the Third 
Reich hardly more than the wretched booty pillaged from Jewish quarters 
enriched the Cossacks. The real benefit it brought was a half-understood 
ideology. That the demonstration of its economic futility heightened rath¬ 
er than moderated the attraction of the racialist panacea points to its true 
nature: it does not help human beings but assuages their urge to destroy. 
The actual advantage enjoyed by the racialist comrade is that his rage will 
be sanctioned by the collective. The less he gains in any other way, the 
more obstinately, against better knowledge, he clings to the movement. 
Anti-Semitism has proved immune to the charge of inadequate profitabil¬ 
ity. For the common people it is a luxury. 

Its usefulness for the rulers is evident. It serves as a distinction, a 
cheap means of corruption, a terrorist warning. The respectable rackets 
condone it, the disreputable ones* carry it out. But the form of the men¬ 
tality, both social and individual, which manifests itself in anti-Semitism, 
the primeval-historical entrapment from which it is a desperate attempt to 
escape, remains wholly obscure. If a malady so deeply embedded in civi¬ 
lization is not properly accounted for by knowledge, the individual, too, 
though he may be as well intentioned as the victim himself, cannot miti¬ 
gate it through understanding. The plausibly rational, economic, and 
political explanations and counterarguments—however correct their indi¬ 
vidual observations—cannot appease it, since rationality itself, through its 
link to power, is submerged in the same malady. Whether blindly dealing 



140 Elements of Anti-Semitism 


out blows or blindly fending them off, persecutors and victims form part 
of the same calamitous cycle. Anti-Semitic behavior is unleashed in situa¬ 
tions in which blinded people, deprived of subjectivity, are let loose as sub¬ 
jects. Their actions—for those involved—are lethal yet meaningless reac¬ 
tions, of the kind which behaviorists register but fail to interpret. Anti- 
Semitism is a well-rehearsed pattern, indeed, a ritual of civilization, and 
the pogroms are the true ritual murders. They demonstrate the impotence 
of what might have restrained them—reflection, meaning, ultimately 
truth. The mindless pastime of beating people to death confirms the drab 
existence to which one merely conforms. 

The blindness of anti-Semitism, its lack of intention, lends a degree 
of truth to the explanation of the movement as a release valve. Rage is 
vented on those who are both conspicuous and unprotected. And just as, 
depending on the constellation, the victims are interchangeable: vagrants,* 
Jews, Protestants, Catholics, so each of them can replace the murderer, in 
the same blind lust for killing, as soon as he feels the power of represent¬ 
ing the norm. There is no authentic anti-Semitism, and certainly no born 
anti-Semite. The older adults to whom the call for Jewish blood has 
become second nature are as ignorant of the reason as the young people 
who have to shed it. The high-placed instigators, who know the reason, 
neither hate the Jews nor love their own followers. The latter, however, 
who always go short, economically and sexually, hate without end; they 
find relaxation unbearable because they do not know fulfillment. Indeed, 
the organized robbers and murderers are animated by a kind of dynamic 
idealism. Setting out on their pillages, they construct a grandiose ideolo¬ 
gy for what they do, with fatuous talk of saving the family, the fatherland, 
humanity. But as they remain the dupes they secretly suspect themselves 
to be, their pitiful rational motive, the theft which was supposed to ratio¬ 
nalize the deed, is finally discarded entirely, and the rationalization 
becomes truthful against its will. The obscure impulse which was always 
more congenial to them than reason takes them over completely. The 
rational island sinks beneath the flood, and those desperately floundering 
now appear only as defenders of truth, restorers of the earth, which has to 
be reformed to its farthest corners. All living things become material for 
their ghastly duty, which now flinches at nothing. Action becomes a pur¬ 
pose in itself, cloaking its own purposelessness. Anti-Semitism always 
stal ls with an appeal to complete the task. Anti-Semitism^and totality have 



Limits of Enlightenment 141 

always been profoundly connected. Blindness encompasses everything 
because it comprehends nothing. 

Liberalism had granted the Jews property, but without the authority 
to command. The purpose of human rights was to promise happiness even 
where power was lacking. Because the cheated masses are dimly aware that 
this promise, being universal, remains a lie as long as classes exist, it arous¬ 
es their anger; they feel themselves scorned. They must constantly repress 
the thought of that happiness, even as a possibility, an idea, and they deny 
it all the more fiercely the more its time has come. Wherever it appears to 
be realized amid the systematic deprivation, they must reenact the sup¬ 
pression which has been applied to their own longing. Whatever that reen¬ 
actment is directed against, however unhappy it may itself be—Ahasuerus 
and Mignon, exoticism which evokes the promised land, beauty which 
summons the thought of sex, the animal whose hint of promiscuity con¬ 
demns it as repulsive—draws down on itself the destructive fury of the 
civilized, who can never fully complete the painful process of civilization. 
To those who compulsively control it, tormented nature provocatively 
reflects back the appearance of powerless happiness. The idea of happiness 
without power is unendurable because it alone would be happiness. The 
fantasy of the conspiracy of lascivious Jewish bankers who finance 
Bolshevism is a sign of innate powerlessness, the good life an emblem of 
happiness. These are joined by the image of the intellectual, who appears 
to enjoy in thought what the others deny themselves and is spared the 
sweat of toil and bodily strength. The banker and the intellectual, money 
and mind, the exponents of circulation, are the disowned wishful image of 
those mutilated by power, an image which power uses to perpetuate itself. 

Ill 

The present society, in which primitive religious feelings, new cults, 
and the legacy of revolutions are peddled in the market, in which the fas¬ 
cist leaders barter the land and lives of nations behind locked doors while 
the public lulled by their radio sets calculate the cost; this society in which 
even the word which unmasks it doubles as an invitation to join a politi¬ 
cal racket; in which no longer is politics merely business but business is the 
whole of politics—this society is scandalized by the Jew with his obsolete 
shopkeeper’s mannerisms, labeling him a materialist, a haggler, who should 



142 Elements of Anti-Semitism 


make way for the pioneering spirit of those who have elevated business to 
an absolute. 

Bourgeois anti-Semitism has a specific economic purpose: to conceal 
domination in production. If in earlier epochs the rulers were directly 
repressive, so that they not onJy left work exclusively to the lower orders 
but declared it the ignominy it always was under domination, in the age 
of mercantilism the absolute monarch transformed himself into the su¬ 
preme master of manufactories. Production became presentable at court. 
Finally, as bourgeois, the masters replaced their colorful robes with civil¬ 
ian dress. Work is no disgrace, they said—the more rationally to take pos¬ 
session of* that of others. Aligning themselves with the productive ele¬ 
ments, they remained the parasites of old.* The factory owner ventured 
and raked in like a great merchant or banker. He calculated, procured, 
bought, sold. In the market he competed with the merchants and bankers 
for the profit due to his capital. But he grabbed not merely from the mar¬ 
ket but from the source: as a functionary of the class system he took care 
not to go short of the fruits of his workers’ labor. The workers had to deliv¬ 
er as much as possible. Like a true Shylock he insisted on his contract. By 
virtue of owning the machines and materials, he forced the others to pro¬ 
duce. He called himself the producer, but he and everyone secretly knew 
the truth. The productive work of the capitalist, whether he justified his 
profit as the reward of enterprise, as under liberalism, or as the director’s 
salary, as today, was the ideology which concealed the nature of the labor 
contract and the rapacity of the economic system in general.* 

That is why people shout: “Stop thief!”—and point at the Jew. He 
is indeed the scapegoat, not only for individual maneuvers and machina¬ 
tions but in the wider sense that the economic injustice of the whole class 
is attributed to him. The factory owner has his debtors, the workers, under 
observation in his factory and can check their performance before he parts 
with his money. They only find out the true nature of the exchange onJy 
when they see what they can buy with it: the smallest magnate has access 
to a quantity of services and goods available to no ruler before him; but 
the workers receive what is called the cultural minimum. Not content with 
letting the market tell them how few goods can be theirs, the salesman 
sings the praises of those they cannot afford. Only the relationship of 
wages to prices expresses what is withheld* from the workers. With their 
wages they have accepted the principle of just remuneration. The mer- 



Limits of Enlightenment 143 


chant presents them with the promissory note they have signed on behalf 
of the manufacturer. The merchant is the bailiff for the whole system, tak¬ 
ing upon himself the odium due to the others. That the circulation sphere 
is responsible for exploitation is a socially necessary illusion. 

The Jews had not been the only people active in the circulation 
sphere. But they had been locked up in it too long not to reflect in their 
makeup something of the hatred so long directed at that sphere. Unlike 
their Aryan colleagues, they were largely denied access to the source of 
added value. Only at a late stage and with difficulty were they allowed to 
gain ownership of the means of production. To be sure, in the history of 
Europe, and even in imperial Germany, baptized Jews had reached high 
positions in administration and industry. But they always had to justify 
this with redoubled devotion and diligence, and stubborn self-denial. 
They were only admitted if, through their behavior, they tacitly adopted 
and confirmed the verdict on the other Jews: that is the purpose of bap¬ 
tism. All the great achievements of their prominent members were not 
enough to allow Jews to be admitted to the peoples of Europe; having 
been prevented from putting down roots they were then criticized as root¬ 
less. They always remained the protected Jews, dependent on emperors, 
princes, or the absolutist state. These patrons were economically more 
advanced than the rest of the population. To the extent that they could 
make use of the Jew as an intermediary, they protected him against the 
masses who had to foot the bill for progress. The Jews were the colonizers 
of progress. Having helped as merchants to disseminate Roman civiliza¬ 
tion throughout Gentile Europe, they became, in keeping with their patri¬ 
archal religion, representatives of urban, civic, and finally industrial con¬ 
ditions. As bearers of capitalist modes of existence from country to coun¬ 
try they earned the hatred of those who suffered under that system. For 
the sake of the economic progress which today is their downfall the Jews 
were from the first a thorn in the side of the craftsmen and farmers whose 
status capitalism undermined. Now it is their turn to bear the brunt of its 
exclusive, particularist character. They, who always wanted to be first, are 
left far behind. Even the Jewish head of an American entertainment trust 
is hopelessly defensive amid his wealth. The caftan was the ghostly residue 
of ancient civic dress. Today it is a sign that its wearers have been flung to 
the margins of a society* which, now wholly enlightened, is exorcising the 
spirits of its prehistory. They who propagated individualism, abstract law. 



144 Elements of Anti-Semitism 


the concept of the person, have been debased to a species. They who were 
never allowed untroubled ownership of the civic right which should have 
granted them human dignity are again called “the Jews” without distinc¬ 
tion. Even in the nineteenth century the Jew remained dependent on an 
alliance with the central authority. The general law, protected by the state, 
was the guarantor of his safety, and the exceptive law the specter which 
ensured his docility. He remained an object, dependent on grace and 
favor, even when claiming his rights. Trade was not his vocation, it was his 
fate. The Jews were the trauma of the knights of industry, who have to 
masquerade as productive creators.* In the Jewish jargon they detect what 
they secretly despise in themselves: their anti-Semitism is self-hate, the bad 
conscience of the parasite. 

IV 

Nationalist anti-Semitism seeks to disregard religion. It claims to be 
concerned with purity of race and nation. Its exponents notice that peo¬ 
ple have long ceased to trouble themselves about eternal salvation.* The 
average believer today is as crafty as only cardinals were in former times. 
To accuse the Jews of being obdurate unbelievers is no longer enough to 
incite the masses. But the religious hostility which motivated the persecu¬ 
tion of the Jews for two millennia is far from completely extinguished. 
Rather, anti-Semitism’s eagerness to deny its religious tradition indicates 
that that tradition is secretly rlo less deeply embedded in it than secular 
idiosyncrasy once was in religious zealotry. Religion has been incorporat¬ 
ed as cultural heritage, not abolished. The alliance between enlightenment 
and power has debarred from consciousness the moment of tryth in reli¬ 
gion while conserving its reified forms. Both circumstances finally benefit 
fascism: the unchanneled longing is guided into racial-nationalist rebel¬ 
lion, while the descendants of the evangelistic zealots are converted into 
conspirators of blood communities and elite guards, on the model of the 
Wagnerian knights of the Grail. In this way religion as an institution is 
partly meshed directly into the system and partly transposed into the 
pomp of mass culture and parades. The fanatical faith on which leader and 
followers pride themselves is no other than the grim doctrine which was 
earlier used to discipline the desperate, except that its content has gone 
astray. That content lives on only as hatred of those who do not share the 



Limits of Enlightenment 145 


faith. Among the “German Christians,”* all that remained of the religion 
of love was anti-Semitism. 

Christianity is not only a regression beyond Judaism. The latter’s 
God, in passing from a henotheistic to a universal form, did not entirely 
shed the features of the nature demon. The terror originating in remote 
preanimist times passes from nature into the concept of the absolute self 
which, as its creator and ruler, entirely subjugates nature. Despite the inef¬ 
fable power and splendor in which such alienation clothes it, that ruler is 
still attainable to thought, which becomes universal through this very rela¬ 
tionship to something supreme, transcendental. God as spirit is the prin¬ 
ciple opposed to nature; it not only stands for nature’s blind cycle as do all 
the mythical gods, but offers liberation from it. But in its remote abstract¬ 
ness, the incommensurable has at the same time become more terrible, 
and the pitiless statement: “I am who am,” which tolerates nothing beside 
itself, surpasses in its inescapable power the blinder and therefore more 
ambiguous judgment of anonymous fate. The God of Judaism demands 
what he is owed and settles accounts with the defaulter. He enmeshes his 
creatures in a tissue of debt and credit, guilt and merit. In contrast, 
Christianity emphasized the moment of grace, although that, too, is con¬ 
tained in Judaism, in God’s covenant with men and in the Messianic 
promise. It softened the terror of the absolute by allowing the creature to 
find itself reflected in the deity: the divine mediator is called by a human 
name and dies a human death. His message is: fear not; the law yields 
before faith; love becomes greater than any majesty, the only command¬ 
ment. 

But by virtue of the same moments by which it lifted the spell of 
nature religion, Christianity is producing ideology once again, in a spiri¬ 
tualized form. To the same degree as the absolute is brought closer to the 
finite, the finite is made absolute. Christ, the incarnated spirit, is the dei¬ 
fied sorcerer. The human self-reflection in the absolute, the humanization 
of God through Christ, is the proton pseudos [first substitution]. The prog¬ 
ress beyond Judaism is paid for with the assertion that the mortal Jesus was 
God. The harm is done precisely by the reflective moment of Christianity, 
the spiritualization of magic. A spiritual essence is attributed to something 
which mind identifies as natural. Mind consists precisely in demonstrat¬ 
ing the contradiction inherent in such pretensions of the finite. Bad con¬ 
science is therefore obliged to present the prophet as a symbol, the magi- 



146 Elements of Anti-Semitism 


cal practice as transubstantiation. It is that which makes Christianity a 
religion, and, in a sense, the only one: an intellectual link to something 
intellectually suspect, a special sphere of culture. Like the great Asiatic 
belief systems, pre-Christian Judaism was hardly separable from national 
life, from collective self-preservation. The reshaping of the heathen ritual 
of sacrifice not only took place in worship and in the mind but determined 
the form of the labor process. In providing the schema for the latter, sac¬ 
rifice becomes rational. The taboo is transformed into the rational organi¬ 
zation of the work process. It regulates administration in war and peace, 
sowing and harvesting, food preparation and slaughter. Although the rules 
may not arise from rational reflection, rationality arises from them. The 
effort of primitive peoples to free themselves from immediate fear engen¬ 
dered among them the institution of ritual; this was refined by Judaism 
into the sanctified rhythm of family and national life. The priests were 
appointed to watch over the proper observance of custom. Their function 
within the power structure was clearly displayed in theocratic practice; 
Christianity, however, wanted to remain spiritual even where it aspired to 
power. In ideology it repudiated self-preservation by the ultimate sacri¬ 
fice, that of the man-god, but thereby relegated devalued life to the sphere 
of the profane: it abolished the law of Moses but rendered what was 
theirs unto both God and Caesar. Secular authority is either confirmed or 
usurped, while Christianity acquires a license to manage salvation. Self- 
preservation is to be conquered though the imitation of Christ—by order. 
In this way self-sacrificing love is stripped of its naivety, severed from nat¬ 
ural love and turned to account as credit. The love mediated by ecclesias¬ 
tical knowledge is presented as immediate love, in which nature and the 
supernatural are reconciled. Therein lies its untruth: in the fraudulently 
affirmative interpretation of self-forgetting. 

That interpretation is fraudulent because the church depends for its 
existence on people’s belief that they will attain salvation by following its 
teaching, whether that teaching demands works like the Catholic version 
or faith like the Protestant, yet cannot guarantee that goal. The nonbind¬ 
ing nature of the religious promise of salvation, the Jewish and negative 
moment in the Christian doctrine, by which magic and finally the church 
itself arc relativized, is tacitly ignored by naive believers, for whom 
Christianity, supranaturalism, becomes a magic ritual, a nature religion. 
They believe only by forgetting their belief. They convince themselves of 



Limits of Enlightenment 147 


the certainty of their knowledge like astrologers or spiritualists. That is not 
necessarily worse than spiritualized theology. The old Italian lady who 
with devout simplicity consecrates a candle to St Gennaro to protect her 
grandson in the war may be closer to the truth than the high priests and 
pontiffs who, untainted by idolatry, bless the weapons against which St 
Gennaro is powerless. To the simple, however, religion itself becomes a 
substitute for religion. Christianity had some awareness of this from its 
earliest days, but it was only the paradoxical Christians, the antiofficial 
thinkers from Pascal through Lessing and Kierkegaard to Barth, who 
made it the keystone of their theology. In this awareness they were not 
only the radical Christians but the tolerant ones. The others, who re¬ 
pressed that knowledge and with bad conscience convinced themselves of 
Christianity as a secure possession, were obliged to confirm their eternal 
salvation by the worldly ruin of those who refused to make the murky sac¬ 
rifice of reason. That is the religious origin of anti-Semitism. The adher¬ 
ents of the religion of the Son hated the supporters of the religion of the 
Father as one hates those who know better. This is the hostility of spirit 
hardened as faith in salvation for spirit as mind. What is vexatious for the 
Christian enemies of the Jews is the truth which withstands evil without 
rationalizing it, and clings to the idea of unearned beatitude in disregard 
of worldly actions and the order of salvation which allegedly bring it 
about. Anti-Semitism is supposed to confirm that the ritual of faith and 
history is justified by ritually sacrificing those who deny its justice. 

v 

“I simply can’t abide you—so don’t forget it,” says Siegfried to 
Mime, who is trying to win his love. The stock reply of all anti-Semites is 
the appeal to idiosyncrasy. Society’s emancipation from anti-Semitism 
depends on whether the content of that idiosyncrasy is raised to the level 
of a concept and becomes aware of its own senselessness. But idiosyncrasy 
attaches itself to the peculiar. The universal, that which fits into the con¬ 
text of social utility, is regarded as natural. But anything natural which has 
not been absorbed into utility by passing through the cleansing channels 
n! conceptual order—the screech of stylus on slate which sets the teeth on 
edge, the hunt gout which brings to mind filth and corruption, the sweat 
which appears on the brow of the diligent—whatever is not quite assimi- 



148 Elements of Anti-Semitism 


lated, or infringes the commands in which the progress of centuries has 
been sedimented, is felt as intrusive and arouses a compulsive aversion. 

The motifs which trigger such idiosyncrasy are those which allude 
to origin. They recreate moments of biological prehistory: danger signs 
which made the hair stand on end and the heart stop. In the idiosyncrat¬ 
ic aversion individual organs escape the subject’s control, autonomously 
obeying fundamental biological stimuli. The self which experiences itself 
in such reactions—rigidity of the skin, muscles, and limbs—is not quite 
master of them. For a few moments they mimic the motionlessness of sur¬ 
rounding nature. But as what is mobile draws closer to the immobile, 
more highly developed life to mere nature, it is also estranged from it, 
since immobile nature, which living creatures, like Daphne, seek with ut¬ 
most agitation to become, is capable only of the most external, spatial rela¬ 
tionships. Space is absolute alienation. Where the human seeks to resem¬ 
ble nature, at the same time it hardens itself against it. Protection as pet¬ 
rified terror is a form of camouflage. These numb human reactions are 
archaic patterns of self-preservation: the tribute life pays for its continued 
existence is adaptation to death. 

Civilization replaced the organic adaptation to otherness, mimetic 
behavior proper, firstly, in the magical phase, with the organized manipu¬ 
lation of mimesis, and finally, in the historical phase, with rational praxis, 
work. Uncontrolled mimesis is proscribed. The angel which, with fiery 
sword, drove humans out of paradise and on to the path of technical 
progress, is itself the symbol of that progress. The severity with which, over 
the centuries, the rulers have prevented both their own successors and the 
subjugated masses from relapsing into mimetic behavior—from the reli¬ 
gious ban on graven images through the social ostracizing of actors and 
gypsies to the education which “cures” children of childishness—is the 
condition of civilization. Social and individual education reinforces the 
objectifying behavior required by work and prevents people from sub¬ 
merging themselves once more in the ebb and flow of surrounding nature. 
All distraction, indeed, all devotion has an element of mimicry. The ego 
has been forged by hardening itself against such behavior. The transition 
from reflecting mimesis to controlled reflection completes its formation. 
Bodily adaptation to nature is replaced by “recognition in a concept,”* the 
subsuming of difference under sameness. However, the constellation under 
which sameness is established, both the direct sameness of mimesis and the 



Limits of Enlightenment 149 


indirect sameness of synthesis, the adaptation of the self to the thing in the 
blind act of living no less than the comparison of reified elements in sci¬ 
entific conceptualization—that constellation remains terror. Society per¬ 
petuates the threat from nature as the permanent, organized compulsion 
which, reproducing itself in individuals as systematic self-preservation, 
rebounds against nature as society’s control over it. Science is repetition, 
refined to observed regularity and preserved in stereotypes. The mathe¬ 
matical formula is consciously manipulated regression, just as the magic 
ritual was; it is the most sublimated form of mimicry. In technology the 
adaptation to lifelessness in the service of self-preservation is no longer 
accomplished, as in magic, by bodily imitation of external nature, but by 
automating mental processes, turning them into blind sequences. With its 
triumph human expressions become both controllable and compulsive. All 
that remains of the adaptation to nature is the hardening against it. The 
camouflage used to protect and strike terror today is the blind mastery of 
nature, which is identical to farsighted instrumentality. 

In the bourgeois mode of production the ineradicable mimetic her¬ 
itage present in all praxis is consigned to oblivion. The pitiless ban on 
regression appears like an edict of fate; the denial is so total that it is no 
longer registered consciously. Those blinded by civilization have contact 
with their own tabooed mimetic traits only through certain gestures and 
forms of behavior they encounter in others, as isolated, shameful residues 
in their rationalized environment. What repels them as alien is all too 
familiar. 1 It lurks in the contagious gestures of an immediacy suppressed 
by civilization: gestures of touching, nestling, soothing, coaxing. What 
makes such impulses repellent today is their outmodedness. In seeking to 
win over the buyer with flattery, the debtor with threats, the creditor with 
supplication, they appear to translate long-reified human relationships 
back into those of personal power. Any emotion is finally embarrassing; 
mere excitement is preferable. All unmanipulated expression appears like 
the grimace which the manipulated expression—of the film actor, the 
lynch mob, the Fiihrers speech—always was. Undisciplined mimicry is 
the brand burned by the old domination into the living substance of the 
dominated, and is inherited through an unconscious process of imitation 
in early childhood from generation to generation, from the Jewish rags- 
.ind-bones man to the banker. Such mimicry provokes anger, because it 
puts on show, in face of the new relationships of production, the old fear 



ijo Elements of Anti-Semitism 


which one has had to forget in order to survive them. It is the compulsive 
moment in behavior, the rage of the tormentor and of the tormented, 
reappearing indistinguishably in the grimace, that triggers the specific rage 
of civilized people. Impotent appearance is answered by deadly reality, 
play by seriousness. 

The grimace seems like play-acting because, instead of performing 
serious work, it prefers to portray displeasure. It appears to evade the seri¬ 
ousness of life by admitting it without restraint: therefore it is false. But 
expression is the painful echo of overwhelming power, violence which 
finds utterance in complaint. It is always overdone, no matter how heart¬ 
felt it may be, because, as in each work of art, the whole world seems con¬ 
tained in every plaintive sound. Only activity is proportionate. It, and not 
mimesis, can bring an end to suffering. But its consequence is the rigid, 
unmoved visage, culminating, at the end of this age, in the baby faces of 
the practical men, the politicians, priests, managing directors, racketeers. 
The strident voices of fascist rabble-rousers and camp commanders show 
the reverse side of the same social condition. The screaming is as cold¬ 
blooded as business. Even the plaintive sounds of nature are appropriated 
as an element of technique. The bellowing of these orators is to the 
pogrom what its howling klaxon is to the German flying bomb: the cry of 
terror which announces terror is mechanically switched on. The screamers 
deliberately use the wail of the victim, which first called violence by its 
name, and even the mere word which designates the victim—Frenchman, 
Negro, Jew—to induce in themselves the desperation of the persecuted 
who have to hit out. They are the false likeness of the terrified mimesis. 
They reproduce within themselves the insatiability of the power of which 
they are afraid. Everything must be used, everything must belong to them. 
The mere existence of the other is a provocation. Everyone else “gets in the 
way" and must be shown their limits—the limits of limitless horror. No 
one who seeks shelter shall find it; those who express what everyone 
craves—peace, homeland, freedom—will be denied it, just as nomads and 
traveling players have always been refused rights of domicile. Whatever 
someone fears, that is done to him. Even the last resting place shall be 
none. The despoiling of graveyards is not an excess of anti-Semitism; it is 
anti-Semitism itself. Those evicted compulsively arouse the lust to evict 
them even here. The marks left on them by violence endlessly inflame vio¬ 
lence. Anything which merely wants to vegetate must be rooted out. The 



Limits of Enlightenment 


• SI 

chaotically regular flight reactions of the lower animals, the patterns ol 
swarming crowds, the convulsive gestures of the tortured—all these ex¬ 
press what wretched life can never quite control: the mimetic impulse. In 
the death throes of the creature, at the furthest extreme from freedom, 
freedom itself irresistibly shines forth as the thwarted destiny of matter. It 
is against this freedom that the idiosyncratic aversion, the purported mo¬ 
tive of anti-Semitism, is ultimately directed. 

The psychic energy harnessed by political anti-Semitism is this ratio¬ 
nalized idiosyncrasy. AJ 1 the gesticulations devised by the Fiihrer and his 
followers are pretexts for giving way to the mimetic temptation without 
openly violating the reality principle—with honor, as it were. They detest 
the Jews and imitate them constantly. There is no anti-Semite who does 
not feel an instinctive urge to ape what he takes to be Jewishness. The 
same mimetic codes are constantly used: the argumentative jerking of the 
hands, the singing tone of voice, which vividly animates a situation or a 
feeling independently of judgment, and the nose, that physiognomic prin- 
cipium individuationis, which writes the individual’s peculiarity on his 
face. In the ambiguous partialities of the sense of smell the old nostalgia 
for what is lower lives on, the longing for immediate union with sur¬ 
rounding nature, with earth and slime. Of all the senses the act of 
smelling, which is attracted without objectifying, reveals most sensuously 
the urge to lose oneself in identification with the Other. That is why smell, 
as both the perception and the perceived—which are one in the act of 
olfaction—is more expressive than other senses. When we see we remain 
who we are, when we smell we are absorbed entirely. In civilization, there¬ 
fore, smell is regarded as a disgrace, a sign of the lower social orders, less¬ 
er races, and baser animals. The civilized person is allowed to give way to 
such desires only if the prohibition is suspended by rationalization in the 
service of practical purposes, real or apparent. One is allowed to indulge 
the outlawed drive if acting with the unquestionable aim of expunging it. 
This is manifested in the practical joke. It is a wretched parody of fulfill¬ 
ment. The mimetic function is sneeringly enjoyed as something despised 
and self-despising. Anyone who sniffs out “bad” smells in order to extir¬ 
pate them may imitate to his heart’s content the snuffling which takes its 
unrationalized pleasure in the smell itself. Disinfected by the civilized snif¬ 
fer’s absolute identification with the prohibiting agency, the forbidden 
impulse eludes the prohibition. If it crosses the threshold, the response is 



152 Elements of Anti-Semitism 


laughter. That is the schema of the anti-Semitic reaction. The anti-Semites 
gather to celebrate the moment when authority lifts the ban; that moment 
alone makes them a collective, constituting the community of kindred 
spirits. Their ranting is organized laughter. The more dreadful the accusa¬ 
tions and threats, the greater the fury, the more withering is the scorn. 
Rage, mockery, and poisoned imitation are fundamentally the same thing. 
The purpose of the fascist cult of formulae, the ritualized discipline, the 
uniforms, and the whole allegedly irrational apparatus, is to make possible 
mimetic behavior. The elaborate symbols proper to every counterrevolu¬ 
tionary movement, the death’s heads and masquerades, the barbaric drum¬ 
ming, the monotonous repetition of words and gestures, are so many 
organized imitations of magical practices, the mimesis of mimesis. The 
Fiihrer, with his ham-actor’s facial expressions and the hysterical charisma 
turned on with a switch, leads the dance. In his performance he acts out 
by proxy and in effigy what is denied to everyone else in reality. Hitler can 
gesticulate like a clown, Mussolini risk false notes like a provincial tenor, 
Goebbels talk as glibly as the Jewish agent whose murder he is recom¬ 
mending, Coughlin* preach love like the Savior himself, whose crucifix¬ 
ion he impersonates for the sake of yet more bloodshed. Fascism is also 
totalitarian in seeking to place oppressed nature’s rebellion against domi¬ 
nation directly in the service of domination. 

This mechanism needs the Jews. Their artificially heightened visibil¬ 
ity acts on the legitimate son of Gentile civilization like a kind of magnetic 
field. In being made aware, through his very difference from the Jew, of 
the humanity they have in common, the rooted Gentile is overcome by a 
feeling of something antithetical and alien. In this way the tabooed 
impulses which run counter to work in its dominant form are converted 
into conforming idiosyncrasies. Against this the economic position of the 
Jews, the last defrauded fraudsters of the liberal ideology, offers no reliable 
protection. Because they are so eminently suited to generating these in¬ 
ductive psychic currents they are unresistingly allocated to such functions. 
They share the fate of the rebellious nature for which fascism substitutes 
them, being put to use with the perspicuity of the blind. It makes little dif¬ 
ference whether the Jews as individuals really display the mimetic traits 
which cause the malign infection or whether those traits are merely imput¬ 
ed. If the holders of economic power have once overcome their fear of 
employing fascist agents, in face of the Jews the harmony of the national 



Limits of Enlightenment 153 


community is automatically established. They are sacrificed by the domi¬ 
nant order when, through its increasing estrangement from nature, it has 
reverted to mere nature. The Jews as a whole are charged with practicing 
forbidden magic and bloody rituals. Disguised as an accusation, the sub¬ 
liminal craving of the indigenous population to revert to mimetic sacrifi¬ 
cial practices is joyously readmitted to their consciousness. Once the hor¬ 
ror of the primeval age, sent packing by civilization, has been rehabilitat¬ 
ed as a rational interest through projection onto the Jews, there is no hold¬ 
ing back. It can be acted out in reality, and the evil which is acted out sur¬ 
passes even the evil content of the projection. The popular nationalist fan¬ 
tasies of Jewish crimes, of infanticide and sadistic excesses, of racial poi¬ 
soning and international conspiracy, precisely define the anti-Semitic 
dream, and fall short of its realization. Once things have gone so far, the 
mere word Jew appears like the bloody grimace whose image—skull and 
mangled cross in one—is unfurled on the swastika flag; the fact that 
someone is called a Jew acts as a provocation to set about him until he 
resembles that image. 

Civilization is the triumph of society over nature—a triumph which 
transforms everything into mere nature. The Jews themselves, over the 
millennia, have played their part in this, with enlightenment no less than 
with cynicism. As the oldest surviving patriarchy, the incarnation of 
monotheism, they converted taboos into maxims of civilization while the 
others were still enmeshed in magic. The Jews appeared to have success¬ 
fully achieved what Christianity had attempted in vain: the disempower- 
ment of magic by means of its own strength, which, as worship of God, is 
turned against itself. They have not so much eradicated the adaptation to 
nature as elevated it to the pure duties of ritual. In this way they have pre¬ 
served its reconciling memory, without relapsing through symbols into 
mythology. They are therefore regarded by advanced civilization as both 
backward and too advanced, like and unlike, shrewd and stupid. They are 
pronounced guilty of what, as the first citizens, they were the first to sub¬ 
due in themselves: the susceptibility to the lure of base instincts, the urge 
toward the beast and the earth, the worship of images. Because they 
invented the concept of the kosher, they are persecuted as swine. The anti- 
Semites appoint themselves executors of the Old Testament: they see to it 
that the Jews, having eaten of the Tree of Knowledge, unto dust shall 


return. 



154 Elements of Anti-Semitism 


VI 

Anti-Semitism is based on false projection. It is the reverse of gen¬ 
uine mimesis and has deep affinities to the repressed; in fact, it may itself 
be the pathic character trait in which the latter is precipitated. If mimesis 
makes itself resemble its surroundings, false projection makes its sur¬ 
roundings resemble itself. If, for the former, the outward becomes the 
model to which the inward clings, so that the alien becomes the intimate¬ 
ly known, the latter displaces the volatile inward into the outer world, 
branding the intimate friend as foe. Impulses which are not acknowledged 
by the subject and yet are his, are attributed to the object: the prospective 
victim. For the ordinary paranoiac the choice of victim is not free; it obeys 
the laws of his illness. In fascism this behavior is adopted by politics; the 
object of the illness is declared true to reality, the system of delusions the 
reasonable norm in a world which makes deviation neurosis. The mecha¬ 
nism which the totalitarian order takes into its service is as old as civiliza¬ 
tion. The sexual impulses suppressed by humanity survived in both indi¬ 
viduals and peoples and asserted themselves in the imaginary transforma¬ 
tion of the surrounding world into a diabolic system. Those impelled by 
blind murderous lust have always seen in the victim the pursuer who has 
driven them to desperate self-defense, and the mightiest of the rich have 
experienced their weakest neighbor as an intolerable threat before falling 
upon him. The rationalization was both a ruse and a compulsion. The per¬ 
son chosen as foe is already perceived as foe. The disorder lies in the sub¬ 
ject’s faulty distinction between his own contribution to the projected 
material and that of others. 

In a certain sense, all perception is projection. The projection of 
sense impressions is a legacy of animal prehistory, a mechanism for the 
purposes of defense and obtaining food, an extension of the readiness for 
combat with which higher species reacted actively or passively to move¬ 
ments, regardless of the intention of the object. Projection has been auto¬ 
mated in man like other forms of offensive or defensive behavior which 
have become reflexes. In this way his objective world has been constitut¬ 
ed as a product of “an art concealed in the depths of the human soul, 
whose real modes of activity nature is hardly likely ever to allow us to dis¬ 
cover, and to have open to our gaze.” 2 The system of things, the fixed uni¬ 
versal order of which science is merely an abstract expression, is, if Kant’s 



Limits of Enlightenment 155 


critique of knowledge is applied anthropologically, the unconscious prod¬ 
uct of the animal tool in the struggle for existence—it is the automatic 
projection. In human society, however, where both the affective and the 
intellectual life grow complex with the formation of the individual, pro¬ 
jection must be increasingly controlled; individuals must learn both to 
refine and to inhibit it. As economic compulsion teaches them to distin¬ 
guish between their own thoughts and feelings and those of others, a dis¬ 
tinction emerges between outer and inner, the possibility of detachment 
and of identification, self-consciousness and conscience. More precise 
reflection is needed to understand this controlled form of projection and 
its degeneration into the false projection which is essential to anti- 
Semitism. 

The physiological theory of perception, which has been despised by 
philosophers since Kant as naively realistic and as a circular argument, 
holds the world of perception to be a reflection, guided by the intellect, of 
the data received from real objects by the brain. According to this view, 
punctual indices, or impressions, are registered physiologically and then 
ordered by the mind. Although the Gestalt people may insist that the 
physiological substance receives not merely points but structure, Schopen¬ 
hauer and Helmholtz, despite or even because of the circularity of their 
view, knew more about the intermeshed relationship of subject and object 
than is reflected in the official logical consistency of the schools, whether 
neopsychological or neo-Kantian: the perceptual image does indeed con¬ 
tain concepts and judgments. Between the actual object and the indu¬ 
bitable sense datum, between inner and outer, yawns an abyss which the 
subject must bridge at its own peril. To reflect the thing as it is, the sub¬ 
ject must give back to it more than it receives from it. From the traces the 
thing leaves behind in its senses the subject recreates the world outside it: 
the unity of the thing in its manifold properties and states; and in so 
doing, in learning how to impart a synthetic unity not only to the outward 
impressions but to the inward ones which gradually separate themselves 
I torn them, it retroactively constitutes the self. The identical ego is the 
most recent constant product of projection. In a process which could only 
be accomplished historically when the powers of the human physiological 
constitution were fully developed, this self has emerged as a unified and, 
at the same time, an eccentric function. But even as an autonomously 
objectified subject it is only what the objective world is for it. The inner 



156 Elements of Anti-Semitism 


depth of the subject consists in nothing other than the delicacy and rich¬ 
ness of the outer perceptual world. If this intermeshing is broken, the self 
petrifies. If it is confined, positivistically, to registering the given without 
itself giving, it shrinks to a point, and if, idealistically, it projects the world 
out of the bottomless origin or its own self, it exhausts itself in monoto¬ 
nous repetition. In both cases it gives up the ghost—in this case the mind 
or spirit. Only mediation, in which the insignificant sense datum raises 
thought to the fullest productivity of which it is capable, and in which, 
conversely, thought gives itself up without reservation to the overwhelm¬ 
ing impression—only mediation can overcome the isolation which ails the 
whole of nature. Neither the certainty untroubled by thought, nor the pre- 
conceptual unity of perception and object, but only their self-reflective 
antithesis contains the possibility of reconciliation. The antithesis is per¬ 
ceived in the subject, which has the external world within its own con¬ 
sciousness and yet recognizes it as other. Reflection on that antithesis, 
therefore, the life of reason, takes place as conscious projection. 

The pathic element in anti-Semitism is not projective behavior as 
such but the exclusion of reflection from that behavior. Because the sub¬ 
ject is unable to return to the object what it has received from it, it is not 
enriched but impoverished. It loses reflection in both directions: as it no 
longer reflects the object, it no longer reflects on itself, and thereby loses 
the ability to differentiate. Instead of the voice of conscience, it hears voic¬ 
es; instead of inwardly examining itself in order to draw up a protocol of 
its own lust for power, it attributes to others the Protocol of the Elders of 
Zion. It overflows at the same time as it dries up. It invests the outside 
world boundlessly with what is within itself; but what it invests is some¬ 
thing utterly insignificant, an inflated accumulation of mere means, rela¬ 
tionships, machinations, a grim praxis unilluminated by thought. Dom¬ 
ination itself which, even as absolute power, is inherently only a means, 
becomes in untrammeled projection the purpose both of oneself and of 
others, purpose as such. In the sickness of the individual, humanity’s 
sharpened intellectual apparatus is turned once more against humanity, 
regressing to the blind instrument of hostility it was in animal prehisto¬ 
ry, and as which, for the species, it has never ceased to operate in relation 
to the rest of nature. Just as, since its rise, the human species has mani¬ 
fested itself toward others as developmentally the highest, capable of the 
most terrible destruction; and just as, within humanity, the more ad- 



Limits o] Enlightenment 


'57 


vanced races have confronted the more primitive, the technically superior 
nations the more backward, so the sick individual confronts the other indi¬ 
vidual, in megalomania as in persecution mania. In both cases the subject 
is at the center, the world a mere occasion for its delusion; it becomes the 
impotent or omnipotent quintessence of what is projected on to it. The 
opposition of which the paranoiac complains indiscriminately at every 
step is the result of the lack of resistance, of the emptiness which the en¬ 
capsulated subject generates around itself. The paranoiac cannot stop. The 
idea, having no firm hold on reality, insists all the more and becomes the 
fixation. 

Because paranoiacs perceive the outside world only in so far as it cor¬ 
responds to their blind purposes, they can only endlessly repeat their own 
self, which has been alienated from them as an abstract mania. This naked 
schema of power as such, equally overwhelming toward others and toward 
a self at odds with itself, seizes whatever comes its way and, wholly disre¬ 
garding its peculiarity, incorporates it in its mythic web. The closed circle 
of perpetual sameness becomes a surrogate for omnipotence. It is as if the 
serpent which told the first humans “Ye shall be as gods” had kept his 
promise in the paranoiac. He creates everything in his own image. He 
seems to need no living thing yet demands that all shall serve him. His will 
permeates the whole universe; nothing may be unrelated to him. His sys¬ 
tems know of no gaps. As astrologer, he endows the stars with powers 
which bring about the ruin of the unsuspecting, whether it is the ruin of 
others in the preclinical stage or of his own ego in the clinical stage. As 
philosopher, he makes world history the executor of inescapable catastro¬ 
phes and downfalls. As completely insane or absolutely rational, he anni¬ 
hilates those marked down as victims either by the individual act of terror 
or by the well-considered strategy of extermination. In this way he suc¬ 
ceeds. Just as women adore the unmoved paranoid man, nations fall to 
their knees before totalitarian fascism. The paranoid element in the devo¬ 
tees responds to the paranoiac as to the evil spirit, their fear of conscience 
to his utter lack of scruples, for which they feel gratitude. They follow the 
man who looks past them, who does not treat them as subjects but hands 
them over to the operations of his many purposes. Like everyone else, 
these women have made the occupation of greater or lesser positions of 
power their religion, and themselves the malign creatures society takes 
them for. And so the gaze which reminds them of freedom must strike 



158 Elements of Anti-Semitism 


them as that of the over-naive seducer. Their world is inverted. But at the 
same time they know, like the ancient gods who shunned the gaze of the 
faithful, that something lifeless resides behind their veil. In the trusting 
look of the nonparanoid they are reminded of the spirit which has died in 
them, because they see outside them only the cold means of their self- 
preservation. To be touched in this way awakens in them shame and rage. 
Yet the madman does not reach them, even though he may stare them in 
the face like the Fiihrer. He merely inflames them. His proverbial gaze 
straight into the eyes, unlike the free gaze, does not preserve individuali¬ 
ty. It fixates. It binds others to one-sided loyalty, by confining them to the 
windowless monadic fortress of their own person. It does not awaken con¬ 
science, but prematurely imposes responsibility. The penetrating look and 
the one that goes past you, the hypnotic and the disregarding gaze, are of 
the same kind: in both, the subject is extinguished. Because in both looks 
reflection is absent, the unreflecting are electrified by them. They are be¬ 
trayed: the women cast away, the nation incinerated. Thus, the self-encap¬ 
sulated figure remains a caricature of divine power. Just as his lordly ges¬ 
ture is entirely without creative power in reality, so, like the devil, he lacks 
the attributes of the principle he usurps: mindful love and freedom secure 
within itself. He is malignant, driven by compulsion, and as weak as he is 
strong. If divine omnipotence is said to draw creation unto itself, this 
satanic, imagined omnipotence draws everything into its impotence. That 
is the secret of its rule. The compulsively projecting self can project noth¬ 
ing except its own unhappiness, from the cause of which, residing in itself, 
it is yet cut off by its lack of reflection. For this reason the products of false 
projection, the stereotyped schemata of both thought and reality, bring 
calamity. For the ego, sinking into the meaningless abyss of itself, objects 
become allegories of ruin, which harbor the meaning of its own downfall. 

The psychoanalytic theory of pathic projection has identified the 
transference of socially tabooed impulses from the subject to the object as 
the substance of that projection. Under the pressure of the superego, the 
ego projects aggressive urges emanating from the id which, through their 
strength, are a danger to itself, as malign intentions onto the outside 
world, and succeeds in ridding itself of them as reactions to that outside 
world, either in fantasy by identification with the alleged malefactor or in 
reality by ostensible self-defense. The proscribed material converted into 
aggression is usually homosexual in nature. Through fear of castration, 



Limits of Enlightenment 159 


obedience toward the father preempts castration by adapting the conscious 
emotional life to that of a little girl, and hatred of the father is repressed 
as endless rancor. In paranoia, this hatred is intensified to a castration wish 
expressed as a universal urge to destroy. The sick subject regresses to an 
archaic confusion between love and dominance. It is concerned with phys¬ 
ical closeness, with taking possession, finally with relationship at any price. 
Because it cannot acknowledge desire within itself, it assails the other with 
jealousy or persecution, as the repressed sodomite hounds the animal as 
hunter or driver. The attraction stems from excessive attachment or devel¬ 
ops at first sight; it can emanate from great figures, as in the case of mal¬ 
contents and murderers of presidents, or from the most wretched as in the 
pogrom itself. The objects of the fixation are replaceable like father figures 
in childhood; whatever it hits on fits its purpose; the delusion of related¬ 
ness strikes out unrelatedly. Pathic projection is a desperate exertion by an 
ego which, according to Freud has a far weaker resistance to internal than 
to external stimuli: under the pressure of pent-up homosexual aggression 
the psychic mechanism forgets its most recent phylogenetic attainment, 
the perception of self, and experiences that aggression as an enemy in the 
world, the better to master it. 

This pressure acts also, however, on the healthy cognitive process as 
a moment of its unreflecting naivety, which tends toward violence. 
Wherever intellectual energies are concentrated on an external intention, 
wherever it is a matter of pursuing, ascertaining, grasping—of exerting 
those functions which have been sublimated from the primitive overpow¬ 
ering of animals into the scientific methods of controlling nature—the 
subjective process is easily overlooked in the schematization, and the sys¬ 
tem is posited as the thing itself. Objectifying thought, like its pathologi¬ 
cal counterpart, has the arbitrariness of a subjective purpose extraneous to 
the matter itself and, in forgetting the matter, does to it in thought the vio¬ 
lence which later will be done in practice. The unconditional realism of 
civilized humanity, which culminates in fascism, is a special case of para¬ 
noid delusion which depopulates nature and finally nations themselves. In 
the abyss of uncertainty, which every objectifying act must bridge, para¬ 
noia installs itself. Because there is no absolutely compelling argument 
against materially false judgments, the distorted perception in which they 
lurk cannot be healed. Every percept unconsciously contains conceptual 
elements, just as every judgment contains unclarified phenomenalistic 



160 Elements of Anti-Semitism 


ones. Because imagination is involved in truth, it can always appear to this 
damaged imagination that truth is fantastic and its illusion the truth. The 
maimed subject lives on the element of imagination immanent in truth by 
ceaselessly putting it on show. Democratically, he insists on equal rights 
for his delusion, because, in fact, not even truth is stringent. While the cit¬ 
izen may admit that the anti-Semite is in the wrong, he requires the vic¬ 
tim to be guilty too. Thus Hitler demands the right to practice mass mur¬ 
der in the name of the principle of sovereignty under international law, 
which tolerates any act of violence in another country.* Like every para¬ 
noiac he takes advantage of the hypocritical identity of truth and 
sophistry; the distinction between them is as uncompelling as it neverthe¬ 
less is strict. Perception is only possible in so far as the thing is already 
apprehended as determinate—for example, as a case of a genus or type. It 
is a mediated immediacy, thought infused with the seductive power of sen¬ 
suality. It blindly transfers subjective elements to the apparent givenness of 
the object. Only the self-conscious work of thought—that is, according to 
Leibnizian and Hegelian idealism, only philosophy—can escape this hal¬ 
lucinatory power. As, in the course of cognition, thought identifies the 
conceptual moments which are immediately posited in perception and are 
therefore compelling, it progressively takes them back into the subject and 
strips them of their intuitive power. In this process every earlier stage, 
including science, turns out to be, in comparison to philosophy, a kind of 
percept, an estranged phenomenon permeated with unrecognized intel¬ 
lectual elements; persistence at this stage, without negation, forms part of 
the pathology of cognition. The subject which naively postulates abso¬ 
lutes, no matter how universally active it may be, is sick, passively suc¬ 
cumbing to the dazzlement of false immediacy. 

Such blindness is, however, a constitutive element of all judgment, a 
necessary illusion. Every judgment, even negative, is reassuring. However 
much a judgment may stress its own isolation and relativity for the pur¬ 
pose of self-correction, it must assert its own content, no matter how cau¬ 
tiously formulated, as something not merely isolated and relative. That 
constitutes its nature as judgment, whereas the clause merely entrenches a 
claim. Truth, unlike probability, has no gradations. The negating step 
beyond the individual judgment, which rescues its truth, is possible only 
in so far as it takes itself to be truth and in that sense is paranoid. True 
derangement lies only in the immovable, in thought’s incapacity for the 



Limits of Enlightenment 161 


negation in which, unlike the fixed judgment, thought actually consists. 
The paranoid over-consistency, the bad infinity of never-changing judg¬ 
ment, is a lack of consistency in thought; instead of conceptually carrying 
through the failure of the absolute claim and thereby continuing to qual¬ 
ify his or her judgment, the paranoiac clings obdurately to the claim which 
has caused the judgment to fail. Instead of going further by penetrating its 
subject matter more deeply, thought places itself entirely in the hopeless 
service of the particular judgment. The latter’s irresistibility is the same as 
its intact positivity, and the paranoiac’s weakness is that of thought itself. 
For reflection, which in the healthy subject breaks the power of immedia¬ 
cy, is never as compelling as the illusion it dispels. As a negative, reflective 
movement not directed straight ahead, it lacks the brutality inherent in the 
positive. If the psychic energy of paranoia stems from the libidinal dynam¬ 
ic laid bare by psychoanalysis, its objective impregnability is founded on 
the ambiguity inseparable from the objectifying act; indeed, the latter’s 
hallucinatory power will have been originally decisive. To clarify, it can be 
said in the language of natural selection theory that during the formative 
period of the human sensorium those individuals survived in whom the 
power of the projective mechanisms extended most deeply into their rudi¬ 
mentary logical faculties, or was least moderated by the premature onset 
of reflection. Just as, even today, practically fruitful scientific enterprises 
call for an unimpaired capacity for definition, for shutting down thought 
at a point designated by social need, for demarcating a field which is then 
investigated in the minutest detail without passing outside it, paranoiacs 
cannot step outside a complex of interests designated by their psycholog¬ 
ical fate. Their mental acuteness consumes itself within the circle drawn 
by their fixed idea, as human ingenuity is liquidating itself under the spell 
of technical civilization. Paranoia is the shadow of cognition. 

So calamitous is the mind’s tendency to false projection that, as the 
isolated schema of self-preservation, such projection threatens to dominate 
everything which goes beyond self-preservation: culture. False projection 
is the usurper in the realm of freedom as of culture; paranoia is the symp¬ 
tom of the half-educated. For such people, all words become a system of 
delusion, an attempt mentally to occupy the regions to which their expe¬ 
rience does not extend, violently to give meaning to a world which makes 
them meaningless, but at the same time to denigrate the intellect and the 
experience from which they are excluded and to burden them with the 



i6z Elements of Anti-Semitism 


guilt really borne by the society which has brought about that exclusion. 
The half-educated who, unlike the merely uneducated, hypostatize limit¬ 
ed knowledge as truth, cannot endure the breach between inward and out¬ 
ward, individual fate and social law, appearance and essence, which for 
them is heightened to unbearable levels. To be sure, their suffering does 
contain an element of truth, compared to the mere acceptance of the given 
to which superior understanding has sworn allegiance. Nevertheless, the 
half-educated reach out stereotypically in their fear for the formula which 
suits their need, now to justify the disaster which has happened, now to 
predict the catastrophe still to come, which is sometimes disguised as a 
regeneration. The explanation, in which their own desires appear as an 
objective power, is always as external and meaningless as the isolated event 
itself, at once feeble-minded and sinister. The obscurantist systems of 
today bring about what the devil myth of the official religion enabled peo¬ 
ple to do in the Middle Ages: to imbue the outside world with an arbitrary 
meaning, which the lone paranoiac now constructs according to a private 
schema shared by no one, and which only for that reason appears actually 
mad. Relief is provided by the dire conventicles and panaceas which put 
on scientific airs while cutting off thought: theosophy, numerology, natur¬ 
opathy, eurhythmy, teetotalism, Yoga, and countless other sects, compet¬ 
ing and interchangeable, all with academies, hierarchies and specialist jar¬ 
gon, the fetishized officialese of science and religion. When confronted by 
an educated public, they remained apocryphal and disreputable. But to¬ 
day, when education itself is withering for economic reasons, unprece¬ 
dented conditions are created for the paranoia of the masses. The belief 
systems of the past, which were embraced by the populace as self-con¬ 
tained paranoid forms, had wider meshes. Just because they were so ratio¬ 
nally elaborated and specific, they left room, at least above them, for cul¬ 
ture and mind, which, conceived as spirit, were their true medium. 
Indeed, to an extent they counteracted paranoia. Freud calls neuroses— 
even rightly in this instance—“asocial formations”; “they endeavor to 
achieve by private means what is affected in society by collective effort.” 3 
Those belief systems retain something of the collectivity which preserves 
individuals from pathological symptoms. The sickness is socialized: in the 
intoxication of the communal ecstasy—indeed, as itself a community— 
blindness becomes a relationship and the paranoid mechanism is made 
controllable, without losing the power to strike terror. Perhaps that was 



Limits of Enlightenment 163 


one of the major contributions of religions to the survival of the species. 
Paranoid forms of consciousness rend to give rise to leagues, factions, rack¬ 
ets. Their members are afraid to believe their madness on their own. 
Projecting it, they everywhere see proselytizing and conspiracy. The estab¬ 
lished group has always taken a paranoid stance toward others; in this the 
great empires, indeed, organized humanity as a whole, are no better than 
headhunters. Those who were excluded from humanity against their will, 
like those who excluded themselves from it out of longing for humanity, 
knew that the pathological cohesion of the established group was strength¬ 
ened by persecuting them. Its normal members relieve their paranoia by 
participating in the collective one, and cling passionately to the objecti¬ 
fied, collective, approved forms of delusion. The horror vacui with which 
they devote themselves to their confederacies welds them together and 
gives them their almost irresistible power. 

With bourgeois property, education and culture spread, driving 
paranoia into the dark corners of society and the psyche. But as the real 
emancipation of humanity did not coincide with the enlightenment of the 
mind, education itself became sick. The less social reality kept pace with 
educated consciousness, the more that consciousness itself succumbed to 
a process of reification. Culture was entirely commoditized, disseminated 
as information which did not permeate those who acquired it. Thought 
becomes short-winded, confines itself to apprehending isolated facts. 

I ntellectual connections are rejected as an inconvenient and useless exer- 
(ion. The developmental moment in thought, its whole genetic and inten¬ 
sive dimension, is forgotten and leveled down to what is immediately pre¬ 
sent, to the extensive. The present order of life allows the self no scope to 
draw intellectual or spiritual conclusions. Thought, stripped down to 
knowledge, is neutralized, harnessed merely to qualifying its practitioner 
lor specific labor markets and heightening the commodity value of the 
personality. In this way the self-reflection of the mind, which counteracts 
paranoia, is disabled. Finally, under the conditions of late capitalism, the 
half-educated condition has become the objective spirit. In the totalitari¬ 
an phase of government its exponents reinstate the provincial charlatans of 
politics, and with them the system of delusion, as the ultima ratio , impos¬ 
ing it on the majority of the administered, who have already been softened 
up by big politics and the culture industry* The absurdity of the present 
•a stem of rule is so transparent to healthy consciousness that it needs sick 



164 Elements of Anti-Semitism 


consciousness to keep itself alive. Only those suffering from persecution 
mania can tolerate the persecution which domination inevitably becomes, 
provided they are allowed to persecute others. 

In fascism, where the responsibility for wife and child painfully 
inculcated by bourgeois civilization is being obscured by the individuals 
insistent conformity to regulations, conscience is being liquidated in any 
case. Contrary to the ideas of Dostoievski and the German apostles of 
inwardness, conscience consisted in the self’s devotion to something sub¬ 
stantial outside itself, in the ability to make the true concerns of others 
one’s own. This ability involves reflection as an interpenetration of recep¬ 
tivity and imagination. Because the abolition of the independent econom¬ 
ic subject by big industry*—partly by absorbing free entrepreneurs and 
partly by transforming the workers* into objects of trades unions—is irre¬ 
sistibly eroding the basis of moral decisions, reflection, too, must wither. 
The soul, as the possibility of guilt aware of itself, decays. Conscience is 
deprived of objects, since individuals’ responsibility for themselves and 
their dependents is replaced—although still under the old moral title—by 
their mere performance for the apparatus. The internal conflict of drives, 
in which the agency of conscience is formed, can no longer be worked 
through. If internalized, the social injunctions would not only be made 
both more binding and more open but also would be emancipated from 
society and even turned against it; instead, the individual identifies him¬ 
self or herself promptly and directly with the stereotyped scales of values. 
The exemplary German woman, who has a monopoly on femininity as the 
true German man has on masculinity, and their counterparts elsewhere, 
arc conformist, asocial human types. Despite and because of its obvious 
deficiency, the system of power has become so preponderant that power¬ 
less individuals can avert their fate only through blind compliance. 

In face of such power, it is left to chance—guided by the Party—to 
decide where despairing self-preservation is to project the guilt for its ter¬ 
ror. The Jews are the predestined target of this guided chance. The circu¬ 
lation sphere, in which they once held positions of economic power, is 
vanishing. The liberal form of commercial enterprise once endowed frag¬ 
mented wealth with political influence. Now, no sooner emancipated, its 
owners arc merged with the state apparatus and placed at the mercy of 
capital powers which have outgrown competition. No matter what the 
makeup of the Jews may be in reality, their image, that of the defeated, has 



Limits of Enlightenment 165 


characteristics which must make totalitarian rule their mortal enemy: hap¬ 
piness without power, reward without work, a homeland without fron¬ 
tiers, religion without myth. These features are outlawed by the ruling 
powers because they are secretly coveted by the ruled. The former can sur¬ 
vive only as long as the latter turn what they yearn for into an object of 
hate. They do so through pathic projection, since even hatred leads to 
union with the object—in destruction. It is the negative of reconciliation. 
Reconciliation is Judaism’s highest concept, and expectation its whole 
meaning. The paranoid reaction stems from the incapacity for expecta¬ 
tion. The anti-Semites are realizing their negative absolute through power, 
by transforming the world into the hell they have always taken it to be. A 
radical change would depend on whether the ruled, in face of absolute 
madness, could master themselves and hold the madness back. Only the 
liberation of thought from power, the abolition of violence, could realize 
the idea which has been unrealized until now*: that the Jew is a human 
being. This would be a step away from the anti-Semitic society, which 
drives both Jews and others into sickness, and toward the human one. 
Such a step would fulfill the fascist lie by contradicting it: the Jewish ques¬ 
tion would indeed prove the turning-point of history.* By conquering the 
sickness of the mind which flourishes on the rich soil of self-assertion un¬ 
hampered by reflection, humanity would cease to be the universal antirace 
and become the species which, as nature, is more than mere nature, in that 
it is aware of its own image. The individual and social emancipation from 
domination is the countermovement to false projection, and no longer 
would Jews seek, by resembling it, to appease the evil senselessly visited on 
them as on all the persecuted, whether animals or human beings. 

VIT 

But there are no longer any anti-Semites. The last of them were lib¬ 
erals who wanted to express their antiliberal opinions. By the end of the 
nineteenth century the old-style conservative aloofness of the nobility and 
the officer corps toward the Jews was merely reactionary. The people 
abreast of the times were the Ahlwardts and the Kniippelkunzes.* They 
drew their followers from the same groups as the Fiihrer, but their support 
1 .line from troublemakers and malcontents throughout the country. When 
people voiced anti-Semitic attitudes, they felt they were being bourgeois 



1 66 Elements of Anti-Semitism 


and rebellious at the same time. Their nationalistic grumbling was still a 
distorted form of civil freedom. The beer hall politics of the anti-Semites 
exposed the lie of German liberalism, on which it fed and whose demise 
it finally brought about. Even though they used their own mediocrity as a 
license to subject the Jews to beatings in which universal murder was 
already latent, they were economically farsighted enough to weigh the risks 
of the Third Reich against the advantages of a hostile form of tolerance. 
Anti-Semitism was still a competing motif within a range of subjective 
choices. But the outcome related specifically to it. The whole chauvinistic 
vocabulary was implied from the start in the adoption of the volkisch the¬ 
sis. Anti-Semitic views always reflected stereotyped thinking. Today only 
that thinking is left. People still vote, but only between totalities. The anti- 
Semitic psychology has largely been replaced by mere acceptance of the 
whole fascist ticket,* which is an inventory of the slogans of belligerent big 
business. Just as, on the ballot paper of the mass party, voters are present¬ 
ed with the names of people remote from their experience for whom they 
can only vote en bloc, the central ideological concepts have been codified 
into a small number of lists. One has to opt for one of them en bloc if one’s 
own position is not to seem as futile as splinter votes on polling day in face 
of the statistical mammoths. Anti-Semitism has practically ceased to be an 
independent impulse and has become a plank in the platform: anyone 
who gives fascism its chance subscribes to the settlement of the Jewish 
question along with the breaking of the unions and the crusade against 
Bolshevism. The anti-Semite’s conviction, however mendacious it may be, 
has been absorbed intojfre preconditioned reflexes of the subjectless expo¬ 
nents of a particular standpoint. When the masses accept the reactionary 
ticket containing the clause against the Jews, they are obeying social mech¬ 
anisms in which individual people’s experiences of Jews play no part. It has 
been shown, in fact, that anti-Semitism’s prospects are no less good in 
“Jew-free”* areas than in Hollywood itself. Experience is replaced by 
cliche, the imagination active in experience by diligent acceptance. The 
members of each class have to absorb their quota of guidelines on pain of 
rapid downfall. Just as they need to be instructed on the technical merits 
of a particular aircraft, so do they, too, on their allegiance to one of the 
prescribed agencies of power. 

In the world of mass production, stereotypes replace intellectual cat¬ 
egories. Judgment is no longer based on a real act of synthesis but on blind 



Limits of Enlightenment 167 


subsumption. If, at an early historical stage, judgment consisted in the 
swift decision which immediately unleashed the poisoned arrow, in the 
meantime exchange and the institutions of law have taken their effect. The 
act of judgment passed through a stage of deliberation which afforded the 
judging subject some protection from brutal identification with the pred¬ 
icate. In late-industrial society there is a regression to judgment without 
judging. When, in fascism, the protracted legal process was replaced by an 
accelerated procedure in criminal trials, up-to-date people had been eco¬ 
nomically prepared for this development. They had learned to see things 
unreflectingly, through ready-made thought models, the termini technici 
which provide them with iron rations following the decay of language. 
The perceiver is no longer present in the process of perception. He or she 
is incapable of the active passivity of cognition, in which categorial ele¬ 
ments are appropriately reshaped by preformed conventional schemata 
and vice versa, so that justice is done to the perceived object. In the field 
of the social sciences, as in that of individual experience, blind intuition 
and empty concepts are brought together rigidly and without mediation.* 
In the age of the “three hundred basic words” the ability to exercise judg¬ 
ment, and therefore to distinguish between true and false, is vanishing. 
Thinking, where it is not merely a highly specialized piece of professional 
equipment in this or that branch of the division of labor, is suspect as an 
old-fashioned luxury: “armchair thinking.” It is supposed to “produce” 
something. The more superfluous physical labor is made by the develop¬ 
ment of technology, the more enthusiastically it is set up as a model for 
mental work, which must not be tempted, however, to draw any awkward 
conclusions. That is the secret of advancing stupidity, on which anti- 
Semitism thrives. If, even within the field of logic, the concept stands 
opposed to the particular as something merely external, anything which 
stands for difference within society itself must indeed tremble. Everyone is 
labeled friend or foe. The disregard for the subject makes things easy for 
ihe administration. Ethnic groups are transported to different latitudes; 
individuals labeled “Jew” are dispatched to the gas chambers. 

The indifference to the individual expressed in logic draws its con- 
i lusions from the economic process. The individual had become an 
impediment to production. The lack of synchronicity between technical 
and human development, the “cultural lag” which used to exercise the 
minds of sociologists, is beginning to disappear. Economic rationality, the 



168 Elements of Anti-Semitism 


vaunted principle of the smallest necessary means, is unremittingly 
reshaping the last units of the economy: businesses and human beings. 
The most advanced form at a given time becomes the predominant one. 
Once, the department store expropriated the old-style specialist shop. The 
latter, having outgrown mercantilist regulation, had absorbed initiative, 
control, and organization within itself and become, like the old mill and 
smithy, a little factory, a free enterprise. Its mode of operation was com¬ 
plicated, expensive, risky. Competition therefore replaced it by the more 
efficient, centralized form of retail shop, the department store. The psy¬ 
chological small business—the individual—is meeting the same fate. It 
came into being as the power cell of economic activity. Emancipated from 
the tutelage of earlier economic stages, individuals fended for themselves 
alone: as proletarians by hiring themselves out through the labor market 
and by constant adaptation to new technical conditions, as entrepreneurs 
by tirelessly realizing of the ideal type of homo oeconomicus. Psychoanalysis 
has portrayed the internal small business which thus came into being as a 
complex dynamic of unconscious and conscious elements, of id, ego, and 
superego. In its negotiations with the superego, the ego, the agency of 
social control within the individual, keeps the drives within the limits set 
by self-preservation. The areas of friction are large and neuroses, the inci¬ 
dental expenses of such a drive economy, inevitable. Nevertheless, this 
complex psychical apparatus made possible the relatively free interplay of 
subjects which constituted the market economy. In the era of large com¬ 
bines and world wars, however, the mediation of the social process by in¬ 
numerable monads is proving obsolete. The subjects of the drive economy 
are being psychologically expropriated, and the drive economy is being 
more rationally operated by society itself. The individual no longer has to 
decide what he or she is supposed to do in a given situation in a painful 
inner dialogue between conscience, self-preservation, and drives. For the 
human being as wage earner the decision is taken by a hierarchy extend¬ 
ing from trade associations to the national administration; in the private 
sphere it is taken by the schema of mass culture, which appropriates even 
the most intimate impulses of its forced consumers. The committees and 
stars function as ego and superego, and the masses, stripped of even the 
semblance of personality, are molded far more compliantly by the catch¬ 
words and models than ever the instincts were by the internal censor. If, 
in l iberalism, the individuation of a section of the, population was neces- 



Limits oj fuilighlcmnnit i6y 


sary for the adaptation of society as a whole to the state of technology, 
today the functioning of the economic apparatus demands that the mass¬ 
es be directed without the hindrance of individuation. The economically 
determined direction of the whole society, which has always governed the 
mental and physical constitution of human beings, is causing the organs 
which enabled individuals to manage their lives autonomously to atrophy. 
Now that thinking has become a mere sector of the division of labor, the 
plans of the authorized experts and leaders have made individuals who 
plan their own happiness redundant. The irrationality of the unresisting 
and eager adaptation to reality becomes, for the individual, more reason¬ 
able than reason. If, previously, the bourgeois had introjected the compul¬ 
sions of conscience and duty into themselves and die workers, now the 
entire human being has become at once the subject and the object of 
repression. In the progress of industrial society, which is supposed to have 
conjured away the law of increasing misery it had itself brought into 
being, the concept which justified the whole—the human being as per¬ 
son, as the bearer of reason—is going under. The dialectic of enlighten¬ 
ment is culminating objectively in madness. 

This is also a madness of political reality. As a dense web of mod¬ 
ern communications, the world has become so standardized that the dif¬ 
ferences between diplomatic breakfasts in Dumbarton Oaks and Persia 
have to be specially devised as an expression of national character, while 
actual national peculiarity is experienced primarily by the millions hun¬ 
gering for rice who have fallen through the narrow meshes. Although the 
abundance of goods which could be produced everywhere and simultane¬ 
ously makes the struggle for raw materials and markets seem' ever more 
anachronistic, humanity is nevertheless divided into a small number of 
armed power blocs. They compete more pitilessly than the firms involved 
in the anarchy of commodity production ever did, and strive toward 
mutual liquidation. The more senseless the antagonism, the more rigid the 
blocs. Only the total identification of the population with these mon¬ 
strosities of power, so deeply imprinted as to have become second nature 
and stopping all the pores of consciousness, maintains the masses in the 
state of absolute apathy which makes them capable of their miraculous 
achievements. As far as any decisions are still left to individuals, they are 
cllectively decided in advance. The irreconcilability of the ideologies 
trumpeted by the politicians from the different camps is itself just one 



170 Elements of Anti-Semitism 


more ideology of the blind constellation of power. Ticket thinking, a 
product of industrialization and its advertising, is being extended to inter¬ 
national relations. Whether a citizen chooses the communist or the fascist 
ticket depends on whether he happens to be more impressed by the Red 
Army or the laboratories of the West. The reification by virtue of which 
the power structure, made possible solely by the passivity of the masses, 
appears to those same masses as an iron reality, has been consolidated to 
the point where any spontaneity, or even the ability to conceive of the true 
state of affairs, has necessarily become an eccentric utopia, an irrelevant 
sectarianism. Illusion has become so concentrated that to see through it 
objectively assumes the character of hallucination. To vote for a ticket, by 
contrast, means to practice adaptation to illusion petrified as reality, which 
endlessly reproduces itself through such adaptation. The reluctant voter is 
therefore ostracized as a deserter. Since Hamlet, hesitation was for modern 
people a sign of reflection and humanity. The wasted time at once repre¬ 
sented and mediated the gap between individual and universal, as circula¬ 
tion does between consumption and production in the economy. Today 
individuals receive their tickets ready-made from the powers that be, as 
consumers receive their automobiles from the sales outlets of factories. 
Conformity to reality, adaptation to power, are no longer the result of a 
dialectical process between subject and reality but are produced directly by 
the cogs and levers of industry. The process is one of liquidation instead 
of sublation, of formal instead of determinate negation. The unleashed 
colossi of production have subdued the individual not by granting him or 
her full satisfaction, but by extinguishing the subject. Precisely therein lies 
their perfect rationality, which coincides with their insanity. The extreme 
disproportion between collective and individual eliminates tension, but 
the untroubled harmony between omnipotence and impotence is itself 
unmediated contradiction, the absolute antithesis of reconciliation. 

For this reason the psychological determinants of the individual— 
which have always been the internal human agencies of wrong society— 
have not disappeared with the individual itself. However, these character 
types are now being assigned to their mathematically exact positions with¬ 
in the coordinates of power. Both their efficiency and their coefficient of 
friction are included in the calculation. The ticket acts as a gearwheel in 
this process. Anything in the old psychological mechanism which was 
compulsive, unfree, and irrational is precisely adjusted to it. The reac- 



Limits of Enlightenment 171 


tionary ticket which includes anti-Semitism is suited to the destructive- 
conventional syndrome. It is not so much that such people react original¬ 
ly against the Jews as that their drive-structure has developed a tendency 
toward persecution which the ticket then furnishes with an adequate 
object. The “elements of anti-Semitism” once derived from experience and 
now rendered inoperative by the loss of experience reflected in ticket 
thinking, are remobilized by the ticket. Being already corrupted, these ele¬ 
ments also provide the neo-anti-Semite with the bad conscience and thus 
with the insatiability of evil. Just because the psychology of the individual 
can now construct itself and its content only from the synthetic schemata 
supplied by society, contemporary anti-Semitism takes on its empty but 
impenetrable character The Jewish middleman fully becomes the image of 
the devil only when economically he has ceased to exist. Victory is thus 
made easy, and the anti-Semitic family man becomes the spectator, 
exempt from responsibility, of an irresistible historical tendency, interven¬ 
ing only when called to do so by his role as an employee of the Party or 
the Zyklon gas factories. As they designate obsolete sections of the popu¬ 
lation for extermination, the administrations of totalitarian states are 
merely the executors of economic verdicts passed long ago. Members of 
other branches of the division of labor can look on with the indifference 
of people reading newspaper reports on clean-up operations at the scene 
of yesterday’s catastrophe. The peculiarities for the sake of which the vic¬ 
tims are killed have long been effaced. Those who fall within the terms of 
the decree as Jews have to be identified by means of elaborate question¬ 
naires, now that the antagonistic religions which once differentiated them 
have been successfully remodeled and assimilated as cultural heritage 
under the leveling pressure of late-industrial society. The Jewish masses 
themselves are no more immune to ticket thinking than the most hostile 
youth organization. In this sense fascist anti-Semitism is obliged to invent 
its own object. Paranoia no longer pursues its goal on the basis of the indi¬ 
vidual case history of the persecutor; having become a vital component of 
society it must locate that goal within the delusive context of wars and eco¬ 
nomic cycles before the psychologically predisposed “national comrades” 
can support themselves on it, both inwardly and outwardly, as patients. 

The tendency according to which anti-Semitism now exists only as 
one item on an interchangeable ticket gives irrefutable reason to hope for 
its end. The Jews are being murdered at a time when the leaders could 



172 Elements of Anti-Semitism 


replace the anti-Semitic plank in their platform just as easily as their fol¬ 
lowers can be transplanted from one location of wholly rationalized pro¬ 
duction to another. The development which leads to ticket thinking is 
based, in any case, on the universal reduction of every specific energy to 
the one, identical, abstract form of labor, from the battlefield to the stu¬ 
dio. However, the transition from those conditions to a more human state 
cannot take place, because benign and malign tendencies suffer the same 
fate. The freedom on the progressive ticket is as far removed from the 
existing political power structures, to which progressive decisions neces¬ 
sarily lead, as hostility to the Jews is external to the chemical cartel. To be 
sure, the psychologically more humane are attracted to freedom, but the 
advancing loss of experience is finally turning even the supporters of the 
progressive ticket into enemies of difference. It is not just the anti-Semitic 
ticket which is anti-Semitic, but the ticket mentality itself. The rage 
against difference which is teleologically inherent in that mentality as the 
rancor of the dominated subjects of the domination of nature is always 
ready to attack the natural minority, even though it is the social minority 
which those subjects primarily threaten. The socially responsible elite is in 
any case far harder to pin down than other minorities. In the murky inter- 
twinement of property, ownership, control, and management it success¬ 
fully eludes theoretical definition. The ideology of race and the reality of 
class both equally reveal only an abstract difference from the majority. But 
although the progressive ticket tends to produce something worse than its 
content, the content of the fascist ticket is so vacuous that it can be main¬ 
tained as a substitute for something better only by desperate efforts on the 
part of the deceived. Its horror is that of the blatant but insistent lie. While 
it admits no truth by which it might be measured, its absurdity is so mon¬ 
strous as to bring truth negatively within reach, so that it can be kept apart 
from those deprived of judgment only by their total abstention from 
thought. Enlightenment itself, having mastered itself and assumed its own 
power, could break through the limits of enlightenment. 



Notes and Sketches 


AGAINST KNOWINGNESS 

One of the lessons of the Hitler period is the stupidity of cleverness. 
How many were the expert arguments with which Jews dismissed the like¬ 
lihood of Hitler’s rise, when it was already as clear as daylight. I recall a 
conversation with an economist who demonstrated the impossibility of 
Germany’s militarization from the interests of Bavarian brewers. And in 
any case, according to the clever people, fascism was impossible in the 
West. Clever people have always made things easy for barbarians, because 
they are so stupid. It is the well-informed, farsighted judgments, the prog¬ 
noses based on statistics and experience, the observations which begin: “I 
happen to be an expert in this field,” it is the well-founded, conclusive 
statements which are untrue. 

Hitler was against intellect and humanity. But there is also an intel¬ 
lect which is against humanity: it is distinguished by well-informed supe¬ 
riority. 

Postscript 

That cleverness is becoming stupidity is inherent in the historical 
tendency. To be reasonable, in the sense used by Chamberlain when he 
called Hitler’s demands at Bad Godesberg* unreasonable, means to insist 
that there be equivalence between giving and taking. Such reason is mod¬ 
eled on exchange. Objectives may be attained only through the mediation 



174 Notes and Sketches 


of a kind of market, in the little advantages that power can steal while 
respecting the rule by which one concession is exchanged for another. 
Cleverness is helpless as soon as power disregards that rule and simply 
appropriates directly. The medium of traditional bourgeois intelligence, 
discussion, is in decline. Even individuals can no longer converse, and 
know it; that is why they have turned card games into a serious, responsi¬ 
ble institution that calls on all their powers, so that although there are no 
conversations, the silence goes unheard. It is no different on the big stage. 
A fascist does not like to be spoken to. When others have their say, he takes 
it as an impudent interruption. He is impervious to reason because he rec¬ 
ognizes it only in concessions made by others. 

The contradiction of the stupidity of cleverness is necessary. For 
bourgeois reason is obliged to claim universality while its own develop¬ 
ment curtails it. Just as, in an exchange, each party receives its due but 
social injustice nevertheless results, the exchange economy’s form of reflec¬ 
tion, the prevalent rationality, is just, universal, and particularistic, the 
instrument of privilege within equality. Fascism makes it pay the price. It 
openly represents the particular interest, thus unmasking reason, which 
wrongly flaunts its universality, as itselflimited. That this turns clever peo¬ 
ple all at once into dunces convicts reason of its own unreason. 

But the fascist, too, suffers under the contradiction. For bourgeois 
reason is not only particularistic but also, indeed, universal, and in deny¬ 
ing its universality fascism defeats itself. Those who came to power in 
Germany were smarter than the liberals and more stupid. The “progress 
toward the new order” has been carried largely by people whose con¬ 
sciousness progress has left behind—bankrupts, sectarians, fools. They are 
exempt from error as long as their power precludes all competition. In the 
competition between states, however, the fascists not only are just as capa¬ 
ble of making mistakes but—with qualities such as myopia, bigotry, igno¬ 
rance of economic forces, and, above all, the inability to perceive the neg¬ 
ative and include it in their assessment of the situation as a whole—are 
also impelled subjectively toward the catastrophe which, in their hearts, 
they have always expected. 



Notes <nu! Sketches 


f/S 


TWO WORLDS 

In this country* there is no difference between a person and that per¬ 
son’s economic fate. No one is anything other than his wealth, his income, 
his job, his prospects. In the consciousness of everyone, including its wear¬ 
er, the economic mask coincides exactly with what lies beneath it, even in 
its smallest wrinkles. All are worth as much as they earn, and earn as much 
as they are worth. They find out what they are through the ups and downs 
of their economic life. They know themselves as nothing else. If the mate¬ 
rialist critique of society once opposed idealism by asserting that it is not 
consciousness which determines being but being consciousness, and that 
the truth about society is to be found not in its idealistic notions of itself 
but in its economy, up-to-date self-consciousness has meanwhile discard¬ 
ed such idealism. People judge their own selves by their market value and 
find out who they are from how they fare in the capitalist economy. Their 
fate, however sad it may be, is for them not something external: they 
acknowledge it. A Chinese, taking leave, 

Spoke with tear-dimmed tones: On me, my friend 
The smile of worldly fortune did not fall. 

And now I leave to wander mountain paths 
Seeking my heart’s peace in their loneliness.* 

“I am a failure,” says the American—and that is that. 

THE TRANSFORMATION OF THE IDEA 

INTO POWER 

Familiar tendencies from recent times are sometimes found prefig¬ 
ured in ancient, exotic history, where distance lends them a heightened 
clarity. 

In his commentary on the Isa-Upanishad, Deussen 1 argues that in 
that work Indian thought took a step beyond what had gone before in the 
same way as Jesus in the Gospel according to St. Matthew 2 went beyond 
St. John the Baptist, and the Stoics beyond the Cynics. However, this 
observation is historically one-sided because the uncompromising ideas of 
John the Baptist and of the Cynics, no less than the views against which 
the first lines of the Isa-Upanishad are supposed to represent progress, 3 



176 Notes and Sketches 


look much more like left-wing secessionist tendencies which have split off 
from powerful cliques and parties than central tendencies of historical 
movements, from which European philosophy, Christianity, and the liv¬ 
ing Vedic religion themselves branched off. Accordingly, as Deussen him¬ 
self notes, the Isa-Upanishad is usually placed at the beginning of Indian 
collections, long before the writings it is said to have gone beyond. Yet this 
first work itself shows traces of a betrayal of youthful radicalism, of treach¬ 
ery against revolutionary opposition to the dominant reality. 

Vedantism, Stoicism, and Christianity took the step which made 
them capable of organization when they began to participate in social real¬ 
ity and to construct unified theoretical systems. That step was mediated 
by the doctrine that an active role in life need not be harmful to the sal¬ 
vation of the soul, provided one has the right spiritual outlook. To be sure, 
Christianity reached this point only with St Paul. The idea which dis¬ 
tances itself from the existing order turns into religion. Those who refused 
to compromise were censured. They stood aloof “from the desire for chil¬ 
dren, the desire for wealth, the desire for the world, and wandered about 
as beggars. For the desire for children is a desire for property, and the 
desire for property is a worldly desire; and both alike are vain.’ M Those 
who express such views may speak the truth according to the upholders of 
civilization, but they do not keep step with the course of social life. They 
therefore became madmen, and did indeed resemble John the Baptist. He 
“was clothed with camel’s hair, and had a girdle of skin about his loins; and 
he did eat locusts and wild honey.” 5 “The cynics,” says Hegel, “have little 
philosophical training and never managed to produce a system, a science. 
Only later was their system made a philosophical discipline, by the 
Stoics.” 6 “Swinish, shameless beggars,” 7 he called these successors. 

The uncompromising figures of whom history has left some record 
did not entirely lack an organized following; otherwise not even their 
names would have come down to us. They set up at least some part of a 
systematic doctrine or a code of behavior. Even the more radical 
Upanishads, attacked by the Isa-Upanishad, were verses and sacrificial for¬ 
mulae used by priestly guilds; 8 John the Baptist may not have inaugurat¬ 
ed a religion, but he did found an order. 9 The Cynics formed a school of 
philosophers; its founder, Ahtisthenes, even sketched the outlines of a the¬ 
ory of the state. 10 But the theoretical and practical systems of such histor¬ 
ical outsiders were unstructured, without a center, and differed from the 



Notes and Sketches 177 


successful systems by a streak of anarchy. The idea and the individual 
mean more to them than administration and the collective. They therefore 
provoke anger. Plato, the champion of power, had the Cynics in his sights 
when he railed against equating the office of king with that of a common 
shepherd and compared a loose organization of humanity without nation¬ 
al frontiers to a state of swine." The uncompromising spirits may have 
been willing to unite and cooperate, but they lacked the skill to construct 
a solid hierarchy closed to those from below. Neither in their theory, 
which was without uniformity or consistency, nor in their practice, which 
lacked the cohesion to make an impact, did they themselves reflect the 
world as it actually was. 

That was the formal difference between the radical and the con¬ 
formist movements in religion and philosophy, which did not lie in their 
content in isolation. The sect of the ascetic Gautama conquered the Asiatic 
world. During his lifetime he showed a great talent for organization. Even 
if he did not, like the reformer Cankara, exclude the lower orders from the 
communication of his doctrine, 12 he expressly acknowledged property in 
human beings and prided himself on the “sons of noble families” who 
joined his order, in which pariahs, “if present at all, appear to have been 
rare exceptions.” 13 From the first, his disciples were differentiated on the 
Brahmin model. 14 Cripples, the sick, criminals, and many others were 
denied admission. 15 Have you, applicants were asked, “leprosy, scrofula, 
white leprosy, consumption, epilepsy? Are you a human being? Are you a 
man? Are you your own master? Are you without debts? Are you not in the 
king’s service?” and so on. Fully in keeping with India’s brutal patriarchal- 
ism, women were admitted only reluctantly to the original Buddhist order. 
They had to subjugate themselves to the men and remained in effect 
minors. 16 The entire order enjoyed the patronage of the rulers and fitted 
admirably into Indian life. 

Asceticism and materialism, those opposites, are ambiguous in the 
same way. Asceticism as a refusal to participate in the bad existing order 
coincides, in face of oppression, with the material demands of the masses, 
just as, conversely, asceticism as an agent of discipline, imposed by cliques, 
aims at adaptation to injustice. The materialistic acceptance of the status 
quo, individual egoism, has always been linked to renunciation, while the 
gaze of the unworldly zealot, roving beyond the existing order, rests mate¬ 
rialistically on the land of milk and honey. Asceticism is sublated in true 



178 Notes and Sketches 


materialism, and materialism in true asceticism. The history of those 
ancient religions and schools, like that of the modern parties and revolu¬ 
tions, can teach us that the price of survival is practical complicity, the 
transformation of the idea into power. 

THE THEORY OF GHOSTS 

Freud’s theory that the belief in ghosts comes from the evil thoughts 
of the living about the dead, from the memory of old death wishes, is too 
narrow. The hatred of the dead is jealousy as much as a feeling of guilt. 
Those left behind feel abandoned, and attribute their pain to the deceased 
who causes it. At the stages of humanity’s development when death still 
appeared as a direct continuation of life, the abandonment of the living in 
death seemed necessarily like a betrayal, and even in enlightened times the 
old belief is not quite extinguished. It runs counter to consciousness to 
conceive of death as absolute nothingness; absolute nothingness cannot be 
thought. And as the burden of life falls back on those left behind, the sit¬ 
uation of the dead can readily seem the better state. The way in which 
some bereaved people entirely reorganize their lives after the death of one 
close to them, the busy cult of the deceased or, inversely, the forgetting 
rationalized as tact, are the modern counterpart to the belief in ghosts 
which, in unsublimated form, continues unabated in spiritualism. Only 
when the horror of annihilation is raised fully into consciousness are we 
placed in the proper relationship to the dead: that of unity with them, 
since we, like them, are victims of the same conditions and of the same dis¬ 
appointed hope. 

Postscript 

The disturbed relationship to the dead—who are forgotten and 
embalmed—is one of the symptoms of the sickness of experience today. It 
might almost be said that the concept of human life itself, as the unity of 
a person’s history, has become invalid: the individual’s life is now defined 
merely by its opposite, annihilation, but has lost all concordance, all con¬ 
tinuity between conscious remembrance and involuntary memory— 
meaning. Individuals are reduced'to a mere succession of instantaneous 
presents, which leave behind no trace, or rather, the trace of which they 
hate as something irrational, superfluous, utterly obsolete. Just as any 



Notes and Sketches 179 


book which has not been published recently is suspect; just as the idea of 
history, outside the specialized activities of the academic discipline, makes 
up-to-date people nervous, the past of a human being makes them furi¬ 
ous. What someone was and experienced earlier is annulled in face of what 
he is now, or of the purpose for which he can be used. The threateningly 
well-meaning advice frequently given to emigrants that they should forget 
the past because it cannot be transplanted, that they should write off their 
prehistory and start an entirely new life, merely inflicts verbally on the 
spectral intruders the violence they have long learned to do to themselves. 
They repress history in themselves and others, out of fear that it might 
remind them of the disintegration of their own lives, a disintegration 
which itself consists largely in the repression of history. The fate which 
befalls all feelings, the ostracizing of what has no market value, is applied 
most harshly to something which cannot even contribute to a psycholog¬ 
ical restoration of labor power, mourning. It is becoming the stigma of civ¬ 
ilization, an asocial sentimentality which reveals that human beings have 
not yet been made to swear absolute allegiance to the realm of purposes. 
Therefore mourning, more than all else, is disfigured, deliberately turned 
into the social formality which, for the hardened survivors, the beautiful 
corpse has always been. In the funeral home and the crematorium, where 
the deceased are processed into transportable ashes, into a burdensome 
possession, it is indeed untimely to let oneself go, and the young girl who, 
proudly describing the first-class funeral of her grandmother, added: “A 
pity that Daddy lost control,” because he had shed a few tears, precisely 
expresses the current state of affairs. The dead are in truth subjected to 
what for the ancient Jews was the most grievous curse: To thee shall no 
thoughts be turned. The living vent on the dead their despair that they no 
longer give thought to themselves. 

QUAND MEME 

External pressure has forced human beings to overcome their own 
inertia, to produce material and intellectual works. Thinkers from 
Democritus to Freud are not wrong in believing this. The resistance of 
external nature, to which the pressure can finally be traced back, propa¬ 
gates itself in society through the classes, acting on all human beings from 
childhood onward as the callousness of their fellows. People are gentle 



180 Notes and Sketches 


when they want something from those who are stronger, and harsh when 
the weaker want something from them. That has been the key to the 
nature of the person in society up to now. 

The conclusion drawn by conservatives, that terror and civilization 
are inseparable, is well founded. What could enable human beings to 
develop the ability to master complex stimuli, if not their own develop¬ 
mental exertions, which have to be spurred on by external resistance? The 
resistance which drives them is first embodied in the father; later it grows 
a thousand heads: teachers, superiors, customers, competitors, the repre¬ 
sentatives of social and state powers. Their brutality stimulates individual 
spontaneity. 

That this harshness might be moderated in the future, that the bloody 
punishments by which humanity has been tamed in the course of centuries 
could be replaced by the establishment of sanatoria, seems no more than a 
dream. Simulated compulsion is powerless. Culture has evolved under the 
shadow of the executioner; Genesis, which tells of the expulsion from 
Paradise, and the Soirees de Petersbour g* are in agreement on this. Work and 
pleasure take place under the shadow of the executioner. To contradict this 
is to fly in the face of all science, all logic. One cannot abolish terror and 
retain civilization. Even to relax the former means the beginning of disinte¬ 
gration. The most diverse conclusions can be drawn from this: from the 
worship of fascist barbarism to a flight into the circles of Hell.* There is one 
other possibility: to scorn logic, if it is against humanity. 

ANIMAL PSYCHOLOGY* 

A large dog stands beside the highway. If he walks trustfully onto it 
he will be run over. His peaceful expression indicates that normally he is 
better looked after—a pet which no one harms. But do the sons of the 
upper bourgeoisie, whom no one harms, have peaceful expressions on 
their faces? They have not been worse looked after than the dog, which is 
now run over. 

FOR VOLTAIRE 

Your reason is one-sided, whispers one-sided reason; you have done 
power an injustice. You have trumpeted the scandal of tyranny eloquent- 



Notes and Sketches 181 


ly, tearfully, sarcastically, thunderously; but the good that power has 
brought about—on that you have kept silent. Without the security which 
only power could establish, that good would never have come into being. 
Beneath the wings of power, life and love have played; even your own hap¬ 
piness has been wrested from hostile nature by power. Thoughts inspired 
by apologetics are true and false at once. Despite its great accomplish¬ 
ments, only power can commit injustice, for only the executed j udgment 
is unjust, not the lawyer’s unexecuted plea. Only when discourse aims at 
oppression, defending power instead of powerlessness, does it contribute 
to the general wrong. But power, one-sided reason now whispers, is repre¬ 
sented by human beings. By exposing the former, you make a target of the 
latter. And after them, worse perhaps will come. The lie speaks truth. 
When fascist murderers are waiting, one should not incite the people 
against the weak government. But even the alliance with the less brutal 
power does not imply that one should keep silent about infamies. The 
likelihood that good causes might be damaged by denunciation of the 
injustice which protects them from the devil has always been outweighed 
by the advantage the devil gains if the denunciation of injustice is left sole¬ 
ly to him. How far must a society have sunk in which only scoundrels still 
speak the truth—and Goebbels reminds us that the lynch mob is still hap¬ 
pily at work. Not the good but the bad is the subject matter of theory. 
Theory presupposes the reproduction of life in its existing forms. Its ele¬ 
ment is freedom, its theme oppression. Where language grows apologetic, 
it is already corrupted; by its nature it can be neither neutral nor practi¬ 
cal.—Could you not portray the good sides of life and proclaim love as a 
principle, instead of endless bitterness?—There is only one expression for 
truth: the thought which repudiates injustice. If insistence on the good 
sides of life is not sublated in the negative whole, it transfigures its own 
opposite: violence. With words I can intrigue, propagate, suggest; that is 
the attribute which entangles them, as it entangles all activity in the world, 
and is the only one which is understood by the lie. It insinuates that even 
when one contradicts the existing order, one is acting in the service of 
other, emergent powers, competing bureaucracies, and rulers. In its name¬ 
less fear, it can and will see only what resembles itself. Anything which is 
absorbed into its medium, language as mere instrument, becomes identi¬ 
cal to the lie as objects become indistinguishable in darkness. But 
although it is true that there is no word which could not ultimately be 



182 Notes and Sketches 


used by the lie, the word’s temper never gleams in the lie but only in the 
thought hardened in the fight against power. Uncompromising hatred of 
the terror inflicted on the last of the earth’s creatures legitimizes the grati¬ 
tude of those who are spared. Invocation of the sun is idolatry. Only the 
spectacle of the tree withered in its heat gives a presentiment of the 
majesty of the day which will not scorch the world on which it shines. 

CLASSIFICATION 

General concepts coined by means of abstraction or axiomatically by 
individual sciences form the material of representation no less than the 
names of individual objects. Opposition to general concepts is absurd. 
There is more to be said, however, about the status of the general. What 
many individual things have in common, or what constantly recurs in one 
individual thing, needs not be more stable, eternal, or deep than the par¬ 
ticular. The scale of categories is not the same as that of significance. That 
was precisely the error of the Eleatics and all who followed them, with 
Plato and Aristotle at their head. 

The world is unique. The mere repetition in speech of moments 
which occur again and again in the same form bears more resemblance to 
a futile, compulsive litany than to the redeeming word. Classification is a 
condition of knowledge, not knowledge itself, and knowledge in turn dis¬ 
solves classification. 

AVALANCHE 

The present time is without turning points. A turn of events is 
always for the better. But when, as today, calamity is at its height, the heav¬ 
ens open and hurl their fire on those who are lost in any case. 

This impression is communicated first of all by what was common¬ 
ly called the social and political sphere. At one time, the front pages of 
daily newspapers seemed strange and vulgar to happy women and chil¬ 
dren—newspapers reminded them of alehouse swagger—until the bold 
headline finally crossed their threshold as a real threat. Rearmament, over¬ 
seas affairs, tension in the Mediterranean, and who knows what other 
grandiose phrases put genuine fear into people, until the First World War 
broke out. Then, with its ever more dizzying figures, came inflation. 



Notes and Sketches 183 


When it paused in its course, that did not mean a turning point but still 
greater misfortune: rationalization, closures, demolition. When Hitler’s 
vote went up, modestly at first but insistently, it was already clear that its 
motion was that of an avalanche. Voting figures are, indeed, characteristic 
of that phenomenon. When, on the evening of the prefascist election day, 
the first results came in from the districts an eighth, a sixteenth of the 
votes already anticipated the whole. If ten or twenty districts turn en masse 
in a certain direction, the remaining hundred will not oppose them. 
Already a uniform mentality exists. The essence of the world coincides 
with the statistical law by which its surface is classified. 

In Germany, fascism triumphed under a crassly xenophobic, anti- 
cultural, collectivist ideology. Now that it has devastated the earth, nations 
must fight against it; there is no other way. But when all is over, a spirit of 
freedom need not spread across Europe; its nations may become as xeno¬ 
phobic, as hostile to culture, and as pseudocollectivist as the fascism 
against which they had to defend themselves. Even its defeat will not nec¬ 
essarily break the motion of the avalanche. 

The fundamental principle of liberal philosophy was that of 
both/and. Today the principle of either/or seems to apply, but in such a 
way that the decision has already been taken for the worse. 

ISOLATION BY COMMUNICATION 

That communication media cause isolation is true not only in the 
intellectual sphere. Not only does the mendacious idiom of the radio 
announcer fix itself in the brain as an image of language itself, preventing 
people from speaking to one another; not only does the voice advertising 
Pepsi-Cola drown out the leveling of continents; not only does the ghost¬ 
ly image of the cinema hero model the embraces of adolescents, and later 
adultery. Progress keeps people literally apart. The little counter at the rail¬ 
road station or the bank allowed the clerks to whisper to their colleagues 
and share their meager secrets; the glass partitions of modern offices, the 
huge rooms in which countless employees sitting together can be easily 
supervised both by the public and by their managers, no longer counte¬ 
nance private conversations and idylls. Even in offices, the taxpayer is now 
protected from wasting of time by wage earners, who are isolated in their 
collective. But the means of communication also isolate people physically. 



184 Notes and Sketches 


The railroad has been supplanted by cars. The making of travel acquain¬ 
tances is reduced by the private automobile to half-threatening encounters 
with hitchhikers. People travel on rubber tires in strict isolation from one 
another. What is talked about in one family automobile is the same as in 
another; in the nuclear family, conversation is regulated by practical inter¬ 
ests. Just as every family with a certain income spends the same percent¬ 
age on housing, cinema, cigarettes, exactly as statistics prescribe, the sub¬ 
ject matter of conversations is schematized according to the class of auto¬ 
mobile. When they meet on Sunday outings or in restaurants, the menus 
and decor of which are identical to others in the same price category, the 
guests find that with increasing isolation they have become more and 
more alike. Communication makes people conform by isolating them. 


ON THE CRITIQUE OF THE PHILOSOPHY 

OF HISTORY 

The human species is not, as has been asserted, a freak event in nat¬ 
ural history, an incidental and abnormal formation produced by hyper¬ 
trophy of the cerebral organ. That assertion is true only of reason in cer¬ 
tain individuals, or perhaps even of a few countries over short periods, 
when the economy has allowed maneuvering space to such individuals. 
The cerebral organ, human intelligence, is firmly established enough to 
constitute a regular epoch of the earth’s history. In this epoch, the human 
species, including its machines, chemicals, and organizational powers— 
for why should they not be seen as a part of it as teeth are a part of the 
bear, since they serve the same purpose and merely function better?—is 
the last word in adaptation. Humans have not only overtaken their imme¬ 
diate predecessors but have eradicated them more thoroughly than almost 
any other recent species, not excluding the carnivorous saurians. 

In face of this it seems somewhat whimsical to try to construe world 
history, as did Hegel, in terms of categories such as freedom and justice. 
These categories do indeed originate in eccentric individuals, who arc 
insignificant in relation to the general course of the whole, unless it be that 
they help to bring about transient historical conditions in which especial¬ 
ly large quantities of machines and chemicals are produced to strengthen 
the species and subjugate others. According to this serious history, all 



Notes and Sketches 185 


ideas, prohibitions, religions, and political creeds are of interest only inso¬ 
far as, arising from diverse conditions, they increase or decrease the natur¬ 
al survival prospects of the human species on the earth or within the uni¬ 
verse. The liberation of citizens from the injustice of the feudal and abso¬ 
lutist past served, through liberalism, to unleash machinery, just as the 
emancipation of women has culminated in their being trained as a branch 
of the armed forces. The mind, and all that is good in its origins and exis¬ 
tence, is hopelessly implicated in this horror. We owe the serum which the 
doctor administers to the sick child to the attack on defenseless creatures. 
In the endearments of lovers, as in the most sacred symbols of Christ¬ 
ianity, we can detect the lust for the flesh of the kid, just as the ambigu¬ 
ous respect for the totem animal is discernible in that lust. Even our com¬ 
plex understanding of cooking, church, and theater is a consequence of 
the sophisticated division of labor, which exists at the expense of nature 
within and outside human society. The historical function of culture lies 
in retroactively heightening this form of organization. That is why genuine 
thought, which detaches itself from that function, reason in its pure form, 
takes on the trait of madness which down-to-earth people have never 
failed to observe. If that kind of reason were to win a decisive victory with¬ 
in humanity, the predominance of the species would be threatened. The 
“freak event” theory would finally turn out to be true. But that theory, 
which cynically sought to support a critique of the anthropocentric phi¬ 
losophy of history, is itself too anthropocentric to hold true. Reason acts 
as an instrument of adaptation and not as a sedative, as might appear from 
the use sometimes made of it by individuals. Its ruse consists' in making 
humans into beasts with an ever-wider reach, and not in bringing about 
the identity of subject and object. 

A philosophical interpretation of world history would have to show 
how, despite all the detours and resistances, the systematic domination 
over nature has been asserted more and more decisively and has integrat¬ 
ed all internal human characteristics. Economic, political, and cultural 
lurms* would have to be derived from this position. The idea of the super¬ 
human can be applicable only in the sense of a transition from quantity to 
quality. Just as the airman with the toxic spray, who in a few flights can 
1 Icansc the last continents of the last free animals, might be called super¬ 
man in comparison to the troglodyte,* a human super-amphibian might 
1 nine into being for whom the airman of today would seem like a harm- 



i8 6 Notes and Sketches 


less swallow. But it is doubtful whether a species one stage higher than 
man can emerge as a genuine product of natural history. For anthropo¬ 
morphism contains a measure of truth in that natural history did not reck¬ 
on with the happy throw of the dice it accomplished in engendering the 
human being. The human capacity for destruction promises to become so 
great that—once this species has exhausted itself—a tabula rasa will have 
been created. Either the human species will tear itself to pieces or it will 
take all the earth’s fauna and flora down with it, and if the earth is still 
young enough, the whole procedure—to vary a famous dictum* 1 —will 
have to start again on a much lower level. 

By attributing humane ideas as active powers to history, and pre¬ 
senting them as history’s culmination, the philosophy of history stripped 
them of the naivety inherent in their content. The poor figure always cut 
by such ideas when the economy—that is, when power—was not with 
them* makes a mockery of everything weak, and in this way their authors 
have unwittingly identified themselves with the oppression they sought to 
abolish. The philosophy of history repeats what happened in Christianity: 
the good, which in reality remains at the mercy of suffering, is dressed up 
as a force which determines the course of history and finally triumphs. It 
is deified as the World Spirit or as an immanent law. But not only is his¬ 
tory thereby turned into its direct opposite, but the idea, which was sup¬ 
posed to break the necessity, the logical course of events, is itself distorted. 
The danger of the “freak event” is averted. Impotence mistaken for power 
is denied a second time by such elevation, as if erased from memory. In 
this way, Christianity, idealism, and materialism, which in themselves con¬ 
tain truth, also bear guilt for the villainies committed in their name. In 
proclaiming power—even a benign power—they became themselves 
highly organized historical powers, and as such played their bloody role in 
the real history of the human species: as instruments of organization. 

Because history as the correlative of unified theory, as something 
capable of interpretation, is not the good but, in fact, the horror, thought 
is in reality a negative element. The hope for better conditions, insofar as 
it is not merely an illusion, is founded less on the assurance that those con¬ 
ditions are guaranteed, sustainable, and final than on a lack of respect for 
what is so firmly ensconced amid the general suffering. The infinite 
patience, the tender, never-extinguished impulse of creaturely life toward 
expression and light, which seems to soften and t pacify within itself the 



Notes and Sketches 187 


violence of creative evolution, does not, like the rational philosophies of 
history, prescribe a certain praxis as beneficial, not even that of nonresis¬ 
tance. The light of reason, which dawned in that impulse and is reflected 
in the recollecting thought of human beings, falls, even on the happiest 
day, on its irresolvable contradiction: the calamity which reason alone can¬ 
not avert. 

MONUMENTS TO HUMANITY 

Humanity has always been more at home in France than elsewhere. 
But the French were no longer aware of the fact. What their books con¬ 
tained was ideology recognized by all. The better qualities led a segregat¬ 
ed existence of their own: in the inflection of voice, the turn of phrase, the 
artful cuisine, the existence of brothels, the cast-iron pissoirs. But the 
Blum government* already declared war on such respect for the individ¬ 
ual, and even the conservatives did little to protect its monuments. 

FROM A THEORY OF THE CRIMINAL* 

. . . Like the criminal, imprisonment was a bourgeois affair. In the 
Middle Ages incarceration was reserved for the offspring of princes who 
symbolized an inconvenient hereditary claim. Criminals were tortured to 
death, to instill a respect for order and law in the mass of the population, 
since the example of severity and cruelty teaches the severe and cruel to 
love. Regular imprisonment presupposes a rising need for labor power* It 
reflects the bourgeois mode of life as suffering. The rows of cells in a mod¬ 
ern prison represent monads in the true Leibnizian sense. “The Monads 
have no windows, through which anything could come in or go out. 
Accidents cannot separate themselves from substances nor go about out¬ 
side them, as the ‘sensible species’ of the Scholastics used to do. Thus nei- 
ther substance nor accident can come into a Monad from outside.”' 7 The 
monads have no direct influence on one another; their lives are regulated 
and coordinated by God, or the prison administration. 18 The absolute 
loneliness, the enforced reliance on a self whose whole being consists in 
1 he mastering of material and the monotonous rhythm of work, spectral¬ 
ly prefigure human existence in the modern world. The radical isolation 
and the radical reduction to an unchanging, hopeless nothingness are 



188 Notes and Sketches 


identical. The human being in jail is the virtual image of the bourgeois 
type he has yet to make himself in reality. Those who fail to achieve this 
outside have it inflicted on them with terrible purity inside. The rational¬ 
ization of prison life through the need to segregate the criminal from soci¬ 
ety, or even to improve him, does not go to the root of the matter. Prisons 
are the image of the bourgeois working world thought through to the end, 
set up as an emblem in the world by the hatred of human beings for what 
they are forced to make themselves become. The weak, the retarded, the 
brutalized must sufFer in modified form the order of life to which others 
have lovelessly adapted themselves; the introverted violence of the latter is 
grimly repeated against the former. The criminal, in whose crime self- 
preservation was paramount, has in reality the weaker, more labile self; the 
habitual offender is an enfeebled being. 

Prisoners are invalids. Their weakness has brought them into a situ¬ 
ation which has undermined them in body and mind and continues to do 
so. Most were already sick when they committed the crime which put 
them in prison—sick through their constitution and their circumstances. 
Other acted as any healthy person would in the same constellation of 
stimuli and motives but were simply unlucky. A residue were more malev¬ 
olent and cruel than most free people—as malevolent and cruel in their 
persons as the fascist world rulers are through their positions. The deed of 
the common criminal is petty, personal, directly destructive. The proba¬ 
bility is that even in the case of the most extreme crimes the living sub¬ 
stance, which is the same in everyone, could not, in any embodiment, 
have escaped the pressure of bodily constitution and individual fate from 
birth onward which led the criminal to the crime; and that you and I, but 
for the grace of the insight granted to us through a chain of circumstances, 
would have acted like the person who committed murder. And now, as 
prisoners, they are mere invalids, and the punishment meted out to them 
is blind, an alien event, a misfortune like cancer or the collapse of a house. 
Imprisonment is a lingering illness. This is revealed by prisoners’ expres¬ 
sions, their cautious gait, their circumstantial way of thinking. Like the 
sick, they can talk only of their sickness. 

When, as today, the boundaries between respectable and illegal rack¬ 
ets are objectively fluid, psychological figures also merge. But as long as 
criminals were still invalids, as in the nineteenth century, custody repre¬ 
sented a reversal of their weakness. The strength to stand out as an indi- 



Notes and Sketches 189 


vidual against ones environment and, at the same time, to make contact 
with it through the approved forms of intercourse and thereby to assert 
oneself within it—in criminals this strength was eroded. They represent¬ 
ed a tendency deeply inherent in living things, the overcoming of which is 
the mark of all development: the tendency to lose oneself in one’s sur¬ 
roundings instead of actively engaging with them, the inclination to let 
oneself go, to lapse back into nature. Freud called this the death impulse, 
Caillois le mimttismeN Addiction of this kind permeates anything which 
runs counter to unswerving progress, from crime, which cannot take the 
detour through the current forms of labor, to the sublime work of art. The 
yielding attitude to things without which art cannot exist is not so far 
removed from the clenched violence of the criminal. The inability to say 
No which causes the young girl to succumb to prostitution also tends to 
determine the career of the criminal. He is characterized by a negation 
which lacks the power of resistance. Against such deliquescence, which— 
without definite consciousness, timid and impotent even in its most bru¬ 
tal form—at the same time imitates and destroys pitiless civilization, the 
latter sets the solid walls of prisons and workhouses, its own stony ideal. 
Just as, according to de Tocqueville, bourgeois republics, unlike monar¬ 
chies, do not violate the body but set to work directly on the soul, pun¬ 
ishments of this kind attack the spirit. Those they torture no longer die 
broken on the wheel over long days and nights but perish mentally, as 
silent, invisible examples in the great prison buildings, which differ from 
lunatic asylums almost only in name. 

Fascism absorbs both institutions. The concentration of command 
throughout production is causing society to revert to the stage of direct 
rule. As the detour of power via the internal markets of nations disappears, 
so, too, do intellectual mediations, including law. Thinking, which had 
developed though transactions, as a result of egoism’s need to negotiate, is 
now given over wholly to the planning of violent appropriation. The fas¬ 
cist mass murderer has emerged as the pure essence of the German facto¬ 
ry owner, no longer distinguished from the criminal by anything but 
power. The detour has become unnecessary. Civil law, which continued to 
function in regulating differences between entrepreneurs surviving in the 
shadow of big industry, has become a kind of tribunal against the lower 
orders, a justice which no longer upholds, however badly, the interests of 
victims—a mere instrument of terror. However, the legal protection 



190 Notes and Sketches 


which is now disappearing once defined property. Monopoly, as the con¬ 
summation of private property, is annihilating the latter’s concept. Of the 
international and social contract, which fascism* in its dealings with states 
is replacing by secret agreements, only the compulsion of the universal is 
allowed to apply in internal affairs, a compulsion its servants then liberal¬ 
ly administer to the rest of humanity. In the totalitarian state* punishment 
and crime are being liquidated as superstitious residues, and a naked erad¬ 
ication of opponents, certain of its political goal, is spreading across 
Europe under the regime of criminals. Next to the concentration camp, 
the penitentiary seems like a memory of the good old days, much as the 
old-style advertiser, though it already betrayed truth, appears beside the 
glossy magazine, the literary content of which—even if it concerns 
Michelangelo—performs the function, still more than the advertisements, 
of business report, emblem of authority and publicity medium. The isola¬ 
tion once inflicted on prisoners from outside has by now implanted itself 
universally in the flesh and blood of individuals. Their well-trained souls 
and happiness are as bleak as the prison cells which the rulers can already 
do without, since the entire labor force of nations has fallen to them as 
spoils. The penal sentence pales beside the social reality. 

LE PRIX DU PROGRES 

In a recently discovered letter by the French physiologist Pierre 
Flourens, who once had the unhappy distinction of being elected to the 
Academie Fran^aise in preference to Victor Hugo, a curious passage 
occurs: 

I still cannot bring myself to assent to the use of chloroform in general sur¬ 
gical practice. As you may know, I have devoted extensive study to this drug and 
as a result of animal experiments have been one of the first to describe its specif¬ 
ic characteristics. My scruples are based on the simple fact that operations under 
chloroform, and probably also under the other known forms of narcosis, amount 
to a deception. The agents act only on certain motor and coordination centers and 
on the residual capacity of the nerve substance. Under the influence of chloro¬ 
form it loses a significant part of its ability to record traces of impressions but not 
the capacity for feeling as such. On the contrary, my observations indicate that in 
conjunction with a general paralysis of innervation, pain is felt still more keenly 
than in the normal state. The deception of the public results from the inability of 



Notes and Sketches 191 


the patient to remember the events once the operation is completed. If we told 
our patients the truth, it is likely that none of them would opt for the drug, 
whereas now, as a result of our silence, they generally insist on its use. 

But even disregarding the fact that the only, dubious benefit is a loss of 
memory regarding the time of the intervention, the spread of this practice seems 
to me to bring with it a far more serious danger. Given the increasing superficial¬ 
ity of the general academic training of our doctors, medicine might be encouraged 
by an unlimited use of the drug heedlessly to undertake ever more complicated 
and serious surgical interventions. Instead of carrying out such experiments on 
animals in the service of research, we should then make our patients the unwit¬ 
ting subjects of experiments. It is conceivable that the painful excitations which, 
in view of their specific nature, may exceed all known sensations of this kind, 
would cause lasting psychical damage to the patient, or might even lead to an 
indescribably agonizing death under narcosis, the peculiarities of which would 
remain for ever hidden from family members and the world. Would that not be 
altogether too great a price to pay for progress? 

If Flourens were right in this letter, the obscure workings of the 
world’s divine governance would at least for once be justified. The animal 
would be avenged by the sufferings of its executioner: each operation a 
vivisection. A suspicion would arise that our attitude toward human 
beings, and toward all creatures, is no different to that toward ourselves 
after a successful operation: blindness to torment. For cognition, the space 
separating us from others would mean the same thing as the time between 
us and the suffering in our own past: an insurmountable barrier. But the 
perennial dominion over nature, medical and nonmedical technology, de¬ 
rives its strength from such blindness; it would be made possible only by 
oblivion. Loss of memory as the transcendental condition of science. All 
reification is forgetting.* 

VAIN TERROR 

The gaze fixed on calamity has an element of fascination. But there- 
lore of secret complicity. So strong are the social bad conscience of all who 
have a part in injustice, and the hatred of fulfilled life, that in critical sit¬ 
uations they turn directly against self-interest as an immanent revenge. 
There was in the French bourgeois a fatal agency which ironically resem¬ 
bled the heroic ideal of the fascists: they rejoiced in the triumph of their 
likeness, as expressed in Hitler’s rise, even though it threatened them with 



192 Notes and Sketches 


ruin; indeed, they took their own ruin as evidence of the justice of the 
order they represented. A precursor of this behavior is found in the atti¬ 
tude of many rich people to impoverishment, the image of which they 
conjure up under the rationalization of parsimony: it is their latent ten¬ 
dency, even while they fight tenaciously for every penny, suddenly to give 
up all their possessions without a fight or irresponsibly to gamble them 
away. In fascism they achieve the synthesis of power-craving and self-hate, 
and their vain terror is always accompanied by the qualification: I always 
saw it coming. 

INTEREST IN THE BODY 

Beneath the known history of Europe there runs a subterranean one. 
It consists of the fate of the human instincts and passions repressed and 
distorted by civilization. From the vantage point of the fascist present, in 
which the hidden is coming to light, the manifest history is also revealing 
its connection to that dark side, which is passed over in the official legend 
of nation states, and no less in its progressive critique. 

Most mutilated of all is the relationship to the body. Under the divi¬ 
sion of labor, in which the benefits accrued to one side and labor to the 
other, brute strength was anathematized. The less the masters could do 
without the labor of the rest, the more base labor was declared to be. Like 
the slave, work received a stigma. Christianity celebrated labor but, in 
compensation, vilified the flesh as the source of all evil. In collusion with 
the unbeliever ,Machiavelli, it rang in the modern bourgeois order by 
extolling work, which in the Old Testament had been designated a curse. 
For the Desert Fathers, Dorotheus, Moses the Robber, Paul the Simple, 
and others of the poor in spirit, labor was still a direct means of entering 
the Kingdom of Heaven. For Luther and Calvin the link between work 
and salvation was already so convoluted that the relentless injunction to 
work seems almost like mockery, the boot grinding the worm into the 
dust. 

The princes and patricians could console themselves for the religious 
gulf which had opened between their earthly days and their eternal voca¬ 
tion with the thought of the revenues they would derive from the labor 
time of others. For the irrationality of the doctrine of election left the pos¬ 
sibility of redemption open to them. But on the others the pressure 



Notes and Sketches 193 


weighed all the more heavily. They were dimly aware that the mortifica¬ 
tion of the flesh by power was nothing other than the ideological reflec¬ 
tion of the oppression practiced on them. The fate of the slaves of 
Antiquity was endured by victims up to the modern colonial peoples: they 
counted as inferior. There were by nature two races: the higher and the 
lower. The emancipation of the European individual took place in con¬ 
junction with a general cultural transformation by which the split within 
the emancipated penetrated more deeply the more the external physical 
compulsion abated. The exploited body was to be regarded by the lower 
orders as the bad and the mind, for which the others had leisure, as the 
highest good. This development made Europe capable of its most sublime 
cultural achievements, but, at the same time as the control over the body 
was increased, the hint of fraud which had been detectable from the first 
also intensified the obscene malice, the love-hate toward the body which 
permeated the mentality of the masses over the centuries and found its 
authentic expression in the language of Luther. In the relationship of indi¬ 
viduals to the body, their own and that of others, is reenacted the irra¬ 
tionality and injustice of power as cruelty; and that irrationality is as far 
removed from judicious insight and serene reflection as power is from free¬ 
dom. In Nietzsche’s theory of cruelty, and still more in the work of Sade, 
the extent of this connection is recognized, while in Freud’s doctrines of 
narcissism and the death impulse it is interpreted psychologically. 

Love-hate for the body colors the whole of modern culture. The 
body is scorned and rejected as something inferior, enslaved, and at the 
same time is desired as forbidden, reified, estranged. Only culture treats 
the body as a thing that can be owned, only in culture has it been distin¬ 
guished from mind, the quintessence of power and command, as the 
object, the dead thing, the corpus. In humanity’s self-abasement to the cor¬ 
pus nature takes its revenge for the debasement of the human being to an 
object of power, to raw material. The compulsion toward cruelty and 
destruction stems from the organic repression of proximity to the body, 
much as, according to Freud’s inspired intuition, disgust came into being 
when, with the adoption of the upright stance and the greater distance 
from the earth, the sense of smell, which attracted the male animal to the 
menstruating female, fell victim to organic repression. In Western civiliza¬ 
tion, and probably in any civilization, what pertains to the body is 
tabooed, a subject of attraction and revulsion. Among the Greek rulers. 



194 Notes and Sketches 


and in feudalism, the relationship to the body was also conditioned by 
power, through the need for personal physical prowess. The cultivation of 
the body had a naively social objective. The kalos kagathoswas only partly 
an illusion; in part the gymnasium was needed for the actual maintenance 
of personal power, at least as training in the lordly posture. With the com¬ 
plete transition of power to the bourgeois form mediated by trade and 
communications, and still more with the rise of industry, a formal change 
occurred. Instead of to the sword, humanity has enslaved itself to the 
gigantic apparatus, which, to be sure, ultimately forges the sword. The 
rational purpose of enhancing the male body thereby disappeared; the 
Romantic attempts to achieve a renascence of the body in the nineteenth 
and twentieth centuries merely idealize something dead and mutilated. 
Nietzsche, Gauguin, George, and Klages recognized the nameless stupid¬ 
ity which is the result of progress. But they drew the wrong conclusion. 
They did not denounce the wrong as it is but transfigured the wrong as it 
was. The rejection of mechanization became an embellishment of indus¬ 
trial mass culture, which cannot do without the noble gesture. Against 
their will, artists reworked the lost image of the unity of body and mind 
for the advertising industry. The celebration of paragons of vitality, from 
the Blond Beast to the south-sea islanders, culminates ineluctably in the 
“sarong film,” the advertisements for vitamins and skin cream, which are 
only stand-ins for the immanent goal of publicity; the new, big, beautiful, 
noble human type—the leaders and their troops. The fascist leaders again 
take the implements of murder into their hands, executing their prisoners 
with pistol and horsewhip, not as a result of their superior strength but 
because the gigantic apparatus and the real holders of power, who still 
abstain from such acts, deliver the victims of reason of state to the base¬ 
ment of their headquarters. 

The body cannot be turned back into the envelope of the soul. It 
remains a cadaver, no matter how trained and fit it may be. The transfor¬ 
mation into dead matter, indicated by the affinity of corpus to corpse, was 
a part of the perennial process which turned nature into stuff, material. 
The achievements of civilization are a product of sublimation, of the 
acquired love-hate for body and earth, from which domination has vio¬ 
lently severed all humart beings. The spirit’s reaction to the corporealiza- 
tion of humanity is productive in medicine, while its reaction to the reifi¬ 
cation of the whole of nature is productive in technology. But the mur- 



Notes and Sketches 195 


derer, the killer, the brutalized colossi who are used by the ruling powers, 
legal and illegal, great and small, as their clandestine enforcers, the violent 
men who are always on hand when there is someone to be dispatched, the 
lynchers and clan members, the bruiser who steps in when someone 
answers back, the terrible figures to whom everyone is delivered up as soon 
as the protective hand of power is withdrawn from them, a soon as they 
lose wealth and position, all the werewolves lurking in the darkness of his¬ 
tory and sustaining the fear without which there is no domination: in 
them the love-hate for the body is crude and direct; they desecrate what 
they touch, they destroy what they see in the light, and this destruction is 
a rancor against reification; in blind rage they repeat against the living 
thing what they cannot make undone: the splitting of life into mind and 
its object. The human being irresistibly attracts them, they want to reduce 
him or her to the body, nothing shall be allowed to live. This enmity of 
the lowest for the life withered within them, an enmity once carefully 
implanted and nurtured by those at the top, whether secular or clerical, 
and to which the lowest relate themselves, homosexually and paranoiacal- 
ly, by killing, has always been an indispensable instrument of the art of 
government. The hostility of the enslaved to life is an inexhaustible source 
of history’s dark side. Even the puritanical excess, hitting the booze, takes 
despairing revenge on life. 

The love of nature and fate proclaimed by totalitarian propaganda is 
merely a superficial reaction to fixation at the level of the body, to the fail¬ 
ure of civilization to fulfill itself. Being unable to escape it, one praises the 
body when not allowed to hit it. The “tragic” world-view of the fascists* is 
the ideological stag party on the eve of the real blood wedding. Those who 
extolled the body in Germany, the gymnasts and outdoor sports enthusi¬ 
asts, always had an intimate affinity to killing, as nature lovers have to 
hunting. They see the body as a mobile mechanism, with its hinged links, 
1 he flesh upholstering the skeleton. They manipulate the body, actuating 
the limbs as if they were already severed. The Jewish tradition instills an 
aversion to measuring human beings with a yardstick, because the dead are 
measured—for the coffin. That is what gives the body-manipulators their 
enjoyment. Unaware, they measure the other with the eye of the coffin 
maker. The truth comes out when they state the result, calling the person 
<.ill [in German: long], short, fat, heavy. They are interested in illness, 
anticipating their fellow diner’s death in what he eats, their interest being 



196 Notes and Sketches 


only thinly rationalized by concern for his health. Language keeps in step 
with them. It has converted the stroll into exercise and food into calories, 
just as in English and French the name for a throng of living trees is syn¬ 
onymous with “timber.” Along with the mortality rate, society is reducing 
life to a chemical process. 

In the fiendish humiliation of prisoners in the concentration camps, 
which—for no rational reason—the modern executioner adds to the death 
by torture, the unsublimated yet repressed rebellion of despised nature 
breaks out. Its full hideousness is vented on the martyrs of love, the alleged 
sexual offenders and libertines, for sexuality is the body unreduced; it is 
expression, that which the butchers secretly and despairingly crave. In free 
sexuality the murderer fears the lost immediacy, the original oneness, in 
which he can no longer exist. It is the dead thing which rises up and lives. 
He now makes everything one by making it nothing, because he has to sti¬ 
fle that oneness in himself. For him the victim represents life which has 
survived the schism; it must be broken and the universe must be nothing 
but dust and abstract power. 

MASS SOCIETY 

Complementing the cult of stars is the social mechanism of the nota¬ 
bles, which levels anything that stands out; the stars and dignitaries are 
mere patterns for the ready-made world, and for the scissors of juridical 
and economic justice, which snip off the last loose ends. 

Postscript 

The view that the leveling and standardization of people in general, 
on the one hand, is matched, on the other, by a heightening of individu¬ 
ality in the so-called leader figures, in keeping with their power, is erro¬ 
neous and itself a piece of ideology. The fascist masters of today are not so 
much supermen as functions of their own publicity apparatus, intersec¬ 
tions of the identical reactions of countless people. If, in the psychology of 
the present-day masses, the leader no longer represents the father so much 
as the collective, monstrously enlarged projection of the impotent ego of 
each individual, then the leader figures do indeed correspond to what they 
represent. Not by accident do they resemble hairdressers, provincial 
actors, and gutter journalists. A part of their moral influence lies precisely 



Notes and Sketches 197 


in the fact that, while in themselves as powerless as all the rest, they 
embody on the latter’s behalf the whole abundance of power without 
being anything more than the blank spaces which power has happened to 
occupy. It is not so much that they are exempt from the decay of individ¬ 
uality as that decayed individuals triumph in them and are in some way 
rewarded for their decay. The leaders have become fully what they always 
were slightly throughout the bourgeois era, actors playing leaders. The dis¬ 
tance between the individuality of Bismarck and of Hitler is hardly less 
than that between the prose of Gedanken und Erinnerungen and the gib¬ 
berish of Mein Kampf. In the struggle against fascism, not the least con¬ 
cern is to reduce the bloated leader images to the true scale of their 
insignificance. At least in the similarity between the ghetto barber and the 
dictator, Chaplins film* hit on something essential. 

CONTRADICTIONS 

A moral system, with axioms, corollaries, and iron logic, and reliable 
application to every moral dilemma—that is what is demanded of philoso¬ 
phers. As a rule, they have fulfilled the expectation. Even when they have 
not set up a practical system or a fully developed casuistry, they have man¬ 
aged to derive obedience to authority from their theories. Usually they 
have justified once again the whole scale of values already sanctioned by 
public praxis, with all the comforts of sophisticated reasoning, demon¬ 
stration, and evidence. “Honor the gods through the traditional native 
religion,” said Epicurus, 20 and Hegel said it after him. A philosopher who 
hesitates to make such a profession is all the more energetically required 
to deliver a general principle. If thought does not simply reaffirm the 
prevalent rules, it must appear yet more self-assured, universal, and 
authoritative than if it had merely justified what was already in force. You 
consider the prevailing power unjust; would you rather have no power at 
all, but chaos? You criticize the standardization of life and progress; should 
we then light wax candles in the evening and have our cities filled with the 
stink of refuse, as in the Middle Ages? You do not like slaughterhouses; 
should society henceforth eat raw vegetables? The positive answers to such 
questions, however absurd, find willing listeners. Political anarchism, the 
reactionary arts and crafts movement, radical vegetarianism, eccentric 
sects and parties have “advertising appeal.” The doctrine need only be gen- 




198 Notes and Sketches 


eral, self-assured, universal, and imperative. What people cannot endure is 
the attempt to evade the either/or, the mistrust of abstract principles, 
steadfastness without a doctrine. 

Two young people are having a conversation: 

A. You don’t want to be a doctor? 

B. By their profession doctors have a lot to do with dying people; that desen¬ 
sitizes them. Moreover, with advanced institutionalization the doctor represents 
business and its hierarchy vis-a-vis the patient. He is often tempted to act as an 
advocate of death. He becomes an agent of big business' against consumers. If one 
is selling automobiles it’s not so bad, but if the commodity being administered is 
life and the consumers are the sick, that’s a situation I’d prefer not to be in. The 
profession of family doctor may have been more innocuous, but that is in decline. 

A. So you think there shouldn’t be any doctors, or the old charlatans ought 
to come back? 

B. I did not say that. I just have a horror of being a doctor myself, and espe¬ 
cially a senior consultant with power of command over a mass hospital. Never¬ 
theless, I do, of course, think it better to have doctors and hospitals than to leave 
sick people to die. I would not want to be a public prosecutor, yet giving a free 
run to armed robbers would seem to me a far greater evil than the existence of the 
body of people who put them in prison. Justice is reasonable. I am not against rea¬ 
son; I only want to investigate the form it has taken. 

A. You are in contradiction with yourself. You yourself constantly make use 
of the advantages provided by doctors and judges. You are as guilty as they are. It 
is just that you don’t want to be burdened with the work which others do for you. 
Your own life presupposes the principle you are trying to evade. 

B. I do not deny it, but contradiction is necessary. It is a response to the 
objective contradiction of society. In a division of labor as complex as that of 
today, horror can manifest itself in one place and bring down guilt on everyone. 
If word of it got about, or if even a small proportion of people were aware of it, 
lunatic asylums and penal institutes might be humanized and courts of justice 
might finally be superfluous. But that is not the reason why 1 want to be a writer. 
I just want to be clearer about the terrible state in which everything is. 

A. If everyone thought as you do, and no one wanted to get his hands dirty, 
there would be neither doctors nor judges, and the world would be even more 
dreadful. 

B. That is just what I find questionable; for if everyone thought as I do, 
then I hope that not just the means of opposing evil would be reduced, but evil 
itself. Humanity has other possibilities. I am not the whole of humanity, and I 
cannot simply represent it in my thought. The moral precept that each of my 



Notes and Sketches 199 


actions ought to provide a general maxim is very problematic. It bypasses history. 
Why should my disinclination to be a doctor be equivalent to the view that there 
should be no doctors? In reality there are many people who would make good 
doctors and have a good chance of becoming one. If they behave morally within 
the limits to which their profession is subject today, they have my admiration. 
Perhaps they may even contribute to reducing the deficiencies I have pointed out 
to you; but perhaps they will deepen them, despite all their professional skill and 
morality. My life as I imagine it, my horror and my desire for knowledge, seem to 
me as justified as the profession of doctor, even though I cannot help anyone 
directly. 

A. But if you knew that by studying medicine you might one day save the 
life of a loved person which would quite certainly be lost without you, would you 
not take it up at once? 

B. Probably, but by now you can see for yourself that with your love of 
implacable logic you are forced to offer the most absurd examples, while I, with 
my impractical obstinacy and my contradictions, have remained within the 
bounds of common sense. 

This conversation is repeated wherever someone refuses to give up 
thought in face of praxis. Such a person finds logic and consistency always 
on the other side. Anyone who is against vivisection ought not to draw a 
single breath which might cost the life of a bacillus. Logic places itself in 
the service of progress and of reaction, and at all events of reality. And yet, 
in an age when education is radically focused on reality, conversations have 
become rarer, and the neurotic interlocutor B needs superhuman strength 
in order not to become healthy. 

MARKED 

People in their forties are apt to make a curious observation. They 
discover that most of those with whom they have grown up and kept in 
contact show disorders in their habits and their consciousness. One allows 
his work to deteriorate so far that his business collapses; another destroys 
his marriage through no fault of his wife; another embezzles. But even 
those who escape such drastic changes bear signs of decomposition. 
(lonversation with them becomes shallow, bombastic, fatuous. Whereas 
earlier the person growing older received intellectual stimulus from others, 
now he finds himself almost the only one who voluntarily displays objec¬ 
tive interest. 



200 Notes and Sketches 


To begin with he is inclined to regard the development of his coevals 
as an unpleasant accident. They have simply changed for the worse. Per¬ 
haps it has to do with their generation and its special outward fate. Finally 
he discovers that this experience is already familiar to him, but from a dif¬ 
ferent perspective: that of his youth in relation to grown-ups. Was he not 
convinced then, too, that something was amiss with this or that teacher, 
with his uncles and aunts, the friends of his parents, and, later, with the 
university professors or the trainee’s manager? It may have been that they 
displayed some ridiculous tic or that their presence was especially barren, 
oppressive, disappointing. 

At that time he did not think further about it, accepting the inferi¬ 
ority of grown-ups as simply a fact of nature. But now he finds it con¬ 
firmed that under the existing conditions the mere act of living while 
maintaining specific technical or intellectual skills leads even in the prime 
of life to cretinism. Not even the worldly-wise are exempt. It is as if human 
beings, as punishment for betraying the hopes of their youth and accom¬ 
modating themselves to the world, are marked by premature decay. 

Postscript 

The decay of individuality today not only teaches us to regard that 
category as historical but also raises doubts concerning its positive nature. 
The inherent principle of the phase of competition was the wrong done to 
the individual. This relates, however, not only to the function of the indi¬ 
vidual and its particularistic interests in society but also to the inner com¬ 
position of individuality itself. The tendency toward human emancipation 
emerged under the aegis of individuality but at the same time was the 
result of the very mechanism from which humanity was to be emancipat¬ 
ed. In the autonomy and uniqueness of the individual, the resistance to 
the blind, repressive power of the irrational whole was crystallized. But 
that resistance was made historically possible only by the blindness and 
irrationality of the autonomous and unique individual. Conversely, how¬ 
ever, that which, as particularistic, was absolutely opposed to the whole 
remains perniciously and opaquely attached to the existing order. The rad¬ 
ically individual, unassimilated features of a human being are always both 
at once: residues not fully encompassed by the prevailing system and still 
happily surviving, and marks of the mutilation inflicted on its members by 
that system. In these traits, basic determinants of the system arc repeated 



Notes and Sketches 201 


in exaggerated form: miserliness, for example, magnifies the principle of 
fixed property, hypochondria that of unreflecting self-preservation. Be¬ 
cause the individual seeks desperately, through such traits, to assert itself 
against the compulsions of nature and society—sickness and bankrupt¬ 
cy—the traits themselves necessarily take on a compulsive quality. Within 
its innermost cell the individual encounters the same power from which it 
has fled within itself. This makes its flight a hopeless chimera. Moliere’s 
comedies show awareness of this curse no less than Daumier’s caricatures; 
but the National Socialists, who are abolishing the individual, feed con¬ 
tentedly on it and set up Spitzweg as their classical painter. 

Only in relation to hardened society, and not absolutely, does the 
hardened individual represent something better. Its hardness bears witness 
to the shame called forth by what the collective ceaselessly does to the 
individual and by what ensues when there are no longer individuals. The 
acolytes of today, bereft of self, are the necessary consequence of the sple¬ 
netic apothecaries, the passionate rose growers and political cripples of yes¬ 
terday. 

PHILOSOPHY AND THE DIVISION OF LABOR 

The place of science in the social division of labor is readily identi¬ 
fied. Its task is to accumulate facts and functional connections between 
facts in the largest possible quantities. The storage system must be easily 
surveyed. It must enable individual industries immediately to locate the 
desired intellectual commodity in the required variety. Already the com¬ 
pilation is largely made with an eye for certain industrial contracts. 

Historical works, too, are required to contribute material. Its utility 
is to be sought not directly in industry but indirectly in administration. 
Just as Machiavelli wrote for the purposes of princes and republics, histo¬ 
rians of today work for economic and political committees. Admittedly, 
the historical form has become an impediment to such use; the material is 
better arranged straight away in terms of a specific administrative task: to 
manipulate commodity prices or the emotions of the masses. In addition 
to administration and industrial consortia, trade unions and political par- 
1 ies arc potential customers. 

Official philosophy serves the science which functions in this way. It 
is supposed, like a kind of intellectual Taylorism, to improve scientific pro- 



202 Notes and Sketches 


duction methods, to rationalize the accumulation of knowledge, and pre¬ 
vent the waste of mental energy. It has its allotted place in the division of 
labor, like chemistry or bacteriology. The few philosophical residues which 
hark back to the divine worship of the Middle Ages or the contemplation 
of eternal essentialities are still tolerated at secular universities because they 
are so reactionary. In addition, a few historians of philosophy continue to 
propagate themselves by tirelessly expounding Plato and Descartes while 
pointing out their obsoleteness. They are accompanied here and there by a 
veteran of sensualism or an expert personalist who keeps the field of sci¬ 
ence free of any dialectical weeds that might otherwise spring up. 

Unlike its custodians, philosophy refers, among other things, to 
thinking which refuses to capitulate to the prevailing division of labor and 
does not accept prescribed tasks. The existing order coerces people not 
merely by physical force and material interests but by overwhelming sug¬ 
gestion. Philosophy is not a synthesis, a basic science, or an overarching 
science but an effort to resist suggestion, a determination to protect intel¬ 
lectual and actual freedom. 

In this effort, the division of labor which has emerged under domi¬ 
nation is not ignored. Philosophy detects the lie which domination 
inescapably brings with it. Refusing to be hypnotized by the preponderant 
power, it pursues it into all its hiding-places in the social machinery, which 
by its nature cannot be taken by storm, or placed under different control, 
but must be understood in freedom from the spell which it casts. When 
the officials which industry maintains in its intellectual departments—the 
universities, churches, and newspapers—challenge philosophy to produce 
credentials by which to legitimate its snooping, it finds itself fatally at a 
loss. It acknowledges no abstract norms or goals which could be a practi¬ 
cable alternative to those in force. Its exemption from the suggestive influ¬ 
ence of the existing order lies precisely in the fact that, without favoring 
them, it accepts the bourgeois ideals, whether those which that order’s 
exponents still proclaim, in however distorted a form, or those which are 
still discernible as the objective purpose of institutions, both technical and 
cultural, despite all the manipulation. It believes that the division of labor 
exists for the sake of human beings and that progress leads to freedom. 
That is why it is liable to come into conflict both with the division of labor 
and with progress. It gives voice to the contradiction between belief and 
reality, paying close attention to phenomena conditioned by the time. 
Unlike the press, it does not attach more importance to gigantic mass 



Notes and Sketches 203 


murder than to the liquidation of a few asylum inmates. It does not place 
the intrigues of the statesman compromised by fascism above the modest 
lynching, or the advertising frenzy of the film industry above the intimate 
funeral announcement. The taste for the grandiose is foreign to it. Thus it 
is at the same time remote from the existing order and deeply complicit 
with it. It lends its voice to its subject, against the latter’s will; it is the voice 
of the contradiction which otherwise would not be heard, but would tri¬ 
umph silently. 

THOUGHT 

It is, of course, mistaken to believe that the truth of a theory is the 
same as its fruitfulness. There are some, however, who appear to assume 
the opposite. For them, theory has so little need to find application in 
thought that it should dispense with thinking altogether. They misinter¬ 
pret every utterance as a final profession of belief, an injunction, or a 
taboo. They seek to submit to the idea as to a god or attack it as an idol. 
They lack freedom in relation to it. But it is in the nature of truth that one 
is involved in it as an active subject. People may hear propositions which 
in themselves are true; but they experience their truth only by thinking as 
they hear and by continuing to think. 

This fetishism manifests itself in a drastic form today. One is called 
to account for one’s thoughts, as if they applied directly to praxis.* For this 
reason, not only is the utterance which attacks power found intolerable 
but the one which gropes forward experimentally, playing wich the possi¬ 
bility of error. Yet to be unfinished and to know it is the mark even of the 
thought which opposes power, and especially of the thought for which it 
would be worth dying. The proposition that the true is the whole* proves 
to be the same as its antithesis, that truth exists only as a part. The most 
wretched of the excuses which intellectuals have found for executioners— 
and in the last century they have not been idle in finding them—is that 
tlie thinking for which the victim was murdered was fallacious. 

MAN AND BEAST 

Throughout European history the idea of the human being has been 
expressed in contradistinction to the animal. The latter’s lack of reason is 
1 lie proof of human dignity. So insistently and unanimously has this 



204 Notes and Sketches 


antithesis been recited by all the earliest precursors of bourgeois thought, 
the ancient Jews, the Stoics, and the Early Fathers, and then through the 
Middle Ages to modern times, that few other ideas are so fundamental to 
Western anthropology. The antithesis is acknowledged even today. The 
behaviorists only appear to have forgotten it. That they apply to human 
beings the same formulae and results which they wring without restraint 
from defenseless animals in their abominable physiological laboratories, 
proclaims the difference in an especially subtle way. The conclusion they 
draw from the mutilated animal bodies applies, not to animals in freedom, 
but to human beings today.* By mistreating animals they announce that 
they, and only they in the whole of creation, function voluntarily in the 
same mechanical, blind, automatic way as the twitching movements of the 
bound victims made use of by the expert. The professor at the dissection 
table defines such movements scientifically as reflexes; the soothsayer at 
the altar would have proclaimed them a sign from his gods. Humans pos¬ 
sess reason, which pitilessly follows its path; the animals from which they 
draw their bloody conclusions have only unreasoning terror, the impulse 
to take flight on a path which is cut off. 

The lack of reason has no words. Its possession, which dominates 
manifest history, is eloquent. The whole earth bears witness to the glory 
of man. In war and peace, arena and slaughterhouse, from the slow death 
of the elephant overpowered by primitive human hordes with the aid of 
the first planning to the perfected exploitation of the animal world today, 
the unreasoning creature has always suffered at the hands of reason. This 
visible course of events conceals from the executioners the invisible one: 
existence without the light of reason, the actual life of animals. It would 
be the proper subject matter for psychology, for only the life of animals 
runs its course according to inner impulses; where psychology has to 
explain human beings, they are already regressive and destroyed. When 
the help of psychology is sought among human beings, the meager field 
of their immediate relationships is narrowed still further, and even within 
it they are made into things. Psychology used to explain others is imperti¬ 
nent, and to explain one’s own motives sentimental. Animal psychology, 
meanwhile, has lost sight of its object; engrossed with the chicanery of its 
traps and labyrinths, it has forgotten that to speak of and acknowledge a 
psyche or soul ( Seele ) is appropriate precisely and only in the case of ani¬ 
mals. Even Aristotle, who attributed a soul to them, if an inferior one, pre- 



Notes and Sketches 205 

ferred to speak of the bodies, parts, movements, and procreation of ani¬ 
mals rather than the life peculiar to them. 

The world of animals is without concepts. There is no word to hold 
fast the identical in the flux of phenomena, the same genus in the succes¬ 
sion of specimens, the same thing in changing situations. Although the 
possibility of recognition is not absent, identification is restricted to vital 
patterns. There is nothing in the flux* that could be defined as lasting, and 
yet everything remains one and the same, because there is no fixed knowl¬ 
edge of the past and no clear prospect into the future. The animal 
responds to its name and has no self, it is enclosed in itself yet exposed, 
one compulsion is followed by another, no idea extends beyond it. Its loss 
of solace is not balanced by a reduction in fear, its lack of awareness of 
happiness by the absence of mourning and pain. For happiness to become 
substantial, for life to be endowed with death, identifying remembrance is 
needed, assuaging knowledge, the religious or philosophical idea, in short, 
the concept. There are happy animals, but how short-lived is that happi¬ 
ness! The animal’s experience of duration, uninterrupted by liberating 
thought, is dreary and depressive. To escape the gnawing emptiness of 
existence some resistance is needed, and its backbone is language. Even the 
strongest animal is infinitely feeble. Schopenhauer’s doctrine according to 
which the pendulum of life oscillates between pain and boredom, between 
brief moments of sated impulse and endless craving, is true of the animal, 
which cannot interrupt the fatal cycle with cognition. In the animal’s soul 
the individual feelings and needs of human beings are vestigially present, 
without the stability which only organizing reason confers. The best days 
flit past in a bustling medley like a dream, which the animal can hardly 
distinguish from waking in any case. It is without the clear division 
between play and seriousness, the happy awakening from nightmare to 
reality. 

In popular fairy tales the metamorphosis of humans into animals is 
a recurring punishment. To be imprisoned in an animal body is regarded 
as damnation. To children and peoples, the idea of such transformations 
is immediately comprehensible and familiar. Believers in the transmigra¬ 
tion of souls in the earliest cultures saw the animal form as punishment 
and torment. The mute wildness in the animal’s gaze bears witness to the 
horror which is feared by humans in such metamorphoses. Every animal 
recalls to them an immense misfortune which took place in primeval 



20 6 Notes and Sketches 


times. Fairy tales express this dim human intuition. But whereas the 
prince in the fairy tale retained his reason so that, when the time came, he 
could tell of his woe and the fairy could release him, the animal’s lack of 
reason holds it eternally captive in its form, unless man, who is one with 
it through his past, can find the redeeming formula and through it soften 
the stony heart of infinity at the end of time. 

For the being endowed with reason, however, concern for the unrea¬ 
soning animal is idle. Western civilization has left that to women. They 
have no autonomous share in the capabilities which gave rise to this civi¬ 
lization. The man must go out into hostile life, must act and strive.* The 
woman is not a subject. She does not produce but looks after the produc¬ 
ers, a living monument to the long-vanished time of the self-sufficient 
household. The division of labor imposed on her by the man was unfa¬ 
vorable. She became an embodiment of biological function, an image of 
nature, in the suppression of which this civilization’s claim to glory lay. To 
dominate nature boundlessly, to turn the cosmos into an endless hunting 
ground, has been the dream of millennia. It shaped the idea of man in a 
male society. It was the purpose of reason, on which man prided himself. 
Woman was smaller and weaker, between her and man there was a differ¬ 
ence she could not overcome, a difference set by nature, the most sham¬ 
ing, degrading agency possible within the male society. When domination 
of nature is the true goal, biological inferiority remains the ultimate stig¬ 
ma, the weakness imprinted by nature, the mark which invites violence. 
The church, which in the course of history has hardly missed an opportu¬ 
nity to take a leading voice in popular institutions, whether they be slav¬ 
ery, crusades, or simply pogroms, sided with Plato, despite the Ave Maria, 
in the assessment of woman. The image of the Mother of Sorrows was a 
concession to matriarchal residues. Yet the church used the very image 
which was supposed to redeem woman from her inferiority to sanction it. 
“The influence of Divine Law in a Christian land,” proclaimed de 
Maistre, that law’s legitimate son, “need only be extinguished or weakened 
to a certain degree by tolerating the freedom of women which has arisen 
from it, and freedom, though noble and moving in itself, will degenerate 
soon enough into shamelessness. Women would become the fatal instru¬ 
ments of a general decline, which would swiftly undermine the vital 
organs of the state. Engulfed by corruption, the state would spread shame 
and terror in its fiery ruin.” 21 The witch trials used by the allied feudal 
rackets to terrorize the populace when they found themselves threatened 



Notes and Sketches 207 


were at the same time a celebration and confirmation of the victory of 
male domination over primeval matriarchal and mimetic stages of devel¬ 
opment. The autos-da-fe were the Church’s pagan bonfires, a triumph of 
nature in the form of self-preserving reason, to the glory of reason’s dom¬ 
ination over nature. 

The bourgeoisie reaped the benefit of feminine virtue and modesty 
as reaction formations of the matriarchal rebellion. Woman gained admis¬ 
sion to the world of mastery on behalf of the whole of exploited nature, 
but in a broken form. Subjugated, she mirrors her conqueror’s victory in 
her spontaneous submission, reflecting defeat back to him as devotion, 
despair as the beautiful soul, the violated heart as the loving breast. At the 
price of radical exclusion from praxis and withdrawal into a charmed cir¬ 
cle, nature receives homage from the lord of creation. Art, morality, and 
sublime love are masks of nature, in which nature reappears transformed 
and becomes expressive as its own antithesis. Through its masks it ac¬ 
quires the gift of speech; in its distortion it manifests its essence; beauty is 
the serpent which displays the wound where once the fang was implanted. 
Yet behind man’s admiration for beauty lurks always the ringing laughter, 
the boundless scorn, the barbaric obscenity vented by potency on impo¬ 
tence, with which it numbs the secret fear that it is itself enslaved to impo¬ 
tence, to death, to nature. When the deformed jesters whose capers and 
foolscaps once enacted the mournful gaiety of broken nature had escaped 
the service of kings, the planned cultivation of beauty was entrusted to 
women. Modern puritanical woman zealously took up the task, identify¬ 
ing herself fully with the fait accompli, with nature not in itswildness but 
in its domestication. What was left of the fens, songs, and dances of 
Roman slave girls was definitively reduced in Birmingham to piano play¬ 
ing and other handicrafts, until the last residues of female wantonness had 
been entirely sublimated as emblems of patriarchal civilization. Under the 
pressure of universal* advertising, powder and lipstick, rejecting their ori¬ 
gin among courtesans, became skin care, the bathing suit an attribute of 
hygiene. Nothing can escape. Even love, through the mere fact that it 
takes place within the completely organized system of domination,* has 
the system’s trademark imprinted on it. In Germany those entrapped by 
the existing order now demonstrate their obedience to it by promiscuity, 
as earlier by modesty, affirming by indiscriminate performance of the sex¬ 
ual act their rigid subordination to the dominant reason.* 

Jutting into the present* like a fossil of the bourgeois esteem for 



2o8 Notes and Sketches 


woman is the termagant, the shrew. For measureless ages her nagging has 
avenged, within her own house, the wretchedness which has befallen her 
sex. Outside it, too, in the absence of the genuflection she foils to receive, 
the malevolent crone barks at the absent-minded man who fails to rise to 
his feet in her presence, knocking off his hat. That the head itself must 
roll, come what may, she has always demanded in politics, whether in rem¬ 
iniscence of the maenadic past or through outbidding man and his order 
in her impotent rage. The bloodthirstiness of women in pogroms eclipses 
that of men. The oppressed woman as Fury has outlived her time, contin¬ 
uing to display the grimace of mutilated nature in an age when domina¬ 
tion is molding the well-trained bodies of both sexes, in whose uniformi¬ 
ty the grimace has been effaced. Against the background of such mass pro¬ 
duction, the scolding of the shrew, who at least retained her own distin¬ 
guishing face, becomes a sign of humanity, her ugliness a trace of spirit. If 
in past centuries the young girl wore her subjection in her melancholy fea¬ 
tures and her devoted love, an alienated image of nature, an aesthetic cul¬ 
tural object, at least the harridan of today has finally discovered a new 
female profession. As a social hyena she actively pursues cultural goals. 
Her ambition runs after honors and publicity, but her understanding of 
male culture is not yet sufficiently sharpened to prevent her, amid the 
injuries done her, from committingj&ttx pas and showing that she is not 
yet at home in the civilization of men. Isolated, she seeks refuge in con¬ 
glomerates of science and magic, misbegotten offspring of the idealistic 
privy councilor ^nd the Nordic clairvoyante. She feels herself drawn to 
mischief. The last female opposition to the spirit of male society is degen¬ 
erating in a morass of trivial rackets, sects, and hobbies, is turning into the 
perverted aggression of social work and theosophical gossip, venting its 
petty rancor in good works and Christian Science. In this quagmire, soli¬ 
darity with creatu rely life expresses itself not so much in the animal pro¬ 
tection league as in neo-Buddhism and the Pekinese, whose distorted vis¬ 
age, now as in early paintings, reminds us of the physiognomy of the court 
jester left behind by progress. Like the hunchback’s ungainly leaps, the lit¬ 
tle dog’s features still represent mutilated nature, while mass industry and 
mass culture have learned to prepare the bodies of breeding bulls and 
humans according to scientific methods.The standardized masses are now 
so little aware of their own transformation, in which they have desperate¬ 
ly collaborated, that they no longer require its symbolic display. Among 



Notes and Sketches 209 


the lesser news items on the second and third pages of newspapers, the 
front pages of which are filled with the horrifying exploits of human 
beings, circus fires and the poisoning of large animals are sometimes 
reported. We are reminded of animals when their last specimens, of the 
same species as the medieval fool, perish in endless torment, a capital loss 
to their owner who was unable to provide the loyal creatures with fire pro¬ 
tection in an age of concrete buildings. The tall giraffe and the wise ele¬ 
phant are oddities which can no longer provide amusement for wised-up 
schoolboys. In Africa, the last part of the earth which has vainly sought to 
protect their poor herds from civilization, they form traffic obstacles to 
bombers landing in the latest war. They are being eradicated entirely. On 
an earth made reasonable there is no longer a need for the aesthetic reflec¬ 
tion. The demons are driven out by directly imprinting humans. Dom¬ 
ination no longer needs numinous images; it produces them industrially, 
the more reliably to insinuate itself into human beings. 

The distortion which is inherent in every work of art, as mutilation 
is inherent in the luster of feminine beauty, the maiming which puts on 
show the wound in which subjugated nature recognizes itself—that 
maiming is again being done by fascism, but no longer as mere appear¬ 
ance. It is inflicted directly on the damned. In this society there is no 
longer any sphere in which domination can profess its contradictions, as it 
does in art; there is no longer any means of duplication by which the dis¬ 
tortion might be expressed. But in earlier times such expression was called 
not only beauty but thought, intellect, language itself. Today language cal¬ 
culates, designates, betrays, initiates death; it does not express. The cul¬ 
ture industry* has, like science, its own precise, external means of mea¬ 
surement by which to judge itself: facts. Film stars are experts, their per¬ 
formances are records of natural behavior, classifying modes of reaction; 
the directors and scriptwriters produce models of adapted behavior. The 
precision work of the culture industry* precludes distortion as a mere 
fault, an accident, something defectively subjective and natural. The devi¬ 
ation is analyzed to discover the practical cause which would link it back 
to rationality. Only then is it forgiven. Along with the reflection of power 
by nature, the tragic, like the comic, has disappeared; the rulers become 
serious in proportion to the resistance to be overcome, and humorous in 
proportion to the despair they perceive. Intellectual enjoyment used to be 
confined to the presentation of suffering, but they play with horror itself. 



no Notes and Sketches 


Sublime love attached itself to strength appearing through weakness, in 
woman’s beauty, but they attach themselves directly to power: the idol of 
today’s society is the masculine face which exhibits a certain rakish lordli¬ 
ness. The woman is used for work, childbearing; or, if presentable, she 
enhances the status of her mate. No longer does she sweep the man away 
in rapture. Adoration reverts to self-love. The world and its purposes 
demand the whole of man. None can give away any part of himself; he 
must keep it all within. But, in the eyes of praxis, nature is all that is with¬ 
out and underneath, an object—as the girl, in vulgar parlance, has always 
been for the soldier. Feeling confines itself to power in relation to power. 
As woman did earlier, man now lays down his arms before man, but with 
dark, unswerving coldness. He becomes a woman, with eyes only for pow¬ 
er. In the fascist collective,* with its teams and work camps, everyone from 
tender youth is a prisoner in solitary confinement, which breeds homo¬ 
sexuality. Even the beast must wear the lordly features. The distinctive 
human face, which humiliatingly recalls our origin in nature and our 
enslavement to it, irresistibly invites expert homicide. The caricature of 
the Jew has always relied on this, and even Goethe’s aversion to apes 
marked out the limits of his humanity. When captains of industry and fas¬ 
cist leaders have animals around them, they are not domestic poodles but 
Great Danes and lion cubs. They are there to add spice to power through 
the terror they inspire. So blind is the murderous fascist colossus in face of 
nature that he conceives of animals only as means of humiliating humans. 
Nietzsche’s unjust accusation of Schopenhauer and Voltaire, that they 
“knew how to disguise [their] hatred of certain men and things as pity 
toward animals,” 22 applies truly to the fascist butcher. The precondition of 
the fascists’ pious love of animals, nature, and children is the lust of the 
hunter. The idle stroking of children’s hair and animal pelts signifies: this 
hand can destroy. It tenderly fondles one victim before felling the other, 
and its choice has nothing to do with the victim’s guilt. The caress inti¬ 
mates that all are the same before power, that they have no being in them¬ 
selves. For domination’s bloody purposes the creature is only material. 
Thus the Fiihrer flaunts his concern for innocents, who are plucked out 
without merit as others ar? killed without desert. Nature is filth. Only the 
devious strength which survives is in the right. But that strength itself is 
only nature; the whole ingenious machinery of modern industrial society 
is no more than nature dismembering itself. There is no longer any 



Notes and Sketches zu 


medium through which this contradiction can find expression. It unfolds 
with the glum obstinacy of a world from which art, thought, and negativ¬ 
ity have vanished. Human beings are so radically estranged from them¬ 
selves and from nature that they know only how to use and harm each 
other. Each is merely a factor, the subject or object of some praxis, some¬ 
thing to be reckoned with or discounted. 

In this world liberated from appearance—in which human beings, 
having forfeited reflection, have become once more the cleverest animals, 
which subjugate the rest of the universe when they happen not to be tear¬ 
ing themselves apart—to show concern for animals is considered no 
longer merely sentimental but a betrayal of progress. In the best reac¬ 
tionary tradition Goring linked animal protection to racial hatred, the 
Lutheran-Germanic joys of the happy murderer with the genteel fair play 
of the aristocratic hunter. The fronts are clearly drawn; anyone who oppos¬ 
es Hearst* and Goring is on the side of Pavlov and vivisection; anyone 
who hesitates between the two is fair game for both. Such a person is told 
to follow reason. The choice is obligatory and inescapable. Anyone who 
wants to change the world should at all costs avoid finishing up in the 
morass of petty rackets, where political sectarians, Utopians, and anarchists 
go to ruin along with the spiritualists. Intellectuals whose thought is unat¬ 
tached to any active historical power, and orientates itself by neither of the 
poles toward which industrial society is heading, lose their substance; their 
thought becomes baseless.* The real is the rational. Anyone who does not 
join in, the progressives also tell them, is of no help to anyone. Everything 
depends on society, and thought, no matter how precise, must align itself 
with the powerful social tendencies, without which it becomes mere 
whimsy. This consensus unites all the righteous realists, who declare their 
allegiance to human society as to a mass racket within nature. The thought 
which does not pursue the aims of any of their departments incurs their 
boundless wrath. It reminds them that something which exists only to be 
smashed still has a voice: nature, with which the lies of the nationalist folk¬ 
lore-lovers are full to overflowing. When its sound interrupts, even for a 
moment, their chanting chorus, the dread they seek to drown with their 
voices, and which lives on in their rationalized, broken hearts as in every 
animal, makes itself heard. The tendencies brought into daylight by the 
expression of such thoughts are omnipresent and blind. Nature in itself is 
neither good, as was believed by the old Romanticism, nor noble, as is 



212 Notes and Sketches 


asserted by the new. As a model and goal it signifies anti-intellectualism, 
lies, bestiality; only when apprehended as knowledge does it become the 
urge of the living toward peace, the consciousness which, from the begin¬ 
ning, has inspired the unerring resistance to Fiihrer and collective. What 
threatens the prevailing praxis and its inescapable alternatives is not 
nature, with which that praxis coincides, but the remembrance of nature. 

PROPAGANDA 

Propaganda directed at changing the world—what an absurdity! 
Propaganda turns language into an instrument, a lever, a machine. 
Propaganda fixes the composition which human beings have taken on 
under social injustice, by stirring them. It counts on their ability to be 
counted on. All people know in their innermost awareness that through 
this medium they are turned into media, as in a factory. The rage they feel 
in following it is the old rage against the yoke, reinforced by the dim 
knowledge that the way out pointed by propaganda is the wrong one. 
Propaganda manipulates human beings; when it screams freedom it con¬ 
tradicts itself. Mendacity is inseparable from it. It is the community of lies 
in which the leader and the led come together, even when its content as 
such is correct. In it even truth becomes a mere means, to the end of gain¬ 
ing adherents; it falsifies truth simply by taking it into its mouth. That is 
why true resistance is without propaganda. Propaganda is antihuman. It 
presupposes that the principle that politics should spring from communal 
insight is no more than a form of words. 

In a society which prudently sets limits to the threatening abun¬ 
dance, what is recommended to everyone by others deserves mistrust. The 
warning against commercial advertisements, that no company gives any¬ 
thing away, is applicable everywhere, and, after the merger of business and 
politics, especially to the latter. The degree of eulogy increases with the 
decrease in quality: the Volkswagen, unlike the Rolls-Royce, depends on 
advertising. The interests of industry and consumers do not harmonize 
even when the former seriously has something to offer. Even propaganda 
for freedom can be a source of confusion in that it necessarily effaces the 
difference between theory and the particular interests of its addressees. 
The workers’ leaders murdered in Germany were cheated even of the truth 
of their own action, since fascism belied their solidarity by the selectivity 



Notes and Sketches 213 


of its revenge. When intellectuals are tortured to death in concentration 
camps, that does not necessarily make the workers outside worse off. 
Fascism was not the same for Ossietzky and for the proletariat. Propa¬ 
ganda cheated both. 

What is suspect is not, of course, the depiction of reality as hell but 
the routine invitation to break out of it. If that invitation can be addressed 
to anyone today, it is neither to the so-called masses nor to the individual, 
who is powerless, but rather to an imaginary witness, to whom we be¬ 
queath it so that it is not entirely lost with us. 

IN THE GENESIS OF STUPIDITY 

The emblem of intelligence is the feeler of the snail, the creature 
“with the fumbling face,” with which, if we can believe Mephistopheles, 23 
it also smells. Meeting an obstacle, the feeler is immediately withdrawn 
into the protection of the body, it becomes one with the whole until it 
timidly ventures forth again as an autonomous agent. If the danger is still 
present, it disappears once more, and the intervals between the attempts 
grow longer. Mental life in its earliest stages is infinitely delicate. The 
snail’s sense is dependent on a muscle, and muscles grow slack if their 
scope for movement is impaired. The body is crippled by physical injury, 
the mind by fear. In their origin both effects are inseparable. 

The higher animals have themselves to thank for their greater free¬ 
dom; their existence is evidence that feelers were once stretched out in new 
directions and not repulsed. Each of their species is a monument to count¬ 
less others whose attempts to develop were blocked at the outset, which 
gave way to fright if only a single feeler stirred in the path of their evolu¬ 
tion. The suppression of possibilities by the direct resistance of surround¬ 
ing nature is extended inwardly by the wasting of organs through fright. 
Each time an animal looks out with curiosity a new form of the living 
dawns, a form which might emerge from the clearly formed species to 
which the individual creature belongs. But it is not only this specific form 
which holds it back in the security of the old state; the force which its look 
encounters is the resistance, millions of years old, which has imprisoned it 
at its present stage from the first, and which, constantly renewed, inhibits 
every step which goes beyond that stage. That first, tentative look is always 
easily repulsed; behind it stand goodwill, fragile hope, but no continuous 



214 Notes and Sketches 


energy. In the direction from which it has been definitely scared off the 
animal becomes shy and stupid. 

Stupidity is a scar. It can relate to one faculty among many or to 
them all, practical and mental. Every partial stupidity in a human being 
marks a spot where the awakening play of muscles has been inhibited 
instead of fostered. With the inhibition, the vain repetition of unorga¬ 
nized, awkward attempts originally began. The child’s endless questions 
are already a sign of a secret pain, a serious question to which it has found 
no answer and which it cannot frame in its proper form. 24 The repetition 
half resembles playful determination, as when a dog endlessly leaps against 
a door it has not learned how to open, finally giving up if the handle is too 
high, and half corresponds to hopeless compulsion, as when a lion paces 
endlessly up and down in its cage or a neurotic repeats the defense reac¬ 
tion which has already proved futile. If the child has wearied of its repeti¬ 
tions, or if the thwarting has been too brutal, its attention can turn in 
another direction; the child is richer in experience, as one says, but at the 
point where its impulse has been blocked a scar can easily be left behind, 
a slight callous where the surface is numb. Such scars lead to deformations. 
They can produce “characters,” hard and capable; they can produce stu¬ 
pidity, in the form of deficiency symptoms, blindness, or impotence, if 
they merely stagnate, or in the form of malice, spite, and fanaticism, if 
they turn cancerous within. Goodwill is turned to ill will by the violence 
it suffers. And not only the forbidden question but the suppressed imita¬ 
tion, the forbidden weeping or the forbidden reckless game, can give rise 
to such scars. Like the genera within the series of fauna, the intellectual 
gradations within the human species, indeed, the blind spots within the 
same individual, mark the points where hope has come to a halt and in 
their ossification bear witness to what holds all living things in thrall. 



Reference Matter 




Editors Afterword 


The Position of “Dialectic of Enlightenment” 
in the Development of Critical Theory 


Horkheimer’s and Adorno’s Dialectic of Enlightenment is undoubt¬ 
edly the most influential publication of the Critical Theory of the 
Frankfurt School, and one of its most compressed theoretical statements. 
The book was written during the Second World War, between 1939 and 
1944, and first published in 1944 in a limited edition, as a hectographic 
typescript of the Institute for Social Research, on the occasion of Friedrich 
Pollock’s fiftieth birthday. It was published as a printed edition by Querido 
of Amsterdam, the most important publisher of German writers in exile, 
in 1947. 

“What we had set out to do,” the authors wrote in the Preface, “was 
nothing less than to explain why humanity, instead of entering a truly 
human state, is sinking into a new kind of barbarism.” 1 Yet the work goes 
far beyond a mere critique of contemporary events. Historically remote 
developments, indeed, the birth of Western history and of subjectivity 
itself from the struggle against natural forces, as represented in myths, are 
connected in a wide arch to the most threatening experiences of the pre¬ 
sent. It is true that the book scarcely forms a unity in the formal sense. It 
consists of five highly unconnected chapters, together with a number of 
shorter notes, the subjects of which at first sight appear somewhat hetero¬ 
geneous. The various analyses relate to phenomena such as the way in 
which science has become detached from practical life, formalized moral¬ 
ity, an entertainment culture which has reverted to manipulation, and a 





218 Editor's Afterword 


paranoid behavioral structure, as expressed in aggressive anti-Semitism, 
which marks the limits of enlightenment. The common element which 
the authors perceive in these phenomena is the tendency toward the self- 
destruction of enlightenment’s own guiding criteria which had been inher¬ 
ent in enlightenment thought from the beginning. The historical analyses 
are intended to elucidate the present. For this reason, the two historical 
chapters, concerned with decisive thresholds of enlightenment in Homer¬ 
ic Greece and in Central Europe in the eighteenth century, are relegated 
to the status of “excurses,” although they are indispensable to the argu¬ 
ment of the book as a whole. In this way, against the background of a pre¬ 
history of subjectivity, the authors show why the National Socialist terror 
was not an aberration of modern history but was rooted deeply in the fun¬ 
damental characteristics of Western civilization. 

The self-destruction of Western reason is seen to be grounded in an 
historical and fateful dialectic of the domination of external nature, inter¬ 
nal nature, and society. Enlightenment, which split these spheres apart, is 
traced back to its mythical roots. Enlightenment and myth are not seen, 
therefore, as irreconcilable opposites but as dialectically mediated qualities 
of both real and intellectual life. “Myth is already enlightenment, and: 
enlightenment reverts to mythology .” 2 This paradox is the fundamental 
thesis of the book. Reason appears as inextricably entangled with domina¬ 
tion. Since the beginnings of history, liberation from the compulsions of 
external nature has been achieved only by introducing a power relation¬ 
ship of second degree. Both the repression of the internal nature of human 
drives, and social domination, are already at work in myth. Finally, fascism 
and the modern culture industry are the forms taken by a return of 
repressed nature. In the service of an advancing rationalization of instru¬ 
mental thought modeled on the domination of nature and serving its pur¬ 
poses, enlightened reason is progressively hollowed out until it reverts to 
the new mythology of a resurrected relationship to nature, to violence. 
This theme is summed up in the opening sentences of the book: “Enlight¬ 
enment, understood in the widest sense as the advance of thought, has 
always aimed at liberating human beings from fear and installing them as 
masters. Yet the wholly enlightened earth is radiant with triumphant 
cala miry.”’ 

The book took a considerable time to reach a wide audience, not 
least because of the peculiarly dense, allusive, and demanding nature of 



Editor’s Afterword 219 


the text. But it has now become one of the most intensively read and wide¬ 
ly discussed writings of Critical Theory. This is not the place to offer yet 
another critical or systematic discussion of the theoretical problems it rais¬ 
es. Instead, three questions relating to editorial matters, which can in part 
be clarified by reference to materials in the posthumous papers, will be 
examined in detail here. First : What were the specific individual contri¬ 
butions of the authors to the text they jointly composed? Second-. Which 
especially important theoretical implications and, in particular, internal 
revisions to Critical Theory, present but not fully worked out in the text, 
are significant for its interpretation? This will also involve clarifying where 
Dialectic of Enlightenment is to be located in the development, in par¬ 
ticular, of Horkheimer’s theoretical thinking. However useful it may be to 
divide Horkheimer’s development into “historical” periods, such an ap¬ 
proach risks hypostatizing those periods. An overprecise diagnosis of dis¬ 
continuities in the author’s thought obstructs perception of the transitions 
within it, and therefore of the preconditions of those discontinuities. This 
account should therefore be seen as a counterweight to an often over- 
schematic reception of Horkheimer’s thought, its identity, and its changes. 
The discussion will therefore take account of a number of shorter pieces 
written in the 1940s which are thematically related to Dialectic of 
Enlightenment. Third, and last, there is the question of how the textual 
variations between the printed edition of 1947 and hectographic edition of 
1944 are to be evaluated. The reasons for the prolonged resistance of the 
authors, especially Horkheimer, to a reedition of the book will also be con¬ 
sidered—reasons bound up with their own later evaluation of their work. 

1. Authorship and the “Tension Between 

Two Intellectual Temperaments” 

The authors of Dialectic of Enlightenment repeatedly stressed their 
joint responsibility for the entire work. In the Preface to the new edition 
of 1969 they write: “No one who was not involved in the writing could 
easily understand to what extent we both feel responsible for every sen¬ 
tence. We dictated long stretches together; the Dialectic derives its vital 
energy from the tension between the two intellectual temperaments which 
came together in writing it.’” 1 That the authors did not make this assertion 
for reasons of academic politics or because of other strategic and external 



220 


Editor’s Afterword 


considerations is demonstrated by the following letter from Adorno to 
Horkheimer of 2 June 1949: “Dear Max, I am enclosing copies of two crit¬ 
ical comments sent to me by their author, Karl Thieme of Basel. I imme¬ 
diately corrected the nonsensical contention that I am the author of 
‘Elements of Anti-Semitism.’ People seem unable to resist the temptation 
to keep us apart, although I wrote to Thieme in February that Dialectic of 
Enlightenment is ‘the joint work of Horkheimer and myself, to the extent 
that every sentence belongs to us both.’ Warm regards, Teddie.” 5 

The collaboration between the two was not confined to this book. 
Records from the years 1931/32 and 1938 to 1946 bear witness to intensive 
theoretical discussions. 6 Numerous essays and memoranda from that peri¬ 
od, and from the 1950s, and even as late as the 1960s, bear traces of their 
joint work, as is clear from handwritten corrections to the typescripts. 
When the two writers decided to return to Frankfurt after the end of the 
war and thought about publishing again in German journals, it is clear 
that they planned for a time to combine their works once and for all vis- 
:Vvis the public. The correspondence between the two demonstrates that 
the initiative came primarily from Adorno. In 1949 he drafted the follow¬ 
ing declaration—which, however, remained unpublished: “As our entire 
scholarly work, both theoretical and empirical, has for years been so fused 
together that our contributions cannot be separated, it seems timely for us 
to declare publicly that all our philosophical, sociological, and psycholog¬ 
ical publications should be regarded as composed by us joindy and that we 
share responsibility for them. This also applies to work signed by us indi¬ 
vidually.” 7 

Indisputable as it is that Horkheimer and Adorno successfully en¬ 
gaged over long periods in a collaboration of which Dialectic of Enlight¬ 
enment is only the best-known and historically most influential product, it 
is extremely doubtful whether both theories really form a seamless unity, 
as asserted in this declaration. Viewed from a temporal distance, the dec¬ 
laration throws less light on the actual relationship between the two 
authors than on their ideal, which they had approached so closely through 
joint work during the 1940s that the differences could largely be over¬ 
looked. With characteristic exuberance, Adorno proclaimed the complete 
identity between their views at the start of a new phase of collaboration at 
the Institut fur Sozialforschung, reestablished in Frankfurt, as if he want¬ 
ed to make permanent that period of joint writing, securing it against all 
countervailing tendencies. 



Editor’s Afterword 


221 


With the work on Dialectic of Enlightenment the thought of the two 
authors drew together more closely than before or immediately afterward. 
All the same, the book had very different functions in the individual 
developments of the two authors. Reference to the manuscripts for 
Dialectic of Enlightenment preserved in the posthumous papers of the 
authors, and to recorded comments on the question of the book’s author¬ 
ship, provides a basis for answering the more far-reaching question con¬ 
cerning theoretical agreements, differences, and developments. Regardless 
of that, however, the fact remains that the authorship of the book, which 
cannot necessarily be reduced to the act of writing the text, must ulti¬ 
mately be attributed to both together. Any motives of playing one author 
off against the other, that may have been involved in similar exercises dur¬ 
ing their lifetimes, automatically cease to apply from the present historical 
distance. 

In determining the respective contributions of the two authors to 
their communal text, two kinds of sources are available: the preliminary 
drafts contained in the posthumous papers (A) and comments transmitted 
verbally (B). 

(A) Posthumous papers 

(1) “Preface”: This is present among Horkheimer’s posthumous 
papers in a number of typed sections which bear numerous handwritten 
corrections and additions by Horkheimer and a few corrections by 
Adorno. 8 No draft is to be found in Adorno’s posthumous papers. 9 

(2) “The Concept of Enlightenment”: In the 1944 version the chap- ' 
ter has the title “Dialectic of Enlightenment,” and in the typescripts it is 
titled “Myth and Enlightenment.” Handwritten notes and text passages 
relating to this chapter by Horkheimer and, in smaller quantities, by 
Adorno, are preserved in Horkheimer’s posthumous papers; fragments of 
typewritten versions with handwritten corrections by both authors are pre¬ 
sent in similar proportions. 10 Adorno’s posthumous papers contain noth¬ 
ing relating to this chapter. 

(3) “Excursus I: Odysseus or Myth and Enlightenment”: Hork¬ 
heimer’s posthumous papers have no material on this chapter, while 
Adorno’s contain a typescript with numerous handwritten corrections and 
additions. 

(4) “Excursus II: Julietre or Enlightenment and Morality”: the type¬ 
script is in Horkheimer’s posthumous papers and has the title “Enlighten- 



222 Editor s Afterivord 


ment and Rigorism.” 11 Adorno’s posthumous papers contain nothing on 
this chapter. 

(5) “The Culture Industry: Enlightenment as Mass Deception”: 
Horkheimer’s posthumous papers contain two versions of this chapter 
with the title “The Schema of Mass Culture.” 12 The earlier of the two ver¬ 
sions is marked “Second Draft,” is dated “October 1942,” and bears the 
name Max Horkheimer (on the cover page of the notebook) and the ini¬ 
tials M.H. in his own handwriting (on the title page). This typescript has 
eighty-nine pages, the first forty-five having numerous handwritten cor¬ 
rections and additions by Horkheimer. Only the part of the chapter 
revised up to that point was included in the editions of 1944 and 1947. 
This version corresponds to the second typescript of the chapter in 
Horkheimer’s posthumous papers. In the printed version it closes with the 
note “To be continued,” which was, however, omitted from the new edi¬ 
tion of 1969. The surviving drafts for this chapter show in exemplary form 
the problems which arise when trying to draw conclusions about author¬ 
ship from the form of the material. They also give us deeper insight into 
the way the two authors worked. To anticipate the result: despite indica¬ 
tions pointing to Horkheimer, Adorno is probably the author of the first 
version (not extant) of the chapter. His posthumous papers also include 
the typescript known as the “Second Draft”; it is in triplicate, one copy 
being uncorrected, another showing a few handwritten corrections by 
Adorno—it has the handwritten initials T.W.A. on the title page—and 
the third having numerous handwritten corrections and additions by 
Adorno on the first forty-five pages. Some of these notes agree word for 
word with those of Horkheimer, while others diverge from them. Judging 
from the materials, therefore, the contributions of the two authors to the 
secondary revision were about equal. Only recorded verbal comments can 
throw light on the authorship of the first draft, and they refer to Adorno 
as the author. If the form of the materials is taken as the basis, the course 
of work on this chapter could be reconstructed as follows: after Adorno, 
on the basis of discussions and notes no longer accessible, had produced a 
“Second Draft” and hurriedly corrected it, the two authors discussed the 
typescript sentence by senteijce, at the same time inserting the corrections 
on which they agreed. Independently of each other—beforehand or after¬ 
ward—each of them made handwritten revisions to the typescript. This 
process of revision came to an end at page 45 of the typescript, for con- 



Editor’s Afterword 223 


tingent reasons. The printed version was produced as a compilation of the 
two revised versions of the first part. According to this interpretation, the 
abbreviations M.H. and T.W.A. clearly do not refer to the author but to 
the “owner” of the typescript at the time, the reviser. The insertion of 
“Max Horkheimer” as the author’s name on the cover sheet was not made 
by Horkheimer himself and appears to be a later, mistaken addition by a 
secretary. This reconstruction is the decisive reason why the Editor decid¬ 
ed not to include the second, unrevised part of the chapter in Hork- 
heimer’s posthumous writings. 13 

(6) “Elements of Anti-Semitism. Limits of Enlightenment”: No 
typescript of this chapter ready for publication is to be found in Hork- 
heimer’s posthumous papers, which do, however, contain numerous type¬ 
written fragments, mostly with handwritten corrections and additions by 
Horkheimer, together with text passages handwritten by Horkheimer. 14 
One of these handwritten texts follows directly after three pages written 
by Gretel Adorno (probably under dictation). This bundle also includes a 
few handwritten notes by Adorno and a six-page typescript by Adorno 
with the title “Draft.” It also contains reports of discussions between the 
two authors on anti-Semitism. 1 ’ Thesis VII of this chapter, not added 
until the printed version of 1947, is also to be found in several versions as 
a typescript with handwritten corrections and additions by Horkheimer. 16 
Attached to this is a three-page typescript by Adorno, “Remarks on Thesis 
VII,” with the date “Sept. 4 / 46” handwritten by him. 17 Adorno’s posthu¬ 
mous papers contain no further materials for this chapter. 

(7) “Notes and Sketches”: These are to be found in Horkheimer’s 
posthumous papers, each one usually in several typescript versions, with 
handwritten corrections by Horkheimer. 18 The parts added as “Postscripts” 
to some of the notes are missing. The aphorisms are collected in several 
bundles. Of the typescripts present here only about half were included in 
the printed version of Dialectic of Enlightenment. The notes not included 
in it 19 are brought together in two bundles, one of which is marked with 
the abbreviations M.H. and Dr. H. The other, the contents of which coin¬ 
cide largely with those of the first, is bound as a typescript and bears the 
title “Notes As an Addition to the Festschrift for Friedrich Pollock” and is 
preceded by the remark: “The notes have not been revised. They were 
excluded from the Notes and Sketches of the Festschrift as being too pro¬ 
visional.'”" The “Notes and Sketches" are the oldest parts of Dialectic of 



224 Editor’s Afterword. 


Enlightenment. Those which are dated were written in 1939, 1940, and 
1942. Adorno’s posthumous papers contain no manuscripts or typescripts 
relating to them. 

(B) Oral comments 

(1) “The authorship of the individual chapters,” writes Jurgen 
Habermas, “is by no means indivisible. Gretel Adorno once confirmed my 
conjecture, which, in any case, is obvious to a careful reader, that the title 
essay and the Sade chapter were written predominantly by Horkheimer, 
while the chapters on Odysseus and the culture industry can be attributed 

primarily to Adorno. This conclusion is based not only on stylistic differ- 

”21 

ences. Z1 

(2) More precise and comprehensive is a report by RolfTiedemann, 22 
based on a verbal communication by Adorno. It is consistent with the evi¬ 
dence from the materials of the posthumous papers. According to this 
remark the two authors dictated the chapter on the “Concept of En¬ 
lightenment” jointly. (The materials indicate a certain preponderance of 
drafts by Horkheimer.) The first excursus, “Odysseus or Myth and 
Enlightenment,” according to this report, was written almost exclusively 
by Adorno, while the second, “Juliette or Enlightenment and Morality,” 
can be attributed to the same degree to Horkheimer. The chapter “The 
Culture Industry: Enlightenment As Mass Deception” is based on a draft 
by Adorno, which, however, was so intensively revised by Horkheimer that 
the contributions of both should be regarded as practically equal. The 
reverse is the case with the chapter “Elements of Anti-Semitism: Limits of 
Enlightenment,” which was originally written by Horkheimer and inten¬ 
sively revised by Adorno. In addition, the “Preface” of 1944 refers to a con¬ 
siderable contribution by Leo Lowenthal to the formulation of the first 
three theses of this chapter. 23 According to this report the “Notes and 
Sketches” were written by Horkheimer and contain no interventions by 
Adorno. Adorno wrote the “Postscripts,” which were not revised by 
Horkheimer. 


2. Genesis of the Work: Theoretical Implications 

Whereas Dialectic of Enlightenment fits more or less seamlessly into 
Adorno’s oeuvre , in Horkheimers case it represents the most pronounced 
expression ol a phase in his intellectual development which differs sharply 



Editors Afterword. 225 


from that of the 1930s. Whereas the essays for Zeitschrift were still borne 
up by the confidence that it was possible to translate the central ideas of 
the philosophical and political Enlightenment into materialist terms and 
to realize them practically. Critical Theory now seems to hope for little 
more than to preserve the memory of those ideas in the vortex of an over¬ 
whelming process of disintegration. The critique derives its incisiveness 
from being directed against a modern concept of reason which took its 
standard from the progress of productive forces and still formed the basis 
of the most advanced critique of the relations of production which had 
existed up to then. Enlightenment thus becomes enlightenment on the 
origins and consequences of enlightenment. The change in the develop¬ 
ment of Horkheimer’s Critical Theory first shows itself in the essays “The 
Authoritarian State” and “The End of Reason” 24 and is emphatically pre¬ 
sent in Dialectic of Enlightenment. 

Since the early 1930s Horkheimer had been developing the idea of a 
materialism to be implemented in an interdisciplinary way. The journal he 
published, Zeitschrift fur Sozialforsc hung, illustrates how a critical theory of 
society guided by philosophy and underpinned historically and psycho¬ 
logically was to articulate and develop theoretically the practical interest in 
the abolition of individual suffering and social injustice. According to this 
conception, the only political groups which had the strength to bring 
about a revolutionary transformation of society were those which were 
able to make use of a comprehensive theory which employed the most 
advanced scholarly instruments. 

The form of this theory, however, and especially its philosophical 
foundations, were by no means clearly outlined. Toward the end of the 
1930s, therefore, Horkheimer planned an extensive work on dialectics in 
which he aimed to elaborate further the philosophical content of his arti¬ 
cles published in Zeitschriftfiir Sozialforschung. In a letter of 10 November 
1938 Adorno wrote to Benjamin regarding Horkheimer: “He is currently 
in an extremely overburdened state connected with his move to Scarsdale. 
In the next few years he wants to free himself from all his administrative 
work in order to devote his undivided energy to the book on the dialec¬ 
tic.” 2 ' We know about the plan for this book from a memorandum writ- 
icn by Horkheimer about the same time on “The Idea, Activities and 
1 ‘rogram of the Institut fur Sozialforschung,” which, however, was not 
published at that time. The planned work is mentioned there under the 
title of a "dialectical logic": “This is not a formalistic epistemology but a 



226 Editor's Afterword 


materialist theory of categories. The scholarly and political discussion of 
social problems makes use of categories about which differences of opin¬ 
ion arise as soon as closer definition is requested. They include concepts 
such as causality, tendency, progress, law, necessity, freedom, class, culture, 
value, ideology, dialectic, etc. [. . .] The definition of philosophical con¬ 
cepts is always at the same time a description of human society in its his¬ 
torically given embodiment. In this respect the planned book conceives of 
logic in a similar way to Hegel in his great work, not as a collection of 
abstract modes of thought but as a definition of the most important sub¬ 
stantial categories of progressive consciousness in the present time.” 26 

But it was not until spring 1941, when he moved to California, that 
the book on dialectics took shape—though not, admittedly, as a “theory 
of categories.” Nevertheless, even now Horkheimer connected his under¬ 
taking with the aim of producing a major philosophical work. In a letter 
to Pollock of 27 November 1942 he wrote about his efforts, his moments 
of success, his ambitions and his awareness of the limits of his work: “It is 
true, the subjects which I am dealing with are the most difficult ones that 
exist, but the pains you suffer by working on them are at the same time 
the greatest experience you can have in life. [. . .] There is no doubt that 
the studies, which I am undertaking now and which are really the fulfill¬ 
ment of what we have dreamt to be our raison d’etre when we were very 
young, cannot be achieved in one or two years. [.. .] If Husserl needed ten 
years to write his Logical Investigations and another thirteen years to pub¬ 
lish his Introduction to Pure Phenomenology, not to speak of more famous 
works on philosophy and related subjects, and if you take my poor forces, 
education, and routine into consideration, you will appreciate what I am 
in for. What I definitely know, however, and what makes me happy, is that 
I am really doing what I can. Ultra posse nemini obligatio. We are really on 

”27 

our way. L ' 

Even after his move from New York to California in spring 1941, 
Horkheimer was unable to withdraw to the extent he wished from the 
administrative tasks mentioned by Adorno. His original plan for a materi¬ 
alist reformulation of Hegel’s Logic was changed, suspended, or abandoned 
in favor of other considerations. However, far more responsible for his 
decision was the circumstance that Horkheimer’s intellectual position and 
self-reflection were being accompanied by a number of significant politi¬ 
cal and theoretical experiences and by outward and inward changes in his 



Editor's Afterword 227 


life. These changes concerned not merely the planned book but—not¬ 
withstanding the continuity of his philosophical intention—Horkheimer’s 
thinking as a whole. 

If one looks exclusively at the difference between “Traditional and 
Critical Theory” and Dialectic of Enlightenment, one risks misinterpreting 
these changes as an abrupt break. A closer examination of his less well- 
known publications, of the records of the history of the Institute for Social 
Research which have now been collected, and of writings from Hork¬ 
heimer’s posthumous papers from that time reveals a number of interme¬ 
diate steps and mediating links which make the transformation compre¬ 
hensible. 

In Horkheimer’s view the twofold linkage of a philosophically ori¬ 
entated, critical theory of society with traditional research, on the one 
hand, and with political action, on the other, became weaker and weaker 
during the 1930s. Adorno had originally tried to draw a sharp dividing line 
between research in individual disciplines and philosophical interpreta¬ 
tion. 28 Now, from the perspective of a sketch of a dialectical logic, or of a 
dialectic of enlightenment and myth from the point of view of the phi¬ 
losophy of history, this division cast crucial doubt on the philosophical 
self-consistency of the categories within individual disciplines. 29 Critical 
Theory could no longer draw on individual disciplines in the same way as 
previously. Finally, in the Preface to Dialectic of Enlightenment, the authors 
write on this point: “In the present collapse of bourgeois civilization not 
only the operations but the purpose of science have become dubious.” 30 
The status of Critical Theory as an immanent critique of traditional the¬ 
ory is thus also called increasingly into question. 

The full scope of the particular considerations and doubts relating to 
the purpose of science becomes clear only from the posthumous papers 
and letters of the two authors. Important examples of these doubts are 
Horkheimer’s public reflections on the philosophy of language from 1939 
onward, which are now published in Vol. 12 of his Gesammelte Schriften. 
They continue from earlier critical discussions of the ideological aspect of 
language, especially with regard to the conception of language of Logical 
Positivism, to be found in a number of essays from the 1930s. Horkheimer 
now radicalizes this earlier standpoint, making it into an aporetic critique 
of the concept itself. The critique remains aporetic because, by interpret¬ 
ing language as the preponderant relationship of the subject to the object, 



n8 Editor's Afterword 


it renders obsolete its own standard of a language which is not instru- 
mentally stunted. Language, Horkheimer writes in one of these notes 
from 1946, contains, inextricably mixed, both the power to suppress the 
particular and the strength to liberate it from that suppression, to recon¬ 
cile the particular with the universal. Both the negative and the positive 
sides of this critique appear in Dialectic of Enlightenment, but without 
mediation. The thesis of the universality of blindness implies the comple¬ 
mentary thesis that the spell could be lifted at a stroke from humans and 
things if only the redeeming word were spoken. The critique of a reason 
which reverts to myth requires as its background not only an historical 
philosophy of reconciliation but also a utopia of true language. In the 
notes from the 1940s in his posthumous papers, Horkheimer even seems 
to be aiming at a sublation of the philosophy of history in a critical phi¬ 
losophy of language. 31 

In Critical Theory, reflections of this kind on the concept of language 
and on the concept itself never have the self-satisfied character of solutions 
to the special problems of individual disciplines or of specialist philosophy. 
Rather, they are persistently seen by Horkheimer and Adorno in their rela¬ 
tionship to social theory, and indeed to historical-political experience. The 
positivist conception of language, in the view of the two authors, con¬ 
cerned merely the real function of language within monopolistic society, a 
function which it misinterpreted. Not least because language threatened to 
forfeit its capacity conceptually to transcend the existing order, the unity 
of theory and political praxis—no matter how mediated—appeared to 
them to be irremediably shattered by the beginning of the 1940s. The hope 
for a radical transformation of conditions, indeed, any confidence in the 
possibility of historical progress at all, seemed to be without substance. The 
failure of a proletarian revolution to occur in the developed capitalist soci¬ 
eties, the subjugation of workers’ organizations to a consolidated and 
expanding fascism, the manipulative power of monopolistic mass society 
in the West and of state socialism on the Stalinist model in the East—all 
these political experiences lent impetus to the transition from the Critical 
Theory of the 1930s to the critique of instrumental reason during the 
1940s, a critique whiclj became at the same time theoretically more radical 
and practically more conservative. In addition, there were internal changes 
at the Institute which went hand in hand with the theoretical transforma¬ 
tions. Especially significant in this context were, first, the break between 



Editor’s Afterword 229 


Fromm and the other members of the Institute’ 2 and, second, Adorno’s 
move from Oxford to New York, which began the phase of particularly 
intensive collaboration between him and Horkheimer. 

In the early 1930s Fromm had played a leading part in the elabora¬ 
tion of a concept of analytic social psychology by the Institute. The func¬ 
tion of psychoanalysis in this project was, above all, to identify the psy¬ 
chical forces opposing rational interests which aimed at social change, 
forces which “form, as it were, the cement without which society would 
not hold together and which contribute to the production of the great 
social ideologies in all cultural spheres. ” 33 Horkheimer drew on this sketch 
for the general conception of Studien iiber Autoritdt und Families’* accord¬ 
ing to which the authoritarian attitude mediated through family or state 
institutions should be understood as the medium by which individuals are 
adapted to the structures of social domination. Fromm took further the 
critique, contained in these studies, of Freud’s conception of himself as a 
natural scientist in his later publications concerning a critique of the psy¬ 
choanalytic theory of libido. The assumption of a basic sexual drive was to 
be replaced by the wider conception of a drive toward social connection. 
At the same time Fromm sharpened the criticism he had expressed earlier 
of Freud’s pessimistic anthropology, which he regarded as a hypostatiza- 
tion of bourgeois-patriarchal family structures. 35 

By contrast, Horkheimer’s evaluation of psychoanalysis changed in 
the opposite direction, one might say, during the same period. Against 
Fromm, whom he accused of lapsing into a psychology of common sense, 
lie adhered more emphatically than ever to the Freudian theory of drives. 
However, he now interpreted this theory in a different way, as a precise 
expression of the disempowerment of the subject, which he saw as bound 
up with the decay of liberalism. Against the theoretical categories and the 
practical, therapeutic maxims of psychoanalytic ego-psychology he 
emphasized the socially critical implications of Freud’s biological, physi¬ 
calise materialism. Freud’s pessimism regarding the possibility of subjugat¬ 
ing destructive forces, founded on the theory of drives, appeared to 
I lorkheimer all the more convincing the less he himself was able to attach 
such hopes to the abolition of domination by concrete social movements. 

How important such an interpretation of psychoanalysis—orthodox 
vet reading Freud, so to speak, against the grain—was for the conception 
til Dialectic of Enlightenment can be seen from records of t a lies between 



230 Editor’s Afterword 


Horkheimer and Adorno from 1939, which can be regarded as preliminary 
discussions on the work they were planning together. 36 It appears that at 
times the authors had considered planning their joint work entirely or 
partly as a critique of psychoanalysis. This is indicated negatively by a for¬ 
mulation concerning the revision of such a plan: “Instead of the orienta¬ 
tion to analysis, I propose orienting the book toward currently outlawed 
concepts like that of the saboteur.” 37 In these discussions psychoanalysis is 
seen, on the one hand, as a variety of positivist thinking ultimately tend¬ 
ing toward a false reconciliation between the mutilated individual and the 
social agencies to which it owes its suffering. On the other hand, howev¬ 
er, the psychoanalytic concepts spring from an Enlightenment tradition of 
asserting truth against illusions and taboos, on which the authors wished 
to draw. Critical Theory was to subject the scientific concepts of “bour¬ 
geois” thought to a change of function corresponding to Marx’s procedure 
with regard to classical political economy. Those concepts contained stan¬ 
dards by which their failure to be realized in existing society was to be 
measured. They were to be stripped of their illusory ahistorical appearance. 
In the case of psychoanalysis, this applied, for example, to the concept of 
the individual: “The Progressive moment of analysis consists in the con¬ 
tributions it has made to an understanding of the individual as an arena. 
It might be said that the analytic categories, however distorted, are con¬ 
ducive to the insight that the individual itself is ‘a history of class strug¬ 
gles.’” 38 

However, in Dialectic of Enlightenment itself the dispute with psy¬ 
choanalysis is carried on much more behind the scenes. It is present in 
central ideas of the book even though it may not be visible at first sight. 
The psychoanalytic category of the return of the repressed, for example, 
itself returns in the dialectic of the domination of nature, in the thesis that: 
“the subjugation of everything natural to the sovereign subject culminates 
in the domination of what is blindly objective and natural. This tendency 
levels out all the antitheses of bourgeois thought, especially that between 
moral rigor and absolute amorality.” 39 The proximity of Horkheimer’s and 
Adorno’s argumentation to psychoanalytic theory and empirical practice is 
unmistakable, above all, in the chapters on the culture industry and anti- 
Semitism. The culture industry is the regression, operating with enlight¬ 
enment means in restricted form, from the effort of cultural sublimation. 
In anti-Semitism this regression reveals its deadly seriousness. It is based 



Editor’s Afterword 231 


on the triumph of the projective manipulation of the world over the dif¬ 
ferentiations and inhibitions of rational thought and behavior: “Impulses 
which are not acknowledged by the subject and yet are his are attributed 
to the object: the prospective victim.”' 10 

In their Preface the authors stress the close connection between the 
chapter on anti-Semitism and the studies in social psychology of the 
Institute for Social Research during the 1940s, which were published in 
the five volumes of Studies in Prejudiced The chapter “Elements of Anti- 
Semitism” should therefore be read as the historical, philosophical, and 
theoretical background to the empirical studies on prejudice, which in 
their turn were an attempt to translate the theory into quantitative inves¬ 
tigations. Moreover, Adorno refers expressly to this connection in an essay 
from 1968; “The chapter ‘Elements of Anti-Semitism’ in Dialectic of 
Enlightenment , which Horkheimer and I wrote jointly in the strictest 
sense, that is to say, we literally dictated it together, strongly influenced my 
contribution to the investigations carried out later with the Berkeley 
Public Opinion Study Group. The Authoritarian Personality was the liter¬ 
ary outcome of those investigations. [. . .] ‘Elements of Anti-Semitism’ 
placed racial prejudice theoretically in the context of an objectively ori¬ 
ented, critical theory of society. Admittedly, in contrast to a certain eco¬ 
nomic orthodoxy, we did not take an aloof attitude toward psychology but 
gave it its due place in our sketch as a moment of enlightenment. Never, 
however, did we leave any doubt as to the precedence of objective factors 
over psychology. [. . .] We regarded social psychology as a subjective medi¬ 
ation of the objective social system: without its mechanisms subjects could 
not have been kept in their place.”' 12 

Despite Adorno’s stress on the connection between empirical work 
and the general theory of anti-Semitism, the gulf between the two, mea¬ 
sured by Horkheimer’s original program for an interdisciplinary material¬ 
ism, cannot be overlooked . 43 Unlike earlier attempts to mediate between 
philosophical, sociological, and psychological knowledge, Horkheimer 
and Adorno contended that the split between these conceptual spheres 
corresponded to an actual breach between individual and society and 
therefore would be merely short-circuited by a purely conceptual ap¬ 
proach. This had the result, however, that their evaluation of anti-Semi¬ 
tism was not wholly consistent in both areas. For example, whereas the 
empirical investigations into the authoritarian character limit its destruc- 



232 Editor’s Afterword 


tive potential by conceding the possibility of a nonrepressive education 
within existing society, the “Elements” chapter emphatically relates it to 
“the nature of the dominant reason and of the world corresponding to its 
image.” 44 An end to prejudice could therefore be expected only from a rad¬ 
ical break with the logic of the civilizing process up to now. In the empir¬ 
ical studies, therefore, the counterpart to the authoritarian, intolerant, and 
prejudice-ridden personality is represented by a subject type which, with¬ 
in the framework of Dialectic of Enlightenment, appears to be almost inex¬ 
tricably entangled with the principles of self-preservation, of the domina¬ 
tion of internal and external nature. 

In the extracts cited above from the report on the studies of the 
1940s, Adorno points to a second strand of theory which, compared to 
psychoanalysis, was still more important for Dialectic of Enlightenment-. 
economics, meaning the critique of Marx and his successors. But howev¬ 
er decisive the link to the critique of political economy may have been, no 
less characteristic was its relegation to the level of the merely implicit. This 
was done still more thoroughly than in the case of psychoanalysis. Where¬ 
as, in the discussions of 1939 already cited, the authors were still consider¬ 
ing an historical-materialist reformulation of the psychoanalytic concept of 
the individual as a “history of class struggles,” the explanatory principle 
underlying the Marxian concept of history is largely absent from Hork- 
heimer’s and Adorno’s historical-philosophical sketch. Its place is taken by 
the more general antagonism between domination of nature and enslave¬ 
ment to it. 

The authors attempt to show how reason, having regressed to instru¬ 
mental rationality, has combined in the present era with the domination 
of nature and social control to form a quasimythical compulsion. In the 
modern varieties of totalitarianism, only the always-calamitous inter- 
twinement of reason and power is manifested. The historical phenomenon 
of fascism no longer appears, as in the orthodox Marxist view, as the last 
political stage of monopoly capitalism but is related in manifold ways to 
overarching structures of bourgeois thought and action. National 
Socialism, which needed military expansion and terror to achieve internal 
stability yet was bound to miss its goal by using these means, is interpret¬ 
ed as an unstable barbaric interlude on the way to the historically and 
generically irrevocable goal of the “administered world.” 

This does not mean, however, that the Marxian approach compris- 



Editor’s Afterword 233 


ing a dialectic of productive forces and relations of production has been 
simply replaced by a general analysis of technological rationality. Rather, 
an abundance of links to the Marxist critique of political economy still 
remain. To give an example from “Elements of Anti-Semitism” just quot¬ 
ed: the role of the Jews is interpreted there not least as a socioeconomic 
function of the distribution sphere and its loss of power in monopoly cap¬ 
italism, and anti-Semitism as a projective obfuscating of the nonequivalent 
exchange of equivalents in the sale of labor power. Such an interpretation 
is based on the continuing attempts of the Institut during the late 1930s to 
redefine the concept of monopoly capitalism and, on that basis, the con¬ 
cept of fascism. A decisive influence on Dialectic of Enlightenment in this 
respect was Pollock’s thesis that fascism and bureaucratic socialism were 
variants of a new order of capitalism which differed fundamentally both 
from earlier private capitalism and from modern monopoly capitalism, 
and which he called “state capitalism.” 45 In a contribution which follows 
this Afterword, Willem van Reijen and Jan Bransen discuss in more detail 
this thesis and its importance for the discussions at the Institute for Social 
Research. 

The pessimism regarding the possibility of socialist politics domi¬ 
nant in Horkheimer’s thought since the early 1940s has its economic foun¬ 
dation in the theory of state capitalism, its political foundation in the con¬ 
nected theory of “rackets” as a “basic form of domination." 46 According to 
Pollock’s thesis there is in state capitalism no structural conflict between 
political objectives and economic necessities. In the “command economy” 
the productive forces and the laws of the market are stripped of their 
autonomy and thus of their explosive potential. The planned economy has 
become inevitable; the only decisive political question is whether it will be 
democratic or totalitarian, that is, the question as to how access to the 
administrative control of the economy and thus to the new ruling class is 
regulated. This provides the starting point for Horkheimer’s theory of 
rackets, according to which social power, in keeping with its own eco¬ 
nomic principle, is transformed from the form mediated by exchange, via 
the form conferred on it by economic monopolies, into direct domination 
by force. By rackets Horkheimer means the groups, cliques, councils, 
boards, or committees formed in the most diverse epochs whose social 
function is largely supplanted by the imperative to preserve and increase 
their own power. The theory of rackets, which grew out of the discussions 



234 Editor’s Afterword 


on the applicability of Marxian theory to the present form of society, is 
first of all an attempt to escape the myth of a revolutionary subject with¬ 
out falling back into illusory cultural criticism behind the screen of a cri¬ 
tique of political economy. Beyond that, it aims to construct a theory of 
power which reveals the historically limited model of the rule of liberalism 
regulated by market laws to be a special case of the monopolization of 
advantages on the basis of social performance. 

For Horkheimer, the topical application of the racket theory was to 
be found in the transfer of traditional class antagonism to the field of 
international relations, on the one hand, and to institutionally determined 
antitheses within the classes themselves, on the other. In postliberal capi¬ 
talism, according to this theory, new forms of conflict conceal the basic 
contradiction between capital and labor. With state capitalism mecha¬ 
nisms have come into being to mitigate the economic crises which earlier 
had the potential to disintegrate the system. In this way the economic 
“base” loses its role in supporting the social totality. National Socialism 
and bureaucratic socialism or, more generally, a new “integral statism,” can 
no longer be described only in terms of economic basic categories. Political 
analysis takes on greater importance to the extent that liberalism appears 
as an historical episode, after the downfall of which society reverts to direct 
methods of domination no longer mediated via the market. The funda¬ 
mental economic factors leading to crisis are tending to become control¬ 
lable by measures of state intervention, which can range from compen¬ 
satory welfare legislation to overt terror. 

This new form of the “primacy of politics” does not leave untouched 
the concept of the political itself, in comparison to its function in general 
capitalism. Above all, it should not be confused with the positivist substi¬ 
tution ofihistorical, political, or psychological laws for economic ones. In 
a fragment written by Horkheimer about 1942, he describes politics in 
postliberalism as an illusion which affects not only the dominated masses 
but the political agents themselves: “Politics, the rediscovery of which in 
the Renaissance was a theoretical advance, has become, in thinking under 
monopoly, even more an ideological category than the laws of the market 
under liberalism: with its aid the surface is hypostatized. The dominated 
masses attribute world events to politics. They hear the appeal and the 
decree, they are informed about the lives of the powerful, which consist of 
facts in no need of theory; the masses experience^ the direct consequences 



Editor’s Afterword 235 


of political actions, of negotiations between rackets, they feel the effects of 
emergency aid, of rising prices, of the new job, of war, and perceive big 
politics as fate and nature just as they earlier perceived the economic 
depression. And the protagonists share this belief: They know that they 
hold key positions; just as the entrepreneur mistook his business ventures, 
calculations and speculations, that he undertook on the basis of the eco¬ 
nomic cycle, for freedom, the presidents of unions and governments mis¬ 
construe their decisions as the beginnings of causal chains. Government, 
however, must bow to the same necessities as buying and selling: to the 
requirements of the reproduction of society within the power relationships 
as they are. This is not so different in the two periods. The opacity of the 
market which gave rise to the self-deception about freedom merely ex¬ 
pressed the fact that the relationships of entrepreneurs among themselves 
were not rational but were governed by individual self-assertion. Today the 
struggles take place within much stronger groups, amid movements of 
highly concentrated masses of capital. The governments are executive 
mechanisms which cannot rationally understand the actual state of the 
forces on which they depend, but merely feel their concrete effects .” 47 

The state capitalist “primacy of politics” can be understood as a per¬ 
version of the socialist idea of the planned economy which was supposed 
to replace the anarchy of private appropriation by rational decisions in the 
generalizable interest of society as a whole. What is expressed in fascism, 
in especially brutal form, is merely what characterizes democratic state 
capitalism as well as bureaucratic socialism of the Soviet kind: the end of 
liberal, legal agencies of mediation under the power politics of competing 
ruling cliques. These groups take over the now necessary planning of the 
economic process, whether that process is still democratically legitimized 
or is already an almost openly planned and organized piracy. 

The starting point of the racket theory is therefore an analysis of 
contemporary society as a conglomerate of organized groups under the 
leadership of bureaucratic or quasi bureaucratic elites. The relationship of 
a clique to its clientele is structured on the principle of protection in ex¬ 
change for obedience. Since the individual rackets no longer even pretend 
to pursue intellectual ideals or objectives relating to society as a whole, the 
traditional ideologies, which used to make particularist interests appear 
universal, also disappear. They are replaced by the unashamedly pragmat¬ 
ic objectives of manipulation and the preservation of power. The ability to 



236 Editor’s Afterword 


impose these objectives decides the selection and careers of the leading 
personnel within a racket. 

Beyond that, this approach aims to produce an historically general- 
izable theory of relations of class and domination: “Under the conditions 
of monopolism and total domination,” Horkheimer writes in 1943, “the 
permanence of oppression, its parasitic nature, becomes manifest. Every 
ruling class has always been monopolistic to the extent that it excluded the 
overwhelming majority of human beings. The structure corresponded to 
that of competing rackets. Even the socially useful functions which the 
ruling classes used to perform have been transformed into weapons against 
the oppressed population and against competing groups within their own 
class. The racket pattern, which used to be typical of the behavior of rulers 
toward the ruled, is now representative of all human relationships, even 
those within the working class. The difference between the racket within 
capital and the racket within labor lies in the fact that in the capitalist 
racket the whole class profits, whereas the racket of labor functions as a 
monopoly only for its leaders and for the worker-aristocracy. The laboring 
masses are the objects of both forms; they merely have to pay for the whole 
system. The similarity between the most highly respected historical for¬ 
mations, such as the medieval hierarchies, to the modern rackets is obvi¬ 
ous. The concept of the racket applies to both large and small enterprises; 
they all struggle for the largest possible share of added value. In this 
respect the highest capitalist corporations resemble the small interest 
groups which operate among the lowliest strata of the population, both 
within and outside the legal boundaries. [...] A true sociology of the rack¬ 
et as the living element of the ruling class in history could serve both a 
political and a scientific purpose. It could help to clarify the goal of polit¬ 
ical praxis: a society with a pattern different to that of the racket, a rack¬ 
et-less society. It could contribute to defining the idea of democracy which 
still leads a shadowy life in the heads of human beings. [. . .] Expressed in 
scientific terms, a more appropriate philosophy of history could evolve 
from the sociology of the racket. [. . .] The modern concept contributes 
to describing social relationships of the past. ‘The human anatomy is the 
key to the anatomy of t^te ape.’ ”‘ i8 

The political and economic basis for a theory of rackets and of state 
capitalism was developed within the Institute primarily by Horkheimer 
and Pollock; dissenting voices were not lacking among their colleagues, 



Editor’s Afterword 237 


particularly those of Neumann and Kirchheimer. Although Horkheimer 
adhered fundamentally to the thesis, the criticism may have retarded early 
publication of his reflections on racket theory. Adorno’s contribution, 49 
too, remained unpublished. These beginnings of the theory were not elab¬ 
orated in detail later. 

They were, however, the decisive factor in the transition from the 
earlier form of Critical Theory, represented by the essays in Zeitschrift fur 
Sozialforschung during the 1930s, to an historical and generic critique of 
instrumental reason, of which Dialectic of Enlightenment is the most im¬ 
portant document. But the specific economic and political arguments do 
not appear, or appear only in rudimentary form, in this book. Never¬ 
theless, they provide the background of social theory against which the sci¬ 
entific, moral, cultural, and psychological phenomena of the self-destruc¬ 
tion of enlightenment were interpreted. Since the authors limit the appli¬ 
cation of the Marxian categories essentially to liberalism—which, espe¬ 
cially with regard to the, at least partial, achievement of bourgeois free¬ 
dom, is presented as a transient episode in a history of power always dom¬ 
inated by the law of the racket—it is understandable why those categories 
are pushed into the background in Dialectic of Enlightenment. Racket the¬ 
ory, of course, has as its occasion and subject the fate of the once opposi¬ 
tional workers’ organizations. 50 It shows how far the class struggle had 
been transformed under monopoly capitalism into a system of transac¬ 
tions between monopolistic units and thus into a medium of adaptation. 


3. Textual Variants. Theoretical Revisions and Misgivings 
Regarding the Dissemination of the Theory 

The reason for the decision initially not to commit Dialectic of En¬ 
lightenment to print was certainly not only the slender financial means and 
uncertain academic, political, and geographical future of the Institute in 
the mid-i940s. This is indicated by the facts that the hectographic edition 
was limited to about 500 copies and distributed only to specific recipients; 
that an American edition was not seriously considered; and, finally, that 
the text for the printed edition published three years later was subjected to 
thorough revision. None of this is surprising in the case of authors who 
were always concerned to ensure that their own theoretical utterances or 
those of others never became entirely detached from their systematic, his- 



238 Editor’s Afterword 


toricaJ, and social contexts. All the more revealing from the historical 
standpoint, therefore, are the revisions to the content and terminology of 
the text undertaken not only in that first period but also more than two 
decades later. In this edition, these changes, when they go beyond mere 
orthographic corrections and minor changes of wording, are indicated in 
the form of footnotes. These were produced on the basis of comparisons 
between the different editions (1944,1947, and 1969) made by Willem van 
Reijen and Jan Bransen. In their commentary, which follows this After¬ 
word, they relate the textual changes (between 1944 and 1947) to the evo¬ 
lution of the economic and political theory underlying them. 

Clearly, there are a number of different motives for the later inter¬ 
ventions in the text. That becomes clear if the textual variants are classi¬ 
fied. The following groups of revised formulations can be distinguished. 

(1) Formulations which tie the text directly to its time of origin. 
These include editorial explanations (“When, two years ago, we began this 
work . . .” 51 ), qualifications reflecting contemporary history (“fascist pre¬ 
sent” 52 ), or overly specialized historical on geographical examples (“The 
German and Russian pavilions at the Paris World Exposition seemed of 
the same essence,” 53 “the monumental buildings of monopoly, the sky¬ 
scrapers of Wrigley and Rockefeller” 54 ). 

(2) Obscure or elaborate formulations which required stylistic sim¬ 
plification or unraveling, but without replacing theoretically or politically 
loaded terms (for example, “the official spokesmen [. . .] are repudiating 
the thought to which they owe their place in the sun” becomes “the offi¬ 
cial spokesmen [. . .] are liquidating the theory to which they owe their 
place in the sun” 55 ). 

Terminological changes based on theoretical considerations, such as 
the replacement of the expression “mass culture” originally used by “the 
culture industry,” can be included in this group. 56 

(3) Formulations in which monopoly capitalism, totalitarianism, and 
fascism were equated too indiscriminately. In these cases what had been 
said in general terms about “class society,” “monopolism,” or the “totali¬ 
tarian order” is made more concrete and is restricted to “fascism” or 
“German fascism.” 57 There is clearly also an intention to soften excessive¬ 
ly crass judgments on Western democracy or liberalism. 58 Two formula¬ 
tions referring especially critically and inclusively to Jewish functionaries 
and Christian churches can also he included in this gfoup. 5 ' 3 



Editor’s Afterword 239 


(4) Formulations in which certain theoretically, historically, or polit¬ 
ically loaded terms from Marxian or Marxist theory were used. This group 
not only preponderates quantitatively—it includes more than half the 
amended passages—but is also far more interesting historically than the 
others. The politico-economic terms are replaced as a rule by neutral eco¬ 
nomic, sociological, or moral-practical expressions—for example, “prole¬ 
tarians” by “workers,” 60 “capitalist” by “entrepreneur,” 61 “throughout class 
history” by “until today,” 62 “exploitation” by “suffering.” 63 More than half 
of these offending formulations include a single concept, that of “monop¬ 
oly” (and, again, the great majority of these cases is found in the chapter 
on “The Culture Industry”). 

One important motive for such reformulations was undoubtedly the 
concern to avoid making political enemies, which might possibly have had 
threatening consequences for the Institute or individual members of it. As 
early as the 1930s Horkheimer had had serious doubts about the lasting 
sustainability of a liberal right of asylum in face of opposition from inter¬ 
est groups involved in domestic or foreign politics. The terminological 
changes, therefore, do not reflect a single break but rather a continuum in 
Horkheimer’s thinking. Even the terminology from this period relating to 
the proletariat and the revolution was characteristically modified in the 
publications of the Zeitschrift. M And even as late as the 1950s and 1960s in 
postwar Germany he constantly anticipated the possibly fatal conse¬ 
quences of ill-considered utterances; indeed, he even feared the return of 
a situation in which people would be able to communicate only, as it were, 
in whispers. 6 ’ 

Such “translations” of Marxist concepts in keeping with the tradition 
of philosophical and political enlightenment were all the more natural 
since Critical Theory, starting with its name, represented a reaction to the 
repudiation of Marxian theory by the authoritarian forms of socialism. 
The use of language, and reference to the “classics,” especially under inte¬ 
gral statism of the Soviet kind, had, in the authors’ view, lost any truly crit¬ 
ical power and, indeed, had itself become a means of repression. For this 
reason Critical Theory not only was able to draw on the established disci¬ 
plines and concepts of scholarly tradition but also considered the “ten¬ 
dencies opposed to official science ” 66 to have become obsolete. For, as they 
write, alluding to Soviet Marxism, “They suffer the fate which has always 
been reserved for triumphant thought. If it voluntarily leaves behind its 



240 Editor’s Afterword 


critical element to become a mere means in the service of an existing order, 
it involuntarily tends to transform the positive cause it has espoused into 
something negative and destructive.” 67 This interpretation is fundamental 
to Dialectic of Enlightenment but was not carried out in the book itself. In 
his “Remarks on Thesis VII [of “Elements of Anti-Semitism”],” Adorno 
noted critically in 1946 that in Dialectic of Enlightenment the authoritari¬ 
an “ticket thinking” present in Bolshevism was neglected: “The thesis 
applies there in its classical form. [. . .] This whole process of the extermi¬ 
nation of humanity in the name of socialism was untouched in the 
Fragments . 68 It is, however, essential to an understanding of the situation 
as a whole and can no longer be ignored.” 69 As early as “The Authoritarian 
State” Horkheimer had criticized bureaucratic socialism as the most 
advanced form of authoritarian rule, and there was no lack, subsequently, 
of unmistakable statements regarding Soviet Marxism by both authors. 
But they never produced a comprehensive critique of that system and 
therefore were constantly in fear of being confused with it. 

Independently of such questions concerning the prejudiced recep¬ 
tion the book might receive, however, there was also a more narrowly the¬ 
oretical motive. The change in their evaluation of Marxian theory and its 
applicability to state capitalism and integral statism, on the one hand, and 
of economic and political reality, of the political tendencies and the 
chances of changing them, on the other, needed to be reflected in the ter¬ 
minology. The elimination of fascist rule in Central Europe as a result of 
the war required a redefinition of certain terms which earlier had implic¬ 
itly equated totalitarianism, fascism, and monopoly capitalism; and the 
regular focus of the diagnosis of the present on “monopoly” in the earlier 
version of the text suggested an indiscriminately economistic or subjec¬ 
tivist approach which stood in flat contradiction to the acuity of their 
analysis elsewhere: economic monopoly could neither causally explain the 
dialectic of enlightenment in its full breadth nor identify the historical 
subject of the fateful history of the species. And, not least important, it 
was necessary to address the thesis that the monopoly capitalism which 
had existed up to then was , ; n the process of undergoing a qualitative 
change to become “state capitalism.” In this respect the racket theory held 
an ambiguous position. On the one hand, the identification of fascist rule 
as an unmediated form of power and at the same time the legitimate heir 
of bourgeois monopoly Capitalism 7 ' 1 prepared the way for a generalized 



Editor’s Afterword 241 


racket theory of domination which went beyond the limited model of the 
criminal gang. On the other, however, such a theory was in danger—as 
Horkheimer himself was aware' 1 —of merely replacing an oversimplified 
economic concept (“monopoly”) by an oversimplified political one (“rack¬ 
ets”). Probably for this reason, the textual changes affected both terms: 
“monopoly” is replaced by “the influential clique” 72 and “rackets” by “the 
completely organized system of domination.” 73 

Despite this critical distance, at the time of the book’s first publica¬ 
tion in printed form the authors continued to regard themselves as 
Marxists. In the report of a discussion in 1946 about the planned contin¬ 
uation of their joint work after the completion of the printed version, 
Horkheimer writes: “We see this moment of unity [in the analysis of pol¬ 
itics and philosophy] in holding fast to the radical impulses of Marxism 
and, in fact, of the entire Enlightenment—for the rescue of the Enlighten¬ 
ment is our concern—but without identifying ourselves with any empir¬ 
ically existing party or group. Our position is, in a sense, a materialism 
which dispenses with the prejudice of regarding any moment of existing 
material reality as directly positive. The paradox, the dialectical secret of a 
true politics, consists in choosing a critical standpoint which does not 
hypostatize itself as the positive standpoint. [. . .] [W]e are [. . .] Stoics 
because there is no party.” 74 

Adorno objected to this stoic conception of oneself on the grounds 
that it was inappropriate to an advanced technology which could now 
eliminate all material poverty. His counterproposal for their continuing 
work was, however, no closer to the reality of politics. For he went back to 
the original conception of a materialist theory of categories dating from 
1938. Political and economic questions should not be taken as the starting 
point for philosophical analyses, as Horkheimer envisaged; rather, “one 
should begin by analyzing logical and epistemological categories. The task 
would be to subject categories like concept, judgment, subject, substan¬ 
tiality, essence, and suchlike to the kind of examination that was already 
begun in the Fragments. This should include not only purely logical but 
also historical and social discussions. The historical and social substance of 
the categories and their present status should be determined from their 
immanent meanings, and such an analysis would lead on to a judgment 
on the correct and false moments of the categories concerned.” 73 

The two authors failed to agree, however, on the question of the 



242 Editor’s Afterword 


proper relationship between political and philosophical analysis. Hork- 
heimer, from the outset, placed greater emphasis on the political. To which 
Adorno responded: “What you fear is a heavy chunk of professorial phi¬ 
losophy. My fear is that the leap from logic to reality will be made in a 
dogmatic or analogistic way .” 76 Perhaps this dissent should be seen as one 
of the—undoubtedly numerous—reasons why the planned continuation 
of Dialectic of Enlightenment did not materialize. Horkheimer put the 
emphasis on the question of how his intention to “rescue the Enlight¬ 
enment ” 77 was to be reconciled with the radical nature of a self-referential 
critique of reason: “I should like to see one main theme, e.g.: What can 
theory do in the present situation? What is its place? Or: How can the 
abstractness of the concept be overcome by the concept itself ?” 78 Adorno, 
for his part, came down much more squarely on the negative side of this 
aporia: “[. . .] reason is its own sickness .” 79 

In this way Dialectic of Enlightenment also remained a fragment in 
the sense that its planned continuation did not come about. It formed the 
indispensable starting point and reference point for Horkheimer’s thought 
during the two decades after his return from emigration . 80 But this refer¬ 
ence point remained latent, and of uncertain usefulness. On the one hand, 
the epochs of fascism and postwar democracy in Western countries, 
despite their deep-seated differences, were, for Horkheimer, connected by 
a continuum: the preponderance of bureaucratic structures over the free 
subject, which they buried beneath them. On the other, he saw in Western 
democracies very serious possibilities of opposing this tendency, which he 
regarded as irreversible in the history of the species; to preserve the scope 
for freedom which, despite everything, still existed, was for him a practi¬ 
cal postulate. To express this contradiction, the resolution of which he did 
not believe possible, he coined, and applied to himself, the notion of a 
complementarity of theoretical pessimism and practical optimism . 81 

This dichotomy is also present in a similar form in the relationship 
of Critical Theory to science. The rejection of established and departmen¬ 
talized science announced in the Preface to Dialectic of Enlightenment is 
anything but consistently carried through in the book itself, in which the 
authors continue frequently to base their argument, whether affirmatively 
or critically, on the findings of individual disciplines. Irrespective of the 
philosophical reflection which rejects both sense data and judgments as 
mediated immediacies, they concede even here that “practically fruitful 



Editor’s Afterword 243 


scientific enterprises call for an unimpaired capacity for definition, for 
shutting down thought at a point designated by social need, for demar¬ 
cating a field which is then investigated in the minutest detail without 
passing outside it.” 82 From this point of view, the empirical research pro¬ 
jects which the Institute had planned from the early 1940s and carried out 
until the end of that decade belie the radical nature of their rejection of 
science. And after their return to Frankfurt both the reestablishment of 
the Institut and Horkheimer’s and Adorno’s intensive academic work and 
involvement in educational politics during the 1950s and 1960s bear wit¬ 
ness to their continuing and vigorous confidence in the enlightening 
potential of science. Nevertheless, all these concessions to the “business” 
of science are subject to a general reservation: science, Horkheimer writes 
in one of his notebooks in the early 1950s, is inherently subject to “stan¬ 
dards adapted to the purpose of domination,” 83 and the true philosophy 
which aims to resist the negative course of the world must beware of 
secretly wishing to submit to scientific standards. 

The question whether a new edition of Dialectic of Enlightenment 
should be published did not arise until the early 1960s—up to then copies 
of the first edition had still been available. At that time the initial decision 
on such matters was in the responsibility of Pollock. In January 1961 he 
compiled, for the first time, a list of “problematic” passages and expres¬ 
sions in the text and noted: “Reacquaintance with Dialectic of Enlighten¬ 
ment leads distressingly to two conclusions: How many significant ideas 
are contained in it, and in an adequate and convincing form; and how lit¬ 
tle or, rather, how much less than fifteen years ago, one can say without 
incurring the fury of the mob. [. . .] My question marks and crosses pre¬ 
dominantly indicate misgivings about the too-unguarded use of language. 
Only in a few places did I think it necessary to express doubts, as an ‘ex¬ 
pert,’ on the correctness of the content. All in all, I come to the dismal 
conclusion that the content of Dialectic is not suitable for mass circulation. 
However, individual chapters, somewhat amended here and there, should 
be republished in the planned collection.” 84 It is reported that Adorno did 
not share such misgivings to the same extent as Horkheimer and that he 
tried, vainly at first, to persuade the latter to agree to a largely unamend¬ 
ed new edition. The particular reasons for Horkheimer’s hesitation have 
not been recorded; but they were, no doubt, political concerns which 
probably arc approximately reflected in Pollock’s formulations. That Ador- 



244 Editor’s Afterword 


no, too, shared such misgivings, at least in part, is shown by a draft he pro¬ 
duced for a letter, written in summer 1962, in which he and Horkheimer 
jointly replied to Marcuse, who had emphatically supported the idea of a 
new edition. In this draft he writes: “The situation is simply that, on the 
one hand, there are certain hazardous formulations, especially concerning 
organized religion, that we are afraid about, should the book achieve the 
circulation which is now to be expected; on the other hand, we wish to 
keep the text intact and not to water it down because of any concerns and 
considerations. [. . .] One gradually grows too old to be able to pay over¬ 
much attention to matters of security. The ‘pro’ for republication is there¬ 
fore beginning to tilt the scales against the ‘contra.’” 85 However, in the 
final text of the letter redrafted by Horkheimer, this is replaced by the gen¬ 
eral formulation: “The well-known reasons which had deterred us from 
agreeing to the second edition become less weighty with each year that we 
get older.” 86 

By now an Italian translation had been ready for printing for some 
time—the authors had agreed to its production, by Renato Solmi, as early 
as 1955; 87 it finally came out in 1966. In this text, and in line with the pre¬ 
ceding misgivings, a considerable number of changes were made, which 
Pollock justified in a draft for a preface, written for Horkheimer and 
Adorno, and certainly after agreeing to the content with them. Because 
this draft clearly characterizes the authors’ political self-understanding at 
this time, as well as their view of the context of the book’s production, it 
will be quoted in full here: 

The German text of Dialectic of Enlightenment is a fragment. About the end 
of the war it was intended to form the introduction to the theory of history and 
society which we had conceived during the National Socialist period of rule. The 
attempt to use Hitler’s regime to accelerate the regression to the bourgeois-indi¬ 
vidualistic world, because the power struggles in the new period of world history, 
in both war and peace, require an absence of economic and administrative fric¬ 
tion which is difficult to achieve under the conditions of democracy, had failed. 
The rapacious nationalism of the East had not been eliminated by its crazy half- 
brother in the West; rather, war had unleashed developments in Asia, Africa, and 
South America from Which nationalism finally benefits. Life in Europe is threat¬ 
ened by a new migration of peoples which overshadows the earlier one in violence 
and terror. If physical resistance finally gives way, at least something of its capac¬ 
ity for experience, for reflection and critical consciousness shall live on, just as the 
critique of power lived on at the end of Antiquity. ' 



Editor’s Afterword 245 


That was the mood in which the fragment was written—and we do not dis¬ 
claim it today. However, instead of developing the theory further we moved back 
to Germany to try to assist by teaching, despite the dark horizon. Meanwhile the 
calamity which seems to hang over Europe has been symbolically concretized in 
the divided Germany. In the Eastern regions people live like slaves, while in the 
West they subordinate everything else to the will to protect themselves from such 
slavery. Culture threatens to become a mere means. That is why we believe the 
book to be still topical today. But the terror inflicted by the National Socialist 
murderers in the 1940s lives on in the more up-to-date and historically more pow¬ 
erful form which the tyrants of the Eastern mass empires disseminate today. 

This has affected the content of the book with no intervention from us. The 
terminology used in our critique of totalitarian terror has hardened through its use 
by terror’s representatives in the East to a litany which contradicts what it once 
meant. No word is immune to its own history. We sincerely thank the translator, 
Dr Renato Solmi, for the dedication to which his work bears witness. As far as we 
can judge, he has masterfully fulfilled our request to convey the book’s meaning. 

Our analysis of cultural phenomena from the 1930s and 1940s, which we in 
no way intend to moderate, is supplemented by our hope that the overthrow of 
the totalitarian Nazi rule has awakened forces which, despite everything, will 
resist the temptation which will not fail to emerge one day in every country. 
Through its theme, our book points out the regressive tendencies which arise 
from economic, social, and cultural progress itself. We know of no linguistic 
sphere which contains a more sensitive organ for this task than the Italian. 88 

Solmi responded by advising urgently against most of the textual changes 
and asked Horkheimer, as the latter writes to Adorno, “almost on bended 
knee,” “to omit the substantive discussion [in the Preface], because it 
would unleash political controversy.” 89 Horkheimer, however, attributed 
these misgivings mainly to concerns about the political tendency of the 
publishing house. The authors therefore insisted on the textual changes, 
but dispensed with the substantive preface on the grounds that “it does no 
good to encourage the reader to start searching for changes.” 90 In the 
event, no Italian reviewer noticed the changes to begin with; they were dis¬ 
covered only about ten years later and subjected, in some cases, to politi¬ 
cal debate. 91 In Germany, however, twenty-nine amended passages were 
painstakingly listed as early as 1967, in an article in a Frankfurt students’ 
newspaper, refuting the assurances in the prefaces that no essential 
changes had been made. Annoyance at what was taken to be an abandon¬ 
ment of Marxism was unavoidable: “What is left of Critical Theory’s claim 



246 Editor’s Afterword 


to be critical if its sting is removed in the way indicated by the Italian edi¬ 
tion?” 92 

This experience with the Italian edition is unlikely, on the one hand, 
to have exactly encouraged the authors to bring out a new German edition 
but probably did, on the other hand, contribute to the fact that, when the 
new edition finally appeared in 1969, it was largely spared further inter¬ 
ventions in the content. A year earlier, in his “Letter to S. Fischer Verlag,” 
Horkheimer had unequivocally distanced himself from the hopes regard¬ 
ing the future that he had expressed in his early writings but without aban¬ 
doning the intention which underlay those essays: “My hesitation [regard¬ 
ing republication] springs from the difficulty of reexpressing the old ideas, 
which were not independent of that time, without harming what seems to 
me true today: the need to renounce the belief in the imminent realization 
of the ideas of Western civilization and yet to advocate those ideas—with¬ 
out Providence, indeed, against the progress attributed to them.” 93 In fact, 
Horkheimer had already renounced the belief in the imminent “realization 
of the ideas of Western civilization,” as he here paraphrases the proletari¬ 
an revolution in terms of cultural philosophy, in Dialectic of Enlighten¬ 
ment. Nevertheless, this statement also throws light on his evaluation of 
his critique of society and reason in the 1940s. For common to both phas¬ 
es of Horkheimer’s Critical Theory is the impulse to withstand the con¬ 
tradiction of “expressing the frightening tendencies of the present while 
not giving up the idea of something different.” 99 

But it was not only external pressures or the pirated editions of the 
text already in circulation which are likely to have induced Horkheimer 
finally to agree to the new, authorized publication. Another decisive factor 
may have been that in the course of the 1960s Horkheimer’s thinking once 
more drew closer to the theoretical standpoint of Dialectic of Enlighten¬ 
ment. In this period, as we can read in Notizen 1950—1969, his thinking was 
marked by a deep-seated skepticism with regard to reason, which took up 
some features of those earlier ideas and radicalized them further. Adorno, 
on his return to Frankfurt, had been able to connect directly with this text 
and the other work from those years in his new writing. It was not until 
the end of the 1950s* however—the year of his retirement, 1959, could be 
mentioned as the decisive moment—that Horkheimer returned to a posi¬ 
tion extremely close in some respects to that of Adorno. 95 However, he 
expressed this position only in the Notizen, which were unpublished in his 



Editor’s Afterword 247 


lifetime. In these notes, negative metaphysics and negative religion are 
joined in a precarious unity. The “true yearning for something different” 
springs from the fundamental experience of ineradicable suffering in the 
social context and of a metaphysical, global negation of meaning. Philos¬ 
ophy seems possible only in the vanishing private sphere. It has thus be¬ 
come obsolete in face of historical progress. Such reflections, however, 
must set themselves philosophical demands if they are not to remain 
trapped in empty skepticism. Horkheimer’s late philosophy is marked by 
this contradiction, already prefigured in Dialectic of Enlightenment-, to rec¬ 
ognize that the path to the realization of reason in history is blocked and 
yet, despite all the criticism, to assume the purpose and possibility of en¬ 
lightenment. 



The Disappearance of Class History in 
“Dialectic of Enlightenment” 

A Commentary on the Textual Variants (1947 and 1944) 

by Willem van Reijen and Jan Bransen 


Since the early 1940s scholars at the Institute for Social Research had 
devoted themselves with special intensity to analyzing the causes and con¬ 
sequences of fascist rule, with the aim of carrying out extensive research 
projects. In the course of this work two opposed views emerged. On one 
side, Horkheimer, Adorno, Pollock, and Lowenthal developed the thesis 
that National Socialism, as compared to traditional capitalism, represent¬ 
ed a new order. While they regarded fascist state capitalism as the most 
recent outcome of capitalist logic, they believed that this outcome mani¬ 
fested a new quality: the dominance of politics over economics. In his 
essay entitled “Is National Socialism a New Order?” 1 Pollock, on whose 
specialist knowledge of economics the other advocates of this view relied, 
answered this question in the affirmative. On the other side, Neumann, 
Kirchheimer, and Gurland supported the thesis that the National Socialist 
economic order was a continuous development of capitalism, so that one 
could not speak of a new order. This controversy over the primacy of pol¬ 
itics or economics in postliberal capitalism, as authors such as Dubiel and 
Sollncr or Brick and Postone show, 2 impinged deeply on the theoretical 
self-understanding of the members of the Institute for Social Research. 

Pollocks study of the development of capitalism had been a perma¬ 
nent part of the Institute’s work since the early 1930s. In his early essays-' 




A Commentary on the Textual Variants 249 


he followed Marx in locating the contradictions threatening the capitalist 
system in the growing tension between productive forces and the relations 
of production. He argued that the quality of the new economic crisis 
demonstrated that liberal capitalism, with its attempts to regulate crises 
through the market, must fail. It was therefore time for a transition to a 
new economic order which, although based on the old one and therefore 
to be seen as a development of it, exhibited the novel quality of a planned 
economy. The latter, according to Pollock, was possible in two forms: as a 
capitalist planned economy on the basis of private ownership of the means 
of production, or as a Socialist planned economy on the basis of socialized 
ownership of the means of production. Pollock contradicted the Marxian 
theory of the collapse of capitalism and went still further in prophesying 
its permanence: “What is coming to an end is not capitalism but only its 
liberal phase.” 4 

In the early 1940s Pollock refined and sharpened his analysis. 5 He 
now applied the term “state capitalism” both to the National Socialist econ¬ 
omy and to the economy of the Soviet Union. Both were totalitarian forms 
of the economic order. Typical of both these forms of state capitalism was 
the “fusion of leading bureaucracies from the worlds of business, state, and 
party” 6 to form a new ruling class. By contrast, in the democratic form of 
state capitalism to be found in the USA, for example, the state apparatus 
was, to be sure, controlled by the people but had in common with the 
totalitarian varieties the fact that state activity rendered the key function of 
the market inoperative. While there were still profits, prices, and wages, 
these no longer predominantly determined economic actiorts. And the 
influence on decisions of the private ownership of the means of production 
had disappeared. The individual capitalist, separated from the centralized 
decision-making agencies and “overruled” by the state administration, had 
become a mere recipient of annuities. 7 There were no longer any auton¬ 
omous economic problems, only administrative problems. For this reason 
impulses for social change no longer emanated from the economic sphere. 
It had become static. All initiatives issued from politics—unless problems 
of political legitimation arose, for example, in connection with unemploy¬ 
ment or the failure of the standard of living to rise. Pollock therefore 
replaced the tension between the relations of production and the produc¬ 
tive forces, regarded as fundamental by Marx, by the tension between the 
relations of production and distribution. The switch from the primacy of 



2 S(> 'Hit' I h.M/>/>fiiniiitr of ('.lass History 

economics to that of politics takes place within the distribution sphere: it 
is the switch from unconscious to conscious distribution and control. In 
both cases Pollock assumed a primacy of the mode of distribution. 8 

The concept of “state capitalism” did not remain uncontested with¬ 
in the Institute. Neumann, in particular, took a critical view. 9 His position 
makes clear the theory of the paramount role of economics which is also 
implicit in Dialectic of Enlightenment. For Neumann continued to advance 
the thesis of continuity in the development from liberal capitalism to 
National Socialism. Neumann considered Pollock’s concept to be a con- 
tradictio in adjecto. Either, he argued, National Socialist society is capital¬ 
ist—in which case market, competition, and profit continue to function 
as before; or the state determines economic processes—in which case soci¬ 
ety is not capitalist in the Marxian sense. Unlike Pollock, Neumann put 
the emphasis on the feet that the contradictions in developed capitalism 
had not been resolved but intensified. As empirical evidence he cited var¬ 
ious measures of totalitarian rule and economic regulation which did not 
curtail the importance of competition and profit. 

But Neumann’s work, too, contains a number of ideas by which he 
sought to account for the qualitative changes in the relationship of mo¬ 
nopoly capitalism to totalitarian rule. He did not dispute the functional 
increase of politics compared to economics which he, too, perceived as 
continuing in the postfascist states and in which he saw a “developmental 
product of capitalism.” 10 Finally, he attempted to incorporate Pollock’s 
analyses, in reinterpreted form, in his own approach: “Control over the 
state apparatus is [. . .] the pivot on which everything turns. This is the 
only possible meaning of the primacy of politics over economics.” 11 In 
arguing this, however, he did not mean to call into question the funda¬ 
mentally capitalist mode of operation of “totalitarian monopoly capital¬ 
ism,” to use his expression, which has remained a standard term until 
today. 

Naturally, Horkheimer’s own work was not uninfluenced by this 
controversy. In 1937 he still unquestioningly accepted the Marxian thesis 
of the contradiction between the productive forces and the relations of 
production; what had changed under fascism was, above all, that the tech¬ 
niques of power and manipulation had been perfected. The culture taken 
over by fascism, Horkheimer argued, no longer held resources for criticism 
and opposition. In 1942, in the essay “The Authoritarian State,” however, 



A ( '.ommrnun y on the Irwin,1/ Variant 


' ■”>' t 

he based hiimell on Pollock's theory of state capitalism. National Social¬ 
ism and bureaucratic Socialism of the Soviet kind were distinguished, at 
most, by the composition of the ruling cliques, but in both cases politics 
had gained dominance over economics. As “integral statism” the Soviet 
system appeared as the most logical form of the authoritarian state. 

If the rwo versions of Dialectic of Enlightenment are compared—the 
mimeographic publication of the Institute of Social Research of 1944 anil 
the first printed copy of 1947—it is clear how deeply the debate over the 
primacy of economics over politics had affected the self-understanding of 
its two authors. To be sure, Horkheimer and Adorno assert in their Preface 
to the book edition, which follows the original Preface, that “The book 
contains no essential changes to the text completed during the War.” 12 Bui 
few things are more open to dispute than the question as to what is essen¬ 
tial; the textual changes made for the book edition of 1947 can be called, 
at least, significant. This will be shown by a few representative passages: 

Throughout the book the authors replaced terms such as “monopo¬ 
ly,” “capital,” and “profit,” which had become charged with specific mean¬ 
ings through the debate over state capitalism, with less charged expressions. 
“Monopoly” becomes “the economic apparatus”; 13 or the term is replaced 
by “the agencies of mass production,” 1,1 “the system of modern industry," 1 '’ 
“the culture industry,” 16 “those in control,” 17 or, more neutrally, “the sys¬ 
tem.” 18 However, the term “monopoly” is not infrequently replaced by 
“trusts” and “combines.” 19 The “monopoly rulers” are transformed into 
“managing directors.” 20 “Capital” becomes “the economy,” 21 its “power” 
the “power of the economically strongest,” 22 or “capitalism” disappears 
completely. 23 

From the postwar perspective in which the printed version was pro¬ 
duced, fascist phenomena are more precisely qualified , whereas earlier they 
had been referred to generally as economic phenomena: the “collective of 
the totalitarian monopoly” becomes the “fascist collective,” 24 “monopoly" 
becomes “fascism.” 25 There is an increasing distance from Marxian termi¬ 
nology. The “relations of production” become “economic forms,” 26 “class 
domination” becomes “domination,” 27 “exploitation” becomes the more- 
neutral “enslavement,” 28 “control” becomes “utilization,” 29 “those in con¬ 
trol” become “leaders.” 30 “Class history” disappears completely. 31 “Mo¬ 
nopoly” becomes “industry” 32 or no longer appears at all. 33 

The almost complete elimination of the term “monopoly” from all 



252 The Disappearance of Class History 


important passages, and the transformation of “capital” into “economy” 
and similar terms in most places, are not sufficiently explained by politi¬ 
cal misgivings and considerations alone. Rather—and this is more impor¬ 
tant for a theoretical and systematic understanding of Dialectic of Enlight¬ 
enment —they show that in the mid-i940s Horkheimer and Adorno, in 
keeping with Pollock’s analyses, had distanced themselves definitively 
from a form of Marxism which assumed the primacy of economics. In¬ 
stead, the importance of control through politics and the culture industry 
moves clearly into the foreground. 

It would nevertheless be mistaken to conclude that Horkheimer and 
Adorno had thereby turned their backs on Marxian theory altogether. The 
references to fascism, which emerged more emphatically in the book ver¬ 
sion than in the first publication, should be understood not only as anx¬ 
ious reminders that the dangers issuing from fascism still persisted but also 
as evidence of the authors’ view that capitalism and fascism were still inter¬ 
twined as social principles and that capitalism continued to have the ten¬ 
dency to prevent the realization of the “realm of freedom.” Horkheimer 
and Adorno decisively rejected a mechanistic interpretation of Marx of the 
kind adopted by theoreticians of the Second International and by the 
Soviet orthodoxy, but they did not deny the fundamental importance of 
the economic order for the totality of social orders in the modern period. 
For this reason the Marxian approach continued to be fundamental to 
Critical Theory. 



Notes 


[Bracketed numbers are the page numbers on which asterisk notes appear; other 
numbers refer to the numbered notes. “It. tr.” = from the Italian translation.] 

DEDICATION 

[vii] “Pollock” / 1944: Pollock for his fiftieth birthday on 22 May 1944; 1947: 
“Pollock for his fiftieth birthday.” 

PREFACES 

[xiii] “Preface to the Italian Edition”: Translated from the Italian by Philipp 
Rippel wich reference to the German draft by M.H. and T.W.A. 

[xiv] “When” / 1944/47: “When, two years ago.” * 

[xiv] “a . . . of” / 1944: “renewed.” 

[xiv] “with an increasing” / 1944: “readily with the.” 

[xiv] “The tireless . . . humanity” / 1944: “The end of enlightenment by its 
own hand, hypocritically celebrated by crude advocates of the totalitarian order 
in their propaganda speeches and naively executed by the smart attorneys of the 
victims in their respective branches of the culture industry.” 

[xv] “friendship” / 1944: “friendship, in the Action Franchise. ”—“Action Fran¬ 
chise”: extreme right-wing movement in France between 1898 and 1944. 

[xv] “place in . . . sun”: allusion to an imperialist slogan coined in Wilhelmine 
Germany. 

[xv] “liquidating . . . completely." / 1944: “repudiating the thought to which 
they owe their place in the sun before it has had time to prostitute itself com¬ 
pletely in the service of those now basking there.” 



254 Notes to Pages xvi—xix 


[xvi] “the regression” / 1944: “its reversal.” 

[xvi] “headlong” / 1944: “in such a way.” 

[xvi] “rational” / 1944: “a rational.” 

[xvii] “In the . . . increase” / 1944: “The powerless and pliability of the mass¬ 
es increase.” 

[xvii] “Today, however,” / 1944: “In the name of enlightenment.” 

[xvii] “increased sufferings” / 1944: “increased exploitation.” 

[xvii] “melting down . . . crucible” / 1944: “application of the national melting 
pot to all cultural entities.” 

[xviii] “Volkswagen” / 1944: “chewing gum.” 

[xviii] “curtain” / 1944: “veil.” 

[xix] “demonstrates” / 1944: “defines.” 

[xix] “fragmentary” / 1944: “fragmentary. Large parts, written long before, 
need only final editing. In them the positive aspects of mass culture will also be 
dealt with.”—The second part of the chapter, not finally edited at that time, has 
now been published with the title “Das Schema der Massenkultur” as an appen¬ 
dix to Dialektik der Aufkldrong in Adorno, Gcsammelte Schrifien, Vol. Ill, Frank¬ 
furt am Main 1981, pp. 299ff. 

[xix] “empirical . . . Research” / 1944: “the research project of the Institute of 
Social Research.” 

[xix] “anthropology” / 1944: “anthropology. 

In selecting the fragments from the work of the previous two years we opted 
for those with clear internal coherence and unity of language. We excluded all 
English works produced in the same period, regardless of their thematic connec¬ 
tion to the fragments. We would mention the lecture series “Society and Reason”; 
the essays “Sociology of Class Relations” and “The Revival of Dogmatism”; the 
extensive analysis of anti-Semitic propaganda, “The Psychological Technique of 
Martin Luther Thomas’ Radio Addresses,” and our other studies in contributions 
to the project on anti-Semitism. Collaboration in this study carried out in New 
York, Los Angeles, and Berkeley took at least half our time.—Of the German pre¬ 
liminary studies to the whole work, which include the fragments themselves, we 
left out the pieces on logic, among others. The already formulated parts of the 
planned section concerned with a critique of sociology are also omitted. 

If the good fortune of being able to work on such questions without the 
unpleasant pressure of immediate purposes should continue, we hope to com¬ 
plete the whole work in the not too distant future. We are encouraged to believe 
this by the confidence, undeflected by the vicissitudes of the time, of the person 
to whom the part completed so far is now dedicated.” 

"Society and Reason”; under this general tide Horkheimer gave five lectures at 
Columbia University, New York, in February and March 1944- They were later 



Notes to Pages i-y 255 

used as the basis of Eclipse of Reason (New York 1947), German tide Zur Kritik der 
instrumentellen Vernunft, Frankfurt am Main 1967. 

“Sociology of Class Relations”: essay by Horkheimer from 1943 now published 
with the tide “Zur Soziologie der Klassenverhaltnisse” in Gesammelte Schriften, 
Vol. XII, Frankfurt am Main 1985, pp. 75ff. 

“The Revival of Dogmatism. Remarks on Neo-Positivism and Neo-Thom- 
ism”: Horkheimer’s manuscript with his tide later formed the basis of Chapter 2 
of Eclipse of Reason. 

THE CONCEPT OF ENLIGHTENMENT 

[1] “The concept” / 1944: “The dialectic.” 

[1] “disenchantment of the world”: “allusion to a formulation of Max Weber’s; 
cf. Weber, “Wissenschaft als Beruf” (1919) in Gesammelte AufiUtze zur Wissen- 
schaftslehre, Tubingen 1968, p. 594. 

1. Voltaire, Lettresphilosophiques, ed. F. A. Taylor, London 1992, p. 36. 

2. “In Praise of Knowledge,” in Francis Bacon , ed. Arthur Johnston, London 
1965, p. 15. 

[2] “enslavement” / 1944: “exploitation.” 

[2] “economic system” / 1944: “capitalism.” 

[2] “exploitation . . . others” / 1944: “control of foreign work." 

3. Cf. Bacon, Novum Organum , The Works of Francis Bacon , ed. Basil Mon¬ 
tagu, London 1825, Vol. XIV, p. 31. 

4. Bacon, “Valerius Terminus: Of the Interpretation of Nature.” Miscellaneous 
Tracts upon Fluman Knowledge, Works, Vol. I, p. 281. 

[3] “spirit-seer”: allusion to Kant’s dispute with Swedenborg: “Dreams of a 

spirit-seer elucidated by dreams of metaphysics” in Kant, Theoretical Philosophy, 
trans. David Walford, Cambridge/New York 1992. 1 

5. Cf. Hegel's Phenomenology of Spirit, trans. A. V. Miller, Oxford 1977, pp. 
33 if- 

6. Xenophanes, Montaigne, Hume, Feuerbach, and Salomon Reinach are at 
one here. Cf. Reinach, Orpheus, trans. F. Simmons, London and New York 1909, 
pp. 6ff. 

7. Bacon, De augmentis scientiarum. Works, Vol. VIII, p. 152. 

8. J. de Maistre, “Les Soirees de Saint-Petersbourg.” sitme entretien, Oeuvres 
completes, Lyon 1891, Vol. IV, p. 256. 

9. Bacon, Advancement of Learning, Works, Vol. II, p. 126. 

10. Genesis I, 26 

11. Archilochus, fr. 87, quoted by Deussen, Allgemeine Geschichte der Philoso- 
phie, Vol. II, Pt. 1, Leipzig 1911, p. 18. 

12. Solon, fr. 13.25 et seq., quoted by Deussen, op. cit., p. 20. 



256 Notes to Pages 7-16 


13. Cf. Robert H. Lowie, An Introduction to Cultural Anthropology, New York 
1940 , pp. 344 f- 

14. Cf. Freud, Totem and Taboo, in The Complete Psychological Works of Sig¬ 
mund Freud, trans. James Strachey, London 1991, pp. Sjff. 

15. Ibid., p. 89. 

[7] “industrial technology” / 1944: “the technology of monopoly." 

[8] “insufficient righteousness”: allusion to the positivists’ charge that meta¬ 
physical philosophers lacked sufficient correctness, honesty, and uprightness, a 
charge generally leveled by “enlightened” thought against the preceding philo¬ 
sophical systems. (It. tr.) 

[9] “doubtless” / 1944: (missing). 

16. Hegel's Phenomenology of Spirit, op. cit., p. 342 (where Trupp is translated 
more neutrally as “group”). 

17. Cf. W. Kirfel, “Geschichre Indiens,” in Propyldenweltgeschichte, Vol. Ill, 
pp. z6iff, and G. Glotz, “Histoire Gr^cque,” Vol. 1, in Histoire Ancienne, Paris 
1938, pp. I37ff. 

[9] “subjugated people” / 1944: “objects of exploitation.” 

18. G. Glotz, op. cit., p. 140. 

19. Cf. Kurt Eckermann, Jahrbuch der Religionsgeschichte und Mythologie, 
Halle 1845, Vol. I, p. 241, and O. Kern, Die Religion der Griechen, Vol. I, Berlin 
1926, pp. i8if. 

[10] “link” / 1944: “link” (n. 20 here). 

20. Hubert and Mauss describe the nature of “sympathy” or mimesis as fol¬ 
lows: “L’un est le tout, tout est dans l’un, la nature triomphe de la nature.” H. 
Hubert and M. Mauss, “Theorie generale de la Magic,” in L’Annee Sociologique 
1902-3, p. 100. 

21. Cf. Westermarck, Ursprung der Moralbegriffe, Leipzig 1913, Vol. I, p. 402. 

[13] “total art” / an allusion to Richard Wagner’s concept of the total art work 

( Gesmtkunstwerk ) (It. tr.). 

22. Cf. Plato, The Republic, Book 10. 

23. Schelling, Erster Entwurf eines Systems der Naturphilosophie. S. 5, Werke, 
Abt. 1, Vol. II, p. 623. 

24. Ibid., p. 626. 

[15] “twentieth century”: allusion to Alfred Rosenberg’s Der Mythos des 
zwanzigsten Jahrhunderts (1930). 

[16] “the consolidated . . . privileged” / 1944: “class domination.” 

25. Cf. E. Durkheim, “De quelques formes primitives de classification," 
L'Annfe Sociologique, Vol. IV, 1903, pp. 66ff. 

26. Cf. The New Science of Giambattista Vico, trans. 3rd ed. Thomas Goddard 

Bergin and M'ax Harold Fisch, New York 1961. , 



Notes to Pages 17-30 257 


[17] “industrial trusts” / 1944: “social upheaval caused by monopoly.” 

27. Hubert and Mauss, op. cit., p. 118. 

28. Cf. Tonnies, “Philosophische Terminologie,” in Psychologisch-Soziologische 
Ansicht, Leipzig 1908, p. 31. 

29. Hegel, Phenomenology , op. cit., p. 51. 

[18] “value” / 1944: “word.” 

30. Edmund Husserl, The Crisis of European Sciences and Transcendental 
Phenomenology, an Introduction to Phenomenological Philosophy, trans. David Carr, 
Evanston, 1970. 

31. Cf. Schopenhauer, Parerga andParalipomena, trans. E. F. J. Payne, Oxford 
1974. Vol. II, §356, p. 610. 

[20] “spirit-seer”: Cf. note [6], p. 255. 

[21] “industrialism . . . things.” / 1944: “industry makes souls into things. The 
rule of the monopolists, as of individual capitalists earlier, is not expressed direct¬ 
ly in the commands of the rulers.” 

[21] “The countless . . . culture” / 1944: “Monopoly.” 

[22] “value” / 1944: “exchange value.” 

32. Spinoza, Ethics, trans. A. Boyle, London/New York 1948, Part IV, Propos. 
XXII, Coroll. 

[23] “merely an aid . . . apparatus” / 1944: “an apparatus in the perpetuating 
monopoly.” 

[23] “unitary knowledge”: The “unity of knowledge” postulated by the Vien¬ 
na Circle, especially Neurath and Carnap. 

[24] “pleasure”: allusion to the National Socialist promotion of physical cul¬ 
ture for racial, genetic ends, which went hand in hand with the lifting of certain 
taboos in the private sexual sphere (“Strength Through Joy,” “Lebensborn e.V,” 
etc. Cf. Friedrich Pollock, “Is National Socialism a New Order?” in Studies in 
Philosophy and Social Science, Vol. EX, 1941, pp. 448k 

[24] “The German . . . self-contempt” / 1944: “Pleasure, which the neopagans 
and administrators of war fever wanted to set free, has, on its way to totalitarian 
emancipation, internalized meanness as self-contempt.” 

33. Homer, Odyssey, trans. E. V. Rieu (amended), Harmondsworth 1965, p. 
194. 

34. Ibid. 

35. Hegel's Phenomenology of Spirit, op cit., p. 116. 

[29] “society” / 1944: “class society.” 

[29] “rulers” [ Lenker\ / 1944: “those in control” [ Verfugende\. 

[29] “of. . . injustice” / 1944: “of exploitation.” 

[30] “of the cliques . . . embodied” / 1944: “of monopoly, the last incarnation 
of economic necessity." 



258 Notes to Pages 30-38 


[30] “Intuitions,” “dynamic worldview,” “mission,” and “fate” were common 
terms in “educated” National Socialist jargon. 

[30] “company chairmen” / 1944: “monopoly controllers.” 

[30] “of those still” / 1944: “the hands needed to operate the increasing fixed 
capital.” 

[30] “Poverty” / 1944: “Increasing misery.” 

[30 “the economy” / 1944: “capital.” 

[30] “rackets”: Systems for extorting protection money; in a wider sense, 
groups securing the system of power. Also see Editor’s Afterword, pp. 233ff. 

[31] “the reason of the reasonable” / 1944: “this.” 

[31] “industrialists . . . This” / 1944: “those in power . . . This twofold.” 

[31] “that thinking”: Refers to the Marxian concept of the period of history 
preceding the socialist society. 

[31] “truth”: The authors are paraphrasing the scholastic formulation: “verum 
index sui et falsi” (It. tr.). 

[32] “eternal”: Cf. Marx, Capital. A Critique of Political Economy , trans. David 
Fernbach. Harmondsworth 1991, Vol. III. 

[33] “unfettered technology” / 1944: “the unfettered technical forces of pro¬ 
duction.” 

36. “The supreme question which confronts our generation today—the ques¬ 
tion to which all other problems are merely corollaries—is whether technology can 
be brought under control . . . Nobody can be sure of the formula by which this 
end can be achieved . . . We must draw on all the resources to which access can be 
had . . .” ( The Rockefeller Foundation. A Review for IP43. New York 1944, pp. 33fF). 

[33] Cf. note 2, p. 255. 

excursus 1 

1. Nietzsche, Nachlass , Werke, Vol. XIV, Leipzig 1904, p. 206. 

2. Ibid., Vol. XV, p. 235. 

[37] “Borchardt”: An earlier draft of the manuscript (Theodor W. Adorno Ar- 
chiv) contains a reference to Borchardt’s afterword to his translation of the poems 
of Pindar Pindarische Gedichte, Munich 1929/30 (private impression), pp. 99, 103, 
and 93; cf. “Einleitung in das Verstandnis der Pindarischen Poesie,” in Gesammelte 
Werke, Prosa II, Stuttgart 1959, pp. i6iff. 

3. Ibid., Vol. IX, p. 289. 

[37] “rational” / 1944/47: “more rational.” 

4. Hoiderlin, “Patmos,” Poems and Fragments, trans. Michael Hamburger, 
Cambridge and New York 1980, p. 463. 

5. Direct evidence in support of this argument is found early in Book XX. 
Odysseus notes, the maids’ nightly visits to the beds of the Suitors. “Odysseus’ 



Note to Page 38 259 


gorge rose within him. Yet he was quite uncertain what to do and he debated 
long. Should he dash after them and put them all to death; or should he let them 
spend this one last night in the arms of their profligate lovers? The thought made 
him snarl with repressed fury, like a bitch that snarls and shows fight as she takes 
her stand above her helpless puppies when a stranger comes by. So did Odysseus 
groan to himself in sheer revolt at these licentious ways. But in the end he brought 
his fist down on his heart and called it to order. ‘Patience, my heart!’ he said. ‘You 
had a far more loathsome thing than this to put up with when the savage Cyclops 
devoured those gallant men. And yet you managed to hold out, till cunning got 
you clear of the cave where you had thought your end had come.’ But though he 
was able by such self-rebuke to quell all mutiny in his heart and steel it to endure, 
Odysseus nevertheless could not help tossing to and fro on his bed . . .” ( The 
Odyssey , op. cit., p. 304). The subject is not yet articulated to form a firm inner 
identity. Affects, courage, the “heart" still rise up independently. “At the begin¬ 
ning of this episode, his heart, kradie or etor (the two words are synonyms for 
“heart,” 17.22), snarls and growls within him, and Odysseus beats his breast, that 
is, his heart, and addresses it. His heart beats violently; this part of his body is stir¬ 
ring against his will. That he speaks to it is not, therefore, a mere formal device, 
as when hand or foot is addressed in Euripides to set them in motion; his heart 
acts autonomously” (Wilamowitz-Moellendorff, Die Heimkehr des Odysseus , Ber¬ 
lin 1927, p. 189). The affect is equated with an animal which the human being is 
subduing: The metaphor of the bitch forms part of the same stratum of experi¬ 
ence as the metamorphosis of Odysseus’s companions into swine. The subject, still 
split and forced to do violence to nature both within himself and outside, “pun¬ 
ishes” his heart, compelling it to be patient and denying it direct satisfaction in 
the present for the sake of a more distant future. Beating one’s breast later became 
a gesture of triumph: What the victor really expresses is that his victory is over his 
own nature. The achievement is accomplished by self-preserving reason. “. . . the 
speaker thought first of his wildly beating heart; his metis [cunning], which is thus 
seen a separate inner force, was able to master it, and saved Odysseus. Later phi¬ 
losophers would have contrasted it as nus [mind] or logistikon [reasoning] to the 
unreasoning parts of the body” (Wilamowitz, op. cit., p. 190). But the “self”— 
autos— is not mentioned until line 24, after the impulse has been successfully 
mastered by reason. If the choice and sequence of the words are taken as evidence, 
the identity-forming self is regarded by Homer as resulting from a mastery of 
nature within the human being. This new self trembles inwardly, as a thing, the 
body, when the heart within it is punished. At any rate, Wilamowitz’s juxtapos¬ 
ing of separately analyzed moments of the psyche, which often speak to each 
other, seems to confirm the loose cohesion of the subject, whose substance con¬ 
sists only in the coordination of these moments. 



260 Notes to Pages 40-41 


6. In contrast to Nietzsche’s materialistic interpretation, Klages understood 
sacrifice and exchange entirely in terms of magic: “The general necessity to offer 
sacrifices affects everyone, because everyone, as has been seen, receives his or her 
share of life, and all the goods of life they can obtain—the original sutim cuique — 
only through the constant exchange of gifts. This, however, is not exchange in the 
ordinary sense of exchanging goods (although at the very beginning that, too, was 
consecrated by the idea of sacrifice) but of exchanging fluids or essences by aban¬ 
doning one’s own soul to the supporting and nurturing life of the world” (Ludwig 
Klages, Der Geist als Widersacher der Seele, Leipzig 1932, Vol. Ill, Part 2, p. 1409). 
However, the twofold character of sacrifice—the magic self-abandonment of the 
individual to the collective (in whatever form) and the self-preservation achieved 
through the technology of this magic—implies an objective contradiction which 
necessitates further development of the rational element in sacrifice. Still under 
the influence of magic, rationality, as the behavior of the performer of the sacri¬ 
fice, becomes cunning. Klages himself, the zealous apologist of myth and sacri¬ 
fice, came up against this contradiction and found himself obliged, even within 
the ideal image of Pelagianism, to distinguish between genuine and false com¬ 
munication with nature. However, he was unable to derive from mythical think¬ 
ing itself any opposing principle to set against the illusion of the magical mastery 
of nature, because that very illusion constitutes the essence of myth. “It is no 
longer merely pagan belief but pagan superstition which compels the king of the 
gods, on ascending his throne, to swear that henceforth he will cause the sun to 
shine and the field to be covered in fruits” (Klages, op. cit., p. 1408). 

7. In keeping with this, human sacrifices in the literal sense do not occur in 
Homer. The epic’s civilizing tendency is manifested in the selection of the inci¬ 
dents narrated. “With one exception . . . both Iliad and Odyssey are completely 
expurgated of the abomination of Human Sacrifice” (Gilbert Murray, The Rise of 
the Greek Epic , Oxford 1911, p. 150). 

[40] “The representative character . . . deity." / 1944: “The idea of magic rep¬ 
resentation implied in sacrifice, which he affirms, cannot be separated from the 
victim’s status as the elect. But this status results from the priests’ transposition of 
the victim to the heaven of the gods. An element of this projection, which elevates 
the perishable person as the bearer of the divine substance, has always been 
detectable in the ego, which owes its origin to projection. It bears the features of 
the idolized victim: not without reason was Odysseus continually regarded as a 
secularized deity.” 

8. Probably not at the earliest stages. “The custom of human sacrifice ... is 
lar more widespread among barbarous and half-civilized peoples than among true 
savages, and it is hardly found at all at the lowest levels of culture. It has been 
observed that in some peoples this custom has become increasingly predominant 



Notes to Page 42 261 


in the course of time”—on the Society Islands, in Polynesia, in India, among the 
Aztecs. “With regard to Africa Winwood Read states that ‘the mighder the nation 
the more prominent the custom of sacrifice’” (Eduard Westermarck, Ursprung 
und Entwicklung der Moralbegriffe, Leipzig 1913, Vol. I, p. 363). 

9. Among cannibal peoples like those of West Africa, “neither women nor 
adolescents . . . were allowed to taste the delicacy” (Westermarck, op cit., Leipzig 
1909, Vol. II, p. 459). 

10. Wilamowicz places mis in “sharp opposition” to logos (Glaube der Hellenen, 
Berlin 1931, Vol. I, pp. 4if). For him myth is “a story one tells oneself,” a fairy tale, 
an untruth, but also, without distinction from that, the ultimate, undemonstra- 
ble truth, as in Plato. While Wilamowitz is aware of the illusory character of 
myths, he equates them with poetry. In other words, he looks for myths only in 
significative language, which has already come into objective contradiction with 
its intention, and seeks to resolve it as poetry: “Myth is in the first place spoken 
discourse; the words are indifferent to the content” (ibid.). By hypostadzing this 
late concept of myth, which presupposes reason as its explicit counterpart, he 
arrives—in an implicit polemic against Bachofen, whom he dismisses as merely 
fashionable without mentioning him by name—at a clear distinction between 
mythology and religion (op. cit., p. 5), whereby myth appears not as the older but 
the younger state: “I attempt ... to trace the evolution, the transformations and 
the transition from faith to myth” (op. cit., p. 1). The Hellenistic scholar’s rigid 
departmental arrogance blocks his perception of the dialectic of myth, religion, 
and enlightenment: “I do not know the languages from which the currently mod¬ 
ish words ‘taboo,’ ‘totem,’ ‘ mana ,’ and ‘ orenda ’ are taken but consider it legitimate 
to confine myself to the Greeks, and to think about Greek matters in Greek 
terms" (op. cit., p. 10). How his unexplained contention that “the germ of the 
Platonic deity” was present “in the earliest Hellenic culture” is therefore to be rec¬ 
onciled with the historical view, put forward by Kirchhoff and taken over by 
Wilamowitz, that the earliest core of the Odyssey is contained in the mythical 
encounters of the nostos, remains unclear, just as the central concept of myth itself 
lacks adequate philosophical articulation in Wilamowitz. Nevertheless, his oppo¬ 
sition to the irrationalism which idolizes myth and his insistence on the untruth 
of myths reveal unmistakable insight. His repugnance for primitive thinking and 
prehistory shows up all the more clearly the tension which has always existed 
between the deceptive word and truth. The arbitrariness of fabrication which 
Wilamowitz criticizes in later myths must already have been contained in the ear¬ 
liest ones, by virtue of the pseudos [substitute] of sacrifice. This pseudos is related 
to precisely the Platonic deity which Wilamowitz dates back to archaic Hellenism. 

11. The conception of Christianity as a pagan sacrificial religion is fundamen¬ 
tal to Werner Hcgemann’s Geretteter Chrisms (Potsdam 192H). 



262 Notes to Pages 43-50 


[43] “society’s predicament” / 1944: “the predicament of the whole of class his¬ 
tory.” 

12. For example, when he refrains from killing Polyphemus at once (IX, 302); 
when he has to endure the mistreatment of Antinous in order not to give himself 
away (XVII, 46off). Also compare the episode of the winds (X, soff) and Tei- 
resias’s prophecy in the first visit to the Underworld (XI, iosff), which makes his 
homecoming dependent on mastery of his heart. To be sure, Odysseus’s renunci¬ 
ation is more a postponement than a final state; he usually performs the deeds of 
vengeance all the more thoroughly for having delayed them; his endurance is 
patience. His behavior still displays relatively openly, as a natural objective, some¬ 
thing which was later concealed in total, imperative renunciation, thereby taking 
on the irresistible violence which subjugated everything natural. Through being 
transposed inside the subject and emancipated from its mythical content, this 
subjugation becomes “objective,” confronting the special purposes of humans as 
an independent entity and becoming the universal rational law. In Odysseus’s 
patience—quite clearly after the death of the Suitors—vengeance is already turn¬ 
ing into judicial procedure: the ultimate fulfillment of the mythical impulse be¬ 
comes the objective instrument of domination. Law is vengeance which is capa¬ 
ble of renunciation. But since this judicial patience is generated by something 
outside itself, the longing for the homeland, it takes on human traits, almost a 
quality of trust, which point beyond vengeance postponed. In fully developed 
bourgeois society, however, both are annulled: with the idea of vengeance long¬ 
ing, too, is tabooed—thereby, of course, enthroning vengeance, mediated as the 
self’s revenge on itself. 

13. Max Weber, Wirtschafisgeschichte, Munich and Leipzig 1924, p 3. 

14. Victor Bdrard has strongly emphasized the Semitic element in the Odyssey, 
though not without some apocryphal interpretation. Cf. the chapter “Les Pheni- 
ciens et l’Odyssde” in La Resurrection d'Hom'ere, Paris 1930, pp. niff. 

[48] “capitalist economy” / 1944: “exploitation.” 

[48] “make use . . . worker” / 1944: “have anyone to exploit.” 

[48] “entrepreneur” / 1944: “capitalist.” 

[48] “moral . . . profit” / 1944: “moral justification for the plunder raked in by 
the privileged.” 

[49] nostos : Greek: “journey,” “homecoming.” 

15. Odyssey, Book IX, op. cit., p. 141. 

16. Ibid., p. 349. 

17. Ibid., p. 141. 

18. Jacob Burckhardt, History of Greek Culture, trans. Palmer Hilty, London 
1963, p. 180. 

19. Odyssey, op. cit., p. 141. 



Notes to Pages 50-$6 263 


20. In Indian mythology Lotus is the earth goddess. (Cf. Heinrich Zimmer, 
Maja, Stuttgart and Berlin 1936, pp. 1 o5f.) If there is a connection between this 
and the mythical tradition on which the old Homeric nostos is based, the 
encounter with the Lotus-eaters might be characterized as a stage in the struggle 
with the chthonic powers. 

21. Odyssey, op. cit., p. 142. 

22. According to Wilamowitz the Cyclopes are “really animals” ( Glaube der 
Hellenen , Vol. I, p. 14). 

23. Odyssey , op. cit., p. 148. 

24. Ibid., p. 142. 

25. Ibid. 

26. Ibid., p. 150. 

27. Ibid., p. 151 (adapted). 

28. Ibid., p. 146. 

29. Ibid., p. 146. 

30. Ibid., p. 149. 

31. “The mindless creature’s frequent stupidities might be seen as a kind of 
stillborn humor” (Klages, op. cit., p. 1469). 

32. Odyssey, op. cit., p. 148. 

33. Ibid., p. 163. 

34. Cf. ibid., p. 159. Cf. F. C. Bauer, Symbolik und Mythologie, Stuttgart 1824, 
Vol. I, p. 47. 

35. Cf. Baudelaire, “Le vin du solitaire,” Les Fleurs du Mat. 

36. Cf. J. A. K. Thomson, Studies in the Odyssey, Oxford 1914, p. 153. 

37. Odyssey, op. cit., p. 161. 

38. Murray refers to the “sexual expurgations” to which the poems of Homer 
were subjected while being edited (cf. op. cit., pp. I4iff). 

39. “Pigs are in general the sacrificial animals of Demeter” (Wilamowitz- 
Moellendorff, Der Glaube der Hellenen, Vol. II, p. 53). 

40. Cf. Freud, Complete Psychological Works, trans. James Strachey, Vol. XXI, 
London 1978, p. 99, fn. 1. 

41. In a note Wilamowitz points to a surprising connection between the 
notions of snuffling and of noos, autonomous reason: “Schwyzer has very con¬ 
vincingly linked noos to snorting and snuffling” (Wilamowitz-Moellendorff, Die 
Heimkehrdes Odysseus, op. cit., p. 191). Wilamowitz doubts, however, whether the 
etymological relationship contributes to elucidating the meaning. 

42. Odyssey, op. cit., p. 161. 

43. The consciousness of her irresistibility was later expressed in the cult of 
Aphrodite Pcithon, “whose magic brooks no refusal” (Wilamowitz-MoellendorfF, 
Der Glaube der Hellenen, op. cit., Vol. II, p. 152). 



264 Notes to Pages 56-60 


[56] “Aeaea”: Circe’s island; old name for Colchis. 

44. Odyssey , p. 164. 

45. Ibid. 

46. Ibid., p. 166. 

47. Ibid. 

48. Cf. Bauer, op. cit., pp. 47, 49. 

49. Odyssey , p. 343. 

50. Goethe, Wilhelm Meisters Years of Apprenticeship, trans. H. M. Waidson, 
London 1977, p. 62. 

51. Odyssey, p. 346. 

[59] “Underworld”: Greek: sacrifice offered for the dead; Greek title of Book 
XI of the Odyssey. 

52. Cf. Thomson, op. cit., p. 28. 

53. “My eyes filled with tears when I saw her there, and I was stirred to com¬ 
passion. Yet, deeply moved though I was, I would not allow her to approach the 
blood out of turn, before I had had speech with Teiresias” ( Odyssey, p. 173). 

54. “I see the soul of my dead mother over there. She sits in silence by the 
blood and cannot bring herself to look her own son in the face or say a single word 
to him. Tell me, my prince, is there no way to make her know that I am he” (ibid., 
P- 175 )? 

55. “I cannot avoid believing that the whole of BookXI, with theexception of 
a few passages ... is a fragment of the old nostos and therefore of the oldest part 
of the poem” (Kirchhoff, Die homerische Odyssee, Berlin 1879, p. 226). 

56. Odyssey, p. 174. 

57. He was originally the “husband of the earth” (cf. Wilamowitz, Glatibe der 
Hellenen, Vol. I, pp. H2ff ) and only became the sea god at a late stage. Teiresias’s 
prophecy may be an allusion to his twofold nature. It is conceivable that his pro¬ 
pitiation by means of an earthly sacrifice far from any sea implies a symbolic 
restoration of his chthonic power. This restoration might reflect the superseding 
of the sea voyage in search of booty by agriculture: The cults of Poseidon and 
Demeter merged (cf. Thomson, op. cit., p. 96, fn). 

58. Translated from Grimm, Kinder- und Hausmdrchen, Leipzig n.d., p. 208. 
Closely related motifs are passed down from antiquity, especially regarding De¬ 
meter. “Demeter came to Eleusis in search of her daughter after she had been ab¬ 
ducted and was given lodging by Dysaules and his wife Baubo; but in her great 
sorrow she refused to touch food or drink. Thereupon her hostess Baubo made 
her laugh by suddenly lifting up her dress and exposing her body” (Freud, 
Complete Psychological Works, Vol. XIV, London 1962, p. 338; cf. Salomon Reinach, 
Cultes, Mythes ct Religions, Paris 1912, Vol. IV, pp. 115 fF). 

160] “up to ndw” / 1944: “throughout class history.” , 



Notes to Pages 61-71 265 


59. Holderlin, “Autumn,” Poems and Fragments, op. cit., p. 595. 

60. Odyssey, p. 340. 

61. Wilamowitz considers that the execution was “carried out with satisfaction 
by the poet” {Die Heimkehr des Odysseus, op. cit., p. 67). But when the authori¬ 
tarian scholar enthuses over the simile of the snares, which “conveys the dangling 
of the maids’ corpses in an apt and modern way” {ibid., also cf. ibid., p. 76), the 
satisfaction appears to be largely his own. Wilamowitz’s writings are among the 
most striking documents of the German intermingling of barbarism and culture, 
which is fundamental to modern Philhellenism. 

62. Gilbert Murray draws attention to the consoling intention of this line. 
According to his theory, scenes of torture have been expunged from Homer by 
civilizing censorship. The deaths of Melanthios and the maids have been retained 
{op. cit., p. 146). 

EXCURSUS II 

1. Kant, “An answer to the question: What is Enlightenment?” Practical 
Philosophy, trans. Mary J. Gregor, Cambridge 1996, p. 17. 

2. Immanuel Kant's Critique of Pure Reason, trans. Norman Kemp Smith, 
London 1973, p. 533. 

3. Ibid. 

4 Ibid., p. 542. 

5- Ibid., p. 534. 

6 . Ibid. 

7. Ibid., p. 148. 

8. Kant’s Critique of Judgment, trans. J. H. Bernard, London and New York 
1892, p. 24. 

9. Ibid., p. 25. 

10. Metaphysische Anfdnge der Tugendlehre, Kants Werke. Akademie- Textausgabe, 
Berlin 1968-, Vol. VI, p. 449. 

11. Spinoza, Ethics, trans. A. Boyle, London/New York 1948, Pt. Ill, Pref., p. 
84. 

[67] “fascism” / 1944: “monopoly.” 

[68] [German text:] Leistungsfahigkeit / 1944: “efficiency.” 

12. Critique of Pure Reason, 2nd ed., op cit., p. 154. 

[68] “is revealing. . . form.” / 1944: “monopoly is outgrowing itself in a fascis- 
tically rationalized form." 

13. Translated from de Sade, Histoire deJuliette, Holland 1797, Vol. V, pp. 319f. 

14. Ibid., pp. 322f. 

15. Ibid., p. 324. 

[71] “economic system” / 1944: “capitalism.” 



266 Notes to Pages 71-79 


[71] “as . . . individuals”: An allusion to Marx’s formulation in Capital (Marx, 
Engels, Collected Works, Vol. 35, London 1996, p. 89). 

[71] “industrial reason” / 1944: “monopoly and its reason.” 

[72] “system” / 1944/47: “system, the reason of capital.” 

16. E.g. Critique of Practical Reason, Kant, Practical Philosophy, trans. Mary J. 
Gregor, Cambridge 1996, p. 165. 

17. Nouveaux Essais sur I'Entendement Humain, ed. Erdmann, Berlin 1840, 
Book 1, Ch. 11 , § 9, p. 215. 

18. Cf. Heinrich Mann’s introduction to the Insel Verlag edition. 

19. Metaphysische Anfdnge derTugendlehre, op. cit., p. 408. 

20. Juliette, op. cit., vol. IV, p. 58. 

21. Ibid., pp. 6of. 

22. Spinoza, Ethics, Pt. IV, Prop. LIV, op. cit., p. 178. 

23. Spinoza, ibid. 

24. Metaphysische Anfdnge derTugendlehre, op. cit., p. 408. 

25. Ibid., p. 409. 

26. Juliette, op. cit., Vol. II, p. 114. 

[76] “bourgeois” / 1944: “bourgeois in democracy.” 

27. Ibid., Vol. Ill, p. 282. 

28. Nietzsche, Umwertung aller Werte. Werke, Kroner, Vol. VIII, p. 213. 

29. Juliette, op. cit., Vol. IV, p. 204. 

30. E. Diihren pointed out this affinity in Neue Forschungen, Berlin 1904, pp. 
453 ff- 

31. Nietzsche, op. cit., Vol. VIII, p. 218. 

32. Juliette, op. cit., Vol. I, pp. 315k 

33. Nietzsche, The Birth oflragedy and The Genealogy of Morals, trans. Francis 
Golffing, New York 1956, pp. 174/. 

34. Juliette, op. cit., Vol. I, p. 300. 

35. Histoire deJustine, Holland 1797, Vol. IV, p. 4 (also quoted by Diihren, op. 
cit., p. 452). 

36. Genealogy of Morals, op. cit., p. 178. 

37. Justine, op. cit., Vol. IV, p. 7. 

38. Nachlass, op. cit., Vol. XI, p. 214. 

39. Genealogy of Morals, op. cit., p. 258. 

40. Juliette, Vol. 1 , p. 2o8ff. 

41. Ibid., pp. 2iif. 

42. Beyond Good and Evil, trans. R. J. Hollingdale, London (Penguin Classics) 
' 990 , P- 97 - 

43. Nachlass, op. cit., Vol. XII, p. 108. 

44. Juliette, op: cit., Vol. I, p. 313. 



Notes to Pages 79-8j 267 


45. Ethics, Pt. IV, Appendix, XVI, op. cit., p. 194. 

46. Ibid., Pt. IV, Prop. L, Note, p. 176. 

47. Ibid., Prop. L, p. 175. 

48. Juliette, op. cit., Vol. II, p. 125. 

49. Ibid. 

50. Nietzsche contra Wagner, op. cit., Vol. VIII, p. 204. 

51. Juliette, op. cit., Vol. I, p. 313. 

52. Ibid., Vol. II, p. 216. 

53. Beobachtungen iiber das Gefuhldes Schonen und Erhabenen, op. cit., Vol. II, 
pp. 2isf. 

54. Ibid. 

55. Nachlass, op. cit., Vol. XI, pp. 227E 

56. Nietzsche, Thus Spoke Zarathustra, trans. R. J. Hollingdale, Harmonds- 
worth 1984, p. 189. 

[81] “fascist masters" / 1944: “masters.” 

57. Genealogy of Morals, op. cit., p. 249. 

[81] “Annie Henry”: In 1940 she shot a man by whom she and a companion 
had been taken for a walk, after having threatened him with a pistol and humili¬ 
ated him for hours; cf. Los Angeles Examiner, 29.11.1942. 

58. Juliette, op. cit. , Vol. Ill, pp. 78b 

59. Ibid., Vol. IV, pp. i26f. 

60. R. Caillois, “Thdorie de la fete,” Nouvelle Revue Frangaise, Jan. 1940, p. 49. 

61. Cf. ibid. 

62. Cf. ibid. , pp. 58f. 

[83] “Benzedrine”: A strong stimulant administered by the Nazi commanders 
to their troops (It. tr.). 

63. Nachlass, op. cit., Vol. XII, p. 364. 

[84] “appeased . . . industry” / 1944: “hypostatized as an accomplished recon¬ 
ciliation. Under monopoly.” 

[84] “system . . . industry” / 1944: “monopoly.” 

[84] “white trash”; derogatory expression for white workers. 

64. Juliette, op. cit., Vol. II, pp. 8if. 

65. Ibid. , Vol. Ill, pp. I72f. 

66. Ibid., pp. i76f. 

67. Private edition by Helpey, p. 267. 

68. Juliette, op. cit., Vol. Ill, pp. 176b 

69. Ibid., pp. 178E 

70. Ibid., pp. 188-99. 

71. Juliette, op. cit., Vol. IV, p. 261. 

72. Ibid., Vol. II, p. 273. 



268 Notes to Pages 88-94 


73. Ibid., Vol. IV, p. 379. 

74. Aline et Vale our, Brussels 1883, Vol. I, p. 58. 

75. Ibid., p. 57. 

76. Victor Hugo, The Laughing Man, Book VIII, Ch. 7. 

77. Juliette, op. cit., Vol. IV, p. 199. 

78. Cf. Les 120 Journees de Sodome, Paris 1935, Vol. II, p. 308. 

79. Der Fall Wagner, op. cit., Vol. VIII, p. 10. 

80. R. BrifFault, The Mothers, New York 1927, Vol. I, p. 119. 

[89] “German fascism” / 1944: “the class society.” 

81. Nachlass, op. cit., Vol. XI, p. 216. 

82. Ibid., vol. XIV, p. 273. 

83. Kant, Practical Philosophy, trans. Mary J. Gregor, Cambridge 1996, p. 82. 

84. Nietzsche, Joyful Wisdom, trans. Thomas Common, New York 1973, p. 
* 79 - 

85. Ibid. 

86. Cf. Nietzsche, Nachlass, op. cit., Vol. XI, p. 216. 

87. Cf. Le Play, Les ouvriers europe'ens, Paris 1879, Vol. I, esp. pp. I33ff 

88. Juliette, op. cit., Vol. IV, pp. 303ff 

89. Les 120 Journees de Sodome, op. cit., Vol. I, p. 72. 

90. Cf Juliette, op. cit., Vol. II, p. 235, n. 

91. La Philosophic dans le Boudoir, op. cit., p. 185. 

92. Cf Democritus, Diels Fragment 278, Berlin 1912, Vol. II, pp. H7f. 

93. La Philosophic dans le Boudoir, op. cit., p. 242. 

94. S. Reinach, “La prohibition de I’inceste et le sentiment de la pudeur,” in 
Cultes, Mythes et Religions, Paris 1905, Vol. I, p. 157. 

95. La Philosophic dans le Boudoir, op. cit., p. 238. 

96. Ibid., pp. 238-49. 

97. Ibid. 

98. Juliette, op. cit., Vol. IV, pp. 240-44. 

99. La Philosophic dans le Boudoir, op. cit., p. 263. 

100. Aline et Valcour, op. cit., Vol. II, pp. i8iff. 

101. Juliette, op. cit., Vol. II, pp. i8iff. 

[92] “prehistory”: Cf note [31], p. 258 (“that thinking”). 

102. Nietzsche, Joyftd Wisdom, trans. Thomas Common, New York 1973, p. 
209. 

THE CULTURE INDUSTRY 

1 94] “The” / 1944: “The German and Russian pavilions at the Paris World 
Exposition (of 1937, Ed.) seemed of the same essence, and the.” 

[94I “die total power of capital” / 1944: “monopoly." 



Notes to Pages 95-ni 269 


[95] “those whose . . . strongest” / 1944: “capital.” 

[95] “economy today” / 1944: “profit economy.” 

[96] “Soap operas”: alludes to the fact that such programs were originally 
broadcast at times when housewives were at home doing their washing (It. tr.). 

[96] “selection” / 1944: “selection. The operations of the large studios, includ¬ 
ing the quality of the highly paid human material populating them, is a product 
of the monopoly system into which it is integrated.” 

[96] “subjected . . . purges” / 1944: “expropriated even before fascism.” 

[98] “at film” / 1944: “at the film monopoly.” 

[98] “agencies . . . business” / 1944: “monopolistic agencies.” 

[100] “industrial society” / 1944: “the machinery.” 

[100] “gigantic economic machinery” / 1944: “gigantic machinery of monop¬ 
oly.” 

[101] “tolerated” / 1944: “tolerated, used by monopoly.” 

1. Nietzsche, Unzeitgemasse Betrachtungen. Werke, Leipzig 1917, Vol. 1 , p. 187. 

[102] “Zanuck”: Film producer, cofounder of 20th Century Pictures. 

[104] “present society” / 1944: “monopoly society.” 

[105] “Pathe”: French film magnates. 

[105] “Hugenberg”: Founders of German publishing combines. 

2. A. de Tocqueville, De la Democratic en AmSrique, Paris 1864, Vol. II, p. 151. 

[106] “Hays Office”: Voluntary censorship agency (It. tr.), set up in 1934 in 
Hollywood. 

[106] “Mickey Rooney”: See note [126], p. 271. 

[107] “ready-to-wear trade or” / 1944: “Jewish clothing trade or the Epis¬ 
copal.” 

[107] “some omnipresent agency” / 1944: “a Rockefeller Institute, only slight¬ 
ly more omnipresent than the one in Radio City,”—“Radio City”: the name given 
since the early 1930s to a part of the Rockefeller Center in New York containing 
several theatres, radio studios, and the Radio City Music Hall. 

[107] “Casino de Paris”: Music hall in Paris, famous for its luxurious furnish¬ 
ings. 

[107] “society” / 1944: “class society.” 

[108] “Lombardo”: Orchestra leader especially known for his annual musical 
broadcasts on New Year’s Eve. 

[109] “novelty songs”: Hit songs with comic elements. 

[no] “cruelty” / 1944: “lust for murder.” 

[no] “of the” / 1944: “of the kiss, but not of the.” 

[in] “. . . overwhelming”: The idea expressed here dates from a time when 
television was not in widespread use (It. tr.). 

[in] “possibilities” / 1944: “productive forces.” 



270 Notes to Pages 111-121 


[in] “culture industry” / 1944: “mass culture.” 

[111] “Hays Office”: See note [106], p. 269. 

[ri2] “Laughter . . . ended”: On this twofold function of laughter cf. pp. 6of 
(It. tr.). 

[112] “res . . . gaudium ”: Seneca, Letter 23; letters to Lucilius ( Letters from a 
Stoic, trans. Robin Campbell, Harmondsworth 1969). 

[113] “constitutes its essence”: Cf. Adorno, “Ober Jazz” (1937), in Gesammelte 
Schriften, Vol. 17, Frankfurt am Main 1982, p. 98. 

[113] “the system” / 1944: “prevailing in monopolistic society.” 

[114] “funnies”: Amusement pages in newspapers with jokes and comic strips. 

[114] “Ludwig”: Primarily a writer of popular biographies. 

[114] “Mrs. Miniver”: Leading role in a radio family serial; also filmed. 

[114] “Lone Ranger”: Title figure in a radio western serial, the type of the lone 
cowboy fighting for the good; also filmed. 

[114] “Lombardo”: See note [108], p. 269. 

3. Frank Wedekind, Gesammelte Werke, Munich 1921, Vol. IX, p. 426. 

[115] “women’s serials”: Light novels in women’s magazines. 

[115] “Adler”: Neo-Thomist popular philosopher who defended film with ar¬ 
guments from scholastic philosophy (It. tr.)—Cf. Horkheimer, “Neue Kunst und 
Massenkultur,” in Gesammelte Schrifren, Vol. 4. 

[116] “the culture industry” / 1944: “the monopoly system.” 

[117] “planning” / 1944: “monopoly planning.” 

[117] “life has been transformed” / 1944: “monopoly has transformed life.” 

[117] “those in control” / 1944: “monopoly.” 

[118] “Industry” / 1944: “Monopoly.” 

[118] “proof”: A play on the various philosophical-theological (ontological, 
cosmological, etc.) proofs of the existence of God. 

[120] “giant corporation” / 1944: “monopoly.” 

[120] “the thinking subject” / 1944: “liberalism.” 

[120] Hans Sonnenstofrers Hollenfahrt. Ein heiteres Traumspiel. Radio play by 
Paul Apel (1931), revised version by Gustaf Griindgens (1937). 

[120] “ Life with Father": Popular American radio family serial after a stage play 
by Clarence Day. 

[120] “the latest society” / 1944: “monopoly society.” 

[120] “Formal freedom . . . answer officially” / 1944: “Bourgeois democracy 
guarantees formal freedom for everyone. No one is officially responsible to the 
government." 

[120] “Dagwood”: Character in the comic strip Blondie. 

[121] “established" / 1944: “established by monopoly.” 

1 121] "leaders of industry” A 1944: “monopolists.” 



Notes to Pages 121-131 271 


[121] “provision” / 1944: “provision by the monopoly.” 

[121] “winter aid”: Winter hilfswerk-. National Socialist organization to support 
the unemployed and other needy persons under the direction of the Ministry of 
Propaganda. 

[122] “even now” / 1944: “even under monopoly.” 

[123] “women’s serial”: See note [115], p. 270. 

[123] “the pressure of the system” / 1944: “monopoly.” 

[124] “the system” / 1944: “monopoly.” 

4. Nietzsche, Gotzendammerung, Werke, op. cit., Vol. VIII, p. 136. 

[124] “those in command” / 1944: “monopoly.” 

[125] “bourgeois” / 1944: “German bourgeois.” 

[126] “Mature . . . Rooney”: Well-known film actors, embodiments of the 
hero and the antihero. 

[126] “cultural conglomerate” / 1944: “cultural conglomerate and monopoly.” 

[126] “Something . . . everyone” / 1944: “Monopoly serves up something for 
everyone.” 

[127] “The . . . purpose”: Cf. Kant, Critique of Judgment, op. cit., p. 68. 

[128] “inner . . . commodities” / 1944: “composition of cultural commodities 
in terms of use value and exchange value.” 

[128] “What . . . replaced” / 1944: “Use value is being replaced in the recep¬ 
tion of cultural assets.” 

[128] “The consumer . . . escape.” / 1944: (missing). 

[128] “Mrs. Miniver”: See note [114], p. 270. 

[128] “deception” / 1944: “swindle.” 

[129] “the commercial radio system” / 1944: “broadcasting.” 

[129] “the sovereign whole” / 1944: “monopoly as the sovereign whole.” 

[129) “combines” / 1944: “monopolies.” 

[129] “invented by the sociology of religion”: Allusion to Max Weber's concept 
of charismatic authority; cf. Economy and Society, Vol. I, ed. Guenther Roth and 
Claus Wittich, Berkeley 1978, pp. 24iff. 

[130] “Even . . . use value” / 1944: “Use value.” 

[130] “screenos”: Bingo games played by the audience between pictures. 

[130] “radio”: Television was still in its infancy when the authors were writing 
(It. tr.). 

[131] “the Warner brothers": Owners of large film studios. 

[131] “hopes” / 1944: “waits.” 

[131] “labor time ... in advertising” / 1944: “social labor time, but saved it. 
Today, when the free market is at an end, monopoly is entrenching itself in adver¬ 
tising.” 

(131] “the combines" / 1944: “monopoly.” 



272 Notes to Pages i31-144 


[131] “wielders of influence . . . economic councils” / 1944: “class remains 
among its peers, as a preliminary form of the resolutions of economic councils of 
industrialists.” 

[132] “It benefits . . . names.” / 1944: “Its termination by an individual firm 
represents only a loss of prestige, in fact an offence against the class discipline 
which monopoly imposes on its members. In wartime, commodities which can 
no longer be supplied continue to be advertised merely in order to keep the insti¬ 
tution, and naturally also the war economy, in operation.” 

[132] “the big companies” / 1944: “monopoly, the skyscrapers of Wrigley and 
Rockefeller.” 

[133] “blackshirt”: A term for fascists, after the black shirts of their uniforms, 
especially in Italy but also in other countries. 

[134] “people” / 1944: “people, which still determines life in monopoly society." 

[135] “Schriftleiter"-. The term Schriftleiter [lit. director of writing] was pre¬ 
ferred by the National Socialists to the “foreign” word Redakteur (It. tr.). 

[135] “such language” / 1944: “the language of monopoly.” 

[136] “false.” / 1944/47: “false.” After paragraph break: “(to be continued).” 

ELEMENTS OF ANTI-SEMITISM 

[137] “Now that . . . reasons,” / 1944: “In the age when political domination 
is obsolete.” 

[137] “workers” / 1944: “proletarians.” 

[137] “appropriation” / 1944: “exploitation.” 

[138] “discharged.” / 1944: “discharged. That would be the classless society.” 

[138] “existing society” / 1944: “the class society.” 

[138] “the existing order” / 1944: “capitalism.” 

[139] “that order” / 1944: “class society.” 

[139] “The respectable . . . disreputable ones” / 1944: “Monopoly, the 
respectable rackets, condone it, and the fascists, the disreputable ones.” 

[140] “vagrants” / 1944: “Negroes, Mexican wrestling clubs.” 

[142] “take possession of” / 1944: “appropriate.” 

[142] “parasites of old”: Allusion to the Nazis’ anticapitalist propaganda dis¬ 
tinction between “productive” [schaffend] and “parasitic” [ raffend ; lit. “grasping”] 
capital, i.e., between industrial and bank capital; cf. Franz Neumann, Behemoth 
(1942), Frankfurt/Main 1977, p. 376. 

[142] “of the economic system in general” / 1944: “of all capital.” 

[142] “what is withheld” / 1944: “what capital withholds.” 

[143] “society” / 1944: “class.” 

[144] “knights of industry . . . creators” / 1944: “capitalist bloodsucker who has 
to justify himself as a creator.” 



Notes to Pages i^.f-tys 


>-n 

[144] “salvation.” / 1944/47: “salvation, now that the churches have been 
reduced entirely to the function of social control.” 

[145] “German Christians”: The Protestant movement “Deutsche Christen" 
sought a union between Church and National Socialism. 

[148] “recognition in a concept": Kant, Critique of Pure Reason, op. cit., pp. 
79ff [B 103]. 

1. Cf. Freud, “The Uncanny,” The Complete Psychological Works, op. cit., Vol. 

XVII, pp. 2l 9 ff. 

[152] “Coughlin”: Charles Edward Coughlin, Catholic priest, demagogic anti- 
Semitic radio preacher. 

2. Kant's Critique of Pure Reason, op. cit., p. 183 [B i8of], 

[160] “any . . . country” / 1944: “even lynching.” 

3. Freud, Totem andTaboo, op. cit., Vol. XIII, p. 73. 

[163] “culture industry” / 1944: “economic and cultural monopoly.” 

[164] “big industry” / 1944: “monopoly.” 

[164] “workers” / 1944: “proletarians.” 

[165] “until now” / 1944: “in liberalism.” 

[165] “. . . turning-point of history”: Allusion to Marx’s “Zur Judenfrage,” in 
A us den Deutsch-Franzosischen Jahrbiichem 1843/44. 

[165] “VII”: The whole of section VII (“But... of enlightenment.”) was not 
contained in the 1944 edition. 

[165] “the Ahlwardts and the Kniippelkunzes”: Hermann Ahlwardt: author of 
anti-Semitic pamphlets, Reichstag deputy at the end of the nineteenth century; 
for years his appearances were accompanied by uproar and scandal. 

Hermann Kunze: teacher at the Cadet School, Chairman of the Deutsch- 
Soziale Partei, anti-Semitic demagogue; his nickname [ Kniippel ; stick, cudgel] 
resulted from the frequent brawls at his meetings. < 

[166] “ticket”: single list of a party’s candidates in the American electoral sys¬ 
tem. 

[166] “Jew-free”: From the National Socialist term judenrein. 

[167] “. . . without mediation”: Allusion to Kant’s proposition: “Thoughts 
without content are empty, intuitions without concepts are blind,” Critique of 
Pure Reason, op. cit., p. 93 [A 51]. 

NOTES AND SKETCHES 

[173] “Chamberlain . . . Bad Godesberg”: Chamberlain met Hitler three times 
in September 1938; the second meeting took place in Bad Godesberg. 

[175] “In this country”: In America [It. tr.]. 

[175) “Spoke . . . loneliness”: Translated from Die chinesische Flote, Nachdicht- 
ungen von Flans Beihgc, Insel-Biichcrei, p. 17 [It. tr.]. 



274 Notes to Pages 175-187 


1. Paul Deussen, Sechzig Upanishad's des Veda. Leipzig 1905, p. 524. 

2. Matthew 2, 17-19. [I think it should be ch. 11—tr.] 

3. Above all Brhad-aranyaka Upanishad 3, 5, 1 and 4, 4, 22. Deussen, op. cit., 
pp. 436f and 479b 

4. Op. cit., p. 436. 

5. Mark, 1, 6. 

6. Translated from Vorlesungen iiber die Geschichte der Philosophic, Vol. 2, 
Werke, Vol. XIV, pp. i 59 f. 

7. Ibid., p. 168. 

8. Cf. Deussen, op. cit., p. 373. 

9. Cf. Eduard Meyer, Ursprung undAnfdngedes Christentums, Stuttgart/Berlin 
1921, Vol. I, p. 90. 

10. Diogenes Laertius, IV, 15. 

11. Cf. Politeia, 372; Politikos, 267FF and Eduard Zeller, Die Philosophic der 
Griechen, Leipzig 1922, Part 2, Section 1, pp. 325b note. 

12. Cf. Deussen, Das System des Vedanta, Leipzig 1906, 2nd ed., pp. 63ff. 

13. Hermann Oldenberg, Buddha, Stungart/Berlin 1914, pp. 174b 

14. Ibid., p. 386. 

15. Ibid., pp. 393b 

16. Cf. ibid., pp. i84ff and pp. 424^ 

[180] “Soirees de Petersbourg: Joseph de Maistre, Les Soirees de Saint Peters- 
bourg (1821). 

[180] “circles of Hell”: Allusion to Dante’s Divine Comedy, Inferno III, 4ff (It. 
tr.). 

[180] “Animal psychology”: In the 1944 edition this entry comes directly after 
“Against knowingness.” 

[185] “Economic . . . forms” / 1944: “Relations of production, forms of class 
domination, culture.” 

[185] “troglodyte”: Paleolithic cave dweller. 

[186] “dictum”: Cf. Marx, DiedeutscheIdeologic, in Marx-Engels Werke, Vol. 3, 
Berlin 1969, pp. 34b 

[186] “The poor figure . . . them”: Cf. Marx, Engels, Die Heilige Familie, in 
Marx-Engels Werke, Vol. 2, Berlin 1958, p. 85; also Marx, “Zur Kritik der Hegels- 
chen Rechtsphilosophie,” in Marx-Engels Werke, Vol. 1, Berlin 1957, pp. 385b 

[187] “Blum government”: Popular front government 1936-37, introduced 
extensive social reforms. 

[187] “From a theory of the criminal”: Cf. the full text, “Theorie des Ver- 
brechers,” in Gesammelte Schriften, Vol. 12, Frankfurt/Main 1985, pp. 266fF. 

[187] “rising . . . labor power” / 1944: “a regular need for labor power, increased 
production.” , 



Notes to I'ages 1X7-107 275 

17. Leibniz, The Monadology and Other Philosophical Writings, cram. Robert 
Latta, Oxford 1925, § 7, pp. H9f. 

18. Cf. ibid., § 51. 

19. Cf. R. Caillois, Le Mythe et I’Homme, Paris 1938, pp. 125ft 

[190] “fascism” / 1944: “monopoly.” 

[190] “state” / 1944: “order.” 

[191] “executioner: each operation . . . forgetting.” / 1944: “executioner. But 
chat is not to say enough. Is not death the radical loss of the ‘residual capacity of 
the nerve substance'? Life would not be a dream but a narcosis. We would behave 
toward other people, not to mention all other creatures, as, in Flourens’s view, the 
patient behaves towards the interval when he or she was under the influence of 
the drug: deludedly. The narcosis acts like the principium individuationis. The 
positivists, however, could learn from this how far they have advanced with their 
science: their note taking would be limited in principle to the postnarcotic peri¬ 
od. It would be the utterance of a life which had forgotten itself under the influ¬ 
ence of narcotics, or rather of death, from which one can remember nothing. 
They would, in their thing-language, have “mortificated” it. Reality would be left 
to metaphysics and to antiquated French physiologists. Admittedly, a test of the 
objective justification of such speculations would call for a discriminating analy¬ 
sis of Schopenhauer’s notion, which still contributes too much to Flourens’s pos¬ 
itivism.” 

[195] “The ‘tragic’ world-view of the fascists”: An allusion to the vulgarized 
reception of Nietzsche by some National Socialist authors in the early 1930s. 

[197] “Chaplin’s film”: The Great Dictator (1940). 

20. Translated from DieNachsokratiker, ed. Wilhelm Nestle, Jena 1923, Vol. I. 
72a, p. 195. 

[198] “big business” / 1944: “monopoly.” 

[203] “praxis.” / 1944: “praxis. In Europe there is now hardly a country in 
which one would not be shot for a slip of the tongue.” 

[203] “The proposition . . . the whole”: Hegel’s Phenomenology of Spirit, op. 
cit., p. 11. 

[204] “today” / 1944: “under monopoly.” 

[205] “flux” / 1944: “transience.” 

[206] “The man . . . strive”: Allusion to Schiller’s poem, “Das Lied von der 
Glocke.” 

21. Cf. Txlaircissement sur les Sacrifices. Oeuvres, Lyon 1892, Vol. V, pp. 322f. 

[207] “universal" / 1944: “monopolistic.” 

[207] “completely . . . domination” / 1944: “system of big rackets.” 

[207] “In Germany . . . reason”: Cf. note [24], p. 257 (“pleasure”). 

(207) “present" / UJ44: “fascist present, in which she no longer needs meta- 



276 Notes to Pages 209-222 


phorically to put on mannish trousers because she is already in desexualized 
slacks, machining bombs.” 

[209] “culture industry” / 1944: “mass culture.” 

[210] “fascist collective” / 1944: “collective of the totalitarian monopoly.” 

22. Joyful Wisdom, op. cit., p. 136. 

[211] “Hearst”: William Randolph Hearst, founder of the USA’s largest press 
conglomerate. 

[211] “baseless” / 1944: “baseless; on this Heidegger and Lukacs agree." 

23. Goethe, Faust, Part I, 4068. 

24. Cf. Karl Landauer, “Intelligenz und Dummheit,” in Das Psychoanalytic he 
Volksbuch, Bern 1939, p. 172. 

EDITOR’S AFTERWORD 

1. P. xiv of this edition. 

2. P. xviii of this edition. 

3. P. 1 of this edition. 

4. P. xi of this edition. 

5. Max-Horkheimer Archiv der Stadt- und Universitatsbibliothek Frankfurt 
am Main (abbreviated henceforth to MHA): VI 1D.210. 

6. Published in Horkheimer, Gesammelte Schrijten, Vol. 12, Frankfurt am 
Main 1985. 

7. MHA: VI 1D.66—The declaration was to be issued in connection with the 
publication of essays by both authors in the periodical Der Monat. As contribu¬ 
tions by Horkheimer, “ Vernunft und Selbsterhaltung” [Engl.: “The End of Rea¬ 
son,” see n. 24, Afterword], “Autoritat und Familie in der Gegenwart” [Engl.: 
“Authoritarianism and the Family Today,” in The Family: Its Function and Destiny, 
cd. R. N. Anshen, New York 1949, pp. 359-374], or a section from Eclipse of 
Reason (Oxford 1947) were considered (cf. MHA: VI 1 D.158, 161A). However, 
Horkheimer then withdrew his permission. The joint declaration, too, was not 
published. The reasons for this emerge only partly from the correspondence 
between Horkheimer and Adorno. They have to do, above all, with misgivings 
about a further political declaration which was to be combined with this first one. 
However, there is no reason to assume that the two authors were unwilling to 
endorse the content and formulation of the first declaration. 

8. MHA: XI 6.86. 

9. My thanks go to Rolf Tiedemann for information on the content of 
Adornos posthumous papers here and elsewhere. 

10. MHA: XI 6.2. 

11. MHA: XI 6.3. 

12. MHA: XI 6.4. 



Notes to Pages 223-227 277 


13. It is to be found under the tide “Das Schema der Massenkultur” as an ap¬ 
pendix :o Dialektik der Aufkliirung in Theodor W. Adorno, Gesammelte Schrifien, 
Vol. 3, Frankfurt am Main 1981, pp. 299ff. 

14. MHA: X 17.1-17. 

15. Published in Horkheimer, Gesammelte Schrifien, Vol. 12, pp. 587fF. 

16. MHA: XI 6.64. 

17. MHA: XI 6.65. 

18. MHA: XI 6.5-110; XI 6a.1-3: XI 78.3-5. 

19. Now published in Horkheimer, Gesammelte Schrifien , Vol. 12. The desig¬ 
nation Fragments , which Dialectic of Enlightenment bears as its subtitle (and as its 
main tide in the original version of 1944), therefore has not only the metaphori¬ 
cal meaning of a kind of thinking opposed to the compulsion of a system but also 
the liteial meaning that the printed version does not include everything initially 
written for it. Adorno also wanted to include The Philosophy of Modem Music as 
an excursus for Dialectic of Enlightenmmt-, cf. Adorno, Gesammelte Schrifien Vol. 
12, Frankfurt am Main 1975, p. u. 

20. MHA: XI 6.43-62. 

21. Jurgen Habermas, “Bemerkungen zur Encwicklung des Horkheimerschen 
Werkes” in Max Horkheimer heute: Werk und Wirkung, ed. Alfred Schmidt and 
Norberi Altwicker, Frankfurt am Main 1986, p. 171. 

22. Verbal communication to the Editor on 22.10.1985. 

23. Cf. p. xix of this edition. 

24. 'The Authoritarian State,” tr. The People’s Translation Service, Berke¬ 
ley, in The Essential Frankfitrt School Reader , ed. Andrew Arato and Eike Geb- 
hardt, pp. 95—117, New York 1982; German: “Autoritarer Staat,” in Gesammelte 
Schrifien, Vol. 5, Frankfurt am Main 1987, pp. 293ff; “The End of Reason,” The 
Essential Frankfurt School Reader, op. cit., pp. 26-48; German: “Vernunft und 
Selbsteihaltung,” in Gesammelte Schrifien, Vol. 5, Frankfurt am Main 1987, pp. 
32ofT. 

25. Theodor W. Adorno, Ober Walter Benjamin, Frankfurt am Main 1970, p. 
143. The straightforward identification by the editor of that volume, RolfTiede- 
mann, of the “book on the dialectic” mentioned in the letter with the later book 
Dialectic of Enlightenment, seems to me questionable, especially in the light of the 
memorindum about to be cited. 

26. ‘Idee, Aktivitat und Programm des Instituts fur Sozialforschung,” in 
Horkheimer, Gesammelte Schrifien, Vol. 12, Frankfurt am Main 1985, pp. 156F. 

27. MHA: VI 33.62-63. 

28. Cf. Adorno, “Die Aktualitat der Philosophic” (1931), in Gesammelte 
Schrifien, Vol. 1, Frankfurt am Main 1973. 

29. Cf. Horkheimer, Adorno, “Diskussion iiber die DifFerenz zwischen Posi- 



278 Notes to Pages 227-233 


tivismus und materialistischer Dialektik,” in Horkheimer, Gesammelte Schrifien , 
Vol. 12, pp. 467ft. 

30. P. xiv of this edition. 

31. Cf. Horkheimer “Vertrauen auf Geschichte,” in Gesammelte Schrifien, Vol. 
12, op. cit. Also compare the more detailed interpretation in Gunzelin Schmid 
Noerr, “Wahrheit, Macht und die Sprache der Philosophic. Zu Horkheimers 
sprachphilosophischen Reflexionen in seinen nachgelassenen Schrifien zwischen 
1939 und 1946,” in Max Horkheimer heute: Werk und Wirkung, op. cit. 

32. Cf. Martin Jay, Dialektische Phantasie, Frankfurt am Main 1973, pp. 125(7, 
and Wolfgang Bonfi, “Psychoanalyse als Wissenschaft und Kritik. Zur Freud- 
rezeption der Frankfurter Schule,” in Sozialforschung als Kritik, ed. Wolfgang 
BonfS and Axel, Honneth, Frankfurt am Main 1982, esp. pp. 39ifF. 

33. Erich Fromm, “Ober Methode und Aufgabe einer analytischen Sozial- 
psychologie,” in Zeitschriftfur Sozialforschung, Vol. I, 1932, p. 50. 

34. Paris 1936. 

35. Cf. Horkheimer, “Ernst Simmel und die Freudsche Philosophic,” Gesam- 
tnelte Schrifien, Vol. 5, Frankfurt am Main 1987, pp. 396ff. 

36. Horkheimer, Adorno, “Diskussionen iiber die Differenz zwischen Positiv- 
ismus und materialistischer Dialektik,” in Horkheimer, Gesammelte Schrifien, Vol. 
12, esp. pp. 433—451; “Diskussionen iiber Sprache und Erkenntnis, Naturbe- 
herrschung am Menschen, politische Aspekte des Marxismus,” ibid., pp. 510-512. 

37. Horkheimer, Adorno, “Diskussionen iiber die Differenz zwischen Positiv- 
ismus und materialistischer Dialektik,” op. cit., p. 443. 

38. Ibid. 

39. P. xviii of this edition. 

40. P. 154 of this edition. 

41. New York 1949-50; one of these volumes is The Authoritarian Personality 
(New York 1950), written by Adorno, Else Frenkel-Brunswick, Daniel J. Levinson, 
and R. Nevitt Sanford, mentioned by Adorno and in the following quotation. 

42. Adorno, “Wissenschaftliche Erfahrungen in Amerika,” in Gesammelte 
Schrifien , Vol. 10.2, Frankfurt am Main 1977, pp. 721-723. 

43. Martin Jay discusses this in more detail in “The Frankfurt School in 
Exile," in Perspectives in American History, Vol. VI, pp. 348—355. 

<14. P. xix of this edition. 

45. Cf. especially Pollock, “State Capitalism,” in Studies of Philosophy and So¬ 
cial Science IX, 1941, and “Is National Socialism a New Order?” ibid. Horkheimer 
himself explains this concept in his essay “The Authoritarian State” [see n. 24, 
Afterword]. 

46. “Auf/.eichnungen und Enrwurfc zur Dialektik der Aufklanmg 1939-1942,” 

in Gesammelte Schrifien, Vol. 12, op. cit., p. 287. ■ 



Notes to Pages 235-240 279 


47. “Zur Ideologic der Politik heute (Fragment),” in Gesammelte Schrifien, 
Vol. 12, op. cit., pp. 317F 

48. “Zur Soziologie der Klassenverhaltnisse,” in Gesammelte Schrifien, Vol. 12, 
op. cit., pp. 101-104. That Horkheimer’s theory of rackets, which, in the end, was 
developed to only a rudimentary level, aimed to go far beyond a sociological 
analysis in the narrower sense becomes clear from an analogy with his reflections 
on linguistic philosophy mentioned earlier. In an essay of 1946 he described the 
function of the concept on the basis of the racket model, protection in exchange 
for oppression: “In the concept fulfillment is inseparable from suffering. Its fixity 
only faithfully reflects the society which serves life by oppressing it, which devel¬ 
ops human beings by mutilating them and knows of homeland only as the pro¬ 
tection which suppresses the protected.” (“Vertrauen auf Geschichte,” in Ge¬ 
sammelte Schrifien, Vol. 12, op cit., p. 124). 

49. “Reflexionen zur Klassentheorie” (1942), in Adorno, Gesammelte Schrifien, 
Vol. 8, Frankfurt am Main 1972. 

50. Cf. Horkheimer, “Zur Soziologie der Klassenverhaltnisse,” op. cit., pp. 

75ff. 

51. P. xiv of this edition. 

52. P. 207 of this edition. 

53. P. 94 of this edition. 

54. P. 132 of this edition. 

55. P. xv of this edition. 

56. E.g., p. 209 of this edition. 

57. E.g., p. 67 and p. 89 of this edition. 

58. E.g., p. 76 and p. 120 of this edition. 

59. P. 107 and p. 144 of this edition. 

60. P. 137 of this edition. 

61. P. 48 of this edition. 

62. P. 60 of this edition. 

63. P. xvii of this edition. 

64. For example, in a note written probably in the early 1930s and at any rate 
not later than 1935, Horkheimer writes of the “independence of the revolutionary 
fighter” (MHA: XI 16.4a, p. 5). The note was incorporated in “Bemerkungen zur 
philosophischen Anthropologie,” published in 1935, where, however, he writes of 
the “independence of the person who pursues this goal [of a free humanity]” 
(Zeitschrifi fur Sozialforschung, Vol. IV, 1935, p. 16). 

65. According to a verbal communication to the Editor from Rudolph Hirsch 
in November 1983. 

66 . P. xv of this edition. 

67. P. xv of this edition. 



280 Notes to Pages 240-246 


68. The original main title of the book was Philosophical Fragments. 

69. MHA: XI 6.65. 

70. Cf. “Reason and Self-Preservation,” op. cit. 

71. Cf. “Zur Ideologic der Politik heute (Fragment),” in Gesammelte Schriften, 
Vol. 12, op. cit., pp. 3i6ff. This text reads like a critique of a positivistically abbre¬ 
viated reading of Pollock’s theory of state capitalism. 

72. E.g., p. 131 of this edition. 

73. P. 207 of this edition. 

74. Horkheimer, Adorno, “Rettung der Aufldarung. Diskussion iiber eine 
geplante Schrift zur Dialektik” (1946), in Horkheimer, Gesammelte Schriften, Vol. 
12, op. cit., pp. 597-599- 

75. Ibid., p. 600. 

76. Ibid., p. 604. 

77. Ibid., pp. 594, 598. 

78. Ibid., p. 601. 

79. Ibid., p. 602. 

80. Cf. The Editor’s Afterword to Vols. 7 and 8 of Horkheimer’s Gesammelte 
Schriften, in Vol. 8, esp. pp. 461—465. 

81. Cf. e.g., “Kritische Theorie gestem und heute” (1969/72), in Gesammelte 
Schriften, Vol. 8, Frankfurt am Main 1985, p. 353; “Pessimismus heute” (1971), in 
Gesammelte Schriften, Vol. 7, Frankfurt am Main 1985, p. 232; “Das Schlimme 
erwarten und doch das Gute versuchen. Gesprach mit Gerhard Rein” (1972/76), 
ibid., p. 467. 

82. P. 161 of this edition. 

83. Notizen ip$o bis ip6p, Frankfurt am Main 1974, p. 12. 

84. MHA: VI 40.245 c. 

85. MHA: VI 4.146. 

86. MHA: V 118.3. 

87. Cf. Solmi’s letter to Horkheimer of 5.7.1961 (MHA: V 61.21). 

88. MHA: V 61.13-14. 

89. Letter of 26.2.1962 (MHA: VI 4.181). 

90. Letter from Horkheimer to Solmi of 15.8.1962 (MHA: V 61.1). In the 
Italian edition Solmi’s name finally no longer appeared but was replaced by the 
pseudonym Lionello Vinci—clearly a sign of distancing. 

91. My thanks go to Furio Cerutti of Florence for this information. 

92. Nico Pasero, Rudolph Bauer, “Aufklarung auf Italienisch," in Diskus. 
Frankfurter Studentenzeitung, Vol. 17, July 1967, p. 4. 

93. In Kritische Theorie, Vol. II, Frankfurt am Main 1968, p. XI. 

94. Ibid., p. IX. 



Notes to I'ltfit's 246 jy/ 


;.Ki 

95. Cf. Alfred Schmidt, “Die geistige Physiognomic Max 1 lorklicimcrs," Intro¬ 
duction to Horkheimer, Notizen ipfo—iyfiy, Prankfuri am Main 1974, pp. XI.IX, 
L, LXV 1 II. 

THE DISAPPEARANCE OF CLASS IIISTOUY 

1. In Studies in Phibsophy and Social Science* Vol. IX, 1941, pp. 264ft. 

2. Helmut Dubiel, Alfons Sollner, “Die Nationalsozialismusforschung des In- 
stituts fur Sozialforschung—ihrc wisscnschaftsgeschichtliche Stellung und ihre ge- 
genwartige Bedeutung,” in Wirtschaft, Recht unclStaat im Nationalsozialismus . . ., 
op. cit., pp. 7IT; Barbara Brick, Moishe Postonc, “Kritischer Pessimismus und die 
Grenzen des traditionellen Marxismus,” in Sozialforschung als Kritik , ed. Wolf¬ 
gang BonG and Axel Honneth, Frankfurt am Main 1982, pp. i7gfF. In what fol¬ 
lows we base ourselves substantially on these texts, without discussing them in 
detail. Regarding the context described in these works cf. also: Martin Jay, Dia- 
lektische Phantasie, Frankfurt am Main 1981, Ch. V, and Alfons Sollner, Geschichte 
und Herrschaft, Frankfurt am Main 1979, Ch. 3.3.6. 

3. “Die gegenwartige Lage des Kapitalismus und die Aussichten einer plan- 
wirrschaftlichen Neuordnung,” in Zeitschrift fur Sozialforschung, Vol. I, pp. 8fF; 
“Bemerkungen zur Wirtschaftskrise,” ibid., Vol. II, pp. 32iff. 

4. Quoted from Brick, Postone, op cit., p. 184. 

5. Cf. “State Capitalism: Its Possibilities and Limitations,” in Studies in Phibs¬ 
ophy and Social Science, Vol. IX, 1941, pp. 20off. 

6. Quoted from Brick, Postone, op. cit., p. 185. 

7. Cf. ibid. 

8. Cf. ibid., pp. 189F. 

9. Franz L. Neumann, Behemoth, New York 1942. 

10. Quoted from Dubiel, Sollner, op. cit., p. 18. 

11. Ibid. 

12. P. xix of this edition. 

13. P. 23 of this edition. 

14. P. 21 of this edition. 

15. P. 84 of this edition. 

16. P. 116 of this edition. 

17. P. 117 of this edition. 

18. P. 124 of this edition. 

19. P. 17 of this edition. 

20. P. 30 of this edition. 

21. P. 30 of this edition. 

22. P. 95 of this edition. 

23. P. 138 of this edition. 



282 Notes to Page 251 


24. P. 210 of this edition. 

25. P. 190 of this edition. 

26. P. 185 of this edition. 

27. Ibid. 

28. P. 2 of this edition. 

29. Ibid. 

30. P. 29 of this edition. 

31. Pp. 43 and 60 of this edition. 

32. P. 118 of this edition. 

33. Pp. 100, 101, 104, and 118 of this edition. 



Cultural Memory 


in the Present 


Herlinde Pauer-Studer, ed„ Constructions of Practical Reason: PhilosophicalTalks 
Jean-Luc Marion, Being Given That: toward a Phenomenology of Givenness 
Ian Balfour, The Rhetoric of Romantic Prophecy 

Martin Stokhof, World and Life as One: Ethics and Ontology in Wittgensteins 
Early Thought 

Gianni Vattimo, Nietzsche: An Introduction 

Jacques Derrida, Negotiations: Interventions and Interviews, 1971—199R, ed. 
Elizabeth Rottenberg 

Brett Levinson, The Ends of Literature: The Latin American “Boom" in the 
Neoliberal Marketplace 

Timothy J. Reiss, Against Autonomy: Cultural Instruments, Mutualities, and the 
Fictive Imagination 

Hent de Vries and Samuel Weber, eds.. Religion and Media 
Niklas Luhmann, Theories of Distinction: Re-Describing the Descriptions of 
Modernity, ed. and introd. William Rasch 
Johannes Fabian, Anthropology with an Attitude: Critical Essays 
Michel Henry, I am the Truth: Toward a Philosophy of Christianity 
Gil Anidjar, "Our Place in Al-Andalus”: Kabbalah, Philosophy, Literature in Aral 
Jewish Letters 

Hdlene Cixous and Jacques Derrida, Veils 
F. R. Ankersmit, Historical Representation 
F. R. Ankersmit, Political Representation 

Elissa Marder, Dead Time: Temporal Disorders in the Wake of Modernity 
(Baudelaire and Flaubert) 

Reinhart Koscllcck, The Practice of Conceptual Histoiy: Timing History, Spacing 
Concepts 

Niklas Luhmann, The Reality of the Mass Media 



Hubert Damisch, A Childhood Memory by Piero della Francesca 
Hubert Damisch, A Theory of /Cloud/: Toward a History of Painting 
Jean-Luc Nancy, The Speculative Remark: (One of Hegel's bon mots) 

Jean-Frangois Lyotard, Soundproof Room: Malraux's Anti-Aesthetics 

Jan Patocka, Plato and Europe 

Hubert Damisch, Skyline: The Narcissistic City 

Isabel Hoving, In Praise of New Travelers: Reading Caribbean Migrant Women Writers 
Richard Rand, ed., Futures: Of Jacques Derrida 

William Rasch, Niklas Luhmanns Modernity: The Paradoxes of Differentiation 
Jacques Derrida and Anne Dufourmantelle, Of Hospitality 
Jean-Frangois Lyotard, The Confession of Augustine 
Kaja Silverman, World Spectators 

Samuel Weber, Institution and Interpretation: Expanded Edition 
Jeffrey S. Librett, The Rhetoric of Cultural Dialogue: Jews and Germans in the 
Epoch of Emancipation 

Ulrich Baer, Remnants of Song: Trauma and the Experience of Modernity in 
Charles Baudelaire and Paul Celan 
Samuel C. Wheeler III, Deconstruction as Analytic Philosophy 
David S. Ferris, Silent Urns: Romanticism, Hellenism, Modernity 
Rodolphe Gasche, Of Minimal Things: Studies on the Notion of Relation 
Sarah Winter, Freud and the Institution of Psychoanalytic Knowledge 
Samuel Weber, The Legend of Freud: Expanded Edition 
Aris Fioretos, ed., The Solid Letter: Readings of Friedrich Holderlin 
J. Hillis Miller / Manuel Asensi, Black Holes / J. Hillis Miller; or, Boustrophedonic 
Reading 

Miryam Sas, Fault Lines: Cultural Memory and Japanese Surrealism 
Peter Schwenger, Fantasm and Fiction: On Textual Envisioning 
Didicr Maleuvre, Museum Memories: History, Technology, Art 
Jacques Derrida, Monolingualism of the Other; or, The Prosthesis of Origin 
Andrew Baruch Wachtel, Making a Nation, Breaking a Nation: Literature and 
Cultural Politics in Yugoslavia 

Niklas Luhmann, Love as Passion: The Codification of Intimacy 
Mieke Bal, ed., The Practice of Cultural Analysis: Exposing Interdisciplinary 
Interpretation 

Jacques Derrida and Gianni Vattimo, cds., Religion 



